(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A00611)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 12754)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 223:08)
T. H. = Thomas Hickock.
A translation of: Viagge de M. Cesare de i Federici, nell' India Orientale, et oltra l' India.
Running title reads: A late voyage to the East Indies.
Leaf 40 missigned 41.
Reproduction of the original in the Bodleian Library.
The Authors going from Venice to Ci∣pris and Tri∣polye.
The Riuer Euphrates.
Feluchia a small Citie in Euphrates.
Mosule.
The Arabian theeues are in number like to Antes.
The old Ba∣bylon hath great trade with Mer∣chants still.
Raffes made of blowen hides, to carie victuals to Babilon.
A prettie deuice.
A bridge made of boates.
The Tower of Babell of ancient me∣mory.
These bricks be in thick∣nes 6 or 7, in∣ches & a foote and a halfe square, seene by our owne countreymen whome I knowe.
A thing wonderfull,
This hole whereout cō∣meth this pitch is most true, for that I know of our own countri∣men which haue seene it▪ and they say that out of the hole there commeth as it were puffing with bellows both water and pitch, and the water and pitch runneth into the valey or Iland wher the pitch resteth, and the water runneth into the riuer Euphrates, and it maketh all the riuer to be as it were brackish with the smell of pitch and Brimstone.
Zizarii, an an∣cient people.
At the castell of Corna the riuer Euphra∣tes & Tigris do meet.
Ormus is the barennest I∣land in all the world.
Carichii an Iland in the gulfe of Persia.
Ormus is al∣waies reple∣nished with abundance of victuall, and yet there is none that groweth in the Iland.
Great trade of merchan∣dize in Or∣mus.
The election of the king of Ormus.
A priuelege for Merchāts.
Goa is the cheefest citie that the Por∣tingals haue in the Indies.
Dui.
Cambaya a countrey a∣bounding with all plentic.
Cambaietta.
Macareo is a
Amadauar a citie in Cam∣baia.
A thing most lamentable.
A merueilous great trade in Gambyette.
A very good order for mer∣chant strāgers if they will.
Marchants that trauell to the Indies must carry their prouisiō of how sholde with them.
Chiawle two Cities.
Great store of men of warre and rouers on the coast of Cambaya.
The grear Magoll was king of Agray and Delay.
A meruelous fond delight in women.
Tana, a coun∣trey inhabited with Portin∣gales. Armesine, a kind of silke like taffitie.
Chiawle two Citties.
Note the pol∣licie of the Portingales.
Creat trafique with mer∣chandize.
The Palmer Tree is the most commo∣dious tree in the world.
Note the commodities of the Tree.
A very fruite∣full tree;
Scauasches are as onr great Mawudes. A thing al∣most incredi∣ble but I haue seene of their Mattes.
The com∣modities that come out of Cambaya.
Great Ordi∣nance made in peeces, and yet seruice∣able.
The cheefest place the Portingales haue in the Indies.
Note the a∣riuall of the Portingall ships in the Indies.
A very good sale for Horsses.
A most vn∣kind & wick∣ed treason a∣gainst their prince: this they haue for giuing credit to strrngers, rather then their owne natiue people.
The sacking of the citie.
An excellent good pollici
Marke this detestable order of the Gentiles.
A discription of the burn∣ing place▪
Feasting and dancing whē they should moorne.
☞
An adaman
Moorning when they shuld reioice
A worse or∣der▪ then the first.
Vngodlye deedes to murther the people.
The cause why the wo∣men do
Penegonde.
Th
Marke the discription of this pallace.
A thing rare to be found in England.
Palanchine is a small lit∣ter borne of foure men▪
Men ride on Bullocks: and trauell with them on the waye.
A prety iest.
A hard matter for traueilers,
This is strāge that euery no∣bleman may coyne what money he would.
The marchā∣dize that come in & out to Bezeneger euery yeare.
The apparell of those peo∣ple.
Their winter is our sūmer.
Foure small fortes of the Portingales.
The commo∣dities that go out of the kingdome of Cananor.
Bettell is a very profita∣ble hearbe in that cuntry
Enimies to the king of Portingales.
Within Co∣chineis the kingdome of Pepper.
The pepper that the Por∣tingales bring, is not so good as that which goeth for Meca, which is brought he∣ther by the straights.
Great priui∣leges that the Citizens of Cochin haue.
The small power of the king of Co∣chine.
Amochy and Nayrii are very hardye men, & haue their wiues common.
A very strāge thing hardlye to be beleued
The merchā∣dize that the Portingales carye from Cochine.
Note the departing of the ships from Cochine.
At Caocome∣ry endeth the coast of the Indies.
The order how they fishe for pearles.
Dutie paid to the king of Portingale for the fish∣ing of perles.
These Perles are prised ac∣cording to the caracts which they waye, euerye caract is foure graines, and these mē that prise them haue an in∣strument of copper with holes in it, which be made by de∣grees for to sort the Perles withal.
Great trouble and danger. Great dangers for ships.
Colomba a hold of the Portingales,
The pollicy of the son de∣priued the fa∣ther of his kingdome.
Cayro is a stuffe that they make ropes with the which is the barke of a tree.
The cutting & gathering of sinamon.
A rare thing▪
A foolish feare of Portingales.
S. Thomas his sepulcher.
A discription of S. Thomas his towne, called of the Portingales S. Tome.
A painted kind of cloth and dyed of diuers co∣lours which those people delight much in & esteeme them of a great price.
In the Ilande of Banda they lade Nut∣megs for ther they growe.
In the Ilands of Andeman they eate one another
The Mowsies is a kind of fruite grow∣ing in clusters and are 5 or 6 inches long 2 peece, & they growe 5. or 7. on a cluster & are a very good meate.
In any a frute like to a T
The com∣modities that grow in the kingdom of Assi.
The great trade that is at Malacca.
Voiages which are on∣lye for the king and his noble men.
At the Mo∣luccos they lade the Cloues.
The ship of Drugs, so termed of the Portingales.
The distance of places.
Ilands not discouered.
A kind of iea∣lious people.
China is vn∣der the go∣uernment of the great Tartar.
The riches of China.
It is a most excellent fine mettall as may be made.
Tymor an I∣land from whence com∣meth all the white Sādolo.
A market kept aboord of the ships.
A prince of a merueilous strength and power.
Treason.
Great tri∣umph
The moun∣tains of Zer∣ziline.
A miserable thing.
They would haue giuen two hundred & a halfe of pepper for a small dish of water and they woul
A rare thing▪
The loue of the King to strangers was so great, that he would take no custome of them.
The commo∣dities that goe out of Orisa.
This cloth we call Net∣tle cloth.
In this Benga¦la, they lade Nutmegges, for there they growe.
The Riuer of Ganges▪
Bazaras and Pa
A town made for two or three monthes and then burnt.
The commo∣dities that are laden in Satagan.
These Gen∣tiles are Ido¦lators.
Moores are of the sect of Mahomet.
A Ceremonye of the gentiles when they are dead.
Portingales doo not drink of the water▪ of the Riuer Ganges.
Mergy a har¦bour where ships land.
Niper Wine is a most ex¦cellent drink.
Niper Wine good to cure the french di¦sease.
Niper Wine very deere in the Indians.
Great extre¦mitie at Sea.
This Tortu go is a shell fishe which li¦ueth in y
Tauay vnder the King of Pegu.
Martauan a Citie vnder the King of Pegu.
A custom that these People haue when the King is in the warres.
A lawe in Pegu for kil¦ling of men.
Great pride of the Portin galles.
A good dis¦crete way ta¦ken for safe garde of his goods.
A reuenge on the Portin¦gales.
Pegu▪ is the name of the Kingdome and y
A thing most meruailous that at the comming of the tide, that the earth should quake
This tide is like to the tides in our Riuer of Se∣uerne.
These tides make their iust course as o
This Maca¦reo is a tide or a coraot. Houses made of Cane and couered with leaues of trees.
Godon is a pla
The forme of the building of the new Cittye of Pegu.
A rich and stately Pal∣laice.
Fower white Eliphants
This mony cald tansa is halfe a ducket which may be three shillings and foure pence.
The Prince valure of a King to ha∣zard his whole King¦dome
Eliphantes houses golded ouer with Golde and
An execllent deuice to
A subtill com¦position.
An excellent pastime of the Eliphants.
These canes are like to thē in Spaine which they call Iaco de¦
A strange thing that a beast so wilde should in so short time be made
The greatest strength that the King of Pegu hath.
A goodly or∣der in a barbe¦rous people.
The order of their weapons and number of his men.
Exercise in armes is the cheefest de∣fence of a Cuntry.
26. crowned Kinges at his commaund.
15. hundreth thousand men in one Camp
A people of a hard nature and fit for warres.
Eating of Ser¦pents.
This King of Pegu is the great King of Tartaria, which we call the great Cam, or the King of Q
The riches of this Ring of Pegu.
An excellent fine mettall made by a mixture of Copper and Lead.
The great pompe of this King.
The order of their going.
This King hath one wise and 300. con∣cubines.
The order of Iustice.
No difference of person be∣fore the king in controuer∣sies or in Iu∣stice.
If we had such paper in Eng∣land, sutes in law would not hang so long.
The commodities that are ventured in Pegu.
Note the de parture of the Ships from S. Tomes to Pegu.
Commodi∣ties brought into Pegu.
The Chicken
The Custome house of Pegu is in y
Great rigour for the stea ling of Cust omes.
Iewells paye custome.
In those Cen¦tries there is another inner lodging, but euery man that trauelleth must hier his house, and bring his ne¦cessaries with him.
Description of the fruitful¦nes of that soyle.
Deling is a small litter caried with men as is aforesaide.
Most vile fil∣ching of goods.
Pay custome of the same goods.
Tareghe are names of the brookes.
The brokers are lowed to make good al the debts to the merchant.
A law for banckroutes.
Euery man may stampe what mony
Buy Golde & filuer with copper and leade.
The order of their monye.
How a man may despose him selfe for the trade in Pegu.
Good instruc¦tions.
The merchan¦dise that goe out of Pegu.
Idoll houses what fashion they are of.
Idoll houses couered with Golde.
An honest care of hea then people.
Bargaines made with the nipping of Fingers vn∣der a cloth.
The Authors desire to see his Cuntry.
This Touffon is an extraor∣dinary storme at Sea.
Touffon com¦meth but eue¦ry 10. or 12. yeeres.
A heauy case▪
A manifest to¦ken of the eb∣bing and flow¦ing in those Cuntries.
This Iland is called Sond
Victualles good cheap.
Sondiua is the fruitfull le
Chitigan is a port in Benga¦la, where the Portingalles goe with their ships.
The King of Rachim neigh¦bour to Ben¦gala.
The force of the King of Rachim.
The commo¦dities that goe from Chiti∣gan to the In¦dies.
The Portin∣gall ships de¦part toward Portingall out of the har¦bor of Co∣chine.
Goa was be¦sieged.
A Chicken or a Henne cost 6. shillinges
Opiū a good Commoditye in Pegu.
A reconing before the hoste.
Pepper tree.
Ginger.
Cloues.
Nutmegs and Maces.
White Sando¦lo. Canfora.
Lignū Aloes▪ Beniamin. Long Pepper.
This Muske the Iewes do
Rubies, Sa¦phires, and Spinelly.
Pearles.
Spodiom.
On the coaste of Melindy in Ethiopia, in the land of Caferaria the great trade that the Por¦tingalls haue.
Buying and selling with▪ out woords one to ano∣
Golden trades that the Por¦tingalls haue.
An order how to prouide to goe ouer the Desart from Babilon to Alepo.
36 daies iour¦ny ouer the Wilderne.
An order how to prouide for the going to Ierusalems.
Counsell of the author.
A very good order that they haue in those Cun∣tries for the re¦couering of the Goods of the dead.
Those Mer¦chants that dieth in Pegu lo
Order of api¦rell in Pegu.
The order of the womens aparell in Pegu.
An admoniti¦on of the Au¦thor.