A relation containing the manner of the solemnities at the election and coronation of Ferdinand the Emperour, in Francford the 30. of August last past, 1619 With other occurrences in Bohemia, and diuers parts of Germany, for three moneths last past.
Approx. 57 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 23 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A00682




STC 10816



ESTC S105587





99841314




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A relation containing the manner of the solemnities at the election and coronation of Ferdinand the Emperour, in Francford the 30. of August last past, 1619 With other occurrences in Bohemia, and diuers parts of Germany, for three moneths last past.
[4], 43, [1] p.   


London :


Printed [by G. Elde] for Robert Mylbourne, and are to be solde at the great south-dore of Paules,


1620.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Ferdinand --  II, --  Holy Roman Emperor, 1578-1637 --  Coronation --  Early works to 1800.
Bohemia (Czech Republic) --  History --  1618-1648 --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-07
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






10816


S105587


99841314


5889














A RELATION CONTAINING THE MANNER OF THE Solemnities at the Election and Co∣ronation of 
Ferdinand
 the Emperour, in 
Francford
 the 30. of 
August
 last past, 1619. 
WITH
 Other Occurrences in BOHEMIA, 
and diuers parts of
 GERMANY, for three Moneths last past.


LONDON.
 Printed for ROBERT MYLBOVRNE, and are to be solde at the great South-dore of 
Paules.
 1620.














THE MANNER OF the Solemnities at the Election and Coronation of 
Fardinand
 the Em∣perour, in 
Francford August
 30. 1619. With other occurrences in 
Bohemia
 and diuers 
parts of Germany for three moneths last past.


T
HE Earle of 
Thorne
 (after hee had renewed his coue∣nant with the 
Bohemians,
 and dispatched his affaires in 
Mo∣rauia,
 according to his harts desire) remoued his Campe from thence, and passed into the lower 
Austria,
 and inter∣cepting some certaine places and townes by the way, laid siege against 
Laba,
 which refused to giue him admittance because it was fortified with a ga∣rison.


The Protestant States, seeing that they could not hitherto make any full agreement with the Romish Catholiques, and that they had spent all the time

in vaine, sent their embassadours vnto him, to de∣mand of him what reason hee had to enter that country with so great an army: and to request him, that, seeng they had done nothing which might offend the 
Bohemians,
 hee would lead away his Forces from thence againe. For the reason why hitherto they had returned no answer to the Let∣ters which were sent from the 
Bohemians
 the fifth of March, was, because that the Romish Catho∣lique States, day by day, deferred to giue their Ca∣tegoricall and resolute answer to the principall ar∣ticles and clauses of those Letters; and yet not∣withstanding had alwayes made fayre shew of a friendly agreement and peaceable end. Howeuer, albeit they saw that their hope hereof was fru∣strate, yet they were not against the much-desired League, but were rather glad of it: and the rather, for that they called to minde, how that the Empe∣rour 
Matthias
 answered the States at 
Budwitz
 in the yeare 1614. that they should send their Legates or Embassadors to the Parliament which was to be holden at 
Prage
 in the yeare 1615. and then and there should enter a Treaty concerning the re∣newing of that League. Wherefore they gaue li∣cence and authoritie to their Deputies or Legates, to renew that League; prouided, that it were not repugnant to the House of 
Austria,
 and the States and Religion of the Romish Catholiques. This Embassie by fiue selected and chosen out of euery State, was performed.




A while after there came to the Camp, certaine Embassadours of the Romish catholike States, and Earle 
Buchem
 being their Spokesman, they say that they neuer did any thing that might aggrieue ey∣ther the Earle of 
Thorne,
 or any others of the 
Bo∣hemians:
 and that they did very carefully maintaine and preserue peace. Wherefore they request that he would be pleased to spare them, and to dislodge his Campe from before 
Laba.


As touching the Confederation and League betwixt the Protestants and them; It was true in∣deed, that the Protestant States and they had not yet drawne to a full conclusion in all things; yet, forasmuch as the points of difference betwixt them were but small, they were in good hope that very shortly a good end and agreement should be made betwixt them.


Thorne
 making answer, said vnto them; That the 
Bohemians
 by maine necessity were constrained to doe what they did: and for his part, That he would not willingly vndertake any thing against any man without cause: but his desire was, to pur∣sue all hostile Forces, and to driue away the ene∣my though hee were at 
Hierusalem:
 That hee came into that Prouince to preserue peace and tranquili∣tie, and to relieue and ayd the oppressed; for hee would faine haue it so, that hereafter the Prote∣stants and Romish Catholiques should walke toge∣ther hand in hand as equals one to another in eue∣ry respect. That heretofore the Romish Catho∣liques

haue had the superiority and preheminence, but against good reason; for the Protestants were as honest men as the Romish Catholiques, and therefore hee would no longer suffer that these be∣ing kept vnder and oppressed, the Romish Catho∣liques (like oyle in water) should swimme aloft: for he would haue an equalitie kept amongst them, without any respect had to one Religion or other; and looke what priuiledges were granted to the one side, the same should be permitted to the o∣ther, that so a constant and perpetuall peace be∣twixt them might be made: And that whosoeuer should be their King and Prince, hee might be safe from the treacheries and commotions of the 
Clese∣lians,
 & so might gouerne the weale publique with greater quietnesse and honour. For his owne part, hee tooke no care whence or from whom he should receiue prouision, mony or aid to maintaine his ar∣my. He had resigned himselfe vp to God, and made prayers to him, that he would further and prosper this his honest and truly Christian purpose, and grant vnto him power and strength fitting and ne∣cessary for him. That he tels them the truth, That he would neuer haue made any attempt against 
La∣ba,
 but that he found it fortified with a Garison, and that they themselues were the causes why hee did besiege it. For hee had giuen notice to Earle 
Traustam,
 that when hee found no Garison, nor any resistance, there the people should not need to feare any danger by his comming.




When the Legates had heard him speake thus, they made answer, that they would deale with 
Fer∣dinand,
 & do their best endeauours, that both 
Laba
 and other places in that Prouince might bee quit and cleared of Souldiers.


Therefore 
Thorne
 gaue his word that on condi∣tion, that Garison might be remoued, the gates of the Citie set open, and hereafter the Citie fenced with a Garison of Protestants, and not with ene∣mies, hee would not attempt any thing further against that place: and so he dismissed them.


In the mean while the Lords directors held a con∣sultation, that if a treaty of peace were to be made, vpon what condition it were to be entertained: and they concluded & decreed it altogether necessary.


1 That all Protestants whatsoeuer (as well States as inferiours) throughout the whole Kingdome, whether they dwelt vnder a Romish catholike or an Euangelicall Magistrate, by vertue of a charter granted vnto them by the Emperour 
Rodolphus,
 in point of Religion; (it being mutually couenanted on both sides) should enioy the benefite of the se∣cretest consultations in the Parliament, and Imperi∣all confirmations, and it should be lawfull for them as well as for the 
Silesians
 & others in other places to erect and set vp Schooles; all such acts, decrees, prouiso's, made heretofore to the contrary, either by 
Ferdinand
 or by them that are 
Sub vnâ,
 being declared to be voyd and of none effect.




2 That the Proscription and the banishing of the Iesuits out of the Kingdome, should be ratified and made sure and firme for euer: so that it shall neuer be lawfull for them to returne into that king∣dome vnder pretence of any order whatsoeuer. That their Colledges and all their goods should be confiscate and adiudged to the publique good of the States, and that their priuiledges should be razed out of publique Records.


3 That their Confederations and Leagues made with the people of 
Hungaria, Austria, Mo∣rauia,
 and of both the 
Lusatia's
 should bee ratified and confirmed.


4 That the Matter of Defence should be defer∣red till the generall Assembly of those Prouinces.


5 That it should be lawfull to ordaine and ap∣poynt Assemblies of States in diuers Territories, after the ancient manner.


6 That the hereditary Leagues with the Ele∣ctors and other neighbour Princes, should bee re∣newed.


7 That the Banishing and proscription of cer∣taine men out of the Kingdome, the remouing of them from the publique Offices, should bee con∣stant and firme.




To these seuen articles, the Directors after∣wards added diuers others which they thought needfull for the Kingdome and the prouinces: as namely,


1 That, that decree where the deceased Empe∣rour did giue to the bishop of 
Prage Ius patronatus,
 the aduowson and patronage, to present Priests to all Churches, is repugnant to his Maiesties Char∣ter; and therefore let it be abrogated, and let the power be giuen to the consistory of 
Prage
 to confer those benefices vpon such Pastors as are addicted to that religion, which is principally professed in that Parish.


2 Seeing that the Subiects dwelling not only in the Emperours dominions, but also in other spiri∣tuall or secular iurisdictions, (both parties being agreed) by the Emperours charter, had had pow∣er and authority hitherto to erect Churches and Schooles, let them still retaine and keepe the same hereafter, and let thest 
Clostergrabiens,
 whose tem∣ple was demolished by the Bishop, make vse of some other temple in the City, vntill their owne be reedified.


3 Let the 
Burnauiens
 hereafter quietly and pea∣cibly possesse their owne Church.


4 The Churches in the City of 
Prage
 (which

haue beene built since his Maiesties Charter was obtained) as namely the Church of the holy Trini∣ty, in the lesser towne; and the Churches of our Sauiour, and of 
Simon
 and 
Iude,
 with the Chappell adioining to it, in the old towne, let them for euer be left in the power of them which are 
Sub vtrâ{que},
 and by whom they were built: and the next Parlia∣ment let them be registred in the publike recordes.


5 Forasmuch as the vniuersity of 
Prage
 and all the goods appertaining vnto it, were giuen by the Emperour 
Rodolphus
 to the States 
Sub vtrâ{que}.
 Therfore let them still haue power either to bestow some thing of their owne, or to exact of their Sub∣iects any thing whereby that vniuersity and other Churches may be sustained, and that which is so collected, let it be kept vpon record, and required of the defenders as well as other publike contribu∣tions of the Subiects.


6 Let not any other spirituall orders besides those which are in the kingdome already, be brought in either by the King, or by those which are 
Sub vnâ.


7 Let not the Commissaries which are wont to be sent to the Parliament by the King: let them not dwell too long vpon the Kings proposition, but speedily require an answer from the States.


8 Let the States in the Parliament conferre their

voyces together; and after they haue collected their voyces, let them giue vp their answers by one either seuerally or generally: neither let the Kings Councellers sunder and separate themselues from the States, but let them also giue their best coun∣sell and aduice for the common good.


9 Let it not be lawfull to except against the an∣swer of the States in Parliaments: neither let the States be bound to admit any reply, or to accept any other conclusion, if perhaps after their depar∣ture any such conclusion be made of any.


10 And let not the Parliament be continued a∣boue 14. dayes, vnlesse it be by a peculiar consent of the States.


11 When the chiefe Chancelor of the King∣domes propoundeth any thing to the King, let an∣other Chancelor be present, and haue notice giuen him of the same.


12 Such as are to be Secretaries and Clarkes of the Chancery, let them be honest men, and addic∣ted to the Religion 
Sub vtrâ{que},
 after the vsuall and accustomed manner in former times.


13 In the next Parliament, let there be a consul∣tation held, about renewing the Hereditary leagues with the Electors and other neighbour countries.




14 That which hath been already concluded, in the last assembly, concerning some perfidious per∣sons, whereof some were to be banished the coun∣try, and some to be barred from publike offices: let it remaine firme and ratified.


15 Hereafter let none of the Kings Lieutenants in the townes of 
Prage
 be susteyned or maintained, neither let the Kings Iudges haue place either in the townes of 
Prage,
 or in any others.


16 And seeing that by commandement of the States, the Directors and exactors of contributi∣ons haue runne into a great deale of debt, in defend∣ing and preseruing the Kingdome from the enemy, and in paying the Souldiers their stipends (the Directors in the meane while being wise enough to saue themselues harmlesse) Therefore let the goods of such as were causes of that war (whether they be fled out of the Kingdome, or still remaine in it) be confiscated, and adiudged to the paiment of those debts.


17 In like manner, let the Kings goods be sold (alwayes excepting those goods of the King which are inserted into publique records, and can neuer be alienated) Let the Kings goods be sould seeing they were redeemed with other mens mony, and that many therefore were constrained to en∣gage their faith and credit: and let the mony which

is collected thence be imployed to the payment of the Kings debts, and towards the repayring of their dammages and losses, whose Houses and goods were pillag'd and burnt vp by the Kings Souldiers.


18 Such Church goods as vpon the vrgency of extreame necessity, haue beene laid to pawne or sold outright, let them not be redeemed at all; but let more of them be sold away, yet with this cauti∣on, that prouision be made that the spirituall per∣sons may be honestly maintained.


19 Let not the chamber of 
Bohemia
 be subiect to the Kings chamber, nor doe seruice to it in further∣ing the decrees thereof.


20 Let the walles be reedified about the townes of 
Prage,
 and let all forraigne Ecclesiasticall lawes be subiect to their iurisdiction.


21 The 
Prage
 townes and other townes which haue a third free state, let them not hereafter be called any more by the royall name of Chamber goods, as heretofore in publique records, (wee know no reason why) they were stiled and enti∣tuled.


22 What shall be done concerning those two Cities in the Kingdome of 
Bohemia,
 namely 
Pilsna


and 
Budwitz,
 let it be consulted vpon.


23 Touching money which shall accrew by bu∣rials, let the halfe of it be imployed vpon the re∣pairing the wals of the City, and vpon the 
Prage
 Townes.


Pilsna, Budwitz,
 and 
Gretsna,
 let them be giuen to the State 
ab vtra{que},
 that in them they may pro∣uide sufficient Armories, without which our bu∣sinesse of Defence cannot come to any good.


24 But to whose trust these Armories are to be committed, and what costs and charges are need∣full for prouiding and storing vp armes therein, let consultation be had hereafter.


At this time there was a Parliament holden at 
Vratislavia
 by the Princes and the States of 
Si∣lesia:
 The King sent to it one 
Otto Melander
 a noble Heroicall Gentleman, and one of his Councell: who from the Prince of 
Lignitz,
 in the name of the rest of the Princes and States, brought backe this answere, 
viz:


They say, that by relation of the Noble and Honourable Parsonage 
Otto Melander,
 and al∣so by his Maiesties Royall Letters, which hee deliuered vnto them, they were giuen to vnder∣stand, that 
Ferdinand
 hath determined, since the Emperour 
Matthias
 is now deceased, to vnder∣take the gouernment of the Kingdome, and to

confirme vnto these Princes and Countries, all lawes, rights, and priuiledges, as well gene∣rall as speciall, all Grants and Customes, euen the 
Maiestatis Diploma,
 the Charters of State, which were granted by his Predecessours, the Kings of 
Bohemia,
 by 
Ferdinand, Maximilian, Rodolphus
 and 
Matthias:
 and that hee is deter∣mined not onely to confirme whatsoeuer hath beene granted by his Predecessors, but also to send his Confirmation vnto them: or if at this time it be full of danger to send such Confirma∣tions, yet at least hee will accept whatsoeuer spe∣ciall priuiledges any of the Prouinces can shew for themselues. That looke what dissentions and disagreements there be betwixt the Romish Ca∣tholiques and Protestants, he is purposed to com∣pound them.


That hee would in these places confirme the Office of the King, and accept from him the Oath of Allegiance: and did hope that by this meanes it would come to passe, that (seeing hee promised moreouer to take vpon him, and to dis∣charge the Emperours debts which hee owed in the Prouinces of 
Silesia
) the States of 
Silesia
 would not onely pay such Contributions as they had formerly promised, but also would performe all other duties and offices which were due vnto him: That in so doing hee himselfe also might haue cause to declare and shew his fatherly loue and affection vnto them still more and more:

And that also, the States of 
Bohemia,
 to whom in like manner he had already sent the Confirma∣tion of their Priuiledges, might thereby take occasion to settle themselues to due obedience, that so all troubles being composed, and warres ended, the Kingdome might enioy her former peace and tranquilitie.


But as heretofore it gaue them great content∣ment, that the Emperour 
Matthias
 was pleased to deuise a way how his Kingdomes and Countries might be prouided of one to be their head, and to succeed him after his death; and that so all occa∣sions of warres and seditions being cut off, peace and tranquility might be preserued and continued in the Kingdome: So also they called to minde, when that Succession was giuen to 
Ferdinand,
 vp∣on what conditions they accepted it, and what promises they receiued from him; and what they on the other side were bound to performe vnto him: and so they wish with all their hearts, that 
Matthias
 his departure had hapned at such time, as all things being in peace, they might quietly vse and enioy their piuiledges and immunities, and 
Ferdinand
 might obtaine the wished end of his Succession with greatest facilitie: for so nothing could haue hindered them, but that vpon the re∣ceipt of the Letters of Confirmation of their ge∣nerall and speciall priuiledges, they had forthwith accepted him for their King, and had performed vnto him all such offices as were due.




But howsoeuer it be, they are exceeding glad, that he remembring his promise made vnto them, is desirous to put it in execution. But they doubt not, but that 
Ferdinand
 will set before his eyes, how lamentable and confused the state of those Countries is; and that the combustion is now spread so farre, and growne so vehement, that it cannot without great difficultie and danger be ex∣tinguished and suppressed: and that hee will be pleased to take into his consideration, how farre these times are altered from those wherein his suc∣cession to the Kingdome of 
Bohemia
 was made:


As namely, that now the publique peace and quiet is disturbed, all the Country embroyled with warres, their Townes sacked and spoyled, and euery place fraught with Soldiers and armed men. That their priuiledges confirmed heretofore, are of no power or strength to defend them from these euils. And that not onely Disputations and diuers wrested interpretations haue beene inuented to discredit that profitable businesse of Defence, vn∣dertaken for the profit and good of all; but also, that warres are prepared, and great violence done to the Subiect: so that it seemeth that the bare con∣firmation of Priuiledges is not now any longer sufficient to establish peace in that Kingdome and those Provinces, but it is necessary that what be∣fore was promised in words, be now shewed in deed and action.


Also they doubt not, but that he will be pleased

to remember what a quiet, sweet and calme state there was thorow the whole kingdome of 
Bohemia,
 and the other confederate countries, not onely in the dayes of former Kings, his Predecessors; but euen at that very time when he was admitted to the succession in the same kingdome: and how farre it is estranged from that tranquility: how much it concerneth the common wealth, that the ancient and wholesome ordinances of the kingdome, and the old custome be obserued, not onely about the designation, but also about the acceptation of the King, whosoeuer he shall bee.


All which things being duly considered; The King and all others may easily perceiue, that, al∣though they in times past did elect and designe him to bee their chiefe Soueraigne Duke, and that of their owne free will and pleasure, without any eye or regard to the Kingdome of 
Bohemia:
 yet, the case with the Kingdom and other prouinces stand∣ing so as it doth; they may not to the great preiu∣dice of others, (as well concerning the execution of the designation, as concerning the designation it selfe) accept and admit him to be their gouer∣nour.


Also that the King by the premises may easily coniecture, that these embroilements and combus∣tions, together with the troubles and hurts which followed thereupon in point of religion through∣out 
Bohemia
 and 
Silesia,
 cannot be remedied and laid asleepe, by the bare charter of confirmation of

priuiledges: but that these times desire to see the effect of this confirmation, and doe require deedes and not words.


These things considered, they hope, and beseech his maiesty, that he would be pleased not to take it in ill part; that, weighing the great danger of these times, they thinke it good for them to expect, vntill he doe not onely vndertake the gouernment and administration of the kingdome of 
Bohemia:
 but also, stinting all these troubles, doe settle the whole kingdome in that state which their priuiledges doe require, and that they may freely without warre and molestation, enioy their priuiledges confirmed. And that this may be done very well, if (all warres being ended) he would 
ipso facto
 performe all things to the Prouinces according to the prescript of their priuiledges in point of Religion, and would take order for them by granting such a charter, that by it they might enioy the peace of Religion. To the performance hereof, he needed not any inter∣position; for here was nothing required but the very effect of their priuiledges; and that is the one∣ly meanes both to settle peace and tranquility on all sides, and also to keepe and retaine it constantly: which being vsed, when he should enter vpon the administration of the kingdome, he needed not to make any question at all, but they in their place will doe what necessity requireth.


Concerning the Earle of 
Thorne
 his expedition and voyage into the lower 
Austria,
 we haue spoken

before. The Romish Catholiques euen vntill then were in deliberating what answer they should giue to the Protestants: For the Protestants had pro∣pounded seuen articles to them to consult vpon: namely, that all the R. catholike States in the vpper & lower 
Austria
 should be one body with the Pro∣testants in those parts; that in time of vrgent neces∣sity the one side should defend the other: that their priuiledges (as well old as new) should remaine whole and entyre to euery state, and nothing in them, should be altered and changed. In burialls and spittles for sicke folke there should be no difference made between Protestants & R. Catholiques: but that without respect of religion both alike should receiue the like benefite by them. That to the vniuersity of 
Vienna
 (which the states by com∣mon consent, founded in the yeare 1613) learned men should be called without respect of what Religion they be, viz. Romish Catholique or Pro∣testant. That no man should be troubled for diffe∣rence in religion. That both sides should abstaine from persecuting one another, and that euery man should be permitted to enioy his owne liberty.


And howsoeuer as yet, they could not agree v∣pon the foresaid articles, yet, because the earle of 
Thorne
 desired it, they remoued the garison from the city of 
Laba:
 which being done, 
Thorne
 placed there a garison of his souldiers; vntill such time as the States had leuied an army, and prouided a ga∣rison for that City.








The Citie 
Tina
 taken in by the Earle of Thorne.


AT the latter end of Iuly the Earle being pro∣uided of a very good Army at 
Omnitium,
 went forth of purpose to ioyne battle with Count 
Buquoy;
 he led after him 46. companies of horse, and 48. ensignes of foote. But the Count thinking it small aduātage to him accept the fight, declined it by all meanes, keeping himselfe very carefully in his tents: wherefore the Earle made an assault vpon the towne of 
Tina
 and tooke it, and so put all the garison souldiers and the borderers thereabout to the sword. Not long after some of the officers of the Count 
Buquoy
 (not knowing what had passed) came that way, and were inter∣cepted by the new garison the Earle had placed there in the towne.








FERDINAND
 His ELECTION, in what manner performed.


AFter certaine sessions in the Court at 
Franc∣ford
 betweene the Electors of the spiritu∣ality; and the Embassadors of the Secular Electors, and that the Bishop-Electors perceiued that those Embassadors could not be wrought v∣pon to remit any thing of their commission, Mes∣sengers were dispatched in all hast the 24. of Iuly to the principall of the Lay-Electors vnto the Duke of 
Saxony,
 and the 
Palatine
 of 
Rhine.
 In the meane while 
Ferdinand
 and the Bishop of 
Colein
 withdrew themselues vnto 
Lewis Lantzgraue
 of 
Hesse,
 and spent the time in hunting, when they came to 
Francford
 againe, and assembled another Court, it was declared to 
Ferdinand,
 that he should appeare in the same Court againe the 9. of August to take a solemne Oath, which was to be administred to him by the State and people of 
Francford,
 accord∣ing as was prescribed in the 
Golden Bull.




The 8. of August hauing receiued full resolution from the Elector of 
Saxonie,
 concerning his more absolute power, the Magistrate presently caused it to be proclamed by sound of trumpet: that all strangers should depart the City: those onely excepted which belonged to the Court of 
Ferdinand,
 and the Princes Electors: the next day the Oath was giuen to him in the Court of the Gouernour, and be∣fore the Court gate of all the Citizens and Garison Souldiers to the number of a 1000. Afterwards their meetings being continued, diuers consultati∣ons were debated, till at length the 18. of August was set downe for the Election day to be perfor∣med in their Church.






The order of going to Church.


FERDINAND
 and the Electors came to the Court in Coaches, and from thence (being Royally apparelled in Electorate Robes) they rode on horse-backe to the Church of S. 
Bartholmew
 about eight a clocke in the morning, being enuironed round about with men at armes, the Citi∣zens being placed on eyther hand.


Now the Order was this: The Archbishop of 
Mentz,
 and 
Trieers
 rode first; 
Ferdinand,
 hauing vpon his head a Crown of exceeding great valew, and the Archbishop of 
Colein,
 to associate him, came next; last of all followed the Embassadours of the secular Electors.


All things being done in the Church about twelue a clocke, they rode backe in this equipage; The Bishop of 
Trieers
 went first alone by himself: next after followed the Embassadours of the se∣cular Electors; first, the 
Palatines,
 with the Globe of the Empire; in the middest the Embassadour of 
Saxonie,
 with the Sword; and after him hee of 
Brandenburge,
 with the Scepter; 
Ferdinand
 fol∣lowed these alone by himselfe; and next vnto him rode the Electors of 
Colein,
 and 
Mentz.


The Election thus solemnly performed, Mes∣sengers were straight sent to 
Aquisgraue
 and 
No∣rimberge
 to fetch the Crowne, and Scepter, and

other ornaments belonging to the Coronation, which are there kept.


In the meane time 
Lewis Lantzgraue
 of 
Hesse,
 and the Embassadour of the King of 
Spaine,
 came to 
Francford
 to congratulate 
Ferdinand.
 Then was made the vsuall preparation for the Coronation: a great long Bridge was built, which reached from the Court, all ouer the Market place, to the very Church. Before the Court was a huge spacious Kitchin raysed for the boyling of an Oxe. Then was there a Well artificially contriued, which did send forth out of the ground, red and white wine, Barrels and Tubbes to that purpose being priuily before conueighed vnder the earth. Another large place was made in the Court for the Imperiall Banquet, Royally furnished with much variety, and drinke in wonderfull plenty. Last of all, there were set vp Theaters and Stages for shewes, and a Royall Chayre of State set in the Church for the Emperour.


About the same time (being the latter end of 
Iuly
) two thousand 
Hungarians,
 who had wasted many places of 
Bohemia
 and 
Austria,
 with their burning of Townes, and robberies, hauing gotten great booty, and being disswaded from so wic∣ked attempts by the States of 
Hungaria,
 withdrew themselues priuately and went home-ward with all their spoyles: and there was a rumour that 
Sumadius
 an 
Hungarian
 Captaine, thought to haue followed them with fiue hundred 
Hunga∣rians


vnder his owne command: But Count 
Bu∣quoi
 getting intelligence thereof, gaue that busi∣nesse in charge to the Cornet of Horse that lay in 
Wallenstein,
 that they should way-lay them at some fit passage: by which meanes they were preuented, and defeated, all their Bootie taken from them, many of them slaine, and the rest put to flight.










The Assembly of the States of 
Morauia,
 and their Decrees, fiue in number, for establishing the 
Confederation.


ABout the beginning of this moneth, it was agreed by the States of 
Morauia
 assembled at 
Prinna:


1 That the Confederation begun of late, and confirmed by a solemne Oath betweene the 
Bohe∣mians, Morauians, Silesians,
 and 
Lusatians,
 should be ratified, and all the branches thereof should be kept inuiolably to all succeeding Gene∣rations.


2 And to the end they might auenge their coun∣try of the barbarous and incredible tyranny, and sa∣uage cruelty which their enemies had exercised vpon them; besides the Souldiers which were alrea∣dy in garison, there should be pressed 1500. more and 
Ralph a Schlenitz
 should be their commander.


3 It was decreed likewise that the Edict touching such as were proscribed for their bad and treche∣rous gouernment should be banished the country for euer, and their goods to be ceized to the vse of the towne where they dwelt, and to that purpose to be sold to the best aduantage, made by the States

a little before assembled in the same place, should still be ratified and confirmed.


4 They haue professed publiquely, and expres∣ly that they cannot with a safe Conscience be help∣full to the States neither in men nor money, vnlesse all the Ecclesiasticall goods of Friers and Nunnes bee sequestred from them and giuen to the States, and might be sold from the good of the common∣wealth without al let or contradiction of any man: and that prouision should be made out of this estate and goods thus alienated & sold from the Abbyes, Prelates, ouer-seers, Friers and Nunnes of what order soeuer, as also from such as refusing the state of mariage, freely choose to remaine in that condi∣tion of a single life still: and that after a fitting and competent state during their liues.


5 That there should be a diligent search made of Armes laid vp in any houses, Monasteries, Nun∣neries situate as well within the City, as without, and that those Armes, together with all gold, siluer and moneyes found in the hand of any Ecclesiasti∣call person to be taken from them, and to be trans∣lated with the publique good: and that all Citizens and subiects of the Romish Catholique Religion, together with all partakers of the Roman faction; should be laid hold on, and their houses being care∣fully searched, all Armes should be taken from them, and be conueied to a certaine place appoin∣ted

for them. And forasmuch as they haue their Gouernor, and inferiour Officers also in suspition, and cannot repose that trust in them which is fit∣ting to men of that place, they shall giue vp their account of the gouernment of their seuerall Pro∣uinces to deputies assigned and authorised to that effect: and in case there be necessity and desert, they shall be displaced from their offices, others of the Protestants being chosen in their roome.


And that hee might restraine them, and force the 
Bohemians
 to breake off their Confederati∣on by the calling backe of his Armie, enters againe into their Countrey with eight hundred horse, and foote; and hauing got into his possession a very strong fort called 
Iosuit,
 determined also to take in the Castle of the Prince of 
Lichtenstein,
 and so at once to open himself a passage into the whole Country, but the States of 
Morania
 preuented him, and recouered the Castle into their owne sub∣iection before, and placed a very strong Garison in it: when he saw himselfe disappointed, and ha∣uing receiued new forces out of 
Hungary,
 he made attempt vpon the gouernment of 
Diffenbacchius,
 and when he found him well appointed, ha∣uing spoiled and fired some poore villages in the frontires of it, hee turned himselfe to a towne called 
Niclasburge,
 but receiued a repulse there to, by valiant resistance of the Garison hee was con∣strained to leaue them with no small losse to his men.




Notwithstanding, the 
Morauians
 incensed with these molestations, hauing leuied 1500. of their owne countrimen, and ioyned with them some o∣ther forraine Aide, marcht directly to meete him, and when they found him, August the 8. day, lying in 
Vistrie
 with 9000 horse and foote, presently he fell a skirmishing with them, and forced him, lea∣uing many of his men dead in the place, from the narrow straight into the Champion Fields. Now he little thought that the 
Morauians
 would prose∣cute the fight, but they all on fire with rage and in∣dignation, set so valiantly vpon him, that the bat∣tailes was prolonged and continued sixe houres to∣gether. 
Tampire
 lost 2000. of his foote and horse, and last of all was driuen by his flight to leaue the 
Morauians
 the glory of the Field and day. During this fight, the Earle of 
Monte-cuculi, Saxo
 of 
Lauen∣berge
 were mortally wounded & many with them, and not long after died of the hurts there receiued. In the heat of the conflict the 
Morauians
 were who∣ly mingled with the 
Tampirians:
 the Smoake and Dust had caused so great darkenes that they could not know one another, that it could be nothing lesse then a miracle, that but 300 of the 
Morauians
 were slaine, and as many wounded, in so great con∣fusion: and thus 
Tampire
 was compelled to forsake 
Morauia,
 and to write to 
Vienna,
 for new supplyes, to be sent vnto him,








The Fort of Vechin taken by
 BVQVOI.


COunt 
Buquoi
 meane while is not idle, but sets vpon the Fort 
Vechin
 and spoiles the little towne belonging to it with 15. small villages, and burnes them to the ground, and when he vn∣derstood Coronel 
Francus
 to march that way with 1200. Musketers, he laid 8000. men in ambush to entrap him, but 
Francus
 hauing seasonable intelli∣gence of so great trechery, turned aside to 
Thabor,
 and so fortunately avoided the danger.








FREDERICKE 
V.
 Count 
PALATINE
 Elector, 
chosen King of
 Bohemia.


NOtwithstanding the Directors for 
Bohemia,
 the 19. of August, together with the Embassa∣dours of 
Morauia, Silesia, Lusatia
 the higher and the lower being present, held a Councell from nine in the morning till three in the afternoone, hauing the doores fast shut and lockt vnto them: in which they finally decreed, that 
Ferdinand
 was to be abdicated and deposed from his Kingdome, and neuer to be admitted to the same, and ano∣ther to bee chosen in his stead: which Decree was published and proclaimed of the 
Bohemians
 at three a clocke the same day: of the 
Silesians
 and 
Lusatians
 the 21. day of the same Moneth: on the 24. and 25. dayes of the same Moneth, all the people assembled in their Churches, for pub∣lique and solemne prayer to God, that he would direct them in electing a King fitting to gouerne them, and Sermons also were made to the same purpose.


On the 26. of August, they met againe, and after prayers and other diuine Seruice finished, 
Fredericke
 Elector 
Palatine
 by the greater number was chosen and proclaimed King of 
Bohemia:
 he

had voyces to the Election, of the Nobilitie 36 of the Gentry 91. these for the present: all the free Cities and States for the most part consented to it the next day. Besides, the hands of the Em∣bassadours for 
Morauia, Silesia,
 and 
Eusatia,
 being gathered, it was manifestly found, that they were all directed to the 
Palatine
 with one consent.


The Solemnitie was thus performed: The Song of 
Ambrose
 was sung, the Bels rung, the Ordi∣nance shot off fiue times together. Embassadours also being deputed, who the next day should beare the newes to the Elector 
Palatine
 of this his E∣lection to be King of 
Bohemia,
 by the ioynt voyces of the whole Kingdome, and the three vnited Pro∣uinces before spoken off.








Pissera surprised by assault of Count Buquoi.


WHile these things were a doing at 
Prage, Bu∣quoi
 marched towards 
Pissera
 with his whole army, and consumed the Suburbs with fire. After, he sent a Trumpet to 
Hacquius
 commander of two Ensignes in the City, to will him to depart the towne, & yeeld it vp to him. The Captain refusing, answered, 
he would fight for his City vntill his latest breath, as was the part of a true Souldier. Buquoi
 en∣raged with this answer, commanded the towne to be assaulted in foure seuerall places at once: in which conflict though the Garison behaued them∣selues valiantly, and slew many, yet at last number preuailing, the City was taken by force. After their forst entrance they ranged vp and downe like mad men. The Captaine was hanged vp, the Gouernor slaine with the sword, great booty was taken, with Engines, and two Rammes for battery, which Ge∣nerall 
Mansfield
 had formerly vsed against the Ci∣tie of 
Pilsna.
 He withdrew his forces backe toward 
Straconitium,
 which towne he had also a little be∣fore brought vnder his power. He thought withall to haue besieged 
Pilsna.
 The 
Bohemians
 followed the Count, but durst not settle vpon him, march∣ing in goodly equipage with a full army: about the same time, many fled from 
Veraucum
 and other places to 
Prage,
 carrying with them their wiues, children and all their estates, being strucken with the terrour of this bloudy massacre and cruelty.








THE CORONATION 
of
 FERDINAND, 
perfor∣med
 at Francford. August. 30. 1619.


W
E spake before of the Election of 
Ferdinand
 to be Emperor: now for as much as it seemed good to his Maiestie, following therein the ex∣ample and president of the Emperor 
Matthias
 deceased, that he himselfe would also be crowned at 
Francford;
 he sent and sought from 
Aquisgrane
 and 
Norimberge
 the Banners, Robes and other ornaments of the Empire; and thus all things necessary to this royall solemnity were prepared, as wee haue touched before: when the appointed day for the Coronation was come, which was the 30. of August, according to the old account and the 9. of September according to the new, two daies before, 
Lewis Lantzgraue
 of 
Hesse
 came thither with his two sonnes, and his brother 
Philip:
 The day before the solemnity approched the Ambassadors of 
Norimberge,
 with the Impe∣riall crowne and other royall ornaments: The

gates were opened to none; the garison souldiers stood in the valley, and the citizens in armes were set in euery corner of the streets, but most of all from the Court to the Colledge of Electors, and from thence on both sides the bridge euen to the Church of Saint 
Bartholomew:
 the middle of the weeke the Eclesiasticall Electors went to the Church apart euery one by themselues; and there putting off their Electorall habits, attired them∣selues like Bishops as they were, and in that sort waited for 
Ferdinands
 comming, who about 8. of the clock, mounted on a gallant horse: rode vnto the Temple in this prince-like order: There went before him on foote a great trayne of Offi∣cers, Counsellors, and other noble personages: the two sonnes of 
Lewis Lantzgraue
 of 
Hesse,
 and after them 
Lewis
 their Father, with his brother 
Philip,
 rode in front together; fiue officers fol∣lowed next, and the Ambassadors of the three se∣cular Electors, who carried before 
Ferdinand
 the Globe, Scepter and Sword of the Empire: 
Ferdi∣nand
 himselfe apparelled like an Elector, and ha∣uing a crowne vpon his head, was carried on horse∣backe vnder a canopy, which was borne vp by two noble men (Consuls) 
Daniell Stalburger
 and 
Phi∣lip Orthius,
 and foure Senators, or states of 
Franc∣ford;
 their names were 
Iohn-Philip Weisius, Hierom Stephens, Iohn-Stephens Schadaeus,
 and 
Iohn-Philip Orthius:
 As soone as they were come to the Church, the Ecclesiasticall Electors, in their 
Pon∣tificalibus;


together with their Suffraganes and some others of the Clergy, aduanced forward to meete 
Ferdinand,
 from the Quire euen to the doore of the Temple, & hauing receiued him ho∣norably, they lead him to an Altar situate at the entrance of the Quire or Chancell: There he en∣tered into a seate appointed for prayer, placed be∣fore the Altar, made of cloth of siluer, and a Ca∣nopy of the same costly stuffe let downe from the roofe of the Church ouer the seate: the two Arch∣bishops also went into their seuerall seates, on the right hand 
Triers,
 on the left 
Colein,
 prepared for them & richly hung with red Scarlet cloth: 
Ferdi∣nand
 tooke vp a little booke which was layd in that seate, and composed himselfe to prayer, the Secular Ambassadors seated also neere him: The 
Chantors
 meane while sang that song: 
Glory be to God on high:
 the Elector of 
Mentz
 began Masse, and in the saying of it the other Electors and Am∣bassadors lead away 
Ferdinand
 to the high Altar, and from thence (after Benediction) vnto a royall Throne, which was placed a step or two aboue the seate where 
Ferdinand
 prayed; continuing their obseruancy and ceremonies, he came to the Altar againe, and there fell vpon his knees, the Electors and the Ambassadors kneeling by him till the Le∣tany was said ouer him. This done, Hee that was to Consecrate him, propounded to him the vsuall Questions. 
Whether He would stedfastly keepe the Christian and Catholique Religion, defend the

Church, administer iustice to all, encrease, and en∣large the Empire, maintaine the widdows and father∣lesse children, render due honour to the Bishop of Rome: Ferdinand
 answered affirmatiuely to euery of these, and confirmed his affirmation with a so∣lemne oath. The Consecrator turned himselfe to the Electors, Ambassadors, and all the people standing round about, demaunded of them, whe∣ther they would submit themselues to 
Ferdinand,
 establish his kingdome, and performe odedience to his commandements: when they had testified their consents to all those motions, and cryed with a loud voice, 
That he ought to be their King;
 hee was vnclothed in certaine places of his body, and then the Consecrator came to him, and taking oyle annointed the Crowne of his head, his neck, his breasts, his right arme and his hands, adding these words at each seuerall part hee annointed; 
I annoint thee with holy oyle, in the name of the Fa∣ther, the Sonne, and the holy Ghost.


The vnction finished, the Ecclesiasticall Ele∣ctors, with their Suffraganes leade 
Ferdinand
 through the Quire into the Conclaue or Colledge of Election, and hauing wiped off the oyle, they put vpon him the ancient Emperiall and Ponti∣ficall Robes brought from 
Norimbergh;
 that is, the Bootes and long Surplisse, and Gowne let downe from his necke by his Brest in parts and so throwne ouer his shoulders, they put also Gloues vpon his hands, and thus attired as it were a Deacon, they

bring him forth againe from the Chancell to the seate where he first prayed, and there the Conse∣crator liberally bestowed vpon him a new blessing; prayers said, 
Ferdinand
 ascends into the Imperiall Throne, and the Electors of 
Triers
 and 
Colein
 take downe the sword of 
Charles
 the Great from the Altar, where together with the Crowne and Scep∣ter it was layd; draw it forth, and giue it into 
Fer∣dinands
 hands, the Consecrator speaking these words: 
Take this sword by the hands of Bishops.
 And when he comes to these words: 
Be thou girt with this sword, &c.
 Then the sword is put vp into the sheath againe, and girt vnto his side by the Am∣bassador of the Emperiall Electors.


Moreouer, after this the Consecrator takes the Ring from the Altar, and pronouncing certaine words put it vpon his finger: from the same Altar he takes the Scepter and Globe of the Empire, and giues them into his hand; the Scep∣ter into his right hand, the Globe into his left, with these words: 
Take the rod of Vertue & Equity;
 last of all, the Emperiall Crowne is lifted off the Altar and set vpon his head by the three Spirituall Electors ioyntly, with these words: 
take the crowne of the Kingdome,
 and then they array him with the golden cloke of 
Charles
 the Great; these Ceremo∣nies obserued, he comes down from his Throne, & deliuers back these things to the Ambassadors of the Temporall Electors, that is to say, the Globe to the 
Palatines
 Ambassador, and the Scepter to

Brandenburghs,
 and so of the rest; then againe hee makes towards the Altar, and there takes a solemne oath, that hee will doe all those things which be∣long to a good Emperor.


The oath taken, the Masse goes on, 
Ferdinand
 betaking him to his throne the while, and here is exquisit musicke playd by the Quire: From the Throne he is once more led to the Altar, the Sa∣crifice of the Masse first offered, Hee receiues the Sacrament at the hands of the Consecrators; the Sacrament, prayers and other seruice fully fini∣shed, the Consecrator 
Mentz
 goes out first, 
Triers
 and 
Colein
 after him; and betweene them goes 
Ferdinand
 to a stately Theater, a stage raysed vp aloft towards the South, hung on all sides with rich Tapistry and Stamell cloth; being layd ouer the floore therof: before him are caried the Armes of the Empire by the Ambassadors of the Secular Electors; the Suffraganes and others of the Cler∣gy following after: there the Spirituall Electors place him in a Princely Throne, eleuated some∣what aboue the rest of the stage, couered ouer with cloth of gold, and hung with a Canopy of red Veluet, the Chanters at the time singing the song of Saint 
Ambrose:
 The Musicke ceasing, the Archbishop of 
Mentz
 drawes neere to 
Ferdi∣nand,
 and in his owne name, and in the name of the other Electors, congratulates to him this hap∣py Inauguration, and withall, excellently and care∣fully commends to him the whole Empire.




Presently vpon this the Archbishop of 
Triers
 and 
Colein,
 and all the Clergy leaue the stage and returne into the Chancell, where putting off their 
Pontificalibus,
 they put vpon them againe the robes of the Electors: 
Ferdinand
 staies still in his Chaire of state, and creates Knights, by striking them with the sword of 
Charles
 the Great. After this Hee rises vp, and goes himselfe out of the The∣ater, and returnes from Church in this solemne order.


First and formost goe the seruants of the Court, next the Counsellors of the Emperor, and the Princes Electors, as also a very great number of noble personages, then followed the Earles and Barons: in the next ranke the Archbishop of 
Triers
 by himselfe, the 
Palatines
 delegate and 
Brandenburghs
 together, carying the Globe, and the Scepter, then the Delegate of 
Saxony
 alone carying the Sword, next the Emperor with the Crowne on his head, and the Emperiall robes on his backe, by himselfe likewise vnder a Canopy borne by the States of 
Francford,
 as was shewed before: The Archbishop of 
Mentz
 and 
Colein
 to∣gether, all going backe on foote closed vp this royall Traine.


Thus goe they along forwards straight to the Court ouer the bridge couered ouer with Stamell: there followed a little after three of 
Ferdinands
 Chaplaines on horse-back which cast abrode mo∣ney to the people, gold and siluer, of lesse and

greater valew of round and square fashion: the greater money on one side had an arme stretched forth of the Cloud, holding in the hand a Kingly Crowne with this inscription, TO THOSE THAT STRIVE LAWFVLLY: on the other side this, FERDINAND II. KING OF HVNGARY AND BOHEMIA, CROWNED KING OF THE RO∣MANS SEPTEMBER IX. MDCXIX. The lesser moneys had the letter F. with a crowne, and the number of 11. stamped on them on the one side; on the other a Crowne, and these words: CROWNED KING OF THE ROMANS, SEP∣TEMBER IX. MDCXIX.


The casting of this money made such a hurly burly among the Common-people, that the Chap∣laines could scarce make way for the greatnesse of the presse, though they were on horsebacke: the cloth on the bridge as soone as the Emperor passed, was cut, torne and rent in peeces by the people.


In the Pallace or Hall of the Court, the Tables were set and royally furnished for himselfe and the Princes Electors: the Tables of the three Tem∣porall Electors were couered with red Veluet as also the Table of the Elector of 
Bohemia,
 but no meate was set vpon them, as is prouided by the constitution of the golden Bull: being thus at last in the Pallace, the Delegates of the Secular Ele∣ctors addressed them to performe the Offices of the Electorship, in stead of their Lords and Princes

themselues. When 
Pappenhemius
 the heredi∣tary Marshall of the Empire mounted his horse, and being brought with a measure of siluer, to a heape of oates, being laid together in the open yard, before the Court, betweene the Well of wine and the Kitchin, filled his measure, and strucke it with a rod of siluer, and then gaue it to a Seruant to keepe, the people after snatching them away.


After him appeared one of the Delegates of the 
Brandenburgh,
 riding also on horse-backe from the Court, and tooke vp a Basen of siluer with an Ewer of gold, and a Towell, set vpon a Board by the Kitchin where the Bull was roa∣sted, and carryed it with him to the Court.


Last of all, the Delegate of the Elector 
Pala∣tine,
 Sewer hereditary to the Kingdome, being brought foorth from the Court, tooke certaine dishes of the Bull roasted in the publique Kit∣chin, couered with foure siluer platters, and set out on the Dresser, and bore them with him to the Court.


This being done, the rude multitude breaking into the Kitchin, by maine force carryed away with them the Bull which was roasted whole, with the head, feet, hoofes, tayle and hornes, and stuft full of Hares, Conies, Lambes, Geese, and diuers other sorts of Birds and fowles, pulling it by peece-meale, and cutting it a sunder with

their kniues: and which is more rude, they defa∣ced the Kitchin, and tooke away all the Tim∣ber of it.


While they kept this coyle, 
Ferdinand
 and the Electors are euery one at their owne Tables. The Well before the Court, made in the manner of a rocke, beganne to flow with redde and white wine, out of the mouth of an Eagle with two heads crowned, which was placed betweene two Lyons bearing the Ornaments of the Empire, the Scepter, the Globe and Sword.


Now the wine ranne out of this Eagle in great abundance for three houres together, being re∣ceiued into two vessels of exceeding great quan∣titie, as many as would hauing liberty to draw and drinke of it as much as they would, till at last, by the rage of the giddy multitude, they in vaine striuing against them who were appoin∣ted to keepe it, the Well was borne downe, and the Eagle, with the Lions, and all other Orna∣ments of it were caryed away.


The Royall Dinner continued till fiue of the clocke in the after-noone with great solemnitie and ioy. The Emperour at last departed from that Court to his owne Royall Palace, the Ele∣ctors accompanying him some few dayes after. There were publique Tiltings for ioy of this Co∣ronation.


After it the Ambassadours of the 
Palatine
 and

Brandenburgh,
 and last of all, of the Duke of 
Saxony,
 returned home to their seuerall Princes, many wishing all prosperitie and good successe to the Emperour, and expressing their prayers for him in Verse.


FINIS.









