Good newes from Florence of a famous victorie obtained against the Turkes in May last 1613. both by sea and land: By the great Duke of Florence, the earle of Candale, and diuers French commanders and gentlemen heereafter named. Translated faithfully into English out of the French copie, printed with priuiledge at Paris and taken out of the Italian discourse printed at Florence.
Relazione della presa della fortezza, e porto di Seleucia, detta Agliman, in Caramania, e di due galere capitane, & altri vasselli Turcheschi. English.
Approx. 26 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 12 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A00985




STC 11091



ESTC S118620





99853827




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Good newes from Florence of a famous victorie obtained against the Turkes in May last 1613. both by sea and land: By the great Duke of Florence, the earle of Candale, and diuers French commanders and gentlemen heereafter named. Translated faithfully into English out of the French copie, printed with priuiledge at Paris and taken out of the Italian discourse printed at Florence.
Relazione della presa della fortezza, e porto di Seleucia, detta Agliman, in Caramania, e di due galere capitane, & altri vasselli Turcheschi. English.
[2], 21,[1] p.   


London :


Printed by Edward Griffin for Nathaniel Butter at Saint Austins gate,


1614.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Florence (Italy) --  History --  Early works to 1800.
Turkey --  History --  1453-1683.
2012-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-03
Geremy Carnes
Sampled and proofread
2013-03
Geremy Carnes
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






11091


S118620


99853827


19225














Good Newes from Florence: OF A FAMOVS ƲICTORIE OBTAINED against the Turkes in May last 1613. both by Sea and Land:


By the great Duke of 
FLORENCE,
 the Earle of CANDALE, and diuers French Commanders and Gentlemen heereafter named.


Translated faithfully into English out of the French copie, printed with priuiledge at 
Paris
 and taken out of the Italian discourse printed at 
Florence.




printer's device?


VERITAS FILIA TEMPORIS




LONDON, Printed by 
Edward Griffin
 for 
Nathaniel Butter
 at 
Saint Austins gate,
 1614.














A RELATION OF the taking of the Hauen and fortresse of 
SELEVCIA
 called 
AGLIMAN
 in CARAMANIA, and of two Gene∣rall Gallies and other ships of the TVRKES.


T
He great Duke 
Cosmo
 the se∣cond, heire of the valour and glorie of his most princely Ancestors as well as of their faire and flourishing States in 
Tuscanie,
 knowing in himselfe hee had as great an inclination and as much obligation towards all high & great attempts in generall, and particularly those that were for the sea, as he saw himselfe left with few oc∣casions and little meanes for the same, hauing beene preuented therein by the ambitious va∣lour of his father 
Ferdinando,
 which seemed to haue left after him nothing of any possibilitie,

or such as was full of extreme difficulties: hee seeing that (I say) fell not a crying with that 
Alexander
 which first got himselfe the name of 
Great,
 but rather the more mooued with lau∣dable emulation, endeuoureth himselfe daily to follow the victories of his father, and if possible be, to raise them vp to the top of all perfection.


For this effect being resolued to giue ouer those flyings on the sea, and vtterly transpor∣ted to the faire enterprises by land, after hee had made a most curious fearch and examina∣tion of the fairest and hardest among them, the first he iudged worthy of himselfe was this of 
Agliman,
 a fortresse of 
Caramania
 or 
Cilicia:
 a Country indeed which in old time hath had two most famous Cities, 
Tarsus
 the Metropo∣litan thereof and 
S. Pauls
 country, and 
Seleucia
 with the port and hauen thereof, now adaies called 
Agliman;
 from thence sailed out armies for sea the most strange and formidable that euer were heard of. Historie tels vs, that the Pyrates which heeretofore there assembled, did set out together sometimes more than a thousand great ships, so sumptuously furnish∣ed,

that many had their sailes of purple, the roapes and gables of gold, and the oares set with siluer, that by their inrodes and scourings they had spoiled and ruinated aboue foure hundred townes, and broken and marred all the trading and commerce thorowout the Mediterranean sea, so that proud 
Rome
 did ac∣knowledge by them she was not vnuincible as she thought, and was forced then to set out against them that great Nauie whereof 
Pom∣peius
 the great was Admirall. This great Duke then aspired to the same place on the which formerly 
Pompeius
 deseigned his great enter∣prise. And though this noble obiect was more than sufficient to mooue his spirit, yet the Christian zeale and pietie was his chiefest and most regarded motiue. For vpon the walles of the same fortresse were set vp the heads of for∣tie worthie and braue subiects of his, cruelly slaine when the ship 
Prospera
 was lost by the stubborne ignorance of the Captaine, which being drowned in the same did escape the ex∣emplarie punishment he deserued. This hor∣rible trophey which the Turkes had thus ere∣cted to their pride, still kept a flea in the eare

(as the prouerbe is) of this great Duke, more than the victories of 
Miltiades
 in the head of 
Themistocles.
 And such a pitifull pawne mise∣rably staked vp there touched his heart to the quicke, more than euer was touched the heart of that famous The bane for the losse of his shield. The Agah of the place did foresee it very well, which many times endeuoured himselfe so to deale at 
Constantinople,
 that these heads might be taken away, assuring that they could auaile to no other purpose, but as baits or spurres to the great Duke to enterprise the ruine of that place. Now then such hath been the enterprise which this yeere amongst many others giuen in charge (according to the cu∣stome) vnto the Admirall 
Ingherrammi
 did seg∣nalize & ennoble the fame of the great Duke. The Gallies haue beene these six: the 
Capitana,
 the 
Padrona,
 the 
S. Maria Magdalena, S. Francese, S. Stephano, S. Giouanni:
 the which well furnish∣ed with victuals and all kinde of munitions for warre, manned also with six companies of souldiers, vnder the command vpon land of 
S
or
. 
Iulio de Conty,
 called 
Montauto,
 with more than fortie Knights, and a good companie of

Nobles willing to venture with them, amongst the which was reckoned 
Don Pietro di Medicis.
 They did set out the last day of March from the port of 
Ligorn,
 after they had deuoutly called vpon the diuine fauour vnder the hap∣pie guidance and luckie presence of the Dukes most excellent greatnesse their master. The second day of Aprill they arriued at 
Ciuita Vec∣chia,
 and there found the Earle of 
Candale,
 Duke of 
Alluyn
 eldest sonne to the Duke of 
Espernon,
 a yoong Lord of some two and twenty yeeres of age, which burning with a generous flame in the loue of valour, and to be segnalized by the worth of warres and deeds of armes, the only meane worthy of himselfe, and practised by his ancestors, was exceeding desirous to be one in this enterprise.


Which his Excellencie vnderstanding, had commanded the Admirall to receiue him, and to vse him according to the worth of his per∣son and house whence hee was descended. Thus that yong Lord with fiftie others which accompanied him were shipped and taken in, amongst which was 
Mons
r
. 
de Cipierre, Mons
r
. 
de Themines,
 the Barons of 
Momberault, de la Tour


and his brother, of 
Auenes, Deltour, Du Plessis, De la Motte Magnas, S. Cyre, Monplaisir, de Loïeres, de Vick, de la Boissiere, de Verneug, de Villandreco.
 The tenth of Aprill they were at 
Messina,
 and the fourteenth departed thence, hauing well refreshed themselues and prouided all com∣modities for their voiage. So they went run∣ning the Archipelag sea, without any worthie exploit, vntill the six and twentieth of the mo∣neth, because they could not bring happily to passe another enterprise they had vpon 
Geron∣da
 a little towne of 
Natolia,
 which is held to be the 
Gerunda
 of the Ancients. They landed there by the fauour of the stilnesse and dark∣nesse of the night, but being entered there in due order, the next day morning they retur∣ned thence without doing any thing, hauing found the place abandoned by the inhabitors, which many moneths afore had retreated themselues in another place for feare of the like surprises. They set on and went forward their iourney Eastward for many daies, euen till the 13. of May, without atchieuing any deed, but the prize of three Changuis, which are ships as bigge as Caramussals, and some

other shippings of lesse bignes. The morning of the fourteenth day finding themselues neere 
Namur
 (a place some other times ruinated by the Gallies) they tooke it for a luckie signe, and resolued their enterprise vpon 
Agliman,
 and making on that way about the breake of day, they spied a ship some ten miles farre off. The Admirall knew full well what difference is betwixt surprizing and hauing in chase. But because that ship was iudged to be a Galley for the forme of their saile, and for the obscu∣ritie which as yet was great, also because they held for certaine, if that ship should escape, it would giue warning to the whole Coast: a∣gaine, that the situation of the Coast was such, that by reason thereof and of a little Iland not farre from thence named 
Papadula,
 the ship could be well and easily had in chase, close and from the sight of the fortresse, hee with the Counsell resolued it should be chased and made on. Thus making towards it and well pursuing it was ouer reached and taken in lesse than one houre. The ship was of a rea∣sonable bignesse of them which are called Grips, and was comming from the port and

fortresse of 
Agliman,
 and gaue intelligence that two daies before two Gallies of 
Cyprus
 were arriued there, the Captaine of 
Cerrigna
 of 25. Beys, and the Captaine of 
Paffo
 of 22. Beys, hauing broght the tribute which from thence is carried vpon Camels backes to 
Constantinople.
 The summe could amount to some 200000. crownes. Besides that they said that the same fortresse was very well fenced and furnished, and well garded, and that about it there was more than 400. horses, and that but a little while after them there was to goe out one of the two Gallies, euen the same way, to come to the Iland 
Papadula
 to take a Mast for their ship: for this cause the Admirall sets forward with his fleet, and places it close vnder the Iland in a place whence it could not be percei∣ued, hauing set his scout or gard on ground. Whilest they were thus waiting for the same, the returne was suddenly made, and intelli∣gence giuen, how the Gallie had made to∣wards the sea more than twentie miles, and in all haste with her Keeper or Conserua was re∣treating towards the Port, whence they con∣ceiued that they had beene discouered in gi∣uing

their chase. Thereupon was made a great difficultie, whether they should goe forward in their enterprise, or else keepe themselues for a better occasion; but all contrary opini∣ons set aside, it was resolued to goe on and follow their designe. To this effect they made towards Port Caualier, being from 
Agliman
 some twelue miles distance, and arriuing there about six a clocke in the euening weighed an∣cour hard by a very commodious lands end, and very secret, with a deliberation to goe out in the night in time that might be fit and safe to land. Towards the end of the night they sent out their long boat to spie and discouer. About two houres after or little more they re∣turne and report that all the Country was vp in armes, the walles furnished with armed men, the horsemen about the fortresse, and the two gallies with two other ships within the Port. There on againe arose a great doubt if they should goe on, but notwithstanding the manifest apparence of so great a danger, they had such confidence in their great courage, in the fortune of his princely Excellencie, and in the helpe and fauour of God, that they confir∣med

againe their former resolution. They therefore take their way about three a clocke in the night in deepe silence, and afore six in the morning their landing was made some mile and halfe from the Port. The Lord 
Iulio Montauto
 did land with the 
Comte Candale
 and some other choice men, few in number, to take a view of the Countrey, and though that they had some mile and halfe from them spi∣ed the Cauallerie or horse men of the enemie, yet neuer thelesse in any case he commanded to land, which was made without the distur∣bance of any of the companies, hauing left only twenty souldiers for the keeping of each Gallie.


The fortresse of 
Agliman
 is seated vpon a fine hillocke right opposite to the south, ex∣tending it selfe from the top of the hillocke to the very sea shore, in figure ouall, or like an egge, the vppermost end whereof is on the top of the hillocke Northward, and the ne∣thermost, at the hilles foot Southward. The wall is of very good stone, the morter lime and sand, a fadome broad and fiue fadomes high, so that a man may easily walke vpon it.

In the third part of the inward space there is a crossing wall, which crosses thorow and ioi∣neth to the compasse of the wall from the East to the West, so that it diuides the place in two vnequall parts; the lesse is as it were a reducti∣on and retreat of the biggest. The going in is by one gate only place diust in the middest. In the girt of the walles there are fiue whole and full towers, and three halfe ones: the full ones are of a square forme fiue fadomes euery face; the halfe ones haue one face of the same big∣nesse, and the other lesse by halfe; their height exceedeth not that of the walles, except that which is in the point of the hillocke, which is eight foot higher: the first full tower is alto∣gether within the retiring place eastward; the other is also eastward, but halfe within and halfe without: within the halfe which is with∣out fouthward is the first gate; the second is in the inward face turned westward. The third tower is likewise halfe within and halfe with∣out of the same side some 200. foot faire from the second: betweene them both is one of the meaue towers situate outwardly. The fourth is at the foresaid top and point of the hill, and

makes as it were the corner by it selfe, being all inward. At the going downe of the hill westward the two other halfe towers equally distant from the fifth tower, which is halfe without halfe within, and directly opposite to the gates tower. There be fiue little staires to goe vpon the wall; foure of them are of stone within the great place, and the fifth is of wood within the retreat. In this place were more than 300. fighting men, the third part where∣of had shewed out themselues the euening before. There was abundance of victuals and of all munition for warre, and many peeces of great ordinance. Without the place about a hundred horses went vp & downe, and within the port there were two Gallies, a Carramussall and a Greeke Brigantin with some hundred and fiftie fighting men: they had retired with∣in the fortresse all rowing people. The order of the fight thus was ordered and contriued by 
Montauto;
 For the principall gate and for that of the retiring place he appointed the companie of the ship 
Cappitana,
 and that of 
S. Stephano
 with the petards vnder the command of the Earle of 
Candale
 head of that troope,

with order taken that all should obey him. The order being giuen, my Lord 
Candale
 con∣ducting the point, spied a corps de garde of footmen and horsemen, whereof he gaue in∣telligence to the Generall, sending word that still he would goe on towards the fort, to per∣forme what he was bidden, and that if the Turkes should make towards him, he would passe ouer their bellies, because the countrey was very fauourable and good for the Infan∣terie or footmen. The Generall praised his resolution, though many gaue aduice to re∣treat within the Gallies. So the way was fol∣lowed on, till they came within six score paces of the place. Then was my Lo. 
Candales
 troope saluted with great force of Muskets from the towne afore him, and from them of the Gal∣lies behinde him, and from them of the hill at his side, and with such outcries and howlings of the Turkes, that many were astonished at it, and particularly the sea men which carried the petards, so that they let them fall and ran away. They were taken vp by the Baron 
Momberault
 and 
le Tiel
 a souldier of 
Languedoc.
 Being fifteene paces neere the place, my Lo.

Candale
 met eighteene or twenty Turkes salli∣ing out, which he set vpon and suddenly put to flight; but in stead of pursuing them, his aduice was to turne to the gate, to the which he ran amaine, thinking to haue found it yet open, but the Turkes with all diligence had shut it againe. Therefore he commanded the Petart to be applied, which quickly was ready, but not without the hurt and death of many: amongst the which 
Dom Piedro de Medicis,
 which had done this honour to my Lo. 
Can∣dale
 to ranke himselfe in his troopes, was bea∣ten downe vnder such a number of stones flung at him, that he fell downe halfe dead. The Lords 
de Callonges, de Momberault, de la Tour, d'Auenes,
 and 
Deltour,
 had taken this charge, the one carrying the Petard, the other the hookes, another the Madrer, and all the rest that was necessary to make it go off more rea∣dily. But as this sernice was a doing, the Ser∣geant Maior came and cried out vnto my Lo. 
Candale,
 that they were all vndone, and that there was comming right vpon them a troope of 300. Musketers: these were the two Beys, which were sallied out of the Gallies in the

port, through the naughty watching and gar∣ding of two companies left by 
Comte Iulio,
 and by him appointed to withstand them, and hinder their comming foorth: so that my Lo. 
Candale
 was forced to take some part of his own men and make head against that troope, leauing the other part for the Petard. But when the Beys saw him ready comming to receiue them, and almost at handie blowes, they turned away towards the mountaine, yet still shooting and playing with their Muskets vpon him. My Lo. 
Candale
 would not follow them, and thought it was more fit and conue∣nient to goe backe to his Petard, which in∣stantly did play on and made such a breach, that three men a breast might easily enter.


Now for the tower aboue, the company of horsemen, commanded by Lieutenant 
Len Zour,
 & the company of the galley of 
S. Maria Magdalena
 with two Ladders were appointed.


For the retreating place towards the fourth, the company of the galley 
Padrona
 with a Ladder.


And to the gallies and ships in the hauen, the company of the galley of 
S. Giouanni.




In that order they marched, conducted by 
S
or
. 
Iulio Montauto,
 and by Captaine 
Alexander di Taranta
 Sergeant Maior, the Cauallerie of the enemie being still aside of them on the top of the hill. They were no sooner within a cali∣uer shot of the walles, but they were saluted from thence with pellets and arrowes liuely and thicke: being come neerer, there flew a showre of huge stones vpon their heads. But all this notwithstanding, their Petard plaied on very happily, as we haue said, and the se∣cond gate being opened, the Earle of 
Candale
 with his troope entered the first with a mar∣uellous furie: and no sooner were they in, but that they ran to the retreating place to applie there another Petard; which was done, and the effect thereof very braue and seruiceable. The Turkes as well at the first as at the second Petard were so abashed and astonied, that they knew not what to doe, but run away and flie to the walles, towers, and fortifications or barricadoes which they had made in the streets: our men pursue them liuely and presse vpon them on all sides. The two ladders be∣low were planted at the same time that the

first Petard plaied on them. But one which was of the south side being broken, not with∣out some hurt to those that were vpon it, all of them ran to helpe the other of the south side, where the Cauallerie of the enemie was charging them very fiercely; by the meanes of which succour, they forced the horsemen to breake away, and tooke their flagge or Cor∣net, and hauing planted the ladder against the walles, a great many of our men got vp, and then diuided themselues into two companies to charge both the one and the other side, opening by force of armes that narrow way, and went directly to the towers, where they gaue many furious assaults. The squadron of horsemen and the company of 
S. Maria Mag∣dalena
 hauing had a longer and harder way to make, could not arriue before the effect of the Petards; at the noise and terrour of the which the Turkes hauing retired into the higher place, they of the squadron found a maruel∣lous resistance afore, and were laid on behind very fiercely by the Cauallerie or horsemen of the enemie, and by the foot which sallied from the Gallies in the port: by reason where∣of

the Lieutenant after hee had done as much as a worthy honest man could doe, with his braue Caualieroes, seeing that he could ad∣uance nothing, by the aduice of the wisest, he resolued to goe thence and make towards the place where it should be more necessarie. But as he was staying the last in that retreat (like a valiant Captaine, as also he had beene the first at the comming on) he was shot tho∣row with two musket shots, and fell dead on the place.


The company of 
S. Giouanni
 mastered at an instant the two Gallies in the port, and our Admirall at the signe giuen came with his Gallies to take possession of them in the port without any difficultie, and touched not the two other ships, because they were of Greece. The fighting and skirmishing did continue still with all the towers and barricadoes of the place, and the combat grew more and more eager from both sides, ours being kindled with a braue courage and held vp with a wonder∣full constancie of resolution, and the Turkes hauing the aduantage both of the stronger place and of their despaire. Finally, God the

giuer of victories, was willing to fauour his owne cause: and the Turkes by little and little begunne either to yeeld or to offer themselues to the slaughter, and so the hoped-for victory was fully obtained, to the honour and glorie of God, and of his Excellence. The fight lasted aboue foure houres, very dangerous and bloodie, a good number of ours hauing beene lost there in the place, besides fiftie fiue which were hurt. The combat being finished, and our dead brought aboord one of the Gallies, amongst the which were found 
Mons
r
. 
de Ver∣nueil
 and the yoong 
la Boissiere,
 very much la∣mented for the great hope of his noble valour: the place was disfurnished of all the ordi∣nance, artillerie, munitions and commodities, and all carried away; and the houses hauing beene fired, euery one retired into the Gallies, whose heads were presently turned towards 
Europe
 with the two Captiues Gallies, all very rich, and with huge booties, as well for ha∣uing taken eight other ships with a great deale of ordinance, munitions, and merchandises, as also for hauing brought with them 350. Turkes for slaues, and slaine aboue 200. fur∣thermore

for hauing ruinated that famous Fortresse, and pulled downe that horrible tro∣phey of 40. heads of his good subiects, and freed from captiuitie some 240. Christian slaues; It was a thing aboue all which greatly reioiced the great Duke. The day after, they met with a bigge Caramousall, the which though it was manned but with fourescore Turkes, yet stood for the eight Gallies, and neuer would yeeld, so that the Captaine of the 
Padrona
 at the request of 
Mons
r
. 
Candale
 was faine to make towards them; which did so well defend themselues, that they killed and hurt aboue foure score of our men, three of the which were slaine hard by 
Mons
r
. 
Candale,
 which alone of all the French had permission to fight at the fore decke, and shot three or foure shots within six paces of the enemie, two of the which were slaine thereby. Finally, as the seamen of ours began to get in, the ship was splitted, and as many as were within both ours and enemies sunke and drowned. Some other ships were taken with lesse combat. Then they arriued at 
Messina,
 where all the people with admiration beheld 
Mons
r
. 
de Can∣dale


after the rehearsall which the Admirall and 
Comte Iulio di Montauto
 made of his valour.


FINIS.










Briefe of the Kings priuilege.


BY speciall grace and priuilege of the King it is granted vnto 
Peter Porter
 Merchant Stati∣oner of 
Paris,
 to print or cause to be printed, sell, and expose the Relation of the prise of the fortresse and port of 
Seleucia
 or 
Agliman
 made vpon the Turkes, with the mappe thereof, all translated out of Italian into French: with most expresse inhibitions in his Maiesties name vnto all Stationers and Printers of this kingdome to print or haue printed, sell or distribute the said booke or Card, but by the will and consent of the said Porter, during the time of three yeeres, vpon penaltie of confiscation of the bookes, as the Priuilege containes at large. Giuen at 
Paris
 the 
26.
 of Iulie 
1613.
 Signed by the Counsell Brigard and sealed.


The said Porter hath granted and consented, that Lague hay shall enioy the same priuilege. Done the 
30.
 of Iulie 
1613.




FINIS.







