The mutable and vvauering estate of France from the yeare of our Lord 1460, vntill the yeare 1595. The great battailes of the French nation, as well abroad with their forraigne enemies, as at home among themselues, in their ciuill and intestine warres: with an ample declaration of the seditious and trecherous practises of that viperous brood of Hispaniolized Leaguers. Collected out of sundry, both Latine, Italian, and French historiographers.
Approx. 585 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 78 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A01165




STC 11279



ESTC S102586





99838358




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The mutable and vvauering estate of France from the yeare of our Lord 1460, vntill the yeare 1595. The great battailes of the French nation, as well abroad with their forraigne enemies, as at home among themselues, in their ciuill and intestine warres: with an ample declaration of the seditious and trecherous practises of that viperous brood of Hispaniolized Leaguers. Collected out of sundry, both Latine, Italian, and French historiographers.
[4], 148 p.   


London :


Printed by Thomas Creede,


1597.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Sainte Ligue (1576-1593)
France --  History, --  15th century --  Early works to 1800.
France --  History, --  16th century --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






11279


S102586


99838358


2733














THE Mutable and wauering e∣state of France, from the yeare of our Lord 1460, vntill the yeare 1595.


The great Battailes of the French Nation, as 
well abroad with their forraigne enemies, as at home among themselues, in their ciuill and intestine warres:


With an ample declaration of the seditious and tre∣cherous practises of that viperous brood of Hispaniolized Leaguers.


Collected out of sundry, both Latine, Italian, and French Historiographers.


LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede. 1597.










To the right worshipfull Maister Iulius Caesar Esquire, Doctor of the Ciuill Lawe, maister of the Requests, and of Saint 
Katherins,
 and chiefe Iudge of her highnesse Court of the 
Admiraltie, &c. a namelesse well-willer, wisheth all courses of happinesse that can bee named.


S
Ir, this Collected Historie, of the inconstant and mutable estate of Fraunce, from the yeare 1460. vntill the yeare 1595. describing the great battails of the French Nation, as well abroade with for∣raigne enemies, as at home among themselues, in their ciuill and intestine warres: also an ample de∣claration of the seditious and trecherous practi∣ses of that viperous brood of Hispaniolized Lea∣guers, during their bloodie mutinies and attempts from time to time, with whatsoeuer else so serious a discourse can or may affoord, I offer to your worshipfull and most kinde patronizing. Your euer knowne affable inclination to studie, and works of woorth, makes me no way mistrustfull of gentle acceptance: wherfore, in one ballance poysing the Booke, and in the other whatsoeuer remaynes in mee, alwayes most readie at your worships seruice, I cease from further troubling you with lines vrging no delight, desiring, that as your vertues are numberlesse, so your ioyes both in this worlde, and that to come, may likewise be endlesse.


Though namelesse, yet alwayes by your worship to be commaunded.








To the Reader.


A
S in a briefe Chronicle, or short compiled Historie (gentle Reader) euen so in this worke shalt thou behold, the slipperie and vncertaine estate of a mightie Kingdome, of 
France,
 our neare neighbour, whose warres, strifes, and most troublesome contentions, as well at home in her owne bosome, 
s abroad with forraigne and hostile enemies, during the space of these many yeares, from 
1460,
 vntill 
1595.
 the accidents of all which t
m
, this present volume do
th truly acquaint thee withall: for out of sundry, both Latine, Italian, and French Hist
riographers, hath 
 beene carefully collected, and being (for thy sake) attired now in an English habit, familiarly tels thee that Monarchies miseries, which when thou hast aduisedly considered on, and therwith compared thy owne Countries continuall blessednesse, I doubt not, but as in sorrowing for the one, so thou wilt hartily pray for the other, that the afflictions of 
France,
 may be 
Englands
 loo∣king Glasse, and their neglect of peace, our continuall labour and studie how to preserue it.


Fare ye well.












THE MVTABILITIE of France.




CHAP. I.




 
Lewis
 sonne to 
Charles
 the seuenth, King of France, is driuen out of his fathers King∣dome. He flieth to 
Philip
 Duke of 
Burgundie.
 Returneth. After his fathers de∣cease is made King. He falleth out with 
Charles
 Duke of 
Burgundie.
 Is suddenly stro∣ken with a sore disease, and dieth miserably.




A
S the wauering and interchaungeable course, whereto euery thing whatsoeuer is continually subiect, hath beene alwayes heretofore dayly obserued, in the most auncient, and renowmed Monarchies that euer were. So hath it appea∣red in these latter dayes,
 and that in a more liue∣ly maner, in the strange and wonderfull altera∣tions of our neighbor countryes: whose peace and prosperous estate, as it was the common ob∣iect of euerie mans eye: so are their vnfortunate warres, and wofull miseries, the vsuall subiect of all mens speach, and nothing is more lystened after, then to what ende matters of so great waight and importance are likeliest to tend. The most noble and renowmed kingdome of 
France,
 which for so many yeares flowed with milke and honie, and for the temperatenesse of the aire, the fertilitie of the soile, the ciuilitie of the Commons, the loyaltie of the Nobilitie, the dignitie and magnificence of the Prince, was accounted the paragon of all Nations, hath especially tasted of this vicissitude, and change: which so long as it was at peace with it selfe, and not afflicted with any ciuill discention, the subiect honouring the King with all dutifull obedience, and the King tendering the welfare of the subiect with a hearty and louing affection, and both concurring in one for

 the aduauncement of the Common-wealth, flourished in most beautifull maner, and appeared verie pleasing to the eye of all Nations round about: but after that it once began to nourish turbulent spirits, and to harbour strange and vnnaturall humours, the Prince following the daungerous proiects of yong and corrupt councellors, who rather sought their owne priuate gaine, then the publike profite and vtilitie of the state, and the people beeing easily drawne by the perswasions of their Gouernours to embrace in a maner any noueltie that was propounded: then began the common-wealth to bee intangled in manie daungerous mischiefes, and to bee encombred with sundrie cares, wherewith for this long time it hath beene exceedingly vexed, and tormented. And albeit there hath often bin some mitigation of paine for a while: and that by the great wisedome and skill of such as sate at the stearne, and had the managing of the publike affayres, the ship, which was well neare ouerwhelmed with boisterous waues, was safely preserued from the wracke: yet, as though there were a fatall destinie, which could not be auoided, it presently againe fell vpon the shelues, and plunged it selfe a fresh into a vast Ocean of vnspeakeable miseries, wherein it hath continued floting vp and downe for these many yeares, and at this day is come to that desperate passe, that although it be neither split vpon the sandes, nor swallowed vp of the fearefull billowes, yet doth it serue as a perfect glasse, to viewe the vnstable estate of these earthly things: and for an assured proofe of the variable change, and continuall vicissitude in the most flowring kingdoms and common-wealthes. Which albeit it doth euidently appeare vnto the eye of euery beholder, yet will it be farre better discerned, if wee consider the reignes of sundry French Kings, in whose times there hath fallen out most strange and admirable accidents, themselues being especiall occasions to prooue a mutuall and an alternatiue course, in al things whatsoeuer.


Lewis
 the eleuenth of that name, King of 
Fraunce,
 and sonne vnto 
Charles
 the seuenth, was in his youth (as 
Philip de Comins
 reporteth) allured by the craftie perswasions of sundrie seditious heades, to become chiefe of a rebelli∣ous faction, and to beare Armes agaynst his father, to his vnspeakeable griefe, and the imminent perill of the whole lande: 
 but that vnnaturall warre not continuing long, and the sonne being drawne to his obedience, by the louing and wise perswasions of the King his father, all things grewe verie peaceable for a time, and the yong Prince continued in verie good grace, vn∣till at length by reason of newe occasions of suspition, hee was forced to a∣uoyde the Realme, so exceedingly was the King his father incensed agaynst him: and going to 
Philip
 Duke of 
Burgundie,
 who at that present was a verie great and mightie potentate, was most honorably intertained, & furnished with all things necessarie for himselfe and his retinue: where hee remained for a long time, notwithstanding, the duke was very often & earnestly solicited to the cō∣trarie by the king his father. At the last all the stormie tempests being blowne o∣uer, and he vpon the decease of his father being called home to receiue the Dia∣deme and crowne of 
France,
 he departed from the Court of 
Burgundie,
 where he had liued a stranger, and vnder the cōtrolment of others, towards his new king∣dome, and naturall Countrie, which he found very peaceable, and flourishing in all wealth and prosperitie: where hee was no sooner quietly established, but

 that remembring some olde iniuries,
 and disliking manie of his fathers most faithfull and trustie counsellers) hee remoued sundry out of their rowmes and offices, and imprisoned others, electing new into their places, to the great griefe of diuerse of his best affected subiects, & the exceeding discontentment of most of his chiefest Nobilitie: wherupon ensued maruellous trouble to the common wealth, and vnspeakeable care and vexation of mind to himselfe.
 For the Duke of 
Brytaine,
 the Duke of 
Berry,
 the Duke of 
Nemours,
 the earle of Saint 
Paule,
 the earle of 
Arminake, Beauleu, Albret,
 and manie other great Lords and states, being highlie displeased with the King, and with his gouernement, banded to∣gither against him, and calling to theyr ayde Count 
Charolois,
 sonne and heyre to 
Philip
 Duke of 
Burgundie,
 raysed a mightie and puyssaunt armie, wherewith they approched 
Paris,
 and held besieged the chiefest Cittie of the land.


The King vnderstanding the daunger wherein the towne stoode,
 and the resolution of his enemies, hasted by all possible meanes to put himselfe with∣in 
Paris,
 the safekeeping whereof woulde be most auayleable for the aduance∣ment of his other affayres. Wherefore hauing gathered a strong power, marched forwardes on his intended voyage, not purposing to hazarde his fortune vppon anie aduauntage that shoulde be offered, but onelie to de∣fende himselfe, and to amuse his enemies, vntill the tyme might minister some better meanes to accomplish his desyres: notwithstanding,
 through the rash headinesse of the Lieutenant of 
Normandie
 called 
Le Bressy,
 who had the leading of the auauntgarde, the King was constrained to fight, and to aduenture to open his passage by force of armes. But being valiantly resisted by his enemies, after a terrible and bloodie fight, hee was forced to forsake the field, and to retyre towards 
Corbeile,
 leauing the entyre glorie of that victorie, to Count 
Charolois,
 and his associates.


As this good fortune puffed vp the haughtie minde of the Conquerour, making him proude, disdainfull, and highly conceyted of his owne va∣lour, which in the ende bred his owne confusion and ouerthrowe:
 so did it teach the conquered to pull downe his spirits, and with all circumspect di∣ligence and care, to prouide for his future safetie, in the most politike man∣ner that hee might: and hauing (though with much adoo) made peace with Count 
Charolois,
 an enemie that hee greatly feared, and reconciled his dis∣contented Nobles, who were a long time as prickes in his eyes, and thornes in his sydes, and withall concluded a league with 
Edwarde
 the fourth King of 
Englande,
 at 
Pikquennie,
 to his great aduauntage, there remayned nothing that might any way endaunger his estate, but onelie the greatnesse of 
Charles
 Duke of 
Burgundie,
 who though he were at amitie with the King, yet for that hee had a most turbulent spirite, and of all other could least abide to conti∣nue for anie long time together in peace, the King thought hee had iust oc∣casion to suspect him,
 and therefore howsoeuer in outwarde shewe he made much of him, yet in heart hee wished for nothing more then his confusion and ouerthrowe: which appeared most apparantly by his secrete practises a∣gaynst the Duke, and then coulde no longer be hidde, when as hee heard of his discomfiture at the battaile of 
Nancy,
 where the sayde Duke was slaine,

 his armie put to flight, and the glorie of that noble house of 
Burgundie,
 which had flourished for the space of an hundred and twentie yeares, in all pompe and magnificence, was vtterly defaced and obscured. For presently vppon the newes, the King was so exceeding ioyfull, that hee did not in a maner regarde how richly and bountifully he rewarded the Messengers of so glad and ioyfull tydings. Nowe beganne hee to studie for nothing so much as howe to dis∣member this poore afflicted Dukedome, and by all meanes possible to teare and rent it in peeces.


He first gayned by liberall rewardes, and fayre promises, the chiefest of the Burgonian Nobilitie, and likewise the Captaines of sundrie strong Townes, by which meanes hee gate 
Abbeuille, Peronne, Arras, Hesdin, Bol∣logne, Dyion,
 and manie other principall places, so that it seemed that the bet∣ter part of the Dukedome of 
Burgundie
 was nowe brought vnder the kings o∣bedience, and annexed to the rest of the Dominions of the 
Flower de Lis,
 By which meanes the reuenewes of the Crowne were greatly augmented, the lande exceedingly strengthened, the same and honour of the king wonder∣fully encreased, all thinges falling out in a manner as well as might be wished or desired.


But hee had no sooner attayned to so high a degree of happinesse, but hee was presently crossed with newe miseryes and afflictions, which in small continuance of tyme did wholie bereaue him of his former ioyes. For bee∣ing at dinner at a Village neare vnto 
Chynon,
 hee was suddainlie stroken with so vehement a payne,
 that hee lost his speach and sences, for the space of two dayes togither, not remembring nor knowing any that were nearest about him. And albeit, by reason of those great meanes, which were vsed, his bo∣die was somewhat recouered, and his mynde much bettered, so that he see∣med to come to some reasonable vnderstanding and knowledge: yet was hee so weakened, and euerie parte of him so mightilie decayed, that it was not possible to free him of his maladie so long as hee lyued. Besides, hee grewe so suspitious of all sortes, and so iealous of his owne sonne, and sonne in Lawe, that hee was neuer at quyet, but lyued in such continuall feare, least that honour and reuerence which had beene for so long a tyme giuen vnto him, shoulde now be anie wayes diminished, or his former au∣thoritie impayred, that for the maintenaunce thereof hee vexed himselfe in most straunge and pittifull sort. Hee woulde not at anie time come abroade, nor bee seene but of some fewe, in whome hee reposed a speciall con∣fidence.


His Court Gates were continuallie guarded, yea, his verie Chamber Doore so surelye watched,
 as that it was impossible to keepe a prisoner in more strayte manner, then hee kept his owne selfe. And beeing a king, that in former tymes had taken his delight in so manie rich, beautifull, and flouri∣shing Cittyes, and solaced himselfe in so manie stately Pallaces, and plea∣saunt Gardeyns, was nowe (to his vnspeakeable torment) confined in a narrowe rowme, sequestring himselfe from all companie, and euerye other thing, which might breede his delight, or encrease his comfort:

 and so continued in this miserable estate, alwaies languishing in feare,
 vntill his death, which was in the yeere 1483. and hauing raigned two and twentie yeeres, left behinde him a sonne, who succeeded in the kingdome, in whose dayes fell out many strange and admirable occurrences, as shall appeare in the Chapter following.






CHAP. II.




Charles the eight inuadeth Italy, and conquereth Naples. Alphonsus and Ferdinando flie into Cicilia: the Venetians and other Princes leuying a great power, driue the French out of Italy. The battell of Tarro. The French king dieth sodainely.




A
Lbeit that 
Lewis
 the eleuenth not long before his death,
 had of∣tentimes, and that very seriously, aduised his sonne 
Charles,
 who was to succeed him in the kingdome, to maintain peace and amitie with all his neighbours rounde about, and by no meanes to enter into warres with any forraigne Princes, before hee were growne to ripe yeeres, and that the Realme which had endured so many calamities and miseries, where∣with it was greatly impouerished, should be growne rich againe, and better prouided to resist any violence that should be offered: yet could not the graue and strong perswasions of so wise and well experienced a Prince, take such deepe rooting in the heart of this yong King, but that thorow his owne am∣bitious desire to make himselfe great, and the manifolde reasons alleaged by sundrie of his aduisants, partly to flatter him in his owne honour, but more especially to serue theyr owne turne, they were quickly plucked vppe againe, and hee fully resolued to enter into a warre, which of all other was thought most daungerous, and which wrought as straunge effectes, as much varie∣tie, and as singular alterations and chaunges, as any other whatsoeuer. All which to the ende they may bee the better vnderstood, it shall bee verie conuenient to rippe vp the matter from the beginning, and in as fewe words as may bee, to shewe the originall of so great trouble, as afterwardes en∣sued.


Charles
 the eight King of 
Fraunce
 pretending a title to the Kingdome of 
Na∣ples,
 as heire to 
Reynard
 Duke of 
Aniow,
 was no sooner settled in his king∣dome, but he was forthwith enduced by the colourable perswasions of 
Lewis Sfortia,
 who had not long before vsurped the Dukedome of 
Millan,
 to put in his claime, and with might and mayne to assay to gette so noble, so rich and renowmed a Diademe. Notwithstanding, for that it was a mat∣ter of no small importaunce, it was thought good to haue it thorowly de∣bated in Councell, and to heare the opinions of the wisest and the best

 experienced in the lande, who when they had with great maturitie of iudge∣ment pondered euerie circumstance: as the danger the king was likely to thrust himselfe into, the infinite treasure that must bee expended: as also what a multi∣tude of valiant mens liues that would cost, before so glorious a victorie could be atchiued, and the difficultie that would be in keeping that beeing once got∣ten:
 they wholly resolued that it was an enterprise in no wise to be attempted. Notwithstanding, the king who was yong, & desirous to eternise his name by some memorable attempt, could in no wise be diuerted, being moued as it were by some diuine instinct, and incouraged by sundrie remonstrances of two of his principall fauorites, called 
Vere
 and 
Brissonet,
 both which were but meane poli∣ticks, and of all other most ignorant in militarie affaires. These two were daily solliciters of the king,
 who otherwise was but too willing of himselfe, to pro∣uide all necessaries for his intended voyage, and to set forwarde with as much celeritie as possibly might be.


The yonger sort of the French Nobilitie, and such as had least experience, were likewise exceeding desirous to enter 
Italy
 by force of Armes, and to shew their valour and noble courage to forraigne Nations. Al things seemed to con∣curre for the furtherance of this happy attempt, saue that which was most ne∣cessarie and that was, wise and wel experienced Captaines, and store of siluer and gold, which are accounted as the veines and sinewes of the warres. There were men enough, but such as were most fitte were most vnwilling: the Kings Coffers were emptie, and nothing could bee borrowed but vpon great interest and good assurance. Thus the lets were many, and the meanes to effect any thing with honour, very small: and in the end, if the successe were such as was desired, yet should there be nothing gotten, (as 
Lewis
 the eleuenth was wont to say) but infinite trouble and imminent perill, and that with the effusion of much French bloud.


The King resoluing to passe into 
Italy
 notwithstanding whatsoeuer could be alleaged to the contrarie, made a league with 
Ferdinando
 King of 
Spaine,
 with 
Maximilian
 king of the Romanes, and with 
Phillip
 Archduke of 
Austria,
 and Duke of 
Flanders,
 as also with the King of 
England,
 least being occupied in his warres abroade, he might happen to be molested at home by some forraigne e∣nemie: and deferring his iourney vntill the spring following, which should be in the yeere 1493. in the meane while commanded that all things should be in a readinesse, which were requisite for the maintenance of his Armie. All men of vnderstanding wondered at this strange resolution of the King, and the best affected towardes the Crowne of 
Fraunce
 did maruailously feare the sequel of so dangerous a iourney.


The more to encourage the King, and to stirre him vp to prosecute his inten∣ded voyage,
 
Lewis Sfortia,
 who vsurped the Dukedome of 
Millan
 (as is alreadie sayde) and had beene the first motioner of this warre, did not onely promise vn∣to the King all the ayde and furtherance that might be, by his embassadours, but also came himselfe with the Duchesse his wife, very nobly accompanied vnto the King, being at 
Ast:
 where, after some debating of the matter, and cleering of sundrie doubts, the king resolued to passe forward, and so came to 
Pauia,
 with∣out any let or interruption: from thence he went towards 
Sarzana,
 being a very

 strong Castle, and belonging to the 
Florentines,
 which in the ende was taken and kept by the French.
 The Citizens of 
Florence
 being not a little amazed at the Kings prosperous successe, thought it best to offer him all the fauour and kind∣nesse that might be, humbly desiring him to come and repose himselfe in their Citie, and to refresh his Armie in the rest of their territories, as 
Pisa, Lygournia, Petrasancta,
 and 
Librafacta.
 Thus had the French gotten the whole state of the Florentines into their possession: this bred a maruailous change in 
Italy,
 and sundrie Citties being wearie of their gouernours, rebelled and chose them new Lords.
 The Florentines themselues considering that the French were growen strong, became their vassailes, and conspiring against their Duke, called 
Peter de Medices,
 droue him out of the City, & tooke whatsoeuer he had, and reserued it for their owne vses. The poore distressed Duke fled to 
Venice,
 in very miserable estate, where he had much adoo before he could be receiued. Thus was the house of the 
Medices
 ouerthrown, which had flourished in great wealth, pow∣er, and authoritie, for the space of 60. yeares: the King departing from 
Florence
 came to 
Sennes,
 and so to 
Viterbium,
 and from thence to the Castle of 
Brachana.


Although that 
Alphonsus
 King of 
Naples,
 was at the first but little moued with the comming of the French, yet to preuent the worst, hee had prouided two great and puissant armies: that by sea was lead by his brother 
Frederik:
 and the other by land, by his sonne 
Ferdinando,
 with whom were these famous and re∣nowned Captaines, 
Virgilius Vrsinus, Petilian,
 and the Lord of 
Treuoule. Ferdi∣dinando
 was gotten into 
Rome,
 and hoped to keepe the Citie against the French King, but the Pope being willing to follow the good fortune of the Conque∣rour, suffered him to enter:
 whereupon 
Ferdinando
 was forced to flie away in the night, and with al possible speede to retire towards 
Naples.


His father 
Alphonsus
 beeing wonderfully terrified with this heauie newes, and remembring the manifold iniuries offered to the Neapolitans, both by his father and himselfe, though hee had beene a very valiant, couragious,
 and hardy Prince, yet hee thought it best to yeeld to the time, and giuing ouer the kingdome into his sonnes hand, with a heauie heart and mournful cheere, say∣led into 
Cicilia,
 with the Queene his mother in law, who was daughter to 
Fer∣dinando
 king of 
Castile.
 Before his departure he was continually tormented with sundrie imaginations, often crying out that the King of 
Fraunce
 was comming, and that the very houses, trees, and stones in the streets were all become French:
 and so with a passionate minde forsooke 
Naples:
 where by the way wee may obserue one thing, which 
Phillip de Comins
 noteth as a strange accident, and that is, that in lesse then two yeeres space there were fiue kings of 
Naples,
 which were 
Ferdinando
 the father of 
Alphonsus, Alphonsus, Ferdinando
 his sonne,
 
Charles
 the eight, king of 
Fraunce,
 and 
Frederik
 the brother of the saide 
Alphonsus.


The yong King 
Ferdinando
 made great preparation to withstand the French, and hauing gathered a strong power, encamped at Saint 
Germin,
 in the frontiers of his territories, resoluing to stop the passage of the enemie at that place. Not∣withstanding, the French king marched on with great courage, taking Castles and townes without any resistance: all things seemed to yeeld voluntarily vnto him, and to bende at his becke: yea, 
Ferdinando
 himselfe durst not abide him, though he were strongly fortified and encamped in a place of great aduantage:

 For assoone as he vnderstood by his espyals, that the French were within two leagues,
 he fled in very disordered manner towards 
Capua,
 suffering the French King to enter at his pleasure, and from thence hasted to 
Naples,
 fearing a reuolt among the Citizens, which indeede immediatly ensued vppon the approch of the French: who comming to 
Capua,
 entred presently vppon composition, and before they came at 
Naples
 by three leagues, the Citizens sent Embassadors to treat with them,
 being willing to receiue thē vpon condition, that they should maintaine their ancient priuiledges which so terrified 
Ferdinando,
 that he pre∣sently tooke sea, and fled to his father in 
Cicilia.
 Then was there a generall re∣uolt, and euerie one made court to the French king, who was receiued with great acclamation and applause of the people: yea, those who were in particu∣lar most bounden vnto the house of 
Arragon,
 and such as had beene their espe∣ciall fauourites, were now in an instant wholly turned French. All 
Calabria, Powilla, Laurentia, Turpia, Encrenes, Tarentum,
 & 
Monopolis,
 set vp the 
Flower de∣lis.
 Thus did this yong King runne as it were through 
Italy,
 without any stop or hinderance,
 neuer staying about the winning of any one towne the space of one day, insomuch as from his departure from 
Ast,
 vntill his entrie into 
Naples,
 there were but foure moneths and ninteene dayes: so that hee might say in re∣garde of his speedy conquest, as 
Caesar
 sometime saide, 
Veni, Vidi, Vici.


The French King beeing entred into 
Naples,
 disposed of all things at his pleasure, and seemed nowe to haue attained to his wished ende: there was no∣thing to crosse him,
 or to stand in his way, but like a conquerour hee comman∣ded and it was obeyed: wherupon he would needs be crowned King. Which being perfourmed, and the French not standing any longer in feare of any ene∣mie, they beganne to bee idle and carelesse, and gaue themselues wholly to riot and excesse:
 They seemed to contemne all others, and scorned the Italians as men of no reckoning, supposing that now they were able to passe through the whole world, and that no man durst abide them. So proude, arrogant, and dis∣dainefull were they become, by reason of this so prosperous and happie successe.


When as the King of 
France
 was growen to this greatnesse, that hee had in a manner all the estate of 
Italy
 at his commaund: that hee had gotten the King∣dome of 
Naples,
 and was quietly possessed thereof, and thereby was climed to the top of fortunes wheele, so that it seemed that nothing was wanting, to the full accomplishment of all his desired happinesse: when as indeed he was most secure and carelesse, and supposed that hee stood without the reach of any mis∣fortune:
 presently the wheele began to turne about, and sundry secret practi∣ses were set abroch, to cut short the French proceedings: & in the end a league was concluded, which darkened the faire shining of the 
Flower delis,
 to proue the variable and vncertaine estate of all things whatsoeuer.


Although 
Alphonsus
 were driuen out of 
Italy,
 yet did hee continually fight against the French, by procuring as many enemies against him as possibly hee might: hee daily layde before the eyes of other Princes, howe perilous a matter it would bee for them to suffer the King of 
France
 to grow so great, and sought especially to stirre the Venetians against him. The Turke on the o∣ther side threatened them at the request of the Pope, if they would not declare

 themselues open enemies vnto him. The King of 
Spaine
 began to feare the losse of 
Sardinia,
 and 
Cicilia,
 and the Emperor grew iealous of his Empyre. All these Princes sent their Ambassadors to 
Venice,
 and in the end banded, with one con∣sent agaynst the French. who being aduertised hereof, began to bethinke them,
 how they might returne into 
France.
 And resoluing presently to retyre from 
Naples,
 set all things in as good order as might bee, and so dislodged, purposing to returne by the same way that they came. Sundrie Cities and good Townes vnderstanding of the league, began to reuolt forthwith, and to pull downe the Armes of 
Fraunce,
 which not long before they had so hastily set vp,
 and to place those of 
Aragon
 in their stead. Thus begin fortune to frowne, and to looke an other way, and to abandon the French on all sides.


 The King being as desirous now to get to 
Paris,
 as hee was before to conquer 
Naples,
 marched toward 
Rome
 with some nine hundred men at armes, and eight or nine thousand footmen, Switzers, Almaines, and French.
 But the Pope hea∣ring of his comming fled to 
Padoua,
 so that he entred without any resistance: but he staid not long there, for intending to make al the hast that might be, he remo∣ued to 
Sennei,
 and from thence to 
Pisa,
 still passing forward, though verie slow∣ly, by reason of the euil waies. By this time had the Venetians gathered a strong power, wherwith they ment to stop his passage. And hauing appointed 
Francis Gonzaga
 Marques of 
Mantoua,
 for their generall,
 with whom they ioyned two Venetian Lieutenants, or 
Prouiditori, Melchior Creuisano,
 and 
Luke Pisano,
 com∣maunded them to put themselues betweene home and the French, and if it were possible to stay the King, and force him to pay the Almendate for the harme he had done to the Italian Nation.


Gonzaga
 being a lusty yong Gentleman, & desirous to win renowme, by some memorable act, hauing intelligence by his espials, that the French marched to∣ward 
Foro Nouo,
 sent his light horsemen before vnder the conduct of 
Nicholas Annonio,
 a Sclauonian, to stay the enemie with light skirmishes, vntill he might ouertake them with the strength of his armie: who readily accomplishing the commandement of the generall, hasted forward with great speed, & taking the French auantgard at aduantage, slue many of them, and forced the rest to retire to their strength. The king ouertaking his vantgard, encamped at 
Foro Nouo,
 hard by the riuer of 
Terro.
 The marques was encamped on the other side, right in the way that the French men should passe: so that the King seeing there was no remedie, but that he must needes fight,
 and open the way by the dint of the sword, disposed of his army in as warlike maner as he could, and resolued as that day to try the vttermost of his fortune. And being mounted vpon a braue and lusty courser enuironed with 7. yong gētlemen of approued fidelity & prowes, armed in all points like vnto himself, rode about his ranks to encourage his sol∣diers, who with their cheerful countenances seemed to assure him of the victo∣rie, and with the hazard of their owne liues, to defend him from the violence of his enemies. The Bastard of 
Burbon
 in whom he reposed a speciall trust,
 with 
Robinet Framesell,
 the valiaunt conductour of the Duke of 
Orleance
 his men at Armes, enuironed him with their companyes of horsemen on both sydes. The Rerewarde was ledde by 
Foix,
 a Noble man of 
Guien,
 and 
Segnieur de Trimouille,
 and with them was there a great troupe of men at Armes.

 the Switzers and Almaines, in whom consisted the strength of the battaile, gar∣ded the Ordinance, which being drawne with equall pace close to the battail∣lon of the footmen, was placed right in the front of the enemie. The Mareschall 
Guy,
 and 
Tribulzi
 a man of great fame and experience in the warres, marched be∣fore with certaine light horsemen, to lead the way to them which followed.


The Marques seeing the French come downe from 
Foro Nouo,
 in aray of battaile,
 quickly arraunged his men, and diuiding them into nine battaillons, as well for the mutuall succour each of other, as thereby to assaile the French on all sides, and intended to abide the comming of his enemies. In the first bat∣taile was 
Petro Dodo,
 a Venetian, with sixe hundred Greeke horsemen, and al∣most as many Archers on horsebacke, who were appointed to compasse the hils, and to assaile the enemie on the backe. The second battaile was led by the earle 
Giazza,
 consisting of sixe hundred men of Armes, and three thousand Almaine and Italian footemen. The Generall himselfe with his Vncle 
Radulph
 and 
Ranucio Farnesi,
 with fiue hundred men of Armes, and as many Archers, with foure thousand footemen, tooke vpon him to encounter with the middle bat∣taile, wherein was the Kings owne person. The fourth battaile was assigned to 
Fortebraccio de Montoni,
 who was commaunded to charge the Rerewarde. Three other battailes were appoynted to 
Anthonie de Feltri, Annibal Bentiuoli,
 and 
Galeazzo Palauicini,
 which should serue to ayde and succour where there was most need. The eight and ninth battaile were likewise prouided against all vncertaine chances which might ensue.


Each armie being thus readie raunged, awayted the signall of the battaile: which was no sooner giuen,
 but they ranne togither with great furie, the trum∣pets sounded, the drummes stroke vp, the great Ordinance thundered from either side, and all sorts fought verie couragiously. But the 
Estradiots,
 who had beene repelled by the French men of armes, espying the Kings baggage (which by counsaile of 
Triuoltio
 had beene obiected to the enemie, to the ende that hee beeing busie about the spoyle, a more readie and easie passage might bee opened for the King) flung out of their rankes, and fell to ryfling in most greedie manner. Which thing (in the opinion of all men) turned to the great good of the French: who otherwise had beene in maruaylous danger to haue beene ouerthrowne at that encounter. The Marques fought valiauntly, and pearcing through the middest of the horsemen hard to the Ordinance, ouer∣threw a great bande of Gascons, which were appointed to guard them. The French being encouraged with the presence of their king, laide about them like men, and the Switzers beeing promised double pay, like Tygres, tare and rent in peeces as manie as fell into theyr handes. And had not the earle of 
Petilia
 at that present escaped from the French, and by comming to the flying Italians, with all the forceable reasons hee coulde, perswaded them to renew the fight, the whole power of the Venetians had beene vtterly ouerthrowne. Both armyes being well wearied with a long and bloody fight,
 they sounded the retreate. The French had lost all their baggage, and the riches of 
Naples,
 which was going into Fraunce, was taken by the Italian souldiours: a great number of their brauest men were slaine, and amongst others the bastarde of 
Burbon,
 a man of surpassing great valour. The King himselfe hauing likewise lost

 all his plate and houshold stuffe, was in extreme peril, and had vndoubtedly bin taken, had it not beene for the excellencie of his horse, which was a cole black, with one eye. And although he gate the victorie, and remained maister of the field, yet were his losses verie great, and farre surmounted the gaine he had got∣ten in that long and wearie voyage. He was constrained to lie the night follow∣ing in a simple cottage,
 and all his great Lords were lodged round about him in the open fields, who had nothing to eate, nor any chaunge of apparell to put on: So that they resolued to dislodge in the dead of the night, and with al speed to recouer 
Ast.
 The Armie was sore afrighted and euery man coueted to bee in the Vauntgard, supposing thereby to be furthest from daunger, and nearest vn∣to places of safest retreate. And thus marching forward in tumultuous maner, with much ado got to 
Ast,
 where they staied not long, but went to 
Thurin,
 and so to 
Lions.


 The king was no sooner in 
France,
 but all things went backewarde in 
Italie,
 all places reuolted, and well was he that could first teare in peeces the 
Flower de Lis.
 Whosoeuer had beene friends before, now became enemies, and nothing was so hastily gayned, but it was as speedily lost. And the French Nation, who not long before had beene the terror of the Turke, the Pope, the Emperor, the Venetians, and in a maner of al 
Europe,
 were now in nothing more famous, then in their dishonourable flight out of 
Italie,
 leauing vnto posteritie a notable ex∣ample of the chaunge and mutabilitie of these worldly affayres. And as it vsu∣ally falleth out, if fortune begin once to chaunge, it neuer ceaseth vntill it haue throwne a man groueling to the ground: so it fared with this king, who be∣gan to decline a pace, and to be crossed euerie day more then other. His yong sonne the Duke of 
Orleance,
 began to be desperately sicke, and so continued lan∣guishing, vntill at last he died, wherewith his father was immesurably greeued,
 and from that time forwards nothing thriued that he tooke in hand: his friends forsooke him, and his enemies dayly encreased, and almost all matters stoode in verie bad tearmes. Euill newes was brought from euery corner, and the worst of all other was this: death suddenly sendeth forth a messenger to summon him to appeare before him, and to giue an account of his stewardship. For as he was in a Gallerie at 
Ambois,
 looking vpon such as played at tennis,
 hee was suddenly stroken with an Apoplexie, and liued not past some fiue or sixe houres after, but yeelded vp the ghost, 1497. hauing reigned fourteene yeares. And al∣beit he were a very mightie Prince, and had exceeding many goodly Castels, beautifull houses, and statly Pallaces, and had conquered so many earledomes, Marquesats, Dukedoms, and Kingdomes: 
 had made all 
Italie
 to stoope, and bend at his becke, had triumphed at 
Naples,
 and atchieued so glorious a conquest, and that so easily, yea, & almost without drawing of his sword, so that hee was now become one of the most redoubted worthies of the world, yet did hee ende his dayes on the sudden, and died in a verie miserable and beggerly place: which sheweth the lamentable estate of all sorts, and that the most mightie Potentates, are subiect to a maruellous chaunge and alteration.








CHAP. III.




Lewis
 the 
12.
 King of France, entreth Italy, conquereth 
Millan,
 taketh the Duke there∣of prisoner. He ioyneth with the Spanish King to conquer 
Naples,
 who expelleth him, and keepeth the kingdome for himselfe. The battaile of 
Rauenna.
 The Switzers driue the French out of 
Millan.
 The death of King 
Lewis.




A
Fter the decease of 
Charles, Lewis
 Duke of 
Orleance,
 and next heire to the Crowne, succeeded in the kingdome, who enti∣tuled himselfe king of 
Ierusalem, Naples,
 and 
Cicil,
 and Duke of 
Millan,
 intending to conquer the Dukedome, and for that purpose prouided all things necessarie, with all the speed that might be. But by reason of the former kings expenses, he foūd small store of treasure: so that for to furnish himselfe, he set to sale all the offices of 
France,
 except such as were iudiciall: a daungerous prac∣tice, and none of the least occasion, of that great confusion, which afterwardes ensued.


Lewis
 Duke of 
Millan
 feared the 
Venetians
 more then the 
French,
 and therfore ioyned with the 
Florentines,
 to recouer 
Pisa.
 But hee erred exceedingly herein: for 
Lewis
 of 
Fraunce
 hauing made peace with other Princes, bent all his forces agaynst 
Millan,
 with whom also the 
Venetians
 ioyned in the ende. Whereat the Duke was maruellously astonished; and began to fortifie his owne territories, so strongly as hee might. But hee putting those in trust, who were in most fa∣uour, and not such as had the greatest vertue, and fidelitie, (too common a fault among great estates) lost one thing after another, and in a short space all things going backewarde,
 hee was forced to forsake 
Millan,
 and flie to the castell, by reason the Citie was yeelded to the French. Which ioyfull newes beeing brought vnto the King, who was then at 
Lions,
 hee determined forthwith to passe in person ouer the Alps:
 and being in 
Italy,
 compounded with all the chiefe estates there, and did in a maner whatsoeuer he listed.


The King hauing remained a while in the Duchie of 
Millan,
 and taken such order for his affayres there, as he liked best, returned home, leauing the Cardi∣nall of 
Ambois
 for his Lieutenant in those quarters. But he was no sooner de∣parted, but the Cittie began to reuolt, and tooke part with their olde Duke. Howbeit the Switzers, in whom he reposed especiall confidence, and by whose valour,
 hee verily perswaded himselfe, hee shoulde bee able to maintaine his quarrell agaynst his enemyes, betrayed him to the French, who sent him prisoner to the King at 
Lions.
 Then there was a maruellous concourse of people assembled to beholde this captiue Duke, who not long before in fame, dignitie, and renowme, had beene equall to anie Prince in 
Italie:
 The King woulde not vouchsafe to see him, but sent him to prison vnto the Castell of 
Locces,
 where hee continued for the space of tenne yeares, and there in verie miserable manner ended his life. And thus was this No∣ble Duke an other argument of the mutabilitie and chaunge of frowarde fortune.




Now was the French King wholy set vpon the conquest of 
Naples:
 and least hee might any wayes bee hindered, he thought it conuenient to procure 
Ferdinando
 King of 
Spaine
 to ioyne with him,
 who was easily drawne there∣to: and the better to countenaunce the matter, pretended a title whereby hee would proue himselfe rightfull heire to the 
Neapolitan
 Crowne. 
Ferdinando
 King of 
Naples,
 beeing wonderfully dismayed heerewith, yeelded vppon composition to the King of Fraunce, and so his Kingdome was diuided be∣tweene the French and Spanish Kings: which two Princes could not long agree, but falling at dissension betweene themselues, there were manie sharpe bickerings, the French still going by the woorst. 
Monsieur de La Palissa,
 and diuerse others were taken prisoners, and 
Monsieur de Nemours
 was slaine by the Spaniardes, vnder the leading of the great 
Consaluo,
 who, albeit there were a treatie of peace, and an abstinence of warre concluded, yet woulde hee take no knowledge thereof, but proceeded still in the warres,
 and so brought the whole Kingdome of 
Naples
 vnder the Spanish yoake.


Lewis
 of Fraunce hearing of all this, was not a little greeued in his minde: but there was no remedie but patience, nor any wayes to doo any good, but by force. Wherevpon he sent newe armies into 
Italie,
 with a purpose to re∣payre his former losses: but a composition was made, and all the warre be∣ganne to bee diuerted towarde the 
Venetians,
 who were brought to mar∣ueylous great extremities. But by reason the Pope beganne to growe iea∣lous of his owne, hee forsooke the French, and ioyned with the 
Venetians,
 taking them into his protection.
 Whereupon the French king thought it best, to desist from any further proceedings: and so entring league with the Pope, returned hom. Notwithstanding hee quickely smelling out the fetches of his late reconciled enemie, ioyned againe with the Emperour, and sendeth 
Mon∣sieur de Chaumont
 into 
Italie,
 with a strong power: who with the Prince of 
He∣
ault
 ouerthrew the 
Venetians,
 and tooke 
Legnague, Mountsilice,
 and manie o∣ther places. Not long after, by reason of the death of 
Monsieur de Chaumont, Gaston de Foix,
 a valiaunt young Gentleman, was sent into 
Italie
 to bee Gene∣rall ouer the French forces: who hauing intelligence that the power of the Spaniardes was comming downe to succour 
Marke Anthonie de Colonna,
 whom hee besieged in 
Rauenna,
 fearing the irruption of those within the Towne, brake vp his siege, and withdrewe his forces three miles of, towards the ar∣mie of his enemies, with whom for that hee intended to fight, he marshalled the troupes as followeth.


The vauntgard wherein was seuen hundred men of armes,
 besides the 
Al∣maines
 footmen, was led by the Duke of 
Ferrara,
 and the Seneschal of 
Normandy.
 Neere vnto them were arraunged the footmen of the middle battaile, 
 which amounted to the number of eight thousande French, vnder the conduct of 
Monsieur de Allegres.
 The Rereward was composed of fiue hundred 
Italians,
 o∣uer whom commaunded 
Frederick de Bosuolo.
 This battailon was flanked both by the archers on horsebacke, and by the light horsmen, being in all three thou∣sand. Behind al these esquadrons, which were so placed as they rather resembled a croysant, or new Moone then any thing else, were six hundred men of armes,









 led by 
Seigneur de la Palaice,
 and Cardinall 
Sanauerino. Monsieur de Foix
 had made choyce of no peculiar charge for himselfe, but taking out some durtie of the valiantest Gentlemen, purposed to haue an eye to euerie place, and to be ready to helpe, where most neede was. In this warlike maner he marched towardes his enemies, whom he found strongly encamped by a Riuers side: who be∣ing certified of the approach of the French, had thus raunged their battailes. In the vauntgarde were eight hundred men of Armes, and sixe thousand foot∣men, vnder the leading of 
Fabricio de Colonno,
 high Constable of 
Naples.
 In the middle battaile were sixe hundred men of Armes, flanked with foure thou∣sand footemen, whose principall leader was the Viceroy himselfe, and with him were the Marques of 
Palude,
 and the Popes Legate, called 
Iohn de Me
.
 The Rerewarde was conducted by 
Caruaiall
 a Spaniard. In which battaile were foure hundred men of Armes, and foure thousand footemen. The light horsemen commanded by 
Daualos
 the Marques of 
Pescara
 (a very yong man, but of passing great hope) who guarded the right side of the footmen. 
Peter de Na∣uarro
 the General of the Spanish footmen would not tie himselfe to any certaine place, but determined to helpe where most neede required. And in this order they expected the comming of their enemyes, who by this time were aduaun∣ced verie neare, and the skirmish began to grow hote on both sides. The fight continued long, and manie were slaine: but the Spanish troupes beeing mar∣uaylously torne,
 and scattered with the French Ordinaunce, could not endure before the men of Armes of Fraunce. For 
Fabritio de Colonna
 beeing taken by the Souldiours of the Duke of 
Ferrara,
 the 
Viceroy,
 and 
Caruaiall
 neuer staied any further tryall of theyr fortune, but fled amaine, leauing the Marques of 
Pescara,
 and the Marques of 
Palude,
 at the mercie of their enemies. Al∣though the horsemen were ouerthrowne, yet the Spanish footemen fought valiauntly, and with incredible fiercenesse maintained the battaile for a long time: but being wearied in the ende, and not able any longer to endure, they began to giue ground,
 yet so, as they rather seemed to retyre, then to bee dri∣uen out of the field: which 
Nauarro
 beholding, rather desyred to die, then liue. and therefore not departing out of the battaile, hee suffered himselfe to be ta∣ken prisoner,


But when as 
Monsieur de Foix
 could not abide to see Spanish footemen to go away in such souldier-like maner, with their rankes vnbroken, hee in a great furie charged them in the taile, with a troupe of horsemen: but beeing ouer∣throwne from his horse, was presently slaine with a Pike, which was thrust into his side, and so died most vnfortunately, when hee had gotten a most glorious and honourable victorie. The Lord 
Lautrech
 (his cousin Germaine) being hurt with aboue twentie wounds, lay besydes him almost dead, but beeing succou∣red in time, was afterwards recouered. The number that was slaine on both sides, were well neare tenne thousand persons: the thirde part of which were French men, whose losse was farre the greater by reason of the death of 
Foix,
 with whom the courage, strength, life and fiercenesse of that army was in a ma∣ner vtterly extinguished: howbeit they entered 
Rauenna,
 which they sacked and spoyled,
 and tooke sundrie other Cities, raunging vp and downe at theyr owne pleasure.




But presently they began to be afflicted with newe crosses: for the Switzers passing the Alpes, and ioyning with the Venetians,
 tooke 
Cremona
 and 
Berga∣mo,
 and approching 
Millan, Triultio
 being without hope to defende the Citie, secretly stole away into 
Piemont:
 and vpon the newes of his departure, 
Parma, Placentia, Bologna,
 and almost all 
Romagna
 returned to the Pope, and 
Geane
 like∣wise reuolted from the French, choosing 
Fregosa,
 who had beene generall of the Venecian armie, for their Duke. Thus the French Kings affaires began to be quailed in 
Italy:
 and by reason the king of 
England
 was nowe readie to enter 
France,
 he was compelled to looke to the defence of his owne countrey,
 and to suffer the Switzers to take their pleasure in 
Millan.
 But the French King recon∣ciling himselfe with 
England,
 married the Kings sister, with whom he liued not three moneths but died at 
Paris,
 1514. after he had raigned seauenteene yeeres, and was buried at Saint 
Denis.






CHAP. IIII.




Francis
 the first, King of 
France,
 winneth 
Millan
 from the Emperor. His great vertues. he besiegeth Pauia, and is taken prisoner. He is sent into 
Spaine.
 A league made against the Emperour. The French King is deliuered, and falleth out with the Emperour. He dyeth at 
Rambouillet.




L
Ewis
 the twelfth was no sooner deceased,
 but 
Francis
 Duke of 
Angolesme
 succeeded in the Kingdome, who continuing the former quarrell for the Dukedome of 
Millan,
 and king∣dome of 
Naples,
 left no stone vnroled to bring his desires to passe: but forthwith there approched many impediments, and sundrie blocks were cast in his way, which maruailously altered his course, & extreamely crossed al his designements: for the Emperour 
Maximilian
 growing aged, and beeing wearie with the bur∣then of the Empire, sent Embassadors to the Electors, and to the Pope, to de∣sire them to choose 
Charles
 of 
Austriche
 and king of 
Spaine,
 for their Emperour: 
 but the French king thinking him to be mightie inough already, labored by all possible meanes to hinder that election. Before that any thing could be accom∣plished, 
Maximilian
 died:
 whereupon the French and Spanish kings became earnest competitors, and each endeuored to win the Goale from other: The French King was put in some hope by the faire promises of the marquesse of 
Brandenburge,
 one of the electors: howbeit, in the ende 
Charles
 of 
Austriche
 was chosen, which spited 
Francis
 to the heart.
 And now hee daily picked quar∣rels at the Emperour, and at last fel flat out with him: for being a Prince of great courage, wise, industrious, rich, and ambitious, hee in a sort disdained that the yong king of 
Spaine
 should be preferred before him, and therefore he present∣ly hired Switzers, who for money became his mercenaries, and sent 
Monsieur de Lantrech
 to besiege 
Millan,
 which was valiantly kept by 
Prospero Colonno.
 The rumour whereof being spread beyond the Alps,
 caused 
Antonio de Leua
 to for∣tifie 
Pauia:
 so that now all 
Italy
 began to bee in an vprore, and the French kings comming was greatly feared: for that hee was a Prince vniuersally furnished

 with all royall vertues, and fit to enterprise great matters: And vnderstanding that the Emperiall power had not onely expelled the French men out of the Duchie of 
Millan,
 but were entred France, and by besieging of 
Marseiles
 in 
Pro∣uence,
 seemed to dare him within his owne dominions, hee gathered a strong power, and marched towardes his enemies with all speede: who hearing of his comming, brake vp their siege and hasted to 
Italy:
 whom the king pursued so fast,
 that the emperials were no sooner entred into 
Millan,
 but that hee was hard at the gates: where hee stayed not long, but that the Cittie was yeelded vnto him, the emperiall forces forsaking it, and flying to 
Lody
 after a very tumul∣tuous and disordered sort.


 The King vsed the Citizens verie graciously, and hauing somewhat reposed himselfe and refreshed his wearie troupes, marched discreetely to∣wardes 
Pauia,
 wherein was 
Antonio de Leua,
 with fiue thousand Lansque∣nets, fiue hundred Spanish footmen, with two cornets of horsemen. The king encamped before the towne, and besieged it very straightly: the emperials beeing aduertised heereof, gathered all theyr forces together, and hauing an army wherein were seauen hundreth men of armes, and as ma∣ny horsemen, a thousande Italian horsemen, and aboue sixteene thousand footemen, Spaniardes and Almans: they sette forwarde from 
Lody
 with a full resolution to remooue the siege or to fight with the French, and ha∣zard all vpon a battaile. The King was no sooner certified hereof, but that sen∣ding for all his Captaines and men of war, he fully determined to continue his siege, and to expect the comming of his enemie, whatsoeuer coulde bee alleaged to the contrarie, often affirming that hee hadde rather dye then to stirre one foote before he had taken the Citie.


The emperiall Captaines beeing driuen into great necessitie for want of money and other necessaries, and hauing much adoo to pacifie theyr soul∣diours,
 thought it best to vse expedition, considering that it was impos∣sible for them to continue long, their men growing mutinous for want of pay: and thereuppon as those that stoode in very desperate estate, hasted to inuade the French, who prepared with great courage to meete them: they were exceedingly encouraged by the presence of theyr King, who should bee an eye witnesse of theyr valour and prowesse. The marquesse of 
Pescara
 with three thousande Spanish footemen assayled the French tren∣ches, where hee slew fiue hundreth men, and poysoned three peeces of great ordinance.


This vnexpected accident dismaied many of the French souldiers, and the rather, for that the Admirall, who carryed the cheefe sway in the Ar∣my next vnto the king, was hurt in the thigh with a shotte, and was car∣ried to 
Placentia
 to bee cured of his wounds.


Much confusion beganne nowe to growe among the Kings Souldiers, and many of his mercenaries or hyred souldiers, departed before the battaile, beeing called home for the defence of theyr owne Countrey: and the num∣ber which was least, was farre lesse then indeed it was reported vnto the King▪ so that the Emperialles spying theyr aduantage, sette forwarde, and with surpassing courage inuaded the Kings Campe in the dead of the night,

 hauing couered their armour with whole shirts, the better to discerne one an∣other. Their army was diuided into foure Battailons, the first consisting of sixe thousand Almains, Spaniards, and Italians, was led by the marquesse of 
Guasto,
 a valiant yong Gentleman, and of great towardnesse in the warres. The second consisting wholy of Spaniards, was conducted by the Marquesse of 
Pescara,
 who commanded as principall in the army: in the third and fourth battailes were the Dukes of 
Burbon
 and 
Lanoy,
 who went as resolutely to the charge as a∣ny others.


The King being certified of their approch, and hauing ordered his troups in as warlike manner as might bee deuised, couragiously prepared himselfe for the encounter: both armies were no sooner met,
 but the fight grew very terri∣ble on both sides, each partie doing his best for the glorie of their nation, and for the obtaining of an entire victorie. The King like a valiant captaine and no∣ble souldier, fought couragiously, and forced the marquesse of 
Pescara
 to giue ground, whereas hee being endangered to loose all, sent to the Vizroy: who had the leading of the formost battaile, to come to his succors, who vnderstan∣ding in what danger the marquesse was, furiously set on the Switzers, who that day answered not the kings expectation, & breaking their array, wholy defea∣ted them in a moment. Then appeared the misery of the French, and the king himselfe was forthwith in imminent perill, albeit he fought manfully, and was seconded with a valiant troupe of French Nobilitie, who did their vttermost for their owne securitie and honor of their country: yet hauing the marquesse in his front, and 
Antonio de Leua,
 who was nowe issued out of 
Paua
 with al his forces, on his backe, after he had beene sore wearied and greeuously wounded, both in the face and hand, and had his horse killed vnder him, hee was forced to yeelde to fiue common Souldiers which knew him not: but shortly after the Viceroy passing by, the king called vnto him, and making himself knowne, was with great reuerence receiued, as 
Caesars
 prisoner.


Thus was the French king, who not long before had beene in so flourishing estate, commanding not onely ouer al 
France,
 but also a great part of 
Italy,
 being so mightie, rich, and puissant, that hee was dreaded of all his neighbor princes, subiected to a maruailous change and alteration,
 being made first a prisoner to common souldiers, and conuaied from one place to another, vntill at length he came into Spaine, hauing left all his army to the mercie of their enemies, who slew of them well neere to the number of 10000. and among them there perished twentie of the greatest of the French Nobilitie, as 
Boniuet, Chauany, Monsieur de la palissa, Tremoile, Obigny,
 and sundry others of especiall account,
 as 
Henry
 the king of 
Nauarre, Renee
 the bastard of 
Sauoy,
 Duke 
Memorancy, Francis
 of 
Burbon
 Earle of Saint 
Paul, Biron, Imbercourt, Floranges
 Colonell of the Swit∣zers, with a great number of especiall account were taken prisoners. The Duke of 
Alanson
 escaped this bloudy conflict, and recouered 
France
 with a mighty troupe of men of armes, who serued for messengers of this wofull newes.


The emperials lost not past some 700. men, and among them no man of any especiall account, but onely 
Ferdinando Castriota,
 the marquesse of Saint 
Angelo.
 The Spaniards were maruailously enriched with this victorie, for neuer had so few souldiers so great a bootie. The gold, siluer, and precious moueables of the

 French Nobilitie, were that day diuided among their enemies, and euerie Spa∣nish 
bisoneos
 seemed to walke in a world of wealth, brauing it out in most superbious manner, with the spoyles of the 
Flower de lis.


All Europe was mightily dismaied with the newes of this victorie, and all estates beganne to grow iealous of the Emperials greatnesse. The Venetians of all others thought themselues most neerely touched therewith,
 and therefore they offered to ioyne with the Pope, and to hire a ten thousand Switzers to de∣fende 
Italy
 against the Emperials, hoping that the Lady Regent of 
France,
 the Duke of 
Ferrara,
 and many other Princes would ioyne with them against their common enimie. In the meane time the King of 
France
 was (as is alreadie decla∣red) transported into 
Spaine,
 and sent vp into the Castle of Madrill. This was no doubt a bitter receipt, and a sharpe corrosiue to this magnanimous prince, who had not been vsed to be confined in so narrow a roume: but patience with hope was his best comfort, for the Emperour would not see him, much lesse minister any matter of consolation in that his wofull distresse, neither yet did he seeme to shewe any externall signes of ioy for so glorious a victorie:
 he prohi∣bited bonefires, ringing of belles, and such like accustomed solemnities, saying that it might bee seemely to vse outwarde reioycings for victories against the Turks, Sarrazins, and other infidels, but not against christian Princes.


The Emperours Councell were long before they could well tell what to do with this prisoner, they beeing distracted into diuers opinions: but in the ende it was fully concluded to make as great a gaine of him as might bee, and therefore they earnestly pressed him to yeeld ouer all his claime and title, to 
Burgondy, Millan,
 and 
Naples:
 besides, hee was bound to pay a huge summe of money for his ransome,
 and to condiscend to sundrie other things, and those so great, that no man of iudgement thought hee would bee so good as his word. Yet for assurance the King was contented to marry the Lady 
Elynor
 the Empe∣rors sister, and to grant that his two sons, the Dolphin and the Duke of 
Orleance
 shuld be left in hostage for the better performance of the conditions. Now was 
France
 brought to a lowe ebbe, and the auncient splendor and glorie thereof mightily obscured: yea, that renowmed Kingdome, which had beene alwaies accounted the parragon of all 
Europe,
 and hadde beene a terror vnto the Ro∣mane monarchy, sate as a desolate widow that had lost her husband, in wee∣ping, wailing, and great lamentation. But shortly after this afflicted countrey began to bee recomforted, and as it were reuiued, after it had felt the pangs of death, for the king being once set at libertie and gotten into 
France,
 sollicited o∣ther Princes, as the Pope, the king of 
England,
 the Venetians, and other states to ioyne with him, and made a strong league, and fell flat out with the emperour afresh, notwithstanding all the promises which had beene made. Then pre∣sently ensued new warres, and all 
Europe
 was in a sort infected with this conta∣gious humor. Fortune which hadde so extreamely crossed the French designe∣ments, began to be more fauourable, and to beholde the king with a smiling countenance, for the Lord 
Lautrech
 beeing sent into 
Italy,
 tooke 
Bosco, Genes, A∣lexandria,
 and 
Pauia
 from the emperour, maruaylously aduauncing the French affaires.


The emperour beeing vexed at the heart with these newes, complained

 greeuously of the king, offering him the Combate,
 calling him forsworne and periured prince; the King gaue him the lie, and affirmed that hee would make it good vpon his body, when and where he durst. Thus did these mightie po∣tentates fight a farre off with their tongues, and their armies in 
Italy,
 and other where sought to ruinate and ouerthrow each other by all possible meanes. Af∣ter many conflicts, wherein sometime the emperials, and sometime the French as it were alternatiuely had the better, there was a peace concluded for tenne yeeres: in which time the Emperour in very freendly and louing manner,
 pas∣sed through 
France,
 to represse certaine tumultuous outrages committed in 
Flanders.
 This peace beeing expired, they fell again into new broyles, but they were soone ended: and nowe began 
France
 to bee scourged with the English, who hauing gotten 
Bulloigne,
 wasted their countrey round about. The French king beeing very desirous to impale the English forces,
 and to keep them from forraging after their woonted manner, raysed certaine forts round about in the most conuenient places: but whilst hee was earnestly busied herein, hee so∣dainely fell sicke and died 1546. at a place called 
Rambouillet,
 hauing raigned 32. yeeres, leauing his sonne to succeede him in all his territories and domi∣nions.






CHAP. V.




Henry
 the second maketh warre against the Emperour, and taketh 
Metz
 and many other townes. The Queene of 
Hungary
 inuadeth 
France.
 The great army of the Empe∣rour for the recouerie of 
Metz,
 which was kept by the Duke of 
Guyse.
 The Emperor raiseth his siege. 
Teroanneis
 besieged by the Emperials. The King raised a great power to withstand the Emperour. The cruelty of the French in 
Henault.
 The battaile of 
Reuty.
 The King and the Emperour breake vp their armies. 
Charles
 the fift yeeldeth ouer his empire. 
Rome
 besieged and taken. King 
Phillip
 of 
Spaine
 besiegeth Saint 
Quintins,
 which he taketh after hee had ouerthrowne all the power of 
France.
 The o∣riginal of the Huguenots in 
France. Callis
 besieged and tak
n by the 
Guyse.
 Count 
Eg∣mond
 ouerthroweth 
Monsieur de Termes
 the Captaine of 
Callis. Phillip
 King of 
Spaine
 marryeth the French Kings daughter. At whose marriage the King of 
France
 is slaine by 
Montgommery.




H
Enry
 the second of that name, King of 
France,
 was not onely heire of his fathers Kingdome, but also of all royall vertues, and princely qualities. In the beginning of his raigne hee maintained the Scots against the English, 
 but at length a composition beeing made,
 hee bent all his forces against the Emperour, who at that time made warre against the Princes of 
Germany,
 and hauing gathered a strong power, wherein were 2500 french footmen, 7000. Lansquenetes, 1200. men of armes, besides 2000. horsemen, & as many harquebuziers on horseback, vnder the leading of the Duke of 
Aumaile,
 ordaining the admirall 
Annebaut
 his Vizgerent in 
France,
 commanded the Conestable to march before with the vauntgard, who aduan∣ced towards 
Metz.
 The towne was quickly yeelded, vpon such composition

 as pleased the king, and so became annexed to the crowne of 
France.
 From thence the king went towardes 
Strasbourg,
 where the French would gladly haue entred, but the Citizens would in no wise permit them: howbeit they offered what prouision they were able to spare, but that would hardly sati
fie: notwithstanding, considering the Cittie was very strong, and the people reso∣lutely bent to defende themselues, the King turned towardes 
Hoguenan
 and 
VVisbourg,
 where the Embassadors of the emperiall princes met with him, and desired him that he would enter no further into 
Germany:
 with which message although the King was nothing well pleased, yet he made a faire shew, and see∣med to take all things well, and returned towards 
France.


The Queene of 
Hungary
 the Emperours sister, vnderstanding of the retreat of the French, deuised all the meanes that might bee to impeach them, and to cut of as many as shee could catch at any aduantage: and hauing leauied an army to the number of twelue thousand footmen, & three thousand horse, vnder the leading of the Count 
Mansfeild
 and 
Martyn Vaurosh,
 entered the faire fields of the 
Flower de Lys,
 which they spoyled verie pittiously. The King beeing ad∣uertised heereof, marched with all speede to releeue his distressed subiects: but the emperials hearing of his resolution, retired speedily, whereupon the King began to cast about how he might conquere the Duchie of 
Luxembourg,
 and ha∣uing taken a Castle called 
Rock,
 hee laide siege vnto Saint 
Iehan, Solieure,
 and 
Danuill,
 all which were forthwith yeelded vnto the King. 
Yuoy
 a place of great importance helde out for a time, but in the ende it was gladde to hearken to a composition: for albeit that the valiant Counte 
Mansfeild
 hadde put him∣selfe within the Towne, and had fortified it very strongly, with a resolution to defende it against all men, yet by reason of the cowardlinesse of his Soul∣diers, he was forced to yeeld to the Conestable, and he with sundrie others of e∣speciall account, were carried prisoners to 
Paris.
 Then ensued the taking of 
Mo∣medy, Luzembourg,
 and the Dukedome of 
Bouillon,
 by the mareschall of 
Sedan: Cimets
 was likewise taken, and the spoyle thereof giuen to the Souldiers.


Thus the French king prospered, gaining many Townes, Castles, and strong holds from the Empire,
 without any resistance: but his souldiers beeing weari∣ed and diseased, hee was forced to breake vp his campe, and lay them in garri∣sons, and to expect what course the Emperour would take, to recouer his ho∣nour and to regaine his townes: who by reason he was occupied in the warres with certaine of the Germaine princes, could not hinder the French procee∣dings. 
 But he hauing (with much ado) compounded with 
Maurice,
 and the rest of the Protestants, employed all his counsels how to recouer that which the French king had taken from him: and hauing perswaded with the Germaine po∣tentates to aide and assist him in hs intended enterprise,
 caused al his old bands which were in 
Italy,
 as well Italians as Spaniards, to repayre to him with all speede: who with the troups of 
Lombardy
 and 
Piemont
 passed ouer the 
Alps,
 and ioyned with the emperiall army, which was assembled in 
Germany,
 consisting of Bohemians, Hungarians, Polonians, Almaines, Wallounes, Cleueners, Flem∣mings,
 and Burgonians, to the number of 50000. footmen, and 20000. horse∣men, with incredible force of artillerie, and all other warlike prouision.


The king of 
France
 vnderstanding of the resolution of the Emperour, which

 was to recouer 
Metz,
 and the rest of the townes,
 which had beene taken from the empire, dispatched the duke of 
Guise,
 a man of good experience in the wars, with commaundement to put himselfe within the Towne, to fortifie it, and to furnish it with al necessarie prouision, the better to endure the siege, & appoin∣ted the 
Rendeuous,
 or place of assembly for the rest of his army at S. 
Michael,
 a little towne in 
Lorraine,
 where there met with him the Conestable, the Duke of 
Ne∣uers,
 the Count 
Anguien,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 the Prince of 
Contie,
 the Prince of 
Aumaile,
 the Vicont of 
Rhohan,
 the Mareschall Saint 
Andrew, Chastillon
 Collo∣nell of all the French infanterie, the Count 
Villiars,
 
Bourdillon
 one of the Ma∣reschals of the Campe, the 
Rhinegraue,
 and 
Reiroc,
 with their Regiments of Launcequenets, and many other noble Lordes and captaines. In the whole there were some thirtie thousand footmen, French, Almains and Switzers: and about seuen or eight thousand horsmen. The Emperor being troubled with the gout, lay long before he attempted any thing, so that October was halfe past, insomuch as the French King seeing the yeare so farre spent, supposed that hee would doo nothing, especially agaynst 
Metz,
 which was a place of very great strength, and plentifullie stored with all necessaries. And the rather for that his principall captaines, and chieftaines of greatest experience disswaded him all that might be, from enterprising any further, vntill some better oportunitie. Notwithstanding, the emperor would not hearken to their counsels, nor be di∣uerted by any meanes, but with all possible speede planted his armie before the towne, in this maner following.


The Duke of 
Alua
 was sent before, with the choisest of the emperiall armie,
 who passing the riuer of 
Seille,
 emcamped as neare the towne as he could, and bestowed sundry of his forces in the strongest forts adioyning. The Spanish companies were lodged at Saint 
Arnold,
 and Saint 
Clement.
 Certaine troupes of the Almaines were placed at a Bridge called 
Magny. Don Lewis, D' Auila,
 cap∣taine of the Spanish Horsemen, was appoynted at the Hospitall. The Se∣neschall of 
Morauia,
 with the Bohemian Horsemen, encamped at 
Blery,
 and the rest at 
Ollerie,
 Saint 
Preich,
 and other places neare abouts. All things beeing in a readinesse, the emperials beganne to beate the Towne with their great Ordinance, in verie furious sort, and in all hostile maner to annoy the defen∣dants. The batterie continued long, and yet the harme was but small, neither could the breach be made sufficient for an assault. Whereupon they remoued the Canon to another part of the Citie. And falling to mining, supposed to o∣uerthrow some peece of the wall with Gunpowder. But the Duke of 
Guyse
 vnderstanding the drift of his enemyes, caused countermynes to bee made, wherein they had not trauailed long, but they might heare the noyse and stirring of the Spaniardes, and so were theyr deuises easily preuented. This was no small discouragement to the Emperials, seeing they preuailed not, neyther by one meanes nor other. Besides the season of the yeare grewe ex∣treame colde, insomuch as the Souldiours which lay in the fieldes,
 were sore pinched, and many dyed for want of necessaries: so that all sortes beganne to waxe wearie of the siege, and inwardly desired to be dismissed. The Almaines themselues began to quaile: yet as men that would win some honour, they in∣stantly craued of the Emperour, that he would commaund a sufficient breach

 to be made, and they would either enter, or loose their liues, for th y were not able to keepe the fi
ld any longer. Then began he to before greeued, foresee∣ing the miserable end that would ensue, of that his rash and inconsiderate enter∣prise, yet would he in no wise consent to raise his siege, but with great perswa∣sions animated his souldiours to persist, promising that if he could not make a sufficient breach before the newe yeare, he would breake vp his armie, and li∣cence euery man to depart.


This satisfied them for the time, and made them to temporise, & expect their better fortune. And to the ende they might all be assured of his great care to perfourme this: he priuately commaunded the Duke of 
Alua
 to continue the mines with all diligence. Which charge was so willingly accepted, and so care∣fully performed, that the pioners ceassed neither day nor night. But the season of the yeare was so contrary, and so repugnant, that nothing could bee accom∣plished as was desired. Besides, the French who were in the Towne, with their often sallying forth, did exceedingly endomage them, and slue many. So that what with the colde,
 and extremitie of the winter, and the couragious attempts of the French, the Emperours army dayly diminished, and yet nothing to the purpose performed. Which when with intollerable sorrowe and vexation of spirit hee considered, he resolued to depart. And sending away his great Or∣dinaunce before, with his other weightiest and most troublesome carria∣ges, himselfe followed with the rest of his armie, which was so feeble, and so weake with famine and sickenesse, that they were scarce able to go. The Duke of 
Neuers
 was left by the King, to attende the Emperour, and to watch him at euerie turne. VVho carefully executing his masters commaun∣dement, followed the emperials in the taile, and cut off sundrie as they strayed from the grosse of the armie.


Chastellon
 Lieutenant to Captaine 
Bourdillon,
 was sent to discouer, and to bring some certaintie of the emperors retreate. Who coming to 
Pont Camonson,
 found that the Count 
Egmond
 with his regiment was departed, and had left behinde him a most pitifull spectacle of maimed and diseased persons. From thence hee passed on towards 
Metz.
 But the Duke of 
Alua
 and 
Brabancon,
 were departed with a great part of the army dislodging in a very strange and disordered maner, without soūd of drum, leauing many of their tents with sundry barels of pow∣der, & much warlike prouision behind them, besids an incredible multitude of lame, sicke, diseased, and impotent persons, as testimonies of their hard fortune.


The French king being certified by the duke of 
Guise,
 of all that had passed, was exceeding ioyfull, and seemed to triumph ouer the emperor, who being a Prince that could not well brooke any indignity, fought still to bee reuenged. Wherupō assembling a new army as soone as the time of the yeare permitted, he besiged 
Teroanne.
 Which the K. vnderstanding, commanded 
Pauuilliers
 to leuie what forces he thought conuenient, and to keep it from the enemy. Wherupon 
Francis Memorancy,
 eldest son of the Constable, accompanied with many valiant captaines, and gentlemen of good qualitie, his followers, repaired to 
Teroanne,
 purposing by their heroycall and noble acts, to win themselues honour and re∣nowme. The towne being defended with so strong a garrison, and sufficiently prouided of all necessaries, was thought to bee tenable agaynst the strongest

 enemie that was: and therfore the emperials were suffred to do what they listed. Who endeuouring to effect some notable exploit, laboured night and day, and made their approches without any empeachment, placing their batterie vpon a little mount, from whence they might annoy the defendants at their pleasure. They had brought with them all warlike prouision, as powder, shot, and all sorts of great and small Ordinance, from sundry townes and castels of 
Flanders.
 For this place was so odious vnto all that inhabited neare vnto it, that as soone as it was besieged, not onely the women and little children, ranne thither to be∣hold so gladsome a sight, but in token of their ioies, they sung songs, with daun∣cing and leaping, and brought into the campe, corne, beere, bread, sheepe, and beeues, in great abundance.


Their battery being once planted,
 they began to beat the towne in such furi∣ous sort, that the besieged were exceedingly endaungered, no place being free from iminent perill. Notwithstanding, like men of valour and courage, they re∣solutely defended themselues, often issuing forth, and fighting with the empe∣rials in their trenches, killed many of them, & poisoning some of their great Or∣dinance, drew other some into the towne in despite of their enemies. And albeit the emperials were much endomaged herewith, yet were they so readily relie∣ued from other places, and all their wants so diligently supplied, that they easily amended as much in a day, as the French had marred in a week. So that wanting nothing that might either helpe themselues, or hurt their enemies, they ceased neither day nor night, but thundring continually with the Canon, beat downe the walles, and ouethrew the Towers and Bulwarks, leauing nothing in a ma∣ner vnder which the besieged might shroud themselues.
 Howbeit they labored continually to repaire the breaches, and as men desperate and carelesse of their owne securitie, they would be most busie where the Canon was most furious, bringing earth, dung, fagots, and such like necessarie matter for defence. Which continuall trauell did maruellously weaken the defendants, and by reason they were no great number, they were forced to be both souldiors and pioners, to watch in the night, and fight in the day, alwayes in action without ceasing or intermission. In the midst of these great extremities, there entred into the towne one called captaine 
Greille,
 with a hundred 
Carabins.
 Who forcing the enemies 
Corps degard,
 with the losse of a fewe of his men, was readily receiued by the French, who attended his comming with great deuotion.


The assailants were nothing discouraged herewith, but plied their batterie more hotely then before, shooting for the space of ten dayes togither. And ha∣uing beaten downe all their flankers, and other places of defence, and therwith∣all made a reasonable breach of sixtie paces in breadth, prepared to giue an as∣sault Collonell, which the French resolued to abide. Then stroke vp the drums, the trumpets soūded, the ensignes were displaied, & the emperials marched on, with crying, showting, and after their maner making a terrible noyse & appro∣ching the breach, striued to enter with maruellous furie. The French on the o∣ther side valiantly resisted, and with equall courage defended themselues.
 The fight continued long, and many were slaine on either side. But in the ende the emperial captains, seeing the great mortality of their men, caused them to retire, hauing lost many of their brauest, and most forward souldiors.




The King of 
Fraunce
 vnderstanding of the noble valour of his men, albeit hee feared not the losse of the towne, yet the more to animate them, hee sent a new supplie of three hundred,
 vnder the leading of Captaine 
Breuit,
 and Saint 
Romain:
 who with great hazard and perill gat into the Towne. They without still continued their siege, and what with raysing forts without, and with vn∣dermining within the ground, they endomaged the besieged more thē before. And hauing after much ado enlarged the breach, and made the ascent so easie, that a man of Armes might passe out and in at pleasure, they cryed to a newe assault. The French beeng greatly dismayed herewith, and knowing they wanted all necessaryes to defende themselues anie longer, demaunded a parlee,
 whereto the emperials yeelded. But whilest they were talking, the Almaines and Burgonians entered in sundrie places, and the Spaniardes approached the great breach. And so was the Towne taken without anie resistaunce. The Almaines and Burgonians enraged agaynst the poore French, committed manie barbarous factes, and straunge cruelties, killing and murthering whō soeuer fel into their hands. 
Francis Memorancie
 hardly sca∣ped, and was led prisoner to 
Binecour,
 lieutenant to the emperor. 
Martigues, Dam∣pier, de Losses, Bandiment, Baylet, Saint Roman,
 and sundry other great captains, yeel∣ded themselues to such as would take them. The towne was sacked and spoiled: whatsoeuer was worth any thing,
 was caried away by the emperials: the em∣peror commanded it should be dismanteled, and the houses fired: so that in short time it was vtterly spoiled and defaced.


When as the French King vnderstood of this losse, he was wonderfully gree∣ued, and fearing least the emperor, (who was on the other side as ioifull for the good newes) would follow his fortune,
 and besiege 
Hedyn,
 he gathered a strong power of French and Switzers, and made all things ready, with as great celeritie as might be, to stop the enemies proceedings, if need required: but it was so long before his troupes could be assembled, that the emperials vnder the leading of the Prince of 
Piemont,
 were gotten before the towne, which they straightly be∣sieged, & battered on all sides. And for that it was not very well fortified, it was quickly gained. There were slaine on the French part, 
Horatius Farnelius
 duke of 
Castres, Martigues, Monuille, Cizieux, Lusignan, Dampier,
 and diuerse other cap∣tains and commaunders. The duke of 
Bouillon, Riou,
 the Count 
Villars,
 with the baron of 
Culan,
 were taken prisoners. The King was more and more inwardly vexed to see himselfe thus thwarted. Wherfore assembling his army neere vnto 
Amiens
 and 
Piquenny,
 vnder the leading of the Constable, hee waited his opor∣tunitie to be reuenged of his enemies: who after the taking of 
Heyden,
 spoyled the frontiers of 
Fraunce,
 without pitie or mercie. The French espying theyr ad∣uauntage,
 set vpon them on the suddaine, and slue seuen or eight hundred, and tooke the duke of 
Askot
 prisoner, and almost fiue hundred others. This losse somewhat abated the pride of the emperiall souldiours, and encouraged the French to attempt greater matters: for they presently marched towards 
Baupalme
 which was very well manned, & sufficiently appointed of all necessaries, & en∣camping before the town, straitly enuironed it on al sides. There were with the Constable, the duks of 
Neuers,
 of 
Vendosme, Anguien, Montpensier,
 and the admiral 
Chastillon,
 with their regiments, amoūting to the nūber of 8. or 9. thousand men.

 the 
Rhingraue
 was collonel of the Lancequenets, with whom was 
Reisberg,
 both which had also 4. regiments, diuided into twenty ensignes, being in the whole sum 12000. besides foure companies of Scots, and two of English, in all not past 1500. men. The Nobilitie and Gentlemen made wel neare three thousand horse, vnder the conduct of 
La Fayle. Sansac
 was captaine of the light horse, being in all two thousand, reckoning the foure hundred English, who were very valiant souldiers, and of great courage. 
Monsieur d' Esire
 was master of the Ordinance, whereof there were in all about a hundred peeces.


This mighty army besieged 
Baupalme,
 which place was as odious to the Frēch as 
Teroanne
 was to the Burgonians.
 The Constable taking with him 4000. hors∣men, and as many footmen, first viewed the town, aswell to see the countenance of those within, as to make choise of a conuenient place to encampe in. 
Hausi∣mont
 was gouernor for the emperor, a man of very great account, hauing with him some twelue ensignes of footmen, and foure hundred horse, who vpon the approch of the French, thundred from the towne with their great Ordinance, and fallying forth at their gates, skirmished very valiantly. The French seeing the resolution of the defendants, & finding an exceeding want of water, which could not by any meanes be supplied, were enforced to depart, & to defer their siege vntil some other time, hauing first spoiled and wasted all the country roūd about, and so marched towards 
Cambray,
 where hauing summoned the towne, and seeing he could not be suffred to enter, he fired the suburbs, & vsing all kind of hostilitie towards them, tooke certaine litle castles and holds neer adioyning. And albeit the emperor being certified of all this, had commaunded the Prince of 
Piemont,
 to aide those of 
Cambray,
 and to relieue them by all possible meanes: yet the French did in a maner what they listed, and being maisters of the field, helde the emperials verie short, who for that they were not able to encounter them, kept themselues within their strengths, and would not bee drawne to ad∣uenture their fortune vpon any occasion which was offered.


The king considering that the emperor did procrastinate, seeking by delaies to spend the time, vntil either the extremity of winter should approch, or his soldi∣ers be wearied with continual toile & trauaile, hauing wonderfully indomaged his enemies by sacking, burning & spoiling all the country ouer,
 and braued the emperor at home at his own doores, thinking he had sufficiently reuenged the former wrongs, & performed al things with great honor & renowme, resolued to break vp his army, and to licence his nobles to depart, and to recreat thēselues after so long & tedious trauail, placing strong garrisons in sundry frōtier towns, the better to bridle the enemy if he should attempt any thing in his absence.


The emperor was not a little vexed with these French brauados, and enuying the glory of the King, sought for nothing so much as for reuenge, wherfore ca∣sting about how he might best effect his desire, he first compassed a mariage be∣tweene 
Marie
 Queene of 
England,
 and his sonne 
Philip
 King of 
Spaine,
 there∣by to strengthen and fortifie himselfe, the better agaynst 
Fraunce.
 VVhich when King 
Henrie
 vnderstood, he againe gathered his forces, with all conueni∣ent speede, purposing indede to preuent the Emperour, or at least to meete with him as soone as anie oportunitie serued. His whole forces were diuided into three Armies: the first, which consisted of nine thousande footemen,

 three hundred men of armes, and six hundred light horse, with as many har∣quebuziers on horseback, was sent into 
Picardie,
 vnder the leading of the prince 
de la Roch sur Yon.
 In the second were fiue and twentie ensignes of French foot∣men: two regiments of Almaines with their Coronels, the 
Rhingraue,
 and 
Reis∣berg:
 and fiue and twentie ensignes of Switzers, foure hundred men of Armes, and two thousand light horse, ouer whom the Conestable was appointed gene∣rall. The third army was led by the Duke of 
Neuers,
 wherein were twentie en∣signes of French footmen, drawn out of the garrisons of 
Metz, Verdune, Thoule, d' Anuille, Yuoy,
 and 
Momedie:
 two regiments of the Count 
Rakendolph,
 and of the Baron of 
Frontenay,
 three hundred men of armes, eight hundred light horse, two hundred Pistoliers vnder the leading of the Prince of 
Conde.


These three armies entred the emperours dominions at three sundry places, burning, spoyling, and making hauocke after a strange and cruell maner. The Duke of 
Neuers
 tooke 
Ardennes, Lincbante, Villarcy,
 besides many other strong Castels, and well fortified places. The Conestable marched towardes 
Auannes,
 and caused it to be bruted, that he would besiege it: but vnderstanding that there was but a slender garrison in 
Mariambourg,
 he secretly dispatched the Mareschall of Saint 
Andrew,
 with the Switzers, and certaine companies of the French foot∣men, who approching on the suddaine, enuironed the towne, and kept those within from receyuing of anie newe supplie. Wherewith they being greatlie terrifyed, yeelded vnto the Conestable vpon the first summaunce. From thence they passed foorth towarde 
Dinon,
 where the Duke incorporating himselfe with an other strong power, brought by the King, layde siege to the Castle, which for that it was verie strong, would not condiscende to anie composition: whereupon the batterie was planted, and the walles were continually beate with thirtie Canons, wherewith the French ouerthrowing the Towers, Bulwarkes, and whatsoeuer might serue for anie defence, made a sufficient breach,
 and gaue a verie hote assaulte, but they were repul∣sed, by reason of the cowardlynesse of some leaders, who therefore were presentlie cassierd, and discharged of theyr places, and pronounced villains, to their perpetuall infamie, and disgrace. Yet those within being not able to holde out, yelded at last to the kings mercy, and suffred the French to enter peaceably.


 As these two armies conquered wheresoeuer they became, and grew verie famous for their noble exploits: so did the Prince 
de la Roch sur Yon,
 with his for∣ces prosper exceedingly, and was verie terrible to the emperials, by winning of townes, castels, and strong holds, and by burning and defacing all things with∣out pitie, or mercie.


The emperour being at 
Brussels,
 and hearing of the proceeding of the French, raised a great power, ouer which hee made Generall his Nephew the Duke of 
Sauoy,
 who suspecting that the French King would besiege 
Namure,
 put him∣selfe in the way betweene the towne and the King, in a very strong and wel for∣tified place, purposing to diuert the enemy, if possibly he might: which indeede was the cause that the King turned towards 
Henault,
 where the French entred with such fury, that they put all to fire and sword, sparing neither man, woman, nor childe, to the vnspeakeable horror of the inhabitants, who fled on all sides from this violent and outragious tempest. The duke of 
Sauoy
 followed them at

 the heeles and endamaged them so much as might be, but could not effect any great matter: for the French king still marched forwarde into the Countrey, and tooke the most delectable and pleasant Castle called 
Marymont,
 which was a house of pleasure, and belonged to the Emperours Sister, 
Mary
 Queene of 
Hungary.
 The King commanded it should be rased, and vtterly defaced in a re∣uenge of the displeasure she had done him, in burning of his Castles of 
Foulem∣bray, Tragny, Baines, Reux,
 and 
Bauet.
 besides, many other places were taken by the French, to the vtter vndooing of many thousandes of the poore in∣habitants.


Whilst these broyles continued thus hotly betweene the emperials and the French, the marriage betweene 
Phillip
 of 
Spaine
 and Queene 
Mary
 of 
England
 was agreed vppon, and immediatly after hee arriued in 
England
 very nobly ac∣companied with the Duke of 
Alua,
 the Counts 
de Padille, Rigomes, Egmond,
 the Admirall of 
Castill,
 the marquesse 
de Languillare,
 and many other great estates. The King of 
France
 seeing well inough to what ende all this tended, thought it best to stand vpon his guard, and to haue all things in a readinesse: and there∣fore hee reuiewed his armies, mustered new Souldiers, gathered mony and all other necessaries, drawing his forces towards those parts that hee most suspec∣ted should be inuaded: and surprising many Castles and strong holds,
 continu∣ed his course without any interruption, vntil hee came before 
Reuty,
 which for that it was a place of very great importance, hee determined to winne it, and the emperour resolued to keepe it. The French hauing planted their siege had so bet the towne, that a conuenient breach was made, and they readie to giue an assault: which when the emperour vnderstood, hee made all possible speed to releeue thē, purposing rather to hazard his fortune, then to suffer the French to haue their willes: wherefore hauing chosen out foure thousande of his best shot, with a conuenient number of pikes to backe them, and about foure thousand horsemen, besides foure field peeces, hee commanded them to march towards a wood which was neere adioyning, which he coueted to take if pos∣sibly he might. The whole cauallery was ledde by the Duke of 
Sauoy,
 and the harquebuziers by Don 
Fernando de Gonzaga.
 There marched also a battailon of Almaines along by the wood side, vnder the conduct of Count 
Iohn
 of 
Nassau,
 & the mareschall of 
Cleue,
 which was flanked with a great Hot or squadron of Reisters, to the number of two thousand horse, vnder the leading of the count 
Vuluenfort,
 who had promised the emperour to march vppon the bellies of the French Cauallery, and to trample them vnder his feete: at whose backe were some thousand two hundred light horse, with other foure field peeces. These harquebuziers were no sooner entred the wood, but they encountred foure hundred French shot, betweene whom and the emperials there beganne a very hot and furious skirmish.


The Duke of 
Guyse
 who had taken vppon him to keepe that quarter, seeing with what courage the emperials maintained the fight, supposed they were wel backed, whereupon hee presently sent word to the King, that he imagined the emperor was comming with all his forces, and that there was great likelihood of a battaile as that day: vppon which aduertisement the king forthwith arran∣ged his troups in as warlike manner as he might, & sent word to the 
Guyse,
 that

 if oportunitie serued hee should accept of the iourney, and hee would be rea∣die to assist him. Then began the Duke of 
Guyse
 to encourage his souldiers, and to animate them with the best words he could deuise: and putting himselfe in the front of his Regiment, waited his best oportunitie to assaile his enemie. In the meane while the Conestable passed ouer a little riuer, with certaine com∣panyes on foote, and the whole battaile of the Switzers, who were wonder∣fully encouraged with the presence of the King, that had promised to liue and die with them.


By this time the Emperials were so farre aduaunced, that they had beaten the foure hundred shot out of the wood,
 and appeared ful in the face of the for∣most battailon of the French, and beeing fauoured by theyr Reisters, ap∣proched within two hundred paces of the Duke, who presently commanded to charge them. Whereupon the Duke of 
Nemours
 with his Regiment of light horse, sette vppon the Reisters in the front, and sent 
Forges
 the guydon of his companie, and 
Tauannes
 to assaile them in the Flanke. So there ensued a hote and furious combate: but in the ende the French were repulsed with the losse of many braue mē. With which happy successe the emperials were won∣derfully encouraged, perswading themselues that they had gotten an entire vic∣tory.
 But the Duke of 
Guyse
 and 
Tauannes
 calling their troups, and ioyning with the Duke 
D' Aumale
 and the whole cauallery of light horse, charged the Em∣perials afresh, and that with such furie, that the Count 
Vuluenfort
 was wholy defeated, and his Pistoliers quite ouerthrowne, who while they hasted to saue themselues, ranne vppon the battaile of their Almaines, who by that meanes were exceedingly disordered: so that the Duke of 
Neuers
 who was placed with his Regiment towards 
Reuty,
 espying a passage laid open, entred as it were at the breach, vpon the Spanish shot, and with such resolution followed his point, that he defeated them in a moment, driuing them to run towards the wood to saue themselues.


There were taken seauenteene ensignes, fiue Cornets, and foure field peeces. The French pursued their victorie, and slew to the number of some sixe or sea∣uen hundred of these runnawaies, chasing them hard to their trenches. Thus did fortune still fauour the French kings proceeding, and crossed the Emperor almost in all his enterprises.


After this victorie the Emperour would no more be drawen to fight, but kept himselfe with all his forces, emparked within his strength: which the French king perceiuing, hee determined to retire towards 
Monterell,
 to refresh his wearie armie, leauing 
Reuty
 as a thing that would not bee gotten in haste: where he staied not long but remooued towards 
Champeigne,
 and hauing for∣tified 
Bouloin,
 and sundrie other frontier Townes, brake vp his Armie, and licensed euerie man to depart: but this was no sooner knowne to the Em∣perour, but hee taking the oportunitie, sent his forces to spoyle the frontiers of France, where there was made a pittious spoyle in a short time. At length the Emperour likewise dissolued his troups, and stuffing his Townes with strong garrisons, thought it best to expect some better oportunitie to accom∣plish his desires.


Winter was no sooner past, but that the French king, who was somewhat

 puffed vp with his former victories, and finding himselfe greeued with newe iniuries, made great preparation for newe broyles, and for more bloudy wars then before:
 and vnderstanding that the confines of 
France
 were sore anoyed with the Emperiall garrisons, sent Mareschall Saint 
Andrew
 and 
Bourdillon
 with a conuenient number, to stop the course of the insolent enemie, and to enterprise further as occasion should bee offered. And albeit there was great meanes made to reconcile these two mightie potentates, yet nothing could bee effected: for the french King required 
Naples, Millan, Burgundy, Piemont, Nauarre,
 and many other places: and the Emperour would part with no∣thing, so that the treatie being broken off, warre presently ensued: for the Em∣perour hauing a power in a readinesse vnder the leading of 
Martin Ronsare
 the bastard of 
Cleue,
 inuaded the territories belonging to the 
Flower de Lis,
 burning, spoyling, and wasting in most outragious manner: but this stormie tempest continued not long, for the emperials began to fal sick of many disea∣ses, and to want victuals, so that they were forced to retire, hauing lost their ge∣nerall and many others of especiall account. Thus did the Emperour stande still in fortunes disgrace, and nothing seemed to prosper that he tooke in hand, vntill mid 
August
 following, that shee began to returne her fauour towardes him, by giuing him as it were some good words, after so many sharpe and bit∣ter checks. At which time 
Hansimont
 gouernour of 
Baupalme,
 vnderstanding that a great power of the French were entred into his maisters territorie, vn∣der the leading of 
La Faille,
 setting vppon them on the sodaine, slewe many of them, and tooke 
La Faille
 prisoner, with sundrie other of good account, in somuch as the emperials bosted, that they hadde taken the French Nobilitie in grosse, and not by retaile, and that they neuer wayed them, but tooke them vp∣on their words.


 While the emperor and the king were thus busied in the frontiers of 
Picardy,
 their armies vnder the leading of the mareschall 
Brissack
 and the Duke of 
Alua,
 sought to anoy each other in 
Piemont.
 Captaine 
Saluoyson
 surprised 
Casal
 in the dead of the night, being one of the strongest and best fortified places in all those quarters: wherein were taken 
Figuerot
 gouernor of the Towne, and the Count 
Ladron,
 general of the Almaines, and maruailous store of all necessarie prouisi∣on for the warres. 
Monsieur de Termes
 preuailed mightily in 
Italy,
 and ouer∣threw the emperials at 
Senes
 with great slaughter and mortalitie: but he being called home, 
Strozzi
 was appoynted Leiutenant in his place,
 who fighting with the emperialles was wholy defeated: and 
Clermont, Moulbazon, Blaise
 with the Collonels of the Switzers were slain, with sundry others, to the num∣ber of three hundred: and fiue hundred were taken prisoners.


Thus fortune seemed to play with these two mightie Princes, and to sport her selfe in the interchangeable fauour which shee bestowed vppon their ar∣mies, vntill winter approching, they were forced to forsake the field, and draw their souldiers into garrisons, expecting the spring of the yeere to make an end of their bitter contentions.


But the emperor now growing sickly and weake, and waxing wearie with tossing and tumbling in these worldly affaires, considering the variable change and mutabilitie to which they were subiect, yeelded vp his kingdome

 of 
Spaine,
 and all other his dominions, and that absolutely vnto his sonne 
Phil∣lip,
 and spent the rest of his daies in a monastery which he had builded for that purpose.


 
Phillip
 King of 
Spaine
 being somewhat terrified with the rumor of the com∣ming of the Turke, and partly solicited by his wife, who was loath to haue him encombered with the warres, was contented to hearken to a peace, which the French king refused not: whereupon, after long debating on either side, a league was concluded for fiue yeeres, but it could not bee kept halfe the time: for the Pope and his Cardinals falling at discention, and the Spanish king taking part with the one, and the French king with the other, the warres beganne a∣gaine afresh in 
It
ly
 betweene these two late reconciled enemies.
 The Duke of 
Alua
 was sent against the triple Crowne of 
Rome,
 who with the ayde of the Duke of Florence, tooke many Castles and holds belonging to the Pope, whom they besieged within Saint 
Angelo.
 The Duke of 
Gu
se,
 though con∣trarie to the Counsel of 
Ann de Memorancy,
 and his Cousins 
Olet
 and 
Iaspar Co∣ligny,
 called 
Chastillon,
 was sent to raise the siege, who accompanied with the Dukes of 
Aumaille
 and 
D' Elbenfe
 his brothers,
 the Duke of 
Nemours,
 the count 
D' Eu,
 the 
Vidame
 of 
Chartres,
 and sundrie other great Captains, marched for∣warde with all possible speede, purposing to releeue the distressed Pope who was well neere famished in 
Rome.


While the Duke was hasting on his way, mareschall 
Strozzi
 tooke 
Ostia
 with a Castle neere adioyning belonging to the Spaniardes, and likewise 
Vico Valerio,
 which was sacked, and the spoyle giuen to the Souldiers. As soone as the Duke of 
Alua
 and the marquesse of 
Pescara,
 the two cheefe com∣maunders of the Spanish forces,
 vnderstood of the approch of the French, they forthwith left 
Rome,
 and retired the one towards 
Naples
 and the other towards 
Millan,
 so that nowe the Pope was almost set at libertie againe, sauing that the Duke of 
Florence
 did somewhat restrayne him: but hee fearing least hee should draw all the warre vppon himselfe, was willing to compounde with the French, who were now growne strong in 
Italy,
 & prospered maruailously: but many thought it would not be long, for that the Spanish king made verie great preparation, both to with stande the French abroade, and also for to finde them occupied at home, and the rather because a third armie vnder the leading of their Admirall 
Chastillon,
 gouernor of 
Picardy,
 inuaded 
Art
oise,
 wasting and spoyling the Countrey exceedingly. Thus was the league which was so so∣lemnly sworne, and so necessary for all Christendome, broken againe by the si∣nister counsels of the 
Guyse,
 and the warres beganne afresh betweene these two mightie Princes.


King 
Phillip
 being highly discontented with the French King for so many iniuries and indignities offered, hauing gathered a great army wherein was thirtie fiue thousand footmen and twelue thousand horse, besides some eight thousand English, vnder the leading of the Earle of 
Penbrooke,
 purposed to be∣siege Saint 
Quintines
 in 
Vermandoise,
 which the Admirall 
Chastillon
 suspec∣ting, putte himselfe within the Towne with such power as hee hadde in a readinesse, and fortified it as strongly as he could: the French king likewise prepared to withstande the Spanish inuasion, and hauing prouided an hoste

 consisting of eighteene thousande footmen, Almaines and French,
 and some fiue or sixe thousand horse, sent the Conestable of 
France
 to front the enemie, and to keepe him from entring into the fat fieldes of the 
Flower de Lis.
 But be∣fore this power could bee in a readinesse, the prince of 
Piemont,
 generall of the Spanish forces, hadde inuested Saint 
Quinsines,
 and planted his siege be∣fore the Towne, which he watched so narrowly, that it was impossible for any succours to enter, without apparant daunger. The Conestable not∣withstanding, espying a conuenient time, conuayed certaine troups of foot∣men and horsemen into the Towne, vnder the fauour of a skirmish, main∣tained by the Duke of 
Neuers,
 and the Prince of 
Condy:
 which beeing perfor∣med hee beganne to retyre as not willing to hazard his fortune at that pre∣sent: which at the first was not discerned by the Spanish. But after that the victuallers and pages of the French Campe perceiued the retrait of theyr Armie, and howe farre they were engaged, they beganne to runne after in great haste, and with theyr yelling and crying, gaue such euident proofe to the enemie of their exceeding feare, so that the Count 
Egmond,
 who first dis∣couered the French dismarch, hauing aduertised the prince, commaunded the trumpets to sounde 
Dedans, dedans,
 and with two thousand horse charged them on the side. The Count 
Henry
 and 
Ernest
 of 
Brunswick,
 each of them hauing a thousand, beeing backed with the Counte 
Horne,
 who hasted on with great fury, did likewise assaile them at one instant, who in their retiring turning head, receiued them with equall valour.


While the French were thus assailed in the flanke, the Count of 
Mansfeild, Dostrate,
 and 
Gueldres,
 with three thousand horse ranne vpon them in the front, and that with such a furious feast, that hauing ouerthrowne theyr formost ranke, the rest were soone defeated and compelled to flie away.
 
Iohn
 of 
Bur∣bon
 Duke of 
Angolesme
 was dismounted at the first encounter, and beeing hor∣sed againe, was slaine at the second. 
Francis de la Tour
 vicount of 
Turin,
 Saint 
Gelais
 and aboue a hundred and twentie Gentlemen of good account, beside sixe hundred common souldiers died at that battaile. The Conestable beeing wounded in the hippes, was taken prisoner and brought to the Prince, and so were the Dukes of 
Montpensier,
 the mareschall Saint 
Andrew, Lewis
 prince of 
Manfona,
 the 
Ringraue Rochfaucont,
 Saint 
Heran, Burdillon, Mouy, Montsales,
 and many other of the Nobilitie of great reckoning and reputation. There were also aboue three hundred Gentlemen of Marke taken prisoners, and many of the footmen beeing slaine, the rest were taken to mercy, and driuen away by troups, as if they hadde beene flocks of sheepe, and presented to King 
Phillip
 with theyr ensignes and colours, as monuments of his glorious and trium∣phant victorie.


The King of 
France
 was wonderfully astonished with this ouerthrowe, and the rather for that 
Paris
 (the cheefe Citie of his Realme) seemed to be straightly terrified, that sundrie of the principall Citizens beganne to flie,
 and to with∣draw themselues towardes the vttermost bounds of the lande, fearing the com∣ming of the enemie, who had nowe libertie to doo what hee listed. Howbeit hauing borrowed thirty thousand pounds of the Parisians, he presently hired fourteene thousande Switzers, and sent to the Duke of 
Guyse,
 who was in 
Italy,


 to repaire into 
France
 with all expedition, and to bring with him all the for∣ces hee could make. Thus was the King driuen to an exigent, and hee who not long before hadde sent the 
Guyse
 to anoy other men, was nowe glad to call him home againe to defende himselfe,
 who stood almost in a desperate state, and lay open to the inuasion of his enemies. In the meane time the King was earnestly busied in gathering of another Armie, sending out his proclamations into all quarters, fortifying 
Paris,
 and appoynting the Duke of 
Neuers
 (who by great happe escaped at Saint 
Quintins,
) to bee his Lieutenant, and to empeach the enemie from entering any further into 
France.


The number of those who were called
 Hugonots began to increase, and were dispersed in a manner ouer all the lande, and because the affaires of the state went thus backward, & almost nothing prospered that was taken in hand, one of the principall men about the king, perswaded him that God was angrie and punished the land, for that such sects and heresies (as they tearmed them) were suffered to increase and multiplie in a manner without controlement, and that the King to pacifie the wrath of GOD, must take a more seuere course in punishing such as were offenders heerein, who hadde beene the principall meanes to pull downe the wrath of God vppon the King, and the whole Lande. Whereuppon there immediatly ensued horrible crueltyes towards the poore Hugonots, and infinite multitudes were putte to death in a short time, so that the rage of persecution grewe very great, supposing there∣by as by an expiation, to turne away the hand of the almightie, which was so heauie vppon 
France:
 but they were exceedingly deceiued heerein, for by ap∣plying a wrong medicine, the disease dayly increased, and God seeing them wilfully repugne his truth, augmented theyr sorrowes more and more: for the Prince of 
Piemont
 did nowe more narrowly besiege Saint 
Quintins
 then be∣fore, and hauing strongly fortified his Campe, and stored himselfe with all conuenient necessaries for to maintaine the siege, raised his mounts and plan∣ted 45. peeces of great ordenance, wherewith hee battered the walles in most furious maner.


The admiral who was a very valiant, pollitike and wise chiefetaine, would not hearken to any composition, but repayring the breaches, resolued to keepe the place in despite of the enemie: the Prince on the other side plyed the batte∣ry, and hauing with much adoo made a sufficient breach, disposed his bandes, and gaue order for the assault: the first place was assigned to Captaine 
Ca∣zares
 maister of the Campe, and to 
Lazaro
 Collonell of fifteene hundred Al∣maines. The second to Captaine 
Nauarre,
 with certain bands of Spaniards, and to count 
Meigue,
 with his Wallones, the third to 
Iulian Romero
 with 3. ensignes of Spaniards, & 2000. English: and the fourth to captain 
Carronnellet,
 with 3. en∣signes of of Burgonians, all which beeing in a readines valiantly approched the wals.
 The Admirall had likewise determined how to receiue the enemie, and putting himselfe into that place where hee supposed most danger, with great hardinesse expecting the comming of the Spaniards: but there was not the like resolution on all hands, for the souldiours beeing discouraged with the late o∣uerthrow, and the inhabitants beeing timorous, as men not accustomed to

 such daungers, made small resistance, so that the enemie entred at his pleasure, which when the admirall to his vnspeakeable griefe beheld, hee was enforced to seek to saue himself, by yeelding to a common souldier,
 who brought him to captain 
Cazares,
 by whom he was led prisoner to the prince. 
Dandelot
 his brother was likewise taken, but he found the means to escape by a desperate aduenture, to recouer his libertie. 
Irnac. S. Remy. La Gard, Cuzneux, Moulins, Bruell, Bretanie, Rambou
llet. S. Romain, S. Andre, Linieres,
 & 
Soleil,
 did likewise remaine prisoners. 
Fayet le Iaune, Salleuert, Oger, Vignes, la Barre, Estang, Gourds,
 and many other braue men were slaine. The whole towne was sacked, and spoiled, and a maruellous masse of wealth gotten, and caried into the low countries.


The French king, was all this while prouiding his forces, and deuising by what meanes he might best make head against his enemie, fearing indeed the Prince would follow his good fortune, and proceed further into 
France,
 by rea∣son that he had sent the Count of 
Frembarg
 with 1000. horse, and 3. regiments of Lancequenets, containing 14. ensignes, & 20. peeces of batterie, to besiege 
Ca∣stellet,
 a place of very great strength: yet was it soone taken by the enemie, the French not daring to abide the Canon, so exceedingly were they afrighted with their former losses. In the middest of all these mischiefs, there fell out one thing which turned to the great aduantage of the French king,
 and brought no small hinderance to the Spanish kings proceedings, and that was the mutinie among the Almaines and Spaniards, who falling at dissention about their booties and spoiles gotten at S. 
Quintins,
 & the ransoms of their prisoners, were the occasion of much trouble and tumult in the army. Which when the French king vnder∣stood, he practised in such maner with sundry of the Almain captains, that their oath being expired with King 
Philip,
 they were contented to be reclaimed by him, and to serue against the enemies of the 
Flower de Lis.


 By this time was the Duke of 
Guise
 come out of 
Italie,
 and being made the Kings Lieutenant, was sent with a strong power toward 
Amiens,
 with a secret commandemēt to enterprise against 
Calice,
 if occasion serued. The duke finding the towne slenderly prouided, suddenly planted his siege about it,
 and that in the midst of winter. And first assailed a fort called 
Nieulay,
 which was easily gay∣ned. From thence he sent part of his army along the downes to 
Risebank,
 which he likewise tooke without any great resistance. The duke hauing gotten two principal places, & that in one day, planted his battery against the towne, wher∣in was gouernor the L. Wentworth: who seeing the vnexpected successe of the French, & how fortune fauored the D. in all his dessignes, disposed of all things as well as he might, and endeuored to remoue the French out of their trenches: but that was impossible, for the duke was so strongly fortified, and had gotten such places of aduātage, that he could not be forced by any means whatsoeuer. The duke hauing planted 15. Canons, began his battery against the old castle, & that with great fury. And for that the wals were ruinous, & easie to be pearced, the breach was soone made, & assault giuen, but the French were repulsed at the first, with the losse of their forwardst men: notwithstanding they being incou∣raged with their former successe, continued their enterprise, and at last gayned the Castell, which the Duke did forthwith cause to be strongly fortified. This was a very great losse to the English, for that from thence the French might shoote into the towne at their pleasure




Now was 
Calice
 narrowly besieged, and all passages were stopped in such sort, that it was impossible to conuay in any succours, or to send forth any to giue aduertisement of the distressed estate of the inhabitants. Which when the Lord Wentworth perceiued, and how that for want of necessaries, he was not able to keepe the towne any longer, he was content to parle with the Duke, and to yeeld vpon composition. Whereto the Duke of 
Guise
 willingly assented: so that after much debating on either side the towne was yelded vpon condition,
 that the inhabitants might safely depart without impeachment whither they li∣sted, and the lord Wentworth with diuerse others to the number of fiftie of the chiefest, to remaine prisoners.


Thus was 
Calice
 in lesse then seuen daies recouered by the French (which had bin besieged by 
Edward
 the third, king of 
England,
 by the space of a whole yere, and which had remained in the English mens hands for the space of 210. yeres) to the incredible ioy of the French. And as it was lost vnder 
Ph
lip of Valois
 the French King: so was it regained by the French, in the time of 
Philip
 king of 
Eng∣land.
 The duke folowing his good fortune, did forthwith besiege 
Guines,
 wher∣in commaunded the valiant lord 
Gray,
 who albeit he did stoutly hold out for a time, abiding the planting of the Canon, and a furious assault, yet was he forced in the end to yeeld, and to resigne his office to another man. Which when the garrison of 
Hams
 vnderstood, they abandoned the fort, & withdrew themselues to a place of greater securitie. The French king was not a little ioyfull to heare these newes: wherefore longing to see that, which he had so often wished and desired, he posted presently to visit his new conquered towne: whither he was no sooner come, but that he gaue order for the repairing and fortifying thereof, and leauing 
Monsieur de Thermes
 gouernor, withdrew himselfe againe towards 
Paris,
 commanding the 
Guise
 to besiege 
Herbemont,
 a place of some importance: which was yeelded at the first summance. Thus did fortune begin to turne her countenance towards the French, and as it were alternatiuely, and by course fa∣uour the Kings desigments.


The French K: intending to prosecute his wars against the Spaniards, thought it good policie to strengthen himselfe with some forrein alliance and therefore contriued a marriage betweene 
Mary
 the yong Queene of 
Scots,
 and 
Francis
 the Dolphin of 
France.
 Which mariage was solemnized at 
Paris,
 in most royall and magnificent maner, the 14. of Aprill 1558. About which time there began some motion to be made, as touching a peace betweene 
Spaine
 & 
France.
 The princi∣pal procurer whereof was the Lady Dutchesse and dowager of 
Loraine;
 and co∣sin to King 
Philip.
 But by reason of sundry impeachments, there was nothing ef∣fected: so that the French king hauing all things in a readinesse, sent the Duke of 
Guise,
 accompanied with the Dukes of 
Neuers,
 & 
Nemours,
 the Mareschal 
Stroz∣zi,
 and 
Bourdillon,
 with a great power to besiege 
Theonuille.
 Who making their approches, raised their mounts, planting their Ordinance, and beate the towne with 35. peeces of artillary. Which when Count 
Horne
 vnderstood, he marched thither in the dead of the night, with certain old bands of Spaniards, purposing to force the 
Corps de gard
 of the enemies: But the Count being not able to effect that which he desired, by reason he found the French very strongly encamped, was forced to retire with losse of many of his men.




The Duke still plied his batterie,
 and for that he could not well discerne whe∣ther the breach were reasonable or not, & what flankers remained to endamage the assailants: as also to see the countenances and resolution of the besieged, sent about midnight fiue hundred of his most hardy and best experienced souldiers, vnder the conduct of 
Cipierre S. Estef, Mellas, Sarlabos,
 and 
Iaques,
 to giue a false assault, with expresse commaundement not to aduance further, then onely to discouer the breach, vnlesse they should be drawne therto by some apparant ad∣uantage: who approching the walles, and crying, scale, scale, as though they would haue giuen a generall assault, so terrified those who garded the breach, that part of them shrinking away for feare, and the rest not able to resist, gaue leaue to the French to ascende to the toppe of the Rampart, and had the soul∣diours followed theyr leaders, with equall courage, the towne had beene gay∣ned at that instant. But the alarum being giuen, the French were soone repul∣sed, with the losse of many of their principall and most forward men: the besie∣ged were much dismaid with this vnlooked for accident, and the remembrance of their manifold wants made them to doubt of the sequell of the siege, where∣vpon 
Caderobbe
 who was gouernour of the towne, knowing he was not able to holde out for any long time, sent a trumpet to demaund a parle, offering to yeeld vpon reasonable conditions: which when the Duke had assented vnto, and the articles were fully agreed vpon, the place was giuen vp the 22. of Iune 1558. vn∣to the French, who entered with great triumphs, and repairing the battered walles, made them as defensible as they could.


This and the like prosperous successe somewhat cheered the French nation, and made their name seeme terrible to the Spaniards, who had for a time beene exceedingly crossed in most of their affayres. But nowe the worlde beganne to change, & fortune which is euer instable, frowned vpon the French,
 by crossing the designes of 
Monsieur de Termes,
 the captaine of 
Calice.
 Who desirous to doo some especiall seruice for his late preferment, inuaded the confines of 
Flanders,
 with an army of 9000. footmen, & 1500. horse, and by an assault tooke 
Dunkirk,
 leauing 
Graueling
 on his backe, with a purpose to enterprise against that also if oportunitie serued, and so passed forth hard vnto 
Newport,
 cruelly wasting with fire and sword, whatsoeuer was in his way. For the repressing of whose furious and barbarous rage, Count 
Egmond
 assembled a power of 12000. on foote, and 3000. horsmen: of whose approch when 
Termes
 was ascertained by his espials, he began to retire with al speed, being indeed not able to encounter with so strong and resolute an enemy: wherfore vsing the benefit of a low water, he marched away in the dead of the night along by the sea, hoping to deceiue the count, and to free himselfe from the danger of the Dutch. But the count 
Egmond
 vnderstan∣ding of the retreat of the French, suspecting that they hasted to get out of his hands, crossed the country by a nearer way, and put himselfe between them and home, meeting them in the front not farre from 
Graueling.
 He was no sooner in view of the enemy, but he caused the signall to be giuen,
 & like a general of sur∣passing courage, went resolutely to the charge. The French who stood in a des∣perate state, receiued the shotte with equall valour: and at the first seemed to haue the better, committing maruellous slaughter with their great Ordi∣nance vpon the formost ranckes of the Burgonians, whom when the French

 saw so broken and dismembred, supposing the day had bin theirs, they cried out victorie, victorie. But this acclamation lasted not long: for the Count 
Egmond
 arriuing with a great Hot of Reisters, and Flemings, so furiously charged the French launces, that they were wholy defeated and ouerthrowne.


Amids these bloody broils hapned a strange chance:
 for at the same time, cer∣taine English ships passing by, and descrying this encounter, made towards the shore, and with their shot beat the flanks of the French army, which on this side lay open to a ful batterie: wherewith they being sore dismaid, and not able to in∣dure the fight any longer, turned their backs and fled amain. There were some 1500. slaine in that place. And the greatest number of such as escaped, were kil∣led by the boores and women of the country who made hauocke of as many as fel into their hands. 
Monsieur de Termes, D'annebault, Senarpont, Meruilliers,
 & sun∣dry others of the principall captains remained prisoners. Moreouer they lost all their Ordinance, ensignes, munition, bag and baggage, and all their rich booties which they had gotten in Flanders. This sinister chance did not a little vexe the French King, who fearing a further mischiefe if it were not timely preuented, sent forth presently for his Bannes & Arierbannes,
 with a straight commaunde∣ment to all his ordinance and men of armes, to assemble themselues at 
Pierreport
 in as warlike maner as might be, there to attend his further pleasure, and to be in a readinesse to be employed as occasion should be offered.


King 
Philip
 of 
Spaine,
 had likewise gathered a very strong power, and al things were prouided by these two mightie Monarkes, as though they ment to deter∣mine all their controuersies by some one cruel & bloody battell. But God who ruleth the hearts of princes, disposed of their intentions far otherwise then their blind affections led them. For vpō the sudden, their hard harts began to be mol∣lified, and each party inclined to peace: so that the place being appointed, and the deputies on both sides agreed vpon, they met about the midst of October follo∣wing at 
Cercam,
 betweene 
Artoys
 and 
Pycardy.
 There were many complaints on both sides, and a commemoration of sundry indignities offered on either part. Each defended others doings, neither was there any likelihood of better agree∣ment: 
 so that after many contentious words, their assembly brake vp, without a∣ny cōclusion for peace: and yet, for that winter approched, & the soldiers were not able to keep the field,
 both princes dissolued their armies, and licenced their men of warre to repose themselues vntill the next yere. But before that time, by reason of newe occurrences, there was a generall peace proclaimed betweene these two nations, & each linked with other with very strait alliances: For King 
Philip
 (whose wife 
Mary
 Queene of 
England
 was lately deceassed) was conten∣ted to take in marriage 
Elizabeth
 the eldest daughter of 
Henry
 the French King, and 
Pilebert Emmanuel
 duke of 
Sauoy,
 was affianced vnto madame 
Margaret
 his sister: so that by reason of these new cōiunctions, there insued much quietnes to all Christendome, but especially to these two kingdoms, who now had made an end of all their quarels & contentions, and seemed to study of nothing but how they might honor and solemnise in most royall maner these new marriages.


There was exceeding sumptuous preparation against the appointed time: all the Nobilitie of 
France
 were assembled at 
Paris,
 to attend the king, & to honor these espousals. The lady 
Elizabeth
 was cōducted by the king her father to our

 Lady Church at the day prefixed in most pompous and stately maner, and there married by the Cardinall of 
Burbon,
 to the Duke of 
Alua,
 was who constituted Procurator of the king of 
Spaine
 his maister.
 There were all the princes of the bloud attending in their order, and many cheefe Prelates, and all the officers of the crowne. The Duke of 
Alua
 was accompanied with the Prince of 
Orenge,
 Count 
Egmond,
 and sundrie other very honourable personages. The marriage being finished, there was exceeding feasting, banquetting, and cheering, with dauncing, masking, and all other pastimes that could be imagined, both to de∣light the eye and please the eare. The king reioyced to see his daughter so ho∣nourably aduanced: the Nobilitie and commonaltie were maruailously glad to remember what ease, peace, and tranquilitie they should enioy by this newe affinitie: and all sorts seemed to triumph, hoping there would be a perpetuall league and corespondency betweene these two Nations: but now behold a woful mishap and lamentable mischance, wherewith all this mirth and iollity was turned into weeping, wailing, and great sorrow: so enterchangeably doo these two accompany each other, & so certainely do they follow one another. The French king, who had bin the principall challenger at tilt, assisted by the Duke of 
Guyse, Alphonse
 the Prince of 
Ferrara,
 and the Duke of 
Nemours,
 hauing borne himselfe very nobly that day, and broken many staues to his great honor and high commendation, would needes in the end run a course with count 
De Mont-gommery
 a valiant gentleman of 
France:
 who at the first refusing,
 yet com∣manded by the king accepted the condition, and offered so freely, that theyr staues flying in peeces, some of the shiuers getting in at the sight of the beuer, pearced into the kings head, & greeuously wounded him, that he died within eleuen daies after, to the immesurable greefe of his subiects, after hee hadde raigned twelue yeeres, three moneths, and tenne dayes.






CHAP. VI.




Francis
 the second the French King. The 
Guises
 authors of all the confusion in France. The 
Guises
 ioyne with the Queene mother against the King of 
Nauarre.
 The King of 
Nauarre
 yeeldeth to the Queene mother. The Duke of 
Guise
 made Lieutenant for the King, and 
Henrie
 Cardinall of 
Lorraine,
 made L. Treasurer of 
France.
 They incense the King agaynst the princes of the blood. The enterprise of the Lord of 
Renaudie.
 The hatred of the 
Guises
 towards the three Chastillons. The Prince of 
Conde
 beeing dis∣contented, goeth from the Court. The order of the States of 
France.
 The Admirall pre∣senteth the supplication of the 
Hugonots
 to the king. The Prince of 
Conde
 committed to prison, and is condemned to die. The death of the King.




T
He Kingdome of 
France
 had for manie yeares togither, beene ve∣rie well acquainted with the variable and changeable estate of vnconstaunt fortune, and vnder 
Charles
 the eight, 
Lewis
 the twelfth, 
Francis
 the first, and 
Henrie
 the seconde, had by wo∣full experience found, how subiect the most flourishing estates, kingdoms & cōmonwealths are to a continuall change and alteration: and ther∣fore hauing by long obseruatiō perfitly learned, that the best means to maintain her selfe in her wonted grandeur and glory, was to be leagued with her neigh∣bour

 Countries, and to be at peace and vnitie at home, beganne to haue a flexible heart, and to encline to quietnesse as much as might bee: so that hauing ended all quarrels, and buried all wronges and indignities in the pit of obliuion, and by a neare coniunction with the Spanyard her ancient and migh∣tie enemy, (in the opinion of most men) procured her selfe a perpetuall peace, began as it were, to clap her handes for ioy, and seriously to tryumph in so in∣comparable a benefite. But the fatall and ineuitable mishap of this most noble kingdome, which had florished for so many hundred yeares, and had been the paragon of her neighbor nations, could not (as it seemeth) be auoyded, but that it must needes take place, and wanting forraigne enemies to worke her ouer∣throw, must needes hatch a viperous brood, which by gnawing out the belly of their owne mother, haue most vnnaturally sought the destruction of her, who haue most tenderly fostered and brought them vp.


The principall cause to produce so lamentable an effect, and the only means in a maner to hatch so horrible a mischiefe, was the immesurable ambition of that haughtie and aspiring house of 
Guyse:
 who albeit they were straungers, and no natural French men, yet fortune so fauoured their attempts, and made some of them so gracious with their soueraignes, that they did not only contend for the superioritie with the greatest Princes of the blood, but at length (as ambiti∣on hath neuer any end) striued with their liege Lords, and through their rebel∣lious counsels and most trayterous plottes, assisted by a multitude of Guysards and Hispaniolized French, draue their soueraigne Lord out of his chiefe Citie: and not contented to offer so great indignitie to so mightie a potentate, neuer left practising, vntill they had most wickedly murthered him, whose life in all dutie should haue beene vnto them more precious then their owne: and with their diuellish sorceries, haue so bewitched and sotted sundry of the French na∣tion, that at this day, to their perpetuall shame and ignominy, they will not be reduced vnto any dutifull obedience vnder their most lawfull and liege Lord.


One of the most notorious plotters of so many mischiefes, was 
Francis
 Duke of 
Guyse,
 who with his brother 
Charles
 Cardinall of 
Lorrain
 (as proud, subtil, and as ambitious a prelate as euer was) grew to that height, through the benefit of their good fortune, that they commanded all 
France,
 and brought the greatest Princes of that natiō to be their vnderlings: and by reason of a mariage between 
Francis
 the second, with 
Mary
 the yoong Queene of Scottes their neece, they bare themselues so loftely, and so egerly stroue to aduance their house, that they turned all 
France
 topsy turuy, so chaunging the gouernment and altering the state, that it seemed in a short time to be a meere 
Chaos,
 and confusion. For after the death of 
Henry
 the secōd, and that 
Francis
 his sonne was crowned King, these two so craftily handled the matter, that ioyning with 
Katherin de Medices,
 the Queen mother of 
France,
 (who contrary to the auncient lawes and ordinances of that Realme, which permit not women to rule, sought to haue the gouern∣ment of the yoong King, and to exclude 
Henry
 of 
Burbon
 King of 
Nauarre,
 and chiefe Prince of the blood) after infinite troubles to themselues, and vnspeake∣able misery to their owne Country, they gat the gouernment into their hands, and swayed euery thing after their owne likings.


And albeit the state of that kingdome had begun long before to be much af∣flicted,

 and through the horrible persecutions of those whom they termed 
Hu∣gonots,
 maruellously decayed and weakned, by reason of a secret diuision bred in the hearts of infinit multitudes, who once dissenting in Religion, could ne∣uer after well agree in matters of state: yet was the land at peace within it selfe, and euery one seemed to be enclinable to their princes pleasure, choosing ra∣ther to endure any affliction, then by seeking to defend their liues and liberties by force of armes, to bring in any intestine warres, the most deuouring plague and sharpest punishment of all other: but after that the house of 
Guyse
 began to rule, and that their factious deuises cloaked with a zeale of mainteining the Ca∣tholicke cause, had once stirred the coales, the flame presently brake foorth, and finding conuenient matter to nourish it withall, spread it selfe in a short time ouer the face of the whole kingdome of 
France,
 to the consuming of in∣finite multitudes of all sorts, and the extreame impouerishing of the whole land.


There were sundry and diuers meanes to hasten this so wonderfull and la∣mentable alteration in 
France,
 but the principall of all other, was the vnexpec∣ted death of t e late King,
 who albeit hee verie seuerely punished all such as were accounted Protestants, and that principally at the instigation of the house of 
Guyse,
 yet did he so politikely carry himselfe, that during his raigne, he kept that ambitious monster in some reasonable good order, and the whole lande from tumult and rebellion: but he was no sooner dead, but that all things be∣ganne to hasten to a confusion, and the whole common wealth to bee daun∣gerously infected with sundry fearefull diseases, the originall whereof arose in this maner.


In the beginning of the reigne of 
Francis
 the second, being but sixteene yeares olde, there grewe a controuersie betweene 
Katherin de Medices
 the Kings mother, 
Henry
 of 
Burbon
 King of 
Nauarre,
 and 
Francis
 of 
Lorraigne,
 Duke of 
Guyse,
 touching the gouernment of the young King during his non∣age. The Queene-mother alleaged many reasons to strengthen her claime, as the lawes of Nature, which would that the mother should haue the brin∣ging vp of her children, as one hauing a most tender care ouer them, and most willing of all others to doo them good, the customes and vsages of sundry na∣tions, and the auncient order of the lande, which made the mother 
Gardien
 of her childe: and so by consequent gaue her the Regency of the kingdome. The king of 
Nauarre
 on the contrary affirmed, that he ought in right to be gouernour of the young king, for that he was the next Prince of the blood, and nearest of kinne vnto him: besides that there were fundamentall lawes of that nation, which did not only shut out all straungers, (by whom he vn∣derstood the house of 
Lorraine
 and of 
Guyse
): but also disabled the Queene mo∣ther, by reason of her sexe, which the 
Salique
 lawe did expresly exclude from all regency, and succession to the Crowne. The Duke of 
Guyse
 had also di∣uers reasons for the aduauncing of his owne title, as that hee was the kinges vncle: that by his seruice the whole state had bene in a maner mainteined, and the land from sundry imminent perilles deliuered. Besides he excepted in a sort against the king of 
Nauarre:
 for that hee and his brother the Prince of 
Condy,
 gaue euident tokens of their liking of the Gospel, and their hatred of

 the Romish Religion: so that if 
Nauarre
 shoulde haue the gouernement of the King, it was to bee feared (saide hee) that the whole lande would fall into heresie.


Thus did these three contende with might and maine for the superio∣rite, each of them deuising al the reasons they could imagine for the furtherance of their cause.


But in the ende, the Queene Mother, and the Duke of 
Guise
 doub∣ting that they shoulde not bee able nor sufficient to preuaile, and also fea∣ring least that the King of 
Nauarre
 (by reason of the great preheminence and authoritie that the princes of the blood shoulde by right haue, besides his iust tytle) shoulde in the ende preuayle and get the better agaynst them both, thought it best to ioyne togither agaynst the King of 
Nauarre,
 and eyther by force, or by policie and fayre meanes to winne him vnto their willes, and by some deuise or other to make him surcease from his iust claime, and interest.


The better to effect this, the Duke of 
Guise
 seysed vppon the king, whome hee conducted and brought to the 
Louure
 in 
Paris,
 with the yong Princes his Brethren, and with the two Queenes, leauing the Princes of the blood, the Conestable, the Mareschall, the Admirall, and sundrie other noble and great personages attending vpon the dead Corps of the late king 
Henrie.


When they hadde preuailed in their purpose thus farre, then was there such watch and warde kept about the King, that no man might speake vnto him, but in the presence of some of the Guyses: and the matter was so well handled in the ende, that the Cardinall and the Duke of 
Guyse
 ruled and go∣uourned all things, and hadde the king in a manner at their will and comman∣dement.


Then beganne they to bring into the kings Councell men of their owne faction, and to procure the kinges displeasure vnto such as they disliked. The rulers and gouernours of the Citties, Townes, and Prouinces were at their appointment: the Princes of the bloud were imployed in busines far from the Court.


The Prince of 
Conde
 was sent into 
Flanders
 to treate of the league made betweene 
Fraunce
 and 
Spaine:
 the king of 
Nauarre,
 the Cardinall of 
Burbon,
 and the Prince 
De la Roch sur Yon
 were sent to conduct the kings Sister into 
Spaine.


There were many deuises and fetches to mooue the king of 
Nauarre
 to giue ouer his claime and title which hee made to the Regencie of the young King, and many faire promises were procured out of 
Spaine,
 conditionally that he would so doo.


And among others there were letters sent to that purpose, wherein the Spanish king promised that if he would be ruled herein, he would restore him the kingdome of 
Nauarre,
 of which he held nothing but the title auerring fur∣ther, & that very imperiously, & with threatening words, that if he did other∣wise, he would take vpon him the protection of his brother in law himself, and

 spend all that euer he had, yea, his owne life and the liues of fortie thousand o∣thers, whom he had in a readinesse in maintaining the quarrell.


Thus partly with faire promises, and partly with threats, the King of 
Nauarre
 began to be cold, and in a manner quiet, and cleane to giue ouer the matter.
 When the 
Guyse
 perceiued this, then did he proceede further, hauing the coun∣tenance of the yong King, and being backed so strongly with the Spanish king, so that nowe hee put out and in whome hee listed,
 and incroched vppon the offices of other men▪ hee would not sticke to meddle with the Conestableship and great maister of 
France,
 arrogating that vnto himselfe which of right be∣longed vnto others. The high courts of Parliament were full of his followers, and whom soeuer he suspected not to fauour his designes, these were by some one sinister information or other, presently disgraced, insomuch as those fewe good men that were in place, considering the rough handling, and seuere v∣sage of sundry well affected persons, and the small good that ensued by com∣plaining vnto the King were content to be silent, and not to meddle in such dangerous times.


The Cardinall of 
Guyse
 was appoynted ouer the Kings finances: the Duke of 
Guyse
 hi
 brother was made Lieutenant generall,
 and had the direction of all matters appertaining vnto the warres, and all Captaines, gouernors of townes, and other officers were commanded to obey him, as the King himselfe. Thus hadde these two gotten the sole authoritie into their hands, and although the Queene mother was at the first the meanes to procure them so great place, and to make them so neere about the king, yet not long after shee repented her thereof, and sought many waies to curb them, and to keepe them as short as shee might: yet shee beeing a most vncertaine and inconstant woman, and e∣uer inclining to the worst, still rather held with them, then with the princes of the bloud, who beganne to waxe wearie of the intollerable pride of the 
Guyse,
 and the burning, murthering, and iniurious dealing of that bloudy house. The 
Guyse
 no sooner suspected that their hearts were alienated, but that hee studied day and night howe to ouerthrow them, and to cause the King to embrew his handes in the bloud of his owne kinred. While these mischiefes were thus in platting, and many outragious parts plaied tending to the strengthening of this factious house, and the vtter ouerthrow of the ancient Nobilitie of 
France,
 in∣finite multitudes grewe maruailous discontented, and both by word and wri∣ting shewed theyr mislike of the present gouernement, exclaiming against the sore persecutions of those of the reformed Religion, and the intollerable wronges and iniuries offered vnto sundrie of the Kings best affected subiects.


There were many supplications presented vnto the Queene mother, to the King of 
Nauarre,
 and others of greatest place & authoritie,
 tending to the refor∣mation of these miseries, but they were little or nothing regarded: for the Queene mother fauoured not the Protestants in her heart, though often in the beginning made some shewe thereof, and gaue some helpe to the persecuted Hugonots. The King of 
Nauarre
 was timorous, and would not prosecute the cause with such a courage as hee ought to haue done: besides, hee was besot∣ted with the perswasions of regaining the kingdome of 
Nauarre,
 if hee would still remaine a Catholike: which conceiued hope so stacke in his mind and made

 so deepe an impression in the bottome of his heart, that of a zealous and earnest professour, hee became key cold, and in the ende proued a bitter enemie to the cause: so that the Guyses did still what they listed, and no redresse was to bee expected, for new Edicts & proclamations were made, & those more seuere then before: such as were knowne or suspected to be Protestants, were appre∣hended, & either forced to recant, or else were burned. This barbarous vsage of so many natural Frenchmen, & outragious crueltie towardes all sorts, bred by little & little a commiseration in the hearts of sundry, in whom there remained some sparks of humanitie, so that banding together & opposing themselues a∣gainst the proceedings of that time, they endeuored by al possible meanes to reforme the common wealth, & reduce the decaied estate to some better order: and albeit that sundrie personages had shewed their liking of a reformation, as the K. of 
Nauarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 the conestable, the Admirall, 
Dandelot,
 & many others, yet no man attempted, but strained courtesie (as it were) who should begin: which procrastinating sundry of good place not beeing able to endure any longer, combined themselues together, hauing for the principall and ringleader of their actions, one called 
Godfray de Berry,
 Lord of 
Renaudy,
 a wise, valiant & wel experienced Gentleman, who notwithstanding wi hout the aduise of six counsellers, and 20. captaines, might not attempt any thing.


This companie consisting of meere polliticks in the beginning, and such as sought for nothing but a reformation in the common weale, were in processe of time assisted by a multitude of those who were tearmed Hugonots (as it is the maner of discontented persons, how different so euer the occasion be, to ioyne rogether in hope of fortunes accidents) who allied themselues with the rest, the more willingly, for that it was in a ciuill cause, and such a thing as tended to the honour of the King, and generall good of the whole state.


Monsieur de Renaudy
 hauing acquainted many of good account with this great and waightie enterprise, as the Baron 
Chastellnaw,
 Captaine 
Mazeres, Vaillay, Bressay, Chesnay, Chiray,
 S. 
Mary, Coqueuille, Chateaunef,
 and sundrie others, resolued with all possible speed in as close and secret maner as might be, to draw neere the Court, which was then at 
Amboyse,
 and on the sodaine with some fiue hundred Gentlemen,
 to seise vpon the 
Guyse
 and the Cardinall of 
Lorrain
 his Brother, and hauing once caught them to put them to death for an exempla∣rie punishment to all other seducers of the King, and disturbers of the com∣mon wealth. This enterprise could not bee so closely kept but that it came to the eares of the Guyses: who vnderstanding after sundrie examinations, the drift and scope of the whole proiect, and howe that most of those who had complotted together, hadde long since shaken off the Popes yoake, deuised straight to publish so notable a conspiracie, and to make it seeme as odious as might bee to the eyes of all men: they declared howe that they of the refor∣med Religion had conspired against the king, the Queene mother, the kings brethren and Princes of the bloud, & sought to bring in their doctrine by force, to ouerthrow the monarchie of 
France,
 and to reduce it to a popular estate and gouernement, and by depriuing the king of his crowne, to pull downe the church, to root out the ancient Catholike faith, & to infect the whole land with all kinde of impietie and irreligion, and hauing by sundry proclamations

 declared the hainousnesse of the fact, fearing that a matter of such consequence was not attempted without the priuitie of some great ones in the land: they for∣tified themselues very strongly, mustered souldiers, gathered forces, and gat all things in a readinesse, to withstand any attempt that should be made vppon the sodaine.


Being thus prouided, they foorthwith apprehended such as they suspected, and proceeded against them with all rigour. Many of them who were taken were executed, and the rest committed to seuerall prisons, sauing some few that by their good fortune escaped their hands. At length diuers of the meaner sort were set at libertie, fearing (indeede) that if all should bee punished, so great seueritie would alienate the hearts of many, who were nothing well affected alreadie. And although that the King of 
Nauarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 the Ad∣mirall nor 
Dandelot
 could bee charged with the maintaining or abetting of anie of these attempts, yet did the Guyses strongly suspect them, and especially the three Chattillons,
 whom of all other they feared most: notwithstanding, they thought it good pollicie to giue them faire speeches for the time, and to enter∣taine them in all plausible maner, vntill they had gotten their forces about them, and had prouided a strong armie in a readinesse: which was no sooner performed, but they began to speake bigge words, and to deale more roughly: and first of all they dealt with the Prince of 
Conde,
 who was commanded not to depart the Court without licence, while in the meane time they practised to catch matter against him, and to that purpose sundrie with faire promises and re∣wardes were subborned to proue him the cheefe of that seditious tumult at 
Amboyse.
 They daily whispered in the Kings eare,
 that so long as 
Conde
 were at libertie, and suffered to countenance such as alreadie were discontented with the present gouernement, the whole land would neuer bee at quiet, nor the kings person in safetie, as appeared by the last rebellious and tumultuous practise. The onely way to preuent so many and so great mischiefes, was to bring the Prince to his answere, and by apprehending the ringleaders, to keep the meaner sort in order and due obedience. Whereupon the king beeing by these sinister informations mightily incensed against the Prince, commaunded 
La Trousse,
 the steward of his house, to attach sundrie of his seruants and to haue them in safe keeping, and to commaund the prince himselfe to come vnto his presence the next morrow: and to the ende there might be some matter found against him, his house was searched, and all his papers ransacked: the Guyses hadde also sent to search the Chamber and study of the king of 
Nauarres
 Secre∣tarie, hoping that something would bee founde to minister matter against these great personages: for nowe they might do what they listed, seeing the king approoued whatsoeuer they did, and did speake as it were with theyr tongues.


As soone as the Prince was informed of the kings pleasure,
 he readily obey∣ed, and comming before him, did so cleare himselfe, and answered with such courage and alacritie, that it was thought good to dismisse him for that present, without any further triall: whereupon the king shewed him very good coun∣tenance, and the Guyses seeing the time serued not to accomplish what they had purposed, cloked all in as couert maner as might bee, and each departed

 from other as good friendes. But the Prince seeing his life was sought for, thought it wisedome to looke to himselfe, and for that long since he fauoured the Gospel, he supposed it to be best to go to his brother the King of 
Nauarre,
 where he should be out of all danger, and might vse his conscience freely. Ma∣ny wondered at this strange dealings with the Princes of the bloud, saying, that if they could not liue without perill of their liues, that it would shortly come to passe, that all true and naturall Frenchmen should bee accounted enemies, and no man bee in securitie but the house of 
Guyse
 and 
Lorrayne,
 who being but strangers themselues, durst notwithstanding attempt such practises against the kings best affected subiects, as were in no sort to bee endured. Heereupon great rumors were raised, and infinite multitudes grew greeued with these in∣iurious proceedings.


To preuent the mischiefes that might ensue hereof, the Queene mother with the rest of the Kings councell, sought by amiable letters and smoth words, to content such as most complained, and where they did feare most danger, thi∣ther did they send such as were most gracious with the people, to keepe them in their obedience. The Admirall, who for his wisedome, integritie, and expe∣rience in all politike affaires, was not inferiour to any of that age, was sent in∣to 
Normandy,
 where there was thought to bee the greatest number of dis∣contented persons, with a straight commaundement to consider of all good meanes, for the quiet of the land, and freely to signifie vnto the court, the occa∣sions of their dislike, and the best way how to reforme those things which were amisse:
 which he from time to time very faithfully performed, aduertising the Queene mother, that the cruell handling of those of the reformed Religion, and the iniurious dealing with all such as seemed to fauour them, or any waies to countenance them, and that vnder an vnlawfull authoritie, vsurped by stran∣gers, without the approbation of the Princes of the bloud, and the cheefe offi∣cers of the land, and that while the King was in his minoritie, to the great pre∣judice of the Realme and dishonour to the Crowne of 
France,
 was the cause of so many mischiefes, and was like still to draw on more dangerous consequents, if there were not some speedie course taken to preuent them. Many such aduer∣tisements were sent from all quarters, and sundrie euident signes appeared of ciuill warres. Whereupon it was thought good to assemble all the Princes of the bloud, the Nobilitie, the officers of the Crowne, and all men of place and authoritie, to deuise of the meanes how to pacifie these troubles, which were likely to ensue: which when the Guyses vnderstood, albeit they liked not to heare of the assemblie of the States,
 and therefore inwardly hated this moti∣on of the Admirall and the Chancellor, from whom it especially proceeded, yet were they outwardly contented therewith, hoping by this meanes to draw the King of 
Nauarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 the conestable and others to the Court, who otherwise could not so easily bee come by, and then to rule them well i∣nough: assuring themselues that the greatest multitude of the Knights of the order, and others of the Nobilitie which should bee there assembled, were at their deuotion, and therefore that nothing could passe in preiudice of them, but rather that all should tende to theyr further profit and aduancement. This reso∣lution beeing taken, sommonances were sent into all quarters, and particular

 letters written to the king of 
Nauarre,
 to request him to come to the Parliament, which was assigned at 
Fountainbleau,
 & to bring his brother the Prince of 
Conde
 with him.
 But when the 
Guises
 had with more maturitie of iudgement conside∣red of this weightie subiect, fearing that if 
Nauarre, Conde,
 and the Constable, with all their adherents should meete togither, they should bee ouermatched, and not be able to make their partie good, they practised with 
Descars
 the Lord Chamberlain, & 
Bouchart
 the Chancelor, two of 
Nauarres
 principal seruants, and those indeed vpon whose counsels he principally relied, corrupting them with great summes, and promising them mountaines, if they would vse the means to disswade the K. their master from that assembly. Which two, put so many suspi∣tious matters into 
Nauarres
 head, and vsed such forceable reasons to diuert him from his intended voiage, that notwithstanding the earnest intreaty of the Con∣stable hee would not bee induced to be at the Parliament at the time appointed,
 which treacherous counsell of theirs, gaue such a blow vnto the whole realm of 
France,
 that it feeleth the smart therof vntil this day. For 
Nauarre
 being withhol∣den by this their wicked aduise, the whole gouernement still remained in the hands of the 
Guises,
 who fortified themselues more and more to their owne ad∣uauncement, and the extreame perill of the whole state.


The day prefixed being come, there presented themselues most the greatest personages which had bin summoned, so that the 21. of August 1559. this hono∣rable cōpanie were assembled in the chamber of the Queene mother, and euery one placed according to their degrees. First the K. vnder his cloth of estate, then the Queene mother, the kings wife, & the kings brethren. Next to these were the Cardinals of 
Burben,
 of 
Lorraine,
 of 
Guise,
 of 
Chastillon.
 The Dukes of 
Guise
 and 
Aumaile,
 duke 
Memorancie
 Constable of 
France, Monsieur d'Hospital
 the Chan∣cellor, the two Mareschals, S. 
Andrew,
 & 
Bressac, Chastillon
 the Admiral of 
France,
 
Marillac
 the Archbishop of 
Vienna, Morbillier
 Bishop of 
Orleance: Mouluc
 bishop of 
Valence, Mortier
 and 
Auancon,
 all of the Kings priuie Councell. The Knights of rhe orders, the masters of the requests, the secretaries, and the rest of the kings officers had likewise their places assigned them.
 All things being disposed after this maner, before any were commaunded to speake, the Admirall rose vp, and with a Supplication in his hand went to the king,
 to whom (after due obeisance done) hee declared, that according to his Maiesties commandement at his going into Normandie, hauing as diligently as hee could looked into the causes of these troubles which sprung vp dayly in the land, hee in his opinion coniectu∣red, that such as found themselues most greeued, intended no harme against his royall person, or the state, but that their greatest discontentment arose of the ex∣treame persecutions of such, as were termed 
Hugonots,
 without any iudicial ma∣ner of proceeding: especially seeing they offered to haue their doctrine tried by the scriptures, and were willing to conforme themselues to the order of the pri∣matiue church, & therfore he thought it a thing very agreeable to his maiesties liking, to take their humble petition, and present it vnto his highnesse, to the end that he vnderstanding their grief, might deuise with his councel in so honorable a presence, somespeedy means to relieue his distressed subiects, & to set his king∣dom in some better quietnes, assuring him, that in his opiniō, there were infinit multituds in 
France 
y
t
 sighed after a reformatiō, seeing ther were, as he was told,

 fiftie thousand in 
Normandie,
 who would willingly haue subscribed vnto that supplication. And so beseeching the King to haue some regarde hereof, and fa∣uourably to enterpret that which he had done, with humble reuerence he re∣turned to his place. When as this supplication was read, & the contents vnder∣stoode, whereof some were that there might bee publike places appointed for the Protestants to meet in, and that their preachers might be permitted to teach the people without perill, many wondred at this bold part of the Admiral, con∣sidering the manifest daunger hee had cast himselfe into, by taking the cause of such odious persons into his hande, and present it vnto the K. who was so exas∣perated agaynst them. The King seemed to take this action of the Admirals in verie good part, giuing him verie gracious wordes, and an honourable te∣stimonie of his good seruice, commanding euery one to speake his opinion in order, and as the case required.


In this assembly there were three which spake excellently to the purpose, lay∣ing open vnto the viewe of all men the naked truth: and as men resolute in their countries cause, not daunted with the faces of any, openly reproued that course which was taken in the administration of the Common-wealth, and the affaires of the land. And those were 
Moluc
 Bishop of 
Valence, Marillac
 the Archbishop of 
Vienna,
 and 
Chastillon
 the Admirall. The eloquent speach of 
Mouluc,
 did somewhat warme the 
Guises,
 and 
Marillac
 with his hardie and learned dis∣courses, did make them as hote as a toast.
 Both concluding, that to preuent so many miseries as were likely to ensue, it were conuenient to assemble a generall Councell: or if that could not be accomplished, then to referre the deciding of those controuersies to a nationall Councell, and in the meane time to deale more mildely with such as were of the reformed religion. But when the Ad∣mirall came to speake, he made them starke mad, hee so touched them to the quicke.
 For hauing first approoued that which had beene sayde by 
Mouluc,
 and 
Marillac,
 he insisted vpon the new garde which the 
Guises
 had set about the king which (said he) was a matter of perillous consequence, to nourish the K. in a diffidence and euill opinion of his subiects, and in time might draw on the ha∣tred of the people towards their prince, who seeing themselues suspected, wold be suspitious againe, seeing their king and souereigne armed against them, and in stead of free accesse, to impart vnto him their griefes and doleances, to be vtter∣ly secluded from his presence, by a multitude of armed souldiours. And for his part he could not conceiue what reason there was, why the French king should be so garded: for he would pawne his honour, his goods, yea, and his life to, that there was no harme meant against his person. If any of his principall Offi∣cers were afrayed of themselues, it were good to cut off all occasions of of∣fence, which arose especially of the disordered gouernment of such as had the managing of the publike affayres.


The Duke of 
Guise
 was in an extreame rage with the Admirall for these spea∣ches, and from that day forward grew to be his mortall enemie. And albeit that hee and the Cardinall his brother, laboured to crosse these good motions be∣fore remembred: yet was it agreed vpon by the King, with the assent of all the Nobilitie, that there should be another assembly of the estates at 
Meaux,
 and there these points to be more fully resolued of: and in the meane time that euery

 one should repaire into their Countries, to learne the state of them, the better to acquaint the King at the next assembly with their plaints. While these things were thus in handling, there were many enterprises of the Mal-contents, ten∣ding to the surprising of sundry townes: which occasioned the 
Guises
 to send out proclamation in the Kings name, and to leuie souldiours, to withstand (as they said) the attempts of the seditious, and perturbers of the state. But the truth was, that hauing their forces in a readinesse, they might send on the sodaine for the Prince of 
Cond
,
 who was still with his brother the King of 
Nauarre:
 and if hee would not come, then to fetch him by force. But first they assayed after a milde manner, to accomplish their deuises, causing the king to write vnto 
Nauarre,
 in friendly sort to request him to come to the Court, and to bring his brother 
Conde
 with him, or otherwise hee shoulde bee compelled to fetch him, for that there were so many, and so euident accusations agaynst him. But 
Na∣uarre,
 and the Prince aunswered so wisely, and with such courage, that their enemies thought it not good to attempt any thing agaynst them by violence. Whereupon they caused the king to sende an other Messenger, by whome they were required to come to his Maiestie,
 assuring them in the worde of a Prince, that there should no iniurie bee offered them, but that they shoulde returne at theyr pleasure: onelie hee desired to bee satisfied from the Prince of 
Condees
 owne mouth, touching such matters as hee was charged with: Whereupon, these two Princes relying vpon the kings faythfull promises,
 re∣payred to the Court, whither they were no sooner come, but that the Prince of 
Conde
 was committed to 
Chauignie,
 Captaine of the guarde, and by him clapt vppe in prison, where no man might speake vnto him. The king of 
Nauarre
 had no further libertie, then to walke from his owne Chamber to the king, and no man might speake with him but such as pleased the 
Guise,
 who set spyes enough about him, to obserue his doings. The mother in Lawe likewise of the Prince of 
Conde,
 and Sister to 
Chastillon
 the Admirall, was sent to prison, and verie narrowlie looked vnto. Her Closet and all her house was ryfled, to find some matter agaynst her. This rough dea∣ling with the chiefe Princes of the blood, and other such of great qualitie and calling, made many muse what would be the issue of such outragious de∣signes.


The Prince had not beene long committed to prison, but there was a priest sent vnto him to say Masse in his Chamber. But hee commaunded him to bee thrust out by the heade and shoulders,
 willing him to tell the King that hee woulde not suffer any such idolatrous seruice in his presence: as also that hee woulde not to saue his life offende the Maiestie of God in so high mea∣sure.


VVhen his enemyes had gotten this aduauntage agaynst him, they so in∣censed the King, that he forthwith commanded his processe to bee drawne, and sentence of death to be pronounced against him,
 with commaundement to ha∣sten the execution as speedily as might bee. But while they were earnestlie busied about this matter, and thought euen nowe to haue attayned to the full period of their desires, the king fell dangerously sick of an vlcer,
 growing in his ear, which increasing more & more, & the phisitions despairing of his recouery,

 the Princes execution, (which should haue beene the morrow following) was respited for a time, vntill they saw what would become of the king, who euerie day waxing worse and worse, notwithstanding all the meanes that could be de∣uised by the 
Guises,
 their solemne vowes to the saints in Paradice, & their publike processions, with earnest praiers for his helth: yet he died the fift day of Decem∣ber,
 1560. after he had reigned 17. moneths, to the exceeding grief of the Catho∣liks, & the great terror of the D. of 
Guise,
 and the Cardinall his brother, who had caried themselues so proudly and arrogantly during all the time of his reigne, that they were extreemly hated of all that were of any vertuous and humble disposition, and therefore were now maruellously afraid, least they should en∣dure some scourge for their former outragious doings, and that horrible confu∣sion which they had brought into the Common-wealth.






CHAP. VII.




Charles
 the ninth, the French King: the Prince of 
Conde
 set at libertie. The discontent∣ment of the Princes of the blood. The King of 
Nauarre
 made the Kings Lieutenant. The Conestable bandeth with the 
Guises.
 The King of 
Nauarre
 forsaketh the Prote∣stants. The 
Triumuirat.
 The murther at 
Vassie.
 The beginning of the first ciuill warres. The death of the King of 
Nauarre. Dandelot
 bringeth forces out of 
Germa∣nie
 for the succour of the Protestants. The battell of 
Dreux.
 Poltrot killeth the Duke of 
Guise.
 Peace proclaimed.




 
F
Rancis
 the second was no sooner deceased, and that 
Charles
 the ninth was come to the Crowne, but all seemed to bee cast in a new mould: especially the state of the Prince of 
Conde,
 was incontinenly altered: for whereas before hee was accused and condemned of high treason, and should haue beene exe∣cuted, had not the malicious purposes of his enemies beene crossed, by the sudden death of the King: now he was clea∣red of all the former accusations, and declared innocent of those pretended crimes, and restored to his dignitie and place.
 The 
Guises
 his mortall enemies beganne in all submisse maner to seeke his fauour, and neuer left the Queene mother, vntill shee had accomplished theyr desyres: which was the more readilie brought to passe, for that they had caused the late King, a day or two before to speake louingly vnto the King of 
Nauarre,
 and to affirme that the 
Guises
 neuer attempted any thing, eyther agaynst him, or his brother, the Prince of 
Conde:
 but that whatsoeuer was done, was at his commaunde∣ment, and that contrarie to theyr counsaile and aduice, hee had caused the saide Prince to bee imprisoned: and therefore hee desired them, for the loue they bare vnto him, that they woulde not conceyue hardly agaynst them, or anie of theirs.


Albeit 
Nauarre
 did not beleeue this, yet as one loath to raise new stirs, he was content to temporise & dissemble the matter, supposing in deed, that now their pride was abated, and that they would no more carrie themselues so hautily as they had done in times past. But they no more able to change their natures, then

 then the Leopard her spots, still aspired to haue the gouernment in their hands: and it seemed the Queene mother was well content to giue them some counte∣naunce, fearing tha
 if they should bee altogither kept vnder, by the Princes of the blood, her authoritie would likewise in short time be limited: which was a thing that shee could not endure by any meanes. Which being noted by the King of 
Nauarre,
 hee complained to the Queene mother,
 that those of 
Guise
 were againe too much fauored, and that they had too great countenance, being preferred before him, who was the chiefest Prince of the blood, and who by the ancient lawes ought to haue the gouernment of the Realme, during the no∣nage of the King: and that he could not endure to see them aduanced, who had alwayes beene his mortall enemies. And although he were contented to beare much in regard of the loue and dutie he bare vnto her,
 yet there was no reason why his kindnesse should be so hardly requited. And if it were, he woulde not endure it: and further, if the duke of 
Guise
 were so neare about the King, he must and would be further of.


The Queene mother sought to content 
Nauarre
 with faire wordes, but yet she did not satisfie him as he desired: and therefore the next day, hee with most of the Princes of the blood, the Conestable, his sonnes and Nephewes of 
Chastillon,
 departed from the Court towards 
Paris,
 highly discontented with the Queenes answere. The Queene mother, who extreemely greeued to see this accident, sent for the Conestable to come and speake with her: to whom she caused the King to say, and that in the presence of two Secretaries of estate,
 who were readie to recorde what was spoken, that seeing hee was the chiefe Officer of the Crowne, and one of whose presence hee stoode in neede of at that instant, he commanded him not to forsake him, as he would answer it at his perill. Which word tooke such place, and made such an impression in the Conestables minde, that albeit hee were often summoned by the King of 
Na∣uarre,
 to stand to his promise, yet he could not be drawne from the Court, but kept him stil with the King: wherupon it was presently voiced, that the Queene mother maintained the 
Guises
 against the King of 
Nauarre,
 and the rest of the Princes of the blood.


But least 
Nauarre
 and his associates should bee too much discontented with this crosse dealing, it was thought good to practise some newe attonement betweene them and the 
Guises,
 and to declare 
Nauarre
 the kings lieutenant ge∣nerall throughout all his dominions:
 which was accomplished by the meanes of the Conestable: so that now 
Nauarre
 was highly honoured, and the 
Guises
 made Court vnto him. This gaue some comfort vnto the persecuted 
Hugo∣nots,
 and caused all men to hope for some better gouernement then had beene of late time: and the rather, for that 
Nauarre
 tolde the Ambassadour of 
Den∣mark,
 that within one yere he would cause the Gospel to be preached through∣out all 
France.


It was a wonder to heare what ioy there was generally, throughout the whole land, and how exceedingly the number of the Protestants were encrea∣sed in a short tyme, by this little countenaunce which was giuen them. In so∣much as they coulde hardly finde conuenient places to receiue the multitudes, which flocked to the Sermons. Now as there were many who vsed this benefit

 wisely, and with great reuerence: so there were others, who indiscreetly abu∣sed it, exceeding a meane, and hastily running from one extremitie to another, supposing they stoode vpon a better foundation then indeed they did, began to vse too much libertie, to eate flesh, and that vpon such dayes as were forbidden, to condemne festiuall dayes, and many ceremoniall vsages, to pul downe ima∣ges, and deface altars, contrarie to that which had not long before beene ex∣pressely commaunded: which was that the ordering of these things, should bee referred either to a generall, or nationall councell.


This boldnesse and rash dealing of many of the reformed, and the dayly in∣formations of such like pranks played in many corners of the land, brought the Conestable (who was a very deuout and a religious Papist) into a maruellous dislike with such as were tearmed protestants, especially when he saw them at Court eat flesh in Lent, and that there were preachings in the Prince of 
Condes
 chamber, and likewise in the Admirals, and free accesse for al men to come vnto them. Which when the 
Guises
 perceiued, they likewise vnder the pretext of re∣ligion ioyned themselues vnto the Conestable, exasperating him agaynst the Admirall his cousin, for his embracing of the Gospel, and set the Mareschal S. 
Andrew
 to whisper him in the eare, that the motion which was made, as tou∣ching the calling backe againe of those excessiue donations, giuen by the late King, was a deuise of the Admirals, to keepe him being his vncle in awe, and by that practise to cause him to chaunge his Religion. Sundrie others (as Madame 
Madalyne de Sauoy
 his wife, the Dutchesse of 
Valentinois,
 & the Count 
Villiers,
 put to their helping handes to whet him on: who altogither alienated by these practises, notwithstanding all the remonstrances of the Mareschal 
Me∣morancie
 his sonne, banded against his owne kindred, and associated himselfe with the Dukes of 
Montpensier,
 and of 
Guise,
 who with their leagues and confe∣derations robbed the king of his subiects,
 and brought into that noble kingdom all disorder and confusion.


The 
Guises
 hauing got the Conestable to ioyne with them, began to lift vp theyr heades, and secretly to spread abroade many infamous things agaynst the Admirall, whose confusion of all others they most earnestly desired, where∣vpon many grudgings arose, and it was vehemently feared, that some tumultu∣ous accidents would ensue: for the preuenting whereof, there was an 
Edict
 made at 
Fountainbleau,
 and sent abroad into all parts of the land, whereby it was forbidden to vse any opprobrious words to any of the Kings liege people, and especiallie that one shoulde not call another Papist, 
 or Hugonot, but that all should liue in amitie togither, and not alter any thing which was alreadie esta∣blished, before the king, by the aduice of his councell, had otherwise ordained. The 
Guises
 could not endure that this peaceable course should bee taken,
 and therefore (as those who thought it their best to fish in troubled waters) they de∣uised with the Court of Parliament at 
Paris,
 to frustrate this Proclamation, and by many reasons to shew the inualiditie therof, & especially for that therby was tollerated two religions: which (said they) was not to be endured, considering that by this meanes, the whole state was endangered, nay that it was impossible for that cōmon wealth to endure long, where there were such cōtrarieties con∣sidering that there can be no agreemēt betwixt god & belial: & a kingdom diui∣ded

 within it self could not continue for any long time. Besides, the Cardinal of of 
Lorrayn
 made many greeuous complaints against those of the Religion,
 say∣ing that their assemblies and conuenticles waxed greater euery day then other, that there were foule and villanous disorders committed by them in their noc∣turnall meetings: that they were people without order, without conscience or any ciuill humanitie, and that they neither feared God nor the King.


These and the like complaints much mooued the Queene mother, & gladly she would haue repressed these assemblies, if shee had knowne how. But the countenance of the King of 
Nauarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 the Admirall 
Roch∣faucont, Dandelot,
 and diuers other of the Nobilitie, did encourage many to per∣sist, and drew on others by their examples, with great earnestnes to embrace the gospel, in so much as at length they finding themselues very strong, and wel countenanced by great estates, seised vppon sundrie of the Catholikes Chur∣ches, and preached publikely in the view of all men, and that in 
Paris,
 the prin∣cipall Citie of the whole land: yea, the Gospel preuailed so mightily in a short space, that it was founde by the diligent enquirie of the Admirall, that there were 2150. congregations that made profession therof:
 which vexed the Guy∣ses to the heart, who by their cunning handling of the matter, had by this time brought the Conestable in such hatred therwith, and with his cousins the three Chastillons, that both hee and the Guyses with all their fauourits, departed the Court in a great chafe, for that they sawe such fauour shewed to the poore Hugonots.


While the Protestants were thus graced at their princes hands, and that all things seemed to go well with them, there fell out a strange accident to crosse that happie course of the Gospel, and a most deuilish pollicie was vsed to ouer∣throw the reformed Religion, well neere established in most of all the princi∣cipall Cities, and cheefest villages of the Realme: and that was this.


The King of 
Nauarre,
 albeit hee fauoured the Religion, and countenanced the professours thereof in very good sort, and that for a good while together: yet beeing a man easily seduced, and almost of no courage or resolution in any thing that hee tooke in hand, was led by others, and by faire words carryed hi∣ther and thither at euerie mans pleasure: which the Guyses and their associats perceiuing, practised sundrie waies to draw him to theyr faction, assuring themselues that if hee might be gained, theyr side would bee strong inough: and that 
Conde,
 the Admirall, and all the rest of their confederates would bee made to stoope whether they would or not. The better to effect this, they pra∣ctised with the Cardinall of 
Ferrara,
 the Popes Legat, and with the Cardinall of 
Turnon,
 who hauing by rich gifts, and large promises, gained two of his prin∣cipall seruants, did in the ende likewise win the maister, by a notorious and deep dissimuled deuise. They put into his head a phantasticall conceit, assuring him that if hee would become a Catholike, and continue in the Apostolike Ro∣mane faith, that the King of 
Spaine
 would giue him the kingdome of 
Sardinia,
 which was foure times so good as 
Nauarre,
 and that the Popish and Spanish gallies should bee at his commaundement for the defence thereof against all men: some also went about to perswade him to diuorce himselfe from his Wife, and to marrie with the Queene of Scots, a yong, faire, and beautifull

 widow,
 the daily soliciting of such as were imployed in this businesse, & their manifolde remonstrances, tooke such place, that his whole mind was set vpon 
Sardinia,
 whatsoeuer could be saide to the contrarie by any friend he had. The Queene of 
Nauarre
 vnderstanding this, sought by all meanes to diuert him, setting before his eyes his many and solemne promises both to God and man, and that if hee should now abandon his friendes, all the world would crie out of him. But all was in vaine, for he began to decline euery day more then other, and in short time did vtterly forsake his profession, combining himselfe with the Guyses, his mortall and sworne enemies.


The Queene mother did all this while very cunningly carrie her selfe, and became (as it were) a newter betweene both, enclining rather to the Catho∣likes, purposing (in deede) howsoeuer religion went, to take the strongest part, and therfore she entertained the prince of 
Conde
 & the admiral with faire words, promising them wonders, and for a better shewe countenanced the preachings all that might bee: howbeit, she fauoured the Catholikes in her heart, and be∣gan to make but light of the daily complaints of the protestants.


The league which before had bin made betweene the Conestable, the 
Guyse,
 and the mareschall Saint 
Andrew,
 afterwards called the 
Triumuirate,
 hauing gained the king of 
Nauarre,
 became very strong, insomuch as they hasted to 
Paris,
 there to fortifie themselues, and to procure so much as they might, an abolishment of those Edicts and proclamations which had beene published in fauour of the reformed Church. The king of 
Nauarre
 began to frowne on his cousins of 
Chastillon,
 and to speake a loofe off vnto them: which made them to forsake the Court, and to retire to their own houses, for feare least there should bee some quarrell picked against them. The prince of 
Conde
 complayned mar∣uailously of those strange fashions of his brother, and resolutely stood in the fa∣uour of the protestants: and the better to preuent all inconueniences, put him∣selfe within 
Paris,
 there to prouide for the countenancing of the refourmed Churches, and to see that the Kings edicts should bee executed, and peace maintained so much as might bee.


 The 
Triumuirate
 being wel acquainted with all these proceedings, & know∣ing the courage and magnanimous minde of the Prince, which would not bee daunted with words, thought it their best to come strongly appointed, and ei∣ther by faire meanes or by foule to seise vppon the person of the King, and the Queene mother: which if they might once effect, they doubted not but the rest of their deuises would be accomplished well inough.


The Duke of 
Guyse,
 desirous to bee with the formost at this audacious enter∣prise, forgot not to ioyne with his associats at the appoynted time, and passing by 
Vashy
 with a great troupe of armed men,
 vnderstanding that there was a Sermon not farre off, where many of the Hugonots were assembled, so∣dainely set vppon them, and in most cruell and outragious sort, put them all to the sword, sparing neither man, woman, nor childe, to the great horror of the beholders of so pittious a tragedy, and to the high dishonor of the King, by whose edict not long before, they were allowed their preachings and liber∣tie of their conscience. After which barbarous fact he hasted to 
Paris,
 there to effect the rest of his diabolicall deuises. The newes of this horrible murther

 (being quickly blowne abroad) came no sooner to the eares of the Protestants, but they began to lay their wits together, and to prouide for their safetie. Many of the nobility which had made profession of the gospel, repaired to the prince of 
Conde,
 who was in 
Paris,
 there to take aduise what course were best to be v∣sed in so perilous & dangerous times: where it was concluded, that before they would rise in armes, they would first seeke for iustice by the ordinary course ap∣pointed: whereupon they complained to the King, the Queene mother, and the King of 
Nauarre,
 desiring that the Duke of 
Guyse,
 who was now vp in armes and marching towards 
Paris,
 might bee commanded to come in more peacea∣ble manner, and to answere those greeuous complaints made against him, and his contemptuous and disobedient proceedings against the Kings lawes. The Queen mother seemed to hearken vnto them, but the king of 
Nauarre
 flatly an∣swered, that hee which touched the little finger of the Duke of 
Guyse,
 touched his whole body, and that hee would not endure that he should be wronged by any.


By this time was the Duke of 
Guyse
 come to 
Paris,
 accompanied with the Conestable, the Duke of 
Aumaile,
 the mareschall of Saint 
Andrew, Randan,
 and with a great troupe of other his associats, where he was receiued with the ac∣clamations of sundrie other his supposts, 
Viue Guyse, Viue Guyse,
 as if the K. him∣selfe had entred. There likewise repaired to the Prince of 
Conde
 great numbers of his friendes and followers: so that the Citie was full of armed men, diuided into two contrarie factions. The Cittizens fearing that there would bee some vprore, and that some dangerous accident would ensue among so many ene∣mies and discontented persons, besought the Prince, that for the loue and fauor which they had alwaies borne to the Princes of the bloud, and in especiall to the house of 
Conde,
 it would please him to haue compassion vppon the Pa∣risians, who now stood in great feare of their liues and losse of their goods, if a∣ny tumultuous stirre should happe, by reason their Citie swarmed with a mul∣titude of souldiers, whom they knewe not how to bee ridde of, vnlesse it might please him whom they had alwaies knowne to bee of a very milde and peacea∣ble nature, to withdrawe himselfe and his troupes to some other place: which course as they were assured, it would bee the safest for theyr Citie, so they doubted not but it would be most honourable vnto him, and an euident argu∣ment vnto all the worlde, of the religious care hee had to saue so many mens liues, as at that instant seemed to be in assured perill.


Whereto the Prince answered, that hee for his part was very willing to leaue the Cittie, if the 
Guyse
 would do the like: which thing beeing promised that it shuld be performed,
 the prince was no sooner departed, but there were strong guards sette at the gates to keepe him from reentring: and so was the Prince ex∣pelled, and the 
Guyse
 remained maister of the Citie: This beeing brought to passe, the 
Triumuirate
 presently marched towards the Court,
 and there tooke the king, the Queene mother, and the Kings brethren, whome they brought to 
Paris,
 and forthwith determined to proclaime wars against the Prince of 
Conde,
 and all his associats. The Prince beeing enformed of these proceedings, sent 
Dandelot
 brother to the Admirall, to seise vppon 
Orleance,
 which (though with some difficultie) hee accomplished: whether 
Conde
 foorthwith repaired, and

 tooke possession of the Towne to the kings vse. 
 Now was the warre open on all sides, and the Reformed persecuted in most cruell maner in euery place, e∣specially at 
Paris,
 where nothing was more common then murthering, spoiling, and pilling the poore Hugonots: yea, such was the rage of the barbarous Ca∣tholikes, that the Princesse of 
Cōde
 passing through a village called 
Vaudray,
 was set vpon beeing in her Coach and great with childe, and by hurling and throw∣ing of stones by sundrie of the townesmen,
 at the instigation of a popish priest, put in hazard of her life, wherewith shee was so terrified, that shee was deliue∣red before her time of two twins shortly after, and at length with much adoo, arriued at 
Orleance
 with her eldest sonne the marquesse of 
Conty:
 where shee found the Prince of 
Conde,
 the Admirall, 
Dandelot,
 and many other principall persons of the Religion, who were busied in gathering forces, and prouiding al necessarie meanes to withstande their enemies. There were letters written to the Emperour 
Ferdinando,
 and the Princes of the Empire, enforming them of the occasion of their bearing of armes, and of the vsurped authoritie of the Guyses and their adherents, earnestly beseeching them to haue some commise∣ration of the King, who being a Child, was held in captiuitie by their tyranny, and al things likely to be brought to a woful desolation throughout the realme of 
France.


The Prince had no sooner gathered a great power about him, & was growne strong by reason of a supply brought vnto him out of 
Poictou,
 and 
Xantoigne,
 of three or foure hundred horse, by the count 
Rochfaucont,
 but that it was thought best to be doing, and to employ some of his forces in getting of certaine strong townes and other well fortified places neere adioyning: and thereupon certain troups were sent downe along by the Riuer of 
Loyre,
 who tooke 
Mun, Baugen∣cy,
 and others, wherein they placed certaine garrisons, to keepe them from bee∣ing regained by the enemie, who now sought continually to anoy the Prince, and to take the aduantage that was offered.


Sundrie Cities in 
France,
 as 
Angiers, Tholous, Lymoux,
 with many others, wher∣in there were thousands of the reformed Religion, seeing that the Prince was growne strong, and very able to confront his enemies, began to shewe them∣selues openly, and to stande with the rest of their confederates: whereuppon foorthwith there ensued a mortall hatred betweene them and the Catholikes, each seeking the ouerthrow of others by all possible meanes. Then immediatly followed robbing, spoyling, rauishing, murthering, & massacring, in most out∣ragious maner,
 with a maruailous confusion in euery corner of the Land. No man could well tell whom to trust, or where to dwell in safetie. The cheefe Ci∣ties were fraught with garrisons, the small villages were sacked and burned by such as cared neither for God nor the deuill, but onely howe to enrich them∣selues. Infinite were the miseries in all quarters, and nothing almost heard of but weeping, wailing, and lamentation, and no hope of any redresse of so in∣comprehensible mischiefes.


The Prince of 
Conde
 and his associats pondering in their minds the wofull de∣solation that was like to ensue, if there were not some present remedy for these diabolicall proceedings, wrote diuers letters to the King, the Queene mother, and the King of 
Nauarre,
 beseeching them to take some commiseration vppon

 the poore and desolate people, and that by suffering the subiect to vse his con∣science so long as he liued in obedience and according to the kings Edict, 
France
 might enioy her former peace, and not be brought to that horrible desolation, which doth inseparably accompanie ciuill and intestine warres▪ but the 
Guyse
 (who in deede with the Cardinall his brother ruled the rost) could not endure to heare of any peace, but daily and hourely cryed out,
 to muster men, to ga∣ther souldiers, to send for the kings bannes and arierbannes, and with fire and sword to persecute the poore protestants. And hauing by their damnable prac∣tises gotten an armie, marched towards 
Orleance
 with great furie. The confede∣rates beeing daily aduertised by their espials of the approch of the Catholikes, thought it best to meete them by the way, and if oportunitie serued, to giue them battaile, being especially mooued thereunto by the continuall perswasi∣ons of the Admirall, and the couragious resolution of all in generall.


Wherupon the prince tooke the field the nineteenth of 
Iune,
 1562. with three Regiments of footmen, amounting to the number of 33. Ensignes,
 whose Col∣lonels were 
Gnamont, Fontenay,
 the yongest sonne of the vicont of 
Roham,
 and 
I∣uoy
 brother to 
Genlis,
 with two thousand horse encamped at 
Vausoudun,
 neere vnto 
Orleance,
 and directly in the way towardes 
Baugency.
 The Catholikes ha∣uing not as yet al their forces in a readinesse, thought it best to amuse the Prince with a parle of peace, in which action the Queene mother was thought the meetest to be employed: who so handled the matter, that the Protestants (who longed after nothing so much as quietnesse) were readily drawne to hearken thereto: onely they required, that before any thing was talked of, the Conesta∣ble, the Duke of 
Guyse,
 and the marquesse Saint 
Andrew
 should withdraw them∣selues to their houses, and then the Prince of 
Conde
 should come to the King to treate of that, which especially tended to the peaceable state of the common wealth, and the welfare of euery particular man.


This was no sooner mooued by the Protestants, but it was accepted by the Queene mother, so that immediatly those three principall Catholikes departed from the Court, and went as farre as 
Chasteaudan,
 where they stayed to expect the sequell of their secret councels. The Prince vnderstanding of theyr depar∣ture, went presently vnto the K. putting himself into the hands of the Queene mother, and other his enemies:
 but he was no sooner come to the Court, but he forthwith repented of his haste, and beeing aduertised by sundry, of his immi∣nent perill and danger, pollitikely obtained of the Queen mother, that the prin∣cipall men of his Armie might likewise come to knowe her further pleasure: which beeing granted, hee wrote a secret letter vnto them of his estate,
 desiring them to hasten, and to come strongly accompanied.


The next day early in the morning there came the Admirall, 
Dandelot, Roch∣faucont,
 the Prince 
Portian, Rohan, Genlis, Gramont, Soubize, Piennes,
 and many o∣ther lords & Captains, with a far greater retinew then the Queen expected: so that nowe she thought it best to make fayre weather, and to sooth them vp, considering (in deed) that shee was not able to detayne the Prince any longer then hee himselfe listed, and therefore in very gracious maner shee bad them al welcome, and openly in the presence of all the Nobilitie, shee gaue them great thanks, for their true and faithfull seruice towardes the king, assuring them

 that shee (for her parte) did thinke very honourably of all their proceedings, and did not doubt but the King her sonne would bee mindfull hereafter to re∣compence so many deserts,
 seeing it was very apparant that both his estate and her owne was maintained by their royall seruices. They againe humbly than∣ked her maiestie for her good opinion, beseeching her to continue their gra∣cious Lady, and to bee a meanes that there might bee an ende of those miseries, which nowe so fearefully threatened the crowne of 
France,
 promising for their parts to bee most ready to employ their whole studies, yea, their goods, and liues, and whatsoeuer other meanes they had to assist her maiestie, in so good and laudable an action, so that they might enioy a peace, with a free exercise of their Religion, according to the Kings edict.


They further declared vnto the Queen mother, the manifold greeuances of the kings subiects, with a meanes to remedie so many & so lamentable disor∣ders, to al which & sundry other remonstrances, albeit she seemed to giue some allowances, yet for that shee stood so stiffly against the free exercise of Religi∣on, and would needes vrge the Prince to depart the Realme (as indeed he had promised, rather then hee would bee any occasion of the continuance of ciuill wars, albeit presently vppon better and more mature consideration hee repen∣ted him of the speech) there could bee nothing concluded. Whereupon the Prince returned to his campe,
 exceeding glad that God had deliuered him out of the snares of his enemies, and resolued with all, for his forces to fight it out, and to hazard his fortune assoone as any oportunitie was offered. With this re∣solution he dislodged and marched towards the Catholikes, hauing in his army ten thousand fiue hundred footmen, and a thousand horse. Now when he ap∣proched the enemie, hauing disposed his troupes in very warlike maner, he twice presented the battaile, but the Catholikes refused,
 for that all their forces were not as yet assembled.


The Prince seeing hee could not drawe them out of their strength, hauing braued them in the faces, and maintained some light skirmishes with them, re∣tired towardes 
Orleance,
 sending abroad into all quarters to prouide all neces∣saries for the warres: and for the more speedy accomplishment heereof, it was decreed that 
Soubize
 shoulde bee sent to 
Lyons, Rochfaucont
 into 
Xaintoigne, Duras
 into 
Guyen,
 and 
Briquemault
 into 
Normandy,
 and so into 
England,
 to procure both men and money, and as many friendes as might be gotten. 
Dande∣lot
 was likewise sent into 
Germany,
 to hasten such succours as were promised by the Princes Protestants. 
Conde,
 and the Admirall, with the rest of the Cap∣taines and Gentlemen, with two and twenty ensignes of footmen remained stil in 
Orleance.


By this time were the forces which came out of 
Germany
 to the aide of the Catholikes in a readinesse to march vnder their Collonelles,
 
Rokendolf, Frewlich,
 and the 
Ringraue,
 who besides certaine Cornets of Reisters, had likewise twen∣tie ensignes of Lansquenits. These were no sooner arriued at the campe, but that the 
Triumuirate
 thought it best to employ them with al the rest of their for∣ces against the Hugonots, and that before they should haue any aide come out of 
Germany.
 For the hastening whereof, 
Dandelot
 hadde assayed all possible meanes, and had so pollitikely handled the matter, that notwithstanding all

 the practises of his enemies, hee procured great ayde for the strengthening of the cause.


The Catholikes were long in suspence whether they should besiege 
Or∣leance,
 or 
Rohan,
 the principall Citie in 
Normandie:
 but at last, they resolued to as∣say their forces agaynst 
Rohan.
 Where hauing first gayned the fort of Saint 
Ka∣therins,
 which commaunded the towne, through the treacherie of the captaine, who was corrupted with money and faire promises, they foorthwith entred by force, killing, spoyling and murthering the inhabitants in most cruell and hor∣rible manner, and making hauocke of all thinges without pittie or mer∣cie. 
Augustine Marolat,
 a famous learned man, and chiefe Minister of the Towne, was there hanged, with 
Mautreuill
 the president of the Par∣liament, besides sundrie other of speciall account. The Catholikes lost manie of theyr brauest men: and amongst others the King of 
Nauarre
 who beeing shot with a Harquebuz in the left shoulder, as hee was making water in the Trenches, dyed the seuenteenth of September following:
 neuer attaining that Marittime Kingdome, the hope whereof had so bewitched him, that he forgat wife, children, kinsfolks, friends, Religion, yea, and God himselfe, and thought of nothing but of the 
Sardinian
 Crowne: beeing happie in nothing but in this, that hee dyed in the beginning of the Ciuill warres, and neuer lyued to see the miserie of his owne Countrey, whereof hee had beene a chiefe and principall cause.


The losse of this Citie being a place of so great importance, was a maruailous discouragement vnto many, who stood but faintly to their tacklings before, and had (no doubt) wrought a more daungerous effect, had not this breach beene repayred, or at least well amended, by the surpassing care and prouident cir∣cumspectnesse of 
Dandelot,
 who so plied his friends in 
Germany,
 that he had ga∣thered about 3300. horse, and 4000. footmen, with whom there met the Prince 
Portion
 at 
Strausbourge
 with 100. French horse. The ioiful news of which power encouraged the confederates to hold out, in hope of their future help, and mar∣uellously animated such, as before were exceedingly daunted with the remem∣brance of their former losses. These new supplies marched towards 
Lorrain,
 and passing ouer the riuer of 
Seine,
 trauersed the country by 
Yonne, Creuen,
 & 
Mon∣targis,
 and arriued at 
Orleance,
 in despite both of the duke of 
Neuers,
 and the Ma∣reschall S. 
Andrew,
 who were sent to stop their passage, with 14. cōpanies of men of Armes, 16. cornets of Argoletters, 25. ensignes of footmen, 9. companies of launces, and 13. of light horse, besides the old troupes of 
Picardie,
 vnder the lea∣ding of 
Pauan, Monsales, Giury, Crenay,
 and many other Chieftaines. This noble and valiant 
Dandelot,
 gayned a verie honourable report, euen of his enemies, for so wise and politique a conduct, insomuch as hee was not onely reputed a Gentleman of surpassing courage, and of an vndaunted spirit in greatest pe∣rils, but also a leader of excellent skill,
 and deepe foresight to preuent all daun∣gers: About the same instant there met with him also 
Rochfaucont,
 and 
Duras,
 with some three hundred horse, and a thousand fiue hundred footmen, al which were no sooner assembled at 
Orleance,
 but that the Prince determined to take the field: and hauing prouided all thinges in a readinesse, departed towarde 
Phiuiers,
 and so to 
Baugencie▪
 both which places were quickelye gayned

 from the Catholikes, with the strong Towne of 
Estamps:
 where was founde great store of prouision, as Corne, Wine, Powder, shot, and all necessaries for the warres.


The Prince after some smal stay to repose his wearied troups, marched on to∣wards 
Paris,
 which he no sooner approched, & that the bands vnder the leading of the 
P. Portian,
 and 
Mouy,
 had giuen in so farre as the suburbs of 
S. Victor,
 but that all the Citie was in an vprore, and euery man at their wittes ende: so won∣derfully were they daunted with the sight of the Princes armie, albeit they were not past eight thousande footemen, and some fiue or sixe thousande horse. Whereas there were within the Citie at the least, a hundred thousand able to beare armes, hauing the Constable, the Duke of 
Guise,
 the Duke of 
Neuers,
 the Mareschals, and in a manner all the braue leaders of 
Fraunce,
 for their chief∣taines and commaunders. But such was their timorousnesse, that they kept themselues close, albeit the battell was presented vnto them twise at the least, and onelie amused the Prince with certaine conditions of peace, about the which there were manie meetings. In the end all being found to be but meere delayes, and onelie to gaine time, vntill the comming of the Spaniardes, the Prince resolued to assaile the enemie in his Trenches: but the same night, which was appoynted for this exployte, and immediately before it shoulde haue beene put in execution, 
Genlis
 a principall man among the Protestants, secretely fledde to the Catholikes: which vnexpected accident quite altered the councell of the Confederates, supposing that now there was some aduer∣tisement giuen of their intended enterprise:
 and therefore they deferred the execution of that proiect, vntill some other tyme. But by reason of the wants that were in the Armie, as the penurie of victuals, and other necessaries, as also a secrete discontentment among the straungers, for that they lacked theyr pay, it was agreed to stay no longer before 
Paris,
 which was not so easie to bee gotten, nor in so short a tyme, as was requisite to supplie theyr pre∣sent necessitie, but to dislodge and to retire towards 
New-hauen,
 there to attende such succours as were expected out of 
England.
 By the way the Prince tooke 
Galardon,
 a towne of good importance, where he stayed to giue some breath to his wearyed troups, and to accommodate his armie of such things as were most necessarie.


The Catholikes coasted him all the way watching to catch him at some ad∣uantage: howbeit nothing was attempted vntill both the camps were come vn∣to 
Dreux,
 where they approched so neare, and either partie had so farre engaged themselues, that there was no remedie, but they must needes fight: so that now each Generall began to bethinke of all good meanes for the strengthening of himselfe, and the weakening of his enemyes. The Catholikes had made choyse of a verie strong place to encampe in, beeing neare vnto 
Dreux,
 wherein there was a garrison of their associates, and likewise adioyning vnto a wood, which was a verie fit and conuenient place, to effect diuers stratagems. There was a large and spacious plaine, through which there ran a little valley, seruing as it were for the bounds and limits of both armies. The Constable hauing got∣ten this aduauntage, presented himselfe in battell aray, at the head of the vil∣lage, vppon the toppe of a little hill, hauing placed two strong battaylons

 of footemen in the towne, which should gard fourteene Cannons: so planted, that they were ready to play vpon the army of the confederates, as soone as the signall should be giuen. Each battaillon was flanked with certaine troupes of horse, as it were for a mutuall succour one for another, with their 
Enfans perdus
 in their fronts, and those of the choysest of all their regiments. They had the Ri∣uer 
Eureux
 at their backes, and espying that they were likely to come to a triall of their fortune, they forthwith emparked themselues betweene two villages, in a place of more aduantage then before.


The Mareschall S. 
Andrew
 led the auauntgard,
 which was composed of nine companies of French launces, thirteene ensignes of Spaniards, with as manie French, and eleuen of Almaines, with foure field peeces: all which were aran∣ged on the left side of the Conestable, who led the maine battaile, further aduaunced then eyther the Mareschall, or the Duke of 
Guise,
 wherein were seuenteene Cornets of men of Armes, and three of light horsmen, with two and twentie ensignes of Zwitzers, seuenteene of French and Britons, and eyght peeces of great Ordinance. The Duke of 
Guise
 led the rerewarde, which seemed to flanke the battaile of the Conestable on the right side, with a strong troupe of horsemen, and two esquadrons of Spanish footemen, with sundrie others his followers, men of especiall account, and much renowmed for their valy∣antnesse.


The prince had so araunged his battailes, that the horsemen wherein they ouermatched his enemies, were in the formost rankes,
 and taking vnto himselfe 
Rochfaucont,
 with certaine light horsemen of 
Guries
 companie, with some other Cornets led by 
Mouy,
 and 
Auarell,
 besides a troupe of Reisters, all which serued as flankers for his battailon of footmen, resolued to encounter the Conestable, who seemed to be readie to giue the charge.


Each generall hauing disposed of all things in this warlike sort, the great artil∣larie began to vomit out their deuilrie, and the Conestable prepared to assaile the battaile of the Prince, which hasted in like maner to the encounter, and that with so stately and superbious a dismarch, that it gaue euident testimonie, that it was led by a generall of noble courage, and great experience. The Prince charged the Zwitzers, who valiantly endured the first shotte, and stoode to it verie manfully.
 But at length by reason of the smal shot which hailed vpon them without ceasing, and somwhat cleared their ranks, they began to giue ground, which the valiant and couragious 
Mouy
 espying, incorporating his troups with 
Monsieur de Daneret,
 set on them with such furie, that he made them flie amaine. And being seconded by the Prince, wholy defeated them, as renowmed Pyke∣men as they were. The Reisters, who followed the Princes good fortune, gaue in with great courage, committing a maruellous carnage and mortalitie vpon their enemies. At the same instant the Admirall charged the Conestable, and that so lustily, that his men began to shrinke, and he himselfe being wounded in the face with a Curtelas, and sore bruised with small pistoll shot, was forced to yeeld to 
Vezines.
 But the Reisters passing by at that instant, tooke him away by force, and carryed him to the Prince, as a prisoner of their owne.
 The rest of the Co∣nestables battaile was quickely defeated, and no hope left for the Catholikes, had not the Duke of 
Guise
 reserued his forces, whole and entyre, and with a

 sudden charge crossed the happy course of the victorious Prince: whose battail∣lons of footmen being bared of their horse, could not endure the furious assault of the Guisards, but fled as fast as they could to saue their liues: notwithstanding all the encouragement vsed by 
Dandelot,
 who perswaded them all that he might to abide their enemies.


Moreouer 
Danuille
 one of the sonnes of the Constable, espying the princes horsmen disordered with pursuing their victory, charged thē before they could be rallied afresh, and hauing first wounded 
Conde
 in the hand, and then slain his horse, the red crosses so pressed on him on all sides, before he could be remoun∣ted, that he was constrained to yeeld himself prisoner,
 to the immeasurable grief of all the confederates. The Admirall gathering togither so manie as possible he might, of his dispersed troupes, gaue a fresh charge vppon the 
Guise,
 where there was a sore and cruell fight: but for that he was not able to match his ene∣mies, after the death of many braue men on both sides,
 he retired to 
Neufuil,
 lea∣uing the honour of that iourney to the 
Guise.
 At the last encounter were slaine the Mareschall of S. 
Andrew, Monbrune,
 the Constables sonne, the Lord 
Picues, Annebaut, Brossy, Giury,
 and many other leaders. The Duke of 
Aumaile
 was greeuously hurt, and likewise the Duke of 
Neuers,
 who dyed shortly after. The principall prisoners which were taken, were the Constable, who was forthwith sent to 
Orlean
e,
 with 
Orayson, Rochfort, Esclauoles,
 and sundrie other Gentlemen of good account. 
 There were slain on the Princes side verie neare a thousand fiue hundred footmen, seuen hundred Almains, & some foure hun∣dred horse, as 
Dinothus
 reporteth. The principall of which were, the Baron of 
Arpaion, Saux, Shandeu, Liencourt, Fredomere, Carliere, Rongnac, Mazelles, Saint Ger∣mier,
 al which for the most part were of the Cornet of 
Mouy,
 who was taken pri∣soner at this last conflict.


The newes of this battaile was verie vncertaine: each side supposing, yea, and constantly reporting their owne ouerthrowe. But vpon more certaine intelligence, how that both Generals were taken, and that they had parted in a maner with equall losse, each faction beganne to rowse vp themselues, and to hope for better successe in their future wars: wherupon they resolued to choose them new Generals, vntill the old were againe restored to libertie. The duke of 
Guise
 was thought the meetest to commaund ouer the Catholikes,
 and the Ad∣mirall ouer the confederates, who pondering their harmes lately receiued by the death of so many braue men, and their want of many necessaries requisit for to keepe the field, thought it best to retire, the one to 
Paris,
 the other to 
Orleance,
 and there to repaire their broken armies.


The Duke of 
Guise
 lay not long idle, but assayed to recouer certaine townes from the Confederates, as 
Pluuiers, Estamps,
 and some others. The Admirall on the other side, beeing as carefull to maintaine heade agaynst the enemie, be∣sieged 
Selles
 in 
Berry,
 which was yeelded vpon composition: where he found good store of gold and siluer for the payment of his Reisters. 
Rochfaucont
 tooke S. 
Agnan:
 and the Prince 
Portian,
 entered 
Monrichard.
 The gayning of which Townes greatly countenanced the wauering estate of the Protestants. Thus did these two armyes flote vp and downe, each seeking to encroach vppon other so much as might bee. At length the Admirall espying the drift

 of the 
Guise,
 which was to inuest 
Orleance
 on the sudden, put himself with all his forces within the Citie. Where notwithstanding vpon better aduice, he remay∣ned not long, but marched towards 
Normandie,
 to meet with the Englishmen,
 whose landing was dayly expected at 
New-hauen,
 which was the place appoin- for that purpose, and that by the consent of the confederates.


The Queene mother being aduertised hereof, laboured to stop his inten∣ded voyage, by propounding a parle of peace: but the Admirall being well ac∣quainted with such stratagems, would in no wise hearken thereto, but folo∣wed his formed proiect, and so with some 3000. horse passingly well furnished, and far better then at the battel of 
Dreux,
 held on his course. And being a man of great experience, and singular expedition in all his enterprises, he surprised on the sudden sundry places, which proued afterward of no small moment, for the aduancing of the affaires of the confederates.


The duke of 
Guise
 hauing his armie in a readinesse, and vnderstanding of the Admirals departure from 
Orleance,
 leauing 
Dandelot
 his brother for the guarde therof, vntill his returne, thought it best to besiege them who were there assem∣bled, while the Admirall with the flower of all their troupes was busied other wheres. With this resolution he dislodged, and planted his siege about the towne,
 which he so sore battered, and couragiously assailed, that the Citie was in imminent perill, and all the confederates were in a wonderfull feare, least it should haue beene taken. Yea, the Duke so assured himselfe thereof, that hee wrote to the King and Queene Mother, that he hoped now to extirpe the race of the 
Hugonots,
 who had for so many yeares troubled the whole land, and that he would send them newes therof within foure and twentie houres. But while he was thus in his ruffe, firmely perswading himselfe that all was his, bebold, there fell out a straunge and vnexpected accident, which brake the necke of all his deuises.


There was a poore Gentleman named 
Iohn Poltrot,
 one of verie little sta∣ture, but full of spirite and lyfe, and generally reputed of such as best knewe him, to bee somewhat a rash headed fellow, and verie vndiscreete, and one that durst attempt any thing. Who being brought vp for a long time in 
Spaine,
 had learned the language verie perfectly: And for that both for his colour, complection, and stature, he was so like vnto them of that nation, he was com∣monly called the little Spaniard.


This fellow seruing sometime vnder 
Soubize,
 who commaunded at 
Lyons,
 woulde often vaunt, that this was the hande (stretching out his arme) that shoulde kill the Duke of 
Guise,
 and deliuer 
Fraunce
 from that monstrous and cruell Tyrant. And this hee vsually vttered in great brauerie: so that as manie as heard him, knowing the humour of the man, laughed at his fol∣lie, little imagining that hee meant as hee sayde, for if hee had, then it was lykely hee woulde haue kept his purpose more secrete, and not haue beene so open mouthed. It happened so, that immediately after the bat∣taile of 
Dreux, Soubize
 sent this 
Poltrot
 with a Letter to the Admirall, who was nowe at 
Selles
 in 
Berrie:
 whither hee was no sooner come, but that 
Feuquieres,
 whome hee had serued in former tymes in the warres in 
Py∣cardie,
 knowing him to bee a man of seruice, commended him to the

 Admirall, saying: that he was a fit man to bee employed to discouer somewhat of the enemyes proceedings about 
Orlean
e,
 for that he shoulde bee taken for a Spaniard, and so a fauourer of theyr designes. Wherupon the Admirall gaue him twentie Crownes, and sent him to 
Orleance:
 where hee conti∣nued not long, but hauing got as good intelligence as he coulde, returned backe to do his message.


The Admyrall lyking the man well for his diligence, and secrecie in mat∣ters of such importaunce, gaue him an hundred Crownes, and bidde him buy him a good Horse, that hee might with more celeritie dispatch his busi∣nesse. With this money 
Poltrot
 bought him a verie excellent Spanish Genet, and leauing the Admirall, went backe to the 
Guises
 Campe, where he away∣ted some oportunitie to put in execution his intended purpose. Which short∣ly after fell out: for hee espying the Duke somewhat late in the euening ry∣ding towardes his Tent vppon a little Nagge, onely attended on by a Gen∣tleman Vsher which went before him, and an other which talked with him: hee approched as neare as hee could, and discharged his pistoll vpon the Duke, hitting him in the shoulder, wounded him verie sore, and so turning his horse, fled as fast as he could. And hauing ridden all that night by by-wayes, for feare of those who pursued him, he not knowing which way he went, wandred vp and downe, & in the end came againe almost to the place where hee committed the fact. Which when he perceiued, he rode all the day folowing, with as much speed as possibly might be, to get out of the danger of his pursuing enemies. But hauing with continuall trauell wearied both himselfe and his horse, he rested at a farm house, where he was taken vpon suspition, and committed to safe keeping for his further triall. Being examined, and found culpable, he was adiudged to be drawn in peeces with foure horses:
 to haue his head cut off, and his torne bo∣die to be burnt to ashes.


This sudden blow did maruellously dismay the Catholikes, and the rather for that it appeared to be deadly, and not possible to be healed: For he waxed worse euerie day then other, and died very shortly after,
 to their vnspeakable greefe: who had reposed their whole confidence in him, and to the great reioycing of the confederates, whose deadly & sworne enemies he was alwayes accounted. And this was the end of that turbulent spirit, & ambitious 
Guise,
 who as he had massacred many: so he in the end was murthered by others, and that euen then when he thought least of any danger: nay rather fully perswaded himselfe well neare to haue attained to the full period of his wished desires. So vncertaine is the state and condition of the greatest, and most mightie personages in this vari∣able and changeable world.


The 
Guise
 was no sooner dead, but there ensued a present alteration: and those conditions which had beene before propounded, were forthwith fully agreed vpon, & so was there a peace proclaimed the 19. of March folowing at S. 
Memen,
 in the campe before 
Orleance,
 wherewith all sorts in generall seemed to bee mar∣uellously well contented, hoping to be freed frō those horrible miseries, wher∣with they had bin afflicted for so many yeres. And indeed albeit this pacification held but for a while, yet did the whole land reape great fruite thereby, and ac∣knowledged the gracious goodnesse of the Almightie, in that it had pleased

 him to giue them some respite, and to make an end of their Ciuill warres. But this blessed peace could not continue long, by reason there fell out many occa∣sions of discontentment to either faction, by meanes wherof they were soone entangled afresh in their former sorrowes and vexations.






CHAP. VIII.




The seditious humour of the Cardinall of 
Lorraine.
 The Admirall accused for the death of the Duke of 
Guyse.
 The complaints of the Protestants. The League made at 
Bay∣on.
 The King refuseth to heare the Protestants. The second ciuill warre. 
Paris
 besie∣ged by the Protestants.




T
He Cardinall of 
Lorraine,
 and brother to the deceased Duke of 
Guyse,
 the especiall instrument of all these calamities which hadde continued for so long time in that noble kingdome of 
France,
 inwardly vexed to see such a peaceable estate, know∣ing full well that it did not stande with his commoditie and profit, to see the Princes of the bloud to bee fauoured at the Court, neither yet the Nobilitie and Gentlemen to liue in peace and amitie one with another, and all sorts as brethren to liue euenly to∣gether, deuised a way to set all men again together by the eares, and to embarke themselues into newe troubles. Hee therefore with the assent of his associats, spread abroade diuers calumniations, and slanderous rumours of those of the reformed Religion, & being a gratious man with the Queen mother, for that their humors were but too agreeable and consonant each to other, he perswa∣ded with her, that if shee should countenance the cheefe Princes and Lords of the Religion, and suffer them to be neere the Court, and beare a sway in mat∣ters of State, they would draw on many followers after them, and peraduen∣ture gaine the yong King and the Princes his brethren to be their friends, and then 
Conde
 being a man of courage and of that proximitie in bloud would looke to haue his place: which if hee might peaceably enioy, her authoritie would be quickly in the dust, and the Burbons, Memorancies, and Chastillons would rule all: and as it was most likely, shee should bee called to an account for her former gouernement, during the Kings nonage: and by drawing on the hatred of the Catholikes, of the Pope, and of the King of 
Spaine,
 loose al her credit and reputation.


The Queene mother being iealous inough of her estate before, and nowe encouraged by the Cardinall to role euerie stone rather then to loose one iot of her authoritie, discountenanced all that shee might those of the Religion, and to be ridde of the Admirall, whome for his wisedome, integritie, valour, and vprightnesse of all his actions shee could not abide, it was deuised that hee should be charged to haue hired 
Poltrot
 to kill the late Duke of 
Guyse:
 and to colour the matter withal
 there was a counterfeit deposition of 
Poltrot
 exhibi∣ted, and the yong Duke of 
Guyse
 was animated to demand iustice of the K. for the death of his father.
 But when this deuise came to the prince of 
Condes
 eare, Lord howe exceedingly was hee offended, protesting, and that openly at the

 Councell Table, that hee would spend all that euer hee had, yea, and his owne life too, before the Admirall whom hee knew to be innocent, should be so in∣iuriously handled: which speech of the Princes, with some other considerati∣ons, was the cause that this pursute ceased for that time, and a reconciliation was made betweene the Admirall, and those of the 
Guyse,
 at 
Moulins,
 immedi∣atly before the King was about to go in progresse to 
Bayon.


Albeit the Admirall was no further troubled at this instant, yet it was a meanes to make him hated and detested of all the Catholikes, and a principall cause of sundrie quarrelles betweene the Papists and the Protestants, which in the ende prooued so great, that they drew on a second ciuill warre: for there grewe daily complaints, each charging other with the breach of the Kings E∣dict, and many accusations were broached on both sides. The Catholikes complained, that the strong Townes and fortresses were not yeelded to the kings obeysance, that there were many preachers which were not allowed of by the Edict, and that they preached in sundrie places expressely prohi∣bited,
 that they were disgraced with many approbrious and scandalous spee∣ches, and that there were secret practises for the leuying of Souldiers in 
Germany
 and other places, which shoulde bee in a readinesse vppon the first sommance.


The Protestants alleaged that they were rigorously handled, and could not haue iustice when they complained: that the insolencie of the garrisons which were placed in sundrie protestant Townes, was intollerable and could not be indured: that there were daily murtherers of the reformed in euery corner of the Lande, and nothing so common as robbing, spoyling, rauishing, pilling and poulling the poore Hugonots, and no punishment inflicted vppon the Authours and abbettors of such horrible and derestable vil∣lanies.


These and the like complaints beeing often reiterated on both sides, and each faction nourishing their suspitions, vppon euery small occasion: their rancour grew greater & greater, and those smal sparks which for a while lay couered in ashes, brake out at last into a furious and raging fire. For the Catholikes had no sooner gotten all things in a readines, exacted their cittadels into the protestant Townes, placed their garrisons, sworne their associations and leagues (which were tearmed the confraternities of the holy Ghost) and that vnder the colour of viewing the state of the Lande, the king was gone to 
Bayon,
 there to make a confederacy betweene himselfe and the Spanish king, and the Duke of 
Alua,
 to roote out all the Hugonots, but that a Million of iniuries and indignities were offered to the poore protestants. There was an Edict made at 
Rousillon,
 which was tearmed a declaration or an exposition of the edict of the pacification: but this was so contrarie to those articles which had beene agreed vppon before; that al men might see they had fully resolued to breake their promises with the Protestants. Then did there follow immediatly after, most barbarous cruelties and tyrannicall oppressions of all sorts which made any profession of the Go∣spel, though it were neuer so little: which when the Protestants (to their vn∣speakeable greefe) behelde, and that after so many iust complaints there was no redresse to bee hoped for by faire meanes, but that their vsage was likely to bee worse and worse, for that the sixe thousand Switzers were still retained in a rea∣dinesse

 to bee employed against them vppon the sodaine, as they vehemently suspected, they thought it high time to looke about them, and to studie howe they might best preuent so imminent perils.


Whereupon they wrote letters,
 and sent their secret messengers into al quar∣ters, to aduertise their associats, to vse al the speed that could be made, & to come and attend the Prince of 
Conde, Rochfaucont,
 and the Admirall, 
Dandelot,
 and o∣thers who were their principall cheefetaines. This could not be so closely kept, but the Queene mother hadde intelligence thereof, who with the King lay at 
Meaux,
 a place not farre distant where the saide Prince of 
Conde
 with his con∣federates were assembled, and had purposed to hasten to the Court strongly accompanied,
 to see if they could bring their enemies to any better reason, or more equall and euen conditions. As soone as the Queene mother vnder∣stood of the dismarch of the Prince, and that hee came directly towardes the King, shee resolued at midnight to dislodge, and to hasten to 
Paris,
 leauing the Constable with the battailon of Switzers and some eight or nine hundred French horse, to stop the course of the Protestants: who seeing them¦selues ouermatched, and that they could neither by faire meanes nor by foule be admitted to the speech of the King, who was by this time gotten within 
Pa∣ris,
 they retired towardes 
Clay,
 expecting the rest of their forces, which dai∣ly repaired vnto them out of 
Picardy, Champaigne, Poictou, Guyen,
 and sundrie other places of the Land: where they stayed not long, but marched towardes Saint 
Dennis,
 which was a little village some two leagues distant from 
Paris.


Nowe beganne there to bee as it were a generall combustion through out 
France,
 and the warres which had ceased for a time were foorthwith open on all sides:
 there were with the Prince of 
Conde
 the Cardinal of 
Chastillon,
 the Ad∣mirall, 
Dandelot, Rochfaucont, Ienlis, Clermont, Amboise, Saux, Bouchart, Bouchaua∣nes, Piquigni, Lysy, Mony,
 Saint 
Phale, Esterny, Mont-gommery,
 the Vidame of 
Chartres, La Noue, Lauardin,
 and all their retinewes. These beeing assembled, sent their humble letters to the King, vnfolding theyr manifolde greefes and dolours, beseeching his maiestie that they might bee heard, and suffe∣red to enioy their liberties, and to haue the free exercise of theyr Religion, according to the Edict of Pacification, made before 
Orleance:
 but answere beeing returned that the Edict was but prouisionable, and made for the necessitie of the time, and that the King to satisfie them would not fall out with all his neighbour Princes, by tollerating any other besides the Romish Religion, they determined to gather as great forces as they could, and to be∣siege 
Paris.


It was not long before they had gotten some 2000. horse, & 4000. footmen,
 with which power they first tooke 
Estamps, Dourdan, Orleance,
 & sundrie other places of good importance, so that stopping the auenues, and blocking the citie on all sides, they determined either to obtaine a peace with better conditions then before, or els to famish the Parisians, who could not long endure without releefe from other places. The Catholikes were not idle, but daily enterprised vppon the Protestants, fighting and skirmishing with them vppon euery ad∣uantage, and vnderstanding that theyr forces were seuered, (
Dandelot
 and

 
Mount-gommery
 beeing sent away with fiue hundred horse and eight hundred footmen to surprise 
Poysy
 and 
Ponthoise: La Noue
 to take 
Orleance, Rochfaucont:
 & 
Mouy
 to conduct the troupes which came out of 
Guyen
 and 
Poictou,
 to the suc∣cors of the Prince:) they thought it not conuenient to let slip so fit oportunity, and therefore hauing all their forces in a readinesse, the Constable issued forth of 
Paris
 the tenth of 
Nouember
 1567.
 with three thousand horse, and about sea∣uenteene or eighteene thousand footmen all very well armed and appoynted for the Combate, and were aranged in this manner.






CHAP. IX.




The battaile of Saint 
Dennis.
 The death of the Constable of 
France.




H
Is whole army was stretched out in length, more resembling a hedge then any thing else, on the left side whereof were placed the battalion of Switzers, flanked with a good num∣ber of harquebuziers, all which stood to assure fourteene pe
ces of great ordinance, which were planted in the mouth of 
Auberuilliers,
 towardes which hee caused his whole army to turne head: on the left side of the Switzers hee appoin∣ted a regiment of Horse, and before them another very strong troupe likewise of horsemen, whereof was Captaine the mareschall 
Memorancy
 his eldest son. There were also on the same side the regiments of the Dukes of 
Nemours, Lon∣geuille,
 the Count 
Retts, Chauigny, Thore, Lansac,
 and many others: close to these stood a good troupe of harquebuziers on foote: behind all these stood the bat∣taile of the Parisians brauely shining with armor, pikes, & halbards, hiding al∣most the side of the army Catholike, wherin was the Constable with his Swit∣zers: on the right side were the regiments of the Count 
Brissac
 and 
Strozzi,
 and somewhat higher those of the mareschal 
Cossy, Biron, Auely, Riuiere,
 with some others, behind whom stood the Duke of 
Aumaile,
 & mareschal 
Danuill,
 strong∣ly guarded with two troupes of horsemen, for the better assurance of the Swit∣zers and French footmen.


The Prince beeing aduertised heereof by his espyals, and knowing that that day would not passe without a fight, marshalled his battalions as fol∣loweth.


The Admirall assisted with 
Cleermont
 and his two sonnes, 
Re
ty,
 sixe cor∣nets of horse, and foure hundred harquebuziers on foote lead by 
Vallefeniere,
 stood right in the face of those that guarded the side of the Constable. 
Genlis
 accompanied with 
Lauardin, Vardes, Bressant, Besancourt,
 with fiue or sixe cor∣nets fronted the mareschall 
Cossy, Biron,
 and the rest before mentioned. The Prince of 
Conde,
 the Cardinall 
Chastillon, Sechalles,
 the vidames of 
Chartres,
 and of 
Amiens,
 the Counts of 
Saux, La Suze, Esternay, Conchauanes,
 and 
Stuard,
 who commaunded ouer certaine Scots, with foure hundred harquebuziers stood lower in the forme of a battaile, couering Saint 
Dennis,
 faced the Conestable and them who were before him, so that their forme of battaile resembled a Croysant or new Moone.




These generalles had no sooner disposed of their battailons in this warlike manner, but their great ordinance beganne to thunder, and theyr 
Enfans Perdus
 to attach the skirmish: 
Genlis
 seeing the Catholikes approch towardes his quarters, ranged his men close together, and hauing desired them to go resolutely to the charge, and to enter succor one another, aduanced to receiue them, who changing their pace into a trot, reencountred them with such furie, that it hasted the death of aboue fiftie persons at that instant. The Admirall who was an olde Fox and beaten to the warres, could quickly e∣spie his aduantage, seeing the state of the battaile, caused his harquebuziers to amende theyr march, and to putte themselues further forwardes, and bee∣ing seconded by the Prince and by the rest of the Armie who were readie to re∣ceiue their part of the blowes as well as others, gaue in so lustily and so coura∣giously charged the red crosses, that hee ouerthrew them, making them runne headlong vpon the Parisian bands,
 whom they exceedingly disordered and af∣frighted.


The Mareschall 
Cossy
 seeing many of the Catholikes disbanding them∣selues, and the Confederates wholy pursuing them, crying Victorie, Vic∣tory, sent worde to the Mareschall 
Danuill,
 and the Duke of 
Aumaile,
 to accompanie him to the charge. Now was the Prince hastening to encoun∣ter the Constable, vppon whome hee ranne amaine, and with such fierce∣nesse assayled them whom hee met, that hee quite defaced them who were much dismayed before with the fearefull flight of their companions, whom the Admirall had chased alreadie, and made such a breach in their great bat∣tailon, that the Conestable being abandoned by aboue a thousand runnawaies, finding himselfe hurt in the face,
 and pressed to yeeld by 
Stuard
 a Scot, could not for choller answere otherwise then with blowes of his sword, with the pum∣mell whereof hee gaue 
Stuard
 such a blow on the Iawe bone, that hee smote out two or three of his teeth, and loosed many of the rest, which when an∣other Scotte espied, he shotte him into the reines of the backe with his pistoll, for that hee wore but a very thin and light harnesse, beeing a man aboue foure score yeeres of age. Now were the Switzers maruailously astonished, and rea∣die to take their heeles as well as others, had they not beene reassured by the Duke of 
Aumaile
 and the Mareschall 
Danuille,
 who promised to liue and die with them, and likewise by the hardy onsette of the Mareschall 
Memoran∣cy,
 who by ouerthrowing certaine of the Princes troupes of Horse, made most of his footmen to flye, and hadde not the night so fast approched, hee had vtterly discomfited all the rest: but the darkenesse which presently en∣sued, caused each to return, & to draw towards those quarters where they heard the cries of their Generalles, the Protestants to the Prince of 
Conde,
 who play∣ned of his horse which was sore hurt and wounded, insomuch as hee began to faile him, and hee was no sooner alighted, but hee fell downe starke dead besides him. The Catholikes went towardes the Constable, who was woun∣ded to death, and seeing all things standing in so badde tearmes, neuer pursu∣ed the Protestants, contenting themselues with the honour of the fielde, and the libertie to burie theyr dead.
 The Prince retyred backe againe to Saint 
Dennis,
 hauing lost the vidame of 
Amiens, Piquigni, Saux, La Suse,


 Saint 
Andrew, Garennes
 with three hundred horsemen, and aboue fiftie Gen∣tlemen of Marke. The Catholikes with their generall, left behinde them dead in the field, the Count 
De Chamne, Hierom
 of 
Turin,
 and aboue fortie chieftaines and commanders, beside three hundred common souldiers, and a great multi∣tude of maimed and wounded men.






CHAP. X.




The Prince of 
Conde
 leaueth 
Paris. Rochel
 yeeldeth to the Protestants. The Duke of 
Aniou
 made the Kings Lieutenant. 
Cassimer
 bringeth ayde to the Protestants. The siege of 
Chartres.
 Peace proclaimed in 
France.




T
He next day after the comming of 
Dandelot
 (who was excee∣ding sorie that hee came not time inough to haue beene at the battaile) the Prince presented himselfe againe with all his whole power before 
Paris,
 but his enimies kept close within the walles: wherefore after hee had braued them for a good space, and had wasted and spoyled hard to the suburbs, see∣ing that no man durst appeare to impeach his proceedings, considering that victuals and other necessaries for his army waxed scant, and that the Catholikes hourely reenforced themselues, as also vnderstanding that 
Cassimer
 was comming with a great army to his ayde, he dislodged then from S. 
Dennis
 the fifteenth of 
Nouember,
 and went towards 
Lorrayne
 to receiue his Al∣maines. Beeing on his way at 
Montargis,
 hee receiued letters from 
Truchares,
 who was a little before elected Maior of 
Rochell,
 that if hee would sende some e∣speciall man of account to be Lieutenant in his absence, they would yeeld the towne to his deuotion. The Prince was wonderfull glad to heare this good newes, knowing that to bee a place of no small importance, and therefore hee foorthwith dispatched Saint 
Hermin
 his Cousin with letters to the Mayor and Shriues of the towne, giuing them hearty thankes for their great fauour and kindnesse, with a request to remaine constant, and to receiue his Cousin as his Lieutenant in his absence.


 
This gentleman was very welcome to the Rochelers, where hee arriued the tenth of 
Februarie,
 1568. and so 
Rochell
 being a maruailous strong place, accomo∣dated with a goodly hauen, by which meanes it was growne very rich, remai∣ned euer after at the deuotion of the Confederates.


By this time were there newe troupes leuied in 
Poictou, Guyen, Xaintoigne, An∣golesme,
 and 
Gascongne,
 vnder the leading of Saint 
Cyre, Soubize, Puuiant, Pilles,
 and other chiefetains, amounting to the number of eighteene Cornets of horse, and twenty leauen ensignes of footmen, who marching to ioyne with the Prince, tooke by the way 
Dorat, Lusignan,
 and 
Pont Sur Yon,
 where they ioyned with the vauntgard, ledde by the Admirall 
Chastillon:
 from thence passing by 
Sens,
 they tooke 
Bray, Nogent, Montereau,
 and 
Espernay.
 Thus did the Protestants stil aduance their affaires, the Catholikes being not able to impeach or hinder them, notwithstanding all their practises and deuises.


Now was 
Monsieur
 the Duke of 
Aniou,
 brother to the King by reason of the

 death of the Constable, proclamed Lieutenant generall ouer all his brothers territories and Dominions: who beeing assisted by the Prince 
de Nemours, Longauille,
 the Mareschall 
Cossy, Tauannes, Martigues, Carnaualet, Losses,
 and sun∣drie other great Captaines, was commaunded to bridle the Protestants as much as might be. The Duke of 
Aumaile
 was sent into 
Lorraine,
 to ioyne with the Marques of 
Baden,
 who had raysed a power of some three thousand horse, for the seruice of the King: and the Duke of 
Alua
 sent the Count of 
Aremberg,
 with a thousand and two hundred horse, and two thousand footmen Spaniards, and Burgonians, who shoulde ioyne with 
Monsieur
 against the Prince of 
Conde,
 and the rest of the Confederates. The yong 
Lonsac
 was sent to the Count 
Pala∣tine,
 to hinder the leuie of the Reisters, made by his sonne 
Cassimer,
 and nowe readie to march for the succour of the Protestants. Thus was there great pre∣paration made on all sides to continue the warres, and to consume 
Fraunce
 with the flame of ciuill broyles.


The Prince being aduertised of all this, hasted to meete with his Reisters, and with much adoo being followed in the taile by the Catholikes, at length ar∣riued at Saint 
Michaell:
 where hee passed the Riuer of 
Meaux,
 and so entered into 
Lorraine,
 still proceeding forwardes vntill hee came as farre as 
Mouso
,
 where hee met with 
Cassimer,
 and his Almaines,
 who accompanyed with the two young Countes of 
Barbie,
 the Count 
Holo,
 the Mareschall of the Pala∣tinate, 
Scomberg,
 and manie others of great reckoning and account, had long expected the comming of the Confederates. After some stay made for the re∣freshing of their wearied troupes, they determined to returne towards the plea∣sant and fertile fieldes of the 
Flower de Lis,
 there to assay if they could bring their enemies to any honest, and reasonable conditions.


Monsieur
 had speedie intelligence of the returne of both Armyes, where∣fore hee sent great numbers, both of horsemen, and footemen, to stoppe all the passages, and amongst others, commaunded the Duke of 
Neuers
 with his Ita∣lian bandes to defende the Riuers of 
Merne, Seyne, Yon,
 and sundrie other pla∣ces. And that if hee could not hinder theyr course, yet he should annoy them by all possible meanes, to the ende that beeng wearied and wasted so much as might bee, his excellencie might fight with them afterwards in grosse, with more aduauntage.


The Protestants minding not to forslowe theyr businesse, dislodged from 
Chalons,
 and marched towards the head of the Riuer of 
Meuse,
 and so leauing 
Comercyon
 on their right hande, passed ouer at 
Marne,
 and went towardes 
Cha∣stillon,
 where they were assayled by certaine troupes of Italians, and French, who set vpon the taile of the army, to cause them to hasten their pace. But 
Scom∣berge,
 being sent with part of his owne Regiment, assisted by some fewe of the French, gaue them such a furious charge, that hee wholy defeated them, and brought theyr colours to the Prince. The armie was forthwith aduaunced, and marching through 
Hurepoise,
 by 
Bleueau,
 and 
Montargis,
 arryued at last in 
Be∣ausse,
 and encamped before 
Charters,
 which they determined to besiege, for that it was verie rich, and well able to relieue the armie with manie ne∣cessaries.


The comming of this great power encouraged diuerse▪ who had kept them

 selues close, to put forth theyr heads, and to attempt manie things in fauour of the Confederates. Those of 
Languedocke, Prouence,
 and 
Gascoigne,
 were pre∣sently vp in armes vnder their leaders, 
Sipteres, Montbrun, Mo
ans, Senas, B
u∣rinq
et, Rapin, Montacut,
 and sundrie other Chieftaines, and suddenly surprised 
Nismes, Montpellier, Saint Marcell, Saint Esprit, Saint Iean, Boue:
 all which they fortified for their greater profite and securitie. The Catholikes were not idle, but sought to catch whatsoeuer they coulde come by, which might any way tend to their aduauntage. 
Montaret
 gouernour of the Countrey of 
Burbonois,
 with 
Terride, La Valette,
 and 
Monsales,
 surprised certaine troupes of the Pro∣testants, whom they quickely defeated and put to flight. 
Mascon
 was taken by the Duke of 
Neuers. Mouluc
 likewise tooke certaine Isles in 
Xainctoigne,
 and pre∣pared all necessaries to besiege 
Rochell,
 one of the principall retreates of the Protestants. The Count 
Martinengo, Richleu,
 and sundrie others, besieged 
Or∣leance.
 Thus were they in euery corner of 
Fraunce
 vp in Armes, and no man knewe where to bee safest from the violence of the souldiours, and men of Armes.


Now were all things in a readinesse for the siege of 
Chartres,
 so that hauing raysed theyr mounts, and planted theyr artillarie, they began to beate the Citie, in verie terrible and furious maner: and hauing ouerthrowne their Towers, battered their houses, and made a sufficient breach, they were readie to giue an assault, and to assay the getting of the Towne by maine force. 
Ligneres
 one of the Knights of the order, was Captaine of the Towne, who endeuoured by all meanes to keepe the same in despite of the Confederates, and with great cele∣ritie repayred in the night, whatsoeuer had beene broken, and throwne downe in the day: and so wisely and politiquely preuented all the stratagems of his enemies, that it was not possible for the Prince to effect his intended purpose. But the King vnderstanding that they could not long holde out, and being not able to remooue the siege, thought it best to offer the Prince a peace: which af∣ter manie meetings was at length concluded. The principall effect whereof was,
 that euery man should quietly enioy his Religion, and from thenceforth neuer bee troubled for their consciences. This being agreed vpon, (though contrarie to the liking of manie of the Princes best friends, and principall Cap∣taines, who still cryed out, that the King would breake his promise, as soone as he espied his aduauntage) and proclaimed in the Campe before 
Charters,
 the Armie brake vp, and euerie one was licenced to depart home into his owne Countrey.








CHAP. XI.




The third ciuill warres. The battell of 
Bassac
 where the Prince of Conde is slaine. The Prince of 
Nauarre
 chosen Generall of the Protestants. The death of 
Dandelot.
 The death of the Duke of 
Deux-ponts.
 A great victorie of the Protestants. 
Monsieur
 dissolueth his armie. The siege of 
Poictiers.




N
Ow was 
France
 once againe reduced to a quiet estate, and who would not haue thought, but that after so many bastonados,
 euery one would haue bin glad to haue nourished the same by all possible meanes, and to haue learned by their former miseries to beware, how they entred into new troubles. But such were the wicked counsels of some turbulent spirits, that they could not endure any quietnes, but gaue daily occasions to fill the whole land full of new broyles and vprores. The two late reconciled factions were continually very iealous each of others proceedings, one blamed the other for not accomplishing such conditions as were agreed vpon, and so solemnly sworne on both sides. The Catholiks alledged that the Protestants had not put all their strong townes into the kings hands, according to the tenure of the Articles of the peace lately agreed vpon: that 
Rochell
 did fortifie it selfe, and would not receyue the Catholikes into their former offices and dignities:
 that they rigged shippes, and made themselues strong at sea, and that without the kings knowledge: that 
Coqueuille
 leuied many soldiers for the ayd of the prince of 
Orenge,
 contrarie to the pacification made before 
Chartres.
 All which things could not be attēpted without the knowledge of the confederats: & that which was most strange of al, they practised to leuy soldiers in 
Germany,
 & other places.


The Protestants complained,
 that they could not be permitted freely to vse their consciences, according as it was conditioned. That the Catholikes did still retaine the Switzers, and the Italian bands, and placed sundry strong garrisons in those townes which were of the Religion, and that such which had liued in exile, could not returne to their houses without imminent peril of their liues. Alledging withall, the horrible murthers, robberies, and other execrable facts, committed vpon the persons, and goods of those of the reformed Churches. These with some others were the reasons which animated both parts to stirre coales, and to begin the warres afresh.


The Catholikes knowing 
Rochell
 to be a verie strong place, sought by al cun∣ning deuises to make themselues maisters thereof, and with fayre promises in∣termingled with threats, laboured to perswade them to receyue a garrison of the Catholikes, but they would in no case agree thereto, but still droue them of with newe delayes. 
Tauannes
 was commaunded to surprise the Prince of 
Conde,
 who was then in 
Noyars.
 But hee beeing aduertised thereof, depar∣ted in great haste, with the Princesse his wife, the Admirall, and some hundred horse: and passing ouer the 
Loyer,
 went into 
Poictou,
 where increa∣sing his forces, by the comming of 
Verac, Soubize, Anguilier, Saint Cyre,
 and 
Puuiant,
 at last arriued at 
Rochell,
 in despite of all his enemies, whither not long

 after came the Queene of Nauar,
 with the yong Prince of 
Barne
 her son. Where there was forthwith a Councell helde for the managing of their future actions. The rest of the Protestant Captaines, as 
Dandelot, Mountgommery, La Noue,
 and others, being aduertised of all these sturres, gathered what forces they could, and marched towards 
Rochell,
 with great speede, taking by the way, 
Partenay, Niort,
 and 
Maile,
 which proued afterwarde very aduantagious for the Confederates. 
Angolesme, Pons, S. Iohn d' Angely,
 and 
Tallebourg,
 were likewise surprised by those of the reformed Religion, so that now many good townes were againe at their deuotion and commaundement.


The King being aduertised of all these designements, declared 
Monsieur
 the Duke of 
Aniou
 his brother, his Lieutenant generall: who dispatched forthwith Letters and Messengers into all parts, to assemble 
Bannes
 and 
Arierbannes,
 and to command all gentlemen, and others to be in a readinesse at the time appointed, at 
Estamps,
 where he had proclaimed the 
Rendeuous,
 there to attend the further pleasure of his excellencie. The protestants assembled souldiours on all sides, especially in 
Languedoc, Prouence,
 and 
Dauphiuy,
 vnder the conduct of Colonell 
Acier, Montbrun,
 and Saint 
Romain,
 who had gathered some sixteene or seuen∣teene thousand footmen, and seuen hundred horse, and were marching toward the Prince, who expected their comming at 
Chalons.
 This new supply did mar∣uellously strengthen the confederates, and encouraged them to proceed on in their enterprise, and to seeke their enemies, who now were growne to an head, and readie to march vnder their leaders and conductors. After many attempts on eyther side, and that both the Armies had endomaged each other, by the taking of sundry townes, and afflicting the poore Coun
ry, with a thousand mi∣series, both Generals resolued to trie their fortunes by an entire battaile, as soone as occasion was offered. With this resolution 
Henrie
 Duke of 
Aniou,
 hauing in∣telligence, that the Lorde 
Pilles
 was comming towarde the Prince of 
Conde,
 with a newe supplie of souldiours, led his armie through 
Poictou, Lymosin,
 and the Countrey of 
Angoumois,
 and discended alongst the Riuer of 
Charente,
 as though hee woulde take 
Chasteaunef,
 there to passe ouer the water, and to barre 
Pilles
 from ioyning with the Prince. VVhich when the Confede∣rates vnderstoode, they passed 
Charente
 at 
Cognac,
 with purpose to preuent the Armie of the Catholiques: 
 who hauing gayned 
Chasteaunef,
 repayred the Bridge, which was in the possession of the Protestants, and made an other with Boats.


The Admirall being appointed to impeach the making of these new bridges considering he was not able to effect that which he desired, retired vnto 
Bassac,
 ordayning 
Soubize, Puuiant,
 and other troupes of 
Poictou,
 to fauour his retreate. The Prince (all things being well considered) was not willing to resolue of a battaile, and therefore willed the Admirall to dislodge with the auaunt∣garde, and to bee with him at 
Farnac
 the next morning by the breake of the day. Which in no wise could be performed by all: for the companies ledde by 
Puuiant,
 could not march so speedily, the Catholikes being at their taile, and so strongly pressed them, that they could not bee disgaged, but with the hazarde and perill of all the Protestants. For the footemen of his excellencie ha∣uing passed a Riuer, doubled their pace to gaine a little hill, which was

 a place of some aduauntage: from which they discouering how small a compa∣nie the Admirall had, aduaunced still forward, knowing that he could not re∣tire, without the intire losse of all his troupes. By this time 
Puuiant
 was so farre engaged, that had not 
La Noue,
 and 
La Loue,
 who made the retreate of the Auauntgarde with fortie Harquebuziers, speedilie come to his succours, hee had remayned at the mercie of his enemies. But when as they had with all theyr deuoir succored them in their need, they were forthwith compelled to defend themselues vpon the bay of a pond, where they were so lustily charged by 
Mar∣tigues, Malicorne,
 and others to the number of fiue of sixe hundred horse, that 
La Noue,
 and 
La Loue
 were taken prisoners,
 and all their bands intirely broken, and defeated. 
Puuiant
 hauing charged, and finding himselfe too weake, retired to the rest of the footmen. During these hot skirmishes, sundry of the Catholikes were aduanced forwards, wherof some two hundred came hard to the village: whō when the Admirall and 
Dandelot
 discouered, beeing ignorant of the ouerthrow aforesayde, for that the village hindered theyr sight, they resolutely charged: and 
Dandelot
 being formost with his cornet, gaue in so furiously, that he made them all to run amaine,
 leauing behind them 
Monsales,
 and thirteen others dead vpon the place. 
Dandelot
 pursued them hard to the village, from whence he was no sooner returned, but those Catholikes being backed with 1200. harquebuzi∣ers, reentred more strongly accompanied then before. Whilest things passed on after this maner, al the rest of the troups of the Catholikes began to shew them∣selues, euery regiment taking his place for the last encounter.


The Prince of 
Conde
 beeing aduertised of all this, and of the daunger that the Admirall with all the Auauntgard was in, if they were not speedily suc∣coured, aduaunced himselfe with those few horsemen of his battaile, which he tumultuously assembled in that vprore, the rest beeing dispersed into seuerall quarters here and there, hasted to the rescue with all the speede that might bee. Each Generall began nowe to seeke his aduauntage, and to prepare himselfe to the fight. The Admirall espying that 
Monsieur
 came fast on vpon the left hand, which was the meanes to enclose the Protestants betweene the riuer, and the armie of the Catholikes, commaunded 
La Touer
 to bring the companies of the Auantgard further forwards: which he did, and bare himselfe so, that his horse being ouerthrowne, he was taken, and beeing knowne to be the man that had slaine captaine 
Carry
 at 
Paris,
 was killed forthwith,
 besides many others, who had no better fortune.


The army Catholike still stretched it selfe forth vpon the left hande, towards the troupes of 
Soubize, Languillier, Puuiant, Cressomere,
 and the rest of the Chieftaines of 
Poictou:
 who thinking it not conuenient to expect anie oc∣casion for a better charge, seeing the enemie reenforce himselfe more and more, assayled the formost Troupes with such furie, that they made them recule: but by reason of newe supplyes which were sent continuallie, 
Sou∣bize,
 and 
Languillier
 were taken prisoners,
 
Mesauchere, Brandamere,
 and ma∣nie others were then slaine. In the meane time his excellencie desirous to breake them on all sides, brought a great part of his armie an other way, purposing to enclose them, who kept the bay of the ponde, and to assayle them on the backe. But this pretence being espied, the confederates, who had

 maintained the aduantage of the ground a good while, thought it best to retyre into a place of greater safetie. Whilest the fight was thus hotely continued on either side, the Prince of 
Conde
 with three or foure hundred horse, gaue a hote charge vpon the Catholiques: and being chaufed to see his men in rout, and the whole army to bear it self no better, flang in with such fury, that he bare to the ground, or made to run all that were before him, vntill such time as his horse beeing wounded, hee was ouerthrowne, and not able any longer to doo any thing for the blowes hee had receyued: and because hee was not succou∣red with a fresh horse in tyme, seeing his enemies to presse sore vppon him, hee yeelded vnto 
Argence,
 and Saint 
Iean,
 who promised to saue his life: but 
Montesquion
 (as some say) passing by at that instant, shot him into the head with a pistoll, whereof he died forthwith.


Now was the disorder exceeding great among the Protestants, who hauing lost their Generall, began to flie as fast as they could, and to get out of the daun∣ger of their pursuing enemies. The Admirall and 
Dandelot,
 seeing the fight irre∣parable, and the affray so maruellous, retired with a few of the nobilitie vnto S. 
Iean d'Angely,
 and from thence to 
Xanctes,
 to the young Princes of 
Nauarre,
 and 
Conde.
 There dyed in this iourney of 
Bassac,
 besides the Prince, 
La Touer,
 yong 
Chasteliere,, Portant, Chandemer, Mesauchere, Brandaniere, Tabariere, Barette, La Mesteray,
 and aboue fiftie other Gentlemen. 
Stuard
 a Scot was slaine with a dagge, and diuerse other died shortly after of their wounds, 
Puuiant, Soubize, Languillier, Corbeson
 brother to 
Montgommery, La Noue, La Loue,
 and 
Guerchy
 the ensigne bearer of the Admirall were taken prisoners. But shortly after 
Soubize
 found the meanes, to deceiue his keepers, 
La Noue,
 was exchanged for 
Sessac
 Lieutenant to the duke of 
Guise. Corbeson
 and 
Guerchy
 were set at libertie, vpon their faithfull promises. The whole number of the Protestants that were slaine in this battaile were almost foure hundred, and some two hundred Catholikes,
 and among them were 
Monsales,
 the Barons 
Ingrand,
 and 
Prunay,
 the Count 
de la Mirande, de Morette, Mo
canure, Linieres,
 and certaine others of marke. 
Mon∣sieur
 sent the King worde forthwith of the victorie. Who presently aduertised the Pope thereof, sending him some of the ensignes, who caused them to be set vp in Saint 
Peters
 Church, from whence he went in procession with all his Car∣dinals to the temple of the holy Ghost, to giue thanks for so ioyfull successe: and so did likewise the Venetians, and duke of 
Alua:
 thinking that all the Protestants in 
France
 had beene wasted and consumed.


But the Admirall with the principall of the confederates, gaue them quickly to vnderstand, that the matter was likely to be farre otherwise then they imagi∣ned. For they gathering togither their dispersed forces, fortifyed 
Cognac, Angolesme, Pos, Saint Gean d'Angely,
 and other places, wherein they plan∣ted strong garrisons to amuse the armie of the Catholiques, vntill the com∣ming of the Duke of 
Deux Ponts,
 who was alreadie marching with a great power, to the reliefe of the confederates. And hauing chosen the young Prince of 
Nauarre
 for their Generall (who promised to spende his life in de∣fence of theyr cause,
 and neuer to abandon them, vntill an assured peace were established) reuiewing their troupes, which amounted well neare to fortie thousand horse, besids their footmen, prouided all necessaries to begin the wars

 afresh, and if it might bee to repaire their former losses. 
Dandelot
 was sent into 
Poictou,
 to view the strength of their forces in those quarters, and to gather as much money as possibly hee could, for the payment of the Souldiers: where after he had very wisely and pollitikely aduanced his busines, and gotten good store of gold and siluer for the maintenance of the warres, in his returne fell in∣to a burning feauer,
 whereof hee died shortly after at 
Xaincts,
 to the vnspeake∣able greefe of the Admirall, and all those of the reformed Churches. Hee was very valiant pollitike, and passing skilfull in all warlike affaires: prouident to foresee all dangers, couragious and hardy in all his enterprises, liberall,
 courte∣ous and affable, and therfore wonderfully well beloued of his souldiers, who thought themselues able to encounter with any whatsoeuer, so long as they had him for cheefetaine and commander: and therfore they bewailed the losse of him as of their father.


The Duke of 
Deux Ponts,
 who was hasting to the aide of the Protestants,
 had in his armie seauen thousand and fiue hundred Reisters, and sixe thousande Lansquenetes, with whom were ioyned the Prince of 
Orenge,
 the two Counts 
Ludouicus
 and 
Henry
 his brethren, with a small band of their followers: besides 
Moruilliers
 the marquesse of 
Reuel, Fequieres, Cleruant, Mouy,
 and 
Esternay,
 with certaine culuerings, sixe field peeces, and a good number of Musqueters: with those companies he got forward as fast as hee might, still gayning ground, and approching the territories of 
France,
 notwithstanding al the hindrances and lets which were giuen by the Duke of 
Aumaile,
 who with a great power was ap∣pointed to stoppe the passages, and to barre this 
Almain
 Duke out of the fertile countrey of the 
Flower de Lis:
 but that could not be, for still hee passed foorth, and at last rested himselfe before 
La Charite,
 a towne of great importance,
 and scituated (as it were) in the heart and bowels of 
France.
 The Towne was verie straightly besieged, and planting his battery, he beate the wals in such furious maner, that those within beeing not able to holde out, and dispairing of any suc∣cours in time, yeelded vpon composition, to haue their liues saued, and so was it sacked and spoyled by the Lansquenetes.
 The taking of the towne was no small aduantage to the confederates, as also the losse thereof did much hinder the fortunate course of the victorious Catholikes, who now began to consult how to impeach the two armies, that they should not meete and vnite them∣selues together: but doo what they could the Duke still aduanced forwardes, passed through 
Lymosin
 so farre as 
Cars,
 where falling sicke hee dyed of a quartaine Feuer, tothe exceeding greefe of all his friendes and followers.


The Princes beeing aduertised of the comming of the Duke, and the taking of 
La Charity,
 hasted to meete them, leauing 
La Noue
 Captaine in cheefe ouer 
Poictou, Rochell,
 and other places vnder their obedience: and ioyning with the Germaines at length neere vnto 
Cars,
 were not a little gladde in their hearts, al∣beit they were mightily crossed by the death of theyr principall and cheefest leader.


When all the confederates were ioyned together, they first sent a supplicati∣cation to the King, desiring a peace: but when they could not bee heard, nor those miserable warres which had so long tormented poore 
France,
 could haue any ende by faire meanes, they proceeded on, and purposed to assay if by fine

 force, they could compell their enemies to any honest and reasonable conditi∣ons: the better to effect this, they determined to get as many strong townes as they could into their handes, as well in the Countrey of 
Lymosyn
 as other where. But the Army of his excellencie was nowe so strongly reenforced with the troupes of the Duke of 
Aumaile,
 as also with one thousand and two hundred horse, and foure hundred footmen, all Italians, and vnder the conduct of Saint 
Fior,
 nephew to the Pope called 
Pius Quintus,
 that they did continu∣ally coast them, & maintained sundrie braue skirmishes with the confederates, barring them from executing many of their enterprises, and at length each Ar∣my meeting together neere vnto 
Rockabeuille,
 had almost tryed their quarrell by an entire battaile: for 
Monsieur
 hauing encamped vppon a goodly plaine, and entrenched his armie round about in most defencible maner, sauing at one corner, placed there a strong 
Corps du gard
 (composed of the two Regiments, sometimes commaunded by the valiant Counte 
Brissac,
 and nowe ledde by the two Captains 
La Barthe
 and 
Goas,
 who still lamented the death of their generous collonell) to defende that quarter from all sodaine inuasions of the Protestants. This 
Gard
 was quickly espied, and the Admirall aduertised thereof, who was very desirous to remooue them further off: but for that hee did not well know their strength, he thought it good to deale warily, and to go with al his whole forces to this exploit, beeing a matter of so great importance, purposing to en∣terprise further if occasion serued. Whereupon all the troupes were forthwith arranged and put in battaile array: the Admirall assisted by 
Beaunois, La Nocle, Briquemant, Soubize, La Noue, Teligny,
 and others, led the vantgard followed by their seueral Cornets, and a great Hot of Reisters, conducted by Count 
Ludouic,
 brother to the Prince of 
Orenge,
 who were flanked with the Regiments of 
Be∣audisne
 and 
Piles,
 and on the left hand with 
Rouuray
 & 
Pouille:
 a strong battailon of Lansquenetes backed the auauntgard, which carried in the front eight field peeces. The battaile marched after, led by the Prince and 
Rochfaucont,
 with the aide of the Prince of 
Orange,
 Count 
Henry
 his brother, and the Count 
Mansfield,
 flanked likewise with another battailon of Lansquenetes, which guarded the rest of the field peeces.


Thus went the Protestants very well appointed to assaile the two Regi∣ments, who beeing aduertised by their Vedetes or espials of their approch, pre∣pared themselues against the inuasion of their enemies. It was not long before the 
Enfans perdus
 of either side beganne the game, and were followed very lu∣stily by the rest of their associats.


Though the Catholikes were but a few in respect of the Protestants, yet re∣membring their former honour (for they were esteemed the brauest and vali∣antest bandes of all the whole Army) and beeing animated by the Collonell 
Strozzi,
 did lustily maintaine the fight, and would not giue an inch of ground, thinking to be succoured in time by his excellencie. There was a long and ter∣ble fight, and many were slaine on both sides: but this 
Corps du gard
 being ouer∣charged with the multitude of Confederates, was (in the ende) wholy ouer∣throwne and put to flight. Collonell 
Strozzi
 was taken prisoner,
 hauing lost his Lieutenant 
La Loup,
 with the choysest men of the Regiment, and 50. men of Marke at the least, and some foure hundred common Souldiers. 
Monsieur
 not

 minding to hazard his fortune at that time, suffered the Protestants peaceably to enioy their victorie, and being counselled to breake vp his Armie, and to di∣stribute them in the garrisons vntill the 15. of August following, euerie one re∣tired to their appointed places,
 leauing the confederates to range vp and down at their pleasures, who forthwith got 
Tiuieres,
 S. 
Sulpice, Confolant,
 S. 
Genais, Chatelerand, Lusignen,
 and many other places, so that now fortune began to smile vpon them more then at any time before, and maruailously to fauor their pro∣ceedings: and seeing themselues maisters of the field, and that there was no man to make head against them, they resolued to besiege the strong Towne of 
Poi∣ctiers.
 With this determination they marched forwards, and encamped before the cheefe Citie in 
Poictou,
 seeking to adde that likewise vnto the rest of their conquests.


His excellency beeing aduertised heereof, sent foorthwith the new Duke of 
Guyse,
 commanding him to put himselfe within the Towne, and in any wise to keepe it from the Protestants, who accompanied with the marquesse 
De Main
 his brother, 
Ruffec, Onoux,
 and sundrie others his followers, entred 
Poictiers,
 where after hee had viewed the walles, and considered of all necessaries requi∣site to endure a siege, hee fortified the Towne with the aduise of the Counte 
Lude,
 the Gouernour of the Countrey, as strongly as could bee deuised, the better to maintaine it against the enemie, who not long after approching, first gained the suburbs, and sundrie other places of aduantage, notwith∣standing all the impeachments giuen by the 
Guyse
 and other Catholikes. Then raised they their forts, cast vp their mounts, entrenched themselues, moun∣ted their Ordenance, and beate the Walles, Towers, and Bulwarks, in all ter∣rible and furious manner that might bee. Those within stood valiantly to their defence, and by often sallying foorth and skirmishing, endomaged the assay∣lants exceedingly, who by reason they were men of courage and resolution, they maintained their owne for a long while. But in continuance of time, af∣ter the losse of manie of their forwardest Souldiers, they beganne to keepe in more close, and were content to holde whatsoeuer was within the Walles, and for that victuals beganne to waxe scant, by reason all the passages & waies were so stopped, that nothing could enter for the releefe of the besieged, they thrust out many of their vnnecessarie people, and spent their victuals among the rest as sparingly as might be: and yet for all that they were brought to that extremitie, that they were forced to eate their horses, asses, and dogges,
 and to fill theyr hungrie mawes with many course meates, yea, such was their mise∣rie, that they thought it impossible to holde it for any long time, and therefore were readie to yeelde vp the Towne, hadde they not beene disswaded by the Duke of 
Guyse,
 the Count 
De Lud,
 and some fewe others, who vowed to spend their goods, liues, and whatsoeuer they hadde, rather then by yeelding vnto their enemies, to blemish their honour and reputation: but all this serued to little purpose, had not 
Bidolier
 the yongest brother of the Count 
De Lude,
 by a wittie and ingenious deuise,
 stopping the Channell of the Riuer, caused it to disgorge it selfe ouer all the low meddowes which lay on the side of the Cittie, by which meanes the confederates were vtterly disappointed of their hope, and that at such time as they thought all had beene theirs.




Now began the affaires of the Protestants to go backwards, and euery day to bee crossed more and more: for shortly after their victuals failed them, and great multitudes of their armies fell sick, and no small number were greeuously wounded and hurt: the Admirall himselfe fell into a desperate disease,
 and all men thought he should neuer haue recouered. 
Rochfaucont, Acier, Briquemant, Beauuoise, La Nocle,
 and others of speciall account were so sickly and weake, that they were forced to remooue from the Army, so that not one of them (except the Admirall and 
Acier
) were able to bee at the battaile of 
Mont∣counter.


All these miseries being considered, as also the comming of 
Monsieur
 to raise the siege,
 the Admirall with the aduise of all the principall men in the Army, re∣solued to discampe, and to leaue 
Poictiers,
 to the great comfort and reioycing of all the Catholiks: and to watch the Army led by his excellencie, who was now marching towards 
Chatelerand,
 to the ende to gaine it from the Protestants. His whole power consisted of 10000. footmen, 3000. Reisters, one thousand Italians, and two thousand French horse: with these forces hee besieged 
Chate∣lerand,
 which hee so beate with his great Artillery, that the breach being found reasonable, euery man cried to the assault. The Italians who had the honour to aduance first, went very brauely forwardes, and made countenance as though they would haue entred at that instant: but the valiant and noble 
La Loue,
 one of the Mareschalles of the Campe, and an especial man among the confederates, hauing the keeping of the Townes, gaue him such a welcome, that after the daughter of many of their forwardest leaders (as 
Fabian de Mont, Octauian de Montalto, Malatesta
 a Collonell, and aboue two hundred others) they retired in haste to free themselues out of such perril. 
Monsieur
 being dismaied with this losse,
 and vnderstanding that the Admirall with his whole armie was at hande, thought best to remooue his siege, and to depart to a place of more securitie, and there to stay vntill he had assembled the rest of his troupes. The protestants beeing quickly enformed heereof, pursued him at the heeles, and often skirmi∣shed with him by the way, vntill they came to a conuenient place, and fit for an entire fight, where they presented the battaile: but his excellency refused, reser∣uing himselfe for a more fortunate time.






CHAP. XII.




The Battaile of 
Montcounter.




A
Fter some small reposing of his wearied and tired bandes, and that his Army was reenforced by the comming of fresh Soul∣diers, so that hee thought himselfe able to match the Confe∣derates, hee againe returned towards them, purposing to trie it out by some bloudy fight, as soone as any oportunitie was offreed. The yong Princes, the Admirall, and the rest of the cheefest Protestants, were quickly aduertised of his intent, who for that the aduancement of their affaires consisted principally in celerity and expedition, as also in assailing their enemies, whereby they did the better

 maintaine their honour and reputation, and likewise the importunate desires of the 
Almaines,
 who were continually crying vppon the Admirall that they might fight, determined to accept the iourney, assoone as it was offered in any fit and conuenient place.


They had not marched long, but they came to the plaines of Saint 
Clere,
 not farre from 
Montcounter,
 which his excellencie vnderstanding, caused his troups to amende their pace, purposing to stop their course, and to compell them to a generall combate, which was a thing that hee much desired.


The Admirall who commanded all, by reason the Princes were but yong,
 finding the plaine (afore said) to be a conuenient place to darrain the fight, ar∣ranged his battails in the most conuenient ground hee could choose, and there expected the comming of his enemies: and hauing sent 
Mouy
 and Saint 
Auban
 with certaine Cornets to discouer the Catholikes, he in the meane time lodged his Ordinance vpon certaine little hilles, and made the battaile which was led by 
Ludouick
 Count of 
Nassau
 to aduance more on the right hande, to whome were deliuered three Cannons and one Culuering. The aduauntgard was on the left hand, led by the Admirall himselfe, assisted by 
Puygreffyer, La Noue, Te∣ligny,
 and certaine others, backed with the Count 
Mansfeild,
 and a great battai∣lon of Reisters, besides the Lansquenets conducted by 
Cranuilliers.
 All which hauing kissed the ground after their accustomed maner, swore to succour each other, and to die in the place rather then to giue one iot of ground to their ene∣mies. These were likewise flanked on both sides with tne Regiments of the French harquebuziers, led By 
Pilles, Rouuray, Briquemant
 the yonger, 
Amb
es,
 and 
Chellar:
 the whole army consisted of 6000. horse, 8000. harquebuziers, 4000. Lansquenets, six Cannons, two culuerings, and three musquets.


His excellency with the direction of his best aduisants,
 deuided his whole forces into a vantgard and a battaile: the aduantgard was composed of French∣men, Almaines, and Italians, ledde by the Prince 
Dauphin,
 the Duke of 
Guyse, Martigmes, Chauigny, La Valette,
 the Count 
VVestemberg,
 the 
Reingraue Bassompier,
 Saint 
Fior, Paul Sforza, Disci, Santelle,
 with well neere three thousand horse: The grosse battailon of Switzers which consisted of foure thousande, was led by Collonell 
Clere,
 flanked with fiue Regiments of harquebuziers, French∣men and Italians, vnder the conduct of 
La Barthe, Sarlabois, Onoux,
 and sundry others: ouer all these commanded the Duke of 
Montpensier.
 The battaile was composed of the Dukes of 
Aumaile
 and 
Longauille,
 the Mareschal 
Cossy, Tauannes,
 the Marquesse of 
Villiers,
 &c. with three thousand horse, and another Count 
Mansfeild
 cousin to the Protestant, and fiue Cornets of a thousand or a thou∣sand and two hundred horse. The marquesse of 
Baden
 had wel neere a thousand horse vnder his leading: these were flanked with the Spaniards & Burgonians, which the Catholike K. had sent to the aide of his brother. All these had theyr 
Enfans Perdus
 in their front, who carried death engrauem in their foreheads, as well for themselues, as for whomsoeuer they first attached. All this Armie which consisted of aboue nine thousande horse, 17. or 18. thousand footmen, and 15. peeces of great Ordenance, was commaunded by his excellencie,
 and beeing ready arranged, awaited when the signe shoulde bee giuen, but first they fought a farre off with theyr great shotte, which for that it

 was skilfully directed by the Cannoneres, made a sore slaughter on both sides. This thundering and terrible noyse was no sooner ceased, and the Artillery re∣tired, but the Trumpets sounded 
Dedans, dedans,
 and the Duke 
Montpensier,
 went resolutely to the Charge, and gaue in so hotly vppon 
Mouy
 and his Regi∣ment,
 that hee being abandoned by his two Cornets of Reisters, who were ap∣pointed to second him, was forced to get him as fast as he could out of the dan∣ger, and to saue the greatest part of his troupes among the footmen: who be∣ing mightily dismaide with so pittious an accident, lost their hearts, and disban∣ding themselues, ranne all away for the best game. Now beganne the Duke of 
Guyse
 with his associats to come lustily forwardes, and in their appointed quar∣ter to charge their enemies: who receiued them with equall courage, so that there grew a very warme fight on both sides. The harquebuziers whome the Admirall had interlaced among his French Launces, played the men, and set of the Catholikes at their pleasure, knowing they were well assured by their horsemen, who serued to guard them at their neede.


The Admirall, who by reason of his great experience in the warres, both at home and abroade,
 and the diligent marking of so diuers euents as had run be∣fore his eyes, iudging of the sequell by this vnfortunate beginning, counsel∣led the yong Princes to retire as couertly & with as smal a traine as they could: but many whose eyes were prying about, and glad to take any occasion to bee gone, espying the retreat & coueting to enfranchise themselues from so great perill as was present before their faces, would needes accompanie them whe∣ther they would or not, so that they had quickly more attendants then eyther they expected or desired.


By this time was the rest of the aduauntgard which was led by the Admirall and 
Acier,
 hotly charged by the Reisters Catholikes, who so furiously encoun∣tred them, that many ended their daies at that instant. The Admirall himselfe was in such danger,
 that hee was hurt in the face, through the default of such as should haue couered him, and was so farre intermedled among the Catholikes, that had not Count 
Mansfeild
 with foure or fiue cornets of Reisters disgaged him, he had vndoubtedly fallen into their hands who loued him but a little.


While these bloudy broyles were continued betweene the aduantgards, his exellency caused his maine battaile to dismarch, the right wing whereof, in which was the Duke of 
Aumaile,
 and the marquesse of 
Baden
 with all his Rei∣sters, gaue in so farre afore the rest, that the marquesse was there slaine,
 and ma∣ny others for, companions of that mortall charge: and 
Monsieur
 himselfe, albeit hee marched full vppon the discouerie of the great Artillery, made such haste, that he left the Switzers vnder Collonell 
Phiffer,
 and their generall 
Memie,
 with the other battailon very farre behind: which when the Protestants troupes dis∣couered, they casting themselues desperately into his esquadron, breaking in euen hard to their Cornet, made them that followed his excellencie to abandon the place: notwithstanding, al the deuoier of the Duke 
De Longauille, Touannes, Carnauallet, Villars,
 and others, who indeuoured with all their might to repell the insisting confederates: in a word, this charge was so terrible, that the most assured Ensignes beganne to turne head, and had not the mareschall 
Cosse
 with his Switzers hasted apace, the battaile had quickly beene at an ende.




Count 
Lodowicke
 seeing the Mareschall aduaunce, thrust in verie lustily with his troupes of Almaines and French, who sought it out most couragiously. By this time had the Mareschall 
Biron
 rallyed diuerse dispersed troupes, and with his owne, which as yet remayned vnbroken, and the Switzers, went directly towardes the Lancequenets:
 but they beeing abandoned by their horsemen, and shrewdly galled with the harquebuziers, were exposed in a manner to the crueltie of the Switzers, their ancient enemies, who entring in as it were at the breach, committed a wonderfull carnage and mortalitie among them. Of foure thousand there escaped not past some two hundred, or there aboutes. And the same misfortune had fallen vpon three thousand Frenchmen, which were ar∣raunged with them, had not 
Monsieur
 of a generous and noble nature conten∣ting himselfe with the honour of so glorious a victorie, commaunded to saue their liues.


And this was the end of this great battell, where both the French men, Al∣maines, Italians, Burgonians, Switzars, Flemings, and Lancequenets had ley∣sure to trie their valours at the full. The Protestants lost at this encounter, three thousand Lancequenets, and a thousand fiue hundred Frenchmen.
 There peri∣shed also of men of name, 
Tauigny, Pugreffier, Dantricourt, Biron
 brother to the Catholike, and Saint 
Benet,
 the ensigne of the Admirals companie. 
La Noue,
 and 
Acier,
 were taken prisoners, and their Reisters lost all their Wagons. Of the Ca∣tholiques there perished some fiue or sixe hundred horsemen, and twise so ma∣nie were grieuously hurt, whereof the most part liued not long after. The Count 
Reingraue
 the elder, the Marques of 
Baden,
 and 
Cleremont
 of 
Dauphinie,
 were slaine. The yong 
Reingraue,
 the Earles of 
Issi,
 and 
Santelle,
 Italians, with the Duke of 
Guise, Scomberg, Bassompcer,
 and 
de Maille,
 were sore wounded, but afterwards recouered.






CHAP. XIII.




Saint 
Iean d'Angely,
 besieged and taken by the Catholiks. The king offreth a peace, which is refused by the Protestants. 
Monsieur de Bellegard
 is slaine.




T
He losse of this battayle gaue a maruellous checke to the af∣fayres of the Protestants,
 who now were dryuen to forsake the Champaigne, whereof they were maisters not long be∣fore, and sundrie of their followers beganne to shrinke, thinking that all had beene lost, and manie good Townes which before fauoured their proceedings, fell quite from them in deuotion, and followed the good fortune of the victorious Catholiques. So mutable and chaungeable are these earthly mat∣ters, and are set in so fickle an estate and condition, that one woulde thinke, that euen God himselfe, who guideth and gouerneth all with the eye of his prouidence, were delighted with an alternatiue course, and continuall chaunge in all things.


Albeit the affayres of the Protestants stoode but in a desperate estate, yet lyke men of great courage, wisedome, and policie, they woulde not shrinke

 from the cause, but sought as it were to begin the game afresh, and by all meanes to maintaine their honor and credits with al their associates. And (if it might be) to repaire their losses, or at the least, to keepe that which remained in their pos∣sessions. Wherupon they fortified sundry townes, as 
Niort, Angolesme, Saint Iean d'Angely, Rochell,
 and others, with assurance that the worst of these were suffici∣ent to stay the Catholikes, if they should happen to attempt them, vntill they had gathered some new forces. They also wrote letters, into all quarters, to as∣semble new troupes, and left nothing vnattempted, which might any way tend to the aduauncement of their affayres.


His excellencie following his good fortune, tooke forthwith sundry good townes, as 
Parthenay, Niort, Lusignen, Fontenay,
 and some others, all places yeel∣ding vnto him of theyr owne accorde: so that hee neuer stayed his course vn∣till hee came before 
Saint Iean d'Angely,
 whereof the Lorde 
Pilles
 was Gouer∣nour. And hauing summoned the Towne, and they within returning an aunswere that lyked him not, hee foorthwith planted his siege, and placed his Cannon, and with maruaylous furie plyed the batterie. And for the greater terrour of the besieged, the King, the Queene mother, the Cardinall of 
Lor∣raine,
 accompanied with a great troupe of Nobles and Gentlemen their atten∣dants, came to the Campe, who were saluted with a thundering peale of Or∣dinaunce, intermingled with sundrie vollies of small shotte, besides many fireworkes, and warrelike deuises, as well to welcome their Maiesties, as to daunt and dismay the besieged Protestants. But they as men resolute to maintaine theyr lyues and libertyes, encouraged each other valyauntlie to abyde the furie of the Catholiques, and laboured day and night to repayre the breaches. Yea, they resolutely stoode to theyr tackeling, and so Soul∣diourlyke bare themselues, that after manie hote skirmishes, and desperate assaultes, beeing men of noble valour, and commaunded by a generous and couragious Chieftaine,
 the King was content to take the towne vpon composi∣tion, and to offer them honourable conditions, promising them leaue to de∣part with bagge and baggage, with their ensignes displayed, and to bee safelie conducted whither soeuer they woulde. But before the King coulde bring them to this passe,
 hee had spent a long time, lost the valiaunt 
Martigues, Def, fans
 one of the maisters of the Campe, with manie other most singular and braue leaders, and well neare tenne thousand common souldiours. So that this siege gaue the Catholiques as shrewde a checke, as that of 
Poictiers
 did the Pro∣testants.


The King beeing greatlie wearyed with these broyles, beganne of his owne accorde to incline to a peace, supposing in deede, that those of the Re∣ligion would accept of any conditions. But they beeing too often before be∣guyled with fayre wordes, woulde not hearken thereto, least the world should thinke, that they were no longer able to maintaine their cause: a speciall plotte (sayd they) to discountenaunce the rest of theyr proceedings.
 VVhereupon both the Catholiques, and Protestants, still continued to vexe each other in all hostill manner. The Count 
de Lude,
 and 
Puygalliard,
 recouered 
Marans, Browages,
 and many other Islandes from the Confederates, which were a∣gaine regayned by 
La Noue,
 and stronglie fortifyed for the further aduaunce∣ment

 of the affayres of the Protestants. Who preuayled also verie mightily by Sea, taking manie great pryses, which were no meanes to further theyr designements.


Whilest things fell out in this maner about 
Rochell,
 the Princes, the Admi∣rall, and the rest of the chiefest of the confederates, had greatly encreased their forces, and hasted to ioyne their troupes with 
Montgommerie, Moubrune,
 and o∣ther Chieftaines, who had gathered a great number of harquebuziers, to supply those bandes, which had beene broken at the battell of 
Mountcounter.
 And ha∣uing thus reenforced their army, they marched towards 
Lorrain,
 there to attend the comming of theyr Almaynes. And as they passed through 
Languedocke,
 and came neare vnto 
Mountpellier, La Loue,
 one of the Mareschals of the campe was slaine, as he was fast asleepe in the dead of the night, through the great negl
gence of the Sentinels,,
 who beeing suddenly surprised by the garrison within the Towne, were the cause of the death of this braue Chieftaine, who for his valour, courage, and noble conduct, was highly commended of all the Protestants.


Many townes were gayned by the Princes in these quarters, as 
Lunell, Nismes,
 
Margarite, Saint Ambrose, Saint Iean, Saint Priu
te, Bezouze, Castillon, Al
ts,
 with sund
y other of good importance: by which happy exploits, the confederates did begin afresh to countenance themselues, and to recouer much of their for∣mer honour and renowme. When as the K. was aduertised of all their designes, and how that they dayly encreased their forces, surprised many castels, & strong holds and were now almost ioyned with their Reisters, with whose ayd they resolued to returne againe into the heart of 
France,
 and peraduenture once more to besiege the capitoll of all the Kingdome, he dispatched forthwith the Mares∣chall 
Cossy,
 with an armie, wherein were 4000. Switzers, 6000. French har∣quebuziers, some 3. or 4000. horse, and twelue great peeces of Ordinance, with which forces he marched towards the princes,
 who were incamped at a place called Saint 
Iean,
 in 
Burgundy,
 with some 2500. harquebuziers, 2000. horse, and eighteene cornets of Reisters. These two armies came no sooner in view each of other, but that their 
Enfans perdus
 began the game, so that there was a hot skir∣mish on both sides. The Prince of 
Berne,
 and 
Conde,
 were there in person, each of them in the front of their Regiment, and resolutely bent to go to the charge, and there to make the first triall of their fortune. The fight continued long, and many were slaine: but the Catholikes hauing the worse, after they had lost 
Mon∣sieur de Bellegard,
 one of the Knights of the order, besides diuerse others of good accoūt, were forced to suffer the Protestants to passe, who hasting on their way, after great trouble, and a long and painefull iourney, hauing in a maner roun∣ded all 
Fraunce,
 at the last they drewe neare to 
La Charitie, Sancerre, Antrin, Ve∣zelay,
 and other Townes of the Religion, where they defended themselues to theyr maruaylous comfort and contentation. Nowe was the treatie of peace before mentioned reiterated, and earnestly pursued by diuerse, who perswa∣ded the King,
 that these intestine warres consumed none but his Subiectes: that the murthers, robberies, burnings, and such like miseryes, woulde bee the confusion of the whole state, and that who so euer gayned, yet hee lost, to the great impouerishing of the Crowne of 
Fraunce,
 and the vtter destruction

 of that noble kingdome, which had beene the paragon of all Europe.


These and the like reasons induced the King at length to condiscend to a peace which was accepted by the confederates, and published in the yere 1570. to the great comfort of all the French, and exceeding quiet of the whole lande: where we may see the strange and wonderful mutabilitie of mens minds, which as they are not long contented with one & the self same estate: so do they seldom or neuer like the better, before they haue beene well scourged with the rod of their owne folly, and taught by wofull experience howe to discerne betweene good and bad.






CHAP. XIIII.




Peace proclaimed in 
France.
 The mariages of the King, the Duke of 
Montpensier,
 the Duke of 
Guise,
 and the Admirall. The Queene of 
Nauarre
 goeth to the Court. The Admirall goeth to the Court. The death of the Queene of 
Nauarre.




T
He kings Edict for the establishing of a peace was no sooner pub∣lished, but that the forces on both sides were forthwith licenced to depart euery man to his owne house, which hee had not seene for a long time before, to the vnspeakable ioy of the protestāts, & no small comfort to the better and honester sort of the Papists, who as mariners that haue escaped some dangerous & troublesom tempests, and are arriued safely in their wished port, held vp their hāds to heauen with giuing thanks for so vnspeakeable a blessing, and earnestly entreated the almightie, that they might spend the rest of their dayes in peace and quietnes.


The Princes with the Queene of 
Nauarre,
 and sundry of the chiefe of the Pro∣testants, as the Admirall, the Count 
Lodowick
 of 
Nassau, Teligny, La Noue,
 and di∣uerse other withdrew themselues to 
Rochell,
 for their greater securitie, vntil they might see how the kings Edict would be executed. Now began there a great al∣teration in the minds of the French, & all mens actions were suddenly changed (as a man would haue thought) after a strange & wonderfull maner. For where as not long before there was no talke, but of hatred, wrath, murther, bloodie broyles, and most cruel and vnnaturall warres, now was there nothing so much spoken of, as loue, amitie friendship, and making of mariages. The King was espoused to 
Isabel
 the second daughter to 
Maximilian
 the emperor,
 whose nupti∣als were solemnised with great pompe and magnificence. 
Lois
 of 
Burbon
 and Duke of 
Montpensier,
 maried with the Duke of 
Guises
 sister,
 and the Duke of 
Guise
 matched with the widowe of the late Prince 
Portion,
 one of the principall of the Confederates▪ The Mareschall 
Cossy,
 and 
Prontiere
 one of the Secretaryes of estate, were sent vnto 
Rochell,
 to treate with the Queene of 
Nauarre,
 as touching a marriage, betweene the Prince of 
Barne
 her sonne, and the Ladie 
Margaret
 the Kinges sister: a thing in shewe highlie tending to the honour of the Prince, and the establishing of a perpetuall peace and amitie with the Confederates. The Prince of 
Conde
 was marryed to 
Marie de Cleues,
 the youngest daughter to the Duke of 
Neuers:
 the Admirall with the daughter of the Count of 
Entremont
 in 
Sauoy,
 and the young 
Teligny
 with 
Lois
 of 
Colligny,


 the Admirals daughter: thus was there nothing but feasting, banquetting, singing, reuelling, and making of loue, throughout all the partes of 
Fraunce.


 The king seemed to stande highly contented with this peace, and began dayly more and more to countenaunce the Protestants. For hauing once perswaded the Queene of 
Nauarre
 to come to the court,
 both he, the Queene mother, the Dukes of 
Aniou,
 and 
Alenson,
 the Kings brethren, did intertaine her in most lo∣uing and friendly maner, making her the best welcome that might be imagined. Count 
Lodowicke,
 brother to the Prince of 
Orenge,
 who attended her, was like∣wise verie honourably receyued by the King, who promised him to ayde the Prince his brother agaynst the Spaniard, and for that purpose had commaunded preparation to be made both by sea and land, as though he had entended to be∣gin the warres with all speede: so that the King desired nothing more then to aduaunce the affayres of the Protestants. The marriage of the yong Prince of 
Barne,
 and the conquest of the lowe Countreys, were the things that the King seemed to affect most. And because the Admirall was a verie wise man, an olde Souldiour, the best experienced Captaine of all 
Fraunce,
 and most skilfull in war∣like affayres. The King sent the Mareschall 
Cossy,
 to 
Rochell,
 to perswade with him to come to the Court, and to assist his soueraigne in so honourable an en∣terprise, the Admirall at the first was very vnwilling of himselfe, and had day∣ly aduertisements to disswade him from that voyage.
 But after many per∣swasions vsed by the Mareschall, sundry friendly messages from the King, and his fatall mishap (as it were) leading him thereunto, he suffred himself to be gai∣ned, and to be wooed, by those who indeed loued him but a little.


He was no sooner come to 
Paris,
 but the people flocked togither to see him,
 as to see a wonder. The King receyued him with much kindnesse, giuing him great honour, calling him father at euerie worde. And when the Admirall kneeled, the King arose and tooke him vp, protesting that he was the most wel∣come man liuing: and that neuer any day was more ioiful vnto him then that, wherein he did see the end of so many miseries, and the beginning of peace and quietnesse for the whole lande. And among manie other speaches, hee chaun∣ced to vtter these words. Nowe we haue once gotten your companie, you shal not depart from vs: and this hee vttered with great laughter, as a token of much ioy and delight. The Queene mother, his excellencie, the Duke of 
Alenson,
 and all the principall Courtiers welcomed him, with farre greater honour then he expected: and that which was more: all these curtesies were accompanied with the great liberalitie of the Prince, who gaue him an hundred thousand pounds in recompence of his losses sustained in the former wars, besides the re∣uenues of the benefices which were belonging to his brother 
Odet
 the Cardinal of 
Chastillon,
 who was lately deceased in 
England.
 He was also admitted into the Kings priuie Councell. His sonne in law 
Teligny,
 was verie much honoured. 
Ca∣uagnes
 was made one of the maisters of the requests: and to be short, all the Ad∣mirals friends tasted of the kings liberalitie, to the great contentment of the Pro∣testants, and the maruellous grudging of the Catholiques.


 This honourable dealing, gaue great hope of the continuance of the peace, and the encrease of amitie amongest the French Nation, in so much

 as the most rested secure, reposing themselues in the faythfull promises of their prince: yet manie suspected that all was but holy water of the Court, and allu∣ring baytes to catch the poore Protestants, and afterwards to dispose of them as should be thought for their most aduauntage: following (said they) herein the olde 
maxime
 in pollicie, which is that where the skin of the Lion will not serue, there it is best to put on the foxes coat. The Queene of 
Nauarre
 was earnestly disswaded by sundry letters from many other friends, from giuing her consent to the mariage. The Admirall was likewise aduertised by secret messengers, that in no wise he should go to 
Paris,
 nor come within the reach of his enemies: but all would not serue, so desirous were they of the yong princes preferment, & so maruellously blinded at that instant. But whilest the Queene of 
Nauarre
 was at 
Paris
 busied in prouiding for the mariage of her son, she suddenly fell sicke and died the 10. of Iune,
 1572. to the great griefe of those of the reformed religion▪ who exceedingly bewayled the death of so vertuous and constant a Lady, and one that had beene a most noble maintainer of the truth all her dayes.






CHAP. XV.




The Massacre at Paris.




T
He sudden death of this Queene, bred a sore suspition, that she was poisoned, and withal brought some delay the to mariage: but at length all doubts being cleared, & both parties agreed, the time appointed for the solemnising of the nuptials be∣ing come, the yong King of 
Nauarre
 and the Lady 
Margaret
 were affianced with great solemnitie, in our Lady Church in 
Paris,
 by the Cardinall of 
Burbon,
 the 18. of 
August,
 1572. in the presence of the King,
 the Queene mother, the Duke of 
Aniou
 and 
Alenson,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 with all the principal protestants. The mariage ended, there was nothing but banketting, chearing, tilting, and all the deuises that might bee to please the eie, and delight the eare, & to set forth all things in most royall and magnificent maner. All old rancour and malice seemed to be buried in the pit of obliuion, by reason of this new alliance, which confirmed the hope of a most blessed peace in the time to come. But in the middest of all this ioy and solace, there fell out a sudden accident, which astonished some, and made others to bethinke themselues, and to suspect the worst, and that was this.


Vpon the 22. of August, as the Admirall was going from the Court toward his lodging, hee was suddainlie shotte with a harquebuz out at a window of the house, where 
Villemus
 (who had beene schoole-maister to the Duke of 
Guise
) did vsually lodge, and sore wounded with three Bullettes, as hee was going a soft pace in the streete, and reading a Supplication, which had beene deliuered vnto him a little before. One of the Bullets stroke off his fore finger, and with the other hee was wounded in the left Arme. The Admirall poynted to the house from whence the peece was shotte, and wil∣led some of his Gentlemen to go search who was within: sending Captaine 
Pilles,
 and Captaine 
Monius,
 to aduertise the King of his hurt.




Whilest he was led home by the lord 
Guerchy
 & another gentleman: the doore, of the house beeing broken open, the harquebuz was found, but the harque∣buzier was fled out at a backe gate, and finding a spanish Gennet which was there prouided in a readinesse, galloped away with all speede, crying as hee went, that now there was no Admirall in 
France.


Captaine 
Pilles
 finding the King at 
ennis with the Duke of 
Guyse,
 related vnto him the Admirals hurt, which hee no sooner vnderstood, but he leauing his play, threw down his racket, & looking very pensiuely, went to his Cham∣ber: the king of 
Nauarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 the Count 
Rochfaucont,
 and ma∣ny other Lords, knights and Gentlemen of the Religion, beeing enformed of this mishap, went presently to visit the Admirall. The King taking with him the Queene mother,
 his two brethren, and most of the principall Catholikes went likewise to comfort him, shewing many signes of great sorrow for his harme, complaining that indeede the Admirall felt the harme, but the disho∣nour was done to the King, vpon whose faithfull promise hee was come to the Court, and therefore both hee that had committed the fact, and all that consen∣ted thereto should bee most seuerely punished, to the example of all other vil∣lanous and notorious malefactors: whereto the Admirall answered, that hee would leaue the reuenge to God, and the execution of Iustice to the King, but as for the authour hee was knowne well inough, and because hee could not tell how long hee had to liue, hee besought the king that hee might talke with him in secret, touching things of very great importance, and such as were most necessarie for the state of the Kingdome. The King seemed to bee willing herewith, but the Queen mother by a deuise brake off their talke for that time, so that there was no further conference: and because the king of 
Nauarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 and diuers others, moued the king that they might haue leaue to carrie the Admiral to his house at 
Chastillon,
 which was some two daies iour∣ney from 
Paris,
 as to a place of greater quiet and securitie: the king not willing to condiscend thereunto, answered, that so long a iourney would very much endanger his health: and therefore he thought it better to haue him lodged in the 
Louure
 neere vnto his owne person, where he should be safe from all perill: furthermore he willed all the cheefe of the Protestant Nobilitie, to place them∣selues as neere him as they could, in case that if there were any need they might be readie to succour one another, and appointed the Mareschall 
Cossy
 with a band of harquebuziers to guard his lodging.
 Vpon the Satterday, which was the twenty three of August, the councell sat about the examination of certaine witnesses touching the fact, and sundrie other suspected persons, taking great paines (as it seemed) to boult out the truth, as though they meant to punish the offender with all rigour and seueritie. With these and the like apparances, the protestants helde themselues well satisfied, neuer suspecting that all was but dissimulation and that so great mischiefe did hang ouer their heads.


The same day there was a sodaine rumour ouer al the Citie, that the king had sent for the Mareschall 
Memorancy,
 commanding him to come to him with al the forces hee could make, and therefore the Parisians were best to stande vppon their guard: but all was founde in the end to be vtterly false. 
Teligny
 beeing gi∣uen to vnderstand by the Admirals trumpetters that there were sixe cart loades

 of Armour brought into the 
Louure,
 answered that hee did not like that men should bee so suspitious without cause: for his part hee was well assured of the Kings good fauour, and wished other men were so likewise, seeing it was not possible that there should be any harme intended towardes them whome the king had honoured so many waies. and had oftentimes so solemnely sworne to remaine theyr gracious and louing soueraigne.


But the king with all those of his secret counsell, seeing that they had nowe brought all things about euen as they had desired, and that the Admirall was taken in a trap and all his principall associats, so snarled in their nets that it was impossible for them to get out, thought it high time to putte in execution that which they had purposed so long before, and at that instant to finish the dayes of all the Protestants. Whereuppon a signall was giuen in the dead of the night by the touling of a Bell in the 
Louure:
 which was no sooner heard by 
Cossy,
 who (as is alreadie sayde) with a bande of harquebuziers guarded the Admiralles lodging, but that hee commaunded his men to breake open the doores, and to kill as many as they sounde in their wayes. The Admi∣rall hearing the noyse and fearing some seditious enterprise, willed one of his Gentlemen to call to the guard which was appointed him by the King, little imagining that it was they that came to offer him such violence, and a∣rising out of his bedde, putte on his night gowne, and kneeled downe to pray.


By this time were sundrie of the murtherers gotten in, & had slaine such as they found in the house. The first that entred into the Admirals chamber was one 
Besme
 an Almaine, a desperate ruffian, one of the Duke of 
Guyses
 houshold ser∣uants, who with his drawne sword in his hand, sayde: Art thou the Admiral? who answered with great constancie, So I am called. Which hee had no sooner vttered, but that 
Besme
 runne him through with a sword, and another called 
Atinius,
 shot him into the brest with a Pistoll, and the rest as 
Causius
 and 
Sar∣laboix,
 stabbed him with their daggers, and threw him out at the window, to the Duke of 
Guyse
 and 
Aumaile,
 and the 
Cheualier
 of 
Angolesme
 (who was King 
Henry
 his bastard) all which stood crying out to make a quicke dispatch, and would not departe thence vntil they were assured of his death, and for that hee was so bloudied about the face by reason of his woundes vpon his head, that it was hard to know him: the 
Guyse
 kneeled down and wiped away the bloud with his handkercheffe, and seeing it was hee whom they looked for, cryed out, that they hadde made a happie beginning, willing them to proceede for it was the Kings pleasure, and that the K. commanded them to spare none of the Hugonots: and this hee vttered very often and with a loude voyce. A certaine Italian cutte off the Admirals head, and hauing embaulmed it, sent it to 
Rome
 as a present to the Pope.
 Some cutte off his handes, and others his secret partes, and hauing trayled his body through the streets, hung vppe his dead carcase on a gibbet at 
Mountfaulcon:
 and this was the lamentable ende of this noble Gentleman,
 who for his wisedome, pollicie, courage and constan∣cie in the profession of Gods truth, and maintenance of the same, was one of the most excellent and famous men that euer was bred and brought vp in 
France.




The same day that the Admirall was hurt, the king aduised his brother in law the king of 
Nauarre,
 to cause some tenne or twelue of his trustiest friends to lodge neere him, the better to defende him if the Duke of 
Guyse
 (whom he tearmed a shrewd boy) should happen to attempt any thing against him. These Gentlemen and some others who were lodged in the king of 
Nauarres
 outer Chamber, after the death of the Admirall, and that they were disarmed by 
Nan∣cy,
 hauing their swords and daggers taken away, were brought to the gate of the 
Louure
 and there were murthered before the kings face. Then were the king of 
Nauarre
 and the Prince of 
Conde
 brought before the king,
 who tolde them that hee would not suffer any more Religions in his Land then one, and therefore if they loued their liues, they must nowe become Catholikes and go to masse, for hee meant not to beare with them any longer. The king of 
Na∣uarre
 made a very submisse and humble answere: but the Prince of 
Conde,
 who was of more stout and couragious nature, replying otherwise then the king expected, was threatned with the losse of his head if hee relented not within three daies, and so was sent to prison, beeing first called obstinate, seditious, and rebellious traitor, and the sonne of a rebellious traytor.


Nowe beganne the Courtiers with the kings guard, who were appointed to massacre the Protestant Nobilitie, to kill and murther all sorts in most outra∣gious manner. The Count 
Rochfaucont
 so greatly beloued of 
Henry
 the second for his conceited and pleasant humour, adorned with so many excellent gra∣ces and noble vertues, fit for a perfect courtier, was forced to yeelde vp his life to these mercilesse wretches, who saluted him with this pittious godmorrow. 
Teligny de Montreuill,
 the Admirals sonne in Law, and for his humble and milde spirit, graced with a singular dexteritie in the mannaging of all publike affaires, very deere vnto his Wife and prudent Father, was seene of many, but no man was so hardy as once to touch him, vntill at last a stranger that knew him not, ranne him thorow with a Rapier, as hee was bewailing the death of so many braue men. The Barron of 
Pardaillon,
 the Barron of 
Pilles,
 
Soubize,
 and 
Puuiant,
 all very famous and worthie men, hauing beene commanders in Cheefe, and well worthie for their rare vertues of better fortune, were there murthered af∣ter a most disloyall and trecherous manner. The marquesse of 
Reuell
 was hotly pursued as hee fled in his shirt towards the Riuer side, and there was slaine by 
Bussy
 of 
Amboise
 his neere kinsman. 
Monsieur
 the kings brother, at the request of 
Archan,
 the Captaine of his guard, who was amorous of the Lady 
Chastene∣ray,
 sent certaine souldiers to kill 
La Force
 her father in law, who had thought that they had likewise slaine both her brethren: but there was but one founde dead, and the other beeing very sore wounded, escaped by reason he was coue∣red with the dead body of his Father, where hee remained vntill the euening following, and then secretly conueyed himselfe into the lodging of the Ma∣reschall 
Biron
 his kinsman: which when his sister 
Chasteneray
 vnderstood, being sorrie that shee could not be heire as she earnestly desired, she went to the Ma∣reschals house, fayning that shee was maruailously glad that her brother had so escaped, desiring to see him, that shee might comfort him: but the mareschall smelling her intent, would not bewray where hee was, and by that meanes sa∣ued his life.




By this time was the signall giuen to such as commanded ouer the common people, to make dispatch of the rest of the Protestants, who beeing in a readi∣nesse, and encouraged by the Duke of 
Guyse, Aumaile,
 and 
Neuers,
 slew euerie one that fell into their handes: yea, they so greedily thirsted after innocent bloud, that in a short time they had made such a maruailous carnage and but∣cherie,
 that the streetes seemed to be paued with dead carcases, and Carts were laden with the bodies of men, women, and children, which were throwne into the Riuer: death and desolation walked about in euerie corner of this Cittie, and that in most gastly and greeuous manner, to the extreme hor∣ror and dreade of euerie beholder. There was nothing but weeping, wayling, and lamentation, and a most wofull and fearefull crie throughout the whole Citie.


About the breake of the day, the Duke of 
Guyse, Neuers,
 and 
Aumaile,
 bre∣thren in euill,
 and the cheefest authors in that pittious tragedie, went to a∣wake sundrie of the Protestant Nobilitie, who were lodged in the suburbs of Saint 
Germain,
 as the Vidame of 
Chartres,
 the Count of 
Mont-gommery,
 the Lord of 
Fountenay, Caumont, Columbiers,
 and many others, who beeing aduertised of that which had happened, supposed at the first that it had beene some vprore of the people and therefore purposed to haue gone to ayde the King, fearing there had beene some danger towards his person: but on the sodain they disco∣uered 200. armed men, and those of the kings guard, who cried, kill, kill, shoo∣ting at them, and that in the kings sight, who also (as is reported) took a harque∣buz, and swearing and blaspheming in most heathenish maner, cried out, shoot, shoot,
 Gods heart, they flie, they flie. As those of the reformed Religion saw this, they fled with all possible speede, leauing whatsoeuer they had behinde them, being pursued by those three Dukes before remembred. The Bastard of 
Angolesme
 and diuers others (who wounded some, and had killed many, had they not beene hindred by the negligence of the Porter, who mistooke the keyes of the gates where they shoulde haue issued foorth) was the occasion that the Protestants had some little time giuen them to prouide for their better securitie.


They were no sooner gone, but the Switzers of the kings guard, and sundrie courtiers spoyled their houses, killing whomsoeuer they found, & cruelly mur∣thering both man, woman, and child: all that day, being the 24. of August, 1572. was spent in massacring, rauishing, & sacking, so that there perished by this tur∣kish and barbarous villany, aboue 10000. persons, as well noble men as Gentle∣men,
 presidents of courts, councellers, aduocates, schollers, preachers, phi∣sitions, proctors, marchants, artisans, women, maides, and children. All places were full of dead carcases, the thresholds, gates, and posts of the kings pallace were painted with the bloud of the slaine: yea, the chanels ouerflowed ther∣with, and the water in the Riuer was turned into a red colour: such and so hor∣rible was the slaughter and butcherie which was made vpon the poore Hugo∣nots. The king, the Queene mother, the kings brethren, with many Lords and Ladies of the Court, went out in the euening to view the dead bodies, and a∣mong others the Queene mother would needes see the nakednesse of 
Soubize,
 for that shee had beene enformed that hee was notable to get any children.




The king not satisfied with the slaughter of so many braue men within 
Paris
 sent letters to the Gouernours of all his principall Cities, as 
Orleance, Tours, Meaux, Angiers, Bourges, Tholoux, Lyons,
 and diuers others, that they should like∣wise kill all the Protestants within their iurisdiction: which commandement was forthwith put in execution, and a most horrible slaughter followed in all places,
 which bereaued aboue a hundred thousand of their liues within the territories of 
France,
 in so much as that it was verily thought that all that were of the Religion were eyther slaine, or else fled into forraine Countreyes.






CHAP. XVI.




 
Rochel
 holdeth out against the King. The beginning of the fourth Ciuil warres. The siege of 
Rochel.
 The siege of 
Sancerre.
 The Embassadors of 
Polonia
 come to the campe before 
Rochel. Monsieur
 raiseth his siege.




W
Ho would not haue thought but that now the Gospel had bin vtterly extinguished in 
France,
 & that the Catholikes by this execrable deuise, should haue attained to the full period of their desires, no man of name remayning to make head a∣gainst them, or to crosse their fortune which nowe seemed so mightily to fauour their designes: and indeede the king was verily perswaded that at this present he might haue accompli∣shed whatsoeuer hee would, and that not any durst haue shewed themselues to fauour the refourmed Religion.
 Wherupon he wrote letters to sundry Pro∣testant townes, commanding them to receiue popish Garrisons, and to liue af∣ter the Catholike manner, but they vtterly refused to satisfie the king heerein, and would not bee induced to condiscend vnto any such thing, by all the perswasions that could bee vsed, but fortified themselues as strongly as they could, purposing to die, rather then to yeeld and abiure their Religion.


The King, partly by threatening and menacing the king of 
Nauarre
 and the Prince of 
Conde,
 and partly by faire promises, but especially by the wicked mi∣nistery of 
Rosier,
 who of late was become an apostate, had caused them to abiure their Religion, and to conforme themselues to the rites of the Romain church, and thinking them to be fit instruments to gaine sundrie strong Townes, who otherwise would not open their gates but by force of Cannon: caused them to write their letters to such as hee thought meete, and to vse all the seasons that might bee to draw them to his obedience, by which deuise some relented, and were content to follow the example of those great Princes, seeing they had no hope to maintaine their cause, hauing lost all their cheefetaines and princi∣pall commanders. But 
Rochel, Sancerre, Montauban, Nismes,
 and some other held out, standing vpon their guards, and prouiding to fortifie themselues in all de∣fensible manner that might be. Many perswasions were vsed to gaine 
Rochel,
 which of al other was the place of greatest importance, and that which the king most desired, as beeing the principall retreat of the Protestants. Diuers messen∣gers were sent thither, who promised golden mountaines: and Mareschall 
Biron
 indeuoured by all meanes to put himselfe within the Towne, but they vtterly

 refused to accept of any other Gouernor then theyr Maior, purposing to main∣taine their Religion, customes, and liberties, and that with the losse of their liues. When the king was aduertised heereof, and that he euidently perceiued that faire meanes would not preuaile, hee resolued to besiege the Towne, and by force of Armes to bring them vnder his obedience. Whereuppon hee com∣manded 
Biron
 to gather a great armie, & to inuest the Rochelers with al speed, who did not onely by themselues crosse the designements of the Catholikes, but were the occasion that many other townes in 
Gascogne, Languedock, Quercy, Poictou, Auergne,
 and 
Dauphony
 beganne to plucke vp their spirits, and to oppose themselues against the kings proceedings.


Besides the forces that the Mareschall brought by land, there was a great na∣uie of shippes appoynted to keepe the seas, and to stop vp the hauen that no victuall or other necessaries should be conueyed in by water, nor any be suffe∣red to go foorth to giue any aduertisements to their confederates. All things being thus appointed in a readinesse both by sea and land,
 the Duke of 
Antou
 the Kings brother, and his Lieutenant generall throughout all his dominions, departed from 
Paris
 the tenth of Ianuary, 1573. accompanied with the Duke of 
Alenson
 his brother, the king of 
Nauarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 the Du
e of 
Montpensier,
 the Prince 
Dauphin
 his sonne, the Duke of 
Longauille,
 of 
Bouillon,
 of 
Guyse,
 of 
Aumaile,
 and of 
Neuers,
 the marquesse of 
Maine,
 the mareschals of 
Cossy, Retts
 and 
Biron,
 the Count 
Rochfaucont, Chauigny, Mouluc, La Valetta, Mauleurier, Pau
y, Puygalliard, Clermont, Du Gas, Cosseines,
 with many other Lords, knights, and Gentlemen, who no sooner arriued at the Campe, but they were saluted with a thundring peale of great Ordenance, and all the battailons of footmen stood readie arranged, who likewise welcomed him with their whole vollyes of small shot, to the high contentment of his excellencie.


Monsieur
 vnderstanding that there were a great number of very valiant and resolute men within the Towne, who were all commanded by the noble and pollitike chiefetaine 
Monsieur de la Noue,
 of whose wisedome, courage, and va∣lour hee had often times before made good experiment, thought it best to as∣say if with smooth words & faire promises mingled with some threats, he could induce the Rochelors,
 to submit themselues wholly vnder the Kings obedi∣ence, assuring them, if they would so do, the king would deale most graciously with them, and requite their loyalty with such fauor, as they should haue good cause to hold themselues well contented: but if (on the contrarie) they stub∣burnely refused to condiscend hereunto, and like a rebellious rable, wilfully re∣iect, and vndutifully contemne so great grace offered by their soueraigne, then they should looke for no fauour hereafter, but for all the extremitie that might bee, and that hee would not desist from persecuting them both with fire and sword, vntil he had taken their towne, & seene such punishment inflicted vpon them, as the nature and qualitie of so traiterous a fact required.


Those within being taught by other mens harmes to beware, & hauing lear∣ned by wofull experience not to trust any faire promises that came from the Court, seeing the king and all his Courtiers hadde so notoriously falsified their words in former times, thought it best to stand vpon their guard, and not to be beguyled with such alluring baites: which when his excellencie perceiued,

 hee commaunded his armie to approach nearer the towne, to entrench them∣selues, to raise Mounts, to plant their Ordinaunce, and to annoy those within, as much as might be. The Canon was no sooner placed, but that it forthwith played vpon the Towne very furiously, and to the great terrour of such as had not beene acquainted with the like sport. Those of 
Rochel
 were not idle, but pro∣uided all necessaries to stop such breaches as should be made, and answering the Catholikes with such shot as they had, often issuing out, and skirmishing with their enemies with notable courage and alacritie. Yea the women, maydes, and children would expouse themselues to al hazard,
 and aduenture forth among the souldiers, carying them wine, comfers, and such like: maruailously animating such as fought with their cheerfull words, & hardy examples. And one among the rest so farre aduenturing that in the hotest of the skirmish, she seeing one of the Catholikes slaine, ran vnto him and tooke away his sword, and harquebuz, which she caried into the towne with great triumph, and reioying, sayde, that she had adorned herselfe with the spoiles of her enemies.


The third of March, those within discharging a Minion from the Tower of S. 
Iohn
 Euangelist, pierced one of the enemies gabyons, and encountring 
Claud
 of 
Lorraine
 Duke of 
Aumaile,
 peere of 
Fraunce,
 and Lieutenant for the King in the Duchie of 
Burgundie,
 stroke him starke deade, to the great griefe of sundrie of the Catholiques, of whom he was verie much beloued, for his many excel∣lent and commendable vertues. And being incensed agaynst the Rochellors for this fact, seeing they could get nothing with open force, thought it best to assay what they could do by a more secret meanes: whereupon they fell to vn∣dermining, & spent a long time in digging, and deluing vnder the ground, en∣deuoring to blow vp their walles, and to ouerthrow their towers & bulwarks, with gun-powder. But they within so nobly & valiantly defended themselues, and so politikely preuēted all their stratagems, that they could not by any means accomplish their desires. Yea, they seemed so little to regard all their endeuors, that vpon May day, in great ioylitie and triumph, they decked their walles, and towers: and with trumpets, drums, flu
ts, and other musicall and delightsome instruments, seemed to spend the day in myrth and solace, as though they little or nothing cared, for their enemies.


Many, who secretly fauoured the religion, seeing the great courage of the Rochellors, and their happy successe in holding out so long a time again such a mighty power, began to pluck vp their hearts, and openly to shew themselues: So that now great numbers were vp in Armes in 
Poictou, Xanctogne, Quercie, 
, Dauphiny,
 and sundrie other parts of the land: so that the Catholikes, who thought that they had destroyed all the Protestants in their Parisian murthers, found themselues maruailously deceiued, and many signes appea∣red of newe ciuill warres, and those as troublesome and dangerous, as anie o∣thers before 
. For now the King, and all the French Catholikes, were growne so odious, both at home and among forraigne Nations, that all the Worlde spake shame of their barbarous and straunge cruelties: and such Pro∣testant Townes as were stronglie fortifyed, woulde not yeelde by anie per∣swasion▪ 
 distrusting in the kings worde, who had so often and so no∣toriouslie falsified his 
, to the great dishonour and staine of his princelie

 dignitie, and perpetuall staine of the French nation.


Whilest his excellencie with a mightie power besieged 
Rochel,
 the Mareschal 
Danuill
 lieutenant for the king in 
Languedocke,
 was sent to reduce all those quar∣ters vnder the Kings obedience: but he found it a matter of more difficultie then he at the first imagined, for albeit he entred the countrey with a strong power, purposing to besiege 
Nismes,
 a place of the greatest importance of all the rest, and by force to constraine it to stand at the deuotion of the Catholikes, yet was he in the end after some losse, at the least of thousand of his best souldiours, be∣fore a pettie village called 
Sancerre,
 compelled to giue ouer his enterprise, and to disperse his men into garrisons, the better to relieue them, and with all diligence to muster new forces to repayre his broken troupes. Which when those of 
Sancerre
 vnderstoode,
 beeing notably encouraged by the surpassing valour of their Confederates, they resolued to endure the vttermost attempts of 
La Cha∣stre,
 and all the Catholiques, and therefore, whereas by reason of theyr long siege all vittailes beganne to bee scarce,
 necessitie (the mother of all fine inuen∣tions) taught them to make manie hard shifts, and to deuise new and straunge meates. For after that they had first eaten vp all theyr Horses, Asses, Dogges, Cattes and such like, they deuised to make meate of their Skinnes, roasting, seething, and broyling them vpon Girdirons, as if they had beene Tripes, Mice, and Rattes were accounted daintie delicates, and well was hee that could get them. And being still pressed with hunger, they deuised to make meat of old shooes, hornes, horses and bullockes hooues, which had lien hid in the dung∣hils for many yeares: the little children would broyle and rost their girdles to to fill their emptie mawes. Rootes, hearbs, and barkes of trees, serued in steade of iunketting dishes: whatsoeuer had any moysture. taste, sauour, or smell, were it neuer so vnholsome, they eate it with greedinesse. And albeit they were of∣ten shewed of the daunger therof, yet would they not take heede: for the belly had no eares. Yea, so intollerable was the famine, that they eate the verie dung, especially of horses, which was accounted indifferent good, and therfore raked it togither, as a thing of much price. The father and mother eat their own child,
 which was pined to death with hūger, & for so horrible a fact were both burned. It is incredible what misery was in that towne, and yet they would not yeeld, nor cōmit themselues to the mercy of their enemies. But at length the fa∣min still increasing, & hauing not past 400. souldiers left, and those for the most part sickly, weake and wounded, and seeing no hope of any succors frō any their confederates, were content to hearken to a parle, which was offred vnto them by 
La Chastre,
 and so by composition to render the towne, with the castle into the hands of the Catholikes,
 who had spent at the least 5914 canon shot, for the gayning of the place, & lost some 1200, or 1300 men, besides a great number that were wounded and sore hurt.


Albeit that the Rochellors had now for a long time very valiantly born them¦selues, and with their often skirmishes and sallyings forth maruailously annoied the assailants, insomuch as that besides the losse of a many common souldiors, and sundry of good account, his excellencie had likewise beene vndoubtedly slaine,
 as hee was going to view the Mynes, had not one of his Gentlemen, whose name was 
Vius,
 espying the fyring of the peece, by putting himselfe

 before his maister saued his life, by receiuing the bullet into his owne bodie: yet their prouision being wel neare spent, and the famine encreasing very sore, they beganne to bee maruellously dismaied, fearing some mutinie among the peo∣ple: and the rather for that they had sounde them very desirous to come to a composition with the enemies. But God did miraculously help them in this ex∣tremity,
 by sending into their hauen an exceeding multitude of muscles, cockles and small fishes, wherewith they plentifully stored themselues in despite of all the Catholikes.


As this extraordinarie prouision did mightily encourage the inhabitants to hold out: so did it not a little dismay their enemies, and made them much more enclinable to peace then before: for they hauing besieged the towne for a long time, and endured much hunger and cold, hoping at last to gaine it, as a recom∣pence for all their labours, did now dispaire thereof, seeing it was so extraordi∣narily victualed, and as it were relieued from heauen. Besides, the Catholikes themselues began to fall into want and penurie,
 their souldiers waxed sick, and many did dayly drop away: their wounded and hurt men were so many, and so negligently looked vnto, that it was a most pitifull spectacle, to behold so many lazers and maimed persons in one place, who for want of necessarie attendance grew incurable: yea, the lice did so abound among them, that sundry were euen eaten and consumed with them, and the rest became so filthy, that they woulde haue loathed any to haue seene them.


About this time came the Ambassadors of 
Polonia
 to the campe,
 to signifie vn∣to his excellencie, that he was chosen king of that country. Which dignity they humbly desired him to accept of, and with as great speed as might be, to hasten thither, and to take the gouernment of them, who with all duty and obedience were willing to receiue him as their king and soueraigne. 
Monsieur
 being excee∣ding glad of this good news, and extreamly weary of the siege, which had wa∣sted so manie of his brauest men, desirous to see an end of the wars in 
France,
 and to take possession of the Polonian Diadem, which he had so long thirsted after, was contēt to offer such reasonable conditions as the Rochelors liked of:
 so that both parties being (contrarie to al expectation) suddenly agreed, the peace was proclaimed in the later end of Iuly, & the siege presently raised, to the vnspeak∣able comfort of all those of the reformed religion. Wherein sundry haue obser∣ued, and not without good cause, the variable estate of this inconstant worlde, which is euer wauering, and cannot continue long without chaunge and alte∣ration. For those who thought that euery man would haue bowed at their becks, and that the strongest townes in all 
France
 durst not once haue made so much as any shew to resist their power & puissance, did now see themselues in a maner ouerthrowne by a handfull of men, who not long before were at their wits end▪ and all their councels brought to naught: so that they were forced (af∣ter the losse of manie braue souldiers, and valiant captaines, besides the expence of many thousands of Crownes, hauing lien before a little village seuen or eight moneths) to depart with dishonour and disgrace, hauing gotten nothing but blowes, wherwith they wasted and wearied themselues, and to seek some bet∣ter place to refresh their weake and diseased troupes.








CHAP. XVII.




Those of 
Quercie
 and 
Languedocke
 refuse peace. The Mareschals 
Memorancie
 and 
Cossy
 committed to prison. Mareschall 
Danuill
 ioyneth with the protestants, 
Mont∣gommerie
 landeth in 
Normandie.
 Is taken and beheaded at 
Paris.




B
Y the narration of that which is alreadie past, euery one may vnderstand the enterchangeable course, and vicissitude, both of the Catholike and Protestant affaires. 
 And that as well the one as the other, had sufficient tryall, of the ebbing and flow∣ing of their fortune. Now let vs see, if after so great experience of their daily calamities, brought forth and nourished by rea∣son of their ciuill dissentions, they waxed any wiser, or more warie how to preuent future mischiefs.


Although that many, as well Protestants, as Papists, were very glad of this late reconciliation, and with ioyfull hearts thanked the King for their desired peace: yet those of 
Quercie, Languedocke,
 and (in a worde) all the Prouinces to∣wards the Leuant seas, were not satisfied therewith: for that (said they) their enemies, and the authours of those execrable Parisian murthers, were still the Kings principal fauourits, and nearest about his person: and therfore they were little assured of any security, but rather had cause to feare an other massacre, con∣sidering the king was ruled by such bad counsel. And further, that there had bin many as strong Edicts, and as solemnly sworn as that at 
Rochel,
 and yet they pro∣ued but wordes without effect, and serued but as nets to catch the poore Pro∣testants: that with fraudulent and subtile deuises, they had euer preuailed more then by open force: and therfore now it stood them vpon (after so much schoo∣ling) to take better heed vnto themselues, & to beware of the practises of those, who thirsted for nothing so much as for their blood, and the vtter abolishing of their Religion, which they had for many yeares maintained with the daunger of their liues: adding withall, that this last pacification was made but with some particulars, without their consent, and therfore that they were not bound to keepe it, further then they liked of it.


These and the like reasons were alledged by a great number of the Confede: rats, who hauing bin often deceiued, would not now so readily giue eare vnto faire promises, but meant to stand vpon their gards, and as warily as might be, to watch the Catholikes at euery turne. And to the intent they might the better maintaine their reputation, and with greater dexteritie manage their affayres, they first assembled at 
Millaua
 in 
Rouergne,
 and afterwards at 
Montaubau,
 where after long and mature deliberation, they established an orderly course for the rest of their proceedings. And hauing gotten sundry strong townes, forts and castels into their handes, they flatly refused those conditions of peace, which the Rochellers had accepted, & fortifying themselues with a newe association and league, began to annoy the Catholiks with open warre.


The King being about this time incensed against the Mareschals of 
Memoran∣cie
 and 
Cossy,
 committed them to prison, and suspecting the Mareschall 
Danuill,


 to be of their confederacie, depriued him of his Lieutenantship in 
Languedo ke,
 and gaue it vnto the Prince 
Dauphin,
 son to the Duke 
Montpencier.
 Which when the Mareschall vnderstoode, hee aranged himselfe with those of the Religion, seizing vppon sundry strong townes, as 
Montpellier, Beucary, Lunell,
 and others,
 fortifying them with sufficient garrisons, and all other necessaries. There were also great numbers of the Catholikes, who receyuing small fauour at the Kings hands, neither were so rewarded for their seruices as they expected, grew male∣conts, and seeing 
Monsieur
 the Kings brother was departed into 
Polonia,
 they thought it now fit time to take their aduauntage, and by leaguing themselues with the Protestants, to reforme the policy of the land, and to reclaim the king, who (said they) was wholy misled by the wicked coūsels of such, as were stran∣gers and enemies tothe Crowne of 
France.


They had also practised with the Duke of 
Alenson,
 the Kings yongest brother, to take part with them, and found him not vnwilling to becom their leader, and generall in this so hautie an enterprise. And where as the Rochellers would not for a long time be drawne to ioyne with the rest of the Protestants,
 & malecon∣tents, at last through the dexteritie and politike inducements of 
La Noue,
 a man of great credit among them, they were contented to bee embarked into that ac∣tion, and to prouide all necessaries, for the maintenance of the future wars.


The Confederates hauing all things thus in a readinesse, attended the depar∣ture of the Duke of 
Alenson,
 the King of 
Nauarre,
 and the Prince of 
Conde,
 from the Court, and for their better safetie had sent some two hundred horse to Saint 
Germain
 in Lay: but the King being made priuie hereof, and his excellencie di∣uerted by 
La Moly,
 the proceedings of the Protestants were mightily crossed, for the time: howbeit, like men of courage, and resolution, they went forwards, and openly inuaded the Catholiques, both by sea and land. 
Montgommerie,
 who for a long while had beene in the Ile of 
Gersey,
 landed on the sudden in 
Norman∣die,
 ioyning with the Columbiers, and incorporating himselfe with the 
Norman
 troupes, made sharpe warre vpon the Papists, getting many townes and fortres∣ses, which were very aduantagious for the Protestants.


Great preparation was made by the King, to withstand these proceedings, and proclamation was sent out into all parts to assemble the 
Bannes
 and 
Arierbannes,
 and such was the diligence vsed herein, that there was quickely gathered toge∣ther a sufficient number to make two armyes, which the King presently diui∣ded, sending the one into 
Poictou,
 vnder the conduct of 
Montpencier,
 against 
La Noue,
 and the other vnder the leading of 
Mategnon
 into 
Bas Normandie,
 agaynst the Count 
Mongommerie,
 who preuayled mightily against the Catholiques, sei∣sing vpon sundry their best townes, and strongest holds, and raunging euery where at his pleasure. But at last the Count comming to 
Donfron,
 was suddenly besieged by his enemies: where he was taken prisoner, being shamefully forsa∣ken by his souldiers, and so was led away to 
Paris,
 and there had his head stro∣ken off,
 the 26. of Iune, to the great reioycing of the Parisians, and the excee∣ding greefe of the Confederates.








CHAP. XVIII.




The King waxeth sicke. Maketh a peace with his subiects. Ordaineth the Queene mother Regent of 
France,
 in the absence of the King of 
Polonia.
 His death. The end of the fourth ciuill warres.




W
Hilest the Duke 
Montpencier
 besieged 
Fontenay,
 the King, who had now for a good while beene sickely, and diseased, began to waxe worse and worse, insomuch as the Queene mother fearing, that if he should die vpon the sudden, there woulde be maruellous hurly burlies at court, thought it best to sende for the Duke,
 whom she comanded to repaire vnto the kings presence withall speed: who thereupon brake vp his siege, licensing his army to depart, and he himself hasted to the Court. There he found a strange Metamorphosis, for the king was now verie desirous to end the wars, and to make a peace with the Protestants, and would haue them fauoured and protected as well as his other subiects:
 desiring, and that verie instantly, all sorts to put to their helping hands, and to shew themselues furtherers of so laudable a worke. Commaunding likewise his Lieutenants and gouernors in all his Do∣minions, to cause his former Edicts to be diligently obserued, & to punish with all rigour and seueritie, who soeuer refused to obey this his commaundement. The Queene mother did likewise labour verie earnestly herein,
 and seemed de∣sirous of nothing so much, as to establish a peace and quietnesse throughout all 
Fraunce.


The King did still decay, and death hasted his pace to ouertake him: so that notwithstanding all the meanes that could bee imagined to escape so hote pur∣sute: yet there was no remedie, but needes he must be arested, and called to ac∣count for his former actions. Which when with great perplexitie of minde and sorrow of heart he perceiued, hauing ordained the Queene mother for Regent (during the absence of the King of 
Polonia,
 to whom the crowne of 
Fraunce
 as next heire did appertaine) he yeelded vp his life the 30. of May, at 
Bois de Vincens,
 1574. in the 13. yeare of his reigne, and in the 24 of his age, hauing bin the most bloodie and cruell Prince, that euer did weare the French Diadem, And as hee continually thirsted after the blood of the poore Protestants, so did hee neuer cease vomiting and belching out of blood, all the time of his sicknesse, with most horrible swearing and blaspheming, vntill his last gaspe, after a most strange and fearful maner. And this was the end of 
Charles
 of 
Valois,
 and King of 
France:
 who beeing by nature wicked, by education irreligious, and by vngodly and wicked counsel easily drawne into all kinde of impious and barbarous actions, began with iniustice, continued with crueltie, and ended in misery, leauing that noble kingdome so torne and dismembred, the Nobilitie so diuided, and discon∣tented, and the communaltie so oppressed, and impouerished, that the whole state, hauing lost the ancient splendor and dignitie, was mightily shaken, and in a maner brought to a 
Chaos,
 and confusion, and hasted (as it were) a maine pace to a lamentable change and alteration.








CHAP. XIX.




Henry
 the third King of 
France
 and 
Polonia.
 The Queene mother laboureth for peace, which is concluded for three moneths. The Prince of 
Conde
 goeth into 
Germany. Lu∣signen dismanteled.
 The King of 
Polonia
 stealeth away into 
France.
 The first Ciu ll warres. The Mareschall 
D'Anuill
 ioyneth with Protestants. 
Cassimer
 com∣meth to the ayde of the Protestants. The Duke of 
Alenson
 departeth malecontent from Court. The ende of the first ciuill warres.




K
Ing 
Charles
 beeing dead, and his brother 
Henry
 king of 
Polonia,
 declared heire to the Crowne, during whose absence the Queene mother (as is already sayde) was proclaimed Regent: the Catholikes beganne to insult more then euer before ouer the Protestants, and to vse them in most outragious manner, presuming vppon the accustomed good fortune of their new king, and the resolute course of the Queene mother, to roote out all those of the Religion, and to expell them out of the territories of the 
Flower de Lis.
 The consideration whereof did maruailously dismay many of the Protestants, and caused sundrie who inwardly fauoured their proceedings, to plucke in their heades and keep themselues close, and to expect what would bee the sequell of these newe occurrences. There was great dissention at 
Ro∣chell
 about these matters, and long it was before they would fully determine what to do: howbeit, at length through the manifolde remonstrances of 
La Noue,
 they fully resolued to continue the warres, both by sea and land, as they had doone in former times.


The Queene mother knowing that the best way to pacifie these tumults, and to restraine the Confederates from any further proceeding in the warres, was to vse them gently, and by smoth words and faire promises to keepe them in, vntill the comming of the new king, sent the Abbot of 
Gadagny
 to 
Rochell
 with letters to 
La Noue,
 in which (among other things) hee exhorted him to liue peaceably like a good subiect, and not to vex the land with newe troubles, in the absence of the king, who peraduenture would bee reuenged thereof at his comming, although shee knew that naturally hee was a very milde and merci∣full Prince, and one that would maintaine his subiects both of the one and the other Religion, in peace and amitie, so farre forth as possibly hee might, & had alreadie signified the same as well to her selfe and the principall officers of the Crowne, as to sundry the greatest and cheefest Citties of the land. These letters with sundrie perswasions vsed by the Abbot, enduced the Rochelers to con∣clude a truce for three moneths.


Mention was made before of the purpose of the Duke of 
Alenson
 and the king of 
Nauarre
 to depart the Court, & to ioyne with the Confederates, which albeit they attempted not, beeing diuerted there from by the councell of some of their friendes, yet the late King had them in great ielousie, and therefore kept them (in a manner) as prisoners, setting spies to watch them and their ac∣tions: and for that hee suspected the two Mareschalles of 
Memorancy
 and 
Cossy


 to bee of their confederacie, hee imprisoned them in the Bastile within the 
Louure,
 and discharged the Mareschall 
Danuill
 brother to 
Memorancy
 of his Lieu∣tenantship in 
Languedock,
 giuing it to the Prince 
Dauphin,
 sonne to the Duke 
Montpencier:
 and albeit the Prince of 
Conde, Meru, Thore,
 the vicount of 
Turin, Montagu
 and many others, were secret fauourers of his excellency in this acti∣on, yet for that they were not discouered, the king suffered them to remaine at their libertie, and sent the Prince of 
Conde
 into 
Picardy
 to looke to the go∣uernement of that Countrey,
 who beeing aduertised of that which had passed at Court, touching the Duke and the King of 
Nauarre,
 and that there was a purpose to clap him vppe likewise, secretly conuayed himselfe into 
Germany,
 and forwith made profession of the Religion, and so practised with the Princes and the rest of his friendes in that Countrey, that hee leauied a great power of Reisters for the ayde of the French Protestants, which when the Mares∣chall 
Danuill
 vnderstood, hee beganne to drawe neere to those of the refour∣med Religion then hee was accustomed to doo, and finding many discon∣tented pollitikes readie to ioyne with him, resolued from that time forwarde to follow the matter with more earnestnesse, and to further their cause all that euer hee might.


Henry
 of 
Burbon
 Prince of 
Conde,
 accompanied with many of the Nobilitie of both Regions, beeing at 
Heppenhem
 in 
Germanie,
 and seriously busied in gathe∣thering of forces to enter 
France
 for the releefe of his associats, was enformed of all the Proceedings, as well of the Protestants as of the Mareschall 
Danuill,
 and the rest of the discontented pollitikes, and vnderstanding that he was cho∣sen generall ouer both sorts, accepted thereof, promising to employ all his credit, power, and authoritie to maintaine them against all their enemies, vn∣der the obedience of 
Henry
 the third of that name, King of 
Poland
 and of 
France.
 Which when the Queene mother vnderstood, shee thought it best to offer a treatie of peace, and to holde all sorts in quietnesse, vntill the comming of her Sonne out of 
Polonia,
 whose presence shee supposed would bee a sufficient weapon to fight against all these practises and deuises. Hereuppon she wrote letters to the Confederates, and especially to the Rochelors, to mooue them to embrace this negociation of peace, whereby they themselues might liue in greater securitie,
 and the whole Lande bee freed from ciuill and intestine warres.


They returned a dutifull answere, desiring her maiestie to deale with the Prince of 
Conde,
 who was elected the cheefe of the reformed Churches, and to whome vnder the Kings obedience they hadde submitted themselues: and in the meane while furnished their Citties with all necessaries for theyr better safetie. With which answere the Queene mother beeing nothing well pleased, sent the Duke 
Montpencier
 into 
Poictou
 with very great forces, who hauing taken 
Maraus, Noille, Noue, Charante,
 and diuers other strong places, planted his siege before 
Fontenay,
 a Towne of very great importance, which in the ende hee tooke by composition, and so gained all base 
Poictou,
 to the exceeding preiudice of the Confederates. Hee likewise besieged 
Lu∣signen,
 which beeing valiantly defended by the Lord of 
Fontenay,
 held out for a long time, yet yeelded at the last vppon reasonable conditions, after it had

 beene besieged three moneths and twelue daies, hauing lost some three and twentie Gentlemen, and two hundred common souldiers:
 the Catholikes spent seauen or eight thousande cannon shot, and left some eight hundred of their men dead before the Towne, to make satisfaction to the inhabitants. The Towers and the Bulwarks were ouerthrowne, and the walles dismanteled: and so in a short time one of the most beautifull and strongest holdes in Eu∣rope was vtterly rased, and remained as a perpetuall monument of the Princes heauie indignation and displeasure.


The king of 
Polonia
 being aduertised of his brothers death by letters from the Queene mother, and that he was now become heire to the Crowne of 
France,
 albeit he was quietly established, and a king ouer a mightie kingdome, which was euerie way both very profitable and honourable vnto him, yet (as the na∣ture of all men is, to loue their owne naturall countrey more then another) hee presently resolued to returne home againe, and as shortly as might be, to beholde the goodly and pleasant fieldes of the 
Flower de Lis:
 but the great loue and reuerence which the Polonians bare vnto him, (who hauing vnderstood that the disease wherewith his brother 
Charles
 was afflicted was incurable, and that peraduenture the Crowne of 
France
 would quickly intyce him out of 
Polonia
) made them watch ouer him with so vigilant an eye, and to obserue him so narrowly, that it caused him to doubt what course he should take to escape their hands: and beeing (indeede) induced by sundrie strong presumptions, to think that they would in no wise condiscend to his departure, & that it were but lost labor, yea, peraduenture much harme to acquaint them with his inten∣ded voyage, determined to accomplish his purpose as closely and as secretly as he might, and to leaue them his reasons in writing, of so sodaine and hasty de∣parture. Wherefore hauing disposed of all things which were requisite for the furtherance of this proiect, he first publikely dismissed 
Bellieure
 the French Embassador, sending him home as one who seeing his maister was dead, was nowe to be discharged of his office, and with him hee sent the choysest Gen∣tlemen about him, and the cheefest and principall Iewels that hee had. This being done, hee made an exceeding sumptuous banket to all the great Poloni∣an Lords, and the Gentlemen in the Court, which beeing finished, and euerie man departed to his rest, the king himselfe went likewise to bed, as though he had purposed to haue slept vntill the next morrow: but he had not rested long,
 but rising againe & putting on disguised apparrel, he passed through the watch with 
Halde
 one of the Gentlemen of his chamber, and mounted vpon his horse which was readie for that purpose, and posted away from 
Gracouia
 with all speede, and shortly arriued in 
Austria
 without any let, notwithstanding all the extreme pursuite made by the Count 
Christophe,
 the Count 
Tancy,
 and many o∣ther Polonian Lords, and comming to 
Vienna
 was royally receiued of the Em∣perour, by whom hee was conducted to the territories of the Venetians, who likewise entertained him in most honourable and magnificent manner, and so passing by 
Padoua, Ferrara,
 and 
Cremona,
 entred into 
Piemont,
 and so into 
France,
 where hee was no sooner come but he found all the countrey full of troubles, tumults, and dissentions, and almost no corner free from cruell and bloudie warres.




The Mareschall 
Danuill
 beganne to stirre coales in 
Languedocke,
 and daily to enterprise vpon the Catholikes, and to aduance the affaires of the Prince of 
Conde
 and his associats, all that euer hee might. The king finding such trou∣bles in euery corner of the Land, seemed to bee very sorrie, and sought by all meanes to establish a peace, and to that ende wrote to the Prince of 
Conde
 and the Mareschall 
Danuill,
 who were the principall men among the Confederates, that they shoulde signifie vnto him the causes of their discontentment, and then he would (as their king and soueraigne) see them satisfied so farre foorth as might stand with equitie and iustice: whereuppon both the Prince and the Mareschall sent their deputies vnto the king and Queene mother, by whome their maiesties were certified of all their greefes and doleances,
 and the reasons that moued them to take Armes, which was (saide they) to defende their re∣ligion, their liues, and liberties, and to maintaine themselues both against their owne enemies, and the sworne aduersaries to the Crowne of 
France,
 who bee∣ing but strangers, ruled all at their pleasure, offering the greatest wrong and in∣dignitie that might bee, and that vnto the Princes of the bloud, and cloking their actions with a colourable shewe of Religion, set the whole Lande in a combustion intending indeede the vtter desolation thereof, vnlesse they were speedily preuented, and some good course taken to stop theyr turbulent pro∣ceedings.


The king seemed to giue them a fauourable hearing, as one willing to make a pacification among his subiects, whom hee would haue to liue in loue and amitie one with another vnder his obedience: but by reason there were cer∣taine articles propounded by the confederates, which could not on the sodaine be agreed vpon, the peace was deferred, and the warres continued, wherupon there were newe associations and leagues, and both parties stood resolutely bent to annoy one another as much as might bee. Those of the Religion were animated by the comfortable letters of the Prince of 
Conde,
 who promised thē speedie aide and assistance, & hauing recouered Saint 
Iean D'Angely,
 with sun∣drie other places of very good importance, they gathered some fiue hundred pistoliers, and a thousand two hundred harquebuziers, led by the valiant 
La Noue,
 wherewith they stopped the roades of their enemies, who hadde a long while harryed and wasted tne Countrey without pittie or mercy.


The king as it seemed, was of himselfe very inclinable to peace, and in a sort contented that the protestants should freely enioy their consciences, and haue publike places allowed them for their preachings: but hee had no sooner en∣tertained the councellers of the late king 
Charles,
 but that hee was foorthwith cast in a newe mould: for albeit hee were very earnestly sollicited by the Em∣bassadours of the Queene of 
England,
 the Duke of 
Sauoy,
 and the Switzers, to yeeld to some good agreement with his subiects, yet would he not be draw∣en thither with all the perswasions that could be vsed, but still maintained the warres, and in all hostill manner inuaded those of the reformed Religion, per∣secuting them with fire and sword, with a full purpose to bring them to vtter ruine and desolation: and being aduertised of the great leauy of Reisters which the Prince of 
Conde
 made in 
Germany,
 which amounted to the number of seauen thousand and fiue hundred horse, and three thousand footmen, vnder the lea∣ding

 of the Duke 
Iohn Cassimer,
 sonne to the Elector 
Palatine,
 hee sent Mares∣chall 
Biron
 into 
Lorraine
 towardes the frontiers, to stoppe theyr passage, and to attend the comming of the Duke of 
Guyse,
 who was mustering of men, and gathering of forces, and that very busily for the same purpose.


As the king was thus deuising how hee might best withstand the Reisters, new troubles ensued, and a maruailous likelyhood of greater and more dan∣gerous sturres then at any time before, if they were not wisely and speedily pre∣uented: for the Duke of 
Alenson
 the kings onely brother and the second per∣son of 
France,
 sodainely departed from the Court,
 and went to 
Dreux,
 beeing highly discontented with his straight keeping, which he accounted no better then an imprisonment: to whom the
e daily repayred great numbers of the no∣bilitie and gentlemen, both Papists and Protestants, and there openly shewed himselfe a fauourer of the Confederates.
 The king of 
Nauarre
 who had like∣wise beene shut vp for three yeeres, hauing libertie on a time to go to hunt in the Forrest of Saint 
Germain
 in 
Lay,
 accompanied with the Duke of 
Espernon
 and many other Lords and gentlemen, so perswaded with them that they were not onely willing to suffer him to go whether hee would, but many offering their seruice to bring him on the way, neuer left him vntill he came to 
Samur,
 where he continued not long but hee grew to that strength, that he cared little or no∣thing for his enemies. These two vnexpected accidents did maruailously a∣stonish the Court, and made the wisest of them well neere at their wits endes: But the Queene mother, who earnestly desired to see some good agreement betweene hir children,
 accompanied with some of the Princes of the bloud, the principall officers of the Crowne, and the two Mareschals of 
France, Memorancy
 and 
Cossy,
 who were now deliuered out of prison, went with all speede to∣ward 
Monsieur,
 and neuer left him vntill she had first made a truce for nine mo∣neths, and afterwards hauing granted vnto him the Dukedomes of 
Berry, Tou∣raine,
 and 
Aniou,
 for his better maintenance, besides many other things done in fauour of the Protestants, the warres ceased, and a generall peace was pro∣claimed thorowout the land: which the Protestants hoped would be more per∣manent then any other of former times, for that it was granted by the king, who as yet had not violated his promise,
 and therefore they had no cause to doubt of him, especially considering that as one exempting himselfe from being cul∣pable of the breach of the former pacification, he commanded that this should be tearmed by the name of his Peace, and therefore in all likelihood meant to haue it duly kept and obserued.






CHAP. XX.




The ambition of the Guyses. The house of 
Valois
 and 
Burbon
 condemned at 
Rome. Monsieur
 forsaketh the Protestants. The beginning of the sixt ciuill warres.




H
Itherto thou maist perceiue (gentle Reader) a maruailous strange alteration, and as it were a continuall vicissitude in these French affaires. The originall and progresse, with the variable effect and incredible accidents, occasioned through the continuance of these wofull ciuill warres, are as it were

 in a glasse, very liuely represented before thy eyes. The due consideration whereof, and m
st needes make euerie one in whom remaineth any piety to tremble at the secret iudgements of the almightie, and to bee mooued with a fellow feeling and commiseration of the woful estate of our afflicted brethren in forraine Countreyes: so ought it to worke an exceeding reioycing, ioyned with most humble thanks, in the hearts of those, who enioy a quiet estate and blessed peace, vnder a most gracious and mercifull prince, with a continual in∣uocation vnto him who is the giuer of so rich a treasure, not onely to poure downe (and that in most plentifull manner) such graces as are requisite for the beautifying and garnishing of so high a maiestie, but also to assist her with such Religious, wise and peaceable Councellers as abhorre a couetous humour, wherewith many haue beene possessed for the enriching of them∣selues, and detesting an ambitious and aspiring minde (a vice oftentimes but too much inherent in the natures of great personages) as are zealously adic∣ted to the setting foorth of Gods glorie, the seruice of his soueraigne, and the peace and prosperitie of the Commonwealth. The want whereof, as it hath euermore beene the bane of many most flourishing nations, so hath it been the principall motiue of such lamentable desolation as hath spread it selfe, and that in most outragious manner, ouer the face of that noble Kingdome of 
France:
 where, albeit that some of the latter Kings haue not beene so vertuously dispo∣sed as were to bee wished, which notwithstanding may peraduenture in some sort bee executed in regarde of their mynoritie and want of good education: by meanes whereof they haue the more easily beene enduced to giue their al∣lowance to many most wicked and vngodly proceedings: yet is it out of que∣stion, that the gratest misteries which haue there fallen out, haue beene hat∣ched and brought foorth by the deuillish and pestiferous practises of sundrie Councellers, who through the benefit of their good fortune and fauour of their Princes, haue attained vnto great places, and had the managing of the whole state.


Among others the house of 
Guyse
 (as it is notoriously knowne vnto the whole world) haue faulted heerein, in the highest degree that may bee, who abu∣sing those notable gifts which had made them commendable in the sight of their soueraignes, and highly esteemed of the people, and therefore ought to haue drawen on an honourable 
yage of themselues towardes all sorts, but in more especiall towardes that house which had so honoured them a∣boue all families in 
France,
 haue rendered euill for good, and sought by all vnlawfull and trecherous meanes to subuert those who haue beene but too ready to procure theyr honour and aduauncement. Which intollerable in∣gratitude of theyrs, though it were prophesied on long before, by the great King 
Francis
 the first of 
 saying:
 That they would 
 
into theyr dublets, and his subiects into their shirts:
 yet such was the carelesse secu∣ritie of the ofspring of that prudent Prince, that they would not take 
 vnto those aspiring heades, but by giuing them countenance and authoritie haue mightily empaired their 
 royall dignitie, and 
 of this sharpe and bitter prophesie.


Francis
 Duke of 
Guyse,
 assisted by the councelles of that 


 associate 
Charles
 his brother, Cardinall of 
Lorraine,
 had long synce layde the plot, and cast in his minde how to effect this diabolicall deuice, and to that ende had set all 
Fraunce
 in a combustion by sowing diuision betweene the King and the Princes of the blood, and incensing the soueraigne agaynst his most o∣bedient and dutifull subiectes. And being growne verie gracious among the French, by reason of his fortunate successe in the warres, caused it to bee se∣cretly spredde abroade among the people, that hee was descended from 
Charle∣maine,
 and therefore had some right and title to the Crowne of 
Fraunce.
 And as though hee meant one day to put in his clayme, had so ordered the matter, that great numbers of the Nobilitie, and sundrie of the principall Citties of the lande, were wholie at his deuotion: but hee was cutte off in the middest of his hope (as is alreadie sayde) before 
Orleaunce,
 and all his deuices came to naught, sauing that he left behind him a sonne, as hautie, as aspiring, and as am∣bitious as euer was the father,
 and one that attempted greater matters then euer did any of that line.


This man beeing growne into great credite with 
Charles
 the ninth, and likewise with 
Henrie
 the thirde, so aduaunced himselfe by their fauours, that he gaue the lawe to 
Fraunce,
 and did euery thing as he lysted. And practising those rules which his father and vncle had left him, was euermore deuising howe to trouble the state, and to holde the King at continuall strife with his subiects, as the readyest and speedyest way to compasse that, which that facti∣ous and turbulent house had so greedily gaped after for these many yeares. VVhereupon hee pondering with himselfe, that if this late reconciliation which was made betweene the King and his subiects, shoulde continue, that the King of 
Nauarre,
 and the Prince of 
Conde,
 with their adherents and asso∣ciates, would quickely growe mightie, and so with theyr power and autho∣ritie, easily ouerthrowe all his councelles, and that in such sort, as hee should neuer bee able to accomplish and fulfill his intended purpose, thought it best and most expedient for his aduantages, to beginne newe broyles and sturres, and with a sixt ciuill warre to bring 
France
 againe into a 
Chaos
 and con∣fusion.


 The better to effect this, and to lay as sure a foundation as might bee for so badde a buylding, it was deuised, that the Bishop of 
Paris,
 and a cer∣taine Aduocate called 
Dauid,
 as craftie, as wilie, and as wicked a fellowe as a∣nie lyued in those dayes, shoulde bee sent to 
Rome,
 to haue the direction of the Pope, and his Cardinalles, howe it were best to beginne, and afterwards most circumspectlie to proccede and go forwardes in so hautie and weightie an en∣terprise.


There were many bitter complaints, and sharpe accusations framed agaynst 
Henrie
 the third the French King, against 
Monsieur
 his brother, the king of 
Na∣uarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 against the race of the 
Valoises,
 the 
Burbons,
 all the prin∣ces of the blood, and the auncient Nobilitie of 
Fraunce:
 they were all either he∣retikes, or fauourers of heretikes, and by their late pacification, entended the vtter subuersion of the holie Church of 
Rome.
 There it was shewed, to make the King and all his Princes the more odious, howe the house of 
Capet,
 had alwayes withstoode the Bishoppes of 
Rome,
 and had in olde time maintained

 the 
Valdensis
 and 
Albigeons,
 and nowe were either 
Hugonots,
 or else great fa∣uourers and abettors of them. But on the contrarie, that the house and lynage of 
Charlemaine,
 (which was wrongfully dispossessed of the Crowne) had a speciall grace giuen them by the Papall benediction, to support and helpe ho∣lie Church, and that yet there were some of that ofspring left, and those stoute maintainers of the Papall dignitie (meaning those of 
Guise
) and such as had alwayes like notable Champions valiauntlie defended the Romaine fayth: and therefore it was expedient, nay most necessarie for the preseruation of the Catholike Religion, to roote out the houses of 
Valois,
 and 
Burbon,
 and to restore the ofspring of 
Charlemaine,
 which was endewed with all excel∣lent vertues, and throughly furnished with most notable gifts, requisite for the execution of all commendable, and honourable attempts.


And for the more speedie accomplishment hereof, it was resolued, that the 
Guises
 with their partakers should procure newe commotions in the lande, and nourish the warres by all possible meanes that might bee. That they should league the Nobililtie by oath to persecute the Gospel, and to choose for their heade and principall of their league, 
Henrie
 Duke of 
Guise,
 whom the King shoulde bee counsayled to let alone, and suffer him to proceede as he liked best, seeing he was a man of that iudgement, that knewe well enough what hee had to doo. The Queene mother likewise should bee sent to per∣swade 
Monsiour
 her sonne to beat the assembly of the States, which should bee holden at 
Blois.
 Whither the king shoulde solicite the king of 
Nauarre,
 and Prince of 
Conde
 to come, by all the faire wordes that could be deuised. And in the meane while there should be sundrie cunning fellowes, and such as were most deuoted to the league, sent abroad into the seueral prouinces, who should secretly labour, that such Deputies might be chosen, as would further the de∣signements of the Leaguers all that might be. During which priuie practises, the Friers and Iesuites shall incense the people agaynst the 
Hugonots,
 by their se∣ditious Sermōs. The priests in their parish churches shal secretly take the names of all the able men for the warres, and in their shriuings, shall charge them to prouide them of all such weapons as shalbe appoynted them by their captaines. The States shal sweare to obserue and obey whatsoeuer shalbe concluded. And if 
Monsieur,
 the king of 
Nauarre,
 the prince of 
Conde,
 and the rest of the princes of the blood, do not appeare at the said assembly, they shall be condemned as re∣bels, and likewise all other that shal any way oppose themselues against the pro∣ceedings of the said States, who shal sweare their obedience to the Sea of 
Rome,
 and to obserue the Councell of 
Trent:
 and withall a request shall be made to the king, that if any man shall resist and refuse to giue his allowance thereto, that he shall appoynt the Duke of 
Guise
 his generall, and giue him authoritie to pursue him to the death: who hauing so great forces, shall cause them to be in a readi∣nesse to march towarde 
Blois,
 assoone as the assembly of the states is begun. All things being thus contriued, there shall be certaine commissioners chosen, to enquier of the life and deedes of 
Monsieur,
 and certaine iudges appoynted to condemne him, for ioyning himselfe with the Heretikes, and so his processe shal be drawene forthwith after the godly example of the king of 
Spaine,
 who put to death 
Charles
 of 
Austrich
 his naturall sonne.




As soone as 
Monsieur
 is condemned, then shall the forces march to strengthen the execution, and shall set vpon all the 
Hugonots,
 and put as many of them to the sworde as they can come by: and the Duke of 
Guise
 beeing so strongly ap∣poynted, shall seyze vpon the persons of the King and Queene mother, and by the permission of the sea Apostolike shall put them into some monasterie, as 
Pe∣pin
 dealt with 
Childeric.
 And by this meanes the Crowne shall bee set vpon his head, and so returne to the blessed stock of 
Charlemaine,
 and he and his successors from thenceforth shall haue their kingdome of the Bishop of 
Rome,
 and shall a∣bolish the prerogatiues of the French Church.


 Whilest these things were a working at 
Rome,
 the 
Guises
 with their adherents fought by all possible meanes to breake the peace in 
France,
 and by grieuous op∣pressions and wrongs, to force those of the reformed religion, to put themselues in arms to withstād so iniurious proceedings.
 And albeit they were but too for∣ward to blow the bellowes of sedition before: yet now vpon the returne of 
Da∣uid
 from 
Rome,
 they went eagrely forward, and with great earnestnesse endeuo∣red to put those rules in practise, which came from their holy father. There wer leagues and associations made, and those as strong as could be deuised. The states were summoned, and by the collusion of the King, none admitted to be at that assembly, but such as were vtter enemies to the Gospel. 
Monsieur,
 by the ear∣nest intreatie of the Queene mother, was brought to the Court, and hauing made his benefite of the fauor of the Protestants, left them when they had most need of him and associated himselfe with their sworne enemies.


The King likewise beganne to interpret his Edict after a straunge maner,
 and farre otherwise then was expected by the confederates. Some articles were strained, and racked out to the vttermost, and other some snipped and curtailed, that they seemed metamorphosed, and changed into a new nature, as farre diffe∣ring from their former, as might be imagined. Many infamous libels were prin∣ted, contayning most villainous matter agaynst the Protestants: and a ru∣mour was spread abroade, that they had surprised sundrie Townes and fortes in 
Poictou, Languedocke, Guyen, Xantoigne,
 and 
Dauphine,
 and therefore that it was impossible to holde in the Catholiques anie longer, who with so manifold iniuries (saide they) were mightily incensed agaynst those of the reformed Churches.


Those of the Religion were exceedingly troubled with this strange kind of dealing, and knowing that it proceeded of a mortall hatred, and that it did euidently argue, that there was a secrete purpose to catch them at aduauntage, and then to make hauocke of them, and to roote them and their Religion out of 
Fraunce,
 they beganne to looke about them, and to prouide for their owne securitie, especiallie considering howe the Catholiques were leagued togi∣ther, and were readie (as it were at an instaunt) to inuade them on all sides. VVhereupon seeing that 
Monsieur
 after hee had gotten the Dukedome of 
Berrie, Touraine,
 and 
Aniou,
 (as is alreadie sayd) had forsaken them, 
 and left them at sixe and seuen, the King of 
Nauarre
 was chosen chiefe of the Con∣federates, and the Prince of 
Conde
 seysed vpon 
Bowrage, Marennes,
 and o∣ther Islandes, beeing places of great importaunce, and verie auaileable for the aduauncement of the Protestant affayres. Thus the peace hauing

 endured but a small time, the sixt ciuill war ensued immediately, vpon the report that it was concluded by King in the assembly of the states, that there should be no other, but the Romane Catholike religion, tollerated within all his territo∣ries and dominions: for then began the warres to be open on all sides. The Ca∣tholikes seysed vpon 
Du Pont, S: Espirit, Merpin, Tallemond, Burdeaux,
 and as ma∣nie other townes as they could get. The Protestants surprised 
Pons, Royan, Reole,
 and 
Cinray,
 and making a counterleague among themselues, couragiously with∣stood the attempts of their enemies: and foreseeing the stormie tempest, which threatned the ship of their safetie, likewise Pilots, and skilfull Mariners, they stoutly stoode to their tacklings, endeuouring by all possible meanes to saue their beaten barke from drowning, and to bring it to some safe port, and quiet harborrow.


Each side alledged sundrie reasons for the iustification of their actions: the Catholikes layd all the blame vpon the Protestants: saying, that they were men that would not be satisfied with any indifferent fauor: but espying their aduan∣tage, had forced the King to yeeld to vnreasonable conditions. Besides, that the Edict was but prouisionall, and might be disanulled at the Kings pleasure: and that it was now determined by the Estates generall, that no other then the Ro∣man religion should be tollerated within all the French Dominions. The Prote∣stants alledged, that they were murthered and killed in euerie corner, and no pu∣nishment inflicted vpon the malefactors.
 That the Catholikes did dayly breake the Kings Edict, which had beene made by the consent of all the noble persona∣ges of the land, who had solemnely sworne the obseruation thereof: and that if such Edicts were accounted prouisionall, who would repose any trust hereaf∣ter in the Kings worde and promise, seeing he helde it lawfull to breake his oath when hee lysted. And as concerning the estates generall, they sayd, they were not lawfully assembled, and therefore they protested of the nullitie of them, and of whatsoeuer thing they concluded. These and manie such reasons were obiected on both sides: and they had not long contended in wordes, but they fell to blowes, and each endomaged other all that euer they might.


The King of 
Nauarre,
 and Prince of 
Conde,
 withdrew themselues to 
Rochell,
 and hauing gotten some 3000. footmen, and 400. horse, they dayly enterprised vpon their enemies. The D. 
de Maine,
 accompanied with 
Puygall
ard, Ruffec, Ro∣ches, Baritand,
 and many others, to the number of seuen hundred horse, besides a strong power of footemen, did continuallie vexe and molest the Prote∣stants, by spoyling their fieldes, and burning theyr houses: and beeing mai∣sters of the Champaigne, couped in the Confederates verie narrowly, and hauing all things in a readinesse, planted their siege before 
La Charitie,
 which in the ende they gayned. Yea 
Rochell
 it selfe began in a maner to bee besieged, enduring maruaylous losses by the continuall roades of the Catholikes, who wasted all without pittie or mercie.


The Protestants being so hardly vsed, offered the like measure, where they preuayled, dealing verie rigourously with such as fell into their handes. The Duke 
de Maine
 following his good fortune,
 tooke 
Tonnay Charentie,
 and 
Roch∣ford,
 which yeelded vnto him vpon the first summance: and so farre hee pre∣uayled

 that he made himselfe Lorde of all the Riuer of 
Charente,
 in lesse then fiue dayes: and vsing great expedition, got 
Marans
 from the Rochellors, who were sore grieued with the losse of a place of so great importance.


Now, as the nature of most men is, to bande with the stronger, and euer∣more to iudge of the end, according to the beginning: so many at this time be∣gan to slippe their neckes out of the Coller, and to runne to the Catholikes, sup∣posing that it was impossible for the Confederates to holde out for anie long time. For besides that they were ouermatched by lande, they were likewise hardly handled at sea, and had much adoo to keepe the Isle of 
Re,
 and 
Chese de Bay,
 from 
Lansac,
 who was Admirall ouer the nauie Catholique.
 But at last they rigging foorth certaine shippes, commaunded by 
Cleremont
 of 
Amb
is,
 so scoured the coast, that no enemie for the time durst appeare in sight of theyr warrelike Fleete, wherewith they were maruellously well recomforted. But their ioy lasted not long: for the Duke 
de Maine
 approaching 
Bro
age,
 so furi∣ously assayled it, that 
Manducag,
 who was gouernour of the Towne, was forced to yeelde vpon composition, being destitute of all necessaries requisite, to withstand so great a puyssaunce. By this time also, 
Lansac
 hauing repayred his beaten Fleete,
 put foorth to sea afresh, and meeting with the Confederates valiantly set vpon them, and putting them to the woorse, burnt their Admi∣rall called the 
Prince,
 and tooke an other vessell called the 
Floressante,
 to the ex∣ceeding greefe of the Protestants, who had reposed no small confidence in their sea forces.


Besides all these infortunate chaunces, there fell out an other crosse, which did verie much grieue and disquiet the Rochellors, and that was the death of their Maior 
Bobinean:
 who for that he was accounted a wise, valiant, and poli∣tique man, one who of all others did wonderfully affect the good of his coun∣trey, and tendered the welfare of all in general, was maruellously lamented of all sortes, and especially of the Rochellors,
 who in a sort were amazed with his death, and as men astonished with so manie crosses, had fainted vnder their bur∣then, had they not beene recomforted with a sudden report of a newe pacifica∣tion, which was earnestly sollicited by the Duke 
Montpencier.
 Wherto the king was the more inclinable, both for that there was a mightie power of Germaines readie to enter 
Fraunce,
 and also for that he wanted money to maintaine so great charges. Whereupon the Queene mother was employed to make the compo∣sition with the king of 
Nauarre,
 & the rest of the Protestants:
 which after much running vp and downe, was agreed vpon by both parties, and proclaimed with great ioy and triumph, both at 
Rochell
 and other places, in token of the earnest desire they had to liue at ease, and to spend the remnant of their dayes in rest and quietnesse.








CHAP. XXI.




The death of 
Monsieur.
 The seditious and treacherous practises of the Guisards. The be∣ginning of the seuenth ciuill warre, called the leaguers warre. The Prince of 
Conde
 goeth toward 
Angiers.
 His great distresse and admirable deliuerie.




 
T
He 
Guises
 and the rest of the confederates, perceiuing howe the King, with great numbers of his nobles, and cōmon subiects began to take some delight in peace, and that there was an in∣tention to reforme many abuses, which were crept into the state in the time of the ciuill warres: to restore the nobilitie to their auncient dignitie, and to vnburthen the people of sundry charges, wherwith for a long while they had bin grieuously oppressed, were inwardly vexed at the hart, to consider that their former coun∣cels tooke no better effect, and therfore they fel in hand with new practises, and those more pernitious, pestilent, and more dangerous then any others that euer they attempted before. For they considering that the cōdemnation & execution of 
Monsieur
 the kings brother could not so easily be brought to passe as they de∣sired, and that the king of 
Nauarre,
 and prince of 
Conde,
 did so prudently prouide for their own security, that it was a very hard thing to entrap thē, & bring their persons within danger, thought it best to go secretly to work, and by some priuy means to work their ruine & ouerthrow, against whom they could not preuail by open force and violence. They therfore hired 
Salcedo,
 a Spaniard to kil 
Mon∣sieur,
 and promised him 6000. crowns for his labor: but he failing of his purpose, they procured a certain Gentlewoman, with whom his excellencie was but too familiarly acquainted, to giue him such a receipt, as neuer left working, till it had wrought the life out of his body: so that he died the 10.
 of Iuly, 1582 to the great reioising of the 
Guises,
 who now began to triumph to see so fortunat successe and happy aduancement of their affaires. And considering that by the death of this great prince, whō they feared more then the King, their side was maruellously strengthened, they began to stir coles afresh, and sought by all meanes to fill the land full of new broiles and hurli-burlies. And the time fast approching, which was appointed for the bringing forth of that monster, wherewith they had tra∣uailed for a long time, they had many secret conferences with the duke of 
Par∣ma,
 
Bernardine Mendoza
 the Spanish ambassador, and 
Giouan Bardach no,
 the King of Spaine his Corriero. There was the bargain made to sell 
Marseiles, Burdeaux,
 and the Dukedome of 
Britaine,
 to the King of 
Spaine
 their maister, & an appoint∣ted time made, that the Duke of 
Sauoy
 should inuade the Marquisate of 
Saluces,
 thereby to occupie the King, and to disperse his forces into diuerse and sundrie places. And beeing strongly supported by the fauors of many of the Nobilitie, and sundry of the chiefe Cities, they first required that the Edict of pacification should be reuoked, that the K of 
Nauarre,
 & prince of 
Conde,
 with all those who made profession of the gospel, shuld be exiled the realm, or else forced to abiure their religion, & that continual war should be denoūced against the protestants.


The King was aduertised of all these treacherous practises, as well

 from sundrie the Princes of 
Germany,
 as also from the King of 
Nauarre:
 but hee would not beleeue any thing, but tooke them to be but slanderous reports, rai∣sed vp by the Hugonots, and therefore lightly regarded them: but still counte∣nanced the Guyses and their adherents,
 who hauing gotten the King to ioyne with them, & to yeeld to their requests, they hired the Monks and Friers to stir vp the people to their seditious ceremonies, shriuings and priuate conferences, to bande with them and the rest of the Leagues, and to persecute those of the Religion with fire and sword, and to roote them and theirs out of the territo∣ries of 
France.


They caused sundrie infamous Libels to be spread abroad, and gaue out that the king of 
Nauarre
 and the Protestant Princes had sworne to roote out the Ca∣tholike faith, and to depriue them of the Romish Church of all honour, digni∣tie and authoritie: that the murther at 
Paris
 should be reuenged, and that three of the principall Burgesses of euerie Citie and towne, should be put to death in reuenge of the saide murther. These with many other notorious vntruths were openly declared in their pulpets wherewith the common sort were mightily enraged against the Protestants, and desired nothing more then their vtter sub∣uersion and ouerthrow. The Guyses hauing likewise obtained good store of Spanish pistolets, corrupted diuers great personages,
 and had hired sundrie Captaines to take their parts. Hauing laide this foundation, and prouided all necessaries that could be deuised for the rest of their building, about the fourth of March, 1585. 
 they brake foorth and shewed themselues openly, seising vpon sundrie the kings Townes, Cities, and fortresses, supposing (indeede) that the rest would ioyne with them and take their parts: but things falling out contra∣rie to their expectation, they were forced to plucke in their heads for a while, and to attend some better oportunitie: and that so much the rather for that the K. the better sort of the Nobilitie, and the courts of Parliament, opposed them∣selues against their proceedings, declaring them Rebelles, and willing all the gouernours of Townes and prouinces to apprehende them, and to see them punished as seditious persons, and perturbers of the State.


This audacious action seemed very odious in the eyes of many: which the Guyses perceiuing, they drew in the Cardinall of 
Burbon
 by sundrie fine deui∣ses, to ioyn with them, whose credit and countenance serued their turnes in ma∣ny great attempts. And because sundrie of the Kings Councellers were either the Guyses creatures, or by some one way or other deuoted vnto them,
 the king was neuer duly enformed of the danger of the League: for they told him that it was nothing but an inconsiderate zeale of some few, who fearing the in∣nouation of Religion, were growne somewhat passionate, and sought for no∣thing indeed but to maintain the people in their obedience to the holy church, who if hee should but once frowne vppon them, they would all come and fal downe at his maiesties feete, and vowe their goods, their liues, and whatsoe∣uer meanes they had to doo his maiestie seruice, and therefore hee neede not feare them who were so good and deuout Catholikes, but rather had cause to animate them in their Religious proceedings, considering that they opposed themselues against none but such as were tearmed Hugonots, the kings sworne enemies, and such as had beene the occasion of all those miseries which had

 continued in 
France
 for so many yeeres.


The King was brought into such a securitie of his estate by this wicked Councell, that he did not onely reiect such aduertisements as were sent to him from time to time, both from the King of 
Nauarre,
 Duke 
Cassimer,
 and other Princes, touching the monstrous conspiration of the Leaguers: but also as one that knew not what hee did, hee made great preparation against them of the reformed Religion, and suffered the Leaguers in the meane time to grow and fortifie themselues at their owne pleasures, vntill they were become so migh∣ty, that they thought themselues able inough, if neede were, to go through with theyr intended course, whosoeuer shoulde say nay. Which was no sooner effected, but that they sette the Kings Councellers on the sodaine to enfourme the king of the great power and puissance of the Leaguers: howe that quite besides their expectations there was an vniuersall con∣sent of all his good subiects, to restore the Catholike Religion, that great numbers of his Nobilitie and cheefest Citties highly commended the zeale of the Leaguers, and were resolued in theyr defence: and therfore that it were good for the king, considering the time, not to make any resemblance to call any of them to account for any of theyr actions, least he should giue some suspicion that hee was a fauorer of the heretikes, which might breed a grudg∣ing in the hearts of his people, wherby some commotions might rise to the im∣minent perill of his royall person, and the extreme danger of the whole state.


The king beeing maruailously amazed with these and such like remonstrati∣ons, thought it best to make peace with them, and to countenance them as his best subiects. They were glad that they had brought him to that passe: and now seeing they had found him so submisse, they meant to make further tryall of his courtesie, and therevppon they required that all their former actions might be ratified by the kings authoritie, as good and lawful, and done for his seruice, and that whatsoeuer had passed in preiudice of the Leaguers, should be reuo∣ked as wrongfull and vniust, and for that they sawe the king was willing to gratifie their smal requests, they were bold to proceed further, & to intreat him, that the Duke of 
Guyse,
 the Duke 
de Maine,
 the Duke of 
Aumaile,
 the Cardinall of 
Guyse,
 the Lord 
Brissac,
 the Lord 
Antragnes,
 the Lord 
Chastre,
 and the rest of the principall Leaguers might haue the gouernement of sundrie the stron∣gest places of the land,
 as of the Cittadell of 
Metz,
 the Castle of 
Di
n, Rhemes,
 the strongest holds of 
Picardy, Orleans, Caen, Aniou, Bourges, Lyons,
 and many o∣thers of like importance. They further perswaded with him to proclaime open warres against the Protestants, & to declare the king of 
Nauarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 and all others who had beene infected with heresie (as they tearmed it) to be for euer vncapable of any office in 
France,
 and that they should packe out of the Countrey with all speede: and for the better countenancing of all theyr proceedings against these great States, they procured Pope 
Sixtus
 to excom∣municate them, thereby to make them more odious with the people.


As soone as they had gotten in a manner whatsoeuer they desired, and had made themselues as good maisters as the King, they with sundrie and most cunning deuises gayned great multitudes to ioyne with them, and e∣uerie man eyther for feare or for loue, was foorthwith at their will and

 commande. They mustered great forces, and gathered mightie armies, to inuade the king of 
Nauarre
 and the rest of the Protestants, who seeing them∣selues abandoned of their king, and exposed to the furie of their mercilesse enemies, stood vpon the defensiue, and resisted the rage of the League as well as they could.


The Prince of 
Conde
 growing strong, determined to besiege 
Brouage,
 which was kept by the Lord Saint 
Luc
 for the Leaguers: where, after hee had spent some time in gayning many of the principall forts, he departed towards 
An∣giers,
 leauing al his footmen to continue the siege: and albeit the Prince vsed great expedition, labouring with all speede to releeue those who had taken the Castle of 
Angiers,
 yet could hee not come time inough, for by reason that Cap∣taine 
Rochmort,
 who had surprised the saide Castle, was slaine with a shot out of the Towne as hee was leaning in his chamber window, the Castle was rende∣red again vpon composition, & made sure for the League, as it was afore time. The Prince beeing ignorant hereof, passed the Loyre with all his troups, which were some eight hundred horse, and almost a thousand and two hundred har∣quebuziers on horsebacke, conducted by the Lord of 
Nemours, Lauall, Trimo∣uille, Bo
lay,
 Saint 
Gelais, Aubigny, Ouches, Rohan Touche, Flesche,
 and sundrie o∣thers. The Lord 
Clermont
 had likewise gathered a great companie of horse, and encamped himselfe with the Prince neere vnto 
Angiers.
 These companies ap∣proching the Towne, expected some signall from the Castle, whereby they might vnderstand that it still held for the king of 
Nauarre
 but they were certi∣fied that the saide Castle was yeelded the day before into the handes of their e∣nemies, and therefore that it was lost labour to stay there any longer. Which newes greeued the Prince exceedingly, & made him with the rest of his coun∣cell, to fall to consultation, how they might safely get backe ouer the Loyre, and free themselues out of that danger which then appeared before their eies: and for that they knewe well inough that both the kings forces and the Lea∣guers were vp in all quarters, and hasted by all possible meanes to encounter them, they retyred towards the Loyre with a purpose to returne the same way they came. The Lord 
Lauell
 beeing the formost, got ouer without any danger: but before the comming of the Prince, all the passages were seised by the ene∣mie, and the prince was aduertised by many messengers, that either hee must resolue to open his way by the sword, or else to hazard himselfe at al aduenture through the Countrey of 
Beause.


The Prince approching the danger,
 and thinking that in either of these there was but hard choyse, called a Councell: but by reason of the diuersitie of opi∣nions it was long before any thing could be concluded: at length it was agreed to passe through 
Beause.
 Then euery man prepared himselfe towardes that de∣sperate iourney, and marching toward 
Luche
 in 
Aniou,
 purposed there to passe ouer the Loyre vpon the Bridge: but the Riuer was so risen, that there was no passage without imminent perill. From thence therefore they went to 
Lude,
 and so to 
Prillay, Vandeloyre,
 & S. 
Arnol,
 where they heard newes that the Duke of 
Espernon
 and the Mareschall 
Biron
 were at 
Boneuall
 in 
Beausse,
 with great for∣ces, readie to fight with the dismayed multitude: that the Duke 
De Mayne,
 as on the other side of the Loyre neere vnto 
Bloy,
 readie to cut off such as should

 fortune to passe that way, and that all the Countrey was full of strong garrisons attending with great deuotion to make a pray of the Prince, and that handfull of men which did accompanie him, so that it seemed the further they went the neerer they approched their destruction and hauing with their long and la∣borious marches wearied themselues and tired their horses, they did vtterly dispaire of any good successe. In this great agony they iourneyed on, and eue∣rie day receiued more vncomfortable newes then other, wherewith many sup∣posing that all was lost, secretly disbanded from the grosse of the Armie, and repaired to such friendes as they had in the Countrey.


The Prince and the rest of the Nobilitie were wonderfully perplexed, and knew not what course to take: at length they resolued to diuide themselues in∣to seuerall companies, some going one way and some another: the Lord 
Rohan
 with many Gentlemen in his retinew, went towards 
Britaine,
 Saint 
Gelais
 went towards 
Vandosme,
 the Prince, the Lords of 
Trimouille
 and 
Auantigny
 with some of their principall seruants, betooke them to their fortune as well as the rest, and hasted to get into some place of greater securitie. The laborious and tedious trauaile of this noble Prince, his wearisome courses, his long Caualca∣dos, his great and perilous dangers hee escaped before he gat to that Iland of 
Gernsy,
 would require a long discourse, & were sufficient for a whole volume. As soone as the cheefetaines were thus dispersed, the common souldiers were quickly scattered, some tooke their way towards 
Orleance
 some towards 
No∣mandy,
 and some towards 
Mayne,
 and to bee short, euerie man went which way hee liked best, trauailing in exceeding great feare, hauing as they ima∣gined, neither meanes to escape nor force to resist, but were readie euerie mi∣nute to fall into the hands of those who did wholly pursue them,
 and thirsted for nothing more then for their bloud: but when all hope failed, God did mi∣arculously deliuer them, and so deli
ered them in theyr iourneyes, that hauing auoyded a million of more then apparent perils, they all arriued at length at 
Ro∣chell,
 and that much about one time, to the exceeding comfort of themselues, and the wonder of all 
France.






CHAP. XXII.




The cruell Edicts of the King against the Protestants. The number of the Popish Armies which were ouerthrowne in one yeere. The villanous deal
ng of the 
Guyse.
 The battaile of 
Coutras.




W
Hilst the Prince of 
Conde
 and the rest of his distressed Armie, made this hard shift for themselues, the Duke 
de Maine,
 whome the League had procured to be appointed generall by the Kings authoritie ouer a mightie power, maintained at the cost and charges of the Clergie of 
France,
 bestirreth himselfe, and seeketh to annoy the protestants as much as might bee: but by reason the Vicount of 
Turin
 opposed him∣selfe against his proceedings with an army of sixe thousand men, hee did no o∣ther harme but gat some fewe Townes which were of no great importance

 The League not prospering so fast as they desired, by force of Armes, caused the king who was nowe solde ouer to worke his owne confusion and the vt∣ter ruine of his Realme and States,
 to make many cruell Edicts against those of the Religion: notwithstanding all the pacifications and graunts of former times, and they were commanded to auoyde the Realme within fifteene dayes, otherwise there was libertie giuen to persecute them to death, to seise vpon their goods, lands and linings, and to employ them to the kings vse.


The king of 
Nauarre
 knowing that all this was doone by the procurement of the League and the Popish Clergie, seised likewise vppon all the Landes, and goods of such as were either Leaguers or fauourers of that factious and rebellious multitude. The seuere proclamations made by the king against those of the Reformed Churches, wrought many lamentable effects in the Land. Some who made profession of the Gospel recanted, and turned to Poperie, and because they would not bee suspected on any dissimulation, they became earnest persecutors of their poore brethren. Others hid them∣selues in secret corners and liued most miserably and in great wants. Infinite numbers fled away, some into 
England,
 some into 
Germanie,
 others to 
Sedan,
 
Geneua,
 and such places as were free from persecution. It was a most pittifull sight to beholde the dissipation of so many families, who were nowe turned foorth of the doores naked and comfortlesse, and forced to shift for them∣selues in strange Countreyes.


The Duke 
de Maine
 did all this while what hee could to any the Prote∣stants, and to gayne as many Citties and townes (through very secrecie) as hee could to ioyne with the League, and to make that faction strong against the King, by seducing his subiects vnder the colour of maintaining the Ca∣tholike Religion. Which beeing suspected by sundrie his followers, they disbanded themselues, and some for want of pay refused to serue any longer.


The Duke 
de Maine
 by reason of these vnexpected crosses, was not able to make head any longer, and therefore wrote to the 
Guyse
 his brother in what bad tearmes things stood, who fearing that if there were not new prouision, that his brother the Duke 
de Maine,
 would come shortly to ruyne, and bee vtterly ouerthrowne, aduised the king to make foure seuerall Armies,
 and to inuade the protestants in diuerse places at once, which (sayde hee) was the onely way to weaken them, considering that their forces should bee seuered and disioyned.


This pollicie was no sooner allowed as the best, but the Mareschall 
Biron
 was appointed to go into 
Xainctoigne,
 the Duke 
Ioyeuse
 into 
Languedocke,
 the Lord 
Foynse
 his sonne into 
Auergne,
 and the Duke of 
Espernon
 into 
Pro∣uence. La Chastre
 should bee readie with a fleete vppon the coast of 
Britaine,
 to enterprise as time and opportunitie serued.


The king of 
Nauarre
 was foorthwith certified of this preparation, which made him fortifie such places as were of importance as strongly as hee could, and vnderstanding that the Mareschall 
Biron
 intended to besiege 
Browage,
 with a power of one thousand & two hundred horse & foure thousand footmen, he did so carefully prouide for the defence therof, that after that 
Biron
 had bin long

 before the towne, and had done little or nothing, sauing that he was content to make a composition with the Protestants, hee brake vp his campe, and sent his companies, some into 
Poictou,
 and some into 
Aniou
 to refresh themselues, and thus was this Army dispersed without dooing of any thing. Duke 
Ioyeuse
 passed into 
Languedocke,
 where hee tooke 
Lodere,
 Saint 
Poure, Montesquion,
 and 
Maruei∣
lx,
 and hauing committed infinite sorts of most horrible villanies and strange cruelties,
 after he had lost aboue thirtie of his best Captaines, and fiue hundred others at the least, before a palterie towne called Saint 
Puels,
 brake vp his army, and returned home in farre worse case then hee went footh. The sauage rude∣nes of this rable made many of the Nobilitie, who before fauored the League, to forsake such an association, wherein there was nothing but robbing, spoy∣ling, whooring, swearing, and blaspheming, and that after a most beastly and brutish manner: the yong 
Ioyeuse
 following rather his pleasures then the wars, made his progresse throughout 
Auuergna,
 where hee did no other harme but spende and waste the Kings treasure: and when that was doone, retired to the Court to see if he could be trusted with any more. And thus were all these ar∣mies brought to confusion, vanishing away as a little smoke, notwithstanding all their great brags.


The Leaguers considering that all these fiue Armies had spent great store of treasor, and all other warlike preparation, and yet had rather hindred then fur∣thered their secret purposes (for by reason they sped no better they were forsa∣ken of many,
 & growen into contempt with others) deuised with the Queene mother, whom they knew to fauour their designements, that shee shoulde offer a parley of peace: which shee did, and sent to vnderstand of the king of 
Nauarre,
 if hee would hearken thereto, who tendering the good of his coun∣trey refused not the motion: wherupon there was an interuiew betweene the Queene mother and the saide King at Saint 
Brice,
 the thirteenth of December, where there was much adoo, and many words spent to small purpose: for the Queene would not condiscend to the excuse of the Religion, and the king of 
Nauarre
 would make no peace, seeing that was the principall cause of bea∣ring armes: howbeit, in the end the Queene vnderstanding of the great leauie of Reisters that were comming to the ayde of the Protestants, and growing in suspition that the Dukes of 
Guyse
 and 
de Maine,
 and the rest of the Leaguers would enterprise somewhat against the King, shee concluded a peace for three moneths, and so returned to the Court.


The Duke of 
Guyse
 intending to discredit the king with his subiects euerie day more then other, sent abroade sundrie his supposts, and caused them to spread a rumor, how that the euill successe of all those armies which had beene employed against the Hugonots, was for that the king beeing led by wicked councell, would not permit that they should be sufficiently prouided for with money, munition and other necessaries, that hee had intelligence with the he∣retikes, that hee had warre (indeed) in his mouth, but in his heart he meant nothing lesse, and that by such fraudulent dealing the good Catholikes were betrayed, and the Heretikes encouraged, and that therefore there was no good to be doone so long as there was such packing and false play. The Domesticall enemie was first to bee ouerthrowne, before the forraine enemie could be van∣quished.

 These and such like sinister informations, were giuen out among the multitude, by Friers, Priests, and 
Iesuites,
 in their Sermons, and manie busie hea∣ded fellowes were set a woorke to spreade these, and such like defamatorie speaches, with much vehemencie and earnestnesse, in Alehouses, Tauerns, Markets, and all other places of greatest assembly. By reason of which s
aunde∣rous and bad reports, there grew much murmuring amongst the people, with no small dislike of the present gouernment. The King notwithstanding (as a man bewitched with the deceitfull dealing of his mother, and the treacherous practises of such counsellers, as he most fauoured) eyther vnderstoode nothing of all this, or else was forced to winke at it, as wanting leysure or meanes to sift the matter more narrowly. For the rumour of the comming of the Germaines, the fortunate successe of the Lord 
Digueres,
 in 
Dauphinie
 and 
Languedocke,
 the counter-league of the King of 
Nauarre,
 the Prince of 
Conde,
 and a great num∣ber of verie Noble and honourable personages of the lande, with a full resolu∣tion to maintaine the reformed Religion, did so occupie his minde, that hee coulde not haue leysure to looke into the rebellious driftes of the Leaguers, who continuallie incensed the King agaynst the Hugonots, and after the con∣fusion and ruine of all his former Armyes, perswaded him to assayle those of the Religion in 
Guyen,
 with newe forces, vnder the conducting and leading of Duke 
Ioyense,
 for that it was thought, that the Mareschall 
Biron
 was of too milde a nature, and had dealt somewhat too fauourably in his late voyage.


Thus Duke 
Ioyense
 being armed, with the Kings authoritie,
 and ayded with a mightie power, inuaded 
Guyen,
 where he tooke sundry townes, as 
Mote, Saint Cloy, Saint Mexent, Tonnay, Charauty, Maylezay,
 and some others: but the plague encreasing among his souldiers, he was forced to breake vp his campe, and to disperse his forces, and hee himselfe posted to 
Paris,
 to the rest of the principall Leaguers.


The King of 
Nauarre
 vnderstanding of his retreate, set vpon his strag∣ling troupes, killed many, tooke sundrie prisoners, and in a short space recoue∣red all that had beene lost. Thus the Leaguers had caused the King to spend much money about nought, intending thereby to weaken him, and strengthen themselues: for by this meanes they were still in authoritie, and did in a maner what soeuer they lifted, empouerishing their enemyes, and inriching theyr friends, as the readyest way to effect that, which they had long before determi∣ned to accomplish.


About this time were the Germains readie to march towards 
France:
 where∣of the King being aduertised, he prepared three seuerall Armies, with the which he ment both to defend himselfe, and to offend his enemies. The du
e of 
Guise
 was made generall ouer the first, wherin were 23000. French men, besides 400 Launces, 2000. Italians, and sixe hundred light horse, sent to him out of the low Countryes by the Duke of 
Parma.
 All which were appointed to barre the Germaines out of 
Lorraine,
 if it were possible, or else to hinder them, that they should not passe through 
Champaigne.
 The King led the second army into 
Berry,
 wherein was 88. companies of men of Armes, ten thousand French footemen, 12000. Switzers, 4000. Rutters, 12. double Canōs, & 2000. pioners, with which

 power the King determined to keepe the 
Loyre.
 The duke 
Ioyense
 conducted the third army against the King of 
Nauarre,
 to keepe him occupied, and to with∣hold him from ioyning with the Germaines.


The King of 
Nauarre
 gathered as great forces as he could, and being accom∣panied with the prince of 
Conde,
 Count 
Soyssons,
 the Lord 
Trimouille,
 the vicount of 
Turen,
 and many other honorable estates, hasted to incorporate himselfe with his strangers, & vsing great speed gat ouer the riuer of 
Droune,
 where the duke 
Ioyense
 had intended to stop his passage, and so marched forwarde, purposing to lodge at 
Contras.
 The duke supposing that the aduauntage was his, for that the king of 
Nauarre
 was weake in power, & inclosed between two riuers, so that he could not escape without fighting: as one desirous to do some notable exploit, resolued to trie his fortune by some generall fight. Whereupon hee tooke his place for the battell neare vnto 
Contras.
 The King of 
Nauarre
 was glad of the Dukes resolution, and hauing disposed all his troupes in very warlike manner, wayted his best oportunitie to begin the battell. About eight of the clock in the morning the Artillarie on both sides began to play. And for that the king of 
Na∣uarres
 Ordinance was commodiously placed, it did maruellously endomage the Dukes men of armes, which stood at his right hand, as also the regiments wher∣with they were flanked for their better assurance: wherewith when many were rent and torne in peeces, the rest resolued rather to charge then to die so misera∣bly without any further fight. The harquebuziers came no sooner in reach each of other, but they powred out their shot as thicke as haile, each partie endeuo∣ring to do well, and to annoy one another to their vttermost.


The king of 
Nauarre
 had diuided his horsemen into foure squadrons the first was led by himselfe, the second by the Prince of 
Conde,
 the third by the Count 
Soysons,
 who stood on the left hand of the king, and the fourth by the vicount of 
Turenne,
 who was at his right hand, equally aduaunced with the formost. These standing still, beheld the skirmish of their footmen, vntil the duke hasted to the generall onset: then these three Princes of the blood, euerie one in the front of their regiment, began to change their pace into a trot, and so into a gal∣lop, giuing such a furious charge vpon their enemies, that they wholy defeated them, and hauing killed a great number, the rest betooke them to flight. The footmen seeing their horsemen ouerthrowne, lost courage, and ranne away for company: then was the mortalitie great: for the Protestants pursuing them, com∣mitted a maruailous carnage among them that fled. There was slaine the Duke of 
Ioyense,
 generall of the armie, and 
Saint Suuer
 his brother, 
Bressay, Rousay,
 count 
Suxe,
 Count 
Ganeto,
 Count 
Aubiyon, Fumel, Rochford, Neufny, Gurats, Saint Fort, Tercelin,
 maister of the campe, 
Chesner
 and 
Vallade,
 besides many other Lordes and Gentlemen of marke. 
Bellegard, Saint Luc,
 the Marques of 
Prennes,
 Count 
Mōsoreau, Sansac, Cipierre, Santray, Montigny, Villecomblim, Chasteaurenauld, Parriere Chasteauueulx, Chasteloux,
 and 
Auuerdiere,
 all captaines and commaunders were taken prisoners, Diuerse Castels and strong holdes were presently yeelded vnto the king of 
Nauarre,
 and a verie great feare possessed the hearts of the rest of his enemies.








CHAP. XXIII.




The great arm
e of the Germaines ouerthrowne. The death of the Duke of 
Bonillon.
 The 
Guises
 slander the King. The Leaguers besiege the Duchesse of 
Bonillon.
 Their ouer∣throw. The Prince of 
Conde
 poisoned. The Parisians rebel against the King. The King flieth to 
Charteres.
 The Guisards vow to kill the King.




T
He French King,
 and Duke of 
Guise
 were all this while verie busie in prouiding of all necessarie meanes to withstande the Germaines, who still came on forwardes. Their armie con∣sisted of fiue thousand Ruttars, fiue thousand Lancequenets, sixteene thousand Switzers, with whom were ioyned foure thousand French harquebuziers, and three hundred French horse. The Lord 
Mouy
 brought also two thousand French harquebuziers on horsebacke, the Lord 
Villeneufe
 one thousand, and the Lorde 
Louers
 one thousand. The Lord 
Chastillon
 likewise ioined with them, with one thousand fiue hundred harquebuziers, and two hundred horses. The whole number came to some thirtie fiue thousand: besides the companies brought by the Prince of 
Contie.
 They had sixteene peeces of great Ordinance, with store of all warlike munition. The general of all these, was the Duke of 
Bonillon,
 who commaunded as Lieutenant for the King of 
Nauarre.


This mightie and puyssant armie was the terrour of the League, and the hope of the Protestants, but the expectation of both was disappoynted: for after that the Germaines had marched through 
Lorraine,
 and were gotten in∣to 
Fraunce
 as farre as 
Lancy
 in 
Masconois,
 where by reason that manie principall Captaines were corrupted with money and fayre promises, and the rest suffe∣red great wants, they concluded to returne backe: so that hauing made their capitulation, and gotten theyr Passeportes,
 euerie man made all the speede home that might bee, loden with miserie, shame, and dishonour, with the losse of many Ensignes and Cornets, besides their chiefest leaders and commaun∣ders. The Duke of 
Bonillon,
 generall of that armie, with the Lord 
Clerebant
 and 
Van,
 being not able to draw them forwards by any perswasion, returned to 
Ge∣neua,
 where they died shortly after: The Count 
de La Marke,
 brother to the duke of 
Bonillon,
 was deceased long before at a place called 
Loyne.
 Great numbers of this dispersed armie were inuaded by their enemies, and slaine in their passage homewards, contrarie to the promise which had beene made vnto them by the Catholiques. The Colonels and Captaines of the Switzers, the chiefe authours of the dissolution of that Armie, were seuerely punished by their 
Segneuries,
 so that this whole armie was maruellously afflicted, and euerie one was scour∣ged after one sort or other: and hauing spent and spoyled infinitely, did nothing but worke their owne calamitie and ouerthrow.


The King vndoubtedly had taken maruellous care to s
uer this mightie puyssaunce, and by cunning handling of the matter,
 had brought them to this extreame passe, that vnder the colour of a Passeport, hee exposed them to the butcherie, and rage of their enemies. And although that by reason of

 this politique dealing, he deserued high commendation: yet the 
Guise
 so hand∣led the matter, that all redownded to his further discredite, and caused his sub∣iects to speake worse of him then at anie time before. For the 
Guise
 had caused it to bee bruited abroad, that not onely the King had willingly suffered the Ger∣maines to escape, contrarie to the counsaile and aduice of the Duke of 
Guise,
 but also had giuen them the meanes to retyre in safetie, some into 
Germanie,
 and others into 
Languedocke,
 there to ioyne with the King of 
Nauarre,
 and so to con∣tinue further troubles in the lande, to the great and intollerable harme of the good Catholiques, and the encouraging of Heretikes, and such as were ene∣mies to holy Chuch.


When the Friers and Iesuits in 
Paris,
 and other principall cities were possessed with these newes, they brake forth into very seditious speeches, openly exclay∣ming against the King, and extolling the wisdome, prowesse & noble acts of the duke of 
Guise:
 whereby they procured him much fauor among the multitude that knew nothing, but what they heard by the Leaguers, and their fauorites, which made them think, that the King had killed his thousand, but the 
Guise
 his ten thousand. All which treacherous dealings tended to no other end but this: either to make the French beleeue that the K. was not indowed with such noble and heroycall vertues, as were requisite for him that should gouerne so mightie and puissant a nation, or else that he was a notorious dissembler, a maintainer of Heretikes, & a secret enemy to the Catholikes. And then what should they doo with such a King? let thē make choise of another more valiant, more wise, more prouident, more religious, & a more stout defender of holy Church: and who should that be, but the 
Guise,
 who for the zeale, courage, valour, and singuler dexteritie in the mannaging of matters of estate, was not onely superior to the King,
 but the paragon of all Europe.


The leaguers being assured of the death of the duke of 
Bonillon,
 and that hee had left his sister Madame 
Charlate de la Marke,
 a yong and tender Ladie, heyre to all his soueraigne segneurie, and principalitie of 
Bonillon,
 thought it their best to let the king of 
Nauarre
 alone for a time, at whose handes there was little to bee gotten, vnlesse they payed deare for it, and to enterprise somewhat a∣agaynst this desolate Ladie, and either by hooke or by crooke (as wee vse to say) to get the Dukedome into their possession. VVhereupon the Duke of 
Guise
 vsed all the cunning hee coulde, to match his sonne the Prince 
Ien∣uill
 with her: and the Duke of 
Lorraine
 was as earnest a suter for his sonne, called 
Marthuis de Pont,
 and Lorde 
Vaudemont.
 But neither of them being able by all their deuises, to winne that Ladies fauour, they thought it best to ioyne together, and to compell her to match according to their lykings. With this resolution they entered the Dukedome of 
Bonillon,
 with a great power, burning, wasting, killing, murthering, rauishing, and committing all o∣ther horrible and detestable villanies that coulde bee imagined,
 and besieged the sayde Ladie, and her two principall Townes, 
Sedan
 and 
Iamets:
 where they continued a long tyme, spent much Treasure, and lost most of theyr men, and in the ende, with shame and dishonour, (beeing well beaten at a womans hand, by the valiant conduct of the Lord 
Necuile,
) were glad to giue ouer, and returne home.




Whilest the dukedom of 
Bonillon,
 was vexed and tormented with these trou∣blesome sutors, the principal leagers assembled at 
Nancie
 in 
Lorrain,
 where there was a great consultation helde, how they might aduance themselues, and ouer∣thow the King, against whose person and state they had for a long time bout all their endeuors. There they agreed to present certain articles to the king, which they would haue him agree vnto: and those were such as tended to the vtter de∣struction of the King, and the auncient Nobilitie of 
Fraunce,
 and the safetie of themselues. First, they requested the King to ioyne more openly with the League, and to put all such as they dislyked out of their offices:
 To cause the Councell of 
Trent
 to bee proclaymed throughout all his Dominions: To establish the Spanish inquisition: To put such Castels and strong Townes into their handes, as they should name vnto him: That hee shoulde sende an armie into 
Lorraine,
 vpon the borders of 
G rmanie,
 to let the entrie of strangers into the land, and for the maintenance thereof, should cause all the goods of those, whome they tearmed Heretikes or fauourers of Heretikes, to bee solde, and the money to bee deliuered into theyr handes. That the Catholiques shoulde pay the tenth of their reuenewes for the same purpose: and that the surplussage shoulde bee to pay the most needfull debts of the principall Lea∣guers, and that the life of no Heretike prisoner, shoulde be spared, vnlesse hee would abiure, and put in good securitie to liue Catholiquely hereafter, and to giue all his goods, or the iust valew of them, which hee hath then in his pos∣session, to the supporting of the League, and to binde himselfe to serue three yeares, wheresoeuer he should be commaunded.


The King did allowe of such of these Articles as did any way concerne the suppression of the reformed Religion:
 but considering that the rest did wonderfull derogate from his Crowne and dignitie, and that they tended directlie to the weakening of himselfe, and the strengthening of the league, of which, for a long tyme, hee had verie hardly conceyued, hee would not bee enduced to condiscend vnto them, by anie manner of meanes or entreatie whatsoeuer.


Now as the Leaguers laboured openly by these and such like deuises, to weaken the King, so they practised secretly to destroy the King of 
Nauarre,
 and Prince of 
Conde,
 knowing that if they were once ridde of them, it woulde bee an easie matter to accomplish the rest. Heerevpon they set on worke certaine wicked and diuellish persons, to bring these two great Princes to their deaths. And assuring themselues that this detestable deuise woulde take effect, they caused it on a suddaine to bee bruited all ouer the Realme of 
Fraunce,
 that 
Na∣uarre
 and 
Conde
 were both dead. But by Gods good prouidence, 
Nauarre
 esca∣ped that daunger, and tooke no harme.


The Prince of 
Conde
 by the treacherous and villaynous dealing of some of his housholde seruaunts, and amongest others, of one 
Brillant,
 and a page,
 (two such as he had greatly fauoured, and bestowed many benefites vpon) was poisoned the third day of March, in the yere of our Lord,
 one thousand fiue hū∣dred eightie and eight, and died within two dayes after, at Saint 
Iean d' Angely.
 Whose death was greatly lamented of all good men, for that hee was wise, valiant, zealous in religion, true harted to his Prince, a louer of his country, and

 an irreconciliable enemie to the perturbers of the state, and to all such as hee knewe to be aduersaries to God, to the King, and to the Crowne of 
France.


The 
Guises
 and the rest of the leaguers, reioysed not a little at this newes: for nowe they thought they were gotten one steppe higher, and had greater hope to oppresse the Protestants then before: who they knewe were migh∣tily weakened with this losse. And for that they supposed that in this conser∣uation of mens mindes, they had oportunitie to attempt something, which might still aduaunce their affaires, they thought good that the Lorde 
Lauerdin,
 who had scaped a scowring at the battaile of 
Coutras,
 should assaile 
Marans,
 a place of very great importaunce, and if it were possible to make it sure for the league.


The Lord 
Lauerdin
 applied his businesse so diligently, that he gayned the sayd Island of 
Marans
 in a short time,
 by reason that the Protestants, being amased (as it were) with the vnexpected death of the Prince, did not prouide timelie enough for the fortifying thereof, with such store of men and munition, as was necessarie.


Albeit that the King was glad, that the Lord 
Lauerdin
 had gotten 
Marans,
 yet he liked not that it should be kept by the Lord 
Cluseaux,
 whom he knewe to bee a fauourer of the League: but there was no remedie, he must beare with the time, being indeede not able to doe as hee would, for the most part of his Councell, and those of the chiefest were leagers, and the Duke of 
Guise,
 the head of those monsters, had caused such infamous rumours to be raysed of the Kings actions, and by secret practises had so disgraced him among his subiects, that he was almost growne into contempt among the communaltie, and was imputed no bodie in comparison of the 
Guise.
 This opinion the King would gladly haue rooted out, and was verie desirous to gaine their good willes and affections, if possibly he might. The better to effect this, he thought best to proclaime wars afresh against the Protestants,
 and to rayse a great power, and to go in person in∣to 
Poictou,
 agaynst the King of 
Nauarre,
 and all his confederates, that so by some famous exploits against those of the reformed religion, hee might regaine the loue and liking of his lost subiects.


The Duke of 
Guise,
 who knew that he had stollen away the peoples hearts from the King, thought it now good time to discouer his secrete meaning more openly, and presuming of his fauourers at Court, and the good wil of the coun∣trey,
 concludeth to get 
Paris,
 to seise vpon the king either aliue or dead, to kill as many princes of the blood, and other officers of the crown as he could lay hands vpon, and by fine force to set the diadem of 
France
 vpon his owne head. Now that he might be the more assured to accomplish all this, he wrote secret letters to all his chiefe friends and followers, to meete him at 
Paris,
 as spedily as they might. And for that the King should not be able to withstand him, he had set the duke of 
Aumaile
 to warre against sundry townes and cities in 
Picardy,
 and had gi∣uen order that others should attempt as much in 
Normandy,
 and other places: knowing that the king would send thither his principall forces to keepe those countries in his obedience, and then he might with more facilitie execute his intended purpose.


Vpon these aduertisements of the 
Guise
 to his associates, there repayred

 vnto 
Paris,
 great numbers of the most factious, turbulent, and malecontent persons of all the Land. Many Spanish Captaines and 
Hispaniolized
 french, were soone assembled in that mightie Cittie, and that to the number of fifteene or sixteene thousand: besides, the Citizen Leaguers who were exceeding ma∣ny, and those as desperate and rash headed as any others whosoeuer: the Duke of 
Guyse
 being diligently enformed of this, and knowing how greatly hee was expected at 
Paris
 by his confederates, resolued to post thither with all speede, and the rather for that the king (euen as he wished) had now dispersed his for∣ces, sending some into 
Normandy
 and others into 
Picardy
 to maintain
 his au∣thoritie in those prouinces: the King had long mistrusted the 
Guyse,
 & for that he was now aduertised that hee was comming to 
Paris,
 he vehemently suspec∣ted that there was some notable practise in hand, to be performed against him by the Leaguers, he therefore sent word to the sayd Duke, whom hee vnder∣derstood to bee forward on his way, by the Lord 
Belieure,
 that in no wise hee should come to 
Paris
 at that time vppon paine of his displeasure, and in case that he would notwithstanding continue his iourney, that then hee helde him for a traytour and the authour of all those miseries wherewith the Land was so encombred at that instant: 
Belieure
 did his message,
 but the 
Guyse
 did little regard it, for he followed the said 
Belieure
 at the heeles, and was at 
Paris
 almost assoone as hee, accompanied not past with some fifteene or sixteene Gentlemen, the better to couer his intended purpose, knowing that he should finde a sufficient number of partakers to maintaine himselfe against all men.


Not long after his arriuall, he went very confidently to see the king, and with all humble reuerence with his knee to the ground, saluted him: but the king being highly despleased for that his comming, contrary to his commandement, gaue him a frowning countenance. The 
Guyse
 stayed not long at Court but re∣turned to his house in the Citie: immediatly after, the King being duely enfor∣med of the great number of strangers that were in the same Cittie, and that it was verie likely that they remained there for some dangerous exploit, caused twelue companies of French men and Switzers to bee distributed into sundrie places to keepe all quiet and in their due obedience. The Cittizens at the in∣stigation of the 
Guyse
 & his companies, tooke the Alarum, & making as though they feared that they should be murthered and haue their houses sacked,
 (for diuers were sent about to disperse such reports) armed themselues, and beeing assisted by 
Brissac, Borsdauphin, Chamois,
 and the rest of the Guysards, set vpon the Switzers and the rest of the Kings guardes: whereof some they killed, and o∣thers they disarmed, and such as remained they kept as prisoners, and hoping nowe to attaine to the Period of their desires, they made theyr approches and besieged the Louure, entending to take the King either aliue or dead.


The king seeing all that great and populous Cittie in an vprore, and that hee had not sufficient forces to oppose against such a rebellious rable, determined to leaue the Louure,
 at the perswasions of sundrie his most faithfull councel∣lers, who aduised him to giue place to that desperate Rebellion, & to seeke his safetie some other where whereupon he incontinently departed from 
Paris,
 and went that night as farre as 
Trappes,
 and the next day to his Citie of 
Chartres.
 Many great Lords & Gentlemen of good place which were the kings friends,

 went after him as fast as they could, some on horsebacke, and some on foote, making as good shift as they could vpon so short warning: wherein wee may note a maruailous strange alteration and vicissitude in the state of this great Prince, who hauing beene so mightie a monarke, and a king of two such noble and puissant countreyes as were 
Polonia
 and 
France,
 a commander ouer so many great and honourable personages, and had ruled such an infinite multitude of all sorts, was now driuen out of his owne house, and out of his cheefest Citie, and forced to flie before him who was his vassaile and subiect, to his intollera∣ble greefe and vexation, leauing his treasure and whatsoeuer precious things he had, to be a pray for his enemies.


The 
Guyse
 vnderstanding that the king was escaped, and had auoyded his bloudy fingers, was maruailously greeued, and cursed his ouersight, knowing that hee should neuer haue the like oportunitie againe to effect his purpose, and fearing that the King would seeke to be reuenged of so great an indignitie offered to his person, thought that hee would prouide the meanes as wel as he could, to defende himself and his: & therfore he seised vpon the Kings arsemall, and vpon his treasor,
 whereof hee brought to his owne house aboue seauen hundred thousand Crownes, which hee laide vp as an earnest for the rest. Then did he forthwith alter the pollicie of the Citie, remoouing 
Perrense
 the prouost of the Merchants from his office, and the rest of the cheefest officers which he knew to be affectionate to the king, and placed such as were the most factious & seditious Leaguers in their roumes: he wrote also sundry letters to his friēds abroad, and to the principall Townes such as he knew to bee deuoted to him, requiring them to ioyne with him, and to be in a readinesse when hee should haue neede, and caused it to be bruted, that all that which had passed at 
Paris
 was not against the king, but to defend the Cittie which was in danger to bee spoyled by strangers, and that the king by the counsell of the Duke of 
Espernon,
 who had (said he) intelligence with the King of 
Nauarre
 and the Heretikes, had caused sundrie gibbets to be set vp in seueral places of the Citie, to hang diuers Cittizens and to spoyle their houses, thereby to gather money, and to warre against the Leaguers.


When the 
Guyse
 had taken the course to assure himselfe by all the deuises hee could, hee wrote letters to the king, seeking to disguyse all this action, and to perswade him, that hee had no euill meaning against his maiestie, but had al∣waies beene and still remained his most dutifull subiect, and had in this tumul∣tuous stirre, happened at 
Paris,
 shewed how hee respected the King and all his seruants, in that hee had taken so great prayes euen with the danger of his life to saue sundrie his officers, his Captaines and Souldiers, and so farre forth as possibly he might, to keep the people from murther and blouds
ed, which was then so likely to haue fallen out, and that to the great and irreperable harme of the Kings best affected subiects. After the alleaging of these and ma∣ny other arguments to proue his fidelitie, he besought the king to be his graci∣ous Lord, and to account of him as his most faithfull and loyall s
biect, and for that hee had a guiltie conscience, hee was continually in feare, least the King would at one time or other bee reuenged, howsoeuer peraduenture for the time hee might dissemble the matter, and shew him a fayre countenance, and

 therefore hee practised all meanes to make his attonement, and to that ende made earnest sute to the Queene mother to stand his gracious Lady. Such was his demeanor, and so cunningly hee handled the matter, that she was woon to be a mediator for him, and to assay to bring him againe into the kings fauor.


The king reposing a maruailous confidence in his mother,
 who had be∣witched him with an opinion of her loue and naturall affection towards him, suffered himselfe to be ruled by her aduice, notwithstanding all the perswa∣sions of the Catholikes that were about him, who exclaimed against the 
Guy∣ses
 and their proude and rebellious enterprises, and required the king to ta
e condigne punishment, proffering him their seruice, their liues, theyr goods, and whatsoeuer meanes they had for the accomplishment thereof. The king thanked them for their good willes, but resoluing to make a peace, sent them home againe, and would not follow their counsels. After much going and comming on both sides, the reconciliation was made, & the K. & the Leaguers became good friendes, and intended to bend all their forces against the Prote∣stants. Wherupon two mighty armies were prepared, the one for 
Guyen,
 com∣manded by the Duke of 
Neuers,
 & the other for 
Dauphiny,
 vnder the leading of the Duke 
de Maine.
 All these troublous stirs being now ended, & the K. and the Leaguers beeing made friends, it was thought good to call an assembly of the state to reforme the pollicie of the Land, and to take some finer course for the prosecuting of the warres against the Hugonots, and to that ende the king sent his writs to summon all prouinces, Cities, and townes,
 to send their deputies to 
Bloys,
 prouided alwaies that they were good Catholiks, and such as neither had fauour, nor were any waies suspected to fauour the king of 
Nauarre
 nor his as∣sociats, and the Duke of 
Guyse
 and the rest of the Leaguers so handled the mat∣ter in the meane time, that not any one man in a maner was chosen to be sent to that assembly, but such as they were assured did either openly or secretly fauor their proceedings.


At this great Parleament there was much adoo and many things talked of, but especially of the Edict of 
Reunion,
 made the one and twentie of Iuly, which tended to the establishing of Poperie, the rooting out of Heresie, and the dis∣inheriting of the Princes of the bloud, prouoking the king with many bitter words & vehemēt exhortations, to embrew his hāds in the bloud of the saints, and with fire and sword to roote them out of 
France.
 All which was assented vnto by the king and his three estates, & enacted as a fundamentall law of the land, which they all swore to see inuiolably kept, and obserued in al the kings dominions, to the vttermost of their powers.


The king of 
Nauarre
 was quickly aduertised of whatsoeuer had passed at 
Bloys,
 and therfore assembled all his principall friends & followers at 
Rochel,
 the 16. of Nouember following, whither likewise all the reformed churches sent theyr deputies: where they resolued vppon the defensiue, and the meanes how to withstand their enemies. The king continued at 
Bloys
 all this while, and albeit hee shewed a faire countenance to the 
Guyse,
 yet in heart hee loued him not, for that indignitie which was offered him at 
Paris,
 besides many other sau∣cie and audacious Pranks which hee plaide since, did breed a reuenging minde in the K. which he meant to shew more apparantly assoone as any oportunity was offered. Now as it vsually falleth out betweene late reconciled enemies,

 each still suspected other, and many tarres 
ell out betweene their friendes and followers, which bred sundrie sturres and hurleburlies in the Court: but there were two especially which gaue the 
larum to the Courtiers, and made euerie man to stand vpon his guard. The first quarrell arose among the Pages and lackies, some holding with the Burbons, and some with the Leaguers, wherewith the Duke of 
Guyse
 was so affrighted,
 that hee ran into his chamber, barred the doores, and kept himselfe as close as he could. The second was oc∣casioned by a souldier, who beeing hurt, ranne to saue himselfe in the 
Guyses
 Chamber, whither hee was followed by the kings guard, with their drawen swords in their hands, whereupon once againe all the Court was in an vp∣rore, not without great feare, least some dangerous euent would ensue.


About the middle of December, the Duke of 
Guyse
 shewed himselfe more disobedient then at any time before, and a great contemner of the king and his authoritie,
 in maintaining a number of Ruffians, murtherers, factious & sedi∣tious persons, and such as raised a rebellion in August last, and had attempted the killing of the Duke of 
Espernan
 at 
Engolesme.
 These were lodged in the Court, and flocked about the 
Guyse,
 and were so countenanced by him, that no Magistrate durst say a word to them: besides, the king being daily enformed of many trech erous practises against his person and estate, called al his Nobles, and willed them to sweare, that they should neuer attempt any thing against him:
 the Duke most disloyally refused, and said in his presence, that he would not take such an oath, and if hee did any thing otherwise then he ought, there were good lawes to punish him, spare him not no other answere could bee gottten at his hands, and fearing that the 
ing would be reuenged as well for this as for other notorious contempts, as also considering that all the drifts of his councellers were so discouered, that there was no way to hide them anie longer, and therefore that now with all speede hee must put them in executi∣on, hee called a Councell of his most trusty friends, as 
Lewis
 Cardinall of 
Guyse
 his brother, the Archbishop of 
Lyons,
 and some fewe others, in which it was concluded,
 that the king must needes bee dispatched out of hand, and that all delaies were dangerous: and therefore the twentie foure of that moneth was appointed for that tragical execution, binding themselues to see the same per∣formed with a solemne oath.


Thus was this great french king discouered of a very auncient and noble race, honoured for a long time of his owne subiects, and reuerenced of his neighbour Princes, condemned to die by the hands of most disloyall traytors, who had all their aduauncement by him and his predecessors.








CHAP. XXIIII.




The King resolueth to kill the 
Guyse.
 The death of 
Francis
 Duke of 
Guyse,
 and of the Cardinall his brother. The terror of the Guysards. The death of the Queene mother.




T
Hough the King knew not of this sentence of death which was pronounced against him,
 yet the olde and new iniuries offered vnto him by the 
Guyse,
 did sufficiently exasperate him, and made him watch all opportunitie to seeke his reuenge, and assoone as euer he could to be ridde of so desperate a traytor. This deter∣mination of the king could not be kept so secret, but that the 
Guyse
 hauing many friends about the king, who suspected some such thing, aduertised the Duke the two and twenty of December, by laying a little bill vnder his napkin, wher∣in was written: 
Looke to your selfe for some are about to play a shrewd play with you.
 Hee perusing the writing, wrote this answere: 
They dare not,
 and so threw it vnder the 
able. The same day the king receiued diuers aduertisements of this horrible conspiracie of the 
Guyse
 against his person,
 and especially from the Duke 
de Maine,
 who sent 
Alphonso Corse
 to him with this message. 
That it was an easie matter to carrie beades about, and to put on a counterfeit shew of holinesse, but hee was sure that his brother had a dangerous enterprise in hand against his Maiestie, which he knew not certainely when hee would put in execution, but hee was well assured that the time was not farre off, and that hee doubted least his warning should come too late.
 And aduised him in these words, 
That his Maiestie should beware of a desperate and fu∣rious mind.
 The Duke of 
Aumaile
 sent likewise the duchesse his Wife to giue the King to vnderstand, 
That there was great danger towards his person, and that the con∣spirators were vpon the poynt of execution.
 The king had also intercepted manie letters, by which hee did euidently perceiue as much, and how that the Guy∣ses had sworne his death and destruction, and disinhereting of the royall bloud of 
France
 in the houses of 
Valoys
 and 
Burbons,
 and to sette vppe the house of 
Lorraine.


All these remonstrances made the king bestirre him, and to deuise some spee∣die Course for the preseruation of his owne life. Wherupon he got the keyes of the Castle, doubled his guards, and appointed a strong watch in the Town, with commaundement not to open the gates without his speciall lisence: all which was doone in the night, without the knowledge of the 
Guyse,
 and cal∣ling vnto him some seauen or eight of those fiue and fortie pensioners which daily attended on his person, hee reuealed vnto them his purpose, requiring theyr ayde and assistance, who receiued most willingly their seruice, with promise to execute his will, and to doo as his Maiestie had directed them.


The next morning the Duke of 
Guyse,
 the Cardinall his brother, the Archbi∣shop of 
Lyons
 with the Mareschall of 
Haultmont
 were assembled in the chamber neere vnto the king, and readie to sit in councell howe and in what manner it were best to commit their detestable parricide. The king hauing disposed of all things in the best manner that hee could deuise, sent a Gentleman to call

 the Duke of 
Guyse
 to come and speake with him, who comming forth, and see∣ing the Guards more carefully disposed then was accustomed, hauing a guiltie conscience, beganne to suspect, and (as oftentimes the minde of man vppon the instant of so great aduentures presageth that which afterward ensueth) so at this present the Dukes hart fainted, and his colour charged, & as one fearing some imminent perill, hee was readie to swound: hee had sent his Page for a handkercheffe, in one of the corners whereof his secretarie named 
Pellicart
 had knit vp a little written bill, containing a warning to get him away with all speede, or else he were but dead. But this handkercheffe was intercepted with the remembrance, as the Page was comming vppe, and neuer came to his handes.


The Duke in going through a narrow passage to the King, encreased his mis∣trust, and was about to returne, but still hee went forwards into the Kings vt∣ter chamber, where seeing the Lord 
Loiguake
 fitting vpon a chest, whom of all other he most hated, for that he had beene long perswaded that the same Lord determined to kill him, hee set his hand to his sword with a purpose to set vp∣pon the sayde 
Loiguake:
 but by reason hee did weare his Cloake Scarft wise, he was so troubled, that he could not draw it past halfe way out of the sheath: they who were appoynted for his execution,
 seeing him enterprise such an au∣dacious act and that at the kings chamber doore, preuented him and slew him at that instant.


The noyse was such in this tragicall execution, that the Cardinall entred into a mistrust, and made hast to get forth, but he was stayed by a Gentleman of the Scottish guard,
 who had commandement to arrest him, and not long af∣ter by reason of his former treasons and his presumptuous behauiour at that present, mingled with some threatning speeches, hee was strangled in the same placce where hee was taken prisoner. The Archbishop rushed foorth in great furie, and saide hee would helpe the Duke of 
Guyse,
 but hee was quickly cooled and clapt vp in prison, though afterwarde released vppon his submission and acknowledgement of his offence. The Cardinall of 
Burbon,
 the Prince 
Ieuuille
 sonne to the Duke of 
Guyse,
 the Mareschall 
D'Albenfe,
 with many other pertakers in this treason, were apprehended and committed to safe keeping, and likewise 
Pellicart
 secretarie to the Duke of 
Guyse
 with all his papers and writings, whereby all the secret Councelles of the Guyses and the rest of the Leaguers, as well of Princes and Nobles as of the Clergie, Towne, and Cities, were manifested and discouered.


The fame of this execution was foorthwith spread abroade in the Towne, albeit the Castle gates were shut, which made all such as had guiltie con∣sciences to packe from 
Bloys
 as speedily as euer did the Protestants from the suburbs of Saint 
Germaines
 on 
Bartholmew day,
 and to seeke to shift for them∣selues some other where.


Thus were the Leaguers wonderfully crossed in their designements, and many who the day before thought it an honour to bee called Guysards and were readie to challenge to the Combate, such as reputed them Royalles were now altered on the sodaine, and cast in a newe mould, esteeming all that factious multitude worse then theeues and murtherers.




Shortly after that these things thus passed at 
Blois,
 died the Queene mother,
 who was very olde, and had liued too long for 
Fraunce,
 where she had beene as the firebrand of the Country, the nurse of all rebellions, the bellowes of all ciuil dissention, the instrument of the diuell, to worke all impietie and vngodlinesse, the procurer of the fall and destruction of her owne children, and the principal worker of all this wofull and lamentable alteration, happened in that noble and renowmed Kingdome.






CHAP. XXV.




The rebellion of Duke 
de Maine,
 and most of the principall Cities of 
Fraunce.
 The King of 
Fraunce,
 and the King of 
Nauarre
 are reconciled, The King of 
Fraunce
 murthe∣red by a Frier, The King of 
Nauarre
 proclaimed King of 
Fraunce.




 
T
He King thought good to aduertise all his subiects of that which had happened at 
Blois,
 and for that purpose wrote di∣uerse Letters to his seuerall gouernors of his prouinces, duly enforming them of al these occurrences: and sent to the assem∣bly of the States, to let them vnderstande, that it was his pleasure, that they should still continue: and that he was ful∣ly determined to followe their reasonable counsailes in all things: but they by little and little slyding away one after another, got them home into their Countryes: and by spreading of most accursed and damnable rumours, deprauing the Kings fact with many hyperbolicall speeches, which they amplified with sundry lying reasons, and defamatorie libels, tearming this execution by the name of the massacre committed at 
Blois,
 caused an vniuer∣sall rebellion of all those Townes, Cities, and Prouinces, which had reiected the Gospel in former tymes. The Duke 
de Maine
 no sooner vnderstood there∣of, but that he perswaded himselfe, that seeing his brother was dead,
 he might now peraduenture obtaine the Crowne for himselfe, if hee would lay in for it: for hee had a great power in a readinesse, and no doubt but the most of the Leaguers woulde followe him, for feare least if they shoulde fall into the Kinges handes, hee woulde punish them according to theyr deserts. With this resolution hee left 
Dauphiny,
 and hasted into 
Burgundie,
 and 
Champaigne,
 taking with him such strength and power as hee could get, and making sure as manie places as hee coulde come by, prepared to make warre agaynst the king.


Paris
 which was the capitoll Citie of the whole kingdome, and had more fauoured the 
Guise
 then anie other, was mooued to great indignation,
 and shewed it selfe highly offended. And being further incensed with the piteous outcryes and lamentable complaints of the Duchesses of 
Guise
 and 
Nemours,
 and with the inuectiue Sermons of the Iesuites, and Friers, grewe into a desperate madnesse, shaking off the yoake of obedience, and rebelled open∣lye agaynst theyr naturall Prince, and liege Lorde. Most of the greatest, ry∣chest, and strongest Cityes, as 
Orleance, Roan, Amiens, Aniou, Lyons, Abe∣uille, Remes, Tholous,
 and manie others, followed the example of the Parisians,

 and conspiring with the rest of the Leaguers, imprisoned the Kings friendes, seyzed vpon his strong holdes, robbed him of his treasure, and vsed him in all outragious and rebellious maner.


The King vnderstanding of all these seditious sturres, sought by faire meanes and in gentle maner, to reduce them to their obedience, sending out his proclai∣mations to pardon whatsoeuer was past, and to burie it in the graue of obli∣uion, so that they woulde lay downe their Armes, and liue peaceablie vn∣der his authoritie,
 as in dutie they were bound: but they made no reckoning of the Kinges clemencie, but tearmed it cowardlinesse, as though hee were afrayed of their forces, beeing animated by the Sorbonists, and their Doctours in Theologie, who had resolued that they were set free from theyr oath of o∣bedience, and former allegiaunce made vnto 
Henrie
 the thirde. And that it was lawfull for them, and for all the residue of the people of 
Fraunce,
 to take Armes agaynst the sayde King 
Henrie,
 and to persecute him, and all his adhe∣rents, with fire and sworde, as enemyes to God, to their Countrey, and to ho∣ly Church.


When they had once gotten this aduauntage, that they were able to colour their proceedings (as it were with an oracle from heauen) they made no more conscience at the matter,
 but presently determined to choose them a Generall for the leading of their forces, and to establish a new Councell: by whose direction they might manage the rest of their affayres. They refused all the Princes of the blood, and chose the Duke 
de Maine,
 who was a man much fauoured of the lea∣guers,
 and one that was well acquainted with all their practises. The Dukes of 
Aumaile,
 and 
Nemours,
 with the 
Cheualier
 of 
Aumaile,
 were made gouernours of 
Paris.
 There were also 47. of the most seditious, turbulent, factious, and bitte∣rest enemies to the King, appoynted to order the state, as the kings priuie coun∣cell had done in former times. These had no sooner gotten this authoritie into their handes, but they committed most horrible outrages against all such as they suspected to be the kings friends, imprisoning, murthering, robbing, sac
ing and spoyling them in such sort, as was neuer heard of within any mans remem∣brance, and going to the royall pallace called the 
Louure,
 they seyzed vpon all the kings goods,
 they violated the great Seale of 
France,
 brake it in peeces, and trode it vnder their feete. They rent and tore the Armes of 
Valois,
 and 
Burbon,
 and trayled them in most despitefull manner in the mire and dyrt through the Streetes: and assembling as manie of the principall Leaguers, both of the Nobilitie, Cleargie, and Communaltie as they coulde, wrote to other Cities, theyr Confederates, to follow their example, and to ioyne with them, and also to procure as manie partakers as they might, the better to countenance their proceedings.


The king had often and very seriously disswaded them from this seditious course, and with all lenitie sought to reduce them to their former obedience: but considering that he preuailed nothing by gentlenesse, and clemency, but ra∣ther that the people waxed worse & worse, he therfore now determined to take a sharper course, and by force to bring them vnder his obedience, but fearing his owne weaknesse, and want of sufficient power to bring his purposes to passe for that he was, as it were cōpassed about with his enemies, not knowing what

 to doo, or whome to trust,
 perceyuing that the most of those who were a∣bout him, were fauorers of the rebels, hee was content to follow the aduice of his most trustie councellors, and to make peace with the King of 
Nauarre,
 and to vse his counsal and forces for his iust and lawfull defence: and the rather for that the Duke 
de Maine
 approched verie neare vnto him, with a great and puissant ar∣mie. Thus was the king for the safetie of his person, forced to cast himselfe into the armes of him, whom for manie yeares hee had reputed for his mortall ene∣mie, and glad to seeke to be preserued by such an one, whose destruction he had sought with all extremitie.


The King of 
Nauarre
 being aduertised of the Kings intent, and solicited by sundry messengers to come to his ayde with all expedition, called his Nobles and Captaines, and gathered all his forces together, and passing ouer the 
Loyre
 at 
Samnur,
 went towards the King, who was greatly distressed at 
Toures,
 and in imminent perill, to bee oppressed by the Leaguers.
 The King vnderstan∣ding of his approach, the thirtie of Aprill sent the Mareschall 
Haultmont,
 ac∣companied with a great number of the Nobilitie, to desire him to come to 
Ple∣sis de Tours:
 where hee with all his Court staid for him.


The King of 
Nauarre
 readily obeyed, passing ouer the bridge of Saint 
Sa∣phorin,
 where hee left all his forces in battaile array, and went towardes the King, whom hee sound staying for him in the Parke of 
Plessis.
 There was such a concourse of people, and so great a throng, that the two Kings were forced to stay aboue halfe a quarter of an houre, stretching and holding out their hands before they could embrace one another: so great was the prease, and such a multitude were slocked togither, to beholde this ioyfull and blessed meeting. The kind embracings and louing salutations betweene these two Potentates, did euidently declare their inward ioy & contentation. The reioy∣sing of all sorts was incredible: nothing was heard for the space of halfe an houre but God saue the King: a voyce which had not beene heard neare the Court in more then foure Moneths before. And reiterating their ioyfull accla∣mations, they ceased not but cryed out, God saue the Kings, God saue the King, and the King of 
Nauarre.


Here wee may see a straunge and maruailous alteration on the sudden: for these two Princes which had beene so bitter enemies, each hauing for a long time pursued other by cruell and bloodie warres, are now reconciled, and are become louing and kind friends. And the king, who not long before stoode in daunger, either to be murthered, or else to be deliuered into the hands of those, who thirsted for nothing more then for his blood, is now freed from all feare, and restored to his former libertie: and is fortifyed by the arryuall of this Prince and Armie, which did both countenaunce his authoritie, and encou∣rage his friendes, and so daunted his enemyes, that the Duke 
de Maine,
 was glad to giue ouer his siege before 
Chasteaurenault,
 and so retire to 
Paris
 with all speede.


The two kings sate often in councell about their affaires, deuising of the best means to prosecute their warres for their most aduantage. The king of 
Nauarre
 made many roades into the Countrie, to the great domage and hurt of the Leaguers, and so scoured the coast that no enemie durst once appeare in sight.

 In the meane while the king receiued certaine Regiments of Switzers, and help came from all parts of his Realme: so that his armie dayly encreased in number, fame and power. And being now able to meete his enemies in the face, he mar∣ched toward 
Paris,
 aad tooke by the way 
Ponthois, Saint Clow, Poysey, Saint Ger∣maines, Charewton,
 and sundrie other townes. By which means that great and po∣pulous Citie beganne to bee sore distressed for want of victuals and other ne∣cessaries.


This made the conspirators to tremble, and to lay their heads togither, howe to auoyd this perill,
 which now hung ouer their heads: whereupon the dukes of 
Maine, Aumatle,
 and 
Nemours,
 the Archbishop of 
Lions,
 whom the King a little before had pardoned and set at libertie, the Lord 
Rosue, Bosdauphin Brissac, Sagone,
 the 47. which were chosen for the Councell, and the 17. Colonels, which were appointed ouer the 18. wards of the city assembled togither: and after much rea∣soning, 
pro & contra,
 at last resolued that the onely meanes to saue themselues, and to aduaunce their affaires, was to kill the King, who otherwise was likely to get the Citie in short time, and to take an exemplarie punishment vpon them, and all their adherents. Hereupon the King is once againe condemned to die, and as speedie a course taken as might be deuised to hasten his execution.
 They perswaded with one Frier 
Iames Clement,
 of the order of S. 
Dominicke,
 a lewd and bold hypocrite, and enduced him with many reasons (who was otherwise rea∣die enough to any mischiefe) to attempt this tragical and bloody act. They for∣ced the first president of the Senate, named 
Harlay,
 whom for his faithfulnesse to his Prince, they had long detained in prison, to write letters to the K. which this Frier should carrie with him. They taught the sayd 
Clement
 likewise a les∣son, containing matters of great weight and importaunce, aduising him that he should not disclose them to any but to the King, and that in priuate, and great secrecie. Prouiding him besides, a sharpe & long knife, enuenomed with dead∣ly poyson, wherewith he should aduenture to murther the sayd King, as soone as he espied any fit occasion offered, and entreated 
Pagarola
 the Popes Legat to blesse him, and his knife for his better speed.


The Frier being throughly schooled by this accursed companie, prepareth for his iourney: he putteth on his hypocriticall weed on his back, layeth vp his les∣son in his head, and secretly hideth his poisoned knife in his sleeue, and taking an other Frier as bad as himselfe in his companie, hasted to execute his deuilish purpose and intent. Hee was no sooner come to the Campe, which then lay at Saint 
Clow,
 but hee tolde such as hee mette first, that hee had Letters to the King from the first President, and certaine other Parisians, well affected to his Maiestie, contayning matters of verie great importaunce, besides manie other waightie things to bee declared by worde of mouth. The King be∣ing foorthwith aduertised hereof, commaunded that hee shoulde attende vntill hee were called. Within a while after, the king willed that the Frier shoulde bee brought before him. The Frier entered verie boldlie into the kings Chamber, and being asked what his errant was, hee aunswered that hee had matters of great waight and importaunce, to declare vnto his Ma∣iestie, and such as highly concerned his seruice, the king supposing that all was Gospell that the Frier sayde, commaunded such as were about him

 to auoyde the Chamber, and sate downe in a Chayre to heare the Friars newes. The Frier approched to the King, and falling vpon his knees, beganne to tell a long tale: and occupying the Kinges eares with a long and lying discourse, espying his aduauntage, drewe out his knife out of his sleeue,
 and stabbed the King in the lower part of his belly, and then made hast to get away. The king being wonderfully terrified with that vnexpected attempt, cryed out, and lay∣ing hand vpon a dagger which was neare him, strooke the Frier, and wounded him. The Lords and Gentlemen which were attending in an vtter Chamber, hearing the noyse, came running in, and with their Swordes and Rapiers,
 slue the Frier.


The Kings Surgeons were presently called, and his wound dressed, and he layde on his bed. And for that he knewe not whether he should die or not, he called for the king of 
Nauarre,
 all the Princes, Lordes, and Noble men, that were in his Campe, and for the Captaines, Colonels,
 and Chieftaines of the straungers, before whom hee declared, that the king of 
Nauarre
 was the true, and indubitate heyre to the Crowne of 
Fraunce:
 praying and exhorthing all of them to acknowledge him, and to promise true obedience vnto him, and to cause the lyke to bee acknowledged in the whole Campe: and forthwith cau∣sed Letters to be written to all Prouinces and Cities, to aduertise them, howe things had passed at Saint 
Clowe,
 and of his last will and Testament: requiring all his faithfull subiects to protest the fulfilling of the same: instantly requiring all true Frenchmen to reuenge his death, and to take condigne punishment vppon the authors of that impious & execrable fact, and so the two and twentie of Iu∣lie 1
89. the poyson preuayling, and dispersing it selfe through his bodie,
 not withstanding all the remedies that could be deuised, or imagined, hee yeelded vp his life into the handes of him that gaue it him, hauing reigned fourteene yeares, and seuen moneths.


And this was the ende of 
Henrie
 the third the French king, and king of 
Polo∣nia,
 and the last of the house of 
Valois:
 who being bewitched with the sorceries of his mother, and inclyning to euill by his owne bad disposition, opposed him∣selfe agaynst Gods true religion, and being giuen ouer to worke his owne de∣struction, followed the wicked counsailes of his notorious and sworne ene∣mies, who spake him fayre to his face, but inwardly hated him, and neuer cea∣sed persecuting of their deuelish deuises, vntill they had brought his state to confusion, and procured his vntimely death and destruction.








CHAP. XXVI.




Henrie
 the fourth the French King, ouerthroweth the Leaguers in two seuerall battels. Great famine in 
Paris.
 The Duke of 
Parma
 entreth into 
Fraunce,
 relieueth 
Paris.
 From whence he flieth againe in great haste into the Lowe Countryes. The Pope ex∣communicateth the King, VVho causeth his 
Bull
 to be burned at 
Towers.
 The great Armie of the Germianes. The Duke of 
Parma
 goeth the s
conde time into 
Fraunce,
 and preuayleth greatly agaynst the King. The Leaguers seeke for peace. The King encline to Poperie. His coronation. 
Paris
 with most of the great Citties of 
Fraunce
 turne to the King.




I
Mmediately after the death of 
Henrie
 the third, 
Henrie
 of 
Bur∣bon
 King of 
Nauarre,
 and the true inheritour to the Crowne of 
Fraunce,
 both by his owne right, and by the last will and te∣stament of the late King,
 was proclaimed King of 
Fraunce,
 by the name of King 
Henrie
 the foorth, and so acknowledged by all the Princes, Nobles, Colonels, Captaines and souldiours in the Campe, after the ancient maner of choosing the Romane Emperors, giuing him their oaths of fidelitie and obedience, with protestation to assist him to maintaine his royall and princely authoritie against all traitours, rebels, and leaguers, to the vttermost of their powers. The Prince 
Montpensier,
 being then at 
Audly,
 a towne vpon the Riuer of 
Seyne,
 caused likewise all his ar∣my to take the like oath, exhorting them to defend constantly the late kings wil, and valiantly to oppose thēselues against al seditious persons, & despisers of gods lawfull ordinance, traitors to their King. & sworne enemies to their own coūtry.


This 
Henry
 of 
Burbon
 King of 
Nauarre,
 and now the French king (and so here∣after he shall be tearmed) considering the strength of his open enemies, and fea∣ring the treacherie of many in the Campe, who were deuoted to the league, knowing that they might be a meanes to distresse him, beeing so neare vnto a great number of his euill willers, who were likely to double their rage, by rea∣son of this exploit done vpon the late Kings person,
 thought good to licence so many as he suspected, to depart the campe, and determined to retire with the rest into 
Normandie,
 somewhat further from his enemies, and to gather as great a power as hee could of his trustiest, and most assured friends, and in the meane time, to view the attempts and preparations of the Leaguers.


The D. 
de Maine,
 besides all the bands which he had collected of the French rebels, receyued certaine Swart Rutters vnder the leading of the Duke of 
Brim∣swicke.
 The Duke of 
Lorraine
 sent his sonne likewise called the Marques of 
Pont.
 with certaine companies of horsemen with this great armie, which amounted to the number of 25000. men. The Duke 
de Maine
 marched towards 
Deep,
 where the King lay with some nine or ten thousand men: who vnderstanding of the approach of the enemie, tooke the field with those forces which he had, and en∣camped at 
Arques,
 about two miles frō 
Deepe,
 where he stayed not long, but that the enemie appeared in fight at a village not far off, called 
Martinglize.
 The king sent out forthwith his light horsmē to discouer, between whō & the forerūners

 of the Leaguers, there were many hot skirmishes. On the 19. day of Septem∣ber the enemie passed ouer a little riuer which ranne betweene both Armies, and put himselfe in battaile array very well ordered & strongly appointed▪ and marched directly towards the king. The Lord 
Billing
 with two thousande shot was appointed to charge first, and the Duke 
de Maine
 stood behinde him, with a strong battaile readie to succour as need required. The king had quick∣ly ordered his battailon, & hauing disposed of all things in as warlike maner as he could deuise, sent forth his light horsemen to charge the enemie, who were backed with the Prince of 
Conde,
 led by the Lord 
Montaret.
 His battailon of footemen was flanked with his owne cornet, wherein were the Lord 
Graund Pryer
 of 
France,
 the Count 
Rochfaucoult,
 the Count 
Rossy
 his brother, the Count 
Rochford,
 with diuers other Gentlemen of great reckoning, and such as were neerest about his person: and hauing called vppon God to ayde him in his iust and righteous quarrell, so furiously charged the enemie, that hee left fiue hun∣dred dead vpon the place at that instant. The rest seeing the slaughter of their fellowes, and the furie of the kings souldiers, began to shrinke, and in a short time to flie away in great feare and disorder.


The Principall men of the Leaguers which were slain, were the Lord Saint 
Andrew Sagne,
 Collonell of the light horsemen, the Lord Saint 
Vidal
 Lieute∣nant of the Ordenance, the Lord 
Vienuille,
 Count 
Billing, Temblecourt, Sauelak,
 and diuers others were taken prisoners. The king lost the Count 
Rossy,
 brother to 
Rochfaucont,
 and the Lord 
Bake Ville
 a Gentleman of very worthy and com∣mendable parts, and not past some thirtie or fortie others.


The Duke 
de Maine
 seeing his bad lucke, retyred his beaten troupes towards 
Picardy:
 the king being strengthened with the forces of the Prince of 
Soysons,
 Duke 
Languauille,
 and Mareschall 
Haultmont,
 besides foure thousand English∣men newly sent him out of 
England,
 vnder the leading of the right noble and valiant Lord 
VVillowby:
 departed from 
Deepe,
 & coasted the enemie, til he came to 
Menlau
 and then returned toward 
Paris,
 supposing that by that meanes hee should draw the Duke to follow him, and so bring him to a battaile.
 The King comming to 
Paris
 about the 28. of October, determined to assault the suburbs, and hauing prepared all things in a readinesse for that purpose, assailed them the first of Nouember following: where hee founde some resistance, but the courage of the Souldiers redoubled with the presence of the Prince, was such,
 that they quickly gayned them, and slew aboue a thousand and fiue hundred of their enemies: there were also taken fourteene ensignes, and thirteene peeces of Ordenance. The king seeing the Leaguers attempted nothing but that they kept themselues close within the Wals, albeit the Duke 
de Maine
 was entred within the Citie with all his forces,
 beeing mooued with sundrie waightie causes, resolued to dislodge, and to employ his forces in some other places. Hee was no sooner departed, but that the Duke 
de Maine
 picked a quar∣rell against diuers of the richest Cittizens, charging them that they had conspi∣red against the holy League, and procured the King to come to 
Paris,
 which promised to deliuer the Citie into his hands, whereupon many were condem∣ned and executed, and their goods seised to the vse of the League.


The King marched with all his power towardes the 
Loyre
 and 
Seyne,
 purpo∣sing

 to redeeme the Townes which lay betweene those two riuers vnder his obedience, and in his way tooke 
Estamps, Ianuille, Chasteandune, Vendosme, Lauer∣din, Chasteande, Loyre, Monteuert, Chere
 and 
Montrichard,
 yeelded of their owne accord. The strong towne of 
Mans
 was taken by composition, 
Sablis, Laual, Chasteantier,
 with the Castles of 
Beanmont, Touuoy,
 and 
Alenson,
 with manie o∣ther places of importance, were likewise yeelded vnto the king, so that in a short space hee had gotten very great number of strong 
ownes, Castles, and Cities, yea, very large and mightie prouinces, out of the hands of the turbulent and seditious Leaguers. The Lord 
Diguceres
 likewise ioyning with the Lorde 
Valette,
 brother to the Duke of 
Espernon,
 preuailed mightily in 
Prouince
 & 
Lan∣guedock,
 and brought the greatest parte of those Countreyes vnder the kings obedience.


The Duke 
de Maine
 lay all this while in 
Paris,
 and did nothing vntill the com∣ming of the Popes Legate called 
Hemico Caietano,
 but then hee beganne to stir beeing animated by this Embassador, who brought with him fiftie thousande Duckets from 
Rome:
 hee also receiued three hundred thousand Crownes from the Spaniard, and by an excessiue taxe imposed vpon the Parisians, with the spoyle and hauocke which was made vpon the Royals and richest marchants: hee got aboue a Million of golde, with which and the rest of his exhibition from 
Rome
 and 
Spaine,
 he furnished his Army with all necessaries, and leauing 
Paris
 went foorth to seeke the king, hauing in his armie three thousand horse, and thirtie thousand footmen. Hee tooke by the way the Castle of 
Viennes,
 and in the latter ende of Ianuarie got 
Ponthois,
 from whence he remoued, and plan∣ted his siege before 
Meulan.


The Duke of 
Parma
 sent the Count 
Egmond,
 and the Lord 
La Mote,
 gouernor of 
Graueling,
 with some fiue or sixe thousand chosen Souldiers to the ayde of the Leaguers the Duke 
de Maine
 receiued them in 
Picardy,
 and ioyning them with the rest of his forces, marched towards 
Dammartin,
 drawing neere vnto the king, who was then at siege before 
Dreux.
 The King was no sooner ad∣uertised heereof, but that hee raysed his siege, and hasted toward 
Yury,
 where he supposed that the Duke with all his forces had beene lodged,
 and comming to a place neere vnto the Towne called Saint 
Andrewes
 plaine, he ordered his battailes,
 deuiding all his horsemen into seuen esquadrons, flanking them very strongly with their seuerall battailons of footmen, euerie one with their 
En∣fans Perdus
 in theyr front, readie to attach the skirmish assoone as the enemie should appeare. The first Squadron was led by the Mareschall 
Aulmont,
 wher∣in in was three hundred horse, and twelue Regiments of French footmen. The Prince 
Montpencier
 led the second, which consisted of three hundred horse and foure hundred Lansquenetes, and a Regiment of Switzers. The third beeing diuided into two companies containing foure hundred light horse, were somewhat further aduanced then the former two, and were led by the Lord 
Graund Pryor,
 the lord 
Guynny.
 The Baron of 
Biron
 commanded ouer the fourth wherein were two hundred and fiftie good horses, with certaine Cornets of light horsmen. In the fift was the king himself with six hundred horse, flanked on each side with foure Regiments of Switzers. The sixt was led by the Ma∣reschall 
Biron,
 with two hundred and fiftie horses, and two Regiments of

 French footmen. The seauenth squadron was a great Hot of Rutters, strength∣ned with French footmen as was vsed in other battailes.


The Duke 
de Ma
ne
 resoluing to trie his fortune at that present,
 set likewise his forces in battaile array, and taking his Cornet consisting of some two hun∣dred and fiftie horses, put himselfe in the middest of two squadrons of Laun∣ces, which came out of the low countreyes, wherin were some twelue or thir∣teene hundred horse. The Duke of 
Nemours
 with other two hundred and fifty horse, & the Cheualier 
D' Aumaile
 with his band of horse, incorporated them∣selues with this huge companie of Launces, containing now in al, some thou∣sand eight hundred horsemen, marching in front they were flanked also with two Regiments of Switzers, lyned with French shot. There were two other squadrons of Launces, the one compounded of French, Italians, & Albaneses, the other of Wallons and Spaniards, and betweene them both a strong battilon of French enfantery and Lansquenetes, who had on their right wing seauen hundred Rutters, and on the left wing fiue hundred, with foure Cul∣uerings.


All things beeing thus ordered, and both armies in a readinesse for a gene∣rall fight, the great Ordenance began to thunder on both sides: the fury wher∣of being once past,
 the horsemen and footmen charged each other couragious∣ly, and maintained a cruell and bloudy fight for a long time, but at length the victorie enclined to the King, and the whole power of the Duke was ouer∣throwne. The King himselfe that day fought valiantly, and performed both the dutie of a prudent captaine and a couragious and hardy Souldier. There were slaine very neere two thousande horsemen of the enemies, and many of them commanders. Some twelue or thirteene hundred were drowned in the Riuer of 
Yury:
 the most part of the footmen were cutte in peeces, and aboue foure hundred were taken prisoners: al the Switzers yeelded to the kings mer∣cy: the Duke 
de Maine
 ranne away with the formost, leauing his friendes to the mercie of their enemies, and lost all his Ordenance and munition: the Duke of 
Nemours, Bassampierre, Tauannes, Rosue,
 and many others, fled to 
Dreux:
 the chee∣fest that was slaine was the Count 
Egmond,
 knight of the order of the golden Fleece, and the general ouer the forces sent from the Duke of 
Parma
 out of the low countreyes: the yong Count of 
Brunswick,
 captaine 
Collin
 a Spaniard, and the Lord of 
Chastaneray:
 the Principall prisoners were the Lord 
Austfrist,
 with many other Italian and Spanish Lords, the Lord 
Boysdauphin,
 who bare the white Cornet of the Duke 
de Maine,
 was likewise taken prisoner, and with him, 
Fountaine, Martell, Lechant,
 and many other Gentlemen of good ac∣count.


On the kings side there were slaine the Lord 
Clermont, Autragne,
 one of the Captaines of the kings guard, the Lord 
Tishcombert, Longanuay, Crenay, Vienne, Muauille, Fequiers,
 with some other twenty or thirtie Gentlemen at the most. The Marquesse of 
Neste,
 the Eearle 
Choysy,
 the Lord 
de O,
 the Count 
Lud,
 the Lords 
Mouleuet, Lauergue, Rosne,
 and many others were hurt, but not in danger of death: and this was the ende of this great battaile, fought in the plaine of Saint 
Andrew,
 the fourth of March, 1590.


The fame of this glorious victorie ouer the Leaguers so terrified sundrie

 townes, that they yeelded forthwith, and sent to craue pardon for their for∣mer offences. 
Mante, Vernon, Cressy, Lagny, Poysy,
 Saint 
Germaine,
 and Saint 
Clow,
 were the first that were drawen to their due obedience, by whose examples sundrie others were easily, reclaimed and yeelded vppon their first som∣mance: the king beeing glad of this fortunate successe, resolued to be∣siege 
Paris:
 whereof when as the Parisians
 were enformed, as also of the o∣uerthrowe of the Duke 
de Maine,
 they were maruailously affrighted, and t
e rather for that they had promised themselues an assured victorie, groun∣ding vppon the Dukes proude bragges, and the fantasticall prophesies of sun∣drie seditious Friers, and had not the Duke 
Henrico Caietanc
 the Popes 
Nuntio,
 and 
Barnardin Mendoza
 scattered good store of Crownes among the Iesuites and such frierlike fellowes, who shoulde with theyr seditious Sermons en∣courage the people to persist in theyr rebellious actions, and corrupted the principall inhabitants with money and fayre promises: the Parisians hadde in that conseruation of minde come to aske pardon as well as others: but they beeing seduced by their chiefetaines and ringleaders, beganne to bethinke them howe to fortifie their Cities, and to make themselues able to endure a siege.


The king seeing their obstinacy, followed his course, and knowing the Ci∣tie to bee very populous, and nothing well prouided for so many moneths, de∣termined to take all the passages, and to blocke in the Parisians so sure, that they should come by no victuals, making choyse to vanquish them rather by famin then by the sword, as the safest way to punish his enimies, and to saue his friends. Hee therefore seised vppon all the stronge Townes about the Ci∣tie, as 
Corbeil, Melun, Montereaufault, Yonne,
 and 
Charenten,
 and stopping the Riuer of 
Oyse, Marne, Yonne,
 and 
Seyne,
 would not suffer any prouision to bee conuayed into the Citie. Whereupon there beganne to grow great scarce∣nesse,
 and a sore famine threatned that rebellious multitude. The Duke 
de Maine
 was gone into 
Peronne
 in 
Picardy,
 and from thence to 
Bruxelles,
 to the Duke of 
Parma,
 to entreate him to come to the succours of the League and v∣sed all the other meanes hee could to leuie newe forces: and hauing had some promises from 
Spaine,
 assured himselfe of ayd out of the low Countryes, wher∣with he should be once againe able to meete the king, who all this while lay before 
Paris,
 and attempted nothing but onely to keepe it from victuals, and by that meanes had so famished the towne of S. 
Dennis,
 that after that they had consumed all their old store, and had eaten vp their horses, dogs, cats, rats, mice, rootes, hearbs, & much bread made of ground straw beaten to powder, they were enforced to yeeld to the kings mercy, who vsed them very gracious∣ly Penury and want likewise so pressed the Citie of 
Paris,
 that by the beginning of Iuly there were no dainties to be found in the Citie, but the Parisians were glad to fall to such homely viands, as not long before had serued for a dish at S. 
Dennis.
 Yea, so great and so horrible was the famine, that there were many children eaten and deuoured by those hungry and staruen rebelles.


When the Duke 
da Maine
 who was still attending vppon the Duke of 
Par∣ma,
 was aduertised of the great and extreme penury that was among the Pa∣risians, as also of the vprores and murtherings of the people, hee wrote letters

 full of rich promises, assuring them of the comming of the Duke of 
Parma
 and himselfe, with a sufficient number to raile the siege. The miserable people op∣pressed with the tyrannie of their rulers, hardned with seditious sermons, blin∣ded with ignorance, seduced with malice, and sed with much villanie from 
Spaine,
 from the Pope, and from this Duke, and by Gods iust iudgement giuen ouer to a reprobate sense, held out obstinately, and would by no perswasions be enduced to submit themselues vnto the Kings mercie.


The hope that the Spaniard had to conquere 
France,
 and to cloath himselfe with the rich spoyle of the 
Flower de Lis,
 made the Duke of 
Parma
 to giue bet∣ter eare to the Duke 
de Maine,
 and to hearken to the succours of the distressed Leaguers, so that hauing gathered a power of some 15000. Spaniards, Itali∣ans, Wallons, and Flemmings, all of the olde bands of the countrey: in the lat∣ter ende of August hee entred into 
France,
 and ioyning with the forces of the Duke 
de Maine,
 marched towards 
Paris.
 The King hauing to deale with so great an enemie, brake vp his siege and went to meete him as farre as the plaine of 
Boundy,
 and there ordered his battailes, & made himself readie to end the quar∣rell by a generall fight: the Kings army consisted of 10000. French footmen, 4000. Switzers, 4000. horsemen, the greatest number wherof were gentlemē of the cheerest houses in 
France,
 and 800. Rutters: there were sixe Princes, two Mareschalles of 
France,
 and a great number of noblemen, captaines, and Gen∣tlemen, who were able to leade as great an armie as that was. The Duke of 
Parma
 hauing discouered all his warlike multitude from the top of a hill, re∣turned to his campe, and caused his souldiers to entrench themselues as strong∣ly as they could, and refused to fight,
 albeit the king staied for him by the space of three daies together: but afterward perceiuing that the Duke would not be drawen to a battaile by no meanes, hee determined to breake vp his armie, and to sende his souldiers into seuerall prouinces to rest and relieue them after so painfull and laborious a iourney, and so to make them fresh and lustie against hee should haue better opportunitie to fight against his enemies.


Assoone as the king was departed wel neere twenty Leagues off, and that he had deuided his forces by sending them into seuerall places,
 the Duke gat him out of the treaches & hasted to 
Paris,
 where he was welcomed with great ioy: but he had not continued there long, but the tyrannie, pride, and villany of the Spaniard and hispaniolized was such, that the Parisians waxed weary of that intollerable burthen, & would faine haue bin rid of them and they had wist how, they therfore entreated the duke to open the riuer for the traffick, which he promised, & vndertooke the siege of 
Corbaile,
 which, after 3. assaults wherin he lost a great nūber of his best & most approued souldiers, he tooke by force, & shewed all crueltie vpon the inhabitants. He made the Parisians beleeue that he would go from thence to take 
Poysy, Meulan, Maule, Vernon,
 & 
Pont del Arch:
 but indeed he was not so good as his word, for he did nothing of al this, but tri∣fled out the time,
 & fed the citizens with faire words vntil the latter end of Oc∣tober, and then marched homeward through 
Bric,
 being followed hard at the heeles, by the king and those smal forces which he could raise vpon the sodain, as far as 
L' Arbre de Guyze,
 where he entred into the low countreyes with not past some 8000. of all that companie wherewith hee had entred into 
France.




After that the Duke of 
Parma
 was gotten into the low Countreyes, the king hauing gathered al his forces together marched toward 
Chartres,
 which he be∣sieged,
 and after many sharpe assaults tooke it, and brought it vnder his obedi∣ence, hee tooke also 
Aulnean, Macheuille, Dourdan, Bonsery, Clay, Tremblay, Ma∣nican, Ginlis,
 and so scoured al the part of 
Picardy,
 that no enemie durst once shew his face, and from thence passed into 
Britaine,
 where hee defeated the Lorde Saint 
Lawrence,
 Mareschall of the Armie of the rebels vnder Duke 
Mercury,
 and surprised Louuiers, where hee found great store of Corne, Wine, and all other necessarie prouision, besides foure thousand fat Oxen, wherewith hee plenti∣fully victualled his army for many dayes.


About the same time the Lord 
Chartres,
 gouernour for the King in 
Deepe,
 and Sir 
Roger VVilliams
 a very couragious and well experienced English knight, with their English & French forces, amounting to some seauen hundred men, defeated two regiments of the Leaguers at a place called 
Cinqcens,
 and put them in a maner all to the sword. The Prince 
Conty
 tooke 
Mount Morillon, Chaurguy,
 S. 
Sauin, Blank en Bury, Bourge, Archambault, Playsance, Bellarbre, Availes, Betoune, Bisse,
 and many other forts and Castles in 
Limosin
 and 
Toureyne.
 The Prince 
D' Ombs
 accompanied with the valiant, fortunate, and noble Gentleman Sir 
Iohn Norris,
 general of such forces as were sent out of 
England
 for the ayde of the K. into 
Britaine,
 tooke 
Guingcampe,
 where there were a great number of the Nobi∣litie and Gentlemen of the Countrey, who with the Towne payed fiftie thousande Crownes for their Ransome, and tooke the oath of Obedience to the king: and passing from thence to 
Quelnec,
 encountred with the Duke 
Mercury
 a principall Leaguer, who at the first shewed a countenance as though he would haue tryed the quarrell by an entire fight: but after the losse of some two or three hundred Spanish and French Leaguers, with 
Don Roderigo,
 cheefe Mareschall of the Spaniards, and the Lord 
Guebrian
 Collonel of all the footmen, he retired further off to places of greater securitie.


The king was now at the siege of 
Noyon,
 which in the ende yeelded vppon composition, and the Lord 
Vile
 submitted himselfe to the king, and had leaue to depart whither hee would: the Leaguers seeing the kings fortunate suc∣cesse, fearing that all in the ende would yeeld vnto him, procured a newe ex∣communication from 
Rome
 against him and all his faithfull subiects,
 and cau∣sed it to be published at 
Pont del Arch
 in 
Normandy,
 by 
Marcellus Landrianus,
 a saucie and malepert Iesuite: but the king beeing aduertised hereof, comman∣ded his Court of Parleament holden at 
Cane
 to proceede against Pope 
Gregory
 the fourteenth, who sent it, and his 
Nuntio
 that brought it, as against tyrannes, conspirators with rebels, perturbers of the State, sowers of sedition, a
 the common and notorious enemies of GOD and all goodnesse, and taking the Popes Bull,
 caused it to bee fastned to a gibbet at 
Tours,
 by the common hang∣man of the towne, and to bee consumed to ashes, to the great reioycing of all the beholders.


The King vnderstanding that the right honourable Lord the Earle of 
Es∣sex
 was nowe arriued in 
France
 with a bande of very braue men, and was mar∣ching towardes him, went to meete the saide Earle at a place called 
Gysors,
 where hee remained not long, but returned towards 
Champaigne,
 for that hee

 vnderstood that his Germaines were nowe in a readinesse to march on for∣wards on their waie towardes 
France.
 In the meane while the English forces tooke the towne of 
Gourny,
 and ioyning with the Mareschal 
Biron,
 distressed the Leaguers in those quarters.


Much about this time the Prince 
Ienuille
 sonne to 
Francis
 late Duke of 
Guyse,
 escaped out of prison at 
Tours,
 where hee had beene kept for the space of three yeeres and more,
 and hauing the waies layde with fresh horse by the counsell of the Lord 
De la Chastre,
 his kinsman got safely to 
Selles,
 and from thence to 
Verdun,
 where hee was most ioyfully receiued of all the Leaguers, who had attended his comming with great deuotion, and were exceeding glad that they had recouered him, by whose means they imagined the better to counte∣nance their actions, and to effect their entended purpose. Howbeit, this their ioy was foorthwith crossed by the comming of the Germaines, who were al∣ready entred into 
France,
 and hasted to the succors of the king.


This great and mightie Armie wherein were some two or three and twenty thousand footmen and horsemen,
 was diuided into sundry battailons, and led by theyr seuerall chiefetaines and commaunders. The Vicont of 
Tu∣rennes
 conducted the Vauntgard, wherein were some 1600 horse, next whom followed the Earle of 
Anhoult,
 cheefe commaunder in the Armie, with two thousand and two hundred horse. The third place was alotted to 
Barbisderse,
 with a squadron of some 1000. horse. 
Iselstenius
 & the Lieutenant of the Lorde 
Robours,
 led 8. or 900. footmen. 
Creighnicht, Bernhard, Dessaw,
 and 
Bonnaw,
 had their seuerall regiments, & each cōsisted of a 1000. horse. The Lord 
Laudins
 and the Earle of 
VVide
 had vnder their leading 6400. footmen, equally diuided in∣to two great squadrons, which were flanked as it were with another strong battailon, wherein were about 4300. footmen, and 200. horse, led by 
Tem∣pluys
 and the Earle of 
VVeda. Christopher de Fesler
 with 300. footmen, serued as a wing on the left hand, betweene whom and the Earle of 
VVide
 was the yong Earle of 
VVestenberg
 with 3400. footmen: there was also maruailous store of all warlike munition, as great Artillerie, pouder, shotte, bridges, boats, spades, shouelles, pickaxes, and all other necessaries for the warres, and no∣thing wanting which was requisite for the aduauncement of their affaires: The Duke of 
Lorraine
 made al the preparation that might be to stop the passage of these Germaines, and to that ende stuffed all his frontier townes with strong garrisons: but they opening their way by force, passed forwards, and by easie iourneyes came to the king, who beeing strenhthened with these new forces, resolued to besiege 
Boar.
 The Leaguers being now not able to encounter with the king in the field, fortified the Citie as strong as they could, and attended the comming of the Duke of 
Parma,
 whose ayde they had instantly desired, the bet∣ter to maintaine head against the king.


The Duke vnderstanding in what tearmes the Leaguers stood, & knowing that the losse of 
Roan,
 being a principall Citie in 
France,
 and the cheefest in 
Nor∣mandy,
 would be very preiudicial vnto that mistery, which lay secretly enclosed in his brest, and a great meanes to crosse the proceedings of the Spanish king, & hispaniolized French, gathered a great power, and leauing the gouernement of the Low countreyes to the Count 
Mansford,
 marched towards 
France,
 which

 he entred about the midst of Ianuary with some 8. or 9000. Spaniards, Italians, Duch, Wallons, & ioyning with the Leaguers so encreased his armie, that he grew to be some 17. or 18000 strong, with which power he determined to raise the Kings siege, & to deliuer thē who had with so great earnestnesse sought his helpe, and with this resolution he marched towardes 
Roan,
 which assoone as those who kept the town vnderstood, they began to plucke vp their hearts, and made many sallyes forth vppon the kings forces but being valiantly withstood & shrewdly beaten, were glad to returne with the losse often times of their va∣liantest leaders and most forward souldiers. Nowe as the Leaguers within the town begā to be punished with many miseries, & the famin daily encreased to the destruction of many so penury and want of necessaries began to creepe in among the kings souldiers, and by reason it was in the extreme of the Winter, many perished with cold, and great numbers fel into very sore & greeuous dis∣eases: notwithstanding, the siege was still continued, and all the politike deuises that might be put in practise to gaine the citie. The Duke being about 
Rue,
 and there thorowly enformed as wel of the state of 
Roan,
 as of the courage & reso∣lution of the kings forces, would not attempt any thing rast ly, but sending for greater forces out of 
Flanders,
 vnder the conduct of the Earles of 
Aremberg
 and 
Barlemont,
 kept himself close for a while, purposing as it seemed, to protract the time, & to cause the K. who (as is already said) began to fal into manifold wāts, to raise his siege from before the city: but the Duke perceiuing that this depose took not so speedie effect as he desired, & pondering with himself how hard & dangerous a matter it was to releeue the citie by force,
 sought by a cunning & pollitike deuise to bring his businesse about, and therefore on the sodaine dis∣lodged, & retired his whole power ouer the Riuer of 
Some,
 as though he had purposed to returne home again without any more ado. Which when the king perceiued, and now verily thinking that hee had bin quite gone, he licensed the greatest part of his Nobilitie and Gentlemen to departe home to their houses, there to refresh themselues after so long & tedious trauaile, & reseruing a suffi∣cient number to maintaine the siege, the K. departed to 
Deepe
 there to repose himselfe and to take counsell for the ordering of the rest of his affaires.


The Duke was quickly enformed by his espialles of whatsoeuer the king had done,
 and 
nowing now that all his aduantage consisted in, celeritie caused his troupes on the sodaine to turne head and to march backe againe towards 
Roan,
 and vsing great expedition, so fast approched, that the kings armie beeing not readye to encounter him, and no assured course taken to crosse his designe∣ments, he besieged 
Candebeck,
 a town standing vpon the riuer betweene 
New-hauen
 & 
Roan.
 By this meanes was the riuer cleered, & liberty obtained to passe and repasse without peril: then were there forthwith a great number of ships prouided, & being thorowly furnished with victuals and all other necessaries, were sent to 
Roan
 to releeue the Leaguers who were nowe extremely di∣stressed and almost famished. The King sought all the opportunitie that might be to fight with the Duke, and offered many skirmishes to drawe him there∣to, but hee knowing fortune to bee very inconstant, and in the warres e∣specially to bee most wauering and vncertayne, vtterly refused to hazard all vppon a Battaile, and vnderstanding that there was some scarcitie

 in the kings campe, and that it was impossible that so great a multitude shoulde bee long kept togither in a Countrey so exceedingly wasted, where there were no meanes to relieue their wants, kept himselfe close, and sought to wearie his enemies by his long delaies.


The K. daily braued the Spaniards in the face, & dared them by many indig∣nities to come to handy strokes: which made the Duke resolue to do somwhat, albeit he were sickly and most vnwilling to fight,
 supposing that if hee shoulde not stirre vpon so many prouocations, his enemies would waxe more couragi∣ous, and himselfe with all his Spaniards should lose much of their wonted ho∣nor & reputation. Whereupon he determined to encounter with the kings for∣ces, and to make some triall of the courage and resolution of his enemies: yet so warily, that he would be sure not to bring himselfe and his souldiers to a set bat∣tell, but by some light conflict to maintain his honor: and by a Spanish brauado, to make the world beleeue, that hee did but little esteeme of the king, and all his forces. Whereupon euery thing being in a readinesse, and hauing encouraged his troupes with sundry perswasions, the signall was no sooner giuen, but there began a sharpe and cruel fight, which hastened the death of many braue and va∣liant souldiers. But the Duke espying the Kings side to be too strong, and that his men were put to the worse, withdrewe his troupes within their intrench∣ments, hauing lost the yong Lord of 
Chastres,
 and many other of great recko∣ning and account. The dukes horse was shot through with a bullet. The Count 
Horratio, Scipio,
 and 
Hanniball Bentiuolio,
 with many others were sore wounded and in daunger of their liues. The Duke not liking to trie the quarell any more by force, fell to his old politike practises,
 and laboured by all possible meanes to get away away from the king without any further fighting. Wherfore leauing a garrison of some 500 Spaniards, French and Wallons in 
Caudebecke,
 and sending the Duke 
de Maine
 with 3000. Leaguers into 
Roan,
 hee reposing himselfe for a while within the Citie, at length marched away, as strongly and as closely as he could towarde 
Paris,
 there to refresh them after so long and tedious trauailes: as also to make tryall what store of Crownes might be gotten to satisfie his gree∣die Souldiers. The King pursued him, and following him in the taile, wat∣ched to skirmish with him vpon euerie aduauntage. But seeing hee coulde not effect that, which hee so earnestly affected, which was to drawe him to an entyre fight: hee caused all his troupes to turne heade, and ledde them before 
Caudebecke,
 which he foorthwith recouered from the Leaguers, and leauing a strong garrison to defende the Riuer, he retyred to 
Deepe,
 giuing leaue to the greatest part of his army to go refresh themselues in more fertile and commodi∣ous Countreys.


Thus was 
Roan
 deliuered out of the hands of the King, by the comming of the duke to the great encouragement of the Leaguers, who seeing the Kinges fortune to frowne, began to triumph, and to reioyce exceedingly for this their vnexpected reliefe: and the rather for that this their good hap was seconded by diuerse other fortunate exploits in other places: for the Duke 
Ioyense
 ouerthrew certaine of the Kinges troupes before 
Lautrech,
 as they went to surprise the sa
d towne, being betrayd by some of those, who had promised them to bee a meanes to let them enter without anie empeachment. But they vsing this

 as a stratagem to entrap the Kings souldiours,
 enformed the Duke of all theyr proceedings: who as soone as hee had intelligence thereof, gathered a strong power, and lying in ambush by the way as they s
ould passe, suddenly set vpon them, and slue three or foure hundred, and tooke 200. prisoners: among whom were 
Monsieur de Violet, de Godius,
 & sundry others of very good account. Three hundred fled to a castell not farre off, called 
la Trappe,
 which was forth∣with besieged by the said Duke, and the leaguers: they who were within the ca∣stell valiantly defended the place for a while, induring some thirtie or fortie Ca∣non shot at length considering their want of necessaries, & how they were not able to maintaine themselues as they desired, they yeelded, hauing lost 
Colaun: bieres, Tanieuse, L'estolies, Raueleus, Bertrand, Deluan, Biense, de Lucques, La Brosse, Les∣pinac,
 and many other chieftains and commanders. 
La Barry, Portale
se, Pibrac,
 besides, sundry gentlemen were taken prisoners, and well neare two hundred common souldiers. About the same time Duke 
Mercury
 likewise ouerthrew the power of the prince of 
Conty,
 & the prince 
D' Ombes
 in 
Britany:
 and hauing taken ten field peeces frō them, slue many of their brauest and valiantest men, as 
Mem∣braise, Rochpot, Picheres,
 with some others, preuailing mightily in those quarters, and reducing sundry townes vnder the obedience of the seditious league. Thus did the Kings affaires begin to go backward, and many townes who were wa∣uering before, did nowe wholy abandon the King, and ioyne with the rebels. Sundry of the nobilitie, who were popishly affected, and therefore glad of the Kings bad successe, reuolted, and secretly conueyed themselues away, either to the enemy, or into their owne countries, and by their bad example, drew on in∣finite numbers to take the same course, forsaking their lawfull prince when hee stood in greatest need of their seruice, exposing that noble kingdome to the bar∣barous villanie of that viperous broode, who neuer cease gnawing out of the bowels of her, that should be their dearest and best beloued mother.


The King wanting sufficient power to stop these wicked proceedings, was forced to suffer the rebels to range at large, and to get many of his townes, both in 
Normandy, Britany, Prouince,
 and 
Dauphiny:
 They took likewise 
Espernon:
 wher∣in they found great store of wine, corne, & other necessaries for the wars. These fortunate exploits so encouraged that rebellious route, and so puffed them vp with the pride of their owne forces, that they vtterly refused to bow their necks vnder the yoake of obedience: or to admit of any other gouernment then such as pleased thēselues. The king was loath to loose 
Espernon,
 being a towne of ve∣rie good importance, and therfore drew all his forces to the siege therof, where the Mareschall 
Biron
 was slaine
 with a shot from the wall, while hee was verie busie in viewing the army, & in giuing order for the planting of the siege Yea, and the king himself was in great perill,
 hauing his horse killed vnder him with the same bullet, wherewith the Mareschall was slaine before. Duke 
Mercurie
 in the meane time tooke 
Manus
 in 
Britain,
 and the duke 
de Maine
 recouered 
Caude∣becke,
 and cleared all the riuer frō 
New-hauen
 vp to 
Roan.
 The D. of 
Nemours,
 go∣uernor of 
Lions,
 took 
Vienna
 and 
Valence,
 and by that means cōmanded the riuer of 
Rhodanus.
 Now were the Germains who came into 
France
 in 91. desirous to returne home: so that taking their leaue of the French K. they marched toward 
Germany
 as fast as they could: but by reason they were not so many, nor so strong

 as when they came first into 
France,
 they were desirous to passe rather by leaue then by force, and therefore they thought it conuenient to send to the Duke of 
Parma
 for to obtaine License of him, that they might quietly passe through the Dukedom of 
Luxemburge,
 who readily condiscēded therto, vpon condition that they should not rifle the Countrey as they went, but should trauaile in peace∣able manner, and pay for whatsoeuer they tooke. Thus this great and mightie Army which had in conceite deuoured halfe 
France,
 and at theyr comming had opened their way by fine force, returned home without dooing of anie great matter, and were driuen to aske leaue and to sue to their enimies for their pasport, such and so strange an alteration ensued in a short space.


The Leaguers beeing drunken with this prosperous successe, began to con∣sult about the election of a new King, and to that ende the Duke of 
Ferta,
 and the Cardinall of 
Sens,
 the Popes 
Nuntio
 were sent to 
Paris
 to bee present as assistants in this waightie businesse, as well to aide with their aduise and counsell, as to perswade with sundrie great states, who as yet were not fully resolued in this poynt, neyther whether they shoulde assent to so wicked and desperate proceedings.


Now albeit that the rebellious multitude had prospered for a long time, and were growen in a maner to the ful period of their desires, hauing effected ma∣ny things greatly tending to the countenancing of their affaires, in so much as that they had gayned the strongest & richest cities, with infinit numbers of tur∣bulent and seditious heades to ioyne hand in hand with them, and to take parte in these their wicked and desperate attempts: yet, as it alwaies falleth out a∣mong such a confused and brainesicke rable, each mistrusted other, and being often admonished by the secret warnings of their owne consciences how dam∣nable a course they had runne, as also considering the intollerable seruitude wherto they were likely to bring themselues and their posteritie if they should longer submit themselues to their Spanish protector, and likewise seri∣ously pondering the kings estate, which was still supported by the cheefe Prin∣ces of the bloud, the ancient and most honourable Nobilitie of 
France,
 fauored by a number of valiant and wise personages, and countenanced by sundrie mightie Princes abroade, so that it still seemed to bee impossible to bring their purposes to passe, but rather that they should hazard their owne estates, their liues and liberties, yea, and in fine the whold kingdome, by calling in the Spa∣niards their olde and ancient enemies, who sought for nothing more then for the spoyle of the 
Flower de Lis.
 All these reasons with many other beeing well weighed, they supposed it to bee their best, to reconcile themselues to theyr king, of whole readie inclination to peace,
 though it were with hard conditi∣ons, they nothing doubted: wherupon they first priuily practised with sundry of the Papists which followed the king, whereof there were no small number, and hauing by their meanes made as it were an entrie vnto their pretensed pur∣pose, they sent their deputies to treate of a peace for three moneths, wherto the king assented in Iuly 1593. and afterwards continued the same for two monethes more, 
videlicet,
 vnto the ende of the moneth of December following: in all which time there was nothing doone, otherwise then the sending of sundrie messages each to other, with continual practising to draw the king to the liking

 of Poperie: wherein there was such paines taken, and so farre humane polli∣cie preuailed, that this noble and famous Prince who had for the space of foure or fiue and twentie yeeres so valiantly and fortunately de
ended the Gospell, and that with the hazard and perill of his owne life,
 freely exposing his royall person, his treasor, his friendes, and all other meanes whatsoeuer 
o
 the main∣tenance thereof, beganne to waxe calme in the defence of his profession, and to encline to that false and superstitious Religion of 
Rome,
 to the high displea∣sure of almightie God, the great dishonour of his princely Maiestie, and to the extreme greefe and astonishment of all the Protestants. Thus this noble and renowned Monarke, the hope (as it were) of al that fauored Gods truth, whom God had beautified with so many excellent graces and notable vertues, as cou∣rage, wisedom, zeale and constancy in so many apparant dangers, & had made him the protecter and comforter of his afflicted church in 
France,
 had deliuered him out of the hands of all his enemies,
 and had giuen him his Lords house (as the Prophet speaketh) and if that had beene too little, would haue giuen him much more, making his proudest enemies to stoupe before h m, and to the admiration and wonderment of all men continually protected him in despight of all those who sought his ruine and ouerthrow, is another argument of the mutabilitie and interchangeable estate of all things in the world, and that not onely the heauens, the earth, the sea, the beasts of the field, the fishes in the wa∣ters, and the soules of the ayre are ful of varietie and change, but likewise king∣domes, countreyes, and commonwealths, Cities, and townes, all estates and conditions, of men high and low, rich and poore, wise and foolish, Prince and people, are full of change and alteration.


In Ianuarie and Februarie immediatly folowing the Kings so apparant incli∣nation to Poperie, most of the principall Cities of 
France
 which had with so notorious obstinacy for a long while shaken off the yoake of their obedience, beganne to bee reclaimed, and as it were on the sodaine to bee arranged on the kings side, & 
Meaux, Lyons, Orleance, Bourges, Ponto
se,
 with many other townes of speciall monument & account opened their gates and willingly receiued the kings garrisons, crying 
Vine Henry
 4. 
roy de France & de Nauarre,
 expelling the Spaniards and hispaniolised French, shewing great forwardnesse to withstande the outragious proceedings of the furious and desperate Leaguers.


The king had no sooner reduced these strong Townes vnder his obedience, hauing by this meanes mightily strengthned himselfe and weakened his ene∣mies, but that hee was forthwith aduised by the Princes of his bloud, the dukes and peeres of 
France,
 the officers of his Crowne, the Lords of his Councel, and the most no
able personages of his courts of Parliamēts, to frame himself to his corona ion and annoynting, and that in such maner as all other kings his prede∣cessors had done before him. Which said ceremonious order of anointing is ac∣counted the euident token of their royaltie, and the publike approbation of the French nation. Whereto the K. assenting as one now entending to obserue the ancient customs of his predecessors: it was resolued that this solemne ceremony shuld be performed at our ladies church at 
Chartres,
 for that the citie of 
Rheims,
 where for the most part the king of 
France
 had wont euermore to be crowned, still persisted in her rebellion, and banded her selfe with the kings enemies.




All things beeing in a readinesse for the solemnizatio
 of th
 
 magnificent coronation, vpon the seuen and twentie day o
 
 the King came to the sayde Church, attended with a great 
 Princes, Earles, Lordes, and other States of 
Fraunce.
 And by 
 some of the twelue Peeres as yet helde out agaynst the King, and o
her 
ere sicke, so that there wanted of the full and competent number to atte
 
, and to dootheyr seruice as the tyme then requyred, the King 
 o∣thers in theyr steade to make vp the whole number, whose names were as fol∣loweth.






Th
 6. peeres ecclesiastical.


1 Bishop of 
Charters.


Represen∣ting the


1 Archbishop of 
Rh
mis
 the first peere Ecclesiast
 all.






2 Bishop of 
Nautes.


2 The Bishop duke of 
,






3 Bishop of 
Digne,


3 Bishop 
,






4 Bishop of 
Mallefais,


4 Bishop 
 of 
,






5 Bishop of 
Orleance,


5 Bishop Cou
t of 
▪






6 Bishop 
Angiers.


6 Bishop
 ou
 to 
.






The 6 peeres temporall.


7 Prince of 
Coney,


Represen∣ting the


7 Duke of 
Bu
▪






8 County 
Soyssons,


8 Duke of 
Nor
,






9 Duke 
Mo
tpensier,


9 Duke of 
Aqr
e,






10 Duke of 
Rays,


10 Count of 
Th
ous,






11 Duke of 
Vantadon,


11 Count of 
Flanders,






12 Lord of 
Lupembourg,


12 Count of 
Champa
ne.






The King was crowned by the Bishop of 
Chartres,
 who for that day sup∣plied the roome of the Archbishop of 
Rhemis,
 and enth
onised him in his royall and Kingly seate, in such maner and order as the rest of the Kings his predeces∣sors had beene accustomed in former times.


Now began the Kings authoritie to waxe great, and to enlarge it selfe euery day more and more, and so farre it spread in a short time, after that it was recey∣ued into the heart of all 
Fraunce:
 for the 20. of March following, 
Paris
 the Me∣tropolitan Citie of the whole realme,
 which had continued in all kinde of re∣bellious disorder, and that for many yeres togither, omitting no kind of outrage that could be imagined against her natural, and liege soueraignes, their crownes and dignities, by the vertuous and commendable industry of 
Brissac,
 was like∣wise reduced vnder the Kings obedience: who pardoning the inhabitants, so many and so monstrous offences, restored them to their auncient priueligie
, rights, grants, Franchises, and liberties, with the reestablishments of his courts of Parliament, and that in as large and ample manner as they had beene at anie time indued by any of the kings his predecessors, abrogating all lawes, decrees, statutes & ordinances, which had passed in preiudice of thē, as appeareth by an Edict bearing date the 28 of March, 1594. So as neither the said inhabitants, nor any of them should from thenceforth be troubled, molested, or disquieted in any maner of sort for their former disobediences, imposing perpetuall silence heereof to his Attourneyes generall, and to all other persons whatsoeuer:

 commaunding withall, all Dukes and Peeres of 
Fraunce,
 all Officers of the Crowne, all his Lieutenants and other Magistrates, to cause the same to be pro∣claymed and published in theyr seuerall iurisdictions and resorts, with expresse charge, that the contents of the same should be inuiolably kept and obserued, to the end that if it were possible, the whole kingdome of 
Fraunce,
 which for a long time had endured so manie calamities, might nowe at length feele some ease and mitigation of former miseryes, and the beaten barke of that distres∣sed state, which had beene so daungerously tossed in a vast Ocean of all kind of affliction, might in the ende be brought to some desired hauen of peace and quietnesse, and there be safely harboured, to the eternall glorie of God, the perpetuall honour of the King, and the con∣tinuall ioy and comfort of the whole Common-wealth.




FINIS.










LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede. 1597.











