(EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A01165)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 2733)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 544:2)
Running title reads: The mutabilitie of France.
Reproduction of the original in the Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery.
Kingdomes and states ful of change and mutabilitie in this age.
Lewis the
Lewis the
Lewis the
The Duke of Britaine, and sundrie other of the nobility rise against the King.
The K. mar∣cheth toward Paris.
The k forced to forsake the field.
The King re∣concileth his subiects, and maketh peace with Count Charolois.
Charles D. of Burgundy slaine at Nancy.
K. Lewis of France get∣teth a great part of Bur∣gundie.
The King stroken with a sudden disease.
The miserie of Lewis the
The death of Lewis the eleuenth King of France.
Charles the eight succee∣ded his fa∣ther Lewis in the king∣dome of France.
Lewis Sfor∣tia
The Kings Councel dis∣swadeth the King from the conquest of Naples.
Vere and Brissonet en∣cite the king to enter Italy
The King resolueth to go to Naples contrarie to the opinion of his councell.
The D. of Millan com∣meth to Ast to the French King.
The French Kings pro∣sperous suc∣cesse in Italy
The Floren∣tines r
Alphonsus King of Na∣ples proui∣deth to with∣stand the French.
The Pope yeeldeth to to the French.
Alphonso yeeldeth his Kingdome to his son, and flyeth into Cicilia.
The great feare of Al∣phonsus.
Fiue Kings of Naples in lesse than two yeeres.
Ferdinando K. of Na∣ples, flieth from the French.
Naples yeel∣deth to the French king.
The speedy conquest of the French King.
Charles of France crowned king of Naples.
The pride of the French.
Sundry great princes con∣spire against the French.
The King o
Sundry cities rebel against the French.
The Pope flieth from Rome.
The Mar∣ques of Man¦toua, generall of the Vene∣tian forces.
The battell of Terro.
The order of the French armie.
The order of the Venetian armie.
The hardie encounter of both armies.
The French K. looseth all his baggage.
The distresse of the French King.
The French run out of Italie.
The great alteration in Italie.
The death of the yong D. of Orleanes.
The sudden death of Charles the
Lewis D. of Orleance. K. of France.
Lewis D. of Millan for∣saketh the French king
Millan yeel∣deth to the French.
The French K. goeth to Millan.
The D. of Millan ta∣ken prisoner.
The misera∣ble end of the D. of Mil∣lan.
The French and Spanish Kings ioyne for the con∣quest of Naples.
The Spani∣niards driue the French out of Na∣ples.
The Pope ta¦keth the Ve∣netians into his protection
The battel of Rauenna.
The Spani∣ards ouer∣throwne at Rauenna by the French.
Nauarro ta∣ken prisoner.
Gaston de Foix general of the French army slaine, after he had gotten the victorie.
Rauenna sacked and spoyled.
The Swit∣zers expell the French out of Mil∣lan.
The death of Lewis the twelfth king of France.
Francis the first King of France.
The King of France labo∣reth to bee Emperour.
Charles K. of Spaine chosen Em∣rour.
The great commendati∣on of Fran∣cis the first.
The great commendati∣on of Fran∣cis the first.
The King of France ta∣keth Millan
The K. besie∣geth Pauia.
The Empe∣rials enuade the french Kings camp.
Sixe hun∣dred Grisons were called home to de∣fende their owne territo¦ries.
The great valor of the King.
The King of France ta∣ken prisoner.
The King of France sent prisoner into Spaine.
The great slaughter of the french Nobilitie.
The Pope, the Veneti∣ans and other potentates, make a league a∣gainst the Emperour.
The modera∣tion of Charles the fift.
The agree∣mēt betweene the Emperor and the french King.
The Empe∣rour offereth the combate to the french King.
A peace be∣tweene the Emperor and the French King.
The death of Francis the first, king of France.
Henry the second King of France.
The king of France ben∣deth all his forces against the Emperor.
Metz taken by the french
The Queene of Hungary leuieth an army to in∣uade France
The French King brea∣keth vp his army.
The prepara∣tion of the Emperour against the French king.
The great army of the Emperour.
The Duke of Guise sent to keepe Metz against the Emperor.
The French Kings armie.
The siege of Metz.
The emperi∣als weary of the siege.
The emperor resolueth to depart from Metz, the
The misera∣ble estate of the emperiall army at their departure from Metz.
The emperor purposeth to besiege Te∣roanne, which Pauuilliers is commaunded to defend.
The furious batterie of Teroanne.
The courage of the besie∣ged.
Captaine Greille en∣treth Tero∣anne with
The emperi∣als are re∣pulsed.
Breuit and S. Romain enter Tero∣anne with
Teroanne surprised by the emperials whilest the French are talking of a composition.
Teroanne is dismanteled.
The French K. gathereth a great power to resist the Emperor. Hedyn besie∣ged and won by the Em∣perials.
The French killeth seuen or eight hun∣dred Empe∣rials.
This wh
The Cone∣stable view∣eth Baup
The K. brea∣keth vp his campe.
The French King gathe∣reth three new armies.
The fortu∣nate successe of the Kings armies.
Certain Cap∣tains cassierd for their co∣wardlinesse.
The Empe∣ror rayseth a great power.
The crueltie of the French in Henault.
Mary∣mont taken and spoyled by the french.
The marri∣age of Phil∣lip king of Spaine, with Marie Queene of England.
The battaile of Reuty.
The vaine brag of count Vuluenfort.
The french charge the Emperials.
Count Vul∣uenfort ouer∣throwne.
The king and the Emperor dissolue their armies.
The Empe∣rour and the French K. would not be reconciled.
Hansimont ouerthroweth the French, and taketh their generall prisoner.
Casal surpri∣sed by Cap∣tayne Sal∣uoyson.
Strozzi o∣uerthrowne by the Em∣perials.
Charles the fift yeeldeth ouer his em∣pire, and be∣taketh him∣selfe to a mo∣nastery.
The Pope besieged by the Spanish forces.
The Duke of Guyse sent to raise the siege.
The siege is raised, and the Pope set at liberty.
King Phillip prepareth a great army to besiege S. Quintines.
Chastillon putteth him∣selfe within S. Quintins.
The Cone∣stable sent to releeue Saint Quintins.
Saint Quin∣tins besieged.
The Cone∣stable of France relee∣ueth Saint Quintins, and retireth.
Count Eg∣mond char∣geth the Co∣nestable.
The Cone∣stable is ouer∣throwne and takē prisoner with a great number of the French Nobilitie.
The great feare of the Parisians af∣ter the ouer∣throw at S. Quintins.
The Hugo∣nots tooke their name of a gate in the Citie of Tours, called Hugon, be∣cause th
The Hugo∣nots persecu∣ted in France.
The Ad∣mirall would not hearken to a composi∣tion.
Saint Quin∣tins taken by assault.
The admiral yelde
A mutiny in the Spanish campe.
The duke of Guise besie∣geth Calice & winneth it.
Calice yeel∣ded to the D. of Guise.
Francis the Dolphin of France mar∣ryeth Marie Queene of Scots.
The
First of No∣uember.
Monsieur de Termes in∣uadeth the low countries
Count Eg∣mont ouer∣throweth de Termes, and taketh him prisoner.
A strange chance.
The French K. mustreth new forces.
Peace con∣cluded be∣tween France and Spaine.
The Duke of Alua mar∣rieth the French kings daughter for his maister the king of Spaine.
The French King slaine with running a course at
The house of Guyse, the principall cause of all the sturres in France.
Francis Duke of Guyse, and Charles Car∣dinal of Lor∣rain, the two fire-brands of France.
The Queene mother, the King of Na∣uarre and the Duke of Guyse, con∣tend for the gouernment during the noneage of the King.
The Queene mother, and D. of Guise, ioine togither against Na∣uarre.
The proude letters of the K. of Spaine.
The king of Nauarre giueth ouer his claime.
The pride of Guyse.
The Card
The Guyse setteth the King against the princes of the bloud.
The Lord of Renaudy with sundry others attēpt against the Guyse.
The enter∣prise of the Lord of Re∣naudy disco∣uered.
The three Chattillons of all other most hated the Guyses.
The Guyses incense the King against the Prince of Conde.
The Prince of Conde brought be∣fore the king.
The Prince of Conde lea∣ueth the court and goeth to the King of Na∣uarre.
The Admi∣rall sent into Normandy to pacifie the Countrey,
The cause of the discon∣tentment in France.
The assembly of the States.
The treche∣rous cou
The King of Nauarre would not bee at the councel of estate.
The order of the estates of France, as they sit in their Parlia∣ment.
The order of the estates of France, as they sit in their Parlia∣ment.
The Admi∣rall presen∣teth the sup∣plication of the prote∣stants to the King.
Mouluc, Marillac, & the Admiral worthy of im∣mortal praise for their free speach.
The Admi∣rall touch the Guises to the quicke.
The duke of Guise highly offended with the Admiral.
The Guises cause the K. to falsifie his worde.
1560
The Prince of Conde cō∣mitted to prison.
The Prince thrusteth a Masse priest out of his doores by the head and shoulders.
The prince condemned to die.
The K. fal∣leth sicke.
The death of the French King.
The horror of the Guises.
The Prince of Conde set at libertie.
The King of Nauarre complaineth to the Queen mother, of the Guise.
The Princes of the blood depart from the Court greatly dis∣contented.
The Cone∣stable com∣manded by the King not to depart from Court.
The King of Nauarre made lieute∣nant generall for the king.
The Consta∣ble alienated from the Ad∣mirall by the practise of the Guise.
The league.
The Edict made at Fountainbleu
The Guises labor to ouer∣throw the kings Edict.
The Cardi∣nall of Lor∣raine com∣plaineth of the assem∣blies of the Protestants.

The Cardi∣nals of Fer∣rara and Turnon tur∣neth the K. of Nauarre from the Gospel.
The King of Nauarre councelled to deuorce him∣selfe from his Wife, and to marrie with the queene of Scots.
The Queene mother play∣eth on both hands.
The Trium∣uirate.
The murther at Vashy by the Duke of Guyse.
The prince of Conde as∣keth for iu∣stice against the Guise, but cannot be heard.
The Guyse receiued with great accla∣mations into Paris.
The prince of Conde lea∣uing Paris at the request of the Parisiās, the Guyse seiseth vpon it
The Trium∣uirate seiseth vpon the K.
The begin∣ning of the first ciuill warres.
The Prin∣cesse of Conde assailed in hir Coach by the Papists.
Conde ta∣keth certaine townes vpon the Loyre.
The misery of the ciuill warres.
The Duke of Guyse cri∣eth out for war.
The Prince of Conde ta∣keth the field.
Conde put∣teth himselfe into the hands of his enemies.
A polliticke deuise of the Prince.
The Queene mother al∣loweth of the proceedings of the prote∣stants.
The Prince of Conde re∣turneth to his Campe & prepareth for warre.
The Catho∣likes refuse to fight.
Forces sent out of Ger∣many to aide the Catho∣likes.
The Catho∣likes besiege Rohan, and take it.
Marlorat hanged.
The King of Nauarre wounded to death.
Dandelot bringeth for∣ces out of Germany to the ayd of the Protestants,
Dandelot esteemed for an excellent captaine
The Prince of Conde marcheth to∣wards Paris.
Genlis flieth to the Ca∣tholikes
The prince leaueth Paris and mar∣cheth to∣towards New hauen.
The battel of Dreux,
The Catho∣like armie.
The Prote∣stants armie
The Prince of Conde charge the Switzers, & ouerthroweth them.
The Cone∣stable taken prisoner.
Conde taken prisoner.
Dinothus saith, that there were
The D. of Guise chosen generall ouer the Catho∣liks, and the Admirall ouer the pro∣testants.
The admiral goeth to∣wards New-hauen, to meete with the English∣men.
The Duke of Guise be∣sieheth Or∣leance.
The storie of Poltot that killed the Duke of Guise.
Poltrot drawne in peeces with horses.
The Duke of Guise died within seuen or eight daies after his hurt
Peace pro∣clamed in the Campe before Orleance.
The Cardi∣nall of Lor∣raine seeketh new occasions of strife.
The yong Duke of of Guyse set on to accuse the Admiral of the mur∣ther of his father.
The com∣plaints of the Catholikes and Prote∣stants.
The league made at Bay¦on among the Catholikes.
The Edict of Rousillon.
The Prote∣stants begin to prouide for themselues.
Conde with his associats go towardes the Court.
The King flyeth to Pa∣ris.
The second Ciuil warres.
The Prince of Conde be∣siegeth Paris
The cone∣stable issueth foorth of Pa∣ris.
The Army of the cone∣stable.
The Army of the Prince
The red crosses b
The Consta∣ble wounded to death.
The number of the slaine.
The Prince raiseth his siege before Paris.
Rochel yeel∣ded to the Protestants.
The troups of Poictou. Xaintoigne. &c.
Monsieur Duke of Aniou made the Kings lieutenant generall.
The marques of Baden, and the Duke of Alua send forces to Monsieur.
The Prince of Conde meeteth with Cassimer, & his Almains.
The Duke of Neuers ap∣pointed to stop the passage of the Almains into France.
Certain Ita∣lian troupes ouerthrowne by Scomberg
Charters be∣sieged.
The King offereth a peace, which is accepted by the Prince.
The third ciuill warres.
The com∣plaints of the Catholiks.
The com∣plaints of the Protestants.
The prince of Conde in danger to bee taken by Tauannes.
Conde com∣meth to Ro∣chel, whether the Queene of Nauarre also repaireth
Monsieur made lieute∣nant for the King his brother.
The battell of Bassac.
La Noue & La Loue ta∣ken priso∣ners.
Dandelot ma¦keth the Ca∣tholiques to runne.
La Touer slaine.
Soubiz, and many other taken priso∣ners.
The prince of Conde slaine.
The admiral and Dande∣lot flie to Xanctes.
The number of those who we
The prince of Nauarre chosen gene∣rall of the prot
Dandelot d
The praise
The Duke of Deux Ponts com∣meth to ayde the prote∣stants with a great power
La Charity besieged and taken by a composition.
La Charity sacked.
The death of the Duke of Deux ponts.
The Prote∣stants had in their army som tenne or twelue thou∣sand horse, and twenty thousand foot men.
A great vic∣tory of the Protestants.
Strozzi ta∣ken prisoner.
Monsieur dissolueth his army.
The Prote∣stants besiege Poicters.
The Duke of Guyse sent to defend Poi¦ctiers.
Great penu∣rie of victu∣als in Poicti∣ers.
The ingeni∣ous deuise of Bidolier.
The Admi∣ral dangerou∣sly sicke.
The Prote∣stants raise their siege before Poi∣ctiers.
Monsieur besiegeth Chatelerand
Monsieur raiseth his siege.
The battaile of Mont∣counter.
The order of the Prote∣stants bat∣taile.
The order of Monsieurs battaile.
Duke Montpensi∣er chargeth the Prote∣stants.
Mouy with his bands defeated.
The princes withdraw themselues from the bat∣taile as se∣cretly as they could.
The admiral hurt, and in danger to bee taken.
The mar∣quesse of Ba∣den slaine.
A great car∣nage among the Lance∣quenets.
The number that was slain on both sides.
A great alte∣ration in the Protestants affayres.
S. Iean d'An¦gely besieged by the Ca∣tholiques.
The K. and Q. mother comme to the campe.

1570
The King inclines to a peace.
The Prote∣stants refuse a peace.
La Loue slain through the negli∣gen

Mareschal Cossy sent against the Princes.
Monsieur de Bellegard slaine.
The King perswaded to a peace.
Peace pro∣claimed.
The King marrieth.
Duke Mont¦pensier mar∣rieth.
D. of Guise marieth.
The prince of Conde mar∣rieth.
The admiral marieth.
The Queene of Nauarre goeth to the Court.
The admiral goeth to the Court.
His enter∣tainment.
The death of Ioan of Al∣bret Queene of Nauarre.
The mariage of the King of Nauarre.
The admiral shot with an harquebuz.
The notable dissimulation of the King.
The king go∣eth to visit the Admiral
The wolfe appointed to keepe the Lambe.
The Admi∣rall murthe∣red.
The Admi∣rals head sent to Rome.
The great commendati∣on of the Ad∣mirall.
The k ng of Nau
Count Roch∣faucont.
Teligny.
The barrons Pardaillon.
Pilles.
Soubize.
Puuiant.
The mar∣quesse of Reuell.
The carnage and butchery in the Citie.
The Prote∣stants in saint Germaines escape by fly∣ing away.
The king helpeth to murther the Protestants.
The number of Prote∣stants slaine in Paris.
The shame∣lesse fact of the Queene mother.
The number of protestants slaine in o∣ther places.
The K. decei¦ued in his ex∣pectation.
Rosier being a minister and of great credit with the Prince of Conde, had recanted his Religion, and by his perswa∣sions caus
Rochel and sundrie other townes hold out against the King.
The begin∣ning of the fourth ciuill warres.
Rochel besie∣ged.
La Noue.
The Roche∣lors would not trust the faire promises of Monsieur.
The courage of the women
The Duke of Aumaile slaine.
The mares∣chal Danuill in Langue∣docke.
The siege of Sancerre.
The great famine in Sancerre.
The father and mother eat their own child.
Those of Sancerre yeeld vpon composition.
The exam∣ple of a faith∣full seruant.
Rochel mira∣culously re∣lieued.
The misera∣ble estate of the Catholike at the siege of Rochell.
The ambas∣sadors of Po∣lonia come to the campe.
Monsieur raiseth his siege before Rochel.
Those of Quercy and Languedock, refuse the peace.
The assembly of the Pro∣testants.
The mares∣chals of Me∣morancie and Cossy com∣mitted to prison.
Mareschal Danu
Rochell ioy∣neth with the rest of the Protestants.
The Duke of Alenson dis∣swaded from going in the Protestants.
Montgom∣mery landeth in Normandy
Montgom∣mery taken & beheaded,
The King waxeth sickly
Duke Mont¦pensier re∣turneth to the Court.
The king de∣sirous to make peace with his subiects.
The end of the fourth ci∣uill warre.
The Q. mo∣ther made Regent of Fraunce.
The death of Charles the ninth, King of France.
Henry the the King of France and Polonia.
The Queene mother wri∣teth to La Noue.
The Roche∣lors conclude a peace for three month
The Prince of Conde sent into Picardy, from whence he secretly conueyed himselfe into Germany.
The Queene mother mo∣ueth a peace.
Lusignen dis∣manteled.
The king of Polonia stea∣leth away in∣to France.
The begin∣ning of the fitf ciuill warres.
The Mares∣chall Dan∣uill and his designes.
The Prince of Conde and the ma∣reschal Dan∣uil send their deputies to the king.
The King in¦censed to wars by the perswasions of his coun∣cell.
Duke Cassi∣mer com∣meth to ayde the Prote∣stants.
The Duke of Alenson sodainly de∣parteth from the Court, to the aide of the confede∣rates.
The king of Nauarre e∣scapeth out of prison.
The Queene mother re∣concileth her children.
The end of the fift ciuill warres.
The great ingratitude of the house of Guyse.
The prophe∣sie of King Francis.
Francis D of Guise as∣pireth to the Crowne of France.
Henrie duke of Guise his ambitious & turbulent nature.
The Bishop of Paris & the aduocate Dauid sent to Rome.
Accusations against the houses of Valois and Burbon.
The Councel holden at Rome for the rooting out of the blood Roiall of France.
Monsieur forsaketh the Protestants, and goeth to the Court.
The com∣plaints of the Catholikes.
The begin∣ning of the sixt ciuill warre.
The com∣plaints of the Protestants.
The duke de Maine ge∣nerall of the Catholikes.
La Charite.
The prospe∣rous course of the Duke de Maine.
Lansac bea∣ten at sea by the Prote∣stants.
The Prote∣stant
The death of Bobinean.
The great d stresse of the Rochel∣lors.
The ende of the sixt ciuill warre.
Salcedo a Spaniard hi∣red to kill Monsieur.
Monsieur thought to be poysoned. His death.
The conspi∣racie of the Guise and the rest of the leaders.
The sediti∣ous practises of the Guyses
The begin∣ning of the seauenth ci∣uill warres, called the warres of the Leaguers.
The king be∣trayed by his Councell.
The King maketh peace with the Lea∣guers.
The Lea∣guers require to be made gouernours of the principall holds in France.
The Prince of Conde be∣siegeth Brou∣age.
The Prince goeth to∣wards An∣giers.
The great distresse of the Prince and the rest of the Prote∣stants that were with him.
The Prince of Conde with the cheefest of hi
The Duke de Maine made cap∣taine gene∣rall ouer the for
The cruell Edicts of the king.
The misera∣blee state of the p
Foure newe armies ap∣pointed to inuade the Protestants.
The armies of the Popish Leagueri o∣uerthrowne in lesse then one yeere.
The Queen mother offe∣reth a parly of peace.

The Duke Ioyense sent against the Protestants.
The great preparation of the King to withstande the Germans
The battell of Contras.
D. Ioyense sl

Sundry of the Germaine Captains cor∣rup
The Guises slaunder the King.
The leaguers attempt a∣gainst the yong duches of Bonillon.
The crueltie of the lea∣guers against the dukedom of Bonillon.
The petitions of the le
The king re∣fuseth to grant all the petitions of the league.
The prince of Conde poy∣soned.
The great commendatiō of the prince of Conde.
Marans gained by the Lord Lauer∣din.
The King prepareth to go into Poictou a∣gainst the Protestants.
The Guise determineth to seise vpon Paris, and to take the King.
The Guyse entreth into Paris contra¦ry to the Kings com∣mandement.
The Parisi∣ans rise a∣against the King and kil his guard.
The King l
The Guyse seiseth vppon the Kings treasor.
The Guyse seeketh to co∣uer his rebel∣lious action.
The Queen mother re∣concileth the Guyse to the King.
Two armies sent against the Prote∣stants.
This Parli∣ament was appointed to begin the
The Prot
Two sodain
The Guyse a ma
The Guyse refuseth to take his oath for the pre∣seruation of the King.
The Guyse and his asso∣ciats vow to kill the king.
The King resolueth to kill the Guyse.
The aduer∣tisements of the Duke of Maine and Aumaile to the King, touching the attempt of the Guyse.
The death of Francis D. of Guyse.
The death of the Cardi¦nall of Guise
The Guy∣sards flie from Bloys.
The death of the Qu
The duke de Maine rebel¦leth aga nst the King.
Paris and the rest of the principal Ci∣ties rebell a∣gainst the King,
The seditious diuinitie of the Sorbo∣nists.
The duke de Maine made general of the Leaguers.
The leaguers appoint a councell of state.
The leaguers notorious disobedience.
The king maketh peace with the
The meeting of the King of France, & the King of Nauarre.
The Duke de Maine hasteth to Paris.
The King marcheth to∣ward Paris.
The leaguers conspire to kil the King.
Frier Iames Clement, ap∣pointed to kill the King.
Frier Cle∣ment goeth to the campe at Saint Clow.
Frier Cle∣ment woun∣deth the king with a poyso∣ned knife.
Frier Cle∣ment is slaine
The King of Nauarre made heire apparant to the crowne of Fraunce.
The death of Henry the
The princes, Nobles, and souldiers take their oath of obedience to Henry the fourth.
The French King retireth toward Nor∣man de.
The armie of the D. de Maine.
The Lord VVillowby.
The king bringeth hi
The suburbs of S. Ger∣maines takē.
The cruelty of de Maine
The Duke de Maine receiueth Money from the Pope and the King of Spaine.
The Duke of Parma sendeth for∣ces to ayde Duke de Maine.
1590.
The Kings battaile.
The Duke de Maines battaile.
The Duke de Maine ouerthrowne in the plaine of Saint Andrew.
The Parisi∣ans prepare to endure a siege.
The Duke de Maine goeth to Bruxelles to the Duke of Parma for ayde.
S. Dennis, yeeldeth to the King.
Great famin in Paris.
The Duke of Parma en∣treth into France.
The Duke of Parma re∣fuseth to fight.
The Duke of Parma en¦treth into Paris.
The Duke of Parma fli th out of France.
Chartres taken by the the king.
Cinqcens t
Cuingcampe taken.
Noyon takē.
The Pope excommuni∣cateth the King.
The Popes Bull hanged vpon the gallowes and burned at Tours.
Go
The yong D. of Guise escapeth out of prison.
The armie of the Germain

The pollitike d
The Duke retur
Roan relee∣
The Duke would not bee drawne to an entire fight.
The duke de Maine en∣treth Roan.
The D. of Parma mar∣cheth toward Paris.
The King goeth to Deepe.
The leaguers ouerthrow sundry of the Kings forces.
Mareschall Biron slaine.
The daunger of the King.
The Ger∣maines re∣turne home.
The Lea∣guers con∣sult about a new King.
The Lea∣guers seeke for peace.
The K. en∣clineth to Popery.
2.
Sundry prin¦cipall Cities of France returne to the King.
Paris