The glory of England, or A true description of many excellent prerogatiues and remarkeable blessings, whereby she triumpheth ouer all the nations of the world vvith a iustifiable comparison betweene the eminent kingdomes of the earth, and herselfe: plainely manifesting the defects of them all in regard of her sufficiencie and fulnesse of happinesse. By T.G.
Gainsford, Thomas, d. 1624?
Approx. 619 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 172 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2003-07 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A01395




STC 11517



ESTC S102803





99838565




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The glory of England, or A true description of many excellent prerogatiues and remarkeable blessings, whereby she triumpheth ouer all the nations of the world vvith a iustifiable comparison betweene the eminent kingdomes of the earth, and herselfe: plainely manifesting the defects of them all in regard of her sufficiencie and fulnesse of happinesse. By T.G.
Gainsford, Thomas, d. 1624?
[20], 331, [1] p.   


London :


Printed by Edward Griffin for Th: Norton and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls-Church-yard at the signe of the Kings-head,


1618.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
National characteristics --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  Description and travel --  1601-1700.
2003-03
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2003-04
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2003-05
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2003-05
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2003-06
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






11517


99838565


2947














THE
 GLORY OF ENGLAND, OR A TRVE DESCRIPTION 
of many excellent prerogatiues and remarke∣able
 blessings, whereby She Triumpheth 
ouer all the Nations of the World:


With a iustifiable comparison betweene the eminent 
Kingdomes
 of the Earth, and Herselfe; 
plainely manifesting the defects of them all in regard
 of her sufficiencie and fulnesse of happinesse.


SENECA.


Quicquid patimur, mortale:


Quicquid facimus, venit ab alto.


By T. G.


LONDON Printed by EDWARD GRIFFIN for TH: NORTON and are to be sold at his shop in 
Pauls-Church-yard
 at the signe of the 
Kings-head.
 1618.










TO THE WORTHILY ENOBLED, THE HIGH AND MOST 
HONOVRABLE
 MARQVIS 
OF
 BVCKINGHAM, WITH ALL HIS OTHER WELL 
DESERUING TITLES,
 and attributes.


Right Honourable,


A
S the diuine Maiestie pro∣portioned all his attri∣butes and works to some speciall end and purpose, redacting the world out of a confused 
Chaos
 for the vse of man to a beautifull vniformity; raising man out of a heape of dust to glorifie his Creator: sending his only Son to redeeme vs from the curse of the law, an expiation for our rebellious transgres∣sions, and proposing his 
Mercy
 and 
Iustice



with equall distribution as the mastring curbs of all humane endeauours: with such like. So should we erect the frame of our actions vpon the foundation of preuailing effects, and not at∣tempt any thing without a speciall limitation. For euen little children, that sport in the aire at randome can say, they meant to exercise themselues, or in emulation to shoot higher then their fellowes. This inciteth me (right Honorable) to anticipate their calumniation, or derision, that shall startle me with these que∣stions, why I presumed like a seeled doue to flie at randome with such disguises, and amongst all others firmed my selfe on the sun-shining beautie of your house. I answere both with the same truth and plainesse, that detruded me be∣tweene the streights of censuring imperfections: Besides the manifest reasons inserted in the Title and Preface, An honest fame, and per∣aduenture orderly profit to maintaine a poore liberty of life, and keepe vertue vnspotted


from the filthinesse of corruption, were the markes of my aime. But concerning your Ho∣nour, an earnest desire to prostrate my endea∣uours before you, and a meere presaging confi∣dence, that with vndefiled vowes you will cha∣rily preserue the loue of our Countrey, impulsed this insinuation, and extended the Argument thus farre; that as it hath pleased his Maiesty to ouermantle you with fauour, and support you with greatnesse (wherein Princes make their vertues truly eminent, and worthily ex∣alted) so you will remember, that the good ser∣uant augmented his tallent; and he liues not at all, who liues onely to himselfe. Therefore Great Lord let me I pray you behold you like a faire moouing Planet in a sufficient Orbe, from whose influence can proceede nothing but sweete presages, and if there be any thing in these triuiall discourses, that may boast of your acceptation, and noble construction, make me the prouder, because I come so simply naked


without palpable flattery, or cunning display∣ing your Fame and merit. Besides, howeuer I am so great a stranger, that not so much as the sound of my name hath passed by your eares, so low a shrubbe, that I stand at a stay, and keepe my owne greennes, and so ruinous a wall, that euen bosome friends haue started away for feare of falling vpon them: I must be yet con∣tented, and hope, you will not search me so narrowly as vpon the discouerie of my imper∣fections to pretend my contempt, nor dismisse me vilipended, when all the world hath pro∣claimed your worth. In which assurance I thus cast my selfe into the open mouth of the Mon∣ster of the world, 
Opinion:
 and presume to be preserued by the 
Antidote
 of your Patro∣nage from any dangerous infection, or Lethal ruine.


Your Honors humble obseruant,


TH: GAINSFORD.








The Preface.


Nec Adulatori. Nec Detractori.


A
Lthough there is no end of writing books (as saies the Preacher) and the vexati∣on of our very soules ariseth from the desire of knowledge, especially when we steppe a little into vaine-glory, the last thing laide away of the wisest men: yet either custome, or some particular purposes doe still traduce many in this kinde, who otherwise walked with sufficient reputation, and like the foole in the 
Prouerbes
 might haue beene counted wise, if they had held their peace. So that it cannot chuse, but I must incurre the like imputation, yea peraduenture ridiculous contempt; when I haue nothing to say, but for the glory of my Countrey, and seeme to maintaine a Position, which few English∣men deny, and that I doe herein no more, then the 
Swizer
 or 
Sauoian,
 who preferreth his snowy hils, before the beau∣ty 
 of 
Lombardy,
 and rageth in his disceptation, if you ei∣ther vilipend his barren Mountaines and dangerous pas∣sages, or preferre any other glorious nation before him. But againe, when I striue to mount a little higher, and tune out this harmony to a reach of excellency, and pre∣rogatiue


ouer all kingdomes, and people in such things, wherein God doth blesse any Nation, you now would a little procrastinate my iourney, and cannot but suppose me ouer-liberall and ouer-partiall in my iudgement, espe∣cially, if 1. either you are a stranger: 2. Or haue beene a Traueller: 3. Or looke no further, then on the bescar∣red and deformed face of antiquity as Authours haue wounded the same: 4. Or liue discontented through par∣ticular greeuances in your Countrey: 5. Or are wilfull and irregular by the impostures of superstition: 6. Or affrighted at the power and greatnesse of other Princes: 7. Or transported with a poore opinion of our wealth: 8. Or to conclude, are meerely ignorant, and vnderstand no more, then is conferred vpon you by relation of o∣thers: wherein you must needes resemble certaine empty trunkes in Court remoues, who onely fill vp a place: but vnderstand not, wherefore, nor by whom they are im∣ploied: yet because I would also satisfie these, and corro∣borate my Hypothesis with probable reason, I will lead them by the hand into the faire fields of this discouerie, and neuer desist, vntill they are conduced to safe harbour, and there Eccho out the truth in security; though it seeme a Panegyricall applause, and carry a phantasticall burthen of flattery. Onely the methode I would vse is somewhat intricate, and the desire I haue to shunne confusion, will make a greater confusion like a true and modest Louer, who fearing to disclose her affection by her lookes, doth in that restraint make the next looke more passionate.


But to the purpose. If you be a stranger, which you 
 may be either by ignorance, or nation: then peraduenture you looke no further, then what you see, or know, and not vnderstanding the honourable secret of our Countrey,


suppose nothing comparable to the ostentous brauery of some few stones, and dead things of those Cities, where∣in you are reziant: but TACITVS, and other famous Authors can tell you, that Cities are not glorious with emptie houses, and lime and stone compacted for show, and subiect to ruine and breuiary demolition; but in the wisedome, wealth, and resplendant eminence of noble Citizens, and well ordered men: so that no man, vnac∣quainted with the secrets of a Kingdome, can compara∣tiuely subiect it either to vilipending, or insufficiency.


If you are a Traueller? Then carried away with present shadowes, or transported with a cursory vanity of some 
 stately edifices, braue Curtezans, entertainement of stran∣gers (recommended by some speciall Councellour of State) strong castles, new ramparts, conuenient harbours, well furnished Arsenalls, some prety gallies, and hearke∣ning after euery report to please the Hearing, or rauished with some comicke sight to moue admiration, you go no further, then present contentment, nor will once remem∣ber, what a mother you haue of your owne, and how a le∣gitimate childe ought to be louing, dutifull, and aduised. 


If you search for no better secrets, then what absolute Authors haue locked vp in their storehouses, who many times filled their papers with extraneall reports, and when they were possessed with a nouelty exciting astonishment, they then enlarged the same, setting downe euery thing as authenticall, which onely carried the show of probabi∣lity by some enforcing circumstances, howeuer it sauour∣ed of detraction, and calumny: Thus I confesse haue ma∣ny written of BRITANY, as of a strange and barbarous nation, naked people, painted, enraged, liuing vpon roots and herbes, eating raw flesh, and remote from the brauery


of populous Cities, and courtly pa
aces: whereby a con∣tinued impression is so made, and lest to posteritie, that in many places they suppose the same still. Wherein I can∣not compare them better, then to some poore Farmer, who liuing in an old cottage, thatcht, and deformed, is compelled at last to go into another Countrey, as dispos∣sessed by some wealthy Lawyer, or Citizen, and so rela∣teth to his new acquaintance, what a pittifull house hee came from, and how miserable hee left the same, little knowing, how delicately, yea stately it is reedified, and holdeth vp such a contrary face of Maiesty, that if he were to returne, and view it againe, he could not imagine it the same, nor that any policy of man, or worldly meanes had contriued the alteration.


If you liue discontented at home, then out of a sullen and dogged humour you spare not any accusation of your 
 countrey, whether for deficiency of blessings, or gouern∣ment; but hearken after euery report of strangers, and are contented to be cosoned with the deceit of forraine relations, and so from a wilfull neglect of our worthines, wilt neither beleeue the maiesty of our honour, the mag∣nificense of our structures, the variety of our happinesse, the decency of our Cities, the exaltation of officers, the beauty of women, the glory of conuersation, and all o∣ther particulars tending to an absolute demonstration of our worth: but dost vnkindly weigh it downe with com∣parison, saying there are some slender commendable things amongst vs, but farre inferiour to other nations.


If you are superstitious, or would seeme affectionate to religion, then vnder a pious show of deuotion, you abso∣lutely 
 condemne all other things, and sweare they are vn∣ualuable to the pacification of the conscience, and setling


the soule to peace, and vnderstanding the way to saluati∣on; and so without either desire, or endeauours to enter∣taine a further truth, you not onely deny those allegati∣ons which may diuert you from falshood, but are an ad∣uersarie to all commemorations of temporall matters, which may giue you light to conduct you to the acquain∣tance of ENGLANDS merit, and high exalted desert.


If you are terrified with the strength and warlike prepa∣ration of forraine Princes, because you heare of well for∣tified 
 places, armies on foote, treasure amassed, shippes rigged, Countries subiugated, garisons dispersed, Princes affied, and the Pope blessing them. Then peraduenture you may suppose, that we cannot propulse such aduersa∣ries, nor haue sufficient meanes to rebate the insolencie of so high exalted Monarchs; because you are either faithlesse in heart, traiterous in loialty, simple in apprehen
ion, of ouer-reached by cunning inferences of others, and so re∣maine confounded at some common wants amongst vs, disabling all things, which may tend to strengthen the hopes and loue to your owne Countrey.


If you are desirous of wealth, and corrupted with the 
 filthinesse of lucre, then it may be hearing of the infinite treasures of the GRAN SIGNIEVR, the Venetian riches, the many millions comming out of India into Spaine, so many crownes of the sunne coined in France, and the an∣nuall entradoes of diuers Countries, and Principates, and troubled at home with strange rumours of penuries and wants, with exportation of our gold and coine into for∣raine parts, and some forcible convulsions of priuate men to enrich themselues: you are amazed, and cannot be set∣led with any opinion of our sufficiency, and will scarce be helped with better information.


uide possessions by way of contribution to their children; reward their seruants, and endeauour to bee neere the Prince? would you dispute of ciuill conuersation, of a Land that floweth with milke and hony, of eating vnder thy owne vineyard, of receiuing the temporall blessings of encrease, of solemnities at feasts, of burials and mour∣nings for the dead, of martiall exequies, of triumphant marriages, and priuate reioycings, of honest and friendly visitations, of mutuall commerces, of powerfull presents? of detaining vs within the limits of naturall obseruation, as 
quod tibi fieri non vis, alteri ne feceris,
 and in truth of all fundamentall principles of gouernment in the hands of the Scriptures is lifted vp a mirror to looke into without specke, staine, base composure, or counterfeit foile.


Would you haue directions for maintaining a magistra∣cie, for adapting you to reciprocall duties of releeuing the poore, succouring the fatherlesse and widowes, suppres∣sing the proud, restraining the offensiue, imparting of fa∣uours, acknowledging of friendlinesse, with such like? would you be thankefull when your cuppe doth ouer∣flow, reposed when necessities knocke at the doore, pa∣tient when aduersitie deiecteth, moderate when prosperi∣ty 
lateth, free from repining at the glory of thine aduer∣sary, sparing insulting ouer the misery of inferiours, and remember, who is the distributer of all good gifts, like the Master of a Comedy, who sorteth out his Sceanes ac∣cording to the inclination of his schollers, making a poore mans childe to personate a Prince, and the sonne of a lord to acte a meaner part? In the Scriptures shineth the light of such vnderstanding, and liueth the soule, and life of the truest wisedome.


In a word, would you know the duty to God and man,


the hope of saluation, the mysterie of religi
n, the esta∣blishments of faith, the preeminence of truth, and 
 sanctified calling of all Gods seruants; from the Scrip∣tures ariseth the fountaine and swelling spring flowing in∣to riuers, yea seas of abundance, which in some are of bit∣ter tast, but inward sweetnesse; in others pleasant in the mouth, but wo
mewood in the belly: so that if from thence proceede all lawes, statutes, and ordinances touch∣ing the supreame godhead, the spirits vnder his throne, the nature of things visible and inuisible, the power of Deuils, the glory of the firmament, the diuision of the earth, the bonds and limits of the sea, the secrets of hell, and the terrors of the last dissolution: what neede wee more, or go any further for a marking stone to colour any kingdome with, whereby it may be known to come neere and enioy most of those blessings, wherewith God hath sealed and ratified the glory of Countries, then out of the storehouse of the Scriptures.


To this purpose I dare be bold to aduance our 
England
 
 into the highest chaire, as if she were to triumph for some notorious victory; and that I may bring vp my forces to∣gether to a close encounter, and connect my reasons with probability, I will discouer at large, what I haue learned out of industrious Authors, obserued by my owne indea∣uours: 
 knowne as 
oculatus testis
 in most countries of Eu∣rope, and since determined in a combat of comparisons, not that I meane to rippe vp the bowels of antiquity, and call in question so many thousand volumes, which haue consumed as many thousand yeeres in discouery of ori∣ginals, and as it were tormented Time with strange dis∣courses: so that if you should take off the vaile, where∣with diuers Authors haue ouermantled both Countries,


Kingdomes, and Cities, you would stand amased at their deformed shapes, and remaine confounded to veiw now their disparity. I will therefore leaue all maligne circum∣stances of my quiet, and shew you with what countenance they looke vp to heauen at this instant, and in what man∣ner they seeme proud of their establishment, whereby 
 that are willing to be impartiall, shall be the better en∣
ed to yeeld vp a verdict of truth against all adulterate sophistication.


Yet must I adde with all this lesson of morality, that in 
 kingdome, where vnderstanding hath pleasured the people with 
 of ciuility (as for barbarous na∣t
s 
 onely make vse of their names) 
 
Sol vitae est 
: 
 Antidotus vitae patientia: 
: 
c
 Vita vitae conscientia: 
c
 & glo∣
 
ntia.
 For with wealth your entertainement 
 
ght w
th Princes; attonement made with Tyrants; 
 
ed amongst strangers; adoration a∣
 
, and such as know not ciuilitie will stand 
 at thy 
rauery, and florishing: By wealth are of∣
 
gated, imperfections remitted, scandals re∣
 
 pardoned, follies excused, and the frowns 
 
ed. For wealth, beauty yeeldeth to a 
 
es are in opposition, enforced 
, men transported to exorbitant 
 for strange vndecencies, and all 
 
ounded with contraries. But this is a pas∣
 
, and 
 part of my worke, or meaning; 
 for feare of longing after that 
, a
l as the Dutchman, who on∣
 
 Now to conclude: The whole 
 into two seuerall Bookes:



In the first, you shall ha
 a 
 Countries of the world, by way 
 plana
on, as they are no
 


In the 
, 
 as Drapers doe 
 clot
 
 whereby the 
 and prerog
 of 
 made appar
.






 3.




Discite nunc miseri, 
.


Quid sumus, aut 


Quis datus, aut m
ae quam m
 


Quis modus arge
o? 


U
le num
us hab
 


Quantum elarg
 


Iussit, & humana qua 












THE CONTENTS OF THE FIRST BOOKE.


THe Empire of Tartaria. Fol. 1


The Monarchy of China. 10


The Monarchy of India. 14


The Empire of Persia. 19


The Empire of the Turkes. 27


The story of the Ottomans, together with their conquests. 31


The Empire of Aethiopia. 39


The Empire of Russia. 44


The story of the Goths and Lombards comming into Italy and Spaine. 53


The Empire of Germany. 56


The history of Coleine. 64


The glory of the Spanyard. 69


The Description of Italy, as in times past. 78


Italy described at this time. 83


The story of Sauoy. 93


The story of Millaine. 100


The description of France. 111


The description of the Low-Countries, 123


The Monarchy of Great Britaine. 142


The description of Ireland. 144






THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND BOOKE.


THe Maiesty of Salomon, and happinesse of Canaan; a full and absolute example for all Nations. 155



Countries compared to Canaan, and Salomons glorious happi∣nesse; and first of all the Tartars. 162


China compared, and her deficiency manifested. 166


India compared, and her defects manifested. 170


Persia compared, with her insufficiency. 174


Turkie compared, and her imperfections layd open. 177


The lamentable death of the principall Viceer, when Sultan Achmat came first to the crowne. 181


The famous history of Mustapha. 185


The story of a Renegado Bashaw. 188


The indirect proceedings of Turkes against Christians, contrary to all religion or morality. 191


Their manner of aduancement, and diuersity of customes, farre from our example and orderly prosperitie. 198


Russia compared. 210


Aethiopia compared. 213


Germany compared. 217


Italy compared. 221


Spaine compared. 230


France compared, with a discouery of her defects. 236


England compared, with the probable reasons, why shee is nee∣rer the example of Canaans happines, than any other nation. 242


Wherin the happinesse of England is both perspicuous and com∣mendable. 251


Forraine Cities compared to London, with the defects of either made apparent, and our sufficiency manifested. 256


Diuers particulars wherein England excelleth other kingdoms, and first in religion. 270


Certaine particulars concerning the Greeke Church. 282


Certaine particulars concerning the Latine Church. 289



Another excellency of England, exposing the noble worth of hier Princes beyond other nations. 294


Another excellency of England, casteth vp an account of her an∣
quity in one vnited Monarchy before other nations. 299


Another excellency of England, consisteth in the happy life of our Countrey man and common people. 3
4


Another excellency of England consisteth in the goodnesse of our nauy and shipping. 309


Another excedency of England consisteth in the number, riches, en
uors, and extraordinary worth of our Marchant. 316


Another excellency of England may bee drawne from this ob∣seruation, that wee haue had more glorious persons, and fa∣mous Kings and Princes to visit our countrey, then any other nation. 320


The Conclusion. 330


















THE
 GLORIE OF ENGLAND.




The First BOOKE: 
TOPOGRAFICALLY
 describing the Countries of the World, with some historicall amplification.




CHAP. I. 
The Empire of
 TARTARIA.


A
Ccording to the vaine, popular, and indeed ridiculous error of opinion, 
 the world hath inuested nine seuerall Monarchs with his glory, and from strange disproportions giuen them prerogatiues to command all the Na∣tions of the earth, interdicting any petty Prince to come neere them by way of competition or comparison. First then the Empire of 
Tartaria
 laid


prostrate vnder the throne of the great 
Cham
 called 
Domi∣nus dominantium,
 and 
Rex regum,
 spreadeth it selfe with so large embracings, that it extendeth from the northren 
Obba,
 or if you will 
Tanais,
 which falleth into the great 
Euxinum,
 euen to the easterne sea; sometimes surnamed the 
Atlanticke,
 whose vast lappe is almost filled with a fry of Ilands, all Idolaters, and most of them enemies to strangers, but especially Christians.


It begirteth those Countries formerly called, and many times still collaterally named, 
Scithia, Sarmatia, Albania, Ieccomangall, Sumongoll, Mercat, Metrit,
 the vast deserts of 
Lop, Tangut, Cathaia,
 and 
Mangia,
 so that shouldring all the Northren shore of the 
Caspian,
 it runneth along with∣out controll by the high looking walles of 
China,
 and is 
 ouershaded by those formidable mountaines 
Riphei, Hy∣perborei, Imaus,
 and 
Caucasus,
 all incorporated into the glorious Character of 
Taurus,
 of whom 
Pliny lib,
 5. 27. writeth almost a whole booke, shewing that the varietie of Nations vnder this great Empire, gaue sundry names vnto the vast body of this high-looking, and high-sprea∣ding heape of earth and stones: as in the first footing you haue heard before: afterward in his larger body he is cal∣led 
Egidis, Paropamisus, Circius, Chambudes, Pharphariades, Cho
as, Oreges, Orates Niphates, Taurus,
 in his glorious 
ozen head, and snowy crowne 
Caucasus,
 in his stretching armes 
Sarpedon, Coracesius, Cragus,
 and 
Taurus
 againe, with diuers others, and some more significantly. But if you would know how it shouldreth all other titles vnder 
, and looketh vp to heauen with the swelling eyes of 
Tartaria,
 raised vp by the supportation of three principall Commaunders: you must be contented to beleeue some thing which is written to this purpose; or at least be re∣posed


to aske no further questions, but know, that from 
Russia
 to the North-east sea, all the Countries and people are now called 
Tartars:
 But we will enlarge it a litle.




The Story of 
BARKA
 and 
ALLAV.


IF you suppose 
Herodatus
 an Author meriting the fame, and good opinion disposed toward him: in his fourth booke you shall finde him ouermantling 
Scithia
 from the denomination of 
Scythe
 the sonne of 
Hercules,
 with his brethren 
Gelo,
 and 
Agathirsis,
 and by a woman with much adoe beleeued to be halfe a snake: but it may be the allu∣sion from the cruell condition of the people extracted 
 from this linage, gaue way to the fiction. For after 
Aga∣thirsis
 had taught the Inhabitants the vse of bow and ar∣rowes, they became so expert in shooting, that from hunting and killing of beasts, they set vpon men and strangers, yea at last grew barbarous toward one another: so that the admirable report of the 
Amasons
 a principall Nation amongst them, is now esteemed a matter of pro∣babilitie, who remembring their vowes to 
Diana,
 and cu∣stomes of their 
Herculian
 Progenitors, accustomed to cut off their right pappes for the better dexterity of this mili∣tary exercise, and so their famous exploits made all the Countrey reuerence the Goddesse for their sakes, in whose memory they performed actions beyond credit, and for whose reuerence 
Thoas
 beganne an 
Holocaust
 of strangers, as by the story of 
Iphigenia Agamemnons
 daughter may appeare: so that they continued in glorious estimation, till 
Tomyr is
 conquered 
Cyrus,
 and taught all mighty Mo∣narchs and Tyrants this lesson, that the punishment of sinnes is a iudgement from heauen, and when they are in


the greatest burning heat of ambitious tumors; some 
lender cloude of reuenge shall ouer-shade their glories, and poure downe showers of deuastation on their heads, as you may read in the Scriptures, and other probable Au∣thors of diuers great Princes brought to ruine; yea slaine by the priuate hands of women, which also happened to these insulting Dames themselues, who grew so proude by reason they supposed the Goddesse 
Diana
 to protect them, or that some supernaturall influence made their prosperitie immoueable, that they not onely conspired a∣gainst their Husbands, but had the name of man in a kinde of hate, and vilipending, except for necessitie of procreation: wherein yet as diuers Authors haue ende∣uoured to strengthen our credulitie, they tied them to certaine conditions of commorance amongst them, vntill they were conceiued, and then compulsing them to re∣turne: so that at the time of their deliuery the 
aemales were reserued, and the males killed; or if you will beleeue so much for ciuilities sake, sent to their fathers; wherupon when time was weary of such degenerating inconueni∣ences, and that some secret whisperers had incited the people to remember the glory of the first Creator, or the Goddesse, Nature, in mans resemblance, the better sort conspired against the women, and by degrees ware them out of the Countrey with many slaughters, teaching the obstinate the vicissitude of things, and admitting the sub∣missiue vnder the warmth of louing embraces, by which occasion the men at last preuailed; and in time this vast Countrey was proud to be the life infuser into many va∣liant sonnes: such as 
Scitha
 with his mother 
Araxa,
 who conquered 
Armenia,
 and 
Scithes
 who married his mother in law 
Opaea,
 and performed actions beyond credit: such


as 
Othoman, Barka, Allau, Tamberlaine
 and others, whose noble exploits made Fame flie about the world to divulge how glorious valour and vertue was in some worthy spi∣rits ouer others. But amongst many hundreds, none ob∣tained so much at the hands of history and report, as 
Barka
 and 
Allau
 both named Emperors at one time. For when many battailes had filled the fieldes with the car∣kasses of as many thousands, the people weary of such slaughters, and they themselues amazed at the crueltie, it was concluded betweene them to diuide the Empire, hauing indeed a world of ground to satisfie ten Emperors: but some Authors are willing to maintaine, that they scorned such partition, and so in a noble combat deci∣ded the controuersie themselues, till the Controuler of men and kingdomes made 
Barka
 triumphant, who in the next lustrum of his gouernment had by the beautifull 
Tar∣tara
 a sonne for his mothers sake named the Author of Peace, and proclaimed besides 
Barka Tartarus:
 so that when he leauing three sonnes behinde him, gaue them al∣so leaue to diuide the Empire. The people were proude of their new name of 
Tartarians,
 and their Princes distin∣guished 
 with 
Tartar Chrim, Tartar Mercat,
 and 
Tartar Cham:
 who many times standeth for all the rest, & drown∣eth the murmuring sound of inferiours with the full name of the great Emperor, and Lord of Lords. For although the 
Tartar Chrim
 would faine challenge affinitie with the 
Turke,
 expecting if the line of 
Othoman
 should faile the greatest share of the worlds magnificence: yet without question it is but a couert presumption, and the fanaticall hopes of some imposturing prediction: Otherwise hee dare not but acknowledge the Emperor 
Cham
 for his su∣preame; and is affrighted, when he heares of any com∣plaints


to his preiudice: As for his further enlarging his credit, because 
Tamberlaine
 was extracted from him, who conquered 
Persia, Asia minor,
 and 
Baiazet,
 it will stand him in litle stead to startle from his first obedience, as I said before, and helpe him as litle to intrude into 
Turkie.
 for all he diuulgeth, that the sonnes of 
Tamberlaine
 brought with them the daughters of the 
Persian Sophy,
 and 
Othoman
 familie into 
Tartary,
 from whence he is now li∣neally descended. But some will haue it thus, that 
Barka
 in remembrance of the horrible confusion of the warres, named his sonne 
Tartarus,
 as a very deciphering of Hell, and that the people should be euer after affrighted at dis∣sensions by recording the mischiefe formerly acted. But to proceede:


From 
Scithia
 to the prouince of 
Tangut
 they liue in troopes called 
Hordas,
 and remoue from place to place ac∣cording to the temperature of the season, plenty of feed∣ing, and conueniencie of accommodating one another: nor before the yeere of Redemption 1212 (as I said) did we in 
Europe
 heare of the name of a 
Tartar:
 but 
Scithians, Sarmatians, Albanians,
 and such like, who were all idola∣ters, worshipping their gods in trees, hanging vp their dead on nether boughes, and by way of auguring diuining their happines or damnation, which custome is still retei∣ned amongst the barbarous sort in the remotest places. They are generally men of square stature, broad faces, hollow eyes, thin beards, owgly countenances, and tye vp their haire to the crowne of their heads in rolles, like a Snailes shell; to which you may adde swarthnes of com∣plexion, not that the Sunne kisseth them with that feruen∣cie, but the aire and their sluttish customes corrupts both their blood and bodies: yet hath nature preuailed ouer


these outward inconueniences in the distribution of va∣lour, swiftness of footmanship, vigilancie, and patience to endure the many encombrances of trauell, hunger, and want of sleepe. They loue Horses, and from that loue accustome themselues to a sauage drinking of their blood, practising a cunning theft herein, which being vnpunisha∣ble, occasioneth many prety changes, both in keeping their owne, and purloyning from others, as if some ciuill Artist had instructed them with the Lacedemonian tole∣ration 
 in this kinde, for the better animating one another in the spoyling their enemies: yet for all this, by reason they liue in tents, and haue small defences for their furni∣ture and goods, theft of petty things is seuerely punished amongst them, as also adulterie, or if you will lying with another mans wife, which is most odious vnto them, be∣cause they are tyed to the trusting of one another, as I said within dores, and no man is debarred any enter∣course: it were therefore a double treachery to deceiue the trust reposed, and either purloyne the goods which lye open, or abuse the women which admit you so friendly. They are gouerned in their trauels and remo∣uings by the starres, and obseruing the North pole settle according to her influence: They liue free from coue∣tousnes, and are thus farre happy, that the strange corrup∣tions of wealth, especially gold and siluer breed no disor∣ders amongst them: yet haue they a kinde of trafficke, and by way of exchange continue mutuall commerces, louing presents, and can be contented to be flattered euen in their barbarisme: and herein I thinke all the Easterne people are delighted, from a receiued tradition of our Patriarkes. But howsoeuer, I can assure you 
Tartar Chrim
 himselfe, who is the most likeliest to be spoken with of all


others, as being the neerest, will not admit of any Chri∣stian without a gratuitie, and present worthy of his fauour.


You must now step a litle forward toward the East, and with the Sunnes rising see their glory arise: For 
Tan∣gut
 is a wealthy Prouince, affording many things befitting 
Europes
 magnificence, especially 
Rheubarb,
 a simple of 
 that prerogatiue, as if the whole world were beholding for this distribution, and had a sauing health by vertue of the same. In 
Cathaia
 amongst many others, the great Citie of 
Cambala
 will excite admiration, if you measure a quadrant of 30 mile about, and ouer-looke at euery cor∣ner a Tower 40 furlongs in circuit, erected for a 
Seralia
 or 
Arsenall,
 wherein the Emperors munition, armour, and prouision for war are secured: but he himself is sequestred to the priuacie of another stately Pallace, and is a strange 
Meteor
 amongst them seldome seene, but for some porten∣tous accident. In 
Mangia
 as Queene of the rest, is the Citie of 
Quinzai,
 hauing a circumference of a 100 mile, by reason a great Lake of 30 mile diuideth the streets into channels, ouer which are numbred 1260 bridges, some opening the arches so high and wide, that a good ship vnder saile hath a passage of ease, but things a farre off are quickly reported; yet hardly beleeued, and some∣times ouer-beleeued vpon easie report, as you may per∣ceiue by the trauels of 
S
r
 Iohn Mandeuile,
 the writings of 
Munster,
 and the constant asseueration of moderne Pilgrims, who all tell of so many monstrous shapes of men in these parts, that our ciuill people are affrighted at the hearing, and many times come flocking to see such Trauellers, as haue escaped the dangerous passages, and sauage immanitie. For my owne part I would per∣swade


you, that the world is a stage of variety and won∣ders, whereon are placed more strange things of truth, then the wit and policie of man can invent to seeme fabu∣lous: but as at a stage the spectators onely are a few in number to the infinite multitudes for the time excluded; so in the exploration of Countries not one amongst ten thousand either take the paines, or haue the iudgement to looke into the wonders of the world, and therefore I would be loth to exclude all enlargements of histories from the closet of truth: yet concerning those fabulous reports of Pigmies and Cranes, of men with long eares, one eye, one foote, and such like, the Iudicious take vp the bookes to read, as if they would excite laughter; and I dare be bold to maintaine, there are no such men or people in the world: but all Gods images are miraculous in this distinction of voice, reason, and an erected counte∣nance, with a proportion of shape, and what is not thus established, is meerely a monster, or a beast. But because I am sure, whether true or false, there is nothing amongst them worthy respect, or challenging any prerogatiue of happinesse, or imitation, I will leaue them to their vast territories, and desist from amasing you with the almost incredible particulars of those places, especially 
Cathaia,
 and 
Mangia.










CHAP. II. 
The Monarchy of
 CHINA.


O
N the second step of the earths Throne is the Country of CHINA mounted, and 
 diuided into eight seuerall Kingdomes, ouer whom one principall Monarch con∣trouleth by those high and illustrious titles of MVNDI DOMINUS, and COELI FILIVS, as if indeed their challenge to all natures immunities were a matter of consequence, & their boasting of many things before 
Adam
 true and canonicall. The principall Citie is now called 
Faquin
 neighbouring 
Tartary,
 out of which the Emperor neuer issueth, but in time of warre, which is as it were an exercise amongst them, and challengeth the atten∣dance of euery nation, as if an hereditarie duty challenged the sonne to the fathers obedience, & one succession recei∣ued of another, what belonged to the setling their estates by attending their principall Commanders. For as you haue read in 
England,
 that from the 
Twede
 betweene 
, Westmerland,
 and 
Scotland,
 euen to the Irish Seas, there was a wall of a 100 mile long, called 
Picts 
 are at certaine spaces fortified with watch-towers, 
 hollow trunckes placed within the cur∣taines, receiued aduertisements one of another; so that 
 a moment upon any alarum, excursion, or attempt, w
 
 
Picts,
 and turbulent 
Scots
 did 
 
ountry was vp in armes, and the ordi∣
e 
 of their militarie discipline put in pra∣ct
 
 
as in 
 Country from the 
Atlanticke
 sea to


mount 
Taurus
 betweene the 
Tartarians,
 and there 
 8000 furlongs in length is a wall raised 
ke a strong 
 fication, and at euery miles end a 
mpart or 
 wherein is continuall garrison. But when the 
 disposeth himselfe to any field encounter of setled 
at∣taile, he seldome marcheth vnder an Armie 
 foote, and 200000 horse, and as seldome mee
 
 uersarie without effusion of much bloud, and 
 many thousands, ouer whom their friends seeme 
 ioyce, whether they haue their dead carkasses, 
 a 
statua,
 as if some glorious blessing were imparte
 
 happy a thing they suppose it to die for their Count
 and obey their Emperor: of which I am not 
 considering that sacred truth hath inlarged the 
error 
 that battaile vnto vs, which was fought betweene 
 and 
Ierusalem,
 wherein 500000 felt the smart of 
 and tyranous dissention: And of another, wherein 
Zeres
 Emperor of 
Mores
 & 
Aethiopians
 brought 
 paire of hands to pull downe the walls of 
 and not the God of 
Iacob
 remembred his promise to 
 and pushed them downe to the pit of destruction.


The great Citie of 
Manquin
 was once Capitall of 
e Kingdome, in which now onely shineth a g
 
een more, insculped with the present Emperors name, and neuer vnveiled, but at Festiuals: at which 
me the reuerence appropriate to his owne person exciteth the 
ike 
∣tion. The Gouernors of Countries, and 
 of Iustice are called 
utant,
 whose 
 looketh the punishment of theeues, who 
 chiefly abound, so are they most seuerely 
 commonly beaten to death with a 
 of 
 
∣gers broad, and one thicke: it is made of 
ewes 



wet in water to supple the same the sooner: so that the executioner daring not moderate his strength, at euery blow draweth bloud, vntill all their ioynts and sinewes are broken to peeces: and in this sort doth tyrannie boast of the slaughter of 3 or 4000 euery yeere, besides such as the prisons deuoure, being sent thither halfe maimed, and formerly tormented.


Amongst them there are few Christians admitted, for feare of discouering the secrets and wealth of their coun∣trey: so cautelous and subtill they are in vnderstanding themselues and strangers, as for their commerces and vtte∣ring the commodities of the countryes, it is done in the Ilands, or with certaine Brokers Indians, who traffique reciprocally betweene Christians and them, receiuing rea∣dy golde and siluer for all, as scorning any thing which other nations can conferre, or transport vnto them: nor is this done without a kinde of iealousie both toward the In∣dians and Christians; yea, sometimes a trecherous policy to cut all their throats whom they can ouermaster, as S
r
. 
Ed. Michelborn
 could haue testified, and many other En∣glish, surprized by disloyalty of such as haue thronged them on ship-boord, or wearied comming on shore a∣mongst the Ilands of 
Moluccae
 and 
Philippinae
 either for wa∣ter, or to view the countrey: yet haue some Portugals in∣truded themselues, and certaine Iesuites by way of insinu∣ation got liberty of entercourse, from whom it should seem they haue learned to blesse themselues with the signe of the crosse, against the assaults & temptations of the Di∣nell, whom they much adore in these parts, & for feare of mischeefe, pacifie with sacrifice and presents, which makes mee remember a reasonable honest man of my acquain∣tance, who hauing two suspicious friends of contrary de∣meanours,


and demanded why hee obserued one before another; answered thus politikely: that the one was ho∣nest of inclination, and would doe him good for vertues sake, or at least no hurt: but the other was more pestilent and dangerous, and therefore must be diuerted by flattery and insinuation from the ill he might prosecute, or intend against him.


The better sort (notwithstanding these affrightings of the Diuell) apprehend, that all things, both supernall and infernall, depend vpon the protection of a greater Influ∣ence, whom by the name of 
Sunne, Moone,
 and 
Stars
 they adore, allowing a duplicity of Priests, the one in a white habit, as sequestred with shauen crownes, like our cloistred Friers: the other in blacke with shag-haire and formidable aspect, going at randome, and frequenting more often their temples, which are very sumptuous and rich, both in cities and countries: these Priests are confederate with certaine women called witches, who doe make trauellers beleeue, they can sell them winde to saile from Iland to Iland, and bring them to certaine wagons for their land iourneyes o∣uer barren and sandy places, which shall haue sailes, & be driuen to and fro with great swiftnesse: wherein as I will not betray my vnderstanding to any vaine and idle credu∣lity, considering that God is the onely commander of his creatures: so must I yeeld to this probability, that by rea∣son of the infinite number of Ilands, and the countrey ly∣ing open to the sea, the winde is euery way more forcible then in other places, and by reason of mountanous blu∣strings, and pressing the aire into straights, seemeth to fight one with another, and at one time to blow with sundry diuisions.


Concerning other particulars of their wiues and con∣cubines,


of their wealth and iewels, of their odours and perfumes, of their wines & syrups, there is no offending chaste eares with their incredible customes: so vilde and filthy is their idolatry, so obscene and shamelesse their liues, so ridiculous their incantations, so exorbitant their presenting of virgins to be deflowred of Idols, so abomi∣nable their exorcismes, and so odious their sencelesse pro∣fanation, with lamentable obstinacy not to be diuerted: I will therefore leaue them to the supreame Iudge, and re∣turne to 
England
 with this caution, that the foole hath sayd in his heart there is no God, and I hope wee attend these discoueries with feare or contempt.






CHAP. III. 
The Monarchy of
 INDIA.


T
HE third part of the worlds glory is enclo∣sed within the store-houses of rich and 
 opulent 
India,
 a countrey not onely inue∣sted with magnificence, but arrogating a preheminence ouer other nations, both for spaciousnesse of ground, and all such bles∣sings, wherewith the diuine prouidence hath made the 
oyes of men exceed. For the two great riuers of 
Indus
 and 
Ganges
 water the same, and diuided into many thou∣sand brookes, like the children of a blessed mother, and plentifull house-keeper, bring glad tidings to the family 
 extraordinary allowances: and thus it insulteth for two summers, temperature of aire, duplicity of encrease, and that we are aduenturers for such things as she vilipendeth:


not yet admitted to vnderstand the one halfe of her se∣crets, The men and women doe now imitate a noble pomp as not encountred abroad, 
nisi ma
na comitante 
∣terua,
 vsing many odours in their bathes and washing; nor are they without oyles and perfumes, iewels, pearles, and other ornaments, not onely befitting the bu
nesse in hand, but to please one another in matters of incontinen∣cy: yet haue they many wiues, who striue with all 
∣cting demeanour to bee best beloued of their 
 But you haue diuers bookes of this subiect, both an
 and moderne, as 
Herodotus, Pliny,
 and other 
Cosmogra∣phers,
 who thus relate the matter: that since the conquest of 
Bacchus,
 whom by another name they call 
oer Pa
r
 they haue settled in their countrey with magnificent eq
 page 5000. principall cities, aduancing a fashion 
le go∣uernment to equall the best 
Common-wealths,
 onely they adored 
Bacchus
 for a God, and 
Hercules
 for a giant: they neuer intruded into any other princes territories, but haue defended their owne from all innouation of strangers, as 
Q. Curtius
 relateth, adding withall a delicate commentary of their famous exploits and noble greatnesse, euen against the Conquerour of the world, in the time of the He
e 
Porus,
 who with great maiesty, valour, and armies of Ele∣phants would haue maintained their freedome and glory: but that Fortune and Successe had condescended to the conditions of ratifying 
Alexanders
 prosperity. And al∣though the many Princes haue sometimes repined one a∣gainst another, and for superiorities sake, shewed the 
∣ety of their owne glories and mightinesse: yet 
 still combined in the prop
ing of for
 
, 
 appeasing priuate encombrances, not reaching 
 ciuill deciding, and hating iniustice and co
 



much as may bee. They loue and reuerence their Kings, (amongst whom the great 
Mogull,
 hauing vs in some esti∣mation before other Princes of 
Europe,
 and with whom we haue a kinde of correspondency, as by reciprocall let∣ters may appeare, is principall and of greatest reputation) making holy-day when hee shaueth his head, and atten∣ding his chariot with pompous brauery, spredding the way where he must passe, with costly ornaments and deli∣cate perfumes. For hee is carried in great pomp on the shoulders of men, adorned with purple, golde, and preci∣ous stones, the chaire hanging with orient pearle, and all thing so ordered, as if the best of our ceremonies should adde an honor to Maiesty. His Guards for his person are many and the best of his souldiers, who suffer no neerer approaches to his stately throne, then hee himselfe shall command, which is publikely knowen by the disrobing of his head of common ornaments, and inuesting himselfe with a magnificent Diadem, then are Embassadors admit∣ted, and diuers lawes enacted for the good of the people.


Another booke will discouer, that when hee disposeth himselfe to pleasure, his concubines are sent for to be par∣takers of the hunting, and then in open view the beasts are killed, being chased before hand into certaine straight en∣closures for the purpose: but if he determine a longer pro∣gresse, their chariots are drawne with Elephants, and their 
 honourable Queenes left at home: but the wantons are enstructed to make proud incontinency swell with varie∣ty, not accustoming their wiues to be partaker of such la∣sciuious changes, but reseruing them for necessity of chil∣dren, or moderation of contentment: when he determi∣neth to sleepe, or peraduenture is ouerloded with wine, that he must resettle his spirits and senses with rest and


ease, the loueliest dames bring him to bed, singing a song of inuocation to the God of silence, and the night.


Another will relate, how worthily their honest matrons liue after they haue had children, how euer they yeelde their chastities at the first to their louers for the price of an Elephant, which yet neuer exciteth any exprobation a∣gainst them. In some places, when a virgin desireth mar∣riage, her parents bring her to publike view amongst a number of young men, where shee electeth whom shee fancieth. In their mutuall commerces they hate vsury, dis∣claime iniustice, denie indentures of couenant, contracts of writing, and haue many seeming excellencies of loue, confidence, and trusting one another: onely they are im∣patient of wrong, and thinke it a glory to take reuenge, but will not offer the occasion.


Another will tell you, that they once esteemed two sorts of wisemen, by the names of 
Samaraei
 and 
Bracha∣manes,
 both which were charactered for 
Gymnosophists:
 but the 
Samaraei
 for their precisenesse were better estee∣med of the Kings; for liuing more moderate then the rest, as eating neither fish nor flesh, it added to their repu∣tation, that the peace of their Kingdomes was established by their 
orizons,
 and the prosperity of the countrey con∣firmed through their holinesse.


Another will demonstrate, how S
t
. 
Thomas
 conuerted them to Christianity, how euer with the Syrians in 
Sama∣ria,
 they haue since intermingled horrible idolatry, and vntill the Portugals came amongst them, would scarse re∣forme the most grossest abuses.


Another will enlarge the conquest of their countrey by the Portugals and Spanyard, with a full description of all things, which may shew you the perfect portraiture of


their kingdomes, courts, common-wealth, riches, plea∣sures, ciuill administration, and mightinesse: yet (as I take it) so farre from a conquest, as wee were ouer 
France,
 when we had only 
Callis
 in 
Picardy,
 or 
Turwin
 and 
Tornay,
 which cost more the re-edifying, then all the country about it was worth. Heere you shall also finde how they haue striued with the Aegyptians for antiquity and cunning, how many Ilands are subiected vnto them, amongst whom 
Summatra,
 in times past called 
Taprobana,
 mustreth the power of eight Kings. 
Iapan
 affoordeth our English a harbour; and at 
Bantam
 they receiue the commodities of 
China
 from the Indian Marchants, who are only admitted to commerce amongst them: and diuers others, as are therein variated with many particulars.


To conclude no one Countrey comes neere it for great∣nesse, 
 which without other addition lifteth vp her title a∣lone, as challenging all the territories betweene 
China
 and 
Persia;
 yea in times past 
China
 it selfe, almost 1200. Eng∣lish mile, and amongst many Kings, hee is principall, that obtaineth by force or popularity. But of late they haue o∣uer-exalted the high Priest called 
Voo,
 who in spirituall matters (as I may say) hath absolute power and authori∣ty, and vpon whose blessing or cursing dependeth the ex∣pectation of future happinesse. Yet hath this idolatrous superstition acknowledgement of a God, whom they in∣uest with a triple crowne, not yeelding any reason for the same, but that he commandeth Heauen, Earth, and Hell. The Iesuites haue taught them to baptize infants in some places, and to fast, wherein they are now tedious obser∣uants (as barbarous people are best maintainers of cu∣stomes and ceremonies) and they vse the signe of the crosse, but it is where they are enforced by the Spanish ga∣risons,


otherwise, what I spake before of 
China:
 for all their silkes, clothes of gold, delicate beds, houses of canes, Serpents, Elephants, precious stones, minerals, pearles, perfumes, drugs, spice, sweet wood, barkes of trees, shels, nuts, and other things of estimation, I may with a Christi∣nn-like sorrow amplifie, concerning their turpitude and morosity. As for their cities, euery one would affoord a story, and I am vnwilling to runne into the errour of ficti∣on or miracle, considering your best Cosmographers haue onely extended the relations of others, and besides the va∣riety of contradicting one another, would now be amazed to see so bewtifull a face of many countries, which they left most glorious, so deformed: and so vnpleasant a coun∣tenance, as they imagined, so illustrious and exalted.


And thus much for that part of 
Asia,
 who are all Idola∣ters, barbarous, inhumane, treacherous, haters of strangers, and so remote from the happinesse I would relie vpon, as my ioy exceedeth for not being a natiue amongst them.






CHAP.
 IV. The Empire of 
PERSIA.


O
N the fourth principall palace of the worlds maiesty, attendeth the expectation of the 
Per∣sian,
 
 who though he cannot boast of 128. regi∣ons, as in the time of 
Hahashuerosh:
 of intru∣ding into 
Greece,
 and subiecting the Ilands of the 
Helle∣spont,
 as in those confused Anarchies of 
Corinth, Athens,
 and 
Lacedemon:
 of re-edifying of 
Babylon,
 and swelling with prosperity and glorious armies, as when 
Darius
 and



Alexander
 the great made slaughter proud to haue the fields furnished with gold, pearle, and treasure: of a since regathered and compacted mightinesse, when the Roman 
Crassus
 was subiected to the calamity of an vnfortunate o∣uerthrow: and of a strained originall from 
Perseus,
 who aduanced that magnificent structure of 
Persepolis
 amongst them, and made the people proud of their denomination, because he was the sonne of 
Iupiter,
 and they the off-spring of the supreame God: yet doth hee still command many regions of 
Asia,
 with reputation of a principall Monarch. For the Kingdomes of 
Saca,
 with the magnificent ex∣ployts of 
Tolmilanda,
 that glorious Queene, the 
Virago
 of her time, and mirrour of her Sex: the regions of 
Bactriana, Sogdiana,
 and many other nations compassing the East and South of the 
Caspian,
 lie still prostrate vnder the feet of this Empire: but because I finde the best authours diffu∣sed in the
 discouery, and neuer conferred but with cer∣taine Armenians, who had trauelled into those parts, by whom I only vnderstood of much tyranny amongst them, and that their greatest exercise was rapine and murthering of passengers, with other mischeeuous practises, both on the confines of 
Media
 and 
India,
 without forme of gouern∣ment, or controll of superiours, as flying into the moun∣taines, and securing themselues in the dangerous passages, in despight of any forces to be raised against them: so that they still remaine vnsubiected and vnpunished, more then a generall acknowledgemet of title and willingnesse, to make the 
Persian
 the arbiter of such controuersies as are raised amongst them. I desist from further dismantling their sauagenesse, as a liuing misery, without either forme, or order of discipline.


I might also be affrighted from poorer relations, in re∣gard


the locuplent history of 
Turkie,
 especially 
Chron
 Turcarum
 in Latine, the Tartarian 
Tamberlaine,
 and valiant 
Scanderbegg
 of EVROPE, or if you will 
George Castriot
 of 
Epirus
 with some others, haue spread abroad, an open car∣pet of pandecticall ampliation, concerning the conquest of these places and people, by another name 
Parthians,
 including 
Media,
 sollemnizing the ostentation of 
Samer∣chanda,
 and making 
Tauris
 with other Cities of 
Persia
 the seates of his reziance, wherein this 
Tamberlaine
 proceeded so farre, that after the victory ouer 
Baiazet,
 he put a Tyara 
 on his head in imitation of the auncient 
Cydaris,
 and 
Per∣sian
 former renoune. I will therefore be the more sparing either in exprobating them that esteemed him at the first a theeuish robber, a base shepheard, or at the best a barba∣rous 
Scithian:
 or exasperating the displeasure of credible Authors, who haue confounded one another with dispa∣ritie of opinions, concerning the alteration of these peo∣ple euen in our moderne times; especially since the Em∣perors of 
Constantinople
 neuer looked backe on the terrors of their vengeance, nor forward on the preuentions of their dissolution: yet because I must now keepe a propor∣tion in my discourses, I will gently lead you a neerer way to the knowledge of such occurrences, as my poore en∣deauours haue obtained.


About the yeere of our redemption 1360. after many 
 mischeeuous practises, and intestine broiles amongst the 
Mahumetans,
 or 
Saracens,
 now 
Persians, Turkes,
 and 
Moores
 a worthy Conqueror amongst them, and especially Prince named 
Sophy,
 aduanced his head ouer the rest, and obtei∣ning the Towne of 
Abdenelis
 attempted likewise the prin∣cipalitie ouer all those factions, that stroue to aduance the honour of 
Mahomet,
 and gaue way to the strong receipt of


his imposturing Alcaron. This 
Sophy
 from the bloud and consanguinity of 
Alis Muamedes
 in the right of his wife 
Musa, Cusinus
 challenged the Empire, and lifted vp the armes of a mightie power to ouer-awe the turbulent spi∣rits almost left breathlesse by a long and tedious dissenti∣on, (for at that time the 
Calipha
 of 
Babylon
 was extirped, and new authority with new names, obscured the first o∣riginall of the 
Persian
 greatnesse, and quickly altered both the Princes and people, teaching them other customes e∣uen in ciuill and mutuall conuersation, with the well en∣tertained religion.) But 
Hosenus
 the sonne of 
Alis
 sto∣maching his Vnkle 
Sophies
 proceedings, as hauing twelue sonnes of sufficient hope, like a Hieroglyphicall resem∣blance of a sheaue of arrowes bound together in one quiuer, proclaimed his right to the 
Persian Cidaris,
 and well conceiued opinion of his interpretation of the Alca∣ron, at such time as the 
Turke,
 assisted by the 
Tartars,
 ad∣uanced a standard of opposition, publishing, that whoso∣euer affected their enlarging of these religious secrets should weare a Tiara on his head of purple with a 
Tulli∣uant:
 wherupon both 
Turkes,
 and 
Persians
 in infinite num∣bers bandied seuerall parties, vntill at last great armies tooke vpon them the deciding of these controuersies, and by many auxiliary forces both of the Northren regions, and all the 
Arabians,
 filled the fields of 
Asia
 with tormen∣ting 
 quarrels: where by the way you must consider, that both 
Persians, Turkes,
 and 
Medes,
 with 
Arabians
 aunciently called 
Saracens,
 doe in a manner adorne their bodies and heads all alike, and may be thus worthy distinguishment and obseruation, First in the Tyara, which is a round or∣nament of the head, in the 
Turkes,
 more formally called a Turban: in the others not so curious, but either inter∣winded


like a rowll; or in some places plighted, at in 
Munster
 in 
Ireland.
 Secondly a Cidaris, which some will haue a hat, or cappe of veluet, or cloth of gold, on which they wreathed their Tiara, or linnen scarffes. Thirdly, a little swelling crowne some foure or fiue inches higher, then the wreath, or Turban called by them a Tulliuant, and cannot be resembled better, then to your younger 
 Merchants wiues of LONDON in their hat-cappes. Fourthly, long coates or gownes with halfe-wide sleeues: yet vnderneath they haue a shorter, girt to them more closely. Fiftly, a large girdle either of net-worke silke, or other curions needleworke, hanging downe as low, as the skirt of the inward coate. Sixtly, a Stola, or robe of Honour particoulored of dellicate stuffe, or veluet. Se∣uenthly, a Semiter, of a reasonable bredth and bending like a bow, or as much as the sheath will giue ease for enter∣tainement. And last of all fine coulored shooes plated with iron, and turning vp at the toe with a peake.


After many conflicts 
Hosenus
 the immediate Heire of 
Alis
 preuailed against his Vnkle 
Sophy,
 and set the crowne on his owne head with remembrance yet of the others glory so farre, that he was proclaimed 
Hosenus Sophy
 
 in the next generation the sanctity of 
Guines
 the sonne of 
Hosenus
 continued with such applause, that the 
 were reputed Heretikes, and suffered that contume
s diuision, as now the Papist and Puritane in EV
 but so the fortune of 
Guines Sophy
 preuailed, that 
 laine
 himselfe tooke armes in his defence, and as a princi∣pall Sectarie of 
Mahomet
 made the colourable suppreding of Heretikes (for so doe 
Turkes,
 and 
Persians
 reciprocally vpbraid one another) the stimulatory cause 
 all 
Asia minor,
 vntill the Emperor 
Baiazet
 with 




Turkes
 fell vnder the stroakes of his warlike hand: Next vnto him succeeded 
Secaider,
 as obstinate as his father, and as successefull in enlarging their 
Mahomets
 blasphemies, of whom I will say no more, seeing they acknowledge one God, one Prophet, and circumcision, differing onely as I said in the antiquity of their Rabby, and idle nicety, for which they haue set in combustion the Countries of the East, and with violent entercourses diuided the spoiles of 
Asia.
 For this 
Secaider
 attempted the conquest of 
Geor∣gia
 and 
Mengrelia
 on the West of the 
Caspian,
 who being Christians according to the superstition of the 
Greeke
 Church, submitted to certaine conditions, as tolleration of religion, paying tribute, and disclaiming to assist the 
Turke
 against them: whereby they obtained a kinde of peace and protraction, vntill againe the 
Persians
 declined in their fortunes, and could not preuent the forwardnesse of the 
O
oman
 glory: yet euer since there hath beene an intermixture and admittance on all sides, especially in the interims of their truce; and when counterchangeable Embasies haue passed betweene them. Besides, from an absolute tradition of the East, which that lasciuious 
Ma∣homet
 inserted, as a tolleration and princely prerogatiue from 
Ahasuerosh
 instance, or if you please 
Salomons
 Con∣cubines, all the beautifullest Virgins are taken vp between 
Persian
 and 
Turke,
 euen perforce out of the laps of Chri∣stian mothers, and sequestred with purifying oyle, and 
e fare for the Emperors pleasure: witnesse SIR 
 SH
S 
LADY,
 who was a Christi∣an 
 
Georgian
 either liuing with some kinred in the freedome of religion, or taken out of the 
Seralio
 (wherein he was exceedingly fauoured) before shee was graced with the 
 
 presence; otherwise, it is death to


marry a Christian, or a 
Persian
 to bee married to a Chri∣stian.


Thus you see how the name of 
Sophy
 began, and was ad∣ded 
 to the Emperours titles, as the 
Abimelech
 to P
e 
Pharaoh
 and 
P
olomeus
 to Aegypt: yea, within our memo∣rie, the 
Soldan
 called 
Cairo
 new 
Babylon,
 and 
Caesar
 was, and is an attribute to all Emperours, since 
Iulius
 and 
Au∣gustus.
 But no sooner had the distinction of these people, 
Persians, Turkes
 and 
Moores,
 from an interpretation of their law, limited the seuerall subiects within certaine bounds of strict allegeance: but time and curiosity cor∣rupted all their manners, and neither 
Herodatus▪ 
 nor 
Pliny,
 liuing now amongst them, would suppose them the same nations, for whom they tooke such paines in their descriptions: so that who viewes them now, must not looke vpon their riches and glory, otherwise the
 
p∣on mighty conquerours, and magnificent people 
yet be∣cause there are some differences amongst them, according to a breuiary obseruation, wherein my time was employed, and that as the 
Iewes
 repined at the 
Samaritans,
 the 
∣ritans
 at the 
Galilaeans:
 so heer is the same discrepancy 
ut extending to particulars of better consequence 
 
e thought good to publish these vses. The 
Persian
 is 
 minded, liberall, sociable, and farre from affect
on. The 
Turke
 is dogged, proud, sparing, and contemp
, 
s not knowing either consanguinity, neighbor-hood, or any thing but the name of a 
aue. The 
Persian
 
 no∣ble-men, loueth such as we call hawke-
ee, from 
 commendation of 
Cyrus,
 weareth his vpper 
p w
 
g and turning mustachoes, boasteth of his 
 
in propagato sanguine,
 is glorious in app
 
 
∣ous, enclining to peace, and de
rous of ple
 



they giue life vnto by solemnizing of feasts, whereat their noble wiues may meet, except when they are heated to la∣sciuiousnesse, then are they sent away, and concubines in∣uited to make wantonnesse the fuller, to which they come by degrees, beginning with a modest shamefastnesse, but more bold, at last set open all the doores of petulant and luxurious variety: nor are they ashamed to produce in∣stances of 
Darius
 banquetting in 
Susa
 180. dayes, with all his Princes: of 
Baltashars
 solemnities, when the cups of of gold were filled, and the beds of iuory spred: of 
Alex∣anders
 the Conqueror, imitating the Persian brauery, and reiecting the barren and shuffling customes of the 
Grecians,
 and diuers others, whose inuentions and customes are re∣membred to set on flame the already burning fire of their voluptuousnesse. The 
Turke
 contemneth such formality in condition: yet is more curious in apparrell; for his Turban is delicately plighted, and when it raines, hath a hood to couer it, his vpper gowne is cleane brusht, his mu∣stacho carefully preserued, his beard the grace of his coun∣tenance, and many other delicacies maintained, while hee is resident in corrupted cities, seeming more solid, tyran∣nous, warlike, and knoweth nothing but obedience, as coniured to raise vp all the trophees of his endeauours to the glory of 
Othoman:
 yea, in his matters of inconti∣nency, he runneth also a strange race, with a more impu∣dent violence then the 
Persian,
 as if the Satyre were exem∣plined: 
Dum vitant stulti vitia, in contraria currunt:
 and both from that horrible corruption of the 
Grecians,
 haue admitted the defiling of males, and the better sort do both geld and keepe Eunuchs, and other to the same purpose. The 
Persian
 loueth learning, painting, exercises, and many generous qualities. The 
Turke
 scorneth any language


but his owne, supposing him a right Politician, who spea∣keth or learneth his, careth for no quality, but riding, shoo∣ting, and playing at chesse, contemneth many superfluous customes of 
Europe,
 and hath in derision, yea in malicious contempt all the ceremonies of the Westerne Churches, by reason of their images, and foolish prophaning of God through idolatry. Thus then from 
India
 to 
Arabia
 East & West, and from the 
Caspian
 to the 
Persian Gulph
 (where the great 
Euphrates
 emptieth his streams, and vnder whose shores is that famous 
Ormus
 scited, where they fish for pearle, and trauell six weekes together, from 
Damascus
 and 
Cairo
 to the same, with 6. or 700, cammels and asses in a company, to carry their prouision, for feare of the theeues of 
Arabia)
 preuaileth this Emperour, possessing withall di∣uers cities on this side 
Ganges,
 as intermingled with the Portugals: so that in 
India
 at this instant you haue many ports and harbours of fortification lying intricately diui∣uided betweene 
Turkes, Persians, Spanyards,
 and the 
Indi∣ans
 themselues.






CHAP. V.
 The Empire of 
TVRKS.


T
HE fift and absolutely the greatest share 
 of the worlds honour for goodnes of ground, as indeed throwing into his lap the spoiles of 
Asia, Europe,
 and 
Africke,
 hath bedecked the Emperor of 
Turks
 with such ornaments, that we now call him the 
Gran Signeur,
 and he vnderstandeth himselfe


thus farre, that for wealth, territories, and command of souldiers, all other Princes come short of him, and are terrified, when he is at peace with the 
Persian,
 and vniteth his Armie against the ill-agreeing Princes of Christen∣dome: But if you please, you shall thus expose the con∣tention to your owne arbitrament.


For countries: He possesseth 
Asia minor,
 now 
Natolia
 
 or 
Anatolia,
 of the Greeke word signifying 
East,
 with all the Regions within the 
Propontis,
 and 
Hellespont,
 and such places as in times past made the Crownes of Kings to shine with gold and pearle, aduancing their chaires to the establishment of the highest Maiestie, as 
Phrigia, Galatia, Bithinia, Pontus, Lidia, Caria, Paphlagonia, Licia, Magnesia, Capadocia,
 and 
Comagena:
 then neere the 
Caspian
 now 
Hir∣canian
 Sea, 
Georgia, Mengrelia, Armenia,
 all Christians of the Greeke Church: To which if you adde the Empire of 
Trebisond,
 you shall then finde him the great controller of the blacke Sea: For although 
Russia, Bogdonia, Mulda∣uia,
 and some 
Polanders
 keepe the north and west shores; yet is it as a man, which hath notice of a theeues comming to rob him, and dareth not slacke his guards, lest hee be surprized vnawares. Next doth the pride of his greatnes send you into 
Assiria, Siria, Palestina, Mesopotamia, Iudea,
 some torne away peeces of 
Persia,
 especially the oppulent Townes of 
Tauris
 and 
Babylon,
 the three 
Arabia's,
 and the red Sea. Thirdly, if you will walke into 
Affricke,
 he can inuite you to the pleasures and plenty of 
Aegipt,
 the fertilitie of 
Nilus,
 and all the shores of the middle land Sea, as farre as the confederation of 
Morocco, Barbary,
 and 
Fess:
 Nor desisteth he so, but in the fourth place from the top of 
Alexandria
 hee biddeth you looke as farre Northward as you can, and all the Ilands in the arches,


except 
Candy,
 and some few circumspecting the couchent lyon of 
Venice,
 acknowledge him for soueraigne Lord, and King. Fiftly, the fields of 
Greece
 lye walle, and are ashamed to lift vp their deformed countenances, and worne-out necks with the yron coller of seruitude and bondage, considering that in times past 
Thracia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Epyrus,
 and 
Pelopenesus
 set both Philosophers and Poets on worke to sing out 
encomions
 of their delight∣some magnificence, and pleasures of loue; all which is now forgotten, as if the swet of a brow were wiped away with a cloth. Last of all, his 
Bashawes
 will bring you to 
Buda
 & 
Belgrade,
 and affright you with a relation of 
Hun∣garies
 troubles, assuring you, that it knoweth not her first parents, but calleth the 
Turke
 a conqueror in many things. Yea the Princes of 
Poland, Transiluania, Sclauonia,
 and others, with whom he hath contracted a pacification, are yet vncertaine of his dammings in, and haue a fearefull care, lest he should breake downe his enclosures, and like an invndation indeed burst vpon them vnawares.


His principall Cities are 
Trebisond, Amasia, Babylon:
 or if you will but the ruines of confusion: 
Tauris
 gotten 
 from 
Persia: Mecha
 famous for the historie and buriall of 
Mahomet: Gran Cairo
 in times past 
Memphis,
 of late new 
Babylon,
 exposing the ostentous workes of the 
Pyramides:
 but now you can wonder at nothing, but heat, dust, slut∣tishnes, and the mortalitie of a 100000 in a yeare, when the pestilence rageth amongst them: 
Alexandria
 boasting of her Founder, and that shee is the porter to let you en∣ter the dores of 
Nilus: Algier
 lifting vp the head of a strong Castle, and daring to publish, how the Emperor 
Charles
 the fift lost his Nauie before her: and 
Tunis
 the Port of old 
Carthage,
 and now refuge of all the English


Pirates: Shall I come backe againe and tell you of 
Ieru∣salem, Tyrus,
 and 
Sidon?
 alas, they are but names, and all the plagues denounced by the Prophets haue broken their bones in sunder, and bruised them like a rod of iron: 
Aleppo,
 which would faine be old 
Antioch,
 yea dare from the mouth of some Authors publish, the antiquities of 
Niniuie:
 The seuen Churches of 
Asia
 renowned for for∣mer election, and former desolation according to the pro∣phesie of the Euangelist for the remouing of the candle∣sticke: 
Rhodes
 mourning for the pulling in peeces the 
Colossus
 of brasse, which named the whole Iland 
Collo∣censes,
 and loaded 700 Cammels after he departed from the siege: 
Nicosia, Paphos,
 and 
Famagosta,
 all Cities of 
Ciprus,
 and almost fretted a peeces to thinke, that the 
Ve∣netians
 lost them so carelesly, and vnfortunately: The few Cities left of 
Europe:
 the poore harbours of 
Asia minor:
 the port townes of the 
Ilands:
 the two castles of the 
Hellespont,
 reducing to your memorie the misfortunes of 
Hero
 and 
Leander,
 whom the townes of 
Cestos
 and 
Abidos
 bewailed, & the principall place of all his reziance 
Constantinople,
 called 
Stanbole,
 or the 
Beautifull;
 and ex∣traordinarily graced with the denomination and conue∣niencie of the 
sacra porta.


His riches consist in commanding the lands, bodies, 
 and liues of all his subiects: For first his owne nation cal∣led the 
Musselman
 laboureth in all businesse to increase his treasurie, and pay him an yeerely 
entrado:
 the coun∣tryman is a drudge, and tilleth the ground to maintaine his officers, who distribute to the people, as he appoin∣teth: the Christians maintaine his 
Sansacks,
 and 
Tima∣triots;
 and all his 
Ianisaries
 and souldiers being the sonnes of Christians are payed, and haue their salary from


his Exchequer and treasurie: the Merchant bringeth him gold from all the world, and filleth his Harbours with such commodities, as the earth affordeth, and the Iew sup∣plieth his wants in such a manner, that he neither lacketh pearles, diamonds, and pretious stones, nor any thing which the earth affords to fringe the skirts of Maiestie with extraordinary pompe and brauery. But if you will aske me in what manner Fortune attended thus to apparell, and set him on the stage of such magnificence, as neuer Emperor, or Monarch could dreame on before; with all their tyrannous inventions besides? I will thus redact some occurrences of former times to helpe your memory.




The storie of the 
OTHOMANS.


ABout the yeere of Grace 1300. to our greater dis∣grace, 
 did 
Othomanus
 the sonne of 
Lichis
 step before other families, as if he were adopted the darling of suc∣cesse, and in his fathers behalfe obteined iurisdiction ouer 
Bithinia, Cappadocia,
 and most part of 
Pontus.
 His suc∣cessor 
Orchanes
 conquered the great Citie of 
Prusia,
 and made it the Citie of his Kingdome, and seat of his inheri∣tance: but in the 22 yeare of his progresse he was killed by the 
Tartars,
 and left his sonne 
Amurah
 to succeed both in his honor and familie; who perceiuing the dissention of the 
Greekes,
 and diuision of the Empire against the re∣mainder of the 
Romans,
 spent not the aduantage which he tooke at the same, without a great satisfaction. For with the water that draue the mill he drowned it, and in∣uited as a guest to this banquet of combats became ma∣ster of the feast; or rather resembled the viper, which


destroyed the mother that brought it forth: so he admit∣ted as auxiliary for another, at last made a conquest for himselfe, of 
Gallipolis, Chersonesus, Peloponesus, Philipopolis, Hadrinopolis, Seruia, Bulgaria,
 and 
Misia:
 But after 23. yeares convulsion of the 
Graecian
 glory, and his owne shouldring into the throng of magnificent renowne, he was stabd with a dagger, and so gaue way to his sonne 
Ba∣iazet
 to fill the chaire of his imperiousnes: He began well, attaining 
Phocis, Macedonia,
 and most part of 
Thracia,
 had not fortune kept him a litle from insulting, and tript vp his heeles euen in the race of his triumph: For with the losse of 200000 Turkes against that valiant 
Tamber∣laine,
 he also lost his freedome, and how he died, our sta∣ges haue instructed Mechanicall men: Yet did 
Calepi∣nus
 his sonne in the meane while take vp the colours of defiance, and forbearing the reuenges of 
Asia,
 wrecked his anger on 
Sigismond
 of 
Europe,
 and determined to ouer∣runne the other territories of 
Hungary,
 and the Empire; but prosperitie was not so attendant. For ere six yeeres had enlarged the branches of this strange spreading tree, the axe was put to the roote, and as in 
Daniels
 vision, 
Na∣buchadnezar
 fell to the earth: but his stump sprung againe, and 
Mahomet
 his sonne in imitation of his fathers pro∣gresse, set forward his owne iourney, winning 
Walachia, Sclauonia,
 all the borders of the 
Ionian
 sea, and made 
Andrianopolis
 the store-house of his honour, wherein for 14 yeere he heaped vp such ornaments of 
Mars
 and 
Bel∣lona,
 that he terrified the Emperor of Germanie, and all the confederate Princes of Italy. Presently followed 
Amurath
 the second, and filled vp his inventory with 
Epirus, Aetolia, Achaia, Boeotia, Attica,
 and 
Thessalonica:
 then subject to the 
Venetians,
 now 
Salenica,
 and the gulph


of 
Napoli,
 running vp by a corner of 
Nigropont,
 in times past 
Eubaea.
 Next him 
Mahomet
 the second ouerthrew the schooles of 
Athens,
 and on a fatall day, a day of pu∣nishment and terror, a day of iudgement and vnanswe∣rable accounts, the 29 of 
May
 1452. brought such a reck∣ning before 
Constantinople,
 that shee forfeited her liber∣tie, and was compelled to pay the amercement, nor had shee time with the politicke steward to alter the bills of the debters, whereby he prouided against future wants: But when 
Corinth, Lemnos, Meteline, Capha
 a towne belon∣ging to the iurisdiction of 
Genoa,
 and many other 
Ilands
 vnderstood of her araignement, and perceiuing there was no contesting with this seuere iudge of assise, they tooke a course of prostitution, and yeelded both homage and fe∣altie; to which they were the rather induced, because 
Trebisond
 first led the way of expectation for mercy, and gaue him leaue to continue in pompe, and glorious esti∣mation 32 yeeres. After him 
Baiazet
 the second ob∣tained 
Naupact, Methon,
 and 
Diriachum
 from the 
Veneti∣ans;
 then went he to make a contract with fortune for the most part of 
Dalmatia,
 and thought to haue bargained for 
Austria:
 but it should seeme the conditions were very intricate, and something interposed it selfe. For an en∣uious hand poisned his body, as ambition had done his minde, which was imputed to his sonne 
Zelimus,
 who most vnnaturally made him away with excuse of 
Alexan∣ders
 emulation against his father 
Philip,
 when he told him his enterprises were so great, that he would leaue him litle to doe: yet it fell out to them both otherwise. For 
Alex∣ander
 set forward the conquest of 
Asia:
 and 
Zelimus
 of 
Affricke,
 vniting 
Cairo, Aegipt, Alexandria,
 and 
Damascus
 to the Empire. But now you must looke vpon the wan∣ton


of fortune, euen 
Solyman
 the magnificent, who step∣ped backe againe into 
Europe,
 and reached at 
Belgrade, Buda,
 and 
Strigonium,
 with so forcible a strength, that he pulld them from the sides of a louing mother, and left the rest of 
Hungarie
 mourning at the cruelty: yet desisted he not so. For he vanquished 
Rhodes,
 pulling the 
Colossus
 and wonder of the world in peeces; to which he added the deuastation of the fiue Churches, and 
Iula:
 but com∣ming to 
Zigethis
 was there arrested with an imperious 
one firma
 from the commander of Kings, and so died. But his sonne 
Zelimus
 the second, liued, and raigned, vntill 
Ciprus
 fell from the 
Venetians
 1570. like a stone pull'd from a ruinous wall: yet being loose before, it did not much endanger the foundation. For presently followed the battell of 
Lepanto,
 wherein these Italian con∣federates played the worke-men indeed, and a little resto∣red both their reputation and losses. Thus was 
Amurah
 the third left the great Lord of Lords, ouerlooking the most part of 
Europe,
 the West of 
Asia,
 and the North of 
Africke,
 but more proud of the old 
Sinan, Bashaw,
 and the 
Cigalas:
 the one his 
Admirall
 at sea, the other 
Viceer
 of his army: then the conquest of any one Kingdome, because through their industry the honour of the Empire flouri∣shed, and yet he might follow his pleasures. But being a corpalent man, he presumed so farre, that luxury & incon∣tinency ouergorg'd him in the feeding. For, 
Nihil violen∣
um 
erpetuum,
 and so his lamp was extinguished, leauing 
 sonne 
tanus Achmat
 the first of his name, and foure∣tee
 
 from 
Othoman,
 not aboue sixteene yeeres olde, to 
ge the horses of this 
Phaetonticall
 charriot.


This Emperor is seldome seene abroad, vnlesse hee be 
 
ted to some 
Bashawes
 Seralio, or appoint to


hawke according to the time of the yeere: but I impu
 this sequestration to his sicknesse, of the small pox, w
 
 which he was greeuously the yeere before perplexed 
 when hee taketh his pleasure in this kinde, to ans
 
 proportion of attendance, you shall haue 300. 
 and 4000. horse in the field together, with whose 
 they spring the game. For wanting Spaniels, the ground besides being hot & stony, they sildome come to 
, but quickely kill whatsoeuer is put vp, by reason 
 multitude, both of haukes and and officers: to this they adde the musike of certaine halfe drums on horse-backe, and so for all our ridiculous prouerb of hunting hares with tabers, they pastime themselues in all their sports, which I was an eye witnes of, about the first of September 160
 and beheld the great 
Turke
 in the fields of 
Greece,
 a gallant young-man of nineteene yeeres olde, somewhat fat and and well fauoured: yet did the pock-holes a little ecclipse the sweetnesse of his aspect: his countenance was sterne and maiesticall, and his apparrell a plaine crimsen satten gowne. He wore no gloues, nor suffered any to doe so in his presence, which likewise all their women obserue, espe∣cially the 
Sultanesses,
 whom when the Lady 
G
ouer
 was admitted to visit, they caused her to put her gloues aside: On his thumb he had a horne ring, as all other 
Turks
 haue, keeping one order for their shooting, as an artificiall de∣uice to draw their strong sinewed bowes, without which a treble enforcement cannot preuaile. His 
Semiter
 was rich, and boasted of a Christian worke-man in 
Dama
s,
 and in a delicate Turban, he had a hanging feather of dia∣monds, valued at 40000. pound sterling, his company was not aboue 2000. horse, most of them 
Capogies
 and 
Chiauses,
 in veluet gownes and rich saddles
 should 



he went not farre, because 200. 
Gimoglans
 carried his re∣past on foot, in certaine delicate baskets couered ouer with rich handkerchifs: after he was past, I was admitted into his gally, in which he came from his 
Caska,
 a delicate banquetting-house without his 
Seralio,
 close by the sea side to 
Porta del Fiume,
 where hee tooke horse: it was a roome of great riches, yet small capacity, set all ouer with inlayed worke of mother of pearle, rubies, opals, emeralds, and had the mettall beaten into thin plates layd counter∣compony, which with the borders answered one another in gracefull proportion; within this 
Cabinet,
 as I may say, no man comes but himselfe, nor on horse-backe were any neere him by 60. foot, except such as ran by him in their proper places, or durst aduenture to deliuer petition vnto him, which certaine 
Russians
 did, complaining on the bor∣derers of 
Bogdonia,
 and daily excursions of the Rouers and Pirates of the blacke sea.


Amongst other entertainements, the Ambassadour S
r
. 
Thomas Glouer
 had seuerall times inuited the Bashaw of 
Tunis,
 the Polish and Persian Ambassadours, from whom I receiued an extraordinary description of all the well-de∣seruing vertues of our noble Queene 
Elizabeth,
 as if that Maiesty alone had made all the East to wonder, who be∣fore were neuer mooued with any businesses of 
Europe,
 and with whom I went to 
Scideret
 a towne in 
Asia,
 iust ouer the sea, against the City, in whose fields about Iuly before, the great army of 200000. 
Turkes
 and 
Tartars
 were mustered: by the way in the midst of the sea stan∣deth a watch-tower, as the guard of the passage in∣to the blacke sea, which in truth is a riuer of great plea∣sure for twenty miles to the blacke tower, and 
Pompey's
 piller, adorned on each side of the banke with delicate


houses, wherein both 
Turkes
 and 
Greekes
 pastime them∣selues in their haruest and vintages, and sometimes retire in the raging of a plague, yet was I in the great City, when there died 80000. in fiue months: but of all other things suppose themselues graced, when the 
Gran Signieur
 will vouchsafe to visit them, and extend his pleasure amongst them: this tower is well guarded and erected, in such a fashion, that wee may dispute therof, if an Iland? how so small? and not washed in peeces with the violence of some tempest; if none? how was twenty fathom deepe raised to a foundation: within two mile more particularly called the vines of 
Pera,
 the 
Greekes
 for seuen or eight daies resort in famelies to their gardens, and solemnize their vintages with musike and dancing, and although the coun∣trey seemeth stony and hot: yet vnder the skirt of the hils are mantling meddowes running in stripes, yeelding hay and pasture for their greater cattle. Beyond 
Constantinople
 Northward, are the 
Iewes
 licensed to bury their dead, and according to the greatnesse of the family and person, set vp tents of watchet and crimsen satten, and obserue a commendable order of mourning & lamentation in their exequies. The riuer runneth into the sea by the vines of 
Pera:
 so that 
Galata
 neither standeth in 
Asia,
 nor is an Iland, but resembleth a spurre of fortification, and is ioy∣ned to the Continent of 
Thrace
 with an 
Istmus:
 some fiue∣teene miles from the City, those stately 
aquae ductus,
 of which there be sixteene in seuerall places, which feede the cesternes of 
Constantinople,
 giue notice what men and mo∣ney can doe. For being the workes of pleasure and osten∣tation, they are raised to a leuell from hill to hill, and the water comming from open springs, is as it were sent to be better secured within passages of stone, mounted vpon


arches 200. foot high, and a thousand in length, from whence it posteth with gladnesse to a delicate aboad of cesternes and fountaines, which by diuers pipes vnder ground pay a continual tribute to the conduits of the great Citie.


The townes and villages of the countrey are disorde∣red, and the people line 
luttishly on roots, fruit, garlicke, onions, gourds, and such like. For they sildome eat any flesh, and if any good thing fall to their share, as melions, pomegranets, almonds, grapes, figs, and other delicates, they raise what profit they can: yea, as beastly as it is, they send their butter and cheese to 
Stanbole,
 which with a loathsome shew openeth the Cow-hides it is put in, and next the filthy haire glutteth a strangers stomach without tasting at all. They cart and plow with 
Buffoloes:
 yet haue oxen, whom they feede to supply the markets and court, as being proportioned out of their 
Sansacks
 end 
Timatriots
 to a weekely number. About the end of Nouember was a comet seene in the West, neere the Constellation of 
An∣dromeda,
 and the plague continued without feare or repi∣ning, to which was added a lasting fire of seuen dayes, con∣suming almost 4000. houses, and shaking the wals of di∣uers 
Bashawes
 houses: the losse lighting vpon the already broken backes of the 
Iewes,
 and some 
Grecians,
 and the repining dispersed amongst the 
Turkes
 themselues, who casting vp an vntoward catalogue of many accidents, and summoning altogether with diuers reuolts, but especially the rebels of 
Armenia,
 and the distasting humours of the 
S
uano
 of 
Asia,
 or if you will, the 
Bashaw
 of 
Aleppo,
 dared to whisper many things against the dignity of the Empire. So that at this very instant, the expectation of a change may embolden vs all, if Christendome will ac∣knowledge


that there is one in heauen, who disposeth of earthly kingdomes, and the Princes could admit of some principall 
Iosua
 to conduct his brethren. For without controuersie, this swelling Monarch is now at the highest marke, and must haue a cadence according to the reuoluti∣on of time and gouernments.








CHAP. VI. 
The Empire of
 AETHIOPIA.


T
He sixt part of the worlds Honour sprea∣deth 
 abroad the roiall mantel of 
Aethi∣opia,
 or if you will 
Abisse
 vnder the command of 
Prester Iehan,
 to whom at this houre are so many Nations and Cities obedient, that for my owne part I want names to decipher them; and concerning the Na∣uill of 
Africke,
 few Europians I am sure haue seene the se∣cret, or searched how the compacted sinues are vnited yet was 
Meroe
 once the principall Citie, and many fa∣mous things are recited by the Scriptures, 
Pliny
 and 
Pto∣lemy
 in the description thereof: as that in Hebrew it was called 
Chus
 for the blacknesse of the people, dwelling be∣tweene the two tropickes, or else of 
Chus
 the sonne of 
Cham
 the sonne of 
Noe;
 or 
Aetheria,
 afterward 
Atlantia;
 and last of all 
Aethiopia
 of 
Aethiope
 the sonne of 
Vulcane▪
 that they are now diuided into 
Arothertae, Atha
uii, Dara∣ticae, Hesperij,
 and 
Perorsi;
 that 
Diodorus
 and 
Volacoran
 haue maintained, how the originall of all Creatures first beganne in this Countrey, and would extend Paradice to


this place, when GOD caused 
Adam
 to name them: but these Philosophers not vnderstanding the truth, inuented what they listed to please themselues, as you may perceiue by 
Homers
 fictions: that they were the best obseruers of religious secrets, and ceremonies; and boasted of true de∣uotion to their gods for the example of all Nations: That they were very warlike, and obedient to their EMPEROR in all things, and so populous, that the Emperor seldome went without a 1000000. into the field: That they were sold to all the Nations of the world for slaues, and seemed contented with such seruitude, as being glad to go out of their owne Countries: That they were wont to plight their haire in knots, and winde it with intricate diuisions: That the great and high mountaines of the Moone ouer∣looketh their territories, and vnburtheneth 
Nilus
 from her wombe, sending it abroad, as farre, as the middle-land sea 1500. mile, like a timely birth to the comfort of his mother, and with ioy to all good kinsfolk, & neighbours: That the nature of the Riuer 
Niger fluuius
 is so strange, that as ashamed of his imperfections, and abrupt breakings out vnder sandy hills, it hideth his head 60. mile together, and then bursteth out with horrible and impetuous vio∣lence: That whole Countries haue beene ouerwhelmed with sand, when the hills make a noyse, and the Sun hath enflamed his heate, and anger against them, departing in that fury, that in breaking the sides of Mountaines the aire and winde maketh a rupture, and so the drie ground first parched presently crumbleth to pouder, and is quick∣ly tossed with forcible blasts: That the Kingdomes of 
Damutego
 and 
Manuongo
 as farre as 
Caput bonaespei,
 with all the shore, Cities, and harbours, are numbred parcell of this Empire, and expose many stories and plentifull rela∣tions:


That infinite Ilands full of drugges, mineralls, gold, pretious stones, pearle, spice, &c. are the handmaides of this Mistris, especially the great Iland of Saint 
Laurence
 in times past called 
Madagascar,
 which now compareth with 
Britaine
 for magnitude, as containing 600. mile in length, but say what deuises can, ours is the greatest Iland of the world. Many other particulars are inserted by Authors with addition of their manners, and customes: but be∣cause all absolute things are worne out of date, and that it would vex a Traueller to read one thing, and finde ano∣ther, I will trouble antiquitie no longer, but content my selfe with some probabilities, and the best receiued opini∣ons of this Monarchy.


You must then vnderstand, that those limited Garisons of 
Aegipt
 vnder the 
Turke,
 are here very strong to keepe backe the excursions of the 
Aethiopians,
 who from 
Nilus
 
 to the South-sea make one Countrey, and are all reputed Christians, boasting of their conuersion from 
Candauce
 the Queene in the 
Actes
 of the Apostles, whom by ano∣ther name they call 
Iudith,
 and so afterward submitted to the obedience of one principall, to whom they afforded the significant title of 
Preste Iehan,
 not that he is a Byshop or Priest, as some superstitiously conceiue, but that those 
 words signifie in the 
Aethiopian
 tongue Great PRINCE, or EMPEROR. Amongst them are many Monasteries both of men and women, but strictly prohibiting any en∣tercourse betweene them, or wanton show of prophana∣tion: their fasts are 50. daies with bread and water, and some slender fruit, as for fish they haue litle store, or lesse skill to take them, or make vse of them by way of suste∣nance: they are so carefull in the obseruation of their cu∣stomes concerning this religious fasting and prayers, that


they will sleepe no longer, then they hold their heads o∣uer water, that the nodding downe may giue them war∣ning to be more vigilant: their bells are of stone for the most part; their Priests marry, and celebrate the masse, allowing in their procession, crosses, censors, tapers, and lampes: the retired monkes maintaine their haire; the common Priests shaue, and both are b
refoote, especially in the Church, wherein no man enters with prophanation; but putteth off his sandalls and laieth them apart, as the 
Turkes
 doe, who are very carefull in such deuout obserua∣tions, adding withall a ceremonious washing, taken from the Iewish purifying, as in his proper place shall appeare. The Sabbaoths and Eues are festiuals and celebrated ac∣cordingly; circumcision is added to their baptisme both in men and women, vnto which they are not admitted, vn∣till 40. daies, and then the three persons of the Trinity haue a reuerent exaltation, and the Eucharist is admini∣stred by custome at the same time according to the cre∣dit of the Greeke Church, which they resolutely confirme to haue priority before the Latine: their names are all significant, and the religion ariseth from a certaine booke, which they confidently maintaine was approued by the Synode of the Apostles, congregated at 
Ierusalem.
 The very common people haue plurality of wiues, according to their sufficient ability to support their estates, and con∣tent their desires, suffering diuorses either for naturall im∣perfections, or iust causes of incontinencie: but such men and women thus scandalized are debarred intermedling with spirituall matters; some say not admitted into the Church at all. Their Nobility are in great estimation, and according to actions correspondent to their professed ver∣tue preserue the wealth, and credit of their Auncestors.


Their greatest Cities are few in number, but such as stand by the sea shore are of good strength and eminence with stupendous Castels and workes of antiquity. The com∣mon heape of houses are poore, sluttish, all on the ground open, without chimnies, and sutable to the dispersed man∣ner of their villages. In all the Empire is no money, but pure gold: salt and pepper are excellent marchandize through 
Africke:
 but here so richly valued, that slaues are redeemed with them: but the commodities of the Coun∣trey soone and easily exchanged, it affordeth many thing▪ as you haue heard, especially Eliphants, Tyger Linkes, Taxos, Apes, Lions, and Harts against an absolute opi∣nion, that there was no Venison in 
Africke;
 but Beares, Cunnies, Corduels, and Cuckowes are not seene amongst them. The custome of their huntings, raising their armies, order of diet, with ciuet and muske, washing and no
∣ting with precious balmes and perfumes, feasting, burials, and superstitions, would fill seuerall relations, either to pacifie ignorance, or strengthen their knowledge who are entred a little into the Schoole of experience: but because there is nothing amongst them fit for our example, I will make my iourney as cursory as I can, and study for no commorance, but where there is possibility of thriuing. Their Cabalisticall Arts, and secrets from certaine wise men named 
Gymnosophists
 with the 
Indians,
 called also or some the Easterne 
Aethiopia,
 would make as tedious dis∣putation, especially when I must name the 
Trogiodite, Ga∣ramaulis, Atlantides, Libera interior, Synega,
 the further plaines of 
Monte nigro,
 and some others, and cannot tell you, whether they be Idolaters, or no; onely I can assure you they allow of the immortality of the soule, on which they are besotted so diabolically, that they will murther


themselues vpon small enforcement, either to honor their lords, dye with their husbands, preuent the discommodi∣ties of old age, helpe their friends, or pleasure their best beloued after their barberous credulity: But because I would faine bring you into 
Europe,
 where my hope and purpose is to finde the happinesse of a kingdome, accor∣ding to the reciprocall duties betweene Prince and Sub∣iect, I will leaue these people to be reiected with 
Esau.
 For sure there is a 
Iacob,
 whom old 
Isaacke
 hath better blessed






CHAP.
 VII. The Empire of 
RVSSIA.


T
Ill now the world hath opened her 
 largest embraces, seeming to giue Honour and Maiesty a breathing time for feare of smoothering with heate, and fulsomnesse of aire: but here shee will hugge it close with a contrary kindnes, and keepe it warme, for doubt of catching of cold; otherwise this great 
Duke∣dome
 of 
Muscouia,
 or if you please Empire of 
Russia
 will shut vp renowne in the dangerous passages of the frozen sea, or pinch her bloud with congealed Isicles, and snowy frosts. For all the Countrey is byting, sharpe, and in some places dangerous to the passengers, especially in winter, which here lasteth long: besides, it is full of woods, and desert places Northward, and they as full of wild beasts, noysome and vnsauory in their liues; but profitable and full of contentment after they be kild. For Beares, Mar∣tins,


Sables, blacke-foxes, Ermines, and some others fill the magnificent Courts of 
Europe
 with furres. Notwith∣standing toward 
Poland
 there is great difference both of ground and aire, and in obseruing certaine customes a∣gainst the intemperatenesse of the weather, there is rea∣sonable suppliment of Natures allowance either concer∣ning food or rayment. It boasteth of foure great Riuers, 
Olba, Volga, Duina,
 and 
Tanaies,
 sometimes taken one for another, and many times confounded, as if 
Olba
 and 
Ta∣naies
 were all one, sending foorth many brookes, like so many seruants of a thriuing Husbandman, and House∣keeper, who are orderly imployed about their busines for the credit and prosperity of the family. The Emperors progenie hath giuen way to diuers Histories, and is now so increased in wealth, mightinesse, estimation, command ouer his Subiects, and such other tumors of Maiestie; that many stratagems, and politicall deuices haue taught one another trickes to bring the proudest Monarch on his knees: whereby sometimes his will and imperiousnesse vpon the least iealosie of competition, or incroaching on the Diadem, hath beene mixed with a kinde of tyrannie, and the Subiects obedience resembled to slauish prostitu∣tion: so that in his chiefest and best ordered Townes of 
Nouagrade
 and 
Mosko,
 many strange and fearefull executi∣ons haue beene practised, and the Subiect enforced to wil∣full murthering one another to satisfie the Emperors pleasure: as for his warres either forraine or domestique, how euer his many Countries, ostentous numbers of people, and seeming resolutions of the Souldiers, would giue an affrighting shadow from some portentous body▪ yet is he glad of auxiliary forces, and according to poli∣tike obseruations of such confused multitudes, must haue


many men and few souldiers, as peraduenture wee our selues haue made some proofe of late amongst them, when a few resolute and well ordred 
English,
 euen in the fields of 
Nouagrade
 contracted their owne conditions, in despight of that threatning Armie, which both 
Poles
 and 
Muscouites
 rallied against them.


But let vs returne to the best flourishes of his peace: whether it be a natiue pride, or ouer-growne custome with corrupted time, he is questionles a proud and stately Prince, and once nailed an Embassadors hat to his head, because he either abated him of that reuerence appropri∣ate to so great a maiestie; or contested with him ouer pe∣remptorily in behalfe of his master: but S
t
 
Thomas Smith
 was entertained with a contrary satisfaction and welcom, how euer our merchants were terrified, when the Abbey of 
S
t
 Nicholay
 should haue beene surprised by certaine English, who I am perswaded would haue done it in∣deede, if the proiect had not beene discouered, and per∣aduenture interdicted by supreame authoritie. If you would aske me any questions of 
Mosko
 the Metropolitane of the Empire; I will spend my topography from vn∣seemely flattering, and assure you, it is compared to 
Gran Ca
o
 for spatiousnes of ground, multitude of houses, and vncomelinesse of streets: so that as the one is patible of sun
e, corruption, and infectious aire; the other is not free from bea
linesse, smoake, and vnwholesome smells: but because there be many vnacceptable relations, sauou∣
ng indeed of Trauellers ouer-reachings, and impossibi∣lities, or at least absurdities, I will desist from bringing you into any such by-waies of misdoubt, and lead you thus into the plainer fields of knowledge and demon∣stration.



They follow for the most part the rites and ceremonie
 of the Greeke Church, and superstitiously maintaine many idle traditions and ridiculous ceremonies: The Priests haue wiues, teach the adoration of images, fast, and compell to confession, which the common people sup∣pose most necessary, especially for the Nobles and Gen∣try, in regard of their sensuall libertie in sinne, and volup∣tuous prostitution to all manner of filthinesse, like those which were reprehended by the Prophet for sitting downe to eat and drinke, and rising vp to play. Their chiefest prayers consist on the faith of this breefe; 
Iesu thou sonne of God haue mercy vpon me:
 as for the Lords prayer they haue in small vse or forme, because the Scriptures are pro∣hibited them, and not suffred to be published; yea the Priests themselues scarse haue the New Testament a∣mongst them. At seuen yeere olde they are terrified with actuall sinnes, and so minister yong children the sa∣crament, mingling bread and wine together. The Festi∣uals they doe rather abuse, then celebrate, gurmondizing with that excesse, that it ouer-passeth the limits of neigh∣bourhood, or friendly conuersation. The common peo∣ple attend their labour, and are indeed the tired seruants of wearisomnes, rather comming neere the tediousnes of slauery, then the honest necessitie of husbandry. They are all incredulous of Purgatorie; yet as the Greekes commit many absurdities for their dead, they howle about their graues, and repaire with seuerall songs to the places of buriall; and this is customarie in 
 euen amongst our selues, especially in 
Gallowa
,
 where all the 
 summer long the yonger women bedecke the g
ues w
 flowers, euery familie in their seuerall Chappels, an 
 satterday at night solemnize a kinde of mourning and 
e∣functory


prayers: No man giueth himselfe holy water, but attendeth the Priest; they haue many wiues, allow of diuorcement, and yet runne into the deceitfull by-waies of filthinesse and incontinency: so that as they count it no adultery, except 
Dauid
 lye with 
Bathsheba,
 when 
Vrias
 is liuing: so it is a dangerous matter to transgresse the law of wedlocke, and the woman is terribly ouer-watcht, and suspitiously restrained from walking abroad, wherein the condition of their reputed honest women is more mise∣rable than in 
Italy,
 and a wife or a maide looseth all repu∣tation, if shee goe at random, or sit by the high way, as 
Thamar
 did to deceiue 
Iuda.


The people are naturally cunning and dangerous: yet as I said subiect to seruitude, and very slaues to the Em∣peror: their apparell is a long coat without plighting, al∣most after the manner of 
Hungarie,
 but indeed all the East generally yeeld no other: they weare coloured bootes comming no higher then their knees, the soles plated with yron; the better sort haue them gilded, painted, and em∣brodered: the women weare such too, and like the 
Turkes
 are not seene abroad bare-faced: all sorts loue iustice, or at least the shew of it. For they punish petty thefts, how euer great robberies and manslaughters, yea after due ex∣amination, passe without capitall execution, which makes me remember the answer of 
Cleonidas
 the Pirate to 
Alex∣ander
 
 the Great, when he sharply reprehended him for the basenes of his life, and intimated besides the common scandall of a rouer, the mischiefes depending, as hindring the Merchant from filling the harbours, and resorting to the Cities, whereby the Kings customes were inlarged, and the Common-wealth enriched: Tis true O King saith he, because I rob with one or two ships, I am con∣demned


for a rouer: but thou that runnest ouer the 
Helle∣spont,
 and fillest great seas with thy Nauies art saluted a mighty Monarch, and reuerenced more for the feare of thy reuenge, then beloued by the extention of thy bounty or liberalitie.


Their coine is both gold and siluer without forme, as stamped long and vnfashionable: their furres fill all the world with merchandize, making vs not onely warme, but proud in 
Europe:
 yea such is the estimation of 
Ermines, Sables,
 and 
blacke Fox
 from a receiued opinion of 
Priamus
 King of 
Troy,
 whose mantle to the greatest shew of osten∣tation and magnificence, was lined with 
Ermines,
 that in the secrets of Armory (except the Prince) all persons are limited, what and how to weare them: and amongst themselues, though the Emperor & Nobles haue gownes of cloth of gold and siluer, tread vpon 
Persian
 and 
Turky
 carpets, and are indeed adorned with great wealth both in iewels and marks of maiestie; yet hath their head at∣tires of blacke fox the preeminence, wherein he thinketh himselfe more honored, than in an imperiall crowne after the manner of auntient Kings: Their great Cities are very thin, and villages lye scattered with low houses, spa∣tious on the ground, with stones; and the territories which now he challengeth, extendeth almost 1200 Eng∣lish mile: their woods foster plenty of beasts, which in an extreame winter will come downe to their houses, and endanger both cattle and people: their horse are reasona∣ble good & many, by whom they maintaine the strength of their Armies, and practising them in hunting haue them the more seruiceable in the warres: But I purpose no further discoueries, and therefore attend the businesse proposed, which is onely to giue you a superficiall view


of these countries, that when we come to compare 
Eng∣land
 vnto them, we may finde them the sooner, and be able to iudge the better.


Thus liueth and raigneth this 
North-east Monarch,
 with reputation of one of the greatest sharers in the aduenture of the worlds happines: As for the other Kingdomes of 
Norway, Sweden, Goteland,
 & 
Denmarke,
 with the pro∣uinces of 
Bothnia, Finmarck, Lapland, Finland,
 and such 
 like, they are onely called 
Reges simplices,
 because they liue and take care of their particular Scepters, without am∣bitious intrusion into anothers possession to make it their owne hereditary. For though sometime 
Sweden,
 and 
Norway
 is vnited: sometimes 
Denmarke
 triumphing, and sometimes as it were disioynted: yet hapneth it by seue∣rall factions amongst themselues and to reuenge iniuries for the present, and may resemble a throng and presse of people in a yard, who one while driue to that corner, an∣other while shoue to this, and suddenly stand at a stay, as wearied with the shouldring. For as Princes are exaspe∣rated to displeasure by their owne conceiued opinions of a wrong and indignity: so doe they prosecute reuenges from a wrathfull indignation, and many times draw whole Armies into the field to stop further outrages, and shew the aduersarie, there is no end, but blood and death, yea the countries deuastation without an honorable agree∣ment, or satisfaction: and thus haue these people vpon no other colour but wilfulnes weakned one another with counterchangeable preuailings: But yet I doe not see, that the Russian Emperor taketh aduantage of their disa∣greements, onely at this instant by reason of former trou∣bles about the succession, and well-grounded suspition of the King of 
Polands
 warlike humors, he standeth on his


guard, and for some priuate respects hath bin auxiliary to the King of 
Swedea,
 to which belong so many particulars, that a whole history might fill your eares with pleasure and instances of worthy prosecution, which I desist from, for swelling the booke too bigg with so poore a breath of common and knowne rela∣tions, and will onely goe forward with some slender descriptions, as the country now lieth vnder fortunes controule.


Norway
 is famous vpon the etymologie of the word, 
 as it were the 
North-way,
 and yeeldeth plenty of fish, cal∣led stockfish, which is taken in the greatest frost for lasting, and is a reasonable good country for feeding cattle, the increase of a dairy, and many other excellent blessings for the nourishment of life.


Swedia
 inviteth you to a Towne in imitation of 
 
Venice
 called 
Stokeholme,
 as if shee boasted onely of this place, considering the rest of her villages resemble the scattered troopes of a retired Armie: yet must you not ouer-passe the famous Castle of 
Calmar,
 which is proprietory to 
Goteland,
 and so depending on 
Swe∣den,
 as the principall Port, Citie, and fortification of these parts, and aduanceth her reputation of strength in such a manner, that excellent enginers, and iudi∣cious Trauellers haue ranked it next the Castle of 
Mil∣laine.


Denmarke,
 and his tributes are knowne to euery bo∣dy, 
 with the shipping and customes of the 
Sont,
 where at one time you shall haue 5000 saile brought to the barre of payment, and defraying the Kings charges: Their feasts and drinking customes, wherein you must not challenge their liberall promises, nor take


hold of cursory speeches vpon an hereafter remem∣brance, least his displeasure suppose you ouer-politicke for his plainenes, yet dangerous humors in his rages: Their maintayning of Gentry, though fearefull for affording titles of honour by opening the enclosures of desires to affect greatnes and popularitie, so that you haue no ambitious titles amongst them: Their fe∣minine scorne of mechanicall men, trades, or pro∣fessors of Arte: insomuch though a man bee neuer so excellent a scholler, or Musician, yet will not the La∣dies of their countrey admit of their society, nor en∣tertaine their wiues with befitting complement, but with a primordiall contempt of 
ill musico, scholastico, pedante,
 or such like, countermand their intrusion: Their ouer-looking of passengers into the East Coun∣tries, and many other things, are matters of some no∣tice: But amongst other points of Heraldry, the bla∣son of the coates of these countries displaieth the pro∣fitable distribution of masts, firre, deale, pitch, tarre, rosen, cables, ropes, hempe, flax, and such like: To which I must needes adde, how from this Continent former times detruded those Nations of 
Vandalls, Gothes, Lombards, Getes,
 and other famous people, who not onely blotted out the scandall of their banishment with more memorable actions, but made a plenary satisfa∣ction to their endeuours with the glorious diadems of 
Italy
 and 
Spaine.






The storie of the 
GOTHS
 and 
LOMBARDS
 comming into Italy and Spaine.


IN the time of 
Sennio
 King of 
Goteland
 about the yeere 
 400. (For 
Norway
 and 
Denmarke
 were but then characters of a new print) there hapned a confusion of blessednesse amongst these Nations. For consi∣dering, how hee was a Prince not onely of great set∣lednes and gouernment, but of peace and prosperity, his subiects likewise participated with the felicitie, and li∣ued so long, and in such increase, that I must resemble them to certaine fish in the sea, amongst whom the great ones deuoure the small; yet not so fast, as they could pre∣uent the sodaine approch of a strange famine, whereby the King and principall Counsellors of the State were as it were brought to behold the comming forward of their misery, in regard that many thousands must perish for lacke of foode, and such as had wherewithall to supply their wants, in danger of spoyling, by the indigent mul∣titude tyed to tyrannous necessitie: wherevpon to pre∣uent the worst, as they supposed, and from the law of na∣ture of two euills to chuse the least, and of nations to re∣ctifie the crooked lines of threatning destruction on them: it was concluded to disburden the Realme of all old, im∣potent, poore, and vnnecessary people, and when the manner was likewise demanded, the inventors were not ashamed to publish, that they must be tied backe to backe and throwne into the sea: with the iollity of which de∣uise euery man departed home, and the King himselfe, as glad, that his subiects were generally appeased, seemed


proud to be the reporter of the iudgement: But when the Queene vnderstood the cruelty of that doome, and from the tendernes of her sex began to compassionate the guilt∣les soules, she was not onely amazed to see such an error seduce the wisdome of Gouernors; but stepped a litle more forward, and in debating the matter, brought them to a hansommer path of preuention, which was by exile to expose them to the fortune of the world, and keep the conscience cleare from shedding innocent bloud, which no doubt in time would once lye heauy vpon the most obdurate heart.


Here reason and honest pitie wanne the field of former wilfulnes and resolution, and the Queene was not onely proclaimed the mother of charity, but applauded for her wisdome, and high exalted vertue: so they allowed her directions, and without further disputing the matter, ship∣ped forth 300000 soules, who dispersed themselues ouer the North-east of 
Europe,
 filling those countries, which now are called 
Muldauia, Bogdonia,
 the borderers of the blacke sea, and 
Russia
 with new names and nations, such as were afterward distinguished by 
Samatae, Gothae, Longa∣bardi, Hunni, Vandali, Getae, Swedi,
 and diuers others, who raised their fortunes out of industry, and made their able bodies the ministers of a great prosperitie: For when the Emperors of 
Constantinople
 groned vnder the burthen of diuision and dissention with the Princes of the West, and had no other way to pacifie the indignation, but by drawing maine Armies into the field; they were also compelled to entertaine these strong and barbarous peo∣ple, as presidiary, and depending on their military salary: But they quickly instructed in the discipline of Armes, and as quickly furnished for any imployment, did as


quickly perceiue the weakned estate of both parties, and so vnderstanding their owne strength with tumultuous in∣nouation kept the best countries of 
Italy
 to their owne vse, making the 
Graecian
 Emperors beleeue, it was in their be∣halfe, and for the renowne of the Empire; but when it came to the casting vp the account, they denied the debt, and by force of armes sent the 
Graecian
 auditors home vn∣satisfied, and so fell againe and againe on the weakned for∣ces of 
Europe,
 and at last possessed the diadems both of 
Lombardy
 and 
Spaine.


I could heere adde the Ilands of 
Freesland,
 and 
Iseland,
 famous for fishing, and the wonders of mount 
Heda,
 suta∣ble to 
Gibello
 or 
Aetna
 in 
Sicilia,
 of both which some haue submitted to a fabulous credulity concerning a locall place of 
Hell,
 about the center of the earth, and that the Diuels goe in and out at these monstrous 
Crateres
 some 4000. miles vnder sea and land: but because it soundeth both ridiculous euen to superstitious eares, and blasphe∣mous to religious hearts, I ouerpasse it with slightnesse: besides, in regard that I am not emulous of any glory, wealth, or eminent magnificence appertaining to these northerne kingdomes, I desist from further enlarging them, or telling them any stranger newes, onely I must needes say, their shipping is commendable, and the re∣membrance of our conquest in those times glorious: so that as we serued 
France,
 and are contented with titles: they haue serued vs, and still quarter the arms of our coun∣trey with their Danish triumphs.










CHAP. VIII. 
The Empire of
 GERMANY.


T
HE eighth prize out of this great lottery of 
 the world, is proclaimed for the Emperor of 
Germany
 & king of the 
Romans,
 to which the house of 
Austria
 is (as it should seeme, or at least would bee) enfeoffed. For at this houre, the sonnes of the olde Arch-Duke haue thus raised the throne of imperiousnesse: 
Ro∣dulphus
 Emperour, yet famous for nothing but peaceable desires, and a priuate sequestration scarce affecting the de∣fence of his owne territories, much lesse the expatiating of any military proiect against the enemy of Christendome. 
Matthias
 after much repining and a great expectation, King of 
Hungary,
 out of which hee hopeth (if occasion serue) to step into his brothers chaire, and command 
Eu∣rope,
 or at lest so much as the 
Pope
 and King of 
Spaine
 can support him in. 
Maximilian,
 Arch-Duke of 
Austria,
 and powerfull enough in being commander of 
Vienna,
 from whence the 
Turks
 with 200000. souldiers was valiantly repulsed. 
Albertus,
 first Arch-Bishop of 
Toledo,
 then 
Car∣dinall,
 next dispensed with, and married to the 
Infanta
 of 
Spaine
 his cozen german, and last of all Arch-Duke of 
Bur∣gundy,
 and Commander of the Low-Countries, or at least so many as are brought so low, that hee standeth like a 
Colossus
 ouer them: and 
Ernestus
 called the Cardinall of 
Austria,
 but whether 
filius naturalis,
 or no, I dispute not on; so that if the father were now aliue, to see this bundle


of arrowes so well, so strong, and so gloriously bound to∣gether, he would flatter himselfe with an opinion, that the 
Emperials
 either would not, or durst not startle from their resolutions of corroborating the Diadem in his familie. But although the 
Germanes
 haue thus raised vp the princi∣pall tree, wherein the double neckt Eagle doth build her airy: yet is it farre from any royall florishing, or Monar∣chall supremacy. For neither is it hereditary, nor after inauguration can he commaund, as other Kings, or like the briefe of 
Samuels
 Oratory to the rebellious 
Israelites,
 shew the reciprocall duties betweene Prince and Subiect: but by no meanes is he powerfull enough to ouerthrow the priuiledges of the Empire, because the Princes be so many, so mighty, so beloued, that they attend in Court at pleasute, raise their forces at pleasure, contest with the Emperor in many cases at pleasure, and supply his wants and demands for impositions at pleasure. The Townes againe are so strong, so priuiledged, so populous, that out of obstinate finding fault with taxes and imperious re∣straints, they many times oppose against their principall lords, and in hostile manner exclude them from the bene∣fit of commaunding, like royall Princes indeed, witnesse the many contentions of 
Colleine
 with the Noble men and Byshops, and at last with the Byshop and the people, the power of the DVKE of 
Saxony
 in maintaining of LV∣THER against both Pope and Emperor: the repining of diuers Cities, and Princes, when the 
Lantsgraue
 of 
Hesse
 was imprisoned vnder 
Charles
 the 5. The last contention betweene the Duke of 
Brunswicke
 and the Citie, and the generall cause of the Protestants protected in euery place 
inuita fortuna,
 yea against Ecclesiasticall curses and tem∣porall menaces.



Of all 
Europe
 it is the greatest Countrey with the best and richest store of Cities, Townes, Castels, and religious 
 places, in that 
decorum,
 and order (for in a manner view one Towne and view all) as if there were a vniuersall con∣sent to raise our admiration from their vniformity: To which is added a secret of Nature, that the people gene∣rally for honesty of conuersation, probity of manners, as∣surance of loyaltie, and confidence of disposition (setting apart their imperfect customes of drinking) exceede our beliefe, as being vnoffensiue, conuersable, maintainers of their honours, and families, wherein they step so farre, as if true Gentry were incorporate with them, and had his principall mansion in 
Germany.
 And although they re∣pine at any strangers intrusion, and will not suffer new Nations to bring in new customes, no not artificers; and seeme withall fantastique in apparrell, and gaudy with de∣uises: yet doe they hate formalitie of Courtiers, and of all other things beware of that horrible deceit of vaparous 
 promises, common protestations, open embraces, palpa∣ble flattery, and hypocriticall bindings of obseruation from inferiours: when the heart is corrupted, yea ready to leape into his Masters mouth, and tell him, that he lies, when it heares him sweare, what he neuer meant: thus can they with 
Lucan
 exclaime:

Exeat aula


Qui vult esse pius, virtus & summa potestas non coeunt.

and thus doe they endeauour themselues in all honest courses to liue of themselues, which questionlesse pro∣ceedes from some worthy caution concerning their mise∣rie, who eate meate vnder the repining eyes of another, and herein no doubt they lay a great imputation on ma∣ny


English, whose profession of libertie by base and ser∣uile attendancy is ouerthrowne: or if they seeme glorious in casting off the yoake of obedience; yet are they be∣smeered 
 with the frothy corruptions of verball & vaine∣glorious Courtiers, who haue with the viciousnesse of time so abused this profession of moralitie, that an honest and vnsubiected heart is afraid to come neere them. For although Liberalitie and Charity haue equall properties to the opening, if it were possible, the gates of heauen: al∣though the fauour of Kings must be purchased by duty and obsequiousnesse, and although the maiestie of a Court must not be depressed by admitting euery man at plea∣sure: yet hath the errors of life so traduced worthy men for swelling too bigge with wealth and aduancement, that their power and authoritie growes tedious, and the depen∣ding on another is a very excruciation of minde, which made the 
Poet
 exclaime against the protraction of good deedes with 
Gratia ab officio, quod mora tardat, abest:
 which made the 
Italians
 murmure with 
Dono molto aspettato è venduto è non donato:
 which made 
Berzelay
 say vnto the King, 
I am old I will go a litle way ouer Iordan, but returne to my owne house, liue with my people, and be buried in the se∣pulchre of my fathers.
 In these things are the 
Germans
 worthy of all commendation: yet me thinkes wanting an hereditarie succession of Princes, and hauing an Em∣peror sometimes by partiality of election, sometimes by factious strength, and sometimes by the absolute com∣maund of the Pope, they should a little abate their osten∣tation concerning his MAIESTIE, or their owne glory. As for their formall custome of denominating all the sons of Arch-Dukes Dukes, Earles, & Barons, according to their fathers titles, and paternall honours, it keepes co∣respondencie with the name of 
Caesar
 amongst them, and


the 
Italians
 hold it so ridiculous, that in their 
facetiae,
 as we terme it, they ieast it thus: The Earles of 
Germany;
 the Dons of 
Spaine;
 the Monsiers of 
France;
 the Byshoppes of 
Italy;
 the Knights of 
Naples;
 the Lardes of 
Scotland;
 the Hidalgos of 
Portugall;
 the Noblemen of 
Hungary;
 and the younger brethren of 
England
 make a very poore company.


But if you are curious indeed, and would search in na∣tures storehouse for the furniture, that 
Germany
 holds, or know in what manner she distributeth her blessings, you shall finde corne, vines, riuers of fish, fruite, hot waters, bathes, minerals, mines of all sorts, and very good cattle. If ambition transport you to view the palace of Honour, they can bring you into well fortified Cities, wherein you shall haue munition, armor, and the very 
Burgers
 trained with martiall discipline: they can cary you into the fields of 
Bellona,
 and delight you with a beautifull sight of 20000. horse diuided into seuerall batalions and squa∣drons with cornets, penons, and sufficient equipage: they can conduct you into the very walkes of Princelines, and show stately palaces, pleasant hunting and hawking, tur∣niaments, iusts, riding horses, and other exercises befit∣ting a Gentleman. If you descend to more moderate expectations, you shall then haue notice, how most men eate vnder their owne vines, how the Citizen liueth in quiet, how the women are blessed in their children, how faults are pardoned, scandals remooued, and euery man appeares like a faire shining Planet in his owne Orbe with∣out disturbance.


On the north from 
Callis
 to 
Dantske
 in 
Prussia
 lieth part of the seuenteene Prouinces, and 
Pomerania:
 On the East 
Brandenburg
 and 
Silesia,
 I might haue named 
Hunga∣rie,



and 
Transiluania:
 to the South as farre as the 
Alpes, Austria, Bauaria, Sweuia,
 and 
Heluetia:
 on the West 
ran∣conia, Hessia,
 and 
Munsterland:
 as a core in the midst 
West∣phalia, Saxonia, Brunswicke, Thuringia, Misina,
 the well compacted kingdome of 
Bohemia,
 circumcepted with 
∣gra, Silua,
 and 
Morauia,
 with many other diuisions of Principats, Dukedomes, Lordships, and Clergie men, that to number them would be more tedious, then satis∣factorie; consider 
Munster
 their owne Countrey-man h
th 
 described them at full, and taken so much paines there
n, as if he studied nothing more, then to set out the honour and dignitie of the Nation, wherein hee was borne. A∣mongst these are seuen Princes sequestred to a speciall lifting vp the Emperor into his throne: the three Byshops of 
Colleine, Ments,
 or as some will haue it 
agunse,
 and 
Treuers:
 the three Seculars, Duke of 
Saxony,
 Marqu
, of 
Brandenburge,
 and Count 
Pallatine
 of the 
Rhene;
 the binding voice is allowed the King of 
Bohemia,
 who was once so absolute, that he triumphed in the three
old City of 
Prage
 with repining, when the Emperor challenged ei∣ther submission or prostitution: but now the Pope and 
Austria
 haue subuerted such immunities, and vnder the danger of fulmination, and Church discipline terrifie them all from contradicting their wilfulnes.


The Cities of this spacious Countrey are many, and haue as many descriptions from seuerall Authors, whom if you finde contrary to one another, you must mod
 your anger, and remember how diuers 
 with sicke bodies, that although they li
 with 
 of learned men, yet shall not any, two agree, 
 in 
 causes, nor the remedie of the disease, le
 
 vnderstand the same neuer so well: So fareth it 



quarians and Chronographers, they shew you such faces, as they themselues beheld, or wrote as priuate affection and information induced, and so the next age enlarged her talent; and the last opposeth against the former. But if you will be contented with my manner of Cosmography, and vnderstand, that my meaning in this cursory iourney is to runne onely away with Titles, you shall then finde vpon the 
Rhene
 a riuer comming out of 
Heluetia,
 and 800. mile together, gathering many confederates of springs and brookes to shew himselfe well accompanied at the Court of the maine Ocean: 
Constance, Basill
 famous in her ori∣ginall vpon the Serpent found in her foundation; 
Stras∣borough
 beautifull in her name, and for her high steeple, 
Spires, Ments, Hidelburge
 the Court of the 
Palatine, Franck∣furt
 glorious in her Marts, 
Coblents
 and 
Coleine;
 these be principall Cities, either supporting the chaires of Byshops, or maintaining their owne freedomes with royall iuris∣diction, or submitting to the controule of some worthy Prince; as for other Townes, which are both walled, and fortified they are infinite, and would fill vp too much roome to ioyne them here together. Vpon 
Danubius
 the greatest riuer of 
Europe,
 as running 1500. mile betweene the bankes of many Countries, and changeth his name into 
er,
 when he commeth into the pride of 
Greece,
 and poureth himselfe, with troupes of attendance into the lap of the black-sea: you haue 
Vlmms, Auspurg,
 or if you will 
Augu
ta
 proud of her title and fortification; 
Ingelstade
 boasting of the birth of Emperors; 
Regenspurg, Paslaw, Vienna, Presburg,
 and 
Keimar;
 vpon 
Weserslood,
 that run∣
eth through 
Brunswicke
 and 
Westphalia, Brennen,
 and 
Ca
;
 vpon the riuer 
Alba,
 which posteth out of 
Bohe∣mia,
 as it were with glad tidings through the midst of ma∣ny


flourishing Countries into the German sea; 
Prag
, Dresda, East Wittenberg, Brandenberg, Hanborough
 and 
Stode;
 vpon 
Odera,
 whose head almost meeteth with the 
Wexell
 of 
Poland; Neisa, Breslaw, Crossen, East Fran
furt,
 and 
Stetin;
 this riuer running toward 
Brandenburg
 through 
Silesia
 watreth a great part of 
Pomerania,
 within the heart of this Continent, whose veines are yet filled, and life as it were refreshed with the moderate flowing and swelling goodnesse of diuers armes, hanging as it were by the maine bodies of these riuers, and may resemble kinde messages, or entercourses strengthning the amity of vn∣setled families, are scituated 
Norremberg
 the greatest of the Countrey, 
Wirteberg, Erfurt, Brunswick, Iger, Gorlitz,
 and so many other, that 
France
 and 
Italy
 both must a litle yeeld. For if a difference may tend to make a place the better, questionlesse 
Germany
 hath the preeminence; yet because it resembleth a Capitoll of so many Princes, ra∣ther then a Parliament house, where the Subiect how great soeuer, acknowledgeth his Monarch; we will allow him Emperor, as I haue said, for good manners sake; but questionlesse standing at the deuotion of his imperials, and Cities; it diminisheth his glory, and obscureth the shining of his three Crownes; witnes the busines of 
Col∣leine
 it selfe, which amongst many others of the same kind, is so subiected to the authority of the Byshop, that the name of Emperor hath sounded harshly to their obedi∣ence, and both people and Clergie haue still opposed a∣gainst all secular Princes: the story is briefly thus.






The History of 
COLLEINE.


COlleine
 is a famous Towne, and one principall of the 
Vbij
 before CHRIST, which questionlesse the 
 
Romanes
 made great account of as a receptacle for their garrisons, when they had warre against the 
Swedians,
 who 
nged then all ouer 
Germany,
 especially in 
Saxonia.
 In the time of 
Iulius Caesar
 there was a wodden bridge made ouer the 
R
ene
 for the better transporting his armie, which was after transhap't into stone, but the miracle pro∣ceeded from the power of money, and industry of man; but because many murthers, rapes, and robberies were committed on the same, 
Bruno
 the Byshoppe by the Em∣peror 
O
os
 commaundement ruined, and quite subuerted it: so it should seeme it was then called 
Vbiopolis,
 vntill a commutation into 
Colonia Agrippina
 of 
Marcus Agrippa
 sonne in law to 
Augustus Caesar,
 who reedified and beau∣tified the same; yet 
Tacitus
 extracteth the title from a daughter of 
Augustus
 borne here, and leaueth it as a place of great consequence vnder the iurisdiction of ma∣ny worthy Commaunders; but it should seeme, they en∣tertained Christianity betimes, and quickly cast away the authoritie of the 
Romanes:
 For thus they record it. A∣bout the yeere 70. 
Maternus
 the Disciple of Saint 
Peter
 conuerted the 
Vbij,
 who admitted their spirituall saluati∣on with such gladnesse, that they likewise determined the preseruation of their liberty and bodies, and so proiected to be free of themselues, had not afterward diuers Em∣perors, setled the Duke of 
Saxony,
 and Earles of the Em∣
 
 established greatness both ouer Citie and Coun∣
, vntill againe the Pope wrested the supremacie ouer


the European Princes, and confirmed the Archbishops in the ostentation of a Count 
Palatine,
 and absolute power of the gouernment of all, which yet the secular Noble men not onely repined at, but sought by noble courses to preuent; and at last, when no deuise could make gentill the hard wound pullies of the Clergies ambition, they were resolute to effectuate it by force of armes, so that many contentions arose betweene the Byshoppe, Nobles, and Citizens, which ended not without effusion of blood, and ouerthrow of whole armies drawne into the field by particeans, whereby the Citie it selfe felt the smart of war∣like scourges, and saw her walles and houses puld on heapes of rubbish, according to the nature of rage and fu∣ry the end of tumultuous vprors. But at last 
Colleine
 is re∣edified, and in despight of all frets and fumes, either of 
Saxony,
 the 
Palatine
 of the Empire, or confederates of the Princes, acknowledgeth the Archbishop for supreame Gouernour, and he still ouermantleth it with a superstiti∣ous protection, so that the people are kept vnder with his blessing and cursing accordingly.


It now bendeth like a bow, as you see our great Citie from 
Surreies
 side: the key before the wall is a place of great pleasure; the ports and ramparts worth the obser∣uing, the Palace stately and magnificent, the houses beau∣tifull and comely, the streets sweet, spatious, and well or∣dered, the Inhabitants ciuill, sociable, and superstitious. For amongst the Churches they are of opinion, that the three Kings haue a memorable monument, concerning the birth of our Sauiour, when they were commaunded to returne another way home, but comming hether it was the fortune and glory of this place, not onely to be their refuge from the fury of 
Herod
 in their life; but a recep∣tacle


for their bodies after death; but how the truth would proue all this ridiculous, it were pity to dispute. Howsoeuer, as I haue said, the Citie and territories now swell with the pride of exemption from the Emperors iurisdiction, and in the same race runne many other fa∣mous Townes, whereby you may see the disioynted go∣uernment of 
Germany,
 and the poore authority the Em∣perors haue ouer the Electors, and imperiall Cities.


For although 
Charles
 the 5. had the fortune to imprison the 
Lantsgraue
 of 
Hesse,
 and by the seruice of the Duke of 
Burbone
 to possesse the Castle of Saint 
Angelo,
 and punish the Pope with a terror of vsurpation, euen ouer his spiritu∣all authoritie; yet was it a sudden greatnesse, and like the blaze of a bauin, lasted but a while. For the German Princes quickly repined, and the next Pope as quickly ra∣tified his owne conditions, so that the Emperors since haue no more to doe in 
Italy,
 then a Pilgrimme, who is ad∣mitted to see the wonders of our Lady at 
Loretto.
 But if 
 you would know, how 
Germany
 is neighboured, and be∣loued of strangers, I answer as if my friend should aske me my opinion concerning anothers loue: the heart is vn∣searchable, we onely can discouer the outward counte∣nance, and formall protestations: thus is it with Topogra∣phicall descriptions, wee can say these and these be the Countries and people, but whether enuious, ambitious, reuengefull, traiterous, cowardly, or such like, it must be referred to actions and time. Toward the North lies 
Po∣merania, Prussia, Lithuania, Silesia, Podolia,
 and 
Poland;
 but 
Poland
 now stands for all, within these 300. yeeres a factious Dukedome, limited within her owne territories, now a well compacted kingdome of many Countries; yet wilfully resolute to haue no hereditary Prince amongst


them, whereby the supreame authority is subiect to the suffrages of men, and a manner of Oligarchy of Nobles limiteth the King in his royaltie, and maketh his establish∣ment but a slauish brauery. The Countrey from her plaines, as spreading it selfe abroad without mountaines, or hills, addeth to the Etymologie of the word, and hath only the great Citie of 
Cracow
 vpon the 
Vistula
 meriting discourse, but litle commendation, or wonder. Toward the East lieth the noble Kingdome of 
Hungary;
 I call it noble, because whole volumes might be writ in relating her troubles; externall with her enemy of Christendome; internall with a confused dissention: For sometimes the glory of the Kingdome elateth them; sometimes priuate reuenges diuideth them; sometimes the Clergie doth ty∣rannize ouer them; and sometimes the generall cause ex∣citeth compassion: then adioyneth what in times past you called 
Illiria
 now 
Transiluania
 and 
Sclauonia.
 Toward the South, but you must first see, what snow lieth vpon the 
Alpes
 all along the bankes of the Adriaticke sea, now 
Gul∣pho Venetiano,
 are spred abroad the Prouinces of 
Friaull
 in times past 
forum Iulij, Histria, Croatia, Dacia, Dalmatia,
 as farre as 
Ragusa
 once 
Epidaurus,
 all full of prety Townes, the shores beautified with 
Ilands,
 and the sea beating on diuers rockes seruing yet for many vses, as the 
Venetians
 can tell, who are the Commaunders of these people, and places for the most part. Toward the West, what wee now nicke-name the 
Wallons, Loraine
 with the memorable Towne of 
Mets,
 and in a prety corner 
Heluetia,
 containing the 13. Cantons of 
Switzerland
 euen amongst the 
Alpes,
 which remaine with freedome of both religions in des∣pight of Pope and other turbulent Princes, and can shew 
Bazill, Bern,
 and 
Zuricke
 as fine and delicate Townes, as


any in the pride of 
Italy;
 but withall you must vnder∣stand, that both the Emperour, France, and Spaine haue diuers times attempted the subiection of these people, especially 
Geneua,
 which belongeth to 
Sauoy:
 yet failed, as the 
Romans
 did with the 
Parthians
 con∣cluding a corroboration of friendshippe rather then a pub∣lication of their shame to be propulsed, which appeared in the time of 
Charles
 the fift, who was mightily incen∣sed 
 against them, had not the blunt reprehension of a foole diuerted him. For when diuers fiery spirits had brought fuell to set on flame these guiltlesse people, and that hee determined to ouerrunne them as it were with one speedinesse. I, I, saith the foole, you all con∣clude well for going into the Countrey, but vnacquain∣ted with the terrible passages of the 
Alpes,
 you litle con∣sider the difficultie of comming out againe. Vpon which pithy and compendious obiurgation, a new de∣batement of matters set vp another loome of retrac∣tion.










CHAP.
 IX. The glory of the 
SPANIARD.


T
HE ninth proportion of the earths hap∣pinesse 
 hath so confirmed the King of 
Spaine
 in a large inheritance, that hee now lifteth vp a head of maiestie with an imperiall countenance and extraor∣dinary titles: But if I must conduct you into the enclosures of vnderstanding, how this comes about, I am affraid I shall torment former times with vaine repetitions, and confused originals; yea indeede abuse your patience with tedious and friuolous discour∣ses, considering so many excellent histories haue explai∣ned the difficulties of these people, and the moderne commentary is a true and delicate glasse to behold her forme and beauty in: Otherwise I could fill your lap with these abstracts, and make vp a kinde of reckning with pleasure and contentment from a modest amplia∣tion. That 
Hercules
 with his large and warlike embrace∣ments clasped this country about, infusing such vertue, as his father 
Ioue
 innated in him, whereby his actions tended to reformation of abuses, & purging the Kingdom of such monsters, as had both terrified them with their huge bo∣dies, and made them miserable with the confusion of rapes, murthers, and cruell oppression: so that 
Hesperus, Gerion,
 and 
Cacus
 mighty giants were subdued, and the country calmed of all stormy blasts of rudenes, and con∣fused barbarisme: That after such heroicke proceedings


he stood like a 
Colossus
 ouer the streights, naming the great mountaines of 
Abila
 and 
Calpe
 his pillers with this inscription of 
Non plus vltra,
 howeuer afterward it was 
 the fortunate brauery of 
Charles
 the Emperor vpon the discouery of the 
West Indies
 to write 
Plus vltra,
 quite ob∣literating 
Non;
 as if his new glory had better conse∣quence: That hee erected a Temple in the Iland of 
Gades
 now 
Cales,
 and as it were enfeoffed the seas and streights with his surname: That from the burnt ashes of 
Tyrus
 after 
Dido
 was forewarned to abandon 
Phoenicia
 by the ghost of her husband 
Sichaeus,
 like the 
Phaenix
 sprung vp a many 
Phoenixes,
 who possessed the shores of 
Africke,
 and built an airy in 
Gades:
 that is, the bani∣shed and discomfited people of 
Tyrus
 erected 
Carthage, Gades,
 and many other townes in 
Africke,
 and 
Spaine:
 That presently followed the dissention betweene the 
Gaditanes,
 and 
Turditanes;
 betweene the 
Celtibrians
 and 
Iberians,
 setled nations in 
Spaine,
 to the deciding of whose controuersies 
Marrhable
 and 
Haldruball
 were called out of 
Carthage,
 which both made a conquest of 
Spaine,
 and proiected to clip the feathers of the 
Roman Aegle,
 who now began to spread her wings ouer the best inhabited fields of the world: That from this emulation, 
Rome
 stood on a better guard, and accounted these 
Africans
 a barbarous people in respect of themselues, as foretold from the prophesie of 
Daniel,
 and the 
Sibills
 of her strange establishment, as Queene of the world, and at last shared the plenty of 
Spaine:
 for impatient of any aduenturers in that voyage, the 
Carthaginians
 were expelled, and the royall standard of 
Italy
 aduanced: That time ouer∣wearied with the insulting of perpetuitie, at last incited the strange nations of 
Gothes, Vandalls,
 and 
Lombards
 to


labour in the worke of the god of alteration, who pull'd this country from all Emperors and Kings, and made a fearefull diuision of the same, keeping themselues warme in 
Spaine,
 when all other countries failed: That long after 
Count Iulian
 began a new worke, as if he could haue powred downe vengeance on the author of his discon∣tents. For after 
Rodrigo
 had rauished his daughter, hee called in the 
Mores
 a race of 
Mahumetans
 into 
Spaine
 to be reuenged on the King, by whose assistance he not one∣ly banished the 
Gothes,
 and other people into 
Castile,
 but kill'd the King, vsurped the country, altred the gouern∣ment, and so plaied their parts in 
Granado, Valentia,
 and 
Andolozia,
 as if they were created of purpose to shew some wonder of heauen, when dissolution of King∣domes, and punishment of offences is determined: so that they quickly made their owne conditions, and bound the countrey euer since to the ratifying of them, infecting the best families of 
Spaine
 with paganisme, whereby our moderne Kings weeding them out by litle and litle, haue also attempted to purge their Churches of such filthines, and when they could not preuaile by precept, and autho∣rity of reason, they erected the office of 
Inquisition,
 to discouer who were addicted to the adoration of 
Mahomet,
 
 and durst contest against the blessednes of saluation in IESVS CHRIST, whereupon the 
Mores
 haue raised ma∣ny innouations in the countrey, & euen the last yeere to 
 the number of a million fraighted their hearts with trea∣son, and a burning desire to set on flame the wondrous compacted peace of 
Spaine.


Here is yet no great cause of amazement: For thus were the children of 
Israel
 persecuted by the 
Aegiptians,
 affrighted with the 
Philistims,
 maligned by the 
Edomites



subiected and made slaues to 
Babylon,
 tormented and threatned by 
Syrians
 and 
Graecians,
 and at last not onely subdued, but subuerted by the 
Romans,
 who of all other, put the axe to the tree, and at one stroke laid the same on the ground, leauing the holy Citie desolate as a widow, cast out as an orphan, despised as a vagabond, and puni∣shed worse than a traiterous rebell, vntill the 
Mahumetans
 by way of curtesie ridd her of her paine at once, and vt∣terly trampled her to peeces: so that now to see the peo∣ple dispersed without a law, common-wealth, or King: to view the countrey like a barren wildernes: to behold nothing but rapes and robberies, where so many promi∣ses had bin made from heauen, where such riches and ma∣iestie flourished, where such mightines and state increased, and where all prosperity triumphed, would leniat an ada∣mantine heart, and raise a crying voice from commisera∣tion, with 
Heu cadit in quenquam tantum scelus? tanta ini∣quitas?
 And thus much for example concerning the se∣uerall alterations of 
Spaines
 gouernment, now to the rest of his ostentation.


The whole countrey retaineth still the antient diuision of 
Baeticam, Lusitaniam
 and 
Tarraconensem,
 and the me∣mory of eight seuerall Kingdomes, 1. 
Gallicia,
 to which 
Asturia
 and 
Cantabria
 are connected: 2. 
Nauarra,
 the pro∣per 
 inheritance of the house of 
Burbon
 in 
France.
 3. 
Castiles,
 a coople boasting both of antiquitie and excellency. 4. 
Lu∣sitania,
 tother day 
Portugall,
 but now incorporated with the rest into the house of 
Austria.
 5. 
Leon
 extinguished long since by the greater light of 
Arrogon.
 6. 
Arrogon,
 laying claime to 
Naples
 and 
Ierusalem,
 and so enlarging the King of 
Spaines
 titles. 7. 
Valencia,
 mourning for her corruption in religion: and 8. 
Granado,
 to which 
Ando∣lozia



or the countrey of 
Vandalls,
 with the former Iland of 
Gades
 are vnited. Amongst these 
Portugall
 did once boast of the conquest of 
India, Aethiopia, Persia,
 and many other places, especially 
Taprabona,
 or the Iland of Saint 
Lawrence,
 betweene whom and Great 
Britaine
 (as I haue said before) at this instant of all the Ilands in the world is comparison for circuit, and spatiousnes of ground. But shall we let them goe on with these vaine-glorious titles of conquest and victory, when they are yet but poore posses∣sors of some harbours and townes by the sea shore, and stand on their guard with more terror to lose, than euer they entertained comfort in getting them. I, I, let them alone a gods name: For quarrels arise from contradi∣ction; and there is no disputing with men resolued in the vaine promises of worldly deceit; nor must you be in∣credulous, when a 
Portugall
 shall report, that these ex∣ploits were carried in the current of successe without the helpe of 
Spaine
 at all, as though there was euer a distin∣ction, or rather separation betweene themselues, and a 
Castilian;
 yea they proceeded further, as if there were an 
Antipathy
 in nature: For they vsed to spit at the naming a 
Spaniard,
 like simple people in 
England
 after the 
Deuill
 was pronounced. But to the rest: if you would truely vnderstand the cause of his pride and former elation of countenance, you must then take notice, that he detaineth all these Kingdoms within his owne Continent, as a com∣manding Monarch, and after many convulsions begged at fortunes hands the ratification of the Royalty, stiling himselfe withall King of 
Naples, Sicilia,
 and 
Hierusalem:
 the two former gouerning by Viceroies, the latter clai∣ming by inheritance, as vnwilling to lose himsele, or for∣get the glory of his auncestors, wherein he pleadeth imi∣tation:


For the Emperor writeth King of the 
Romans,
 not once visiting of 
Italy:
 the 
Denmarke
 King of 
England, England
 of 
France,
 and 
France
 of 
Nauarre:
 then are the Ilands of 
Sardinia, Corsica, Maiorca,
 and 
Minorca
 entred his booke of accounts; to which if you adde the noble Duchie of 
Millane,
 into whose demeanor 
Count Fuentes
 looketh with prying eies for his behalfe, & that the state of 
Genoa
 dependeth on his protection, you will say ambition set him well on worke, and as well rewarded him for his daies labour. As for the Low Countries, he would faine shew them as feathers belonging to his broken wings, and taketh the house of 
Burgundie
 for his owne, hoping that the Pope, which can canonize a Saint, will make the daughter of 
Spaine
 a Queene, especially of her owne in∣heritance.


Thus liueth and ruleth he in 
Europe:
 but all this were rather burthensome vnto him, considering the barren hills and sandy plaines of his countrey, if you looke not one way into the shores of 
Affricke,
 and another way o∣uer the bottomles Ocean, and so examine the cause of his boasting indeede, which is his store-houses of golden mines, his conquest of many nations, his reducing them 
 to Christianity, and his triumph in the fruition of posses∣sed tranquillitie: For 
America
 is almost his owne, resem∣bling a 
Peninsule,
 and ioyned in the midst with an 
Istmus.
 If you begin at the streights of 
Magellane,
 they will tell you, that 
Magellanus
 a Spaniard first explored the passage: If you aske, what was done a litle before, an answer is ready, that 
Americus Vesputius
 gaue name to this new world, and 
Christophorus Columbus
 of 
Genoa
 about a 130 yeeres since, searched her entrailes, discouered her mala∣dies, and applied a 
Cataplasme
 to her most dangerous


wounds, which was irreligion and barbarous idolatry: For although he found vnlookt-for glorious Cities, and well compacted gouernments, yet was he faine by strong hand to ouerthrow their idols, and punish their obstinacy with cruelty. The south shore, or if you please the Con∣tinent on the left hand 10000 miles long called 
Psitaco∣rum regio,
 is questionles inhabited, though vndiscouered, and not fully descried. The other Continent beyond the line inuites you to the view of strange nations, whom we confound with the generall horror of 
Cannibals,
 as men or rather monsters feeding on humane flesh, 
Giants:
 the land of 
Patagons,
 and 
Amazons,
 as supposed to flie hither, when the Kings of 
Europe
 repined to see women the equall sharers of honour amongst them: But for my owne part, I rather suppose it the error of ignorant Cos∣mographers, who when they cannot, or dare not certainly deliniate a countrey, then will they fill vp a place with monsters and formidable creatures both men & women: Thus haue they done with the interior parts of 
Africke,
 and the remote countries of 
Mangia,
 and the inhabitants of 
Taunis,
 when God knowes all these places with the rest are possessed by men, and of orderly proportion, yea such men, that though they be idolaters, beleeue the im∣mortality of the soule, and care not to dye in hope of a better life: therefore let the iudicious be perswaded, that what hath not voice and reason, is a beast or monster. From hence neerer the line or more northward looking from the streights of 
Magellane,
 you come into the gol∣den kingdomes of 
Peru, Brazill,
 and 
Caribana,
 and may be pleased with the streames of two mighty riuers 
De la Plata,
 and 
Maragnon,
 which by computation maketh a winding of 5000 mile, and haue their shores stored with


Cities and inhabitants, of whom and which so many idle things are reported, that though I am not incredulous, as knowing, what barbarous nations can afford; yet doe I disclaime vnnecessary discourses, because I haue further busines in hand, and of better consequence. A litle more remote toward the West, beginneth the 
Istmus
 circum∣spected with the territories of 
Mexico, Cusco,
 and 
Themi∣stian,
 with many other Cities of such wealth and mighti∣nes, that the people were slaine by thousands, or rather millions, ere they could sauour other obedience, than ido∣latrous and sauage liberty: On the other side toward the North looketh vp to heauen the new fashioned Ilands of 
Cuba, Hispaniola, S. Iohns,
 and many others: the fur∣ther side of the land is as it were fringed with the coun∣tries of 
Virginia, Terra Florida, Noua Francia, Norrem∣bega,
 and the fishing land; I call it fringed, because as yet we haue onely entred vpon the skirts of the same, not daring further exploration, and indeed not knowing what to doe with the rest, much desiring the discouery of the north-west passage into 
India,
 and resolued there is a way, if successe would lead vs by the hand to preuent the te∣diousnes and the charge of going about by the south Cape.


Here you see is great cause of triumph: For of all these he either challengeth the principality and confede∣ration, or ouer-looketh with such ielous eyes, that they dare not start from his obedience; and would not so ma∣ny kingdomes, so many nations, and such power elate any Prince to assume extraordinary titles? But (as I said) all this were vaporous smoake, and the frothy breath of opi∣nion, if his treasuries at home were not yeerely supplied from the tribute of the Esterne & Westerne mines abroad,


whereby he presumeth to yeeld more reason of his osten∣tation, than 
Salomon
 himselfe. For though 
Salomon
 did fetch gold from 
Ophir,
 and that the pride of 
Ierusalem
 swelled with plenty, when gold filled euery mans purse, and siluer was as common as stones: yet he made it a iourney of three yeeres, and had no other cunning, no 
 other wisdome, no other Philosophers stone, than the in∣dustry of Merchants, and confederation of the Kings of 
Tyrus
 and 
Sidon:
 But the King of 
Spaine
 can make a yeerely returne, or at least once in 16 moneths, as vnder∣standing himselfe thus farre, that his Cities of 
Toledo, Ma∣drid, Valiodolid, Leon, Barcelona, Saragossa, Valentia, Carta∣gena, Malaga, Corduba, Seuilla, Lisbone, Baione,
 and the rest, cannot maintaine their glories without them: That the monastery and stately Palace of the 
Scurial
 could neither invite you to her magnificent structures, nor supply ne∣cessities of life with prouision: That the Garisons of 
Mil∣lane, Naples, Sicilia,
 the townes of 
Africke,
 the inheritance of 
Burgundy,
 his owne Castles and frontiers townes, with diuers other remote in many Prouinces, would quickly decay, and haue oftentimes mutined for want of money, and their ordinary entertainment: That the Ports and Harbours would be empty of shipping, yea the ships themselues vnbuilt and vnfurnished: that the countrey commodities might be vnuttered: his souldiers disap∣pointed: his kingdomes many times famished, and his glory vtterly eclipsed, if there wanted but one returne of his treasure, or that any disastrous encounter defeated or disappointed his Nauy. And thus much for the se∣uerall principall Monarchs of the world, as at this howre they looke vp to heauen with ouer-liberall ti∣tles, and haue blowed opinion bigg with some seeming


reasons, and yet in comparison of true roialtie and hap∣pinesse, absolute partiality.






CHAP. X.
 The description of 
ITALY,
 as in times past.


W
Hereas you partly heard, that the house of 
Austria
 obtaining the Empire euen 
 with the Popes grudging, did also intrude it selfe into the pleasant fields of 
Italy,
 whereby the King of 
Spaine
 would haue his head empaled indeed with one of the Imperiall Dia∣demmes of the world: we will steppe thether, and see with what fashion her countenance is made cheerefull, and how her curtesie is prepared to entertaine vs. I will therefore desist from any former ampliation of absolute beginnings, least I should wrong the labours of ther men, and speake indeede their owne words more imperfectly, onely I must somewhat abstrusely and abstractly to helpe your memory with some things, that sauour of antiquity, and shall assist your comparatiue bringing them face to face in these moderne times. Vnderstand then, that it was the first Countrey inhabited of 
Europe
 by 
Ianus,
 or 
Iaphet
 the sonne of 
Noe,
 whose history giueth life to many strange and fabulous relations: How presently followed the possession of many Nations, whose loue to the Coun∣trey changed her name into 
Oenotria, Ausonia, Hesperia, Saturnia, Italia;
 and some others of lesse consequence, some significantly according to the goodnes of the place,


some metonimically either 
pars pro toto,
 or 
totum pro parte;
 some ironically for idle actions, or Poeticall fictions, and some iudicially according to the vertue of the Inhabi∣tants, excellency of the soile, or honour of the first explo∣rator, or Redacter to gouernment, and thus it was sud∣denly diuided into Prouinces, as 
Liguria, Hetruria, Vmbria,
 
 
Latium, Campania foelix, Lucania, Brutia
 or 
Magna graecia, Salentitij
 or 
Salentini, Appuleia Peucetia, Appuleia Daunia, Samnites, Pisenum, Aemilia
 or 
Galsia transalpina,
 now 
Lom∣bardy;
 and 
forum Iulij
 or 
Friaul,
 now 
Venetorum regio;
 Some say 15. 
Blondus
 18. and 
Leander
 19. parts. 


How 
Rome
 became the metropolitane Citie of 
Italy,
 
 and Queene of the world, so that the Emperors amplified the same with magnificent structures and monuments, and in diuiding, or rather translating their seates to 
Con∣stantinople
 left all to the Exarchat of 
Rauenna,
 and vsur∣pation of Byshoppes; who by a higher stile at last made themselues Popes, and with the cuppe of abomination, like the whore in the 
Apocalips,
 poisoned the westerne Kingdomes.


How the 
Venetians
 beganne their Citie and State, and 
 about anno 700. constituted a DVKE, boasting indeede that they were the poore remainder of the Roman Nobi∣lity, as it were sequestred into certaine remote Ilands, which the 
Goths
 respected not, nor 
Lombards
 regarded: yet hath Time you see raised a glorious flame from the poore dispersed imbers, almost extinguished, either from heate, or light.


How 
Millane
 was incorporated to a principalitie: First built by the Frence, after subuerted by the 
Vandalls,
 then 
 reedified, next made a Duchy; fiftly, strengthned with the band of 
Sforza;
 sixtly, possessed by the 
French
 againe,


and now by the 
Spaniard.


How 
Genoa
 boasteth of her antiquitie from 
Ianus,
 and 
 about 1237. constituted a DVKE like vnto 
Venice,
 but daring not to trust her owne foundation entertained the noble assistance of the 
Spanish
 castells.


How 
Turine
 or 
Taurinum
 was an Academy, the chiefe 
 Citie of 
Piemont,
 and now giueth so much aire to 
Sauoy,
 that he breatheth with one of the noblest Dukedomes of the world.


How 
Papia
 or 
Pauy
 in times past 
Ticinum
 by reason of 
 the riuer, that runnes round about it, was vnited to the Duchy of 
Millane
 by 
Iohannes Galeazius
 the first Duke.


How 
Padoa
 boasteth of her neighbourhood to the ri∣uer 
Padus,
 her Vniuersitie, 
Antenors
 foundation, fertillity 
 of ground, strong ramparts, and repineth at her subiecti∣on to 
Venice.


How 
Cremona
 is very auncient, and flourished with orderly strength and prosperity, vntill it was burnt in the 
 warres betweene 
Vitellius
 and 
Otho.


How 
Verona
 is pleased with the common enterpretati∣on 
 of her name 
quasi vera vna,
 with the orderly accesse of 
Italians
 nobles, with the ruines of her Amphitheater so goodly a structure, that I dare be bold to say, it would containe 80000. people to behold the spectacles, presen∣ted to the Inhabitants for triumphs of Emperors, and fa∣mous Consuls, and being once free was subiected to the 
Venetians
 about anno. 1405.


How 
Mantua
 was first a Marquisate, but by the marri∣age of the onely daughter of 
Montisferate
 raised to a Du∣chy 
 by the Emperor, and thrust warme vnder the mantell of 
Gonzaga
 by the Pope.


How 
Mirandula
 was fortified, besieged by the Emperor 



and Pope, assisted onely by the 
French,
 and at last vnited to the principate of 
Parma.


How 
Ferrara
 was first subiect to the Byshoppe of 
Ra∣uenna,
 then vnder the family of 
Est,
 made a Marquisate; 
 lastly, a Dukedome, and now vsurped by the Pope, as part of Saint 
Peters
 patrimonie.


How 
Parma
 boasteth of antiquitie, suffered many con∣cussions, 
 fell into the blessing of the Clergy, and with the Coronet of a Duke was presented to 
Alexander Fernesius.


How 
Bononia
 was once ruled by an Exarchate, as a place 
 of greatnesse, and important conueniency for the gouern∣ment of the Countrey: after giuen to the Church by King 
Pepin,
 and 
Carolus magnus,
 and hath now a famous Vniuersitie.


How 
Rauenna
 boasteth of antiquitie, was the principall 
 seate of the Vicegerents, for the Emperors of 
Constanti∣nople,
 and after surrendred into the Popes hands by the name of 
Romandiolas
 territories.


How 
Vrbine
 was famous for courtshippe, and made a 
 Dukedome 1476. by Pope 
Sixtus
 in the family of 
Frede∣ricus Vbaldinensis,
 who were once citizens of 
Florence,
 but for their vertue raised to this honour, so that the family extinguished, it is returned to the possession of the Pope againe.


How 
Ancona
 is an old walled Towne and port in the 
 Adriaticke sea, now 
Gulpho Venetiano,
 is knowne by her white cliffe, inuiteth you to come on land, and see the wonders of our Lady at 
Loretto;
 and obeyeth the Pope in his temporall iurisdiction.


How 
Florence
 suffered many alterations, increased in wealth, buildings, state, populousnesse, was honored in 
 the house of 
Medices,
 and aduanced her fame with the best


through the valour and well-deseruing of that valiant 
Co∣simo,
 by the stile of 
Magnus Dux Hetruriae,
 and hath since boasted of two Queenes of 
France
 from her daughters, who haue filled the Courts of all the Princes in 
Europe
 with strange reports. How 
Pisa
 was once Mistresse of 
Ma∣iorca,
 
 had an Acedemy, was sold to the Florentines, by the Vicount 
Iohannes Galeasius,
 and bought of the Empe∣rour 
Charles,
 1369. by 
Petrus Gambacurta,
 for 12000. peeces of gold. How 
Leuca
 was made a 
Seignory,
 and had 
 many Gouernours, but at last obtained their freedome by donation of a Cardinall, who distributed for the same 25000. 
Checkinos.
 How 
Sienna
 boasteth of the birth of 
 
Aeneas Siluius,
 called Pope 
Pius,
 of the Vniuersity of Phy∣sicians, is delicately scited, was tossed, or rather tormented in the factions of the 
Guelphs
 and 
Gibellines,
 submitted to the 
Spanyard,
 then to the 
French,
 next to the Cardinall 
M
ndoza,
 and at last 1558. yeelded to the Duke of 
Flo∣rence.
 How 
Naples
 encreased in glory, and raised her 
 dignity next to 
Lombardy,
 of all the Principats of 
Italy,
 to a Kingdome, suffred many alterations, had Princes of se∣uerall families, filled the world with the occurrences of her troubles; and at last, by example of 
Sicilia,
 prostituted it selfe to 
Spaines
 insulting. Of all which to discourse at large were another 
Gordion:
 and with the Preacher a man may cry out, all things are so hard to be knowen, that no creature can expresse them, the eye is not satisfied with sight, the eare not filled with hearing, the thing that hath beene, commeth to passe againe, and there is no new thing vnder the Sunne: and therefore I will desist from further tormenting my selfe or you, because many worthy au∣thors are opposite to one another, in vnfolding the secrets of antiquity, and hee which striueth to please all readers


with satisfaction, must transforme himselfe into all shapes, especially with 
Ianus
 looke two contrary waies, and study the arts both of detracting and flattery: yet there is but one truth, if a man did liue in such a blessed age, that he might maintaine the same with worthy boldnesse, speaking what he thinkes, thinking what he knowes, and knowing nothing, but honest certainties: wherein not to be corrupted, is a glory exceeding report, and a worke of wonder indeed: therefore as neere as I can, I will reiect all impossible reports and authorities, and tie my selfe to pro∣babilities and truth, or at least so much, as is either receiued for currant in iustifiable relations: or my poore experience dare warrant from mine owne endeauours: and so I will shew you with what face 
Italy
 lookes vp to heauen at this houre, and may with 
Heraclitus
 weepe for the vanities and miseries of the earth: yet is cheerefull, and thus like a strumpet is knowne by the pride of her eyes.






CHAP. XI. ITALY
 described at this time.


F
Irst, towards the East lies the Kingdome of 
Naples,
 within whose enclosures are 
 detained the countries of 
Calabria, Bru∣tia,
 and 
Apulia,
 now 
Abruzzo Puglia,
 and separated by the chāmpaine of 
Roman∣diola,
 and the large 
Appenini,
 which bee mountaines rising by 
Ancona,
 and running forward to the great gulph, that thrusteth it selfe between 
Rocca Imper
all



and 
Gallipolis.
 It hath many townes, but few cities: onely 
Brindisi, Ottonto, Barletto
 and 
Naples
 are of some account: the Countrey is rich in vines, oyle, and silke-wormes, the people are dangerous, superstitious, and the 
Villano
 liues beastly: the Gentle men are maintainers of liberty and pleasure, scoffers at their owne religion, and as great blas∣phemers as the Greekes of 
Cyprus,
 insomuch that I haue heard them in their rages cry out, 
Iddio Beco: Puttana del Di:
 and sweare by the absurd oath of 
potta del Cielo,
 as in their commedy called 
Ruffiana,
 and published in print, may appeare: yet is their adoration of her so superstitious, that the Sauiour of the world is accounted her inferiour, her attributes make heauen amazed, and her altars smoke with incense and prophanation. And what is this: but to cause the Prophets to exclaime against the sacrifices of the Queene of Heauen? and what is this, but with 
Ahaz
 to make images for 
Baalim,
 and burne children in the valley of 
Hinnon,
 after the abhomination of the heathen? and what is this? but to build high altars with 
Manasses,
 and like a Sorcerer, to regard the crying of birds, to vse en∣chauntments, & giue way to the imposturing art of witch∣craft. As for true religion, oh God! thou laughest them to scorne, as they haue the truth in derision, which makes me remember, what is reported in these parts of that wor∣thy S
r
. 
Philip Sidney,
 who conuersing with a Neapolitane Count, and brought to one of their Churches, wherein he was loth to enter at that time, was yet vnwilling altoge∣ther to distaste him, but interiected some excuses: but the Count vnderstanding him well enough, bad him tarrie a while, and so went into his formall deuotion, but quickly returning, embraced him with an oath, by his 
Santa Donna,
 that he would renounce all the religion of the world; yea,


his part of Paradice, before hee would trouble againe the conscience of so well deseruing a Gentle-man and com∣panion. They liue in great pomp for outward shew, and make the City, both rich and stately, because they are not permitted to be resident in the Countrey, but keepe heere continuall entercourse, howeuer they groane vnder the Vice-Royes controll, and the ouerwatchings of two strong castles, which keepe both towne and harbour in awe: and although the Spanish pride, and sometimes cru∣elty, is exercised amongst them, as abating their natiue glory: yet doth it little abridge them of moderne pleasures and customary wantonnesse: so that if the Prophets in times past exclaimed against 
Tyrus
 and 
Sidon,
 threatned 
Damascus
 and 
Syria,
 prophesied the desolation of 
Aegypt
 and 
Aethiopia,
 lamented 
Iuda
 and 
Samaria,
 and mour∣ned for 
Babylon
 and 
Assyria,
 they might now cry out a∣gainst 
Italy
 and 
Naples,
 which as in times past was called 
Parthenope,
 of the Syrens haunting these shores, of the dangers of 
Scilla
 and 
Caribdis,
 and for the notorious tran∣shaping men into monsters by 
Circes,
 allegorically allu∣ding to the voluptuous sinnes, and abusiue pleasures of this City and Countrey: so still may it retaine the compa∣rison, and men bee terrified with the same dangers. For if any place in the world keepes wickednesse warme, with glorious flames and stretcht-out sensuallity to the length and bredth: heere men are not only drunke with iniquity; but commit fornication with Idols; yea, are mad with the rage of impiety.


The next is 
Romagnia,
 or 
Romandiola,
 called 
S. Peters
 
 patrimony; a great countrey vnder the Pope, in which are reckned the two Dukedomes of 
Ferrara
 and 
Vrbine,
 of late daies fallen into the power of the Conclaue of


Cardinals, for want of lawfull succession; or else by rea∣son of their weaknes, who peraduenture haue right, but are not able to contest with so irregular an aduersary, which makes them step a litle aside for feare of being trampled to peeces indeed. The chiefe Cities are 
Rome, Loretto, Rimano, Bologna, Ferrara, Vrbine, Perugia, Viter∣bium, Spoletto, Ancona,
 and 
Rauenna,
 all places of account, well fortified, adorned with palaces, replenished with in∣habitants, and resort of Gentills both natiues and trauel∣lers, and supplied with all manner of prouision both for necessitie and wantonnes. But 
Rome
 is the seat of the Pope, and keepeth the Priests to the duties of the Sanctu∣ary: For the Colledge of Cardinals suffer no man to de∣presse the glory of the Church, and proclaimes him an heretike, that intermedleth with the ordinances of the great Bishop; so that according to their seuerall degrees religious persons liue in great st
te, keepe Curtezans, tra∣uell in Carosses with six moiles sumptuously trapped, though but a quarter of a mile to the Conclaue, solem∣nize feasts and banquets, make onely show of some ridi∣culous ceremonies, and are in truth of slender deuotion in spirituall secrets, but foolish superstition in absurd ap∣paritions: so that if I were an Atheist, and a man vncon∣scionable to suppose, that there were not a day of account to be made with the commander of all actions, I had ra∣ther liue a religious man in 
Rome,
 than be a Nobleman of 
Naples,
 who (as I said a litle before) of all men liuing wash their hands in carelesnes, and like 
Pollicrates
 the ty∣rant haue nothing to trouble them, but that nothing hath troubled them concerning worldly encombrances; so that with the Prophet I may well cry out, the Priests are gone astray by the meanes of strong drinke, and are ouer∣come


with wine, they faile in prophesying, and stumble in iudgement, their tables are full of vomit and filthines, and no place is cleane: yea the vision of the Prophet is come vnto them, as the words of a booke which is sealed vp, which men deliuer to one that is learned, saying, read thou, and he replies, I cannot, for it is sealed; then it is deliuered to an ignorant with read thou, but his answer is, I am not learned: so that with the Apostle I may say, that Antichrist shall sit in the Temple of the Lord; and in the latter daies shall be the doctrine of deuils, forbidding to marry, and eat meat, which God hath sanctified: so that with the Euangelist I may lawfully tell you of the Vision of the beast, which rose out of the sea, hauing 7 heads and 10 hornes, and that he opened his mouth vnto blasphe∣my, resembled to the woman araied in purple and rose colour, decked with gold, pretious stones, and pearle, and holding a cup of gold in her hand full of abomination and filthines. The Citie yet is swelling bigger and big∣ger, though nothing comparable to the ostentation of former times: For Historiographers haue confirmed it for greatnes, riches, magnificence, Nobilitie, and famous illustrations the admiration of the world, as contayning 20 English mile in circuit, and shewing a countenance of brauery, and princely structures: But now it onely boa∣steth of some few ancient buildings, the ruines of the 
Amphitheater,
 certaine 
Obelisci,
 the swiftnes of 
Tiber,
 new erected Palaces of 
Cardinals,
 the Castle of 
S
t
 Angelo olim moles Adriani,
 the Popes owne Palace, and the Church of 
S. Peter,
 threatning to exceed with his high erected 
Cuba
 and wondrous crosse Iles, our London Cathedrall, which is the vastest heape of stones vnder the sunne: the aire is most pestilent, and vnwholesome, so that S



haue died in a yeere by infection, and the vninhabited places afford such damps and mists, that many times they effectuate suffocations, but are alwaies dangerous and patible of no remedy, but extraordinary fires.


The third part of 
Italy
 affordeth an honorable title to the Duke of 
Florence,
 who is stiled 
Magnus Dux Hetruriae,
 
 and registreth in his booke of renowne for principall Ci∣ties 
Florence, Pisa, Sienna,
 and 
Legorne
 a strong new ha∣uen towne on the sea shore almost ouer against 
Corsica.
 The Citie it selfe is one of the stateliest and richest in 
Italy,
 the riuer 
Arnus
 runneth in the midst, playing the wanton vnder the arches of three delicate stone bridges: the 
Dona
 is a delicate and curious Church: the state-house, Dukes palace, and treasurie, with other Arsenals, and store-hou∣ses are to be made account of, as glorious spectacles, and worthy structures; but whereas you shall finde a booke of the wonders of the Citie, when you come to the sub∣stance from the shadow, it will proue either ridiculous, or not answering expectation. The Duke himselfe studieth nothing but wealth, for which he liueth both sparingly and basely, not caring by what meanes his yeerely 
entrado
 is augmented, taking the indirect profit of common Innes: He is of the family of 
Medices,
 and his subiects (if I may so terme them, which doe what they list) are fine speakers, but buggerers, and blasphemers.


The fourth roome of 
Italies
 palace is opened for the de∣licate state of 
Leuca,
 a Signiory and Citie of that riches, 
 and estimation, that in comparing it to so much ground againe, you shall easily finde the difference: For being not 20 mile square, yet can they muster 3000 horse, and 15000 foote: they make much silke, and are well condi∣tioned Merchants: their chiefest 
Podesta
 or officer is cal∣led



Confaloniero,
 changed euery two moneths: his coun∣cell are of the chiefest Citizens, altred euery six moneths; they liue altogether for the time in one Palace: they haue had many Gouernors, but at the last the Cardinall (as you heard) purchased their manumition, and they as appre∣hensiue are resolued to maintaine their priuiledges.


The fift share is taken out of 
Italies
 lap by the 
Venetians,
 who boast of great antiquity, haue a Duke during life, 
 chosen by the balls of the full Councell, who is at this in∣stant a 
Donatus,
 and are proud of their great possessions, but might haue gloried, if they had not lost their first foo∣ting. Within the land they keepe close 
Forum Iulij
 or 
Friaull,
 with the territories of a large countrey round a∣bout 
Venice
 it selfe, which is called the impossible within the impossible, scited in the sea, and diuided into such channels, that you goe both by water and land to their houses, which indeed are hansomely contriued, and be∣longing to the Noblemen worthy the reputation of Pa∣laces; yet are the streets so narrow, that they endure nei∣ther horse nor cart, neither doth their Gentlemen weare sword or cloake; nor is any fresh water, or good aire be∣longing to the same, more then what is brought them, or they reserue in pargetted cesternes, as in 
Zeland
 and 
Hol∣land
 when it raineth. 
Padoa
 is their Vniuersitie, and a large towne, famous for 
Titus Liuius
 and 
Peter Auenons
 birth, who made the bathes vnder the mountaines some fiue mile beyond, where the vipers are taken; it retaineth a goodly monument of a Hall, keeps 
Antenors
 toombe in the streets, and dare tell you, that 
S. Lukes
 sepulchre is in the Church called the 
Santo: Palma
 is a fine towne, and strong in fortification: 
Verona
 a famous Citie, whi∣ther the Noblemen resort, who much stomach the 
Vene∣tian



gouernment: 
Vizenza
 is a delicate Academie, and hath a stately & yet hansome theater: 
Crema
 a frontier towne, and well guarded: 
Vdine
 comely and conuenient enough after the Italian manner, and superstitious alike. 
Treuiso
 hath a faire 
Piazzo,
 and sheweth some wanton Curtezans: and 
Brescia,
 where the language is corrupt; for belike they haue beat out the finenes with hammering their armours. On the other side of the Adriaticke sea, they command the pleasant shores of 
Histria, Dacia,
 and 
Dalmatia
 almost as farre as 
Ragusa:
 a litle further in their owne 
Gulph,
 and amongst the musters of the Greeke Ilands, they protect 
Cephalonia,
 once 
Ithaca,
 or the coun∣trey of 
Vlisses. Corfu,
 where the strong Castle is accoun∣ted a principall peece of workmanship: 
Xante,
 an Iland famous for the vallies yeelding 4000 tunne of Corans euery yeere: 
Zerigo,
 and many other Ilands, in euery one of which they haue for Gouernour one 
Prouisor,
 and two 
Conciliarij
 as assistant: they had also many other fortunes, but 
tempus edax rerum,
 and the 
Turkes
 greatnes hath almost broken the chaine of their prosperitie abroad in peeces: For they haue lost 
Rhodes, Ciprus,
 and some other commands; yet doe they keepe 
Candy
 in the Mediterranean sea, whose Gouernour is priuiledged with the title of DVKE, and hath 
potestatem vitae & necis.


Modena
 is the sixt step of 
Italies
 glory, and an heredi∣tary Dukedome, full of riches and fashionable Gentry, 
 newly allied to 
Mantua,
 and reasonable well fortified a∣gainst his dangerous neighbour in 
Millane:
 The country is very pleasant, and conducteth you to those plentifull water-pooles, called 
Lago de Garda,
 and 
Lago de Como;
 the first vnder the 
Venetian,
 the next belonging to the Car∣dinall


of 
Trento,
 and both very neere 50 Italian mile in length, and 30 in bredth.


On the seuenth degree of honors chaire, as he is moun∣ted 
 in Italy, is 
Mantua
 placed, a new Dukedome of an old Marquisate, in the name of 
Gonzaga:
 He liueth in bet∣ter fashion of Courtship than the other Princes, with a guard of 
Switzers;
 the Citie is large, boasteth of 
Virgils
 birth, the delicate streames of 
Po,
 ouer which for all the swiftnes and bredth, a gallery bridge transporteth both coach, cart, and horse, and vnder which are preserued ma∣ny courtly barges both for magnificent showes, pleasure of the water in summer time, and necessitie of the inhabi∣tants at all times.


The eight prize of Italies lottery is proclaimed for the 
 Dukedome of 
Parma,
 connited to the house of 
Farne∣sius
 a Spaniard, and signorising ouer 
Macentia
 and 
Miran∣dula,
 not onely holdeth vp a stately countenance of three magnificent Cities, famous for many alterations, proud of well contriued ramparts, boasting of hansome women, and exposing an extraordinary profit from the vent of se∣uerall country merchandice; but openeth the plentifull fields of increase, and giueth cause of wonder for many temporary blessings.


The ninth proportion of this countries happinesse is distributed to the Duchie of 
Millan
,
 a principality in times 
 past of such eminence, that like a faire shining planet in a conspicuous orbe, it once had a prerogatiue of title and goodnes ouer other Dukedomes: and how euer the King of 
Spaine
 hath charged 
Count Fuentes
 to ouer-looke the Citie and countrey, and 
Don Diego de Piemontel
 to super∣uise the Castle and Garison; yet is the brauery of the place very litle abated, nor doth the Nobleman shrinke


vnder the burthen, but carrieth his load lightly, how euer his inward grones are breathed, and lifteth vp a face of cheerefulnes, as if he dranke wine, and fed on oyle indeed according to the properties of either.


On the tenth rondell of Italies ladder is 
Genoa
 moun∣ted, a rich, proud, and sumptuous state; yet much per∣plexed 
 for their perfidious dealing with the French, and now depending on Spanish protection; hath a Duke by their constitution, and placed or displaced according to the mightinesse of factions, or fauour of the Clergy: The Citie hath many buildings of eminent sumptuous∣nes, and is not so filed in the rankes of reputation, but that they iest it thus with the aire birdlesse, the sea fishles, the mountaines woodles, the men respectles, and the wo∣men graceles.


On the eleuenth seate of this Countries Councell∣chamber hath residence the Prouince of 
Trent,
 famous 
 for a Generall Councell, and lieth warme vnder the Alpes neighbouring 
Germany:
 you may passe to it through the famous lakes of 
Lombardy, De guarda,
 and 
De Como,
 from whence arise those swelling springs, that fill the streaming riuer of 
Padus,
 and strengthen the Citie like an Iland, ex∣cept it be toward the West, where yet you shall behold a reasonable fortification, and a well murited wall with ramparts and rauelings: It is subiect to a Cardinall, who like a Count Palatine taketh all iurisdiction vpon him, and with the two mastring coorbes of the world 
praemium,
 and 
poena,
 gouerneth the sterne of this principalitie.


The twelfth place to make the iury the fuller, is assigned to 
Piemont,
 the flourishingst part of 
Sauoy,
 as opening the 
 gates of his chiefest palace, and Citie 
Turine,
 where a Ci∣tadell of Spanish Garisons taketh account of all passen∣gers,


which come ouer the Alps; it sendeth the riuer of 
Po
 through the countrey as farre as 
Ferrara
 into the 
Venetian
 Gulph; and hauing many Knights of 
Malta
 within her walles is ready for their succour, which way soeuer it chance, and they againe for hers, as reciprocally depen∣ding vpon one another, and howeuer they are all ielous of the Spaniard, they yet dare not breath it aloud; but sure I am when I passed through 
Italy,
 and that the Car∣dinals 
Aldabrandino
 and 
Caesario
 came with a treaty to haue the Prince of 
Piemont
 and his brother vnder the King of 
Spaines
 protection, the Secretary was impriso∣ned by the Councell of State for vrging the matter in the King of 
Spaines
 behalfe: so that there is probable suspi∣tion, that the 
Sauoijen
 and 
Spaniard
 will not continue long friends for all their alliance: it receiueth the cu∣stomes of Merchants trauelling ouer the Alpes, and main∣taineth the office of 
Dacij,
 and could be contented to haue either 
Millane
 or 
Naples
 annexed to his Coronet. But if you will haue 
Sauoy
 flie with her owne wings, you must hearken a litle after some antiquitie.






CHAP. XII. 
The storie of
 SAVOY.


T
HE countrey of 
Sauoy
 is all mountanous euen from the fields and champaine of 
 
Lions
 to Mount 
Sinese,
 the onely passage of the Alpes into 
Italy:
 It is called 
Si∣nese, quasi nunquam sine niue,
 neuer with∣out snow, and is indeed a dangerous, te∣dious, and cold trauell euen in the midst of summer: but



Sauoy
 hath many other hills, as 
Aguabelle,
 and 
Agabellette,
 and is euery way full of strange and vneuen iournies, so that it shall not be amisse to deriue our discourse from the etymologie of the word, which may serue to con∣front ignorance, and enrich vs with the knowledge of things, which is no great burthen, but rather a happines, according to the Poet, 
Foelix qui potuit rerum cognoscere causas:
 You must then vnderstand, that this strange and vnsauoury nation, by reason of the streight and narrow waies to trauell in, was euer subiect to theeues, and being slenderly inhabited had not sufficiency to protect either themselues or passengers from the confused rages of men addicted to spoiles and murthers: wherevpon it conti∣nued in the name and scandall of 
Maluoy,
 the ill or mis∣cheeuous way, vntill a worthy aduenturer of the countrey attempted a reformation, and shew'd these disordred people the strength of a more powerfull arme, preuailing so farre, that by his industry and fortune, these enormities were not onely purged, but the first causers remoued, I meane the robbers and theeues were either slaughtred outright, or publikely executed for a terrifying example, and as a reward to his vertues, the end of his labours had a quadruplicitie of blessings: First, the Emperor made him a DVKE, gaue him part of 
Italy
 called now 
Piemont,
 as if it would speake for it selfe, that it is a countrey at the foote of the mountaine, and inuested him with 
iura rega∣lia,
 not to be accountable to any Prince for his actions within his owne territories. Secondly, the countrey it selfe changed her title from 
Maluoy
 into 
Sauoy, quasi salua via.
 Thirdly, these incredible mountaines erected hou∣ses, entertained husbandmen, and cattle, and builded Chappels, where a man would imagine an impossibilitie


of footing. Last of all, it was stored with forts and castles, in such a defensiue manner, that some of them at this day rancke themselues in the highest forme of bulwarkes and and ramparts. But I must not thus passe ouer their ac∣counts, nor vilipend their glory. For they boast of anti∣quity of Kings, as that 
Hanibal
 found 
Brunco
 disseised of his inheritance by his yonger brother, and so rectified that discord. That 
Bitultus
 or 
Bituitus,
 another King, was ta∣ken prisoner by 
Q. Fabius Maximus,
 some 50. yeeres after 
Hanibals
 passage into 
Italy.
 And that 
Cotius
 raigned in the time of 
Augustus
 the Emperour, so that till the 
Goths
 and 
Vandals
 dissolued all gouernments of the West, these coun∣tries remained firme in their former renowne, as part of 
Gallia Cisalpina:
 but afterward mischeefe was added to mischeefe, till it was concluded otherwise by time and worthy endeauours, as you haue heard: whereupon 
Chambery
 was the cheefest towne on this side the Alps, sci∣tuated in a delicate rich valley, full of Gentle-mens hou∣ses, on the other side of the mountaine 
Agabella,
 ouer which the traueller spendeth commonly fiue or six hours: it hath a handsome castle now manned with Spanyards, in the behalfe of the Duke, the City is orderly ditcht and fortified, & by the fauor of a pretty riuer, hath commodity of a reasonable water, otherwise it is snowy through the countrey, and the people are 
Strumosae,
 as in 
Switzerland.
 The suburbs are not fully recouered of her ruines, which they were subiect vnto in the yeere 1600. when the King of 
France,
 as stomaching the cunning violence of the Duke of 
Sauoy's
 detention, of the 
Marquisat
 of 
Salust,
 came to 
Grenoble
 by the marches, and after good surueigh besieged 
Chambery,
 lodging in the suburbs, and commanded 
Villeroy
 to parley with 
Iacob
 and the President 
Rochet,
 about the


surrendring the towne and castle, whom at last the people compelled to a composition, as finding it impossible to resist the French forces: thus within three dayes was the towne, and within six the castle surrendred, and 
Le Buise
 a Gentle-man of 
Daulphine
 left for Gouernour: but the suc∣cesse of these actions was not comparable to the fortune of attaining mount 
Melian,
 and S
t
. 
Katherines
 fort, two of the strongest holds that euer I saw. For mount 
Melian
 is 
 seated on the top of an high and rocky mountaine, the ditch bankes very steepe, and the defences consist of fiue great bastions flanked in most warlike manner, to which is but one passage, and that from the towne. The King (ac∣cording to the condition of men) transported onely with outward shewes, sayd it was impregnable, but vnderstan∣ding himselfe afterward a little better, commanded to be∣siege it: so the Marquis 
Rosny,
 great master of the artille∣ry, drew vp seuen canons by the force of armes, and strength of men, and two batteries were made by 
De Bourdes,
 Lieutenant Generall of the artillery, against the bastions of 
Maiuosin
 and 
Bouillars,
 besides an old Tower, which had beene shaken by 
Francis
 the first.


The Fort was commanded by the Earle of 
Brindis,
 who had all prouision for his defence, and like one of 
Dauids
 Worthies, prooued an honourable Seruitor, had not the 
Duke
 failed, and brake his word, leauing him to such a fortune, as extremities accustome. For hee held it out foure months, after many thousand shot of fortie canons, whose voyces sounded out nothing, but terrour; and effects made way vnto feare and mistrust: and accor∣dingly, seeing the French had too good footing to bee re∣mooued, a composition was condescended vnto, and the castle surrendred.



The towne of 
Aguabelle
 is scituated at the foot of a great rocke, as if it lay asleepe in the lap of security. By it 
 runnes the riuer of 
Arck,
 it was surprized by the good en∣deauours of the 
Signeurs
 of 
Crequy
 and 
Morges,
 not giuing them of the castle any leasure to burne it. At the same time was 
Conflans
 commanding the passage of 
Tarentaies
 and 
Carboniers,
 with all the straights of 
Morien
 in the Kings hands: but if you would know what pleased him indeed, it was the braue surprizall of S
t
. 
Katherines
 Fort, a gift as if fortune should open her lap, and bid him with cheere∣fulnesse be his owne caruer. For it is scited on a high hill within six mile of 
Geneua,
 and not onely ouerlookes the Countrey, but raiseth her rocky sides in such a manner, as if it cared neither for battery, nor bullet, but would return them backe againe, as you see a man spit against the winde to his owne defiling.


Concerning 
Geneua,
 by the water it seems impregnable, 
 as washed with the pleasant billowes of the lake 
Lemanus,
 and yet made vnaccessable, by reason of certaine marishes, ouer which neither horse nor cart can trauell: by the land it hath all the helps of art & nature, yet not without danger of treason and stratagems: but that I am perswaded God hath reserued it, as little 
Zoar
 was a city of refuge, when all the cities of 
Sodome
 and 
Gomorrha
 were on a blaze round about it. So 
Sauoy,
 the King of 
Spaine,
 the 
Pope,
 and her owne treasons were all disappoynted, and it still remaines in the freedome of ablessed protection, boasting of no∣thing more, then her 300. yeeres continuance in an vni∣formity of religion, and that it retaineth the true method of the Primatiue Church. But to S
t
. 
Katherines
 Fort a∣gaine. It consisteth of fiue bastions, which are not walled but ditcht. well furnished with artillery, and had 600. men


to defend it, who yet were in seuerall distractions, when they perceiued the confidence of the Kings army, not to take all that paines without further satisfaction; so they submitted to the clemency of Count 
Soysons,
 after the King was departed, to goe meet the Queene at 
Lyons,
 and thus were these impregnable places made the tennis-ball of fortune, and left vs this obseruation, that men, money, and endeauours, will ouercome all disasters, and make the very mountaines yeeld to heroike resolutions. This is that Fort, which was excepted in the composition between 
Sauoy
 and 
France.
 This is that Fort, that was to keepe the Countrey in obedience. This is that Fort, whose gouern∣ment being denied to Duke 
Byron,
 startled his resolutions, and plunged him in the irrecouerable gulph of disconten∣ted treasons. The towne of 
Moriana
 is beautified with a Colledge, Monastery, and Churches, and tooke the first name, either because the people are swartish & blacke; or the earth (like some places of 
Aethiopia)
 resembleth clots of pitch, and so indeede their swine are of the same colour. A little further lies 
Bramont,
 a city of that antiquity, that 
Caesar
 filleth some part of his Commentaries with her re∣lations. The passages to all these places are somewhat fearefull to strangers. For to ride vnder, and behold such mighty mountaines and rockes, to see the snow dissolue and runne downe with that impetuous force, making such 
anfractus
 and ruptures, that diuers hundred mils are tur∣ned with the same, to heare the terrible noyse of the chan∣nell, whose foundation is huge stones disseuered from the hils: to see the pine trees stand vnder like a carpet, ready to receiue the falling of the snow, is a thing both of admi∣ration and pleasure. But for mine owne part, it startled me not at all, in regard I had marched ouer some moun∣taines


and places in 
Ireland;
 especially 
Pen men mawre
 in 
 
Wales,
 which for the length of the passage, is the feareful∣lest that euer I saw, because the stony rocke hangeth ouer so many hundred fathome high, and the sea lieth vnder as great a depth: so that a quarter of a mile together, the way is not eight foot broad, and (as it were) patch vp in the broken places, with furrs and bauin, to keepe both horse and man from slipping. Besides, after a great frost you shall haue an hundred load of stones fall at once from the rocke into the sea, and almost batter the fence in peeces, which in the fearefull report, and sudden viewing by a new commer, must needs be troublesome, and indeed surmoun∣teth any place of 
Sauoy,
 or the Alps.


Thus much for 
Sauoy,
 whose eldest sonne is now called Prince of 
Piemont,
 hauing his court a part from the Dukes palace, with a small guard of 
Switzers,
 and liueth in rea∣sonable eminence, knowing his father to bee an absolute Prince, himselfe a nephew to 
Spaine,
 & neerly allied to the house of 
Austria.
 As for the Dukes iealousie of the power of the Clergy, and the Spanish encroachments, I am resol∣ued (like a smoothering fire) it will one day burst foorth into flames of despight, and did he not rather feare 
France,
 as a neere neighbour, and more dangerous aduersary, he would peraduenture attempt further into 
Italy,
 in despight of 
Spaines
 ouer-watching. But because it is a thanklesse labour to gleane the fields of other folkes haruest, and that you haue whole volumes of the Spanish, French, Low-Countries, Hungary, Venice, Portugall, and Turkish af∣faires, I will entermeddle no further: onely I must speake a little concerning 
Millane,
 and so leaue 
Italy
 betweene the straights of her owne pleasures at home, and suspicion of forraine intrusion abroad.








CHAP.
 XIII. The Story of 
MILLANE.


A
Bout the yeere 1492. the Realme of 
Naples
 reuolting, 
Rhene
 Duke of 
Lo∣raine
 
 was sent for by the Pope to be in∣uested King, which was the first mo∣tiue for the 
French
 to be admitted into the attractiue delights of 
Italy.
 For when many hands had (as it were) torn a peeces the peace of this Countrey, it seemed a charitable and meritorious worke to contriue an establishment, and redacting it to vniformity, which the Controller of King∣domes at that time, I meane the Pope, determined by this course, had not the very next yeere his minde receiued a further perturbation. For this Pope was a 
Spanyard,
 by the name of 
Roderick Borgia,
 or 
Alexander
 the sixt, whom the 
Venetians,
 and Duke of 
Millane
 beeing an vsurper at that time, established in the Papacy, because they might bee assisted from him in all their demands. Where∣upon the 
Duke,
 by the name of 
Lodwick Sforza,
 and an vnkle, surprizeth the Cittadle of 
Millane,
 insinuated into the loue of the principall nobility, and confederated with many Princes of 
Italy,
 to corroborate his new gotten great∣nesse. All this yet hindred not the next iourney of 
Charles
 the eighth, King of 
France,
 who now pretending a very right to 
Naples
 and 
Sicilia,
 with much adoe was incited to passe the Alps, and take his pleasure in these plenteous fields, in which, that his walkes might be the more smooth, hee condescended to certaine articles with this Vsurper



Lodwick,
 much about the time that 
Iohn
 the true Duke of 
Millane
 died, leauing behinde him one son and daughter, in whose minority 
Lodwick,
 as hee had before wrested the gouernment, now assumeth the title, had not his forward∣nesse beene somewhat intercepted by this French visitati∣on, whereupon he perswaded the 
Venetians,
 who of them∣selues were suspicious enough, when they saw the French Kings glorious entrance into 
Florence,
 to some interposi∣tion, and so both 
Millane
 and 
Venice
 grew iealous of King 
Charles
 his proceedings, which yet could not bee so cun∣ningly trauersed, but hee was made acquainted with their vnconstancy, and held his peace till a fitter opportunity. For now he was to make his pompous entrance into 
Rome,
 where the wals both of the City, and the Castle S
t
. 
Angelo
 fell downe miraculously before him. By which occasion, as if the sword of 
Iehu
 should kill the Priests of 
Baal,
 is prognosticated, that by the hand of 
France,
 the enormities of the Church, and the monstrous abuses of the Clergy, should be winnowed and throughly fanned: but it should seeme there was a tricke of preuention put vpon him, and the name of an Emperour taught him another way to ac∣knowledge the Popes fauour. For 1495. about the 12. of 
May
 he enters 
Naples
 in an Imperiall habit, as Emperor of 
Constantinople,
 by the Popes grant and confirmation: but he had not possessed it fiue months, before there was a generall reuolt concluded against him, as at the same in∣stant 
Millane
 had done with 
Lodwick:
 whereupon the King somewhat fearefull of an Italian receipt, or other strange surprizals, returnes the next yeere home againe, with purpose to renew the warre, and reintegrate his for∣mer losses: but the Cardinall of S
t
. 
Malo
 hindred it at that instant, had not the Princes of 
Italy,
 perceiuing how the



Venctian
 and 
Millenois
 triumphed for the departure of the 
French,
 incensed the King againe to punish them both 1497. which was also interceded against by his brother the Duke of 
Orleance,
 who disclaimed in his owne name or person to disturb the peace of 
Millane:
 yet had not suf∣ficient authority to diuert the Kings designes, and so the warres of 
Italy
 were renewed.


Now is 
Lodwick
 perplexed indeede, and compelled to prostrate himselfe before the 
Couchant Lyon
 of 
Venice,
 and lower then the same vseth so his submission, that the noble beast enclineth to succour him: yet in such a manner, as 
Israel
 assisted 
Iuda
 against 
Assyria,
 being fearefull of extir∣pation her selfe; but as soon as the publike enemy was de∣parted, the emulation at one anothers greatnesse drew whole armies into the field: so playd 
Simeon, Eleazer
 and 
Ichoconon
 with the 
Romans,
 when their ciuill mutinies bar∣racadoed the streets with heaps of slaughtered carkasses, and filled the channels with the spilt-out bloud of mur∣thered men. For 
Millane
 is now iealous of 
Florence, Flo∣rence
 of 
Millane,
 both of 
Venice, Venice
 of both, and all three of the 
French:
 yet 
Charles
 goes on, and leauing garrison almost ouer all 
Italy,
 returnes home againe: but at his ca∣stle of 
Amboyse
 dies of an Apoplexy, 1498. after hee had vnfortunately strucke his head against a low doore, going to see a set at tennis. 
Lewis
 the 12. then succeeded, and not onely claimed the Dutchy of 
Millane, iure millitari,
 but takes vpon him the stile by right of succession, and a property of inheritance, as resolued to maintaine, what his father had gotten, and so gloriously purchased, to which he is adiuted by all the supportation, wherein Pope 
Alexander
 could animate him, who to raise vp his ba∣stard sonne 
Caesar Borgia
 to a Princely throne in 
Italie,



ioyneth with King 
Lewis
 in his enterprizes, and so contri∣ueth the matter, that 
Millane
 mutinies against 
Lodwick Sforza,
 and submits vnto the 
French
 with 
Cremona
 and 
Genes.


All this while is 
Lewis
 at 
Lyons:
 but who will not run to 
 carry so great a King glad tydings; so that he is quickly ad∣uertized of the fortunate proceedings of his army, and as quickly trauels ouer the Alps, beating the way of Mount 
Sinese,
 entring 
Millane
 in triumph, and left for Gouernour, 
Philip
 Lord of 
Rauestine,
 and 
Baptista Fregose
 his Lieute∣nant. The castle was yet protected with the guard of 3000. men, and committed to the loyalty of 
Bernardine
 of 
Corte
 borne in 
Pauia,
 who by his good beginning gaue life to their opinion, which supposed it impregnable, and not to be taken by force. But what men cannot in the Ly∣ons, they compasse with the Foxes skin, and thus farre deride both the strength of souldiers, and pride of fortifi∣cations, that where the minde may be corrupted vpon any tearmes of disloyalty, neither wals, ramparts, nor man∣hood, can preuent the power and deceit of bribery. This appeared in the disposition or 
Bernardine,
 and 
Philip
 of 
Fresques;
 whom the cunning of 
Triuulce,
 and the disbur∣sing 20000. crownes, quickly diuerted from their first re∣solutions, and made a breach in the 
Citadle
 without mine or battery.


Thus was the French possessed of this Duchy without competition, or diffidence, and 
Lewis
 the 12 made his royall entry accordingly. But marke the vicissitude of all things, 
Millane
 reuolts againe, and 
Sforza
 recouers all as easily, as he lost it, in which busines the 
Swisses
 proued very disloyall to the 
French,
 and the lookers on were a∣mazed to behold fortune proud of inconstancy, so that


this vse may be raised thereby: How euer men satisfie ambition for the time, yet are they certaine of nothing vnder the sunne. Againe, when by indirect courses de∣signes are concluded, they must stand the better on their guard, and prepare their patience when any alteration startleth resolution: thus fared it with 
Millane
 againe. For as you see a glooing heat in Aprill changed on the sodaine to bitter blasts and cloudy tempests, so was 
Sfor∣zas
 iollity reuersed, himselfe surprized, taken and caried prisoner to 
Lions,
 where denied the benefit of a princely execution, and resolued nothing can be so acceptable to a man in misery, as a noble death, worthy the name of a Romane, hee dies at once, whether for griefe, or great heart, it matters not: yet doth the King of 
France
 pardon 
Millane,
 and at last keeps all in quiet. But the warres of 
Naples
 are renewed 1501. and the kingdome is diuided betweene 
France
 and 
Aragon,
 so that great alteration hap∣pens in 
Italy,
 and within two yeeres there is a generall ouerthrow of the French with the taking of the Castle at 
Naples
 by the Spaniard: yet is not 
Beniamin
 discomfited, but calleth his brethren together, and with more setled courages reintegrate their estates, and so the French make head againe, attending the good hower of a better pro∣sperity.


About this time in August died Pope 
Alexander
 the sixt of poyson, which he had prepared for the Cardinals: but his taster by mistaking the flagons tooke away both his life, and the pride of his expectation concerning 
Caesar Borgias
 glory, or his further desires to set the fuell of 
Italy
 on a blaze: After him to stint the strife of many Nati∣ons expecting the Papacie, old 
Francis Piccolamini
 Cardi∣nall of 
Sienna
 was chosen Pope, by the name of 
Pius
 the


third, in memory of 
Pius
 the second his Vnkle, who made him Cardinall: but a yong man must prepare himselfe to dye, and an old man cannot liue long: so he continues scarce a moneth, leauing his roome, and the glory of all 
Rome
 to the Cardinall of 
S. Pierre,
 who was made Pope by the name of 
Iulius
 the second 1504. in which yeere 
Naples
 wrested her head out of the French coller, and seemed more glad to be supported by 
Arragon:
 nor was this sufficient, but vpon a supposition to extinguish the light of the lamps of France in Italy, a new league 1511. was corroborated by the vnstedfast Italians against the French, which when the King perceiued, and that he con∣iectured, how his barke must bee driuen to dangerous streits by the vncertaine windes of alteration, he transpor∣ted his Court and Councell from 
Florence
 to 
Millane,
 and from 
Millane
 to 
Lions,
 determining to weary them with tedious iournies and attendance, so is 
Italy
 perplexed, and the Nobles repine without remedy; till at last the Em∣peror 
Maximilian
 spreadeth the wings of the Aegle, and clocketh the Princes of Italy vnder her sides: where∣upon with the help of the 
Spaniard
 called the holy league, warre is made against 
Lewis,
 and the Duchy of 
Millane
 recouered againe to the vse of 
Maximilian Sforza
 grand∣childe to 
Lodwick,
 who was inuested Duke by the Cardi∣nall of 
Sion
 about the end of December, yet by the 
Swiz∣zes
 assistance, and loyalty, the Castles of 
Millane
 and 
Cre∣mona
 hold still for the French; and the imbers are not so extinguished, but fire appeares, and yeeldeth this com∣fort, that if they moderately proceed, a greater heat and more quickning light may be made.


In the midst of which convulsions of 
Italy,
 Pope 
Iulius
 dies, and 
Iohn
 Cardinall of 
Medices
 succeeded him by the


title of 
Leo
 the 10. whereby a second truce was ratified betweene 
Lewis
 of 
France,
 and the King of 
Arragon:
 so that 
Lewis
 made great benefit of this 
interim
 and cessa∣tion, confederating with the 
Venetians,
 by whose assistance he brought a royall Armie into the Duchy of 
Millane:
 but the Pope hauing sent 40000 ducats amongst the 
Switzers,
 quickly weighed downe their former stedfast∣nes, and so when 
Millane
 and 
Cremona
 was stored with them, they were corrupted to be traitors to their first ma∣sters, and accordingly against all expectation, with an odi∣ous reuolt encountred the French in as cheerefull a man∣ner, as euer before they had entertained the crownes of the sunne against the 
Italians:
 so that ere the yeere went about, the Castles of 
Millane
 and 
Cremona
 returne to the obedience of the Duke, and King 
Lewis
 held nothing in 
Italy
 but the lanterne of 
Genes,
 which afterward the 
Geno∣uais
 razed to the ground, both to preuent the occasion of future tyranizing ouer them, and to manifest their invete∣rate malice against the flower-de-luce, though it glistered neuer so gloriously in an azure field. Now dyes 
Lewis
 1514. but 
corruptio vnius generatio alterius:
 For 
Francis
 the first suruiues, and renewes the warres of 
Italy,
 passing the 
Alpes
 the yeere following, and surpassing considering his Royall Armie into the Duchy of 
Millane
 against the 
Emperor, Arrogonians, Sforza:
 and the 
Switzers
 contract a league, and aduance a strength to shoulder the new French King from any firmenes, nay if it may be footing in 
Italy;
 but like a Cedar of 
Libanus
 he standeth vpright, enduring the shaking of these tempestuous stormes, and so proceedeth to a warlike tryall, whereby the 13 of 
Sep∣tember
 in a gallant encounter at 
Marignan,
 he preuaileth 
 against the 
Switzers,
 besiegeth the new Duke 
Maximilian




Sforza
 in 
Millane,
 and coadiuted by the Duke of 
Burbon
 wrested this composition, that 
Maximilian
 shall bee the Kings pentioner in 
France,
 and the 
Switzers
 to depart with bagg and baggage.


Thus are the French once againe welcommed into the pleasures of 
Lombardy,
 and 
Francis
 the first is Lord of this vnquiet Duchy, which now is detained with a seem∣ing securitie, because the Pope applauded the successe, and according to the superstition of those times, and po∣licie of temporizing, blessed the royall standard of 
Va∣loies.
 But about the 20 of 
Iune
 1519. the Emperor 
Ma∣ximilian
 paies his tribute of life to the first enlarger of breath, and 
Charles
 of 
Austria,
 competitor with the King of 
France,
 is preferred by the name of 
Carolus Quintus,
 inheritor of 
Spaine,
 with so many titles besides, that the Harolds were troubled in the proclaiming them, and the stile was tedious to be divulged. Betweene these two great Princes so many grudges increased, and stimulatory causes of enmitie appeared, that at last open defiances proclaimed an vnappeased warre, and the trumpets of 
Bel∣lona
 ecchoed nothing but disturbance in the fields of 
Eu∣rope,
 especially after the Pope declares himselfe against 
France,
 and by way of prophesie fore-telleth the ruine of the 
French
 gouernment in 
Italy,
 adding withall some omi∣nous signes of calamitie to ensue, and casting vp an vnto∣ward reckning in this manner: That on 
S. Peters
 day at sunne-set, a lightning fell on the great tower of the Ca∣stle of 
Millane,
 and ouerthrew 6 fathomes of the curtaine on either side, consumed 250000 weight of powder, 1200 fire-pots, salt for 5 yeeres, and buried in the rubbish 
Richbowrg
 Captaine of the Castle, with 300 Gentlemen of account: vpon which aduantage the 23 of 
Nouember
 the



Marquis
 of 
Pescarra
 with his Spanish bands, the 
Marquis
 
 of 
Mantua,
 the 
Cardinall
 of 
Medices,
 and all the 
Emperors
 and 
Popes
 confederates come to 
Millane,
 and once againe recouer it, sacking the Towne which continued 15 daies, in which time the Pope dying, a new Pope called 
Adrian
 the sixt, who was 
Cardinall
 of 
S. Sixtus,
 was elected, and admitted 
Sforza
 into 
Millane,
 had not the French the yeere following attempted to recouer their losses, besie∣ged 
Millane
 againe, tooke 
Nouarra,
 and presumed to esta∣blish themselues more strongly, which questionles they had done, but that the 
Venetians
 forsaking them, made the matter somewhat difficult, and left the Army staggering, like a tree almost tormented with the cruelty of many strokes, and waueth in the winde ready to fall with the next violence. At last the fatall stroke is giuen indeede, mischeeues throng on one another so hastily, that the 
French
 1522 are expelled 
Italy,
 so farre from hoping to augment their glories, that they are in despaire to recouer their owne, formerly possessed. For presently the Castle of 
Millane
 yeelded to the conqueror, the garrison was quickly dispersed, or rather consumed with sicknesse, the 
Spaniard
 insulted, the 
Italians
 trembled, and in a word all the French particeans were eaten out with hunger, disea∣ses, and mutinies.


Thus was 
Francis Sforza
 invested in the Duchy of 
Mil∣lane,
 and a generall league betweene the 
Millanoies, Empe∣ror,
 and 
Venetians
 concluded: but for all this successe of the confederates (with the addition of the Duke of 
Bur∣bons
 reuolt to the Emperor) the French Armie continues in Italy, and the Admirall with new forces breatheth out new malice against 
Millane,
 besieging the towne, battering the Citadle, and trampling their best fields to durt: in


which times Pope 
Adrian
 dyes, and 
Iulius
 Cardinall of 
Medices
 is chosen by the name of 
Clement
 the 7. who to insinuate with the Emperor beginneth a strange worke, and by the way of conniuencie permitteth him to vsurpe 
Millane
 for himselfe, whereupon all the Princes of 
Italy
 
 are terrified indeed, and not only repine against the Popes proceeding, but goe the plaine way to worke seeking by force of armes to propulse the Spaniard, wherein the bet∣ter to preuaile 1524, the French are recalled againe, and by the glorious titles of 
Protectors of Millane,
 the 
Marquis
 of 
Salust
 and 
Tremouile
 admitted for the French: But at the last the 25 of 
February,
 the fatall battaile of 
Pauy
 de∣termined all controuersies, and the Emperor triumphed in the captiuitie of the King of 
France,
 which occasioned a very dissolution of the French gouernment in 
Italy,
 as inforced to disclaime their interest both in the kingdome of 
Naples,
 and Duchy of 
Millane.


Notwithstanding 
Francis Sforza
 is in no securitie of his estate, as suspecting the Emperors demand of 1200000 ducats for his expences, and that he intended a plaine vsurpation of the whole Duchie, whereupon disabled by force to suppresse him, he flies to the succour of his wits, and tampers with the 
Marquis
 of 
Pescara
 for the inuesture of the royall mantle of 
Naples,
 vpon condition to ende∣uour the spanish expulsion out of 
Millane;
 which designe and proiect the Pope and other Princes not onely allow, but as principall agents are imployed in the negotiation: but the Emperor 
Charles
 is incensed, and taking notice of these treasons, as he now entitleth them, raised vp the dust, that made 
Sforza
 blinde, and thus punisheth him, as chiefe delinquent. On the 24 of 
Iuly
 1526. he brings his Armie to the siege of 
Millane,
 and with 
Caesars
 spee∣dinesse


of 
Veni, vidi, vici,
 circumspecteth the Citie, ob∣taineth the conquest, and settles the Duke of 
Burbon
 in the Duchy: nor is his anger so moderated, but seeing the father of charitie durst transgresse his owne principles, he marcheth to 
Rome,
 and sacketh it, expulsing the Pope, not in admonitory manner, or after the discipline of the Church to excommunicate him 
ad coertionem;
 but with violence and terror to torment him 
ad ruinam,
 teaching him a new lesson of obseruing Emperors and Kings, and as farre as time had discouered to his conscience, shewing apparant signes of disanulling his authoritie in temporall affaires: nor desisteth he so, but vnderstanding of new releefe from the 
French
 and 
Lansguents,
 he hurrieth about with a full resolution to make due end of all. Thus en∣dured this Duchy all the plagues depending on a misera∣ble warre, till at last 1530. the children of 
France
 are re∣leased, and a peace ratified betweene the Emperor and the French King, who in the articles of agreement surrendred his claime to all these territories in 
Italy,
 and the Emperor is proud, hee hath so easie a passage into the countrey, which although seemed much distasting to the Princes, and was as thornes in the sides of the Clergy, as appeared 
 amongst the Cardinals, when they were enforced to ratifie the same: yet was the Emperor carelesse of their displea∣sure, and proceeded in what iourney he listed in despight of the Papacie; onely with a colourable show of commi∣seration, he restored 
Sforza
 to the Duchy of 
Millane,
 but kept the Castles of 
Cremona,
 and it in his hands: so that presently after his death, it was incorporated to the crowne of 
Spaine,
 and hath euer since looked with the eyes of ielousie and repining vpon all their Gouernors.








CHAP. XIV.
 The description of 
FRANCE.


T
HE flourishing kingdom of 
France
 euer 
 since that 
Charles
 the great did as it were spread the wings of the Cherubins ouer 
sanctum sanctorum,
 and ratified the glory of the Pope of 
Rome
 by ex∣pelling the 
Gothes
 and 
Vandalls
 out of 
Italy,
 was knowne by the characters of the Christian King, and eldest sonne of the mother Church. But long before it suffred a diuision into 
Cisalpinam
 and 
Transalpinam: Transalpinam
 againe into 
Celticam, Belgicam,
 and 
Acquita∣nicam:
 whereby the best parts of 
Lombardy,
 the low Countries, and all on this side the 
Rhene
 westward march∣ed vnder the standard of 
France,
 and was proud to be re∣gistred in the booke of her accounts: so that whatsoeuer hath bin since disioynted from this French frame, may be resembled vnto children pull'd out of the armes of a lo∣uing mother. But I will quietly bring you into her own roomes, whereby you shall partly behold the beauty and workmanship of her building: onely by the way I must a litle touch the Etymologie of the word, and tell you, that 
 in Greeke signifieth milke, and so the people 
 from their complexion, and resemblance to whitenes, were called 
Galli
 or 
Galati.
 For other particulars, you haue 
Caesars
 commentaries, and well compacted histories, which haue tossed and tumbled the lodgings, yea the very beds of her chambers, and our owne acquaintance hath


ouer-lookt her choicest closets. It was once the nurse of valour, and afforded her vberant paps in those daies to such men, as trampled ouer the fields of 
Greece,
 robbed 
Apollos
 Temple at 
Delphos,
 fetcht away the spoiles of 
Asia,
 and by the assistance of 
Brennus
 an Englishman perfor∣med actions of wonderment, and applause. It was after∣ward the pride of Roman Consuls, and the greatest am∣bition thought it selfe sufficiently recompenced with her gouernment, when 
Rome
 had yet lessned her roome to make it prouinciall.


Presently followed the diuision of the Empire, and all the gouernment almost of 
Europe
 was rent asunder with the furie of very strange and sauage Nations, whose con∣fused 
Chaos
 of barbarisme the brauery and goodnes of this countrey redacted to vniformity. A litle while after diuers families by being 
maiores palatij
 became masters of the Kingdome, wherein some by suppression, some by merit, some 
iure militari,
 and some by right of inheritance lifted vp the crowne and maiesticall head of this country: Straight-way the Eagle of 
Rome
 was sicke, and from 
France
 recouered health, how euer afterward it sought for further cure from the 
Germanes.
 Then followed the Law 
Salick
 amongst them, with absolute interdicting the Crowne of this glorious Monarchy to fall to the distass: whereupon the three famous houses of 
Valois, Burbon,
 & 
Loraine
 entailed the same, and made as it were a feofment of perpetuity, wherein this Diadem still keepeth her resi∣dence, and is dunged, watred, and liketh her manuring: so that whatsoeuer hath bin long since diuided amongst, ma∣ny Princes, looking vpon one another with the eyes of emulation, and ambitious desires to become greatest in the same, is now at length vnited vnder one Monarchy,


and title of 
France:
 so that howsoeuer some will haue 
Loraine
 absolute of it selfe, and no subiect: some stomach, that 
Burgoine
 is revolted: some repine, that 
Daulphine
 was vnited by donation: some confound 
Gascoigne
 and 
Guienne,
 abolishing quite the name of 
Acquitane:
 some remember, that 
Normandy
 was 
English:
 some presume of 
Britany,
 as a 
Principate
 of her owne: some make 
Sauoy
 afraid, when 
Geneua
 calls the King of 
France
 patron and protector; and some by diuision and subdiuision would extenuate her greatnes: yet is now all 
France,
 and the worthy Princes are resolued to keep correspondency with strangers, but suffer no new intrusion, nor any forreine claimes to preuaile at their marble table: I will therefore desist from any further vnwinding the yarne of strange bottomes, but spread a moderne cloth, and giue you some slender taste of her present dainties, whereby you shall not depart away altogether vnsatisfied.


To begin euen vnder the mountaines 
Pirenei,
 which 
 diuide 
Spaine
 from 
France:
 the first part is called 
Gasconia,
 including 
Guienne
 and 
Acquitane,
 Dukedomes once ap∣propriate to the heire of 
England,
 before the inuesture of the 
Principat
 of 
Wales.
 The chiefest Cities are 
Burdeaux
 and 
Tholouse,
 washed with the plenteous waters of the 
Garonn,
 a riuer not onely spreading her many armes a∣broad to send plenty all ouer the fields; but powring out her greater streames into the sea, welcommeth store of ships into her ports and harbours, sending them backe againe into many countries of 
Europe
 with glad tidings of an abundant vintage. 
Burdeaux
 is watrishly scited, by reason the riuer, and springs raiseth many marshes here about; yet is it wholesome, and the heat of the climate can endure the moistnes of the aire; the Citie is ancient,


and boasteth of an Vniuersitie, but more properly of the great concourse of Merchants: It is beautified with ma∣ny monuments, especially the Pallace, wherein King 
Ri∣chard
 the second, the sonne of the blacke Prince was borne; and another without the Towne, a worke euer since the Emperor 
Galienus,
 and then supposed a glorious 
Amphitheater.
 The towne of 
Tholouse
 is more proud of antiquitie, and telleth of time before 
Troies
 devastation: yea remembreth since 
Deborah
 Iudge of 
Israel
 was fa∣mous for her wisdome and gouernment. It hath now a well disciplined schoole, a court of Parliament, populous streets, and reasonable buildings, but indeed they seeme very ancient, and for some speciall structures may carry the credit of magnificence. The other townes are ma∣ny and very good, except countrey villages, which are as rude as in other places, and the Pesant liueth like a drudge, not daring scarse drinke of the wine of his owne garden, lest he should not raise such profit, as would answer the proportion of his rent. But herein our English Merchant hath somewhat ouer-reached them: For they hire the gardens themselues, and make the best vse of them, not trusting their labourers and husbandmen to handle the presses, but as they be hired by the day, or great.


The second part is called 
Poictoy,
 a countrey so great, and plentifull, that there are numbred 1200 parishes, and 
 three Bishopricks, & faine would haue you reckon these principall walled townes within her diuision of 
inferior
 and 
superior:
 The bishopricks are 
Poictiers, Leucòne,
 and 
Mailezay:
 The superior townes 
Roch sur yon,
 or if you will 
Rochell,
 one of the strongest townes in 
Europe,
 and the rather because it hath not trusted her walls and ramparts, which are yet stupendous, and magnificent, but the Lord


of hostes, and his true religion, which hath alwaies raised their spirits to an extraordinary confidence of mercy, and preuailing against any Antichristian attempt: 
Talmont, Meroil, Vouuant, Meruant, Bresfure, Lodun, Fountenay le Conte:
 The inferior, or townes of the lower diuision, 
Noiart, Partenay, Touars, Moncontoul, Herenault, Meribeau, Chastelleraut,
 and others of like eminence, amongst whom 
Poictiers
 is reckned the most populous of all 
France
 next to 
Paris,
 it is watred with the ouer-flowings of 
Clanius,
 a riuer filling the 
Loire,
 and sending it the faster into the sea: it boasteth of some antiquities, a 
Theater
 called the 
Sandes;
 a palace of the Emperor 
Galienus;
 an 
Aquaeduct,
 to which belong certaine fountaines, vulgarly called 
ar∣ceux de parigne,
 and other memories from famous Ro∣mans, who were here euer resident: To talke of their Churches, prisons, walls, ports, ramparts, arsenals, towers, riuers, bridges, and such like, it were superfluous conside∣ring they are not subiects either of admiration, or delica∣cie, but euen common or ordinary buildings.


The third part is 
Aniou,
 though a litle Prouince, yet ve∣ry 
 fruitfull, and affordeth such excellent vines, that the common prouerbe crieth out, the wine of 
Aniou.
 For the stately riuer of 
Loire
 comming from 
Orleance
 posteth a pace with the glad tidings of a plentifull country, and ex∣cellent husbandry in their gardens: The mountaines yeeld a red stone and parget called 
ardoises;
 the vallies plenty of grasse, the riuers fish, and the barrennest place pasture for cattle: The chiefe Citie is 
Angiers
 on the banke of the 
Meduan,
 not far from the 
Loire;
 yet is it ioy∣ned by a bridge of stone to another on the other side, and so you may conclude, that two townes make one Citie: Here you haue also ruines of 
Theaters,
 vulgarly 
Brohan,



and an Academy enlarged, or rather founded by 
Lodwick
 the second 1389: the other townes are 
Samurs, Belforce, Bange,
 and such like, of whose particulars my purpose is not to make relation.


The fourth part is 
Britania,
 in times past 
Armorica:
 It boasteth for sending ouer such inhabitants into our coun∣trey, 
 as not onely taught them a language, but peopled and possessed the same: Wee againe are resolued, that though 
France
 was first inhabited, yet from the greater 
Britaine
 the lesse receiued denomination, and by enter∣course of people, affinitie, mariage, and politike confede∣ration, both countries learned one anothers language. For being called 
Armorica,
 it at last condiscended to be enti∣tled litle 
Britaine,
 retaining a long time an absolute Duke of her owne, and diuiding her territories into low and high 
Britaine:
 in both which are numbred nine Bisho∣pricks, 
Carnouaile, S. Paul, Treguires, Doll, Rheines, S. Malo, Nants, Vannes,
 and 
Brein,
 amongst whom 
Doll
 hath the precedency, though 
Renes
 and 
Nants
 be the chiefest and greatest Cities: It is three parts exposed to the sea, and hath many strong ports, especially 
Brest,
 famous for sun∣dry warlike exploits, and the last intrusion of the Spanish leaguers.


The fift part is 
Normandy,
 diuided into the countries of 
Constantine, Bessin, Maine,
 and 
Auge,
 in which as princi∣pall 
 Cities are recorded 
Roan, Pontoise, Alenson, Argenni, Caen, Baieux,
 and some few others: The people boast of their endeuors in spinning linnen cloth, excellent wits, and able bodies for the warres: But of all other things, they would exceede (especially the Gentlemen) for man∣suetude, courtship, and affabilitie in attending the affaires of peace, and quietnes.



The sixt part challengeth the title of the 
Ile of France,
 a countrey so named, because it is in a manner environed 
 with excellent riuers, which make the ground so fertile, that for number of Townes, Gentlemens houses, places of pleasure, conueniencie of prouision, and other parti∣culars tending to brauery and profit, it excelleth all the countrey: But her chiefest pride ariseth from the posses∣sion of 
Paris
 on the riuer 
Sequana,
 or the 
Sein,
 the mistris of all Cities; and 
Orleans
 on the 
Loire
 famous for many remarkable actions, betweene whom almost 40 English mile is one cawsey of stone, or otherwise there were no trauelling, especially in winter: For all the ground is so fat and clammy, that 
Paris
 it selfe is called 
Lutetia
 of 
luto,
 or the durtinesse of the soile.


The seuenth part belongeth to 
Bourges,
 or 
Berry,
 a coun∣trey 
 boasting of many delicate things; but the Citie is quite out of patience, if you either forget her monuments, or contradict her first founder to be 
Ogiges,
 the grand∣childe of 
Noe:
 It is enclosed with the countries of 
Tou∣raine, Burbon,
 and 
Niuernois,
 and on the riuer of 
Loire
 washing cleane the fields with his strange ouer-flowings are erected 
Cosme, Le Charity,
 the Citie of 
Neuers
 with her long bridge, 
Molins,
 and many other townes, some of hansome eminence, and some of lesse consequence.


The eight part is attributed to 
Limosin
 or 
Lemania,
 
 contayning the County of 
Auernge,
 and yeeldeth such plenty of fenns and marishes, that the fatnes of the soile is both bettered and augmented thereby, howeuer the aire seemeth not so wholesome, and the Cities & Townes are fuller of inhabitants, by reason of natures suppliment in all things, and the easines wherewith good husbandry dispatcheth her busines: yet are they neither great, nor


extraordinarily beautified: no not 
Limoges, Clermont, Beurgard, Monferau,
 and 
Goudade,
 which are the prin∣cipall.


The ninth lot of 
France
 her renowne, is taken out of fortunes lap for 
Languedock,
 reaching to the sea as farre as 
 
Montpelier
 and 
Arles;
 on the other side Westward, 
Car∣
ossen
 and 
Narbon:
 yet doe some ioyne 
Languedock
 to 
Pro∣uence,
 and call all these sea-coasts, with the territories adia∣cent, by the title of 
Gallia Narbonensis.


The tenth principall roome of this French palace, is 
 beautified with the Parliament roabes of the seuerall coun∣tries of 
Prouence, Daulphine
 and 
Orange.
 For they account 
Arles,
 a towne compassed with the streames of 
Rhodanus,
 rather in 
Prouence
 then 
Languedock,
 because it standeth (as it were) at the mouth of the riuer, to watch how the sea and the fresh water meets: as for 
Narbon,
 they esteeme it the pride of the riuer 
Araxis,
 and boast of the great lake for her denomination accordingly. Heere abouts were those excellent bathes contriued, spoken of so much in the 
Ro∣man
 Commentaries: and 
Marius
 celebrated his triumphs for conquering the 
Cimbrians,
 who came thus farre in those dayes, from that countrey which we now call 
Denmarck,
 to re
st the 
Romans.
 To 
Daulphine
 they added a gracious allowance of the famous and ancient city of 
Lyons,
 whom the 
 diuideth, and whose wals are so ambitious, that they 
mb vp to the top of very rockes: the riuer playes the wanton about the towne, and runs a pace to 
Valence
 & 
Vienna,
 neuer leauing vntill he thrust himselfe into the 
Me∣diterranean
 sea, hard by 
Marselles,
 a city and port of great consequence: but is so separated from the riuer, as if it were affrayd of his swiftnesse. But 
Lyons
 hath yet more cause of insulting, in regard that all this part of 
France
 was


called 
Gallia Lugdunensis,
 from her owne name 
Lugdunum
 and diuers monuments of water-workes, bridges, towers, and temples, were magnificent in 
Caesars
 time. The pro∣uince of 
Daulphine
 was giuen to the eldest sonne of 
France,
 with no other intent, but to name himselfe accordingly, by which occasion all 
Europe
 knowes what the 
Daulphine
 means. To 
Orange
 is a town so named appropriate, & 
Gre∣noble
 with 
Auignion,
 are coniured within this circle. For although euer since the Pope made it his seat, & established heere a Conclaue for the Cardinals, it hath since rema
ed firme to the Roman Clergy: yet is it sited in this pro∣uince, and called 
France
 her naturall mother: some reckon heerein the three Bishoprickes of 
Carpentoract, Lissa
 and 
Vaurias,
 with many other townes, allowing vs to call it the Principate of 
Orange,
 and will haue vs take notice, that the house of 
Nassau,
 which challengeth the glory of the Low-Countries, as by the worthy life of the last Prince of 
Orange
 (whose younger sonnes are still so famous for the Belgick warres) may appeare: was extracted from hence, and glo∣rieth in her denomination accordingly. For mine owne part, I haue thus bound them together within the girdle of 
Prouence,
 and could finde in my heart to make 
Geneua
 with her great lake and plaines vnder the mountaines, a daughter of 
France,
 although she hath vrgently denied her first mother. Besides, howeuer the 
Rhosne
 or 
Rhodanus
 commeth a pace out of 
Burgundy;
 it was once knowen by the name of 
Araris,
 and telleth a true tale of an hundred seuerall townes dispersed on his streames, and supported by his bankes.


The eleuenth booke of this noble countrey, openeth 
 the leaues of knowledge for 
Burgundy,
 which was once a Kingdome, as absolute as the King of 
France
 himselfe; and


is still a Dukedome and County graced with such royal∣ties, that by their owne prerogatiues they haue brought armies into the field, and proclaimed the absolute free∣domes of their gouernment: yea, in the latter times of contestation with 
France,
 they held the dignity of a Parlia∣ment: kept a full palace sequestred: and instituted the no∣ble order of knighthood called the golden Fleece: some would annex the 
Dutchy
 of 
Barr
 vnto it, which I thinke more properly belongs to 
Loraine,
 and many 
Earledomes
 of estimation. The petty riuers receiue augmentation from the springs of her fields, and the swift 
Araris
 is sent into the sea from her mountaines. Her cheefest cities are 
Digion
 and 
Austune,
 maintaining regall tribunals, expo∣sing ostentous edifices, boasting of great antiquity, setting out the brauery of diuers monuments and palaces, and supporting the necessities of many people. The townes of the Dukedome would bee called 
Latornelle, Rochpot, Chalons, Verdune, Seure, Argilly, Sausieu,
 and such like. The townes of the County please the inhabitants with the titles of 
Iussy, Gray, Dole, Besanson, Quingay, Salins, Arboies, Paligny, Bouteuant, Noseroy, Vennes, Chastillion,
 and diuers others: none of which, but either boasteth of one excel∣lency or other; some for making salt, some for fulling cloth, some for spinning linnen, some for mines and mine∣rals, some for excellent pastures, some for vines, some for cattle, and all for good building, plenty of Gentle-men, and concourse of people.


The twelfth doore of this Countries enclosure, is vn∣locked 
 for 
Loraine,
 howeuer the Duke repineth that he is not a King with his ancestors, and still protesteth he wil be as absolute within his own territories as an Emperor: nay, sometimes addeth the French King himselfe. For louing


both alike, he will bee auxiliary to either, and sometimes enemie to both, as being such a Prince, who aduanceth and diminisheth at his pleasure the Marquisate of 
Ponce,
 the Earledoms of 
Vademont, Verdune, Blamont, Demanche, Marchen,
 and diuers other coronets, with the immunities of sundry Baronies; all depending vpon his 
praemium
 & 
poena.
 The townes of this countrey are 
Metts,
 famous for the Emperours siege, and many warlike fortifications, 
Nancy, Voige, Chaligy, Vaudmont, Dompair, Rosiers, Rum∣belluillier,
 and such like worthy description: but as I sayd in the beginning, I intend not to extenuate the endeauours of other men, either in their trauels or commentaries, nor tell any abrupt tales, when such and so many famous Au∣thors and Cosmographers speake so orderly and plainely. Therefore I referre you thither for more ample discourses, especially concerning such cities as I haue ouerpassed, and yet flourish at this hower in seuerall countries; it shall only suffice me to name the countries and principall places, that I may prepare you the better to attend my comparison, when I shall set out 
England
 to the sale with her ornaments of commendation indeed.


The thirteenth roome of the palace of 
France
 her Ho∣nour, is appropriate to 
Callis
 and 
Boloigne,
 maintaining the 
 sea-shores ouer against 
Kent,
 and the sweet breathing mouth of the 
Thames
 in 
England:
 but in such emulation being so neere, that either they complaine to be thus long disioynted from her gouernment, or seeme offended that we euer possessed them, and could keepe them no longer: much of this countrey once belonged to 
Artoys,
 and was diuided betweene the Emperour and 
France,
 by way of composition. But if you would know, wherin and wherof it boasteth indeed, it is for two famous Dukes of the same,


or if you will, but Earles; who by their valours and heroik endeauours, obtained the noble Diadems of the world: the one was 
Godfrey,
 inuested King of 
Ierusalem,
 and made like another 
Agamemnon,
 Captaine Generall of the Chri∣stian army against the 
Saracens.
 The other was 
Stephen,
 sonne of Duke 
Williams
 daughter of 
Normandy,
 raised to the dignity of 
England,
 and maintaining the possession a∣gainst 
Maud
 the Empresse and her sonne, during his life.


The last part of this glorious Kingdome may include 
Vermond
 and 
Picardy,
 whose principall townes are 
Guise,
 
 
La Fere, Han, S
t
. Quintine, Tornay, Chatel, Abeuile, Amiens, Auxi, Peron,
 and such like, washed with the streames of the 
Some
 and 
Scaldis,
 whose rivulets make the fields plen∣tifull in corne and grasse, although the inhabitants are not industrious in planting of vine-yards, which I rather im∣pute to the indisposition of the soile, then their negligence.


Thus you see with what a glistring crowne the head of 
France
 is impaled in the chaire of Maiesty, and may visit the palace of honour with more and better attendance of Princes, Dukes, Earles, and Gentle-men, then any abso∣lute Monarch of the world: yet because it hath some de∣fects in meere matters of state, according to the true pro∣sperity of a countrey: and that diuers deficiencies chance somewhat disgraciously vnto her, like staines and spots to pure linnen, I cannot yeeld her the pride of happinesse: be∣cause you shall see in my next book of comparison, wherin her fulnesse of glory is ecclipsed, and how wee our selues enioy many prerogatiues before her.








CHAP. XV.
 The Description of the 
Low-Countries.


B
Eyond all, euen to the sea, which made a sea of their fields and townes, lie the seuen∣teene 
 Prouinces, called the 
Low-Countries,
 or 
Germania inferior.
 For alas, the name and title of 
Gallia Belgica
 is long since ex∣tinguished, although (as I sayd) all the Countries on this side the 
Rhene
 toward 
France,
 were re∣puted as 
France.
 Of these I must vse a little ampliation, because I cannot chuse but wonder, how any Prince would neglect such a benefit, as the peaceable possession of these places, which for goodnesse, greatnesse and wealth vnited with the loue of the inhabitants, might haue excee∣ded 
Spaine
 it selfe, as by their reuenewes, multitude of people, cities, shipping, traffique with all nations, and home-bred commodities, may appeare. They are called 
Ditiones inferior is Germaniae,
 diuided into Dukedomes, Counties, and 
Lordships,
 and knowen by these Characters: The Dukedomes, 
Brabant, Limburck, Luzenburg,
 and 
Gelderland.
 The Counties, 
Flanders, Artoys, Henault, Hol∣land, Zeland, Namurs,
 and 
Zutphen,
 which is but one prin∣cipall towne, and some small territories adiacent. The Marquisate of the Empire. The Lordships, 
Freesland:
 for you must take notice, that 
East Freesland
 belongeth to a Prince of her owne, and euer disclaimed to bee subiect ei∣ther to Emperour or King, and so holdeth vp a head of liberty accordingly, 
Mechlin, Vtrech, Trans-Ysell,
 and 
Groining.



In these are numbred 228. great townes, murited with wals, ramparts, ditches, warlike ports, bridges, and fortifi∣cations. Besides, their guards are continuall, either of their owne Burgers, or Souldiers lying in garison, according to the proximity of the enemy, importance of the place, ne∣cessity of affaires, or inconueniences of the time. The vil∣lages or dorps are 6300. beautified with embattelled Churches of many seuerall fashions, frequented with en∣tercourses of people, adorned with handsome markets, and priuiledged by ancient immunities, faires, solemne fe∣stiuals, and neighbourly meetings; besides granges, ca∣stles, religious houses, towres, and Yonkers mannor-pla∣ces. The aire seemeth moyst, especially of 
Holland
 and 
Ze∣land,
 with the sea-coasts of 
Brabant
 and 
Flanders;
 yet not preiudiciall to the health of the inhabitants: for in the champaine of 
Brabant
 men liue an hundred yeeres. The Countrey is euery where visited with nauigable riuers, nor come they empty handed, but affoord delicate water and excellent fish: but what talke I of fish? when the large O∣cean is so nigh, out of whose store-house a man may take, without being called in question, or repining. It is beau∣tified with many woods, affoording timber to build with∣all, and the pleasure of hunting. It is smally, or not at all mountainous, except about 
Namurs, Luzenburg
 or 
He∣nault,
 It is fruitfull of corne, grasse and herbs, fit for pa∣sture for cattle, and medicine for health: yet in some places of 
Brabant
 and 
Gelderland
 full of heath, which notwith∣standing is not so barren, but cattle are fatted with the same, and their flesh hath an extraordinary sweet taste: It is free from those creatures, which are either noysome, or dangerous to man, and wanteth none of those blessings, wherewith the God of all blessing marketh a Countrey:


but a noble Prince, vnity of religion, and a quiet go∣uernment.


The Countrey of 
Limburck
 hath many names, and is a 
 prouince full of villages, it containeth part of the Duke∣dome of 
Boloigne,
 the Marquisate of 
Franckmount,
 the Earledome of 
Haspengo
 and 
Lootes,
 with many other Baro∣nies. There are brought into the lists 24. great townes, amongst whom we begin 
inprimis
 with 
Leege,
 situated on the 
Mase,
 as hauing a Bishops See, a delicate castle, & many well-ordred edifices: the dorps are reckned 1700. besides Abbayes and religious houses: toward the North adioy∣ning to 
Brabant,
 it flourisheth in corne & hath some vines. Toward the South, neighbouring 
France
 and 
Lutzenburg:
 it is more barren, as intermingled with hils and woods, the remainder of that great forrest of 
Ardenia,
 of which so many fabulous accidents are recorded. It containeth di∣uers mines of marble and cole, and in such goodnesse of euerything, that a prouerb raiseth it selfe, to haue bread better then bread, fire hotter then fire, and iron harder then iron.


The Dukedome of 
Lutzenburg
 is for the most part mountainous and full of wood, in the rest well tilled, and 
 where they haue stocked vp the trees, excellent ground: what neighboureth 
France
 conserueth both their language and customes, the rest speake Dutch. The names of the Prouince and principall City haue one sound, but it is ill diuided, part on a hollow by the riuer 
Essa,
 part on a rocky mountaine: so that it proposeth no great vniformity: but yet yeeldeth a gracefull obiect, and in retaining the autho∣rity of a Parliament, hath a preheminence of many greater and prouder townes. The next is 
Arlunum, quasi ara Lunae,
 as supposed, that they heere worshipped the Moone.


The rest are sutable, some for strength, as 
Thion
 on the 
Mosell;
 some for commodity, as 
Baston,
 the mart of the Countrey, and adiacent to the forrest; and some for con∣tentment and orderly conueniency, as 26. others.


The countrey of 
Henault
 is sutable to the rest, and mar∣cheth with the same equipage of plenty and pleasure: the 
 cheefe cities are 
Mons
 and 
Valenciens.
 To 
Mons
 is attribu∣ted the precedency, for antiquity, strength and riches: yet is it almost neere the center of the Land, and on a little riuer called 
Trulla,
 whose visitation makes the common people wealthy and industrious, especially in weauing of a stuffe called Sayes, which heere exceede all the townes of the 
Low-Countries. Valenciens
 is better sited on the riuer 
Scal∣dis,
 and is very spacious, well walled, and full of ancient buildings, the Citizens are great trades-men, and gaine much by the making of fustians, the rest are brought into the account with the number of 22. Amongst whom 
Binchium
 might haue showne you a goodly palace, erected by 
Mary,
 sister to 
Charles
 the fift, and beautified with gar∣dens of pleasure to these vses. To beguile idle houres, to countenance a solitary retiring from the great encombran∣ces of the world, to quicken meditation with a correspon∣cency of time and place, and to inuite the body to a better aire, then commonly populous cities affoord, it was yet destroyed, some would faine say defaced, by 
Henry
 the se∣cond, King of 
France,
 in those times of desolation, when intestine mutinies could not be appeased without effusion of bloud, and the rage of Princes exasperated one another to sore reuenges. Heere is also the ancient towne of 
Ba∣
aies,
 which flourished in the time of 
Constantine
 the Em∣perour. The rest are 
Charlimont, Manburg,
 and 
Philips
 towne, wherein the first founders, or rather re-edifiers,


made strong defences against the eruptions of the 
French,
 and were resolued to diuide the house of 
Burgundie
 for euer from the 
Flower-de-luce.
 Many other townes with the villages might be spoken of; but because there are few memorable things in them, I passe all ouer with such a slightnes, as is required in a man, that maketh haste out of an idle iourney, till he come to his place of rest, and better consequence.


The countrey of 
Artois
 did once absolutely belong to the 
Flower-de-luce,
 as by the antiquitie and scituation 
 may appeare: But afterward in the contract 1529, it was patible of diuision, when the Emperor and the French King were weighed in the ballance of successe to set forward the renowne of eithers preuailing; so that when 
France
 was found too light, in regard that the false hand of fortune turned the scale on tother side, twelue pretty townes fell from the King, as stones pull'd from a ruinous wall, leauing the whole Prouince in hazard of fal∣ling too, had not the other part of the countrey succor'd it selfe vnder the supportation of 
Picardy,
 and now tel∣leth vs of good corne, many riuers, much wood, and re∣porteth of the raining wooll by the testimonie of Saint 
Hierome,
 and others, who set it in the account of won∣ders.


The Prouince of 
Namurs
 is plentifull of all things, that 
 belongeth to the vse of man, as if the horne of 
Achelous
 were not onely reserued here for a monument, but distri∣buted abundance by reason of the vertue following the possession: it hath many iron and cole mines, of whose nature and condition this is obserued, that whereas other coales are extinguished with water, and enflamed with oyle; these are set on fire with water, and rebated in their


heat with oyle. It hath onely fowre walled Townes, who dare thus lift vp their heads aboue water to keepe the bo∣dies from sinking. 1. 
Namurs,
 scituated on the two ri∣uers 
Mosa
 and 
Scambra
 vnited by a well compacted bridge of stone, retayning a Bishops sea, and keeping the solem∣nitie of a Parliament. 2. 
Bouinum
 on the banke of 
Mosa,
 much defaced by the warres, being of late a rich, stately, and populous Citie. 3. The third is 
Charlemont,
 one of the strongest Castles in 
Europe,
 mounted on a high look∣ing rocke, whose foundation is washed by the riuer 
Gillet,
 and from the Emperor retaineth both glory and denomi∣nation. 4. The last is 
Vallencuria,
 whose etimology doth almost expresse it selfe: For here are all ciuill causes de∣termined, and the villages of the Prouince bring their controuersies to be decided.


The Dukedome of 
Brabant
 challengeth a more plen∣tifull description: For it hath 26 walled townes, and at 
 least 700 villages well inhabited, industrious people, and proud of their glory in retaining the presence of the 
En∣fanta,
 and the Court of State in 
Brussels,
 where, by reason of the pleasure and conveniencie of many delicate foun∣taines, diuers well ordred pallaces invite you to behold euen obiects of magnificence, and the Noblemen boast, how they are better accommodated here, than in other parts of the countrey. 
Antwerp
 is scited on the riuer 
Scaldis,
 and so glorious for goodly buildings, famous marts, a beautifull Statehouse, delicate Churches, an Ex∣change for Merchants, an house for Englishmen, a won∣derfull Cittadle, an admirable harbour, and such like illu∣strations, that not long since it stroue for the Coronet of 
Europe,
 and to be the Queene of Townes. 
Louaine
 is very populous, and graced with an Vniuersitie, which the


Duke of 
Brabant, Iohn
 the 4. erected. 
Mechline
 hath her estimation from the assembly of States, and deciding of controuersies. 
Busumduce,
 a towne of note for a publike schoole, and the peoples meeting to solemnize triumphs. 
Tiena,
 neighbouring the riuer 
Geta,
 from whence the cheese hath a particular estimation. 
Leuua,
 famous for drinke brewed there. 
Niuella,
 proud of a monasterie only of noble women. 
Arscot
 by the riuer 
Demera,
 in times past a 
Marquisate,
 but by the Emperor 
Charles
 aduanced to a Duchy. 
Berghen-op-zoome,
 named so for the kisses of the riuer that saluteth it, and famous for the auncient Marte, and frequentation of Merchants; yet since 
Ant∣werp
 flourished vtterly decaied. 
Megen,
 a place of con∣tentment, glorying in the passages of the riuer, playing the wanton with her shores, and running vp and downe, as if it brought glad tidings of prosperitie. 
Breda,
 a towne of delicacie; yet may you in respect of her building adde the Epithet of magnificent. 
Steneberg
 vpon the sea, which once had wealth enough to invite Merchants to a banquet of commercing. 
Lira,
 a place so sufficiently pleasant, that diuers Noblemen haue retired thither, as repining against the troubles, which debarred them from more oftner entercourses. 
Vileuord
 raiseth her fame from the strength of a well scituated Castle, and the feare of a soule-terrifying prison. 
Gembloures
 can shew you a Lord Abbot, as free and imperious, as a Count Pala∣tine in his iurisdiction. 
Iudoigna
 boasteth of her nurse∣ry of Princes, and that the wholesomnes of her aire in∣uiteth them to an abode of wantonnes and content∣ment. 
Hannutum
 maintaineth the credit and estimation of an Earledome, and addeth withall the blessing of a most fertile countrey. 
Landen
 lifteth vp the head of age


in such a manner, that shee warranteth her selfe the first, though not the best of Townes. 
Halen
 is notorious for the warres and many deuastations by battery of the Ca∣non, and breaches made in her walls and bulwarks. 
D
ist,
 a towne washed on both sides by the fluent riuer of 
Demeta,
 it is of great receit, and famous for wollen cloth, and the profit arising from thence, as if it were powred by the hand of plenty into the laps of the inhabitants. 
Sich∣num
 proud of the kisses of the same streame. 
Herentalls
 full of clothiers, and of such inhabitants, who boast of of their labour and handyworke. 
Endoue
 vpon the riuer 
ommela,
 which watreth the fields of the champaine, and maketh very seeming barren ground exuberant: and 
Hellmount
 raising her walls vpon a hill, and is both ouer∣looked, and defended by the fortification of a well muni∣ted Cittadle.


The country of 
Flanders
 is nobly diuided into three parts, 
Teutonicam, Gallicam, Imperatoriam,
 and plentifully 
 watred with three principall riuers, 
Scaldis, Lisa,
 and 
Te∣nera;
 affording this reason for 
Imperatoria,
 that it neuer acknowledged any superior, but their owne Earles, and therefore had also the attribute of proprietory: For as the Dukedome of 
Millane
 boasted with a superiority be∣fore other Dukes; so the Earledome of 
Flanders
 had the prerogatiue of other Counties, in regard that with Kings the Earles stile had this emphasis, 
Comes Flandriae Dei gratia;
 yet were they afterward subiect to 
France,
 and numbred amongst the 12 Peeres. It retaineth the esti∣mation, and aduanceth the walls of 28 Cities, plowing the fields of 1200 villages, whose enclosures yeeld plen∣ty of grasse toward the West, and bringeth forth strong oxen for tillage, and horses for seruice, as you may see by


their beautifull mares, of whom we make such good triall, and vse in our Carosses. The blessings of milke and ho∣ny fill their cups euen to ouer-flowing, and the abun∣dance of wheat might once haue told them, that it was no miracle, when 
Isaac
 sowed in the land of 
Abimelech,
 and receiued a 100 for one, because they haue reaped, and found after haruest 60 for one. The people are gentle, and the women streight and comely: their hu∣sbandry is graced with the sale of linnen cloth, and their Semsters boast of bone-lace, and delicate needle-workes: but concerning the Townes the principall are thus the subiect of relation. 
Gaunt
 hath a wall of 9 mile cir∣cumference, but possessing much waste ground is not ve∣ry populous, nor filled with houses, although three ri∣uers are at strife for her partition, and making 20 Ilands of her territories, challenge one another for lifting vp most land aboue water: but in truth the inhabitants in her behalfe complaine of the misery of many sieges, and that her fortunes haue bin as it were tossed to and fro with extremities: For shee hath tried the seuerall dispo∣sitions of 
French, English, Dutch,
 and 
Spanish,
 boasting of nothing so much, as the famous birth of 
Iohn
 Duke of 
Lancaster,
 sonne of 
Edward
 the third, and in the right of his wife King of 
Castile;
 and that memorable retreat, wherein 
Generall Norris
 with a few resolute 
English
 con∣fronted the whole Armie of the Prince of 
Parma. Bruges
 for delicacie of buildings, sweetnes of streets, frequenta∣tion of merchants, and strength of walles did once sur∣passe all the townes of the Low Countries, and still boa∣steth, that howeuer her reputation is somewhat dimini∣shed, she was yet the occasion of the credit and glory of 
Flanders. Ypers
 raised her wealth from the endeuours


& industry of Clothiers, vntill the 
English
 with the help of those of 
Gaunt
 destroying their great suburbs, ouerthrew likewise their trafficke, & brought more ruder hands to pull their loomes & mills a peeces, then laboured in their first building, and raised them vp: the rest with the vil∣lages, castles, houses, Churches, bridges, and such like stru∣ctures of admiration, are worthy of further enlargement: but the booke fills already too fast, and I purpose another thing, then to patch vp thus an ill fauoured cloth out of the shreds of other mens Cosmography, who tell you of 
Turwin
 and 
Tornay,
 and those noble endeuours of 
Hen.
 8. when the King of 
France
 claimed 
Artois
 and 
Flanders,
 as well as 
Picardy.


The Prouince of 
Gelderland
 is altogether champaine, yet intermingled with woods, and stored with euery 
 thing to satiate our desire, especially if wee looke after plenty of corne, and pasture, which both stuffeth full their garners, and fatteth their cattle, insomuch that they bring them leane in great heards from the furthest part of 
Den∣marke,
 to receiue here, as it were a more seemely forme. It is visited with the three riuers of 
Rhene, Mase,
 and 
Whale:
 it hath 22 walled townes, attended on by the care and diligent seruice of 300 villages, amongst whom 
Numegam
 is 
metropolis,
 and indeed boasteth not onely of antiquitie, but the royaltie of a King, had not time worne out the shining brightnes of his Crowne, or some boistrous hand pull'd the scepter out of his arme, and shouldred him quite aside from his Throne; or else it was as the Kings of Cities in Mesopotamia, 
Reges à regendo,
 when nine of them made battaile together, and the pre∣uailers spoiled 
Lot,
 and tooke him prisoner.


Herein is also contained the country and Earledome of 




Zutphen,
 and the delicate Iland of the 
Betto,
 how euer 
Holland
 would challenge her of disobedience, if shee should call another mother. For 
Goricum, Worchum,
 and many other townes are reputed hers, onely 
Arnham
 on the other banke of the 
Rhene,
 with the sweet fields of the 
Vellwe,
 will still belong vnto 
Gelderland,
 and could tell you of a sconce builded ouer against it: of another on the banke of 
Icell:
 of another before 
Numegen,
 where that valiant German 
Sir Martin Skinck
 lost his life, and was tossed from graue to graue, vntill a military ceremo∣nie laid him in an honorable place of rest: and of another at the point of the Iland, diuiding the riuer into the 
Rhene
 and 
Whale,
 which saies you can scarce shew such another, and is proud of nothing more, than her founder, and title: For it is called still 
Skinck sconce,
 and could affright you with the relation of many strange designes, and changes of military seruice, as if the Armies chose these parts of the country to play at base in, and as it were dance a 
mat∣tachene
 in armour. For I my selfe knew the leaguer one yeere in 
Gelderward,
 within two mile of 
Eltam;
 another yeere at 
Bommel;
 a third at 
Berck;
 a fourth in 
Cleueland,
 &c. It flourished vnder 
Otho
 the third Earle of 
Gelder∣land,
 who walled in 
Ruremond, Arnham, Harderwick, Bo∣mell, Gooch,
 and 
Waggenhen,
 and so held the title of a Countie vntill 
Rheinaldus
 the second, whom for his va∣lour, iustice, piety, and other vertues the Emperor 
Lodwick
 lifted vp to the dignitie of a Duke in the presence of the Kings of 
England, France,
 and the 
Princes Electors
 1339.


Zeland
 is a new name, and not read of in ancient histo∣ries, as if a man should say, a countrey compounded both 
 of land and sea: For it is euery where distinguished with


Ilands, which are environed with water, and knowne by 15 seuerall names, against whom the sea hath much pre∣uailed, and not long since with violent invndations swal∣lowed 300 of their inhabited townes; so that now you may saile by the steeples of Churches, and not knowing the reason, wonder to what purpose the Towres were so erected. There remaine now three principall, which are preserued against the rage of the Ocean with exceeding cost, and powerfull industry, namely 
Walcheren, Schouen,
 and 
South-Beueland:
 and foure inferior, 
Diuelant, Tolen, North-Beuelant,
 and 
Woolfersdike;
 which are graced with the prerogatiues of eight walled townes, whereof six continue their Estates Deputies for the whole County. 
Midelborough, Flushing, Camphere,
 and 
Armenden,
 which hath no voice, although it cry out neuer so loud, that it standeth with the rest in 
Walcheren.
 In 
Schouen, Si∣rexee,
 and 
Bucers
 hauen, which hath likewise no voice. In 
South-Beueland
 which is the greatest and fertilest Iland, the towne of 
Tergowse;
 and in the land of 
Tolen,
 the towne of 
Tertolen,
 and 
Martins dike,
 which hath also no voice. These Ilands are preserued by the downes, which be certaine bankes of sand cast vp with the tides, and where there are no sands, as toward the south, the dikes are raised by the industry of man, and proportioned with equall height to the rest; all so rammed with mats & casses of fagots 6 or 7 foote long, that it not only performeth the effect of their securitie, but seemeth an artificiall gracefulnes, and being so neere 
England
 is worthy the ouer-viewing. In times past the 
Marquis
 of 
La Vere,
 and 
Flushing
 were onely at the Generall Councels of the countrey, now the places are supplied with Deputies, and new times haue giuen way vnto new orders: For these


inheritances and titles are incorporated in Prince MAV∣RICE of NASSAV, and the Abbot of S
t
 
Martins
 in the towne of 
Midlebourgh,
 which at this instant is the Court of 
Zeland:
 As for the Prince, he is the seruitor of the States, and can doe nothing absolute of himselfe with∣out their direction: And for the Abbot, his name is ex∣tinguished with his superstition, and the reformation of religion hath also reformed his very title and authoritie: so that the Estates make the 
Democratia
 a princely gouern∣ment, and assume to themselues the power of life, death, controuling, punishing, rewarding, and resolute ordering all their affaires, except in cases of necessitie, wherein there is no disputing, nor interiecting any cause of impu∣tation either of negligence, or improuidence: For so great Princes either diminish or augment their illustrious royaltie, and Monarks whose pride at the first swelled ouer the banks of preuailing, haue in one age bin left bare on the sands of an ebbing fortune. The cheefest trade of the inhabitants is nauigation, fishing, and making salt: yet within the land they imploy themselues to tillage, and feeding of cattle. The people doe so multiply and increase, that they are compelled to inlarge their Townes, as well for their owne inhabitants, as frequentation of strangers, who since the troubles of 
Antwerpe
 resort hi∣ther extraordinarily; but if I should adde the brauery of fortifications, I should do them no wrong, nay I might augment their glory: For 
Flushing
 is one of the stron∣gest Townes of 
Europe;
 and 
Midleborough
 so rampar∣ted and guarded, that a very militarie renowne is attri∣buted vnto them, and the Burgers themselues deserue well of all good reports.


The prouince of 
Holland
 is (as it were) a 
Peninsule,
 cir∣cumuironed 



with water. For the sea, the 
Rhene,
 and the meeting riuers, open their doores in such a manner, that you may goe (as it were) round about the house, except in one corner toward 
Gelderland.
 and although it contai∣neth not in circuit aboue two hundred English mile: yet lifteth vp the wals, ramparts, and warlike ports of thirty townes of such receipt, wealth and shipping, that the pride of 
Tyrus
 and 
Sidon,
 exclaimed vpon by so many Prophets, had not greater occasion of raging and oftentation, howe∣uer they are yet blessed with moderation, and restraint of distempered actions. The villages or dorps are foure hun∣dred, amongst whom the stately county of the 
Hague
 ad∣uanceth her counteuance equall to a great city: for their court retaineth some shew of princilnesse, and the old pa∣lace maketh demonstration of those noble customes and hospitality, which the ancient Earles in their former power maintained; yet because it is vnwalled, neighbouring a pretty parke of fallow Deere, and inuiteth you to better re∣tired places, then the townes of hurliburly and continuall commerces accustome, it is reputed a Dorp, and seemeth much contented with her situation so remote from the forraine enemy of the State. 
Harlem
 with her spacious∣nesse is founded most delicately; for as soone as you are entred, the pleasure of a pretty wood inuiteth your abode, where the Citizen in the dayes of pastime make their ho∣nest conuersation, the strengthning of one anothers friend∣ship. Besides, for bulwarkes, harbours, shipping, capacity, entercourse, and noble meetings, it challenged the prece∣dency of all the towns of 
Holland,
 & howeuer 
Amsterdam
 hath got the start for riches, marchants, and nauigation; yet hath 
Harlem
 a greater wall, and better compacted buil∣dings. 
Dort
 or 
Dordrech
 some 150. yeeres since was made


an Iland by the inundation of the sea, which with vngen∣tle violence (at that time) washed away whole fields of firme ground, and like a barren vnsatiate wombe, filled her paunch with aboue 200. villages: It is a beautifull long towne, and graced with the staple of Rhenish wine, corne and timber, brought in great, strange and long boats called 
Punts,
 which neuer goe backe againe, but serue in these ri∣uers as a receptacle of diuers families, and many people who haue no other dwelling then on shipboord, & if you demand how they liue the voyage ended, & maintain their estates when the first businesse is determined. They spin, fish, follow the league with prouision, carry corne and turffe from towne to towne, and are employed for the vse of bridges, to transferre whole armies ouer riuers; but to tell you that some of them are 160. foot long, and haue three or foure diuisions or houses in one boat, would raise a suspicion, and peraduenture make you smile at the ficti∣on, but admire the truth. 
Delft
 is so named of a ditch, cut out betweene it and the 
Hague,
 and is a sweet and pleasant towne, although the inhabitants are emploied for the most part about brewing, and spinning of wooll. 
Leyden
 boa∣steth of her antiquity, as deriuing her originall from the Legions of the Roman souldiers heere resident, when the custome of warre, and the coldnesse of winter did enforce them to garison, and orderly sequestration: it is now an Vniuersity, beautified with walkes of pleasure and magni∣ficence: yet cannot wash away the imputation of many trayterous reuolts and vnconstant resolutions against the gouernment of the 
States. Gouda
 is a populous towne vp∣on the riuer 
Isell;
 yet could tell you of another of her owne name, that runneth into the Ocean, as if it made haste to tell you, from whence it came. 
Amsterdam,
 besides


the sea is visited by the gentle riuer 
Tia:
 yet seemeth sory that she cannot be affoorded the sweetnesse of her waters, and is so contriued as the channels of 
Venice,
 which direct you by boat from house to house: for shipping, it is one of the most famous harbours in the world, and hath such entercourse of Marchants and Saylors, that I haue num∣bred 1000. ships of all sorts to goe out at one tide: for buildings it equals the best, and for orderly watches and fortifications the Burgers haue a blessed vniformity and glorious reputation. 
Enchusen
 vpon the banke of the sea called the 
Zuidersea,
 is famous for the building of ships, which are heere yeerely built and orderly rigged. 
Horne
 hath the same foundation, and in 
May
 bringeth together such a faire of butter and cheese, and in such incredible manner, that almost all countries haue suppliment from thence. 
Alcmar
 likewise maintaineth the dairy, and enclo∣seth such fields, that a very few acres of ground raise a good farme. 
Purmerndum
 boasteth of her first estimation, by reason of the palace and delicate castle, which belon∣ged to Count 
Egmond,
 was within her wals. 
Edam
 hath great store of shipping, and such kine, that few oxen are larger: besides, heere is sowed so much hemp, that most of the netting, which either 
Holland
 or 
Zeland
 vse is heere made. 
Sconhouen
 is a delicate towne and place of plea∣sure: for indeed it is an attribute, or significant name from the attracting delight of their gardens, and hath a staple for Salmons. 
Rotterdam
 a great city full of shipping, yet ra∣ther boasteth of the birth of 
Erasmus. Brill
 is a towne of defence, and was once causionary to 
England,
 in regard of great summes disbursed for the 
States,
 but now of late, by the Kings Maiesty, resigned into the hands of the 
States.
 Thus for strength, fertility, wealth, and plenty of shipping,



Holland
 exceedeth any countrey in the world, challenging no more circuit of ground, as may be ghessed by the yeere 1587. when there was 600. ships arrested in the 
Sont
 by the King of 
Denmark,
 and in 1588. it is well knowen, that in very short warning they supplyed vs with an hundred men of warre, as for 
Cales
 voyage, the third part of that Nauie was theirs: but if you looke further, in the West and East-Indies, in the hauens of 
Barbary
 and 
Affrick,
 in the 
Arches,
 and 
Constantinople,
 in the Gulph of 
Venice,
 and al∣most all the frequented places of the world, the 
Hollander
 aduentures, and is now a glorious Marchant and Mariner. To conclude, 
Holland, Zeland,
 and 
Freesland,
 smile in the possession of 2500. good ships, from 150. tun to 700. and although they haue no timber, or at least very little grow∣ing for this purpose, yet doe they yeerely set vpright 5. or 600. of one sort or other.


Of all in the 
States
 diuision, the City and Lordship of 
 
Vtrech
 is principall, as retaining an ancient Bishops See, and shewing the ruines of a castle, erected to suppresse the insolency of the inhabitants, who in a pride of their owne greatnesse, made a continuall sport of rebellion, it is now vtterly defaced, and the loyalties of their harts seeme more firme, then the workes of mens hands, assuring vs that so noble a citie and populous territories would yeeld a very ambitious Prince reasonable satisfaction, if it might bee commanded by the authority of a Monarch, and had the vnity of a well-ordered Common-wealth and Kingdome.


The Countrey of 
Freesland
 would require an ample dis∣couery 
 to extract her originall, and relate her stories: so would 
Cleeueland,
 the land of 
Luke Munsterland,
 and some others reputed 
Neuters,
 that is, neither maintaining the 
Spanyard
 in his military inuasion, nor supporting the 
States



in their iustifiable defences. But I refer you to their own & manyother cōmentaries, & content myself with a cursory trauell, and what I can catch hold of by running touches. It is diuided into two parts by the riuer 
Amisia,
 which commeth downe by 
Embden: East Freesland
 challenging a particular preheminence and iurisdiction, as I sayd, by it selfe: and 
West Freesland
 suffering this partition, 
Ostergo,
 
 
Westergo, Transilana, Drenta, Tuenta,
 the seuen woods and Lordship of 
Groining,
 a beautifull towne and famous for that siege, wherein were 80000. in the field on both sides 1594. when Prince 
Maurice
 obtained it for the 
States,
 be∣ing before ouer-awed 1580. by the Duke of 
Parma.
 As it hath more cattle and pasture then other prouinces: so more villages, & the inhabitants are more warlike, inso∣much, that commonly there is a Regiment or two of Fri∣zons in the army, when amongst the foot-companies there is scarse two hundred Dutch-men besides: yet haue they many troops of horse, and are distinguished by diuers cha∣racters, although they speake all one language, either high or Low-Dutch, as 
Resties, Lansguents, Frizons, Switzers, High-Germans, Dutch,
 and 
Free-booters,
 or 
Boot-halers.


I haue insisted the longer on the discourse of these Pro∣uinces, 
 because you may see the errours of selfe will and ill counsell, euen in the gouernment of mighty Monarchs, as I sayd before. For the conquest of the 
West Indies,
 the onely greatnesse of 
Spaine,
 was not, nor is so glorious to his ostentation, as the losse of the Low-Countries (when hee might with peace & mansuetude haue opened the arms of a louing father ouer them) greeuous to his remembrance, and a very wound to his policy. Because if these countries were vnited, and altred from their 
Aristocratia
 or 
Democra∣tia,
 chuse you whether, to the vniformity of a 
Monarchie,



affoording to 
Caesar
 what belongeth to 
Caesar,
 raising their nobility, aduancing the well-deseruers, encreasing their estates, disciplining their able men to the seruice of the warres, and from the imitation of other countries endea∣uouring to raise their owne glories, it would surmount all the reuenues of 
Spaine,
 which for extent of ground mea∣sureth six times as much; nay, if I added the 
West Indies, computatis computandis,
 I might be beleeued after some rea∣sonable disceptation. For say a stirring spirit desired glory and pompous attendancy. From hence might bee obtai∣ned infinite treasure, settled content, high magnificence, multitude of subiects, commerces of marchants, store of shipping, stately horses, louing people, and the glory of 
 nature, beauty it selfe: so that if the 
Arch-Dukes
 fortune could raise him to such a height, if at first he honoured the 
Enfanta,
 with vshering her bare-headed into 
Bruxels,
 hee might then prostrate himselfe before her throne indeed, as one of the greatest Princes of the world. For although his hopes did depend vpon other supportation, and in her owne language he cries 
Kala,
 as peraduenture determining a composition with his brother 
Mathias,
 if the peacefull 
Rodolphus
 were once discharged of his debt to nature, whereby she might be Empresse of 
Germany:
 yet cannot a meere titular dignity come neere so great a contentment, as to haue the fruition of such a kingdome, and natiue felici∣ty. But if delicate life and quiet establishment of tempo∣rall happinesse were propounded, amongst these is hone∣sty of contracts, probity of manners, truth of word, pre∣uention of wants, fulnesse of wealth, delicacy of apparrell, neatnesse of furniture, vniformity of building, magnifi∣cence of structures, plenty of viands, sumptuousnesse of feasts, liberty of conuersation, and what else enflameth our


desires to helpe our deficiencie: yea the very behauiour of the women enforceth admiration. For being tall, beau∣tifull, actiue, and familiar, they are yet free from those pee∣nish humors of ielousie, lightnes, & pride, which make vs weary one of another: Besides all their words, & actions tend to simplicitie, and modest plainenes, retaining with all this suppliment of wants, making of cloth, and knit∣ting of lace and dainty works: But when I consider their mutuall entercourses, their skill in buying and selling, their frequenting of the shops, their going from place to place without so much as suspition of incontinencie, and their loue to their husbands and children euen in the ouer∣flowings of naturall imperfections, or if you will diseases of the Nation; I stand amased, and sweare, that vertue cannot be poore, and an honest minde will not be seduced for any worldly respects to the slauish corruption of las∣
iuiousnes, or dishonestie.






CHAP. XVI. 
The Monarchy of
 Great Britaine.


T
HE last of all Countries, and as many 
 thinke the least, but such a least, as if a pretty sparke of a pure Diamond should triumph ouer a border of soft topasses, is the kingdome of ENGLAND; now proclaimed vnder the royall stan∣dard of 
Great Britaine, France,
 and 
Ireland,
 stile enough,


if the desire of man know what is enough. But alas, 
∣nisi ab orbe Britanni:
 wherein I thinke nature and glory plaied the silken Artist or Artificer, chuse you whether, who in sorting out his commodities laies the principall aside for a friend, or his owne vse: so did our first mother deale with this ILAND, allowing it a double portion of blessings before the other countries of the world for her owne honour. But at this time you shall not heare mee stammer out my words, considering M
r
 
Cambden
 hath spoken so well and distinctly, as if a Lawyers cunning had not onely inlarged some excellent matter, but doubly graced the same with good deliuerie, and pleasing elocu∣tion: Besides, I must in the second booke vntie her bound-vp fardell, and come to more neerer particulars, and therefore there shall be now no further disputing of the same: yet 
Ireland
 hath made me amased to see such an impossibilitie to reduce her, which mee thinks cannot proceed from any innated hatred against vs particularly (though it be an vnsauoury truth) because in affecting 
Spaine
 and 
France
 shee disclaimeth their formalitie, and would faine besprinkle the beautifull faces of ciuilitie, gouernment, formes of Cities, courtlines, maiestie, and state, with the vntoward termes and abuses of policie, re∣straint of libertie, couetousnes, flattery, pride, and licen∣tiousnes: therefore I will bee the bolder to speake a word or two of her vnkindnes.








CHAP. XVII. 
The description of
 IRELAND.


T
HE country and kingdome of IRELAND is generally for naturall aire, and commo∣ditie 
 of blessings, sufficient to satisfie a couetous, or curious appetite: but withall diuided into such fastnes of mountaine, bogg, and wood, that it hath emboldned the inhabitants to presume on hereditary securirie, as if disobedience had a protection. For the mountaines de∣nie any cariages, but by great industry and strength of men (so haue we drawne the Cannon ouer the deepest boggs, & stoniest hils) and the passages are euery way dan∣gerous, both for vnfirmenes of ground, & the lurking re∣bell, who will plash downe whole trees ouer the paces, and so intricately winde them, or lay them, that they shall be a strong barracado, and then lurke in ambush amongst the standing wood, playing vpon all commers, as they in∣tend to goe along. On the bogg they likewise presume with a naked celeritie to come as neere our foote and horse, as is possible, and then flie off againe, knowing we cannot, or indeed dare not follow them: and thus they serue vs in the narrow entrances into their glins, and stony paths, or if you will dangerous quagmires of their moun∣taines, where a 100 shot shall rebate the hasty approch of 500; and a few muskets (if they durst carry any) well placed, will stagger a pretty Armie, not acquainted with the terror, or vnpreuenting the mischeefe.



The Prouince of LEMSTER is more orderly than 
 the rest, as being reasonable well inhabited, and hauing some forme of a Common-wealth; so that I finde no mislike either for delight, or profit, but that the want of wood abridgeth their computation of happinesse; yet questionles was the principall cause of our reducing them to ciuilitie, and the place wherein we first setled many En∣glish families. Some vnite, and some diuide the king∣dome of 
Meth
 from 
Lemster,
 and make it a Prouince of it selfe, containing 
East-Meth, West-Meth,
 and 
Longford,
 wherein 
O Roorck
 is resident, supposing himselfe the greatest Gentleman in the world; yea contesting many times with 
Oneal,
 how euer with much adoe he afforded him precedencie: The countrey is very fruitfull and pleasant, not so mountanous, but ill inhabited: For the warres, and their owne bestialitie, haue not onely made a separation of all good order, but euen terrified both beast and fowle from commorance amongst them in many places.


The Prouince of MVNSTER hath some Townes well 
 aduanced by the sea coasts, and many excellent harbours, wherein 
Ireland
 may boast ouer all the countries of 
Eu∣rope:
 The grounds adiacent are very fertile, and in many places afford cause of ostentation; but more inward they are very barren and mountanous, full of boggs, wood, and other remote places, whose fastnes hath incited the people to ouer-great presumption: yet because of the spa∣tiousnes with men desiring good order, it might be redu∣ced and reformed, as enioying plentifull and sweet ri∣uers, full of fish, and some of sufficient depth to transport reasonable boates into the land.


The Prouince of CONACH is diuided from the rest by a 



goodly riuer called the 
Shanon,
 being as I take it the grea∣test of any Iland in the world: For it fetcheth a course of 200 mile, and filleth his channell along the shores of 
Longford, Meths, Ormond, Limrick,
 and 
Kerry,
 yet serueth them in no great stead: For their shipping commeth no further, than 
Limrick,
 where it is fiue mile broad fresh water, and 60 mile from the maine sea, from thence small cotts, as they tearme their boates, carry their wood, turff, fish, and other commodities: but for fish, as Salmon, Breame, Pike, and diuers other sorts, I shall not be be∣leeued to relate the numbers, and hugenes, by such as are enemies to obseruation, or the beleefe of the blessings of other countries. Within 20 mile of 
Limrick,
 as I take it, a litle beyond, the praecinct of 
Caher-Castle
 a strange rock hath taken her lodging euen crosse the riuer, and filleth the roome in such a manner, that almost the nauigation is hin∣dred thereby: but what cannot men and money doe? and why should not these idle people be industriously im∣ployed to remoue the same, & so free the passage to 
Ath∣lone:
 As for an obiection of impossiblitie; the iudgement of men hath yeelded to suruey, and many examples haue confirmed the effects of more laborious attempts. The south part, namely 
Tomond,
 (for by reason of the riuers in∣terposing it selfe I see no reason why it should be disioin∣ted from 
Conach)
 with 
Galloway
 and 
Clenricard
 is very sto∣nie, full of marble, alablaster, and iett, and hath better order both for number and good building in their Castles, than other parts of 
Ireland:
 The north from 
Athlone
 to the Abbey of 
Aboile,
 and so beyond the 
Curlewes
 as farre as 
Slego,
 is of excellent temperature and goodnesse: These 
Curlewes
 are mountaines full of dangerous passa∣ges, especially when the 
Kern
 take a stomach and a pride


to enter into action, as they terme their rebellion and tu∣multuary insurrections. On the other side the County of 
Maio
 consorteth with the pleasingest place in the King∣dome, by whose beaten banks lye those famous 
Ilands of life,
 of whom a ridiculous tale is fathered, that nothing dies in them, so that when the inhabitants grow old, they are caried else where, which custome they haue of late su∣perstitiously obserued both in these Ilands of 
Aran,
 and some other adioyning of the same condition, as they suppose.


The Prouince of VLSTER, and called the 
North
 is 
 very large, and withall mountanous, full of great Loughs of fresh water, except 
Lough Cone,
 which ebbeth and flow∣eth, as the Sea shouldreth aside the streites at 
Strangford,
 and with that violence at the ebb, that a ship vnder saile with a reasonable gale of winde cannot enter against the tide. These lakes nature hath appointed in steed of riuers, and stored with fish, especially Trowt, and Pike, of such strange proportion, that if I should tell you of a Trowt taken vp in 
Tyrone
 46 inches long, and presented to the 
L: Montioy,
 then Deputie: you would demand, whether I was 
oculatus testis,
 and I answer, I eat my part of it, and as I take it both my 
L: Dauers,
 and 
Sir William Goodolphin
 were at the table, and worthy 
Sir Iosias Bodley
 hath the portraiture depicted 
in plano.
 Here are no Townes, or at least very few, but diuers Castles dispersed, and the inhabitants remoue their cabbins, as their cattle change pasture, somewhat like the 
Tartarians,
 except in times of warre, and troubles, then doe they retire vnder the couett of Castles, and order their houses wonde with rods, and couered with turffs, as well as they can, bringing their cat∣tle euen within their houses, lying altogether in one roome


both to preuent robberies of 
Kern,
 and spoile by Wolues. Amongst these euery country is subiect to the Law 
Tanist,
 which is, he which is best able to maintaine the reputation of their familie, is the great O, and commander.


Through the Kingdome generally the winter is neither so cold, nor the summer so hot as in 
England,
 by reason whereof Haruest is very late, and in the North wheat will not quickly ripen, nor haue they acornes once in a dozen yeere: their principall corne is oates, which are com∣monly burnt out of the straw, and then trod from the husks with mens feete; of this they make their bread in cakes, being first grownd by calliots and drudges very na∣ked, and beastly sitting on the ground, with the mill like our mustard quernes betweene their legs, and then vpon broad yron presses they bake the meale when it is knea∣ded; which custome the best obserue in 
Munster
 with their cheefest corne. The continuall showers and mists make the countrey more dangerous to our Nation, debar∣ring the absolute assurance of wholesome aire, and the consequent health: seldome any frost continues, or snow lieth long, but on the mountaines, in which are great store of Deere both red & fallow. The abundance of Wolues compels them to house their cattle in the bawnes of their Castles, where all the winter nights they stand vp to the bellies in durt: another reason is, to preuent theeues, and false-harted brethren, who haue spies abroad, & will come 30 mile out of one Prouince into another to practise a cunning robbery. The people are generally haters of bondage, and beyond measure proud: so that the yonger brothers, and bastards, who are as deare as the other, scorne all endeuours, but liberty and warre. The Gen∣tlewomen stomach, and in truth vilipend others, who get


their liuing by trade, merchandice, or mechanically: yet are diuers Grauers in gold and siluer, called plaine tinkers, who make their challices, harpes, buttons for their sleeues, crucifixes, and such like, in estimation amongst them. Their Noblemen, or Lords called 
Dynastas,
 are knowne by 
O
 and 
Mac,
 and euery familie hath such as minister iustice to the people, famoused by the title of 
Breahans,
 and yet the exactions ouer their tenants by way of cut∣tings, and other terrible impositions, haue caused diuers rebellions and insurrections amongst themselues, which when the State hath attempted to reforme, then haue they stood on their guard, and taken indirect occasions to con∣demne our vsurpation, whereby their odious and hatefull repinings, like a menstruous cloth, haue made their disobe∣dience loathsome, and brought vpon them such miseries, as a calamitous warre and angry Prince inflicteth turbu∣lent people withall. These families haue also such, as by way of historie elate them to exorbitant actions, ioyning withall the abuse of Poetry, and deceit of Physicke, knowne by the name of 
Bardes,
 on whom depend cer∣taine harpers, rymers, and Priests, which liue in a kinred, the father instructing the sonne, or brother, and he his cosin, or friend. The name of 
Galliglas
 is in a manner extinct, but of 
Kern
 in great reputation, as seruing them in their reuolts, and prouing sufficient souldiers, but ex∣cellent for skirmish. They haue strong and able bodies, proud hearts, pestilent wits, liberall of life, subiect to in∣continency, amorous, wherein their women are extraor∣dinarily pleased, patient to endure, louers of musicke, and hospitalitie, constant to their maintainers, whether men or women, implacable in their hatred, light of beleefe, co∣uetous of glory, impatient of reproch, or contumelie;


not thinking it yet any disgrace to receiue a nickname at their christning, as 
Con Oneale banco,
 because hee was lame. Besides, they are all extreamely superstitious, as indeed barbarous people are best obseruers of ceremo∣nies, and when any of them enters into religion, it is ad∣mirable with what austeritie they reforme themselues: Their children are nursed abroad, and their foster-fathers and foster-mothers are as deare to them, as their owne kinred: They vse incantations and spells, wearing girdles of womens haire, and locks of their louers; they suppose idlenes a glory of nature, and by their sluttish, or rather sa∣uage customes striue to scorne (as they say) our superflui∣tie: They are ready vpon any inforcement by the impo∣sturing Art of their 
Bardes
 to innovation, as enuying our first conquest, and stomaching they were neuer able to expell vs: They are desperate in reuenge, and their 
Kerne
 thinke no man dead, vntill his head be off: They suppose theft no great offence, as imitating the 
Lacedemonians;
 for they pray to prosper in their attempts: but these be com∣monly the bastards of Priests, who proue notorious vil∣laines, and the daughters either begg or become strum∣pets, or if you will, beggerly strumpets. They common∣ly intermix othes with their speeches, as by the Trinitie, God, his Saints, S
t
 Patrick, S
t
 Briget, faith, and troth, the Temple, your hand, O Neales hand, and such like. Their mariages are strange; for they are made sometimes 
 so conditionally, that vpon a slight occasion the man ta∣keth another wife, the wife another husband: They are easily deliuered of their children, and if they haue any by diuers men, at their deaths they resigne them to the right father; the new maried and conceiued with childe giueth the 
Barde
 her best clothes: They haue soft and excellent


skins and hands: but the small of their leggs hangeth in a manner ouer their brogs: Their apparrell is a mantle to sleepe in, and that on the ground on some rushes or flags: a thicke gathered smocke with wide sleeues graced with bracelets and crucifixes about their necks: They weare linnen rowles about their heads of diuers fashions: in 
Vlster
 carelesly wonde about: in 
Conach
 like Bishops miters, a very stately attire, and once prohibited by Sta∣tute: in 
Munster
 resembling a thicke Chesshire cheese. Their smocks are saffrond against vermine; for they weare them three moneths together; but to be lowsie is hereditarie with the best of them, and no disgrace. Both men and women not long since accustomed a sauage manner of dyet, which was raw flesh, drinking the blood, now they seeth it, and quaff vp the liquor, and then take 
Vsquebath:
 not hauing flesh they feede on 
Watercresses, Shamrocks,
 and 
Bonniclaboch,
 which is milke strangely put into a tub a sowring, till it be clodded, and curded toge∣ther: when the Cow wiil not let her milke downe they blow her behinde very strangely, and sometimes thrust vp their armes to their elbowes, speaking words of gentle∣nes and intreaty by way of bemoning. The men weare trowses, mantle, and a cap of steele; they are curious a∣bout their horses tending to witchcraft; they haue no saddles, but strange fashioned pads, their horses are for the most part vnshod behinde: they vse axes, staues, broad swords, and darts: In 
Terconnell
 the haire of their head growes so long and curled, that they goe bare-hea∣ded, and are called 
Glibs,
 the women 
Glibbins.
 These and many other doe the meere Irish obserue with resolu∣tion and our wonderment not to be diuerted, as if the Poet should finde fault with


Quo semel est imbuta recens seruabit odorem


Testa diu.

And thus much for 
Topography,
 or superficiall view of the Kingdomes of the world.






LIBRI PRIMI FINIS.










EVRIP: ORESTES.




Io, Io, lachrimosae mortalium gentes, laboriosae,


Videtis quàm praeter spem parca adveniat.


Aliae alijs atque alijs permutantur


Clades diuturnitate temporis:


Mortalium namque vniuersum instabile est aeuum.


















ENGLANDS GLORY: THE SECOND BOOKE.


Wherein by way of comparison you shall see, with what prerogatiues shee ma∣keth her progresse to the house of perfection before other NATIONS.






Imprinted at London by 
Edward Griffin.
 1618.
















that euery man may step into a Millaners shop, and prune himselfe in another bodies glasse: euery Reader take a booke of maps, and very neere deliniate as much; and euery eye gase on the outside of a Pallace to praise or dis∣praise according to the transportation of humors: I will conduct you somewhat further into more inward roomes, or at least wise such, as my fortune or friendship admitted me into: For you must vnderstand, that as indeed in the Pallaces of Kings, the priuy chamber, bed-chamber, gal∣leries of state, gardens of sequestration, and walkes of pri∣uacie are debarred common intruders, yea sometimes de∣nied to men of good eminence: so in the vnderstanding matters of state, conditions of kingdomes, secrets of com∣mon wealths, vses of trauell, and such like, euery man hath not the gift, & capacitie to yeeld you reason, or satisfaction: You shall therefore haue no more vaine-glorious promises of me, than a plaine demonstration of my owne endeuors, oportunity, and obseruations, concluding with that excel∣lent 
Seneca:


Quicquid patimur mortale:


Quicquid facimus venit ab alto.

And because my first purpose and intent promised to ap∣proue that of all the former recited countries, 
England
 had the prerogatiue, & enioyeth most of those blessings where∣with God euer marked any kingdome: in this booke I would faine perswade you to the same, and by reason or comparison bring you the sooner to distinction, & know∣ledg, wherby you shall be the abler to conclude with iudg∣ment, & confidence in the truth: I must therfore giue you an instance of a time, cuntry, & King, which had a preroga∣tiue in happines ouer all nations either before, or since, & then contract our sophistry thus: that that kingdome, which commeth neerest to the example, shall haue the precedency.



The raigne of 
Salomon,
 and country of 
Canaan,
 euen the best part of terrestiall paradice shall be the lanterne to light vs out of this contention. For although 
Ahashuerosh
 preuailed from 
India
 to 
Aethiopia
 ouer 127 Prouinces, and made a feast in the Pallace of 
Sushan
 to all his Princes, and subiects, which lasted 180 daies vnder a hanging of white, greene, and blew cloth, the beds of gold and siluer, vpon a pauement of porphyrie, marble, and alablaster, the drinking vessels of gold with change after change; and the Queene 
Vashti
 likewise kept the same correspon∣dency with the women in the royall house of the King: Although 
Nabuchadnezar
 by lifting vp his eyes toward the Pallace of 
Babylon,
 elated also his heart with vaine ostentation, because he not onely had triumphed ouer 
Israel,
 tooke 
Iehoiachim
 King of 
Iuda
 prisoner, sacked 
Ie∣rusalem,
 and caried the Princes of the Tribes into capti∣uitie, but might now establish the glory of the Chaldean Monarchy, and celebrate his magnificent feasts in the great Citie: Although 
Beltashar
 banqueted with the vessels of gold, wherein his Princes, his wiues, and con∣cubines dranke before a 1000, and with magnificent bra∣uery was aduanced on a throne to command their prosti∣tution, when he had cause of imperiousnes: Although another 
Nabuchadnezar
 was invested in 
Nineuie,
 and after the conquest of 
Arphaxad
 and his Cities, returned to that great Towne, & Pallace with a wondrous multitude, cele∣brating a feast 120 daies, & with insulting iollity appointed 
Holophernes
 to conduct 120000 foot, & 12000 horse, with all the glory of an 
Emperors
 armie against 
Siria
 and 
Iudea:
 Although 
Alexander
 the Macedonian preuailed against the forces of 
Asia,
 conquered 
Darius
 King of 
Medes
 and 
Persians,
 and compelled the tributary nations of the East


to a slauish prostitution, rewarding his endeauours with an assumpted reputation of a god-head, & all the effects of wanton peace and magnificence, when hee returned to 
Babylon
 to celebrate the triumphs of his victories. Al∣though 
Antiochus
 surnamed the Great, established his Kingdome from 
India
 to 
Aethiopia,
 and satisfied his am∣bition with the spoyles of 
Iuda, Ierusalem,
 and 
Aegypt,
 whereby he exposed a wonder of honourable court-ship, and illustrious gouernment. And although 
Octauius,
 for his happy successe in all his actions, was surnamed 
Augu∣stus,
 and had those Halcion dayes, as an Emperour of peace, wherein abundance, state, and prosperity played the wantons with one another. Yet questionlesse must all instances of Emperours, Kings, maiesty and gouernment, giue place to the time and royalty of 
Salomon,
 whose pro∣sperity ouerflowed like a swelling riuer, and filled euery empty place with fulnesse, gladnesse, and encrease: so that if you will examine me vpon interrogatories, I thus put in mine answer, and according to the true vse of an 
affidauit,
 affirme nothing but truth and plainenesse.


Then was 
Salomon
 in his royalty, when the Temple was built, the Priesthood confirmed, the Prophets set at 
 liberty, and the Saints of God were had in estimation: when he erected a brazen scaffold in the midst of the court, fiue cubits long, fiue broad, and three in height, on which hee stood, and kneeled before all the congregation of 
Israel,
 when hee offered a sacrifice of 22000. bullockes, and 120000. sheepe, making a feast of seuen dayes, and all 
Israel
 with him: when he serued God truely, and permit∣ted 
Nathan
 the Prophet, 
Ahiah
 the Silonite, and 
Ieddo
 the Seer, to pronounce the iudgements of God against the re∣probate and obstinate, and divulge his mercy toward the


penitent, and true conuertist. Then was 
Salomon
 in his royalty, when hee made a porch of fifty cubits long, and thirty broad, in which hee sat to determine the controuer∣sies of his Kingdome, whereby all sorts had accesse to the throne of Iustice, and very harlots leuiated in their gree∣uances. Then was 
Salomon
 in his royalty, when his owne palace was finished after thirteene yeeres labours of 160000. worke-men, to which he brought his wife, euen 
Pharaohs
 daughter: when hee was aduanced on a throne of iuory and gold, and caused a seat to bee placed for the Kings mother, & rose to meet her, setling her on his right hand: when his throne had six steps, and twelue Lyons of gold, when all his drinking vessels were of gold, and siluer was nothing esteemed: when hee made two hundred tar∣gets, and three hundred shields of gold, a throne of preci∣ous stone, and couered the 
Ibony
 with the best gold: when his prouision for one day was 30. measures of fine floure, and 60. of meale, 10. fat oxen, and 20. out of the pastures, 100. sheepe, besides harts, buckes, bugles, and fat foule. Then was 
Salomon
 in his royalty, when he asked wisdom at the hands of God, and distributed equity to all his peo∣ple, when hee spake 3000. prouerbs, and 1000. songs, when he related the nature of trees, plants, beasts, fowle, fishes, and creeping things, when he appoynted the Offi∣cers of his houshold, and Commanders ouer Prouinces, first 3300. then 300. lastly 250. as Princes and principall ouer the other, when the Queene of 
Sheba
 came to prooue him with hard questions, and brought him odours, golde, and precious stones: when she saw his wisdome, the house he had built, the prouision of his table, the sitting of his seruants, the ordering of his ministers, and their apparrell, his drinking-vessels, and burnt offerings, when there came


of all people to heare his wisdome, when hee excelled all the Kings of the earth in riches, and administration of e∣quity, when hee blessed the people, and praised God in publike, giuing the Priests and Prophets liberty to main∣taine the cause of the Lord of hosts, and not permitting the corruption of the world to transferre them beyond the limits of true deuotion, and religious piety, and when he so ouer-looked & ouer-awed all Officers of the King∣dome, that neither the mighty made their greatnesse a bar to descend to the practise of charitable actions, nor the better sort tooke ill example by the higher to practise vn∣befitting policy, or oppressions of the poore: nor the in∣feriour had cause of clamorous repinings, or tumultuary insurrections against the gouernment, abusing the people.


Then was 
Salomon
 in his royalty, when he had built ci∣ties of store, cities of chariots, cities for horse-men neere 
Ierusalem,
 when hee went in person to 
Hamah Zobah,
 and ouercame it, and re-edified 
Bethoran
 the vpper, and 
Betho∣ran
 the nether, cities defenced with walls, gates, and bars: when he built the cities of store in forraine parts, and wal∣led in all places expugned and depopulated by the wars of 
Saul
 and his father, or if you will, the house of 
Beniamin
 and 
Iuda,
 contending for the Diadem. When hee had 40000. stalls of horses for his chariots, 12000. horse-men for his guard, and fortified diuers places of garison, main∣taining martiall discipline, and by example of 
Dauids
 Princely rewarding men of merit, not permitting the ver∣tue of well-deseruers to mourne for want of acceptation. Then was 
Salomon
 in his royalty, when he built a nauy of ships by the red sea, when King 
Hiram
 sent him mariners, and they were entertained for their experience, industry, and knowledge: when they went to 
Ophir,
 and brought


from thence 400. tallents of gold, when hee ioyned the nauy of 
Tharsus
 with the nauy of 
Hiram,
 which once in three yeeres brought gold, siluer, iuory, apes, and peacocks, when he had horses out of Aegypt, and fine linnen, which the Kings Marchants receiued at a price, when he went to the red sea to view his nauy, when he mustred his chariots and horse-men, marching with his armies like an Empe∣rour indeede, and making his peaceable progresses like a magnificent Prince. Then was 
Salomon
 in his royalty, when the King of 
Tyrus
 contracted a league with him, when the Aegyptians and Moores sent him presents, and all the neighbouring Princes combined amity, and were (as it were) either emulous of his greatnesse, or proud of his friendship. Then was 
Salomon
 in his royalty, when the cities of his Kingdome were populous, opulent, and full of delight, when 
Iuda
 and 
Israel
 dwelt without feare, euery man vnder his vine and figg-tree, when they were many as the sand of the sea, eating, drinking, and making merry, when the people reioyced in mutuall entercour∣ses, liuing with reciprocall obseruations, no man repining, no man malicious, no man iealous, no man elated, no man oppressing, no man insulting, no man ambitious, no man an Vsurer, or traduced for such raging sinnes, as com∣monly are supported in all gouernments by Princes fa∣uours, conniuency of Magistrates, power of authoritie, corruption of officers, and wilfulnesse of offenders: not that the times were so cleere, and free from abuses, as if men were Angels on earth, without errours or imperfecti∣ons: but that they liued in a more modest fearefulnesse for offending God, then in these presumptuous times, and durst embolden one another to make a pastime of iniquity, and vex the honest neighbour with a violent prosecution


of wickednesse: otherwise in all ages, times, and nations, as you endure at natures hands frosts, thunders, tempests, vnseasonable weather, barren yeeres, and raging invnda∣tions; her hereditary defects: so must you tolerate the vaine-glory and prodigality of Courtiers, the couetousnes of Magistrates, the legall dissembling of Citizens, the cun∣ning of Artificers, the idlenesse of Gentle-men, the stub∣bornnesse of Pesants, the contumacy of Souldiers, and such like offences, as inconueniences of life, and somtimes nationall vices, or customary sinnes. And thus much for example.






CHAP. II.
 Countries compared to Canaan, and Salomons glorious happi∣nesse, and first of all the Tartars.


N
Ow must wee take out our other clothes to 
 the light, & by laying them together, iudge of their finenesse, or at least, how neerely they can match our example: and although to this purpose wee neede not once name the countries of prophanation, or fill our discourses with the vnsauoury particulars of such beastly, filthy, and abo∣minable gouernment: so farre from the method of true maiesty, and established blessednesse, as their workes of mens hands, I meane their Idols, from the omnipotency of the Creatour, or blasphemous ignorance from the translucent light of inestimable truth: yet will I not bee so partiall, or preiudicate, to cast them off without reason, or


sufficient cause of disparity. To beginne therefore with those vast and huge territories of the great Emperor 
Cham,
 now including infinite nations vnder the name of 
Tartari∣ans.
 Vntill you come to 
Tangut
 and 
Mangia,
 all the North & Western parts are stil rude & vnciuill, without fashiona∣ble cities, or any formall handsomnesse, and liue in a man∣ner as barbarously as the ancient 
Scythians,
 who to their frozen climate and distempered aire, added as frozen harts to morality and charitable workes; nay in truth, liued in all inhumane bestiality, vnder the couert of valour, and being a fierce nation to strangers, and in battell against their enemies: so that, what with their vast desarts, remote countries from 
Europes
 concourses, and want of such things, which we either desire, or stand in neede of: they are sildome visited by strangers but for curiosity, and as sildome entertaine such as come amongst them with affa∣bility and orderly welcome. Besides, according to that absolute principle, that barbarous people are best obser∣uers of ceremonies & customs, they wil neither reform any thing which is amisse, nor conform thēselues to the decen∣cies of our Christian cities; nay, in a manner either out of scorne or hate, their next neighbors the 
Turks
 are distasting vnto them, & after a strange fashion of derision they mock at their formality, although (as I sayd in my first book) the 
Tartar Chrim
 challengeth a kinde of affinity with the race of 
Ottoman,
 and euer since 
Tamberlaine
 conquered 
Persia
 and 
Baiazet,
 haue entermingled some of their women a∣mongst them, wherby they keep correspondency and con∣federation, so that when the 
Turke
 hath occasion to supply his running army, either against 
Persia
 or 
Christendome,
 they send him 100000. at a time: but so rude, naked, vn∣prouided, and vndisciplined, that I speake confidently,


and out of some experience, a hundred well trained and ordered souldiers will beat a thousand of them, especially if they can be first staggered with any vnacquainted sight, or strength; I meane our battalions of pikes, strong squa∣drons of horse, firme standings of muskets, and martiall cheerefulnesse from trumpets and drums: for they are presumptuous of nothing, but their bowes and arrowes, swiftnesse of horse-manship in pursuits, and running after preyes or spoiles, and clamorous noyse of horse, and mi∣serable out-cries: so that at one word, neither in warre or peace, they cannot be graced with one word of our exam∣ple, or 
Salomons
 happinesse. As for 
Tangut
 and 
Mangia,
 the very cause of his pride and elated titles, if there can be any pride in bestiality, or shew of magnificence in a Princes se∣questration from his people; they are mighty prouinces in∣deed, and extend to the circling about 1500. English mile of ground, haue many and great cities, and that part to∣ward 
China,
 is walled 800. mile, for feare of excursions of the common aduersary: but neither is their gouernment tending to the true vse of iustice in generall, nor their con∣uersation admitting of happy and sociable meetings in particular: for hee that is most mighty ouerswaies the weaker, and he that is most friendly, will cut your throat vpon the least susption or cause of reuenge: as for their best fortified cities, their temples, wals, store-houses, and Emperors, or Gouenors palace, are structures to be looked vpon, and onely worthy of commendation: but the rest of the houses low, vnfashionable, builded most of turffe and canes, which they buy from 
India
 and 
China,
 and in winter full of smoke and stincke, as in other remooueable cab∣bins or tents of the 
Tartars:
 so that except the Emperour himselfe, and his customes, which are rather tyrannous,


then princely, there is nothing amongst them worthy imi∣tation of ruder people. For such marchandies as passe re∣ciprocally betweene them and the 
Chinesses,
 or those of 
Iapan
 (except 
Rheubarb,
 which commonly commeth 
 neerer way into 
Europe
 through the 
Caspian
 sea, and so into 
Armenia)
 are euer in hazard to be lost, by the most power∣fullest fraud, either of the buyer or seller: so that some∣times you shall haue 20000. marchants of 
Iapan, China,
 and the other Ilands, stayd at a time in 
Quinzay, Camb
lu,
 and 
Tangut,
 whereupon the vnkindnesse bursts out into open hostility, and to be reuenged of one another, armies of 200000. and more of a side, fill their fields with terror and death, to which if you adde the aduantagious lying in wait on the wall raised vnder mount 
Taurus
 betweene them, vpon sudden excursions of the inhabitants, or brea∣ches in the time of inuasion, it will adde a feare and terror to your attention, from the report of so many sauage slaughters, and wilfull command of the Emperours, for whose sake whole families will not care to die, nay, striue to shew their duty in this kinde: yet there is one thing most commendable amongst them, that except the warre is (at it were) publikely proclaimed betweene their Empe∣rors, the people of themselues liue peaceably from offen∣ding one another, and dare not touch a stone on either side of the wall, with a cunning purpose to weaken the same. Amongst other things, their strife about their Emperours titles is so ridiculous (for 
Cham
 will be called 
Dominus Do∣minantium,
 and he of 
China, Filius Coeli,
 as in my first book may appeare) that the least derogation is breach of the peace, and a small comparison casteth vp the dust of con∣tention in both their eyes. For although 
China
 be not so big as 
Tartary
 by two parts, yet being better inhabited and


adorned with Townes, and Cities, it presumeth for com∣petition of glory, and dare aduenture to maintaine their honorable bestialitie, and idolatrous wretchednes both waies with force of armes. To conclude, if you come to gouernment, loue, dyet, conuersation, hansom apparell, attendancie, friendship, honest meetings, peaceable traf∣ficke, and all such things, whereby the temporall blessings of God are manifested to men, that looke no further, nor enioy the happines to search for happines more deeply, there is not any thing otherwise, than the pride and state of their Emperor, some herbes and drugs for physicke, their northern race of horses, and certaine skins & furres, which couer their houses, and keepe their bodies warme, worthy the looking after, or indeed fit to come neere the borders of the kingdome of true felicitie.






CHAP. III. CHINA
 compared, and her deficiency manifested.


B
Efore I proceede any further in the 
 description of these remote coun∣tries, I must by way of Apologie excuse my pouertie in knowledge and breuity in bringing either par-'∣ticular, or substantiall matter be∣fore the barre of examination. For first I dare not meddle with anci∣ent Authors, because times haue altred all things, and there is a kinde of vicissitude of gouernment and king∣domes


attending the highest prouidence: nor will I once read ouer moderne writers, lest I be tempted to a cunning theft, and can but shew you indeed the countenances of other men, so that if the first were now to view their owne handy-works, and either saw, how warres, or antiquitie had ouer-mantled those delicate, strong, and magnificent Cities and countries, with deuastation, misery, and wret∣ched affliction, which they had so much commended, and laboured by great arte and industry to delineate, or decipher: Or could consider how peace and ingenious endeuours had manured, and made exuberant euen barren soiles, & vnfashionable grounds, had clothed naked men with royall ornaments; had inlarged poore Townes and Cities to stately, and princely structures; had taught de∣spised people to march arme in arme with honorable re∣nowne, and glorious victories, with infinite such like, they would questionles stand amased to see now such a change and alteration, or confounded to suppose themselues vn∣happy for not liuing in this happines, and these times of peace and plenty, yea such peace and plenty, as if they had learned an arte of gracefulnes, and cunning of adorna∣tion: like a curious and expert Ieweller, who though a diamond be a diamond, and stone of inestimable valew, yet can by his skill adde a brauery and extraordinary lu∣stre to the same. As for the newer sort of Historiogra∣phers, first for my selfe, they shall haue no such aduantage ouer mee, as to challenge mee for felony in stealing any wealth or riches from them, or exprobrate me of ingrati∣tude for being beholding vnto them, and not acknow∣ledging the same: Next concerning themselues, I won∣der they are not ashamed to fill vp their leaues with the lines of falshood, and maruell they are so litle acquainted


with honest trauellers, that may tell them the truth, or at least instruct them in an arte of seeming probabilitie; as for example: in plaine honestie I wonder, how 
Munster
 that learned man, and famous 
Chronologer,
 could be so deceiued or abused to talke of 
Pigmeies,
 of men with long eares, and one foote, and such like? I could name many others, as 
Sir Iohn Mandeuill,
 the description of 
India,
 diuers pamphlets of voyages, and peraduenture histories of acceptation, in which not onely absurdities passe for current, but vntruths and impossibilities carry the sway of licence, and approbation. Therefore (as I said) for my owne part, I disclaime them all, and either tye my selfe to my poore endeuours, or aduenture on such passages of ciuill authoritie, as come neere probabilitie and religion: onely in this I will play the truant with others, that as in vnknowne countries they fill vp the Map with gyants, beasts, monsters, and some strange battailes: and in wri∣ting of Chronicles they passe ouer the liues of their first Princes with only names, and peraduenture suppositions, because they would say some thing: so in these, or of these remote Nations, I will onely tell you what I haue seen my self in some cursory trauels, or learned of others, with whom by an Interpreter I haue of purpose entertai∣ned communication: As when I was in 
Turky
 I saw the Armie of the 
Tartars
 mustred by the fields of 
Scideret,
 and had the priuiledge of a 
Ianizarie
 to protect me from wrong, and be my interpreter for such things, as my wit and memory incited me to make vse of. At my 
L: Em∣bassadors
 againe I presumed on a conference with the 
Per∣sian Embassador,
 and as farre as my memory and vnder∣standing was capable of instruction, made benefit of some relations: and going to sea to 
Alexandria
 there were


both 
Indians, Iewes, Arabians,
 and 
Armenians
 aboord, from whom I catched what I could, supplying my desire of no∣uelties with their discourses: of whom concerning the purpose in hand, I learnt, that 
China
 was a great and oppu∣lent countrey in continuall warres with the 
Tartars,
 ielous one of another, and an enemy in the highest degree to all strangers, yea so farre from hospitalitie, and pious inclina∣tion to entertainment and commiseration, that they studie to circumuent their passengers, and come aboord with hypocriticall desire of satisfaction in nouelties, and then at aduantage either surprize the ships, or endanger the weaker company by ouer-mastring them, as many of our 
English
 both at the 
Philippines,
 and landing in 
Iapan
 haue had cause of testification: nor amongst themselues is there any such appearance of happines, or plenty. For though they boast of mines and many pretious stones, yet doe they vent no commodities or merchandice, but for ready money, and we are faine to carry siluer into 
India,
 from whence we receiue such things, as curious stuffe, and trifling toyes, as they are disposed to vtter. But if you come neerer them, and to our purpose indeed, as by the 
Indians
 discourses may be collected; they are ielous, mali∣tious, want prouision, take little rest, are in tumultuous vp∣rores, terrified with theeues, for all there is nothing so se∣uerely punished, dare not displease their Emperor, who is in a manner adored amongst them, liue on rootes, and kernels of nuts, and troubled with serpents, and many venemous wormes, distempred with strange tempests, and windes, terrified with apparitions and illuding visions, kill their old men, if they liue too long, make no consci∣ence of selling their virgins for money, and filthy pr
sti∣tutions, are carelesse of any orders, and glory in nothing


but going to warres with the 
Tartars,
 and keeping all Na∣tions out of their countrey. Besides, they are diuers times subiect to famine of bread, and liue vpon herbes and fruit, nor doe they conuerse one with another with cheerefull meetings, but are enuious, if any grow richer than themselues: as for the country-man, his only main∣tenance consists in keeping a few Bees, silke wormes, fil∣ling his gardens with gowrdes and rootes, and making a kinde of drinke of berries, and the fruit of certaine trees preserued for the same purpose: but in all things so short of our example of happinesse, as he would be of reaching heauen with a stretched-out arme, that goeth of purpose to the top of the 
Alpes
 with supposition of attaining his purpose, because the mountaine seemeth so exalted aboue the inferior ground.






CHAP. IV. INDIA
 compared, and her defects manifested.


A
Lthough (as I said before) concerning 
 these idolatrous countries, I might with 
Iehu
 cast out the Priests of 
Baal,
 breake downe the altars, and ouerthrow the idols of the heathen, and so neede not once name them for want of true religi∣on, and acknowledging the mysterie of saluation: yet will I ouerpasse that principall point, and come to their Citie walls and plenteous fields with neerer approches of con∣futation:


nor shall their two summers, double increase of fruit, plentifull riuers, temperature of aire, strange wol∣ly and tailed sheepe, great fowle, and vnheard of wormes, with rindes of trees, silkes, pretious stones, canes, and ma∣ny other trifling marchandice, which they receiue for the most part by commutation out of 
China,
 terrifie me from my assertions, considering, if God send temporall bles∣sings, and they are either not wrought vpon with comfort, and orderly profit; or abused in their vse and seruice, it were better for a kingdome not to enioy the same at all. If then in 
India,
 and the many countries and kingdomes marching vnder the flourishing colours of her prosperi∣tie, be as many filthy customes of incontinency, that they prostitute their daughters for money, and are contented to sell their chastitie for reward, nay in sundry places to bring their virgins before beastly idols, and cause them to fill their wombe with the 
priapus
 of the same, whereat, if so be the tender maide seemeth terrified, or ashamed, the mother shall stand behinde, and thrust her most violently forward: with diuers other lamentable customes tending to abomination: how can it come neere our example, when adultery was punished with death in 
Israel,
 and there was not a whore to be found (especially by tolera∣tion) amongst the daughters of 
Iuda?
 If then in 
India
 the Kings and Princes swell against one another with ty∣ranous ambition and reuenges, raising violent hostilitie against their neighbours and confederates, and practising horrible cruelty in their slaughters and victories: how can it come neere our example, when 
Salomon
 was deno∣minated the Prince of peace, and confirmed a league of amitie and confederation with all adioyning Princes? If then in 
India
 the Kings and Princes suppose it a glory to


bee sequestred from their people, to terrifie them with cruell lookes and imperious controuling, not to be seene abroad, but in times of feares and terrors, to deny them orderly accesse for their complaints and greeuances, and to liue, as commanding obedience by tyranny, rather than loue: How can it come neere our example, when 
Salo∣mon
 made a porch before his Pallace to determine the controuersies of his people in person; offred sacrifice in publike vpon an Altar, and for seuen daies feasted all com∣mers with cheerefulnes; admitted the harlots to plead before him; and aduanced his mother on a throne by his right side in the open view of the congregation, and proclaimed free audience and accesse for all commers, that had cause of complaint, and oppression? If then in 
India
 theft and intrusion by strong hand be common matters, and howeuer there is great punishment inflicted on offen∣ders in this kinde, as also in 
China,
 yet do they liue in con∣tinuall feare one of another, and the rich are hard-hearted against the poore, not onely suffering them to sterue with∣out releefe, but in a manner hastning their deaths by au∣thoritie, if either they grow aged, or impotent, and haue not of their owne to releeue their necessities: How can it come neere our example, when in 
Israel
 there was nei∣ther vagabond, or begger, no man durst remoue the marke in his neighbours field, no man oppressed his brother with vsury, and euen contrary families were entertained with mutuall entercourses; yea when nature came to chal∣lenge her due, and sent her harbinger death to demand the same, they brought the body to the graue in peace, and solemnized the exequies with a fashionable ceremonie? If then in 
India
 there is a maine want both of flesh, fish, and other prouision for the sustenance of man, especially


to feede any multitude, or satisfie the meaner sort of peo∣ple, who know not, what orderly feasting, and neighbour∣ly meetings meane: How can it come neere our exam∣ple, when 
Salomon
 spent 30 oxen, with infinite other acates euery day, and the people met in abundance, eating and drinking euery man vnder his vine & fig tree, and sent pre∣sents and gifts to one another with mutuall conuersation & reciprocall loue: If then in 
India
 neither are the Cities hansomly contriued, nor well furnished with houses, want ciuill gouernment, and administration of iustice, if the country villages are rude, and disordered, liuing in suspi∣tion of one another for spoile and robbery, if they faile in all comelines and morall fashioning themselues to han∣somnes, and good order: How can it come neere our ex∣ample, where 
Salomon
 reedified the Cities of store, the Ci∣ties of fortification, the Cities of refuge, the Cities of plea∣sure, when 
Salomon
 had his orderly officers of visitation, and gaue commandment to ouer-looke the manifold di∣sturbances of the kingdome, and redresse the same with a strong hand against the mighty & insolent, and with a sup∣porting arme for the poore and afflicted? If then in 
India
 they care not to visit other countries, sell their people for slaues, make marchandice of one another, barbarously scorne to gratifie other Princes, and will in no sort practise the exploration of remote countries: How can it come neere our example, when 
Salomon
 built a Nauie at the red sea, had another to ioyne with 
Hiram,
 and sent abroad for gold and other prouision into forreine nations; when he liued in peace and amitie with 
Pharaoh,
 contracted a mari∣age with his daughter, and maintained all the honorable customes to inlarge the glory and happines of a kingdom? And so in diuers other particulars.










senting from 
Salomons
 prosperity and happinesse. So that to conclude in a word, neither are they to defend their owne glories, which so spred abroad former estimation, not to come neere our comparison in this her moderne di
unction. For in their wants they are almost vnwilling to make triall of any fortune, considering they haue had such disastrous euents, as both the 
Turkes
 haue mightily encroached and preuailed against them. The 
Arabians
 with diuers roads and ouer-watchings haue dilacerated their gouernment, and the other countries adiacent to the 
Ca∣spian
 sea stood at defiance with them: so that they not onely liue in continuall feare of further mischeefe, but are compelled to maintaine frontire garisons, to preuent finall ouerthrow and extirpation, and this they doe with extra∣ordinary charge on all sides, and want indeed the martiall brauery, and forcible possibility of their former armies. In their best peace (which is now still poysoned with the dregs of mischeeuous insurrections) they are deficient in orderly traphique of marchants, in well-rigged nauies for exploration of other countries, or maintaining confede∣racy with remoter Princes: in pleasant and secure passages and wayes to trauell in: in cities or townes of entertain∣ment, to lodge and repose the wearied company: in pro∣uision of the countrey to sustaine nature, according to the blessing exposed in that kinde: in the countrey-mans ho∣nest vocation, who is heere worse then a miserable slaue: in the honourable liberty of women and conuersable mee∣tings, who are heere debarred friendly entercourses, ex∣cept wantons and strumpets, whom they inuite against fe∣stiuals, to lengthen out their pleasure, and lasciuious de∣light in voluptuousnesse: all which with diuers other, as there are diuers others to bee brought to the triall, if wee


should dispute the matter more forcibly, come so farre short of our example, that they are rather meer contraries, and by reason of opposition, vtterly to bee excluded from any fulnesse of reputation, or true example of a King∣domes prosperity.






CHAP. VI. TVRKY
 compared, and her imperfections layd open.


A
Lthough the 
Grand Signeur
 is the onely 
 absolute Prince in the world, as hauing the liues, lands, and wealth of his sub∣iects liable to his wilfulnesse, and impe∣rious controling of whom hee please; yet commeth hee farre short of a King∣domes happinesse, religious administra∣tion, or generall blessings of a countrey, especially our ex∣ample, where 
Salomon
 established his Princes and Nobles 
in propagato sanguine,
 where the 
Israelites
 pitched euery man vnder the tents of their fathers houses, and armes of their family, where 
Israel
 eat and dranke in mirth, and all sorts were ouer-shaded with their vine-yards and figg∣trees in quiet, where the marchant trauelled in peace, and grew rich without repining, where many marchants were entertained from forraine countries, and well-commed with noble hospitality, where neither witch, begger, whore, or vsurer were permitted, and where plenty opened her lap, affoording equall distribution to all commers, who were either marked with merit, labour, vertue, or valour,


and because you shall haue pleasure in a little variety, we will thus search the wounds of this gouernment, and dis∣couer those defects, which must needes exempt her from exemplary happinesse, how euer she may swell with a big swolne face of territories and conquests, and first concer∣ning the cruelty and tyrannous slaughters amongst them∣selues.


To begin with the fundamentall firmnesse of their go∣uernment 
 and greatnesse, and the cheefe cause of expatia∣ting the Empire: it consisteth all in aduancing of slaues, and cutting off any one, whether brother, sonne, and sometimes the fathers, who are either a barre in the plea∣sant walke of their soueraignty, or giue the least cause of suspition through competition or popularity. As for the name of slaue; the greatest 
Viceer
 must acknowledge it, as the infallible position of establishment, a law ratefied by 
Mahomet,
 confirmed by custome, and strengthned through the obedience of all his vassals, as you may collect by that famous history of 
Mustapha,
 the principall 
Bashaw
 vn∣der 
 
Mahomet
 the first, who when hee saw the great Empe∣rour effeminately ouercome with the loue of 
Hyrena
 the faire 
Greeke,
 and that there was suspition of ill successe in the warres, by this retardance and ouer-passionate satisfa∣ction of pleasure, he aduentured to reclaime him from such neglect of his army, and tooke vpon him by some formall aduice, to diuert him from vilipending the 
Otthoman
 glo∣ry; but how he proceeded, with what prostitution, with how many tearmes of slaue, and miserable wretch, and how vnlookt for hee escaped with life, after hee lay groue∣ling on the ground, as resolued to die, our common stages can relate, and the story hath pregnant authority from many famous authours, who all conclude, that how euer


he remembred himselfe, and with a sterne repining at 
Mu∣stapha's
 audaciousnesse, with much a doe pardoned him from cruell execution: yet the beautifull 
Grecian
 shrunke vnder the stroak of a sauage hand, & 
e the next day (after a glorious shewing her with admiration to the whole ar∣mie) strucke off her head, and most barbarously, as he in∣ferred, to satisfie the army, deliuered him and them from further suspition of his effeminatenesse: in which fury he approached 
Adrinopolis,
 & neuer desisted till he had laid it prostrate before him. But if you would be acquainted with the true condition of their tyranny & imperiousnes, then looke vpon the new admission of their Emperours, into the sublime chaire of Maiesty, and you shall heare him commanding all his brethren to bee strangled before him, except one; reserued, if the time allow it, for propagation of children, who likewise vpon the 
Turkes
 suppliment that way, shall miscarry by one meanes or other: yea, some∣times it happens, that when the aged father, or eldest bro∣ther is contented to admit of his sonne or yonger to the coparcinary of administration, or if you will, absolute power in the Empire, by reason of impotency, age, luna∣cy, or other naturall defects, they are most inhumanly re∣warded with death, as 
Zelimus
 poysoned his father 
Baia∣zet,
 and the sonnes of 
Soliman
 the 
Magnificent
 shouldred one another into the pit of destruction.


Concerning the subiect; nobility they neuer suffer in continuall discents, nor permit any man to grow rich, mighty, or popular, otherwise then may stand with the pleasure of the Emperour, which is apparant by the de∣struction of many worthie 
Bashawes
 and Seruitours, who (when the Doctors of the Law haue concluded the mat∣ter by priuate conference) are commonly carried by a





confessing that 
Mordecai
 had not bin rewarded; but secret politicians supplied the roome, intimating still and still matter against him, which kindled the fire of the Empe∣rors ielousie to such a blaze, that nothing but his personall appearance could quench the same.


When the 
Viceer
 perceiued the danger of such ouer∣watchings, and began to be acquainted with too many princely messages, he absented himselfe a while, and with dilatory excuses laid as it were open his suspition of the Emperors ielousie against him, whereupon followed an obstinate deniall of comming, lest the affaires of the king∣domes might be intermitted; and when that serued not the turne, he determined to stand on his guard, till at last the 
Gran Signeur
 was aduised not to regard him at all: whereupon the 
Mufti
 was called to councell, which is their principall Churchman, who together with diuers Doctors of their law resolued, that he was too dangerous to liue, and yet policie must be vsed in cutting him off: When the foundation of this building was laid, letters were contriued from the 
Prince
 vnto him deceitfully im∣porting thus much: That he had great cause to be thank∣full to the great Prophet 
Mahomet
 for his indulgent care ouer the house of 
Ottoman,
 euen in these suspitious times to prouide, that a man of such courage, wisdom, and mag∣nanimity gouerned the sterne of the ship of his affaires, & like a discreet pilot knew how to conduce the barke of the Common-wealth to safe harbour. He accordingly assumeth the glory to himselfe, with full resolution, that either the yong Prince durst not finde fault, or nothing was fault-worthy, like 
Aesops
 asse, who supposed, that the Lyon would be terrified with his braying. For at last he came to the Emperors presence into the 
Seralio,
 who was


taught to entertaine him with a politicall acceptation, which lasted a while, and with the continuance of 14 daies seemed to wipe out the print of former vnkindnes: But when the day of his fatall destruction approched, (after the yong Prince had bin a hawking, and meeting with cer∣taine inhabitants of 
Bogdonia,
 and the borders of 
Russia,
 who made petition vnto Him for diuers redresses, gaue them a kinde of audience) hee was sodenly sent for to a priuate conference, which he verily supposed, according to some speciall inferences, tended to that purpose: nor did he once rebate the glory of his former iollity, but went at least with 300 
Ianisaries,
 and his other officers toward the gates of the 
Seralio,
 where by the way the 
Haga
 or 
Captaine
 of the 
Ianisaries
 met him to tell him, how the Prince was retired to a 
Caska
 by the sea side, and he must goe through the garden, and enclosure of Roe-bucks vn∣to him, which he performed accordingly, and neuer seem∣ed once staggering in his resolutions, till he came to the yron gate, and saw his company prohibited to enter, and the gate fast barred, as soone as he was admitted.


Here he must needs passe through a guard of 
Capogies,
 who demanded his 
Semiter,
 which he furiously denied, and with increase of rage and choller railed vpon them all. But they being too well instructed to forbeare any such opprobrious speeches, spared a reply of words, and tooke an opportunitie to ouer-master him with the company, who most cruelly cut him all to peeces: yet some would raise the Emperors ielousie from a suspition of loue to his mother, who taking a fitting opportunitie, as was imagi∣ned, came with him to admonish her sonne from his 
pede∣rastria,
 or accompanying with boyes, but belike they per∣formed it with vnseasonable wisdome; for in his furie he


spurned her away, and bad him remember, he was but a slaue. Some report that the first motiue of the 
Emperors
 displeasure was occasioned by reason of his buildings, which ouer-looking some priuate walkes in the 
Seralio,
 was both irkesome to the maiestie of the 
Prince,
 and a dore to let in his euerlasting hate, to which there wanted not the seuerall suggestions of many flatterers, and tem∣porizers. But let his death, and the cause be what it will, there is no gaine-saying their wilfulnes, nor moderating their rage and tyrannie, witnes his fathers killing of his elder brother, a Prince of great expectation: but comming one day (though he did it with reuerence and teares in his eyes) to put him in remembrance of the 
Ottoman
 glory, and inlarging the Empire, which euery Prince had done sauing himselfe, the admonition was so vnsauoury, or the ielousie of his vertues so forcible, that he beat him to death with his owne hands, to the amase of all the Iani∣saries and soldiers: insomuch that the grandmother, a woman of excellent parts, who is yet liuing, had like to haue perished in the hurly-burly. To which may be ad∣ded, this yong Princes dislike of one of his Concubines, whom he shot to death in his gardens. I could here in∣sert many other stories of their cruelty, and tyrannous supplanting one another, murthering 
Bashawes,
 destroying 
Princes,
 and letting loose the streames of all rage, wilfull∣nes, and distemperature: but you will say I gleane but out of anothers haruest, and time is too pretious to spend it in idle relations, I will therefore leaue you to the origi∣nall, and only for the strangenes make a breuiate of 
Mu∣stapha's
 tragedy, who was so cruelly murthered by an in∣temperate Prince, intoxicatedby the cunning of a mali∣tious strumpet.






The famous historie of 
MVSTAPHA.


SVltanus Soliman
 surnamed the 
Magnificent,
 amongst 
 many others had one beautifull Concubine called 
Rozza,
 or 
Roxalana,
 but more properly 
Hazathia,
 on whom he so doted in his later times, that all amarous dal∣liance with the rest was neglected for her sake, as if plea∣sure and delight attended her, though shee were but his slaue. Thus he so followed the humors of this wanton woman, that at last the noble Prince 
Mustapha
 his eldest sonne was prohibited his presence, and his former chil∣dren slightly regarded, in respect of hers: which when shee had fully apprehended, and politikely entertained, the next businesse was to make vse of the same, yea such vse, as cunning fauourites, and newly aduanced officers con∣triue, who suspecting some sudden alteration, and percei∣uing the Prince cannot last long, care not by what meanes they enrich themselues, and many times runne in the race of indirect courses to establish their hopes.


Wherevpon shee wonde vp her wilfulnes on the pesti∣lent bottome of 
Rustan Bashawes
 ambition, who had ma∣ried her daughter, and hauing likewise corrupted the principall 
Mufti
 to second her enterprise, they all com∣bined a league of amitie, and proiected to cast the Empire on her owne sonnes: which was no sooner ratified, and confirmed betweene them, but on a sudden shee became very deuout, and being rich with the fauours and presents bestowed vpon her, proposed a meritorious worke for her soules health by erecting some religious monument or 
Mosque,
 which was intercepted by the high Priest, as


discouering the invaliditie of the same, because shee was yet a slaue, and therefore laboured in a busines, whose me∣rit and effects must tend to the good of another. This caused such a dissimiled pensiuenes, that 
Soliman
 himselfe was in a manner exanimated to behold the darling of the world in such a confusion and heauines: shee againe well lessond how to act her part, filled the scene with teares of disconsolation, related all occurrences from the begin∣ning, and finely vrged, how her godly zeale had certaine obstacles, which must be remoued, ere her former alacrity could gaine the field of this sullen meditation and vnto∣ward sadnes: whereupon the Doctors and Interpreters of the 
Alcaron
 were sent for, and commanded to deliuer the truth without praeuarication, who thus animated, dis∣couered the secret most plainely, and with impudent asse∣uerations concluded, that she had iust cause to complaine, & insist on the meanes to procure her redress, which made such impression into the ouer-worne heart, and easily-per∣swaded disposition of the 
Emperor,
 that he presently ma∣numitted hir, & by sound of trumpet proclaimed her free∣dome, and so cheered her, that he might the better reioyce in her company. But when shee had thus raised her selfe vpright vpon the honorable steps of liberty, shee stood vpon higher termes, and was not ashamed to assure him there was another lesson to be taken out, than now to dally with her as his slaue: for being free it was against the law of 
Mahomet
 to be commanded as a strumpet, and therefore, how euer he could dispence with religion, and ouer-awe the same, shee would not, nor durst betray her soule, as a delinquent in such impiety: yet she prostrated her life before him, and was ready to yeeld her necke to the blocke, if so it pleased him to inforce it. Here againe


were the Doctors summoned, who maintained her cause, and with exceeding admiration at her piety and zeale fell humbled on the ground before him, with request not to cast her headlong to destruction, and damne her soule for euer, which so enflamed him, as 
Nititur inuetitum,
 that without looking aduisedly on the pretended mischiefe, and searching too narrowly in the closet of her deuises, in a foolish passion he solemnely married her.


This is that she long expected, and raising her thoughts with her fortunes, after much variety and infinite passages 
 in the Common-wealth, she now studied nothing but the aduancement of her family; which could not be done vntil the worthy Prince 
Mustapha
 his eldest sonne by a former wife was thrust into a slaughter house, she quickly brought him into the danger of suspition (for euen good Princes are iealous in points of soueraignty) and cunningly in∣ferred, that she affected not his popular loue, his great concurses, his strengthning of 
Amasia,
 his entertaining of Embass: from 
Tartary,
 his taking vp such beautifull virgins out of 
Georgia
 and 
Mengrelia,
 with diuers other probabi∣lities, that he determined a present enlarging of his great∣nesse: which was as quickly apprehended; as politickely vrged, and nothing could satisfie the Emperor, but the present sending for 
Mustapha,
 who although he was fore∣warned of the mischiefe, and aduised to stand on his guard with full resolution, that the army was firme vnto him: yet remembring it was his father commaunded, and how obedience was a duty befitting a sonne; but principally laying a firme foundation on a cleare conscience, and an vncorrupt heart, he came to 
Constantinople,
 but was wel∣comed as Husbandmen doe their cattle into pleasant fields for to make them the more fit for the Butcher. Thus


followed the tragedy of this noble and worthy Prince made the tennis ball of Fortune, the misery of a doting iealous man, the florishes of an impudent cunning wo∣man, the vanity of an ambitious idle 
Bashaw,
 and the hy∣pocrisie of a deceitfull imposturing Priest. For the Father strangled his sonne the iewell of the Empire, and perished after the action with vntimely griefe. The villanous wo∣man raised her sonnes to the dignitie; but they quickly supplanted one another, which tumbled her into the pit of destruction. The Bashaw shrunke vnder the pressure of confusion: the Priest was disappointed and strangled; and the whole gouernment tossed with the tempestuous billowes of distruction.






The Story of a Rennegado Bashaw.


IN the raigne of 
Amurath
 the third this mans father there was a certaine Rennegado Dutchman aduanced to the dignitie of a Bashaw; for so they call Christians, who ab∣iure their religion at mans estate, and are circumcised ac∣cording to the Law of 
Mahomet.
 Where by the way you must consider of that mischieuous position not to dispute of either law, gouernment, or ceremonies of their religion, but absolutely allow of the great Prophet, and the Alca∣ron as infallible verity, wherein the Romane Byshoppes tread the same measures, and interdict any man from cal∣ling their actions in question, not suffering vs to read the Canon of Gods law, nor once dispute in matters of faith, but to confirme the power of the Church as of sufficiency to direct vs in the way of truth: a most diuellish, and re∣pugnant conclusion against God and his word, who com∣maundes vs to search the Scriptures, and try the spirits.


But to our Story. This Bashaw liuing in great pompe to the outward show, seemed yet much excruciated in minde with meditation on the latter iudgement, and the sauing of his soule, whereupon he communed with one of his principall slaues to the same purpose, admitting all free∣dome of speech, and animating him so farre to deliuer his opinion, that at last hee attempted his patience in this sort. Sir you know, or at leastwise should know, that God at the first did chuse vnto himselfe a people called the Iewes, giuing them a law, priesthood, and Prince named 
 
Moses,
 who questionlesse is the Mediator still in heauen for honest Iewes imploring his assistance on earth; but when this wretched people despised the blessings of so great a God, falling to idolatry, and other horrible abuses, they were cast out of fauour, and vanished like smoake, or if you will, resembled, water spilt on the ground neuer to be gathered vp againe. Then did God select another nation called Christians, and admitted of their worthy acknow∣ledgement of Iesus Christ, whom they suppose God and man, and borne of a Virgin, and in whom still the good Christian beleeueth; this caused their increase of wealth, maiesty, and greatnesse, till at last growing wanton with prosperitie, they tooke the same or worse courses with the Iewes, and by degrees became flat Apostates, so that God was weary of them likewise, & gaue a third nation power to thrust them from their firmenesse, and disiointed their established foundation of religion, and happinesse: which was acted by the hands of Turkes, who succeeded them, and had likewise their Prophet 
Mahomet
 to instruct and direct them to loue the great God of heauen more religiously than the others, from whose supportation the maiesty you now behold, spreadeth the wings of glory


ouer the imperiall Citties both of Iewes, and Christians, namely, 
Ierusalem
 and 
Constantinople:
 nay, if you looke into 
Asia,
 we haue 
Tauris
 and 
Babilon;
 and in 
Egipt
 pos∣sesse 
Cairo
 or 
Memphis,
 and 
Alexandria:
 so that no doubt we shall multiply blessing vpon blessing, if wee continue confident toward him, and his elected Prophet; other∣wise some strange and barbarous nation shall expell and extirpate vs, as we haue vsurped ouer others. Thus then you see with what successe these three religions haue bin caried in the current of estimation both with God and man; namely the Iewes, who haue 
Moses
 to make inter∣cession for them: The Christians, who haue IESVS their Mediator; and Mahumetans, who depend vpon the me∣rits and exaltation of 
Mahomet.
 But for you, that are of no religion, nay, haue denied the faith, wherein you were borne and baptised, there is sure no redemption, but the Deuill himselfe to fetch you away. Which answere was so distasting, although as you heard, it went vnder safe conduct, that the tyrannous Lord not onely commaun∣ded him to be broken on a wheele to shiuers, but inflicted many Christian slaues in his house with the like punish∣ment, and thus much for their crueltie amongst them∣selues: now you shall see their behauiour toward Stran∣gers.










CHAP. VII.
 The indirect proceedings of Turkes against Christians con∣trary to all religion or morality.


W
Hen M
r
 BARTON was Agent for the En∣glish in 
Constantinople,
 as he passed along to 
 the Viceers vpon occasion of busines, the great Empresse this mans Grandmother, (For 
Amurath
 the third his father was but a young man, when he died) came of purpose to see him, formerly moued with a commendatory report of his vir∣tues and personage by diuers iudicious Turkes. Where∣upon she promised her fancy some satisfaction, which not to be performed without a formall looking vpon him, she was somewhat appeased, that this occasion was mini∣stred; but finding it farre short of a fulnesse, another in∣terueiw was contriued, and the Scene acted in the house of a Iewe, to whose wife she came disguised to bargaine for certaine pearle, after which in the affaires of the Mer∣chants she countenanced him extraordinarily, and had at last priuate conference with him, giuing so way vnto their opinion, that supposed the secret passages of kinde∣nesse betweene them, which was no sooner published, and entertained amongst the Bashawes for current, but shortly after he died, not without suspition of poison, and our English affaires had vntoward alteration, as the han∣ging of our Consull at 
Alexandria,
 the imprisoning of di∣uers in the blacke Tower, a place neere 
Pompeis
 pillar at the mouth of the 
euxine
 sea, especially 
Arnald
 and 
Stran∣guish,



who lay there long for their ransome; the terrible insulting ouer slaues committing all to their gallies with∣out respect of persons; the denying of our former right in the admitting of Merchants into the 
sacra Porta
 vnder the bandiers of 
England,
 and giuing the precedency to 
France;
 the raising of customes, the office being farmed by the Iewes; the abusing of Trauellers and other of our Coun∣trey men by Ianisaries, and Mechanicks of 
Stanbole:
 the customary calling vs Christians dogges, not daring once to returne an vnsauory answere; with diuers such like ex∣orbitant abuses.


In the time of Master 
Henry Lisso
 the Prouinces of 
Bogdonia
 and 
Moldauia
 were at strife about the establish∣ment 
 of a Gouernour; but at last condescended to an v∣surper, which caused the banishment and flight of the true Princes, whereby they were compelled to seeke for succour vnder English protection at 
Constantinople,
 being Protestants, or at least willing to admit of our re∣formation; but whether feare, or corruption preuailed, he was to the great indignity of our Nation not onely dis∣couered, but taken away perforce euen out of our Embas∣sadors house, and very disorderly committed to the seuen Towers prisoner, from whence by the helpe of 
Signior Gasparo Gratiano
 a man for speciall vses entertained a∣mongst the English, whose brother and sister were both taken and admitted amongst the Turkes, being formerly Christians of 
Transiluania,
 or 
Austria;
 he escaped: but some disastrous fortune returned him backe againe into the hands of apprehenders, who with a more powerfull restraint sent him to the castells; from whence once againe through the fauour of a Turkish woman he got his liberty, and escaped into 
Poland;
 but there hee taried not long,


both in regard of their iealosie of him to discouer their proceedings, and his suspition of them for some treache∣rie against his life, or at least his liberty, and so he passed to the Emperour, where finding small reliefe, hee came through 
France
 into ENGLAND, and there saw the diffe∣rence between other Nations concerning the entertaining of strangers. For he was not onely admitted with corre∣spondency to his estate, but had letters of credit to the 
Gran Signeur
 for his reestablishment, with sufficient induce∣ment to our merchants to lend him 10000. duckets, vp∣on the least hope of his better successe. In his absence his mother with great expence and gifts elaboured his restitu∣tion, but greater summes as it should seeme weighed downe the other scale of his respect, or the fortune of hap∣pier men preuailed against him. For after she had spent 20000. duckets, tasted the misery of contempt, impor∣tuned my Lord Embassador, I meane Sir 
Thomas Glouer,
 in the busines, and saw the affliction of Petitioners fed with dilatory excuses, she very impatiently attended the good hower of her sonnes returne, and was terrified to experience with what extremities men deiected must wra∣stle, especially when he came indeed, and was not onely repulsed in his suite, but entertained with scorne and con∣tempt. Where is now the Turkish ostentation of suppor∣ting the innocent, and distributing of iustice to all sorts of people?


When 
Soliman Catanea
 was Bashaw of 
Algier,
 Master 
Christopher Willoughby
 a Gentleman and Merchant of 
 LONDON had his shippe and goods seazed on most in∣iuriously to the valew of 50000. duckets, whereof many complaints were made, and diuers letters from the Coun∣cell of ENGLAND in his behalfe; but still distasting an∣swers


were returned, procrastinating the matter, and af∣fording much suspition of not preuailing in his recouery: whereupon he went another way to worke, and made the principall Viceer acquainted with the same, betweene whom and 
Catanea
 he vnderstood was a little grudging: so that when he had promised him 5000. pieces of gold, and laide open his grieuances, that they seemed vnanswer∣able, he was remooued from his gouernment, and by a missiue commission cited to 
Constantinople.
 But it should seeme all this was but forme; for in 
Zio
 the counsell of his friends diuerted his appearance, and the power of his presents reconciled the Viceer, who contrary 
o expecta∣tion sent him to 
Tunis
 as Gouernour, not onely neglecting his former promises and prosecution of the busines, but in a manner deriding their importunity, who complained against a Turkish Bashaw. Master 
Willoughby
 euery way vnsatisfied made it a new suite, and with letters both from King and Councell came himselfe to 
Constantinople,
 and there sollicited the cause, preuailing so farre by Sir 
Thomas Glouers
 meanes, that the Bashaw was at last mansuold, and condemned to pay the money, or loose his head: But this was still the ordinary manner of satisfaction, when Chri∣stians demaund iustice against Turkes; for the Gentleman was onely protracted with good words, but in a manner despaired of further preuailing, and so hee remained euery way discontented.


The 
Vineyard
 a shippe of 
London,
 where of 
Harris
 was Master, hauing Turkes and Turkish goods abord, 1605. 
 was surprized by the Maltasses, which although it fell to the losse and displeasure of our Merchants, yet bred it great vnkindnesse euen in 
Constantinople
 by forcible in∣ducements, how the shippe was rather betraied by the


treachery of the English, then surprised by inequality of fight, so that the Emperour as young as he was, (for hee was then scarce fully 16.) commaunded in a fury to set fire on all our shippes in harbour, and threatned the Mer∣chant with further inflictings, not once admitting either of excuse or iustification, whereupon that night (for all the Viceers and Mufties opposition) one of them was burnt indeed, whether by chance or of purpose, I may not dis∣pute, such is the tyrannie of their gouernment, and misery of men vnder their subiection.


Edward Conach
 a Merchant resident at 
Aleppo,
 when 
 Master 
Paul Pindar
 was Consull ioyned with a French∣man in a bargaine of galles to the valew of 12000. dol∣lers, which they bought of a 
Moore:
 the money was no sooner paide, and the commodity ready to be housed, but a certaine Turke perswaded the Moore, that he was cou∣soned in the weight, who still replied to the contrary, con∣fessing himselfe much satisfied, and a great gainer in the traphique; but at last ouer-ruled by the suggestion, and villanous instigation, they made it a matter of complaint before the Bashaw, who with an apprehensiue anger en∣tertained the same, as glad of any occasion to quarrell with a Christian, especially a Merchant, from whom mo∣ney might be extorted; whereupon he sent for the officer, that weighed the galles, and so vrged the matter against him, that whether right, or wrong, hee was broken on a wheele all to pieces, and after many wordes of reproach calling vs dogges, and deceitfull wretches, the Consull had a terrible commaund to put in execution the like ex∣emplary iustice on the Merchants. But hee perceiuing a trecherous conueiance of the busines, procrastinated the Sessions, had not the Ianisaries and common Turkes ex∣claimed


against our retardance, and vrged, that seeing the Officer suffred death there should be either a commutati∣on of liues, or full restitution, which in the end cost 10000. dollers, 6000. for the French, and 4000. for the English, a summe that stopped the mouth of fury, and brought the Tigre at last to more lenity.


About the 20. of 
October
 1607. the Viceer, that came 
 from 
Arabia,
 and had beene resident before in 
Gran Cairo
 presented the Emperour and rest of the Bashawes with many rich iewels, by which occasion the opinion of his inestimable wealth filled very quickly the dangerous eares of Repiners, and diuers murmured against him, as if hee grew too mighty for a subiect; nay, there wanted not malicious instruments to sound out the harsh discord of his ouerthrow by traducing him for many sinister actions in his gouernments; for ambitious insinuating into vulgar respect; for attempting to winne the Ianisaries by vaine∣glorious expences; for releasing of slaues, in whom ano∣ther man had a propriety; for repining at the former Vi∣ceers supplantation; for complaining on the Emperours vicious louing of boyes, with such like: all which added but fewell to the fire, which at last consumed him. For within two daies hee was found dead, some said of the plague, some that he was strangled, some poysoned, and some that he entertained two vnwelcome guests griefe and discontent: Howsoeuer, his goods, treasure, children, houses, and all belonging vnto him, were seazed vpon to the 
Gran Signeurs
 vse, which confirmed their opinion, that supposed him murthered for his wealth.


The shippe of the 
Iohn Baptist
 being in 
Zio
 about the beginning of 
Nouember
 the same yeare, was searched by Turkes for the Cooke, vpon a supposition, that hee was


confederate with a French slaue about his escape; but he denying the accusation was imprisoned, had his hands al∣most flead, and suffered great torment to enforce a confes∣sion. At last meere hunger compelled the Offender to dis∣couer himselfe, and most voluntarily to lay the guilt vpon his owne shoulders, whereby the Englishman was after great suite discharged, otherwise no doubt he had felt the effect of Turkish iustice.


In the yeere 1605. amongst other Trauellers, and sear∣chers for nouelties out of curiosity, a French Gentleman presumed to tell the artillery, and canons before the Ta∣pinaw, as they lay by the sea shore, which was taken for so great an offence, that he had a 100. blowes giuen him on the feete according to the manner of such reuenges, and not dismissed without great intercession of the Embassa∣dour. These and many other instances of their tyrannous gouernment would fill whole volumes, and make easie collections the discouerers of their incongruity betweene 
Salomons
 magnificense, peace, plenty, administration, wise∣dome, affabilitie, vprightnesse, and good orders; and their pride, contentions, wants, confusions, diuellish policy, tyrannie, wrested constructions, and wilfulnesse: so farre from the example of happines, and methode of a well setled Common-wealth, that I will absolutely dis∣claime the naming of any true goodnesse amongst them, not that I touch the maine point of religion in de∣nying the Godhead of Christ, an argument of sufficiency to debarre him from worldly and terrestriall happinesse, but that many heathenish reasons of firmely setled king∣domes disalow his vsurpation, and strangely compacted tyranny tending to nothing, but wilfulnesse in themselues, and slauery ouer others, all proceeding from his chal∣lenges



militari iure,
 and that the Disposer of Kingdomes would humble vs from any ostentation of a perpetuity on earth.






CHAP. VIII.
 Their manner of aduancement, and diuersitie of customes farre from our example, and orderly prosperitie.


O
Vr former allegations haue maintain∣ed, 
 that the Turkish Empire is cor∣roborated by the absolute will of the Prince, and wretched duty of the subiect; for he pulleth downe and aduanceth whom he pleaseth, and without sense or reason debar∣reth any man from pleading in his owne behalfe, or contesting with authoritie, if so be, he will not haue it so; otherwise, there is a certaine shadow of vprightnesse amongst them; an approaching to honor by degrees, and spreading the faire colours of some good customes, though farre short of our example: all which in in this Chapter shall be for diuers reasons enlarged. You must then consider, that euery second or third yeare his Officers range ouer all his kingdomes, and territories for slaues, Moores, and Eunuchs, but especially for the beau∣tifullest and handsommest children they can finde, being all the sonnes and daughters of Christians, who accor∣dingly are brought into his seuerall 
Seralios
 by 20. and 30000. at a time, and there from their infancy instructed in the Law of 
Mahomet,
 circumcised, and disposed of with∣out


knowledge of parents, friends, or countrey, except some Eunuch or Keeper out of meere commiseration discouer the same; so that all his Concubines, Wiues, Officers, and souldiers are the off-springs of Christians depending immediately on the Princes Exchequer, and pensions, not acknowledging other God, other law, other religion, other King, other Benefactor, or other life (ex∣cept in the story of 
George Castriot,
 who rebelled against him, after he knew his father was a Christian, and King of 
Epirus,
 which we may briefly runne ouer thus. When 
Amurath
 the 2. had conquered 
Epirus,
 with many other places of 
Seruia, Bulgaria,
 and 
Albania,
 he tooke prisoners 
 with him to 
Adrinopolis
 the King, and fiue of his sonnes, whom he tormented most barbarously vpon some dis∣tasting reply of the old Prince by putting out their eyes, and at last strangling them, except the youngest named 
George,
 whom he so fancied in his infancie, that he present∣ly circumcised him, instructed him in the Law of 
Maho∣met,
 and kept him secure in his owne pallace, vntill a mighty Champion of 
Persia
 made a challenge to fight with any Turke for the honour of both Empires hand to hand, starknaked, and with single 
Semiters:
 wherein as the motiue might be honourable enough, so the manner seemed ridiculous; yet so formidable, that for three daies together he insulted round about the Court without a daring answerer, or any man who durst take the matter in hand; at last this 
George Castriot
 out of some diuine inspi∣ration, and generous spirit, stepped foorth in the presence of the Emperour, not fully 18. yeere old, and without procrastinating the matter, stripped himselfe before them, and made them as much amazed at the beautifulnes
, and comelinesse of his person, as greatnesse of courage, and


shaking his sharp and glistring curtelax triumphantly ouer his head, approached the 
Persian,
 who by this time was prepared to the encounter, and in lesse then one quarter of an houres trauersing the ground, closed with him, wrastled with him, stradled ouer him like a 
Colossus,
 after hee had layd him on his backe, and strucke off his head: for which hee was presently embraced in his sweat by the great Em∣perour, inuested with a robe of honour, proclaimed by the sound of a trumpet 
Scanderbeg, quasi Alexander Mag∣nus,
 and aduanced to the dignity of 
Generall
 of the army: Therfore I wonder at their ignorance, or slender enforma∣tion, which haue published in print, that it was a name of scorne and derision; when we neuer read of so famous an action, and so high a recompence, wherein hee proceeded more and more, with loue of the army and regard of the Prince, till indeed an 
Eunuch,
 rauished with his worthi∣nesse, discouered what he was, and opened at large his fa∣thers story vnto him, whereat hee startled, as it were con∣founded, and neuer desisted, till he had perswaded the ar∣my to reuolt, and so obtained his Kingdome, making war against the 
Turke
 seuenteene yeere together, as in the lar∣ger stories may appeare. But to the businesse in hand.


The naturall 
Turke
 they call 
Muscellman,
 and he seldom comes to preferment: but liues as a trades-man in cities, 
 husbandman in the countrey, or mariner at sea: yet, for the most part, are all your gally-slaues Christians, and o∣uerlooked by the cruell eyes of hard-hearted masters, the rest cast vp their account in this manner. At the begin∣ning they are called 
Gimoglanes,
 or 
Azamoglanes,
 resem∣bling 
 poore hospitall-boyes, doing all manner of drudge∣ry, both in court & the houses of 
Bashawes,
 and are known by a plaine habit and strange hat on their head, which is a


felt like a suger-loafe, of a maiden-haire colour.


The second degree is of 
Ianizaries,
 whose 
Haga
 or Cap∣taine is a most honourable, though dangerous place. Of 
 these be two sorts: of the court, limited in their numbers; and at large without restraint, as alwaies mustred for chiefe souldiers in the army: yea, as (a man may say) the principall beame of the whole Empires frame. For from their suffrages and obedience, the 
Gran Signeur
 is confir∣med: from their repinings, disorders are multiplied: from their partiality, a sonne deposeth a father: and from their mutinies confusion riseth, and like a swelling sea casteth downe the bankes of all gouernment.


The third sort are 
Capogies,
 employed as porters of gates, purseuants on errands, attenders on the 
Viceers,
 as 
 they sit at meat in their great 
Dowana's,
 which be open hals trauersed, as occasion shall serue with Persian hangings, and sometimes trusted with secret murthers, and such like dangerous businesse.


The fourth place is appropriate to the 
Spahyes,
 who are inferiour horse-men, with high fethers in their strange fa∣shioned 
 hats, somewhat more glorious then the 
Ianizaries,
 their arming, as also the 
Ianizary,
 keepes some correspon∣dency with the 
Persian.
 On foot, either bow and arrowes, and a semiter, or hargabush and a semiter: on horse-backe the very same, with addition of a shield made of sinewes, or the barke of an Indian tree, cast behinde at their backs, with addition of a pollax, hatchet, or iron mace, which are made like scepters: but, for the most part, none pre∣sumes to weare them vnder the degree of a 
Chiaus,
 who haue them in the city of siluer for shew, and of steele for execution.


The fift roome is supplyed by the 
Chiaus,
 a degree of 



honourable eminence and may ranke with our 
Barons.
 For they ride in veluet gownes, siluer-plated saddles, costly stirrups, and rich turbanes: with these I may almost equall the Captaines of castles, forts, frontire townes, bands of foot, cornets of horse, and such like Commanders, known by the name of 
Haga's.
 Heere also, though hee seeme to step a little higher, may be seated the 
Cady,
 who is a Iudge or Magistrate ouer criminall causes, ouer whom there is one principall called 
Cadeleskier,
 as our Lord cheefe Iu∣stice, in some places they haue also 
Sub-Bashawes
 accor∣ding to his 
Sansacks, Trimatriots,
 or countrey diuisions, ei∣ther for maintaining his armies, or prouision ouer his ci∣ties. Then may you name with a little better reputation the Treasurer called 
Testerdy,
 ouerseer of customes, which is an office farmed by the 
Iewes,
 his 
Chancellor,
 Doctours of the Law, and such like.


On the sixt step ofhonour is the 
Bashaw
 lifted vp, who is a principall Viceroy, or at least hath beene, ouer King∣domes 
 and Countries, such as 
Arabia, Aegypt, Tauris, Tunis,
 and diuers others, both in 
Asia, Affricke,
 and 
Europe,
 and 
 according to the dignity and maiesty of the place called 
Beglerbeg:
 these are euery three yeeres 
mansuold,
 that is to say, remooued. For as they be subiect to strange ouerseers, so they are not permitted to grow rich, and indeed seeme iealous of their liues and estates, if any extraordinary for∣tune or greatnesse be imposed vpon them, except the 
Ba∣shaw
 of 
Aleppo,
 who either is so permitted to haue, or ma∣keth his place hereditary, daring sometimes to doe actions befitting an absolute Prince.


The last and greatest place of account is a 
Viceer,
 who commonly exceede not fiue in number, besides the 
Gene∣rall
 
 of the army, who is principall, these bee they that go∣uerne


the Empire, and to whose trust all matters depen∣ding in controuersie are committed. But you must consi∣der, that times haue altred their first strictnesse, when in the inchoation of goodnesse they resolued on a perseue∣rance & stedfastnesse. For amongst the best of them, abuse hath bespotted that faire promising countenance, and o∣uer-vailed that beauty, which shewed true Iustice, puni∣shed extortion, and made adultery one of their haynousest offences, with fowle deformity, and new fashions of im∣piety. And thus much for their persons. Now to their customes, and generall conditions.


The 
Turkes,
 by the law of their 
Alcaron,
 should drinke nothing but water, or water mixed with honey, which they 
 call 
sherbert:
 yet the better sort haue certaine 
Iuliups,
 which be syrups of roses, violets, and such like, of which a spoon∣full or two will season a pinte of water, and is not onely pleasant in taste, but powerfull enough in operation: they shaue all their head, sauing one tuft on the crowne, super∣stitiously imagining to bee pull'd vp to heauen thereby: they maintaine their beards with great formality and cost, and haue them in such reputation, that they sweare by them: they sildome doe any thing in vaine, or speake an idle world, but in a substantiall grauity passe the time, euen at their pleasure and sports: they sit crosse-legg'd, and so commonly eat on the ground, or higher bench: they hate prophanation, and will not suffer 
Christ
 to be ill spoken of. Their religion generally carries a reuerent shew, but no substantiall commendation, as allowing God Omnipo∣tent, a father, inuincible, and creator of the world, and 
Ie∣sus Christ
 as the Prophet of his time, as 
Moses
 had beene before, but haue opinion that 
Mahomet
 was sent to them, as the last 
Mediator,
 with promise ofreturne to consum∣mate


their eternity after 1000 yeeres, which time is almost expired, whereupon hee enrolled a booke called his 
Alca∣ron,
 in which he bound together, both lawes touching re∣ligion, and precepts for ciuill administration, with prohi∣bition of disputing on their probability, and warrantize of the flourishingest Common-wealth vnder the sunne, vpon their obseruation; coniuring them to a strict obedience, if euer they hoped to thriue in glory and terrestriall maiesty, and attaine the blessednesse of an immortall Kingdome, and a trebled felicity in the world to come: wherein hee imitated 
Lycurgus,
 who compelled the 
Lacedemonians,
 and bound them by oath to the resolute keeping his instructi∣ons, vntill his returne, which they ratefied by a solemne vow, whereupon coniecturing the subsequent good, hee banished himselfe for euer; or, as some suppose, threw himselfe from a cliffe of 
Olympus.
 The like wee reade of 
Empedocles,
 but with greater suspition of ambition, as in∣deede affecting a god-head, who cast himselfe into the 
Cra∣teres
 of 
Aetna,
 after hee had combined the 
Sicilians
 to the iudicious allowance of his decrees.


They loue their Churches, reuerence the Priests, make account of Naturals, dumb men, and Lunaticks, and must 
 not enter into their 
Mosques,
 either with their shooes on, or fowle hands, or any vnreuerent gesture. Amongst these the order of 
Deruices
 or Turners are of greatest ac∣count, as men liuing a contemplatiue life, and no way tran∣sported with mundane affaires. They celebrate diuers re∣ligious dayes, especially Friday, and haue many ceremo∣nies of preaching, musike & solemne silence: concluding their seruice with a strange turning about, encreased by de∣grees from a slow stillnes to a violent circular whirling, pa∣
ible of foure seuerall diuisions, lasting in all an houre, ac∣cording


to the modulent sound of certaine instruments, which haue a primordiall solemnity, and so by little and little encrease to a swiftnesse, in which time they with strange gestures looke vp to heauen, and when they haue done thus a quarter of an houre, all in a sweat they fall groueling to the ground, and haue certaine garments cast ouer them, to preuent taking of colde; then after a while they beginne againe, and so foure times together: the loo∣king vp hath relation to extraordinary visions, and that they are rauished with high inspiration, forgetting the world, and all affaires in the same: the prostitution on the ground would acknowledge the vilenesse of mans creati∣on, and their humility to consider of the same: they ob∣serue the ceremonie of praying for the dead, bewailing their losse, and bemoaning ouer the graues; they repaire to their Mosques or Temples foure times a day, and on Friday fiue: and they haue a solemne fast and a solemne feast, called 
Ramdam
 and 
Byrame,
 much about our Alhal∣low-tide, at which time their Mosques, and the turrets, are solemnely furnished with burning lamps night and day, fiue weekes together: with diuers other particulars, much like the absurd ceremonies, both of Greeke and Romish Churches, consisting all in forme and outward adoration, as you shall heare anone.


They circumcise the men, & in 
Arabia
 cut their women, they sell all things by weight, write Bias, like the ancient 
Arabians
 and 
Chaldeans,
 read backward as the 
Iewes,
 and obserue many other customes of 
Moses
 Law. For their women are sildome or neuer seene abroad, except the meaner sort, who yet couer head and face (sauing their ve∣ry eyes: what rich apparrell soeuer shee weares, the out∣ward garment is a long cloth gowne with wide sleeues,


breeches, boots, or rather buskins, and an ill-fashioned tire on their heads: their hands are without gloues, their nailes and eye-browes painted, which they learnt of the 
Greekes,
 and all outward appearance most vncomely; but within doores they are more stately, and with a comely presence entertaine those which are to be admitted. Their marria∣ges are somewhat strange; for they neuer see their wiues, vntill they lie with them, vnlesse it bee such as are able to buy slaues, and keepe many concubines; and then expect no dowry, either of land or money, but 
vtensells
 and pre∣sents of apparrell, which are carried in delicate baskets on boyes heads, singing of songs in the street before the Bride, vntill shee come to her place of aboad. In which negotiation are elder women employed, and dare not but tell the truth, vntill the matter be fully determined. Thus are also their incontinences satisfied by entercourses of Pandars, yet for aduantage they haue brothels and stewes; yea, the very 
Balnea's
 serue for meeting places.


Thus could I runne ouer a large field of discourses: but my purpose is onely by demonstration to bring the defects 
 of this Empire in question, for all their ostentation of glo∣ry, and proud boasting of magnificent gouernment, yet so farre short of our example and comparison, as they are from iudgement and loue of religion, who extoll it for the greatest, best, and richest Kingdome of the world. 
Salomon
 led the Vantguard of royalty, and like a noble minded Land-Lord, let happinesse to farme amongst all his Ten∣nants rent free. The 
Turke
 is so farre from augmenting the peace and plenty of his subiects, that as soone as any of them is but entring into the field of thriuing and con∣tentment, he puls them backe, and thrusts them doggedly into the dungeon of penury and wants. 
Salomon
 was an


honourable King, and sat on a throne to decide the con∣trouersies of his people. The 
Turke
 is an absolute Tyrant, and neither commeth amongst them, but for glorious magnificence, nor admitteth any to approach neere him, but for pleasure and wantonnesse. 
Salomon
 had Princes ouer the Tribes, and the sonnes of Lords enioyed their fathers immunities. The 
Turke
 hath none of eminence, but himselfe, and the name of slaue obscureth all light of posterity. 
Salomon
 kept an order in his cities and townes, whether they were places of harbour, traffique, and forti∣fication; or for concourse, sacrifice, and reposednesse. The 
Turke
 alloweth none, or very few, with 
Decorum
 and glory of Citizens. In the dayes of 
Salomon,
 the Country-man liued at peace vnder his vine, and the 
Israelites
 with∣out number eat, dranke, and made merry. Amongst the 
Turkes
 nothing but feare and terrour is threatned, like a tempestuous storme hanging ouer the heads of the Inhabi∣tants. For the cities lie deuasted, the townes depopulated, and confusion is powred out in full measure amongst them; yea, spred like a menstruous cloth, to make mode∣sty and true gouernment ashamed, so that if you returne to the ouerlooking the gallant fields of 
Greece,
 which in times past was a subiect for Philosophers and Poets to write vpon, except some few, namely 
Constantinople, Gratianopolis, Andrinople, Philipopolis, Gallipolis, Salenica,
 and such like, and heere and there a pretty towne in an Iland, the rest are vnwalled, the people vnarmed, their goods taken by force, their daughters reserued for incon∣tinency, and the whole Countrey a true patterne of mise∣ry, insomuch that the Inhabitants being Christians, in a manner creepe into their houses at a little doore through a wall, otherwise shall a 
Turke
 come and make a stable of


his hall, rauish his daughter, abuse his wife, and consume him like a lingring disease, which washeth away the flesh, and leaueth nothing but skinne and bone: besides, he dare not manure the ground to grow rich, lest an intruder reap his haruest, and make his endeauours fruitlesse: so that though this great Emperour be so mighty in people, spa∣cious in territories, opulent in wealth, and glorious in im∣periousnesse: yet receiueth hee not the fift commodity of his countries, by reason the fields are vnplowed, the vine∣yards vndressed, the medowes vnstored with cattle, and the very trees vnpruned, all which were plentifully suppli∣ed and compassed about with the embracings of husban∣dry in the time of 
Salomons
 peace. Nay, such is the misery of corrupted times, that whereas the 
Turkes
 haue been euer a true and religious people toward their Prophet, obser∣uing the lawes of his 
Alcaron
 very strictly: in these dayes they are all transported with prosperity, and seduced with filthy and abhominable wickednesse. For they endure both sloth and idlenesse, augment their desires of inconti∣nency, maintaine the extremities of gluttony, and will bee drunke, against their owne prohibitions and naturall en∣clination.


I haue insisted the longer on these Turkish particulars, because of all the Empires of 
Asia,
 and Kingdomes of 
Affrick,
 it affoordeth matter of discourse, and mine owne commorance amongst them warrants the truth of what is published, whereby you may thus conclude, after a sum∣mary collection, that their Common-wealth may rather bee termed a coniuration of tyrannies, then method or forme of good gouernment: their Emperours masters of a slaughter-house, then fathers of the countrey: and their Gouernours such as the Iudges of 
Israel,
 when euery man


did what was best in their owne eies, then 
Iosua
 or 
Samuel,
 who washed their hands in innocency, either from doing wrong themselues, or winking at others vnder them, wit∣nesse the stories you haue heard, and thousands other vn∣repeated. But if this will not yet exclude them out of our palace of happinesse, nor diuert their conceits, which are onely carried away with nouelties, why then let vs extract these fearefull particulars amongst them. First, that fun∣damentall 
 poynt of establishment, by murthering all their brethren. Next their ambitious supplanting their fathers 
 and elder brothers, and rather then they would bee disap∣poynted in their proiected drifts, thrusting them into a slaughter-house. Thirdly, the policy and cunning of their Concubines, who haue destroyed very worthy Princes for 
 degenerating persons. Fourthly, the raging cruelty and iealousie against 
Bashawes,
 neither permitting the lawfull 
 discent of the sonne, nor continuing long a constant opi∣nion toward the well-deseruing father (for euen the wor∣thy 
Cigala's
 themselues, had much a doe to keepe their cre∣dit without murmuring, and repining of others. Fiftly, a∣gainst the maine position of preseruing Iustice, their cor∣rupting 
 by bribes and presents, euen to the peruerting of manifest causes, especially against 
Christians.
 Sixtly, the miserable estate of the country-man, and poore commu∣nalty, 
 who are in as ill condition as their asses, fit for no∣thing but to haue heauy burthens layd vpon them. And last of all, their confusion of diet, both for the time and 
 plenty, wherein nothing is gracious or acceptable, nor any thing worthy the name of a happy countrey, or weal∣thy people. Now to the rest.








CHAP. IX. RVSSIA 
compared.


A
Bout the 25. of our famous Queene ELIZABETH 
Albertus Alasco Vaiuod
 
 of 
Siradia
 in 
Poland,
 came ouer as Em∣bassadour from the King of 
Poland,
 and amongst other particulars concerning the estate of his owne Countrey disco∣uered many secrets of 
Muscouia,
 or 
Russia
 chuse you whether; since when (as before our Mer∣chants had begunne a traphique amongst them) both Em∣bassadours haue come to vs from them, and we haue sent many Agents and gratuities to confirme a peace and en∣tercourse; wherein more especially then in any other Sir 
Thomas Smith
 preuailed with honourable welcome and dispatch; so that besides the continuall trauell of our Merchants, and endeauours of many Gentlemen ad∣dicted to curiosity, we haue a kinde of publike authority, and certainty of collections to warrant our discourse, and make manifest the imperfect customes of this great Em∣pire, so contrary to our example and patterne of happi∣nesse, that whereas we looke out for a yoake-fellow with 
Salomon
 to draw along the chariot of magnificense and terrestriall prosperity, he cannot come neere the dashings of the wheeles, nor must presume of any thing more then the commaunding of his subiects as slaues, which is ty∣rannie; and the keeping the better sort of women honest by sequestring them from wandring abroad, which is mi∣sery


and wretchednesse. First concerning religion, the maine point and foundation of all goodnesse, in the daies of 
Salomon
 they knew not what a groue meant; a strange altar was odious vnto them, and vntill his later falling a∣way from God, which was reuenged with the falling away of 10. Tribes from his sonne, there was no mention made of idolatry, and the very sound was a harsh kinde of discord. In 
Muscouia
 they are both ignorantly superstiti∣ous, and ambitiously affected to superiority: for although in that poore knowledge they haue, they euer depended vpon the authority of the Greeke Church, as by their Saints may appeare, which be Saint 
George, Demetrius,
 and 
Nicholay,
 to whom is consecrated one of the richest Abbies of the world: yet haue they presumed in the as∣sumpting the same to themselues, boasting of a bargaine by commutation, wherein the Patriarch of 
Constantinople
 was contented to resigne to the Metropolitane of 
Mosco
 all his authority, and supremacy for a great summe of 
 gold. But see the iust iudgement of God, as he returned into Greece, he was robbed of the same, and most treache∣rously murthered. Thus yet doe they presume of the glory of the Church amongst them, and in 
Russia
 thinke it sufficient to cry out IESV thou sonne of God: as for the Scriptures, in some places they haue the Greeke Testa∣ment onely, and heare of the Bible a farre off. For preach∣ing or interpreting, they know not what it meanes; and the common people beleeue any thing their Priests tell them, allowing of nothing but some ridiculous ceremo∣nies, strange fasts, and idle feasts. Concerning their Princes, oh how farre are they from the reciprocall duties between themselues and subiects, and those excellent prescriptions which 
Samuel
 prescribed to 
Saul,
 and 
Salomon
 practised to


his eternall honour. For such hath beene the confused and disordred intrusion of these Emperours, that they haue without care of posterity, conscience, or the Com∣mon-wealth shouldred one another from their thrones by treasons, murthers, deuises, and publique hostility. For euer since that old 
Iuan Vasellowich
 grew odious to his subiects, horrible stratagemmes haue succeeded, and euen 
Poland
 like a neighbour hath feared the burning of his owne house, when the next hath beene on a blaze; especially in the vsurpation of 
Borris Pheordiwich,
 who to aspire to the dignity made away 
Demetrius
 the second sonne to 
Vasellowich,
 and so from other monstrous effects of policy obtained the Diadem, wherein at the first by his bounty and worthy promising demeanor, he in a man∣ner blotted out the print of his former vniust proceedings, and taught them as it were away to forget the wrongs done to their lawfull Princes, till at last growing odious to the subiect, a new search was made, and a further hurli∣burly about another Emperor confounded all estates, and for many yeeres hath turmoiled the Countrey round a∣bout. Concerning the gouernment, there is onely some forme of iustice, & punishing of adultery; but so far from 
Salomons
 magnificense, 
Salomons
 pallace, 
Salomons
 proui∣sion, 
Salomons
 nauy, 
Salomons
 Nobles, 
Salomons
 tranquil∣lity and peace, and 
Salomons
 worthines in euery thing, that I am ashamed to name them for Christians. For the com∣mon people, though they lie not with other mens wiues, yet they change their owne as often as they list, and how∣euer the better sorte mainetaine many wiues, yet doe they practise nothing more then gurmondize and incon∣tinency, with Strumpets and Concubines, whom they re∣sorte vnto in certaine stoues or hot houses, as the hotter


Countries haue Balnea's and washing places. Concerning their Citties? in a word both their Citties and townes are subiect to such bestialitie and confusion, that they seeme rather so many smoakie cotages, and Irish cabbines, then hansome dwellings, or conuenient places of aboad; and in 
Mosco
 it selfe for all her populousnesse, and large exten∣sion of ground, there is not any thing worthy the admira∣tion or imitation, more then the markets of furres, and some rich ornaments of the skinnes of beasts; as for the Citizens, or Countreymen, I rather resemble them to some scattered troupes of a discomfited army, then men orderly disposed to the managing affaires either for mutu∣all commerce, or noble trade of Merchants. And thus could I runne ouer all other particulars, but that I shall ouer-runne my owne discourse, considering there is no∣thing but a meere disparity betweene them and our ex∣ample.






CHAP. X. AETHIOPIA 
compared.


A
S the distempered climate of cold and vnseasonable weather seemed a barre of 
 separation betweene 
Muscouia
 and han∣some Prosperity, or true happinesse of a kingdome; so is orderly plenty, and ne∣cessary prouision affrighted to come neere 
Aethiopia,
 least the scorching heate, and burning sunne should consume the same, and not only turne their


corne into cinders, but stifle their cattle for want of wa∣ter, sending them braying, as the Hart to the riuers vp and downe after refreshing springs. For although 
Aegipt
 hath bin counted the garner of corne, and that the watrey 
Ni∣lus
 hath dispersed her rivulets ouer many Countries, yea comming out of 
Aethiopia
 hath taken along sundry swel∣ling fountaines to accompany her into the 
Mediterranean
 sea; so that diuers Historiographers haue numbred 6000. Citties on the bankes of the same, and boasted of the glo∣ry of their Emperors, and mightinesse of their armies: yet (not once speaking of the barrennesse of the rest) could any of these places take vpon them any glorious exaltati∣on of a well compacted Common-wealth, or terrestriall happinesse of a Nation. For you may read, that when it flourished in the height of prosperity (as when there was a generall famine in many Countries) there was corne in 
Aegipt, Saba
 the Queene of 
Aethiopia
 came to visit 
Salo∣mon
 in his roialty, and went away with admiration, when she saw the difference betweene her owne Countrey, and the blessednesse of 
Iudea,
 so that the particular relation of the Court, and gouernment, was occasioned from this Empresses willingnes to be instructed, and desire to grati∣fie the King for his extraordinary magnificense, and ad∣ministration of the Common-wealth: whereby I am not incredulous of their information, that report, how that many times the Parents sell their children to Merchants for corne, and at all times send the people to the market for slaues, which are bought vp at easie rates, and disper∣sed ouer the world: nor will I much contradict their opi∣nion, that haue fashioned their Common-wealth out of an vnfashionable gouernment without law, terrour of dis∣obedience, ciuill institution, orderly precepts, and soci∣able


louing of one another. For since they marched vn∣der the colours of Christianity, it hath not beene much better, and except it be such as are borne vnder the same Climate, no man of a temperate Countrey can liue a∣mongst them. Their manners and customes I haue partly described, and could here adde, that howeuer they boast of their antiquity, as being the first Countrey inha∣bited by 
Chus
 the sonne of 
Cham,
 which in the Hebrew tongue signifieth blacke, and that afterward they changed their name from the sonne of 
Vulcane:
 I cannot finde ei∣ther any setled gouernment, or state worthy the imitati∣on; or noble enterprises befitting a story, or slender praise. Howeuer they are commended for the first acknow∣ledging a diuine power, and entertaining a religious Priest∣hood, and manner of celebration of sacrifices; I cannot see, that there now remaines any thing amongst them, but idle customes, and corrupted abuses, beleeuing the incarnation of Christ onely, without a better progression to sanctifying graces; and neuer disputing further then a barren obseruation of ridiculous ceremonies. How∣euer they haue some scattered Cities, and nobilitie in esti∣mation, as the Captaines of their Souldiers, and Leaders of their armies, I cannot finde either orderly preseruation of families, or louing entertaining of one another, but rather thefts, rapines, murthers, and spoyling of them∣selues, and passengers. Howeuer their Countries are very spatious, and haue a great quantity of ground with variety of people; yet is the barrennesse, and vnfrequen∣ted Citties a barre to their estimation; and as we say a lit∣tle good is worth a great deale of badde; and one corner of 
Canaan
 equalled tenne times as much ground for pro∣uision, and plenty of riches. As for their tying their haire


in knots, their odoures, perfumes, sweet wood, spices, El∣liphants teeth, almugge trees, and such like; alas, there is neither milke, nor honey, neither good prouision for backe or belly, neither comlinesse of rayments for ornament, or necessity,; neither order for glory, or good neighbour-hood; neither prouision for hansomnes, or magnificense. To conclude in a word, it wanteth many things, wherein barbarous Nations (after their account) come neerer prosperitie, and retaineth nothing, which either happy kingdomes stand in neede of, or desire by way of imita∣tion. As for such blessings, wherewith God hath stored their Countries, and they haue corrupted the Merchants of 
Europe;
 I answere in one word for all, both for 
China, India,
 and themselues, that they resemble poyson throwne into a wholesome potion, which of it selfe had beene a 
 preseruatiue, but now is a dangerous receipt, and not fit for euery one to drinke: or else they are like sluttish maskes, which couer more beautifull faces, and debarre one another from pleasing themselues with their owne natiue comelinesse. But say, that both iewels, pretious stones, perfumes, spices, mineralls, mettall, and other glo∣rious riches are befitting the Maiesty of Princes, the ho∣nor of pallaces, the ornaments of Kings, and the benefit of Countries; I hope wee haue them in more abundance then themselues, and like the Seruant that proued better workeman than his Master, make more commodious vse of them, then any Countrey in the world: so that our Merchant is a noble aduenturer, and our Cities rather store-houses of blessings, then shops of wares: and as for LONDON it selfe, I protest, I rather wonder at it for her excelling prerogatiues, then commend it for a thriuing Emporium.








CHAP. XI. GERMANY 
compared.


S
Hall wee come neerer home, and 
 with prying eyes (like the 
Censors
 of 
Rome
 ouer offenders) looke into the Empire of 
Germany:
 or if you will, the countrey it selfe, as it might make a glorious Kingdome indeed. You know how I haue already stept into her enclosures, and opened the very gates of her secrets. The Princes are too absolute, and he himselfe not able to raigne, as 
Ahasuerosh
 did, from 
India
 to 
Aethiopia,
 ouer 127. Prouinces: nor doth the Queene of 
Saba,
 come to heare his wisdome, or view the ordering of his palace, the attendance of his Nobles, the sitting of his seruants, the prouision of his tables, and the charity of his deuotion: nor doth the Kings of 
Arabia
 send him presents, the Kings of 
Aegypt
 wiues, and all the con∣federate Princes admire his magnificence, nor 
Hiram
 of 
Tyrus
 contract a league, or the nauy of 
Tharsus
 ioyne with his, to fetch gold from 
Ophir:
 nor will the Marchant bring him horses and fine linnen from remote places, or supply his wants according to the prerogatiue of Kings, or glori∣ous abundance of opulent countries: nor are the cities or∣dred by the appoyntment of his ministers, nor can he send his charriots to this place, nor horse-men to that, nor his army whither he list, nor fill the streets of 
Ierusalem,
 when hee would solemnize a Passouer. For heere the cheefest


townes liue in freedome, and the Burgers boast of their wealth and policy, in manumitting themselues, and (as it were) sealing the honour of cheefe commanding; yea, sometimes contesting with the Emperor himselfe on their owne gates. As for the countrey commodities and pro∣uision tending either to necessity or pleasure; alas, the commutation consisteth in enriching particular persons, and smally to the augmentation of the Emperours Maie∣sty, wherein all the tracts of auarice, corrupt mixtures, o∣uer-reaching one another, and putting off either refuse things, or paltry trifles, as the 
Italians
 call them 
Baggatini:
 are trod amongst them, and euen beaten smooth with con∣tinuall entercourse. So that their marts and faires are so many boothes of drunkards, and instead of ships at sea, fill the fields with waggons of such strange creatures, who make their bellies as great deuouring gulphs as the sea, so that their eating and carowsing is farre from the moderati∣on of mirth, which the 
Israelites
 accustomed, or the Per∣sian banquet, where none were compelled: but letting that passe, as an imperfection proprietory to the countrey and nation. I can traduce them further, for mangling the bles∣sings of God bestowed vpon them, by the cuttings and hackings of many grosse sinnes, as vsury, rebellion, con∣tumacy, prophanation, swearing, drunkennesse, murthers, and such like: but especially for vilipending the high com∣mission of the Almighty in two principall matters. The one, in murmuring and repining at strangers, not suffering any to haue any commorance, or dwelling amongst them. For how euer in some of the cheefest townes there is a glo∣rious shew and formall entertaining of Marchants and passengers, who come stored with crownes to powre them into the laps of Inn-keepers, and houses of wantonnesse:


yet will they neither releeue the wants of indigent beg∣gers, nor permit Gentle-man or Artificer to dwell amongst them, or be entertained as a free Denizon, being a stran∣ger of another countrey, except in some sparing cases, and times of necessity, wherein a bribe or great Princes com∣mendatory letters preuaile, by way of entreaty and insinu∣ation. The second is, their grossenesse and simplicity in refusing the right of Kings, and succession of their Em∣perours, debarring so the best of gouernments, which is the Monarchy, from ruling ouer them, and whereas they may alledge, that the suffrages of men are vncorrupt, and a Prince so chosen shall be the worthier, in regard his ver∣tues must be eminent, whereas the father may leaue a son compounded of so many vices, which ouerruling his ver∣tues, shall make him odious: or otherwise he may prooue simple, tyrannous, dishonest, or irregular. First, it is meer∣ly erroneous, because we are not to contest with the dispo∣ser of Kingdomes about his 
Vice-Gerents,
 in regard, that sometimes as a fatherly correction hee permitteth a defe∣ctiue Prince, rather then folding vp a sorer mantle of ven∣geance, to spred it abroad to their more greeuous punish∣ment. Next they haue failed in this also amongst them∣selues: for many of their Emperours thus elected, haue prooued doltish, lasciuious, cowardly, and rather mang∣lers of the Empire, then prouident stewards to augment the wealth and reputation of the same: nay, the best of their 
Caesars
 haue beene affrighted at the fulmination of a tyrannous Pope, and seduced with the imposturing cun∣ning of deceiuing Priests, and a corrupted religion, nor could they goe with the wise King to view his nauies, visit his cities, fortifie the townes, erect store-houses, or come neere the six steps of golde on 
Salomons
 throne, which was


most apparant, euen the other day, in one of their glorious Princes, from whom the house of 
Austria
 hath taken such firme rooting, that it hopes to spred so largely, and so high, that no daring hand shall presume to lop a bough, or breake off a principall stem. I meane 
Charles
 the fift, who for all his seeming corroborated mightinesse, quickly lost the loue of the Princes, and for want of ceremonies main∣taining the glory of a King, was euen scorned of Pesants. The story is breefly thus. Vpon the report of the losse of his gallies at 
Argier,
 he had a purpose to re-enforce his na∣uy, 
 and as the Poet sayes, 
saepe premente Deo, fert Deus alter opem,
 to hope, that as one misfortune had ouerclow∣ded the faire shining sunne of his glory: another happy winde would ouer-blow the threatning storme, and make a serene element, which caused him to come into 
Italy,
 for his better and speedier passage, either at 
Ligorn
 or 
Genoa:
 but entring into 
Millane,
 a leane olde man in a blacke cape cloake, the people thronging to see a glorious Emperour, or at least some magnificent shew and pompous ceremo∣nie: they were so daunted to be thus frustrated, and in a manner scorned to bee so disesteemed, that they neither gaue him a 
Viue le Roy,
 nor scarse opened a window to looke toward him: nay more, when hee set forward for 
Spaine,
 indeede there scarse went a voluntary Gentle-man with him, and the very Waggoners put their thumbs be∣tweene their fingers, in contempt of his troopes, which is as disgracious a thing in 
Italy,
 both amongst themselues, and against strangers, as either the lie in 
France,
 or 
Beco
 to the Gentle-man of 
Venice,
 whereat hee tooke such a con∣ceit, that he neuer returned into 
Italy
 or 
Germany
 againe, howeuer some would impute it vnto his greefe, for not preuailing against the 
Mahumetans:
 or deuotion, as desi∣ring


to giue ouer the world, and not be entangled any fur∣ther with disaduantagious encombrances. And thus you see, why 
Germany
 cannot match our example, especially as the Eagle flies now, with broken wings and bruized sides






CHAP. XII. ITALY 
compared.


S
Hall wee venture ouer the 
Alps,
 and the gulph of 
Venice
 into 
Italy,
 and 
 search either the 
Appenine
 hils, the fields of 
Campania,
 the garden of the world called 
Lombardy,
 the territo∣ries of 
Rome,
 or attractiue 
Naples,
 for an instance of greatnesse and happinesse, which may come neere the example. I must not now dispute, what it was in the flourishing times of 
Augustus
 and other Emperors, sweet∣ning contentment with the delicates of riches and plea∣sure, till God sent strange and cruell Physicians to purge them for their surfetting in gormandize and wantonnesse, I meane the 
Goths
 and 
Vandalls:
 nor will take vpon mee to presage what it might be, if some diuine power would ga∣ther her plights together, and make it one handsome and magnificent garment for a sole soueraigne: but shew her, as she is now loose, vnlaced, and hath her ornaments di∣lacerated, and euen rent from her sides and shoulders. A∣las, it is far worse with them, then it was with the 
Israelites



in the time of the Iudges, when euery man did what hee listed, and hauing no King (as if they had beene embra∣cers of the 
Tanist
 law in 
Ireland)
 ranne like sheep without a shepheard, and through the presumption of their owne forces, wrested the enheritance from the true heires. But more properly I may resemble them to the 
Anarchies
 of 
Greece,
 who through emulation at one anothers greatnesse and credit in the world, kept true prosperity indeed from a noble race and happy thriuing amongst them. For as in ciuill warres, while diuers factions fight one by one, all are in the end subdued; whereas if they did vnite themselues with a stubborne holding together, they might peraduen∣ture hazard and propulse the greatest strength, and raised forces against them. So in the plenties of peace and flouri∣shes of happinesse, the best portion diuided into many parts will quickly bee spent, and a flowing riuer hath not that brauery, when it is cut out into small brookes, as in his owne streame running in a deep and fashionable chan∣nell. Againe, as in noble families, when the mannour houses, capitall messuages, and populous Lordships de∣scend to one immediate heire, the dignity & honour of the same, is more and more vpheld, whereas if they were di∣uided amongst many sonnes, the glory would soone bee extinguished, and strength of the first firmnesse rebated. So fareth it with 
Italy,
 the very blessings affoorded by na∣ture are disioynted, and the diuiding it into Principates, hath also deuided her fortunes, and former credit of raui∣shing beauty. For in one corner rules the 
Spanyard,
 at ano∣ther end encrocheth the 
Sauoyan,
 on this side the 
Venetian
 keepeth all in awe, on that the 
Hetrurian
 Duke maintaineth a iurisdiction, heere the Church with the contraries of blessing and cursing locketh vp S
t
. 
Peters
 Patrimony, as


the Pope himselfe in the castle of S
t
. 
Angelo,
 there many petty Princes are iealous of forraine trecheries, and how∣euer they doe maligne the common enemy, yet can they not agree amongst themselues, but repine with an emu∣lous hate against one another.


But would I could vnite them together, and set vp the wals of 
Rome,
 placing her seuen hils in such an order, that the city might boast of twenty mile compasse, and the go∣uernment lift vp a head, as in 
Daniels
 visions. Or that I might in a yeere of 
Iubile
 settle you vnder the wings of the Angell on the top of the palace, and shew you the Consi∣story of Cardinals, the triumphs of a Popes inauguration, his stately carrying on mens shoulders, his triple crowne, and such like ostentous and pompous ceremonies with all the glorious celebrations of the other Princes, either at their owne elections, or entertainment of forraine Ambassa∣dours, yet would all this come farre short of our example. For the very prouision of 
Salomons
 palace would exhaust the countrey, consume the commodities, and like a barren ground drinking vp the raine, deuoure the plenty of the land, and pull in peeces their best compacted husbandry, of which wee haue had many instances in former times, when 
Italy
 suffered diuers famines and want of corne: so that if 
Aegypt
 had not beene a store-house and garner of graine to let in a supplyment, as it were an vnlookt for way, the people had perished for lacke of food, and the countrey beene wasted for want of husband-men and til∣lage. Againe, say they could drinke in vessels of golde (wherein yet I finde them very sparing) and that they de∣termined to expose the glory of some ambitious triumph. Wherewith should their cups ouerflow, considering their wines are not only small, but in such a penury and scarcity,


that if the women and children were not not prohibited, or at least from the customes of modesty did not limit themselues, a stranger should either drinke water or no∣thing, and had not wherewithall to satisfie their thirst. As for the 
Villano,
 he is glad of any water, and quencheth his heat from the muddy channells, which fall from the mountaines of snow, and are cleansed with much adoe by the swift courses of 
Eridanus,
 which sendeth her streames into the Adriatick sea, and makes a confederacy with other riuers for the same purpose, though the places require stranger titles. Many other defects haue, and must bespot this countries face, and debarre it from boasting of that happinesse, I would propose vnto you. For though the Inne-keepers daughter goe in a sattin gowne, and that the brauery of their women is amplified from their attire, as if the burs had golden kernels, and euery corner were full of silke-wormes; yet doe they neither eat good meat, feed cleanely, nor meet together with friendly neighbor-hood, or inuitation. As for ciuill gouernment and administration of Iustice, euery Prouince hath a seuerall method, and the pride of one anothers liberty and power to defend a delin∣quent flying to them for succour, raiseth a presumption of strange committing offences, and perpetrating horrible thefts, rapes and murthers: so that whether they by 
bandi∣ted,
 or no; when reuenge or wicked instigation hath set any man on worke, the 
Neapolitan
 flies vnto 
Rome,
 the 
Ro∣man
 to 
Florence,
 the 
Florentine
 to 
Venice,
 the 
Venetian
 to 
Mantua,
 and so in all the rest. And for the more peaceable Inhabitants, they sildome reioyce vnder a vnity, and very sparingly admit of any customes, tending to the smooth∣nesse of loue and true contentment: so that in a manner all the defects, which deforme the naturall beauty of King∣domes,


may be heere lookt vpon with pitifull eyes, and much lamented with passionate heart greefe. As for those ostentous heapes of stone, which transport the slight cre∣dulity of the ignorant, to beleeue that it surpasseth for ci∣ties, buildings, and outward magnificence, any countrey in 
Europe,
 when you come to examine particulars, you shall finde it onely, as we deceiue our children, in sugring ouer a little course bread, made in the forme of delicate manchet on the outside. For what saies 
Tacitus,
 cities are the men; gouernment, feeding; and obedience of people, subiect to formall orders and handsome ceremonies, and not houses or palaces made of lime and stone, vnfurnished of dwellers, voyd of hospitality, and iealous euen of one anothers best enclinations, when they are furnished at the best. So that besides all naturall imperfections: In 
Italy
 there is neither roome in the house for thy seruants, nor litter for the cammels, especially out of their frequented high road wayes, as 
Rebecca
 promised the steward of 
Abra∣hams
 family: neither can you fetch the well-fed veale from the droues to entertain the man of God with the Patriark, dresse fine venison with 
Esau
 for olde 
Isaak,
 nor kill the fat calfe with the good father, that welcomed home his peni∣tent sonne, which makes me remember a merry reason, by one of the same countrey, who being demanded why the muttons, calues, and other cattle, were so few, small, and leane; replyed very soberly, because the 
Italians
 deuoured the grasse in sallets, and robbed the pastures to deceiue the poore cattle: but in truth the sunne kisseth the ground with that feruency, and the fields are so matted with dry∣nesse, that for the most part the medowes are vnbefitting to satisfie much store of cattle, nor can feede oxen to any purpose. In another place, a Curtezan questioned with a∣bout


the conditions of men in her faculty, or if you will, concerning matters of incontinency, touching the 
Italian
 (for all the worlds opinion of his forwardnesse in that kinde) she answered with a tush, 
Il Italiano pisciar molto.
 Nor, if I would flatter them according to the ridiculous soothing of Princes: could I of late dayes exemplefie any of their glorious exployts abroad, or famous attempts at home, more then ruining one another, and making of forts and fortifications, which sometimes prooued like 
Perillus
 bull to the inuentor, many times emboldned disobedi∣ence to relie on a wrong security, and at all times raised vp greater distrust and fowle suspitions, euen in their best ci∣ties and gouernments, as you see, how 
Naples
 and 
Millane
 is curbed, & the braue liberty of the Gentle-men, strangely fettered from the terror of Citadels, of which the 
Spanyard
 himselfe is yet transferred with an imaginary conceit, that souldiers may be corrupted, and no place is so impregna∣ble: but thendeauours and policy of men can subiect to the fortune of alteration.


But let vs search a little into their best flourishing fields, for all 
Naples
 hath a story of it selfe, and boasteth of fa∣mous 
 Kings, and certaine Queenes the 
Viragoes
 of their time and Mirrors of 
Europe.
 For all the 
Romans
 haue had the aduancing of Trophes to the honour of the moderne 
Columni, Caesarij,
 and many worthy families from the 
Guelphi Gibellini,
 diuers from 
Florence, Ferrara, Vrbine,
 and some others. For all the 
Venetians
 expose to open view the Statues of 
Gatto Malato
 at the 
Santo
 in 
Padoa,
 of 
Bartholomeo Coloneo
 a Venetian Generall at Saint 
Iohn
 and 
Paul
 in their Citty; the memorable battaile of 
Lepanto
 a∣gainst the 
Turke;
 the donation of the kingdome of 
Cy∣prus
 by the Queene, who was once a Deuotresse in their


Monasteries; the attempt against 
Millane,
 and expelling both French and Spaniard in those daies; the entertaining of 
Francis
 the third King of 
France,
 and 
Poland,
 in des∣pight of forraine threatnings, searches, pursuite, and the Popes displeasure; and the last ouerdaring contesting with the Pope in matters appertaining to their State and go∣uernment. For all 
Florence
 swelled vp to this height of riches, and brauery, from the plentifull spring of a noble 
Medices,
 and famous actions of a politicke man. For all an heroike 
Gonzaga
 aduaunced his Marquisate to a Duchy, as a worthy recompence of his warlike endeauours. For all the Dukedome of 
Millane
 was incorporated into the house of 
Sforza
 a deuised name for his valour and mar∣tiall proceedings; with diuers others of this kinde: yet alas you see, what is now become of 
Naples,
 and the no∣ble man repines at his lost liberty, nor can he be satisfied, for all he may flutter in a golden cage, and ride through the streetes in a veluet Carosse; yet you see that 
Rome
 hath beene sacked, and almost trampled vnder feete euen of late daies, insomuch, that when the Duke of 
Burbon
 en∣tred for 
Charles
 the 5. no worthy 
Roman
 durst shew his head, and the other principates of 
Italy
 were afraid of pul∣ling downe such a house, whose dust must needes fall into their eyes, and smoakie rubbish stifle their breath; yet you see, how pittifully 
Ferrara
 and 
Vrbine
 haue lost their repu∣tation of courtshippe, and offred their coronets on the altar of a Clergie mans vsurpation: yet you see, how 
Flo∣rence
 liues now, and for all the stile of 
Magnus dux Her∣truriae,
 thinketh of nothing but amassing of treasure from mechanicke drudgery, and corrupted auarice: yet you see, that 
Rhodes
 is lost, and the miraculous Colossus beaten to pouder, that diuers discomfitures haue made 
Venice



sweate in the midst of her cold bathe the sea; that 
Cyprus
 was pul'd from her sides by violence, when but a little more strength and prouidence would haue kept it secure, and so warme, that no boisterous arme of 
Turkes
 should haue vncouered her to the catching of cold; that they haue beene since inforced to contriue a treatice of pacification with the 
Gran Signeur,
 and in truth beene subiect to many indignities, which a man would not imagine so rich and politicke a gouernment could endure: but alas the Duke is but an vnsignificant voice. For the sword is caried be∣fore the 
Gran Concilij,
 who take order, that he neither liue profusely in his expences, nor haue any daring confi∣dence to practise any thing preiudiciall to their gouern∣ment: yet you see, 
Mantua
 is now at quiet, and dare not entermeddle with any warlike troubles, or martiall af∣faires, except he haue the cunning to discouer the aduan∣tage of a preuailing party, and the fortune to ranke him∣selfe in the strongest squadrons: yet you see, how 
Millane
 mournes like a captiue, and for all her 300. Carosses, and 500. foot-cloths, dare not lift vp a countenance suta∣ble to their hearts, nor a hand to pull the ramparts of the Citadle to the ground, when their wishes would faine see all throwne into the sea. And so in diuers others of this kinde.


As for the generall reputation of 
Italy,
 which it hath gotten by Marchants, it is abused in the 
metonimia.
 For their silkes and veluets, their marchandize and wares, that all 
Europe
 and 
Turky
 welcome them into their harbours and ports, but with such errours, ouersights, and perad∣uenture difficulties, that they neither make vse of nauiga∣tion out of their middle sea and Arches: nor haue any good Saylours and Souldiers amongst them: nor will ad∣uenture


as worthy men indeede for their countries honor, nor can performe any voyage with true iudgement and expedition. For the least affrighting newes of a Pirat, shall detaine them three months in harbour, and an vnexpected storme driue them into euery Port and Iland. Thus haue I my selfe beene witnesse, that an 
English-man
 hath left two great 
Italian
 ships in the towne of 
Xant,
 for feare of 
Ward,
 supposed to houer about 
Sapientia
 an Iland adioyning, be∣ing bound for 
Scanderon,
 and sayled to 
Cyprus,
 vnladed, dispatched, and returned backe againe, ere they were on their iourney. Nay, thus haue I knowne them foureteene weekes betweene 
Constantinople
 and 
Venice,
 which an 
En∣glish-man
 with a prosperous wind hath dispatched in four∣teene dayes, although I imagine it 1700. English mile, and in lesse then six weekes almost with any winde. So that 
Venice
 it selfe boasting of the brauery of three hundred gallies, eight or ten galleasses, and thirty ships for mar∣chants, neither hath sufficient men to man twenty, nor can without time and great expences fill vp the roome of that inuentory without 
Greekes,
 who are their cheefest Saylors, and condemned slaues, whom they spare from a death at the gallowes, which must needs release them from world∣ly troubles, to a liuing misery in the gallies, wherein to breath in continuall horrour is worse then twenty deaths indeed. Thus could I tire you with distasting particulars against the reputation of 
Italy:
 but I meane not to ouer∣looke them with any maleuolent aspect, or disparage them, to bring my speeches within compasse of defamati∣on: but onely keep my example in practise, and conclude, that it wanteth many things (with 
Germany)
 to make it proportionable with 
Salomons
 greatnesse, and 
Canaans
 goodnesse.








CHAP. XIII. SPAINE 
compared.


S
Hall wee then goe into 
Spaine,
 where 
 the 
Grandes
 of the Kings court haue golden keyes of his chamber, and are priuiledged by patent, to stand with couered heads before his Ma∣iesty: where the Exchequer is full of golde from 
India,
 and the Trea∣surers bring in account of 100000. souldiers in garison and actiue employment, yeerely payd and orderly supplyed: where the Noble-man insulteth for his Gothish bloud, and will prooue a true 
Castilian,
 more ancient in gentry then the race of 
Othoman,
 and euery one, though he be but a maker of 
Chappinoes,
 weares his rapier point-blancke, as you call it, looking as high (though not altogether so big) after an oliue an a little ruske, as a 
Ger∣mane,
 that eats and drinks more at a meale, then a 
Spanyard
 doth in a weeke: where so many Kingdomes are vnited, as you see the seuen starres in the firmament make a more perspicuous shew then single planets in their sequestred spheres: where they can without boasting, I will not say vaine-glory, relate diuers histories of voyages at sea, disco∣ueries of Countries, plantation of Colonies, conquest of both 
Indies,
 vsurpation of many Principates, running ar∣mies, and diuers other glorious exploits: howeuer the rest of 
Europe
 haue resembled them to prying and raging wolues ouer silly sheepe, either with a couetous minde of


intrusion, or tyrannous desire of deuouring. Shall wee I say goe thither, and looke out a match for our example; me thinks I am answered of euery man that weares a light hat, great ruffe, and full paire of hose. If 
Spaine
 doe not e∣quall him, who can doe it? I am not yet prepared for such a satisfaction, but will presume to shut 
Spaine
 out of dores, from entring into the priuy chamber of one example, for all his 
India
 supply, the only tumor of his greatnes, which did not 
Apollo
 pardon the fault, would prooue but the wish of 
Midas,
 who with his golden fortunes wanted the vse of natures benefits, and could neither eat nor drinke without choaking. But to particulars.


If 
Spaine
 be the richest Kingdome of 
Europe,
 and that some of them boasted, when time was, in ouerlooking the beautifullest worke in the world, I meane the Chappel at 
Westminster,
 that their King was able to make such ano∣ther of siluer: where is 
Salomons
 golde amongst them, or 
Ierusalems
 plenty? when siluer had no better reputation then stones, and euery man in 
Iudea
 was rich indeed, with∣out abusing others, or others repining against them: where is their care to store the countrey, which questionlesse mo∣ney would doe, from other exuberant prouinces, though nature had denyed them orderly prouision? How came the 
Malec
ntents
 in 
Flanders
 and 
Brabant,
 to threaten the principall cities for want of their salary? who incited the Garisons of 
Antwerp, Gaunt,
 and euen 
Brussels
 it selfe, with diuers other townes, to mutinie? who distasted sundry times the whole armies vpon their marches and employ∣ments? who aduised the Treasurers to be so slacke in dis∣charging of 
Liberanca's
 and other souldierlike pensions? who doth euery yeere thrust the Garisons into penury and scarsity, insomuch that not onely in the Low-Countries,


but euen in his gouernment of 
Millane, Naples,
 and 
Sicilia,
 the souldier wanteth, and many times is compelled to re∣mit one halfe, to purse vp the other: Is not all this ei∣ther for want of treasure (the opinion whereof hath made his pride swell vncontrollable) or orderly distribution? the spring from whence the fluent plenty of 
Salomon
 had encrease. Be not therefore affrighted at this monster opi∣nion, nor seduced with the vanity of report. For put the best Hispaniolized English man to the skirmish of vnder∣standing the truth, and the wealth of 
Spaine
 shall prooue but false fires, if you be so neere to discouer their disburse∣ments, and infinite occasions to dispend their treasure: but if you should aduenture to lay their peeces to the light with 
Salomons
 cloth, by way of comparison, good God, how course, how cockeld, how short, how shrinking, how faulty, and indeed ridiculous would all appeare? And thus much for their wealth. Now to the rest.


What hath 
Spaine
 worthy commendation, much lesse any prerogatiue of happinesse? why, 
Canaan
 flowed with milke and honey, yeelding such blessings of encrease, that the King not onely had his great store of prouision with∣out repining: but 
Israel,
 as the sand of the sea, eat, dranke, and made merry, and can this bee done in 
Spaine?
 The burnt hills and desart places will quickly answer the argu∣ment; the country-man hides his garlike and onions, as ashamed of his diet; the Citizen powders his fish, and buyes cheese of the Dutch-man; the Gentle-man is limi∣ted what he shall eat, and how much hee may carry home to his family; the Court hath much adoe to be supplyed, and many concussions are practized from the Kings pre∣rogatiue, to furnish the offices with reasonable allowance, and the whole Kingdome is sometimes affrayd to want


bread; whereupon certaine agents are employed, euen in remote countries, to bring in both corne and victuall, tempting both them and our selues with golde and ready payment of money: for which purpose onely is a 
prouiso
 in their acts of Parliament, concerning exportation of coyne, of which in truth though they haue great cause to boast, yet are they tied to so many inconueniencies for o∣ther wants, that in their best cities is neither good fare, nor good lodging, nor any thing worthy the name of a bles∣sing. As for their silly praising of sallets, fruits, and herbs: I remember S
r
. 
Roger Williams
 answer to an idle 
Spanyard,
 boasting of his countries citrons, orenges, oliues, and such like: I, but (sayd he) in 
England
 we haue dainty veale, and well fed capons to eat with this sawce, and many delicate dishes worthy the name of sustenance indeede. For God made the beasts of the earth to liue on the grasse and fruits of the same; but man to liue vpon them, and command all. So that 
Adams
 wisdome gaue them titles, and his su∣perioriry prescribed subiection: but how? for mans vse, mans delight, mans necessity, mans conuersation, mans triumph. Thus doth oyle make a cheerfull countenance, wine a gladsome heart, bread a strong body, and flesh a ful∣nesse of bloud: thus was 
Salomons
 palace and tables fur∣nished, and 
Dauid
 praised God for infinite blessings: thus were odours and incense prouided, and the loue of bre∣thren compared to the deaw and balsome of 
Hermon,
 or the costly oyntment on 
Arons
 vestures: thus in 
Peters
 vi∣sion he might kill and eat, and the Sauiour of the world li∣ued amongst Publicans, feasted at marriages, and allowed of honest conuersation: and thus had 
Canaan
 neighbourly meetings, banquets of triumphs, and times of publike and priuate celebrations. But in 
Spaine
 no such matter; they


neither dare, nor can bid you welcome. For farre worse then in 
Italy,
 idle iealousie, filthy malice, feare of expen∣ces, arrogant menaces, wicked suspition, and such like, will debarre you from the pleasure of inuitation, from the free∣dome of entercourses, and cannot sauour the noble liberty of mutuall amity. 
Canaan
 had the temple furnished as God commanded, the Priest obedient to the King, the Prophets in estimation, and the feasts of the Leuiticall Law orderly celebrated. 
Spaine
 is polluted with Paga∣nisme, and inuented that cruell office of Inquisition to pu∣nish the Moores, or such as adhered to their superstition, is ouerawed by the Cleargy, and is so terrified with the thundring voyce of excommunication, that he durst not but put his owne sonne to death, to please the Pope. 
Ca∣naan
 was a receptacle for strangers, loued princely solem∣nities, and could not endure neither begger, nor whore of their owne nation. 
Spaine
 hates all men, or at least vili∣pends them in respect of themselues, commits them to fire and sword, that exclaime against their stewes and pro∣phanation, and cannot order many solemne festiuals, ex∣cept at a Kings inauguration, a Princes marriage, or a Car∣dinals iollity: where yet an 
Italian
 inuention shall fill a ta∣ble with painted trenchers and dishes of 
China:
 but a hun∣gry belly may cry for meat, and not be satisfied.


Canaan
 had cities of refuge, cities of store, cities of strength, cities for horses, and the Kings magnificence, to all which the high-waies were conuenient, and men passed to and fro without danger, or want. In 
Spaine
 you must haue a Guide, yea sometimes a guard, and are so farre from expecting reliefe after your daies endurance, that if you haue not a borracho before your saddle, and commo∣dious prouision on an Asse or Moile hired for the same


purpose, you may go supperlesse to bedde, and peraduen∣ture haue no other bedde, but a Stramezza, or some stink∣ing tike filled with sedge, and shalings of hempe. 
Ca∣naan
 
 had beautifull women; 
Abraham
 and 
Isaack
 were a∣fraid of their wiues, least the 
Abimileckes
 might be enamo∣red on their beauty: 
Dina
 was full of fauour, and her ra∣uishment reuenged in bloud. 
Iacob
 serued 14. yeares for his wiues, and 
Rahel
 was a woman of great comelinesse: 
Ruth
 no doubt pleased 
Boaz,
 and the times afforded deli∣cate creatures, 
Bersabe, Abigaile,
 and 
Abisack
 are commen∣ded for their beauty: 
Thamar
 was at first pleasing to 
Am∣mon,
 and her loue molested the young Prince: 
Ester
 and 
Iudith
 were Mirrors of their time, the one pleased the Mo∣narch of the world, the other ouercame with a double victory the great Captaine of 
Assiria: Susanna's
 beauty enflamed the Iudges, and the dotards fell into the pit of burning wantonnesse: 
Herodias
 was so attractiue, that shee might haue commaunded halfe a kingdome: the Queene 
Berenice
 allured 
Titus,
 and he neglected his greatest affaires for her sake, and so in thousand other relations, besides the generall applause afforded the meaner sort, whereby the very heathen confessed the happinesse of 
Iudea
 in this kinde, and added blessing to blessing, when they vnder∣stood their worth, vertue, and commendation. But 
Spaiue
 must mourne for strange disparity this way, and either la∣ment that the whore of 
Babylon
 hath poysoned her Coun∣tries with the dregges of abomination, or complaine, that the women are painted like the images of the groues, and sit in the high-way, as 
Thamar
 when shee went to deceiue 
Iuda.
 For if they be honest, they are for the most part vn∣pleasing, and swartisb: if Curtezans, dangerous and im∣pudent: so that for these and many other insufficiencies


I dare be bold to say, that as yet 
Salomon
 must sit vnpar∣ralel'd, and 
Spaine
 can in no sort come neere the Coun∣trey of 
Canaan,
 as it was in the time of his prosperity, and administration.






CHAP. XIV. FRAVNCE
 compared with a discouery of her defects.


B
Vt what thinke you of 
France?
 saies 
 some iudicious Traueller, is not your iourny now almost at an end, and will not your searches be satis∣fied with the goodliest Kingdome of the world? The answere shall not be a peremptory contradicti∣on, nor derogate from the merit of the least worth, or vertue: yet are they traduced for many defects, and I beleeue will fall vnder our example; how∣soeuer, I am sure, it dares not abide the touch in the triall. For setting the wisedome of 
Salomon
 aside, whereof 
Fraunce
 could seldome make ostentation, the Queene of 
Saba
 commended the obedience of the Princes, the sitting of his seruants, the ordering of the palace, the furnishing of the tables, the prouision for the houshold, and the glo∣ry of his throne: not so much for outward maiesty of the structure, and princely magnificense in his attendants, as the aduised care ouer his subiects, and impartiall determi∣ning of controuersies. In 
Fraunce
 the Princes contest with the King, the Clergie affront the Princes, the Gen∣trey


murmure against the Clergie, the Pages mocke the Gentlemen, the Citizens complaine of the Pages, and all sorts of people are proud of nothing, but slouenlines fa∣miliarity, and disorder; so that with much adoe the Me∣chanicall man stands bare to the King; and the Nobles sit at meate, as Carriers in an hostery without any reue∣rence, with vnmannerly noise, with impudent snatching the dishes from the table by the Seruitors, and confused trouble of commers and goers: whereby a vild custome hauing got the vpper hand, the maiesty of the Court and Kingdome is much depressed, which otherwise redacted to an vniformity might indeede augment the glory of 
Europe.


The Kingdome of IVDEA and gouernment of CA∣NAAN, as soone as euer obedience had set in a foote a∣mongst them, admired the wisedome of their women, as well as admitted the policy of the men; and in no sort debarred the daughters, neither from the princely throne, nor fathers inheritances, when the sonnes were extinct, and the line failed in the males, which all men know, whose consciences are opened with the key of vnderstan∣ding Gods truth. For the daughters of 
Zelophaad
 came before 
Iosua,
 and had their portion with the rest of the Tribes: But in 
Fraunce
 the Law salicke debarreth the wo∣man from her lawfull inheritance, out of a wilfull positi∣on, that the 
Flower-deluce
 may not go to the distaffe, 
 which I wonder at the rather, because we haue such forci∣ble instances both in Scripture, and many other worthy Nations to the contrary. For to enlarge our protasis a litle: In the swelling fulnesse of the greatest and longest lasting Monarchy of the world, I meane the 
Assyrians, S
iramis
 raigned sole Empresse aboue 20. yeares. When


the Persians beganne to shrinke in their estimation, the Kingdomes of 
Saca, Sogdiana,
 and 
Bactriana
 were subiect to 
Tamira,
 and 
Tolmilanda
 two famous Queenes. The barbarous 
Scithians
 admitted of 
Tomiris
 for their Soue∣raigne, and how she conquered 
Cyrus,
 a worthy Histori∣ographer hath enlarged. In 
Canaan Debora
 iudged 
Israell,
 and 
Athalia
 was Queene of 
Ierusalem.
 When 
Salomon
 had aduanced both the Temple and Palace, 
Saba
 came as Empresse of 
Aethiopia
 vnto him, and in the time of the A∣postles 
Candauce
 gouerned the same Countrey. When 
Cae∣sar
 presaged his owne fortunes 
Cleopatra
 was sole Queene of 
Egipt:
 and some write that 
Dido
 ouer-ruled 
Carthage
 and 
Africke.
 In 
Bohemia
 euen of late daies 
Libussa
 and 
Velasca
 obtained the Diadem, and when they supposed themselues seated in firmenesse, they gathered a company of Ladies, and vpon a light credulity, that the story of the 
Amazons
 was to be beleeued, would haue erected such a foolish Common-wealth. Amongst our selues before the conquest we had a 
Gueudoline
 Queene of 
Brittaine,
 a 
Cor∣delia Vaodicea,
 and some other; and since two Daughters of HENRY the 8. Amongst whom ELIZABETH was such a Prince, that forrane report hath established her for the Miracle of all ages, howeuer some of our selues haue beene too sparing in her admiration, and enlarging her greatnesse. In 
Italy
 we remember two Queenes of 
Na∣ples,
 who haue done such actions in the world, that they will be remembred in despight of obliuion. In 
Hungary
 the history of diuers Queenes hath startled euen men of resolution to be ashamed of their pusillanimity, and inci∣ted diuers heroike persons to worthy imitation. I might name the Queene of 
Cyprus
 taken out of the Monastery at 
Venice,
 and so inuested with the Diadem, which at last


she laid prostrate before the feete of the Senate, and they protected the same, till a stronger arme wrested it out of their tuition. Whereby I cannot but wonder, that neither example, nor precept can preuaile with them, considering in all kingdomes, with all sexes, and at all times such inhi∣bitions to debarre the right of kingdomes from the true and indubitate successors did not passe without the scan∣dall of intrusion, tyrannie, and wrong. Besides, accor∣ding to the Satyre,

Dum vitant stulti vitia in contraria currunt.

from an inconuenience (as they suppose) they haue fal∣len into a mischiefe, and if I would vse it by way of per∣sonating, whereas in submitting to diuine appointment in such cases, they might please both God and man, in ouer-ruling the truth, they haue made their preposterous dealing ridiculous to all the world. For howeuer they deny their owne naturall daughters this prerogatiue, by a contrary fashion they admit of stranger women to bee more imperious ouer them: as by the two late Queene mother Regents, and both 
Italians
 of the house of 
Me∣dices,
 is made apparant by lamentable experience: what the one contriued, and how like a firebrand she had like to haue set all 
Fraunce
 on a blase; the History is pregnant, and the Legend of the Cardinall of 
Loraine
 composed by that true hearted Frenchman 
Francis de Lisle
 a man of ho∣nour, is most apparant; & how the other is suspected is now no newes: But to the rest.


Salomon
 made diuers nauies, went in person to view his shippes, had great custome from his Merchants, loued and maintained good Marriners and pilots, contracted leagues with forraine Princes, making the confirmation of them honourable, and performed all good offices, that


tended to the expatiating his glory. 
France
 wanteth ship∣ping, is carelesse of nauigation, raiseth few Saylors, sel∣dome attempteth voiages, or discoueries, and hath many times incurred the imputation of perfidious breach of faith, vnder that diabolicall position, 
fides non est conser∣uanda cum Haereticis:
 as also that iesuiticall doctrine of e∣quiuocation: witnesse their horrible massacres, the impri∣soning the Princes of the bloud, their tragicall warre, the inhumane murther of the Admirall, the Guisian pride, and the terror 
Francis
 the third was put into, when he was put into the Lovure. 
Salomon
 had that good order and obedience in his townes and cities, that he knew his cities of store, his cities of traphique, his cities of fortification, his cities of refuge, and his cities of composition. But in 
France
 both cities and townes with their inhabitants, and Merchants are vnfashionable, sluttish, dangerous, rebel∣lious, and the people neither of wealth, nor eminence: In 
Paris
 they dare talke of a Kings wantonnesse, enter∣meddle with tractates of Parliament, and State, call any Prince 
Hugonet,
 that onely saies the 
Nostre Dame
 is but a darke melancholly Church, and iustifie very monstrous and abusiue actions: Besides, to tell of their inconstant and refractary dispositions, would be too tedious, and sooner discouer their loathsome treasons, then preuent the customary, and mischeeuous practises of the people.


The peace of 
Salomon
 caused plenty, and that spred it selfe ouer all 
Israel
 like a shady tree, which as a double shelter kept backe the cold of winter, and tempered the burning heate of summer: so that it is apparant with the Kings magnificense at Court, the husbandmans peace and wealth in the Countrey was enlarged, whereupon most of them were 
Berzalites
 and would go no further, then ouer



Iordan
 with 
Dauid,
 but rerurne to their owne houshold, sit vnder their owne figg-trees, and bee gathered together into the graues of their ancestours. But 
France
 knowes not now what to say: For the Court is a meere mapp of confusion, and exposeth many actions more ridiculous then worthy imitation: as for the Countrey-man, hee is called a Pesant, disparaged in his drudgery and seruile toylsomnesse, liueth poore and beastly, is treacherous at aduantage, and yet afrayd of his owne shadow, and can∣not free the vineyards from theeues and destroyers: yea, all the countrey swarmeth with rogues and vagabonds, whose desperate wants driue them to perpetrate many horrible murthers, although for the most part the Prouosts of euery diuision are very diligent. The wisdome of 
Salo∣mon
 setled his cities, that strangers were admitted at all times, except in frontire townes, which peraduenture were guarded in the night, according to martiall disci∣pline, prouided that the passages were easie and secure, ad∣mitted of all complainants, and leuiated their greeuances, aduanced himselfe on a golden throne to entertaine mat∣ters of Iustice, allowed of the Prophets, who yet out of zeale cryed out against the abuses of the Temple and Pa∣lace, and commanded the subiect, first to remember his duty to God; then his obedience to the Prince; and last of all, his loue to his neighbour: and this hee performed by admonitory preceps to enstruct the ignorant, and princely indignation to punish the obstinate. 
France
 re∣ferreth all to Parliaments and Presidents, excludeth the reformed Churches out of the walls of the cities, hath the name of Prophet in derision, suffered the 
Iesuites
 to mur∣ther two famous Princes, permitteth them still a Sanctua∣ry, and from worldly policy excludeth true religion out


of doores. In 
France
 the passages are toylesome and dis∣ordered, dangerous for extraordinary robberies, and vn∣der officers shuffle vp diuers times most notorious abuses. To conclude, in 
France
 many particulars choak the breath of happinesse, from giuing life to a glorious Kingdome indeede, if the reciprocall duties betweene Prince and subiect were but easily extended: so that with these de∣fects I cannot chuse but exempt her from sitting on any hand of 
Salomons
 throne. Whither shall wee then goe to match our example? or at least to come so neere, that a ci∣uill censurer will neither flatter nor detract: you know my first purpose, and I now determine to lead you into the sweet and orderly fields of 
England.






CHAP. XV. ENGLAND
 compared, with the probable reasons, why she is neerer the example of 
CANAANS
 happinesse, then any o∣ther nation.


W
Ithout preface or circumloquution, you shall finde the Kingdome of 
England
 in 
 geographicall dimension equall to the country of 
Canaan,
 and the people pray∣sing of God, in regard of their great and extraordinary blessings. For begin where you will, wee shall come so neere the comparison, as a close order in ranging a battalion. Concerning the generall view of the same, did you euer heare or read of any so well diuided in∣to shires and hundreds, with Lords, Lieutenants, Sheriffs,


Iustices, and other inferiour officers: insomuch, that it hath layd an imposition on the endeauours of a prin∣cipall scholler, and hee (according to the secret of satisfa∣ction) hath most worthily vnclasped the records of anti∣quity, and with such sufficient ampliation, that our aduer∣saries haue beene silent in excepting against it. But to my first purpose: I say, that to match all the particulars, wher∣with I haue stored 
Salomons
 magnificence and the coun∣tries prosperity, there is not at this houre any Kingdome in the world, so ready, apt, or worthy to take him by the hand, to pace out the measures of true glory and happi∣nesse, as the Kingdome of 
England.


Concerning our glory abroad, what worthy voyages haue we made? I hope no people or nation euer equalled vs, witnesse S
r
. 
Iohn Mandeuill
 into 
India
 by land; 
Stafford
 ouer 
Europe,
 much about the same time; 
Ienkinson, Wil∣loughby, Borogh,
 and many others into 
Russia
 and 
Muscouia; Forbisher
 and 
Hawkins
 to discouer the northerne passages: the 
Fenners, Ralph Lane, Iohn Clarke,
 and diuers into 
Ame∣rica;
 another voyage, where of S
r
. 
Walter Raleigh
 was the proposer; our setling in 
Virginia;
 our traffique to the 
West Indies, Brasill, Peru, Caribana,
 and 
Guiana;
 Captaine 
Drake
 round about the world, twice or thrice; 
Thomas Candish
 the like, our trauels to the 
East Indies,
 or 
Philippines;
 the Earle of 
Cumberlands
 worthy voyages, & amongst others, that to 
Santo Port-Ricco;
 the 
Portugall
 voyage; 
Cales
 voy∣age; the Iland voyage, and sundry others; as in Master 
Hackluits
 booke about this subiect only. Besides moderne trauellers, both of Noble-men & Gentle-men, although euery man is not a free Denizon of prosperities Kingdom, nor can boast of natures bounty in the gifts of vnderstan∣ding, or fortunes liberality in disposing her treasures. If


you would see how our marchants are bestowed, look into all the Ports of the world, you shall find them setled, & our shipping in harbour? If you could view all the countries of the earth, where men dare or can come, we are nobly dispersed, & I beleeue might be pull'd out of the center of the same, if such a passage did euer excite man to explore for secrets, marchandize, or wealth. If you were admitted into the remotest palaces of Emperours & Kings; yea 
Tar∣tary
 it selfe, 
English-men
 would salute you, and speak your owne language: and if you haue a purpose to affright idle∣nesse with any enterprize in the world, especially to make them beleeue, that the hand of profit will fill their laps with plenty, 
English-men
 dare set endeauours on their best feet, and can tell how to tumble all blockes and hindran∣ces aside, which may either terrefie them from such enter∣prizes, or detaine them from the glory of the actions: only heere lies a secret of traducing them, that a supposition of the wants of others, or feare of cumbersomnesse, when they meet with an indigent countrey-man abroad, hath debarred free conuersation, and doth make the mutuall supplying the necessity of strangers, a harsh-kinde of wel∣come; yea, an absolute leauing them to misery, if they haue not bills of exchange or letters of credit, to ouer∣beare mischances.


But our glory abroad is truely expatiated, when you shall know how helpefull wee haue beene to other nati∣ons, both with purse and forces; yea, contrary to the opi∣nion of the world, concerning our penury, opened the en∣closures of riches, and hononrably supplyed the defects of other Kingdomes. Wee haue made peace betweene 
Denmark
 and 
Sweden,
 and pacified those troubles long a∣goe. We haue releeued the Estates of 
Holland
 with men,


money, and munition, vnderpropping them, as if a man should vndershore a ruinous wall, vntill the foundation were repaired. We haue assisted the Protestant Princes of of 
France
 in their first ciuill warres, and beene auxiliary to many noble houses of 
Germany,
 we setled the last King in his greatnesse, and lifted him vp to that honour, that none of his Predecessours had their crownes shining with such a lustre. We playd the Physician with 
Geneua,
 and admi∣nistred her such an antidote, that no aconite of Pope or 
Sauoy
 could envenom her to death, or contriue her destru∣ction. We brought the distressed Prince 
Antonio
 to knock at the gates of 
Lisbone,
 and had he not found a fatall vicissi∣tude of times and occasions; yea, the minds of inconstant men corrupted with by-respects, and priuate following the stronger side, we might questionlesse haue preuailed in the proiect, and vpon the least filling the sailes of our ex∣pectation with the winde of home assistance, brought re∣couery to receiue the fulnesse of life. Wee haue made 
Spaine
 weary of the warres, and at last desire a peace, which I would be loth to resemble to still waters, wherein are the deepest gulphs and most dangerous places to ad∣uenture. We returned the 
Polish
 Ambassadour, with ad∣miration at our Princes greatnesse and magnanimity. We haue setled the good opinion of the 
Muscouite.
 Wee haue emboldned the 
Venetians
 in their last dissentions against the Pope. Wee haue accorded the Arch-Duke, who not onely admitteth vs into entertainment, but giueth way vnto such, as yet maintaine the cause of the contrary. We haue welcomed the Prince of 
Moldauia,
 and as farre as po∣licy or charity could goe, brought him along into the faire fields of expectation to regaine his enheritance. We haue lately ouerlooked the fields of 
Sweden
 and 
Russia;
 yea,


thought it befitting to send a martiall supply into 
Den∣marck,
 and howeuer the 
Polander
 repine, must in the end (I beleeue) determine those controuersies. To conclude, (though it shall be no cause of ostentation) wee haue pro∣spered in so many glorious thriuings, that the 
Spanyard
 in his prophanation hath sworne IESVS CHRIST to become a 
Lutheran,
 and railed on report, for filling the world with the sound of so many memorable actions.


Concerning our glory at home, lay abroad our exam∣ple 
 and spare not, and marke the emptiest place, which we will not fill vp with comparison. First, the best manner of gouernment from Gods own mouth, which is monarchal; and philosophicall principles, which is a King; and morall enstructions, which is a distributer of Iustice; and peoples desires, which is an honourable preseruer of Common-wealths: all vnited in one person, from a continuall de∣scent of princely ancestours, gaining the loue and obedi∣ence of many nations, by excelling induments of nature, as wisdom, learning, iudgment, peaceable desires, honora∣ble liberality, magnanimity, & such like. And did it please him to add some glorious repairing, or rather magnificent quadrant, to his palace at White-hall, being the principall place of entertainement, and the eye to ouerlooke such a city, as is not in the world, it would come neere our ex∣ample indeede. For the Kings house in 
Ierusalem
 was thir∣teene yeere a building, and no one thing addes more ho∣nour to a nation, then regardable edifices, and eminent workes of Maiesty, being the very fruit of peace, and (as it were) the birth-right of prosperity, whether it bring forth sumptuous structures or adorning monuments. And (if it were not a pride & elation of hart to number the people, looke how many nations and languages are vnder subie∣ction:


namely 
English, Scottish, Irish, Welch, Cornish, Ments, Ilanders
 both 
Hebrides
 and 
Orchades,
 & the 
French
 of 
Gersy
 and 
Iersy:
 so that if the honour of a King consisteth in the multitude of his subiects, what Prince hath more, and such variety? If you looke on his palaces, where are so ma∣ny, and so good, belonging to any Kingdome in the world? If you will behold his court; I hope for state, good order, expences, entertainment, and continuall attendan∣cy, other places come farre short? If you will view his shipping and nauies, I am sure you passe away with asto∣nishment, when you are enstructed in the secrets of their seruice and strength? If you will behold his armours and munition, they exceede report, and the Arsenalls of other countries haue neither such equipage nor sufficiency; but when you shall finde euery Noble-man and Gentle-mans house so well furnished, euery Hall and Company so well prouided, euery Shire so willing to continue their prepa∣ration, euery Master so cheerefull in storing himselfe, and euery man so ready to giue eare to any martiall summons, and prepare with ioy to attend the seruice; you must needs returne, not louing vs with feare and trembling, but affe∣cting vs with triumph and well wishes, for our preuailing against the proudest aduersary? If you will number vs at sea, I know there is not so many good Mariners and Say∣lours in 
Europe,
 excepting the Low Countries. If you will muster vs at land, who can shew such companies of foot? such troopes of horse? so many worthy seruitours? and so well appoynted? Insomuch that I know diuers Gentle-men of 
England,
 who can conduct 3000. men into the field (in their King and Countries name) of their owne tenants, seruants, and friends. If you will examine our Nobility, I confesse they doe not boast of factious greatnesse, as in



France,
 & the Princes of 
Germany:
 but their number, noble disposition, & willingnes to be obedient, may passe in the best items of Fames account. If you would see our Coun∣cellors, prepare a reuerence, and settle your estimation to∣ward them for their orderly life, probity of manners, inte∣grity in deciding controuersies, & affability in admitting suters: & though you come from the 
Grandes
 of 
Spaine,
 the Principalities of 
Italy,
 the 
Electors
 of 
Germany,
 the Dukes of 
France,
 & the States of other Countries, yea, the osten∣tous pomp of 
Cardinals:
 yet bee not too preiudicate, nor transported with selfe-conceited wilfulnes; for you shall see as great brauery, retinue, & obseruation amongst vs, as any subiects in the world dare challenge or put in practise, for outward glorious ostentation: nay more, the order of our 
Garter,
 and the ceremonies of enstalling, are continued with that triumph and maiesty, that no one celebration of petty Princes dare lift vp a countenance of such iollity & regardable honor. And if you will behold the other Cour∣tiers, they are generally so many, so handsome, so seruicea∣ble, & of their own retinues so well prouided, that I protest they so farre exceede other places, both for gracefull shewes and sufficient estates, that I wonder, how such a corner of the world should haue such a generall conflu∣ence of all happinesse and courtship, as if a raised winde should beat the swelling sea of prosperity to one shore.


But if you will be rauished indeede, or transported with the loue of the world, come and behold the beauty of our Ladies, and the disposing them at a night of solemnity, to which if you adde the generall contentment, which our English women affoord generally, without sophisticate and adulterate additions, either to comelinesse or fauour, there is no man can hold his peace, but proclaime our pre∣eminence.


Againe, if you would see 
Iustice
 proud of her entertainment, and how shee presents both 
praemium
 and 
poena
 to the seuerall attendants on her throne of equity; looke into our 
Starre-chamber,
 and view the 
Sunne
 in most perspicuous splendour, without so much as the least clow∣dy respect of persons. If you will enter our Gentle-mens houses, I hope, there is no such cupbords of plate, beds of of veluet and embroidery, hangings of tapistry, variety of roomes, duty of seruants, order of house-keeping, store of pastime, and all that man can desire in any countrey in the world. If you will search our cities and townes, what they want in outward deceit of formality (and yet I cannot so extenuate our buildings) is supplyed in sweetnesse and de∣licacy, and within doore surpasseth the best of them for wealth and furniture. As for expences, I am sure some Citizens of 
London
 are at more annuall charge of diet, then the Dukes of 
Venice, Florence,
 or 
Genoa,
 for their own palaces. If you will examine our marchants, howeuer some great 
Foulker
 or agent for a whole Kingdome, in 
Genoa, Antwerp, Brussels,
 or other citties may surpasse vs for vsury, venting commodities, or supposition of wealth: yet I am sure, there died not two such in one yeere, out of one towne in the world, as 
Spencer
 and 
Sutton.
 As for the rest, they surpasse for curious fare, statelinesse, follow∣ing their pleasures, handsome education, comely enter∣tainment, and orderly contribution, Besides, they liue at home in ease, purchase land with security, bring vp their children in daintinesse, maintaine their families in obedi∣ence, and cannot be matched by any forraine opposition. Would you be acquainted with the Trades-man, Artezan, and others of mannuall occupation, looke how hee liues, looke how he fares, looke where he dwels, looke what he


weares, looke whether he goes to buy his meat, to such markets and shambles, that the very sight astonisheth all strangers, and once made acquainted with their variety and goodnesse, they are amazed at our blessings, and won∣der, how so much prouision can bee orderly deuoured. Would you be refreshed with the pleasant countrey aire; our Yeoman and Husbandman liueth in such delight and sweetnesse of situation, that you may repine at his health and prosperity: but if you consider in what comelinesse and decency, in what peace & tranquility, in what neatnes and hospitality, in what wealth and good condition; you will fall to praising of God, for imparting his blessings to our nation, and wishing the like to your owne deficient countrey in this kinde: For beleeue it (as you shall heare heereafter) whether he be Purchaser or Farmer, our ene∣mies haue repined at our prerogatiues in this kinde, and our friends embtaced our noble customes with desire of imitation. I could adde many things to the ampliation of our glory, as our hauens and harbours, especially in 
Ire∣land,
 our riuers, high wayes, secure trauelling, vniuersities, castles, bathes, mines, and honorable orders of watchings, trainings, and musters: but I referre them to their due pla∣ces, when I shall prooue our excellency and transcending prerogatiues beyond other nations. And thus much for our glory.








CHAP. XVI.
 Wherein the happinesse of 
ENGLAND
 is both perspicuous and commendable.


C
Oncerning the happinesse of a nation, what 
 Kingdome hath more commodities within it selfe, wanteth lesse, or is better furnished from forraine parts? so that whether for profits sake, the strangers of other countries make sale of their best things, or that there is a secret in transportation, or that custome or cunning hath taught our marchants, euen curiosity it selfe, in selecting the choycest things, I know not, but am sure our 
England
 is the shop of the world, and 
London
 the 
Magazin
 of natures dainties. But to particulars; if it bee a blessing for euery man to eat vnder his owne roofe, to sit with the pleasure of conuersation in his orchard or garden, to enioy the fruits of the earth with plenty, to liue in neighbourly gra∣tuities: and in a manner our doores open all night, to haue many children, seruants, and store of cattle, to purchase great estates, marry our daughters beyond expectation, and strengthen one another in worthy families and pre∣uailing affinity: looke amongst vs, and tell mee where is the like? If it be a blessing not to be suppressed with supe∣riours, not to haue the Common-wealth rent in peeces with tyrannie, not to see others enioy the fruits of our la∣bours, not to be tormented with intrusion, vsurpation, or malicions lookes of ouer-couetous Land-Lords: looke amongst vs, and demand who can complaine, or at least,


who is so wronged, but hee may haue satifaction or re∣dresse. If it be a blessing to enioy the preaching of the Go∣spell, to be free from corrupting and absurd ceremonies, to reioyce in the liberty of vpright consciences, to conti∣nue in a true, perfect, and established religion (as heereaster shall be more amply explained) to abound with reuerend learned men, to haue liberall accesse, and dispute of our faith with moderate perswading and disswading, and to haue all controuersies tried vpon the touch-stone of Gods truth; come and heare vs, and tell me wherein you are vn∣satisfied. If it bee a blessing to haue sociable conuersati∣on, and yet with honourable respect to continue the free∣dome of neighbourly meetings, exempted from this in∣tolerable yoake of iealousie and suspition, to loue one an∣other with those comfortable conditions of charity, to seast without scandall, to entertaine without repining, and to be merry without lasciuiousnesse? Examine the di∣sposition of vs all generally, and setting mens imperfecti∣ons aside, which follow life, as the shadow the sunne, and tell me where is lesse offence in so great fulnesse offelicity. If it be a blessing to make the best vse of natures blessings, to be rather helpfull, then indigent of others help, to be at peace with all the Kingdomes of the world, to haue con∣fining Princes gratefie vs by Embasie, to haue the greatest Monarchs allied, or desiring our alliance, to welcome all comers with a noble and correspondent inuitation, and to thriue euery day more & more in the propagation of our worth, Take vp the example, put vs to the triall, and see whether I speake vaine-gloriously. To conclude with the best of all blessings, if it be a blessing to liue in expecta∣tion of a royall succession, to bee confident of hopefull Princes, to haue adioyning countries study our obserua∣tion,


to see our owne country and people flourish with all abundance, and to suspect nothing but the corruptions of greatnesse, through wantonnesse and ease: looke vpon vs; pensill out our defects, if you can, and let not emula∣tion, which sometimes dependeth on vertuous deserts and desires, bee turned into enuy, or so attended on by malice, that you will not yet confesse our neernesse in mat∣ching our example, when I am sure no Kingdome is so beautified with vnstainable colours.


But you will say, for all this, we neither fetch gold from 
Ophir,
 nor are our cities and buildings of any sufficiency, to hold out against a military expugnation, nor satisfie the high looking eyes of magnificence. To the first, I answer directly, we may if we list, either fetch treasure where it is, or bee the cause, that it shall bee brought vs euen to the doores of our Exchequer in peace. For I am sure, we haue not onely ships and men, but such hands and spirits, as with 
Dauids
 Worthies, can pull the speares out of the hands of the 
Philistims,
 and with 
Sampsons
 riddle take meat out of the eater, and sweetnesse from the strong, and who shall hinder vs? I hope not 
Spaine,
 if there were such occasion, nor the gallies of the middle-land sea, nor the confederate Princes of 
Italy,
 nor the Turkish 
Carmisans
 or gallies, nor the fortifications of 
China,
 nor any one world∣ly Monarch. But see the conditions of true worthinesse; valour and a noble spirit dare doe no wrong, and our ex∣cellent King (out of true addictions to vprightnesse) hath rolled vp all ensignes of defiance, and therefore will not infringe the honourable couenants of his compacted peace, nor giue example to his sonne, to stirre the poole of 
Silo,
 vntill the Angell descend for the good of the people.



Concerning our buildings and cities: first for the glori∣ousnesse and brauery of them; I answer, 
Ars non habet ini∣micum nisi ignorantem,
 and men are too preiudicate, that either condemne vs for want of knowledge; or effeminate, that vilipend vs for defect of formality; because of mine owne knowledge, I dare say, generally there are not so many beautifull Churches, handsome castles, glorious palaces, sweet townes, stately houses, and of great capa∣city, and delicate structures, within the circular dimension of so much ground in the world: so that if our Gentle-men (admitting the custome of liuing in cities, as they doe in most parts of 
Europe)
 would compact all the edefices and conuenient houses of a shire within a wall, or that we were sited in a continent, like the through-fares of 
France, Germany,
 or 
Italy,
 we might questionlesse haue more glo∣rious, great, and populous cities, then any one kingdome vnder heauen. Secondly, for the strength; what care wee for extraordinarie fortifications amongst our selues, the onely darings of presumption, and inducements to vnna∣turall treasons, when times and worthy gouernment so curbs the ambitious subiect from any dangerous attempt, that they are so farre from affrighting the Prince, or one another, with factious hostility, that they can quickely v∣nite themselues for the common good: as for the feare of forraine enemies, and inuasion of any enraged foe, wee haue the sea for our walls, the shores as strong as brasse, and such a nauy for our defence, that I protest my heart leaps for ioy, when I see the channell so plentifully stored, the Kings harbours so magnificently filled, and know that all the hauens of the world entertaine vs for one respect or another. But say, we doe not this way put the ambitious man in any hope ofthriuing in fowle pretension offormi∣dable


actions against the peace of our State: or the quiet man in any feare, that well fortified places may be surpri∣zed by treasons, and maintained by power, to the distur∣bance of the whole Realme, and animating forraine Prin∣ces to expect such coadiutement by corrupted and abused men. I am sure we come neerer our example (some fron∣tire townes or speciall landing places excepted) both for hospitality and the generall blessings of the kingdome, reciprocally imparted to poore and rich. And for our o∣ther townes and villages, such as they are, considering the vse and necessity of trauell, surmount by farre the Hoste∣ries and deformed villages of other nations, and am sure, if you let loose the Queen of cities, as you terme 
Paris;
 the 
Sacra Porta;
 or the beautifull, as 
Constantinople;
 the im∣possible within the impossible, as 
Venice;
 the happy and fashionable, as 
Augusta;
 the populous, as 
Norremberg;
 the great, as 
Millane;
 the delicate, as 
Florence;
 the Gentle, as 
Naples;
 the spatious, as 
Cracow, Mosco, Cayro,
 and tripar∣tite 
Prage:
 not one of them all (as for infinite other towns, they are not once to be named to this purpose) can looke so bigg, or angerly vpon our LONDON: but shee can affront them with a matching countenance; yea, ouer∣match them in many seuerall exercises and excellencies, wherein for your better instruction we will dispute a little.








CHAP. XVII.
 Forraine cities compared to 
LONDON,
 with the defects of either made apparant, and our sufficiency manifested.


I
F I beginne not at first with too sullen or 
 concise a question; more then the new gallery of the Lovure, and the suburbs of S
t
. 
Germanes,
 as it is now re-edified, what one thing is worthy obseruation or wonder within 
Paris:
 as for 
London,
 but that you will say my particular loue transporteth mee, it hath many specialities of note, eminence, and amazement; & for greatnes it selfe, I may well maintain, that if 
London
 and the places adioyning were circummunited in such an orbicular manner, it would equall 
Paris
 for all the riuers winding about, and the fiue bridges sorting to an vnifor∣mity of streets: and as wee now behold it, the crosse of 
London
 is euery way longer then you can make in 
Paris,
 or any citie of 
Europe:
 but because peraduenture you will not vnderstand what I meane by this word 
crosse,
 it shall bee thus explained, that from S
t
. 
Georges
 in 
Southwarke
 to 
Shoreditch
 South and North; and from 
Westminster
 to S
t
. 
Katherines
 or 
Ratcliff,
 West and East, is a crosse of streets, meeting at 
Leaden-Hall,
 euery way longer, with broad spaciousnesse, handsome monuments, illustrious gates, comely buildings, and admirable markets, then any you can make in 
Paris,
 or euer saw in other city, yea 
Constan∣tinople
 it selfe. Concerning multitude of people, if you take 
London
 meerely as a place composed of Marchants,


Citizens, and Trades-men, the world neuer had such ano∣ther: If you conioyne the suburbs, 
Southwarke, Westmin∣ster,
 S
t
. 
Katherines,
 and such like, it exceeds 
Paris
 euen for Inhabitants, or if you will come to vs in a terme time, ac∣cording to our custome of resorting together, I hope you may bee encountred either with hands or swords, as for 
Paris,
 you know the better halfe, euen of the indwellers, are Gentle-men, Schollers, Lawyers, and belonging to the Cleargy: the Marchant liuing obscurely, the Trades-man penuriously, the Crafts-man in drudgery, and altoge∣ther insolent and rebellious vpon the least distasting, vn∣accustomed impositions, or but affrighted with the altera∣tion of ridiculous ceremonies. But let vs search our com∣parison a little further: insteed of a beastly towne and dirty streets, you haue in 
London
 those that be faire, beautifull, and cleanely kept: insteed of foggy mists and clowds: ill aire, flat situation, miry springs, and a kinde of staining clay, you haue in 
London
 a sunne-shining and serene ele∣ment for the most part, a wholesome dwelling, stately a∣scension, and delicate prospect: insteed of a shallow, nar∣row, and sometimes dangerous riuer, bringing onely barges and boats with wood, coale, turff, and such coun∣trey prouision: you haue at 
London
 a riuer flowing twenty foot, and full of stately ships, that flie to vs with marchan∣dize from all the ports of the world, the sight yeelding a∣stonishment, and the vse perpetuall comfort: so that set∣ting the vnconstant reuolutions of worldly felicity aside, who shall oppose against our nauy, and if wee would de∣scend to inferiour roomes, the riuer westward matcheth 
Paris
 euery way, and supplieth the city with all commo∣dities, and at easier rates: In steed of ill fauoured woodden bridges, many times endangered with tempests and frosts,


you haue in 
London
 such a bridge, that without ampliati∣on of particulars, is the admirablest monument, and fir∣
 erected structure in that kinde of the Vniuerse, whe∣ther you respect the foundation, with the continuall charge and orderly endeauours to keepe the arches sub∣stantiall, or examine the vpper buildings, being so many, and so beautifull houses, that it is a pleasure to beholde them, and a fulnesse of contentment to vnderstand their vses conferred vpon them. Insteed of an olde Bastill and ill-beseeming Arsenall, thrust as it were into an outcast corner of the City, you haue in 
London
 a building of the greatest antiquity and maiesticall forme, seruing to most vses of any Citadle or Magazin that euer you saw. For the Tower containeth a Kings palace, a Kings prison, a Kings armoury, a Kings mint, a Kings ward-robe, a Kings artilery, and many other worthy offices: so that the Inha∣bitants within the walls haue a Church, and are a sufficient parish. Insteed ofan obscure 
Louure,
 newly graced with an extraordinary gallery, the onely palace of the King neere 
Paris.
 In 
London
 his Maiesty hath many houses, parkes, and places of repose, and in the countries dispersed such a number of state, receipt, and commodity, that I protest I am driuen to amaze, knowing the defects of other places, nor doe I heere stretch my discourse on the tenter∣hookes of partiality, or seeme to pull it by the by-strings of selfe-conceit or opinion: but plainely denotate what all true hearted 
English-men
 can auerre, that to the crowne of our Kingdome are annexed more castles, honors, forrests, parkes, houses of State, and conueniency to retire vnto, from the encombrances of the hurliburly of cities, then any Emperor or King in 
Europe
 can challenge 
proprio iure.
 Insteed of an old ruinous palace, as they terme their house


of Parliament, Hall of Iustice, concourse of Lawyers, or meetings of certaine Trades-men or Milleners, like an Ex∣change, and as it were 
promiscuè,
 confounding all together: we haue in 
London
 such a 
Circo
 for Marchants, with an vp∣per quadrant of shops, as must needs subiect it to forraine enuy, in regard of the delicacy of the building, and stateli∣nesse in the contriuing. We haue in 
London
 a second buil∣ding for the ease of the Court, profit of the Artizan, and glory of the city, which for any thing my outward sence may iudge of, can equall the proudest structure of their proudest townes, though you should name S
t
. 
Marks Pi∣azza
 in 
Venice,
 for so much building. We haue in 
London
 a 
Guild Hall
 for a State-house, and 
Westminster
 for generall causes of the Kingdome; two such roomes, that without further dispute, maketh strangers demand vnanswerable questions, and gently brought to the vnderstanding parti∣culars, lift vp their hands to heauen and exclaime, O hap∣py 
England!
 ô happy people! ô happy 
London!
 and yet I must confesse, that the hall at 
Padoa,
 and great counsell∣chamber in 
Venice,
 be roomes of worthy note, and suffici∣ent contentment. We haue in 
London
 diuers palaces for resort of Lawyers & their Clients, & other offices appro∣priate, all workes rather of ostentation to our selues, then imitation to others. Insteed of narrow dirty streets, neither gracefull to themselues, nor beautified with any orna∣ment, wee haue spacious, large and comely streets, expo∣sing diuers workes of peace, charitie, and estimation. In∣steed of obscure Churches, we haue first the goodliest heap of stones in the world, namely 
Pauls;
 next the curiousest fabricke in 
Europe,
 namely 
Westminster
 chapple, and gene∣rally all our Churches exceede for beauty, handsomnesse, and magnificent building, as framed of hard stone and


marble, and exposed with a firme and glorious spectacle, as for the 
Dona
 of 
Florence,
 S
t
. 
Marcks
 in 
Venice,
 S
t
. 
Marcks
 in 
Millane,
 the 
Noterdame
 at 
Paris,
 and some others in 
Ger∣many
 (the steeple onely at 
Strasborough
 except, which is denominated 
Beautifull,
 for the height and handsomnesse) they are either buildings of bricke, or conceited structures like a fantasticall bird-cage of a little inlayd or mosaijcke worke, worthy of applause from such as respect new dain∣ties, and not to bee ouerpassed for curious pictures and paintings: where yet by the way you must obserue, that in those daies of superstition, and particulars of ostentation, concerning rich hangings, imageries, statues, altar-cloths, roods, reliques, plate, pictures, and ornaments, other Churches and monasteries of 
Europe
 come farre short of our glory and Popish brauery. Insteed of Gentle-men on dirty foot-clothes, and women in the miry streets: the one with an idle Lacquey or two; the other with no company of respect: wee haue fashionable attendancy, handsome and comely going, either in Carosse, Coatch, or on horse∣backe, and our Ladies and women of reputation, sildome abroad without an honourable retinue. Insteed of a con∣fusion of all sorts of people together, without discouery of qualitie or persons, as Citizens, Lawyers, Schollers, Gen∣tlemen, religious Priests, and Mechanickes, that you can scarse know the one from the other, nor the master from the man. In 
London
 the Citizen liues in the best order with very few houses of Gentle-men interposed, and in our suburbs, the Nobility haue so many and stately dwel∣lings, that one side of the riuer may compare with the 
Gran Canale
 of 
Venice.
 But if you examine their receipt and capacity, 
Venice
 and all the cities of 
Europe
 must sub∣mit to the truth. Nay' in 
London
 and the places adioy∣ning,


you haue a thousand seuerall houses, wherein I will lodge a thousand seuerall men with conueniency: match vs now if you can. Insteed of a poore 
Prouost
 and disor∣derly company of Marchants and Trades-men, we haue a 
Podesta
 or 
Maior,
 that keepeth a Princely house, wee haue graue Senatours, comely Citizens, seuerall Halls, and au∣thorized Corporations, all gouerned by religious Magi∣stracy, and made famous by triumphant solemnities: so that our best Gentry are delighted with the spectacle, and strangers admire the brauery.


To conclude, if you looke on and in our 
London
 truly, as it is composed of men following trades & occupations, there is not such a city, such a gouernment, such a method of conuersation, such a vnity of good fellowship, such a glasse to see vnity and beauty in, such a treasury of wealth, such a store-house of all terrestriall blessings vnder the sunne. If you will view it without at all times, and yet consider the customes of keeping our country houses, you will say there are not so manie Gentle-men in anie place, nor gathered together to better purpose, nor can the varie∣tie of 
Paris
 bring you into the walks of such pleasure, with so little charge and offence, as 
London.
 For with vs our riding of horses, musique, learning of all Arts and Scien∣ces, dancing, fencing, seeing of commedies or interludes, banquets, masques, mummeries, turnaiments, shewes, lotteries, feasts, ordinarie meetings, and all the particulars of mans inuention to satiate delight, are easie expences, and a little iudgement with experience, will manage a ve∣ry meane estate to wade through the current of pleasure, although it runne to voluptuousnesse. But if you come to our Court, I hope you finde not such another for stately attendants, dutifull seruice, plentie of fare, resort of No∣bles,


comelinesse of Ladies, gallantrie of Gentles, con∣course of people, princely pastimes, noble entertainment, and all things befitting the Maiestie of a King, or glorie of a nation: so that I may say for 
London,
 as the King of 
France
 answered the Emperors tedious titles with 
France, France, France,
 and nothing but 
France:
 so crie I 
London, London, London,
 and nothing but 
London,
 to their proudest and all their cities. And thus much for 
Paris:
 now to 
Constantinople.


What I haue said of 
Paris
 by way of comparison, con∣cerning 
 the gouernment and orderly managing the af∣faires of a citie, I may well conclude against 
Constantinople:
 but because this imperiall place looketh with a more ma∣iesticall countenance then other cities, and lifteth vp (as it were) a daring head against all contradiction, for her supe∣rioritie: I must needes pensill out the line of her praises at some length, and tell you truely, wherein her worthinesse consisteth, and yet may deceiue opinion without true iudgement. 
Constantinople,
 otherwise called 
Stanbole,
 the Beautifull, hath a handsome and formall triangle of a wall, the first part whereof reacheth from the seuen towers (which is a place for suppliment of a prison, a treasurie, and ward-robe) vnto the 
Seralio,
 some three English mile. The second from the 
Seralio
 to 
Porta del Fieume,
 a little more and both toward the sea, which runneth one way be∣tweene 
Asia
 and 
Europe
 into the 
Euxinum,
 and another way to encounter a pretty fresh water riuer, beyond the North of 
Pera.
 And the third ouerlooketh the fields of 
Thracia,
 with a greater compasse and strength, because it is a double wall, and openeth three or foure gates, as 
Andri∣nople, Gratianople,
 the Tower gate, &c. into the countrey, which flourished when 
Pausanias
 was contented with the


title of Duke and Captaine of the 
Spartanes,
 and built this wonderfull towne by the name of 
Bizantium,
 in honour of his father 
Bize,
 who was Admirall of the Grecian Nauy, when 
Thebes,
 and other cities stroue for superiority. The wal is orderly beautified with square towers of hard stone, whose equall distance makes a reasonable shew, but that it resembles a painted Curtezan of outward good becom∣ming, yet within full of corruption and danger. For con∣cerning the streets, citizens, houses, or order of a well com∣pacted Common-wealth, it retaineth nothing comming neere our 
London,
 or happinesse. The situation is yet a stately ascent from the sea, as if it had a pride to mocke at the swelling of any tempest: and embolden the Marchant with the security of the 
Sacra Porta,
 being indeede the goodliest habour in the world, twenty fathom deep close to the shores of two cities. Thus it containeth ten English mile in circumference, hauing no suburbs, and shewing much waste ground in the vnfrequented places toward the land, especially where the Bashawes houses are seque∣stred from the hurliburly of the Trades-man.


The 
Seralio
 is the palace of the 
Gran Signeur,
 yet is a 
 name appropriate to diuers sequestred places, wherein his women are detained, and hath questionlesse the deriuation from our Latin word 
Sera,
 or locked vp: it is a receptacle for diuers thousands, enclosing as much ground, as S
t
. 
Iames
 parke. For the courts are very large, with seuerall guards of 
Ianizaries,
 according to the necessity of the times, or neernesse to the Emperours person. The gardens spacious, with embattelled walls, stored with artillery, the gates most of them iron, kept by 
Capogies:
 the buildings are many and stately, bearing in their front certaine 
Dowa∣na's
 or open hals, which haue trauesses of Persian stuffe, and


are roomes of great receipt, wherein the officers of the pa∣lace sit in open view at their feasts and diet. The ban∣quetting-houses, wherein his concubines and boyes are aparted from the court hurliburly, expose diuers manner of structures, and seeme indeede seuerall palaces, amongst whom there is one called a 
Caska
 without the wall of the 
Seralio
 close to the sea-side where hee accustometh to take his gally, of the delicatest and richest presence, that euer I beheld: for it is a quadrant of seuen arches on a side cloy∣ster wise, like the 
Rialto
 walke in 
Venice,
 in the midst riseth a core of three or foure roomes with chimnies, whose mantell trees are of siluer, the windowes curiously glazed, & besides protected with an iron grate all guilt ouer most gloriously: the whole frame so set with opals, rubies, eme∣ralds, burnisht with golde, painted with flowers, and gra∣ced with inlayed worke of porphery, marble, iet, iasper, and delicate stones, that I am perswaded there is not such a bird cage in the world. Vnder the walls are stables for sea horses called 
Hippopotami,
 which is a monstrous beast taken in 
Nilus,
 Elephants, Tygres, and Dolphines: sometimes they haue Crocadiles and Rhinoceros: within are Roe∣buckes, white Partridges, and Turtles, the bird of 
Arabia,
 and many beasts and fowles of 
Affrica
 and 
India.
 The walkes are shaded with Cypres, Cedars, Turpentine, and trees which wee onely know by their names, amongst which, such as affoord sustenance, are called figs, almonds, oliues, pomegranets, limons, orenges, and such like: but it should seeme, they are heere as it were enforced, and kept in order with extraordinary diligence: for the sunne kisseth them not with that freuency, as may make them large, or ripen in their proper kindes.


The city is very populous toward the harbour, the 
Be∣sesteine,



Bashawes houses, Mosques, conduits, tombs and monuments, open as it were a store-house of magnificent workes: yet when I read, that 
Constantine
 vnplumed 
Rome,
 and as it were robbed all the world, making this place accessary to the theft, and cannot finde the particu∣lars in mine inuentory, I maruell who hath either dared to purloine them, or presumed to ruinate and deface them. For the cheefest structures and monuments are now the great 
Seralio,
 the lesser 
Seralio's,
 the seuen towres, the dou∣ble wall, diuers Bashawes houses, before some of which are spacious quadrants graced with antiquities, recording the ancient manner of turnaiments, when the 
Greekes
 flou∣rished: the Mosques or Temples, amongst whom the 
So∣phia, Solimana
 and 
Amorata,
 are indeed heaps of ostenta∣tion and fabricks of great delight, the place called 
Iobs
 tombe, sequestred for the buriall of the Emperours chil∣dren, who are commonly all strangled on the day of his elder sonnes inauguration by 
Mutes,
 and then enclosed in coffins of Cypres, and so receiued by the 
Mufti
 into chap∣ples consecrated for that purpose; the Patriarcks house; certaine 
Balnea's; Aquae ductus; Constantines
 palace; and the Towers on the wall. To these you may adde the 
Be∣sesteine,
 a place like our Exchange, for varietie of marchan∣dize, market of virgins, selling of slaues, and the vaults vn∣der ground fenced with iron gates to secure their treasure, which especially belongeth to the 
Iewes,
 who farme the office of 
Dacij
 or customes, and are (as it were) the 
Turkes
 receiuers, so that these places must needes bee strongly guarded, both to preuent the furie of the 
Ianizaries,
 who are very irregular in their tumults, and the extremity of fire and earth-quakes, to whose violence the Citie is many times subiect.



The next diuision is of 
Galata,
 a city ouer against it diui∣ded onely by sea, no broader heere then our 
Tamisis,
 of great antiquity, walled about, and retaining a particular name and renowne, for holding out a yeere and better, af∣ter 
Constantinople
 was surprized: it standeth likewise vp a hill, and equals it both for beastlinesse, confusion, and vn∣comely streets and houses: heere liue many 
Greekes,
 and the 
Francks,
 as they terme the Papists (of what nation soe∣uer) haue a Church by permission; the Curtezan likewise liueth at some liberty; yet is it death for any Christian to lie with a Turkish woman or Iew.


The third part of this great city comprehendeth the vine of 
Pera,
 which is a huge suburbs, compassing 
Galata
 round about, a place of quiet dwelling, good aire, and pleasant gardens: yet in regard the many thousand tombs of 
Turkes
 (for you must know, that neither 
Turke, Iew,
 nor 
Christian,
 interre any corps in their Mosques or city, ex∣cept they build a chapple of purpose, or haue the priui∣ledge of the Franck Church) fill vp a great quantity of ground, with disordered, confused noysome, and feare∣full graues. On the one side toward the north-east, you haue an Arsenall for gallies, a little beyond, a handsome Seralio, & somwhat further a pretty fresh water riuer, as if they lay in sequence, by whose banks are certaine houses erected of purpose, for the pleasure & reposednes of spe∣ciall Bashawes. On the other side toward the south-west, the office of artilery called 
Tapinaw,
 inuiteth you to the view of such ordnance and munition, that for number, greatnesse, and vse, surmount any one city of 
Europe:
 you haue likewise another Seralio, and in these suburbs are re∣sident the 
English, French,
 and 
Venetian
 Ambassadours: as for the 
Persian,
 Emperours of 
Germany,
 and 
Polacks,
 they


liued in the great city, and sometimes visited one another, as either necessitie of businesse, or pleasure of inuitation affoorded.


The last quarter of this diuision affoordeth the obiect of a towne in 
Asia
 called 
Scideron,
 or 
Scideret,
 betweene which and 
Constantinople,
 the sea runneth 20. English mile in length, and onely two in bredth, as farre as 
Pompey's
 pil∣lar and the blacke Tower, resembling a lace fringed with spangles and purles: for the Bashawes and Chawses hou∣ses, so stand on both sides, as if they were made to answer a proportion of handsomnesse: but when time and a daies trauell hath taken away the pleasure of this spectacle, then fall you into a larger gulph, once called 
Euxinum mare,
 now the blacke sea, extending a thousand mile, as farre as 
Trebisond:
 on the farther shore of the continent now called 
Russia,
 is shouldred vp close 
Maeotis Palus;
 into which the great riuer of 
Tanais
 sendeth his streames, as if a messenger of glad tydings and businesse should hasten to discharge his duty. Thus I confesse, if on the towers of the 
Amorata,
 or battlements of the 
Sophia,
 you beheld all at once, as it were one vnited body, it would equall, if not surpasse 
London,
 for spaciousnesse of grounds, some monuments, and diuers palaces and houses: but yet come no way neere my satisfaction, as being defectiue in many things, which I supposed to excell in it, & deficient in all things, wherin a happy countrey supplieth the wants of her enhabitants. For heere is neither good lodging, proportionable fare, free recourse, gracious entertainment, true religion, secure abiding, allowable pleasure, orderly gouernment, or any thing wherein a noble city is made glorious indeed: nor is it so populous as report hath busied vs, but 
famarialum,
 and it may be, the plague hauing consumed 80000. and


the army of 200000. deducted, diminished somewhat the glory, & left the rest of the people to enioy more free∣dome. And thus much for 
Constantinople.
 Now a word or two for 
Venice.


Venice
 I confesse is both rare in situation, and wonderfull for gouernment, as cementing together diuers Ilands with 
 small bridges, and not trusting their liberty either into the the hands of one Prince, or iudgement of inferiour per∣sons. Thus hath the Duke but a binding voyce, and the sword is carried before the Senate: thus is nothing done without the consent of the Nobility, who are very neere 1500. in number, and the trades-man is in no sort admit∣ted amongst them, till either he purchase the freedome, or deserue it by some heroicke imployment; therefore they doe them wrong, that call the 
Venetians
 marchants. For though some of them haue a traffique at sea: yet doe the better sort of the Nobility scorne to trade for profit, and those which are aduenturers, are either newly raised hou∣ses, or licensed by the state for speciall purposes: but how∣soeuer, hee leaues the managing of affaires to inferiours, and the drudging (as we say) for money, either to the Iew as an Vsurer; or to common banke for the good of the city; or to the Shop-keeper, for the entertaining the con∣course of people, sitting at home in ease, and going abroad for some variety of delight, as the true Gentle-men of 
Na∣ples
 and 
Millane
 accustome, who suppose nothing wor∣thy, which sauours of curbing liberty, and tying them to seruile attendance. But yet in all this, so farre short of our 
London,
 as a dumb painted statua of a liuing substance. For neither are the Noble-men permitted the eminency of o∣ther natious, nor patible of such degrees, as our greatnesse looketh vpon one another withall: nor can the Marchant


equall the twentieth part of our comparison for number: nor in that which they boast of, which is wealth, can they generally match our 
Londoners:
 as for the Trades-man and Shop-keepers, as I sayd before, neither for order, go∣uernment, libertie of meeting, diet, purchasing of land, de∣licate furniture, and all the particulars whereby a city is made famous, worthy, or wealthy: onely some few hou∣ses haue a handsome shew of comelinesse, and (according to the custome of their stone-buildings) seeme pretty piles for the receipt of a small company. But where are their fiue hundred ships at sea; when all 
Venice
 hath not aboue thirty marchant men, and ten galleasses; onely they boast of three hundred gallies, according to the custome of 
Na∣uall
 encounters in the 
Leuant?
 where are their voyages and setled aboad in all the harbours in the world? where are their large and braue streets, antique monuments, when their city is scarse eight hundred yeere old, glorious gates, magnificent structures to lodge Princes and all their reti∣nue, houses of entertainment for trauellers and strangers, such as our Tauernes and Inns? where are their conduits and good waters? where are their fields and pleasant walkes? where are their exercises and heroike pastimes? where are their triumphant shewes and magnificent specta∣cles, with infinite other particulars, wherein they must yeeld, if 
London
 had no other Commander then the Maior and Senatours? after this manner could I runne into 
Affrick,
 and fetch 
Cayro;
 into 
Russia,
 for 
Mosko;
 into 
Po∣land,
 for 
Craccow;
 into 
Germany,
 for 
Augusta,
 or 
Norrem∣berg;
 into 
Bohemia,
 for 
Prage;
 into 
Austria,
 for 
Vienna;
 into 
Spaine,
 for 
Leon,
 or 
Madrid;
 into 
Portugall,
 for 
Lisbone;
 and so in all the rest: but if they were brought before the barre of comparison, they might bee quickly arraigned of


presumption for contending with our 
London
 in any of those things, wherein a city looketh vp with a iustifiable countenance, to shew her comelinesse, beauty, glory, bra∣uery or antiquity. But see what it is to embolden a for∣ward man; I am not yet satisfied, vntill I tell you diuers stranger things, and so open the enclosures of knowledge, that you shall enfeoff her with many excellencies, wherin our 
England
 is truely imparadized before all nations.






CHAP. XVIII.
 Diuers particulars wherein 
ENGLAND
 excelleth other Kingdomes, and first in 
RELIGION.


W
E will begin with the blessing of all bles∣sings, 
 and as the 
Logicians
 say, 
Causa sine qua non,
 which is RELIGION, or the true worshipping of God, and to bee found amongst vs, or no where in the world: For I hope without further disputing, as I haue spoken else where, wee will exclude euen out of our thoughts, heathenish prophanation, and the filthinesse of idolatry, against which the sharpest arrowes of Gods quiuer are darted, and the Prophets sound out his iudge∣ment, as terribly, as the Angels the trumpets to summon the inhabitants of the earth against the day of doome. But because the Deuill before the generall dissolution must appeare like an Angell of light, and hath taught vs cunning to deceiue our owne soules with false interpreta∣tions


of scripture, with the impostures of aequiuocation, with adding and diminishing to and from the booke of life, to which most formidable curses are belonging, with quite extinguishing the second commandement, & other dangerous pollutions infecting the Churches of 
Europe:
 I thought it not amisse both to discouer the enormities of the 1. Greeke, and 2. Latine superstition, and muster together some pretty forces out of Gods campe against the 3. pride of the Popish Cl
rgy: 4. the worlds vili∣pending the true Saints of God: 5. and that deceiuable worshipping of images vnder a couert praying to the Saints, vpon a supposition of being our Mediators in heauen: of all which in order, and first against ido∣latry.


When 
Rahel
 stole her fathers idols, there was much adoe in the search, and 
Laban
 would faine haue pickt a quarrell with 
Iacob:
 but God foreseeing the wretched∣nes of his minde, preuented the mischiefe, and laughed mans invention to scorne, euen before the Law was esta∣blished: But presently so soone as the LORD had pre∣scribed them, what to relie vpon, euen twise in one chap∣ter the gods of siluer and gold were forbidden, and a sen∣tence pronounced, that hee which offred vnto any gods saue vnto the LORD should be slaine: wherevpon by a diuine inspiration, 
Iacob
 reformed his houshold by put∣ting away the idols, termed in scripture, clensing, purging, and pleasing of God. If you come forward to 
Moses
 gouernment: neuer any temptation traduced him for impatience, being the meekest man on earth, as at the ma∣king the golden calfe in 
Horeb,
 and the folly of 
Aaron,
 which brought 3000 men to destruction: but looke a little further, and all fellowship with Idolaters is forbid∣den;


and whereas the wickednes of mans inuention had so farre enlarged it selfe, as to terrifie one another with the mischiefe wrought by Deuils, imposturing them yet withall by a cunning art of pacification in offering sacri∣fices, and vowes to that purpose, God interdicted the same, and 
Moses
 flatly prohibited such abomination: yea in the 20 of 
Leuiticus
 it was absolute death to offer their children vnto 
Molech,
 meaning any kinde of idoll: nay more, such was the ielousie of Gods honor from the be∣ginning, that it was losse of life to blaspheme the name of the liuing, mighty, and onely true God.


In the 26 of 
Leuiticus
 idolatry is forbidden againe, and the very making of images reputed an vnanswerable sinne; and because the policie of man should be quite defeated, the eternall prouidence is contented to yeeld reasons for the same in the 4 of 
Deuteronomie
 15: yea such sufficient reasons, that we may conclude them posi∣tiue lawes to all Nations. First in the third verse, to pre∣uent 
 their destruction, lest they might vtterly perish, as they did, because of 
Baal Peor.
 Secondly, because it was wisdome and vnderstanding, wherein the naturall man delighted, to keepe the ordinance of God, vers. 6. Thirdly, because the Lord had done more for them in their deliuerances, than for other Nations, v. 7. Fourth∣ly, because the lawes of God were better, more vpright, and had a fuller iustice in them than the lawes of other Nations, v. 8. Fiftly, because they saw no image in that day, wherein the Lord spake vnto them in 
Horeb,
 and out of the fire, v. 15. Sixthly, because we must not worship either sunne, or moone, and starres, which are most glori∣ous; therefore much lesse the inferior creatures, much lesse idols and images the worke of mens hands: 
Argu∣mentum




à fortiori,
 or 
à maiore ad minus,
 v. 19. Seuenthly, because God was angry with 
Moses
 for speaking in their behalfe, when they had worshipped the golden calfe in 
Horeb,
 and punished him for their sakes, with debarring him from entring into the land of 
Canaan,
 v. 21. Eight∣ly, and last of all, because they might be blessed in perfor∣ming the will of God, whom they knew to be the onely true God, v. 35. Wherevpon when the Iewes were to take possession of the land of the Gentiles, although it might be intended, that there could not be wrought an vtter extirpation at the first; yet did the spirit of God co∣uenant with them, that they should not be at atonement with their abominations, but destroy their idols vtterly: yea a litle further, the very places where the idols were to be erected are to be abandoned, as if he should then say, I will be worshipped, as I command, and not as mans fan∣cy deludeth, wherevpon followed that great curse against the inticers, and seducers to idolatry, and the Magistrates had a strict commandement to preuent the planting of groues and trees, the very nurses of heathenish invention, and to hinder the occasions of solitarie sequestration, whereby were practised 
Diabolicall
 arts, 
Pithonisticall
 in∣cantations, 
Cabalisticall
 secrets, 
Hieroglyphicall
 representa∣tions, imposturing deuises, and all dangerous sacrifices belonging to the formall perfecting the same.


This that is alleaged might be sufficient to vnderstan∣ding men to affright them from affecting either idoll, image, or church-painting: But I will goe a litle further, and wade in the foord of this swelling streame, which from the springs of the Prophets ouerflow the fields of all countries: but how? euen by shouldring aside the proud cast-vp-banks of opposition, and threatning Gods venge∣ance


against such as dare perpetrate such 
llicit actions. So that if I store this discourse with some collected ab∣stracts, intimating nothing from enuy, or malice against the greatnes and wealth of other Kingdomes, which are Idolaters, I hope we shall thereby auoide in our selues the least sauouring of those monstrous customes of 
India, China,
 or other dangerous Kingdomes, and adulterate ex∣cuses 
 of misled Christians, who thus farre agree with the grossest idolaters, that their images are but representati∣ons of more excellent spirits, and no man is so senselesse to kneele to, or adore the dumbe and dead things, but onely to resuscitate our stupide memories, either of God, or his Saints, in regard the nature of man is so slender of it selfe, and the condition of the Diety so gentle to giue way to any thing, which may further the adoration of his glory, and the confirmation of our saluation: in both which how grosse and palpably they abuse the great and wise God, and deceiue ignorant and simple men, shall here appeare.


In the 17. of 
Deuteronomie
 there is as it were a solemne quest of enquiry against the peruerters of true religion in this kinde, and the conclusion tendeth to the punishment of stoning to death; and because we should haue no star∣ting hole or tricke to deceiue our selues, God is contented in the 28 to establish to his people a contract of blessing, and cursing, all tending to discouer the vses and reasons of either: following it so farre, that he plainely nameth idolatry, or if you will, erecting of images, for any cause to exasperate his displeasure, that plagues, punishment, and vtter extirpation must follow: to which end and purpose 
Iosua's
 exhortation for the worshipping the one∣ly, true, and wise God, and after his owne onely, true, and


wise way, was so enlarged, commended, and applauded after his so many and great victories, and established qui∣etnes. How neere to vtter destruction, and desolation, were the 
Israelites
 in the time of the IVDGES, when the Angell rebuked the people for liuing wickedly in the sight of the Lord, and seruing 
Baalam,
 wherevpon follow∣ed a casting them away by God, and the hands of 
Midian
 fettred them in chaines seuen yeere: nor could the Princes of 
Iuda
 deliuer them, although 
Gedeon
 began well, and set vp preuailing on his strongest legs, to stand vpright for their behoofe. But what followed? He and all his house fell into the pit of destruction: and wherefore? for making an ephod, wherein hee presumed yet to doe well; but it was the step and staire of idolatry, and that the cause of a following vengeance; then if you looke into 
Micahs
 story, you shall finde that euery man did what was good in his owne eyes, whereby ensued murthers, rapes, robberies, and such like intolerable enormities, all hauing their cur∣rent from this spring, that his mother made him images of siluer, and he consented to the wicked worke. If you ouerlooke the story of 
Sampson,
 howeuer hee lost his strength, and was inflicted with a seuere punishment, of being bereaued of his sight, and disgracefull captiuity; yet you saw, as the Eagle casts her bill to renew her youth, for the punishment of Idolaters, God raised vp another wall of fortification, and when his vigour was restored, he pul∣led downe the prophane temple vpon the heads of two thousand soules: when the 
Philistins
 brought the arke of God into the house of 
Dagon,
 the Idoll fell downe before it, and the men of 
Ashdod
 were plagued for abusing the same. Did not 
Salomon
 reioyce in all worldly felicity, and was not the mantle of pleasure and happinesse spred be∣fore


him? vntill he fell to idolatry, then did his priuate e∣nemies cast it out of sight, and God diuided ten Tribes from his sonne, which was a strange disparity, considering his father built the Temple, consecrated the same, and blessed the people. Wherein was God so offended with 
Ieroboam,
 that he made him the capitall authour of the sins of 
Israel?
 but by reason of his golden calues, the punish∣ment whereof was thus farre extended; His sonne died, his hand was dried vp with leprosie, the seduced Prophet was killed by a Lyon, and the same 
Abiah
 that made him King, confirmed the extirpation of his family, and for all his wife went to delude him, yet she heard the iudgement of terrour, which she could not preuent. In the story of 
Ahab,
 what was the cause of so many troubles in 
Israel,
 tyranny in the Common-wealth, murthering of Gods Prophets, vsurpation of other mens inheritances, wicked∣nesse of 
Iezabel,
 witchcrafts, whoredomes, and in the end a generall defection from his obedience, and coniuration against his house, was it not idolatry? wherupon followed the slaughter of the King, the casting the Queene out of a window, the killing of 
Baals
 Prophets, first by 
Eliah,
 then by 
Iehu,
 and an vtter confusion in 
Iuda
 and 
Israel.


Wherein was 
Iehoiada
 so acceptable to God, as when he destroyed the altars of 
Baal,
 and layd his images on a heape? looke amongst all the Kings of 
Iuda,
 or 
Israel;
 and whereas you finde some of them murthered, some of them deposed, some of them taken away in the pride of their yeeres, some of them lepers, and some of them carried in∣to captiuity: it was all by reason of idolatry, & transfoun∣ding the adoration of the onely true God, with the infe∣ctious leprosie of mens traditions: thus 
Azariah
 of 
Iuda
 became a Leper, 
Zacharia
 of 
Israel
 was slaine by 
Shallum,




Shallum
 by 
Menahen,
 and 
Menahen
 purchased his peace of 
Assyria
 by money. The wicked idolatry of 
Ahas,
 and that horrible consecration of his sonne in fire, was a motiue of trouble and desolation to all 
Ierusalem. Hosea
 King of 
Is∣rael
 was ensnared, and he and his realme caught in the net of Assyrian policy, by reason of their confidence in Idols, & that euery one worshipped the God of his nation, con∣trary to 
Moses
 Law; but what ensued? curses, plagues, vt∣ter desolatenesse, adumbration of the sunne-shine of hea∣uenly fauours, and when they presumed of well-doing, in making a hotchpotch of religion in 
Samaria,
 the Lyons of the forrest came into the city, and deuoured both Priests and people.


When 
Manasses
 restored idolatry, giuing life to filthy prophanation, which viper-like abused the curtesie of him which warmed her, and stung him to death. I will bring (sayes God) an euill vpon 
Iuda
 and 
Ierusalem,
 that who heareth of it, both his eares shall tingle, & I will stretch o∣uer 
Ierusalem
 the line of 
Samaria,
 and the plummet of the house of 
Ahab,
 and I will wipe 
Ierusalem,
 as a man wipeth a dish, and turne it vpside downe: so 
Ammon
 was slaine by his seruants, and the poyson of idolatry that had choa∣ked the people of God with the dreggs of abomination, made 
Iuda
 so vlcerous and deformed, that God would not know his owne handyworke, but suffered them to be led into captiuity, and brought into the schoole of tyran∣nous correction.


Looke ouer all the prophesie of 
Esay,
 where the desola∣tion of 
Ierusalem
 is denounced, where the 
Medes
 and 
Per∣sians
 shall destroy 
Babel,
 where 
Moab
 must looke for an o∣uerthrow, where 
Damascus
 and 
Ephraim
 must come to ru∣ine, where the Aegyptians must be dislocated by the Assy∣rians,


where 
Aethiopia, Idumea,
 and 
Arabia
 must grone vn∣der affliction, where 
Tyrus
 must feele the yoke of subiecti∣on, and all superbous Monarchies come to ruine: and you shall finde that idolatry is the cause, and principall motiue of Gods wrath against them. nor desisteth he so, but exem∣plifieth at large, how the full cup of Gods vengeance floweth ouer for following the traditions of men: nay more, certaine curses are exaggerated against such, as ei∣ther adhere to mans assistance, or are seduced with world∣ly vanity, and in the 41. chapter, you shall finde an ironi∣call derision of the Inhabitants of the Ilands, for making of images, and such like bestiall traducements, especially for extenuating the power of God, by introducing the in∣uentions of man, and mingling worldly deuices with true religion, concluding in the 43. that there is no God but one, nor any worshipping of him, but in spirit and holi∣nesse of life.


Looke into the prophesie of 
Ieremy,
 and all his Lamen∣tations, and you shall find, why the 
Iewes
 were destroyed, why compared to a disobedient woman to her husband, why reprehended for crying out the temple, the temple, and relying vpon the outward ceremonies, why exprobra∣ted for following strange Gods, after the custome of their fathers, why threatned with such plagues, as sauoured of bitternesse & poysoning their outward prosperity, cheefly for idolatry, as more especially 22. Then followeth the word of God, like the voice of a cryer in the wildernesse, against 
Aegypt,
 the 
Philistins, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumea, Damascus, Kedar,
 and 
Elam,
 all in one chapter: nor is it a bare angrie vehemencie; but illustred with many excellent comparisons, not desisting till he leaue 
Babylon
 flat on the ground, yeelding reasons for her desolation, because the


nations of the world were made drunke with the carowses out of that golden cup, which shee represented out of the Lords hand, and all to shew the vanitie and wickednesse of idolaters.


Ezekiels
 visions were most against 
Israel,
 and his mouth opened the fearefull indignation of the Lord against 
Ieru∣salem,
 because their altars were erected to strange Gods, and that they made images of the sunne, to pollute their soules worse then the carrion of a dunghill: then procee∣deth he against them with personating names, calling 
Sa∣maria
 and 
Ierusalem, Aholah
 and 
Ohalibah:
 the end onely to discouer their idolatry, and intimating Gods wrath for their notorious wandring from the true path of know∣ledge, insomuch that from the parable of a seething pot, 
Iuda's
 destruction is threatned: yet for all this, God will not condescend to any treatise of pacification, vntil all the nations round about, namely 
Edom, Moab, Aegypt, Chaldea, Tyrus, Sidon, Gog,
 and 
Magog,
 taste the bitternesse of the same fruit, corrupted and made irksome by the same trans∣gressions.


Was not the adoration of 
Nebuchadnezzars
 statua of golde, a strange and notable worke of God against Idola∣ters? and the history of the Kings humiliation, an instance of terrour and reuenge against the pride and ambition of man? was not 
altashars
 tragedy and example of admira∣tion? and would a man desire a better warning to auoyde the punishment of idolatry, and blaspheming the true God? did not 
Daniels
 miraculous deliuery from the Ly∣ons strike the Heathen with amazement? and brought confusion amongst the imaginary vanities: so that 
Darius
 himselfe disclaimed the worship of the sunne and fire, ac∣cording to the ancient manner of the 
Persians,
 and pro∣claimed


exaltation of the eternall Deity indeede.


Doth not 
Hosea
 threaten the people, because of idolatry, and makes 
Ierusalem
 worse then an harlot, telling of the swift comming of their enemies, by the comparison of an Eagle, resembling the Iewes to an empty vineyard, an heart diuided in twaine, and concluding, that her sorrowes shall be like the trauell of a woman in childe-bearing, be∣cause of their going a whoring after false Gods, or if you will, counterfet Idols, and colourable images, being no o∣ther, nor other waies vsed, then now the Church of 
Rome
 accustometh, 
 by preuaricating true religion, by calling them the bookes of the Laity, by excusing them with an honourable remembrance of the Saints deceased, by cor∣rupting them with filthy painting, and the art of the crafts∣man, and by a diabolicall erecting them, as if they had life and motion.


Doth not 
Amos
 (as if a man should runne a race for a reward) passe from one countrey, city, and person to ano∣ther, with prophesies and threatnings against 
Moab, Iuda, Israel,
 the Gouernours of 
Samaria,
 and the Princes of the Tribes, adding withall the famine of the word of God, for their abusing true religion, and teaching and practizing a doctrine which God neuer prescribed, nor had any thought correspondent.


Was not 
Michahs
 voice raised higher and higher against 
Iuda
 and 
Israel,
 onely for idolatrie? and did not 
Zephaniah
 tremble at the disobedience of the Iewes? foretelling their destruction, by reason of their corruption and abomina∣tion of Idols. Looke 
Zechariah
 cleane ouer, and where the Iewes are affrighted with the exclamation of wants, famin, and ouerthrowes, his warrant proceedeth from this occa∣sion, that the altars of incense smoake vp a pace, but stinke


before the throne of God, sending their vapours backe a∣gaine, to choake the Inhabitants of the earth. All 
Mala∣chies
 complaints are against the Priests and Seducers of the people, who not onely were wicked themselues, but per∣mitted the rest to be polluted with idolatry. There is scarse one chapter in the booke of wisdome, which doth not pensill out the grosse and palpable running a whoring af∣ter the ridiculous adoration of images. To conclude, our Sauiour, the Euangelists and Apostles preach, that the true worshipping of God consisteth in spirituall deuotion, not wordly or carnall circumstances, and inueigh against no∣thing more then mens traditions, the obseruing the out∣ward letter, the adhering to ceremonies, and with 
Martha
 leauing the most needefull thing to bee encombred with worldly vanities and beastly corruptions, to which if you adde that excellent reuelation, it is a plaine discouery of 
Antechrist,
 and how the westerne Churches should be in∣fected with the contagious diseases of trumperies, idola∣try, and diuellish interpretation of Scriptures, I durst say a Iewish contradiction of the truth, and Apostate falling from the maine building of Gods Church. And thus much for Idolatry in generall.








CHAP. XIX.
 Certaine particulars concerning the Greeke 
CHVRCH.


S
Ome define religion, and indeede most truely, thus: 
Religio est vera
 
 
cultura Dei,
 and then I referre you to 
Monsier de Plessis
 discourse, wherein he proueth with sufficien∣cie, that all the customes of the world concerning diuine adoration come short of Christianity: but if you will conuert it thus: 
Religio est cultura veri Dei,
 then may you both diuide, subdiuide, and diuide againe, al∣lowing of three Religions; the Iewes, Christians, and Mahumetans, all maintaining the omnipotency of God, and pretending obedience toward the high Creator of all things. But because we hope for our established saluation in the merits and mercies of Iesus Christ, and know, that the excellency of the Trinity is described in the old Te∣stament, when God said, 
Let vs make man,
 when the great King saw the image of one like the sonne of man in the furnace, when 
Iob
 knew that his Redeemer liued, & when the mysterie of the Trinitie is reuealed in many places: let vs leaue the vanitie of the Heathen with their obstina∣cie, the abomination of Idolaters with their grosse abuses, the antiquity of the Iewes with their stiffneckednesse, the innouation of the Mahumetans with their errors and im∣possibilities, and be onely proud of our liuery of Christi∣ans. But now we must subdiuide againe, and say, that a∣mongst


Christians there is a tripartite separation. For the Greeke Church runneth one way with the title of East: the Latine Church rangeth another way with the deno∣mination of West: and the reformed Church spreadeth a modest glory with the liberty of Protestants.


Concerning the Greeke Church I will be bold to tell you, that I haue heard some of their Protopapans and Archimandritans maintaine their greatnesse, precedency, and truenesse of Religion before the Latine, and thus they assume the defence. For greatnesse it containeth most parts of 
Armenia, Georgia, Mengrelia
 neere the 
Caspian,
 many places in 
Natolia,
 or 
Asia minor,
 the Countries of 
 
Aethiopia
 in 
Affricke,
 which may equall them of the West 
Indies,
 of whom the Pope doth now boast so much: In 
Europe
 all 
Grecia:
 many great Ilands (except such as are diuerted Papists, incurring the scandall of Heretickes) 
Muscouia
 or 
Russia:
 some parts of 
Poland, Lithuania, Bogdonia,
 and the shores of the 
Euxinum,
 much more ground, then the Pope can challenge, where he is the most offen siue Vsurper.


For Precedency it claimeth likewise the prerogatiue, both waies: First, by priority, in regard they were first 
 Christians, and the Apostles planted Churches amongst them, before either 
Paul
 preached at 
Rome,
 or 
Linus
 was appointed Byshoppe. Secondly, by authority, as by translation of the Empire, from whence 
Rome
 challengeth hers: For when there was no such ambition thought vpon 
Iohn Patriarch
 of 
Constantinople,
 vsurped the title of vni∣uersall Byshoppe, and practised the supremacy ouer all other Churchmen, by reason the Emperour 
Constantine
 had so enobled and enabled the great Citie, where hee would haue the Byshoppe to be principall in regard of the


maiesty of his person and the brauery of the place, and therefore not onely graced him with the elated title of Patriarch, but inuested him with many roialties, and pal∣laces, and temporall iurisdictions, to which the Byshoppe of 
Rome
 did then intercede, interposing a negatiue euen a∣gainst the very title, disprouing it as Antichristian, and 
 traduced 
Iohn
 the Patriarch, as a wicked and malicious man for practising such ostentation: nor desisted he so, but writ whole volumes of letters tending to a manner of de∣famation: some entreating him to disclaime such elation of heart: some disalowing the presumption, as exorbitant in a Byshoppe, who should rather imitate the humilitie of Christ: some thundring the cursed prediction of Anti∣christ by such apostacy, and all of them disswading the true Ministers of Gods word from poysoning their pre∣ciously redeemed soules with the venome of pride, and vaine-glory: then followed the fearefull history of 
Nau∣clerus
 a strong papisticall writer, on whom they lay the imputation of a fable: But he saies plainely, that that ve∣ry instant, in which 
Constantine
 the great enfeoffed the 
 Church with temporary lands, and sumptuous edifices, the heauens seemed to frowne, the aire was thickned with a cloude, the earth troubled with a tempest, and after great thunder and lightning, a voice was heard; now is poyson throwne into the pure streame of Gods truth. Vpon this the matter was a while respited with a grant on∣ly of sitting downe first at generall Councells, naming in Commissions, and the binding voice in equality of censu∣ring; all which, if they were priuiledges, enlarged first the precedency of the Patriarch of 
Constantinople.


Afterward, when the sinnes of the Empire, like a fluent streame ouer-spread the bankes of his enclosures, and that


God determined the vtter subuersion of all: two wicked men contriued the most lamentable desolation, both of the gouernment of the Empire, & religion of the Church, which were 
Phocas
 and 
Bonifacius;
 the one conspiring thus with the other against God and Angells, against hea∣uen and earth, against men and Deuills, that to establish 
Phocas
 in the Empire of 
Constantinople,
 he would be con∣tented, that 
Bonifacius
 of 
Rome
 should be consecrated with the title of Vniuersall Byshoppe; whereupon 
Phocas
 by the murther of his Master 
Mauritius
 and other inhumane treacheries was inuested Lord of the Easterne Monarchy, and 
Bonifacius
 by the cousoning his Predecessor 
Siluester,
 and other religious practises obtained the papacy: inso∣much that 
Platina
 and diuers of their owne writers (a∣mongst other pasquills and satiricall inuections) exclaime, that he came in like a fox, raigned as a lyon, and died like a dogge: so that all premises considered, if there be a ne∣cessitie in any such precedency, the Roman Byshoppes be but vsurpers. For 
Constantinople
 had it at generall Coun∣cells, and was permitted all the fauour of titles, which the Church, and most Christian Emperour collated at that time.


Concerning the truth, it is well knowne, that 
Peter
 of whom they boast so much was Byshoppe of 
Antioch
 
 20. yeares, and those of 
Asia
 the first reputed Christians in the world; so that euen from Scripture it selfe and 
Pauls
 perigrination, many plentifull collections enlarge his history and life with warrantable knowledge of what we must trust vnto. As for his visiting of 
Rome,
 howeuer 
Eusebius
 adhereth to some formall discoueries, and other Authors produce instances of his owne death and daugh∣ters Martyrdome vnder 
Nero,
 it is both fanaticall, imagi∣nary,


and vnwarrantable by Scripture: nay I will say more, neither by collected circumstances, probable con∣iectures, or authenticall Authors is there any inducement to beleeue it: But say he did visit 
Rome,
 and conferred with 
Paul,
 what sense, reason, or honesty can allow the transla∣tion of his owne Byshopricke out of 
Asia
 into 
Europe,
 an intrusion into another mans iurisdiction. For 
Paul
 was constituted to be the light of the Gentiles, and lost his head at 
Rome
 in iustifying his innocency: how then could 
Peter
 be condemned of so functory a negligence, that be∣ing appointed to the dispersed Iewes of 
Asia,
 hee would vilipend them, and intrude himselfe into the gouernment of the Gentiles of 
Italy:
 so then considering 
Antioch
 and the 7. Churches spoken of in the 
Apocalips,
 were the first receiuers of the Gospell, from whence the Greekes in 
Eu∣rope
 were the next embracers of the truth, who can oppose against her residence and conseruation rather, where it was first published, then in 
Italy,
 and the remoter places of 
Eu∣rope,
 whereas yet some of their Countries are not quite purged from Paganisme.


Thus doe they dispute, and with stomachous ardency enueigh against the pompous and ostentous glory of the latine Church, putting them to silence, as our Sauiour did the Pharisies, when hee questioned their opinion of 
Iohns
 baptisme, & exprobrated them for aduancing the 
Hidra's
 head of confusion through enormous ceremonies, and mens traditions, wherein they saw the inconueniences be∣fore their faces, that they were not onely patible of altera∣tion, but would grow in time to a Congeries and moun∣taine of deformitie, as men & deuises did augment them: notwithstanding time being weary of stabilitie, and the Deuill affraid of impeachment in his kingdome, hath


scattered many corruptions in the fields of Gods farmes, which haue ouergrowne the seedes of verity in these parts, that it now resembleth the corne sowne amongst tares, which choaked the growth of the best seede, and came vp with such a violent ouerspreading, that at haruest there was little benefit to the owner. For all the Greeke Churches are very small, full of idle painting, lampes, candles, tapers, and such like: their seruice and language Greeke, and when they write or print it is a reasonable good Character, though farre from the atticke Dialect: and yet I will be bold to say, a good Scholler of our gram∣mer instruction, shall scarce vnderstand the phrase of their common speakers, no more then a southerne man, one borne farre north, or in Scotland. Their Monasteries are poore, vnhansome, and farre from the state of the Romish Church; and surely if in any thing they imitate the Apo∣stles, it is in their scorne of worldly pompe, carelesnesse, wants, and sometimes austerity of life, although naturally they are the merriest and most iouiall men in the world: their chiefe Abbots are called Archimandritans, but all in generall submit to the Episcopo of the Dioces, who wea∣reth coloured apparell of silke with a crosse ouer his hat, which is low crown'd, broad brimmed, and tied vnder his beard with long strings, hee carrieth a crosier in his hand, but it hath a plaine crosse; they call him also Protopapan the first Father of the congregation (from whence the By∣shoppe of 
Rome
 assumeth his 
Papa,
 or if you will the name of Pope) acknowledging the Patriarch of 
Constantinople
 at this very instant for supreame, and absolutely contesting against the Popes tyrannicall vsurpation: yea such is their hate to the Latins, I will not name their corruptions and Church, that they had rather liue in slauery and bondage


vnder the Turke, then either implore the aide of 
Italians
 for their restitution, or submit to that strange ambition of that Cleargy-man, as some of them ironically tearme the Pope. They obserue foure lents in a yeere, eat flesh on Saturdaies, but on Fridaies and all the lent, with other prohibited times, they neither eat flesh, fish, butter, cheese, or any meat, but like the Christians of 
Aethiopia,
 are absti∣nent beyond reason, the ordinary desire of man, or any prescription of Scripture, or example of the Primatiue Church. They baptize with water and oyle, deny purga∣tory, neuer cut their haire, adore no pictures, nor images out of the Scriptures, and yet are superstitious in diuers fe∣stiuals, as S
t
. 
Nicholay
 about sea matters, and 
Celestinus;
 S
t
. 
Demetrius,
 a feast about the 25. of October, called their drunken feast; and S
t
. 
George,
 who as our Ladies Knight hath obtained sufficient reputation. Their marria∣ges, dancings, festiuals and burials, haue the seuerall passa∣ges of many and strange ceremonies: but because whole volumes are written against their erroneous superstition, I referre you to such commentaries, concluding; that al∣though they are some way more tolerable then the Ro∣mish abuses, yet are their best garments so plighted with errours, and layd vp vnhandsomely with wrinckles, that when you come to vnfold them, you either exclaime a∣gainst the negligence of the seruant, or carelesnesse of the Master: who should be a better ouerseer. And thus much touching the Greeke Church. Now a little concerning the Latin.








CHAP. XX.
 Certaine particulars concerning the Latin Church.


T
Here are so many bookes and disputations concerning the enormities of papisticall re∣ligion, that little children can in a manner 
 retort an argument, and cite you common places of Scripture, against their absurdi∣ties and idle traditions. I will therefore referre you to the larger dilations of matters of faith, and fundamentall points of saluation: and concerning the strength of their props, which now vphold their suprema∣cie and monarchall iurisdiction; in a few leaues of S
r
. 
Edwin Sands
 his worthy discourse, you shall see them tur∣ned vpside downe, as if an arme of 
Heccate
 were put into the throat to pull the entrailes outward, and shew you the strange diseases both of heart and lungs: or else examine the paraphrase of the Reuelation, and you shall heare di∣stinctly prooued the seat of Antechrist, the pride of the whore of 
Babylon,
 the persecution of the Saints, and the enormities of this 
Hosean
 strumpet, that hath broken the bands of her first wedlocke, and bedashed her selfe with lusts loathsome charriot. For mine owne part therefore, I will leaue that common way of inuection, or mustring vp the forces of argument out of the maine battell of Gods word, and breefly summe vp the accounts of her condemnation in this manner. 1. First, concerning their gouernment, it is meere politicall, as allowing all positi∣ons of tyranny, reuenge, disloyalty, licenciousnesse, wealth,


and liberty, and wherein 
Euripides, Demosthenes, Isocrates, Tully, Salust, Perseus, Horace, Sigonius, Lipsius, Machiauell,
 or any other absolute or moderne writer opened a school∣house doore of diuellish deuices and distasting principles, to modest and orderly gouernments: they haue culled out the same to serue their owne turnes, and with the Iesuites, repute all others simple, that cannot labour in the worke of alteration of Kingdomes, and setting Princes at vari∣ance to corroborate their owne greatnesse. 2. Concer∣ning religion, it is meerely ridiculous, and a dart out of the quiuer of mans inuention; yea, so Diabolicall and Turkish, that it interdicteth the searching of Scriptures, disputing of matters of faith, or any opposition of their su∣perstitious decrees, councels, and consistorian statutes. 3. Concerning society and conuersation, it is meerely mundane, voluptuous, and sauouring nothing but de∣lightsome liberty: so that if there were not a God to bee prayed vnto and beleeued in, a heauen to bee expected, a saluation to be hoped after, and an account to bee made vpon a dreadfull summons indeed, I had rather be a Car∣dinall of 
Rome,
 then a Noble-man of 
Naples,
 who of all the Gentles in the world spred the largest cloth of vanities and voluptuousnesse. 4. And lastly, concerning their seeming vowes to obedience, chastity and pouerty; it is like 
Ianus
 face looking two wayes, and with the Lapwigg crying farthest from her nest: for they sauour not one word of truth in the same, as you shal see in the next chap∣ter. So that I will onely relate vnto you three seuerall sto∣ries of three seuerall sects, in which the absurdities of the Latin Church most plainely appeare.


In 
Rome
 amongst diuers others there liued a certaine 
 Iew, who had many controuersies with Christian Friers


about both their religions, alledging for himselfe pre∣uailing arguments against their idolatry, or worshipping of images, wherein they would faine distinguish with the differences of 
 and 
, &c. praying to Saints, pro∣phaning of the Saboth, incontinency of life, and burning candles in the day time, as it were in scorne of the glorious light of the sunne, all which though they were vnanswera∣ble, yet the Frier pleading the calling of the Gentiles, the destruction of the temple, the disanulling of Iewish cere∣monies, the birth and comming of Christ, as a prefixed time of another religion, the authority of the same, and the orders of the Church, preuailed so farre with the o∣ther, that he enclined a little to bee a Proselite, which the Frier reioyced to heare, triumphing exceedingly at the good successe of his oratory: nay soft (quoth the Iew) it is not thy perswasion hath coapted me to this course, but a certaine impression, that some great and good God is pro∣tectour of this place, or the prayers of an holy Patriarch (as 
Abraham
 disputed with 
Iehoua
 about the sauing of 
So∣dom
 and 
Gomorrha)
 are acceptable to heauen in the behalfe of some vnknowne good men; otherwise the sinnes of 
Rome
 are so many, the liues of Priests so corrupt, the wic∣kednesse of men so abominable, the villany of politicks so mischeeuous, and all things so discrepant to true religion and honesty, that I haue wondred a thousand times, how the whole countrey, especially the city, hath beene prote∣cted and supported from sinking to hell.


At another time, a sober 
Turke
 liuing in 
Rome,
 and wea∣ried with the riot of their Carneuall or Shroue-tide, at his 
 returne to 
Constantinople,
 being demanded his opinion of the Christians, answerered, that they had some tolerable customes, eat good meat, weare good clothes, or rather


spoyled much stuffe with fantasticke slashing and cutting it, and liued in good townes; but they were madd twice a yeere: For at one time they ranne like Diuels in a play vp and downe the streets with squibs of fire, making a noyse both on horse-backe, and on foot, keeping a coyle with Curtezans and Bawds, sporting with scurrulous and vn∣manly gambols, and performing actions of strange vnde∣cencies, which indeed is their time of Carneuall, a time of such sluttishnesse, vnrulinesse, and venerious riot in all the cities of 
Italy,
 that in 
Venice
 one 
Iceppo Marcello
 hath writ∣ten an inuectiue against it. Shortly after they went how∣ling in the streets like dogges, mourning with lamenta∣ble gestures, and whipping themselues vntill the bloud came, and this was on good Friday, when the Penetencia∣ries are couered ouer with a cassocke of canuasse, except two holes to looke out at, and all to belash themselues, vntill the blood runne downe their shoulders, whereby great Princes are so impostured, that contrary to a maine position of Scripture, against such voluntary humiliation and ridiculous inflictings, they haue entertained the pe∣nance, and vndertaken the stripes, witnesse 
Charles
 the 5. who left his rod of cords, as a iewell of his tresury to King 
Philip.
 Duke 
Ioieuse,
 called father 
Angelo;
 who returned to his orders, which was a bare-foot, or Mendicant Capu∣chin Frier, as soone as the league was dissolued, and many other both men and women of noble families, who enioy∣ned penance by their ghostly fathers, either by punishing their bodies, vnsauoury pilgrimages, fasts, abstinence, or such like endurances, are very zealous in the execution, and vpon confidence of some meritorious act, condiscend to dangerous and laborious miseries, yea, terrours abhor∣ring to nature. Now to my olde woman.



It is well knowne, that in the last dayes of Queen 
Mary,
 
 those dayes of firy triall, our roods and images in 
England
 were so palpably abused, and diuellishly stored with deui∣ces, that the Priests had diuers trickes to moue either eies, heads, or hands, yea to make them speake with variety of voyces, and palpable gesture, as if the Idols of 
Molech
 and 
Chemosh
 were to entertaine the presents of the people, and 
Bell
 had life indeede to deuoure the Kings allowance: which course is continued still in many places of 
Europe,
 insomuch that a while agoe in the Froe Church at 
Strasbo∣rogh,
 when certaine olde deuout women came to worship our Lady, the knauish Priests caused the childe to salute them in her armes, and (as it were) courteoufly to thanke them for making such account of his mother, which they not onely wondred at, but seemed in a manner offended, that the sonne should bee so bolde in the presence of our Lady: whereupon one more zealously angry then the rest, cryed out aloud; 
Peace I pray you young Gentle-man, I haue nothing to doe with you, let me heare what my good Ladie your mother sayes;
 and so when shee had no further reply, went away discontented.


Of this sort in our owne Kingdome of 
Ireland,
 in the beginning of his Maiesties raigne, when the townes were 
 commanded to frequent the Churches, I was my selfe an eare-witnesse of many strange grudgings and murmurati∣ons, amongst which I yet encountred with this facete and indifferent deuotion; while two neighbours of 
Dublin
 were disputing about Church-matters, the one an indiffe∣rent Protestant, the other a superstitious Papist, and yet so seeming cunning, that she durst dispute between the Popes supremacy and the Kings authority, with a willing minde to satisfie either; her neighbour thus aduised, to goe to


Church a Gods name, and for the Popes sake to say 
Pater noster,
 for the Kings 
Our Father,
 let God take which hee will: and so it was merrily concluded, and the woman went accordingly to her deuotion. And thus much concerning the Latine Church. The parelell of which with ours would sufficiently shew our happinesse: And this you may see at large deliuered in the workes of many learned Diuines of our Country, to whom I re∣ferre you.






CHAP. XXI.
 Another excellencie of 
ENGLAND,
 exposing the noble worth of her 
Princes
 beyond other Nations.


W
E will not be so vnciuill, as to awake the 
 drowsie eyes of antiquitie, or call in que∣stion things done so long agoe, that either by-opinion, or the deceit of mens inven∣tions haue bin falsified against all reason and vnderstanding; but quietly maintaine the glory of our moderne Kings, and plainely vphold this 
position,
 that we haue had more famous and illustrious Princes since the Conquest, than any gouernment of the earth.


If you begin with 
William
 of 
Normandy,
 his actions and warlike exploits are memorable, his trauels and la∣borious industry extraordinary, his wisdome in the seda∣tion of the tumults and factions amongst vs wonderfull,


his magnanimitie in setling his Court and Palace admira∣ble, and his successe in all designes vnmatchable.


Howeuer 
William Rufus
 was so beholding to peace and prosperitie, that he tempred his warlike spirit from affe∣cting either forreine or domesticke dissention; yet did he consecrate many famous workes to the memory of his quietnes, and out of a swelling of princely greatnes, thought 
Westminster
 Hall (the wonder of the world for a roome in a house) too litle for so great a Maiestie.


Robert
 of 
Normandy
 went in person to 
Ierusalem,
 and for his Heroicke successe and exploits might haue bin re∣warded with the Diadem, howeuer he was diuerted to re∣turne home againe into the fields of peace.


Henry
 the first was setled in the loue of his people, ta∣med the French, pacified 
Normandy,
 looked after 
Ireland,
 terrified his foes, corroborated his friends, loued learning, and was a 
Maecenas
 of all worthy conditions either in himselfe, or others; and howeuer the ielousie of soue∣raigne points intercepted the amitie of the brethren, yet was his worth many waies expatiated, and diuers parti∣culars of estimation extracted from his gouernment.


Henry
 the second obtained the dominion of 
Ireland,
 brought to happy period many conflicts in 
France,
 stop∣ped the breath of gaping hostilitie in 
England,
 lashed the sides of his vnruly children with stripes of discomfiture, and liued in great honor and estimation: insomuch, that he neuer exacted imposition of his people, nor wanted in his warres, yet left a treasure of aboue 200000 pound in ready coine, besides iewels, and plate, which was much in those daies.


What thinke you of 
Richard
 the first? Were not his voyages, conquests, titles, and surname of 
Cuer de Lyon
 for


his valour, and exceeding courage, markes of true honor? Would not his life make a memorable story? Shall not his actions be registred in the court of eternitie? Did he not proue a worthy champion of renowme? 
Ciprus
 was wonne, 
Acon
 conquered, 
Ierusalem
 established, the confe∣derate Princes ielous of his glory, and all the countrey full of his memory: so that considering his tedious iour∣neyes, the perill of his person, the successe of his actions, and the noble end of his atchieuements, let the proudest of the 
Othoman
 race be compared and spare not.


The troubles of King 
Iohn,
 the Barons warres, the plantation and buildings in 
Ireland,
 the discouerie of the Clergies corruption, the calling in of 
Lewis,
 the dismissing the 
French
 backe againe, and the turbulency of those times may ranke themselues with the fame of very proud Mo∣narks.


Henry
 the third subdued the 
Welchmen,
 made sundry voiages into 
France,
 had many conflicts with his owne 
Barons,
 set forward a notable expedition to 
Hierusalem,
 shewed diuers effects of an heroicke and magnanimous spirit, raigned gloriously 56 yeeres, and in the 
interims
 of his peace brought many ostentous buildings to per∣fection.


Edward
 the first went diuers times into 
Scotland,
 dispo∣sed of that Crowne, as he thought good, subiected them to 
England;
 conquered the 
Welchmen,
 appeased them with a Prince of his owne sonne borne in 
Carnaruan;
 setled his estate, and ended a famous life with a glorious death, to which when renowne and victorie was added, the applause rang through the world.


Edward
 the third, and the blacke Prince haue engrossed the fame and renowne of the vniuersall earth, and many


memorable actions are aduanced vp as trophees of their vnimitable glory; so that they may march to the palace of maiestie with the proudest Emperors. For what wor∣thy atchieuements so euer haue bin perpetuated in 
Eng∣land, Wales, Scotland, Almaigne,
 and 
Flanders,
 in their owne persons they haue brought to passe, as if they had bin borne to shew some wonder of nature, and exposed as rare examples to succeeding times. And for his other sonnes, step into the proudest house of 
Austria,
 and tell me who can match them? 
Iohn
 of 
Gaunt
 went twise into 
Spaine,
 and conquered 
Castile
 in the right of his wife. 
Lionell
 Duke of 
Clarence
 passed the Alpes into 
Italy,
 ma∣ried the daughter of 
Millane,
 reuelled in those parts with extraordinary cost, pompe, and attendants, and wrought both a reuerence and loue toward his person from for∣reine people. 
Edmond
 of 
Langley
 Duke of 
Yorke
 was so wise and reposed, that the gouernment of 
England
 kept it selfe warme vnder the ouer-spreading of his embraces. 
Thomas
 of 
Woodstocke
 Duke of 
Glocester
 was so true a lo∣uer of his country, and champion of honor, that he con∣tested with Maiestie for degenerating from her owne pro∣perties, and durst tell his nephew King, wherein he wan∣dred from his paternall renowne.


Henry
 the fourth, when he was but Earle of 
Hertford,
 went into 
Africke,
 bare his father company into 
Spaine,
 and obtained the diadem through popular loue, and re∣spect of the people.


And although King 
Richard
 the second, was an vnfor∣tunate Prince, yet did he surpasse both auncestors and successors for brauery in apparell, costly expences, sum∣ptuous fare, glorious courtship, noble company, princely reuels, and magnificent estimation: For all the while


Queene 
Anne
 of 
Bohemia
 liued, the fame of 
England
 was dispersed ouer the world, and the King had 8 or 10000 continually in his Court, whereby his pompe and port surpassed other Princes.


But would you wonder indeed? Then looke into the 9 yeeres of 
Henry
 the fift, and you shall see such a vnitie of vertues, consent of graces, entertainment of valour, perfection of industry, militarie brauery, and fulnes of ge∣nerous designes, that his very enemies gaue way to the report of his worthy life; and 
France
 in his death was left as a comfortles widow, or desolate orphan.


I might recite the fame of 
Edward
 the fourth, for reuen∣ging his fathers death, many conflicts before and after he was King, his voiages into 
France,
 his distastings against 
Burgundy,
 his troubles at home, and other princely dis∣positions.


I could also bring into your good opinion the valour of 
Henry
 the seuenth, his miraculous deliuery, his noble establishment, his buildings and sumptuous monuments, his riches and wealth, his wisdome and politicke contri∣uing of affaires, the stately disposing of his Palace, and many other remarkable actions, but I am affraid, that I am too weakly furnished to enter into the lists with iudi∣cious censurers, nor shall be able to wrastle with opinion and seuere examination, which will rather condemne me for slight extenuation in the attempt, than entertaine the discourse, as a befitting subiect, or adapted explication of princelines.


Henry
 the eight wan 
Turwin
 and 
Turnay,
 entertained the Emperor 
Maximilian,
 welcommed 
Charles
 the fift, compounded at his pleasure with 
France,
 made voiage after voiage, conquered 
Bulloigne,
 had almost obtained the



Empire,
 was maiesticall in all things, and died as it were in the armes of kingly reputation.


Queene Elizabeth
 deserues a whole story of her life, maiestie, and gouernment: For the very 
Heathen
 and 
Ma∣humetans,
 the 
Persians
 and 
Idolaters,
 the 
Aethiopians
 and 
Muscouite
 doe name her with reuerence.






CHAP. XXII.
 An other excellencie of 
ENGLAND
 casting vp an account of her antiquitie in one vnited Monarchy before other Nations.


A
S no country in 
Europe
 did euer aduance 
 vp so many excellent parts together to∣ward the building the frame of perfecti∣on: so is it apparant in nothing more liuely, than in 
Englands
 antiquitie in one vnited 
Monarchy,
 without either claime or competition of forreiners, vsurpation of intruders, at∣tempt of hostile invaders, and desire of alteration a∣mongst our selues: whereas yet all the Kingdomes of the world, especially within the reach of 
European
 know∣ledge, within 400 yeeres haue had other titles, bin sub∣iect to strange disparitie of gouernment and religion, and confronted many times with such Princes, or fearefull subiects within their territories, as haue made them ielous of soueraigne points, yea the very losse of their cheefest


crownes and dignities. If you search the wounds of the 
Persian
 and 
Turkish
 gouernment, as they seeme now to be healed, you shall finde them badly cured, and in∣deed festred so dangerously, that they must bee better ouer-viewed, or their inward putrefaction will on a sud∣den poyson the very entrailes: For they haue bin tossed and tumbled with many alterations, and euer since 
Tam∣berlaine
 descended out of 
Scithia
 amongst them, suffred diuers concussions both in gouernment and religions, so that howeuer the 
Persian
 is more noble, yet he hath per∣mitted a mixture of many barbarous people to the great disturbance of his former glory: As for the 
Turke
 hee is meerely new to vs, and a formidable intruder into such territories, as he gripeth with a strong arme; so that what you now behold amongst these 
Mahumetans
 is onely vp∣held by tyrannie, a band of no greater strength, then power, forces, and reward can tye together, wherein if any faile the gouernment is quickly let loose, and the sub∣iect at liberty taketh hold of euery innovation: and al∣though by tumbling and tossing like to heaps of snow rowled vp and downe, they haue growne greater and greater, while the frosty coldnes of our Christian Princes gaue them leaue to harden, whereby they are increased to that stupendous heape you now see: yet when a thaw comes, and that 
rota fortunae
 is in 
Gyro,
 it shall and will be subiect to diminution, especially when the glorious sunne of successe shineth out the consent of our Kings to expulse them at least out of 
Europe,
 if not from the vsurpation of the better parts of 
Asia.


The Kingdome of 
Hungary,
 though but lately establi∣shed, and knowne by a different royalty from the 
Empires
 either of 
Greece,
 or 
Germany;
 yet as you see a prey seased


on by a hawke, or other tormenting vulture, pull'd in peeces, and cruelly rent a sunder: hath suffered many di∣lacerations, and besides the capitall enemy of Christen∣dome her proppes sawed a sunder by some barbarous hands amongst themselues. The Kingdome of 
Poland
 is not 300. yeere old: For it retained in times past, but the prerogatiue of a Dukes coronet, and was euer in conten∣tion with 
Lithuania
 and the adioyning Princes, vntill the Pope vndertooke the appeasing of those troubles, and ad∣ded the grace of a roiall inuesture to 
Sigismundus,
 surna∣med the great, who at last vnited both 
Pomerania, Prussia,
 and 
Lithuania;
 yet is not so established, but the Election of the Peeres diminisheth the prerogatiue of the King, and new Princes; new lawes, new confederacy, new go∣uernment, haue let confusion, and alteration loose vpon the Countrey.


The Emperour, Princes, Electors, and principalities in 
Germany
 are almost of the same nature and condition, but that many liberties of Cities haue beene bought out with mony and diuers franchises purchased to redeeme themselues from the tyrannie of wanton lords: so that in particular many families haue beene chopped and changed, honourable houses transmuted, and new names and titles haue as it were thrust the old out of doores: and in generall, what with the French, Germanes, and the house of Austria, there hath not a thought passed for here∣ditary succession, but all things haue beene subiect to in∣stabilitie, and are still hurried in the current of preuailing, as either the Pope, 
Electorum placitus,
 or 
militareius
 filling the sailes full of winde, giueth them leaue to driue the barke of the gouernment forward. The Princes of Italy in worse estate, then they. For except the Venetians,


some of their Dukedomes, as 
Ferrara
 and 
Vrbin
 are fallen to the Papacy: some of their Kingdomes, as 
Naples
 and 
Sicilia
 possessed by the 
Spaniard,
 with 
Millane
 and 
Genoa:
 and the rest suspitiously standing on a guard of circum∣spection, least they should betray one another to the stronger side: and whereas the 
Venetians
 doe boast of 700. yeares continuance, I am sure they neuer flourished, but by the dissentions of the rest, and in their first inchoation, these Ilands were but receptacles for banished men: yea compared to 
cauernus
 for simple beasts to shroude in, whom the others of prey and rapine did not looke after. For the 
Gothes
 and 
Lombards,
 that infested 
Italy,
 made no more account of them, then we did of the stragglers in the mountaines of 
Walles,
 or fastnesse in 
Ireland;
 but they haue beene better coadiuted, and taken successe by the hand to pace out the measures of prosperity, as you now see their glory, riches, and augmentation. The King∣dome of 
Spaine
 is so new, that the other day there was a King of 
Portugali,
 as absolute as himselfe; a King of 
Ar∣ragon
 of sufficiency to contest with 
Castile;
 a King of 
Granado
 & 
Valencia
 within memory subiect to Paganisme, and maintaining the new sect of 
Mahomet;
 a King of 
Na∣uarre
 as fearefull to him, as the rest; and sundry other abridgments tending to the diminution of Maiesty: how∣euer at this instant he is blowne bigge with the winde of superfluity and greatnesse. The Kingdome of 
France
 but a while ago compacted. For 
Burgundy
 challengeth a roialty, and had afterward a 
Duke
 maintaining his owne priuiledges. The Earle of 
Flanders
 writ 
Comes Deigratia: Normandy
 was another mans: 
Brittaine
 in a Dukes posses∣sion: 
Gascoine, Guien,
 and 
Acquitane
 our owne: 
Daulphin
 and 
Prouince
 incorporated by gift, and 
Rhene
 Duke of



Loraine
 inuested with the Toialties of 
Naples:
 and thus could I runne ouer all the rest, if either they were of emi∣nence sutable to the glory of these recited, or consequence to store vs with obseruations and example: only 
England
 for aboue 600. yeares (I might recken from 
Edgar)
 but that you will answer some 400. yeeres since the Prince of WALLES was onely an Homager, and SCOTLAND in continuall opposition, had fedde vpon the plenty of a flourishing 
Monarchy,
 and beene fatted with the well fedde dainties of an exuberant Countrie, diplaying the colours of her owne roialty in such a glorious manner, that shee hath not onely spread her fame with an vncontroulable hand, but brought the glory of other Nations vnder the adumbration of her canopy: so that if I should adde her seuerall conquests of 
Ireland, Walles, Scotland, France, Cyprus, Ierusalem,
 and 
Castile
 it selfe, it would torment vs with remembrance of our losses, or augment our iealosie for hassarding our honour by negligence, and corrupted peace, which was once so worthily established by the proppes and supportation of merit, and vertue.








CHAP. XXIV.
 Another excellency of 
ENGLAND
 consisteth in the happy life of our Countrey-man and common people.


I
F you looke on our example you shall finde, that the chiefest part of 
 
Salomons
 glory extended it selfe from the abundance of his people, when euery man did eate vnder his owne Vine, or fig-tree, when Israell were many as the sand of the sea, making merry one with an other; when the Husbandman plowed in peace and reap∣ed in content; and when the wrongs of the common sort were as well streightned by the line of Iustice, as the oppressions of the mighty reformed by the hand of au∣thoritie. In which prerogatiues I dare be bold to say, that ENGLAND excells all other nations, as the light of the Sunne inferiour Planets: For in some places they are abso∣lute slaues: in some places denied the comfort of their owne endeauours: in some places not capable of purcha∣ses: in some places not permitted to marry aboue their de∣gree, and elsewhere not suffered to enioy the freedome of life, or benefit of nature: as for an instance. In 
Turkie
 hee is with the rest a most poore and vnfortunate slaue; for whether 
Mustleman
 or Christian, he dare not manure his ground to the best profit of his endeauours, liuing so poorely with such sluttish and drudging company, that I haue pittied his fortune, and commiserated his distresse. In 
Hungary
 and those parts they resemble carrion to bee


preied vpon by rauens, who not only feed themselues, till their gorges be full, but call for others to consume that which is left: thus liuing vnder the Turke he hath nothing of his owne, and in the Christian gouernment all is taken from him, either to furnish the warres, or maintaine the tribute. In 
Italy
 they are a little better, as long as they be able to pay their rents, and husband their grounds; yet doe they seldome liue of their owne, or execute any thing befitting the freedome of conuersation: Besides in many places they are so terrified with the troublesome incursi∣ons of the Banditi, who euen make a prey of their wealth and cattle, that although they know of their robberies and murthers, yet dare they neither detect them, nor deny to entertaine or releeue them. These be men proscribed 
 by the Law, and banished from their owne Inheritances for some hainous mulct or other, and flying into a stran∣ger Princes iurisdiction liue by rapine and ouer-mastering of Passengers, as they doe in 
Arabia,
 and most parts of 
Turkie,
 remote from the great City, especially in 
Epyrus,
 where both Theeues and Rouers shelter themselues with∣in the Mountaines 
Assassini,
 but seldome performe any robberie without murther: whereupon as we say figura∣tiuely, all inhumane and monstrous delinquents in this kinde are called 
assassini.
 But to our Italian Countrey-man againe: After the pride of 
Italy
 (especially the wo∣men) they will be a little gaudy in the same apparell their mothers bestow vpon them, or their 
amorosos
 send as a gratuity, and thus I confesse I haue seene an Inne-keepers daughter go to Church in a coloured damaske gowne with Spanish sleeues laide on with gold lace, and come home to dresse our dinners: the men are very industrious according to the goodnesse of ground, as hauing in one


selfe-same field (though it be but an acre of Land) both corne, vines, and fruite trees, and in his gardens about his house rootes, sallets, Bees, and silke-wormes, boasting how the 
Romans
 maintained their Colonies from the Countrey-man, and supported the Farmer as a nursing fa∣ther for Souldiers: nay they can remember the Law 
A∣graria,
 when the 
Gracchi
 lost their liues about an equall distribution of the Roman territories, and the maintai∣ning the immunities of the free 
Italians:
 but they sigh to recount, how it was abrogated, and euer after they were suppressed in their insolencies, as kept from outward pompe, and pleasures of frequented cities.


He is now called 
Villano
 (from whose character we haue 
 a contemptible tenure of land in 
England
 called villenage) seruing to no other vse, but to enrich his Lord, feeding himselfe vpon garlike and onions, and is acquainted with no good thing but superstition, a few gawdy clothes, and the incontinent life of curtezans.


In 
Spaine
 it is farre worse, and the 
Contadini
 are num∣bred amongst the reproches of their gouernment, and al∣most 
 esteemed as the asses, which bring their cabages, me∣lons, & suchlike to the market. For he neither dare atempt to cheapen any thing appropriate to the vse of Gentle-men, as flesh, fish, wheat, and excellent fruit, nor must hee (though he haue of his owne) but furnish the market with the best, feeding himselfe with the worst and vildest stuffe. Besides, as the errour of 
Italy,
 or if you will horrible abuse, if the mother haue a comely daughter, shee is contented for money, with her prostitution, and many times is her Bawd, if she can happen of a good Chapman, nor desisteth she so, but in one house you shall sometimes haue the mo∣ther a drudge, & 3. or 4. daughters mercenary strumpets.



All 
France
 ouer the pesant is not onely beastly within doores but churlish of condition, sauouring nothing but 
 his labour either in setting forward his husbandry, or dres∣sing his vines: yet how? with base and seruile behauiour, with poore and miserable expences, with obscene and fil∣thy lodging, with iealous and malicious welcome, with licentious and ill becomming liberty of speech against both Court and Common-wealth.


In 
Germany
 the Boore is somewhat better, for he eateth good meate sometimes, though vildly dressed, will bee 
 drunke and merry, must be alwaies imployed, and alwaies a hungry or desirous of drinke, euen when he is able to drinke no more, and can apparell himselfe hansomely to go to Church either on sunday or holliday: but they are dangerous in their tumults, and rages, and not to bee tru∣sted in their reconciliation after a wrong.


In 
Ireland
 he is called Churle, and if we nick-name him in 
England
 we terme him Clowne: He liues in great drud∣gery, 
 not so much for his labour, as his watches. For hee is compelled to guard his poore Cattle, as well as he can, both from Theeues and wolues: insomuch, that although he haue but one poore Cabine his cow and hogge lies with him in the same. But if he boast of larger increases, he is then compelled to bring them all night into some bawne of a castle, or vnder the loop-holes of some raft, or fortification: For the Kerne watch all aduantages in times of peace, and thinke their thefts iustifiable in defiances of warre.


But looke vpon vs truely, as we liue indeede, and you shall finde our Yeoman of 
England
 a title of estimation 
 in regard of his wealth, antiquitie, and maintenance of his familie in a continued discent: so that in times past hee


would not alter his title of rich Yeoman for any vaine∣glorious attribute of beggerly Gentlemen: you shall now see them dwell in braue houses, Mannors, Lordships, and Parkes to the annuall vallew of a thousand poundes, hauing sometimes their sonnes Knighted, their daughters well bestowed, their other children so disperced, that Lawyers, Citizens, and Marchants are raised through our Kingdome from sonnes, and kinred of Countreymen: nay, you shall behold them inuited to courtly promotion, and knowing that the breath of Kings aduanceth or de∣iecteth can attend the good houre, and begge all such graces, as a Princes fauour distributeth to the subiect: yet haue I read of a King in 
England,
 who importuned by a Yeoman to be made a Gentleman, answered, hee could enoble him with knighthood, or the title of a Baron; but not confirme him a Gentleman; because true gentry had another manner of lustre from the raies of vertue, and ho∣nour in a continuall discent of Auncestors, illuminated from the sunne of worthy actions, either in military pro∣fession, or administration of ciuill gouernment But thus liueth our Countreyman, by what name or title soeuer: onely we were wont to interpose this difference betweene Yeoman, & Francklin or Farmer, that the Yeoman was a 
 landed man, either Freeholder or coppieholder: the Far∣mer onely hired another mans land, paying a fine or rent, and so growing rich had the denomination of the other, and did not in times past murmure, though you called him Good-husband, or expert Plow-man: yet call him what 
 you will, he is in some Countries able to lodge you richly, set a peece of plate on the cupbord, fiue or six dishes of meate on the Table, sweete and fine linning on your bed, cheerefully to welcome you, and is so cunning besides,


that he can tell his Lawyer a formall tale, and complaine to the Iustice, if a farre better man doe him wrong: and in this who can come neere vs?






CHAP. XXV.
 Another excellencie of 
ENGLAND,
 consisteth in the goodnes of our Nauy and shipping.


I
 Hope I shall now passe without contra∣diction, 
 especially when I bring you forward to our ports, harbours, and ri∣uers, shewing you the glory of our ship∣ping, whether you esteeme them, as the Kings, and onely purposed for magnifi∣cence, state, and occasion of warre; or the Marchants for exploration of countries, plantation of Colonies, bringing in of commodities, enriching of our Kingdoms, and yet withall defending our selues: or both together for noble actions, memorable voyages, extraordinary en∣counters, and ceremonious brauery, wherein wee haue bin so priuiledged, that from the memorable fame of 
Edward the third,
 to this instant, we neuer met enemy, but preuailed vpon equall termes, yea great odds, and when we had misfortunes, it was as 
Sampsons
 death amongst the 
Philistims,
 who pulld downe the Temple on their heads, and slew more at that instant than in his former enterpri∣ses; witnes many nauall battailes, wherein what losse so∣euer we susteined, the aduersarie had double and treble:


euen when about the fourth yeere of 
Hen:
 8. the Nauies of 
England
 and 
France
 met at 
Britaines Bay,
 and we lost the 
Regent
 of 
England,
 wherein 
Sir Thomas Kneuet
 was Captaine with 700 men; yet did they endure the wreck of many ships, especially the 
French Carick,
 called then the wonder of 
Europe,
 in which 
Sir Piers Morgan
 with a 1100 men perished: as also when 
Sir Richard Greenueild
 within our memory miscaried by a meere disastrous chance, although I might honestly excuse it by ouer-great aduantage of both ships and gallies; yet as they them∣selues haue confessed, they had no great cause to boast, or let any vaine-glorious insulting runne at random. But how wee haue preuailed indeed, let these few instances suffice.


About the 14 of 
Edw:
 3. the King gathered a Nauy of 200 saile against the 
French,
 who in those daies were co∣adiuted with 
Flanders,
 as a Peere of 
France,
 wherein though he was mightily ouer-matched with numbers, yet preuailed he in execution, and had so triumphant a victo∣rie, that their owne account numbred 30000 men slaine, 200 ships surprized, and taken, and the rest put to an ig∣nominious flight. The 20 yeere hee went into 
Nor∣mandy,
 dismantled her Townes, spoiled 
Cane,
 and as a messenger of reuenge brought fire into the Harbours vn∣till the ships were consumed and set on a blase. 
Anno
 24 he encountred the power of 
Spaine,
 and vnplumed their fethers of ostentation by taking 28 great ships, and ma∣king the rest vnseruiceable. 
Anno
 33 he sailed into 
Pi∣cardy,
 and so preuailed, that the sea yeelded him safe pas∣sage, and all 
Burgundy
 safe conduct. 
Anno
 41 with a memorable victory both at sea and land did the blacke 
Prince
 resettle 
Peter
 of 
Spaine,
 and in despight of all the


sea forces, or other warlike opposition passed and repassed at pleasure. In the time of 
Rich:
 2. about the 10 yeere the Duke of 
Lancaster
 sailed into 
Spaine,
 but how glorious that victory was on our side, and how surmounting our Nauie before theirs, the wonderfull successe attested, and their owne inventories record the losse with lamentable 
Items.
 The next yeere following 
Richard Earle
 of 
Arun∣dell,
 and 
Thomas Earle
 of 
Notingham
 encountred at sea with an infinite number of 
Flemmings;
 but victory is in the hands of God, and multitudes of men faile in their ostentation: For in that maritime contention were taken a 100 ships and better, the successe filling our Cities with commodities, and our mouthes with praises and thanksgiuing. In the 5 of 
Henr:
 4 when the 
French
 came to the Ile of 
Wight,
 and assailed 
Dartmouth
 with a great Nauy, the rusticall people preuailed against them, and manning out but the fisher-boats of the country, with certaine Pinaces attending the seruice, tooke 16 of their best ships, and compulsed the rest to be the messen∣gers of their owne obloquy. The 3. of 
Hen:
 5. was a yeere of triumph, and a 1000 saile of ships filled the narrow seas, cleared the passage into 
Normandy,
 amased all men, who had notice of our brauery, and reioyced the rest of 
Europe
 with 
Encomians
 of our successe, which followed presently in 
France.
 In the 15 of 
Edw:
 4. it pleased the King to passe ouer to the aide of the 
Duke
 of 
Burgundy,
 but howeuer his inconstancie proued vnsauory to vs at land, it matters not: I am sure the seas gaue vs way, nor durst their Nauy presume to intercept vs. In the 5. of 
Hen:
 8. the former encounter, which I named at 
Britaines bay
 was a day of terror, and we tooke, burnt, and spoiled as many, as we mustred out of harbour. The


next yeere threatning 
Turwin
 and 
Turnay
 our Nauy ca∣rying all afore it like a swelling riuer, beating downe the slender banks, there scarce appeared an opposite: for the former losses were so great, that they halted downe-right in their recouery, and 
France
 once lamed in her shipping, cannot euery yeere bring a new Nauy into the channell with good equipage, or aduantage. The 14 yeere the 
Earle
 of 
Surrey
 was 
Admirall,
 and not onely preuailed in all encounters at sea, but by vertue of our shipping con∣quered diuers townes both in 
Britaine
 and 
Picardy.
 The 15. the Duke of 
Suffolke
 was sent into 
France
 with an army of 30000, who passed the seas, yea the water of 
Some
 without battaile, and so terrified the French with all their coadiutors at that time (for you must vnderstand in those repining and murmuring daies against our glory, 
France, Spaine,
 the 
Low-Countries,
 and 
Scotland
 were ei∣ther confederate, or entertained for wages: so that almost all the mercenary shipping of 
Europe
 attended on the payment of the crownes of the sunne) that they thought it the best part of their securitie to absent themselues. The yeere 35. 
Sir Iohn Dudley Vicount Lisle
 high 
Admirall
 of 
England,
 with a Nauy of 200 saile, passed the seas into 
Scotland,
 in despight of all the power the confederates could raise, and not onely performed actions beyond ex∣pectation, but taught them the true knowledge of English shipping and mariners. The next yeere the French Na∣uy came into 
Sussex;
 but vpon very short warning were dissipated, and in a sudden encounter felt the smart of presumption. Presently as in diuers aduantages of such petty roades and excursions; they landed at 
Portsmouth,
 and the 
Ile
 of 
Wight,
 but with what successe or satisfa∣ction, I cannot compare it better than to a bowle of wa∣ter


spilt, irrecouerably to be gathered vp againe: For they neuer durst aduenture, when our ships looked bigg vpon them, but vnderstanding of their imployment abroad, and sequestration farre off, then hurried they suddenly vpon vs; yet I hope neither found vs vnprouided, nor returned backe againe with true cause of insulting. In the 3. of 
Edw:
 6. the French Kings gallies and Caricks invaded 
Gernsey
 and 
Iersey:
 but with what face fortune looked vpon them, the losse of a 1000 men, with the spoile of their greatest ships and gallies suddenly discouered. Why may I not name here our iourney to 
Newhauen
 in the 4. of 
Queene Elizabeth,
 when through the power of our Nauy, at which both 
French
 and 
Spaniards
 began to repine, the Earle of Warwicke made the seas wanton with iollity, and affrighted the land with those small troopes of old souldiers from the Garison at 
Barwick,
 vnited to others raised from the willing musters of our country: and al∣though some enuious hand would stop the mouth of re∣port from ecchoing our applause at this time, yet I am sure 
Count Ringraue
 and his armie felt the smart of affliction, and the sorrow of many defeatures, and dare auouch, that the seas lay open vnto vs in despight of opposition, or any encounter our enemies durst or could prepare to invite vs to. In the 18. yeere was 
Forbishers
 first voyage, and by reason that this glorious Queene had as it were tied the obseruation of all Nations to her actions and gouern∣ment, a peace being generally contracted, diuers presum∣ptuous persons tooke aduantage of the same, and filled the narrow seas with rouers and pirats, who ranne vp and downe without controll, like vntamed colts, scorning all enclosures and bounds', vntill 
Captaine Holstock
 with 4. good ships and two pinaces was appointed the reformer


of these abuses, who presently brought into the schoole of correction 200 rouers, 8 Flushingers, diuers Barks and Pinaces, and pacified the outragiousnes of these pet∣ty thefts. The 19. 
Forbishers
 second voyage. The 20. 
Forbishers
 third voyage, with many other of famous me∣mory, amongst whom 
Hawkins, Drake, Candish,
 and such worthy sea-men (preuailing in all their explorations) as they attempted great matters, deserue as great commen∣dation. About the 23. that famous busines of 
Desmonds
 rebellion breathed insolencie into those people, by reason the Pope and Spaniard had fortified themselues in 
Smir∣wick
 in 
Ireland,
 and with a sufficient number of ships blocked vp the hauen, vntill certaine of her Maiesties Na∣uie, and the Deputies forces at land (being then the for∣ward 
Lord Grey)
 behaued themselues with such good or∣der and successe, that all the passages of victory to vs, and miserable discomfiture to them were set open, and we tri∣umphed with a plenary satisfaction to our endeuours. In the 24. 
Monsieur
 returned into the Low-countries to bee invested with the Duchy of 
Brabant:
 but when he beheld our glorious fleete, and iudiciously looked vpon their strength and brauery, he burst out into a passionate ap∣plause, and sware, that howeuer men were enemies to our peace, they were enemies to truth, if they did not acknow∣ledge it without comparison. The yeere following 
Cap∣taine Borough
 with one ship, and a small Barke went to sea against Rouers, and although the Councell at that time suspected vs ouer-weake to withstand an vnited despe∣ratenes; yet the fight continued against 7 or 8, and all men can witnes our memorable successe in that encoun∣ter. The triumphs of 88 are of such renowne, and wor∣thy celebration, that the world still remembers our illu∣strious


Nauy, and admirable victory: but this secret was not fully reuealed, that wee were not prouided, nor throughly furnished: so that as true hearts praied for vs, the great God of heauen fought for vs. The yeere fol∣lowing the 
Portingall voiage,
 and (as it were set on de∣grees) 
Cales voiage,
 the 
Iland voiage, Sir Richard Leusons
 noble exploits, and his place since supplied by 
Sir William Mounson,
 haue set forward our reputation to runne the race of vnresistable preuailing, and hold vp our glorious countenances in despight of any confronting looke, or re∣pining eyes. Nor doe I heare reckon vp our Merchant Aduenturers, and the sundry times encountring with greater and more aduantagious forces: witnes the Mar∣chant Royall in those times, when 
Iohn King
 was Master, which alone encountred with 3 ships, and 10 gallies, and came off with such iollity, as they fretted to be so disap∣pointed, and we triumphed to welcome home so well de∣seruing a man. Since when, although those of 
Malta, Florence,
 the confederates of the Arches, and many de∣sperate Pirats, haue conspired against our traphique, and made our iourney into the 
Leuant
 somewhat dangerous: yet we haue still gone forward, and could not bee pull'd backe by any wrenching arme whatsoeuer: especially in those daies of tryall, when we stood on our guard, and made our warlike preparation a very paire of tarriers to the Spaniard. For in those daies the 
Conuoy
 for his we∣sterne treasure was so toilesome, troublesome, chargeable, and dangerous vnto him, that one million defraied but the charges of another, and by that time it came to distribu∣tion, there was a strange account cast vp of losses, and de∣fatigable expences. Thus had our hopes still life, and our spirits grew stronger and stronger with honorable expe∣ctation,


and noble impl
t: And now it hath plea∣sed his Maiestie to shut vp the brazen dores of conten∣tion, and we haue reason to sound out his excellent 
Motto
 of 
Beati pacifici.






CHAP. XXVI.
 An other excellencie of 
ENGLAND
 consisteth in the number, riches, endeuours, and extraordinary worth of our Marchant.


I
N the ouer-looking as it were the map of the worlds busines, I must needes 
 confesse, that neuer Monarchy was established, or inlarged, but by the power of the sword: yet alas, when I consider the inconveniences im∣pending, the affrightings of people, the demolition of Cities, the deuastation of Countries, the slaughters of Armies, the rapes, murthers, and terrors of the world in the best conquests and victorie; I cannot but lament the condition of man, that doth extract his glory from tyrannie and curses, from confusion and tur∣moyle, from blood and death. For thus doe wee boast of our auncestors, and the very women doe esteeme no man noble or worthy, that cannot relate the victories of his forefathers, and dare not himselfe set furie on worke to the killing of his enemie, nay to the murthering of his


Competitor, whether for loue, or displeasure. But if you will truly consider the admirable composition of Com∣monwealths, and extraordinary glorie of Kingdomes, it consisteth in sedation of troubles, and in the enriching of priuate men: yea euen 
Salomons
 greatnesse was raised to a stupendous mountaine of amasement, from the ef∣fects of a well compacted peace; in which his Temple was built, his Pallaces were finished, his Cities disposed of, his Souldiers maintained, and his glory spred abroad with sufficient fulnesse: For horses were brought him out of 
Arabia,
 fine linnen from 
Aegipt,
 perfumes and odours from 
Aethiopia,
 spices from 
India,
 precious stones from the Ilands, gold from Ophir, beasts and strange fowle from 
Affricke,
 and many other things both for exornation and pleasure from the remotest parts of the earth. But how? by the industry of Merchants, and worthy endea∣uours of men disposed to honour their Countrey, and ad∣uance themselues: As for corruptions of life, couetous∣nesse, vaine-glory, ambition, pride, emulation, cunning, and infinite of this kinde, they are not to be named by way of Character, or personating any particular condition of man whatsoeuer. For from a Prince to a Peasant no body liues, but may be traduced in the selfe same kinde, that you would lay imputation on the shoulders of the Merchant: therefore I will absolutely conclude, that the true Merchant-aduenturer, as he is one way the supporter of politicall States by commerce, conuersation, and bringing in of wealth, so is he another way the 
Atlas
 of honour and magnificent maiesty by his customes, filling the store-houses of a Court, supplying the wants of a pal∣lace, pleasing the desires of nouelty, cooling the heates of pride, and satiating the vanitie of wishes; nay if you would





and the Ilands, explored 
Virginia, Norrembega, Guiana,
 and other coasts, and made a trade with these 
Indians
 for diuers commodities; so that from one place or other of our Countrey, we haue not so few as a 1000. sailes of shippes abroad: nor so small a number as a 100000. per∣sons disperced vnder this acceptable title of Marchant. For so I must tell you, that except you aduise with your selfe for this denomination in many places of the world the excuse of curiositie will not serue your turne: For you shall be taken for a Spie, and a dangerous Hypocrite, such is the iealousie of Kingdomes toward wanton Tra∣uellers, and the necessitie of entertainment for well im∣ploied men. And thus much for some speciall excellen∣cies wherein England excelleth all other Nations.






CHAP. XXVII.
 Another excellency of 
ENGLAND
 may be drawne from this obseruation, that we haue had more glorious per∣sons, and famous Kings, and Princes to visit our Countrey, then any other Nation, &c.


A
Mongst other spreading boughes of prerogatiues drawing sappe from the tree of 
Englands
 glory, I may not leaue out this obseruation, that wee haue had since the Conquest more se∣uerall magnificent entertainments of forraine Princes, and voluntary pro∣gresses of famous Kings, and Emperors; some for plea∣sant iournies, others for necessary imploiment, then any


Nation of 
Europe:
 not that I meane to trouble you with vaine or tedious repetitions of Embassadors, Legats, Car∣dinalls, or other ordinary Liegers, as is customarie in all Princes Courts, and concurses of State; but meerely of extraordinary solemnities, and occasion of resplendant showes, triumphs, and festiuall inuitations to delight and contentment.


No sooner had the 
Normane
 setled his Conquests, and established his sonne 
William Rufus
 in the throne of great∣nesse, as well appeared by his ambitious desires to fill all 
Europe
 with the report of his exaltation; especially after his returne out of 
Normandy,
 and that he found fault with the smalnesse of 
Westminster-hall,
 being yet the remarke∣ablest roome for State, greatnesse, and capacity in the world. But 
Malcolme
 King of 
Scots,
 and the two Princes of 
Wales
 came to doe homage vnto him about the third yeere of his raigne; yea 
Robert
 Duke of 
Normandy
 with many Princes of 
France
 acknowledged his eminent glory, and maiesticall Kingdome; although the said 
Robert
 was his elder Brother, and made way to his peace and amitie. This likewise continued toward 
Henry
 the first, and for addition, the Kings his adioyned neighbours assumed no∣thing to themselues, but what stood with the good liking of the King of ENGLAND, for which purpose they ma∣ny times came in person to gratifie him: To which if you vnite the aduantagious marriage of 
Henry
 Emperour of 
Rome
 to his daughter, I hope it may passe for a reasonable beginning, and giue life to after hopes for the augmentati∣on of our credits, and exaltation of our prerogatiues.


Anno
 1184. about the 31. of 
Henry
 2. 
Heraclius
 Pa∣triarch of 
Hierusalem
 came into our Countrey to desire aide against the Turke. 1201. and the 3. of King 
Iohn



at a solemne entertainement in 
Lincolne, William
 King of Scots and diuers of his Nobles did homage vnto him in person, to which if you adde his marrying of Lady IANE his bastard daughter to 
Leuelin
 Prince of Wales, who was in those times a turbulent and ambitious man, you may easily iudge, what reputation our Countrey had got in the world, when the Pope was more affrighted at the starting aside of little ENGLAND, then if whole 
Spaine
 had at that time falne quite away, from his suppor∣tation, or if you will Antichristian vsurpation.


Anno
 1224. about the 8. yeere of the raigne of 
Hen∣ry
 3. 
Iohn de Brennes
 King of 
Hierusalem
 came into 
Eng∣land
 for aide and assistance against the Saracens, and from that vnimitable example of 
Richard
 1. called in those times the flower of chiualry, that wunne 
Cyprus
 and 
Acon
 in person, well hoped to finde the other branches of that kingly off-spring full of the sappe of the same roialtie; but when I remember, how the chiefest Potentates of 
Eu∣rope
 came to elect 
Richard
 Earle of 
Cornwall
 his brother Emperour, and King of the Romans, I am more then sa∣tisfied for maintaining this vnanswerable position of our excellency in this kinde.


If you ouerlooke the life of 
Edward
 1. you shall finde it a very mappe of honour, and be able to tell the world, that besides many forraine Potentates, the Prince of 
Wales
 and his brother 
Dauid
 reioiced in his acceptation of them; and 
Iohn Baliol
 King of Scots was glad to be named and established by him: But come a little forward, and at the naming of 
Edward
 the 3. me thinkes all English hearts should leape for ioy. For 1334. 
Edward Baliol
 King of Scots did him homage; the Prince of Wales was glad to 
 kisse his hands; and the Electors of 
Germany
 1348. inuited


him to the chaire of the Empire: nay such was our roy∣altie that 
Henry Pichard
 Vintner and Maior of 
London
 feasted EDW. of England; IOHN King of France; the King of 
Cyprus
 comming to see our worthinesse; DAVID King of Scots; EDW. Prince of Wales, Duke of Aqui∣tane, Guien, and Cornwall, all in one day: Besides at di∣uers triumphes and Iusts these forraine Princes were led as it were by the hand of amasement to magnifie, and extoll the heroicke spirits of our nation. Againe in the 38. yeere of the King; the French King, the King of Cyprus, and the King of Scots, came all into England, and made pleasure proude, that it had good occasion to welcome them. Besides, 1367. 
Peter
 King of Spaine was disseised by his bastard brother 
Henry,
 but comming into England made such impression in the compassionate soule of EDW. the blacke Prince, that he assisted him in person, and re∣established him in his kingdome.


Shall I remember you of that glorious celebration of 
Himmeneus
 triumphs, when Duke 
Tussus
 and many Prin∣ces of 
Boheme
 and 
Hungary
 brought that magnificent La∣dy ANNE daughter to the King of 
Bohemia,
 and married her to King RICHARD the 2. of England, during whose life such was the royaltie of our Court and State, that in the 8. yeare the King of 
Armenia
 came into England for coadiutement against the Turkes. In the 12. yeare the Earle of Saint 
Paul
 and many Princes out of France and other Countries came to a Iusts in Smithfield, and made a iust estimation of our vnualuable glory. In the 16. yeare the greatest Lords of Scotland came to our triumphes in England, and checked their owne presumption for con∣fronting vs with a supposition of equality. In the 20. yeare the Dukes of 
Burbon
 and 
Barre
 brought ouer 
Isabell



of Fraunce to be a Queene in England, and glad was that Prince of Europe, that had beene an eye-witnesse of our glory: yea that magnificent workemanshippe concerning the exornation of the Hall of his Pallace, now West∣minster (and by community and disparaged alteration vn∣regarded) was as it were a 
magnes
 to draw ouer the seas thousands of people, and hundreds of Princes, and No∣ble lords to looke vpon the wonder of the world.


In the 4. yeare of HENRY 4. King of England the Emperour of Constantinople came of purpose as the Queene of 
Sheba
 to 
Salomon,
 to set report on the touch∣stone of truth, and see whether custome had enlarged our fame or no, and here he was entertained with all the sump∣tuous and attractiue showes, and delights, that Arte and expences could deuise to satiate the minde of man: But when Dame IANE Dutches of 
Britaine
 came ouer to marry our King HENRY, I hope our enemies will ima∣gine, her traine and Attendants to bee much augmented with the company of many forraine Princes and Poten∣tates: And if you steppe forward to the 8. yeare of his raigne the Earle of 
Marre,
 and the great lords of 
Scotland
 came to solace themselues, and made their triumphes both at Tilt and Turney acceptable to the beholders. The like was performed the 10. yeare, when the 
Seneschall
 of 
Hen∣nault
 with all those Princes reputed the Court of England a very Schoole of chiualry, and put in practise according∣ly all the braueries of marshall discipline. But when the Lady LVCIA the Dukes sister of 
Millane
 came to marry EDMVND Earle of 
Kent,
 both citie and pallace was so furnished with strangers, and the concurses of people so well ordered, that inferiours were amased at so extraordi∣nary attraction, and the better sort gaue a plaudite to our glory.



If you ouer-looke the time of 
Henr:
 5. surnamed the 
Champion
 of 
Honor,
 though it was lamentable for the breuitie, yet was it vnmatchable for the royalty. For after his coronation he was scarse three yeeres in his own Kingdome, and yet in the third of his raigne he welcom∣med the 
Emperor
 of 
Almaine
 and King of 
Rome,
 and pre∣sently after graced the daughter of 
France
 and all her re∣tinue, with many forreine Princes, who would not re∣turne, till they saw their 
Lady Katherine
 Queene of 
Eng∣land.
 To which if you adde the entertainment of the Duke of 
Holland,
 and many Princes of those countries, especially 
Freesland,
 you cannot chuse but make vp a plentifull breuiary of Heroicke Maiesty, and worthy princelines.


About the yeere of Grace 1502. and the 17. yeere of the raigne of 
Henry
 7. the expectable 
Prince Arthur
 ma∣ried 
Katherin
 daughter to 
Ferdinando
 King of 
Spaine,
 and his eldest sister 
Margaret
 was affianced vnto 
Iames
 King of 
Scots,
 at whose inaugu
tion the concurse of strangers, and amongst them of the choisest Princes was so great, that all other adioyning Kings as much magnified our royalty, as feared our power, insomuch that the very re∣port of our Kingdomes brauery draue 
Philip
 King of 
Castile,
 and his wife into 
England.


About the end of 
August
 1546. 
Flawd
 high Admirall of 
France
 was so royally entertained in 
England,
 that the King lying at 
Hampton-Court,
 the Prince of 
Wales
 met him comming to haue audience with a 1000 horse, whereof 500 were in one liuery, the coates of veluet halfe embro∣dered with gold, and one sleeue of cloth of gold: let other Princes acknowledge this magnificence. 
Holinshed
 saith 2000 horse.



In the beginning of 
Henry
 the 8. 
Lewis
 the 12. of 
France
 maried 
Mary
 the Kings yongest sister: and 1520 the great Emperor 
Charles
 the 5. came into 
England
 to visit his Aunt, and within two yeere after made a second returne to view 
London,
 and bee acquainted with our country, from whose example 
Christiern
 King of 
Den∣marke,
 and his wife about the 15 yeere arriued in 
England,
 and was welcommed to the pleasures of our country, and variety of our pastimes. The Prince of 
Salerne,
 and di∣uers of 
Naples
 about the 30. &c.


Shall I name you King 
Philips
 mariage with Queene 
Mary?
 I hope then I must trouble you with a tedious so∣lemnitie, and tell you, that many strangers knew not the way home againe into their owne countries a long time; and if the peace of their soules as they vainely imagined, might haue bin added to the delight of their bodies, the happines of 
England
 had bin the subiect of their tongues, and the obiect of their eyes. In the second yeere of her raigne 
Ecmondine
 a Prince of 
Germany,
 and other Embas∣sadors were sent from the Emperor. In the third yeere 
Emmanuel
 Prince of 
Piemont,
 with other Lords came into 
England,
 and the next moneth the Prince of 
Orange
 landed at 
London.


But let mee passe forward to the mirror of all times 
Queene Elizabeth:
 how proud was the Prince of 
Sweden,
 that he was graced in 
England
 with so glorious entertain∣ment at the beginning of her raigne. Not long after 1565 
Christopher
 Prince and Marquesse of 
Baden
 came of purpose to haue his childe borne amongst vs, and re∣ioyce in the fortune of such a godmother. About the 11. yeere of her raigne 
anno
 1568 
Mary Queene
 of 
Scots,
 though shee was surprized in her flight to 
France,
 and de∣feated


in her maine proiects; yet for a long time misliked not her imprisonment, and was glad to confesse the pre∣rogatiues of her natiue soile and country. In the 14. yeere 
Francis
 Duke of 
Memorancy,
 and 
Betrawde de Sa∣ligniers
 Knights of the order of S
t
 
Michael,
 came both into 
England,
 with other great Princes to gratulate her Maiestie, and acknowledge her worthines. In the 21. of her raigne 1578. 
Cassimirus
 Count Palatine, and Duke of 
Bauaria
 was entertained the better, because he came of purpose to admire her Maiestie, and commend her coun∣try. Not long after 1581. 
Francis Burbon Prince Daul∣phine
 of 
Auergne, Arthur Cass Marshall
 of 
France,
 with 
Lusignian
 and others came to make way to 
Monsieurs
 ad∣mission, who accordingly 
anno
 24, as Duke of 
Aniou,
 the French Kings brother, and next heire to the 
flower-de-luce,
 was welcommed beyond expectation, and entertained with such sumptuous showes, and variety of delight, that they know not, how to put it ouer with true noblenes, considering the disparity betweene their customes and ours. About the yeere 1583. 
Albertus Alasco
 free Ba∣ron of 
Lasco Vaiuode,
 or 
Palatine
 of 
Siradia
 in 
Poland,
 was an eye witnes of our many prerogatiues, such as we may terme Court brauery, Cities excellency, countries happines, vniformitie of our Vniuersities, strength of our Nauies, and glorious contentation in all estates.


Anno
 1596. The Duke of 
Bolloigne
 came into 
England,
 and in 1600. extraordinary Embassadors from 
Barbary
 and 
Russia,
 who although from a stubborne bestialitie see∣med to vilipend the managing of many affaires by out∣ward forme; yet were driuen to applaude our generall happines, and confesse with admiration, that no King∣dome was so disposed for reciprocall duties betweene


Prince and subiect. Yea 1601. that vndaunted soul∣dier 
Duke Birone,
 who seldome gased at any 
meteor,
 or setled 
planet
 out of his owne sphere, came ouer amongst vs with 300 attendants, and returned with this resolu∣tion, that the Queene and Court of 
England
 vnder such a Queene, was the true mirror of maiestie, and map of mag∣nificence, had not some of them misliked the broken and vnsauoury structures of 
Whitehall,
 which indeede if it might hold vp a head of outward vniformitie and stateli∣nes, as it doth when it list of inward maiestie, and greatnes, I know not then who could compare with vs any way: except the gallery of 
Paris,
 being the worke of 60 yeeres expences, and pride of many seuerall Princes; and the 
Turkes Seralio
 in 
Constantinople,
 a vast aedifice for many purposes, and receptacle for 20000 people, which one way or other are lodged in and about it. For in truth within the walls and iron gates it containeth as much roome or more, than all 
S. Iames
 parke, and 
Whitehall
 together.


When our 
King Iames
 was established to the admiration of all the states of 
Europe; Monsieur Rosne
 from 
France; Don Iohn de Tassis
 from 
Spaine;
 and many other extra∣ordinary Princes from all the Courts of Christendome, came ouer to gratifie his happines: but 1604 
Don Iohn de Velasco, Constable
 of 
Castile
 was as an extraordinary Prince extraordinarily entertained: to which if you vnite the glorious welcome and admission of 
Prince Vlrick Duke
 of 
Holstaide:
 as also of 
George Lodwick Lantgraue
 of 
Lu∣tenburgh
 sent from the 
Emperor Rodulph,
 you may well expose their entertainment against the greatest magnifi∣cence of other countries. 
Anno
 1606 
Don Iohn de Mendoza Marquisse
 of 
S. Germaine
 was sent ouer to his


Maiestie; and presently the King of 
Denmarke
 came to visit his sister. The next yeere 1607. 
Prince Ienuile
 se∣cond sonne to the Duke of 
Guise
 sported amongst vs, and much applauded our Court and customes. Then in 1608. followed the welcome of 
Christianus
 Prince of 
Henault;
 and presently after the admission of many great personages, besides the 
Leigers Embassadors
 of diuers Na∣tions. To which if you vnite the second comming in of the King of 
Denmarke;
 the Duke of 
Bolloignes
 wel∣come, and many others about the seuerall treatises of our Princely mariages, with the 
Lady Elizabeths
 solemnities, when 
Prince Fredericke Count Palatine
 came in person to take her to his wife, I make no doubt concerning the pur∣pose in hand, you will all confesse that 
England
 hath not bin a litle graced, and the rowle of our excellencies hath one 
Item
 beyond other countries for remarkable persons comming amongst vs either for pleasure, or state-imploy∣ment: which the rather hath place of wonder, because wee are seated in the sea, and so farre remote from the maine commerces of the world: so that whosoeuer comes to vs, must looke for no through-fare, nor Cities of strength, as in many places; but bee content to sit amongst vs with amasement, that euery man eats vnder his vine with plenty, peace, and such acates, as great Kingdomes want for all their treasure, and popish fasting daies.








CHAP. XXVIII. THE CONCLVSION.


I
 Could further marke your tallies with many memorable priuacies, wherein we ouer-passe other Nations: but they be things so well knowne already to iudi∣cious and vnderstanding men, that I must needes be ielous of my selfe for entring so slenderly armed into the lists of so great a con∣tention, and against such aduersaries, who will either out of curtesie smile at my folly, or prouder experience de∣ride my ignorance, or peremptory wilfulnes scorne my tenuity: but I will anticipate all censorious exceptions with a plaine confession of

Scribimus indocti, doctique poemata passim.

Yet notwithstanding seeing I haue plaied the truant al∣ready, I will imitate the cunning and stubborne schoole∣boy, who perceiuing an impossibilitie to auoide the pu∣nishment for his offence, gaue a longer content to his pleasure, and taried out the last houre with supposition, that all could end but with one chiding: so considering I haue racked your patiences thus farre, I will questionles determine my first purpose after my owne fashion, and vndergoe your pitty, or vilipending for all together.


Know then, that our Vniuersities for state, maiestie, good order, number of schollers, and iudicious learning, surpasse all countries of 
Europe;
 and if in 
Cambridge



you looke on Kings Colledge chappell, the sumptuous quadrant of Trinitie, and the delicate compacting of our new Colledges, you cannot but imagine, we had a hope in the structures to contriue some thing for admiration. If in 
Oxford
 you consider the Diuinitie schooles, the foundations of 
Christs Church, Sir Thomas Bodleis
 library, and other things of account, you must needs conclude, that we striued to exalt our Nation for such rarities. Our bathes, high waies, and securitie to trauell in are not to be ouer passed. Our 
Inns,
 or as they call them 
Hosteries,
 with other places of entertainment, yeeld a plenary satis∣faction to our trauels, and open the embracings of extra∣ordinary welcome, insomuch that our wearied bodies are folded in the armes of quietnes and rest, and our troubled spirits setled in reposednes and content. In our hospita∣litie we goe beyond all other Nations, and many worthy mens houses exceede scattered villages both for diuers buildings, and numbers of people else where: Our diet is abundant, and the best of the cattle, and for the blessings of increase bids you welcome to the fat of the earth, 
Abra∣hams
 cake, 
Abrahams
 calfe, 
Esaus
 venison, 
Labans
 good cheere, the louing fathers fat kid, and all of that sort. Our seruants are hansome and honest in comparison of others: our ciuilitie and attendance extraordinary, nor is the Gen∣tleman to be dallied with by inferior groomes, nor any man to be abused, if he stand on the true leggs of obser∣uation. Our lawes are seuere toward capitall crimes, and if offences bedurty vs, wee are not yet impudently to mount on a stage to be seene; nor be so ignorant, but we can hide our selues, till we be cleaner, or make a composi∣tion with mercy and pacification, if the busines bee not darkned indeede with loathsomnes: and euery thing


amongst vs with a fashionable hansomnesse ouerswaieth nicer exception.


Thus I hope you will first pardon me for vaine-glory or affectation, considering I speake for my country, and then yeeld vnto the truth, which at last must preuaile, con∣sidering I haue confirmed her excellencies and preroga∣tiues: Nor haue I taken this taske vpon me out of suppo∣sition, that 
England
 would haue lost her reputation, if I had not traduced my selfe in these triuiall Tractates: but meerely I protest to affront some 
humorists,
 who as irreso∣lute or ignorant thinke too slightly of our worth, and in my owne hearing haue presumed to match petty Princes with vs, against whom I dare maintaine, that if there were such occasion, the 
Voluntaries
 and idle disposed of our Country would goe in such troopes, and in such a man∣ner, that we need neither pay customes for silkes out of 
Florence, Genoa, Leuca,
 or some other of their principall states of 
Italy;
 nor haue our store-houses empty of the marchandice of 
India
 or 
China.
 As for the gold of 
Ophir,
 though many thinke, ancient mines may be exhausted: oh that they might try their fortune, I beleeue we should not need proclamations against exportation of our coine. But better is better: I haue commended the peace of 
Sa∣lomon,
 as one of the cheefest parts of blessednes, which the birth of our Sauiour ratified, and the comming in of our King exampled: and let it continue a Gods name with the spreading of the 
Cherbins
 ouer 
sanctum sanctorum,
 and the shadow of the Almighty couer vs, vntill we come to the port indeed of all comfort, happines, and securitie.




FINIS.















