The legacye or embassate of the great emperour of Inde prester Iohn, vnto Emanuell kynge of Portyngale, in the yere of our lorde M. v.C.xiii. Of the fayth of the Indyans, ceremonyes, relygyons [&]c. Of the patryarche [and] his offyce. Of the realme, state, power, maiesty, and order of the courte of prester Iohn
Legatio magni Indorum Imperatoris Presbyteri Ioannis, ad Emanuelem Lusitaniae Regem. English.
Góis, Damião de, 1502-1574.
Approx. 58 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 32 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2008-09 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A01828




STC 11966



ESTC S116675





99851891




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The legacye or embassate of the great emperour of Inde prester Iohn, vnto Emanuell kynge of Portyngale, in the yere of our lorde M. v.C.xiii. Of the fayth of the Indyans, ceremonyes, relygyons [&]c. Of the patryarche [and] his offyce. Of the realme, state, power, maiesty, and order of the courte of prester Iohn
Legatio magni Indorum Imperatoris Presbyteri Ioannis, ad Emanuelem Lusitaniae Regem. English.
Góis, Damião de, 1502-1574.
More, John, fl. 1533.
26 [i.e. 30] leaves   


[[London] :


Printed by w. Rastell in Fletestrete in saynte Brydys chyrch yarde,


1533]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Manuel --  I, --  King of Portugal, 1469-1521 --  Early works to 1800.
Voyages and travels --  Early works to 1800.
Portugal --  History --  Manuel, 1495-1521 --  Early works to 1800.
2005-11
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2006-03
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2007-03
Ali Jakobson
Sampled and proofread
2007-03
Ali Jakobson
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2008-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






11966


99851891


17184














¶ The legacye or embassate of the great empe¦rour of Inde prester Iohn̄, vnto Emanuell kynge of Portyngale, in the yere of our lorde M.v.C.xiii.


Of the fayth of the Indyans, ce¦remonyes, relygyons &c.


Of the patryarche & his offyce.


Of the realme, state, power, ma∣iesty, and order of the courte of prester Iohn̄.










Iohn̄ More to the crysten sten reader.


F
Or as myche as euery mā natural∣ly is desyrous to here new thinges and straunge (as both authours te¦styfye, and expery¦ence proueth) all though there were none other com¦modyte therof then the neweltye: I thought yt a thynge worthe the la∣bour, to translate this lyttell worke, late happed in my hande through the helpe of a specyall familyar frende of myne / syns surely I thought it shuld be a worke not onely new, trew, and plesaunt to the reader, but also for y
e
 knowlege of sundrye thynges therin conteyned very profytable and neces¦sary. For in this lytle treatyce be con¦teyned, the state, the fayth, the rely∣gyon, the ceremonyes, the Patry∣arche wyth his offyce, the powre, the lawes of the lande and empyre of pre¦stre Iohn̄, besydes his royall maiestie


and order of his courte. All whyche thynges were rehersed vnto y
e
 mygh∣ty and pusaunt prynce Emanuell kynge of Portyngale, by the mouth of one Mathew, sent frō themperour of Inde prester Iohn̄, vnto the forna¦med Emanuel, in the yere of our lord M.v. hundred .xiii. And all though of this prester Iohn̄ syr Iohn̄ Maū∣defeld knyght, in a worke y
t
 he made of the dyscrypcyon of coūtrees, som∣what hath made mencyon: yet this embassatour that came from thens to the kynge of Portyngale, as he to whome euery thynge perteynyng ey¦ther to the religyon and fayth of that people, or to the polytyque order of that lande, was myche more perfyte∣ly knowen, yt is no meruayle though he myche more perfytely descrybe theym, namely to that prynce, whych from poynte to poynte was curyouse to enquyre. This empyre of prester Iohn̄ ys reputed as great a maygne countre in a maner (yf yt be not gret¦ter) as all the remanaunt that nowe remayneth christened, except the new founden landes, that haue ben byco∣men


chrystened wythin few yeres of late. And therfore yt greatly may, & of reason greatly ought to reioyce all good chrystē people, to perceyue that though there are dyuerse thynges wherein they and we dyffere in rytes lawes, customes, and ceremonyes: yet in all other thynges necessary∣ly perteynynge as well to the ver∣tues of fayth and relygyon, as all other vertues morall, they so farre∣forth accorde and agre wyth these cri¦sten nacyons of ours, and wyth the catholyque doctryne of the chyrche, that yt may well appere euen by that thynge alone, that the spyryte of god hath wrought and worketh this full agrement & consent, in so many thyn¦ges necessary to saluacyon, thorowe so many great countreys and regyōs as ours are and theyres both, y
e
 tone by so longe space hauynge so lytle ac¦cesse vnto the tother, that of many ye¦res tyl nowe very late, we coulde not wel tell whyther they were well criste¦ned or not. Howe be yt yet appereth well nowe by many thynges, not in this boke onely, but in those letters


also, whyche now very late the empe¦rour of that lande that nowe is, & son vnto him that sent thembassatour vn¦to the kynge Emanuell, dyd send not onely to the noble kynge of Portyn∣gale that now is, sonne vnto the said noble kynge Emanuell, but also to the popes holynesse that now is Cle∣ment of that name the .vii. by his em¦bassatour, wyth his obedyence after the maner of other chrysten prynces: by this treatyce and those letters yt doth I saye well appere, that the said emperour and all the chyrche, that ys to wytte all the chrysten people of that empyre, be of the same fayth that we be. And in this treatyse ye also se, that y
e
 great thynges whych haue ben byfore this tymes establyshed a∣gaynst heretyques by generall coun∣sayles of olde, agaynst whych old de¦termynacyons these new heretyques make newe besynesse nowe, the selfe same thynges haue the chrysten peo∣ple of that great chrysten empyre frō the tyme of theyre fyrste cōuersyon, whych was forthwyth vpon the deth of Chryste, cōtynually byleued and


euer obserued styll. So y
t
 this poynt is able alone yf yt be pondered as yt is worthy, eyther to tourne and con∣uert or putte to sylence for shame, all the besye bretherne that wolde make men so madde, as to wene that those thynges were new deuysed and late brought vppe here by prestes / whych thynges theym selfe se well ynough (though they dyssymyle and say nay) in the bokes of old holy sayntes, and whych thynges are now well knowē to haue ben this .xv. hundred yere by∣leued and vsed thorough that great empyre as great a people as oures, into whyche our prestes as farre as men can tell of, neuer came hense to teache them. But syth that we begyn nowe eache to heare more of other, I pray god as there is in bothe many thynges very good, and some thyn∣ges that myght be better: eche peple may lerne & take of other those thyn∣ges that be good, and lette the badde go by. And that we may make bothe so but one chyrche mylytant here in erth, that we may both be partes of one gloryouse chyrche, that euer shall be tryumphaunt in heuen.














Damyane Gooes a Portyngale, vnto the ryght reuerent fa∣ther in god lord Iohn̄ y
e
 great Goth, archbys¦shop of wpsalen̄ inhabytyng the coun¦trey of Swetia sendes gretynge.


T
Hrough the great famylyar frenshyp (god therof the vn¦douted autor) that was betwene your holynes & me whē we were to gether at Dantiske, what tyme I had there maters of my pryn¦cis to do, after often metynges, at the last happened vs cōmunycacyon of y
e
 maters of Portīgale, as of y
e
 viages of the Indyans, Arrabies, and Per∣ses. And also of the longe and dyffy∣culte passage into those coūtreys, of the parelles of the mayne Occean see also, and of the cōtynuall warre that the inhabytours as well on thys


syde Gaūge as beyond, made agayn y
e
 Arrabyans, Persyās, & Indyans, of the yerely inuasion of the Turkes, whych by theyr mighty naueyes sent by the see of Arrabye vnto Inde the lesse, all though not venqueshyd, yet greatly vexed and troblyd our peple. But after we had mych debated this mater, your holynes putte wel in mynde of the high emperour of Inde prester Iohn̄. From whome surely my self ones saw an embassatour sent vnto our kynge, and beynge present by, harde all that euer he tolde, as well of the fayth, as of the ceremo∣nies and estate of prester Iohn̄s em∣pyre, whyche he parcell mele descry∣bed in the presens of many of his no¦bles. All whych when in order I had shewed your holynes you requyred me, yf euer yt chaūced me to returne to the lowe countres, that I wolde sende you all those thynges breuely descrybed, wyth the artycles of the fayth, ceremonies, and estate of theyr countrey. whyche I faythfully pro∣mysed to do. Therfore, after ones (though a thousande daungers esca∣ped)


I was come saufe to the lowe countreys, callynge to mynde your moste holy company (whych I neuer forget nor neuer shall) and therwyth all my promyse, all those thynges as was your request dylygently haue I done, whyche now here I sende you. I sende you chyefely the copye of the letter whyche the hygh and myghtye prynce themperour of Inde prester Iohn̄, writ on a season vnto my may¦stert he kyng of Portyngale / & after that, all the artycles, as the religyon, ceremonies, themperours power, the noblenes of his court, euen in as com¦pendyous maner as the same legate descrybed them.


More ouer then this (to thentent the trouth of the mater more playnly may appere) I shall shewe you bryef∣ly, howe presently I both harde and saw all those thynges.


In the yere of our lorde a thou∣sande, fyue hundred, and .xiii. there landed & arryued in Portyngale, an embassatour of the high emperour of Inde prester Iohn̄, and of quene El¦lynes his mother, sent vnto the most










chrystened prynce Emanuell kyng of Portingale. Thembassatours name was Mathew, an Armenicane born̄, wyth whome was ioyned in commys¦syon a nother noble yonge man an Abessyne, brought vp in thēperours prester Iohn̄s courte, and his name was Iames. These were very well welcomed of y
e
 kynge, in whose court they abode and remayned .iii. yeres to gether, & had there in great reputa¦cyon, foūde onely at the kynges coste and charge / tyll afterward they toke theyr leue, and so merely retourned saufe home agayn to theyr countrey. This Mathew then, all suche thyn∣ges as he had in cōmaundemēt, com¦myssyon, and charge, ones declared to y
e
 kynges hyghnes, & lykewyse the letters of his emperours delyueryd: the kynge wythin few days after cau¦sed thē to be sent for / & so there in the company of certayn well lerned men, and presence of his nobles, demaun∣ded by an interpretour, of the fayth, ceremonyes, and estate of thēpyre of Inde.


Now thē at this time was I .xii. yere


olde, and one of those chyldrene that are wonte to brynge in the kynges seruyce vnto the kynges table. Two yere after I hadde done the kynges grace seruyce in that offyce, I was by at all this as other of the court were, and both harde saw and vnderstode all, as myche at leste ways as my yonge and tender age wolde gyue me leue.


But here you maye obiecte and say, howe couldest thow beyng so yonge (as then thou wast) other wryte or remember all those thynges, so that thow sholdest thereby be able so long tyme after, in euery poynt so perfyte∣ly to describe yt. I answere, I cōfesse my yough wold not suffer me to do it But after I hadde spent full .x. yere in that offyce, the moste chrystened prynce kynge Emanuell my brynger vppe, gaue me a new offyce. He sent me hether to the lowe coūtres on his busynes. whether as sone as I was come, I founde a companyon a very noble quycke yonge man, both of the same order & offyce I was on, whose name was Roderyke Fardynande,


whyche now was there for maters of his prynce (and suche a one in theyre vulgare tonge is called a factour) He beyng before sent as an embassatour from the kyng Emanuell vnto Ma∣ximiliane themperour, and Alberte the duke of Bauarye, had receyued letters frō Antony Carnere y
e
 kyng Emanuelles secretary, in whyche let¦ters these artycles whyche ones he hadde wryten before the kyng hadde inclusyd and sent. Now after I was fully acquaynted wyth thys Rode∣ryke Ferdynāde, & eche had shewed a nother others besinesse I happened to speke of his legacy into Germany, chaūsed vs also to fall in cōmunyca¦cyon of Inde. After which he shewed me he hadde receyued from Antony Carner, both thartycles fore remem∣bred, and also the copy of the letter y
t
 was sent vnto the kynge, from the hygh em{per}our of Inde prester Iohn̄. whych as soone as I had hard, incon¦tynent I desyred he wold let me haue a syght of them. He was content. I toke theym, and as well as I could, haue translated them out of the Por¦tyngale


tonge into latyne. To you I dedycate them, to you I sende them. In which if ye espye any Barbarous speche perdon me, as a courtyer and vnlerned, and with great besynes ve¦ry myche let and troubled. But how so euer they be wryten, trew they be. Al whyche we requyre your holynes to take in good worthe. But nowe heare you, what that hygh and mygh¦ty emperour prester Iohn̄ wrote vn∣to our kynge, here I saye this letter vnto our kyng not fayned, but very trew &, word for word almoste, trans¦late oute of the Caldeane language (which speche they most vse) into the Portyngale tonge, and so agayn out of that into latyne.




The letter of the hygh emperoure of Inde Prester Iohn̄ vnto the moste myghtye prynce Emanuell kynge of Portyngale.


I
N the name of the father the sonne and y
e
 holy gost, thre persons and one god, helth, grace, and the bles∣synge of our lorde and re∣demer


Iesu Chryste y
e
 sonne of Ma∣ry the vyrgyn, borne in the house of Bethleem, be wyth our welbeloued brother, the moste chrystened kynge Emanuell, lorde of the sees, the sub∣dewrr of the fers and mysbeleuyng Moers. Our lord god prosper you, and sende you thouer hande of your enymyes, and dylate & enlarge your kyngdomes and realmes through y
e
 deuout prayers of the messengers of Iesu Chryste our redemer, that is to say of the foure euangelystes, saynte Iohn̄, saynt Luke, saynt Marke, & saynt Mathew, whose holynes, and prayers preserue you.


we certyfye you our interely welbe¦loued brother, that here vnto our coū¦trey be cōe out of y
e
 hygh noble court of yours, two messengers, of whych two one is named Iohn̄ and calleth hym selfe a prest, and thother Gomer who of vs haue desyred vytayle and soudiers. wherfore vnto you we send our embassatour Mathew wyth the leue of y
e
 patriarch Marce, whych ge¦ueth vs his blessyng, & sendes prestes to Hierusalem, whych is our father,


and of all those that be vnder our do¦myon, the pyller of Cristes fayth and the holy trynyte. He by our cōmaun∣dement hath sent vnto your great ca¦pytayne of them, that in Inde fyght for the fayth of our sauyoure Iesu Cryste, to shewe hym that we shall be always redy when nede requyreth to sende them both vitayle sustynaunce and soudyours. Therfore the fame goeth that y
e
 prynce of Cayry prepa∣reth many a nauy agaynste your ar∣myes to be reuenged of the iniurys & damages, that they haue susteyned by the capytayns of your warre that ye haue in Inde. whyche (as yt is in∣formed vs) they haue often sufferyd, wherin I pray god of his gret good∣nes dayly prosper you, that so in con¦clusyon all infydeles may vtterly be subdewed. we therfore agaynst theyr assaute shall sende soudyours, whi∣che shall abyde and tarye at the see of Mecha, that is to wit at Bebalmam¦des, or to be sent (yf you so thynke beste) vnto the hauen of Iuda, or Thor, that so at the laste you maye rydde oute of the way & destroye such


myscreant Moers, so that the gyftes and oblacyons, that be offered vppe at the holy sepulcre frome that tyme forward be not deuoured of dogges.


Now is come the tyme that was {pro}mysed in whych (as they say) Cryst & his blessed mother Mary forshew∣ed, that in the later dayes of the Cry∣sten countreys in Europe, a certayne kynge sholde arryse, whych sholde de¦stroy the hole nacyon of the Babary∣anes and Moers. And surely this is the same selfe season whych our sauy¦our Chryste promysed to hys blessed mother Mary shulde come. Further¦more what so euer our embassatour Mathew shall shewe you, accompte you yt, as spoken of myne owne mouth & byleue him. For he is one of the chyefe of our courte, and for that cause we wylled to sende hym to you. we wolde haue commytted all this, to your owne messengers you sent he¦ther, had yt not ben that we feryd lest our besynes sholde not come to passe accordynge to our mynde.


we sende vnto you by this our em¦bassatour Mathew a crosse, made of


the same selfe wood, on whych our sa¦uyour Iesu Cryste was crucyfyed at Hierusalē. A pyece of this holy wood was brought vnto vs from Hierusa¦lem, of whyche we haue made .ii. cros¦ses, wherof the one styll remayneth wyth vs, & thother we sende by our embassatour vnto you. The colour of the wood is black, and hangeth at a lyttell syluer rynge. Moreouer yf it please you eyther to mary your dou∣ghters with our sons, or your sons wyth our doughters, yt shall be ve∣ry plesaunt and profytable for both partes, and a great stablyshement of the brotherly lege all redy enterd, whych I pray god longe to cōtinew. No more at this tyme but the helthe and grace of our redemer Iesu Cryst and of his blessed mother our ladye saynt Mary the vyrgyn, holde theyr hande ouer you, your sonnes, your doughters, and all your hole hous∣holde. Amen.


Besydes all this we certyfye you yf we lyst to assemble our power that we haue strength ynough to destroye (yf god be our helpe) all the eny∣myes


of our holy fayth. But as for our realmes and countres so be an∣nexed and ioyned to gether, that on no parte we can breke out to the see. wherfore we haue no power on y
e
 wa∣ter, wherin (god be thanked) you of all nacyons are most myghty.


Iesu Cryste be your ayde, helpe, & succour, for the thynges that ye haue done in Inde / be surely more by goddes myght then mannis. If so be it you wold prepare & set out a thou∣sande sayle to se, we shall fynde vy∣tayle, and all other thynges, plenty∣fully, necessarye for the furnyshynge of your nauey.




After that the moste chrystyned kynge emanuell by the interpretour had well vnderstanden these letters, very desyrous to heare of Cristen ma¦ters, gredy to knowe agayne, of the legate, how the maters and Crystes fayth stode amongest the Indyans / after certayne dayes, callynge to ge∣ther the nobles of his court, commaū¦ded that by certayne well lerned chry¦sten deuyns, whyche was there redy at hande, he shold be demaunded in


hys presens, of euery poynt. And he answerynge by parcell mele declared all thynges, as hereafter in order foloweth.




The confessyon of the fayth, ce∣remonyes, and manner of theyr relygyon, of the empyre of pre∣ster Iohn̄.


I
N this poynt, fyrst of all, they beleue as we do, thre per∣sons and one god, in whyche one and moste beste father thei faithfulli trust and byleue.


2 Item that he of no subiecte ma∣ter at all, nor of nothynge erthly, but by a meruaylous meanes made both heuen and erth, & lyke wyse all thyn∣ges conteyned in them.


3 Also that Iesu Cryste, that an∣oynted kynge, oure sauyoure, the ve∣rye Messyas so often by prophetes promysed, is the very sonne of very god borne in Bethleem the cytty of Dauid (accordynge to y
e
 prophecyes)


of Mary, whyche contynued a vyr∣gyne, both byfore the byrth and also euer after.


4 Moreouer that the same Iesu Cryste for our synne at Hierusalem byfore Pontius Pylate a Romayne there presydent and gouernour of Iury, by an vniuste iugement, both was condempned, suffered, died, and was buryed.


5 Furthermore he incontenent af∣ter his deth descended to hell, & theyr gates shaken and all to broken, the thyrde daye arrose from deth to lyfe hauynge the vyctory of his enymyes and deth, and that after he retour∣ned agayne, and meruaylously ascen¦ded vp to heuen frō whens he came.


6 Bysydes this, they faythfully cō¦fesse that after all this mortall lyfe, they loke for an vnyuersall and ende∣les resurreccyon of our body.


7 Also that by the same fayth they loke for Cryste to be iudge, who shall geue an vnyuersall iudgement of good and euyll, in whyche eche man shall receyue a iuste rewarde, accor∣dynge to his deserte in this worlde.


8 By whych iudgemēt geuē ones, good men shal haue eternall ioy with out ende, and euyll men euerlastyng payne vexacyon and shame.


9 Therfore they as well as we, so∣lemnely obserue and dyligently kepe the .x. preceptes of Moyses.


10 Also they rekē as we do the .vii. dedely synnes.


11 They haue also all y
e
 bokes wri¦ten of Moyses, & fynally all the pro∣phetes, wyth all such other volumes of the olde lawe.


12 The four euāgelistes haue they in great estymacyon, euen the selfe same that we haue, that is to wytte, saynt Mathew, saynt Marke, saynt Luke, and saynt Iohn̄.


13 Of Poules epystles they lacke nothynge, whyche eche by name he there in presence recyted.


14 The crede made by thapostles and euery artycle of the same they well allowe.


15 The pater noster made by Crist they so mych set by, that they preferre yt byfore all other prayers.


16 The Aue Maria also they mich


vse, in the honoure of the mother of god the virgyn our lady saynt Mary


17 Theyr chyldrē the .vii. day after theyr byrth, both be baptysed, and al∣so after Moyses law cyrcumcysed. And that not for any respecte of me∣ryte or trust they haue in it, but onely for y
t
 yt so hath remayned of an olde custome frō theyr forefathers, and so to them left from hande to hande.


18 All the people in the remēbraūce of the trewe and theyr ones receyued baptyme, yerely in feste of the epy∣phanye wyth a meruaylouse great gladnes and reioysynge of mynde, openly a freshe professe the fayth of Cryste, and be solempnely baptysed agayne.


19 In the remembraunce of our lor¦des maundy, euyn in maner as we vse, they saye masse, but that not for any rewarde money or lucre, vnlesse that percase some of a good relygy∣ouse mynde frely wythoute axynge geue theyr almoyse.


20 The blessed sacrament of thau∣ter they recounte for the hyghest sa∣crament, fyrmely wyth a syncer and


pure fayth, professyng it to be the vn¦douted bodye and blood of our lorde Iesu Chryste / and accordynge vnto Chrystes ordynaunce, receyuynge yt vnder both the formes.


21 As for the sacramentes of anoy∣lynge and vnxyon, they confesse.


22 Strayte ways as soone as they haue cōmitted any dedely synne, they get them a preste to whome in secrete they confesse theyr fautes.


23 They receyue payne for theyre trespas (whyche in theyre vulgare tonge they call penaunce) lymyted at the dyscrecyon of the confessour, why¦che the party cōfessed fulfylleth with all dylygence.


24 On fastynge dayes (as often as they come) they absteyne both from fleshe and fyshe, wythoute the recey∣uynge of collocyons or refeccyon.


25 In stede of the lenton faste, they faste the septuagesime. And that (as we may gathere of the tyme) bygyn∣neth wyth our lent.


26 As for sondayes and other holy dayes, appoynted by theyr byshop∣pes, in the remembraunce of god and


our lady and other saintes, they kepe wyth al reuerence.


27 In the later weke of theyr lent, they vse the memoryall of Crystes passyon euen as we do.


28 They kepe y
e
 palme sondaye ye∣rely euen aboute the same selfe tyme that we do, and as we do.


29 And they vse to burne tapers as we do, & at the same tyme that we do.


30 The go on comon processyons, as the tyme or necessyte requyreth.


31 Ones in y
e
 yere they vse to haue a solemne dyryge for all chrysten soules.


32 They vse to take ashes, both in the maner we do, and also about the tyme that we do.


33 There is there an infynyte nom¦ber of monasteryes, as well of womē as of men, lyuynge very straytely in great abstynence.


34 Amongeste these monasteryes some there be, wherof eche hath in yt eyther vii. hundred viii. hundred or a thousand monkes.


35 In that realme is there a cer∣tayne montayne, that hath inhaby∣tynge


here and there vppon yt .xii. thousande monkes.


36 All those mōk{is} as many as they be, get theyr lyuynge by theyr handy labour, nor in no wyse may go to axe almoyse house by house, in stretes, vyllage, countres, or townes. All ma¦ner of beggynge is vtterly forbyd∣den them, vnlesse that some of a good godly mynde gyue theym any thyng frely, then may they receyue yt, not as begged, but as frely gyuen.


37 Here and there be preachers, whych preche to the people the fayth of Cryste, and those be prestes or mō¦kes, and that of the beste lerned.


38 Euery where be many hospytal∣les, wherunto all pore folke be gētyl¦ly welcomed and receyued.


39 Theyr holy houses, that is to wytte the temples of sayntes, yf any malefactour fle thyther for ayde and helpe, yt shall succour hym and serue hym. But this herein prouyded yet, that yf any happen to come thyther for murderynge of theyr neyghbour, they gyue hym so small a porcyon to eate, that at the laste he is compelled


to dye for hunger.


40 If one dy, they make myche a do at his buryeng, euen as it is wyth vs, wyth prayers, crosses, prestes, & such other kynde of ceremonyes, and burye hym in the chyrche.


41 Such as haue ben holy, & men of good conuersacyon in theyr lyfe, after they haue bene longe tyme dede and buryed, they make dylygēt serch of theyr vertuous lyuynge. whyche done, they recounte hym a saynt, that is to say (as the greke worde is) ca∣nonyse hym.


42 The housbandes solempnely wyth a great company come to the chyrche doers, and mary onely but by wordes that they speke of the pre∣sent tyme.


43 Of an olde custome they haue, men may not mary any of theyr kyn¦dred wythin the .vii. degree / wythin whych, no not theyr hygh patryarche in any wyse eyther may or wyll pre∣sume to dyspense.


44 In theyr chyrches and temples they haue and worshyppe the yma∣ges of god, oure blessed lady saynte


Mary the vyrgyn, wyth other holy sayntes.


45 They haue in theyr temples ho¦ly water, whyche they beleue good and effectuall agaynst euyll and wyc¦ked spyrytes.


46 Very many costly temples and belles they haue.


47 The garmētes wherin they say masse in, vse to be consecrate.


48 Chyefly they honoure the feaste of saynt Iohn̄ Baptyste.


49 They begynne the yere at Sep¦tember.


50 The pope of Rome they know∣lege / but the cause why they do not theyr obedyence to hym (as other cry¦sten people do) is the euyll dyffycult waye.


51 Saynt Bartholmew thapostel of Chryst, preached fyrste the gospell and Chrystes fayth vnto them.






Of theyr patryarche, and of his offyce.


T
Hey haue but one chyefe preste or bys¦shoppe which they call a patryarche, that is to saye the chyefe of the fa∣ders. He only hath power on spyry∣tuall maters, that is to saye as well in ecclesiastycall offyces as dyspen∣synge wyth benefyces, wythoute the interrupcyon of any tēporall person / & he lyueth contynually vnmaryed.


2 This patryarche hath very gret possessyons / for the thryde parte of prester Iohn̄s reueneus commeth to his parte, and that besydes all the ty∣thes of the hole realme.


3 All the profytes hereof ys be∣stowed onely vppon pore folke, the maryage of fatherlesse chyldren, and prysoners.


4 when the patryarche dyeth, the emperour prester Iohn̄ is the heyre of al his goodes. His successour hath no maner a thynge left hym, besydes the dignyte of y
e
 patryarches chayre, and the cure of al his fold of shepe cō¦mytted


to his charge.


5 This patryarche is called the patryarche of Alexādry / and for this cause. For that where of olde there were onely foure through out al crys¦tendome, of whyche Inde chansed to haue the patryarche of Alexandry.


6 This patriarche of an old vsage was wonte to be chosen at Hierusalē onely, and that by the voyces of all good relygyous men of thempyre of prester Iohn̄ that there were at the same season dwellynge.


7 This patryarche extendeth hys curse or excōmunycacyon vpon such as are obstynate and rebellyous per∣sons / whyche in so farforth is dreded and feryd, that who so euer stande so accursed dare not touch neither meat nor drynke tyll tyme he knowe hym selfe assoyled. For yf so be yt there be any so obstynate a persone that he ca¦reth not for the curse, but that not wythstandynge he leueth not from the cryme for whych he so was accur¦sed: his meate and drynke shall be taken from hym, and he so compelled to dye for famyne.


8 This patryarche shall not let or forbydde the people from the sacra∣mentes of the chyrche, for no maner of offence but onely for murder.


9 The prestes haue wyues / but when one is dede, they may not mary another.


10 Bastardes shall neuer be admit¦ted to be prestes.


11 Neuer shall there be any admyt∣ted to the order of presthed, but that before he shal be examined, by a well lerned company, whether he be mete for yt or no. If he be not mete, he ys reiected wyth shame ynough.


12 The emperour him self. Prester Iohn̄, hath no maner powre on the clergy. For that is a thynge bylon∣geth onely to the patryarche.


13 If any spyrytuall man commit∣teth any abomynable cryme, hym the patryarche after his own dyscrecyon suffereth to eate but certayne vnces of meate, & so lyttel and lytell to dye for famyne. But none of them euen out of hande putteth he to deth, but onely murderers.


14 That same patryarche geueth


playne and full remyssyon and abso¦lucyon of synnes.


15 Twelue hath he of his coūsayl, wyth whome he ordereth and gouer∣neth al spyrytuall maters.






Of the realme and estate of themperour pre∣ster Iohn̄.


A
Fter al this beyng further demaūded of the emperours realme and domy∣nyon, he answered in this maner.


1 Fyrste he hath in his realmes very many cyties and townes.


2 His nobles weare garmentes of sylke, cloth of golde, veluet, satyn, damaske, wyth such other precyouse thynges.


3 The comen people were nothing but cloth.


4 Dyuers kyndes of marchaun∣dyse hath he in his realmes, & those very precyouse.


5 He hath great plenty of mynys


of gold, syluer, and other metall.


6 Money hath he none, but that is brought out of realmes nexte borde∣rynge there about. They take golde & syluer by weyght in stede of coyne.


7 Great plenty of corne haue they, and that of dyuerse colours, bothe blacke, whyte, redde, and gray. But as for theyr meale of all of thē is very whyte. Benys, pesyn, tarys, and all suche other codware, haue they ynough both plente & also of diuers kyndes.


8 There groweth great abundaūs of suger.


9 Oxen, shepe, horse, mulys, ca∣melles, gotes, hogges, wyth suche other housholde cattell besydes byr∣des they haue great plentye.


10 Porke eate they none / not for y
e
 that eyther theyr conscyens or relygy¦on that forbyddeth, but bycause they fynd it not holsome for theyr bodyes.


11 Themperours estate and powre is very great, for he hath vnder his domynyon thre skore chrystened kyn¦ges. whych be kinges of great mygh¦ty kyngdomes. whose names the le∣gate


there shewed openly.


12 Besydes these thre skore kyn∣ges, yet hath he .v. other Machomet kynges vnder hym.


13 Moreouer he hath vnder his do¦minion meruaylous many gret men, as prynces, dukes, marquyses, erles, barons, lordes of very great landes and reueneus.


14 They obserue & straytely kepe what so euer themperour commaun∣deth them.


15 The Cronycles and noble actes of theyr prynces they kepe saufe, and what so euer is worthy remembraūce theyr secretary dylygently regesters.


16 The rytes, lawes, statutes, and comen ordinaunces made for the peo¦ples gouernaunce, they saufely kepe in wrytynge.


17 Themperour hath euer .xii. men present wyth hym of his counsayll, whome he may comen wyth of all the maters of his realme.


18 Through al the realmes and do¦mynyons of his empyre, there be iud¦ges appoynted, whych serue (accor∣dynge to the trewth of y
e
 mater) both


to heare causes and iudge them.


19 No iudge maye iudge any man to deth but onely for murder.


20 The emperour hath very great trybutes.


21 The emperour hath as well of y
e
 inhabytours as of other marchaunt straungers, the .x. parte of theyr gay¦nes / theyr stocke saued hole.


22 There be souldyours of a cer∣tayne relygyon, whyche euer go in whyte, wyth crosses on theyr cote ar∣mour / alwaye redy for to warre for Crystes fayth, yf nede be.


23 Of the inherytaūce of theyr fa∣thers, one hath as mych as a nother, no respecte hadde to the age, whyther they be older or yonger.


24 In all those realmes & prouyn∣ces, there be no Iewes, all though yt is well knowen that ones there were many. But when the people coulde not suffer or bere theyr naughtynes, sodenly they set vppon them and vt∣terly destroyed them.


25 Many fayres and ryche market∣tes haue they by reason of y
e
 marchaū¦tes that resorte thyther.


26 The realmes, prouynces, and countres of prester Iohn̄, stretcheth to both the partes of Nilus floode.


27 The people knowe none nother but Erithreā, y
t
 is to say the redde see.






Of the order of the same empyre, and maner of the courte.


1 THe emperours proper name is Dauid. His cōmon name prester Iohn̄, kynge of the Ebessyns.


2 His tytles be in this maner. Da∣uid kynge of kynges, kynge of the Ebessins, prester Iohn̄, kynge of kyn¦ges vnto the Ebessyns and of all his prouynces, both nexte and also at the ende of the sees. The kynge of Nilus flood, and iudge of y
e
 gret Sodane, & of the countrey of Cayre, and the see of Alexandrine. By the power of god and our redemer Iesu Chryste, & by the powre of our ladye the vyrgyne saynt Mary.


3 This emperour of an old custome maryeth euer the kynges doughters that be vnder his domynyon.


4 The eldest sonne euer succedeth his father in his kyngdome.


5 This sonne of his is veryly well nuryshed and brought vppe wythin his fathers courte / as for his other sonnes (at lest ways yf he haue any) be brought vppe lyke noble men, ey∣ther vnder the kynges, or ellys some great prynces of the emperours do∣mynyon.


6 The inherytaunce of his empyre neuere descendeth to the doughters. But yf themperour happe to dye wythout issew male, then cōmeth yt to the nexte of his blood.


7 Themperours wyues be had in great honoure and kepe a gret port.


8 Themperour hath euer redy at hande a meruaylous great number, as well of horsemen as fotemen.


9 The emperoure to thentent he wolde exercyse his souldyours, in ac∣tes of warre, is euer for the moste parte in the felde amongest theym. where they applye them selfe to fetys of armes.


10 In the emperours courte the chamberlayn hath the chyefest rome.


11 Themperour hath for sauegard of the body, euer at hande .xii. of the noblest of his realme. Eche of whome haue vnder hym .xii. thousand fygh∣tynge men.


12 Those same .xii. noble men oc∣cupyes y
e
 gretest romes in the court.


13 They kepe very dylygently in writyng pedygrees, names, & surna∣mes of theyr ansetours, wherby eue∣ry one may perfytely knowe his nacy¦on and stok.


14 Themperours sonnes & dough¦thers be maryed vnto the sonnes or doughters of other kynges vnder hym wyth great dowers geuen wyth them in maryage. And then all y
e
 peo¦ple come, and of theyr owne mocyon geue them gyftes.


15 Themperoure what tyme neces¦syte so requyreth vseth thobedyence and seruyce of his subiectes.


16 The men chylderne of the kyn∣ges, that be vnder hym, be (to wynne theyre fathers good wylles) brought vppe in themperours courte.


17 He admytteth and suffereth cha¦lenges amonges his subiectes.


18 The name of the emperours pre¦ster Iohn̄s mother y
t
 nowe is, is El∣len, a very holy woman, and one that sheweth a great example of chastyte, to whome for here especial goodnes, and the nonage of her sonne, is com∣mytted all the hole order and rule of the realme.


19 Of kynges, emperours, or the chrysten prynces of Europe, they ne∣uer had knowledge but onely of the frenchmē whom they cal in theyr vul¦gare tonge Cristyans. But by y
e
 rea∣son of certayne noble actes that were done few yeres passed by the Portyn¦gales, agaynst the Turkes, Persys, Arabyens, and Indyās, the name of the kynge of Portyngale begonne to be well knowen and had in myche re∣uerēce & reputacyon amongest them.






H
Ere haue you now ryght reue¦rēt father y
e
 thyn¦ges I promysed your holynes (at my beynge wyth you) of the lega∣cy


of Inde. But yet to thentent you may geue the more credēce to the ma¦ter, I shall put somwhat to, that a ve¦ry noble yonge man, and one of my famylyar acqueyntaūce, named Ge∣orge Lupe Dandrade (what time we were to gether about our prynces be∣synes in the lowe countreys, and al∣so hosted both twayn in one house at Antwerpe) told me. On this wyse was his tale.


In the tyme of his beyng at Inde for certayne maters he had there of his prynce (where he remayned by the space of certayne yeres) one a ve∣ry valyant man Lupus Soarez, by the kynges commaūdement was the chyefe capitayne of the Portyngales warres, & chyefe ruler of all the real∣mes, cyttes, townes, and castelles, that be vnder the kynge of Portyn∣gales domynyon, euen frō Ethiope, thorough out the Chynas. Thys Lupe had prepared hym a meruay∣louse gret nauey, to sayle as his aūce¦tours were wont to do from Cochine (now is Cochyne y
e
 castel & dwellyng place of the Portyngale captayns) &


so intended to come to the see of Ara¦by commenly called the redde see, a∣gaynste the Turke / whyche Turke nowe in stede of the Soldayne occu∣pies the coūtrey. when he was ar∣ryued in a certayne Ile, called of the inhabytours Camara, that lyeth in that coste / incontynēt he caused two shippes to be made redy, and toke vn to hym a certayne chosen Portynga∣les bothe famylyar and faythfull, a∣monges whome this George was one. This done he commaūded they sholde caste ouer to a nother Ile cal∣led Mazua, to the entent that when he were there ones, he wolde send out thre espyes vnto the great emperour of prester Iohn̄, vnder the pretext of marchaūdyse, & that for two causes. One to be certyfyed of the legacye wherof Mathew before shewed vnto our kynge, and to knowe whether those thynges were trew or false. Secondely that they very narrowly sholde serche, what portes and what hauens were vnder the dominyon of Pester Iohn̄. Of these .iii. spyes one was well lerned and very expert in


scrypture whose name was Iusarte Viegas, a Baccaren borne. After they were ones saufe come home a∣gayne bothe man & shyppes to theyr capytayne, and had made an ende of theyr vyage / they shewed hym all, both that they hadde sene there, and also harde of the inhabytours of that countrey / and further declared that they knewe for a suerty that the lega¦cy of Mathew was trewe / and that the same Mathewe they sayde was suche a one as we had sene hym with our owne eyen ones embassatour be¦fore our kynge. The cause and ma¦ner of the legacye they say was sych.


After that Ellyn the mother of Da¦uid prester Iohn̄, that then was a ve¦ry wyse and a dyscrete gouernour of all his hole realme (for he was but a chylde) had lerned of certayne Por∣tyngales whyche were come to her court, & specyally of one called Iohn̄ Clerke, all that euer we hadde done at Inde agaynste the infydeles, she sendeth that Mathew in a secrete le∣gacy vnto the most christyned prynce Emanuell, the fyrste of that name,


kynge of Portyngale / wyth whome she sendeth also a nother yonge man an Ebyssyne borne an noble man, Ia¦mes by his name, of whome byfore in the descrypcyon of the legacy, we haue made mencyon. To theym she gaue here letters of commendacyon dyrected to the hed ruler of that pro∣uynce, vnder the domynyon of pre∣ster Iohn̄, whose powre stretcheth to Mazua and the see of Araby, to pray hym to helpe them as secretely as he coulde with all such thynges as they shold nede, makyng as though they were marchaūt men which came the∣ther for marchaundyse. This ruler (and who so euer happeneth to be in that offyce) is called in the Ebessyne tonge Baruagays. This Mathewe and his companyon the Ebyssyne; through the letters of commendacy. on they had, were louīgly welcomed, where as they made mery a certayne space, neuer tellynge no man theyre purpose, neyther what he wolde do there, or where when he thens depar¦ted he wolde become. But (to the en∣tent


he myght brynge his purpose to passe wyth lesse parell) fayned hym selfe a lether byer, and in the meane season now and then bought certayn presents whych pryuyly he sent vnto quene Ellyn. And vnder this cloke, perused dyuers prouynces, menyng this, that escapynge saufe wythout hurte, through enmyes of the Portin¦gales, at last myght come to Portyn¦gale yt selfe, and so there do the thyn¦ges he come for. For other way then this was there not. Alwaye whether so euer he went or where so euer he became, he toke with hym this yonge man his felowe the Ebyssyne, le∣uynge all his hole housholde at Ar∣quyke, whyche is a cytty nere the see coste, appertaynyng to prester Iohn̄, dystant about a myle from the yle of Mazua. wherin that Baruagais be∣fore named then abode. For it is euer the abydynge place of that offycer.


But nowe yf percase any capcy∣ous felowe wolde obiecte why of so many noble men, as there is no dout but there be in so great a court as pre¦ster Iohn̄s is, there were not sent in


that embassate, some oldermen, men of more grauyte, of greater experyēce and bysydes this Ebyssyns borne, whyche myght haue borne a greater porte and maieste before our prynce rather then these, of whome the one was farre frome the nobilyte ether of an Ebyssyne or Indyane eyther, bycause beyng an Armenycane / and the other all though he was an Ebys¦syne and in y
e
 kynges court brought vppe, yet but a yonge man, an wyth∣oute the company waytyng on hym y
t
 becometh a prynces embassatour to haue / and therby sheweth not the dygnyte of a legate. But hereof may there be two causes alledged.


The fyrste, in all those regyons (as great as they be) from the see of Araby, to the water of Gange, there be but two languages, that is to wit, Persyke and Arabyke. whyche lan∣guages who so perfytely knoweth, may easely passe thorough all those prouynces. Nowe in Prester Iohn̄s courte be there very fewe or none no∣bles, Ebyssyns borne, that can skyll of those tonges. Fyrste bycause they


haue lyttell cōpany or acquayntaūce wyth the out borderars. Secondely for that yt seldome causeth theym to go out of theyr owne countrey, as be∣ynge contente wyth theyre countrey lawes. And for y
t
 cause the same Ma¦thew, skylled in both the tonges and in all the prouynces there about, for he hadde ofte ben in them / and seyng that at that tyme, all though he were an Armenyane, yet he was of the que¦nys counsayll, and very great about her, he was thoughte the metyst for that message / namely syns he hadde one ioyned wyth hym an Ebyssyne borne, whyche both knewe the ton∣ges and maners of many nacyons / so that yf nede shold requyre, he were mete to be sent on a lyke embassat.


The seconde cause is. The actes of warre of the Portyngales done wyth the Indyans, agaynst the Tur¦kes or Persyes at that tyme was not so well knowen of the Ebyssyns, that they thought it nedefull to vēter any old noble Ebyssyne, & specyally syns they were vnexperte in y
e
 tonges, in so farre and so dyffyculte a vyage, tyll


tyme they were farther certyfyed by some other. And therfore pleased to sende that Mathew, an Armenycane borne, as moste meate for that besy∣nes whyche not greatly accōpanyed, but as a marchaunt sholde go and espye al to gether. And that it so was ment, the mater selfe shewed. For af∣ter ones all was exactely tryed by hym, there was then a nother embas¦satour sent, both an old man, a noble man, an Ebissyne borne, and a preste, connyng both in scrypture and Cal∣day / on whome wayted a very great company of nobles of the Ebyssyns, of themperours p̄ster Iohn̄s courte. And this mā was sent vnto the most myghty prīce one Iohn̄, y
e
 thyrd king of Portyngale. For Emanuel that was his father departed almost .x. ye¦res ago. This legate wyth all his cō¦pany at this present day is wyth our kynge, myche made on, and hadde in great reuerence. whome ques∣tyonlesse they wold neuer haue sent, hadde they not ben afore surely certy¦fyed of our maters by Mathew. But now we be a littell degressed therfore


let vs agayn returne to our purpose. This Mathew then vnder the pre∣texte of fayned marchaundyse, after his beynge at many other cytyes, re∣sorted to Aden / whych is a cytye by y
e
 see of Arabye vnder the Turkes do∣mynyon, byelded euen as our cytyes be, very ryche, and very well fensyd wyth fortresses. where after he hadde fallē in some familiare acqueyntaūce wyth certayne marchaunt men, and hadde serched all thynge to the vtter moste, and fynyshed the maters he came for, makynge hym selfe euer a∣mōgest y
e
 Turkes a Turke, for other wyse coulde he neuer haue escaped & done his besynesse saufe without daū¦ger, he returned to Arquique where before he had left his houshold wyth his companyon the Ebyssyne, & thus he remoued, toke his houshold again and so retourned to Aden, hopynge that from thens he myght sayle wyth his warys and his housholde to In∣dia. For why at the towne of Aden they are wonte to take shippynge to∣warde India. where when he was landed he sold al his lether & bought


other marchandyse of Alexandrye to cary wyth hym to Indy, by whych he muste nedes passe into Portyngale.


Now was a shyppe redy goynge to Inde, and he redy wyth all his mar¦chandyse to go wyth that shyppe, whyle there spronge a certayne suspy¦cyon amonges the cetezyns of Aden, that he sholde be a spye. wheruppon he was taryed and let that he coulde not take passage at that season. But he as one of a great wyt and expery∣ence, so clerely purged hym selfe of that suspycyon, prouynge in dede he was a marchaūt man, and that there he soughte nothynge but marchaun∣dyse, that they gaue hym wyth hys housholde free pasporte, to departe whether hym pleased. But now then beynge dysmyssed / he founde neuer a vessel goynge toward Inde. Then he was fayn to hyer one, & so he with all his company toke shyppyng, and came towarde Inde, to a certayn no¦ble ryche cytye called Xaer. whych is dystant from Aden about a hundred myle, where lykewyse he founde no shyppes goynge to Inde, bycause y
t



nowe yt was wynter, whyche there begynneth in Marche. And whyle yt lasteth no man may saile toward In∣de, for the great stormes of wynde (whyche is a meruaylous thynge) y
t
 contynually blows contrary oute of one quarter. But when the sees ser∣ued hym, he sayled from the cytye of Xaer vnto a towne called Fartaque, there in euery place faynynge hym selfe a marchaunt of Turkey. From whens he wente to a place called the inhabitours of Dabul / & from thens to departe to the town of Goa. where thē wyntered the gret Alfonsus Dal∣bubarque a Portyngale, the chyefe capytayne of all India, predecessour vnto Lupus Soarez, whom we haue made mencyon of byfore, whych was he y
e
 subdewed al that same Inde, Ara¦by, Perse, Malach, and the hole see of Ganges, and made all them sub∣iectes to Portyngale. Dabull is dy∣stant from Fartaque, whych is in the cost of Inde .iiii. hundred myle, from Goa .xl. frō Dio .iii. score great myle. Dio is a very ryche cytye, vnder the domynyon of Cambaie very well fen¦sed,


wyth gonnes and suche other in∣gens of warre, and very well walled.


Furthermore he taried at Dabul from May to Decēber, and there oc∣cupied hym selfe about marchaūdyse because in all that tyme he could not take shyppynge. At laste he gate hym a smale vessell, and beganne to gete hym away. And by y
e
 reason he shew∣ed certayn of his frendes & the mays∣ter of the shyppe that he wolde go vn¦to Portyngale wyth his marchaun∣dyse, by and by yt was shewed to cer¦tayne hed offycers of the towne, that there was a straunger one vnknowē, whyche pryuyly wolde conuey hym selfe to Portyngale. wheruppon wot¦tynge neuer what they shuld thynke of the mater, they kept him styll with fayre wordes, and so let hym of hys passage for y
e
 season. After he saw this incontynēt by certayn marchaūt men whych were wonte to be cōuersant in Inde with the Portyngales, whyche he before hadde made hys frendes, he wrote secretely vnto the capy∣tayne Alfonsus Dalbuberque, cer∣tifyeng hym as diligētly as he could


how it stode with him. He as soone as he knew it sent thither certain shypp{is} and galleys some great some smale vnto hym. Siluester Corzo was y
e
 ca¦pitayn of them, where whē he was ar¦ryued, strayt way he shewed the offy∣cers of the town that he was sent vn∣to them from y
e
 great duke Alfonsus Dulbuberque to seke a certayn mar∣chaunt man whyche he muste nedes speke wyth all, & that the same Ma∣thew was he whom he sought / which knowen they gaue hym leue to speke wyth hym and so delyuered hym into his handes. For this cause the Dabu¦lenses vsed this liberalyte towarde hī, for fere they shold seme our opē eni¦myes, for as mych as they take mych profyte by our Portyngales whyche vse Goa & Inde, & yet in place & time whē the may, secretly do vs displease. This Mathew then cōuayde frō the citie of Dabull, cam with this noble yong man y
e
 Ebyssyne his felow, & al his famyly, at y
e
 last to Goa, where as we before recyted, y
e
 noble capytayne Alfonsus then wintered wyth a gret number bothe of people & nobles of


the Portyngales. There is bothe an ile & also a citie of this name of Goa. The citye I say as it is very riche, so is yt also very habūdaūt of all thyng that seruyth for the fyndyng of men. In that dwelleth marchaunt men of all kyndes, Indians, Arabyes, Per∣syās, wyth diuers of the realmes of Narsynga & Cambaia. In thys yle be .iiii. great & very well fensed for∣tresys, well māned wyth many hye∣red souldyers of the Portyngales. There inhabiteth the city, about .xv. hundred Portyngales. These be cy∣tezyns there, wyth theyr wyues, chyl∣dren, and seruauntes, besydes many other, as soudiours, & marchauntes. Both that hole Ile the cytye & the ca∣steles, be vnder the Portyngales. In the cytye be grāmer scoles kept, wher in is taught in comyn scoles both the latyne and the Portyngale tonge. wherby the inhabytours of those par¦tes, be as well skylled in both those lāguages, as in the lāguage of theyr natyue coūtre, where they were brede and brought vp. The fayth of Cryste is euery where receyued amongest


them. Many sumptuous and costely temples & houses of relygyō be there as well of other as of saynt Fraūces order, where dayly is vsed diuine ser¦uyce. Ouer y
e
 hyghest parte of a gate in the cytye, whyche they call saynte Mary da sera, be kept & had in great veneracyon & honour, the bones of that capytayne Alfonsus Dalbuber∣que. But nowe after y
t
 Mathew had arriued, from the town of Dabull in the hauen of Goa, the Capitayne Al∣fonsus cōmaunded hym to come vn¦to him. He denyed & sayd he wold not come out of the shyppes, alledgynge y
t
 he was not the legate of any meane prince but of y
e
 hygh mighty em{per}our of Inde Prester Iohn̄ / & hereūto ad∣ded that it were not cōuenyēt nor me∣tely that thembassatour of so hygh a myghty chrystened emperour, shold be receyued to so noble a duke as Al∣fonsus is wythout dewe reuerence & honour. Thē Alfonsus callyng to ge¦ther his clerkes, prestes, & all his no∣bilite y
t
 were nigh at hand, goth forth (namely syns he was y
e
 embassatour of thēperour Prester Iohn̄s) to mete


hym wyth crosses, and such other or∣namentes of the chyrche, the prestes and clerkes syngynge this hymne: 
Te deum laudamus,
 within a fewe dayes after Alfonsus began to aske hym of his legacy, to whome he answered, y
t
 he was sent from prester Iohn̄ vnto the most Crystened prynce Emanuel kynge of Portīgale, & that he ought onely to open the cause of hys em∣bassate to no creature but vnto hym alone. whych when he hard the duke Alfonsus axed hym no further ques∣tyons. wythin a whyle after when he saw his time, this Mathew & this no¦ble yonge mā y
e
 Ebyssyne, with al his company makyng hast toward Por∣tyngale, Alfonsus very gentylly ac∣cōpanied him vnto y
e
 hauen, where ta¦kyng shyppyng frō Goa they cam to¦ward Portīgale. All this shewed vn me this George Lupe Dandrade, that he knewe of a suerty for trewth, for as myche (as we haue shewed you before) the great rular of Inde Lup{us} Soarez had sent him from the Ile of Camara, as a spye amonge the Ebys¦synes vnder the pretexte of marchaū¦dyse,


to serche out the trewth of that legacye. when he & that noble yonge man the Ebyssyne, wyth all his fa∣myly came to Portyngale, my selfe (as I haue shewed your holynes by¦fore) was by, whome I both saw and spoke often wyth all. He was a man of mean stature, very whitly visaged and somwhat sallowe, wyth a syde & hore here, wyth a longe whyte berde. whych a lyttell more at lēgth I haue shewed your holynes, to thentēt you with all other y
t
 be desyrous to know the very trewth shall not thynke yt be a lye or fayned.






Of the people of Pilapes.


I
 Very well remembre me ryght reuerēt father howe you shewed me at my laste beynge wyth you, that vn¦der your archbyshopryke, was y
e
 same wyld regyō of Scythyce other wise calleth Pilape where they neyther knowe god or Chryste, nor aw haue they none amonges theym


for theym to lyue by. Surely a very myserable case, & a thynge nothynge chrystenlike consydered of your men. For yt was tolde me bothe of good men & vertuous men also (and that for a suerty to) that your nobles (the more shame for theym) were in faute why those people were no better then brute bestes, nor came to chrysten∣dome. For so they fere they shall lese a great parte of theyre pollynge and pyllynge and theyr accustomed raue∣nous roberye, thorough the whyche they pytyfully oppresse with insacya¦ble auaryce those sylly pore innocent people. And therfore I desyred you then (& yet agayne in Chrystes name do) and that not I alone, but also as many as thynke as I do, that syns yt is your offyce (as beynge theyre herdman, and they cōmytted to you by god) you wold cause those nobles of yours, to leue theyr couetous cruel¦tye, and so in conclusyon to brynge those symple soules to the knowlege of Cryste, and so payenge theyr dew trybutes to theyr kynges, as other crysten people do to theyre prynces.


Let those nobles of yours take hede therfore what they do, that they com¦pell not so great a folde of shepe in tyme to come, in the presence of that iuste iudge Iesu Cryste, to axe iudge¦ment of that tyranny of theyrs. I de∣syre your holynes to do that lyeth in you, whyche doyenge, se what glory and what rewarde you shall obtayne of god, what prays and laude bysy∣des of the worlde. No more to your holynes but thus fare you well. I suppose that I shalbe shortly at Por∣tyngale with the kynges hyghnes or elles at Germany. But where so euer I become I shall be holly yours. I pray you I may be hertly recomēded vnto your brother Olaus the great Goth, a very specyall frende and lo∣uer of myne.




At Antwerpe out of the comyn hou∣ses of our realme of Portyngale, 
in the Calendas of December, the yere of our god M.D.xxxi.












¶Prynted by W. Rastell in Fletestrete in saynte Brydys chyrch yarde. 1533 Cum priuilegio.











