(EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A02494)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 6277)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 1205:16)
Compiler's dedication signed: R.H., i.e. Richard Hakluyt.
A compilation of various document relating to discoveries in the New World.
Printer's name from colophon.
Signatures: pi²  [par.]⁴ A-D⁴; ² A-K⁴.
The maps have captions "Septentrio orbis vniuersalis descriptio" and "Illustri viro, Domino Philippo Sidnæo Michael Lok ciuis Londinensis hanc chartam dedicabat, 1582.".
Reproduction of the original in the University of Michigan. Library.
The speech of a learned Portin∣gale.
Master Iohn Barros the causer of the in∣habiting of Bresilia.
The iudgement of Gerardus Mercator of a passage by the Northwest.
A lawe made of late by king. Phillip.
The cōtractatiō house at Siuill.
M. Steuen Borrowes.
A lecture of the art of nauigatiō necessarie for to be erected in London.
The bountiful offer of sir Frā∣cis Drake to∣ward furthering the art of Naui∣gation.
Ihon Gabote and his three sonnes.

Licence grā
To subdue
The fift of all goods to be paid to the king.
Freedome from all customes.
None but they & their assignes may trauaile thither.
The 5. of march 1594.
In the 13. yere of king Henrie the vii. 1498.
Note.
Bristow.
William Pur∣chas Maior of London.
Three sauage men brought into England.
Rawe flesh. Beastes skins.
Sebastian Gabots letters to Ramusius.
Note.
He calleth them Ilands.
Sebastian Gabot might haue sailed to Catheis.
This voyage to Cathay reser∣ued by God for some great Prince.
This way the shortest of all others.
This discouery were a most glorious ente∣prise.
William Wor∣thington Pen∣sioner.
Note.
Note.
Note.
Note.
Note.
To know the latitudes.
To knowe the Longitudes.
Now called the streit of Ma
The longitudes harde to be founde out.
New found lād discouered by the englishmen.
Note.
To sayle by the pole.
Or the straite
Note.
Benefite to Englande.
A true opinion.
A voyage of discouerie by the pole.
M. Thorne and M. Eliot disco∣uerers of New found land.
The cause why the west Indees were not ours: which also Se∣bastian Gabot writeth man epistle to Bap∣tist Ramusius.
Gr. 34.
Courteous and gentle people.
The pleasant∣nes and riches of the lande.
The descriptiō of Claudia I∣lande.
Claudia was wife of King Francis.
The Countrey of Sir H.
Podesta.
The ship of M. N. Zeno cast a∣way vpon Fris∣land in anno. 1380.
A forraine prince hapning to be in Frislād w
Zichmni prince of Porland or duke of Zorani.
Frisland the king of Nor∣wayes.
N. Zeno, made knight by Zichmni.
Ships laden with fish at fris∣land: for Flaun∣ders, Britaine. England, Scot¦land, Norway, and Denmark. But not to bee proued that euer any came thēce. A letter sent by master. N. Zeno from Friseland to his brother, M. Antonio in Venice. End of the first letter.
Engrouelande. Preaching Fri∣ers of S. Tho∣mas.
A notable
Trade in som∣mer time from Trondon to S. Thomas friers in Ingrouclād.
Resort of friers from Norway & Sueden, to the monasterie in Ingrouelande called S. Thō.
In the monasta∣rie S. Thomas most of them speake the latin tongue. and of the two letter.
N. Zeno died in Frislande.
3. letter begin∣neth from the second brother M. Antonio out of Frislande, to his other bro∣ther in Venice named Master Carlo. Estotiland. 6. Fisher men taken.
Fishermen of Frislande spake latin.
Sixe were 5. yeeres in Esto∣tilande.
One of the f sh∣ers of Frisland reporteth of E∣stotilande. Estotilande rich: abounding with al the com∣moditie of the worlde.
Aboundance of golde. trade from esto∣tiland, to En∣groueland-skins, brimstone and pitche. Gold, corne, and bere, or ale. Many cities and castles.
A countrey cal∣led Drogio.
The 6. fishermē of frisland only saued, by shew∣ing the maner to take fishe. The chiefest of the 6. fishers, specified before his cōpanions
In the space of 13. yeres in Drogi
Sent to more then 25. lords, which continually war¦red amongst thē selues for the same fisherman.
3. yeres in Dr
Where by happ arriued certaine boates from E∣stotsland.
He became in∣terpreter for y
4. letter be∣ginneth frō M. Antonio in fris∣land, to his bro∣ther Carlo in Venice. The fisherman dead that should haue bin guid & interpreter. Certaine mar∣riners taken in his steede which came with him frō Estotiland. Iuly Ile Ilofe.
Zichmni his first discouery of the Iland Icaria.
Infinit number of people in armes.
An Island man in Icaria.
Icaria Ilande. All the kings y
The people of Icaria desirous of the Italian tongue.
Hauing in that Iland 10. men of ten sundry nations.
Infinite multi∣tude of armed men in Icaria.
Zichmni depar¦ted from Icari
Sight of land.
100. good soul∣diers sent by Zichmni to search the coun∣trie (which countrie is not named.)
Iune. The ayre so tē∣perate & sweete, as impossible to expresse it.
Hauen Trim.
Capo di Trim. The 100, soul∣diers returned which had been through the I∣land, report what they sawe and found.
Zichmni deter∣mining to re∣maine in the new discouered land, kept with him his barkes with oares, and mē that were willing & sent the rest away homewards: Appointing Antonio Zeno chiefe captaine of them. Antonio Zeno had sight of Ne∣ome, and knewe himselfe past Island. Ende of the 4. letter. A peece of a 5. letter.
Beginning of the letter.
Sebastian Gabota.
Iohn Verarzā.
Iames Cartier
Why the riuer of May was so called.
Seuola within xx. daies trauai∣ling by boate of the riuer of May.
Gold, siluer, and copper in Flori∣da. Turquesses and aboundance of pearles. Marshes.
Pearles as big as acornes.
Gentlenes must be vsed towards them.
Great fertilitie.
Note.
The riuer of Sene.
Heardes of tame Hartes.
Good hauens and riuers.
7. Great & good riuers.
Maps and Sea Cardes.
Port royall a most excellent hauen.
Note.
Pepper tr
A speciall note.
A commande∣ment.
The riuer of Iordan.
Exceeding faire and great vines
Fortification most necessarie in all newe dis∣coueries.
30. lefte behind at their owne suite
They fortified in an Iland.
Fortie degrees of eleuation.
Mistes & fogs when they come.