A relation of a voyage to Guiana Describing the climat, scituation, fertilitie, prouisions and commodities of that country, containing seuen prouinces, and other signiories within that territory: together, with the manners, customes, behauiors, and dispositions of the people. Performed by Robert Harcourt, of Stanton Harcourt Esquire. The pattent for the plantation of which country, his Maiestie hath granted to the said Robert Harcourt vnder the Great Seale.
Harcourt, Robert, 1574?-1631.
Approx. 162 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 44 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2004-03 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A02626




STC 12754



ESTC S103834





99839579




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A relation of a voyage to Guiana Describing the climat, scituation, fertilitie, prouisions and commodities of that country, containing seuen prouinces, and other signiories within that territory: together, with the manners, customes, behauiors, and dispositions of the people. Performed by Robert Harcourt, of Stanton Harcourt Esquire. The pattent for the plantation of which country, his Maiestie hath granted to the said Robert Harcourt vnder the Great Seale.
Harcourt, Robert, 1574?-1631.
[16], 71, [1] p.   


At London :


Printed by Iohn Beale, for W. Welby, and are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Churchyard at the signe of the Swan,


1613.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Guyana --  Description and travel --  Early works to 1800.
2003-11
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2003-11
Aptara
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2003-12
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2003-12
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2004-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






12754


99839579


4011














A
RELATION
OF A VOYAGE
TO GVIANA.


DESCRIBING THE CLIMAT,
Scituation, fertilitie, prouisions and commodities
of that Country, containing seuen Prouinces, and
other Signiories within that Territory: Together,
with the manners, customes, behauiors, and
dispositions of the people.


Performed by
 ROBERT HARCOVRT, 
of

Stanton Harcourt 
Esquire.


The Pattent for the Plantation of which Country,

his Maiestie hath granted to the said
 ROBERT
HARCOVRT vnder the Great Seale.


NOMB. 14. 7, 8.


The Land which we walked thorow to search it, is a very good Land.


If the Lord loue vs, he will bring vs into this land, and wil giue it vs.


AT LONDON
Printed by IOHN BEALE, for W. WELBY, and
are to be sold at his shop in Pauls Church yard at the
signe of the Swan. 1613.










❧To the high and
Mighty Prince, CHARLES, Prince
of GREAT BRITAINE:


H
Auing had tryall

(most worthy Prince)
of your most renowned
Brother Prince 
Hē∣rie

his many fauours
towardes mee, and
princely furtherance of my humble sute
vnto his Maiestie your royall Father, and
our dread Soueraigne, for obtayning for
mee his gracious Letters Pattents for the
planting and inhabiting of all that tract of
Land, and part of 
Guiana,
 betweene the
riuers of 
Amazones,
 & 
Dessequebe,
 sci∣tuate


in 
America,
 vnder the Equinoctiall
Line: Whereof I haue taken possession to
his Maiesties vse, and discouered the ma∣ritime
parts. I was greatly thereby incou∣raged
to proceed in the enterprise, and had
(vnder his Maiesties fauour) deuoted my
selfe vnto his seruice. But now seeing (by
Gods permission) your excellent Brother
his princely Honour, by right of succession
is fallen vpon your Highnesse, and verily
hoping, that you will not onely equall, but
also exceed him in vertuous exercises, and
aduancing all honorable actiōs, and worthy
enterprises; I haue in like maner religiou∣sly
vowed the best fruits and effects of my
indeauors vnto your Highnesse seruice.
And for as much as that part of the world
which wee now call 
America,
 was hereto∣fore
in the yeere of our Lord 1170. disco∣uered,

conquered, and possessed by 
Madoc,

one of the sons of 
Owen Gwyneth
 prince
of north-Wales: I therfore (in all humble


reuerence) present the prosecution of this
high Action vnto your gracious Patronage,
principally belonging of right vnto you, be∣ing
the honourable, true, and worthy Suc∣cessor
to the Principality of 
VVales.
 If
my trauell & seruice therein shall perform
ought, woorthy of your Princely regard,
I shall much glory thereat, and account it
my happiest fortune, and greatest honour:
And shall heartily pray vnto the King of
Kings, to continue in your Highnesse a pi∣ous,
and inuincible heart; and to giue you a
conquering and victorious hand; and the
dominion of many rich and mighty King∣domes
in this world, and in the worlde to
come, a Crowne of Glorie, in his eternall
Kingdome.


Your Highnesse
most humble deuoted seruant,
ROBERT HARCOVRT.










❧To the Readers,
ADVENTVRERS, FAVORERS,
and wel-willers to the Plantation
in GVIANA.


I
T is the part of valiant and noble spirites to
apply their indeuours to honourable and
woorthie atchiuements: but chiefely to
frame their actions therein by the rule of
vertue, and accomplish the end for which
they were created, which is in their vocati∣ons
to serue and glorifie GOD, and to doe good vnto o∣thers:
For the better performance of their dueties in that be∣halfe,
let them examine their inclinations and dispositions
in the course of their life, and what they finde themselues
most inclined vnto, to that let them seriously bend their for∣ces;
either to cherish or suppresse it; to follow or forsake it,
according as it tendeth to vertue or vice; to honour or
disgrace.


As touching the courses of life, inclining to the better
part, some men are naturally giuen to bee schollers, either in
Diuinity, Philosophy, or other learning; some are more inclined
to be Statists; some to be Souldiers, and trauellers; some desire
to bee Citizens, and Merchants; and some like best to leade
Coun
trey life, and follow husbandry; and othersome are


wholly inclined to the Mechannicall trades, and handy crafts.
In all which professions, as men are naturally addicted more,
or lesse, they attaine to perfection, and may thereby accomplish
the end for which they were created. But to vndertake any pro∣fession
contrary to a mans naturall inclination, is a losse of time,
a worke that yeldeth no profit, but breedeth many inconueni∣ences,
and destroyeth nature: For the meere Scholler will ne∣uer
bee good Statist, Souldier, Merchant, nor Mechanicall
tradesman, (yet learning is a singular helpe in all these profe∣ssions)
neither will the professed Souldier euer attaine to exqui∣site
perfection in learning, or in the other professions; so lik∣wise
of the rest. The naturall inclination of man, may bee som∣what
restrained, corrected, and reformed, but is rarely and
hardly altered.


Naturam expellas furca licèt, vsque recurret


In these and all other professions whatsoeuer, men may so
proceede in their particular societies, that each seuerall com∣pany
in his proper vocation, may bee a help, comfort, and sup∣port
vnto the rest: and they are firmely bound both by the
law of God, and Nature, to exercise and follow their professi∣ons
for the benefit of others: not coueteously seeking their owne
gaine only thereby; but charitably, respecting first the glory of
God, and then the honour of their Prince, and profit of their
Countrey, which is the end for which they were created


To the end therefore that our Countreymen of all professions
in this Kingdome may bee worthily induced to performe their
duties in that kinde not only at home in their owne Countrey,
but also abroade in foraigne parts, wheresoeuer any of our
Nation shall be imployed, eyther by discouery or conquest, for
the reducing of vnknowne and barbarous people (void of all
knowledge of God, and ciuill gouernement) to Christianity and
the subiection and obedience of of our Soueraigne, and that
such others as want imployment, or competent meanes to fol∣low


their professions, and are slipt aside from vertuous exerci∣ses,
and honourable enterprises, to idle wantonnesse, effeminate
disorders, and other extrauagant courses of life, may bee recal∣led,
reformed, and encouraged (by better endeuours) to per∣forme
their duties to God, their Prince, and their Countrey.
I thought it conuenient to propound vnto them a worthy and
memorable enterprise: (for the prosecution and accomplishing
whereof, it hath gratiously pleased his Maiesty to grant mee
priuiledge by Pattent) namely, the discouery and plantation of
a part of the great, rich, & mighty Empire of 
Guiana:
 where∣in
they shall finde variety of imployments to spend their times
worthily in their seuerall vocations; plentifull meanes to sup∣ply
all wants and necessities; and many worthy aduentures to
obtaine immortall renowne and perpetuall fame.


And for as much as all mens actions are subiect to miscen∣sure,
and some (perhaps) may thinke the labour lost, which is
bestowed in this enterprise, foreiudgeing the Countrey being
rude, barbarous and heathen, to bee vnprofitable; I will there∣fore
here particularly shew wherein our Countreymen of the se∣uerall
professions before mentioned, may profitably labour in
this worke, and performe thereby to God a seruice most accep∣table,
and register their fame to all posteritie.


First, the Scholler in diuine learning may worthily labour
the conuersion of infinite numbers of vnbeleeuing people, who
may be reduced to a quiet, sober, and ciuill life: the scoller in
Philosophy, and other Learning, may doe much good by trai∣ning
vp of the youth in the knowledge of the litterall arts, and
by the practise of his skill in Phisicke and Chirurgery: the Sta∣tist
may highly aduance his Princes seruice, and his Countries
good, by giuing ayd vnto this action, and his discreet and
prouident furtherance in managing the businesse thereof: The
Souldier and Traueller, by bearing armes in the execution of
this noble enterprise, and by memorable discoueries of strange


and vnknowne Countries and Nations, may open the way to
increase and inlarge the Dominion of our Soueraigne: the
Merchant by assisting the plantation there, and by erecting
conuenient factories for that purpose, may highly increase the
trade of merchandise, by returning thence the riches and
commodities there found and gathered. The Countrey-man
that professeth busbandry and tillage of the earth, may also be
sufficiently imploied for the increase of corne and catell, and
in planting, gathering, and getting as many rare and necessa∣ry
fruits and prouisions, as shall be needefull for the life of man.
And lastly, the Mechannicall tradesman, and such as exercise
the handy crafts, (in which company I include all sorts of la∣bourers)
may by this action of 
Guiana,
 highly aduance their
trades and occupations, to their owne vnspeakable profit, and
benefit of others, by their diuers and sundry workes for seue∣rall
vses, and for persons of all quallity whatsoeuer; and may
teach the people of that Countrey (being once conuerted to chri∣stianity,
and brought to the knowledge of ciuill gouernement)
such seuerall trades, as our experience shall finde necessarie for
them, and conuenient for vs.


Hauing heere particularly shewed wherein our Countrey-men
of diuers professions may worthily follow their vocations,
and imploy their endeuours in this action: I leaue the matter
whereon they are to worke, to be more fully expressed in the
following discourse.


And because they may the better be encouraged in this enter∣prise,
by examples of the like nature: let vs looke into the dis∣coueries
and conquests, performed by the Spaniards, in the
East and West Indies; but chiefely in the West: where with a
small number, and as it were with a handfull of men, 
Her∣nando
Cortez
 a Spaniard, in the yeere of our Lord 1519.
discouered and conquered that great, mighty, and rich King∣dome
of 
New Spaine,
 and the Citie of 
Mexico.



And in the yeere of our Lord 1531. 
Don Francisco Pizar∣ro

attempted the conquest of the great Kingdome of 
Peru;
 he
vanquished 
Atibalipa,
 the King of that Countrey, conquered
and subdued many spacious and rich Prouinces; and in the end
after infinite perils and dangers by practise of the Indians
and much variety of fortune, by ciuill warres with his owne
Nation, he atchiued his enterprise. The particulars of these
discoueries and conquests, are more at large recounted by 
Pe∣ter
Martyr
 in his Decades, by 
Benzo,
 and diuers other Au∣thors,
to which for breuities sake I referre you. The honour
these Spaniards gained by these discoueries and conquests, was
doubtlesse great: but the benefit that ensued to the Crowne of

Spaine,
 and all the Spanish Nation thereby, was infinite be∣yond
expectation, as amply may appeare in the Authors late
mentioned, and in the Naturall and Morrall history of the East
and West Indies, written by 
Iosephus Acosta.


Let vs also note the wonderfull workes of God in those Coun∣tries,
and his great mercy thereby shewed to the Indians, who
by their continuall conuersation with Christians, are redu∣ced
from their abhominable life and cruell manners, to the
knowledge of God and their former infidelity, and to the frui∣tion
of the holy Ghost in Baptisme; for in all those great Pro∣uinces,
conquered in 
New Spaine,
 the people are generaly con∣uerted
to Christianity: for about the yeere of our Lord 1524.
there went diuers learned men into those parts, who by lear∣ning
the Indians languages, and their painefull diligence in
teaching and instructing youth, did so effectually proceed in
that laborious worke, that within the limits of many hundred
leagues, there are few or none vnchristened. The beginning
of that Worke was very difficult, by reason of the vnaptnesse
of the Indians, so long imbrued in cruell sacrifices of humane
blood, and abhominable Idolatry, and by the continuall malice
of the diuell, rebelling against God, and striuing to maintaine


his owne kingdome: but in the end their constant and paine∣full
indeuours so farre preuailed, that Christian religion
increased amongst them, to the establishing of many Bishopricks
in 
New Spaine,
 besides diuers Schooles of learning. So like∣wise
in 
Peru,
 and diuers other Countries, conquered by the
Spaniards, the conuersions of the people haue proceeded to no
lesse admirable effects.


As touching the state of common wealth, they haue all
sorts of Gouernours, and magistrates in great honour and re∣putation;
houses of Nobility and Gentry flourish, and increase
amongst them; Souldiers, and trauellers are regarded highly,
and worthily rewarded; Merchants, and tradesmen pros∣per,
and gather wealth in extraordinary measure; what shall
I say more, there bee few or no professions or trades amongst vs,
in these parts of Christendome, but the same are vsed, follow∣ed,
and practised in great perfection, both in 
New Spaine,
Peru,
 and other parts of the Indies, where the Spaniards haue
preuailed by their Conquests.


By these memorable examples may our Nation (being in
valour inferiour to none other vnder Heauen) bee moued and
stirred vp to the vndertaking of this noble action of 
Guiana;

which in respect of the climate, firtility of the soile, and tracta∣ble
disposition of the people (whereof in the following discourse
I haue spoken more at large) doth assure vs that (with Gods fa∣uour
and assistance) as great effects may bee wrought in
the conuersion of these Nations, and as great benefit, and
commoditie may arise to the Realme and Crowne of England,
both in generall, and particular, as euer was performed or ob∣tained
by the Spanish Nation, since the first beginning of their
trauels and discoueries.


For if they in 
New Spaine,
 and 
Peru,
 haue Cuchenille,
Anir, and Cotton wooll; wee in 
Guiana
 haue also Cotton
wooll Tobacco, Suger-Canes, diuers good commodities for


Dyers, and likewise in all likelihood Cuchenille; and sundry
sorts of excellent wood for ioyners worke, and other vses. If
they haue variety of Apothecary drugges, and Balsome for
Phisicke, and Chirurgery; so also haue wee, and those that
are of admirable vertue. If they haue gold, siluer, and other
mettalls; Pearles, and pretious stonnes; so doublesse wee in
time may haue the like, hauing had good testimony thereof
already; as plainely shall appeare hereafter, when time better
serueth.


Moreouer, in singular aduantage wee haue before them to
further, and aduance our enterprise, by the peculiar loue and
affection of the people in those parts, towards our Nation be∣fore
all others. For whereas the Spaniards were constrained
by great labour, bloudy battailes, and much cruelty (for which
they lost their hearts) to subdue the Indians; wee contrari∣wise
are well entertained, and friendly receiued by them, being
willing to hold commerce with vs; whereby wee haue a more
secure and ready meane, to establish a peaceable and assured
Commonwealth amongst them, for the imployment of all the
seuerall professions of men mentioned before.


Finally, for your better inducement to the worthy vnder∣taking
of this high action; let vs call to remembrance one ex∣cellent
and materiall obseruation; that is the discouery of this
Countrey of 
Guiana,
 was heretofore attempted by 
S
r
. Walter
Raleigh,
 who made an honourable entry thereinto by the riuer
of 
Orenoque;
 what hee then, and there discouered, and how
great and assured his hopes were, of gaining to our Countrey
inestimable riches, and subduing to the Crowne of 
England

a potent Empire, was effectually, and faithfully published to
the world by his owne penne; which excellent discourse I wish
you to peruse, preceeding from so wise and iudiciall an
Author; who if some knowne fortunes had not crossed his
first intendiments, for the prosecuting of that enterprise) had


(in all likelihood) long before this time increased the honour
of our Nation, by the reputation of the most famous and rich
discouery and conquest that the world could afford.


Let vs herewithal obserue, that before his time it was often
attempted by the Spaniards, but to small effect; for eyther by
misfortune of shipwrack, discention amongst the most eminent
persons in their Troopes, mutiny of the souldiers, mistaking
of the Commanders, or violent fury of the Indians (who beare
an inueterate and mortall hatred against them) they haue e∣uer
failed of their purpose: whereof the said discourse of 
S
r
.
Walter Raleigh
 maketh particular mention more at large.


The continuall losse, and great misfortunes that haue fol∣lowed
the Spaniards from time to time, in all their attempts of
this discouery and conquest, for the space almost of an hundred
yeeres; and the fortunate successe that most happily fauoured
the other in his first attempt thereof, may bee a great presumti∣on,
and may giue vs an assured hope, that the powerfull hand
of God doth worke for vs in this behalfe; and hath reserued
the execution of this action for honour of our Nation.


Which forcible considerations, gaue me great encouragement
to repaire the decay of so worthy an enterprise, not with intent
to rob him of his honour, who first of all our Nation (nobly
with great iudgement and valour) gaue the onset; but ra∣ther
to doe him more honour, by working vpon his foundati∣on,
and prosecuting this proiect, according to his first designes,
which doubtlesse aimed at the glory of God, his Soueraignes
seruice, and his Countries good.


Hereupon I made triall of my fortune in the attempt, and
haue found the successe so prosperous and hopefull, (although
it hath been chargeable vnto mee) and my acceptance so free
and friendly amongst the Indians, that it hath giuen not only
to my selfe, but also to the rest of my associats, (who with the
loue and good liking of the people, haue liued and remained in



Guiana
 for the space of three yeares) good assurance of repay∣ing
the charge past with trebble recompence; and a resolued
courage to proceed in the enterprise, to the prosecution where∣of,
we haue deuoted both our substance and our selues.


And because the life of this Action consisteth in the timely
progresse thereof, and requireth the assistance of many Aduen∣turers;
I thought it very needful to lay before you these former
examples, and materiall considerations: and therewithall doe
recommend vnto your view this following Discourse (wherein
I haue compiled the hopefull fruites of my painefull trauels)
thereby to moue you to wipe away from your eyes, the cloudie
incredulous blindnesse that possessed our forefathers in the
dayes of 
Henry
 the seuenth, when they reiected the offer made
by 
Batholomew Columbus,
 in the behalfe of his brother

Christopher Columbus,
 and therby lost the fruition of those
inestimable riches in the West Indies, which now we see posses∣sed
by the Spanish Nation: And also doe inuite and summon
my Country-men in generall, to rouze vp their valour, to quic∣ken
and spurre on their endevours, to be coadi
utors with vs in
this action, both of honour and profit.


And because it may be obiected to the discouragement of
such as may haue otherwise a desire to inhabit 
Guiana,
 that
the Spaniards inhabiting about 
Cumana, Margarita,
 and

Trinidado,
 may disturbour Plantation, and indanger the liues
of those that shall make the first settlement there; I thought
good to resolue all such as haue affection to make themselues
Conquerors of that goodly Countrey, that from the King of
Spaines Indies nothing can offend them; for 
Guiana
 being
seated in the head of the Brises, and to the wind-ward of al the
Spanish Indies, the current also of the Sea setting to the West,
maketh it impossible for any Shipping to turne it vp from the
forenamed places towards vs. The Spaniard therefore can no
way offend vs but by a preparation out of 
Spaine
 it selfe. And


whensoeuer he shall finde himselfe at so great leisure, as to send
a Fleet out of 
Spaine
 to seeke vs out vpon the shallow coast of

Guiana,
 eyther we shall frustrate that attempt by raising a
Fort defensible for two or three moneths (for they must famish
if they stay longer) or else by setting our selues aboue two or
three of the ouerfalles of the Riuers, where one hundred men
will defend themselues against fiue thousand. But I am per∣swaded
that the Spaniards will take great deliberation, and be
well aduised of all insuing accidents, before they giue any at∣tempt
vpon vs: for we doe not finde that they haue yet attemp∣ted
any thing vpon 
Virginia,
 which lieth in their way home∣ward
from the West Indies, albeit there haue passed many years
since the first Plantation there. And surely, if 
Virginia
 had
not a sharpe Winter, which 
Guiana
 hath not (which Countrey
of 
Guiana
 is blest with a perpetuall Summer, and a perpetuall
Spring) and that it had that store of victuals which 
Guiana

hath, it would in a short time grow to be a most profitable place.
But thus much I can auow truely, that from 
Guiana,
 without
any great labour, there may be returned within the yeare, good
store of Cotton Wooll, very rich Dyes, diuers sorts of Gummes,
many sorts of Fethers, all kindes of rich Woods, Balsamums,
Iasper, and Porpherie stone, Waxe, Honey, and Tobacco, and so
euery yeare may we pay the Transportation, vntill we encrease
in people to make Sugars, and discouer Mines.


If the paines past bestowed in my first attempt, may taste of
your gratefull acceptance, and that I may obtaine your willing
furtherance in the future, I shall then thinke my paines well
imployed, and delight my selfe in labouring for your profit; and
we all shall gaine honour and reputation, by vndergoing the
burden of so worthy a worke; whereby our Nation shall bee
greatly enriched, the Dominion of our Soueraigne much en∣larged,
and Gods seruice in those Countries highly aduanced.


R. H.












A RELATION
OF A VOYAGE TO
Guiana performed by Robert
Harcourt of Stanton Harcourt in the
Countie of OXFORD
Esquire.


I
N the yeare of our Lord
1608. and the three and
twentieth of March,
 when
I had furnished my selfe
with one ship of fourescore
Tunnes called the Rose;
a Pinnesse of sixe and thir∣tie
Tunnes called the Pa∣tience;
and a Shallop of
nine Tunnes called the Lilly, which I built at 
Dart∣mouth;

and had finished my other businesse there, and
prepared all things in readinesse to begin my voyage,
the winde reasonably seruing, I then imbarked my
companie, as followeth.


In the Rose,
 I was accompanied with captaine 
Ed∣ward
Fisher,
 captaine 
Edward Haruey,
 master 
Edward
Gifford,
 and my cosen 
Thomas Harcourt:
 And besides
them, I had of Gentlemen and others one and thirtie


land men, two Indians, and three and twentie Mari∣ners
and Saylers.


In the 
Patience,
 my brother captain 
Michael Harcort

had with him of gentlemen and others twentie land-men,
and eleuen Mariners and Saylers.


In the 
Lilly,
 
Iesper Lilly
 the Master, had one landman,
and two Saylers: so that my iust number (too great
for so few ships of no greater burden) was in all foure∣score
&
 seuenteen, wherof threescore were land-men.


Being thus imbarked, wee set saile from the Rainge
at 
Dartmouth
 the said three and twentieth of March;
but the winde altering vpon a sudden,
 put vs back a∣gaine
that euening; and about two of the clock the
next morning (it comming better for vs) we weighed
anchor, and put to Sea: the euening following we lost
sight of the Lyzart, and steered away for the Canaries.


Vpon Saturday the first of Aprill 1609.
 towards
the euening the winde increased and grew so violent,

that my Shallop (which we towed in a Cablet by rea∣son
of the foule weather) was that night seperated
from vs; for by the rage and fury of the winde and
Sea, the Cablet brake in sunder, and the little Barke
was in great danger to be cast away, but it pleased God
to preserue her, for the next morning we discryed her
to 
Leeward
 of vs, contrary to our expectation, ha∣uing
giuen her lost.


Then holding on our course, the seuenth day wee
fell with 
Alegranza
 and 
Lancerote,
 two Islands of the

Canaries:
 wee stoode in with 
Alegranza
 and came to
anchor on the South-west side thereof;
 that euening
and the next day I landed my company to exercise
their limbs on shoare: in this Island we found no in∣habitants,


nor fresh-water, neither fruitfull tree,
plant, herbe, grasse, nor any thing growing that was
good, onely an abundance of vnwholsome Sea-foule,
which after one meale were vnsauory & distasteful, & a
few wilde Captitos, or wilde Goats, which the craggy
rocks defended frō our hands, and hungry mouthes.


The eighth of Aprill we departed from 
Alegranza,

and directed our course for 
Tenerife,
 another of the I∣slands.
The eleuenth day I sent the Pinnesse, and the
Shalloppe to water at the calmes, and there to attend
my comming; but with my Shippe I held my course
for 
Orotauo,
 a towne on the other side of the Island, in
hope to get some wine amongst the Merchants there;
but not being able (by reason of a contrary winde) to
double 
Punta de Nega,
 wee altered our course from
wine to water. And the twelfth day wee Passed by

Santa Cruz,
 and watered that euening at the Calmes.


This watering place is very conuenient for all such
as passe by those Islands,
 and is thus to bee found;
there is a wooden crosse neere vnto it, the high 
Pike

of 
Tenerife
 beareth due North from it. There is also a
ledge of rockes to the Eastward of the landing place,
which is a short Sandy bay. When you are landed,
you shall finde▪ the place about fourty or fifty yardes
from the Sea side.


The next day we met againe with the Pinnesse and
the Shalloppe, who missing of the right place, had not
yet watered, wherefore wee stood backe againe to
guide them to it; but the winde preuenting vs, enfor∣ced
them to seeke for water elsewhere, which with
some dificulty they obtained vpon the fifteenth day
in the morning.



Then wee stood on our course for the riuer of 
Wia∣poco

in 
Guiana,
 hauing aprosperous winde, faire wea∣ther,
and a smooth Sea. The ninth day of May, wee
fell into the current of the great and famous riuer of

Amazones,
 which putteth out into the Sea such a
violent and mighty streame of fresh water,
 that being
thirty leagues from land, wee drunke thereof, and
found it as fresh and good as in a spring or poole.


This riuer for the great and wonderfull breadth,
(contayning at the mouth neere Sixty leagues) is
rightly termed by 
Iosephus Acosta
 the Empresse and
Queene of all flouds:
 and by 
Hieronimus Giraua Tarra∣conensis:

it is said to bee the greatest not only of all 
In∣dia,

but also of the whole world; and for the greatues
is called of many the sweete Sea: It riseth and floweth
from the Mountaines of 
Peru,
 and draweth out her
streams in many windings & turnings vnder the Equi∣noctiall,
for the space of one thousand & fiue hundred
leagues and more: although from her fountaines and
springs vnto the Sea it is but six hundred. When wee
entred into the aforesaid current, wee sounded, and
had fouerty fouer fadome water, sandy sounding.
The tenth day the colour of the water changed, & be∣came
muddy, whitish, and thicke; then wee sounded
againe at twelue of the clocke at noone, and had thir∣teene
fadome; and seauenteene at fower in the after
noone.
 The eleauenth day at eight of the clocke in
the morning we made land, the vttermost point there∣of
bearing West from vs, and came to anchor in fiue
fadome water.


At night the Patience putting in to neare the shoare
came to anchor in 2½ fadome water vpon the floud,


which fell from her vpon the ebbe,
 and left her
dry vpon the Oaze, and the next floud comming in,
did so shake and beate her against the ground, that be∣fore
shee could get off, her rudder was beaten away,
and her ribbes so rent and crased, that if Almighty
God had not preserued her, she had been wrackt: but
(God bee thanked) with much adoe shee came off
into deeper water, and mended her rudder, as well as
the time and place would afford meanes. Then wee
followed on our course, coasting along to the North-north-west,
the land so trending. It is very shoale all
along this coast, the ground soft oaze, but no danger
to bee feared, keeping our ship in fiue fadome wa∣ter.


When wee came to the latitude of two degrees and
a halfe,
 wee anchored in a goodly bay, by certaine
Islands, called 
Carripapoory
 I did at that time forbeare
to make particular discouery of this coast, intending
(if God spare me life) to make a perfect discouery of
the famous riuer of 
Amazones,
 and of her seuerall bran∣ches,
and countries bordering vppon it, and of all this
tract of land from the 
Amazones,
 vnto the riuer of 
Wia∣poco,

which containeth many goodly Prouinces, and
Signiories, which are in this discourse, but briefely
mentioned: For at this time I purpose onely to prose∣cute
my first proiect, which hastened mee vnto ano∣ther
place.


From hence I stood along the coast,
 and the sea∣uenteenth
of May, I came to anchor in the Bay of 
Wi∣apoco:

where the Indiands came off vnto vs in two or
three * Canoes,
 as well to learne of what Nation
wee were, as also to trade with vs, who vnerstanding


that wee were English men boldly came aboard vs
one of them could speake our language well, and was
knowne to some of my company to bee an Indian,
that sometime had been in England, and serued
S
r
. 
Iohn Gilbert
 many yeeres: they brought with them
such dainties as their country yeeldeth; as hennes, fish,
pinas, platanaes, potatoes, bread of 
Cassaui,
 and such
like cates, which were heartily welcome to my hungry
company: In recompence whereof, I gaue them
kniues, beades, Iewes trumpes, and such toies, which
well contented them. But when I had awhile enter∣tained
them, and made knowne vnto them the re∣turne
of the Indian 
Martyn
 their country man, whom
I brought with mee out of England, they seemed ex∣ceeding
ioyfull, supposing that hee had been dead,
being aboue foure yeares since hee departed from
them.


The Indian before mentioned to haue serued S
r
.

Iohn Gilbert
 (whose name was Iohn) whilest hee liued
(for he is now dead, and died a Christian) was a great
helpe vnto vs, because hee spake our language much
better then either of those that I brought with mee,
and was euer firme & faithful to vs, vntill his death. By
him I vnderstood that their town was scituate vpō the
east side of the hil in the mouth of 
Wiapoco,
 & was called

Caripo:
 that the Indian 
Martin
 was Lord therof, and
that in his absence his brother was chiefe. Moreouer
hee certified me that the principall Indian of that ri∣uer
was called 
Carasana,
 (who by good fortune) was
then at 
Caripo,
 and so hauing spent sometime in other
conference and friendly entertainement, they tooke
their leaue, and departed for that time. I sent one of


my company with them to giue notice to 
Carasana,

& the rest of the Indians of 
Caripo,
 that I had brought
home their Countrymand 
Martin,
 whom they all
thought to be dead, and another of their Nation also,
who had kindred and friends amongst them: to desire
him to come aboord my ship, and to bring with him
the principall Indians of 
Caripo,
 that I might declare
vnto them the cause of my comming into their Coun∣try,
and conferre with them of other matters inten∣ded
for their good. The next day I came into the ri∣uer
of 
Wiapoco,
 and Anchored ouer against the 
Sandy
Bay.


The day following the Indians came aboord as I
had desired and brought vs good store of their Coun∣try
prouision:
 
Carasana,
 and one or two more of them
were attired in old clothes, which they had gotten of
certaine Englishmen, who (by the direction of Sir

Walter Raleigh)
 had traded there the yeere before; the
rest were all naked both men and women; and this I
obserued amongst them,
 that although the better sort
of men (especially the 
Yaios)
 doe couer their priuities,
by wearing ouer them a little peece of Cotton cloth
pretily wouen after their manner; yet did I neuer see
any of their women couered in any part,
 either aboue
or beneath the waste, albeit they daily conuersed a∣mongst
vs, but were all (as the plaine prouerbe is) euen
starke belly naked.


At their comming aboord my ship; first 
Carasana

as the principall amongst them, and after him the
rest, saluted and welcōmed vs after their rude maner.
I vsed them with all curtesie, and entertained them as
wel as the straight roome would giue me leaue, giuing


them good store of 
Aquauitae,
 which they loue excee∣dingly:
I presented to their view their two country∣men,

Martyn
 the Lord of their towne, and 
Anthony
Canabre,
 who was a christian, and had liued in 
England

fourteen yeers, both which I had brought home vnto
them: when they beheld them, and after salutations,
and some conference knew to bee the same persons,
whom they supposed had been long since dead, they
expressed much ioy and contentment: aud vnderst∣anding
(from their owne mouthes) how well I had
vsed them, they seemed to bee better pleased with our
comming: and when their rude salutations to their
new come countrymen were ended, I tooke them a∣part,
and thus declared the cause of my comming.


First,
 I brought to their remembrance the exploits
performed by S
r
. 
Walter Raleigh
 in their country, in
the raigne of our late Soueraigne Queene 
Elizabeth,

when (to free them from seruitude) hee most worthily
vanquished the Spaniards at 
Trinidado:
 burned their
towne: tooke their Gouernour 
Don Anthonio de Ber∣reo

prisoner; deliuered fiue of the Indian Kings im∣prisoned,
and bound by the necke with collers of I∣ron;
and with great labour and perill discouered the
riuer of 
Orenoque,
 and the countryes adioyning, as far
as the Prouince of 
Aromaya,
 the countrey of 
Topiawa∣ry,

and the riuer of 
Caroly
 beyond it. And that their
countreymen called the 
Orenoqueponi,
 (who are the
borderers of the 
Orenoque)
 did then most willingly
submit and render themselues vnder the subiection of
the late Queene; all which they well remembred, and
said, that S
r
. 
Walter Raleigh
 promised to haue retur∣ned
againe vnto them long since.



Then I excused his not returning according to his
promise, by reason of other imployments of great im∣portance
imposed vpon him by the late Queene:
shewing them moreouer, that when he could not (for
that cause) returne himselfe, hee sent Captaine 
Keymis

to visite them, and to bring him true intelligence of
their estate, (supposing that he had left no Spaniards
behind him at 
Trinidado
 of power to molest them) to
the end that releef & aid might be prepared for them,
according to their necessities, and oppression of their
enemies. Then I told them of the death of the late
Queene, whereby that businesse of theirs was againe
hindered.


Moreouer I declared vnto them, that our gracious
Soueraigne Lord King IAMES, who now raigneth
ouer v3, (being the onely right and lawfull heire, and
Successor, to the Crowne and dignity of the Realme
of 
England,
 after the death of the late Queene) was
throughout the whole land proclaimed King of 
Eng∣land;

and so comming to raigne ouer vs, hath been
euer since busied in ordering the State and affaires of
the Kingdome, which being (by his great wisdome)
setled in tranquillity and peace, like a good, gracious,
and worthy King, doth now permit his subiects to
trauell abroad into forraigne Countryes, and Nati∣ons
to aid and assist all such as are vniustly molested
by their enemies. Whereupon I, and the rest of these
worthy Gentlemen my associats and friends,
 hauing
intelligence by some that had been followers of Cap∣taine

Charles Lee,
 (who was a man well knowne a∣mongst
them, and heretofore had taken possession of
their Countrey to his Maiesties vse, and was planted


diuers yeares in 
Wiapoco,
 where he lyeth buried) of the
great variance and discord depending betweene them
the allyed nations, the 
Yaios, Arwaccas, Sappaios,
 & 
Para∣go
tos;

and their enemies the 
Charibes;
 (all inhabiting
betweene the riuers of 
Amazones,
 and 
Dessequebe)

haue made a long and dangerous voyage into those
parts, to appease their discentions, and defend them
against the Charibes, or other enemies that shall mo∣lest
or oppresse them: and now being there arriued,
do intend to make search in those Countries for con∣uenient
places, where such of our Nation as shall
hereafter come to defend them, may bee fitly seated
to dwell amongst them; that if any of those Nations
shall attempt at any time to disturb the quiet liuing of
their neighboures, they may haue store of English
friends at hand and amongst them, that will not spare
their paines to appease their discords, nor their liues
to defend them from harme.


When I had thus declared vnto them the cause of
my comming, they made this answere; that with our
comming they were well pleased; but our number
of men they thought too great, that they wanted
meanes to prouide vs bread sufficient for them all, ha∣uing
but a small Towne, few gardens, and slender pro∣uision
for their owne companies, because since Cap∣taine

Lee
 his death, and his mens departure from
them, they neuer made prouision for any strangers.


I replied, that albeit their towne was small, and
their gardens few, (for the grounds wherein they
plant their 
Cassaui,
 whereof they make their bread,
they call their gardens) yet their Countrey was full
of inhabitants, and had store of gardens to supplie


our wants of bread, and was plentifully stored with
other prouisions sufficient for a greater number,
which I desired might be weekely brought vnto vs, as
need required, for that I meant not to take it without
recompence, but would giue them for it such com∣modities
as should well please them, which they
wanted: as axes, hatchets, kniues, beades, looking∣glasses,
Iewes trumps, and such like things wherein
they most delight.


Then they desired to consult amongst themselues,

which I permitted, and expected their answere aboue
two howres, which time they spēt in debating the mat∣ter
after their maner, & drinking 
Aquauitae,
 and in the
end desired my presence, and made me this answere.


That they were contented and well pleased wee
should liue amongst them;
 that they would furnish
vs with houses to lodge in, and prouide all necessa∣ries
for vs in the best manner they could. But where∣as
I said our King would permit his people to liue &
abide amongst them, and defend them against their
enemies; they answered, it was a thing they greatly
desired, and had expected long, and now they made
much doubt thereof, and said they were but words,
hauing heretofore been
 promised the like, but no∣thing
performed. To resolue that doubt, and make
good my speeches, I told them that what I had spo∣ken
should certainely bee performed, and to that end
would leaue my brother in their countrey, and some
of my company with him, to dwell amongst them,
vntill a greater supplie might bee sent from England
for their better defence. Then they seemed to giue
credit to my words: And so after much talke, and


many complements to please the naked people, I
gaue to 
Carasana
 a sword, and to the rest some other
things, which pleased them well: and then after their
manner taking their leaue, they departed. The next
day the Indian 
Martyn
 went ashoare,
 and seemed
ioyfull that hee had againe recouered his owne
home.


The day following I tooke land, with my com∣panies
in armes and colours displayed, and went
vp vnto the towne,
 where I found all the women and
children standing at their doores to behold vs. The
principall Indians came out vnto me, and inuited me
into the Captaines house, which vntill the returne of

Martyn
 belonged vnto his brother,
 as chiefe Lord
in his absence: I went vp with them, and was friendly
feasted with many kinds of their Country cates; when
I had well eaten and refreshed my selfe,
 
Martyn
 tooke
mee by the hand and said, that hee had not any thing
wherewith to require my kindnesse towards him, in
such manner as hee desired; neither had hee such de∣licate
fare, and good lodging for vs, as in England
heretofore wee had been vsed vnto: but humbly in∣treated
mee to accept of his house in good part for
my selfe, and the Gentlemen of my company; and
the rest should bee lodged in other Indian houses ad∣ioyning:
and that such prouisions as the Country
yeelded, should bee prouided for vs. His speech was
approued by the rest of the Indians present, who
tooke mee by the hand one after another, and after
their manner bade mee welcome. I gaue them many
thanks, & some rewards for their kind entertainment;
and thē disposed my company in conueniēt lodgings:


but yet I kept a continual guard, as in time of warre.


When I had thus setled my company at this vil∣lage,

I went out to view the scituation of the place,
 and
the aduantages for defence thereof. It is a great rockie
Mountaine, not accessable by reason of fast woods, and
steepe rockes, but only in certaine places, which are
narrow foote-paths, very steepe and easie to bee de∣fended:
whereby wee were lodged as in a Fort, and
most conueniently in respect the harbour was so neer,
for our shippes did ride at anchor vnderneath vs, ouer
against the foote of the hill.


Being thus ariued vpon the Coast, I found the time
of the yeare so vnseasonable for our purpose, that (by
reason of continuall raines) wee were constrained to
lie still and doe nothing for the space of three weekes,
or a moneth; in which idle time I conferred with the
Indians, so metime with one, sometime with another;
and by helpe of my Indian 
Anthony Canahre,
 and the
Indian 
Iohn
 aboue mentioned (whom I vsed for my
interpreters) I gathered from them as well as I could,
the State of their Country; the manner of their go∣uernement
and liuing; how they stood with their
neighbours in tearmes of peace, and warre; and of
what power and strength they were. I inquired also
of the seasons of the yeare in those parts: of their di∣uision,
and account of times, and numbers; of the
prouisions of their Country for victuals, and other
necessaries; and made a diligent inquiry of all the
commodities their Country yeeldeth, & what things
were of most estimation amongst them; all which I
haue briefely declared vnto your Highnesse in this
following discourse.



This goodly Country, and spacious Empire, is on
the North part bounded with the Sea,
 and the great
Riuer of 
Orenoque,
 wherein S
r
. 
Walter Raleigh
 perfor∣med
his worthy and memorable discouery: on the
East and South parts, with the famous Riuer of 
Ama∣zones;

and on the West part with the Mountaines of

Peru.


The westermost branch of the Riuer of 
Amazones

that falleth into the Sea;
 is called 
Arrapoco;
 vpō which
riuer are seated many goodly Signiories wel deseruing
a particular discouery, which shall (by Gods permi∣ssion)
bee performed hereafter. To the North of 
Ar∣rapoco

is the riuer of 
Arrawary,
 which is a goodly riuer,
discouering a gallant Country. From 
Arrawary
 vnto
the riuer of 
Cassipurogh
 extendeth the Prouince of 
Ar∣ricary;

containing the Signiories of 
Arrawary, Mai∣cary,

and 
Cooshebery;
 of which 
Anakyury
 is principall,
who by Nation is a 
Yaio,
 and fled from the borders of

Orenoque
 for feare of the Spaniards, to whom hee is a
mortall enemy. Hee hath seated himselfe in the Pro∣uince
of 
Arricary,
 and now dwelleth at 
Morooga
 in the
Signiory of 
Maicari.
 To the N. Norwest of which, there
falleth into the Sea a riuer called 
Conawini,
 wherevpon
the Signiory of 
Cooshebery
 bordereth;
 whereof an In∣dian
named 
Leonard Ragapo
 is Chiefe,
 vnder the subie∣ction
of 
Anaki-v-ry.
 This Indian is christened, and hath
been heretofore in England with S
r
. 
Walter Raleigh,

to whom hee beareth great affection; hee can a little
vnderstand and speake our language, and loueth our
Nation with all his heart. During my aboad at 
Wia∣poco,

hauing intelligence of him, and of his Country,
and that certaine stones were found therein, suppo∣sed


to bee Diamonds: I sent my Cozen Captaine

Fisher
 to discouer the same, and to fetch some of those
stones, to bee resolued of the truth.


At his comming thither, 
Leonard
 entertained him
with all kindnesse, not after the ordinary rude man∣ner
of the Indians, but in more ciuill fashion, and with
much respect and loue, hee furnished him with guides
to conduct him through the Country to the place
where the Stones were found, being fifty miles
Southward vp into the Land: beyond which place
there is an high Mountaine appearing in sight, called

Cowob,
 and on the top thereof (as the Indians report)
a great Lake or Poole,
 full of excellent fish of diuers
kindes. The Country was as pleasant and delight∣full,
as euer any man beheld; but the Stones not 
Di∣amonds:

yet they were 
Topases,
 which being well cut,
and set in Gold by a cunning workman,
 doe make as
faire a shew, and giue as good a lustre as any 
Diamond

whatsoeuer: which yeeld good hopes of better to be
found hereafter: For where the 
Topas
 is found on the
Mountaines of 
Tenaseren,
 in the East Indies, the grea∣test
store of 
Diamonds
 are also found.


When my kinsman returned, Captaine 
Leonard

came with him to 
Wiapoco,
 (being aboue an hundred
miles from his owne Country) only to visite mee and
my company; for the great loue hee did beare to S
r
.

Walter Raleigh,
 and our Nation. I much maruelled to
see him, for assuredly hee is the brauest Indian of all
those parts.


After hee had been with mee a day or two, hee ear∣nestly
requested mee to send some of my company
into his Countrey, which hee greatly commended for


the wholsome ayre, and plenty of victuals, alleaging
that the place where then wee liued (by his owne ex∣perience)
was very vnhealthfull; that our men would
there bee subiect to sicknesse, and die: and for an in∣stance
hee named Captaine 
Lee,
 and his company,
who formerly were planted there, and almost all dy∣ed
by sicknesse in the same place: But hee assured me
that his owne Country 
Cooshebery
 was of a good ayre,
pleasant, and healthfull; that there they might haue
roome sufficient to build English houses in, (for those
were the words hee vsed) that thither they should be
welcome and should want nothing. Much hee per∣swaded
to draw mee to his desire, which by his im∣portunity
I granted, and accordingly performed it;
finding his Country answerable to his report; being
for the most part champian ground,
 naturally in∣termixt
of plaine fields, fruitfull meadowes, and good∣lywoods,
in such admirable order, as if they had been
planted artificially by handy labour. The fields ap∣pearing
aboue the meadowes in pleasant and delight∣full
manner, presenting here and there vnto the eye,
from stately Mounts, most beautifull and liuely pro∣spects:
the meadowes bordering on euery side be∣tweene
the fields and woods, the woods growing in
the lowest valleyes betwixt the meadowes, and com∣monly
are watered with sweete and pleasant fresh
stremes running through them: which strange & rare
mixture of Mounts, valleies, meadowes, fields, and
woods, afford as excellent and healthfull habitations
as can bee wished or desired, but is not greatly peo∣pled.


From the riuer of 
Cassipurogh
 N. Westward to the


riuer of 
Arracow,
 and vp further into the land to∣wards
the West, and Southwest, as farre as the riuer of

Arwy,
 (which falleth into 
Wiapoco
 aboue the ouerfalles)
extend the Prouinces of 
Arracoory,
 and 
Morownia,

which also to the landward (by the relation of my
Brother Captaine 
Michael Harcourt,
 and Captaine

Haruey,
 who haue trauelled and discouered those
parts) are pleasant and delightfull plaine Countries,
like vnto 
Cooshebery.
 The 
Arracoory
 Countrey is well
peopled, and their chiefe Captaine is called 
Ipero.
 Be∣twixt
the 
Wiapocoories and Arracoories
 there is no hear∣ty
loue and friendship, yet in outward shew they hold
good quarter. In 
Morrownia,
 there is also store of
people, which are friendly Indians. In that Prouince
there is a very high Hill called 
Callipuny,
 fashioned
like a Sugerloafe, or a 
Pyramides,
 which ouervieweth
and discouereth all the Territories adioyning aboue
an hundred miles.


Beyond the Country of 
Morrownia
 to the South∣ward
bordering the riuer of 
Arwy,
 is the Prouince of

Norrak;
 the people thereof are Charibes, and ene∣mies
both to the 
Morrowinnes
 the inhabitants of 
Mor∣rownia,

and to the 
Wiapocoories;
 who are also vnder
the subiection of 
Anaky-v-ry,
 the Principall and grea∣test
Lord, or 
Cassique
 of all the 
Yaios
 in those Prouin∣ces,
bordering vpon the Sea betwixt the 
Amazones,

South-eastward, and 
Dessequcbe
 North-westward.


From the riuer of 
Amazones
 to the Bay of 
Wiapoco;

there fall into the Sea these riuers following:
 
Arrapo∣co

(a branch of 
Amazones) Arrawary, Micary, Conawi∣ni,

and 
Cassipurogh:
 In the Bay of 
Wiapoco
 to the East
of the said riuer, there falleth into the Sea the riuer of



Arracow;
 and into 
Arracow
 falleth the riuer of 
Watts.

To the North of 
Wiapoco
 there is a smal creeke called

Wianary,
 which letteth in the Sea a daies iorney West∣ward
vp into the land: some take this creeke to bee a
riuer, but they doe erre in that opinion, it hauing nei∣ther
spring nor fountaine from whence it falleth. To
the North, and N. west of the said creeke, there is a
ridge of high Mountains running towards the riuer of

Apurwaca,
 the soile whereof is excellent & fertile for
Tobacco, and beareth the best of all those parts; so are
the Sugar-canes there growing the best and fairest
that are found vpon the Coast: and all the tract of
Land betwixt the riuers of 
Wiapoco,
 and 
Apurwaca,
 is
accounted the Prouince of 
Wiapocoory,
 containing the
Signiories of 
Wiapoco,
 and 
Wianary.
 Beneath the o∣uerfalles
in 
Wiapoco,
 (which are forty miles distant
from the Sea) there is much people, both of 
Yaios,
 and

Arwaccas:
 of the 
Yaios
 in this riuer 
Carasana
 is chiefe.
Of the 
Arwaccas,
 
Arriquona
 is Principall. In 
Wianary

there are few Indians,
 and 
Casurino
 is their chiefe∣taine.


To the N. west of the Bay of 
Wiapoco,
 there fall in∣to
the Sea the riuers of 
Apurwaca, Cowo, Wio, and Cai∣ane.


Apurwaca
 is a goodly riuer, and well inhabited;

Cowo
 is void of inhabitants; 
Wio
 is a faire riuer and
leadeth many daies iourney into the high land, and
discouereth a firtile and hopefull Countrey. At 
Cai∣ane

there is an excellent harbour for shipping of any
burden, which heretofore by Captaine 
Lawrence Key∣mis

was called 
Port Howard:
 On the Starboord side
as you enter this harbour there is an Iland of low land
called 
Muccumbro,
 scituate betwixt the riuers of 
Cai∣ane



and 
Meccoria,
 containing in circuit about six∣teene
leagues. In this Island there are two Hils, the
one called 
Muccumbro,
 whereof the Island taketh the
name; the other called 
Cillicedemo:
 from these Hils the
greatest part of the Island may bee ouerviewed, which
containeth many goodly pastures, and meadowes in∣termixt
with some woods, and is full of Deere, both
red and fallow.


On the Larboord side, as you enter 
Caiane
 there is
another Island of high Land, called 
Mattoory
 in
quantity much like vnto the first;
 this Island for the
commodious scituation, is of great effect for the de∣fence
of the harbour, affording naturally two such
notable conuenient places for the planting of Ordi∣nance
for that purpose, as no industry of art could de∣uise
better, or more auailable.


The inhabitants of this Prouince of 
Caiane,
 are 
Cha∣ribes,

their principall commander is called 
Arrawica∣ry,

who dwelleth at 
Cillicedemo
 before mentioned: we
haue found him trusty and faithfull to our Nation;
but to our friend 
Leoanard
 of 
Cooshebery,
 hee is a mor∣tall
enemie. At this mans house I left foure or fiue
of my company, thereby to hold amity and friend∣shippe
with the Charibes, to learne their language,
and to keepe peace betweene them and the 
Yaios, Ar∣waccas,

and other nations their allies.


To the South-westward of these Prouinces aboue
mentioned towards the high land, there bee many o∣thers
which hereafter shall bee more exactly discribed
by a second discouery.


These Prouinces and Signiories to the Landward
are not plentifully inhabited; the greatest numbers of


people, are seated neere vnto the riuers, and trauell
from place to place in 
Canoes.
 There is no setled go∣uernement
amongst them, onely they acknowledge a
superiority, which they will obay as far as they please.
In euery Prouince or Signiory there is a Chiefe Cas∣sique,
or Captaine, commanding all: So likewise in eue∣rie
Towne and Village,
 they commonly chastice mur∣der
and adultery by death, which onely are the offen∣ces
punished amongst them, and certaine persons are
appointed by them to execute those punishments.
The Indians take wiues ouer whom they are extream∣ly
iealous,
 and expect great continencie in them; for if
they take them in adultery, they presently cause their
braines to be beaten out. The better sort of persons
haue euery one of them two or three wiues,
 or more,
the rest but one; accounting him that hath most wiues,
the greatest man. Their wiues (especially the elder sort)
are as seruants vnto them, for they make their bread
and drinke, dresse their meate, serue them at meales,
and doe all the other businesse about the house.


These Prouinces are peopled with diuers Nations
of seuerall languages,
 namely, 
Yaios, Arwaccas, Sappaios,
Paragotos,
 and 
Charibes.
 The 
Charibes
 are the ancient
inhabitants, and the other Nations are such as haue
beene chased away from 
Trinidado,
 and the borders of

Orenoque.
 And forasmuch as they haue vnited them∣selues
in those parts, the 
Charibes
 haue held them in
continuall warres, but the 
Yaios
 and the other Nations
their Allyes, are growne so strong, that they haue con∣strained
the 
Charibes
 of the Sea cost to contract a peace
with them, yet beare no hearty loue the one Nation to
the other: But with the 
Charibes
 inhabiting the in-land


parts vpon the Mountaines, they haue as yet no peace
at all; for they doe often times come downe vpon
them in great numbers,
 spoile and burne their houses,
kill their men, and carry away their weomen, which is
the greatest cause of warre and hatred amongst them:
whereof our men haue seene experience in 
Cooshebery;

where happened an accident worth the obseruing,
which I will here declare vnto your Highnesse. The
Indian 
Leonard Ragapo,
 before mentioned, is a 
Yaio,

who finding the Country of 
Cooshebery
 slenderly inha∣bited,
hath seazed vpon it for his owne Siguiorie; and
at his earnest request, I sent foure Gentlemen of my
company to remaine there with him. The naturall
inhabitants that dwell vpon the vttermost bounds
thereof, towards the South, and West, are 
Charibes,
 and
enemies to him, and to his Nation: for while our men
(vnknowne to the 
Charibes)
 staied at 
Cooshebery,
 they
assembled themselues together to the number of 200.
or more, and came downe into his Signiorie, burned
and spoiled houses, roasted one woman, tooke many
prisoners, & intended to assault him also: which to pre∣uent
he armed about 50. of his Indians,
 with their vsu∣all
weapons; which are Bowes and Arrowes, long
staues sharpened at the point, and with fire hardened:
wooden Swords and Targets very artificially made of
wood,
 and painted with Beasts, and Birds; He reque∣sted
also our men to aide and assist him with their mus∣kets,
which I commanded them to doe, vpon all such
occasions offered: And so being all in readinesse, 
Leo∣nard

(as their captaine) led them on to intercept his
enemies; and as I haue heard by M
r
. 
Henry Baldwin,

(who then was present, and (to obserue the manner


of their warres) gaue him leaue to command all) hee
brauely performed that exploit, in good order after
their manner, and with great iudgement and resoluti∣on.
For in the Front, he first placed our foure English∣men,

by two in a rancke; next to them, two Indians
armed with woodden Swords and Targets; then
two archers; and after them two men with sharpned
staues, insteed of pikes: and in like manner ordered,
and ranked all his Company. Being thus prepared, he
marched against the Charibs, who (neer at hand) were
comming in the same order towards him; but when
they approched, & (vnexpected) perceued our English
men amongst the 
Yaios,
 they were much amazed, and
made a sudden stand:
 which 
Leonard
 perceiuing,
guessed rightly at the cause, and instantly did make
good vse of that aduantage. Hee commanded his
owne company to keepe their Station, himselfe with
a sword in his hand (which I had giuen him) and a
Target of his owne fashion, went boldly towards
them to parley with their Captaines. And hauing
called them out,
 hee reproued them for comming
(as enemies) into his Signiory, for burning and spoi∣ling
his houses, and his people; hee demaunded sa∣tisfaction
for the hurt done, and restitution of the pri∣soners
taken; and warned them forthwith to depart
out of his Signiory, and desist from warre: which if
they refused to fulfill, hee was there ready with his
friends the Englishmen to fight with them, and
reuenge his wrongs: and said further, that if in the
conflict any of the English men were slaine, or hurt;
hee would then fetch all the rest from 
Wiapoco,
 and re∣turne
to burne their houses, and cut them all in pee∣ces.


Thus he boldly spake, with such a courage, shew∣ing
also our men vnto them,
 (who had their match in
cocke ready to discharge) that he strooke such a feare
into them all, by reason of our mens presence, that
they presently agreed to peace, performed what con∣ditions
he required, and then departed home with all
their company. Here may your Highnesse note, the
factions among the Indian Nations; the discipline and
order they hold in war, the feare the 
Charibes
 concei∣ued
at the sight of our Englishmen, and the policy of
the Indian 
Leonard
 to take aduantage by their feare,
and make our men his Guard, and chiefe protection
against them. These things in time will much auaile
vs, being well obserued, and rightly applied according
to occasion. But to our former discourse.


The power and strength of these Countries (be∣ing
so thinly peopled,) is not very great to withstand
the might of forraine enemies; the vsuall weapons of
the Indians, are before described, sauing that their ar∣rowes
are oft-times poisoned. But since our trade and
commerce with them, they haue gotten a few good
swords, muskets, caliuers, and some small quantity of
shot and powder; and haue learned to handle their
peeces very orderly, and some of them are good
shot.


The seasons of the yeere vpon this coast,
 and in this
climate are diuers, for in the East parts of 
Guiana
 to∣wards
the 
Amazones,
 the dry weather, which we call
their Summer,
 beginneth in August; and the violent
raines and tempestuous winds, which we count their
winter, doe begin in February: But in the Westerne
parts,
 towards 
Orenoque,
 the dry season beginneth in


October, and the raines and windes in Aprill. There
is little difference of heate and cold in this diuersity of
seasons beeing so neere the 
Equinoctiall,
 where the
day and night are alwaies equall, the sunne euer rising
and seting at six of the clocke or neere thereabout:
which climat by the ancient Philosophers (in respect
of the neerenes of the Sunne, which causeth excessiue
drowth and heate) was accounted the vnhabitable
and burning 
Zone:
 but our dayly experience doth
assure vs of their certaine mistaking in that point: for
in those parts wee finde, that when the Sunne decli∣neth
furthest from them towards the 
Tropicke
 of 
Ca∣pricorne,

the ayre is then cleerest, and the season of the
yeare most dry; as in the Easterne parts of 
Guiana
 in
August, September, October, Nouember and De∣cember:
and when the Sunne returneth towards the

Tropicke
 of 
Cancer,
 then doe the raines begin, increase,
and decrease, from February to Iuly: but some∣times
they begin to fall, and the riuers to rise, swell,
and ouerflow sooner or later by a moneth; and the
yeare is sometimes more or lesse windie and wet,
according to the disposition of the heauens, and of
the Planets: and as the Sunne approcheth, or decli∣neth
little, or much, euen so the earth wanteth or a∣boundeth with water and moisture.


The reasons of these strange diuersities from other
regions without the 
Tropickes,
 are very excellently
declared by 
Ioseph Acosta
 in the second book of his na∣tural
& morall history of the Indies,
 to which Author
I refer you for your better satisfaction therein: but
withall I must aduertise you, that when you reade
his first and second bookes, you haue regard to the


place where they were writtē, which was in 
Peru,
 repu∣ted
by vs to be beyond the Equinoctiall, towards the
South, or Pole 
Antarticke,
 lest you erre by mista∣king
his meaning: for in those two bookes, when hee
mentioneth any place beyond the Equinoctiall, hee
meaneth towards the North, or Pole 
Articke.
 And
also you must note that this generall rule for the hea∣uens
temprature, is only limited to the Region of the
burning 
Zone,
 within the 
Tropickes.


They haue no diuision or account of times or
numbers;
 they onely reckon by the Moones, as one,
two, three, foure, or fiue Moones: or by daies in like
manner. Their numbers they reckon thus, one,
two, three, and so to tenne: then they say tenne and
one, ten and two, tenne and three, &c. And to shew
their meaning more certainely, they will hold vp one,
two, three, or more of their fingers, expressing the
numbers, still making signes as they speake, the bet∣ter
to declare their meaning: when they will reckon
twenty, they will hold downe both their hands to
their feete, shewing all their fingers and toes, and as
the number is greater, so will they double the signe.
When they appoint or promise any thing to bee done
by a time limited, they will deliuer a little bundle of
sticks equall to the number of daies, or Moones, that
they appoint, and will themselues keepe another bun∣dle
of the like number: and to obserue their appoin∣ted
time, they will euery day, or Moone take away a
sticke, and when they haue taken away all, then they
know that the time of their appointment is come, and
will accordingly performe their promise.


As touching Religion, they haue none amongst


them,
 that I could perceiue, more then a certaine
obseruance of the Sunne and Moone, supposing them
to bee aliue, but vse no religious worshippe towards
them, nor offer sacrifice to any thing: vnlesse they vse
a superstition in their drinking feasts, by sacrificing
Iarres of drinke: for at the death of any of their 
Cas∣siques,

Captaines,
 or great friends whom they esteeme,
they will make a solemne feast, (their chiefest prouisi∣on
being of their best and strongest drinke, which they
call 
Parranow)
 which feast shall continue three or
foure daies, or as long as their liquor lasteth, spending
their time in dancing, singing, and drinking excessiue∣ly:
in which vice they exceede all other nations what∣soeuer,
accounting him that will bee drunke first, the
brauest fellow; during this solemnity of their drin∣king,
some woman being neerest of kin vnto the party
dead, doth stand by and cry extreamely; thus their
manner is vntill their drinke bee spent, and then the
feast is ended. Whether they vse any superstition in
this custome I know not; time will reueale, and also
reforme it.
 It is most certaine that their 
Peeaios,
 (as
they call them) Priests, or Southsayers, at some spe∣ciall
times haue conference with the diuell, (the com∣mon
deceiuer of mankinde) whom they call 
Wattipa,

and are by him deluded; yet notwithstanding their
often conference with him, they feare, and hate
him much, and say that hee is nought: and not with∣out
great reason, for hee will often times (to their
great terror) beate them blacke and blew.
 They be∣leeue
that the good Indians when they die, goe vp,
and will point towards the heauens, which they call

Caupo;
 and that the bad Indians goe downe, poin∣ting


to the earth,
 which they call 
Soy.
 when any 
Cas∣sique,

Captaine, or chiefe man dieth amongst them,
if hee haue a slaue or prisoner taken from their ene∣mies,
they will kill him; and if he haue none such,
then wil they kill one of his other seruants, that hee
may haue one to attend him in the other world.


The quallity of the land in those Countries,
is of diuers kindes, by the Sea side the land is
low, where the heate would bee most vehement, if it
were not quallified and tempered by a fresh Easterly
winde or Brieze, most forcibly blowing in the heate of
the day: in many places this low land is very vn∣healthfull,
and little inhabited, by reason of the ouer∣flowing
of the waters: but for the most part it hath
goodly nauigable riuers, a fertile soile, much people,
and is a healthfull habitation. Vpon the Mountaines
there is a high land, where the ayre is coldest, in some
places it is fruitfull, in others not: but generally is
full of Mineralls, and mines of mettals, and yeel∣deth
as many as any part eyther of the East, or West
Indies, both of the best, and of the basest whereof
we shall (by Gods permission) giue good testimony,
to the benefit of our Countrey, and honour of our
Nation in time conuenient: and in most places vpon
the Mountaines there is sound and healthfull dwel∣ling.
There is also a middle sort of land, which is of a
meane height, and is most temperate, healthfull, firtile,
and most inhabited of all other; it aboundeth in mea∣dowes,
pastures, and pleasant streames of fresh water,
in goodly woods, and most delightfull plaines, for
profit, pleasure, sport, and recreation: and also is not
void of Minerals.



The prouisions of this countrey for victuals,
 are
many; First of the roote of a tree called 
Cassaui,
 they
make their bread,
 in manner following; they grate
the roote vpon a stone, and presse out the iuice there∣of,
which being rawe is poyson, but boyled with 
Gui∣nea

pepper, whereof they haue abundance, it maketh
an excellent and wholsome sawce, then they drie the
grated roote, and bake it vpon a stone, as wee bake our
Oaten cakes in England. This bread is very excellent,
much like, but far better then our great Oaten cakes,
a finger thicke, which are vsed in the Moorlands, and
the 
eake
 in Staffordshire and Darbyshire.


There is a kinde of great wheat called 
Maix,
 of
some it is called 
Guinea
 wheat, which graine is a sin∣gular
prouision in those Countries, and yeeldeth ad∣mirable
increase, euen a thousand or fifteene hun∣dred
for one, and many times much more: It maketh
excellent meale, or flower for bread; and very good
malte for beere or ale, and serueth well for sundry o∣ther
necessary vses for the reliefe of man.
 Of the a∣foresaid

Cassaui
 bread, and this wheat the Indians
make drink, which they call 
Passiaw:
 it will not keep
long, but must bee spent within foure or fiue daies:
they make another kinde of drinke of 
Cassaui,
 called

Parranow,
 very good and strong, much like vnto our
best March beere in England, and that kinde of drinke
will keepe ten daies; many sorts they haue which I
haue tasted, some strong, some small, some thicke, some
thinne, but all good, being well made, as commonly
they were amongst the 
Yaios,
 and 
Arwaccas,
 which are
the cleanliest people of all those Nations.


There is great store of hony in the Country,
 and al∣though


it bee wilde (being taken out of trees, and bu∣ries
in the earth) yet is it as good as any in the world;
of which may be made an excellent drinke much vsed
in Wales, called meath. The hony and the waxe, are
also good commodities for marchandise.


There be no Vines in that country,
 but the Soyle
being rich and ferlile, and the climate hot, if they
were planted there, they would prosper excce∣dingly,
and yeeld good Sackes, and Canary wines,
which in those parts we finde to be very wholesome.


Many other necessary prouisions sufficient for the
sustenance of man,
 do there abound in plenty: Name∣ly,
Deere of all sorts, wilde Swine in great numbers,
whereof there are two kinds, the one small, by the In∣dians
called 
Pockiero,
 which hath the nauile in the
backe; the other is called 
Paingo,
 and is as faire and
large as any we haue in England. There be store of
Hares, and Conies, but of a kinde farre differing from
ours: There be Tigers, Leopards, Ounces, Armadils,
Maipuries which are in taste like beefe, and will take
salt: Baremoes or Ant-Beares, which taste like Mutton,
and other small beasts of the same taste, coloured like
a fawne, Elks, Monkies, and Marmosites of diuers
sorts, both great and small: of these beasts there be in∣numerable,
and by experience wee haue found them
all good meate. Many other kinds of beasts there are
of sundrie and strange shapes, which heereafter shall
bee figured in their true proportion according to the
life with their names annexed.


Of Fowles there be diuers kinds;
 namely, Wild∣ducks,
Widgins, Teates, Wild-geese, Herons of di∣uers
colours, Cranes, Storks, Pheasants, Partriges,


Doues, Stock-doues, Black-birds, Curlewes, God-wits,
Wood-cockes, Snits, Parrats of sundry sorts,
many other kinds of great and small birds of rare co∣lours;
besides great rauenous fowles; and Hawkes
of euery kinde.


Of Fish the variety is great,
 first of Sea-fish, there
is Sea-breame, Mullet, Soale, Scate, Thorneback, the
Sword-fish, Sturgion, Seale, a fish like vnto a Salmon,
but as the Salmon is red, this is yellow; Shrimps,
Lobstars,
 and Oysters which hang vpon the branches
of trees: There is a rare fish called Cassoorwa, which
hath in each eye two sights,
 and as it swimmeth it
beareth the lower sights within the water, and the o∣ther
aboue: the ribbes and backe of this fish resem∣ble
those parts of a man, hauing the ribbes round and
the backe flat, with a dent therein, as a man hath; it is
somewhat bigger then a Smelt, but farre exceeding it
for dainty meate; and many other sorts there be most
excellent. Of fresh-water fish many kinds vnknowen
in these parts, but all exceeding good and dainty: And
I dare be bold to say, that this Country may compare
with any other of the world, for the great variety of
excellent fish both of the Sea, and fresh waters. There
is also a Sea-fish which vsually commeth into the fresh
waters, especially in the winter and wet season; it is of
great esteem amongst vs, and we account it halfe flesh,
for the bloud of it is warme; it commeth vp into the
shallow waters in the drowned lands, and feedeth vp∣on
grasse and weeds:
 the Indians name it 
Coiumero,

and the Spaniards 
Manati,
 but we call it the Sea∣cow;
in taste it is like beefe, will take salt, and serue to
victuall ships, as in our knowledge hath beene proued


by our Countrimen: Of this fish may be made an ex∣cellent
oyle for many purposes; the fat of it is good
to frie either fish or flesh; the hide (as I haue heard)
will make good buffe: and being dried in the Sunne,
and kept from wet, will serue for Targets and Ar∣mours
against the Indian arrowes: In the wet sea∣son
the store of them are infinite; some of these hides
were heretofore brought into England, by S
r
. 
Walter
Rawleigh.


The seuerall kindes of fruits are many,
 the Pina,
Platana, Potato, Medler, Plummes of diuers sorts,

 Nuts of strange kindes. The excellency of the
Pina I cannot expresse,
 for I dare boldly affirme that
the world affordeth not a more delicate fruit: In taste
it is like Strawberries, Claret wine and Suger. The
Platana is also a very good fruite,
 and tasteth like an
old Pippin.
 The Potato is well knowen. The Med∣ler
exceedeth in greatnesse.
 The Plummes I cannot
commend,
 for to eate much of them doth cause Flux∣es,
which in those Countries are daungerous. The
Nuts are good being moderately eaten. Hauing thus
(most excellent Prince) declared the seuerall sorts of
prouisions for victuals and necessary foods,
 it remai∣neth
that I now make mention of the variety of com∣modities
found in the Country for the trade of Mar∣chandise,
which in few yeeres, by our paines and in∣dustry,
may be brought to perfection, and so setled in
those parts, that not only the vndertakers may receiue
reward for their indeuours, but our country also may
grow rich, by trading for the fruits of our labours.


The first and principall commodity of estimation,
are the Suger-canes,
 whereof in those parts there is


great plenty;
 the soile is as firtile for them as in any
other part of the world: They doe there grow to
great bignesse in a short time; by orderly and fit plan∣ting
of them, and by erecting conuenient workes for
the boyling and making of Sugers, (which at the first
will require som charge & expence) may be yeerely re∣turned
great benefit and wealth: the long experience
of the Portugals, and Spaniards, in 
Brasill,
 and the
Island of the Canaries; and of the Moores in 
Barbary,

may giue vs certaine assurance, and full satisfaction
thereof.


The Cotton wooll is a generall commodity, benefi∣ciall
to our Marchants,
 and profitable to our Coun∣trey,
by making of sustians, and seruing for bumbast,
and other vses: for making of 
Hamaccas,
 which are
the Indian beds most necessary in those parts, and also
of a fine cotten cloath for cloathing of the people.
There is a naturall Hemp or Flaxe of great vse,
 almost
as fine as silke as it may bee vsed; wee haue now found
out the best vse of it; and for making of linnen cloath
it is most excellent.


There bee many rare and singular commodities for
Diers,
 of which sort there is a red Berry called 
Annoto,

which being rightly prepared by the Indians, dyeth a
perfect and sure Orange tawny in silke;
 it hath been
sold in 
Holland
 for twelue shillings starling the pound,
and is yet of a good price. There is another berry
that dyeth blew. There is also a gumme of a
tree,
 whereof I haue seene experience, that in cloath
dyeth a sure and perfect yellow in graine. There bee
leaues of certaine trees, which beeing rightly pre∣pared,
doe dye a deepe red. There is also a wood


which dieth apurple, and is of a good price; and
another that dieth yellow. There is yet another
wood which dieth a purple when the liquor is hot,
and a crimson when the liquor is cold. Many other
notable things there are (no doubt) not yet knowne
vnto vs, which by our diligent labour and obseruati∣on
in time will be discouered and found.


The sweet gummes of inestimable value & strange
operation in Phisick & Chirurgery,
 are innumerable;
there is yellow Amber, Gumma, Lemnia, Colliman,
or Carriman, Barratta, and many more which I o∣mit.
The Colliman hath been proued by M
r
. 
Walter
Cary
 of 
Wickham
 in Buckingham-shire, (a Gentleman
of great iudgement and practise in Phisicke) to bee of
speciall regard for many purposes:
 this gumme is
black and brittle, much like in shew to common pitch;
if you put a little of it vpon burning coles, it filleth all
the roome with a most sweete and pleasant sauour.
He further reporteth of it, that certainely if you hold
your head ouer the fume thereof three, or foure
times a day, it cureth the giddinesse of the head, and is
also a most excellent comfort and remedy for a
cold, moist, and rheumaticke braine: it is olso good a∣gainst
the resolution (or as the common sort call it) the
dead Palsie, whereof the giddines of the head is often
a messenger, and the fore-teller of that most perniti∣ous
griefe. It is also of great vse for the paine that
many woomen haue in the lower part of their backes:
which is very common to such as haue had children:
for remedy whereof, it is to bee melted in a pewter
vessell with a gentle fire, then with a knife it must bee
spread lightly vpon a peece of leather, and laid warme


to the place grieued, vntill it come of it selfe. This
Plaister is also very good for aches, and doth greatly
comfort and strengthen the sinewes. Thus much
hath M
r
. 
Cary
 written and reported of it, and hath
proued by his owne experience.
 This Gumme is al∣so
approued to bee an excellent remedy against the
Goute; and of singular vertue in the cure of wounds.


The Barratta is a most soueraigne Balsamum farre
excelling all others yet knowen:
 which by the same
Gentlemans experience is of admirable operation in
the cure of greene wounds: and being burned vpon
coales, is of a sweete and odoriferous sauour.


There be many other sweet Gummes of great vse
for Perfumes;
 whereof one doth make a very rare
perfume, much like vnto the sent of sweet Marge∣rome,
very pleasant and delectable.


For phisick there be also many excellent Druggs;

namely, Spiknard, Cassia, Fistula, Sene; and the
earth yeeldeth Bole-Armoniacke, and Terra-Lem∣nia,
all which are knowen vnto vs. There bee other
Druggs and simples also of strange and rare vertue, in
these parts vnknowen; of which sort there is a little
greene Apple,
 by the Indians called in their language
the sleeping Apple; which in operation is so violent,
that one little bit thereof doth cause a man to sleep to
death: the least drop of the iuice of it, will purge in
vehement and excessiue manner, as dangerously was
proued by my Cosen 
Vnton Fisher,
 who first found it:
for biting a little of it for a taste, and finding it to
burne his mouth in some extremity, did sodainely
spit it out againe, but some small quantity of the iuice
(against his will) went downe into his stomack, which


for two or three daies space did prouoke in him an ex∣traordinary
sleepinesse, and purged him with 60.
seates. This Apple, for the purging vertue in so small
a quantity, is like to be of good price, and great esti∣mation
in the Practise of Physicke; for the learned
Physicions do well know how to correct the sleeping
quality thereof wherein the danger resteth. There is
a Berry in those parts very excellent against the bloo∣dy-fluxe,

by the Indians it is called 
Kellette.
 The
iuice of the leafe called 
vppee,
 cureth the wounds of
the poisoned arrowes. The iuice of the leafe called

Icari,
 is good against the head-ache. Many other
Druggs and simples are there found of singular pro∣perties
both in Physicke and Chirurgery,
 which if
they should be seuerally described according to their
valew and vvorthinesse, would containe a large vo∣lume.


Moreouer the Tree wherewith they take their fish,

is not a little to be esteemed, but chiefely the great
goodnesse of God therein is highly to be praised and
admired, who amongst so many admirable things by
him created, and planted in those parts, hath vouch∣safed
to bestow vpon those barbarous people so great
a benefit, and naturall helpe, for the present getting
of their foode and sustenance. These Trees are com∣monly
growing neere vnto the places of their habita∣tion
for their present vse: for when, at any time, they
goe to fish, they take three or fowre little sticks of this
tree, and bruise them vpon a stone, and then go into
certaine small creekes by the Sea shore, which at a
high water are vsually full of very good fish of diuers
kinds, which come in with the tide; and there they


wade vp and downe the water, and betweene their
hands rub those smal bruised sticks therein, which are
of such vertue, that they will cause the fish to turne vp
their bellies, and lie still aboue the water for a certaine
time: In which space they presently take as many as
they please, and lade them into their 
Canoes,
 and so
with little labour returne home sufficiently prouided.


There is also a red speckled wood in that Coun∣try,
called 
Pira timinere,
 which is worth 30 or 40.
pounds a tunne: It is excellent for Ioyners worke; as
Chaires, Stooles, Bed-steds, Presses, Cupboords, and
for Wainscot. There are diuers kinds of Stone of
great vse, and good price, as Iasper, Purphery, and
the Spleene-stone.


There is yet another profitable commodity to be
reaped in 
Guiana,
 and that is by Tobacco, which albe∣it
some dislike, yet the generality of men in this king∣dome
doth with great affection entertaine it. It is
not only in request in this our Country of 
England

but also in 
Ireland,
 the 
Neatherlands,
 in all the Easter∣ly
Countries, and 
Germany;
 and most of all amongst
the Turks, and in 
Barbary.
 The price it holdeth is
great, the benefit our Merchants gaine thereby is in∣finite,
and the Kings rent for the custome thereof is
not a little. The Tobacco that was brought into this
kingdome in the yeare of our Lord 1610. was at the
least worth 60. thousand pounds: And since that time
the store that yeerly hath come in, was little lesse. It is
planted, gathered, seasoned, and made vp fit for the
Merchant in short time, and with easie labour. But
when we first arriued in those parts, wee altogether
wanted the true skill and knowledge how to order it,


which now of late wee happily haue learned of the
Spaniards themselues, whereby I dare presume to
say, and hope to proue, within few moneths, (as o∣thers
also of sound iudgement, and great experience
doe hold opinion) that onely this commodity To∣bacco,
(so much sought after, and desired) will bring
as great a benefit and profit to the vndertakers, as euer
the Spaniards gained by the best and richest Siluer
myne in all their Indies, considering the charge of
both.


The things which the Indians desire from vs by
way of trade in exchange for the aboue named com∣modities,

(whereby we hold society and commerce
with them) are Axes, Hatchets, Bil-hookes kniues, all
kinde of Edge tooles, Nailes, great Fishhookes, Har∣ping-irons,
Iewes-Trumps, looking-glasses, blew, and
white Beades, Christall Beades, Hats, Pinnes, Needles,
Salt, Shirts, Bands, linnen and wollen Cloathes,
Swords, Muskets, Calliuers, Powder, and Shot: but
of these last mentioned, wee are very sparing, and part
not with many, vnlesse vpon great occasion, by way
of guift to speciall persons.


For these toies, and such like trifeling things the In∣dians
will sell vnto you any of the aboue mentioned
commodities that can be gotten or prepared by them;
or any thing they haue, or that their Countrey yeel∣deth;
and will performe any reasonable labour for
them. Thus haue I deliuered vnto your Highnesse,
the particulars of the seuerall commodities, which hi∣therto
we haue discouered, and found likely to bee
profitable in 
Guiana;
 (whereof examples are remayning
to bee seene in the hands of M
r
. 
Henry Houenaer
 a


Dutch-man, who in the yeere of our Lord 1610. per∣formed
a voiage to 
Guiana,
 to the places where our
Company was seated, and now abideth in Thames-streete,
neere vnto Cole-harbour: and I make no
doubt, that by continuance of time, our painefull tra∣uels,
and diligent obseruations, wee shall discouer and
get knowledge of an infinite number of others, as
rich, necessary, and beneficiall as these already spoken
of, or any other whatsoeuer: if it please Almighty
God to fauour and blesse our proceedings.


When the raines ceased, which was in Iuly, I began
to trauaell abroad in search of those Golden Moun∣taines,
promised vnto vs before the beginning of our
voiage, (by one that vndertooke to guide vs to them)
which filled my company so full of vaine expectati∣on,
and golden hopes, that their insatiable and coue∣tous
mindes (being wholy set thereon) could not bee
satisfied with any thing but oenly Gold. Our guide
that vainely made those great promises, being come
vnto the wished place to make performance, was then
possessed with a shamelesse spirit of ignorance, for hee
knew little, and could performe nothing. What o∣ther
intelligences (of Mines already fouud) I had from
other men in England, and from the M
r
. of my ship,
who had bin heretofore in those parts, I foūd them by
experience false, and nothing true concerning Mines,
that was in England reported vnto me.


Our greedy desire of Gold being thus made fru∣strate,
diuers vnconstant persons of my vnruly com∣pany
began to murmure,
 to bee discontented, to kin∣dle
discords and discensions, and to stirre vp mutiny,
euen almost to the confusion and ruine of vs all: and


were vpon the point to shake off all obedience to their
commanders; to abandon patience, peace, & vnity, and
wilfully to breake out into all mischeefe & wretched
disorder, onely because they were deceiued of their
golden hopes & expectations: but with good words,
and comfortable perswasions, I pacified them for the
time, and made them acquainted with my better
hopes conceiued of the commodities aboue mentio∣ned.
I perswaded them in generall from idlenesse,
to trauell abroade, to search and seeke out amongst
the Indians what other nouelties they could (though
gold were wanting) whereby wee might hereafter
benefit our selues; and still I imployed them some one
way, and some another, to occupie their mindes by
doing something, the better to preuent discention,
which commonly is bred of idlenesse, the slouthfull
mother of all filthy vices.


As I daily conuersed amongst the Indians, it chan∣ced
one day, that one of them presented mee with a
halfe Moone of mettall, which held somwhat more
then a third part Gold, the rest Copper: another al∣so
gaue mee a little Image of the same mettall; and
of an other I bought a plate of the same (which hee
called a spread Eagle) for an Axe. All which things
they assured mee were made in the high Countrey of

Guiana,
 which they said did abound with Images of
Gold, by them called 
Carrecoory.
 These things I shew∣ed
to my company to settle their troubled mindes,
which gaue much contentment to the greater part of
them, and satisfied vs all that there was Gold in 
Guia∣na.

Shortly after that my Indian 
Anthony Canabre,

brought mee a peec of a rocke, of white Sparre,


whereof the high Countrey is full: And if the white
Sparres of this kinde,
 which are the purest white of all
others, (for euery sort of Mine hath a sparre, and for
the most part white) bee in a maine rocke, they are
certainely Mines of Gold, or Siluer, or of both I
made triall of a peece of Sparre, which the same Indi∣an
discouered vnto me, and I found that it held both
Gold, and Siluer, which (although it was in small
quantity) gaue mee satisfaction that there bee richer
Mines in the Countrey to bee found: but the best
lie deeper in the earth, and wee had not time nor
power to make search for them.


Being thus informed, and sufficiently resolued of
the commodities of the Countrey, & well satisfied of
the Minerals; I bent all my endeauours to finde out
the fittest places, and most conuenient for our first
plantations: at the last I found out many, and some of
speciall note, which are (for many respects) of great
importance; and when time serueth, our forces and
number of men being answerable, I will lay them o∣pen
to the knowledge of the world: and for wealth I
hope they shall fully answere all mens expectations.


I trauelled vp the riuer of 
Wiapoco,
 to view the ouer∣falles,
but the waters being high and strong, I could
not passe them. In August when they are fallen, with
some labour they may bee passed.
 This riuer hath
very many ouerfalles, lying one a good distance be∣yond
another, euen to the head thereof. Aboue some
of the first falles there dwelleth an Indian, called 
Co∣marian,

who is an old man of a free disposition; by
him I learned that a certaine distance aboue the first
falles, the riuer 
Arwy
 falleth into 
Wiapoco;
 moreouer


that certaine daies iourney beyond him towards the
high land, vpon the borders of 
Wiapoco,
 there is a Na∣tiō
of Charibes hauing great eares of an extraordina∣ry
bignes,
 hard to bee beleeued, whom hee called 
Ma∣rashewaccas:

amongst these people (as 
Comarian
 re∣porteth)
there is an Idole of stone, which they wor∣ship
as their God; they haue placed it in a house made
of purpose for the greater honour of it, which they
keepe very cleane and hansome.


This Idole is fashioned like a man sitting vpon his
heeles,
 holding open his knees, and resting his el∣bowes
vpon them, holding vp his hands with the
palmes forwards, looking vpwards, and gaping with
his mouth wide open. The meaning of this pro∣portion
he could not declare, although he hath been
many times amongst them, and hath often seene it.
What other Nations were beyond these he did not
know, hauing neuer trauailed so farre, but hee sayth
they be 
Charibes,
 and also enemies vnto them. It see∣meth
there bee many Nations of those great eared
people: for in the Riuer of 
Marrawini
 I heard also of
the like, who dwell farre vp towards the high land, as
hereafter you shall heare and I suppose, by the tren∣ding
of the Riuers of 
Wiapoco,
 and 
Marrawini,
 are
all one people.


Vpon the 14. day of August I went vnto a Moun∣taine,
called 
Gomeribo,
 being the vttermost point of
land to the Northward in the bay of 
Wiapoco;
 I found
the soile of it most excellēt for Tobacco, Maix, Cot∣ton
trees, Annoto trees, Vines, & for any other thing
that should be planted there. When I had taken good
view of the place, and found it commodious for ma∣ny


purposes;
 then in the presence of Capt. 
Fisher,
 di∣uers
Gentlemen, and others of my company, and of
the Indians also, I tooke possession of the land, by
turfe and twig, in the behalf of our Soueraigne Lord
King 
IAMES:
 I tooke the said posession of a part,
in name of the whole continent of 
Guiana,
 lying be∣twixt
the riuers of 
Amazones
 and 
Orenoque,
 not being
actually possessed, and inhabited by any other Chri∣stian
Prince or State; wherewith the Indians seemed
to be well content and pleased.


In like manner my Brother Capt. 
Michael Hare∣court,

and Capt. 
Haruey,
 (whom I left as his associate,
and hee esteemed as an inward friend,) in a notable
iourney, which (to their great honour) they perfor∣med,
to discouer the Riuer of 
Arrawary,
 and the
Country bordering vpon it, (neere adioining to the
riuer of 
Amazones)
 did take the like possession of the
land there,
 to his Maiesties vse.


The dangers and great difficulties which they in
that attempt incountred, were memorabe, and such,
as hardly any of our Nation in such small Canoes (be∣ing
onely some-what longer, but not so broad as our

Thames
 wherries, and flat bottomed,) euer ouercame
the like. First the number of their owne attendants
besides themselues, was onely one man, and a boy:
Their troope of Indians 60. persons. Their iourney
by Sea vnto the Riuer of 
Arrawary
 was neere 100.
Leagues: wherein (by the way) they met with many
dreadful plunges, by reason of a high going sea, which
breaketh vpon the flats and shoales; especially, at
the next great cape to the North of 
Arraway,
 which,
in respect of the danger they passed there, they named



Point Perilous.
 Then their discouery vp the riuer, was
50. leagues more: where they found a Nation of
Indians, which neuer had seene white men, or Chri∣stians
before, and could not be drawne to any fami∣liar
commerce, or conuersation, no not so much as
with our Indians, because they were strangers to
them, and of another Nation. The discouery of this
riuer is of great importance, and speciall note, affor∣ding
an entrance more behouefull for the▪ searching
and discouery of the inland parts of 
Guiana,
 then any
other riuer yet knowne vpon the Coast; for tren∣ding
Westward vp into the land, it discouereth all the
Countries and Nations to the Southward of 
Arrica∣ry,
Cooshebery, Morrownia,
 and 
Norrack,
 which I haue
mentioned before.


Many weekes they spent in this aduenture, still
taking vp their lodgings in the woods at night. Pro∣uision
of meate they wanted not,
 for Fish were euer
plenty, and at hand: and the woods yeelded eyther
Deere, Tigers, or Foule: their greatest want was of
bread and drinke, which onely defect did hinder (at
that time) the accomplishment of that discouery. For
when the Indians perceiued their bread to bee neere
spent, and their drinke to bee corrupted, they could
not bee perswaded to proceede, hauing no meanes to
supply their wants amongst the Arrawaries, the Indi∣ans
of that riuer, who would not freely trade with
them vpon this first acquaintance, but alwaies stood
vpon their guard, on the other side of the riuer, where
they inhabited: yet they desiring to obtaine some of
our English commodities, and make triall of our In∣dians
friendshippe, afforded some small trade for their


present releefe during their aboade in that riuer: So
that of force they were constrained to breake off their
discouery, and hasten homeward.


But here their dangers ended not, for as they retur∣ned,
arriuing at certaine Islands called 
Carripoory,
 and
passing betweene them & the main land, much against
the wils of all the Indians, who knowing the danger
of the place, and more respecting their safety, then
their owne, (being themselues all expert swimmers)
would haue disswaded them from that hazard: but
they being ignorant of the perill, would needs passe
onne, and at the last met with such a Boore (as the Sea-men
terme it) and violent encounter of two tydes
comming in,
 which like two furious inraged Rammes,
or Bulles, rushed togeather, and oft retired back, to re∣turne
againe with greater violence, vntill the one (by
force had ouerborne the other: that if next vnder
God) the diligent care and paines of the Indians had
not preserued thē, they had been there destroyed, and
swallowed vp by that mercilesse Boore or breach of
waters; which (God be thanked) they escaped, and
returned home in safety.


Here may your Highnesse fitly note and obserue
two things,
 the one, the assured loue and fidelity of
the Indians to our Nation; who hauing in their pow∣er
for six weekes space, foure only of our company,
and two of those the chiefest of the rest; and if they
had been false & trecherously minded towards them,

might easily haue drowned, starued, or slaine them;
yet did not only forbeare to practise harme against
them, but did also safely rowe their boats; night by
night prepare their lodgings in the woods, & daily vse


their care and best endeauours to discouer and pre∣uent
all dangers that might happen to them, and to
guide them, serue them, and prouide them meate.
Such trust and faithfulnesse is rarely found amongst
such barbarous infidels, and yet wee haue had three
yeeres experience thereof. The other thing to bee
obserued heere,
 is the store and plenty of victuals in

Guiana;
 where sixty foure persons togeather in one
company, without any prouision of victuals (bread
and drinke excepted) before hand made, could tra∣uell
abroade for six weekes space, most commonly
lodging in the woods, seldome in any towne or vil∣lage,
and yet in all places wheresoeuer they came,
could readily get meate sufficient for them all: which
blessing God hath giuen to 
Guiana;
 for the comfort
of all such as shall bee willing to bee planters there.


This, and much more could my Brother haue true∣ly
auouched, if hee had liued; but (since his returne
into England) it hath pleased God, who gaue him
life, and preserued him from many dangers, to take
him to his mercy. But the other, Captaine 
Haruey,

suruiueth, whose life hath euer suted with a generous
and worthy spirit, professing Armes, and following
the warres: who also is generally well knowne, to be
a Gentleman, both honest, and of spotlesse reputati∣on;
hee will auerre and iustifie for truth, what heere
is mentioned. But I will now returne from whence I
haue digressed.


When I had (as before) taken possession at 
Gome∣ribo,

in presēce of the said parties, I deliuered the posse∣ssiō
of that Mountain to my Indiā 
Anthony Canabre, To
haue, hold, possesse, and enioy
 the same, to him, and to


his heires for euer, of our Soueraigne Lord King 
Iames,

his Heires and Successors, as his subiect; 
Yeelding and
paying
 yeerely the tenth part of all Tobacco, Cotton
wooll, Annoto, and other commodities whatsoeuer,
which should hereafter bee either planted or growing
within the said Mountaine, if it were demanded. The
Indian most gladly receiued the possession vpon these
conditions, and for himselfe, and his posterity, did
promise to bee true subiects vnto the Kings Maiestie:
his heires, and successors: And to pay the duties im∣posed
vpon them: and so that busines being finished,
I returned againe to 
Wiapoco.


Now (most worthy Prince) there came vnto my
knowledge, an inconuenience happened by the care∣lesse
negligence of the Master of my ship, who had
the charge of prouiding and laying in the prouisions
and victuals for the voyage,
 which was the cause that I
gained no present profit by it, but left off all my dis∣coueries
in the first beginning. I had a purpose at that
time to performe a businesse, which might haue pro∣ued
profitable, and honourable vnto vs, if I had been
able to haue staied the time, but it was not my chance
to bee so fortunate: for the Master, his Mates, and the
Steward of my Shippe, came vnto mee, and told me
plainly, that if I made any longer aboad in that Coun∣trey,
I would neuer in those Shippes returne into
England: or if I did aduenture it, my selfe, and all my
company would starue at Sea for want of Beere, Sy∣der,
and water, for all my Caske was spoiled, because
it was not Iron-bound; the woodden hoopes flew
off, by reason of the heate of the Clymate; and our
Beere, and Syder, (whereof wee had good store) did


leake about the shippe, that wee could hardly saue
sufficient to releeue vs, if wee made a longer stay vpon
the Coast; which was the Masters fault, hauing had a
speciall charge to bee carefull of that onely poynt. By
this default, I was constrained to make a vertue of ne∣cessity,
and prepare my selfe for England, and leaue
my former purposes to bee accomplished hereafter,
which shall bee done (God aiding mee) in time con∣uenient.


Then disposing of my company,
 I appointed my
Brother Captaine 
Michael Harcourt
 to remaine in
the Countrey, as chiefe Commander in my absence,
and to continue the possession on the Kings behalfe;
I gaue him directions to trauell abroad, as (occasion
serued) to discouer the Countrey, to spend sometime
at 
Cooshebery,
 and sometime also in other places; but
to make his chiefest residence at 
Wiapoco,
 (the onely
Rendeuous for shippes that trade vpon that Coaste)
and there to plant good store of Maix, for our reliefe
of bread and drinke, which is the chiefest thing to be
respected in those parts; for other victuals we need not
take much care being alwaies easily prouided. He per∣formed
his charge with great reputation, discouered
many goodly Prouinces, and spacious Countries; and
worthily continued the possession full three yeeres
compleat. I left with him for his assistance, Captaine

Haruey,
 aboue mentioned, who hath nobly vowed his
time and fortune to bee imployed in the prosecution
of this honourable action. For his Liuetenant I ap∣pointed
M
r
. 
Edward Gifford,
 a valiant and worthy
Gentleman; and I left also with him of Gentlemen
and others, about twenty more, with all such necessa∣ries


as I could spare, and thought conuenient for
them: and so commending them to God the eigh∣teenth
day of August I departed from 
Wiapoco,
 and the
day following arriued at 
Caiane.


At my comming to 
Caiane
 my Pinnesse receiued a
leake,
 which would haue proued dangerous, if wee
had been far at Sea; whereby enforced to attend the
stopping thereof, and new trimming of the Pinnesse;
and vnwilling to bee idle in the meane space doing no∣thing,
I left my shippes there to repaire their defects,
and in my ship-boate departed thence, the twenty
three of August: taking with mee Captain 
Fisher,

who hath euer been (since wee first crept into the
world) my chiefe companion, both in Armes and
trauels; I tooke also with mee his brother 
Vnton Fi∣sher,

M
r
. 
Cradle
 the Masters mate of my ship, and a∣bout
six more. I followed the Coast to the Westward
stering due West,
 and passing by the riuer of 
Mec∣cooria,

I lodged that night in the mouth of the riuer

Courwo:
 which hath a narrow deepe entrance, and
within affordeth a good harbour, which may in time
to come (for some speciall purpose) bee of great
vse.


The next day, and the night following I procee∣ded
Westward with full saile, and passing the riuers
of 
Manmanury,
 
Sinammara, Corassowini, Coonannonia,
Vracco,
 and 
Amanna;
 I arriued the twenty fiue day at
the riuer of 
Marrawini,
 which openeth a faire riuer,
but is shoale vpon the Barre, which lyeth two or three
Leagues off at Sea, hauing but two fadome water:
within the Barre, the Channel is three, foure, fiue, and
six fadome deepe. Fiue leagues within the ruier wee


passed by certaine Islands called 
Curewapory,
 not inha∣bited,
for at the rising of the waters they are alwaies o∣uerflowen,
of which sort the riuer hath very many: wee
lodged that night a litle beyond these first Islands at a vil∣lage
called 
Moyemon,
 on the lefthand, the Captaine there∣of
is called 
Maperitaka,
 of the Nation of the 
Parago∣tos,

a man very louing and faithfull to our Nation,
whereof wee haue had good proofe. The next day wee
proceeded vp the riuer three leagues, and stayed at a
towne called 
Coewynay
 on the right hand, at the house of

Minapa,
 (the chiefe Charib of that Signiory) to pro∣uide
two Canoes to prosecute our iourney for the disco∣uery
of this riuer.


The twenty eight day wee went forward passing ma∣ny
villages and townes,
 which I forbeare to name, and
hauing gone about twenty leagues from the Sea, wee
found the riuer in a manner barred vp with rocks, ouer
which the water falleth with great violence, yet notwith∣standing
wee aduentured to proceed,
 and the further
wee went, the more dangerous we found the ouerfalles,
and more in number; but when we had passed the first
Mountaine, towards the high Countrey of 
Guiana,
 cal∣led

Sapparow,
 and discouered far off before vs other high
Mountaines called 
Matawere Moupanana,
 and had pro∣ceeded
6. daies iourney vp the riuer (which was more thē
forty leagues) we met with such shoale rocky streame, &
great ouerfalles, that there to our griefour iourny ended.


Being thus for that time debarred from our intended
discouery, wee prepared our selues with Patience to re∣turne
towards our shippes, and the third day of Septem∣ber
wee turned downe the riuer, shooting the ouerfalles
with more celerity then when wee came vp, dispatching
three daies iourney in one, and the fifth day returned


safe to 
Moyemon;
 but before I departed thence, Cap∣taine

Fisher
 told mee of certaine plants which hee had
then found, much like vnto Rose-trees, growing about
halfe a yard in height, whereof (for the strangenesse of
them) I cannot forbeare to adde a word or two.


These plants or little trees had assuredly the sence of
feeling,
 as plainely appeared by touching them: for if
you did but touch a leafe of the tree with your finger,
that leafe would presently shrinke, and close vp it selfe,
and hang downe as if it were dead; and if you did cut
off a leafe with a paire of cisers, then all the other leaues
growing vpon the same tree would instantly shrinke and
close vp themselues, and hang downe as if they were dead
and withered, and within halfe a quarter of an hower,
would by degrees open themselues againe, and flourish
as before; and as often as you did either touch or cut
off any of them, they would doe the like; which did e∣uidently
shew a restriction of the spirits, inuincibly ar∣guing
a Sence. Howsoeuer this may seeme strange and in∣credible
to your Highnesse, and to them that haue not
seene it,
 yet forasmuch as 
Scaliger,
 and 
Bartas
 make men∣tion
of the like, I dare bee bold to affirme it vpon my
credit,
 hauing seene and shewed it to forty others: I ga∣thered
two of the plants, and did set them in pots in their
owne earth, and carried them aboord my shippe, where
I kept them fairely growing almost a fortnight, vntill
they were destroied by certaine Munkies that brake
loose, and pulled them in peeces: which might haue been
preuented, but that I was constrained to set them in the
open ayre, the better to preserue them.


The seuenth day I went to 
Wiawia,
 a great towne of

Paragotos,
 and 
Yaios,
 foure leagues to the West of 
Mar∣rawini,

whereof 
Maperitaka
 aboue mentioned, and 
Ara∣pawaka



are chiefe Captaines. At this towne I left my
Cozen 
Vnton Fisher,
 and 
Humfrey Croxton
 an Apotheca∣ry,
to beare him company, and one seruant to attend him
called 
Christopher Fisher,
 hauing first taken order with

Maperitaka
 for their diet, and other necessaries, both for
trauell, and otherwise: who euer since (according to
his promise) hath performed the part of an honest man,
and faithfull friend.


I gaue directions to my Cozen 
Fisher
 to prosecute the
discouery of 
Marrawini,
 and the inland parts bordering
vpon it, when the time of the yeere, and the waters bet∣ter
serued; and if it were possible to goe vp into the high
Countrey of 
Guiana,
 and to finde out the City of 
Ma∣noa,

mentioned by S
r
. 
Walter Raleigh
 in his discouery.
He followed my directions to the vttermost of his abili∣ty,
being of a good wit, and very industrious, and ina∣bled
to vndergoe those imployments, by obtaining the
loue, and gaining the languages of the people, without
which helpes, there is little or no good to bee done in
those parts.


When the waters of 
Marrawini
 were risen, and the
riuer passable,
 (much differing from the riuer of 
Wiapo∣co,

which is not to bee trauelled, but in the lowest wa∣ters.)
He began his iourney for the discouery thereof, in
company of the Apothecary, his seruant 
Fisher,
 the Indi∣an

Maperitaka,
 and eighteene others, and proceeded e∣leauen
daies iourney vp the riuer, to a towne of Charibes
called 
Taupuramune,
 distant from the Sea aboue an hun∣dred
leagues;
 but was foure daies iourney short of 
Mo∣reshego,

which is also a towne of Charibes, scituate vpon
the riuer side in the prouince of 
Moreshegoro:
 the chiefe
Captaine thereof is called 
Areminta:
 who is a proud and
bold Indian, much feared of all those that dwell within


his Territories,
 hauing a rough skin like vnto Buffe lea∣ther,
of which kinde there bee many in those parts; and
I suppose proceedeth of some infirmity of the body.


Hee vnderstood by relation of the Indians of 
Taupu∣ramune,

and also of 
Areminta,
 that six daies iourney be∣yond

Moreshego,
 there are diuers mighty Nations of In∣dians,
hauing holes through their eares, cheekes, no∣strils,
and nether lippes, which were called 
Craweanna,
Pawmeeanna,
 
Quikeanna, Peewattere, Arameeso, Acaw∣reanno,
Acooreo, Tareepeeanna, Corecorickado, Peeauncado,
Cocoanno, Itsura,
 and 
Waremisso:
 and were of strength
and stature far exceeding other Indians, hauing Bowes,
and Arrowes foure times as bigge: what the Indians al∣so
report of the greatnesse of their eares, I forbeare to
mention, vntill by experience we shall discouer the truth
thereof. Moreouer hee learned that there fall into 
Mar∣rawini

diuers great riuers,
 called 
Arrennee, Topannawin,
Errewin, Cowomma, Poorakette, Arroua, Arretowenne, Wa∣oune,
Anape, Aunime,
 and 
Carapio:
 whereof some he hath
seene himselfe.
 That it was twenty daies iourney, from

Taupuramune,
 to the head of 
Marrawini,
 which is inha∣bited
by 
Arwaccas, Sappaios, Paragotos,
 and some 
Yaios;

and that a daies iourny from thence to the land-ward
the Countrey is plaine,
 and Champian ground, with
long grasse. Hee passed in this iourney aboue eighty o∣uerfalles
of water, and many of them very dangerous: of
some of them I had experience the yeere before. Hee
proceeded no further at that present, being vnprouided
for so long a iourney, supposing that it had been neerer
(then hee found it) to the head of the riuer by a fort∣nights
trauell: and so returned backe in six daies space,
intending better preparation for a second iourney: but
his purpose was preuented by an vntimely death: for


shortly after hee was drowned by misfortune; whereby
we see, that man determineth, but God disposeth.


The tenth day of September being Sunday,
 I left the
main of 
Guiana,
 and in my ship-boat stood off into the sea
to seek my ships, which were forced to ride foure leagues
from shoare, by reason of the shoales; but as wee passed
ouer them,
 wee were in danger to bee cast away by the
breach of a sea, which verily had sunke our boat, if with
great celerity we had not lightned her, by heauing ouer∣bord
many baskets of bread, of Cassaui, Maix, Pinas, Pla∣tanas,
Potatoes, and such like prouision, wherewith our
boat was loaden; by which meanes it pleased God to de∣liuer
vs from present destruction, and to bring vs safe vn∣to
our ships.


When I came aboord, we weighed anchor, and steered
away from the Island of 
Trinidado,
 and vpon the 18. day
in the morning,
 we arriued at 
Punta de Galea,
 where wee
found three English ships at anchor, which was no small
comfort vnto vs, considering our great defects & wants.
One of these shippes was called the 
Diana,
 belonging to
M
r
. 
Lula
 Dutch merchant dwelling in 
London.
 The other
two, the 
Penelope,
 and the 
Indeuor,
 belonging to M
r
. 
Hall,

a merchant also of 
London.
 We staied at this place 6. daies
to mend our bad caske, and to take fresh water: during
which time I was kindly intreated, & feasted by the Mer∣chants,
and had supply of al such things as I stood in need
of; which curtesie I requited in the best manner I could
for the present.


Vpon Sunday the twenty foure of September we
weighed anchor, so likewise did the 
Diana
 (the other
two shippes being gone two or three daies before vs,)
but the wind shifting to the north-east▪ inforced vs backe
againe almost to the same place from whence we depar∣ted.


The twenty fiue we weighed againe, and plied along
the shoare towards 
Cape Brea,
 about three leagues. This

Cape
 is so called of the 
Pitch
 which is there gotten in the
earth, whereof there is such abundance, that all places on
this side of the world may be stored therewith.


It is a most excellent Pitch for trimming of shippes
that passe into these Regions and hot Countries, for it
melteth not with the Sunne, as other Pitch doth.


The twenty six day wee stood along againe, the
winde being still contrary and variable, intermixt with
many calmes,
 & so continued vntill the second of Octo∣ber,
when we arriued at 
Port de Hispania.


Within two daies after our arriuall there, 
Don Sanches
de Mendosa,
 the Teniente for that yeare, with certaine o∣ther
Spaniards came aboord vs: we gaue them the best
entertainement that our meanes, the time, and place
would affoord, and had much friendly conference toge∣ther.
They told me, that they lately had a conflict with
the 
Charibes,
 wherein they had lost seuen or eight of their
men, and had many others hurt and wounded, whereof
some came to my Chirurgion to haue their wounds
dressed during our aboad there. And they plainely
confessed that they are verie much molested by the

Charibes,
 and knew not how by any meanes to sup∣presse
them.


We staied at 
Porte de Hispania
 vntill the seuenth day,
in hope to get some good Tobacco amongst the Spani∣ards,
who daily fed vs with delaies and faire words, but
in truth they had none good at that present for vs, which
we perceiuing,
 departed thence vpon the 7. day, about
one of the clocke in the morning, leauing the other ships
to attend their trade, and stood away for the passages, cal∣led

Les
iot boccas de Drago,
 and disembogued about


eight of the clocke the same morning. Then we steered
away for an Island called 
Meues,
 and leauing the Islands
of 
Granado, Saint Vincent, Guadalupa,
 and 
Monserate,
 in
our starboord side, wee arriued there the twelfth day,
where wee stopped to take in Ballast, and more water,
for our shippes were very light.


In this Island there is an hot Bath,
 which as wel for the
reports that I haue heard, as also for that I haue seen and
found by experience, I doe hold for one of the best and
most soueraigne in the world. I haue heard that diuers of
our Nation haue there been cured of the Leprosie, and
that one of the same persons now, or lately dwelt at

Wollwich
 neere the riuer of 
Thames,
 by whom the truth
may be knowne, if any man desire to bee further satisfied
therein. As for my owne experience, although it was
not much, yet the effects that I found it worke both in
my selfe, and others of my company in two daies space,
doe cause mee to conceiue the best of it. For at my com∣ming
thither,
 I was grieuously vexed with an extreame
cough, which I much feared would turne mee to great
harme, but by bathing in the Bath, and drinking of the
water, I was speedily cured: and euer since that time, I
haue found the state of my body (I giue God thankes
for it) farre exceeding what it was before, in strength
and health. Moreouer, one of my company named 
Iohn
Huntbatch
 (seruant to my brother) as he was making a
fire,
 burned his hand with Gunpowder, and was in
doubt thereby to loose the vse of one or two of his fin∣gers,
which were shrunke vp with the fire, but he went
presently to the Bath, and washed, and bathed his hand
a good space therein, which soopled his fingers in such
manner, that with great ease hee could stire and stretch
them out, and the fire was so washed out of his hand, that


within the space of twenty foure houres, by twice or
thrice washing and bathing it, the sorenesse thereof was
cured, onely the eye-sore for the time remained. Further∣more,
two or three others of my company hauing swel∣lings
in their legges,
 were by the Bath cured in a day.
This can I affirme, and boldly iustifie, hauing been an eie
witnesse thereof.


Hence wee departed the sixteenth day of October,
 in
the afternoone, and leauing the Islands of S
t
. 
Christo∣pher,

S
t
. 
Martin,
 and 
Anguilla
 on the Starboord side,
wee dissembogued through the broken Islands on the
North side of 
Anguilla
 vpon S
t
. 
Lukes
 day, where I thinke
neuer Englishmā dissembogued before vs: for we found
all our Sea-charts false concerning that place, those bro∣ken
Islands being placed therein, to the Southward of

Anguilla,
 betwene it and S
t
. 
Martins,
 and wee found
them scituat to the Northward thereof.


When wee had cleered our selues of the broken I∣slands,
wee stood away North-East, shaping our course
the neerest way wee could for 
Flores,
 and 
Corues,
 and so
continued with faire weather, the winde still mending
vpon vs, vntill the thirtieth day of October: about
twelue of the clocke that day there began a storme, with
contrarie windes, still variable, which continued vntill 4.
the next day in the afternoone. In this storme wee lost
the company of the Pinnesse in the night, but had fight
of her againe vpon the fourth of Nouember late in the
euening, and the next day shee came vp vnto vs, at two
of the clocke in the afternoone. Then the winde came
faire at West,
 and wee steered away East by North, and
E. N. Eastamong. The seauenth of Nouember I relie∣ued
the Pinnesse with more bread, and left her to follow
after vs, not being able to keepe way with vs before the


winde, which then blew strongly at West: for I was ve∣ry
vnwilling to loose the benefit of a speedy passage,
which the cōtinuāce of that faire winde was like to afford
vs. And so following our course, on the eleuenth day in
the morning we had sight of 
Fayal,
 one of the Islands
of the 
Terceras,
 which we left on our starboord side, and
steered away for England, the winde continuing faire vn∣till
the twenty foure day. But then it changed, first to the
East by North, and then to the East south-east, and be∣came
so violent and furious, that for three daies space
we were not able to beare out saile, but did driue before
the winde at the least three leagues a watch,
 out of our
course; and the first land wee made was 
Cape Cleere
 in
the South-west part of Ireland, where against our wils we
arriued at 
Crooke Hauen
 the twenty nine of Nouember.


Our arriuall there at that present,
 was happy for vs,
considering our extreame wants, and great necessities;
for of all our store, we had remaining but one hogshed
of water, halfe a hogshed of beuerage (all our beere be∣ing
spent and wasted by leakage) sixe peeces of beefe, and
three of Porke, which was all our prouision: we had nei∣ther
fish, butter, oyle, cheese nor pease left to relieue vs,
whereby we had fallen into a lamentable distresse, if al∣mighty
God had not in time brought vs vnto this har∣bour
where we supplied our wants, by the helpe of Cap∣taine

Reignolds
 commander of his Maiesties Pinnesse cal∣led
the 
Moone,
 whom we fortunately met there alto∣gether
vnexpected. But the winde continuing contrary
at the East, and like to hold still in that corner, presa∣ged
new wants to insue, if a speedy remedy was not pro∣uided.
To preuent the worst, I resolued to goe by land
to 
Yoghall,
 neere vnto which place remained some friends
and acquaintance of mine, by whom I might prouide


my selfe of meanes to defray my charge, vntill my re∣turne
into England: and therefore gaue commandement
to the master of my shippe to wage a Pilot, and vpon
the first shift of winde (if it fauoured him in any time) to
bring the shippe about to 
Yoghall,
 where I ment to abide
his comming, resoluing thence to goe for 
Bristol.
 And I
appointed (if the winde did hold against him) to send
him mony to supplie their victuals, vntill it pleased God
to alter it: but he regarding his owne priuate ends, more
then my commaund and direction, vpon the first shift
of wind went away with my shippe (without my know∣ledge)
to 
Dartmouth
 in the west Country, and left me be∣hind
in 
Ireland:
 whereof as soone as I had intelligence, I
presently tooke the opertunitie of a speedy passage in a
barke then reddy bound for 
Bristol,
 and so the next mor∣ning
being the fifteenth of December, I departed from

Yoghall,
 and arriued at 
Bristol
 the seuententh day.


My Pinnesse which we left at Sea to follow after vs,

was likewise by the aforesaid storme driuen into the west
of Ireland, to a place caled 
Dingen le Coushe:
 and there re∣mained
along time wind-bound: but at the last (by Gods
permission) arriued at 
Bristol
 the second day of February.


During the time of my voyage, we left but one land∣man,
who died in 
Guiana:
 and one sailer, and an Indian
boy,
 who died at Sea in our returne: and during the space
of these three yeares last past since the voiage, of all the
men which I left in the country, being in number about
thirty, there died but six, whereof one was drowned: an∣other
was an old man of threescore yeeres of age: and
another tooke his death by his owne disorder; the rest
died of sicknes, as pleased God the giuer of life: for which
small losse, his holy name be blessed now and euer.


Hauing thus (most noble Prince) declared the whole


course of my voiage to 
Guiana,
 performed in the yeare of
our Lord 1609. I hold it needefull for the better sa∣tisfaction
of the fauourers, and wel-willers of this action,
by adding of a speciall note or two, and by a briefe re∣remembrance
of some points mentioned in the former
discourse, to expresse the worthinesse of the enterprise,
being of importance, and not to bee regarded lightly.


In euery forraine action vndertaken by the subiects of
a Christian Prince,
 they ought to haue especiall regard
to three principall ends and designes. First, that it may
bee for the glory of God: Secondly, for the honour of
their Soueraigne: Thirdly, for the benefit and profit of
their Countrey. Which three principall ends and in∣tendements,
if they faithfully prosecute, and labour
to aduance with constant resolution, they shall infallibly
bring their vndertakings to blessed, prosperous, and ho∣norable
end. And now if it shall appeare that this enter∣prise
for discouery and plantation in 
Guiana,
 is chiefely
grounded vpon these three designes; I hope there is not
any man (bee hee neuer so malitious and full of enuy)
that can with iust exp
tions scandalise it, or worthily
contemne it.


First then for the glory of God,
 it hath been, and euer
will bee held cleere and vnquestionable, that God can∣not
be more honoured, nor his holy name by any meanes
more glorified, then by the prosperous grouth and hap∣py
increase of his Church, through the conuersion of
those that bee heathen and barbarous Nations to the
knowledge of him our true God, his Sonne Iesus Christ,
and the holy Ghost, the blessed indiuiduall Trinity, and
to the profession and practise of Christianity; which
heauenly and euer memorable worke, may through
Gods good blessing and assistance (without which (in∣deede)


all our trauell therein, and all the labour of the
world is but lost) bee easily effected and accomplished
in 
Guiana▪
 the people thereof being of a louing and tra∣ctable
nature towards the English, whom they loue and
preferre before all other strangers whatsoeuer: and by
whom (next vnder God) I verily hope, and am constant∣ly
perswaded, it will bee their blessed happe to bee freed
from the seruitude of the diuell, that now so tyranizeth
ouer them, and to bee led out of that infernall darke∣nesse
wherein they liue, and bee drawen to Christianity:
for they will come vnto vs (already) at time of prayer,
shew reuerence, and bee very attentiue all the while, al∣though
they vnderstand nothing: they will bee content
that wee baptize their children, and will after call them
by the Christian names wee giue them, suffer vs to bring
them vp, and in a sort acknowledge their ignorance, and
shew a kinde of willingnes to be instructed & reformed.


As touching the second, by what meanes may our gra∣cious
Souraigne the Kings Maiestie doe God better ser∣uice,

and honour him more, or vnder him bee more ho∣nored,
then by obtaining and gaining the Soueraignty
of so many great, spacious, and goodly Countries and
Territories, not yet actually possessed, and inhabited by
any Christian Prince or Sate whatsoeuer? which in that
Region, by the timely and worthy vndertakings of his
Subiects, (without bloodshed, and with the loue and
affection of the people) may bee possessed, planted, and
annexed to his Crowne, as the Nations and Countries
beyond, by the Emperour 
Charles
 the fifth, were annex∣ed
to the Crowne of 
Spaine,
 whereby, what honour and
benefit the Spaniards haue gained, and to what a degree
of greatnesse they are thereby growen, these parts of the
world can witnesse, and wee for our parts haue had tri∣all,
and might haue had woful experience of, if our God


that alwaies tooke our parts,
 had not crossed their bloo∣dy
designes, and put them to flight and confusion.


And for the third,
 who can deny but that our Coun∣trey
by this worthy action may bee enriched, through
diuers and sundrie commodities of great worth, in those
parts dayly found, and easily obtained? which before
are mentioned more at large, from page 31. to page 37.
and therefore needeles here to bee againe repeated.


And for their further satisfaction, and more incou∣ragement
in this enterprise, let them consider the nature
and disposition of the climate in this Region of 
Guiana,

which for healthfull and wholsome ayre, (some few pla∣ces
onely excepted) I hold generally to bee inferiour to
none other vnder Heauen: for notwithstanding it bee
scituate vnder the Equinoctiall, by the ancient Philoso∣phers
called the burning 
Zone;
 yet such are the wonder∣full
workes of God for the benefit of man, that contrary
to their opinion, wee finde by late experience, that those
Regions which were in times past by them accounted
vnhabitable, through extremity of drougth, and heate;
are now found out to bee inhabited, temporate, and
healthful Countries, as plainely appeareth in diuers
patts of the East and West Indies, and especially in this
Countrey of 
Guiana,
 whereof I haue taken possession to
his Maiesties vse, being plentifully inhabited by people
of diuers Nations: the climate there pleasant, and agree∣able
to our constitutions,
 and the soile fruitfull, as before
hath been declared; affording as many admirable helpes
towards the leading of an happy life, as any knowne
part of the world: for whatsoeuer is necessary for the re∣liefe
of man: eyther for foode, Phisicke, or Chirurgery,
or for clothing and architecture, is here (by the proui∣dence
and goodnesse of God the creator) in plen∣tifull


store euen naturally prouided.


Moreouer the good inclination of the people towards
our Nation,
 being willing to trade with vs, and become
subiects to his Maiesty, our Soueraigne; their louing
and gentle entertaining of vs, desiring to haue vs liue and
abide amongst them; and their tractable conuersation
with vs, not refusing to be instructed in Christianitie;
and coueting to imitate and learne any trade, or worke,
that they see vsed or practised by our men: are no small
motiues to perswade the prosecution of this action, and
plantation in 
Guiana.


Furthermore,
 all younge Gentlemen, Souldiers, and
others that liue at home in idlenesse, and want imploy∣ment,
may here finde meanes to abandon and expell
their slouthfull humors, and cast off their fruitlesse and
pernitious designes; and may worthily exercise their
generous spirits in honourable trauels, and famous dis∣coueries
of many goodly and rich terretories, strange
and vnknowne Nations; and a multitude of other rarie∣ties,
hitherto vnseene, and vnheard off in these parts of
the world: which may be thought incredible, but that
our own experience, & the generall & constant report
and affirmation of the Indians, doth assure vs thereof.


And to conclude,
 we may by the gracious assistance
of our good God, gaine vnto our Soueraigne the domi∣nion
of a rich and mightie Empire, which if it may bee
once possessed by his Maiestie, and inhabited by his En∣glish
Subiects, will absolutely be inuincible, to the vn∣speakable
honour & renown of our natiō in al after ages.


All these things respectiuely considered, what may be
more required? to moue & induce all noble and worthy
dispositions, louing honour, and honourable attempts; all
Marchants desiring wealth & riches; & generally al the in∣habitants


of this Kingdome, freely to giue assistance to∣wards
the aduancement of this noble action, and planta∣tion;
so much tending to the glory of God; the honour
of our Soueraigne, and the benefit of our Countrey.






¶The names of the Riuers falling into the Sea from
Amazones, to Dessequebe, and of the seuerall Nations
inhabiting those Riuers.




RIVERS. NATIONS.


Charibs.
 


1 Amazones.


2 Arrapoco, 
a branch of
 A∣mazones.


3 Arrawary.




Yaios 
and
 Charibs.
 


4 Maicary.


5 Connawini.




Arracoories
 


6 Cassipurogh.


7 Arracow.




Yaios 
and
 Arwaccas.
 


8 Wiapoco.


9 
Wianary,
 a creeke or in∣let of the sea.




10 
Cowe,
 not inhabited.


Charibs.
 


11 Apurwacca.


12 Wio.


13 Caiane.


14 Meccooria.


15 Courwo.


16 Manmanury


17 Sinammara.




18 
Oorassowini,
 not inhabited.


Arwaccas.
 


19 Coonannoma


20 Vracco.




Paragotos,
Yaios, Cha∣ribs,
Arwac.
 


21 Marrawini.




Charibs.
 


21 Amanna.


23 
Camoure,
 or
 
Comawin,
 a
 branch of 
Se∣linama.


24 Selinama, 
or

 Surennamo.


25 Surammo.


26 Coopannomy


27 Eneecare.
 




Arwaccas

&
 Charibs.
 


28 Coretine.


29 Berebisse.
 




Arwaccas.
 


30 Manhica.


31 Wapary.


32 Micowine.


33 Demeerare.




Charibs.



34 Matooronnee


35 
Quiowinne,

 braunches of
 
Dessequebe.

 




Arwaccas

&
 Charibs.
 


36 Dessequebe.
 












The Plantation in Guiana is most easie
to be performed, as is at large expressed in the former
Treatise: And may in briefe appeare by these notes fol∣lowing,
which are here added for the better comfort
and incouragement of the Aduenturers and Planters of
the meaner sort.


FIrst, the climate in 
Guiana,
 although it bee hot, yet is
it habitable;
 and affordeth healthfull habitations:
for in three yeeres space that my Brother Captaine 
Mi∣chael
Harcourt
 and his company, remained in the Coun∣trey,
of thirty persons there died but six.


The naturall inhabitants of that Countrey are a lo∣uing,

tractable, and gentle people, affecting, and prefer∣ring
the Englishmen before all other Nations whatsoe∣uer,
and desiring commerce and conuersation with them:
with those barbarous people we may liue in safety, with∣out
suspicion of trechery, or dread of danger; if wilfully
wee offer them abuse, and harme issue, the fault is ours;
for a worme being trodden on, will turne againe. If they
at any time doe giue offence to vs, they will suffer and
abide such moderate chastisements, as we in our discre∣tions
shall thinke fit to lay vpon them.


The soile of the land there,
 as is said before, is excee∣ding
rich, neuer yet broken vp, nor ouerworne with til∣lage,
but still remaineth in the greatest perfection of
fertility.


The prouisions of that Countrey for victuals, are al∣ready


mentioned before. But it is fit they bee againe re∣membred
for the comfort of the ordinary people,
 that
in person shall aduenture in this action. There are great
store of Deere of all sorts; wilde Swine, Hares, and Co∣nies;
besides diuers other beasts vnknowne in these
parts, Phesants, Partriges, wilde foule of all sorts, and e∣uery
house hath Cocks, Hennes, and Chickens, as in
England; and the variety of Fish is wonderfull, without
compare: but the chiefest comfort for our Countrey∣men
is this, that the beast called 
Maypury,
 and the fish
called the Sea Cow (being seuerally as bigge as a Heifer
of two yeres old,
 & of which kinde there are very many)
are in eating so like vnto our English beefe, that hardly in
tast wee can distinguish them, and may as well as beefe
bee salted, and kept for our prouision.


There is also a beast in colour like a Fawne,
 but ful∣ler
of white spots; in stature somewhat lesse then a small
sheep, and in tast like Mutton, but is rather better meate:
the Baremo is also of the same taste.


These for the time will giue vs good content, vntill
wee can bee stored with the breed of our English sheepe
and cattell.


The store of Maix,
 or 
Guinea
 wheat in 
Guiana,
 is very
plentifull, which graine doth make an excellent good
bread, and very wholsome. So likewise doth the 
Cassa∣ui,

whereof there is also great abundance; and much
more may bee,
 as we please to plant.


Of the 
Cassaui
 bread, the Indians do make good drink,
which in colour, taste, and strength, doth equall our
March beere in England.


Of the 
Guinea
 wheat,
 we may make good Malt, which
also maketh as excellent strong Ale as can bee possible.


The soile being rich, fruitfull, and neuer nipt with


frosts doth giue vs hope that in few yeeres space by plan∣ting
vines,
 we shal make good store of Sacke, and Canary
wine, which in those parts are needefull, and very whol∣some,
and will greatly comfort and lighten the hearts of
our Countreymen, and make them iouiall and couragi∣ous
to vndertake and execute the greatest laboures, and
most difficult aduentures of discouery.


The commodities already found in 
Guiana,
 are at large
declared in the former discourse;
 yet for the better me∣mory
of those that are disposed to aduenture in this acti∣on,
I haue againe in briefe remembred them. First with∣in
a yeere without much labour, there may bee transpor∣ted
thence good store of Cotton wooll; diuers kinds
of rich dies; sundrie sorts of gummes, drugges, and fea∣thers;
many kindes of rich woods: Iasper, and Purphe∣ry
stone; Balsamum, waxe, hony, and Tobacco. And
hereafter within few yeeres, wee shall returne thence
great plenty of Sugers: and I hope discouer as rich
Mines, as euer the Spaniard found, eyther in new 
Spaine,
Peru,
 or any other part of the Indies.




F
Orasmuch as it hath pleased his

Excellent Maiestie, for the planting and inha∣biting
of all that part of 
Guiana,
 or continent
of 
America,
 lying betweene the riuer of 
Ama∣zones,

and the riuer of 
Dessequebe,
 to grant his
gracious Letters Pattents to 
Robert Harcourt
 of Stanton
Harcourt in the County of Oxford Esquire, Sir 
Thomas
Challener
 Knight, and 
Iohn Rouenzon
 Esquire, and to the
heires of the said 
Robert Harcourt,
 of all the saide Coun∣tries,
Lands and Territories betweene the said two riuers
of 
Amazones
 and 
Dessequebe,
 and of all Islands, Lands and
Territories within twenty Leagues adiacent thereunto,
&c. Together with all Prerogatiues, Iurisdictions, Roy∣alties,
Priuiledges, Franchises and Preheminenses, both
for Gouernement, Trade, Trafficke, and otherwise, in as
large and ample manner, as either his Maiestie, or any of
his noble Progenitors, or Predecessors, haue heretofore
graunted to any Aduenturers, or Vndertakers of any Dis∣coueries,
Plantations, or Trafficke, of, in, or into any for∣raigne
parts whatsoeuer. To haue, hold, possesse, and en∣ioy
all and singular the premisses, to the sole and proper
vse of the saide 
Robert Harcourt,
 and his heires for euer.
And for that diuers honourable personages, Gentlemen,
and others, who are willing and desirous, for the Glory of
God, and the Honour of our Nation, to giue aide and as∣sistance,
eyther in person, or purse, to the vndertaking of
this worthy Action, and Plantation, may truly vnderstand
and know, how, and in what maner they shall receiue be∣nefit
and profit by their aduentures, and trauells therein;
It is thought fit and necessary, for their better content and
satisfaction, to publish these Articles insuing.


THe Planters in generall, are all Aduenturers either in per∣son,
or purse.



The meanest Aduenturer in Person, shall haue fiue hundred A∣cres
as a single share.


Euery one that aduentureth twelue pounds tenne shillings, shall
haue fiue hundred Acres as a single share; and so ratably according
to the aduenture, be it more or lesse.


The Plantation and Aduenture is intended to bee partly Gene∣rall,
and partly Particular.


In the Generall Plantation and Aduenture, all persons of all
conditions and estates, euen to the poorest seruants, and laborers,
men, women, and children, may aduenture asmuch or as little as
they please, from ten shillings vpwards, and shall haue in fee sim∣ple
the assured ratable increase and gaine according to the quanti∣tie
of his aduenture; So as for euery ten shillings aduentured, he
shall haue twenty Acres in inheritance, and so much yearely profit
as those twenty Acres may yeeld.


A Register shall be truely kept of the names of euery Aduentu∣rer
in person, and of euery Aduenturer in mony, and of the summe
by him aduentured, to the end that they may proportionably receiue
the full benefit of their Aduentures.


During the first three yeres, the whole benefit shall goe towards
the aduancement of the Plantation.


At the end of those three yeres, a fourth part of the cleere pro∣fites
remayning shall be diuided betwixt all the Aduenturers in
purse or person, ratably according to their shares, and aduen∣tures.


Yeerely for seuen yeares after the first three yeeres ended, three
parts of the whole cleere yeerely profit vpon euery returne shall be
in like maner diuided; and the other fourth part shall goe towards
the aduancement of the Plantation.


In those tenne yeares the Land may be surueyed, & fit distribu∣tions
& alotments made thereof to the Aduenturers and Planters.


After those tenne yeares it shall be free for euery one to make his
best of his alotment at his owne discretion by himselfe, or else to
trade and deale in common, as he did before with others, which per∣happes
will be most conuenient for all small Aduenturers: And a
setled order shall for that end be continued, for a continuall, ioynt,
and common trade and commerce for euer; for otherwise it might
prooue hard for Aduenturers of small summes to reape any benefit


after the ten yeeres ended: but by a common continued commerce,
they, or their heires, or assignes, shall be sure to haue it.


A Treasurer generall for the Plantation shall bee resident in
London, and when the returne of profit diuidable shall be, he shall
forthwith deliuer to a particular Treasurer resident in euery shire,
the proportionable part or profit due to the Aduenturers of that
shire, which particular Treasurer shall deliuer to the high Consta∣bles
of euery Hundred, the proportionable part due to the Aduen∣turers
of that Hundred: And the high Constables shal deliuer to
the Constables and Minister of euery Parish within their Hun∣dreds,
where any Aduenturers shall be, the proportionable part
due to the Aduenturers of that Parish. And the Constable & Mi∣nister
shal deliuer to euery person in that Parish his due, according
to the proportion of his aduenture.


To this end a Register shall be kept by the Constable and Mi∣nister
of each parish, of the names of each Aduenturer in that Pa∣rish,
with their seueral aduentures, & the time when they brought
in the same; So as such as he remooued out of a Parish where they
aduentured, to some other place, shall either themselues, or their
heires, or assignes receiue his proportionable profite in the parish
where he aduentured, without further trouble or trauell.


The like Register shall remaine with the high Constables, of the
Aduenturers in their Hundred.


And the like with the particular Treasurer of that shire, of the
Aduenturers of that shire.


And the like of all the Aduenturers whatsoeuer, with the Trea∣surer
generall for the Plantation.


But yet such as aduenture not before this next intended voyage;
(which wee account the first voyage for the Plantation) or before
the second, but stay longer expecting the euent, must not expect e∣quall
shares with the first Aduenturers: but if his aduenture come
in after the second voyage, and before the third, he shall want a fift
part of that which the first Aduenturers shall haue. And such as
come in before the fourth voyoge, shall want two fift parts. And
such as come in before the fift voyage, shall want three fift parts.
And such as come in before the sixt voyage (which perhappes may
be the last voyage in the first three yeeres, a voyage being ses forth
euery halfe yeare) shall want foure fift parts of what the first Ad∣uenturer


shall haue. And so a single share for so late an Aduentu∣rer
of twelue pound tenne shillings, will be but one hundred Acres
in inheritance, and his profit accordingly in proportion, and so for
a greater or lesser rate, so lately aduentured,


Euery Aduenturer in person, if he die hauing neyther wife, nor
childe in 
Guiana
 liuing, his next kinsman that will goe in person
at the next voyage or sending after his decease, shall haue his share
or part: but if none such will goe in person, then the next heire of
the deceased in England, shall haue a fift part of that share in in∣heritance,
being about one hundred Acres: And the residue being
foure hundred Acres, shall be disposed of to some other that will goe
in person, that so by the death of the party deceased, the number of
the Planters in person may not be diminished, and that yet his next
heire here, may haue some competent benefite by the aduenture of
his kinsmans person.


If a man and his wife goe, each of them shall haue fiue hundred
acres; yet so, that the share of the wife be at the husbands dispose,
as is vsed by husbands in England, that marry women heires, who
cannot alien the same without the wiues consent.


If a man & his wife goe, the suruiuor shal haue the others share,
if they haue no children borne in 
Guiana;
 but if they haue children
borne there, then onely the suruiuor shall haue the share of the de∣ceased,
vntill the childe be one and twenty yeeres olde, and then the
child shall haue it, for that the share of the personall aduenture of
the suruiuor, will be competent maintenance, so as the childe may
well haue the other share.


If a man and his wife, and a childe of theirs goe, each shall haue
fiue hundred Acres.


The shares of Commaunders, Officers, and men of place, and
qualitie, that aduenture in Person, are not to be rated according
to single shares of inferiour and common persons, that aduenture in
person: but according to their place, qualitie, and merite, in such
sort as shallbe fit to giue them content, and incouragement to ad∣uenture
their persons in so honorable and worthy an Action.


Diuine Preachers that wil imitate the glorious examples of the
Apostles (who ceased not to trauell amongst all sorts of Heathen
and sauage people for the plantation of the holy Gospel) are worthi∣ly
numbred amongst the persons of place & qualitie, and shall haue


such worthy shares, for the aduenture of their persons, in 
 ser∣uice
of the blessed Trinitie, as shall giue them good content. Thus
much concerning the Generall Aduenture and Plantation.


In the Particular Plantation and Aduenture, there shalbe cer∣taine
Signiories or other Portions of land allotted and graunted to
such as like not to be partakers of the Generall Plantation and Ad∣uenture;
but haue otherwise a desire to ioyne together in seuerall
companies or corporations of select friends and acquaintance, or
else to plant apart, and single by themselues, as Lords of Mannors,
or as Farmers.


These Signiories or Portions of Land shalbe conueyed and assu∣red
vnto them in Fee simple, with all such Royalties, Liberties,
Priuiledges, Franchises, and Commodities, as shalbe fit and neces∣sary
for the aduancement of their Plantations, and can (by vertue
of the Pattent) be granted vnto them.


They shall plant and people the same at their owne proper costs
and charges, and conuert the profits thereof to their owne vse and
behoofe, vnder the conditions following.


They shal yeerely pay vnto such Officers as shalbe appointed for
that purpose, the fift part of all Ores of Gold and Siluer, as shall at
all times hereafter, be found and gotten within the bounds and li∣mites
of the Signiories and Lands graunted vnto them, which fift
part of Oare, is by the Pattent reserued to his Maiestie.


The fift part being deducted for his Maiestie, they shal also pay
to the Patentees, or vnto their Officers for that purpose appointed,
all such rents and dueties, as betwixt the said Patentees, and them,
shall be agreed vpon, and such as haue beene vsually payed by the
planters and inhabiters of the like Plantations, whereof there are
extant many presidents: And also from time to time shall obserue,
pay, & performe, all such other customs, impositions, reseruations,
and limitations, as are mentioned & expressed in the said Patent.


And for their safety and defence in all the said particular Plan∣tations,
they shall be ayded, protected, and defended, both by Sea,
and Land, against all assaulters, inuaders, and intruders, accor∣ding
to the power and strength of the Vndertakers of the Generall
nerall Plantation, which I hope (with Gods assistance)
shall be sufficient to resist and repell the ma∣lice
of our greatest enemies.


FINIS.









