Strange and wonderfull things. Happened to Richard Hasleton, borne at Braintree in Essex, in his ten yeares trauailes in many forraine countries. Penned as he deliuered it from his ovvne mouth
Hasleton, Richard.
Approx. 60 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 19 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2004-03 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A02794




STC 12925



ESTC S106122





99841847




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Strange and wonderfull things. Happened to Richard Hasleton, borne at Braintree in Essex, in his ten yeares trauailes in many forraine countries. Penned as he deliuered it from his ovvne mouth
Hasleton, Richard.
Barley, William, d. 1614.
[36] p. : ill.  


London :


Printed by A[bel] I[effes] for VVilliam Barley, and are to be solde at his shop in Gratious streete, neere Leaden hall,


1595.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Voyages and travels --  Early works to 1800.
2003-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2003-10
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2003-11
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2003-11
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2003-12
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






12925


99841847


6462














STRANGE AND WONDERFVLL THINGS.


Happened to Richard Hasleton, borne at Braintree in Essex, In his ten yeares trauailes in many forraine countries.


PENNED AS HE DELIVE∣red it from his ovvne mouth.




NON PLVS


WB


printer's or publisher's device




LONDON Printed by A.I. for VVilliam Barley, and are to be solde at his shop in Gratious streete, neere Leaden hall. 1595.












AA




TO THE VVORSHIPFVLL Maister Richard Stapar, one of the vvorship∣full companie of the Marchants aduenturers of this ho∣nourable citie ofLondon, trading to Turkie and the Easterne kingdomes. Your worships faithfull welwiller W. Barley, wisheth all fortunate and happie successe in all your enterprises, with en∣crease of all worldly worship: and after death the ioyes vnspeakeable.


W
Orshipfull sir, the manie reportes of your rare vertues, generally spoken of all honest trauailers, who hath ta∣sted the benefit of your bountie, not onely in our home borne countrey where you haue your residence but in those farre countries where your ho∣nest factors trade; by whose worshipfull and expresse commaund giuen them, and the good they dayly do for all men which seeke them: your worship is accounted and called the Patterne of bountie, especially of such as are in their trauaile distressed with want, which with mo∣ney are releeued, aswell as other great cost their fauour or friendship can procure, so that not onely the poore and needy are pleasured thereby, but those that swim in most aboundance▪ all proceeding of your most kinde and courteous disposition.


The remembrance of which, mooued a longing desire in me, in some sorte, to explaine your worthinesse and fame by your bountie gained, it had neuer such oppor∣tunitie vntill this time: when perusing my store of pa∣pers and writings, of sundry mens labours, I chaunced


on this Pamphlet, which importeth the troublesome trauailes of our neere neighbour borne at 
Brainetree
 in Essex, named 
Richard Hasleton,
 whose miseries as they were many, being in the hands both of Christians and Heathen enemies, for God and our countries cause, and his escapes from death so often and so wonderfull, with the constant enduring of the same: his preseruation, and safe returne to England, where his longing desire so of∣ten wished him: all which considered, with your wor∣ships loue to all Traua
ers, imboldned me the rather vnder your worships patronage to publish the same, especiall zeale procuring me therevnto: and partly in regarde of your many fauoures to the said 
Hasleton
 in his miseries extended, that your worships good ensam∣ple may lighten others to such good actions, hoping your worship will except of it no lesse friendly, then I offer it willingly▪ which if you do, then is my desire satis∣fied, and my selfe rest bounden to your worships wor∣thinesse: euer beseeching the giuer of all good to en∣crease the number of such worthy minded subiects, by whom our Prince and countrie, are in for∣raine parts so much honoured.


Your vvorships to com∣maund in vvhat I may, 
William Barley.












The miserable captiuitie of Richard Hasleton, borne at 
Brainetree
 in 
Essex.






I
N the yeare 1582. departing the English coast toward the ende of May, in a ship of London, called the Mary Marten, one of the owners was a citizen of London, called M. 
Eastwoode,
 the other of them na∣med Maister 
Estridge
 dwelling at Lime-house, being laden and bound for 
Petrach.
 A Towne of ma
te, being within the dominion of the Turke, where we safely ariued and made our marte, and within eight and twentie daies wēte lading homeward, and presently we waied an∣ker, and set saile, and comming out of the golfe of 
Lepontoe,
 grounded vpon a rocke, lying on the larboarde side, béeing in very great daunger, in doubt to loose both ship and goods, yet it pleased God that we recouered. Then about the middest of the moneth of Iuly, we came right before 
Cape de gatte,
 when hauing a very small winde, we discried two


Gallies, whereupon the maister commaunded the gunner to put forth the ordinance, and to heaue the skiffe ouer board, then did the gunner demaund of the maister to make a shot, which he graunted. Then did he bestow eight and twentie shot, but to no purpose, for the enemy lay very far out.


Now when we sawe our shot and powder spent so much in waste, some of our company cryed to our maister to shew the Turkes letters, but he would not, but commaunded the gunner still to shoot, for now the Gallies were within shot, and did shoote at vs, both with great shot and Muskets, and presently both our gunners were slaine, both with on shot, and some other maimed, whereby we were in great doubt, for the Gallies lying on both sides of vs, one of them had shot vs vnder water, whereby our ship was foundred before we perceiued: then we perceiuing the ship to sinke from vs, such as were weriest lept into the skiffe, as many as it was able to beare▪ the rest leaping ouer board, such as could swim saued them selues, going aboard the Gallies, the other were drowned. Now I being the last man vpon the bat∣ches, because I was at the sterne and being sore hurte with a Muscot shot, the Turkes made hast to board our ship, ho∣ping to saue some of our goods, two of them came aboard, the first came to me and tooke me by the bosome. I drew out my knife very spéedily and thrust him into the body, and so slew him the other was gone downe into the ship where I left him, for euen then was the ship sinking from me, wherefore I betooke my selfe to swimming and turning me about to sée the ship I cou'd see nothing thereof but onely the flag: then did I 
oun to the Gallies, and laying holde vpon an oare, got into the Gallie: when I was aboard, I stripped of my clot
es, then presently was I commaunded to the Poope to talke with the Captaine, who inquired of me whether I was a Marchant, which because I would not confesse, he gaue me xv. strokes with a cudgell, and then put me in the Ga
lie
 holde, where I was sixe dayes, taking very little sustenance, lying in extreame paines, by reason of my hurts which▪ I haue receiued in the fight, and with anguish of minde for my harde happe.


About thrée monthes after the Gallies returned to 
Argire,
 where immediatly after my landing I was s
lde for 66. doubles. Then did I fall into extreame sicknesse for ten dayes space, no
∣withstanding I was sent to sea by my maister (to whom I was sold) to labour in the Gallies at an Oares end, where I remain
d thrée moneths, being very féeble and weake, by reason my sicknes continued the most part of that time, yet was I constr
ined either to labour or else to loose my head. I had no other choice: then the Gallies returning home to 
Argire,
 after my comming on shore I was in a maruailous weaknesse, what with contin
all labour, with beating, and with sicknesse, which indured thrée monthe
, being in a most miserable estate without all sucker, seeing no man to pitty my miserie, hauing no nourishment but onely bread and water, and that but sma
l quantity: no apparrell on me but a thi
 shirt, 
nd a paire of linnen bréeches, and l
dged in a stable on the colde ground. Thus I being almost in dispaire euer to recouer, yéelded my self
 to the will of Almightie God, whom it pleased in the en
 to giue me a little strength. And after for the space of two years or more▪ I was diuers times at my labour at the oares end, after my accustome
 manner, till such time our sléete of Gallies 
 wi
h the Gallies of 
Genua
 néere the Christian shore, and they following 
 in cha
e, it chanced by reason of tempest, that our Galley was cast away néere vnto the wea
 side of the Iland 
Fermonterra
: there were in it of Christians and Turkes to the number of two hundred and fiftie, which were all drowned, except fiftéene, of which my selfe with two others, with great difficultie brake o
r chaines, and taking hol
e vpon an Oare, we escaped to the shore, not without great danger of drowning. We being now gotten to land, and accompanied both with Turkes and Christi∣ans, we tooke our rest vnder bushes and thickets, the Turkes were very vnwilling to depart with vs, thinking to finde some other Galley of the company to take vs aboard and carie vs back to 
Argire,
 but we hoping now to get out liberties, conueyed our selues as secretly as we could into the w
ds▪ and went vnto a 
ck and with sharpe stones we did beat off our Irons, and s
ed 
me∣diatly to the Christians, and yée
ded our selues: but one of them which escaped with me who was borne in 
S
lauony,
 tol
e them that I was and English 
Lutherian.


Then was I presently caried aboard a Gallie of 
Genua,
 and put in chaines, and vpon the mo
row was I sent ouer into the Isle of 
Iuisey,
 being within the iurisdiction of 
Maiorque,
 which all are in the dominion of Spaine) there was I imprisoned in the high Tower of the towne Castell, with a paire of bolts vpon my héeles, & a claspe of Iron about my necke, there hanging a chaine at the claspe, where I remained nine dayes, fed with a little bread and water. Now because I had in no respect offended them, I de∣maunded wherefore they molested me, saying it was contrary to law and the profession of Christians. Then did they aske me if I had spoken any thing against the king, and against the Church of 
Rome?
 I answered nothing. Then they tolde me I should be sent to 
Maiorque,
 to answere before the Inquisition. Then the Iu∣stice or chiefe officer of 
Iuesey
 brought me backe to 
Genua,
 re∣questing to haue me chained in a Galley, which the Captaine did, asking the Iustice who should be my surety for running away? He demaunded if there were not a spare chaine? he said yes: then he commaunded a chaine to be brought foorth, and chained me at the sixt Oare before, where I rowed vntill we came to the Porte of 
Spine
 in 
Maiorque,
 garding me with xiiij Gallies.


Then were the 
icers of the Inquisition, sent for by the Cap∣taine, which came the second day after our comming there: and at their comming they offered me the Par, which I refused to touch: wherevpon they reuiled me, and called me 
Lutheran,
 taking me presently out of the Galley, carried me on shore in 
Maiorque,
 and finding the Inquisitor walking in the Market place, presented me to him, saying: Here is the prisoner. He immediatly commaunded me to prison, whether they carried me, and put a paire of shackles on my héeles, where I remained two daies. Then was I brought forth into a Church, where the Inquisitor sate vsually in iudge∣ment: who being ready set, commaunded me to knéele downe and to do homage to certaine images which were before me, I tolde him I would not do that which I knew to be contrary to the com∣maundements of Almighty God, neither had I béene brought vp in the 
Romaine
 lawe, neither would I submit my selfe to it. He asked me why I would not? I answered, that whereas in Eng∣land, where I was borne and brought vp, the Gospell was trulie preached, and mainteined by a most gracious Princes, therefore


I would not now commit Idolatrie, which is vtterly con
emned by the word of God. Then he charged me to vtter the truth, other∣wise I should abide the smart: Then was a stoole set, and he com∣manded me to sit downe before him, and offered me the crosse, bid∣ding me reuerently to lay my hand vpon it, and vrged me instant∣lie to do it, which mooued me so much, that I did spit in the Inqui∣sitors face, far which the Scribe gaue me a good buffet on the face.






So for that time we had no more reasoning, for the Inquisitor did ring a little Bell, to call vp the kéeper, and caried me to warde


againe, and the third day I was brought forth againe to the place aforesaid.


Then the Inquisitor asked me what I had séene in the Chur∣ches of England, I answered that I had séene nothing in the Church of England, but the word of God truly preached: then he demaunded how I had receiued the Sacraments? I replied that I had receiued them according to the institution of Christ that is, I receiued the bread in remembrance that Christ in the flesh died vp
n the crosse for the redemption of man. How (said he) hast thou receiued the Wine? whereto I replied and said, that I rec
iued the wine in remembrance that Christ shed his bloud to wash a∣way our sinnes 
e said it was in their manner, I said no: then he charged me to speake the truth, or I should die for it. I told him I did speake the truth, and wou'd speake the truth: for (said I) it is better for me to die guiltlesse then guiltie. Then did he with great vehemency charge me againe to speake the f
th, and sware by the Catholick Church of 
Rome,
 that if I did not, I should dye in fier, then I said, if I died in the faith, which I had confessed I should die guiltlesse, and tolde him he had made a vaine othe. And so I willed him to vse no circumstance to diswade me from the truth, for you cannot preuaile though I be now in your hands, where you haue power ouer my body▪ yet haue you no power ouer mysoule. I told
 him he made a long ma
ter farre from the truth, for which he said I should die. Then he had me say what I could to saue myselfe: where I replied as followeth. Touching the ma∣ner of the receiuing of Sacraments, where he said it was like to theirs: you (said I) when you receiue the bread, say it is the very body of Christ, and likewise you affirme the wine to be his very bloud, which I denied: saying that it was vnpossible for a mor∣tall man to eate the materiall body of Christ, or to drinke his bloud.


Then he said I had blasphemed the Catholick Church, I an∣swered that I had said nothing against the true Catholick church, but altogether against the false church: he asked how I could prooue it, saying, if I could not prooue it, I should die a mos
 cruell death.


Note by the way, that when any man is in durance for religi∣
n he is called to answere before no 
en assembly, but onely in


the presence of the Inquisitor, the Secretarie, and the Solic
, whom they terme the Broker: the 
 is as I take it, be
use they doubt that very many of their owne people 
 confesse the Gospel, if they did but 
 and vnderstand their absurd dealing. Againe to the matter because it was so secret, they v
ged me to speake the more: then he inquired whether I 
 euer bin conf
st, I said yes: he demaunded to whom? I said to God: he asked me if I had euer confessed to any Frier? I said no, for I do vtterly de∣fie them: for how can he forgiue me my sinnes, which is himselfe a sinner as all other men are.






Yes sayd he, he which confesseth himselfe to a Frier, who is a Father, may haue remission of his sinnes by his mediation, which I said I would neuer beléeue. Wherefore séeing they could s
duce me by no meanes, to 
 to their abhominable id
latrie,


the Secretary cried, Away with him: the Inquisitor and he 
row∣ned very angerly on me for the aunswers which I had giuen, and said they would make me tell an other tale. So at the ringing of a little Bell the Kéeper came and caried me to warde againe. At my first examination, w
en the Kéeper should lead me away, the Inquisitor did blesse me with the Crosse, but neuer after. Two dayes a
ter was I brought and set againe vpon a stoole before the Inquisitor, he bad me aske 
misericordiam,
 I tolde him I would craue mercie of Iesus Christ, who died for my sinnes, other 
mise∣ricordiam
 I would craue none. Then he commanded me to knéele before the Aultar, I said I would, but not to pray to any image, for yo
r Altar so adorned with many painted images (which were fashioned by the hands of sinfull men,) which haue mouthes and speake not, eares and heare not, nosesand smell not▪ han
s and handle not, séete haue they and walke not, &c, which God dot
 not allow at his Altar, for he hath 
tterly condemned them by his word. Then he said I had béene wrong taught, for said he, whoso∣euer shall s
 these figures in earth, may the better remember him in heauen, whose likenesse it doth represent, who would be a medi∣ator to God for vs: but I replied that all images were an abhemi∣nation to the Lord, for he hath condemned them in expresse words by his owne mouth, saying: 
Thou shalt not make thy selfe any grauen image, &c.
 Yea said he, but we haue néede of a Mediator to make intercession for vs, for we are vnworthy to pray to God our selues, because we are vile sinners, I sayde there was no mediato
 but Iesus Christ: where a
ter many absurd reasons and vaine perswasions, he tooke a pause.


Then I asked him why he kept me so l
ng in prison, which ne∣uer committed offence to them, knowing very well that I had béene Captaine in 
Argire
 néere fiue yeares space: saying, That when God by his mercifull prouidence, had thorow many great dangers, set me in a Christian countrie, and deliuered me from the cr
elty of the Turkes, when I thought to finde such fauour as one Christian oweth to another, I found them now more cruell then the Turkes, not knowing any cause why. The cause (said he) is, because the King hath warres with the Quéene of Eng∣land (for at that instant there was their Armie prepared ready to go for England:) wherevpon they would diuers times giue me


reprochefull words, saying that I should héere shortly of their a
∣riuall in England, with innumerable vaine bragges, which I omit for breuitie.


Then did I demande if there were not peace betwéene the king and the Quéenes Maiestie? whether they would kéepe me still? yea said he, vnlesse thou wilt submit thy selfe to the faith of the Romish Church: so he commaunded me away, I asked, where∣fore he sent for me, and to send me away, not alledging any matter against me? he said I should haue no other matter alledged, but that which I had spoken with mine owne mouth. Then I deman∣ded why they would haue the Romish Church to haue the supre¦macie? whereto he would make no answer. Then I asked if they tooke me to be a Christian? yes said he, in some respect, but you are out of the faith of the true Church. Then the kéeper tooke me to prison againe: and after for the space of thrée wéekes, I was brought forth to answer, thrée seuerall times euery wéeke: at which times they did sometime threaten me with death, some while with punishment, and many times they attempted to seduce me with 
aire words, and promises of great preferment, but when they sawe nothing would drawe me from the truth, they called me shamelesse 
Lutherian,
 saying many times: sée, he is of the ve∣rie bloud of 
Luther,
 he hath his very countenance: with many other friuolous spéeches.


After all this, he commaunded to put me in the dungion with∣in the Castell, fiue fathem vnder ground, giuing me once a day a little bread and water, which they let downe in a basket with a rope, there remained I one whole yeare, lying on the bare ground séeing neither Sunne nor Moone, no not hearing man woman or chi
de speake, but onely the kéeper which brought my small victu∣all. It happened about the yeares end, vpon the feast of 
Philip
 and 
Iacob,
 being the first day of Maye, that a prettie boye being the Keepers sonne, came to giue me my ordinarie foode, which he vsed sometime to do. Now when he opened the doore, and had let downe the basket, I asked who was there? he answered by his name, saying here is 
Matthew.
 I asked him where his Father was? he is gone to Masse, said he: so he let downe the trap doore and went his way, leauing the roape with the basket hanging still. And forasmuch as I lay without all comfort, reposing my


selfe onely vnto Gods prouidence, yet vnwilling to loose any op∣portenitie that lay in me (if God were pleased) whereby I might be deliuered.


So soone as I heard the boye was gone. I iumped vp and tooke holde vpon the reape, and wound my selfe vp to the doore▪ setting my foote against the wall and with my shoulders did I lift vp the trap doore. Now when I was aloft, and saw no man, for they were gone to sée some ceremonies of their idolatrous exercises in the citie. I knew no way to escape away, being now in the midst of the way: wherefore it was vnpossible to conuey my selfe so se∣cretly but I should be espyed.


Wherefore for a present shi
t▪ I went secretly into a voide roome of the Caste
l, where lay great store of Lime and earth, where I tied an old cloth (which I had) about my head and face, to kéepe the dust out of my eyes and eares, an
 so did I créepe into the lime, and couered my selfe so well as I could▪ lying there till toward midnight: and then hearing no man stirring, I got vp, and sought some way to get forth but could finde n
ne. Then be∣ing greatly perplexed, I bent my selfe to the good pleasure of Al∣mighty God, making my humble prayers, that he would of his mercie vouchsafe to deliuer me out of this miserable thraldome And searching too and fro, in the end I came where thrée great horses stoode tyed by the head and féete: then did I vnloose the hal∣ters from their heads, and the ropes from their legs, and went to the castell wall: when I had tied them end to end, I made it fast to the body of a Uine which grew vpon the wall, and by it did I strike my selfe over the wall into the towne ditche, where I was constrained to swim about fortie paces, before I could get forth of the ditch.


Then walked I too and fro in the city aboue two houres, sée∣ing no man, neither could I deuise any way forth: wherefore I retu
ned backe againe to the towne ditch▪ to sée if I could 
 any way to bring me without the towne walles▪ and following the ditch, at the last I perceiued by the noyse of the water, that there qas a water gate thorow the wall: where I 
 and found that the 
 of the water was vnder the wall, then did I very 
y enter the water, and diuing vnder water, got into the watergate, and sodainly the force of the water did driue


me through with such violence, that it cast me headlong against an other wall on the outside, which with the blow did much amase me: yet by the helpe of God I recouered, swimming downe the ditch, till I came where was a trough or pipe, which I tooke to be laid ouer the d
tch, to conuey some fresh water spring into the city: there did I climbe vp a post which bare the same, and got vpon the top of the pipe, where some ofthe watch being néere the wall per∣cei
ed me, but could not any way come néere to me. Then cried they in their toung, who is there, thrée or foure times, but I made no answer, but crept as fast as I could to get off the pipe to land: where before I could get downe, they shot some of their Muskets after me, but thanked be God none of the shot did hit me. Thus with great difficultie I escaped out ofthe citie, and went about six miles from thence before the day brake.


Then I we
t into a thick wood, for I perceiued there was ve∣ry many sent forth with 
span and crie, both footemen and horsemen to apprehend me, 
 I lay 
till the day and night following:






And after for s
auen daies space I wandred thorow desart waies, among woods and bushes, many times as I came néere t
e porte wayes, I heard the pursuers inquiring after me, demaunding of diuers whether they had séene me passe: 
me were very earnest to take me, other wishing that I might escape, for very many times I was so néere them, that I heard euery word they spake. Thus I imagined by all possible meanes to auoide the hands of these vnmercifull tyrants, being in great extremity with hunger and colde: for since the time I came out of the prison, which was at the least eight dayes, I had none other sustenance but Berries which I gathered from the bushes, and the rootes of Palme, and other like rootes which I digged out of the earth, and no other ap∣parrell but an old linnen cloth about my body, and a red Cap on my head, without either ha
, sh
es or any other furniture, so that by reason the way was very hard, I was forced to cut my cap in two, and lap it about my féete, to defend them from the sharpe stones and grauell.


Thus 
aueiling for the most part by night, I cha
sed to come where was a house standing alone, and néere the house there stoo
 a cart, wherein lay certaine horse collers, where searching among them, I 
ound the collars lined with sh
pe skinnes, which 
 I 
 
pon the collars, and apparrelled my selfe with them in 
 manner. I put one péece before me like a brest-plate, and an 
 on my shoulders and backe, with the wool
ie side toward my body 
 them together ouer my shoulders & vnder my armes with 
, which is a wéede like to that whereof our hand-baske
 are made, which is we
l knowne to such as haue trauel∣
 
 parts▪ and with an other péece I made me a cap. And in 
 s
emely ornaments I passed forth till about thrée daies after, 
 early in a morning, most vnhappily I crossed an high way, 
 a countryman trauailing with a Moile laden with rund∣
 of wine, espied me, and demaunded of me whether I was bound, I said I was going to 
Coothea,
 which is a towne lying vpon the shore side, but he suspecting me to be the man which was pursued, b
d me stay but I went onward, he ran after me, and threw stones at me, but I not able to ouer-runne him, being very 
éeble, turned backe, and with a pole which I caried began to de∣fend my selfe, striking at him thrée or foure times, at the last I


thrust at him, and hit him on the brest, and ouerthrew him, where∣vpon he made a horrible crie: and immediatly there came to the number of fiftéene more, some horsemen, some footemen: some ha∣uing swordes▪ some Harquebushes, and other Crosbowes: when I was thus beset, knowing no way to escape, I yéelded my selfe. Then they bound me hands and feete, laid me on a Moyle▪ and ca∣ried me backe againe to the citie of 
Maiorque,
 deliuering me to the Inquisitor, who when he had sent me to prison, commaunded a paire of boltes to be put on my legges, and an Iron claspe about my neck, with a chaine of fiue fathome long hanging thereat, which was done accordingly. And on the morrow I was brought foorth to the accustomed place, and in the same maner, where the Inquisitor sitting, asked me first why I had br
ken prison, and runne away, I said to saue my life: yea (said he) but now thou hast offended the law more then before, and therefore shall the law be now executed vpon thée.


Then I was carried away againe, and immediatly there was called an assembly of Cittizens, and such as were séene in the law, to counsell, and to take aduice, what punishment they might in∣flict vpon me▪ which being deliberated: I was brought forth a∣gaine and carried to the place of torment, which was in a Cell or vaute vnder ground, there being present but foure persons, that is to say, the Inquisitor, the Solicitor or Broker, who is to sée the law executed, a Dutche woman that dwelt in the citie, who was commanded thether to tell them what I spake, because I spake many times in the Dutche tounge, and lastly the tormentor. The Racke now standing ready before them, with seauen Flaxen roapes lying thereon, new bought from the market.


Then the Inquisitor charged me (as at all other times he vsed to do) that I should speake what I had to say, and to speake the truth, otherwise I should be euen now tormented to the death I séeing my selfe in the hands of such cruell tyrants, as alwayes thirst after the bloud of the innocent, euen as 
Caine
 who being wroth with his brother 
Abell,
 and carrying an heauie counte∣nance, could no way be eased but with his brothers bloud: so I past hope of life, turned my back toward them, and séeing my tor∣ments present before me, I fell downe vpon my knées, & besought the Lord to forgiue me my sinnes, and to strengthen my faith,


and to graunt me pacience to indure to the end.


Then they tooke me into a voide roome, and stripped me out of my ornaments of shéepe skins, which I repeated before, and put a paire of strong Canuas bréeches vpon me to couer my pri
ies, then bringing me to the racke againe, he commaunded me to lie downe (the barres of the Racke vnder me were as sharpe as the backe of a knife) now I willingly yéelding my selfe, lay downe, then the tormentor 
ound my hands ouer my brest crossewise, and my legs clasped vp together, were fast 
ied the one foot to the other knée. Then he fastened to either arme a corde, about the brawne of the arme, and likewise to either thigh an other, which were all made fast againe vnder the racke to the barres, and with an other corde he bound downe my head, and put a hollow Cane into my mouth· then he put foure cudgels into the ropes which were faste∣ned to my armes and thighes.


Now the woman which was present being interpretor, began to perswade me to yéelde, and confesse the faith of the Church of Rome. I answered, if it were the will of God that I should end my life vnder their cruell hands, I must be content: but it it please him, he is able to deliuer me, if there were ten thousands against me. Then the tormentor (as he was commaunded) began to wrest the ropes, which he did by little and little to augment my paines, and to haue them indure the longer, but in the end he drew them with such violence, as though he would haue plucked my foure quarters in sunder, and the
e stayed a good space: yet to declare their tyrannicall malice, thinking my torment not sufficient, he added more, powring water thorow the Cane which was in my mouth by little and little, which I was constrained either to let downe, or to haue my breath stopped, vntill they had tunned in such quantitie, as was not tollerable to indure, which pained me extreamely: yet not satisfied, they tooke and wet a linnen cloath, and laid it ouer my mouth, till I was almost strangled: when my body being thus ouercharged with such aboundance of water, af∣ter they had thus stopped my breath with the wet cloth, suddenlie with the force of my breath, and that my stomack was so much ouercharged, the water gushed out and bare away the cloath as if it had béene the force of a condict spoute. When the Inquisitor saw that all this would not make me yéeld, he commanded the tormen∣tor


to winde the corde on my left arme more straig
t▪ which put me to horrible paines, and immediatly the roape burst in sunder. Then said the Inquisitor, yea is he so strong, I wi
l make him yéeld, and commaunded the tormentor to put too a new roape.






Then the woman againe bad me yéeld, saying it were better to yéeld then to die so miserable a death: but I besought Almightie God to ease me of my paines, and to forgiue me my sinnes, answe∣ring her, that though they had power ouer my body, yet there was no torment should compell me to yéeld to their idolatrie, whereby I might bring my soule in danger of hell fire. Then the Inquisitor asked her, what I said? she answered that I had said I would neuer submit my selfe to the Church of 
Rome
: then did he most vehemently charge me to yéeld and submit my selfe to the Romish Church, otherwise he would pluck off one of my armes:


Whereupon I denying still, the tormentor in most cruell maner, wrested the r
pes as if he would haue 
ent my body in sunder: I being now in vntolerable paines, and looking for nothing but pre∣sent death, cryed out in the extremity o
 my a
guish. Now fare∣well wife and children, and farewell England, and so not able to vtter one word more, lay euen sencelesse.


The Inquisitor asked the woman againe what I said, she layd her hand vpon my head, & perceiuing that I was spéechlesse, tolde him I was dead: wherefore the Tormentor loosed the ropes, vn∣bound my hands and féete, and caried me vnto a chamber which they te
med 
S. Walters
 chamber. Where I c
mming to my selfe and receiuing some sence and reason, but could haue no féeling of any lim or io
nte. Thus I lay in a most lamentable and pittifull manner for fiue dayes, hauing a continuall issue of bloude and wa∣ter forth of my mouth all that space, and béeing so féeble and weake by reason of my torments, that I could take no sustenance: till the sixt day, a little recouering my strength, they gaue me a little quantity of bread and wine 
oo together, and presently the very same day, they caried me forth into t
e City, and set me vpon an Asses backe, and whipped me thorow out euery streete of the City of 
Maiorque,
 giuing me to the number of fiue hundred lashes, which made the bloud to runne downe my miserable carcase in such abundance, that it dropped at the belly of the Asse, to the ground. Now there were caried with me about the Citty very many harlots and whores, and other malefactors which had of∣fended the law, but none punished like me. After this they caryed me to the chamber from whence I came, where I lay without all worldly comforte.


Can any man (which vnderstandeth the absurd blindnesse, and wilfull ignorance, of these Spani
 tyrants, or Romish monsters) thinke them to be of the true church, which defend their faith with fire, sworde, and hellish torments, without all remorse or pitty, as you may perceiue by a manifest triall here set downe to the open viewe of the world: for when these helhounds had tormen∣ted this miserable creature, as you haue heard with a monsterous and most vnchristian kinde of torment, which he indured for the space of thrée howe
s: till being at the very poynt of death, and ready to yeeld vp the ghost, they not yet satisfied with these tor∣ments


which he had suffered already, reserued his life, minding to increase his paines, which they were nothing slacke to performe, so l
ng as he remayned in their power.


Now the second night a
ter that they had whipped me about the city as aforesayd, about midnight I recounting to my selfe in what m
sery I both did and h
d remained, I thought to put in practise once againe to get my libertie, crauing of the Lord with heartie prayer to assist me with his mighty hand.


And immediatly searching about, I found an olde Iron stub, with the which I▪ brake an hole thorow the chamber wall, and crept through 
 an other chamber, where I felt in the darke many péeces of plate, which I little regarded: after I found ma∣nie Towels and Table napkins. Then séeking further, I found a long Cane whereon there hung many puddings and Sauceges, I plucked downe the Cane, but had little minde on the victuall. Then I found certaine kniues, then I espied some light at a great window in a Garret or loft ouer me: wherefore I tied a crooked knife to the Cane, and thrust vp a long Towell, and with the knife at the end of the Cane I drew the Towell about a barre of the window, and drew it to me, and with that towell I did climbe vp into the windowe, but then I could not get forth betwéene the barres, wherefore I digged forth one of the barres, and tyed my towels and napkins together end to end, and fastned one end to a barre of the windowe, and then did slide downe by them till I came within thrée or foure fathom of the ground, when the towels brake in sunder, and I fell downe into a Well which was direct vnder me, where I was almost drowned: yet it pleased God to deliuer me. And then being in the city without the castell w
lle
, I knowing no other way to get out, went againe to the towne ditch, where I got thorow the water gate with lesse perrill then before, by reason there was lesse water then was the other time. Then went I with all spéede into the woods, lying all dayes in woods as close as I could, and trauailed by nights thorow woods and mountaines: and vpon the third night about midnight, I happened into an Oliue garden, not aboue halfe a bow shoote from the sea side, in which garden I found a little skiffe or boate lying vnder a Pomegranate trée, and there lay in the boate a hatchet, all which serued happily for my deliuery.


Now I being vnable to carrie the boate to the water side, di
ut small tr
rchens of wood, and vpon them did slide it downell the water fide. Then I cut downe an arme of an Oliue tr
e, t
 make my boate a mast, and hauing no other shift, made me a sail
 cloth with my bré
ches and a péece of mantle which I had abou
 me, and for my Oares were very meane, yet durst I stay to look
 for no better, but presently set sayle and yealded my selfe to the goo
 pleasure of almighty God, betooke my selfe to sea, willing rather to abide what the Lord would lay vpon me, then to dye among these most cruell tirants.


And by the prouidence of God, vpon the second day in the fore∣noone I discryed the coast of 
Barbar
e,
 for the 
de stoode north∣east, which seruedme most happily.


Understand that this cut is from shoare to shoare, one hundred and fifty leagues, which is foure hundred and fifty Englishmiles, and at that time a very rough sea, in somuch if it had not bin by the greate and wonderfull power of God, my vessell and I, had both bin ouer whelmed.


But I falling with the countrie of 
Cabiles,
 commonly called the king of 
Cookooes
 lande, néere a towne called 
Gigeley,
 where I went on shoare, leauing my boate to swimme which way the winde and weather would conduct it, thinking it had done me sufficient seruice.


But sée now, when I had escaped through the surges of the sea from the cruelty of the 
Spaniard,
 I was no sooner landed and entered the Mountaines, but being espied by the 
Moores
 which inhabit the countrie, who pursued very earnestly to take me, sup∣posing me to be come from the Christian shoare to robbe in their coaste for many times the 
Spaniards
 will passe ouer in some small vessell, and go on shoare: and if they can catch any man of the countrey, they carry them away to make Gallie slaues, where∣fore the 
Moores
 are very diligent to pursue them at their land∣ing: and if it chaunce they take any Christian▪ they vse him in like sort. Wherefore I being very 
nwilling to 
all into their hand
, was constrained to go into a riuer which ranne betwéene two Mountaines, and there to stand in water vp to the chinne, where the bushes and trées did growe most thick ouer me: where I stoo
 certaine houres, vntill they had lest searching for me.


Now when I perceiued they were departed▪ I went out 
 the water being very 
eeble, for I cat nothing all that time, but the barke of the trées which I cut with my hatchet. I went 
oorth as secretly as I could, minding to passe to 
Argi
e:
 I had not gone aboue three mi
es, when I espied a 
Moore
 a very well fauoured olde man, who was wéeding in a fiel
 of wheat, I spake vnto him in the toung of 
Franke,
 and called him to me, I hauing my hatchet in my 
 cast it from me,




He came vnto me, and taking me by the hand, demaunded very gently what I would haue. I perceiuing that he did euen at the first sight pitty my poore and miserable estate, tolde him all things that had happened vnto me, how I was an Eng∣lish man, how I had bin Captiue in 
Argire,
 how I chanced


to come to 
Genua,
 their sending me to 
M
iorque,
 and all the the torment which I had suffered there, and finally, my escape from thence, with all the rest that followed.


This good aged father, when he had heard my lamentable discourse,
 shewing himselfe rather a Christian, then a man brought vp among the Turkish Mahometists, greatly pittied my misery▪ and 
ort
with did leade me home to his house, and caused such vi
tu
s as the countrie yéeldeth to be set before me, which was dried Whea
e and Hun
e, and baked a cake vpon the fire hearth, and then 
ried it with Butter which I thoug
t very good mea
e, for I had not béene at the like ban∣ket in six
 yeares before▪ the good father shewing me what comfo
t he could.


There I remained 
 and twentie howers, in 
he mean
 time the 
Moores
▪ which dwelt in the vil
ages by, vn∣derstanding of my being there, came, and calling me foorth, in∣quire of me what I was, from whence I came, and whether I would▪ and with great vehemencie c
arged their 
eapons again
t my brest,
 insomuch 
hat I thought they woul
 verily haue 
, but mi
e 
 t
at good old man came forth and 
 for me, and 
o diswaded them from doing me any 
 
nd tooke me backe againe into his house▪


This being past, I r
queste
 him to helpe me to a guide to con
ict me to 
Argire,
 and he presently prouided two, where∣of the one was his sonne, to whom I promised to g
ue foure crownes for their paines. So taking my leaue of my good hoas
, we 
oke our way toward 
Argire
: when we had not passe
 aboue xxiiij. miles on the way, we chaunced to méete a Gen
eman of that countrie, who was as 
 were Pu
ueior to the k
ng, and went about the countrie to take vp c
rne and graine for the kings prouision: he méeting vs vpon 
he way, asked whet
er we were trauailing? my guides answered, that we were going to 
Argire,
 he asked what we had to do there? they sayde to deliuer me there. Then he demanded what I was? 
hey 
ol
e him I was an Englishman that came from the Christian 
oare; and was bound towards 
Argire.


Then did this Gentleman take me from them, sending them backe from whence they came, but compelled me to goe with him to a village by, and very earnestly perswaded me to turne 
Moore,
 promising if I would, he would be a meane to preferre me greatly, which I still denyed. Then vpon the next day, he caried me further to a towne called 
Tamgote,
 and deliuered me to a noble man of great authoritie with the king, which was as Liefetenant generall for the warres (for this King of 
Cook
o
 houldeth continuall warre with the King of 
Argire,
 although they be both subiect to the great Turke.)






I was no sooner brought before this Nobleman, but he


demanded whether I would turne 
Moore,
 I answered that I would not immediatly he commanded a paire of shackels to be put on my héeles, and a claspe of Iron about my neck▪ with a chaine thereat▪


Then was I set vpon a Mule, and conveyed to 
Cookooe,
 where the King lay▪ when I was came thether I was pre∣sently brought before




the king: who inqui∣red what I was, and from whence I came & what my pretence was. I aunswered that I was an Eng∣lishman, and that I came from the Chri∣stian shore, intend∣ing to passe to 
Ar∣gire.
 Then he asked me what I could do. I tolde him I could do nothing. Then he demanded whether I were a Gunner,
 I said no: then he per∣swaded me very in∣stantly to yéelde to their religion, offe∣ring to preferre me: wherefore, I desired him to giue me liber∣tie to depart, for my desire is to be in Eng∣land with my wife and children. Yea, said he, but how wilt thou come there, for they minded to kéepe me still: and euer∣more the king assayed to seduce me with promises of great preferment, saying: if I would serue him and turne 
Moore,
 I should want nothing. But on the contrary, I besought him to giue me libertie to go to 
Argire,
 where I was in hope to


be deliuered, and sent home to mine owne countrie.


Now he séeing he could winne me by no gentle meanes, commaunded me to prison, saying, that he would either make me to yéelde and turne 
Moore,
 or else I should die in capti∣uitie.


In this while that I remained in prison, diuerse of the kings house came to me, perswading me to yéelde to the kings de∣maund, alledging how hardly the king might vse me, being now in his power, vnable any way to escape, and againe how bountifully the king would deale with me, if I would submit my selfe.


Within a little time after, it happened there was great preparation for to receiue the King of 
Abbesse,
 whose coun∣try adioineth to the king of 
Cookooes
 land, and are in league together, and ioyne their armies in one against the king of 
Argire.
 Now at his comming, I was fetcht foorth of prison, and commaunded to charge certaine péeces of Ordinance,
 which were thrée Sacres and two Minions of brasse, which I refused not to doe, trusting thereby to get some libertie, wherefore at the comming of this king of 
Abbesse
 into the towne, I discharged the Ordinance as liked them very well, for they are not very expert in that exercise, for which I had some more libertie then before.


This King of 
Abbesse
 tarrying some certaine time there in consulting with the king of 
Cookooe,
 for matters tou∣ching the warres with 
Argire,
 and vnderstanding of me, sent for me, bring very desirous to talke with me, where after cer∣taine questions, he desired of the other king that he might buie me, which he would not graunt. Then the King of 
Cabiles
 or 
Cookooe
 perswaded me very seriouslie to serue him wil∣lie, and to turne 
Moore,
 and offered to giue me vij. hundred Dubles by the yeare,
 which amounteth to the summe of fiftie pounds of English money, and moreouer to giue me by the day thirtie Aspers (which is worth twelue pence English) to finde me meate, and likewise to giue me a house and lande sufficient to sowe an hundreth bushels of graine yearely, and two Plowe of Oxen, furnished to till the same: also to furnish me with horse, Musket, Sworde, and other necessaries, such


as they of that country vse. And lastly he offered to giue me a wife fréely, which they estéemed the greatest matter, for al buy their wiues at a great price, yea if there were any in his court could content me I should make my choise, but if there were not, he would prouide one to my contentment, whatsoeuer it should cost him. But whē he perceiued all he said was in vaine, he sent the Quéene and her gentle women to talke with me.




When she came, she very courteously intreated me to turne and serue the King, and to consider well what a large offer the King had made, saying, that I was much vnlike to come to any like preferment in my country: and many times she would shew me her Gentlewomen, and aske me if none of them could please me, but I tolde her I had a wife in mine


owne country to whome I had vowed my faith before God and the world, which vow I said I would neuer breake while we both liued. Then she sayd she could but maruaile what she should be whome I estéemed so much▪ as to refuse such offers of preferment for her sake, being now where I must re∣maine in captiuity & slauery, all the daies of my life, but whē she▪ could preuaile no way with me, when she had vttered these forsaid spéeches, & many other which were friuolous to reherse, she left me, yet by her meanes I had more libertie then before.


After this I was set to sawe Boardes and Plankes, and was commaunded to make a carriage for a péece of Ordi∣nance: Thus they compelled me to labour daily, which I did the more willingly, because I hoped still to get my libertie thereby in the end. Then they willed me to shew the fashion of our edge tooles after the English, which when they saw the fa∣shion, their Smithes wrought them very artificially, & gaue them very good temper: for these things I was had in more estimation, insomuch that they tooke off my Irons, and let me walke abroad with a kéeper. Then was I commanded by the king,
 to teach the Carpenters to frame a house after the man∣ner of English building, and for that purpose were sent foorth Carpenters and workemen with me to the woods to fall tim∣ber, all which were to do what I appointed vpon the kings commandement. Now I being chiefe Maister of the worke, appointed out the trées which were very speciall good timber: in small time we had finished our frame, which liked the King very well. By this means I had more liberty then before, and was very well intreated, yet I was greatly gréeued in minde, that I could not procure any meanes for my liberty, although at that time I wanted few necessaries: yet was I daily deui∣sing how I might escape away, for thrée speciall causes: one was, for the speciall care I had of my saluation, because (as you haue heard) there were many temptations laide before me, to drawe me from a Christian to be an abhominable idolatour. The second cause was, for the loue & dutifull allegiance which I owe to my Prince & naturall countrie. The third is, the re∣gard of the vow which I had vowed in matrimonie, & the care of my poore wife & children: which causes mooued me so much,


that whereas by reason of my diligence in these foresaid mat∣ters, I walking abroad with my kéeper, who not suspecting me, was not so attentiue as before he had béene. So soone as our frame was finished, I tooke opportunitie, and shewing them a paire of heeles, tooke my way ouer the Mountaines, intending to go for 
Argire.
 But presently there was great store of men, both on horseback and one foote, who being more perfect in the way then I was, quickly ouertooke me, & caried me back againe to 
Cookooe.
 I was presently brought before the King, who asked me why I ran away? I told him to haue libertie. Then he called certaine of his seruants to him, and commanded them to lay me downe at his féete, which foure of them did, and laying me flat vpon the belly, one of them gaue me 75 stripes with a great cudgell, till I was not able to re∣mooue out of the place. Then the king commanded to carie me to prison againe, whether two of them caried me, and put me in Irons and there left me, where I remained for the space of two moneths:
 then was I brought forth of prison, & sent daily to a fountaine or well, about halfe a league from the towne to fetch water with a couple of Asses, for y
e
 vse of the kings house.






Now in this time many artificers, as Smithes, Ioynces, and carpenters, and many other, came to me to vnderstand the fashion of many English tooles, as Plane yrons, Goudges▪ Chissels, and such like, for which they shewed me some fauour, and gaue me some money: and when I had gotten a little mo∣ney, I bestowed it vpon apparrell, and caused it to be made like to theirs, which I caried secretly, when I went to fetch water, and did hide it in a drie caue vnder the side of a rocke: I bought me likewise a sworde and a launce, such as they vse to trauaile with, I also prouided a file, all which I laide vp with my apparell.






It happened that the King of 
Abbesse,
 came againe to visit the King, and to take counsails about warlike affaires, as vsu∣ally


they did, wherefore when they heard of his comming, ma∣king great preparation for him, it fell out so that there wanted water, in the offices: where in an euening there was excéeding thunder▪ and raine, and lightning so that there was no man would goe for water, but euery one calling for the English∣man: then I, which durst say no nay, tooke the vessels, and hung them vpon the Asses, and so went thorow raine, and winde, and thunder, and all, till I came to the well, where I left my Asses, to wander whither they would, and went to my apparrell, and with my File cut off my yrons, and made me ready, in my sute of Moores clothing, and with my sworde by my side, and my Launce on my shoulder, tooke my way once againe towards 
Argire.


And that night I went about twentie miles ouer Rockes, and mountaines, kéeping my selfe out of beaten waies, cast∣ing my way by the moone and starres. When the day began to be light I lay me downe in a brake of thicke bushes, and there I slept the most parte of the day, and in the euening I began to trauell forth on my way.


Now on the third night I was to passe a bridge where was continuall watch, and warde, both day and night, where I must of necesitie passe, by reason the riuer ran betwixt two mountaines which were so stéepe that no man can neither goe downe to enter water, nor yet béeing in, can by any possible meanes get vp on the other side, which riuer is a great defence to the Countrey.


Where I vsed no delay but entered the Bridge in the be∣ginning of the night, about nine of the clocke, being in great doubt of the watch, but at the first end of the Bridge I sawe no man, vntill I was happily passed ouer, then there came one after me and asked who goes there, it being somewhat darke and I in apparrell and with my weapons like a Moore, of their countrey, answered bouldly that I was a freind and tolde him I was comming to the Gouernour to deliuer letters from the King, for neere the riuers side there is a Uillage, where dwelleth hee who hath charge of the kéeping of this passage.


Whereby I went onward thorow the Uillage, but before I was farre passed: I heard horsemen vpon the Bridge, which asked whether any man had passed that night, the watchmen told them there was one gone euen now, which said he went to deliuer the Kings letters to the Officer.






But I thought no time now to heare any more of their talke but betooke 
e to my héeles, and so soone as I was without the Towne I went out of the Porte way, into woodes, and kept desert wayes that night and day following. And the next night I came within the liberties of the King of 
Ar∣gire,
 where I knew the 
Cabiles,
 could not fetch me backe againe.


In this order I escaped their hands, by the mightie power of God: for vnderstand, that in these desart Mountaines there are all manner of wilde beasts in great number,
 as Li∣ons, Beares, Woolues of marueilous bignesse, Apes, wilde Swine, and also wilde Horses and Asses, with many other hurtfull beasts, yet was I neuer in danger of any of these.






In this countrie of 
Cabyles,
 there is diuerse kindes of ve∣rie pure mettales, as Golde, Siluer, and Lead, and good Yron and Stéele, but they for want of knowledge and skill, make no vse of any mettall, except Yron and Stéele: although at such times as I haue béene present whiles the Smithes haue tryed their Yron, I haue séene among the drosse of the Yron very perfect golde, which they perceiuing me to beholde, were very inquisitiue to vnderstand whether it were golde, or any


other mettall of substance: but I tolde them it was but a kinde of drosse, whereof we made coulours for paint
 in England.


They caried me out to the Mountaines, and shewed me the rockes where they gathered their Yron, which rocks had vaines of very pure golde Oare, which I would not reueile to them, but answered as before: because I doubted if the king once knew me to haue experience in such mysteries, he would kéepe me the more straight, whereby I might haue remained in bondage during my life.


Now when I was within the countrie of 
Argire,
 I was out of danger from the pursuers, and then did I walke by day, and kept the common wayes, where comming within the view of 
Argire,
 vpon the way I met a Turke, who knew me at the first sight, since I was prisoner in 
Argire,
 and de∣maunded if I had not béene captiue with such a man? I sayd yes: he then inquired whether I wente to the citie? I saide yes, then returned he backe, and did accompanie me to the Citie.


When I came there, I would haue gone to the English house, but he led me violently to my olde Maister, where I rested me a day and a night, my maister not being very earnest, for be∣cause in this time that I was absent all the English captiues were redéemed and sent home. Wherefore I went to the English counsell, hoping to be presently deliuered, who gaue me very good words, but did not shew me that fauour which he professed.


I could make some discourse of his vnkinde dealing with me and other of our countreymen, which I will leaue till moe fit occasion: for vnderstand that whiles I was with him, there came a messenger from my olde maister, with whome I was before I went to 
Genua,
 who would haue caried me away by force, but I would not goe, requesting the counsell to take order for my deliuerie: but he perswaded me to goe with him, saying, that he would in time prouide for my li∣bertie.


But by meanes I would not yéelde to go to my Maister, nor yet the counsell would not take order for me I was taken


by the kings officers, and put in chaines in the Kings prison among other captiues: and at the next setting out of the Gal∣lies I was put to my olde occupation, where I remained a Galley slaue for thrée yeares and aboue after.






In which time I was eight voyages at sea, and at such time as the Galleys lay in harbour, I was imprisoned with the rest of the captiues, where our ordinarie foo
e was bread and water, and at some fewe times, as once or twise in the wéeke a small quantitie of sodden wheat.


To conclude, I passed my time in sicknesse and extreame slauerie, vntill by the helpe of an honest Marchant of this citie of 
London,
 and hauing a very fitte opportunitie by meanes of certaine our English ships were ready to set saile bound homeward, vpon Christmas euen being the 23 of Decem∣ber 1592. I came abourd the 
Cherubin
 of 
London
: who weighing anckor, and hauing a happy gale, arriued in Eng∣land toward the end of Februarie following.


Thus haue you heard how it hath pleased the Almightie God (after many and great miseries) to bring me to the porte which I longed greatly to sée: beséeching God of his mercy, to prolong the dayes of our most gratious and renowmed Quéene, whose fame reacheth faire, and whose most happy gouernment is in admiration with forraine Princes▪ So wishing all to t
e glory of God, and fur∣therance of the Gospell, I end.


FINIS.











