Instructions giuen by the princes of Nauarre and of Conde, the Counte of Colligny admyrall of Fraunce, and other lords & gentlemen of their counsell, and others chosen by the nobilitie of the prouinces of this realme, to the deputies of their parte, vpon the conferences holden vvith the sieurs of Biron & Malassize; tvvo of the kings priuie counsell, and deputed by his Maiestie, for the negociation of the peace, most humbly beseeching his Maiestie to graunt vnto them the most iust and necessary demaundes vvhich follovv, for the health of their soules, and preseruation of their honors, lyues, and goodes.
Approx. 27 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 14 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A02964




STC 13104



ESTC S108567





99844225




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Instructions giuen by the princes of Nauarre and of Conde, the Counte of Colligny admyrall of Fraunce, and other lords & gentlemen of their counsell, and others chosen by the nobilitie of the prouinces of this realme, to the deputies of their parte, vpon the conferences holden vvith the sieurs of Biron & Malassize; tvvo of the kings priuie counsell, and deputed by his Maiestie, for the negociation of the peace, most humbly beseeching his Maiestie to graunt vnto them the most iust and necessary demaundes vvhich follovv, for the health of their soules, and preseruation of their honors, lyues, and goodes.
[48] p.   


[London :


S.n.,


1570]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
France --  History --  Wars of the Huguenots, 1562-1598.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Enrique Valdive
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Enrique Valdive
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






13104


S108567


99844225


9016














INSTRVCTI∣ons giuen by the Princes 
of Nauarre, and of Conde,
 the Counte of Colligny Admyrall of Fraunce, and other Lords & Gen∣tlemen of their counsell, and others chosen by the Nobilitie of the Prouinces of this Realme, to the Deputies of their parte, vpon the conferen∣ces holden with the Sieurs of Biron & Malassize, two of the kings priuie Counsell, and deputed by his Maiestie, for the negociation of the peace, most humbly beseeching his Maiestie to graunt vnto them the most iust and necessary demaundes which follow, for the health of their soules, and preseruation of their honors, lyues, and goodes.




1. 
T
Hat all persōs of what qualitie and condition so∣euer they be, and in what∣soeuer townes and places of thys realme, and coun∣tries of the obeysance and protection of hys Maiestie they doe dwell or abyde, maye lyue in the same in full libertie of conscience nowe and hereafter wythout impechement or gainsaying, or to be com∣pelled to doe any thing in matter of Reli∣gion against their will.


2 That all Gentlemen and other per∣sons inhabitants of the realme, or straun∣gers, hauing high Iustice in all or in part, of their owne in propertie, or during their liues, or else such as doe fully possesse roy∣alties in 
Normandy,
 may in the same pla∣ces where they haue the saide Iustice and royalties, and in such places as they shall thinke most conuenient as well absent as present, haue and cause to be vsed the said exercise of their religion, as wel for them∣selues, their householde and tenaunts, as for all other that will resort thither.


3 As for other Gentlemen, hauing no

 such highe Iustice: that they may vse the same exercise of the religion in their hou∣ses for themselues and their houshold. So as they doe not dwell in the townes, bo∣roughes, or paryshes of the sayde Lordes that haue high Iustice (sauing such as be his Maiesties) or else with the sufferaunce or lycence of the sayde Lordes of highe Iustice. Which it may please his Maie∣stie to order that by his example the same licence may not be refused. And shall not suffer them to be reproched or blamed as breakers of his Edict, if there resort to the sayd exercise of religion any other persōs than of their owne housholde, or y
t
 if there happen any christning that requireth hast.


4 That in all townes and places where the exercise of the sayde religion is nowe vsed, the same may so continue. And to ac∣commodate the reast of the Prouinces of this realme with the same exercise of the religion, that in thrée townes of the same Prouinces and gouernments to be na∣med in the sayde Edict, the exercise of the religion shall be vsed for all persons that will resort thyther.


5 That the Quéene of 
Nauarre,
 the

 Princes and Princesses of the bloud, and the principal officers of the crowne, being at the Court, may vse the sayde exercise of the religiō, in y
e
 lodgings of their traines.


6 That vnder the name of the exercise of the religion may be comprised all actes appertayning as well to the ministery, or∣dring, and discipline, as also to the publike and priuate teaching of children & others.


7 As for Churchyardes, for the buriall of the deade, that the Lordes of high Iu∣stice, Maiors, Aldermen, and officers of the places where the sayde exercise of the religion shall be permitted, may thereof consider and take order. And in other pla∣ces they shall get some place to burie the deade, and therein to haue the assistance of the kings officers.


8 That in all Vniuersities and schooles, all persons may be indifferently receiued, whether it be to teach or to study, and not to be questioned withall, or forced for the matter of religion.


9 That al pore and sick folkes shal also be receyued into the Hospitals & other like houses, and haue part of all publike alme∣ses, and be vsed with lyke indifferencye,

 being of the one religion or the other.


10 That those of the sayde religion shall not be chalenged for their mariages, be∣ing in the degrées not forbidden by the lawes receyued in this realme.


11 That the lymits of .x. leagues men∣tioned in the article touching the exercy∣sing of the religion forbidden at 
Paris,
 as vncertaine, may at the least be chaunged into the Prouostie and Viscontie. In the which if it so please his Maiestie, to com∣maunde it absolutely, he shall not néede to be further pressed, to haue the exercise of the religion there. But if that shall not please his Maiesty: yet that it may please him to moderate somewhat the straight∣nesse of this commaundement, and not to take awaye from all Lordes of highe Iustice, the generall licence giuen vnto them, to vse the exercise of the sayde reli∣gion, some of them hauing chiefe Lord∣ships within the sayde Prouostie and Vi∣contie, which shall be named vnto him by the sayde Deputies. This to be done as well on the behalfe and fauour of the said Lordes, as of a great number of people that otherwise shal be without heauenly &

 spiritual foode, or else shal be to much trou∣bled in going farre, to haue it farre of, but chiefly for the christning of their children.


12 And as touching that which (next vnto the conscience) is most déere vnto all persons, that is, the honor and goodes, and to lay a sure foundation in that which shal be for this cause ordred, to the ende there be no doubt made of the sinceritie of the Quéene of 
Nauarre,
 of the Princes of 
Nauarre,
 and of 
Conde,
 the father and the sonne, according to the assurance gi∣uen to his Maiestie of their part, that all y
t
 which hath bene done in these warres, was done for a good meaning, and for the zeale of their religion: his sayde Maiestie shal declare y
t
 he doth take thē for his good Cosins, faythfull subiects and seruauntes, as in lyke case he doth take and estéeme the Lordes, Knightes, Gentlemen, Cap∣taines, officers, and other inhabitants of the townes and Boroughs of this realme and countries of his obeysance, who haue folowed, succoured, and holpen them in the saide warres, in what place or sort soeuer the same hath bene, to be his good and faithfull subiects and seruaunts. And

 for like good and reasonable occasion, his Maiestie shall declare that he doth take the heyres of the late Duke of 
Deux∣pontes,
 the Princes of 
Orange,
 Counte 
Ludouic
 of 
Nassau
 his brother, and 
Vol∣rode
 Counte of 
Mansfeld,
 to be his good Cousins, neighbors, and friends.


13 And to shew himselfe to be so in déede towards the sayde persons: he shall order that the sayde Princes of 
Nauarre
 and 
Conde,
 shall enioy those lands belonging to them, which haue bene taken from them, and are in the handes of the king of 
Spaine.
 Or else for lack of satisfaction to be made by the sayde king of 
Spaine,
 the King shall giue them letters of Mart.


14 Also his Maiestie shall effectuallye cause the sayde Prince of 
Orange,
 and Countie 
Ludouic
 of 
Nassau
 his brother, to be restored and put in possession, in the principaltie of 
Orange,
 rightes, landes, and iurisdictions of the same, and all that therevnto belongeth, and also in other lands, Lordships, and iurisdictions, which they haue in his realme and obeysance. Of which principaltie, one parte of the places haue bene taken by the 
Sieur
 of

 
Suse
 Knight of the order, and some o∣ther places haue bene seazed by the kings letters patents for his seruice. And that the sayd Prince and Counte his brother, may from henceforth enioye the same, as they did before the troubles, and as it is expressed in the treaties of peace, made betwéene the late king Henry of Fraunce and the king of Spaine, and other proui∣sions and declarations sithence graunted for the behoofe of the saide Prince: Not∣withstanding all procéedings, sentences and orders, made and giuen during the troubles, which shall be as nothing, and of none effect or force.


15 He shall also cause to be restored ef∣fectually to the sayd noble mē, all the wri∣tings, titles and documents, rents, fruits, and reuenues appertayning to them, ta∣ken in the time of the present troubles, as∣well in the sayd principalitie, as in the landes of his maiestie, the same to be exe∣cuted by the Commissioners, at the tyme of the execution of the Edict of pacificati∣on, or by such other of the kings officers, as the sayde noble men will choose.


16 And his Maiestie meaning to re∣paire

 all things happened in the tyme of these warres, as much as he can: his ma∣iestie will giue order that al prisoners and such as haue bene stayed by iustice, and o∣therwise sent to y
e
 Galleys vpon occasion of these troubles, shall be set at lybertie on eyther part, without paying any raūsome. And as for the Raunsoms alreadie payde, there shall nothing thereof be recouered.


17 And whereas variaunce may hap∣pen to aryse vppon occasion of sales of landes and other immouable goods, and engaygings made vpon occasion of raun∣soms, before y
e
 Duke of 
Aniou
 the kings brother, (calling vnto him the Mareschals of Fraunce) to be by him decyded and en∣ded: It may be ordered that all persons, aswell of the one Religion as of thother, reciprokely, and whome it toucheth, shal enter agayne into all their immouable goodes, which they did possesse before the sayde troubles, and that haue fallen vnto them during the same. And as for their mouable goodes which shall be founde to remayne, the same shall be restored vnto them purely & simply: & so shall also such as haue bene taken betwéene neighbours

 and neighbours, and deliuered in trust to be kept. And as for suche as haue béene solde by order of Iustice, they shall haue them agayne, paying the same price that they were solde for. And yet neuerthe∣lesse such as haue béene taken by way of hostilitie, shall remaine as good prise, and not to be brought againe in question.


18 All they also of the said religion shall recouer all offices of iustice, of reuenues and other, togither with the benifices wherevnto they haue any interest, to en∣ioy them wholy and peaceably, and also al offices of dignities, gouernements, cap∣tainships, charges, or pensiōs which they had before the sayde troubles, except it be that they were constrayned to resigne thē by the kinges Edict made in that behalfe. In which case they shall restore the profite which they shall haue thereof in déede re∣ceyued, as likewise they of the sayde reli∣gion do offer of their part to be a meanes for the whole restitution of their sayde of∣fices and benifices, to reuoke and recouer from them to whom through the necessity of the warres, they haue solde the tempo∣rall reuenue of the Cleargie, the king

 graunting vnto them suche letters and commissions as shall be requisite for that purpose.


19 That all procéedinges, sentences, iudgements, and definitiue or interlocu∣tory decrées, giuen against anye of them of the religion, of what sorte or condi∣cion so euer they be, as well deade as li∣uing, whether they haue borne armes or not, at the beginning, since, and during the troubles, and by occasion of the same, till the day of the sayde Edict, shall be broken, reuoked, and made voyde, and so also all executions, if there haue béene any, and all markes, tokens, and monuments, of the said slaunderous executions against their persons, and the remembraunce of them, taken away with such solemnitie as is re∣quisite for the full reparation and recoue∣rie of their honor. And the places where the sayd executions haue bene made, to be established in their first state, and restored to the owners of the same. And as for ci∣uill procéedings and processes, the parties to be put in their first state as they were before the troubles.


20 All prescriptions happened during

 the sayd troubles shall be voide, and taken as though they had not happened, and no meanes left whereby any of eyther reli∣gion may helpe themselues therewith a∣gaynst other.


21 And for the better establishing of the peace for the tyme to come, and to take a∣way all inequalities, and a like good vsage to be shewed equally to all the kings sub∣iectes: all those townes that be or haue béene kept by those of the sayde religion, shall be vsed with like equalitie as the o∣thers be, and not to be grieued and ouer∣charged with lones, garrisons, or anye o∣ther burthens, and the inhabitauntes of them and of others of this realme being of the religion, or that shalbe thereof here∣after, shall be indifferently admitted to all offices, dignities, charges, and publike functions, and called also to all counsels and determinations, in towne, houses, or in generall offices of Prouinces.


22 That all places, townes, and Pro∣uinces shall remaine and enioy the same priuileges, exemptions, lyberties, and franchises, which they did before the saide troubles.


23 That the king shall extend the beni∣fite of his Edict of pacification (in such sort as he doth to all his owne subiects, and to those that be vnder his obedience and pro∣tection) to those that be of the countie of 
Venisse,
 and of the Archbishopricke of 
A∣uignon,
 as being within his realme, and within the compasse or circuite of hys crowne, at the least for the restitution and enioying of their goodes, the libertie of their consciences, their sure habitation and frée accesse and trading within hys realme, and within the sayd Countie
ed Archbishoprike, as the kings own and na∣turall subiects doe and may doe: And this for the reasons that haue béene more at large set forth to the 
Sieurs de Biron
 and 
de Malassize,
 & specially for the pre∣seruation of the kings right and authority in the sayd Countie and Archbishoprike.


24 That althoughe the Reyters who haue béene called to the succor of those of the religion at their great néede, and who be yet with them, ought to bée payde by such as haue béene the first and principall authors of this warre, and that haue coū∣selled and in maner constrayned the king

 therevnto, and since also to continue ther∣in, notwithstanding the earnest and con∣tinuall instance made by them of the reli∣gion for the peace, and namely since the ioyning with them of the sayd late Duke of 
Deuxponts:
 Yet neuerthelesse for a∣uoyding of these contentions, and not to omit one onely poynt of all meanes pos∣sible for them, they of the sayde religion offer to contribute towards the sayd pay∣ment, the summe that the king shall vn∣derstand by hys said Commissioners. And for the doing of y
e
 same they offer the first part of the reuenue of all those that be of the religion, and that they maye be after that rate taxed and coated according to their vocations and liuing, as it is accu∣stomed, vntill the summe which shall be declared, shall be perfourmed, deducting onely from the same reuenues the ordina∣rie charges, and forbearing the execu∣tion till the next yeare, bicause the fruites of this present yeare shall scarcely suffice for the entertainment of the said Reyters. And the said taxation or coting to be made vpon them that be of this realme onely.


25 That all letters of pardon and of ab∣holishments

 graunted by the king, eyther generall or particular, for matter happe∣ned before and during the troubles for the cause of religion, shall haue theyr full force and effect, and shall be executed by the Commissioners for this Edict of Pa∣cification.


26 That the Quéene of 
Nauarre,
 the Princes of 
Nauarre,
 and 
Conde,
 the fa∣ther and the sonne, the Lords, gentlemen, officers and others, that haue ayded and succoured them in their warres, shall re∣maine quit and discharged of all money that hath béene by them, or by their order taken & leuied of the receipts & reuenues of the king, to what summe soeuer the same doth amoūt vnto, as also of townes commonalties, and of rents, reuenues, & treasories, of the sale of moueable goodes, as well of the Church as of others, that are come of the sale of the kings timber, woodes, alienation of the temporaltie and reuenues of the Church, of forfeytures, bootyes, raunsoms of prisoners, & of any other summes of money, of what nature soeuer, by them or by their knowledge and consent taken, vpō occasion of these wars

 without any daunger to them and their heyres, or to those that haue bene by them appointed to leuie the sayde money, or that haue furnished and giuen the same, to be touched eyther for the present time, or the time to come. And as well them∣selues as their sayde Deputies shall re∣maine discharged of the handling, dealing and imploying of the same, bringing (for full discharge) an acquittance of the saide Quéene, or of the sayde Princes, or of them before whome they were to giue ac∣count. The establishment also of officers of Iustice made by them, of iudgements and executions of the same authorised and confirmed in time past, shall so remayne. And also such as haue bene appointed De∣puties or Commissioners of what sort so∣euer, shall remayne discharged of all trea∣ties and contracts by them made with all Princes, Potentates, and foraine com∣monalties, of all negotiation with them, of bringing in of the sayde straungers, of casting of Ordinaunce, making of pow∣der and Saltpeter, taking of Ordinaunce and munitions in the kings Storehouses, and of particular fortifications and ra∣sing









 of townes, spoyling and burning of houses, of Churches, of leuying and con∣ducting of men of warre, and of all actes of hostilitie, and generally of all that hath bene done and treated before and since the present warre, and the warres past, as though it were particularly expressed and specified. And to this ende, that all things done by the knowledge and consent of the sayde late Prince of 
Conde,
 or of the said Quéene of 
Nauarre,
 and the other Prin∣ces, shall be sufficient for all warrant and discharge.


27 And for as much as in the distribu∣ting of Iustice (whereof doth chiefly de∣pend the suretie of this Edict of pacificati∣on) diuers abuses haue bene commytted, which procéeded of the passion and partia∣litie of the most part of the Iudges, a∣gainst those of the religion: therefore to preuent the lyke dealing, and that from one warre there be not an entry made to an other more intollerable for them, vn∣der colour of Iustice, the proces of those of the religion, both ciuill and criminall, as well on the behalfe of the plaintife as of the defendant, shall be treated & heard

 at the first, before the ordinary Iudges, and after, vpon appeale, before certaine others to be taken of all the bodyes of the saide Courts of Parliaments, as the par∣ties shall accorde and agrée vpon, to a cer∣taine number by which according to these particuler orders of the sayde Courtes of Parliament, iudgement may be giuen, sauing where the parties cannot agrée, within one onely and that a short delaye, then the sayde processe shall be iudge in the high councell, being called therevnto foure maysters of the requestes of the number of those that the king shall ap∣poynt, for the matter that shall be deliue∣red by those of the religion.


28 As for the assuraunces, that it hath pleased the king of himselfe voluntarily to graunt vnto them of the religion, not in respect of it, but for the conseruation of himselfe, vntil the sharpnesse of the warre might be qualified with the time, and hath for that ende (for certaine yeares) com∣maunded them to haue the kéeping of the townes of 
Rochel, Montauban,
 and 
San∣cerre,
 and that they may there during and after the sayde terme, vse the exercise of

 the sayde religion: They desire and most humbly beséeche, that it maye please the king, for the reasons that they haue more at large declared vnto the 
Sieurs de Biron
 & 
Malassize,
 to graunt vnto them 
la Charite
 in stéede of the towne of 
San∣cerre
 for the sayde assurance, and to adde to the number of the thrée townes, the towne of 
Angoulesme,
 in respect of the si∣tuation of the sayde 
Rochell,
 and for bet∣ter health sake, and other commodities.


29 Beside these things, and touching others besides the King, as is aforesayde, there haue bene diuers other thinges propounded, contayned in the Articles presented vnto the King, of which there can nor ought to be cut off scarcely one, seing they serue all to this ende, that the peace maye be the surer and stronger. True it is, that the principallest and most important of them, are, that all straun∣gers, men of warre, maye withdrawe themselues the spéediest that maye be out of this Realme, the Kings subiectes to their houses, or other places that they shal choose for their abode without being im∣peached.


30 And to take away all mistrusting; and not to giue libertie to the gouernors of Countries to execute their reuenge a∣gainst townes, and specially against those that haue bene or are kept by those of the Religiō, or to cause them to redéeme their yll handling by force of exactions vpon the inhabitantes of the same Townes: It maye please the King to discharge all those townes that be not vpon the Fron∣tires, and wherein there haue béene no Garrisons vsed to be put.


31 That all the Mareschals of Fraunce in ryding their circuites according to the distribution of their prouince, shall be one∣ly accompanied with Gentlemen and o∣ther men of learning of both the Religi∣ons in lyke number, at the least of the lesse partiall and most louers of peace and common tranquilitie. Which shall bée lykewise put in vre at the choyse and e∣lection of the Commissioners, for the exe∣cution of the Edict of pacification.


32 That the sayde Mareschalles of Fraunce and Commissioners, shall cause the inhabitantes of the townes of both the Religions to sweare, the obseruing and performing of the said Edict in all points

 And shall giue the charge of the one vnto the others, and shall charge them respec∣tiuely and by publike act, to aunswere for the breach of the said Edict, made by them of their sayde Religion, within the towne or village where they shall dwell, at the least wise orderly, or otherwyse to present them to the Iustice.


33 That no person shall taxe or reproch any other, for any thing past during the troubles, and that which toucheth them, eyther by worde or by writing, openly or pryuately, and least of all, in Sermons, or in any publike actes, sauing in iudge∣ment in the deducing of their rightes.


34 The trade of merchandize shall be restored and established in the same liber∣tie and suretie, as it was wont to be be∣twéene the subiectes of his maiestie, and others, and change of habitation permit∣ted to all. And the Princes, straungers, and forreine potentates shall be required of his Maiesties parte, to suffer lykewise the saide trafficke, in their countries and landes, without exception of any person or religion.


35 It may please his Maiestie to cause the exact obseruation of the sayde Edict, to

 be sworne by the Quéene his mother, the Dukes of 
Aniou
 and 
Alencon
 his bro∣thers, all the princes of the bloud, Mares∣challes of Fraunce, and by those of the Kings priuie Counsell, and officers of his Crowne. And that they may gyue Acte of the sayde othe vnder their signes and Seales to those of the sayde Religion.


36 That the gouernors of Prouinces, Mayors, Aldermen, heade Officers, and Counsellers of townes, maye make the lyke othe, and renewe it euerie yere.


37 That all sentences, and declarati∣ons that shall happen to the preiudice of the saide Edict, shall be voyde and of none effect. Which Edict shall be firme, sta∣ble, and irreuocable, and these words shal be mentioned. In the Preface of the saide Edict shall be mentioned, all derogations, and notwithstanding that, and namelye those in the saide ordinaunces made vp∣on the alienatiō of reuenue and vnitings to the Crowne, and also the saide deroga∣tions of Edicts, declarations, sentences, retentions, and secret Registers made or to be made to submissions, voluntarie, or constrayned, publike or particular.


18 That there shall be a place and daye

 of publication, which may not be refu∣sed or deferred for any occasion whatsoe∣uer. Vpon payne that those that make delay shall make aunswere in their owne name. And that shalbe without alteration, kéeping backe, or secret Register.


Gyuen at Bussy
 
the. 21. of Iune. Anno.
 1570.











