True report of the gainefull, prosperous and speedy voiage to Iaua in the East Indies, performed by a fleete of eight ships of Amsterdam which set forth from Texell in Holland, the first of Maie 1598, Stilo Nouo, whereof foure returned againe the 19. of Iuly anno 1599. in lesse than 15. moneths, the other foure went forward from Iaua for the Moluccas.
Approx. 39 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 15 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A04364




STC 14478



ESTC S1251





ocm 22045308




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
True report of the gainefull, prosperous and speedy voiage to Iaua in the East Indies, performed by a fleete of eight ships of Amsterdam which set forth from Texell in Holland, the first of Maie 1598, Stilo Nouo, whereof foure returned againe the 19. of Iuly anno 1599. in lesse than 15. moneths, the other foure went forward from Iaua for the Moluccas.
Neck, Jacob Cornelissoon van, ca. 1564-1638.
Warwyck, Wijbrant van, ca. 1569-1615.
[4], 23 p.   


At London :


Printed by P.S. for W. Aspley, and are to be sold at the signe of the Tygers head in Paules Church-yard,


[1599?]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
East Indies --  Description and travel.
Netherlands --  Commerce --  History --  16th century.
2010-06
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2010-06
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2010-08
John Pas
Sampled and proofread
2010-10
Apex CoVantage
Rekeyed and resubmitted
2010-12
Kayla Ondracek
Sampled and proofread
2010-12
Kayla Ondracek
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2011-06
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






14478


22045308


24997





















A TRVE REPORT of the gainefull, prosperous and 
spee∣dy voiage to Iaua in the East Indies,
 performed by a fleete of eight 
ships of Amsterdam:
 WHICH SET FORTH FROM Texell in Holland, the first of Maie 
1598. Stilo Nouo. Whereof foure returned againe the
 19. of Iuly Anno 1599. in lesse then 15. moneths, the other foure went forward from Iaua for the Moluccas.




ET VSQVE AD NVBES VERITAS TVA




AT LONDON Printed by P. S. for W. Aspley, and are to be sold at the signe of the Tygers head in Paules Church-yard.














A
 True report of the gainfull, prosperous, and 
speedy voiage to Iaua in the East Indies, performed
 by a fleet of 8. ships of Amsterdam: which set forth from 
Texell in Holland the first of Maie 1598. Stilo Nouo.
 Whereof foure returned againe the 19. of Iuly Anno 1599. in lesse then 15. moneths: the other foure went forward from Iaua for the Moluccas.


W
HEREAS in the yeare of our Lord 1595. a certaine company of substantial merchants of Am∣sterdam in Holland did build and set forth for the East Indies four well appointed shippes, whereof three came home An. 1597. with small profit (as already in sundry languages is declared) Yet neuerthelesse the afore∣said company, in hope of better successe, made out the last yeare 1598. for a second voiage, a fleete of eight gallant ships, to wit, The shippe called the Mauritius, lately returned from that former voy∣age, 
 being of burden two hundreth and thirty last, or foure hundreth and sixty tunnes, or thereabouts. This shippe was Admirall of the fleete. The Ma∣ster wherof was 
Godevart Iohnson,
 the Commissa∣rie or Factor 
Cornelius Heemskerck,
 and the Pilot 
Kees Collen.



The second ship called the Amsterdam, was of the 
 burden of four hundreth & sixty tuns. The masters name was 
Claes Iohnson Melcknap;
 The Factor or commissarie 
Iacob Heemskerck.


The third was named Hollandia, about the bur∣den 
 of sixe hundreth tuns: which had likewise been in the former voiage. The Master was 
Symon Lambertson
 or 
Mawe,
 the Factor Mast. 
Witte Nijn,
 who died in the voyage before Bantam, and in his roome succeeded 
Iohn Iohnson smith.


The name of the fourth ship was Gelderland, of 
 burden about foure hundreth tuns. Master wher∣of was 
Iohn Browne,
 Factor or commissarie 
Hans Hendrickson.


The fift was called Zeelandia, of the burden of 
 three hundreth & sixtie tuns. The master was 
Iohn Cornelison,
 the Commissary or Factor 
N. Brewer.


The sixt ship named Vtrecht of the burden of 
 two hundreth & sixtie tuns. The Master was 
Iohn Martsen,
 the Factor or commissary 
Adrian Veen.


The seuenth, a pinnas called Frisland, of burden 
 about seuenty tuns. The Master 
Iacob Cornelison.
 The Factor 
Walter Willekens.


The eighth, a pinnas that had been in the former 
 voiage, called the Pidgeon, now y
e
 Oueriissel, of the burden of fifty tuns. The Master 
Symon Iohnson.
 The Factor 
Arent Hermanson.


Of this fleete was Generall and Admirall Ma∣ster 
Iacob Neck:
 Viceadmirall 
Wybrand van War∣wick:
 and Rereadmirall 
Iacob Heemskerck.


With this fleet of eight ships we made saile from Texell the first of May 1598. 
Stilo Nouo,
 being the 21. of Aprill, after the account of England, and sai∣led with good speed vnto the 
Cabo de bona speranza:
 as further shal appeare by a Iournal annexed vnto the end of this discourse.



Being past the Cape, the 7. and 8. of August, by a stonne of weather fiue ships were separated from the Admirall, who afterwardes came together a∣gaine before Bantam.


The 26. of August with three shippes wee came within the view of Madagascar, and the 29 wee 
 met with a ship of Zeeland called the Long-barke, which had put to sea before vs, and now kept aloofe from vs, supposing we were enemies: but at length perceiuing by our flagges what we were, they sent their Pinnas aboord vs, reioycing greatly to haue met with vs, because that diuers of their men were sicke, and ten were already dead: and they had in all but seuen men aboord the shippe that were meat∣whole, and eleuen marriners to guide the shippe. Wee agreed to relieue them with some supplie of men: but through darkenesse and great winde wee lost them againe.


After this, we the Admiral Mauritius, the Hol∣landia, & the pinnas Oueriissell keeping together, came to the Island of Santa Maria, before the 
 great bay of Antogil in Madagascar: where wee got a small quantity of Rice. We tooke the King prisoner, who paide for his Ransome a Cow and a fat calfe.


In this Island we found no great commodity: for being the month of September, the season was not for any fruits: the Oranges had but flowers: Le∣mons were scant: of Sugar-canes and Hens there was some store, but the Inhabitants were not very forward in bringing them out.


Heere wee sawe the hunting of the Whale (a strange pastime) certaine Indians in a Canoa, or 
 boate following a great Whale, and with a har∣ping Iron, which they cast forth, piercing the whals body, which yron was fastned to a long rope made of


the barkes of trees, and so tied fast to their Canoa. All this while pricking and wounding the Whale so much as they could, they made him furiously to striue too and fro, swiftly swimming in the sea, pluc∣king the canoa after him: sometimes tossing it vp and downe, as lightly as if it had been a strawe: the Indians in the meane time being cunning swim∣mers taking small care though they were cast ouer∣boord, tooke fast hold by the boat stil, and so after some continuance of this sport the whale wearied & wa∣xing faint, and staining the sea red with his bloud, they haled him toward the shore, and when they had gotten him so neare shore on the shallowe that the most part of him appeared aboue water, they drew him aland and he wed him in pieces, euery one ta∣king thereof what pleased them, which was to vs a strange sight. It is reported that the Indians of Terra Florida vse the like fishing for the Whale. Our men might haue taken some part thereof, but refused it: the pieces therof were so like larde or fat bacon.


From thence we made toward the great Bay of 
 Antogill and ancored vnder the Island, where wee tooke in fresh water.


Our Indians that were brought from thence by them of the former voiage (the names of whome were 
Madagascar
 the one, and the other 
Laurence)
 wee offered to set there on land, but they refused, chusing rather to tarry with vs and to be apparel∣led, then to go naked in their owne countrey: wor∣king and moyling for a miserable liuing, opposing their bare skins to the vehemency of the sunne and weather: and their excuse was, that in that place they were strangers and had none acquaintance. 


Our beere continued good vntill we were passed the 
Cape de bona speranza.
 From thence we began to


mingle it with water hauing a portion of wine al∣lowed vs twise a day, and this allowance continued vntill our returne into Holland.


We went with our boates vp the riuer seeking refreshing: but the Inhabitants gaue vs to vnder∣stand by signes that wee might returne, for there was nothing to be had. Wee rowed into the riuer about three leagues, and found their report to bee true. The cause was, that the Kings made warre there one against an other, and so all the victuals were in manner destroied, insomuch that the In∣habitants themselues many of them perished for hunger, and in one of these battailes one of their Kings was lately slaine. Wherfore after fiue daies abode and no longer, we departed, & in Gods name made to sea again, directing our course the sixteenth of September for Iaua. About the ninteenth of Nouember we came within sight of Sumatra, and the 26. of the same moneth 1598. wee in the three shippes aforesaid, to wit, the Mauritius our Ad∣mirall, the Hollandia, and the Ouerissell, arriued 
 befo
e the citty of Bantam in Iaua. Presently vp∣on this our arriuall, our Admirall and Generall Master 
Iacob van Neck,
 sought with all friendship to traffique with the people of the saide towne of Bantam, sending Master 
Cornelis Heemskerck
 on land to shew them what we were, for they thought vs to be the very same men that had been there the yeare before, and al that while guarded the sea-cost, as being assuredly persuaded that we were pirates and sea rouers. But we, to make them vnderstand the contrary, sent on lande one 
Abdoll
 of China a captiue of theirs, whom we brought from them in our first voyage; by whose meanes we got audience 
 and credite: and so we presented our gifts and pre∣sents to the King, which was but a childe: and the


chiefe gouernour called 
Cephat,
 hauing the kingly authority, most thankfully receiued the same in the name of his King. The said presents were a faire couered cup of siluer and gilt, certaine veluets and clothes of silke, with very fine drinking glasses and excellent looking glasses, and such other gifts more. Likewise we presented our letters sealed very costly with the great seale of the noble & mighty lords the Estates generall of the vnited Prouinces, and of prince 
Mauritz,
 whome they termed their Prince. Which letters were by them receiued with great reuerence, creeping vpon their knees: and (the same being well perused, read, and examined) they found thereby our honest intent and determination for traffike: insomuch that a mutuall league of friend∣ship and alliance was concluded, and we were freely licensed to trade and traffike in such wise, that euen 
 the fourth day of our arriual we began to lade; and within foure or fiue weekes all our foure ships ha∣uing taken in their full fraight, were ready to de∣part.


When our three shippes aforesaid had remained there welnigh a moneth, about Newyears-tide ar∣riued the other fiue shippes of our company before mentioned in very good manner, and well conditio∣ned. And so our whole fleete of eight ships ioyfully 
 met together, and had none or very fewe sicke per∣sons among them, hauing lost by death in the whole fleete but 35 men in all, of which number some pe∣rished through their owne negligence. Vpon this happy meeting wee displaied our flags, streamers, and ensignes after the brauest manner, honouring and greeting one one another with volleies of shot, making good cheere, and (which was no small mat∣ter) growing more deeply in fauour with the towns∣men of Bantam. Vnto vs were daily brought a∣boord


in Prauwes or Indian boats great quantity of hens, egs, Cocos, bonanes, sugar-canes, cakes made of rice, and a certaine kinde of good drinke which is there made by the men of China. Thus the people daily bartered with vs for pewter and other wares, giuing so much virtuals for a pewter spoone, as might well suffice one man for an whole weeke. Wee trucked likewise for diuers other things, as for porcellan dishes and such like. How∣be it that which our Indian 
Abdoll
 declared (name∣ly, that more ships were comming besides the three aforesaid, and that others beside them also were sent out of Zeland) little tended to our commodity: for thereupon the Iauans tooke occasion to inhanse 
 the price of their pepper; insomuch that we were forced to pay for 55 pounds of pepper first three, and afterward foure Reals of eight: neither did they demaund or call for any thing so much as for the said Reals of eight. Mercery or haberdashers wares were in no such request as money. Also we much marueiled how the Iauans should tell vs of more shippes to come, making signes with their foure fingers and thumb, that foure Lyma (which word in their language signifieth shippes) were com∣ming.


And here you are to vnderstand, that our Gene∣rall Master 
Van Neck,
 together with the commis∣saries or factors, thought good, besides the three for∣said 
 ships that came first, to lade one other, to wit, the greater pinnasse called Frisland, whereof was Master 
Iacob Cornelison,
 and Factor 
Walter Wille∣kens.
 These foure shippes hauing receiued their ful fraight, and giuen notice on land of their departure (to the end that none of their creditours might bee vnpaid) and also hauing well prouided themselues of rice and water, departed the thirteenth of Ianu∣ary


1599. and sayled to Sumatra, where they tooke 
 in fresh water; for that the water of Bantam first waxeth white, and afterward crawleth full of ma∣gots.


Upon the land of Sumatra we bartered kniues, spoones, looking-glasses, bels, needles and such like, for sundry fruits, to wit, melons, cucumbers, oni∣ons, garlike, and pepper though little in quantity, yet exceeding good.


We had to deale with a notable Merchant of 
 Bantam, named 
asemolonke,
 whose father was a Castilian, which sold vs not much lesse then an hun∣dreth last of pepper▪ He was most desirous to haue traueiled with vs into Holland: but misdoubting the displeasure and euil will or the king, and fearing least his goods might haue bin confiscated, he durst not aduenture vpon the voiage.


Certaine daies before our departure from Ban∣tam were the other foure shippes dispatched to go 
 for the Moluccas, and ouer them was appointed as Admirall and Generall Master 
Wybrant van Warwicke
 in the shippe called Amsterdam, & 
Iacob Heemskerck
 Viceadmirall in the shippe Gelderland, the other two shippes in consort with them being Zeland and Vtrecht before mentioned


These foure made saile towards the Moluccas, and parted from vs the 8. of Ianuary in the night, and in taking of our leaues both of vs together, made such a terrible thundering noise with our or∣dinance, that the townsemen were vp in Alarme, vntill they knewe the reason thereof. The people were glad of their departure, hauing some mistrust of vs, remaining there so strong with 8. ships. And they asked daily when wee should depart, making great speed to help vs vnto our lading, and shewing themselues most seruiceable vnto vs.



The 11 of Ianuary 1599. we in the foure shippes laden with pepper departed from Bantam home∣ward. The 13 we arriued at Sumatra. The 19 we shaped our course directly for Holland. The 3 of April we had sight of 
Capo de buona esperanza.
 The 8 of Aprill we doubled the said Cape, proceeding on for the Isle of Saint Helena, whither we came the twenty sixt of the same moneth, and there refreshed our selues for the space of eight daies.


In this Island we found a church with certaine boothes or tents in it, and the image of Saint He∣lena, as likewise a holy water-fat, and a sprinkle to cast or sprinkle y
e
 holy water: but we left all things in as good order as we found them.


More ouer here we left behinde vs some remem∣brances in writing, in token of our being there. At this place died of the bloudy flixe, the Pilot of our Admirall 
Kees Collen
 of Munickendam, a worthy man, to our great griefe.


This Island (as 
Iohn Huighen van Linschotten
 describeth it) is replenished with manifold commo∣dities, as namely with goates, wilde swine, Tur∣kies, partriges, pidgeons, &c. But by reason that those which arriue there vse to discharge their or∣dinance, and to hunt and pursue the saide beastes and fowles, they are now growen exceeding wilde and hard to be come by. Certaine goates whereat we shotte fled vp to the high cliffes, so that it was impossible to get them. Likewise fishes wee could not catch so many as wee needed; but wee tooke in fresh water enough to serue vs till our arriuall in Holland.


Here we left on land as a man banished out of our 
 society, one 
Peter Gisbrecht
 the masters mate of the great pinnasse, because hee had stroken the Ma∣ster.



Very penitent hee was and sorie for his misde∣meauour, and all of vs did our best endeuour to ob∣tain his pardon: but (the orders & ordinances wher∣eunto our whole company was sworne being read before vs) we were constrained to surcease our im∣portunate suit, and he for the example of others to vndergo the seuere doome that was allotted him.


There was deliuered vnto him a certaine quan∣tity of bread, oile, and rice, with hookes and instru∣ments to fish withall, as also a hand gun and gun∣poulder.


Hereupon we bad him generally farewell, besee∣ching God to keepe and preserue him from misfor∣tunes, and hoping that at some one time or other he should finde deliuerance; for that all shippes sai∣ling to the West Indies must there of necessity re∣fresh themselues.


Not far from this place we descried a saile which wee iudged to be some Frenchman, by whom per∣aduenture the saide banished party might bee de∣liuered.


The fourth of May we set saile from Saint He∣lena, 
 and the tenth of the same moneth wee passed by the Isle of Ascension. The 17 day wee passed the line. The 21 we sawe the Pole-starre. The 10 and 11 of Iune we had sight of the Canaries. About the Azores wee stood in feare to meete with some spanish Armada, because our men were growen faint and feeble by reason of their long voi∣age. The 27 of Iune we entered the Spanish sea. The 29 we found our selues to be in fortie foure de∣grees of northerly latitude. The 6 of Iuly our Ad∣mirall y
e
 Mauritius had two of his mastes blowne ouerboord; for which cause we were constrained to towe him along. The 11 of Iuly wee passed the Sorlings. The 13 we sayled by Falmouth, Dart∣mouth


and the Quasquets. The 17 we passed by Douer. The 19 meeting with some stormes and rainy weather we arriued at Texell in our owne natiue countrey, without any great misfortune, saue that the Mauritius once stroke on ground.


Thus hauing attained to our wished home, we gaue God thankes for this our so happy and pros∣perous voiage: because there neuer arriued in Hol∣land any shippes so richly laden.


Of pepper we brought eight hundreth tunnes, of 
 Cloues two hundreth, besides great quantity of Mace, Nutmegs, Cinamom, and other principall commodities. To conclude, this voiage was per∣formed in one yeare, two monethes and nineteene daies.


We were sailing outward from Texell to Ban∣tam seuen moneths, we remained there sixe weekes to take in our lading, and in six moneths we retur∣ned from Bantam in Iaua to Holland.


The performance of this long and daungerous voiage in so short time we ascribed to Gods deuine & wonderfull prouidence, hauing sailed at the least 8000. leagues, that is to say, twenty four thousand English miles.


The ioye of the safe arriuall of these shippes in Holland was exceeding great: and postes were dis∣patched to euery principall towne and citty to pub∣lish these acceptable newes.


The merchants that were owners of these ships went straight toward Texell for the refreshing of their men, and for other necessary considerations, The Commissary or factor master 
Cornelis Heems∣kerck
 together with 
Cornelis Knick,
 hied them with all speed towardes the Estates generall and prince 
Mauritz
 his excellency, not onely to carry the saide good newes, but withal to present the letters of the


King of Iaua importing mutuall alliance, friend∣ship 
 and free intercourse of traffike in consideration of their honourable, liberal, and iust dealings: they brought gifts also from the said king of great price and value.


The 27 of Iuly the Mauritius our Admirall to∣gether with the Hollandia came before Amster∣dam: where they were ioyfully saluted with the sound of eight trumpets, with banqueting, with ringing of bels, and with peales of ordinance, the Generall and other men of command being honou∣rably receiued and welcommed by the citty.


The merchants that aduentured in these voyages 
 being in number sixeteene or seauenteene (notwith∣standing the foure shippes gone from Iaua to the Moluccas, as is before mentioned) haue sent this last spring 1599. foure ships more to continue this their traffique so happely begun: intending more∣ouer the next spring to send a newe supply of other ships. And diuers other Marchants are likewise 
 determined to enter into the same action.


Of them that departed from Zeland these bring no newes, otherwise then is aforesaide. Neither doe they report any thing of the two fleetes or com∣panies, that went from Roterdam the last sommer 1598. shaping their course for the streites of Ma∣gellan


Wee haue before made mention of an Indian called 
Abdoll,
 which was brought from Bantamin the first voiage, and had continued an whole win∣ter or some eight monethes at Amsterdam in Hol∣land.


Where during that space (being a man of good ob∣seruation and experience, and borne about Chi∣na) hee was well entreated, cherished, and much made of.



This 
Abdoll
 vpon his returne to Iaua being de∣manded 
 concerning the state of the Netherlands, made vnto the principall men of Bantam a full de∣claration thereof, with all the rarities and singu∣larities which he had there seene and obserued.


Which albeit to the greatest part of readers, who haue trauailed those countries may seeme nothing strange, and scarce worthy the relation: yet because the report was made by so meere a stranger, & with the Iauans that heard it wrought so good effect, I thought it not altogether impertinent here in this place to make rehearsall thereof.


First therefore he tolde them (to their great ad∣miration in that hoat climate) That hee had seene aboue a thousand sleds drawen, and great num∣bers of horsemen riding vpon the frozen water in winter time, and that he had beheld more then two hundreth thousand people trauailing on foote and on horseback vpon the yce, as likewise that the said sleds were by horses drawen so swiftly, that they made more way in three houres than any man could go on foote in tenne. And also that himselfe for plea∣sure had been so drawen, the horses being brauely adorned with bels and cymbals.


Howbeit they would hardly be induced to beleeue that those countries should be so extreamely colde, and the waters so mightely frozen, as to beare such an huge waight.


Hee tolde them moreouer, that Holland was a free countrey, and that euery man there was his owne Master, and that there was not one slaue or captiue in the whole land.


Moreouer, that the houses, in regarde of their beautifull and lofty building, resembled stately pal∣laces, their inward rich furniture being altogether answerable to their outward glorious shew.



Also, that the Churches (which he called 
Mesqui∣tas)
 were of such bignesse & capacity, as they might receiue the people of any prety towne.


He affirmed likewise, that the Hollanders with the assistance of their confederates and friendes, maintained warres against the King of Spaine, whose mighty puissance is feared and redoubted of all the potentates of Europa.


And albeit the said warres had continued aboue thirty yeares, yet that during all that time the saide Hollanders increased both in might & wealth.


In like sort he informed them of the strange situ∣ation of Holland, as being a countrey driuing vpon the water, the earth or ground whereof, they vse insteed of fewell, and that he had oft times warmed himselfe, and had seene meat dressed with fires made of the same earth.


In briefe, that it was a waterish and fenny coun∣trey, and full of riuers, chanels, and ditches, and that therein was an innume
able multitude of boates and small shippes, as likewise great store of tall and seruiceable ships, wherwith they sailed vn∣to all quarters of the world, &c.


This man 
Abdoll
 wee found to bee a captiue or slaue, and sawe there his wife and children in very poore estate dwelling in a little cottage not so bigge as an hogsty: but by oure meanes he was made free and well rewarded.


Not withstanding he did but euil recompence vs: for he was charged to be the cause why pepper was solde dearer then ordinary vnto vs by a penny in the pounde: for hee told them that certaine shippes of Zeland and of other places were comming thither∣wardes.


And here the reader is to vnderstand, that some foure moneths before the said three ships arriued at


Bantam, the Portugales came with an Armada 
 of gallies and fustes, being set foorth by the Viceroy of Goa and the gouernour of Molucca, to intercept the traffique of the Hollanders vnto those partes, and to make them loose all their expenses, labour, and time which they had bestowed: and also that their great and rich presentes which they gaue vn∣to the Iauans the yeare before, to bring them in∣to vtter detestation of the Hollanders, might not be altogether in vaine.


The Generall of them that came from Goa was 
Don Luis,
 and of those that came from Molucca 
Don Emanuell:
 who brought their Armada before Bantam, intending to surprize the citty, vnder pre∣tence that the same preparation was made to resist certaine pirates that came thither out of Holland the last yeare, and were determined this yeare also to come againe. Vnder these colours they sought to take the towne and to fortifie the same, & they built certaine sconces in the countrey, committing great outrages, rauishing the Women, with many other villanies. Hereupon the townsemen of Bantam ve∣ry secretly prouided certaine gallies and fustes in great hast, and sodainly assailed the Portugales before they were well aware of them: for which cause finding but small resistance, they tooke 3 Por∣tugale gallies with certaine shippes, and slewe a∣bout 
 300 of them, taking 150 Portugales priso∣ners, of which we daily saw some going vp & downe the streetes of Bantam like slaues and captiues. Besides these they tooke about 900 galli-slaues pri∣soners.


Vpon this hard successe the rest of the Portugals betooke themselues to flight: but whither they bee arriued at Goa or Molucca, or what is become of them since, we are not able to auouch. The foresaid


attempt and ouerthrowe, bred greater enmity be∣tweene the Portugales and them of Bantam, and gaue an especiall occasion for the aduauncement of our traffique.


The fiue ships (whereof we haue before signified 
 that foure were dispatched by the whole companie for the Moluccas) being seuered beyonde the Cape of 
buona speranza
 from the other three of their company, and hauing quite lost them, came all of them shortly after vnder an Island called (as it is thought) by the Portugals 
Isola de Don Galopes:
 but they named it the Island of Mauritius. Here they entered into an hauen, calling the same 
Warwicke,
 after the name of their Viceadmirall, wherin they found very good harborow in twenty degrees of sou∣therly latitude.


This Island being situate to the East of Mada∣gascar, 
 and containing as much in compasse as all Holland, is a very high, goodly, and pleasant land, full of green & fruitfull vallies, and replenished with Palmito-trees, from the which droppeth holesome wine. Likewise here are very many trees of right 
 Ebenwood as black asiet, and as smooth & hard as the very Iuory: and the quantity of this wood is so exceeding, that many ships may be laden herewith.


For to saile into this hauen you must bring the two highest mountaines one ouer the other, lea∣uing sixe small Islands on your right hand, and so you may enter in vpon 30 fadomes of water. Lying win the bay, they had 10. 12. & 14. fadoms. On their left hād was a litle Island which they named 
Hems∣kerk
 Island, and the bay it selfe they called 
Warwick
 bay, as is before mentioned. Here they tarried 12 daies to refresh themselues, finding in this place great quantity of foules twise as bigge as swans, which they called Walghstocks or Wallowbirdes


being very good meat. But finding also aboundance of piogeons & popiniayes, they disdained any more to eat of those great foules, calling them (as before) Wallowbirds, that is to say, lothsome or fulsome birdes.


Of the saide Pidgeons and Popiniayes they found great plenty being very fat and good meate, which they could easily take and kil euen with little stickes: so tame they are by reason y
t
 the Isle is not inhabited, neither be the liuing creatures therein accustomed to the sight of men.


Here they found rauens also, and such abundance of fish, that two men were able to catch enough for all fiue ships.


Tortoises they founde so huge, that tenne men 
 might sit and dine in one of their shelles, and one of them would creepe away, while two men stood vpon the backe thereof.


Here was founde waxe also whiter then any of ours, lying about the strande, bleached (as it is like) by the sunne: and in some of this waxe there were Arabian letters or characters printed: wher∣by it is probable, that some Arabian ship might bee cast away thereabout, out of which the said waxe might be driuen on land.


They found like wise Corall on this land, and ma∣ny 
 trees which we call Palmitos, whereout drop∣peth 
 wine as out of the Coco-tree: which wine be∣ing kept, hath his operation as our new prest wine, but after some time it commeth vnto the tul vertue and perfection.


The said Palmitos they esteemed to bee a kinde of wilde date-trees.


We sought all the Island ouer for men, but could find none, for that it was wholly destitute of Inha∣bitants.



Vpon this Island we built an house with a pul∣pit therein, and left behind vs certaine writings as a token and remembrance of our being there, and vpon the pulpit we left a Bible and a psalter lying.


Thus after 12 daies aboad at this Island, being well refreshed, they tooke in excellent fresh water be∣ing 
 easie to get, and very sweet and sauory to drinke, and then set saile, meeting the three other ships their consorts at the time and place before mentioned.








A briefe description of the voiage be∣
fore handled, in manner of a Iournall.




MAIE.


T
HE first of Maie 1598. with the eight shippes before mentioned, we set saile in the name of God from 
Texell
 in 
Holland.


The third of May we passed along the coast of 
England,
 des∣crying some of her Maiesties ships, and they vs, whom we honoured with discharge of our artillery.


The fourteenth, we had sight of the Isle of 
Porto Santo
 lying in thirty two degrees.


The sixteenth, wee came within sight of the 
Ca∣naries.


The twenty two, we first saw flying fishes.


The twenty three, we passed by the Isle 
Dell Sall.


The thirty one, we had a great storme, so that we lost sight one of another: but by night we came to∣gether againe.








IVNE.


The eighth of Iune wee crossed the 
Equinoctiall
 line.


The twenty foure wee sayled by the sholdes of 
Brasile
 lying vnder eighteene degrees of Southerly Latitude.






IVLIE.


The twenty one of Iuly we got to the height of the 
Cape
 of 
buona esperanza.


From the thirtith of Iuly till the second of Au∣gust, we continually sayled in sight of the land of the foresaid 
Cape.






AVGVST.


The seuenth and eighth of August wee had such foule and stormy weather, that fiue ships of our company were separated from vs, whom we saw no more vntill they came to vs before 
Bantam.


The Twenty sixt we descryed the Island of 
Mada∣gascar.


The twenty nine came by vs the ship called the 
Long barke
 of 
Zeland,
 hauing in her but nine sound men, tenne dead, and the rest all sicke: but the same night we lost the sight of her againe.






SEPTEMBER.


The seauenth of September, we came before the Island of 
Santa Maria,
 and afterward wee put into the great bay of 
Antogill.


The sixteenth of September, wee set saile from thence, directing our course for 
Iaua.








OCTOBER.


The first of October, wee got to the heighth of 
Bantam.


The fifteenth, died the first man in our 
Admirall.






NOVEMBER.


THe nineteenth of Nouember, we came within sight of 
Sumatra.


The twenty ninth, wee road before the citty of 
Bantam:
 And the thirtith, we payed our toll to the gouernour.






IANVARIE.


ANd vpon Newyeares date 1599. 
Stilo Nouo,
 we began to take in ourlading.


Then came vnto vs before 
Bantam,
 with great idie and triumph, our fiue separated shippes, all the people standing vpon the shore gazing, and sus∣pecting some harme intended against them.


The eighth of Ianuary, foure of the said 5 new∣come shippes (God send them a prosperous voyage) set saile toward the 
Moluccas.


Moreouer our foure shippes being well and rich∣ly laden at 
Bantam
 made saile homewarde the ele∣uenth of Ianuary, and the thirteenth, wee were shot as farre as the Isles of 
Sumatra.


The nineteenth, we proceeded thence on our voi∣age, and the same day, to the great griefe of vs all, died the Pilot of our 
Admirall.








APRILL.


THe third of Aprill, we descried the land of 
Capo de buona esperanza.


The eighth, wee doubled the same 
Cape,
 thence shaping our course for the Island of Saint 
Helena,
 where the twenty sixt we happily arriued, and de∣parted from thence vpon the fourth of Maie.






MAIE.


THe tenth of Maie, wee sailed by the Isle of 
As∣cension.


The seauenteenth, we passed the 
Equinoctiall line.


The twenty one, we saw the 
North starre.






IVNE.


THe ninth and tenth of Iune, we had sight of the 
Canaries.


The twenty seauen, wee sayled vpon the Spa∣nish Sea.


The twenty nine, we were in fortie four degrees.






IVLIE.


THe fourth of Iuly, we saw behind vs two sailes, one before the other, which were the first that we had seene of a long time.


The sixt of Iuly our 
Admirall
 had both his Fore∣mast and Maine-mast blowne ouer boord.


The eleuenth, we passed the 
Sorlings,
 the thir∣teenth, 
Falmouth, Plimmouth,
 and the 
Quasquets.


The seauenteenth, we came before 
Douer.



The nineteenth, wee had foule and stormy wea∣ther, at what time by Gods good blessing wee arri∣ued in our natiue countrey at 
Texell
 in 
Holland,
 ha∣uing performed in the short space of one yeare, two moneths and nineteene daies, almost as long a voi∣age, as if we should haue compassed the globe of the earth, and bringing home with vs our full straight of rich and gainfull Marchandize.




FINIS.









