A relation of the late iourney of the Iesuites, banished out of the kingdomes of Bohemia and Hungaria
Relatio nuperi itineris proscriptorum Jesuitarum ex regnis Bohemiae et Ungariae missa ex Helicone juxta Parnassum. English.
Approx. 55 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 19 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A04415




STC 14537



ESTC S121301





99856485




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A relation of the late iourney of the Iesuites, banished out of the kingdomes of Bohemia and Hungaria
Relatio nuperi itineris proscriptorum Jesuitarum ex regnis Bohemiae et Ungariae missa ex Helicone juxta Parnassum. English.
[2], 35, [1] p.   


[London :


Printed by George Eld],


Anno Dom. 1620.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Jesuits --  Czech Republic --  Bohemia --  Early works to 1800.
Jesuits --  Hungary --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






14537


S121301


99856485


22038














A RELATION 
OF
 THE LATE IOVRNEY of the IESVITES, 
BANISHED
 Out of the Kingdomes of 
Bohemia
 and 
Hungaria.


Anno Dom.
 16
0.














A RELATION OF the late Iourney of the Iesuits banished out of the Kingdomes of 
Bohemia, and Hungaria.


F
Ame (as I suppose) hath suffi∣ciently declared how all the 
Iesuits
 were sent and bani∣shed out of the Kingdomes of 
Bohemia
 and 
Hungaria,
 that they might neuer at∣tempt to come againe into those Kingdomes hereafter: and this banishment of theirs was after this maner, that if any of those 
Iesuits
 be found in the two fore∣said Kingdomes, wheresoeuer, with whom soeuer, of what condition soeuer he be; and vnder what pretence soeuer; according to the definition of the Statutes of either Kingdome, he should pay the iust reward of his fact. The poore wretches are exclu∣ced, that neither intercession, nor any way deuised by art or friend should preuaile to bring them in againe for euer. Now I come to their going out, why doe they goe? Being once constrained to de∣part; they went away willingly, 
bona voluntas non est agitanda calcaribus,
 a willing mind needs not the spur. Constrained say you? namely, they would

 depart for the time of anger willingly. This ba∣nishment and casting forth of them, although it brought exceeding much greefe and sorrow to their whole Society, euen as that same Bore sent by 
Diana
 into the corne of 
Callidonia:
 yet did it not altogether cast away the speare, but rather fol∣lowed that same most Godly sentence, 
(when they shall persecute you in that City, fly into another.)
 But who doe you aske? this was their recreation where∣by these wretched students distinguished the inter∣missions of their studies.


They doe too too much earnestly thinke that they are to search into these cares, where they may recouer a secure, and (as I may say) a healthfull place; such as they had left at 
Bohemia
 and 
Hun∣garia:
 and see, the euent was contrary to their pur∣poses.


While they went thither in this 
Bohemian. Hungarian
 banishment, that at length they might embrace faire 
Germanie,
 they come, they see, they salute their fellowes and bretheren. O 
Germanie,
 how great a wonder wert thou to these banished men at there first entrance, how diddest thou yeeld an allurement to those greedy eies! they see the goodnesse of the land: it is most wonderfull and remote from all danger: they see the temper of the aire; it is most wholesome. There is all sound and perpetuall healthfulnesse.


What should I speake of the florishing fields, the high hills, and the vnhurtfull chases? I will not

 speake of the little brookes sliding with a plea∣sant brinke, and the stately kinds of woods and groues. These, these seemed to the Fathers the 
Ie∣suites
 most full of a pleasant sweetnesse: the very midnight, which is wont to bee pleasant to all, they made vnquiet to themselues. And what would it bee (say they) if so pretious fleeces of sheepe, so many fertill Cities, villages and mona∣steries; and so good great a plenty of corne, oliues, and vine-yards should appertaine vnto vs? Oh brethren, let vs make tryall, let vs vse our best cun∣ning: that wee may be receiued first in 
Germanie:
 afterwards that wee may become Lords of it. Be∣hold ô 
Germany,
 how thou strikest without a bruise, how thou woundest without blood! how quickly and louingly thou doest drinke to these Fathers the cups of their desire and wish! how thou smi∣lest on them! O brethren, these men about to touch the matter to the quicke, doe put on them (as they are wont,) the prepuce of impudency; they solicite faire 
Germany
 with earnest and daily intreaty; that it would afford them a most safe defence against these clouds of banishment.


They cry out, thou ô 
Germany
 art the onely an∣chor, which art able to preserue this company, to chase away stormes amongst the waues and tem∣pests. 
India
 would most bountifully defend vs; neither would 
Italy
 deny vs any thing: but it is an exceeding long iourny thither; here the aire is most dangerous, that which way soeuer we turne

 vs, an exceeding great burthen of this difficulty is laid vpon vs.


We haue no small cause to reside elsewhere: but now seeing our passing ouer hath a little tasted of this land (in which these that are addicted to our fellowship doe not liue in want) we conclude, that this thing is not done without the diuine proui∣dence. Also this 
Germany
 being better knowne through a processe of time, hath deserued to be a longer time loued of vs; and is accounted worthy to be adorned with the garland of our piety, and most faithfull instructing. Walke ouer and ouer it. O 
Germany,
 what is it, that our so many com∣panies doe watch in thy townes and houses for thy safety? other lands being let goe, wee desire thy helping hand, ô 
Germany
 (say they.) Let the holy Scripture moue thee; 
Succour the needy:
 Let it mooue thee, that thou maist follow mercy; 
excer∣cise mercy.
 Neither doe we request any great mat∣ters, nor things too high, onely some monasteries in which we may haue meate, drinke, and apparrell. In these monasteries we will liue religiously; we will shew our deuotion and loue towards 
Germany;
 and also our especiall care in instructing youth. And we, and others with vs shall fly with these winges, and shall exceed all humane matters. In the meane time although our innocency shall bring vs into a narrower roome and fame, yet shall it fly a∣gaine through all the coasts of 
Germany;
 and staine 
Bohemia
 and 
Hungary,
 vnlesse they become better.




Of which their wonderfull faire perswasion after that the brethren had made an end; the Lords the Delegates of 
Garmany
 not long meditating, at last doe answer thus. Neither doe they dissemble that they also are stirred and heated with that same vn∣timely heat. We haue beene very attentiue to your request (o Fathers): Also we haue attentiuely heard (as is fitting) your causes and reasons, prouoking vs to prouide you settled places amongst vs, which truely haue beene acceptable to vs. Wee would that our answere to you be plaine and without co∣lour. For that you extoll our beautifull Country, 
Germany,
 with all kind of prayses, we doe take it ac∣ceptably: onely this wee dislike, that you desire to rest with vs in this bosome which is proper and be∣longing to ours. And truely we do very much won∣der, that you do not seeke out and desire other pla∣ces fuller of our miracles. For although the ayre might be most dangerous in 
Italy,
 by your saying, perhaps it might bee more temperate in 
Spaine,
 where there be more of your companies; and more of your brethren. Yea there you haue your 
Meca∣nas
 himselfe, who as a 
Minerua
 doth preserue you on water, and as an 
Vlisses
 doth defend you being in danger of life.


Doe you say that the iourney into 
India
 is too long? It is shorter into 
France,
 where (if your apo∣logy may bee beleeued) your companions are of late preferred with new priuiledges. If you haue there so good opportunities, why doe you striue to

 forgoe them? Doe you say it will be good for vs, hurtfull to you, to profit vs by your piety and in∣formation in our studies? It is not expedient for you (ô Fathers) if yee determine any thing to bee done of you in our right. And if we be not decei∣ued, 
Germany
 hath more certaine assertions of li∣berty to thinke well, then 
Trecensis
 heretofore in 
France
 (which is commonly called 
Troy.
)


But we doe exceedingly maruell what the cause should be, why in so short a time ye should bee cast out of so many stately common-wealths and King∣domes? Truely all their fields are large bookes, which we cannot thrust vpon you by turning them, but for conference sake onely shew them as true to the whole world, and of you as yet not refuted We desire that some of you would behold your acts done in 
England: Certainly the acts of
 Garnet 
and of all of you would breath out some other thing then Innocency:
 namely, treason, and innouation, of which you were all guilty.


This one thing you obiect, (ô Fathers) but know this, a deepe wound retaines a scarce: Yee did not bid farewell to the 
Venetians
 against your wills; but perhaps vnconstrained.


You had neuer gone away by the decree of the 
Venetian
 Lords, had not the commandement of 
Paul
 the fifth Pope caused you, to whom being the head of the Church, you yeelded all humble obe∣dience with due obseruance: and in this intermissi∣on from Religion you adored his Surplice: 
So obe∣dience

 alone is the vertue which worketh the other vertues in the minde: and what were it of ye should call him Lord, Lord, and would not doe what he saith?
 Ah how impatient were the 
Venetian
 Lords of your departure? How willingly would they haue detai∣ned you longer, if good words, honours, if more∣ouer new priuiledges could haue preuailed any thing.


But in sayling we must giue eare to our Pilot, in warre to our Captaine: 
So that fidelity due to the Pope by the Venetian title hath made you wretched men banished.
 It is written: 
He that beleeueth shall be saued.


We now talke alone (ô Fathers Iesuits) and are weakned: we could wish that a 
Venetian
 were here who might affirme these things.


We do adde nothing heere but what your selues had in your Apology: that the will of God may be done, who is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; from whom as you expect saluation, so al∣so expect iust iudgement. We do willingly passe ouer with silence the 
Belgicke
 fame, declaring what reproachfull things, contentions and wicked deeds you haue there committed: If in others there bee any disgrace and wickednesse, in you it is prayse and comelinesse (as it is in your Apology.)


We know not what to say, onely this wee hold, that God liueth, who causeth his Sunne to shine vpon the good and bad, and raineth vpon the iust and vniust, and will reward euery one according to

 his workes: VVe do also willingly passe ouer, why wee saw your honest company banished out of 
France
 for their faults: wee are full of writings to this purpose.


In briefe, ye are accused of treason and slaughter intended against Kings: whose life and blood how you laid in waite for, would haue beene manifest (more cleare then the noon day) had not that same 
Carmelitane
 worke couered it vpon your Martyrs. Hereupon a Catholike within these three yeares (if I be not deceiued) obiected fairly vnto you that you teach and write commonly, that any man of what condition soeuer hee bee, may and ought to kill or slay a King (suppose any King you will) for a certaine stipend or pension of mony, if hee bee a Tyrant, or disobedient to your will and sayings.


This is your practise whereby you preuaile much with bad men: whereupon you deseruedly worship 
Henry Garnet,
 as a Martyr for that his wicked and sauage deed, who for it was executed in Eng∣land.


VVee ingeniously confesse that which is proper to all 
Garmans,
 that our Gallowes, Iibbets, prisons and all instruments of torture, are full of such Mar∣tyrs.


Let vs not cherish a thought of the feyned and lying miracles of such most false martyrs. We do euen tremble (as God shall help vs) that the Catho∣lique religion should couer such Barbarous, Sa∣uage, and most diuellish facts; and that it can call

 and worship such wicked and filthy men as Saints. So much euill was religion able to perswade. Nei∣ther were the winds the cause of their expulsion out of those most famous Cities of 
Hungary,
 and 
Bohe∣mia,
 (we will not speake of 
Polonia,
 and 
Swetia:
) These things shall neuer be forgotten, so long as that winged charriot of Fame shall passe through countries and ages. Yea haue beene shunners of peace and concord: yea haue brought in dissensi∣ons, braules, and treacheries into these kingdomes. All these you doe vnder colour of religion; as that your practise wrought by most fraudulent wiles, and most wicked attempts doth witnesse. This is it by which you wring your selues into high places; you flatter the eares of the chiefest men; being most skilfull in that matter: And so you couer your indirect going and sitting amongst these Peeres with the mantle of religion and piety (with a mis∣chiefe.) We also vnderstand (ô fathers vnlesse you haue some other religion then the Catholike) that you also, after your manner doe attempt the same: iust after the manner of Sorceresses; which while they can doe no harme to others, doe hurt them∣selues.


Amongst these excellent Estates of Common∣wealths, you bring in also an innouation: where those same good Catholiques are Atheists, Liber∣tines, and simple men, they are commonly called: yee doe all for this end, that treacheries and braw∣lings might be brought in, whereby you might fish

 in safety for your company. And truly, not the 
Bohemians,
 and 
Hungarians
 onely, but euen your Catholikes, from elsewhere doe obiect the fame things vnto you. Where we certainly suppose this to be in the better part of you; grant vs ô Lord to speake forth peace in our times: All the turmoiles which you cause (your accusers alleadge) are made for religions sake (vnder this colour you affect your monarchy amongst the Catholikes;) yet not∣withstanding they must not be said to be vnderta∣ken of the professors of the Gospell at any time, for the cause of religion: O misery; we suffer not our cisterns to be drawne for all, whom we vnderstand you runne into.


For to what end is that plenty? But aboue all we set before vs the present estate onely of the 
Bohe∣mians.
 The seducers of the common people, say, that here is no talking of religion: ô blindnesse! Let them beleeue that will; they shall finde to their owne cost, that religion is our beginning, middest, and end: by which all things done, or to be done, are ruled; or rather in which they are all contained, your following, seuere, and harsh proceedings with 
Clostargrab
 and 
Braunaro
 shall afford you one liuely example of sixe hundred.


Hereupon the Emperour 
Matthias
 wrote very pre∣cisely in his late letters to the Earle of 
Bucquoy;
 Thou shalt deserue excellently well of vs, of out Princely house, of religion, and of the Common-weale; if thou wouldest admit of this religion,

 ô 
Bohemia,
 and wouldest entertaine friendship with the 
Iesuites,
 thou couldest not haue warre: The 
Pope
 would blesse thee; the 
Spaniard
 would salute thee, and all the whole Clergy would visite thee. But all these things ô Fathers, are vaine; vnlesse more weighty matters be behind. For yee pro∣claime and condemne all for Heretiks, which doe not obey the 
Romane
 Church, and yee teach open∣ly that no credit is to be giuen to them. In the meane time yee stirre vp the Peeres of this Realme one against another by your diuers waies and de∣uises: yee sow discord betweene the magistrates and the subiects; and by your vnspeakeable sub∣tilty yee cause variances in this Empire. By which your deceiptfull stratagem yee haue shewed your companions to be most deceiptfull; that your pro∣mises are esteemed as rotten nuts; yea a rusticke honesty is better than this your learned malice.


You promise all things vpon oath, but in the end you keepe none. And good reason: for what religion doth bind them to the law, whom their owne religion and the 
Popes
 Bull doe free from all bonds of Law? You make a politike mixture of those things which belong to the honour of God and his word, by saying; As though conscience were not so much to bee kept in politicke matters. Doe not we know these things (good men) we do altogether thinke with him, That there is no greater deceipt in all iniustice then is in them, who then, when they most deceiue,

 doe it, that they may seeme to be good men. And truly, they seeme most strange to vs enquiring, why faith amongst the Iesuits should want followers: Afterward it was told vs that it was prouided a∣mongst you long agoe by a speciall edict, that any man may prouide for other good men by his last will; that faith cannot be said hereditary. All the true professours of the Gospell in the Sacred 
Ro∣mane
 Empire shall for euer endanger their liues and safety vnlesse they be carefull, prouident, and watchfull in these and such like matters. Good God, was it possible that these things should come to our cares?


Beleeue it (ô Fathers) euen your instruments and meanes by which you doe these things; much more your wicked deeds themselues are knowne to vs.


You haue Sermons; this is a great matter; which like a canker spread abroad: by which also you ayme at the end of the Oratour, which is, to per∣swade, and draw others into his owne opinion. To these are added your actions and most strange va∣riations in your behauiours and carriages, by which you allure the wayward common people; which do become the seller of victuals a iuggler or baud, beter then they become a Pulpet. As the Trecen∣sian iudgement in 
France
 is of Father 
Binet.


Neither haue you Sermons onely (ô Fathers) but confessions also, this is greater: by these the condition of euery priuate house, and of the

 goodmen of the houses, the secrets of the whole common-wealth or Kingdome, where you liue; yea the secrets of the Romane Empire and their neigh∣bours are knowne to you. By these (we say againe) you deseruedly domineere ouer the consciences of men, and by compelling whom you will to vnlaw∣full things, you moderate all things by your owne reason: because it is written: VVhose sinnes you shall remit, they are remitted; and whose sinnes you retaine, they are retained.


By this place iniust contracts are made with you, commandements, or wicked and turbulent coun∣sailes are inioyned with a gentle buzzing, things iniustly gotten are kept still: loues and vnlawfull mariages are not onely not broken off, but often∣times are contracted: In a word, the court is kept here.


To these truely (that I may speake with you) pe∣netent men may bee compelled by the priest. For neither was power granted in vaine to the Apostles and their successors by Christ, as well to binde as to loose.


Lastly, (ô Fathers) this is your chiefest deuice: you haue two sorts of disciples here; all for your owne vse and profit: one of them, murtherers of heretique Kings and Peeres, as you call them. whom you neuer cease to incense and animate with all diligence and care, as also with promises of get∣ting perpetuall glory, and of escaping Purgatory. Who can here resist so many armed men?




The other sort of your disciples are the sonnes of great men, whom while you teach so, that when the perfection of wit in them shall come at length to the top and height of knowledge, you so binde vnto you, together with their parents, that you may haue sufficient by the helpe of these, wherewithall you may liue, and encrease your companies and religion. You instill Logike and Rhetorike into them, that they may be Sophisters. This, that they may defend any doubt, perswade false things, and open the doores to your companions amongst all men. There the truth is ouerwhelmed with deceiptfull distinctions sophistications, equi∣uocations, and mentall euasions; here it is ouer∣whelmed with a trimnesse of words, and with a 
Ciceronean
 eloquence. 
And I gaue my heart
 (saith the Preacher) 
that I might know Wisdome and Lear∣ning, and my Errours and folly.


And not to omit the diuinity, which we heare that you reach, you haue a singular methode there∣in, (as becommeth singular men) by which all of your teaching doe expound the Bible philosophi∣cally, and Philosophy like Diuinity; so that 
Ari∣stotle
 may feed on the flower of their youth, Sathan may rightly challenge to himselfe the rest thereof.


O good Iesu, how these wicked men doe pretend with their Atheisme thy most holy name to the de∣struction of all mankind? But what boldnesse and rashnesse is it of yours (ô Fathers)? wee will not say impudency, that you should come out of the Pulpit

 (which was bestowed vpon you in 
Bohemia,
) into the Court, and attempt to adminish the weight and worth of his Maiesties letters, by a diuerse inter∣pretation, and wrested explication of the words? that you read 
Elias Donat, Catoes
 Dislikes, the 
Compendium
 of Logicke, or the 
Epitome
 of Rheto∣ricke: when yee disputed the Letters not confir∣med by the Pope; wrested from 
Rodolphus,
 by the vrging & constraining of the 
Bohemians,
 that you taught the sum of Phisicks, the extract of Metaphi∣siks, a breuiary of the whole world; whē you said that these letters were not subscribed of all: Loe wee sweare vnto you, that you had still remained in your rest and quietnesse, if omitting these publike, you had conteined your selues in your owne priuate matters, and in the meane time (being so busied) had better indoctrinated the children: So it falleth out as often as any transgresseth the limits of his profession, and so, I know not by what de∣stiny he is iustly punished for his curiosity: 
Nature hath giuen to all men to be happy, if any knew how to vse it.
 VVho also had this saying, 
Let euery one re∣maine within his owne fortune.


Moreouer, O Fathers, you haue drawne to you wonderfull goods: and that you might be still dai∣ly more wealthy, you were come to that height, that leauing your priestly function, you were not ashamed to intrude your selues into the secular go∣uernment. Hereupon you are proclaimed the sub∣uerters of the common good, the enemies and de∣stroyers

 of the kingdome, which custome of yours seemes very feeble. For the Kings of the gentiles beare rule: and they which haue power ouer them are liberall: But you not so, it is your part not to reigne, but to vse the rod, and to shake the feruloe within the territories of your kingdome. This we thinke belongeth to you (ô Fathers) that wee may speake truely. It is one thing to weaken, another thing to entreat, this belongeth to you. It is one thing to obey, another thing to command; that belongeth to you. It is fitting to keepe priests in the state of humility and obeysance. We (ô good Fathers) but that you goe in an outward shew and title of holinesse, which hath a shadow of vertue; would by these relations call your vile company, wicked, adulterate, to whom it is pleasant to de∣ceiue: they had rather haue a great name, then a good name: while they cannot be knowne by their vertues, they desire to be knowne by their wicked∣nesses. The end of your actions doth declare that, which is, to bring in subiection not onely these two Kingdomes, but the whole 
Romane
 Empire; yea all the whole world to the 
Spanish
 and 
Romish
 bon∣dage.




 YEa it is not the least amongst the greeuances of the 
Hungarians,
 for which you are driuen out of that Kingdome, namely that by your helpes and perswasion truce is made betweene the 
Turkes
 and our men: onely that the strength of the house of 
Austria
 might be kept whole and sound for the rooting out of all Heretikes (as you terme them) out of 
Gremany.
 And hereupon you stirre vp a Bishop elsewhere in the City, that he would build a fortresse or tower, to the hurt of his potent neigh∣bour; and to the disprofit of all professors of the Gospell. The loue of the 
Dublines
 elsewhere kee∣peth no measure amongst the counsailers, whom you disgrace and staine with a 
Portugallike
 libera∣lity. Whereupon one professor of the Gospell is exceeding mistrustfull to another: and although they seeme to encline to friendship, we know not what hand oftentimes doth cause contention. O strife, ô cruell strife; ô strife sprung from the furies and hell it selfe. All excellency of true professours of the Gospell is by you troden downe, and (be∣hold the Authors of discord) is come to nothing. This (ô Fathers 
Iesuites
) is your crafty deuice; by which you might giue from hand to hand the sa∣cred 
Romane
 Empire to the 
Pope
 and 
Spaniard
 as perpetuall dictatours, but that 
Mercury
 the go∣uernour of sleepe had lately (although too too late) stirred vs vp.




This is your end; who can hope for better meanes by which you atchiue your end? 
Lucius Mummius
 taking 
Corinth
 reserued not so much as an halfpeny to himselfe of so many inestimable spoiles: you doe not thirst after our goods, or li∣berty, but euen after our very blood. Your letters proclaime this, your plots and stratagems in 
Com∣mataw,
 and elsewhere doe proclaime it. For your auncienter wickednesses in 
France,
 and 
Spaine,
 are odious vnto vs. Haue you not yet heard how some blood-sucker of your owne order in the yeare of our Lord, 1582. spake? but that we knew it was one of the Emperours house, we should haue sworne it had bin written in 
Caucasus.


How Germany may safe be held,


Take my aduise (thou Reader mild:)


O Caesar vse thy power, the seruants all of Luther,


With sword, with wheel, with sea,


With ropes, with fire, eke bemurther.


Wee tremble to repeate your filthy 
Spanish
 ex∣ploits (which is your praise) surely you haue thought of that same old saying of yours; 
If I can∣not mooue the gods aboue, I will trouble the diuels below.
 So your workes are vnprofitable, and the worke of iniquity is in your hands: your feete doe runne to mischiefe, and doe make hast to spill in∣nocent blood. These are the things which haue caused you to be banished.


For what would it haue beene, if the 
Bohe∣mians
 or 
Hungarians,
 should haue contended

 any longer with words? They said with 
Cato,
 moo∣ued with the reproaches of a certaine man; we haue an vnequall condition of striuing with you: for as it is most easie for you to speake ill, and to heare ill; so it is vnpleasant to vs to speake ill, and vnaccu∣stomed to heare ill. But get yee gone rather yee 
Iesuites,
 neuer returne into these Kingdomes. So the daies of the wicked shall be shortned. And what other remedy is there? 
Agar
 and her sonne 
Ismael
 attempted to stirre vp strife, dissensions and contentions, also to sow the greatest discord be∣tweene 
Abraham
 and 
Sara.
 Can a wise father of a family winke at these things? he can neuer doe it: rather let him cast out the bondwoman with her son. Which thing is done; who can say it is ill done? furthermore the 
Bohemians
 are not priuy to any fault in your setting forth of showes: vnlesse happily passing by, they appoint a popular action against the act of eiection and banishment: which those crafty and nimble actours, and able knaues doe (we speak these things againe (ô Fathers) lest wee too much smart for them) not retained and kept in darknesse; but openly restored into the City 
Prague;
 and so the aire is a fresh infected. In the meane while (not nim∣ble in relating) the 
Bohemians
 doe wonder at your nimblenesse in dancing, accusing nature that shee made not you actors and tumblers. The report go∣eth (for what do we standing any longer vpon these) that in times past chastity and continency were amongst the Catholike brethren: wee beleeue it,

 but in that age: when innocency was honored, sim∣plicity extolled; and pouerty esteemed: now what sinke is not more cleane then this state of Priests? yee are truly the Fathers of your country: the 
Bohe∣mians
 haue found your key which you haue lost or laid aside: they now behold your effeminate appar∣rell and houshold stuffe. Thus they see, and through∣ly see now that which so many religious men of you haue locked vp, who are whoremongers, adul∣terers, lewd persons, Sodomiticall, Parricides, murtherers of Kings, disdainefull, warre-makers, Atheists, Epicures, malefactors, truce-breakers, tyrants, in a word, who are all wickednesse. Ye shall know them by their fruites, as it is written. Where you intrude your selues, you make your selues Lords; these, seruants, which the Preacher foresee∣ing, saith; I saw the seruants riding, and the Prin∣ces walking on foot, like seruants. Marriages also are contracted amongst some (of which you are the authors) without the consent of parents: they talke of this in euery towne, village, and company in 
Flanders, Italy
 and 
Germany.
 You steale away their eldest sonnes; 
France
 doth witnesse this. You take away their onely sonnes from their Parents, that yee may afterward be possessors of their goods, and so relieue and help your owne companies. And this is your sure 
Vulcans
 shield; by which you were so noted, that 
Spaine
 did vrge you to change these your wicked practises; that the elders of the families might be secure from your inuations.




Pliny
 (I beleeue) foreknewe this your religious∣nesse; saying, Many doe feare an ill report, fewe an ill consience. But you deale warily, in that you are not ashamed to teach openly, that you are sub∣iect to no gouernment in the world but to the Sea of Rome. Who therefore shall iudge you in these coasts? Shall the Pope? Vnlesse the 
Bohemians
 and 
Hungarians
 by chance doe come betweene: You teach the youth for nothing; but for no∣thing? This appeares by your Religious houses; by the most Princely and stately Theaters in them: on which you haue Comedies acted, ful of a poeti∣cal or Heathenish delights; How faith is not to be kept with Heretikes; How Euangelicall faith is to be rooted out with 
Luther
 and 
Caluin,
 and such like things, that you may bee the better emboldned, you spend whole daies with your Scholers in these delights & pleasures; and the nights also doe you passe ouer on this wise: you are become so brazen faced through these your doings, that shortly you may learne to bee quite shamelesse. Hence it is no maruell that you are Winebibbers, Effeminate, stately, and full of money. Your Schollers bring you Gold as much as they can; that they may neuer ouerloade you. Is vertue to begotten after money? Wee let passe to speake of your companions in certaine well ordered Ci∣ties; that one example of Father 
Swares
 shall suf∣fice you, which we commit to your moyst memo∣ry in these things. But who are they whom you

 teach for nothing? Are they poore? truely no; they are Heires of great riches and large Pos∣sessions. These will not suffer your Society to want for riches. We wonder that you know not these things. You know many things, and doe you not know your selues? The summe of Phi∣losophy bids; Know thy selfe. So no man know∣eth how much he knoweth not. You read 
Danus
 in 
Terence,
 but you doe not see how you disturbe and confound all things. You reade of the Gi∣ants in 
Virgill;
 but how you your selues doe wage Warre with heauen and all the gods, you doe not know. You reade of the 
Cyclops
 in 
Euripides;
 but you see not how you feare neither God nor man. Truely it is more then Cymmerian darknesse you are in; vnlesse you happily imitate 
Socrates,
 who knew onely this, that he knew nothing. But why doe wee prosequte these things with stile and words? One thing we adde of those huge ones, before we bring in the Conclusion. You Iesuits were meere Aeoluses, who sent your boysterous Northerne and Easterne windes vpon this age, and the whole Romane Empire: that you might onely obtaine the most cursed ende of your Sect; namely, the Monarchie of the whole world, and subiect all the Kingdomes of the World to the Sea of Rome. Hence doe troubles compasse vs about like vnto 
Numida,
 and new waues amongst the surges. O when shall wee be in that pure and certaine calme, which you haue couered with

 clowdes, that shortly will cause a tempest. The ashes which you spread abroad seeme to returne to you, ready to burne vp your Society. The ho∣ly Scripture saith, 
In the multiplying of the wicked, wickednesse shall be multiplyed, and the iust shall see their falles.
 But that wee may make an ende of these things which we say by the report of others, do not thinke (O Fathers Iesuits) that wee would hurt any of your Society hereby; for they are not ours: but such as long since were obiected against you by the whole world: which things, because you haue not answered; I thought good to mooue, not for vpbrayding, but for conference sake.


It is not possible (me thinke) that Religion and so many wickednesses should dwell together in one Colledge: which if you should suffer to reside vpon you, surely we would say that you are the worst of all that goe on two feete: whose bodies are hardened with so many skarres of villany and wickednesses, that there is no roome for another stroke. But, though we knowe no other by you, yet we hope better. For whither you goe; you immitate the Nouensilian gods. Doe you make speeches? your lippes are besmeered with 
Cicero∣nian
 eloquence. Doe you laugh? the Graces seem to be in your eyes. Doe you pray? All the Mar∣tyrs are beheld in your countenances. Doe yee line? you are chaster then the Monkes of 
Syria,
 called Escenor: so that if you should chance to

 see dogges and bitches together in the street you would turne away your faces like 
Clotomicus;
 for they that haue honest mindes haue tender fore∣heads, as 
Simocus
 writeth. You are more abstinent from Wine, then 
Fulgentius,
 sometime Bishop of 
Ruspanary:
 you doe almost go beyond 
Elias
 who li∣ued in the Wildernesse neere the Brooke 
Carith.
 What are 
Paul
 the first Hermit, 
Antony, Hillarion, Patroclus;
 and others, in their austere solitarie liues, which are mariages in respect of your auste∣sterity? Will the world needs be deceiued? Let it be gulled, we speake sparingly of your praises, lest those truthes we tell should be blotted with a sus∣pition of flattery: we could not chuse but set down the things fore-mentioned that it might appeare what opinion Germany hath of you, and that we might hold you no longer pining in suspence of expectation, if you be not guilty of the aforesaide knaueries, surely there must be some secret auer∣sation, or contrarietie of nature which made these Countries spue ye out, as some mens stomacks do Cheese, or Fish, or Oyle, which proceeds not of any known cause, but from a certaine Antipothy of nature: wherof in imitation of 
Marshial
 the Po∣et we may say:

I loue thee not O Iesuite,


The cause thereof I cannot write:


But this I wot, I loue thee not.


Graue Fathers we can say no more to this vnles there be some strange & hidden disease in yee: tis

 wonderful what should be the reason why all true 
Germaines
 should openly professe, that all Cities & Townes are desperatly sick wher ther be any nests of 
Iesuits:
 surely there must be some contagious di∣seas that stickes to your Companies, or els you are tormented with some other maladies of the Stone or burning Feauers, or turmoiling of your loynes, els why are found in your Coleges, such groaning chaires as women vse in Child-birth. 
Homer
 tels of of one that was angry because 
Thirsites
 sate in coun∣cel among the Princes, & shall we be so patient to suffer those to dwell among vs that are ouerrunne with I know not what scuruy foule euill? Surely, it were fitter that all of your ranke were swept out of al 
Germany,
 then be let in adores where they haue bin once fairely rid of ye. Why should 
Germany
 let ye set footing in more places then ye haue already, the Monistary which you seeke are profitable for our Churches & schooles which are not to be rob∣bed that you might enioy them. It should go very hard with vs if your Lettine should bee song a∣mongst vs, we mean that Letany by which ye song to death two 
Popes, Clement
 the 
8.
 who in the dispu∣tation concerning 
Grace
 did set you out in your co∣lours; and 
Sixtus
 the fift who was your professed enemy: if ye will not deale so with vs, we will af∣ford ye our counsell and helpe, but vpon this con∣dition, that ye keepe your selues within the limits of your Schooles, and affect not heereafter the intermedling of State matters.




Augustus Caesar
 might bee your Prtrone, who though he were a man made of the best moulde, yet often wished his own quiet & desired to be va∣cant from the affaires of gouernmēt, that he might liue to himselfe, and to the Muses: why should not your great spirits doe so? and let Kings handle their owne Scepters: whilest yee striue to clime thus high, yee make your selues ridiculous. Keepe your selues in the middle course, hold yee to your owne station; that is, read Grammer to young youthes: It was good aduise giuen of olde;

That which thou art desire to be,


And wish not other lotte 
 to thee.


The place which yee are to be sent, must be su∣table to your religious Sect, such a one we com∣mend vnto you, being very fit for your Confession and whole course of life. We haue found a place where you may haue your Schoole, your Innes, your Hospitals, your Prisons, your Chayres, your Churches and places of Confession: heere yee may exercise your fasting and seuerest discipline, or rather a temperate and medecinall diet; if your iollity heere be ouer clowded some time with sor∣row, you must remember how braue a thing it is to beare stripes manfully, but you will aske where this religious holy place is, whither wee would send yee, it is in 
Amsterdam
 in the Low countries, the Saint that is worshiped in this religious and

 miraculus place is called Saint 
Rorspine,
 and his Colledge that is ioyned with them is Saint 
Ponus,
 the place is sittuate in the way nere the holy street, and because you loue holesome Ayre well: heere is that admirable good temper of the Ayre which can neuer be exprest, though a man hard as many tongues as there be flies in 
Armenia,
 at 
Amsterdam,
 by reason of the sea incompassing and interlacing, there is perpetuall trafficke, so that hereby ye may haue opportunitie to doe that which Iesuits much busie themselues withall; namely to send and re∣ceiue daily intelligence from farre Countries, this is a fayre pull for you, but yet there is more be∣hind: our Maisters of 
Amsterdam
 are somewhat ouerhonest, and easily taken with men that make profession of religious order, and by reason of the monstrous miracles that are daily performed, they giue very large offerings to this saint 
Rorspine
 and his fellow; they cease not euery day to offer vp most precious Francomscence to this god, and to account his Priest the toppe of their friends, and because they know that yee loue faire and large houses, they promise that if this house be to little for you, they will enlarge it, and adde other hou∣ses to it; and all for Saint 
Rorspine
 sake, and Saint 
Ponus,
 and for the Brother-hood of the Iesuits: and heere might yee haue good opportunity to spread your Religion and instructions, for that many that haue a Catholike vaine are brought dai∣ly to 
Amsterdam
 by wooden horses, who would

 acount it great gaine for them that you are re∣ceiued into Saint 
Rorspines
 sanctuary, and there ye should be rid of the daily feare of being banished or being torne asunder like 
Acteon
 with his Doggs. If yee haue any secret disease which yee would be ashamed to confesse in the Temple of 
Esculapius,
 yee may be bould with this 
Saint,
 who will be wil∣ling to heale your sores if yee shall doe thus, and ply the people as they shalbe sent to your schoole, yee may laughe at the great Statse-men that are in∣dangered by the factions of the people, and are faine to fish with a golden hooke, whilest your selues sit quiet in the middest of all stormes. And now there shall be no more Pilgrimages taken to our Ladie of 
Loretto,
 or of 
Hales,
 saint 
Rorspine
 shall take vp all the custome, that shall robbe all other shrines of miracles, there shal we heare how many hath beene healed by the power of saint 
Rorspine,
 by the intercession of saint 
Ponus,
 here was one freed from a burning Ague, there another bursten guts healed: 
Iohn Fuks
 a souldier of Scotland reco∣uered his health by singular deuotion and cease∣lesse praier. 
Francis Rosse
 at 
Anwerpe
 was in the like manner cured of a dangerous melancholly disease by the same intercession: Another like∣wise of a lame Creeple was made as nimple as a dauncer: Another voyded a worme out of his body of a huge length. And this same saint 
Rorspin
 in the yeare 1610. did cure a certaine Irishman of

 the Falling sicknesse, and cast a Diuell out of a woman at 
Lewarden.
 Nay, the very name of saint 
Rorspine
 being vttered in the hearing of the sicke will make them as whole as a Fish. In the yeare 1602. when the plague was so ripe in 
Amsterdam,
 it neuer touched this holy place, the inhabiters thereof were in so good health, that their skinnes were so full as they could hold for cracking: Be∣sides these, many Miracles are done in 
France, Italy,
 and 
Spaine,
 but there a man must beleeue them, and make himselfe blinde to see them. But our Saints Miracles doth bulke vp a Gods name, though a man hath no beliefe in them, there remaine visible euidences of them which hang vp in the Church of Fame. And that we be not silent of the houses prouided for our Fathers the 
Iesuits,
 the house prouided for them is a faire Pallace, the Roofe of it is couered with Brasse, the Pauement of Mar∣ble and Porfree Chechered in diuers colours, wherein are artificially ingrauen the story of all their Miracles, a stately Vaile is sustained with three Pillers, betweene which runneth a Foun∣taine whose water gusheth out through the throat of a seuen headed Hydra. Here may the 
Iesuites
 inioy all those recreations and pleasures which their minds or bodies incline vnto: haste your selues hither Iolly Fathers, the 
Amsterdamians
 do ernestlie looke for your comming, St. 
Rorspine
 and Saint 
Ponus
 expect your seruice, make no delay to hoise vp Saile for 
Amsterdā,
 good fortune wil blow

 a full gale in the poope of your feruent desires.


They ended their speach, & the good Fathers the 
Iesuits,
 wold haue bin weeping ripe at these words, but that there faces are made of Bell-mettell, they set a good face on it, and deuoure their griefe, and with a seeming good courage proclaime that they are all for St. 
Rorspine;
 they trusse vp their Trinkets, and prouide for 
Amsterdam,
 three daies hence they take Waggon where they sit fixe of them, by two and two; their most nimble & officious Waggo∣ner is 
Arnold
 the Aduocate of the Parliament of 
Paris,
 he that made the famous Oration in the be∣halfe of the Vniuersitie of 
Paris,
 he gets vp with the whip in his hand, and layes about him so lusti∣ly, that he flies with his luggage through the coun∣trey, the people that see this Chariot scoure a∣long so fast, giue many reasons of this gallopping; the wisest among them say, that 
Arnolt
 makes this haste with his carriage, lest perhaps these Fathers should sneake away and goe into 
France,
 and there not onely swarme in the 
Iesuite
 Colleges, but also creepe into the Kings Court and Counsell, and so domineere that no man dare open his lippes against them. Thus the Iesuites flew out of the countrey as it were with the wings of 
Peggasus,
 and no maruell, for no man would hold vp his fin∣ger to stay them, whether Papist or Protestant. The Superior Commanders among the 
Iesuites
 rid thus in pompe, but the ordinary frye of them did laky it out on foot, and carried euery one his pack

 at his backe, and these were as proud as their ma∣sters that ridde, and would be thought to imitate the Apostles: and as they went in Procession, they chaunted a Letany to saint 
Rorspine
 making the fa∣berdum of their song, 
Nunc dimittis Seruos tuos Do∣mine:
 whereto 
Germany
 sung an Ecco, 
Iusta sunt iuditia tua Domine.


Thus I haue deliuered in briefe, the relation of the sending of the Iesuites of 
Bohemia
 and 
Hungary
 on a long arrante to Saint 
Rorspine;
 whereto I adde nothing else but that it is hoped that all 
Germany
 wil furnish their Waggons with all their Iesuits to follow their Fellowes on this iourney: the eyes of great many of the greatest haue bene long time hoodwinked, and the darke night cast ouer them, but now that vaile vanisheth and cleare light ap∣pearing, discouereth the danger which hangeth ouer the Empire, so that now small brabling con∣trouersies being laidaside, the Princes of the Em∣pire wil haue an eye to the publick, & forasmuch as they see that all this danger and mischiefe doth arise from the Iesuites, why should not they begin at the right end with casting them out, and it be∣ing euident, that these are spies and vnderminers for the aduancing the 
Spanish
 Monarchy? Why should they not be more iealous of them then of the 
Ottoman
 Empire. 
Spaine
 boasteth that the Em∣pire of the West is due to them by destinie, vpon this hope, they which had their beginnings from the Mores and Sarizens, goe on to worke their

 owne ends by their bloudy Inquisitions. This creeping Gangreine must be cut off lest it grow to farre in the 
Low Countries,
 in 
Italy, France
 and 
Eng∣land.
 What Priuy Counsels of State are there in 
Germany
 vnreuealed to the 
Spaniard?
 Where hath he not in other countries his Pensioners for intel∣ligence, and his partie among the Counsellors of State linked to him with a golden chaine? What Diets or publike meetings haue we, the secrets whereof are not knowne to the 
Spaniard,
 as well as to them that sit in those Parliaments? A thing most pernicious to our States, and dishonourable to the name of 
Germany.


What Prince or people is there of the reformed Religion, whom the 
Spaniard
 doth not thinke he hath as iust cause to ruine, as to quell the Turkes or Pagans? Nor is this iust feare to be found in Pro∣testants, but it concernes them also that are pure Roman Catholikes. Were not the 
Fredirankes, O∣thoes,
 and 
Henries,
 thinke you, good Catholikes? yet drunke they of this cuppe. They that will not beleeue that all the Bishoprickes in the Em∣pire were promised by the Spaniard to the 
Iesuites.
 They that would rather haue the 
Spaniard
 rule o∣uer them then a 
Caluinist,
 or 
Lutheran
 Prince, let them expect the reward which he gaue to the 
Neo∣politans
 and 
Portugales: Vestram animam pertranscibit gladius:
 the Iesuites Creede is, that there is one God, one Pope, and one Catholike or Vniuersall King.




Be wise O yee Kings, yee haue an enemy as full of gold as 
Midas,
 who hath in readinesse, in di∣uers Garrisons, for any exploite thirty thousand 
Spaniards,
 all olde beaten Souldiers. Moreouer he sends out his Firebrandes into 
Europe, Affrica, Asia
 and 
America,
 and into the East and West Indies also. He commandeth 
Lucitanta,
 with the most fertill Iles and Kingdomes of 
Oceanus:
 be∣sides 
Italy,
 and he thirsteth after your prosperitie: Your prosperity? That sufficeth not, but he thir∣steth after your bloud: hee is potent. But hee will neuer disturbe you, if these his grounds be broken by vnited forces. But O good God! How men are most secure in their dangerousest & most hazardablest matters? O yee Lords & Princes of the Empire, if all the 
Spaniards
 heare me, let them view with a curious eye the Lands situated with long distance of place, to which they deny pas∣sage; they cut off ayde, and doe waste all pla∣ces: this is a hard matter, but he will put to his hand againe that the 
Spaniard
 may bring forth the extreamest of his cruelty and tyrranny, that the Subiects lamentably should see the last Act of the Tragedy: whose heart doth ake through the feare and horror of the 
Spaniard,
 that they can desire nothing but occasion how they may gett out of this bondage into their former liber∣tie.


Let vs see the 
Belgie
 destitute of all hope, they shaked off his yoake they retained the Field: let

 vs see the Prince of 
Auratia:
 the huge number of Souldiers hee derideth and explaudeth them and their madde attempts. And that I may goe no far∣ther (o Princes and Peeres) who are yee? are yee not 
Germaines?
 surely altogether the same. Now the dignitie and power of the Germaine Empire is not to be measured, by the greatnes of Coun∣tries and people but by the vnited faith, power and fortitude; by these (but what doe I stand to say it) you shall ouercome the Kingdomes of the whole world if yee be of one mind; I say your dignitie (oh yee Peeres of the Germaine Empire) and power are mightie if they be vnited. Oh yee States of the Empire, doe not suffer that Heroy∣call vertue and those deuine forces to bee extinct in the Germaynes: by which yee haue tamed the whole World, but exercise your valiant breastes and vnconquered strength against these Massing Priestes; and doe yee all meete and agree in one holy league against your professed and sworne e∣nemies, if any generositie or courrage remaine in you, shew it, but if otherwise, I, like another Cynicke, will laffe at your sluggishnes and Le∣thorgie: and will say, that I cride out in vaine to this age, which hath a great number of sleepers and very few wakers: heare a parradox, I will giue you a great precept if you will remaine great, 
Cauete, Consulite, Vigilate,
 this is only nescessary in this age, 
Hoc agite.


Thou in the meane while good and courtious

 Reader be fauorable, and fare thou well, if there be any pleasant speech let it redound to our loue∣ing Country, and also to thy pleasant and fauo∣rable iudgement, in the meane time doe not e∣steeme and thinke it my purpose to speake of any Classicke thing to wheet one and stire vp the Professors of the Gospell against the Catholikes; to adde fewell to that publike fier; I haue ano∣ther minde that the sweetenes of concord might shine betweene the Professors of the Gospell and the Catholikes in this Empire: which the Iesuit∣ticall and Spanish Clowdes haue not only obscu∣red but almost extinguished, these Iesuitticall and Spanish wickednesses, haue drawne the spea∣ches from me against my will; we vnfainedly im∣brace these sincere affection of the rest of the Ca∣tholikes in this Empire, and with our vnited and conioyned forces (as it becommeth bretheren in one Land,) wee doe seeke remedy for these pub∣like euils; I did write with a troubled penne, in a troublesome yeare: wherein we see that good men are pressed downe and euill men set vp, and wicked men pressed downe and good men set vp.


FINIS.









