(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A04494)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 8205)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 745:04)
The first leaf and the last leaf are blank.
Reproduction of the original in the British Library.
The trade of the Moores in in Barbary for their gold.
The Kings Ma∣iesties Letters Patents.
The first voy∣age.
The ship taken by the vagrant Portingall, and the men slaine.
The second voyage.
Captaine
The third voy∣age.
The whole way from England to the Riuer, runne in 20. dayes.
The particulers handled in this booke.
These are all more largly written of, where the til∣lage of the ground is han∣dled.
We were 10 of our owne com∣pany, that went vp in a shallop, and 4 Blacke that I hired to carry vp a Canoe.
These
The Country people haue no boates or Ca∣noos aboue the ebbing and flowing.
We laboured to get vp the Ri∣uer onely 7. houres in 24.
No townes neare the River side after wee past the ebbing and flowing.
The Descripti∣on of the Cro∣codile, whom the Country people call Bumbo.
How the people do feare him.
The manner they passe their cattle ouer the Riuer, for foare of Bumbo.
The Blackes would not goe into the Riuer.
Their answere when they went in.
The strong sent of the Croco∣dile, changing the tast of the Riuer water, & the fish were taken in it.
The desctipti∣on of the sea-horse.
The sea-horse feedes in the night vpon the shore.
A daungerous blow, by a sea-horse.
A neglect to be hereafter, care∣fully prouided for.
The Country People esteeme the sea-horse, for excellent meate.
A strange ope∣ration of a fish.
The running fish.
The nature of the riuer foule.
The manner of the peoples fishing.
The vagrant Portingall.
An especiall Caueat.
The curteous vsage of the naturall inha∣bieants.
The reward of treachery.
The misery of the Fulbic.
The cleane∣lines of the Fulby women.
The time and manner of the peoples fee∣ding.
A digression, by the Writer, for the better preseruing of mens liues and healths.
The Writers o∣pinion concer∣ning dyet.
The Cauneat must be lookt carefully to, in the setting forth.
The manner of their building:
Strange Ante∣hils.
The towne of
The armes or weapons the people haue in vse.
The inhabitans custome in the night.
The great King of
The great King of
The great King of
These great Kings are like∣wise tributa∣ries to one great King fat ahoue in the land, as is re∣ported to vs.
The reuerence of the people to the petty Kings.
The Religious ceremony of these people
The manner of their apparrell.
The descripti∣on of their Gregories, which are tharmes they receiue from their Ma∣ry-buckes.
The number of their wiues.
Allowance of o∣ther women for necessitie sake.
The reason of that necessity.
Strict punish∣ment for vn∣chastity.
The men buy then wiues.
The widdowes buy their hus∣bands.
The subiection of the women.
No outward daliance seene amongst them.
A strange report.
The womens clothing.
The manner of taking away their wines, which in some sort is vsed in
The modesty of a new mar∣ried woman
These people stand much vpon their dig∣nity.
A daungerous quarrell be∣twixt them.
The certaine knowledge of their Kings & Gouernours and their suc∣ressors.
Their titles of honor.
Wherein their Riches consists. Great Beggers.
The temporall people great drinkers of Aquavitae.
The life of their Kings tru∣ly described.
The deposing of Kings.
The ceremony vsed betwixt the King and vs, when first we meet.
He giues his chiefe Gregory drinke first.
Their women not allowed to drinke in publike, al∣though they loue it well.
They obserue the leuiticall Law.
And haue great knowledge of the old Testa∣ment.
They marry in their own tribe and breede vp their children in their owne sects.
The Mary-bucks haue the same allowance of women the Kings or tem∣porall people haue.
This

Both Priest & people weare one manner of apparrell.
The chiefe Ma∣ry-bucke, daun∣gerously sicke.
His manner of entertaining me.
The valuation of the present gaue him, which was so highly estee∣med.
The descripti∣on of the town called
The chiefe Mary-bucke wonderfull de∣suous to confer with me about our Religion.
They worship the true God aboue, whom they call Alle.
They haue no manner of Image.
They haue no Chuches.
They obserue not their Sab∣both.
The manner of teaching their male children to write, and reade.
The manner of their character.
Their law is not written in the publicke
We suppose they performe their religions ceremonies, vnder the shady trees.
They called our dwelling the white mens towns.
In any oecasi∣on of falling out betweene the people and vs, this old man would come with his Assegy present∣ly to ayde vs.
Their manner of devotion.
The death of the chiefe Ma∣ry-bucke.
The great re∣sort to his buri∣all.
They do bury the body, with∣all sweete sa∣uors and per∣fumes they can get.
The manner of buriall.
Verses and O∣rations in com∣mendations of the deceased.
A Relique of great esteeme.
The inuesting of the eldest sonne in the fathers place.
A Ramme for sacrifice.
They cal Christ by the name of Nale.
The opinion they hold con∣cerning him.
They haue bookes of great volumes all manuscripts.
The wonder∣full sobernesse of these Mary-buckes.
They abstaine from all sweete things.
A strange ex ample of absti∣nence.
The true way to know a ma∣ry-buck
They will tell no lies.
The marybucks manner of tra∣uaile.
They will beg of vs without deniall.
The Mary∣bucke free to trauaile in all places.
Their report of gold.
Old Mahome he ceremony at my going vp
The subtilty of his neighbour Hammet.
The trade and trauaile of the mary-bucks of Setico.
Wherewith he maintaines his greatnesse.
An ill opinion of the Mary-buckes, to bury their golde.
A good com∣moditie.
The reason of looking after Buckor Sano.
Note.
The Mary-buckes name was Selyman, the other Tom∣bo.
Samgulley a blacke boy.
Eleuen dayes trauell against the streame, wherein wee wrought eighty eight houres.
Some of our men grew fear∣full.
As bigge in bo∣dy as a great Stagge, and had wreathed bornes.
The returne of one of our messengers.
The comming of Buckor Sano.
Prouision the people brought
His going a∣boord the boat and report of our powder.
A Stalker.
The saying of Buckor Sano aboord the boate.
Hee was but once ouerta∣ken with our strong drinkes.
The great e∣steeme of salt.
He makes a proclamation.
He offers we∣men to sell vn∣to vs.
Their commo∣dities.
A markethouse made a shorc.
Warning not to take notice of their gold.

He seem'd won∣derous willing of our compa∣nies.

His declarati∣on of the Moores of
Pleasing intel∣ligence being the maine bu∣sinesse wee ayme at.
Their course of trading.
An oath they obserue care∣fully.
An vnhappy accident.
A people that neuersaw white men before.
Strange bree∣ches the com∣mon people did weare.
An encourage∣ment to search further vp the Riuer.
These people had another language.
These people expect our re∣turne.
The King comes vnto vs.
Buckor Sano did alwayes eate with vs in the boate.
These exercises did commonly hold three houres in the night.
Buckor Sano made the white mens Alchade.
The acknow∣ledgment of his new title.
His mediation to the King in our behaltes.
The Kings an∣swere.
Buckor Sanos gratification.
The Kings ac∣ceptance and faire reply.
He giues vs the Country.
A strange rece∣mony in take∣ing of posses∣sion.
The possession giuen vnto me.
A great prote∣station of de∣fence.
A people markt in the face.
Obserue this Mary-Bucke.

The marybucke first tale.
His second discourse.
Our opinion cercerning, Trombutto and Gago.
More incou∣ragment to go further vp the Riuer.
The manner of merchandizing without speech or sight one of the other.
The report of the people with the great lippe.
The people who bought our salt had no vse of it, but for sale.
This ought speedily to be considered of.
The place cal∣led St.
Our curteous parting with Buckor Sano.
The fashion of the Irish Rimer.
Vpon this in∣strument only they play with their fingers.
A strange con sort-ship.
Their chiefest instrument.
The manner of this instrument
Their manner of daunsing.
Their Fidlers rich.
They are base∣ly esteemed of, and being dead are not buried.
The affection of Saingulley our blacke boy vnto vs.
This Bo Iohn was brother to Ferambra.
The feast of their Circum∣cision.
Samgulley ta∣ken from vs to be circumsised.
The great re∣sort to this so∣lemnity.
They that were cut, kept all to gether.
The curtesie and muth that past betwixt vs.
women looke vpon the cir∣cumcision.
Our boy cir∣cumcisised, and the manner thereof.
We were not suffered to go amongst the new circumci∣sed.
No vse of me∣dicines to cure them.
The discourse of their diuell Ho-re.
He is a mon∣strous cater.
Sumetimes 8 or 9 atonec, are carried away, and sayd to be in his belly.
Comming forth they speake not for certaine daies.
Our opinion concerning Ho-re.
How he was partly discoue∣red.
An example of the diuells con∣uerse with the Fidlers.
The Diuell could not tell the Portingall where we were friends or foes.
The trades or occupations they haue in vse, their pain∣full season of thunder and lightning, also what fruites & plants the Country yeeldes, and are growing there amongst them.
The Smith.
An excellent charcole to worke their Iron,
The Sepatero they of this trade are most ingenious.
The Potter & tobacco pipe∣maker.
They haue in the highest of the Riuer, ex∣cellent mattes.
A market kept euery monday.
No mony or coyne amongst them.
All labour to till the earth and sow their graine.
They vnder∣stand not to make their cat∣tle worke.
The manner of their painefull labours.
Their co
The manner of their Rice.
The planting of cotton
The misery of the people.
The times of their raines & the fearefulnes thereof.
A faire intrea∣ty to men of iudgment.
The great a∣boundance of poyson.
The nature of the first raines.
An obseruation to be kept.
A note of ex∣perience.
An obseruati∣on of the tem∣pestuous times.
They heare & speak of Christ but will not be∣leeue.
Gods mercy to vs.
A comfort to the traueller.
Plantans.
Limes.
Orenges.
Good wine sorth of a tree.
Seuerall sorts thereof. Palmeta apples
Amade drinke, called Dullo.
Gowrdes.
Locuste.
Wild hony.
Munkies meat.
A stony apple.
This fruite is of great esteeme.
They are not growing with∣in the limit we saw.
Great store brought vs, when we were aboue.
This is like our water Lilly.
The sensible tree.
All reuenous beasts in the day time keepe their dennes.
The Lyon.
His small ser∣uant.
His manner of hunting.
The causes of our knowledge.
Ounces, and Leopards.
The Ounce dangerous.
A true tale of a Child.
Ciuit Cat. Porcupine.
The Elephant.
The stature of the great ones.
He browses like a deare.
A false opinion
This was that
Elephants flesh good to feede vpon.
The manner how he killed them.
I brought two of these tayles away with me.
The Elephant a fearefull beast.
The peoples admiration, we durst set vpon them.
Buffelos.
Blew boores.
Antelops. Deare of all sorts.
Munkies.
Babownes a strange story.
A gouerment amongsts them
The people of the Country eate them.
The Spaniards opinion of them.
The pleoples report of a Vnicorne.
The Stalker.
The wake.
Ginney hens.
Patridges.
Quailes.
Pigeons.
Parrats.
Paraquetos.
Variety of smal birds.
A small bird withoutlegges.
A bird with foure wings, about the big∣nes of a turtle Doue.
How the birds preserue their young, from the Babouns, and Munkyes.
The su
Another meanes of pre∣seruation.
Hawkes that will kill a Val∣low deare.
Bastard Eagles.
How the peo∣ple finde the dead beasts.
The Inhabi∣tants want knowledge to take them.
The Kings man ner of Haw∣king.
The vagrant Portingall.