The description of a voyage made by certaine ships of Holland into the East Indies VVith their aduentures and successe: together with the description of the countries, townes, and inhabitantes of the same: who set forth on the second of Aprill 1595. and returned on the 14. of August. 1597. Translated out of Dutch into English by W.P.
Verhael vande reyse by de Hollandtsche schepen gedaen naer Oost Indien. English.
Approx. 129 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 43 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-04 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A05051




STC 15193



ESTC S109348





99844998




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The description of a voyage made by certaine ships of Holland into the East Indies VVith their aduentures and successe: together with the description of the countries, townes, and inhabitantes of the same: who set forth on the second of Aprill 1595. and returned on the 14. of August. 1597. Translated out of Dutch into English by W.P.
Verhael vande reyse by de Hollandtsche schepen gedaen naer Oost Indien. English.
Phillip, William.
Houtman, Cornelis de, d. 1599, attributed name.
Langenes, Barent.
[4], 40 leaves : ill. (woodcuts), maps  


London :


Imprinted by [John Windet? for] Iohn Wolfe,


1598.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Java (Indonesia) --  Description and travel --  Early works to 1800.
2009-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2009-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2009-10
Simon Charles
Sampled and proofread
2009-10
Simon Charles
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2010-04
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






15193


99844998


9867














THE DESCRIPTION of a voyage made by certaine Ships of Holland into
the East INDIES. With their aduentures and successe: Together With the
description of the Countries, Townes, and inhabitantes of the same: Who
set forth on the second of Aprill 1595. and returned on the 14. of
August. 
1597.


Translated out of Dutch into English by W. P.


 



depiction of a ship




LONDON Imprinted by 
Iohn Wolfe.
 1598.










To the right worshipfull Sir 
James Scudamore,
Knight.


R
Ight worshipfull, this small trea∣tie (written in Dutch,
shewing a late voyage performed by certain 
Hollanders
 to the
Islandes of 
Iaua,
 part of the East 
Indies
) falling into
my handes, and in my iudgement deseruing no lesse commendati∣on then
those of our Countrey men, (as Captaine 
Raimond
 in the

Penelope,
 Maister 
Foxcroft
 in the 
Marchant Royall,

and M. 
Iames Lanca∣ster
 in the 
Edward Bonauenture,
 vnto the
said East 
Indies,
 by the Cape 
de Bona Sperance,
 in

Anno 1591.
 as also M. 
Iohn Newbery,
 and 
Raphael
Fich
 ouer land through 
Siria
 from 
Aleppo
 vnto

Ormus
 and 
Goa,
 and by the said 
Rapha∣el Fich

himselfe to 
Bengala, Malacca, Pegu,
 and other places in 
Anno
1583.
 as at large appeareth in a booke written by M. 
Richard
Haclute
 a Gentleman very studi∣ous therein, & entituled the
English voyages) I thought it not vnconuenient to translate the same into
our mo∣ther tongue, thereby to procure more light and encou∣ragement to such
as are desirous to trauell those Coun∣tries, for the common wealth and
commoditie of this Realme and themselues. And knowing that all men are 

 not like affected, I was so bold to shrowd it vnder your
worships protection, as being assured of your good di∣sposition to
the fauouring of trauell and trauellers, (and whereby it hath pleased God to
aduance you to that honourable title, which at this present you beare) and
so not fitter for the protection of any then your selfe: and as a poore
friend wishing all happines and prospe∣rity in all your valiant actions.
Which if it please your worshippe to like and accept, it may procure the
pro∣ceeding in a more large and ample discourse of an East

Indian
 voyage, lately performed and set forth by one 
Iohn
Hughen
 of 
Linschoten,
 to your further delight. Wherewith
crauing your fauor, & beseeching God to blesse your worship, with
my good Ladie your wife, I most humbly take my leaue:


This 16. of 
Ianuarie.
1597.
 

Your Worships to commaunde 
W.
Phillip.








To the Bayliefes, Burghemaisters, & Counsell of the
Towne of Middelborgh in 
Zeelande.


I
T may well bee thought (Right wor∣shipfull) as many learned
men are of opinion, that the actions and aduen∣tures of the ancients long
since done & performed, haue beene set forth with more show of wonder
and strangenesse then they in truth deserued: the reason as I think
was, because that in those daies there were many lear∣ned and wise men,
who in their writings sought by all meanes they could to excell each other,
touching the description of Countries & nations: And againe to the
contrarie, for want of good Historiographers and writers, many famous actes
and trauels of diuers nations and Countries lie hidden, and in a manner buried
vnder ground, as wholly forgotten and vn∣knowne, vnlesse it were such as
the Grecians and Romanes for their owne glories and aduantages thought good to
declare. But to come to the matter of voyages by sea, it is euident to all
the world, what voyage 
Iason
 with certaine yong Grecian Princes made
to 
Colchos
 in the Oriental Countries to winne the golden Fleece, as
also the trauels by 
Hercules
 performed into 
Libia
 in the
West partes, to winne the 
Aurea Mala
 or golden apples of

Hesperides,
 which notwithstanding neither for length, daunger, nor
profite, are any thing comparable to the nauigations and voyages, that of late
within the space of 
 one hundreth years haue been performed &
made into the East & West Indies, whereby in a manner there is not one
hauen on the sea coast, nor any point of land in the whole world, but hath
in time beene sought and founde out. I will not at this present dispute
or make an argument, whether the Countries and na∣tions of late yeares found
out and discouered, were knowne to the auncients, but this is most certaine,
that not any strange worke or aduenture was, or euer shall be performed,
but by the speciall grace, fauour and mightie hand of God, and that such
are worthy perpetual memory, as with noble minds haue sought to effect, and
be the first enterprisers thereof, and with most valiant courages and
wisedomes, haue performed such long & dangerous voyages into the East
and West Indies, as also such Kinges and Princes, as with their Princely
liberalities haue imployed their treasures, shippes, men and munitions to
the furtherance and performance of so worthy actes, which not∣withstanding
in the end turned to their great aduancementes and inriching with great
treasures, which by those meanes they haue drawn, & caused in great
aboundance to be brought from thence, in such manner, that the King of

Spaine
 nowe liuing, (hauing both the Indies in his possession,
& reaping the abundant treasures which yearly are brought out of those
coun∣tries) hath not only (although couertly) sought all the means he could
to bring all Christendome vnder his dominion, but also (that which no King
or country whatsoeuer although of grea∣ter might then he hath euer done) hee
is not ashamed to vse this posie, 
Necspe, nec metu.
 And
although the first foun∣ders and discouerers of those Countries haue
alwayes sought to hinder and intercept other nations from hauing any part of
their glorie, yet hereby all nations, & indifferent persons may well know
and perceiue the speciall policie, and valour of these vnited Prouinces, in
trauelling into both the Indies, in the 
 faces, & to the great
griefe of their many and mighty enemies. Wherby it is to be hoped, that if they
continue in their enter∣prises begun, they will not onely draw the most
part of the In∣dian treasures into these Countries, but thereby
disinherite & spoyle the Countrie of 
Spayne
 of her principall
reuenewes, and treasures of marchandises and trafiques, which she
continually vseth and receyueth out of these countries, and out of

Spayne
 are sent into the Indies, and so put the King of

Spaine
 himselfe in minde of his foolish deuise which hee vseth
for a posie tou∣ching the new world, which is, 
Non sufficit orbis,

like a se∣cond 
Alexander magnus,
 desiring to rule ouer all the
world, as it is manifestly knowne. And because this discription is fallen
into my handes, wherein is contayned the first voyage of the Low-country men
into the East Indies, with the aduen∣tures happened vnto them, set downe
and iustified by such as were present in the voyage, I thought it good to
put it in print, with many pictures and cardes, whereby the reader may the
easilier perceyue and discerne, the natures, apparels, and fashi∣ons of
those Countries and people, as also the manner of their shippes, together
with the fruitfulnesse and great aboundance of the same, hoping that this
my labour will not onely be accep∣table vnto all Marchants and Saylers, which
hereafter meane to traffique into those Countries, but also pleasant and
profita∣ble to all such as are desirous to looke into so newe and
strange things, which neuer heretofore were knowne vnto our nation. And
againe for that all histories haue their particular commo∣ditie, (specially
such as are collected and gathered together) not by common report, from the
first, seconde, or thirde man, but by such as haue seene and beene
present in the actions, and that are liuing to iustifie and verifie the
same: And although eloquence and words well placed in shewing a history,
are great ornamentes and beautifyinges to the same, yet such reports & 

 declarations are much more worthy credite, & commendabler for
the benefit of the commonwealth, which are not set down or disciphered by
subtill eloquence, but showne and performed by simple plaine men, such
as by copiousnesse of wordes, or sub∣tiltie do not alter or chaunge the
matter from the truth there∣of, which at this day is a common and notorious
fault in many Historiographers: And thinking with my selfe to whome I were
best to dedicate the same, I found it not fitter for any then for the right
worshipfull Gouernours of this famous Towne of 
Middelborgh,
 wherein
for the space of 19. yeares I haue peaceably continued, specially because
your worships do not one∣ly deale with great store of shipping, and
matter belonging to nauigation, but are also well pleased to heare, and
great fur∣therers to aduance both shipping and traffiques, wherein
con∣sisteth not onely the welfare of all marchants, inhabitants, and
cittizens of this famous City, but also of all the common wealth of the
vnited Prouinces, hoping your worships wil not onely ac∣cept this my labour,
but protect & warrantise the same against all men: Wherwith I
beseech God to blesse you with wise∣dome, and godly policie, to gouerne
the Common wealth: 
Middleborgh
 this 19 of October. 1597.


Your worships seruant to command 
Bernardt
Langhenez.








 A briefe discription of a voyage per∣formed 
by
certaine Hollanders to &
 from the East INDIES, with their
aduen∣tures and successe.




T
He ancient Historiographers and discribers of the world haue
much commended, and at large with great prayse set downe the diuers and
seuerall voyages of many no∣ble & valiant Captains (as of 
Alex∣ander
Magnus, Seleucus, Antiochus, Patrocles, Onesecritus
) into the East

Indies,
 which not∣withstanding haue not set downe a great part of
those coontries, as not being as then discouered, whereby it is thought and
iudged by some men, that 
India
 is the full third part of all the
world, because of the great Pro∣uinces, mighty Citties, famous and Islands
(full of cost∣ly marchandises, and treasures from thence brought into all
partes of the worlde) that are therein: Where∣in the auncient writers were very
curious, and yet not so much as men in our age: They had some know∣ledge
thereof, but altogether vncertaine, but we at this day are fully certified
therein, both touching the coun∣tries, townes, streames and hauens, with the
trafiques therein vsed and frequented, whereby all the world, so farre
distant and seperated from those strange nations, are by trade of
marchandises vnited therevnto, & ther∣by commonly knowne vnto them: The
Portingalles first began to enterprise the voyage, who by art of
na∣uigation (in our time much more experienced & grea∣ter then in times
past, and therefore easilier performed) 
 discouered those
wild Countries of 
India,
 therein pro∣curing great honour to their
King, making his name fa∣mous, and bringing a speciall and great profite of
all kindes of spices into their Countrie, which thereby is spread
throughout all the worlde, yet that sufficed not, for that the Englishmen
(not inferiour to any nation in the world for arte of nauigation) haue
likewise vnder∣taken the Indian voyage, and by their said voyages into
those Countries, made the same commonly knowne vnto their Country, wherein
Sir 
Fraunces Drake,
 and M. 
Candish
 are chiefly to bee
commended, who not onely sayled into the East 
Indies,
 but also
rounde about the world, with most prosperous voyages, by which their
voyages, ours haue beene furthered and set forwarde, for that the condition
of the 
Indies
 is, that the more it is sayled into, the more it is
discouered, by such as sayle the same, so strange a Countrey it is:
So that besides the famous voyages of the Countries aforesaid, in the ende
certain people came into 
Holland
 (a nation wel known) certifying them,
that they might easily prepare certaine shippes to sayle into the East

Indies,
 there to traffique & buy spyces, &c. By sayling
straight from 
Hollande
 and also from other countries bordering
about it, with de∣sire to see strange and rich wares of other Countries,
& that should not be brought vnto them by strangers, but by their owne
countrey men, which some men would esteeme to be impossible,
considering the long voyage and the daungers thereof, together with the
vnaccusto∣med saylinges and little knowledge thereof by such as neuer
sayled that way, and rather esteeme it madnesse, then any point of
wisedome, and folly rather then good consideration. But notwithstanding
wee haue seene 
 foure ships make that voyage, who after
many dangers hauing performed their voyage, returned againe and haue brought
with them those wares, that would neuer haue beene thought coulde haue beene
brought into these countries by any 
Holland
 ships; but what
shoulde I herein most commende eyther the willingnesse and good
performance of the parties, or the happinesse of their voyage? whereof that
I may giue the reader some knowledge, I will shew what I haue hearde and
beene informed of, concerning the description of the Coun∣tries, customes,
and manners of the nations, by them in this voyage seene & discouered,
which is as followeth.


In
the yeare of our Lord 1595. vpon the 10. day of the month of March, there
departed from 
Amsterdam
 three ships and a Pinnace to sayle into
the East 
Indies,
 set forth by diuers rich Marchantes: The first
called 
Mauritius,
 of the burthen of 400. tunnes, hauing in her sixe
demie canon, fourteene Culuerins, and other pee∣ces, & 4. peeces to shoot
stones, & 84. men: the May∣ster 
Iohn Moleuate,
 the Factor

Cornelius Houtman:
 The second named 
Hollandia,
 of the
burthen of 400. tunnes, hauing 85. men, seuen brasse peeces, twelue
peeces for stones, and 13. iron peeces, the Mayster 
Iohn Dignums,

the Factor 
Gerrit van Buiningen,
 the thirde called

Am∣sterdam,
 of the burthen of 200. tuns, wherein were 59. men,
sixe brasse peeces, ten iron peeces, and sixe peeces for stones, the
Mayster 
Iohn Iacobson Schellinger,
 the Factor 
Reginer van
hel:
 The fourth being a Pinnace cal∣led the 
Doue,
 of the burthen
of 50. tunnes, with twenty men, the Mayster 
Simon Lambertson:

Which 4. ships vpon the 21. of the same moneth came vnto the Tassel,
where they stayed for the space of 12. daies to take in 
 their
lading, and the seconde of Aprill following, they set saile with a North
east winde & following on their course the fourth of the same moneth
they passed the heades; The sixt they saw 
Heyssant,
 the
10. of April they passed by the Barles of 
Disbon:
 With an East
and North East wind, the 17. of Aprill they discouered two of the Islands
of 
Canaries:
 The 19. 
Palm,
 and 
Pic, Los Romeros,
 and

Fero:
 The 25. of Aprill they saw 
Bona visita,
 the 16.
they ankered vnder 
Isole de May:
 The 27. they set sayle againe
and held their course South Southeast. The 4. of May, we espied two of
the King of 
Spaines
 ships, that came from 
Lisbone,
 and went
for the East 
Indies,
 about 1000. or 1200. tunnes each ship, with
whom we spake, and told them that we were bound for the straights of

Magellanes,
 but being better of sayle then they, wee got presently
out of their sight. The 12. of May being vnder fiue degrees on this side
the Equinoctiall line, we espyed fiue ships laden with Sugar, comming from
the Island of 
S. Thomas,
 and sayled for 
Lisbone,
 to whome
we gaue certaine letters, which were safely deliuered in 
Holland.

Departing from them and keeping on our course, vpon the fourth of Iune we
passed the Equinoc∣tial line, where the extreame heat of the ayre spoyled
all our victuailes: 

Our flesh and fishe stunke, our Bisket molded, our Beere
sowred, our water stunke, and our Butter became as thinne as Oyle, whereby
diuers of our men fell sicke, and many of them dyed; but after that we
learned what meat and drinke we should carrie with vs that would keepe good. 

The 28. of Iune wee passed the sandes of

Brasill,
 by the Portingalles called 
Abrolhos,
 which are
certaine places which men must looke warely vnto, otherwise they are very
dangerous.


 



map of Africa


AFRICA.




These sandes lie vnder 18.
degrees, and you must passe betweene the coast of 
Guine
 and
the sandes afore∣said, not going too neer eyther of them, otherwise
close by the Coast there are great calmes, thunders, raines &
lightnings, with great stormes, harde by the sands men are in daunger to be
cast away: and so sayling on their course, first East South east,
then East and East and by North. Vpon the seconde of Iuly wee passed

Tropicus Cancri,
 vnder 23. degrees, and ½. The 
13.
 of
the same Month, we espied many blacke birdes. 

The 
19.
 great numbers of white birdes, and the
20. a bird as bigge as a Swan, whereof foure or fiue together is a good signe
of being neere the 
Cape de bona Sperance.
 These birdes are alwaies
about the said Cape, and are good signes of being before it.


The second of August we saw the land of the Cape

de bona Sperance,
 and the fourth of the same Month we entered into a
hauen called 
Agne Sambras,
 where wee ankered, and found good depth at
8. or 9. fadome wa∣ter, sandy ground.


The 5. day we went on shore to gather fruite, there∣with to
refresh our sicke men, that were thirty or 33. in one shippe. In this bay
lyeth a smal Islande, where∣in are many birdes called 
Pyncuius
 and
sea Wolues that are taken with mens handes: we went into the coun∣trey and
spake with the inhabitantes, who brought di∣uers fresh victuailes aborde
our shippes, for a knife or small peece of Iron, &c. giuing vs an Oxe,
or a sheepe &c. The sheepe in those Countries haue great tayles, 

 and are fat and delicate. Their Oxen are indifferent good, hauing
lumps of flesh vpon their backes, that are as fat as any of our good brisket
beefe: the inhabitantes are of small stature, well ioynted and boned, they
goe naked, couering their members with Foxes and other beastes tayles: they
seeme cruell, yet with vs they vsed all kind of friendship, but are very
beastly and stinking, in such sort, that you may smell them in the
wind at the least a fadome from you: They are apparrelled with beastes
skinnes made fast about their neckes: some of them, being of the better
sort, had their mantles cut & raysed checkerwise, which is a great
ornament with them: They eate raw flesh, as it is new killed, and the
entrailes of beastes without washing or making cleane, gnawing it like
dogs, vnder their feet they tye peeces of beastes skinnes, in steed of
shooes, that they may trauel in the hard wayes: We could not see their
habitations, for wee saw no houses they had, neither could wee
vn∣derstande them, for they speake very strangely, much like the children
in our Countrey with their pipes, and clocking like Turkey Cockes: At the
first wee saw a∣bout thirtie of them, with weapons like pikes, with broade
heades of Iron, about their armes they ware ringes of 
Elpen
 bones:
There wee coulde finde ney∣ther Oringes nor Lemons, which we purposely
sought for.


 



map of St Lawrence [i.e. Madagascar]


I.S. Laurentij.




The 
11.
 of August we hoysed
anker, sayling towards the Island of 
S. Laurence,
 and the 22. of
the same Month we had a contrary wind that blew North east: The 25. a
West winde, and so held our course East North east: The 28. there
blew a south east wind, & the 30. a south west winde, and our
course lay North North east to sayle to the Isle of 
S.
Laurence.
 The first of September wee discouered the point of the
Islande of 
S. Laurence.
 vnder 
16.
 degrees, and the third
day we saw the Island being very desirous to go on land, for that many of
our men were sicke, whereby wee coulde hardly rule our shippes, or bring
them farther without healing, or re∣freshing of our men. 

The 9. of September 
Iohn Schel∣linger
 sent out his
boate to rowe to lande, where they founde three Fishermen, of whome for two
or three kniues they had great store of fishes. The 
13.
 we entred
into a small Bay, but because wee founde no good anker ground, as also
being very foule we sayled out a∣gaine. The 14. we sayled vnder a small
Island about a mile or 2. great, by the Hollanders called their Church yarde,
or the dead Island, because many saylers dying in that place, were buried
in the 
African
 earth, and the 29. of the same Month died 
Iohn
Dignumsz
 Mayster of the 
Lyon
 of 
Holland,
 and was
buried the next day after.


There 
Iohn Peters
 of 
Delft
 Sayler of the

Hollandia,
 & 
Koelken van Maidenblick
 of the

Amsterdam
 were set on shore vpon the Island of 
S.
Laurence,
 where they were left, because they had committed certaine
notorious crimes.


Meane time the Pinnace was sent out to looke for fresh water,
which hauing found, the boat returned to bring vs newes, and therewith the
fleete sayled thither, 
 and the 10. of October the shippes
ankered before the Riuer, and went on shore, where we found good proui∣sion
of all necessaries, the inhabitantes being very wil∣ling thereunto,
bringing vs of al things that we needed, where for a Pewter Spoone wee had an
Oxe, or three sheepe. 

The 
11.
 of October we went on
shore with a boatfull of sicke men, and the next day we were assay∣led
by a company of wild men, against whom our wea∣pons little preuayled, for
they hurt one of our men, and tooke all that we had from vs, whereby vpon the
thir∣teenth of the same Month, wee were forced to insconse ourselues
with peeces of wood, and braunches of trees, making Cabins within our Sconse,
for that the 
15.
 of October they came againe, but then we tooke one,
and slew another of them. The 
19.
 of Nouember our Pi∣lot 
Claes
Ianson
 was intrapped and murthered by the wild people, although we
vsed all the means we could to helpe him, but they feared no weapons, about
ten or twelue dayes after we tooke one of them that paide for his death. The
first of December our men hauing for the most part recouered their
healthes, were all car∣ryed aborde the ships: 

in that parte of 
Madagascar
 the people are of good
condition, and goe naked, onely with a Cotton cloth before their priuie
members, and some from their breasts downward: Their ornaments are Copper
ringes about their armes, but Tin rings are more esteemed with them, and
therefore Tinne with them is good Marchandise. Their Oxen haue great lumpes
of fat vpon their backes: Their sheepes tayles way at the least twelue
pound, being of an elle long, & two and twentie inches thick. They gaue vs
six of those sheepe for a tinne Spoone: They dwel in cottages and 

 liue very poorely: they feare the noyse of a peece, for
with one Caliuer you shall make an hundred of them runne away: Wee coulde not
perceyue any religion they had, but after wee were informed that they helde the
law of 
Mahomet,
 for the two boyes that wee tooke from of the land,
shewed vs their circumcision: There we found no fruit of

Tambaxiumes,
 but great numbers of 
Parrats, Medicats,
 and

Turtle Doues,
 whereof we kil∣led and eat many. The second of
December we bur∣ned our Sconse, and fourteene of our men going fur∣ther into
the Islande, brought certaine of the countrey∣men prisoners, and being
abord our ships taught them what they shoulde doe. The thirteenth of
December wee hoysed anker, minding to holde on our course for the Islands
of 
Iaua,
 & for that by reason of the pleasant∣nesse of the
ayre we had in a manner all recouered our healthes, we set our course
East and by North, and East Northeast. The nineteenth of the same Month
wee were seperated by foule weather, & the 22. with great ioy we met
againe. The tenth of Ianuarie 
Vechter Wil∣lemson
 dyed, being a verie
honest man, and Pilot in 
Mo∣lenaers
 shippe, for whome we were much
grieued, and the same day we determined to put back againe for the Islande
of 
S. Laurence,
 for as then wee began againe to haue a great
scouring among our men, and many of them fell sicke: 

But presently therevpon we espied the Islande of 
Saint
Mary,
 and the next day being arriued there, some of the inhabitants came
abord out shippes with a basket of Ryce, Sugar canes, Citrons, Lemons, &
Hens, whereof we were very glad, as being phisicke for vs.


The 13. 14. 15. 16. and 17. dayes we were on land, 

where we bought Ryce, Hens, Sugar-canes, Citrons, and Lemons in great
aboundance, and other kinde of fruites to vs vnknowne, also good fish, and
greene Gin∣ger: There we tooke a Fish, which thirteen men could hardly pull
into our shippe, and because the Island was little, and we had many men,
wee entred into the Bay of the firme land with our Pinnace, where for a
string of Beades of small value we had a tunne of Ryce: 

The King came abord our Pinnace to see it, & was as blacke
as a Deuill, with two hornes made fast vpon his heade, and all his body naked
like the rest of the countrey peo∣ple.


This Island lyeth about a small mile from

Madagas∣car,
 about 19. degrees Southward from the Equinocti∣all line
(
Madagascar
 or 
S. Laurence
 is an Islande belong∣ing to
the Countrey of 
Africa,
 and lyeth Southwarde vnder 26. degrees, ending
Northwarde vnder 11. de∣grees by the inhabitants it is called

Madagascar,
 & by the 
Portingalles
 the Islande of

S. Laurence,
 because it was discouered on 
S. Laurence

day: The riches of this Is∣land is great, it aboundeth in Ryce, Honnie, Waxe,
Cotton, Lemons, Cloues &c. The inhabitantes are blacke and go naked, but
the haire vpon their heades is not so much curled as those of the

Mosambique,
 & they are not ful so blacke).


The 
23.
 of Ianuary we ankered before a
Riuer where likewise we had all kind of necessaries, and after that we
went to lie vnder a small Islande within the same Bay.


The 25. of Ianuarie there came some of the wild peo∣ple aborde our
ships, making signes to haue vs go on land, which we did, and there we had
good Ryce & o∣ther fruits in great abundance: on the left side of the
en∣try 
 of the Riuer lyeth one of their Townes, and on the
right hand two townes, where we had most of our tra∣fique. The 
26.

of Ianuarie wee had interpreters, whom we made to drink wine, wherewith they
were as drunk as beastes.






The manner & condition of the people inhabiting in the great
Bay of Antogil, on this side the Equinoctiall line vnder 16. degrees, on the
South side of the Island Madagascar.


I
T is a very great Bay, about ten mile broade, behind it lyeth a
high Island, and three small Islands: there is good harbour against all
windes. The Is∣land is inhabited, and therein grow∣eth all kindes of fruites,
it hath a great fall of water that commeth down out of the hilles, where we
laded all our water, and halfe a mile from thence within the land, there
runneth a great Riuer, wherein likewise there is much water to be had, when
you enter into the Riuer about a quarter of a mile inward on the left hand,
ther is a smal towne or village, not closed nor fortified, in it there is
about 200. houses, & on the right hand where the Riuer diuideth it
selfe, there is two other such Townes: They were all com∣passed with
palles, and the houses were placed about two foote aboue the ground, vpon
foure or fiue palles or stakes of wood, and all the vpper partes of reede and
strawe. 

The cause why their houses are made so high from the ground,
is to auoide the danger of venemous beastes that are there in great
aboundance, as Serpents, 
 Snakes, Camelions, and other kindes of
beastes. 

The people are very blacke, but their hayre and beardes are not
so much curled as the right Mores, nor their noses nor lippes so great
nor flat. They are subtill and strong people, much addicted to drinking,
for they will bee as drunke as Swine, with a kind of drinke made of Honie &
Ryce. They go naked, onely that about their midles they weare a cloth made of
the barke of a tree, drawne in small threedes: they make and vse very fine
Mats to sitte vppon: They haue no great store of weapons, for that halfe of
them are vnprouided, and that they vse is a speare of nine or ten foote
long, with a great wooden Target: They are very fearefull of our Caliuers, for
5. or sixe men with Caliuers will cause great numbers of them to flie away:
We taught them what our Peeces ment, for wee perceyued that they knew them not,
be∣fore they had proued them: at the first they thought they coulde carry no
further then their owne lengthes, for they knew not what they were: Their
Kinges or∣namentes were ten or twelue Copper Rings about his armes: if we had
had such Ringes with vs, wee might haue sold them at what prices wee
woulde. They like∣wise vse beades of Glasse, which they weare about
their armes and neckes, by them esteemed for great orna∣ments: for a boxe of
beades of small value, we had an Oxe, or three or foure Sheepe, rounde about
this Bay are townes and villages, where you may haue of all things to refresh
your selues, Lemons and Citrons are there greater and better then in

Portingall:
 Likewise Oringes, Ryce, Hennes, Goats, Honie, and many
other sortes of fruites, and to conclude it is the best Bay in all the
world to refresh ships. Being on land we were wel 

entertayned, and must of force drink with them of their drinke made of Hony
and Ryce: There we trafiqued with them, and had sufficient of euery thing,
but euery night we went aborde our shippes.


The third of February we had so great a storme, that most of
our ankers were lost, and we ran vpon the land in great daunger to cast our
ships away, but God holpe vs, for the storme ceased, and then we went to
hoyse vp our lost ankers, and so againe went to anker vnder the Island,
glad that we had so well escaped that daunger. The fift of February we went
to seeke for our boats, but the wild men had smitten them in peeces, &
taken out the nailes, thinking likewise that our shippes woulde haue beene
cast away vpon the shore, which they still expected: and when we came
thither, they stood vpon the shore with their weapons in hand and threw
stones at vs, and we perceyuing them in that minde, made to∣wardes our
shippes, for we desired not to reuenge our selues, nor once to fight with
them without commissi∣on from our Generall, whom we certified thereof. The
eyght of February we rowed into the Riuer to buy cat∣tle, and other things, but
they were become our ene∣mies, threatning and casting stones at vs,
wherevpon we put out two shalops to run a shore close to the land, and
made our Caliuers and other weapons ready.


Wherewith we shot at them, but they feared not our shot, for
they knew not what they ment, they thought likewise that the peeces coulde
carrie no further then they were long: but when they sawe eight or nine of
their fellowes dead, they fled into the woodes, and wee entering vpon the lande
set fire on their houses, where∣of we burnt about twentie or thirtie. The
9. of Febru∣arie 
 



map of Sumatra


SVMATRA INSVLA


 
 we sailed on the other side to buy
cattle, and other necessaries, but they seemed vnwilling to deale with
vs, but we threatning to burne their houses, they brought vs Cattle and
fruites inough, with all things else to our desires.


The 12. of Februarie wee hoised anker, and set sayle out of
the great Bay of 
Antongil,
 being well prouided of all necessaries,
we put out with a North wind, the Bay stretching Northeast and Southwest:
The 2. of March we had a West winde, our course being East and East
& by North towards 
Iaua.
 In March and Aprill about the Islande
of 
Brandawe,
 we found that our Compasses helde two Strikes to
farre Northwarde, and we coulde not perceiue the sands that are set downe
in the 
Portin∣galles
 sea Cards, but we saw many turnings of
streames, and we were much troubled with calmes, but with the new Moone we
had winde enough out of the West & North west. The 27. of May we found
the water abord our shippes to bee much lessened, and therefore euery
mans portion was but halfe as much as he was wont to haue; so that each man
was allowed but foure draughts euery day, which was but a small quantitie.
Whereby through the extreame heat we endured great thirst, so that at that
time a draught of water abord our ship was worth a Riall of 8. The first of
Iuly we saw the Islande of 
Emgano,
 whereat we much reioyced,
because of the great thirst wee endured in our shippe, and when wee made
neerer to it, we perceyued it to be an Islande ly∣ing before the straightes
of 
Sonda,
 vnder 9. degrees on the south side of the line. The
sixt of Iuly we put some∣what nearer to the land, and there we saw sixe
or seuen canes lying vnder the shore, but farre off, and durst not 

 make toward vs: in the end we manned out a shalop & rowed
to land, but they made from vs, & when our men were hard by the shore,
there we saw about 40. or 50. of them standing vpon the shore with their
bowes; wherewith our men durst not land, for they seemed to be a cruell
kind of people, and altogether wild, for they went all naked, not hauing any
thing before their priuy members. They were of a reddish colour, but when our
men saw no aduantage they turned again vnto their shippes.


The seuenth of Iuly we saw the point of the land of

Sumatra,
 which is a verie high land descending downe∣warde with a
long end.


The 11. of the same Month we were close vnder the land, where
there lay an Island, and there we ankered.


The 12. of Iuly in the morning we saw certaine ships, whereof
one came vnto vs, wee rowed vnto it with a shalop, and spake with it, but
we could not vnderstand them, but they shewed vs where we should haue
water, which made vs glad, that wee might once againe haue our bellies full of
water: it being almost foure Monthes that wee had not seene any land, nor
taken in any fresh victuailes. We sent our Pinace to the firme land of

Su∣matra,
 there to seeke for some reliefe: for that where we lay
there dwelt not any man. 

The 13. of Iuly the Cap∣tain or principall ruler of

Sumatra
 came abord our ships to see them, which was done with
great solemnitie, hee being apparelled after the Turkish manner, with a
wreath about his heade, and a fearefull countenance, small eyes, great eye
browes, and little beard, for a man might tell all the haires vpon his chinne:
he brought vs a present of Betele, which are leaues which they conti∣nually 

 chaw, and eat it with chalke.


This Island of 
Sumatra
 or 
Taprobana
 (as it is
saide) is the greatest of all the Orientall Islandes, it is diuided from
the firme land of 
Malacca
 by a straight and dange∣rous sea, by
reason of many Islandes and cliffes that are within it: Out of this
Island as some men are of opini∣on, 
Salomon
 had his Gold wherewith
he beautified the Temple, and his owne pallace, and then in the Bible it
should be named 
Orphir,
 for certainly 
Sumatra
 is rich of
mynes of Golde, Siluer and Mettall, and the inhabi∣tants therof are very expert
in melting of brasse peeces: Therein is a fountaine of pure Balsame, the

Portingalles
 haue no fortresse therein, yet they traffique in
certaine hauens, specially in 
Pedir
 and 
Campar:
 There is
also in this Island a place called 
Manancabo,
 where they make
poinyardes and daggers, by them calde cryses, which are much esteemed in
those Countries, and those of 
Malacca
 and 
Iaua,
 hold them
for their best weapons, and with them are very bold.


The same day our Pinnace returned againe vnto vs, bringing vs good
newes, that wee were welcome vnto the Countrey people, and brought vs certaine
Indian Nuttes, or Cocus, Melons, Cocombers, Onions, Gar∣licke, and a sample
of Peper and other spices, which li∣ked vs well.


The fourteenth of Iune we laded in some fresh wa∣ter.


Right ouer against 
Sumatra,
 on the South side of the
Equinoctiall lyeth the Islande of 
Iaua Maior,
 or great

Iaua,
 and these two Islandes are deuided by a straight commonly
called the straight of 
Sunda,
 which lyeth be∣tween these two
Islands, bearing the name of the prin∣cipall 
 



map of Java


IAVA MAIOR


 
 hauen of 
Iaua
 called

Sunda:
 In this channel there runneth a great streame, and course
of narrow waters, through this straight M. 
Candish
 an Englishman
passed with his ship, comming out of the South sea from new 
Spaine.
Iaua
 beginneth vnder seuen degrees on the south side, and so
stretcheth East and South 150. miles long, it is very fruitfull,
specially of Ryce, Catle, Hogges, Sheepe, Hennes, Onions, Garlike, Indian
Nuttes, and all kinde of spices, as Cloues, Nutmegges, Mace, &c. Which
they carrie to 
Malacca.
 The chiefe hauen in the Islande is 
Sunda
Calapa,
 there you haue much Pepper, better then that of 
India,
 or
of 
Malabar,
 & there you may yearely lade 4. or 5000. Quintales of
Pep∣per 
Portingall
 waight, there likewise you haue great store of
frankencense, Camphora, & some Diamants: but they haue no other kinde
of money but a certaine peece called 
Caixa,
 as bigge as a

Hollands
 Doibt, but not so thicke, with a hole in the middle to hang
it vppon a string, in which manner they commonly hange hun∣drethes or
thousandes together, and with them they know how to make their accountes,
which is two hun∣dred 
Caixas
 make a 
Sata,
 and fiue

Satas
 make a thousand 
Caixas,
 which is as much as one
Crusado of 
Por∣tingall,
 or three 
Carolus Gilderns,
Flemish
 money: Pep∣per is solde by the sacke, each sacke waying
45. Catten waight of 
China,
 each Catte as much as 20. ounces

Por∣tingall
 waight, and each sacke is worth in that Country at the
least 5000. 
Caixas,
 and when it is highest at 6. or 7000.

Caixas:
 Mace, Cloues, Nutmegs, white and blacke Beniamin, Camphora,
are sold by the Bhar, each barre waying 330. Catten of 
China:
 Mace
that is faire & good is commonly worth from 100. to 
120.

thousande: 
 
Caixas:
 Good Cloues accordingly, and foule
Cloues called Bastan are worth 70. & 80. thousand 
Caixas
 the
Bhar: Nutmegs are alwaies worth 
20.
 & 
25.
 thousand

Caixas
 the Bhar: White and blacke Beniam in is worth 150 and 180
thousand 
Caixas,
 and sometimes 
200.
 thou∣sand. The
wares that are there desired and exchanged for spices, are diuers sortes
and colours of Cotton Lin∣nen, which come out of seuerall Prouinces; and if
our Cambricke or fine Hollande were carryed thither, it would peraduenture bee
more esteemed then the Cot∣ton linnen of 
India.


The 15. of Iune there rowed a scute called a Prawen harde vnder
the lande by vs, wee called him, but not a∣gainst his will, and shewed him
siluer, and other wares that liked him well, he bad vs make towards the
strand, and told vs of 
Bantam,
 saying that there we should haue
al kinds of Marchandise. Then we made signs vnto him taht if he wold bring
vs to 
Bantam,
 we wold pay him for his labor, he asked vs 5. rialles of
8. and a red cap, which we graunted vnto, and so one of the men in the
scute came on bord the 
Mauritius,
 and was our Pilot to

Ban∣tam,
 where we passed by many Islandes.


The nineteenth of Iuly as wee sailed by a towne, many

Portingalles
 borded vs, and brought vs certaine Cocus and Hens to
sell, which wee bought for other wares.


The 
22.
 of the same Month wee came before the towne of

Bantam,
 within three miles of it, and there an∣kered vnder an
Island. The same day about euening a scute of 
Portingals
 borded
vs that were sent by the Go∣uernour to see what ships we were, & when
we shew∣ed them that wee came thither to traficke with them, 

 they told vs, that there was the right Pepper country,
& that there we might haue our lading, that new Pep∣per was readie to be
gathered, and would be ripe with∣in two Monthes after, which pleased vs well,
for wee had already beene fifteene Monthes and twelue daies vppon our voyage,
hauing endured great daungers, miseries and thirst, many of our men by
sicknesse being dead.


The 23. of Iune wee hoysed our ankers, and went close to the
towne of 
Bantam,
 and ankered harde by 4. small Islands, that lie
right North from the Towne: the same day the 
Sabandar
 (who is there
one of the greatest officers next the King) came abord our shippes, asking
vs what we would haue, we said we were come to buy Pepper and other spyces,
and that wee had readie mo∣ney, and certaine wares, whereof we shewed him
some parte, which hee liked well, saying that there wee might haue lading
enough, shewing vs great counte∣nance.


The same day likewise there came a great number of scutes vnto
our ships, bringing all kinds of victuailes to sel, as Hennes, Egges,
Cocus, Bonanas, sugar canes, Cakes of Ryce baked, and many other thinges. The
24. of Iune there came many men aborde our ships, bring∣ing diuers wares to
sell, shewing vs great friendshippe, and as it seemed were very glad of
our arriuall there, tel∣ling vs that there we might haue Pepper enough, and new
Pepper within two Months after, and that Pepper was then as good cheap as it
had beene any time with∣in ten yeares before, that wee might buy 5. or 6.
sackes for one Catti, (being about 20. Guilderns) which was ordinarily sold
but one sacke for that price: euery sacke 
 wayeth 54. pounde

Hollandes
 waight, so that a pounde would be worth about a brasse
penie 
Hollands
 money. The same day about noone the 
Sabandar

borded vs once againe, willing 
Cornelis Houtman
 to go on land to
speake with the Gouernour, for as then there was no King, for about a Month
before our arriuall there, the King was gone with a great armie before the
towne of 
Palimbam,
 which hee thought to take, and had almost gotten
it, but there he was striken with a great Peece by a Renigado of the

Portingalles,
 and so was slaine. His death was much lamented by
the straungers that dwelt at 
Bantam,
 for he was a good king, being
about 25. years of age: he left behind him foure wiues, whereof the el∣dest
was not aboue 15. yeares of age, and a yong sonne of three Monthes olde, that
was to succeed him in his Kingdome, and they had chosen a Protector or
Go∣uernor to rule in his minoritie, whom they call 
Kipate,
 and when
the 
Kipate
 by the 
Sabandar
 sent to our Sarge∣ant Maior to
come vnto him into the towne, he made him answer that he had no such
commission, but he de∣sired the Gouernor first to come abord his
ship, and then he would go on shore, he like∣wise desired vs to go
neerer to the towne with our shippes.










 



depiction of Bantam, Java




THe Towne of
 Bantam 
in the Island
of
 Iaua, 
as our foure shippes lay before it
 A. 
is the barre
of the Riuer that was shutte vp, by it all wares passed both in and out,
and the next house vnto it is the custome house.
 B. 
the
Hollanders lodging where we receyued and sold our wares,
 C. 
is the
walles of the towne of
 Bantam, 
al made with flankers, vpon them lay
great store of brasse peeces, which when they shot at vs, did not much
hurt vs, because they knew not wel how to vse them; & the wal is not
aboue two foot thicke made of brickes, and at euery place where the peeces
lyeth, there are places made of mastes and o∣ther wood, which they vse for
defence against the enemies.
 D. 
are the Portingalles houses,
 E.

the Pepper market,
 F. 
the Hol∣landers market,
 G. 
the
pomegranat market,
 H. 
the apparell market,
 I. 
the porseline
market,
 K. 
the great market, which is also the Burse where many
nations do meet,
 L. 
the Fish mar∣ket,
 M. 
the hogge
market,
 N. 
the Chinars houses,
 O. 
their Church or
Mostua,
 P. 
a skirmish betweene our Pinace and 24. of their boates
that came towardes vs like a halfe Moon
 all full of men, armed with bowes and speares, with some
bases, making to the Pinace that lay on grounde vnder an Islande, where it
wound off, 17. of them being on the larborde, and 7. on the starre borde of
her, so neare that they thrust their spears in at her portes, but those
of the Pinace shewed themselues like men shooting brauely against them,
both with great shot and Caliuers for they could hardly shoot in vaine, and
hauing hoi∣sed saile, she came to the shippes againe in dispight of
all her e∣nemies, that were in great numbers, and had compassed her about
like sconces.








And therevpon wee sayled somewhat neerer to the Island that
lay next vnto the towne, within halfe a mile from it, & there we ankered at
4. fadome clay grounde, the towne lying South from vs, where wee had a good
roade: 

The next morning the Gouernor sent aborde, and the men that
came spake not onely good 
Portingal,
 but other languages: he let our
Sargeant Maior vnder∣stand that he would come aborde, and desired that hee
woulde with a shalop meet him halfe the way, which was done about noone, and
the Gouernour came a∣borde with a great company of men, where we shewed him
all our wares, which liked him well, desiring vs to come on land, saying
that we should be welcome, pro∣mising vs much fauour, wherewith he returned
to the land with certaine rich presents that we gaue him. The 
26. Barent
Heijn
 Factor of the ship called the 
Mauritius,
 died very
sodainly.


The 27. and 28. great numbers of people borded our shippes
bringing all sortes of necessaries & victuails to sell.


The 29. there came an
Emperour abord our shippe, whose father in time past had beene Emperour
of all 
Iaua,
 and commanded all the Kinges of 
Iaua,
 but this
man because of his badde life was not much accounted of: he spake good

Portingall,
 for his mother was a 
Por∣tingall
 woman borne in

Malacca:
 This Emperour had conspired against vs with the

Portingalles,
 but as then we knew it not.


The 30. of Iune 
Cornelis Houtman
 tooke a boate and went
into the towne, and there spake with the Gouer∣nour about certaine affaires,
touching a contract to bee made with him.


The first of Iuly 
Houtman
 went again into
the towne, and when he returned he brought with him a certaine contract made
& signed by the Gouernor himself, who most willingly consented
therevnto, & saide vnto him, Go now and buy what you will, you haue free
liberty; which done, the said 
Houtman
 with his men went to see the
towne, apparelled in the best manner they coulde, in veluet, Satin, and
silkes, with rapiers by their sides: The Captaine had a thing borne ouer
his head to keep him from the Sun, with a Trumpet before him, which certaine
times he caused to bee sounded: There the Emperour bad them to a banket
after the 
Indian
 man∣ner: From thence they went to the

Portingalles,
 that made much account of 
Houtman,
 and made him
a ban∣ket, saying that they had seene him in 
Lisbone.
 The 2. of
Iuly many Marchants came abord, profering vs Pep∣per verie good cheape, but
because we were vnskilfull in the waight and other thinges wee tooke
respite to answere them.


The 3. of Iuly the 
Sabander
 came abord, and he was our
great friend, for that after we found it so, hee tolde vs what waight the
sackes of Pepper were, and what prises they bare, counselling vs to
buy.


The 7. of Iuly the Gouernour sent vs a man secret∣ly by
night willing vs to looke vnto our selues, and not to trust the Emperour,
with whom all the Marchantes conspired, and went to inuade our ships, and
that hee ment to rob vs, as being very licentious and euill mind∣ed.


The 8. of Iuly the Emperour sent vnto our ships, & offered
to make them a banket, bidding all the Cap∣taines, maisters, Pilots,
Gentlemen, Officers, Trumpets, 
 and Gunners to come into the towne
to him, and there he woulde make merrie with them: This was done by the

Portingalles
 aduise, thereby to haue all the chiefe and principall
men out of our ships, but we perceiued their intent.


The 11. of Iuly the Emperour perceyuing that his deuise would not
take place, hee went from 
Bantam
 to 
Iacatra.


The 12. of Iuly wee had a house offered vs within the towne.


The 13. of the same month 
Reyner van hel
 with eyght
Gentlemen went into the towne, taking certaine wares with him, of euery thing a
little, and laid it in the house appointed for the purpose: there to keep a
ware house and to sel our marchandise, and presently both Gentle∣men
and Marchants came thither to buy and to sell vs Pepper.


The 15. and 16. many Gentlemen, Marchants, Chi∣nars, and Arabians
came to our warehouse & into our ships, offering vs Pepper, but our
Factor offered them too little a price.


The 25. of Iuly the Gouernour came againe aborde our shippes, and
there looked vppon certaine of our wares, whereof hee bought some, and
counselled vs to buy Pepper: 

About the same time the 
Portingalles
 made great sute
vnto the Gouernour, promising him many guiftes to deny vs trafficke, and to
constraine vs to depart from thence, saying we were no marchantes, but that
we came to spie the countrie, for they said that they had seene many

Fleminges
 in 
Lisbone,
 but none like vs. Among the

Portingalles
 there was one that was borne in 
Malacca,
 of the

Portingalles
 race, his name was 
 
Pedro
Truide,
 a man well seene in trauayling, and one that had beene in all
places of the world: He was our good friend, & euery day came to talke with
our Cap∣taines, saying, you do not well that you make no more haste to take
in your lading, you shall haue no better cheape wares, & withall shewed
vs many other things: wherevpon the 
Portingalles
 hated him, and not
long af∣ter he was murthered in his bed.


In August we did little, and tooke no great store of lading in
seeking to haue Pepper better cheape, which the 
Portingalles
 liked
not well of, and saide vnto the Go∣uernour, that we desired not to buy;
which the Gouer∣nour began to hearken vnto, for they offered him great summes
of money that hee shoulde not permit vs traf∣fique, so that in the end hee
commaunded that no man shoulde carrie any Ryce aborde our shippes, whereby
we were abashed, and thereupon we sent vnto the Go∣uernour for our money
which hee ought for the wares hee had bought, which moued him. The 26. of Iuly
hee sent one of our Gentlemen with some of his men and nine slaues abord
our ships.








The situation of the Towne of 
Bantam,
 the principall
towne of traffique in the Island of 
Iaua,
 their strength &
manner of building, with their traffique, what people come thither, what wares
are there most desired, what nations bring them thither, or come to fetch
them, together with their religion, customes, & manner of house
keeping.


B
Antam
 lyeth in the Islande of 
Iaua maior,

about 25. miles to sea ward within the Isle, betweene 
Suma∣tra
 and

Iaua:
 On both sides of the Towne there runneth a Riuer, a∣bout 3.
foot and a half deep, so tha
 no
shippes can enter into them: The Towne is compassed about with a Riuer:
The towne is almost as great in compasse as the old towne of

Amsterdam:
 The wals are made with flankers: They haue great numbers
of Peeces therein, but they knowe not how to vse them, for they feare them
much: all their Peeces are of brasse, & they haue many brazen bases.
Their walles are not aboue two foote thicke made of brickes: euery flanker hath
di∣uers mastes and peeces of wood, which they vse when they are besieged
by their enemies. The houses are made of straw and reedes, standing vpon
4. woodden postes. The rich haue their chambers all hanged with silken
Curtins, or els with cotton linnen: Their houses are most placed vnder
Cocus trees, whereof the towne is full: Without the walles are many houses,
wherein strangers for the most part haue their dwellinges. The 

 towne hath three great market places, wherein dayly there
is markets holden, where you may buy all kindes of wares, and where there
commeth a great number of people, very strange to beholde: Within the towne
there is a great church or muske of wood, wherein they obserue the law of

Mahomet:
 Gentlemen & men of any qualitie haue their owne muskes in
their houses. The towne is not built with streetes, nor the houses placed
in order, but very foule lying full of filthy wa∣ter, which men must
passe through, or leape ouer, for they haue no bridges: In the towne there
is great re∣sort of diuers Countries and nations, as of 
Malacca,
Ben∣gala, Malabar Guihereters
 of 
Pegu, Sani Malicas, Ban∣da,
China,
 and of many Kingdomes that haue great traf∣fique for Pepper, that
groweth rounde about 
Bantam,
 which in August and September is ripe,
there you haue Nutmegs, out of the Island of 
Banda,
 and Cloues from

Moluca,
 which the 
Portingalles
 doe most buy vp: Wee bought
Nutmegs there for a blank a pound: All victu∣ailes and necessaries are
there in great aboundance to be had, as Hennes, Hartes, Fish, and Ryce, and
diuers kindes of fruites, as Auanas, Cocus, Bonanas, Manges, Doroyens, Iacca,
Pruna, Grapes, Oranges, Lemons, Pomegarnets, Cocombers, Melons, Onions,
Garlicke; but breade they haue none, but in steade of it they eate Ryce:
Beefe is there the dearest victuaile, for an Oxe in that place is worth 7. 8.
or 9. Rialles of 8. The Chi∣nars haue the greatest and most trafficke in
that towne. They come thither in the Month of Ianuarie, with 8. or 9. great
shippes, bringing all sorts of Porseline, silks, Damaske, gold thread,
Iron pannes, and 
Iauas
 money called 
Caixas,
 whereof 12000.
make a Ryall of eyght: 
 They are hanged vpon stringes by two
hundred toge∣ther, for the which they both buy & sel al kinds of
mar∣chandises, and there they lade Pepper which they car∣rie into

China:
 Without the towne they haue a great place wherein they commonly
vse to sell their wares, and there they dwell, and haue greater and better
hou∣ses then any are within the towne, all made of reedes, onely that in
euery house they haue a square place made of stone, wherein they put
their wares to keepe them from burning, as some riche men in the towne
likewise haue: The 
Chinars
 are very subtill and indu∣strious
people, and will refuse no labour nor paynes to yearne money, there they make
much Aqua vitae of Ryce and Cocus, and trafficke much therewith, which the

Iauars
 by night come to buy, and drinke it secretly, for by

Mahomets
 law it is forbidden them. The 
Chi∣nars
 liue there
with free libertie: When they come to remaine there for a yeare or more as they
thinke good, they buy themselues a wife or two, or more as they thinke good,
and liue together like man and wife, and when they meane to depart, they sell
their wiues again, but if they haue children they take them with them, &
so returne to 
China:
 They haue no special religion, but pray vnto
the Deuill, that he would not hurt them, for they know that the Deuill is
wicked, and that God is good, and hurteth no man, therefore they thinke it
needlesse to pray to God. They acknowledge not the resurrection of the
deade, but when a man dyeth they thinke he neuer riseth again: In their
houses they haue great painted Deuils, before the which they place wax
candles, and sing vnto them, praying them not to hurt them, and the more
monstrous that their shapes be, the 
 more they honour
them. These people liue very hard∣ly and poorely within 
Bantam,
 for
there is not any work or labour how filthy soeuer it be, but they will do it
to get money, and when they haue gotten something they returne again to

China.
 They are verie like Iewes in our countrey, for they neuer goe
without a paire of ballances, and all thinges is good wares with them, and are
ready to do any seruice. When we came first before 
Bantam,
 they
came euery day in great companies into our shippes, and there set out their
wares to sel, as silkes, sowing silkes, and porselines, so that our
vpper deckes were full of pedlers, that wee could hardly walke vpon the
hatches.






The manner, condition, custome, going, standing, apparell,
housekeeping, wares, and behauiour of the Iauars in Ban∣tam.


T
He 
Iauars
 and inhabitants of 
Bantam,
 are proude
and obstinate, with a ve∣ry stately pace, they hold the law of

Mahomet,
 which they haue not had aboue 
35.
 yeares, for as yet
there are many heathens among them that ne∣uer were made 
Mores:
 it is
a very ly∣ing and theeuish kind of people, not in any sort to bee
trusted. Their apparell both of rich and poore is a cot∣ton cloth, and some
of silke about their middles, which they tie about them with a girdle, the
vpper parte and from the knees downewarde all naked: most of them goe
bareheaded, but the principallest of them haue a wreath or Turkish roule
about their heades, and some 
 little cappes: Their priestes
come out of 
Meca
 in 
Arabia,
 and are yellowe of colour: 

Their weapon is a
poinyard, which they call Crisis: it is made with hilts, & the handle is
a Deuil cut out of wood or bone: the sheathes are of wood: with them they are
very bolde, and it is accounted for a great shame with them if they haue not
such a Dagger, both yong, old, rich & poore, and yong children of fiue or
sixe yeares olde, and when they go to the warres they haue targets, and
some long speares, but most of them such poinyardes: They vse neyther
great shotte nor caliuers when they go against their enemies: for a small
matter one King wil make warre against another When we came first before

Ban∣tam,
 we offered to make a contract with the Gouernor and the
counsell of the towne, that they should deliuer vs a certaine quantitie of
Pepper, and wee woulde goe with our shippes before 
Palimbam,
 and
helpe them to reuenge the death of their Kings vppon their enemies, for (as
they said) we might goe within a bowe shot of the towne with our shippes,
and the Towne is but of wood without walles, so that we would presently
haue beaten it downe to the ground. They offered vs some of their principall
Gouernours to be left for pledges in our shippes, and their men woulde
sayle in their fustes, such as shoulde go on land, and we should doe
nothing els but shoote out of our shippes, but our Captaines would not do
it, considering our small number of men. 

The

Iauers
 take as many wiues as they will, and are able to maintaine; but
the common people haue but one, & some two marryed wiues, and some 10.
20. & 30. con∣cubines: For a small matter they will sende their
mar∣ried wiues home agayne vnto their fathers, when they 

haue layne fiue or sixe dayes with them, saying they like them not, and
so their marriage is vndone, when they desire it.






The manner, custome, housholding, childbearing, sporting
& cleanlinesse of the women in 
Bantam.


T
He women of the towne are well kept from such as are
circumcised, where∣of the rich men haue many, and from other men or their
friendes, for their owne sonnes may not come into the house where the women
are. They lie all naked and chaw Betelle, and haue a slauish wo∣man that
continually scratcheth their bodies, that is, such as are married women,
but such as are concubines are as waiting Gentlewomen to the married women,
when they goe out to giue them more maiestie, and those that haue the
greatest number are of most estima∣tion: The Concubines haue but fewe
children, for the married women poyson their children, and these concubines
are bought and solde: by their apparell a man can hardly discerne the riche
from the poore, for they goe all with a Cotton cloth about their bodies vp to
their breastes, and bounde about their middles with an other cloth, bare
footed and their heads vncouered, their hayre bound right vpon the top of their
heads in a heape, but when they are in their pride, they weare crownes vpon
their heads, whereof some of them are of pure golde, & ringes of golde,
& some of siluer about their armes, euery one according to their
abilitie. They are very curious about their bodyes, for they washe 

 themselues at the least fiue or sixe times euery day: they
neuer ease themselues nor haue the company of their husbandes, but they
presently leape into the water and wash their bodies, and therefore the
water that runneth through 
Bantam
 is very vnholesome; for euery one
wa∣sheth themselues in it, as well pockie as other people, whereby wee
lost some of our men that drunke of the water: The women are verie idle,
for they do nothing all the day but lie downe; the poore slaues must doe
all the drudgerie, and the men sit all day vpon a mat, & chaw

Betele,
 hauing ten or twentie women about them, and when they make
water, presently one of the wo∣men washeth their member, and so they
sit playing all the day with their women: Many of them haue slaues that
play vppon instrumentes much like our Shakebois, they haue likewise great
basons whereon they strike, & therewith know how to make good
musicke, where∣at the women daunce, not leaping much, but winding and drawing
their bodies, armes and shoulders, which they vse all night long, so that
in the night time they make a great noyse with basons and other
instruments, and the man he sitteth and looketh vpon them, euerie one of
the women striuing to doe her best that she may get her husbands fauour
and her secreat pleasure. The Gentlemen, Citizens, and marchantes haue
their Gar∣dens, and fieldes without the towne, and slaues for the purpose
to labour in them, and bring their maisters all kindes of fruit, Rice and
Hennes in the towne, 

as
also the Pepper that groweth there, which runneth vp by an other tree, as
Hoppes with vs, and groweth in long bunches like Grapes, so that there is at
the least 200. graines in one bunch: it is first greene, and after it
be∣commeth 
 blacke, and is there in great aboundance, so
that it is the right Pepper countrey; for when we came thither they said vnto
vs, 
Aqui ai tanta Pimienta, como terra,
 that is, here is as much
Pepper as earth, and so we found it, and yet we departed from thence by our
own follies, without our lading of Pepper: Wee staide for new Pepper, meane
time the 
Portingalles
 sent their let∣ters into euery place seeking
to hinder our trade: At the first we might haue sufficient, for there we
founde enough both to buy for money or to barter. We like∣wise had money and
wares sufficient: we might easily haue had sixe or eight hundred tunnes,
as we were ad∣uertised by some of the countrey, that we should
pre∣sently buy, for that the 
Portingalles
 sought all the means
they could to hinder vs, as after it appeared; and there∣fore he that thinketh
to come soone enough, commeth oftentimes too late, and we vsed not our time
so well as it fell out.


The 29. of August we had a letter sent vs by night
from our men that were in the towne, that lay in a ma∣ner as prisoners, to
will vs to let our pledge go a shore, o∣therwise they feared they shoulde
hardly escape with their liues, and great danger might fall vpon them: this
pledge came aborde with the 9. slaues.


The 30. of August we sent the pledge and the rest of our

Iauers
 to land, with promise that he would do the best he might to
get our men leaue to come aborde: a∣bout euening of the same day wee had
newes from our men by foure of our saylers that as then they were bet∣ter
vsed, saying they thought they should come aborde when two shippes were
gone that ment to saile for 
Ma∣lacca,
 being laden with Nutmegs and
other things.


The first of of September, and the 2. 3. and 4. wee
sent many letters to the Gouernour and hee to vs, and likewise to our men
that were in the towne, being nine in number, all our best marchants and
captains, hauing with them about 6. or 7000. Guildernes in marchan∣dise, and
they againe to vs.


The 5. of
September when wee perceyued that de∣layes were daungerous, wee went close to
the towne with all our 4. shippes, and so neere that we had but two fadome
muddie grounde, and presently with two of our boates for our securitie wee
set vppon three 
Iauan
 shippes, whereof two were laden with fish
and Cocus, wherein wee founde a man of 
China,
 being of some account.
The third ship was laden with 20. tunnes of Cloues, 6. tunnes of Pepper, and
some Benioni, and 
Piementa da Rauo,
 wherein we founde fiue

Malabardes
 slaues to the 
Portingalles,
 whom wee likewise
tooke, & they were very willing to goe with vs, thereby to bee eased of
the slauery wherevnto the 
Portingals
 put them, and perceyuing that
the 
Portingalles
 went often to and from another shippe that lay not
farre from vs, we took our Pinace and made towardes it, and being harde by it,
the 
Portingals
 left it & set it on fire: This ship had the
richest wares in it as the 
Portingalles
 slaues tolde vs, for it
was laden with fiftie tunnes of Cloues, which were burnt in it.


The sixt and seuenth of September we hearde no newes, so that
wee went close to the Towne agayne, shooting with our great Peeces into it,
slaying diuers of the people (as after we were informed:) They likewise
shot with their Peeces agaynst vs, which the 
Portingalles
 did, for
that the 
Iauars
 haue little or no skill at all there∣in, 

 and are very fearefull of them, and although they had many
peeces in the towne, yet they did vs no o∣ther hurt then onely shot one of

Molenares
 halfe masts in peeces.


The seuenth of September wee had a skirmish, which was in this
manner, we perceyuing a 
Iauan
 ship vnder sayle, sent our Pinace
with sixe and twentie men in her to fetch it in, which the 
Iauan

shippe perceyuing fledde behinde an Islande, where our Pinace followed him
so fast that shee fell a grounde, which the townes men perceyuing, made
them readie with foure and twentie boates full of men, all armed after their
man∣ner, and set forwarde in good order, being diuided in two companies,
seuen on starre bord, & 17. on lardde bord of the Pinace, in order like
a halfe Moone, threat∣ning vs with their speares, they thought by reason of
their great number of men, that they had already taken it, but it fell out
otherwise, for they in the Pinace per∣ceyuing them comming, shotte among
them, and they were so near vnto her that we could not shoot at them: and
when they were harde by the Pinace, shee gotte a flote, as they thought to
take her, hauing cast out an anker in good time, and thereby wounde
them∣selues off the grounde, but for haste they were for∣ced to cutte their
Cable, because they had not time enough to winde it vppe, and with all they
shotte one of their boates vnder water. The Pinace draw∣ing her boate after
her, the 
Iauans
 presently leapt into it, and cutte a sunder the
roape that helde it, which they immediately stole from vs, thrusting vvith
their Speares in at the loope holes. Seuen of their Boates being round about vs
were so sharpely 
 paid with the iron peeces, stone peeces,
and Caliuers, that the 17, others durst not come so neere vs: I thinke
there were at the least 100. of them that neuer carryed newes how they sped
in that skirmish, for euery boate had at the least 60. men in it, and they
were so thicke in them, that they could not help themselues, nor did any
thing els but shake their speares, and they shot but one base: their
arrowes hurt vs not, and so the Pinace retur∣ned againe vnto our shippes,
sayling close before the towne, and shooting into it with her ordinance:
They shot out of the towne, but it hit her not, because they shot with
stone pellets, wherewith you cannot shoote so certainly as with iron
bullets.


The 8. 9. and 10. of September we had letters from our men out of

Bantam,
 by the which they willed vs not to shoot any more, for that
the Gouernour threat∣ned to set them vpon stakes: 
Houtman
 wrote
they were in good hope that they shoulde bee put to raunsome, which wee
counselled them to doe as well as they might.


The
11. of September we had a letter from 
Houtman,
 and one from the
Gouernour, wherein hee wrote that he would set our men at libertie, so we
would be quiet, but if we desired warre, he woulde once againe come and
visite vs in another sort: wee aunswered him that there he should find
vs, that wordes were but wind, & that he should set our men at a
reasonable ransome, and thereof send vs an answere the next day.


The 12. and 13. of September wee had no answere out of the towne,
and we had want of water, and could get none thereabouts but that which came
out of the towne, for that the Gouernour had taken order that we 

 should get no water about the towne, so that we
hoised ankers to go seeke some.


The 17. of September we came before 3. or 4. Islands which

Molenare
 and 
Shellenger
 sayled betweene, and for that the
streame ranne so strong there, they were forced to goe so nigh the
shore, that they might al∣most leape on lande, whereby they escaped great
dan∣ger, but the other shippe and the Pinace sayled about the Islands,
and so met with the other two, and casting forth their ankers went on
shore, where wee spake with men that saide they would shew vs where wee
shoulde haue water, so we would giue them two Caliuers.


The 18. 19. 20. 23. and 24. we stayed to lade water, for it was
hard to get, and we were forced to keep good watch, which done hoysing ankers
againe, wee sayled towardes 
Bantam,
 holding our course
Eastwarde.


The 27. we sayled Northeast towardes the lande of 
Iaua
maior.


The 28. setting sayle agayne, we kept East North∣east along
by the coast of 
Iaua,
 & about noone because of the great
streame that runneth in the straight, wee were forced to anker, and the 30.
day wee set sayle a∣gaine.


The first of October in the euening wee came to a great Islande,
being three miles from the towne, and there we ankered finding good clay
ground.


The 2. of October wee had a letter from our men, how they were
seperated one from the other, and kept by the Gentlemen of the towne, and
their wares parted among them.


The 3. 4. and 5. when wee were againe before the towne, we had other
letters, that by our comming they 
 were better vsed, and hoped
to bee set at a reasonable ransome, and that they promised that one of
our men should come aborde, so he would returne againe into towne, that
shoulde by worde of mouth certifie vs what hope they were in, and the cause
thereof, that we might the better belieue it.


The 6. of October in the night one of our men came aborde,
and shewed vs what had past, when we shotte into the towne, how they were
seperated and kept close prisoners, and cruelly threatned by the

Iauers,
 whereby they still expected when they should bee put to
death, and howe they sought all the meanes they coulde to make them to deny
their faith, and become 
Mores,
 but they remayned constant, and
saide they woulde rather die, and that they had by force shauen three of
our men after the 
Morish
 manner, and how the 
Portingals
 had
sought all the meanes they coulde to buy them for slaues, offering money
for them that they might sende them to 
Malacca,
 how they were set
at libertie againe, & might goe where they woulde within the towne, and
so they hoped all would be well, and that they shoulde bee set at
libertie for some small ransome, and that the Gouernour asked them 3000.
Rialles of 8. but they hoped to bring him to 2000. whereat we much
reioy∣ced.


The 8. 9. and 10. of October we passed ouer to make some
agreement with them that we might be quiet.


The 11. of October they agreede vppon a ransome of 2000. Ryalles
of eyght, and were content, that what goodes soeuer we had taken from them,
wee shoulde keepe as our owne, and for our goodes that they had stolen, and
forcibly taken from our men within the 
 towne, 

they would
keepe them, and so exchange one for the other, they likewise were content
to quit vs of all our debts, that we ought within the towne eyther to the
Gouernor or to any other man, and that from thence forwarde we should be
free, and traffique in the towne, both to buy and sell when it pleased vs,
& with their good willes as we had done, and before we paide our money, the
towne was to sende two men aborde our ships, which done, we were to pay the
halfe of our ransome, and vpon the payment thereof, they shoulde set
halfe of our men at liberty, and that halfe of our men being come aborde, wee
were to pay the other halfe of our ransome, which was 1000. Ryalles of eyght;
which being performed, their two men, and their other halfe of our men were on
both sides to bee deliuered and sette free, and without contradiction it
was perfor∣med.


The 12. and 13. this agreement being ended, diuers victuailers came
aborde our shippes to sell vs Hennes, Egges, and all other kind of
victuailes.


The 14. we gaue certaine presentes in signe of good will, to
such as had shewed vs fauour when we were in contention with them.


The 15. 16. 17. and 18. some of our Factors went into the towne,
where they bought certaine Pepper, & brought it abord our ships.


The 19. they went again into the towne, & bought a greater
quantitie at 5. sackes for one Catti, minding in that sorte euery day to
take in our lading, but it fell not out as wee desired, for the

Portingalles
 that coulde not brooke our company, made such means to
the Gouer∣nour, that he gaue commandement that we should buy 
 no
more Pepper, before we had paide 1400. Rialles of 8. which he challenged of vs
because we had cast anker within his streame, whereupon our Marchantes
went and agreed with him, which done wee thinking to buy Pepper as we did
before, 

the
Gouernour againe com∣manded to the contrarie, whereby we perceyued their
deceipt, in that he wold not hold his word. The coun∣try men would gladly haue
solde their Pepper, as also the 
Chinars, Arabians, Mahometitians,

and secretly some 
Portingalles,
 but when we saw wee could not
get it out but with great daunger, wee thought it not conuenient to buy: and
when we spake vnto the Gouernour, tou∣ching the holding of his worde, he made
vs answere, that he had no bones in his tongue, and that therefore he could
speake that which he ment not to doe: and to say the truth most part of
the 
Iauars
 are a kind of deceit∣full people, for whatsoeuer they
say and presently per∣forme, that shall you be sure of and no more.


The 25. of October there came an Ambassador into

Bantam,
 sent from 
Malacca
 to the Gouernor with a pre∣sent
of 10000. Rials of 8. desiring him to forbid vs both his towne and streame,
that wee might not traffique there. Whereof wee were aduertised by the

Sabandar
 and other of our friendes counselling our men to get them
out of the towne, and not to returne again, other∣wise they would be in
daunger to be stayed againe, and we hauing sent a man into the towne to
saue him from being holden prisoner, our host where we lay being on
shore was forced to bring him out couered with cer∣taine mattes; so that
vppon the 26. of the same month all our trafficke and friendship with them
ceased: but our hoast being our friende, came secretly aborde our 

 ships, and shewed vs that he and his company had two
ships lying before the towne, laden with Nutmegges and Mace that came from

Banda,
 for the which hee a∣greed with vs at a price, vpon condition
that we should seeme to take them by force, that thereby he might co∣lour
his dealing with vs: wherevpon the first of No∣uember we sailed close to
the towne with all our ships, 

and set
vpon the two 
Iauan
 shippes, wherein we found to the number of 30.
slaues, that knew nothing of their maisters bargaine made with vs, so
that they began to resist vs, wherewith we shot among them, and
present∣ly slew 4. or 5. of them, the rest leapt ouer borde, and swamme
to land, which done we tooke the two ships, and put their lading into ours: 

The

Portingalles
 shippe that brought their Ambassadour, lay close
vnder the shore, wherevnto we sent two of our boats, but the

Por∣tingals
 that were in her shot so thicke with their peeces
vppon our men, that our boates were forced to leaue them with losse of one
of our men, but our shippes shot in such sorte with their ordinance
vppon the 
Portingall
 shippe, that they spoyled and brake it in
peeces, where∣in their Captaine was slaine, and the victuailers that stil
brought vs victuailes to sell, tolde vs that with our pee∣ces we had slain
three or foure men within the towne, & that the townes men began to make an
armie of ships to set vpon vs.


The 2.
of Nouember we espyed a shippe that came toward 
Bantam,
 which we
ioyned vnto with our boats, and being neere vnto it, they spread their
fights, which were of thicke mattes, and began to defend themselues; our men
shot among them with stone peeces and Ca∣liuers, and they defended
themselues with great cou∣rage, 
 hauing halfe pikes wherewith
they thrust at vs, & that serued likewise to blow arrowes out of
them, for they were like trunkes, out of the which trunkes they shot so
great numbers of arrowes, that they fell as thick as hayle, and shotte so
certainely, that therewith they hurt at the least eyght or nine of our men,
but the ar∣rowes are thinne and light, so that their blaste coulde not make
them enter into the flesh aboue the thicknes of two fingers, onely the head
of the arrowe (which is made of reede, and loose stayeth in the flesh)
when we shot with our Caliuers they runne behind their fightes, but whē they
perceiued that their matted fights could not defende them, and that they were
killed through them, they entered into their boate, and by strength of oares
rowed from vs, leauing their shippe, wherein we founde two dead men, and we
slew three more of them as we rowed after their boat, so that in all they
lost fiue men, as we after heard, and that they were to the num∣ber of 40.
which done, wee brought their shippe to ours, wherein we found good store
of Ryce and dryed fish.


The 6. of Nouember, perceyuing not any hope of more trafficke for vs
with those of 
Bantam,
 wee hoised anker and set sayle,
setting our course towardes the straight of 
Sunda.


The
seuenth of Nouember wee came and ankered before a Riuer of freshe water,
about sixe miles from 
Bantam,
 where wee tooke in our prouision of
water: thither certaine Merchants followed vs with Porseline, telling vs that
they were sory for our departure, & that they longed for our returne
againe.


The thirteenth of Nouember wee set sayle, and a∣bout 

 euening wee came before 
Iacatra,
 in time past
called 
Sunda Calapa,
 which hath beene a rich Towne of marchandise,
but vppon some occasions, and by rea∣son of their hard vsage the
Marchants had withdrawen themselues from thence, therefore at this present
there is little or nothing to doe. 
Iohn Hughen
 in his booke saith
this to be the principal towne of trafficke, but that is long sithence, for
now there is not any trade of mar∣chandise.


The fourteenth of Nouember wee sent two of our men into the towne,
hauing some of theirs in pawne, who tolde vs that many of the inhabitantes
were gone out of the towne with all their goodes, being in great feare of our
peeces, and there wee had great store of victuailes, and much more then wee
required brought abord our ships.


The 18. wee set saile from 
Iacatra,
 and being about two
miles from the towne, our shippe called 
Am∣sterdam
 fell vppon a
cliffe, but it got off againe without any hurt, and therewith wee presently
made towardes the straight.


The 2. of December we passed by 3. townes which we might
easily perceiue, we likewise passed by 
Tubam,
 and ankered
vnder 
Sidaya.
 The 3. of December there came men out of the towne,
& desired vs to stay, saying that there we might haue Cloues &
Nutmegs as many as we woulde, bringing certaine banketting stuffe (as a
present from their King) vnto 
Sche
lengers
 ship, because it lay nearest to the land, and
they came most abord it.


The 4. of December they came again into 
Schellen∣gers

ship, bringing certaine presentes with them, and a∣mong the rest a
certayne birde that coulde swallowe 
 fyer, which is a very
strange fowle, and was brought a∣liue to 
Amsterdam,
 which after
was giuen to the states of 
Hollande
 lying in the 
Hage,
 and
some good fruites, willing vs to sende a man on shore to see their
spices, whereof they said they had great store: wherevpon we sent a man
out of the 
Amsterdam,
 and with him an inter∣preter, one of the

Portingalles
 slaues, they leauing three or foure of their men aborde
our shippes, for pawnes till his returne: when our man came to lande hee was
well vsed, and there they shewed him fortie or fiftie bals of Cloues; which
done they brought him before the King, that promised him great fauor, and
told him that the next day he wold himselfe come aborde our ships, and
deale with our Captaines, and with that he let our man depart.


The 5. of December we expected the Kinges com∣ming aborde, putting
out all our flagges and streamers, and about noone there came 8. or 9.
indifferent great shippes full of men from off the shore, wherein wee
thought the King to bee, but when they were almost at vs they diuided
themselues, three of them rowing to 
Shellengers
 ship, and when
they borded him, they thin∣king the King had been there, 
Reymer van
Hel
 as Factor and the Maister came forth to receyue him, but the

Ia∣uers
 entering all at once, 
Reymer van Hel
 said, What
will all these people doe aborde the shippe, for there was at the least
two hundred men, who all at one time drewe out their poinyardes, and stabbed
our men that neuer suspected them, so that presently they had slaine
twelue of the shippe, and two sore wounded, that boldly with∣stoode them:
the rest of our men being vnder hatches presently tooke their pikes, and
thrust so fast out at the 
 grates, 

that the

Iauers
 woulde haue forced the middle part of the ship, wherein was
two entries, but our men standing at them with their swordes in hande draue
them out, not ceasing still to thrust vp with their pikes, meane time
they kindled fier, lighted their matches, & shot off their stone peeces
that lay aboue the hatches, wherwith they began presently to flie, most of
them lea∣ping ouer bord, and swam to their two boates, that lay harde by our
shippes, whereof one with a great peece was presently striken in peeces:
The rest of our ships hearing vs shoote in that manner, entered into
their boats, and made towardes them, rowing harde to the three 
Indian

fustes, wherein were at the least 100. men, and shotte among them with
their peeces, wherewith they leapt into the water, euery man swimming to
shore, and we with two boates after them, hewing and killing them as our
deadly enemies, who vnder pre∣tence of friendshippe sought to murther vs,
and wee handled them in such sort, that of two hundred men there got not
aboue thirty of them to lande, the rest of their fustes lay farre off and
beheld the fight: Three of their fustes thought to rowe to the Pinace to take
her, which they might easily haue done, as hauing not a∣boue 7. or 8. men in
her, being busie to set vppe a newe maste, but when they perceyued their
men to bee so handeled in the 
Amsterdam,
 and that they leapt ouer
borde, they turned backe againe, and in great haste ro∣wed to land, so that
at that time they got not much by the bargaine, and no small griefe to vs,
for there wee lost 12. men, that were all stabbed with poinyards, their
names were 
Iohn Iacobson Schellenger,
 maister of the ship,

Reymer van hel
 Factor, 
Gielis Gieleson
 Gentleman,

Barent 
 

Bonteboter, Arent Cornedrager, Cornelis van Alcmuer, Si∣mon
Ianson, Wiltschut Ioos
 the Carpenter, 
Adrian de
Metselar,
 one of the 
Portingalles
 slaues, and two boyes,
whereof one was but twelue yeares olde, whereby wee perceyued them to be a
kinde of cruell people, for they had giuen the little boy and all the rest of
our men at the least 12. stabbes a peece after they were dead.


The same day about euening we hoysed ankers, and set saile,
hauing manned the 
Amsterdam
 with men out of our other shippes, and
so helde our course East∣ward.


The 6. of December we came to a great Island cal∣led

Madura,
 where we ankered, and in the euening two of their men came
aborde our shippes, with message from their Gouernour, saying that we
were welcome, desiring vs to stay there, for he would trafficke with vs,
and sell vs some Pepper, as they saide, but wee belieued them not.


The 7. of December there came another boat abord, bringing certaine
fruites, saying that the next day their Gouernour would come to see our
shippes.


The 8. there came a great fuste and three smal boats, from off
the land all full of men, saying their Gouernor was among them: we willed
them not to goe to the 
Amsterdam,
 but to the 
Mauritius,
 but
they woulde not, but made to the 
Amsterdam,
 thinking because there
had beene so many murthered in her, there was not ma∣ny men aborde her at
that time, and when they were within a pykes length of her, (although they were
di∣rected to the other shippes) they remembring their late mischance,
shotte off three or foure stone Peeces full laden, wherewith they slew
and hurt many of the 
 
Indians,
 wherevpon they
presently leapt ouer bord, & wee with our boates followed after and
slew diuers of them, taking ten or twelue, thinking by them to know what
their intent was to doe, but they coulde not cer∣tifie vs, and therefore we let
them go againe onely kee∣ping two boyes, who long after stole out of the
shippe, and swamme to lande: They tolde vs that the Gouer∣nour being a
Bishoppe or chiefe instructor of the coun∣trey, was within the boate and
slaine among the rest, hee had therein likewise a little boy one of his
sonnes who wee likewise tooke, and sent to lande: The Bi∣shoppe was of

Meca,
 and much esteemed of among them, a great Clearke, and
Gouernour ouer all the rest of the Countrey: There was a Iewell found about
him, which as yet is kept.


About euening we hoysed ankers, & set sayle, & the 11.
of December we came to two small Islands, where wee ankered, there wee
founde none but poore people and fishermen, that brought vs fish, Hens,
& other fruit to sell.


The 13. wee set sayle, and the 14. wee had a
West winde, which they call the passage winde, that would haue serued
vs well to saile to 
Moluccas,
 from whence wee were not distant
aboue two hundred miles, and as then it was a good yeare for Cloues, which
happeneth euery three yeares: It was told vs that we might there haue a Cabbin
laden full of Cloues, wherevpon wee determined to sayle thither, but
because wee had already indured a long and troublesome voyage, and but ill
manned, wee woulde not, longing to bee at home: This contrary wind holding
vppon the foure and twentie of December wee came to an Islande 

where we had beene before.


The 25. of December 
Iohn Molenaer
 maister of the

Mauritius,
 dyed sodainely, for an hower before hee was well and in
good health.


The 28. 29. 30. and 31. of December wee were busi∣ed to take all
the wares, sayles and other thinges out of the 
Amsterdam,
 her
victuailes and furnitures seruing for our voyage homewarde, & lying vnder
that Island, we had victuailes brought vs euery day as much as wee needed,
both fish, Hens, venison and fruit, and at reaso∣nable price, but there
we could get no water.


The 11. of
Ianuary when we had vnladen the 
Am∣sterdam
 we set her on fier,
letting her burne, taking her men into our shippes.


The 12. of Ianuarie we set sayle again, some desiring to
sayle Eastward, others Westward, but in fine wee set Westwarde to
sayle once againe to 
Bantam,
 wherewith the 
Mauritius

sayled Southeastwarde, to gette about the Island of 
Iaua,
 and we
followed her. The 14. of Ia∣nuary we once againe perceyued the East point of
the Island of 
Madura,
 and held our course Southward: on that
side of 
Madura
 there lyeth many small Islandes, through which we
sayled.


The 16. in the
morning our Pinace fell on grounde vpon the coast of 
Iaua,
 not far
from 
Pannorocan,
 where she shotte off three peeces, at the which
warning wee made thither with our boates, and by the helpe of God got her off
againe: There we saw a high hil that burnt, vnder and aboue the fire hauing a
great smoake, most strange to behold.


The 18. of Ianuary we entered into the straight that runneth
betweene 
Iaua
 and 
Baly,
 and by reason of the 

 hard & contrary streame that ran therin, we were
forced to anker vpon the coast of 
Iaua,
 where wee found good anker
ground.


The 19. wee set sayle, and when wee came neere to the coast of

Baly,
 we entered into a rough streame, and our shippes draue
backeward, as swiftly as an arrow out of a bow, and there we found no anker
ground, nor a∣ny anker could haue holden vs, but 
Molenaer
 got the
coast of 
Iaua
 and ankered, which in the ende wee like∣wise did,
and ankered at the least three miles from him, and so much we had driuen
backe in the space of halfe an houre.


The 20. of Ianuarie wee went and lay by our other ships.


The 21. of Ianuarie there came two barkes to the 
Mauritius,

wherein there was one that coulde speake good 
Portingall,
 who tolde
vs that the towne of 
Balla∣boam
 was besieged by a strange King,
that had marryed the King of 
Ballaboams
 daughter, and after he had
laine with her he caused her to bee slaine, and then came to besiege her
father. This towne of 
Ballaboam
 lyeth on the East end of the
Island of 
Iaua,
 and is the same towne where M. 
Candish

was when hee passed that way, and the old King wherof he writeth was as
then yet liuing, being at the least 160. years of age. There we saw great
numbers of Battes, that flew ouer our shippes, and were as bigge as Crowes,
which in that Countrey they vse to eat, as they say: About noone we came
before the towne of 
Ballaboam,
 so neare vnto it that we might
easi∣ly see it, and there we lay behind a high point of lande, thinking to
take in water.


The 22. of Ianuarie we tooke our Pinace, and sayled 

about the shore as neere the land as possible we might, to seeke for
fresh water, but we found none, for the Ri∣uer that ran through the towne was
paled vp (by them that lay before it) so that no man might passe either
out or in, but onely on the lande side, and that with great daunger: The
same day there came 2. or 3. men abord our shippe, that stole out of the
towne by night, and came from the King, to desire our help with our great
shot, which wee coulde not doe; because that therea∣bouts it was very
shallow, and we might not go neere it with our shippes: they tolde vs they
had great want of victuailes within the towne, whereby many of them were
already deade for hunger, and much desired our aide, but it was not in vs to
doe. Those that besieged the towne were 
Mores,
 but they in the
towne were hea∣thens, and as yet had not receyued 
Mahomets
 lawe, and
that (as wee heard after) was the cause of their warre: There wee sawe many
Storkes flying and sitting in the fielde: with vs we cannot imagaine where
the Storkes remaine in winter time, but here wee sawe them in the winter
time.


The 24. of Ianuarie we sayled from thence, percey∣uing nothing for
vs to get, and tooke our course right ouer to the Island of

Bally.


The 25. we came to 
Bally,
 where one of their barks borded
vs, telling vs that there we should find a Riuer of fresh water, and of all
thinges els sufficient to serue our necessities, wherevpon wee
ankered.


The 26. of Ianuarie our Pinace sent her boat to land, to see the
Riuer, and there one of our men was sent on shore, but when he was on land
he found nothing, but an armie of ten thousand men, that ment to relieue the 

 towne of 
Ballaboam,
 and the Riuer was nothing
worth to lade water, wherevpon our men came on borde a∣gaine: Their Generall
thought to haue gotten some great pray out of our shippes.


The 27. of Ianuarie we set sayle to finde a conueni∣ent place to
refresh vs with water and other prouision, for wee were informed by a man
of 
Bengala,
 that of his owne will sayled with vs, and that had beene
in 
Bally,
 that there wee should finde water and other thinges to
serue our necessities, so that by night wee ankered vn∣der a high
pointe of lande on the South west ende of 
Bally.


The 28. of Ianuary one of their boates borded vs with sixe or
seuen men, saying that their King was de∣sirous to deale with vs for
such wares as hee had, and sent to know from whence we came, and we saide
wee came out of 
Holland.


The 29. and 30. there came more men aborde our shippes, but as wee
suspected that was not the right ha∣uen, for the people came rowing in
great haste a far off, and the man of 
Bengala
 could not tell what to
say, but the King was thereabout, and euery day sent vs some fruit.


The first of February wee had two hogges brought aborde our
shippes, that wee bought for two Ryalles of eyght, and we eate them very
sauerly.


The 2. of Februarie, we set saile that wee might get aboue the
point, where wee thought to finde a better place for freshe water, but by
reason the winde was contrary, wee coulde not doe it, but were forced to
an∣ker againe.


The 
3.
 of February we set saile againe,
and then wee had a storme, so that our saile blew euery way, and
be∣cause of the contrarie winde we could not reach aboue the point, but were
constrained to anker, but the 
Mau∣ritius
 and the Pinace got past
it, although thereby the 
Mauritius
 was in no little daunger; but
because the Pi∣lot had laid a wager of 6. Rialles of 8. that hee woulde get
aboue it, hee would passe, what daunger soeuer it might be, and sayled
close along by the cliffes, where∣by wee lay at anker without companie.


The 4. and 5. wee set saile once againe to get aboue the point
but could not reach it.


The 6. we had a letter from 
Rodenburgh,
 that certifi∣ed vs
how the 
Mauritius
 lay at anker at the least 7. or 8. miles beyond
the point, and he that brought the letter came with it ouer land; and at the
same time there was a man sent on lande with a small present for the
King, that we might winne his fauour.


The 7. our man came on borde againe, and brought vs newes how

Rodenburgh
 with one of the 
Portingalles
 slaues, being on
lande were against their willes led be∣fore the King, but the saylors of
the 
Mauritius
 had got∣ten men for pledges.


The 8. of Ianuarie, the same man went on land out of our shippe
with more presentes of veluet and a cali∣uer, the better to get the Kinges
fauour, which liked him well, and desired vs to bring the ship nearer to
the towne, saying he would send vs water and other things sufficient to
supply our wants.


The 9. we sayled into the cheeke with our shippe, & ankered
about a small halfe mile from the land, & being ankered there came at the
least 70. boates of the Coun∣trie 
 to see our ship,
and the King sent vs word that hee was desirous to heare vs shoote off 5.
or 6. of our great peeces, wherevppon wee shot fiue of our greatest
pee∣ces, and the King stoode vppon the shore to see them.


The 10. we had a letter from 
Cornelis Houtman,
 to wil vs to
come to them, for that there they had founde a good place for water, and of all
other necessaries, so that about euening wee set sayle, leauing two
of our men and a 
Portingall
 slaue among the 
Indians,
 whome
the King promised should come vnto vs ouer land, yet that night wee could
not reach aboue the point, meane time we perceyued our Pinace that came to
helpe vs.


The 16. we got by the 
Mauritius,
 that had already laden in
her water, and hooped her vessels, wherevpon we began presently to do the
like, and to visite our ves∣sels that were almost spoyled.


The 17. our men whome wee left with the King came ouer land vnto our
shippes, and then we bought great store of cattle and fruit.


The 18. 19. 20. and 21. wee imployed our time to lade water, which
wee had verie easily, and refreshed our selues with Cattle, Hogges,
fruit, and Lemons suf∣ficient. There came one of the Kinges principall
offi∣cers with our men ouer land, to pleasure vs in all things we desired,
he was very desirous to haue some present of vs.


The 22. of Ianuarie two of our men that sayled in the

Mauritius
 stayed on lande, but wee knewe not the cause: it
should seeme some great promises had beene made vnto them, for as we
vnderstoode, the King was very desirous to haue all sortes of strange
nations about 
 him, 

but our people were therein much ouerseene, for
there they liued among heathens, that neyther knewe God nor his commandementes,
it appeared that their youthes and wilde heades did not remember it, one of
their names was 
Emanuel Rodenburgh
 of 
Amsterdam,
 the other

Iacob Cuyper
 of 
Delft:
 within a day or two they sent vnto
vs for their clothes, but wee sent them not.


The 23. 24. and 25. we made a voyage on land, and fetcht as many
Hogges abord our shippes as we could eate.


The 25. of Februarie we hoysed ankers, minding to set saile
& so go homeward, leauing our 2. men aforesaid on land, but because
it was calme weather we ankered, and went once againe on lande, and the 26. of
the same Month wee set saile and helde our course West South west,
but we had a calme.






The situation of the Island of Baly.


T
He Island of 
Baly
 lying at the East end of

Iaua,
 is a verie fruitfull Islande of Ryce, Hennes, Hogges, that are
verie good, and great store of cattle: but they are very drie and leane
beastes. They haue many horses: the inhabitantes are heathens and haue no
religion, for some pray to Kine, others to the Sunne, and euerie man as hee
thinketh good. 

When a man dyeth his wife burneth her selfe with him: there were
some of their men aborde our shippes, that told vs, that when some man
dyeth in that Countrey, that sometimes there are at the least fifty wo∣men 

 that will burne themselues with him, and she that doth
not so is accounted for a dishonest woman: so that it is a common thing
with them: The apparel both of men and women is for the most part like
those of 
Ban∣tam,
 nothing but a cloth about their middles: Their
weapons is, each man a poinyarde at their backes, and a trunke with an iron
point like a speare, about a fadom and a halfe long, out of the which they
blowe certaine arrowes, whereof they haue a case full; it is an euil wea∣pon
for naked men: they are enemies to the 
Mores
 and

Portingalles.
 This Island yeeldeth no spice, nor any o∣ther
costly ware, onely victuailes and clothes which they weare about their
bodies, and slaues that are there to be solde. The King went with more
state then the King of 
Bantam:
 all his garde had pikes with heades
of fine gold, and he sate in a wagon that was drawen by 2. two white
Buffles.


The first of March we had a calme.


The third we got a good wind that blew Southeast, holding our
course West South west.


The fourteenth the wind blew stil South east, some∣times more
Southwarde, and sometimes Eastward, be∣ing vnder 14. degrees, and a good
sharpe gale, holding our course West Southwest: 

There we
found that 
Ia∣ua
 is not so broade, nor stretcheth it selfe not
so much Southwarde, as it is set dovvne in the Carde: for if it were, we
should haue passed clean through the middle of the land.


The 22. of March the winde helde as it did, be∣ing vnder 19.
degrees, holding our course West South west.


The 19. of April our ship had no more bread left, but 
 for our last partition euery man had seuen pound, both good and
badde breade, and from that time forwarde our meate was Rice sodden in water,
and euery man had a canne of water euery day, with three romers of wine, and
weekely each man three romers or glasses of oyle and that very strong,
and nothing els.


The 20. we had a calme, the 
21.
 a calme with a Nor∣therne
aire.


The 23. a good wind that blew Southwest.


The 24. we saw the firme lande of 
Aethiopia,
 being vnder
33 degrees, and as wee gessed, wee were then a∣bout an hundred miles from
the Cape 
de bona Sperance,
 yet we thought we had been at the least
three hundred miles from it, so that wee may say, that God wrought
wonderfully for vs: for that if wee had fallen by night vpon the land, we had
surely runne vpon it: wee had a good winde out of the West, and West
Southwest.


The 25. of Aprill in the morning wee had a calme, with a very hollow
water, & at euening we had a good winde, that came North and Northeast,
and although wee had so good a vvind yet our shippe bare but little
sayle, although the other two shippes of our company were at the least
two mile before vs, for most part of the night wee sayled with our
schouer saile, holding our course Southwest & by West.


The 26. of Aprill in the morning we coulde not see our shippes,
which pleased not our men, besides that our shippe was very weake,
whereby her ribs shoke, and her ioynts with the force of the water opened and
shut, so that as then our shippe was very leake, hauing the winde
Northwest, holding our course as neere as wee could West Southwest, and
then we put out our maine 
 sayles, at noone the winde
came West, with a great storme, so that most of our sayles blew in
peeces, and so wee draue forward with out sayles.


The 27. of Aprill still driuing without sayle with a West
winde, wee were vnder thirty sixe degrees, so that we found that the
streame draue vs South & South West.


The 28. of Aprill still driuing without sailes, we had the
height of 36. degrees and 20. minutes, and about euening we hoised saile
againe, the winde being West Southwest, & we held our course
Northwest with ve∣ry hollow water.


The 29. of April we could not as yet see our shippes, the wind
being West.


The 
30.
 of Aprill we had fayre weather with a West and
west South west wind, and then we saw many great birdes with white
billes, which is a signe not to bee far from the Cape 
de bona
Sperance,
 we likewise saw certain small birdes, speckled on their
backes, and white vpon their breasts.


The first of May wee had a South vvinde with fayre weather, hauing

34.
 degrees and a halfe, holding our course West Southwest.


The seconde of May wee vvere vnder 
35.
 degrees, and
½. holding our course West and West and by North.


The fourth of May we found our selues to be vnder 
37.

degrees South South east winde, our course being West and by North, and
West North west.


The 5. and 6. of May we had all one winde at noone being vnder

35.
 degrees, wee thought wee had past the Cape, and held our
course Northwest, towardes Saint 
 
Helena,
 still
without sight of our ships.


The 8. of May with a South wind wee helde North West and by
West.


The 9. we had a calme with a gray sky, and were vn∣der
31. degrees and twentie minutes, and then our por∣tion of oyle was increased
a glasse more euery weeke, so that euery man had foure glasses.


The 
10.
 we had stil south winds, & were vnder 29.
deg.


The 14. of Aprill twice or thrice we saw reedes, cal∣led

Trombos
 driuing on the water, being such as driue about the Cape

de bona Speranza,
 which wee thought verie strange, for that the

Portingals
 write, that they are seene but thirtie myles from the
Cape, and wee gest our selues to be at the least 200. beyond it.


The 15. we still had a South east wind, & helde our course
Northwest.


The 16. of Aprill in the morning we saw two ships, whereat we
much reioyced, thinking they had beene our companie, we made to leewarde of
them, and the smallest of them comming somewhat neere vs, about the
length of the shotte of a great peece, shee made pre∣sently toward her
fellow, whereby we perceiued them to bee French men, yet wee kept to leeward,
thinking they would haue come & spoken with vs, but it should seeme
they feared vs, and durst not come, but held their course Northeast: at
noone we had the height of 22. de∣grees, and 50. minutes with a Southeast
wind, holding our course Northwest.


The 17. of May wee were vnder 
21.
 degrees and a halfe: the
18. the wind being Southerly, we vvere vnder 19. degrees and a halfe.


The 19. and 
20.
 we had a calme with a Southern are.


 



map of St Helena


SANCTA HELENA




The 21. the ayre comming
Southwest, we held our course Northwest, and were vnder 17. degrees and
⅔. partes: There we found the compasse to decline three quarters of
a strike or line North eastward, after noone we had a Southeast wind, and
our course West North∣west.


The 22. of May we had still a Southeast winde, and were vnder
the height of 16. degrees and 40. minutes, holding our course West
Northwest.


The 23. of May, by reason of the cloudy sky, about noone we could
not take the height of the Sunne, but as we gest we had the height of the
Island of 
S. Helena,
 and held our course West and by South to
keepe vnder that height, for there the compasses decline a whole strike
or line: in the euening we found that we were vn∣der 16. degrees.


The 24. of May in the morning wee discouered a 
Portingall

ship, that stayed for vs, and put out a flagge of truce, and because our
flagge of truce was not so readie as theirs, and we hauing the wind of him,
therefore he shot two shootes at vs, and put forth a flagge out of his
maine top, and we shot 5. or 6. times at him, and so held on our course
without speaking to him, hauing a South east winde, holding our course
West and by South to find the Island of 
S. Helena,
 which the

Portingal
 likewise sought.


The 25. of May we discouered the Island of 
S. Hele∣na,

but we could not see the 
Portingal
 ship, still sayling with a
stiffe Southeast wind, & about euening we were vnder the Island,
which is very high lande, and may be seene at the least 
14.
 or

15.
 miles off, and as we sayled a∣bout the North point, there lay
three other great 
Por∣tingal
 ships, we being not aboue half a mile
from them, 
 wherevpon wee helde in the weather and to seawarde
Northeast as much as we might. 

The

Portingalles
 per∣ceyuing vs, the Admiral of their fleet shot off a
peece to call their men that were on land to come a borde, and then wee saw
foure of their shippes together, that were worth a great summe of money, at
the least 300. tunnes of gold, for they were all laden with spices,
precious stones, and other rich wares, and therefore wee durst not anker
vnder the Island, but lay all night Northeast∣warde, staying for our
company.


The 26. of May in the morning wee made towardes the Island againe,
with a good Southeast winde, and a∣bout noone or somewhat past we
discried two shippes, and about euening as we made towards them, we knew
them to be our company, which made vs to reioice, for we had been asunder the
space of a whole Month, & so we helde together and sayled homeward,
holding our course Northwest: for as yet our men were well and in good
health, and we found a good Southeast winde, and had water enough for foure
or fiue monthes.


The 27. 28. 29. and 30. of May wee had a Southeast winde, with
faire weather, and the 27. day we were vn∣der 14. degrees, The first of Iune
we were vnder 6. de∣grees, with a Southest wind, holding our course north
west, but by means of the Compasse that yeelded north eastward, we kept
about Northvvest & by North. The 6. of Iune vve were vnder one degree on
the South side of the line, there vvee founde that the streame draue vs
fast into the West, and therefore vvee helde our course more Northernely,
and sayled Northvvest & by north, vvith an East and South east
vvind. 

The 7. of
Iune wee past the Equinoctiall line, vvith an East vvinde, holding our
course North Northvvest.


The 10. of Iune in the euening we were vnder 5.
de∣grees and a halfe on the North side of the line, and then we began again
to see the north star, which for the space of 2. years we had not
seene, holding our course North Northwest, there we began to haue smal
blasts, & some times calmes, but the aire all South and
Southeast.


The 
11.
 of Iune we had a calme, and yet a darke sky, that
came Southeastwarde. The 
12.
 of Iune wee had a close sky with
raine, and the same day about euening our fore top maste fell downe.


The 13. we strake all our sailes and mended our ship.


The 
14.
 we had the wind Northward, holding our course
West Northwest as neare as we coulde, but by reason of the thick sky wee
could not take height of the Sun. The 
15.
 of Iune we had the wind
North, & North Northwest. The 
16.
 of Iune wee had the height of
9. degrees & 
10.
 minutes, the winde being Northeast and North
Northeast. The 
17.
 the winde was Northeast with fair weather,
& we held Northwest, & northwest & by North till after noone. 

The 
18.

we tooke a great fish called an 
Aluercoor,
 which serued vs all for
2. meals, which wee had not tasted of long time before.


The 26. we had still a Northeast winde, and some∣times larger,
holding our course North Northwest with large saile, and were vnder

17.
 degrees and ½.


The same day there came much dust flying into our shippe, as
if we had past hard by some sandie downe, & we gest the nearest
land to vs might be the Island of 
S. Anthony,
 and wee were as then
at the least 40. or 50. miles from it: The same day likewise there came a
fly∣ing fish into our shippe, which we eat.


The 28. of Iune wee had the height of 20. degrees, with a East
Northeast wind & East and by West, with 
 full sayle,
there we saw much Sargosse, driuing on the water. The last of Iune we
had the Sun right ouer our heades, and yet we felt no heat, for that by
reason of the cold ayre we had a fine coole weather. The same day we
passed 
Tropicus Cancri,
 still hauing the winde East
Northeast, and in the euening we were vnder 24. degr.


The second of Iuly we still saw Sargosse driuing vp∣on the
water, & had the wind somewhat lower North Northeast with a calme. The
thirde of Iuly the winde came againe East Northeast, and wee helde our
course North and by West. The 8. of Iuly wee were vnder 33. degrees &
½. with an East wind, holding our course North and by East, and
yet we saw much Sargosse dri∣uing, but not so thicke as it did
before.


The 10. of Iuly we had a good wind that blew south and South and
by East, and hoysted vp our maine tops, that for the space of 26. daies
were neuer touched, and held our course North Northeast, there we were in
no little feare to fall among the 
Spanish
 fleet, which at that time
of the yeare keepeth about the 
Flemmish
 Islands.


The same day one of our boyes fell ouer bord, and was carried away
with a swift streame before the wind, but to his great good fortune, the
Pinace saued him, that was at the least a quarter of a mile from vs: this
euening we found the height of 36. degrees.


The 12. of Iuly we had a Southwest wind, holding our course
Northeast and by North: Our Pilot and the Pilot of the Pinnace differed a
degree in the height of the Sunne, for ours had 38. degrees, and theirs but 37.
We gest to be about the Islands of 
Corbo
 & 
Flo∣res,

but the one held more easterly, and the other more Westerly. The 13. of
Iuly wee had still a Southwest winde, and after noone wee thought wee had
seene 
 land, but we were not assured thereof, for it
was some∣what close. The 14. of Iuly we had a calme, and saw no land, and
then our men began to be sicke.


The 17. of Iuly wee had a South Southeast winde, with faire
weather, and were vnder 41. degrees, holding our course East
Northeast.


The 
18. 19. 20.
 and 
21.
 it was calme. The 22. of
Iuly the winde came North, and wee helde our course East Southeast. The
23. of Iuly the wind was North North east and Northeast, and we held as
near as we could East & East Southeast, the same day our steward
found a bar∣rell of stockfish in the roming, which if we had beene at home
we would haue cast it on the dunghil, it stunke so filthily, & yet we
eat it as sauerly as the best meat in the world.


The 24. we had a West wind, & that with so strong a gale,
that wee were forced to set two men at helme, which pleased vs well.


The 25. of Iuly we had a storme that blew West and west
Northwest, so that we bare but two sailes, holding our course
Northeast and by East.


The first of August we were vnder 45. degrees with a North
west wind, holding our course Northeast and by East.


The second of August one of our men called 
Gerrit
Cornelison
 of 
Spijckenes
 died, being the first man that dy∣ed
in our voyage homeward.


The 4. of August we had a Northwest wind.


The 5. of August in the morning the winde came Southwest, and we
were vnder 47. degrees, holding our course Northeast and the North
Northeast, and wee gest that vvee vvere not farre from the channell,
those dayes aforesaid vve had so great colde in our shippes, as 

 if it had beene in the middle of winter: We could not be warme
with all the clothes wee had. The same day we saw Sargosse driue vpon
the water.


The 6. of August we had a West wind, in the
mor∣ning cast out our lead and found grounde at 80. fa∣dome, and about noone
we saw a shippe that bare the Princes flagge, yet durst not come neare
vs, although we made signes vnto him, and after noone wee saw the land of

Heissant,
 whereat we all reioyced.


The 7. of August in the morning we saw the land of

Fraunce,
 and held our course North northeast, and like∣wise vve
saw a small shippe, but spake not vvith it.


The 8. of August in the morning vve savv the Kiskas, and had a
South vvind and somevvhat West, holding our course East
Northeast.


The 9. of Augst
vve entered the heades, and past them vvith a Southvvest vvind, sayling
Northeast. Af∣ter noone we past by a man of vvarre being a

Hollander,
 that lay at anker, and hee hoysed anker to follow vs,
a∣bout euening vvee spake with him, but because of the wind wee coulde
hardly heare what hee sid, yet hee sailed on with vs.


The
10. of August the man of warre borded vs with his boat, and brought vs a
barrell of Beere, some bread, and Cheese, shewing vs what news he could
touching the state of 
Holland,
 and presently wee sawe the land
of 
Holland,
 & because it blew very stiffe & a great
storme, after noone wee ankered about 
Petten
 to stay for better
weather, and some new Pilots, & that was the first time we had cast
anker for the space of 5. monthes together, about euening it beganne to blow
so stiffe, that wee lost both an anker and a cable.


The 11. of August we had still a Southerly winde, & 

 therefore about noone the 
Mauritius
 set
saile, and wee thought likewise to saile, but our men were so weake
that we could not hoyse vp our anker, so that we were constrained to lie
still till men came out to helpe vs, a∣bout euening the winde came
Southwest, and with so great a storme, that we thought to haue run vpon
the strand, 

and were
forced to cut downe our maine maste.


The 12. and 
13.
 we had a hard South west wind, &
sometimes West, so that no Pilots came abord our ship, but the

13.
 day about euening it began to be faire wea∣ther.


The 14. of August about breake of day in the mor∣ning, there came
two boats with Pilots and men abord our ship, that were sent out by our
owners, & brought vs some fresh victuailes, which done they hoysed vp
our ankers, and about noone we sayled into the 
Tessel,
 and
ankered in the channell, where we had fresh victu∣ailes enough, for we were
all very weake.


This was a great noueltie to all the Marchantes and inhabitantes of

Hollande,
 for that wee went out from thence the second of April

1595.
 and returned home a∣gain vpon the 14. of August 
1597.

there you might haue bought of the Pepper, Nutmegs, Cloues, and Mace, which
vvee brought vvith vs. Our saylors vvere most part sicke, being but 80.
men in all, tvvo third partes of their company being dead, & lost by
diuers accidentes, and among those forescore such as vvere sicke, as
soone as they vvere on land and at their ease presently recoue∣red their
healthes.










The Copper money of Iaua.


 



diagram of the copper coin of Java




THis Copper money commeth also out of 
China,
 & is
almost as thicke, great and heauy, as a quarter of a Doller, and somevvhat
thicker, in the middle hauing a square hole, 2000. of them are vvorth a Riall
of 8. but of these there are not ouer many, the vse to hang them vpon
stringes, and pay them without telling, they stand not so narrowly vpon
the number, for if they want but 25. or 50. it is nothing.






The leaden money of Iaua.


 



diagram of the lead coin of Java




THis peece of money (being of bad Leade is very rough) hath in the
middle a foure square hole, they are hanged by two hundred vppon a string,
they are commonly 
10. 11.
 and 
12.
 thousand to a Riall of 8.
as there commeth great quantitie out of 
Chi∣na,
 where they are made,
and so as there is plentie or scarcitie they rise and fal.




FINIS.











