(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A05331)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 8928)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 262:12)
A translation of: Della descrittione dell'Africa.
Printer's name from STC.
"Iohn Leo his first booke of the description of Africa" (caption title) begins new pagination and register.
An imprint variant of STC 15481.5.
Reproduction of the original in the Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery.
Read pag. 58. of places vnde∣scribed by Iohn Leo.
Tull. Acad, quaest, lib.
The varietie of this emperours names read in a marginall note Pag. 12. of places vndescribed by Iohn Leo.
Or Xeriso, or Serifo.
Africa other∣wise called Li∣bya.
The greater part of Africa vnknowen in
When Africa was sailed round about.
And since also by the En∣glish, French, and Dutch.

Why
The situation and shape of Africa.
A comparison betweene Afri∣ca and Europe.
The causes why Africa is so slenderly inha∣bited.
Sandie seas in Africa.
The position of Africa, accor∣ding to the hea∣uens.
The boundes of Africa.
The mountaines of Africa.
Mount Atlas.
The prouin∣ces of
Extreme cold fountaines.
Mountaines called Os Picos
Lunae montes.
The lake of Zembre, which by some others is placed vnder the Equinocti∣all.
The riuers of Africa.
Nilus.
Niger.
These two ri∣uers of Senaga and Gambra are not certain∣ly known, whe∣ther they be maine riuers of themselues, or branches and mouthes of Ni∣ger.
The isle of Ele∣phants.
These two ri∣uers of Cuama and Magnice (according to Philippo Piga∣fetta) spring both out of the great lake and are not bran∣ches of one riuer.
The promonto∣ries or capes of Africa.
Cabo de buena esperanza.
Cabo
Cabo de los cor∣rientes.
The inhabi∣tants of Africa.
The diuersitie of religions in Africa.
The ancient di∣uision of Africa by Ptolemey; and a compari∣son of the anci∣ent with the moderne names.
Mauritania Tingitana, be∣ing all one with the kingdomes of Maroco and Fez.
Mauritania Caesariensis cal∣led at this pre∣sent Tremizen, and Aiger.
Numidia the ancient, contay∣ning Bugia, Constantina, Bona, Mezzab, &c.
Africa
Cyrene now called Mesrata.
Marmarica comprehended in the desert of Barcha.
Libya propria, called Sarra.
AEthiopia, now called Abassia.
This isle I take to be Babel∣mandel.
Suez called of olde Heroum ciuitas, and Hazion Geber.
Arsenale signi∣fieth a store∣house for mu∣nition, and for all necessaries to build, re∣paire, and fur∣nish a fleete.
Troglodytae were a people that liued in caues vnder the earth to auoide the extrem heat, being deriued
A great part of Barnagasso subdued by the Turke.
Dangala the head citie of Nubia.
Or AEthiopia the higher.
Commonly called in Latine writers, Presbi∣ter Iohannes, by the Moores A∣siclabassi, and by the Abas∣sins his owne subiects Ace∣gue, that is, Em∣perour, & Ne∣guz which im∣porteth a king, and Belul also, being all one with Encoe in the Chaldean toong, both which wordes signifie pretious or high.
Or Barnagasso
Most rich gold∣mines.
And by the late writers
Sinus Barba∣ricus, a mightie gulfe on the backeside of Africa, stret∣ching (as some will haue it) from 4. degrees of northerly to 17. of southerly latitude.
Of these Betene∣guz read Fran∣cis Aluarez cap. 42.
Or yardes: for Braccia sig∣nifieth both.
Or yardes: for Braccia sig∣nifieth both.
Of Melich read more at large in Fran∣cisco Aluarez cap. 37. and cap. 138.
Or
The Moores called Dobas.
Barnagaez.
Out of this lake also the riuer of Zeila runneth eastward into the Red sea.

All persons of the Abassin blood royall en∣closed within a mightie roundel of mountaines. Francis Alua∣rez cap. 57, 58, 59, 60, 61, &c.
The mountaine of death.
Of these Ama∣zones read more in the discourse of Monomotapa following.
This stile is ta∣ken out of a let∣ter written by Dauid the Em∣perour of AE∣thiopia 1524.
1526.
Philippo
The true cause of the increase of Nilus.
Oyle strayned out of an herbe.
Their manner of Iustice.
Their maner of swearing.
The ceremonies
Their musicall instruments.
The riuer of Quilimanci in nine degrees of northerly lati∣tude.
Adel the first generall part of Aian.
Or Arar.
Ptol. geog. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Adea, the se∣cond part of Aian.
The kingdome and citie of Magadazo.
Melinde the first part of Zanguebar.
Mombaza the second portion of Zanguebar.
Quiloathe third part of
Mozambique the fourth part of Zanguebar.
Or Moghin∣cats.
Angoscia.
Sofala the fift part of Zan∣guebar.
Some will haue Magnice and Cuama to be two branches of one mightie ri∣uer springing out of the great lake; which be∣ing so, they must quite separate Monomotapa from the same lake.
This place both in regard of the name and situation may seeme to haue been Agysimba mentioned by Ptolemey.
* Mine author here setteth downe too great a number.
G. B. B. Rel. vn. dell. Afr. Part. 1. lib. 2.
Os Picos fra∣gosos.
The kingdome of Matama.
Angola.
The siluer∣mines of Ca∣bambe.
Quizama.
Bahia das
The six prouin∣ces of Congo.
S. Saluador the chiefe citie of Congo.
The great
Crocodiles.
Water-horses.
The Zabra.
The elephant.
The isle and hauen of Lo∣anda.
Loango.
Anzichi.
Of this long pep∣per read Ramu∣sius, vol. 1. fol. 115. pag. 2.
The prouinces of Temian, Dauma, and
Grana Para∣disi.
The
Pliny calleth them

Sierra
A factorie of the Portugals.
The isle of ele∣phants.
A mightie ca∣taract or fall of Senaga.


The isle of Camaran.
Dalaqua.
Mua.

The isle, hauen, and citie of Suaquen.
Or vermillion.
Two townes of the Portugales in Socotora.
The two sisters.
Isles which are not inhabited.
Concerning the isles of Mōbaça, Quiloa, & Mo∣çambique read more at large in the discourse of Zanguebar be∣fore set downe, whereas
Plentie of Am∣bergrise.
The isles of Ascension.
Concerning this isle read more at large in the descrip∣tion of Congo.
Or perhaps Pouaçaon, which (as I con∣iecture) may be all one with Poblacion in Spanish, which signifieth a Co∣lonie or towne.
Seuentie Inge∣nios in San Tomé.
This towne was taken by sir Francis Drake 1585. and by sir
This isle with the principall towne and ca∣stles was sac∣ked by the Hol∣landers in
The Pike of Tenerif.
Madera in Spa∣nish signifieth wood or timber.
Puerto santo, the principall
The
Others diuide it from Asia by the red sea.
Non.

The
Aethiopia.
Habat.
Chauz.
Tremizen.
Iohn
Cairo.
About the yeere 1526.
Fortè Asia minor.
Genesis the 10. v. the 6. Mezraim is accounted the
Gen. 10. 7.
Guadalhabit.
Tremizen cal∣led by the an∣cient Cosmo∣graphers Cae∣saria or Mau∣ritania Caesari∣ensis.
Who were the founders of Maroco.
Aquel Amarig


Cairaoan.
Tunis.

The Moores of Granada.
A
Gehoar a slaue by condition, conquered all Barbarie, Nu∣midia, Egypt, and Syria.
Gehoar the first
Ten tribes of Arabians

1526.

Traffique to Tombuto.
Alger.
The Arabi∣ans called
The Arabians called
The people of Numidia.
Wooll growing vpon the Palme tree.

Where the Bar∣barie horses are bred.
Arabian poems and verses.
The Arabians offer themselues slaues to any that would re∣leeue their ex∣treme hunger.
The Arabians of Barca lay their sonnes to pawne vnto the Sicilians for corne.
The
Trenizen.
Maroco and
A booke writ∣ten by Iohn Leo concerning the Mahumetan religion.
The Africans vsed in times past none other kind of letters but the Roman letters.
Perhaps he meaneth the histories of Sa∣lust,
The Mahume∣tan Calisas caused all the bookes of the Persians to be burned.
The mountaines of Atlas excee∣ding cold.
Most woonder∣full and terrible snowes.
The extreme danger of snow which Iohn Leo himselfe escaped
Agadez.
A strange re∣medie vsed by the African merchants to quench their thirst.
A merchant constrained by extreme thirst, gaue ten thou∣sand duckats for a cup of water.
The fruit called Goron. Cocos.
The oliues of Africa.
Raine signify∣ing plentie or
The pesants and vnlearned peo∣ple of Africa cunning in Astrologie.
The yeere of the Arabians and Africans.
The yeere diui∣ded into two seasons onély, vpon the moun∣ain es of Atlas.
The increase of the riuers of Niger & Nilu.
The French disease.
When and by what meanes the French
Hernia or the disease called
Earth of
The Moores are a people of great fidelitie.
The author of this worke his Apologie for the former relation.
The fruit

Cauterizing.
Their manner of entertaining strangers at Tednest.
Tednest left desolate.

Teculeth de∣stroyed by the Portugals.
1514.
Hadecchis sac∣ked by the Portugals.
1513.
Teijeut de∣stroyed by the Portugals.
The curtesie of the citizens of Tesegdelt towards stran∣gers.

A pestiferous Mahumetan preacher.
A treatise written by
A punishment of murther.

Dates which will last but one yeere.
Great store of whales.
A whales rib of incredible greatnes.
Amber.
Store of sugar.
Cordouan lea∣ther of Ma∣roco.
Good sale for cloth.
Gartguessem surprised by the Portugals.
Store of sugar and of woad.
Mines of siluer.
The
Sidi signifi∣eth a Saint in the Arabian toong.
The first foun∣der of Maroco.
Maroco in times past con∣tained aboue 100000. fami∣lies.
Mansor the king of Ma∣roco.
Obscurum.
Great store of bookes in olde time to be sold in Maroco.
The miserable death of Abra∣ham king of Maroco and of
Three golden sphears.
A great college.
Excellent spot∣ted marble.
This king called Mansor was he vnto whom Rasis that fa∣mous
The huge do∣minions of king Mansor.
The Christians happie
Ibnu Abdul.
Abdul Malich.
Ariuer run∣ning vnder the ground to Maroco.
The desolation of Agmet.
Iohn Leo stu∣dent at Fez.
The
Iohn Leo con∣strained to play the iudge.
Or Elmaheli.


Free entertain∣ment for mer∣chants.
The occasion of the prince of Azafilin his death.
The prince of Azafi slaine, as he was hearing of a Mahume∣tan sermon.

Iohn Leo ten yeeres old at the winning of
The citie of Tit tributarie vnto the King of Portugall.
Elmedina left desolate
Corne preserued 100. yeers.
Or
Azamur woon by the Portu∣gals.
The fruit called by the Italians Frutto Afri∣cano.
Great plentic of fish.
Iohn Leo sent ambassadour from the King of Fez vnto Maroco.
By what means the townes of Elmadin and
Grapes of mar∣uellous bignes. White honey.
The vncle of
The excellent wit & toward∣linesse of Iohn Leo at 16. yeers of age.
A most stately and rich pre∣sent.
Read of this Abraham be∣fore in the de∣scription of the citie of Maroco.
Ilbernus.
A notable and effectuall pra∣ctise to wring more money out of the
Or
* Ilbernus.
These people liue like the Tartars.
Or Salt-peter.
Habat.
Chauz or Cheuz.
A dangerous seducer.
The horrible desolation of Temesne.
English traf∣fique.
Anfa destroied by the Portu∣gals.
Iron-mines.
Why king Mansor built the towne of Rebat vpon the seashore.
Where king Mansor was buried.
Iron-mines.
Lyons, and leopards.
Or Sidi.
Or
English traf∣fique.
Sela woon by a captaine of Castilia, and recouered forthwith by the king of Fez.
A merchant of Genoa.
The occasion of the bloody wars mooued by Sahid.
The citie of Fez besieged for se∣uen yeeres to∣gether.
This number (as I take it) should rather be 819.
Most cruell and
The Portugals attempting to build a forte within the mouth of the riuer Subu, de∣feated of their purpose, and slaine.
A lamentable slaughter.
Iohn Leo his
Fierce lions.
Mecnase redu∣ced vnder
Idris the first founder of Fe
Idris his
1526.
The number and
The principall temple of Fez
The reuenues of the great temple, and how they are bestowed.
The
Iohn Leo in his youth a notarie of an hospitall for two yeeres together.
Like vnto our horse-mils.
The porters of Fez.

The gouernour of the shambles in Fez.
In the Italian copie they are called Baiochi.
Or
A
Iohn Leo was at Tauris in Persia.
The punish∣ment of male∣factors in Fez.
Or Baiochi.
Or
A kinde of
The marriage of widowes.
The circumci∣sion of their children.

Their funerals.
Rewards for poets in Fez.
Three sorts of diuiners in Fez.
An Arabian grammar writ∣ten by Iohn Leo.
Diuination and soothsaying forbidden by the lawe of
Diuers Mahu∣metan sects.

72. principall sectes in the religion of Mahumet.
A booke writ∣ten by Iohn
The habitation of lepers in Fez and their go∣uernour.
Or Aburi∣nan.
The founder of new Fez.
Orturbant.
Engins for the conueiance of water.
The manner of choosing officers in the court of Fez.
The king of Fez his guard.
How the king of Fez rideth on progresse.
Or kines folkes.
The king of Fez his
A
Hunting of lions vsed by the king of Fez.
Tame
Tame lions.
A pleasant dis∣course how king Mansor was entertained by a fisher.
Read Osorius lib. 2. de rebus gestis Eman.
The
An attempt and defeate of the Portugals.
1562.
The taking of Arzilla by the English.
Arzilla taken by the Portu∣gals.
Habdulac the last king of the Marin family.
Read Osorius lib. 5. de rebus gestis Eman.
Iohn Leo serued the king of Fez in his wars a∣gainst Arzilla.
Or Boetica.
Casar Ezzaghir taken by the king of Portu∣gall.
The entrance of the Moores into Granada.
Or çeuta.
The streits of Gibraltar from Septa but 12. miles broad.
Septa taken by the Portugals.
Abu Sahid king of Fez and his sixe sonnes slaine all in one night.
Threescore thousand Moores slaine.
Here seemeth to be an error in the originall.
Zibibbo.
A caue or hole that perpetually casteth vp fire.
Wine that will last fifteene yeeres.

Chasasa taken by the Spani∣ards.
Yron-mines.
Or Tremisen.
The great cur∣tesie of Mahu∣met toward strangers.
1526.
Iron-mines.
Lions, leopards, and apes.
A woonderful bridge.
Porcellan.
The beast called Dabah.

Or Tremizen.
Or Oran.
Or Mersal∣cabir.

1526
Great store of ostriches.
A ship of great
The king of Telensin taken prisoner and beheaded.
Or Turbant.
A passage from Europe to Ac∣thiopia through the kingdome of Tremizen.
Mines of
A
Oran taken by the Spaniards.
Mersalcabir surprised by the Spaniards.
Perhaps
Alger become tributarie to the king of Spaine.
A voyage per∣formed by Iohn
The citie of Bu∣gia taken by Pedro de Na∣uarra.
The hard suc∣cesse of the king of Tunis his three sonnes.
Hot baths.
A fond and senseles
S. Augustine in times past bi∣shop of Hippo.
Great store of corall.
The fish called
1526
The building of Cairaoan.
Tunis subiect vnto Abdul∣Mumen and other kings of Maroco.
Or perhaps Andaluzia.
A strange kind of spinning.
Doble.
Sugar-Canes.
El Mahdia.
The isle of Si∣cilie subdued by the gouernour
The fruit called Habhaziz.
A riuer
The lake of lepers.
The armie of don Ferdinando defeated.
Gerbi made tributarie vnto Charles the fift by meanes of a knight of the Rhodes.
Plentie of dates.

Tripolis sur∣prized by Pedro de Nauarra.
Iron-mines.
Most
The Arabians of Barca most cruell and bloo∣die theeues.
Error.
The beast cal∣led
The port of Gart
Copper-mines.
The strange propertie of the palme or date∣tree.
Indico.
The flesh of the Ostrich.
Infinit num∣bers of Scorpi∣ons.
Mines of lead and antimonie.
An iron-mine.
Deadly scor∣pions.
Great store of Manna.

A whole caro∣uan conducted by a blinde guide who lead them by sent onely; as at
The Negros subiect vnto Ioseph king of Maroco.
Abuacre Iz∣chia.
This round and white pulse is called Maiz in the west Indies.
The naturall commodities of Ghinea.
The Prince of Ghinea kept prisoner by Izchia.
The prince of M
Tombuto was conquered by the king of Maroco 1589. from whenc
The king of Tombuto his daughters mar∣ried vnto two rich merchants.
1526.
Great scarcitie of salt in Tom∣buto, which commoditie might be sup∣plied by our English mer∣chants to their vnspeakable gaine.
Reuerence vsed before the king of Tombuto.
Poysoned ar∣rowes.
Shels vsed for coine like as in the kingdome of Congo.
Rich sale for cloth.
Their maner of sowing
The
Zingani.
Agadez tribu∣tarie to the king of Tombuto.
The kings of Zegzeg, of Ca∣sena, and of Cano subdued by Izchia the king of Tom∣buto.
Izchia.
Izchia.
The king of Zanfara slaine by Izchia, and the people made tributarie.
Gold.
Izchia.
The desert of Seu.
Fifteene or twentie
A Negro-slaue who hauing slaine his Lord grew to great might and au∣thoritie.
The riuer of Nilus not nae∣uigable be∣tweene Nubia and Egypt.
The rich com∣modities of Nubia.
Most strong poyson.
Zingani.
Prete
Bugiha.

Gen. 10. 6.
Mesraim is recorded to be the brother of Chus, and the sonne of Cham. Chibith.
The towne of Pharao.
The
Extreme pe∣stilence.
The French maladie most rife in Egypt.
The increase of Nilus.
Ancient traf∣fique of the
Alexandria surprised and sacked by the king of Cyprus.
The water of Nilus brought by a sluce into Alexandria.
Certaine Chri∣stians called Iacobites.
Iohn Leo was at Rasid the same time
The fruits cal∣led Mose.
Sugar.
Great abun∣dance of Sugar.
1526.
Delicate drinks made of all kind of fruits.

A stately
These asses are somewhat like to Banks his curtall, that plaid his prizes all England ouer.
Soothsaying birds.
Saint
The place where balme groweth.
The manner of measuring the increase of Nilus.
This piller is called by Plinie Niloscopium.
The attire of the women of Cairo.
The libertie of the women of Cairo.
Birds hatched after a strange manner in Egypt.
The reward of new and inge∣nious deuises.
Fower seuer all sects of the Ma∣humetan reli∣gion permitted in the citie of Cairo.
An horrible kind of execu∣tion.
The nauel be∣ing cut is pre∣sent death.
Women
Iohn Leo was thrise in Egypt
The
The originall of the Mama∣luks.
There is such an officer in the court of Eng∣land called, The Maister of the Reuells.
The
Egyptian
Store of the graine called Sesama.
Most excellent hempe.
Crocodiles.
The place where Ioseph was buried.
It is otherwise read in the x. chap. of Genesis, verse 6.
Dubium.
Emralds.
Antonio Gal∣uano maketh large mention of this citie.
The hauen of Chossir.
Suachen.
Bugiha are those which in
The great trauels of Iohn Leo.
Or
Or Muluia.
A riuer of hot and salt water.
Or Guart∣guessen
Sundry opini∣ons concerning
The manner of taking elephants in
Here is a word wanting in the originall.
In all parts of the world which the author at that
The African
Three kinds of camels.
Camels of a woonderfull swiftnes, other∣wise called Dromedaries.
The camels great abstinence from drinke.
How the Ca∣mels of
Morses fedde with camels milke.
Targets made of a skin.
The manner of gathering ciuet.
Amber.
A medicine for the leprosie.
The craft of the Crocodile in ta∣king both men and beasts.
Little birds fly∣ing into the cro∣codiles mouth to picke wormes from betweene their teeth.
The manner of taking the cro∣codile.
How the came∣lion killeth the serpent.
A strange nar∣ration.
A strange
Or fathomes.
That is, in Barbarie, Nu∣midia, Libya, the lande of Negros, and Egypt.
Of this moun∣taine read in the discourse be∣fore the be∣ginning of Leo.

The kings armes.
A
A recrely
Described by Leo in his fifth booke vnder the name of Lha∣rais.
Or Miramo∣nin.
The maner how the Xeriffos aspired to the kingdomes of Maroco, Sus, and Fez.
Or the king∣domes of Maro∣co, and Fez.
Or Abnet.
Or Azaphi.
Artillerie cast by French Re∣negados.
Caruuen the principall Mahumetan temple in Fez, being a mile and an
These are a mi∣litarie order, like vnto them which hold land
Mine author heere much mistaketh the matter.
Or Emina.
Or Haly.
G. B. B. Rel. vn. part. 1. lib. 2. dell' Asia.
With this frier Ascelline was sent Iohannes de Plano Car∣pini, whose voiage is put downe in the first volume of the
Or Olouchali.
Or Coptitae.
As the church in all the hither parts of Europe hath beene cal∣led the western, and that of Greece and A∣sia, the
Whātsoeuer Dresserus think eth; yet diuers other authors of good note do hold the domi∣nions of Prete Ianni to be no∣thing so large.
These Mores are called Do∣bas.
Acts of the Apost. cap. 8. verse 26.
Matthew the first ambassa∣dor sent from Aethiopia to Portugall.
This ambas∣sage was at the first vnderta∣ken by Odoardo Galuano: who dying at the isle of
Zagazabo the second ambas∣sador sent from AEthiopia to Portugall.
Whereas the Iewes circum∣cised the males
Yet in the time of Pope Paule the 4. were sent cer∣taine priests with a new created Patri∣arke, and two
The Emperour of Ethiopia wil by no meanes admit the su∣premacie and religion of the Romish church.
Adamas a new Emperour of Ethiopia.
Fartac a coun∣trey of Arabia Felix; the king whereof subdu∣ed the isle of Zocotera, 1482.
So are the in∣habitants of Congo called.
So called by Osorius lib. 3. de Reb. Gest. Eman. But by Phil. Pigafetta. lib. 2. Cap. 2. Mani-Pango.
Osorius de Reb. Gest. Eman. lib. 3.
* Called by Philippo Pi∣gafetto
Concerning these Giacchi, otherwise cal∣led Agag, read the discourse of Mohenemugi before the be∣ginning of Iohn Leo.
Not Maza∣gan vpon the coast of Bar∣barie.