New-England. Or A briefe enarration of the ayre, earth, water, fish and fowles of that country With a description of the natures, orders, habits, and religion of the natiues; in Latine and English verse.
Morrell, William, fl. 1625.
Approx. 46 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 17 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2004-03 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A07792




STC 18169



ESTC S110054





99845672




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
New-England. Or A briefe enarration of the ayre, earth, water, fish and fowles of that country With a description of the natures, orders, habits, and religion of the natiues; in Latine and English verse.
Morrell, William, fl. 1625.
[6], 24, [2] p.   


London :


Imprinted by I. D[awson],


1625.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
New England --  Description and travel --  Poetry --  Early works to 1800.
2003-04
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2003-05
Aptara
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2004-01
Judith Siefring
Sampled and proofread
2004-01
Judith Siefring
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2004-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18169


99845672


10588














New-England.

OR

A BRIEFE
ENARRATION
OF THE AYRE,
Earth, Water, Fish and
Fowles of that Country. WITH
A DESCRIPTION
of the Natures, Orders, Habits,
and Religion of the 
Natiues;
IN

Latine and English Verse.


Sat brevè, si sat benè.


LONDON,

Imprinted by 
I. D.

1625.










TO
THE RIGHT
HONOVRABLE
THE LORDS, AND THE
Right Worshipfull Knights and
Gentlemen; Adventurers for
NEVV-ENGLAND.


W
Hat your favourable im∣ployments
haue taught
me to obserue, I presume
here briefly to relate I
hope it will be accepta∣ble,
because innocent,
though nothing excel∣lent.

Vera, non mira cam,
 assured that with your
more acurate judgements. 
Plus valebit vera oratio
quam carminis candida & maxime compta in singulos pe∣des
commensuratio.
 Censure at the least would be
my best sentence, if I should answer such ser∣vice
with a 
NIHIL DICIT.
 VVhen in
contempt of Envy, I may present your Coun∣cell


with an 
OMNE BENE,
 at least, 
Certâ
spe boni,
 if the three noble Mistresses of Monar∣chies,

Pietas, Pecunia,
 and 
Potentia,
 royally vn∣dertake
and resolutely continue constant fa∣vourers
to their well ordered and sweetly s
i∣tuated

Colonies.
 Without these, at least the two
latter (I suppose vnder favour) the 
Spanyard
 and

Hollander
 had 
d Graecas callendas
 raysed to such
sweet tones their westerne and easterne flou∣rishing
Plantations. But 
illorum postpono mea ser
a
ludo.
 The keys of Kingdomes, judicious States∣men
are best able to open and explicate these
closets and secrets of state. I may admire, but
scarce without offence obserue such princely
attempts and royall secrets. Yet giue me leaue
to you worthy favourers of 
Colonies,
 as in armes
and architecture to be your remembrancer,
first to accompt, and then to accomplish: so
power and abilitie shall crowne your procee∣dings
with happie perfections. Beyond these
I presume nothing, onely wishing every per∣son
in his severall sphere such happie motion
as may crowne him with immortall perfec∣tion.


Your Honors and Worships servant, late Preacher with the
Right Wor: Cap: 
Rob: Gorge
 late Governour of 
New-England.
WILLIAM MORRELL.








VNDERSTANDING READER;


VVHen my melancholly leasures first conceived these
rude heroiks, my consciou
 
Muse
 censured them 

tender-sighted to be admitted the common lig

Induced by some ki
de friends, who are truely stu∣dious
of the publiqu
 good, I was vnwilli
gly willing to adve
ure
them the publique censure, desirous, I ingeniously confesse: (and so I
professe my selfe ever) in my best endevours, to further such royall
and religious imployments: if my po
re iudgement can ass
redly ob∣serue
p
tie to be one prime end of plantation, and the vnder-taking
probable to prosper. If (Gentle 
Reader
) these lyne
 please the
,
pervse and vse vs gently: if not, 
Parce vati.
 You know that 
Ex
quó-libet ligno non fit M
curius.
 Besides, error in Poefi
 is
lesse blemish than in Historie, Experienc
 cannot 
 ignorant,
much lesse innocent, hav
 gsee
e and suffered. I should delude o∣thers

vanâ spe,
 or 
fal
o gaudio.
 What can be expected from false
Relations, but vnhappie proceedings, to the best intended, and most
hopefull Colonies. So that want of provisions, and right informati∣on,
begets in the distract
 planter n
thing but mutinies, fearefull
execrations, and sometimes miserable interitures. But of all such
perchance hereafter. These were at this time beyond my intent. I
onely non and ever desire that my 
est incense may for ever waite vp∣on
all truely zealous and religious planters and adventurers, who
seri
sly endevour the dilat
ug of Christs kingdo
, in the propaga∣ting
of the Go
pell, and so advise
ly vndertake so weightie and so
worthie a Worke, as that they and theirs may paralell these wor∣thies
of the world in all externall, internall, and eternall abundances.
Farewell with this 
 
Mem
 

without an equiv
lent abilitie, produce nothing but losse, 
,
oppro
ries, and imperfectio
s.


Thine if thy owne,

W. M.








¶Lectori.


Candide si placidum dederis Philomuse Camoenae


Intuitum: trifti dulce levamen erit.


Optima mellifluis modulari carmina nervis


Illud Apollineis cantibus euge melos.


Mellea coeleste est effundere carmina munus,


Frustrà de sicco pumice quaeris aquam,


Dicito musa probè, brevitèr, simul, ordine, perge:


Gloria summa 
ibi dicere vera: Vale.


Gul: M.

Perlege: pars vltima, prima.












¶NOVA ANGLIA.


HActenùs ignotam populis ego carmine primus,


Te Nova, de veteri cui contigit Anglia nomen,


Aggredior trepidus pingui celebrare Minervâ,


Fer mihi numen opem, cupienti singula plectro


Pandere veridico, quae nuper vidimus ipsi:


Vt brevitèr vere{que}, sonent modulamina nostra,


Temperiem coeli, vim terrae, munera ponti,


Et varios gentis mores, velamina, cultus.


Anglia faelici meritò Nova nomine gaudens,


Saevos nativi mores pertaesa Coloni,


Indigni penitùs populi tellure feraci,


Maesta superfusis attollit fletibus ora,


Antiquos precibus flectens ardentibu
 Angl
s,


Numinis aeterni faelicem lumine gentem


Efficere: aeternis quae nunc peritura tenebris.


Gratum opus hoc Indis, dignum{que} pijs oput Anglis,


Angelicae quibus est naturae nomen in vmbra:


Caelica vt extremis dispergant semina terris.


Est locus occiduo procul hinc spatiosus in orbe,


Plurima regna tenens, populis{que} incognitus ipsis:


Faelix frugiferis sulcis, simul aequore faelix:


Praedis perdives varijs, & flumine lives,


Axe satis calidus, rigido{que} a frigore tutus.


Proximus aethereo socius volitabilis igni


Aer, natali saliens levitate; calore


Temperie{que} satis faelicibus, humidus ante


Omnia principia, innatâ virtute coactus


Sistere diffi
ilè in propri
 regione, volenti


Alterius motu penetrans loca, inania complens


Vi tenuj: foeae regio quae proximae terrae


Solis ab igne, poli motu, terrae{que} vaporum,


Vnde{que} attractu calet hinc, hinc humida restat,


Hinc fit temperies: fit & hâc Nova terra beata:


Est aliquandò tamèn rapidis subiecta procellis,


Quae sceleri subito{que} solum{que} salum{que} minantur,


Flamine corripere, & terras diffundere caelis:


Mox tamèn Aeolio compressis carcere ventis


Omnia continuò remanent sub sidere tuta.


Indè suis vicibus luctantes murmure venti


Qua data porta ruunt, quatientes turbine terras.


Magna pare
s tellus, reram communis a
umna,


Frigida sicca gravis subsidens vallibus imis,


Montibus extendens nemerosa cacumina celsis


Longiùs intuitu nautis pergrata: feraci


Irriguo{que} solo l
tanti messibus aequis


Optima frugiferis mandantes semina suleis.


Agricolis quam terra ferax, quae grata ministrat


Assiduis alimenta viris: nullo{que} serenti


Dulcia d
t variae naturae mora nuces{que}


Dissimi
les, placidas tumidas{que} in vitibus vuas


Innumeris, mixtas redolentes floribus herbas


Multigenis, morbo loesos medicare potentes


Artus, radices similis virtutis amaenas.


Dimine gramineo nux subterranea suavis


Serpit humi, tenui
 flavo sub cortice, pingui


Et placido nucleo nivei candoris ab intra,


Melliflua parcos hilarans dulcedine g
ustus,


Donec in aestivum Phoebus conscenderit axem.


His nupeis lautè versutus vescitur Indus:


His exempta fames segnis nostratibus omnis


Dulcibus his vires revocantur victibus almae.


Arboribus dives vernantibus, est quo{que} tellus


Cedris, & fagis, Iuglandibus & Iovis altâ


Arbore, fraxineâ, gummosis pinibus, alnis,


Iuniperis, multis{que} alijs tum gramine & herbis,


Pascua quae prebent animalibus, vndè fugaces


Pinguescunt cervi, vulpes vrsi{que} lupi{que}


Linces, & fibri, musci, lutra{que} politae


Pellibus eximij pretij, volucres{que} saporis


Perplacidi variae, pelli{que} grues{que} palumbes,


Megulus & Phasianus, anas, cignus Iovis ales,


Penelopes{que}, columbae, perdix, accipitres{que},


Et capitolij aves variae tum carne saporâ,


Tum pennis placidè decorantibu
 arte canautas:


Equibus ornatu capitis, fit plumula digna


Vertice sublimi, quibus ad renovanda levanda,


Languida perplacidum completur membra cubile.


Intima frugiferae vix cognita viscera terrae


Praetereo: artifices gremium serutentur opimum.


Dulce solum caelum{que} vides en terra serenis,


Perspicuis, placidis, levibus, liquidis{que} beata


Fontibus, & fluvijs facili quaerentibus Eurum▪


Motu, praecipiti cursu post flumina nimbos▪


In mare decurrunt stagnis{que} paludibus Indis,


Aucupio placidis benè, piscatu{que} colonis.


Grata solum, caelum{que} viris alimonia praebent.


Devia quam dives regio haec? benedicta sereno


Aere, faecundis glebis, faelicibus vndis.


Prospera tranquillus contingit littora portus


Altus, apertus, vbi valeant se condere naves▪


I
vitis. ventis, securae, rupe & arenâ▪


Aequora multiplices proebent tranquilla marina


Temporibus solitis praedas utentibus hamis:


Ha
ices, fagros, scombros cancros{que} locustas,


Ostrea curvatis conchis, conchas{que} trigones


Cete eti
 rhombos, sargos, cum squatina asellos.


His n
ves vastas o
erat piscator honestus:


His mercator opes cumulat venerabilis almas,


His pius ampla satis faciat sibi lucra colonus:


Deni{que} divitibus quibus intima cura suorum


Divitie & pietas, licet hisce beare colonos.


Digna viris patria endignis, vbi maenia digna.


Principibus claris facilè est fabricare columnis


Exce
s, cheu nunc tota cupidinis antrum.


Sunt etenim populi minimi sermonis, & oris


, risus{que} parùm savi{que} saperbi,


Constricto nodis hirsuto crine sinistro,


Imparibus formis tondentes ordine villos,


Mollia magnanimae peragentes otia gentes,


Arte sagittiferâ pollentes, cursibus, armis


Astutae, recto, robusto corpore & alto,


Pellibus indu
tae cervinis, frigora contra


Aspera, cum placeant conversis flamina pelles


Obvia ut impellant, c
lefacto pelle lacerto


Dextro, quo facilis sit flexile sumere 
ornu,


Omnia ut extinguant subitò in surgentia, & ipsos


Salvos desendant, inducto tergore corpus


Villoso, levitèr miris se singula formis


Texta ligant, molles cingunt genitalia pelles,


Grande femur caligae cervinae cura{que} longa


Exornant, plantas conservat calceus aptus,


Hos taemen exutos curant aliundè reversi


Depositos{que} suosealamos, arcu
{que} sonantes,


Fessa{que} constrato sua stramine membra soluti


Tectis instar harae, dextrè loca verna petentes,


Adveniente hiemis g
aciali tempore saev
,


In{que} suam patriam redeuntes sole benign


Calfaciente leves artus fervore, revisa


Vt pereant inimica, solo{que} nocentia, frugem


Det{que} solum solitam, rutilis dant ignibus arva.


Horum non
ulli regali nomine gaudent,


Et consorte tori prognatâ sanguine tali,


Regibus undè pari fuerit virtute propago,


Rectores faciens regali prole parentes:


Inferiore sibi capientes stirpe maritas,


Progeniem timidam credunt, cordis{que} socordis


Nec solij, sceptrive sui fore posse capacem.


Rex tenet imperium, p
nas & pramia cunctis


Constituit, dat iura; senes, viduas{que} pupillos


Et miseros curat, peregrinos molitèr omnes


Excipit hospitio semper, tamen indè (tributi


N
mine) primitias rerum partem{que} priorem,


Ven
tu captae praedae capit, at{que} requirit.


Cingitur obsequio regis plebs omnis, & ultrò


Arma capit, forti{que} facit sua pralia dextrâ


Pallida lethiferis, faciens praecordia telis


Hostium, & expugnans sceleratis fata sagittis.


Insupèr 
rnavit quorum Bellona cor
llâ


Tempera, praesidio, vitâ, virtute virili,


Regibus incedunt comites tutamine certo.


His reges capiunt consultis cautiùs arma;


C
utiùs exactis faciunt his fadera bellis:


Eloquijs horum concedere regibus omnis


Subsidium, quodcun{que} valet, plebs alma movetur,


Mundi acie tantùm semel vndè profecta reversâ.


Nec priùs excerce
 crudelia paruulus arma,


Qu
 patiens armorum vt sit sibi pectus, amaram


Herbis compositam 
eramaris sorbiat vndam,


Vs{que} in sanguineum vertatur lympha colorem,


Vndi{que} sanguinea ex vomitu rebibenda tenellis.


Vs{que} va
ent m
ribus: sic fit natura parata


Omnia dura pati: puer haec cui potio grata▪


ctore fit valido cuncta expugnare pericl
.


Magnanimis medici comites virtute periti


Artibus 
mpericis, diro contamine, tactu,


Fi
tu, sudore, & percusso pectore palmis


Duritèr expassis proprio, pallentia eorum


Corpora resti
unt facili medicamine sana:


Vu
ner
 sanandi si nulla potentia verbis,


Artibus out herbis, confestim spiritus illi
,


Impius humanâ specie respondet iniquis


Reddidit iratus Deus artus morte solutos


Moribus: undè dolor nullis medicabilis herbis.


Deni{que} sunt populi fungentes munere iusso,


Instar servorum, quacun{que} subire parati


Ardua, consilijs subiecti, foemina, fumus,


Indicus ad certos inhibetur, & omnibus annos.


Poste
 liberior concessa potentia cunctis,


Connubio multas sibi coniunxisse maritas:


Ditior est plures nuptas qui duxerit omnis,


Viribus, & natis: nati quia summa parentum


Gaudia, descessus quorum (nam mortis hiatu


Compressos lachrimis decorant) longo{que} gravi{que}


Commemorant luctu, tumulis{que} cadivera mandant.


A genibus subrecta cavis pallentia cuncta;


 opibus tumulis, Titanis ad ortus,


Attollunt facies, ad quem post tempora longa


Venturos credunt omnes, vbi praemia digna


Imposita accipient, fuerint{que} salutis ad hortos


Elysios vecti, miranda{que} gaudia, summis


Exornata bonis: haec spes post funera gentis.


Est alia vtilitas, multis vxoribus arva,


Valdè onerata tenent Cerea
ibus, omnis eorum


Nocte die{que} cib
 gaudet quasi natus vt omnes


Illicò consumat fruges, su
 grana{que} (Marte


Aripiente man
 penetrantia tela) minutis,


Abdita speluncis tutis, & ab hostibus, hoste


Decedente suo subitò repetenda reponit.


Artibus Hybernus pr
duxit temporis olim.


Multum Marte, levis, virsutus, durus, inermis,


Difficilè edomitus done
 secreta latebant


Iudicia, at{que} doli taciti: fit & arte supers
s.


Saepiùs hac Indus, victoris victor & ingens,


Faemina praetereà vultu plerum{que} ven
sto,


Multos irridens risus, linguam{que} loquacem;


Iudicio{que} gravi, genio placido{que} virili


Pectore, perrecta corpus per & omne statur


Nervis conexâ validis, manibus{que} tenellis,


Pollice pergracili, digitis faelicitèr altis.


Inclita diversis faciendo est gramine corbes


Contextos formis, vario{que} colore tapetum.


Stramine compositum tenui, miris{que} figuris.


His decor eximius color est contrarius albo:


Ortibus vndè suis per totum candidus artus


Et piceo facies est 
bfucata colore.


Consuetudo tamen populis his faemina vt omnis,


Omnia perficiat duri mandata laboris:


Arva fodit manibus, committit semina terris,


Vt{que} seges crescit levibus fulcitur ab illa,


Continuò terris, segitem sarrit{que} resarit,


Tergore portat onus, victum{que} labore paratum,


Et brevitèr peragit mulier conamine prompto,


Omnia ad humanam spectantia munera vitam.


Hinc Anglos Indi stolidos dixere maritos,


Cum videant operis ferventes omnibus illos,


Attamèn uxores omnem deducere vitam


Molli, vel nullo fungendi munere dextrâ.


Quamlibet ob noxam manet altâ mente reposta


Invidia & dirum gelido sub pectore vulnus.


Vndè fugit sceleri pede fortia fortis in arma


Hostis, & indè sui laetans fit sponsa cubilis.


Praeda satis faelix; hinc victa iniuria mentis,


Deni{que} cuiusdam cultores numinis omnes


Sunt, cui primitias reddunt, quoties{que} necesse▪


Fortia discruciat miserabile pectora, luctu


Acri{que} horrendis clamoribus aethera complent.


Omnia principio fecisse agnoscitur illis,


Vnum principium, primos crevisse parentes,


Vnum terrarum dominum, consorte; duobus


His mortale genus divam sumpsisse figuram:


Quorum progenies illi, quo{que} stirpe racemi.


Insupèr hunc dominum dominis posuisse creatis,


Optima iustitiae sacrae praecepta docenda,


Sacro perpetuis aetatibus omnia iussu.


Hactenùs est omnis longaevae litera genti


Vix audita, viris penitus{que} incognita cunctis.


Fas, non quid fasti: falsum non, faedera curant:


Lumine naturae summi sunt iuris amantes


Promissi{que} dati; tanti sunt faedera genti.


Nulla fides populis tamèn est capiente sagittas▪


Marte feras, fueris 
isi saevis fortior armis.


Litera cuncta licet latet hos, modulamina quaedam


Fistulae disparibus cala
s facit, est & agrestis


Musica vocis ijs, minimè iucundi, sonoris


Obtusis{que} sonis ob
ectans pectora, sensus,


At{que} suas aures, artis sublimis inanes.


Omnes, praesertim multos provectus in annos,


Indus, quid coeli, cursus, quid sidera, vires


Sunt, benè concipiunt animis, coelum{que} futurum:


Quâ mihi notitiâ latet, aut quo numine certo.


Festa tamen gens nulla nisi Cerealia servat:


Genti nulla dies sancto discrimine nota:


Annus & ignotus, notus tamen est bene mensis,


Nam sua lunari distinguunt tempora motu,


Non quot Phoebus habet cursus, sed quot sua coniux


Expletos vicibus convertat Cinthia cursus:


Noctibus enumerant sua tempora, nulla diebus,


Mos{que} dijs Indis est inservire duobus,


Quorum mollis, amans, bona dans, inimica repellens.


Vnus, amore bonum venerantur: at invidus alter


Dires effundens cum turbine, fulgura, nimbos,


Afficiens{que} malis varijs, morbis{que} nefandis,


Et violentis: hunc gelidà formidine adorant.


Naturae gens luce suae sublimia tentat,


Agnoscens praecepta dei pia singula summi,


Excepto de ducendis vxoribus vno,


Affectis etenim morbis vxoribus 
llis,


Vel gravidis, alijs opus est vxoribus illis.


Heù quam dissimilis naturae, gratia vera,


Humina & ratio. Sublimia gratia vitae


Aspicit aeternae fidei bonitate potita:


Enervata suis ratio at virtutibus aequis.


Illi nulla manet verae scintilla salutis,


Talia quis fando lachrimas non fundit amaras,


Divinae lucis, virtutis vis{que} capacem


Gentem▪ coelestis, verae pietatis inanem.


Flebilis ardentes mitti Phlegetontis in undas.


Aspicis effigiem terrae, levis aetheris, vndae:


Aspicis antiquae mores, v
lamina, gentis:


Aspicis optatos, hilarantia littora, portus:


Aspicis his modicum faelicitèr (Ente faventi


Caelesti caeptis) laetantia singula votum.


Si mea Barbaricae prosint conamina genti:


Si valet Angli
nis inco
pta placere poesis:


Et sibi perfaciles hac reddere gente potentes,


Assiduos{que} pios sibi persuadere Colonos:


Si doceat primi vitam victum{que} parentis


Angli si fuerint Indis exempla beatè


Vivendi, capiant quibus ardua limina coeli:


Omnia succedunt votis: modulamina spero


Haec mea sublimis fuerint praesagia regni.










New-England
 so nam'd by your Princely 
Grace,


Dread Soveraigne,
 now, most humbly sues to see


Your 
Royall Highnes
 in your 
Regall
 place,


Wishing 
your Grace
 all peace, blisse, soveraignty,


Trusting 
your Goodnesse
 will her state and fame


Support, w
ch
 
goodnesse
 once vouchsaf'd her
name.








If thou 
Apollo
 holdst thy Scepter 
orth,


To these 
 numbers that's thy 
Royall
 worth.


Vaine is all search in these to search that vaine,


Whose stately style is great 
Apolloes
 straine.


Minerva
 ne're distil'd into my 
Muse


He
 sacred droppes, my pume
se wants all iuce.


My 
Muse
 is plaine con cise her fam's to tell


In truth, and method. Loue, or leaue: Farewell.










NEVV-ENGLNAD.


F'Eare not poore Muse, 'cause first to sing her fame,


That's yet scarce known, vnlesse by Map or name;


A Grand-childe to earths Paradize is borne,


Well lim'd, well nerv'd, 
aire, rich, sweete, yet forlorne.


Thou blest director so direct my V
rse,


That it may winne her people, friends commerce;


Whils
 her sweet ayre, rich soile, blest Seas, my penne


Shall blaze, and tell the natures of her men.


New-England,
 happie in her new true stile,


Wearie of her cause she's to sad exile


Expos'd by her's vnworthy of her Land,


Intreates with teare
 
Great Brittaine
 to command


Her Empire, and to make her know the time,


Whose act and knowledge onely makes divine.


A Royall worke well worthy 
Englands
 King,


These Natiues to true truth and grace to bring.


A Noble worke for all these Noble Peares


Which guide this State in their superiour spheres.


You holy 
Aarons
 let your Sensors nere


Cease burning, till these men 
Iehovah
 feare.


Westward a thousand leagues a spatious land,


Is made vnknowne to them that it command.


Of fruit
ull mould, and no lesse fruitlesse maine


Inrich with springs and prey high-land and plaine.


The light well tempred, humid ayre, whose breath


Fils full all concaues betwixt heaven and earth,


So that the Region of the ayre is blest


With what Earths mortals wish to be possest.


Great 
Titan
 dartes on her his heavenly rayes,


Whereby extreames he quells, and overswaye
.


Bl
st is this ayre with what the ayre can blesse;


Yet frequent ghusts doe much this place distresse▪


Here vnseene ghusts doe instant on-set giue,


As heaven and earth they would together driue.


An instant power doth surprize their rage,


In their vast prison, and their force asswage.


Thus in exchange a day or two is spent,


In smiles and frownes: in great yet no content.


The earth grand-parent to all things on earth,


Cold, dry, and heavie, and the next beneath


The ayre by Natures arme with low discents,


Is as it were intrencht; againe ascents


Mount vp to heaven by 
Ioues
 omnipotence,


Whose looming greenesse ioyes the Sea-mans sence.


Invites him to a land if he can see,


Worthy the Thrones of stately soveraigntie.


The fruitfull and well watered earth doth glad


All hearts; when 
Flora's
 with her spangles clad,


And yeelds an hundred fold for one,


To feede the Bee and to invite the drone.


O happie Planter if you knew the height


Of Planters honours where ther's such delight;


There Natures bounties though not planted are,


Great store and sorts of berries great and faire:


The Filberd, Cherry, and the fruitfull Vine,


Which cheares the heart and makes it more divine.


Earths spangled beauties pleasing smell and sight;


Objects for gallant choyce and chiefe delight.


A ground-Nut there runnes on a grassie threed,


Along the shallow earth, as in a bed,


Yealow without, thin, filmd, sweete, lilly white,


Of strength to feede and cheare the appetite.


From these our natures may haue great content,


And good subsistance when our meanes is spent.


With these the Natiues doe their strength maintaine


The Winter season, which time they retaine


Their pleasant vertue, but if once the Spring


Returne, they are not worth the gathering.


All ore that Maine the Vernant trees abound,


Where Cedar, Cypres, Spruce, and Beech are found.


Ash, Oake, and Wal-nut, Pines and Iunipere;


The Hasel, Palme, and hundred more are there.


Ther's grasse and hearbs contenting man and beast,


On which both Deare, and Beares, and Wolnes do feast.


Foxes both gray and blacke, (though blacke I never


Beheld,) with Museats, Lynces, Otter, Bever;


With many other which I here omit,


Fit for to warme vs, and to feede vs fit.


The Fowles that in those Bayes and Harbours 
eede,


Though in their seasons they doe els-where breede,


Are Swans and Geese, Herne, Phesants, Duck & Crane,


Culvers and Divers all along the Maine:


The Turtle, Eagle, Partridge, and the Quaile,


Knot, Plover, Pigeons, which doe never faile,


Till Sommers heate commands them to retire,


And Winters cold begets their old desire.


With these sweete dainties man is sweetly fed,


With these rich feathers Ladies plume their head;


Here's flesh and feathers both for vse and ease,


To feede, adorne, and rest thee if thou please.


The treasures got, on earth, by 
Titans
 beames,


They best may search that haue best art and meanes.


The ayre and earth if good, are blessings rare,


But when with these the waters blessed are,


The place is compleat, here each pleasant spring,


Is like those fountaines where the 
Muses
 sing.


The easie channels gliding to the East,


Vnlesse oreflowed, then post to be releast,


The Ponds and places where the waters stay,


Content the Fowler with all pleasant prey.


Thus ayre and earth and water giue content,


And highly honour this rich Continent.


As Nature hath this Soile blest, so each port


Abounds with blisse, abounding all report.


The carefull Naucleare may a-farre discry


The land by smell, ast loomes below the skie.


The prudent Master there his Ship may more,


Past winde and weather, then his God adore,


Man forth each Shalop with three men to Sea,


Which oft returne with wondrous store of prey;


As Oysters, Cra-fish, Crab, and Lobsters great,


In great abundance when the Seaes retreate:


Tort
ise, and Herring, Turbut, Hacke and Base,


With other small fish, and fresh bleeding Place;


The mightie Whale doth in these Harbours lye,


Whose Oyle the carefull Merchant deare will buy.


Besides all these and others in this Maine:


The costly Codd doth march with his rich traine:


With which the Sea-man fraughts his merry Ship:


With which the Merchant doth much riches get:


With which Plantations richly may subsist,


And pay their Merchants debt and interest▪


Thus ayre and earth, both land and Sea yeelds store


Of Natures dainties both to rich and poore;


To whom if heavens a holy 
Vice-roy
 giue,


The state and people may most richly liue:


And there erect a 
Pyramy
 of estate,


Which onely sinne and Heaven can ruinate.


Let deepe discretion this great worke attend,


What's well begun forth' most part well doth end:


So may our people peace and plentie finde,


And kill the Dragon that would kill mankinde.


Those well seene Natiues in gra
e Natures hests,


All close designes conceale in their deepe brests:


What strange attempts so ere they doe intend,


Are fairely vsherd in, till their last ende.


Their well advised talke evenly conveyes


Their acts to their intents, and nere displayes


Their secret proiects, by high words or light,


Till they conclude their end by fraud or might.


No former friendship they in minde retaine,


If you offend once, or your loue detaine:


They're wondrous cruell, strangely base and vile,


Quickly displeasd, and hardly reconcild;


Stately and great, as read in Rules of state:


Incensd, not caring what they perpetrate.


Whose hayre is cut with greeces, yet a locke


Is left; the left side bound vp in a knott:


Their males small labour but great pleasure know,


Who nimbly and expertly draw the bow;


Traind vp to suffer cruell heate and cold,


Or what attempt so ere may make them bold;


Of body straight, tall, strong, mantled in skin


Of Deare or Bever, with the hayre-side in:


An Otter skin their right armes doth keepe warme,


To keepe them fit for vse, and free from harme▪


A Girdle set with formes of birds or beasts,


Begirts their waste, which gently giues them'ease.


Each one doth modestly binde vp his shame,


And Deare-skin Start-vps reach vp to the same;


A kinde of 
Pinsen
 keeps their feete from cold,


Which after travels they put off, vp-fold,


Themselues they warme, their vngirt limbes they rest


In straw, and houses, like to sties: distrest


With Winters cruell blasts, a hotter clime


They quickly march to, when that extreame time


Is over, then contented they retire


To their old homes, burning vp all with fire.


Thus they their ground from all things quickly cleare,


And make it apt great store of Corne to beare.


Each people hath his orders, state, and head,


By which they'r rul'd, taught, ordered, and lead.


The first is by discent their Lord and King,


Pleas'd in his name likewise and governing:


The consort of his bed must be of blood


Coequall, when an of-spring comes as good,


And highly bred in all high parts of state,


As their Commanders of whom they'rs prognate.


If they vnequall loues at hymens hand


Should take, that vulgar seede would nere command


In such high dread, great state and deepe decrees


Their Kingdomes, as their Kings of high degrees:


Their Kings giue lawes, rewards to those they giue,


That in good order, and high service liue.


The aged Widow and the Orphanes all,


Their Kings maintaine, and strangers when they call,


They entertaine with kinde salute for which,


In homage, they haue part of what's most rich.


These heads are guarded with their stoutest men,


By whose advice and skill, how, where, and when,


They enterprize all acts of consequence,


Whether offensiue or for safe defence.


These Potents doe invite all once a yeare,


To giue a kinde of tribute to their peere.


And here obserue thou how each childe is traind,


To make him fit for Armes he is constraind


To drinke a potion made of hearbs most bitter,


Till turnd to blood with casting, whence he's fitter,


Induring that to vnder-goe the worst


Of hard attempts, or what may hurt him most.


The next in order are their well seene men


In herbes▪ and rootes, and plants, for medicen,


With which by touch, with clamors, teares, and sweat,


With their curst Magicke, as themselues they beat,


They quickly ease: but when they cannot saue,


But are by death surprizd, then with the graue


The divell tells them he could not dispence;


For God hath kild them for some great offence.


The lowest people are as servants are,


Which doe themselues for each command prepare:


They may not marry nor Tobacco vse,


Tell certaine yeares, least they themselues abuse.


At which yeares to each one is granted leaue,


A wife, or two, or more, for to receiue;


By having many wiues, two things they haue,


First, children, which before all things to saue


They covet, 'cause by them their Kingdomes fild,


When as by fate or Armes their liues are spild.


Whose death as all that dye they sore lament,


And fill the skies with cryes: impatient


Of nothing more then pale and fearefull death,


Which old and young bereaues of vitall breath;


Their dead wrapt vp in Mats to th' graue they giue,


Vpright from th knees, with goods whilst they did liue,


Which they best lou'd: their eyes turn'd to the East,


To which after much time, to be releast


They all must March, where all shall all things haue


That heart can wish, or they themselues can craue.


A second profit which by many wiues


They haue, is Corne, the staffe of all their liues.


All are great eaters, he's most rich whose bed


Affords him children, profit, pleasure, bread.


But if fierce 
Mars,
 begins his bow to bend,


Each King stands on his guard, seekes to defend


Himselfe, and his, and therefore hides his graine


In earths close concaues, to be fetch'd againe


If he survives: thus saving of himselfe,


He acts much mischiefe, and retains his wealth.


By this deepe wyle, the 
Irish
 long withstood


The 
English
 power, whilst they kept their food,


Their strength of life their Corne; that lost, they long


Could not withstand this Nation, wise, stout, strong.


By this one Art, these Natiues ost surviue


Their great'st opponents, and in honour thriue.


Besides, their women, which for th'most part are


Of comely formes, not blacke, nor very faire:


Whose beautie is a beauteous blacke laid on


Their paler cheeke, which they most doat vpon.


For they by Nature are both faire and white,


Inricht with gracefull presence, and delight;


Deriding laughter, and all pratling, and


Of sober aspect, grast with gra
e command:


Of man-like courage, statu
e tall and straight,


Well neru'd, with hands and fingers small and right.


Their slender finger
 on a grassie twyne,


Make well form'd Baskets wrought with art and lyne;


A kinde of Arras, or Straw-hangings, wrought


With divers formes, and colours, all about.


These gentle pleasures, their fine fingers fit,


Which Nature seem'd to frame rather to sit.


Rare Stories, Princes, people, Kingdomes, Towers,


In curious finger-worke, or Parchment flowers:


Yet are these hands to labours all intent,


And what so ere without doores, giue content.


These hands doe digge the earth, and in it lay


Their faire choyce Corne, and take the weeds away


As they doe grow, raysing with earth each hill,


As 
Ceres
 prospers to support it still.


Thus all worke-women doe, whilst men in play,


In hunting, Armes, and pleasures, end the day.


The 
Indians
 whilst our 
Englishmen
 they see


In all things servile exercisd to be:


And all our women freed, from labour all


Vnlesse what's easie: vs much fooles they call,


'Cause men doe all things; but our women liue


In that content which God to man did giue:


Each female likewise long reteines deepe wrath,


And s nere appeas'd till wrongs reveng'd shee hath:


For they when forraigne Princes Armes vp take


Against their Leige, quickly themselues betake


To th'adverse Armie, where they're entertaind


With kinde salutes, and presently are daign'de


Worthy faire 
Hymens
 favours: thus offence


Obtaines by them an equall recompence.


Lastly, though they no lynes, nor Altars know,


Yet to an vnknowne God these people bow;


All feare some God, some God they worship all,


On whom in trouble and distresse they call;


To whom of all things they giue sacrifice,


Filling the ayre with her shrill shrikes and cries.


The knowledge of this God they say they haue


From their forefathers, wondrous wise and graue;


Who told them of one God, which did create


All things at first, himselfe though increate:


He our first parents made, yet made but two,


One man one woman, from which stocke did grow


Royall mankinde, of whom they also came


And tooke beginning, being, forme and frame:


Who gaue them holy lawes, for aye to last,


Which each must teach his childe till time be past:


Their grosse fed bodies yet no Letters know,


No bonds nor bills they value, but their vow.


Thus without Arts bright lampe, by Natures eye,


They keepe iust promise, and loue equitie.


But if once discord his fierce ensigne weare,


Expect no promise vnle'st be for feare:


And, though these men no Letters know, yet their


Pans
 harsher numbers we may some where heare:


And vocall odes which vs affect with griefe;


Though to their mindes perchance they giue reliefe.


Besides these rude insights in Natures brest,


Each man by some meanes is with sence possest


Of heavens great lights, bright starres and influence,


But chiefely those of great experince:


Yet they no feasts (that I can learne) obserue,


Besides their 
Ceres,
 which do'th them preserue.


No dayes by them descernd from other dayes,


For holy certaine service kept alwayes.


Yet they when extreame heate doth kill their Corne,


Afflict themselues some dayes, as men forelorne.


Their times they count not by the yeare as we,


But by the Moone their times distingui'sht be.


Not by bright 
Phoebus,
 or his glorious light,


But by his 
Phoebe
 and her shadowed night.


They now accustom'd are two Gods to serue,


One good, which giues all good, and doth preserue;


This they for loue adore: the other bad,


Which hurts and wounds, yet they for feare are glad


To worship him: see here a people who


Are full of knowledge, yet doe nothing know


Of God aright; yet say his Lawes are good


All, except one, whereby their will's withstood.


In having many wiues, if they but one


Must haue, what must they doe when they haue none.


O how farre short comes Nature of true grace,


Grace sees God here; hereafter face to face:


But Nature quite en
ru'd of all such right,


Reteines not one poore sparcle of true light.


And now what soule dissolues not into teares,


That hell must haue ten thousand thousand heires,


Which haue no true light of that truth divine,


Or sacred wisedome of th' Eternall Trine.


O blessed 
England
 farre beyond all sence,


That knowes and loues this Trines omnipotence.


In briefe survey here water, earth, and ayre,


A
 people proud and what their orders are.


The fragrant flowers, and the Vernant Groues,


The merry Shores, and Storme-a
ranting Coues.


In briefe, a briefe of what may make man blest,


If man's content abroad can be possest.


If these poore lines may winne this Country loue,


Or kinde compassion in the 
English
 moue;


Perswade our mightie and renowned State,


This pore-blinde people to comiserate;


Or painefull men to this good Land invite,


Whose holy workes these Natiues may inlight:


If Heavens graunt these, to see here built I trust;


An 
English
 Kingdome from this 
Indian
 dust.


FINIS.












EXcuse this 
Postscript,
 perchance more profitable than
the 
Prescript.
 It may be a necessary Caveat for many
who too familiarly doe 
Serò sapere.
 The discreet artifi∣cer
is not onely happie to vnderstand what may f
yrely and
infallibly further his duly considered designes and determi∣nations:
but to discover and remoue what obstacle soever
may oppose his well-advised purposes, and probable conclusi∣ons.
I therefore, desiring that every man may be a 
Prome∣thius,

not an 
Epimethius,
 haue here vnderwritten such
im
ediments as I haue observed wonderfully offensiue to all
Plantations; 
Quae prodesse qu
ant & delectare legen∣tem.


First therefore I conceiue that far distance of plantations
produce many inconveniences and disabilities of planters,
when as severall Colonies consist but of 
, or thirtie,
or about that number, which in a vast vncommanded Conti∣nent,
makes them liable to many and miserable exigents,
which weakens all vnion, and leaues them difficultly to be
assisted against a potent or daily enemy, and dangerously to
be commanded; when as some one Bay well fortified would
maintaine and inrich some thousands of persons, if it be
planted with men, able, ingenious, and laborious, being well
furnished with all provisions and necessaries for plantati∣ons.
Besides, 
f one Bay be well peopled, its easily defended,
surveyed, disciplined, and commanded, be the seasons never
so vnseasonable, and all their Forces in few houres readie in
Armes, either offensiuely to pursue, or defensiuely to subsist
convenient numbers ever at sea, and sufficient ever at
home for all service, intelligence and discoverie.


Secondly, Ignorance of seasons, servants, situation, want
of people, provisions, supplies, with 
 courage and
patience, in and against all opposition, 
 and affliction.



Vincit patientia durum.
 Fishermen, manuall artificers,
e
geners, and good fowlers are excellent servants, and onely
fit for plantations. Let not Gentlemen or Citizens once ima∣gine
that I preiudize their reputations, for I speake no word
beyond truth, for they are too high, or not patient of such ser∣vice:
though they may be very necessary for Martiall disci∣pline,
or excellent, (if pious) for example to the seditious
and inconsiderate multitude.


Boats with all their furniture, as sayles, hookes, and lines,
and other appendences, afford the painefull planter both va∣rietie
of comfort, and a sufficient competent, and an happie e∣state.
Good mastiues are singular defences to plantations, in
the terrifying or pursuing of the light-footed Natiues. Hogs
and Goats are easie, present, and abundant profit, living and
feeding on the Ile-lands almost without any care or cost.


Plantations cannot possibly, profitably subsist without chat∣tels
and boats, which are the onely meanes for surveying and
conveying both our persons and provisions to the well advi∣sed
scituation. Without these, plantations may with much
patience, and well fortified resolution indure but difficultly,
though with much time flourish and contentedly subsist. For
when men are landed vpon an vnknowne shore, per adven∣ture
weake in number and naturall powers, for want of boats'
and carriages; are compelled to stay where they are first lan∣ded,
having no meanes to remoue themselues or their goods,
be the place never so fruitlesse or inconvenient for planting,
building houses, boats, or stages, or the harbours never so vn∣fit
for fishing, fowling, or mooring their boats. Of all which,
and many other things necessary for plantation, I purpose to
enforme thee hereafter. Wishing thee in the 
interim
 all fur∣therance,
all fortunatenesse.


Farewell.











