The lamentable destruction of Mulheim, a Protestant towne in Germany Done by the inhabitants of Cologne the 30. of September last 1615. at three of the clock in the morning. Printed according to the Dutch originall.
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A07885




STC 18254



ESTC S102866





99838628




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The lamentable destruction of Mulheim, a Protestant towne in Germany Done by the inhabitants of Cologne the 30. of September last 1615. at three of the clock in the morning. Printed according to the Dutch originall.
[8] p.   


London :


Printed by G. Eld for Richard Lea, and are to bee sold at his shop at the North entry of the Royall Exchange, and in Paules Church yard by Edward Marchant,


1615.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Thirty Years' War, 1618-1648 --  Early works to 1800.
Mülheim am Rhein (Cologne, Germany) --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-07
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18254


S102866


99838628


3013














THE LAMENTABLE DESTRVCTION of Mulheim, a Protestant Towne 
in Germany.
 Done by the Inhabitants of Cologne 
the
 30. 
of September last
 1615. at three of the Clock in the Morning. 
Printed according to the Dutch Originall.


LONDON,
 Printed by 
G. Eld
 for 
Richard Lea,
 and are to bee sold at his shop at the North entry of the Royall Exchange, and in 
Paules
 Church yard by 
Edward Marchant.
 1615.














The pitifull destruction of the 
Towne of
 Mulheim 
extracted out of
 certaine letters bearing date in 
Cullen the first of October in the euening.
 1615.


V
Pon the nine and twenty day of September last past, there was an extraordinary Coun∣cell and secret meeting hol∣den in the city of Cullen: which done, in the afternoone, it being S. 
Michaels
 day, (which is to be noted) all the Masons, Bricklayers, Carpenters and Sla∣ters, were called and assembled together, before the Magistrates, by whom they were told and willed to make them selues ready, with pickaxes, shouels, and other tooles, the night ensuing about three of the clocke in the morning, therewith vtterly to raze and breake downe the towne of Muhleim, vpon paine of being put from their trades of liuing, if they refused so to doe. This vnexpected warnjng put the workemen in∣to no little feare, and perplexity, so that at

the first they vtterly refused and denied to doe it, saying that it behoued them to set better soldiers a worke, in that peece of ser∣uice, then they were, alledging that they feared and greatly doubted that the stones thereof might and would then, or in time to come, breake their, or their childrens Shins: wherevnto the Magistrates made answere that they would be their warrant and protectors against all men for doing it. Wherevpon the worke men fully resolued, that if the Burgo-Master and the Magi∣strates of the city, would goe before them & be their guides, they would follow them: which they promised to doe. While this matter was in determination, the gates of the city were kept shut, that no man in the meane time should goe out, to make report thereof abroad, and that the townes men of Mulheim might not haue intelligence of their pretence, to saue them selues by flight. At the same time there was a rumor spread abroad, that in the new market place, in the city of Cullen, there was a murther com∣mitted,

and that search was then to be made for the murtherer: vnder this pretēce in the night time, about 3. of the clock, which was the pretended time and houre appointed: 
Iohn Bowlant
 the Burgermaster, and others of the Magistrates, went out of the gates; with such a number of cressets, fackles, linkes, and lanternes, that the night seemed to be as light as day, and after them the towns men followed to the number of 800. at the least, besides straglers, hauing 200. soldiers, with pipes and drums, marching before them, to defend the worke men: be∣fore they fell to worke, there was a com∣mission red vnto them to shew and certifie them, that it was not onely the Emperors and the Dukes pleasure, to haue it done, but also the new-Burgers and the Magi∣strates of Cullens will, who had sought and procured the same, for the good & welfare of the city of Cullen, & the preseruation of the citizens thereof: which done they fell to worke, first breaking downe the greatest houses, and so continued the spoyle the

whole night, and all the next day vntill the first of October in the euening, whereby not a stone therof is left standing one vpon the other. The bricks, free stones, lead, and iron, and that which would serue for any thing, was giuen vnto the Capucins, and al the ruines of the great Church. The French Church, with all the ruines thereof, was gi∣uen to the Fulldoers, which they them∣selues brake downe. The great deep cellers and vaults, which could not well be broken in hast, they tooke order that they should be blowne vp with gunpouder, and that then the new houses that had bin built in old Mulheim within the space of foure yeares, should be throwne downe. No man therein had any warning giuen him of the destruction thereof, nor any time permit∣ted them to scape away: al the women (were they neuer so great with childe, or lying in childe bed) children, and men, were straight∣ly charged and forbidden not to goe into Cologne, so that no man knowes whether they fled to saue them selues, for that, all

thereabouts in some pesants houses, and al∣so in old Mulheim there lay many Wal∣lons, that had more desire to spoile and de∣stroy the poore distressed people running away, then to saue and harbor them. This heauy and sorrowfull night, raysed a great cry, pitifull noyse, woe and clamor in the towne of Mulheim, specially among poore women and children, for that most part of the Merchants of the Towne were then at Fanckfort Mart, and those that dealt in wines, were gone vp into the country, to buy wine. To conclude, in this vnexpe∣cted and cruell action, all the fauour show∣ed them was, that they murthered not the poore distressed men, whose wofull cries clime vp and pierce into heauen, and make complaint vnto the great reuenger of all iniuries, and oppressed people, that with deuout prayer re∣commend themselues vnto him.


FINIS.











