Pidax Petreia, or, The disc[ov]erie of S. Peters well, [a]t Peter-head, in Scotland being in latitude 57.d.43.m. and in longitude 22.d.40.m. : shewing the admirable vertues thereof, against many deplorable diseases / by A.M. student in medicine.
Mure, Andrew.
Approx. 48 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 21 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A07920




STC 18290



ESTC S918





ocm 23035815




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Pidax Petreia, or, The disc[ov]erie of S. Peters well, [a]t Peter-head, in Scotland being in latitude 57.d.43.m. and in longitude 22.d.40.m. : shewing the admirable vertues thereof, against many deplorable diseases / by A.M. student in medicine.
Mure, Andrew.
[40] p.   


Edinburgh :


Printed by the heirs of Andrew Hart,


1636.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Mineral waters --  Scotland --  Peterhead. --  Therapeutic use.
Peterhead (Scotland) --  Description and travel.
2010-05
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2010-06
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2010-08
Pip Willcox
Sampled and proofread
2010-08
Pip Willcox
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2011-06
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18290


23035815


26125












ΠΙΔΑΞ ΠΕΤΡΕΙΑ OR, The disc
erie of S. Peters Well, 
t 
Peter-head,
 in SCOTLAND, 
being in lati∣tude
 57. d. 43. m. and in lon∣gitude 22. d.
40. m.


Shewing the admirable vertues thereof, against many deplorable diseases.


BY A. M. 
Student in Medicine.


Visitavimus Interiora Terrae, Rectificando Invenimus Occultum Lapidem, Veram Medi∣cinam.


EDINBURGH, Printed by the Heirs of 
Andrew Hart, Anno Dom.

1636.








TO THE TRVELY NOBLE, 
AND
 Vertuous Ladie, D. MARIE ERSKEINE, Countesse of 
Mareshall,
 &c.


MADAME,


THese my travels, upon the medicinall wa∣ter of

Peter-head,
 are yours, as the Well is, and many miles about: neither ar
 my travels only, but my self am, and many of my progenitors, parents, and kinred are, and were yours, as receaving first breath under your L. most noble and famous house of

Marshall.
 Wherefore I have taken the bold

 to publish them to the world under your L. name, that who∣soever shall bee benefited hereby, may, next to God, blesse your L. for that blessed instrument of their health. What I have written, I have not written at randon, but by infallible grounds of reason and experience. And if neither the 
Well, nor the Writer were yours, yet the singular vertues and graces wherewith your L. beautiful minde is richly adorned, should have furnished reason sufficient for this dedication, and for much more then 
 spring of my years could pos∣sibly produce. Receave herefore, Noble Ladie, these first fruits of my small ingine, as an earnest of a greater harvest of service: which, if it please God, may bee after reaped, for your L. and your most noble Family, and hopefull progenie: whom God continue in felicitie and honour, so long as the Sun and Moon shall last.


Your L. devouted servant, AN. MURE.








To the Reader.


GOD by his wise, mighty, and wonderfull provi∣dence, in such fashion governeth the world, that hee doth furnish every nation, with what hee knows to bee most necessary and convenient for them. This our nation of North Britaine, in all former ages, was esteemed and known to be as wise and valiant in minde, so health full in body; while now that by intemperan∣cie, the gut, gravell, the diseases of the splene, the hypo∣chondriak melancholy, with many other terrible uncouth, cruel and monstruous maladies are come in ready to under∣mine and destroy us, if God of his great mercy, had not re∣vealed to this nation that excellent spring, and water of health, which I thus discovered, being at London, with that hopefull gentleman 
Iames Scot,
 son to my 
L.
 of

Scots-tar∣vet,
 who was he avily troubled with a disease, which the chief∣est and greatest Physicians in that place, called a

Carnositie in the urinall passage,
 (though it proved in end to be a very hard one, and turned in a stone) the which to cure, they applyed many good and laudable medicaments, without prevailing any thing against his disease. At length despairing of health: he is sent to the waters of Tunbridge, as t
s last refuge. With whom amongst others I went: where, by the use of these waters, his paine was mitigate and aboundance of slimy hu∣mors voyded: from thence he went to Paris, where he was cu∣red, and ordained to go to the Well of Spaw in Germany, and from thence to Knesbrough in England: by the use of all which waters, he is come to be expert, and to have full know∣ledge, of the nature and vertues of such minerall waters.


In the mean time of these voyages, my study was of that

kinde of fountains: remembring from my childhood, in some kinde, the affinity of the taste of the Well of Peter-head, with that which I did finde in thole Wells, whereof now I have spoken, I resolved to come and try the vertues and ope∣ration, of that Well. Which first the inhabitants of that town of Peter-head manifested to me, by their relation of its curing of sore eyes, loosing of the belly, if bound, & stop∣ping the immoderate course thereof, serving to them for a cup of preparation before dinner, with many other such like experiences: as one, which I think not amisse to insert in this place of an old, ancient, grave man of 76. years experience, yet living, who diverse and often times hath told me, that he himself being usually troubled with sand and stones in the kidneys, used many kindes of drogues, to free him from this fearfull and consuming desease: at last being vehemently vexed with paine, took some 5. or 6. draughts of this water, after which, there burst out with his urine, great quantitie of sand and stones. Which water thus he did drink 8 dayes altogether, every morning, with the like effects, and hath never been troubled hithertils, with so vehement paine.


Another in that same town, who voyded his stomach of a stone, bigger then a tennis ball 
per anum,
 and I think it was, the great antipathie which this water hath against stones or sand, in all places of the body, that made him so evacuate such a monstrous thing as this.


Yet not content to know the truth hereof, and that the vertues of this water were great by some experiences: I in∣tended to dive in the deepest of this fountaine, by the ordi∣nary tryals of such waters: as the drawing of the tincture of a nutgall, which it will do in the twinckling of an eye, with many other pretty little tryals of that sort: as in all of them it proved excellent.


Neither yet confident of my own tryals, I carryed the wa∣ter of this source, to the source and fountain, from whence my first knowledge in medicine did slow: and from whom, many in this nation have received the most part of their 
knowledge, both divine and Philosophicall, which water was keept half year, then tried and found neither changed in taste nor smell, as yet it remaineth in that same state after two years: and by his advise, information, and ordinance I caused pur this clear, pure wholesome water in a vessell, which after a little boyling, was coagulate in a red or brow∣nish tincture. (like that of Plin. chap. 2. lib. 3, 
Tungria, ci∣vitas Galliae, fontem habet insignem, plurimis bullis stillantem, ferruginei saporis, quod ipsum non nisi in fine potus intelligitur. Purgat hic corpora, tertianas febres discutit, calculorumque vitia. Eadem aqua igni admota, turbida fit, ac postremo ru∣bescit.
) In the bottome of which vessel, after evaporation remained a red kinde of matter, like unto 
colcothar,
 which was calcined, pulverised, and dissolved with common water: the water being separate from the sediment by inclination, and evaporate there remained in the bottome a perfect vi∣triol, of a greenish colour, and of taste sharp and sweet: the vitriol by concoction within the earth, having turned its cor∣rosive acrimonie, in a good sweet aciditie, 
ideo aquae therma∣les omnes, qua solutam vitrioli materiam fixam, eamque coctā & subdulcem, sine suo humido complectuntur, caeteris omnibus praestant: quod materia illa fixa vitrioli, humido radicali fixo auri & argenti respondeat, cui infinitas occultas virtutes in∣esse tota credidit antiquitas. inquit Fabet. Cap.
 17.

Pallad. spag.


The sediment which remained after separation of the wa∣ter by inclination, being again tried in the fire, proved to be a confused masse of not perfectly cancocted mettals.


But none can speak more by experience, of the goodnesse and vertue of this fountaine, then the gentleman, I have named, and another gentleman of good worth, 
M. Thomas Aikinhead,
 Commissar of Edinburgh, who in August last, 
An.
 1635. did find in this Well, as much worth, as they found in any of the forementioned exotick Wells, having tryed both. And not only those, but many other gentlemen of good respect can testifie these things to be true, which in this booke, I have written, concerning the medicinall vertues of this 
fountaine: which, good reader, I hope you may patiently read, and thank God; if, diseased, you reap any benefit from hence.


Neither had I intention to have published this treatise be∣ing conscious of my own weaknesse, if I had not been ani∣mated and encouraged thereto by a letter, which I receaved from my learned Master, whom I shall reverence, with a filial respect so long as breath shall delay to expire.






Io: Adamsonus An. Moro S. D.


PErgratae fuerunt tuae ad me literae; per∣gratus libellus: utraque vel quod à te: ex utrisque amorem, satis antea perspectum; sed ex hoc & industriam, quà scrutinio quo∣dam accurato nobis videris 
 thesau∣rum, à nemine hactenus ved quaesitum, vel inventum, demonstrasse. O te felicem, cui coelitus obtigit tam eximium thesaurum invenisse, in salutem humani generis pro∣didisse! Sed & ego hujus felicitatis non va∣cuus abiero, cui contigit discipulum habuisse tam industrium, tam doctum, & disertum; qui talis thesauri vires & usum tam eruditè & concinnè patriae suae aperuerit. Tu per∣ge, ut facis, virtuti litare, & amantem me tui redamare.


Vale.


Edinb.
 
Cal. Mart
 1636.








De Fonte 
Petraeo,
 ejusque reclusore, ANDREA MORO.


Cùm gelidus, fons est nitidis argenteus undis,


Vulcanum admoveas, aurea lympha siet.


Est auro argento{que} simul praestantior omni,


Quâ reparent vires languida membra suas.


Ergo, aegri, vivis libate è fontibus undas,


Et manibus puris sumite, sultis, aquas


Atque Deo coeli grates persolvite dignas,


Qui facit ut tantas petra refundat opes.


Et 
Mori
 ingenium voto laudate benigno,


Qui facit ut tantas penna recludat opes.


I. A.






Ad 
Andream Morum,
 Petraei fontis detectorem,



PEtraei
 laticis gratas languentibus undas


Detegis, & tanti quae sit origo boni.


Si tanta utilitas insit vulgaribus undis,


Hasce sibi ut vulgus commoda prima putet;


Quanta o Petraeo debetur gloria fonti;


Omnigenis obstat quae Panacèa malis!


Nymphae monstratis meruerunt Orgia lymphis:


Quanta erit inventi gloria; 
More;
 tui?


T. CRAFORDIUS.












S. PETERS WELL, 
OR
 THE WELL OF Peter-head.


MEdicinall waters differ much in sa∣vour and taste: some of them being sulfureous, some vitriolate, some saltish: yet all of them

communi nomine
 are called 
acidi,
 from the taste: which acidity or sharpnesse comes partly from vitrioll and partly from the salt of minerals: or they are called mine∣rall waters because passing through the con∣cavities of the earth, they carry with thē the tinctures of what they renconter, and are im∣pregnate with the quintessence of those mi∣nerals by which they passe whether it bee 
terra lemnia, bol. armen. chalk:
 or congeled liquors an juyces, as 
allome, succin, sulphur, nitre, vitriol &c.
 or mettals, as gold, silver, yron, &c. or stones as christall, marble, load-stone &c: they are also called medici∣nall waters for their rare and admirable ver∣tues in curing diseases and preserving of 
health. Many of these waters are found out by the diligent searching and industrious la∣bour of the learned, endevouring to find out the secrets of nature most easie for the help of mankind; as the wel of Spaw in Germany, the wells of Burbon, of Pouges, of For∣ges in France, of Porrecta in Italy, of Tun∣bridge, and Knesbrough, in England with many others of infinite vertues, as Plinius recordeth in many passages of his books, e∣specially in the 2. chap. of his 31. book. And I would that any reader who doubts of the excellent vertues of infinite diversity of waters should read that chapter: And now our waters of Peter-head called be our fore∣fathers Saint Peters wel thinking that it was S. Peter that sent from Rome a facultie of curing diseases to these waters, because hee himself could not come, being imployed a∣bout more necessary affaires at Rome, for the time Pope. Wherefore to gratify this holy Apostle they have built a temple, which to this day is called S. Peters church. They used to come to the well on S. Peters day, assemb∣ling themselves in great mulitudes; on which 
day as yet we have a great faire at this place. But this is meer superstition, like that of the heathen, who as Plinius testifieth lib. 31. chap. 2. denominate their rare and medici∣nall waters from diverse of there gods.


S. Peters well may be compared with Spaw waters, being nothing inferiour to them in medicinal vertues, and far excells any other as yet found out, in Europe.


It is certain that this Petrean water (for so hereafter shal it be called) passes through minerals: but with what proportion they are mixed in these subterranean cells, it is im∣possible to know, or whether it be hote or cold, moist or dry, some thinges from whence it flows being hote, some cold, some temperate, seeming rather that it is tempe∣rate, well mixed, as its effects shows: yet al∣wayes this water while it is drunken hume∣ctates and refrigerates, incontinent, being daunted through the heat of the stomach, heats and dryes.


For the vertues of our water: it cleanseth and wasteth viscide & Tartareous humors, extenuats pituite, it voyds the liver, melt,

mesaraicks, and other our entrails, of what∣soever obstructions is troublesome to them: it strengthens the stomach so, be its astricti∣on, that none can complain of harme by its actuall coldnesse: It gives strength to the nerves, tempers the heat of the kidneys, cleansing and expelling their gravell, sand and stones more forceably then any other medicament, because it is diuretick, simple, naturall, voyd of all arte, made by the hand of God alone, and most gracious to the taste it hinders the concretion or coagulation of sand, resisting the generation of confirmed stones; and if confirmed, diminishes them: it purgeth the bladder and mundifies the stone of viscide pituit and mucositie wherewith it is environed, prepairing it to be easily ta∣ken out by cutting, it is most profitable for the ulcer of the reins and carnosities in the urinal passage, cast in be injection: it certain∣ly helps the venerean & Virulent Gonorhea and all other diseases of that sort, applyed with out for their ulcers, chancres, poula∣nes, pustules, within by injection, and po∣tion, it helps the concoction of the stomach, 
quenches thirst, appeases dolours, throwing of the belly, with Colick and Iliack passions: it purifies the bloud, kills and expells all kynd of wormes, chases away all fevers, cleanses the skin of pustles and skabs, be lo∣tion & bathing, it louses the belly, if bound, taking away the obstructions from the gal, which sends forth its choler or 
bilis
 the on∣ly 
stimulus foecum in jejunum intestinum,
 wherewith being sharpned, casts out the foe∣ces therein contained, it restraines the fluxes of the belly, by corroborating the retentive facultie, drying the intestins, and makes them slow to expell the humors being drawn by the force of the water to the reins and bladder, and so it works proportiona∣bly according to the necessity of nature, as an excellent instrument appointed by Gods providence for the health of mankinde.


They also carry with them out of the body diverse wayes, the cold and watry bloud with other excrementitious humors of choler, pituite, melancholy. Our 
Hydropo∣tae
 pisse much their expulsive facultie being helped through the diuretick quality of our 
water, their grosse excrements are black or greenish: because the salt of minerals be its precipitating vertue 
facit deseendere terre∣streitatem ad fundum:
 some vomites, voyding their stomach of superfluous humors, some sweats sending forth their obstructions by the pores: for all diuretick things are also diaphoretick, the urine and sweat being of natures little different.


These clear pure waters gratious both to palate and eyes provoke so many and divers evacuations, which scarce any medicament, grievous to the smell, horrible to the sight, and loathsome to the taste, could effectuate: they agree with both sexes, all ages: restor∣ing health lost: preserving in integritie the present.


Wee have used all kynd of tryalls for ex∣amination of the Petrean water; and have found (as we are able to demonstrate) that these waters carry with them the tincture of vitriol and of mettals not perfect nor al∣together solide; but crude begun, growing to a solide mettall if every day a part were not carryed away with the waters.




As for the vertues and qualities of vitriol, they are so renowned by many of the ancients and all our moderne writers, that purposely I omit them to a more fit occasion then the brevity of this peece can permit. And if I shal but point at the generation of vitriol, within the earth the understanding reader shall quickly perceave its nature and operation, which is thus.


There ariseth a sulfureous exhalation be the action of the subterranean heat: which mixed with water makes a sharp corrosive juyce, proper to corrode and drink up a part of copper and yron, and to collect and coa∣gulate it self in one; which we cal Vitriol. So that the principles and elements of vitriol are sulfur, water, the two mettals of yron and copper, and some little portion of the minerall clay adhering either to the mettals, as seldome they remain in the bowels of the earth without some slimy matter: or else in the water with which was mixed the sulfu∣reous salsuginous exhalation, which things we see in the anatomy of vitriol be destillatiō First the watry part being volatile, ariseth in 
making of Colcothar, then that sulfureous salsuginous exhalation, which being by cold condensed in the recipient, turns in oyl: the

hypostasis
 or sediment being puluerised, washed dryed and liquified with 
borax, se∣cundum artem,
 shall produce a metallick sub∣stance. Out of which considerations 
A. Gun∣therus
 hath defined it to be 
sulfureae salsuginis aeratae ferratae{que} coagulum.


And albeit evidently 
ad sensum
 we can see no more mettals but copper and yron, yet certainly it is 
coagulum omnium metallorum autcorum sal.
 Whence some have taken occa∣sion to make an allusion to the letters of 
Vitriolum, Visitando interiora terrae rectifi∣cando invenies occultum lapidem veram me∣dicinam.


As for the mettals, the Chimique Philoso∣phers say that their

proxima materia
 Mer∣curie engendred of the first matter of mine∣rals well mixed: to wit, that viscous humi∣ditie subtilly incorporate to incombustible earth equally mixed with the least parts in the minerall concavities of the earth. And seeing that kinde of matter can not produce

self, nature hath given it a proper agent 
sul∣phur,
 a certain fatnesse of the earth, engend∣red in its own bowels by temperate coction, for concocting, digesting and converting the forsaid Mercurie in forme of mettall, the sulphur having relation to the mercurie, as the male to the female, and as the proper agent to its proper matter: this is 
proximae materia metallorum.
 As in the generation of man, the aliment is a nearer mater then the elements, the bloud then the food, the seed then the bloud, and in end after a long and continuall digestion the matter receaves hu∣mane forme: so in the generation of mettals there ariseth vapors of the elements, these vapors being condensed turn in a viscous and ponderous liquor mixed with subtile and sulfureous earth, which is called mercu∣rie, whereof as of its 
proxima materia,
 bee the mixtion and action of sulphur, is made gold, silver, yron, or any other mettall according as nature hath digested it lesse or more: for there is no difference betwixt gold and yron, but that gold hath happened to bee better and longer concocted then the other.




Some striving to imitate nature in perfect∣ing of mettals, meaning to bring them to their perfection, Gold, have used many arti∣ficiall operations in making their Philoso∣phers stone so much searched.


First they calcine the matter without di∣minishing the body, they attenuate the gros∣nesse and solidity of the calcined matter by solution, and reduce it to its 
prima materia,
 which they call minerall water, whereof gold is the father, silver the mother, and quicksilver the 
proxeneta,
 that makes the ma∣riage and union: this done they separate the foure elements in two parts, one superior and celestiall, which is the spirit that quick∣ens, another inferior and terrestriall which must bee enlived by the spirit making the combination with the soule and body, for that first part is a soul inspired: they conjoyn the water and aire with the earth, and fire, they putrifie the matter bee a moist heat, after putrefaction comes coagulation, ciba∣tion, sublimation, fermentation, exaltation, augmentation, and lastly projection upon imperfect mettals, changing them into per∣fect gold and silver.




It is certain that the chief end of the an∣cient Philosophers, who traveiled and la∣boured about this stone, was to compose an universall balsamick medicine to roborate and conserve the radicall balsame and nectar of our life, in a good and laudable tempera∣ment: which great and incomparable medi∣cine they searched in minerals: and knowing that gold, the perfection of minerals, could not have action in our bodys: be reason of its compact and firme composition: they have endevoured to break its hardest bonds, and to reduce it to its first matter, that it may be dissolved in all liquors, and communicate to them that excellent and balsamick perfecti∣on of our life and nature.


The transmutation of mettals in the con∣cavities of the earth appears evidently; but be artificiall projection many imaginations are not strong enough to conceave, though some too strongly conceave them, & by thus conceaving have deceaved many of the world and themselves: and it is thought be many that gold is not so dissolved bee any preparation as yet found out, that it renders 
any tincture worthy of the least and smalest part of the praises it receives. For 
in auro pota∣bili, essentia auri, sale auri,
 there are other ex∣cellent things of more worth nor the gold, lurking in another forme reducible to the metallick substance, neither perchance is it to bee denyed, but there is in gold excellent vertues and specifick remedies for all kinde of diseases: yea, more then in any other thing else, if the right and true preparation thereof were known, as it may bee future ages, more happy then wee shall finde, and I pray GOD they that spend their spirit and expence herein, may better themselves, and the world.


And it may be thought, if the ancients, or moderns had known that the tinctures of minerals were carryed from the concavities of the earth, with water, as in our Petrean fountain, they had never so perplexed them∣selves to have tryed so many solutions, cal∣cinations, coagulations, fixations, sublima∣tions, &c. As they have done, evaporating their spirits, and exhausting the 
humiàum radicale
 of their substance.




Within the earth from whence our Pe∣trean water flows, is a concavitie, a great ves∣sel, 
ampullare matratium capacissimum,
 where∣in is contained 
materia proxima metallorum:
 which sends forth its tincture with our wa∣ter. In this natural operation there is no need of calcination, solution, reduction to its 
pri∣ma materia:
 and separation of the foure ele∣ments, which are the most difficile operations in the composition of the stone. And where many may erre, for here as yet the matter is not coagulate, neither is mercurie vnited to its salt and sulfur: but nature finding the salt, sulphur, and mercurie of minerals, as yet not vnited, conjoyns them by digestion and cohobation, sublimating and subtilizing the earthly part, rēdring the mercurial fixed, go∣ing on naturally with all the operations re∣quisite to the perfection of the work, as co∣agulation, cibation, sublimation, fermenta∣tion, exaltation, augmentation, as certain∣ly it would increase, grow, and fill up, the whole concavities where our water is con∣tained, if there were not a continuall proje∣ction of this naturall elixir, this 
magisterium
 
this quintessence of all mettals, in our water dissolving it self therein, the water being im∣pregnate with this admirable yet naturall medicine, bursts out dauncing, bringing with it the cure of all diseases, crying and calling all those who are troubled and load∣ned with infirmities, to come and buy with∣out money what may restore them to their health. And truely I may speak of this source what sweetly the prince of French Poets did sing of the tree of life: neither let divins take exception that we symbolize from one earthly thing to another, from the tree of life to the water of life, for what is called the tree of life in the old testament is called the water of life in the new: both pointing out the lively vertue of our life which is hid in Christ: yet from the tree of life to the water of life let mee 
subsultim
 passe, as birds doe from sprayes to brayes and from mountains to fountaines, saying of this water what hee spoke of that tree, 
Du Bartas.
 pag. 174.


O holy, peerlesse, rich preservative!


Whether wert thou the strange restorative
 


That suddenly did age with youth repaire?


And made old A Eson younger then his heir?


Or holy Nectar that in heavenly bowrs


Eternally self-pouring Hebe pours?


Or blest Ambrosia (gods immortall fare)


Or else the rich fruit of the garden rare?


Whereof three Ladies as assured guard


A fire arm'd dragon day and night did ward?


Or pretious Moly which Ioves pursuivan


Wing footed Hermes brought to th' Ithacan


Or else Nepenthe enemie to sadnes


Repelling sorrows, and repealing gladnesse?


Or Mumie or elixir that excels


(Save men and angels) every creature else.


And it may be thought that a more ancient (I will not say a better) Poet, when he said 
 comparing water with the rest of the elements, meant of this and such other medicinall waters, and not of common ri∣vers & fountains which have no taste, not be∣ing impregnate with barley or beef or some such like good commendable ingredients.


Nature hath here prepared an vniversall medicine by many, divers, long and natu∣rall 
preparations, which for its perfect temperament and puritie, is able governe, conserve and increase the radicall humor, and enliving 
nectar,
 sympathizing be its spi∣ritall nature with our spirits. Hee that useth this water aright and in season, shall be restored, corroborate, and so armed with strength, that he may afterwards more easi∣lie and readily shake of diseases: of whose comforting help nature being destitute may sooner succumbe. For if our naturall 
bal∣same,
 the shining torch and lampe of our life faile either through defect of proper ali∣ment, or bee confined and retrenched by dregs and ashes obstructing, or impeded be any other cause from exercing its livelie flame, for the conservation of our life, then and in that case it must be restored, fortifi∣ed & inlarged with this 
balsamick
 medicine, the true and naturall tincture of such whole∣some minerals, that it may afterwards ab∣solutely, exerce its functions, which come from a friendly harmonie which this

balsa∣mick
 medicine hath with our naturall 
bal∣same:
 And from this sympathie and simili∣tude 
of nature this our water is indued with great activity, spirituall and penetrative, for it attenuats, digests, dissolves and evacuats these feculent oppilations which threaten danger to our health and life. If there bee any impuritie or corruption offending na∣ture, by what better and more safe way can it be extirped then be so excellent and pure a thing as this? If any ardent fever invade us, with what sharp 
julep,
 with what more con∣venient and efficacious 
syrup
 of limons shal you extinguish it, then with the 
balsamick
 aciditie of our medicinall water? is their pain to quench, let this be your 
Anodyn,
 this your only and safe

Nepenthes,
 this your safest 
Triacle,
 your wholesome

Alexiphar∣macum
 and 
Antidote
 to abolish and extirpate poysonable, pestilent and maligne qualities; no 
Bezoar
 naturall nor artificiall, animall, minerall or metallick: no 
Alkermes
 compa∣rable to this for corroborating the heart, that our bodies may by its comforting help continue in lively strength and vigour: these and many more vertues are proper to this 
Panacea
 and universall medicine, these are 
the vertues of our medicinall 
balsamick
 wa∣ter, working together with our naturall 
bal∣same:
 which naturall balsame is the only go∣verner and conserver of life, the only pre∣server of health, and expeller of diseases: for if 
morbus
 be 
affect us contra naturam actiones laedens,
 altogether contrary to our naturall

balsams,
 and 
nectar
 of life, which is nothing but nature, or an assisting instrument so con∣joyneds; that without its help nature can per∣fect or do nothing: then if the functions be weakned, corrupt or altogether abolished, it must necessarily follow that our naturall

bal∣same
 in some part is hurt, since it it is cer∣taine that all the laudable functions flow from it: This it that 
 of Hippo∣crates: this is that dispensator making attra∣ctions, expulsions, mixtions, coctions of aliments. This naturall 
balsame
 is not sub∣ject to alterations in its own substance, since it is of an aethereal and heavenly nature, and somewhat incorruptible, but its action is retarded or hindred by impediments, lurking in our internall members and entrailes, brea∣ding trouble and labour to that 
balsame.


Hence it the occasion, the generation, the chief foundation of diseases:


Inextirping of diseases nature is to be re∣stored to its entire and pristine estate, to which end all our cogitations should tend, having first taken away the impediments: which intentions are perfected by the onlie restauration of our naturall 
balsame,
 (from which all healthfull 
Crises
 depends) by the help of the medicinall balsame, which is in nothing else more powerfull and opera∣tive then in this our

S. Peters well,
 being pure separating, correcting, roborating, expel∣ing: exercing the rest of its functions, as the nature of the patient requireth, without vi∣olence or perturbation of the body. Which waterye may use as the proper 
vehiculum
 of all medicines for all diseases: for its salt is de∣tersive, purgative, diuretick, an universall voyder and corrective of all impurities and corruptions its 
sulphur
 a generall and spiri∣tuall Anodyne, its 
mercurie
 an universall confortative and nutritive, which being all conjoyned in our water by the industrious working of nature, can furnish us means, not 
only for defence, but also for expulsion and suppression of diseases.


Now since this water brings with it the 
salt, sulphur,
 and 
mercurie
 of minerals, it must also be able to cure all diseases, bred from a regression of these three principles from their naturall state in our bodies: as first the diseases of resolved salt, which are Tumors, or excrescences, inlarging the whole or a part of mans body more nor the naturall constitution and competency requireth by the resolution of salt into liquor: unto which are referred the 
leucophlegmatick
 kynd of 
dropsies, anasarca, ascites, the vterinedropsy, hydrocephalum, diabetes, cachexia,
 the dissolu∣tion of salt throughout the whole body, 
fi∣cus, psidracus,
 all soft phlegmatick tumors.


A disease of coagulate salt is 
Tartar,
 con∣taining all kynd of calculs or stones, what∣somever part of the body they be bred in∣to, as sand and stones in the head, stomach, kidneys and bladder, the Tartar of the 
hy∣pochondres,
 begetting the hypochondriack melancholy, the 
Tophes
 and knots bred in the gut and joynts &c.




This Tartar is the nearest and imme∣diate cause of the stone and gut, as the acri∣mony or some other quality of the salt, nox∣ious to the sensible parts of the joynts is the cause and action of lesse or greater paine, according to the diversity of the 
Tartar
 or salt contained in the joyntures, since some salt is more sharp and mordicant then ano∣ther, some bitter, some sweetish, and some insipide.


A disease of reverberate 
salt
 is a defiling of the skin: to which pertains the venerean diseases, the french poxe, leprosie, scur∣vie, &c.


A disease of inflamed sulphur is called 
 which is nothing but an inflammati∣tion or kindling of sulphur in the whole body or in some certain part thereof, whence the heat of all the body is augmented, and is found and known unnaturall to the touch without, in the whole or in some part of the body. To which are referred all kind of agues,

burnings,
 and 
intermitting, putride
 and not 
putride, hectick, ophthalmick, inflāmations, phlegmons, erysiples
 or

Rose,
 wild-fire, or 
ig∣nis 
persicus,
 the english peste, 
squinance, gan∣grene, &c.


A disease of resolved 
sulphur
 is a 
flux,
 and resolution of the 
sulphur
 in the parts of our body, as

dysenteries, diarrhes, lienteries, vomi∣tes
 and all unnaturall excretions.


A disease of coagulate 
sulphur
 is called

co∣ma,
 or 
sopor,
 containing under it all kinde of sleeping and drowsie diseases, as the 
thargie, giddinesse
 of the head, 
somnolentia, cataphora, caros, myopia &c.


Mercurie
 makes regression from its natu∣rall state by a dry or humide destillation.


The diseases of the first is an inflammati∣on, when some part of the body suffers pain by 
flatus
 included, or flowing thereto, as all kinde of flatulent phlegmatick tumors, scro∣fules or crowels,

melliceria, myrmecia,
 flatu∣ous throwing of the 
colick,
 Tympanie, pier∣cing pains &c.


The disease of an humide destillation of 
mercurie,
 is a convulsion, when mercurie resolved into liquor molests the nervous parts: hence come 
apoplexies, palsies, epilepsies, tetanus, emprostotonos,
 trembling of the heart, 
the night 
mare, crampes, tenesmus, yexing,
 which is a convulsive motion of the sto∣mach, &c.


The disease of sublimed 
mercurie
 com∣prehends under it all these diseases which pearce the membranes with fervor, as

mad∣nesse, phrenesie, migraine, peste, pleurisie, con∣sumptions
 with exulcerations of the 
pulmons, apostemes, charboncles,
 &c.


The disease of precipitate mercurie is, 
arthritis,
 and all diseases which hurt the ex∣tremities of bones & ligaments, as

chiragra, podagra, scriatick,
 the 
doggish appetite &c.


Which diseases, proceeding from a di∣gression of

salt,
 from its naturall state by so∣solution, coagulation, reverberation: of 
sul∣phur,
 by its inflammation, resolution, coa∣gulation: of 
mercurie
 by its dry and humide destillation, sublimation, precipitation, 
un∣de actio partis necess;ario laeditur,
 are cured by the 
salt, sulphur,
 &

mercurie
 of minerals, con∣veighed to us from the innermost parts of the earth by our 
Petrean
 waters, to the glory of GOD, and our particular comfort.


And thus have I spoken anent the medi∣cinall 
vertues of this water in curing of hu∣mane diseases, which are common to men and women: and now I must tell you that its vertues are not confined within the com∣passe of this generalitie, that do not reach to the particular diseases of the infirmer sexe, which as it is more lovely and delicate then the other, so is it more opportune to the own defects, and is obnoxious to some pro∣per diseases, as far different from those of men, as the sexe is from the sexe.


This water helpeth, as other common di∣seases, so barrennesse in both: but in the wea∣ker sexe the 
pale
 colours, theimmoderate 
evacuation
 or 
retention
 in their desired sicknes, insurrection, precipitation, suffocation and other diseases of the mother: and in a word by removing al impediments of beauty (for diseases impare the beauty with the health) makes them look clear, fair, beautifull ra∣ther like angels then mortals: in such sort that I doe not admire that many of the ancient divins affirm that the sons of GOD, that is the angels, loved the daughters of men, and begat with them gyants. For at

that time before the flood, the custome was to drink waters, and I warrant you, the choisest: which made women look so fair, that the angels were taken with their love: and if Angels were, it is no uncouth thing to see men taken with the same beauty.




When the Petrean waters are to be taken.


GEnerally all seasons, when the weather is good, and the aire dry, and clear, are convenient to drink of this water, abstaining when the air is ful of hanging clouds, threat¦ning us with rain, or foggy mists. In win∣ter there is more strength in our water then any other time, because then the subterrane∣an heat is greater, 
per antiperistasin,
 sending forth in greater abundance, the tinctures of what is there included. But because in May, Iune, Iuly, August, ordinarly their is fairest and hotest weather, and longest dayes, gi∣ving opportunitie to walk, and use exercise for helping the digestion of the waters, these months are thought fittest for drinking: not∣withstanding that all kinde of medicine in the canicular dayes with many be odious, founding on that aphorisme of Hippocra∣tes, 
exoriente cane & ante canis exortum, per∣difficiles sunt purgationes:
 meaning that the great and burning heat of that time, is able to cast us in fevers, after any kinde of immode∣rate evacuation, by medicine. Yet Hippo∣crates doth not altogether forbid the use of medicine, about that time, but tells us only that it is difficult. The medicaments used in his time, were Hellebore, without any good preparation, or some such other violent me∣dicament, which we in this our age will use in no time of the year, without great and ex∣quisite preparation. For if he had known the use of 
Cassia, manna, Rubarbe, syrup ro∣sat, &c.
 he had never mentioned any danger in the canicular dayes. You must also distin∣gush the place, he lived in a hote countrey, we in a cold. The most part of physicians affirme, that the spring and automne are the most proper times for medicine, because then the aire is most temperate, without pearcing cold, or scorching heat: we in Scot∣land are troubled at no time with heat, the summer distinguished chiefly from the win∣ter, by the longer sojourning of the sun in 
our horizon, wherefore it is most agreable with reason to take medicine in Scotland in our hottest season. When the air is too hote remain in a cold chamber: if cold, cause it be∣come warme with fire, and in so doing you may safely purge, phlebotomise, sweat, bath and so forth any time or season in the year.






How the Petrean waters are to be taken.


HE who is to drink of this water, either for curing disease, restoring health lost: or to preserve it being present, avoyding fu∣ture inconveniences: shal come to this Wel in a convenient tyme of the year, whereof now I have spoken, resting the first day after arrivall: the next day purge with fit and con∣venient medicines, either powders, potions, pilles, syrups, juleps &c. 
cum regimine,
 by the advise of some Medicin, because diversi∣ty of diseases require diverse medicaments, since some have their stomach and intestines oppressed with tough and glewie phlegme: some their liver and gall obstructed: some their melt hardned with melancholy juyce: some their reins and bladder burdened with 
sand, stones, pituite, viscide and tartareous humors, and so forth. Therefore let the medicament be proper having respec to the humor which is peccant. The day follow∣ing purgation, let him come to the Well, (neither fear any 
Hypercatharsis
) early in the morning, yet after the sun rising, and drink so much even the first day, while he finde his stomach full, not loadned, walking a little betwixt every two or three glasses, taking in the mean tyme, some confected anise, coriander, cinamom, or some good tablets proper for the disease: or tobacco to help the stomach to daunt and vanquish the actuall coldnesse of the water; which done walk, ride, or exercise your self with goaf∣ing, bowling, or some such other exercise, (for the Petrean fields are as the Elisian, for such exercises) whilst the most part of the waters bee voyded, which will be so soone as the urine doth begin to bee coloured. Then dine with meats of good digestion: let the better sort drink wine moderatly, others ale or beere. Afternoon beguile the time, with reading, talking, walking, daun∣cing, 
singing, dicing, carding &c. Then sup lightly with a tosty of bread, some raisins of the sun, or some such other thing, of good and easie digestion. Use this kynd of doing 20. 30. 40. 50. dayes or so long, as the disease requireth, or affaires can permit. Aday after you leave off the drinking of wa∣ter, take some other good purgative medi∣cine, resting aday after, then take journey to go whither you list.


Live temperatly a long time after the drinking of the water in a clear, pure, wholesome aire to breath on: eating meats of good digestion to suffice nature, not gree∣die appetit: sleeping to refresh, not to dull your spirits: waking to drive away stupidi∣tie, dulnesse, and drowsineesse from your braines, not to wast, consume, and dry your bodies: using exercise for recreation, not to weary: taking rest for a remeed to your wea∣rinesse, restoring strength, that your bodies may be made more fit, to indure new travels and labours: avoyde repletion of the belly, intestins and veins, by moderate evacuation of nature, and if slow, make help by art: nei∣ther 
violent, to resolve your spirits, or to evacuate with excrements your souls. Flee perturbations of the minde: and in so do∣ing, by the grace of God, you shall continue healthful, even to your lives end. To which I pray GOD happily to bring us all, throgh IESUS CHRIST, Amen.








We have thought good to in∣sert in this place, some approved re∣ceiptes, fitto be taken before, after, and in the mean tyme, of drinking of our Petrean waters.




A potion.


R. of sene vnc. 
ss.
 Cinamom. drag. 
ss.
 of the marrow of Cassia fistula, vnc. 1. salt of tartar. drag.

ss.
 which infuse in lib. 
ss.
 of the Petrean water, cold, 12 hours, straine it, and dissolve therein of suggar ro∣sat. vnc. 1 .syrop of pale roses vnc. 
ss.
 which give discretly to all kinde of persons, young 
men and maides, old men and babes. It is harmelesse, pleasant to the taste, and purges well and strongly.






Another.


Take of manna, syrop of pale roses an. Vnc. 2. crystall tartar, drag. 1. dissolve them in abroth.






A good electuary.


Take of electuar. lenit. vnc. 2. pul. sen, vnc. 
ss.
 cryst. tartar. drag. vi. mixe them with the syrop of pale roses.






A potion.


Take of the cold infusion of cassia fistula in the Petrean water, vnc. vi. mixe with it of pul. sen. laxat. Ruland. drag. 1.

ss.






Syrup. benedictus.


Take of the whole Cichory, of Celidone an. manip. iij of lig. vitae of sarsa parill. ana. vnc. 2. of sasafras, of crystall tartar, pul. no∣stri emetici, & benedict. an. vnc. 1. boyle these things, in agood sufficient quantity of the Petrean water, to the consumption of two parts: wherein put sufficient quantity of suggar. Adde thereto of Venice theriack. vnc. 1. confect. alkerm. drag. 2.




The effects of this blessed syrop, are mo
 nor ordinary, in extirping the roots of de∣plorable diseases: it purgeth up and down without violence and may be given safely to all ages and sexes, with discretion.






For expelling the stone.


Take of the barke of the ash tree lib. 2. Iuniper feed lib. 3. Venice turpentine lib, 2. 
ss.
 mixe them with three pints of the Petrean water, and distil it after the manner of other oyls. This oyl being taken in the mean time or before the drinking of our waters, breaks and expells the stone.






Another.


Take of tartar vitriolate vnc. 
ss.
 of Iulep rosat vnc. iij. cannel water vnc. 1 mixe them and you shall finde an efficacious and profi∣table detersive of the reins.






For the jaundise.


Boyl in the 
Petrean
 water, of Rad. & Flor. Chelid. Hyperic an. M. 1. ebor. of 
. an. drag. 3. of safran drag.

ss.
 of suggar-candi. vnc. 1. whereof make 3. doses for 3 dayes together.




FINIS.









