A description of the prosperitie, strength, and wise gouernment of the vnited Prouinces of the Netherlands Signified by the Batauian virgin, in her seat of vnitie. Wherein is related the whole state of those countries at this present time.
Approx. 52 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 14 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A08071




STC 18437



ESTC S113182





99848421




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A description of the prosperitie, strength, and wise gouernment of the vnited Prouinces of the Netherlands Signified by the Batauian virgin, in her seat of vnitie. Wherein is related the whole state of those countries at this present time.
[28] p.   


At London :


Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Edward Marchant,


1615.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Netherlands --  History --  Twelve Years' Truce, 1609-1621 --  Early works to 1800.
2012-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-07
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-09
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2012-09
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18437


S113182


99848421


13514














A DESCRIPTION OF THE PROSPE∣RITIE, STRENGTH, AND WISE GOVERNMENT of the vnited Prouinces of 
the Netherlands.
 SIGNIFIED BY THE BATAVIAN VIRGIN, in her seat of vnitie. WHEREIN IS RELATED THE WHOLE state of those countries at this present time.




printer's device of Felix Kingston, featuring two clasped hands emerging from clouds, holding a caduceus and two cornucopias (McKerrow 274)


 BY WISDOME PEACE BY PEACE PLENTY




AT LONDON,
 Imprinted by FELIX KYNGSTON, for 
Edward Marchant.
 1615.














A DESCRIPTION OF THE PROSPERITY, STRENGTH, AND WISE GO∣uernment of the vnited Prouinces 
of the Netherlands.


See how by wisedome Hollands house doth flourish,


And trust not Leopards craft that warre doth nourish.




A Friend to his natiue Countrey.


G
Od saue you 
Batauian
 gentlewoman, I am very glad to see you thus triumphantly set in your throne of freedome, it seemes the world goes better with you now then it did in times past.






The Batauian gentlewoman.


In deede (my good friend) it is true that it is otherwise with me now then it was heretofore: for now (God bethanked) I am in my first and pristinate state.






Friend.


Is it better with you now (gentlewoman) then it was? and are you as you said in your former ancient state? and how vn∣derstand you that? I pray you tell me.






Batauia.


My good friend, marke the particulars, as I shall set them downe plainely vnto you, and you shall easily vnderstand it. I was long since, in former time a free State; but after that, I fell

into great slauerie and bondage, and now at this present I am restored againe to my former liberty and free state. For when my first founders came hither into this free countrey, which as that time belonged not vnto any man in perticular, but onely vnto those that first tooke possession thereof, and inhabited the same (according to the Law of nature,) in this free place they built me this house, which was called the 
Batauian
 go∣uernment, and at this time the Holland Common-wealth, wherin I placed my seat or Throne, called freedome or liberty.






Friend.


Had you at the first no soueraigne Gouernour, that had the chiefe command ouer your house, and houshold?






Batauia.


The gouernment of my house was committed vnto two States, chosen and appointed out of mine owne people and in∣habitants; that is, the noblest and honourablest men amongst them, and the best and greatest Citizens and inhabitants of the same. These were the principall Commanders of my house and houshold, who for the better gouernment thereof, made cer∣taine customes and lawes for the strengthening of peace there∣in, and had a great care ouer the same, for the preseruation of the Common-wealth.


And in processe of time, there was a principall person (as a King) chosen out of those two States, who as the chiefest of∣ficer or high Steward, had the principall command ouer it and the common-wealth.






Friend.


Then your forefathers in time past were gouerned after a princely manner by a chiefe Commander.






Batauia.


Yea, Kings by name; as 
Veromerus,
 who was called the first 
Batauian
 King, who notwithstanding was but the chiefe man, amongst the principall persons of the Land, and had the first command, and chiefe authoritie thereof.


So were all the rest that succeeded him, Kings ouer my 
Ba∣tauian
 Land, but had more authority to giue their counsell and aduice for the gouernment thereof, then power to command

and rule ouer it. For the other Rulers and States that were cho∣sen out of the Nobilitie and Commons, had as much power or superintendance ouer the King, as the King had ouer them, who with him together ruled the Land. But the King had an vpper command, or highest power permitted him, but not by authority or power, of, or in himselfe: onely in regard and respect of his princely name he was obeyed, and his authority allowed with great reuerence and respect, and yet he himselfe neuerthelesse subiect to the Lawes of the Land, as is ordinary in electiue, not hereditarie Kings.






Friend.


Hereby I perceiue, that your house (called the 
Batauian
 Gouernment) from the very first originall thereof was a free Common-wealth, and your commonaltie, free people.






Batauia.


We were neuer subiect vnto any forraine Nations, but one∣ly to our elected Gouernour and States, together with the lawfull and probable Lawes, made for the good gouernment thereof, whereunto euery man willingly submitted himselfe. In this state we continued long time before the Romane Mo∣narchie, and were vnited vnto the same, and by her liued in peace, although the Romans had the sole command and go∣uernment of the greatest part of the world, and yet they were content to account of my forefathers, as their vnited friends; acknowledging my house to be a free State, and calling my houshold seruants the 
Batauian
 commonaltie; and when they had any warres, and were aided by vs therein, they called vs their fellowes, and companions, (as 
Iulius Caesar
 did,) and which is more, esteemed vs as their brethren, friends, and vni∣ted neighbours, in regard of the great aide and strength they found at our hands, to helpe them in their need against their enemies.






Friend.


Then the Romans had no imperiall command ouer the 
Ba∣tauian
 Countrey, when they were Monarches of the world.






Batauia.


No. For my forefathers of 
Baetauia
 (according to their an∣cient

Lawes) were still gouerned by their owne people, which continued aboue an hundred yeeres, during the Romane Mo∣narchie, vntill such time as their friendship turned into de∣ceit, and extreame oppression, seeking to rob and spoyle mee and my Land, with pretence to turne my freedome into slauery and bondage, contemning our vnity, and wholly forgetting the forepassed friendship and aide by vs formerly shewed, and done vnto them. For which cause my forefathers tooke armes in hand, and began a lawfull warre, for the defence and safe∣gard of mine honour and freedome, whereby the name of the Romans, in short time, was wholy driuen away, & cleane roo∣ted out, wherein personally they neuer had any absolute au∣thority nor gouernment. For the which my 
Batauian
 people were so much honoured and esteemed of, that as then they were called and held to be the authors of the freedome and li∣berty of our neighbours, and other Princes, who likewise were vnder the subiection of the Romans: but I obtained my free∣dome againe, and after that continued long in my free state, and was gouerned by my two states of the Land, vntill the sauage Normans came and inuaded vs.






Friend.


Was it then at that time that you began to be gouerned by Earles?






Batauia.


I, but not as Soueraigne Gouernours, but onely chosen as chiefe Commanders, to serue in stead of Iudges, wee subie∣cting our selues willingly vnder their command, esteeming and holding them worthie to be our Protectors, and to haue the superintendance ouer our 
Batauian
 gouernment, but had no power (by authority) to alter the Lawes and customes, nor to raise tolles, nor impositions, without the consent and good will of the two States, but were bound by oath to defend and maintaine the Lawes and priuiledges of the Land, and to sub∣iect themselues thereunto.






Friend.


Whereby it appeareth that neuer any Prince nor Earle had Soueraignty, or chiefe power alone, ouer you and your house?








Batauia.


No: for in the time of the Earles, there haue been some of them that by their bad gouernment and life, became oppres∣sors of the Lawes and customes of the Land, and for that cause their authority was misliked, and they put out of their com∣mand. As it happened to the Ladie 
Iacobe,
 Countesse of Hol∣land, from whom because of her disorders, and wilfulnesse in her gouernment, against the priuiledges of the Land. The command ouer my house was taken away, and transported vn∣to 
Philip
 Duke of Burgundie, which 
Batauian
 gouernment in processe of time, and by marriages, was changed and fell into the house of Austria, and after that to 
Charles
 the first, Empe∣rour of Rome, (who with the good will and voices of all the States of my house) made ouer the 
Batauian
 Principality vnto his sonne 
Philip,
 certifying him of my priuiledges, and the na∣ture of my subiects addicted vnto rest and freedome, with an earnest charge and warning giuen him, to haue a great regard and respect of the 
Batauian
 Common-wealth, and to gouerne them with a mild and fatherly affection: for that he esteemed the same to be the best branch of his Crowne, which hee with Princely words and oathes promised to performe; but the contract being made, and he hauing the authority in his hands, wee straight found a great alteration in our 
Batauian
 house; for that he being a Spaniard, both by birth and conditions, a great Prince, and very powerfull, and had the Soueraigne command ouer many Kingdomes, and Principalities, did not respect our 
Batauian
 liberty, nor once esteemed our priui∣ledges, but contrary to his promise, brake his Princely oath.






Friend.


By this meanes your free State was turned into a bondage.






Batauia.


That is true, by this meanes my troubles began. For in stead of naturall borne Princes to protect my house, I got strange outlandish wasters and destroyers thereof, who therein made a fearfull stur, with most strange and great exactions, cruelties, and tyrannies ouer our liues and goods; to the end he might procure the breaking of the ancient authority of my priui∣ledges,

the weakening of my lawes, and the abolishing of my liberty: But I seeing the beginning of my ouerthrow, the weake condition of my house, and the subuersion of my peo∣ple, was compelled to seeke meanes for the preseruation of my maidenly liberty, against those that sought to spoyle and be∣reaue me thereof; but finding my selfe in a manner very weak, by reason that diuers of my principall houshold seruants fled from me, and that I was almost cleane spoyled of my houshold stuffe, yea and my seat very neere taken from vnder me, which I had so long held and enioyed from my ancestors, for that the feet thereof were almost drawne and broken each from the o∣ther; whereby in a manner I sat so wagling, that I could not deuise how I should sit faster, by reason of my weake estate. But taking courage, I made meanes vnto my neighbours for aide; but where I expected security and support, (ere I was a∣ware) I had like to haue been cleane spoyled: for by the aide that was sent me, my house, Court, and Throne, was rather in worse case then it was before.


Whereupon my principall officers were by necessity com∣pelled to seeke to marrie mee vnto some one, that by his aide they might haue meanes to helpe me and themselues. But not long before I had had a good example set before mine eyes, of another maide, one of my neighbours, who by her welwillers was perswaded to 
Handt-werpe,
 that is, to betroth her selfe vn∣to him that sought to bring her to 
Val-loos,
 that is, to the de∣struction of her and all her people.


This made me (I say) to goe to my crosse neighbour, (who also was esteemed a maide) to get some aide of her, to helpe to fasten my Seate, and thereby to hold a fit place to sit in; for without that, they pretended to haue broken downe my 
Bata∣uian
 house, and to haue made a bridge therof at their pleasure, to haue gone ouer to my neighbours, thereby to obtaine the like dominion and power ouer them; and their meaning also was, vpon the old foundations and ruines of my 
Batauian
 house, to erect and build vp a new Spanish regiment, and to take my seate from me, and to turne it cleane ouer, as if I had had no voyce nor command therein: which made some of my

fugitiue friends and welwillers to looke backe, and to stirre vp my neighbours, who as then vpheld and maintained me in my right, against those that thought to haue thrust mee cleane out of it, and by my ouerthrow to haue ouer-runne my neighbors, which was done by the commandement of that Spanish Earle, who as a fatherly protector was placed ouer me, according to his oath and promise to defend my maidenlike honour: but he sought by strange ruffians to violate mine honour, to ruinate my house and Court, (which notwithstanding was one of his fairest palaces) and also my houshold seruants, esteeming all as nothing; and which is more, sought to make my people slaues, without once respecting my 
Batauian
 state, which is a Demo∣craticke gouernment. By this meanes (I say) hath hee by his vnspeakeable tyrannicall gouernment, and vnlawfull vsurpari∣on, lost the rule and pretended right (by my old customes and ancient priuiledges) that he had, by the aide and helpe of my neighbours and friends that stood in doubt of further mis∣chiefe to come, aided by the power of the principall and chiefe Iudge of Iudges, who after 40. yeeres troubles, hath redcuced and placed me in my former seate of ancient freedome.






Friend.


Gentlewoman, you haue now shewed me the state of your old freedome, and withal of your troubles forepassed, whereof you say you are now freed. From hence forth therefore shew your maidenlike wisedome, by calling to remembrance things past, wisely to consider of things present, & well to foresee that which is to come, and which concerneth you neere. Therefore let not your forepassed blowes (by a deceitfull bright sunne-shining time) so soone be forgotten. For that many times after faire weather commeth a storme, you doe well to sit at your doore, to see whether it be cleere weather abroad; for in truth for these 40. yeeres together you haue endured many, and too many stormie winds, mightie raines, hailes, thunders, light∣nings, and fierie flames.






Batauia.


Erasmus
 saith very well and truly, that industrious labour makes a man rich. So haue I (by Gods helpe) and industrious

labour, with defensiue warre ouercome and withstood the great force and power of my tyrannous enemie, and such as haue by him been ouercome, and forced to flee their countrey, and to liue like strangers in other countreyes; I haue with their wiues, children, and goods receiued into my house, and giuen them lodging therein. Whereby I got both thankes and furtherance, which to him was a weakening and enfeebling, and to me a strengthening and fortification, which happened most hereabouts. But he fearing further mischiefe, (perceiuing my fortunate proceedings,) was forced to seeke to me, (who at the first he contemned and esteemed of no account; yea in a manner thought verily to bee his owne) to make peace with him, and to acknowledge me to be a free State, without once pretending to haue any right of gouernment ouer mee, and so I once againe got my long contentions (and almost cleane lost) freedome into my hands. By the acknowledging and a∣greement of my enemies themselues, who iudged it to bee my lawfull right, which in truth happened and came to passe by an accusation of his owne conscience, and a compulsiue neces∣sitie, possessed with a desperate hope of neuer to ouercome me. These were the speciall things that moued him thereunto, and not because hee desired peace, nor for any good will that hee bare vnto the welfare of my house, and houshold seruants. Ne∣uerthelesse, I haue recouered mine ancient freedome, and hope to continue in this my maidenlike state, by his aide and po∣werfull helpe that hath seene my misery, and hath euidently in the sight of all the world holpen and freed mee from the Spa∣nish yoake.






Friend.


God be praised, thanked, and glorified therefore, and to him must you pray, and in him firmely trust. But it is commonly said, that where there is no care, there is no feare: for while that you are now free and in good estate, you must bee carefull for your selfe and your houshold, and that in twofold manner:


First, to looke well about you, that you be not deceiued nor ouer-runne by those from whom you haue been deliuered, and haue freed your selfe from their bondage, because they haue

done that they did vpon meere necessity, and not for any loue they bare to you.


Secondly, that you must bee prouident to prouide for that which is needfull and necessarie for you in time of need, that in time of want you run not to borrow corne of your neighbours to feed your geese withall: for a learned man wrote not in vaine, when he said, Happie is that Land, which in time of peace thinketh vpon warre. And another learned Philosopher teacheth vs, that a man must not trust his recon∣ciled enemy too much: therefore now you sit quietly and free∣ly in your house and possessions, it standeth you vpon to fur∣nish your house well with 4. most necessarie things, wherein the whole, and all the state thereof consisteth.


First, you must haue true, trustie, and prouident houshold seruants, such as seeke not their owne good, but the profit of the common State, and those that will not lightly by them∣selues take any thing in hand, that may bee burthensome and hurtfull to the Common-wealth, and the subiects thereof.


Secondly, fit houshold stuffe, such as is honest, necessarie, seruiceable and furtherly in a house, to bee vsed for the seruice of the Common-wealth.


Thirdly, good prouision of such things, as in such a house (as yours is) are most necessarie and conuenient, as Chests, Ware-houses, and sellers, well furnished.


Fourthly, and lastly, you must specially bee prouided of that wherewith you may doe most, and which by men is most desi∣red, for that thereby you may get whatsoeuer you will, yea and almost as much as you will.


All this is needfull for you to doe, whereof you are to haue a great care to bee prouided, that against an assault, or a hard and bad time, you may helpe your selfe, by your selfe.


Also it is conuenient for the female kind (specially a free maide as you are,) not to haue too much conuersation with strange men, specially with such as in times past sought to vio∣late your chastitie; yet I doubt not of your good behauiour in any wise, because you haue already withstood many as∣saults, and by meanes of your honest minde and courage,

haue hitherto ouercome all stormes whatsoeuer.






Batauia.


My good friend, I am warned to bee watchfull, but I hope God will preserue and defend both me and my houshold.


For the first, I haue true and prouident houshold seruants, in my 
Batauian
 dominion, (according to the ancient manner) first, an ouerseer of the house, (called father of the Countrey,) then my two States, the noblest persons of the Land, and the men of greatest account among the Commons, who haue all the care, and speciall charge of the state of my house, both in peace and warre. Secondly, I haue conuenient and profitable houshold stuffe, as good counsell, and vpright dealing, where∣with my 
Batauian
 house is furnished, as with a heauenly and bright shining light, thereby to behold things past, to marke things present, and to foresee things to come. The other are as instruments in needfull and profitable things, to serue the state of the Land, (each one according to his qualitie and conditi∣on) when time shall require. Thirdly, (God bee praised) my house is well prouided, (and daily more and more shall be) of that which shall serue for the Common-wealth, and such as my housholding requireth. First, my Chests and Wardrops are well furnished with apparell of all sorts; that is, of good iron dublets, steele gloues, stiffe shining collars, with the appurte∣nances, all faire and well kept, that when I haue need of them they are readie at hand; my warehouses are well prouided of fireage, which is made of black wood coales, brimstone, & falt∣peter, therewith easily to set fire on my turfe, which are round, and as hard as iron, and great heauie fiery arrowes, wherewith to make a good fire against winter and hard frosts. And for my sellars, I haue yet a great many brasse vessels therein, to wel∣come such as come to visit me, honourably; and in diuers ca∣ges I haue many old geese, that when there is a faire, I may set some of them before my friends to welcome them withall. Now for that wherewith I can doe most, (which is money) I haue my vnited Commons, which are foure faithfull and tru∣stie labourers; that is, Husbandmen, Burgers of townes, Say∣lors, and Souldiers, (who at this time for a while are at their

rest, and liue quietly.) These are all fast bound together with the band of vnitie, and are they that at all times wil make pro∣uision for my 
Batauian
 house, and Hollands garden, whatsoe∣uer I shall want. For my Husbandmen at this present are well prouided of corne, and other necessaries, and sell it as deare, al∣most, as they will or can, which also is apparant by the deck∣ing of his wise and children with gold and siluer which they daily weare. The townesmen also build great and high houses, which within are richly furnished with excellent faire hous∣hold stuffe and moueables; as Tapistrie, siluer, and guilt plate, and hee himselfe, and his wife and children, richly apparelled and smugd vp in silke and veluet, laid on with gold and siluer lace, making great bankets; all which are signes of prosperity, and are euery one industrious to maintaine themselues in good estate; some by vsurie, others by trade at home, and some by merchandising, euery man striuing not to bee the least a∣mongst the rest. The Sailor saileth farre and wide for strange merchandize; and if a rouer sets vpon him at sea, hee can play his part so well, that he shall get nothing at his hands; and ma∣ny times lookes himselfe for such a prize, so that it oft falleth out that he can saile with a by-legger, better thē he doth when he saileth before the winde. But the Souldier likes not of this sleepie calme weather, hee rather desires to bee rustling in the field, to shew himselfe a gallant. But the other three are very rich, and haue great meanes to helpe me, (I could not know it so well, but that they by their superfluitie makes it manifest to all men) for which cause I and my houshold are bound to haue a great care for them, and the Common wealth, for that they without me, and I without them, would bee a meanes to ouer∣throw both me and my house, and also the commonaltie, and euery one of them in their perticular states would come to nothing. For if the band of vnitie should breake, or by con∣tention become loose, it would bee their destruction, and my ouerthrow out of my Throne.






Friend.


I would faine see the pales of your gardens, and the manner of building about your house, or else of you heare the dis∣course

of the whole situation thereof, while you are now in a free state.






Batauia.


My Holland garden is bordered about with a willow hedge or hurdle, called 
Fidelity;
 at the entry whereof there is a stile, ouer the which my watchfull (many eyed Lion) with his two forefeet stands looking, there to hold sharpe watch. Then within, before the stile, and beninde the Lion, standeth a high 
Orange
 tree, with a young sprig or branch at the foot thereof, both comming out of an old root of a tree that hath been cut downe: round about this tree there is a root planted, called 
Gods blessing.
 In the middle of the garden there standeth an old high strong 
Piramides,
 called 
Priuiledge,
 closed about with a medicinable graft, called 
Gods grace.
 This garden is made of, and filled vp with good Holland earth, out of the which the Spanish vnfruitfull power is wholly rooted vp; and therefore in, and round about it there groweth 
Good will, Good courage; Heart hearbe; Care seede:
 (Ladie marke) also, 
Golden flowers, Siluer hearbes, Lance hearbes, Knights spurres, Horse-mens herbe, Gun hearbe,
 and much 
Honour
 and 
Commendation.






Friend.


Is not your garden somtimes weeded and cleansed of weeds and hurtfull plants?






Batauia.


Yea: sor we were wont in times past to bee much troubled with great quantities of weedes; as with 
Force hearbe, Death hearbe, Catching roote, Feare hearbe, Pine apples, Blood herbe, Fier hearbe, Blacke hearbe,
 and 
Bitter gall nuts.
 But necessitie, and my houshold seruants, appointed two officers to looke vnto it, (which were 
Reason
 and 
Power
) each of them, as their turnes came, to weede it; for if it were not for these weeders, sometimes there would some weeds grow vp in a nights space before the Sun riseth; as 
Romish thistle, False lilies Fox hearbe, Strife flowers,
 and 
After-hurt.
 For not many yeers since, there grew a filthie hearb in my garden, called the 
Diuels Nay-thrid,
 and a hearbe called 
Diuels-beet,
 which stanke all ouer the garden, being of such a nature, that whosoeuer eate it, it made him enuious, and contentious; for it is of the kind of the seed

of the apple whereof 
Eua
 and 
Adam
 ate in Paradise, which then presently caused great contention betweene God and them, and so it did now also; for whosoeuer did eate thereof, thought that they were as wise as God, and knew all things, and for that cause thinking themselues to be wise in their own conceits, they fell at strife with their neighbours; but reason weeded out as much thereof as hee could, and in stead thereof planted a root called 
Part strife,
 which in time will grow to be a great hearbe, but the diuels 
Nay-thrid,
 ran almost cleane through the whole garden, and hath made the 
Orange tree
 for certaine yeers to stand stil at a bay, and not to blossome, which maketh many heere amongst vs to long for some of his fruit, if it were to be had; but the earth of my garden is so rich and fruitful, that if once a hot Spanish sun-shine should fall theron, (after the which a 
Batauian
 stroke-raine vseth to follow) we should presently see the blossomes and fruit of the 
Orange tree
 shew forth thēselues. Neuertheles we haue 
Oranges
 for a plea∣sant sawce, and a good sauour daily in my kitchin, and also for a refreshing we haue the faire 
Orange lilie,
 and the 
Roselike thistle flower,
 which is placed properly in seuerall beds in my garden.






Friend.


Now I haue heard the manner of the situation of your gar∣den: let me I pray you heare from you, what kind of building you haue in your house?






Batauia.


The foundation of my house is named 
Vnity:
 the principals thereof are made of great straight timber, lined and daubed with good vnited Netherlandish stones, the Hall thereof cal∣led the 
Batauian
 gouernment, is beautified with eight faire cleere windowes, and in the middle of them all standeth one specially, as a principall shield beautifying the same. The roofe of the house is couered ouer with faire shining shels, which couer is called 
Hardinesse.
 The entrie or gate thereof is named 
Victory:
 the posts and top of it are couered ouer with greene hearbes, in the middle whereof my seate standeth, called 
Free∣dome;
 made of firme ground wood: and aboue all the rest the signe of my house is 
Emanuel.
 Now my friend, you haue heard

and vnderstood the manner and forme of my house and gar∣den, wherein at this present I haue and hold my free habitati∣on; which, of almost a desperate lost inheritance, I haue made free againe, more by honest meanes, and true and lawfull right, then by forcible craftinesse, although my ill willers behind my backe report and say, that I decke my selfe with strange fea∣thers, when as they notwithstanding lurke and hide them∣selues vnder my wings; neuerthelesse I haue striuen as much for their freedomes, as I haue done for mine owne naturall and good peoples liberty.






Friend.


Gentletwoman, Doe you perceiue that which I see there, which is a strange show, it seemeth to bee a twin, or a body of two kindes, whereof the one halfe before seemeth to laugh friendly vpon you, with a sweet womanlike face; and the o∣ther halfe behinde, is armed with a cruell souldiers looke, and hath a monstrous great beast by him, wherein I take no plea∣sure.






Batauia.


This partie hath been heere some few yeeres since, and brought that beast with him into our 
Batauian
 house; but what shall I doe, seeing he lookes so smilingly vpon me, whe∣ther it be in outward shew, or in action, I will not as yet quar∣rell with him and mistrust him, before he leaues laughing, and then I will see, (and also aske him) what hee meaneth to doe, that he commeth here into my garden with such a hinder part, and so faire and pleasant a forepart.






Friend.


Doe you not thinke that he can soone turne that laughing countenance behind him from you, and place the bitter looke before: It was wont to be the Italian manner, and the Spanish custome: see you not that hee hath turned the hinder part of his face towards a troupe of souldiers, and the forepart towards you; the while that he with outward flearing face lookes on you: with the hinder part hee doth expect your ouerthrow; therefore it is fit that the Lion should take good heed vnto him.






Batauia.


But (my friend) doe you know what manner of man this is,

and doe you know the beast well? I haue long time cast mine eyes thereon: let me heare what your iudgement is of him, see∣ing you shew your selfe to bee so carefull for me.






Friend.


The happinesse of your state makes mee so carefull for you, but in my iudgment this man is one of the foure sorts or kinds of 
Hermaphrodites,
 (which are both men and women,) which is one of the worst kind of creatures that are liuing vpon the earth, if they may (without restraint) vse and shew forth their nature. For they can suffer themselues to be dealt withall in na∣ture of weake and effeminate women, with faire shewes, and sweet words to deceiue withall; and as a woman by nature is milde, they can bring their subtill practises, and deceitfull charmes to passe, which if they effect not in two or three yeeres, they doe it in 6. or 8. and somtimes in 10. or twelue.


Againe, these 
Hermophrodites
 (when they list) can bee like cruell and sturdie men, and can as well by force as by craft bring many things to passe, for they are without all measure wicked and hollow hearted.


Which for you (being a maide) is very dangerous, for thin∣king to see a womanlike face, and to heare an effeminate voyce, you should with the turning of an hand fall into a snare, and be deflowred, whereby your most noble and great fame should be ouerthrowne, and your praise-worthie name cleane defaced.


Batauia,
 this is my iudgement, and a forewarning for you concerning this person, and where you thinke this great sweet shining nosegay to be a Palme branch, it is not so; for it is a branch of a hearbe called 
Munkes hood,
 a venomous hearbe, which heretofore was rooted out of your garden, which hee hath taken vp again, therewith to bring you at length into a sound sleepe.






Batauia.


What thinke you of that monstrous beast, what beast, and of what kinde and nature is it?






Friend.


That may well and easily be seene and iudged by the speck∣led

skin that it hath, which is like a 
Nay-ed
 or patcht Monkes gowne; and therefore I thinke that it is naturally a 
Leopard,
 which is a greedie blood sucking beast, begotten of a 
Lionesse,
 by a 
Panther;
 and therefore it is called by a double signifying name, a 
Leopard.
 This beast although it is brought forth by a shee 
Lion,
 yet it is most greedie and eruelly bent to seeke the destruction of the male 
Lion:
 but as it is bloodily minded, so it is subtill and craftie, specially to intrap his greatest enemy the 
Lion,
 therby to fall vpon him and to destroy him: to the which end he is skilfull how to make double holes, one aboue the o∣ther, which run both into one, being wide aboue, and narrow or straite in the middle, whereinto he runneth, to get the 
Lion
 (following him) betweene them both, and so to entangle him∣selfe therein; in the meane time the 
Leopard
 leapes out at the other hole, and falleth vpon the backe of the 
Lion,
 for by that meanes the 
Lion
 cannot vse his strength against him; and so he sheweth his deceitfull nature and condition, which by sub∣tiltie he practiseth and bringeth to passe.


And yet at other times he hath shewed other 
Leopards
 tricks vpon the African 
Apes,
 and West-Indian 
Monkeyes:
 for vpon a time when hee spied many of them together, hee made as though he had been dead, or asleepe; in the meane time the 
Apes
 and 
Monkeyes
 came without feare out of their holes, (thinking to be free & out of doubt) and were very ioyful, and played many apish toyes one with the other, not doubting any thing, nor once so much as dreaming of the rising vp againe of their slumbring enemie, who like a 
Leopard
 lay lurking, and seeing time fit and conuenient, when those beasts were vnar∣med, and without feare, he rose vp out of his counterfeit slum∣ber, and falling vpon them, deuoured and tare in sunder the most part of them. This (Gentlewoman) serueth also for a war∣ning to you: for not long since, I heard you say, that you yet haue many old geese for prouision for your kitchin, whose cages you are to looke well to, lest this 
Leopard
 with craftie baytes and force comes not suddenly and deuoureth them, as he hath already deuoured many 
Lions
 and 
Monkeys,
 and the same would hee doe vnto your owne person also, if hee

had the meanes according to his will.


I meane this leering suiter, who with a craftie dissembling manner of suite, though not openly, seeking to get as neere vn∣to you as he can, as you may perceiue by his entry into 
Gulicke,
 and 
Cleaueland,
 and from thence to 
Marke,
 and meaneth not to leaue so, vntill he hath gotten something that may further his pretence for the warre, not by skirmishes, thereby to set forth your honour the more (which hee thinketh before this time to haue sufficiently tried) but by long and continuall po∣licie in the end to lay hold vpon you by force.


For he accounts you already to bee his owne, although ne∣uerthelesse (of meere necessity) hee did acknowledge you to be a free State.


But as he knoweth the nature of diuers slaues whom he hath vnder his subiection, and perceiues well that hee must not vse them one like another, to keepe them in bondage, and to get more, he hath therein a speciall watch vpon you, for the 
Ango∣lish, Sentomish,
 and 
Guineian
 Moores, were with great cru∣elty made his slaues, and with seueritie held in bondage. Whereas the 
Brasilian
 Nation were by deceit and policy be∣reaued of their freedome, and made his, and by compulsion holden slaues.


Now marke well Gentlewoman; at the first hee sought to you, now he begins to worke otherwise: in time past he began it by cruel 
Alua,
 whereby he put you into so great a feare, that hee was forced to call backe his executioner for your people were so wilde, that they from himselfe (as the author of the execution) got a discharge of him, so that thereupon came a great 
Commander,
 with a pardon for your obstinacie towards him, who ministred such Spanish figs (called pardons) that thereby you were almost choaked in the mier, and many of you died. After him came 
Don Iohn de Austria,
 to pacifie you, who at first seemed somewhat to encline to a peace, but in short time after he made an vproare amongst you againe. For that cause there was a strange present sent (but yet for more furtherance to his intent.) which was an Italian 
Parmasan:
 but perceiuing that it was too sweet for your taste, and not liked

of, he let the 
Parmasan
 rot, and began to come vpon you with a hastie 
Duch-Earust:
 but because your 
Batauians
 are milde of nature, and can see farre, hee tooke no pleasure in such 
Erust
 proceeding: then hee sent a red shining Spirituall man, that should make 
Albright,
 and cleare, thinking to ouercome your person, and the 
Batanian
 gouernment with his 
Claer Iu∣genious
 wit and behauiour, which he put in practise; but all in vaine: after that he came with craftie 
Spinners,
 (and now with leering 
Leopards
) but the 
Spinners
 webbe was too weake to catch you in: for that cause he spread another 
Nay-d,
 or broad net, which hee cast ouer your head; but it is so loose and so wide, that you can see cleerely through it, vnlesse that the shew of the nose gay should make your head so dissie, that by means of the venomous smel thereof, you should fall asleepe, and that is it which this leering 
Leopard
 lookes for: to bring you first to the 
Brasilian
 slauerie, then to deale with you as with the 
Guineans;
 and lastly, with the 
West-indians.
 Therefore preserue your freedome, and also shew that you are free; let not others appoint your lawes concerning that which toucheth you, for the preseruation of your house, and the defending of your next neighbours, which concerneth your selfe much, for which this 
Leopard
 hath long leered (Shipper looke out.)






Batauia.


My good friend, wee are well acquainted in my house with the nature and conditions of this 
Leopard,
 we haue often heard his howling in our garden, but yet we beleeue him not. To that end my many waking eied 
Lion
 stands before the stile and looks out; and this 
Leopard
 must not thinke that he is in West-India; for in stead of 
Monkeys,
 I would send great store of 
Grashoppers
 after him, which are easily to bee sound in my gar∣den; and I haue nests, yea whole regiments of 
swift
 flies, (
a fig for
 the Spanish flies) which nestle vnder my 
Orange tree,
 which with their sharpe pricking 
Augls,
 will so pricke and sting him through his speckled skinne, that you shall heare him howle into Spaine, to call for helpe. But my water-fowles (that are very cunning in swimming) would so well watch the coasts and hauens there, that not one 
Leopard
 (which are but 
Flutte∣rer


in the water) shal not dare to thrust their heads out of their holds, for my water-fowles are very sharpely set against the 
Leopards,
 because at other times he hath often taken their egs out of their nests, and puld away many of their feathers, and hath cut many of them short, somtimes when they were wont with great danger to swimme ouer the Spanish seas, into the Spanish hauens, which they yet remember well, and can better reuenge themselues then the 
Monkeys.
 For first my 
Grashoppers
 for the most part of them, are old 
Leapers,
 that haue good skill to leape vpon the water-sides, and the hard land, as they in times past did vpon Turenholt 
Heath,
 and Newport sea∣strand: but since that time they haue brought forth many young ones, who are well learned and instructed by the old ones, and can match the flies well enough, who also are old and well experienced; for they were wont in times past, lustily to flie vpon the Canary, and S. 
Thomas
 Suger; and also vpon the figs and reasons of 
Calis malis,
 which was good meate for them; but my water-fowles are so swift in flying, that their nimblenesse is known in East-India, where they at other times haue lustily flowne vpon their Nutmeg blossomes, and there left the smell and sauour of the Netherlands 
Mateliue,
 whereat they did not greatly reioyce; yea they are so quicke and strong in flight, that they flie vp through strange water and waies to 
Heemsche-kercke,
 there to hold the 
Iubile,
 and they bite so sore, that there is no Spanish 
Nut
 but they will bite it in peeces, how hard soeuer it be. In swimming also they are very craftie, and stout, specially vpon a Spanish fleeet, to bee masters of it with a small power, whereby in Spaine they are called water-Diuels, (without once remembring that God is their Pilot) And though this 
Leopard
 is a great enemie to the 
Lions,
 wher∣of he hath deceiued and taken many, yet he hath not found the meanes to be guile them all, as it appeareth; for in my 
Batauian
 house, there standeth or sitteth yet seuen that lookes out at the window:


1 First, my 
Hollands
 rampant 
Lion:


Who although he doth neere leaue climing still,


he's not so high as he would by hit will.




2 Next him the 
Zelands
 swimming 
Lion
 stands:


Who also hath a head and liues thereby,


And for the 
Libard
 careth not a flie.


For although he hath swome long time, he is not yet drow∣ned, if occasion once serued he would make the 
Leopard
 dance vpon the water, but it should be no apish dance.


3 In a higher window there stands a 
Gelders
 Lion.


This holds a place iust in the 
Libards
 way,


And when he thinkes to passe, will make him stay.


4 In the window beneath him there are two 
Freeseland
 Li∣ons readie to run;


Not for to run away out of his sight,


But t'hinder his pretence to his despight.


5 Then there is two other 
Lions,
 each of them in a window apart, whereof the one,


Stands not in 
Ouer Isel
 t'haue a sight


Of leering 
Libard,
 but with him to fight.


6 In the other window is the 
Zutphen
 Lion:


Which if the 
Libard
 should begin to baul,


Would lustily with's clawes vpon him fall.


7 In a high window at the vpper part of my house:


The lustie, strong, and valiant 
Vtrechts
 Knight,


Doth watch, and hath the 
Libard
 still in sight.


And in the vpper part of my house:


Th'East 
Friesland
 quicke sight Eagle lookes about,


With's wings abroad to see how things fall out.


And how high soeuer hee seemes to sit, yet if the 
Leopard
 begins once to play his part, he would soon fle vpon his back: for it is most certaine, that all of them together, and euery one of them particularly is well acquainted with the blood-thir∣stinesse, cruelty, and craftinesse of the 
Leopard;
 and haue a re∣gard to what end he comes thus leering hereabout, euery one of them thinking that he leereth vpon him; and therefore they all stand vpon their guard, and would rather willingly leape vpon him, then suffer him to lay hold on them.






Friend.


I am of the same opinion also, Gentlewoman, and I thinke

that all your foure men, whom you tearme your trustie hus∣band men, before you should bee throwne downe, would ra∣ther for a time leaue their tilling the land, seafaring and mer∣chandising, and set their wiues on worke for the vpholding of your person, and they themselues with the Souldiers, (whom they would soone raise out of their sleep) would march against the 
Leopard,
 for the defence of your 
Batauian
 gouernment, and the keeping of the Hollands garden: yea, & before that you for want of meanes, or by restraint should be forced to leaue your seat of freedome, your Commons would rather labor for you, till they sweat blood, and yet too great toles and heauie bur∣thens are cumbersome to labouring men; but the loue they beare to you, and the hope they haue of their happinesse by your freedome, would make them forget the paines they take, for the furtherance of the Common-wealth: but the Husband∣men, Sea-faring men, and Citizens, altogether with one con∣sent, (to bring their purpose the better to effect,) wish that the Souldier also were awake with them. For a common but then seems a common ease, but an assured common rest & quietnes is better, although your men apply themselues to the time. For which cause, willing labourers that are tied together in the bands of vnity, deserue some furtherance, and for that you are all their naturall mother, it learnes euery one both great and small, together and apart, to shew their good wils and duties vnto you in that respect.






Batauia.


That is true, for my State is costly to beare all the charges that are necessarily to be laid out, specially now I am set againe in my free Seate; therefore I would, if I could, bring it so to passe, that no man should haue any cause to finde fault, thereby to make all man free in our garden.






Friend.


Then it is requisite and very needfull to haue a good regard that the 
Leopard
 makes no double holes for the 
Lion,
 that you need not stand in doubt at what hole to watch for him, and al∣so to looke well to that double face, and to haue an eye to the troupe of men that stands yonder, for it seemeth that they are

at a stand, and would bee gone away: but me thinkes rather that they encrease and seeme to come neerer; and in the meane time this forepart giueth you a faire smiling countenance, and the hinder part is for their furtherance; and therefore a farre off they assemble speedily and hold together.






Batauia.


Therfore we will commend the watch to our chiefe watch∣man 
Emanuel,
 and commit the charge of our house to him, and altogether from henceforth will be vigilant, and looke well to the craftie fetches of the 
Leopard;
 for if I were sure that hee would leeringly come too neere mee, and that his face would turne about, I would presently let my 
Lion
 loose to flie vpon the 
Leopard,
 and wake my Souldier, to beard that marshall face, who thinketh that he that slumbreth is fast asleepe, but the noise would soone awake him.




Distrust and watch th'enemie to withstand,


Concord and faithfulnesse in Towne and Land,


Are weapons sure and strong:


But before all these things, vpon him call,


And chiefly trust in him that can doe all


By's power, and right thy wrong.






I.


BAtauian Virgin faire,


That sits in freedomes chaire,


Victoriously and well:


Looke to thy enemy,


That on thee casts his eye.


Beware of Libard fell.






II.


Where false loue cannot win,


To hate thee they begin,


For when loue waxeth cold,


Then hatred for good will,


Makes them seeke thee to kill.


Trust not the Libard bold.








III.


Sowre sawce distasts sweet meate.


Craft th'upper hand doth get.


Reuonge breakes peaces lawes.


The thing that's not straight wonne,


May chance in time be done.


Keepe out the Libards clawes.






IV.


He that first bragd of thee,


That thou his owne should be,


But nothing thereby got.


After long warre seemes meeke,


And maketh shew to seeke


Thy loue. Beleeue him not.






V.


Though he said thou shouldst haue,


Thy liberty, and gaue


Consent to't in his need.


He seekes to spoyle thee now,


If that he could tell how.


Of Libards wiles take heed.






VI.


Thy true loue holdes him backe,


Thy trustie friends doe make


Him feare, and therefore hee,


Tintrap thee if he may


Doth lurke. Wherefore I say,


Of him still warie be.






VII.


Fight in thy friends defence,


If he will not goe thence


In time, sith he doth so,


Torment them, for thy sake,


Reuenge their wrong, and make


Him out the field to goe.








VIII.


Faire Hollands Princely Dame,


Maintaine thy ancient fame,


Be not at his command:


Although t'is his intent.


Doe nought thou maist repent.


Gainst Libard boldly stand.






Printed somewhere in the
 Batauian 
Land,


My name if you desire to vnderstand:


It is, (as men me commonly doe call,)


The Pleasant, Rich, and Famous
 Hollands 
Hall.






FINIS.











