A tru[e] relati[on] of the pro[cee]dings of the Bauarian and Spa[nish] forces before the city Heydelburgh hauing very strongly besiedged it. As also, the marching of the King of Bohemia and Count Mansfield, with their forces into Alsatia, belonging to Leopoldus the emperours brother, and the Duke of Brunsvvicke into Bauaria. Likewise, the newes from most of the prouinces of Europe, that therein you may behold, the afflicted estate of Christendome, with the various changes whereunto man is subiected.
Approx. 22 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 11 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A08164




STC 18507.61



ESTC S115059





99850278




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A tru[e] relati[on] of the pro[cee]dings of the Bauarian and Spa[nish] forces before the city Heydelburgh hauing very strongly besiedged it. As also, the marching of the King of Bohemia and Count Mansfield, with their forces into Alsatia, belonging to Leopoldus the emperours brother, and the Duke of Brunsvvicke into Bauaria. Likewise, the newes from most of the prouinces of Europe, that therein you may behold, the afflicted estate of Christendome, with the various changes whereunto man is subiected.
19 [i.e. 21], [1] p.   


At London :


Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and Thomas Archer, and are to be sold at the Royall Exchange, and Popeshead-Pallace,


1622.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Thirty Years' War, 1618-1648 --  Early works to 1800.
Germany --  History --  1618-1648 --  Early works to 1800.
Europe --  History --  1517-1648 --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18507.61


S115059


99850278


15468












A TRV
 RELATI
 OF THE PRO
¦dings of the Bauarian and Spa
 forces before the City Heydelburgh, hauing very strongly besiedged it.


AS ALSO, 
The marching of the King of
 Bohemia 
and Count
 Mansfield, 
with their forces into
 Allatia, 
belon∣ging to
 Leopoldus 
the Emperours brother, and the Duke
 of Brunswicke 
into
 Bauaria.


LIKEWISE,
 The newes from most of the Prouinces of 
Europe,
 that therein you may behold, the afflicted estate of Christendome, with the Various Changes whereunto man is subiected.


Printed the 11. of Iulii. 
Sua cuique mihi mea.


At LONDON, Printed for 
Nicholas Bourne,
 and 
Thomas Archer,
 and are to be sold at the 
Royall Exchange,
 and 
Popeshead-Pallace.
 1622.














The first letter from Constantinople,
 the 
10.
 of Iune 
1622.


VVE vnderstand from Tartaria that there is great mustering of men, and that they intend to challenge the Throne of 
Othoman,
 hauing heard of the death of 
Osman,
 the great Turke: for this it stands, all that vast Countrey from Russia to the Indian and Atlantick Seas, is diuided be∣twixt three chames of ancient and noble race: The first is called 
Tartar Cham,
 a mighty Em∣peror, possessing the Prouince Mangia besides diuers other great Countreyes: The second 
Tartar Mechrit,
 vnder whom is 
desertum de lop;
 and many Nations to the Caspian Sea. The third is 
Tartar Chrim,
 discending directly from the Family of 
Othoman,
 who both by birth and contract may challenge the Imperiall Crown of Turkey, if that line shall faile, as is thought that he will doe now, or otherwise reuenge the murther of the aforesaid 
Osman
 vpon the Iannissaries.




Also the Letters from 
Venice
 make men∣tion that some of the principall offenders that layed their hands on the Emperor, are fled, and that the rest at home are diuided, some holding with 
Mustapha,
 and some with a yonger brother of 
Osman
 aforesaid. And that 
Mustapha
 desires not the 
Empire,
 longing one∣ly to visit the Temple of 
Mecha,
 being raui∣shed with the promises of 
Mahomet.


They write also, that the principall 
Musty,
 and some Doctors of the Law, haue fore-told and presaged the determination, and finall end of the Turkish greatnesse, perswading the Visirs at the imitation of the Graecians, e∣uery one to step in for a Kingdome, or more.


From 
Persia
 they certifie vs, that notwith∣standing, through this dissention in 
Turkey,
 they haue gotten good opportunity to reco∣uer 
Tauris,
 and other places left; the Sophy be∣ing much displeased with the insolent mur∣ther of the great Turke (as one Prince may act anothers part) is onely resolued to raise an ar∣my, to be reuenged on the 
Iannissaires,
 where∣vpon the 
Beglerbeg
 of 
Arabia
 hath sent him a present of diuers braue Horses.




From 
Alexandria
 we heare, that the plague is so great in 
Gran Cayro,
 that about 80000. there haue beene buried within the space of foure moneths, and that the Iewes are flock∣ing in such numbers to the Sea Townes, whereby the traffick is much augmented, and increased in the Straites.


From Algier they write, that the Pirate be∣gin to erect a Common wealth among them∣selues, and haue written to the Hollanders, that if they will vnite with their forces toge∣ther, they will make an notable attempt vp∣on the dominions of the King of Spaine, and begin a possession there.


It is reported here that at Naples there hath been an attempt made vpon the Viceroy by the Nobility and inhabitants, being perplex∣ed with a dearth: but they cry out vpon no∣thing so much as liberty, and lye in waite to put some thing in execution.


These that come from Rome, relate that the Pope hath giuen a free indulgence and pardon of sinnes to all them that will serue the Emperour in his wars, wherupon many soul∣diers and great store of money are sent vnto him.




The Signorie of Venice hath sent lately diuers Gallies at Sea, besides some Gulleons towards Candia, and fortified the Harbours in Histria and Dalmatia, and vpon the conti∣nent about Crema and Brescia, prouideth all the places of importance with strong gar∣risons.


Letters of Millane make mention, that there hath beene an insurrection amongst the Grisons, whereby diuers Spaniards and Imperialists haue beene slaine, and many pla∣ces forsaken, not without great terrour of the rest.


From Genoa it is certified, that some vn∣dertakers haue taken sanctuary, or Asylum, being denied a protection from Spaine, al∣though they say their debts arise, for being en∣gaged about the Catholike Kings affaires.


They write from Florence and Luca, that there is great complaint against the English, seeing they deale not for so many silkes as they were vsed to doe; and therefore they will endeauour to make cloth and cottens of their owne, and not trade with 
England,
 as in times past.




From 
Poland
 the Newes is, that the Iesuites are hatefull to the Inhabitants, wherupon the 
Lords
 of the Country haue petitioned to the Maiestie of 
Sigism
nd,
 ei∣ther to banish, or dismisse them, about which there is great discontent occasio∣ned: and heere giue me leaue a little by way of transsition to wonder at this ge∣neration, why they? ouer all the Or∣ders of Religion should so far vary from true Religion, as to delight in murther, combustion of Kingdomes, ostentation of knowledge, rapture of visi
ns, and especially setting Princes at division, yea breaking the band of amitie betweene Prince and Subiect, sure I can yeeld you no r
ason for it? but this as it fareth with Children, who sucking of a froward nur∣ses breast become accordingly froward and pettish in their liues: so they having one 
Ignatius Loyalta
 a Souldier to their Fa∣ther of a fiery disposition, no doubt ac∣cording to his name, doe immitate him in the fierie and bloody stepps of warre and dissention: God grant that all Prin∣ces

 may take heede of their pollicies. For in my Conscience they would pull down the 
Papacy,
 if they could, and set vp their owne Superintendancy.


They also write, that from the Cit∣tie of 
Leopolis
 and the Country adiacent, much Corne hath beene transported to 
Constantin
ple
 in this time of their dearth through the Blacke Sea, whereby they haue beene wonderfully enriched, as the Turkes neighbourly are releived.


From 
Spaine,
 there is newes of the feare of the Mores, who haue lately made an attempt in 
Granado,
 and word is brought by a 
Brazill
 man into 
Portingall,
 that the wilde men about the River of 
Amazones,
 haue rebelled against the 
Portingals,
 and 
Spaniards,
 who governe the Country and rule there. Much like that vnfortunate mischiefe which hath happened of late in Virginia▪ where we heare almost 300. of the English Plantation were slaine by the perfidiousnes of the old Inhabitants.


The second, from 
Vienna
 the 22, day, This Cit
ie is much quieted since the Em∣perours

 Marriage, for heere are many Nobles and Ladies, who professe the Gos∣pel, and haue their Congregations with∣out the walles of the Cittie, to the num∣ber sometime of fortie or fiftie Coaches, all which liue here vndisturbed by reason the Emperesse entertaines them gracious∣ly, and they attend the Court with all humilitie when occasion serveth; where∣as before they stood vppon their guard, and their Servants rodd with pistols and petronels to the Church: And (God be thanked) the 
Iesuites
 cannot divert him from his resolution, to keepe good quar∣ter with his Subiects, although they haue many times attempted the same. Or other wise it may be, their great numbers keepe all in awe, and that the Emperour is loath to be troubled with warres abroad, and dissentions at home.


From 
Odenburgh,
 is here newes that the Emperour proposed to the Lords and States, the Coronation of his Sonne, but that they absolutely denyed it, as ha∣ving made choice of another.




It was also Reported, that the Co∣sackes having no Warres in Poland, threatned to come downe into Hunga∣ria, which the Iesuits vrged, and the Em∣perour intertayned, but it is sayd, and thought, the Tartarians and Russians will keepe them backe with their Incursions and Enterprises, which they intend to make shortly.


In those parts are still made great mu∣sterings, to supply the Emperours warres. This Cittie, 
Prague
 it selfe, hath guard and watch like a Towne of warre, and they beate vnto the 
Parado,
 as if the enemie lay before it. In plaine termes, they are iea∣lous one of another, and the Heires and Friends of those whom the Emperour put to execution, long to be revenged. As for the Iewes, though they generally reioyce at those dissentions among 
Chri∣stians,
 and slaughtering one another, yet doe they particularly rather fauour the Protestants then the Catholiques.


From 
Moravia,
 wee vnderstand that the

 Marquis of 
Iaggerendorf,
 remayneth con∣stant to the King of 
Bohemia,
 and hath written to Count 
Mansfield
 for his com∣ming into 
Bavaria,
 alledging if hee doe attempt that, he shall be sure to finde many Friends for his passage into 
Bohe∣mia,
 where, if the warre beganne againe, no question, some great alteration will follow: for 
Bethlem Gabor
 is now at lea∣sure to take his part, and will question∣lesse assist him, if he can prosecute any course to come neere him.


The fourth, from 
Cullen
 the first of Iu∣ly. The Baron of 
Anholt
 hath threatned the Countrey of the Landtgraue of 
Hes∣sen,
 in behalfe of the Imperialistes; hee intends to recover the places in 
W
stpha∣lia,
 taken by the Duke 
Christian
 of 
Bruns∣wick,
 but the Inhabitants are all rather for 
Brunswick,
 then the Bishop of 
Cullen,
 from whom they were taken.


From 
Franckfort
 we vnderstand, that the Duke of 
Saxony
 hath imposed a harsh Commandement in his Townes, for the

 searching of Passengers, and although he seemeth discontent at 
Bavaria's
 pro∣ceedings, yet doth he governe Silesia for the Emperour, or at least so much of it as the Catholiques are willing to submit vnto him. But among other things, the Bishops are most fierce against the Protestants, and will not suffer them to goe vnto their Churches.


From 
Poland
 we haue Newes, that the inhabitants being become loath of the Ie∣suits, the Nobilitie hath requested the King, either to banish or dismisse them, about which is great discontent occasio∣ned.


They write from 
Noragrad
 in Russia, that the Iesuites had layd a plott with certaine Prussians, to robbe and surprise the Abbey of Saint 
Nuclay
 in 
Muscovia,
 adioyning almost to the Sea, which they did either out of envie, at the flourish∣ing of the Greeke Church, then which there is nothing more hatefull to the Ro∣man, or out of a common disposition, and

 wicked perversenesse to raise quarrels be∣tweene Countries, and nourish enmitie betweene Princes.


The last from 
Franckfort,
 the first of Iu∣ly. After the arrivall of the Duke of 
Bruns∣wick
 at 
Mainhem,
 where he was stately well-commed; the King of 
Bohemia
 see∣ing the Countrey was not able to sustaine his Forces, called a Counsell of Warre, and resolved to depart; leaving the 
Pala∣tinate
 to the care and tuition of the Lord 
Belfast,
 and Generall 
Vere;
 with whom he also left eight thousand men more then they had, and so they devided them∣selues, that they presently marched ten thousand horse, and twentie thousand Foote.


The King and 
Mansfeild
 ar now in 
Al∣s
tia,
 prosecuting the Warre there against the Emperours Brother 
Leopaldus,
 burning, spoyling, and taking the Countrey to his obedience, the which will constraine 
Tilly
 soone to forsake the siege of 
Heidel∣burge,
 and follow the King, and so by this

 meanes divert the Warre into his Ene∣mies Countrey: He hath sent the Duke of 
Brunswick
 into 
Bavaria,
 to furnish the Kings Armie with provision, and then to march and ioyne both together, and so to goe forward as toward Bohemia, as God shall giue them leaue. They were no sooner gone, but 
Tilly
 advanced his Forces towardes 
Ladenburgh,
 and from thence to 
Heidelburgh.
 Whereupon Sir 
Gar∣ret Herbert
 Commaunder there of the Ca∣stle, assembled the Burgers and Inhabi∣tants to know both their abilitie, and re∣solutions, whether they would endure the siege or no, & how long they thought their provision would last: they answe∣red generally, that they would liue and die with him, and so they prepared them∣selues to endure the siege. And it was thought that 
Tilly
 did this rather to di∣vert them from their Iourney into 
Alsatia,
 then to bestow so much time in the siege of a Towne which could profit him l
ttle in the obtaining more, then the possession of the place, vnlesse the Emperour were

 resolued contrary to his owne Embassy, to make it a continuall warre. 
Tilly
 going on with his siege, tooke two of the inha∣bitants, and cut off their heads, which he pitched vpon poles, turning their faces toward the towne to terrifie the Burgers: but they in requitall cut off fiue souldier▪ heads, & serued them so likewise. 
Gonsales
 in the meane time being at 
Opp
nheim,
 was yet doubtfull whether he would set vpon 
Mainheim
 or 
Frankendale,
 and so to get the Palatinate at once, lest it be gotten a∣gaine: but there is a God that holdeth the windes in his hands, and will no doubt hold backe that resolution, which must be the cause of so much blood-shedding, if the warres should goe forward in such a manner: but what will be the issue, time will reueale.


The 
Landgraue
 of 
Hessen,
 mistrusting lately the forraging of his countrey by the Imperials, writ to the Princes of the vnion concerning the same, who all re∣turned, that their cause was a common feare, and therefore they would liue and die together in maintaining the generall

 cause of Religion, and particular defen∣ding one anothers Countrey.


In the same Letter was likewise set downe the resolution of diuers Imperiall Cities, 
viz. Auspurg, Norremburg, Witten∣burg, Francfort, Strasburg,
 and some other, for the maintaining of the confession of 
Auspurg,
 which was the resolution of the Protestant Faith, bought out long since by great summes of Money of 
Rodolphus
 and 
Matthias,
 former Emperors. Where∣upon these Cities fortified their walls, had their Burgers in Armes, for feare to bee surprized.


We haue heard from 
Hagenaw,
 that the Imperials had lately gone about to sur∣prize the said Citie, and had gotten fortie men through a Vault within the Walls, but were all presently shot to death, and the Citie preserued of that dangerous en∣terprise.


In 
Hungaria
 the matters stand yet doubt∣full: the 
Hungarians
 haue flatly denyed the Coronation of the Emperors sonne: the Clergie desires to haue all the Spiri∣tuall goods backe againe, with the arrera∣ges,

 but the States and Lay-men will re∣store them but a part. They can neyther agree vpon many other points: so that it is likely nothing will be concluded at the Dyet.


Here was flying newes, that the Empe∣ror was taken prisoner, but it is not true: but this is certaine, 
Bethlem Gabor
 and the Lord 
Bridiani
 are very strongly marched vp in armes.


Those of 
Glatz
 and 
Klingenburgh
 stand yet brauely out, and haue lately giuen a great Ouerthrow vnto the Imperiallists, and they grow daily stronger & stronger. The old Count of 
Thorne
 is reported to be vpon the way with 26000. men, to res∣cue them.


From 
Denmarke
 they write, that the King hath sent diuerse Presents to the 
Queene
 of 
Bohemia
 at the 
Hage,
 and written sundry Letters of comfort & consolation, assuring of his assistance as wel of Men as Money: and that hee hath requested the Hauen Townes to arme diuers Souldiers to goe into 
Westphalia,
 to helpe and supply those garrisons which 
Brunswick
 left there.




The 
Hollanders
 lately come from 
Swe∣den
 report, that the Captaine of 
Calmar
 ca∣stle was called in question for his life, as b
ing betrayed by a counterfeit letter, written by some secret malitious enemy, as though the same came from 
Poland
 for the surrendring of the fort when time should serue: but his innocency saued his life, and the matter was soone taken vp.


From 
France
 it is written, that the king is resolued to go forward in his enterpri∣ses against the Protestant townes. That the Iesuites are iealous of the Prince of 
Conde,
 and he gets but the kings displea∣sure by his violent courses. That the Pro∣testants will rather make sallies and die in the field then in their houses. That 
Mountalbo
 is so well prouided of all kind of prouision, that they thinke the king will not easily b
siege it againe. Those of 
Mompellier
 prepare themselues likewise, if his Maiestie would attempt any thing a∣gainst them.


That the Duke of 
Rohan
 increase
h his army dayly, and hopeth vpon a great per∣son in 
France.
 That the king is much

 discontented, and hath a growing disease vpon him. That the 
Rochellers
 take dayly prizes, and were resolued to make a sally vpon the Duke of 
Espernon,
 being strong and able to minister many braue souldi∣ers. That there is a prohibition for the landing of the English at 
Callice,
 or on those Coasts. That diuers Apologies are written in the defence of the Protestants, and that the Queene laboureth what she may to pacifie the troubles.


From 
B
u
sels
 they write, that if the Ambassadours doe not suddenly agree vpon a peace, it is feared that the warre
 will increase both in the Palatinate, and the Low Countries. My Lord of 
A
gile
 hath almost filled his Regiment, and they lo
ke for foure or fiue thousand Brit∣
i
 more to come vnto them within this 
 i
 weekes.


From the 
Hag
 we heare, that the Prince of 
O
ang
 is marched vp with a braue ar∣my, with resolution to set downe b
fore 
Shertog
nb
s
h,
 & hath sent for all his Cap∣taines out of 
England
 to attend his seruice
 no question 
S
eola
 will follow him. Wee

 heare also, that there are publicke Fasts and set Prayers for the affaires of the Pa∣latinate.


They write also, that his subiects of 
Austria, Stiria, Curniola,
 and 
Curinthia,
 haue petitioned to his Maistie, that as they proue good and obedient subiects vnto him, it would please him to be a gratious Lord vnto them, to giue them leaue to liue in the libertie of their conscience, and die in the profession of the Gospel, that liuing and dying they may giue God the praise for his protection, who ope∣neth the hearts of kings, and his Maiestie the honour of their welfare, for being so beneficiall vnto them.


Wee doe further vnderstand, that there is cōming to the King of 
Bohemia,
 Count 
Mansfield,
 and the Duke of 
Brunswicke,
 for their further helpe in the great enterprises they intend, ten thousand horse and foote of 
Switzers,
 and ten thousand horse and foote of 
Bohemians:
 and that the old Earle of 
Thorne
 is gone to releeue 
Glatz
 with twentie foure thousand horse and foote,

 and that 
Iagensdorpe
 is marching toward the King of 
Bohemia
 with thirty thousand horse and foote, and that 
Bethlem Gabor
 will not bee long absent from the King: God (I hope) will rayse vp friends to helpe his true Church, notwith∣standing the Greatnesse of the Enemies.




FINIS.







