The 4. of Octob: 1622. A true relation of the affaires of Europe, especially, France, Flanders, and the Palatinate Whereby you may see the present estate of her prouinces, and coniecture what these troubles and wars may produce. Together with a second ouerthrow giuen the French Kings forces at Mompelier, by those of the Protestant League, wherein were slaine a great number of the Kings armie. Last of all. the remoue of the famous siedge before Bergen, vpon the 22. of September last, with the retreat of Spinola to Antwerp, as taking aduantage of the time, and not able to continue, for feare of vtter dissipation.
Approx. 61 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 20 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2007-10 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A08168




STC 18507.81



ESTC S101763





99837566




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The 4. of Octob: 1622. A true relation of the affaires of Europe, especially, France, Flanders, and the Palatinate Whereby you may see the present estate of her prouinces, and coniecture what these troubles and wars may produce. Together with a second ouerthrow giuen the French Kings forces at Mompelier, by those of the Protestant League, wherein were slaine a great number of the Kings armie. Last of all. the remoue of the famous siedge before Bergen, vpon the 22. of September last, with the retreat of Spinola to Antwerp, as taking aduantage of the time, and not able to continue, for feare of vtter dissipation.
[2], 37, [1] p.   


London :


Printed [by Bernard Alsop?] for Nathaniel Butter, and Nicholas Bourne,


1622.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Europe --  History --  17th century --  Early works to 1800.
2005-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2006-01
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2006-12
Ali Jakobson
Sampled and proofread
2006-12
Ali Jakobson
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2007-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18507.81


99837566


1895














The 4. of Octob: 1622.


A TRVE RELATI∣ON OF THE AFFAIRES of 
Europe,
 especially, 
France, Flan∣ders,
 and the 
Palatinate.
 Whereby you may see the present estate of her Prouin∣ces, and coniecture what these troubles and wars may produce.


TOGETHER WITH A SECOND ouerthrow giuen the French Kings forces at 
Mompelier,
 by those of the Protestant League, wherein were slaine a great number of the 
KINGS
 Armie.


Last of all.


The remoue of the famous siedge before 
Bergen,
 vpon the 22. of September last, with the retreat of 
Spinola
 to 
Antwerp,
 as taking aduan∣tage of the time, and not able to continue, for feare of vtter dissipation.


LONDON, Printed for 
Nathaniel Butter,
 and 
Nicholas Bourne.
 1622.














A TRVE RELA∣TION OF ALL THE AF∣faires of Europe, especially the busi∣nesse of 
France, Flanders,
 and the 
Palatinate,
 wherein you may see what is now acted for the present, and coniecture, what these Warres and troubles may in time produce.




From Naples.


I
 Begin with 
Naples,
 because as neere as I can I will come orderly for∣ward with the Prouinces as they lye, and in regard the seuerall Letters beare not one date, I haue thought good to Muster the Newes, which be∣longs to the same place, as it were into one Armie, and so you shall receiue the occurrences all toge∣ther.


From hence they write, that the Catholicke Maie∣stie vnderstanding of the pacification of the troubles in this Kingdome, and accustomed to performe all the duties of a noble Prince in gratifying, or at least re∣compencing the seruices of his worthy Captaines, Gouernours, and Souldiers, hath granted an annuall pension of sixty thousand crownes to 
Aadiuta de Cista
 Duke of 
Brattana,
 and a present disbursement of a 100000. crownes, both for money laid out for the


prouision of corne in the time of famine, and disbursed to souldiers in the tumults of that Common-wealth.


Secondly, that there are certaine directions for the leuying of two thousand men at his Maiesties charge of 
Spaine
 to passe into the 
Valtoline.


Thirdly, that diuers souldiers were leuyed about 
O∣tronto
 and 
Brindisi
 in 
Apulta,
 but the 
Venetians
 would not let them passe ouer the gulph to land either in 
Dal∣matia
 or 
Histria.


Fourthly, that the Popes Nuntio arriuing in 
Spaine
 aduercised the Conclaue of his welcome and enter∣tainment, writing withall, that the Catholicke King had declared himselfe concerning the 
Ʋaltolina,
 and indeed the whole countrey of the 
Grizons,
 that what he had gotten he would defend and keepe to the vtter∣most of his power, as minding to incorporate it to the Dutchy of 
Milcaine,
 and what was to be got he challen∣ged, as formerly forfeited to the Duke 
de Osanne
; to whom the whole countrey was morgaged for 200000 crownes lent vnto them, when they first enterprised the warre against those of the religion.


Fifthly, and last of all, that the noble men of 
Naples
 are more strictly lookt vnto for going at their plea∣sure into the countrey, or maintaining greater guards and attendants, then the Viceroy hath limited them.








From Rome.


The Letters of 
Rome
 haue likewise seuerall dates, but after the ouerlooking, affoord vs thus much.


First, that the Pope hath created foure Cardinals, two of 
Spaine,
 one of 
Italie,
 and one of 
Poland,
 who hath commission to determine the controuersies be∣tweene the Iesuites and the Nobilitie.


2 That the Dutchesse of 
Peteliano
 is deceased, be∣ing the Popes Neece.


3 That there is a Nuntio sent to the Emperour for the release and deliuery of the Cardinall of 
Steall
 ta∣ken at 
Peang
 and now prisoner in the 
Aponte,
 the agree∣ment is, that the Emperor is contented with the Popes mediation, and his Holinesse will examine the cause, and so punish him, if he haue beene a delinquent in the matter accused of against his Imperiall Maiestie.


4 That there are certaine letters writ from 
Naples
 vnto his Holinesse, about the dangerous sickenesse of the Dutchesse of 
Montelione,
 who is very importunate for the prayers of the Church and the Popes blessing.


5 That by reason of the want of corne in 
Naples,
 there was a great imposition on all the Popes territo∣ries, and they that could not spare their graine, were contented to disburse their money: so that at last 
Arni∣go Antonio
 Captaine of the foote did conuey much corne to 
Abruzza,
 for the releefe of that Cittie, and countrey.


6 That the solemnitie of the Exequies of the Duke of 
Parma
 were celebrated, and the Cardinall



Pernese
 sent thither to remaine with the widow Dut∣chesse for the establishing of her estate▪ who so or∣dered the matter, that the Nobilitie, Officers, and better sort remained in their places, but many infe∣riors were altered and discharged.


7 That the Bishop of 
Cortona
 in 
Tuscane
 was dead, whose reuenues was a thousand fiue hundred crownes a yeere, out of which the Pope challenged diuers arrerages, and other duties belonging to the Con∣claue of Cardinals.


8 That Count 
Robert Sherley
 Embassadour for the King of 
Persia
 had particularly visited the Cardi∣nalls, and was on the day of Saint 
Rouo
 to passe to the seuen Churches, where were shewed him the re∣liques and treasure; which solemnitie finished, hee tooke his leaue and departed toward 
Persia.


9 That the Duke of 
Montileone
 remaining in 
Spaine
 desired to bee dismist from the Court, and that there was expected in his place Monsieur 
de Massimi
 as a new Apostolicall Nuntio.


10 That his Holinesse went in procession to the 
Basilica
 of 
Sancta Maria
 to celebrate the feast of the Ascension of the blessed Virgine, and while he remai∣ned in the Chappell, he created the Cardinall 
Meli∣no
 with the dowry of the Chappell, and so when hee had confirmed the company of 
Consalone,
 returned home.


But the day after the festiuall of Saint 
Rouo
 great pastime was on the water, like the 
Regatius
 of 
Venice,
 with painted Boates, diuers sorts of Musicke warlike instruments, guilded Gallies, with Streamers and Pe∣nons, and, the Gentlemen well appointed.


11 Last of all, that presently followed the death of Monsieur 
Marcabrow,
 which a little rebated this iollitie.






From Venice.


Because commonly our Post lettters of 
Italy
 come from 
Venice,
 or at least those of 
Venice
 make mention of the affaires of the petty Prouinces, especially 
Mil∣laine
: I haue therefore thought it conuenient to put in the Items of Italian affaires into this section of 
Venice,
 and so make vp as it were one bundle in this matter.


First, that it is written from 
Millaine,
 that the Duke 
de Feria, Leopoldus
 of 
Austria,
 and the 
Switzers
 haue a∣greed vpon a treatie of peace, and appointed a place of meeting at 
Loudray,
 the better to accommodate the company, which must needes be very great, conside∣ring there is expectation of seuerall Embossadours from 
France, Venice,
 the Archduke 
Leopoldus,
 the the Duke of 
Feria,
 the 
Cantons
 of 
Switzerland,
 and the 
Grizons,
 who shall bee commissioned to treat of conditions betweene 
Millaine
 and them: notwith∣standing the expectation of this faire weather, euery day almost hath had his interposition of clouds, & war∣licke preparations: for there is nothing but killing, and intercepting of passages among the 
Grizons,
 and preparing of souldiers in 
Switzerland,
 so that they haue still an army on foote of seuen thousand, as resol∣ued to defend their countrey against the vsurpation of strangers, whosoeuer.


Secondly, That though the Archduke 
Leopold
 bee gone himselfe to recouer his Townes in 
Alsatia
; yet haue his souldiers forraged the 
Alpes,
 and the Valleyes of the 
Grisons,
 as farre as 
Tiroll,
 with the taking of 500 Head of Cattell, and still and still encreaseth his For∣ces, as if he meant to subiugate that Countrey wholly to the vse of the 
Spaniard.


Thirdly, That for all this faire shew of Pacification, they write from 
Venice,
 That the 
Spaniard
 will haue no Peace, but are resolued to continue the Warre, till ey∣ther by force they make their owne way, or by compo∣sition free the Countrey, that his Armies may passe from 
Millan
 into 
Germanie,
 without interception.


Fourthly, That whereas there was a payment of 25000 Crownes yeerely disbursed to the 
Valtolina,
 the Gouernor of 
Millan
 hath denyed the same, & stopped it in his Chamber of Accounts, by directions from 
Spaine
; and therefore they suppose those propositions of Peace to be in vaine, considering there is an Armie mustring in 
Millan.


Fifthly, That 
Monsieur di Sugli
 comming post from 
France
 with sixe Horses, and some carriages of 
Spaine,
 was surprized by the 
Huguenots
 neere vnto 
Molins,
 and all his Money and Carriages rifled, he himselfe hardly escaping; the Countrey being euery where in an Vp∣rore, and the people in Armes.


Sixtly, That there came from 
Vienna
 by the way of 
Millan,
 to returne into 
Spaine,
 the Count 
Rambuldo Col∣lulto,
 and that the Master of the Campe, 
Giou. Tornazo Carrauich
,
 comming from 
Naples
 to goe to 
Madrid,
 was requested by the Duke of 
Feria
 to be (as it were) a Remembrancer to his Catholike Maiestie, that a new


Army were sent to 
Millan,
 eyther vnder his command, or some other worthy Captaines, as his Embassadour should giue directions.


Seuenthly, That there was newly arriued from 
Spaine
 Doctor 
Peribelto,
 to goe as Commissioner into the 
Val∣toline,
 well rewarded with a chayne of 1000 Crownes, and better furnished with sufficient Treasure, to defray his charges, and an annuall pension for the honor of his place.


Eightly, That the Diet, which was once appointed to bee held for the 
Switzers
 and 
Grisons
 in their owne Countrey, shall now be kept in 
Lindo,
 belonging to the 
French
 King, whither 
Leopoldus
 will come in person, and meaneth, as it should seeme, to stand vpon higher tearmes, then in former times.


Ninthly, That one of the Gentlemen of 
Venice,
 na∣med 
Illustrissimo Gironimo Lando,
 hauing bin their Em∣bassador, was on a Sabbath day made a Knight of Saint 
Marks,
 and admitted into the Colledge of 
Ten,
 being wel gratified with a sufficient recompence of 
Zecchinos.


10. That in the Church of 
Sancta Maria,
 two yong 
Turks
 were baptized, who had brought to 
Venice
 great store of Treasure, and diuers Iewels.


11. That the Letters of 
Bollogna
 assure vs, that among other prisoners, there were taken certaine vnruly per∣sons, who had in a riotous night spoyled the Image of our Lady, and disrobed other Saints; but after great search, they were found, and are likely to endure seuere punishment.


12. That on a Tuesday in September, in the 
Piazz
 of S. 
Markes
 in 
Venice,
 there was a publication of the Banishment of 
La illustrissima Signora Bianca,
 sister to


the illustrious 
Almenio Balli,
 for poysoning her Hus∣band 
Illustrissimo Gironimo Seranço
; and whosoeuer could bring in her Head, should haue 2000 
Liuers:
 her Goods were publikely sold, her 
Vecchia
 bandited, and a seruant of trust proscribed.


13. That in the open Market-place of S. 
Markes,
 one 
Antonio Strauariol
 did deadly wound in the head 
Giacomo Lauoradi,
 a Musician of S. 
Marks
 Church: for which hee fled, and is not yet taken.






From Vienna.


You see what Method I haue vsed, to draw the ac∣count of 
Europes
▪ Businesse by 
Items,
 which I am per∣swaded is not vnpleasing, and therefore I will continue the same: For breuities sake, and to auoide discour∣sing, know then, that the Letters from 
Vienna
 con∣taine these particulars.


First, That the Emperour and Empresse are retur∣ned from the Diet of 
Hungarie,
 which was determined and ended to the applause of the 
Hungarians,
 and con∣tentment of the Prince of 
Transyluania
: For it was concluded, that all their Fortresses and Holds on their Confines, should be naturall 
Hungars,
 and no stran∣gers; and that the Emperour should presently send to the solemne Meeting at 
Ratisbone,
 where all the great Lords and Princes of 
Germanie
 haue appointed an Assembly, for the setting vpright the staggering af∣faires of the Commonwealth, and rectifying the dis∣orders of the Empire.


2 That 
Bethlem Gabor
 had entertained some suspition against his Subiects, because they repined at his imposi∣tions, and had bin hurried out to vnnecessary and vnpro∣fitable Warres, as hauing spent three yeares to no pur∣pose. 3 That 
Ill Signeur Don Pietro Aldabrandino
 had dismissed all his foot Souldiers, but retained his Horse, with which he resolued to passe into the 
Valtolina
 against the 
Grizons.
 4 That there was a whispering of an in∣nouation in 
Transiluania,
 by reason 
Bethlem Gabors
 Bro∣ther had Mustred an Army of 30000. as if he meant to v∣surpe some of his Prouinces from him. 5 That there is a 
Bashaw
 sent from the new Emperour 
Mustapha
 in 
Con∣stantinople
 with 300. Horse well accompanied both to re∣nue the League, which hath formerly kept these Princes in good order, and to affoord an accompt of the inso∣lency of the tumultuous 
Ianizaries
 in rising against their Lord, which haue beene seuerely punished, and seeme strangely penitent, as wondring at their owne handi∣worke: but now all is quiet, and the 
Sacra Porta
 stands o∣pen, as in times past, yea the two young Brothers of 
Os∣man
 are not Imprisoned in the 7. Towers, but onely well tutored, and guarded as it becommeth such great Prin∣ces. 6 That about the 10. of September, the Empresse after her returne and Coronation in 
Hungary
 to 
Vienna,
 did solemnize a sumptuous Maske, in which her greatest Ladies were Actors, and to which the Noble Princes, Ambassadors & many Strangers were inuited. 7 That mong others, after great intercession, the Count 
Hollocke
 hath made his peace with his Imperiall Maiesty, but vp∣on very hard Conditions as it chanceth in all thriuing busines, where the deiected must be at the will and plea∣sure


of the Conqueror, 8 Last of all, that the 
Bashawes
 of 
Buda
 and 
Belgrade,
 haue had an Army in readines of 40000. euer since that mischieuous attempt vpon the person of the great Turke, as suspecting some furions in∣nouation by their owne mutinous Soldiers, or watching an opportunity to encroch further into 
Hungary,
 but of of that there is little feare, because there wanteth a suffi∣ciet Maiesty to Commaund and controule them.






From Prague.


They write from hence. 1 That those of 
Clerenbergh
 came to Composition with his Imperiall Maiesties Ar∣my, and had promise to depart like Souldiers with their Amour and prouision, but they were no sooner out of their Trenches and fastnes, but they were taken and car∣ried Prisoners to 
Prague,
 both the Captaine and the Company, contrary to the faith proposed, and the con∣ditions of their Promise. 2 That the Emperours Sol∣diers returning from 
Hungary, Morauia,
 and 
Silesia,
 were so tatter'd, torne, and in a manner out of countenance, when they came to ciuill places, that hee was compelled to take order for their new Arming and apparelling, dis∣bursing great summes amongst them for their further satisfaction. 3 That the Emperour had new preferred 
Il Signeur Sluuato
 to the Gouernment of 
Morauia,
 who presently aduertised his Maiesty of the resolution of 
Glatz,
 which was, to holde it out to see the vttermost, though no succour came to them at all. 4 That hither came certaine Letters out of 
Poland,
 whose originals be∣like were sent to his Imperiall Maiesty, containing thus


much; that by the wisedome of the 
Bashaw
 of 
Aleppo,
 a man of great yeares and greater wealth, now the princi∣pall 
Viceer,
 the Gouernment of the Turkish Empire was cast as it were in a new molde: For hauing wisely setled a generall Peace with forraigne Princes, and iudiciously confirmed the gouernment of the seuerall 
Bashawes,
 he by little and little got the vpperhand of the 
Ianizaries,
 and did so tractate with the 
Chawse
 and 
Spahies
 that in one place or other hee put 2000. 
Ianizaries
 to Death: For af∣ter he had pollitickly proclaimed them all Trators, that were consenting to the Death of 
Osman,
 and as pollitick∣ly promised great rewards to the discouerers of these mutinous Souldiers, many were detected, and as many Executed: yea such was the mischiefe, that euen pow∣red downe a tempest of destruction vpon their heads, that their very Wiues (a custome newly begun amongst them to marry) did detect them to the Magistrate, wherein sure the Iudgement of God was seene to punish such audacious impiety in any one, that durst boast they had layde violent hands on a Prince. 5 That there is newly come from 
Tabor
 6. pieces of Ordnance, and 200. Souldiers: from 
Morauia
 800. from 
Silesia
 800. from 
Saxony
 1000. with 12. pieces of Cannon more, who are presently to bee sent to the siedge and battery of 
Glatz,
 which is now the onely Towne of same, that holdeth out against this Imperiall Maiesty. 6 That in the Towne of 
Glatz
 is the Count 
de Thorne,
 and in the Fieldes a∣broad the Marquise 
Ieggensdorp,
 and the olde Count 
Thorne,
 who keepes as it were a running Army, where∣upon the Father vnderstanding what danger his Sonne must needes bee in, if the Emperour proceeded so vio∣lently


against the Towne, caused 2000. Foot and 500. Horse of 
Crabuts
 to bee put into the same, for the better defending the place, and opposing their Enemies.


7 That the said Forces as they were Marching, en∣countred with many of the Emperours Souldiers, who were comming to the Siedge, and not onely defeated them, but rifled their Carriages, which when the young Count 
Thorne
 vnderstood, hee presently made a Salley with 200. Horse and 1500. Foote onely, wherein hee so preuailed, that that Quarter of the Emperours Army was dispersed, and the Cannon clogged, and so they re∣turned with some booty and a great deale of honour.






From the Palatinate.


These Letters come from 
Franckfort
 and certifie thus much, that the rumour after the taking of 
Heidelburgh
 of putting all to the Sword, is not true: For the 300. Eng∣lish and Scots, that were in the Towne had safe conduct to passe to 
Franckfort,
 where my Lord of 
Belfast
 was, and so by his directions either to goe into 
England,
 or di∣sperce themselues, as they could to other places, onely they might not returne to 
Mainhem,
 nor 
Franckendale,
 for feare of further trouble or resistance, if these places were so supplyed: That since the taking of 
Heidelburgh, Leopoldus
 and 
Tilley
 haue by a Counsell of Warre, resol∣ued to make an end of the troubles in this Prouince, by surprising or enforcing the rest of the Townes, yet for a time they desisted from the siedge of 
Franckendale,
 and set themselues downe before 
Mainhem,
 as casting vp this


account, that if they could any way preuaile heere, the lesser would be more easily obtained either by surren∣der, or composition: When they were thus resolued, they marched forward with 12000. foot and 500. horse, which when General 
Vere
 vnderstood, & saw plainly that mischiefes now followed one another, as the waues of the Sea, seeing hee had endured so much to his eternall fame and memory, he would sure put vp the rest in the account of his Honour, and beare all with patience whatsoeuer might chance: whereupon he sends for two Companies from 
Frankendale,
 to adde some little strength to the businesse, which made vp 8. Companies of English, besides 4000. Dutch and other Strangers, with whom hee is determined to preserue the place to the last man, as long as any prouision or supply will last, vnlesse he shal receiue further directions to the contrary form 
England.
 But before 
Mainhem
 was thus affrighted, 
Leopoldus
 and 
Tilly
 put in stronger Garisons into 
Wormes
 and 
Spiers,
 for feare of new reuolts and hurliburlies: for they saw plainly, that the people bare a great good will to the 
Palatine,
 and would with all conueniency attend the restitution, and returne of their first Lord.


Bauaria
 on the other side was not so confident of his security, but that he fortified his owne Townes, putting certaine Cannons into 
Mriken,
 which he had taken from 
Amberg,
 and were once the 
Switzers,
 called 
the man and the woman,
 being Peeces of principall account: but when hee had salued this sore of the diffidence of his owne Countrey and people, hee sent the rest of his forces to 
Tilly
 and 
Leopoldus,
 who were now marched from 
Hei∣delberg
 by 
Spiers
 to take in the Castle of 
Magdenburg



which yet held out with diuers other against them, which when they perceiued, and that they should be as much troubled with matters of lesse importance as the greater, they left that course and returned (as you haue heard) toward 
Mainhem,
 where they resolue to conti∣nue, vntill the affaires in the 
Palatinate
 be cast in a new molde, or the Countrey setled to quiet: but here I can∣not but remember a saying of 
Stephens
 King of 
Poland
: Kings may commanud bodies and liues, but not hearts and consciences: so may some other Prince presume on the Emperours Donation of this Prouince, but the Inha∣bitants will euer loue their owne Prince, and burst out (no question) vpon any occasion of reuolt or alteration: which the Archduke 
Leopoldus
 and 
Bauaria
 knowes too well; and therefore, whereas report hath beene lauish, concerning 
Tillies
 descending into 
Brabant:
 beleeue it, he cannot second their expectation: For 
Bauaria
 will not spare him, nor 
Leopoldus
 consent to his dimission, considering the Countries are still grudging and repi∣ning, and they must detaine them within obedience by strong hand. Besides: the Winter approacheth, and the Germanes expect some rest after their great toyle, being euer as much encumbred with a long march, as with a furious skirmish. Therefore I conclude this point, there is no feare of 
Tillies
 comming into 
Brabant,
 or ioy∣ning with 
Spinola.






From Spaine.


The Letters from 
Spaine
 haue great variety in them, and haue written into 
Italy
 concerning some things done in 
England
; but because I will meddle with nothing but


iustifiable actions, I will also tell you of nothing, but shall be befitting for any auditory; the perticulars then may be thus welcommed.


First, that the businesse of the 
Valtoline
 supposed to raise a warre and disturbance in 
Italy,
 is ouerpassed, from the Kings resolution to haue the Countrey at his com∣maund: and whereas the French King by his Ambassa∣dour made intercession for the appeasing of the trou∣bles, especially that it would please his Catholick Maie∣stie to forbeare their disturbance, and giue way, that his great Fort might be demolished according to a former treaty by his Ambassadour Monsieur 
Bassompier
 with 
Philip
 3. it pleased his Catholick Maiestie to answer in this manner to the French Ambassadour, that he should aduertise his King by Letters to appease the troubles of his owne Kingdome, and seeke the quietting of those tu∣mults, before he intermedled with other Princes affaires: and therefore not to take further care, but leaue the dis∣posing of this warre to the Catholick Maiestie and his Counsell.


Secondly, they write, that 
Don Pietro de Lieua
 being dead, the Duke of 
Ferandina
 is made Generall of the Gallies of 
Spaine. Don Diego Pimentelli
 Commaunder of those of 
Naples
 and 
Don Octauio de Aragon,
 Gouernour of those of 
Sicila.


Thirdly, that the Duke of 
Ossuna
 hath the liberty of the prison, yet vnder guard, so that his wife, children, and friends may come and see him.


Fourthly, that the Duke of 
Alua
 is created a Counsel∣lour of State, and shall presently depart from 
Italy
 into 
Spaine.


Fiftly, that the Prince of 
Ascoli
 hath an augmentation of 500. crownes a moneth, and is returning into 
Spaine
 either from 
Naples
 or 
Millane.


Sixthly, that in 
Italy
 diuers Bishops and Lords were newly dead, by name Monsieur 
Marcabrano,
 the Bishop of 
Torcona
 in 
Tuscane. Richardor Piauan
 the Rector of St. 
Nicolay:
 the great Master of 
Ruuenna Iohn Dominico
 Inqui∣sitor Generall of that Citie, of 77. yeares age, and conti∣nuing in that gouernment 22. yeares.


Seuenthly: Last of all, that in the midday in 
Venice
 of late arose so great a tempest of winde with such horrible and fearefull whistlings, that many Boates were splitted and drowned, many trees ouerthrowne, many men de∣stroyed on the water, and diuers other stupendeous mis∣chies chanced, especially the hurrying of the Priest of St. 
Vidal
 from the Port of the Pallace to the pillar (or very neere) of 
Angelo di Angoli
: so that hee was caried home to his bed all brused and battered.






From France.


The Letters of 
France
 come from diuers places, as ei∣ther the warres are prosecuted, or the King in person vi∣sites the Prouinces and Cities: as they write from 
Lions,
 that the King tooke in all the Townes as he went round about 
Montpelier,
 but when he came thether, it seemed as a damme to an inundation, & so he was stopped a while, and enforced to tractate about conditions, demaun∣ding 200000. Florins, and the raising of a Citadell for the commaunding of the Towne, which being deni∣ed, though that Madame 
d'Agusta
 came vnder hostages to capitulate the matter: the King much incensed,


commanded a generall assault, wherein fayling, he returned to 
Lyons
 with great losse, and greater dis∣contentment.


From 
Rochell
 the Letters giue vs to vnderstand, that the Count 
Soysons,
 Generall of the Kings Ar∣mie in those parts, consisting of aboue 6000. hath lost most part of the same this Summer, lying before it, without performing any great peece of service against it: whereupon the King is enforced to raise a new supply out of 
Poiters, Gascoine,
 and 
Angolesme,
 to the number of 6000. more, who are alreadie marched to maintaine the said Campe, but they haue prevailed little or nothing: For the 
Rochellers
 passe and repasse to and fro at pleasure, yea, day by day skirmish with them, killing thirtie or fortie at a time, and taking diuers prisoners.


Besides, though as yet their approaches are farre off, yet the Ordnance from the Towne, shooting at randome, kill many of them in the fields, so that they wonder, what the King meanes to doe, that he proceedeth not more orderly in the businesse, then to come onely with such a handfull of men, and they to lye so farre off, without endamaging them. As for the blocking vp their hauen, or intercepting their out-roades by Sea, true it is, that many Ships and Gallies from 
Burdeux, Marselles,
 and other pla∣ces, lye before their hauen, to intercept their passa∣ges, but to so little purpose, that the Ships of the Towne haue this Summer taken aboue a hundred Barkes and Ships, loaden with Salt, Corne, and o∣ther prouision, so that Corne is better cheape in 
Rochel,
 then in any part of 
France
 or 
England,
 yea,


these Ships lye in harbour for want of men to man∣nage them, or Marchants to buy them, that they know not what vse to put them vnto, except bur∣ning, vnlesse their troubles end, or that they may certifie the 
Hollanders,
 what good penni-worth may be had in marchandizing for them, and this they resolue to put in practise by publicke Proclamation in such Citties, as they can conueniently send vnto. Other Letters from hence assure vs, that they haue of their owne fourescore men of Warre, well proui∣ded, and manned, who haue at the least this foure monthes giuen attendance on the Kings Armado, and Gallies, but still they take the Sea and flie from them, as belike loath to hazard themselues with re∣solute men, and desperate persons: but in truth, the Gallies are not for these great Seas now Winter is approaching, and therfore they are retyred to 
Brest
 in 
Brittaine,
 and there determine, either to watch for 
Subiss,
 as he commeth home out of 
England,
 or take opportunitie by her hayry foretop to set vpon the Towne, or the hauen at advantage, &c.


From 
Paris
 they write, that both the Queenes are at 
Lyons,
 whether the King meanes to come and feast with them, for which purpose many Embassa∣dors repaire thither, and expect him daily, to whom at last, after great losse at 
Mompelier,
 he comes: yet some say, he went to 
Auignion,
 sending an Embassa∣dor to his 
Holines,
 to allow him that Towne for his retyring vnto, vntill he had either expelled the 
Hu∣gonits,
 or 
Heretickes,
 according to the 
Iesuits
 phrase, or compounded the Warre vpon honourable con∣ditions for his Greatnesse.


But notwithstanding these affrightings of his Country, and threatning his people, while he was in 
Lyons
 he left the Constable 
Desquiers
 with his whole Armie before 
Mompelier,
 and if need were, to goe also to 
Montalbon,
 yea, he was Commissioned, and had full power to treat with the Duke 
de Rohan
 about a Peace, or faire conditions of attonement, so it might be effected to his Maiesties honour, and the dignitie of the Common-wealth: the place ap∣pointed was named 
Arles
 in 
Prouence,
 whether it should be lawful for al the Commissioners to resort vnder safe conduct, and the royall word of the most Christian King, which concluded, he went to 
A∣uignion
; but such is the chance of Warre, and the condition of Princes themselues, to be subiect to misfortunes, that while he recided in those partes, Monsieur 
de Rohan,
 with the Garrison of 
Pismes, Montalbon,
 and other Townes of the Religion, ha∣ving vnited themselues, marched a whole night, and came with such speedinesse, and courage to 
Mompelier,
 that early in the morning they assaulted the Kings Armie, and so continued fighting till noone, which when they of the Towne perceiued, they made three severall Sallies at the seuerall ports of the same, so that the Kings Armie was set vpon both behind and before, and the successe thriued so well, that a great slaughter followed, and the whole Army was routed, so that if you would haue particulars, they say, there perished foure thousand at the least, some Ordnance surprised, sixe peeces of Cannon clogged▪ the Popes 
Nuncio
 and his let∣ters intercepted, and in a word, the whole Armie much dissipated.


From 
Sedan
 the Letters certifie thus much, that it is true, that 
Mansfeild
 left most of his Carriages behind, and sixe Peeces of Cannon, yea, the Duke of 
Bulloigne
 did also cast downe the mount before the Towne, but with no intent, eyther to oppose his Maiestie, maintaine any rebellion, or support the Protestants themselues in any violence against their King: but meerely to stand vpon his guard, least such as durst enforme against him, might also procure his destruction by violent courses, and force of armes.


Besides, a Prince in distresse, his kinsman, and a maintainer of the Gospell of 
Iesus Christ
 was come, as it were, vnder his roofe, and therefore the Law of Hospitalitie, Religion, and honestie, tyed him to observation, and tooke him out a les∣son of care and regard both to see himselfe, and defend him, if need were against his enemies.


In this manner as they will haue it, the Duke of 
Bulloigne
 iustified himselfe, and the King was con∣tented to be pacified, and admitte of the attone∣ment, so that like a Noble Prince indeed, this ef∣fect followed, that the Duke was receiued into fa∣uour; that the King of 
Bohemia
 might passe and re∣passe at his pleasure; that the Duke 
de Nauers
 made a Retreat with his Armie, commanding the chiefest to retyre to their owne houses, and sending the rest to attend the King, where he should appoint.


From 
Provence, Delphinate,
 and those parts, they assure vs, that the Congregations of the 
Protestants
 mett daily with the reformed Ministers, and conti∣nued the exercises of fasting and prayer, for the


good successe of their brethren, and sent one ano∣ther reciprocall comforts, and gratifications, as farre as they could, or durst: yea, when they found dispersed Libells, and inuectiues, as though their ruine were threatned by Massacres, or other waies of circumventing, they sent them to the new Con∣stable, & intreated him for preuentiō, that although his honour was engaged to the Kings seruice, yet his soule was in the hands of God, who would li∣mit his actions to the sparing of blood, and destroy∣ing of innocents.


To this they added certaine points of iustificati∣on, and discoueries of the 
Iesuites
 doctrine, and cru∣ell intents, to keepe 
France
 in an vprore, and com∣bustion, not for the loue of Religion, which was none at all: but for political purposes, which time would bring to light. All which 
Lesdesquiers
 shew∣ed to the King, and in such humble manner, that he tooke pleasure in his conference, so that there is some hope, he will be more tractable, and looke vp∣on dilacerated 
France,
 with the eyes of iudgement and compassion.






From the 
Low-Countries.


There are so many Letters from the seuerall parts of the Low-Countries, and so much contradiction, as men on either side fauour the cause, that I know not how to satisfie the Reader: yet considering there is but one truth, and to be honest in a plaine enarration of the same, is allowable, therefore as neere as I can, I will relate, what is most probable and worthy of your acceptation.


Know then, that the 
East India
 Company of 
Am∣sterdam



haue taken a great Caricke from the 
Por∣tingalls,
 supposed worth a million of Crownes; for therein is much gold, and rich Commodities, but neither the honour, nor profit of this exployt doth belong to them alone: for they had the helpe of the English, with whom they seeme now better to agree, then in times past. They are also building diuers men of Warre, and almost in euery Maritime Towne of 
Holland,
 the Ship-wrights are at worke; For the 
States
 are resolued to man and set out sun∣dry Vessels, as well to watch 
Dunkirke,
 as defend 
Sluice
; but of late 
Sluice
 hath better confidence, that the enemy will not attempt her expugnati∣on.


From 
Brussels
 the Letters certifie, that the Mar∣quis 
Spinola,
 lying before 
Bergen,
 resolued vpon some Stratagem, as disappointed in the attempts, which he had made by force, and seuerall assaults, therefore hee gathered together diuers thousand loades of Casshes, or long Fagotts, eyther to dam vp the Riuer, or to make some Mounts, whereby he might neighbour their Trenches, and so annoy their Courts of guard, but as you shall heare, hee fayled in this likewise.


From the 
Hage,
 the last letters assure vs of a Dutch man of Warre, to encounter with a well loaden vessell of 
Spaine,
 going to 
Dunkirke
 with much pro∣uision for the Armie, but after a long fight, shee was taken, and brought to 
Amsterdam,
 from whence by turnes, and in their seuerall watches, divers shippes tooke the narrow Seas, to attend their enemies, especially, the 
Dunkirkers,
 amongst whom some


three or foure lighted vpon a great ship, called one of the twelue 
Apostles,
 and built in 
Dunkircke,
 who being now at sea, and lying at aduantage to catch the 
Hollanders,
 as they for them, was at last set vpon by them, and chased some fiue or sixe houres, euen to the Coast of 
England:
 but when she saw that her vnder-greatnesse as being fiue hundred tunne, hin∣dred her from sayling, and that to fight it out, would returne to her dammage, and to bee taken, to her great dishonour: she first blew vp her deckes, and so thought to set her selfe on fire, which when the 
Hollanders
 perceiued, they made hast to boord her, and she made as much hast to bee deliuered from them: but such was the fortune of either, that she presently sunke before their faces, and so that fight ended: But concerning the Land-businesse; after his Excellency was resolued to do something, he mustred his whole Army; that is to say, his owne, Count 
Mansfields,
 and the Duke of 
Bruns∣wicke,
 who was returned for all his wound vnto them againe. By whom, and a Councell of warre, it was thus determined; that if they did rise at all, that they would order the busines in this maner: To diuide each Nation by themselues, and so the 
Ger∣mans, English, Scots, French, Dutch,
 and 
Wallons,
 might march with their seuerall colours, to be di∣stinguished apart: the grosse summe, or if you will, the whole body of the Army, consisting of eigh∣teene thousand foote, and eight thousand horse, which were also to be diuided into two parts; fiue thousand horse, and eight thousand foote to bee


left with 
Mansfield
 and 
Brunswicke,
 to remaine on the North-side of 
Bergen,
 where 
Spinola
 lay about 
Steen Bergen:
 the other three thousand horse, and ten thousand foote, he would take with himselfe, and encamped betweene 
Antwarp
 and 
Bergen,
 com∣passing in the Fort of 
Lillo
 with his trenches, by which diuision of his Army, he determined to in∣tercept all succours and releefe, as well of victuall, as supply of men, which might come to 
Spinolas
 Campe on either side. Likewise, he also prouided three hundred Boates by water, with foure thou∣sand Mariners, well armed, and of great experience: but what his designe is vnknowne; vnlesse to watch the 
Scheld,
 a riuer comming from 
Antwarpe,
 or terrifie that towne, which is not onely affraid of a siedge, but in a manner in an vprore, euen mur∣muring against 
Spinola,
 for sending so many hurt Captaines, and Gentlemen, and dead bodies vnto them to be buried: and when they heard how ma∣ny were buried, and vnburied in the Campe, they lamented out-right, and complained much on that disastrous enterprise. But this determination, as you shall heare, was not put in practise: For the States came to 
Dort,
 and protracted this rising of the Prince of 
Orenge,
 whereby 
Spinola
 had time to preuent the mischiefe.


Mansfield
 and 
Brunswicke
 yet beganne their busi∣nesse very prosperously: for, they supprised the Villages, where 
Spinola
 laid in his prouision, where∣by he was much disppointed and appauled: then they came neerer and neerer to 
Bergen,
 and put him as it were out of all hope of receiuing any further sup¦ply:


For although 
Graue Henry Vanderbergh
 was on foot, and come downe from Wesell with 6000. foot, and 1500. Horse, who lay about Horstrat, within tenne miles of 
Mansfield
; yet there was great doubt of his weaknesse to doe any good vpon him, or cleare the passage, considering now he was so well appoin∣ted. But the truth is, the 
Prince of Orenge
 had left 
Graue Henry of Nassau
 in those Quarters, to watch his proceedings, and to attend his progresse, which way soeuer hee tooke. And in this perplexity stands the whole Countrey, and these Enemies continue watching one another, as a Hawke houereth ouer her prey; so that nothing is to be expected but blood and death, warre and confusion, vnlesse the God of mercy eyther take pitty vpon them, or will haue a punishment light vpon some offenders.


Besides all this, 
Count Ernestus of Nassau
 Gouer∣
or of 
Freesland
 for the States, is come downe to Emricke with 5000 Foot, and 1000 Horse, to inter∣cept the forwardnesse of the Baron of Hanow, who is marching with 4000 Cossackes, & certaine Dutch Horse, vnder the pay and entertainment of the Bi∣shop of Cullen. The Cossackes they will haue those which the Duke of Bauaria eyther spared or cashei∣red in the Palatinate: but it should seeme, they dare not encounter with 
Ernestus,
 neyther in skirmish nor battaile. For as yet they only run vp and downe spoyling and forraging the Countrey without any setled resolution to assault the Enemy.








From Bergen.


THE last Letters vvere altogether about a Myne, or if you will, two Mynes; the one made out of the Raueling into 
Spinolas
 Campe, which blew vp the mount, that so annoyed their Courts of guard, to which was added (after the blow was past) a salley from the towne, wherein many of the contrary side were slaine: the other was attempted by 
Spinola
 himselfe against the towne, wherein hee had laboured aboue fiue weekes with excessiue paines, and charges, they will haue it so great and effectuall, that if it had taken, it would not onely haue giuen him enterance into the Rauelings, but blowne vp a great part of the wall, whereby it doth appeare, that they were almost in despaire of taking the towne any other way then by a Stratagem, which is the last act of the Tragedy of warre, and doth commonly bring with it all rerror and confusion: But the God of mercy, who stayeth the rages of men, and with-holdeth the fury of bloody Souldiers, preuented this likewise; and it proued like 
Perillus
 Bull, to the deuiser; for they within 
Bergen,
 as cautelous, and euery way as resolute as themselues, countermined and stopped them as it were in the mid∣dest, before they had placed any powder: only they had brought certaine barrels to the mouth of the Myne, which vpon the alarum of the enemies being in the earth, were at last by the hasty comming in of the Souldiers, set on fire, so that the blow was so vio∣lent and impetuous, that in a moment it destroyed a∣boue 1200 persons which was both lamentable and fearfull for the time.


But see the misery of warre, and the dangers and


turmoiles this occupation is accompanied with; no sooner was this smoake as it were ouerblowne, but they of the towne made a salley, and vvere so glorious in their forwardnesse euen farre into the Campe, that besides the slaughter of many Souldiers, they killed 40. principall officers, and commanders, amongst vvhom the brother of the Duke of 
Ascot
 vvas shot in the cheekes, so that the bones vvere broken, and the bullet made his vvay by sliding by, not killing him out right.


In this salley many of the Earle of Argiles, and the Lord 
Vaux
 his Regiment vvere slaine; but there vvas a commandement presently, that all should bee kept from the knowledge of the other side of the Campe, especially that they in 
Antwerpe
 tooke no notice of the same, lest the Souldiers might be altogether disco∣raged, and the towne distracted, vvho vvere more and more in continuall feares: yet it ended not thus nei∣ther; for the great Generall 
Spinola
 vvas so incensed vvith this disasterous chance, that hee not onely laid the blame of the misfortune on the ignorance or hasti∣nesse of the principall enginer, but presently comman∣ded him to be hanged vp, notvvithstanding hee had performed his endeuor, and had formerly been a vvell deseruer.


Novv you must consider, that all this businesse and hurli-burly vvas done and ouerpassed before the rumor vvas that the Prince of 
Orenge
 raised him∣selfe, and brought his armies to 
Spinolas
 quarters, or if you vvill, by vvay of interception to lye be∣vveene them and such places, as vvere appointed to supply the vvants of the Campe.


But now that it was suspected that 
Mansfield
 was come and 
Brunswicke
 in the field, the Souldiers incen∣sed, and euery one ready to play their part, 
Spinola
 knew not what to say, or to doe, considering the mar∣tial court dibated the particulars of the businesse in this manner:


First, that whereas they expected the comming downe of 
Mounseur Tilley
 out of the Palatinate, the Letters came to Brussels to the contrary, that conside∣ring they intended the siege of Manheim, and that many towns in the Bishoprick of Spiers and Worms, would not yeeld to 
Leopoldus,
 he could not be spared; besides; the Germans were loath (winter coming on) to take so long a iourney, after their great toyle, but cried out already for rest, and a Garrison.


Secondly, that the towne of 
Antwerp,
 from whence they had their greatest suppliment, was al∣most weary of the warre, and beganne to finde fault with the enterprize, either that 
Spinola
 had ouerpri∣zed himselfe in a presumptuous resolution to get the towne, or vnderualued the States, as weake and vn∣able to resist the forces; or was not well informed of the strength and situation of the place.


Thirdly, that the slaughters were so great of his armies, and decay of his souldiers, that although it might be passed ouer with the chance of warre, and malignity of circumstances, yet time would consume them more and more; and which way could the wit of man inuent how other Souldiers should come for∣ward, as their enemies lay to affront them.


Fourthly, that the wants of the Campe were in∣tolerable, as enduring famine, and cold, euen to the


eating of horses, yea many other inconueniences which must needs be aggrauated and increased both with the time, and diuers other circumstances, where∣in they saw no prevension, as the case now stood.


Last of all, that if the States armies were raysed, then would the Prince of 
Orenge
 lye on one side, and 
Count Mansfield
 on the other, who meant not to fight with them but when they list, and then vpon great ad∣uantage, but were sure to consume them, and weary them out, or torment them with daily eruptions and encombrances, and that without any manner of pre∣uention.


All which considered, the Councell thought it meet by one meanes or other to raise the siege, and ra∣ther saue the liues of so many braue men, who might in some other proiect, and at some other time reco∣uer this losse, and reintegrate their fortunes; then to endure a certaine destruction, and irrecouerable wret∣chednesse; and although the Marquesse 
Spinola
 obie∣cted, that his honour was so farre ingaged, that he had rather perish in the misfortune, then endure the indi∣gnity of being thus disappointed; yet they answered, necessity was a commanding mistresse, and there was no withstanding of Fate and Destiny, yea there was iudgement and reason in enduring some inconuenien∣ces, rather then a mischiefe or assured destruction.


As for the honour hee enterposed, what was it more to him, then to the former Duke of Par∣ma, who had raised his siege in the same place, after hee had layen there with 32000. men almost halfe a yeare: yea the great Turke went from Vienna and Malta, disappointed; and diuers other Princes haue


beene enforced to cast vp another accompt with the disposing of a higher power, then their owne presumptions at the beginning: whereupon when hee saw there vvas no remedie, hee vvith much adoe condiscended to their importunities, and so taking the aduantage of a darke night, raised his campe indeed very couertly, the particulars you shall now knovv more at large.










THE MANNER OF The raising of the Siege of 
BERGEN


WHereas a little before, the Letters make mention, that his Excellency the 
Prince of Orenge,
 with 
Count Mansfield,
 the 
Duke of Brunswick,
 and their Forces had a purpose to diuide themselues and blocke vp 
Spinola
 in his Trenches, and as it were set downe the manner of their marches, if they should 
ise indeed, and how they would quarter themselues: the truth is, they did onely capitulate the matter, but not put it in execution, as eyther pre∣uented by 
Spinola's
 couert escape, or the aduise of the States, who they say came to Dort for the same pur∣pose, and to whom his Excellencie with some speciall Commanders resorted


But this was not so effectually done, but that Her Highnesse at 
Brussels
 had notice of the same iust in a manner at the same time as Letters came from 
Baua∣ria,
 that 
Mounseur Tilly
 could not be spared out of the Palatinate: Whereupon, when she considered the


danger eminent and imminent, and in what perill her whole Army stood, (besides the infinite inconueni∣ences it was subiect vnto, as you haue heard) if the Prince of Orenge should come one way with his Forces, and Count 
Mansfield
 the Duke of 
Bruns∣wicke
 another way with their Armies, she very consi∣derately aduised the Marquisse 
Spinola,
 by speedy messengers and seuerall Letters to raise his siege, and follow the Law of Nature, which teacheth all her Creatures the meanes of preseruation.


Whereupon, both this Imposition and the neces∣sity of the businesse, with other malignant circumstan∣ces, led him out of the wilde fields of peremptori∣nesse and presumption, into the orderly bounds of safety and securitie; so that hee lay in waite for an opportunitie to passe quietly without interception; which (as it should seeme) he effected in this man∣ner: When he perceiued that his Excellency did not rise, or was not ready, on Sunday our 22 of 
Sep∣tember
 he made a fayre shew of his Army before the out-workes of the Towne, both Horse and Foot, yet somewhat more remote then hee was accustomed when hee determined any On-set: whereby, as it ap∣peared afterward, his whole campe was blinded from the discouery of the Courts of Guard, and the Town, who prepared to defend themselues, and thought vp∣on nothing lesse then an escape.


This done, by twy-light his Cariages were ready, which still kept the left hand of the march; within them went the Ordnance which hee meant to conuey with the Army, and here attended the Pioners, the Camp-followers, and all such vnnecessary people, as


belongs to such a businesse. When they were ready, and the scoutes brought word the coast was cleere; for all it seemed a windy and duskish night, he seemed to welcome the opportunity, and set forward the munition with great silence, and taciturnity, allowing them a sufficient conuoy of horse, and the pioners conuenient armes for their purpose: they marched very neere six houres be∣fore hee stird, comming close by the wet ground, and drownd land, on the east side of 
Bergen,
 where as they say they met with 
Gonzales de Cordua,
 and that other part of his Armie, which lay betweene 
Antwerp
 and 
Bergen:
 Thus they goe on, and before noone the next day came within sixe English mile of 
Antwerp,
 having spent aboue eighteene houres in the trauell.


By that time the Armie was thus rid of her en∣cumbrances, and all this while heard not of an ene∣mie, and that the great Generall conceiued they had overgone their affrightings betweene midnight and one a clocke in the morning, the horseboies and cer∣taine men appointed of purpose, set fire on all their quarters, and burned those things which were left, which made so great a smoake and smother for the time, that nothing was perceiued till the Army was very forward, and then the fire had ouergone the moisture, making all things combustible, so that the flame shewed the glory of her brightnesse, and the neighbour places said apparantly, he was departed: this was the light that ap∣peared in 
Zealand,
 so that the pinckes and passengers in the sea, without searching further after particulars, only coniectured the siege was raised, and so gaue it forth ac∣cordingly.


To this, may be added, that of a hundred peeces of ordnance, he caried away but 30, and what is be∣come of the rest, time will discouer, those which he sa∣ued, are now brought to 
Antwerp
: besides they say, that having many wounded and diseased people, he proui∣ded for all manner of nations, but Scots and English, whom he left to the furie of the fire, and terror of ex∣tremitie, but that some recouered and creeped as it were to the towne, where they found a sanctuary contrary to expectation, and the towne heard strange things of them, not to be beleeued in the report. Last of all they relate, he was not fully 18000 horse and foote: for hauing lost very neere 10000 by one meanes or other, it was a good account to bring his 
Items
 to such a reckoning; and thus much for the rising of the Marquesse 
Spinola
 before 
Ber∣gen.
 The next thing (as I suppose) will be the searches of his Campe place, the demolishing of his mounts, and fortifications, the refreshing of the towne, the repairing of the decaied places, the watching of the Enemies acti∣ons, the mustering of new forces, the prouiding of muni∣tion, and if the winter make much haste, the Garisoning of souldiers on all sides; but as yet the eies of iealousie are in euery corner, and therefore I beleeue they will bee sure of 
Spinolaes
 setling his Army, before the 
States
 re∣moue theirs.








A true Relation of the cruell Execution done in 
Ommelberg,
 a Towne in the Bishopricke of 
Mentz
 vpon the persons of two Ministers, or Preachers of the Gospell, by the instigation of the IESVITES.


Hereunto is annexed, in what manner 
Count Henry
 of 
Nassaw
 hath taken about VENLO in 
Gelderland,
 400. Waggons loaden with certaine bags with Gold, besides ammunition, victuals, and baggage, which were with a Conuoy going to the Campe of Count Henry of the Bergh.


I
T is manifestly knowne to all the world, that hatred, enuie, and dis∣sention reigne mightily now a∣dayes: The sonne is against the father, and the sister against the bro∣ther, and in generall we are so ex∣asperated one against another, that if we could drowne one another in a spoone with water, we would not fetch a paile, as partly


appeareth by this present example. 
Iohannes vander Veeck
 and 
Lambertus Liber,
 being two Protestant Preachers, and hauing disputed against certaine Priests at 
Kruysganck,
 the Iesuites caused them to be apprehended, and afterwards most cruelly to be executed within the Towne of 
Vmmel∣berg,
 the 30. of August 1622. where the Hangman with red hot pinsers pulled the flesh from their bones, (so that a heart made of stone would haue taken compassion of them) and put them to death with great martyrisation. But they haue suffered it patiently, as a sheepe that is brought to the slaughter-house. But three dayes after the same, one of the Iesuites, called 
Pater
 or 
Father Iohn,
 aged 96. yeeres, was taken about 12. a clocke from his Table, and was ne∣uer seene afterwards: wherein surely God had a hand. Therefore let vs pray vnto God that he will not iudge vs according to our deserts, but grant vs the everlasting sal∣uation.


COunt Henry
 of 
Nassaw
 being aduised that a Conuoy was to be sent to 
Count Henry Van de Berg,
 with 400. Waggons, which were loaden with money, ammunition, victuals, and other necessaries: He tooke with him 1000. muskettiers and 5. Cornet of horse, to wait vpon them; and about 
Venlo
 he dispersed and slew the same Conuoy, (whereof some retired to 
Venlo, Re∣munde,
 and 
Naseijcke
) and tooke the said Wagons with their loading aforesaid. Wee lost not aboue 12. men, which were partly hurt and partly slaine. Whereby wee may see how miraculously God workes in our behalfe, and to the preseruation of our and the neighbouring Countries, to whom we are therefore bound to giue thankes, and to mend our sinfull liues, leauing all pride and bitternesse, so that we may liue in peace and amitie, and receiue Gods be∣nediction and grace, auoiding the punishments which ten thousand times we haue deserued. Therefore let vs pray the Almightie, that he will forgiue vs our sinnes, and as∣sist vs with his mercy, that we may once be deliuered of all Tyrannies, and cruell Warres: Which God grant through his infinite mercy. AMEN.


FINIS.









