Coppies of letters sent from personages of accompt vnto divers personages of worth in London truely relating all such remarkable occurrences as haue hapned in the Palatinate from the 30th of May to the 11 of Iune. Amongst which, the prise that Count Mansfield hath taken from the Bavarian. As also the mis-hap of the Duke of Brunswicke in his passage over the river of Mayne. Likewise a relation of divers strange and miraculous accidents, falling out thereabouts. By Doctor Welles and others. Printed this 22. of Iune 1622.
Approx. 13 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 8 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-04 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A08159




STC 18507.56A



ESTC S107085





99842788




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Coppies of letters sent from personages of accompt vnto divers personages of worth in London truely relating all such remarkable occurrences as haue hapned in the Palatinate from the 30th of May to the 11 of Iune. Amongst which, the prise that Count Mansfield hath taken from the Bavarian. As also the mis-hap of the Duke of Brunswicke in his passage over the river of Mayne. Likewise a relation of divers strange and miraculous accidents, falling out thereabouts. By Doctor Welles and others. Printed this 22. of Iune 1622.
[4], 10 p.   


London :


Printed by I. D[awson] for Iohn Bartlet, and are to be sold at  his shop in Cheap-side, at the gilt Cup in the Gold smiths row,


1622.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Palatinate (Germany) --  History --  Frederick V, 1610-1623.
2010-01
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2010-02
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2010-03
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2010-03
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2010-04
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18507.56A


99842788


7476














COPPIES OF LETTERS SENT FROM PERSONAGES Of Accompt vnto divers Personages of Worth in 
London;
 Truely relating all such remarkable Occurrences as haue hapned in the 
Palatinate
 from the 30
th
 of 
May
 to the 11
th
 of IVNE.


Amongst which, the Prise that Count 
Mansfeild
 hath taken from the 
Bavarian.


As also the Mis-hap of the Duke of 
Brunswicke
 in his passage over the River of 
MAYNE.


Likewise a Relation of divers strange and miraculous Accidents, falling out thereabouts.


By 
Doctor Welles
 and others.


Printed this 22. of 
Iune
 1622.


LONDON, Printed by 
I. D.
 for 
Iohn Bartlet,
 and are to be sold at his Shop in 
Cheap-side,
 at the gilt Cup in the Gold-smiths Row. 1622.










❧To the courteous Reader.


C
Ourteous Reader;


These are to advertise thee that these Letters are Prin∣ted without the privitie of those that sent them, but I suppose that they will not take it offencively, that all such as are well-willers to the cause of the 
Palatinate,
 should bee made ac∣quainted with the common occurrences which fall out there, and I suppose they would the rather suffer it, if they knew or were made acquainted with the false Rumors which often passe heere for current, vntill wee heare the contrary by such Letters as these are: I haue not prefixed any long preamble to the ensuing Relation, neither is it stuffed with any superfluous coniectures, but you haue them printed in the same wordes and phrase in which I received them.


Vale.














COPIES OF LETTERS Sent from personages of accompt vnto divers personages of Worth in 
London,
 truely relating all such 
remarkeable Occurrences as haue
 hapned in the 
Palatinate
 from the 30
th
 of 
May
 to the 11
th
 of IVNE.


F
Rom 
Hannaw
 within these two dayes are come together all the Forces the Emperor, 
Bavaria,
 and the Bi∣shops can make with∣in six Germaine myles of vs. The King hath his Forces together, the one halfe in 
Ments
 Lands, the King in 
Darmstradts
 Lands. 
Brunswicke
 is not yet with the King, he is this day about a myle from 
Freesburg
 in the Watterewe, foure myles from vs. The King hath or shall haue from 
Franckford
 an 100000. Reeks Dollars. The 
Bavarian
 souldiers fall daily to 
Mansfield,
 I


haire seene it, and haue heard it of his offi∣cers, that they goe twelue or sixteene in a day out of a Company. And two dayes a∣goe there was money going to pay for foure Moneths, but 
Mansfeilds
 Souldiers tooke it.


There were three Hathorn Trees by 
Darmstadt,
 which were spotted all over on the leaues as with blood; they are in 
Franckford
 to be seene; when they are wa∣shed they will go off, but come on againe. For three weeks word came from 
Valtaline,
 from the Grisons, that the folke had slaine all 
Leopoldus
 Forces he had left there, for he had also put the 
Valtalines
 to the sword for them of their Religion, and that after such crueltie, as the like hath not bin heard of. This weeke Newes came, that in a towne called 
Bunfen,
 there were but fiftie men left in habitants; and many women, who putting themselues into mens apparell, slew at severall times two thousand of the Papists their enemies: it is accounted here a worke and a wonder of God.


MAINHEM 
2. of IVNE.








Mainhem 
the 2. of Iune, 1622. 
Old Stile.


MY L. 
Chichester
 arived here on Thurs∣day last, to my Lord Generals great comfort, and the whole troupes. Barron 
Tilley
 strengthened with his fresh supplies, which were 5000. foote and 1000. horse, marched towardes the Maine, to hinder Count 
Mansfeild
 and Marquis 
Baden,
 from meeting with the Duke of 
Brunswick.
 Now the passage aimed at on both sides was 
Ashenburge
 a Towne of the Bishop of 
Ments
 vpon the Maine, where there is a Bridge. The Count 
Mansfeilds
 Army came about 
Darmstat,
 one Thursday was sevennight, and there staid the comming of the Mar∣quis which was Sunday: to conclude it was Teusday before they marched from their quarters, in the 
Lantgraues
 Countrey towards this 
Ashenburge,
 when beeing by 
Dippergen
 a small Towne, which ransom∣med it selfe at 15000. 
Lor.
 advertisement came of the Barron 
Tillies
 hauing possessed


himselfe of the passage, and that hee mar∣ched directly towards them with a great power, weied to bee (by the coniecture) of the Barron 
Anhalts
 forces and most of 
Gonsales
 with him 30000. and the horse ful∣ly armed from top to toe as they say. Our Armie then thought of a faire retrait, and applied to it by the same way they advan∣ced, and lay the same night in Armes: on Wednesday they retreated towards 
Openhe∣im
 bridg and lodged about 
Girah.
 On thurs∣day (which was a very great march) they came on this side 
Bensheim,
 The Enemie all this while following without any thing done, on Fryday morning our two Ar∣mies hauing so disposed of themselues, mar∣ched by severall passages to 
Loresh,
 least the enemie should cut betweene them and 
Mainhem,
 but were no sooner risen, but the Enemie appeared, and with a body of Cai∣rassiers, charged the rereward of the Mar∣quis of 
Baden,
 wher his Lieutenant General Colonell 
Golstein
 a man much lamented for his courage and vnderstanding was at the first shot slaine. But since that written newes came from the Enemies Leaguer


that hee is liuing shot in the head, but not mortally, and his horse put to the worse, but the presse of the enemy was kept vp by the Rereward of Count 
Mansfields
 horse, the Regiment of Colo∣nell 
Megant,
 and were forced to a disor∣derly retreat. Note the enemies foote ne∣uer came vp, which if they had, the whole must needes haue beene engaged. Thus skirmishing continued in the rere somewhat sharpely by fits, till towardes night: the danger on euery side was by the Chiefes vigilance preuented, and the estimate of men slaine on both sides is betweene 3. or 4. hundred, but till a par∣ticular view bee taken of the particular companies by each Captaine, the iust number of those that are wanting can∣not be knowne. In this skirmish his Ma∣iesty shewed himselfe (as before) most forward and valorous to the encourage∣ment of others.


The 
Landgraue
 of 
Darmstart
 and his yonger sonne are inuited hither, and lodged with the King at the Citadell, the King of 
Bohemia
 came suddenly and vn∣exspectedly


vpon the 
Landgraue
 of 
Darm∣stat,
 so that hee came to meete the King withall speeding demonstrations of af∣fection and much complement, which hee would haue spared if the king had not brought a force with him able to fleece the 
Landgraue,
 the King notwith∣standing did not trust him; but shewed him an intercepted letter of his, whereat he was silent, and most of the Cattle in his countrey are driuen into the 
Pallati∣nate
 to make supply of flesh there.


The Arch Duke 
Le
poldus
 at my since his retreat from 
Hagenaw
 hath bene in a grea
 consumption, what with muting and a great different betweene the 
Spa∣nish
 and 
Dutch
 souldiers, a
 also by the 
Switzers
 who are sayde to haue killed a great number of them.


The Count 
Leuensteine
 in a letter to my Lord, takes notice of a Castle be∣tweene 
Ca
iere
 and 
Zurich,
 taken from the 
Spaniard
 with three peeces of Canon which the Citizens haue now before 
Mainfelt.


We here nothing from aboue, but


great preparations (if the armies on foot suffise not) against the poore 
Palatinate.
 Whether our army will aduenture once more ouer the Neckar, or take some o∣ther course, leaue.


A 
Germaine
 Prince of the house of the 
Rhinegraues,
 and a Count of the house of the 
Mansfields
 were taken, and some o∣thers meaner of Officers, on the Ene∣mies side was a Collonell slaine in com∣pleate armour, by a bullet in his face when hee lifted vp his helmet to take cold aire. And many other Officers of horse, we count it a great blessing of God that in a retreat of thirty miles, we lost no baggage, nor more men the enemy.






From 
Mainheim,
 
Iune 6. 1622.


You will happily in few dayes heare of a scoffe sooner then of armes, or a for∣bearer of hostility, which makes as much, wee haue the Marquesse of 
Baden
 and Count 
Mansfield
 here with vs, with both their armies, which are shortly else where to be bestowed or discharged of


attending the good successe of the trea∣ty. The 
Bauarians
 forces are in 
Darmstrats
 countrey in a readinesse to oppose what may be attempted by the duke of 
Bruns∣wicke
 in his passage vpward: but it is conceited that the endeauours of the Lord Ambassador here, and those at 
Brussels
 will put a barre betweene them, here is a speech that the 
Turke
 is pow∣ring downe his forces vpon Christen∣dome, but hauing no ground for it other then a common report, you shall take it accordingly. This day the king sent 2. Gentlemen to 
Brussels
 as doth also the Marquesse of 
Baden,
 there to treate for them: my Lord Ambassador sent his Se∣cretary to 
Gonsalo Tilly,
 and so to 
Bruns∣wicke,
 who is neere to 
Ashenburg.
 Most of the Marquesse his forces are put into Garrison at 
Hidelberg, Frankendale,
 and 
Mainheim:
 my Lord Ambassador hath re∣ceiued them for 3. weekes into the king our soueraigns pay; he payes so many as makes the number vp, with these my Lord Generall already hath, in that space of three weekes it is thought that they of



Brussels
 will either conclude or breake off.


The Duke of 
Brunswicke
 hath taken 
Hasteon;
 the riuer of 
Main,
 and made a bridge ouer it, he hath sixe Regiments of foote, and eighty Cornet of horse.


Count 
Mansfields
 horse went to meete the Duke of 
Brunswickes
 forces, and after∣wards his foote.






From 
Mainheim
 
the 11. of 
Iune.


In hast I desire to present my loue, & tell you that Barron 
Tilly
 and 
Gonsalo
 are gone with all the forces they can make ouer the 
Main
 to see if they can finde out the Duke of 
Brunswicke,
 who lay intren∣ched at a place called 
Hoest
 within a Dutch league of 
Frankford,
 where the Duke lay ready to encounter him, there is great disaduantage in their forces, but we hope that it will bee made vp by the aduantage of the ground, it is apparant by the great preparation of the campe that he hopeth to swallow vp the Duke, but wee hope it shall turne to the aug∣mentation


of the Dukes honor, the duke hath had many skirmishes with them, wherein he hath had the better of them We haue, and you will heare of a lamen∣table defeate of the Duke of 
Brunswicke
 by 
Francford
 to the losse and scattering of the whole army, but God be thanked it is not true but what is the truth is hard to say, the likeliest is, that in passing the 
Main
 towards a bridge by 
Hoest
 below 
Franckford, Tilly
 who is now sayd to bee 30000. at least, with three supplyes from aboue, from 
Bohemia, Bauaria,
 and the Bi∣shops, and the Duke had but two small peeces: and the Barron of 
Anhoults
 occa∣sion hath broke the bridge with thirteen peeces of Canon, where the foote were most passed, and put the horse to swim, and so tooke much of the baggage and some men therewith, but God be praised the body of the Army ioynes this night with the kings, we hope.


The Army hath laine euer sine they came out of 
Darmstat
 here by 
Mainheim.


FINIS.











