The certaine and true newes, from all the parts of Germany and Poland to this present 29. of October, 1621. Published by authoritie.
Approx. 12 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 6 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-04 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A08153




STC 18507.35C



ESTC S119029





99854236




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The certaine and true newes, from all the parts of Germany and Poland to this present 29. of October, 1621. Published by authoritie.
[2], 8 p.   


London :


Printed by F. K[ingston] for B. D[ownes] and are to bee sold by William Lee, at his shop in Fleetstreet, at the golden Bucke, neere Serieants Inne,


1621.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Thirty Years' War, 1618-1648 --  Early works to 1800.
2009-05
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2009-06
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2009-07
Scott Lepisto
Sampled and proofread
2009-07
Scott Lepisto
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2009-09
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18507.35C


99854236


19645












THE CERTAINE AND TRVE NEWES, FROM ALL 
THE PARTS OF
 GERMANY AND POLAND, 
TO THIS PRESENT
 29. 
of October,
 1621.


Published by Authoritie.


LONDON Printed by F. K. for B. D. and are to bee sold by 
William Lee,
 at his Shop in Fleetstreet, 
at the golden Buck
, neere Serieants Inne.
 1621.














From Hungary, Octob. 
28. 1621.


I
N 
Hungary,
 affaires goe not very well for 
Bethelem Gabor,
 and the Marquesse of 
Iagen∣dorff,
 are already in 
Morauia,
 and make themselues Ma∣sters of the field, winning one place after another with great speedinesse: yet neuer∣thelesse the treaty of 
Niclausburgh
 goeth forward.


The accord betweene the Duke of 
Bauaria
 and Count 
Mansfield
 is broken off, wherefore the Duke of 
Bauaria
 followeth him foot by foot.


They in 
Franckendale
 behaue themselues very braue and manfully, and if other places had done the like, it would not haue beene in the 
Palatinate
 as it is.


Euen now, I haue newes, that Count 
Mansfield
 is ariued at a place called 
Necker,
 within foure miles of 
Heydelberg:
 and it is thought that 
Franck∣endale
 will bee aided or succoured by him, next Munday or Tuesday.


At 
Newenmarik,
 the Iesuites and Capuchines preach openly in the Castle, and Parish Chur∣ches.


From Pr
staw in Silesia, the
 17 
of Octob.
 1621.


Although the purposed Diet in 
Silesia
 vvas de∣ferred by the Lords and States of the Countrey: yet is it appointed againe by the Emperour and Duke of 
Saxony,
 that it shall be kept, and begin ere October be finished, because all manner of prepa∣ration belonging thereunto is in a readinesse, and already set forward.


The Marquesse of 
Iagendorff
 was in 
Silesia
 with 20000. taking one place after another, and so went into 
Morauia
 to the Prince of 
Trāsiluania,
 to whom came 10000. of 
Walachia,
 who spoile and burne all they meet withall, so that it is reported, that these forces together, are very neere 50000. I meane 
Be∣thelem Gabors,
 and the Marquesse of 
Iagendorff.


Glaty
 is not as yet taken, but holds out still.


Out of 
Poland,
 newes is come, that there were slaine in the last conflict betweene them and the 
Turkes,
 20000. 
Polonians,
 and at least 40000. 
Turks
 and 
Tartars.


It is also certaine, that the Marquesse of 
Bran∣denburg
 ariued in the end of September last, at 
Warschan
 in 
Poland,
 whom the King of 
Poland
 met, with 500. 
Heiduckens,
 and many horsemen, and so the said Marquesse very shortly after receiued the feoud of the King.


Out of 
Prussia
 the newes is, that the King of 
Swe∣den
 hath taken in 
Riga,
 or 
Rigwe,
 and that the King of 
Poland
 is gone for certaine, as resolued to meete with the 
Turkes
 armie.


In 
Silesia,
 it is likely it will be very dangerous to liue and continue, and therefore many of them are


about to buy land in the Country of 
Brandenburg,
 fearing it will fall out very ill with them in their owne Countrey.


The Lord of 
Do
n
 is come vnto 
Iagendorff,
 with 3. Companies of foot, and 4. peeces of Artillery, and so put a Garrison the rein, from whence he went vn∣to 
Trappaw,
 and tooke with him the Ordnance that were in 
Iagendorff,
 getting a great bootie by the way.


In 
Morauia
 there is like to be an vprore, and the 
Wallachiens
 will fall directly to the Marquesse, wherupon they suspect the Marquesse in the vpper 
Silesia,
 who would march thorow their Countrey with 8000. 
Hungars
 and 6000. 
Dutch,
 which hath caused a great feare amongst the Souldiers on all sides.


From Vienna,
 25. 
Octob.
 1621.


After that Captaine 
Reuber,
 contrary to his oath, had surrendered vp the Towne of 
Scalitz, Bethelem Gabor
 went forward with his forces all along 
Mo∣rauia,
 and as soone as the Souldiers which lay in 
Strafnitz
 perceiued his comming, they made them∣selues masters ouer their Captaines and Comman∣ders, hurting and wounding some of them, especi∣ally one of 
Haugenitz
 very sore, because he would not yeeld vnto them, and afterwards they threw him out at a window.


Thus when they had bound all their Captaines and Commanders, they deliuered them and the Castle vp vnto 
Bethelem Gabor,
 who would haue put them all to the sword; but by the meanes of the Marquesse of 
Iagendorff
 they were saued: yet a


great feare was raised in the Countrey by this meanes, that the treaty of 
Niclaus
urgh
 should haue beene deferred: but since there ariued 9000. 
Silesians
 in 
Morauia,
 it is begun.


In the meane time, the 
Hungarians
 did set vpon 
Holl
schaw,
 the Lord Cantilar of 
Bohemia,
 and the Lord Generall, with their followers, and tooke a∣way from them what they had: notwithstanding, the Earle of 
Emerid, Titzio,
 and fiue other 
Hunga∣rian
 Lords are come vnto the Treatie, and shall (no question) haue what the whole country can afford.


Three dayes agoe there was put in prison heere, an 
Italian,
 called 
Cro
la,
 with his sonne and seruants, for coyning certaine pieces of money, amounting to the value of a thousand pound.


Bethelem Gabor
 and the Marquesse of 
Iagendorff,
 haue taken in most places on this side the Marsh, and our forces haue likewise taken in the best quar∣ters on the other side all along, till you come to 
Randisch,
 where they meane to remaine on both sides, vntill a Treaty of peace is concluded.


The 
Bu
lean
 forces doe daily great hurt, conti∣nuing burning and spoiling the Countrey heerea∣bout 
Newstadt:
 and although the chiefe places are beset with Souldiers, as 
Hanbach, Prugg, Alten∣burgh, Eisenstad,
 and 
Newstadt,
 yet they dare not venter vpon the enemy, either for feare of discom∣fiture, or leauing their Townes naked.


Since our forces left the 
Schutt
 and 
Thombia,
 and went into 
Morauia,
 they haue indured great scarci∣tie, and still want necessary prouision: for the Soul∣diers liuing by prouant, and getting none, could


neither passe thorow, nor trauell any longer, inso∣much that many horses died for want of prouen∣der, and as many Souldiers for want of victuals, so that they are not able to resist the enemy: besides, the sicknesse & dearth which is increased amongst them, doth trouble & affright them more & more.


Out of Prage,
 27. 
of Octob.
 1621.


They in 
Tabor
 doe hitherto hold out, and haue only 50. very expert in shooting, so that none dare shew themselues before it: all the forces which are heereabouts, were brought together, being about 4000. foot, and 600. horse, who should haue giuen an assault vpon the Towne, but finding themselues too weake, they desisted: whereupon they determi∣ned to vndermine it: wherein likewise they failed, by reason of the situation vpon a stony and hard ground.


The Prince of 
Lichtenstein
 cannot as yet goe for∣wards with his regiment of foot, and 500. horse, because all the men which can be mustered, are brought before 
Tabor.
 Likewise the Dukes forces goe not forward, but lye heere and there on the high wayes side, robbing and stealing from all they meet: and although the Duke of 
Saxony
 hath beene called vpon diuers times by the Emperor to march with his Army into 
Morauia:
 yet for any thing we heare, he is not so much as a going.


The 
Hungarians
 all this while are falne very strong into 
Morauia,
 doing very much hurt, and al∣though the 
Imperials
 follow them, to intercept their outrage, yet are they too weake to doe any good vpon them.


The Prince of 
Lichtenstein
 went yesterday in the forenoone with a few toward 
Rundis,
 where the Arch-duke 
Charles
 is to meet him.


From Neurenbergh, Octob.
 26. 1621.


On Sunday last, there passed by vs 
Monsieur Tilly
 with 66. companies of foot, 44. troopes of horse, 9. Peeces of Ordnance, 1500. waines, and 5000. horse∣men, all which went presently to 
Furth,
 where they pitched their Campe and resolued to remaine.


Hitherto they haue had prouision sent vnto them from hence; they did much hurt by the way, and terrified all the Countrey: Whether he followed with this Army after the Count of 
Mansfield,
 who then lay at 
Rottenbergh,
 is vncertaine, because they suddenly incamped, as (belike) vnderstanding of a new Treaty betweene the Duke of 
Bauaria
 and the Count 
Mansfield.


From the Palatinate, the
 26. 
of Octob.
 1621.


The 
Ritterschaft
 lieth as yet at 
Neckerhansen,
 and thereabouts.


The enemy before 
Franckendale,
 hath got the halfe moone by 
Raldenlech
 already, and they haue beene vpon the wall at 
Franckendale,
 but were for∣ced to a retreat by the valour of the defendants▪ they looke daily for Count 
Mansfield,
 who as it is thought, will quarter himselfe about 
Masbach,
 and then no doubt, as soone as he comes, 
Franckendale
 will be aided and releeued.


Last Friday there was a skirmish betwixt the 
Spaniards
 and Captaine 
Obertrant,
 who carried away with him three Peeces of Ordnance, leauing the fourth in the lurch: all these he took from them very brauely.


At 
Manhaime
 the enemy would haue taken the Ship-bridge avvay, but they vvere beaten backe a∣gaine vvith no small losse.


Last Saterday the enemy made another strong assault vpon the Sconce before 
Franckendale,
 vvherein the 
English
 lay, but vvere beaten off a∣gaine vvith the losse of 700. men, vvhereof some of them stucke so fast in the marish, that they vvere there cut in pieces. There is a rumor that the Earle of 
Nederysenburgh
 vvas slaine vvith a Peece of Ordnance: some say he vvas but hurt: but it is sure, that certaine chiefe Captaines vvere slaine in that assault. About midnight they made another as∣sault vpon the halfe Moone, and tooke it vvith tvvo Peeces of Ordnance, tvvo tunne of povvder, vvith certaine clothes: but ere they could goe quite a∣way, all was recouered, and they lost againe many men, besides 300. that were wounded. There were found dead of the 
English
 some 80. but it is vncer∣taine how many they brought into the Towne with them. Their hope is now in Count 
Mansfield:
 for they haue sent the enemy word, they haue nothing for them but powder and shot: in which, they were as good as their words, as it should seeme: for newes came presently againe, that they haue beaten the 
Spaniards
 once more from the wall of 
Franck∣endale.


From the Palatinate, the
 30. 
of October.
 1621.


That the Count 
Mansfield
 marching day and night, is come into the 
Palatinate,
 his forces being 16000. hath ioyned himselfe with Sir 
Horacio Vere.


Spinola
 hearing of it, made toward them with his forces: they perceiuing him willing to fight, ioyned battell with him, slaying 3000. of his men; and following him so long as day-light lasted, kil∣led many of them in the flight.


FINIS.











