A true and faithfull relation, presented to his Maiestie and the prince, of what hath lately happened in Constantinople, concerning the death of Sultan Osman, and the setting vp of Mustafa his vncle Together with other memorable occurrents worthy of obseruation.
Roe, Thomas, Sir, 1581?-1644.
Approx. 37 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 18 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2004-03 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A08166




STC 18507.71A



ESTC S120714





99855908




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A true and faithfull relation, presented to his Maiestie and the prince, of what hath lately happened in Constantinople, concerning the death of Sultan Osman, and the setting vp of Mustafa his vncle Together with other memorable occurrents worthy of obseruation.
Roe, Thomas, Sir, 1581?-1644.
[34] p.   


Imprinted at London :


[By F. Kingston] for Bartholomew Downes, and are to be sold at his house neere Fleet-bridge [by B. Downes], and in Popes head Alley, by William Sheffard,


1622.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Mustafa --  I, --  Sultan of the Turks, 1591-1639.
Osman --  II, --  Sultan of the Turks, 1603-1622.
Turkey --  History --  1453-1683 --  Early works to 1800.
2003-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2003-09
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2003-11
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2003-11
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2003-12
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18507.71A


99855908


21416












A TRVE AND FAITHFVLL RE∣LATION, PRESENTED TO HIS MAIESTIE AND THE PRINCE, of what hath lately happened in Constantinople, 
concerning the death of
 Sultan Osman, 
and the setting vp of
 Mustafa 
his Vncle.


Together with other memorable occurrents
 worthy of obseruation.






Imprinted at London for 
Bartholomew Downes,
 and are to be sold at his house neere Fleet-bridge, and in Popes head Alley, by 
William Sheffard.
 1622.














THE DEATH OF SVLTAN OSMAN, AND THE SETTING VP of 
Mustafa
 his Vncle.


T
He Grand Signior 
Sultan Os∣man
 discontented since his disgrace in 
Poland,
 as soone as he came to 
Constantinople,
 pretended a iourney vpon the 
Emir de Saida,
 who was reported to bee in Rebellion, hauing taken Armes to other ends. But being diuerted from this purpose by the great instance of the 
Vizi∣ers,
 and that it would not so well serue his se∣cret designes, because he must then keepe an Army on foote; he gaue out that he would vi∣sit 
Mecha,
 the tombe of his false Prophet.


To make this voyage the more secure, in apparance, he seemed content to accept of a∣ny Treatie with the 
Polacks,
 euen to conditions




both of disaduantage and dishonour; for his estates in 
Hungary,
 he reenforced the frontiers with diuers troopes, and though hee were much troubled at the league betweene the 
Em∣peror
 of 
Germany
 and 
Bethlem Gaber,
 yet hee dissembled it so, as that he would not displease the 
Transiluantan,
 but rather offered new suc∣cors, and forbearance of his Tribute. From the incursions of the 
Cossacks,
 he hoped to as∣sure himselfe, by the treatie of the 
Poles,
 and in occasion of breach, he had the 
Tartars
 ready to requite them (it being both their trades to liue vpon spoyle and robbery) and for more secu∣rity he appoynted twenty Gallies to keepe the blacke Sea. The common people and 
Uiziers
 that loued rest, and knew not the designe, were much troubled and discontent at this iourney, who made many Remonstrances to him of the inconuenience and danger to leaue the seate of his Empire to the trust of a Deputy, in a time when 
Bethlem Gaber
 was newly reconci∣led to the 
Germane Emperour,
 and therefore not to be trusted, and the 
Polacks
 newly recon∣ciled to him, and therefore to bee mistrusted. Diuers other reasons were made to him, many Petitions deliuered from the Church-men,


Lawyers, and from all estates. But Melancho∣like reuenge had wholy possessed him, so that by no meanes he could be perswaded to desist. The Soldioury pasted so farre, as to threaten publikely, and to protest, they would not fol∣low, but rather set vp another King in his ab∣sence that should stay among them. In con∣clusion, carried by his owne fate to destructi∣on, the seuenth of May hauing first comman∣ded away all his Gallies to the 
Leuant,
 and thereby disposed away many of his Souldiers, he began to passe ouer his Tents and Pauilions to 
Asia
 side, with great quantities of Treasure: The 
Ianizaries
 and 
Spahees,
 who had also se∣cret intelligence vpon the King, his owne words and actions betraying some further de∣signe then a Pilgrimage (for he made prepara∣tions to carry away all his Iewels and Trea∣sure, euen defacing his Palace, and taking from Churches, and his Wardrobes, whatsoeuer could bee conuerted to Bullion) suddainely met at the 
Hippodrome
 in the Citty vpon a word giuen; and from thence ranne to the 
Seraglio
 in tumult, but without Armes, and there accor∣ding to their barbarous mutinies cried out for the King (hauing first taken order to stop the


passage of anything vpon the water) who ap∣pearing to them, asked what this insolency meant, and what they pretended. They then by the mouth of a multitude (for they had no head but that of the monster) demanded first that he should not proceed in his purpose to goe to 
Mecha
 nor into 
Asia,
 but that he must abide in the Cittie; Secondly, they would haue deliuered to their fury the great 
Uizier de-lauir Bassa,
 the 
Hoia
 or Confessor of the King, the 
Cashariaga
 gouernour of the women, the 
Tefterdar
 or Treasorer, the 
Caddee Leskar,
 or Chiefe Iustice, and some others, as enemies to the State, and consenting to this Voyage, which they pretended would be the ruine of the Empire. The first, after a little dispute, the King granted vnto them; promising to giue ouer his iourney, but they not content, exacted it in writing. To the second he replied that it was dishonour to him to haue his Seruants so vsed without order of Iustice: but perswaded them to haue patience to stay vntill Saterday, the next 
Diuan
 or publike Councell, where they should all appeare, and if they were found culpable, they should receiue punishment; not meaning to performe any of this, but to get


time and allay their present fury. These fel∣lowes not content with this moderate answer, vndertooke to know that they were guilty, and therefore that they needed no other wit∣nesse, trials, nor Iudge, but themselues, and with extreme clamour called to haue them deliuered. But the King refusing to giue them any other satisfaction, and they vnprepared for force, returned into the Cittie, which now was all in feare, euery house and shop shut vp, expecting a generall sacke. But they followed the way of their owne hatred, and first went vnto the house of the 
Hoia,
 which they brake and pillaged: but not finding him, they procee∣ded to the great 
Uiziers,
 who made some de∣fence, and (they being vnarmed) beat them off; and so they separated being now euening, but yet kept a Guard in some parts of the Towne.


This night the King made an attempt to send ouer to 
Asia
 side, but was preuented; and to fortifie and defend his 
Seraglio,
 which is walled strongly about, and hath alway in it of household Seruants about three thousand, but it seemes no man would Arme in his cause: For the next morning the Mutiners assembled


againe, and taking their Armes, went first to the 
Mofti,
 or Arch-priest among them, and for∣ced him and diuers others to accompany them to the Court, where they anew demaunded these men, but with more instance and fury. In the meane time the 
Hoia, Caddee Leskar,
 and 
Tefterdar
 fled, and were yet neuer heard of. The 
Uizier
 retired to the King, and perswa∣ded him earnestly to goe ouer in person in his owne boates (which from his Garden hee might easily doe) to 
Asia,
 and there to take Horse, and he would secure him from all pe∣rill; but the King would not mooue, bidding him stay confident and assured that he would punish these Rebels.


The wise old man seeing this constancy or obstinacy, desired leaue to shift for himselfe, which he either tooke or obtained, and so got away to the Hermitage of a Saint renowned amongst them, who (like himselfe) betrayed him to a Captaine of the 
Ianizaries;
 yet did him the fauour as not to deliuer him to the multitude, but carried him backe to the Kings house. At this time it was disputed in the 
Sera∣glio
 about the deliuerie of these Officers, the Emperour refusing, the Rebels clamouring


and threatning, in somuch as he began to feare they would breake in, and in their rage doe worse then was yet pretended. Whereupon, whether by the Kings order, or by his owne consent (willing to be the peace-offering) the 
Uizier
 went out to them, and with a good as∣surednesse demaunded what they sought of him, and wherein he had offended: But they answered him with their swords, and suddaine∣ly cut him in pieces.


The Emperour seeing their fury so outra∣gious, had now more cause to doubt, and reti∣red himselfe then too late, when hee had lost his braue Counsellor, would haue fled into 
Asia,
 and could not, but conueyed himselfe in∣to a priuate place prepared by his 
Bustengi Bassa,
 or chiefe Gardiner. The Rebels con∣tinue without in their madnesse, asking for the King, and for more sacrifices. But the Seruants protesting they knew not where he was, they said they must haue a King, and if hee would not appeare, they would make another; and hauing a while attended, they resolued to en∣ter the Palace (but first tooke a generall oath not to sacke the Imperiall Throne, which they called their house and their honour) and there


seeking for the King, not able to finde him, they extorted by confession the 
Caslariaga,
 and slew him, and then they demanded for 
Musta∣fa,
 Vncle to 
Osman,
 by him formerly deposed, a man esteemed rather holy (that is franticke) then wise, and indeed fitter for a Cell, then a Scepter. The King the first day of this tumult had put 
Mustafa
 into a vault with two Negro women, without bread or drinke, in which estate these new Electors found him almost naked, & halfe pined. At first sight, he thought they had bin the messengers of death: but that feare passed ouer, he begged of them a cup of water. Whom they tooke, and instantly pro∣claimed their Emperour, which he was loth to accept, 
vti pudebat aucti nominis;
 How vnsta∣ble are the estates of the greatest Princes. 
Quem dies videt veniens iacentem, hunc vi∣dit dies fugiens regnantem;
 He that was now in the Iawes of death, naked, starued, and dying for thirst, is become the Emperour, and may drinke gold, or the blood of men.


They as yet not knowing what was become of 
Osman,
 and loth to trust 
Mustapha
 in the Palace, carried him in triumph to the old 
Se∣raglio,
 and there left him, departing to the


sacke of the 
Viziers
 house, and so in the eue∣ning to their Rendeuous, where they kept both good guard, and good order in the Cittie from fires and other Insolencies. 
Sultan Osman
 amazed with these newes, so soone as they had left the Court, came out, and called to Councell in the night, 
Huzein Bassa,
 late 
Uizier
 in the 
Polish
 warre, and the 
Aga
 of the 
Ianizaries,
 both faithfull to him, and deman∣ded their aduice, first, hauing sent to the old 
Seraglio,
 to practise the women there, to stran∣gle 
Mustafa;
 but some taking his part, a new vprore began in the house betweene that sexe: and the Souldiers that kept watch, taking the Alarum, entred in, and rescued him, and from thence remoued him to the Chambers of the 
Ianizaries,
 where they garded him for that night, in an ill lodging. All this while 
Osman
 consults what course to take. These two his friends, and some others, tell him that the case was desperate, and could not be cured but by a desperate remedy. And therefore they agreed that the 
Aga
 should goe and perswade with the 
Mofti,
 and that the King in the morning should suddainely present himselfe to the Souldiers at their owne dore, and make expe∣rience,


what his Presence, his submission, and his beneuolence promised could worke, to moue them to Loyalty, or compassion; which counsell early in the morning they put in pra∣ctice. The King accompanied with the 
Mofti
 (who neuer consented to his deposing, though he fauoured the Souldiers against the 
Vizier)
 with 
Huzein Bassa,
 and about twelue Horse-men, went directly to the 
Ianizaries
 Colledge where 
Mustafa
 was kept, and there in teares made them an Oration, offring great recompence, repenting of his errour, and fi∣nally inuoked them by the merits of his father and all his Ancestors to haue some pittie vp∣on their true Master. The multitude 
(tam prona in misericordiam, quam immodica saeuitiâ fuerat)
 now knew not what to do; a silent murmure ran among them, and they were halfe conuerted: But the 
Aga
 of the 
Ianizaries,
 thinking to me∣rit of the King, and beginning to plead vn∣seasonably for him, with some harsh words of vpbraidure, 
vt natura Maris omni flatu ventitur∣bida,
 anew moued their furie, so that they creid out Treason, and fell vpon him and 
Huzein Bassa,
 and cut them into pieces, euery man ta∣king a part of their flesh to satiate their re∣uenge.


The 
Mofti
 would speake, but is with∣drawne by some, for respect to his place, and with difficulty is conueyed away. Now the poore 
Osman
 sees his friends slaine, and knowes not which way to conuert himself, but binding vp his eyes with a napkin, expects death as the last of their furie; But they carrie him first be∣fore 
Mustafa,
 and accuse him as the disturber of the Peace of the Empire, and demand sen∣tence against him, 
more vulgi suum quisque fla∣gitium alits obiectantes.
 The forsaken Prince pleads for life, and the new King knowes not how to condemne, but nods and agrees to all that is propounded. At last they consult with themselues, and put him vpon an horse (an in∣solent 
Spahee
 changing 
Turbants
 with him) and sent him away prisoner to the seuen to∣wers vnder good guard, and then returned to their new Master, and placed him in the 
Sera∣glio
 and Imperiall Throne, where hee hath neede to haue good broths and nourishment to restore his decayed body.


The Souldiers thinke all is done, and (one∣ly sacking the houses of 
Huzein Bassa
 and some others their conceiued enemies) returne in quiet to their seuerall lodgings, and haue no


further malice. But the new 
Uizier Daout Bas∣sa,
 made by 
Mustafa,
 knew well, if 
Osman
 liued, that this storme might passe ouer, and hee would as easily and by the same meanes re∣turne to his estate, as he fell from it, 
Uulgus vt mos est, cuiusque noui motus cupidum.
 Therefore he consulted with some few interessed in 
Mu∣stafaes
 preferment, and thereby obnoxious to 
Osman,
 to search how many of the Royall blood were left aliue, and resolued if there re∣mained two, to make an end of 
Osman.
 Two of his brothers were found, the one about twelue, the other about seuen yeeres of age: and thereupon the 
Uizier
 went himselfe to the prison with a packe of hangmen, and gaue order to strangle the vnfortunate Prince: who now hauing had no rest in two nights, and thinking himselfe secure for a season, was new∣ly falne asleepe: but awaked by the comming of these Messengers, asked what newes, saying he did not like their suddaine intrusion. They at first stood amazed, and the King made shew to defend himselfe; but a strong knaue strooke him on the head with a Battle-axe, and the rest leaping vpon him, strangled him with much adoe. Thus one of the greatest Monarkes in


the world, is first affronted by mutined troops, his owne slaues, almost vnarmed, and few in number, no man taking vp a sword to defend him: and they who began this madnesse, not meaning to hurt him, by the increase of their owne furie, which hath no bounds, depose him against their owne purpose, and at last expose his life against their will, to the counsels of o∣ther men, whom they equally hate. And now they mourne for their dead King, as freshly as they raged vnreasonably, knowing they haue stayned their honour, being the first of their Emperours they euer betrayed, and that they haue set vp another that in all likelyhood they must change for disability: 
Nonunquam tulit documenta sors maiora, quam fragile loco starent superbi.


This is the last act of the life of 
Sultan Os∣man:
 but his intents and great designes, which drew vpon him this fatall blow, I suppose will not bee vnworthy the communication, the practices, reasons, secrets and counsels of all actions being the soule of history, and 
res gestae
 but the bare carcasse: and I am perswaded, as many ages haue not produced so strange an example of the incertainty of humane great∣nesse;


so in the disposition thereof, and in the waies leading thereunto, there is seene euident∣ly the wonderfull prouidence of God, in con∣founding of the counsels of the worldly wise, who had laid a foundation of new greatnesse, whereby he aspired the vniuersall Monarchy, ambitious of the honour of 
Traian,
 in whose time the decayed Empire was said 
primum mo∣uere lacertos & senectutem Imperit, quasi reddita iuuentute reuiuiscere.
 And lastly, the world may see vpon how weake foundations this Monar∣chy was at first builded, but it is now shaken and corrupted; how their Kings are subiect to the rage of a few Slaues, how Anarchy hath prepared it an easie prey to any able hand, that would attempt it. From the Inuasion of 
Poland
 all these changes tooke their begin∣ning. 
Sultan Osman
 aduanced to the Throne in his youth, full of heate and blood, being of a great and haughty spirit, very couragious, strong of body, and a mortall hater of Chri∣stians, enuious of the glory of his Ancestors, and ambitious to raise his name aboue any of theirs, had proiected in himselfe the Conquest of the remaines of the bordering 
Europe.
 But to so great designes he had one vice that resi∣sted


all hope of prosperity, which was ex∣treme auarice, and he fell into the latter times and decrepit age, 
vbi vires luxu corrumpeban∣tur, contra veterem disciplinam & instituta maio∣rum, apud quos virtute quam pecunia res militaris melius stetit.
 His first enterprize was that of 
Po∣land,
 mooued by the incursions of the 
Cossacks,
 which yet hee vndertooke of his owne head, without the counsell of any his 
Uiziers
 (who in a Monarchy growne to the height by ease and wealth, & perhaps 
longa dominatione inertes,
 are euer corrupt and lazie) and against the liking of all the Souldiers, who now contrary to their institution being married, and fathers of a family, entred into trades, receiuing no∣thing in warre more then in peace, 
praeter peri∣culaet labores,
 are not easily drawne from their owne chimneies. This action he thought so easie, as he had disposed of his conquest, and deuided the liue Lyons skinne. But being met vpon the borders with a poore Army in com∣parison, he was first arrested at 
Chotyn
 a little fortresse, which he was faine to leaue behind him vntaken; And then seeking to aduance into the plaine countrey, by forcing the trenches of the 
Chancellor
 of 
Poland
 opposed against him,


he could neuer procure his 
Ianizaries
 to fight, though engaging his person once or twice beyond the regard of his quality, and his own Troopes ready to mutine against him, or to forsake him, he was at last enforced to raise shamefully his Campe, and to accept of any treatie to saue his outward honour. In this at∣tempt he lost aboue 100000. horses for want of fodder, and 80000. men for want of fight∣ing: for they would rather die, running, or pillaging, or eating, then in the face of the e∣nemie. For this disgrace he cōceiued so inward and rooted an indignation against the 
Ianiza∣ries,
 and so iustly, that he often lamented him∣selfe, and complained hee was no King, that was subiect to his owne slaues, vpon whom he spent great treasures, and yet they would nei∣ther fight in warre, nor obey in peace, with∣out exacting new bounties and priuiledges. 
Delauir Bassa
 a man of great wit and courage, lately called from the Easterne parts, where he had long gouerned with honour, who came in, though late, yet in a very braue and war∣like equipage, aboue all other his Captaines, was suddainely made great 
Uizier,
 the for∣mer 
Huzein Bassa
 being in the same disgrace,


common with the souldier, though not in the same fault. This man was neuer bred at Court, but had liued many yeeres in Action, and so had neither faction nor dependance here, but stood vpon himselfe and his owne merit: And being now vnlooked for, and aduanced to this high dignitie, he wrought vpon the Kings dis∣content, and nourished it: and in conclu∣sion, brake with him, that it was true, he was no 
Emperour,
 nor could be safely aliue, while the 
Ianizaries
 had the power which they lately vsurped: Informing him, that they were cor∣rupted from their ancient Institution, & were lazie Cowards, giuen ouer to ease and lust, 
et animo per libidines corrupto, nihil honestum inerat.
 But if this Maiestie would pull vp his spirits, and follow his aduice, he would prouide him a new Souldioury about 
Damascus,
 and from the 
Coords,
 of men euer bred in the frōtier, hardnes, and warre, of great courage and experience, and that of them he should erect a new 
Mili∣tia,
 that should wholy depend of him, enter∣taining onely 40000. in pay, which should alway be his Guard, and that in the distributi∣on of euery Prouince, he should constitute that the 
Beghler begh
 in his Gouernement should


traine some of the Inhabitants, who in all oc∣casions of making a great Army, should bee in readinesse, and hereby he should spare infinite treasures spent vpon these Drones that eate vp his estate; And with men of new spirits and hopes, he should bee enabled to doe greater matters, then any of his Ancestors: but withall he desired the King to communicate this coun∣sell to no man, nor to trust his life vpon ano∣thers secrecy. 
Delauir Bassa
 neuer reueling himselfe to any but the King, who extreme∣ly pleased with this aduice, that flattered his owne humour, consented, and remitted all to the 
Uiziers
 direction, who was a true souldier, and a very wise man, able by his credit in 
Asia,
 to performe all hee had vndertaken: for hee was exceedingly beloued in those parts, very rich, and had kept 
Damascus,
 whereof he was Gouernour, for himselfe in the last re∣bellion. Vpon this conclusion betweene them, it was first agreed, that the king should pre∣tend to goe in person against the 
Emir de Zai∣da,
 who was moued to take Armes really to assist in the designe: but they vsed it, to co∣lour the departure of the 
Emperour;
 which when it was welwaighed, itwas found, that then


the Armie of the 
Ianizaries
 must be kept to∣gether, which could not agree with their ends. Hereupon the iourney of 
Mecha
 was divul∣ged, that the King might, vnder the shadow of an holy pilgrimage, goe out with a small trayne, and disperse those who were suspected to him. And for this, preparation was made, but somewhat to grosely, by melting of all the Plate, Saddles, Furniture of house, Lamps of Churches, and whatsoeuer could more ea∣sily bee conueyed away in metall, with all the Iewels and Treasurie. This gaue the first suspicion, which was confirmed by diuers vn∣aduised words let fall from the King, of dis∣daine against the cowardize of the 
Ianizaries,
 and that hee would shortly finde himselfe souldiers that should whippe them; and last∣ly, dismissing all his houshold, except some few elect, the discontented obserued and betraied him. 
Delauir Bassa
 kept his owne secret, and in the meane time prepared by his friends in 
Asia
 10000. about 
Damascus,
 10000. from the 
Coords,
 besides those in readinesse of the 
Emir de Zaida,
 and all vpon pretence of defen∣ding the borders of 
Persia,
 who hauing Intel∣ligence of some change in those parts; And


gaue order that all these should meete the King at 
Damascus,
 where he would presently cut off his Guard and stay there, vntill he had regulated his new Army, and Discipline, and then to returne triumphant to 
Constantinople,
 and vtterly roote out the order of 
Ianizaries, Spahees
 and 
Timariots,
 and to exauctorate all their Captaines and officers to settle a new gouernement, and to change the name of the Citty. And these things succeeding, hee then resolued vvith his new Souldiers to attempt the recouery of his honour in Christendome: in the meane time to hold a dissembled friend∣ship there in all parts. Certainely this was a braue and well-grounded designe, and of great consequence for renewing of this de∣cayed Empire, languishing vnder the insolen∣cies of lazie slaues, if God had not destroyed it: It being very true, that the Turkish Empe∣rour stands at the deuotion of his owne troopes for peace or warre, life or death, and is in effect nothing but the Steward or Trea∣surer of his 
Ianizaries.
 If this proiect had ta∣ken effect, what euents it might haue produ∣ced by a Ciuill Warre, is not easie to iudge. For doubtlesse, the Souldioury here would


haue set vp another King, and maintayned him as well as they could, and this 
European
 part had beene in danger to haue beene torne away by the diuision. Besides, 
Delauir Bassa
 hauing the King and the Treasurie in his possession, and his owne credit so great, and his inclination 
velle imperare
 once dis∣couered, it may well bee thought that hee had some ends of his owne to share a part of this mighty estate: If on the other side the 
Uizier
 had prooued true and faithfull, the re∣formation and new erection of the Discipline of Warre, and the increase of Treasure conse∣quent to the dismission of the old 
Militia,
 would haue beene fearefull to all Christen∣dome: But, 
Ubiest sapiens? Ubi disquisitor sae∣culi haius? Nonne infatuauit Deus sapientiam mundi huius? Perdam sapientiam sapientum, & vanam reddam intelligentiam intelligentium.
 It is a great question whether is the wiser wish, that these Counsels had succeeded or not: for either diuision and subuersion, or a new pros∣perity and enlargement of their Dominion had necessarily followed.


Some obseruations vpon this occasion, will not be very impertinent to those that de∣sire


to know as well the disposition and vse, as the things themselues. First, in the purpose of the Souldier, not at all to violate or hurt the King, much lesse to depose and murther him; but only to take away those about him, whom they thought assistants in this proiect: yet the furie once on foot, they proceeded by mis∣sensible steppes, to the vttermost of outrage, against many innocents in that businesse, though otherwise obnoxious, and against the Throne and life of their own 
Emperour, vbi furor ingruat innocentes ac noxios iuxta cadere.
 Secondly, in the degrees, that yet the King had not falne thus low, if first he had not lost that awe & reuerence which alway attendeth vpon Maiesty, by vnseemely offices, done by him in the streetes and Tauernes, apprehen∣ding many souldiers for pettie faults, like a Constable, making his person com∣mon, cheape, and despised among them which were wont onely to be seene and fea∣red, as somewhat 
supra humanitatem.
 And this he did also in hatred and disdaine of those that had in the war forsaken him. And now in this last act, if his own obstinacy had not plun∣ged him into destruction, but that he had soft∣ned


them by a seasonable yeelding to time, he had preuailed onely by time. Thirdly, in the order, That these Mutiners hauing no head, or direction, kept that Reglement, that they tooke oath in their fury, in hot blood, in the Kings yard, not to disho∣nour, spoile nor sacke the Imperiall Throne, neither committed nor suffered any insolence nor violence in the Citie to the 
Neutrals,
 but rather proclaimed peace and Iustice. Fourth∣ly, in the consequents, that at the third daies end, all was at quiet, and all men in their trade, as if no such thing had happened; Onely the 
Ianizaries
 suffered no 
Diuan
 nor 
Councell,
 vntill they had receiued a 
Donatiue,
 as Guer∣don of their Iniquity; In which also the infi∣nite waste of Treasure is worthy of conside∣ration, which must of necessity be exceeding∣ly exhausted by three changes in foure yeeres, and by the late warres in 
Persia
 and 
Poland:
 For euery 
Ianizarie
 in the Citie, absent or present, whose roll is about 40000. receiue 25. 
Chequins
 gold, besides 
Spahees, Iamoglans,
 and other orders at euery Alteration, which a∣mounts in all neere to two Millions. And now these fellowes all liuing, that haue tasted the


sweete of prosperous mutinies, 
haud ignari summa scelera incipi cum periculo, peragi cum prae∣mio,
 they haue taken such a head as cannot safely be suffered on, nor securely be taken off. Fifthly, of certaine presages that fore-ranne, it being related to mee from the mouth of a 
Cadee,
 inward with the King a moneth before the tumult: That 
Osman
 dreamed in the night, that he thought to ride a Cammell, and being mounted, he could not force him to goe by faire meanes nor stripes, and that then he de∣scending in a rage, the body of the beast va∣nished, and left the head in the Kings hand. Who next day troubled at this fancy, sent to a Learned man, familiar with him, for the interpretation. He excused himselfe as vnfit to giue opinion in a matter of that Conse∣quence, but perswaded 
Osman
 to send to the 
Mofti.
 Hee also craued pardon, but withall said, there was none so fit to interpret it, as 
Mustafa
 the Kings vncle, and now 
Emperour,
 who is esteemed a holy man, 
that hath visions, and Angel-like speculations,
 in plaine tearmes, 
betweene a mad man and a foole.
 The King re∣paires to 
Mustafa,
 who briefely tells him, The Cammell signifies his Empire: his riding, a∣buse


in gouernment: his descention, his dispo∣sition: the vanishing of the body, the reuolt of his Subiects: the head remaining in his hand, onely a bare title; and that he should shortly dye within few Moneths, and lose his King∣dome, but the empty name of 
Emperour
 should accompany him to his graue.


A second of lesse consequence in the 
Ui∣zier Delauir Bassa,
 from whom the Lord Ambas∣sadour hauing receiued particular friendship about sixe dayes before this vprore, hee went to visit, and hauing no other businesse but to perswade him to stay the King from this in∣tended Pilgrimage, the Ambassadour gaue him many reasons in the present estate of their owne affayres, especially the Treaty of 
Po∣land
 yet depending. To which the 
Bassa
 re∣plyed very grauely. Then the Ambassadour vrging the feare of some tumult, collected from the licentious speeches rumored in the Towne, and hee was bold to deale plainely, sincerely and friendly, That if any such thing should happen, the fault would be imputed to the 
Bassa,
 as being of authoritie to per∣swade the King, whom his qualitie and youth would excuse, but all the fury would be dis∣charged


vpon the greatest Minister; desiring him to consider the euent, at least, to take his affection in the best part.


The old 
Renard
 stayed a while from re∣ply: at last, smiling to himselfe at the Ambassa∣dour, who perswaded him against that which was his owne counsaile, hee gaue him a finall answere, that there was no remedy, hee durst not hazard himselfe to oppose the Kings re∣solution: but assured him, he would so order the matter, as this iourney should not pro∣ceede so farre, as was expected. The Ambas∣sadour concluded for himselfe, desiring then that he would leaue him a particular recom∣mendation to the 
Chimacham
 or Deputie as his friend. To which he suddainely replied, Trouble not your selfe, nor feare; I will neuer remoue so farre, but that I will leaue one of my legges in this City to serue you: which the poore man fulfilled; for being murthered in few daies after, one of his legs whole and entire, was hanged in the 
Hippodrome,
 the most publike place of the City. Lastly, in things yet to come, and probably to be suspected, That the Souldiours in 
Asia,
 who haue now lost their hopes, will not sit downe by this affront,


but rather will attempt some Reuenge, for the death of that king who was their Martyr; Or that some great 
Bassaes
 farre remoued from Court, will apprehend this occasion, not to obey an Vsurper, set vp by treason; And vpon this colour ground their owne Ambi∣tions, or that all euery where will fall into Combustion and Intestine warre; For I dare not hope, that God will open the eyes of Christian Princes to see the littlenesse of their owne vnciuill quarels, while this mighty 
Monarchy
 inuiteth them to Concord, and to di∣uide it as a prostitu∣ted spoile.


FINIS.










THE CONTINV∣ATION OF THE STORY, PRESENTED TO THE KINGS MAIESTY from the same Person.


O
N Saturday euening, the first of Iune following, the 
Capiaga
 or 
Ma∣ior Domo
 of the 
Seraglio,
 hauing receiued a secret order to remoue the brethren of 
osman
 from their lodgings, and in the night to strangle them: as hee was performing his command, aided with a few of his 
Carnifices
 to carry away the Prin∣ces, they cried out: the Pages running to the noise, and incouraged by the 
Casliaraga,
 who had some suspition, without further examina∣tion kill the 
Capiaga,
 now almost euery order hauing risen against their owne head. That night they sent secretly to the 
Ianizaries
 and 
Spahees,
 to informe them what they had done, and in the morning early hanged his body in the 
Hippodrome
 for a publike spectacle. The soldiers returned in fury to Court, in fauour of the Pages, and demanded iustice against those that had consented to this wicked order; which


had made an end of all the 
Ottoman
 race, only this 
Mustafa
 being left aliue, who is so holy a Saint, that he will not people the world with sinners, nor indure any women about him. The innocent King protests hee knowes no∣thing of this purpose: and if his command were procured, it was gotten by subreption, and he is easily beleeued. But his mother ano∣ther 
Liuia,
 and the new 
Uizier, Daout Bassa,
 who had her daughter to wife, were vehemētly suspected. It was a day of 
Diuan
 or 
Councell;
 But these Souldiours would suffer none, vntill they had an account of this treason. The 
Vizier
 denies all; the mother is a woman, & hidden in the house: yet it is very likely, they both were guilty to vphold and secure their owne au∣thority: It being rumoured, that the 
Uizier
 de∣termined to place 
Subdititiously,
 in the roome of the elder Prince, his own Son, and very like him, and so to gouerne 
Mustafa
 for a time, and by his remoue to establish himselfe and his Race for euer. But now somewhat must bee done to appease the people; Therefore 
Daout Bassa
 is degraded from his office, and one 
Hu∣zein Bassa
 newly arriued from the gouern∣ment of 
Cairo,
 aduanced to his place, with


promise of further examination. Since, the fury once ouer, there hath beene no great search nor discouery made. I thinke the 
Sul∣tanes
 Chequines haue quieted the matter. This new 
Uizier,
 a man here without friends, yet very rich, of a stubborne and obstinate na∣ture, reported iust in his wayes, but perempto∣ry and inflexible; 
audax, ferox, & prout ani∣mum intendit prauus aut industrius eadem vis
 one from whom almen may expect much good or much ill; Begins his gouernement roughly, vndertakes to punish Insolencies early, and professeth a reformation, or to be a Sacrifice. A man fit for these times that are desperate: For the worst will be, that he must at last en∣dure their furie: In the meane time he procures a little awe, & hath restored the face of Iustice: yet I am perswaded it cannot last long, the Ghost of 
Osman
 will not be at rest, vntill there are some 
parentalia
 made vnto him; The na∣ture of this 
Vizier
 is vnsupportable; But if he preuaile, and once settle, he will a new change the King, and lay an obligation vpon the Bre∣thren of 
Osman;
 For he will neuer thinke him∣selfe secure vnder a man gouerned by an inso∣lent woman, 
Dominandi auida:
 And what assu∣rance


can he haue in that Prince, 
cui non iudici∣um, non odium est nisi indita & iussa?
 And though I cannot foresee the particulars, and where the Sore will breake out, yet I am sure the whole body is sicke; And Princes of Christendome shall haue breath three yeeres, before they shall haue cause to feare this state, whose present King is 
mentis inops,
 and the next in ex∣pectation, a Child, vnfit for action, and all the great men and Souldiers decayed, mutined and corrupted.


FINIS.











