A relation of the King of Svveden, his happie and incomparable successe and victories, against the forces of the Emperour, in Pomerania and the adjacent places, since Christmas last with his answer to the Emperours letter, expressing the cause of his vndertaking the said warre and his resolution to continue the same, vntil Germany bee restored to his former liberty. Together with the names of the forts, townes, and cities taken; as also, the interception and taking of the convoyes of waggons of prouision and other necessaries of the Imperialists, since the same time by the King of Svveden. Febr. the 18. Vnto which is added our weekely avisoes from Germanie and other parts.
Approx. 29 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 8 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2016-02 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A08144
This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A relation of the King of Svveden, his happie and incomparable successe and victories, against the forces of the Emperour, in Pomerania and the adjacent places, since Christmas last with his answer to the Emperours letter, expressing the cause of his vndertaking the said warre and his resolution to continue the same, vntil Germany bee restored to his former liberty. Together with the names of the forts, townes, and cities taken; as also, the interception and taking of the convoyes of waggons of prouision and other necessaries of the Imperialists, since the same time by the King of Svveden. Febr. the 18. Vnto which is added our weekely avisoes from Germanie and other parts.
[2], 6, [8] p.   


London :


Printed for Nath: Butter and Nicholas Bourne,


1631.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Gustaf --  II Adolf, --  King of Sweden, 1594-1632 --  Early works to 1800.
Thirty Years' War, 1618-1648 --  Early works to 1800.
2010-02 
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images 
2014-11 
John Latta 
Sampled and proofread 
2014-11 
John Latta
Text and markup reviewed and edited 
2015-03 
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion 






18507.208


99841720


6319














A RELATION OF THE KING OF SVVEDEN, his happie and Incompa∣rable Successe and Victories, against the forces of the Emperour, in 
Pomerania
 and the adja∣cent places, since 
Christmas
 last, with his Answer to the Emperours Letter, expressing the Cause 
of his vndertaking the said Warre and his
 Resolution to continue the same, vnto 
Germany
 bee restored to his former Liberty.


TOGETHER With the Names of the Forts, Townes, and Cities taken; as also, the Interception and taking of the Convoyes of Waggons of prouision and 
other necessaries of the Imperialists, since
 the same time by the King of SVVEDEN.


Febr. the
 18. Vnto which is added our weekely Avisoes from 
Germanie
 and other parts.


LONDON. Printed for NATH: BVTTER and NICHOLAS BOVRNE. 1631.














Extract of the Answer of his Maiestie of 
Sweden
 GVSTAVUS ADOLPHVS. Sent to his Imperiall Majestie, concerning this present Warre.


High and Mightie, most Illustrious Emperour, loving Kinsman and Friend.


W
Ee haue recei
d your Letter at our Army at 
Rubenitz
 Whereby wee vnderstand, that your Majesty seemes greatly to admite at our invasion in∣to the Empire, this fore-passed Sum∣mer with our Army. Also you im∣pute the cause of this combustion of warre wholly vnto Vs.


We had not thought that your Memory could so much haue failed your Maiesty, as to put in Obliuion so many attempts lately undertaken against vs. For ex∣ample, how your field-marshall came vpon vs in 
Prussia
 with a compleat army both of Horse and Foote, your Eagl
n Ensignes displayed, & that vnexpectedly. Besides many 
iniuries
 more plodded against vs as is manifest and notified in all places and knowne of all men. Insomuch that you cannot accuse vs to be the occasion or cause of this warre enterprised. For necessity compells vs to as¦sure our owne State at this present, and to wage battaile and raise forces for our owne surety and safety.


Wherefore it must of necessity follow, that wee are

 excusable in this matter. The rather because wee haue made knowne in writing, at two seuerall times, as also declared through our Embassadors, both to the Electors of the Empire & your Generals, that in case these intol∣lerable Injuries, & enimicitiall abuses did not cease, nor were remedied we should necessarily be constrained, by other lawfull meanes to disburden our selues, and ensure our selues and our estate. For it is easily to be guessed at, what your warlike preparations doe tend too, euen by your daily enterprises. Also the Countrey of 
Po∣merania
 and those Prouinces, by wofull experience can too to well testifie, by their excessiue losse and suf∣fering, what may be expected from your proceeding, although we had neuer ey'd the matter.


If your Imperiall Maiestie obiect, that these differen∣ces might haue beene moderated and allayed, without such miserable turmoiles and warlike proceeding, wee cannot but willingly grant; But euen then, and vpon that occasion you dismissed and reiected out Commit∣ties and Deputies against all right, reason, and modesty, when they appeared at the City of 
Lubeck.
 For than we were fully resolued to end all manner of dissention, and to come to an accord and honest agrement.


Besides all this, your owne Army hath proclaimed vs, (or at least) declared vs open Enemies, because they shewed all manner of hostility, and manifest enmity a∣gainst vs and ours. As for the present, true it is, you profer vs a treatie of peace (conditionally that we will abandon and lay downe our Armes) when as now the wound is growne incurable, and the rent is torne so great, that 'tis past mending. For now we cannot any longer esteeme of these emminent dangers, as meere

 imaginations and fantasies, but must be sensible of reall injuries, when as both by Sea and Land We are palpa∣bly assaulted, and groane vnder these kind of grievan∣ces. Wherefore you shall excuse Vs, that Wee will no longer trust to your meerely Verball promises, but are resolued to entertaine and keepe our Armies in our owne hands, so long till we shall be assured of a faire Peace, and faithfull agreement.


If therefore in the meane time you shall resolue, and deeme fitting (as in your writing you doe intimate) to afford all your endeavour and best ayde and assistance toward the conducting of the Barque of whole Chri∣stendome (which now a long time hath beene tossed on the waues of Warre and turbulencie) to the hauen of Peace and tranquilitie, and to that end enter in a Treaty of consonant agreement, You shall find Vs no way re∣fractorie, but in euery kind most tractable and inclining to so desireable and wholesome expedition.


Adde herevnto, that put the case, you will be pleased to restore and re-establish our mainly respected friends, loving brothers in Law, Cousins, Vncles, aliants, friends Neighbours, Peeres and States of 
Germany,
 into the for∣mer state and constitution, in which they were seated, before the rising and combustion of this Warre began; that also furthermore, all injuries dammages and losses which Wee so grieuously of late haue sustained, may be reasonably considered and brought to a faire composi∣tion, then will Wee fully resolue, to contract a Peace with you and all your neare adjoyning Neighbors, and faithfully performe and keepe the same. In the meane while, be you recommended to the Diuine protection?


From Stralsundt, &c.








Here followes the relation of the severall vi∣ctories, and victorious proceedings, which the King of 
Sweden
 lately hath (by Gods great assistance obtained) with all the parti∣cularities and circumstances.


The Copy of a Letter written from 
Berlyn,
 concerning all what passed betweene the King of 
Sweden Gu∣stavus Adolphus,
 and the Emperour his Ar∣my, from the 
1.
 of Ian: to the 
12.


VVHerea
 the Imperialists had commanded great For∣ces from their Army at 
Gartz,
 for to releeue the Ci∣ty 
C
berge
,
 which was then Blocqued vp, and the same For∣ces were driuen backe and preuented by the Feild Marshall of the King of 
Sweden. Gustavus Hoorn.
 His Majestie consulted and resolued vpon, to visite the Imperialists in their owne quar∣ters. To this end, his Majestie commanded his Forces of 
Stargart, Groffenbarg
e
 and other places, and tooke his Ren∣devous at 
Dan
ime,
 situated a mile from 
Statyn.
 Whence his Majestie marched forth with an Army of 16000. foote and 86. Cornet of horse very well mounted, hauing along with them 80. peeces of Ordnance: also downe the Riuer 
Oder,
 he sent 8. great flat bottom boates, with each of them foure Demicanons. With this strong Army he came at the strong passage 
Griffen∣hagen,
 which is three small miles from 
Statyn.
 In the Citie 
Griffenhagen
 was Governour, a certaine 
Spaniard, Don Ca∣pua.


The fourth of 
Ianuary,
 his Majestie caused Sermons to bee preached 
hroughout the whole Army, and all the Soldiers to be earnestly stirred vp, to call vpon God for assistance and victo∣ry, being Gods owne cause which they went about to main∣taine.

 His Majestie himselfe in person, did call vpon his Com∣manders, Officers and common boldiers, wishing them to be of good cheere, and to fight couragiously in so good a Cause, with arguments mouing them therevnto.


Herevpon his Maiestie caused 10. Demicanons, to be plan∣ted vpon the place of Execution, which is somewhat a high Hill without the City. These Demicanons playd without in∣termission vpon the City, from 9. of the clocke in the mor∣ning, vntill two of the clocke in the afternoone; by which time they made a great breach in the wall of the said City. Wherevpon the Soldiers ran furiously through the breach into the City, and mastered the same, so that they presently flew 200. soldiers, and tooke 140. of them Prisoners, amongst them was also taken 
Don Capua,
 who was shot in his thigh. Also Major 
Ant
onius,
 and 
Don Joseph,
 the younger Earle of 
Turn,
 with many Captaines, Commanders and Officers, were taken Prisoners in this surprizall. The rest of the Garrison, in∣stantly cast downe their Armes, and craued for qua
ter, which was graciously granted them, some of them saued themselues by flight. In the City were found 8. Peeces of Ordnance. The Garrison consisted in all of horse and foote 2500 men. In this hot skyrmish the King of 
Sweden
 lost no more but 6. men, but many more were hurt and maimed.


The fifth of 
January,
 his Maiestie sent his Army to the strong Sconce called 
Morewitz,
 which lyes ouer against 
Gartz,
 thinking that the Imperialists, rather than they would loose that Sconce, being a place of so great importance, would af∣ford and wage battaile; for this his Maiestie aimed at at the the first, thinking to allure the enemy to battaile. But God omnipotent did apparantly fight himselfe for the King of 
Sweden
 and his Armie. And caused such feare and perplexi∣tie to possesse the Enemies, that they fled and abandon
d their weapons and Armes at the very fight of a few horse∣men which his Maiestie of 
Sweden
 commanded toward the foresaid sconce. Insomuch, that the Imperialists did not make one shot.




Thus it happened also, at the taking of 
Gartz,
 which City of 
Gartz
 the Enemie burnt downe to the ground, except fiue houses and the Custome-house, and the Church, leauing be∣hind all their Armes, 8. pieces of Ordnance, much Munition and Prouision. But they cast some Ordnance and munition into the Riuer 
Oder.


This was all couragiously performed by the King of 
Swe∣den
 as shall appeare in the sequell. For as soone as his Maie∣stie had gained these places hee earnestly and speedily pur∣sued his Enemies at the very heele, on both sides of the Ri∣uer 
Oder.


His Maiestie in his owne person, with an Army marched toward 
Coninxbergen,
 and his Feeld-Marshall 
Gustavus Hoorn,
 with other Forces to 
Custerin Franckfort,
 and 
Lantz∣bergen.
 In this persuit they slew many of their dispersed E∣nemies, and many of them in the flight were drowned: E∣specially, about 
Bardeward,
 and the 
Custerine Damm.
 The Crabates are most of them massacred; insomuch, that hardly any are escaped, but the 
Dutch
 obtained quarter.


In 
Peritz
 were in Garrison, 1400. horsemen, which also most of them were slaine by the Commander 
Banditz,
 neare vnto 
Coninxbergen.
 This City 
Coninxbergen
 his Maiestie of 
Sweden
 tooke easily, for those of the City brought him the Keyes of the Gates, and layd them downe at his feete.


Vpon the 8. of Ianuary, his Maiestie of 
Sweden
 pitched his Army neare vnto the Pallace or Fort called 
Lubbs,
 which is within a Mile of 
Franckeford
 by 
Oder.


The Imperiall Regiments, namely some 
Saxons, Gotish, Swertenhallish,
 and other were constrained thereabout to leaue behind them aboue 1000. Wagons. 30. peeces of Ordnance, Bag and Baggage, with 14. Ensignes. Onely the Generall 
Spaer
 saued himselfe within 
Custerin,
 with three Waggons and some Baggage, how safe he is there, we shall hereafter vn∣derstand.




In this prosecution of the King of 
Sweden,
 the Imperialists fired the little City 
Britzen
 with the Cloister which is there. Those Imperialists that are neere vnto 
Colbergen,
 and 
Grip∣swalde,
 are now depriued of all manner of reliefe and assistance, there being no meanes for any helpe to come to them; for his Maiestie hath cleered and freed the whole Countrey therea∣bouts, euen from 
Pruysia
 to the 
Oder
 and 
Warts,
 and the whole Prouince of 
Pomerania,
 and also of 
Mark-land.
 Hee causeth now a very strong Sconce to be raised neere vnto 
Custerin,
 and shortly shall another be raised neerer vnto 
Silesia,
 so that hee also will assure himselfe and cleare those passages.




From Meyssen 
20.
 Dito.


The dispersed Army of his Emperiall Maiestie assembleth a∣gaine together, and make their march toward 
Frankford.
 Vnto them General 
Tilly
 resorts and adioynes his forces. Vnto whose Army the tenth of this moneth 8. Companies of the 
Badish
 Re∣giment were added and arriued at 
Brandenburgh.
 The said Ge∣nerall 
Tilly
 expects also an addition of the Regiment of 
Don Balthazzar,
 and also two Scottish Regiments; but by all probabilities, scarcity, and penury, and hunger will surely pu∣nish them. Insomuch that very likely they will be preuented of their enterprize.


It was lately related, but that relation is now seconded, that 
Zantsberghen
 also, after it had beene besieged but three dayes, is with agreement yeelded vp vnto his Maiestie of 
Swe∣den.
 The Imperiall Garrison did first free the Suburbs, or 
Fore∣stadt,
 and afterward when with appointment they had deliue∣red vp the towne, they marched with the Commander 
Cratz
 toward 
Silesia.






From Leypsich the 
20.
 dito.


The Generall 
Tilly
 the 20. of this moneth arriu'd at 
Har∣mundt
 within 4. miles of 
Berlyng
 with fine Regiments of foote and two of horse; hee bends his course toward 
Franckford
 to adioyne himselfe to the dispersed Imperialists. His Maiestie of 
Sweden
 hath hereupon commanded his field-marshall 
Gusta∣vus Horn
 to march with some forces toward 
Silesia,
 hauing a reasonable Army consisting of both horse and foote. Now

 comes certaine tidings, that his Maiestie of 
Sweden
 hath vtterly defeated Generall 
Tilly,
 and beat him quite out of field, his Army now also being dispersed, as were those distressed Im∣perialists which he went to assist and fortifie. The particulari∣ties of this exploit we shall heare at large hereafter.


Heere is also good intelligence come lately, that those of 
Maghdenburgh
 who were very strong, fell out of the City with 5000. men and raised the quarter of Earle 
Wolf. Mansfield,
 slaine abundance of his men and taken the Earle himselfe pri∣soner. Wee vnderstand from 
Breslau,
 that great preparation and fortifications are made at 
Great-Glogan,
 and that men are busied with all expedition to raise diuers Sconces there, to which end many houses are pulled downe to the ground.






From Hamburgh the 
27.
 of Ianuary.


Yesterday was writing receiued here from the Imperialists from 
Brandenburgh,
 which affirmed that 
Francford Oder
 is also taken by the King of 
Sweden;
 the truth thereof is very probable by the relation of the circumstances; for it seems that the Citizens vnderstanding the comming of his Maiestie of 
Sweden,
 they all betooke themselues to their armes, which the Imperialists perceiuing, they durst no longer trust them, but departed thence and marched ouer the bridge toward 
Silesia,
 so that at the comming of the King of 
Sweden,
 the City was de∣liuered vp into his hands. The King of 
Sweden
 hath in person himselfe beene at 
Custerin
 with the Duke of 
Brandenburgh.


Before 
Maghdenburgh
 at this present lay no more forces but onely the Regiment of the generall 
Holck,
 and some forces which from 
Papenheim
 were commanded thither, insomuch that now the said City is quite at liberty and free.






From Gulicke the 
24.


We feare here that we shall fall into new troubles and com∣bustion againe; for the Duke of 
Nieuburgh
 hath promised the States of 
Holland,
 that he will permit the Protestants free exer∣cise of Religion. Wherevpon vpon New-yeares Eeue last about sixe of the clocke certaine Protestants being assembled toge∣ther at 
Bracht
 in 
Amptbrugge
 were surprized, the Preacher and master of the house were imprisoned close, and their feete

 and hands piniond and not released till they paid 300. Crownes forfeiture, which money being paid, presently the Officer took part of the same and employd it to buy powder.








Contents of a Letter written from Leypsich, wherein is com∣prized the whole summe of the good successe of the King of Sweden.


The great successe and admirable victory which it hath plea∣sed God to afford vnto his Maiestie of 
Sweden,
 is now fully con∣firmed from all parts. That at the taking of 
Griffenhagen
 and 
Gartz,
 his Maiestie hath obtained aboue 60. pieces of Ordnance and much munition, it is much to be admired that the Imperiall Army neere vnto 
Gartz,
 did not bid the King of 
Swedens
 Army head, since they were 15000. strong. They fired the store∣house of prouision and munition.


His Maiestie of 
Swedens
 Army be 86 Coronet horse and 18 Regiment of foote, followed them those in their flight, and so closely stopt vp the passage neere 
Lantsberghen,
 so that the Im∣perialists could not retire toward 
Silesia,
 but were constrained to betake themselues againe toward 
Custein.
 Where they were vtterly disioynted, and put to disorder, and constrained to flie, leauing behind them Bagge and Baggage and many hundred waggons; and not few of them slaine and wounded. Many of them fled into 
Francfort,
 which City is also hath taken. 
Lantsberghen
 also is incorporated by the 
Swedish;
 there also the Imperialists fired the Storehouse of munition. The Gentry and country people in 
Marck
 haue done great exploits for the King of 
Sweden
 neere vnto 
Custrin,
 and 
Ʋogelstangh.
 They haue slaine all the 
Crabates,
 and of them obtained great bootie, both moneys and booty. In the space of 3. houres they tooke at least 300. wagons. The 
Silesian
 forces, vnder the command of Generall 
Scaffgotzy;
 neare vnto 
Custrin
 passed the 
Oder,
 but were constrained to forsake and leaue their Baggage and prouision, he himselfe with the commander 
Keraus
 was taken prisoner, and the speech goes that 
Monte Cuculye
 is also taken, but we haue no certainty of that. By meanes of this great vi∣ctory the Imperialists are quite expelled out of the Land of 
Marck.
 Three dayes since the 
Maagdenburghers
 made an

 excursion, and haue slaine (as it is confidently reported) to the number of 800. of the enemies forces. Those of 
Maagden∣burgh,
 brought into the City 800 sheepe, and 76 Bullockes without any opposition or resistance; they haue incorporated also the Village 
Presten
 neere 
Delue
 into their fortifications. The same is in briefe confirmed and verified from 
Statin
 the twenty one, how that his Maiestie of 
Sweden
 in 8 dayes space accomplished by Gods great helpe this vnexpected and almost vnheard of most victorious proceeding, in the which he tooke many Cities, defeated and slaine many of the enemies forces; ta∣ken many great and chiefe commanders Prisoners, dispersed all their troupes, and cleared whole 
Pomerania, Mark-landt,
 and all the country from 
Pruysen
 to the 
Oder
 and 
Warte,
 and now labours by the building of Sconces to free all the passage toward 
Silesia.
 For this inestimable fauour publike thanks∣giuing hath beene giuen to God in all Churches.




From Prague the 
16
 of Ianuary.


Forces are leuied in these parts for the Earle of 
Sauelly.
 From 
Silesia
 we vnderstand that great taxation is laid vpon the Inhabitants, as namely, they are to finde 5000 quarters of corne for the Emperours Army, or else for euery bushell two rycxdallers, which is a heauy taxe, and the people will very hardly be able to raise the same.






From Cleue the 
28.
 of Ianuary.


We are most troubled at this present of the Gouernour at 
Orsoy. Don Leonard Caracciola,
 who demands of these neu∣trall Townes 12000 Rycxdallers, and therefore hath taken out of this City, as also out of 
Goch Calcher
 and other places aboue 20 Citizens prisoners, which haue beene already impri∣soned aboue 10 weekes at 
Orsoy;
 neither is there any appea∣rance as yet of their releasement. Last Tuesday we sent Depu∣ties to 
Orsoy
 and dayly expect a fauourable answer at their re∣turne. We pray God to deliuer vs from that Italian.


Next Tuesday following is a generall meeting to be held at 
Wesell,
 where all the chiefe of this Prouince, and also the Earl∣dome of 
Bergh
 and 
Marck,
 and 
Rauensbergh
 are to appeare. We hope somthing will be concluded vpon there for our com∣fort,

 and the good of these countries. The Duke of 
Nienburgh
 is againe arriued lately at 
Dusseldorp.






Contents of a Letter written from Paris the 
29.
 of Ianuary. 
1631.


I can communicate nothing vnto you concerning the pub∣like state at this present, but onely that those great diuersions and preparations which the great Turke makes in 
Transil∣uania,
 and the King of 
Sweden
 in 
Germanie,
 administer great employment to his Emperiall Maiestie and yeeld him his hands full of businesse, more than well he can dispatch; inso∣much that the 
Spanish
 not being able to continue their war in Italie, without the ayd and assistance of the Emperour are con∣strained (as also doth the State) to hold themselues to the peace treated of and articled at 
Ratisborne,
 which by degrees proceeds in execution. 
Mazarine
 is here to hasten forward 
Monsieur Thorax,
 and 
De Seruient,
 Secretary of State; which two are the Commissaries which the King sends ouer the Alps or mountaines, in hostage or pledge in the behalfe of 
De Galuzzo,
 who hath full power in the behalfe of his Impe∣riall Maiestie for this execution. The said 
Galazzo
 hath al∣ready caused his moueables (or rather bootie) to be remoued from 
Mantua.
 And here is promise made that the Emperour shall shortly send that ratification which shall cause all these warres to cease.


Our diuisions at Court continue still; the Cardinall 
Riche∣lieu
 subsists yet powerfully, through the continuance and se∣quell of the Kings fauour toward him: how long the same shall endure I cannot so certainly assure you of it as I can and doe, to be your vnfained friend.






From 
Antwerpe
 the 
2.
 of February.


The 
Italians
 and 
Spanish
 which were leuied for these Countries, doe now march toward 
Lutzenburgh,
 being strong 3000. men.


Here arriued lately a Post from 
Madrid,
 certifies, that the 
West-India
 plate which was expected in 
October
 last is arriued the 23. of 
Ianuary
 at 
Calis Malis,
 being in all of them 5. or 46. Ships, and the treasure which they brought is valued to a∣mount

 to 7. millions, which partly belongs to the King, and part to marchants. This Fleet intended to come from 
Cartha∣genae
 into 
Hauana,
 but they being aduertized that the 
Hol∣landers
 expected and waited for their comm
ng vpon the coast of the Iland of 
Cuba,
 they returned homeward another way about, to shun the 
Hollanders.
 Which hath beene the cause that in this Voyage so many of their men haue been star∣ued, to the number of seuen or eight hundred, for they were not v ctualled for so long a voyage, as by their Compasse 
hey tooke they were constrained to make; they were in all 50. saile; but two of their 
Gallions
 with siluer and other costly treasure did miscarry; three or foure other of this Fleete are missing, and it is presumed that they are taken. The comming of this Fleete caused much ioy in Spaine.






From Serghen op Zoom the 
28.
 of Ianuary.


From 
Gendt
 in 
Flanders
 letters confirme, that in their as∣sembly there did meet Marquis 
Aeirona,
 Marquis 
d Leganes,
 the Earle 
Caepeni
 and the Lord Chancellor, who made a pro∣position in the name of the King of 
Spaine,
 to these of 
Flander
 to this effect. That they must maintaine 12000. 
Walloons,
 1000. 
Spania
ds,
 1000. 
Italians,
 and 1000. 
Irish,
 at their owne proper charges, and pay them monethly. Vpon which proposition they are not yet fully agreed and resolued, but doub lesse it will be granted, as also the like is to be propoun∣de
 to the States of 
Brabant, Artois, Henegou, Liniburgh, Lut
nburgh, Namen
 and 
Mechelen.
 His Maiestie of 
Spaine
 i
 to continue the pay of bread, and to pay the horsemen. This also causeth great ioy and contentment in those parts.


We a
e also informed that the Arch-Dutchesse hath pro∣
d toward the maintenance of this warre, all the expences of 
 Court, but conditionally the Spirituality doe the same. The 
Sp
 leuie many forces in these Countreyes. It is sup∣posed it i
 to send a great conuoy into 
Breda,
 for they feare lest that City should this yeare be besieged.


The 
Dunk
rks
 continue still very strong at Sea, and doe much mischiefe; they haue againe taken another great prize, a Ship which came from the 
Canaries.




The 
Caualery
 of 
Shertogenbosch
 did lately encounter with some of the Enemie, forces, who did conuoy many Waggons with Corne into 
Antwerp,
 they tooke from them great booty and at least 50. or 60. good horse.


Twenty horse-men of 
Wesel
 met with some horsemen of Count 
Iohn
 of 
Nassau,
 which they slew and brought home the Lieutenant and corp
l prisoners with their horse.


The high and mighty States Generall haue giuen order to the Lord 
Stakencroke,
 to fetch certaine Priests out of the vpper quarter of 
Gerderlant,
 whereupon the Priest of 
Ʋeuraey
 was brought prisoner into the 
Graue:
 
he reason of this is, because the 
Spanish
 haue imprisoned the Preacher of 
Dapelle
 and some other in 
Langestrete;
 this causeth those mi∣nisters about 
Nimminghen, Maes
 and 
Wa
l
 to flie for safety into the next townes.


There is no certainty as yet whe
 the Nauie which lay ready in 
Texel
 for the Honourable Company of 
West-India,
 haue set saile yet yea or not, howsoeuer they haue long beene in readinesse, and if they are not yet, they will speedily depart.




FINIS.









