Sir Francis Drake reuiued calling vpon this dull or effeminate age, to folowe his noble steps for golde & siluer, by this memorable relation, of the rare occurrances (neuer yet declared to the world) in a third voyage, made by him into the West-Indies, in the yeares 72. & 73. when Nombre de Dios was by him and 52. others only in his company, surprised. Faithfully taken out of the reporte of M· Christofer Ceely, Ellis Hixon, and others, who were in the same voyage with him. By Philip Nichols, preacher. Reviewed also by Sr. Francis Drake himselfe before his death, & much holpen and enlarged, by diuers notes, with his owne hand here and there inserted. Set forth by Sr Francis Drake Baronet (his nephew) now liuing.
Nichols, Philip.
Approx. 179 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 52 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2006-02 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A08210




STC 18544



ESTC S110153





99845759




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Sir Francis Drake reuiued calling vpon this dull or effeminate age, to folowe his noble steps for golde & siluer, by this memorable relation, of the rare occurrances (neuer yet declared to the world) in a third voyage, made by him into the West-Indies, in the yeares 72. & 73. when Nombre de Dios was by him and 52. others only in his company, surprised. Faithfully taken out of the reporte of M· Christofer Ceely, Ellis Hixon, and others, who were in the same voyage with him. By Philip Nichols, preacher. Reviewed also by Sr. Francis Drake himselfe before his death, & much holpen and enlarged, by diuers notes, with his owne hand here and there inserted. Set forth by Sr Francis Drake Baronet (his nephew) now liuing.
Nichols, Philip.
Drake, Francis, Sir, d. 1637.
[8], 94, [2] p.   


London :


Printed by E[dward] A[llde] for Nicholas Bourne dwelling at the south entrance of the Royall Exchange,


1626.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Drake, Francis, --  Sir, 1540?-1596.
West Indies --  Discovery and exploration --  Early works to 1800.
2005-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2005-10
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2005-11
Judith Siefring
Sampled and proofread
2005-11
Judith Siefring
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2006-01
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18544


99845759


10680














Sir Francis Drake Reuiued: Calling vpon this Dull or Effeminate Age, to folowe his Noble Steps for Golde & Siluer, By this Memorable Relation, of the Rare Occurrances (neuer yet declared to the World) in a Third Voyage, made by him into the West-Indies, in the Yeares 72. & 73. when 
Nombre de Dios
 was by him and 52. others only in his Company, surprised. Faithfully taken out of the Reporte of M. 
Christofer Ceely, Ellis Hixon,
 and others, who were in the same Voyage with him.


By 
Philip Nichols,
 Preacher. Reviewed also by S
r.
 
Francis Drake
 himselfe before his Death, & Much holpen and enlarged, by diuers Notes, with his owne hand here and there Inserted. Set forth by S
r
 
Francis Drake
 Baronet (his Nephew) now liuing.






LONDON Printed by 
E. A.
 for 
Nicholas Bourne
 dwelling at the South Entrance of the 
Royall Exchange.
 1626.










TO THE HIGH AND MIGHTY, CHARLES THE FIRST, OF GREAT BRITAINE, FRANCE AND IRELAND KING, All the blessinges of this, and a better Life.


Most gracious Soueraigne,


T
Hat this briefe Treatise is yours, both by right & by succession, will appeere by the Authors & Actors ensuinge Dedication:


To prayse either the M
istris
 or the Ser∣uant, might iustly incurre the Censure of 
Quis eos vnquam sanus vituperauit,
 eithers worth hauing sufficiētly blazed their fame.


This Present looseth nothing, by glan∣cing on former actions and the obseruation of passed aduentures, may probably ad∣uantage future imployments. 
Caesar
 wrote


his owne Commentaries; and this dooer was partly the Inditor: Neither is there wanting liuing testimony to confirme its truth. For his sake then, cherish what's good, & I shall willingly entertaine check for what's amisse. Your fauourable accep∣tance, may incourage my Collecting of more neglected Noates: how-euer though Vertue (as Lands) be not inheritable, yet hath he left of his Name, one that resolues and therein joyes to approoue him-selfe


Your most humble and loyall Subject, 
Francis Drake.








The Dedicatory Epistle, intended to Q. 
Elizabeth
 Written by S
ir.
 
Francis Drake,
 deceased. To the Queenes most excellent Maiestie, my Most dread Soueraigne.


M
Adam, seeing diuers haue di∣uersly reported, and written, of these voyages and actions which J haue attempted and made, eue∣ry one endeuoring to bring to light, whatsoeuer inklings or coniectures they haue had; whereby many vntruthes haue bene published, and the certaine truth concealed: as I haue thought it necessary my selfe, as in a 
Card
 t
 pricke the principall Points of the counsailes taken, at∣tempts made, & successe had, during the whole course of my imployment in these seruices a∣gainst the 
Spaniard,
 not as setting sayle, for maintainnig my reputatiō in mens iudgement, but onely as sitting at Helme if occation shall be, for conducting the like actions hereafter: So J haue accounted it my duty, to present this Discourse to your Ma
tie.
 as of right, either for


it selfe, being the first fruits of your seruants Pen, or for the matter, being seruice done to your Ma
ti.
 by your poore vassall against your great enemy, at such times, in such places, and after such sorte, as may seeme strange to those, that are not acquainted with the whole cariage thereof: but will be a pleasing remembrance to your Highnesse, who take th'aparent height of th'almighties fauour towards you, by these euents, as truest instruments, humbly submit∣ting my selfe to your Gracious censure, both in writing & presenting: that posterity be not depriued of such help, as may happily be gay∣ned hereby, and our present age (at least) may be satisfied, in the rightfulnes of these actions, which hitherto haue beene silenced, and your Seruants labour not seeme altogether lost, not onely in Trauell by Sea and Land, but also in writing the Reporte thereof, a worke to him no lesse troublesome, yet made pleasant and sweet, in that it hath beene, is and shall be, for your Ma
•ies
 content; to whome J haue deuoted my selfe, liue or dye.


Francis Drake.


Ian. 
1. 1592.








TO THE COVRTEOVS READER.


H
Onest Reader, without Apologie I desire thee in this insuing Discourse; to obserue with me the power and Iu∣stice of the Lord of Hostes, who could enable so meane a person, to right himselfe vpon so mighty a Prince, together with the goodnesse and Prouidence of God very obseruable, in that it pleased him to raise this man, not onely from a low condition, but euen from the state of persecution: his father suffered in it, being forced to fly from his house (neere South 
Tauistocke
 in 
Deuon
) into 
Kent,
 and there to inhabit in the Hull of a Shippe, wherein many of his younger sonnes were borne: hee had twelue in all, and as it pleased God to giue most of them a being vpon the water, so the greatest part of them dyed at Sea: the youngest, who though hee were as farre as any, yet dyed at home, whose posterity inherits that, which by himselfe, and this Noble Gentleman the eldest brother, was hardly yet worthily gotten. I could more largely acquaint thee, that this voyage was his


third he made into the West-Indies, after that his excel∣lent seruice both by Sea and Land in 
Ireland,
 vnder 
Walter
 Earle of 
Essex;
 his next about the World: Ano∣ther wherein hee tooke Saint 
Iago, Carthagena,
 Saint 
Domingo,
 Saint 
Augustino,
 his doings at 
Cadiz,
 besides the first Carricke taught by him to sayle into 
En∣gland,
 his stirrings in eigty seauen, his remarquable actions in eighty eight, his endeauours in the 
Portingall
 imployment, his last enterprise determined by death, and his filling 
Plimouth
 with a plentifull streame of fresh wa∣ter; but I passe by all these, I had rather thou shouldest enquire of others, then to seeme my selfe a vaine-glorious man. I intende not his praise, I striue onely to set out the prayse of his and our good God, that guided him in his truth, and protected him in his courses: my ends are to stirre thee vp to the worship of God, and seruice of our King and Countrey by his example: if any thing bee worth thy consideration, conclude with me, that the Lord onely can doe great things.


FRANCIS DRAKE.












SIR 
FRANCIS DRAKE
 REVIVED: Calling vpon this Dull or Effeminate Age, to follow his Noble Steps for Gold and Siluer.


A
S there is a generall vengeance, which secretly pursueth the doers of wrong, and suffereth them not to prosper, albeit no man of purpose empeach them: so is there a particular indigna∣tion, engraffed in the bosome of all that are wronged, which ceaseth not seeking by all meanes possible to redresse or remedy the wrong receiued. In somuch as those great and mighty men, in whome their prosperous estate hath bred such an ouer-weening of themselues, that they doe not only wrong their inferiors, but despise them being injured; seeme to take a very vnfit course for their owne safety, and farre vnfitter for their rest. For as 
Esope
 teacheth, euen the Fly hath her spleene, & the Em∣met is not with on ther choller, and both together many


times finde meanes whereby though the Eagle lay her egges in Iupiters lappe, yet by one way or other, shee escapeth not requitall of her wrong done the Emmet.


Among the manifold examples hereof, which for∣mer ages haue committed to memory, or our time yeelded to sight: I suppose, there hath not beene any, more notable then this in hand: either in respect of the greatnesse of the person, by whom the first injury was offered; or the meannesse of him, who righteth himself: the one being (in his owne conceit) the mightiest Mo∣narch of all the world: the other an English Captaine, a meane subiect of her Maiesties. Who (besides the wrongs receiued at 
Rio de Hacha
 with Captaine 
Iohn Lo∣uell
 in the yeares 65. and 66.) hauing beene greiuosly in∣damaged at Saint 
Iohn de Vllua
 in the bay of 
Mexico,
 with Captaine 
Iohn Hawkins,
 in the yeares 67. and 68. not onely in the losse of his goods of some value, but also of his kinsmen & friends, and that by the falshood of 
Don Martin Henriquez
 then the viceroy of 
Mexico,
 and find∣ing that no recompence could bee recouered out of 
Spaine,
 by any of his owne meanes, or by her Ma∣iesties letters: hee vsed such helpes as hee might, by two seuerall voiages into the West Indies: the first with two Ships, the one called the Dragon, the other the Swan, in the yeare 70. the other in the Swan alone in the yeare 71. to gaine such intelligences, as might further him, to get some amends for his losse. And hauing, in those two voyages, gotten such certaine notice of the persons & places aimed at, as he thought requisite, and there∣vppon with good deliberation resolued on a third voyage (the description whereof we haue now in hand) hee accordingly prepared his shippes and Company, and then taking the first opportunity of a good


winde, had such successe in his proceedings, as now followes farther to be declared.


On Whitsunday Eeue being the 24.
 of May in the yeare 1572. Captaine 
Drake
 in the 
Pascha
 of 
Plimouth
 of 70. tonnes his Admirall, with the 
Swanne
 of the same Port of 25. tonnes his Vice-Admirall, in which his brother 
Iohn Drake
 was Captaine (hauing in both of them of men and boyes seauenty three, all voluntarily assembled, of which the eldest was fifty, all the rest vnder thirty: so deuided that there were forty seauen in the one ship, and twenty six in the other: both richly furnished, with victualles and apparell for a whole yeare: and no lesse heedfully prouided of all manner of munition, Artillery, Artificers, stuffe and tooles, that were requisite for such a Man of warre in such an at∣tempt, but especially hauing three dainty Pinnases, made in 
Plimouth,
 taken a sunder all in peeces and stowed aboard, to be set vp as occasion serued:) set sayle from out of the Sound of 
Plimouth,
 with intent to land at 
Nombre da Dios.


The winde continued prosperous and fauorable at Northeast, and gaue as a very good passage, without any alteration or change:
 so that albeit we had sight of 
Porto Sa to,
 one of the 
Maderas,
 and of the 
Canaries
 also within twelue dayes of our setting forth: yet we neuer strooke sayle, nor came to anchor, nor made any stay for any cause, neither there nor elsewhere, vntill 25.
 dayes after; when we had sight of the Iland of 
Guada∣lupe,
 one of the Ilands of the West Indies, goodly high land.


The next morning we entred between 
Dominica
 & 
Guadalupe,
 where we descryed two Canoas,
 comming from a rocky Iland, three leagues off 
Dominica,
 which


vsually repayre thither to fish, by reason of the great plenry thereof, which is there continually to be found. Wee landed on the South side of it, remaining there three dayes to refresh our men, and water our ships, out of one of those goodly riuers, which fall downe off the mountaine. There we sawe certaine poore cot∣tages, built with Palmito boughs and branches, but no inhabitants at that time ciuill nor sauage; the cot∣tages it may be, (for we could know no certaine cause of the solitarinesse we found there) seruing, not for con∣tinuall inhabitation, but only for their vses that came to that place at certaine seasons to fish.


The third day after about, three in the after-noone, wee set sayle from thence, towards the continent of 
Terra firma.
 And the fift day after, wee had sight of the high land of 
Santa Martha,
 but came not neere the shoare by ten leagues. But thence directed our course, for a place called by vs 
Port Phesant,
 for that our Cap∣taine had so named it in his former voyage, by reason of the great store of those goodly Fowles, which he and his Company did then daily kill, and feed on, in that place. In this course, notwithstanding wee had two dayes calme,
 yet within six dayes after we arriued at our 
Port Phesant,
 which is a fine round Bay, of very safe harbor for all winds, lying betweene two high points, not past halfe a cables length ouer at the mouth, but within, eight or tenne cables length euery way, hauing ten or twelue faddome water more or lesse, full of good fish, the soyle also very fruitfull; which may appeare by this, that our Captaine hauing beene in this place, within a yeare and fewe dayes before, and hauing ridde the place with many alleys and paths made, yet now all was so ouer-grown againe, as that we


doubted at first, whither this were the same place or no.


At our entrance into this Bay, our Captaine ha∣uing giuen order to his brother what to doe, if any occasion should happen in his absence, was on his way, with intent to haue gone aland, with some fewe only in his company, because he knew, there dwelt no Spa∣niards within thirty fiue leagues of that place. 
Tolou
 be∣ing the neerest to the Eastwards, and 
Nombre de Dios
 to the westwards, where any of that Nation dwelt. But as we were rowing a shoare, we saw a smoake in the woods, euen neere the place, which our Captaine had afore∣time frequented: therefore thinking it fit to take more strength with vs, he caused his other boat also to be mand, with certaine muskets, and other weapons, sus∣pecting some enemy had beene a shoare.


When we landed, we found by euident markes, that there had beene lately there, a certaine English man of 
Plimouth,
 called 
Iohn Garret,
 who had beene condu∣cted thither by certaine English Mariners, which had beene there with our Captaine in some of his former voyages. He had now left a plate of Lead, nailed fast to a mighty great tree (greater then any foure men, joy∣ning hands, could fathome about; on which were en∣grauen these words, directed to our Captaine.




CAptaine 
Drake,
 if you fortune to come to this Port, make hast away: For the Spaniards, which you had with you here the last yeare, haue be∣wrayed this place, and taken away all that you left here. I depart from hence, this present 
7.
 of Iuly, 
1572.


Your very louing friend IOHN GARRET.




The smoake which wee sawe, was occationed by a fire, which the said 
Garret
 and his Company, had made before their departure, in a very great tree (not farre from this which had the lead nayled on it) which had continued burning at least fiue dayes before our arriuall.


This aduertisement notwithstanding, our Captaine meant not to depart, before he had built his Pinnases, which were yet aboard in peices, for which purpose hee knew this Port, a most conuenient place. And therfore assoone as we had moared our Ships, our Cap∣taine commanded his Pinnases to be brought ashore, for the Carpenters to set vp, himselfe employing all his other company in fortifying a place, which he had chosen out, as a most fit plot, of three quarters of an acre of ground, to make some strength or safety for the present, as sufficiently as the meanes he had would afford, which was performed, by felling of great trees, and bowsing and haling them together with great Pulleis and halsers, vntill they were inclosed to the water, and then letting others fall vpon them, vntill they had raised with trees and boughes thirty foot in height round about, leauing onely one gate to issue at, neere the waters side, which euery night (that wee might sleepe in more safety and security) was shut vp, with a great tree drawne athwart it. The whole plott was built in a Pentagonall forme, to wit, of fiue equall sides and angles, of which angles two were toward the sea, and that side between them was left open, for the easie launching of our Pinna∣ses: the other foure equall sides were wholely (ex∣cepting the gate before mentioned) firmely closed vp. Without, insteed of a trench, the ground was


ridd for fifty foote space, round about. The rest was very thick with trees, of which many were of those kindes, which are neuer without greene leaues, till they are dead at the roote (excepting onely one kinde of tree amongst them, much like to our Ash, which when the sunne commeth right ouer them, causing great raines, suddenly casteth all their leaues, 
viz.
 within three dayes, and yet within six dayes after be∣comes all greene againe. The leaues of the other trees doe also in part fall away, but so as the teees con∣tinue still greene notwithstanding) being of a mar∣uelous height, and supported as it were with fiue or six naturall buttresses growing out of their bodies, so farre, that three men may so be hidden in each of them, that they which shall stand in the very next but∣tresse shall not be able to see them. One of them spe∣cially was marked to haue had seauen of those staies or buttresses, for the supporting of his greatnes and height, which being measured with a line close by the barke and neere to the ground, as it was indented or extant, was found to be aboue thirty nine yards about. The wood of those trees, is as heauy or heauier then 
Brafill
 or 
Lingnum vitae,
 and is in colour white.


The next day after wee had arriued,
 there came also into that bay, an English Bark of the Ile of 
Wight,
 of Sir 
Edwaad Horseys,
 wherein 
Iames Rause
 was Captaine and 
Iohn Ouery
 Master, with thirty men; of which, some had beene with our Captaine in the same place the yeere before. They brought in with them a 
Spanish
 Caruell of 
Siuell
 (which hee had taken the day before, athwart of that place, being a Caruell of 
Aduiso
 bound for 
Nombre de Dios
) and also one Sallop with Oares, which he had taken at Cape 
Blanck.
 This Captaine 
Rause



vnderstanding our Captains purpose, was desirous to ioyne in consort with him, and was receiued vp∣on conditions agreed on betwene them.


Within seauen dayes after his comming, hauing set vp our Pinnaces, and dispatched all our busines, in prouiding all things necessary, out of our ships into our Pinnaces: wee departed from that harbrough, set∣ting sayle in the morning towards 
Nombre de Dios,
 con∣tinuing our course till wee came to the Iles of 
Pinos:
 where being within three dayes arriued, wee found two Fregates of 
Nombre de Dios,
 lading planck and timber from thence.


The Negroes which were in those Fregates, gaue vs some particuler vnderstanding of the present state of the towne: and besides, tolde vs that they had heard a report, that certaine souldiers, should come thither shortly, and were daily looked for, from the Go∣uernor of 
Panama
 and the countrey thereabout, to de∣fend the towne against the 
Symerons
 (A black people, which about 80. yeares past, fledd from the 
Spaniards
 their Masters, by reason of their cruelty, and are since growne to a nation, vnder two Kings of their owne: the one inhabiteth to the west, th'other to the East of the way from 
Nombre de Dios
 to 
Panama
) which had neere surprised it about six weekes before.


Our Captaine willing to vse those Negroes well (not hurting himselfe) set them ashore vpon the maine, that they might perhaps ioyne themselues to their con∣trymen the 
Symerons,
 and gaine their liberty if they would, or if they would not, yet by reason of the length and troublesomenes of the way by land to 
Nom∣bre de Dios,
 hee might preuent any notice of his com∣ming, which they should be able to giue. For hee was


loath to put the towne to too much charge (which hee knew they would willingly bestowe) in proui∣ding before hand, for his entertainment, and there∣fore hee hastned his going thither, with as much speed and secrecy as posibly hee could.


To this end, disposing of all his companies, accor∣ding as they inclined most, hee left the three Ships and the Caruell with Captaine 
Rause,
 and chose into his foure Pinnaces (Captaine 
Rauses
 Shallop made the fourth) besides fifty three of our men, twenty more of Captaine 
Rauses
 company, with which hee seemed competently furnished, to atcheiue what hee intended: especially hauing proportioned, according to his owne purpose, and our mens disposition, their seue∣rall armes▪ 
viz
 six Targets, six Firepikes, twelue Pikes, twenty foure Muskets and Calliuers, sixteene Bowes, and six Partizans, two Drums, and two Trompets.


Thus hauing parted from our company:
 wee arri∣ued at the Iland of 
Catinaas,
 being twenty fiue leagues distant; about fiue dayes after, there wee landed all in the morning betimes: and our Captaine trained his men, deliuering them their seuerall weapons and armes, which hitherto hee had kept very faire and safe in good caske: and exhorting them after his man∣ner, hee declared the greatnes of the hope of good things that was there: the weaknes of the towne be∣ing vnwalled, and the hope hee had of preuailing to recompence his wrongs, especially now that hee should come with such a crew, who were like minded with himselfe; and at such a time, as hee should bee vtterly vndiscouered.


Therefore euen that afternoone, hee causeth vs to set saile for 
Nombre de Dios,
 so that before sunne set


wee were as farre as 
Rio Francisco
: thence hee led vs hard aboard the shore (that wee might not bee descried of the watch house) vntill that being come within two leagues of the point of the Bay, hee caused vs to strike a hull, and cast our grappers, riding so vntill it was darke night.


Then wee waighed againe and set sayle, rowing hard aboard the shore, with asmuch silence as wee could, till wee recouered the point of the harbor vn∣der the high land: there wee stayed all silent, purpo∣sing to attempt the towne in the dawning of the day, after that wee had reposed our selues for a while.


But our Captaine with some others of his best men, finding that our people were talking of the greatnes of the towne, and what their strength might bee, es∣pecially by the report of the Negroes that wee tooke at the Ile of 
Pinos
: thought it best to put these con∣ceits out of their heads, and therefore to take the op∣portunity of the rising of the moone that night, per∣suading them that it was the day dawning. By this oc∣casion we were at the towne, a large hower sooner then first was purposed. For wee arriued there by three of the clock after midnight: at what time it fortuned that a Ship of 
Spaine,
 of sixtie Tunnes, laden with Ca∣nary wines and other commodities, which had but lately come into the Bay, and had not yet furld her sprit-saile, espying our foure Pinnaces, being an extraordinary number, and those rowing with ma∣ny Oares, sent away her Gundeloe towards the towne, to giue warning: but our Captaine percei∣uing it, cut betwixt her and the towne, forcing her to goe to th'other side of the Bay: whereby wee landed without impeachment, although wee found


one gunner vpon the platforme, in the very place where wee landed, being a sandy pray and no key at all, not past twenty yards from the houses.


There wee found six great Peeces of brasse Ordi∣nance, mounted vpon their cariages, some Demy, some whole Culuering: wee presently dismounted them, the gunner fled, the towne tooke alarme (being ve∣ry ready thereto, by reason of their often disquieting, by their neere neighbours the 
Symerons
) as wee per∣ceiued, not onely by the noyse and cries of the peo∣ple, but by the bell ringing out, and drums running vp and downe the towne.


Our Captaine according to the directions which hee had giuen ouer night, to such as hee had made choice of for the purpose, left twelue to keepe the Pinnases, that wee might be sure of a safe retreat, if the worst befell. And hauing made sure worke of the platforme before hee would enter the towne, hee thought best, first to view the mount, on the East side of the towne, where hee was informed, by sun∣dry intelligences the yeare before, they had an intent to plant Ordinance, which might scoure round about the towne. Therefore leauing one halfe of his com∣pany, to make a stand at the foote of the mount, hee marched vp presently vnto the top of it, with all speed to try the truth of the report for the more safety. There wee found no peice of Ordinance, but onely a very fit place prepared for such vse, and therefore wee left it without any of our men, and with all celerity re∣turned downe the mount, Then our Captaine appoin∣ted his brother, with 
Iohn Oxnam
 and sixteene other of his men, to goe about, behinde the Kings treasure-house, and enter neere the Easter end of the market-place:


himselfe with the rest, would passe vp the broad street, into the market place, with sound of drum and trompet.


The Firepikes diuided halfe to the one, and halfe to th'other company, serued no lesse for fright to the enemy, then light of our men, who by this meanes might discerne euery place very well, as if it were neere day, whereas the inhabitants stood amazed at so strange a fight, maruelling what the matter might bee, and imagining, by reason of our drums and trompets sounding in so sundry places, that wee had beene a farre greater number then wee were.


Yet by meanes of the soldiers, which were in the towne, and by reason of the time which wee spent in marching vp and downe the mount, the soldiers and the inhabitants had put themselues in armes, and brought their companies in some order, at the south east end of the market place, neere the gouernors house, and not farre from the gate of the towne, which is only one, leading towards 
Panama,
 hauing (as it seemes) gathered themselues thither, either that in the gouernors sight they might shew their valor, if it might preuaile, or else that by the gate, they might best take their 
vale,
 and escape rediest.


And to make a shew of farre greater numbers of shot, or else of a custome they had, by the like de∣vice to terrify the 
Symerons,
 they had hung lines with matches lighted, ouerthwart the wester-end of the mar∣ket-place, betwene the church and the crosse, as though there had beene in a readines some company of shott, whereas indeed there was not past two or three that taught these lines to dance, till they them∣selues ranne away, assoone as they perceiued they


were discouered.


But the Souldiers and such as were joyned with them, presented vs with a jolly hotte volue of shot, beating full vpon the egresse of that streete, in which we marched, and leuelling very lowe, so as their bullers oft times grazed on the sand. We stood not to answer them in like tearmes; but hauing discharged our first volly of shot, and feathered them with our arrowes (which our Captaine had caused to be made of pur∣pose in 
England,
 not great sheafe arrowes, but fine ro∣uing shafts; very carefully reserued for the seruice) wee came to the push of pike, so that our fire-pikes be∣ing well armed and made of purpose, did vs very great seruice. For our men with their pikes and short weapons, in short time tooke such order among these gallants, some vsing the but-end of their peeces in stead of other weapons, that partly by reason of our arrowes, which did vs there notable seruice, partly by occasion of this strange and suddaine closing with them, in this manner vnlooked for, and the rather for that at the very instant, our Captaines brother, with the other Company, with their fire-pikes, entred the market place by th'easter street: they casting downe their weapons, fled all out of the Towne by the gate aforesaid, which had beene built for a barre to keepe out of the Towne the 
Symerons,
 who had often assai∣led it, but now serued for a gap for the Spaniards to fly at.


In following and returning, diuers of our men were hurt, with the weapons which the enemy had let fall as he fled: somewhat, for that wee marched with such speed, but more for that they lay so thicke and crosse on the other.


Being returned, we made our stand neere the midst of the market place, where a tree groweth hard by the Crosse; whence our Captaine sent of our men to stay the ringing of the alarme Bell, which had continued all this while: but the Church being very strongly built and fast shut, they could not without firing (which our Captaine forbad) get into the steeple where the Bell hung.


In the meane time, our Captaine hauing taken two or three Spaniards in their flight, commanded them to shew him the Gouernours house, where hee vnder∣stood was the ordinary place of vnlading the Moyles, of all the treasure which came from 
Panamah
 by the Kings appointment: Although the siluer only was kept there: the gold, pearle and jewels (being there once entred by the Kings Officer) was caried from thence to the Kings treasure-house not farre off, being a house very strongly built of lime and stone, for the safe kee∣ping thereof.


At our comming to the Gouernours house, wee found the great dore (where the Moyles doe vsually vnlade) euen then opened a Candle, lighted vpon the top of the staires; and a faire Gennet ready sadled, ei∣ther for the Gouernour himselfe, or some other of his household to carry it after him. By meanes of this light, we saw a huge heape of siluer, in that nether roome: being a pile of barres of siluer, of (as neareas we could guesse) seauenty foote in length, of ten foot in breadth, & twelue foote in height, piled vp against the wall, each barre was betweene thirty fiue and forty pound in weight. At sight hereof our Captaine commanded straightly that none of vs should touch a barre of siluer, but stand vpon our weapons, because the Towne was


full of people, and there was in the Kings treasure-house neere the waters side, more gold and jewels then all our foure Pinnases could carry, which wee would pre∣sently set some in hand to breake open, notwithstan∣ding the Spaniards reports of the strength of it.


Wee were no sooner returned to our strength, but there was a report brought by some of our men, that our Pinnases were in danger to be taken, and that if we our selues got not aboard before day, we should be op∣prest with multitude both of Souldiers and townes-people. This report had his ground from one 
Diego
 a 
Ne∣gro,
 who in the time of the first conflict, came and called to our Pinnaces, to knowe whether they were Captaine 
Drakes?
 & vpon answer receiued, continued intreating to be taken aboard (though he had first three or foure shot made at him) vntill at length they fetcht him, and lear∣ned by him, that not past eight dayes before our arri∣uall the King had sent thether some hundred and fifty Souldiers to guard the Towne against the 
Symerons,
 and the Towne at this time was full of people besides: which, all the rather beleeued, because it agreed with the report of the Negroes, which wee tooke before at the Ile of 
Pinos:
 and therefore our Captaine sent his brother and 
Iohn Oxnam
 to vnderstand the truth thereof. They found our men, which we left in our Pinnaces, much frighted, by reason that they sawe great Troops and Companies running vp and downe, with matches light, some with other weapons; crying 
Que gente? que gente?
 which hauing not beene at the first conflict, but comming from the vtter ends of the Towne (being at least as bigge as 
Plimouth
) came many times neere vs, and vnderstanding that we were English, discharged their peeces and ran away.


Presently after this, a mighty shower of raine, with a terrible storme of thunder and lightning, fell, which powred downe so vehemently (as it vsually doth in those Countries) that before we could recouer the shel∣ter of a certaine shade or pent-house, at the Wester end of the Kings treasure-house (which seemeth to haue beene built there of purpose to auoid Sunne and raine) some of our bow-strings were wet, and some of our match and powder hurt: which while we were carefull of, to refurnish and supply; diuers of our men, har∣ping on the reports lately brought vs, were muttering of the Forces of the Towne, which our Captaine per∣ceiuing, told them, that he had brought them to the mouth of the treasure of the world, if they would want it, they might henceforth blame no body but them∣selues. And therefore as soone as the storme beganne to aswage of his furye (which was a long halfe houre) willing to giue his men no longer leasure to demurre of those doubts, nor yet allow the Enemy farther res∣pit to gather themselues together: he stept foreward, commanding his brother, with 
Iohn Oxnam
 and the Company appointed them, to breake the Kings Trea∣sure-house; the rest to follow him, to keepe the strength of the market place, till they had dispatched the businesse for which they came.


But as he stept forward, his strength and sight and speech failed him, and he began to faint for want of blood, which as then wee perceiued, had, in great quantity, issued vpon the sand, out of a wound recei∣ued in his legge in the first encounter, whereby though he felt some paine, yet (for that hee perceiued diuers of the Company, hauing already gotten many good things, to be very ready to take all occasions, of win∣ding


themselues, out of that conceited danger) would he not haue it knowne to any, till this his fainting, against his will, bewrayed it; the blood hauing first filled the very prints which our foote-steps made, to the great dismay of all our Company, who thought it not credible, that one man should be able to spare so much blood and liue.


And therefore euen they, which were willingest to haue aduentured most, for so faire a booty, would in no case hazard their Captaines life; but (hauing gi∣uen him somewhat to drinke wherewith he recouered himselfe, and hauing bound his Scarfe about his legge, for the stopping of the blood) entreated him to bee content to goe with them aboord, there to haue his wound searched and drest, and then to returne a shoare againe if he thought good.


This when they could not perswade him vnto (as who knew it vtterly time) impossible, at least very vn∣likely, that euer they should (for that) returne againe, to recouer the state in which they now were: and was of opinion, that it were more honorable for himselfe, to jeopard his life for so great a benefit, then to leaue off so high an enterprise vnperformed:) they joyned altogether, and with force mingled with faire intreaty, they bare him aboard his Pinnace, and so abandoned a most rich spoile for the present, only to preserue their Captaines life, as being resolued of him, that while they enjoyed his presence, and had him to com∣mand them, they might recouer wealth sufficient; but if once they lost him, they should hardly bee able to recouer home, no not with that which they had got∣ten already.


Thus wee embarqued by breake of the day,
 hauing


besides our Captaine, many of our men wounded, though none slaine but one Trumpetter: whereupon though our Chyrurgeons were busily employed, in pro∣uiding remedies and salues for their wounds: yet the maine care was respected by all the rest; so that before we departed out of the Harbour for the more com∣fort of our Company, wee tooke the aforesaid Ship of Wines without great resistance. But before we had her free off the Hauen, they of the Towne had made meanes to bring one of their Culuerins, which we had dismounted, so as they made a shot at vs, but hin∣dred vs not from carrying forth the prize to the Ile 
Ba∣stimientos,
 or 
The Ile of victualles
; which is an Iland that lyeth without the Bay to the Westwards, about a league off the Towne, where we stayed the two next dayes, to cure our wounded men, and refresh our selues, in the goodly Gardens which we there found, abounding with great store of all dainty rootes and fruites, besides great plenty of Poultry and other Fowles, no lesse strange then delicate.


Shortly, vpon our first arriuall in this Iland, the Gouernour and the rest of his assistants in the Towne (as wee afterwards vnderstood) sent vnto our Cap∣taine a proper Gentleman of meane stature, good complexion, and faire spoken, a principall Soul∣dier of the late sent Garrison, to view in what state wee were. At his comming hee protested he came to vs of meere good will, for that wee had attempted, so great and incredible a matter with so few men: and that at the first they feared that wee had beene French, at whose hands they knew they should finde no mercy: but after they perceiued by our Arrowes, that we were Englishmen, their feare were the lesse, for that they


knew, that though we tooke the Treasure of the place, yet we would not vse cruelty towards their persons.


But albeit this his affection gaue him cause enough, to come aboard such, whose vertues so he honoured, yet the Gouernour also had not only consented to his comming, but directly sent him, vpon occasion that diuers of the Towne affirmed (said hee) that they knew our Captaine, who the last two yeares had beene often on their coast, and had alwayes vsed their per∣sons very well. And therefore desired to knowe, first, whether our Captaine were the same Captaine 
Drake
 or no? and next, because many of their men were wounded with our Arrowes, whether they were poy∣soned or no? and how their wounds might best be cured? lastly what victualles wee wanted, or other necessaries? of which the Gouereour promised by him to supply and furnish vs, as largely as hee durst. Our Captaine although he thought this Souldier but a Spye: yet vsed him very curteously, and answered him to his Gouernours demands. That he was the same 
Drake
 whome they meant: it was neuer his manner to poyson his Arrowes: they might cure their wounded by ordinary Chirurgery: as for wants hee knewe the Iland of 
Bastimientos
 had sufficient, and could furnish him if hee listed: but hee wanted nothing but some of that speciall commodity, which that Countrey yeel∣ded, to content himselfe and his Company. And therefore hee aduised the Gouernour to hold open his eyes, for before he departed, if God lent him life and leaue, he meant to reape some of their Haruest, which they get out of the Earth, and send into 
Spaine
 to trou∣ble all the Earth.


To this answere vnlooked for, this Gentleman


replyed: If he might without offence moue such a que∣stion, what should then be the cause, of our departing from that Towne at this time, where was aboue three hundred and sixty Tunne of siluer ready for the Fleete, & much more Golde in value, resting in yron chests in the Kings Treasure-house? But when our Captaine had shewed him the true cause of his vnwilling retreat aboord; he acknowledged, that we had no lesse reason in departing, then courage in attempting: and no doubt did easily see, that it was not for the Towne to seeke reuenge of vs, by manning forth such Fregates or other vessels, as they had: but better to content themselues and prouide for their owne defence. Thus with great fauour and courteous entertainement, be∣sides such gifts from our Captaine as most conten∣ted him: after dinner hee was in such sort dismissed, to make report of that he had seene, that he protested, he was neuer so much honored of any in his life.


After his departure, the Negroe forementioned, being examined more fully, confirmed this report of the gold and siluer, with many other intelligences of importance, especially how wee might haue gold and siluer enough if we would, by meanes of the 
Symerons,
 whome though hee had betrayed diuers times (being vsed thereto by his Masters) so that he knew they would kill him, if they gat him: yet if our Captaine would vndertake his protection, hee durst aduenture his life, because hee knewe our Captaines name was most pre∣tious and highly honored of them.


This report ministred occasion to further consul∣tation: for which, because this place seemed not the safest; as being neither the healthiest nor quietest. The next day in the morning wee all set our course


for the Ile of 
Pinnos
 or 
Port Plenty,
 where wee had left our Ships, continuing all that day, and the next, till towards night before wee recouered it. Wee were the longer in this course, for that our Captaine sent away his brother and 
Ellis Hixon
 to the west∣ward, to search the Riuer of 
Chagro,
 where himselfe had beene the yeare before, and yet was carefull to gaine more notice of: it being a Riuer which tren∣deth to the southward, within six leagues of 
Pana∣mah,
 where is a litle towne called 
Venta Cruz,
 whence all the treasure, that was vsually brought thither from 
Panams
 by Moyles, was imbarqued in Fregates, downe that Riuer into the North sea, and so to 
Nombre de Dios.
 It ebbeth and floweth not farre into the land, and therefore it asketh three dayes rowing with a fine Pinnace to passe from the mouth to 
Venta Cruz,
 but one day and a night seruerh to returne downe the Riuer.


At our returne to our Ships, in our consultation,
 Captaine 
Rause
 forecasting diuers doubts, of our safe continuance vpon that coast, being now discouered, was willing to depart: and our Captaine no lesse willing to dismisse him: and therefore assoone as our Pinnaces returned from 
Chagro,
 with such aduertise∣ments as they were sent for, about eight dayes be∣fore: Captaine 
Rause
 tooke his leaue,
 leaving vs in the Ile aforesaid, where wee had remained fiue or six dayes. In which meane tyme, hauing put all things in a readines, our Captaine resolued, with his two Ships and three Pinnaces to goe to 
Carthagene,
 whither in sayling we spent some 6. dayes, by reason of the calmes which came often vpon vs: but all this time wee at∣tempted nothing that wee might haue done by the


way, neither at 
Tolou,
 nor otherwhere, because wee would not bee discouered.


Wee came to anchor with our two Ships in the evening in seauen fadome water,
 betweene the Ilands of 
Charesha
 and Saint 
Barnards:
 our Captaine led the three Pinnaces, about the Iland, into the harbor of 
Carthagene
; where at the very entry, hee found a Fregate at anchor, aboard which was onely one old man; who being demanded, where the rest of his company was? answered, that they were gone ashoare in their Gundeloe that euening, to fight about a mi∣stresse: and voluntarily related to our Captaine that two houres before night, there past by them a Pinnace, with sayle and Oares, as fast as euer they could row, calling to him, whether there had not beene any 
English
 or 
Frenchmen
 there lately? and vppon answere that there had beene none: they bid them looke to themselues: that within an houre, that this Pinnace was come to the vtterside of 
Carthagene,
 there were many great Peeces shot off, whereupon one going to top, to descry what might bee the cause? espied, ouer the land, diuers Fregates and small shipping, bringing themselues within the Castle.


This report our Captaine credited, the rather, for that himselfe had heard the report of the Ordinance, at sea, and perceiued sufficiently, that hee was now descried: notwithstanding, in farther examination, of this old mariner, hauing vnderstood, that there was, within the next point, a great ship of Siuell, which had here discharged her loading, and rid now with her yards a crosse, being bound the next mor∣ning for Saint 
Domingo:
 our Captaine tooke this old man into his Pinnace to verifie that which hee had


informed, and rowed towards this Ship, which as wee came neere it, hayled vs, asking whence our Shallops were? wee answered, from 
Nombre de Dios
: straight way they raild and reuiled: wee gaue no heed to their words, but euery Pinnace, according to our Captaines order: one on the starboord bough, the other on the starboord quarter, and the Captaine in the midship on the larboord side, forthwith boarded her, though wee had some difficulty to enter, by rea∣son of her height, being of two hundred forty Tunne. But assoone as wee entred vpon the decks, we threwe downe the grates and spardecks, to preuent the 
Spaniards
 from annoying vs with their close fights: who then perceiuing that wee were possessed of their Ship, stowed themselues all in hold with their wea∣pons, except two or three yonkers, which were found afore the beetes: when hauing light out of our Pinna∣ces, wee found no danger of the enemy remaining, wee cut their Cables at halfe, and with our three Pinnaces, towed her without the Iland, into the sound right afore the Towne, without danger of their great shott.


Meane while, the Towne hauing intelligence here∣of, by their watch, tooke th'alarme, rong out their Bells, shott off about thirty Peeces of great Ordi∣nance, put all their men in a readines horse and foote, came downe to the very point of the wood, and dis∣charged their Caliuers, to impeach vs if they might, in going forth.


The next morning our Ships tooke two Fregats,
 in which were two, who called themselues the Kings 
Scriuanos,
 the one of 
Carthagene,
 th'other of 
Veragua,
 with seauen Mariners and two Negroes: who had


beene at 
Nombre de Dios
 and were now bound for 
Ca¦thagene,
 with double letters of aduise, to certifie them that Captaine 
Drake had beene at Nombre de Dios, had taken it, and had it not beene that hee was hurt with some blessed shott, by all likelihood hee had sackt it: hee was yet still vpon the Coast: they should therefore carefully prepare for him.


After that our Captaine had brought all his fleet together: at the 
Scriuanos
 entreaties, hee was content to doe them all fauor, in setting them and all their companies a shore; and so bare thence with the Ilands of Saint 
Barnards,
 about three leagues off the Towne: where wee found great store of fish for our refreshing.


Here our Captaine considering that hee was now discouered, vpon 2. of the cheefest places of all the Coast, and yet not meaning to leaue it, till hee had found the 
Simerons,
 and made his voiage, as hee had con∣ceiued, which would require some length of time & sure manning of his Pinnaces, hee determined with him∣selfe, to burne one of his Ships, and make of the o∣ther a storehouse, that his Pinnaces (which could not o∣therwise) might be throughly mand, and so he might be able to abide any time. But knowing the affection of his company, how loath they were to leaue either of their Ships, being both so good Saylers and so well furnished, hee purposed in himselfe by some pollicy, to make them most willing to effect that hee intended. And therefore sent for one 
Thomas Moone
 (who was Carpenter in the Swanne) and taking him into his Cabbin, chargeth him to conceale for a time, a peice of seruice, which hee must in any case consent to doe aboord his owne Ship: that was, in the middle of the second watch, to goe downe secretly into the well of


the Ship, and with a great spike-gimlet, to boare three hoales, as neere the keele as hee could, and lay something against it, that the force of the water en∣tring, might make no great noise, nor be discouered by boyling vp: 
Thomas Moone
 at the hearing hereof being vtterly dismaied, desired to knowe what cause there might bee, to moue him to sincke so good a Bark, of his owne, new, and strong, and that by his meanes, who had beene in two so rich and gainefull voyages in her with himselfe heretofore: If his bro∣ther, the Master, and the rest of the company should knowe of such his fact, hee thought verily they would kill him. But when our Captaine had imparted to him his causes, and had perswaded him with promise that it should not bee knowne, till all of them should bee glad of it: hee vndertooke it, and did it accor∣dingly.


The next morning our Captaine tooke his Pinnace very early,
 purposing to goe a fishing (for that there is very great store on all the Coast) and falling aboord the Swanne, calleth for his brother to goe with him, who rising suddenly, answereth that hee would follow presently, or if it would please him to stay a very little, hee would attend him. Our Captaine perceiuing the feate wrought, would not hasten him, but in rowing away, demanded of them, why their Bark was so deepe? as making no great account of it: but by occa∣sion of this demand, his brother sent one downe to the Steward, to know whether there were any water in the Ship? or what other cause might bee? The Stew∣ard hastily stepping downe at his vsuall skuttle, was wett vp to the waste, and shifting with more hast to come vp againe as if the water had followed him, cryed


out that the Ship was full of water. There was no need to hasten the company, some to the pumpe, others to search for the leake, which the Captaine of the Bark seeing they did on all hands very willingly, hee fol∣lowed his brother, and certified him of the strange chance befalne them that night; that whereas they had not pumpt twise in six weekes before, now they had six foote water in hold: therefore hee desireth leaue from attending him in fishing, to intend the search and remedy of the leake: and when our Captaine with his company profered to goe to helpe them, hee answered, they had men enough aboord, and prayed him to continue his fishing, that they might haue some part of it for their dinner. Thus returning, hee found his company had taken great paine, but had freeed the water very little: yet such was their loue to the Barke (as our Captaine well knew) that they ceased not, but to the vtmost of their strength, laboured all that they might till three in the afternoone: by which time, the company per∣ceiuing, that though they had beene relieued by our Captaine himselfe and many of his company, yet they were not able to free aboue a foote and a halfe of wa∣ter, and could haue no likelihood of finding the leake, had now a lesse liking of her then before, and greater content to hear of some means fot remedy: wherevpon our Captaine consulting with them what they thought best to bee done: found that they had more desire to haue all as he thought fitt, then iudgement to con∣ceiue any meanes of remedy. And therefore hee pro∣pounded, that himselfe would goe in the Pinnace, till hee could prouide him some hansome Fregate, and that his brother should bee Captaine in the ad∣mirall,


and the Master should also bee there placed with him, insteed of this: which seeing they could not saue, hee would haue fired, that th'enemy might neuer recouer her: but first all the Pinnaces should bee brought aboord her, that euery one might take out of her whatsoeuer they lackt or liked. This, though the company at the first marueiled at, yet presently it was put in execution and performed that night: our Captaine had his desire, and men enough for his Pin∣naces.


The next morning, wee resolued to seeke out some fitt place, in the sound of 
Darienne,
 where wee might safely leaue our Shipp at Anchor, not discoue∣rable by the enemy, who thereby might imagine vs quite departed from the Coast, and wee the meane time better follow our purposes with our Pinnaces; of which our Captaine would himselfe take two to 
Rio Grande,
 and the third leaue with his brother to seeke the 
Symerons.


Vpon this resolution,
 wee set saile presently for the said sound: which within fiue dayes wee recoue∣red, absteining of purpose, from all such occasion, as might hinder our determination, or bewray our being vpon the Coast. Assoone as we arriued, where our Captaine intended, and had chosen a fit and conuenient road (out of all trade) for our pur∣pose; wee reposed our selues there, for some fifteene dayes, keeping our selues close, that the brute of our being vpon the Coast might cease.


But in the meane time wee were not idle: for be∣sides such ordinary workes, as our Captaine euery month did vsually enure vs to, about the trimming and fitting of his Pinnaces, for their better sayling


and rowing: hee caused vs to ridd a large plot of ground, both of Trees and brakes and to build vs hou∣ses, sufficient for all ourlodging, and one especially for all our publique meetings; wherein the Negroe which fled to vs before did vs great seruice, as being well acquainted with the Country, and their meanes of building. Our Archers made themselues Butts to shoot at, because wee had many that delighted in that exercise, and wanted not a Fletcher to keepe our Bowes and Arrowes in order. The rest of the com∣pany, euery one as hee liked best, made his disport at Boules, Quoits, Keiles, &c. For our Captaine al∣lowed one halfe of their company to passe their time thus, euery other day interchangeably, the other halfe being enioyned to the necessary workes, about our Ship and Pinnaces, and the prouiding of fresh victuall, Fish, Foule, Hogs, Deere, Conies, &c. whereof there is great plenty. Here our Smithes set vp their Forge, as they vsed, being furnished out of 
England,
 which Anuill, Iron, Coales, and all manner of necessaries, which stood vs in great steed.


At the end of these fifteene dayes, our Captaine leauing his Ship in his brothers charge, to keepe all things in order; himselfe tooke with him, according to his former determination, two Pinnaces for 
Rio Grand,
 and passing by 
Carthagene,
 but out of sight, when wee were within two leagues of the Riuer,
 wee landed to the westwards on the maine, where we sawe great store of Cattle. There wee found some Indi∣ans, who asking vs in freindly sort, in broken 
Spa∣nish,
 what wee would haue, and vnderstanding that wee desired fresh victuals in traffick; they tooke such Cattle for vs, as wee needed, with ease and so rea∣dily,


as if they had a speciall Commandment ouer them, whereas they would not abide vs to come neere them: And this also they did willingly, because our Captaine (according to his custome) contented them for their paines, with such things as they account great∣ly of, in such sort that they promised, we should haue there of them at any time, what we would.


The same day wee departed thence to 
Rio grand,
 where wee entred about three of the clocke in the af∣ter-noone. There are two entrings into this Riuer, of which we entred the Westermost called 
Boca chica.
 The freshet of this Riuer is so great, that we being halfe a league from the mouth of it, filled fresh water for our beuerage.


From three a clocke till darke night wee rowed vp the streame, but the current was so strong downewards, that we got but two leagues all that time. We moared our Pinnaces to a tree that night: for that presently with the closing of the euening, there fell a monstrous shower of raine, with such strange and terrible claps of thunder, and flashes of lightning, as made vs, not a little to meruell at, although our Captaine had beene acquainted with such like in that Countrey, and told vs that they continue, seldome longer then three quar∣ters of an houre. This storme was no sooner ceast, but it became very calme, and therewith there came such an innumerable multitude, of a kind of Flies of that Coun∣trey called 
Muskitos
 (like our Gnats) which bite so spitefully, that we could not rest all that night, nor find meanes to defend our selues from them, by reason of the heate of the Countrey: the best remedy wee then found against them, was the juyce of Lemmons.


At the breake of day we departed, rowing in the eddy,


and haling vp by the trees where the eddy failed, with great labor,
 by spels, without ceasing, each Com∣pany their halfe houre glasse: without meeting any, till about three a clocke afternoone, by which time we could get but fiue leagues a head. Then we espied a Canow with two Indians fishing in the Riuer: but we spake not to them, least so wee might be descried: nor they to vs, as taking vs to be Spaniards. But with∣in an houre after wee espyed certaine houses, on the other side of the Riuer, whose channell is twenty fiue fathome deepe, and his bredth so great, that a man can scantly be discerned from side to side. Yet a Spaniard which kept those houses, had espied our Pinnaces, and thinking wee had beene his Countrey-men, made a smoake, for a signall to turne that way, as being desi∣rous to speake with vs. After that, we espying this smoak, had made with it, and were halfe the Riuer ouer, he wheaued vs with his hat, and his long hanging sleeues to come ashoare: But as we drew neerer vnto him, and he discerned that we were not those he looked for, he tooke his heeles, and fled from his houses, which we found to be, fiue in number, all full of white Ruske, dryed Bacon, that Country Cheese (like Holland Cheese in fashion, but farre more delicate in taste, of which they send into 
Spayne
 as speciall Presents) many sortes of sweet Meats, and Conserues; with great store of Sugar: being pro∣uided to serue the Fleet returning to 
Spayne.


With this store of Victuals we loaded our Pinnaces, and by the shutting in of the day we were ready to de∣part; for that we hastned the rather, by reason of an in∣telligence giuen vs by certaine Indian Women which we found in those houses: that the Fregates (these are ordinarily thirty, or vpwards, which vsually transport


the Marchandize sent out of 
Spayne
 to 
Carthagene,
 from thence to these houses, and so in great Canoas vp hence into 
Nuevo Reyno,
 for which, the Riuer running many hundreth leagues within the land serueth very fitly, and returne in exchange, the Golde and Treasure, Siluer, Victuals and Commodities, which that Kingdome yeil∣deth aboundantly:) were not yet returned from 
Cartha∣gene,
 since the first alarum they tooke of our being there.


As wee vvere going aboord our Pinnaces from these Store-houses,
 The Indians of a great Towne called 
Villa del Rey
▪ some 2. miles distant from the waters side where wee landed, were brought downe by the 
Spaniards
 into the bushes, and shot their Arrowes; but wee row∣ed downe the streame, with the current (for that the winde was against vs) onely one league, and because it was night, Anchored till the morning, when wee rowed downe to the mouth of the Riuer, where wee vnladed all our prouisions, and clensed our Pinnaces, according to our Captaines custome, and tooke it in againe, and the same day went to the westward.


In this returne, wee descried a Ship, a Bark, and a Fregate, of which the Ship and Fregate went for 
Carthagene,
 but the Bark was bound to the North∣wards, with the winde easterly, so that wee imagined she had some gold or treasure going for 
Spaine:
 there∣fore wee gaue her chase, but taking her, and finding nothing of importance in her, vnderstanding that she was bound for Sugar and Hides, wee let her goe, and hauing a good gale of winde, continued our former course to our Ship and company.


In the way between 
Carthagene
 and 
Tolou,
 we tooke fiue or six Fregates, which were laden from 
Tolou,
 with liue Hogs, Hens and Maiz, which wee call Guynie


wheate: of these hauing gotten what intelligence they could giue, of their preparations for vs, and diuers opinions of vs, wee dismissed all the men, only staying two Fregates with vs, because they were so well stored with good victuals.


Within three dayes after wee arriued at the place which our Captaine chose at first to leaue his Ship in, which was called by our Company 
P
r
 plenty,
 by rea∣son we brought in thither continually all manner store of good victuals, which we tooke going that way by Sea, for the victualling of 
Carthagene
 and 
Nombre de Dios,
 as also the Fleetes going and comming out of 
Spaine:
 so that if wee had beene two thousand, yea three thousand persons, wee might with our Pinnaces ea∣sily haue prouided them sufficient victuall of Wine, Meale, Ruske, Cassauy, (a kinde of Bread made of a roote called 
Yucca,
 whose juyce is poyson, but the sub∣stance good and wholesome) dryed Beefe, dryed Fish, liue Sheepe, liue Hogs, aboundance of Hens, besides the infinite store of dainty fresh fish very easily to be ta∣ken euery day. Insomuch that wee were forced to build foure seuerall Magazines or store-houses, some tenne, some 20. leagues a sunder, some in Ilands, some in the maine, prouiding our selues in diuers places, that though the Enemy should with force surprize any one, yet wee might be sufficiently furnished, till wee had made our voyage as we did hope. In building of these, our Negroes helpe was very much, as hauing a speciall skill, in the speedy erection of such houses.


This our store was such, as thereby wee releeued, not onely our selues and the 
Symerons,
 while they were with vs, but also two French Ships in extreame want. For in our absence Captaine 
Iohn Drake
 hauing one of


our Pinnaces as was appojnted, went in with the maine, and as he rowed a loofe the shoare▪ where hee was directed by 
Diego
 the Negroe aforesaid, which wil∣lingly came vnto vs at 
Nombre de Dios,
 hee espyed cer∣taine of the 
Symerons,
 with whome he delt so effectual∣ly, that in conclusion he left two of our men with their Leader, and brought aboard two of theirs: agreeing that they should meete him againe the next day, at a Riuer midway betweene the 
Cabezas
 and our Shippes, which they named 
Rio Diego.


These two being very sensible men, chosen out by their Commander, did with all reuerence and respect, declare vnto our Captaine, that their Nation concei∣ued great joy of his arriuall, because they knew him to be an enemy to the 
Spaniards,
 not only by his late be∣ing in 
Nombre de Dios,
 but also by his former voyages, and therefore were ready to assist and fauour his enter∣prises against his and their Enemies to the vttermost: and to that end their Captaine and Company, did stay at this present neere the mouth of 
Rio Diego,
 to at∣tend what answere and order should be giuen them: that they would haue marched by land, euen to this place, but that the way is very long, and more trou∣blesome, by reason of many steepe Mountaines, deepe Riuers and thicke brakes: desiring therefore, that it might please our Captaine to take some order, as hee thought best, with all conuenient speed in this behalfe. Our Captaine considering the speech of these persons, and waighing it with his former intelligences had, not only by Negroes but Spaniards also, whereof hee was alwayes very carefull: as also conferring it with his brothers informations of the great kindenesse, that they shewed him being lately with them: after he had


heard the opinions of those of best seruice with him, what were fittest to be done presently: resolued hmselfe with his brother, and the two 
Symerons,
 in his two Pinnaces to goe toward this Riuer, as he did the fame euening; giuing order, that the Shippe and the rest of his Fleet, should the next morning follow him, be∣cause there was a place of as great safety and sufficiency, which his brother had found out neere the Riuer. The safety of it consisted, not only, in that which is com∣mon all along that coast from 
Tolou
 to 
Nombre de Dios,
 being aboue sixty leagues, that it is a most goodly and plentifull Countrey, and yet inhabited not with one Spaniard, or any for the Spaniards: but especially in that it lieth among a great many of goodly Ilands full of Trees, where, though there be channels, yet there are such Rockes and shoales, that no man can enter by night, vvithout great danger, nor by day vvithout discouery, vvhereas our Ship might lye hidden vvithin the Trees.


The next day vve arriued at this Riuer appointed, vvhere vve found the 
Symerons
 according to promise: the rest of their number, vvere a mile vp, in a vvood by the Riuers side. There, after vve had giuen them en∣tertainement, and receiued good testimonyes of their joy and good vvill tovvards vs, vve tooke tvvo more of them into our Pinnaces, leauing our two men vvith the rest of theirs, to march by land, to another Riuer called 
Rio Guana,
 vvith intent there to meete vvith another Company of 
Symerons,
 vvhich vvere novv in the Mountaines. So vve departed that day ftom 
Rio Diego,
 vvith our Pinnaces tovvards our Shippe, as maruelling that shee follovved vs not as vvas appoin∣ted.


But tvvo dayes after, vvee found her in the place vvhere vve left her, but in farre other state,
 being much spoiled and in great danger, by reason of a tempest she had in our absence.


As soone as vve could trimme our Shippe,
 being some tvvo dayes, our Captaine sent avvay one of his Pinnaces, tovvards the bottome of the Bay, amongst the shoales and sandy Ilands, to sound out the channell) for the bringing in of our Shippe neerer the maine.


The next day vvee follovved, and vvere (vvith vvary pilatage, directed safely into the best channell,
 vvith much adoe to recouer the Roade, among so many flats and shoales. It vvas neere about fiue leagues from the 
Catiuaas,
 betvvixt an Iland and the maine, vvhere vve moared our Shippe. The Iland vvas not aboue foure Cables length from the maine, being in quan∣tity some three Acres of ground, flat and very full of Trees and bushes.


Wee vvere forced to spend the best part of three dayes, after our departure from our 
Port plenty,
 before we were quiet in this new-found Road,
 which wee had but newly entred, when our two men and the former Troupe of 
Simerons,
 with twelue other whom they had met in the Mountaines, came in sight ouer against our Shippe, on the maine: whence wee fet them all aboard, to their great comfort and our content: they rejoycing that they should haue some fit opportunity, to wreake their wrongs on the Spaniards: wee hoping that now our voyage should be bettered.


At our first meeting when our Captaine had mo∣ued them, to shew him the meanes which they had to furnish him with gold and siluer: they ansvvered


plainely, that had they knowne gold had bin his desire, they could haue satisfied him with store, which for the present they could not doe, because the Riuers, in which they had suncke great store, which they had taken from the Spaniards, rather to despite them then for loue of gold, were now so high, that they could not get it out of such depthes for him, and because the Spaniards in these rainy months doe not vse to cary their Treasure by land.


This answere although it were somewhat vnlooked for, yet nothing discontented vs, but rather perswa∣ded vs farther of their honest and faithfull meaning to∣wards vs. Therefore our Captaine to entertaine these fiue months, commanded all our Ordinance and Artillery a shoare, with all our other prouisions: sen∣ding his Pinnaces to the maine, to bring ouer great Trees, to make a Fort vpon the same Iland, for the planting of all our Ordinance therein, and for our safeguard, if the Enemy in all this time should chance to come.


Our 
Symerons
 cut downe 
Palmi
o
 boughes and branches, and with wonderfull speed raised vp two large houses for all our Company. Our Fort was then made (by reason of the place) Triangle wise with maine timber & earth, of which the Trench yeelded vs good store, so that we made it thirteen foote in height.


But after wee had continued vpon this Iland four∣teene dayes, our Captaine hauing determined, with three Pinnaces to goe for 
Carthagene,
 left his brother 
Iohn Drake,
 to gouerne these who remained behinde with the 
Symerons,
 to finish the Fort which hee had begunne: for which hee appointed him to fetch boords and plancks, as many as his Pinnace would


cary, from the prize which wee tooke at 
Rio Grand,
 and left all the 
Catiuaas,
 where shee draue a shore and wracked, in our absence: but now shee might serue very commodiously, to supply our vses, in making platformes for our ordinance. Thus our Captaine and his brother tooke their leaue, the one to the East∣ward, and the other to the 
Catiuaas.


That night wee came to an Ile, which hee called 
Spurkite
 Iland, because wee found there great store of such a kinde a Bird in shape, but very delicate, of which wee killed and roasted many; staying there till the next day midnoone, when wee departed thence:
 And about foure a clock recouered a big Iland in our way, where wee stayed all night, by reason that there was great store of Fish, and especially of a great kind of Shellfish of a foote long: we called them 
Whelkes.


The next morning wee were cleere of these Ilands and Shoales, and haled off into the Sea.
 About foure dayes after, neere the Ilands of Saint 
Barnards,
 wee chased two Fregats a shore:
 and recouering one of the Ilands, made our aboad there some two dayes to wash our Pinnaces and take of the Fish.


Thence wee went towards 
Tolou,
 and that day lan∣ded neere the Towne in a garden, where wee found certaine 
Indians,
 who deliuered vs their Bowes and Arrowes, and gathered for vs such Fruit as the Gar∣den did yeeld, being many sorts of dainty Fruits and Rootes, still contenting them for that wee receiued: our Captaines principall intent in taking this and o∣ther places by the way, not being for any other cause, but onely to learne true intelligences, of the state of the Country and of the Fleetes.


Hence wee departed presently, and rowed towards



Charesha
 the Iland of 
Carthagene,
 and entred in at 
Bo∣cha Chica,
 and hauing the winde large, wee sayled in towards the Citty, and let fall our Grappers betwixt the Iland and the maine, right ouer against the good∣ly Garden Iland. In which our Captaine would not suffer vs to land, notwithstanding our importunate desire, because hee knewe, it might be dangerous: for that they are wont to send Soldiers thither, when they know any men of warre vppon the Coast: which wee found accordingly: for within three houres after, passing by the point of the Iland, wee had a Volly of a hundred shot from them, and yet there was but one of our men hurt.


This euening wee departed to Sea: and the day following, being some two leagues off the Harbor, wee tooke a Bark, and found that the Captaine and his wife with the better sort of the Passengers, had for∣saken her, and were gone a shore in their Gundeloe: by occasion whereof wee boorded without resistance, though they were very well prouided, with Swords and Targets and some small Shott, besides foure iron Bases. Shee was about fifty Tunne, hauing ten Ma∣riners, fiue or six Negroes, great store of Sope and sweet Meats, bound from Saint 
Domingo
 to 
Carthagene.
 This Captaine left behinde him a silke Ancient with his Armes, as might be thought, in hasty departing.


The next day wee sent all the company a shore to seeke their Masters, sauing a young Negrito of three or foure yeares old, which wee brought away, but kept the Bark, and in her, bore into the mouth of 
Carthagene
 Harbor where we Anchored.


That afternoone, certaine horsmen came downe to the point by the Wood side, and with the 
Scriuano



forementioned, came towards our Bark with a Flag of Truce, desiring of our Captaine safe conduct for his comming and going: the which being granted, hee came aboord vs, giuing our Captaine great thankes for his manifould fauors, &c. promising that night before day breake, to bring asmuch victu∣all as they would desire, what shift so euer hee made, or what danger soeuer hee incurd of law and punish∣ment. But this fell out to be nothing but a deuice of the Gouernor forced vpon the 
Scriuano,
 to delay time, till they might prouid ethemselues of sufficient strength to entrappe vs: for which this fellow by his smooth speech, was thought a fitt meane.
 So by Sunne ri∣sing, when wee perceiued his words but words, wee put to Sea to the westward of the Iland, some three leagues off, where wee lay at Hull the rest of all that day and night.


The next day in the afternoone,
 there came out of 
Carthagene,
 two Fregats bound for Saint 
Domingo,
 the one of fifty, th'other of twelue Tonne, hauing nothing in them but ballast: wee tooke them, within a league of the Towne, and came to Anchor with them, with∣in Saker short of the East Bulwark: there were in those Fregats some twelue or thirteene common Mariners, which intreated to bee set a shoare: to them our Cap∣taine gaue the great Fregates Gundelow, and dismis∣sed them.


The next morning when they came downe to the Wester point with a flagge of Truce,
 our Captaine mand one of his Pinnaces and rowed a shoare: when wee were within a Cables length of the shoare, the Spaniards fled, hiding themselues in the Woods, as being afraid of our Ordinance; but indeed to drawe


vs on to land confidently, and to presume of our strength. Our Captaine commanding the Grapnell to bee cast out of the sterne, veered the Pinnace a shore, and assoone as shee touched the sand, hee a∣lone leapt ashore in their sight, to declare that hee durst set his foote a land, but stayed not among them: to let them knowe, that though hee had not sufficient forces to conquere them, yet hee had sufficent iudge∣ment to take heed of them. And therefore perceiuing their intent, assoone as our Captaine was aboord, we haled off vppon our Grapner and rid a while. They presently came forth vpon the sand, and sent a youth, as with a message from the Gouernor, to know what our intent was, to stay thus vpon the Coast? our Cap∣taine answered hee ment to traffique with them: for hee had Tinne, Pewter, Cloth and other Marchan∣dize that they needed. The youth swam back againe with this answere; and was presently returned, with another message: that, The King had forbidden to traffique with any forraine Nation for any commodities, ex∣cept Powder and Shotte, of which if hee had any store, they would bee his Marchants; hee answered, that he was come from his Country, to exchange his commo∣dities for Gold and Siluer, and is not purposed to re∣turne without his errand. They are like (in his opini∣on) to haue little rest, if that by faire meanes they would not traffique with him. He gaue this Messenger a faire Shirt for a reward, and so returned him: who rolled his Shirt about his head and swamme very spe∣dily.


We heard no answere all that day, and therefore toward night wee went aboord our Fregats and repo∣sed our selues, setting and keeping very orderly all


that night our watch, with great and small shott.


The next morning the winde which had beene west∣erly in the euening, altered to the eastward. About the dawning of the day, wee espied two Sayles tur∣ning towards vs, where vpon our Captaine waighed with his Pinnaces, leauing the two Fregats vnmand. But when wee were come somewhat nigh them, the winde calmed, and wee were faine to rowe towards them, till that approaching very nigh wee sawe many heads peering ouer boord. For, as wee perceiued, these two Fregates were mand and set forth out of 
Car∣thagene,
 to fight with vs, and at least to empeach or busy vs, whilst by some meanes or other they might recouer the Fregates from vs: but our Captaine pre∣uented both their drifts. For commanding 
Iohn Ox∣nam
 to stay with the one Pinnace, to entertaine these two men of warre, himselfe in the other made such speed, that hee gate to his Fregates which hee had left at Anchor, and caused the 
Spaniards
 (who in the meane time had gotten aboord in a small Canow thinking to haue towed them within the danger of their shott) to make greater hast thence, then they did thither. For hee found that in shifting thence, some of them were faine to swim a land (the Canow not being able to receiue them) and had left their ap∣parell, some their Rapiers and Targets, some their Flaskes and Calliuers behinde them, although they were towing away of one of them: therefore conside∣ring that wee could not man them, wee sunck the one, and burnt the other, giuing them to vnderstand by this, that wee perceiued their secret practises.


This being done, he returned to 
Iohn Oxnam,
 who all this while lay by the men of warre without proffe∣ring


of fight. And assoone as our Captaine was come vp to these Fregates, the wind blew much from the Sea, so that, wee being betwixt the shoare and them, were in a manner forced to beare roome into the Harbor before them, to the great ioy of the 
Spa∣niards
 who beheld it, in supposing, that wee would still haue fled before them. But assoone as wee were in the Harbor, and felt smooth water, our Pinnaces (as we were assured of) getting the winde, wee fought with them vpon th'aduantage, so that after a fewe shott exchanged, and a storme rising, they were con∣tented to presse no neerer. Therefore as they lett fall their Anchors, wee presently let drop our Grapners in the wind of them, which the 
Spanish
 Soldiers see∣ing, considering the disaduantage of the winde, the likelihood of the storme to continue, and small hope of doing any good, they were glad to retire them∣selues to the Towne. But by reason of the foule and tempestuous weather, wee rode there foure dayes, feeling great cold, by reason wee had such sore raines with westerly winde, and so little succor in our Pinna∣ces.


The fift day after, there came in a Fregate from the Sea, which seeing vs make towards her, ranne herselfe a shore, vnhanging her Rudder and taking away her Sayles, that shee might not easily bee car∣ried avvay. But when we were come vp to her, we per∣ceiued about a hundred horse and foote, with their furniture, came downe to the point of the maine, where wee interchanged some shott with them. One of our great short past so neere a braue Caualiere of theirs, that thereby they were occasioned to aduise themselues, and retreat into the woods, where they


might sufficiently defend and rescue the Fregate from vs, and annoy vs also, if wee stayed long about her. Therefore we concluded to goe to Sea againe, putting forth through 
Boca chica,
 with intent to take downe our Masts, vpon hope of faire wether, and to ride vnder the Rocks called 
Las Serenas,
 which are two leagues off at Sea, as wee had vsually done aforetime, so that they could not deserne vs from the Rocks. But there the Sea was so mightily growne, that wee were for∣ced to take the Harbor againe: where wee remained sixe dayes, notwithstanding the 
Spaniards
 greeued greatly at our aboade there so long,
 put an other de∣uice in practise to indanger vs.


For they sent forth a great Shallop, a fine Gunde∣loe, and a great Canow, with certaine 
Spanyards
 with Shott, and many 
Indians
 with poisoned Ar∣rowes, as it seemed, with intent to begin some fight, and then to fly. For assoone as wee rowed towards them and enterchanged shotte, they presently reti∣red and went a shoare into the woods, where an Am∣bush of some sixty shott were layde for vs: besides two Pinnaces and a Fregate warping towards vs, which were mand as the rest. They atttemed vs very boldly, being assisted by those others, which from out of the wood, had gotten aboord the Gundelo and Canow, and seeing vs bearing from them (which wee did in respect of the Ambuscado) they incouraged themselues and assured their fellowes of the day. But our Captaine weighing this their attempt, and being out of danger of their shott from the land, comman∣ding his other Pinnace to be brought a head of him, and to let fall their Grapners each a head the other, enuironed both the Pinnaces with Bonnets, as for a


close fight, and then wheaued them aboord him.


They kept themselues vpon their Oares at Calli∣uer shott distance, spending powder apace, as wee did some two or three houres; we had one of our men onely, wounded in that fight: what they had is vn∣knowe to vs, but wee sawe their Pinnaces shotte through in diuers places, and the powder of one of them tooke on fire: vvhereupon vvee vvaighed, inten∣ding to beare roome, to ouer-run them: vvhich they perceiuing and thinking that vvee vvould haue boor∣ded them, rovved avvay amaine to the defence vvhich they had in the vvood, the rather because they vvere disappointed of their helpe, that they expected from the Fregate vvhich vvas vvarping tovvards vs, but by reason of the much vvinde that blevv, could not come to offend vs, or succour them.


Thus seeing that wee were still molested, and no hope remained of any purchase to bee had, in this place any longer, because vve vvere novv so notably made knovvne in those parts, and because our victuals grevvv scant, as soone as the vveather vvexed some∣vvhat better (the Wind continuing alvvayes Wester∣ly, so that vve could not returne to our Shippes) our Captaine thought best to goe to the Eastvvard, to∣vvards 
Rio grand,
 alongst the Coast, vvhere vvee had beene before, and found great store of victuals.


But when after two dayes sayling, we were arriued at the Villages of store, where before wee had furni∣shed our selues with aboundance of Hens, Sheepe, Calues, Hogges, &c. Now wee found bare nothing, not so much as any people left, for that they by the Spaniards commandment were fled to the Mountaines, and had driuen away all their Cattle, that wee might


not be releeued by them. Herewith being very sor∣ry because much of our victuall in our Pinnaces was spoild, by the foule weather at Sea, and raines in Har∣bour: a Fregate being descryed at Sea reuiued vs, and put vs in some hope for the time, that in her we should finde sufficient; and thereupon it may easily be gues∣sed, how much wee laboured to recouer her: but when we had boarded her, and vnderstood, that shee had neither meate nor money, but that she was bound for 
Rio grand,
 to take in prouision vpon bils, our great hope conuerted into greefe.


Wee endured with our allowance seauen or eight dayes more, proceeding to the Eastwards, and bea∣ring roome for 
Santa Martha,
 vpon hope to finde some shipping in the Roade, or Limpets on the Rockes, or succour against the storme in that good Harbor. Being arriued, and seeing no shipping, we anchored vnder the Wester point, where is high land, and, as we thought, free safety from the Towne, which is in the bottome of the Bay, not intending to land there, because wee knew that it was fortified, and that they had intelligence of vs. But the Spaniards knowing vs to be Men of warre, and misliking that wee should shroud vnder their Rockes, without their leaue, had conueyed some thirty or forty shot among the cliffes, which annoyed vs so spitefully and so vnreuengedly (for that they lay hidden behind the Rockes, but wee lay open to them) that wee were soone weary of our Harbour, and enforced, for all the storme without, and want within, to put to Sea, which though these Ene∣mies of ours were well contented withall, yet for a farewell, as wee came open of the Towne, they sent vs a Culuerine shot, which made a neere escape, for


it fell betweene our Pinnaces, as wee were vpon con∣ference of what was best to be done. The Company aduised that if it pleased him, they might put them∣selues a land, some place to the East-ward to get vi∣ctuals, and rather hope for curtesie of the Countrey-people, then continue at Sea, in so long cold, and great a storme in so leake a Pinnace. But our Cap∣taine would in no wise like of that aduice, hee thought it better to beare vp towards 
Rio de Haca,
 or 
Coricao,
 with hope there to haue plenty without great resistance, because hee knewe, either the Ilands were not very populous, or else it were very likely that there would be found Shippes of victuall in a readines.


The Company of the other Pinnace answered, that, they would willingly follow him through the World, but in this they coulde not see how, either their Pinnace should liue in that Sea, without being eaten vp in that storme, or they themselues able to en∣dure so long time, with so slender prouision as they had, 
viz.
 onely one Gammon of Bacon and thirty pound of Bisket for eighteene men. Our Captaine replyed, that they were better prouided then himselfe was, who had but one Gammon of Bacon, and forty pound of Bisket for his twenty foure men: and therefore hee doubted not but they would take such part as hee did, & willingly depend vpon Gods Almightie prouidence, which neuer faileth them that trust in him: with that he hoysed his fore-sayle, & set his course for 
Coricao,
 which the rest perceiuing with sorrowfull hearts in respect of the weake Pinnace, yet desirous to follow their Cap∣taine, consented to take the same course.


We had not sayled past three leagues, but wee had espyed a sayle plying to the Westward with her two


coarses, to our great joy, who vowed together, that we would haue her, or else it should cost vs deare. Bearing with her, we found her to be a Spanish Ship of aboue ninty Tunne, which being wheaued a maine by vs, despised our summons, and shot off her Ordi∣nance at vs.


The Sea went very high, so that it was not for vs, to attempt to board her, and therefore wee made fit small sayle to attend vpon her, and keepe her com∣pany to her small content, till fairer weather might lay the Sea. Wee spent not past two houres in our at∣tendance, till it pleased God, after a great shevvr to send vs a reasonable calme, so that we might vse our Peeces and approach her at pleasure, in such sort that in short time we had taken her; finding her laden with victuall well poudred and dryed, which at that present wee receiued as sent vs of Gods great mercy. After all things vvere set in order, and that the Winde in∣creased tovvards night, vve plyed off and on, till day, at vvhat time our Captaine sent in 
Edward Hixom,
 vvho had then charge of his Pinnace, to search out some Har∣bor along the Coast: who hauing found out a little one, some tenne or twelue leagues to the East of 
Santa Martha,
 where in sounding he had good ground and sufficient water, presently returned, and our Cap∣taine brought in his new Prize. Then by promising liberty, and all their apparell to the Spaniards which we had taken, if they would bring vs to water and fresh victuals, the rather by their meanes, wee ob∣tained of the inhabitants Indians, what they had which was plentifull. These Indians were clothed, and gouerned by a 
Spaniard
 which dwelt in the next Tovvne, not past a league off: we stayed there all day, watering


and wooding, and prouiding things necessary, by giuing content and satisfaction to the Indians. But towards night our Captaine called all of vs aboard, (onely leauing the Spaniards lately taken in the Prize ashoare, according to our promise made them, to their great content, who acknowledged that our Captaine did them a farre greater fauour, in setting them freely at liberty, then hee had done them dis∣pleasure in taking their Ship) and so set sayle.


The sickenesse which had begunne to kindle amongst two or three dayes before, did this day shewe it selfe, in 
Charles Glub,
 one of our Quarter-Masters, a very tall man, and a right good Mariner, taken away to the great greefe both of Captaine and Company. What the cause of this malady was, we knewe nor of certainety, we imputed it to the colde, which our men had taken, lying without succour in the Pinnaces. But howsoeuer it was, thus it plea∣sed God to visit vs, and yet in fauour to restore vnto health, all the rest of our Company, that were tou∣ched with this disease, which were not a few.


The next morning being faire weather, though the Winde continued contrary, our Captaine com∣manded the 
Minion
 his lesser Pinnace, to hasten away before him towards his Shippes at 
Fort Diego
 within the 
Cabeças
 to cary newes of his comming, and to put all things in a readinesse for our Land journey, if they heare any thing of the Fleets arriuall by the 
Simerons,
 giuing the 
Minion
 charge if they wanted Wine, to take 
Saint Bernards
 in their way, and there take in some such portion as they thought good, of the Wines which we had there hidden in the sand.


We plyed to windwards, as neere as we could,


so that within a seauen-night after the 
Minion
 departed from vs, we came to 
Saint Barnards,
 where we stayed many houres, finding but twelue Botijos of Wine, of all the store wee left, which had escaped the cu∣rious search of the Enemy (who had beene there) for that they were deepe in the ground.


Within foure or fiue dayes after,
 we came to our Ship, where we found all other things in good order, but receiued very heauy newes of the death of 
Iohn Drake
 our Captaines brother, and another young man called 
Richard Allen
 which were both slaine at one time, as they attempted the boarding of a Fre∣gate within two dayes after our departing from them.


The manner of it (as wee learned by examination of the Company) was this: when they saw this Fre∣gate at Sea, (as they were going towards their Fort with planckes to make the Platformes) the Com∣pany were very importunate on him, to giue chase and set vpon this Fregate, which they deemed had beene a fit booty for them. But he told them, that they wan∣ted weapons to assaile, they knew not how the Fregate was prouided, they had their boat loaden with planckes, to finish that his brother had commanded. But when this would not satisfie them, but that still they vrged him with words and supposals: If you will needs said he aduenture, it shall neuer be said that I will be hindmost, neither shall you report to my Bro∣ther, that you lost your voyage by any covvardise you found in me.


Thereupon euery man shifted as they might for the time: and heauing their planckes ouer board, tooke them such poore vveapons as they had: 
viz.
 a


broken pointed Rapier, one old Visgee and a rusty Caliuer: 
I
hn Drake
 tooke the Rapier, and made a Gantlet of his Pillovv, 
Richard Allen
 the Visgee, both standing in the head of the Pinnace, called the 
Ei
n, Robert
 tooke the Caliuer and so boarded. But they found the Fregate armed round about vvith a close fight of hides, full of Pikes and Caliuers, vvhich vvere discharged in their faces, and deadly vvounded those that vvere in the Fore-shippe, 
Iohn Drake
 in the belly, and 
Richard Allen
 in the head. But notvvithstan∣ding their vvounds, they vvith Oares shifted off the Pinnace, got cleare of the Fregate, and vvith all hast recouered their Shippe, vvhere vvithin an houre after this young man of great hope, ended his dayes, great∣ly lamented of all the Company.


Thus hauing moared our Shippes fast, our Cap∣taine resolued to keepe himselfe close, vvithout be∣ing descried, vntill he might heare of the comming of the Spanish Fleet, and therefore set no more to Sea, but supplyed his vvants, both for his ovvne Company and the 
Symerons,
 out of his foresaid Maga∣zine, besides daily out of the vvoods, vvith vvilde Hogges, Pheasants and Guanas, continuing in health (God be praised) all the meane time, vvhich vvas a month at least, till at length about the be∣ginning of Ianuary,
 halfe a score of our Company fell dovvne sicke together, and the most of them dyed vvithin tvvo or three dayes: so long that vve had thirty at a time sicke of this 
Calenture,
 vvhich at∣tache our men, either by reason of the suddaine change from cold to heate, or by reason of brackish vvater vvhich had beene taken in by one Pinnace, through the sloth of their men in the mouth of the


Riuer, not rovving further in vvhere the vvater vvas good.


Among the rest, 
Ioseph Drake
 another of his bre∣thren dyed in our Captaines armes, of the same di∣sease: of vvhich, that the cause might bee the better discerned, and consequently remedyed, to the re∣leefe of others, by our Captaines appointment hee was ript open by the Surgeon, who found, his Liuer swolne, his heart as it were sodden, and his guts all faire. This was the first and last experiment that our Captaine, made of Anatomy in this voyage.


The Surgeon that cut him vp, ouer-liued him not past foure dayes, although hee were not toucht with that sickenesse, of which he had beene recouered aboue a month before: but onely of an ouerbold practise which he would needs make vpon himselfe, by receiuing an ouer-strong purgation of his owne de∣uice: after which taken, hee neuer spake, nor his boy recouered the health which hee lost by tasting it, till he saw 
England.


The 
Symerons,
 who, as is beforesaid, had beene entertained by our Captaine in September last, and vsually repaired to our Ship, during all the time of our absence, ranged the Country vp and downe, betweene 
Nombre de Dios
 and vs, to learne what they might for vs: whereof they gaue our Captaine aduertisement from time, to time, as now particularly, certaine of them let him vnderstand, that the Fleete was certainely arriued at 
Nombre de Dios.


Therefore he sent the 
Lyon,
 to the seamost Iland of the 
Catiu
as,
 to descry the truth of the report: by reason it must needs bee, that if the Fleete were in 
Nombre de Dios,
 all the Fregates of the Countrey


would repaire thitherwards with victuall.


The 
Lyon
 within few dayes descryed that shee was sent for, espying a Fregate which shee pre∣sently boarded and tooke, laden with 
Maiz,
 Hens, and Pompions from 
Tolou,
 who assured vs of the whole truth, of the arriuall of the Fleete: in this Fregate were taken one woman and twelue men, of whome one was the 
Scriuano
 of 
Tolou.
 These wee vsed very courteously, keeping them dilligently guarded from the deadly hatred of the 
Symerons,
 who sought daily by all meanes they could to get them of our Captaine, that they might cut their throats, to reuenge their wrongs and injuries, which the Spanish Nation had done them: but our Captaine perswaded them not to touch them, or them ill countenance, while they were in his charge: & tooke otder for their safety, not only in his presence, but also in his absence. For when he had prepared to take his journey for 
Panama
 by land, he gaue 
Edward Hixom
 charge of his owne Ship and Company, & espe∣cially of those Spaniards whome hee had put into the great Prize, which was haled a shoare to the Iland (which we termed slaughter Iland, because so many of our men dyed there) and vsed as a store-house for our selues, and a prison for our Enemies.


All things thus ordered, our Captaine confer∣ring with his Company and the Chiefest of the 
Syme∣rons,
 what prouisions were to bee prepared for this great and long journey, what kinde of weapons, what store of victuals, and what manner of apparell: was especially aduised, to cary as great store of Shooes as possibly hee might, by reason of so many Riuers, with stones and grauell as they were to passe,


which accordingly prouiding, prepared his Com∣pany for that journey,
 entring it vpon Shroue∣tuesday. At what time there had dyed twenty eight of our men, and a fewe whole men were left aboard with 
Edward Hixom,
 to keepe the Shippe and tend the sicke, and guard the prisoners.


At his departure our Captaine gaue this Master straite charge, in any case not to trust any messen∣ger, that should come in his name with any to∣kens, vnlesse hee brought his hand writing: which he knewe could not be counterfeited, by the 
Symerons
 or Spaniards.


We were in all forty eight, of which eighteene onely were English, the rest were 
Symerons,
 which besides their Armes, bare euery one of them, a great quantity of victuall and prouision, supplying our want of cariages in so long a march, so that wee were not troubled with any thing but our furniture. And because they could not cary enough to suffice vs al∣together, therefore, as they promised before, so by the way with their Arrowes, they prouided for vs competent store from time to time.


They haue euery one of them two sortes of Ar∣rowes, the one to defend himselfe and offend the ene∣my, the other to kill his victualls. These for fight are somewhat like the Scotish Arrowe; onely somewhat longer, and headed with iron, Wood or Fishbones▪ but the Arrowes for prouision are of three sorts, the first serueth to kill any great Beast neere hand, as Ox, Stagge, or wilde Boare: this hath a head of iron of a pound and a halfe weight, shaped in forme like the head of a Iauelin or Boare-speare, as sharpe as any knife, making so large and deepe a wound, as can


hardly bee beleiued of him that hath not seene it. The second serueth for lesser Beasts, and hath a head of three quarters of a pound: this hee most vsually shoo∣teth. The third serueth for all manner of Birds: it hath a head of an ounce weight. And these heads though they bee of iron onely, yet are they so cunning∣ly tempered, that they will continue a very good edge a long time: and though they bee turned sometimes yet they will neuer or seldome breake. The necessity in which they stand hereof continually, causeth them to haue iron in farre greater account then Gold: & no man among them is of greater estimation, then he that can most perfectly giue this temper vnto it.


Euery day wee were marching by Sun-rising: wee continued till ten in the forenoone: then resting (euer neere some Riuer) till past twelue, wee marched till foure, and then by some Riuers side, wee reposed our selues in such houses, as either wee found prepa∣red heretofore by them, when they trauelled through these woods, or they daily built very readily for vs, in this manner.


Assoone as wee came to the place, where wee in∣tended to lodge, the 
Symerons,
 presently laying downe their burthens, fell to cutting of Forkes or Posts, and Poles or Rafters, and Palmito boughes, or Plantaine leaues: and with great speed set vp, to the number of sixe houses. For euery of which, they first fastned deepe into the ground, three or foure great Postes with Forkes: vpon them, they layde one Transome, which was commonly about twentie foote, and made the sides, in the manner of the roofes of our Country houses, thatching it close with those aforesaid leaues, which keepe out water long time: obseruing alwayes


that in the lower ground, where greater heate was, they left some three or foure foote open vnthatcht be∣lowe, & made the houses, or rather roofes, so many foote the higher. But in the Hils, where the ayre was more peircing & the nights colder, they made our roomes al∣waies lower, & Thatched them close to the ground, lea∣uing onely one dore to enter at, and a Louer hole for a vent, in the midst of the roofe In euery of these, they made foure seuerall lodgings, and three fires, one in the midst, and one at each end of euery house: so that the roome was most temperately warme, and nothing annoyed with smoake, partly by reason of the nature of the wood, which they vse to burne, yeelding very litle smoake, partly by reason of their artificiall making of it: as firing the wood cutt in length like our billets, at the ends, and ioyning them together so close, that though no flame or fire did appeare, yet the heate con∣tinued without intermission.


Neere many of the Riuers where wee stayd or lodgd, wee found sundry sorts of Fruits, which wee might vse with great pleasure and safety temperately, 
Mammeas, Guayuas, Palmitos, Pinos, Oranges, Limes
 and diuers o∣ther; from eating of which they disswaded vs in any case, vnlesse wee eate very few of them, and those first dry roasted, as 
Plantans, Potatos
 and such like.


In iournying, as oft as by chance they found any wilde Swine, of which those Hills and Valleys haue s
ore, they would ordinarily, sixe at a time, deliuer their burthens to the rest of their fellowes, and pur∣sue, kill and bring away after vs, as much as they could carry, and time permitted. One day as wee trauelled, the 
Symerons
 found an Otter, and prepared it to bee drest: our Captaine maruelling at it, 
Pedro
 (our cheefe



Symeron
) asked him, 
Are you a man of warre, and in want, and yet doubt whether this bee meat, that hath bloud?
 herewithall our Captaine rebuked himselfe secretly, that hee had so slightly considered of it before.


The third day of our iourney, they brought vs to a Towne of their owne, seated neere a faire Riuer, on the side of a Hill, enuironed with a Dike of eight foote broad, and a thicke mud wall of ten foote high, sufficient to stop a sudden surpriser. It had one long and broad street, lying East and West, and two o∣ther crosse streets of lesse bredth and length: there were in it some fiue or sixe and fifty households, which were kept so cleane and sweet, that not onely the hou∣ses, but the very streets were very pleasant to behold. In this Towne wee sawe they liued very ciuilly and cleanely: for assoone as they came thither, they washed themselues in the Riuer, and changed their apparell which was very fine and fitly made (as also their we∣men doe weare) somewhat after the Spanish fashion, though nothing so costly. This Towne is distant thirtie fiue leagues from 
Nombre de Dios
 and fortie fiue from 
Panama.
 It is plentifully stored with many sorts of Beasts and Foule, with plenty of Maiz and sun∣dry Fruits.


Touching their affection in religion, they haue no kinde of Preists, onely they held the Crosse in great reputation: but at our Captaines perswation, they were contented to leaue their Crosses, an
 to learne the Lords prayer, and to bee instructed in some measure concerning Gods true worship. They keep a continuall watch in foure parts, 3. miles off their Towne, to preuent the mischeifes which the 
Spaniards
 intend against them, by the conducting of some of


their owne coates, which hauing beene taken by the 
Spaniards
 haue beene enforced thereunto: wherein, as wee learned, sometimes the 
Spaniards
 haue preuai∣led ouer them, specially when they liued lesse care∣full; but since they against the 
Spaniards
 whome they kill like Beasts, as often as they take them in the woods, hauing aforehand vnderstood of their comming.


Wee stayed with them that night,
 and the next day till noone: during which time they related vnto vs diuers very strange accidents, that had fallen out betweene them and the 
Spaniards,
 namely one: A gal∣lant Gentleman entertained by the Gouernors of the Country, vndertooke the yeare last past, with a hundred and fiftie Souldiers, to put this Towne to the sword, Men, Women, and Children. Being conducted to it by one of them, that had beene taken prisoner, and wonne by great gifts: hee surprised it halfe an houre before day, by which occasion most of the men esca∣ped, but many of their women and children were slaughtered, or taken: but the same morning by Sun rising, after that their guide was slaine, in following another mans wife: and that the 
Symerons
 had assem∣bled themselues in their strength: they behaued them∣selues in such sort, and draue the 
Spaniards
 to such ex∣tremity, that what with the disaduantage of the woods, hauing lost their guide and thereby their way, what with famine & want, there escaped not past thirty of them, to returne answere to those which sent them.


Their King dwelt in a City within sixteene leagues Southeast of 
Panama,
 which is able to make one thou∣sand seauen hundred fighting men.


They all intreated our Captaine very earnestly, to make his aboade with them some two or three dayes,


promising that by that time, they would double his strength if hee thought good. But hee thanking them for their offer, told them, that hee could stay no lon∣ger, it was more then time to prosecute his purposed voiage: as for strength, hee would wish no more then hee had, although hee might haue presently twenty times asmuch: which they tooke as proceeding not onely from kindnes, but also from magnanimity, and therefore, they marched forth that afternoone with great good will.


This was the order of our march: Foure of those 
Symerons
 that best knew the wayes, went about a mile distance before vs, breaking boughes as they went, to be a direction to those that followed: but with great silence, which they required vs also to keepe. Then twelue of them were as it were our Vantgard, and o∣ther twelue our Reereward: wee with their two Cap∣taines in the midst.


All the way was through woods very coole and pleasant, by reason of those goodly and high Trees, that growe there so thick, that it is cooler trauelling there vnder them in that hot region, then it is in the most parts of 
England
 in the Sommer time. This gaue a speciall encouragement vnto vs all, that wee vnder∣stood there was a great Tree about the midway, from which, wee might at once discerne the North Sea from whence wee came, and the South Sea whether we were going.


The fourth day following wee came to the height of the desired Hill, (a very high Hill, lying East and West, like ridge a betweene the two Seas) about ten of the clock: where the chiefest of these 
Symerons
 tooke our Captaine by the hand, and prayed him to


follow him, if hee was desirous to see at once the two Seas: which hee had so long longed for.


Here was that goodly and great high Tree, in which they had cutt and made diuers steps, to ascend vp neere vnto the top, where they had also made a conuenient Bower, wherein ten or twelue men might easily sitt: and from thence wee might without any difficulty plainely see, 
th'Atlantick
 Ocean whence now wee came, and the South 
Atlantick
 so much desired: South and North of this Tree, they had felld cer∣taine Trees, that the prospect might be the cleerer: and neere about the Tree there were diuers strong houses, that had beene built long before, aswell by other 
Sy∣merons
 as by these: which vsually passe that way, as be∣ing, inhabited in diuers places in those waste Coun∣tries.


After our Captaine had ascended to this Bower, with the cheefe 
Symeron,
 and hauing as it pleased God, at that time, by reason of the brize, a very faire day, had seene that Sea, of which hee had heard such gol∣den reports: hee besought Almighty God of his goodnes, to giue him life and leaue to sayle once in an English Ship in that Sea: and then calling vp all the rest of our men, acquainted 
Iohn Oxnam
 especial∣ly with this his peticion and purpose, if it would please God to grant him that happines: who vnder∣standing it, presently protested, that vnlesse our Cap∣taine did beate him from his company, hee would follow him by Gods grace.


Thus all throughly satisfied with the sight of the Seas, descended, and after our repast, continued our ordinary march, through woods, yet two dayes more as before: without any great variety.
 But then wee


came to march in a Champion Country, where the grasse groweth, not onely in great length as the knot∣grasse groweth in many places, but to such height, that th'inhabitants are faine to burne it thrise in the yeare, that it may bee able to feed their Cattle, of which they haue thousands. For it is a kinde of grasse with a stalke, as big as a great wheaten reed, which hath a blade issuing from the top of it, on which, though the Cattle feed, yet it groweth euery day higher, vntill the top be too high for an Oxe to reach. Then th'inhabitants are wont put fire to it, for the space of fiue or sixe miles together, which notwith∣standing after it is thus burnt, within three dayes springeth vp fresh like greene Corne. Such is the great fruitfulnes of the soyle: by reason of the eeuennes of the day and night, and the rich dewes which fall euery morning.


In these three last dayes march in the Champion, as wee past ouer the Hills, wee might see 
Panama
 fiue or sixe times a day, and the last day wee sawe the Ships riding in the roade.


But after that we were come within a dayes journey of 
Panama,
 our Captaine vnderstanding by the 
Syme∣rons
 that the Dames of 
Panama
 are wont to send forth Hunters, and Fowlers, for taking of sundry dainty Foule, which the Land yeeldeth, by whom if wee marched not very heedfully, wee might be descried; caused all his company to march out of all ordinary way, and that with as great heed, silence and secrecy, as possibly they might, to the Groue, which was a∣greed on foure daies before, lying within a league of 
Pa∣nama,
 where we might lye safely vndiscouered nere the high way, that leadeth from thence to 
Nombre de Dios.


Thence wee sent a chosen 
Symeron,
 one that had serued a Master in 
Panamah
 before time, in such appa∣rell as the 
Negroes
 of 
Panamah
 doe vse to weare, to bee our Espyall, to goe into the Towne, to learne the cer∣taine night, and time of the night, when the Carriers laded the Treasure from the Kings Treasure-house to 
Nombre de Dios.


For they are wont to take their journey from 
Pana∣ma
 to 
Venta Cruz,
 which is sixe leagues, euer by night, because the Countrey is all champion, and conse∣quently by day very hot: but from 
Venta Cruz
 to 
Nom∣bre de Dios,
 as oft as they trauell by land with their Trea∣sure, they trauell alwayes by day and not by night, because all that way is full of Woods, and there∣fore very fresh and coole: vnlesse the 
Symerons
 happily encounter them, and make them sweate with feare, as sometimes they haue done: whereupon they are glad to guard their 
Recoes
 with Souldiers as they passe that way.


This last day our Captaine did behold and view, the most of all that faire City, discerning the large streete which lyeth directly from the Sea into the Land, South and North. By three of the clocke we came to this Groue, passing (for the more secrecy) alongst a certaine Riuer, which at that time was al∣most dryed vp.


Hauing disposed of our selues in the Groue, wee dispatched our Spye an houre before night, so that by the closing in of the euening, he might be in the City, as he was: whence presently he returned vnto vs, that which very happily hee vnderstood by companions of his: That the Treasurer of 
Lima,
 in∣tending to passe into 
Spaine
 in the first 
aduiso,
 (which


was a Shippe of three hundred and fifty Tunne, a ve∣ry good sayler) was ready that night, to take his jour∣ney towards 
Nombre de Dios,
 with his Daughter & Fami∣ly: hauing foureteene Moyles in company, of which, eight were loden with gold, and one with jewels And farther, that there were two other 
Recos,
 of fifty Moyles in each, loaden with victualles for the most part, with some little quantity of siluer, to come forth that night after the other. There are twenty eight of these 
Recas,
 the greatest of them is of seauenty Moyles, the lesse of fifty, vnlesse some particular man hire for himselfe, tenne, twenty or thirty, as hee hath need.


Vpon this notice, wee forthwith marcht foure leagues; till we came within two leagues of 
Venta Cruz,
 in which march two of our 
Symerons
 which were sent before, by scent of his match, found and brought a Spaniard, whome they had found a sleepe by the way, by scent of the said match, and drawing neere thereby, heard him taking his breath as hee slept; and being but one, they fell vpon him, stopt his mouth from crying, put out his match, and bound him so, that they well neare strangled him by that time hee was brought vnto vs. By examining him, we found all that to be true, which our Spye had reported to vs, and that he was a Souldier entertained with others by the Treasurer, for the guard and conduct of this Treasure, from 
Venta Cruz
 to 
Nombre de Dios.


This Souldier hauing learned who our Captaine was, tooke courage, and was bold to make two re∣quests vnto him: the one, that hee would command his 
Symerons
 which hated the Spaniards (especially the Souldiers) extreamely, to spare his life, which hee


doubted not but they would doe at his charge: the other was, that seeing he was a Souldier, and assured him, that they should haue that night, more gold, besides jewels, and Pearles of great price, then all they could cary (if not, then he was to be delt with hovv they vvould) but if they all found it so, then it might please our Captaine to giue vnto him, as much as might suffice for him and his Mistresse to liue vpon, as hee had heard our Captaine had done to diuers others: for which hee would make his name as famous, as any of them, which had receiued like fauour.


Being at the place appointed, our Captaine with halfe of his men, lay on one side of the way, about fifty paces off in the long grasse: 
Iohn Oxnam
 with the Captaine of the 
Symerons,
 and the other halfe, lay on the other side of the way, at the like distance: but so farre behinde, that as occasion serued, the former Company might take the formost Moyles by the heads, and the other the hindmost, because the Moyles tyed together, are alwaies driuen one after another; and especially that if wee should haue need to vse our Weapons that night, we might be sure not to enda∣mage our fellowes. Wee had not laine thus in ambush much aboue an houre, but wee heard the 
Recos
 com∣ming both from the City to 
Venta Cruz,
 and from 
Venta Cruz
 to the City, which hath a very common and great trade, when the Fleetes are there: wee heard them, by reason they delight much to haue deepe soun∣ding Belles, which in a still night are heard very farre off.


Now though there vvere as great charge giuen as might be, that none of our men should show or stirre themselues: but let all that came from 
Venta Cruz
 to


passe quietly: yea their 
Recos
 also, because wee knewe that they brought nothing but Marchandise from thence: yet one of our men called 
Robert Pike,
 hauing drunken too much 
Aqua vitae
 without water, forgat himselfe, and entising a 
Symeron
 forth with him, was gone hard to the way, with intent to haue shewne his forwardnesse on the foremost Moyles. And when a Caualier from 
Venta Cruz,
 well mounted, with his Page running at his stirrop, past by, vnaduisedly he rose vp to see what he was: but the 
Symeron
 of bet∣ter discretion puld him downe, and lay vpon him, that he might not discouer them any more. Yet by this the Gentleman had taken notice by seeing one all in white: for that wee had all put our shirts ouer our other apparell, that wee might be sure to knowe our owne men in the pell mell in the night. By meanes of this sight, the Caualier putting spurs to his Horse, rode a false gallop, as desirous not onely himselfe to be free of this doubt; which he imagined, but also to giue aduertisement to others that they might auoid it.


Our Captaine who had heard and obserued (by reason of the hardnesse of the ground and stilnesse of the night) the change of this Gentlemans trot to a gallop, suspected, that he was discouered, but could not imagine by whose fault, neither did the time giue him leasure to search. And therefore considering that it might be, by reason of the danger of the place, well knowne to ordinary trauellers: wee lay still in expecta∣tion of the Treasurers comming, who was by this time within halfe a league, and had come forwardes to vs, but that this Horseman meeting him, and (as we afterwards learned by the other 
Recoes
) making re∣port to him, what hee had seene presently that night,


what hee heard of Captaine 
Drake
 this long time, and what hee conjectured to be most likely: 
viz.
 that the said Captaine 
Drake,
 or some for him, disapointed of his expectation, of getting any great Treasure, both at 
Nombre de Dios
 and other places, was by some meanes or other come by land, in couert through the woods vnto this place to speed of his purpose: and thereupon perswaded him to turne his 
Reco
 out of the way, & let the other 
Recoes,
 which were comming after to passe on. They were whole 
Recoes,
 and loaden but with victuals for the most part, so that the losse of them were farre lesse if the worst befell, and yet they should serue to discouer them as well as the best.


Thus by the rechlesnesse of one of our Company, and by the carefulnesse of this Traueller, we were dis∣appointed of a most rich booty, which is to be thought God would not should be taken, for that by all like∣lihood it was well gotten by that Treasurer.


The other two 
Recoes
 were no sooner come vp to vs, but being stayed and seased on, one of the cheefe Carriers a very sensible fellow, told our Captaine by what meanes wee were discouered, and counselled vs to shift for our selues betimes, vnlesse vvee were able to encounter the whole force of the City and Coun∣trey which before day would be about vs.


It pleased vs but little, that vvee were defeated of our golden 
Recoe,
 and that in these we could finde not past some two Horse-loade of siluer: but it greeued our Captaine much more, that hee vvas discouered, and that by one of his owne men. But knowing it bootlesse to greeue at things past, and hauing learned by experience, that all safety in extremities consisteth in taking of time: after no long consultation with 
Pedro,



the cheefe of our 
Symerons,
 vvho declared that there vvere but two vvayes for him: the one to trauell backe againe the same secret way they came, for foure leagues space into the Woods: or else to march for∣ward, by the high way to 
Venta Cruz,
 being two lea∣gues, and make a way vvith his Sword through the Enemies. Hee resolued, considering the long and weary marches that vvee had taken, and cheefely that last euening and day before: to take now the shortest and readiest vvay; as choosing rather to en∣counter his Enemies vvhile hee had strength remai∣ning, then to bee encountred or chased vvhen vvee should be worne out vvith vvearinesse: principally novv hauing the Moyles, to ease them that vvould, some part of the vvay.


Therefore commanding all to refresh themselues moderatly vvith such store of victuall, as vve had there in aboundance: hee signified his resolution and reason to them all: asking 
Pedro
 by name, vvhether hee vvould giue his hand not to forsake him (because hee knew that the rest of the 
Symerons
 would also then stand fast and firme, so faithfull are they to their Captaine.) Hee being very glad of his resolution, gaue our Cap∣taine his hand, and vowed that hee vvould rather dye at his foote, then leaue him to the Enemies, if hee held this course.


So hauing strengthned our selues for the time, vve tooke our journey towards 
Venta Cruz,
 vvith helpe of the Moyles, till vvee came vvithin a mile of the Towne, vvhere vvee turned away the 
Recoes,
 charging the Conducters of them, not to follow vs, vpon paine of their liues.


There the vvay is cut through the Woods, about


tenne or twelue foote broade, so as two 
Recoes
 may passe one by another. The fruitfulnesse of the soyle, causeth that vvith often shredding & ridding the vvay those Woods grow as thicke as our hickest hedges in 
England
 that are oftnest cut.


To the midst of this Wood, a Company of Soul∣diers, vvhich continually lay in that Towne, to defend it against the 
Symerons
 vvere come forth, to stoppe vs if they might on the vvay, if not, to retrait to their strength, and there to expect vs. A Conuent of Fryers of vvhome one vvas become a Leader, joyned vvith these Souldiers, to take such paete as they did.


Our Captaine vnderstanding by our two 
Symerons,
 vvhich vvith great heedfulnesse and silence, marched novv, but about halfe a flight-shot before vs, that it was time for vs to arme & take vs to our weapons, for they knew the Enemy vvas at hand, by smelling of their match and hearing of a noyse: had giuen vs charge, that no one of vs should make any shot, vntill the Spaniards had first spent their volly vvhich he thought they vvould not doe before they had spoken, as indeed fell out: For as soone as vve vvere vvithin hearing, a Spanish Captaine cryed aloud, Hóó, our Captaine answered him likevvise, & being aemanded, 
Que gente?
 replyed 
Englishmen.
 But vvhen the said Commander charged him in the name of the King of 
Spaine
 his Ma∣ster, that wee should yeeld our selues, promising in the word and faith of a Gentleman Souldier, that if we would so doe, he would vse vs with all curtesie; our Captaine drawing somwhat neere him said: That for the honour of the Queene of 
England
 his Mistresse, hee must haue passage that way: and therewithall dischar∣ged his Pistoll towards him.


Vpon this, they presently shot off their whole vol∣ly, which, though it lightly wounded our Captaine and diuers of our men, yet it caused death to one onely of our Company called 
Iohn Harris,
 who was so poudered with haile-shot (which they all vsed for the most part as it seemed, or else quartered, for that our men were hurt with that kinde) that we could not recouer his life, though he continued all that day afterwards with vs. Presently as our Captaine percei∣ued their shott to come slacking, as the latter drops of a great shewre of raine, with his Whistle he gaue vs his vsuall signall, to answere them with our shot and Arrowes, and so march onwards vpon the Enemy, with intent to come to handi-strokes, and to haue joy∣ned with them: whom when hee found retired as to a place of some better strength, hee encreased his pace to preuent them if he might. Which the 
Symerons
 perceiuing, although by terror of the shot continuing, they were for the time stept a side: yet as soone as they discerned by hearing that we marched onward, they all rusht forwards one after another, trauersing the way, vvith their Arrowes ready in their Bowes, and their manner of Countrey dance or leape, very lusti∣ly, singing 
Yó pehó, yó pehó,
 and so got before vs, where they continued their leape and song, after the manner of their owne Countrey warres, till they and wee ouer-tooke some of the Enemy, who neere the Townes end, had conueyed themselues within the Woods, to haue taken their stand at vs, as be∣fore.


But our 
Symerons
 now throughly encouraged, when they sawe our resolution, brake in through the thic∣kets, on both sides of them, forcing them to flye,


Fryers and all, although diuers of our men were woun∣ded, and one 
Symeron
 especially was runne through with one of their Pikes, whose courage and minde serued him so well notwithstanding, that hee reuen∣ged his owne death ere hee dyed, by killing him that had giuen him that deadly wound.


Wee, with all speed, following this chase, en∣tred the Towne of 
Venta Cruz,
 being of about forty or fifty houses, which had both a Gouernour and other Officers and some faire houses, with many Store-houses large and strong for the Wares, which were brought thither from 
Nombre de Dios,
 by the Riuer of 
Chagro,
 so to be transported by Moyles to 
Panama:
 besides the Monasterie where wee found aboue a thousand Bulles and Pardons newly sent thither from Rome.


In those houses wee found three Gentlewomen, which had lately beene deliuered of Children there, though their dwelling were in 
Nombre de Dios,
 because it hath beene obserued of long time, as they reported to vs, that no 
Spaniard
 or White woman could euer bee deliuered in 
Nombre de Dios
 with safety of their Children, but that within two or three dayes they di∣ed; notwithstanding that being borne and brought vp in this 
Venta Cruz
 or 
Panama
 fiue or sixe yeares, and then brought to 
Nombre de Dios,
 if they escaped sicknes the first or second month, they commonly liued in it as healthily as in any other place: although no stranger (as they say) can endure there any long time, without great danger of death or extreame sicknes.


Though at our first comming into the Towne with Armes so suddenly, these Gentlewomen were in great feare: yet because our Captaine had giuen strait charge


to all the 
Symerons
 (that while they were in his com∣pany, they should neuer hurt any woman, nor man that had not weapon in his hand to doe them hurt, which they ernestly promised, and no lesse faith∣fully performed) they had no wrong offered them, nor any thing taken from them, to the worth of a gar∣ter: wherein, albeit they had indeed sufficient safety and security, by those of his company, which our Captaine sent vnto them, of purpose to comfort them: yet they neuer ceased most earnestly intreating, that our Captaine would vouchsafe to come to them himselfe for their more safety: which when hee did, in their presence reporting the charge hee had first giuen, & th'assurance of his men, they were comforted.


While the Guards which wee had (not without great need) sett, aswell on the bridge which wee were to passe ouer, as at the Townes end where wee entred (they haue no other entrance into the Towne by Land: but from the waters side there is one other, to carry vp and downe their Marchandise from their Fregates) gained vs liberty and quiet to stay in this Towne some houre and halfe: wee had not onely re∣freshed our selues, but our company and 
Symerons
 had gotten some good pillage, which our Captaine allowed and gaue them (being not the thing he looked for) so that it were not too combersome or heauy in respect of our trauell, or defence of our selues. A little before wee departed, some ten or tvvelue horsemen came from 
Panama
 by all likelihood, supposinge that wee were gone out of this Towne, for that all was so still and quiet, came to enter the Towne confidently: but finding their entertainement such as it was, they that could, rode faster backe againe for


feare, then they had ridden forwards for hope.


Thus wee hauing ended our busines in this Towne, and the day beginning to spring, wee marched ouer the Bridge, obseruing the same order that wee did be∣fore. There wee were all safe in our opinion, as if wee had beene enuironed with Wall and Trench: for that no 
Spaniard
 without his extreame danger could follow vs. The rather now, for that our 
Symerons
 were growne very valiant. But our Captaine consi∣dering that hee had a long way to passe, and that hee had beene now well neere fortnight from his Ship, where hee had left his Company but weake by rea∣son of their sicknes, hastned his jorneys asmuch as he might, refusing to visit the other 
Symeron
 Townes (which they earnestly desired him) and encouraging his owne Company with such example and speech that the way seemed much shorter. For hee marched most cheerefully and assured vs, that hee doubted not but ere hee left that Coast, wee should all bee bountifully payd and recompensed for all those paines taken: but by reason of this our Captaines haste, and leauing of their Townes, wee marched many dayes with hungry stomackes, much against the will of our 
Symerons
: who if wee would haue stayed any day from this continuall journeying, would haue killed for vs victuall sufficient.


In our absence, the rest of the 
Symerons
 had built a little Towne within three leagues off the port where our Ship lay. There our Captaine was contented, vppon their great and earnest intreaties to make some stay, for that they alleaged, it was onely built for his sake. And indeed hee consented the rather, that the want of shooes might bee supplyed by meanes of the



Symerons,
 who were a great helpe vnto vs: all our men complayning of the tendernes of their feete, whom our Captaine would himselfe in their complaint ac∣company somtimes without cause, but sometimes with cause indeed, which made the rest to beare the burthen the more easily.


These 
Symerons
 during all the time that wee were with them, did vs continually very good seruice, and in particular in this journey, being vnto vs insteed of intel∣ligencers, to aduertise vs; of guides in our way to direct vs; of purueiors to prouide victualls for vs; of house∣wrights to build our lodgings; and had indeed able and strong bodies carying all our necessaries, yea many times when some of our company fainted with sicknes or wearines, two 
Symerons
 would carry him with ease betwene them two miles together, and at other times when need was they would shew them∣selues no lesse valiant then industrious and of good iudgement.


From this Towne, at our first entrance in the euen on Saturday, our Captaine dispatched a 
Symeron
 with a token and certaine order to the Master, who had this three weekes, kept good watch against the enemy, and shifted in the woods for fresh victuall, for the re∣leefe and recouery of our men left aboord. Assoone as this messenger was come to the shoare, calling to our Ship, as bringing some newes, hee was quickly sett aboord, by those which longed to heare of our Captaines speeding: but when hee shewed the tooth-pike of gold, which hee said our Captaine had sent for a token to 
Edward Hixom,
 with charge to meete him at such a Riuer: though the Master knew well the Captaines Tooth-pike: yet by reason of his ad∣monition


and caueat giuen him at parting, hee (though he bewrayed no signe of distrusting the 
Sy∣meron
) yet stood as amazed, least something had befallen our Captaine otherwise then well. The 
Symeron
 perceiuing this, tolde him, that it was night when hee was sent away, so that our Captaine could not send any letter, but yet with the point of his knife, hee wrote something vpon the Tooth-pike, which (hee said) should be sufficient to gaine cre∣dit to the messenger.


Thereupon the Master lookt vpon it, and sawe written 
By me Francis Drake,
 wherefore hee beleiued, and according to the message, prepared what pro∣uision hee could, and repaired to the mouth of the Riuer of 
Tortugos,
 as the 
Symerons
 that went with him then named it.


That after noone towards three a clocke, we were come downe to that Riuer, not past halfe an houre, be∣fore wee sawe our Pinnace ready come to receiue vs: which was vnto vs all a double reioycing: first that wee sawe them, and next so soone: our Captaine with all our Company praised God most hartily, for that wee sawe our Pinnace and fellowes againe.


We all seemed to these who had liued at rest and plenty all this while aboard, as men strangely chang∣ed (our Captaine yet not much changed) in counte∣nance and plight: and indeed our long fasting and sore trauell might somewhat fore-pine and waste vs: but the greefe wee drew inwardly, for that wee re∣turned without that Gold and Treasure wee hoped for, did no doubt shewe her print and footesteps in our faces.


The rest of our men which were then missed, could


not trauell so well as our Captaine, and therefore were left at the Indian new Towne: and the next day wee rowed to another Riuer in the bottome of the Bay and tooke them all aboord.


Thus being returned from 
Panama,
 to the great reioycing of our Company, who were throughly re∣uiued with the report wee brought from thence: es∣pecially vnderstanding our Captaines purpose, that he meant not to leaue off thus, but would once a∣gaine attempt the same journey, whereof they also might bee partakers: our Captaine would not in the meane time suffer this edge and forwardnes of his men to bee dulled or rebated, by lying still idly vnim∣ployed, as knowing right well by continuall experi∣ences, that no sicknes was more noysome to impeach any enterprise then delay and idlenes.


Therefore considering deepely the intelligences of other places of importance thereabouts, which hee had gotten the former yeares: and particularly of 
Veragua,
 a rich Tovvne lying to the Westvard, be∣tvveene 
Nombre de Dios
 and 
Nicaragua,
 vvhere is the richest Mine of fine Gold, that is on this North side: hee consulted with his company touching their opinions, what was to bee done in this meane time, and how they stood affected? Some thought, that it was most necessary to seeke supply of victuals, that wee might the better bee able to keepe our men close and in health till our time came: and this was easy to bee compassed, because the Fregates with victuall went without great defence, whereas the Fregates and Barkes with Treasure, for the most part were vvaft∣ed vvith great Ships and store of Souldiers. Others yet iudged, vvee might better bestowe our time in


intercepting the Fregates of Treasure: first for that our Magasines and Storehouses of victuall were rea∣sonably furnished, and the Country it selfe was so plentifull, that euery man might prouide for himselfe if the worst befell: and victuall might hereafter bee prouided abundantly aswell as now: whereas the Treasure neuer floateth vpon the Sea, so ordinarily as at this time, of the Fleets being there, which time in no wise may bee neglected.


The 
Symerons
 being demanded also their opinion, for that they were experienced in the particularities of all the Townes thereabouts, as in which, some or other of them had serued: declared that by 
Veragua Sinnior Pezoro
 sometime their Master from whome they fled, dwelt not in the Towne for feare of some surprise, but yet not farre off from the Towne, for his better releefe: in a very strong house of stone, where hee had dwelt ninteene yeares at least, neuer trauelling from home, vnlesse happily once a yeare to 
Carthagene
 or 
Nombre de Dios
 when the Fleets were there: hee keepeth a hundred slaues at least in the Mines, each slaue being bound to bring in dayly cleere gaine (all charges deductted) three Pezos of Gold for himselfe and two for his women (eight shillings three pence the Pezo) amounting in the whole, to about two hundred pound sterling each day: so that hee hath heaped a mighty Masse of Treasure together, which hee keepeth in certaine great Chests of two foote deepe three broad, and foure long: being, notwithstanding all his wealth, hard and cruell, not onely to his slaues, but vnto all men, and therefore neuer going abroad, but with a Guard of fiue or sixe men to defend his person from danger,


which hee feareth extraordinarily from all creatures. And as touching meanes of compassing this purpose, they woulde conduct him safely through the woods, by the same wayes by which they fled, that hee should not need to enter their Hauens with danger, but might come vpon their backes altogether vnlooked for. And though his house were of stone so that it could not bee burnt, yet if our Captaine would vn∣dertake th'attempt, they would vndermine and ouer∣throwe, or otherwise breake it open, in such sort, as wee might haue easy accesse to his greatest Trea∣sure.


Our Captaine hauing heard all their opinions, concluded so; that by deuiding his Company the two first different sentences, were both reconciled, both to bee practised and put in vre. 
Iohn Oxnam
 appointed in the 
Beare,
 to bee sent Estwards towards 
Tolow,
 to see what store of victuals would come a∣thwart his halfe, & himselfe would to the Westward in the 
Minian,
 lye off and on the 
Cabezas,
 where was the greatest trade and most ordinary passage of those which transported Treasure from 
Veragua
 and 
Nicara∣gua
 to the Fleet: so that no time might bee lost, nor opportunity let slip either for victuall or Treasure. As for th'attempt of 
Veragua
 or 
Sinior Peroros
 house by land, by marching through the woods, hee li∣ked not off, least it might ouer weary his men by con∣tinuall labor, whom he studied to refresh and strength∣en, for his next sreuice forenamed.


Therefore vsing our 
Symerons
 most curteously, dis∣missing those that were desirous to their wiues, with such gifts and fauors as were most pleasing, and entertaining those still aboord his Ships, which


were contented to abide with the Company remai∣ning, the Pinnaces departed as was determined, the 
Minion
 to the West, the 
Beare
 to the East.


The 
Minion
 about the 
Cabeças
 met with a Fregate of 
Nicaragua,
 in which was some gold, and a 
Geno∣way
 Pilot, of which Nation there are many in those Coasts, which had beene at 
Veragua
 not past eight dayes before, he being very well entreated, certi∣fied our Captaine of the State of the Towne, and of the Harbor, and of a Fregate that was there ready to come forth within fewe dayes, aboard which there was aboue a million of Gold, offering to conduct him to it, if wee would doe him his right, for that he knew the channell very perfectly, so that hee could enter by night safely without danger of the sands and shallowes, (though there be but little water) and vtterly vndescryed, for that the Towne is fiue leagues within the Harbor, and the way by land is so farre about and difficult through the Woods, that though wee should by any casualty be discoue∣red, about the point of the Harbor, yet wee might dispatch our businesse and depart, before the Towne could haue notice of our comming. At his being there hee perceiued they had heard of 
Drakes
 being on the Coast, which had put them in great feare, as in all other places (
Pezoro
 purposing to remoue him∣selfe to the South Sea) but there was nothing done to preuent him, their feare being so great, that, as it is accustomed in such cases, it excluded Counsell and bred dispaire.


Our Captaine conferring with his owne know∣ledge and former intelligences, was purposed to haue returned to his Shippe, to haue taken some


of those 
Symerōs
 which had dwelt with 
Sinior Pezoro,
 to be the more confirmed in this point. But when the 
Ge∣noway
 Pilot was very earnest, to haue the time gai∣ned, and warranted our Captaine of good speed, if wee delayd not, he dimissed the Fregate somewhat lighter to, hasten her journey, and with this Pilots ad∣uise, laboured with sayle and oares to get this Harbor and to enter it by night accorcordingly, considering that this Fregate might now bee gained, and 
Pezoros
 house attempted hereafter notwithstanding.


But when wee were come to the mouth of the Har∣bor, we heard the report of two Chambers, and far∣ther off about a league within the Bay, two other as it were answering them: whereby our 
Geno
aise
 Pilot coniectured that we were discouered: for hee assured vs, that this order had beene taken, since his last be∣ing there; by reason of the aduertisement and charge, which the Gouernour of 
Panama
 had sent vnto all the Coast, which euen in their beds lay in great and con∣tinuall feare of our Captaine, and therefore by all likely-hood, maintained this kinde of watch, at the charge of the rich Gnuffe 
Pezoro,
 for their secu∣rity.


Thus being defeated of this expectation, wee found that it was not Gods will that wee should en∣ter at that time: the rather for that the winde, which had all this time beene Easterly, came vp to the Westward, and inuited vs to returne againe to our Shippe,
 where on Sheere Thursday wee met accor∣ding to appointment with our 
Beare,
 and found that shee had bestowed her time to more profit then wee had done.


For shee had taken a Fregate in which there


were tenne men, whome they set ashoare; great store of 
Maiz,
 twenty eight fat Hogs, and two hundred Hens. Our Captaine discharged this Fregate of her lading, and because she was new,
 strong and of a good mould, the next day hee tallowed her to make her a Man of warre: disposing all our Ordinance and prouisions that were fit for such vse in her.
 For we had heard by the Spaniards last taken, that there were two little Gallies built in 
Nombre de Dios,
 to waft the 
Chagro
 Fleete to and froe, but were not yet both lanched: wherefore hee purposed now to aduenture for that Fleete. And to hearten his Com∣pany hee feasted them that Easter-day with great cheere and cheerefulnesse,
 setting vp his rest vpon that attempt.


The next day with the new tallowed Fregate of 
Tolow
 and his 
Beare,
 wee set sayle towards the 
Cati∣ua
s,
 where about two dayes after wee landed, and stayed till noone: at what time seeing a sayle to the Westwards, as wee deemed making to the Iland: wee set sayle and plyed towards him, who descry∣ing vs, bare vvith vs, till hee perceiued by our con∣fidence, that wee were no Spaniards, and conje∣ctured that wee were those Englishmen, of whome hee had heard long before. And being in great want, and desirous to be releeued by vs, hee bare vp vnder our Lee, and in token of amity, shot off his Lee Ordinance which was not vnanswered.


Wee vnderstood that hee was 
Tetú
 a French Captaine of 
New-hauen,
 a Man of warre as wee were: desirous to be releeued by vs. For at our first mee∣ting the French Captaine cast abroad his hands, and prayed our Captaine to helpe him to some wa∣ter,


for that hee had nothing but Wine, and Cider aboard him, which had brought his men into great sickenesse. Hee had sought vs euer since hee first heard of our being vpon the Coast, about this fiue weekes. Our Captaine sent one aboard him with some releefe for the present, willing him to follovv vs to the next Port, vvhere hee should haue both vva∣ter and victuals.


At our comming to anchor hee sent our Captaine a case of Pistols, and a faire guilt Symeter (vvhich had beene the late Kings of 
France,
 vvhome Mon∣sieur 
Mongomery
 hurt in the eye, and vvas giuen him by Monsieur 
Strosse
) our Captaine requited him vvith a Chaine of gold, and a Tablet vvhich hee vvore. This Captaine reported vnto vs the first nevves of the Massacre at 
Paris,
 at the King of 
Nauars
 Ma∣riage on Saint 
Bartholomewes
 day last, of the Admirall of 
France
 slaine in his Chamber, and diuers other murthers: so that hee thought those French-men the happiest vvhich vvere farthest from 
France,
 novv no longer 
France
 but Frensie, euen as if all 
Gaul
 vvere turned into Worme-vvood and Gall: 
Italian
 practises hauing ouer-mastred the French simplicity. Hee shevved vvhat famous and often reports he had heard of our great riches: hee desired to knovv of our Cap∣taine vvhich vvay hee might compasse his voyage also.


Though vvee had him in some jealousie and di∣strust, for all his pretence, because vvee considered more the strength hee had, then the good-vvill hee might beare vs: yet vpon consultation among our selues, vvhether it vvere fit to receiue him or no: vvee resolued to take him and twenty of his men, to serue


with our Captaine for halfes: in such sort as wee nee∣ded not doubt of their forces, being but twenty, nor be hurt by their portions, being no greater then ours: and yet gratifie them in their earnest suite, and serue our owne purpose, which without more helpe wee could very hardly haue atcheiued. Indeed hee had seauenty men, and wee now but thirty one: his Ship was aboue eighty Tunne, and our Fregate not past twenty, our Pinnace nothing neere tenne Tunne: yet our Captaine thought this proportionable, in consi∣deration that not number of men, but quality of their judgements and knowledge, were to bee the princi∣pall actors herein: and the French Shippe could doe no seruice, nor stand in any steed to this enterprise which we intended, and had agreed vpon long before, both touching the time when it should take begin∣ning, and the place where wee should meet, namely at 
Rio Francisco.


Hauing thus agreed with Captaine 
Tetu,
 wee sent for the 
Symerons
 as before was decreed: Two of them were brought aboard our Shippes, to giue the French assurance of this agreement. And as soone as wee could furnish our selues and refresh the French Compa∣ny, which vvas within fiue or sixe dayes (by bringing them to the Magazine which was the neerest, where they were supplyed by vs in such sort, as they protested they were beholding to vs for all their liues) taking twenty of the French and fifteene of ours with our 
Sy∣merons,
 leauing both our Shippes in safe Roade, wee mand our Fregate and two Pinnaces (wee had for∣merly suncke our 
Lyon,
 shortely after our returne from 
Panama,
 because wee had not men sufficient to man her) and went towards 
Rio Francisco,
 which because it


had not water enough for our Fregate: caused vs to leaue her at the 
Cabeças,
 mand with English and French, in the charge of 
Robert Doble,
 to stay there without at∣tempting any chase, vntill the returne of our Pinna∣ces. And then beare to 
Rio Francisco,
 where both Cap∣taines landed with such force as aforesaid,
 and charged them that had the charge of the Pinnaces, to be there the fourth day next following without any faile. And thus knowing that the cariages went now daily from 
Panama
 to 
Nombre de Dios,
 vve proceeded in couert through the Woods, tovvards the high way that lea∣deth betvvene them.


It is fiue leagues accounted by Sea, betvveene 
Rio Francisco
 and 
Nombre de Dios,
 but that vvay vvhich vvee marched by land, vve found it aboue seauen leagues. Wee marched as in our former journey to 
Panama,
 both for order and silence, to the great vvonder of the French Captaine and Company, vvho protested they knevv not by any meanes hovv to recouer the Pinnaces, if the 
Symerons
 (to vvhome vvhat our Captaine com∣manded was a law, though they little regarded the French, as hauing no trust in them) should leaue vs: our Captaine assured him, there vvas no cause of doubt of them of vvhom he had had such former tryall.


When vve vvere come vvithin an English mile of the vvay, vvee stayed all night, refreshing our selues in great stilnesse in a most conuenient place, vvhere vve heard the Carpenters, being many in number vvor∣king vpon their Shippes, as they vsually doe by reason of the great heat of the day in 
Nombre de Dios,
 & might heare the Moyles comming from 
Panama,
 by reason of the aduantage of the ground.


The next morning vpon hearing of that great


number of Belles, the 
Symerons
 rejoyced exceeding∣ly, as though there could not haue befallen them a more joyfull accident, cheefely hauing beene disap∣pointed before. Now they all assured vs, wee should haue more gold and siluer then all of vs could beare away, as in truth it fell out.


For there came three Recoes, one of fifty Moyles, the other two of seauenty each, euery of which ca∣ryed three hundred pound waight of siluer, which in all amounted to neere thirty Tunne. Wee putting our selues in readinesse, went downe neere the way to heare the Belles, where we stayed not long, but we sawe of what mettall they were made, and tooke such hold on the heads of the foremost and hindmost Moyles, that all the rest stayed and lay downe as their manner is.


These three Recoes were guarded with forty fiue Souldiers or their abouts, fifteene to each Reco, which caused some exchange of Ballets and Arrowes for a time, in which conflict the French Captaine was sore wounded with hayle-shot in the belly, and one 
Symeron
 slaine: but in the end these Souldiers thought it the best way to leaue their Moyles with vs, and to seeke for more helpe abroad: in which meane time wee tooke some paine to ease some of the Moyles, which were heauiest loaden of their cariages. And be∣cause wee our selues were somewhat weary, wee were contented with a few barres and quoits of gold, as wee could well cary: burying about fifteene Tunne of siluer, partly in the boroughs which the great Land∣crabs had made in the earth, and partly vnder old Trees which were fallen thereabout, and partly in the sand and grauell of a Riuer, not very deepe of water.


Thus when about this businesse wee had spent some two houres, and had disposed of all our matters, and were ready to march backe, the very selfe same way that we came, wee heard both Horse and Foote comming as it seemed, to the Moyles, for they neuer followed vs, after we were once entred the Woods: where the French Captaine by reason of his wound, not able to trauell farther, stayed, in hope that some rest would recouer him better strength.


But after wee had marched some two leagues, vpon the French Souldiers complaint, that they mis∣sed one of their men also, examination being made whether hee were slaine or no: it was found that hee had druncke much Wine, and ouerlading himselfe with pillage, and hasting to goe before vs, had lost himselfe in the Woods. And as wee afterwards knew, hee was taken by the Spaniards that euening, and vpon torture, discouered vnto them where we had hid∣den our Treasure.


We continued our march all that and the next day, towards 
Rio Francisco,
 in hope to meet with our Pinna∣ces, but when we came thither, looking out to Sea, wee savve seauen Spanish Pinnaces, which had beene searching all the Coasts thereabout: vvhereupon vvee mightily suspected, that they had taken or spoiled our Pinnaces, for that our Captaine had giuen so straight charge, that they should repaire to this place this after-noone from the 
Cabecas
 vvhere they rode, vvhence to our sight, these Spaniards Pinnaces did come.


But the night before, there had fallen very much raine, with much westerly winde, which as it enfor∣ced the 
Spaniards
 to returne home the sooner, by rea∣son


of the storme: so it kept our Pinnaces, that they could not keepe th'appointment, because the wind was contrary, & blewe so strong, that with their Oares they could all that day get but halfe the way. Notwithstand∣ing, if they had followed our Captaines direction in setting forth ouer night, while the winde serued, they had arriued at the place appointed with farre lesse la∣bour, but with farre more danger, because that very day at noone, the 
Spanish
 Shallops mand out of purpose from 
Nombre de Dios,
 were come to this place to take our Pinnaces: imagining where wee were, after they had heard of our intercepting of the Treasure.


Our Captaine seeing the Shallops, feared least hauing taken our Pinnaces, they had compelled our men by torture, to confesse where his Fregate and Ships were. Therefore in this distresse and perplexi∣ty, the company misdoubting that all meanes of re∣turne to their Country were cut off, and that their Treasure then serued them to small purpose: our Captaine comforted and encouraged vs all, say∣ing: wee should venter no farther then hee did: it was no time now to feare: but rather to haste to preuent that which was feared: if the Enemy haue preuailed against our Pinnaces, which God forbid, yet they must haue time to search them, time to ex∣amine the Mariners; time to execute their resoluti∣on after it is determined: before all these times bee taken, wee may get to our Ships if yee will, though not possibly by land, because of the Hills, Thickets and Riuers, yet by water. Let vs therefore make a Raft with the Trees that are here in readines, as offe∣ring themselues being brought downe the Riuer, hap∣pily this last storme, and put our selues to Sea. I


will bee one, who will bee the other? 
Iohn Smith
 offered himselfe, and two Frenchmen that could swimme very well, desired they might accompany our Captaine, as did the 
Symeron
 likewise (who had beene very earnest with our Captaine to haue march∣ed by land though it were sixteene dayes journey, and in case the Ships had beene surprised, to haue aboade alwaies with them) especially 
Pedro,
 who yet was faine to bee left behinde, because hee could not rowe.


The Raft was fitted and fast bound; a Sayle of a Bisket sack prepared; an Oare was shaped out of a young Tree to serue in steed of a Rudder, to direct their course before the winde.


At his departure hee comforted the Company, by promising, that if it pleased God, hee should put his foote in safety aboard his Fregate, hee would, God willing, by one means or other get them all aboard, in despite of all the 
Spa
iards
 in the Indies


In this manner putting off to the Sea, hee sayled some three leagues, sitting vp to the waste continual∣ly in water, & at euey surge of the waue to the armepits, for the space of sixe houres, vpon this Raft, what with the parching of the Sunne and what with the beating of the salt water, they had all of them their skins much fretted away.


At length God gaue them the sight of two Pinna∣ces turning towards them with much winde, but with farre greater joy to him, that could easily coniecture, and did cheerefully declare to those three vvith him, that they vvere our Pinnaces, and that all vvas safe, so that there vvas no cause of feare. But see, the Pinnaces not seeing this Raft, nor sus∣pecting


any such matter, by reason of the vvinde and night growing on, were forced to runne into a coue behinde the point, to take succour for that night: which our Captaine seeing, and gathering, because they came not forth againe, that they would Anchor there, put his raft a shore, and ranne by land about the point, where hee found them, who vpon sight of him, made as much hast as they could to take him and his Company aboard. For our Captaine, of purpose to try what hast they could and would make in extremity: himselfe ranne in great haste, and so willed the other three with him, as if they had beene chased by the Enemy: which they the rather suspected, because they saw so fewe with him. And after his comming aboard, when, they de∣manding, how all his Company did? hee answered coldly, well: they all doubted, that all went scarce well. But hee willing to ridd all doubts, and fill them with ioy, tooke out of his bosome a Quoit of Gold, thanking God that our voyage was made. And to the Frenchmen hee declared, how their Captaine in∣deed was left behinde, sore wounded and two of his Company with him: but it should bee no hin∣drance to them.


That night our Captaine with great paine of his Company, rowed to 
Roo Faancisco:
 where hee tooke the rest in, and the Treasure which wee had brought with vs: making such expedition, that by dawning of the day, we set sayle backe againe, to our Fre∣gate, and from thence directly to our Ships: where assoone as wee arriued, our Captaine deuided by weight, the Gold and Siluer into two euen por∣tions, betwene the French, and the English.


About a fortnight after, when we had set all things in order, and taking out of our Ship all such necessa∣ries as wee needed for our Fregate, had left and giuen her to the 
Spa
iards,
 whome wee had all this time detayned, wee put out of that Harbor, together with the French Ship, riding some fewe dayes a∣mong the 
Cabezas.


In the meane time our Captaine made a secret com∣position with the 
Symerons,
 that twelue of our men and sixteene of theirs, should make another voyage, to get intelligence in what case the Country stood, and if it might be, recouer Monsieur 
Tortú
 the French Captaine, at least-wise to bring away that which was hidden in our former surprize and could not then bee conueniently caried.


Iohn Oxnam
 and 
Thomas Sherwell
 were put in trust for this seruice, to the great content of the whole Company, who conceiued greatest hope of them next our Captaine, whome by no meanes they would condiscend to suffer to aduenture againe this time: yet hee himselfe rowed to set them ashore at 
Rio Francisco:
 finding his labor well imployed both other∣wise, and also in sauing one of those two French∣men that had remained willingly to accompany their wounded Captaine.


For this Gentleman hauing escaped the rage of the 
Spaniards,
 was now comwing towards our Pin∣nace, vvhere hee fell dovvne on his keees, blessing God for the time, that euer our Captaine vvas borne, vvho novv beyond all his hope, vvas become his de∣liuerer. Hee being demanded vvhat vvas become of his Captaine and other fellovv, shevved that vvith∣in halfe an houre after our departure, the 
Spiniards
 had


ouergotten them, and tooke his Captaine and other fellovve: hee onely escaped by flight, hauing cast avvay all his carriage, and among the rest one Box of Ievvells, that hee might fly the svvifter from the pursuers: but his fellovv tooke it vp and burthened himselfe so sore, that hee could make no speed, as easily hee might othervvise, if hee vvould haue cast downe his pillage, and layd aside his couetous minde: as for the siluer, which we had hidden thereabout in the earth and the sands, he thought that it was all gone; for that he thought there had beene neere two thou∣sand Spaniards and Negroes there, to dig and search for it.


This report notwithstanding, our purpose held, and our men were sent to the said place, where they found that the earth, euery way a mile distant had beene digged and turned vp in euery place of any like∣lihood, to haue any thing hidden in it. And yet ne∣uerthelesse, for all that narrow search, all our mens labour was not quite lost: but so considered, that the third day after their departure, they all returned safe and cheerefull, with as much siluer as they and all the 
Symerons
 could finde, (
viz:
 thirteene barres of siluer, and some fewe quoits of gold) with which they were presently embarqued without empeachment, repai∣ring with no lesse speed then joy to our Fregate.


Now was it high time to thinke of homewards, hauing sped our selues as wee desired: and therefore our Captaine concluded to visit 
Rio grand,
 once againe, to see if he could meet with any sufficient Ship or Bark, to cary victuall enough to serue our turne home∣wards, in which wee might in safety and security em∣barque our selues.


The French-men hauing formerly gone from vs as soone as they had their shares at our first returne with the Treasure, as being very desirous to returne home into their Countrey, and our Captaine as de∣sirous to dismisse them, as they were to be dismissed; for that hee foresawe they could not in their Shippe auoid the danger of being taken by the Spaniards, if they should make out any Men of warre for them, while they lingred on the Coast, and hauing also beene then againe releeued with victuals by vs: Now at our meeting of them againe, were very loath to leaue vs, and therefore accompanied vs very kinde∣ly as farre vp as Saint 
Barnards,
 and farther would, but that they durst not aduenture so great danger, for that wee had intelligence, that the Fleete was ready to set sayle for 
Spaine,
 riding at the entry of 
Carthagena.


Thus wee departed from them, passing hard by 
Carthagena,
 in the sight of all the Fleete, with a Flagge of Saint 
George
 in the maine top of our Fregate, with silke streamers and ancients downe to the water, sayling forward with a large winde, till wee came within two leagues of the Riuer, being all lowe land, and darke night: where to preuent the ouer-shooting of the Riuer in the night, we lay off & on bearing small sayle, till that about mid-night the winde vee∣ring to the Eastward, by two of the clocke in the morning, a Fregate from 
Rio grand
 passed hard by vs, bearing also but small sayle. We saluted them with our shot and Arrowes, they answered vs with Ba∣ses: but wee got aboard them, and tooke such or∣der, that they were content against their willes to depart a shoare and to leaue vs this Fregate which was of twenty fiue Tunne, loaded with Maiz, and Hens


and Hogs, & some Honey, in very good time fit for our vse: for the Honey especially was a notable releeuer and preseruer of our crased people.


The next morning as soone as wee set those Spa∣niards a shoare on the maine, wee set our course for the 
Cabeças
 without any stop, whither wee came about fiue dayes after. And being at anchor, presently wee houe out all the Maizaland, sauing three Buts which we kept for our store: and carying all our prouisions a shoare, wee brought both our Fregates on the 
Ca∣rine,
 and new tallowed them.


Here wee stayed about seauenight, trimming and rigging our Fregates, boarding and stowing our pro∣uisions, tearing abroad and burning our Pinnaces, that the 
Symerons
 might haue the yron-worke.


About a day or two before our departure, our Captaine willed 
Pedro
 and three of the cheefest of the 
Symerons
 to goe through both his Fregates, to see what they liked, promising to giue it them whatsoeuer it were, so it were not so necessary as that hee could not returne into 
England
 without it. And for their wifes hee would himselfe seeke out some silkes or lin∣nen that might gratifie them: which while hee was choosing out of his Trunckes, the Cymeter which Captaine 
Tetú
 had giuen to our Captaine, chanced to be taken forth in 
Pedros
 sight, which hee seeing grew so much in liking thereof, that hee accounted of no∣thing else in respect of it, and preferred it before all that could be giuen him: yet imagining, that it was no lesse esteemed of our Captaine, durst not himselfe open his mouth to craue or commend it: but made one 
Francis Tucker
 to be his meane to breake his minde, pro∣mising to giue him a fine quoit of gold, which yet hee


had in store, if he would but moue our Captaine for it; and to our Captaine himselfe, hee would giue foure other great quoits, which hee had hidden, intending to haue reserued them till another voyage.


Our Captaine being accordingly moued by 
Francis Tucker,
 could haue beene content to haue made no such exchange, but yet desirous to content him, that had deserued so well, hee gaue it him with many good words, who receiued it with no little joy, affirming that if hee should giue his wife and children (which hee loued dearely) in liew of it, hee could not suffi∣ciently recompence it, (for hee would present his King with it, who hee knew would make him a great man, euen for this very guifts sake) yet in gratuity and steed of other requitall of this jewell, hee de∣sired our Captaine to accept these foure peeces of gold, as a token of his thankefulnesse to him, and a pawne of his faithfulnesse during life.


Our Captaine receiued it in most kinde sort, but tooke it not to his own benefit, but caused it to be cast into the whole aduenture, saying, if hee had not beene set forth to that place, he had not attained such a commoditie, and therefore it was just that they which bare part with him of his burthen in setting him to Sea, should enjoy the proportion of his benefit whatsoeuer at his returne.


Thus with good loue and liking wee tooke our leaue of that people, setting ouer to the Ilands of 
 whence the next day after, wee set sayle towards 
Cape Saint Anthony,
 by which wee past with a large winde: but presently being to stand for 
th'Hauana,
 wee were faine to ply to the windward some three or foure dayes: In which plying wee fortuned to take a small Barke, in which were two or three hundred


Hides, and one most necessary thing, which stood vs in great steed, 
viz.
 a Pumpe, which wee set in our Fregate: their Barke, because it was nothing fit for our seruice, our Captaine gaue them to carry them home.


And so returning to Cape Saint 
Anthony,
 and lan∣ding there wee refreshed our selues, and besides great store of Turtles egges, found by day in the 
 wee tooke two hundreth and fifty Turtles by night: wee poudred and dryed some of them, which did vs good seruice, the rest continued but a small time.


There were at this time, belonging to 
Carthagene, Nombre de Dios, Rio grand, Santa Martha, Rio de Hacha, Venta Cruz, Veragua, Nicaragua,
 the 
Honduras, Iamai∣ca &c.
 aboue two hundred Fregates, some of a hun∣dred and twenty Tunnes, other but of tenne or twelue Tunne, but the most of thirty or forty Tunne, which all had entercourse betweene 
Carthagene
 and 
Nombre de Dios,
 the most of which, during our abode in those parts wee tooke, and some of them twice or thrice each, yet neuer burnt nor suncke any, vnlesse they were made out Men of warre against vs, or layd as stales to entrappe vs. And of all the men taken in these seuerall vesselles, wee neuer offered any kinde of vio∣lence to any, after they were once come vnder our power, but either presently dismissed them in safety, or keeping them with vs some longer time, (as some of them wee did) wee alwayes prouided for their sustenance as for our selues, and secured them from the rage of the 
Symerons
 against them, till at last, the danger of their discouering where our Shippes lay being ouer past, (for which onely cause wee kept them prisoners) we set them also free.


Many strange Birds, Beastes and Fishes, besides Fruits, Trees, Plants, and the like, were seene and obserued of vs in this journey, which willingly wee pretermit as hastening to the end of our voyage, which from this Cape of Saint 
Anthony,
 wee intended to fi∣nish, by sayling the directest and speediest way home∣ward, and accordingly, euen beyond our owne expe∣ctation most happily performed.


For whereas our Captaine had purposed to touch at 
New-found land,
 and there to haue watered, which would haue beene some let vnto vs, though wee stood in great want of water, yet God Almighty so proui∣ded for vs, by giuing vs good store of raine water, that we were sufficiently furnished: and within twenty three dayes wee past from the Cape of 
Florida,
 to the Iles of 
Silley,
 and so arriued at 
Plimouth,
 on Sunday about Sermon-time, August the ninth 1573. at what time the newes of our Captaines returne brought vnto his, did so speedily passe ouer all the Church, and sur∣passe their mindes, with desire and delight to see him, that very fewe or none remained with the Preacher, all hastening to see the euidence of Gods loue and blessing towards our Gracious Queene and Countrey, by the fruite of our Captaines labour and successe.


Soli Deo gloria.


FINIS.












ERRATA.


PAge 7. lines 26. and 33. for Rause 
reade
 Ranse: as also in other pages, l. 32. for Sallop, 
read
 Shallop. p. 11. l. 2. pray, 
read
 Bay. p. 14. l. 3. sent of, 
read
 sent some. p. 17. l. 18. vtterly time, 
leaue out
 time: l. 19. 
read
 (for that time) p. 18. l. 5. 
read,
 maine care of our Captaine was r
sp. l. 35. feare 
read,
 feares. p. 19. l. 4. so he, 
read,
 he so. p. 37. l. 2. leaft all, 
read,
 left at. p. 43. l. 23. atttemed, 
read,
 attempted. p. 45. l. 19. free safety, 
read,
 free in safety. p. 48. l. 11. amongst two, 
read,
 amongst vs two. l. 16. nor, 
read,
 not. p. 50. l. 30. attache, 
read
 attached. p. 52. l. 16. or them ill, 
read,
 or giue them ill. l. 19. 
Edward,
 read, 
Ellis.
 p. 53. l. 5. 
Edward,
 read, 
Ellis.
 p 55. l. 22. Limes, 
read,
 Limons: and whereuer you finde it, 
read,
 Limons. p. 56. l. 16. as they came, 
read,
 as we came. p. 58. l. 31. ridge a, 
read,
 a ridge. p. 60. l. 11. wont put, 
read,
 wont to put. p. 67. l. 4. hickest, 
read,
 thickest. l. 12. pacte, 
reade,
 parte. l. 24. aemanded, 
read
 demanded. p. 68. l. 32. they our, 
read,
 they saw our. l. 33. thickets, 
read,
 thick
st. p. 76. l. 25. 
Peroros,
 read 
Pezor
.
 l. 3
. to their wiues, 
read,
 to goe to their wiues. p. 87. l. 25. 
R
 read, 
Rio.









