(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A08239)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 13552)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 326:3)
A translation of: Les quatre premiers livres de navigations et peregrinations orientales.
Edited by John Stell, who signs the dedication and states the book was "now printed in English at my costes & charges".
The illustrations are copied from the 1576 Antwerp edition.
Running title reads: The orientall peregrination. ..
Reproduction of the original in the Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery.
1550. The Lorde of Aramont sent Ambassadour from the king of Fraunce to Soliman Em∣perour of the Turkes.
The voiage by land from Cō∣stantinople to Ragusa.
Nauigation from Ragusa to Venice.
Iourney from Venice to the city of Blois.
The Lorde of Arramōt made gentleman or∣dinarye of the kings chamber and captain of two gallies.
The king cō∣maundeth the author of this booke to goe with the Am∣bassadour into Leuant.
The departure of the Lord of Arramont frō the court to re∣turne on hys Ambassadge in to Leuant in anno 1551.
The Ladye of Arramont re∣ceyueth the Ambassadour her husband at Auignion.

Port of Carry▪
Ingratitude mother of al vices.
Cape de Creo.
Description of the Iles Balea∣res.
Vigece saith the inhabitātes of this Ile to haue been the first inuentors of casting with the sling.
Description of the Iles pitious
Description of the Palais.
The king of Alger recei∣ueth the Am∣bassadour.
Capi-aga,
Capigis.
The Ambassa∣dour saluteth the king.
Liberalitie of the king.
Couetous na∣nation.
Conspiracie of the Turkes a∣gainst vs.
The Turkes rose in arm
Erasme ne∣phew vnto cap¦taine Coste was deliuered vnto y
Cape of Ma∣tafus.
Change of names of Al∣ger.
Furnaces fitly made for bree¦ding of chic∣kins.
Camels and oxen shod.
The Moores do ride their horses with∣without sad∣del or bridel.
VVeapons of the Moores
Manie ren
A miserable life of the chri∣stian slaues in Alger.
Pleasant Gar∣dens.
Sauo a riuer.
Tipasa an old citie.
Ferdinando king catholike constrayneth the Moores to a truce.
Selim slaine by treason.
Cape of Te∣dele.
Strange myce.
Teddel.
Borasque of Barbary moste dangerous for saylers.
Porte of Bone.
Bone ancient∣ly Hippon.
Charl. the v. builded there a castel.
The Spaniards driuen out of the castle.
Merdez a peo∣ple.
A church buil∣ded by S. Aug.
Cape de Rose.
Galite and Symboles.
A flying fishe.
Newes sent to the Ambassa∣dour.
Pantalaree an∣ciētly Paconie.
Oile made of Stinco.
The womē of this countrie are very good Swimmers.
Roade of S. Paule.
Goze sacca∣ged.
6300. priso∣ners taken.
A pitiful histo∣ry.
A strange cru∣eltie.
The zeale of king Henry to the religion of Malta.
The ambassa∣dor consenteth to go too Tri∣poli, too per∣swade the Bas∣sha to leaue the siege thereof.
Malta anciētly called Melita.
The castle of the grand ma∣ster verye strong.
Many whores in Malta,
Sommer cloa∣thing of the women of Malta.
Description of the citie.
Eeles with sharp teeth.
Sixtie villages in Malta.
Port of Saint Peter.
Acts. 28.
Cape of march Siroch.
Ignorance in Pilots is most dangerous.
Cape of Ta∣iure.
The Ambassa∣dour saluteth the Bascha,
The Bascha his answere founded on the periury of the knights of the religion.
A hardie en∣terprise of cer∣taine knights.
Tripoli.
Extortions of officers: cause sometimes the subiects to re∣uolt from their soueraine.
An heremit constrained to take gouern∣ment vpō him
Charles the
Maner to serch the christian slaues that come to bee sold.
Raiz are cap∣taines of the gallies.
Importunitie of the Argosin
Cōditions pro¦poned by the assieged.
Vaillier vpon the Baschas word goeth to him.
Vallier sent to the gallies with irons vp∣on him.
A good & wise answere of Vaillier.
Faith and pro∣mise broken
The ambassa∣dors care for the Prisoners.
An Arch try∣umphal.
Munitions of warre resting within the ca∣stle.
A cruel sacry∣fice vppon the person of Iohn Chabas a gun∣ner of the Ca∣stle.
The maister & two gallie
Ingratitude of the grand mai∣ster.
Vaillier put vnder arest▪
The Iles of Zefalonia and Zante.
A gift agreea∣ble and neces∣sary.
The yle of Sa∣pience.
Cape Malee or S. Ange verye dangerous for Saylers.
The yle of Ce∣rigo.
Port S. Nicho∣las.
The castle Capsali.
Curtesie of the Proueditor of Cerigo.
Cerigo.
Error of Pliny & Strabon.
Wild asses ha∣uinge in theyr head a stone of great vertue.
Ruine of the temple of Ve∣nus.
The sta∣ture and effig
Foundations of the castle of Menalaus.
Bathes cut in rockes.
Our comming to Chio.
An oration made to the Ambassadour.
Pli. lib. 5. c. 30.
Mount S. He∣lie.
Book 14. C. 15.
Moūt Pelenee.
Port of Car∣damille.
S. George.
Lithilimione.
Cape Mastico of the aunci∣ents, Phane promoutoriū.
The maner of gatheryng of mastick.
The price and value of the mastick.
The Geneuoi∣ses do pay vnto the Turke 10000. crowne
The Burse where the mer¦chants doc as∣semble.
Prase of the women of Chio.
Apparrel of the women of Chio.
A sumptuous church of the Grecians.

Foure goue
Twelue coun∣cellers.
Officers for victuals.
4. Officers for the ouerseeing of the buil∣dings.
Twoo Maho∣mies haue the gouernment of the mastic.
Tame partri∣ges which are led & brought to and fro the fieldes.
A tribute whi∣che the wid∣dowes of Chio that wil not marry must pay
The whoore
Io tragicque.
Theopompe the Historian.
Theocrite the Sophist.
Homere.
Bubal and An¦therme bre∣thren.
Hipponax the Poet Iambi∣que.
Ile of S. Steph.
Port Delphin. Cardemille.
In his descrip∣tio of Asia the lesse. chap. 74.
Cape of Les∣bos.
Cairadni and Ariadne bre∣thren.
Metelin vnder the puissance of the Turke.
Promontorie Sige
The fountayn Ephere.
Temple of Neptune.
The riuer Sca∣
Mesaulon.

Two castles.

A streame very dangerous.
Exaction of those of the gard vpon the passingers.
Maitō a great village.
VVindemilles with x. wings.
Tributes or head mony.
Macrotique.
Byzante or Rodesto.
Goulph Se∣limbrie.
Casal S. Ste∣phano.
Iadicula,
Calcedon in Natolie.
Our arriuall at Cōstātinople.
The Ambassa∣dor being arri∣ued goeth too salute the Ro∣stan Bascha.
Byzance other∣wise Constan∣tinople.
Description of Constantino∣ple.
Calcedon.
Phane.
The time of the building & repayring of Constantino∣ple.
Megariās▪ why they are called blind.
Calcedō buil∣ded by the Me∣garians.
Ligos.
Diodore and Polibe contra∣ry to Pliny.
Byzance ruy∣ned by Seue∣rus the Empe∣rour.
Troy begun to be new buyl∣ded.
A signe gyuen by Eagles.
The palladi
Mehemet the 2. spoyleth and saccageth Cō∣stantinople.
Constantine the emperour killed in a presse.
The emperesse, with her daughters, and maydens, raui∣shed, defloured, & after cut in peeces.
The temple of S Sophia made a Stewes.
A marueilous prouidence.
Twelue king∣domes & 200▪ cities by the Turks taken from the chri∣stians.
A Librarie of 120000. vo∣lumes.
The stature of of a dragon 120. foot long
Hippodrome.
The sepulchre of Constantin mad of Por∣phyre.
Sarail of Sultane wyfe to the great Turke.
the Sarayl for the yonge Slaues.
The court vvhere the bas¦chas 3. times in the week doe giue audience vnto all com∣mers.
the porters of this Sarail are Eunuches.
The turke hath aboue 200 cōcubin
Iustinian foū∣der of the
The Turks o
Mosques in Constantin

Bathes publik
The Mahuma¦tised maie not enter into the Mosques with out first being washed.
Herod.
Cleander.
The vsage of the baths hath byn anciently obserued of the Scithes.
Good cheap
Slaues sold as horses are in markets.
The Friday is vnto the Turkes as the Sunday to the Christians, & the Saterday to the Iewes.
Pera Galata, Cornubizance
Pera signifieth beyond.
Description of Pera.
Pera inhabited by three sun∣dry nations.
An Arcenal of 100▪ Arches.
Artillery got∣ten of the chri∣stians.
Sarail of the Azamoglans.
Churchyards.
The Ambassa¦dors of France Venice & Flo∣rance, were lodged in Pe∣ra.
The apparel of the Graecians and women of Pera is ex∣ceeding rich.
Excesse of ap∣parrell procureth vnshame∣fastnesse.
Of 3. male children one leuied for tri∣bute.
Compassion ought to bee had of these christiā slaues.
200. Cōmissa¦ries ordained for leuying of these poore children.
Snow preser∣ued al the som¦mer long.
VVages and entertainment of the Azamo∣glans.
Tambora like vnto a Cittern.
The Azamo∣glans doe be∣come deadlye enemies to the Christiās and their owne parents.
Vnnatural in∣gratitude of Rostan Bascha
Georg Castri∣ot called Scan∣derbegus being brought vp as an Aza∣moglan reuol∣teth against the great Turk and setteth his Cuntrie at libertie
Vnhappie brin¦ging vp Pas∣seth nature
The order of the Ianissaries instituted by Amarat the 7. Emperour of the Turkes.
Armure of th
Armure of the Ianissaries.
Distribution of the order of the Ianissa∣ries.
Wages of the Ianissaries.
The spoile of the Marchant Iewes and chri¦stians giuen vn¦to the Ianissa∣ries by the new Emperour
Aduertisment for all princes
The Ianissaries vnmarryed in time of peace do keep watch in Constanti∣nople.
Euery Ambas∣sadour hath 6. or 8. Ianissa∣ties for his gard.
A commenda∣ble order for intertaining of the old Ianis∣saries.
Chechaia or Protegero.
The Ianissa∣rie Aga doth somtimes mar∣ry the daugh∣ters or sisters of the greate Turke.
300. Solaqu
To turne the back toward the great Tur
Sugar candie good for fain
They runne backwards on the way.
The ancient Peiz wer shod like horse
Peichz weare a bal in their mouthes like horses
There are no
Pleuianders are Moores, Indians, or tartares.
VVhy wrest∣lers do anoint themselues.
many wrest∣lers in Alger
Inuention of wrestling.
4. Officers se
Great differēce betwixte the Turks & vs in dressing of meate.
Meates of the Turkes.
Water is the moste commō drinke of the Turkis
Opium wyll make them drunke.
Iewes excellēt in phisicke & why
Amon
Ten Phisitions for the com∣mons of the Sarail.
Voinuchz neighbors vn∣to Bo
A Baggepype.
2. cadilisqu
Vages of the Cadilesquers.
Apparrell and
4 orders of
VVhy the G
abstinence & chastitie of the Calenders.
Apparrell of the Calender
The first mar∣tir of these re∣ligious.
Apparrell of the Deruis.
Spoiles vnder pretext of reli∣gion.
Matslach an hearbe of pe∣stilent opera∣tion.
a foolish teme¦ritie of one of these Religious.
Apparel of the Torlaquis.
Beastlinesse of these Torla∣quis.
The Torla∣quis do vse al∣so of the Mats¦lach.
Mahomets kinsemen doe weare a gar∣ment & Tul∣bant seueral to be known frō others.
VVine forbid∣den by Mah
opinion of the Persians to∣wardes their Kinge.
Arabia parted into three pro∣uinces.
The smell of mirrhe vn∣wholesome,
Dellys.
Cilicia of Ci∣lix.
A caue very strange.
Iewes great vsurers.
Tanais a god∣desse worship∣ped by the Ar∣menians.
A strange fa∣shion of con∣tracting mar∣riage,
A generall de∣scription of Grecia.
Phalangue.
Heresie of Donatus.