The heroicall aduentures of the knight of the sea comprised in the most famous and renowned historie of the illustrious & excellently accomplished Prince Oceander, grand-sonne to the mightie and magnanimous Claranax, Emperour of Constantinople, and the Empresse Basilia; and sonne vnto the incomparable Olbiocles Prince of Grecia, by the beautious Princesse Almidiana, daughter vnto the puissant King Rubaldo of Hungaria. Wherin is described ... his owne losse, strange preseruing, education, and fostering (by Kanyra Q. of Carthage) his knighthood, admirable exploytes, and vnmatchable atchieuementes, graced with the most glorious conquestes ouer knights, gyants, monsters, enchauntments, realmes, and dominions; with his ... combating, affecting, and pursuites in his loue towardes the rarely embellished princesse and lady-knight Phianora, daughter vnto the inuinicible Argamont King of England, by the gracious Princesse Clarecinda.
Approx. 595 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 127 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A08441




STC 18763



ESTC S110204





99845796




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The heroicall aduentures of the knight of the sea comprised in the most famous and renowned historie of the illustrious & excellently accomplished Prince Oceander, grand-sonne to the mightie and magnanimous Claranax, Emperour of Constantinople, and the Empresse Basilia; and sonne vnto the incomparable Olbiocles Prince of Grecia, by the beautious Princesse Almidiana, daughter vnto the puissant King Rubaldo of Hungaria. Wherin is described ... his owne losse, strange preseruing, education, and fostering (by Kanyra Q. of Carthage) his knighthood, admirable exploytes, and vnmatchable atchieuementes, graced with the most glorious conquestes ouer knights, gyants, monsters, enchauntments, realmes, and dominions; with his ... combating, affecting, and pursuites in his loue towardes the rarely embellished princesse and lady-knight Phianora, daughter vnto the inuinicible Argamont King of England, by the gracious Princesse Clarecinda.
[8], 239, [1] p.   


At London :


Printed [by R. Bradock] for William Leake,


1600.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






18763


S110204


99845796


10718














THE HEROICALL ADVENTVRES OF THE 
KNIGHT OF THE SEA
 COMPRISED IN THE MOST FA∣mous and renowned Historie of the Illustrious 
& Excellently accomplished Prince OCEANDER,
 Grand-sonne to the mightie and Magnanimous 
CLA∣RANAX,
 Emperour of 
Constantinople,
 and the 
Em∣presse
 Basilia; 
and sonne vnto the incomparable
 Olbiocles 
Prince of
 Grecia, 
by the
 beautious Princesse 
Almidiana,
 daugh∣ter vnto the puissant King 
Rubaldo of
 Hungaria.


WHERIN IS DESCRIBED HIS 
PA∣rents misfortunes, and captiuities, his owne losse, strange
 pre∣seruing, education, and fostering (by 
Kanyra
 Q. of 
Carthage
) his 
Knighthood, admirable exploytes, and vnmatchable atchieuementes, graced with the most glorious conquestes ouer Knights, Gyants,
 Mon∣sters, Enchauntments, Realmes, and Dominions; with his fortunate comming to the knowledge of his Parents in the greatest extrea∣mitie of their captiuitie; his combating, affecting, and pursuites in his loue towardes the rarely embel∣lished Princesse and Lady-knight 
Phia∣nora,
 daughter vnto the inuincible 
Argamont
 King of 
England,
 by the gracious Princesse 
Clarecinda.


AT LONDON ¶ 
Printed for
 William Leake, 
1600.










Fauourable Readers whosoeuer


I
N the exposing of this Historie vnto you, I thought it best to deale with you, after the manner of that puissant Kinge of the 
Lacedemonians, Agesilaus:
 who being cho∣sen (according to the custome at such friendly meetings) by drawing of lottes, the maister of the banquet (whose office was to prescribe how much each guest should drinke) and be∣ing asked of his Sellerer, how much wine he should set before each of them? If there be store (saith hee) giue euery one as much as he requireth: if there be but little, diuide it equally amongst them; to the ende there should neither be want of wine, nor any man enforced to drinke more then hee thought sufficiently conuenient: So I, tracing his steps herein, wish no man to spend his pretious time in reading this my historie, any longer, then it standeth with his owne liking: neyther will I discourage any one, that taketh liking therof, frō the cōtinuall reading; promising to him that desireth most, inough: and leauing to them, that at the most esteeme the least for i∣nough, leaue inough to vse therein their owne discretions. As for those who hauing once perused the same, and are desirous once more to renewe some especiall matters: as also for thē, whose waightier affaires will not lend leasure to the reading of so long an Historie, I haue set downe my Chapters so, as some of them are almost full histories; at least, amongst other straunge aduentures, containe sundry Tragicall and lamenta∣ble relations: The names wherof you may finde in the table. What faultes are eyther committed for want of good heede in the writing, or haste in the reviewing, it resteth in thy pati∣ence to pardon it: if in the historie it selfe, it remaineth to my power to perfect it. Which, till my leasure shall giue me bet∣ter leaue to performe, I leaue you to the perusing of what al∣ready is proposed.








The Table of the Chapters.




HOw after great warrs, the Em∣perours sonne of 
Constantino∣nople
 was espoused to the beau¦tious Princesse of 
Hungarie:
 & how 
Olbiocles
 combated the Knight of the Tigre, who wrongfully challen∣ged the espoused Princesse for his la∣die: and by what meanes the knight of the Tigre escaped death. Chap. 1.


The extreame crueltie the Knight of the tigre inflicted on 
Allua
 the Da∣mosell of the Round-Iland: & how he caused the Dwarfe 
Toydell
 to cast himselfe headlong into the Sea. Chap. 2.


How the Princesse 
Almidiana,
 in the absence of her husbād the prince 
Olbiocles,
 was surprised, with the prin∣cesse 
Eristama,
 and all her Ladies, by the sterne Gyant 
Ortolomorgantell:
 And how the princesse 
Almidiana
 was deliuered of a most beautifull in∣fant: and to what exigents she was driuen, to saue it from destruction, Chap. 3.


How 
Olbiocles, Alfortio
 and 
Orthi∣sius,
 with other Knightes, put them∣selues in enquest after the Gyant 
Or∣tolomorgantell,
 to rescue the enthral∣led Princesses: and how 
Olbiocles
 ar∣riued on the Ilande of 
Acconumbo:
 where, in reuenge of the damose
 
Al∣luas
 death, he fought with 
Treglador,
 the knight of the Tigre: And of the exceeding ioy the Queene of 
Car∣thage
 made, for the young sea-borne babe, her brother 
Artimagus
 sēt vnto her. Chap. 4.


How after 
Orthisius
 and 
Alphortio
 had put themselues to sea, they arri∣ued at the Isle of 
Sycily;
 where they encountred with a strange aduēture of 
Oezima
 the dutchesse of 
Siracusa;
 whome they deliuered from the ter∣ror of death, to which she was betray¦ed by the treacherous dealing of her wicked Aunt 
Atryelph:
 who by the cōsent of the Cittizens, was put to a most cruell death. Chap. 5.


How 
Oceander,
 excited by the la∣mentable discourse of his foster-mo∣ther the 
Carthaginiā
 Queene 
Kanyra,
 vndertooke to reuenge the deathes of her husband 
Asdrey,
 and her son 
Sygandez,
 on the tyrant 
Marcymodez:
 And how he valiantly assaulted, and slewe the Duke of 
Thaebes,
 yōger bro∣ther to 
Marcimodez,
 and hung his carcasse ouer the walles of the castle 
Carzar,
 to the terrour of his enimies. Chap 6.


How the Gentleman of the sea at∣tempted the aduēture of the enchaū∣ted shield, which he atchieued. And how he was presented by a Dwarfe, with a most gorgeous coate-armour frō the wise 
Artimagus:
 in the which he receiued the order of knighthood of 
Marcimodes,
 whose nephew 
Nigra∣sto
 he combated: for whose death, hee left all the campe in an vproare. Chap. 7.


Of the knight of the Tigres arri∣uall, at the Hermit 
Calander
 his Cell: and the comfort the ould father yeel∣ded him, by the relating of his owne misfortunes: Howbeit 
Troglador
 en∣raged with the remembrance of his cōmitted wickednesse, with his owne hands ended his life, in the Hermits groue. And how 
Olbiocles,
 finding him dead, deliuered his bodie vnto 
Calander,
 to be buried: Of whom hee receiued straunge directions cōcer∣ning his enquest. Chap. 8.


The assault of 
Marcimodes
 against the Castle of the Queene 
Kanyra,
 & of the cruell combate betwixt him & the knight of the sea; and how by 
Marcimodez
 treason hee was caught captiue, and was redeemed by the valour of the straunge Knight of the Fiue swords; by whose aideance, 
O∣ceander


 slewe 
Marcimodez,
 and dis∣comfited his whole armie. Chap. 9.


How 
Oceander
 departed frō 
Car∣thage,
 with 
Medion
 (knight of the fiue swords) to the enchaunted Castle of 
Bryarostez:
 where he conquered the Gyant, and dissolued the inchaunt∣ment of the Sorceresse 
Mardegua;
 whereby hee recouered the valiaunt prince 
Ptoladine
 to his senses, and finished the aduenture of the Foun∣taine &c. Chap. 10.


How the princes of 
Fraunce
 and 
Spaine
 arriued at the kingdome of 
Volcania,
 where they combated the vsurper 
Terindantes:
 who perceiuing he should be vanquished, murthered the imprisoned Queene 
Mabina:
 and desperately throwing himselfe head∣long from the Tower of the palace, being not altogether dead, was after∣wardes put to a most cruell torture. Chap. 11


How the knight of the Sea, accō∣panied with 
Briarostez
 and 
Medion,
 in the way as they trauailed to the fiery caue of the Egyptian princesse 
Cyafa,
 encountred with xi. Knightes, who would haue forced a Lady: whome they ouerthrewe. And how 
Ocean∣der
 freed the Infant of 
Egypt
 from her fierie prison, and entred com∣bate with the Graund 
Cardigan,
 for the release of the Knight with the Goulden shield: who, at the enchaū∣tresse 
Mardeguas
 entreaties, after∣ward combated 
Oceander;
 & by what accidēt they were parted. Chap. 12.


How 
Norin
 and 
Nigramounde,
 the sonnes of the Gyant 
Cardigan,
 ouer∣tooke the Infant 
Cyafa:
 whome, in re∣uenge of their fathers death, they woulde haue murthered; but were with shame repulsed by 
Bryarostez
 & 
Medion.
 And how the Knight of the sea arriued on the Iland of the in∣chauntresse 
Malagda.
 Chap 13.


The arriuall of 
Olbiocles
 on the I∣land of 
Malagda,
 where he remained of a long time enchaunted. How hee was deliuered from his transmutati∣on by the knight of the sea, to whome he related his vnfortunate metamor∣phosing: And how he supposed 
Oce∣ander
 to be drowned in the boate of the inchauntresse. Chap. 14.


How 
Phianora,
 the princesse of 
Eng∣land,
 arriued at the cittie of 
Constan∣tinople,
 where shee founde the Empe∣ror 
Claranax
 his Court in exceeding sadnes. And how she obtained of the Emperour to proclaime a lust for the pretious mantle of 
Mardegua:
 her conquest ouer many Knightes, and dangerous combate with the knight of the sea. Chap. 15.


Oceanders
 deliuery from the in∣chaunted mantle of 
Mardegua,
 by the arriuall of 
Artimagus
 his messenger: with whome, the Knight of the Sea departed vnto the wise mans Castle: of the death of 
Artimagus,
 and the dolefull mourning of the 
Carthagini∣ans
 for him. Chap. 16.


Howe 
Phianora,
 the Lady-knight, freed the knight of the Leoparde, frō the wonderfull enchauntments of the Gyantesse 
Gola,
 & her two Sonns 
Norin
 and 
Nigramound:
 with whom she departed vnto the Rocky-Iland. Chap. 17.


The terrible and perilous com∣bate, that 
Olb
ocles
 and the knighte of the Goulden shield had with 
Orto∣lomorgantell,
 the gyant of the Rocky-Iland: their distresse by their diuelish aduersarie: and their vnexpected re∣scue by the valorous knight of the Sea; by whose aide they slew the gy∣ant, and released the distressed prin∣cesses 
A
midiama
 & 
Eristama,
 cha. 18.


Of the daungerous conflict be∣twixt

 the Knight of the Sea, and the barbarous Pirate 
Tolurino,
 brother vnto 
Marcimodez.
 His perill, and con∣ditionall yielding to the fleete of 
Tu∣nis
 and 
Tangur,
 as champion of the 
Alcharon
 against the christian Empe∣rour of Grecia. And of the originall of the hatred betweene 
Tomarin
 and the Emperor 
Claranax,
 for the death of 
Tumanio.
 Chap. 19.


How 
Olbiocles, Phianora, Almidia∣na
 and 
Eristama
 landed on the Ilād of the Hermite 
Calander.
 Frō whom they carried tydinges to the Empe∣rour 
Claranax
 of the purpose & pro∣ceeding of the Kings of 
Tunis
 & 
Tan∣gur.
 And of the exceeding ioy the Emperour, and the Empresse 
Basilia
 made, for the recouerie of their long absented children, and their politick praeparatiō for the resistance of their approaching Pagan enemies. cha. 20.


How 
Tomerin
 of 
Tunis, Tangu
 of 
Tangur,
 the knight of the Sea, and 
Tolurnio,
 with the residue of the Pa∣gan army, accoasted the Isle of 
Sicily:
 where they slewe the Duke of 
Hybia,
 and tooke 
Orthisius
 and 
Alfortio
 pri∣soners, and enforced King 
Dionine
 & all his subiects, to forsake christiani∣tie, & become 
Mahometans.
 Cha. 21.


How the Pagans, arriuing at 
Con∣stantinople,
 sent Embassadors to sum∣mon the Emperor to personall appea∣rance, before the Potentates of 
Tu∣nis.
 And how the knight of the Sea slewe the young prince of 
Sparta,
 for his stout reply in the behalfe of the Emperour his maister. and of 
Clara∣nax
 his resolute answere to the mes∣sage of the king of 
Tunis.
 Chap. 22.


Of the great battaile betweene the christians and the Pagans, cut off by the comming of the night, begun a∣fresh the next day wherein the Gre∣cians went with the worse: & their reuenge wrought by the slaughter of 17000 
Barbarians
 And how the Pa∣gan Princes, enraged, concluded the speedie confusiō of all christendom. Chap. 23.


How the christians were vtterly vāquished of the 
Africās,
 the citie ta∣ke
 by the Infidel
; the Emperour, Empresse, the Kinges of 
Hungarie
 & 
Bohemia,
 and all the estates of 
Greece
 put in strong prisons and manacled &c. And how by the sodaine arriuall of the wise 
Magartez, Oceander
 knew himselfe to bee a christian. Cha. 24.




The ende of the Table to 
this first Part.








A Table of such tragique Relations,
 as are in diuerse places occurrent, 
being rather occasions of aduen∣tures
 for varietie, then altoge∣ther of the Essence of the 
Historie.




1
 The tragicke tale of 
Allua
 and the Knight of the Tigre. pag. 
9.


2 Curioes
 Rustick to 
Olbiocles.
 pag. 
26.


3
 The miseries of 
Oezima
 Dutchesse of 
Siracusa.
 pag. 
48.


4
 The lamentable Tragedie of 
Asdrey
 and his Sonne 
Sigandez,
 murthered by 
Marcimodez
- pag. 
53.


5
 The storie of 
Ericlea
 and 
Tantanez,
 Gouernour of 
Memphis.
 pag. 
64.


6
 The pitifull Historie of 
Basileon
 and 
Albinoe.
 pag. 
79.


7
 Of 
Ptoladine
 and the Infant 
Cyafa.
 pag. 
97.


8
 The Tragedie of 
Terindantes,
 and the Queene of 
Volcania.
 pag. 
109.


9
 Of 
Zodalin
 and 
Lydia.
 pag. 
117,
 & 
118.
















❧ THE FAMOVS HYS∣TORY OF THE HEROI∣call aduentures of 
Oceander
 Prince 
of Graecia (Grandsonne vnto the
 mightie Emperour 
Claranax
 of 
Con∣stantinople, and Sonne vnto the excellently
 ac∣complished Prince 
Olbiocles
 and the incom∣parable Princesse the faire ALMIDIANA of 
Hungary
) the Knight of the SEA.




CHAPTER. 1.




¶ How after great warres, the Emperours sonne of 
Con∣stantinople,
 was married to the beauteous Princesse of 
Hun∣garie:
 And how he combatted the Knight of the 
Tygre,
 and vanquished him, who wrongfully chalenged the es∣poused Princesse for his betroathed Lady. And by what accident the Knight of the 
Tygre
 escaped death.




A
S soone as the bashfull mi∣stresse of the morning, from the windowes of the East (mounted in her golden Char∣riot) had sent forth her radiant blushes to illuminate the dark∣some foreheade of night-sha∣dowed 
Cosmos:
 The illustri∣ous Prince of 
Graecia, Olbio∣cles,
 being alreadie spedde of his pretious prize, the inua∣luable Princesse 
Almidiana;
 poasted with all the speede pos∣sibly hee could, from the vnsuspecting Court of 
Rubaldo.
 And taking his troublesome iourney with most speedy cele∣ritie

 from his pursuing enimies, within fower or fiue daies hee attained the vttermost boundes of 
Hungaria.
 From whence with great ioye entering into the confines of the 
Grecian
 Territories, hee leasurely shaped the latter part of his trauaile towards the famous citie of 
Constantinople:
 where arriuing, hee remained in secret in an acquainted friends howse, w
t
 his most beautious sister (for so he termed her for that season) the admired princesse 
Almidiana.
 Who attyring themselues in vnknowne abillimenrs, trauersed vp and downe the streetes to their good contentment; vntill such time as 
Olbiocles
 page, 
Curio,
 hauing followed a great concourse of people to the Emperours palace; brought ti∣dings that 
Rubaldo,
 king of 
Hungary,
 had by his Embassa∣doures proclamed open warre against the whole Empire of 
Greece,
 in regard of the dishonour offered vnto him, by the stealth of his daughter 
Almidiana
 from his Court, by you my Lord 
Olbiocles,
 quoth hee. But what answere (said 
Olbio∣cles
) did the Emperour my father returne them? Answered y
e
 page: He denyed any such fact to be done by his consent: and for his excuse (being vrged) hee proffered to defend his innocencie by dint of Sworde. And now on both partes they are making heade, to inuade each others Ter∣ritories.


These newes strooke the princesse 
Almidiana
 to the very hearte; so as her colour chaunging, shee was almost readie to swoune, for the sorrow that she endured: Insomuch as at length, enforced by the extremitie of her griefe, she brast forth into these passions. 


Wretched 
Almidiana,
 how art thou tos∣sed in the seas of endlesse trouble! and vexed with the tor∣ments of eternall anguishe! hauing no remedy to helpe thy misery, nor no Balsame to salue thy misfortune. First, by reason of my loyall loue, did I forsake my kingdome to enioy an husband: And now (miserable that I am) hauing obtai∣ned, I dare not be acknowne I doe affect him. And thus (vn∣able to preuent it) shall I see my deare deare loue, the causer of my Fathers, Countries, and husbands harmes: & by their vntimely hurts, mine owne finall destruction: which I can not eschew but by danger; which I cannot conceale but to

 my disparagement: which (gratious heauens) I would only might extend to me; thereby that I alone might wofully bewaile such happened misfortunes.


But (foolish woman that I am) why doe I bewaile, what cannot be holpen! with the vnwise Phisition, seeking in vaine to salue that sore, that cānot be recured. What say I? lament vnhappie 
Almidiana;
 and weepe at thy mischaunce. Nay rather be patient, and rebuke not thy misfortunes. God hath not created thee to be confounded: neither made thee a Princesse, to be alwaies punished: hope well therefore (poore Princesse) and if this happe be vnluckie, blame not thy fate, but thy follie, that hath made thee to aduenture so farre beyond the limited boundes of thy obedience; as to make thee frighted by thy fathers frowne: thereby be∣comming the sad subiect to the turning wheele of For∣tune.


In these lamentations continued the wofull princesse of 
Hungarie,
 continually receiuing hopefull comfort from her deare 
Olbiocles;
 vntill such time as (open warres being pro∣clamed on either parties, betweene the 
Grecians
 and 
Hunga∣rians
) both the Emperour 
Claranax,
 and 
Rubaldo
 had brought their armies to the incounter: wherein many wor∣thy knights, on either side, by the deadly furie of their fierce opponents being most cruelly done to death, the Ge∣neralles at length pitying the wonderfull destruction of their innocent subiectes, incited each other to try the right of their quarrelles in a single combat: whereto the King 
Rubaldo
 was the first in moouing of the que∣stion.


Mightie Emperour of 
Constantinople
 (for though thou bee my enemie, I will not abase thy tytle) since it hath beene our vnhappie fortune,
 to contende in this vn∣kinde enmitie together, to the endangering of both our Diademes; let our indignation reach no more to the ru∣ine of our subiectes: but since for our cause is growne this contention, let our owne armes defende our iustice; that thereby none but the offenders might make satis∣faction for his offence, with his bloude. To which the

 king of 
Hungaries
 wordes, the Emperour thus replyed; Pu∣isant King of 
Hungaria,
 although it becomes not the Em∣perour of 
Constantinople
 in his owne territories, to abase my selfe to any inferiour P
tentate; yet since your request is so reasonable and profitable for both our Countryes, I condescende to combat thee: with a full hope (or euer it be long) to make thee confesse the treason, with too deare a re∣pulse for thy enterprised inuasion.


Now are the souldiours on both sides, barred out by strong fastened launces from a prepared place, purposely chosen out by most skilfull champions, for the two chiefe∣taines to fight in which being finished; the king of 
Hunga∣ry
 entered as chalenger on a milkewhite palphrey,
 with trappings of the same coloured veluet, embossed about with siluer barres: prauncing vp and downe the listes with a wrathfull minde, expecting y
e
 comming of his opponent: who presently approached the listes, on a dapple-gray cour∣ser, clad in rich caparisons of tissue; adorned with mightie hosses of the refined gould of 
Ophir;
 who, putting his Launce in the rest, gaue forth to encounter with his fierce 
Hungarian
 aduersarie. Who assaulted each other so furiously, as both their launces broken vpon their helmets; they were borne out of their saddles, and both of them sent headlong to measure out their lengthes vpon the grounde. But nothing amased at their falles, they rose vp lightly, & vnsheathing their keene courtelaxes, they ganne speedily to prepare themselues to their foot encounter. But 
Olbio∣cles,
 at length fearing the heauie chaunce of warre between such noble potentates; hauing with him his beauteous 
Al∣midiana,
 with great celeritie possed vnto the combat; see∣ing so fit an oportunitie; stepped in betweene the menacing Potentates; and shewing his naked brest, began in this wise to allay the furie of the inraged Combattants.


Here, here (most mightie Princes) in this breste of mine sheathe those keene instruments of your anger; For I alone am the causer of this contention; hauing enfired your prince∣ly hearts with rage, and prouoked your vnkinde displea∣sures; against you. Be ye therefore reuenged on me (deare

 Princes) or else for my sake lay away these armes; vpon whose causage you haue leauied them; that either I may liue in your affections, or make your selues the actors of my afflictions: that if my tongue cannot begge full pardon for my offence, yet my heart blood being shed by you for the pro∣fit of the common wealth, might at length purchace some fewe floudes of teares to bewaile my vnhappinesse. Speake 
Rubaldo;
 say deare 
Claranax;
 I am 
Olbiocles,
 shall 
Olbio∣cles
 die? Beholde 
Almidiana,
 shall 
Almidiana
 die? Wee are your vnfortunate children; deare parents, shall wee dye?


Herewith he finished his speach with sighes; and as well the good Emperour, as 
Rubaldo,
 vnable to refraine from weeping, let fall their swordes and stoode amazedly gazing vpon their submissiue children; with sorrowfull soules, cra∣uing their reinstalment in their absented fatherly fa∣uours. Which wofull sight when y
e
 attending souldiers be∣held, they all fell downe vpon their knees; with one voice praying mercy, for the wofull princesse, whose incessant ef∣fusion of teares from their eyes fountaines,
 declared the a∣bundance of their hearts sorrow. Wherewith the furie of the offended parents being at last mollified; they were a∣gaine most louingly reconciled vnto one another, and the match betweene the two princes, being concluded vpon; with all speede possible their mariage was in most sumptu∣ous order celebrated. In the time of whose enduring, to de∣clare what knightly Iustes, tiltes, tournaments, what royall brauery in feasting, infinitie of pleasurable pastimes were enacted, would not onely be tedious to the reading: but also superfluous for the recitall:
 wherfore to following acci∣dents wee will apply vs.


The marriage rites being in this sort solemnized; in the very middest of their chiefest pleasure (whilest the Emperor 
Claranax
 with the Empresse 
Basilia,
 in company of a num∣ber of other estates, and knights of 
Graecia,
 and 
Hungary,
 were recreating themselues in the Palace garden) newes was brought vnto the Emperours highnesse, of the arriuall of a certaine knight, with the deuice of a 
Tigre
 on his shield;

 being a knight of a mightie making, and of most proud car∣riage, armed in compleat harnesse of a sable colour, fitting his minds contentment, who came vnto 
Constantinople,
 to defie the Prince 
Olbiocles,
 in defence of his rightful interest that he had to the late espoused princesse 
Almidiana:
 whom he chalenged for his true betrothed wife; and in defence of his challenge, he offered to maintaine his iustice by force of armes, agaynst whom soeuer durst to enter combate in the Prince 
Olbiocles
 behalfe.
 The good Emperour hea∣ring the knight of the 
Tygres
 so insolent presumption, waxed blanke for anger, whereby the knight remained vnanswe∣red for a long space; vntill such time as the prince of 
Spaine Alfortio,
 in the roome of the Prince 
Olbiocles
 (who a little before was ridden on hunting) gaue him this pettie morsell to stay his enraged stomacke.


Thinke not vntutored knight of the 
Tygre,
 that thy bare boasting and threatning braues, shall in regarde of the maintenance of so iust a quarrell, driue the meanest knight in the Emperours Court to his trumpes, or make any of vs feare thy manlinesse; whose manhoode wee haue neuer experienced. By thy stately gate, and comely accomplish∣ments, thou seemest to bee a valiaunt knight; and yet be∣leeue mee, were you valiaunter then you are, he were wor∣thie the name of a cowarde, that should stande in doubt of your force, before he had made tryall of your furie. In which regard (by the Emperours permission) I here, in the name of the Prince 
Olbiocles,
 pronounce the vniustnesse of your challenge, avowing to defende his right hee hath, vnto the Princesse 
Almidiana,
 in armes agaynst thee vn∣vnto the death. Haste thee then (replyed the straunge knight) vnto the combat; that or euer an hower bee at an ende, I may abate thy foolish hardinesse, by thy miserable death.


The consent of the Emperor herein obtained, they present∣ly departed from the hall; the one to the place appoynted for combats; the other to arme himselfe, for defence of the prince 
Olbiocles
 right. Who hauing by this time heard of the knights presumption, he left of his sport, and gan presently

 returne to the citie; where hauing armed himselfe in vn∣knowne armor, arriued at the lists, as 
Alfortio
 was ready to enter: whom beckning aside, he entred the lists and prepared himself to answere the threatned obiection of his aduersary: Who hauing set his speare in the rest, spurred forth so fiersly against 
Olbiocles,
 as breaking his staffe on his shield he pas¦sed by with as good a guerdon; being wounded a little in the left shoulder. Wherwith nothing at al agréeued, he returned vpon the valiant Greeke, with his sword in his hand, deter∣mining to requite his former foile, with a treble damage, on the helme of his aduersarie: who I warrant you entertained him so valiantly, as hauing cleft each others shield, & bruised their armours in many places; in that the fight had almost continued an whole houre, they began both for to be wearie; but especially the knight of the 
Tygre;
 who by reason of his woūds receiued in diuerse places, was scarcely able to stand: which the 
Grecian
 prince perceiuing, hee vtterly denied all time of resting; but rather more fiercely laying load vpon his enemie, he enforced him many times to stagger, in such sort, as ha
 not a youg Damzell (attended on by a dwarfe) come speedily vnto his rescue,
 
Olbiocles
 had smitten his head from his shoulders: but euen as he was vnlacing of his helmet, the Damzell kneeled downe before him, with showers of pear∣led teares trickling from her eyes, most instantly begging his liues pardon.


Faire 
Grecian
 Prince (she said) if euer mercie did har∣bour in thy knightly breast; or thy mollifiable heart can relent at the pitiful intreatie of a Damzel, then be now most gently moued vnto compassion; and intimated by my wofull prayers, be gracious vnto thy vassaile: and though hee haue thus grieuously offended, yet (gentle 
Olbiocies
) by my words, let thy heart be wooed to relenting. Damsel (replyed 
Olbiocles
) is this wounded knight anie thing of kindred vnto you, that you intreate thus for him? Not anie thing a kinne to me (answered the Damzell) but for the deare af∣fection that I beare vnto him, I haue aduentured to craue his release. Damzel (quoth 
Olbiocles
) at your intreaty I shal willingly grant him life; but otherwise assure you he should

 haue died, for his villany: herewith he deliuered the woun∣ded knight vnto the Damzell who binding vp his bleeding woundes; laide him on her Palphrey, and in all hast depar∣ted from the Emperours Court towards the sea-side; where wee will leaue them taking shipping, and returne againe vnto our Champion.


Olbiocles,
 hauing thus obtained the victory of the knight of the 
Tygre,
 presently spurred his horse to depart againe from the companie; But 
Alfortio
 clapping his hand fast v∣pon his shoulder, beganne to stay his iorney with these speaches.


Sir knight, although I may thinke it a profered iniury, to be in such sort disappointed of y
e
 combat; which in knight∣hoode I ought to haue performed; yet scorning to enuy your cheualrie, I only demaund you to declare your name. in recompence of the iniury. To whom the Prince answe∣red; Sir knight, I am not ashamed to declare my name; yet since you haue obiected vnto mee, the proffering of an iniurie: know I am resolued, at this time not to manifest it. The 
Spanish
 knight was almost enraged, with this dis∣courteous answere, insomuch as he was readie to drawe out his Semitar: but remēbring himselfe, he thus replyed. My Lord 
Olbiocles,
 you neede not in sooth to conceale your name in this sort from your friend: but that you alwaies loue to be thwarting mee. Had I not knowne you by your speach; wee might haue begunne but ilfauored iesting: Heere at 
Olbiocles
 laughed, and presently approached to the Palace windowe: where doing his duety to the Empe∣rour; hee caused exceeding gladnesse in the hearts of the 
Grecian
 Princes, who not a little reioyced at his happie conquest, gotten ouer the knight of the 
Tigre.






CHP. 2.




¶ The extreame crueltie inflicted by the knight of the Ty∣gre, on the sely damzell of the 
Round Iland,
 and how hee caused the dwarfe 
Toydell
 to cast himselfe head
ong into the Sea.






B
Vt in the 
interim
 of those actions, the sor∣rowfull Damzell of the round Iland toge∣ther with her Dwarfe 
Toydall
 (for so was he called) with great care and exceeding speede, hauing got the wounded knight of the Ty∣gre safely aboord her ship, which she had ly∣ing at anchor, in the hauens mouth of 
Cōstantinople,
 she ap∣plied many healing plaisters to his woūds, & with such dili∣gence tended his hurtes, as greater could not be expected at the hands of the best Chirurgion in the world. But yet, for al her applying of medicines, and doing whatsoeuer other ne∣cessaries about him, he continued still in a dead swoune; so as the poore Damzell doubtfull of his reuiuing, most woful∣ly despaired of his happie recouerie: and for verie griefe to thinke on his wofull disaster, she remained in a quandarie, almost in a maner besides her selfe. But to the ende you may the better vnderstand the occasion of this Damzels affec∣tion, I will briefly relate vnto you, from the beginning, the cause of her louing him.


This Damzels father being called 
Acconumbo,
 hauing spent his youthfull yeares, in following of knightly aduen∣tures; in his older age,
 kept his abiding in a certaine castell in the 
round Iland,
 which he held as his patrimonie. Now he being a verie cruell man, and of a most seuere nature, not contented onely to taxe and rate his loyall subiectes, but also at most base prices would deliuer vp the liues of his people, into the hāds of their enemies: which the cheifest men of the Iland, seeing by no meanes they could remedie, consulted togither to bereaue 
Acconumbo
 of his gouernment: amongst whom this knight of the 
Tygre
 (called 
Troglador
) was one of the chiefest; who by his professed loue to the yong Dam∣zell 
Allua
 (for so was this Damzell called) obtained means to enter into 
Acconumbos
 Castell,
 where he got her (entised by his faire loues promises) with her owne handes to helpe strangle her distressed father: who in the pangues of death, on this wise exclaimed agaynst her beastlike crueltie.






Acconumbos curse.




Vnnaturall, not my begotten daughter;


Some hellish hagge, hath mee, with thee beguild
;


Harde is thy heart, for to commit this slaughter;


More fit for sauage beastes, & Tygres wilde;






Yet scarcely shall wee see their pawes defil'de,


Or iawes beraide with murdered parentes goare:


And yet wilt thou prooue so vnkinde a childe


To him, who thee hath nourished of yoare?






Thinke heauens at last will plague thee for this ill,


And damne thy soule to euerlasting fire:


(Inhumane) then refraine thy wicked will;


Tis not a petty sinne to slay thy Syre:






But if thoul' needs performe this wicked acte,


And fathers cryes can not thy anger swage;


Beare to thy graue, with terror of thy facte,


The cruell curse of my declyning age:


If heauens be iust, account hereof withall,


By him thou louest best, thy life shall fall.






But nothing relenting at her fathers wordes, this hard hearted Damzell proceeded in her enterprize; which being performed,
 and 
Acconumbo
 now by her vnnaturall means depriued both of his life and dignitie; she curtezanlike faw∣ned vpon succeeding 
Troglador;
 who being a knight of no lesse beauty & wisdome, then fortitude & magnanimity, was chosen, as Gouernour vnto the liberties of the 
Round Iland:
 wherein established, he kept aloufe from the Damzels loue, and made a may-game at poore 
Alluas
 affections,
 and set∣ting his fauour on an higher 
Phoenix,
 thought by force of armes (as you haue heard) to bereaue (in his folish brauery) the Prince 
Olbiocles
 of his new married bride. Thus was poore distressed, 
Allua
 had in contempt by him she most af∣fected; yet was her loue so exceeding towards him, as all y
e
 while he remained in his amazement, she did nothing but

 weepe, sigh, groane, & wring her hands; wherew
t
 tearing her haire frō her head, she would blame her ha
, lamēt her misfor∣tune, & curse the time y
t
 euer she was borne vnto such misery.


Oh vnfortunate wretch that I am (said she how am I able once to lift vp my eyes vnto the heauens,
 who haue most iust∣ly made me thus miserable; since both my wickednesse is so exceeding as it can not be pardoned, and my misfortunes so extreames they may in no wise be remedied. Haplesse wo∣man that I am, woe worth y
e
 hower wherin first I breathen: for euen from my infancy haue & bin nourished vnto mishap, & tended vp vnder an vnlucky planet, to be the only anatomy of hate & wretchednesse. O my deare heart & loue 
Troglador;
 why doe my wofull eyes endure to beholde thy faire sweete body thus massacred, and thy manly limbes so cruelly mang∣led: I would I had beene harmed for thee, so that thou wouldest haue pittied mee; I would I had beene wounded for thee, so my trickling bloud might haue mollified thy heart to haue taken compassion on mee.


At these last words 
Allua
 shed such abundance of teares, as her sight thereby failing, she fell in a swoune at the side of 
Troglador;
 but by the dwarfes diligence being recouered, she prepared her selfe to her second lamentation; but perceiuing the knight of the 
Tigre
 begin to open his eyes,
 she ran vnto him to imbrace him & comfort his drooping senses; but hee maruailing how he came thither, remembring himselfe of y
e
 battaile had w
t
 
Olbiocles,
 & knowing by his receiued woūds that he had suffered the wracke of his honour, & verily sup∣posing that the Damzell was cause of his disparagement: he fiercely rose out of his bed (which seemed to blush with y
e
 bleeding of his woundes) and taking his Semiter in his hand, he came vnto the trembling Damzell, & renting her vp and downe the cabbin wherein hee lay, hee tare of all her golden haire, from her swollen head,
 beating & boun∣cing her with his fists, & kicking her w
t
 his feete, remorse∣lesse at her cryes, & obdurate vnto her clamors; at length (thinking therein to prooue the more cruell vnto her) he cast her into the ship-boate, and binding her hande and foote; with his dagger he nayled her to the ribs thereof; & dipping

 his finger in her blood, he wrote these horrible verses for her Epitaph.


The loue the father bare the childe,


Condemn'd, forsaken, scorn'd;


Conuerted vnto curses vilde,


This wicked wretch forlom'd;


Whose foolish fansie frenzie-like,


Fell furie did compell,


To seeke her death at champions hands,


Whose soule (condemn'd to hell)


Couets with nought but vgly bands


Of hideous fiends to dwell:


Where hundred tongues can scarcely halfe


Her suffred torments tell.


And a little vnderneath, to the 
Spectator.


If hatefull horror may


Thy harmelesse heart affray,


Bewaile this heauie sight,


With s
d and sorrowing sprite,


Contrarie vnto him,


That did commit this sinne;


Whose heart shall neare repent


The c
us
 of 
 torment:


W
 
ickednesse was such


To father, and to mee;


As torture none too much


For her I thinke to bee.


Hauing written these inscriptions on the side of the boat, he cut the cable, wherwith to the ship it was fastned: & letting y
e
 same go at rādon, he returned towards his cabbin againe: where finding 
Toydell
 the dwarfe crept behind a fardell of marchandize (halfe dead for feare) to saue himself from 
Tro∣gladors
 furie, he dragd him out by the eares, and causing him to run vp to the top mast, with 
hreatning wordes, and daring menaces, he made the poore wretch to tūble headlong

 into the Ocean: from whence how hee escaped, and also of the reuenge wreaked on the most cruell knight of 
Tygre;
 a∣nother chapter shall serue in due time to treate of.






CHAP. 3.




¶ How the Princesse 
Almidiana,
 in the absence of her hus∣band 
Olbiocles,
 was surprised, with the princesse 
Eristama,
 and all her ladies, by the sterne Giant 
Ortolomorgantell;
 And how the princesse was deliuered of a most beautifull infant; whom shee commended to the tuition of the vn∣mercifull waues.




C
Onstant & ioyfull remained the faire Prin∣cesse 
Almidiana
 to her louing 
Olbiocles,
 in such sort,
 as the time almost expired of wo∣mans expectation, her wombe (impleat with an happy burden) beganne so extreamely to giue euidence of her downe-lying; as for a great while be∣ing somewhat weakned therby, she was faine to keepe her chamber: but at length her sicknesse somewhat ouerpassed (though the time of her painefull trauell, then nigh her, ap∣proached) she determined for her recreatiō, to walke a whi
 in the fieldes next adioyning with 
 
Athens, Orthisius,
 y
e
 Prin
 
 
¦teous 
Erista
 
 dies, & lusti
 
 Empero
 
 in that it 
 
Flora
 ha
 
 
Siluanu
 
 
¦ding t
 
 and fr
 
 y
e
 ye
 
 
¦pen 


 ap
 
 al
 
 
¦ningly

 supported by many pretty wands of hasell: vpon the compassing rafters whereof,
 were many pleasant deuices liuely both painted and ingrauen; as of birdes, the pra∣ting Popi
ay, the ashbredde 
Phoenix,
 the fatall Scrich∣owle, the cole-blacke Rauen: Of beastes, infinite both a∣liue and pictured, were artificially placed all along the sides of the benches: whereof some were of stercer, others of milder, more of stranger, and the rest of a commoner; but none of seruile or contemptible natures. As for fish∣es, there wanted not greate store of them; by reason that quite thorough the arbour there ranne a most sweete and pleasaunt streame. Which pittering on the prettie peb∣bles, made such a dulcet harmonie, as seemed to bee the musique of the Sea-gods, in the eares of the hearers. Quer the toppe of the entrance into this pleasaunt ar∣bour, were hung vp, by 
Moroander
 (who was thiefe artifi∣cer in this deuise) certaine gratulatory verses, in a table of the wood 
Pla
anus:
 which the Princesse 
Almidiana
 ta∣king in her hand, perused, vnto herselfe, this courteou
 welcome.


Heauens Ioy,


Earthes pleasure,


Iunnes
 loue.


 
towes


 
enter∣
 
 
f the 


 entertaine his gestes in the most royalty hee coulde. How excellent their bankets, what cheere, sports, and pastimes were; or how eloquently they framed sundry histories to passe away the time withall, it is needelesse to recite; least wee should be longer demonstrating them, then their ple∣sures lasted; which receiued a cruell crosse by the sodaine approach of a mightie Gyant;
 his name was 
Ortolomor∣gantell,
 sterne Gouernour of the (remote and almost vn∣heard of) 
Rocky Iland;
 who being informed at his Castle 
La∣pidine,
 by a certaine 
Hungarian
 prisoner, of the greate beau∣tie of the Princesse 
Almidiana;
 with all possible speede, he tooke shipping, and scouring along the sea to 
Hungary,
 he had beene thereto seeke her: In the chiefe citie whereof hee did great scathe, slaying the people, wounding the young Prince 
Morcauill,
 driuing him and the Queene 
Anaxia
 his mother, by force of armes, to seeke for saueguard in their Castle; where hearing that the prey hee so labou∣red for, was abyding at the Court of the Emperour of 
Constantinople,
 hee returned backe with his shipping vn∣to the coastes of 
Greece;
 where hee thus vnluckily arriued, euen at the time when the Princesses 
Almidiana
 and 
Erista∣ma,
 were in the middest of their pastimes; when being certified by a prisoner that she, for whom he sought, was in that companie, hee presently set hande to his fauchon, and rushing in amongest the troune of trembling Ladies, hee ranne vnto the Princesse,
 and taking them both (halfe deade) vnder his arme, hee began to depart with his prisoners; when the Prince of 
Fraunce,
 loath to let him passe so quietly, recalled him in this sort backe a∣gaine.


Stay furious Diuell, and suppose not to goe so lightly a∣way with those Ladies, before you haue vnderpassed the vi∣gour of my correction. 
Ortolomorgantell
 made little ac∣count of the Princes wordes, but passed on without any feare or regarde of them; which made the Prince, in a chafe, to aduance himselfe the faster towardes him; when taking his sworde in his hande, hee smote the Gyant a cruell blowe on his left arme wherein hee held the Ladies;

 wherewith hee was almost faine to let them fall from him: but yet remembring himselfe, heee vsed them as his buck∣ler against the vnhappie French man; who well might make proffer; but neuer wound the Giant, for feare of hurting the two distressed innocents, whome he knewe assuredly the Giant lead vnto their deaths. Wherfore as a mā beside him∣selfe hee stoode amazed; and by griefe being made carelesse hee stoode leaning on his sworde, altogether astonished at his hard misfortune, that hee could not be a succour to the distressed Princesses sorrow.


You may well sweare, that 
Ortolomorgantell
 was not in the meane while idle;
 for so soone as hee perceiued in what case the matter stoode with 
Orthisius,
 hee florished his fau∣chon aboute his heade, wherewith striking a maine blowe at the Princes heade, hee laide for deade on the ground; and not staying any longer to prosecute the Tragedie, de∣parted vnto his shippes, where hee staide for his other soul∣diers; who, with multitude had oppressed the manhoode of the 
Grecian
 knights; and leauing the duke of 
Athens
 most pitifully wounded; were returned vnto their master (like hagges to the diuell) with the remnant of the Ladies.


Ortolomorgantell,
 glad of his gotten prey, binding the wofull Ladies with cable to the shippe mast;
 hoysed vp his sailes, & putting from the shore; shaped forth his iorney to the place, from whence at first hee inuited himselfe to this enterprise.


Being about the middest of the afternoone, hee thus put off from the shores of 
Greece;
 and with greate swiftnesse sailed hee, vntil it was an hower before the decline of 
Apollo
 the earthes reioycer: when mounting vppon the hatches of the shippe, wherein himselfe sailed; he perceiued (making vnto him amaine) fower tall shippes; who being approa∣ched, called vnto the mariners of his shippe, to yelde them prisoners vnto their mercie: which 
Ortolomorgantell
 hea∣ring, presently started vp, and with his fauchon in his hand and his steele plaited shielde on his arme, casting a grimme looke at his enimies; with a terrible voice hee de∣maunded; who durst be so bould as to interrupt the passage

 of the mightie 
O
tolomorgantel?
 wherewith closing furious∣ly with the shippes of the pirate 
Tolurnio
 (who was brother vnto 
Mar
im
des
 the vsurping king of 
Carthage
) he presēt∣ly leaped into one of them;
 and smiting all those that hee mette vnder his feete, hee met with 
Tolurnio,
 who resisting the Gyants rage, was occasion, that betweene them two there grew a most bitter bickering: which no doubt has beene daungerous vnto both of them, had not the darke se∣crecy of the silent night come sodainly stealing vpon them; whereby being vnable any longer to continue combat, they were inforced to vngrapple their Barques, and cease off the conflict.


But now returne wee to our prisoners. No sooner was the conflict begonne betweene this mercilesse Giant and the menacing pirats, but that the Princesses 
Almidiana
 and 
Eristama
 recouered their senses; and reuiuing out of that their long continued traunce, they fell most wofully to be∣wailing of their miseries; 
Eristama
 wonderfully, for death of her brother 
Orthisius:
 But 
Almidiana
 more grieuously, both for the losse of the Prince of 
Fraunce,
 as also for the vn∣lucky absence of her deare husbande 
Olbiocles,
 thus la∣mented.


Ah deare and loyall husband 
Olbiocles,
 how exceedingly will thou grieue when thou shalt heare of my captiuitie? And how bitter wil be thy anguish,
 when thou shalt know of my miseries? Little wilt thou brooke with patience my penu∣ry: and lightly thou wilt not sorrow at my mishappes; but wilt fret with anger to be partaker of my mischiefes. Dan∣gerously thou wilt aduenter for my releasement; but in thy attemptes, God shield thee from the author of my euill; who worse then a deuil,
 houldeth forth horror and hazard to destroy; venture not sweete Prince, endaunger not thy selfe so much for my sake deare 
Olbiocles.
 But since my de∣stinie declines to dire destruction, and that necessarily I must abide in this thraldome, cheare vp thy heart (deare husband) and let this one thing suffice to comfort thee: That as I liued, so I will die none but thy deare and loyall 
Almidiana.




On this maner did the distressed Princesse both lament and comfort her disconsolate thoughts, vntill such time as enforced by her griefe, the time of her lying downe appre∣ched; and for griefe of her heauie burthen, giuing great shriekes and gromes; the Marriners mooued by her distresse vnto compassion (and the rather because they had beene Christians) geue her Ladies leaue to conuey her downe in∣to 
inner cabbinet, her painfull throwes comming vpon hereafter grieuous torment suffered, she was within a while deliuerer of a most goodly infant; whose beautie causing her greater sorrow, 
nfo
ced her 
ongue on this sort to lament the childes mis ortune.


Ah deare Infant in what vnhappie time I haue trauel∣led in childbed with thee, the Gods doe know, and thou art vnable to acknowledge: but what great miseries after this lucklesse tinte of thy birth thou art like to suffer, thy selfe I feare shalt too exceedingly feele, whilest I thy vnhappy mo∣ther shall grieue at thy misfortune.


Herewithall she kissed the childe, and with the teares fal∣ling from her eyes, weeping most extreamely, in the excesse of her passions, she was thus comforted by the Princesse 
E∣ristama.
 
Doubt not (deare Madame) of your poore Infants happinesse, neither affright your selfe, concerning his future fortunes. Heauen (no doubt) hath not blessed you with an husband, that you shoulde die in thraldome: neither gra∣ced this Infant with a Prince to his father, to the ende hee should suffer the wracke of his happinesse. What though at this time you continue a captiue to the tyrannie of your fierce enemie 
Ortolomorgantell;
 yet you ought to be pa∣tient: and although your childe bee borne in this time of disaster, will you therefore torment your selfe? Nay, ra∣ther thanke the Almightie, who shewed you such fauour in your distresse; and become not impatient by your mi∣seryes: but haue a firme hope, that hee (the God of hea∣uen) who hath blessed you with such an ofspring, will daigne in his mercye, to prouide for all following casu∣alties.


The distressed Princesse 
Almidiana,
 was somewhat re∣comforted,

 by the good aduice of 
Eristama;
 wherefore she clea∣red vp her cloudie browes, and with a more mild fare (accor∣ding as her sorrow would suffer her) looking vpon the infant, he seemed to her thinking, to smile vpon her. Wherewith she said, 
God grant (my sweete childe) y
t
 after a sūshine there come not a cloudie tempest. 
Herewith they heard some knocking at the doore of the cabbinet: who reported vnto the Princesse the successe of the fight, and how he thought that very speedi∣lie the conquest between 
Tolornio
 & 
Ortolomorgantel
 would be finished; which strake the Ladies to the heart: but know∣ing they had no remedie but pacience, they remained quiet; consulting by what meanes they might saue the harmlesse Infant from the furie of this diuelish monster.But alas,
 what should they doe? On what should they so (in vaine) con∣sult? Two wayes onely there was, both doubtfull; either of life, or death. If they should keepe him still, who coulde tell whether 
Ortolomorgantell
 would saue him; or offer him (according to his wicked custome) vp on the aultar; of his heathenish God 
Metrath Agorah?
 Or if peraduenture he did decline from his diuelish custome, and saue his inno∣cent bloud; yet it was too manifest, that hee should for euer∣more continue a most wretched captiue: where, if he had not what was sufficient to maintaine him, hee was like enough, eyther by colde or hunger, to suffer daunger. What then should be done? This one way wrought assured mis∣chiefe, and the other brought as mickle daunger. For if they should commit him to the mercie of the 
Ocean,
 who knowes not that the Seas are senslesse, and therefore mercilesse?
 If they place him in a boate, where will he haue victuals? or hauing victualling prouision, in this haplesse miserie, what man shall helpe him? Who shall feede him? or what kinde heart shall cherish him? Helpe himselfe he cannot: yea, though meate be put into his mouth, hee can not eate it He is but an hower olde, and can not shift: he is but tender, and of no force, and therefore can not helpe it selfe. what then shall hee doe? What meanes shall the wretched mother deuise for his deliuerie? Cast him into the Seas? Perhaps some nature-incited Dolphin, wil on his back take

 pitie on him? Who knowes that? were hee 
Aryon,
 he could not without an harpe be saued: or had hee an harpe, being he could not vse it, it were bootlesse: or coulde hee vse it, yet being so tender, the windes would haue power of him, and the chilling colde of the billowing waters, would with a sodaine stifnesse stifle him. Oh poore childe, how vnfortu∣nate is thy fate, and how vnhappie thy chaunce, to be borne in such a time of miseries? Yet God shall purueye thee of better fortunes.


With these sorrowfull considerations, the wofull mother exceedingly terrified, for very griefe was readie to giue vp the ghost: but being recomforted by her ladies, shee recei∣ued courage to crosse her mifortunes; and at the last con∣sented, with patience to commit her silly soule to the tuiti∣on of y
e
 calmed Seas. In which determination, taking the babe in her armes, bestowing on his heart (whereon by Na∣ture were liuely depainted the billowes of the Ocean; which by his hearts panting waued vp and downe like the mari∣time deepe) a thousand kisses, into his opened bosome, af- a whole volley of sighes, shee breathed out this affectionate farewell.








¶ The Princesse Almidianaes farewell to her most deare Infant.




MY pretty babe, whome royall Sire begotte


On beautious mother, in vnhappie time,


In whose natiuity kinde starres daign'd not


To future happinesse for to combine,


Their prosperous glory foreshewing shine,


Behold thy mother (sitting in my lappe)


With watry eyes bewailing thy mishappe.






Thy wicked happe, which wofull fate aboads thee,


To crosse thy sweete spring, with sad winter sower:


Which from thy infancy (poore soule) o'reloads thee;


And chiefely for thy infant-yeares want power,


To shadowe thee from saddest sorrowes shower;




Whose stormie gust's, and frosty nipping blast,


Thy faire youths heauen, with griefe shal ouercast.






For why? (vnkinde) I must against my will,


Euen in a moment thy poore selfe forsake,


And to thy lucklesse lot, must leaue thee still,


Vnto the senselesse Ocean to betake


Thy tender corpse, whose pitious cries might make


An harder hearte, then mine (God knowes) to rue:


Yet I poore soule, cannot the facte eschewe.






Ah, what will others say, when they shall heare


How cruell I am proued to my childe?


Will they not bounce their brestes, and tresses teare?


Cursing, fell vengeance on a deede so vilde?


And say, 
Medea
 neuer proued so wilde:


For shee did only slay her infant brother;


But thou thy sonne: O most tyrannous mother!






Her fact may be excus'd, her shame may leaue her;


Consuming time her crueltie may hide;


But thy most sauage deede shall blamed, euer


Within the memories of men abide;


So as, though time doe neere so swiftly slide,


Yet shall he on his winges, transported still,


Cary remembrance of my wicked will.






What then (vnhappie wretch) wilt thou effect?


Which way wilt thou determine his relieuance?


Wilt thou, for feare, his safety neglect?


And still retaine him to a farther grieuance?


If heare he stay, he dies: if goe, perchaunce


Some happie star may guide him to good fortune:


Which otherwise might too much ill importune.






Then silly soule, why should I longer stay,


From prosequuting what I haue intended?


What though a while from me (poore babe) thou stray,




Vnto the raging billowes safe commended?


It must be borne which can not be amended.


And since withouten helpe I must forsake thee,


Sweete boy, to Gods tuition I betake thee.














CHAP. 4.




¶ How 
Olbiocles, Alfortio, Orthisius,
 and other knightes put themselues in enquest after the Gyant 
Ortolomorgantell,
 to reskew the inthralled Princesses: And how 
Olbiocles
 ar∣riued on the 
Round Iland;
 where, in reuenge of the Damo∣sell 
Alluas
 quarrel, he fought with the Knight of the 
Tygre:
 and of the exceeding ioy of the Queene of 
Carthage,
 for the young Sea-borne babe that her brother 
Artimagus
 sent her.




D
Eliuering forth together with sobbes and sighes, this sorrowfull farewel, she set her last loues signet vpon the tender lips of the young infant: whom, hauing wrapped in warme swadling clothes,
 shee put into the ruines of an olde chest, which by y
e
 helpe of an honest mariner, (who pittied her case) was with pitch so cūningly fastned from taking any violence from y
e
 waues, as hoping the Gods would, as well in this little planke, as wel as in a greater vessel protect him, speedily she deliuered the silly infant vp vnto the tuition of the Ocean.


But the Almightie pitying the childes miseries, most gra∣tiously prouided for his safety; for by his diuine institution & prouidence, he caused a poore fisherman, who was casting his nets about the shoares of 
Asia,
 to draw nigh vnto the ship, & (hauing neuer seene any such before) to stād houering about it, & in amazement, to gaze exceedingly vpon y
e
 strangenesse thereof. Wherof y
e
 Ladies being aduertised, called him vnto them and some of them giuing him their purses, others their bracelets, girdles, cheines, or whatsoeuer else might seeme of worth, to carry that childe vnto the Emperour of 
Grecia:


 which he promising to doe; they deliuered the childe, & yet before they would depart with him (as well as they could) they gaue him his christendome, by the name of 
Oceander:
 which greeke word 
 signifieth a man of the 
Ocean:
 Whereafter suffering the poore fisherman to depart with his charge; th
y al with one consent returned vnto the mastes a∣gaine; whereto being, as they were erst, chained, they expected y
e
 cōming of their furious keeper 
Ortolomorgantell;
 who hauing ended the combat, waued vnto their ship, to fol∣low more neerely vnto them; which they did: and because there was none but Christians in the ship, y
e
 Gyant cōcluded to haue the same guarded by a certaine nūber of 
Barbarians:
 who seeking to dominier ouer y
e
 poore Christian mariners, caused y
t
 the miserable Ladies indured y
e
 greater seruitude:
 which don 
Ortolomorgantel
 w
t
 al hast possible, made towards y
e
 
Rocky Iland:
 where we will leaue him, til time fit to tell his tyranny, to talke a while of our wofull knights of 
Greece
 and 
Hungarie.


Such was the extreame anguish, that both y
e
 Emperour 
Claranax
 & the king 
Rubaldo,
 w
t
 all the rest of the knights of 
Grecia
 conceiued for the sodaine surprisement of y
e
 Ladies, as also the death of 
Meroander
 duke of 
Athens;
 as they were all at the point of going out of their wits;
 but especially the young prince of 
France;
 who reuiuing out he fell into by rea∣son of his wounds receiued, by the fury of y
e
 Gyant, being enraged w
t
 despight of his owne misfortune & his sister 
Eri∣stamas
 losse, presently called for his horse and armour, & in the company of y
e
 valiant Impe of y
e
 king 
Oruntio
 of 
Spaine,
 he hyed him vnto the hauen of 
Constantinople;
 where im∣barquing himselfe he put out to the Sea. But yet for all this hast of 
Orthisius: Olbiocles,
 hatting heard of his Ladies il for∣tune, had armed himselfe, and before euer 
Orthisius
 could at∣taine the hauen; he went aboarde, and hoysing vp his sailes, made away so amainely from the coastes of 
Greece;
 as in short while he was past ken of his country inhabitants: which he perceiuing; and with teares lamenting, at last brast forth into this agony of passions.


How vnaduised are those foolish Poets, which sticke

 not in their laboured penworkes, to praise Fortune as a Goddesse? and how indeliberate are those makers, which impute vnto her fickle Deitie, more then a diuine potencie? too farre doe they reach their fancies, to attribute such in∣finite power to such an inconstant guide:
 Since if she were what they faine her to be, shee would be mercifull, whereas now shee is monstruous; and she would continue mightie in her constantnesse, when now she is euer variable and vn∣constant in her mightinesse; resembling the Sunne, who by his heate scorcheth the grasse of 
Pelion,
 y
e
 earst by his beames was nourished; playing the cunning Panther with mens af∣fections, shewing a glorious countenance to allure, whome shee determineth to delude: putting a pleasaunt bayt downe our throates, vnder the which shee hydeth a hooke to rent our weasand, couering serpents with Sinamon, and foule toades vnder the sweete leaues of a florishing Lawrell, to the end, that if wee tast wee might be stinged; or if wee smell, wee might be enuenomed. She prouideth 
Cleopatras
 dainties to allure vs, that being bitten with the figge-hid∣den 
Aspis;
 we should sleepe to death, with securitie, retchlesse and vnrepentant.


Not vnlike the monster 
Hyenna,
 shee can chaunge her selfe, and in a moment growing variable transmute her countenance with her conditions, so as no man is able in most securitie, to say accordant to the presuming pro∣uerbe;


"
Maior sum quam cui possit fortuna nocere.


"I am beyond the reach of Fortunes rage.


For euen in performance of our pleasures, shee seconds vs with paine, crossing our delight with dislike, and our ioyful∣nesse with ioylesse accidents: as in mee shee hath made ma∣nifest, whome in the middest of pastime, she hath pained; and in the interacting of my pompe, hath dashed out my glorious title, and plunged mee in a sea of punishment, making my loue a captiue, mee a catife, her an enthralled prisoner, mee a painefull pilgrime, obliged by my hearts loue, to attempt her freedome. And lastly, allotting her bands, with care, & my selfe, banishment without comfort, or almost any possi∣ble

 hope of regaining her, my loue, my deare spouse 
Almidia∣na:
 whose soule the almightie for his mercy, comfort, and whose chast body the high 
Ioue
 preserue from spitefull vil∣lany of her ouerrulers; that as she hath liued for me, so in mine armes she may contentedly giue the worlde her indeb∣ted farewell.


Herewith, teares stopping his speach,
 hee fell downe in a passion, in the bosome of his page 
Curio;
 who lamenting his Lords mifortunes was sitting by 
Olbiocles;
 with trickling teares to beare the diapason in his maisters melancholy mu∣sicke. This 
Curio,
 therefore, raised from his dumpes by 
Ol∣biocles
 swoune, started vp on his feete,
 and vsing sufficient meanes for his Lords recouerie, whom hee quickly reuiued from his traunce, and enquiring of his welfare, was thus answered. O, my deare page 
Curio,
 how often haue I bin recouered by thy diligence & care, from extazies! Sure ma∣ny times; but thou shalt not passe requitelesse: for here I giue the this chaine: which, being thou shalt by reason of my mi∣series, shortly leaue me, may peraduenture stand thee in some steade. Herewith he profered his chaine (which was made of refined golde fetcht from abounding 
Ophire
) and vrged him to take it: But poore 
Curio,
 rather wishing his Lords presēce without rewarde, then delighted with riches in his masters absence, fell prostrate at 
Olbiocles
 feete; and with teares in his eyes, hūbly requested his Lords fauour, & that he would rather with his owne hands reaue him of life, then once to motion a matter so opposite to his soules affection; vowing before y
e
 maiesty of the heauens neuer to ioy, after he should be so forsaken without deseruing.


Olbiocles
 perceiuing by the outward action, his poore pa∣ges inward affectiō, most kindly recōforted him vp w
t
 a firme promise neuer, whilest his life lasted, once to offer to forsake him: whereat y
e
 louing lad reioycing, he humbly kissed his Lords hands, in token of his cōtent, studying dayly, seing his lords melancholy humor, by some pleasant entercourses, ey∣ther by way of history or tale, to expel his assiduous sorrowes; & amongest diuers others, hee cheared vp 
Osbiocles
 drooping senses, with this pleasant, (though vnpolished) Rusticke.










¶ The Pages pleasaunt 
Ru∣sticke.




VPpon the hilles of 
Arcadie,


Where olde God 
Pan
 melodiously


His pipe of reede full sweetely strainde,


Whilest on fell Fortune hee complainde,


Which did his beauteous 
Sirinx
 change


Into the whistling reede (so strange


An accident was neuer seene,


Vnto Gods, Paramours to beene)


At what time 
Flora
 in her prime,


Obseruing it was summer time,


With fragrant flowers of each dye,


Had diapred most gorgeously


The face of mother 
Tellus
 faire;


So as thereby she did declare


Th'approaching sacred festiuall


Of God 
Siluanus
 nuptiall,


Vnto faire goddesse 
Clarida:


Wherefore this Sheepheards holiday


Was clepid of each country swaine,


That to 
Siluanus
 did pertaine.






Thilke day of mirth and mery cheere


Each sheepehearde knew approaching neere:


Wherefore they gathered euery one,


Together to king 
Caucus
 stone:


About the which they place the flockes


Of Sheepe and Goats, about the rockes


Which skip and leape wilde thyme to brouse,


Which growes thereon most plenteouse.






Then with 
Pastoraes
 hand in hand,


Each Rusticke doth in roundell stand;


Which is intrenched in the ground,


With seates of turnes y placed round;


On which poore Sheepeheards louingly


Declared their true constancy,


Vnto their loues: who them inuested




With coronets of greene bowes wrested.






In lieu whereof, to Sheepeheardesses,


In courteis wise each swaine addresses


His hand, his heart, his cappe, his coyne,


And all the good hee can conioyne


Vnto his true loues courtesie;


Who giues againe most louingly,


All kinde of token shee did take,


And then as to her louing make


Shee yieldes herselfe obedient


In all that is expedient:


When if he likes her, he doth gin


To vowe to her, and shee to him,


Foreuermore continually


To liue with him obediently.


Thus they conclude, and thus agree,


Both louing man and wife to bee;


So 
Cloden
 did to 
Coladine,


So 
Ferin
 to faire 
Eglantine,


So 
Chloris
 did to 
Coridon:


And so dealt sheepeheards euery one;


Solemnizing their nuptials,


Vpon such holy festiuals.






Thus in disport, while they them held,


They sodainely mongst them beheld


A Nimph in strange attier drest,


Which putting in among the rest,


Had kept their day of frolicking,


With a strange kinde of wondering:


Sometime her face they might perceiue,


Readie to smile, and then deceiue


Their louing expectation,


With other kinde of fashion.


For sometime laugh, and sometime cry,


Now right, now houlding necke awry,


With ieering kinde of scoyning eye,


She chang'd her face so diuersly,


As soone each seely sheepeheard boy




Gan feare she meant them some annoy,


In that she came in such disguise,


Vnto their sheepeheards sacrifice.


Wherefore they gan for to suspect her,


And cast about them to detect her:


Of her they did inquiry make:


But no man of her knowledge spake:


But euery one did murmur much,


To see her change and gesture such:


Wherefore they did determine straight,


Her to intrappe, for to lay waite.






Therefore on her their hands they lay;


But there they did their selues betray;


For some lost sheepe, and some their good,


Others for want of loue were wood:






Yet doe what euer she could do,


Shee was at length oppressed so,


By such a rusticke multitude,


As being brought to seruitude,


Her selfe false 
Fortune
 shee confest;


Which knowen, the Swaines her so detest,


As presently with all their might,


They proffer her most fell despight;


And stripping her from her attyre,


To whippe her they done all conspire:


Which they did so performe indeede,


As soone they made her body bleede:


And for she wrought their miseries,


They reaued her of both her eyes:


Then setting her vpon a wheele,


Which forward could (not backward) reele,


They sent her from their rurall store;


To which she vowed to come no more:


Which is the cause that euer sence


She doth to sheepeheards none offence;


But bendes her power gainst kinge & princes,


Whom to her thraldome shee conuinces.












The wofull Prince of 
Greece,
 was greatly eased of his griefs, by this and such like pleasant tales of 
Curio;
 who en∣deuoured, both in speech and action, so neatly to set forth the matter he pronoūced, as 
Olbiocles
 could not chuse but both applaud the poore pages inuention, and added grace; which made the matter handled, farre more pleasant and delight∣some. But notwithstanding all this iouisance that he recei∣ued; he could in no wise forget the miseries that most galled him; neither did he at al leaue to meditate on his misfortū
, for although his countenāce waxed calme, & the clo
s of his browes were sometime cleared; yet his heart harboured dis∣content, and the faire welkin of his happinesse was surchar∣ged with sorrow; so as euen in y
e
 very center of his soule, was sadnesse inclosed; and in his wofull breast, a whole legion of tormenting passions were included: which feeding vpon his liues maintainer, with such eager fiercenesse, as the star∣uen Eagle vpon the outcast carion, scarcely suffered him to desist one minute, from thinking on his deare and louing La∣die 
Almidiana:
 whose sacred 
Idea
 continually presenting it selfe before his sleepelesse eyes, caused new commotions to arise in his breast, and vnwonted perturbations to perplex his soule: which agony so afflicted him: as euen in his night∣ly rest (which was nought but of broken slumbers) he would rise out of his bed, exclaime against Fortune, and in his rage and furie call for his sworde and armour, to defend his di∣stressed 
Almidiana.


In this perplexitie he continued almost for the space of fourteene dayes, with a most earnest desire, wishing to at∣taine some straunge harbour, where hee might heare of anie tydings concerning the distressed prisoned Princesses.
 And after a while sayling, he came within the ken of an Iland; into the hauens mouth wherof being entred, he enquired of a certaine Marriner, the name of the countrie, and in what state the gouernment thereof remained. To all which inter∣rogatories the Mariner answered, that the countrie wherin they were now landed, was named the 
Round Iland;
 wherein in times past the cruell knight 
Acconumbo
 helde his tyrannie: for the which deposed and done to

 death by the helpe of his daughter (who lately here arriued all massacred) and the vngentle prince that now raigneth; he left his diadem to this knight 
Proglador
 to inherit; who (as we heare credibly by the Damosels dwarfe reported) hath since most inhumanely murthered the young maiden, named 
Allua.
 For which cause y
e
 whole Iland is vp in armes; and by the reason of 
Trogladors
 mightinesse, it is likely that the contrary partie shall suffer a great hazard of their good fortunes, and the Common wealthes extreame ruine of her most loyall subiectes. The Prince thanked the mariner for his relation, and presently striking saile to come nigher y
e
 shoare, he went a land with his dwarfe 
Curio:
 who carying his helmet and launce after him, trauailed farther onwarde into the Iland; when they perceiued a great company of pa∣uilions pitched about the walles of a Castle, wherein, as then y
e
 Damozels friendes were besieged. Wherfore, he spe∣dily buckled on his helmet,
 and kept on his pase, vntill hee was entered into the campe of 
Troglador:
 where hee was greeted by a company of knightes after this sort;


Knight of the 
Leopard
 (for such was the deuice in his shield) know that from the mightie prince of this 
Round I∣land,
 we are to commaund your stay in this place; vntill his Highnesse leisure of enterparleance for your abearing. Vpon paine of his displeasure, proceede no farther: but for the as∣surance of your desisting, dismount yee; and either leaue thy horse or thy heade, for gage of your abiding. Here∣with they beganne to lay holde vpon his horse bridle: wher∣at 
Olbiocles
 enraged, rendered them this answere. Vnwor∣thy, in good faith, were I of the honour of knighthoode, if for the vaine bragges of a sort of iniurious opponentes, I should be so foolish as to hinder my intended iourney: and more vnwise should I prooue, if I should not only de∣siste frō my purpose, but also (in lieu of my cowardize) leaue either my horse, or my heade behinde mee, without en∣terprising their deliuerance. Herewith hee vnsheathed his curtelax, and gaue him that held his bridle, such a recom∣pence for his bouldnesse, as he curtald both his armes off at the elbowes, giuing him a faire warning for approaching a∣ny

 more so neere him: who falling downe,
 left his void place for the rest of his companions; whereof diuers of them had almost as vnlucky entertainement. For, some their shoulders, some their brawned armes, and others their heades had (by the Princes vigorous fury) parted in a short space from their maimed bodies: so as by his valour, 
Olbiocles
 being rid from his enemies, for feare of farther daunger, pric∣ked forth his horse, towardes the Castle:
 whereinto recei∣ued by the porters, he was gladly entertained of the de∣fendants, for their conductor and Champion; and so af∣ter due rep
st taken, for that night hee reposed himselfe on a most soft bedde of downe, placed in a most gorge∣ous gallery of white marble; on the walles whereof were curiously carued infinite images of the strangest liuing creatures; with such liuely art-proportioned lineaments, as if they had as yet enioyed the vitall spirit of brea∣thing.


On the next morrow, so soone as the fyre-breathing pal∣freys of 
Apollo,
 with their horned hooues, had stricken the Hunts vp, at the iron lattices of 
Thalatto,
 and that their master 
Phoebus,
 leauing the watry bosome of his louer 
The∣tis,
 had with his Iuory chariot made his swift passage tho∣rough the ribbes of the Ocean; the valiant 
Greeke,
 awa∣ked from his slumbers, attired himselfe in his warlike abil∣liments; and, descending the staires of his chamber, came in∣to the base court of the Castle: where assembling together the principals of the knights defendants, he consulted toge∣ther with them about the effecting of their libertie:
 amongst whom at length it was concluded that (for the tryall of their innocency) the knight of the 
Leopard,
 with the vsur∣ping 
Homicide,
 should contend in a monimachye or single combat. Vpon which, being resolued; 
Olbiocles
 calling for inke and paper, determined to write a challenge to his ad∣uersary, the more to egge him on to enraged furie: But in the 
initium
 of his intent, he was presented with the like Letter of chalenge frō his angry aduersary 
Troglador:
 which 
Olbiocles
 vnripping, found it to containe thus much in ef∣fect following.






Troglador


to the most iniurious Knight of the Leoparde, neither health nor happinesse.


IN regard (discourteous knight) of thy wicked dealing to∣wards me, not onely bereauing me of my faire spouse, the Princesse of 
Hungaria,
 and also thy disloyal & vnknightly abearing of thy selfe towards me in the combat of 
Con∣stantinople
 (both which I can willingly pardon) but also for thy great villainie thou hast offered my knight-heraulds which I sent vnto thee, whome thou hast most inhumanelie massacred, against al right or law of armes; I here challenge thee (as thou wilt be accompted valourous) in a single com∣bat with me, before the gates of the Castell, with thy bodie to make good the damages thou hast done me; or else, not daring to satisfie my request, keepe thee still inclosed in thy fortresse: but with assurance, that yer long, by maine force, I shall pull thee out from thy walled defence, and with my sworde, lay dire vengeaunce on thy cursed shoulder. 


From my campe.


Troglador
 your greatest enemie.




This threatning Letter being lowdly read by the prince 
Olbiocles,
 caused to the whole audience great sorow: but the generous 
Greeke
 made so small accompt of his vaine boa∣sting, as with a great laughter at the vsurpers follie, he sent backe the messenger to his Lord, with this answere. I know not what mad furie driueth thy master 
Troglador
 vnto this follie; as, with the burned child, once more to put finger into the fire: or with the singed gnat to dare againe to flutter a∣bout the flame of the candle. The fish 
Sphyrana,
 once en∣tangled, will take heed of the net; and the dogges of 
Aegypt,
 once throughly terrified by the Crocadils, will euer after onely war
ly l
ppe at the brinks of the riuer 
Nilus.
 Tel 
Tro∣glador,
 
e should haue meditated before he menaced; and like a wise Martialist haue consulted with his courage, be∣fore he 
hallenged the conceyted conclusion of a doubtfull conquest: hee might will enough haue better remembred

 with perpendancy, his 
Constantinopolitan
 combat, and then hee should not haue needed to challenge a newe conflict: But since he is so wilfully forgetfull,
 the next time that I meete him (which shalbe within this hower) with my cur∣telar, ile beate a little better memorie into his braines.


The messenger, though he were a good knight, yet hee was almost terrified with so terrible an answere: insomuch as longing to depart, hee tooke his leaue, and presently re∣turned vnto the campe: where finding 
Troglador
 in his tent, he throughly declared vnto him the whole resolution of 
Ol∣biocles;
 wherewith the cruell tyrant enfired with anger pre∣sently stepped vnto a launce, and piercing the messenger to the heart, vowed by the powers of heauen, with the selfe same weapon to make the sterne 
Greeke
 to abye his insolent presumption.


In this anger he armed himselfe; and taking (on his arme) a most strong shielde of wel tempered steele, hee mounted a mightie Courser, wherewith he praunced gallantly vp and downe, before the gates of the Castle, awaiting the com∣ming of his fierce aduersarie: who,
 in the meane time (being loath to enter the combat but in cause of trueth) examined the dwarfe 
Toydel,
 of the whole misfor∣tune of his mistresse: who making relation of her mi∣series, begunne in her life, and continuing vnto her death; declared also, how after the Damozell was so mas∣sacred, and himselfe toppled into the sea, by reason hee had some cunning in swimming, he attained the boate, wherein 
Allua
 lay murthered, and the helpe of a poore fisherman (whom 
Troglador
 kild for his labour) hee was set a lande on this 
Round Iland:
 where he, with the Damoz
ls friendes and aliance, hath euer since sustained the furie of the tyrant. Which relation of 
Toydel,
 when y
e
 
Grecian
 Prince had ful∣ly waied; pondering in his heart, how hainous a thing the cruell murthering of a Damosell (though d
ath des
ru
ng) was in the eye of the most high, hee determined by the assi∣stance of the almightie, once more to co
e the co
ge of this vniust catife. Wherefore, hauing endorsed his harnesse, and purueyed him of sufficient (as well offending as defen∣ding

 weapons; he mounted his Palfrey; & (cōmanding one∣ly his Page 
Curio,
 to waite on him forth of y
e
 Castle gates, he departed from his wronged friends, with hope to make his wrōging enemy feele y
e
 force of his vigorous arme: with∣out the gates he found his aduersarie, ready appointed for y
e
 assault; whereupō fewtering their Speares, they ran fierce∣ly one against theother as in their courses; the Knight of the 
Tygre;
 shiuered his Launce vpon the shielde of 
Olbiocles
 without any further harming him:
 The like the Grecian Prince performed to the full on 
Trogladers
 Target: where∣by passing one by another quietly, they prepared themselues, for their second encounter; which was so valiātly performed by the noble Gréeke, as (without any harme receiued to him∣selfe) with a mighty blow, he bare him out of his saddle to y
e
 ground; and presently alighting, proffered the Tyraunt y
e
 combate on foote. But, as the prouerbe is, 
The baited Beare will beware of the stake.
 So 
Troglador,
 hauing once before throughly felt the furie of 
Olbiocles
 to his cost: & now again being entred within y
e
 same predicamēt, fearing his starres to boade a worser chance, hee determined not to hazard hys life in the single Combate against so tried a Champion, and therfore casting his shield at his back; he remoūted his horse: and betooke himselfe to flight,
 from the furie of his aduersa∣rie: whereat the worthy Grecian, enraged, mounted also on horsebacke, and after him for the space of an hower, he hotely followed in pursuite: But seing he could not ouer-take him; he spéedily returned, first to the Campe, where (sauing of some fewe) he was willingly entertained, and afterward to the Castle, where he was most ioyfully welcomed, and hono∣rably feasted where we must this time leaue him; to turne our tale to the poore distressed Infant.


By the prouidence of the 
Olimpian
 Rector, the poore capti∣ued Princesse of 
Hungary,
 being on the sodaine eased of the care of her sillie Infant, through the comming of a poore Fi∣sherman, to whom she deliuered her Sonne to bee transpor∣ted into 
Greece;
 beseeched the Heauens for their good hap, and so to her sorrowe committed them to their following for∣tunes. The poore Fisherman 
Kalus
 (so called for his hone∣stie)

 was no lesse confoūded for ioy of this little Babe, & his gotten infinitie of treasures, then the poore Princesse was comforted with the hope of her Childes more happy safety: wherefore with a glad hart & a merrie gale, he cut his course towardes the coastes of 
Greece,
 fully hoping, for the presen∣ting of so bewtifull an Infant, to receiue of his Landlord (who was a great Gentleman of his countrey) some rich re∣compence for his labour.


But as no Garment sooner receiueth staine, then that which is most brightly coloured: nor any man sooner decei∣ued, then hee who by hope was most assured: so this man, in his chiefest expectation of good,
 was sodainely crossed wyth vexation. For while 
Kalus
 was thus merily making way crosse the billowes in his Ferry-boate, there rose such a sodaine Tempest, that he being in the middest of the vaste 
Ocean,
 without hope of any harbour, was so tossed vp and downe by the bounding waues, as thereby hauing lost the vse of his sea-skill, he was forced to commit his Barke to the furie of the waters.


In this plight hee remained for the space of thrée whole dayes, dangerously ryding on the rising surges, most won∣derfully amazed at y
e
 swiftnes of hys Ferry-boate, which for the roughnesse of the Seas and the rage of the Storme, sly∣ced her course crosse the 
Ocean,
 with such a speedinesse, as (contrarie to all naturall reason) hee safely arriued at the thirde dayes ende, at a certaine Iland,
 on the confines of 
Africa,
 where at that time, inhabited a cunning Magiti∣an, named 
Artimagus:
 who knowing by the secrets of his arte of his infantes miserye, hadde framed his whole science to the bringing of this fishermans boate to the place of his abiding. Wherefore hauing now brought to effect his intended purpose, hee attended at the marble staires of his Castle (which by arte was so framed, as none, but when hee consented,
 coulde descry it) hee attended his comming: whome with what ioy hee re∣ceiued; my penne nor my tongue, is scarcely able to make manifest; but onely thus much I will willingly

 insert; that hee, hauing reserued him to some necessary pur∣pose (whereof in place conuenient you shall bee enformed) s
nt him by his daughter 
Magartez,
 to the wronged Queene of 
Carthage,
 his sister; who accepted his present so thanke∣fully as euer after shee thought her selfe more bounde vnto him by this good turne, then by her naturall consanguini∣tie. In which her ioy, wee must bee faine to leaue her, vntill such time as 
Oceanders
 yeares giues vs a more sufficient occasion to treate of him; and turne our stile to o∣ther accidentall occurrences.






CHAP. 5.




¶ How after 
Orthisius
 and 
Alfortio
 had put themselues to the Sea, they encountred with a strange aduenture of the Dutchesse of 
Siracusa,
 whom they deliuered frō the terror of death, to which she was betrayed by the vniust dealing of her wicked Aunt: who by the consent of the Estates of the city, was put to a most cruell death; and the young Dutchesse reinstalled in her inheritance.




E
Ven as these thinges were thus in acting, the two valiant Princes of 
Fraunce
 and 
Spaine
 hauing put themselues in enquest (as you haue heard) after y
e
 Gyant 
Ortolo∣morgantell;
 bending their course towards the west end of 
Europe,
 they furrowed so spedily crosse the 
Greekish
 Seas, as into the 
Mare Mediterraneum;
 wherein they sayled a good space, vntill such time as by the rage of the rising billowes, they were enforced to seeke for harbour on the Coastes of 
Sici∣lia:
 where, surging at the porte of 
Sicacusa
 (a citie in the forenamed Iland) they were very ioyfully receiued by the young duke of 
Hybla;
 who was brother to a most beautifull Ladie,
 being Dutchesse of 
Siracuse,
 named 
Oaezima.
 For the redresse of whose miseries, her brother 
Oreardey,
 hearing of the arriuall of the worthy Princes, attended their aduent with exceeding diligence; whome, hee causing to land, after

 most courteous embracements, in this sort most kindly wel∣comed: Faire knights and (as I guesse) noble princes of 
Grecia:
 If vnknowne 
Choraebus,
 with his troupes of vp∣daunted souldiers, were in 
Troyes
 extreamity welcome to the distressed 
Priamus;
 or the resolued bandes of 
Achil es,
 w
t
 his fierce and fearefull 
Mirmedons,
 acceptable to the 
Gre∣cians,
 in the time of intestine skirmishes; then thinke braue minded Champions, that your cōming is not vnwelcome vn∣to my country; or that I will prooue vnthankefull to the Almighty for your most lucky arriuall in my hauen, in this time of disaster; wherein I haue more neede of your heroick actions, then either 
Priam,
 or the 
Grecian Heroes,
 of their proffered succouring aiders. The Princes were ready to reply vpon him, when hee thus cut off their inceptions. But yet for all my miseries which I endure, let them not a∣ny whit aggrieue you, vntil such time, as (hearing the whole circumstance of our misfortunes) ruthe may driue you to rage, & your conceiued anguish moue you to such exrreame anger, as by your knightly vertues you may dissolue y
e
 
Gor∣dian
 knot of our miseries. Herewith he led them with him towards the Dutchesses Palace, where the two princes found exceeding good entertainement, both for delicate cheare, as for sweete sounding musique: which, though it somewhat solemnely sounded, yet exceedingly delighted the noble Champions, so as with great content (after their royall welcomes) they betooke their wearied bodies vnto the downe-soft couches: with which they were not a little contented; finding themselues so safely seated from the furie of their late feared tēpest. In this quiet they remained vntil y
e
 morning at which time 
Apollo,
 the daies glorious direc∣tour, had no sooner chased away the coale-blacke night; but that the noble Princes of 
France
 and 
Spaine
 presently brake off their slumbers, and attiring themselues in scarlet co∣loured veluet mantels, they were by an attending Page conducted into the Palace garden: wherein, by the varietie of most sweete smelling hearbes, flowers, and diuersitie of 
Indian
 shrubs, their drooping senses were exceedingly de∣lighted and refreshed, There they walked vp and downe,

 meditating and asking many questions of the boy concer∣ning his Lord, and the young Dutchesse 
Oezima;
 whereun∣to, the Page in this manner answered.


My Lords, it is not the part of an honest seruant to de∣lay the delating of his mistresses sorrow; neither should it be the propertie of a curteous 
Siracusan
 bluntly to deny any interrogant, asking whatsoeuer is lawfull, and more necessary for the required, than the inquirers, to be decla∣clared: Therefore in that which I can, I will resolue you; especially touching my selfe: But as for any thing tou∣ching my Lady the Dutchesse of 
Siracusa,
 I neither can nor may informe you, since it is a matter onely to bee re∣solued by her selfe, after her deliuery: to the contrary whereof shee hath sworne neuer to performe any thing to the infringement of her determination, though shee dye therefore.


The two knightes seeing they could get no more con∣cerning this Ladie Dutchesse, being loath to vrge him to tell any thing against his will, or the oath of his deare Ladie; required the relation of his owne misfortunes wher∣unto the Page willingly consenting, reported vnto them the same, after this manner.








The Pages report.


Although (most noble and valourous Champions) my mi∣series bee without remedy, and my sorrowes vnsalueable; yet. notwithstanding to requite your courteous requestes; I shall not sticke to rippe vp the whole history of my misfortunes. Know yee therefore, that in times past, I was bestowed by Fortunes sauour, on a most beautifull Ladie, for her Page: whom with how much loue and diligent care I serued for the space of two or three yeares, I will not at this time di∣late: onely thus much knowe yee, that I attended her w
t
 such affection, as should she haue required my head I should haue thought my selfe ingrate, if I could not haue founde in my heart to haue giuen it her: But alas, I would she had had it, so by my death she might haue beene defended from following misfortunes: which a little after befell her in this wise.




There was a knight of great power in the Iland of 
Vul∣cania
 (whereof my Ladie was Gouernesse) named 
Terindan∣tes:
 who,
 as his possessions and power were greater than any others in the Iland; so he had his hearts centre im∣pleate with farre more pride, and his thoughtes soothed more high exceeding ambition, than any others else within the confines. Which his ambition, causing him to make his marke of a crowne; gaue him so great respite and leaue for his affecting, as openly with great insolence, he began to be checke make, or haile fellow well met with my Ladie 
Mabina:
 for so was her name. Which his presumptuous ac∣tion, shee but indifferently brooking, began to coole his cou∣rage with this caueat. Take heede proude 
Teridantes,
 and be warned in time by her who may commaund thee, that thy abearing bee better towardes thy Soueraigne; and thy audacious actions be more humbly ordered towardes our highnesse; least. prouoked by thy misdemeanour, wee dis∣deame of thy disloyalty; and thereby, or euer thou beest a∣ware, thy presumption procure punishment for thy ouer∣weaning pride. Thinke not that Princes are painted gew∣gayes, to bee prickt on thy sleeue; or that I, a Queene, am made of cloutes, to be plaide withall by euery cullion-like companion; but know that wee are borne Princes, & therefore must rule; wee are created Queenes, and there∣fore will be obeyed: wherefore I charge thee heere, by our regall authority; not to dare (vpon paine of death) here∣after once to approach our presence, or to come nigh the gates of our Royall court, by a league, without our high∣nesse graunted permission; remembring henceforth, that the Prince is not to be compared with,
 of a subiect but with loyall eyes to be gazed at, as an heauenly obiect. Herewith the Queene 
Mabina
 caused 
Teridantes
 to be presently exclu∣ded her Court gates, with firme resolution, not without his penitent submission, euer any more to admit him to her high∣nes fauour.


Teridantes,
 galled to the heart with this nipping repre∣hension, in a rage departing from the gates, vowed or e∣uer the Goddesse 
Cynthia
 had thrice changed shape, to

 ruinate the Palace of the Queene 
M
bina,
 and worke a most cruell reuenge on his female enemie.
 In which his resolution, he called together his kinsmen and neare alies, and with their helpe leuying a sufficient armie, hee laide straight siege against the Palace wherein y
e
 Queene remai∣ned: which by reason of the infinitie of souldiers, victuals, & munition, by the prouidence of the Queene being furnished, hee was not able any way to carry; although by the space of a moneth, he had encompassed the wals with his multitudes of valiant and hardy souldiers. Which almost made him to be past all hope of euer winning it; and the rather, be∣cause that the defendants (in a sally, which they sodainely made out at a backe posterne gate, vpon his vnsuspecting souldiers) had by their valour not only greatly disturbed his Campe,
 but also taken a Cosen of his (named 
Tarisdin
) prisoner. Wherfore he resolued to breake vp his Campe: but cruelty not suffering him to proue cowardly, he sodainly be∣gan to stay, and bethinking on his reuenge, hee at length ef∣fected it by this stratagem.


Hauing parlously pondered with himselfe of the sundry mischiefes and infinite miseries that happened to a Com∣mon-wealth, through such ciuill warres, & homebred con∣tentions, he cunningly concluded a peace for eight daies with the Queene 
Mabina;
 with lawfull leaue graunted for either other,
 quietly to passe and repasse from the Campe to the Court, or the Court to the Campe; and in as peaceable manner (during the time of the truce) to conuerse one with another, as if there had neuer before beene any deadly fued betwixt them. Of the which truce, not only 
Tirindates,
 but also 
Maniba
 (vnsuspecting future misery) was greatly re∣ioyced.


But how long continued it? Not (scarcely) passing two daies. For 
Tirindates
 (who minded nothing but reuenge for iniuries) cleane contrary to his taken oath and plighted fidelity, spying his time of aduantage (though hee was nar∣rowly watcht by the Queenes loyall defendants) entered y
e
 Palace with his armed souldiers,
 and laying hould on 
Ma∣binaes
 two young sisters of exceeding beauty, in spight of

 of all the resistance that could be made to the contrary, hee departed with them to his tents; where, for that night hee kept sure watch and ward about his armie, for feare of some sodaine sally from his fortified enemies. Which indeed ser∣ued him in good steede; for about midnight, hee had gone nigh to haue payed for his treason, had hee not beene fore∣warned by his skoutes; and so being in a readinesse, pre∣uented the furie of his assailants. But, what profited these secret assaults? since what they aduentured for, was in the handes of their enemies. On the next morrow, 
Tirindan∣tes,
 causing all his army to be in armes, with a troope of lusty knightes, caried with them the Queenes sisters to the gates of the Palace: where, erecting a place of execu∣tion for the two innocent young Ladies; he threatned the Queene, that vnlesse shee would presently deliuer him his captiue cosen 
Tarisdin,
 she should speedily see the destructi∣on of her louing sisters; who wofully houlding vp their hands, most pitifully requested her hearts compassion. But, as the Lyon scorneth to bee bearded by any seruile or base condicioned beast;
 but with his pawes and gnashing his tushes together, will fiercely assaile him: so this worthy Queene disdaining the terrible threates of the disloyall traitour, with a couragious heart, and vnterrified sto∣mache, for his former menace, did mete the like measure.


Doe what thou canst, or darest, proude Traitour (quoth shee) vnto my innocent sisters: for of this thou maiest bee assured, that if they perishe; nay if thou doest but wring their fingers, thy Cosen 
Tarisdin
 (whom thou louest as dearely as thy life) shall of his heade, make a footeball for my souldiers to spurne at. That shall I quickly try, saide 
Tirindantes.
 Now therefore expect thy elder sisters Tragedie: And therewithall,
 hee caused the Executioner to smite off 
Katherinaes
 heade. And then againe hee set∣tled him to sollicite his former suite. Nowe Queene 
Vol∣cania,
 resolue thy selfe what thou wilt doe; since thou se∣est mee resolute in my enterprise: answere mee to the proofe: wilt thou restore my Cosen 
Tarisdin?
 or wilt thou perspect thy second sisters execution? Speake therefore,

 and that briefely: otherwise, no longer deceiue thy selfe, but be sure I will make short with 
Straffera.
 Herewith hee paused a while, expecting the Queenes determi∣nation.


But 
Mabinaes
 heart being already stricken deade with the former butcherly spectacle; and with sorrow amazed in her soule, for her sister 
Katharinas
 death; ouerwhelmed in a sea of griefe, shee sanke downe in a swoune; not being able for the space of halfe an howre to vtter one worde, or heaue vp the liddes of her eyes; vntill such time, as reuiued from her passion by the piteous and lowde cryes of her loyall subiectes,
 who lamented the death of her second sister; shee sodainely started vppe: and viewing the cruell murder, cursing and crying out vpon the wicked Traitour;
 shee resolued on reuenge on captiue 
Tarisdin:
 whome causing to bee helde ouer the walles by her souldiers, with his owne dagger shee digged out his heart from his traiterous brest, and griping it in her hand, shee flang it, in des∣pite, at 
Tirindantes
 face, saying; And not this onely, O bloudie tirant, but a farther reuenge I doe seeke for.


With which her fierce reuenge, 
Tirindantes
 being enraged, presently embattailed his armie; and approa∣ching to the walles of the Palace, at the seconde as∣sault, hee mounted the gates; and winning the ma∣stery ouer the Queenes subiectes;
 in his fury hee put all to the sworde, except the Queene (whome, hauing put out her eyes, hee keepeth in extreame thraldome) and a fewe others, who getting out by a posterne gate, fledde for the safety of their liues both night and day from the furie of their pursuing enemies. Amongest which number, I beeing faine to shift for my life, was forced to fly vnto 
Sicilia;
 where of my Lord 
Ori∣ardey,
 at 
Hibla
 (with whome I now remaine) I was entertained for his trustie seruant.




Thus haue you heard (most noble knights) of my mis∣fortunes, and my deare Ladies miseries: of which (vntill fates and fortune both agree for her releasement) I know most assuredly, that I shall neuer, while I liue be reme∣died.








The Page hauing concluded his storie, with a streame of teares trickling from his eyeliddes; mooued the noble minded Princes to great compassion; insomuch, as they were about to comfort him with a promise of reuenge∣ment on 
Tirindantes:
 but by reason of a certaine lamen∣table noyse of some distressed Ladie that they heard, they were inforced to keepe silence for that season; and desi∣rous to vnderstand more manifestly the whole complaint, they drewe a little nearer vnto the east side of the garden, where they heard a sorrowfull voice proceede out of the iron grates of a prison windowe, which on this sort dolefully lamented.




O heauens when will you helpe my helplesse selfe?


And by your sacred powers most diuine,


Together when will you your aides combine?


Vnto my saddest suites for to encline


Your hearkening eares; that Iustice may refine


Her wicked faults, tirannous 
Atrielph,


That thus hath sunke mee on sad sorrowes shelfe;


By her endeauours, and conspiring traines


(Supposing for to worke my ioyes decline)


Condemning mee vnto a thousand paines,


Which here within this dongeon I sustaine.






Within this dungeon full of nightbred dreade,


Where nought but horror and despaire should dwell,


I doe in chaines of steele fast fettered still,




(Orecloyde in senses with each noysome smell)


Remaine in torment more then tongue can tell,


Wishing a thousand times that I were deade,


Rather than in this sort imprisoned:


Robbed of honour, hated in defame,


Vexed in soule, with bodies torture fell;


Still to reuiue, discredited in name:


The figure of dishonour, hate, and shame.






Helpe therefore (oh ye heauenly Gouernours)


And from the vertice of 
Olimpus
 hye


(Yielding regard vnto my plaintfull cry)


Powre downe your mercies most incessantly;


Least, wanting that adiument heauenly,


And sacred auxill of celestiall powers,


Like 
Biblis,
 I be turned into showers;


Through the effluction of my watry eyes:


Which hauing powred forth continually,


Whole 
iuerets of teares, denotifyes,


Dire death shall ouer my soule soone tyrannize,






Wherefore (O Gods) to you I doe commit


The safe tuition of my greeuing soule,


Which here tormented in this prison foule,


Incessantly my prayers doth vnfould,


Vnto your deities; for to enrowle


Within your brests (where Iustice still doth it)


The memorie of this fowle fact, vnfit


For any humane heart for to inuent;


And graciously her malice nill permit


To bring my honour to so bad euent,


As hitherto she hath determin'd it:


But by your heauenly prouidence, preuent


Her will, that bends vnto so bad intent.




The two Princes of 
Spaine
 and 
Fraunce,
 were greatly mo∣
ed at this dolefull lamentation; & therfore turning them∣
lues to the Page, they enquired of him y
e
 cōplainants name,

 as also the estate of torments, wherein she remained. Wher∣vnto, Noble Knight, answered the Ladie, this is the La∣die Dutchesse of this Cittie called 
Oezima;
 sister to my L. y
e
 Duke of 
Hybla:
 who by y
e
 insidious dealing of her Aunte, the ould Dutchesse 
Atrielpha,
 is here cast into this prison, where she sustaines her wearie life with onely course bread and puddle water; which with a woodden dish, she is fayne to take out of the stinking kennell, that runneth cleane tho∣rough the dungeon: thus doth she lie helplesse and hopelesse continually, as at this time, imploring the heauens, to haue mercy on her soule, wearied of her earthly tormented body.


Herewith, entred the Duke of 
Hybla,
 into the Garden vnto them; who, with teares in his eyes, requested their knightly ayde in the defence of his imprisoned sister, against three wicked Knights, that wrongfully accused her for the death of her Husband, the late Duke of 
Siracusa,
 & in defence of their quarrels, taken on the behalfe of the ould Dutchesse 
Attrielpha;
 threatning to venture their bodies against any Champions. Which when the valiant Princes heard, they bad him be of comfort; for in their owne persons they meant to combate the Knights Traytors; and yer long, by force of armes to make them openly to confesse their treason. And presently they departed to their chambers, where endorsing on their armours, they were attended on by 4. Dwarfes, who carryed their Speares and Helmets.


In this guise, they came into the palace base Court, where they found their aduersaries (according to the won∣ted custome, which should continue for Fiue moneths) at∣tending the comming of any knights, that durst aduenture to challenge them for their treason: who praunced vp and downe the listes with such infinite pride (daring the behol∣ders with their threatning menaces) as the heroycke min∣ded Princes of 
Spaine
 and 
Fraunce
 (vnable to endure silent any longer) began to thunder forth their deaths peale, into their eares.


At the last, O ye wicked traytours; at the last (I say) the iust Gods from their heauenly thrones perceiuing your per∣petrated villanies, haue prouided for the safetie of oppressed

 Innocent, and in his iust iudgements, will powre downe vengeance vppon the heades of the malefactors. Prepare your selues therefore (O ye wicked men) to receiue the iust recompence of your treasons, by the hands of them, who not for number, but iustnesse of the quarrell, will offer you the combate.


Herewithall the Princes entered the lists, and the three Knights (whose names were 
Licandro, Mirnao,
 and 
Rogesto
) prepared themselues to the Careyre.


Licandro,
 and 
Rogesto
 fewtered their Launces at once against 
Alphortio,
 who receiued them with such a fiercenesse, as, though they both brake their speares vppon his shielde, yet he little or nothing moued, but answering them in their owne language, gaue 
Rogesto
 such a wicked welcome, as piercing him cleane through the cuirace into the flesh, hee made fal dead to the groūd,
 where he lay gasping for life, vn∣till they had begun the second Careyr: which being perfor∣med with Semitars was very notable, and of a pretie con∣tinuance, vntill such time, as 
Licandro
 hauing wounded 
Al∣fortio,
 in the sword arme, so enraged him, as the 
Spaniarde,
 little liking such a bargaine, with a maine blowe striking of a great peece of 
Licandros
 helmet, and a péece of his brawne of the shoulder, rendered him a sufficient requitall for his proffered furie.


In the meane season, 
Mirnao,
 who was in combate with 
Orthisius,
 seing how the world went with his companions, hauing receiued a great fall, and being likely to receiue the foyle at his enemies handes,
 fell downe on his knees, and yeilding vp his weapon to the Prince of 
Fraunce,
 confessed openly his complotte, and how they were allured, by the ould Dutchesse 
Atrielpha,
 vniustly to accuse the innocent 
Oezima,
 of the murther of her husband the good Duke of 
Siracusa;
 whom in a secret complot w
t
 the ould wicked Dut∣chesse, they had most cruelly done to death, and throwne him into the 
Mediterranean
 Sea. Which discourse, so soone as the beholding people had heard related, they cast vp their hats for ioy of the Dutchesses approued Innocence: & not any longer withhoulding their furies, they leapt ouer the listes, and in a

 rage, running to the ouercome traytours, they sett fiercely vpon them, & neuer rested, vntil they had torne their flesh from the bones, no man thinking himselfe happy, but he that had rent some gobbet from the slaughtered carcases.


Cursed 
Atrielpha,
 in the meane while knowing by y
e
 shoute of the people, howe the matter stoode with her Champions,
 pre∣sently ran towardes the prison gates, with a clubbe in her handes, meaning to dispatch the innocent Dutchesse: but blinded with rage, not knowing where to finde the key of y
e
 dungeon, she cursed her selfe, banned Fortune, & exclaming against the Heauens, so sayde at the dore with her iron bee∣tle; as by the reuerberation thereof, 
Orlardey,
 being aduer∣tised about what worke the wicked wretch was, called vnto the worthy Champions, and conducting them vnto the dun∣geon dore, surprised the ould Traytresse, yer she were aware,
 and carrying her in their armes, out vnto the people, requi∣red their iudgements, to what death she should be cōdemned: whereunto, some answered this, and others that, according to the common prouerbe;

Quot homines, tot sententiae.


How many men, so many sundry mindes.


AT length they required her to be deliuered them where∣unto, at the Duke at 
Hyblas
 intreates, the Knightes consented, and yeilding her into their handes, gaue them power of her life & death. So soone as they had her among them, they stripped her out of her clothes;
 and tying her hande and foote, ran vp and downe ouer her, vntill such time as they hadde squiesed her to death by their often treading. Whome, being thus dispatched, they cast into the Hauen of 
Siracusa;
 reioycing in their harts, that they had taken such vengeance on her treason.


Oriardey,
 in the while returned vnto the prison, vnto his pined sister: whome loosing from her chaynes, hee brought forth of the dungeon, into the vpper Chamber: where cau∣sing her to put on her best attire, and declaring vnto her,
 the whole historie of her releasement, brought her by the hand into the palace Hall; in humble wise, to render thanks for her happy deliuery, fro her thraldome which a
 sone as she

 espied her h
ppy deliuerers, she so artificially performed as, (although she was most bewt
full) she gaue them more cause to admire her wit, then wonder at her bewtie; wherewith y
e
 Princes were greatly delight
d, but especially 
Alpho
t
o,
 who vowed in his heart neuer to entertaine any other para∣moure.


Yet notwithstanding, she was growne so leane and mea∣gre, with her thinne dyet in the Dungeon; as shee gaue the Princes good occasion, to require y
e
 occasion of her disasters inition; Too which she (being vnwilling to séeme vngrate∣full) with great facilitie cōdiscended: but, for it was now din∣ner-time, they washed their hands, and sate downe at the ta∣ble: and hauing sufficiently taken their due repast, they at∣tentiuely hearkned to this relation of 
Oezima;
 who taking them by the hands, began the historie of her misfortunes, af∣ter this manner.








Oezimaes
 relation of her misfortunes.


IT is scarcely thrée moneths, since (Heroyck Champions) it be fortuned my lucklesse Husband 
Tirocles
 was one e∣uening a (little after the decline of 
Appollo
 into the westerne Seas) found dead, all mangled, and massacred in the Pa∣lace garden, and all couered ouer with Rose-leaues and o∣ther hearbes; to the end, he might not be perceiued: when about that time my wicked Aunte 
Atrielpha,
 cōspiring with thrée other knights (who indéede, had murthered my Hus∣band 
Tirocles
) ganne run vp and downe the Palace shrée∣king and crying out against me, where is that same wicked woman? that same homycide? and that same murtherer of her Husband? what is become of her? whither is she gone? what, doth she thinke to scape condigne punishment for her wickednesse? God forbid; & the Heauens themselues will frowne, if so great a crime should be passed duer so lightly: herewithall they rushed into my chamber, where I was rea∣ding of my booke, and all at once, rayled on me saying: Ah, ha, thou wicked woman, and thou villanous wretch, for all thou couldest doe it so cunningly, yet by the iust iudgement of the Heauens thy treason is detected: I, poore soule, was

 not a little amazed at these their out-cries, but standing still in a sodaine passion, I gazed vpon them, not knowing in my hart, after what sort to answere vnto their vniust accusati∣ōs: wherupon my infidious Aunte taking sufficient aduan∣tage, sayd: See you not (O you worthy knight) howe her shamefull silence detectes her, and howe hee heart pricked with the stinge of her infected conscience, withhouldeth her tongue, from executing the function of an excuser?


Herewithall, I could with-hould no longer: But, O yee iust dooming Iudges of 
Olimpus
 (quoth I) looke downe frō your throanes of Iustice, and with the eyes of Truth per∣spect my vnspotted innocence, that is accused wrongfully of what I neyther knowe, nor euer committed.


O, Callet (replyed the deceitfull wretch) dost thou make as though thou knewest not of thy Husband 
Tyrocles
 murther, calling to the heauens to defende thine Innocence, as though thou haddest not been an actor in this Tragedy? thinking by thy protestations and bragging of thy guiltlesse innocencie to escape the due punishmēt y
t
 by thy wickednes thou hast deserued? No, no: For assure thy selfe, that, as long as I liue (the louing Aunte of vnhappy 
Tyrocles
) I neyther may, nor will suffer such a wicked malefactour as thou to passe vnpunished.


This her false accusation, not a little pinched mee at the very heart: wherefore vrged by her exclaimes, I beganne to excuse my selfe for guiltlesse of y
e
 fact, as well as I could; w
t
 my teares & wordes, kéeping a iust 
Decorum
 of a distressed Ladie: But all in vaine. For my Aunte, who before hadd prepared a brest-place against all pittie, replyed vppon me, with this (more then seuere) answere: Dost thou excuse thy selfe (oh shame of all womankinde) of a matter, making so manifestly against thee? What is it that leads thee vnto such farther follie? Dost thou suppose 
 be cannot proue thee guiltie? Or dost thou thinke, 
 thee, but one∣ly vppon surmizes? O most vnpr
 
t, and foolish wo∣man! if thou thinkest so, thou ar
 
ed; for behold here, how manifestly wee will con
 
hee: And therewithall (before a number of my loyall 
ens) she pulled foorth of

 my gowne pocket, a bloody handkercher; and pulling out also my kniues,
 she shewed them all begored with blood, vn∣to the behoulders: who, presently not wading into y
e
 depth of her treachery, applauded her cunning detecting (of so close conuayed a treason; and with one accorde, condemned me for to be an homicide, and the inhumane murtherer of my Husband. And therfore as a conuicted person, they con∣demned me vnto the stinking dungeon, there to be kept as prisoner vntill the next morning:
 at which time, I shoulde be condemned, to be burned at a stake (according to the cu∣stome) on the Market hill: where that same night they dyd nothing else but erect a mighty stacke of wood, and make vp a number of boorded scaffolds, for my loyall Citizens, to sit and behould my vndeserued martyrdome. Which the next morrowe had been effected, had not my louing brother 
Ori∣ardey,
 partly by his authoritie, as also by perswasion, redu∣ced the Knights (sore against my Auntes wil) to deferre the day of execution, onely but for Fiue Monethes. In which space, if by the valour of some hardy Champions, I were not by right of Armes deliuered, then at the time and place ap∣pointed, to suffer the deserued punishment of a wicked ma∣lefactresse. Thus for a while was I repriued, and I en∣ioyed vnlooked for life: which how loathsome it was vn∣to mee, liuing in such a desolate, stinking, and darkesome dungeon, I will omit at this time to speake of. Onely thus much I must reioyce at, that the Goddes haue at length hearde the 
ee
t prayers of their humble hand-mayde; and by the valour 
 
ou his seruants, hath in his infinite mercie, deliuered me from the hāds of my oppressors. Wher∣fore vnto their sacred deities all honour and glorie; and vn∣to you his instrumentes, I yielde all hearty and humble thankes, both now and euermore.








Oezima,
 co
ded her discourse with a paire of kisses on the handes of the 
oble Princes: who receiuing them ve∣rie thankfully, 
ered her 
ate obedience. And hea∣ring that the Estates 
re ar
 
ding at the Palace gate, to awayte the Dutchesse, 
 her r
investment, in the gouer∣ment of the Cittie; the 
ll in hast arose vppe from their

 enter coursinges: and the two Noble Princes of 
Fraunce
 and 
Spaine,
 taking the Dutchesse 
Oezima,
 by the little hāds, conducted her royally betweene them, in the companye of the Duke of 
Hybla
 her brother, into the Palace base court: where admitting the Citizens vnto her presence, she graci∣ously with a smiling looke and louely gesture,
 proffered her bared hande vnto them for the 
Bassient:
 who, with great shoutes and clamours of gladnesse, reioyced at the happye refruition of their wronged Gouernesse. Herewith the Dut∣chesse mounted her Palfrey: whose trapping being of a sad ash-colour veluet, hemmed about with twist of Goulde and Pearle, fitly represented the terrour of her heart, being as yet not throughly inuested in her authority: which, to bee briefe was w
t
 great solemnitie y
t
 very after-noone performed; and with such royall and admirable manner effected, as the like, neyther before nor since that season, was neuer hither∣to done, seene, or heard of. But least wee may seeme, to farre to haue waded into this matter, wee will nowe leaue these 
Siracusans
 in their iollity, and for a while treate of some other storie, which as yet we haue left vnperfected.






CHAP. 6.




¶ Howe 
Oceander
 excited by the lamentable discourse of his foster-mother 
Kanira,
 vndertooke to reuenge her iniuries done to her by the Tyrant 
Marcimodes,
 the vsurped King of 
Carthage:
 and how hee valiantly assaulted and slewe the Duke of 
Thebes,
 yonger brother to the Tyrant; and hung his carcasse ouer the walles of Castle 
Carzar,
 to the terrour of his enemies.






F
Orasmuch, as thou maist peraduenture (gentle peruser) desire to heare more of the little Infant whome wee left, safely deliuered from the furie of the waters, in the custodi
 of the Queene of 
Car∣thage,
 commended vnto her, by her bro∣ther 
Artimagus,
 wee will nowe, a little break square w
t
 
Decorum,
 and (briefly ouer-passing all other occurrences) steppe boldly vnto our Champion: whose no∣ble actions enflame mee with such a feruent furie, as in post haste (though absurdely) I approach, resolued to my po∣wer, to emblazon his heroycke enterprises; which are so many and so wonderfull, as without y
e
 diuine help of the learned 
Muses,
 I shal neuer be able to declare his victories. But to be short.


So soone, as twice nine Winters (which equaled so ma∣ny Summers) had speedily passed ouer the heade of that or∣phanized Infant, and that he now was of the age of Eygh∣teene yeares; he began to be so apt and towardly in each action, so affably courteous to al people, and so gracious in his carriage towardes his familiars, as hee not onely wonne the loue and liking of the Quéene of 
Carthage,
 but also gaue her exceeding greate hope, that onely by his happy meanes, shee should bee deliuered from thraldome, and bee at last throughly reuenged vppon all her Enemies. Where∣fore,
 seing him now to bee of indifferent yeares to conceiue of her offered wronge; as also of sufficient stature (as beyng but 12. he exceeded in height the tallest souldiar in her gar∣rison) to vndertake the requitall of so extreame an iniurie; taking sit opportunitie, while he was walking in y
e
 Castle garden; after many by-intreaties, to incite him to hearken vnto her Tragicke storie, and he hauing graunted audience, she brake her minde, vnto him after this sort.










¶ 
The lamentable and tragicall discourse of
 Kanira, touching the death of her husband 
Aldrey,
 and her sonne 
Sigandes.


TWenty times (deare sonne) hath the fruitfull Goddesse 
Ceres
 furnished the naked earth with her hidden trea∣sures, and so many times, hath frosty-bearded 
Hyems,
 with hibernall flowers, nipped downe the florishing toppes of Lady 
Estas
 fosterchildren, since the first time that I fell into misfortune, or sawe the decline of my glory, by the cruel tyranny of vnmercifull 
Marcimodes;
 who, by his in∣sidious dealing and plotted treacheries, effected both my noble husband 
Asdreyes,
 and my valiant sonne 
Sigandes
 tragedies.


For (after he had by his mighty power conquered all the best knights in these quarters, and brought the greatest por∣tion of the confines of 
Africa,
 vnder his subiection) his am∣bitious minde being neuer satisfied with sufficiency, nor glutted with saciety; but still coueting the farther enlar∣ging of his dominions; caused him at length to affect the 
Carthaginian
 Crowne, and to desire the supreame gouern∣ment ouer so great a kingdome. Which he, knowing the force of my husband, & by armes not daring to attempt, by a newe deuised and vnsuspected stratagem, in this wise ef∣fected.


He caused by the sea side, a huge theater of lime and stones so artificially to be builded by most cunning workemen; as, it hauing but only one little wicket to enter in at, seemed within to haue an infinite number of faire posternes, which being barred ouer with great iron plates,
 obumbred (from the sight of any straunger) the viewe of a number of great pipes of leade, which dispersed themselues into euery pos∣terne so innumerably, as being vnstopped by the most cunning 
artifex,
 they would in a short time, ouerflowe the whole compasse of the Theatre, and drowne all, whatso∣euer was therein contained.


This deceiptfull instrument, thus vnhappily, by the great

 labour & toyle of most expert workmen, at last finished; 
Mar∣cin
odes
 in most curteous and louing manner, inuited my Lord and husband 
Asd
ey
 vnto that accursed Theatre, to the end to be hould the sundry fights of most strange beastes and t
rrible monsters;
 whereof at that time he had prouided a number, which were sent him from the deserts of 
Ara∣bia.
 With which his curteous embassage, my deare husbād (enticed to his destruction) repaired, accompanied with a royall troope of loyall attendants, according to his promise, vnto the forepointed place of the beholding pastimes: into the circuit of whose fatall walles, being graciously conduc∣ted by certaine attendants of 
Marcimodes,
 they remained expecting the performance of sundry promised pastimes. Which expectation was accordingly in a moment satisfied, to their no small content, that least of all suspected any fol∣lowing misfortune.


But when men thinke themselues most secure, then are they most subiect to danger: as it fell out with my deare 
As∣drey,
 and my suspectlesse countrimen. For, in the very mid∣dest of their pleasures, when they were most intenciue to their sports, the tyrant caused the leaden pipes to be ope∣ned by his artificers: which spouting forth their streames all about the encōpassed game-place, yielded no free roome from the springing of their waters: which in short while, swelling vp as high as a mans chinne, gaue the drenched 
Carthagenians,
 a sufficient warning to seeke shiftes for their safeties. But all was in vaine: for out at the gates, they could not passe; by reason the wicket was with wa∣ter ouerwhelmed, and also so surely barred, as had 
Her∣cules
 beene in such a taking, his clubbe would haue done him little seruice. What then should they doe? Get vp the walles they might not: for, beside the daunger in climing, the 
Thebans
 with their warlike weapons so resisted the skalers, as either armelesse, or headelesse, they sent them backwardes into the water. How then shoulde they saue their liues? By a hard shift for they must either swimme or sinke: and endure aboue water they could no longer, but vntill they were wearie: which (out of doubt) would be very

 quickly: for most of them already had yielded vp their ghostes, and with their heads dounewards,
 bid adiewe to the world in the bottome of the water. In the meane while my poore and louing 
Asdrey
 laboured for his life; and being in a quandary, whither hee should sinke or swimme, was cheered vp with this comfortable speech of 
Marcimo∣des:
 Maintaine thy wearie life by swimming a little lon∣ger, O noble 
Carthaginian
 king; and I shall fetch thee a sufficient supporter to holde thee vp from sinking. My innocent husband, though hee was almost deade with o∣uer-labouring himselfe in the water; yet hearing the Ty∣rant speake so gently, as well as hee could, hee rendered him thankes for his vnlooked for curtesie, and with all his might, stayed his bodie against the side of the wall, expec∣ting the comming of the outragious Tyrant:
 who mind∣ing nothing but infidious cruelty, presently caused my sweete sonne 
Sigandes,
 by his souldiers, before my hus∣bands face to bee beheaded. And then taking the heade in his hande, hee called vnto my distressed husband, saying; Here, here, O king of 
Carthage,
 thou maiest perfectly behoulde the glasse of thy destruction: herewith he threw the heade vnto my deere 
Asdrey.
 Who for griefe hee con∣ceiued by so sorrowfull a sight, let goe his houlde: and being euen at the midway betwixt life and death, hee onely brea
hed out these speaches for a farewell: And is this (O Tyrant) the performance of thy plighted pro∣mise? It might bee sufficient to ridde mee from any fur∣ther labour, replyed 
Marcimodes:
 But since you will needes chalenge mee of my promise, houlde take this slaughtered carcase in steede of a logge to holde thee vp from destruction: And therewith his souldiers tossed y
e
 head∣lesse body of my deare sonne 
Sigandes
 into the water. Ouer y
e
 which my noble Lord and husband (doing y
e
 exptations of a deere parent after y
e
 death of his louing son) shed forth an O∣cean of pearled teares, & w
t
 his redoubled sighes,
 bedimming the ayre al about him, he made the very wild monsters which swam vp & downe y
e
 Theater to draw nigh him, & (in their mā∣ner) w
t
 mornful lookes, and dolefull sighes & roares to make

 knowne, how deepely his sorrowful shriekes had penetrated, into their vnreasonable hearts; which prouing more pittiful than humane creatures, who stode obdurate at his miseries; most straungely did relent at so great a punishment; into whose eares hee dolefully sighed forth these acclamations.




High 
Ioue,
 which fro thy throne dost see my woe,


And sitting in thy seate celestiall


Dost by thy diuine prescience foreknowe


Each deede of man that liueth here belowe:


Looke downe vnto this deede tiranicall:


Committed by conspiring Traitours skill,


Insidiously poore Innocents to spill:


Almighty King, and if it be thy will,


Before thy heauenly seate Iudiciall


Prepose this hainous fact done here belowe,


And in thy Iustice, doe requitance showe


Vnto the causer of our torments all;


Who traiterously hath vs betrayed so:


And subtelly infringing plighted faith,


Deliuered vs to this most cruell death.






But oh, that death had beene the worst extreame;


And that our torments should haue gone no further:


Then should we not haue sung so sad a theame


Like dying swannes amids 
Meanders
 streame;


But chearily comforting each one the other,


Wee should haue yealded vp our wearied ghosts,


Vnto the burning 
Acharontique
 coastes;


And vndisturbed by a tirants boastes,


In quiet peace, vnto thy 
coelique
 Realme,


Our innocent soules should flit; of worser murther


No whit affrighted, nor could thinke to deeme


Men worse than senselesse monsters for to seeme,


And more obdurate, and from pittie further,


As now they are. For beastes lament my greeuing;


But men looke on, laugh, and yield no releeuing.




Therefore (O sacred, high 
Olimpique
 King)


Before thy heauenly throne maiesticall,


Condemne these tirannizers bestiall;


And do them forth to cruell iudgement bring,


According to deserts in euery thing:


And then shall I with thanks and praises meete,


Continually thy holy iustice greete.




This saide, he louingly kissed whilome 
Sigandes
 brest, and clasping his trembling armes about the breathlesse trunke,
 hee gaue himselfe downe; and sinking with it to y
e
 bottome of the water, hee there ended his wofull life together with a multitude of his most loyall subiectes: who seeing their Soueraigne deade, and perceiuing no remaining hope of safetie, desperatly sunke themselues vnto the bottome of the water. Which dolefull Tragedy of my deare husbande so soone as the tyrant 
Marcimodes
 had effected; hee pre∣sently leuied an armie, and with ensigne displayed, marched towards my vnprouided City of 
Carthage;
 which hee sonne tooke,
 and ouercomming my amazed and vnarmed Souldi∣ers, hee enforced me with a few of my most trusty Citizens, to fly for safety of our selues, vnto this Castle of 
Caezar;
 wher∣in I haue already remained for the space of his twentie yeares, without hope of any deliuerance by any, but onely your worthy valour, who are chiefely preserued from y
e
 rage of the mercilesse seas, for the preseruation of my Estate; and wonderfully outpointed by the secret and diuine wor∣king hand of Nature, for the sole regaining of my liberty, and reposing of my former dignitie in the citie of 
Carthage:
 of whose happy fortune, and lucky effectes in this enter∣prize, it hath beene long agoe fore-prophecied by my aged father 
Artimedoro;
 who left vnto mee for his last will and testament, his onely precaution of my sorrowes finishing. Herewith shee drewe from out her bosome, a little square Table of 
Citterne
 woode, on the which was written in goulden Characters these following presages.




Vntill betwixt two seas, by lucklesse chaunce




A sucking infant shall himselfe aduance:


And, leauing in captiuitie his mother,


Shall safe arriue by cunning of thy brother.


Vpon the shoares of Sun-burnt 
Barbary,


Marcimodes,
 with extreame tiranny,


Shall keepe thee vnder stauish vassalage:


Yet, when that Sea-borne babe shall come to age,


By manlike force and worthy chiualry


Hee shall contend against his enimy:


And yer the Moone her course shall runne, vnneath:


Hee shall proue famous by the faitors death.


ARTEMEDORO.










Thus (deare sonne) thou seest how my fortunes depend on thy forwardnesse, & my chiefe comfort is soly comprised in thy chiualry. Say therfore, sweete gentleman of the sea (for so hee was there named) if in thy valour I may safe∣ly repose my confidence, and by thy vncomparable vali∣ancy repossesse my kingdome?
 
Oceander,
 who was not a little tickled in the hearte strings, that his valiant pro∣ceedings were thus foreprophecied by so learned a Magitian as 
Artemedoro
 was (glad also of such fit occasion to declare his good affection he had to doe his foster-mother any seruice) made no long pausing but presently rendered hir this com∣fortable answere.


Faire Madame, and my honorable mother, although my infant yeares forbids mee to be to bolde, yet my good courage and the iustnesse of your cause commandeth mee to abell all cowardly thoughts and putting on the armour of resolution in tryall of so manifest a quarrell,
 to dare manfully in arms to buckle with so fierce a tyrant, and to quell the fury of so proud a presumer, so vniust vsurper, and so vnmercifull and insidious a traitor. Cheare vp your drouping soule therfore (deare Lady mother) with this assurance, that on my fide∣lity both vnto Gods and men, I shal neuer be at rest, vntil I haue cooled the courage of so wicked an oppressor; or els (fay∣ling in my first attempt) left my carcasse for a recompence of

 my bould aduenturing; accounting alwaies (according to the adage) that;

It is the part of worthy men,


In duety for to see,


That vicious and wicked wights


Iustly corrected bee.


Assure your selfe therefore (sweet Madame) of my aide, not onely in this action, but also in whatsoeuer enterprize else you shall willingly commaund mee.


Kanira
 seeing his hardy resolution so well (yea beyonde the hope of his yeares) to fit her expectation; for very ioy could not containe her selfe any longer, but needes shee must by her outwarde action demonstrate her inwarde af∣fection. Wherefore running vnto him, & imbracing him, after shee had sweetely kissed him, shee saide, O my deare sonne, now I see that my fathers presage is true, con∣cerning thy courage, and that the iust iudging heauens, in mercy, haue hearde my plaintes and pittied my afflicti∣ons: to this did the Gods send thee vnto mee, and to this end haue I preserued thee, and hitherto thou hast giuen mee sufficient hope of recouering my lost dignitie, and reinfranchising mee from the tiranny of so vile and wicked an oppressor. Only one thing as yet resteth in triall to make vp my wauering hope, a well assured happinesse (which if thou canst not effect, I am resolued neuer more to expect my deliuerance) and that is this; After my father 
Artime∣doro
 was deade, and that hee had resigned vp his Cell and bookes of skill vnto my brother 
Artimagus,
 and his daugh∣ter 
Magartes;
 I entreated some straunge effect of their sci∣ence to be framed for mee; to the end, that thereby I might bee the more assertained of the person that shoulde ful∣fill the prophecie. Wherefore, my brother 
Artimagus
 with great studie and labour endeauoured to fulfill my requests; and at length by his cunning, hee fabricated a most strong and faire well tempered shielde; which hee charmed so

 fast and sure, to the shoaring side of a craggy rocke, by his magicall spelles and Nigromancy, as no knight (be he neuer so strong) shall haue the courage to approach it, by reason of an infinitie of inuisible Furies, that withstand their endeauours; or hauing approached it, can be able to pull it away; it is so firmely inchaunted. This is the ad∣uenture, I would haue you to attempt: of the which if you faile not in your enterprize. I shall thinke mee the most hap∣py woman, and you the most valiant and hardie Champion in this Southerne Continent.


The forward gentleman of the Ocean, no sooner heard of this rare aduenture,
 of the inchaunted shield, but hee presently burned w
t
 an ardent desire of attempting so won∣derfull an enterprize. Wherefore, resoluing his mother of his will and courage that hee had vnto the triall, hee concluded with her, as soone as hee could puruey him of weapons and armour, to goe and couragiously giue the ad∣uenturing. Nay sonne (replyed 
Kanira
) if that bee the worst, you shall soone be prouided for; and presently she caused a dwarfe to buckle on his armour (which shee had hidden for that purpose in an arbour of the garden) and to girde him with a trusty sworde: which being performed, calling for their Palfreies, they speedily mounted, and on∣ly attended on by the dwarfe,
 and two other knightes (
Lu∣gonto
 and 
Piresty
) they hastily tooke their iourney towards the rocke of the inchaunted shield.


And as they were thus trauailing onwardes, they espyed a furlong before them, a company of knights souldiers, who had gotten amongst them, the poore silly fisherman 
Kalus,
 and were dragging him amongst them, into the neighbou∣ring woods,
 for to make him confesse the estate of the Q. of 
Carthage,
 during her aboade in the castle 
Carzar.
 Wher∣with 
Oceander
 enraged, presently setting spurres to his horse with his launce in his rest,
 hee ruffled in so rudely among them, as making some for feare fly this way and others that way, hee leuelled his launce at the fairest, and by good happe he hit 
Organio
 (the Duke of 
Athens,
 and bro∣ther vnto 
Marcimodes
) so sound a buffet on y
e
 helmet, as per∣cing

 him cleane through the beauer, into the face, he made tumble ouer his horse croope, & measure his lubberly length on the dustie earth: and then vnsheathing his Curtelaxe, he layde about him so lustily, on the helmes of his Enemies, as he wondered himselfe exceedingly of his furies execution: for by this tyme, hee had ouercome, maymed, and slaine out∣right, fiue verie valiant Knights and of some reputation. Which his hauocke made of the outraging Knights, so soon as 
Piresty
 saw, enraged with a worthy emulation at y
e
 yong Gentleman of the Seas doings, he set spurs to his Palfrey; in great furie he pricked forward vnto the conflict, and af∣ter him 
Lugonto.
 Which two so brauely behaued thēselues in their assailing, as they sent a paire of their foes to the ground; and with the selfe same Launces, they effected the seconde encounter so valiantly, as each of them piercing quite through the brest-plates of their opponēts, they quick∣ly made the rest to take their heeles; and thereby, both freed themselues and the young Prince, from all further trouble and contention.


But, for by this time 
Phoebus,
 the dayes cheerefull direc∣ter, had taken his decline vnto the Westerne 
Ocean,
 and that the darkesome Night, with her sable coloured mantle, had ouer-spread the dusky Earth; the Q. of 
Carthage,
 with the Gentlemā of the Sea, and the rest, were inforced to frus∣trate their iourney; and for that season to returne vnto their Castle 
Carzar:
 so named for their enforced endurance. Ouer the walles whereof, the next morning, hauing stucke y
e
 head on a bore speare, they hanged the dead carcase of 
Organio;
 to the great terror of y
e
 
Thebans,
 his louing subiects,
 and the extreame griefe of his brother 
Marcimodes:
 who vowed by maine force to redeeme his body from such shame of his insul∣ting foes; or in hazarding the attempt, to leaue the bodies of his brauest souldiers, massacred in the ditches of the Castle 
Carzar.








CHAP. 7.




¶ How the Gentleman of the Sea, attempted the aduenture of the enchaunced Shield; which he atchiued: And how he was presented by a Dwarfe, with a moste gorgeous in∣chaunted coate-armour, from the wise 
Artimagus;
 in the which he was made Knight by 
Marcimodez,
 whose Ne∣phew he combated: And how he left 
Marcimodez
 and his Campe all in an vproare, for the death of 
Nigrasto
 his kins∣man.




G
Reat was the ioy and frolicking, that they of the Castle made, for the victorie of the young Gentleman of the Sea, ouer y
e
 
Thebans
 Duke, 
Organio
 (whom they hung ouer the walls) which endu∣red the whole night-time: Not one∣ly the Queene her selfe, but also the rest of her loyall subiects, being greatly assured by his first good proceedinges, that hee would not onely atchieue the aduen∣ture of the shield, and redeeme them from the tyrannye of 
Marcimodez;
 but also, if the Heauens graunted him their Celestiall fauour, and diuine auxil, become the most heroy∣icke and valorous Champion in all the world.


But, as soone, as the blushing morning had brought as∣sured tydings of the approaching day, the noble Gentle∣man of the Sea (with a desirous minde of finishing the ad∣uenture of the Inchaunted shield) arose out of his bed,
 and with all haste possible he shaped his way, towards his foster-mothers, the Queene 
Raniraes,
 chamber: whom finding wal∣king alone in a faire large gallerie, very fairely hunge with right Tapistrie, he thus dutyfully saluted


My deare Mother, Gods graunt you a happie daye, and sende you as pleasant a downe-lying, as they haue affoorded you an vnsorrowfull vprising. But Madame what muse you on, thus earely in the morning? Doo you meditate of our following aduenture? or forethinke you of some fu∣ture daunger? Speake madame; but with this 
Prouiso,


 that you doe not gaine-say my proposed proceedings; con∣sidering I am resolued, eyther to loose my life, or bring a∣way by force of armes, the Inchaunted shield from y
e
 Rocks of 
Africa.


Deare sonne (answered the Queene of 
Carthage
) in this your resolute determination, I do no whit dislyke your he∣roycke minde: But yet hereof I assure you, y
t
 you haue mist your marke in so sodainely iudging of my cogitations. For I doe not meditate vppon any thing, but onely walke here in my gallerie, to driue away a little pernicious disease from me, which hath sorely troubled mee all this morning, in∣somuch as I can scarcely refraine frō sleeping: For in déede I am so drowsily idle; as I should presently fall into a slumber, yf I should but sit still a little: But I knowe it woulde bee verie sore against your minde, that I should any longer prolong our iourney, to the Rocke of the inchaunted 
Shielde.
 True madame (replyes 
Oceander
) and therefore I beseech your Maiestie, our Palfreyes to be brought forth. It shall bee so (answered the Queene) and therewith shee caused the Horses to attend in the Base court for them; when she with 
Oceander
 and Fiue or Sixe Knightes more (whose names were 
Lugonto, Piresty, Maruall, Gerardo,
 and 
Trosny
) withall speede possible departed to the Rocke of the Inchaunted shield. But because the tourney was somewhat long, and such extreame posting so exceeding painefull, and their accompanying woulde bee tedious without conuersing; they agreed to passe awaye the tyme with merrie Stories; and that euerye one, accor∣ding to his turne, should deliuer forth some pretty theame, for his following friend to treate of.
 Content (quoth 
O∣ceander
) and first of all, the Queene my mother shall pro∣pound her question.


Agreed (replyed the Queene) but then I must bee ex∣empted from telling my tale. Be it so Madame, replyed the Gentleman of the Sea, and on that condition, I will beginne; and therewithall hee thus answered to his giuen question.










Whether, virtue or violence, is the stronger.


ALthough perhaps some man (whose insight might bee more deepe, and whose wisedome and iudgement bee sounder to conceiue more sharply of this matter thē my selfe) might happily maintaine violence to bee the stronger, in regard it so often (and almost euer) ouerthroweth and o∣uerwhelmeth the vigour of Virtue; yet not him which con∣tinually giueth the foyle:
 but him which longest endureth, I accompt the victour. And although for a time the beawtie of virtues forces be by violence ouershadowed, and in a ma∣ner almost dashed, yet shall I needes iudge virtue to bee the stronger; since, euen in a moment, after so huge a tempest, her troubled skie being cleared of such darke clouds of vio∣lence,
 she at the last re-enioyeth a far more glorious splen∣dour, and thereby with speede ouercommeth her foe, and vnburdeneth her selfe of such violent disgraces. And to the ende, that thou shall not thinke, that with onely my bare wordes, I seeke to proue it, I shall alleadge you a fitting example, of the virtuous conquest of a bewteous Damosell, ouer the violent attemptes of wicked iniurers.








The storie of vertuous 
Ericlea,
 reported by 
Oceander.


I
N the famous Cittie 
Memphis
 (in former auntient tyme, the 
Metrapolis
 of the 
Egyptian
 Monarchy) there gouerned as Vice-gerent in place of the pu∣issant King 
Arcabanus,
 (who was departed into y
e
 kingdome of 
Armenia,
 against 
Arsainez,
 to reuenge an iniurie) one 
Tan∣tanez
 a worthy Knight, and of exceeding valour, and repu∣tation; who for his vertues was no lesse renowned, and for his Iustice honoured, then any 
Memphian
 of what estate so∣euer, within the 
Egyptique
 territories: Notwithstāding as the winde cannot be alwaies at one corner; nor her horned Moone be all times in her waining; but the one must needs change, and the other by the strict necessity of ould antique Tyme, must decline vnto her wayning: So this vnhappy 
Tantanez,
 could not for euer so obserue a moderation in his matters, but that at length he was conuicted of vniustice, and his graue abearing found out at last to bee turned into

 gracelesse attēptings: For it was his (though most vnlucky) chance one day as hee was going in progresse, with greate pompe and Maiesty about the walls of 
Memphis,
 to espy frō out the chamber windowe, of a Knights house where he thē reposed himselfe, a most bewteous Lady (named 
Ericlea
) to walke hand in hand,
 very louingly with her husband 
Zar∣mez
 (a man whose deformitie and ill fauoured 
Vulcan
 like countenance, very ill befitted so faire and louely a 
Venus
) about her Garden: with whose bewty he was sodainly so en∣flamed, as he could not be at quiet, vntill such time as he had made knowne his passions vnto her, by this following Epi∣stle, that he sent to her house by a most secret and trusty mes∣senger.




1


With penne in steede of pearled teares,


I doe my passions paint;


Then (
Venus
 match) lend listning eares


Vnto my sad complaint;






2


Complaint of my tormented heart,


Exhibited vnto


Thy charming eyes, which worke my smart,


And euer-during woe.






3


Therefore let graciousnesse proceede,


From vndisdainefull minde:


And what your beawty made to bleede,


Salue wth your being kinde,






4


Least fondly staying ouer-long,


From lending remedie,


I doe complaine of suffered wronge,


By double crueltie.






5


Seeke not therefore (deare Dame) to cure


My sorrowe with disdaine,


Least that thereby thou dost procure,


Vnto thy selfe the paine.








6


For knowe if thou denie remorse,


Vnto my kind entreates,


I will not wooe; but ile enforce


Thee to my will, by threates.






7


Resolue thee therefore, and with speede,


What answere thou maist make.


For I determin'd am, thy fruit


Of beautie for to take;


Or missing narrowly my marke,


To make the Tree to shake. 
Adieu.


He that may commaund, and yet


entreates thee, 
Tantanes.




ERiclea,
 poore Ladie, hauing verye well entertained the messenger of 
Tātanez
 Letter, withdrew her selfe into her closet to peruse y
e
 contents. Which so soone as she had read, and thoroughly pondered y
e
 meaning therof in her thoughts, and thinking verely that the Vicegerent writ it to no other purpose but to trie her honestie towards her husband 
Za∣mez;
 whome (though none of the comelyest) she as dearely as her life affected; she determined so to answere him, as if hee meant in iest, he might know her constancie: or if in earnest, he might thoroughly perceiue her wife like fidelitie. Wher∣fore taking penne in hande, she answered him thus briefly.




Desist (deare Lord) to vndermine the fauour I doe beare


Vnto my husband; whō I loue, euen thē my selfe more deare:


And let not such polluted thoughts, once harbour in your minde,


As to request I false should be vnto my 
Zames
 kinde.


Wert thou the mightiest amongst men, 
Artabanus
 himselfe,


Thou shouldest not wrack my honesty vpon dishonors shelfe.


A 
Lais,
 may a 
Lais
 play: but shee that is a wife


(Like 
Lucrece,
 with her 
Collatine
) should lead an honest life.


Therefore desist solliciting: but if it will not be,


Seeke forth a 
Lais
 for thy lust, and not dishonest me.


Shee that scorneth thy threats,


Ericlea,
 the constant wife of 
Zames,






T
His letter deliuered to the messenger, who presented it vnto the Vicegerent, did so nippe the 
Memphian
 to the heart; as for griefe falling sicke, for a greate while he remained in great perplexitie, for sorrow that he could not obtain his hoped for fauor at 
Ericleas
 hands, whom he so dearely loued. But thinking that the cause of her refu∣sall was, by reason that her husband was yet liuing, hee re∣solued with himselfe by some cunning stratagem, to make a∣way 
Zamez.
 And therefore he presently sent for him by an Herauld to come vnto the Court. At whose summons he pre∣sently repaired vnto 
Tātanez:
 who causing certaine knights of the post, hired with goulden coyne, to accuse him of hygh treason, against the 
Egyptian
 Maiestie; without suffering him once to answere or excuse himselfe, vniustly w
t
out any law or equitie, he cōdemned him to a most cruel death. Which being executed on him, 
Tantanez
 supposing he could not now lightly misse of obtaining 
Ericlea,
 betooke himselfe once a∣gaine to solicite his loues suites; not attempting any more to winne her to his lust, but wed her to his wife: And there∣fore with purse & promises, he at once sollicited her constāt heart, and by all meanes possible enticed her to yeeld to his affections.


But all in vaine: for 
Ericlea
 still reseruing the memo∣rie of her husbande 
Zamez
 death, freshly in her minde, and knowing, how by the most vniust dealing of the Vicegerent 
Tantanez,
 he was against the order of law most rigorously condemned and executed, determined vtterly to refuse 
Tan∣tanez
 offers,
 & rather to abide y
e
 chast widow of her first chosē 
Zamez,
 then to be held the chaunging concubine, or wret∣ched (if she should be) wife of 
Tantanez.
 Whereupon shee not onely denied his lustfull suites, but firmely auowed if hee did euer againe proffer her such an iniurie, eyther in worde or writing; she would not onely be her owne executioner, and by her death disappoint him of her loue; but also woulde by her acclamations, excite her friends and allyed kinsfolkes to the reuengment of her husbands death, and her own wrong; to his vtter discredit and destruction.




All these absolute denials notwithstanding, 
Tantanes
 remained in his purpose so resolute, as seing hee could not by fa
e meanes,
 hee decermined by fowle, to ouer-maister her reiections. Wherefore he sent for her by certaine 
Place∣boes,
 who were the 
Pandors
 to his wicked lustes; & hauing her before him he condemned her vniustly to be famished in a d
ngeon, at the side of a great wood: where, for all his al∣lurements and inticing words, she remained, for the space of two dayes,
 free from any consent or thought of yielding to his wicked will; a
d so had remained to her death, had not he (euerwhelmed in his last) the third day, offered her vio∣lence, and by force attempted her chastities disparagement.


Wh
ch his wickednesse she very illcontentedly brooking, se
ng by no other meanes she could eschewe dishonour, shee determined to put her life in daunger,
 rather then to yielde her bodies fruition to so manifest a ieopardy: and therefore resoluing her s
lfe of this remedy, she desired that before she consented to this wicked entent, she might be suffered to me∣ditate w
t
 her s
lfe of her safest way of cōdescending.














Which her request, 
Tantanez
 (little suspecting any stratagem) ha∣uing graunted, the virtuous Lady arose vp on her feete, and presently pacing vnto a deepe Well of puddle water in the one side of the dungeon, standing vpon the brinkes, she sayd aloude vnto the Vicegerent;

Speake Vicegerent, whether shall 
Tantanes
 leaue his lust, or 
Ericlea
 her life?


Which words when 
Tantanez
 heard, and withal perceiued to what ende her resolution tended, he presently fell downe on his knees, and promising neuer againe to proffer her any violent wronge, with the teares in his eyes, he most earnest∣ly intreated her to desist from her so desperate enterprise; a∣uowing, neuer any more whilest he liued, to persist in his pre∣tēded purpose of her surprisage, or once againe so much as to harbor one ill meaning thought w
t
in the secret closure of his pancing, penitēt brest With which earnest spokē words of recōcilemēt, y
e
 lady somwhat pleased, though not altogether pacified for her husbāds death, causing 
Tātanez
 to sweare by

 the sacred deity of celestiall 
Iupiter,
 to forsake his intended villanie, 
hee remoued from the Well, & receiuing humble thankes of the poore vicegerent,
 she was immediately s
t at freedome from imprisonment: and being returned home vnto her house shee remained there quietly, without so much as once looking out of her doores (for feare of the like sur∣prisage) vntill cruell 
Atropos,
 hauing shred her liues thred, gaue a full period to her long-lasted languor. Thus (deare mother) haue you heard what I can answere vnto your propounded question: whereon if I haue not sufficiently di∣lated, I beseech you saue mee checklesse, by remembring my bookes are left at home, and that I am not come as a Scholler, but a souldier to pleade in armes before your maiesty.


The Queene answered him very pleasantly againe, some time reprehending him, and some time reioycing at his handsome saluing of his ignorante dispute, with excuses and therewith shee beganne to propound her second questi∣on, to Sir 
Luganto;
 who excusing himselfe, by shewing them the toppe of the rocke of the charmed shielde, gaue 
Ka∣nira
 occasion to reprehend 
Oceander
 a little, for his so long tarying in his related story, as also the rest to haue a need∣full care of both the Prince 
Oceander,
 and their owne a∣billiments; to the end that when they should attempt any dangerous aduenture, they might not the sooner miscarry by reason of some vnlooked to misse, in their armour. In this like worke they busied themselues, vntill they might per∣fectly beholde the stony rocke glister like the reflexion of the Sun, all about the brims of the inchanted shield: which y
e
 gracious 
Carthaginian
 Gouernesse reputing as a signe of y
e
 young gentleman of the seas good fortune (goshopping her palfrey close vnto him) she thus began to assure him of good and happy finishing of his aduenture:


O my most deare and louing foster-sonne, how happy may I thinke my selfe to bee, that haue brought thee vp with such care, from thy childhoode, and made thee endosse on ar∣mour in thy young yeares; since to thy glory I see thy acti∣ons to tend, and the very senselesse things by the goodnesse

 of y
e
 Gods, by strāge signes to prognosticate thy happy fortune. For to what other purpose doth the rocke effuse so exceeding a splendour about the shield? but therby to manifest, how thy exceeding valiancy shall make thee wondersome, and thy heroicke atchieuements shall make thy glory to illuminate the earth: as in a sommers day doth the glorious raies of light-bringing 
Tytan,
 begild the billowes of the Ocean with his brightsome reflexions. Feare not therefore, noble gentleman of the Sea, to attempt, nay (by force of armes & thy well boading fortune) to atchieue this straunge aduen∣ture of this shield, which is here (only for thy fame and ho∣noures encrease) placed thus wonderfully, by most cunning Inchauntments.


The forward young Prince, hearing his mothers com∣fortable excitements of him, to vndertake the performance of the enterprise, though hee foreknewe it to be somewhat dif∣ficult in atchieuing; yet with an vndaunted stomach hee de∣termined to hazard the aduenture: and in this resolution set∣ting spurres to his Palfrey, he galloped a pase towardes the rocke,
 determining in spight of his inuisible resisters, on horsebacke to approach the shield. But yet he came nigh it, by a metrodde he receiued so strong an encounter from some vnseene enemies launce, as with force of the pushe, hee was dispossessed of his saddle, & enforced whether he woulde or no, on foote to try out the euent of the aduenture.


This notwithstanding, he was no whit at all abashed: but rather enraged at his receiued fall, hee leaped vp light∣ly on his legggs againe: and vnsheathing his good Curtelax (that for the approuednesse thereof was cleped 
Scindifer
) he mainly pressed on vnto the rocke,
 and clapping his armed hand vpon the shield (for all he receiued multitudes of buf∣fets on his gauntlet) by force he pulled it from the hard stone where it was fastned; & clapping it before him, he supposed by the safegard thereof, to rush through the middest of the vnseene defendants. But as he was so indeauoring, he was thus staide by the sound of a voice, which proceeding from the hollownesse of the rocke, pronounced forth these words of comfort.




Perplex thy selfe no more, heroicke Prince,


To entertaine thy vnresisting soes;


Whome by your valour you did erst conuince.


For knowe that now wailing their ouerthrowes,


They are inchaunted here by magicke arte,


Within this Rocke to bide eternall sm
t.


These verses draue such exceeding ioy into the young Princes heart, as hee presently kneeled downe vpon his knees, and with great deuotion,
 he rendered thanks to the Gods, for that they had giuen so good successe vnto his en∣terprise. Which his sodain gladnesse, so soone as 
Carthagini∣nian Kanira
 perceiued, with the other six knights, she ranne vnto the young gentleman of the Sea, and most kindly em∣bracing, and kissing him, she gratefully rendered him excesse of thankes for his good atchieuement: which being thus happily finished, with great ioy and mirth, they mounted thē∣selues (hauing before alighted for the 
Bassient
) and putting spurs to their Palfreys, they pased home againe withan in∣different celerity: & hauing forgotten to propound any more questions, they counted it their 
propositum,
 to prattle onely of the prince 
Oceanders
 actions; which not only the knight, but the Queene herselfe; euen vnto the very heauens, extolled with admiration.


Iourneying onwards in this sort towards their Castle in great iouisance, they perceiued a farre off, a dwarfe to ap∣proach towards them,
 leading a horse loaden with very cost∣ly furniture for a warlike Champion: which being of a new faire colour very richly ennameled, and beautified with di∣uers rockes of gould & siluery hewe, interlaced here & there w
t
 sundry sorts of Cristall scaled fishes, made such a faire shew through y
e
 pleits of a loose Lawne (wherwith it was co∣uered) as this troope of gallants were greatly delighted w
t
 the beautifulnesse therof. But so soone as the dwarfe was come something nigh vnto them, he demaunded, which of thē was the young gentleman of the Sea? Who being shewed him, taking 
Oceander
 by the armed hand, & kissing it, hee in this wise saluted him from his master: Noble gen∣tleman

 of the Ocean, my Lord and master, the wise and lear∣ned 
Artimagus,
 knowing by his art, of your noble finished enterprize of the inchaunted shield, and foreseing by his cunning and skill in Nigromancy, the exceeding daungers, and ineuitable misfortunes, that you are hereafter to vnder∣goe, or hardly escape, hath sent you by me his seruant, this rich coate armour (which by his magicke arte hee hath so charmed, as it shall neuer faile you in the hottest conflicte) in token of his firme friendshippe and loue which hee bea∣reth vnto you, and as an obligation to binde him as a most duetifull seruant vnto your Princely safeguard.


Hauing ended his salute, hee tooke downe the armour from his hackney, and vncouering it, gaue it vnto 
Oceander:
 who not a little ioyfull for being owner of so gorgeous a piece of harnesse,
 rewarding the dwarfe, sent him backe with innumerable thankes to his master 
Artimagus,
 for so rare a present: and causing himselfe presently to bee indos∣sed with his inchaunted armour, hee found it more fit for him then the nine hide-folded Target for the vigorous arme of the invulnerable 
Greekish
 Champion 
Achilles;
 and more gorgeous, then the Vulcan-framed armour of 
Aeneas,
 fetched from the 
Cyclops
 forge by the 
Paphian
 Goddesse 
Cytharea,
 when she sought for her sonnes safeguarde (from the fury of 
Rutilian Turnus
) fighting for a kingdome, and his loue 
La∣uinia. Oceander
 being thus gorgeously armed in the inchaun∣ted harnesse, and stoutly aduancing his shield (the deuice whereof was the 
Neptunian
 kingdome) hee praunced vp & downe before Queene 
Kanira,
 being esteemed of his behoul∣ders, to be the best accomplished gentleman in all the ter∣ritories of the 
Afrike
 continent.


But, by this time hauing sufficiently glutted their eyes with gazing on the gorgeousnesse of the armour,
 they once againe set forward to the Castle: which, by the shutting in of the euening, they entred; but alas, in an ill hower. For they no sooner came vp into the great hall, but they sawe where eleuen of their best knights were sitting on their chaires, halfe deade with the daungerous wounds they had lately receiued in a conflict, against the cruell 
Nigrestoe,
 Ne∣phewe

 of y
e
 tyrant 
Marcimodes;
 who with a band of warlike 
Thebans,
 and 
Barbarians,
 had that afternoone most furiously assaulted the Castle,
 and (wounding those knights) by force taken away from the walles, the deade corps of the treache∣rous Duke 
Organio,
 and carried it away vnto 
Marcimodes;
 who within a while avowes, for his brothers death, to take a more cruell and sufficient reuengement.


The good Queene, hearing these sorrowfull tidings, was exceedingly vexed; insomuch as, sitting her downe, shee re∣sted silent for a long while; for very griefe of hart not able to vtter a word, and in that sort remained all the other, both knights and gentlemen: But 
Oceander
 (whose stomach ra∣ther yearned to wreake an iniury, than waile a misfortune; coueting rather to cry quittance,
 then to lamēt quite helples with his enemies) made 
Nigrastoes
 cruel dealing an edge to reuenge; & enraged w
c
 the 
Thebans
 actions, in y
e
 vehemency of his anger, he plighted solemne promises, to requite 
Nigrastoe
 to the proofe for his so bould aduenturing: and therewith all hee plotted forth a stratagem, befitting to the night; and only made the Queene, and certaine others of his friends priuy to his attempts; with onely one dwarfe named 
Trufidill.
 Af∣ter his repast taken, hee departed from the Castle 
Carzar,
 and in the silence of the pitchy night, hee tooke his way spee∣dily towards the sea side; where hee rested himselfe vntill the appearing of y
e
 cheerefull morning: whose due harbēger, 
Lucifer,
 was no sooner mounted on the clouds, giuing vnfai∣ned notice of the approperating day, but that this wor∣thy Prince remounted his Palfrey, and from the shoare side directly trauailed to the campe of 
Marcimodes
 (part wherof being not able to be lodged within the citie, was pitched, without the walles of 
Carthage
) where being admitted vn∣to the presence of 
Marcimodes,
 he faining himselfe (more truely then hee thought) to be a 
Grecian;
 humbly requested his orders of knighthoode at the tyrants handes,
 to be giuen him. 
Marcimodes
 eying the yoūg prince, & perceiuing him to be of an excellent feature, was very greatly delighted; and hoping thereby hee might winne the 
Greeke
 for his con∣stant friend, taking his sword and striking him three blowes

 on the shield, he girded the knightly sworde vnto him, and commaunding him to rise sir knight, he schooled him to ob∣serue religiously and loyally his orders of knighthoode:
 and neuer but in a iust quarrel to offer the combat vnto any per∣son.


Schoole thy selfe tyrant with that lesson (quoth the gentle∣myn of the Sea) and teach not me those precepts, which thou thy selfe hast dissoyally eschewed. For assure thy selfe hereof 
Marcimodes;
 that I, only to correct such villany and iniu∣stice, haue at this time taken vpon mee these knightly orders. 
Marcimodes
 hearing the boulde (though true) speaches of the knight of the Sea, could in no wise re∣fraine from vttering his conceiued anger by his hearts mes∣senger.


Proud and vndiscrete new made knight, how darest thou, being but euen now inuested with the royall orders, once so presumptuously to vpbraid mee with disloyalty, who haue (almost longer yeares, then thou hast daies) with my sword, couragiously maintained the honour of vnstained knight∣hoode? Doe but stay a while (foolish hardy young springould) vntill I haue but armed mee; & with my sword (to thy cost) I shal shew thy dul capacity, how ill the insolent words are befitting for thee.


Herewith, in a chafe, he went hastily into his tent to arme himselfe, thinking in a moment to haue made 
Oceander
 w
t
 his life to doe penant satisfaction, for his committed presūp∣tion. But he was deceiued of his purpose, at that time, by his Nephew 
Nigrasto;
 who, seing the reproach that 
Marci∣modes
 suffered, had sodainly (and therefore slightly) armed himselfe, & came out vnto 
Oceander
 with a volley of threats, giuing the watchword vnto the combat.


By 
loue,
 thou foolish strippling. I maruell how such foolish∣hardy audacity could once enter into thy cowardly breast,
 as that thou shouldest so much as dare to but behold a frowne, much lesse abide the fury of the most mighty Commaunder of all 
Africa?
 But since thy bould presumption hath drawne thee into so intricate a labyrinth of our displeasure: by the heauens high Ruler, though I am nor my Lord 
Marcimodes;


 yet at my hands, full dearly shalt thou buy thy follies repen∣tance. To which 
Oceander:
 Thinke not 
Nigrastoe,
 that I am ignorant of thy name, or cursed conditions: But letting this passe, know tyrant that I am destined to bee thy death, and that on my Launces point, as on the speare of 
Phtigian Hector,
 sitteth confusion to my enimie; and dismall des∣truction to my despisers. Defend thee therefore; for not thou,
 but I, am determined the assailant. And herewith they both set spurres to their coursers, and encountered toge∣ther with such a fiercenesse, as both their Launces being shiuered in pieces, they prouided them of fresh and stron∣ger: wherewith, returning to the second encounter, they crossed each others helmes so rigorously, as 
Oceander
 was by the strength of his aduersaries push, inforced (in spight of his heart) to kisse his horse crouper. But 
Nigrastoe,
 hauing his buckles of his helmet broken, by the fury of 
Oceanders
 affronting, was deceiued of his headpeece: and being cast out of his saddle (and yet loath to leaue his stir∣roppes) hee hung backwardes at his horse heeles: who, in dragging him vy the feete alongst the fieldes, with his horned hooues, battered his armour, so close vnto his backeside and ribbes;
 as hee soone made his weary soule with dolefull grones and heartbreaking sighes, to giue his battered bodie a sorrowfull farewell.


Which wofull Tragedie of 
Nigrastoe,
 when the knights of 
Thebes
 and 
Barbary
 behelde, they cryed to arms: and together by multitudes, euen in a moment,
 get∣ting them to their weapons, they clustered about the pa∣uilion of their Generall: and causing him to mount a mighty 
Bactrian
 Course, they furiously pursued after the knight of the Sea, crying out, cursing, banning, and outragiously exclaming vpon 
Oceander:
 whome, calling the accursed newe knight, they wished might repasse home againe with his life in safetie. Thus rode the tray∣terous franticke 
Thebans
 in a rage, after the knight of the Sea. Who (no whit at all weighing their in vaine spent curses, or bitter bannings) for the safeguarde of his life, tooke his speediest way towardes the Castle

 
Carzar:
 from the turrets wherof, being by the diligent watch∣men a farre off descryed; hée was presently reskued by twentie or thirtie worthie knights; who comming vpon the spurre vnto his aide, encountred so couragiously with the foremost of the tyrants souldiers, as (sending at the least a score of 
Barbarians,
 and with them 
Marcimodes,
 vnto the earth) they made them by heapes, as fast to recoyle vnto their Campe,
 as they came by multitudes in pursuit vnto the Castell; some of them for feare hurting themselues, maiming their friends, and in such sort mischieuing their companions; as more miscarried in their fearefull flight, then fell by the vnresistable furie of their opposing aduer∣saries. Which vnlooked for foyle, when the tyrant 
Marci∣modes
 perceiued; hée remained halfe in an extasy at his misfortunes; exclaming against heauen, cursing earth, and blaspheming the name of his Gods;
 in such irreligious sort, as he fully demonstrated himselfe to bee as hee was; a Barbarous miscreant and a Godlesse Infidell. But yet at last (hauing already giuen his rage sufficient scope) hee somewhat pacified himselfe with full hope of reuenge. And therewith, causing the deade bodies of 
Nigrasto
 and 
Orga∣nio,
 with solemne cerimonies (according to the custome) to be burned, he disolued their ashes into little barrels of wine; whereof hee euery morning dranke an heartie draught,
 coueting to make his body their sepultures; whose waight and bones, the earth and fire hee iudged vnworthy to carry or consume. To which his proud superstitious∣nesse, wee will for this time leaue him, to proceede more forward with our abruptly finished history of the knight of the 
Tigre,
 and the worthy 
Grecian
 Prince, 
Olbio∣cles.








CHAP. 8.




¶ Of the Knight of the 
Tygars
 arriuall at the 
Hermits
 cell: and the comfort the ould Father yielded him by the relation of his owne misfortunes: howbeit notwithstanding, 
Troglader
 inraged with commemoration of his owne wickednesse, with his owne hands ended his life in the Hermites groue; and how the Prince 
Olbiocles,
 finding his dead carcasse, de∣liuered it vnto the Hermite to be interred: of whome hee receiued directions concerning his enquest.




H
Auing with disgrace (as you haue hearde) in such vnexpected manner, receiued a due re∣compence for his villanies, at the handes of his most hated Enemie 
Olbiocles:
 the van∣quished Knight of the 
Tygar,
 with all might and maine trauailed from the Castle of the Rounde Iland,
 foure or fiue dayes iourney into the farther part of the Iland: where he entered into a large and a thick set groue, very pleasantly decked here and there, w
t
 Dates, Oranges, and Oliue trées; which rendered so odoriferous a sauour, as he was not onely refreshed, but also exceedingly delighted with so delicate obiects; insomuch, as in his conceit he deemed it the sole Paradice of 
Siluanus;
 who had plan∣ted those fragrant arbours, for the pleasant recreating of his beawtious 
Clarian;
 or the silent groue of 
Calisto,
 wherin en∣amoured 
Iupiter,
 in likenesse of a woodnymph, did dally with her. In so great an amazement, did he stand gazing on their quiuering braunches, as at length an extreame desire exci∣ted him to enter into the bowels of the wood; to see if perad∣uenture he might encounter with any courteous passenger, that of his meere compassion, woulde charitably accept of him, for his companion. And herewith, because the way was but onely a small track of footemen, thorough the thicke set Bushes (whose narrownesse was impassable for any trauai∣ler on horseback) he presently dismoūted; and vnbridling his Palfrey, he turned him loose vnto the pastures; and on foote

 tooke his waye towardes the middest of the Groue; not of a long while hearing or seing any one, of whom he might re∣ceiue but euen the common comfort; vntill about that time the days illustrator had in his goulden charriot, fully moun∣ted vnto the toppoinct of the Zodiack. At what time, he per∣ceiued comming from the East side of the wood, an ould age wearted man,
 clad after a homely yet a comely) fashion, w
t
 a white long beard reaching downeward vnto his girdle. at the buckles wherof hung a leatherne Scrip, a booke, and an holland handkerchiefe: wherewith, ouer-laboured with ga∣thering windfallen rotten boughes, hee wiped the sweate from off his wrinkled forehead: which was as proud of those trickling small drops, as the 
Pactolian
 sand-hills of their most pretious glistering Pearles, there left and forsaken of the ebbing billowes of the bubbling waters. To whom, the wandring Knight giuing y
e
 time of the day, as courteously as his sorrowes could afford him, the graue Hermite in this courteous manner greeted.


Welcome young Prince (for so I do suppose thee)


Vnto this silent vnfrequented groue:


Where after wearie toyle, you may repose ye,


In quiet hermitage, which here aboue


I builded haue of mudde and strawe compacted,


Suffitient inough to keepe him free,


From showring rayne and tempest, that extracted


From worldes abuses, willingly would be;


And from the restlesse and disturbing rage,


Of earthly wightes pernicious perturbations:


Stately in ough, for my declining age;


Who onely doe desire, in meditations


Of high 
Iehouah,
 and his sacred lawe,


The small remainder of my life to spende.


Which since to death I see so neare to drawe,


I nourish chatily to godly ende.


In which my poore, simple, vndecked Cell


(Such one as 
Baucis,
 with 
Philemon
 had)


And if with me you shall vouchsafe to dwell,




I shal be of your company more glad,


Then can a Father be of his deare Sonne,


After he hath him many yeares forgonne.


This welcome was vttered in such affectionate sort by y
e
 good ould Hermite; as the Knight of the 
Tygar,
 perpending with himselfe, in what securitie, he might there safely re∣maine free from any pursuing Enemies, with that godly fa∣ther; he accepted willingly of his courteous offer, & rendring him thanks for his adiument in such a time of tribulation, he went along with him to the solitarie Cell;
 in the way at full relating vnto the Hermit, the whole historie of his mis∣fortunes, from point to point as you haue already heard it. Which ended, the auntiēt Separiste, cōforting him vp with an 
Exordium
 of good counsel, at last wishing thoroughly his welfare; by declaring his owne mischaunces, he went about to exhort hym to beare his miseries with patience, in hope of some better following happinesse,








 his relation of mishappes.


AT what time the mighty Emperour of 
Moscouia
 (na∣med by reason of his virtues and stayed gouernement 
Basileon
) waged intestine warres against the powerfull 
Cor∣lordine
 of 
Caspia,
 I was not only in fauor,
 but also in a firme conioyned bonde of amity wyth my Souereigne: whose gra∣cious looks I accompted more worth then the worlde, and whose committed secrecies, I retained with more inuiola∣ble affection, then my very soule. Insomuch as if he smiled, I was ioyfull: if frowned, I accounted my selfe ioylesse & vnfortunate. For in his lookes lay my life, and in his blithe∣some browes my blessednesse: so as I thought nothing good, but what he did: no religion true, but what he embraced: nor no man happy, but whom he most fauoured:
 so far did my affection lead my fansie, to esteeme hym aboue all earthly, and honoured him aboue the heauenly gouernours. But all Riuers beare not 
Tagus
 goulden sandes: neyther was hee whome I so adored,
 endued with the heauenly virtues (that I supposed) for anye long continuance: but ma∣king friendshippe, a visage for his villanye, hee sought

 by such secret meanes to effect my tragedy. The reasō this; y
t
 exceeding fame of my most deare wiues beawtye (for none was more beawtifull then my 
Albinoë
) being by pick thanks 
Pandors
 buzzed in his itching eares, he was so enflamed with her features (as his lust suffering no longer stay) he present∣ly sent a messenger vnto mee, to declare by word of mouth, as also by his Maiesties Letters, his Highnesse affection to 
Albinoë.
 The one I heard, the other I read: and the 
Nuntio
 I courteously receiued, rewarded honourably, and humbly returned vnto his Master, with most wished tydinges of my consenting: who herein, without making my poore 
Albi∣noe
 acquainted, sent her presently most honourably atten∣ded, with a troope of my trustiest seruaunts, to the 
Moscan
 Court,
 to satisfie the vnnatural beastly lust of the lasciuious Tyrant: But seing her sad countenance at her departure, as she was mounting vp into her coach, I sought to comfort her with this kinde farewell. 
Albinoe,
 my deare 
Albinoe,
 cheere vp thy drooping thoughtes, affrighted with thy so∣daine departure vnto our Soueraigne (for vnto him it is I send thee) since thou thy selfe dost knowe and I canne also assure thée, of his exceeding virtue: as thou needest neyther doubt, nor I feare any following misfortune. God almigh∣tie graunt it (quoth she) but my soule is affrighted with the presage of some ensuing danger. All must sort out as it plea∣sed God and our King (quoth I) and herewithall committed the innocent Lambe to the furie of the deuouring Woolfe:
 who quickly made his pray of her vnspotted honestie; w
t
out eyther regard of her honour or exclamations. Which being done, he sent home againe vntome, the haplesse wife of an vn∣happy husband:
 rather repressing, thē reuenging my poore wiues wrong on y
e
 lasciuious Tygre, who abused my friend∣ship by his filthinesse; and distained my loyall loue, with the dregges of defiling lust: who was not contented by making me the 
Pandor
 to his pleasure,
 to robbe me of my right; but also within a while, beginning to loath the thing that hee earst so earnestly loued, he sought my dearest wiues confusi∣on; & by her death, my liues destructiō: which in so cunning a sort he endeuoured to haue effected, as neyther by his looke

 or gesture, could of any of vs, bee eyther of my wife or mee, (poore soules) once so much as suspected.


For hauing in a maner reconciled himselfe, by his faigned submission, both with my wife and me,
 he earnestly inuited vs vnto a banquet, in a little pauilion, which he had pitched by the side of a broade and swift running riuer: where wel∣coming vs very courteously, he entertained vs with dainty cates to please the taste, rare obiectes to inchaunte our eies, and most swete sounding Musicke to delight our senses: in∣somuch as wee thought our selues happy, to haue so gra∣cious a Souereigne, and iudged our chaunces fortun
 
 enioying so familiar a friend. But long this our excell 
 ioye lasted not: for his wicked lust, hauing erst l
 vnto lewdnesse, brought his conscience to sorro
 
 committed villanie; yet not with repentance, but with 
¦uenge, seeking to blot out his faults remembrance: Inso∣much as now minding to manifest his malice, he, vnder a faigned shewe of kindnesse, dranke a 
Cleopatraes
 draught vnto 
Albinoë;
 and in deliuering the boawle vnto her, he tou∣ched the brims therof with so stronge a poulder, as my wife no sooner tasted thereof, but shee fell downe breathing; out,
 together with her life, this sorrowfull farewel.




Vnkinde, ingrate, cruell 
Basileon,


A former iniurie thus to requite.


Hadst thou no subiect else to worke vpon,


But onely me, poore miserable wighte?


What if thou hadst or not? Hereof assured


Bee, that I ioy in this my death procured.






In that I knowe remembraunce of the shame,


That thou hast wrought to me vnhappy woman,


Shall here on earth commaculate thy fame,


And thee accompted make a Beast, no man:


And after death, my soule shall dayly cry


To 
Saturns
 sonne, to venge thy tyranny.






AS soone as she had ended her speach and was dead, the cruell vnremorsefull Tyrant 
Basilion
 arose from hys seate, and with his fauchon strake of her necke. Which, in such violent sort disseuered, left a bubbling foūtaine of blou∣die goare betweene y
e
 headlesse shoulders. Which sight made me exceeding sad: so as I could not chuse, but, with the teares in my eyes casting sorrowfull glaunces vppon so dismall a spectacle, crie out (without eyther regarde or feare of the ty∣rants furie) Oh 
Albinoe,
 my deare 
Albinoe,
 how deepely thy heads smart penetrateth into my loyall heart, let y
e
 teares 
sse the faithfull messengers of my miseries. Herewith 
ooke vp my deare Ladies head, and causing her body to be 
ried in the sandy shoares, I was about to depart into the 
 
os
o,
 there with full determination to manifest my 
ued iniuries before the 
Muscouian
 estates: whose iustice I knewe to be such as would quickly haue seuerely punished so great wickednesse. But 
Basilion,
 iealous of my pretence, sent after me, a bande of his trusty seruants; who, with their weapons compassing me about made my heart astonished at that thē, which I afterwards most earnestly desired: & brin∣ing me vnto 
Basilion,
 they made me in spight of my heart, to sweare vnfaignedly, neuer hereafter whilest I liued to disclose the committed murther:
 but rather in a new made bonde of friendshippe, to plight my selfe obliged to his cruell Tyrannie. Which I did: and thereupon licence was giuen me, to depart home. Where for a long season I remained se∣cret, not daring to see; much lesse to speake w
t
 any body. But onely in the night season I would oft-times take my walke vnto the Sea side, where my deare 
Albinoe
 lay buried: where taking her goulden haired head, from forth of a little coffin (wherein I had placed it) in spight of my teeth, my thoughts Embassador would vtter forth my soules extreamities.




O world of woes, wherein I once delighted;


Faire fashion'd head, of naught but sorrowes matter


Compacted, framed cunningly, condighted


By Natures selfe onely the world to flatter;


With fruitlesse hope of thy fruition,


Which in a moment was begun and done.








Done in a moment may I rightly say:


For to thy cheekes, faire cheekes of yuorie hewe,


Thy bewty was but ioyned for to betray


Thy soules deare gemme: which lost, ne'rs got anew.


For by th'attractiue vigour of thy beawtie,


He did obay, to pay a duelesse dutie.






He did obay. Ah had he not obayed,


Then had I liu'd secure, carelesse vnscorned;


Which by his wicked lust, being now betrayed,


Am loue-rob'd, life-reau'd, hopelesse, hap-forlorned:


And all by him, whome I to much belieued,


Wicked &c. but ho; blab not his name though grieued.






Oh had he had remorse, or manlike pittie,


He would not haue enuenom'd those with poyson,


From out betwixt whose ruby closet prettie,


He sucked with delight, his fancies foyson:


Which singing his soules musicke neuer misses,


But whil'st he descanted on them with kisses.






But ruby those are pale, and her faire tapors,


Which like to 
Luna,
 heauens illuminated,


Are dulled now by death, like 
Nilean Papors:


Whose force, and vigour, by the flouds abated,


Doe droope their hea dsnd circle to the grounde:


Euen so did lust these Lamps of light confounde.






These Lamps of light confound; whose glorious shine


Would 
Ioue
 himselfe, from 
Iuno
 haue enticed,


Are now become dull, iellied, not bright eyne,


Because their lights foundation being sliced,


The builded 
Architecture
 needs must fall,


Which then is worse then neuer built at all.


Thus this poore head, with cheeks & lipps, & eyes,


Slic'd, beawtylesse, pale, iellied, decayes, dyes,


And I (poore soule) in teares, doe wish that neuer,


They had been so, not to continue euer.






I
N this sort would I many times lament ouer the breathlesse body of my poore 
Albinoe,
 with whome my ioyes, pleasure, libertie, and life, were in a ma∣ner ended, thwarted, disturbed, and almost finished: where∣with, I, for so long a time and so many nights, spēt my selfe; as almost ouerwearied with such extreame watching, I chaunced to lay me downe on the sandie graue of my decea∣sed wife, to take some sense-refreshing nap. Where I no soo∣ner slumbred, but there appeared before mee the pale Ghost of my 
Albinoe,
 in such hideous and horrible sort dismem∣bred,
 as I rather thought it but my dreaming fancie then some true vision of any risen bodye; vntill such time as I heard her with a soft hollow voice, to vtter forth these sigh∣ing lamentatiōs: which with so liuely, though lamentable, action she out-breathed, as my foolish fancie almost mistoke her to be liuing.




Vnhappy wight, why dost thou thus lament,


Ouer the body of thy wife in vaine,


With dimmed eyes, and cheeks with teares besprent?


Since I (for whome alone thou dost complaine)


Am reaued of my simple sepulture,


Which thou (poore 
Calander
 with sorrowes rent)


Amids the bowels of this sandy plaine,


Didst for thy slaine 
Albino
 procure.






For knowe, no sooner had the sable Night,


Thrice
 with her hellish darknesse ouerspread


The glorious splendor of 
Olympos
 light,


And thrice to 
Limbo,
 her blacke mantles led,


But that the 
Moscan
 Prorex, in a rage,


At such my simple buriall tooke spight:


And taking from my graue my carcasse dead,


Gainst it he cruellie newe warre did wage.






And in his furie, with his brandisht sworde,


Tyrannously he did my body spoyle.


For why? therewith hauing my stomacke gor'd,


With filthie-clotted blood he did defoyle




My stiffened limbes, which long death ouerspred:


Then with his curtleax (in sort abhord)


He all my carcasse thus dismembered,


And all the ioynts did in a Cauldron boyle.






And Loe, hee meanes in farre more cruell wise


(Erst as he hath done vnto mee thy wife)


Ouer thy selfe yer long to tyrannize.


Wherefore some other place from tyrants strife,


Enquire thou forth; where thou in safety


Maiest euermore remaine. Therefore arise,


And swiftlier then the ayre, shift for thy life;


Least by thy stay thou breede thy misery:


But now farewell; I must to 
Elizye.




Shee no sooner ended her tale, but she presently vanished, leauing mee (poore soule) halfe distracted from my senses, for griefe of my poore 
Albinoës
 anguishe: insomuch, as the very vexation of my heart, caused my eyes to open; and being broken out of my slumber, I pondered with my selfe of the wonderful apparance of my deare wife: whose admonition of flight so peplexed mee, as I presently (finding indeede her bodie to be vngraued) resolued of my iourney into some other country. Whereupon, leaping into a boat which was fast floating at the shoare, I betooke my selfe to the sea; neuer determining either to rowe with the Oare, or turne to land for prouision, vntill such time, as by the course of the wa∣ters, I should be cast on land at some vnknowne and alien kingdome: when hauing in that purpose resolutely a certain space continued, I was at length, through the mercy of the pittying heauens, surged on the Coasts of this same Iland; wherein, erecting this poore simple Hermitage, I haue for these fortie winters (thankes be to God) to my contentment, in quiet remained. Thus (gentle Prince) haue you heard my miseries, and seene the salue of my misfortunes: which if with patience you shall willingly follow, no doubt but it shall prooue to your bodies ease and your soules eternall contentation.










The knight of the 
Tygre,
 hearing 
Kalanders
 relation, ra∣ther grewe to be more perplexed then pacified, with his re∣membrance of his miserable estate:
 and the more the good ould father desired his safety, the more 
Troglador
 despaired of saluation. And therefore, as despaire is the mother of damnation: so his hopelesse, restlesse, & tormented thoughts leading him to destruction, hee presently rushed out of the Hermites Cell, & entring a furlong or thereabouts into the woode; with his dagger he ingraued vpon the barke of an Oliue tree, whereon he hanged himselfe, these verses fol∣lowing.


Blacke sinne, oreloading my tormented soule,


With sad remembrance of my faults committed,


Enforceth mee, my wickednesses foule


Firmely to feare, neuer to bee remitted:


In which distrust, this Oliue I prepare


To shewe the signall of my dire despaire.


The godly hermit, for all his hast hee made to preuent this mischiefe, came to late to prouide a medicine for 
Tro∣gladors
 miserable mischaunce. For, before hee coulde once finde him out and haue a sight of him, he was starke deade, his lips blacke, his countenance colde, and his members stiffe, & his lifelesse bodie alreadie cut downe, by the Prince 
Olbiocles:
 who after al the good entertainements giuen him at 
Acconumboes
 castle (where he instituted the good knight 
Aradinus
 gouernour) had followed in pursuite after y
e
 knight of the 
Tigre;
 and euen at his last gaspe, hanging on the Oliue tree, found him.


The 
Grecian
 prince was exceeding sory, though not that 
Troglador
 was deade, yet because of his hands (by reason of his selfe caused death) he escaped vnpunished. But seing there was now no other remedy, he determined to suffer his ghost to passe quietly ouer the 
Stigian Lake:
 and therefore with his dagger (as well as he could) he endeauoured to digge forth a sepulture. But perceiuing ould 
Calander,
 with all might & maine, to approach him, he relinquished his endeauour; and

 deliuering the deade body of the knight of the 
Tygre,
 to the Hermit (who in that place buried him) also hauing related vnto him, his vndertaken charge for finding out of the sur∣prized 
Grecian
 princesses, he receiued from his aged mouth, these cunning directions, concerning his enquest.




My sonne, my son (quoth he) though sorrow makes me


Vnwontedly to tremble, and amazed


To stand, with both my minde and body crazed;


Yet shal I in myne Arte not much mistake thee:


But by my knowledge gotten long agoe,


I shall to thee some following chaunces showe.






Listen therefore vnto the words I speake,


And in thy heart imprint my declaration.


For why? those wonders vnto thee I breake,


That all the world shall haue in admiration;


And onely by thy wofull hapn'd chaunce,


Thou shalt the fame of worthy knights aduance.






For yet thou shalt finde out the gemme of 
Greece,


(Which is detain'd vpon the 
Aegypticke
 shoares)


Thou shalt thy bodies outward feature leese:


And in the forrest mongst stif-bristled Boares,


Thou shalt goe grunting, grinding of thy tushes,


Making thy cabbinet amongst the bushes.






Twice seauen yeares in such a monstrous shape


Thou shalt remaine, estranged from thy selfe,


Till by thy helpe thy sonne shall safe escape


From daunger of of thy Sirtes, and sandy shelfe;


Who shall by chiualry the spels vndoe,


Of hellish hagge, that thee transmuted so.






Then shalt thou ioy, and then remember this:


But long your friendshippe with him shall not last.


For in the middest of your pleasures blisse,


Your ioy vnto annoy shall be displaste.




For him you shall in Ocean drown'd misdeeme,


And to an Eagle you shall chaunged seeme.






Out of which misery, by maidens hand


You shall be straungely set at liberty:


With whom, you shall depart to 
Africke
 land;


Where you shall see, amids her misery,


Your Lady freed, the captiuer dismaide,


By courage of straunge knight, and English maid.






Then shall you ioy, then shall you liue in peace,


Within the bowels of your country 
Greece;


Vntill some worser fortune doe befall you,


Which shall vnto farre greater mischife hall you:


Yet corage, gentle Prince: for through your griefe,


You shall receiue new pleasure, and reliefe.




Herewith the Hermit ceased, and 
Olbiocles
 rendering him hearty thankes for his directions (by reason that by this time the firie charriot horses of the Sunne, ouerweari∣ed with their long labour, had drenched themselues in the westerne Ocean, for the refreshing of their sweating mem∣bers) departed with ould 
Kalander
 to his hermitage; where wee will for this time leaue him to his rest a while, to re∣turne againe to our 
Africke
 Champion 
Oceander:
 whose manlike heart burned within the enclosure of his breast, with the ardent desire he had to reuenge the Queene 
Rami∣ras
 iniury, vpon that vsurping and cruell tyrant 
Marcimo∣des;
 who, all this while fretting with fury for his Nephew 
Nigrastoes
 ouerthrowe, hath solemnly sworne by his great God 
Termagaunt,
 vtterly to ruinate that same pelting Castle of the 
Carthaginian
 runnagates.








CHAP. IX.




¶ The assault of 
Marcimodes
 against the castle of the Queene; and of the cruell combat betweene him and the young knight of the Sea: and how 
Marcimodes
 by treason caught him captiue; and was redeemed by the valour of a straunge knight of the fiue swords; by whose helpe 
Oceander
 slewe 
Marcimodes,
 and ouerthrewe all his armie.




I
Nflamed as yet with the extreame iniu∣ry offered vnto his foster-mother, the gratious Queene of 
Carthage,
 the noble knight of the Sea could not chuse, but continually be deuising and contriuing for the newe complots, to wreake more sufficient reuengement on the knight of the 
Round orbs
 (for such was the deuise in the shielde of the tyrant.) wherefore, so soone as the daies guidresse,
 
Au∣rora,
 had the next morning appeared, hee armed himselfe in his inchaunted armour; & with the residue of the 
Carthagi∣nian
 Champions, which bare true loyalty towardes their Soueraigne, hee prepared himselfe to depart towardes the pauilions of 
Marcimodes.
 But as hee was in egresse from the Castle, hee was giuen to vnderstand (by the watchmen from the battlements) of the assured and present approach of the tyrant to the assaulting of the Castle;
 with such a mighty troupe of souldiers, as they seemed in multitude to passe the starres, and in number almost equall to the sandes of the Sea. Wherefore the baser sort of souldi∣ers, at so vnexpected an infinitie of enemies, stoode amazed; and their courage failing them, they wauered betwixt hope and feare, to whether side they should betake themselues. Which the valorous knight of the Sea perceiuing; like a good Captaine, in this sort hee cheared vp the hearts of his drouping souldiers.


O yee noble and couragious 
Carthaginians,
 my mates in armes, and worthy followers; what cause hath so crac∣ked

 your credits? and what auke occasion hath thus cooled your vndaunted courages? What is it at a rabble of tyran∣nizing robbers,
 that you are amazed? and is it at the sight of a few base & cowardly carpet knights that you are in this vnwonted sort troubled? O my friendes, if so it bee; de∣pell that fearefull faintheartednesse, and trusting in the iustnesse of your quarrell, cry 
Canira
 for 
Carthage;
 and with your swordes pointes write your angry lessons cou∣ragiously on the breast of your 
Barbarian
 enemies, in blo
∣dy Characters; that either by death or victory, you may bee renowned through all following posteritie; who shall Chronicle vp your conquestes in leaues of molten brasse, with this title; 
Beholde the men that dyed for Countries good.
 Courage therefore braue competitors: and since 
Marcimodes
 is come to fore vs at our Castle gates, let vs giue him so hote a welcome, as hee shall but ill fauoured∣ly bragge of his entertainement.


The drouping heartes of the 
Carthaginians
 were so cheared with these comfortable exhortations, as they pre∣sently with one accord cryed out; The iustice of our quar∣rell for good Queene 
Kanira
 and 
Carthage:
 and there∣withall they fiercely assailed their approaching enemies: with whome they so valiantly contended,
 as of a great while it could scarcely be iudged to which side the victo∣ry would encline: vntill, at last oppressed with multitude, their assailing in euery place without the warlike order, y
e
 
Carthaginians
 were in spight of their teethes (yea though their Generall did admirable actes of Chiualry) enforced to retyre with shame into their Castle:
 where, maugre their valiant resistance, the stout 
Barbarians
 entered, to∣gether with them, in at the gates. Which caused such excee∣ding courage in 
Marcimodes;
 as, not staying to enter with his souldiers, hee caused ladders to be set against the wall. Wherby mounting vp to the battlements with his 
Theban
 Champions, he had made it a bloudy day to the 
Car
hagi∣nians;
 had he not beene the sooner espyed by the knight of the Sea: who like a valiant Captaine, beeing vigilant to

 helpe all places, trauersed vp and downe the Castle, here aiding and there succouring his distressed followers: and at length, perceiuing his daungerous enemie on the Battle∣ments (who with his sworde stoode menacing destruction) hee speedily passed vnto 
Marcimodes;
 and with his courtle∣axe gaue him so sounde a welcome,
 as had he not the bet∣ter defended himselfe with his steele tempered shielde, hee had at that time receiued a sufficient guerdon for all his cru∣elties.


But 
Oceander
 gained nothing by this bargaine. For 
Marcimodes
 couragiously brandishing his fauchone about his heade, hee rendered the knight of the Sea so sounde an answere vpon the crest of his helmet; as had hee not caught the surer houldefast vpon the stones, hee had gone nigh to haue staggered off from the battlements.


Yet recouering himselfe,
 hee so furiously prepared his good sworde 
Scindifer,
 for his requitance; as 
Marcimodes
 loath to abide the doubtfull fury of his descending blowe, cast away his weapons: and grappling close with 
Oce∣ander,
 or euer hee was aware or able to preuent any such mischiefe, hee cast both himselfe and his aduersarie downe headlong amongst his souldiers; with a lowde voice cal∣ling vnto them; Heere, heere, O my worthy followers, heere lyes the enemy of all your happinesse, enclosed in the steely armes of your noble Generall, like conquered 
Hector
 yielded to the ouermatching might of the war∣like 
Ithacan.
 Hether therefore bende your forces, vali∣antly to bereaue him of libertie, who hath against the royall order of his Knighthoode, offered vnto our line∣age such hainous iniuries. Now therefore bee you all throughlie reuenged of so publike and notorious a distur∣bing enimy.


The knightes and souldiers hearing the exclaimes of their 
Theban
 Generall, with an vndiscreat fury they cir∣cled themselues rounde about the worthy 
Greeke:
 who

 vnable of so many to resist the forces, was faine (whether he would or no) to yeelde himselfe to the furie of his enimies. For,
 although his armour was so excellent and of so fine a temper, as it could in no wise be perced; yet hee beeing but young, and his synewes not fully strenghthened, and also engriped by the iron armes of his aduersarie 
Marcimo∣des,
 could not chuse but in a moment bee oppressed by so huge a multitude of vnmercifull souldiers; who had neither pittie nor compassion ouer his youth or valiancie: who hauing in this wise caught him captiue, with great showtes, in tryumphant wise (with his hands bound, and his feete tied vnder the horses belly like a base slaue) they departed with him towards their pauilions: where, what they would haue done vnto him, the latter end of this chapter shall make manif
st.


But to returne to the Castle; such shreekes, such cryes, such clamours and lamentations were there, as neither the Queene 
Kanira
 herselfe neither any of her worthy 
Car∣thaginians
 could once lift vp their eyes to the heauens, nei∣ther cast a cheerefull looke on the earth; but with weeping and howling penetrating the skyes, they went vp & downe the Castle, striking their griefe-wounded breastes with their fistes,
 in such mercilesse manner, as they manifest∣ly declared the little hope they had of his recouery, or their owne safety. And the worthy Gouernesse had ful∣ly decreed to giue ouer her life and interest in the king∣dome of 
Carthage;
 had shee not beene recomforted by the approach of a (straunge) most faire proportioned knight, all in blacke armour, with the deuice of the fiue swordes: who enquiring for the knight of the Sea, and being giuen to vnderstand of his enthralment, dasht his gauntlet on his head and therewith pointed to the declyning Sun; in token that he vowed yet the same were set, either to leaue his life, or gaine captiued 
Oceanders
 liberty. Wherewith, setting spurs to his 
Pegasian
 Palfrey, & beckening to the 
Cartha∣giniās
 for to follow him, he galloped as fast as his horse could carry him towards the tents of the tyrant. Where he was no

 sooner arriued, but he might perceiue how busily the merci∣lesse 
Barbarians
 were gathered in a cluster,
 to erect vppe an huge iron stake, wheron to torture their gotten Captiue 
O∣ceander:
 who, as yet hauing no vnderstanding of the true God, sate lamentably bewayling his miserable misfortune. To whome, the Knight of the fiue Swords drawing neare, he heard him on this wise to lament his mischaunces.


O most wretched and miserable Caytife, how vnhappy a wretch art thou, euen in the Aprill of thy aduauncements,
 to to be thus disastrously crossed by disaduentures? Haddest not th
u strength whē thou wert assayled? did thy arme faile thee in the Combate? or did thy armour deceiue thee in the conflict? None of these: for my strength was fresh my arme stronge, and my armour vnperceable. Then why didst thou not eff ct thy thoughts affecting? or, because thou faylest, why doest thou not banne thy strength, curse thy arme, and blame thy armour. O no: they did their duties, and onely ill foresight and wicked fortune, hath brought mee to this mischiefe: on whome (remedilesse) I must complaine in the midd
st of my anguish, and at my latter gaspe onely thinke my selfe wronged by her fickle deitie: whose furrowing frownes, I neuer once hope to see rechaunged into a faire calmed countenaunce. Farewell therefore deare foster-mo∣ther my gracious Soueraigne, and your loyall succourers: for neuer againe shall I reuise you, in perfect mirth and iol∣litie. But deare friends, of this I woulde to the Gods you were assured; that nothing doth halfe so much torment my troubled soule, as that I shall in this sort suffer death like a towardly caytife, & cānot coragiously giue vp my life amōgst the freely weapons of my compassion wanting Enemies.
 Herewith he offered to haue knapped the cords wherewith he was bounde, in sūder. Which y
e
 Knight of the fiue swords seeing, with his Courtleax he sliced the bands; and, giuing the enthralled Knightes handes vnexpected libertie, he snat∣ched a Launce from a stoute 
Barbarian,
 and deliuering it to 
Oceander,
 he sayd:Now noble Knight take here what thou hast so earnestly desired, and couragiously fight for thy liber∣tie, and behould me here before thee; who will rather loose

 my life, then not regaine thy freedome.


The good Knight taking the Launce in his hand, and ioy∣fully kissing it, sayde: welcome, O vnexpected author of my libertie: now shal the traytors knowe, how dearely they shal abie for my enthralment. And therwithall he gaue the 
Bar∣barian
 that was next him, so sound a buffet on the brest-plate; as he made him with teares of blood, to lamēt his so sodain∣ly happened misfortune: the like did he the second, & a third; the valiant Knight of the fiue swords, continually equalling him in his actions.
 And herewith pressing vnto the rabble∣ment of vnsuspecting 
Thebans
 and 
Barbarians,
 they rushed in amonge them so roughly, as neyther of them both, but had borne downe in a moment sixe of their armed aduersa∣ries. Which the rest of the remaining route perceiuing, they sodainely encompassed them about, and with their semiters so fiercely layd at the Champions (who were now weapon∣lesse, except their Curtleaxes) as had not speedy rescue come sodainely frō the Castle 
Carzar,
 vnder the leading of y
e
 fiue worthy Knightes 
Lugonto, Piresty, Maruall, Gerardo,
 and 
Trosney,
 they had in lesse then an howers conflict, macera∣ted both 
Oceander
 and the other knight, into a thowsande peeces.


But nowe 
Oceanders
 side, being thoroughly relieued by this fresh supply of souldiers, began greatly to triumph ouer the almost conquered 
Barbarians:
 who like sheepe before de∣uouring Leopardes, fled for their liues from y
e
 furie of their following foes; who pursued the victorie so hotly, as they made them in heapes to flie for safety to the tents of 
Marci∣modez,
 who being at his wits end for anger of so vnexpec∣ted an ouerthrowe, banned the heauens, the earth, and his Goddesse fortune, for working of his so sodain miserie. And in a rage buckling on his helmet, & taking a mighty launce in his hand, he caused his souldiers to returne againe vnto y
e
 battaile:
 and espying the ring-leaders of his enemies, hee fewtered his speare; and meeting enraged 
Oceander
 for his opponent, he smote him so stronge a blowe vpon the cuirace, as loosing both his stirrops, he was faine to embrace his hors∣necke, to saue himselfe from falling: But quite scotfree not∣withstāding

 
Marcidomez
 not escaped. For, besides y
t
 he was wounded with the Knight of the Seas Launce in the right shoulder, he was enforced by the furie of the encounter,
 to for∣sake his saddle, and as well as he could to saue himselfe frō hurt in the falling. But enfired with the foyle, hee nimbly raysed his wounded corpse from the grounde, and vnshca∣thing his fawchon, he thus angerly threatned his conten∣ding enemie.


Alight, alight, thou disloyall and traiterous Knight, and on foote with me trie out the euent of the battaile, or else, by the diuine Maiestie of the Gods I doe sweare, I shall slaye thy skipping Palfrey, and in my fury wreake the extreamest reuenge I canne against thee. Come therefore, and, an if thou canst, eyther leaue thy owne wretched, or bereaue mee of my wished life.


Now by the honour of Knighthood (answered the Knight of the Sea) thou shalt not die so faire a death 
Marcimodez.
 For neyther do thy villanies deserue a better, neyther shal I do thee wrong in giuing to thee a far worser. Now therfore prepare thy selfe to die: for vnder my horses hooues will I trample thy accursed carcasse.
 And therewith hee and his following souldiers trotted ouer him: who yielded vp his miserable life amonge the horse-heeles of his mightiest ad∣uersaries; who reioyced to heare the bitter groanes that his heart dolefully breathed, from the bottome of his brused bo∣dy. Which his ouerthrowe when his amazed souldiers saw, they fearfully betoke thēselues to flight, shamefully leauing y
e
 late vanquished 
Carthaginiās
 victors in the field. Who, ha∣uing gathered togither the most precious spoyle of the bat∣taile, most ioyfully returned w
t
 their newe obtained victo∣rie, to their expecting friend in y
e
 impregnable castle 
Carzar.






CHAP. X.




¶ Howe 
Oceander
 departed from 
Carthage
 with the Knight stranger, to the Castle of 
Briarostez:
 where hee conquered the 
Gyant,
 and dissolued the inchauntment of the 
Sorceresse Mardigua;
 whereby he recouered the valiant yong Prince 
Ptoladine
 to his senses, and finished the aduenture of the fountaine; and what thereof followed.






K
Anira,
 the good Queene of 
Carthage,
 not a lit∣tle ioyed at the happy recouered freedome of her beloued foster-sonne, the Knight of the Sea: and therefore rendered shee exeeeding thanks, to the valiaunt Knight of the fiue swords, for his happy adiument in so daun∣gerous an enterprise. But the straunge Knight, knowing that it was more for his owne profite then for hers, that 
O∣ceander
 was so aduentured for, in this sort answered.


Indeede gracious Madame, partly thorough my help he obtained the refruition of his freedome: yet I assure your Maiestie, that if his valour had been no more thā mine, we might both of vs perchaunce haue bought our libertie with the losse of our liues: and also it stoode not onely on my life, but also on my dearest Cosens for whose cause I came to implore his valiancy) that he shold be thus luckily deliue∣red. Wherefore, you are not behoulding vnto me (deare ma∣dame) but vnto my Lord the Knight of the Sea; who, by his valorous actions, is thus in an happy howre returned home to both our comforts. It seemeth then (quoth the Queene, speaking very sadly) by your speach sir, that my son should, within this little while, depart from mee to the accomplish∣ment of some aduenture. True Madame, replied y
e
 knight. Vnhappy woman as I am (then sayd she) why haue I thus ouer-liued my good fortunes? And then shed
ing a floud of pearled teares, which in two small riuers ran from her eye∣lids, she most ea
nestly entreated the straunge Knight, at that time for to pardon her young (and as it were new borne) foster sonne. But, seing his impossibilitie of condescending, yet (quoth she) since there is no other remedie but y
t
 I muste needs forgoe him, let my grieued minde be satisfied w
t
 the re∣latiō of so desperat an aduēture, as by necessity cōpels him, so sodainely to forsake vs. But, sith y
e
 tables are couered, we will omit it vntill after supper: betwixt the which and bed∣tyme, I hope we shall haue suff
cient leysure to giue an at∣tentiue auskult vnto your historie.


Wherewith, taking 
Oceander
 in one hand, and y
e
 Knight of the fiue swordes in the other, she placed her selfe vnto the

 table. Whē hauing sufficiently taken their repast of most de∣licate prouision, cloath being taken away, & their night mā∣tles put about their shoulders; the Queene, and her com∣pany, diligently attended to the Knight of the fiue swordes his pronounced historie.








A declaration of 
Ptoladines
 misfortunes.


T
Here bordereth vpon the East side of this Cōtinent of 
Africa,
 the famous and fertile Kingdome of 
Nile∣watered Egypt:
 ouer whose spatious and large limi∣ted territories, at what time the mighty 
Alcaazo
 gouerned as Souldā, there was a most cunning Nigromancer named 
Cturidan:
 who hauing by his inchauntments builded a most impregnable Castle, little or nothing cared, eyther to pill, rob, or spoile any of his Maiesties most loyall subiects: yea,
 & dared sometimes, to proceede euen vnto the 
Metrapolis
 of 
E∣gypt,
 and beseige the Souldā, euen within the walles of his royall Cittie 
Cayery:
 insomuch as all the subiects and com∣monaltie, vnable to abide the inchaunters so violent incursi∣ons, withdrew both themselues, their wiues and children, as also their goods, cattell, and whole substance, into the chie∣fest and strongest Townes & Cities neare adioyning. Wher∣by,
 all the Countrey being abandoned and left desolate of in∣habitants (by whose wants did followe diuers calamities) the Souldan 
Alcaazo
 was faine (after many a foughten bat∣t
ile, to no aduantage) by making faire promises, and sen∣ding right rich presents, to buy a composition at the handes of 
Cturidan.
 Who for a pretty season remained a faithful per∣former of his promised bargaine, vntill such time, as by the wished consent of the parents, 
Ptolodine
 the onely sonne of the King of 
Mesopotamia,
 was matched in the bonds of ma∣trimonie to the sole daughter of 
Alcaazo
 named 
Giafa.
 At whose solemne concelebrated nuptials (all the estates of both the Kingdomes beeing assembled, tylts and turneyes proclaimed, and all other princely pleasures whatsoeuer, both royally and sumptuously performed) amongst the rest that were thither assembled, the inchaunter 
Cturidan,
 with a great troope of his attendants, repaired vnto 
Cayry
 to so∣lemnize that day of feasting. When princely delicates being

 placed b
f
re him, and change of outlandish wines filled out to h
m in glistering gobblets of 
Ophir
 gold, he dranke so ma∣ny du
c
t draughts with 
Antony,
 as w
t
 him his senses being 
uer-drenched,
 he fell to dallying with Prince 
Ptoladines,
 faire 
Cl
opatra,
 in such vnseemely manner, as the King of 
Mesopotamia
 (who sate next vnto him) seeing his misdemea∣nour, began to take him vp after this order.


Doe not deceiue thy selfe Inchaunter (quoth hee) by mis∣taking this bride for 
Hipodamia:
 for assure your selfe, if so you counterfeit 
Lycus,
 here is a 
Perithous
 in this company, that will play a reuenger of thy villanies.


Cturidan,
 enraged at these speaches, being vnable for an∣ger to vtter any answere, swelling with wrath, and in hys soule yearning to be reuenged, gnashed his teeth togither; & with so stronge an inchauntment he ouercast the face of the bright-some heauens with a mighty darkenesse,
 as no one was able to discerne his friend, but only 
Maridomir;
 who, mounted on the backe of a charmed Dragon, was speedily transported through the aire, into places as yet neuer heard of.


No sooner were the heauens cleared of their darkesome cloudes, and an accustomed passage opened to the transplē∣dent rayes of 
Tytan,
 but the estates missed the K. of 
Meso∣potamia:
 and the Prince 
Ptoladine
 (who had heard the en∣tercoursing of his father with the Nigromancer) assuring himselfe of 
Cturadines
 vilanies, drawing out his Semitar, he doubled his blowes so fast vpon the head of the cursed In∣chaunter, as had he not all the better helped himselfe by his Magicke art, he might peraduenture haue but a little mis∣sed of leauing his life behind him. And yet he escaped not al∣together scotfree: for he had receiued one wounde so deepe∣ly into his braine-pan,
 as being returned home vnto his in∣chaunted Castle, he layde him on a soft bed of downe: and perceiuing the same for to be mortall, and that he could not liue any longer season, he called vnto him his nephewe 
Bri∣arostez,
 a most terrible Gyant, and committing vnto him and his ould mother 
Mardigua
 (togither with the charge of the inchaunted Castle) an expresse commaundement, eyther

 by force or sorceries, to reuenge his death, on the whole house of 
Ptoladine,
 he suffered his cursed soule to depart out of his filthy carcasse:
 which (entertained with terrible cracks of thunder & lightning) was transported in a sulphury 
super∣ficies,
 vnto y
e
 burning banke of 
Phlegeton
 prepared for such damned sorcerers.


Cturidans
 body was no sooner bereaued of his essentiall vigour, but that his furyous nephewe 
Briarostez
 gan set vp his bristles, and threaten destruction to the 
Egypticke
 & 
Mesopotamian
 territories; vowing with fire and sworde,
 to make that desolate, that had made his haughty spirite so dis∣consolate. And therfore he both priuily and openly attemp∣ted to reuenge himselfe of the young Prince 
Ptoladine,
 and his beawtious spouse faire 
C
afa.
 Which his affecting, 
Bria∣rostez
 at length effecting, he surprised all (except the Prin∣cesse 
Cyafa,
 who, ayded by my Lord the wise 
Artimagus,
 is hidden in the fierie caue of 
Egypt
) and carrying them all captiue to his Castle,
 he there afflicteth thē with vnknowen tortures; whilest the baser sort of 
Egyptians
 and 
Mesopota∣miās
 do lead their weary liues at randō, hartlesse, helplesse, & hopelesse, by reason of their detained worthy gouernours; of whose vpright and iust ruling, it may well be verified.


Ould time shall neuermore such kings bewray,


Their scepters with like iustice for to sway.








Thus the Knight of the fiue swords hauing finished hys storie, with exceeding earnestnesse craued the Queenes con∣sent to the Knight of the seas iourney: which (though with some vnwillingnesse (at last being cōdiscēded, they arose frō y
e
 tables: & taking their leaues of one another, by the groomes of the chambers they were conducted vnto their lodginges; where they rested all night in such great quietnesse, as ey∣ther could be thought, or wished for.


On the morrowe, by that time 
Triton
 the shrill trum∣pettor to y
e
 Sea-gods, had lowdly sounded his Hunts vp to y
e
 
Oceans
 inhabitants, the knight of the fiue swords forsooke

 his idle couch; and bethinking him of speedy dispatch for his iourney, he dismounted the marble stayres of his lodging, and entering into the castle Hall, he attended the comming of the Knight of the Sea. Who, being conducted thither by his mother y
e
 gracious Queene of 
Carthage,
 was with teares presently deliuered vnto the society of the Knight straunger. Who very heartily thanking the Queene for her graunted fauour,
 immediatly departed from the Castle 
Carzar.
 And at the hauens mouth of 
Carthage,
 going a shipborde, they be∣tooke themselues to the the fauour of the windes. By whose pleasant gales they in short time, slyced through the billows of the 
Mare Mediterraneum;
 & to their great comfort, happi∣ly arriued on the shoares of 
Egypt:
 whē, putting in at y
e
 We∣stermost braunch of the Riuer 
Nylus,
 they bare alongst the bankes thereof, vntill they came to surge right vnder the foote of an high declining mountaine. Whereunto ascending, they espyed a league frō the shoare,
 a most beawtifull & strong ca∣stell: whose foundation being drawne by Inchauntmentes out of the hardest rocky substance, seemed to the eyes of the beholders, to be vncōquerable. Which also was in so strange a sort situated, as not only the neighbour Regions, bordering the mountaine it selfe,
 but also the farthest confines of the kingdome lay openly subiect to the prospect therof. Which was so pleasureable, as if euer any Paradice was framed by the handes of cunning Artificers, for the delighting of some mighty Princes, then surely this same, excelled: w
t
 which neyther y
e
 
Piramidez
 for height, neyther 
Babilon
 for bignesse, neyther the 
Memphian
 Temple of the 
Egiptiā
 Goddesse 
Isis,
 do once deserue to be compared. For besides the goodlynesse of the building it selfe, the whole vertice of the Mountaine was so adorned with sundry sorts of fruitfull Orchards, such an infinite number of sweete smelling Gardens, through the middest of whose bowels streamed faire cristall riuerets (which watred y
e
 borders) & such vnheard of diuersified plēty of al things, as it was admirable to behould, & almost incre∣dible to be reported. All which things were in such exquisite order placed, as y
e
 whole top of y
e
 adorned mountaine seemed more like an artificiall heauen, then any earthly building.




Wherewith 
Oceander
 was so delighted, as (had not the knight of the fiue swordes with the more earnestnesse vrged him to the finishing of his iourney) hee could haue willing∣ly remained in perspection, till the approaching of the eue∣ning: so exceedingly was hee amazed at the so cūning work∣manshippe. But being rouzed from his dumpes, hee procee∣ded in his iourney, vntill hee came vnto a great drawe-bridge of the Castle; which, being let downe by reason of a certaine messenger which was sent to informe the Gyant 
Briarostes
 (who was then on hunting) of the approach of the two Champions, they speedily entered:
 and beeing come vnto the gate, they might perceiue the picture of a most ter∣rible and monstrous gyant most artificially carued out of the hard marble: on whose brasen shield (which hee seemed to beholde with a most sterne countenance) they sawe written in bloudy characters, these following verses.




Bee not too bolde, foolehardy passenger,


For to aduenture thy approaching hether;


Least by my dreadfull angers messenger,


Thou wishest to haue turn'd some other whether;


When thou shalt see thy wisdome come to late


After thou hast incurd my heauy hate:






Which once commote, with instruments of death,


It will inflict thy ouerweakned coarse:


And then in vaine thou shalt dispend thy breath,


To begge some kinde compassion, and remorse;


Which at my hands thou neuer shalt obtaine


Til liuelesse thou shalt conquered remaine.






After which conquest gained by my might,


When as thy body is of life dispoyld,


The carion Crowes shall for thy carcasse fight.


By whose flesh-renting bils thy limbes tormoyld,


Shall after that withouten sepulture,


Naked and fleshlesse on the fieldes endure.








Therefore be warned whilest thou maiest in time,


By him, which loathes to meddle with such gnats,


By spending of his vigour; which diuine


Is counted for so many fierce combats,


And ouerthrowes, which I to men of might


Haue heretofore giuen in single fight.






Fiue times, fiue knights, within lesse than a yeare,


I haue fordonne, and cast vnto the ground,


And halfe so many monsters fierce, welneare,


By knight ly cheuisance I did confound:


Which lying liue lesse on the dusty earth,


Pronounce mee, Fortune-fauored, from my birth.


Therefore desist from this thine enterprise:


For whoso doth attempt it, surely dies.


BRIAROSTES.




Now in faith (quoth 
Oceander
 with a great laughter) this same burley piece of mans flesh brags well: & if there came no better then I hither, in sooth they should praise his scarbugge faculty; and yet in despite of his threatnings, I remain here to try the euent of this enterprise. What a diuel, doth he thinke men of valour to be so foolish, as vpon his bare menaces, and the setting forth of his painted picture, so so∣dainely to terrifie their senses? Now by the high Gods of 
Carthage;
 I do verely auowe, that I shal neuer in my heart, ioy hereafter, if I cannot coole the courage of this boasting beast, 
Briarostes.
 And therewith, taking the pommel of his sworde, he bounced at the steely barres of the gate so sound∣ly, as he made all the Castle therewith ring againe: and then looking vp towards y
e
 battlements, he espyed where the wic∣ked witch 
Mardigua,
 sate lasciuiously playing & dallying w
t
 the sense-reaued young prince 
Ptoladine;
 who amorously en∣tertained whatsoeuer loue-trickes she offered. Wherat the knight of the Sea enraged, he said: Ah, thou wicked & las∣ciuious woman; shamest thou not with thy whordome, to a∣buse so noble a yoūg gentleman? And thē turning his speach to 
Ptoladine,
 O worthy and noble ofspring of the 
Mesopota∣mian

 Prorex,
 in time call to thy remembrance, the miseries that thou art moyled in and enraged, w
t
 the pernicious en∣ticements of that subtill sorceresse: giue her a iust recōpence for her deseruing. But seing, how for all his speaches, nei∣ther 
Mardigua,
 nor 
Ptoladine
 once glaunced their eyes vpon them, or seemed to regard his speaches; but rather to be the more pleasant & sportiue; he turned his face frō thē, & leaning vpon y
e
 raile of y
e
 bridge, he there rested himselfe, expecting y
e
 cōming of the furious gyant 
Briarostes.
 Who by this time, hauing heard the true report of the speady messēger, in a rage clapped vp his beuer, & casting his bewgle horne at his back, with his boarespeare in his hand, w
t
 all his might & maine, hee galloped home vnto the Castle: where seeing the two knights attending his arriuall, before he spake vnto them, he thus beganne to fall on chiding with 
Mardigua.


How commeth it to passe (my honour-vnminding Aunt) that by the little regard thou hast vnto my credit, thou hast suffered the damned wretches, to enter so neere vnto my Castle (whether neuer as yet, the best Champions durst ap∣proach) without condigne punishment for their aduentu∣ring? And then turning him to the knights (whose cou∣rages were neuer by wordes daunted) he thus shooke them vp with this euill language (which proceeding out of a can∣cred breast, must needes effuse a very crabbed salute)


O yee wretched death-seeking men, what fury hath incensed your foolish fancies, thus audaciously to attempt the indaunge∣ring of my dignity? at whose feete, both the liues of you, and al other 
Aegyptian
 Champions, are submissiuely humiliated:
 in whose hands both your weale, woe, paine and pleasure is so surely engaged, as with the bending of my frowning brow I could worke your wretchednesse, & with the furious out∣breathing from mine angry spleene, I could ouerthrow and consume you.


What? haue ye lead your liues at too much ease, and liued so pleasantly frée from the burdenous yoake of my afflictions; as now, growing carelesse of any farther continuing consola∣tion, you doe dare the triall of his strēgth, whose halfe-pitche vigour shal ouerwaigh your too weake bodies, to destructions




 If so it be, proceede to your perill: but if, as wandring pas∣sengers, you haue in the middest of your iourney gone astray vnto this Castle, wee willingly (of curtesie, though not of custome) permitte you to depart hence, to the perfecting of your painefull pilgrimage. Hauing thus ended, hee sternely looked on the two valorous knights, expecting their answere: which, with resolution, was in this sort vttered by 
Oce∣ander.


Thinke not 
Briarostes,
 that our comming to this thy Castle was by happe or chaunce,
 as waiefaring trauellers, which in their need seeke to relieue their necessities at some neighbouring hamlets. For know, that we are no painefull pilgrimes, but honour-prizing Princes; into whose eares the true report of thy horrible villanies being sounded, hath caused vs in this sort of set purpose to approach this thy for∣tresse: in armes to let thee vnderstand of the extreame wrongs thou hast offered vnto most mightie Potentates: and there∣fore wee craue at thy hands, restitution of iniuries; or thou denying (vtterly refusing thy proffered pittie, and scorning thy presumptions) wee defie thee to the combat; hoping yer the decline of 
Climenes
 Parramour,
 to giue thee the iust recompence of an inhumane and butcherly ty∣rant.


Briarostes
 (hauing as yet neuer heretofore found any one that durst so bouldly vpbraid him with his villanyes) was so angred at the heart with the knight of the Sea; as, without bidding him beware, he flang his boare-speare so strongly at him, as had he not all the nimbler leaped from his station, he had beene peppered for his presuming. Which (as God would) missing him, smote so deepe into an oaken poste of the gate (which was ouercouered with iron barres) that they might well perceiue the diuelish gyants force was admira∣ble. For, almost fower hand fulles, he had hidden the iron head, within the thicknesse of the woodden propper, which was riuen euen from the bottome, by the force of the en∣tring.


Which 
Oceander
 well weighing, he determined, as little as hee could to hazard himselfe to the Gyants vnresistable

 outward fury; & therfore, as soon as he could, resolued to close with him. Where, although he receiued some small disaduan∣tage, hee knewe he could not greatly be harmed, by reason of the goodnesse of his armour: which being impenetrable, could neuer be bruised by y
e
 crushing of his enemy: whē pray∣ing the helpe of the knight of the fiue swordes, in his extrea∣mity, he vnsheathed his good curtlear, & bearing his inchaū∣ted shield before him, he couragiously pased towards the gy∣ant: who as furiously with his brandished fauchon with out-breathed threatnings aduanced himselfe as fast forward to meete him. Who incountred with 
Oceande
 so fiercely, as he made him surely to vnderstand the great power and strength that lay inclosed within the sinewes of his boisterous braw∣nie armes.


For,
 with his fauchon he so lashed on the helmet of y
e
 young Champion, as had not the inchauntment stoode him y
t
 more in steede, for all his nimble auoidings, he had in a moment beene heawed into as smal pieces as flesh to y
e
 pot. And yet, I beleeue, the gyant had but small cause to boast of his win∣nings. For, being but slightly armed, only with a single Cor∣slet,
 as one who little fore-suspected any such aduenture hee was wounded so deepely on the thighes, and vnder the left side, as by the great effusion of his bloud from out those wide gashes he was so weakned, as (perceiuing he could not long continue the combat) he determined at one blowe to make an end of the conflict. And therefore, casting downe his shield, with his fauchon in both his hands, he let fall so mi
tie a blowe on the shield of his aduersary; as therewith battering it vnto his helmet, he made the worthy 
Greeke,
 in spight of his teeth to bend his knees and doe him reuerence.


But the couragious knight of the Sea, recouering againe vpon his feete, and seing that to endure any more such di
e∣lish buffets, was but to hasten himselfe to destruction, hee resolued a through requitall for the gyants fury. And th
re∣fore, florishing his sworde, 
Sc
ndifer,
 about his heade, he lent such a maine blowe (with interest) vpon the armed shoul∣der of 
Briarostes;
 as (paring both harnesse and flesh, s
eare from the bone of his sword hand) hee made him humbly at

 his feete, to begge compassion at the handes of the valiant vanquisher: vowing and earnestly promising neuer any more to vse his tyranny:
 but to liue his humble and obedient ser∣uant in all vassailage, whensoeuer hee should commaund him.


Oceander
 reioycing at the calmed courage of the gyant, gently tooke him from the ground:
 & kindly embracing him in his armes, auowed, y
t
 if he loyally performed his promises, not only not to accept him as his vassaile: but also, louingly to receiue him for his most constant friende Wherewith 
Briarostes
 was so exceedingly well pleased, as for very ioye the teares brast out of his eyes; and in a sweete extasie, hee manifested the great delight he conceiued, by y
e
 Princes cur∣tesie: and therewith commaunding the gates to be opened, entered with the two knights straungers into the Castle∣yarde: wherethrough they had scarcely passed, but that wic∣ked sorceresse 
Mardigna
 hauing raised all her seruants in ar∣mour, came marching towards the knight of the Sea shoo∣ting, and casting arrowes stones, borespeares, iauelins, and darts; so fast and furiously against him, as it seamed for a while, that the heauens had rained them downe vpon them: so thicke they fel vpon the armours of the Champions. Who enraged with her villany had made a bloudy massacre of her souldiers had not 
Briarostes
 (whom fauour had won to friēd∣ship) vpon paine of his displeasure, cōmanded his seruants to desist their enterprise: & then (being entreated by the princes) 
Briarostes
 safely conducted them vp into 
Mardiguas
 tower:
 where they ascending vp into the highest gallery, espied at the farther dore thereof the young Prince 
Ptoladine,
 dally∣ing amongst a number of maiden Musitions with a glorious Coronet of glistering pearles ouerpearching his goulden lokes: which circling about the ridges seemed to the behol∣ders to be in loue with the pretious abilliment: which was so cunningly enchaunted by the sorceries of 
Mardigna,
 as so long as the head was therewith engirte, y
e
 wearers brains were so distempered, as presently forgetting all former acci∣dents,
 hee should only betake himselfe to the dallying with beautifull damozels: which made 
Ptoladine
 to giue no re∣gard

 vnto the approaching knights: but, hauing his minde still plodding on his pleasures, to stand stil as one in a trance: whose minde was rauished, & whose senses robbed, by sweete melodious sounde of the eare-delighting mufique of the de∣licate maidens. Whose sweete warbled lullabyes entermix∣ed cunningly with their instruments delectable sounding, would haue made any effeminate creature, to haue adiudged it the 
Olimpian
 melody that was consorted by the learned 
Parnassian
 Muses, at the ioyfull ouerthrowe of lasciuious 
Venus,
 by their soueraigne Gouernesse 
Tritonia.
 Where∣at, y
e
 couragious knights were almost at the first amazed; but remembring themselues of what they came for they ranne vnto the maidens, and wt
h their swords shredding a
onder the string of their instruments, made them to cease their 
Syren-like
 musique: which was no sooner performed, but they sodainely vanished away: and the sense-reaued prince 
Pto∣ladine,
 for anger of their actions, fell in a swoune. But being reuiued by the knights diligent helpe, he tare his haire, and in a rage he ranne out at a back dore, downe into the Tow∣er garden, in his frantique resolution, determining in an inchaunted Well to defend himselfe (as hee had beene well fore-lessoned by the wicked sorceresse) from the sight of his pursuers. But with such exceeding celeritie was he follow∣ed by the valorous knights, as yer he could effect his action, 
Oceander
 tooke holde fast on the skirts of his doublet: by the which he vpheld him strongly, vntill with the 
Mesopo∣tamians
 struggling, y
e
 seame of the skirt rending,
 he sodain∣ly plundged vnto the bottome of the water; lea
ing both 
O∣ceander
 and the good knight of the fiue swordes, in a pit∣tifull taking, for the worthy young gentleman. Wherefore, with teares standing in their eyes they poared downe into the fountaine, which seeming bottomlesse quite extinguish∣ed their hope of euer attaining the younge Princes safetie.


Whilest in this sort they dolefully powred forth their lamentacions ouer the fountaine, they perceiued about the brimmes thereof, these verses of comfort following, by some cunning Artificer to be characterized.




Couragious knight that doest the conquest gaine


Ouer the cruell keeper of this tower;


By cunning skill I doe demonstrate plaine,


That, till th'inchaunted crowne, by manly power


Be taken from the sence-reau'd princes head,


This towers inchauntments are vnfinished.


Therefore proceede: if this thy valour winnes,


Thou shalt behold strange & vnthought of things.


The knight of the Sea, with great admiration, read these verses: and perceiuing how in the getting of the Crownet, consisted fini
ing of the inchauntment, hee valiantly re∣solued to cast himselfe headlong into the fountaine.
 Which his determination he so speedily executed, as hauing takē off y
e
 charmed Coronet (after some striuing) from the Princes heade, in a moment the Castle sunke, and all the rest of the faire Orchards, sweete-smelling Gardens, & christalline Fountaines on a sodaine vanished: only he sawe 
Ptoladine, Briarostes
 himselfe,
 and the knight of the fiue swordes stand beside him (on y
e
 plaine & large chāpeine vallie) amazed both at the things that vanished, and also at the sodaine approa∣ching of the two mighty kings 
Alcaazo
 and 
Maridomir,
 attended on by a great troope both of 
Aegyptian
 and 
Mesopo∣tamian
 knights and gentlemen: who kneeling downe at the feete of the 
magnanimous
 knight of the Sea, with most hearty thankes rendered a gratefull guerdon for his incom∣parable valour, shewed in deliuering both them and their disiressed sonne 
Ptoladine;
 from the furious abuses, & beastly cruelty of the wicked inchauntresse 
Mardigun.
 Which their thanks the worthy knight rendering in orisons to the fauou∣ring heauens, shewed his great pietie to the Gods, and his small delight taken in the transitory praises of earthly crea∣tures. But now for a while let vs forsake him, to returne to the vnfinished enterprise of the two valiant knights, 
Orthi∣sius
 and 
Alfortio:
 by whose aduenturous atchieuements, both 
Fraunce
 and 
Spaine
 shall eternally be renowned.








CHAP. XI.




¶ How the Princes of 
Fraunce
 and 
Spaine
 arriued at the king∣dome of 
Volcama:
 where they combated the vsurper 
Ter∣midantez.
 Who, seeing he should be conquered, murthered the imprisoned Queene 
Mabina,
 and then desperately throwing himselfe from the porch of the palace, being not altogether dead, was afterwards put to a most cruell tor∣ture.




L
Ong those valiant princes 
Orthisius
 and 
Al∣fortio
 (by reasō of their desire they had, both to do Iustice, as also to followe in enquest, after the most beawtious 
Grecian
 Princes∣ses 
Almidiana
 and 
Eristama
) could not re∣maine amongst their newe-wonne friendes in the Citties of 
Hybla
 and 
Siracusa:
 wherefore courteously (with thankes for their good entertainement) taking their leaue of 
Oezima,
 and her brother the Duke 
Oriardey.
 who w
t
 teares in his eyes giuing them a most kinde farewell, with vnfained orisons for their safeties, he committed them to the Seas. Ouer whose calme bosome hauing sayled, they happily surged on the coastes of 
Volcania.
 Where, being in the chiefe Cittie by their Page, prouided of a requisite lodging,
 they rested their weary limbes, for the space of two dayes: when giuing notice to the chiefest and most loyall fauourits of the wronged Queene 
Mabina
s
 cause, the third day they repai∣red in armes, with the people flocking after their heeles, vn∣to y
e
 vsurpers palace. Out at a window of whose gate-house they heard the sorrowfull Queene, thus dolefully to effuse her soules sad lamentations:




And shall I still (O gods) in this distresse,


With brinish teares, from mine eyes fountaines spring,


Bewaile my miseries remedilesse,


And wearying my handes with often wringing,


Continue in this dungeon euermore,


My sad mischaunces thus for to deplore?








Which being tould vnto these prison walls,


That are both reasonlesse and life-lesse thinges,


Whil'st that my tongue me wretched caitife calles,


Their Eccho from their bowels wretched wrings:


And when that I do tyre them with exclaiming,


They answere sadly, as lamentinges framing.






I sigh, and say alas: they doe replie,


Alas, alas: and when that I doe groane,


They, seeming to lament my miserie,


Doe, ecchoing, reanswere mee with loane:


So as, where I condole without reliefe,


They do lament, as partners in my griefe.






And were it not for them, I should become


Heart broken, franticke, mad, and melancholy.


For by their wofull ecchoing alone,


I doe receiue my soules refreshing wholly:


Which onely keepe themselues from wanting pittie,


To be sad consorts in my carefull dittie;


Which euermore I sing with sobbing breath,


As prep'ratiue before approaching death.




SHee had no sooner sighed out her sorrowes, but that the vnmercifull vsurper, entering the prison, reprehended her sharply, for being so lauish in her laments; with menacing words threatning her most cruelly to cut out that apt & deli∣cate organe of her speach if she continued any longer in her lamentations. Which when the Noble minded 
Spaniarde
 heard, he thus began canuasse him for his beastly and trea∣cherous cruelty: In humane monster; & vnciuill tyrant, who hath instituted thee a sterne corrector of most disconsolate Ladies? What, is thy heart waxed so haughty since the v∣surpation of thy tyrannie, as thou canst not onely be conten∣ted to disgrade and disgrace; but also to sight-reaue: and not only that, but to speec
-ba
 thy wrōgly oppressed prisoner? whose iniuries crie for iustice, & whose vnregarded wrongs inuocate the high commander of the firmament to powre downe iust vengeance on thy accursed head: at whose hands

 we are come in armes,
 to require the respitelesse restitution of her right, and sufficient satisfaction for all the outrages that thou hast vniustly offred her Come downe therefore vnto me, who will enter the Lists against thee, in defēce of thy Soue∣raignes iust quar
ell, to whome thou hast vsed such Satiricall actions.


Tyrindantez,
 though he was gallen to the very heart with these obiections, yet the better to make the common citizens to beare the better liking to his cause, he very patiently see∣med to brooke these menaces. But, as the fire cannot long lie hidden vnder the drie flaxe, but that by the smoke it should be discouered: so, for al the tyraunt sought by not answering, to cloake his anger; yet the fiercenesse of his countenance so manifested his indignation, as both the Prince of 
Spaine
 himselfe, as also all the beholders, did plainely perceiue out of what mettall the quintessence of his meekenesse was ex∣tracted. But (to say the truth) he refrained from replying, till with his launce he might batter an angry answers on y
e
 stomack of his aduersarie. And therfore speedily causing his Squires to arme him, he descended his palace-hall staires, and mounting h
mselfe on a mighty Courser, hee praunce
 vp and downe proudly before the Lists; till being vrged by the Prince 
Alphortio,
 he presētly rendered him this disdain∣full answere.


Proude Knight, straunger,
 knowe that I so lightly ac∣compt of thy brauing challēge, as wert thou y
e
 
Mars
-like chā∣pion to the gods, I should scorne to enter the listes against thee; much more as thou art now a proud young Princocks, whome wante of yeares hath made so vndiscre
tely at∣tempt this daungerous enterprise. Come on therefore (vain∣glorious young man) and at my handes receiue thee a iust guerdon for thy foolish hardinesse. Herewith, setting spurs to his hor
e, hee gallop
d so fast to the incountring of his enemies, as his Palfrey stumbling, hee was cast quite headlong out of his saddle to the groūd.
 Which he taking to be 
malum omen
 of any future good fortune on horsebacke, resolued to trie out the combate on foote. Wherfore drawing out his courtleax, he pased towardes 
Alfortio,
 to haue stayne

 his Courser. Which he perceiuing, presētly dismounted; and deliuering his Palfrey to his Page,
 with his shield aduan∣ced before him, he went to meete his approaching aduersa∣rie. Who, with his heauy sworde smote so thicke and fury∣ously vpon 
Alfortioes
 shield; as, if he had in such sort long con∣tinued, he had not onely heawen his shield (wherwith he de∣fended himselfe) in sunder, but also gone nighe within lesse than an howers space, by wide-gashed woundes, to haue made his 
Volcanian
 grasse of purple hew, by the effusion of 
Spanish
 goare. But 
Tirindantez,
 beeing alreadye awearied with his so thicke bestowing of his vaine sent blowes on the shield of his valourous enemie, began somewhat more lazily to lift vp his courtleaxe, as if he had more minde to haue re∣sted his wearie limbes on some downe-bed, then continued his resistance against approaching daunger.


Which the worthy 
Spaniarde
 with great dexteritie tur∣ning to 
Tirindantez
 disaduantage, with his sword of spanish steele he so couragiously behaued himselfe against the Ty∣rant, as hauing sliced his shield in sūder, within two or three soundly sent buffets, he so cooled the 
Volcanians
 courage, as on his knees hee made his humbly to prostrate himselfe before his knightly feete. With which his so sodain foyle, the wicked vsurper was so enraged, as rysing vppe agayne, he so couragiously redoubled his blowes on his aduersaries shielde, as (hauing now sufficiently freed himselfe from the 
Spaniards
 furie, and fearing some sower answer to his sharpe obiection) making way w
t
 his courtlear, through the thicke preasse of the behoulding multitude,
 he left the combate: and despairing of any future good fortune, he speedily ran vp into the gate-house; and burst open violently the prison dore, where the vnhappy wronged Queene 
Mabina
 remained, in teares bewailing her misfortunes. To whome with a fained penitency, as sorrowing for the wrongs that he had done her, Now deare (though by my meanes wretched) Madame, said he, am I at last (lamēting my iniustice, and tyrannous mis∣dealing) come happily to release you of your torments. And therewith lifting her vp from the bare bords (by whose ascending, coldnesse her limbes were chilled, benumned and

 stiffened) he knocked off her manacles, which hadde so long time made her beawtious body swell with their hard engri∣ping: and taking her gentlye by the (once lillie white) hands, he presently ledde her vp to the top of the gate-house; where she (poore soule) vnsuspecting any such insidiousnesse (to her griefe) heard him with an hoarce voice, to sound forth the dreadfull allarum, to her fatall tragedie.


The deceitfull Panther, before the destruction of his eye-gazers, doth hide his head;
 and set forth his delectable skinne to the inticement of other wild beasts: and y
e
 deformed Por∣pisces, before the comming of some outragious tempest, are pleasantly sportiue before the shipmen: the one vseth his in∣sidie, to forwarne: the other to deuoure: so I, vnhappy 
Mabi∣na,
 vsed pleasant gestures vnto thee, to refresh thy drooping spirits; but to let thee know that a procellious storme cō∣meth after a pleasant Sun-shine, I haue with the Panther, allured thee to thy destruction; which with my courtleaxe I shall execute on thee with extreamitie: now therfore receiue the last extreme of al my cruelties.
 With which word, 
Mabi∣na
 giuing a most groanefull farewell to the faithlesse world,
 he strake of her head: whose tongue wauering in her mouth, seemed (though speechlesse) to call for vengeance at y
e
 hands of the iust iudging heauenly deyties. And then turning him selfe towards the amazed people, he on this sort prognostica¦ted his owne disparagement.


O ye vnhappy subiects of the deceased 
Volcanians
 gouer∣nesse, why are your senses amated, and your selues amazed,
 at this my mercilesse committed murther? What? are your hearts not your owne? or is your loyalty so lazie, and your selues so leaden, as cowardice is entered where courage was once interested? that seing the murtherer of your Princesse (your mindes sole meditation) 
Mabina,
 you can refraine from weapons; and astoniedly gazing in my face, desist from wrea∣king vengeance on my accursed treachery? What, doe yee (in your thus stil standing) expect that my selfe should worke my owne destruction? If so yee doe (amazed Cittizens) as∣sure your selues, your expectations shal be satisfied. For first, behould, how like to stony-harted 
Pirrhus (Achilles
 soboline)

 I cast down headlesse 
Polixena
 frō off y
e
 battle mēts, & after (cō∣trary to y
e
 worthy 
Greciā
) behold y
e
 downfall of her enemy.


Wherwith as desperate of any remission for his commit∣ted villanie, he threw himselfe headlong from off the gate∣house;
 thinking by his owne violent action to haue sodain∣ly sent his 
Cimerian
 soule to 
Acharon.
 But God, who seeth al things, in his iustice disappointed him of his intēded pur∣pose, so as that, onely being bruised, he was taken vp aliue, by the rowte of the attending people, who with open mouths tried for iudgemēt against the traytor: with which their iust intreaties, the worthy Princes of 
Fraunce
 & 
Spaine
 being ex∣ceedingly mooued, to this effect before the multitude, pronoū∣ced this terrible iudgement.


That first for the space of three dayes (if he liued so long) he should haue his fl
sh torne peece-meale with hote burning pincees from off his body; & then his bones to be burned in a∣fire of pitch & brimstone; that so cōsumed, he might not haue cōuenient sepulture, appointed for al dying christians. This iudgement against him, so well pleased the true hearted Ci∣tizens, as it was no sooner pronounced by the two Princes, but it was immediately most seuerely executed by the com∣mon people: who taking themselues to be highly bounde vn∣to the couragious champions, with one consent, chose them to be their kingdomes gouernours:
 but both 
Alfortio
 and 
Or∣thisius
 refusing, they remained the obedient subiectes vnto 
Philocalus
 their late slaughtered Queenes kinsman; whome for Ruler, the noble Princes hadde ouer them appointed. But now another while let vs busie our selues, about some other matters, lesse impertinent.






CHAP. XII.




¶ How the Knight of the sea, accompanied with 
Briarostez,
 & the knight of the 5. swords, in the way as they trauailed to the firie caue, encoūtred with eleuen knights who would haue forced a Lady; whome they ouerthrewe: and how he freede the Infant 
Ciafa
 from her firie prison, & afterwardes departed from them, in pursuite after the grande 
Cardigan
 with whom hee entred combate for the releasement of the Knight with the golden shield, who at the Inchauntresse 
Mardiguaes
 entreaties combated 
Oceander;
 and how they were parted by a strange accident.






M
Aridomer
 & 
Alcaazo
 w
t
 their sonne 
Ptoladine,
 & the rest of the 
Mesopotamian
 and 
Egyptian
 e∣states, being thus happily deliuered frō their miserable enthralement, by the incompara∣ble valour of the Knight of the sea, with great ioy and gladnesse tooke their way towardes 
Caiery,
 whose high topped towerets they no sooner saw, but kissing the ground, they thanked the gods, for granting them the reuise of y
t
, wherof by reason of their extreame thraldome, they had so long time despaired: and then embracing the knight of the sea, by whom they had obtained conquest, and thanking 
Me∣dion
 (for that was the knight of the fiue swordes name) by whose carefull diligence they were prouided of a Champion, w
t
 great iouisance and shouting they ran towards their ho∣ped home: at whose gates they found their louing Cittizens with pretious presents,
 and princely pageants ready to en∣tertaine them. But beeing entred into the paued streete of 
Cairy,
 to tell what hollowing, shouting, clapping of hands, leaping, dauncing, ringing of belles, playing on timbrells, harpes, and clarions, sounding of hornes, corners, trūpets, sagbuts, and all other kinde of musicall instruments there was, it both surpasseth my pen, & accloyeth my remembrāce: but I am sure that all the rest of the remayning day, and all the whole night was spent in nothing but in presenting their happy returned Princes with most pleasureable pastime.


This notwithstanding, as the Heicfer, though shee be in the middest of her sportiuenesse, hath a continuall regarde other houseld calfe, so these worthy Princes in the middest of their pastimes, could not so forget their dearest daughter the Princesse 
Ciafa,
 whom (you haue heard) 
Artimagus
 had hidden by his skill in the firie caue of 
Egypt,
 but that they must needes send immediately for her releasement: & there∣fore, once more entreating the adiumēt of the valiāt knight of the sea, and obtaining his consenting, they presently dis∣patched him, with 
Briarostez,
 & that worthy knight of the 5. swords, 
Mediō,
 towards y
e
 euenting of the inchantmēt: who taking their iourney more Northwestward, toward y
e
 citty 
Carthage,
 as they trauailed ouer a ridge of mighty moūtains,

 they espyed, where belowe in the valley, a sort of armed Knights were forcibly binding of a beawtifull Lady, on one of their horses; to carrie her against her will away with thē. Whose sorrowfull shreekes so penetrated into the thoughts of the noble minded Knights of 
Africa,
 as enraged with the offered outrage, they speedily galloped their horses, downe the hill; and enterrushing roughly amongst the rabblement of traytours, drawing out their swordes, they couragiously commaunded them on paine of forfeiting their heades to de∣sist from any farther prosecuting of their pretended euill en∣terprise: alleadging them to be a shame and fowle dishonour to the order of knighthood, so vnciuilly to abuse any honou∣rable or honest Damosell: and therewith the Knight of the Sea began to lay his hand on the Ladies manacles, too vn∣loose thē; when one of the eleuen Knights (trusting more thē any of the rest, to his owne valor) vnsheathing a mighty cour∣tleax, began in this sort to terrifie the vndaunted courage of the 
Carthaginian
 champion.


By heauen sir Knight, who made you so bould as to cor∣rect vs in our actiōs? Either let goe your hould-fast on these damosels manacles, or (by our great god 
Mahomet
) with my sword I shal make your sea-shield spatter about your eares: and therewith he let flie at the Knight of the sea, with all his might. Who receiuing the blow on his charmed shield, with his good sword 
Scindifer,
 he smote 
Durdon
 so sound a buffet on the headpeece; as cleauing it to the beauer, he made him life-lesse to kisse the cold cheeke of his ould Grandmother.
 Wherewith the other ten Knights (ashamed for their ouer∣matching number, to betake themselues to flight) grewe so enangred with 
Durdons
 ouerthrow, as all at once they stout∣ly assaulted the Knight of y
e
 sea; but to their smal profite. For, what by his couragious wel dealing of his blowes, & the vn∣resistable adiument of his 2. cōpanions, he gaue thē so sowre a welcome, as hauing slaine and mortally wounded seauen of thē, they enforced the other three, for feare of their vnabi∣dable-furie, to betake themselues to their heeles; and in the neighbouring woods (by hyding their crauen head in y
e
 thick∣set bushes) fearefully to prouide for the safety of their liues.




Oceander,
 glad that he had in this sort so quicklie ridde his handes of the wicked Traitours, vnbound the sorrowfull Lady: who rendering him most hearty thankes for her deli∣uerance, most hūbly entreated them, at a Castle of hers there∣by, for that night to take vp their lodging. Which they ac∣cepting, she presently conducted them vnto her Castle: where giuing thē exceeding good entertainement, she caused y
e
 woū∣ded corps of her late murthered husband to bee brought be∣fore them. At whose vnmercifully massacred limbes, the worthy knights being in a manner amazed, she in this sort made the dolefull recitall of her husbands Tragedy.


I am ascertained, 
magnanimous
 knights,
 that in your harts you doe wonder at, and in your thoughts abhorre this de∣testable villany; which only vpon spight was in this cruell sort executed vpon my innocent husband, by those wicked wretches, from whose vnmercifull violence, your noble che∣uesance of late defended mee.


What the occasion of their conceiued hatred against him, should bee, I know not: only I surmise it from hence to haue his inition.


It misfortuned,
 that in a single combat betweene two knights (the one whereof was a stranger, the other our near neighbour, named 
Milodes
) by the variable chaunce of the fight, that 
Milodes
 was slaine: and the other (though sore wounded, yet not so near death) to the end he might the more speedilier escape from the hands of any following pursuers, cast off his battered and burdenous armour; and so dishar∣nished, hee presently betooke himselfe to flight: but whe∣ther, the Gods doe knowe, and not I: for as yet I neuer heard of him.


Which his vnbuckled armour being found out by my (vn∣happy) husband 
Zadolin,
 hee caused his attending Page to gather all the scattered pieces together, and wrapping them vp in his cloake, to beare them on his backe home after him; which he did: and (thinking nothing of any following mis∣fortune) hee remained quiet in his chamber all that eue∣ning.


But no sooner had the daughter of darknesse, the light daies

 enemy, ouercast the heauens with a mourning mantle; but y
e
 kinsfolkes and allies of slaughtered 
Milodes,
 with weapons, and torches, arriued at our Castle, and with great violence rushing in at the gates, they killed my Porter, slewe my ser∣uants;
 and without either pittie or compassion, with their swords and battleares, they in this most cruell manner mur∣thered & massacred my poore husbād 
Zadolin;
 whose thoughts legate vnmercifully griped betwéene a paire of pinsons, was vniustly dissuffered to pleade his masters innocence. Onely I (poore and vnhappie 
Lidia
) in my thinne smocke on the colde floore, with teares, sighes and groanings endeauoured to begge his pardon, pleaded his innocencie, sware hee was guiltlesse; and in briefe declared the matter, as manifestly as my interrupting sobs would suffer mee: But all in vaine: they were obdurate to my orisons; or could they by my plea∣ding, haue been made pittifull, it had beene to no purpose: for yer I could haue halfe spoken, my deare 
Zoladin
 was mur∣dered;
 and only my agony appeased, with the threats of the treacherous villaines; who bad mee be contented, for my turne was the next vnto my husbands: and then, haling mée by y
e
 haire, downe the staires, they rode away with mee vnto this mountaine; where they meant to haue boūd mee to their horsetailes, & haue speedily dragged me to the burning Caue of 
Ciafa;
 whereinto they threatned for to throwe mee: which they had surely performed, had not you by the gracious ap∣pointment of the heauens, happily arriued at that instant for my deliuerie.


Now ow mine honour (quoth the knight of the Sea) I haue not in all my life heard tell of a worser vil∣lany.


But thanks bee to 
Mahomet
 (saide 
Briarostes
) they haue sufficiently at your hands paied for it; as better men than they haue done before them: & had not I tasted of better mer∣cy then they did, perhaps my heade should haue fledde with a vengeance, where my heeles should neuer haue ouertaken it. All things goe by the direction of the Gods (replied 
Medion
) and so it is sufficient that wee all are liuing. True (answered 
Briarostes
) but since it is so farre in the night,

 let vs prepare our selues vnto our lodgings: whereunto the knight of the Sea, & 
Medion
 consenting, they gaue the good∣night vnto the Lady; and so departed vnto their prouided bedchambers; where they all slept soundly: only 
Medion,
 in this sort meditated on the Ladie.


Diuine 
Lidia
 (I call thee diuine,
 bycause like a deified Goddesse thou gouernest my affections) would to the Gods thy heart were as benigne, as thy hewe beautifull, and thy tongue as apt to pronounce my content, as thy frownes (I feare) are about to prognosticate my cōfusion: then should I glorie in my good fortune, that am now grieued with heart-gnawing languishment: yea but I feare the failing of thy fauour, and that in vaine with the trauailer, 
 shall assault a Basiliske; by whose eyes penetrating, I shall finde my owne confusion. But foole, why fearest thou? will the ambitious souldier lay aside his armour, and for feare of missing the conquest, not aduenture the conflict; where the pretious price of the victory is an Oliue garland, amiddest whose wreathes sittes honour in her chiefest dignitie? No, rather will he die in the attempt, then, by not hazarding his happe, to bee bereaued of his happinesse. And wilt not thou aduenture a frowne, to obtaine her fauour? which is more glorious then a conquest, and more high-prized, then the Oliue garden: whose lookes infuse life, and whose pretty smiles, seeme a petty Paradice of eternall pleasures: whose ruddy cheekes like the raies of 
Cynthia
 re∣fresh thy loues flower; & from out whose Rubilike fine closu∣rets proceedes a comfortable warme deawe, to infuse new mirth into thy loue-massacred soule in the middest of thy martyrdome. But stay: the fragrant flower, called 
Flos So∣lis,
 if it be nipped off at the toppe, by the 
Indians,
 when it is but young, it will neuer beare any blossome: and the younge Eagle, that hath his talents cut when it is but a nestlecocke, will neuer prooue so rauenous as his dam did: So 
Medion,
 must thou nippe the heade of thy springing fā∣cie, in his infancie; & it shall neuer beare blossome in his age, to hurt thee: and pare his griping talents yet hee bee fledge, and he shall neuer lacerate thy heart in his fierce flight:

 and so shalt thou liue at freedome, by being freed from mai∣med fancy. Nay rather, thereby shalt thou worke thy con∣fusion, then content; and kill thy owne selfe, by quelling thy fancifull cogitations. For, what be came of the branch that was nipped? it neuer bloomed? true. For his opened iuyce being dryed vp by the hote reflexion of the scorching Sunne, sodainely withered: and the talent-wanting Eagle, neuer after prospered. Thus both perished: and so shall I, if I follow their example, finish a like end vnto my follies. Suffer therefore thy fancy to haue his ful course; and curbe it not in the waxing, least thou curse it in the waning: & only rest herewith fully satisfied, y
e
 
Lidia
 is faire without cōpare, & therfore worthy to be loued incōparably: that she is gratious, & will listen vnto thy greeuings: she is kinde, & may breede thy cōfort: & lastly, which I hould my sowles sole 
Axiome,
 she is a woman, & therefore to be wonne.


With this conclusion, he cloased his eyes, and in their slō∣bers he quietly accōpanied his sleeping cōpanions: in which quiet repose, they remained y
e
 remnāt of y
e
 night: which no soo∣ner was put to accustomed flight, by y
e
 appearing of y
e
 bright∣some morning, but that these exquisite Cheualiers, 
Ocean∣der, Briarostes,
 and 
Medion,
 forsooke their graue-imitating beds: and causing their armoures to be presently buckled on their shoulders, crauing a conductour to the burning Caue, they tooke their leaue of their Hostesse: which was so soundly sealed on the lips of 
Lidia
 by 
Medion,
 as she had a suffitint 
Item,
 to iudge of his affections. And departing in all hast from 
Zadolins
 Castle, they shaped their iorney backe againe vnto the mountaines. Alongst the declining bankes whereof, directly passing on their iourney, within three daies (after their wearisome trauaile) they arriued at y
e
 foote of a most high cliffe: whose steepe down chalkie sides beating backe the raies of the resplendent Sunne, by his beames reflexion they seemed to guilde the Ocean with a new 
Phoebean
 glister. This th
 
 Champions ascen∣ding,
 they perceiued from the 
 thereof, a mighty fire to effuse himselfe into so man
 
 which licked their chalky architecture, as it 
 of them to

 yeild a sufficient heat for y
e
 burning vp of any indifferent in∣cēdible substance. In which flame (which proceeded out of an artificiall Fornace) knowing the infant 
Ciafa
 to be in∣closed, the worthy knights were exceedingly grieued; but especially 
Medion:
 who dolefully lamented the miseries of the beautious Princesse, whose fate he thought already to haue failed, & whose vnhappy ruine he thought to be remedi∣lesse and vnrecouerable. Wherefore prostrating himselfe v∣pon the earth:
 O deare grounde (quoth hee) I would I had bin engraued within thy bowels, before I had liued to haue seene this lamentable time of disaster. Ha my deare Lady 
Cyafa,
 how greatly is vnprouident nature to be blamed, y
t
 made thee, so seemely beautifull, so sodainly to bee burned. What will your loyall husband 
Ptoladine
 say, when hee shall heare of your end? and how vnmercifully with his bea∣ting hands, will he massacre his breast, when he shal vnder∣stand of your misfortunes! From any further proceeding in his plaints, hee was cut off by a sodaine passion: where∣out, being by the diligence of 
Oceander
 and 
Briarostes,
 reui∣ued, hee ragingly ranne vp and downe the toppe of the craggy cliffe, to finde, if it were possible, which way they might safely get to the farther side thereof:
 which by no meanes they could effect, vntill by the pursuing of a mon∣strous Beare, which had lately seased vpon a young Kidde, they chanced happily to happen on an vnfrequented by way: which with their swordes clearing from the intercepting brambles and thickset prickly bushes, they speedily through passed; & were by the sandy shoares soone directed vnto the firie caue of 
Ciafa;
 which seeing in vaine they should indeuour with water to quench, by forcible furie they sought for to en∣ter. Whereupon clapping their shields before their faces,
 they all at once attempted the ingression: but such was both the ill fortune of the giant and the knight of the fiue swords, and so exceeding was the swelter of the inchaunted flame; as be∣ing therewith almost smoulthered, they were forced to turne their faces from the fire warde, & hic themselues faster out (by one halfe) then they entred: Onlie by the vndaunted cou∣rage of the vncomparable knight of the sea, was the hote in∣tending

 fume of the firy flaming, little respected, and wholly suppressed; though vntill egresse of paragon of 
Aegypt,
 his fury could not altogether be extinguished.
 Which the noble minded knight suspecting, he presently tooke the faire prin∣cesse (who was there sitting in a chaire of Alablaster) in his armes; and with great swiftnesse issuing out againe from the intrailes of the firy Caue, he no sooner rested himselfe safe on the sands; but incontinently, with a most terrible clappe of thunder, the fire ceased, the Cauerne cloased, and all the inchauntment was effinished.
 Whereat 
Medion
 excee∣dingly reioycing, humbly kissed the Princesse 
Ciafaes
 handes; and in the best sort that hee coulde deuise, hee ioy∣fully welcomed her vnto her happie freedome. For the which, both hee and the faire infant 
Ciafa,
 so heartily thanked the valiant knight of the Sea; as 
Oceander
 al∣most ashamed of their too great gratitude, promised them in lieu thereof, his duetifull seruice in whatsoeuer they should command him. Which offer of his good will, the beautious infant of 
Aegypt
 gratiously accepting, with all humilitie, desired their backe conducting vnto the fa∣mous citie of 
Cayry;
 where her father 
Alcaazo
 and the 
Mesapotamian Maridomir,
 in care expected their safe arri∣uall. 
Oceander
 would very willingly haue condescended; had hee not beene preuented by the sodaine arriuall of a Shippe of warre vpon the shoares of the burning Caue: out of the which hearing a most lamentable exclaming; to see the euent thereof, hee was faine to part from his com∣panions:
 and leauing 
Briarostes
 and 
Medion,
 to guard the infant of 
Aegypt
 safely vnto 
Cayry,
 he pased softly towards the seaside: where he perceiued a mightie gyant of most mon∣strous bignesse, & exceeding stature, with a massie iron mace on his necke, hauing come on shoare to mount vp into a steely Chariot;
 which was drawne by two fierce & bigge Lions, vp vnto the firme land; and vnder his feete in steede of a foot-stoole, to lye an armed knight: which in iron chaines be∣ing strongly fettered, effused such passionate laments; as the tender heart of the valorous Prince therby was so extreame touched with compassion, as making anger his spurres to

 honour, he presently poasted after the monstrous Gyant; whom ouertaking, he beganne couragiously in this sort to enquestion.


It seemeth vnmercifull Tyrant, by the outcryes that this captiued knight here maketh,
 that thou hast villanous∣ly offred him some outrage: which if it bee, assure thy selfe, incompassionate, infringer of the lawe of Nations, that ven∣geance is already at this instant hanging ouer thy vngrati∣ous heade; which powred on thee by the iudgement of the iustest Iusticer, shall make thee all to late to repent thy com∣mitted wickednesse.


Grand Cardigan
 (for so was the Gyant named) hearing the Princes peart challenge, could not chuse but laugh at his (supposed) folly. And therefore without speaking any worde, for an answere; with his huge hands hee thought to haue fastened vpon his helmet, and so drawing him into his Chariot, to haue there carried him captiue in company of his other prisoner: But he farre failed in his effectes. For 
Oce∣ander
 (whom vse of armes had taught to knowe aduātages) seeing the incōparable pride of the haughty diuell to exceede reason so farre, as with his weaponlesse hand to thinke to sur∣prise an harnessed knight; vnsheathing his trusty Curtelax, he so curtold 
Cardigans
 arme off at the elbowe; as the hand falling to y
e
 ground he taught his haughty heart a sound les∣son,
 for y
e
 inconsiderate reattempting of any so dangerous an enterprise. But the diuelish Giant was herewith incensed with such an vnspeakeable fury; as for very anger, his eyes seemed to sparkle fire, and out of his ribs of his beauer his angry breath issued out w
t
 such a thicknesse, as therwith his eyesight being dimmed, he sat stil for a great while in a quan∣dary, not knowing well which way to bestir himselfe: till vexed w
c
 y
e
 extreeme smarting of his wound, he grew sodainly so enraged as dismounting his steely Coach, & furiously ad∣uancing his iron we apon ouer y
e
 helmet of 
Oceander,
 hee let the blow descend downe with such a fury vpon his inchaun∣ted armour, as battering 
Oceanders
 shield with y
e
 mighty forcefull poyse thereof, vnto his headpeece, hee made him sufficiently to feele the fury of such angry Giants. And

 to say the trueth,
 had not the iron mace beene somewhat more, then the maimed monster could well haue wielded, 
Cardigan
 had at that one blowe, battered 
Oceander
 all so pieces. For such was the inuincible force of this giant before he happenned to be thus dishanded, as young oakes pluc∣ked vp by the very rootes, scarcely sufficed him for a mace, to ouermaster the most mightiest monsters: and with his owne hands he would subdue fierce Lyons, and bring them to a wonderfull tamenesse. But y
e
 heauens viewing his pride to be so vncomparable, at last made him to bee humbled by a knight, whose stature (though not stomache) was farre, to his, inferiour. For the worthy knight of the Sea (though hee was beaten to the ground, and sorely inly brui∣sed by that diuelish stroke of 
Cardigan
) so nimbly arose from the slippery earth, as before 
Cardigan
 could mount his mace to redouble his blowe,
 he was gotten within him; and running strongly against him to ouerthrowe him, he great∣ly bruised the gyants armour; but by his vneffected po∣licy, enwrapped himselfe in a net of exceeding daunger: which surely had beene ineuitable; had not 
Cardigan,
 who with his boisterous arme endeauoured to crush him against his brestplate, in the middest of his action, for want of bloud to maintaine his vigour, fallen downe to the grounde for faintnesse: and yet in his fall with his huge body hee so ouerwhelmed him, as 
Oceander
 for a great while, was not able to recouer himselfe from his furie, and heauie ouerpoise: but hauing at last after much struggling, safely freed himselfe and remounted vpon his feete, he drew out 
Cardigans
 mighty and broad fauchon; wherewith smi∣ting off his other arme,
 he left the vgly gyant in a pitti∣full pickle, to expect his wretched liues approaching pe∣riod.


And then turning himselfe towards the Chariot, hee vn∣bound the enthralled knight with the golden shield,
 who in this sort rendered him thanks for his liberty: Noble and couragious knight, whomsoeuer thou art; the Gods, whome thou adorest, send thee as great good fortune, as thou deser∣uest fauour at my hands for this thy shewed friendshippe in

 deliuering me from the hands of this diuelish Gyant, whose infinite furie, millions of the mightiest Knights in this We∣stern world could neuer haue abated. Herewith the Knight with the goulden shield offered to kisse his gauntlet. But 
O∣ceander,
 in whose hart meekenesse and courtesie sate royal∣ly enthronized) toke him gently by the hand, and in this ma∣ner made refusall of the proffered fauour: what I haue effec∣ted for thy freedome (Knight of the golden shield) was by the fauour of the Gods, and as I was obliged by the noble order of my Knighthood: and therefore requireth no thankes, at your hands; since what I did, was not at your request, but for the performance of my duetie: wherein I hope I haue ho∣nourably accōplished the part of a worthy champion, by free∣ing the oppressed, and giuing a bridle vnto haire-brainde presumption: desist therefore from such vnmerited requitall, and let vs both reioyce for the fruition of our happy cōquest. Now because that by this time, it grewe toward the appro∣ching of the euening, they left the Gyant to his griefes, & tooke their wayes towarde the sea side where, in 
Cardigans
 argosie, they determined for that night to take vp their lod∣gings. Where they were no soner come,
 but ariued an old wi∣thered woman (whose haires being colored like y
e
 midnight, & strāgely curled like the snaky wreathed tresses of y
e
 Furies) putting to the shoare, landed, like helbred 
Alecto,
 to bring debate betweene the two valorous Princes: Her name was 
Mardigua
 that wicked sorceresse: whose inchauntments for spight that 
Oceander
 had happily effinished, she now by her insidious craftinesse (by vndermining the Knight of the goulden shield, with a faigned shew of receiued iniuries) sought a through reuengement on the knight of the sea: and therefore comming to 
Phianora
 (for that was the name of y
e
 Knight with the goulden sheild; though following aduen∣tures, she would not be knowne to be the diuine daughter of King 
Argamont
 of 
Englād
) Noble Knight with the goulden shield (quoth wicked 
Mardigua
) if any pittie or compassion be in your princely breast, I beseech you of your knightly valor,
 to take a iust reuēgemēt for me on a most wicked traytor, that hath done me the greatest villanie that euer any honest

 eares haue heard of. Wherunto the Knight of y
e
 goldē shield condescending, and with a religious oath confirming, the insidious wretch, after some faigned teares, forceably wrūg out from her hollow eye-lids, in this sort began to taske her champion to his promises performance: Knowe then, most worthy Prince, that it was yonder Knight of the Sea, that hath so villanously outraged me, raced my castle, slain my subiects, and (obdurate to my intreaties) carried awaye my kinsmen, captiue prisoners: chastice him therefore accor∣ding to his deserts, and euermore be renowned by being my couragious champion. 
Oceander
 very well knowing her, & hearing how shamefully she had before his face belied him, could not for his bloud refraine; but with his sword drawne he must needes proffer to loppe of her accursed head from her withered shoulders: whereof, the vnsuspecting Knight of the goulden shield, taking aduantage; nay, nay (sayd he) thou hast too too much already manifested thy malice against her: prepare thy selfe therefore to receiue thy iust deseruinges at his hands,
 who is sorie so soone to bee thy correctour: And therwith, she strake 
Oceander
 a sound buffet on the cuirace: wherewith he was so enangred, as leauing of excuses, hee soone requited the Knight with the goulden shield for his la∣bour. For he so notably behaued himselfe against him; as no occasion was offered, whereof he tooke not aduantage; and no part of his aduersaries body which was not so soone woun∣ded as negligently defended: which caused the Knight of the golden shield, somewhat to become faint, and in a short space to waxe so wearie, as shee was hardly able to continue her party good, for one onely bout longer; without taking some breathing space (for in their combate they had continued, y
e
 better part of an howre and thrée quarters, without brea∣thing, or once desisting frō dealing of their deadly blowes: whereof, on the contrarie side, the couragious Knight of the Sea (being no whit a wearied) tooke so great aduantage, as with his sword hee thought at one stronge-fetched blowe, to haue ended both the Knight of the goulden shieldes life, and the contention. Which in
 hee had 
ndoubtedly done: 
had not his good swo
 
 by the prouidence of the

 highest, fallen flatly on the crest of his enemie: and therwith the buckles being broken, haue empouerished the helmet, to inrich 
Oceanders
 eye-sight with the aspecting of the most beawtifull obiect, y
e
 euer Dame nature by her deified cūning framed. For so soone as the proud helmet was distennanted of so precious a head;
 such a bush of goulden twisted tressa∣lines rained themselues into the bosome of the Princesse, as the 
Ioue
-sent showre of 
Pactolian
 gold into the louely lap of 
Danac:
 which being handsomly dissheueled about her armed shoulders, made her resemble bright-shining 
Cynthia
 in the gray cleare Welkin, in fashion; though farre exceeding her in fauourable fairenesse; so angelicall were the lookes of this diuine & more then beawtifull Lady-knight: at whose sight, like the sun-gazing 
Indian, Oceander
 was so amazed; as like one transmuted, hee stoode still mute in a quandarie, being of a great while not able to recouer his ouer-rauished senses: till the Princely mayde ashamed of her such discoue∣rie, clapped on her helmet againe, and leaping into the boate with 
Mardigua,
 she hastily both carried away his harts hor∣ror, and his eyes 
Elisian
-like exceede of pleasure.






CHAP. XIII.




¶ How 
Norin
 and 
Nigramonde
 the sonnes of the grand 
Car∣digan,
 ouertooke the Infant 
Ciafa,
 whome in reuenge of their fathers death they would haue murthered: but were repulsed by 
Briarostez
 and 
Medion;
 and how the Knight of the sea was carried in his inchaunted boate to the Ilande of 
Malagda.




N
Orin,
 in the meane time, and 
Nigra∣monde,
 the diuelish issue of that dam∣ned Gyant 
Cardigan,
 beeing rouzed from their rests (which they tooke in a most strong fortresse) by the lamenta∣ble out-cries (which bellowing-like thundered into their eares) of their massacred and distressed Father, with all the hast possible they presently hyed vnto him: whome

 finding both armelesse, and in a maner lifelesse, they hoisted vp into his irō charriot: & hauing carried him vnto their castle to be carefully tended by their Chirurgions,
 & causing their Lyons to be humbled vnto the seruile saddle, they present∣ly mounted on them: & with their battleares on their shoul∣ders,
 they hastily galloped after their Fathers mischiefe-worker, to be reuenged on him for his too too audacious cru∣eltie: but all in vaine. For taking a cleane contrary way, they left their aduersarie 
Oceander
 (though vnknowing) in his combate against the Inchantresse cursed 
Mardiguaes
 cham∣pion; the beawtie vnmatchable, the fairer then fairenesse it selfe, 
Phianora:
 and with an angry haste, they cut forth their iournies towards the neighbouring mountaines, whither they vainly thought their aduersarie to be galloped. Now as the valiant 
Briarostez,
 and the valorous Knight of the fiue swords, high minded 
Medion,
 were w
t
 their princely charge, the faire Infant 
Ciafa,
 returning leasurely towards y
e
 castle of late wronged 
Lidia
 the wofull wife of 
Zadolin,
 whom the eleauen Knights murthered for the death of 
Milodez,
 they were sodainely recalled by one of the younge Gyantes; who being come with in voice-reach, with a hoarse throat in this sort sounded out their sodaine retreate. Thinke not, most vile and wicked traytors, by this your sodaine taking flight, to passe thoroughly vnpunished for the cruell murther of our deare father the mighty 
Cardigā;
 whose princely blood, shed cowardly by your peasant blades, presents a sorrowfull re∣membraunce of wrathfull vengeance to be wreaked on your carrion carcasses. In an euill hower (quoth 
Briarostez
) art thou come thus vniustly to challenge vs: but since thou wilt needes be meddling, come on a gods name, and by the power of almighty 
Mahomet
 (who guide my hand to gaine the vic∣torie) I shall giue thy proude approach so pearcing a wel∣come, as thou shalt with shame wish thy farther safetie, whē by my Launces point thou shalt bee borne to the grounde, shamed,
, foiled, and ouerthrowne. Therewith they both met together so fiercely, as breaking their pinetree speares a∣gainst their pouldrōs, they were both sent headlōg frō their horsebackes, to finish the rest of their Monimachy on foote,

 who nimbly recouering themselues from the fall, presently drewe out their steele-heawing weapons; and so stoutly be∣labred one another about the crestes, as it might well haue made them dissy: for their intollerable stroakes, made the o∣ther foure behoulders, very exceedingly amazed: 
Briarostez
 with his broad fawchon 
Cordelue,
 sent such a strong blowe on the shield of 
Norin,
 as nigh therewith he parted it in two peeces; and then slyding betweene the breast-plate and the arme-hole, it straight descended vnto the grounde; where doing no other harme it stayde: but so was it stricken into y
e
 muddy substance, as before 
Briarostez
 could thoroughly vn∣loosen it, 
Norin
 flourishing his battleaxe with a stronge whirle about his heade, stroke 
Briarostez
 such a sound buffet ouerthwart his shoulders, as with the furie thereof, he was forced to stagger backwarde, at least three yardes from the place where he first stood. But, as hap would, in his retyring he gaue such a twitch at the hilt of his sword 
Cordelue,
 as he vnburyed it from the bowels of the earth, wherein it was so fast enclosed. And hauing recouered both himselfe and it in his hand; now holy 
Mahomet
 (quoth he) and 
Termagaunt;
 on whose 
Mecā
 altars, I vnmissingly offer a precious annu∣all sacrifice, but inspire mine arme at this time, with some inresistable flauour of your sacred vigours; and I here make a solemne vowe for euer steadfastly to maintaine your holy deitie, and heauenly lawes written in your diuine 
Alca∣ron,
 against any mortall man whosoeuer it oppugning: as indeed he did: for in defence thereof he manfully dyed vnder the resistlesse sword of 
Oceander,
 who had newly embraced the holy fayth of Christ, as you shall heare in the second part of this present historie. 
Briarostez
 hauing in this sort ended his short orisons, he added such a fierce furie to his vigorous arme, as therewith mounting vp his fawchon, aboue the helmet of his strong aduersary, the same descended with such violence betweene the cuirace and the shoulder of 
No∣rin,
 as it not only pared away a great peece of his left arme, but w
t
 such a diuelish decline rushed on the hard temperature of his steely gauntlet,
 as with an vnresistable furie it cleane parted the hand, from the arme of 
Norin:
 who instantly with

 hideous teares and bellowings, exclaimed vpon his brother 
Nigramonde,
 w
t
 an inuincible courage to take iust vengeāce on his ouermatching enemies; and herewith he thought to haue fled. But 
Medion,
 who as yet had not meddled in the conflict,
 gaue him such a recall with his courtleaxe on the cuirace, as he fetcht him downe backewards from his fierce beast, with a vengeance, to trie if hee durst to hazarde the second combate; and therewithall aduauncing his shielde before him, he stoode watchfully expecting the vndoubted assault of enraged 
Nigramond:
 whose stomack was so taken downe by his brothers misfortune, and the 
Egyptian
 honou∣rable manhood; as horsing his wounded brother 
Norin
 vp∣pon his furious beast, before him; he made feare adde spurs to his feete;
 and hastily flying from his vnpursuing enemies, he left the field open to his foes: who, glad they were so well freede from their troublesome guests, speedily hied them to 
Lydias
 castle; where we will leaue thē to their recreation, & 
Briarostez
 to his wounds recuring; and returne again to our former forsaken chāpion 
Oceander:
 who (as you haue heard) being left all alone by the witch 
Mardigua,
 and the worthy Princesse 
Phianora,
 sauing onely accompanied, with the ap∣proaching night,
 and the huge inuironing Cliffes; casting an admiring, amated and amorous sight after the fleeting boate wherein the beautious Princesse sailed from him; his thrōging thoughts, amazed at the misse of their blessednes, began to charme his trembling mindes Embassadour, thus dolefully to lament his irreparable misfortune.


Of sodaine griefes and heart-amating wronges,


Why sit I in this silence vncomplayning?


Since raciturnitie in griefes-explaining,


My inward heart with woe so ouer-thronges;


As if I had whole infinites of tongues,


They scarcely to my torments could giue vente,


Wherewith my soule incessantly is wronge,


One sorrowe would another so preuent,


Vnder my palates vault passing along.




Therefore must sorrowe from his secret cell,


(Wherein amids the centre of my heart,


He, captiue-like tyed, doth in terror dwell)


From out his prison house perforce depart,


To act a Libertine released part:


Who with exclaimes to my sense sorrowe-torne,


This axiom of my fortunes shall impart;


That in vnhappie time, poore I was borne,


To sit and see reliefe, yet liue forlorne,


I
N these and the like musings he spent the time, vn∣till by the sodaine approach of the silent night (who in her pitchy charriot, had already coursed ouer the face of the Element) he was forced both for his sauegard & his ease to take vp his Inne, for that night, in a litle tilt-co∣uered wherrie boate, which lay hard at the shoare:
 wherein being entred, he found an ould fisherman, who on a chaffing∣dish of coales (which he had kindled by the light of a strange precious stone, which with dropping on of salt water & oyle strāgely blazed) was broyling him a few freshwater fishes for his supper: who seing (as indeed none then he could see bet∣ter) the valorous Knight of the sea, comming towards him, presently started from his stoole, whereon 
Diogenes
 like he was set, and steadfastly looking on 
Oceander
 (who gaue him courteously the good euen) he spightfully threwe the dish of fish downe on the bords by 
Oceander,
 saying: By 
Mahomet
 I woulde thy nose were slit, that thus vnhappily hath smelt out my hungry supper. By 
Ioue,
 had not yeares taught me y
e
 better wisedome; I could finde in my heart desperatly to ouer-turne the boate, and drowne my selfe, because I would haue thee drenched in the 
Ocean:
 Herewith he so puft and blowed for anger, as 
Oceander,
 though hee were somewhat cholericke, at his curmudgenlynesse, yet hee could not chuse but smile at the ould fisher-mans vaine anger. And therefore bursting out into a great laughter, he thus began to pacifie his angrie hoste: Why good ould man, what meanest thou in this sort to cast awaye thy meate and

 in this sort to be offēded? as though I were such a base condi∣tioned villaine, as to cut thy age-crazed weasand, for a fewe gobbets of homily broyled fish. Feare not ould father, for I am no such man: for by the almighty and great prophet 
Mahomet
 I protest vnto thee, that my intent is only here to get me some safe harbour, and not in any wise iniuriously to harme you I knowe it well (deare Prince quoth hee) nor am I y
e
 man y
t
 for a dish of homely broyled fish,
 would so iar∣ringly stand at tearmes in earnest with so gracious a Lord, to whom not only my boate, but my skill, my bodie & (if need so require) soule is wholly endebted, and altogether deuo∣ted. And then discouering himselfe vnto the knight of the sea, to be y
e
 most wise & learned Lord 
Artimagus,
 the only brother (as you haue heard) of 
Carthaginian Kanira,
 he heaped such ioyes on the heart of 
Oceander,
 as both by tongue and penne are vnable to be expressed: onely let this suffice, that they fell from their chat, to their cates; and from their repast to their sound repose. Whilest they being in a sweete & silent sleepe, the wherrie, inchaunted by the arte of 
Artimagus,
 stealingly slyced through the salt waters of the 
Ocean:
 and in that on∣ly night (gouerned by the supernaturall skill of the diuine Artist) it speedily crost, from the coastes of 
Africa,
 vnto (which is almost vncredible) the Inchaunted Ilande, of the witch 
Malagda,
 whose diuellish sorceries the follow∣ing chapter shall presently entreate of.






CHAP. XIIII.




¶ How 
Olbiocles
 arriued on the Iland of 
Malagda,
 where he was enchaunted; how he was deliuered from his transmu∣tation, by the Knight of the Sea, to whome hee tould his misfortune after his metamorphosing; and how he misdee∣med 
Oceander
 to be drowned in the boat of the Inchaū∣teresse.






O
LBIOCLES,
 that worthy Prince of 
Grecia,
 thanking the good olde Hermit 
Calander;
 not onely for his honest enter∣tainement in the Cell, but also for the straunge relation of his following for∣tunes; departed from the Hermitage, backe againe vnto the Castle of the good knight 
Aradinus;
 whome hee (as you haue heard) had crea∣ted chiefe Gouernour of the 
Round Iland,
 on conditionall fealty vnto the Maiesty 
Constantinopolitan:
 to whose desi∣rous eares, y
e
 whole history of tyrāt 
Trogladors
 selfe-wrought Tragedy being related, caused such excesse of ioy in his soule; as falling on his knees, and kissing the armed feete of the worthy 
Greeke,
 hee most earnestly prayed for the like suc∣cesse to second all his vndertaken actions; offering his loue, his lands, his life, to be put in the hazardous and most per∣nicious perill, to doe his exquisite selfe any acceptable iot of pleasure. And to confirme his profferings for vnfained, hee humbly entreated the willing acceptance of a young sonne of his, named 
Tclio;
 for the good companion of his Page 
Curio:
 whose seruice hee would warrant on his life to bee most trusty, loyall, and humiliate. The knight of the 
Leo∣parde,
 seeing the affection of the good Gouernour 
Ara∣dinus,
 with thankes requited his good will: but for certaine seacret considerations of approaching casualties, he curte∣ously refused 
Telio,
 saying, that in his soule, he had vowed; vntill the regaining of his thoughts soueraigne, diuine 
Almidiana,
 neuer to receiue more company, or comfort, then that onely which his poore Page 
Curio
 coulde yielde him.


With which his answere 
Aradinus
 and his sonne 
Telio,
 being very well satisfied, they left him wholly to his owne determinations; when, after a fewe daies resting in the Castle, 
Olbiocles
 tooke his farewell of the Gouernour, and going on ship-boarde, hee hoysed vp sailes, and with his heartie comprecations, to the heauens for his safetie, hee committed himselfe to the mercy of the seas.
 Vpon the crestes of whose mounting billowes, how often he was

 tossed, and in fearefull daunger of drowning; neither vnto the shoares of how many alien kingdomes by force of the waues hee was driuen; neither how many dangerous aduentures, both by sea and land hee atchieued; nor what straunge conflicts, combats, and contentions hee entered for ladies, wronged Princesses, and damosels; as, that a∣gainst the arch-pirat 
Tolurnio,
 the brother of 
Marcimo∣des
 the tyrant, for the Countesses sister of 
Corinth, Vpio∣ra;
 I will not at this time make any tedious mentioning commemoration: onely let this suffice you, that his fame so farre encreased, as the great Gouernesse 
Malagda,
 not onely admiring; but also beeing enuiously enamoured with his vertues, enited her selfe with the strongest spels, and straungest Nigromanticke charmes that either by arte or nature shee could practise, to bring him by the ir∣resistable vigour of her damned science, to the vnhappie surging on her accursed Iland. Where 
Olbiocles,
 vn∣fortunately apporting,
 hee was no sooner landed, but hee was thus encountred by this cunning Inchaun∣tresse: 
Mirrour of magninamity, & prewe Patron of prowesse and chiualrie: How long I haue expected thy comming vn∣to this my poore inheritance, well maiest thou diuine by the hollow sinking of my consumed eye-balles; which haue ne∣uer ceased the continuall effluxion of their teares, since the first time their lights guidresse longed for thy to too long-abstained approaching: and surely, haddest thou but pro∣longed thy comming a little longer, my eyes had become blinde; and my eye-balles beene no bigger then pinnes heades, so dry woulde I haue drawne the almost empty foū∣taines of visers: and all for griefe of thy absence, deare Prince of 
Constantinople:
 whose presence since I now so happily at last enioy; welcome, and thrice welcome bee thou to poore 
Malagda;
 whose loue-sicke thoughts haue rent almost in sunder the concaue vamure of my tender breast: & herewith taking 
Olbiocles
 by the armed hand, shee con∣ducted him very honorably vnto her castle, where shee ban∣queted him so royally with all kinde of diuersities of dain∣ty delicates,
 whose knelles the warbling voices of an hun∣dred

 heauenly nymphelike Damozels so melodiously soun∣ded;
 as the more the worthy sonne of 
Claranax
 did eate, the more reliuing hee felt his appetite: such admired vir∣tue consistes in this celestiall arte, which vsed by a cunning 
Orpheus,


Can deade-mens ghosts (whom death did earst surprise)


From blacke 
Cocitus
 lake, cause to arise,


And daunce straunge antickes on th'Elizian plaines,


Libertinized from their suffered paines.


This sumptuous banquet being ended, after repast they went to repose themselues in their lodgings: where for that night they slept so securely, as vntil it was towards morning not any of them opened their drowsie eyelids; but onely the wicked Inchauntresse 
Malagda:
 who awaking about midnight, by her cunning sorceries raised such a vaile of darknesse before the face of the siluer moone, as, at that time being vnable to be seene of any mortall creature, thin∣king herselfe safe in her wickednesse, she approached the chamber doore of the sound-sleeping knight of the 
Leopard:
 which breaking open, shee (whilest shee bathed his body in a most straungely inchaunted liquor) breathed out this in∣cantation ouer the vnsuspecting 
Constantinopolitan:


My beldame, Grandame 
Cyrces,
 helpe in haste,


Thy daughter deare to wreake a full reuenge,


Vpon this wicked murtherer of my sonne:


Whom hee hath slaine by vigour of his arme;


Which was ourioy, which was our onely hope,


Our onely comfortable ages stay:


Whose soule doth cry for vengeance to bee wreake,


Vpon his mischiefes worker: therefore lend


Your happy helpe; yet not to put to death,


This worthy knight: for know ô grandame great,


Malagda
 loues him better than her soule;




Therefore agree to my enchaunting spels,


And let him liue, though reaued of his shape,


The penant satisfactour of our wronges:


Therefore to tushes bee his teeth ychang'd,


His breathing nostrels to a rooting snowte,


Pricke vp his eares, in length out-shooting straight,


His feete and hands turn'd into horny hooues;


And all his skinne of Alablaster hewe,


Discoloured and turn'd to heary hyde;


Eeke all his body bee transmuted so,


As what hee was, no earthly man may know.


And let this spell, O Goddesse, firmely stand;


Till hee be vanquisht by the strongest hand.


Ending her charmes, she conueyghed him out of his cham∣ber, vnto the toppe of a most high hill neighbouring to the sea side: within whose enchaunted promontory, shee left the poore prince, in such strange sort metamorphosed; as for the space of full fourteene winters, hee hath there remai∣ned without any (euen the least) hope of recouering his for∣mer manlike feature; greefully casting for the gastly grunts and groanes in such strange manner, as the whole Ilande oftentimes rang of his effused lamentations: whose fenses, though charmed, were not so vtterly reaued of their manlike wonted reason; but that sometimes they would thinke on his misfortunes, sigh at his miseries; and lamenting, reckon vp his whole worlde of mischaunces; as, the losse of his Lady, leauing of his country, &c; and now lastly his owne vnhappy & monstrous transmutation: which though he no otherwise, then as one in a dreame, as yet perceiued; yet he could not chuse but exceedingly sorrow at (if it had beene) so dreadfull an anatomy of misformitie. Such was the extreame longlasting misery of this poore (once princely) creature, to whose so festered sore, by the diuine prouidence of the almighty Physition, a most pre∣cious plaister is in preparing. Let vs leaue him therefore in his miseries, to fetch with speede this happie and (if it might hee) more then happie 
Oceander,
 whome wee

 lately left in his silent slumbers with 
Artimagus
 in the in∣chaunted boate, which (as you haue heard) so speedily ap∣ported this Iland of 
Malagda.


By that time the sable night had banished all further a∣boade, and trussing vp her pitchy mantles, had yielded vp her gouernement to the approaching morne; the thrice-exquisite and valiant 
Carthage
 fostered 
Oceander,
 bidding adieu to his drousie slumbers, beganne to arise from his cabbinet: and looking vp and downe the boate for the wise 
Artimagus,
 and not finding him (for ear∣nest occasion, as afterwardes you shall heare, had from thence withdrawne him) hee was so exceedingly amazed; as in a doubt, hee began in this wise to ponder of his pro∣ceedings.


What? haue I dreamed that I haue seene, or doe I nowe dreame that I doe perspect these straunge accidents? haue I beene mocked with illusions? or are my senses enchaunted; that I nowe doe what I knowe not of, and remember what I haue but as yet surmised. Did I not set free thee beautious infant of 
AEgypt,
 faire 
Cyafa,
 from the burning Caue of 
Artimagus?
 were not these handes employed for the deliuery of the knight of the goulden shielde from y
e
 tyranny of that diuelish Gyant 
Car∣digan?
 and did not these eyes (vnfortunate because my eyes) cast gentle loue-entertaining glaunces, on the di∣uinest perfecture of Nature? and is not this the wher∣ry-boate, wherein with 
Artimagus
 that counterfaite fish∣erman I happily tooke vp my lodging? yes, true; No, tis not so. But (O 
Mahomet
) if I bee deceiued, why hast thou suffered such vaine fancies to inhabit my mor∣tall braines? But if it bee true, deare GOD of our forefathers, why hast thou so vnhappily berest mee of my louing and learned foster-father? And eake 
Artimagus,
 if thou hast beene with mee, whether art thou gone? af∣ter thy departure leauing thy foster-sonne accoasting this straunge and vnknowne region:
 with this worde, the warme teares trickled downe his cheekes; but remembring him∣selfe,

 hee wiped his eyes, and buckling on his helmet, hee went to the forepart of the boate (which surged right vnder the foote of 
Malagdas
 mountaine) and taking his footehold,
 hee assayed to leape a lande: but in his rise, a boysterous (spel-raised) billowe so vnhappily turned the boate side∣long, as, his feete slipping, 
Oceander
 fell into water, where hee stucke knee-deepe in the sands where, by rea∣son his boate was sodainely departed, hee was forced to stay helpelesse, not beeing able, for the daunger one way, and for his sticking fast, on the other side, either by one meanes or other to relieue himselfe; vntill by the prouidence of the almightie (who in his mercie pittied his miseries) sense and shape-reaued 
Olbiocles,
 the vnfortunate father of distressed though not knowne to be) 
Oceander,
 according to his accustomed order, descended that inchaunted hill, to take his morninges draught at the brinkes of the brinish Ocean; when espying an armed knight vnhappily suffe∣ring his liues shipwracke on the swallowing quicksands, hee set vp his stiffe backearming bristles; and with a greis∣ly grunt grinding his fomed tushes together, he wallow∣ed into the water; with open mouth thinking (as hee had done diuerse) to haue crushed the armoure of 
Oceander
 in a thousand peeces:
 but seeing that by reason of the good temperature of the mettall, as also the strong enchaunt∣ment thereof, hee could not hurt it, hee grasped faster hould, and in his mouth, hee carried him presently out of the water, and shaking his heary hide, hee beganne to as∣cende the mountaine, with intent to haue borne him vnto his beastly Stye, which hee had framed amongst the bu∣shes of the mountaine. Which the valourous knight of the sea seeing, and withall perceiuing that nowe or neuer it was time to free himselfe; hee striued to set his foote on the ground: where obtaining sure footing, hee on the so∣daine leaped out with such a forcible spring, as in a moment hee got himselfe from the iawes of the inchaun∣ted beast: which seeing hinselfe bereaued of his prey, gaue such a groane & gnashed together his teeth so irefully, as

 the whole mountaine trembled at the terrible noise thereof, & therwith he ran fiercely against 
Oceander,
 and with his i∣ronlike tushes,
 hee steake the defending shielde with so irresistable a furie, as, maugre his heade, the knight of the sea was faine to forsake his houlde, and kneeling to the ground, to cry, Ha most mighty 
Mahomet;
 and shall I nowe bee shamed by a sowes sonne, and after so many conquests, become the prey to a beastly swine? Ah, God of our progenitours, if it bee thy will, by thy dreade power defende mee from my vnreasonable, vnmercifull aduersa∣rie. This saide, with his good sworde 
Scindifer,
 he poin∣ted so sound a period on the gammon of the sauage beast, as had it hit vpon an Anuille, it would vndoubtedly haue cleft it asunder in the middest; so maine was the blowe, sent by more then almost an humane fury: which notwith∣standing, no more entered into the inchaunted skinne, then an if the sworde had beene of woode, and the Boare of steele. Wherewith the knight of the Sea was so ama∣zed, as hee was at his wits end, not knowing which way well to cleare himselfe of so daungerous a conflict: But see∣ing there was no other worst (if the worst should come) but death, and that,

,


Death is the ende of euery mortall man,


He determined to doe his vtmost to get the conquest and gaine his freedome, and once more to try the whole hazard of his good fortunes. But because his good sworde could doe him but small auaile, in that the Boares skinne was vnpierceable, hee cryed, helpe 
Mahomet:
 and therewith stepping to an Oake tree (whose braunches had alreadie borne the bitter blasts of an hundred winters) to pull some heauie clubbe from the withered stocke, he perceiued there∣vnder, the vndisseuered bones of a man,
 couered ouer with sundry pieces of armour; vpon the shield whereof (whose

 deuise was a 
Leopard
) were raggedly engraued these fewe verses,

Hard is thy temper, harder is thy happe,


Poore shield, disfurnished of princely master;


Whose chaunce mischaunced, and whose sad mishap


If I should seeme to waile in such disaster,


My pearled teares, then raine, should shower downe faster.


For why, he is transmuted to a Boare,


From which he neuer shall bee changed more.


And a little belowe.


Alas that women kinde should haue their will,


Since their conceits, bende only vnto ill,


Ʋnfortunate CVRIO.


As soone as 
Oceander
 had read them, hee perceiued, that vndoubtedly that Boare, wherewith hee did com∣bat, was the vnhappie owner of that harnesse, for whose metamorphosing the vnfortunate dead Page had lamen∣ted in such his dolefull engrauen Elegy. Wherefore, de∣termining not longer to seeke his destruction, but redemp∣tion from the inchauntment; hee endeauoured himselfe to the finding out of the hidden limits of that wonder∣full enchauntment: which, by the vnapproaching of the, Boare vnto him, effecting, hee incontinently rushed vp∣pon the Boare, and in his armed hands clasping his hor∣ny feete, the valourous knight of the Sea, or euer the beast was aware of him,
 dragged him forcibly from out the circuit of the inchauntmente: which with a terrible clappe of Thunder finishing, left the 
Grecian
 Prince to the fruition of his former manlike shape and beautifullfeatures. And then 
Olbiocles;
 
On my knees (most vali∣ant knight) I render thee humble and deserued thankes for this my freedome; freedome (I say) from euen the most wicked and diuelish imprisonment, that euer a∣ny mortall creature endured. For know, that not onely by the diuelish spelles of a most damned witch 
Malagda,
 I was straungely enstraunged from my manlike features; but

 also in such wonderfull sort, besotted in my senses; as,
 what I was, what was good, what was bad, I neyther knew nor remembred: but as I was so I liued, a swinish life, only pre∣serued in life for the lustfull pleasures of the wicked inchaū∣tresse; of whose accursed body I had more often beastly frui∣tion, then the heauens of the sunne since my metamorpho∣sing: yet in my pleasure, I was continually rated for slaying of her sonne 
Coaran,
 in defence of the beawtious Princesse 
Vpiora,
 as rather had I to haue been dead, then so to haue endured such assiduous vp-brayding: from which (thankes be to the almightie) I am thus happily by your knightly valor at length released: for which I should thinke my selfe ingrate, if I should not stand obliged, in an eternall bonde of amitie vnto you, for this vnrequitable adiument: herewith 
Olbiocles
 would haue kissed 
Oceanders
 gauntlet, in token of gratefulnesse.
 But he (in whome nature hadde happily planted chiualrie and courtesie) woulde not suffer such humilitie, but turning his backe to him, he hastily ran vnto the sea-side after the flying transfugant 
Malagda:
 with whom he no sooner leaped into her ferrie boate, but that as seeming ouer-loaden, it sodainly sunke vnder water: where∣at leauing the noble minded Prince 
Olbiocles
 exceedingly amazed, wee will a while forsake this accursed Iland, to turne our stile a little to the knight with the goulden shield,
 and our worthy peeres of 
Grecia.






CHAP. XV.




¶ How 
Phianora
 arriued at the cittie of 
Constantinople,
 where she founde the Emperour 
Claranax
 his court in exceeding sadnesse, how she proclaimed a Iust for the pretious man∣tle of 
Mardegua,
 her cōquest ouer many Knightes, & com∣bate with the Knight of the Sea.




P
Hianora
 in such sort (as you hearde) beeing departed in the wherrie of the Inchauntresse wicked 
Mardigua,
 from the shoares of 
Afri∣ca,
 as ashamed of her disclosure of 
Ocean∣der,
 in all hast shaped forth her iourney to

 the coastes of 
Grecia,
 when surging within a short while be∣fore the hauens mouth of 
Constantinople,
 they perceiued there neyther ship,
 nor men of any reckoning; but only a few fisher-boates for to apport there. Which solitary spectacle so amated the young Princesse, as for very griefe to see so fa∣mous an harbour, so little frequented now, which in times past, yea euen within her owne fathers memorie, had been the onely receptacle for all, both heathen and christian na∣tions; y
e
 teares trickled downe so abundātly, by her cheeks, as for very pitie therof the (though otherwise pittilesse) In∣chauntresse, could not chuse but comfort her vp with these kinde speeches;


Perplex not thy selfe in this sort (deare daughter) with the sodain sorrow conceiued for so strange an alteration. For of this I shall assure thée, that yer I (as ould as I am) should die, 
Phianora
 shal see the court of 
Constātinople
 far more fa∣mous and frequented, then hitherto any enrowled recorde hath left in notice. With these wordes the Princesse was somewhat comforted: and taking heart of grace, as hoping for better fortune to befall so faire a cittie, she entreated the witch to put to land: which 
Mardigua
 performing, they both togither passed vp vnto the Emperour 
Claranax
 his palace: where they found the hall, parlour, and galleries, hung all with sable hanginges;
 the Knights and Ladies, attendāts, cloathed in mourning vestures; bearing in their lookes the signes of sorrow, and breathing frō their hearts centre me∣teorized sighes, multiplied by the continuall commemora∣tions of their misfortunes: at the vpper end of the galleries, the liuely images of the Emperour 
Claranax
 and the Em∣presse 
Basilia
 were engraued in alablaster in full proportiōs, hanging their heades in their bosomes, and with their na∣ked hands instead of a Mounde, vphoulding a deathes head: whereupon in latine characters was written; 
NOSTRAE SPES TANTA SALVTIS.


At this sad sight, 
Phianora
 was exceedingly mooued to compassionate sorrowe, insomuch as shee could not refraine from kissing the hands of the stony pictures; saying, ha, my royall friends, how greatly is fortune to blame for affrēting

 you in such cruell manner! Once before haue I vowed, and heare againe doe I auouch, an eternall enquest after your most distressed children, for whose losse you thus languish, & for whose mischaunces you are growen thus miserable: w
t
 these speeches she effused her sorrowes: which were no sooner ending, but that the Emperour and the Empresse 
Basilia,
 all attired in a sad suite of blacke veluet, entered into the gal∣lerie, with such cast downe countenances, as (respecting on∣ly their sad entercoursings) they neuer so much as regarded the two straungers 
Phianora
 & 
Mardigua;
 vntill they so nigh approached them; as 
Phianora,
 doing her dutie, in this ma∣ner raysed the Emperour from his melancholy; 
Mighty Emperour, and my dreade soueraigne Queene 
Basilia,
 the gracious god of heauē,
 for the loue of his deare sonne Iesus Christ, comfort vp your disconsolate thoughtes; and of his mercy, free you from your long-endured miserie: by y
e
 hap∣pie resending of your haplesse children.
 The Emperour hea∣ring this salutation, could not but in courtesie regreet the straunger: and therefore kindly embracing 
Phianora
 about the gorget, with his eyes full of brinish teares, 
Knight of y
e
 goulden shield (quoth he) how much I am endebted vnto thee for thy continuall deprecations to the highest, for my happi∣nesse, I am not able to explaine: onely with thankes I must needes expresse the great good will that I beare vnto thee, whose demerits haue more then firmely obliged mee, in an vndissolvable bonde of eternall amitie.


Ha, my good Lord (answered 
Phianora
) I thanke your Maiestie that you doe so graciously accept of my poore and humble seruice: which since with such loue it is recompēced, I protest before the almightie, neuer to slacke, vntill by Gods gracious helpe, I shall regaine your, almost irrepai∣rable and vnhopeable comfort; that once againe I may with ioye behould the Court of 
Grecia
 to bee repleni∣shed with as many valiaunt and vndaunted Champions, as euer hitherto, you may remember it. And to that ende, I beseech your Highnesse, to graunt mee a

 commission, to proclaime solemne tiltes and tourneis to be houlden on the plaine before the cittie, wherunto vnder safe conduct and assurance, the worthiest Knights of all natiōs may safely repaire: thereby not onely to knowe what valo∣rous warriours your 
Grecian
 Dominions may affoorde, but also to make knowne vnto your neighbouring Potentates (that wonder at your glories dimnesse) that euen in your greatest misfortunes your knightly royalty cannot be repres∣sed.
 Graunt it (great gouernour quoth 
Mardegua
) and for the accustomed victors prize, I shall propose a gorgeous mantle of my owne making, so curiously wrought, & costly enchaced with pretious stones and pearles, as hee that win∣neth it, shall thinke himselfe blessed to be the wearer of so rich a garment.
 The good Emperour thanking them for their courtesies, graunted them their requests; with pro∣mise that himselfe to the second vanquisher, woulde giue as rich a collar of gould as euer came about any Princes necke in Christendome: al which being concluded on, they conduc∣ted each other into the parlour. They had not talked any lōg time of their intents, before the tables were couered; and the meate being serued in, they fel to their victuals: frō y
e
 which after a little recreation of walking in the Emperours gar∣den, they departed to their lodgings, giuing charge vnto cer∣taine trusty knight-heralds, to proclaime a Iust to be houl∣den for all commers on the plaine before the famous Cittie of 
Constantinople.
 Wherin to be briefe, such was the excee∣ding diligence of the messengers, as the rumor therof spread both farre and neare vnto the Courtes of the most mightiest christian Princes: Insomuch as by y
e
 time appointed (which was 6. moneths) the whole hauen of 
Constantinople
 was almost choaked with multitude of ships of all neighbouring nations:
 such an infinite number of Knights and Gentlemē arriued, within that short time, on the fertile shoares of 
Gre∣cia.
 For first, from 
Hungaria,
 came the good King 
Rubaldo
 with his Queene 
Anaxia,
 and his young sonne 
Morcauil;
 who being newly dubbed a Knight, most earnestly excited his fa∣ther vnto that iourney: with these also came the ould knight of 
Bohemia, Fyardon
 his Queene 
Zaama,
 and his sonne and

 nephewes, 
Arcanio,
 
Tholon,
 and 
Thiorin.
 The aged king of 
Transiluania
 also sent a couzen of his named 
Kauiscon,
 his heire apparant adopted, with a great troope of that coū∣trey knightes and gentlemen for his attendants. Thither also came a stronge Pagan, with a great retinue of his coun∣trey knights, from the shoares of 
Danuby,
 sonne to the migh∣tie 
Orbirrohell,
 called by y
e
 right name 
Xanzimar;
 but in his pride vsurping the title of 
The Christiās Terrifier.
 All which being (as aforesayd) arriued at 
Constantinople,
 pitched their tents (after their salutations to the Emperour) round about the plaine before the walls of the Cittie: which were placed in such order about y
e
 Lists, as they seemed like a company of pettie villages, about some great borough Towne. With which sight not onely y
e
 Emperour, Empresse, & the Knight of the goulden shield, but also 
Mardegua
 (as she whose cun∣ning inuention had conspired some worthy knights destruc∣tion) greatly reioyced: insomuch as now w
t
 great preparatiō they stayed for the day of pleasure prefixed. Which being ap∣proached, they no sooner espyed the morninges mistresse, with disheueled tressalines to mount her iuorie charriot, but they endossed on their armours; and on their foming cour∣sers, they praunced vp and downe before the Listes, away∣ting the arriuall of the 
Grecian
 Challengers: who by reasō that that morning y
e
 Emperor found himselfe somewhat ill at ease; and also the King of 
Bohemia,
 by reason of his late long iourney, was faint and weary, as yet had no leasure to come. And in the meane time, the alyen Knightes doing their deuoyres, spent the whole fore-noone in Iusting:
 which was very valiauntly performed, to the foyle of many good Knights, and the brasting of many stronge launces. At the end whereof, a lustie knight attendant of 
Xanzimar
 (for hee scorned to iuste with the basest himselfe) named 
Martio,
 re∣mained with the honour of the field; hauing since his first encountring, ouerthrowne sixteene 
Transiluanian
 knights to the grounde: from whome (though against the lawe) hee tooke away both horse and harnesse.


After dinner was ended in the Emperours palace, the day grewe so serene and pleasant by reason of the bright

 ascent of the dayes illustratour, into the top-front of the Zodiacke; as the Emperour 
Claranax
 his feeble minde was exceedingly refreshed: and therefore taking the oulde King 
Fiardon,
 of 
Bohemia
 (to whose cheekes also the estiue heate hadde added a crimoson blush) by the age-wrinkled handes,
 hee chearefully sayde; Brother of 
Bo∣hemia
 though euen nowe fainte sicknesse made vs giue small respect vnto our Princely pastimes: yet nowe a∣gaine, the faire sunshine inuiteth vs to the conspecting of our royall feates of late-renewed Knight-hoode. From the viewe whereof I protest I would not bee any longer absent, for twice the price of the inestimable Mantle of 
Mardegua;
 such heroicke encouragement, I knowe, my presence will infuse into the vndaunted heartes of my 
Grecian
 Companions. Accompany me therefore deare friend O couzen 
Fyardon,
 with a merrie countenance, vnto the behoulding of our prepared Iustes: which one∣ly to relieue the drooping sadnesse of sorrowfull Gree∣kish soules, was purposely proclaimed, by the worthy Knight of the goulden shield: whose exquisite a bearing against these repaired forrainers, shall winne him the de∣serued name of the flower of Chiualrie. In this sort the good Emperour inuited the ould 
Bohemian
 King, to the behoulding of the Iusts: who gladly graunting his high∣nesse request, staying his feeble ioyntes with an Iuorie staffe, presently departed with him vnto the great To∣wers of the Cittie gate; which hadde beene in former times erected to the same intent and purpose: to the top whereof ascending, they might at ease ouer-view y
e
 whole circuite of the newe-suburbized pauilions: which being of sundrye Nations, and therefore of diuers fashions, drew great delight vnto y
e
 hearts of the great Potentates, who now had fresh occasion of calling to minde their won∣ted such like pleasures.


The Emperour 
Claranax,
 in this sort, with the Kinges of 
Hungarie,
 & 
Bohemia,
 the Empresse 
Basilia,
 the Queenes 
Anaxia, Zaama,
 and an infinite number of most beautifull

 Ladies, amongst whome (as 
Cynthia
 amongst a troope of starres) the faire young Princesse of 
Sparta, Rosamyra,
 eldest sister to the toward Knight 
Ismerion,
 shone foorth her siluer rayes, which (seconding vnmatchable faire 
Phi∣anora
) was onely admired of the amazed gazers; but e∣specially of the exquisite Prince of 
Transiluania:
 whose hap if it had beene to haue hadde her, had beene most hap∣pie: but or euer he could come to sollicite her, she was vn∣fortunately slaine by the cruell Pagan King of 
Danuby;
 as you shall heare related in the second part of this pre∣sent historie.


The Emperour and Empresse being placed, there en∣tred vppe into a high scaffold, for Iudges of the fielde,
 foure verie auntient Knightes of 
Constantinople,
 named 
Sornio, Florido, Sanio,
 and 
Sigando:
 who commaunding the trumpets to bee sounded, gaue licence to the knights that would, to doe their deuoires. Then entred there into the Lists, three 
Grecian
 Knightes,
 with their launces in their reastes; who were encountred and vnhorsed by 
Martio,
 and two other sturdie Pagans, 
Iperom,
 and 
Perronu:
 who abore themselues so valiauntly against the 
Greekes,
 as in lesse then a quarter of an hower, they vanquished a dozen worthy 
Constantinopolitans,
 approo∣ued Knightes. Whereat the Emperour looked verye sad, saying; I pray God wee haue a better ending then we haue had a beginning: or else shame and woe to the 
Grecian
 Knight-hoode.


Herewith hee turned about to the King 
Rubaldo,
 with intente to require his helpe towardes the recouerie of his 
Grecian
 credite. But yer hee coulde vtter his minde, hee was recalled to the battlementes, by the ould King, of 
Bohemia;
 who shewed him him three exquisite young Knightes all in white armour (who by their hero
call demeanours gaue perfect notyce of their wonderfull va∣lour) whome when the Emperour sawe, he highly com∣mended their couragious carriages; and therefore earnestly

 wished to see them runne their carriere: which he no sooner wished, but they perfourmed it with such irresistable furie;
 as at their forceable fierce shockes (without any re∣sistaunce) both their enemies and horses, were ouerthrowne to the ground. Which 
Xanzimar
 the diuelish 
Pagan
 percei∣uing, with a monstrous clamour he cryed out to his aduen∣turing knights of 
Danuby,
 to withdrawe themselues from the combate; for hee onely would bee the executioner of the young Greeke Champions tragedies: and with a mighty Pinetrée launce in his reast, he ran such a stronge carryere against 
Thyorin,
 as although the 
Bohemians
 speare gaue him a shr
wde shocke in the encounter, hee so roughly ru∣shed his Launce against the younge Knightes gorget, as (giuing him a sore wounde) he bare him topsy turuy ouer his horse croope to the grounde:
 and then rushing in with the other two Knightes 
Arcanio
 and 
Tholon,
 with his fau∣chon he so stoutly behaued himselfe against them, as many times not onely 
Tholon,
 but also the 
Bohemian
 Prince him∣selfe, he made grieffully to groane vnder his heauie stroakes. Neuerthelesse so exceeding couragious was the resistaunce of the valiaunt Knights, as in spight of his heart he was sometimes enforced to confesse his foolish hardinesse, in attempting so daungerous a conquest.


But, now too late hee stoode to repent him: and there∣fore, seeing howe it stoode vppon his safetie to ridde him speedily from two such fierce enemies, hee raysed hym∣selfe vpright in his stirrops, and (casting his crooked shield behinde him) with his sworde in both his handes,
 hee strake such a resistlesse blowe on the shield-arme of 
Tho∣lon,
 as disiointing it from the shoulder, hee made him for safetie of his life to turne his horse heade, and flie amaine for some succour to the Surgeons of the Empe∣rour. Now God of heauen (quoth the good Emperour weeping) since the tyme of my youth haue I not seene a more fiercer combattante, then yonder mighty and va∣liaunt Knight of 
Danuby:
 of my life, hee is vnmatch∣able; and from him, no 
Grecian,
 shall bee euer able

 to receiue honour. Ha, my deare sonne and friends 
Olbio∣cles, Orthisius,
 & 
Alfortio,
 that you were but heere to behould this terrible Champion; for well I knowe, you would leese your liues, but you would wreake vengeance on the heade of you proude insulter. Thus lamented the good 
Prorex
 his misfortunes, thinking assuredly, that neuer againe the 
Grecians
 should fende the Listes with victory: for also, by this time was the braue 
Bohemian
 Prince 
Arcanio
 beaten off from his horse, and grieuously wounded.
 Which the prince of 
Hungary
 perceiuing, hee stepped before 
Xanzimar,
 and with his courtelax hee distributed such sounde buffets on the helmet of the 
Danubian,
 as had hee not the better de∣fended his heade with his steely shield, his curled Peti∣cranion had beene crazed: but the furious 
Pagan,
 rather incensed, then daunted with the young knights stroakes; brandished his fauchon so strongly ouer the helmet of prince 
Morcauill,
 as paring away his whole plume of crimson coloured feathers, and a great part of his crest,
 hee sent him headlong to associate his fore-foyled friend 
Arcanio.
 But now were the chearefull clamors huge and mightie of the 
Pagans
 attendants, for ioye of their Princes victories: which had so daunted the 
Grecian
 knights,
 as 
Xanzimar
 for more than halfe an hower trauersed vp and downe the Lists, without disturbance of any one offering the encoun∣ter. Wherefore, by reason of the fast approaching of the night, hee was permitted with honour of that daies Iust to returne for that night vnto his tents: where leauing him, a ioyfull man for his gotten glory, vnto his rest; in the meane while, conuert wee our stile to our stories only subiect, the heroicke and valorous knight of the Sea: who (as you haue heard) beeing departed from the knight of the Leopard, into the boate of the Inchauntresse 
Malag∣da,
 was thought of 
Olbiocles,
 to be drowned in the surging Ocean: wherein, indeede hee was exceedingly deluded by the cunning of the Inchauntresse. For shee knowing the great loue that 
Olbiocles
 did beare his worthy deliuerer, had by her cunning framed that monstrous billow, to seeme to ouerswallowe the enchaunted wherry-boate; to the end

 that thereby she might perplex the friendly thoughts of the worthy 
Greeke;
 who shee knewe would extreamely bewaile the death of so good a Champion. But (to bee briefe) she lo∣ued herselfe too wel to be her liues only abbridger: and there∣fore she refrained from such a daungerous reuengement. But knowing by her arte of the subtle dealing of the wicked In∣chauntresse 
Mardegua,
 shee determined to bring 
Oceander,
 to the aduenturing for so mischieuous a prize, as the ritch proposed mantle:
 which was so cunningly enchaunted, as if hee did but weare it, he should presently, become franticke, to his owne destruction. Wherefore (after a long sailing) turning herselfe towards the knight of the sea (as if amazed at his presence) she sodainely started backe, and then falling prostrate on her knees, she most pittifully with floudes of ef∣fused teares,
 besought him of mercy for her misdeedes; besée∣ching him by the duety he owed to his deare fostermother 
Kanira,
 that he would slacke his incensed fury, and not in his anger execute any euill against her, whose life was subiect to doe his liking,
 and whose arte & learning tended only vnto his aduancement: and therewithall she vp and tolde him of y
e
 great Iousts at 
Constantinople,
 and the rich prize proposed; which she was assured hee should conquest, by reason of his matchlesse fortitude: and with these fained faire wordes 
Sy∣ren-like
 charming the anger of 
Oceander,
 she kissed his ar∣med foote, and with a trembling heart expected the doubt∣ful answere of the valourous Prince. Who irefully knitting his browes,
 Minion (saide he) take heede, that what thou say∣est, be true: for else I vowe by 
Mahomet
 the deified Prophet of our holy ancestoures, that with my sworde I shall disse∣uer thy bodie into as many pieces, as thy withered hide is enwrapped into wrinkles: make hast therefore to 
Constan∣tinople,
 that, for thy liues safety, I may speedily finde thy ac∣tions according to thy plighted protestations. The cunning woman laught in her sleeue at the foolish pittie of the worthy knight: whose dolefull tragedy in her wicked thoughts, shee alreadie (though vainely) supposed acted. And therefore v∣sing her might and maine, arte and skille, to the forwar∣ding of the iourney, she made crosse y
e
 seas with such celeri∣tie,

 as by that time the beautious 
Aurora
 had, with vermi∣lion-blushing cheekes, forsaken the saffron couche of her loathsome age-wearied louer 
Tython;
 they safely apported the shoares of 
Grecia:
 where they no sooner landed, and pit∣ched their Pauilion; but that they were visited by an infinit number of Pages, who enquired of him both his name and country: whereto hee answered, hee was called of his countrymen, the knight of the sea, brought vp in 
A∣frica,
 vnder the vertuous and noble Queene 
Kanira
 of 
Carthage;
 for whose sake he was thither repaired, by force of armes, to winne away the prize-proposed mantle, from the proudest that dared to defende it against him. The Pa∣ges hearing his speaches, and iudging him to bee of small force, because of his fewe attendants, laughed at his bold∣nesse; saying, they hoped yer it were noone, to see him foi∣led by some base cowardly carpet knight: and therewith departing,
 they left him to the expecting the second daies Ioustes inition. To the which (the Emperour, Empresse, and Iudges of the fielde beeing placed on their scaffolds, as aforesaide) the trumpets sounding, lent licence to the attending Champions, to giue their valourous onsets. And therefore 
Xanzimar
 and 
Phianora
 fewtring their speares a∣gainst each other,
 with a strong carreire met togither so fiercely, as both their Launces breaking, without any harme, being not so much as once diseased by their shocke, they passed by each other; & either of them, lightly proui∣ding himselfe of newe weapons, prepared himselfe to the second encounter: which was performed so couragiously by the Knight of the Oliue braunch (for such was the deuice, by the aduice of the wicked witch 
Mardegua,
 of the Englishe Princesse at this time) as pearcing with her steely pointed Launce quite through,
 both sheelde and cuirace of the furious Pagan, shee bare him at her speares pointe cleane out of his saddle, laying him almost breath lesse vpon the colde earth: from whence in a swoune, hee was speedily conueyed by his attendantes, to his Pauilion, to hee healed from his deepe strucke iction.




For anger of their Lord 
Xanzimars
 ouerthrowe, the mis∣beleeuing 
Pagans,
 thicke and threefould, clustered to combat the worthy knight of the Oliue-braunche:
 but so valourous∣ly did the worthy English Damozell distribute her iron almes amongst the thickest of that rabble multitude, as in a moment shee brought more then nineteene of them, with crased crownes to their 
Beso las tierras:
 insomuch, as now, their courages being somewhat cooled, they beganne to keepe somewhat more aloofe from her, then they were wont. Wherefore at pleasure shee might praunce vp and downe the Lists, without any disturbance. In which ease hauing continued the better part of two howers (seeing no more to aduenture the combat) shee dismounted her courser; and leaning against the railes of the Listes, she there rested her wearyed limbes: which milde 
Zephirus
 with gentle breath, so pleasingly cooled, as (the hoat swel∣ter of her sweate abated) her late-enfeebled body beganne to be refreshed; and anewe to receiue, as it were a seconde force and vigour. Which, that choyce flower of vnmatchfull Chiualry, 
Oceander,
 sufficiētly peceiuing; with y
e
 ould witch 
Malagda,
 in steede of a Page to carry his sworde, excellently accoustred in his admirably-inchaunted wat∣chet armour, hee praunced in most stately manner, towardes the Pauilions of vanquished 
Xanzimar:
 and taking out a strong and mighty speare, cut out of the heart of a hard knotty oake,
 hee entred into the Lists; and clash∣ing the trunchion end of his Laūce, with great force against his shield, he gaue signall vnto the combat. Which the wor∣thy maiden knight vnderstanding, shee presently remoun∣ted her bit-champing Courser, and taking a sturdie tough Launce in her hand, with a swift carryere, shee spurred to∣wards the knight of the Sea:
 who regreeted her with as great forwardnesse; insomuch as the very earth seemed scarcely to bende vnder their horses hooues; with such excee∣ding celeritte they passed to the incounter. Their meeting was wonderous sodaine: and though the shocke was most fierce and forcible; yet onely on their shieldes, they brast their knottie staues, which in a thousand pieces flewe shi∣uering

 vnto the Element; & without moouing in their sad∣dles, they passed by each other, without any other harme, thē a small wound, which 
Phianora
 receiued, through her shield into her shoulder; 
Oceander
 by reason of the incomparable goodnesse of his armour, scaping scotfree from his femall enemies furie. But now are they prouiding for the second encounter: and the trumpets sommoning them to doe their deuoiers with new refreshed courages they spurred their readie Palfreyes to their swift carreiring:
 and leaueling their Launces at each others helmet, they met with such a mightie and irresistable felnesse; as the knight of the sea, hauing borne his aduersarie both horse & man to the ground, was enforced by his foes fortitude (though against his will) to caper ouer his horses croope for company.


In this sort being both dispalfreyed, they lightly leapt vp∣pon their feete, and vnsheathing their trusty Curtelaxes, with their aduaunced shieldes before them, they mena∣cingly marched vnto each other, and with their swordes, laying loade vpon their steely burgonets, each endeauored his vttermost against his aduersarie; so as neither of them hauing the victorie, though 
Oceander
 had the better, they continued an whole howers combat, in such couragious, ne∣uer ceasing sort, as both 
Greekes
 and aliens stoode by, all a∣mazed at their so long-endured contention: which (no doubt) had lasted longer, had not the glorious Princesse 
Phianora,
 by reason of her bloudes effusion, out of her deepe-gashed woundes, on a sodaine, fainted before the feete of her enemie; who sorrowed at her disparagement more then if hee had lost the conquest. And therefore sending her by her attending sorrowfull Pages to her chamber, he repaired vnto the scaf∣folde; at the handes of the Iudges, to receiue his honour of the Iust, conquered in so dangerous a conflict.
 The iudges hearing him demaunde but what was iust, allotting to the wounded knight of the Oliue-braunch, the second; they wil∣lingly tendered vnto him then, for winning the first place in y
e
 conquest, y
e
 gorgeous & pretious mantle of y
e
 deceitful In∣chaūtresse 
Mardigua:
 who, togither w
t
 
Malagda,
 inwardly re∣ioyced at their so wel (vnforecōplotted) performed stratagem.








CHP. XVI.




¶ 
Oceanders
 deliuery from the inchaunted Mantle of 
Mar∣degua,
 by the comming of 
Artimagus
 his messenger: with whom the knight of the Sea departed to the wise mans cell: of the death of 
Artimagus,
 and the sorrowfull mour∣ning of the 
Carthaginians
 for him.




Q
Vestionlesse the wickednesse of thes
 two mischieuous women was exceeding mon∣str
us, in such a villanous sort to en∣tangle such rare Parragons of prow∣esse within the nets of their inuentiue consp
racie: who brought about their drift so cunningly,
 as needes, and of force, either 
Phianora,
 or 
Oceander
 must perishe by their contriuements; which only in their hearts the Inchaun∣tresses desired: and therefore 
Mardegua
 caused 
Phianora
 to chaunge her shielde of gould which too wel was knowne to y
e
 knt
ht of y
e
 sea, into the shield of the Oliue braunch; to y
e
 end, that by 
Oceander
 (of whose arriuall by her arte shee fore-vnderstoode) shee might receiue her deathes wounde; and (herein ioyning with 
Malagda
) the valourous knight of the sea, by adorning him selfe with the pretious mantle, might by the operatiue force of the strong enchauntment, become his owne cruell executioner. Which indeede, hee had done, had not their wicked complets beene cunningly ouerreached, by the more then naturall inuentions of 
Arti∣magus:
 whose speciall regarde ouer his deare foster childe caused him in hast to preuent these mischiefes, by sending his daughter 
Magartes
 in present embassage, to the fa∣mous Citie 
Constantinople:
 who, onely attended on by a paire of Dwarfes, pressed through the multitude, to∣wardes the knight of the Sea: to whome (after dutie to

 the Emperour) shee in this wise deliuered the message of her father:


All health and happinesse bee restored to the wise man my father 
Artimagus:
 who, tendering thy safetie; by virtue of thy obedience vnto him, chargeth thee by mee, that leauing the pernitious glorie of the prize, thou pre∣sently depart with mee vnto his Cell; where hee lyeth betweene life and death, sorrowfully expecting thy spee∣die repaire vnto him:
 and therewith snatching the mantle (which he was casting about his shoulders) out of his hande, shee clapped it ouer the backe of the wicked Inchauntresse 
Mardigua
 (who little thought of such a mischiefe) and pre∣sently poasting away with 
Oceander,
 shee neuer ceased till they were all embarqued in the Inchaunted whery-boat: wherin, hauing put from the shores of 
Gretia,
 they com∣mitted themselues to the finishing of their long and dan∣gerous iourney; to the greate ioy of 
Magartes,
 whose re∣paire had thus happily repriued 
Oceander
 from so greate a mischiefe; and on the contrary, to the exceeding griefe of the miserable and wretched woman 
M
rdegua.
 Vpon whose bodie and boanes the enchaunted p
yson of the man∣tle tooke such operatiue power; as all her bodie swelling monstrously, her haire standing vpright vpon her heade, and the very skinne crumpling into little roules vpon her 
nuenomed members, put her to such extreame paine,
 as enforced by the intollerablenesse of her cruell tormente, and anguishe, shee galloped vp and downe the List∣yarde, with hideous shrickes and roaring, emploring e∣uery particular amazed behoulder, with his death-wor∣king Cortelaxe, to ridde her (most wretched wight) out of her most miserable languor. But finding none so harde heart
d, as to worke her tragedie, shee dismounted her Palfrey; and mounting vp the toppe of the Citie walles, from the highest Battlementes thereof,
 shee desperately cast downe her excruciated carcasse, into the ditches: which loath to bury so badde a creature,

 in their speedie current, they presently conueighed her vnto the 
Adriaticke
 sea; where what became of her body or mantle afterwards, was neuer since, either knowne or hearde of. But in the meane while, the good Emperour 
Claranax,
 and all the worthy order of knighthoode there con∣gregated were so amazed at that sodain happenned sorowful accident, as without any worde speaking they stoode for a great while gazing one another in the face; not knowing whether to their left hande, or to their right (they were so astonished) for to turne themselues: to which their amaze∣ment, well wee will leaue them, to welcome our worthy knight of the sea, to y
e
 sunburnt coastes of 
Africa:
 w
t
 with his teares hee ioyfully saluting,
 he speedily poasted to the faire Citie of 
Carthage;
 where hee founde the inhabitants in ex∣ceeding sadnesse, for the assured report of the extreame sick∣nesse of the wise 
Artimagus;
 whose age had brought such an∣guish, and whose approaching death would prognosticate their dreadfull destruction. The valorous knight was stric∣ken to the heart, with this rumor; and therefore hasted the faster towards the Castle 
Carzar:
 where hee was kindly (though sorrowfully) entertained by the wofull Queene 
Kanira:
 who kissing his cheeke very tenderly, with her eyes fraught with teares, and a trembling voice; I would to the Gods (shee saide) that either thou haddest come sooner, or else not repaired so soone to this so dispaireful a Castle; whose hard walles harboure none but heauie heartes, rea∣die to breake in pieces for thinking of their approaching mi∣series. For know (deare fosterchilde) that my deare brother the wise 
Artimagus
 (whose welbeing was my soules com∣fort) hath his life dated at a present period, and lying pan∣ting and almost breathelesse vpon a downe soft Pallade, leaues vs poore wretched creatures, fearefully expecting his latter gaspe: which least it bee finished before you see him. I shall hastily leade you into his chamber; that in∣to the closure of your bosome, as hee most desireth, he may with ioyfulnesse yielde vp the vnlasting lease of his lin∣gring life.




With these words, the wofull Queene conducted 
Ocean∣der,
 vnto the lodging of her brother 
Artimagus
 
on whose ar∣med personage the good ould man, no sooner cast his dim eyes, but that they perceiued how his colour freshly reuiued in the pale cinders of his thinne cheekes, and a vermilion tincture, already ginne pleade a newe possession in his sun∣ken mansions; also his spirits to receiue fresh vigour, by the life enfusing presence of 
Oceander:
 by whose armed hands the wiseman shaking him; with an hollowe voice & a death∣like sounde,
 on this manner (weeping for verye ioye) hee softlye breathed out this welcome. 


Ha, ha, my deare foster-sonne 
Oceander,
 dearer vnto me then my verie soules essentiall substance; sweete 
Oceander,
 howe welcome art thou vnto me! and how exceedingly is my departing spirit refreshed by thy happy presēce! Infinitely surely am I boūd to thāke the heauēs arch-ruler, for thy safe & happy deliue∣rie frō y
e
 mischieuous cōplots of most wicked sorceresses: who had layde deceitfull snares by their cunning enchauntmēts for to intrappe thee; without eyther respect of thy valours virtue, or the highest 
Mahomets
 reuengeance. Alas my sweete sonne, little diddest thou suspect y
t
 when thou haddest conquered y
e
 mantle, thou didst with the vnprouident tra∣uailer, seeke for shelter vnder the bright scales of a vene∣mous serpent. For, if thou hadst but worne it, thou shouldest haue endured straunger tortures, then did 
Prometheus
 (fas∣tened to the moūtaine 
Caucasus
) vnder y
e
 crooked beake of y
e
 neuer ceasing heart-deuouring 
Vulture:
 onely herein, your torments differed, that w
t
 your owne handes you should end your miserable life, whē this languor shal last vnfinished.


This, yea this onely, was the cause of my griefe; & one∣ly to release thee from this wretchednesse, did I sende my daughter 
Magartez
 vnto thee, to fetch thee speedily vnto me: for whose good and prosperous fortunes I haue spent my life and vsed my learning in such sort, as when y
e
 times shall fully be expired, the whole world shall wonder at thy chaunces. For in this same litle scrowle of gilded parchmēt,
 which thou seest heere couered ouer with these leaues of brasse, is contained the rarest 
 approo∣ued

 skill: whose leaues are fast bound with so stronge En∣chauntments, as they neuer shall bee opened, vntill a cer∣taine secret time prefixed by the Gods: wherein after thou hast done thy parents the most extreame wronge that may be offered, thou shalt by this, come to the true knowledge of thy pedigree, and the true and euer liuing sauiour, to thy owne great happinesse, and the wonderfull astonishment of all creatures, that shall heare of so strange an happened ac∣cident. But deare sonne, though the time be somewhat long yer these things come to passe, tempt not thy fortune by the ardent desire of knowing these secrets, yer the time is fully expired of the accomplishing of these wonders. For, at that very instant; shall my deare daughter 
Magartez
 (to whose vse I leaue both my Cell and learning) present the same vnto thee: & then thou maist bouldly vaunt thy selfe to be the most happiest knight that euer was borne of any mother. Al∣so deare Prince (for now it concernes me to entreate thee) since euery creature is subiect vnto death, let me request thy patience for my departing out of this wretched life: and though thy loue thou bearest vnto me for my manifold adiu∣ments in thy necessities, bee incomparable; yet when thou shalt with those cleare shining glasses of thine eyes, behold this crazed carcase & withered body of mine, both cold and liuelesse, suffer not thy sorrowes to goe beyond their bounds: but with a moderate meane in greeuing, with some fewe teares trickling from thy eyes fountaines, bathe ouer my colde, pale, age-nipt chéekes, in token of thy vnstained af∣fection; that 
Marga
tez
 (to whose artfull tuition I be∣take thee) may the more willingly oblige her selfe in an e∣ternal dutie to thy preseraance, & preferment in the field of glorie, & triumphant honour, wonne by the virtue of thy ne∣uer ouermatched chiualrie: and, now hoping that you will rest somewhat satisfied with my sad departure, I humbly print on your stéely gauntlet the last signall of my affectio∣nate and loyall friendshippe:


when, sweetely kissing y
e
 iron gloue,
 hee plucked his armes downe into the bedde, and turning his face from the attendants, hee quietly y
elded vp his ghost; whilest his daughter 
Margartez,
 w
t
 a cast-down

 countenance and a trembling voice (equiualent to y
e
 cunning couch of a sweete sounding Lute) dolefully sighed forth this sorrowfull knell verse;

O Prophet great, which in the heauens aboue,


Thy residence dost keepe eternally,


Looke downe vpon his soule with eyes of Loue,


Which languishing in mickle misery,


With sighes and groanes would to compassion moue


Thy sacred soule; that since hee needes must die,


His fleeting ghost may to the skyes remoue;


There to attende vpon thy deity.


As soone as he was throughly deade, they most dolefully lamented ouer his deade bodie, w
t
 such greeful groanes,
 cries and clamoures, as the whole Castle rang againe of their mourning; so loudly did their shreekes eccho, and pene∣trate euen into the vnder-cloudes of heauen; so dolourously they bewailed the death of the most wise and learned Lord 
Artimagus.
 Which their sad ceremonies beeing ended, they pretiously embalmed his disentrailed body; and perfuming it with infinitie of most sweete odoures, they caused it, the very same night, to be carried in an 
Ebon
 Chariot, into the middest of the market place of 
Carthage;
 where, before the sorrowfull Citizens, they consumed it vnto ashes: and ouer the place where it was burned, the louing 
Carthaginians,
 with a huge masse of pearles and treasure,
 speedily erected a most faire Chappell, consecrated vnto 
Mahomet:
 where∣in for many yeares together they kept sad ceremonies, in commemoration of this most wonderfully wise 
Artimagus.
 Whose departed soule leauing to the censure of the Highest, let vs againe r
eit our speaches backe to the famous Court of 
Grecia;
 where, after her daungerous combat, wee left the beautious and warlike 
Phianora
 in a pitifull plight, vnder the hande of well-experienced Chirurgeous.








CHAP. XVII.




How 
Phianora,
 being recured of her woundes, deliuered the Knight of the Leoparde from the enchauntmentes of 
Gola,
 and her sonnes 
Norin
 and 
Nigramounde;
 whome she vanquished, and departed with him to the Rocky-Iland of 
Ortolomorgantell.




R
Ight sore and daungerous were the woūds, that y
e
 worthy daughter of 
Ar∣gamonte,
 K. of fertile 
England,
 recei∣ued in her late-foughtē combate, with the Knight of the Sea: neuerthelesse they nothing so much in comparison, grieued her, as the vexation she recei∣ued, by reason of the great care she had to keepe her selfe vndiscloased from the cunning Surgeōs;
 whome onely by the continuall wearing of her helmet, shee kept from the knowledge of her sex and features. But, as the more the mistrusting spie seeks by his subtle carriage, and honest, fained conuersation, to hide his secret intent from his entercoursers, the more he is suspected of all men, & his wicked drifts farre narrowlier looked into: so w
t
 how much the greater diligent care the beawtious Princesse conser∣ued her selfe from the knowledge of all men, by so much the sooner insearching lyer shee was watched by the suspitious Surgeons; who vsed all indifferent meanes possible to finde out the cause of her concealing: but to no purpose; though at length they espied her in her secret closet, with her helmet vnlaced,
 and her yellowe golden lokes, such as the Poets haue fained 
Ariadnes,
 smoothly dissheuelled adowne her shoulders, proude to beare the burthen of such sun-excel∣ling beautious tressalines. Which so admired wonderment so soone as they descried, they presently ran to tell the Em∣presse and the Queenes 
Basilia
 and 
Zaama;
 who were then walked abroad into the royall ga
den. Who no sooner heard the humiliated Chirurgeons, to man
fest the worthy knight

 of the Oliue brannch to bee a Princesse: but that, all ama∣zed, they held vp their lillie hands to heauen, and shedding teares of ioye; Oh God (quoth they) and is it possible that in our sexe should remaine so vnualuable valour? now God forbid but that wee speedily goe and see so peerelesse a para∣gon. And therewith in all hast they ranne vnto the lodging of the Princesse 
Phianora:
 where they founde her missing, her armour gone, and onely one Page in all the Palace that could tell any tydings of her departure. Wherefore with greate griefe they searched about the chamber, to see if they coulde finde any thing of her, for to reserue as a lasting remembrance: and finding nothing but onely a ruffled-vp piece of paper, they vnfoulded it open, and with teares in their eyes, they ioyntly read these verses, in manner of a so∣net, following;



The Mariner amid the Marine deepe,


By boystrous blast of winde vnkindely tost,


His mounting barke from ragged rocks can keepe,


By cunning skill of euery neighbouring coaste:


Eake trauailers amongst their daungers most


Can shield themselues in sured safety,


From birde, from beast, from fiercest fomans host,


In quietnesse and ease: and only I


Of creatures euery one, in misery


Done leade my lingring life, which euermore


Is subiect vnto each calamitie:


To nightly paine, the day doth paine restore,


Which pitilesse of my endured spoyle


Doth adde encreasing torments to my toyle:


To which false Fortune neuer shall lende ease,


Vntill my death procure her freakes appease.






Mundi nulla quies.
 Wretched 
Phianora
 of 
England.




Now on my faith (quoth the good empresse 
Basilia
) I had

 rather then my life, that she had not thus sodainly departed; that before shee had left vs I might haue done her more honour then I haue done: for which I am most hear∣tily sorrie. But since I cannot now pleasure her, I will earnestly pray for her speedy returne, that once againe yer I die, I may in part recompence her princely courte∣sies. Truely madame (quoth 
Anaxia
) if shee haue not re∣ceiued that honour from you, as befitted the estate of so high and worthy a Princesse, shee may thanke her owne selfe for it, that of so long a season held such a nice point to discouer her selfe: and for my parte I doe re∣ioyce, that I flacked my courtesie to her; since (as it should seeme) she scorned to make her selfe knowne vnto vs.


But the good ould Queene 
Zaama,
 beeing of a more milder nature then the Queene of 
Hungarie,
 with a smi∣ling countenance began gently to excuse the young Prin∣cesses departure: auerring, that shee rather thought the younge valorous Princesse wise, in concealing her selfe in such a place; cōsidering that that happeneth in a day, that chaunceth not in seauen yeares; and perhapps shee hadde some secret intelligence of conspiring traytours: whose lasciuious lustes shaddowed vnder the smoth vaile of loue, might call her chastity in question: moreouer what knewe shee, whether my Lord the Emperour would royally entertaine her? considering she came so vnaccōpa∣nied of attendants, such and so many as befitted the traine of so great a Princesse. And for her sodaine absenting of her selfe in this sort from her lodging, peraduenture it was, by reason shee feared, beeing discouered, to receiue some checke of the Emperours highnesse for her such a-bearing. Therefore we are rather to bee blamed for fin∣ding out her driftes no sooner: and not shee for not dis∣cloasing her selfe no speedilyer.


In this sort excused the ould Queene 
Zaama
 the sodaine departure of the English Princesse: who by this time, was farre inough departed on shipboard from the shoares of 
Grecia;
 and with such speede and celerous haste she sai∣led,

 as (to make a briefe report in steed of tedious descrip∣tions) shee verie quickly arriued on the coast of 
Asia:
 where onely refreshing her sea-sicke selfe (in the cittie 
Tripoly
 a port towne of that same countrey) she tooke shippe anew, & dauncing on the mounting billowes of the Mid-land Sea, shee safely put a shoare, at the territories of the huge Gy∣antesse 
Gola,
 the woefull widow of the mighty gyāt 
Car∣digan.
 When trauailing all alone in her armour, w
t
 her goulden shield on her arme, farther vp into the country, wherein she wearily iourneyed so long vntill such time, a∣bout the third appearance of 
Appollos
 radiancie, she was mounted vp (though not without great toyle) the tree adorned vertice of a most steepe and rocky mountaine. Frō whence despecting, shee beheld a most goodly strong built Castle right at the foote thereof: whose high towers, al∣most equalling her cloude-menacing station, gaue her suf∣ficient cause to wonder. Gazing at whose artificiall great∣nesse shee had surely for a great space remained, had not her eares, conducted her eyes, to a place of farre grea∣ter wonderment. For in the Orcharde of the Easter∣most Tower, shee espyed the most pittifullest spectacle that euer eye looked on. For,
 by the vttermost boughes of a large spreading and highe Cedar tree, shee sawe a leane scraggenly, flesh-consumed creature, hanging by both his handes, as fast as could be: which, a most hun∣ger-starued, rauenous, Vulture or Eagle continually with his sharpe horned beake vnmercifully pecked;
 whilest a∣bout his owne necke and feathered winges, a thousand slender, long, and venemous 
Aspides
 (a most pernitious kinde of Serpents) vncessantly pierced his owne body and pineons quite through and through, with their paine-procuring stinges. Wherwith hee then beeing all empoysoned, did swell so monstrously, as it was almost impossible y
t
 his skin should vncracked containe any lon∣ger his puft vp intrailes. Which putting him to more then an infinitie of torments, made his troubled soule to breath out such sorrowfull sighing shreekes without cea∣sing,









 as the neighbouring ecchoing the dolefull sounde of his sad canzons (as shaken by the violent motion of some sodaine earthquake) instantly trembled at the shril∣nesse.


Certes if the 
magnanimous
 English mayde was ama∣zed hereat, it was no meruaile; since had that bigge boand tamer of vsurping tyrants, 
Hercules
 himselfe, heard such an hideous and fearefull yelling, his very eares woulde haue ringled thereat, and his heart haue little mist of fayling him. Wherefore, with a long silence, 
Phianora
 sadly sighed at so sorrowfull a spectacle: which brought her wits almost to an end, and her white alablaster bodie to a sodaine shiue∣ring: such stronge possession had faint feare taken in her heart, vntill (remembring her selfe that what shee ey∣ther saw or heard, was but a false illusion raysed by y
e
 strange enchantments of the wicked gouernour of the Castle, who∣soeuer) she resolued putting her confidence in her almighty redeemer 
Iesus Christ;
 and next vnto him in the rare vertue of her golden shield (vnder whose shadow she was safe frō all hellish sorceries) to dissolue so harde, doubtfull and dange∣rous an aduenture. And therefore (seing there was no safer way vnto the Castle) shee submitted her soule to the mercie of her sauiour; and then casting her shield at her back, with her handes shee let her selfe downe by little and little, by the steepie side of that mighty mountain: where, by that time, the brightsome rayes of 
Phaetons
 faire father reflected so swel∣tringly; as the wearied Princesse, all to scorched with such hoatenesse, beganne to wa
e faint for lacke of water to coole her wesand, which was all to wrinkled w
t
 the great thirst y
t
 sun had caused. And knowing not wel how to prouide for the remedying of her want, she determined to put all to the regard of the highest: and then passing, by litle & little, to the one side of the rocke; shee espied, where out from betweene a quarrey of red marble, there sweetely issued a most swift running riueret; which intruding in here & there betwixt the hollownesse of the hill, made many pretty semicircles in his

 speedy descent vnto the valleyes vnderbounding it. To this brooke the thirstie Princesse no sooner approached, but that in her steely helmet shee dranke whole carrouses to her fol∣lowing fortunes: and being wel refreshed, with this (as thirst taught her to thinke) Nectarean liquor, she relaced on her helme againe; and all alongst the side of the little brooke, she softly slid downe safely; vntill comming within a fathom and a halfe to the grounde, she was forced, by the right down steepenesse thereof, to disfurnish herselfe of her shield & other troublesome raiments; and then leaping downe into the val∣ley, by reason of her former wearinesse she lighted so heauily on her feete, as all her bodie shrewdly shaken with the fall, caused that her late cured wounds fel fresh on bleeding: which for to stint, with greate toyle and paine she sought forth cer∣taine great and broad leaues of a sort of straunge shrubbes which there grewe: which plaster wise applying to her soares,
 within lesse then a quarter of an hower she founde herselfe in indifferēt state to proceede on in her intended iourney, which without delay she spedily ended; and comming to the gate of the inchaunted garden, which was all of steele, she might perceiue thereon written in vermilion letters;



Within this garden, in an Eagles shape,


The Sonne of 
Claranax
 inchaunted bides▪


From out the which he neuer shall escape;


Till eighteene winters from his feathered sides,


Empoysoned Serpents with their forked stinge


(To glut their greedy mawes) the bloud shall bring▪


Nor then shall cease his more than cruell paine.


For when those yeares are spent of all his trouble,


Vnlesse th'Inchauntresse be by virgine slaine,


His former suffred torments shall redouble.


Therefore ô thou that shalt this writing reade,


Pray for the aduent of some helpe with speede,






Written with the teares my wide wounds wept,


HƲGVY.






The worthy English Princesse at the perusing of these ver∣ses was diuersly perplexed: for one way she sorrowed for the miserable misfortune of 
Olbiocles
 (y
e
 worthy sonne of a more then thrice worthy father) who was so wickedly bereaued of his manlike proportion: another while, she reioyced that she had at length found out the chiefest subiect of her enquest & occasion of many loyall 
Grecians
 sorrow: whom, seing that God had so happily sent her, she solemnely auowed either to redeeme from such mischiefe, or to spend the best bloode of her body, in her thoughts affecting: & herewithal, cōmending her selfe to God; she fiercely bounced at the gates w
t
 the hiltes of her Courtelax, so as all the castle rang therwith: and then leauing herselfe vpon her sworde, she stood expecting some so∣daine answere: but all in vaine. For as the cruellest mastiues bite before they barke:
 so whilest the wicked witch 
Gola
 & her two sonnes 
Norin
 & 
Nigramonde
 delayed their answere, they busied themselues in furbrushing of their armes: where∣with accoustred, they presently departed out at a backe po∣sterne; with intent that whilest their mischieuous mother 
Gola
 should open the doore and entice the knight of the gol∣den shielde into the garden, they would encompasse her a∣bout; & then make her sure inough for euer going out againe. Which indeede they had done, had not the worthy princesse, by chaunce lifting vp her eyes, espyed the dust which was a∣boundātly raised by the beating hooues of 
Norins
 Lion horse: who poasting forward faster thē his brother 
Nigramond,
 cau∣sed that betwixt him and 
Phianora,
 began a sodaine combat; which speedily was ended by the valourous Princesse: who at one blowe seuering the left legge of the young Gyant from his brawny thigh,
 made him to tumble off frō his huge beast. Whose vnrulinesse was so exceeding; as almost halfe mad, it galloped backe againe, dragging the aide destitute bodie of the lim-lopt 
Norin,
 by the right foote hanging fast in the stir∣rope, rounde about the Castle walles: vntill 
Nigramond
 per∣ceiuing it; for anger of his brothers mischaunce, with his broad fauchion (which sometime was his father the 
Grand Cardigans
) he smote off the Lions head, saying in this maner; By the aide of 
Mahomet,
 will I be reuenged on my ouer∣daring

 enemy: and thererewith putting spurres to his horse, he neuer ceased galloping till hee had sight of his vndaunted enemy. Whom approaching w
t
 his broade sword in his armed fist; By 
Mahomet,
 foolish hardy knight (quoth he, w
t
 a hoarse voice) in an il hower hast thou aduētured hither, to harme vs: for with my slicing sworde, within a moment I shall so heaw thee, as thou shall neuer hereafter stand in neede of any Chy∣rurgeon: when lifting vp his heauie weapon, hee strake a mighty blowe at the valiant princesse.
 Which lighting vpon her well tempered shield made the ayre to reeccho the noyse thereof: which sounded as a world of waters in their fierce cōbats against some cōcaue rock. To which his furious prai∣ers, 
Phianora
 with her cutting Curtelax lent such a forceable Amen, on the spatious target of the Gyant; as cleauing it in two pieces, she pared away therewith halfe his hand. Which so incensed him, as with such a diuelish fiercenesse hee let his fauchion descende vpon the shield of thē worthy virgin, as it being battred to her helmet, she was forced for her safety to stagger backward. From which, with much adoe recouering, she smit at 
Nigramound
 so terrible a blow, as the fine edge of her Curtelax paring away a piece of his beauer; in descent,
 alighted with such wonderfull force vpon the curled head of the Lion-horse, as parting it both from necke & shoulders, y
e
 vgly beast sodainely sanke downe to the ground, and in the fall, ouerwaighing his master, did exceeding pleasure to the worthy princesse. Who presently vnlacing 
Nigramounds
 hel∣met, and setting her point of her sworde against his throate:
 shee threatned him with present death, vnlesse he would be∣come a true Christian: and leauing all his cruell and heathe∣nish complots (which would lead his soule to hell) would pre∣sently deliuer the valiant Prince of 
Grecia
 from his extrea∣mest torments. Whervnto hee, for feare of death subiecting himselfe, promised that both hee would become a Christian, and vnfainedly belieue in the right Redeemer: & also, as far as in him lay, cause his ould mother the Gyantesse 
Gola,
 to do the like; and speedily set at liberty, the two enchaun∣ted Champions 
Olbiocles
 and 
Hugui.
 On this condition (quoth the Princesse) I release the: and therewithall raising

 him vp from vnder the Lions belly, she went with him to∣wards the gate, whereout he issued. Nay (saide shee) yonder is a gate of iron, that is farre nigher then that you leade mee vnto. True saide the Gyant, but therein I would not wish you to enter, for it is so inchaunted, as whosoeuer goeth in thereat, shall neuer enter out againe. I passe not for that, (replyed 
Phianora
) for if it were ten times more perilous; yet would I enter into it, and assuredly thinke by the grace of Iesus Christ, safely enough to proceede out againe; or if I doe not, yet I know the worst, and so long it makes no mat∣ter. The young Gyant, though (by reason of his passed pro∣mise) it somewhat grieued him to see the knight of the goul∣den shielde so mad minded as to hazard his life to such mani∣fest destruction; yet, hee not greatly sorrowed at the same, because that thereby hee hoped of a iust reuenge to bee wrea∣ked vpon him by the strength of the inchauntment. And ther∣fore conducting him to that posterne gate, hee causes his mo∣ther 
Gola
 to open the same.
 Whereat, when shee saw the noble Princesse to enter, shee swelled for very anger: and stepping to a Pollaxe (which vnderpropped a piece of the wall) calling her sonne 
Nigramond,
 base, bastardly, coward∣ly minded slaue, shee presently pasht out his braines; & then taking her flight towardes her lodging,
 shee supposed by her swift running to saue her wretched life. Which her intent shee no sooner put in execution, but 
Phianora
 (remembring 
Olbiocles
 deliuerance consisted in 
Golas
 destruction) spedily pursued after her;
 & ouertaking her, she presently smote of her wicked heade from her withered shoulders. At which wound her life finishing; with a sodaine thunderclappe (which made the whole valley to tremble) shee allotted a finall end to the whole inchauntments: which being thus happily dissolued, restored 
Olbiocles
 to his former features, and 
Huggui
 to some better ease:
 both whom, 
Phianora
 returning from the place where shee flewe the Gyantesse, founde, by reason of their long-lasted torments, so weake and feeble; as neither of them being able to stand, shee carried them into the Castle: where, laying them in their warme beds, shee caused them to be so carefully tended by the seruants (who were sub∣mitted

 to her fauour) as within short time she brought them on foote againe so well, as they could now walke into the fieldes, or into the gardens, for an hower, or two howers, if they so pleased. Which brought great ioy to the worthy and vertuous Princesse: whose minde greatly yearning, to know the whole occasion of their inchaunting, receiued this satisfying answere from 
Obiocles.








Olbiocles
 tale of his transmutation.


EXcellent princesse (quoth he) vnderstand you, y
t
 by birth I am a Prince, and borne to great patrimony, as the only sonne of the mighty Emperour 
Claranax
 of 
Constantinople;
 in times past, reuerenced for his vertues, and famourized for his fortunes; vntill such time as that fickle deitie by whom hee grewe most happie, made him most infelicious; by per∣mitting a most monstrous and deformed Gyant, at vna∣wares to reaue him of his ioye, by robbing from him the most chast, constant, and amiable Princesse 
Almidiana,
 the vnhappie wife of me, most vnfortunate husband: after whom hauing in vaine long trauailed in enquest, I misfortuned af∣ter many other mischaunces,
 by forcible fury of a most ter∣rible tempest (wherein the lightning with the thunder e∣qually contended which should excell the other either in¦lightnesse or in lowdnesse) to be cast ashoare vpon these ter∣ritories; where together with 
Hugui,
 this my faithfull cōpa∣nion seeking for some kinde cōfort at this Castle, we were sodainely assailed and vanquished by the diuelish sonnes of that deade and damned Gyantesse: who, with their furies oppressing our feeble forces, tooke vs prisoners, & (first most pittifully scourging vs with whips of twisted wier) tould vs how the cause of their malicious crueltie was,
 for bycause that in single combat they knewe mee by my shield (which indeed was a most worthy Pagan princes, called the knight of the Seas) to haue traiterously slaine their dearest hus∣band and father, y
e
 terror of the worlde, 
Gran Cardigan:
 and af∣terwardes (not satisfied with our former vndeserued pu∣nishment) they strongly enchaunted vs into this garden.

 Where,
 in what strange shape my selfe was metamor∣phosed, and reason-reaued, and with intollerable tor∣ments both I and my vnhappie companion were tor∣tured, is altogether vnpossible to be by me expressed: consi∣dering, that whatsoeuer my trembling tongue shoulde tell thereof, my inwarde thoughts would continually recall; be∣cause with too too much lenitie, it would demonstrate my vn∣speakeable perplerities. Onely thus much. I may auouch, that neuer yet poore christian suffred halfe so many mis∣chiefes vnder the handes of such misbelieuing infidels, as we haue done, for wearing the mistaken shield of that most magnanimous 
Pagan,
 the knight of the Sea.








Most true (quoth 
Phianora
) and with him that oweth this shield, I fought two combats (though to my daunger, as I deserued) & onely for my sake slewe hee that monstrous Gyant 
Cardigan:
 which I but euilly requited. But letting it passe with my repentance; since wee haue all hitherto en∣daungered our liues and safeties, for so gracious a Ladie, as is the faire Princesse 
Almidiana;
 you (my Lord 
Olbiocles
) playing the part of a loyall husband, and we of most louing friendes, let vs neuer breake league, but vnto our liues ends continuing resolute (our wounds being whole, & our selues healthy) still stoutly persist in our vndertaken enquest;
 and eyther to finde and free the beautious Princesses of 
Hunga∣ry
 and 
Fraunce,
 from a cruell and vnknowne oppressour; or failing of our purposes, leade our liues like banished pil∣grims, in euerlasting exile. Infinitie of thanks did 
Olbio∣cles
 render the knight of the goulden shield for that fauour: and relating vnto her the whole historie of his foretould for∣tunes by the good ould hermit 
Kalandar,
 hee perswaded her that now the time was fully accōplished of his approaching happinesse,
 and earnestly excited the Princesse to take ship∣ping; which the next day she did: and with 
Olbiocles
 & 
Hu∣guy
 in her company she pleasantly sailed towards the rocky Iland: where, of their arriuall and proceedings against 
Or∣tolomorgantell,
 some following chapter shal speedily treate of.








CHAP. XVIII.




¶ The great and cruell combat, 
Olbiocles
 and the Knight of the Oliue branch had, with 
Ortolomorgantell
 the gyant of the Rocky Iland; their distresse by their diuelish aduersarie, and vnexpected helpe of the Knight of the Sea; by whose ayde they slew the Gyant, and released the distressed prin∣cesses, 
Almidiana
 and 
Eristama.




S
O soone as that diuelish and dreadfull Gy∣ant 
Ortolomorgantell,
 had conflicted (as be∣fore ye haue heard) the proude arch-pirate 
Tolurnio
 (the middle brother of 
Marcimo∣dez,
 whom the valourous 
Oceander
 cōque¦red in defence of the good Queene of 
Car∣thage
) and was safely surged at 
he hauēs mouth of y
e
 Rocky Iland (so called by reason of the inuincible strength there∣of, ensituated amidst a multitude of stonie promontories) he presently landed all his prisoners of 
Grecia:
 whome he cau∣sed to be numbred vnto him. And finding them to amount to fifteene, he laughed exceedingly at his good lucke: & ren∣dering thankes vnto his great god 
Mettath Agorah
 for his happy fortune, hee vowed by his obedience vnto his sacred deitie, customarily as he had begun,
 so for euer to continue a yearely sacrifice of christiā Ladies bloud, vnto his godhead. And then rising vp frō the bare ground, where he knéeled to make his orisōs; for an earnest pēnie of his promises perfor∣māce,
 he presently w
t
 his battle axe smote off one of y
e
 Ladies heads, named 
Hebitha:
 which burning on a pan of Cypresse coales (cōmixt w
t
 Cinamon & diuers other sweete smelling shrubs of 
Africa
) to ashes, he mingled the hoat cinders with y
e
 new shed bloud: & therw
t
 bepainting his heart & hāds, he frā∣tickly daunced towards his Idoll of his God, which stoode right before the gates of his castle 
Lapidine:
 where babbling out, with a loud voice, certaine blasphemous words, hee all to benoynted the image (which in the likenesse of a Gyant was made of hard marble) ouer & ouer w
t
 bloody fingers: & then returning vnto the sorrowfull Ladies, hee caused them to be carried to prison, in a most darke vaste, and stin∣king dungeon; where they were dayly fed onely with bread &

 water; vntill such time as either they dyed, or by one & one, were by y
e
 a cursed Gyant yearely offered vp in sacrifice vnto his diuel
sh Idoll. Only amongst all the rest, and out from all the rest, of that wretched company of worthy Christian Ladies,
 he excepted the two beautious Princesses, 
Almidiana
 and 
Eri
ima;
 for pretious presentes, to bestowe vpon his wife the Gyantesse 
Duronda.
 Who, like the swine that knew not how to vse the pretious 
Hematite,
 most villanously abu∣sed these two more thē angelical creatures; by making them slaues to moyle and toyle, and putting them to all kinde of continuall beastly drudgery: insomuch as their iuory browes beganne to banish beauty,
 their pretty ruddy cheekes to bee chaunged to pale roughnes, & their lilly white hands (whose slender fingers were like the rootes of the 
Daphne
-changed Baye, whose cunning wauering on the well strained Lute strings, had so many times heretofore caused amazement to y
e
 hearts of y
e
 happy hearers) now chaūged to a swart blacknes, & began to be harde, greate & rugged: insomuch, as being thus (in a manner) metamorphosed from themselues, they stand gazing with wonder vpon themselues mistaking thē∣selues,
 not to be themselues: so straungely they were estran∣ged from themselues. All which notwithstanding, they bare so patiently as alwaies incessantly calling on the holy name of Ch
ist, they accounted these miseries worthily to be chaū∣ced vnto them; such multitudes of sinnes, with wofull hearts they confessed themselues, daily to haue committed; and in all matters neuer more to haue misdane, then in clean∣sing of the accu
sed Idoll from the slimie filth of the Christian bloud offered sacrifice: whereunto they neuer at a∣ny time repaired; but on their bared knees, with sobs & sighes they would earnestly aske forgiuenesse at the hands of the Almighty, for their enforced wicked doing: as in a pretty verse which the Princesse 
Almidiana
 wrote on the walles of y
e
 dongeon, wherein the 
Grecian
 Ladies lay enfettred, is ma∣nifestly declared.


Sweete Sauiour of the world (whose pretious bloude


Was shed on Crosse for all beleeuers good)


Downe from thy heauenly throne, with gratious eye,




Behould (O lambe of God) my innocencie,


Which is enforced here by tyranny,


Against my will (O Lord) for to digresse,


From thy commaundements, to wickednesse:


Therefore, O sauiour, more then mercifull,


Seeke not according vnto my misdeedes,


For to wreake vengeance on my soule at full:


But with a countnance that kinde comfort breedes,


Looke courteously vpon my blacke offences,


When hell against my soule his suite commences.


IN this great miserie did these two beawtious and virtu∣ous Princesses (whilome the glistering Comets of 
Europ
) lead their liues vnder the cruell thraldome of 
Ortolomor∣gantell
 and 
Duranda:
 which with great extreamitie hauing now lasted 23. yeares; by the prouidence of the most merci∣full 
Iehouah,
 draweth now at length to a full conclusion. For by this time are those three worthy gallants,
 apported and landed at the hauen of the rocky Iland of odious 
Orto∣lomorgantell;
 and prosperously proceeding onwardes to the Castle, haue both read 
Phianoras Catalagy
 to the highest commaunder, and reuenged their angers that they beare to blasphemers of the faith and gospell of 
Christ Iesus,
 suffici∣ently on the bloud-sprinkled Idol of 
Mettath Agorah:
 whom with their swordes hauing all defaced,
 cast downe to grounde, subuerted and vtterly raced; they all fell prostrate to the earth, and with one accord they cryed out;


O almighty God of our forefathers, and holy sauiour of the world 
Christ Iesus,
 behold we beseech thee,
 with the eies of pittie and compassion, vs thy poore penitent and distressed creatures, the worke of thy holy handes, according to thine owne image; & as our wretched liues lengthē or lessē to thy liking, so with a tēder and fatherly care haue regard ouer vs, thy poore children: who not for our owne glorie, but for the aduauncing of the holy name of thy sonne our sauiour 
Iesus Christ,
 haue endangered our safeties to the handes of our faithlesse and mercilesse enemies: into whose bloud-thirsty throates (vnlesse adiuved by thy heauenly potency) wee are

 like to enfuse our dearest liues. Hauing ended their praiers, they remounted on their feete againe, and buckling on their helmets, they gan cheerefully approach the Castle: but in y
e
 gates, before they could enter, they founde such shrewde re∣sistance by the Gyants seruants, as maugre their heades they were for a great while debard of their entrāce.
 Which strake such an anger into the couragious hearts of the wor∣thy Princes 
Olbiocles
 and 
Phianora,
 as like the Ramme, re∣coyling to giue y
e
 fiercer butte, with their trustie curt leaxes in their armed fistes, they gaue so fresh and furious an onset vpon y
e
 vnarmed slaues; as, or euer they rested, they sent some armelesse, others leggelesse, & moe headlesse, but all lifelesse, to take vp their cold lodgings vnder the black mantle of e∣uerlasting night. Which dreadfull destructiō of her seruāts, whē the monstrous giantesse 
Duronda
 saw, out of her chāber window, w
t
 a loud thūdring voice she cried vnto her husbād saying: How lōg, how lōg, ah thou mighty corrector of ouer-daring christians, wilt thou suffer thy selfe to bee abused by their feeble forces? Vp 
Ortolomorgantell,
 vp I say, & with thy mighty arm, like y
e
 blustering blast
 of 
Boreas,
 ouerturn y
e
 slight glorie of these simple shrubs: whose corages I see al∣ready to faile, & whose hearts to tremble for feare of thy in∣placable wrath; w
t
in whose limits their liues are already en∣tred. With these words, she brought to him a mighty & mas∣sie Mace:
 which being armed, both for offence & defence, w
t
 long nailes of steele, seemed altogether death-working, to whomsoeuer the furie thereof alighted: & then buckling on his iron armes, which were almost 3. inches thicke, she thrust him out at the doores by head & shouldere: who no sooner espi∣ed his enemies, but w
t
 a mighty frowne & fume, like a smoak, issuing out at his wide nostrells, he set himselfe in this sort to checke their ouer-daring:


By my soule (audacious knights) your foolish attemp∣tings wil lead you to destruction. What, were your wits not your owne? or are you mad? that hauing slaine my seruants, you dare not onely stay heere in my castle-yard, but also me∣nace my mightinesse with threatning shewes, the sooner to incite me to the combat. Well then, since you wil need proue

 couragious and hardie, hardly come on: and, being you haue thus farre prouoked me, proceede on in your enterprise; that by my irresistable furie, you may quicklie feele the force of my mightie arme, which shall assuredly pash your bones in peeces: if my holie God 
Mettath Agorah
 fight not against me.


Your dumb, dead Idoll (quoth 
Huguy
) can neyther fight with you, nor against you now: for not an hower since, in spight of his holy deitie, he was layd in the dust, frō whence he is like neuer to be recouered. When the gyant had heard those words, hee was so exceedingly enraged, as his teeth gnashed together, and his eyes for anger sparkled with fire: & lifting vp his mightie Mace (which was as bigge about, at the knottie end, as a mans middle) w
t
 both his hands, he sent such a deuilish buffet at 
Huguy,
 as battering his head & hel∣met downe flat vnto his shoulders, hee made him w
t
out any farther ceremonies, to yeeld vp his sodaine-sent soule into the hands of his holy sauiour. And then conuerting his furie to the other 2. Knights (who were loth to abide the waight of his vnwieldy weapon) he coursed thē round about the Ca∣stle court; they, like hares before the houndes, not daring to turne againe; vntill such time as 
Ortolomorgantell
 excee∣dingly wearied with his trauersing, leaned vpon his clubbe to rest his wearie limbes, & to wipe of the sweltring sweate from his swollen face (which, ouerdropping his eye-lidds, made him in a manner blinded w
t
 a mistie vapor) the wor∣thy English Princesse lēt him an indifferent iction vpō the left legge:
 which though it did no great harme, yet it did him but little good. For, ētring into his bootes of maile, it sliced away, at least an handfull of the calfe of his legge: which not smally grieued the huge monster; so as betaking him againe vnto his clubbe, hee pursued 
Phianora
 so hoate∣ly, as driuing her into a narrowe corner betweene two conioyning pillers, he put her to her trumpes. And euen there had shee acted an vntimely tragedie, had it not been for y
e
 approued goodnesse of her golden shield: w
t
 which, as vnder a canopie, ouercouering her helmet,
 shee pretily preserued her selfe from wounding; though her crest of her

 headpeece was almost battered to her skull, with y
e
 waigh∣tie blowes that forceably descended from her enemie. But on the other side, why doth not that worthy admired Prince of 
Grecia,
 by his inresistable valour, giue happy help vnto y
e
 Princesses imminent danger. Alas, what should he doe? rather then his life he would redeeme her: but good Knight his way is hindered by a number of the Giauntesses slaues: which hauing been by this time sufficiently armed, had en∣compassed him about and all at once with their sharp wea∣pōs laying incessātly at him,
 haue, though not woūded him, yet wearied him; so as his armes beeing wearie of striking, and his feete of standing, he (though with much a doe) with∣drewe himselfe vnto the stonie steps of the Image of 
Met∣tath Agorah.
 On the vpper staire wherof, resting his ouerla∣boured limbes, with only his inchaunted shield (at his most ease he could) he resisted his remorselesse assailants: who in a moment had vndoubtedly oppressed him (whose féeble hands, now began to decline with the waight of his inchaū∣ted shield) had not that renowned and admirably valorous Knight of the Sea, 
Oceander,
 in his enchaunted boate, the onely legacie y
t
 the wise 
Artimagus
 left him,
 happily arriued at the instant of 
Olbiocles
 feeble fainting. Who, seeing such a multitude of seruile culliōs, to ouerpresse so ouer-weake∣ned a knight (who now was ready to yield vp his life vnto y
e
 Lord, and his body vnto their butcherie) grewe immediate∣ly so enraged, as vnsheathing his good sword 
Scindifer
 out of the curiously gold wrought scabberde,
 he sodainely shea∣thed it in the boyling bowels of an vnmercifull slaue, y
t
 stood next him:
 and then turning himselfe at one side, he lent such a blowe to one 
Linguaro
 (who with terrible wordes threat∣ned death & destructiō to 
Olbiocles
) as slycing off both tongue and chaps (before he had halfe ended his babbling) he gaue a full period to his oration. At which buffet the worthy sonne of 
Grecian Claranax
 receiued such exceeding comfort, as (in a manner relieued from his languor) taking vp his charmed shield, hee cryed to 
Oceander;
 Heere, O worthy knight o
th
 Sea, receiue againe the waighty weapons which on∣
 
 or thee to wield: which notwithstanding, vntill I

 can deliuer vp vnto thy worthynesse, I shal make once more to endure y
e
 heauie blowes of my hatefull enemies) he smote so fiercely vpon his encroaching assaulters; as full quickly he made thē to feele y
e
 refreshed furie of his vigorous armes. The worthy Knight of the Sea, on the other side, so vali∣ātly behaued himselfe against those that opposed themselues against him; as hauing with his keene courtleaxe cut asun∣der the thread of thirteene of their liues,
 he made the rest (which were in nūber, halfe as many moe) to betake y
e
 safe∣gard of their liues, to the swiftnesse of their heeles: whome 
Oceander
 with an honourable anger, so speedily pursued, as, or euer they could get into the Castle, he made some of them shorter by their heads. In the meane while, so great was the care of 
Olbiocles,
 for the Knight of the goulden shields safety (whome before he saw in such extreamitie of daunger) as he presently pased towards the sterne Giant 
Ortolomor∣gantell:
 whom, hauing layd aside his mightie mace, he espi∣ed with might and maine to be pulling the swowned 
Phia∣nora
 out of her corner. Wherwith he was so agrieued,
 as no∣thing respecting the greatnesse of the daunger, hee ran and closed within him, thinking by wrastling to haue withstood his enterprise. But alas, his armes and legges are so weake and wearie, as hee was not able to grapple and keepe his ground, at one time. Which 
Ortolomorgātell
 perceiuing he cast the worthy 
Greciā,
 with great impatiencie, to the earth: and setting his foote vpon him, hee there kept him downe; vntill hauing dragged the body of the English princesse, crosse ouer his breast, hee tooke vp his heauie club, and breathing out most beastly blasphemies against the sauiour of all Christian soules, he menaced the heauēs in his haugh∣tinesse, & lifting vp his wicked weapon with both his hands aboue his temples, hee now menaced e
ernall night to the trembling Princes. But 
Oceander
 grieuing to behould her whom hee best loued, the fairest of all faires, faire 
Phiano∣ra,
 sorrowfully ouer-canopyed with such imminent crueltie (stepping betweene the Gyant and the Knightes) in the de∣clining of the dreadfull blowe, hee encountered the Gyants

 armes, so soūdly; as paring thē both togither at the elbow, he left the diuellish tyrāt armelesse to prosecute his intended ex∣ecutiō. Wherat, 
Olbiocles
 (though by his late perill greatly perplexed) laughed a good: but 
Ortolomorgātell
 (quite dasht out of countenance with his late arme-curtalling cut) sen∣ding out of his huge throate horrible roaringes, ran vp and downe the castle to finde some ease, for his curelesse disease. Whom the worthily enraged knight of the sea, so fast follo∣wed, as ouertaking him at the chamber dore (where the wic∣ked Gyantesse, his wife 
Duronda,
 wofully bewailed him) w
t
 his sharp pointed sword, he bored both him & her cleane tho∣rough the entrailes:
 wherewith falling on the floore; they impenitently yielded vp their sinne-bespotted soules into the blacke hands of 
Belzebub,
 their adopted Grandfather.






CHAP. XIX.




¶ Of the dangerous combate of the Knight of the Sea, against the barbarous Pyrate 
Tolurnio;
 his perill and conditionall yielding to the fleetes of 
Tunis
 & 
Tangur
 as Champion of the 
Alcharon
 against the christian Emperour of 
Constanti∣nople;
 and of the originall of the hatred of 
Tomarin
 to 
Cla∣ranax,
 for the death of 
Tumanto.




T
O whose wicked endes, the twoo Princes 
Olbiocles
 and 
Phianora
 (being recouered and raised from the cold paue∣ment) no sooner arriued, but that 
Olbi∣ocles
 offering him his shield, and the wor∣thy 
Phianora
 proffering him her eternall friendshippe; with desire of pardon, for her former offensiue contentions, they in this sort heartily tendered him most humble thanks, for safe deliuering of thē from so perilous and dangerfull a labyrinth of losse; where∣in, their liues had been so insnared, as only by his incompa∣rable power they were to be deliuered.


Glorious in thy conquestes, and gracious in thy mercies, (most illustrious knight of 
Carthage
) alas poore sielie crea∣tures as we are, how shal we be able, euer to requite thy ma∣nifold deseruings? which are so infinite, as our tongues are vnable to tell: much lesse, our thankes for to regratifie. Yet

 (noble knight) such as we can at this time tender, take thou; that in some part we may satisfie our owne soules, saluting thee w
t
 these poore presents. Which if thou shalt please to ac∣cept, we shal euer think our selues in honour obliged, to your virtues; which haue not onely freede vs, but (also as we hope) released y
e
 2. most mighty, yet miserable Princesses, frō whole multitudes of mischiefes wherein they were enwrapped. 
Oceander
 (whose heart yearned after soe-got honour) refused this friendly humility of so valorous knights: whom raising from y
e
 ground, he most louingly embraced, & deliuering vp vnto thē the tuitio
 of y
e
 Castle Lapidine, as also the full go∣uernmēt of the whole Rocky Iland of 
Ortolomorgātell
 (cō∣maunding them to doe his dutie to the distressed Ladies,
 for whom they conflicted) with his enchaūted shield on his arm, he presently tooke his leaue of the two Knights (who sorro∣wed exceedingly at his so speedy departure: but especi∣ally 
Phianora,
 in whose thoughts, loue had already placed his imperiall throane) & descended to the water side: where not finding his inchaunted boate, he greatly meruailed. But hoping y
t
 al was done to the best, he pacified himselfe; & wal∣king vp and downe the shoare, he at last espied, where his boate lay at surge, vnder the hollownesse of a Rocke: which greatly reioyced him. But seing it ready to put frō the shore, he made the more haste to it;
 and with much adoe getting on bourd, he launched out swiftly into the Egyptiā sea. Wherin he had sailed verie swiftly for the space of 3. or 4. dayes, w
t
out meeting w
t
 any aduenture; vntill about midnight the Moone being in the meridian of her course, he perceiued right be∣fore him, 3. call ships furnished very fitly with all appu
te∣nances; and on the hatches only one mighty bigbaned Ma∣riner: who calling vnto him, cōmanded him to yield vnto the mercie of y
e
 mighty & most magnanimous 
Tolurnio,
 least his head smarted for his heartes haughtinesse. Wherunto, the Knight of the Sea seemed to giue little heede; vntill the Mariner vexed at his vnregarding, with a long grapple pulled the boate vnto the side of the ship: and then drawing out a mighty courtleaxe, hee vainelye spent his spirits to 
Oceanders
 spoyle. Who, sorrowing to meete

 with so vnmeete and mightelesse an opponent made no more adoe, but only with his gaūtlet-armed fist, he smote y
e
 brag∣gart so stinging a whirret vnder y
e
 temples, as striking him starke dead vnder the hatches, he gaue his drowsie fellowes a foule fore signall of their following destructiōs. Wherupō they were so enraged, as (without any tarrying to arme thē¦selues) onely in their shirts, or hose and dublets, they fierce∣ly mounted vpon the hatches▪ but seing, but one only knight to oppose himselfe against so many of them, they presently brast out into a loude laughter, thinking with their verie lookes to haue quickly made him su
missiuely to repent him of his too too audacious aduenturing. But alas, poore soules, therein they were deceiued: for he no sooner e∣spied their retchlesse issuing, but with his good sword 
Scin∣difer,
 he so dreadfully behaued himselfe amongst thē, as ha∣uing stricken to the ground (neuer to rise againe) sixteene of them, he made some to hide their heades vnder the hat∣ches, and others, for safegard of their liues, desperately to cast themselues into the sea: whose open mouths made such piti∣full exclamatiōs, as y
e
 soldiers of y
e
 other shippes awakened w
t
 their wailings, approached speedily to aid their want. Of these, there were in nūber at the least thirtie well approued & sturdie 
Pagans:
 who with hoarce voices crying on y
e
 name of their earthly God, and King 
Tolurnio,
 presently closed with the shippe wherein 
Oceander
 remained victour: and all at once encompassing him about, with their naked swordes, they for a great while fiercely assailed the wor∣thyest flower of all chiualrie. Who, seing that to stande idle, was vnprofitable to a man in his perill, placing his backe against the shippemaste, with his sworde and shield he made such defending offensiue resistaunce, as when they most looked for victorie, they still felt the grea∣test extreamitie of his virtue: so as, therewith amazed & atterrifi
d, they by their great woundes, learned more wisely, and lesse wilfully, to keepe aloofe off from the sway of his confounding sword; which like the fire-brand of some hellish furie, flourished forth nothing, but sorrowe & confusion,




Tolurnio
 himselfe, in the meane season hauing endossed on his armoure, with greate griefe perceiuing how daunge∣rously the worlde went with his souldiers (for, of thirty, were scarcely three and twenty left aliue, and vnwounded) grew into a greate rage with them: and bidding them, like co∣wardly dastards as they were, to retire themselues backe vnto their cabbinets, with a shrill voice hee thundered out these threatning menaces against vndaunted and interri∣fiable 
Oceander:
 Poore Pilgrime, by the diuine issue of almightie 
Ops,
 for thy audacious aduēturing to our distur∣bance, thou shalt demerit thy owne destruction: which shall be so duely executed on thee in my anger and vnplacable fu∣ry, as thou shalt neuer neede to boast of thy excessiue win∣nings; vnlesse by a more then a deitie-defended wonder, thou shalt admirably escape the handes of more then most mighty 
Tolurnio;
 who I am: and whose very frounes the mightiest Monarches of the worlde haue trembled at. For with my Battleax I shall, like 
Hercules,
 batter thy braines in pieces about thy shoulders: and with that word,
 he lifted vp his heauie harchet aboue his head & with all his force he smot so strong a blow on the inchaunted shield of y
e
 knight of the sea; as although it could not enter, yet hee was greatly endaungered with feare of falling into the seas. For with such fury the blowe descended, as hee was faine to saue himselfe both on hands and knees, from toppling ouer the hatches. But by his nimblenesse soone recouering his feete, he aduaunced himselfe so fiercely against the Pirate, & with his 
Scindifer,
 he strake so strongly on y
e
 helmet of 
Tolurnio;
 as hauing battered the creast to his scul, he made him to ad∣mire at his vnresistable valour. Neuerthelesse, 
Oceander
 gaue not so stout obiections but he receiued as strōg replies: for 
Tolurnio
 rendered him so rough requitals on the inchaū∣ted azury helmet, as hee made him many times to stagger & reele (in a manner astonished) so resistlesse almost was the Pirats fury. Wherewith the worthy Grandsonne of thrice worthy 
Claranax,
 grewe so impatient; as, casting his shield at his backe, he strake so sound a buffet, with his swords in both his handes, at 
Tolurnio,
 y
e
 hee parted his shielde in two

 pieces,
 and in the descent of the blowe battering his gorget (which was of pure steele) close vnto his neck-boane, he left small vent vnto the 
Pagans
 breathing; who had there pre∣sently yielded vp his life, had they not beene parted by the sodaine approach of a mighty nauie of 
Barbarians:
 who in a moment boarding them, commaūded their submission vn∣to the most mighty kinges of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur,
 ay-dreaded 
Tomarin,
 and vndaunted 
Tangut.
 Whereat, the two comba∣tants were so amazed, as they knewe not what to say; vntill 
Oceander
 (whose magnanimous courage, no accident could controule) with a stout voice answered; that vnlesse right commaunded him, though reason bad him; yet hee woulde not yield himselfe vnto his enemies, whose Iustice or Iniu∣stice hee neuer as yet sawe ballanced. For, 
Multa pericla petit, noto qui fiderit hosti:
 and therefore hee demaunded pardon of them for not yielding; vnlesse in 
Parle,
 they could alleadge sufficient reasons to induce him, to doe so base a dutie. Whereunto the king of 
Tunis
 in this wise replyed; Knowe sir knight, that the cause of calling for thy submissi∣on, is not as a seruile slaue scornefully for to controwle thée; but, in the honour of our most holy and sacred Prophet 
Ma∣homet
 and his neuer to be confounded 
Alcharon,
 to request thy helpe, to maintaine his h
sts, and wholly to supplant the fatned Religion of the 
Europan Christians:
 who vnder the gouernement of the 
Grecian
 Emperour 
Claranax,
 haue heretofore entered and inuaded our territories of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur,
 slaine my deare, and onely dearer sonne 
Tumanto
 (whose vertues ouershined their valours) vnder most fained friendshippe, & coloured treason. And thereupon he beganne to relate at large his owne imprisonment by the 
Grecians,
 the besieging, assaulting, and taking of the greate Citie of 
Tangur,
 and la
ly with teares hee tould his sonne 
Tu∣mantos
 tragedy: first, howe hee was conioyned in friendly league with the Emperour; then how he laboured for peace betweene the king 
Tangut
 and 
Claranax,
 and then the insi∣dious traines of the worthy Gouernour, which were laide to betray his too too trustfull and credulous childe. Which fault obiected to the good Emperour, though it were not al∣togither

 true, yet it seemed so vnto him, because his eyes of Iustice were blinded with fatherly fauour. To all his tale, he added such infinitie of teares, as hee greatly moued cō∣passion in the hearts of 
Oceander
 and 
Tolurnio:
 who hea∣ring his quarrels iustnesse, quickly condescended vnto their requests;
 protesting with all their power and strength to maintaine the honour of their holy Prophet 
Maho∣met,
 roote out the gospell of 
Christ,
 and throughly to reuenge the wrong offred him by the 
Greekishe
 Empe∣rour: to all which, they sware themselues on the 
Alcharon.
 Wherewith king 
Tomarin
 and 
Tangur
 were so wel pleased; as at the report of 
Oceanders
 couragious behauiour in his late foughten combat,
 they ioyfully created him the inuin∣
ble Champion of al the territories of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur;
 as also the sacred defender of the holy 
Alcharon;
 to the great reioycing of 
Tolurnio
 (who of a furious foe, was now be∣come a faithfull friend) and the generall contentment of the whole fleete. Which gratious offers, the knight of the sea accepting most gratefully, gaue them exceeding encourage∣ments to proceede in their intended voyage; whereby hee doubted not,
 but to see all Christendome happily conuerted either into bloud, or turned to the obedience of their highest Prophet 
Mahomet:
 vnder whose ensigne we will resigne them, and assigne our stile to the perfecting of our former story.






CH P. XX. ¶ How 
Olbiocles Phianora, Almidiana,
 and 
Eristama
 arriued on the Iland of the Hermit 
Calander:
 from whome they carried newes to the Emperour, of the kings of 
Tunis
 and 
Tanguts
 proceedings: of his ioy, for the recouerie of his long absented children, and politike preparation for the repelling of his Pagan enemies.




V
Ery sorrowfull were the Christian Prin∣ces, for the sodaine absence of the vncon∣troulable knight of the sea: but seeing that they could not remedie it, they some∣what calmed their desires of his accom∣panying. And therefore 
Olbiocles
 arming his left arme with the battered shielde of 
Oceander,
 and 
Phianora
 resuming her trustie Courtleaxe keene 
Calibine,
 they descended backe againe into the Castle court: where, on the pauements, they founde foureteene of 
Ortolomorgantels
 seruants,
 with their weapons scattered, & hempen haulters about their naked necks: whose endes de∣liuering into the hands of the Princes, they trembling
 expected y
t
 doubtfull answers of their liues or deaths. With whose humble submissions, their tender hearts, were soone moued to compassion: therefore vncasing their neckes of such vnkinde collers, the Prince 
Olbiocles
 in this sort pro∣nounced the sweete sentence of their safeties.


Well wote I, well wote I (poore Paganized soules) that, not only against your consciences you became the false ado∣rers of 
Mahomet;
 but also against your wils, you were en∣forced for feare of death to bee the cruell keepers, and (as I feare) killers of the most beautiful Princesses of Christen∣dome. Wherefore, wee heere mercifully pardon you and forgiue your offences: for onely as instruments you serued to satisfie the insatiate minde of your bloud-thirstie master: whose soule, by this time, hath participated with such male∣factors, the endlesse torments of neuer to be extinguished fire and brimstone. In regard of whose sorrowes, wee charge you to discharge your soules of all such wickednesse, as makes you to incurre hels wretchednesse; where that mon∣ster to mankinde, lurking 
Leuiathan,
 raignes in his euer damned royaltie. Repent therefore (deare brethren) and re∣linquishing all further remembrance of your long retained false 
Alcheronticke Acharonticke
 religion, submissiuelie & vnfainedly, in your soules, subscribe vnto the suspectlesse su∣premacie of our deare Sauiour 
Christ Iesus;
 whose preti∣ous bloud hath bought you, and whose fatherly patience

 hath preserued your soules (as I hope) from the gaping gulfe of 
Gehenna:
 whose tushes are vnable to touch you, and whose roaring throate shall neuer swallow your soules, if by your vnfained repentance you obtaine your sinnes remis∣sion at the hands of your righteous Redeemer; who (though we pardon your bodies) can to your soules adde infinitie of euerlasting torments. Speake therefore, and that truely, whither (aliue or dead) our worthy mistresses are remaining within your custodies?


These wordes they willingly answered, that of all the faire Ladies of 
Grecia,
 onele but two of them were liuing, whose vertues were vnspeakeable, and whose beauties were far more brightsome, then the eye-bedimming sunbeames; named (as with teares they often tould them) the vnhappie daughters of the two most happy kinges of 
Fraunce
 and 
Hungary:
 and therewithall one of the slaues ranne speedilie vnto their (loathsome) lodgings, to fetch them, whome hee knewe he should make happie bp the two Christian knights reknowledgement.


If the good prince 
Olbiocles
 were exceedingly reioyced with the tidings of his true-loues happy health,
 it is not to be wondered at; since his newly coceiued ioyes then, were but as shadowes to following substance of his soueraigne gladnesse, receiued by the sodaine approach of his sweetest spouse 
Almidiana:
 whose entertainementes bredde such a∣stonishment in the hearts of the amazed beholders, as euen the veriest butcherliest 
Barbarian
 thought his heart, for ioy of their kinde embracements, would leape out of the man∣sionized concaue of his breast; and in conceipt being rapt in∣to the court of heauen, hee clearely commemorized the plea∣sing daliance of greate 
Saturnes
 sonne with his sweete 
Se∣mele,
 enwrapped within the misty mantles of the crime-cō∣cealing cloudes: so heauenly and happy were the sweete im∣braces of the regreeted louers: who in a moment,

Viewed, embraced, kist,


Sense failed, falled, swounded,


Relieued; yer they wist,


That so they had beene grounded:




But to bee briefe, their louing encounter being ended, they all togither kindly embraced each other: and on their knees, rendring most hearty thanks to the Almightiest, for such their fortunate remeeting, after so many multitudes of mischieuous miseries, they pased into the Castle hall. Where causing themselues to be vnarmed, they were pre∣sented by the Princesse 
Eristama
 (who was not a little glad that the worthy knight of the golden shield, by vnlacing his helmet, had discouered himselfe to bee a Ladie) with a most ritch basen and Ewer of massy Siluer: whereon were cunningly engraued the victories of 
Ortolomorgantels
 aun∣cestours. Wherewith, the faire Princesse of England ba∣thing her bloudie and bolne face all ouer,
 founde herselfe somewhat fainte by reason of a sodaine chilnesse which assaulted her sweating temples: whereby, in a great dis∣temperature, shee was conducted into a costly chamber. Where wrapping her in warme mantles, they somewhat refreshed her feeble senses: which notwithstanding coulde not that night be so throughly recomforted, as that, with ioyfull heartes they could betake themselues, either to their repast or repose.


So soone notwithstanding, as the Celestiall waggoner had in a franticke fury, forsaken the watry lappe of his welbeloued Goddesse 
Thetis,
 and issuing out at the latti∣ced portals of the easterne Ocean, had swiftly followed the flying darkenesse (which with sable winges had tane her speedy iourney to the westerne 
India
) the worthy 
Phianora
 was wholy recouered of her sicknesse; and with infinite incitements,
 so well preuailed with her companions, as they al cōsented that morning to take shipping. Which their determination in such a happy hower they performed, as (their sailes full filled with a gentle gale of winde) they in great safety, and with no lesse speede, furrowed ouer the a∣zury face of the midland sea, towardes the Iland of the good ould hermit 
Calander;
 of whose habitation before hath bin declared. At whose sandy shoares, by that time, that 
Triton,
 the trumpetter of the seagods,
 had eleauen times shrilly sounded the Hunts vp, on his shelly Shackbut; they plea∣santly

 approached. Where, what was their entertaine∣ment by the good ould father, welcome vnto his solitary Cell, or entercoursings with him, about more then most straunge accidents, I will not at this time tediously treate of: only let this suffice;
 that they were so well contented with his kindenesse, and so well pleased with his plaine∣nesse; as for the space of fiue daies they continually conuer∣sed in his company; repairing from their shippes to his Cel, and from his Cell backe againe, euery morning & euening,
 as duely and with as great delighte, as if they had pased to the pleasure-abounding Pallaces of the most mightyest monarche in 
Europe.
 But,
 as the Fawne cannot bee al∣waies weaned frum the company of the Damme: so these faire ofsprings of most famous parents, could not now any longer remaine absent from their deare father: whose death they feared would (if it had not already) depriue them yer long of all earthly comfort. And therefore giuing the ould Hermit to vnderstand of their departure, they (eare∣ly the sixt day) awaited his comming on the shoares side, where the holy father (after morning salutations en∣ded) with teares like pearles bespangling his snowy bearde, deliuered them, togither with a letter of import vn∣to the Emperour their father, this kinde farewell.
 Deare friendes, and my royall Lords and Ladies of 
Constanti∣nople,
 how many & diuers dangers are incident to al trauai∣lers; as well by sea as land, I will not at this time dis∣pute of: but leauing such straunge secrets to the sole al∣commaunding potency of the highest directour, with thāks for your gentle acceptance of my homely entertainement accordant to my poore abilitie, I tender your excellencies all hopefull assurance of a most happie iourney to the fer∣tile territory of 
Greece
 & 
Hungary.
 Tto whose inhabitants, what infinity of intestine casualties shall shortly occurre, my tongue doth tremble to tell, and my heart rende almost in sunder to thinke on: but God for his mercy shall at last (yea euen at the last gaspe of good fortune) deliuer it. The right relation of al which this same Letter, within this little casket, so largely discloaseth; as I hope, the good Em∣perour

 
Claranax
 (to whose highnesse hands I most earnest∣ly entreate you to deliuer it) shall haue,
 though not alto∣gether sufficient, yet indifferent time to prouide him∣selfe of all thinges necessarie, for the repelling (if it might be possible) of so ineuitable a mischiefe. These wordes, not without weeping, ended, hee commended them all to the protection of the most powerfull; and then humbly ta∣king his leaue, hee presently departed backe againe vnto his melancholy mansion; where for a while we will let him rest, and returne to our trauailers: who with faire wordes & riche promis
s so incessantly allured the toyling mariners; as with a neuer slacking celeritie they sliced through the salt seas (as it were) in a moment,
 vnto the hauen of 
Con∣stantinople.
 Whose wide wombe, they no sooner espyed im∣pleate with a great sort of swift-sailing shippes; but that, with wonderous gladnesse they clapped their hands, & with excesse of ioyes they speedily entred into the harbour. Where the fame of their arriuall was no sooner spread abroad, but that in great multitudes the citizens clustred about them to beholde the only hopes of al following good fortune. When, they had not any long space, through the cristall casements of their eyes, fedde the couetize of their fancies; but that the aged Emperoure 
Claranax
 with his good Empresse 
Basilia,
 the kings of 
Hungary
 and 
Bohemia,
 with their louing bedfellowes 
Anaxia
 and 
Zaama
 (who accompani∣ed with 
Rosamira
 the beautifull Princesse of 
Sparta,
 and a huge multitude of worthy attendants, both Ladies, knights and gentlemen of all states and conditions) approached gallantly vnto the hauen. Where, after the Emperour had louingly embraced his most be loued children;
 and after him, both Kinges, Queenes, and Ladies hauing ioyfully gi∣uen their louing welcomes vnto the late arriued Paragons, they altogither (not without excesse of gladnesse manife∣sted by their sundry stoppes of heart-delighting harmo∣nies) conducted the Prince 
Olbiocles,
 the knight of the goulden shielde,
 
Almidiana
 and 
Eristama,
 to the greatest Temple of 
Constantinople:
 where, diuine seruice ended, a∣mongst

 y
e
 rest, y
e
 Emperor in this sort, powred out his grate∣full thanks before the Maiestie of the most maiesticall:
 Glo∣rious God, who for thy loue of thy deare and onely begotten son Iesus Christ, hast had a gracious and fatherly care ouer me, thy poore and base hanidworke, thanks, yea vnfained thāks doth my submisse soule render vnto thy diuine maie∣sty that w
t
 the incomparable power of thy mighty right hand hast thus mercifully released me, at last, from so many multi∣tudes of miseries, which encompassed my soule, and in a ma∣ner ouerwhelmed me. Hauing finished his thankesgiuing, hee turned towardes his obedient ofspring: of whom (after many kisses bestowed) he receiued this following Letter of 
Calander.




To the sacred Constantinopolitan Maiestie, all health and happynesse.


MIghty Emperour,
 and most puissant Princes of 
Greece
 and Christendome &c. Vnderstand you by these pre∣sents, that at this time the whole Knighthood of 
Tu∣nis
 and 
Tangur,
 are in most warlike manner well ac∣coustred, safely shipped, and swiftly sayling towards the terri∣tories of 
Sicilia:
 which by arms cōuerting to the false worship of their heathenish 
Mahomet,
 they wil celerously surge on the coast of Constantinople: vnlesse By the prouidence of God they be speedily preuented.


From my solitarie Hermitage,
 CALANDER.




NOw vpon my honour (quoth the Emperour in a maze) by this letter of the Hermit, I wotte of wonders: Be∣like these barbarous 
Barbarians
 are growne of late to con∣ceit a conquest ouer 
Constantinople:
 thinking 
Claranax,
 by reason of his approaching age, to be growne to so cold a con∣stitution, as hee is either too feeble, or too much affraide to enter any combat. Well, well, let 
Tomerin
 and 
Tangut
 com∣mence their conflicts: by the help of God and his good grace,

 I shall neuer be saide to flie their furies, as long as my wi∣thered bodie is able to beare armour against their forces. But considering,
 that not wordes, but warinesse was the re∣pelling of warre, in great wisdome hee caused his hauens mouth to bee chained vp; that they might not with their i∣ron Rammes, by water any whit endaunger the citie wals: and as for the city it selfe hee engarisoned it with infinitie of approued and vndaunted souldiers, of that same Religion. Also to all his neighbouring Princes of Christendome he presently sent ayde-requesting letters: as, to 
Sparta, Thessaly, Transiluania:
 the kings 
Rubaldo
 also and 
Fiardon
 spedilie departed vnto their seuerall prouinces of 
Hungary
 and 
Bo∣hemia,
 to leauie a competent number of their country soul∣diers, for the defence of 
Greece
 and 
Christendome.
 To which their warlike expedition, wee will leaue those worthy Princes, to returne vnto our huge host of the 
Pagan
 Poten∣tates.






CHAP. XXI.




¶ Howe 
Tomarin
 of 
Tunis, Tangut
 of 
Tangur,
 the knight of the Sea, 
Tolurnio,
 and the rest of the 
Pagan
 armie accoa∣sted the Iland of 
Sicilia;
 where they slewe the Duke of 
Hibla,
 tooke 
Alfortio
 and 
Orthisius
 prisoners: and enfor∣ced King 
Dionine
 and all his subiectes, to forsake the Gos∣pell of Christ, and become 
Mahometans.




W
Onderfull was the ioy that y
e
 cruell 
Barbari∣ans
 conceiued in their hearts for the notable conquest that they hoped to gaine against y
e
 Christians; whome they thought vtterly ei∣ther to conuert or conuince, by the fiercenesse of their diuelish furies: whose irresistable forces they first and formost bent against the poore inhabitants of 
Hybla
 and 
Sicilia;
 where at this time raigned that terrible Tyrant 
Di∣onine.
 Vpon whose sandy shoares landing whole millions of mischieuous miscreants, vnder the safe conduction of the most inuincible Knight of the sea, and the foure eldest sons

 of the great Gyant 
Gawdramound, Brammadon,
 
Ca∣maru,
 
Xamaru,
 and 
Hollobron.
 Who, in company of thir∣teene other of their brethren, all mighty membred men (ha∣uing vowed to reuenge their father 
Gawdramounds
 losse of both his hands, in his combat with the Emperour 
Claranax
 before the gates of 
Constantinople,
 to their powers, vpon all Christendom) began first of all in the expedition against the Citie of 
Hibla,
 to manifest the rancour, their cankered hearts had vntill this seasō obliuionized. For w
t
 so straight a siege,
 they sodainly engirt the christiā Citizēs w
t
in their walls, as there could not any one so much as passe or repasse through y
e
 armed troupes of these mercilesse miscreaunts: whose bloody hands no sooner layd hould on any straunger, but that pre∣sently stripping his body naked, they would incompassio∣nately strangle him before the faces of the behoulding citti∣zens. Whose hearts were so at terrified at these remorselesse actions of their barbarous enemies; as many times, they would be ready desperately to destroy their hunger-pinched bodies, with their owne proper hands. Which in deed many had done, and more would haue begun, had not that worthy Duke 
Oriardey,
 w
t
 y
e
 teares trickling down his pale cheeks, prouoked by pittie, in this wise counsailed them to prouide for their safeties.


Louing friends,
 and my most deare countriemen & loy∣all subiects, turne hither your faces, and on me your more then most miserable Duke, conuert your carefull ouerclow∣ded countenaunces. What though the furie of our faithlesse enemies force vs to this straight, shall we therefore feare? though they seeke to destroy vs, shall wee therefore in a desperate moode, distrusting to the mercie of our saui∣our, dispossesse our bodies of liuing, & our soules of the life euerlasting? God forbid. For 
(si paruis componere mag∣na licebit)
 which of you all, my louing Cittizens, ha∣uing & holding a sure fortresse, whose situatiō was your safe∣tie, would willingly race it to the ground and ruinate it, e∣uer after to liue in the wide fields, or in the woods, subiect to crosses, cold, calamities, daungers, and destruction? If any of you should doe so, were you not worthy to bee accompted

 foolish, or stark franticke? Yes verily. Why then (O ye ama∣zed inhabitants of 
Hibla
) are your mindes infected with such poysonous madnesse, as to make away your selues, to eschewe your oppressing enemies, without regarding your sweete soules; which is subiect to our Sauiours eternall enmitie? O remember, remember, that you are not 
Pagans
 (as those that perpetrate your perils) but rightly beleeuing Christians. Then for his sake whome you serue, feare, and salute by the sweete name of Sauiour, depelle those hea∣thenish fancies from the centre of your heartes habitacle: and let not y
e
 subtleties of the deceitefull Diuell so much surprise you, as to make you by your owne selues, the sequesterers of your soules from that heauenly paradice, which is prepared for those that faithfully belieue in y
e
 holy name of Iesus Christ. Furthermore, were you forsaken of the Father, refused by the son, & left reprobates on y
e
 face of the earth, would you lay violent handes vpon your owne liues? He that killeth himselfe (saith 
Aristotle,
 an heathenish Philosoper) doth not so much wronge vnto his owne life,
 as iniurie to the cōmon wealth. For being so dead by his owne dispaire, what profite canne hee do vnto his countrie? for which alone he liueth, and for whose good he ought to make small spare of his life. Therefore (O my louing friends) de∣sist, I beséech you, for doing that double wronge, both to your selues and to your Cittie, by your proper-caused de∣struction; but onely at my request, laying aside such wicked thoughts, cheare vppe your drooping cogitations: and since there is no other remedie, but we must neede die, let vs sal∣lie out at the Cittie gates; and with our swords bedyed w
t
 the purple gore of our Pagan enemies, let vs lustily lauish out our lingring liues; bought by the blouds of our hatefull aduersaries.
 The good Duke no sooner finished his exhor∣tatorie oration, but that he speedily enraunged his willing soldiers in order of battaile: & with such great care, & kinde∣nesse, hee went from one band to another, exhorting euery particular person to aduenture his life couragiously, for the aduauncemēt of their true religion. Which he had no sooner done, but they heard a sodaine allarme in the campe of the

 Pagans.
 Which the worthy Duke thinking to be some mu∣tinie risen amongst his enemies; courage (quoth hee) cou∣rage my louing countriemen. For our God, moued to mercy by our miseries, hath made the way open by his mighty arme, for vs to wreake vengeance vpon our enemies. God & our Lord Iesus Christ therefore be your sauiour and defen∣der, in the enterprise that we attempt for the glorie of his gospell:
 and therewithall they couragiously issued out of the Cittie gate, vppon their 
Pagan
 enemies. Who (being pre∣aduertised of their attempt, as of al other accidents besides, by the trayterous dealing of a 
Hyblan
 Knight named 
Ne∣quion,
 who affected the principalitie of y
e
 
Hyblean
 pro∣uince) were by this time sufficiently armed against their approaching aduersaries. Whome they encountred with so irresistable a furie; as although like Oxen, the valiant Duke 
Oriardey
 felled almost fiue and thirtie 
Pagans
 starke dead to the grounde (and amongst the rest thrée giantlike bre∣thren, of the seauenteene sonnes of 
Gandramounde,
 whose names were 
Trybart, Roron,
 and 
Pyramon
) yet were the 
Hibleans,
 like sheepe before the face of the pursuing wolues, made to flie from the furie of their following foes: who yer they could regain the citie gates, encōpassed thē in, so strongly on all all sides, as hauing slaine 
Oriardey
 and an infinite sort of other souldiers, tooke foure thousand of them prisoners. With whom it had been a bloudy day, had not y
e
 (incomparable for all vertues) most exquisite 
Oceander,
 ap∣peased the anger of the enraged sonnes of 
Gādramound;
 & opposing himselfe against their attempts (as it were) enfor∣ced 
Bramadon
 (who was both the eldest & mercifullest of thē) to entreate his brethrēs patiēce, for the preseruing of y
e
 liues of the submitted christians: who,
 yeelding vnto their mer∣cies had consented to receiue the holy 
Alcherō
 of their great prophet 
Mahomet,
 for their faith & defence: wherew
t
 y
e
 braue brethren were indifferently satisfied. And all commotions appeased, & circumstances finished, they suffered the Paga∣nized 
Hybleans,
 in quiet continually to possesse their liues, liuings, and habitations, without any further disturbance.


Now, notwithstanding all these things were brought to this vnlucky passe, by y
e
 trayterous dealings of that disloi∣all









 
Nequion;
 yet was he neuer the more regarded, but rather (according to his wickednesse) worse ent
eated at the hand of the most iust cōquerour 
Oceander.
 Who iudging al things according to Iustice and equitie, caused him to be present∣ly stripped out of his cloathes,
 and (by a slaue being led tho∣rough the streetes of the cittie of 
Hybla
) to be whipped vnto death by the betrayed Citizēs. Who after they had scourged him sufficiently,
 carried him vnto the marketstead: where cō∣manding his head to be smitten off from his shoulders, they flayed his body: &, letting his carcase be cast vnto the doggs, they made a displayed ensigne of his skinne; thereby to ter∣rifie hereafter traytors, from the perpetrating of any such villanie against their countrie. But alas, it doth little a∣uaile: for euen in these our dayes, doth treason in more plen∣tie abide, and treachers more abound then euer heretofore hath ben denotified. Which mischieuous maladie, I beséech you a while to suffer me thus briefely to bewaile.


Whither is dutie f
ed? and vnto what desart


Of 
Arabia,
 or groues vnfrequented


By dayly haunt of men, doth faith depart?


As that without thinking on desert,


Or to the Soueraigne, godly obeysaunce;


Multitudes of christians don them auaunce,


Against their Kings, and Gods lawes to stert:


As, in their minde clogged with mischaunce,


Trait'rously to conspire to worke great grieuaunce,


Against their God and mighty Soueraigne:


Vnder whose check they should rightwise remaine.


Soone after these things were thus luckily by the Pagan power performed, the valorous knight of the sea, 
Bram∣madon,
 
Camaru, Zamaru, Hollobron, Sylias,
 and an hun∣dred thousand of the chiefest of the 
Barbarian
 armie, marched vnder the banner of 
Mahomet
 (which was aduaunced by a sturdie knight of 
Tunis,
 named 
Oridor
) by long and speedy iournies, farther into the bowels of the vpland countrey; ta∣king all the Citties, Castles, Townes, & prouinces; and

 bringing them vnder their yoake, caused their consci∣ences to be confounded, and their soules spotted with y
e
 de∣uillish doctrine of the 
Alcharō;
 which for feare of death they were forced to embrace: to such extreamity were these poore & miserable creatures driuen, by the remorselesse cruelties of their most wicked oppressours.


Euen vnto the promontorie, abufting the 
Hesperian
 Cit∣tie 
Rhegium,
 reached the limits of their conquestes: from whēce w
t
 great toyle & laborious trauaile they passed in bat∣taile aray, alongst the Eastside of the fire outbreathing 
Aetna.
 From whence they might perceiue the ship-engor∣ging gulfe of 
Charybdis,
 at one side; on the other side calme danger-colouring 
Scylla:
 on whose mossie vertice a sort of deceiuing 
Syrens
 were set in consort, and right before them an huge ranke of vnconquered Citties relinquished,
 and left desolate by y
e
 cowardly flight of their feareful Inhabitāts. Of whose abode, togither w
t
 the tyrant 
Dionines
 (the bastard sonne of 
Dionisius
) the true reporte being related vnto thē, by a captiue christian (whome they had taken in the moun∣taines) to be in the stronge cittie of 
Syracusa;
 they present∣ly dislodged their armie by great iournies, to that side of the Iland: against whose towring walles beeing approached, they couragiously displayed their ensignes of defiaunce. Which being answered w
t
 as great stoutnesse on y
e
 aduerse part by the christians, they caused their camps to bee pit∣ched & fortified round about the west, south,
 & north sides of the cittie: wherein, they remained quiet for the space of thrée whole dayes, without giuing any attempt against the chri∣stians. But on the fourth day, with the sunne, they beganne to set themselues i
 warlike order, expecting sound of the shrill trumpet, to 
t
 
ō them to their assaultings:
 which no sooner breathed, but it runge out the sorrowfull knell of a thousand christians. For, in so good and martiall order, the stout 
Barbarians,
 with their steely weapons, approached the gates of the Cittie (frō out the which the vndaunted regi∣mēts of 
Alfortio, Orthisius
 
 the tyrant 
Dionine
 sa
lied) as,
 the Christians vnable to 
f aray their rankes, were forced (though not without some losse vnto their enemies) with

 great disad
ntage to returne vnto the Citie againe: which had been there assuredly surprised, had not y
e
 worthy hopes of 
Fraunce
 and 
Spaine,
 with more then inuincible courages, euen in the entraunce into the gates, stoutly repelled the di∣uellish disturbers; and twice grappling with 
Bramadon
 and 
Oceander,
 by diuine auxill no doubt fairely freed themselues from mischiefe, & the whole Cittie from that dayes mise∣rie.


On the morrowe againe, 
Hollobron,
 and 
Camaru
 with sixteene thousand approued Knights of 
Tunis,
 were sent by the commaundement of the Knight of the Sea, valiantly to rea
aile the walles of the cittie by land; whilest himselfe w
t
 
Brammadon,
 and the residue his brethren sate in consulta∣tion about the bringing of their shipps and little pinnaces of 
Tangur
 to assault the same by water. With great shoutes & cries, 
Hollobron
 and his followers approached vnto y
e
 dit∣ches of the Cittie: ouer the bridge whereof, hauing couragi∣ously won passage, they stoutly assaulted the issuing christi∣ans. Betweene whome there began so bitter a bickering, as within lesse then an houre, by the valorous virtue of the wor∣thy 
Spaniard
 & his battalion of 
Syracusans,
 fifteene hundred Pagans were layd breathlesse on the earth. Wherat 
Hollo∣bronso
 extreamely chaufed, as for verie wrath his nostrills gushed out on bleeding: and then taking a mighty launce in his rest hee fewtred it against 
Alfortio:
 who did the like to him. But with such a stronge furie they at the front of the bridge encountred, as the Prince of 
Spaine
 (being in the disaduantage, by reason of the lower grounde) was force∣ably borne ouer his horse crouper to the grounde in a swoune:
 and 
Hollobron
 was with y
e
 head of 
Alfortios
 launce (which more then an handbreadth lo
▪ as entred into his shoulder) so extreamely grieued & torm
ted as causing the enpasmed Prince to be speedily conueied 
 his soldiers vn∣to his tents, he would abide no longer amongst his enimies
 but in post hast he fied to his pauilions, leauing his brother 
Camaru,
 who was in combat w
t
 
Orthisius,
 in great perplexi∣tie, for the safe recoyling from hi
 
nemies, without giuing any disaduantage.




Who (though not without some daunger) speedily soun∣ded the retreate vnto his souldiers. Whereof 
Oceander
 vn∣derstanding, his eares glowed to heare of their cowardize, 
nd his heart for anger beganne to swell so bigge, as if it 
ould haue beaten open y
e
 lattices of his ribs with his fu∣ri
us panting: and sodainely rising from the table, with 
Brammadon
 and all the worthiest approued knights in the whole armie, he furiously hasted to the assault. Which hee gaue so forcibly against the Christians in 
Orthisius
 his re∣giment, as (hauing boysterously beaten the French Prince,
 from of his palfrey) they put the residue to fearefull flight: whome the worthy knight of the Sea, with a huge troope of Sarazens, followed in such hote pursuite; as entring by force of armes into the citie gates,
 they slewe and spoyled all (of what degree or sexe soeuer) that made any resistance against him.


Which sodaine sacke, brought such exceeding terrour in∣to the hearts of the 
Sicilians;
 as, together with their King 
Dionine,
 wiues, concubines, children, goods and liues, they submissiuely yielded themselues to the mercie of their mischieuous molestours. Who, pardoning their bodies of a∣ny farther dammages, caused them to forsake their deare Sauiour, renounce his holy gospell: and finally, by obliging their selues in obedience to 
Mahomet,
 to deliuer their soules vp to multitudes of endlesse miseries, and to euerlasting dā∣nation. God for his mercy forgiue the Authour hereof, who rather of ignorance, then of enuie, perpetrated so vnpardo∣nable a wickednesse.






CHAP. XXII.




¶ How the Pagans arriued at 
Constantinople,
 and sent Embas∣sadours to summon the Emperour to personal appearance before the Estates of 
Tunis:
 and how the knight of the sea, slewe the young Prince of 
Sparta,
 for his stout reply in the behalfe of his master: and of the resolute answere of 
Claranax
 to the message of the king of 
Tunis.






X
Amaru, Brammadon,
 and 
Hollobron
 were ve∣ry greeuously wounded in this exployt; but es∣pecially 
Hollobron:
 whose shoulder rankled so exceedingly, by reason that a piece of y
e
 Lances heed was broken in the boane; as for very pain his life was in great perill, and at last (by the way on the seas as they sayled to 
Constantinople
) perished, to the no lit∣tle heauinesse of his brethren: who in reuenge thereof would diuers times haue destroyed the two worthy Christian prin∣ces, prisoners; had not the diligent endeauours of 
Oceander,
 caused them to desist from their diuelish determination. Not∣withstanding, this conquest obtained, and the state of 
Sycily
 subuerted and conuerted to their obeysance; the knight of the sea returned his Campe, to the shoares of 
Hybla.
 Where recounting vnto the kings of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur,
 the happie successe that seconded his attempts, with great congratula∣tions and ioy (hauing in this enterprise spent the best part of the spring) they reembarqued themselues: and hoysting vp sailes, they speedily committed themselues to the doubtfull mercie of the Seas: on whose mounting bistowes, they were for some fo
er or fiue daies very daungerously tossed, & migh∣tily dispersed (as vpon the neighbouring shoares of 
Italy
 and 
Naples
) where 
Brammadon
 (as you shall heare in the seconde part of this history) did suffer shipwracke. But within a sea∣uen howers after the tempest ceased, there arose so fresh a gale at the poupe of the shippes; as, hauing sufficiently reco∣uered the third part of their Nauie, they chearefully pro∣ceeded on in their voiage towards 
Cōstantinople:
 which they prosecuted w
t
 so good fortune,
 as they arriued within lesse thē a moneth after, at y
e
 hauens mouth therof. Which finding it by the prouidence of the good Emperour debarred from thē; as well as they could, they vnchained, emptied, and with such facilitie entred; as before the 
Grecians
 could prepare for their resistance, the whole hauen was in full possession of y
e
 Pagans. Neuerthelesse they were so continually pestred w
t
 multitude of garbage, as stones, blockes, and such other like weapons, as they were faine to retreate their vessels a little

 backer into the seaward: which greatly gladded the 
Greciās,
 who were thereby freed from a many sore gallings.


The Kings of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur
 were wonderfull wroth w
t
 their displacing from the hauen: & therfore he determined (knowing the inuincible courage of the Christians) by land wars, & single cōbats, to weary and disanimate his enimies. Wherfore, putting to the shore, he alanded his souldiers:
 who in this order, encāped themselues beside y
e
 wildernesse of 
Gre∣cia:
 The whole army of fierce 
Barbarians,
 was diuided into fower seuerall battels, conducted vnder the ensignes of the kings of 
Tunis Tomarin, Tangut
 of 
Tangur,
 y
e
 vncōtrouleable knight of the sea, and the vndaunted sons of the giant 
Gan∣dramound:
 who in warlike array marched about the country to find out fit place for to encāpe thēselues. But not knowing any, more adiuvable for their army, thē the plaines vnder y
e
 wildernesse of 
Grecia,
 they there incontinently pitched their pauilions: which, garnished w
t
 plumes of sundry coloured fea∣thers, on y
e
 crests of their wel tempered helmets, raised such a lustre by the raies of the earths illustratour, as heauen it selfe seamed to blush at the excelling gorgeousnesse of y
e
 enritched earth; whose duskie face was so admirably adorned w
t
 such a glorious armie.


Whose greatnesse, albeit amazed a multitude of most co∣wardly meacocks; notwithstanding, no whit amated the ex∣cellent courage of the good Emperour 
Claranax:
 who only reposing his cōfident hope in his righteous Redeemer 
Christ Iesus,
 neuer changed once his countenance for feare of his huge nūber of enemies: yet, therfore did he not neglect, like a carefull Christian and a louing Captaine, prouidently to puruoy for the safetie of his signiorie; but with great wat∣ching and vigilancie, he strongly engarrisond the city with sufficiencie of Souldiers, and munition. And filling all the storehowses with corne and victuals for a whole years pro∣uision, he not only made restraint of cates (where superfluity drewe them to ryot) but also by his strict commandement, he caused all his subiects very straitly to obserue fasts, and offer vp continuall oblatory orisons, w
t
 singular deuotion, vnto the maiesty of the most Highest.




These matters being with wonderfull discretion and wisdome ordered, intelligence was giuen him by his most trusty espials, of the approach of the King of 
Barbaries
 Em∣bassadours vnto his Palace. Wherfore commaunding them admittance vnto presence, there entred into the great Hall, the knight of the sea,
 with 
Camaru, Tribart, Vibrant
 and a great companie of knights of 
Tunis,
 all armed sauing their heads, whereon they ware light hats of Taffeta. Who, see∣ing the Emperour sitting vnder his Canopy of Estate, with the whole knighthoode of 
Greece
 about him; with∣out any reuerence fit for so mighty a Monarche, in this wise (by the mouth of 
Oceander
) proudly saluted him.


Our great Prophet 
Mahomet
 maintaine and defende the most mighty kings 
Tomarin
 of 
Tunis,
 and 
Tangut
 of 
Tangur,
 and graunt them happie victory ouer all their eni∣mies: and confound 
Claranax
 of 
Constantinople,
 and all the damned Christians, that tendered the defence to the destruc∣tion of the worthy Prince 
Tumanto
 of 
Tabaroa;
 whom thou most traiterously flewest before the walles of 
Tangur,
 vnder a fained colour of counterfaite friendship, against all equi∣tie, and contrary to the promise that thou plightedst to the honourable orders of knighthoode. Which, being mani∣fest before the eyes of the Estates of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur,
 hath vrged them at this time, by mee, to summon thee (in all hū∣ble and submissiue sort, disroabed of thy royal vestures, with an halter about thy necke, and a white wand in thine hand) presently to repaire vnto the pauilions of the 
Barbarian
 Po∣tentates. Before whome, if proudly thou refuse to make thy personall appearance, wee heere (in the names of our dread Soueraignes) proclaime vtter ruine and destruction against thee and all thy kingdome; within whose territories no Christian shall be left aliue: so extreamely and rigorously shall our Pagan Curtelaxes, within these fewe daies, punish thy inconsiderate contumacy.


With such presumption and hautinesse was this speach deliuered by the knight of the sea, against the Emperours honour & fame; as for very anger at his bouldnesse, his eyes waxed bloudshot, & his forehead was furrowed w
t
 so feareful

 a frowne, as al the lookers on trembled at y
e
 terrible aspect of his bunched browes: which notwithstanding were but the very shadows of his hearts substancified impatience. Whose cholericke humour so choaked vp the mouth of his voices organ, as he was vnable to render any reply vnto his expec∣ting enemies. Which 
Oceander
 perceiuing, he turned vnto his fellowes, and in great derision; See yee not (quoth he,
 w
t
 a lowde laughter) with what patience the Emperour endures our Embassage? No doubt but by that time he hath studied a little longer, wee shall receiue some stout answere: he strug∣gleth so mightily to speake to vs. The young Prince, 
Ismeri∣on
 of 
Sparta,
 and the brother to the faire 
Rodasilua,
 with little patience brooked this shamefull indignity offered vnto his Soueraigne: and therefore doing his obeisance to the Em∣perour, with an high voice, he beganne thus to correct their in ciuilitie.


It better befitteth the grauitie of Embassadours, to vse themselues with reuerence before a Potentate: and not in such iniurious manner, to miscarry theirselues before so mighty a Monarch, as the Emperour 
Claranax,
 my dread Lord & Soueraigne. Whose sword, like y
e
 mowers sithe, be∣ing discontinued frō correcting of your misdemeanours, hath giuen leasure to your carelesse cōceits, in your prides, to per∣petrate newe controuersies: which with a greater vēgeance will speedily procure you a more dreadfull destruction.


By 
Mahomet
 (quoth 
Oceander
 very scornefully) the boy prattles pretily: and on mine honour it were pittie to let the little vrchin to die of a consumption; that craued his present confusion so pithilie.
 And therwith he smote the young 
Spar∣tan
 Prince such a buffet vnder the temples, with his armed fist, as he quite felled him to the ground:
 and with his feete there prosecuting his pittilesse furie, as he made his mouth together with a streame of clotted bloud, to belch out his mi∣serable life.


O who hath seene the sad countenances of 
Priam, Heccuba,
 & 
Polixena
 (bedeawed with the teares of true sorrow, for y
e
 death of their deare sonne 
Hector
) saw but euen the very tipe of the torments, that 
Claranax, Basilia,
 and most wretched

 
Rodasilua
 endured, at the woful sight of so sorrowfull a spec∣tacle: whose cōceiued griefe was in such excesse of sadnes, as

No Rhetoricians tongue in words can paint


The sorrowes great, that did their soules attaint.


For with teares their azury eyes were drowned, w
t
 trem∣bling their armes and hands shaked, their hearts for hor∣rour panted from out their places, their tongues faultred, their temples trauailed with sweate, & (to conclude) all their bodies were distempered, they shrieked at the sight, they left their throanes, thronged about him, threwe themselues vpon the ground, felt his pulses, found no life, fainted vnder him; reuiued (not to relieue) but renew their lamentings ouer his cold carcasse; whom they most loued being aliue, and most lamented being sodainely sequestred from himselfe, & from those he more affected then himselfe. In this dolefull sort they passionatized themselues ouer the departed Princes bo∣dy: which they bathed in the deawe of their teares, vntill an∣ger and magnanimity, drawing the good Emperour from such wailing effeminacy, enforced his cogitations Embassa∣dour,
 to vtter forth this couragions resolution. 
Sleepe in thy soules securitie sweete Prince of 
Sparta:
 whose vntime∣ly death, as my eyes haue relented ouer thee, so mine ire shal reuenge with an vnplacable fury, on the heads of thy wic∣ked enemies. Harken therefore (O ye mercilesse miscreāts) and behould my more then deserued clemency towards yee: that I should harme Embassadors, is against the lawes of Nations; yet you manifestly see, that your misdemeanours haue merited no mercy: which notwithstanding (though euen contrary to iustice) I willingly and graciously grant you; that in my rage it may not be reported, rather of your words (wherin your masters wrong mee highly) then of your deeds (wherin your selues haue proffered me most intollerable in∣dignity) I tooke reuengemēt. Which though it be warran∣ted in all religious both Christian & Pagan, yet with multi∣tudes I will not wreake it, nor with so many as I might cōmand to punish yee,
 will I oppresse yee: but quietly per∣mitting you to depart my Palace, remit the tryal of our cau∣ses to our fortunes followed in the field: where fierce 
Bello∣na


 shall decide y
e
 Iustice of our quarrels without partialitie.Depart ye therfore in peace (discourteous knights) to your Pauilions: where, humbled on your knees, you shall denoti∣fie vnto your Soueraignes, y
t
 they shew their pride, & inconsi∣deratenesse; so presumptuously to commaund one, that is far better then their selues; so basely at their sole summons to submit himselfe, and safety, vnto their doubtfull censures; since what they lay vnto my charge is altogether vntrue, and of malice falsly forged, to picke quarrels against mee. For, where 
Tunian Tomarin
 inferreth treason vnto mee,
 practised against his sonne 
Tumanto,
 he should haue said (& that right∣ly) that I was too trusty vnto his treacherous sonne: whose 
Barbarian
 manners grewe so barbarous, as after I had pro∣moted him to the highest dignitie in 
Grecia,
 he falsly (hauing feloniously stollen away my Neece 
Marinda
 of 
Moldauia
 frō mee) fled ouer to my foes of 
Tripoly
 and 
Syria.
 Vnder whose banner he bouldly bandied against mee; vntill by the iust iudgement of the heauens, he in the 
Adriaticke
 seas (accor∣ding as he had deserued) by a sort of seruile sea-roauers,
 re∣ceiued the right recompence of a traitour (to wit, plain han∣ging) yet nether by my consent nor countrimen. Therefore tel your misinformed masters of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur,
 that they done iniurie to my innocencie, by inuading my territories, vnder the pretence of my committing treason against 
Tumā∣to;
 since (in my conceipt) they rather complot the cōprizing of my Crowne and city of 
Constantinople:
 yet I will not take knowledge therof. But since they will needs accuse me thus wrongfully in words, tell them, I will yer long excuse w
t
 deeds rightfully & willingly: for w
t
 my sword I hope on their gorgets to plead guiltlesse, to their peril & destructions.






CHP. XXIII.




¶ Of the great battaile betweene the Pagans & the Christians, cut of by the comming of the night, begun a-fresh the next day: wherin the 
Grecians
 went by the worse: & their reuēge by the death of 17000. 
Barbarians,
 & how the Pagan Po∣tentates enraged, concluded the speedy destruction of the whole City.






Y
F the Pagan Embassadours admired the vnheard of clemencie of the royall Empe∣rour, it was no maruaile: since both for magnanimous prowesse, & merciful pati∣ence hee was vnmatchable. Wherefore with the greater reuerence they respected his highnesse; courteously replying, that whatsoeuer he had commaunded them for answere, they would, on their honors truely refer vnto their Soueraignes: and thereon engaging their credits, they presently departed (after honourable en∣tertainement) from the Palace of the Emperour, to the tents of the kings of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur.
 Where, to the rela∣ting of the good Emperours answere, wee will leaue them; to returne to the (by this time, returned) Commaunders of Christendome. Who with a mighty nauie hauing passed o∣uer the 
Adriatike
 seas, speedily alanded their troopes of trai∣ned souldiers (in sight of their enuious enemies) vpon the plaines of 
Constantinople,
 to the exceeding comfort of the 
Constantinopolitan
 Christians:
 who from their wals battle∣ments espyed, where first the stout young Prince 
Morcauill
 of 
Hungaria,
 with his battalion of 3000. horse (after whom followed the king 
Rubaldo
 with 2000. 
Huns,
 and stout 
Bul∣garians
 on foote) proudly passed alongst the forefronte of the Pagans pauilions. Next whom the ould king of 
Bohemia,
 with his forward sonne the Prince 
Arcanio,
 marched with a strong battaglion of an hundred horse, and 9000. foote, all worthy knights: from 
Thessaly
 and 
Transiluania,
 came also forty thousand sturdy souldiers, marching vnder the ensigne of the valiant princes 
Curan
 and 
Kauiscon:
 at whose arri∣uall the 
Constantinopolitans
 so loudly showted, as y
e
 whole citie trembled therwith. Then a great Lord of 
Sparta
 with 4000. vnder his leading, well approued 
Grecians,
 disembar∣qued themselues. Who hearing of the timelesse death of their young Prince 
Ismerion,
 solemnly vowed to make a slaughterhowse amongst the pauilions of the pittilesse Pagans: with whome also the like sware the thrice-excel∣lent 
Erimaro
 and 
Orbano
 the worthy Gouernours of the French and Spanish armies; protesting till the death,

 resolutely to wreake vengeance on their misbelieuing mo∣lesters, who had encaptiuated, their yong Soueraignes. All these in martiall order couragiously passing close by y
e
 pauili∣ons of the Pagans, marched 3. times round about the plaine before the Citty: where (though greatly against the minde of the carefull Emperour 
Claranax,
 who fore-warned them of some treacherous mischiefe that might there befal them) they straight wayes strongly encamped their companies; whose courages yearned to be grappling with their Pagan enemies,


With exceeding gallantnesse they marched in this order into the Cittie: where they were graciously entertained of the good ould Emperour 
Claranax.
 Who with great gentle∣nesse gaue to euery seuerall soldier such singular welcomes, as euery one vowed, willingly to spend their liues in defēce of him and his whole countries: such and so vnheard of was the forwardnesse of the Christians in 
Constantinople:
 who no lesse comforted the drooping spirits of the Grecians, then discouraged the stout hearts of the rude barbariās, Kings of 
Tunis
 & 
Tangur.
 Whose hostes, as they were huge in mul∣titudes, so they were haughty in maners, diuerse in dispositi∣ons, & contrarie in condition: & therfore not onely gaue often occasion of quarrels and debates,
 but also of sodaine destruc∣tion to the whole armie; had not some malitious malefac∣tours been the more speedily corrected, by the good aduice of the Knight of the Sea. Who, assuredly seing how many multitudes of mischiefes were likely to secōd each mutiny, (causing a fit place by the hādy-works of painefull Pyoners) with a loude voice and an vndaunted courage, in this sort played the 
Proloquutor,
 to the Pagan princes: who encom∣passing him about with their armed chariots, yeelded an at∣tentiue auscult to his oration.


Sacred Emperours of 
Tunis, Tangur,
 and 
Tabarca,
 if I were able in wordes, like a cunning Oratour, or another 
Hermes,
 but euen halfewise to expresse the very 
colon
 of my conceite; your mightinesse should thoroughly pe
¦ceiue the great pittie, that I would plainely prostrate before the eyes of your excellencies, of the sodaine confusion of our

 complotted enterprise. But (alas) I am insufficient to per∣forme my pretence: and therefore, in plaine tearmes, I shall truely lay open vnto you my proposed purpose. Vn∣derstand you therefore, my Lordes, that not onely euer since our arriuall, but euen at this instant, our armie hath been, and is so pestered with pernitious traytours and conspiratours; as neuer a day, nor houre, nay nor scarcely at this present, our friends and loyall followers can rest free from their disturbances: whose hearts are still concei∣ting, whose heads euer complotting, and whose handes are ready to the accōplishing of all wickednesse and treasonous insidies, that can possibly be plotted or performed.


Such conspiracies were contriued by 
Cascar
 and 
Om∣bator
 against the holy 
Alcheron
 of 
Mahomet:
 and such was the blasphemie of 
Blandulon
 against his deitie. The like was that of 
Raphan,
 who enterprised the sodaine surprisage of your maiesties liues in your pauilions: and no whit dif∣fered that same abhominable action of 
A
tior Esson,
 who in armes openly oppugned against the profitable procee∣dinges of your potencies. Infinite more of molestours could I number, that within these few dayes, haue tray∣terously conspired against the common good of our glori∣ous armie. But what became of them? They dyed either by perishing or punishment: and more vndoubledly will followe them; should not our holy prophet 
Mahomet,
 the better prouide, by his diuine prouidence, for our perfect prosperitie. Let vs therefore on our knees, magnifie his holy name; and with our handes, manfully maintaine his true beliefe against all his misbelieuing aduersaries, that peruersly oppose themselues against his holy heastes, and against our hostes for his sake. And so shall wee not onely profite the perfectnesse of our religion, but also preserue our campe and countrey from the trayterous complots of some wicked wretches, whom idlenesse and ambition egge on, to the worke of their deserued endes, and our dolefull confusion.


The Knight of the Sea, with so great vehemencie of spirit pronoūced this his speech; as the 
Barbariās,
 being ex∣ceedingly

 amazed at his bould & braue behauiour; in to∣ken of their great good liking of his counsell, rendred him a grations applause, with excessiue shouting: all in gene∣rall reioycing that they had so good a chieftaine, and cou∣rageous a champion to conduct them; except 
Ebator.
 Whose heart yearning for anger of the remembrance of his brother 
Ombators
 treacherie, caused him secretly to conceiue no small hatred against the Knight of the Sea, for euer after. And therefore, with all his 
Moroccans,
 he stoutly opposed himselfe against the opinion of 
Oceander,
 in a great rage saying; that hee neyther could nor woulde giue graunt vnto the gracelesse disposing of the warres of 
Tunis,
 after the desperate deuising of so inconsiderate a Punie: whose lacke of discretion, had brought him to such an ill determi∣nated disposition. Whose plottes if they proue not rather preiudiciall then profitable to your holy practise and religi∣ous proceedings, I shall thinke hereafter, that aged expe∣rience may breede expense; but neuer bee able to worke that effect, as youthfull rashnesse is able to effinish. 
E∣bator,
 ending his speech, speedily poasted to his tentes: and packing vp all his pauilions, with his band of 
Moroccans,
 he presently embarqued himselfe: and, without any farre word, or farewell, hee set vp sailes towardes the shores of 
Barbarie:
 where, leauing him to his wilfulnesse, we will re∣turne to the warres in 
Grecia.


Though the Knight of the Sea were gauled euen to the quicke, w
t
 
Ebators
 spitefull quirke; yet seing neyther the time, nor place to bee fitte for reuenge, he wisely re∣tained his anger: and, with the subtle Serpent 
Echid∣non,
 ceased hissing vntill some better season, wherein he might safely hitte the 
Moroccane
 home, with a full re∣quitall. But in the meane while, defiance beeing de∣nounced against each other; aswell the Pagans as the christians drewe forth their forces into the middest of the plaine, before 
Constantinople:
 whose walles and warlike battlementes being emburdened with a multi∣tude of beawtious Ladies, set on the same so faire an embellishment; as hadde the Sunne shone neuer so

 brightly, they would scarcely haue sent so splendent a lustre into the eyes of the admiring souldiers: whose hearts, tho∣rough their cristall casements, were so deepely enflamed, as they thought nothing able to quench the hote fire of their fancies, but onely the heart bloud of their hatefull ene∣mies.


Wherfore, by the commaundements of the gouernours on both sides, y
e
 dreadfull signall to y
e
 fight being sounded, there no sooner approached the King of 
Tangur
 with his 
Fessians
 from the armie of the Pagans; but that Prince 
Morcauill,
 with his 
Hungarian
 horsemen, pressed furiously against thē. Betweene whom there was so strong an encounter as king 
Tangur,
 breaking his launce vppon the gorget of the young 
Hungarian,
 was quite vnhorsed, & fifteen of his best knights at the same time in the like sort serued. Where they had en∣ded their liues, had not a fresh band of 
Barbarians
 bosterous∣ly buskled in amongst them; & ouerthrowing a great num∣ber of christians, made the residue to retire thēselues, vntil the King of 
Tangur
 was rehorsed. Who no sooner found him∣selfe repossessed of his his saddle, but that setting spurs to his palfrey (like an angrie Lyon) he lashed with such fierce∣nesse into the thick troope of his enemies, as the prince 
Mor∣cauill
 being vnable to withstand his force, by little & little he retreated from the Pagans furie. Which his deare friend 
Arcanio
 perceiuing,
 he called amaine to his 
Bohemiā
 Mar∣tialists; and putting his strong speare made of knotty Cor∣nel, in his rest, he ran so swiftly against a prue pagan knight named 
Rodorin
 (who was one of the K. of 
Tangurs
 gard) as, bearing him quite ouer his saddle, he made him to take a new and more vneasie seate on the crooper of his palfrey. Whom leauing to his shame, with the same speare he bare to ground seauen other sturdie Pagans, before his arme or aime failed. In which his enterprise he was so brauely seconded, by his battaglion of 
Bulgarians;
 as in spight of the king of 
Tan∣gur,
 they not onely wan grounde of his 
Barbarians,
 but in a moment made them, maugre the might of their commaū∣der, to betake themselues vnto most fearefull flight.


At which their cowardise, the Knight of the Sea was

 so exceedingly enraged, as for very wrath, hee waxed so wood as vnneath any Sarrasen was able to behould him: vntill, taking 
Xamaru
 and 
Brammadon
 by the gauntlets; How long (sayde hee) shall our generous hearts trust our honours, in the handes of these heartlesse souldi∣ers? Vntill our christian enemie shall ioyfully tryumph, in our ouerthrowe? Our holy 
Mahomet
 fore-fend it: and then in what I can, I shall defend it. For rather had I die, then suffer our selues to be thus cowardly sacrificed vnto all misfortune by these vnbelieuing christians.


Ending these wordes, he caused 
Brammadon
 and his bro∣ther to followe him▪ who, with his launce in his rest,
 and his shield on his shoulder, leauelled so stronge a stroake against the helmet of 
Arcanio,
 as beating him quite from his horse, he left him to seeke for succour, amonge a number more of 
Bulgarian
 knightes, whome his fellowes sent downe head∣long to associate him. Whereat the good Prince of 
Hunga∣rie
 waxed so wroth, as with a hundred of his best and coura∣giousest warriours, he presently encompassed the three Pa∣gan knights within their armed angle: & in such sort beha∣ued themselues against them, as though 
Oceander
 was most excellently armed, and of a most inuincible courage; yet had he much adoe to match so many worthy Martialists. Whom though many times he exceedingly endammaged, hurt, and beate off from their horses, yet he could not so quietly rid his hands of them, as he should (w
t
out some sound knocks) scape scotfree from their furies: especially Prince 
Morcauill,
 who three times though he were felled to his horse mane; yet so many times he reuiued: and recouering his vigour, seald such sorrowfull quittances on the helmets of his aduersaries, as hee made them in an ertasie, to decline their heades, and leaning on their palfreyes creastes, quite forget to execute their entended enterprise. But in vaine it is to contend with ones stronger: a mightier manageth armes against 
Morcauill:
 and therefore no meruaile, though any longer he cannot withstand his furious & waighty blowes: which, in such irresistable sort, and vnceasing maner, lashed against his burgonet; as the buckles being broken, and the armour

 brast in peeces, he was forced for want of defence, to loose some of the best bloud in his bodie;
 and by swiftnesse of his horse speedily to escape frō the furie of his vnmatchable ad∣uersarie 
Oceander:
 who, with his good sword 
Scindifer,
 did cut such broad lanes crosse the battaglion of 
Bulgarians,
 as there was not any one that durst once so much as oppose him selfe against him: so like a neuer-matchable Martialist, or rather 
Mars
 himselfe, he behaued himselfe amongst the ama∣zed christians. Who had presently beene foyled, had not the stronge King of 
Hungaria,
 with the Princes 
Kauis∣kon,
 and 
Curan,
 with their vnbroken bandes of 
Rutters, Thessalians,
 and 
Transiluanians,
 incontinently come to their rescue. At whose angrie assault the battaile began, once more, to be so fortunate vnto the christians; as the knight of the sea was on a sodaine beaten backe; & his, & 
Brammadons
 horses slaine vnder them; & 
Xamaru,
 with the scattered legiō of Sarasens, enforced violently, to betake themselues, by little and little to the retreat. Whom the King 
Rubaldo
 pursued so couragiously, as the whole cōpany of christiās (as∣well within, as without the cittie of 
Constantinople
) clapped their hands, & shouted for ioy; praysing god for giuing them such good prosperitie, and almost an assured victorie ouer all their misbelieuing enemies: whome at that time they had vtterly vanquished, or at least exceedingly foyled; had they not for greedinesse of getting the conquest, dis∣arraunged themselues, and run headlong after their ene∣mies.
 Which, y
e
 couragious and wise leader of the discom∣forted Sarasens, no sooner aduised, but he presently tooke thereby occasion of aduantage. For, horsing himselfe againe by pure force, on the palfrey of a sturdy Knight of 
Thessa∣ly,
 named 
Radoron
 (whome at one blowe hee seuered to the breastbone) hee spurred speedily into the middest of his daunted souldiers; and there strongly brandishing his courtleaxe, with a loude voice and a commaunding ac∣tion, hee stoutly recalled his slying fellowes, saying; For shame, for shame (my worthy countrie men) flie not so fearefully before your following enemies: but, remem∣bring the iustice of your quarrell, and for what cause

 yee vndertooke this enterprise (
viz,
 for the death of 
Tabar∣can Tumanto,
 and the exalting of the holy 
Alcheron
) cheare vp your disconsolated courages; and turning your faces to∣wards them, like a streame dammed vp, make your recoy∣ling be the recouering of more furie; and on the sodaine with farre greater violence breake out vpon their resisting troopes; and by the resistlesse vigour of your armes, make them to breake now, who earst made you to bend: or, refusing to performe it, prepare your selues to receiue the guerdon of your cowardize, at the hands of him, who esteemes his life lesse, then the losse of so assured and glorious a vic∣tory.


These wrathful words, were so excellently graced w
t
 ire∣full actions, as his Pagan souldiers, partly for shame, partly for feare, were incontinently enforced to follow him. Wher∣vpon, ioyning himselfe with 
Xamaru, Tribarte, Vibrante,
 and 
Cammatu,
 he thundred in, with such furie amongst the dis∣arayed troopes of the suspectlesse Christians; as at the first brunt, there were ouerthrowne, to the very ground,
 thirty of the most approued 
Transiluanians,
 and 
Thessalians;
 and the valourous Princes 
Curan
 and 
Cauiskon,
 both at once, enfor∣sed to loose their stirrops, and embrace their horses neckes, to saue themselues from falling.


The dismayed Christians, with wonder, made way for the Paganne Champions: who neuer rested, vntill such time, as they approached vnto the strong garrison of 
Bulgarians;
 who, had all this while encompassed in the braue knight 
Bram∣madon;
 though in vaine: who had so couragiously main∣tained the combat against them,
 as eleauen of their fel∣lowes being slaine, the rest stoode a loofe off, without once daring to approach him. Whereof the good king 
Rubaldo
 being aduertised, he presently poasted vnto the Paganne, & with him hand to hand, entred to sore a combat; as, had they not beene both of the most approued Knights in the whole armie, the battel had in a moment on one or other side beene finished. But, ha good good, that 
Rubaldo
 was so farre in yeares; for had he beene in his prime, two 
Brammadons
 could scarcely haue matcht him. Neuerthelesse, he so brauely

 behaued himselfe against the 
Barbariā;
 as, despoyling him of certaine parcels of his empaired armour, he had in a short space put him to the worst; had not the Knight of the Sea and the whole knighthood of 
Morocco
 (seconded with fortie thousand 
Tabarcan
 souldiers,
 brought freshly in, vnder the conduct of the 
Arabian Argostas
) set so fiercely vppon the garrison of 
Hungaria;
 as making a bloody lane quite tho∣rough them, they presently parted the combate: & hauing (though not verie easilie) taken 
Rubaldo
 prisoner, sent him pinioned backe vnto their pauilions, by a stronge bande of 
Sarasens,
 and 
Brammadon;
 whilest they hotly pursued after the discomfited 
Hungarians:
 who, like sheepe before the wolues, fled fearefully from the furie of their mercilesse pursuers. Who followed thē so fiercely, as, before they could gaine the gates of 
Constantinople,
 there fell three thousand christians, vnder the slaughtering swordes of the mercilesse miscreants: against whose endeauours the Lord of his mer∣cie oppose his power; or else the perill of all christendome is perpetrated in their proceedings. Which brought extream sorrowe to the verie soules of the controwled souldiers: who entred the gates of the Cittie with such sad gestures, and heauie countenances, as if the destruction of 
Phrygian Troy
 had been counterenacted by the woefull 
Grecians.
 For, some came in with their armes off, other with their helmets cleft, and more with their bodies wounded: all hanging downe their heads, and houlding downe the points of their weapons, and trayling their pikes and launces by the club endes on the ground, in such sorrowfull sort; as who hadde seene them, and would not pittie their perplexities,

Duris genuit se cautibus horrens


Caucasus, Hyrcanae{que} admôrunt vbera Tigres.


Hard Caucasus within his marble maw had got him first:


And by the milke of Hircan Tigres, he was after nurst.


Assoone as these were in this sort entred, there came fly∣ing vnto the Cittie, 
Curan
 with his 
Thessalians
 and

 
Transiluanians:
 who brought such a sorrowful relation of the conflict, as there was neuer the like terrour within the ama∣zed hearts of the wofull 
Constantinopolitans,
 before. But, oh; when the Emperour 
Claranax,
 the Empresse, and all the rest of that worthy rout, heard the taking of 
Rubaldo
 prisoner, and the death of 
Kauiscon
 related; with what an irefull gea∣sture did they teare their tresses, beate their breastes, and bewaile their miseries! But in especial, the Queene 
Anaxia
 so extreamely bewailed the captiuitie of her deare husband, as, for agony of heart, shee fell into such an hot burning a∣gue, as shee neuer while she liued, recouered perfectly ther∣of againe. And surely at that instant, shee had yielded vp her weary life, had she not beene the better comforted vp, by the sage councellings of the Princesses 
Almidiana
 and 
Eristama;
 who had (as you haue heard) proued by experience, that the only remedy in aduersity was patience. If these were woful, how wroth on the other side was the good Prince 
Olbiocles?
 who was angry at nothing so much, as y
t
 he was so shrewdly taken downe by a feauer; as, like another 
Hector,
 he coulde not patronize the notable performances of his country men; whose body should haue beene the buckler to his Christian followers. Wherefore,
 hee smote himselfe sorely on the sto∣mach, and beating his head against the boulster, hee continu∣ed for a while almost in a franticke passion. Vnhappy wretch (quoth hee) and most accursed caytife that thou art; why was I borne to see the ruine of my Country and Religion, and not be able in such extreames to succour them? If so, I would I had neuer rather receiued life, then thus haue li∣ued to behould such irrepairable misfortunes. And there∣withall hee sodainely threwe the sheetes ouer his face, as if hee had beene ashamed of what could not be salued. For, by the prouidence of the Highest he was preuēted in his prince∣ly purpose; least by couragiously defending himselfe, hee might haue more offended himselfe, then by mans forepro∣uidence could be perceiued. For, had he and the knight of y
e
 sea, once entered the combat; who knoweth not, y
t
 their vn∣daunted courages would haue brought one of their confusi∣ons? whose neare affinitie being once known to the relieuer;

 who then would bee more sorrowfull then the vanquisher? and more care oppressed, then the conquerour? But to re∣turne, together with the day; that daies destruction of the poore Christians being ended, the knight of the Sea cau∣sed the retreate to bee sounded: whereupon, all of them retyred to their tents.
 Where, how gratiously each couragi∣ous souldier was guerdoned for his valiancie, and what wonderfull reioycing there was generally through the whole Campe of Pagans, I take it to bee both tedious for the reading, and superfluous for the relating: and ther∣fore, I will backe addresse mee to the brused bands of sor∣rowfull and disconsolate Christians. Whose hearts as they were full of sorrow for their recoyle, so were they hopeful of wreaking a ful reuenge on their inhumane and diuelish ene∣mies. And therefore, calling their young Prince 
Curan,
 and the sage and strong Lord 
Labasto,
 with all the worthiest of the 
Spartane
 knights and souldiers, into counsell; they spedi∣ly concluded on a sodaine reuenge, to be wreaked on the vn∣suspecting Pagans: which they no sooner cōtriued, but they put it in execution. For, by that time y
e
 heauens had bin hid∣den thrice three howers, in the sable coloured mantle of that same goddesse of obscuritie, and that by the crowing of the wakefull cocke,
 they knew that it was past midnight; these two worthy Captains, 
Curan
 and 
Labasto,
 closely conducted their bands of 
Transiluanians, Thessalians,
 and 
Spartans,
 out at a posterne gate of the citie: & with such aduised secrecie & silence they marched vnto the Campe of the Pagans, as be∣fore the scoutwatch could descry them, they were within a furlong of the Royall pauilions of 
Tangur.
 When, bearing the alarum to be sodainly giuen to the Saracens, they ru∣shed into the middest of the amazed Pagans, w
t
 such a sodain fury; as if 
Mars
 himselfe accompanied w
t
 infinities of his e∣quals, had broken out of ambush, to take them at aduantage: for on all sides, the fiery 
Spartans,
 following their Lordly lea∣der, made such slaughter amongst the Infidels, as they met not with any, for the while, that were able to withstand thē. And the first that encountred was 
Brammadon,
 & his two bro∣thers 
Tribarte
 & 
Vibrante:
 who hurtled, like wilde bulles, a∣gainst

 
Labasto
 and a strong 
Sparan
 knight, named 
Tellador.
 Who in y
e
 like sort receiued them so valiantly, as they made their steely point
d Launces to strike sparkles of fire, from out their wel tempered beauers; neuer a one of them sca∣ping scotfree, from the furie of his aduersary. For, 
La∣basto
 & 
Telador,
 by reason of their opponents incomparable strengthes, were exceedingly brused; & 
Brammadon
 and his brother, for default of their hastily endossed armours, wer
 both exceedingly wounded: yet they passed by one another, w
t
 such inuincible demeanours, into the thicke presse of each others enemies; as on all sides in a moment they massacred multitudes of resisting souldiers,
 aswell Pagans as Chri∣stians. But oh, who had seene the wonders were wrought by 
Curan
 and his 
Thessalians,
 against the armed troopes of their numberlesse enemies, hee would haue thought he had beene irresistable in his angry action. For in lesse then an hower, he and his followers had giuen such a bloody banquet to the Saracens, vnder the king of 
Tangurs
 regiment, as w
t
 ease they might approach vnto the Royall pauilion: where, they had surprised 
Tangut
 himselfe, had not 
Oceander
 with a strong band of 
Tunis,
 with 
Xamaru,
 and diuers others of the noblest of the 
Barbarian
 knighthoode, with such vnheard of valiancy repugned them; as, seeing themselues vnable to resist their innumerable forces, by little and litle, they ad∣uisedly retreated to their fellow followers of 
Sparta:
 who, ha∣uing by this time slaine, at the least,
 seauenteene thousand 
Barbarians,
 w
t
 no little ioy returned speedily vnto the city of 
Constantinople.
 Where, what ioyes, what triumphes, and what thanksgiuing there was generally amongst al Christi∣ans, I will not at this time stand to recite; least I shoulde make my booke bigge only with superfluous descriptions.


The hurly-burly in the meane time continued still,
 in such disorderly manner in the Campe of the Pagans, as no man knowing well who was his friende, he tooke euery one to be his enemie. Wherfore there happenned exceeding bloodshed amongst them: which had not beene possibly pacified; had not the knight of the sea caused his guard, with their battleaxes in their handes, in the names of the Kings of 
Tunis
 and

 
Tangur,
 charged euery one particularly to returne vnto his station. Which being (with much ado) performed, and the tumult appeased; the knight of the sea, by the commaunde∣ment of King 
Tomarin
 and 
Tangut,
 causing silence to bee proclaimed, called together 
Brammadon, Xamaru, Vi∣brante,
 
Tribarte,
 and 
Zabieir
 the Duke of 
Alcazer,
 with di∣uerse more of the most valourous, and wisest of the 
Affricane
 knighthoode, vnto secret counsell. Where many and diuers verdictes being of diuers giuen, and diuersly censured; at last the eldest sonne of Gyant 
Gandramond
 (with a fierce looke, an hautie courage, and an high voice) 


Had I thought (quoth hee in a rage) that so glorious an enter∣prise, as the inuasion of all 
Europe,
 had beene vndertaken by such a sort of white liuered milksoppes; by 
Mahomet, Brammadon
 would neuer haue once stirred a foote to aide you.


For, where I thought, that not so much as the meanest souldier, if a Pagan, but that he was inuincible; what may I now thinke? studying (vnhappie that I should finde so) the noblest, most heroicke, and most worthiest knights (yea e∣uen the Generals thēselues, whose virtues should be as a pat¦terne to the baser 
Barbariās
 valour) to be become such simple meacockes and of such cowardly resolutions. What? for an assault made by night vpon vs, by a sort of misbeleeuing Christians, who, like 
Arabian
 theeues, haue euen in our sleepe set vpon our souldiers, and surprised them, shall we, as my degenerate brother 
Tribarte
 counsels vs, breake vp our campe, leaue our attempts, & surcease our endeauors, euen in the middest of our enterprises? 
Mahomet
 our holy Prophet, and great 
Termagant
 forefend it; and defend mee from those, who for a flea-bite (in respect) wil chaunge their mindes, and (vnmindefull of their eternall honours) refrain from finishing, euen the last act of these Christians trage∣dies: who will not sticke to thinke and talke, that their God in whom they beleeue, hath by his heauenly power de∣defended them, and preserued their citie from being sacked by such an infinitie, of (as they call vs) misbeleeuing Pa∣gans; whose holy Gods are not in potency halfe equall to

 their 
Christ Iesus.
 Oh holy and most mighty 
Mahomet,
 what a blemish wil this be to thy diuine maiesty? To the dimming of whose resplendent glory, rather then any accident should ankly happen, I would first teare downe the stony wals of 
Constantinople
 w
t
 my nailes; or hazard my selfe to a doubt∣lesse destruction. 
Brammadon
 vttered these last words with such a wonderous vehemency of spirit, as the whole assem∣bly both admired and admitted what he had counselled. And thereupon, with great ioy they stedfastly resolued, so soone as the blushing morne appeared next; by their sodaine as∣saults, to bring confusion on the Christians, & by the spee∣dy conquering of 
Constantinople,
 to make all 
Grecia
 desti∣tute of any fortified place of refuge, for to repugne them in their attemptings.






CHAP. XXIIII.




¶ How the Christians, by the politicke counsell of Duke 
Za∣bier
 of 
Alcazar,
 were vanquished by the Infidels; the Em∣perour 
Claranax,
 the Empresse, the king of 
Bohemia,
 and all the Estates of 
Greece
 put in stronge prisons and mana∣cled; the 
Constantinopolitans
 forced by tortures and feare of death, to belieue in 
Mahomet:
 And how by the so∣daine arriuall of the wise 
Magartes,
 the knight of the sea knewe himselfe to be a Christian.




Z
ABIER,
 the good ould Duke of 
Alca∣azar,
 though hee well had proued by ex∣perience, that haste bringeth wast; yet he determined willingly not to affront ey∣ther 
Brammadon,
 or any of the others, in their resolues. Neuerthelesse, as one somwhat displeased, that y
e
 whole coun∣sell had so rashly consented vnto the youthfull vnaduised deuise of 
Brammadon;
 as to surmise the sodaine surprise of 
Constantinople
 (wherein the better part of the powerfull prowesse of Christendome was strongly engarrisonned: he

 turned to the one side, as a male content, from the company of such young Counsellers: and leaning his arme vpon his helmet, he there rested in a melancholie dumpe; vntill, se∣ing both the kings, 
Tomarin
 and 
Tangut,
 with silence to expect his verdicte (as one whome they knewe most prudent) w
t
 his snow-white hand, smoothing downe his whiter beard, he grauely endeauoured in this sort better to aduise them; 


It is not vnknowne vnto ye (my noble Lords) how at that time the Emperour 
Claranax,
 with his millions of manful Chri∣stians, embattelled himselfe against the armed bands of 
Tu∣nis,
 I bouldly met him in the face, & not only cōbatted him, but woūded him in the head very sorely: yet I but little pre∣uailed: for I scaped not scarrelesse (I assure ye) in my enter∣prise. Also at the battels of 
Tangur
 and 
Tabarca,
 I bouldly bad him battell, and hand to hand three times in one after∣noone affronted him; but to no purpose. For by my vnaduised rashnesse, I stil lost more then I gained, & went away w
t
 the disaduantage; yea, euen when I had my enemies at most aduantage.


The Christian Emperour 
Claranax
 (my worthy Countri∣men) is not only warlike, but wary, wise and wily: & is not therefore to be dealt withall so rashly and headily, as any of our neighbouring nations, in 
Barbarie, Lidia,
 or the rude 
A∣rabians,
 y
e
 foster themselues in the desert wildernesses, by base pillage & petty pilfry; whom in a moment, w
t
 a band of Laū∣ciers, or at the most w
t
 a small army, ye may presently put ei∣ther to the flight or the foile. But, this nation w
t
 whom wee now contend, are Christians: whose forces wee haue (to our costs) so throughly felt, as they seeme in armes, rather to bee like those valiant 
Heroes
 their auncestours (on whose helmet creasts, is engrauen 
Assured victory
) then to haue fetched their pedigree from puling 
Paris,
 who more delighted in amours then in armours; as one who cared not for bloody 
Bellona,
 so he might enioy his harmelesse 
Helena,
 to dally with. These are no such simple soules (O ye worthy knights of 
Africa
) & therefore not to be dealt withall scarbugge-like, as young 
Brammadon
 would haue thē. For it is not one battels losse will ouercome them: but sundry slight skirmishes, y
t
 must

 first weaken them: for they are both prewe and pollitique,
 ha∣uing some of their knights in armes, whilest others be in am∣bush. And therfore, it is ill for vs, with the eagre mastiffe, to venture to far in pursuite after the subtill Panther; least, vn∣awares entangled within his renting pawes, we finde our selues subiect to ineuitable daunger, and destruction.


Oceander
 harkened most attentiuely to the briefe oration of the good ould Duke of 
Alcaazar;
 who had no sooner ended, but 
by y
e
 holy 
Alcheron, Zabier
 (quoth he) thy counsell is both politicke and profitable: for hereby we may both weaken the 
Constantinopolitans,
 and yer long (
Mahomet
 and his holie Angels fauouring vs) take them at such aduantage, as all the prisons in 
Greece
 may easily be filled with their captiue carcasses.


Hereunto the whole counsell condescended: and thereu∣pon each one departed to his owne pauilion; except 
Tomarin, Tangut,
 the knight of y
e
 Sea and 
Zabieir:
 who,
 with their pa∣ges & six other attendāt knights, secretly stale out of y
e
 campe, & poasted to the city: which they saw so exceedingly wel wat∣ched & warded w
t
 bands of souldiers at that time, as they all wondered to see the Christians so vigilāt in their defēcings. Whereupon, 
Tomarin
 (quoth 
Tangut
) I would to the Gods my men had bin Christians, on y
t
 condition they would thus safely haue guarded themselues from their 
Grecian
 surprise∣ments. Wherat they al fetched a deepe sigh, & speedily depar∣ted to their campe again. Where they were no sooner entred, but they might perceiue on their pauilions, the brightsome glimmering of the blushing morning, to bid good morrowe to those Martialistes, whose eyelids y
e
 drowsie slumbers of y
e
 former night had neuer closed. When, speedily & prouidētly embattelling their souldiers, before it was fully daylight. 
Brammadon, Xamaru,
 & 
Taliertez
 tooke their way, w
t
 a strong battaglion of 3000. stout and valiant souldiers (as spéedily as they could) vnto a little nooke of y
e
 forrest, adioyning w
t
in half a league of 
Cōstantinople.
 Within whose bushy entrails they closely enambushed themselues; whilest y
e
 knight of the Sea, 
Bamaru, Tomarin,
 & a selected battaglion of 
Tunis
 marched celerously forward, to encoūter their Christiā enemies. Who

 (vnder the generall conduction, of the wounded Prince of 
Hungary, Labasto
 of 
Sparta,
 and Prince 
Curan
 of 
Thessaly,
 with their eager bands of 
Huns, Moldauians, Bulgarians, Bo∣hemians, Budans, Transiluanians,
 & angry 
Spartans
) had war∣likely enraunged themselues in battell aray, against the ap∣proaching of their reproachfull aduersaries of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur:
 whose hearts were enflamed with such an ardent de∣sire of reuenging their Religion, and the death of their slain friendes and brethren in the last daies conflicte; as like en∣raged Lions (running furiously to pray vpon an hearde of Neat, or Buffins) they marched fiercely against their Pa∣gan foes. When, with their Launces in their rests, each side charged the other so strongly, as at y
e
 first encounter, sixteene of either part, were quight borne out of their saddles: amongst whom 
Curan
 and 
Tomarin
 accompanied their foyled fellow souldiers. But 
Tomarin
 in a moment receiued his horse a∣gaine, at the hands of 
Oceander:
 who with almost an hūdreth couragious knights, endeauoured w
t
 all might and maine to repell the irresistable furie of the 
Spartans.
 Who (hauing hemmed in strongly on all sides, amongst them, 
Bamaru
 & the knight of the sea, whom they most enuied) crying all aloud; The death of 
Ismerion
 of 
Sparta,
 shall this day be reuenged: w
t
 one accord they lashed so furiously on y
e
 misbeleeuing Sa∣rasens; as, though the knight of the sea wrought wonders, in wounding and killing them without ceasing; yet they so desperately pressed vpon him; as, had not 
Bramma∣don, Xamaru,
 and 
Taliartez
 discouered themselues the soo∣ner out of their ambushe
 (maugre his magicke armour) hee had been in a moment, either taken prisoner, or heawen into a thousand pieces: so exceeding dreadful were the angry for∣ces of the enraged knightes of 
Sparta,
 for the reuenge∣ment of the vntimely death of their young Prince 
Ismerion.


In the meane time, 
Tomarin
 and 
Bamaru
 were neither idle nor knightly occupied: for with multitudes of pittilesse Pagans, they inuironed the good Prince 
Curan
 in such strong, & straunge manner amongst them; as, being on foote, and the Sarazens all horsed, hee had much adoe, of a long while, to settle one sound blowe vpon any of his aduersaries:

 vntill by the happy helpe of the young Prince 
Morcauill,
 his enemies thicke set troopes were forcibly broken: and foure of the mightiest Sarasens beeing quite vnhorsed, hee was speedily remounted on a stronge 
Barbarian
 palfrey, whose maisters head he payd for y
e
 horse hire. When with his cour∣sers heeles making some rome amongst them, he smote a big knight named 
Tleas,
 so smart a blowe ouer the left thigh, as cutting it quite from the loynes, hee made him quickly to leaue his saddle to the sauegard of some vnhorsed Christian. And therewithall, ioyning side to side with the Prince of 
Hungarie,
 they heawed such a lane, through y
e
 thick troupes of the misbelieuing enemies, as within the space of a quar∣ter of an houre, they quite freede thēselues from the furies of the diuelish Pagans.


But alas, they could not long enioy such happily en∣franchised libertie.


For now approacheth the pitious period of all their ge∣nerous proceedings. 
Oceander
 is at hand (freede, & hauing foyled and confounded his 
Spartan
 opponentes, slaine 
La∣bastoe,
 and slaughtered almost euery of his souldiers) with his faucheon 
Scindifer,
 reaking with luke-warme blood of new-slaine christians. Who brādishing it aboue his helme, lent such a right-downe blowe vppon the 
Hungarian
 Prin∣ces helmet; as, battering it into his braine-panne,
 hee sent him headlong vnto the colde earth. Whose yellowe dust (as pittying the innocent young Princes death) gathered into clottered balles, before the mouth of his bleeding wounde: which straungely seeking to stop, it neuer ceased till it selfe was drowned in the bloody gore of the slaine young Gen∣tleman. Whose executioner the God of heauen forgiue: for when hee strake the stroake, he knewe not that hee wrought the downefall of his dearest kinsman. At whose death, the Prince of 
Thessalie
 was so enflamed with desire of re∣uenge, as (not regarding the multitudes of his mischieuing enemies) he roughly rushed into the thickest squadrons of 
Barbarians:
 and with his trustie courtleaxe he layed so lusti∣ly about him, as he neuer lent blow that lighted in vaine; his brandished sword bringing assured death to his opponents:

 so as, before he once so much as rested, hee brought eleuen of his resisting foes to ground; with his owne hands, still ma∣king an easie way, for his almost slaughtered souldiers, to follow him through. But what preuaile doughty deedes, against death? or a warlike Martialist against a more wor∣thy 
Mars? Oceāder,
 with a fatall furie, hath crossed him tho∣rough the troupes, and by the brandishing of his cutting courtleaxe, hath summoned his sweete soule to take flight from his earthely prison house. For, with such an irresistable furie the faucheon descended vppon 
Curans
 cuirace, as par∣ting it in peeces, it buried his cursed blade in the bowels of his christian stomacke: which, belching out his life togither with his bloud, bad a sorrowfull farewell to his more then sorrowfullest souldiers. Who like good subiects neuer ioy∣ed, vnreuenged to after-liue their slaughtered Soueraigne: but, desperately dispersing themselues amongst their ene∣mies, they ioyfully dyed, in effecting of their reuengefull re∣solutions,
 after the slaughter of more then fourteene hun∣dreth stout 
Barbarians.


In this sort, from day to day, did the good fortune of the christians cōtinually decline; so as, the good old Emperour, perceiuing no happie helpe for his helplesse hap, remained in a most melācholy pensiuenesse, as one who had lost himselfe in some desert wildernesse; where, not hauing what to re∣lieue him he determineth to banish his breath from his body by dolefull dumpishnesse: such and so sorrowfull was the good Emperour, for the emprisement of 
Rubaldo,
 death of prince 
Morcauil,
 losse of his friends, slaughter of his subiects, ruin of his Realme, & sodaine confusion of all christendome. The meditating on which miseries so mightily massacred his soule; as, had he not been of the greater wisedome, & had y
e
 surer confidence in the power of his God, to whom nothing can be impossible, it had been almost impossible for him, to haue any long time, kept his life & body togith
r. Neuer∣thelesse, with y
e
 assiduous thought of his thronging misfor∣tunes, he was so exceedingly vexed, as in his agonie hee seemed more like some anatomie; then as he was, the ge∣nerous, worthy and thrice excellent Emperour 
Clara∣nax.


 Whose sorrowes dayly more and more encreased, in such abundance, as it was a wonder to see the excesse of his extreamities, like an vnhealeable vlcer, still to en∣crease; whilest his power, pleasure, and princely pompe de∣cayed, ceased and decreased.


And euen in the middest of these his mischiefes, his enemies pressed, and oppressed, towardes his Cit∣tie, and subiects, in such huge multitudes; as, hauing encompassed 
Constantinople
 in, on all sides,
 and by their narrowe watchinges, disappointed the Cittizens of all further prouision of victualling necessaries, they penned them in, like a flocke of sillie sheepe, with∣in the encompassing circlings of deuouring Leopardes: whose staying brought staruing, and whose egresse as∣sured daunger, destruction and death. In these infinities of extreamitie; O God therefore, at last take pittie and compassion of thy distressed seruants pitious perplexities; that by their foile receiued of their remorselesse ene∣mies, thy owne honour, and thy sweete Sonne Iesus Christes glorie may neuer fall, or bee defiled with the filthie and horrible blasphemies, that will proceede out of the malitious mouthes of misbelieuing and faithlesse Sarrasens: from whose power, if of thy gracious good∣nesse, thou doest not protect thy deare children, vndoubt∣edly, euen in a moment, all christendome shalbe conuerted vnto Maumetrie.


But, least wee seeme herein too redious, let vs now re∣uert our stile to the last act of this lamentable storie, or ra∣ther dolefull Tragedie.


After that (to their no little ioy) the plagues of 
Europe,
 y
t
 misbelieuing Pagans, had in many skirmishes (by the vnmatchable chiualrie of that same choyce flower of Knighthood, thrice exquisite 
Oceander
) sequestered all good fortune from the proceedinges of the pent vp 
Grecians;
 and that they perfectly perceiued the 
quondam
 power of the christians, to be in such straunge sort dimi∣nished; as only w
t
in the circuit of the wals of 
Cōstantinople,


 there were remaining but thirtie or fortie thousand figh∣ting souldiers (most of which number were eyther pined w
t
 hunger euen vnto the boanes,
 or preiudiced so in their bo∣dies by woundes, as they were not able to make any strong resistance) they waxed continually more boulder & boulder in bidding battaile to their vnabiding enemies: who rather sought, if it were possible, by peace to pro∣cure some happy conclusion; thē by conflicting any more, to bring their Citties & religion to confusion. Yet notwith∣standing, such was the vncontrouled courage of the ould Emperour 
Claranax:
 as though he should haue dyed, he could not in such cowardly sort refraine from affronting of his fu∣rious foes. And therfore commanding his souldiers to spee∣dy armes; with the good aged king 
Fyardon
 of 
Bohemia,
 the couragious Princes 
Arcanio, Tholon, Thiorin,
 & the young Duke 
Siranius
 of 
Athens,
 brother of murthered 
Meroander
 (whom y
e
 Emperour 
Claranax
 the selfe same day, with other three of his his companions named 
Riscian, Lebarano,
 and 
Yponto,
 had ennobled with y
e
 honourable order of Knight∣hood) he marched warlikely out of the gates of 
Constanti∣nople,
 towards the camp of the 
Africans.
 With whose num∣berlesse multitudes, before he would ioyne in conflict (cau∣sing a little mount of turues to be raised by his pioners) with a stronge voice and a chearefull countenaunce, hee in this wise began to comfort vp his almost disconsolate soul∣diers: who hauing settled themselues in order round about him, with greedy eares attended, to his following orati∣on.


My deare friends, & faithfull followers, though I am as∣sured of your high valours, and that your courages are vn∣controulable: yet, that in your haughty hearts centre, no one thought of childish and cowardly feare might (by rea∣son of the multitude of your heathen enemies) once enter, I can in no wise refraine or retaine my tongue, frō telling you your duties in such distressefulnesse. Hearken therefore vnto the wordes of your deare soueraigne, my most dutifull sub∣iects: and embrace, with ioy, what I shall relate with ioy∣fulnesse of soule: if to your soules comforts my exhortatiue

 speeches may penetrate into your hearts, which misfortune hath macerated, and vnheard-of hard mishap hath made (I feare-me) heauie vnto destructiō. 
 At which word, y
e
 teares fell in such abundance from his eyes; as, for a while being vna∣ble to proceede any further, he leaned himselfe on the arme of the young Prince 
Arcanio:
 but by the sorrowfull sighing of the christian souldiers, beeing somewhat mooued, at last (sighes lending leaue) he once againe prepared himselfe to his former proposed taske: 
But God be our guide, and as his will shal be, so let our wills be: and though hee haue a great while turned his face aside from vs, yet let vs still hope that he hath not cast vs into these perrils, to cast our liues into perditiō: but rather, by making our foes to triumph ouer vs, at the last by their sodaine confusion, to worke his name e∣uerlasting glorie. Which though for a space, I see it must be dimmed with the darkesome dreggs of 
Paganry
 and 
Barba∣risme;
 yet I hope he will not altogither forget the faith∣full, or suffer his chosen children to beare the intollera∣ble yoake of heathenish thraldome. Which (if it bee his holy pleasure wee should endure) let vs not shrinke aside, or bee dismayde at the matter: but rather with vnaffrigh∣ted hearts, and constant courages, let these same baser parts of our selues (our soules hatefull prison houses) willingly sustaine the shamefull seruitude, whereto our maker, hath appointed vs. I speake not this neuerthelesse (deare friendes and associates) to disswade you from your hero∣icke and worthy resolutions, or to perswade you to most co∣wardly yielding vnto your enemies, or to prostrate your selues submissiuely, before the proudest of the Pagan Po∣tentates. For, farre be it from me, to wishe your thraldome, especially, seruilely to subiect your selues (yea, and also your sweete soules) to such shame and slauerie: for whose libertie and the glorie of our Religion (against the prou∣dest hee, that dareth) euen from my cradle. I haue v
wed to loose the dearest member of my poore carcasse: which this day (God willing) shall eyther be heawen in peeces amongst my enemies, or else returne victorious in the hap∣pie ouerthrowe of the common aduersaries of all christen∣dome:

 which God, of his goodnesse graunt vnto me. 
 The good Emperour 
Claranax
 hauing ended, his souldiers shut vp his oration with such a shr
ll iteration of 
Amen,
 as both hills and dales ecchoed with resoūding.
 When (by reason of the fast approaching of the Pagan armie) euery one repay∣ring vnto his ensigne; before the rest, the foure newe made Knights 
Siranius, Riscion, Libarano,
 and 
Yponto,
 stepping out before the Emperour 
Claranax,
 fell downe on their knées, & most humbly begged to bee honoured with the first encounter. Whereunto the Emperour condescending, they speedily mounted their stronge limbed coursers: on whose backes, at once, each seemed to the behoulding 
Gre∣cians
 (like as a second 
Perseus
 on his winged 
Pegasus
) to flie before their fellowes for greedinesse of the first onset: with such a furious swiftnesse their vertuous emulations caused them to poast vnto their enemies squadrons. A∣gainst whome came pricking out 
Zamaru, Vibrante,
 and two other mighty Pagans, with such wondrous fiercenesse, as the very ground seemed to tremble vnder the battering houes of their well timbred palfreyes: betwixt whome the onset was giuen with such his resolution:
 as, bra∣sting their knottie speares euen to their gauntlets, they see∣med to haue dymmed the aire with the seuerall shiuers of their stiuered launces; whilest they passed by each other, not without sufficient tokens of their approoued valours, encharactred vpon their gorgets. When at once, vn∣sheathing their keene Courtleares, they renewed their cruell combate: wherein each one of them behaued him∣selfe with such dexteritie; as the whole armies aswell 
Africans,
 as Christians, wondered at their angrie acti∣ons.


And now by this time, y
e
 battaglion that was ledde by the Princes 
Arcanio
 and 
Tholon,
 ioyned so strongly with 
Brammadons
 regiment of 
Barbarians;
 as at the first shocke, sixteene of their side were quite throwne to the grounde, and 
Tholon
 and 
Bawrant
 (with whome hee encountred) enforced both to make a pillowe of their palfreyes croupes, to saue themselues from a shamefull falling. On the o∣ther

 side, the stronge battaglions of 
Tunis
 and 
Tangur,
 vn∣der y
e
 cōduct of incomparable 
Oceander,
 marched forward,
 to cope with the Emperour and the Kinge of 
Bohemias
 regiments. Betwixt whom there beganne so hote a conflict, as not any of them (except the Knight of Sea, whose speare bare death vnto his opponent) escaped hurtlesse from the incounter. For the ould Kinge 
Fiardon,
 being the first (by reason of the swiftnesse of his horse) that incountred, mette 
Tomarin
 so strongly vppon the cuirace, as pear∣cing his brasen armour, he brake off the head of his launce, against the breast-bone of the Pagan potentate: who on the other side, so aduenterously affronted the 
Bo∣hemian
 King, as he bare both horse & man almost on the earth. Wherewith, 
Fiardon
 was so greatly bruised, as he was faine presently to depart aside out of the battaile, for to breath himselfe. Which the Emperour 
Claranax
 se∣ing: Ha, deare God (quoth he, with a great sighe) what pittie is it of my deare cousen of 
Bohemias
 age-caused weakenesse! good ould man, I shall reuenge thee on thy boysterous opponent: and therewithall (thinking to haue learned the Pagan King, a lesson for his ouer-bould en∣counter) he leaueld his launce with such vnusuall strength against him; as, had not 
Bamaru
 the sodainlyer st
pped in betweene them, hee had fully requited the foyle, receiued by the King 
Fiardon.
 For he so couragiously charged 
Ba∣maru,
 as (for all by the Pagans assault hee lost the stirrops and was wounded in one of his thighes) hee bare him, without once breaking of his launce, cleane out of his sad∣dle to y
e
 earth: where, had not a band of sturdie Sarasēs come speedily vnto his rescue, hee had there been eyther slaine or taken prisoner.


In the meane while, the vndomptable Knight of the Sea, and 
Thiorin
 mette one another with such a stronge carreiere; as, 
Thiorin
 breaking his launce in a thow∣sande shiuers vpon the Knight of the Seas helmette, hee receiued 
Oceanders
 speare vppon his three-foulde shielde. Which vnable to withstand the death bringing

 sharpenesse,
 yeelded way to the steely point; vntill (hauing peirced quite through and through the 
Bohemiās
 armed bo∣die the same stack halfe a yard out behinde his backe, to the great wonder of the christians; who, neuer since the com∣bate of the Emperour 
Claranax
 and the king 
Fyardō,
 against the sterne Gyants 
Rhombort
 and 
Ramorin,
 in defence of the Queene 
Gyloria,
 of England had once behelde so strange an accident.


But, the Knight of the Sea neuer stayed with that en∣counter: but like a wood Lyon, or some mountaine Tigre, he fiercely rushed into the thickest troopes of christians, and with the selfe same speare, wherewith he slewe 
Thiorin,
 hee so valourously assailed his resistantes, as before it brake, hee vnhorsed eleauen 
Constantinopolitā
 knights: and then, wre∣sting a stronge launce from an attending 
Moore,
 he so cou∣ragiously behaued himselfe therewith; as, w
t
out resting, he sent three 
Bohemian
 Knights, both horse and man, to mea∣sure their lengthes vppon the ground.


Which 
Fiardon
 aduising, Oh, deare Lord of Heauen, (quoth he) what wonders doth yonder Knight in the wat∣chet armour, w
t
 the goldē rockes performe against vs! Sure∣ly, if his arme faile him not the sooner, I shall stand in doubt of our vtter ouerthrowe: wherewithall, the Knight of the Sea charged a stronge 
Athenian
 named 
Maxetes,
 with such sure, as he bare him vp by plaine force, at the p
int of his speare, welnigh three quarters of a yard, from his horseback. Who was no sooner recouered vpon his feete againe, but that, Knight of the Sea (quoth he) now will I trie, whether thy fortune be so good on foote as on horsebacke: and there∣with running his sword vp vnto the hiltes, in 
Oceanders
 Stéedes bellie, he made y
e
 valorous Knight of the Sea, in spight of his teeth, to dismount himselfe vnto him. Whose haughty heart, vnable to brooke such an horrible iniurie, in∣censed him w
t
 multitudes of angrie thoughts: which boyled in such wondrous wise w
t
in his breast, as his eyes sparkled w
t
 fire, & out of his mouth (togither w
t
 these dreadfull words) proceeded abundance of smoke; which like to a thicke miste, conducted these terrible tidinges, out at the loope holes of

 his beauer; Now by 
Mahomet
 (vnknightly Christian) if my good sworde hould, thou shalt full dearely aby thy perpe∣trated villany, in slaying of my palfrey. Wherwith the furi∣ous fostersonne of 
Carthaginian Kanira,
 smote such a stroke vpon the helmet of the 
Athenian;
 as, cleauing his helme and head asunder, the biting steele neuer stayed, vntill in the bowels of poore 
Maxetes
 body,
 it had buried it selfe in a bloo∣die sepulture. At which sorrowfull spectacle, the Christian souldiers were so exceedingly amazed, as by little and lit∣tle they gaue ground to their following foes; and in short time would haue fled; had not the god king 
Fiardon,
 after his breathing space, once more put in amongst them; and like a good Chiefetaine, sought rather to forsake his life, then forgoe his souldiers, in such extreamitie. Wherefore, with his faucheon in his fist, and his shield on his arme, hee speedily rode vnto the place where 
Oceander
 remained vn∣horsed: when, calling vnto him; 
Sir knight (quoth the good king of 
Bohemia
) induced therto by thy vertue, though thy foe, and hostile enemie; yet enuying that any one should tri∣umphe in thy misfortune-caused ouerthrow, I shall quick∣ly deliuer thee from the daunger of thy enemies horses feete; that with the greater glory I may bouldly boast of my got∣ten victory. Hould thee therfore (quoth he) and on the prepo∣sed condition, remount thee on this same 
Barbarian
 Palfrey:
 and therewith he deliuered him a strong and tall Courser, which he had wonne at one ful blow from a stout 
Moroccan:
 whose shoulder depriued of the head, spewed out a streame of bloody goare, vpon the dustie grounde; which willingly dranke vp the purple floude that flowed, from such a forced fountaine.


Oceander,
 though he could not chuse but wonder at 
Fi∣ardons
 vnprofitable curtesie; yet he would not refuse his so gentle offer, especially standing in neede at that time of such an happie adiuver. And therefore, taking the horse by the raignes, hee lightly mounted vp into the saddle: & then approaching to the king of 
Bohemia,
 Now sir knight (quoth he) wil you I should performe the promise I made vnto you? Yea, replyed 
Fiardon.
 Surely (answered the knight of

 the sea) then, thought it might seeme a point of discurtesie to do so; yet since you wil needes haue it so, I shal willingly condescend to satisfie your fancie: prepare your selfe ther∣fore for the encounter. You shall be welcome, said 
Fiardon:
 & thereupon they buckled together so fiercely, as if two hun∣gry Panthers had bin contending for some gotten prey:
 & w
t
 such exceeding strength, with their keene-edged Curtelaxes, they vnceasingly lashed on one anothers helmet, as it seemed they were al on fire, w
t
 the sparkles that were raised by their furies. When, 
Fiardon
 (angry to be so long in such a simple combat) lifted vp Queene 
Gilorias
 sharpe slicing fauchon, and therewith smote the knight of the sea, so sound a buffet on the beauer; as, had not his age made him crazed (for all his enchaūted armour) he would at that same blowe, haue either slaine him outright, or so amazed him, as all y
e
 Chirurgeons in Europe, w
t
 their 
Esculapian
 skill, should neuer haue beene able to heale him againe. Neuerthelesse, the same descended not so lightly, but y
t
 it made the knight of the sea not onely to stagger, but also to embrace his horse necke, to saue himselfe frō falling. But recouering himselfe, now by y
e
 holy 
Alcheron
 (quoth he) I shall not be behinde hand w
t
 thee for my paie∣ment: and therewithal raising himselfe vp in his stirrops, he lent y
e
 good ould king of 
Bohemia
 so sound a blowe vpon the shield; as, parting it quight in two pieces, the sword neuer stayed, til it vncreasted his helmet. With the heauinesse of whose fal, 
Fiardon
 was so amazed; as in a swoun he lay stil on his Cou
ser, vntill, by the commaundement of 
Oceander,
 he was carried captiue vnto 
Tomarins
 pauilion: whilest y
e
 more then thrice renouned son of 
Olbiocles,
 followed eagrely after his flying enemies; whom to the very gates of 
Constanti∣nople,
 with a great slaughter, hee swiftly pursued.


As here, so in all parts of the battel, the 
Grecians
 and 
Bo∣hemians
 went to the worst. For, where the fower new dub∣bed knights of 
Athens, Siranius, Riscion, Libarano,
 & 
Vponto
 were in combat against 
Xamaru, Vibrant, Accoell,
 & 
Norlas,
 the battel went so disastrously against them; as, though 
Sira∣nius
 and 
Libarano,
 had slaine their opponents 
Vibrant
 and 
Norlas,
 and the other two had sorely wounded 
Accoell
 & 
Xa∣maru;


 yet they were at last so wōderfully weakened, not on∣ly with the offending and defending of their enemies, and friends; but also with y
e
 abundance of bloud that issued in no small quantitie out of their broad woundes at the be∣ginning of the combat, their strengthes so exceedingly de∣creased, as in spight of their vncontrouled courages, they were faine submissiuely to prostrate themselues, and their liues to the doubtfull mercy of the misbeleeuing Pagans. Who, not a little glad of their gotten victory, sending them altogether (with the deade bodies of 
Vibrante
 and 
Norlas
) vnto their brother 
Brammadons
 tent Royall, they present∣ly rushed into the middest of the 
Athenian
 regiments, with such puissance; as, maugre their couragious magnanimi∣ties, the Christians were faine to graunt themselues con∣quered; and by base flight,
 to seeke to saue their wretched liues, frō y
e
 furies of their wicked oppressours. Which when y
t
 prew Prince 
Arcanio
 (who was doing miracles of Chiual∣ry against his Pagan enemies) perceiued, with such a fell fury, he stoutly opposed himselfe, and his band of 
Bohemi∣ans,
 before the face of the Pagan pursuers; as, at the first shocke, hee ouerturned 
Accoell,
 both horse and rider to the earth: and then, puissantly passing on further, with the selfe same Launce, hee charged a gyantlike Saracen, so full v∣pon the breastplate; as, piercing him into the stomach, he so∣dainely made him tumble headlong vnto the ground Which 
Bawrant
 (who was in combat with one-armed 
Tolon
) adui∣sing, hee at vnawares assaulted 
Arcanio
 behinde, with such vnknighty fiercenesse; as, pearcing him quite through the right shoulder, he bare him halfe deade, cleane to the ground. Which vnchampion like assault, & treacherous stercenesse, braue-minded 
Brammadon,
 not without blushing,
 behould∣ing; with his sharpe sword he so soūdly executed his vigorous virtue, vpon y
e
 traitour 
Bawrantes
 helmet; as, parting it to the beauer, he made him too late repēt his but lately offered iniu∣ry. With which his virtuous valour & true knightly prowesse, 
Acanio
 was so amazed, as he presently deliuered vp his sword vnto his hands; & yielded himselfe & his safety,
 prisoner to so praise worthy a vāquisher; who speedily sent him to accōpany Fiardon,

 his distressed father. Betweene whom, and the king 
Rubaldo
 of 
Hungary,
 and other Christian Captiues, what sad con∣gratulations passed (for that I hast towards an end of this my first part of the history) I will not stand to relate, nei∣ther can they long remaine in it. For within lesse then the third part of a quarter of an hower,
 there entered 
Toma∣rin
 all wounded into their pauilions, in such grieuous, sort; as with a ioyfull hope of some better fortune, to betide the good Emperour 
Claranax,
 against his Pagan foes, they were halfe amazed: each one in his heart most earnestly so∣liciting the Almightiest of all mighties, to sende his happie succour, at last to second the cruell conflict of the discouraged Christians, against the barbarous 
Barbarians:
 when presently they heard such a ioyfull shout in the Chri∣stian armies; as, if the victory had wholy vaded from the 
Moores,
 and aduanced it selfe miraculously among the 
Gre∣cians.
 Wherefore, their hearts daunced for ioy within their brests; which held an assured hope, that now at length their happie freedome should be regained, their oppressours repel∣led, and so great a plague as (if God defended not) was like∣ly to infect all Christendome, should be quite and cleane, e∣uen before the declyning of the daies illuminatour, into the westerne Ocean, be abelled, and expelled. But alas, such their hope was sodainely frustrated. For, as by the appro∣ching of the Prince 
Olbiocles
 (whose ague the fearefull a∣gony of the subuersion of all Christendome, had straungely banished) together with the ould Queene 
Zaama
 of 
Bohe∣mia
 (who hearing of her husband 
Fiardons
 harmes, had ta∣ken armes 
Amazon
-like, for his reuengement) the retiring 
Bohemians
 and 
Athenians
 were againe reduced into their martiall order;
 and the battell on the 
Grecians
 side, was ranke by ranke couragiously begun a fresh against their e∣nemies; so as those that got groūd lately, were now growen to be good inough for their pursuers; whome they continu∣ally chased, with a newe encreased slaughter: Euen so a∣gaine, the stout Queene 
Zaama
 of 
Bohemia,
 being ouermat∣ched, by the valour and youthfull vigour of a lustie 
Afri∣can,
 named 
Caliartez
 (who had quite vnbuckled her haber∣geon)

 in one place; and in another, the worthy (though sore weakened) Prince of 
Grecia,
 fighting couragiously, in the reskewe of his captiued father 
Claranax,
 with 
Oceander;
 being ouermastred, and made captiue;
 the fortune of Chri∣stendome began to shewe a newe face; and the dicomfited souldiers, casting down their weapons, to betake themselues to most speedie retreate. Wherein,
 being swiftly followed by the Infidels, after great slaughter, they were forced to submit themselues vnto the mercy of the bloudthirstie 
Bar∣barians;
 who would haue put them euery mothers child vnto the sworde; had not their diuelish furies beene contradicted, by the dreadfull frownes of their knightly conductours: who, by the commaundement of the illustrious knight of the sea, causing all the Christian prisoners, as wel noble, as ignoble, to bee manacled together, marched faire and softly towards the gates of 
Constantinople:
 where what multitudes of mournefull Matrons,
 angellike companies of beautifull Ladies, and sorrowfull troopes of oppressed Orphanes, and age-wearied fathers, came basely cre
ping on their bare knees, to begge their liues pardon at the handes of their hauty conquerours, it were both tedious to recite, and in∣credible to be beleeued.


For none there was, but those that scornd


To bowe at fortunes frowne,


That did refuse for to confesse


Themselues for ouerthrowne.


Wherefore in anger all enrag'd,


The Pagans them apply,


To set resistants to a taske


Of long captiuitie:


So as that prisons euery one


Were fill'd with Christians store,


As none should haue beene empty left,


Had there beene many more.


Amongst the rest, is 
Claranax,


Fiardon,
 and their wiues,


With children, friends, and subiectes chiefe,




Adiudg'd to leade their liues,


In dungeons deepe, where darknesse still


doth light of heauen expell,


Whilest that they iustly represent


The lightlesse caues of hell.


Where they must fettred still remaine,


Vntill to 
Mahounds
 lawe,


They would become obedient,


And liue in fearefull awe.


Which whosoeuer did embrace,


With willingnesse of minde,


Not onely life, but lawfull loue


He did 'mongst Pagans finde.


Which was the cause, that multitudes


Forsooke their Sauiours best,


And to the patched 
Alcheron,


Their confidence addrest:


Which to the good, what griefe it caus'd,


It cannot be exprest.


OF which their endurāce, God (of his infinite & incom∣parable goodnesse) at last taking mercifull compassiō, he gratiously stretched out his hand to help his seruants; & lent leaue, that at last his chosen people might bee miracu∣lously defended by him, by whome their state, religion, and libertie, had been earst so exceedingly endammaged and of∣fended. For now was the time come, when to knowe his father, & acknowledge himselfe vnto his kinsfolkes: whome he had no sooner emprisoned, manacled, and enthralled, but that there arriued before him, in the base-court of the Em∣perours palace, the wise woman, and learned Ladye en∣chauntresse, 
Magartez,
 accompanied with a great troupe of most valiant 
Carthaginian
 Knights (whose spangled plumes of diuerse-coloured feathers, chumbrating y
e
 steely creastes of their gilded helmetts, shewed in semblance, like war∣like 
Mars
 his burganets, ouer-shadowed w
t
 goldē tressalines of his 
Paphian
 faire paramoure) who falling prostrate before his armed feete, in this sort deliuered she her Ambassage:




Braue Knight of the Sea, that God that ruleth all that he made, and made all that is, preserue (for his deare sonnes sake Iesus Christ, the sacred sauiour of all belieuing soules) preserue I say, the gracious 
Kanira,
 the happy (yea thereby thrice happy) mother of thee so fortunate a foster-child.


Oceander,
 hearing the wise woman to greete him w
t
 such a christian salutation, knewe not what to iudge of the mat∣ter: but wondring at the manner, hee stoode still in a maze; vntill 
Magartez
 proceeding on forward in her speech, in this sort, awaked him out of his melancholy muses.


What? doe you wonder my gracious Lord at this? one∣ly because I greete you like a christian? Madame, quoth he, I doe and stand amated at the strangenesse of the accident. Then will you meruaile more, replied the wise Lady, when you shall assuredly vnderstand, that you your selfe are a chri∣stian; and with your valour, shall hereafter defende the de∣cayed estate of christendome; yea, & that thou shalt bee heire to the Empire of 
Greece
 and 
Constantinople.


Surely (answered 
Oceander
) it may bee so: but I as∣sure you I cannot easily belieue it. No? quoth shee, you will tell mee another tale, by that time you haue per∣used the contentes of this scrowle: and therewith shee gaue him the brasen scroule of 
Artimagus:
 (which you be∣fore hearde, was giuen to the custody of 
Magartez,
 being charmed with such admirable skill, as it could neuer bee opened by any man, but 
Oceander;
 neyther by his owne selfe vntill such time as hee had done his parentes the greatest wronge that could bee) which the Knight of the Sea receiuing at her handes, and with great and spee∣die facilitie opening, he might perceiue therein, not with∣out great arte encharactered, this following relation of his royall birth and noble Parentage.










¶ TO THE MOST EXQVISITE OCEANDER.




I


HAppie atchieuer of each harde aduenture,


Illustrious Sea-knight, vnto thine assaies


Fortune is bound to crosse each disaduenture,


That shall oppose it selfe against thy praise.






II


For that great God that rules the azure sky


By mighty hand and power puissant;


As hee for thee hath giuen his sonne to die:


So let him his grace in thy heart emplant.






III


That after thou shalt come to be of powre,


And matchlesse force, thou maist be knowne to bee


The worthy Grand-childe of that Emperour,


That rules all 
Greece
 in Christianitie.






IIII


Thou maiest giue honour to his deitie,


That hath preseru'd thee to this happie time,


To free thy country from the tyranny


Of strong Vsurpers, of a straunger clime.






V


Which when by these lines thou shalt vnderstand,


See that thou straight it to redresse endeauer:


But first thy parents free: then out of hand,


In thy attempted enterprise perseuer.


And then that God that made and gouerns all,


Shall make thee famous by thy foemens fall.


ARTIMAGUS.










Oceander,
 not without amazement, hauing perused this pleasing poeme of his parentage, grewe on the sodaine to be both glad, & sad: glad, that hee knew his friends, kinsfolkes, & parents: sad, that he had caused the ruine and destructiue

 downefall of his worthy countreymen, in whose faces hee should be ashamed euer hereafter for to looke; were it not that through ignoraunce his fault beeing committed, tho∣tough repentance, his punishment might be remitted. And therefore (after on his knees he had powred out his orisons of thanksgiuing before the throne of his heauēly maker,
 for his gracious mercy, at last compassionately bestowed vppon his wretched and vnworthy selfe, to wit the reuealing vn∣to his terreane thoughts, that he was one of the happy mem∣bers of Christ Iesus, his holy redeemer and sauiour) taking the wise 
Magartez
 by the hand, and leading her into a secret chamber, he gaue vnto her all the keyes of the prison hou∣ses, wherein his vnhappy countryfolkes were inclosed, hee bad her dispose of all things at her pleasure, & according to her great discretion; whilest hee himselfe, would cause the Townesmen and conuerted Cittizens, against the next mor∣ning to be ready in armes, to defend the rightnesse of their religion, and libertie of their consciences. Whereupon, till towardes the euening, she departed vnto her lodging (which was in a very faire tent of needleworke, wrought most arti∣ficially with diuerse-couloured silke and pearles) whence, af∣ter the shutting in of the silent euening, shee tooke her iour∣ney, first frō one prison vnto another (without any let or stop of the watch, because the Knight of the Sea himselfe, for that night, by the commaundement of the Kinges of 
Tunis
 & 
Tangur,
 watchfully garded the streetes in armour, with a band of his most valiant souldiers) where finding a number of the Grecian nobilitie, sitting in sad consort, with their deare soueraignes. 
Claranax, Rubaldo, Fyardon, Olbiocles,
 the Empresse, the sicke Queene 
Anaxia,
 wounded 
Zaama,
 sad 
Almidiana,
 wise 
Eristama,
 and diuers more of that dole∣full company; entring hastily in among them, shee first gaue a willing greeting, & thē sitting her selfe downe amongst y
e
 Princesses, she there briefly related vnto them, from one end to the other, the whole and almost incredible historie, of the Knight of the Seas aduentures; assuring them that he was their sonne, and would (when time serued) most willingly acknowledge them for his parents. Which pleasing storie

 brought them all into such excesse of delight and pleasures; as before it was altogither ended, they all sanke downe in a swo
ne,
 vpon one anothers neckes: such wonderfull ioy doth the reobtaining of a lost friend procure, vnto the kinde hearts of the louing father, and kinsfolkes. But, after the space of a quarter of an howers wondering at their admira∣ble fortunes; Oh deare God (quoth 
Almidiana
 then with teares trickling downe her faire cheekes) and hast thou thus graciously, then at length (yea euen at the last gaspe) taken compassion on thine handmaide? as to send me my deare son, whom in the hands of a poore fisherman,
 I left to the mercy of the 
Ocean?
 O great God, for euer and euer shall I praise thee, and thy mighty power shal be magnified amongst al na∣tions. And then turning her to 
Magartez:
 yea but (deare Lady quoth she) when shall my vnworthy eies enioy y
e
 hap∣py sight of my most worthy Sonne? Replied 
Magartez;
 It will not be long, most beawtious Princesse, before hee come & visite you: for towards y
e
 morning I do expect him. Wher∣vppon they brake off their talke,
 vntill the breaking out of the blushing morning, from the lattic'de portals of the Ea∣sterne-
Ocean;
 when the Knight of the Sea, togither with y
e
 sunne, entred into the prison house vnto them. Whom 
Almi∣diana
 and 
Eristama
 no sooner beheld, but they disarmed him of his breast-plate, & vnbuttoning his doublet, which hid y
e
 secret signall y
t
 he was their son: this is he, this is he O my worthy parents and companions, for whome my heart hath more then ten thousand times been ready to rende in péeces: welcome my sonne, welcome 
Oceander,
 my more then swée∣test sonne. Wherwithall she kissed him so sweetely, that 
Ru∣baldo
 could not refraine from teares, thinking of the time∣lesse death of his deare sonne Prince 
Morcauill.
 For whose slaughter, his heart a great while wrestled, whether with an∣ger he should reuenge his disaster on the Knight of the Sea, as his enemie: or, forgetting the mischiefe, kindly to enter∣tain him for his deare and louing Graunde-child, In which conflict of contrarie cogitations, kinde loue obtained the conquest: for,

Anger, from a fathers heart,


Will in a moment soone depart,


 Wherfore rising vp from the cold pauements, where he was sadly set, he presētly ran to 
Oceander:
 & w
t
 the pearled teares trickling downe his snow-white bearde; Sufficeth it (quoth he) my deare sonne, that thou art yet liuing: for as deare art thou to me, as was 
Morcauill;
 though through thee, my sad soule mournes for his destruction: and therewith they fell both in a pasm
 vpp
n one a
h
rs b
s
me: so 
 were th
 
y 
; but e
p
c
l
y of the Emperor 
Claranax,
 the Empresse, 
Olbiocles,
 and the Queene 
Anaxia.
 Who for very gladnesse sat silent in their places on the cold pauements, not being able to vtter one word, or so much as becken vnto their soules 
Elisium,
 more then thrice happy 
O∣ceander:
 such pleasure able passions his presence caused, in the hearts of all his louing friends. To whose courteous em∣bracings, kinde kissinges, and louing entercousinges, we will at this time leaue him: as at his loosing wee did be∣gin, so at his happye finding, reviewing, and reinioy∣ing of his royall Parents, now also determi∣ing to finish this first part, of the fa∣mous Historie of his admira∣ble, and heroycall Ad∣uentures.




FINIS.












R. VV. To the authour 
of this HISTORIE.




LIke as the poysoned Spider and the Bee,


In sommers time from off one fragrant Rose,


To sucke sweete iuice and venome we do see;


Yet not the hearb her virtue for to lose:






Euen so, what sielie Innocent not knowes,


That among men the like effect is founde?


As some from Truth it selfe, others from showes,


Will reape both good and ill, from off one ground.






Wherefore (perhaps) some men will limits bound,


Vnto thy praises with sufficiencie:


Others (perchance who will seeme more profound)


Will count thy writings but a foolerie;


And will it scandilize iniuriouslie:


Yet let not such despight thy heart confound,


But suffring them to passe such as they be,


Care onely for to please the hony Bee.




R. W.











