(EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A08441)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 10718)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 259:2)
Partly in verse.
Printer's name from STC.
Reproduction of the original in the Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery.
Olbiocles de∣parteth se∣cretly with Princesse Al∣midiana from Hungary.
Open warres proclaimed betweene Hungary and Greece.
The Grecian & Hungarian armies en∣counter.
Honorable not to dero∣gate euen frō his enemy.
Single cōbat betweene the Emperor Cla∣ranax & Ru∣baldo.
Olbiocles with the Princesse manifest
Olbiocles and the princesse reconciled to their father.
They are o
Troglador chalengeth the combat of Olbiocles.
Combat be∣twixt Olbio∣cles, and the knight of the Tygre.
T
Acc
Allua for T
Acconūbo
Trogla∣dorcasteth Allua off.
True lo
Troglador waketh out his swoune.
He cruelly murthereth Allua.
Impietie a∣gainst pa
Almidiana with childe.
Solaceth her with Era∣stus and o∣ther ladies at Meroanders Arbour.
Their disp
The Prince
Orthisius laid for dead, and Meroander.
The Gyant setteth saile with his pri∣soners.
Cōflict betwixt the Pyrate Tolurnio, & Ortolomorgā∣toll.
Almidia∣nas lamē∣tation.
True loue desireth no copartner in misery.
Eristama comforteth her.
The Ladies deuise for the childs safety.
An hard choyse.
Hard shift.
The childe christned O∣ceander and deliuered to K
We returne to them again in the 18. chap
Meroande: deceased.
Orthi
Oshiocles inuectine agianst Fortune.
Olbiocles swouneth.
A carefull ser∣uant.
low Fortune ame to be linde.
Olbiocles arriueth on the round Iland.
The inhabi∣tants in armes to reuenge All
Olbiocles en∣treth the cāp of Troglador.
Olbiocle
He entreth the castle of the defendāts
Olbiocles de∣termining to chalenge the monimachy of Troglador, is preuented.
Olbiocles ac∣cepteth the combat.
The iustnesse of the quarrel to be respect∣ed.
They encoū∣te
Troglador betakes him to flight.
Kalus ouerta∣ken with a tempest.
He arriueth on the Iland of Artim
Artimagus his Castle.

Kindly enter∣tained by O
Mabina La¦dy of Vul∣cania.
Teridan¦tes banis
Maketh a conspiracy against Ma¦bina.
Tarisdin taken pri∣soner.
Truce for eight daies
Mabinas two sisters
Maiesty cannot brooke in∣solency.
Kathe
Straffera beheaded.
Tarisdin slaine.
Mabinas power o∣uerthrown and her eyes put
Oezimaes cō∣plaint in the dongeon.
The Princes accept the combate a∣gainst Atriel∣phaes chalen¦gers.
They enter combate.
Rogesto slaine.
Licandro wounded.
Mirnao yeil∣deth, and re∣uealeth the treason.
Atrielph de∣termineth to murther Oe∣zima.
She is attach∣ed.
Atrielph tro∣den to death by the people
Oezima set at libertie.
Tirocles murthe∣red by A∣trielpha, and Oe∣zima for it accu∣sed.
A subtle treache∣rie.
Oezima condem∣ned, and impriso∣ned.
A gracious Nature.
Of procerous stature.
The insa
A stran
Falshood in fellow∣ship.
A woefull & lamen∣table exi∣gent.
Cold com∣fort.
Sigandes beheaded.
A sorrow∣full inter∣tainemēt.
Asdreys im∣precations for vengeance on Marcimodes treason.
Monstrous men, whome monsters ex∣ceede in pity.
Asdrey drowned.
Carthage taken, and Queene Kanira fled to her Castle Carzar.
Oceanders vertuous eagernesse to reuenge the treasō of Marc
Hazard exci∣teth the ho∣norable.
They iorney
Kalus reskew∣
Organio slain
Organios bo∣dy hung ouer the Castle wall.
Virtue is im∣patient of de∣lay.
Purposes to deceiue the wearinesse of their iourney.
Virtue may be for a while dashed, but not quite destroyed.
Reuirescit vulnere vir∣tus.
Tantanez en flamed with Ericleas loue
A wise deter∣mination.
Imbrobe A∣mor quid non mortalia pec∣tora cogis?
Zamez put to death.
A virtuous & honest reso∣lution.



Ericlea deliue¦red.


Nulli pietate secundus.
A dwarfe frō Artimagus.
Oceander pre¦sented with an inchaunted coat-armour from Artima∣gus.
Returned to the Castle they finde di∣uers of their knights woū∣ded.
Nigresto re∣priseth the bo¦dy of Orga∣nio, from the walles of Ca
A noble minde makes mis∣fortune a spur to vertue.
Oceander en∣ters the camp of Marcimo∣des.
Oceander re∣ceiueth the honour of knighthoode of Marcimo∣des.
Nig
Oceander and Nigrasto en∣counter.
Nigrasto slain with his horse heeles.
Tumult in the Campe.
Oceander pursued by the Thebans, fly∣eth to the Ca∣stle, and is res∣kued by the Carthagini∣ans.
Marcimodes dismounted.
Tyranny and impiety are stil consociats.
A strange ceri∣mony of Se∣pulture most commonly v∣sed in many places in the ould time.
Troglador entereth in∣to the groue of Calander.
The good he
His kinde sa∣lutations to Troglador.
He arriueth at the Hermi∣tage.
Mans im∣becilitie, to admire great states, be¦cause they are gre
All is not gold that glistreth.
A faire face may hide foul fals∣hood.
Friend∣ship abu∣sed.
Albinoe sent vn to Basileon.
Retur∣ned to Calande.
Lust tur∣ned to loathing.
Ex ficta a∣micitia, Impudetia ex Impudē∣tia, livido: ex libidine
poylo
Vnheard of barba∣rousnes.
Head.
Calāders la∣mentations ouer the head of his deare Albinoe.
Cheekes.
Lipp
Eyes.
Albinoes ghost appea∣reth to Calā∣der.
Worse then barbarous & beastly cruel∣ty of Basileon.
Troglador
Troglador


Calanders predictions
In the 14. Chapter.

Oceanders preparation aga
Marcimode
Oceanders oration to the dismayed Car¦thaginians.
The armies ioyne.
The Cartha∣ginians are
Oceander en∣countereth Marcimodes.
Marcimodes tumbleth himselfe and Oceander downe from the wall.
Oceander ta∣ken captiue by the oppres∣sing multi∣tude, and led boūd to Mar∣cimodes pa∣uilion.
Sorrowfull state: the Car∣thaginians wholly dis∣maide.

Place of exce¦cutiō prepa∣red for Oce∣ander.
Oceāders lamenta∣tion.
Median cutteth Oceāders carde
Oceander set free.
They make a massacre a∣mongst the Barbarians.
A supply of Carthaginiās from the Ca∣stle.
Thebans fly.
Marcimodez encountreth Oceander.
Marcimodez vnhorsed.
Marcimodez troden to death, by O∣ceāders hors∣men.
The tyrā∣ny of the inchaun∣ter Cturi∣dan.
Alcaazo maketh peace with him.
Ptoladine prince of Meso∣potamia espouseth the Egip∣tian Prin∣cesse Cia∣fa.

Marido∣mir tran∣sported by enchāt¦ment, vn∣to Cturi∣dans Ca∣stle.
Cturidan mortally wounded by Pala∣dine.
He dye
Briarostez wasteth the Kingdome of Egypt & Me∣sopotamia.
Ptoladine, Alcaazo &c. surprised and imprisoned by Briarostez.
Oceander & Medion em∣ba
Nylus.
The Castle of Briarostez.
A goodly prospect.
They arriue at the Castle.
Ridiculum terriculame

They which are quite drowned in vice and sen∣sualitie, are endeafened to the good ad∣uice of the virtuous.
Briarostes to Ocean∣der & Me∣dion.
Oceāders answer to Briarostes.
The gyant defied to
The comba
Briarostes wounded.
Briarostes yieldeth him∣selfe to Oce∣ander.
Curtesie mat∣ched with co∣rage.
They ascend Mardiguas

True reason refuseth to giue eare vnto the rauishing allurements of voluptous Syrens.
Ptoladine plungeth him¦selfe into the Well.
Oceander ta∣keth the in∣chaunted crowne off, from Ptola∣dines head.
The inchaūt∣ment dissol∣ued.
Orthisius and Alfortioariu
Queene Ma∣binaes com∣plainte.
Quamuis
Terind
Malum omen.
A foot fight between Al∣fortio & Te∣
Terindantez leaueth the combate.
Terindā∣tez to M
The Q. Ma∣bina behead¦ded by Terin¦dantes.
His orati∣on to the Volcani∣ans.

The sentence of his iudge∣ment.
Philocalus installed Ru∣ler of Volca∣nia.
Cairo.
The Cairoans ioy for the s
Oceander, with Bri
Durdon slain.
Lidia freed from the vil∣lany of Dur∣don & ten o∣ther knights.
Lidias re∣lation of her hus∣band Za∣delines death,
Milodes slaine.
Delirant Re¦ges, plectū∣tur Achiui.
The rage of Durdon and his mē against guiltlesse Lidia.
Medions passionate resolue, for the loue of Li∣dia.
Oceander ar∣riueth at the fiery caue.
Medions griefe for the supposed tor∣ments of Cia∣fa.
Oceander & the rest pur∣sue a Beare.
They attempt to enter the caue. Medion and Briarostes en∣forced to re∣turne.
Ciafa deliue∣red out of the caue by Oce∣ander.
The inchaunt∣mēt finisheth.
Medion and Briarostes guard the in∣fant Ciafa to Cayro.
Cardigan.
Oceander to Grand Cardigan.
Oceander smiteth off the Gyants arme,
A daungerous combat be∣tweene Oce∣ander and Grand Cardi∣gan.
Oceander grappleth with the gyant.
Cardigans o∣

The sorce∣resse Mardi∣gua arriueth.
She soweth debate be∣tween Oceā∣der and Phia∣nora.
The knight of the golden shield comba¦teth Ocean∣der.
An happy ac∣cident.
The Knight of the goldē shield disco∣uered to bee a Lady-knight.
Cardigan ca∣ried vnto his Castle.
Norin & Ni∣gramonde haste to re∣uenge the death of their Father.
Norin and Briarostez encounter.
Norin sorely wounded by Briarostez.
Slaine by Medion.
Nigramon de betaketh him to flight.
Oceander amazed, and enflamed with the beauty of Phianora.
Artimagus counterfei∣teth himselfe a fisherman, to disport with Ocea
Artimagus reu
Aradinus Go∣uernour of the Round Iland.
Olbiocles l

Olbiocles ar∣iueth at the land of Ma∣

She exerciseth her inchaunt¦ment ouer him.
Olbiocles metamorpho∣sed into a Boare.
Oceander a∣waking misseth Arti∣magus.
Oceander is cast on the shore of Ma∣lagdas Iland.
Olbiocles de∣liuereth Oce∣ander from drowning.
Oceander fighteth with the inchaun∣ted Boare.
Curio Olbio∣cles Pages bones found by Oceander.
Oceander per¦ceiueth the Boare to be some enchaū∣ted knight.
The inchaūt∣ment finished, and Olbiocles restored to his
Those that are onely led by the appetite, following but what their out∣ward sen∣ses lead them to, are no whit different frō bruite beastes; who here∣in especi∣ally differ frō man; In that he is indued with rea∣son. No plea∣sure but hath his paine.
Oceander pursueth Malagda.
Phianora ar∣riueth at Cō∣stantinople.
The Grecian court, in a dead quiet∣nesse.
This is our onely hope of safety.
The Empe∣ror & the em∣presse mourn for the losse of their chil∣dren.
Phianoras salute vn∣to them▪
Later an∣guis in herba. A treache∣rous pur∣pose vn∣der the maske of a gorgeous prize,
Iusts & tour∣neis proclai∣med.
Many princes and kings re∣paire to the Tournemēts. Rubaldo. Anaxia. Morcauill. Fiardon. Zaama.
Arcanio.
Tholon.
Thiorin
Kauiscon.
Xanzimar.
Iusting amōg the stranger Knights.
Claranax & Fiardon goe to behold the Iourney.
The Kinges, Queenes, & Ladies pla∣ced.
Rosamyra of whome you shall heare more in the second part of this histo∣rie.
Iudges of the fielde.
Grecian knights, vn∣horsed by Martio, Ipe∣rom, and Pe∣ronu.
Martio and
Thioron dis∣mounted.
Tholōs arme disiointed frō his shoulder.
Arcanio bea∣ten from his horse, & woū¦ded.
Morcauill smitten dow
The Grecian knights daun¦ted.
The inchaun∣
Malagdas sub∣mission.

Oceander.
Oceander & Malagda ap∣port at Con∣stantinople.
The second daies iustes.
Xanzimar & Phianora iust.
Xanzimar borne out of his sadle by Phianora.
The Danubi∣ans pel-mell assault Phia∣nora.
Oceander en∣tereth the lists against Phia∣nora.
A sharpe com∣bat.
Phianora both horse and mā borne to the earth. Oceander vir∣horsed by her.
Oceander
A mischieuous treachery, al∣most ineuita∣ble.
Magartes.
Her mes∣sage from Artimagus to Ocean∣der. Wisdome prouidēce, and good, counsell preuenteth the greates
Oceander de∣liuered from Mardeguas mantle.

She waxeth franticke with torments of her mantle, & throweth her selfe into the sea.
Oceander ar∣riueth at Car∣thage.
Artimagus sick.
Queene Ka∣niras salute
Oceander in presence of Artimagus.
Artima∣gus his welcom to Oceāder.
Read of this in the last Chapter.
Artimagus depar
Carthagini∣ans lamēt the death of Ar∣timagus.
Artimagus fu∣nerall rites.
Phianora still cōceleth her selfe.
The Prin∣cesse disco∣uered by her Surgeons.
Phianora de∣parteth in se∣cret from the Court.
Phianorae▪ Epitimen.
Basilia.
Anaxia.
Zaama.
Phianora em∣barqueth for the coast of A
Phianora ar∣riueth at Go∣las castle.
The terrible and intolle∣rable tormēt of Olbiocles and Huguy.
Phianora re∣solueth to re∣deeme him.
Phianoras woundes fall a fresh on blee∣ding.
Treachery of Golas sonnes.

Encoūter be∣tweene Nigra∣mound and Phianora.
Nigramound Lion-horse slaine by Phi∣anora.
Nigramound vanquished.
Phianora safe¦ly entereth the inchaunted gate.
Nigramond slaine by Gola
Gola is be∣headed. The inchaūt∣ment dissol∣ued.
Olbiocles and Huguy regain their former shapes.
Olbiocles & Hugui driuen by tempest, on the shores of Gola.
Taken pri∣soners by her sonnes.
They are in∣chaunted. Olbiocles by reason of O∣ceanders shield (which for hast to follow Malag¦da, he had left behind him, at the moun∣tain) being mistaken to be the knight of the Sea.
Phianora re∣solueth still on the search of Almidiana
They em∣barque for the Rocky Iland.
Ortolomor∣gantell lan∣deth on the Rocky Iland.
A detestable and wicked custome.
Hebitha sa∣crificed to Mettath A∣gorah by Or∣tolomorgan∣tell.
The castle Lapidine.
The two prin∣cesses Almidi∣ana and Eri∣stama presen∣ted to Duron∣da.
A wofull chaunge.
Whatsoeuer miseries and misfortunes happen vnto vs, they hap∣pen not vnde∣serued for our sinnes conti∣nually merit ex
Almidianas praies.
Along & mi∣serable thral∣dome.
Olbiocles, Phianora and Huguy land at the Rocky Iland.
The Idoll of M
Their deuour praier for a prosperous proceeding.
A conflict with the Gy∣ants seruants.

Ortolomor∣gātell to the 3. knights.
Huguy is slaine.
Ortolomor∣gantell woū∣ded by Phia∣nora.
Phianora dri∣uen to a de∣ceitfull e
Olbiocles as∣saulted and distressed by the gyants seruants.
Oceāder ar∣riueth.
Hee rescueth Olbiocles.
Slayeth Lin∣guaro,
Thirteene slaine the rest flie.
Olbiocles closeth with Ortolomor∣gantell.
Ortolomor∣gantell and Duronda slaine by O∣ceander.
Oceander departeth frō them.
Hee putteth to the Sea.
Oceander encountred the fleete of Tolurnio.
Slaughter of Tolu
Tolurnio ar∣meth himselfe
Tolurnio as∣saulteth Oce∣ander.
Tolurnio o∣uercome by Oceander.
A nauie of Barbarians.
Tomarin of Tunis.
Tangut of Tangur.
The cause of the Barbariās expedition into Christē∣dome.
Of this thou must read in the history of Claranax prae¦cedent.
Oceander & Tolurnio ac∣corded, and ioyne with Tomarin a∣gainst the Christians. Oath taken.
Oceander chosen Cham∣pion of the Alcharon.
Deus auertat,
Submission of the rest of Ortolomor∣gantels ser∣uants.
Olbiocles oration to them.
Only Almidi∣ana & Erista∣ma aliue of all the Grecian Ladies.
A ioyful mee∣ting of Olbi∣ocles and Al∣midiana.
Eristama.
Phianora fee∣leth her selfe ill at ease.
They embar∣que for Grece
They arriue at the Round I∣land.
Eget qui cupit: qui non cupit habet.
Content a kingdome is.
Remembrāce of the Parents cannot be ea∣sily rooted out of the mindes of the childrē.
Calāders fare∣well to the Grecian Princesses.
A Letter from the Hermit to Claranax.
They arriued at Constanti∣nople.
Their ioyfull & louing en∣tertainemēts by their pa∣rents & deare friendes.
Absentia reuer∣sos reddit a∣micis chario∣res,
Thāksgiuing of the Em∣perour for the return of his long ab∣sented chil∣dren.
The hermite Calanders Letter,
Claranax pre∣paration a∣gainst the in∣uasion of To∣marin.
Dionine. The fleete of Tunis arriue at Sicilie.
Brammadon.
Camaru.
Xamaru.
Hollobron.
Hybla be∣sieged.
Oriardeis o∣ration to his discouraged Hybleans.
We are born especially to doe good to our coun∣trey.
A good Cap∣taine.
A wise Ge∣nerall tur∣neth euery accident to an occasion of encou∣ragement.
A Sally vpon the Pagans.
Nequion through am∣bition, be∣trayeth the Hybleans.
The Hybleās flie.
Oriardey slaine.
Hibleans yield and turned
Proditionem amo, non pro∣ditorem.
Memorable Iustice exe∣cuted on so monst
The Pagans match vp in∣to the coun∣trie.
Cities aban∣doned.
Syracusa be∣sieged.
The cittie assaulted.
Alfortio Or∣thisius and Dionine make a
Alfortio vn∣horsed and taken priso∣ner.
Orthisius bea∣ten from his horse by Oce∣ander.
The Siracu∣sons ouer∣throwne.
Dionine & his Sicilians yield and be∣come Maho∣metists.
Hollobron di∣eth.
The fleete of Tunis arri∣ueth at Con∣stantinople.
They encāpe.
Constant cou∣rage io
Embassadours from the kings of Tunis and Tangur.
A bould ambassage
Bould & bit∣ter.
Ismerion slain by Oceander
The Empe¦rours reso∣lute an∣swere to the Em∣bassadors.
Honorable patience.
The Em∣perour Cla¦ranax wrongfully accused, to haue trea∣cherously murthered Tumanto.
Tumanto taken by Rouers & slaine.
Aide of Chri∣stians in suc∣cour of Con∣stantinople: with Morcauil 3000. horse, Rubaldo 1200 foote. Fiarden Arcanio 100. horse, 9000. foote, with Curanand Kauisco
Tumult in the Pagās Cāpe.
Oceanders oration to the kings of Tunis, T gur & Tabarca.
Ebator.
Priuate ha∣tred hin∣dreth pub∣like procee∣dings.
Ebato
The battels of Fessians & Hungari∣ans affront.
A supply of Bohemians.
Oceander Brammadon and Xamaru enter the battaile.
Morcauill flieth.
The battaile of Huns, Thessalians, and Transil∣uanians set forward.
Through dis∣order of the ch
The Transil∣uanians and Thessalians re∣coyle.
The Bulgari∣ans giue back
A supply of Tabarcans.
Rubaldo ta∣ken prisoner.
The Hunga∣rians discō∣forted.
Curan & his Transiluani∣ans put to the retreit.
Olbiocles im∣patient for his extreame weaknesse.
Retreat soūd∣ed by the Pa∣gās.
The Christiās in the night, sally out into the Campe of the Pagans.
A great ha∣uocke both of Christians & Pagans.
Oceander. with a supply of Pagans.
17000. Barba∣rians slaine.
A tumultuous hurly-burly in the Pagans Campe,
The Pagans sit in counsell.
Brammadons aduice.
Zabiers sage coun∣sell vnto the Pagan Princes.
Where the Lions skin will not serue, wee must piece it, with the soxes case.
The Pagan princes goe to view the city.
An ambuscado of Pagans.
The ambushe breaketh out.
Tleas slain
The Spartās foild.
Labasto slaine.
Morcauill slaine by Oceander.
Curan it slaine.
Thessalians slaughtered.
Constantino∣ple straight engirt on al sides.
The miserie of the christi∣ans.
Claranax lea¦deth his ar∣mie against the Pagans.
Claranax his oratiō to his armie.
The army of the christiās march ioy∣fully to the battaile.
They encoū∣ter.
The battagli∣ons of Arca∣nio & Bram∣madon en∣counter.
The battali∣ons of the Emperour & Tomarin meet.
Fiardo ouer∣thrown horse & man.
Thiorin slaine.
The knight of the sea doth great deedes of armes.
Maxetes slain by Oceander.
The Christiās giue ground.
Fiardon hor∣seth Oceāder
Combat be∣tweene Fiar∣don and Oce∣ander.
Fiardon ca∣ried captiue to Tomarins pauilion.
The Christiās goe to wrack.
Vibrant & Norlas slaine.
The Christiās fly.
Arcanio with his Bohemi∣ans giue a sup∣ply.
Accoell slaine Arcanio ouer∣throwne.
Virtuous va∣lour. Bawrante slaine.
Arcanio priso∣ner.
Tomarin wounded.
The battell renewed by Olbiocles & Zaama.
Olbioce
The Christi∣ans retreat, are sharpely pursued, and yielde.
A sorrowfull time, full of calamity and pitty.
Magartez ar∣riueth hap∣pily at Con∣stantinople.
The scroule of Artima∣gus.
Oceander. knoweth his parents.
An happy change.
Oceander deliuereth the keyes of the prisons to Magar∣tez.
Magartez reporteth of Oceander to the captiued christiā prin∣ces.
Vnhoped-for comfort.
Almidianas thāksgiuing.
Oceander entreth into the prison, & is knowne to be Olbiocles sonne.