(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A09829)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 5316)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 904:01)
Translated by John Frampton.
Printer's name from STC.
Reproduction of the original in the British Library.

The redde Sea.
Souldan.
Arabia Fe∣lix.
Alepo.
Erronious iudgements of the voya∣ges of
Three In∣dias, the first is the lower India.








Foureteene great Ships with foure Mastes in a Shippe, and sixe hundred men in eue
The returne of the two breethrē and
They take great plesure in Hawking and hunting.
a Citie vpon the Sea side, called

Heere on a high Moun∣ta

Heere was King
In this coun∣trey be many fayre Cities and Townes wher is made great plenty of cloth of gold, and of silke.
Excellente good hawkes Great trade of Merchan∣dise.

Here is made cloth of golde and silke, cal∣led



In this Citie
The three Kings offe∣red Gold, Incense, and Myrre.
A miracle if it be true.
Heere is great plenty of fayre Hor∣ses, Moyles, and Asses.
Heere is made great plentie of rich cloth of gold & silke.
Heere they do make gret plentie of cloth of golde and silke.
Pretious stones, as Turkises and others.

Sheepe as great as asses.
Enchantmēt.
Great trade of Merchāts
When the husband dy∣eth the wife & the friends do
Great plenty of salte.
Good wines and great drinkers.
For lacke of cloth the peo∣ple weare skinnes of such beastes a
N
A Citie of 3. days iourney long.
Sheep that haue hornes of foure or fiue and ten spans long.
Fortie daye
Iaspes and Calcedonies.
The Citie Iob.
A rich moue∣ning & good cheare.

The first Em¦perour of the
In this moū∣taine
The Tar∣tares doe make them Idols of feltes, and other bag∣gage.
The Nobili∣tie & Gentle∣men go in cloth of gold and silke, fur∣red with rich furres.
The Tar∣ta
When any of the Tartares sonnes dye, and also a daughter of another, then they do mar∣rie these two togither, say∣ing, they shall be so in the other worlde.
The voice of euil spirites heard.
Mons
Heere is the best Muske in the world.
I think these be Peacocks
Heere be Chamlets made.
Heere is founde the stone called
Heere was the imperiall seate of
Here be Cra∣nes of fiue sorts or colours.
The wall of this house is gilded.
Her
Here y
Al y
A superstiti∣ous beliefe y
Here his en∣chaunters do worke by the Diuel.
A great Mo∣nas
Three hun∣dred thou∣sand fighting men.
The pollicie of the great
A strange kind of death to his cousin.
The great Cane ha
The great Cane hath many Concu∣bines.
The greate

At euery gate is a thousand m

Commonly foure thousand persons do sitte in that Hall at a dinner. A vessell of fine gold tha

Great feast is made eue∣rie yeare, the day when the great
He giueth a rich Liuerie.
Euery Liue∣rie is worth a thousande Markes.
The Tar∣tares begin their yeare the first day of February.
Tenne thou∣sand white Horses and Mares pre∣sented to the great
Al his nobili∣tie do
A great and rich offering.
The great Cane doth giue liueri
Four months he doth con∣tinue in
No man may hunt no haul
Two noble men be mai∣sters of his dogs, and they haue ten thousand mē apeece.
The grea
They do ne∣uer leese Faulcon nor Gerfaulcon.
A straunge going a hau∣king.
There be at the least ten thousand tēts and pauilions set vp in the fielde.
These two tents bee of a good valure.
Three dayes he doth make great cheare after his hun¦ting is ended
The money t
He
The noble men that doe set order for all the greate

The riuer
A goodly Bridge and long.
Here is plen∣tie of cloth of Golde.
Here is much armor
A King was made a sheep¦hearde by
Cloth of gold and cloth of silke made.
The inside of the pallace wall is layde on with gold.


Here be ma∣ny Muske cuttes.
A bridge of a myle long, and eight paces brode of marble and housen on it.
Here be Canes of fifteen paces long and ten spans about.
No maydens may marrie in this Coun∣trey.



Plenty of Pearles and precious stones.
Heere they haue an ill custome.


Heere be ma∣ny Horses bredde.
A Sazo of gold is worth eyght of siluer, which is an ounce.
Heere is great plent
The men of this countrey haue theyr teeth couered with gold.
Heere is a custome, that the good man is much made of, after hys wife is brou∣ghte a bed.
A Sazo of gold is an ounce, and is worth fyue of Si
A strange kind of Phi∣sicke.
Vnicornes.
Great plen



The riuer
Fiue thousan̄d vessels on this riuer.
Seauen thou¦sand bridges of stone.
Plentie of Rewbarbe. Fiue pounde of Ginger for sixe pence.
Quinsay.
The nobles
Twelue thou¦sand bridges of stone.
The manner how they do kil the Lions
Good cheape Suger.


This Citie hath the best Hauen in the world.
For one Shippe that commeth to
Great cu∣stome is payd heere.
The Iland of
In this I∣land is great plent

Men hauing stones that were inchan∣ted, could not be slaine with weapons of iron, but with clubbes.
The Citie taken by a prettie meanes.

This King had .325. chil∣dren.
A very riche Iland of spi∣ces and golde in great plen∣tye.
Heere is found plentie of golde.
Great trade for Pepper by reason of the quantity.

Plenty of Pepper and Ginger, and Turbit.
A darke land


Men liue three hūdreth yeares.
Their Pole riseth and fal¦leth.