Nevves from Virginia The lost flocke triumphant. With the happy arriuall of that famous and worthy knight Sr. Thomas Gates: and the well reputed & valiant captaine Mr. Christopher Newporte, and others, into England. With the maner of their distresse in the Iland of Deuils (otherwise called Bermoothawes) where they remayned 42. weekes, & builded two pynaces, in which they returned into Virginia. By R. Rich, Gent. one of the voyage.
Rich, Richard, fl. 1610.
Approx. 11 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 8 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2006-06 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A10725




STC 21005



ESTC S122506





99857630




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Nevves from Virginia The lost flocke triumphant. With the happy arriuall of that famous and worthy knight Sr. Thomas Gates: and the well reputed & valiant captaine Mr. Christopher Newporte, and others, into England. With the maner of their distresse in the Iland of Deuils (otherwise called Bermoothawes) where they remayned 42. weekes, & builded two pynaces, in which they returned into Virginia. By R. Rich, Gent. one of the voyage.
Rich, Richard, fl. 1610.
[16] p. : ill. (woodcut)  


London :


Printed by Edw: Allde, and are to be solde by Iohn Wright at Christ-Church dore,


1610.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Gates, Thomas, --  Sir, d. 1621.
Newport, Christopher, ca. 1565-1617.
Virginia --  Description and travel --  Early works to 1800.
Virginia --  History --  Colonial period, ca. 1600-1775 --  Early works to 1800.
Bermuda Islands --  Description and travel --  Early works to 1800.
Bermuda Islands --  History --  Early works to 1800.
2005-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2005-11
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2006-02
Taryn Hakala
Sampled and proofread
2006-02
Taryn Hakala
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2006-04
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






21005


99857630


23393














depiction of ship




A










The lost Flocke 
Triumphant.


With the happy Arriuall of that famous and worthy Knight S
r.
 
Thomas Gates:
 and the well reputed & valiant Captaine M
r.
 
Chri∣stopher Newporte,
 and others, into England.


¶ With the maner of their distresse in the Iland of Deuils (otherwise called 
Bermoothawes)
 where they remayned 42. weekes, & builded two Pynaces, in which they returned into 
Virginia.


By 
R. Rich, Gent.
 one of the Voyage.


LONDON Printed by 
Edw: Allde,
 and are to be solde by 
Iohn Wright
 at Christ-Church dore. 1610.










To the Reader.


R
Eader,


how to stile thee I knowe not, per∣haps Learned, perhaps vnlearned: happily cap∣tious, happily enuious: indeed what or how to tearme thee I know not, only as I began I will proceede.


Reader, thou dost peraduenture imagine that I am mercenarie in this busines, and write for money (as your moderne Poets vse) hyred by some of those euer to be admi∣red Aduenturers, to flatter rhe world: No, I disclaime it, I haue knowne the Voyage, past the danger, seene that honorable work of Virginia, & I thanke God am arriud here to tell thee what I haue seene, don, & past: if thou wilt be lieue me so, if not so to: for I can∣not force thee but to thy owne liking: I am a Soldier, blunt and plaine, and so is the


phrase of my newes: and I protest it is true. If thou aske why I put it in Verse? I prethee knowe, it was onely to feede mine owne hu∣mour: I must confesse, that had I not debard my selfe of that large scope which to the wri∣ting of prose is allowed, I should haue much easd my selfe, and giuen thee better content. But I intreat thee to take this as it is; and be∣fore many daies expire, I will promise thee the same worke more at large.


I did feare preuention by some of your writers, if they should haue gotten but some part of the newes by the tayle, and therefore though it be rude, let it passe with thy liking, and in so doing I shall like well of thee: but how euer, I haue not long to stay: if thou wilt be vnnaturall to thy country-man, thou maist, I must not loose my patrymonie; I am for 
Virginia
 againe, and so I will bid thee hartily farewell, with an honest verse:


As I came hether to see my natiue land,


to waft me backe lend me thy gentle hand.


Thy louing Country-man. R R.












Newes from Virginia
 OF THE HAPPY A¦riuall of that famous & worthy knight Sir Thomas Gates and well reputed and valiant Captaine Newport into England.




IT is no idle fabulous tale,


nor is it fayned newes:


For 
Truth
 herselfe is heere arriu'd,


because you should not muse.


With her, both Gates and 
Newport
 come,


to tell 
Report
 doth lye:


Which did deuulge vnto the world,


that they at Sea did dye.






Tis true that Eleauen monthes and more,


these gallant worthy wights:


Was in the Shippe 
(Sea-venture
 nam'd)


depriu'd 
Virginia's
 sight.


And brauely did they glyde the maine,


till 
Neptune
 gan to frowne:


As if a Courser prowdly backt,


would throwe his ryder downe.








The Seas did rage, the windes did blowe,


distressed were they then:


Their Ship did leake, her tacklings breake,


in daunger were her men.


But heauen was Pylotte in this storme,


and to an Iland nere:


Bermoothawes
 call'd, conducted then,


which did abate their feare.






But yet these Worthies forced were,


opprest with weather againe:


To runne their Ship betweene two Rockes,


where she doth still remaine.


And then on shoare the Iland came,


Inhabited by Hogges:


Some Foule and Tortoyses there were


they onely had one Dogge






To kill these swyne, to yeild them food


that little had to eate:


Their store was spent, and all things scant,


alas they wanted meate.


A thousand hogges that dogge did kill,


their hunger to sustaine:


And with such foode, did in that Ile


two and forty weekes remaine.








And there two gallant Pynases,


did build, of Seader-tree:


The braue 
Deliuerance
 one was call'd,


of seauenty Tonne was shee.


The other 
Patience
 had to name,


her burthen thirty Tonne:


Two only of their men which there,


pale death did ouercome.






And for the losse of those two soules,


which were accounted deere:


A Sonne and Daughter then was borne


and were Baptized there.


The two and forty weekes being past,


they hoyst Sayle and away:


Their Ships with hogs well freighted were,


their harts with mickle ioy.






And so vnto 
Virginia
 came,


where these braue Souldiers finde


The English-men opprest with greife


and discontent in minde.


They seem'd distracted and forlorne,


for those two worthyes losse:


Yet at their home returne they ioyd,


among'st them some were crosse.








And in the mid'st of discontent,


came noble 
Delaware:


He heard the greifes on either part,


and sett them free from care.


He comforts them and cheeres their hearts,


that they abound with ioy:


He feedes them full and feedes their soules,


with Gods word euery day.






A discreet counsell he creates,


of men of worthy fame:


That noble 
Gates
 leiftenant was


the Admirall had to name.


The worthy Sir George 
Somers
 knight,


and others of commaund:


Maister Georg 
Pearcy
 which is brother,


vnto 
Northumberland.






Sir Fardinando 
Wayneman
 knight


and others of good fame:


That noble Lord, his company,


which to 
Virginia
 came


And landed there: his number was


One hundred Seauenty: then


Ad to the rest and they make full,


foure hundred able men.








Where they vnto their labour fall,


as men that meane to thriue:


Let's pray that heauen may blesse them all


and keep them long aliue.


Those men that 
Vagrants
 liu'd with vs,


haue there deserued well:


Their Gouernour writes in their praise,


as diuers Letters tel.






And to th' Aduenturers thus he writes,


be not dismayd at all:


For scandall cannot doe vs wrong


God will not let vs fall.


Let England knowe our willingnesse,


for that our worke is good,


Wee hope to plant a Nation,


where none before hath stood.






To glorifie the Lord tis done,


and to no other end:


He that would crosse so good a worke,


to God can be no friend.


There is no feare of hunger here,


for Corne much store here growes,


Much fish the gallant Riuers yeild,


tis truth, without suppose.








Great store of Fowle, of Venison,


of Grapes, and Mulberries,


Of Chesnuts, Walnuts, and such like,


of fruits and Strawberries,


There is indeed no want at all:


but some condiciond ill,


That wish the worke should not goe on,


with words doe seeme to kill.






And for an instance of their store,


the noble 
Delaware,


Hath for a present hither sent,


to testific his care,


In mannaging so good a worke,


two gallant ships: by name


The 
Blessing
 and the 
Hercules,


well fraught, and in the same






Two ships, are these commodities:


Furres, Sturgeon, Cauiare,


Blacke-walnut-tree, and some deale-boords,


with such they laden are:


Some Pearle, some Wainscot and clapbords,


with some Sassafras wood:


And Iron promist, for tis true,


their Mynes are very good.








Then maugre scandall, false report,


or any opposition


Th' aduenturers doe thus deuulge:


to men of good condition:


That he that wants shall haue reliefe,


be he ofhonest minde:


Apparell, coyne, or any thing,


to such they will be kinde.






To such as to 
Virginia,


do purpose to repaire:


And when that they shall thither come,


each man shall haue his share.


Day wages for the Laborer,


and for his more content,


A house and garden plot shall haue,


besides, t'is further ment






That euery man shall haue a part,


and not thereof denaid:


Of generall profit, as if that he


twelue pounds ten shillings paid,


And he that in Virginia,


shall copper coyne receiue,


For hyer or commodities,


and will the country leaue,








Vpon deliuery of such coyne,


Vnto the Gouernour:


Shall by exchange at his returne,


be by their Treasurer


Paid him in London at first sight,


no man shall cause to grieue:


For 'tis their generall will and wish


that euery man should liue.






The number of Aduenturers,


that are for this Plantation:


Are full eight hundred worthy men,


some Noble, all offashion.


Good, discreete, their worke is good,


and as they haue begun:


May Heauen assist them in their worke,


and thus our newes is done.




FINIS.











