Nevves from Rome, Venice, and Vienna, touching the present proceedinges of the Turkes against the Christians in Austria, Hungarie, and Heluetia, otherwise called Seuenbergh Also the true copie of a lamentable petition exhibited in the names of the afflicted Christians in those parts, to the Christian kingdomes in the vvest.
Approx. 27 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 11 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A11027




STC 21294



ESTC S103468





99839221




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Nevves from Rome, Venice, and Vienna, touching the present proceedinges of the Turkes against the Christians in Austria, Hungarie, and Heluetia, otherwise called Seuenbergh Also the true copie of a lamentable petition exhibited in the names of the afflicted Christians in those parts, to the Christian kingdomes in the vvest.
[20] p.   


Printed at London :


By Iohn Danter, for Thomas Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop adioyning to London Bridge Gate,


1595.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Europe --  History --  1517-1648.
Austria --  History --  1519-1740 --  Early works to 1800.
Turkey --  HIstory --  1453-1683 --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






21294


S103468


99839221


3624














NEVVES FROM ROME, Venice, and Vienna, touching the present proceedinges of the Turkes against the Christians in Austria, Hungarie, and Heluetia, otherwise called Seuenbergh.


Also the true Copie of a Lamentable Petiti∣on exhibited in the names of the afflicted Christians in those parts, to the Christian Kingdomes in the VVest.




depiction of an armoured knight with feathered helmet, lance, and spurs, on a horse with plumes




Printed at London by Iohn Danter, for Thomas Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop adioyning to London Bridge Gate. 1595.














NEVVES FROM ROME, Venice, & Vienna, touching the present proceedinges of the Turkes against the Christians in Austria, Hungarie, and Heluetia, otherwise called Seuenbergh. Also the true Copie of a Lamentable Petiti∣on exhibited in the names of the afflicted Christians in those parts, to the Christian Kingdomes in the VVest.


M
Ens vnbeléeuing harts hasten too late repentance, and the vnwillingnesse of Christians either to assist other, giues way for Infidels to insult ouer all.


Christs Prophecie is nowe performde, the daies waxe worse and worse, & charitie is growne colde: For if mercie had had any gouernment among Christian men, so many beaute∣ous. Townes, goodly Cities, glorious Kingdomes had not (as nowe they are) either béene vtterly made waste, or suffered the woefull bondage of Turkish

 tyrannie. The flourishing Churches to which Christs Apostles writ, and in which they and the first Fathers of the Church laboured, are now the recep∣tacles of vnhallowed multitudes, and onely a small corner of the earth professeth Christ. One Christian suffering another to be as easilie consumed, as an idle or enuious townesman his neighbour helplesly to be robbed or burned: Els had not all 
Asia,
 some of 
Affricke,
 and so much of 
Europe,
 suffred so great and irrecouerable slauish bondage. Howe many goodly Nations the vnbeléeuing offspring of 
Ottoman,
 haue subiected, sufficiently too late experience expresseth, and the purpose of the common enemie to subiect the rest, immediate proofe explaineth.


Amurath
 now Emperour of 
Turkey,
 glorying in the vsurped seate of the Greekish Emperre, not long since subiected by 
Mahomet
 the sonne of 
Amurath
 his predecessour, ambitiously by his tyrannous Bassaes incited, hath attempted the affliction of 
Austria,
 the vnconquered part of 
Hungarie, Poland, Heluetia,
 and other Kingdomes neighbouring 
Greece,
 whose procéedinges since the 25. of December last, till the middle of Ianuarie, this small Pamphlet handleth.


Rab
 is a towne néere 
Donow
 in 
Hungarie,
 which in the end of the last Haruest, the Turkes violently after long siege entred, sparing neither age nor sexe, but making the Infants daies equall with the aged Elders, both young and old by their crueltie at once perished. The winning of which place hath not smal∣ly weakned the other Forts of 
Hungaria,
 in the Chri∣stians power. After they had tyrannously insulted o∣uer 
Rab,
 they immediatlie bent their forces against 
Comar,
 the people of which Citie assisted by the hand of God, and resolued rather to die than subiect them∣selues to the slauerie of Infidels, valiantly defended

 themselues, and violently compelled, the huge multi∣tude of the Turkes to raise their siege and retire to 
Rab
 which they had lately taken. From sundry parts of Christendome since the 25. of December these certaine and vnreprooueable intelligences haue béene sent: 
videlicet,
 it is certified from Rome the last of Ianuarie.


The Emperours Maiesties Legates had audience before the Pope, who desired a subsidie should be leui∣ed on the Cleargie, for the cutting off of an Arme of the Riuer of 
Donow,
 that falls in by 
Comar,
 thereby not only to defend the said towne and the parts there∣abouts, but also to hinder the Turkes from enter∣course to 
Oouen:
 and besides it would bee a meane to spare many Souldiers that must be imployed in these parts. To this the Pope condiscended; with promise to aide the Emperour with all he might. 
Iustiniano
 is appointed the Collector.


The same time also it was certified that the great Master of 
Malta
 was reconciled, béeing authorised from the Pope to be accountable to no Estate.


It is also concluded, that the Prince of 
Seuenbergh,
 otherwise called 
Heluetia,
 vpon whose burden the first war betwéene the Turkes and Christians must néedes lye, shall haue 20000. Crownes monthly to maintaine the warre, and if (which God forbid) he be expulsed 
Heluetia,
 he shall haue some dominion allotted him in the Emperie and 200000. crownes yearely.


Moreouer at 
Rome
 the same day arriued this newes, that the Archbishop of 
Toledo
 in Spaine, being ninetie foure yeares of age deceased, and left behinde him a Million of readie money, halfe a Milli∣on in debts, and sixe hundred thousand Crownes in Plate, Roabes, costly apparrell and other Iewels:

 Making fiue Executors; of which the King of Spain is principall, who hath obtained that his money should be imployed to the Churches vse, séeing the saide Archbishop had bequeathed nothing to his kin∣dred, whom belike he prouided for in his life time.


Alberto
 the Cardinall succéeding in the Bisho∣pricke and possessing these goods, hath granted halfe of them to be imployed against the Turkes.




From Venice 
the 13. of Ianuarie.


LEtters came from 
Syria,
 certifiying, the 
Sycalla
 or Admirall with the Gallies are come to Con∣stantinople, and that a great 
Armatho
 is prouiding against 
Hungarie
 by Sea.


It is likewise certefied to that state of 
Venice
 from 
Halow,
 by reason of the great frost and snowe, the Cytrons, Lymons, Oringes, and such frute were all spoiled, that woulde bee great impeachment to the Turkes prouision.


Also the eleuenth of Ianuarie there came a Post from 
Paris
 to 
Venice,
 that certified them of the French Kings hurt: and the same Post saide, that as he passed on his way by Lyons, he heard of some com∣motion at 
Marsilles,
 whence sundrie Noble men are fled.






From Vienna 
the 11. of Ianuarie.


AT fiue of the Clocke that day in the morning, came these ill newes: that eight hundred Turks some on foote but most part horse, came from 
Rab
 to saint 
Georgen,
 and that the fift daie of this said month the Turkes had taken 
Prûg
 nere 
Leyten,
 and burned the Cities and Country of the Lord 
Herryth,
 making

 excursions within eight myles of 
Vienna,
 murdring the people, or making them slaues, robbing, spoiling and burning the whole Countrey, and threatening within few daies to gather head against 
Vienna.


Likewise the said 11. of Ianuarie, a Gouernour of horsemen (being in a Hold hard by) required to haue aid: and the Magistrates of 
Vienna
 haue taken order that euerie Citizen (according to his abilitie) should kéepe a proportion of horse and footmen, till other pre∣paration may be made.


The 
Graue Hardigh
 beeing taken prisoner by the Turkes, sought to breake prison, his brother hauing prouided a ladder of roapes for his escape, and fortie horse for his rescue: but it was discouered, and they all slaine or taken.


Thrée sodaine fiers haue béen lately in 
Vienna,
 yet by Gods great mercie but one house at a time burnt: neuerthelesse the fearfull multitude conster it to be an ominous presage of sad misfortune.






From Prage 
the 10. of Ianuarie.


THis day the Emperours Ambassadours returned to 
Prage,
 from the King of 
Poland,
 with this an∣swere: That the 
Polonians
 would willingly assist the Emperour, vpon condition the Emperour would doo asmuch for him, if the Turke should moue warre vpon 
Polonia:
 of which to be resolued, hee requireth the Princes Electors, to send their Ambassadours to his Parliament holden in 
Polonia.


Maximilian
 Archduke of 
Austria,
 intends to bée Generall against the Turkes. 
Charles
 of 
Mansfield
 will come with 3000. horsmen, one thousand of thē being bard, and two Regiments of foote of 6000, are promised out of the lower 
Germanie
 to bee sent into

 
Hungarie
 with all spéede.


This tenth of Ianuarie a Legate came to the Em∣perour at 
Prage,
 with foure demands from Charles the Duke: first for necessaries concerning his mar∣riage, and relief for thrée yeares, till the warres were somewhat quieted in 
Hungarie.
 Secondly, that hée be taken as a Sessor or Prince in the Emperie, & in∣corporated in the Kingdome of 
Hungarie,
 conditio∣ning, that if he died without issue male, his lands be∣ing 
Moldau, Walachia,
 and 
Bulgaria,
 shall come to the succéeding Kings of 
Hungarie.
 Thirdly, that the Emperour would send him foure thousand horse∣men at his proper charge. Fourthly, that the Em∣perour should not enter into peace with the Turke, without his knowledge. But what the Emperour resolues to answere is not yet knowne.






From Vienna 
the 6. of Ianuarie.


THe last night in the euening 
Syfrid van Colneyt
 sent his seruant to 
Vienna,
 certifiyng the State that the Turks and Tartars in great numbers were come ouer the passage at 
Altenbergh,
 and fired a towne called saint 
Peters,
 and remained that night at saint 
Iohns.
 But the day before they were at saint 
Nicholas, Sturne, Cabastain, Somerain, Zuiden∣bergh,
 and other neighbouring places betweene 
Al∣tenbergh
 and 
Prage,
 and he feared, they had taken some of those places, spoyled the people, and hazarded 
Altenbergh,
 by reason there was but two hundred men at Armes therein, the enemie beeing twentie thousand strong, and very well furnished with all munition.


Presently the same day came another messenger, certifiyng that the enemie is come to 
Prage
 and

 
Men eshoffen,
 firing many townes, killing multi∣tudes of people, and taking diuers prisoners, so that 
Altenbergh
 is in great danger to be taken away, as 
Rab.






More from Vienna 
the 8. of Ianuarie.


THE seconde of this month came the Ambassa∣dours from 
Seuenbergh,
 the chiefe mans name beeing 
Bapteri Istuan,
 accompanied with them of 
Moldau,
 and were lodged at the Lorde of 
Westerna∣hers,
 next day they had audience before 
Maximilian
 the Emperours brother.


About foure a clocke in the afternoone they came to 
Iohn de Medices,
 and the fourth day iourneyed to 
Prage
 to the Emperour.


Two daies after came tydinges that fiftéene thou∣sand Turkes were come to 
Rab
 with intention to take 
Altenbergh,
 which they may easily doo, by rea∣son the riuers are so extreamely frozen, and the helpe so small.


Presently after came worse newes, that foure and twenty thousand Turkes were entred 
Austria:
 wher∣fore that euening euery thirtith man was chosen in that Citie, beside the quarter of 
Vienna Wald,
 who were mustred the seauenth of this month at 
Brûg
 vn∣der 
Leyther.


By the last Parlament, all things stand as before, but the enemie growes very strong, our souldiers for want of pay beeing vnwilling to serue: Certaine of the Generall of 
Seeneberghs
 souldiers mutening for want of pay, are gone vpward into the Emperie, and will make vs haue a very ill name: The mo∣ney which they receiued, they left word should pay for their horses.




One of my Lord the Dukes seruaunts, that was sent to the Lord 
Haunce Wererne,
 Generall for the Margraue of 
Bourgan
 toward 
Nysadell,
 brought ti∣dings, that the Turkes and Tartars did great harme thereabout, none resisting them, the people onely de∣termining of flight.






From Presbergh, 
the last of December.


THe Embassadors of 
Seuenbergh
 yesterday about twelue a clocke arriued heere, and immediatelye went toward 
Fishau.


The Spies bring certaine tidings, that the Turks gather in manie thousands about 
Rab,
 meaning to spoyle the Countrey about 
Vienna,
 for whom they make here great prouision.


The 25. of this month the Turkes set forward to∣ward 
Seinneyt
 in 
Hungarie,
 but the people of the Country so fiercely assailed them, that there remaind aboue an hundred dead on the place, beside a number that were drowned in flight. Some Turkish priso∣ners that were there taken, confessed, that the Bas∣saes purpose immediately after Newyeares day to doo some great exployt.


This last of December, one of our Embassadors came from 
Seuenbergh,
 certifying vs the Prince of 
Seuenbergh
 greatly endamageth the Turke, taking from him one Hold after another. And that he hath thrée goodly Campes, one lead by 
Herbart Michael
 beyond the 
Donow,
 to hinder the Turkes passage to 
Oouen:
 the other by 
Istuan Ferran
 in 
Lucar,
 neere 
Tamusweer:
 the third by 
Cornus Iasper
 from 
Ther∣neyt:
 to whom are adioyned of the vpper 
Hungari∣ans
 and Gréekish Souldiers, fifteene hundred men at

 armes. What their expedition will sort vnto, is one∣ly in the hands of God: and of their successe we looke shortly to heare from 
Cassau.






From Cassau, 
December the 28.


THe Turkes and Tartars gather daylie in great multitudes about 
Iula,
 lead by the Bassa of 
Ta∣musweer,
 and the Bassa of 
Selnicke,
 desirous to doo some seruice (while the 
Teysca
 and other waters are frosen) against 
Tartasail
 by 
Teyny.
 Against whom the Christians on our side make head, looking for cer∣taine knowledge which way they intend to take, and being assured of their march, wee will with them of 
Seuenbergh
 méete them, committing our selues to God, in whose quarrell wee willingly lay downe our liues, hoping he will defend his distressed and afflicted flocke.






More from Cassau 
the last of December.


THe Turkes and Tartars perreyuing our inten∣tion to ioyne with the 
Seuenberghers,
 are for all theyr great multitudes, fearfully retyred. Neuer∣thelesse doubting their sodaine returne, wee kéepe ve∣rie carefull watch.










The Confession of a Tartarian Horseman taken amongst other Prisoners.




depiction of an armoured knight with feathered helmet, lance, and spurs, on a horse with plumes




F
Irst hee saith, although the Turkish Emperour commaunded them to win∣ter in 
Hungaria,
 they notwithstanding went forwarde, hearing their owne Countrey was afflicted, and sending six∣téene

 thousand men before, they were all slaine and taken by the Christians of 
Seuenbergh.


2 Also hee saith, that the King of 
Tartars
 sonne, with the rest of the Armie lye about 
Tamusweer
 and 
Wesenbergh,
 and that of the 
Tartars
 onely two thousand shall remaine there.


3 Also he saith, that in the last skirmish thrée hun∣dred 
Tartars,
 and one hundred 
Turkes,
 all horsemen, were sent to learne if the riuer of 
Rabnitz
 were hard frozen to passe or no, but what they haue done hée knowes not, for by the stumbling of his horse he was taken prisoner: but he thinketh they meant to set vp∣pon 
Capurar.


4 Fourthly, hee knoweth not what number of men were at 
Cappa,
 but at 
Rab
 there were some fif∣téene thousand.


5 Fifthly hee saith, that no more 
Tartars
 must come downe, but those that are there, are commaun∣ded to set vpon 
Erlaw.


6 Sixthly he faith, all those 
Turkes
 that came last from Sea, beeing about fiftie thousand, are all peri∣shed.


7 Seuenthly hee saith, the 
Turke
 hath made peace with the 
Persian,
 but because the 
Souldans
 sonne is dead at 
Perto,
 he knoweth not whether the peace will holde.


8 Eighthly hee saith, hee knoweth not whe∣ther

 the Souldan will hold warre against the 
Geor∣geani
 or no.


9 Ninthly hee saith, At 
Comar
 the Christians slue nine hundred Ianissaries: but at 
Rab
 hee know∣eth not how manie were slaine, onely he remembreth that some daies thrée, some dayes foure, and some dayes fiue hundred perished.


10 Lastly hee saith, The men of 
Comar
 so vali∣auntly resisted, that the Turkes were not able to continue their siege, but were forced to retyre barke againe to 
Rab.








The true Copie of a Lamentable Petiti∣on exhibited in the names of the afflicted Christians in the East parts, to the Chri∣stian Kingdomes in the VVest.


I
F either humane pi∣tie (naturally graf∣ted in mans heart) to compassionate the oppressed, or the sweete bandes of Christian Loue wherein you & we (members of one head) are mutual∣ly bound either to other: haue anie power to intreate your hartie praiers or speedie help: we humbly beg the one, and beseech the other.


You happie Princes of peopled Kingdomes, and blessed people of those happie Princes: commise∣rate (for CHRISTES cause) our miserable distresse, that haue no day of happines, no night of rest: but feare within, and terror without, dimmes the bright∣nes of our day, and doubles the darknes of our night. We heare, (which addeth heauinesse to our greefe) that ciuill warres, priuate quarrells, and vnchristian malice, weakneth the Arme of Christendome, that should be strengthened among you. Alas, what need yee (like the earth-bred brethren) maliciously let

 cut each others blood? when ye haue a whole world of enemies to warre against: and wee and you in all but a corner of the earth to oppose our selues against their crueltie.


VVe heare how you prouoke (as wee haue done) by the excesse of sinne, Gods wrathfull and heauie vengeance. Let our pride, be a president for you to learne humblenes: our neglect of God, a warning that you leaue such negligence: our wrath, enuie, and auarice, a meane to make you milde, louing and liberall: our sloth, wantonnes and excesse, to increase your diligence, chastitie and temperance. Now for our rich array we put on sackcloath, our beauteous Ladies sit with teare-distained faces, our Virgines sing not the Hymnes of gladnes, but of sorrow, our Old-men faint feebly in the streete, and our Yong∣men prepare themselues to venture their precious liues in open field,


Dere Christian Brethren, turne turne your pity∣ing eyes vppon our prostrate miserie. Remember the willingnes of your fore-fathers in that great Ex∣pedition to 
Ierusalem,
 vnder the leading of 
Godfrey
 Duke of 
Bulloigne.
 Then Princes, Noblemen, and well disposed people, came in person from the vt∣most VVesterne Kingdomes, euen from 
England, France, Netherland,
 and 
Scotland:
 the women gaue the souldiers their bracelets of gold and siluer, yea, poore seruants offred of their small wages to maine∣taine that holy VVarre. Ah, where is that pitie, care, true loue and mercie now become? The Turkish & vnbeleeuing Enemies are come by manie Kingdoms farre neerer your homes, and your commiseration is by manie degrees farther off. Let 
Antioch,
 the first Citie wherein the name of Christians began (nowe made a Synagogue of vnbeleeuing Infidels) moue

 ye to compassion. The Candlestickes are remoued from the Churches in 
Asia
 as S. 
Iohn
 prophecied: the light of Christianitie is wholly extinct among them. In 
Syria
 Christs Spouse hath lost her beautie. In the Emperie of 
Greece,
 Kingdomes of 
Epyrus, Lystria, Crete, Cyprus,
 and other the Mediterranean Nati∣ons, CHRIST had (& that within these few yeres) his beloued Vineyard, planted, tended, wel dressed, compassed about. But now the Turkes (like wilde Boares are entred, the Vineyard is wasted. In stead of wine, the earth (in all those and diuers other king∣domes) is drunke with Christian blood: and there is no face of Christianitie left, no outward Church. Let that part of our Kingdomes alreadie lost, & the rest now hazarding, win ye to some compassion.


But it may be, because the Turke is farre off, you thinke he neuer can haue power to hurt ye, you and your children shall be safe. Be not so grose conceip∣ted. Consider, wee had Fathers that gathered for vs, so had the 
Greekes,
 and other the forenamed Na∣tions: but now their welth and ours lies open to the Enemie. VVe had houses, but Turkes posses them: Pallaces, but they are spoyled: Churches, but they are prophaned: Cities, but they are wasted: & some more we haue, but how long they shalbe ours, we li∣tle know. And yet within these few yeres, wee were thrice farther off from daunger than you now are. Neither flatter your selues that your Countryes are populous, your Cities strong, your Kingdomes fen∣ced with the Sea: they and we had peopled King∣domes, fenced Cities, sea-walled Ilands, but all was vaine, they were singled one by one, their neighbors denied them helpe, and first they, then those deniers perished. Such will our case be, if we be not aided: such will yours be, if ye doo not aid vs.




Besides, there is a rumour spred in some partes of Christendome, how the Turkes are iust in keeping faith and promise. O fond and idle beliefe: What faith can they keepe that haue no faith?


Such faith as not long since they kept with that noble Christian Prince of 
Cyprus,
 the Turkish Em∣perour himselfe passing his word vnto him. When that most Princely Christian VVarriour, had defen∣ded 
Famagosta
 till all munition and vittaile failed: hee and his small companie yet worthely resoluing, intended deerely to sel their liues, and stood valiant∣ly to defend the breaches. The Turke seeing their resolution, offred the Prince, that if hee would sur∣render the Citie, himselfe and the souldiers, wyth theyr Armes, weapons, and colours displaied, the Princesse with her children, the other women, peo∣ple, and children of the Citie with bag and baggage should passe quietly through the Turkes Armie, and bee transported to what Hauen in Christendome they desired. The Prince accepted these conditions, the Turkish Emperor confirmed them with an: oath: but (like a false miscreaunt) when they were issued, hee compelled the Prince and the able men to beare burthens of earth vppon their shoulders to repayre the breaches: then commaunded the Princesse, her children, the women and other weake people (after manie shamefull abuses) to be cruelly tortured to death. Then stripped they the Souldiers and chay∣ned them for slaues. Lastly they puld out the wo∣full Princes eyes, punched his warlike bodie full of hoales, and hangd him on the top mast of their Ad∣mirall Galley, more to afflict his poore subiects that rowed there as slaues.


Such faith will they keepe as with the last Empe∣rour of 
Greece
 they did: whom (after many frendly

 seeming Ambassades) they sodainly besieged in his chiefe Citie 
Constantinople,
 and in the chiefe Gate of that Citie, he and his children were found mangled wyth manie wounds, and trampled with their hor∣ses feete.


Such faith will they keepe as lately they did wyth vs of 
Hungarie:
 Hauing taken certaine yongmen of noble Families. Wee laboured for their libertie to the Bassa of 
Buda.
 Their ransome was set downe, and license granted for their frends to bring it. The Bassa himselfe receiued it: and then tyrannouslie to seuerall stakes he tyed the miserable yong Gentle∣men naked, and in presence of their friends caused their bodies to be sliced with sharpe kniues, the flesh cast vnto hungrie dogs, and the dead carcasses deli∣uered their sorrowfull friends for the raunsome they had paid.


This is the Turkish faith, this their vow, this their religion: let no Christian State beleeue them, nor for lucre hold league with them, for they doo await time first to destroy vs, then to extirpate them.


What should wee say that you cannot conceiue, looke on your Cities, Pallaces, Fieldes, Meadowes, walkes, pleasant Gardens, thinke ours were like yours, but nowe are nothing but receptacles of sor∣row. Looke on your wiues and beauteous daugh∣ters, and remember that we haue such (though not so fortunate) yours safe, ours subiect to rauishment and spoile. Looke on your sonnes and forget not ours, of whom no small number are alreadie with their wofull fathers chained in Turkish slauerie, the rest opposing themselues against their tyrannie. And then remember it is in his quarrell wee striue, that hath promised to reward a cup of colde water giuen in his name: much more reward againe with tenne

 folde blessings, your Christian mercie and pittie to∣ward vs.


To him that is able to helpe as well by one as ma∣nie, we commit ourselues: and commend the con∣sideration of our miserable estate to your Christian Charities.


From 
Prage,
 
the 13, of Ianuarie.


Your poore afflicted Christian Bretheren of
 Boheme, Hungarie, Austria, Polonia, 
and
 Heluetia.


FINIS.










Printed at London by Iohn Danter, for Thomas Gosson, and are to be sold at his shop adioyning to London Bridge Gate. 1595.











