(EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A11529)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 1780)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 1006:03)
Signatures: A-C⁴.
Running title reads: The voiage of the Iesus into Tripolie in Barbarie.
Reproduction of original in the British Library.
Man dooth purpose, and God dooth dispose.
The Maister and the Pur∣ser with all the rest ex∣cept the Pilot drowned.
A new Mai∣ster chosen.
The new m
The Iesus driuen backe ag
After set for∣ward and dri∣uen backe a∣g
The Iesus ar∣riued into Tripolie.
The king of Tripolie a marchant.
Another ship of Bristowe came to Tri∣polie.
A French fac∣tor beguiled an English factor.
The French factor desired vengeance to light on
A conspiracie practised by the French Factor, to de∣ceiue a Tur∣kish mar∣chant of 450 crownes.
The king of Tripolie swarueth frō his promise, through co∣uetousnesse.
The begin∣ning of their troubles, and occasion of all their miserie.
All the Tur∣k
A proclam
The English men cheined by foure and foure.
The Christiā captiues as greedie of the English∣mens spoile as the Turks.
A Turks tooke a Ge∣neua Bible for his sh
All that had share of the spoile (short∣lie after) by Gods iudge∣ment peri∣shed.
The lamen∣tation of the marchants and marriners being all cheined in prison.
The English∣men arraig∣ned.
Romaine Sonnings condempned to be hanged ouer one of the Bulwarks. The Maister Andrew Dier, condempned to be hanged ouer the o∣ther Bul∣warke. Rich. Skegs procured maister Diers pardon and his owne.
Maister Dier afterwards condempned to be hanged ouer another Bulwarke.
Romaine Sonnings the French man turned Turke in hope of his life, and died in the profes∣sion of a Turke.
XXIII. Eng∣lishmen con∣demned to perpetuall prison.
Euerie fiue men allowed but two pēce of bread in a daie.
The English∣mens heads and beards forceablie shauen.
The Christi∣ans cheined, three & three to an Oare in the Galley, and rowed all naked aboue the girdle, & pitti

The Christi∣ans sent three times a weeke thirtie miles to fetch wood
The Christi∣ans plucked vp the wood by the roots to loade their Cammels.
Eighteene captiues run awaie from Tripolie.
The iudge∣ment of God vpon wicked blasphemers.
The Moores tooke the xviii. christi∣ans that ran awaie from Tripolie.
The king of Tripolie had a son which was ruler in the Iland of Ierbbye.
The kinges sonne had a Captiue that was sonne to one of the Queenes ma∣iesties guard, that was for∣ced to turne Turke.
Richard Bur¦ges made a Turke by force.
Iames Smith made Turke, and circumci∣sed by force.
The first mo∣tion for those Englishmens deliuerie.
A Commissiō come from the great Turke for the Englishmens deliuerie.
The somme of the great Turkes com∣mission, pro∣noun
The English∣men released by the king of Tripolie, and deliuered to M Barton, the 28 daie of Aprill, 1585.
The plagues and punish∣ments that happened to the king and his people.
150 captiues died of the plague in one moneth. Nine of the companie of the Iesus died of the pl
Two English¦men shipped to Constan∣tinople with M. Barton. N
Two Gal∣leis of Venice tooke the king of Tri¦polie hi