Heuy newes of an horryble earth quake whiche was in the cytie of Scharbaria in this present yeare of. xlii. The xiii. day of June. Also how that a cytie in Turky is sonke.
Hevy newes of an horryble earth quake whiche was in the cytie of Scharbaria.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A11564




STC 21807



ESTC S104707





99840440




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Heuy newes of an horryble earth quake whiche was in the cytie of Scharbaria in this present yeare of. xlii. The xiii. day of June. Also how that a cytie in Turky is sonke.
Hevy newes of an horryble earth quake whiche was in the cytie of Scharbaria.
[8] p.   


[[London] :


Imprinted in Aldersgate strete by Nicolas Bourman,


[1542]]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Earthquakes --  Italy --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






21807


S104707


99840440


4946














Heuy newes


¶ Of an horryble earth quake whiche was in the cytie of Schar∣baria in this pre∣sent yeare of. xlij. The xiij. day of Iune.


¶ Also how that a cytie in Turky is sonke
;














¶ The heuy newes contayned in a letter sent out of Italy.


R
Ighte douty and wel∣beloued Lorde I lette you wytte the pytieful new tydyng and horri∣ble earthquake, which I meselfe haue sene, where I with my two company
 was at ynne by a towne, which 
 a∣bout .xvi. myle from Florence, a
s called Scharbaria, where we wer
 
¦ged ouer nyghte. On the .xiii. da
 
 Iune of this present yeare one ho
 before the breake of the daye, hath al∣myghty God of his greate mercy an
 fatherly loue preserued vs 
 from all euell and 
 whiche we neuer 
 prayse hym. 
 that throu
 


 he wyll alwaye preserue vs. For we may surely marke well ynough by the wonderfull tokens that he hath pro∣phecyed to come, and partly do nowe dayly chaunce, before our eyen, that the daye of dome is at hande.


In the mornynge one houre before the breake of the daye dyd ryse greate and horryble earth quakes: for there happened seuen in the space of an h
ure, & I with me two fellowes were al
 thre in slepe in the bedde, in an ynne of the suburbes, neare to the gates, whi¦che was a great fortune fo
 
s that we were not closed in.




¶ The fyrste earthquake.


The fyrst earthquake was so fear∣
 
 
ade so great a noyse, that I 
 
oughte at the fyrste 
 
yshynge that I 
 
ut at the same 
 house be∣gyn

 to cleue in sunder, and the chyme∣ney with the thacke to fall, so that we dyd flye contynently, & howe we eska∣ped can not I tell: yet throughe the helpe of God, dyd we eskape withoute hurte or harme of oure bodyes. But within the cytie are nearehande sonke and broken all the houses, and some folke peryshed. The churches & greate howses are all fallen to the grounde. The people that was lefte in lyfe dyd crye Misericorde with greate chatte∣rynge of tethe, by reason of the feare, and ranne out of the citie into a moras grounde, where we were fledde also with oure ooste and his housholde.


Helas for pitie, there was so pytiefull an outcrye and howlynge of men and women, as I neuer dyd heare all the dayes of my lyfe. Muche people dyd lye besyde the stones and timber, which coulde not be holpe for feare: whether some dyd ronne to them, that can not I

 tell: For I can not fully wryte vnto you of the horrible punishment and ad¦uertisement of God.


Farthermore dyd there ryse at the same houre yet .vj. earthquakes more the one after the other, whiche were so horryble at the fyrst, that the earth dyd so shake, as though it wolde haue ope∣ned it selfe, and swalowed vs all. It was so calme wether, that one leafe of the trees dyd not moue. The skye was so darck and black, that I for my part dyd wayte for the clerynge therof euery twynckelynge of an eye. Summa eue∣ry thynge was muche more, and more horrible, than I can euer describe vnto you. Neuerthelesse God gaue grace, that the darckenesse voyded, and the daye came agayne, the wynde began also to blowe agayne: wherfore we were glad and lauded and thanked God, which had so gracyously shewed his mercy to vs.




After that dyd we ryde to Florence, our Lorde be mercyfull vnto vs: for I beleue surelye that I haue in dede sene an example of the domes daye. The town hath yet left foure hundreth and twenty heerthes or places for fyre.


Good Lord what a pitieful cryenge and callynge vppon God was herde there. To burne a towne is not to be compared by this dolorous chaunce. God our Lorde graunte vnto vs all his mercy, that we maye by this earth∣quake amende and conuerte vs to his glory, and oure soules health. Amen.


Lyke earthquakes haue ben at Florence, and in all those countryes, but they haue not done so great hurtes saue onely that they haue ouerthrowen many chymenies. This haue I written vnto you in hayste, bycause the Post coulde not tarye.








¶ An other new tydynge that is happened in Turky.


IN Turky (as I vnderstande) is a cytie sonke into the grounde, out of the whiche is not one man escaped.


She lyeth in a playne contry, from the whiche the Turkysh safferon com∣meth, about a dayes iourney from Solonichio, whiche is a renowmed citye in Turky. Thus fare ye well. In my nex writynge vnto you shall ye haue farther certifi∣cation of all thynges ∴












¶ Imprinted in Aldersgate strete by Nicolas Bourman.











