(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A12460)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 11424)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 1084:10)
With an additional leaf of Prince Charles's new names for New England places. Variant: lacking this leaf.
The map has heading "New England", imprint "London printed by Geor: Low [or "Iames Reeue"]"; most states dated 1614. It is signed "Simon Passæus sculpsit. Robert Clerke excudit". For a fuller discussion of states of the map see Sabin 82819 and 82823.
Running title reads: The description of New England, by Captaine Iohn Smith.
Reproduction of the original in the British Library.
Hioderers.
My first voy∣age to new-England.
The situation of New Eng∣land.
Notes of Flo∣rida.
Notes of Vir∣ginia.
The description of New Eng∣land.
The particular C
The mixture of an excellent soyle.
A proofe of an excellent tem∣per.
A proofe of health.
St
The Hollan∣ders fishing.
Which is fifteen hundred thou and pound.
Examples of the altitude comparatiuely.
The particular staple commo∣dities that may be had.
The nature of ground ap∣prooued.
The seasons for fishing approo∣ued.
Imployment for poore peo∣ple and father∣lesse children.
The facility of the plantation.

An example of the gains vpon euery yeare or from one thes returne.
A description of the Coun∣tries in particu∣lar, and their situations.
A good Coun∣trie.
The land∣markes.
Hearbs.
Woods.
Birds.
Fishes.
Beasts.
A note for men that haue great spirits, and smal meanes
An example of secure coue∣tousness.
The Authors conditions.
The planters pleasures, and profits.
Imployments for gentlemen.
Imployments for labourers.
Examples of the Spanyard.
The blisse of Spaine.
My second voyage to New England.
The occasion of my returne.
My reimbark∣ment, incoun∣ters with py
Captaine Fry
The one of 200, the other 20.
The Admirall 140 tuns, 12 peeces, 12 mur∣derers, 90 men, with long pi∣stols, pocket pistol, musket, sword and po∣niard, the Vice-admirall 100 tuns, the Rere-admiral 60, the other 80: all had 250 Men most armed as is said.
The gentlemen and souldiers were euer wil∣ling to fight.
A double trea∣chery.
A
A prize worth 16000 crow
A prize worth 200000 crownes.
My escape from the French men.
Sir Thomas Edmunds.
They betraied mee hauing the broad seale of England and neere twentie sayle of Eng∣lish more, be∣siles them con∣cealed in like manner were be∣trayed that year
My returne for England, 1615
The successe of my vice Admi∣rall and the foure ships of London, from New England.