(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A13519)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 18856)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 1036:28)
I.T. = John Taylor.
In verse.
Signatures: A-B.
Running title reads: A very merry wherry-ferry-voyage.
Reproduction of the original in the Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery.
The yeare of our Lord

The Dog-dayes were 6. dayes en∣tred.
I obserue signes, win∣des, Tides, dayes, hou∣res, times, Scituations & manners.
Noone if you'le take it so.
Boats are like Bar∣bars Chairs Hackneyes or Whores: common to all estates.
These star Sands are called the Spi

And a ship Car∣penter.
We were in a puz∣zell.
We were like Floun∣ders aliue in a frying Pan, that leap'd into the fire to saue them∣selues.
These were the names of the cum∣bersome
People did come thither 3. or 4. miles about, to know what the matter was.
I had as good to haue said nothing.
Diligent Officers.
The dan∣cing on the Ropes, or a Puppet play, had come short of his ta∣kings, ac∣counting time for time.
This was more then I could willingly afford.
And the sword was rusty with Salt-water, that it had neede of a quarters warning ere it wold come out.
O braue sent.
He would haue had vs to haue stayed 3. or foure dayes with him.
They long'd for imploy∣ment, and rather then be idle, would be ill occu∣pied.
The God of Riuers, Springs, Brookes, Foords, & Fountains.
We Row∣ed aboue 100. miles that day.
Sands ly∣ing crook∣edly in our way, ma∣king vs goe 3. or foure miles about at lowe wa∣ter.
It is so call'd in Mr
It is a passage cut through the land 8. miles from
I went 15. mile out of

The mea∣ning of those marks are onely knowne to the Towns∣men there.
An inge∣nious man named
M
The Ri∣uer of
He built another faire Wa∣terwork, at
A Prouerb
Mark, for all is true.
I write not by heare-say.
But I was euer better with forks to scatter, then with Rakes to gather, therefore I would not haue the Townes-men to mistake chalke for Cheese, or
At
There is some oddes betweene keeping & spending.
Heere I make a full point, for I receiued not a point in ex∣change.
I thought it my duty (being wee had come a dangerous voyage) to offer our Boat to the chief Maie∣strate. For why should not my Boat be as good a mo∣nument as
And for∣gat to say, I thank you good fel∣lowes.
A substā∣tiall wor∣thy Citi∣zen, who hath beene Shriefe of

An Arch-Flammin which was as an Ido∣latrous high Priest to



Prince
Sir
King