The new found vvorlde, or Antarctike wherin is contained wo[n]derful and strange things, as well of humaine creatures, as beastes, fishes, foules, and serpents, trées, plants, mines of golde and siluer: garnished with many learned aucthorities, trauailed and written in the French tong, by that excellent learned man, master Andrevve Theuet. And now newly translated into Englishe, wherein is reformed the errours of the auncient cosmographers.
Singularitez de la France antarctique, autrement nommée Amérique. English
Thevet, André, 1502-1590.
Approx. 611 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 149 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2009-03 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A13665




STC 23950



ESTC S111418





99846770




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The new found vvorlde, or Antarctike wherin is contained wo[n]derful and strange things, as well of humaine creatures, as beastes, fishes, foules, and serpents, trées, plants, mines of golde and siluer: garnished with many learned aucthorities, trauailed and written in the French tong, by that excellent learned man, master Andrevve Theuet. And now newly translated into Englishe, wherein is reformed the errours of the auncient cosmographers.
Singularitez de la France antarctique, autrement nommée Amérique. English
Thevet, André, 1502-1590.
Hacket, Thomas, fl. 1560-1590.
[8], 138, [2] leaves   


Imprinted at London :


By Henrie Bynneman, for Thomas Hacket. And are to be sold at his shop in Poules Church-yard, at the signe of the Key,


[1568]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Voyages and travels --  Early works to 1800.
Indians --  Early works to 1800.
America --  Early accounts to 1600.
2008-01
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2008-01
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2008-03
John Pas
Sampled and proofread
2008-03
John Pas
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2008-09
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






23950


99846770


11759












¶ THE NEW found vvorlde, or Antarctike, wherin is contai∣ned wōderful and strange things, as well of humaine crea∣tures, as Beastes, Fishes, Foules, and Ser∣pents, Trées, Plants, Mines of Golde and Siluer: garnished with many learned aucthorities, trauailed and written in the French tong, by that excellent learned man, master ANDREVVE THEVET.


And now newly translated into Englishe, wherein is reformed the errours of the auncient Cosmo∣graphers.


¶
Imprinted at London, by Henrie Bynneman, for
 Thomas Hacket.


And are to be sold at his shop in Poules Church yard, at the signe of the Key.










¶To the right honorable 
Sir Henrie Sidney, Knight of the most
 Noble order of the Garter, Lorde 
President of Wales, and Marches of the 
same, Lord Deputie Generall of the Queenes Ma∣iesties
 Realme of Ireland. Your humble
 Orator Thomas Hacket wisheth the fauoure of God, long and happy life, encrease of ho∣nor, continuall health and felicitie.


N
One are more to be
 commended (right Hono∣rable) than those who wer the first inuenters and fin∣ders out of Artes and Sci∣ences, wherwith mankind is beautified and adorned, without the which giftes he were but naked, barba∣rous and brutish, yea and a seruile creature. It was not for nothing that the elders in times past did so muche celebrate the instituters of those things: as 
Herodotus
 wri∣teth, that the Egiptians before all other men first foūd out the yere by the course of the Planets, and deuided it into .xij. mon∣thes. 
Diodorus
 assigned it to the 
Thebanes,
 the which stan∣deth well with the opinion of 
Herodotus,
 bicause the 
The∣banes
 be a nation of Egipt. As 
Numa
 added to the yere Ia∣nuary and February, 
Romulus
 ordred Marche, Aprill, and May, 
Augustus
 an other part, and so 
Iulius Caesar
 made vp


the perfect yere, as 
Polidorus Vergilius
 witnesseth in his boke 
De inuentoribus rerum.
 But how much praise is to be giuen to such as haue inuented good lawes & statutes for the bride∣ling of the Barbarous and wicked, and for the maintayning and defending of the iust? As we reade that 
Isis
 ariuing in 
Egipt,
 brideled that Countrey, and ordained good common wealths. How did the 
Scicilians
 honor 
Ceres,
 for that she was the first inuenter of wheat sowing, with other innumerable? Among all other, none in my iudgement is more worthier to be praised, thā the first finders out how to make ships and ves∣sels nauigable for the sea. 
Strabo
 writeth that 
Minos
 king of 
Crete,
 had the first rule of the sea. But 
Diodorus
 sayth, that 
Neptunus
 had the Empire of it afore him, for he inuented the feat in rowing of boates, and made a nauie, and was made Admirall of it by his father 
Saturnus,
 and 
Plinie
 reporteth that King 
Erichthas
 deuised boates first, and rowed in them on the Red sea. Some say they were ordained by the Troyans in the narow seas called 
Hellespontus:
 some thinke they were inuented in the English sea. 
Danus
 as some write, was the first that vsed any ship when he sailed out of Egipt into Grece. But for more assurance, what so euer their opinions be, as touching the beginning hereof, (as we rede in the holy scripture) 
Noe
 was the first inuenter or maker thereof, before the floud. The ingenious industry of man hath brought many things to a no∣table and good perfection, as well in Cosmography and Naui∣gation, as in any other arte or science: for no doubt, (as it ape∣reth by this trauaile or worke of Cosmography & such like,) the olde ancient writers, as 
Ptholomeus
 and others, were de∣ceiued, in that they iudged this Newe found Worlde, or the West part to be vnhabitable. How muche are they to be prai∣sed, that for their Countrey sake refuse no imminent perill, leauing the Pleasaunt bedde of Delicacie, and the seate or cradle of Sensualitie, their landes and goodes, their Wiues


and children, which in dede, are dearest vnto them, to aban∣dō themselues and their swetest liues to the fauoure of the boy∣strous seas, to the hap of the vnconstante windes, to the chayre of fortune, and finally to a thousande imminent euils, onely to encrease the fame and good renowme of their countrey. A∣mong the which I might rehearse, that this most noble Seig∣norie and Territorie of England hath of late yeares gotte the fame and renowme, that it hath had in times past, by Naui∣gation lately atempted by many and sundrie of our countrey∣men, (God graunte them still to go forwarde and encrease in those and such like enterprises, to Gods glory and the benefite of this common Wealth.) But alas, the greater number of mē are giuen to idelnesse or sensualitie, as if I mighte say nowe: where are the 
Tiberians,
 the 
Metelli,
 the 
Emili,
 the 
Marij
 and the 
Catones
? Among the number of a great many, and in the middest of aboundance and pleasure, we meditate no∣thing else but onely securitie, almoste abhorring to heare the name of trauell or payne, by which it may be sayde to vs, in a manner, as it was sayde of 
Haniball,
 after the battell 
Tra∣simenius
 or 
Cannas,
 that his wintering at 
Capua
 in pleasure and delicacie was more noysom and hurtfull vnto him, than either of the battels before named. We reade after that 
Ale∣xander
 had vanquished almost the thirde parte of the world, hauing ouerthrowē the mighty King 
Porrus
 one of the stron∣gest Kings of 
India,
 with whom (as rehearseth 
Plutarche
 in the life of 
Alexander
) he among all other had moste to doe, hauing also subdued vnto him the mighty King 
Darius,
 hea∣ring the Philosopher 
Anaxagoras,
 in a certayne lecture, hol∣ding this opinion, that there were Worldes out of number, therewith he burste out sodaynely into weeping, his friendes moued with this sight, demaunded whether any mishap had fallen vnto him mete to weepe for or no, he sayde these wordes: Oh, haue I not good cause to weepe trowe ye, that


there being worlds innumerable, I am not yet come to be full Lorde of one? of whom I gather the inceasable stomake, glory and renowme, how little he estemed him selfe and his King∣doms, without the name of victorious and mighty. Among and aboue all (as affirmeth 
Plutarchus
) he estemed the 
Ilia
 of 
Homer,
 bicause in the same was declared the excellent prowes of 
Achilles.
 Thus (right honorable) we see, the valiant and curagious personages of the world haue brought to passe many excellent enterprises, so that their fame shall neuer dye, atcheued as well by sea as by lande, as this worthy traueller 
Andrewe Theuit,
 in this his Nauigation of the New found World, which I haue dedicated vnto your honor, as a tokē of my good will, the which after your great & waighty affaires, it may please you to vse, and to pardō this my rash enterprise, wherein I am enboldned to prefer this towards you, as a thing very rare, and of such exquisite doing, as before this time the like hath not ben heard of, whose annotations therin be such, as no Cosmographers hereto before haue done the like: desi∣ring your honor so to accepte the same, as the good will of him that gaue it. And thus I commit your good Lordship to the tuition of God, who preserue you and all yours in health and eternall felicitie. Amen.


Your Lordships moste humble,
 Thomas Hacket.








¶An Admonition to the Reader.


I
 Doubt not gentle Reader, but that the description of this present historie wil make thée to wonder, as well bicause of the varietie of things that herein then mayst Reade, as also of many others whiche at the firste wil seme vnto thée rather monstrous than naturall. But after that thou hast soberly wayed & considered the great effects of our mother dame nature, I doe surely beleue y
t
 such admiratiōs shal haue no more place in thée. Also let it not seme to thée strāge the setting forth of many strāge trées, as Palme trées and others, with beasts of the fielde and foules of the Ayre, the which are cleane contrarie to the setting forth of our Cosmographers and Anciente writers, who for bicause that they haue not sene the pla∣ces, and for the smal experience and knowledge that they had, did greatly erre. But if thou herein stande in doubt, then those that haue trauelled thether, and those 
Indians
 that were brought frō thence, can affirme al things here∣in contayned to be true. Furthermore if that there be here in this booke any wordes that seme to thée rude or il placed, thou shalt therefore accuse the feuer and death, (y
e
 feuer) which hath so kept or cleaned to the Author since his returne home, that he had no leasure to peruse his boke before that it came to the Printer, being prouoked to deliuer it at the commaundement of the Cardinall of 
Sens:
 and death which happened to 
Ambrose de la porte,
 a good student and well sene in the Frenche tong, who had taken vpō him the whole charge of this present boke. Notwithstanding gentle Readers, our good will herein hath not bene wanting, onely wishing for recompence, that it may be agreable to thée. Farewell.










In prayse of the Author.


THe farthest scope of heauen and earth also,


The subtile stremes inclosed in the grounde,


The mighty Mines of Metals that doe gro


In lurking vaynes, that hidden are profounde,


The Cristall pearle, the Diamond so fayre,


The floting fish of diuers kindes of hew,


Of diuers soiles, to which thou mayst repayre,


Of other landes that yet to vs be new,


Hath 
Theuet
 here through trauell his and payne,


Educted forth, to satisfie thy minde,


Who well deserues thy thankefull speech to gayne,


As single eye of iudgement thyne shall finde.


Therefore as craues this his deserued stile,


So of his worke let iudgement thyne procede,


Who of good will this libell did compile,


To further thee, that tooke the same to rede.






IN THEVETVM NOVI ORBIS peragratorem & descriptorem, Io. Auratus, literarum Graecarum Regius professor.


AVre tenus, sed non pedibus, nec nauibus vllis,


Plurimus & terras, mensus & est maria


Multa tamen non nota maris terrae{que}ue relicta


His loca, nec certis testificata notis.


At maria & terras pariter vagus iste Theuetus


Et visu, & mensus nauibus & pedibus.


Pignora certa refert longarum haec scriptae viarum,


Ignoti{que}ue orbis cursor & author adest.


Ʋix quae audita alijs, subiecta fidelibus edit


Hic oculis, terra sospes ab Antipodum.


Tantum alijs hic Cosmograephis Cosmographus anteit,


Auditu quanto certior est oculus.


Ʋale in Christo.










¶To my Lord the Right 
reuerend Cardinall of Sens, keper of
 the great seales of France: Andrew Theuet wisheth peace and felicitie.


M
Y good Lorde,
 being sufficiently en∣formed, (how greatly) after the moste com∣mendable and no lesse great and paynfull ex∣ercise, to the which it pleased the King to employe and bestowe your prudencie (& for∣casting witt) you take pleasure not onely to reade, but also to see and taaste, some fayre Historie, the which among so many cares, might recreat your spirite and giue it a delectable libertie of his moste graue and carefull businesse. I haue boldened my selfe to present vnto you this my discourse of a lon∣ger farre voyage made into 
India America,
 o∣therwise by vs named 
Fraunce Antartike,
 being partly peopled and partly discouered by our Pi∣lotes, a land which at this day may be called 
the fourth parte of the vvorlde,
 not onely by the withdrawings of our orizons, as by the diuer∣sitie of nature of bests, and temperatnesse of the ayre of the countrey. Also for that none hereto∣fore hath sought it out, supposing al Cosmogra∣phers


(yea persuading with themselues) that the world was lymitted in that which the el∣ders to vs had shewed. And although that this worke semeth to me of it selfe to be very litle to be offered before the eyes of your Lordship, not∣withstanding, the greatnesse of your name will extol the basenesse of my worke: seing also that I am assured wel of your wonted clemēcie, ver∣tue, and desire to heare wonderfull things, that easily you will iudge howe that my intention doeth tende to no other ende but onely to make you vnderstand, that I haue no other delyght than to offer vnto you that thing, of the which you may draw and receiue some contentation, and wherein sometimes, you shalbe eased of the great and troublesome affayres which are of∣fered in thys degree and office, that you holde. For there is no mind or spirit be it neuer so con∣stant, but that sometymes is troubled with the quicke dispatch, graue and weighty affaires of a common weale. Therefore it is needefull sometimes to ordayne as the learned Phisition doth to a pacient or sicke body, some chaunge of meates to recreate the appetite of them which by their infirmitie and sicknesse, cannot broke nor taste one kind of meate continually, be it ne∣uer so pleasant.


This therefore is the cause why the ancient Philosophers and others did oftentimes with∣drawe themselues from being wrapped in or charged with the publike affayres. As also the


great Orator 
Cicero
 witnesseth to haue absen∣ted him selfe many tymes from the Senate of 
Rome,
 (to the great displeasure of the cytizens) for to remayne in his countreyhouse to be de∣lighted in the plesant and Harmonicall melodie of the birdes. Seing then that among oures, as he among the 
Romaynes,
 for your singular erudition, prudencie, and eloquence, you are as chiefe and principall minister of the triumphant common weale of 
Fraunce:
 and such a one as describeth 
Plato
 in his common weale, that is to know, great Lorde, and a louer of vertue and science, therefore it is not without reason to imitate and folow him in this point. Euen so (my good Lorde) as returning all weake and wery of so long a voyage, I was by you first of your grace receiued and welcomed home, which gaue me to vnderstand and know, that you are the singular patron of vertue and of all those, that folowe it also to my iudgement, I thinke I could not direct this my little labour to a bet∣ter than to you, the which if it please you to re∣ceiue so beningly as with a good & affectioned will I do present and direct it, and also to reade and peruse it, you shal find in my opinion wher∣in to recreate your spirites, and to holde me yours for euer. Although that already for many causes I feele my selfe greatly bound and holdē to do most humble and obedient seruice to your lordship: to whom I besech the creator to giue all good lucke and prosperitie.








¶A Preface to the Reader.


C
Onsidering vvith my selfe hovv much the
 long experiēce of things, & faithfull obseruation of many countries and nations, also their orders and ma∣ner of lyfe, bringeth or causeth per∣fection to man, although there were no exer∣cise more cōmendable by the which a man may sufficiently decke his spirite with all kinde of Heroicall vertue and science: biside my first & formal Nauigation into the countrey of 
Leuant,
 in 
Grecia,
 in 
Turkie, Egypte,
 and 
Arabia,
 the which in times paste I haue put to light, I haue againe vnder the protection and sauegard of the great gouernor of the vniuersal worlde, seing it hath pleased him to shew me so much fauor be∣ing left to the discretion and mercy of one of the most vnconstant Elements, & least assured that is among the rest, with small vesselles of wood so fraile that many times there was more hope of death than of life, for to sayle toward the 
Pole Antartike,
 the which was neuer discouered nor found out by the elders in times past, as it ap∣pereth by the writings of 
Ptolomeus
 and others, also ours of 
Septentrion,
 to the 
Equinoctiall,
 and therefore it was thought to be vnhabited. And we sayled so long that at the laste we came to 
India America,
 aboute the 
Capricorne,
 a mayn land of good temperatnesse and inhabited, as we will particularly & more at large hereafter de∣clare, the which I haue taken in hande at the


instant request of many great personages, of whō the gestes more than Heroical & high enterprises celebrated by the Histories, cause them to lyue for euer in perpetual honor and immortall glory. What hath prouoked the great Poet 
Homer
 so vertuously to celebrate in his writings 
Vlysses,
 but onely his long peregrination and far trauell that he made in diuerse places, with the experiēce of many things aswel by sea as by land after the spoyle of 
Troye?
 What moued 
Virgill
 to write so worthily of the 
Troyan Aeneas
 although that he according to the writing of some Historiogra∣phers had most trayterously betrayed his natiue countrey in to the hands of his enimies, but one∣ly for that he had vertuously resisted the furie of the raging waues, and other inconueniences of the sea, he had sene & endured many sharpe shou∣res, and finally he came into 
Italie?
 Euen so as the soueraigne creator hath made man of twoo sub∣stāces the one differing or exceding the other, the one elementary & corruptible, the other celestiall; diuine and immortall. Also he hath put al things in his subiectiō, that is contained vnder the scope or circuite of the Firmament, to the ende that he might know asmuch as to him was necessary for to attaine to the soueraigne gift, leauing him ne∣uerthelesse some difficultie & varietie of exercise. Man then although that he be a creature marue∣lously accomplished, yet he is neuerthelesse an in∣strument of vertuous actes, of the which God is the original, so that he may electe such an instru∣mēt as pleaseth him for to execute his plesure, be


it by sea or by land. But it may so chaunce as it is cōmonly sene come to passe, that some vnder this pretexitie make it a custome to abuse the worke∣master by an auarice and an vnsatiable appetite of some particular and temporall appetite, ieo∣parding themselues vndiscretely & as wickedly, (as 
Horace
 in his epistles doeth manyfestly shew) that he is worthy of prayse, that for the beautifi∣ing and eluminating of his spirite, & in the fauor of the common wealth doth willingly offer and put forth him selfe. This rule or meane 
Socrates
 the wise Philosopher knew how to practise, and after him 
Plato
 his disciple, (bothe the which) not onely contented to haue traueled and made voyages into strange countreys for to attaine to the full perfection & knowledge of Philosophie, but also to declare it openly without hope of any reward or recompense. Did not 
Cicero
 send his sonne 
Marke
 to 
Athens?
 partely for to heare 
Cra∣tippus,
 and of him to lerne Philosophie, and partly also for to lerne the maners and lyuing of the ci∣tisens of 
Athens. Lysander
 being elected for his magnanimitie & worthinesse gouernor ouer the 
Lacedemonians
 hath so worthily atcheued so many faire enterprises against 
Alcibiades,
 a man prewe and valiant, and 
Antiochus
 his Lieutenant on the sea, that what losse or detrimēt so euer did chāce, his heart and manly courage did neuer faile him, but pursued his enimie by sea & by lande, so that in the ende he brought 
Athens
 to his obedience. 
Themistocles,
 not lesse experte in the feate of warre thā in Philosophie, for to shew what a feruēt de∣sire


he had to ieoparde his lyfe for the libertie of his countrey, persuaded the 
Athenians,
 that the siluer that was gathered in the mynes the which they were wonte to distribute to the people, was turned and bestowed to furnishe and make ships and galleys against 
Xerxes,
 who for that he had partly distressed him, and almost put to flight, fal∣ling to appointment after this happie victorie a∣gainst the order of an enimie, made him present with three of the beste Cities of his Empire. What hath caused 
Seleucus Nicanor,
 the Emperour 
Augustus Cesar,
 and many Princes and noble men to beare in their pendens and standarts the Dol∣phin and the anker, but onely to giue instruction to al their posteritie, that Nauigation is the first and of al others the most vertuous. Here therfore without any long discourse is an example of na∣uigatiō: as al things the more excellent they are, the more difficile or harde is the way to attaine to them, as after the experience 
Aristotle
 witnes∣seth, speaking of vertue. And that the nauiga∣tion is alwaies folowed with peril, as a body is with his shadowe, the which in times past was shewed by 
Anacharsis
 the Philosopher, who af∣ter he had demaūded of what quantitie or thick∣nesse were the plācks or side of a ship: it was an∣swered, not aboue four fingers: so much (said he) is the lyfe of him from death that sayleth with ships on the water. Now gentle Reader in that I haue alleged so many excellent personages, it is not to compare, much lesse to thinke my selfe e∣qual to them, but I am persuaded that the great


power of 
Alexander
 hath not letted his successors to attempte yea the very extremitie of fortune. Also the deepe knowledge of 
Plato
 did nothing at all feare or abashe 
Aristotle,
 but that at his owne pleasure he hath treated of Philosophy. For this intent therefore not to be found ydle and slacke among others, no more than 
Diogenes
 was amōg the 
Athenians,
 I haue thought good to set out in writing many notable things that I haue dili∣gently obserued in my Nauigation betwene the South and the Weast, that is to wit, the situa∣tion and disposition of places, in what clymat, zone or paralegie it be, aswel of the sea costes, I∣landes, and mayne land, the temperatnesse of the ayre, the forme and maner of liuing of the inha∣bitants, the forme and propertie of beasts of the earth and of the sea, also of trees and roots with their frutes, mines and precious stones, shewing it liuely and truely as neare as is possible. As touching the reste I wold thinke my selfe happie if that it would please you to accepte and receiue this my little labor with as willing a heart as I doe present it: as for the rest I am assured that it wil be agreable if the Reader thinke well and way in his minde the long and dangerous pere∣grination that I haue taken in hand, for to see with the eye & to bring to light those things most memoriall that I cold note and gather together, as hereafter shalbe sene.












The first Chapter. How the Author tooke shipping.


A
Lthough that the firmament and all things that are contayned vnder the Moone, euen to the scope of the earth, séeme as the veritie is, to haue bene made for man,
 yet neuerthelesse it is so that dame Nature mother of all things, hath bene, and is alwayes such a one, that she hath preserued and kept hid within, the things that are most precious and excellentest of hir worke, yea she hath remised hir selfe, contrary to things artificiall, the moste expertest workeman that euer was, were it 
Appelles
 or 
Phidias,
 euen so as in the outwarde shew remayneth the paynting, grauing or decking of the vessel or statue, and within it remayneth altogether rude and vnpollished. But in nature we sée the contrary. Let vs first take example by the humayne body. Al the art and excellencie of nature is hidden within: also of al other na∣turall bodies, the exterior or outwarde parte is nothing in comparison if that of the interior part it taketh not his perfection. The earth sheweth outwardly a sorowful and heauy face, being for the most parte couered with stones, thornes and thistles, or such lyke: but if the husbandman minde to open it with the plough, he shall finde this ver∣tue so excellent, redy to bring him forth abundance, and to recompence him a thousand folde. Also the vertue of the roote & of the plante being without a harde barcke sometimes single & sometimes double, & that part of the frute that is most precious, wherein the vertue to bring forth his lyke, is hid within, as in the surest place or belly of the sayd frute. Euen as the laborer or husbandman ha∣uing


tylled the earth, receiueth thereby greate profit and aduantage:
 others not contented onely to sée the waters, would in like case sounde them by the way of this noble Nauigatiō with shippes and vessels, and for bicause that thereby they haue founde & gathered inestimable riches, y
t
 which is not without reason, seing al things were made for man, the Nauigation is become by little & little so fre∣quented and folowed of men, that many not continually remaining in vnconstant Ilands, haue in the end aborded the mayne land good and fruitfull, the which before the ex∣periēce was not thought, neither according to the opiniō of our elders.
 Therefore the principal cause of our Naui∣gatiō was for that 
Mounsieur de Villegagnon,
 knight of 
Malta
 a very expert gentleman as wel in Nauigation as in other honest & comely affaires, hauing with more deli∣beration receiued the Kings commaundement, & for that he was sufficiently enformed of my voyage made into the countrey of 
Leuant,
 and the good & perfect knowledge that I had in Nauigation, did most instantly request me, yea vnder the Authoritie of the King my soueraygne Lorde & Prince, to whom I owe all honor & obedience, charging and commaunding me to assist him in the accomplishing of his enterprise, the which I frely graūted, as wel for the obediēce that I will giue to my natural Prince according to my capacitie, as also for the honestie of the thing, al∣though it was payneful.
 And therfore the sixt day of May 1555. after that the sayd 
Mounsieur de Villegagnon
 had giuen order for the rigging and trimming of his ships, for munitions & other things of warre, but with much grea∣ter difficultie than to an Armie marching on the lād, and to the qualitie of his men of al estats, gentlemē, souldiers, and diuers artificers: to be short, all things being made redy and prepared in as good order as might be, the tyme


being come for vs to take shipping,
 at new 
Hauen
 a porte town (the cause why it was so named I will shew before passing further) being so named to my iudgement of this worde that signifieth sea or straight, or if you say 
Hauen, 
ab hauriendis aquis,
 lying in 
Normandie,
 whereas for∣saking the lande we hoysed sayle, sayling vpon that great sea by good right named 
Occean,
 bicause of his raging, of this Greke word 
 as som iudge, being wholy vnder the power and mercy of the winde and waues. I know well that in times past, according to the superstitious Re∣ligion of the Gentiles, many made their Vowes, Pra∣yers, and Sacrifices, to diuers Goddes,
 according as their necessitie did shewe, then among those that would goe on the water some before hande would caste some péece of money therein as a presente or offering for to cause the Goddes of y
e
 sea to be fauorable and to appease their Ire. Others attributing som deuinitie to the windes, thought to appease them by strange ceremonies. As we find the 
Calabrians
 to haue done to 
Lapix,
 a wind so named: like∣wise the 
Thurins
 and 
Pamphiliens
 to certayne others. Al∣so we reade in 
Aeneidos
 in 
Virgill,
 if it be worthy of cre∣dence, that notwithstanding the importunate prayer of 
Iuno
 to 
Aeolus
 King of windes, the miserable 
Troyan
 re∣mayned on the sea, and the quarrell of the Goddes that did folowe. By this we may euidently knowe the error and abuse, with the which the Antiquitie was blinded, being an erronious and damnable opinion, attri∣buting to one of the least creatures and vnder the power of man, that which appertayneth to the onely Creator, to whome I cannot sufficiently giue prayse in this place for his fauor shewed to vs, in deliuering vs out of such blinded ignoraunce. And for my parte, for that of his onely grace he hath so fauoured our voyage, that


giuing vs a good full winde, we haue safely and peacea∣bly passed the streights, and from thence to the 
Canaries,
 Ilands distant from the equinoctial .27. degrées, and from our 
France
 fiue hūdreth leagues or there about. Now for many reasons I thought good to begin this my discourse at our embarkment, and shipping, as by a more certaine and sure meane, the which being done, I thinke louing Reader, if that you take pleasure to reade it, I doute not but to guide you from point to point, and from place to place, euen from the beginning vnto the end, as right as is possible, obseruing the longitude and latitude of coun∣tries. Neuerthelesse whereas I haue not vsed such forme and meane, as the thing and your néedefull iudgement doeth deserue, I beséech you to hold me excused, conside∣ring that it is very harde for one man alone, without the fauor and maintenance of some Prince or great Lord, for to sayle and discouer far countries, obseruing the things singular, nor to execute greate enterprises, although y
t
 of him selfe he might. And to my remembrance 
Aristotle
 agréeth well to this purpose, that it is vnpossible and very harde that he should do any thing of great excellencie and worthy of prayse, when the meane, that is to say riches, wanteth, knowing that the life of man is shorte and sub∣iect to a thousand fortunes and aduersities.






Of the streight aunciently named Calpe, and now Gibaltary. Cap. ij.


COasting 
Spaine
 on the lefte hand, with a calme and fauorable winde, we came ouer against 
Gibaltar,
 not striking our sayle, nor casting anker very nere, for many causes. In y
t
 which place we stayed certaine dayes. This streight is on the borders of 
Spaine,
 deuiding 
Europe



with 
Africa,
 as 
Constantinople
 doeth 
Europe
 and 
Asia.
 Many thinke this to be the originall of our sea 
Medita∣reum,
 as if the great sea being to full, shoulde by this place poure out vpon the earth, of the which writeth 
Aristotle
 in his booke of the World in this maner: the Occeā that of all sides doeth compasse vs toward the west neare to the columnes or pillers of 
Hercules,
 doeth poure out by the earth into oure sea as in a porte or hauen by a narow straight: neare to this straight are twoo Ilands neare one to the other, inhabited with slaues and others, the which labor to make salte, and therefore there is good trade and traffike: of these Ilandes the one is southwarde and the greatest made in maner of a triangle, if that ye beholde it from far, named by the elders 
Ebusus,
 and by the moder∣nesse 
Ieniza,
 the other is towarde the north and named 
Frumentaria,
 and for to saile thether it is very dangerous,
 bicause of certayne rockes that are there, with other in∣conueniences. Furthermore there entereth diuerse naui∣gable Riuers that bringeth greate riches, as one named 
Malue,
 separating 
Mauritania
 frō 
Cesariensia,
 another yet named 
Sala,
 taking his spring in Mountayne Dure, the which trauessing the Kingdome of 
Fes,
 diuideth in forme of this Greke letter Δ and then runneth into this streight: likewise of many others the which at this time I omit: this much I will say by the way, that this straight passeth ouer the coast of 
Afrike
 to the troppike of 
Cancer,
 where as the sea doeth very little ebbe and flowe, but in those partes so sone as one draweth néere to this greate floude 
Niger, 11.
 degrées from the lyne, the course of this Riuer is not perceiued. In this straight of the sea 
Medi∣tareum,
 there be twoo Moūtaynes of a wonderful height, one on the coste or side of 
Africa,
 in tymes paste named 
Calpe,
 and now 
Gibaltar,
 the other 
Abyle,
 the which both


together are called the Colūnes,
 or pillers of 
Hercules,
 for that according to some writers he diuided them in twain that before was but one mountaine named 
Briarei:
 and there retourning into 
Grecia
 by this straight finished and ended his labors, esteming and thincking that he coulde passe no further, bicause of the Amplitude and spreading of the sea, which extended euen to his orizon & end of his sight. Others do affirme that the said 
Hercules
 for that he woulde leaue a memorial of his happie conquests, caused ther to be erected two columnes or pillers of a meruelous height on the cost of 
Europe.
 For the old & ancient custome hath ben that the Noble & great Lords, did reare & set vp a piller or columne, in that place whereas they did finishe their voyages & high enterprises, or else at their toombes or sepulturs, thereby to shew and manifest their might & famous actes aboue others. As we reade of 
Alexander
 which did leaue certaine markes in 
Asia
 the great, wher∣as he had bene. For the like cause the like was erected at 
Rhodes.
 As much may be said of 
Mausolia
 numbred amōg the seuen wonders of the world, made & edified by 
Arte∣misia
 in the honour & for the loue that she bare to hir hus∣band: the like of the 
Pyramides
 of 
Memphis,
 vnder y
t
 which are embalmed the Kings of Egypte. Furthermore at the entrie of the great sea, 
Iulius Caesar
 reared vp a hye piller of white marbell. And for bicause that many haue bene of this name of 
Hercules,
 we wil say with 
Arian
 y
e
 Historio∣grapher,
 this 
Hercules
 to be he, that the 
Tyriens
 haue cele∣brated, for bicause that they haue edified 
Tartesse
 on the borders of 
Spaine
 whereas are the pillers of the which we haue spoken, and there is consecrated to him a temple ac∣cording to y
e
 maner of the 
Phenicians,
 with such sacrifices and ceremonies as was vsed in times paste. Also it hath ben named the place of 
Hercules.
 This straight at this day is the refuge and succor of theues, pirates and rouers on


the sea, as 
Turkes, Moores
 and 
Barbarians,
 enimies of our Christian Religion,
 who lurking and flotting there with their Galleys and barkes, rob and spoyle marchāts that come to trade as well of 
Africa
 and 
Spayne
 as of 
Fraunce, Englande
 and other places, and that which is more to be lamented, the captiuitie of diuers Christians whom they vse most cruelly, yea worse than brute beastes in all their affaires, beside the losse of soules in denying their Chri∣stendome bicause of their horrible and dreadful torments.






Of Africa generally. Chapter .3.


SAyling beyond this straight,
 for that we had costed the countrey of 
Africa
 the space of eight dayes, on the left hand euen right to the Cape of 
Canti
 being distant frō the 
Equinoctial
 .33. degrées, we wil write therof generally. 
Africa
 as 
Ptolomeus
 writeth,
 is one of y
e
 third parts of y
e
 world, or else the fourth, according as certayne writers haue affirmed that haue writen sine, tchat by nauigatiōs many countries, in times past being vnknowē, haue ben discouered, as 
India America
 of the which we pretende to write, named as Ioseph witnesseth 
Africa
 of 
Affer,
 who as we reade in the Gréeke and Latine Histories, for that he ouercame it, raigned him self & named it after his own name, for before it was called 
Libia
 as some think of this Gréeke word: 
 the which signifieth the South winde that there is frequented and familiar, or of 
Lybs
 that rai∣gned, or else 
Africa
 hath ben named of this article A, and 
 that signifieth colde, and before called 
Hisperia.
 As touching his lying,
 it beginneth truely at the Weaste 
Atlantike
 and endeth in the straight of 
Arabia
 or at the sea of 
Egypte
 as 
Apian
 witnesseth, as in like case in fewe woordes 
Aristotle
 doeth very well write. Others make it to beginne at 
Nyll
 towardes the North, at


the sea 
Meditareum:
 furthermore 
Africa
 hath bene called as 
Iosephus
 writeth in the Antiquities of 
India,
 al that is comprehended on the one side from the North sea or 
Meditareum,
 euen to the West Meridionall, neuer∣thelesse seperated in twayne, olde and newe, the new be∣ginneth at the hilles of the Moone, hauing his head at the Cape of good hope in the South sea .35. degrées aboue the lyne, so that it contayneth of latitude .25. degrées. As tou∣ching the olde, it is diuided in foure prouinces, the first is 
Barbaria,
 contayning 
Mauritania, Cyrenia,
 and 
Cesarien∣sia,
 there the people be very blacke. In tymes past this countrey was little inhabited, but nowe much more: also the diuerse kindes of people remayning in this countrey with the diuersitie of maners and of their Religion, the knowledge of which wold haue made both a long voyage and also a large volume. 
Ptolomeus
 hath made no men∣tion of the exterior parte towarde the South, for bicause that it was not founde out nor discouered in his tyme. Many haue discribed it more at large, as 
Plinie, Mela, Strabo, Apian,
 and others, and therefore I wil not stand therein.


This Religion, as 
Herodian
 writeth, is frutefull, and well peopled with people of diuerse sortes and maners of liuing.
 Also the 
Phenicians
 in times past came to dwell in 
Africa,
 as it is sene by that which is writen in the 
Pheni∣cian
 tong in certaine pyllers of stone that as yet are to be sene in the towne of 
Tynge,
 called at this day 
Thamar,
 belonging to the King of 
Portugal.
 As touching their ma∣ners euen so as is the temperatnesse of the ayre according to the diuersitie of places, also the people themselues doe cause varietie of temperance, and by folowing of maners for the 
Simpathie
 that the soule hath with the body, as 
Galian
 sheweth in the booke that he hath writē. Likewise


we sée in 
Europia,
 in diuers Kingdomes, the varietie of maners and customes, the 
Africans
 in general are crafty,
 as the 
Syrines
 couetous, the 
Sicilians
 willy, and the 
Asians
 voluptuous. There is also difference in Religions: some worship after an other maner, some are 
Mahometistes,
 o∣ther some are Christians after a very strange maner con∣trary to vs. And as for brute beastes, there are diuers kindes. 
Aristotle
 saith that the beastes in 
Asia
 are very cruell, and in 
Africa
 monstrous. For the scarcetie of water many beastes of diuers kindes are constrayned to assemble where as there is any water to be had, & there oftentimes they couple together, and therby engendereth the diuersitie of strange and monstrous beastes,
 the which causeth this argument and prouerbe, that 
Africa
 alwayes bringeth forth some new thing. This prouerbe is commō among the 
Romaines,
 for that they made thether many vayages, hauing the Dominion of it of a long tyme, as 
Scipio Africanus
 sayth, they alwaies brought from thence some strange thing, which séemed to engender a rebuke or shame to their citie and common weale.






The fourth Chapter treateth of Africa particularly.


NOwe as concerning that parte of 
Africa
 the which we haue coasted towards the West, as 
Mauritania,
 and 
Barbaria,
 so named bicause of the diuersitie and strange maner of the inhabitantes, it is inhabited with 
Turkes, Moores,
 and others borne in the countrey, true it is that in some places it is vnhabited, and as desert as wel for the extreme heate that maketh them to goe naked sauing onely their priuie partes, as also for the sterilitie and barennesse of some places being full of Spiders, and




for the quantitie of wild beastes, as Lyons, Tigers, Dra∣gons, Leopards, Panthers, and others vnknowen, the which causeth and constrayneth the people of that coun∣trey to go in bandes and companies to their affaires and trades, garnished with bowes and arowes, & with other weapons, for their defense. But if by aduenture they be sodainly beset with these wild beasts, being but a smal cō¦panie whē that they go a fishing or otherwise, they flée to the sea, casting thēselues in, & so saue thēselues by swim∣ming, in the which they are wel exercised & accustomed. The others being not so swift in running, or not hauing the knowledge to swym, clyme vp into trées, and by this meane they euitate or eschew the danger of those beastes. Ye must also note that the people of y
e
 countrey dye more by the rauishment of wilde beasts than by natural death: and this is from 
Gibaltar
 to the Capuerd. They kepe the cursed and damnable lawe of 
Mahomet,
 yea more su∣perstitiously than the naturall 
Turkes.
 Before they make their prayer in their temples, they washe wholy their bo∣dies, thinking thereby they purge their soule as well as the body by this outwarde washing and ceremonie with a corruptible element, and their prayer is made foure times a day, as I haue sene the 
Turkes
 do at 
Constantino∣ple.
 In times past when that the 
Pagans
 had firste receiued this damnable Religion, they were constrayned once in their time to make a voyage to 
Mecha,
 where as their gentill Prophete is buryed, otherwise they had no hope of the rewards or benefits that to them wer promised, the which things the 
Turkes
 obserue at this day, and they as∣semble for to accomplishe this voyage with all kinde of munitions and attilery, as though they would goe a war∣far, for feare of the inuasions of the 
Arabians
 that kepe the mountaines in certaine places. What assemblies I


haue sene being in 
Cairea,
 with the magnificence and triumphes that there is made. And yet this is more cu∣riously and straitly obserued amōg the 
Moores
 of 
Africa
 and other 
Mahometists
 so blinded and obstinate are they, the which hath giuen me occasion to speake in this place of the 
Turkes
 and of their voyage afore they take in hand the warre or any thing else of waight or importance. And when that principally the meane is taken from them to make this voyage, they sacrifice some wild or tame beast, as they chaunce to méete, which they call as well in their language as in 
Arabike, Corban,
 which is as much to say as present or offering, the which abuse is not vsed a∣mōg the 
Turkes
 of 
Leuant,
 neither in 
Constantinople.
 They haue certaine Priests that are the greatest deceiuers of y
e
 world, they make the common sort beleue & vnderstande, that they know the secrets of God and of their Prophete that speaketh many times to them. Furthermore they vse a strange maner of writing, and do attribute the first vse of writing before all other nations. To the which the 
E∣gyptians
 wil neuer accord to whom the most part of those that haue treated of 
Antiquities,
 giue the first inuention of writing with the representing by certaine figures the cogitations and thoughtes of the minde. And to this pur∣pose writeth 
Tacitus
 in this maner:
 the 
Egyptians
 wer the first that represented and manifested the conception of the minde by figures of beastes, grauing vpon stones for the memorial of mē, the things that happened and were done in times past. Likewise they say that they are the first inuenters of letters. And this inuention, as it is founde by writing, was brought into 
Grecia
 by the 
Phenicians,
 that then ruled on the sea, being reputed to their great glory as the first, finders out of that which they had learned of the 
Egyptians.


The men in this parte on the coaste of 
Europe,
 vse to noynte their ioyntes with Oyle, of the which they haue greate plenty, before they take in hand any greate exer∣cise: for al softe and pliable things are not easy to breake, they principallie make warre with the 
Spanyardes
 on their borders, partly for religion & partly for other causes. It is true that the 
Portingals
 of late time haue ouercome certaine places in 
Barbaria,
 and edified townes and Ca∣stels, and planted our Religion, specially one faire towne named the holy Crosse, for that they ariued & stayed there the same day, & it is at the foote of a faire mountayn. But within this twoo yeres the wicked people of the countrey being assembled together, haue throwne downe from the sayde mountayne so many greate stones, that they had pulled out thereof, that in the ende the poore 
Portingals
 were constrayned to forsake the place, & there is alwayes such enimitie or hatred among them, that they trade and trafficke together their Suger, Oyle, Ryce, Lether and o∣ther marchandise by leauing of pledges and hostages. They haue quātitie of good fruts, as Oranges, Lemōds, Citrons, Pomegarneds, the which they eat for wante of better meate, and Ryce in stede of Wheate: also they drinke Oyles, as we do Wine. They liue many yeares, more to my iudgement bicause of the sobrietie they vse, than otherwise.






Of the fortunate Ilandes novv called the Canaries. Cap. 5.


LEauing 
Barbaria
 on the left hande, hauing alwayes the winde fauorable, we knew by our compasse how néere we were to the fortunate Ilandes, lying on the borders of 
Mauritania
 toward the west, being so named


by our elders, bicause of the good tēperatnesse of the aire,
 & frutfulnesse of the same. Nowe the first day of Septem∣ber in the foresayde yeare, about sixe of the clocke in the morning, we had sight of one of these Ilands, bicause of the hyght of a great Hill, of the which we wil speke more largely and particularly hereafter. These Ilandes as some do affirme are .x. in number,
 of which there are thrée that the Authors make no mention of, for that they are vnhabited, the other seuen, which are named, 
Tenerif
 the Ile of yron, 
Gomeria,
 and the great Iland, properly called 
Canaria,
 are distant from the 
Equinoctial
 .27. degrées, the other thrée, 
Forteuenturia, Palma,
 and 
Lencelota,
 are .28. degrées, so that by this ye may sée, that from the first to the last, is a degrée, the which is .17. Leagues and a halfe, rec∣kening from the North to the South, according to the opinion of Pillotes. But without further talke, he that wold finde out by the degrées of the firmament the quan∣titie of leagues, and stades, that the earth doth contayne, and what proportion there is from league to degrée (the which ought to be obserued of him that will write of coū∣treys as a true Cosmographer) let him reade 
Ptolomeus,
 the which treateth therof at large in his Cosmography.
 Among these Ilands there is none of them, but the grea∣test that is named 
Canaria,
 bicause of the multitude of greate Dogs that there are nourished, as 
Plinie
 sheweth, and many others after him, that say as yet, that 
Iuba
 bare away twayne.


But nowe they are all named the 
Canaries
 without a∣ny distinction, for this onely reason before shewed.
 But in my opinion I thinke they were named 
Canaries,
 for the abundance of Canes and wild Réedes that growe on the sea brink: as for the Canes or Réedes y
t
 beare Suger, the 
Spaniards
 haue planted a great many, since the tyme


that they haue there inhabited, but ther did inhabite bru∣tish & Barbarous men before that there were any Dogs, the which standeth by good reason, for I knowe well by experience, that in all the countreis and 
Indies
 y
t
 haue ben discouered and founde out of late dayes, they had neuer knowledge of dog or catte, as hereafter shal be shewed. Yet I knowe well that the 
Portingals
 haue brought the∣ther some, and kept them for to hunte after wild beastes. 
Plinie,
 therefore speaketh in this maner: the first is called 
Ombrion,
 whereas there is no signe of house nor building. In the mountaines there is a fountaine, & trées like vnto that which is named 
Ferula,
 both blacke and white, out of the which may be wrong or writhen water. Of the blacke ones the water is very bitter, & to the contrary the white ones, the water is pleasant to drinke. The other is called 
Iunonia,
 whereas there is but one onely house builded of stone, ther is sene another that is next to this, but lesse & of the sayd name: another that is full of greate Lizardes. Right ouer against these before shewed, there is another named 
the Iland of Snowe,
 for that it is alwayes couered with snowe. The next to that is 
Canaria,
 so called bicause of the multitud of great dogs y
t
 it engendreth, as we haue before shewed, wherof 
Iuba
 King of 
Mauritania,
 had two, & in the saide Ile ther are some apperāce of old buildings. This coūtrey in times past hath ben inhabited with wild & Barbarous people, not knowing God, but altogether Idolaters, worshipping y
e
 Sūne y
e
 Moone & certaine other planets, as soueraigne deities, of the which they thought they receiued al their benefits, but in lesse thā .58. yeres, y
e
 
Spaniards
 haue subdued and ouercome them, and slayne part of them, and the rest they hold and kepe as slaues and captiues: and they inhabiting there, haue established or set vp the Christian fayth, so that at this present ther is none


of the ancient dwellers left,
 onely a fewe excepted that are hid in the mountaynes, as in the mountayne of Pych, of the which we will speake hereafter folowing: True it is that that place is the refuge of all the banished of 
Spaine,
 the which for punishement are sent thither into exile, so that there is an infinite number also of slaues, the which serue as well to labor the grounde, as to do other labors. I do much maruel how the inhabitantes of these Ilands, and of 
Afrike,
 for that they are néere neighbors, haue so differed in language, in colour, Religion and in maners. Also that many vnder the 
Romaine
 Empire haue conque∣red and subdued the greatest parte of 
Africa,
 and neuer touched these Ilands, as they haue done in the sea 
Me∣ditareum,
 knowing also that they are very fruitfull, ser∣uing as a victualer to y
e
 
Spaniards,
 euē as 
Cicilie
 serueth to the 
Romaines
 and 
Geneuois.
 This countrey of it selfe is good, being so well tilled, it bringeth greate profit, and the most in Sugers. For within these fewe yeares they haue planted many Canes that bring forth greate quan∣titie of Sugers maruelous good, not only in these Ilands but in other places that they hold there.
 Neuerthelesse it is not so good in any part as in these Ilāds of 
Canaries.
 And the cause why it is there better gathered & desired, is, for that the Ilāds in the sea 
Meditareum
 on the cost of gréeke lād, as 
Metelin, Rhodes,
 & other places bearing good suger, before the 
Turke
 had the dominiō of them, haue ben spoy∣led by negligence or otherwise. And in all the countrey of 
Leuant,
 I haue sene no suger made but in 
Egypt,
 & y
e
 canes y
t
 beare it growe on the brinke of 
Nyll,
 the which also is greatly estemed of the people & of the marchants y
t
 trade thether as much & rather more, than 
Canarie
 Suger. The elders before vs estemed greately the Suger of 
Arabia,
 for that it was maruellous harty and pleasant, specially


for medicine, to the which vse they did put it & to little o∣ther. But now adayes voluptuousnesse is so incresed, spe∣cially in our 
Europe,
 that there cannot be neuer so little a banket made after our maner of liuing, but that euery sause must be sugered, and also our meates and drinkes. The which thing was defended to the 
Athenians,
 by their lawes, as a thing that did effeminate the people: the which the 
Lacedemonians
 haue folowed by example.


But of a trueth the great Lordes of 
Turkie
 drinke su∣gered waters, for bicause that wine is defended them by their lawe. As touching the wine that was inuented by the greate Phisition 
Hyppocrates,
 it was onely permitted to sicke folke and vnable, but at this day it is so common with vs, as it is scarce in other countreys. So much haue we spoken by the way, on the talke of suger, let vs nowe returne to our mater.
 As for corne there is sufficient in these Ilands, also of very good wine, better than the wine of 
Candia,
 where as they make Malmesies, as we will de∣clare intreating of the Ilands of 
Madera.
 Of flesh also there is sufficient, as wilde and tame goates, birds of all kindes greate quantitie, Oranges, Citrons, Lemonds, Pomegranads and other fruites, Palmes, and greate quantitie of good Hony.


There is also about the riuers and floudes little trées named 
Paper,
 and in the sayd riuers and floudes there are fishes named 
Silures,
 the which 
Paulus Iouius
 in his booke of fishes, thinketh to be Sturgion, of the which the poore slaues féede on, sweating for trauell & almost breath∣lesse, and oftentymes they féede thereon for wante of other meate. And thus much I will say by the way, that they are very hardly intreated of the 
Spaniards,
 specially of the 
Portingals,
 yea worsse than of the 
Turkes
 or 
Ara∣bians.
 And I am constrayned to speake thereof, for that I


haue sene it my selfe. Among other things, there is found an herb against the hils sides commonly called 
Oriselia,
 the which they gather with greate diligēce for to dye co∣lour. Furthermore they make a kinde of blacke gumme the which they name 
Bre,
 of the which there is greate abundāce in 
Tenerif.
 They take thornes of y
t
 which there is great quantitie, and breake them, and lay them by pece one vpon another like crosses, and vnder eche heape there is a little hole of no great depth, and then they set fire on this woodē almost at the very top, and then it rendereth his gumme that falleth into this hole. Others do make it with lesse labor, for the hole being made, they set fier on y
e
 trée: this gumme bringeth them great profit in their trade that they make to 
Perou,
 of the which they vse to calke ships and other vessels for the sea, putting it to no other vse. As touching the harte of this trée being somewhat red, the poore people that dwel on the hils and moūtaynes cut it by long stickes of the length of halfe a fadome, as greate as our thumbe, and lighting it at one ende it ser∣ueth in stede of a cādel. Also the 
Spaniards
 vse it after this manner.






Of the high mountaines of Pike properly called Pikehill. Cap. 6.


IN one of these Ilands named 
Tenerif,
 there is a Hil of so wonderful a highth that the mountaynes of 
Arme∣nia,
 of 
Persia, Tartaria,
 neither the Hyll 
Lybem
 in 
Syria,
 the mounte 
Ida, Athos,
 nor yet the mounte 
Olympus,
 so much celebrat by the Historiographers, ought not to be cōpared to this Hil, the which containeth in circuite at the leaste twenty miles, & from the foote to the top 54. miles. This moūtaine or Hil is named 
Pike,
 at al times snowy,


mysty, and ful of great and cold vapors, and also of snow, although that it is not easily sene, (to my iudgement) for bicause that it extendeth to the lower Region of the Aire the which is very colde, as Philosophers, and Astrono∣mers holde opinion, so that the snow cannot melt, bicause that in that place the Sunne cannot cast hir beames, and therefore the superior or vpper part remayneth alwayes colde. This mountayne or Hill is so high, that if the ayre be cleare, it may be sene fiftie Leagues on the wa∣ter and more, the top and the bottome of this hill though one be néere or farre of, is made in maner of this Gréeke figure Ω the which signifieth 
Omega.
 I haue also sene the Hill called 
Ethna
 .30. Leagues, and on the sea néere to 
Cypris,
 I haue sene a certayne mountayne of 
Armenia,
 fiftie Leagues of, though I haue not the eye sight so good, as 
Linxius,
 who from the 
Promontorie
 of 
Lylibie
 in 
Cicilie,
 did discerne and sée the ships, in the porte of 
Car∣thage.
 I am sure that some will thinke this strange, este∣ming that a mans eye coulde in no wise sée nor discerne so far of: but neuerthelesse this is most true in plainnesse, but not in height. The 
Spaniards
 haue diuers tymes assayed to sounde the height of this hyll, and for to doe it, they haue many tymes sent a certayne number of peo∣ple with mulles, bearing bread, wine & other munitions, but they neuer returne againe as I haue ben crediblie informed of those that haue dwelled there ten yeres. And therefore they holde opinion, that in the sayd hill, as wel on the toppe as on the circuite, there are some reste or remnant of these wilde 
Canarians,
 that thither are reti∣red, and kepe the sayde hyll, liuing with Rootes, and with wilde beastes, the which kill and slaye those that presume to get vp the hill,
 to discouer the toppe thereof. Also of this 
Ptolomeus
 hath had knowledge, saying, that


beyond the Columnes or pillers of 
Hercules.
 In a certain Ile there is a hil, of a maruellous and wonderful height, and therefore towarde the toppe it is alwayes couered with Snowe: from the sayde hille there falleth greate a∣boundance of water, that watereth all the Ilande, the which maketh it very fruitfull of Canes, Sugers, and other thinges. And there is no other water than that which commeth from that hill, otherwise the countreys that are vnder the tropike of 
Cancer,
 wold remayne bar∣ren bicause of the excessiue heate.
 It bringeth forth a∣bundantly great stones like to spunges, & are very light, so that one as great as a mans heade doth not waigh half a pounde: it bringeth forth other stoanes like Iron sled∣ges: and foure or fiue Leagues vpon the Hill, are founde other stones, that smell like smoke, and therefore the in∣habitants think that in the hil ther is some smoky Mine.






Of the Ile of Iron. Cap 7.


AMong these Ilandes I thinke good particularly to describe the Ile of Iron next to 
Tenerif,
 so named for bicause that there are founde Mynes of Iron, as the Ile of Palme, so named bicause of y
e
 multitude of Palme trées, that are there, and so of others. And although that it be the least of the others, (for his circuite is not aboue 6. Leagues) yet neuerthelesse it is fruitful, for the circuite that it containeth, as well in canes bearing Suger,
 as in beasts, fruits, & fayre gardens, aboue al y
e
 rest. It is inha∣bited w
t
 the 
Spaniards
 as wel as y
e
 rest. As touching corne, ther is not sufficiēt for the dwellers, therfore the greatest part as y
e
 slaues, are cōstrained to nourishe them selues w
t
 milke and chéese, made of goates milke, of y
t
 which ther is


plenty, and therefore they looke fresh, well disposed, and maruellous wel nourished, for bicause that such nourish∣ment by custome is familiar to their nature, likewise for that the good temperatnesse of the ayre fauoureth them. Some half Philosopher or half Phisitiō (giuing alwayes honor to thē that merit honor) may here demaunde whe- that they vsing these things, are not grauelly, knowing y
t
 milke,
 and chéese engender grauel, as may be sene in ma∣ny in our 
Europe.
 I answere that chéese of it selfe may be good and bad, grauelly and not grauelly, according to the quantitie that is taken, and the nature & disposition of the person. True it is that to vs which being not contented with one kinde of meate, we take oftentimes euen in an houre twenty, or thirty kindes of meates and drinkes, it may be hurtfull, but not to them which vse one kinde on∣ly, yea, and that moderatly.


We sée that the 
Indians
 liue seuen or eight moneths in the warre with meale made of certayne harde and dry rootes, in the which some woulde Iudge that there were no nourishment nor sustenance. The inhabitantes of 
Creta
 & 
Cypris,
 liue almost with no other thing than milke the which is better than that of the 
Canaries
 for that it is Kowe milke and other Goates milke. Furthermore that milke is good nourishment, that prōptly is conuerted into bloud,
 for that it is but bloud whitted in y
e
 dug or roother. 
Plinie
 in his seconde boke & .42. Chap. sheweth that 
Zora∣stes
 liued xx. yeres in the wildernesse onely with chéese, y
t
 
Pamphiliens
 in the war, had almost no other victuals but chéese made of Asses, & Camels milke, the which also I haue sene the 
Arabians
 do, the which did not onely drinke milke in steade of water passing the Desert of 
Egypt,
 but also gaue it vnto their horses. Also the Ancient 
Spaniards
 for 
he moste parte of the yeare lyued with Ackornes,


as 
Strabo
 sheweth & 
Possidonius,
 of the which they made their bread, and their drinke of certayne rootes, and not onely the 
Spaniards
 but many others, as 
Vergill
 reciteth in 
Georgicon:
 but nowe the season serueth vs to liue more swéeter and more humaynly. The men in all these Ilands are more broken to labor and trauel than the 
Spaniards
 in 
Spaine,
 hauing no lerning but rustically. To cōclude, they of knowledge that are wel sene in the Nauigation, aswel 
Portingals
 as 
Spaniards,
 say that this Iland is right vnder the 
Diametrial,
 as they haue noted in their carde 
Marins,
 limitating all that is from the North to the South as the 
Equinoctiall
 lyne of Weast and East, the which lines are equall in greatnesse, for euery one cōtaineth .360. degrées,
 and euery degrée as before we haue sayde, is seuentene leagues and a halfe. And euen as the 
Equinoctial
 lyne di∣uideth the Sphere in two, and the foure and twenty cly∣mats twelue, in the East, and as much in the Weast, al∣so this 
Diametriall
 passing by this former Ilande, as the 
Equinoctiall
 by the Iles of 
S. Omer,
 cutteth or breaketh the Paralizes and all the sphere by the half of the North to the South. Other things I haue not founde in this I∣lande worthy of memorie, sauing that there are greate quantitie of Scorpions, & more dangerous thā those that I haue séene in 
Turkie,
 as I haue knowen by experience.
 Also the 
Turkes
 gather them for to make Oyle, good for medicine, as the Phisition can very well vse it.






Of the Ilandes of Madera. Cap. 8.


WE reade not in Authors how that these Ilandes were discouered,
 but within these sixtie yeares that the 
Spaniardes
 and 
Portingals
 haue hazared










and enterprised many Nauigations towarde the Weast, and as we haue sayde before, 
Ptolomeus
 had vnderstan∣ding of the Fortunate Ilāds euen to the 
Caape verd. Pli∣nie
 also maketh mention, y
t
 
Iuba
 brought two dogs from the great 
Canaria,
 beside many Authors that thereof haue spoken. Then the 
Portingals
 were the first that found out these Ilands, of the which we speake, and named them in their language 
Madera,
 the which is as muche to say, as Woode, for that it was altogether a Wildernesse full of woode, and not inhabited. These Ilands lye betwene 
Gi∣baltare
 and the 
Canaries
 towardes the West, and in our Nauigation we coasted them on the right hand, being di∣stant from the 
Equinoctiall,
 about .32. degrées, and from the 
Canaries
 .63. leagues. Now for to discouer and labour this Countrey, as a 
Portingale
 being a master Pilot she∣wed me, they were constrained to set fire in the woode, as well of the highest as of others. Of the greatest and prin∣cipallest Iland, that is made in maner of a Triangle, as Δ of the 
Greekes,
 cōtaining in circuit .14. leagues, or ther∣about. Wherein the fire continued the space of vj. or .vij. dayes, with suche a vehement heate, that they were con∣strained to saue them selues in their ships, and the others that had not this meane nor libertie, cast themselues into the Sea, vntill the smoke of the fire was past. Inconti∣nently after, they began to labor the ground, to plant and sowe diuers graines: the which profited greatly, bicause of the good disposition and temperatenesse of the aire. Af∣terwarde, they builded and edified houses and Castles, so that at this day there is found no place so faire and plea∣sant.
 Among other things, they haue planted great plen∣tie of Canes, that beare very good suger: with the which they haue a great trade into other Countreis, and at this


day the suger of 
Madera
 beareth the name. The people that nowe inhabite 
Madera,
 are muche more ciuill and fuller of humanitie, than they of the 
Canaries,
 and they trade with others, as humainely as is possible. Their greatest trade is Suger and Wine, of the which we will treate héereafter at large. Also they haue Honey, Waxe, Oranges, Citrons, Lemonds, Pomegranads and Corde∣rians, they make great quantitie of Comfets,
 the best that may be wished for, and they make them in the likenesse of Men, Women, Lions, Birdes, and Fishes, the which is a faire thing to sée, and muche better to taste. Also they conserue many fruits, the which by this meanes do kepe, and they are caried into straunge Countreis, to the com∣fort and recreation of euery one.
 This Countrey is very good, faire, and fruitfull, aswell of his natural disposition, bicause of the faire hills decked with woodes and strange fruits, the which we haue not in these parties: as also of fountaines and liuely springs, with the which the fieldes and medowes are watered, being garnished with herbes and floures sufficiently, and wilde beastes of all sortes. A∣mong the Trées that are there,
 there are many that caste gumme, the which they haue learned with the time, to put to necessary vses. There is also séene a kind of 
Gaiac,
 but for that it is not found so good as the 
Gaiac
 that is at the 
Antilles,
 they set nought thereby: it may also be, that they know not the manner how to vse it. There are also certaine Trées, that at certaine times of the yeare, ca∣steth good Gumme, the which they call Dragons bloude,
 and for to get it out, they pearse the trée foote, opening it wide and déepe. This trée beareth a yellow fruit, as great as a Cherrie, the which is very good to refreshe one, whe∣ther he haue the Ague or otherwise.


This kinde of gumme is not vnlike to 
Cynaber
 of which writeth 
Dioscoridus,
 saying, as for 
Cynaber
 sayth he, is brought from 
Africa,
 and is solde deare, so that there is not ynough to satisfie paynters: it is redde, and therefore some iudge it to be Dragons bloude, and so hath 
Plinie
 thought it in his booke the .33. of his naturall Historie the seuenth Chapter, of the which as well 
Cynaber
 as Dra∣gons bloude is not at this day founde among vs so natu∣rall, as the elders haue described, but the one & the other is artificiall: therefore knowing what the elders haue iudged it, and that which I haue knowen of this gumme, I woulde esteme it to be altogether like to 
Cynaber
 and Dragons bloude, hauing a softe, and a cold vertue. I wil not here forget among these, so singular fruites as great Lemonds, Oranges, Citrons, and abundance of swete Pomegranads, winish, swéete and sowre, little and great, the ryne or péele of which serue to tanne and harden the skins, for that they are very suppell. And I thinke that they haue learned this of 
Plinie,
 for the treateth therof in his 19. booke and thirtenth Chapter of his Historie. To be short, these Ilāds so fruitful & wel disposed, do excel in di∣licatnesse those of 
Greece,
 were it 
Chios
 that 
Empedocleus
 hath so much extolled, and 
Rhodes, Apollonius
 and ma∣ny others.






Of the Wine of Madera. Cap. 9.


WE haue here shewed howe much the lande of 
Madera
 is fruitfull and well disposed, to beare many kinds of good fruite: nowe we must speake of the Wine of 
Madera,
 the which is aboue all fruites, for the vse and necessitie of our humayne life. I cannot tel


whether it meriteth the first degrée, at the least I am assu∣red it meriteth the seconde in excellencie and perfection. The Wine & Suger bicause of an affinitie in temperat∣nesse that they haue together, require a like disposition as doeth the ayre and the lande. And euen as our Ilandes of 
Madera
 doe bring forth greate quantitie of very good Suger,
 so doe they in lyke maner bring forth good Wine from what partes so euer the plantes are come. The 
Spaniards
 haue affirmed that they wer not brought from 
Leuant
 nor from 
Candia,
 and yet the Wine is as good and better. The which then ought not to be attribu∣ted to any other thing, but onely to the grounde. I know well that 
Cyrus
 King of the 
Medians
 and 
Assirians,
 be∣fore that he had conquered 
Egypte,
 made to be planted a great number of plāts that he caused to be brought from 
Siria,
 that since brought forth good Wine, but yet they passed not these of 
Madera.
 And as for the Wine of 
Can∣dia,
 though they are very excellent, so that in times paste they haue bene greatly estemed in the 
Romaine
 bankets, the which haue bene more celebrated than the Wines of 
Chios, Metheglyn,
 and of 
Promentorie of Aruasia,
 which for his excellencie and pleasantnesse hath bene called Wine for the Gods. But at this day the Wines of 
Ma∣dera,
 and of the Ile of 
Palme
 one of the 
Canaries,
 hath got the reputation, whereas there groweth white, red & claret with the which they doe trade into 
Spaine
 and from thēce into other countreys. The most excellentest is sold at the place where it is made, for nine or ten Ducats the Pype. From the which countrie being transported into other places, it is very hot and burning, and rather poyson to men, than nourishmēt, if it be not taken with discretion.


Plato
 estemed Wine to be a very good nourisher, and very familiar to our bodies, stirring vp or prouoking the


spirites to vertue and honestie, alwayes prouided that it be moderatly taken.
 Also 
Plinie
 saith, that Wine is a so∣uerayne medicine. The which being well knowen of the 
Persians,
 estemed their greate enterprises after that they had dronke Wine (moderatly) to be more worthy than those that were done fasting, that is to wit, being taken in sufficient quantitie according to the complectiō of mē. We haue here shewed, that onely the quantitie or super∣fluitie of meates and drinkes hurteth: therefore to my iudgement this Wine is better the second and third yere than the firste, when it hath the heate of the Sunne, the which heate within time consumeth and vadeth, so that then there remayneth but the naturall heate: for being transported from one place to another, the burning heate extinguisheth. Moreouer in these Ilandes of 
Madera,
 the trées, herbes, and fruites growe so rancke and thick, that they are constrayned to cutte and to burne a greate parte thereof. In stede of which they plante canes of Su∣ger that profit very much, bringing their Suger in, in .6. monthes, and those that they plante in Ianuarie, are cut in Iune, from one moneth to another, and so according as they are planted, the which letteth that the heat of the Sunne doth not hurte them. Here I haue briefly she∣wed that which I could obserue, as touching the secretes of the Iles of 
Madera.






Of the Promentarie Verd, and of his Ilandes. Cap. 10.


THE elders haue called or named a 
Promentarie,
 a point of a lande that lieth out long in the sea, the which may be séene a farre of, and that this day it is called with vs a 
Caape,
 as a thing eminent aboue others,


as the heade is aboue the rest of the body? also some will write 
Promontorium à Prominendo,
 the which to my iudgemēt is best. This 
Caape
 or 
Promentarie
 of the which we minde to speake, lyeth on the coast of 
Africa,
 betwene 
Barbaria,
 and 
Guinny,
 in the realme of 
Senega,
 distāt from the 
Equinoctiall
 .15. degrées, being in times paste named 
Ialout,
 by the inhabitants, and since 
Caape verd,
 by those that haue sayled thither & discouered it, being so named bicause of the multitude of trées bothe small and greate, that are gréene at all tymes of the yere, euen as the white 
Caape
 is so called, bicause it is full of white sandes, being as white as Snowe, without any appearance of Herbes or trées, distant from the 
Canaries
 .70. Leagues: and there is founde a goulfe of the Sea, called by the people of the countrey 
Dargin,
 of the name of a little Ilande,
 néere to the mayne lande. 
Ptolomeus
 hath named this 
Caape verd
 the 
Promentorie
 of 
Ethiopia,
 of the which he onely had knowledge without passinge further, the which I iudge for my parte, to be well termed of him, for this countrey extendeth of a greate length, and therefore many haue sayde, that 
Ethiopia
 is diuided in 
Asia,
 and in 
Africa.
 Among the which 
Gemaphrisius
 saith, that the mountains of 
Ethiopia,
 did occupie the greatest parte of 
Afrike,
 exten∣ding to y
e
 brinkes or borders of y
e
 west 
Occidental,
 toward the South, euen to the floud or riuer 
Nigritis.
 This 
Caape
 is very fayre and greate lying farre into the sea, e∣dified on two fayre mountaynes. All this countrey is in∣habited with rude & vnciuil people, not so rude or wild as they of the 
Indies,
 very black as they of 
Barbarie,
 ye must also note that frō 
Gibaltar,
 to 
Prestre Iohns
 land, 
Calicute,
 cōtaining more thā .3000. leagues, the people is al blacke. Also I haue sene in 
Ierusalem
 thrée Bishops on the parte of 
Prester Iohn,
 that came thither to visite the holy Se∣pulcher,


that were much more blacker than those of 
Bar∣bary,
 and not without occasion, for it is not to be thought that generally those of 
Africa
 are a like blacke or like in maners and conditions, considering the varietie and dif∣ference of Regions, that are some more hotter than o∣thers. Those of 
Arabia,
 and of 
Egypt,
 are betwene blacke and white, others browne coloured whom we call white Moores, others are cleane blacke: the moste parte goe all naked, as the 
Indians,
 acknowledging a King, whō they name in their language 
Mahouat:
 yet some of them as well men as women, hyde their priuie parts with beasts skins. Some among the others weare shirtes, & gownes of course hairy cloth, the which they receiue in trading with the 
Portingals.
 The people are familiar inough to∣wardes strangers. Before that they take their sustenance they washe their bodies and members, but in another thing they doe greatly erre, for they ordaine their meates very vnclenly, also they eate stinking and rotten flesh, & fish: the fish bicause of his moistnesse putrifieth, and the fleshe for that it is tender and moyst, is quickly changed, bicause of the vehemēt heat, as we sée here in Sommer. For moystnesse is signe of putrifaction, and the heate is as a cause efficient. Their houses & lodgings are alike, all rounde in maner of our doue houses, couered with réedes and Rushes, of the which also they vse to lye on, in steade of beds for to slepe and take their rest. As touching their Religiō, they hold diuers kinds of opinions strange inough, and contrarie to the true Religion. Some wor∣ship Idols, others 
Mahomet,
 chiefely in the realme of 
Camber
; some thinke, that there is one God, the Author of all things, with other opinions not vnlike to the 
Turkes.
 There are some amōg them that liue more hardly than the others, hauing hanged at their necke a little


boxe closely shut and glewed with gumme) like to a little chest, ful of certain letters or wrytings, for to make their inuocations and prayers, the which customably they vse certaine dayes without ceassing, hauing an opinion that whilest they haue it about them, they be out of daunger. As for Matrimonie, they ioyne together one with ano∣ther by certaine promisses and agréementes without any other Ceremonie. This Nation passeth the time in plea∣sure, louing daunsing, the which they exercise at euening in the Moone shine: in their daunsing they turn their face as by some manner of reuerence and worship, the which a very friend of mine hathe shewed me of a truthe, who dwelled there a certaine time.
 Nere adiacent are the 
Bar∣bazins
 and 
Serrets,
 with the which those of whome we haue spoken make continuall warre, although that they be like, (only excepting) that y
e
 
Barbazins
 are more wilde, brutishe, cruel, and hardy. The 
Serrets
 are vacabonds and despearsed, euen as the 
Arabians
 by the deserts, pilfering all that they may come by, without law, & without King, sauing only that they beare a certaine honoure to him a∣mong them, that hath done some prowesse or valiant acte in the warre. And this they alleage for reason, that if they wer subiect vnder the obedience of a King, he might take their children, and vse them as slaues, as doth the King of 
Senega.
 They fight for the most part on the water in little boates made of the barke of a trée, of foure fadome long, the which they name in their language 
Almadies.
 Their weapons are bowes and sharpe poynted arrowes enue∣nomed, so that he is vncurable that therewith is stricken. Furthermore, they vse staues of Canes, garnished at the end with some beastes téethe in steade of iron, with the which they can well helpe them selues. When they take their ennimies in the warre, they kéepe them to sell to


to straungers, for to get other Marchandise, (for there is no vse of money) they doe not kill them and eate them, as the 
Canibals
 doe and they of 
Bressill.
 I will not leaue out, y
e
 ioyning to this Countrey, there is a faire riuer or floud named 
Nigritis,
 and since named 
Senega,
 the which is of the same nature as is 
Nylle,
 from whence it procéedeth as many doe affirme, the which passeth by hie 
Lybia,
 and the kingdome of 
Orgunea,
 running through the midst of that Countrey, watering it as 
Nylle
 doeth 
Egipt.
 And for this cause it was named 
Senega.
 The 
Spanyardes
 many times haue assayed by this riuer, to enter into the Coun∣trey for to subdue them, and sometimes they haue entred well foure score leagues: but for that they could not at no time addulciate nor appease the inhabitauntes, being straunge and stoute, for auoiding of further inconuenien∣ces that might happen and fal, they departed home again. The trade of these brutishe men, is Oxen and Goates, specially their skins, and they haue so great abundance, that for a hundreth waight of yron, you may haue a cou∣ple of Oxen of the best. The 
Portingals
 make their vaunt that they were the first, y
t
 haue caried to this 
Caape verd,
 Goates, Cowes and Bulles, the which haue since so mul∣tiplied: also that they haue caried thither diuers Plantes and Séedes, as of Rice, Citrons & Orenges. As touching 
Nyll,
 it groweth in the Countrey plentifully. Neare to this 
Caape verde,
 next to the maine land, there are thrée litle Ilandes, others than those that we call Ilandes of 
Caape verd,
 of the which we wil speake héereafter, being fair inough, bicause of y
e
 faire trées that they bring forth, neuerthelesse they are not inhabited. They that dwell there neare, goe thither to fishe, from whence they bring suche a multitude of Fishe, that they vse it in steade of bread, being once dried, and beatē to dust. In one of these


Ilands is found a Trée,
 the which beareth leaues like to our Figge trées: the fruite is a two foote long or there a∣bout, and great in proportion like to Cowcombers of the Isle of 
Cypres.
 Some eate of this fruit, as we doe Mylli∣ons or Pompous, and within this fruit, there is a graine of the greatnesse of a Beane, wherewith some of them féede their Apes and Munkeys: others make collers to put about their necks, for it is very faire when it is dried and seasoned.






Of the Wine of Palme trees. Cap. 11.


HAuing written as muche as is possible, that which merited writing of the 
Promentary verde,
 being héere before declared. I am nowe minded particularly to treate, séeing it cōmeth to purpose of Palme trées, and of the Wine and Beuerage, that these blacke brutishe men haue learned to make: the which in their language they cal 
Mignoll.
 We sée how muche God the father and crea∣tor of all things, giueth meanes and wayes for the com∣fort of our life, in suche sorte that if one way faileth, he sheweth vs another. And although that in that Countrey the wine is not so good as in other places: and paraduen∣ture for that they haue not bene planted, or so diligently looked too, as it is in many places of 
Europe,
 neuerthelesse they haue by Diuine prouidence recouered by Arte and some diligēce, that which otherwise to them was denied. Now this Palme is a trée maruellous faire & wel accom∣plished, be it in heighth in perpetuall gréennesse or other∣wise, (of y
e
 which) there are diuers kinds,
 & that grow in diuers places. In 
Europe
 aswell as in 
Italy,
 these Palmes growe abundantly, chiefly in 
Sicily,
 but they are barren:


in some of the borders of 
Spaine,
 they beare fruite vnreli∣shed and sowre, not to eate. In 
Affrica
 they are swéete, and also in 
Egipt,
 in 
Cypris,
 in 
Creta,
 and also in 
Arabia.
 Likewise in 
Iuda:
 the wine that therof is made, is excel∣lent, but it hurteth the braine. Of this trée there is male and female, the male beareth his floure at the braunche, the female buddeth without floure. And it is a maruel∣lous thing, and worthy of memory of that which 
Plinie
 and many others doe resite, that in the Forest of Palme trées that naturally grow out of the earthe, if that the males be cut, the females become baren without bearing any more fruit, as widowes that want their husbandes. This trée requireth a hot Countrey, a sandy ground, and brackishe or salt, otherwise they salte the roote before they plant it. As touching the fruit, it beareth meat outwards, the which groweth first, and within, a nut with a shel, the which is the graine and séede of the trée,
 as we sée Appels in our Countrey: and also there groweth little ones a∣mong these, without nut, growing al on a braunch. Fur∣thermore, this trée being dead, reuiueth and springeth a∣gaine of it self,
 of y
e
 which it séemeth y
e
 bird 
Phoenix
 hath taken his name, the which in Gréeke signifieth Palme, for that he reuiueth againe of him self, without any other meane. And yet more this trée so muche celebrated, hath caused this Prouerbe and argument,
 that is 
to cary the Palme,
 asmuch to say, as the triumph and victory, or for that in times past they vsed a crowne of Palme in their victories, as a thing that is alwayes gréene. And yet eue∣ry play or game hath his trée, as the Bay trée, the Mirrhe trée, and the Oliue trée, or for that this trée, as some say, was first consecrated to 
Phoebus
 before the Laurell or Bay, the which of antiquitie hath represented the signe of victorie. And the reason thereof reciteth 
Aulus Gelius
▪


when he saith, that this trée hath a certayne propertie,
 that happeneth to worthy and vertuous men, that is, that the Palme trée neuer boweth nor bendeth, but to the cō∣trarie, the more that it is laden the more as by a manner of resistance it redresseth and beareth vpwarde, the which 
Aristotle
 confirmeth in his Problemes, also 
Plutarche, Plinie,
 and 
Theophrastus,
 the which seme to agrée with the saying of 
Virgill.


Shrinke not at all though fortune at thee frowne,


But valiantly resist and beat hir downe.

Now to our purpose, in the which as wel for y
e
 dispositiō of the ayre which is very hot being in the zone 
Torida
 di∣stant 
15.
 degrées from the 
Equinoctial
 lyne, as for the good nature of the earth, there groweth abundance of Palme trées, from the which they draw a kind of Iuice for their store and ordinary drinke:
 the trée being opened with a certayne instrument a foote or twaine from the grounde, there procedeth a Licor, that they receiue in an earthen vessell, and kepe it in other vessels for their vse. And for to kepe it from corruption they salt it a little, as we doe verioice in our countrey, so that the salt consumeth or ta∣keth away the taast of the trée. As touching the colour & strength, it is like to the white Wines of 
Anion,
 the taaste is very good.
 This likor is very good for to refresh and quenche their thirst, to the which they are subiect bi∣cause of the extreme heate.


The fruit of these Palmes are little Daates sharp and sower, so that they are not toothsome to eate, neuerthe∣lesse the Iuices of the trée is very plesant to drinke. And among them they esteme it as we doe good wines. The 
Egyptians
 in tymes past before they did embalme the dead bodyes hauing prepared thē according to their custome, for to kepe them from putrefieng, did washe them thrée


or foure tymes with this likor, and then anoynted them with myrrh and Cynamon. This drinke is vsed in many countries of 
Ethiopia,
 for want of better Wine. In like maner certayne 
Moores
 make a kinde of drinke with the fruite of an other trée,
 but it is as soure as veriuyce be∣fore they be ripe: for to be short, I wil leue many & diuers fruites and rootes the which the inhabitants vse for their sustenance, that they haue taken onely by experience, so that they knowe how to vse them in their sicknesse. For, euen as they eschewe voluptuousnesse, and superfluitie, the which among vs are very familiar, so also they are more harder and stronger for to endure outward iniuries be they neuer so greate. And to the contrary we, for that we are ouer delicate and dayntie, are hurte with a small thing.






Of the Riuer of Senega. Cap. 12.


ALthough that I am not minded in this my discourse as a true Geographer to set out the Countreys, Townes, Cities, Floudes, Goulfes, Mountaynes, Distances, Situatiōs, and other things appertaining to Geography, yet neuerthelesse it semeth not contrarie, to write and set forth at large the moste notablest places when it commeth to purpose: as the things that I haue séene for pleasure and contentation of my mind, that the reader might thereby receiue some pleasure and profit. Now this floude so famous among other things,
 of the which the countrey and Kingdome that it watereth hath bene named 
Senega,
 as our sea 
Meditarium,
 hath or re∣quireth diuers names according to the diuersitie of coun∣treys


where it passeth, and in 
Libia,
 comming to the 
Caape verd,
 of the which we haue spoken here before, from the which to the ryuer, the countrey is very plaine, sandie and barren, for the which cause there are not so many deuouring beastes, as in other places. This floude or Riuer is the firste and moste celebrated of the lande towarde the Weaste side, separating or deuiding the drie and barren countrie from the fruitfull, and it ex∣tendeth euen to the high 
Libia,
 and to many other coun∣treys and Kingdomes that it watereth. It contayneth in bredth about a league, the which is very little in the re∣spect of many riuers that are in 
America,
 of the which we will treate hereafter more at large. Before that it entereth into the Weaste, it deuideth, and entereth in by two mouthes or openings being separated the one from the other about half a league, the which are of an indiffe∣rent depth, so that smal ships may be brought in. Some in the olde time as 
Solon
 in his booke named 
Pollycistor, Iu∣lius Caesar
 and others,
 haue written that the great floude of 
Nill,
 passing all ouer 
Egypt,
 hath the like spring or Ori∣ginal as 
Senega,
 & procedeth out of the same mountaines, the which semeth not true. For the originall of 
Nill,
 is far beyonde the 
Equator,
 for it commeth from the high hills of 
Bede,
 otherwise named of the Auncient Geographers, hills of the Moone, the which separateth the olde and newe 
Africa,
 as the hills 
Pyrannes,
 deuide 
Fraunce
 from 
Spaine.
 And these hills are in 
Cerenaique,
 the which is beyond the lyne .15. degrées. The source or spring of 
Sene∣ga,
 of the which we speake, procedeth from two hills or mountaynes, the one named 
Mandro,
 and the other 
Thala,
 being distant from the hills of 
Bede,
 more than a 1000. leagues. And by this may be sene how greately ma∣ny haue erred for y
t
 they haue not sought out things, as


we haue done of late dayes. As for the hills of the Moone, they lye in the lower 
Ethiopia,
 & those from whence com∣meth 
Senega
 into 
Libia,
 of the which, the chiefest hills are 
Vsergate,
 from whence procedeth the Riuer of 
Darda,
 the mounte 
Mandro,
 being more spokē of than the others, for bicause that all the riuers that runne from 
Salata,
 to 
Massa,
 being distant the one from the other about seuen∣ty leagues, take their originall out of this hill. Further∣more, the mounte 
Gyrgila,
 from whence their falleth a ri∣uer named 
Sympho,
 and of 
Hagapole,
 commeth the floude 
Subo,
 being full of good fish and Cocodrils hurtful to their neighbors. True it is that 
Ptolomeus,
 hauing treated of many countreys and strange Nacions, hath sayde that which semed hym good, chiefely of 
Africa
 and 
Ethiopia.
 And among all the Auncient writers, I finde none that hath had so perfit knowledge to my minde as he, when he speaketh of the 
Promentarie of Phraso,
 hauing fiftene de∣grées of latitude, & that is the farthest lād of the which he hath had knowledge, as also describeth 
Glarean,
 in the end of the descriptiō of 
Africa.
 In his time the inferior world hath bene discribed,
 neuerthelesse he hath not wholy spe∣ken thereof, for that he knewe not a greate parte of the land 
Meridionall,
 which in our time hath ben since disco∣uered. And many things haue ben added to the writings of 
Ptolome,
 that may be sene in the generall table that is properly of him. Therefore the simple reader hauing not greatly turned in the Cosmography, nor had experience of things, shal note that al the inferior worlde is deuided by the elders in thrée partes vnequal, that is to wit 
Asia, Europa,
 and 
Africa,
 of the which some haue writen the truth, other that which semed them good, without making any mention of the west 
Indies,
 that at this day make the fourth parte of the world, discouered of late yeres, as also


hath bene the most greatest part of the Easte 
Indies Cali∣cut
 and others. As touching those of the Weaste, as 
Fraunce Antariike, Peru, Mexica,
 they are now com∣monly called the Newe Worlde,
 yea to the .52. degrée and a halfe of the lyne, where as is the straight of 
Ma∣gello,
 and many other prouinces on the North side, and of the South on the coast of 
Leuant,
 & to the lower tropicke of 
Capricorne
 in the Weast 
Meridionall,
 and the North lande, of the which 
Arian, Plinie,
 and others Historio∣graphers, haue made no mention that they haue ben dis∣couered in their tyme. Some haue made mention of cer∣tayne Ilandes that were founde out or discouered by the 
Carthaginians,
 but I iudge thē to be the Ilandes 
Hisperi∣des
 or fortunate. 
Plato
 also sayth that in tymes past there was in the sea 
Atlantike
 or Weast, a great mayne lande or countrey, and that there was in like case an Iland na∣med 
Atlantike
 more greater than 
Africa
 or 
Asia
 toge∣ther (the which) was swallowed vp with an earthquake, the which I thinke rather to be a fable than otherwise, for if it had ben true, others beside him would haue writ∣ten thereof, knowing that the lande of which the elders haue had knowledge, deuideth in this maner. First of the Easte parte it is next vnto the vnknowen land, the which is next to the great 
Asia,
 and to the Easte 
Indies
 on the South side: they haue had knowledge of a few, that is to wit, 
Ethiopia Meridionall,
 named 
Agisimbra
 or the North side of the Ilandes of 
Englande, Scotlande, Ireland,
 and the hills 
Hiperbores,
 which are the Further partes of lande Northwarde as some do say. Now to retourne to 
Senega,
 on the one and on the other side of the floude, euen as the grounde is diuers and differing, so are the inhabitantes therof: on the one side the people are very blacke, of great stature and strong of body, neuerthelesse the countrey


flourisheth w
c
 fayre trées bearing fruit, on the other side you shal sée al contrary, the mē of the colour of Asshes, & of little stature. As touching the people of the countrey of 
Senega,
 I can say no other thing than of those of 
Caape verd,
 but that they are rather worse, for that the Chri∣stians dare not so easily descende a lande for to trade or to haue refreshing, as in other places, vnlesse they wil be killed or taken for captiues, and so to be made staues. All things among them are wilde and contemptible sauing onely peace, the which they doe somewhat esteme one to∣warde another. In like case reste, with some excercise, sometimes in laboring the grounde for to saue Ryce: as for corne and Wine there is none, as touching corne it cannot prosper nor come vp as in other countreys for that there falleth very little and seldome rayne, which is the cause that the séedes cannot bud out nor floure bi∣cause of the extreme heate and drieth. So soone as they sée their grounde watered or dewed, they begin to sowe, and after they haue sowed within thrée monethes the fruite is ripe redy to be cut. Their drinke is the Iuice of Palme trées and water.
 Among the trées of this countrey there are founde some of the greatnesse of our Oke trées, the which beareth fruite as great as dates: with the nut they make Oyle that hath meruelous properties. The firste is that it holdeth water in yellowe collour like safferne, with y
e
 which they dye or collour their little boulles, that they drinke in, also there hattes that are made of the strawe of rice. Furthermore this Oyle hath a smell like to Marche violets, and a sauor or taast like Olyue Oyle, therefore many eat of it with their Fish, Ryce, and other meates that they eate. Thus much thought I good to speake of this ryuer and countrey of 
Senega,
 the which extendeth from the coast of 
Leuant,
 to the land of 
Thuen∣sar,



and from the South parte of the Realme 
Cambra,
 from the ponent, to the Weaste sea, keping alwayes our course, certayne dayes after we began to enter into the countrey of 
Ethiopia,
 in that parte that is named the Kingdome of 
Noby,
 which is of a greate circuite, with many Kingdomes and prouinces, of the which we will hereafter speake.






Of the Ilands Hisperides, othervvise named Caape verd. Cap. 13.


AFter that we had lefte our 
Promentary
 on the lefte hande,
 for to kepe our course as right as it was possible, making the Southwest a quarter of South almost a whole day, but about ten or eleuen of the clocke the winde came contrary, the which cast vs on the right hande towardes certayne Ilandes the which are called by our carde 
Marins,
 Ilandes of 
Caape verd,
 the which are distant from the 
Canaries,
 about two hundreth lea∣gues, and from the 
Promentarie
 sixtie leagues by sea, and a hundreth leagues from 
Budomell,
 in 
Affrica,
 following the coste of 
Ginnie
 towarde the pole 
Antartike.
 These Ilandes are ten in number, of the which there are two wel peopled with 
Portingals,
 that firste discouered them & brought them to their obedience, one of them which they haue named 
S. Iames
 Iland, is better peopled than the rest,
 also thither is made greate trading by the 
Moores
 as well of those that inhabite the mayne lande, as of the others that sayle to the 
Indies
 in 
Ginnie,
 and of 
Many∣congra,
 in the countrey of 
Ethiopia.
 This Ilande is distāt from the 
Equinoctiall
 lyne, fiftene degrées: an other


likewise named 
S. Nicolas
 Ile,
 inhabited as the other: the others are not so peopled, as 
Flera, Plintana, Pintoria,
 and 
Foyon,
 in the which there are a certayne number of people and slaues sent thither by the 
Portingals,
 to labor the grounde in some places where they finde it beste, and chiefly for to get goate skinnes of the which ther is great store, & therewith make good trade & haue thereof a great vent, and therefore the 
Portingals
 pass twise or thrise in a yere with ships and munitions leading with them dogs, and bringing nets, and snares for to chase and hunte wild goates, the which after they are skinned, they re∣serue onely the skinnes, the which they season with salt and earth, in certaine vessels made for that purpose, for to kepe them for putrifieng, and so they carry them into their countrey, and therewith they make their 
Marokins,
 that are so greately estemed with vs. Also they inhabitants of these Ilands are bound to render or pay for tribut, for euery one to the King of 
Portingall,
 the number of six thousande goates wilde and tame, being salted and dried, the which they deliuer to those, that of the parte or for the Kings behoofe make the voyage, with his greate shippes to the Easte 
Indies,
 as to 
Calicut
 and other places passing by these Ilandes: and these number of goates are bestowed for their sustenance during the voyage, which is two yeres long or more, for bicause of the distaunce of places and the greate Nauigation that they muste make. Moreouer the ayre in these Ilandes is Pestilent and vnholsome, so that the firste Christians that beganne there to inhabit, were of a long tyme ve∣xed with sickenesse, as well to my Iudgement for the vn∣temperatnesse of the ayre that in such places cannot be good, as also the changing of dyet and of countrey.


Also the burning Agues are there very familier & com∣mon to the slaues specially, and the bloudy flixe, of the which neither the one nor the other procéede not but of humors extreme hot, bicause of their continuall trauaile and naughty nourishment: also of the hotnesse of the air, with the water that is next, and therfore they receiue ex∣cesse of these two Eliments.






Of the Torterels, and of an herbe that they call Orselie. Cap. 14.


SEing y
t
 in our Nauigation we are minded to write certaine secretes obserued in places where we haue bene, it shal not be hurtful to speak of Torterels, that these former Ilands doe norishe in as great quantitie as goates. There is found four kind of Torterels,
 of y
e
 land & of the sea, the third liuing in fresh water, the fourthe in marishes. Of the which I meane not to speake particu∣larly, but only of those that are séene on the sea coastes that compasse these Ilands. These kind of Torterels wil leape from the Sea to the shore at his appoynted time, making with his clawes a hole in the sande, wherein af∣ter she hath laid hir egges, (being of the number of eight paire, of the which speaketh 
Aristotle,
) couereth them so well, that it is vnpossible to sée them, or to finde them vn∣till that the floude commeth that vncouereth them, then bicause of the extreme heate that is there of the Sunne, they engender and open (as the Henne of hir egge) the which consisteth in greate number of Torterels, of the greatnesse of Crabbes (which is a kinde of Fishe) the which the floud returning, beareth into the Sea. Among these Torterels, there are some of suche a greatnesse, spe∣cially in these partes whereof I speake, that foure men


cannot almost beare one, as of a truth I haue séene and vnderstanded of men worthy of credence.
 
Plinie
 sheweth that in the 
Indian
 Sea, there are so great Torterels, that the shel is bigge inough to couer a meane house, and that at the Ilandes of the red Sea, they might make there∣with vessels Nauigable. The sayde author sayeth also, that there are the like at the straight of 
Carmania
 in the 
Persian
 sea. There are many wayes to take them. Some∣times this great beast of a desire to swim more easily,
 se∣keth the vpper parte of the water a little before noone, when the day is faire, where as hauing the backe bare and vncouered out of the water, sodainly their shell is so well dried by the Sunne, that they cannot descend to the depth of the sea, so that they floote aboue water, will they or not, and by this meanes they are taken. It is other∣wise sayd that in the night they come out of the Sea se∣king their repast, and after they are full and weary, they fall a sléepe on the water neare to the shore, wheras they are easily taken, for they are heard how they snort in slée∣ping, beside many other wayes and meanes, which were to long to rehearse.
 As touching their couer and shell, I leaue you to iudge of what thicknesse it may be propor∣tioned to his greatnesse. Also in y
e
 coast of the straight of 
Magelan,
 and of the riuer of plate, the 
Indians
 make thē shieldes, which serue them for to receiue the blowes of arrowes of their enimies. Likewise the 
Amazones
 on the coast of the peaceable Sea, make their Bulwarkes when that they are assailed of the enimies. And for my parte I may boldely say, that I haue séene suche a shell of a Torterell, that a hande gun could in no wise pierce. We néede not to aske how many the 
Insulares,
 or Ilande dwellers of 
Caape verde
 doe take and eate, as we woulde doe héere Béefe or Mutton. Also it is like to Veale, and


almost of the same taste. The wilde man of 
India Ame∣rica
 will in no wise eate of them, persuading with them selues that it would make them heauy, as it is an heauy meat, which wold be a great let or hinderaunce to them in the warres, for that being heauy, they cannot pursue lightly their enimies in the warre, neither escape them selues. To conclude,
 I wil rehearse a Historie of a Gen∣tleman 
Portingalls,
 that was a Leper, who for the great paine that he receiued of his disease, séeking all the mea∣nes he could to absent himselfe from his Countrey, as one being in extreame dispaire, after he had knowledge of the conquest of these faire Ilands by those of his coun∣trey, was bent for recreation to goe thither, so that he prepared himselfe in the best order he coulde, with ships, men, and artillery, and beastes aliue, specially Goates, of the which they haue quantitie. And in the ende he lan∣ded in one of the Ilandes, who for the taste that his dis∣ease caused him to haue, or for that he was weary of ea∣ting of fleshe, the which they vse customably in their Countrey, he had a desire to eate egges of Torterels,
 the which he did for the space of two yeares, in suche sorte, that in the ende he was healed of his Leprosie. Now I would gladly aske, whether that by the tempe∣ratenesse of the aire, he recouered his healthe, which he had chaunged, or the meate that he eate. I thinke verily, that bothe the one and the other was the cause. As tou∣ching the Torterell, 
Plinie
 who speaking as well for su∣stenaunce as for medicine, maketh no mention that it should be good against the Leprosie. Neuerthelesse, he sayeth that it is good against many poysons, specially a∣gainst the Salmander by a 
Antipathia,
 that is betwéene them two, and mortall enmitie.


Whether that this beast hath any hid propertie against this euill, I leaue to the Phylosophers and Physitions: and so ye may sée that experience hath geuen the know∣ledge of many medicines. Of the which none cā giue any certaine reason: wherfore I wold that some wold proue the experience of these of our Countrey, the which to my iudgement shold be more better & more sure than Vipers, so much commended in this affection, and of which is cō∣posed and made the great Theriaque, knowing that it is not sure to vse Vipers, bicause of the poyson y
t
 they bear, what so euer they say, the which thing was also firste known by experience. It is also sayd that many vpon the example of this 
Portingall
 haue gone thither, to whom it hath also wel succeded. This much therfore shall suffice for Torterels, and as for the Goates that this gētleman bare thither, they haue there so well multiplied, that at this present there are an infinite nūber, & some holde opi∣nion that their original commeth from thence, & that be∣fore there was none séene. Nowe there resteth to speake of an herbe that they name in their lāguage 
Orselie:
 this herbe groweth on the tops of high and accessible rockes without any earthe, of the which there is great aboun∣daunce, and for to gather it, they fasten ropes on these Mountaines or rockes, then they clime vpwarde by the lower ende of this corde or rope, and scraping the rocke with certaine instruments that they haue, make it to fall as a chimney swéeper doeth, the which they reserue, and let it down by a rope, in baskets or other vessels. The vse of this herbe, is for to make coloures, as héere before we haue shewed.






Of the Ilande of Fire. Cap. 15.


AMong other secretes I wil not leaue out y
e
 ile of fire, so named, for that it casteth cōtinually a flame of fire,


suche a one, that if the elders had had thereof any know∣ledge, they wold haue written it among other things, as∣wel as of the Mountaine of 
Vesuue,
 and of the hill 
Etna,
 of the which for a truthe they rehearse maruels. As touching 
Etna
 in 
Sicilie,
 it hath cast the fire sometimes with a mer∣uellous noise, as in the time of 
Marcus Emilius,
 & 
T. Fla∣minus,
 as writeth 
Orosa,
 the which many other Historio∣graphers doe affirme, as 
Strabo,
 the which affirmeth to haue séene it, and diligently considered. The which ma∣keth me to beleue somewhat also in the respecte of these men that haue spoken thereof. Also they are not so farre off, but y
t
 we may proue whether it be true or no. I know well that some of our writers would say, that one of the Ilandes of 
Canaria
 casteth continually fire: but let him take héede that he take not that, of which we speake, for the other. 
Aristotle
 in his boke of maruels, speaketh of an Ilande discouered by the 
Carthaginiens
 not inhabited, which did cast flames of fire, beside many other wonder∣full things. Notwithstanding, I cannot thinke that they haue knowen this, muche lesse the hill 
Etna,
 for it was knowen before the raigne of the 
Carthaginiens.
 As for the hil of 
Pussola,
 it lieth on the maine land,
 and if any one wil say otherwise, I will notwithstand them: as for my parte I cannot finde that euer it was found out, but since a M. D. and .xxx. with others as well néere as farre. There is also an other hill in 
Hirland,
 named 
Hecla,
 the which at certaine times casteth stones, as thought they had come out of a fiery furnace, so that the ground within .v. or .vj. leagues about, is barren and vnprofitable, bicause of the ashes that procéede out of this hill, wherwith the ground is couered. This Ilande of which we speake, containeth vij. leagues compasse, by good right called the Ile of fire, for the Mountaine hauing of Circuite .679. paces, and


of height a thousand and fiftie fadome or there about, ca∣steth continually fire at the top, the which may be séene thirty or forty leagues on the sea, much more clearer in y
e
 night than the day, for that by good Philosophy the grea∣test light shadoweth the least: the which maketh the Na∣uigants afraide, that haue no knowledge thereof before. This flame hath a very euill smel, and therfore ye néede not to thinke suche manner of fire straunge, knowing that they are naturall things, as the Phylosophers wit∣nesse, (that is) those places are ful of fire, and hot Mines, of the which procéedeth a vapor hot and dry, like to fire, the which cannot be done without aire. Also from thence procéede waters naturally hot: furthermore in 
Esclauonie
 by 
Apolonia,
 there is a fountaine coming out of a rocke, whereas is séene procéede a flame of fire, whereby all the waters adiacent are as boyling. This place or Ile of fire is inhabited with 
Portingals,
 as many other are in those quarters. And so, euen as the burning heate of this hill doth in no wise let the frutefulnesse of the lād, the which bringeth forthe diuers kindes of good fruits, where as is a great temperatnesse of the aire, liuely springes and fair fountaines, also the sea that cōpasseth it, doth not quench this vehement heate, as rehearseth 
Plinie
 of 
Chimera,
 al∣wayes burning, 
 and quencheth with earth or hay, being cast vpon it, but with water it is kindled.






Of Ethiopia. Cap. 16.


ALthough that many Cosmographers haue sufficiēt∣ly described the Countrey of 
Ethiopia,
 also among our writers, those the which haue made many faire Nauigations by this coast of 
Affrica,
 in many and farre Countreys, notwithstanding this shall not let, but that


according to my endeuor, I wil declare some secretes ob∣serued in sailing by this saide coast into the great 
Ame∣rica. Ethiopia
 therfore extendeth so far,
 that it hath parte bothe of 
Asia
 and 
Affrica,
 and therfore they are deuided in two. That parte which is in 
Affrica,
 is named 
India,
 or 
Leuant
 of the red sea, and to the North part of 
Egipt
 & 
Affrica
 toward the South parte of the floud 
Nigritis,
 the which as we haue said, is called 
Senega.
 To the ponent it hath the whole parte of 
Affrica,
 the which extendeth to the banke side or brinkes of the West. And so it hath ben named by the name of 
Ethiops,
 the sonne of 
Vulcane,
 the which before had many other names. Toward the West it is hilly, small inhabited in the East,
 others set it out after this sorte folowing. There are two 
Ethiops,
 the one is vnder 
Egipt
 riche and large, and in the same is the Ile 
Mirva,
 great among those of 
Nylle,
 and of the same parte extending to the East, raigneth 
Prester Iohn.
 The other part is not so well knowen nor discouered, it is of suche a greatnesse, sauing only by y
e
 borders of the sea. Others deuide it otherwise, that is to wit, the one parte being in 
Asia,
 and the other in 
Affrica,
 that now are called the 
In∣dies
 of 
Leuant,
 compassed with the red Sea in 
Barbarie,
 towardes the Northe, to the Countrey of 
Libia
 in 
Egipt.
 This countrey is very hilly, of the which y
e
 hils are 
Bed, Iona, Bardita, Mescha, Lipha.
 Some haue written that the first 
Ethiopians
 and 
Egiptians,
 among other were most rude & ignorant, leading a wild life euen as brute beasts, without lodging or remaining, but resting them wheras they wer benighted, worse than at this day do the 
Ma∣sonists.
 From the 
Equinoctiall
 toward the 
Antartike,
 ther is a great coūtrey of 
Ethiopians,
 y
t
 norish great Eliphāts, Tigers, Rhinoceros, beasts so named. There is another region bearing Cynamon betwene the armes of 
Nylle:



the realme of 
Etabecke,
 on bothe sides of 
Nylle,
 is inhabi∣ted with Christians. The others are named 
Ickthiopha∣ges
 liuing only with fishe, being in times past brought vn∣der the obedience and subiection of 
Alexander.
 The 
An∣thropophages
 are neare to the hils of the 
Mone,
 and the rest extending from thence to 
Capricorne,
 and returning towarde the 
Caape
 of good hoppe, and inhabited with di∣uers and sundry people, hauing diuers similitudes and monstrous. Neuerthelesse they are estéemed to be y
e
 first borne into the world, also the first that haue inuented re∣ligion and ceremonies, and therfore they were neuer vn∣der the yoke of subiection, but haue alwayes liued at li∣bertie.
 It is a wonderfull thing to sée the honor and ami∣tie that they beare to their King: for if it chaunce that he be grieued in his body, his subiects or houshold seruaunts will be the like, estéeming it a thing vnpertinent to re∣maine whole, and their King grieued or offended.


The greatest part of these people are al naked, bicause of the extréeme heat of the Sunne, others couer their pri∣uie partes with certaine skinnes, others couer halfe of their body,
 and others their whole body. 
Meroa
 is the hed Towne of 
Ethiopia,
 in the olde time it was named 
Saba,
 and since by 
Cambises, Meroa.
 There are diuers kinds of religion. Some are Idolaters, as hereafter shalbe decla∣red, the others worship the 
Sunne
 when it riseth, but they despise the West. This Countrey aboundeth in miracles and wonders, it nourisheth toward 
India
 very great bea∣stes, as great Dogges, Eliphants, Rhinocerous of a wō∣derfull height, Dragons, Basiliscus and others: further∣more, trées so hie that no Archer can shoote to the toppe, with many other wonderfull things, as also 
Plinie
 reher∣seth in the seconde boke, the .xvij Chapter of his naturall Historie. Their corne is customably Mill and Barley,


with the which also they make a certaine drink, and they haue fewe other fruites and trées, sauing only certaine great Palme trées. They haue also in some places, good quantitie of precious stones more than in other. Also it shal not be out of the way, to say that these people are ve∣ry blacke, according as the heat is more or lesse vehemēt, and that that colour commeth of a superficiall action, be∣ing the great heate of the Sunne,
 the which is the cause also, y
t
 they are very fearfull. The heat of the aire being so violent, draweth out the natural heat of the heart, and other interior parts, & therfore they remain colde within being destitute of the naturall heate, and onely burned outwarde, as we may sée in other things. The action of heat in what thing so euer it be, is no other thing thā re∣solution or dissipation of the Eliments, when it perseue∣reth and is violent, in suche sorte that the most subtillest Eliments being consumed, there remaineth but y
e
 earth∣ly part, keping colour and consistence of the earth, as we sée Ashes and burned woode. Then to the skin of this peo∣ple so burned, there resteth but the earthly parte of the humor, the others being dispersed which causeth the coulour. I said they were fearful, bicause of the inward coldnesse: for hardinesse and manhoode commeth not, but with a vehement heate of the heart. The which causeth the Englishmen, & those that are vnder the North 
Pole,
 which cōtrary are cold without, but maruelous hot with∣in, to be hardy, couragious, & ful of great boldnesse. Ther¦fore these 
Neigers
 haue their heade curled, their téethe white, great lips, croked legges, the women vnconstant, with many other vices which wold be to long to reherse: therfore I wil leaue this to Philosophers. Let vs come to our purpose.
 These 
Ethiopians
 & 
Indians
 vse Magike bicause they haue many herbes & other things proper for


that exercise. And it is certaine & true, that there is a cer∣tain 
Sympathia
 in things, and hid 
Antipathia,
 the which cannot be knowen but by long experience. And bicause that we coasted a countrey somwhat far in this land, na∣med 
Ginney,
 I thinke good to write therof particularly.






Of Ginney. Cap. 17.


AFter that we had refreshed vs at 
Caape verd,
 it be∣houed vs to passe further, hauing y
e
 wind at North∣east, maruelous fauourable for to conducte vs right vnder the 
Equinoctiall
 line, the which we ought to passe: but being come to the height of 
Ginney,
 lying in 
Ethiopia,
 the winde became cleane contrary, bicause that in that region, the windes be very vnconstant, with raine, tem∣pest, and thunder, so that the Nauigation on that coast is very dangerous. Now the fourth day of September we arriued into this Countrey of 
Ginney,
 on the West bor∣ders. But somewhat far within the lande, it is inhabited with a very straunge people, bicause of their Idolatry & darke ignoraunce. Before that this Countrey was disco∣uered, and the people knowen, it was thought that they had liued like the 
Ethiopians,
 hauing the like manner of religion of those of the higher 
Ethiope,
 and of 
Senega:
 but it is found cleane contrary, for all they that inhabite or dwel from the said 
Senega,
 to the 
Caape
 of good hope, are al Idolaters without the knowledge of god and his law. And these people are so blinded and ignorant, that the first thing that they méete in the morning, be it birde, ser∣pent, or other wilde or tame beast, they take it with them bearing it about them all the day, about what businesse so euer they haue, as a God or protector of their worke, if they go a fishing in any of their litle boates of bark, they will put it in one of the endes of the boate well wrapped with some leaues, hauing an opinion and beleuing that


it wil bring them all the day good lucke, be it on lande or on water: neuerthelesse they beleue in God, alleaging y
t
 he is there aboue immortall, but vnknowne, for that he will not be knowne to them sensibly. The which erroure differeth nothing from the error of the 
Gentiles
 in times past, that worshipped diuers Gods, vnder the coloure of Images and similitudes. But yet this is a thing worthy to be noted, though it be superstitious and abhominable: that these pore, ignorant, and brutishe men, had rather worship corruptible things, than to be reputed without a God. 
Diodorus
 the 
Sicillian
 writeth, that the 
Ethiopians
 had the first knowledge of the fained gods, to whom they began to vow, and to sacrifice. Also 
Homer
 signifieth that 
Iupiter
 with other Gods went into 
Ethiopia,
 as well for that they were there honored and sacrificed vnto, as for the wholesomnesse of the Countrey. The like you haue of 
Castor
 and 
Pollux,
 the which going on the sea at the re∣quest of the 
Greekes
 against 
Troy,
 were vanished in the aire, and were neuer after séene againe, the which giueth opinion to some to thinke y
t
 they were rauished & placed among the starres of the Sea: also many name them the cleare starres of the sea, attributing their names 
Caster
 & 
Polux,
 to two fair & bright starres. The sayd people haue neither temples nor churches, nor other places appoyn∣ted for sacrifice and prayer. Besides this, they are without comparison much more wicked than those of 
Barbarie
 or 
Affrica,
 in such sort that the straungers dare not aborde them, nor set foote on land, but by pledges:
 otherwise they would take them, and handle them like slaues. These Villaines or wicked impes goe all naked, sauing some since the time that their Countrey hathe bene somewhat frequented, haue worne a little shirt of Cotten, or some suche thing, the which is brought them from other places.


They make not so great trade with beastes, as in 
Barba∣rie:
 there is very fewe fruits, bicause of the drinesse & ex∣treme heat, for this region is vnder y
e
 signe 
Taurus
: they liue a good many yeares, and yet séeme not olde, so that a man of a .C. yeares olde, would be iudged with vs not a∣boue .xl. Neuerthelesse, they liue with the fleshe of wilde beasts, without séething, roasting, or wel preparing of it: they haue also some fishe, and great aboundaunce of Oy∣sters, more larger some than halfe a foote, but they are more dangerous to eate, than any other fishe, they cast a liquor like to milke, and yet the inhabitants eate thereof without any danger, and they vse as well salte water as freshe. They commonly make war with other nations: their weapons are bowes and arows, as the other 
Ethio∣pians
 and 
Affricans.
 The women of this Countrey fre∣quent the warre as much as the men, and they beare for the most part, a large buckle of fine gold or other mettal at their eares, lips, and also on their armes. The waters of this countrey are very dangerous,
 and also the aire is vnholesome, for that to my iudgement, the South winde being very hot and moist, and familiar in that countrey, is subiect to all kinde of putrefactions, the which we féele many times in this Countrey. And therefore they that of our Countrey, and of other Countreys of 
Europe
 that tra∣uaile to 
Gynney,
 cannot remaine there long, without re∣ceiuing some sicknesse, the which chaunced to vs, for ma∣ny of our companie died, and others remained a long time sicke, and with great paine they recouered their health. For the which cause we remained not there long time.
 I will not omit that in 
Ginney,
 the fruit that is most rife and common, and with the which the straungers of straunge Countreis lade their ships, is named 
Manigu∣etta,
 being very good, and wel estemed aboue other spices,


with the which the 
Portingalles
 make a great trade. This fruit commeth vp in the fields like an Onion. The other that commeth from 
Molucquer
 and 
Calicut,
 is not so wel estéemed by a great deale. This people of 
Ginney
 trade with certaine 
Barbariens
 adiacent, golde and salt after a straunge fashion. There are certaine places ordained a∣mong them, where as eche one of his parte bringeth his Marchandise, those of 
Ginney,
 salte, and the others gold molten in lumpes, and without any other talke togither, bicause of the small trust and confidence one of another, as the 
Turkes
 and 
Arabians,
 and some of 
America
 with their neighbors, they leaue in the place before spoken, the golde and the salte of eache part. This being done, these 
Ethiopians
 of 
Ginney
 if they finde there golde inough for their salt, they take it away, otherwise they leaue it, and let it lie. The which the other séeing that their golde wil not satisfie, they adde vnto it vntill that there be suffici∣ent: then they beare away that, that to eche one doth ap∣pertaine. You shall vnderstande furthermore, that the 
Neigers
 hitherwarde are more ciuill and better nurtered than these of 
Ginney,
 bicause of the great resorte of Mar∣chantes that trade thither: also they prouoke others to barter for their golde, for things of smal value, as kniues, glasses, and suche like.
 Also the 
Portingals
 trade and bar∣gaine with the 
Mores
 of 
Ginney,
 beside other things, for Iuorie, that we call Eliphants téethe. And one among o∣thers, shewed me that at one time they haue ladē twelue thousand of these téethe: among the which there was one found among the other, that wayed a hundred pounde waight: for as we haue sayd, the lande of 
Ethiopia
 nouri∣sheth Eliphantes, the which they take at the chase, as we doe here wilde Boares, and so they eate the flesh, which many affirme to be very good: the which I had rather


beleue than taste, or to stand disputing thereof. I will not therefore in this place stand to reason or set out the ver∣tues and properties of this beast, the moste gentlest, and approching to humain reason than any other,
 séeing that this beast hathe bene so muche celebrated of our elders, and also by those of our time: and knowing that 
Plinie, Aristotle,
 & many others haue sufficiently treated there∣of, and of his fleshe, the which some say is medicinable, and good against the Leprosie. The téethe that we call Iuorie, dothe comfort the heart and the stomake, and it wil also helpe with all his substance, the parte or belly of the mother. I will not therefore wryte that which they haue written, for that it is not to our purpose. Neuerthe∣lesse I will not leaue to speake that which I haue sene: the which is, if that they can get any yong Eliphantes, they teache them many prety knackes. For this beast is very apt, and of a good vnderstanding.






Of the Equinoctiall line, and of the Ilandes of S. Omer. Cap. 18.


LEauing therefore this parte of 
Gynney
 on our lefte hande, after we had stayed there but a while for the infection of the aire, as we haue before shewed, we kept our course, coasting alwayes to the height of the 
Caape
 of Palmes, and of that which is called the thrée poyntes, where as runneth a faire Riuer, able to beare great shippes, by the reason whereof there is good trade all ouer the Countrey,
 and the which beareth golde and siluer aboundantly in lumpes, and therefore the 
Portin∣galles
 haue landed there, and being in fauoure with the Inhabitantes, they haue builded there a faire Castle, the


which they haue named the Mine Castle: And not w
t
out a cause, for their Golde is without comparison more fi∣ner than that of 
Calicute,
 or of 
India America.
 It is on this side the 
Equinoctiall
 about thrée degrées and a halfe. There is founde a riuer that commeth from the Moun∣taines of the Countrey named 
Cania,
 and another more lesser, named 
Rhegium,
 the which beareth or bringeth ve∣ry good Fishe, also Cocodrils very daungerous, as 
Nylle,
 and 
Senega,
 and they eate them as we doe Venson. I will not forget what was shewed me to haue bene sene neare to the Mine Castle: a sea monster hauing the shape of a man, that the floud had left on the shore, the which was heard crie.
 In like case the female came with the next floud, crying aloud, and sorowing for the absence of hir make: the which is a wonderfull and straunge thing. By this may be knowen, that the Sea doeth nourish and bring forthe diuers, and straunge kinde of monsters, as well as the land. Being now by our iourneys come euen vnder the 
Equinoctiall,
 I minde not to passe any further, without noting somewhat. This line 
Equinoctiall,
 or Circle 
Equinoctiall,
 or else 
Equator,
 is a trace imagined, of the Sunne by the midst of the world, the which deui∣deth in two equall partes, two times the yeare, that is to wit, the fourth of September, and theleuenth of March, and then the Sunne passeth directly by the 
Zenithe
 of the earth, and leaueth vs this imagined Circle, equall to the Tropicks & others that may be iudged betwene the two 
Poles,
 the Sunne going from the East to the West: it is true that the sunne goeth al the yeare by the 
Ecliptike
 to the 
Zodiake,
 sauing on the dayes aboue named, & standeth directly ouer them that inhabit there. Furthermore they haue right course, without y
e
 one of the 
Poles
 be more ere∣cted than the other: the day & the night are to thē equall, &


therefore they were named 
Equinoctiall,
 and according as the Sunne doth depart from the one to y
e
 other 
Pole,
 there is vnequalities of dayes and nights, and eleuation of the 
Pole.
 Then the Sunne declining by litle and litle from this point 
Equinoctial,
 goeth by his 
Zodiake
 almost to the Tropike of 
Capricorn,
 and passing no farther, cau∣seth the 
Solstice
 of winter: then returning, passeth by the sayd 
Equinoctiall,
 till that he come to the signe of 
Cancer,
 whereas is the 
Solstice
 of Sommer: therefore he maketh vj. signes parting from the 
Equinoctiall
 to eche one of these Tropikes. The elders haue estéemed this countrey or 
Zone
 among the Tropikes to be vnhabitable bicause of the extreme heate, as those that are neare to the two 
Poles,
 bicause of the colde. Neuerthelesse, within these few yeares this 
Zone
 hath bene discouered by Nauiga∣tions, and inhabited for that it was found frutefull, and abounding in many good things (notwithstanding the heat) as the Ilandes of 
S. Omer
 and others, of the which we will speake hereafter. Some vnder this line cōparing the coldnesse of the night, with the heate of the day, haue taken this argument: that in that respect there might be good temperatenesse,
 biside many other reasons y
t
 I omit for this present. The heat that is there séemed to me no hotter than it is here at Midsomer. Furthermore there is much tempest, thunder, lightnings and raines, & therfore at the Ilands of 
S. Omer,
 as also in a nother Iland na∣med the Ile of Rats, there is as much verdure or grene∣nesse as is possible. These Ilands vnder the 
Equinoctiall
 line are marked in our cardes 
Marins 
S. Omer,
 or 
S. Thomas,
 inhabited at this day by 
Portingals,
 although that they be not so frutefull as certain others.


Also there is gathered a certain suger, but they trade with the 
Barbarians
 and 
Ethiopians,
 Golde molten,


Pearles, Muske, Rhubarbe, Beastes, Byrdes and other things according to the countrey. Also in these Ilandes the seasons and times are vnequall and differing from other countries, the people more subiect to sicknesse than they of the North part, the which difference & vnequali∣tie commeth of the Sunne, the which sheweth his quali∣ties by the ayre being betwene him and vs. It passeth as euery one knoweth, two times the yere customably there∣by, and then y
e
 
Equinoctial
 descrieth him, in the monthes of Marche, and September.
 About this lyne is founde such abundance of fishes of sundry & diuers kindes, that it is a maruelous and a wōderful thing to sée them aboue water, and I haue heard them make such a noyse about the ships side, that we could not hear one another speke: whether this is bicause of y
e
 heat of the Sunne or for any other reasons, I leaue that to the Philosophers. There resteth nowe to shewe that euen about our 
Equinoctiall,
 I taasted the water the which was more swéeter & plea∣sāter to drinke thā in other places, wheras it is very salt, though that many affirme the contrarie, iudging that it shoulde be rather more salter, for that it draweth to the lyne whereas the heate is most vehement, knowing that from thence commeth the saltnesse of the sea, and therfore that shoulde be more swéeter that is towarde the 
Poles.
 I do verily thinke that from the one 
Pole
 to the other euen to the line, that as the ayre is not equally temperat, so in like case the water is not temperat. But vnder the lyne the temperatnesse of the water doeth folowe the tempe∣ratnesse of the ayre. Therefore there is a good reason, why the water in that part is more swéeter than in other places. Being passed this line, we found the sea more and more calmer and peaceable, keping our course towarde the 
Caape
 of good hope.








That not onely all that is vnder the lyne is inhabited, but also al the worlde is inhabited contrary to the opinion of our elders. Cap. 19.


IT is euidently sene howe greate the curiositie of men is, either for a desire to knowe things, or for to attayne to possessions, or else to auoyde Idlenesse, that they haue hazarded them selues (as the wise man sayth, and beside him the Poet 
Horace
 sayth in his Epistles) to all dan∣gers and trauels, for to eschew pouertie, to leade a more quiet life without trouble or payne. Notwithstanding it might be ynough for them to know and vnderstande that the soueraygne workmaster, hath made with his owne handes this worlde al rounde, so that the water hath ben separated from the lande, to the ende that more commo∣diously euery one might inhabit in his proper Eliment, or at the leaste in that place whereas he thought moste beste. Neuerthelesse not content with this, they would knowe if it be all ouer inbabited. Notwithstanding for such finding out, and diligence, I esteme them for my parte as much and rather more worthy of prayse, than our late writers and Nauigators, for that they haue first opened to vs these things. Otherwise with greate payne we could not haue knowen them nor comprehended: but 
Thales,
 
Pithagoras, Aristotle,
 and many others as well 
Greekes
 as 
Latins
 haue sayde, that it is not possible that all partes of the world should be inhabited, the one parte for the greate and vnsuportable heate, another parte for the great and vehemēt cold. Other Authors deuiding the world into two parts called 
Himisperes,
 (one of y
e
 which) they say can in no wise be inhabited. But the other parte in the which we are, muste of necessitie be inhabited.


And so of foure partes of the worlde they take away thrée, so that to their opinion there shoulde rest but two, that be habitable. And for the better vnderstanding thereof to eche one, excepting those that haue knowledge thereof, I will declare this more playner,
 minding there∣fore to proue that al the world is inhabited. They suppose that there is fiue zones in all the worlde, by the which they will measure, and compasse all the earth, of the which two are colde, two temperate, and the other hot. And if you wil know how they gather these fiue 
Zones,
 extende your lefte hande towarde the Sunne rysing, being the fingers spredde abroade, and by this meane 
Probus Grammaticus
 dyd teach, or instructe. Then when you haue beheld the Sunne, thorough the lower parts of your fingers, bowe and bende them euery one in forme or manner of a Circle. By the thumbe ye shall knowe the colde zone, which is the North,
 the which by the excessiue coldenesse (as they doe affirme) is vnhabited. Neuer∣thelesse the experience hath shewed within fewe yeares, that all those partes well néere to our 
Pole,
 also vnder the 
Paralezey Artike
 ioyning to the 
Hyperbores,
 as 
Sca∣uia, Dacea, Swetherlande, Gotlande, Norway, Denemarcke, Thilia, Lyuonia, Pilapea, Pruse lande, Russia, Muscouia, Ruthenie,
 whereas there is nothing but Ise, and conti∣nual coldnesse, to benotwithstanding inhabited with fro∣warde and brutish men. The which to our Englishe Marchantes is well ynough knowen. Therefore the An∣cient writers in this do greatly erre, & are not to be bele∣ued, hauing onely spoken by gesse and thought, and not by experience. Let vs speake of the other zones: the o∣ther finger next to the thumbe, doeth signifie the tempe∣perat zone, the which is inhabited, & extendeth to the tro∣picke of 
Cancer,
 though y
t
 in drawing néere it be more hot


than temperat, as that which is iustly in the midst, that is to know betwene this tropicke & the 
Pole.
 The thirde finger doeth represent the zone placed betwene the two tropickes named 
Torrida,
 bicause of the extreme heate of the Sunne, the which resteth and burneth vp all, and therefore it was iudged vnhabitable. The fourth finger is the other zone,
 temperated of the 
Antipodes,
 a meane betwene the tropicke of 
Capricorne,
 and the other 
Pole,
 the which is inhabited. The fifth which is the little fin∣ger signifieth the other zone colde,
 the which in like case they haue estemed vnhabited for the like reason as they alleged for the former 
Pole,
 of the which we may say as much as we haue sayde of the North parte, for the like reason is of bothe. After then that this rule or example is knowen, it is easily knowen what partes of the Worlde are inhabited, and which are not, according to the opiniō of the Auncient writers. 
Plinie,
 diminishing that which is inhabited, sayth, that of the fiue partes that are named zones, we muste take away thrée bicause they are not in∣habited, the which hath bene shewed by the thumbe, the greate finger and the little finger. Also he taketh away al that occupieth the Weast sea. And in another place he writeth that y
e
 earth that is vnder y
e
 
Zodiack,
 is onely in∣habited. The causes that he allegeth why these thrée zones are vnhabited, is, the vehement colde, which for the farre distance & absence of the Sunne is in y
e
 Region of the two 
Poles,
 and the greate and extreme heate that is vnder the zone 
Torrida,
 is bicause of the continuall presence of the Sunne. As much doe our late Theologiās affirme and write. The contrary notwithstanding, may be shewed by the writings of these Authors before alle∣ged, by the authoritie of Philosophers, specially of our tyme, by the witnessing of holy Scriptures, and then by


experience which passeth all, the which by me hath bene made. 
Strabo, Mela,
 & 
Plinie,
 although that they disproue the zones, write neuerthelesse that there are men in 
Ethiopia,
 in the Ilande named by the elders 
Aurea,
 and also in the Ile 
Tabroban, Malaca,
 and 
Zamotra,
 vnder the zone 
Torrida:
 also that 
Scandenauia,
 the hills 
Hyper∣bores,
 and the countrey adiacent néere to the North, of the which we haue before shewed, are peopled and inhabited although according to the saying of 
Herodita,
 these hills are directly vnder the 
Pole.
 The first that founde out the lande contayned vnder the two temperat zones to be in∣habited, as 
Plutarche
 writeth, was 
Parmenides.


Many haue written that not onely the zone 
Torida,
 may be inhabited, but also wel peopled. The which 
Aue∣roys
 proueth by the witnessing of 
Aristotle,
 in the fourth Chapter of his booke intituled, 
of the worlde and of the firmament 
Auicen
 in the like case, in his second doctrine,
 and 
Albertus Magnus,
 in his sixte Chapter of the nature of Regions, efforcing to proue by naturall reason, that this zone is inhabited, yea more profitable for our hu∣maine life than those vnder the tropickes. So that by this meanes we will conclude and say that it is better, more commodious, & more wholesome for our humayne life, than any others. For euen as the colde is an enimie, so in like case the heate is friendly to our bodies, knowing that our life is nothing but heat and moysture, to the contrary death is colde and drinesse. By this ther∣fore ye may knewe that all the earth is peopled, and is neuer without dwellers neither for colde, nor heate, but for barennesse, and whereas it is vnfruitfull it may be inhabited, as I haue sene in 
Arabia,
 and in other coun∣treys. Also man was created of God for that he might dwell and lyue in what parte of the worlde he woulde,


were it hote, colde or temperate: for he him selfe sayde to our first parentes: 
Growe, increase and multiplie.
 The ex∣perience furthermore teacheth, (as many times we haue sayde) howe large the worlde is, and commendable to all creatures, the which we may sée by the continuall Naui∣gations on the sea, and by the long iourneys on the lande.






Of the multitude and diuers kindes of fishes being vnder this lyne Equinoctial. Cap. 20.


BEfore the departing out of our lyne, I thinke it good to declare particularly of the fish that is found about seuen or eight leagues on this side and beyonde the lyne of diuers colours, and such a multitude, that it is not possible to number them, or to heape them together, the which are as a greate heape of corne in a barne. And ye shall note that among these fishes many haue folowed our ships more than thrée hundreth leagues, specially the 
Dorades,
 of the which we will speake hereafter more at large. The 
Marsouins
 or sea Hogs, after that they had perceiued our ship from farre, dyd swimme a mayne against vs, the which gaue to the Mariners a certayne signe and forshewing of that parte from whence the winde ought to come, for these Sea beastes (say they) will swimme against one, and in a greate com∣pany as foure or fiue hundreth together. This fish is na∣med 
Marsouin,
 of 
Marissus,
 in Latine, which is as much to say as a sea Hog, bicause that he is like almoste to Hogs on the earth, for he hath the lyke grunt or noyse, and hath the snoute lyke the ende of a Canne, and on


the heade a certayne cundite or opening, by the which he yaunneth or purgeth, euen as the Whale. The Mariners take many of them with certayne gynnes of Iron being sharpe, and pointed at the ende and croked, and they doe eate but little thereof, hauing other better fish: but the liuer and lights is very good & delicate being bothe like, and also in taste to a Hogs harscelet. When they are taken, drawing towarde their death they caste greate sighes as we sée our countrey Hogs do when they are let bloude. The female bringeth but twoo at a tyme. It was therefore a wonderfull thing to sée this greate number of fish making a maruelous greate noyse with∣out comparison, the which some peraduenture wil thinke strange and vncredible: but I will affirme it to be so, for that I sawe it. As I sayd before, that there is fish found of al colours, red, as those whō they named Bonnites, the others Azure, & like golde, shining brighter than fine A∣zure, as those named 
Dorades,
 others gréene, gray, blacke. Yet I will not say, that out of the sea they shoulde kepe those colours. 
Plinie
 rehearseth that in 
Spaine,
 in a fountayne, the fish are of the coloure of golde, but out of the fountayne they are lyke to others, the which may come of the colour of the water, being so betwene our eye and the fishe, euen as a glasse being of a gréene or blewe colour representeth the things that ar within of the same colour. Now to retourn to our 
Dorade,
 many as wel An∣cients as others haue written of the nature of fishes, but very homelie, for that they haue not sene but hearde say, and specially of the 
Dorade,
 
Aristotle
 writeth that she hath foure finnes, two aboue and two vnder, and that she maketh her yong ones in sommer, & y
e
 female remayneth hyd a certaine time, but he telleth not how long. 
Plinie
 to my iudgement, hath borowed or lerned this of 
Aristotle,



speaking of this fishe, saying that she hideth hir self in the sea a certayne time, but in passing further he hath defined this tyme to be when it is extreme hot, for that it cannot endure so greate a heate. There are founde great ones like Samons,
 others that are lesser: from the head to the tayle it hath a creste and all that parte coloured lyke fine Azure, in such sorte that it is vnpossible to excogitate or thinke a more fayrer colour: the inferior or lower parte shineth like fire golde and for this cause it was named 
Dorade,
 also of 
Aristotle,
 in his lāguage 
, that the interpretors call 
Aurata,
 and it is very fierce on the flying fish, the which she foloweth, and chaseth in the wa∣ter, as the hounde chaseth a haare in the fieldes, for she li∣ueth by pray, casting hir selfe hye aboue water after this flying fish, and if that she fayleth at one time she recoue∣reth at another tyme. This fish folowed our shippes the space of seuen wekes without once forsaking of them, yea night and day, vntill that she founde the sea vnsauery or not for hir nature. I knowe wel that this fish hath ben much celebrated and estemed in tymes paste among No∣ble men, for that she is very delicate and pleasant, to eat. For we reade of 
Sergius,
 that founde the meanes to haue one brought to 
Rome,
 the which was serued at a bancket to the Emperour,
 whereas it was meruelously estemed. And since that tyme hath this fish 
Dorade,
 bene greatly estemed among the 
Romaynes,
 so that there was no sumptuous banket but that it was serued for a greate dayntie dish. And whereas this fish is scant in sommer, & harde to come by, 
Sergius
 the 
Senator,
 founde the meanes to kepe it with foode aliue, to the ende that this fish shoulde not fayle them in no season: and for this curiositie it was na∣med 
Aurata,
 or golden fish. This fish is in much better sauor in Winter than in Sōmer, for al things haue their


season. 
Cornelius Celsus
 ordayned this fish to the sicke, specially, to those that had the Feuer or Ague, for it is light fish and not heauie, but may be well digested: there are found more store in the West sea, thā in the East sea. Moreouer all kinde of fishes are not found in euery place of the sea. Helops a singular fish is not found but onely about 
Pamphilia, Ilus
 and 
Scaurus,
 onely in the sea 
Atlan∣tike,
 and so of many others. 
Alexander
 the great being in 
Egypt
 bought two 
Dorades
 for two marke of golde, for to proue if that they were so delicate and fine meate, as it was shewed him, so that there were two a lyue brought him from the Weast sea, to 
Nemphis,
 whereas he remai∣ned, as a Iewe being a Phisitiō, shewed me by a Historie being at 
Damasca
 in 
Siria.
 Thus much gentle Reader I haue learned as touching the 
Dorade,
 for that thou shoul∣dest sée what the elders haue written thereof, and among others, my lorde 
William Pellicier
 Bishop of Mountpel∣lier, who hath treated of the nature of fishes as faithfully and truely, as any in our tyme.






Of an Ilande named the Ascention. Cap. 21.


THE twentie sixth day of October, being eight de∣grées beyonde our lyne 
Equinoctiall,
 we founde an Ilande not inhabited, the which at the firste we thought to name the Ile of Birdes, bicause of the greate multitude of Birdes that are in the sayde Ilande,
 but looking in our carde 
Marin,
 we found that before tyme it was founde out by the 
Portingals,
 and named the Ile of the 
Ascention,
 bicause that on that day, they ariued thi∣ther. We therefore seing those Birdes flying on the sea,


made vs to thinke that there was some Ilande néere hande, and the néerer we came, we sawe such a multi∣tude of birdes of diuers sortes with coloured feathers, that the lyke was neuer séene in our tyme,
 the which came flying to our ships, and woulde reste vpon vs, so that we might take them with our handes, and with greate payne coulde we be ridde of them. For if one had stretched out his Arme they woulde haue rested vpon it, euen lyke tame birdes, and not one of them lyke to the birdes of our countrey, the which to some semeth vn∣credible. Being caste of from our handes they flyed not away, but let them selues be taken agayne as before.


Furthermore in this Ilande there is a certayne kinde of greate birdes that I haue heard called Aponars,
 they haue little wings, and therefore they cannot flye. They are great and hye, lyke hearnshawes, the belly white and and the backe blake as cole, the byll lyke to a cormo∣rant, when they are killed they crye lyke hogs.


I thought good to speake of this birde among others, for that there are founde a greate number of them in an Ilande lying towarde the 
Caape,
 of good Spéede, on the coste or borders of newe founde lande,
 the which was named the Ile of 
Aponards:
 Also there are such a multi∣tude, that on a tyme thrée greate ships of 
Fraunce,
 going to 
Canada,
 did lade eche of them two tymes their cock∣boates with these birdes on the brinke of the sayde Ilande, and it is no maistrie to goe into the Iland and to driue them before them to their boates lyke shéepe. This therefore hath giuen me occasion to speake so much thereof. As touching the reste of the Ile of 
As∣cention,
 it is indifferent faire and pleasant, being of cir∣cute six leagues, with mountaines garnished with faire gréene trées, herbes, and floures. Not forgetting the


number of birdes, of the which we haue spoken,
 I sup∣pose that if it were labored and tilled with many others that are in the Weaste, as well beyonde, as on this side the 
Equinoctiall,
 it woulde render as good profit, as 
Tene∣dos, Lemnos, Metelin, Negrepont, Rhodes,
 and 
Candia,
 or any others that are in the sea 
Helispont,
 and the 
Cy∣clades:
 for in this greate Weaste sea, there are Ilandes that are more then .80. leagues compasse, and some lesse, among the which the greatest parte are desert, and not inhabited. Nowe after that we had passed this Ilande, there dyd appeare foure starrs of a wonderful greatnesse made in manner of a crosse, neuerthelesse farre ynough from the 
Pole 
Antartike.
 The Mariners that sayle that way name them charets. Some of them thinke that among these is the South Starre, the which is fixed and vnmoueable, as the North starre that we call the lesser beare, the which was hyd before that were vnder the 
E∣quator,
 and many others that are not sene at this side to the Northwarde.






Of the promentarie of good hope, and of many secretes obserued in the same, likewise our Ariuall to the Indies, America, or Fraunce Antartike. Cap. 22.


AFter that we haue passed the 
Equinoctiall
 lyue,
 and the Ilande of 
S. Homer,
 folowing the coste of 
Ethio∣pia,
 the which is called 
India Meridionall,
 it be∣houed to folow our course euē to the 
Tropike
 of winter, about the which time we discouered the great & famous



Promentarie
 of good hope, the which the Pilots haue na∣med 
Lyon
 of the sea,
 bicause that it is feared and redou∣ted, being so great and difficil. This 
Caape
 on bothe sides is compassed with two great mountaines and hils, of the which the one beholdeth the East, & the other the West. In this coūtrey are many beasts named Rhinoceros, for that they haue a horne vnder their snout. Some cal them Oxen of 
Ethiopia.
 This beast is very monstrous, and ke∣peth perpetuall warre and hatred with the Elephante. And for this cause the 
Romaines
 haue taken great plesure to make these two beastes fight, for a spectacle of greate∣nesse, chiefly at the creation of an Emperoure or some o∣ther high or greate magistrate: as they doe at this day marke Beares, Bulls, and Lyons. He is not altogether so high as the Elephant, nor such as we paynte him or set him out in our countrey. And that which moueth me to speake, is, that traueling from 
Egypt
 to 
Arabia,
 I sawe a very Auncient monument, whereas was engra∣ued certayne figures of beastes in stede of letters as it was vsed in the olde time, among the which was the Rhenoceros, being without horne and mayles, not lyke as our painters setteth him out. This beaste for to pre∣pare him selfe to fight, as 
Plinie
 rehearseth, sharpeneth his horne against a certayne stone, and alwayes draweth to the belly of this Elephant, for that it is the part of the body that is most softest. There is also great quantitie of wilde Asses, and another bearing a horne betwene bothe there eyes of two foote long. I sawe one being in the citie of 
Alexandria,
 that is in 
Egypt,
 that a Lorde 
Turke
 brought from 
Melcha,
 the which horne he sayde, had the lyke vertue agaynst poyson as had the horne of an Vnicorne. 
Aristotle
 calleth these


Asses with horne, Asses of 
India.
 About this 
Promentarie,
 is the departing of the way to the Easte and the Weaste 
Indies,
 for they that will goe to the Easte 
Indies,
 as to 
Ca∣licut, Tabrobane, Melinde, Cannonor
 and others, they take on the left hande, costing the Ile of 
S. Laurence,
 guiding the head of the ship to Weast or Southweast hauing the winde at Weaste Northweaste. This countrey of the Easte 
Indies
 extendeth so farre, that many iudge it to be the thirde parte of the worlde. 
Mela,
 and 
Diodorus,
 wri∣teth y
t
 the sea compassing these 
Indies,
 from the South to the Easte is of such a greatnesse, that with much payne they can passe though the wind be fauorable in the space of fortie dayes, but I dare affirme twice fortie. This countrey therefore is on that side compassed with the sea, which bicause of that, is named,
 the 
Indian
 sea or 
Indi∣que
 confining towardes the North to the hill 
Cancasa,
 and is named 
India,
 of a Riuer named 
Indus,
 as 
Tartaria
 of the Riuer 
Tartar,
 passing by the countrey of the greate King 
Chan.
 Yt is inhabited with people of diuers kinds as well in manners as in Religion. A great parte is vn∣der the ohedience of 
Prester Iohn,
 the which holdeth the Christian Fayth: the others are 
Mahometists,
 as we haue before shewed speaking of 
Ethiopia:
 and others are Idolaters. The other way at the departing of this 
Caape
 that is on the right hand, leadeth to 
America,
 the which we folowed hauing the wind good and fauorable, neuer∣thelesse we remayned a good long time on the water, as well for the distaunce of the places, as for the winde that afterwarde fell contrarie, the which made vs to lynger euen to the eightene degrée of our lyne,
 and then agayne it began to fauor vs. Before passing any farther I will shewe a thing that is worthy of memorie. Aproching or drawing néere to 
America,
 within fiftie leagues we be∣gan


to smell the ayre of the lande, otherwyse than the smell of the sea, with such a swéete and pleasant smell of the Trées, Herbes, Fruits, and Floures of the countrey, that neuer balme were it the balme of 
Egypte,
 that euer smell swéeter or pleasanter. Therefore I leaue you to thinke or iudge what greate ioye the poore Nauigantes had, although that of a long time before they had eaten no breade, also being out of hope to recouer any for their retourne. The next day which was the laste day of October about nine of the clocke in the morning,
 we discried the high hills of 
Croistmouron,
 although that was not the place whereas we pretended to goe, wherefore costing the lande a thrée or foure Leagues, not minding to descend a lande, being well enformed that the inhabi∣tantes there are allyed with the 
Portingals,
 and therefore for nothing we woulde aborde or descende there, keping on our way till the second of Nouember, that we aryued to a certayne place named 
Maqueh,
 for to enquire of things, specially, of the King of 
Portingals
 Armye, whereas preparing our boates and barges, for to come a shore, and set foote on lande, there appeared foure olde men of the countrey, for that the yong men were gone to the warre, the which olde men at the firste, fled away thinking we had bene 
Portingals,
 their enimies, but she∣wing them a token of assurance in the ende they came néere vs. Neuerthelesse staying there not aboue foure and twentie houres, we hoyssed sayle for to drawe to∣warde 
Caape de Frie,
 distant from 
Maqueh,
 twentie fiue leagues.


This countrey is maruellous fayre, in tymes past in∣habited by the 
Portingals,
 the which gaue it that name, which before was called 
Gekan,
 and there they reared a


tort, minding there to remayne, for bicause of the good∣nesse of the place. But within a shorte tyme after,
 for what cause I knowe not, but the 
Barbarous
 men of the countrey made them all to dye, and eate them vp as they vse customably their enimies. And at our ariuall they helde two 
Portingals,
 that they had taken in a little boate, and to them they though to doe the lyke, to whom our comming was a pleasure, for by vs they were reco∣uered out of the handes of these cruell inhabitantes. 
Pomponius Meleus,
 calleth this 
Caape,
 of which we speake, the front of 
Africa,
 for that beyonde it bendeth lyke an Angle, and retourneth by little and little into the North and East, there whereas is the ende of the mayne land and of 
Africa,
 of the which 
Ptolomeus
 had neuer any knowlege.


This 
Caape
 also is the chiefe or heade of Newe 
Africa,
 the which towarde 
Capricorne,
 extendeth to the mountaynes of 
Habacia
 and 
Gaiacia,
 the flat countrey is little inhabited, it is very brutish and Barbarous, yea monstrous, not that the men are so disformed as many haue written, as though that in their sléepe they had dreamed it, being not afrayde to affirme that there are people of whome their eares hang to their héeles, others with one eye in the foreheade as 
Arismases,
 others with∣out heade, others hauing but one foote but of such a bredth, that therewith they may shadowe them selues against the heate of the Sunne, and they call them 
Mo∣nomeres, Monosceles,
 and 
Sciapodes,
 certaine others being ignorant doe write yet more strangenesse yea: late writers, writing without iudgement reason or ex∣perience. I will not altogether denye the monsters, which are vnnaturall approued by the Philosophers,


and affirmed by experience. But I doe impugne things that are so farre out of reason: let vs returne to our 
Pro∣mentarie.
 There is founde diuers kindes of dangerous beastes, & venomous, among others the Basiliscus, hurt∣full to the inhabitants, also to the strangers and to those that go to fish on the Borders. This Basiliscus as euery man may know, is a venomous beast, that killeth a man with his onely looke, the body about nine inches long, the head like fier, vpō y
t
 which ther is a white spot in maner of a crowne, the mouth red, & the rest of the face of blacke colour, the which I knowe by the skinne that I dyd sée in the handes of an 
Arabian:
 he chaseth away all other Serpentes with his hissing (as 
Lucian
 sayth) for to re∣mayne alone master of the fielde. To be short, I may say with 
Salust,
 that there dyeth more people by wilde beasts in 
Africa,
 than by any other inconuenience. This much thought I good to speake by the way.






Of the Iland Madagascar, otherwise of S. Laurence. Cap. 23.


THE great desire that I haue to let slip nothing that is necessarie and profitable to the Readers, bindeth me that I thinke it the office and duetie of a wri∣ter to treate of al things that partayne to his argument, without leauing one word out, the which thing hath sti∣red me vp to set out in this place this Ilande so notable, hauing seuenty eight degrées of longitude, no minut, and of latitude aleuen degrées and thirtie minutes, very well peopled, and inhabited with blacke wilde men, (within a certayne time) the which kepe or holde the like maner of Religion as the 
Mahometists,
 some being Idolaters, but after another manner. It was firste discouered by the



Portingals,
 and named 
S. Laurence,
 and before 
Madagas∣car
 in their language, rich and fruitfull of all things, for that it lieth well. And also the trées bring forthe fruit of themselues without planting, grafting, setting or sow∣ing: neuerthelesse their fruits are as good, swéete and ple∣sant to eate, as if the trée had bene grafted. We sée in our countrey that the fruits of the fields, that is to wit, those that the earth bringeth forthe without laboring, is rude, wilde, soure, swete, and without any good tast, the others are contrary. Therfore in this Iland, is much better fruit than on the maine lande, although that it be vnder one 
Zone
 and temperatenesse, among the which there is one that they name in their language 
Chicorin,
 and the Trée that beareth them, is like to a fether trée of 
Egipt,
 or 
A∣rabia,
 as well in height as in leaues. The which fruit is séene héere, the which the shippes bring, and we cal them 
Nuts
 of 
India,
 the which the Marchants holde deare, for they are very faire and proper to make bottels, for the wine being a certaine time in these vessels, hath a mar∣uelous swete smell and pleasaunt, bicause that the fruit hath a smell like Muske. Furthermore, those that custo∣mably drinke in these cuppes or vessels, as I was enfor∣med of a Iewe, are preserued from the head ache, & from the ache in the flankes, and prouoketh vrine. The which being noted of 
Plinie
 and others, they say that al kinde of Palmes, are healthfull and good for many things. This fruit wherof we speake, is altogether good. The 
Indians
 & 
Ethiopians
 being visited with sicknesse, péele the fruit, & drink the iuice or liquor, the which is white, like to milk, and therewith they are eased: also with this fruit, they make a kinde of sustenance, being mingled with certain meale of dried rootes or dried fishe, of the which they eate after that it is wel boiled together. This liquor is not to


be kept long, but for the time that is may be kept, it is without comparison better for the partie that taketh it, than any kinde of conserues that may be found. And for the longer keping of this fruit, they boile the liquor, the which when it is colde, they put into vessels therfore ap∣pointed: others put therein Honey, to make it pleasaunt to drinke. The trée that beareth this fruit, is so tender, that if it be neuer so little touched or pricked with any sharpe or pointed thing, the iuice will come forthe, the which is pleasant to drinke, and very proper to quenche thirst. All these Ilands that are found on the coast of 
E∣thiopia,
 as the Isle of 
Prince,
 hauing 
.35.
 degrées of longi∣tude minute 
.0.
 and of latitude minute 
.0. 
Mopata, Zonzi∣bar, Monfia.
 S. Apolin,
 and 
S. Thomas,
 vnder the line are riche and fruitfull, almost all full of these Palme trées, and other trées bearing fruit, that are maruellous good. There are found diuers other kinde of Palme trées bea∣ring fruit, although that not all, like those of Egypt, and in all the Indies of 
America
 and 
Perou,
 as well on the maine land, as in the Ilands are found of seuen sortes of Palme trées, all differing in fruit the one from the other. Among the which I haue found some that beare Dates good to eate,
 as those of 
Egipt,
 of 
Arabia, Felicia
 and of 
Siria.
 Moreouer in this said Iland, are Melons of a mer∣uellous greatnesse, being as great as a man may com∣passe or embrace, of a ruddy coloure. Also there are some white, and others yellow, but muche more wholesomer than oures in 
Europe.
 There are also diuers kindes of good herbes and health some, among the which there is one,
 the which they name 
Spagnin,
 the which they vse for their woundes and sores, also against the biting of Vi∣pers and other venemous beastes, for it draweth out the venime or poison. Furthermore there is founde great


quantitie of good Saunders in the woodes and groues. As touching beastes wilde and tame, fishes and birdes, our Iland norisheth of all sortes, and in as great quanti∣tie as is possible. In the which Iland there is a straunge birde, made like a puttocke or rauenous foule, the bill like a Hauke, hir eares hanging downe to hir throte, the féete very rough and full of fethers, being of a white shi∣ning coloure like to siluer,
 onely the fethers on hir head are blackishe. This birde is named in their language 
Pa,
 in the Persian tongue 
Pie
 or 
Lege,
 and this foule li∣ueth with Serpents, of the which there are great quan∣titie, and of diuers kindes. Also there are other kinde of birdes not like to those in our Countrey. As for beastes, there are a great number of Eliphants, and beasts with one horne being of two kindes. Of the which the one is the Asse of 
India,
 hauing the foote not clouen, as those that are found in the land of 
Persia,
 the other is named 
Orix
 or clouen foote. There are no wilde Asses, but onely on the dry land. Whether y
t
 there be any Vnicorns I know not, but being at the 
Indies
 of 
America,
 certain of the 
In∣dians
 came to sée vs aboue .lx. or .lxxx. leagues of: whome as we did question with of many things, they shewed vs that in their countrey there was a great nūber of certain great beastes, like to a kinde of wilde cowes y
t
 they haue, hauing one only horne in their forehead, about a fadome lōg, but to say y
t
 they are Vnicorns I am not sure, hauing no perfect knowledge therof. I haue before shewed y
t
 this countrey or Iland norisheth great store of serpents & Le∣zards of a maruelous greatnesse, y
t
 which are easily takē w
t
out dāgers. Also y
e
 
Neigers
 eat these Lezards, so do the 
Indians
 of 
America.
 There are lesser ones of y
e
 bignesse of a lege, that are very good and delicate to eat, beside many good fishe and foule, which they eate when they sée time.


Among other secretes, bicause of the multitude of fishe, there are great store of Whales, out of the which the in∣habitaunts of the Countrey draw Amber, the which ma∣ny take to be gray Amber, a thing that is here very skāt and precious.
 Also it is very hearty, and good to comfort the most notable partes of our humaine body: and with the same they make a great trade with straunge Mar∣chauntes.






Of our arriuall to Fraunce Antartike, otherwise named America, to the place named Caape Defria. Cap. 24.


AFter that by deuine prouidence, with so many tra∣uailes common and ordinarie to so long a Nauiga∣tion, we were come to the maine land, not so soone as our heartes desired, which was the tenth day of No∣uember, and in stead of taking our rest, it behoued vs to discouer & séeke out proper places, to make or reare newe siedges, being no lesse astonied or amazed, that the 
Troy∣ans
 were at their arriuall into 
Italie.
 Hauing therefore stayed but a while at the former place, where as we lan∣ded, as in the former Chapter we haue shewed, we spred againe our sa-les,
 sailing towarde 
Caape Defria,
 wheras we were well receiued of the 
Indians
 or wilde men of the Countrey, shewing according to their manner, euident signes of ioy: neuerthelesse we stayed ther but .iij. dayes, they welcomed vs one after an other, according to their custome, with this word 
Carainbe,
 which is as muche to say as welcome, or ye are welcome. And for to shew their good wils,
 one of their great 
Morbicha Onassonb,
 that is to say, King, feasted vs with a kinde of meale made of rootes, and with their 
Cahonin,
 which is a drinke made of



Mill
 is named 
Auaty,
 and it is great like a pease: there is bothe white and blacke. And for to make this drinke, they let this 
Mill
 boile with other rootes, the which af∣ter it is boyled, hath a coloure like to Claret wine: and these 
Indians
 finde it so good, that therewith they will be dronken, as men will be with wine in our Countrey. It is thicke like to wine lées. Héere I wil shew you a super∣stition that they vse, to make this drink, after the straun∣gest maner in the world.
 After that it hath boyled in car∣then vessels made for that purpose, there shall come cer∣taine virgins or maidens that shall chawe or champe in their mouthes this 
Mill
 being so boyled or sodden, then they shall put it into a nother vessel therunto appointed, or if that a woman be called therto, she must first abstain certaine dayes from hir husband: otherwise they thinke that this 
Byuerige
 or drinke, will neuer come to good perfection. This being done, they will make it boyle a∣gaine, vntill that it be purged or cleansed, as we sée the wine boyling in the tunne: & then within certaine dayes after they drinke thereof. Now after that they had enter∣tained vs after this sorte, they brought vs afterwarde to sée a large stone of fiue féete long or there about, in the which appeared certaine strokes of a rod or small wand, and the print of two féete, the which they affirme to be of their great 
Caraibe,
 whome they haue in as great reue∣rence, as the 
Turks
 haue 
Mahomet,
 for bicause (say they) that he hath giuen them the vse and knowledge of fire, likewise to plant rootes, for before they liued but with leaues, as doe the brute beastes. Being thus guided and led about by their King, we forgate not diligently to know and visite the place, wheras among other commo∣dities requisite and necessary, we founde that there was no freshe water to be had but far from thence, the which


letted vs to stay ther any long time, for y
e
 which we were sorie considering the bounty of the countrey.
 In this place there is a Riuer of salt water passing betwene two hills, separated the one from the other about a stones throwe, and entreth into the countrey about .36. leagues. This Riuer hath great quantitie of good fish of diuers kindes, chiefly greate moulets, so that whilest we were there we sawe the 
Indians
 catche of these fishes aboue a thousand in a shorte space.
 Furthermore there are many birdes of diuers kindes with strange fethers, some as red as fine scarlet, others white, ashey, and other colours. And with these fethers the wilde men or 
Indians,
 make hats, and garments, either for to couer them or for beauty. When they goe a warfare or when they haue any skirmish with their enimies. Others also make them Gownes and Caps,
 after their maner: and for a manifest truth it may be knowen by a gowne that I brought home, with the which gowne I made present to 
Monsieur Troisteux,
 a gentleman of the house of my Lorde, the right reuerend Cardinall of 
Sens.
 Among these number of birdes al dif∣fering from those of our 
Himisperia,
 there is one which they name in their language, 
Arat,
 the which is a very hearon in proportion,
 sauing that his fethers are red as Dragons bloud. Furthermore there are sene trées with∣out number being gréene all the yeare long, of the which the moste parte rendreth diuers kindes of gumme, as well in coiour as otherwise. Also there is growing on the sea bankes little vines (which is a kinde of cockle of the greatnesse of a pease) the which the wilde men beare or hang about their necke like pearles, specially when they are sicke, for they say it prouoketh the belly, and serueth for a purgation, some of them make powder thereof and eate it. Moreouer they say, that it is good to


stay a bloudy flixe, the which semeth to me contrary to his purging vertue. Neuerthelesse it may haue bothe, bi∣cause of the diuersitie of his substances. And therefore the women beare it more oftener at their neckes adn armes than the men. Likewise there is found in that countrey, and on the sea borders on the sande greate plenty, and a kinde of fruite that the 
Spaniards
 name sea beanes, being rounde lyke a Teston, but more greater and more thic∣ker of a ruddy colour, so that if you sawe them you wold say they were Artificiall: the people of the countrey set nought by them, neuerthelesse the 
Spaniards
 cary them into their countrey, and the Womē and Maydens, com∣monly hang them about their necke, being set in gold or siluer, the which they say hath vertue against the collicke, the payne in the head, and others. To be short, this place is pleasant and fruitfull, and they that enter farther into that countrey shall finde a flat countrey, couered with strange kinde of trées, the like are not in 
Europe,
 being al∣so beautified with fayre Riuers and springs and very cleare waters: among the which there is a fish very mon∣strous for a freshe water fish, this fish is of the largenesse and greatnesse of a herring, armed from the head to the tayle, like a little beaste of the earth, named 
Taton,
 the heade without comparison greater than the body, hauing thrée bones in the chyne, and very good to eate, at the least the 
Indians
 eate of them, and they name it in their language 
Tamonhata.






Of the Riuer of Ganabara otherwise called Ianaria, and how that the countrey whereas we ariued, was named Fraunce Antartike. Cap. 25.


HAuing no time to remaine any lōger at 
Cape de Fria,
 for the reason before shewed, it behoued vs to depart,


so the we wayed our ankers, and hoised vp sailes to sail to some other place, to the great displeasure of the 
Indi∣ans
 of that Countrey, that thought we wold haue stayed a longer time, folowing the promise that we had made them at our first arriuall. Therfore we sailed the space of foure dayes vntil the tenth, that we found this great ri∣uer of 
Ganabara,
 being so named of the inhabitaunts of the Countrey, for that it is like to the lake, or otherwise 
Ianaria,
 by those that first did discouer it, being distaunt from the place from whence we departed 
.30.
 leagues: and by the way, the winde became contrary. Now therefore that we had passed many little Ilands on the sea coast, and the straight of our riuer being about a gunne shotte brode, we were determined to enter in at that place or straight, and with our barkes to take land, whereas in∣continently the inhabitants receiued vs very curteously, and as hauing knowledge of our comming, they had re∣red faire Palace according to the manner of the Coun∣trey, strewed & decked with leaues, and boughs of trees, and swéete smelling herbes, by a manner of honor, shew∣ing of their part great signes of ioy, inuitating vs to doe the like. The most eldest which are as Kings and gouer∣nours, receiued vs one after an other, and with an admi∣ration they saluted vs in their lāguage according to their maner, and then they conducted vs to the place that they had prepared for vs, to the which place they brought vs vitailes of all sides, as meale made of a roote, which they name 
Manihot,
 and other great & little rootes, very good and pleasant to eate, and other things according to the Countrey. So that being there ariued, after that we had prayed and giuen thanks, (as the true Christian ought to do, to him that had pacified the Sea and the windes) to be short, to him that had shewed & giuen vs the mean


to accomplish this voyage, we rested vs vpon the gréene grasse: as the 
Troyans
 did after so many shipwracks and tempests when that they met with the good Lady 
Dido,
 but 
Virgill
 saith that they had good olde Wine, and not faire water. After that we had rested there the space of two moneths, & viewed as wel the Ilands as the maine land: the Countrey was named 
Farre about,
 the which by vs was discouered 
Fraunce Antartike,
 whereas we found no place so proper and wel standing for to reare or edifie a holde, as a litle Iland, cōtaining only one league of circuit, lying almost at the original beginning of this riuer which we haue before spoken of. The which Iland with the holde that we there edified, was named 
Ʋille∣gagnon.
 This Iland is very pleasaunt,
 for that therein groweth Ceader trées, and many swéete smelling Trées that are gréene throughout the yeare. In déede there is no fresh water to be had néere hand: neuerthelesse the Lord of 
Ʋillegagnon
 fortified himselfe there, for to be sure and out of danger of the wild men that will be sone offended. And also against y
e
 
Portingals,
 least they shold at any time make thither, so that he strengthened himselfe in the I∣land, as wel as was possible. Now as for vittails the 
In∣dians
 or wilde men brought vs thither suche as the land or countrey bringeth forth: As fish or Venison and other wilde beasts, for they norish them priuily, as we do here a dog or a cat. Also they brought vs meale of those rootes of which we haue before shewed, hauing neither breade nor wine. The which victels we had for a small value, as little kniues, loking glasses, & nets to take fish. Moreouer amōg other things noted in this riuer, nere to y
e
 straight, there is a lake that procedeth out of a high stone or rock,
 being of a maruelous height, being to loke to, as high as the cloudes and very large, the which is a thing almoste


vncredible. This rocke is enuironed or compassed with the Sea.






Of the fish that is in this great Riuer before named. Cap. 26.


BEfore that I procede any further, I meane to treate particularly of the fish that is founde in the fayre Ri∣uer of 
Ganabara,
 otherwise named 
Ianaria,
 which are in great abundance,
 amōg the which there are oysters, of which the shell shineth like fine pearles, y
t
 which oysters, the wild mē do commonly eate with other little fish that the children fish: and these oysters are like to those that beare pearles, of the which also there are founde in that countrey,
 but not so fine as those of 
Calicut,
 and other places in the Easte. Moreouer these wilde men fish for other great fish, of the which there is great plenty. Their vse and maner to take them is, that they being naked in the water, be it fresh or salt, shoote at them with their ar∣rowes, to the which they are very expert, then they draw them out of the water, with a corde made of cotton or of the pille of some trée, or else the fish being dead, floateth of himself aboue the water. Among these fishes there is one very monstrous,
 the which they name in their language 
Panapana,
 lyke to a Dog fish, the skin whereof, is very rough: this fishe hath sixe holes or spurgings on eche side of the throte like to a Lampron, the head monstrous, and the eyes almost at the ende of the heade, so that from the one eye to the other, ther is distant a foote and a half: this fish is geason,
 notwithstanding the flesh is not so excellēt to eate, for it hath the taste of a Dog fish. Moreouer, there is in this floud or riuer, a great multitude of thornebacke & skaate fish, but not like to ours in 
Europe,
 they are twise as large and more longer, the head flat and long, at the ende of which there is twoo hornes, being a foote long


a péece, and betwene these hornes are the eyes, and hir tayle is two foote long, and sclender like a Rats tayle: the wilde men of the countrey will not eate of them for no good, neither of the Torterel. For they imagin and think that euen as this fish is slowe in swimming, it wolde also make them heauie and slowe, by the which meanes they might be taken of their enimies, so that they coulde not runne, nor folow nimbly the course.
 They name this fish in their language 
Ineuonia.
 The fish of this riuer gene∣rally is good to eate, so is the sea fish that coasteth that countrey, but not so delicate as the fish vnder the lyne, & in other places of the sea. I will not forget nor leaue out now that I am in purpose of fish, to shewe a maruel∣lous thing, and worthy of memorie. In this lande or coūtrey about the riuer before named, are trées growing on the sea borders or brinkes, couered with oysters al∣wayes to the very top: you shall vnderstande, that when the sea swelleth, it casteth the floud very high, and far on the lande twise in .24. houres, so that the water couereth oftentymes these trées, so that the oysters being brought in by these springtydes, take holde,
 and close against the branches, being of an vncredible multitude, of the which when the wilde men minde to eat, they cut the branches of the trée being so charged and loden with oysters, as we doe here a branch of a peare trée, being loden with peares, the which they eate more commonly than greater oysters that are in the sea, for bicause (say they) that they are more wholesomer and haue a better taste, and that they wil not engender feuers, so soone as the others.






Of America generally. Cap. 27.


NOwe that I haue treated particularly of the places wheras we did most remaine after that we had takē land & chiefly of y
e
 wheras the 
Sieur
 of 
Ʋillagagnon,
 doeth


inhabite with other French men euen at this day. Like∣wise of this most notable riuer which we name 
Ianaria,
 the circumstances of the places, for that they lie in a land discouered and found out in our time, there resteth nowe to wright that, the which we haue learned & knowne for the time that we remained ther.
 It is most true that this land was not knowne to the writers in times past, nei∣ther yet to the auncient Cosmographers that haue deui∣ded the earth to be inhabited in thrée parts, 
Europa, Asia,
 and 
Affrica,
 of the which they only had intelligence, but I am sure that they had no knowledge therof, for if they had knowē it, they wold haue noted it for the fourth part of the world, for it is much more greater than any of the others. This lād by good right is called 
America,
 taking name of him that first found it out, being named 
Ameri∣cus Ʋespucia,
 who was a very expert man in the Arte of Nauigation & in other high enterprises. But since him, diuers men haue discouered the greatest parte lying to∣wards 
Temistitan
 vnto the Countrey of the Giants, and the straight of 
Magellan.
 Why it shold be named 
India
 I know not, but the East countrey that is named 
India,
 hath taken his name of that notable floud or riuer 
Indus,
 the which is very farre from 
America.
 It shall therfore suffice to call it 
America,
 or Fraunce Antartike. It lieth betwene the two Tropikes euen beyonde 
Capricornus,
 the west side extending towards 
Temistitan
 and 
Molu∣ques,
 toward the South to the straight of 
Magellan,
 and on bothe sides of the West sea and peaceable: true it is that neare to 
Darienna
 and 
Furna,
 this Countrey is ve∣ry straight, for the sea on bothe sides entreth very farre into the land. Nowe will I write of that parte which we haue moste knowne and frequented, which lieth a∣bout the Tropike 
Brumall,
 and yet beyond that it hathe


bene and is inhabited at this day, besides the Christians that haue dwelled there since 
Americus
 time,
 with a mar∣uelous strange wild and brutish people, without Fayth, without Lawe, without Religion, and without any ciui∣litie: but liuing like brute beasts, as nature hath brought them out, eating herbes and rootes, being alwayes naked as well women as men, vntill such time as being more visited and frequented of Christians, they may perad∣uenture leaue this brutish liuing, and lerne to liue after a more ciuill and humayne manner. And therefore we ought greatly to praise our maker that hath illuminated our hartes, not leauing vs so brutishe as these poore wild men. As touching the grounde or lande of 
America,
 it is very fruitfull in trées bearing very excellent fruite with∣out labor or séede. And it is not to be douted, y
t
 if the land were tilled, it wold bring forth very good things, conside∣ring how it doth lye with fayre mountaynes and dales,
 riuers bearing very good fish, fat Ilandes likewise firme and mayne lande. At this day the 
Spaniards
 and the 
Por∣tingals
 do inhabite and dwell in a great part thereof, the 
Entilles
 on the West sea, 
Moluques
 on the peaceable sea, from the mayne lande, vnto 
Dareiena, Parias,
 and 
Pal∣maria,
 the others more toward the South as in the land of 
Bressill,
 so much thought I good to write of this Coun∣trey in generall.






Of the Americans Religion Cap. 28.


WE haue before shewed how that these poore peo∣ple liue without Religion, and without Lawe, the which is very true, but there is no creature liuing that is partaker of reason (so blinded) seing the


heauen, the earth, the Sunne, the Moone so ordayned, the sea, & the things that are dayly séene, but that will iudge these things to be made by the hande of some greater worckemaister than man. And therefore there is no Nation be they neuer so brutish, but that by their owne naturall reason haue some religion, and some cogitatiō of God: they all therefore confesse, that there is some power and soueraygntie: but what a one it is, fewe there are that knowe it, and that hath caused the diuision of Religion.
 Some haue acknowledged the Sunne for so∣ueraigne, others the Moone, some others the Starres, & others otherwise, as Histories do recite. Nowe to our purpose, these wilde men of 
America,
 make mention and tel of a greate Lorde, whom they name in their lan∣guage 
Toupan,
 the which they say is aboue, and maketh it rayne and thunder, but they haue not the meane to praye nor to honor him at one tyme or other, neither yet no place appointed. If one shew them of God, as I haue many times done, they will giue an attentiue eare there∣vnto with an admiration, and they will aske if it be not that Prophete that hath taught them to plante their great rootes,
 that they name 
Hetich.
 And they haue heard say of their fathers, that before they had the knowledge of the rootes, they lyued but with herbes and wild rootes, like brute beasts: there was they say in their countrey a great 
Charaiba,
 that is to say a Prophete, y
t
 which came to one of their yong maydēs, & gaue hir certaine great rootes named 
Hetich,
 shewing hir, that she shoulde cut them in péeces, and then plante them in the earth, the which she did, and since they haue alwayes continued from father to sonne: the which roots haue so wel prospered, that now they haue so great abundance that they eate little other foode, and it is as common with them as breade is with


vs. Of this roote I find two kindes of one greatnesse: the first when it is sodden or boiled becommeth yellow, & the other white, and these two kindes haue the leafe like to a mallow, it neuer beareth séede, and therefore these wild men do plant againe this roote, being cut in péeces, so that they being replanted multiplie excedingly. When that this countrey was firste discouered and founde on,
 as before we haue shewed, which was in the yeare. 1497. by the commaundement of the King of 
Castilia,
 these wilde men being amased to sée the Christians in the order as they had neuer before sene y
e
 like: likewise their maner, gesture and doings, they estemed them as Prophets and honored them as Goddes, vntil they perceiued that they became sicke to dye, and to be subiect to the like passions that they were, then they began to dispraise them, and to intreate them worse than they were accustomed as they that afterwardes went thither 
Spaniards
 and 
Portingals:
 so that if they be angred, they force no more to kil a Chri∣stian and to eat him, than if it were one of theyr enimies: but this is in certayned places, and specially among the 
Canibals,
 that lyue with none other thing,
 as we doe here with biefe and mutton. Also they haue left calling them 
Carabes
 or halfe Gods, and nowe they call them as in re∣proche 
Mahira,
 the which was the name of one of theyr anciente Prophetes, whom they did detest and abhor. As touching 
Toupan,
 they esteme him greate, not resting in one place, but going about here and there, and they say that he declareth his greatest secretes to their Prophets. This therefore shal suffice for the Religion of these wild men, the which I knew and vnderstode by a french expo∣sitor that had dwelled there ten yeares, who vnderstode perfectly the language.








The maner and custome of the lyuing of these Americans as well men as women. Cap. 29.


WE haue here before shewed speaking of 
Africa,
 the which we costed in our Nauigation, that y
e
 
Barbarians
 and 
Ethiopians,
 and others in 
India
 went customably naked excepting their priuie partes, the which they couer with certayne vailes or aprons of cot∣ton, or beastes skins, the which without comparison is more tolerable than in our 
Americans,
 that liue all na∣ked euen as they come out of their mothers wombe, as well men as women without any shame. If you woulde know whether they do it of indigencie, or for the extreme heate, I answere that they may make themselues clo∣thing of cotton as well as to make them beds thereof to rest in, either they might cloth them with beastes skins, as well as those of 
Canada,
 for they haue greate plenty of wild and tame, easy to be taken. They haue this opiniō, that being naked and without apparell, they are more nimbler and better disposed to all kynde of exercises.


Moreouer if any tyme they be clad with any thyn and light shirte, the which they haue peraduenture gotten by greate payne: when they mete with their enimies they put it of before they set hande to their weapon (whose weapons) are a bowe and Arowes, for they thinke y
t
 this garment or shyrte would take away their dexteritie in their fight, also that they could not easily flye nor remoue their iointes before their enimies: yea they say that they shoulde be taken of their enimies by such garments. And therefore they had rather be naked, so ignorant are they and yll aduised. Neuerthelesse they are very desirous of gownes, shirts, hats, and other clothing, and they esteme them so precious and costly, that they will rather let them


marre & take harme, than once to weare them, least that by that meanes they shuld hurt them. In déede somtimes they will put them on when that they remaine at home, drinking and making good chéere after the death of their parents and friends, or in some solemnity after that they haue obtained victorie of their enimies. Moreouer if that they haue on any garment, they will put it of when that they sit downe on the ground, and caste it on their shoul∣ders for feare of soyling of it. There are olde men & wo∣men among them, that hide their priuie partes with leaues. Some haue said that in 
Europe
 when it was first inhabited, the men and women went al naked, only their secrete parts couered, as we read of our first parents. Ne∣uerthelesse in that time the men liued longer than they do in our age, being not subiect to so many diseases as we are, so that they haue affirmed that all men ought to goe naked as 
Adam
 and 
Eue
 our first parents did, when they were in Paradise. As touching this nakednesse, we finde it not by Gods commaundement, I know that there are certaine heretikes called 
Adamians,
 that mainteine this nakednesse, the which sect liued all naked, as these 
Ame∣ricans
 of which we speake.
 And they assēbled in their sina¦gogs for to pray, al naked, and by this ye may know their opinion to be false, for before the sinne of 
Adam
 & 
Eue,
 as it is shewed in the scripture, they were all naked, but af∣terward God gaue them garmēts of lether to couer their nakednesse, as the 
Canadians
 vse at this day.
 The which error others haue maintained, as the 
Turlupins
 and the Phylosophers named 
Ciniques,
 y
t
 which alleage for their reasons, & do teach it publikely, that a man ought not to hide that, which nature hath giuen him. By this ye may sée that these heritikes are more impertinēt, hauing had the knowledge of things than our 
Americans.
 The 
Ro∣maines



though they were very straūge in their liuings, yet they neuer remained naked. As touching y
e
 statues and images, they were made and reared vp in their tem∣ples all naked, as 
Titus Liuius
 sheweth, hauing neither hat nor coife vpon their heads: as we find of 
Caius Caesar,
 who being balde before, was wont to bring his hair that grew behinde,
 forward for to couer his forhead: and ther∣fore he had licence to weare a cap or coife on his head, for to hide that parte of his head that was balde. So muche thought I good to speake, treating of the wilde men of 
America.
 Moreouer I haue séene those of 
Perou
 vse to weare litle garments made of Cotten after their maner. Also 
Plinie
 sheweth, that in the farther parte of the East 
Indies,
 (for he neuer had no knowledge of 
America:
) on y
e
 borders of 
Gangis,
 there is a kinde of people cladde with broad leaues, which people are of a litle stature. I wil say moreouer as touching our wilde men, y
t
 they haue a very feareful loke, bolde of speche, their language is short and obscure, and yet more easier to learne than the Turkishs speche, and others of the East parts, the which I may af∣firme by experience. They take great pleasure to speake distinctly, and to vaunt of the victories and triumphs that they haue had ouer their enimies. The elders among thē will kepe their promisse, and are more faithfull than the yong men, & yet they are all subiect to theft, not that they steale one from another, but if they finde a christian or a straunger, they will rifle him (of their golde & siluer they will take none) for they haue not the knowledge nor vse therof, but their garments. They vse great threatnings, specially when y
t
 they are angred, not only to smite but to kil. Though they be vnciuil, yet are they prompt & ready to do one seruice, yea for a little reward, euen to guide a straunger .l. or .lx. leagues into the Countrey for feare of


difficulties and dāgers, with other charitable and honest déedes (more than among Christians.) Now these wilde men being naked, haue a tawny colour,
 the reason ther∣of I leaue to the iudgement of naturall Phylosophers, & why they are not so blacke as the 
Neigers
 of 
Ethiopia.
 To the rest, wel formed and proportioned of their members, but their eyes are euill made, that is, blacke and louring, and their loke like to the loke of a wilde beast: they are of a high stature, wel disposed, quicke & nimble, seldome grieued with sicknesse, vnlesse they be hurt with arowes in the warre.






The manner of their eating and drinking. Cap. 30.


IT is easy to be knowne,
 y
t
 these wilde men of 
America
 haue no more ciuilitie in their eating, than in other things, for as they haue no lawes to take the good, & to eschue the euil, euen so they eat of al kinds of meats at al times and houres, without any other discretion. In déede they are of thēselues superstitious, they will eat no beast nor fish, y
t
 is heauy or slow in going, but of all other light meats in running & flying, as Venison and such like, for bicause that they haue this opinion, that heauie meates wil hurte and anoy them when they should be assailed of their enimies. Also they wil eate no salte meates, nor yet permit their children to eate any. And when they sée the Christian eate salt meats,
 they reproue them therfore as a thing impertinent, saying that such meats will shorten their liues: their ordinary meates are roasted after their manner, as Rats of diuers kinde, and great ones, a cer∣taine kinde of Toades greater than oures, Cocodrils and others that they roast all whole, with the skin and the bowels, and this they vse without any difficultie,


yea these Cocodrils and great Lezards as great as a pig of a month old,
 the which is a fine meat (as they say that haue eate thereof.) These Lezards of 
America
 are so pri∣uie, that they will come neare vnto you, and take their repast, if that you wil take it without feare or difficultie. Their flesh is like a Chickens flesh, & they kil them with shooting at them with their arrowes. The meates that they boile, are Oysters and other shell fishe of the sea. In taking of their foode, they obserue no houre, but all times and houres that they féele them selues to haue a stomake or appetite, be it in the night after their first sléepe, they will rise to eate, and then lay them downe to sléepe. In their repast they kepe a maruellous silence,
 the which is more to be commended, than amongst vs that bable and talke at our tables, they doe séethe and roast very well their meate, and eate it measurably and not rashly, moc∣king vs that deuoure in steade of eating: they will not drinke when they eate, nor eate when they drink, so that they will forbeare drinke a whole day. When they make their great bankets and solemnities, as when they haue obtained some great victorie on their enimies, then they wil sit drinking a whole day without eating. They make drinkes of great 
Mill
 white and blacke, the which they call in their language 
Auaty.
 Neuerthelesse after that they haue sate drinking, being once departed the one from the other, they will eate such as they can finde. The poorest sorte liue more with sea fishe, & other like meates than with fleshe, they that are farre from the sea, do fishe in riuers. Also they haue diuers kindes of fruites, as na∣ture bringeth them forthe, & yet they liue long in health and well disposed. Héere you must note that our elders in times past liued with fishe. The lawes of 
Triptolomeus,
 as 
Xenophon
 wryteth, did defend and forbid the 
Athe∣niens



the vse of flesh. Therefore it is no strange thing for to liue with fish. Firste in our 
Europe,
 and before that the grounde was tilled, men lyued more hardly without flesh or fish, hauing not the meane to vse them, and yet not∣withstanding they were stronger, and lyued the longer,
 being nothing so feminate as now in our age. Now these wilde men vse flesh and fish, as we haue before shewed. Some lye and eate in their beds, at the least they sit and eate in their beds, specially the maister or chiefe of the family shalbe in his bed: and the others about him doing him seruice, as if nature had taught them to doe honor & reuerence to the aged.


Moreouer they haue this honesty, that the firste that hath taken any great praie, be it on water or lād they wil distribute to euery one specially to Christians, if there be any, and they will request and desire them fréely to eate therof, esteming it a great iniurie if you refuse it. Also so soone as you enter into their lodgings, they will aske you in their language 
Marabisser,
 what is thy name? and you may be well assured, that if they once knowe it, they will neuer forget it, their memorie is so good. Were it 
Cyrus
 the King of 
Persia, Cyneas
 legate to the King 
Pyrrhus, Metridates,
 nor 
Ces
,
 the which 
Plinie
 writeth of, to haue bene of so good a memorie, and after you haue answered them, they will aske you, 
Marapipo,
 what wilt thou say? and many other things.






Against the opinion of those that thinke these wilde men to be all heary. Cap. 31.


FOR bicause that many haue this foolish opinion, that those people, whome we call wilde men, as they


liue in the woods and fields almost like to brute beasts, so in like maner they are beary all ouer their bodyes, as a Lion, a Beare, or such like. Also they are so pictured and painted in their tablets & clothes. To be short, in setting out a wilde man, they set him out al hairy, euen from the head to the foote, the which is altogether false and vntrue. I haue knowne some so obstinate, that they would af∣firme it with an othe, as those that had séene it of a truth. As for me I knowe and affirme the contrary, for that I haue séene it. The wilde men as well of the East 
Indies,
 as of 
America,
 come forthe of their mothers wombe as faire and as well pollished as oures of 
Europe.
 And if that haire grow by succession of time on any parte of their bo∣dies, as it doeth to vs and others in what parte of the bo∣dy so euer it be, they scratche it of with their nailes, sa∣uing only the haire of their heads, so greatly they doe de∣test and abhorre it, as wel women as men. And the hairs that growe on their browes,
 the women doe shaue it of with a certaine herbe that cutteth like a raser: this herbe is like to Sage or Iouncke, that groweth by the water side. As touching the hair Amatory, and their beards, they pluck it of, as wel as of the rest of the body. Within these few yeares they haue found the meane to make litle pin∣sers, with the which they pull of their haire, for since that they haue bene frequented of Christians, they haue lear∣ned the way how to forge Iron. And therfore beleue not hereafter the common opinion of y
e
 painters nor their do∣ings in this poynt, for they haue libertie to paint things to their owne discretion, euen as Poetes haue to forge and inuent lies. If it should chaunce that a childe should come forth of his mothers wombe hairy, & that the hairs should grow & encrease all ouer his body, as the like hath bene séene in 
Fraunce,
 this were an accident of nature, as


if a childe should be borne with two heades or suche like.
 These are not things so wonderfull and straunge, consi∣dering that Physitians can shew the reason. I haue séene a childe in 
Normandie,
 couered with scales like a Carpe. These are imperfections of nature, according to y
e
 Glose on the .xiij. Chapter of Esay, shewing of certaine mon∣sters hauing the shape of men named 
Satires,
 liuing in the woodes, hairy like wilde beastes. And of this the wry∣tings of Poets are full of Satyres, Faunes, Nymphes, Dryades, Hamadryades, Orcades, and other kinde of monsters, the which at this day are not to be founde, as they were in times past: by the which meanes the Deuill sought to deceiue man, chaunging himselfe into a thou∣sand similitudes and likenesses. But now that our Lord Iesus of his mercy hathe reuealed himselfe to vs, these wicked spirits haue bene chased and driuen out, and hath giuen vs power to resist thē, as witnesseth the holy scrip∣ture. Moreouer in 
Affrica
 are to be séene at this day cer∣taine monsters disformed, for the reason that we haue be∣fore shewed in the beginning of this booke, with others that at this presēt I will leaue out. Further more as tou∣ching these 
Americanes,
 they make their haire grow as Monkes were wont to doe, the which passeth not their eares, they cut their haire of before, for this occasion as I haue bene enformed, for if they should weare their haire long before, and their beard lōg, it shold be occasion that they shold fal into the hāds of their enimies, which wold take them by their haire and by their beard. Also they say that their ancestors haue shewed them, that to haue their head and beard thus cut and shauē, causeth them to haue a maruellous great audacitie and courage. It would be thought, y
t
 if these wilde men haue frequented 
Asia,
 they shold haue learned this of the 
Abantes,
 y
e
 first found this


inuention of shauing or cutting of heare. For to be as they say, more valiant and hardy among their enimies. Also 
Plutarke
 sheweth in the life 
Theseus,
 that y
e
 custome of the 
Athenians
 was,
 that they that were constituted as tribunes in their common wealth, were bounde to offer the lockes or heare of their heades to the God in the Ilād of 
Delphos,
 so that 
Theseus
 hauing shaued the heare of, on the forparte of his head was thereto prouoked by the 
Abantes,
 a people of 
Asia.
 Moreouer we find, that 
Ale∣xander
 the great, caused his men to take the 
Macedoni∣ans
 by the heare of their heade, and by their bearde: for at that time there was no barbars for to polle and shaue, and the firste barbars that were séene in 
Italy,
 came out of 
Sisily.
 This much as touching the heare of these 
Ame∣ricans.






Of a tree named in the Americans tong Genipat, with which they make coloures. Cap. 32.


GEnipat is a trée, the which the wild mē of 
America
 do greatly esteme for the fruit that it beareth being of the trées name, not that it is good to eate, but pro∣fitable to other things that they applie it too. It is like of greatnesse and of colour to our peach, of the iuice wherof, they make a certayne coloure, with the which sometimes they coloure al their bodies. The poore brutish men not knowing the meane to drawe out the iuice or liquor of this fruit, are constrayned to chew it, as if they woulde swallow it downe,
 then they take it out & wring iuice out with their handes, as you woulde wring water out of a spunge, the which liquor or iuice is as cleare as cristal, so that when they are minded to make any enterprise or


feate, or to visite one another, and to make some solemp∣nitie, they wet all their bodies with this iuice or liquor,
 and the more it drieth vpon them, the more perfecter co∣lour it attaineth. This coloure is betwene an Azure and a blacke, and neuer in his perfect coloure, vntill it haue bene the space of two dayes vpon their bodies, & so these pore people be as well content with that, as we be with Veluet or Sattin, or any other costly garment when we goe to a feast or a wedding. The women do more oftner coloure them selues therewith than men. Furthermore ye shall note in this place, that if the men are minded to go ten or twelue leagues off to drink or make good chéere with their friendes, they will pille some kinde of Trée, where within shall be red, yelowe, or some other coloure and they will stampe it very small, and then they wil take gumme out of another trée, the which they name 
Ʋsub,
 with the which they wil rub al their body ouer, although it be good for wounds and sores, as I haue séene by expe∣rience, & then vpon this Gumme they wil poure of these coloures before shewed. Others in stéede or for want of these trées or coloures, wil sow many little fethers toge∣ther of all colours, some as red as fine scarlet, and others of others colours, & about their heads they will haue gar∣lands of these fethers maruelloues faire. This trée 
Genipat
 hath leaues like to a nut trée, and y
e
 fruit groweth at the end of the braunches one vpon another on a straunge fa∣shion and maner. There is also a nother trée named 
Ge∣nipat,
 of which the fruit is greater, and good to eat.
 There is a nother secrete herbe which they name in their lan∣guage 
Petun,
 the which most commonly they beare about them, for that they estéeme it maruellous profitable for many things, this herbe is like to our Buglos.
 They ga∣ther this herbe very charely, and dry it within their litle


cabanes or houses. Their maner to vse it, is this, they wrappe a quantitie of this herbe being dry in a leafe of a Palme trée which is very great, & so they make rolles of the length of a cādle, & than they fire the one end, and re∣ceiue the somke therof by their nose and by their mouthe. The say it is very holesome to clense & consume the su∣perfiuous humors of the brain. Moreouer being taken af∣ter this sort, it kepeth the parties from hūger & thirst for a time, therfore they vse it ordinarily. Also whē they haue any secrete talke or coūsel among them selues, they draw this smoke, & then they speake. The which they do custo∣mably one after another in the warre, whereas it is very néedeful. The women vse it by no meanes. If that they take too much of this perfume, it will make them light in the head, as the smel or tast of strong wine. The christiās that do now inhabite there, are become very desirous of this parfume, although y
t
 the first vse thereof is not with∣out danger, before that one is accustomed therto, for this smoke causeth sweates & weakenesse, euen to fall into a 
Syncope,
 the which I haue tried in my selfe. And it is not so straunge as it séemeth, for there are many other fruits that offende the braine, though that the tast of them is plesāt & good to eat.
 
Plinie
 sheweth, that in 
Lyncestis
 ther is a fountaine that maketh the people dronken, that take therof, likewise an other of 
Paphlagonia.
 Some think this not to be true, but altogither false, y
e
 which we haue spo∣ken as touching this herbe, as though nature coulde not giue such power to things, yes truely muche more grea∣ter, also to beasts, according to the Countreys and Regi∣ons. Wherfore shold it then leaue this countrey voide of such a benifite, being temperate without cōparison more than others? And if there be any not content of this our witnessing or affirmation, let him read 
Herodita,
 which


in his second boke, maketh mention of a people in 
Affri∣ca,
 liuing only with herbs. 
Apian
 reherseth that the 
Par∣thians
 being banished & driuen out of their Countrey by 
Marcus Anthonius,
 liued with a certaine herbe that toke away their memory: neuerthelesse they had opinion that it did norish thē, though y
t
 in a short time after they died. Therfore ought not y
e
 story of our 
Petun
 be foūd straūge.






Of a tree named Paquouere. Cap. 33.


SEing that we are now come to the rehersal of trées of our 
America,
 I think it good to set forth some, not for the amplifying of this work, but for the great vertue and secretenesse of things, and for that there is found no such in our 
Europe,
 neither in 
Asia
 nor in 
Affrica.
 Ther∣fore this trée that the wilde men name 
Paquouere,
 is per∣aduenture the wonderfullest trée that euer was séene.
 It is not more higher frō the ground to the braunches, than a fadome or there about, and of greatnesse as muche as a man may gripe with both his hāds, when that it is come to his ful groweth. And the trée is so tēder, that it may be easily cut with a knife. As touching the leaues, they are in bredth two foote, and of lengthe a fadome, a foote and iiij. fingers, the which I affirme and assure of a truthe. I haue séene almost of that kinde, in 
Egipt
 and in 
Damasco
 returning from 
Ierusalem.
 Notwithstanding, the leaues are not halfe so great, as those of 
America,
 likewise ther is great difference in y
e
 fruit, for y
e
 fruit is a good foote lōg, I meane the longest sort, & great like a Cucumber much like vnto it, as touching the proportion: this fruit which they name in their language 
Pacoua,
 is very good whē it is come to his ripenesse, & of a good relish. The wilde men gather them before they be ripe, which fruit being gathe∣red, they beare into their lodgings, as we doe our fruit.


It groweth on the trée by clusters, xxx. or .xl. togither, and close to another vpon litle branches neare to the trunck. And that which is more to be maruelled at, this trée ne∣uer beareth fruite but once. The greatest parte of these wilde men that dwel far within the countrey, do norishe themselues with this fruit a good part of the yeare, and of an other fruit that commeth vp in the fieldes, which they name 
Hoyriri,
 the which to loke on, would be iudged to grow on some trée. Notwithstāding it groweth in a cer∣taine herbe that beareth leafe like to a Palme, as wel in the length as in largenesse, it groweth in the midst of the leaues very round, & within it be litle Nuts, of the which the kernell is white & good to eate, sauing that ouermuch therof, as wel as of other things, hurteth the braine. The which force & strengthe is in the Coriander séede, if it be not trimmed and dighted. Likewise if the other were so dressed & trimmed, it wold take away this vice. Notwith¦standing the 
Americanes
 eat therof, chiefly y
e
 litle childrē. The fields ar very ful within two leagues of 
Cap de Fria,
 neare to the great marish grounds y
t
 we passed, after that we had set foote on land at our returne. This much wil I say by the way, that biside y
e
 fruit that we saw by y
e
 way, we found a Cocodril dead of the greatnesse of a good calfe, that was come out of the marishes, & had ben ther killed, for they eat the flesh of them,
 also of great Lizards, of the which we haue before shewed: they name thē in their lan∣guage 
Iacareabson,
 & they are greater than those of 
Nyll.
 The people of the Countrey say, that there is a marishe being a.v. leagues compasse, on the side of 
Pernomeri,
 di∣stant frō the line .x. degrées towards the 
Canibals,
 wheras there are certaine Crocodrils as great as oxen, that cast out a mortall smoke by their mouth, in suche sort, that if ye come neare them, they will goe neare to kill you, as they haue heard tell of their auncestors.


In the place whereas groweth this fruite of which we speake, are a great number of Hares like to ours, but not so great, nor yet like in coloure. There is also found ano∣ther little beast named 
Agoutin,
 as great as a Hare, the haire like to a wilde Bore brisled, the head like the head of a great Rat, the eares and the moosel like to a Hare or Wat, the féete clouen like to a Hogge, and the taile not aboue a finger lengthe, they liue with fruites: also the wilde men norishe them for their pleasure, their fleshe is very good for to eate.






Howe these Americanes or wilde men doe disforme them sleues, esteming it a great glory. Cap. 34.


IT is not sufficient for these wilde men to be naked, to paint their bodies, & to scratch and pluck of their haire: but also for to make them selues more disformed, they pearce their mouthes being yong with a sharp and poin∣ted herbe, so that the hole encreaseth & groweth as their body, for they put therin a certain kind of fish, hauing the skin very hard, of which fish the greater end is within, & the lesser without (on the nether lippe.) When that they are great, ready to be maried, they put into these holes great stones, being much like to the coloure of an Eme∣rauld, the which they doe so estéeme,
 that it is not easy to recouer any of them, without some great reward or pre∣sent, for they are very rare and scant in their Countrey. Their neighbors & nie friendes bring these stones from an hie Mountain, that is in the countrey of the 
Canibals,
 the which they pollish with an other stone for y
e
 purpose, so runningly, that it is not possible for the best & most ex∣pertest workman that is, to do it better. And I think ther might be found in this forsaid hil very Emeraulds: for I haue séene of these stones, that you could not discern from Emeraulds. These 
Americanes
 as I say, do disfigure thē¦selues


after this sort, & do disforme & mishape themselues w
t
 these holes & stones in their faces: in which they take as great delite & pleasure as a Lord or gentleman wil do in a rich & precious chaine of gold or som other Iewel: so that among them that beareth the most, is estéemed their King or greatest Lord, and not only on their lippes and mouth, but also on both sides the chéeke: these stones that the men cary, are as broad as an Angel or soueraine of gold, and as thicke as a finger bredth, which letteth their speache, so that one can skant vnderstand their speach, for they speake as though their mouth wer ful of meat: whē these stones are taken out, if that they speake, you shal sée them slauer at these holes, the which is a filthy and vgly fight to behold. Also when these brutish beasts are dispo∣sed to mock, they wil put their tōgues out of these holes, the women & maidens are not so disformed. In dede they haue hanging at their eares prety litle stones and shels, that they haue in the sea, also bracelets of certaine shels. They esteme much litle beades of glasse, y
t
 the frenchmen haue caried thither. Bicause of their disformitie & chaun∣ging of their naturall colour, these men & women are for the most part black, for that they colour themselues with colours that they make of y
e
 fruit of trées, as we haue be∣fore shewed, they colour one an other. The women they colour & deck the men, we do not read that other natiōs haue done the like. We finde that the 
Scythians
 going to the funerals of their friends, did painte their faces with black. The women of 
Turkey
 do paint their nailes with coloures red & blew, thinking by this to be more fairer, but not y
e
 rest of their body. I wil not here forget y
t
 these women of 
America
 do not only paint their childrēs faces with black, but also their bodies, and that with diuers co∣lours, specially of one colour like to a vernishing, y
t
 which colour wil continue the space of .iiij. dayes, & with y
e
 same


colour the womē paint their legs, so y
t
 for to loke a far of, you wold iudge them to be hosed with fine black kersey.






Of visions, dreames and illusions, that these Americans haue, and of the persecution that they receiue of wicked spirites. Cap. 35.


IT is a wonderful thing, that these pore men although they be not reasonable, for y
t
 they are depriued frō the right vse of reasō, and from the knowledge of God,
 are subiect to many fantastical illusions & persecutiōs of wic∣ked spirites. We haue said that before the cōming of our sauior Iesus Christ, we wer in like maner vexed: for the deuil studieth onely to seducte that creature that hath no knowledge of God. Euen so these pore 
Americanes
 do of∣tentimes sée a wicked spirite, sometimes in one forme,
 & sometimes in an other, the which they name in their lā∣guage 
Agnan,
 the which spirit persecuteth them day and night, not onely their soule, but also their body, beating them, and doing them much iniury, so that you shal hear them make a pitiful cry, saying in their lāguage, (if there be any christian by or neare,) séest thou not 
Agnan
 y
e
 bea∣teth me, defend me if thou wilt that I shal serue thée, and cut thy wood: for many times they wil trauail to the Bra∣sel wood for a smal reward. Therfore in y
e
 night they wil not goe out of their cabens or houses, without bearing fire with them, the which they say, is a soueraine defence and remedy against their ennimie. And I thought that it had bene a Fable when it was shewed me first, but I haue séene by experience this wicked spirite to be driuen out by a christian, in inuocating & naming Iesus Christ. Also the people of 
Ginney,
 & of 
Canada
 are likewise tormē¦ted, chiefly in the woods, wheras they haue many visions, and they call this sprite in their lāguage 
Grigri.
 Further∣more these wilde men of 
America
 being this disprouided


of reason,
 and of the knowledge of veritie, are easie to fal into many foolish errors. They note & obserue their drea∣mes diligently, thinking that al that they haue dreamed, should sodainly come to passe. If they haue dreamed that they shall haue victorie of their enimies, or to be vanqui∣shed and ouercome, you shall not persuade them the con∣trary, but they beleue it assuredly, as we doe the Gospel. Of a truthe there be Phylosophers which holde opinion, that some dremes wil naturally come to passe, according to the humors that raigne, or other dispositions of y
e
 bo∣dy, as to dreame of fire, water, black things & suche like. But to beleue and affirme the other dreames, as those of these 
Americans,
 it is a thing impertinent, & contrary to the true religion of Iesus Christ: and to my iudgemēt so are al other, 
Macrobius
 in the dreme of 
Scipion,
 saith that some dreames come to passe, & happen bicause of the va∣nitie of y
e
 dreamers. Other dreames come of things that we haue too much apprehended. Others beside our 
Ame∣ricanes,
 do giue creadit to dreames, as the 
Lacedemonians,
 the 
Persians
 & certaine others. These wilde men haue an other straunge opinion which is an abuse, they estéeme some among thē to be very Prophets, whome they name in their lāguage 
Pages,
 to whome they declare their drea∣mes, & the others do interprete them, & they hold opinion that they tel truthe. These may be cōpared to 
Philon
 the first interpreter of dreames, & to 
Trogus Pompeius,
 that therein was very excellent. I might here bring in many things of dreames & diuinations, and what dreames are true or no. Likewise of their kinds & the causes therof, as we haue bene instructed of our elders. But for that it is repugnant to our religion, and for that defence is made to giue therto any credit, we wil leaue it, and leane only to the holy scripture, and to that which is commaunded


vs, & therfore I wil speake therof no more: but sure I am that for one y
t
 hitteth right, there are a numbre contrary. Let vs returne to our wild men of 
America,
 they beare greate reuerence to these Prophetes, otherwise named 
Pages
 or 
Charaibes,
 which is to say, halfe Gods,
 and they are truely idolaters, euen as were the ancient Gentiles.






Of false Prophetes and Magicians, that are in this countrey of America, the which inuocate and cal vpon wicked spirites, and of a tree named Ahouai. Cap. 36.


THis people being so far from the truthe, beside the persecution that they receiue of wicked spirits, their errours and dreames, yet are they so far out of rea∣son that they worship the deuill, by the meane of some of his mynisters named 
Pages,
 of the which sorte we haue spoken already. These 
Pages
 or 
Charaibes,
 are men of a wicked lyfe, the which are giuen to serue the diuel for to deceiue their neighbors. Such deceiuers for to coloure their wickednesse, and to be estemed honorable among o∣thers, remayne not continually in one place, but they are vacabunds, wandering here and there, through the woodes and other places, and returning with others, at certayne houres, making them beleue that they haue cō∣ferred and counseled with the sprits, for publike affaires, and that they must do so and so, or that this or that shall happen, and then they are receiued and intertayned ho∣norably, being nourished and intertayned for this their doing: and they esteme them selues happie, that may re∣mayne in their fauor and good grace, and giue or offer to them some presente. Likewise if it happen, that any of them haue indignation or quarrell against his neighbor, they come to these 
Pages,
 to the ende that they mare dye


with poyson him or them to whom they will euil. Among other things they helpe themselues with a trée named in their language 
Ahouay,
 bearing fruite venomous and mortal, the which is of the greatnesse of a little chestnut, and it is very poyson, specially the nut. The men for a light and little cause will giue thereof to their wiues, be∣ing angred, and the women likewise to the men: likewise these wicked women when they are with childe, if their husbandes haue displeased them, they will take in stede of this fruite a certaine hearbe, for to make their fruit of their wombe to come before their time, this fruite being white with his nut, is made like this greke letter Δ 
Del∣ta,
 and of this fruit the wild men when the nut or kernel is out, they make bels, and hang them on their legs, the which maketh as a great a noyse as the Moris daunsers in our countrey. The wilde men wil in no wise giue of this fruite to strangers being fresh gathered, likewise they forbid their children in no wise to touch thereof be∣fore that the kernell be fallen away. This trée in heigth is lyke to our peare trées, the leafe of two or thre fingers long, and two fingers broade, being gréene or springing all the yeare long, the barcke is whitishe. When there is a braunche cut thereof, it rendreth a white iuice or ly∣quor almost like milk, the trée being cut it casteth a mar∣uelous stinking smell, therefore the wilde men will put it to no vse, not to make therewith fier woode. I will for∣beare here to set forth the properties of many trées, bea∣ring fruites maruelous faire, neuerthelesse as much and rather more venemous than this trée of which we speke. Furthermore ye must note that the wild men haue these 
Pages
 in such honor and reuerence, that they worship them or rather do Idolatry to them, specially when they returne from any place: ye shall sée this people goe before


them prostrating them selues, and praying them, saying, Make that I be not sicke, that I die not, neither I nor my children, and such lyke thinges. And they wil answer, thou shalt not die, thou shalt not be sicke and such like. If it chaunce that these 
Pages
 speake not truthe, and that things happen otherwise then they haue predestinated, they make no difficultie to kill him or thē, as vnworthy of that title and dignitie of 
Pages,
 euery Village nouri∣sheth of them, some one, some two or thre, according to their greatnesse, and when it behoueth to knowe any greate thing, they vse certayne ceremonies and deuilishe inuocations, the which are made after this maner. First is made a newe lodging, in the which neuer man before hath dwelled, and there within they will reare or make a newe white bedde and cleane according to their maner.
 Then they will cary into the sayde lodging greate quan∣titie of vittels, as 
Cahouin,
 which is their ordinarie drink made by a virgin of ten or twelue yeres of age, lykewise of their foode made of rootes, the which they vse in stede of bread. So al things being thus prepared the people be∣ing assembled doe guyde this their gentle Prophete to this new lodging, wheras he shal remaine alone, after y
t
 a maide hath giuē him water to wash withal, but ye must note, before this mysterie he must abstain from his wife the space of nyne dayes, being in the house alone: and the people gone a little backe, he lieth flatt downe on the bed, and beginneth to inuocate and call the wicked spirite for the space of an houre, and furthermore ma∣king his accustomed ceremonyes, in such sorte that in the ende of his inuocations, the spirite commeth to him hissing, and whisteling, as they say. Others haue shewed me, that thys wycked spirite commeth some∣tymes in the presence of all the people, thoughe


they sée him not, but they heare a fearefull noyse, then they crye all with one voyce in their language, saying: we praye thée to tel the truthe to our Prophete, that ta∣rieth for thée there within:
 their intorrogatiōs is of their enimies, to knowe who shall haue the victorie, with the like answeres, that say, who shalbe taken and eaten of their enimies? who shal be hurte or offended with any wilde beaste or such lyke. Some of them among other things, shewed me that their Prophet had forshewed our comming.
 They call this spirite 
Houioulsira:
 this & many other things haue Christians affirmed me of, that had dwelled there a long tyme. And they neuer take any greate enterprise in hande, before they knowe the an∣swere of their Prophete. When this mysterie is ac∣complished, the Prophete commeth out, who being com∣passed about with people, maketh a long narration vnto them, wherein he reherseth al that he hath hearde of this spirite: and God knoweth the gréetings, rewardes and presentes that are made vnto him. The 
Americans
 haue not bene the firste that haue practised magike, but before them it hath bene common in many nations, vntill the comming of our Sauiour Iesus Christe, whose presence did efface and ouerthrowe the power of Sathan, by the which meanes the deuill sought to begile and deceiue y
e
 world: it is not therefore without a cause, that it is for∣bidden by the holy Scripture, yea by Gods own mouth. Of this 
Magike,
 we finde two chiefe & principal kinds, one is in hauing familiar and secrete talke with wicked spirites, who openeth & sheweth the most secretest things of nature in dede, the one is more wickeder than the o∣ther, but they are bothe naught & full of curiositie. Why should we, seing that by the prouidence of God we haue all things that to vs is necessary and nedefull, goe about


to seke out the secrets of nature and other things, which our Sauiour Iesus Christe hath obserued to him selfe: such curiousnesse in vs, sheweth an vnperfect Iudgemēt, want of faith and true Religion,
 and yet the simple peo∣ple that beleueth such things is most abused: Surely I cannot but maruell, specially in a countrey (where good and politike lawes are vsed) why such filthy and wicked abuses be lefte vnpunished, with a companie of olde wit∣ches, which put hearbes to armes, writings about neckes, with other mysteries and ceremonies, as to heale Feauers and other things, which are very Idolatrie, and worthy of greuous punishment. But at this day such wickednesse may be founde among those that are in Au∣thoritie, of which sorte we should haue good counsell and iudgemente, but they themselues are firste blinde.


Therefore it is no maruel, if that the simple and igno∣rant be soone seduced, séeing that men of wisdome and grauitie, are so blinded. O blinded ignorance, wherefore serueth the holy Scripture? wherefore serueth Lawes & other good sciences, the which our Sauiour Iesus Christ hath opened and shewed vnto vs, if we lyue in errour & ignorance as doe these wilde men, and more brutish than the very brute beasts? Neuerthelesse, we wil be estemed, to know much, & make a large profession of vertue. And therefore it is not to be marueled at, if our elders not knowing the truthe are fallen into errours, seking it by all meanes much lesse of these wilde men, of which we speake: but the vanitie of this worlde, shall cease when it pleaseth God. Now to our matter, we began to shew, that there is a kinde of 
Magike
 most damnable, that is called 
Thurgia,
 or 
Goetia,
 ful of enchantementes, wordes,
 ceremonies, and inuocations, hauing yet vnder hir cer∣taine other kindes, of the which as it is sayde, was inuen∣ter



Zabulus.
 As touching the true and perfit 
Magike,
 the which is to seke and know heauenly things, to celebrate and honor God, it hath bene commended of many noble & graue personages, such had the thrée Kings that went to seke out Christe, and such 
Magike,
 is taken to be perfit and pure wisdome.
 The 
Persians
 woulde not re∣ceiue any into the dignitie of their Empire vnlesse he had lerned this 
Magike,
 that is, if he were not wise. For 
Magus
 in their language is wise in oures, and 
 in Gréeke is 
Sapiens
 in Latine.
 Of the which was the in∣uentor as it is sayde 
Zalmoxis
 and 
Zorastria,
 not he that is so common, but he that was sonne to 
Oromasia.
 Also 
Plato
 in his 
Alcibiades
 saith, that he verily thinketh that the 
Magike
 of 
Zorastria,
 is no other thing, but to know and celebrate God, the which to know, and vnderstande he him self with 
Pithagoras, Empedocles,
 and 
Democrites,
 hazarded themselues bothe by sea and by lande, going into strange countries, for to learne and know this 
Ma∣gike.
 I knowe well that 
Plinie
 and many others haue en∣forced themselues to attaine thereto. As for me I thought good to speake thus much by the way, séeing it commeth now in purpose as touching our wilde men.






How these Americans beleue the soule to be immortall. Cap. 37.


THis poore people although they be ignorant & erre, yet their errour and ignorance is more to be borne with all, than the 
Arians
 of our tyme which being not content to haue bene created to the image and lyke∣nesse of the eternal God, perfit aboue al creaturs, against all scripture and miracles, they wil shew themselues like brute beastes without lawe or reason, and therefore bi∣cause of their obstinate errour, they shoulde be handled lyke beastes, for there is no beaste be he neuer so wilde


and brutish, but will obey and serue man, as the very image of God, the which we dayly sée. But it will one day come to passe, that these wicked Imps shall well knowe that there resteth somewhat after the death of this worlde that at the later day shall appeare before the maiestie of God, there to giue account of their wicked and damnable errour. Nowe therefore these poore peo∣ple do think y
e
 soule to be immortal, the which they name in theyr language 
Cherepicouare,
 the which I knewe in asking of them what became of their soule when they were deade. The soules sayde they of them that haue va∣liantly faught with their enimies, goeth with many o∣ther soules to places of pleasure, goodly woods, gardens, and orchardes, but to the contrarie those that haue not well defended their countrey nor resisted their enimies shall goe with 
Agnan,
 that is, to the wicked spirite that tormented them. On a tyme I boldened my self to aske or inquire of a greate King of that countrey as touching the immortalitie of the soule, who was come aboue thir∣tie leagues of, to sée vs, but he answered me fiercely in his language these words. Knowest thou not sayd he that after we be dead, our soules go into a far countrey wher∣as they be founde altogether in fayre & goodly places, as our Prophets doe say that visit them oftentimes & speke vnto them, the which opinion they beleue and holde of a truthe. Another tyme we went to visit another greate King of that countrey named 
Pindahouson,
 whome we founde sicke in his bed of an Ague, who among other things demaunded of me what became of the soules of our friendes, and others when they dyed, and I made answere that they went with 
Toupan,
 the which he dyd easily beleue, vpon the which he answered me these wordes: come hether sayde he, I haue hearde thée


speake much of 
Toupan,
 that can doe all things, speake to him for me that I be healed, and if I can be made whole, I will giue thée many faire giftes, yea I wilbe clad, and arrayed as thou art, beare such a greate bearde, and ho∣nor 
Toupan,
 as thou doest. And in dede when that he was whole, the Lorde of 
Ʋillegagnon
 was determined to haue him baptized, and therefore he kept him alwayes with him. They haue another foolish opinion, the which is, that being on the water, be it sea or Riuer, for to goe a∣gainst their enimies, if that in the meane time there arise a tempest or rage on the water,
 as many times ther doth, they thinke that it commeth of the soules of their parents or friendes, but wherefore they cannot tell, and for to appease the tempest they cast some thing into the water, in tokē of a present or offering, thinking by this meanes to appease the windes? Furthermore, when any of them die, be he King or other, before that they lay them in their graue, if that there be any that hath any thing belonging or partayning to the dead body, they will not kepe it backe, but wil bring it and deliuer it openly, & restore it before them all, for to be put into the earth with him: o∣therwise they doe thinke, that the soule after that it is separated from the body, wil come and molest them that kepe their goodes. I woulde to God, that many amongst vs were of the lyke opinion, (I meane without errour) then would they not kepe backe deade mens goodes, from poore orphelins and others. Now they hauing restored to the deade man that which is his, he is surely bounde with ropes of cotton, and of the pithe of trées, so that it is vnpossible as they thinke for him to reuiue and come a∣gayne, the which they doe greatly feare, saying, that to the elders it hath so chaunced, and that hath made them since to looke better to it.








How these wilde men make warre one against ano∣ther, specially against those whome they name Margageas and Thabaiares. Also of a tree which they name Hayri, of the which they make their wea∣pons for warre. Cap. 38.


THese people of 
America
 are greate quarrellers a∣gainst their neighbors, chiefly against those whome they name in their language 
Margageas,
 & 
Thaba∣iares,
 & hauing no other meane to appease their quarrell, they fight cruelly one with another: They gather toge∣ther vpon a .6000. men, sometymes ten or .12000. village against village, or otherwise as they do méete, the like do those of 
Perou
 and the 
Canibals.
 And before that they exe∣cute any greate enterprise, be it in warre or otherwise, they assemble and come together, chiefly the eldest sorte, without their wiues or children, with such a grace and modesty, that they wil speake one after another, and be that speaketh shal be heard with attētiue silence, who ha∣uing declared his minde, giueth place to another, and so folowing in order, the Auditors sit downe on the earth, vnlesse it be some ancient men, that lye on their beds, the which considering with my selfe, commeth to my remem∣brance the moste commendable custome of the gouernors of 
Thebes,
 an ancient Citie in 
Grecia,
 the which for to cō∣sult together of the affaires of the common welth would alwayes sit downe vpon the ground: the which maner of doing is estemed an argument of prudence. Furthermore it is a strange thing that these 
Americans
 do neuer make amongst them any paction or concorde, though that their hatred be great, as other natiōs do be they neuer so cruel & barbarous, as the 
Turkes, Moores,
 and 
Arabians:
 and


I thinke that if 
Theseus,
 the first inuenter of peace amōg the 
Greekes,
 were among them, he shoulde be more trou∣bled, than euer he was: this people haue certaine sleights of warre to trap one another, as well as in other places. Therefore these 
Americans
 haue perpetuall enimitie one against another at all tymes against their neighbors before shewed, séeking their enimies, and fighting as furi∣ously together as is possible, the which causeth eache vil∣lage to fortifie, & to make themselues strong with people and weapons. They will assemble together on the nights in greate number for to kepe watche and warde. For they are wonte to skirmish togethers, more on nightes than on dayes: if that they haue knowledge therof before hande, or otherwise do suspecte the comming of their eni∣mies, they wil plante in the grounde rounde about their lodgings the compasse of a bowe shot, sharp pointed pins of wood, the which are so set in the earth, that they are scāt perceiued: this kind of policie they vse to gal & pierce the féet of their enimies, which are al bare and naked, as well as the rest of their bodies, to the ende that by this meanes they might intangle their enimies for to kill some, others for to take prisoners. It is a greate honor to them, the which departe out of their countrey, for to as∣sayle their enimies on the borders: and when that they haue taken many of their enimies prisoners in theyr countries, he that hath taken most prisoners, is honored and celebrated among others, as a great King or a great Lorde: when he hath most killed, and when they meane sodainly to assayle a towne or village, they wil hide them selues in the woodes lyke Foxes, lurking there for a cer∣tayne tyme, vntil they haue espied the tyme and vantage to come forth sodainly to beset their enimies. Whē they be come to a village, they know the mene to set fier ther∣on,


for to make them come forth with their wiues & chil∣dren, bag and baggage: being come forth, they assaile one another shoting of their arrowes: also with their Maces & Swords of wood, that to behold them it is a good passe∣time: they wil bite one another w
t
 their téeth in all places wheras they cā take hold, shewing sometymes the bones of those whome they haue vanquished and ouercome be∣fore times in the warrs, and eaten: to be short, they do y
e
 worst they c
n to feare & anger their enimies. Some ye shall sée takē prisoners boūd & manacled like theues. And when those returne from warre far in their owne coun∣tries (vanquishers) God knoweth the noyse and passe∣tyme that they make. The women folow their husbands to the warres, not for to fight as the 
Amazoness
 doe, but for to minister to their husbands foode and other necessa∣ries, requisite in the warres; for sometymes they make iorneys of fiue or six moneths before they returne: he that is greatest among them, hath moste wiues to serue him. And when they make any greate iorney, they set fire on their houses, and if they haue any good thing, they hide it vnder the ground vntill their returne. Their vittels that they haue is such as the lande beareth, that is, rootes ve∣ry delicate and pleasant to eate, and flesh of wild beastes, and fish dried in the smoke: their beds of cotton are ca∣ried with them: the men beare nothing but bowes and arrowes in their handes: their weapons are also greate Swordes and Clubs of wood very heauy: their bowes are as long as oure bowes in Englande: their ar∣rowes are made pointed, some of Canes that growe on the sea coast, and others are made of a kynde of a woodde named 
Hayri,
 bearing leafe lyke to a Palme trée, the whiche is of the coloure of blacke Marble:


therefore many say it is hornbeame, but it semeth to me otherwise, for the right and perfect hornebeame is more shining.
 Furthermore the Hornebeame trée is not lyke this, for this is very thorney al ouer. The best Hornbeam is to be had in 
Calicut,
 and in 
Ethiopia
 This wood is so heauie, that it sincketh to the bottome of the water lyke Iron, therefore these wilde men make therewith their swordes and clubs, to fight with in the warres. It bea∣reth a great fruit, somewhat pointed at one of the endes, within it a whit kernel, of y
e
 which fruit I haue brought home with me a greate many. Besides this the wild men make faire collers of this woode: also it is so harde and tough as I haue before shewed, that y
e
 arowes that there∣with are made,
 are so strong that it wil pearce a good cor∣selet or Harneis: their third weapō or defence is a great buckeler, the which they vse in the warres, it is very lōg, made of the skin of a beast, like in colour to the Neate or Oxen in our countrey, & so diuers in colours. The buck∣lers are of such strength as the bucklers 
Barcellonoys,
 so that they wil beare out the shot of a handgunne. And as touching handguns, many of them haue and cary with them to the warres, the which the Christians haue giuē them, but they knowe not howe to vse them, but often∣tymes they shoote them of onely for to fear their enimies.






Their maner of fighting as well on the lande, as on the water. Cap. 39.


IF you aske me why these wild men make warre one a∣gainst an other, seeing that they are not greater Lords one than another, also for y
t
 they do not esteme worldly riches, & that the earth bringeth forth more than serueth


their necessitie, you shal vnderstād that the cause of their warre is euill ynough grounded, it is onely a desire of vengeance, that they haue without any other reason or cause, but euen like brute beasts, that cannot agrée one w
t
 another by no honest meane: & to conclude, they say, that they haue bene alwayes their mortall enimies. They méete together then as we haue sayde before, in greate numbers, for to go and finde out their enimies, (if that they haue receiued any iniurie before hand) wheras they méete together, & shoote one at another, & after they ioine together, taking holde of their heade, eares, & biting one another by the armes, yea buffetting one another with their fistes. There is no speaking of horse. They are very obstinate and couragious, in such sorte, that before they ioine to fight, being separated one from another the space of gunne shot, sometimes for the space of a whole day or two, they wil beholde, & threaten one another, shewing angrie, cruell and fearefull lookes, shouting and making such a terrible noyse, that ye could not here God thunder: also shewing their affections by signes with their armes and handes holding them vp,
 and shaking their swordes and clubs of woodde at their enimies. We are say they, valiant and hardy, we haue eaten your parentes, also we we will eate you, with many other threatenings. In this they obserue (in my iudgement) the ancient custome that the 
Romaynes
 vsed in their warres, who before they entred into battell made greate boastes and crakes, with greate cryes and larums, the which since hath bene vsed among the 
Galles
 in their warres, as 
Titus Liuius
 rehearseth, bothe the which doings I thinke differeth much frō the doings of the 
Acaians,
 of the which 
Homer
 speaketh of, for that they being redy to giue battaile to


their enimies would make no noyse, but kept themselues from speaking. The greatest vengeance that these wilde men vse,
 and that semeth to them moste cruell, is to eate their enimies. When that they haue taken any in the warres, if they be not strong ynough to cary them away, then if that they can before any succor come, they wil cut of their legs & armes, & before they wil leaue them, they will eat them, or at the least euery one wil cary a piece a∣waye little or much: if they can get any prisoners, that they may without danger leade into their countrey, they wil in like maner eat them. The ancient 
Turkes, Moores,
 and 
Barbarians,
 vsed in times past almost the like maner, (so that yet remayneth this prouerbe,
 I woulde I had eaten his harte with salt:) they vse almost lyke weapons as our wild men do, but Christians haue forged for them and haue taught them to forge Armors, with the which we our selues are nowe beaten, and it is in dout that they will doe the lyke to these 
Americans
 and others. Fur∣thermore this poore people doe venture them selues vpon the water, for to finde out their enimies, as those of the great riuer of 
Ianaria,
 against those of 
Morpion,
 in which place doe inhabit the 
Portingals,
 enimies to the 
French∣men,
 as the wilde men of that same place are enimies to those of 
Ianaria:
 the vessels that they vse on the water, are little Almadies or boates made of the barcke of trées, without nayles or woodden pins, being in length fiue or six fadome and thre foote brode. And you shall vnderstand that they couet not to haue them greater, thinking that then they coulde not make them rowe faste, for to escape or for to folowe theyr enimie. They holde a foolish opinion and superstitious to vnbarke these trées,
 that day that they doe take of the barke, the which is done


euen from the roote to the top, they will neither drinke nor eate, fearing (as they say) that otherwise there would happen vnto them some mysfortune on the water. These vessels being thus made, they will set a floate fiue or sixe score of them, and in euery one fortie or fifty men and women, the women serue to cast out of these little boats the water that commeth in many tymes with a little dish made of the frute of some trée, the men are assured therin hauing their weapons, and rowe a long by the banke sides, and if they finde a village by the way, they will set foote on lande and spoyle it, putting it to fire and sworde, (if that they ouercome it.) A litle before our ariuall those 
Americans
 that are our friendes, had taken on the sea a little barcke of 
Portingals,
 being harde by the shore in some place, but what resistence so euer they made aswell with their gunnes as otherwise, neuerthelesse they were taken and the men eaten, sauing a fewe that we ranso∣med, and bought at our ariuall. By this ye may knowe that the wilde men that are resident, where the 
Portin∣gals
 be, are enimies to the wilde men, that inhabit where the 
Frenchmen
 ariued. Well to conclude, they fight as well on the water, as on the lande, if it happen at any tyme the sea to rage and to swell, they cast therein Par∣trige fethers, or some other thing, thinking by this means to appease the waues of the sea. In lyke manner doe the 
Turkes
 and 
Moores,
 being in the lyke danger,
 wa∣shing their bodies with the water of the sea. Nowe our wilde men, returning with victorie, shewe all signes of ioye, sounding Flutes Trompettes, Drummes, and singing after their manner, the which is pleasant to hearewith their Instrumentes a lyke made of certayne fruites hollow within, or with the bones of some beast,


or els of their enimies: their instrumentes for warre are richly decked with goodly coloured fethers, as we doe oures in our countrey with banners of silke and such lyke. Their Fleutes, Drummes, and other instruments, semeth to relieue the spirits half gone, euen as a bellows doeth relieue a fire half dead. And to my iudgement there is no other meane to stir vp the spirites of men,
 but only by the noyse of these instrumentes, & not onely men, but also beastes (neuerthelesse not making comparison seme to leape for ioy) the which hath ben obserued at al times. It is of a truthe, that these 
Americans
 and Barbarous men in their assaultes and combates vse great cries and fearfull noyse as here after shall be shewed of the 
Ama∣zones.






Howe these Barbarous and wilde men put their enimies to death, that they haue taken in the warre, and eate them. Cap. 40.


NOwe that I haue shewed how that the wilde men of 
America,
 leade their enimies prisoners, into their lodgings, after that they haue taken them in the warres, there resteth now to shewe how they do intreate them at the last. Thus therefore they vse them, the priso∣ners that they take and bring into their countrey,
 shal be very wel intreated, a fiue dayes after shal be giuen hym a wife, peraduenture his daughter to whome he is priso∣ner, for to minister to him his necessities, as well at his bed as otherwise, in the meane time he is serued with the best meates that can be founde, minding to fatten hym lyke a crammed Capon against he shall dye, the which tyme he may easily knowe by a coller made of cotton,


on the which they hang certaine rounde fruites, or the bones of some beast of fishe made in maner of beads, the which they hang about their prisoners neck. And so ma∣ny Moones as they are minded to kepe him, the like quā∣titie of these Beades will they hang about their neckes, and so take of euery Moone one, vntill that y
e
 Moones are expired. And some in stead of these Beades, will hang as many litle collers about their necks, as they haue Moo∣nes to liue. Furthermore ye shall note, that these wilde men doe not recken neuer aboue fiue, and they obserue neither dayes nor houres, neither monthes nor yeares, but they count only by Moones. This maner of counting or reckening, was in times past commaunded to be vsed by 
Solon
 to the 
Athenians,
 that is to obserue the dayes by the course of the Moone. Nowe to our purpose, if that of this prisoner, and of the wife that is giuen him, there are borne any children for the time that they shalbe togither, they shall be kept and nourished for a time, and than they will eate them: saying, that they are their enimies chil∣dren. This prisonner, after that he hath bene well enter∣tained and made fat, they will put him to death, thinking it to be a great honoure. And for to celebrate this slaugh∣ter, they wil send for their farthest friends and kinsfolks, for to eate their parte thereof: the day before the execu∣tion, he shall be laide in his bed, and chained with Iron, the which vse they haue learned of the Christians, sin∣ging after this sorte: 
The 
Margageas
 our friendes, are good men, strong and mightie in the vvarre, they haue ta∣ken and eatē a good number of our enimies, likewise they vvill eate me vvhen it please them. But as for me, I haue killed and eaten his parentes and friends,
 
to vvhome I am prisoner,
 with many suche like woords. By this ye may know, that they feare not death. I haue sometimes (for


pleasure) deuised with suche prisoners being faire and strong men, demaunding of them if they did no more care to be thus slaine and murthered from day to day, to the which they answeared, laughing and scoffing: Our friends sayd they, will reuenge our death, shewing a hardie and an assured countenaunce. And when that I did shewe them, that I would redéeme them out of the handes of their enimies, they tooke it in mockage and derision.


As touching the women and maids that are taken in the warre, they are kept like prisoners as the men are for a certaine time, & then vsed after that maner. They are not kept so muche in captiuitie as the men are, but they haue libertie to goe about, and they are set to dresse Gardens, and to fishe and gather certaine shell fishe. Now when that they are retourned from this slaughter or murther,
 the owner of the prisoner, as we haue al∣ready shewed, will request all his friendes to come to him against that day to eate their parte of their bootye, with good quantitie of 
Cahouin,
 which is a kinde of drinke made of 
Mill,
 with certaine rootes. Vpon this day of solempnitie, all the assistantes will decke them selues with fethers of diuers coloures, or else they will painte their bodies. Specially he that doeth the executi∣on, shall be decked after the best maner that is possible, hauing his sweard of wood, wherewith he doeth his office, richly adorned with faire Fethers: but the priso∣ner, the shorter time that he hath to liue, the more greater signe of ioy doeth he shewe. He shall be brought surely bounde wyth cordes of Cotton into a publike place, being accompanied with ten or twelue thousande of the wilde men his enimies, and there he shall be


smitten downe like an Oxe in the Shambles (after many Ceremonies.) This prisoner being deade, his wife that hath bene giuen him, shall mourne a certain time for his deathe: but the body being cut in pieces, they take the bloud, and therewith bathe their male children, for to make them the more hardye, as they say, shewing them that when they come to age, they doe the like to their enimies, as their fathers before them had done. By this ye may knowe, that the like is done to them, if they be taken in the warre. The prisoner being put to death after this sort, and hewed in pieces, and pre∣pared according to their maner, shall be distributed a∣mong them all, be they neuer so many, euery one a mor∣sell or piece: as for the bowels or inner partes, the wo∣men eate them vp commonly, and they reserue the head to set it on a poll out of their houses in signe of triumph and victorie. And aboue all other, they haue a pleasure to vse the 
Portingals
 after this sorte.
 The 
Canibals,
 and those of a riuer named 
Marignan,
 are much more cruel to the 
Spanyardes,
 making them to die a cruell death, and then they eate them.


We finde not in no Historie of any nation, be it ne∣uer so straunge and barbarous, that hathe vsed the like crueltie as these haue done: but onely 
Iosephus
 wryteth, that when the 
Romaines
 had besieged 
Ierusalem,
 vnder 
Titus, Vespasians
 sonne, after that the famine or hunger had deuoured all, the mothers were constrained to eate their owne children. And the 
Anthropophages,
 that are a people inhabiting in 
Scythia,
 liued also with humain flesh as these wilde men do.


Now he that hath made y
e
 execution straightly, after that he hath done, goeth home to his house, and there re∣maineth


all the day without meate or drinke in his bed. Likewise he shall abstaine certaine dayes, and in thrée dayes after he shal not set foote on groūd. If he be minded to goe to any place, he is borne on mennes shoulders, ha∣uing among them this fonde and foolish opinion, that if he should not so doe, there would happen vnto him some mischiefe, or else the like death. This being done, with a little sawe made of the téethe of a beast named 
Agon∣tin,
 he will race his skin on his brest, or on other places, so that it shall appear all rent and broken. And the cause why they doe these things, is as I haue bene enformed of some of them, that they doe it for pleasure, estéeming the murther that by him hath bene committed against his enimie, a great glory and honoure to him warde. Vn∣to whome, minding to shewe the crueltie of the thing, disdaining my woords, sayd vnto me, that it was a great shame to vs for to forgiue and pardon our enimies, ha∣uing once taken them in the warres. Moreouer he sayd, that it is muche better to put them to death, to the ende that they moue not warre against vs an other time. By this ye may sée with what discretion these poore brutishe men doe rule and gouerne themselues. Also the maidens doe vse suche Ceremonies with their bodies the space of thrée dayes continually, after that they haue had the first purification of women, so that sometimes they are very sicke. Also the same dayes they do abstaine from meates, not comming out of their houses, nor setting foote on ground, as we haue before shewed of the men, sitting on∣ly vpon a stone appoynted for that vse.








Hovv that these vvilde men couet greatly to reuenge their harmes and iniuries. Cap. 41.


IT is not greatly to be maruelled at, if that these peo∣ple walking in darknesse, and ignorant of the truthe, prepareth not only vengeaunce, but putteth it in vre: Considering that the Christian, although it be straightly forbidden him by expresse commaundement,
 cannot kepe himselfe from it, folowing the error of one named 
Meli∣cius,
 who helde opinion, that we ought not to pardon our enimies, the which error hath of a long time polluted the Countrey of 
Egipt.
 Therfore to prepare vengeance, is to hate our neighbor, the which is wholly repugnant to the lawe. But in these people it is not straunge, the whiche as we haue before shewed, liueth without faithe & with∣out law. For all their warre procéedeth only of a foolishe opinion of vengeaunce without cause or reason. And thinke not but that this foolish opinion hathe helde them from the beginning, and shall doe vntil the ende, if that God for his mercies sake illuminat not their harts. This pore people are so ill taught, that onely for the flying of a flie, they will prepare mischiefe. If that a thorne pricke them, or a stone hurt them, they will stampe it in a thou∣sande pieces, as if the thing were sensible or had vnder∣standing, the which commeth not but for fault of good iudgement. Furthermore this is of a truthe, the which I am ashamed almost to speake, that for to reuenge them selues of Fleas and Lice, they kill them with their téeth, a thing more brutishe than reasonable. And when they féele them selues offended or gréeued, be it neuer so little an offense, they will neuer be reconciled without


vengeaunce. Such opinions are taught, and be obserued from age to age. Ye shall sée them instructe and teache their children being a thrée or foure yeares of age, to handle a Bowe and an Arrowe to learne to shoote: also they exhorte them to manlinesse, to take vengeaunce of their enimies, and not to pardon any, whome so euer it be. Moreouer, when they are prisoners one to another, thinke not that they require to be redeemed by any com∣position what so euer it be, for they hope no other thing than very death, estéeming it an honoure and glory vnto them. And therefore they can very well mocke vs, that deliuer our enimies that we haue in our power, for mo∣ney or suche like things, the which they say, is vnwor∣thy to a man of warre. As for us say they, we vse no such things. Vpon a time it chaunced that a 
Portingall
 being prisoner to these wilde men, thought by faire words to haue saued his life, so he began to preache to them by faire woordes as gentle and as lowly as might be. Ne∣uerthelesse his flattering woords could not preuaile,
 but he to whome he was prisoner, shotte him to death with his arrowes: Goe thy wayes saide he, thou haste not merited to die honourably as others, neither yet among companie.


On a time there was brought a yonge male childe of these wilde men of 
America,
 of the Countrey and lig∣nage of those whome they name 
Tabiares,
 which are mortall enimies to those wilde men, with whome the Frenche men are in concorde and peace by certain Mar∣chauntes of 
Normandie,
 the which was afterwarde baptised, norished and maried at 
Roan,
 liuing like a Chri∣stian man. But he was minded to returne into his coun∣trey with vs, being of the age of two and twenty yeares.


It came to passe that being there, he was discouered of his auncient enimies, by the meanes of certaine Chri∣stians, who incontinently as madde Dogs furious and woodde, ran to our shippes which were at that time de∣stitute of men, where as by casuall chaunce they found him, so they fell vpon him, and rent him in pieces, not touching any other of the company there present, who by the prouidence of God, enduring this pitifull death, exhorted them in the Christian faith, so this poore man died among their handes a good Christian man, whome they did not eate, as they did other of their enimies. What opinion of vengeaunce is more contrary to our lawe? Notwithstanding, there is found among vs ma∣ny, so obstinate that they will reuenge as well as the wilde men. Furthermore, this is among them, if one smite an other, let him be assured to receiue as muche a∣gaine, and rather more, for they will not leaue it vnpu∣nished: it is a faire sight to sée them quarrell and sight together. As for the rest, they are faithfull one to an o∣ther,
 but to Christians the most affectioned and subtel∣lest théeues, although they be naked, that are possible, and they estéeme it a great vertue, that they may steale any thing from vs. This I speake, for that I haue pro∣ued it my selfe, for being there about Christmasse time, came a king of the Countrey to sée the 
Sieur
 of 
Ʋillegag∣non.
 They of his company did steale away my apparell being sicke. Thus muche by the way concerning their fi∣delitie, after I haue shewed of their obstination and de∣sire of vengeaunce.








Hovv these vvilde men of America, are maried. Cap. 42.


THis honorable estate of Matrimonie, sheweth that we haue brought some naturall reason from oure mothers wombe. Otherwise we should be counted as brute beasts, if that God of his mercy did not illumi∣nate our heartes. Therefore ye may be well assured, that these 
Americanes
 are no more discrete in their maria∣ges, than in other things. They mary one with another, cousins with cousins, the vnkle with the néece, but not the sister and the brother. A man, the more worthy and valiant he is estéemed,
 the more wiues is permitted to serue him, and to the other lesse: and for to say the truth, the women trauail more than do the men, that is to wit, to gather rootes, make meale, drinkes, gather together the fruites, dresse gardens, and other things that apper∣taineth to housholde. The man only goeth sometimes a fishing, or to the woodes to take Venison for their suste∣naunce. Others occupy themselues to make bowes & ar∣rowes, leauing the rest for their wiues to doe. They will giue you a maid to minister vnto you necessaries whilest you be there,
 or otherwise if ye will, and it shalbe lawfull for you to restore hir againe when you thinke méete, and this they vse customably. Assone as you be come thither, they will say to you in their language: come hither, what wilte thou giue me, and I will giue thée my daughter that is faire, she shall serue thée to do thy necessaries and other things. But for to auoide this, the 
Sieur
 of 
Ʋille∣gagnon
 at our arriuall defended vpon paine of death, not to acquaint our selues with them, as a thing not lawfull for Christians.


In déede when the women are maried,
 it is not law∣full for hir to play the harlot with any others: for if she be taken in adulterie, hir husband will not stick to kill hir, for they haue suche things in disdaine. And to the man that is taken with hir, he will doe nothing, thin∣king that if he should touch him, he should procure the displeasure of all the others friends: for so ther should engender and ryse perpetuall warre betwéene them: but he wil put away his wife, which is lauful for them to do for adulterie, and also if that they be bareyn, and can bear no children, and for other occasions. Further∣more, they haue neuer companie with their wyues in the day time but onely the nightes, neither in publike places, as many in our countrey thinke they haue, as the 
Cryb,
 a people of 
Thracia,
 and other barbarous men in certaine Ilands of the sea 
Magilanike,
 a thing very detestable and vnworthie of christendome, to whome may serue for example these poore brutishe men. The women for the tyme that they be greate with childe, shall not beare or carie any heauie burthens, neyther shall do any great labour for feare to be hurt. The wo∣man being brought to bed or deliuered, the wiues shal carie the chyld to the sea to be washed, or to some Ry∣uer, and then will bring it to the mother, who shall re∣maine in hir childe bed twentie dayes, and foure hou∣res, the father shall cutte the childes nauell with his téeth, as I my selfe haue séene: as for the rest, they han∣dle and vse the women in child bed, as tenderly as we doe here: the norishment of the litle childe is the mo∣thers milke, notwithstāding that within certain days after his natiuitie, they wil giue it grosser sustenance. The father shortly after the childe is borne, shall giue him a bow and arrow in his hand, as a beginnyng and


protestation of warre and vengeaunce of their eni∣mies. But yet there is one thing that marreth al, that is, that the fathers & mothers before they marry their daughters, wil gyue them to be abused, to the first cō∣mer for a little value, principally to Christians, that trade thither, if they will couple with them, as wée haue before shewed. Wée fynde in some histories of certaine people, lyuing in maner as these wilde men do in their mariages. 
Seneca
 in one of his Epistles, and 
Strabo
 in hys Cosmographie writeth,
 that the 
Lydians
 and 
Armenians
 hadde a custome to sende their virgins and maidens to the sea borders, there in offering them selues to all commers to get them husbandes, or else their dowries. As muche sayeth 
Iustinus,
 dyd the vir∣gins of 
Cypris,
 for to get their dowries and mariages, which when they were quit and well iustified, offered to the Goddesse 
Venus,
 a present or offeryng. We may fynde at this day amongst vs, that making great pro∣fession of vertue and religion would doe the lyke, and rather more, without offering presente or candle, the which I knowe of a truthe. As touching the consangui∣nitie in Mariage, Saincte 
Hierome
 writeth, that the 
Athenians
 were woonte to marrie the brethren wyth the systers, and not the Auntes wyth the nephewes, the whych is contrary to the order of the 
Americanes.
 Lykewise in oure countrey a woman of late hadde li∣bertie to marrie hir selfe to fiue husbandes, and not contraried. Beside this we sée the 
Turkes
 and 
Arabi∣ans
 tooke many wiues: I speake it not for that it is ho∣nest and allowable, but for that we christians should auoyde such things. To conclude, our wylde men vse the maner and order that wée haue shewed, so that a mayden is seldome maried, hauing hir virginitie, but beyng once maryed, they dare doe no faulte: for their


husbandes doe looke straightly to them, hauing a sus∣pition of Iealousie: shée may leaue hir husbande if that she be euill intreated, the whiche oftentimes commeth to passe, as we reade of the 
Aegyptians
 that dydde the lyke before they had any lawes. In this pluralitie of women that they vse, as wée haue sayde,
 there is al∣wayes one aboue the others, moste fauoured, whiche is not subiect to so much trauell as the others. All the children that procéede by the mariage of these wiues, are reputed legittimate, saying, that the first Author of generation, is the father and not the mother, which is the cause that many tymes they kill the male chil∣dren of their enimies being prisoners, bicause y
e
 such children in time to come might be their enimies.






Of the ceremonies, buriall, and funeralls, that they vse to the deceassed. Capit. 43.


SEyng that I haue shewed you their doing and ma∣ner of liuyng, and other theyr orders and ceremo∣nies, there resteth to speake of their Funerals and burialls. For all that these kinde of people are bru∣tishe and vnciuile, yet haue they this custome and opinion to lay the dead bodies in the earth, after that the soule is separated from the body, in the place wher as the deceased in hys life time toke most plesure,
 thin¦king so as they say, that they can not put hym in place more notable than in the earth that bringeth forth the men, that beareth so many fruites, and other richesse profitable and necessarie for the vse of man. There haue ben many lewde and vnaduised Heathen Philo∣sophers, that toke no care what should becom of their bodies after their decease, whether it were cast out to y
e
 beasts in the fields or birds of y
e
 aire, they forced not:


As 
Diogenes,
 who after his death, cōmaunded that this body should be cast out to the foules of the aire, & bea∣stes of the fielde for to be eaten and deuoured, saying that after his death, his bodie should fele no more pain, and that he loued much better that his body shold serue for sustenance than to putrifie and rot. Likewise 
Ly∣curgus,
 among the 
Lacedemonians,
 did giue straight cō∣maundement, as 
Seneca
 writeth, that after his deathe his body shoulde be cast into the sea, others that there should be burned to ashes. These poore people of 
Ame∣rica,
 though they be brutish and ignorant, shewe them selues after the death of their parentes or frends, with out comparison more reasonable, than aunciently dyd the 
Parthians,
 who for all that they had lawes, in stede of putting their dead bodies into the earthe, cast them out to be a praie for soules and dogs. Also the 
Taxili∣ans,
 did cast their dead bodies to the soules of the ayre, and the 
Caspians
 in like maner. The 
Ethiopians
 did cast the dead bodies into the waters: the 
Romans
 did burne them to ashes, as many other nations haue done. By this ye may sée, that the wilde men are not so voide of honestie, but that they haue some knowledge of good, considering that without lawe or faith they haue this knowledge and aduise, that is to wit, as much as Na∣ture hath taught them,
 Therfore they burye the deade bodies in the earth, as we haue alreadie sayde, in like maner as did aunciently the 
Nasomones.
 Nowe the bu∣riall of the dead is approued as well by the olde, as by the new testament: Likewise the ceremonies if they be duly obserued, as well for that they haue bene ves∣sels and instrumēts of the soule diuine and immortal, as also to giue hope of the resurrection to come. Here might I bring in many things as touching this mater,


but for that it is not my argument I omitte it, and let it passe. Nowe therefore among these wylde men yf that a housholder happen to dye, hys wyues, and hys néere kinsefolke and friends shall make a maruellous mournyng, not for the space of thrée or foure dayes, but foure or fiue monethes, and this greatest sorow is foure or fiue of the first dayes: ye shall heare them make such a noyse and harmonie as dogges and catts, ye shall see as well men as women layde on their bed∣des sorowfull, others sittyng downe with their bare buttockes on the grounde, imbracyng one an other, saying in their language: Our father and friend was so good a man, so valiant in the warres, that hath cau∣sed many of oure enimies to dye, hée was strong and myghtie, he laboured so wel, and dressed our gardens, he caught beastes, foules, and fishes for our sustenāce, alas he is deade, we shall sée hym no more, but after we bée deade wyth oure friendes in the countreys where oure 
Pages
 saye they haue séene them, wyth many suche lyke wordes, the which they will repete aboue ten thousande tymes continually day and night for the space of foure or fiue howers not ceassyng to lament. The chyldren of the deceassed, a moneth af∣ter these mournyngs, wyll desire their friendes to make some feast or solemnitie for hys honure, And there they will come together paynted with diuers co∣lours, decked wyth fethers, and otherwise after their manner, makyng a thousande ceremonies and passe∣tymes, wyth daunces, playes,, tabour playing with Flutes made of the armes and legges of theyr eni∣mies, and other instrumentes after the maner of their countrey. The others as the auncient sorte, all the day long, will not ceasse to drinke, without eating of


any thing, and they are serued by the women and kin∣rede of the deceased: the which their doings is as I am aduised, to stirre vp the heartes of yong children, and to moue and prouoke them to warre, makyng them bolde against their enimies. The 
Romanes
 vsed almost the lyke maner:
 for after the decease of any Citizen that had greatly trauailed for the cōmon wealth, they made playes, pompes, and funeral songs to the praise and honour of the dead man. Likewise to gyue exam∣ple to the yonger sorte, for to imploy their myghte for the libertie of their countrey. 
Plinie
 sayth, that one named 
Lycaon
 was the inuenter of such thyngs. Also the 
Argiues,
 a people of 
Grecia,
 in memoriall of the furious Lion ouercome by 
Hercules,
 they made playes and games.
 And 
Alexander
 the great, after that he had seene the sepulchre of the worthy and valiant 
Hector,
 in memorie of his worthynesse, commaunded, yea hée him selfe dyd make many gamboldes and solemnities. Here myght I reherse or bring in many histories how the elders in times past haue diuersly obserued funeral rites accordyng to the diuersitie of places, but for that I will not be tedious vnto you, I omit it: it shall suffise at this present to knowe the custome of these wilde men, for bicause that as well the elders in ti∣mes paste, as also those of oure time, haue made many excesse bankettes in their funerall pompes, more for a vaine and worldely glorie, than otherwise: but to the contrary, ye must vnderstande, that those that are made to the honour of the deceased, and for respecte of hys soule, is cōmendable, declaring hym by this mea∣nes immortall, and foreshewyng the Resurrection to come.








Of Mortugabes, and of the charitie that they vse toward straungers. Cap. 44.


SEing that our argument is now of the sauage men we will saye somewhat of their order and liuyng.
 In their countrey there is neither towne nor Ca∣stell of any greatnesse, sauing those that the 
Portingals
 and other Christians haue edified for their cōmoditie, the houses wherein they dwell are litle lodgyngs, the which they name in theyr language 
Mortuga
es,
 as∣sembled by hamlettes or villages, suche as we sée in some places here. These lodgyngs are of two or thre hundred paces long, and of bredthe twentie paces, or thereaboutes, buylded of woodde, and couered wyth palme leaues, layde on so trimmely, as possible may bée. Euery lodgyng hathe fayre coueryngs, but they are so low, that one muste stoupe to goe in, as he wold do at a wicket, in euery one there is many roomes, and euery one for hym selfe and his familie, thrée fadome of length. This I fynd much more tollerable and lesse grieuous than of the 
Arabians,
 and 
Tartarians,
 that neuer buylde nor edifie a place for to remain and dwel in, but they stray about here and there like vagabun∣des: neuerthelesse they gouerne them selues by certain lawes, but our wylde men haue none, but onely as Nature dothe gouerne them. Nowe therefore these wylde men in these little houses, are many houshol∣des together, in the middest of which theyr beddes ar hanged euery one in his quarter vnto pyllers mighty strong and square, the which beds are made of good Cotton woll: for thereof they haue greate plentye, the whiche a trée beareth,
 béeyng of the height of a man lyke vnto greate Buttons, or Akornes: but


neuerthelesse they differ from those of 
Cypris, Malta,
 and 
Syria:
 The sayd beddes are not thicker than a lin∣nen clothe of this countrey: and they lyde downe ther∣in all naked, as they are accustomed. This bedde in theyr language is called 
Iny,
 and the Cotton where∣with it is made, 
Manigot.
 On both the sides of the bed of him that is maister of the houshold, the wiues make hym fire day and nyght, for the nights are somewhat cold. Euery housholde kéepeth and layeth vp in store a kynde of fruite, greate as an Estrige egge, the which is of the colour of our Cucumbers that wée haue here in Englande, being fashioned like a bottell pierced at bothe endes, passyng through the middest a stycke of Hornebeame a foote and a halfe long, one of the endes beyng planted in the earth or ground, the other ende is decked wyth faire feathers of a byrde named 
Arat,
 that is altogether red: the whiche thyng they haue in such honor and reputation, as if it dyd merite no lesse. And they take this to bée theyr 
Toupan:
 For when their Prophetes come towards them, they make that to speake, that is within them, knowing by this mea∣nes the secrets of their enimies, and as they say, they know & heare newes of the soules of their friendes de∣ceased. This people aboute their houses norish & bring vp no domestical beasts sauing certain hennes & cocks, which are very rare & scant,
 and they ar but in certain places, wheras the 
Portingals
 haue first brought them: for before they had no intelligence of them, neuerthe∣lesse they set so litle store by them, that for a litle knife ye shall haue two hennes: the women for no good will eate of them, takyng great displeasure when they sée a Christian eat at one repast foure or fiue hennes egs, the which they name 
Arignane,
 thinking that for euery


egge they eate a henne, the whiche woulde suffise to repast two men: besides this, they nourish and bring vp Popingays, the which they change in trading with the Christians, for small yron tooles.
 As for golde and siluer they vse none: They hauing on a time amōg thē taken a 
Portingale
 ship, where there was a great num∣ber of pieces of siluer, that was brought from 
Morpion,
 they gaue al to a Frenchmā for four hatchets and cer∣taine litle kniues, the which they esteme very muche, and not without a cause: for they are necessarie to cut their woodde, the which before they were constrained to cutte with stones, or to sette a fyre the trées, for to beate them downe, and for to make their bowes and arrowes they vse no other thing. Moreouer, they are very charitable, and as much as their lawe of Nature dothe permit them.
 Those things that they receyue of Christians, they sette much store by, but of suche com∣modities as groweth in their countrey, as sustenance, beastes, fruites, and fishe, they are very liberall (for they haue little other thyng) not onely to vs, and a∣mong them selues, but also to any other nation, pro∣uided that they be not their enimies. For so soone as they shal sée any a farre off, enter into theyr countrey, they will present vnto them victualls, lodgyng, and a mayde for his seruice, as we haue before shewed. Al∣so agaynste thys pylgryme or straunger, the women and maydens wyll come, and then they wyll sytte downe and crie and wéepe for ioye, the which if thou wylt endure, casting out teares, they wyl say in their language: Thou art welcome, thou arte of our best friendes, thou hast taken great paines to come and vi∣site vs, and many other gréetings. Also the father and chiefe of the familie shalbe in their beds wéeping euen


as the women: If they iorney thirtie or fortie leagues be it by water or land, (they liue common together) if one haue, and others want, he shall distribute to the néedeful, the like do they to strangers. And moreouer, this people are curious of new things, and wondreth according to the prouerbe, Ignorance is the mother of wonder: but yet for to get from a stranger that thing that he fansieth, they can so wel flatter, that it is hard to say them nay. First the men, when any doth visite them in their lodgyngs or cabans, after they haue sa∣luted them, they will drawe nere to you, with such fa∣miliaritie and assurance, that they will streight ways take your cappe or hatte, and putting it on their heads one after an other, they will beholde and wonder at them selues, hauyng opinion to be the fairest: others will take youre dagger, sworde, or other knife, if ye haue any: and therewith will with wordes and iestes threaten their ennimies: And to be shorte, they will rifle you, and ye must refuse them nothing, for if ye doe, ye shall neither haue grace, fauour, seruice, loue, nor friendship, in déede when they haue rifled ye, they will restore and giue you againe youre trinkettes: as much will the women and maidens doe, being muche greater flatterers than the men, and alwayes for to get to them some thyng: this is of a truthe that they will be contented with a trifle, they wil come to you euen with the like grace as doe the men, with some fruites or other things of small value, with the which they vse to make presentes, saying in their language, 
Agatouren,
 which is as muche to say, howe good thou arte, by a manner of flatterie, 
Fory asse pia,
 shewe me suche thyngs as thou haste, being very desirous of newe things, as little glasses, & litle heades of glasse.


Also ye shal haue following of you a companie of yong children, and they will aske in their language 
Hama∣ba pinda,
 Giue vs some fishe hookes, the which they vse to take litle fishe with. And they are well instructed in this terme before sayde, 
Agatouren,
 Thou arte good, if ye giue them that which they demaund, other∣wise with a frowarde looke, they will saye to ye 
Hip∣pochi,
 goe thou arte naught, 
Daganaiepa aionga,
 thou muste be killed, with other threatnings and iniuries, but they wil not giue any thing, vnlesse ye giue them. besides this, they will marke ye and knowe ye again, for the deniall that you haue made them.






The description of a sicknesse named Pians, to the which are subiect these people of A∣merica as well in the Ilandes as the maine land. Ca. 45.


KNowing wel y
t
 there is nothing, not frō the earth vnto y
e
 first heauen, what making or proportion so it hath, but that is subiect to chaunging and alte∣ration, the aire then that compasseth vs, béeing not simplie an aire, but made and composed, is not alwais like in all times nor in all places, but nowe of one fashion, incontinent of an other. And for that all dis∣eases (as oure Phisitians shewe vs) come or happen either of the aire, or of the maner of mens liuing, I am determined to write and set out here a sicknesse or disease verie rife and common in these countreys of 
America,
 and of the West, discouered in our time.
 Now this sickenesse named 
pians,
 by the people of the countrey, cōmeth not of the corruption of the aire, for it is there verie good & tēperat, which sheweth by expe∣ence,


the fruites that the earth bringeth forth, with the benefite of the aire, without y
e
 which nothing is made, bee it of Nature or artificiall. Also that the sycknesse procéedyng of the corruption of the ayre, hurteth as aswell the yong as the olde, the ryche as well as the poore, notwithstandyng the internall or inwarde dis∣position.
 Therefore it muste néedes bée, that it procée∣deth of some misgouernement, as to much carnall and fleshely frequentation the man with the woman, con∣sidering that thys people is very lecherous, carnal, and more than brutishe, specially the women: for they do seeke and practise all the meanes to moue man to lust. This sickenesse is no other thyng than the pocks that raigneth, and hath power ouer all 
Europe,
 specially a∣mong the Frenchemen: For of vs it is named the Frenche pockes, the whych disease as the Frenchmen wright,
 was first taken at a voyage into 
Naples,
 and thether it was broughte by the 
Spanyardes,
 from the West 
Indies.
 For before it was discouered and made subiecte to the 
Spanyardes,
 there was no mention ther∣of. It is not onely here in 
Europe,
 but also in 
Grecia,
 in 
Asia,
 and in 
Affrica.
 Well let vs returne vnto the wylde mens euyll, and to the remedies that they doe vse therefore. Nowe this euill taketh the parties, as well wilde men as Christians that are there, by con∣tagion or touching, euen as the pockes dothe in the realme of 
Fraunce.
 Also it hath the like 
Symptomes,
 and it is so daungerous, that if it be waxen old, it is harde and daungerous to heale: for sometimes it dothe afflict them euen to the death. As for the Christians, whiche doe inhabite in the lande of 
America,
 if they couple them selues with the women, they shall neuer bée rid of the same, but shall fall into the daunger thereof,


muche more sooner than they of the countrey.
 For the curing of this disease likewise for a certain alteration that oftentymes commeth wyth this euill, they make a certaine decoction of the barke of a trée, named in their language 
Hiuourahe,
 of the which they drincke,
 more easier to cure than with our medicine, and they are more easier to be healed than others, to my iudge∣ment for their temperatenesse and complection, which are not broken out with infections, as the Frenchmen are. Thus much thought I needefull to speake in this place. And he that will make any difficultie to beleue my words, let him aske the opinion of the moste lear∣nedest Physitions of the originall & cause of this dis∣ease, and what internall partes are soonest grieued, where it is nourished. For I sée at this day many con∣tradictions (but not among the lerned.) And to my sée∣ming, I fynde very fewe that toucheth the pricke, spe∣cially of those that take vpon them to heale it: among the which, there are men and women so ignorant, that they cause many mishaps vnto the poore pacientes: for in stéede of curyng and healyng of them, they make them worse and worse.
 There are other kinde of dis∣eases, as 
ophthalmies,
 of the whiche we haue alreadie shewed, that comes of ouermuch smoke, for that they make their fires in many corners and places of their lodgings, the which are great, for that they assemble a great number; for to take vp their lodgings. I knowe well that al 
ophthalmies
 come not of smoke: but wher of so euer it be, it commeth of the ylnesse of the brain,
 being by some meanes grieued. Also all the diseases of the eies are not 
ophthalmies,
 as may bée séene among the inhabitauntes of 
America,
 of whiche we speake: for many haue loste their sight, hauing no inflamation


in their eyes. And this fulnesse and abundance of trou∣bles of the braine, as I maye learne and vnderstande, commeth of the ayre, and southwindes hot and moyst very common in 
America,
 the whiche sodainly fylleth the brayne, as 
Hippocrates
 sheweth. Also we feele in our selues, our bodies to wax heauy, specially the head when the winde is at south. For to heale this paine of the eyes, they cut a braunch of a certaine trée, very soft rinde, like to a kind of palme trée, the which they bring home to their houses, and they let drop the iuyce being redde, into the eye of the pacient. Moreouer, this kind of people is always subiect to the leprosie, paralysey, and other exterior vices as we are in this country, but they are alwayes whole and well disposed, walkyng with a great courage and boldnesse, their heads lifting vp like a stagge or hart. This much by the way of this sicknesse, the most daungerous that is in 
Fraunce
 An∣tartike or 
America.






Of the diseases most rife and common in America, and the meane that they obserue to cure them. Cap. 46.


THere is none be they neuer of so rude and grosse memorie, but that knoweth well, that these 
A∣mericanes
 are made of foure elementes, as all na∣turall bodies are, so that by this meanes they are sub∣iect to the like affections that wée are. In déede diseases and sickneesss may be diuers and contrary, according to the temperatenesse of the ayre, and maner of ly∣uyng. Those in that countrey that inhabite neare


the sea, are subiecte to rotten diseases, as Feuers, Catarres, and others. In the whiche these poore peo∣ple are so persuaded and abused of their Prophetes, of whome we haue spoken, the whiche are called for to heale them when they haue these diseases: and they haue this foolishe opinion, that they can cure them:
 we can not better compare these impes, thā to a companie of new fond foolish & ignorant Physitions in our dayes here in our realme y
t
 persuade the pore people, & make profession that they can heale all kinde of diseases cu∣rable and vncurable, the whiche I woulde very well beleue, if that science were become ignorance. Ther∣fore these Prophetes make them to beleue, that they doe speake vnto the spirites and soules of their paren∣tes, and that nothyng to them is vnpossible, also that they can cause the soule to speake within the bodie. Moreouer, when soeuer any sycke man féeleth his sto∣macke to swelle by the occasions of some humours in the stomacke and liuer, the whyche by debilitie or o∣therwyse he can not caste or vomite vp, he thinketh that it is his soule that complaineth. Now these goodly Phrophetes for to heale this disease wil suck with their mouth the place where the sore or disease lieth, thin∣king that by this meanes they drawe it oute. Lyke∣wyse they sucke one an other, but not with such belefe and opinion: the women vse other meanes,
 they wyll put into the pacientes mouth a thréede of cotton a two foote long, the whiche afterwardes they sucke, thyn∣kyng also by thys thréede for to get away thys disease or sickenesse. If one of them doe hurte an other in er∣nest or otherwyse, he is bounde to sucke his wounde vntill the tyme that he bée healed. And in the meane tyme, they doe abstayne frome certayne meates,


the which they thinke is contrary: They haue y
e
 mean to lette bloud betwéene the shoulders, with a kynde of herbe very cutting, or with the teeth of some beast. The maner how to diet the pacient is this:
 They wil neuer giue him no meate nor sustenance before he doe aske it, and they will rather let him languish a whole moneth. They are not so often grieued with sicknesse as we be, although they go all naked day and nyghte: also they vse no excesse or superfluitie in their meates or drinkes. In other things they are very curious to knowe the trées and fruites, they will not tast of any fruite that is perisht, vnlesse it be thorough ripe: The fruite of which they commonly eate in their sicknesses is named 
Naua,
 being great, made in maner of a Pine apple, thys fruite when it waxeth ripe, becommeth ye∣low, the which is very excellent, as wel for his swete∣nesse as his relish, as pleasant as fine suger and more: It is not possible to bring of them into this countrey, but conserued, for being ripe they will not long kéepe. Furthermore, it beareth no grain, wherfore they plāt them by litle slippes, as the fruites that are grafted in our countrey: Also before it be ripe, it is so roughe in eating, that it will pull of the skinne of your lips: the leafe of this trée when it groweth, is like to the leafe of a large Iounck or sags. I wil not forget, that amōg their diseases they haue one maruellous indisposition, which commeth by litle wormes that enter into their féete,
 named in their language 
Tom,
 that are litle ones and I thinke that they ingender in their féet: for there will be somtimes such a number in one place, that they wyll rayse a knob as big as a beane, with doloure and paine in that place, the whiche paine also chaunced to vs: for being there, our féete and our handes were co∣uered


with little clothes, in the which when they were broken, was onely one white worme with filthe. And for to shunne this griefe, the wilde men make a certain oyle of a fruite named 
Hibonconhu,
 like vnto a Date,
 the which is not good to eate: they preserue it in little vessels of fruites, named in their language 
Caramenio,
 and ther∣with they rubbe the places that are grieued, a thing ve∣ry necessary as they doe affirme against these wormes. Also sometimes they anoynt therewithall their bodies when they be weary. Bisides this, the oyle is proper for woundes and sores, as they haue knowne by experience. Thus much as touching their infirmities, and the reme∣dies that these 
Americans
 vse.






The maner hovv to trade among these people: of a birde named Toucan, and of the spicerie of that Countrey. Cap. 47.


ALthough that in 
America,
 there is diuers kindes of people: neuerthelesse brutish and of diuers sorts and fashions, accustomed alwayes to make warre one with another. Notwithstanding, they let not to trade & trafike as wel among themselues,
 as with the christians and straungers, specially those that are néere to the Sea, with such commodities as is to be had in the Countrey. Their greatest trade is with Estridge fethers, garni∣shings of swords made of fethers, & other fethers muche set by and estéemed, the which are brought from the higher Countrey to the sea side, aboue a hundreth or sixe score leagues, also great quantitie of coloures white and blacke, also of the gréene stones that they beare hanging in their lips, as we haue before shewed. The others that


dwel on the sea coast, where as the Christians to trafike receiue certain hatchets, kniues, daggers, swordes, and other iron tooles, beades of glasse, combes, loking glasses, and other little trifles of small value, which they trucke with their neighbors, hauing no other mean sauing on∣ly to giue one marchandise for an other, and they vse af∣ter this maner: giue me that, and I will giue thée this, without any further talk. On the sea coast, the most fre∣quented Marchandise, is the fethers of a birde, that is named in their language 
Toucan,
 the properties of which I wil describe, séeing it commeth to purpose. This birde is of the greatnesse of a Pigeon: there is an other kinde like to a Pie,
 of like fethers that the other haue, that is to wit, bothe twaine blacke, sauing that about the taile, there are some red fethers among the blacke. Vnder the brest, the fethers are yellow about foure fingers broade, as well in bredth as in lengthe, and it is not possible to finde yellow more excellent, nor finer coloure than is the fethers of this birde: at the ende of the taile, there are lit∣tle fethers as redde as bloud. The wilde men take the skin of that parte that is yellow, and they vse it to make garnishings of swordes after their maner, and certaine garments, hattes, and other things.


I the author of this worke, brought a hatte of fethers very riche and faire out of 
America,
 the which was pre∣sented to the King of 
Fraunce, 
Henry
 by name, as a pre∣cious iewell. And of these birdes there are none founde but in 
America,
 beginning from the riuer of 
Platte,
 vn∣to the riuer of 
Amazones.
 Ther are some sene at 
Perou,
 but they are not so great as the others. At newe 
Spayne, Florida, Messique,
 and newe found lande, there is none to be séene, bicause the countreis are to cold, of the which


they stande in great feare. Moreouer this birde liueth with no other thing among the wooddes, where he ma∣keth his residence, but with certaine fruites that the Countrey doeth bring forthe: some might thinke that this were a water birde, the which is not so, for that I haue séene the contrary. To the rest, this birde is disfor∣med and monsterous, hauing the bill more greater and more longer than the rest of the body. I haue also brou∣ghte one of them from thence that was giuen me,
 with the skinnes of many of diuers couloures: some as redde as fine scarlet, others yelow, blewe, and others of diuers colours. These fethers be much set by of y
e
 
Ame∣ricans,
 with the which they trafike and trade, as we haue before shewed.


This also is of a truthe, that before the vse of money, they traded after this sorte ware for ware, so that the wealth and richesse of men, yea of Kings, Princes, and Magistrates, did consist in beastes, shepe, goates and Ca∣mels, of the which ye haue examples in 
Berosus
 and 
Dio∣dorus,
 the which shewe vs by wrytings, the maner and vse that the elders before vs vsed to trade one with ano∣ther, the which vse I finde to differ very little from the 
Americanes
 order, and other barbarous people. So that in times past one thing was giuen for an other, as shéepe for corne, woolle for salte, and suche like.


The trafike of one Countrey with an other,
 if we cōsider it wel, is maruellous profitable & necessary, for by it ciuil societie is kept: also it is much estéemed through∣out all nations. 
Plinie
 in his seuenth booke doeth attri∣bute the first inuention and vse thereof to be among the 
Ʋenicians.
 The trade that many of the Christians


vse with the 
Americanes,
 is brasell woode, Popengayes, cotten and other things,
 in trucke and chaunge of those things before shewed: they bring also from thence a kinde of spice, which is the graine of an herbe or little trée of thrée or foure foote highe, the fruit is like to our countrey strawberies, as well in coloure as otherwise. When it is ripe, there is within it a séede like to fenell séede. Our christian Marchants doe loade this kinde of spice being nothing so good as the spice that groweth on the coast of 
Ethiopia,
 and in 
Ginney,
 also it is not to com∣pare to the spice that is had at 
Calicut,
 or of 
Tabroban.
 And this ye shall note by the way, that though it be na∣med 
Calicut
 spice, ye must not thinke that it is all of 
Ca∣licut,
 but commeth a fiftie leagues off, from Ilands vn∣known, and chiefly from an Iland named 
Corchell.
 Not∣withstanding 
Calicut,
 is the chiefest place whether all the Marchaundise of the East countreys is broughte, and there it is shipte, and therefore it is called the spice of 
Calicut,
 the which is better than the spice of 
America.
 The King of 
Portingall
 as euery one knoweth, hathe greate profite of the spices, that he receiueth from thence, but not so muche as in times past, for bicause that since the 
Spanyardes
 haue discouered the Iland of 
Zebut,
 riche, and of a great compasse, the whiche ye shall finde after ye haue passed the straight of 
Magellan.
 This Ilande beareth a Mine of Golde, Ginger, and great aboun∣daunce of white Purselaine. Afterwarde they found out 
Aborney,
 fiue degrées from the 
Equinoctiall,
 and many other Ilandes inhabited with 
Neigers,
 vntill they came to 
Moloqus,
 where as is 
Atidora, Terenata, Mata,
 and 
Machian
 little Ilandes somewhat neare the one to the other, as are the 
Canaries
 of the which we haue spoken.


These Ilandes are distant from 
Fraunce,
 more than 
.180.
 degrées lying to the West, they bring forthe many good spices, muche better than those of 
America.
 This much by the way of 
Moloquus,
 hauing first treated of the tra∣fike and trade that the wilde men vse of 
America.






Of birdes most common in America. Cap. 48.


AMong many kindes of birdes that nature diuersly bringeth forthe, setting out hir giftes by particular properties, (truely worthy to be maruelled at,) the which she hath giuen to euery liuing beast.
 There is not one found that excéedeth this birde, commonly séene in 
America,
 named of the wilde men 
Carinde,
 decked with so pleasant and faire fethers, that it is not possible for no man but to wonder at the like worke. This birde excée∣deth not the greatnesse of a Crowe, and his fethers from the belly to the throte, is as yellow as fine gold: y
e
 wings and the taile, which are very long, are of the coloure of fine Azure. To the likenesse of this bird, there is another founde of his greatnesse, but differing in coloure, for in stead of hauing the brest fethers yellow, this hathe them as red as pure scarlet coloure, and the rest Azure. These birds are a kinde of Parats, and of like forme as well in head and bil, as in féete. The wilde men of the Countrey sell them déere, for that thrée or foure times a yeare, they plucke their fethers for to make hats, garnishe bucklers, swordes of woodde, and other things requisite, the which they doe commonly. The saide birdes are so priuie, that all the day they will sit vpon the trées, rounde about the wilde mennes lodgings. And when the night commeth, these birdes withdrawe them, some into the houses, and


some into the Woodes, but they faile not to retourne the next morowe, euen as our priuie or tame Doues or Pigeons, that will neastle in houses. They haue diuers other kindes of Popengayes differing in Fe∣thers the one from the other. There is one kinde more gréener than those that are brought into oure Coun∣trey,
 the which they name 
Aiouroub,
 others hauing on their heades blewe fethers, others all gréene, the which the wilde men doe name 
Marganas:
 there are none found gray as in 
Ginney,
 and in high 
Affrica.
 The 
Americanes
 kéepe all these birdes in their lod∣gings, but they are not taught to speake, as they are with vs, I meane being made priuie when they are yong, according to the custome of our elders, as 
Plinie
 sheweth in the tenth booke of his naturall Hi∣storie speaking of birds, where he affirmeth that 
Stra∣bo
 was the first that put birds into Cages, the which before had libertie to goe and come.
 The women in like maner nourishe some, the which they sette suche store by, that they call them their friends. Further∣more our 
Americanes
 doe learne these birdes in their language to aske for meale made of rootes. But they teache them most commonly to say and profer, that they must goe a warfare against their enimies, for to take them, and for to eate them, and other things. They will for no good giue them fruite to eate, nei∣ther great nor little,
 for they say that it engendreth a worme that pierceth their heart. There is a multi∣tude of other Popengayes that are in the wooddes, of the which they kill a great many with their arowes for to eate, and they make their nests in the toppes of trées, for feare of stinging beastes.


The time hathe bene, that these birdes were not knowne to the auncient 
Romaines,
 and other Coun∣treis of 
Europe,
 but euen since as some doe witnesse, that 
Alexander
 the great, sent his lieuetenaunt 
Onesecriteus
 into the Iland of 
Tabroba,
 who brought from thence a certaine number, and since they multiplied so wel, as well in the East countrey as in 
Italie,
 and chiefly at 
Rome,
 as 
Columella
 sayeth in his thirde booke, of the sayings of the elders, that 
Marcus Portius Cato,
 (of whome the life and Doctrine was an example to all 
Rome
), as he felte him selfe slaundered, sayd on a day to the Senate.


O Fathers ouerseene, O vvicked Rome, I knovv not I,
 
to vvhat dayes vve are falne, seing that I see in Rome such dissolute liuing, that is: for men to beare Popengayes on their handes, and to see the vvomen norishe in their deli∣ciousnesse, little dogges.


Well, let vs returne to our birdes, that are founde there of an other kinde, and more straunger, as that birde named 
Toucan,
 of the which we haue before spo∣ken, all differing from the coloure of those of oure 
Hi∣misperie,
 as may be knowne by these before rehearsed, and of many others, of which I haue brought home the bodyes garnished with fethers, some yellow, red, gréene, purple, Azure, and of many other colours, the which wer presented to the king as singular things, that was neuer séene with vs in our realme. There resteth now to des∣cribe and set forthe certaine other kinde of birdes being rare and straunge. Among the which there is found one kind of the like greatnesse and colour, as litle crowes, sa∣uing that before their breast, they haue a spot as red as bloud, & they are named 
Panon,
 his bil colored like ashes, which bird liueth with no other thing, then w
c
 a kinde of


Palme named 
Ierahuua,
 there are another kinde found like to oure Merlions, as redde as Dragons bloud, the which in their language they name 
Quiapian,
 there are another kinde of the greatnesse of a litle Munkey, a birde so named,
 the which is all blacke, liuing after a straunge maner. When he is ful with Ants, and another little worme that he eateth, he wil flie to some little trée, and there wil flutter from one braunch to another with∣out ceasing: the wilde men name it 
Annon.
 Among al the rest of the birdes that are there to be séene, there is found another kinde that the wilde men will not by no meanes kill nor hurt:
 this birde hath hir voyce very pitifull, and these poore men say, that hir song causeth them to remē∣ber their friends that be dead, thinking that this birde is sent by them, bringing to them good happe and fortune, and naughty lucke to their enimies. This bird is no big∣ger than a stocke Doue, being coloured like to ashes, and liuing with a kinde of fruit, of a trée that they name 
Hi∣uourahe.
 I will not yet forget another birde named 
Go∣uanbuch,
 the which is no bigger than a great Flie, the which for all that it is little, is so faire to sée too, that it is vnpossible to sée a fairer: his bill is somewhat long and slender, and his coloure grayishe, and althoughe to my iudgement it is the least birde liuing vnder the skye, ne∣uerthelesse it singeth very well, and pleasant to heare. I omit héere the water birdes, as well of the freshe water, as of the salte, which are all variable to those that are in our Countrey, as well in proportion of body, as diuer∣sitie of fethers. I doubt not Reader, but those that haue written of the kindes and properties of Birdes, will finde these things very straunge that I haue rehearsed, but without shame it may be reputed to their ignorance,


being ignorant of these Weast partes, and also the small knowledge that they had of strange things. This there∣fore shal suffice thée which I haue truely gathered of the strange birdes that are in 
America,
 or 
Fraunce Antar∣tike,
 for the tyme that we dyd there remayne.






Of Veneson and wilde beastes that these wilde men take Cap. 49.


I Thinke it necessarie gentle Reader, séeing that I haue treated of strange Foules, somewhat to speke as tou∣ching the wilde beastes that are founde in the woodes, and hills of 
America,
 and also to shewe how the inhabi∣tantes of the countrey take them for their nourishment. I remember that I haue sayde in some place,
 that they nourish no domesticall beasts, but there are in the woodes greate quantitie of wilde beastes, as Hartes, Hyndes, wilde Bores and others. When these beastes straye a∣broade to séeke their liuing, they will make a déepe hole couered ouer with leaues, in the place where the beaste doth most frequent, the which is made so cunningly that with greate payne shall he escape. And they wil take him aliue or kill him in that hole sometymes with their ar∣rowes. The wilde Bore semeth to me more dangerous, he is altogether lyke to the wilde Bores in 
Fraunce,
 but more fiercer and more dangerous, and hath the tooth more longer and more apparant: he is altogether blacke and without tayle, moreouer he beareth a vent on his backe lyke to a sworde fish.
 This wilde Bore will make a fearful noyse, also ye shal here his téeth make a noise to¦gether when he is féeding or otherwise: the wilde men on a tyme brought vs one bounde, the which notwithstan∣ding escaped in our presence: the Harte and the Hinde


haue not their beare so smoth and euen, as with vs, but more rougher and longer,
 the Hartes haue their hornes more shorte than oures, the wilde men set much by these hornes, for bicause that after they haue pierced their chil∣drens lippe,
 they put most commonly into the hole a piece of Hartes horne for to increase it, thinking that therein is no poyson nor danger, but to the contrarie, it letteth and kepeth that at that place of the lyppe there will en∣gender no euill. 
Plinie
 sheweth that a Hartes horne, is a remedie against poyson. Also Phisitions put thereof a∣mong Medicins that are cordiall, as a comforte to the stomacke, as Iuorie and others: the smoke of this horne burned hath power to driue awaye Serpentes. Some will say, that the Harte hath euery yeare newe hornes, and casteth hir olde ones, and when he is without his hornes, he hideth himselfe. The elders haue taken it for an yll signe for a man, to méete a Deare, or a Hare, but we thinke the contrarie: also the same superstition is foolish and repugnant to our Religion. The 
Turkes
 and 
Arabians,
 are at this day in that error. To this pur∣pose: if our wilde men take an opinion he thinketh it true and it shalbe harde to perswade them the contrarie, the which is, hauing taken a Buck or a Doe, they dare not beare it into their houses, before that they haue cut of the haunches and the legs behinde, thinking that if they shoulde beare it with the foure quarters, it woulde take from them and from their children the meane to take their enimies in running, beside many other foolish opinions, whereof their head is ful. They haue no other assurance thereof, but that their greate 
Charaibe
 shewed them so, as their 
Pages
 and false Seductors doe affirme. They will dresse theyr Venison by péeces, but with the skinne, and after it is ynough it shall be distributed to


euery housholde, that inhabite vnder one roufe alto∣gether, as schollers in colledges, they will neuer eate the flesh of no rauening beaste, or that doeth féede on vn∣cleane things, be he neuer so priuie, but they will not force to kepe priuie such a beaste, as one which they name 
Coary,
 as greate as a Foxe,
 hauing the moosell a foote long, blacke like a Molle, and little lyke the moosell of a Ratte, hir heare rough, a sclender tayle lyke to the tayle of a wilde Cat, spotted white and blacke, hauing eares lyke a Foxe. This is a raue∣nous beaste, and lyueth of praye or spoyle, about the water side. Furthermore there is founde kinde of Fesantes, as greate as a Capon,
 but blacke fethe∣red, onely the heade which is graye, hauing a little red combe, hanging lyke a 
Turkie
 Henne and redde féete. Also there are Partriges, named in their lan∣guage 
Macouacanna,
 that are greater than oures.
 Also there is founde in 
America,
 greate quantitie of those beastes which they name 
Tapithire,
 the whiche is much desired for his deformitie. Also the wilde men folowe them at the chase, not onely for the flesh whiche is very good, but also for the skins, with the whiche they make bucklers that they vse in the warres, and the skinne of this beaste is so strong and tough that a Crosbow can skant pierce it, and they take them as they doe the Harte or the wilde Bore,
 of the which we spake euen nowe. These beastes are of the height of a greate Asse, but they haue a greater necke, and the heade lyke the heade of a yong Bull of a yeare olde, the téeth sharpe and cutting, neuerthelesse he is not dange∣rous. When she is chased, she maketh no other resi∣stence, but to flée away, séeking some conueniente place for to hide hir, running more swifter than a Harte,


she hath no tayle, but a very little one of a finger length, the which is without haire, & of such beasts without tayle there are found a great nūber, she hath clouen féete, with a very long horne almost as much before as behinde, his beare is browne colour lyke some Mules and Oxen in our countrey. And for this cause the Christians that are there, name such beastes Kine, not differing much from Kine, sauing onely she wanteth hornes: and truely to my séeming it is as lyke an Asse as a Cow. For there are fewe beastes of diuers kindes that be lyke in al pointes, without some greate difference.
 As also fishes that we haue sene in the sea on the coaste of 
America,
 one among the others had the head like a Calf, and the body slender. So that in this ye maye sée the industrie of nature, that hath altered the beasts according to the diuersitie of their kindes, as wel on the lande as on the water.






Of a tree named Hiuourahe. Cap. 50.


I Will not by no meanes leaue out for his excellencie and secretnesse, a trée named of the wilde men 
Hyuou∣rahe,
 which is as much to say as rare a new. This trée is of a highe stature, hauing the barke shining lyke sil∣uer, and within halfe redde. It hath almost the taaste of salt, the which I haue many tymes tasted, the barke of this trée hath a maruelous propertie among al others: al∣so it is in such reputation among the wilde men, as the woode 
Gaiac:
 also some think it to be very 
Gaiac,
 y
e
 which I denie, for it is not to the purpose, that all that hath the like propertie that 
Gaiac
 hath, is 
Gaiac.
 Notwithstāding it serueth in stede of 
Gaiac
 to the Christians, for the wild men are not so subiect to this common disease, of y
e
 which


we wil speake in another place more at large: the maner to vse it is this, they take a quantitie of the barcke, the which giueth milke when it is separated from the woode, the which being cut in little péeces,
 they make it to boyle in water the space of thrée or foure houres, till that the colour be changed lyke claret wyne, & of this they drinke the space of fiften or twentie dayes continually, making or keping a little diet, which helpeth well as I do vnder∣stande. And the sayd barcke is not onely good for the sayd affection, but to all diseases for to bring out ill humors, of the which in lyke maner vse our 
Americans
 in their diseases: and besides,
 this drinke is pleasant to drinke in your ful health. Another singular thing there is in this trée bearing fruite of the greatnesse of a little prune, as yellow as fine Angell Golde. And within it, is a little nut very pleasant and swet, being good for sicke folke to dis∣gest. But another thing is peraduenture strange and al∣most incredible to those that haue not sene it, that is, that it beareth not fruite, but from fiften yeare to fiften yeare: some woulde haue made me beleue, from twentie yeare to twentie. But I hearde the contrary, being sufficiently enformed of the anciente people of the countrey. I haue caused them to shewe me one, and he that shewed it me, sayde that in his lyfe tyme, he had eaten but thre or foure tymes of the fruit. I remember of the good fruit of the trée named 
Loth,
 of which the fruit is so pleasant, as 
Homer
 sheweth, that after that 
Scipions
 men had tasted,
 they for∣ced not but forgat to returne to their shippes to eate any other meates or fruites. Furthermore there are trées that beare 
Cassa,
 but it is not so excellent as that of 
A∣rabia
 and of 
Egypt.








Of a tree named Vhebehason and of the hony Bees that frequent it. Cap. 51.


GOing on a day vnto a village distant from the place whereas was our remayning a ten leagues, being in my company fiue wilde men, and a Christian to interpret, I was myndefull to beholde on all sides the ttées, of the which there were diuers sortes, among the which I stayed to beholde that of the which I minde to speake,
 the which to sée to, woulde be iudged to be an ar∣tificiall woorke, and not of nature. This trée is very hye the braunches passing one with in another, the leafs like the leafes of a Colwoort, euery braunche laden with his fruite, the which is a foote long. Therefore asking one of the company, what kynde of fruite it was, he she∣wed me and byd me beholde a company of flyes or honey Bées about the same fruite, the which then was gréene, with the which these honey Bées doe lyue and nourish them selues, of the which Bées there were a greate num∣ber in a hole that was in the trée, whereas they made honey and waxe. There is twoo kyndes of the honey Bées,
 one kynde are as greate as oures, the which com∣meth not onely but of good smelling Floures, also theyr honey is very good, but their waxe not so yellow as oures: there is another kinde halfe so greate as the o∣thers, their honey is better than the others, and the wilde men name them 
Hira,
 they lyue not with the others food, which to my iudgemente maketh their waxe to be as blacke as coales, and they make greate plenty, specially neare to the Ryuer of 
Ʋasses
 and of 
Plate:
 there is also


founde a little beaste named 
Hyrat,
 which is as much to say as a honey beaste, for that this beaste séeketh but all partes of this trée for to eate the honey that these flies make. This beaste is tauney, and as greate as a Cat,
 and knoweth the meane to drawe out the honey with his pawes, without touching the flyes, nor they hym. This honey is much estemed in that countrey for bicause that the wilde men giue thereof to their sicke people, mixed with meale, that they vse to make of rootes: as for the waxe, they put it to no vse, but to make their fe∣thers holde together about there heade, or else they occu∣pye it about their greate canes, in the which they put their fethers (the which) is the beste and chiefest trea∣sure that these 
Americans
 haue.


The aunciente 
Arabians
 and 
Egyptians,
 dyd vse to minister vnto the sicke, honey, more than any other me∣decine, as 
Plinie
 witnesseth. The wilde men that inha∣bit about the Riuer of 
Marignam,
 eate almost no other meate but honey, with certayne boyled rootes, the whiche honey in those parties droppeth downe from the trées and rockes, as 
Manna
 from Heauen (the which) vnto these Barbarous men is a good sustenance. To this agréeth very wel 
Lactantius
 in his firste booke of Deuine Institutions (as farre as I can remember) that 
Me∣lissus
 King of 
Creta,
 the which did firste sacrifice vnto the Goddes, had two daughters, 
Amalthea
 and 
Melissa,
 the which did nourish or féede 
Iupiter
 with goates milke,
 when he was a childe, and also with honey. So that the people of 
Creta,
 séeing and perceiuing that honey was a good sustenance, beganne therewith to féede theyr children. The whiche thing hathe caused this argu∣mente amongst the Poetes, to say that honey Bées dyd flye into 
Iupiters
 mouth. The whiche also being


knowen of 
Solon,
 did permit that they might transport al kinde of fruit out of the citie of 
Athens
 and many other victuals, except honey. Likewise the 
Turckes
 haue honey in as great estimation as is possible, thinking after this life that they shall goe into some pleasant places repleni∣shed with al kinde of sustenance, and chiefly of honey, the which opinion is fantasticall and foolish. Now to returne to our former trée, it is greatly frequented of these flies or honey bées, although that the fruite is not good to eate as many others are in that countrey, for bicause that it com∣meth not to his ripenesse, but is eaten of these honey bées as farre as I can perceiue. Moreouer this trée bringeth forth a red gumme,
 good for many things, as they knowe wel how to vse it.






Of a strange beaste named Haut. Cap. 52.


ARistotle
 and many others since his tyme haue with al their diligence and industrie enforced themselues to finde out the nature of Beasts, Trées, Hearbes, and other naturall things. Notwithstanding it doeth ap∣peare by their writings that they neuer had intelligence of 
America,
 for that it was not discouered before (nor in their tyme) neuerthelesse their writing hath giuen vs some comforte and contentation. Therefore if we set out here and shewe of those that are vnto vs strange and vn∣knowen, I trust it will not be taken in il parte, but to the contrary I truste it will bring some contentation to the Reader, that loueth to heare of rare and singular things, the which nature wil not shal be common to euery coun∣trey. This beaste for to be short, is asmuch disformed as is possible, and almoste vncredible to those that haue not


séene hir. They name hir 
Hau
 or 
Hauthy,
 of the great∣nesse of a greate Munky of 
Afeca,
 hauing a great belly, and the head almost in proportion of a Childes head. She being takē, casteth out sighes lyke a Chyld féeling payne, hir skyn colored lyke ashes, and rough lyke a litle Beare, hauing on each paw three nayles or clawes, a foure fingers long, and made lyke the fyn of a Carpe, with the which she climeth on Trees, abyding there more than on the ground. Hir tayle is thrée fin∣gers long, with lyttel heare thereon. Another thing there is worthy of memory, that this straunge beast was neuer séene eating, for the wylde men of the coū∣try haue watched hir to sée if she would féede, but all was in vayne, as they them selues haue shewed me. Bysides this I would neuer haue beleued it if I had not proued it, for a captaine of 
Normandy,
 and the Cap∣taine 
Mogneuylle,
 borne in 
Picardy,
 walking on a time in the great thick woods, dyd shoote with a Handgunne at two of these beastes, which were in the top of a trée, so that they fell bothe to the ground, the one sore hurt, & the other onely amased or astonned, the which was giuen to me for a present, so it was well kept the space of .xxvj. daies, and in the meane time it would neuer eat nor drinke, but always at one estate, but in the ende it was strangled by certaine Doggs that we brought thyther: some thinke that this beast lyueth onely with leaues of a certaine Trée named in their language 
Amahut,
 this Trée is the highest Trée in that countrie, bearing leaues very small and thin: and for that this beast is commonly in this Trée, she is na∣med 
Haut.
 Furthermore this beast is very louing to man, when she is tame, coueting to be always on his shoulders, as if hir nature were to remayne on high


places, the which doings the wylde men of the coun∣trey cannot abyde for that they are wicked, for this beast hath very sharpe clawes, and longer than the clawes of a Lyon, or any other beast that euer I saw. To these wonders I haue séene by experience certain 
Chameleons
 in 
Constantinople,
 that liued only with the ayre. And by this I knew it was of a truthe, that the wylde men shewed me as touching this beast: moreo∣uer if that this beast be abroade in the greatest raine that is,
 yet she will be always as drie as before. By this ye may sée the wonderfull works of nature, how that she can make things strange, great, incompre∣hensible, and wonderfull to mans iudgement. There∣fore it is a thing impertinent, to seke out the cause & reason, as many daily go aboute to doe. For this is a very secret of nature, y
e
 knowledge whereof is reser∣ued and kept to the onely creator: also of many others that might be héere alleadged, but for that it is not my argument, I omit it for to finish the rest.






Hovv these 
Americans
 kyndle Fyer: of their opinion of the drowning of the World, and of their Yron works. Cap. 53.


NOw y
t
 I haue shewed you of some singular plātes and vnknowne beastes not onely to vs, but as I think to all the world, for that this countrey was ne∣uer knowne nor discouered but of late daies, being minded to make an ende of this discourse of 
America,
 I will shew you the straunge maner and practise that these Barbarous people vse to get fyre, as well as we doe with a flint stone and a tinder boxe, the which in∣uention


truely is celestial,
 giuen by diuine prouidēce to man for his necessitie. Now these wilde men haue another meane, almost vncredible to get fire, greatly differing from our vse, that smite a flynt stone with an Yron. And ye must note, that they vse customably fire for their necessities as we doe, & rather more, for to resist the wicked spirit that tormenteth them, for thē which cause they neuer lye downe in what place so euer they be, but that they haue first fire lighted by their beds side. And therefore aswell in their houses or other where, be it in the forest or in the fieldes, whereas they are constrained to remaine a long time, as when they go a warfare or hunte for Venison, they beare commonly with them their instrumentes to make fire. Therefore they will take two stickes vn∣equal, the one which is the least shalbe a two foote long or thereaboute, made of a certaine drie wood, hauing a rinde or pith, the other somewhat more longer. He that will make fire, will lay the lesser sticke downe on y
e
 ground pierced through y
e
 middest, y
e
 which he holding with his féete, wil put the ende of the other sticke in∣to the hole that is in the other, with a littell cotton and dried leaues, then with turning of the stick, there engendreth such a heate, that the leaues and cotton begin to burne, so that by this meanes they light fire, the which in their language they name 
Thata,
 and the smoke 
Thatatyn:
 and this maner or way to make fire so subtilly, they say came by a great 
Charaibe,
 more than a Prophete, the which taught it to their Elders, with other things also, of which they before had no intelligēce or knowledge. I know wel there are ma∣ny fables, as touching y
e
 inuention of fire.
 Some say y
t
 certaine pastors or shepherds were y
e
 first y
t
 inuēted to


make fire, after the maner that these wilde men vse, with certaine wood, being destitute of Yron and flint stone. By this we may euidently know, fier commeth neither of stone nor Yron,
 as 
Aphrodisius
 disputeth in his probleames. 
Dioderus
 writeth, y
e
 
Ʋulcan
 was y
e
 first inuenter of fier, the which for this respect was elected King by the 
Egiptians.
 Also the wylde men are almost of this opinion, the which before this inuention of fi∣er,
 did eate their meates dried in the Sunne. And this knowledge was brought to them, as I haue before shewed, by a great 
Charaibe,
 one night in their sléepe after a great deluge of waters, (the which) they main∣taine to haue ben in times past, although they haue not memoriall by writing, but onely from age to age, so that they wil beare in memory things foure or fiue hundreth yeares past, the which is to be maruelled at. And by this meanes they are very curious to teach & instruct their Children things done and past, which are worthy of memory. The auncient men after their sléepe in the night, doe no other thing but declare auncient stories to the young men, so that to heare them, you will say they are Preachers or Readers of Lectures: now say they, the water was so exceding great in this Deluge, that it couered the highest moū∣taines in that countrey, so that all the people were drowned, the which they tell of a truthe, and beleue as stedfastly as we doe, that which was in 
Noes
 time, that is read of in holy Scripture. Neuerthelesse it is easy for them to fayle, considering they know nothing but by memory, and as they heaue heard sayd of theyr Fathers.
 Also they number by stones or other lyke things, for otherwise they cannot number, but onely to fiue, and they count y
e
 moneths by y
e
 Moones, (as we


haue before made some mention) saying it is so many Moones since I was borne, and so many Moones since the Deluge was, the which tyme faithfully con∣sidered, commeth to a fiue hundreth yeares. They affirme and stifly stande in opinion of their Deluge. And if ye say the contrary, they wil efforce by certain arguments to sustaine the contrary. They say after that the waters were gon back & retired, there came a great 
Charaibe,
 the greatest that euer was among them, that brought thither a people from a far coun∣trey, that people being naked as they are at this day,
 the which hath since so multiplied, that of them they say they are descended. It séemeth to me not repug∣nant to reason, that there hath ben countreys drouned since 
Noes
 time, (throughout the whole world) but se∣ing we haue none but that the holy Scripture she∣weth, I will let it passe.
 Therefore let vs returne to these wilde mens fire, the which they vse for many things, to rost and séeth their meates, to burne downe Trées, vntill that they founde since the meanes to cut wood with stones, and now of late days with Yron, the which they haue learned of the Christians that haue gon thether. I dout not that 
Europa,
 and other countreys haue ben without Yron. But 
Plinie
 writeth in the seuenth booke of his naturall history,
 that 
Deda∣lus
 was the first inuenter of yron work, or forge, with the which he forged him selfe a wedge, an axe, a saw, & nayles. Notwithstanding 
Ouid
 in the eight booke of his 
Metamorphosis,
 saith, that one named 
Pedris,
 of the kindred of 
Dedalus,
 inuented a saw like to the finne of a fishe. And of that kinde of fishe (passing at our return vnder the 
Equinoctiall
 lyne,) we tooke one that had the fynne vpon y
e
 back, aboue a foote long. Therefore these


wylde men desiring y
e
 vse of yron worke of late days, for to serue their necessities, haue learned to forge, being first instructed by Christians.






Of the Ryuer of Vases, likewise of certaine beastes that are found thereabout. And of the lande named Morpion. Cap. 54.


THis Riuer of 
Ʋases,
 being there so much estemed as 
Charanta Loyre,
 or the Riuer of 
Sayne,
 being twenty fiue leagues from 
Ienaria,
 where we did re∣mayne, and where as at this day doe inhabit French∣men, is much frequented, aswell for the habundants of good Fish, as for the Nauigation and other things necessarie. This floud watereth a great countrey, as∣well the hylls, as the plaine. In the which is founde a certaine Myne of Golde, the which bringeth no great profit to the owner, for bicause that by the fire, it con∣sumeth almost all into smoke. There about are many Rocks, and likewise in many other places of 
Ameri∣ca,
 the which beareth great quantitie of wedges, shi∣ning like fine Golde, but not so fine as those of the East countrey, also other littell shining stones. There are founde no Rubies, Diamonds, nor other riche stones: besides this, there is great plentie of Marbell and Iasper stones. And in the sayed place I hope may be founde Mynes either of Golde, or Siluer, the which as yet we dare not vnder take, bicause the eni∣mies are neare hand. In those hills are séene rauishing beasts, as Lybards, wilde Stags, but no Lyons, nor


Wolues. There is also another kynde of beast that the inhabitants name 
Cacuycu,
 hauing a beard on the chin lyke a Goate. This beast is greatly inclined to lechery. Also there is founde another kynde of yellow beast named 
Sagauius,
 not onely in this place,
 but in other places, y
e
 wyld men chase them for to eate them. And if they perceiue that they are followed, they wil get their young ones on their necks, and runne their ways. Of the former beasts there are grey and black ones in 
Barbaria,
 and at 
Peru,
 lyke to the colour of a Fox. There are found no Apes as in 
Africa,
 but to the contrary, there are founde great number of 
Tattons,
 that are beasts armed, of the which some are of the greatnesse and height of a great pigge, the others lesse, and this much will I say by the way, their flesh is ten∣der and pleasant for to eate. As touching the people of that countrey, they are more warrelyke than in any other place of 
America,
 bicause they border their eni∣mies, the which forceth them to excercise the fears of warre.
 Their King in their language is named 
Quo∣niambec,
 the most feared and redouted that is in all the countrey, and so is he martial and a worthy warrier▪ And I think that neuer 
Menel
us
 King and 
uider of the Grecians Army, was euer so feared nor redouted of the 
Troyans,
 as this King is of his enimies. The 
Portingalls,
 feare him aboue all others, for he hath cau∣sed many of them to die. Ye shall sée his palaces which in a lodging made of purpose; but yet like to y
e
 others, hanged without rounde aboute with 
Portingalls
 heade. For it is the custome to cary away the heads of their enimies, and to hang them at their lodgings.


This King hauing knowlege of our comming, came straightways to sée vs at the place where we were, &


there remained the space of eightene dayes, occupying the most parte of the tyme, specially thrée houres, to recite and tell his victories and noble actes against his enimies. Moreouer, threatning the 
Portingals,
 with certaine iestes and countenances, whome he named in their language 
Peroes.
 This king is the most renou∣med of all the countrey, his village & land is great: for∣tified all about with earth, planting therein certaine peces of Artillary, as Fauconnets, that he hath won from the 
Portingales.
 As touching townes & houses of stone, there is none, but as I sayd before, they haue lod∣gings very long & broade, the which at the beginning was not had, for the people that then were, did so little esteme to be in sauegard, y
t
 they forced not for walled Townes, nor strong holdes, but they wandered a∣broade, as doe the wilde beastes, without hauing any certaine place for to take their rest, but they rested thē euen in that place where the night ouertooke them, without feare of any theues, y
e
 which the 
Americans
 doe not though they be very wylde. Now to conclude, this King of whome we speake, thinketh him selfe ve∣ry great, & hath nothing else to rehearse, but his great∣nesse, reputing it a great glory & honor, to haue made to die many people, and to haue eaten them by and by, yea to the number of fiue thousand as he sayd. I can∣not remember that there hath ben the lyke inhuma∣nitie,
 as is in this people. 
Plinie
 sheweth that 
Iulius Caesar
 in his battailes as it is iudged, hath slaine nintie two thousand & eleuen hundreth men. And there are shewed of many other warres & great slaughters, but they haue not eaten one another. Now to our pur∣pose: this King and his subiects are in continual warre


with the 
Portingalles
 of 
Morpion,
 and with the wylde men of the countrey. 
Morpion
 is a place bending to∣wards the Riuer of 
Plate,
 or to the straight of 
Mag∣nellan,
 distant from the lyne twenty six degrées, being subiect to the 
Portingales,
 so that the King of 
Portingale
 hath there a Lieutenant generall, with a great num∣ber of people of all estates, and slaues, whereas they behaue them selues so well, that there commeth from thence great profit to the King of 
Portingale.
 At the beginning they began to plant great quantitie of Canes to make Suger. But since they haue not great∣ly trauailed therein, but haue occupied them selues to a better worke, since that they haue found out Mynes of Siluer. This place hath greate quantitie of good fruite, with the which they make Conserues, after their maner, and chiefly of a fruite named 
Nauas.
 Among these Trées and fruites, I will rehearse one named in their language 
Cochine,
 bearing fruite as great as Pompion, the leaues lyke to a Baye trée, the fruit made lyke an Estryge egge, it is not good to eate, but pleasant to beholde when the trée is ful. The wyld men (besyde that they make thereof vessels or cups to drynk in,) they make a certaine mistery as straunge as is possible. After that this fruit is hollow, they fyll it with certaine graines of 
Myll,
 or such lyke, then with a stick hauing one ende in the grounde, the other ende comming thorough, being decked all ouer with fayre fethers, will kepe euery housholde after this sort in their house two or thrée of them with great re∣uerence, thincking these poore idolaters in handling and sounding this fruite, that their 
Toupan
 speaketh vnto them, and that by this meanes they haue re∣uellation of all, by the meanes of their Prophets,


so that they esteme and thinke therein to be some de∣uinitie. And they worship no other thing sensible, but this instrument that soundeth when it is handled. And for a rare and straunge thing I brought one of them home, the which I got secretly from one, with many skinnes of Birdes of diuerse colours, of the which I made present to 
Monsyer Nicolas
 of 
Nicolay,
 the Kings Geographer, a wittie man, and a louer, not onely of the antiquitie, but also of all vertuous things. And synce he shewed them to the King, being at 
Paris,
 in his house, who came of purpose to sée the booke that he caused to be printed of the Easte partes, and he shewed mée, that the King tooke great pleasure to sée such things for that they were vntyll then vn∣knowen. Moreouer there is plentie of Orenges, Citrous, Canes of Suger. To bée short, this place is very pleasaunt.


There is also a Ryuer not very great, whereas there are founde little Pearles, and great store of Fyshe, chiefly of one kynde,
 the which they call 
Piraipouchi,
 which is as much to say as naughty Fishe: it is mar∣uellously disformed, bréeding or ingendrieg on the backe of a dogge Fishe, and being young followeth hir as his principall tutor. Furthermore in this place of 
Morpion,
 the which is inhabited by the 
Portingalls,
 are now nourished many domesticall beasts, the which the sayd 
Portingalls
 haue brought thether, the which enrytcheth greatly, and setteth out the countrey, be∣syde his naturall excellencie, and husbandry, the which is dayly more and more excercised.








Of the Ryuer of Platte, and the countrey adiacent. Cap. 55.


SEing that we are so farre in talke,
 I thinke it good to speake a word or twaine by the way of this faire floude of 
America,
 the which the 
Spaniards
 haue na∣med 
Platte,
 either for his largenesse, or for his Mines of Siluer that are founde hard by, the which in their language they name 
Platte.
 The wylde men of the countrey name it 
Paranagacu,
 which is as much to say, as Sea, or great congregation of water. This Riuer containeth of largenesse, twenty six leagues,
 being beyond the lyne, fiue degrées, and distant from 
Caape Sainct Augustine,
 six hundreth and seuenty leagues. I thinke that name of 
Platte,
 hath ben giuen by those that first did discouer it, for the reason before shewed. Also at their firste arriuall thether they receiued a maruellous ioye, thincking that this ryuer so large, hadde ben the straight of 
Magellan,
 the which they sought for to passe on the other syde of 
Ameryca,
 neuerthelesse knowing the veritie of the thing, they delibered to sette foote on lande, the which they dyd. The wylde men of the countrey were maruellously amazed, hauing neuer séene Christian before so to a∣borde their lymittes. But by succession of tyme, the 
Spanyards
 acquainted them with the wylde men, allu∣ring them by giftes and otherwyse, so that in view∣ing the Countrey, they founde many Mynes of Syluer, and after that then hadde thus viewed the Countrey, and marked the place verie well, then


they retourned hauing loden their ships with Erasill.
 With in a short time after they made redy thrée great shippes with men and munitions for to returne, be∣ing couetous of the Mynes, and being aryued at the same place where before they had ben, they prepared their skiffes for to take land. First y
e
 Captaine, hauing with him foure score Souldiers, for to withstande the wylde men of the countrey, if that they had made a∣ny insurrection. But the wylde men at their arriuall fled héere and there of purpose, to catch the 
Spaniards
 in their danger,
 so that when they were landed, there came vpon them thrée or foure hundreth of the wylde men, which in their fury and rage lyke hungry Lyons, they kylled and deuoured, as their custom and maner is, and afterward they shewed their bones, legges and armes, vnto the rest of the 
Spanyards
 that were in their Ships, threatning them with the lyke, if that they dyd descend on lande: the which things were shewed to me by a 
Spaniard
 that was in one of the shippes. Also the wylde men of the countrey wil shew thereof, as a thing worthy of memory, when it is in their myndes.
 After this, the 
Spanyards
 returned a∣gaine thether with a bande of two thousande men, with other shippes, but for bicause that they were af∣flicted with sicknesse,
 they could attempt nothing. But afterwarde the Captaine 
Arual,
 in Anno. 
1541.
 hauing with him onely two hundreth men, made a voyage thyther,
 hauing also with him a fiftie Horses, where∣with he vsed such policie, that he made the wylde men of the countrey afrayde, which thought that these Horses hadde ben deuouryng beastes, (for to them they were vnknowne,) this being done, hée caused his men to bée armed with bright shining Armour,


hauing painted vpon their Harnies many dreadfull Images, as heads of Lyons, Leopards, Beares, Wolues, and such like, with their mouthes gaping, & figures of horned deuils, y
e
 which sight did so affraie y
e
 wilde inhabitants of the countrey, y
t
 they fled away, & by this meanes they were driuen out of theyr coun∣trey, so that the 
Spaniards
 remained there Lordes and Maisters, beside many other lands adiacent, that since they haue conquered euen to 
Moluques
 in the Ocean, to the West of the other coast of 
America,
 so that at this day they haue in possession a great deale of lande about this fayre Riuer whereas they haue builded Townes & holds. And some of the wylde men adiacēt, are reconciled with them, and become Christians, True it is that about a hūdreth leagues beyond, there are other wylde men that make warre with them, be∣ing stoute men and of great stature,
 almost like Gy∣ants. And they liue with littell other foode than hu∣maine fleshe as the 
Canibals.
 This kinde of people go so swyftly on foote; that they will easely take wilde beastes in their chase: they liue longer than any of the other wilde men doe, as a hundreth and fiftie yeares, and the other lesse, they are very prone and subiect to that damnable sinne of lechery, haynous before God, the which I omit, not onely for the respect of this coū∣trey of 
America,
 but also many others.
 These Giants make warre aswell with the 
Spaniards
 as the wilde men about them. Now to our purpose. This Riuer of 
Platte
 with the countrey adiacent, is now very riche aswell in Siluer as in stones: this Riuer swelleth or encreaseth certaine daies in the yeare as doeth 
Aure∣lana
 that is at 
Perou,
 and 
Nyll
 in 
Egipt.
 At the mouth of this Riuer there are many little Ilands, of the which


some are inhabited, the others not: this countrey is ve∣ry full of Hylls and Mountaines, from the 
Caape 
S. Mary,
 vnto the white 
Caape,
 specially that towardes Saint 
Helenes
 point, distant from the Riuer 
.65.
 lea∣gues, and from thence to 
Arnes Govvrdes .30.
 leagues, then from thence to 
Basseas,
 to the other land so named bicause of the great valleis that there are. And from 
Basseas
 to the Abbey of 
Fonda .75.
 leagues. The rest of the countrey hath not ben frequented of christians, ex∣tending to the 
Caape 
Saint Dominik,
 or 
Caape 
Blanke,
 and from thence to the 
Promentary
 of the eleuen thou∣sand Virgins 
.52.
 degrées and a halfe beyond the 
Equi∣noctial,
 and thereby is the straight of 
Magellan,
 of the which we mynde hereafter to speake.


As touching the flatte countrey, it is at this present very fayre, by an infinit number of Gardens, Foun∣taines and Riuers of swete fresh water, in the which are great plenty of very good Fish. And to the said Ri∣uers, there haunteth a kinde of beast, that the wylde men name in there language 
Saricouiemia,
 which is as much to say, as fine or daintie beastes; the which beast remaineth more in the water than on the land, and is no bigger than a little Cat. The skynne of this beast which is intermedled with gray; white and blacke, is as fine and smooth as veluet, his féete made like the féete of a water Foule. And as for his flesh, it is very pleasant and good for to eate. More ouer, in this coun∣trey toward the straight, there are many strange and monstrous beastes, but not so cruell as in 
Africa.
 And to conclude, this countrey now is brought to so good a forme, that it would not be taken for a strange countrey: for the wylde men of the countrey haue inuented of late days by the meanes of Christians,


artes and sciences very ingeniously, so that they may be a very spectacle to many people of 
Asia,
 and of our 
Europe,
 I meane of those that curiously obserue and kéepe the damnable law of 
Mahomet,
 and other fonde and deuilish Doctrine.






Of the straight of 
Magellan,
 and of 
Daryen.
 Cap. 56.


SEing that we are come so neare to this notable place, it shall not be out of the way to write some∣what thereof. Now this straight, called in Greke 
Poeidinos,
 as the West betwene two landes, named in Greke 
Istmas,
 a straight or a pointe of lande betwene two waters, as that of 
Daryen
 confineth 
America
 to∣ward the South, and there seperateth with an other land discouered but not inhabited, euen as 
Gebaltar
 doeth 
Europe
 with 
Africa,
 and that of 
Constantinople
 doeth 
Europe
 with 
Asia,
 being named the straight of 
Magellan,
 by his name that first dyd discouer it,
 lyeng fifty two degrées and a halfe beyonde the 
Equinoctiall,
 contayning of bredth, two leagues by one only height straight East and West, two thousand two hundreth leagues from the North to the South, furthermore, from the 
Caape
 of 
Essead,
 which is at the entring of the straight, vnto the other South Sea seuenty foure lea∣gues, vntill the first 
Caape
 or 
Promentary,
 which is for∣tie degrées. This straight hath ben long time desired and sought, more than two thousand, eight hundreth leagues, for to enter by this straight into the Sea of 
Magellan,
 to attayne to the Ilandes of 
Moluques.


Americus Vestucia,
 one of the best Pylots that


euer was, hath coasted almoste from 
Ireland
 vnto the 
Cape
 of Saint 
Augustin,
 by the commaundement of the king of 
Portingale
 the yeare 
.1501.
 And since another Captaine the yeare 
.1534.
 sayled vnto the Region na∣med of Gyants. In this Region betwene the Riuer of 
Platte,
 and this straight, the inhabitaunts are very mightie, named in their language 
Pategones,
 Giants, bicause of their high stature, & forme of bodies. They which first discouered this countrey, tooke one of them finely, being twelue foote long, who was so vneasie to holde, that 
.25.
 men had inough to doe about him, and for to kepe him it behoued them to bynde his féete and hands in their shippe, notwithstanding they could not kepe him long aliue, but for sorow & thought (as they saye) he died for hunger. This Region is of lyke tem∣peratnesse as 
Canada
 and other countries néere to our 
Pole,
 and therefore the inhabitants are clothed with the skynne of a certaine beast named in their speach 
Su,
 which is as much to say, as Water, for bicause (to my iudgement) that this beast for the most part re∣maineth in the waters and flouds. This beast is a ra∣uenous beast, made after a straunge maner: besides this if she be chased or pursued, as the people of the countrey vse to doe, for to haue the skinne, she taketh hir yong ones on hir backe, and couering them with hir tayle that is thick and long, saueth hir selfe with running. Neuerthelesse the wild men of the countrey vse a policie for to take this beast, making a déepe pit in the grounde néere to the place where she maketh hir most residence, the which they couer ouer with gréene leaues, so that in running knowing not of this pit, the poore beaste falleth in with hir yong ones: and she seing hir selfe thus taken, in hir rage she kylleth


hir yong ones, and maketh such a terrible noyse, that she maketh the wylde men afrayde. But for all this, in the ende, they kill hir with darts and arrowes, and then they take hir skinne. Now to our purpose. This captain 
Fernandus
 of 
Magellan,
 a couragious man,
 be∣ing informed of the riches that might be found in the Ilandes of 
Moluques,
 as great quantitie of spice, gin∣ger, muske, gray amber, myrabolanes, rubarbe gold, pearles, and other richesse, specially in the Ilandes of 
Matel, Magian, Tidora,
 and 
Terenata,
 nere inough the one to the other, thinking by this same straight to find a way more shorter and necessarie, was minded to at∣tempt it, departing from the 
Canaries,
 to the Ilandes of 
Caape verde,
 keping his right course to the 
promon∣tarie
 of saincte 
Augustine
 eight degrées, beside the line,
 coasting neare to the Caape of Virgins, distant from the Equinoctial fiftie two degrées, néere to the straight before spoken. And after he had sailed the space of fiue dayes from the east right to the West on the Ocean, the which in swelling or flowing, caried them without sayle right to the South, the which made them ioyful & glad, although the most part of their men were dead by the incōmodities of the sea & the aire, but chiefly by hunger & thirst. In this straight are many fair Ilands, but not inhabited, the country about is very baren: ful of hilles and mountaines, and there is founde nothing but rauishyng beastes, birdes of diuers kindes, chiefly Estriges, woodde of diuers sorts, Cedres, and others. Also an other kynde of trée bearing fruite almoste like a cherie, but muche more pleasant to eate. This is the occasion, and how this straight was founde out: since they haue founde out an other waye, sailyng vpon a great riuer on the coast of 
Perou,
 in the land of 
Chagra,



foure lagues from 
Panana,
 and from the goulfe 
S. Mi∣chel .25.
 leagues. Not long after a captaine hauing sai∣led a certaine time vpon these floodes, aduentured to visite the countrey. And the king of the wylde men of that countrey,
 named in their language 
Therea,
 re∣ceiued hym very gently with presentes of golde and pearles, as certaine 
Spaniardes
 haue shewed me, that were in their cōpanie, although y
t
 in going on the land they were not without greate daunger, as well for the wilde beastes as other incommodities. They founde afterwarde a certaine number of the inhabitauntes of the countrey very wilde, and more to be feared than the first, to the which for the smal trust and confidence that they had in them, they offered and promised theyr seruice and friendshyp, specially to their King, whome they call 
Atorizo,
 of whome also they receyued cer∣taine presentes, as great pieces of golde, waying ten pounde. After that they had giuen to him also of suche things, as they had and thought would be moste to hys contentation, the which was small yron wourke, shir∣tes and gownes of small value: In the ende with good guide they came vnto 
Daryen,
 from thence they entred in, and discouered the south sea, on the other coast or side of 
America,
 in the which are the 
Moluques,
 wher as they hauing found y
e
 cōmodities before shewed, haue fortified them selues hard by y
e
 sea, so y
t
 by this straight of land, they haue without comparison shortened their way, without entring into the straight of 
Magellan,
 as well for their tradings as for other commodities. And since that time they trafike and trade to the Ilande of 
Moluques,
 the which are great, & at this present inhabi∣ted and conuerted to the christē faith, the which before was peopled with very cruel people, much more cruell


than those of 
America,
 which wer blinded in ignorāce, and hauing no knowledge of the great riches and tre∣sure that the countrey brought forth. About this place of the west sea, ther are foure Ilands desert inhabited (as they say) onely with 
Satyres,
 therfore they haue na∣med them Ilands of 
Satyres.
 Likewise in this same sea are found ten Ilands named 
Manioles,
 inhabited with wilde men, the which are of no religion, nere to the which there are great rocks that draw the ships vnto them, bicause of the yron wherwith they are nailed. For the which cause those that trade into that country there, are constrained to vse small ships or skiffes pin∣ned with wood for to eschae the danger of these rockes or adamant stone. Thus far as touchyng y
e
 straight of 
Magellan.
 Nowe as touchyng the other lande named 
Australl,
 which in costing y
e
 straight is left on the left hand, is not yet known of christiās, but only of an En∣glish pylote, being a man aswell séene & estemed in na∣uigation as any that can be founde, who hauing passed this straight, shewed me that he had descended on land so that I was bold to demaund of him what people did inhabit in y
e
 cuntrey, he shewed me y
t
 they wer mighty black men, which I know to be cōtrary: knowing that this land is almost of the height of England & Scotlād, for the countrey is of suche a temperatnesse, that it is subiect to winter with continuall frostes and snowes.






How that those that inhabite from the riuer of Plate vnto the straight of Magellan, are our Antipodes. cap. 57.


ALthough we se as wel in y
e
 sea as in riuers, many Ilandes diuided & separated from the maine land, yet neuerthelesse y
e
 element of y
e
 erth is estemed to


be one alone, and onely bodie, the whiche is no other thing than this largenesse of the earth, the which sée∣meth vnto vs all full for his great and wonderful am∣plitude. And such was the opinion of 
Thales Milesius,
 one of the seuen wise men of 
Grecia,
 and other philoso∣phers, as 
Plutarke
 sheweth. 
Oecetes
 the great philoso∣pher,
 and 
Pythagoras
 ordained .ij. partes of the world, that is, this wherin we inhabit which we name 
Hemis∣pheria,
 and that of the 
Antipodes,
 which we likewise cal the lower 
Hemispherie. Theopompus
 the historiograph sayth after 
Hermogenes,
 that 
Silenas
 shewed king 
Mi∣das,
 that there was an other world and globe of earth than this which we are in. 
Macrobius
 last of all, doth most amply treate of these two 
hemispheries
 and par∣tes of the earth, to whose works ye may haue recourse yf that ye minde to knowe farther on the opinions of Philssophie. But thus much must be known, whether that these two partes of the earth ought to be altoge∣ther separated as earths that differ, and so to be iudged to be two worldes, the which is not true, considering that there is but one element of the earth, the whiche wée must iudge, is cut by the sea in two parts, as 
Solin
 writeth in his 
polyhistor,
 speakyng of the people 
Hy∣perbores,
 but I had rather say, that the whole worlde is separated into two equall partes by this imagined circle which we name 
equinoctiall.
 Furthermore, if ye behold the image and figure of the worlde in a globe or a earde, ye shall clerely sée howe the sea diuideth the earth in two parts, not altogether equall, whiche are the two 
hemispheries,
 so named by the 
Grekes,
 one parte of the world containeth 
Asia, Affrica,
 and 
Europe,
 the other containeth 
America, Florida, Canada,
 and other regions comprehended vnder the names of the occi∣dentall


of West 
Indies,
 in the which many thinke our 
Antipodes
 to inhabite.
 I knowe well that there are many opinions of the 
Antipodes:
 some iudge and think that there are none, others that there are, and that they are those y
t
 inhabite the other 
Hemispherie,
 which to vs is hidde. As for me, I am of this aduise, that those that inhabit vnder the two Poles (for we haue shewed y
t
 they are inhabited) are 
Antipodes,
 one to y
e
 other. For example, those that inhabite the Northe, the neerer they drawe to the pole, the higher it is:
 the pole oppo∣site is abased, to the contrarye, so that it muste nedes be, that such are 
Antipodes,
 and the others, the farther they withdrawe to the Poles, approchyng to the 
Equi∣noctiall,
 are lesse 
Antipodes.
 Therefore I take for right 
Antipodes,
 those that inhabite the two Poles, and the two others taken directely, that is to wyt, Easte and West, and the others in the midst 
Anticthones,
 rather than 
Antipodes,
 to those that inhabit in 
Lima, Luzco, Eariquipa,
 or 
Perou,
 to those that aboute this greate floud 
Indus,
 in the countrey of 
Calicut,
 the Iland of 
Zei∣lan,
 and other landes of 
Asia,
 the inhabitants of the Ilands of 
Moluques,
 from whence the spices come, to those of 
Aethiopia,
 nowe called 
Ginney.
 And for thys reason, 
Plinie
 hath well spoken, that it was 
Tabroban,
 where as were the 
Antipodes,
 confinyng as many 
An∣tipodes,
 with 
Anticthones.
 For truely those that lyue in these Ilandes are 
Anticthones,
 to the people that in∣habite that parte of 
Aethiopia,
 takyng from the riuer of 
Nyll,
 vnto the Ilande of 
Meroa.
 Although that those of 
Mexicona,
 are directely 
Antipodes,
 to the people of 
Arabia, Felicia,
 and those that are at the endes of the Caape of good hope. Nowe the 
Greekes
 haue named those 
Antipodes,
 that goe with their féete ouerthwart


one ouer an other, as those of which we haue shewed. And 
Anticthones,
 those that inhabite a land diuided, as those whom they cal 
Anteci,
 as the Spanyards, Frēch¦men, and 
Almaynes,
 to those that inhabite nere to the riuer of 
Plate,
 and the 
Patagones,
 of the which we haue spoken in the former Chapter, whiche are nere to the straight of 
Magellan,
 are 
Antipodes,
 the others named 
Pateci,
 that inhabite one onely zone, as Frenchmen, and Almaines, contrary to those that are 
Antaeci.
 And although that these two proprely are not 
Antipodes,
 notwithstanding they are commonly called so, and many mixe them one with an other.
 And for this rea∣son, I haue noted that those of the 
Caape
 of good hope, are not to vs altogether 
Antipodes,
 but those whome they call 
Anteci,
 the which inhabite a lande not oppo∣site, but diuided, as those that are beyonde the 
Equi∣noctiall,
 to vs that are here, euen to come to the 
Anti∣podes.
 I doubt not but that many do mystake this ma∣ner of going of the 
Antipodes,
 which hath ben y
e
 cause that many haue not approued it.
 Also S. 
Augustine
 in the .xv. boke of the Citie of God. chap. ix. but he y
t
 wold diligently consider shal find it very easy to comprehēd. If it be so that the earth is round like a globe, hanging in the midst of the worlde, it must nedes be, y
t
 it be be∣holden of the firmament on all sides. Therfore we that inhabite the higher 
Hemispherie,
 as touchyng vs, we sée one part of the firmamēt to vs propre & particular. The others inhabiting the lower 
Hemispherie,
) we be∣ing to them superior) they se the other part of y
e
 firma∣ment which to them is appropried. There is like reson of the one as of y
e
 other: but ye shal note that these two 
Hemispheries
 haue one onely and common centrie in y
e
 earth. Thus much of y
e
 
Antipodes:
 now to our mater.








How these wilde men exercise husbandry and make gardens of a roote named Manihot, and of a tree that they name Peno absou. Ca. 58.


OVr 
Americans
 in the time of peace, haue litle o∣ther occupations but to make gardens,
 or when the time requireth, they are constrained to go to the warres, but some of them as we haue before she∣wed vse certaine trades, neuerthelesse necessitie con∣straineth them to labour the earth as we in our coun∣tries. And they in a maner folow the custome of the elders, who after that they had endured and eaten the fruites that procéeded from the earth without any la∣bour or industrie of man, so that being not sufficiente to nourishe and sustaine all that liued on the earthe, it caused rapines and inuasions, preparing ech one a cer¦taine portion of lande, which they separated by certain limites, and then among men began the state of the people and common weales.
 And thus our wylde men of 
America
 haue lerned to labour the earth, not with oxen and horses or other domestical beasts as we haue here, for they haue none such, but with the sweat and labour of their bodies, as the like also in other prouin∣ces, notwithstanding that which they laboure is very little, as certaine gardens distant from their houses about two or thrée leagues, where as they sowe only 
Myll,
 and no other grayne, but they plante certaine rootes, the which they gather two tymes a yeare, at Christmasse, whiche is their Sommer, when the Sun is in 
Capricornus
 and at 
Pentecost:
 this 
Myl
 is as great as a pease, commonly white and blacke,
 the herbe that it beareth is like to sea réedes. Nowe the fashions of their garden is after this sorte and manner; When


after that they haue cut seuen or eyght acres of wood, leauyng nothyng but the foote or body of the trée about a mans heygth, they put the fire therein, and burne it, and the grasse about it, beyng all in a valey or low countrey: they scratche the earth with certayne in∣strumentes of woodde, or of yron, since that they haue had the knowledge, then the women plant this 
Myll
 and rootes which they name 
Hetich,
 makyng a hole in the grounde with their fynger, as we plante Beanes in this countrey: To fatten and amende the earthe, they haue no practise, but it is frutefull inough of it selfe, beyng neuer lefte vntylled, as we do many lan∣des in our 
Europe.
 Notwithstanding, it is a wonderful thing that it will not beare oure corne, suche as wée haue and vse. I my selfe haue sometymes▪ sowed, for we caried corne with vs for to proue, but it would ne∣uer profite. And to my iudgement, it is not long of the grounde, but of some other litle vermine that ea∣teth it in the earthe: Neuerthelesse, those that are re∣maining there, may in tyme make a surer triall and experience.
 As touchyng oure 
Americanes,
 it is not to be maruelled, though they neuer had the vse of corne: For likewise in our 
Europe,
 and in other countreys, at the first men liued with such fruites as the earth brou∣ght forth of hir selfe without any mans labour. True it is that husbandry is verie auncient, as appeareth in Holie Scripture by 
Abell
 and 
Cain.
 But thoughe that they had corne since the begynning, yet they knewe not the vse therof. 
Diodorus
 writeth, y
t
 the fyrst bread was sene in 
Italy,
 being brought thither by 
Isis,
 Quene of 
Egipt,
 the whiche shewed the meane howe to grynde corne, and to bake bread: for before they dyd eate the fruites of the earth, as Nature brought them forthe,


whether that the earth was laboured or no: but that all men vniuersally on the earth haue liued like as do the brute beastes, it is rather a fable than a true story fained by Poets, and of suche as imitate them, as 
Vir∣gile
 sheweth in 
Georgicon.
 But I beleue rather the ho∣lie Scripture that maketh mention of 
Abell,
 and of his first fruites that he offered to God. Well the 
A∣mericanes
 make meale of those rootes that are called 
Manihot,
 which are as great as my arme,
 a foote and a halfe long, and they are writhen or crooked most com∣monly. And this roote is of a litle tree in height from y
e
 grounde aboute foure foote, the leaues are like to those which we call 
Patallionis,
 which are in number sixe or seuen at the ende of euery trée, and euery leafe halfe a foote long, & thrée fingers brode. Their maner to make this sustenaunce or meate is this: they bruse these roo∣tes either drie or gréene, with a large barke of a trée, garnished aboute with very harde stones: this beyng done, they make it hot in some vessell of earth on the fire with a certaine quantitie of water, so that it ga∣thereth into small lumpes, and it is very good when it is thus vsed, and a good nourisher. And ye shall vnder∣stande, that from 
Perou, Canada,
 and 
Florida,
 in all the landes and countreys betwene the Ocean and 
Magel∣lan,
 as 
America, Caniball,
 euen to the straight of 
Magel∣lan,
 they vse this kinde of foode, the which is very cō∣mon, and yet there is distant from the one end to the other more than two thousande leagues by lande, and they vse it with their fleshe and fishe as we doe breade. These wilde men vse a strange maner in their eating,
 for they neuer bryng their handes to their mouthes, but caste theyr meate into their mouthes more than a foote off, to the whiche they are verie apte. Also they


mocke christians that vse otherwise. All the labours aboute these rootes are remitted to the women, thyn∣king it not decent for mē to occupie them selues ther∣in.
 These 
Americans
 doe plant beanes, the which are all white and flatte, more large and longer than ours. Also they haue a kynde of white gourdes, not differing to those that grow in 
Turkey
 and 
Italy,
 they boyle them and then eate them with salte,
 the which salte is made with salt water boyled, when it is consumed to halfe, with an other thyng they make it tourne into salt.


Likewise with this salt and a kind of spice of graines, they make loaues of bread as byg as a mans heade, of the which many eate with fleshe and fishe, chiefly the women. Beside this, they mingle many times spice with their meale, not beaten to dust as we doe, but as it is gathered.
 Moreouer, they make bread with dried fishe very good to eate, with other things mingled with it, whiche I do not knowe: I will not forgette here a kinde of colewort leaues, almost like to the brode lea∣ues that growe on ryuers sides, the whiche they call 
Nenuphar,
 with an other kinde of herbe, growing like our thistles. Nowe there resteth to speake of a trée, which they name in their language 
Peno absou.
 This trée beareth a fruite of the greatnesse of a good bigge apple round like an egge, the which is not good to eate, but rather daungerous, as poyson. This fruite hath within sixe nuttes like our Almondes, but somewhat more larger and flatte, in the which is a kernel, which (as they say) is good to heale woundes and sores, when that they haue bene hurte in the warre with the Arro∣wes of their enimies or otherwise. I haue brought of them into 
France,
 which I haue giuen vnto my frends: the meane to vse them is this: First they draw out of


this kernell certaine oyle, the which they put vpon the wounde. The barke of this trée hath a very straunge smell, and the leafe always gréene, of the thyckenesse of a testorne, and made lyke the leaues of Pourslane. In this trée frequenteth a byrde, hauing a great bushe of feathers on hir head as yealowe as fyne golde,
 the tayle blacke, and the rest of hir feathers yealow and blacke, with some strikes of dyuers other coloures, redde aboute the chappes, betwéene the byll and the eyes lyke scarlette, and she kéepeth this trée onely for hir foode, whyche is littell wormes that she fyndeth in the sayde trée. To make shorte, leauyng many kyn∣des of trées, I wyll say thus muche, that there are fiue or sixe kinde of palme trées bearynge fruite, not as those of 
Aegypte,
 that beare Dates, for these beare none, but other kynde of fruites, some as great as an egge, the others lesse. Among the whiche palme trées,
 is that whyche they calle 
Gerahuua,
 a nother named 
Iry,
 the whyche beareth a nother kynde of fruite, dif∣fering: there is also that dothe beare their fruite all rounde, and as greate as a prune or damsyn, beyng of the like coloure when it is rype, the whiche be∣fore hath a taste lyke veriuyce: it beareth a whyte kernell of the greatnesse of a hasyll nutte, the which these wylde men doe eate. Thus muche as touchyng oure 
America,
 the whiche I haue thoughte good to sette oute after that I had knowne the secretes ther∣of, the whiche wée maye hereafter sette forth more at large. Lykewise of many trées, hearbes, and other secretes with their propreties, accordyng to the expe∣rience of the people of the cuntrey, the which we haue left out to auoyde prolixitie. Also we haue thoughte


good by the way somewhat to speake as touchyng the lande of Brasile.






Howe and after what sorte the lande of America was discouered, and Brasill wood founde: with many other trees sene no where but in that countrey. Cap. 59.


THis we know of a truth, that 
Americus Vesputia
 is the firste that discouered the mayne lande be∣twene the two seas,
 though not all the lande, but the moste parte. And since the 
Portingals
 many tymes being not content with their limits, haue alwayes ha∣zarded themselues to discouer and fynd out countreis, euen as they founde the cōmodities, and as they were intertained of the people of the countrey. They ther∣fore visiting the countreys, and séeking as the 
Troyans
 dyd in the lande of 
Carthage,
 they sawe diuers four∣mes and manners of feathers, with the whiche they dyd trade and traffike, specially redde ones, whiche were coloured, so that they were desirous to knowe the meane howe to make this coloure. The people of the countrey shewed them the Brasille trée, whyche they doe name in their language 
Oraboutan,
 and is very fayre to looke on, the barke therof is of a gray co∣lour withoute, and the woodde is redde within, and chiefly the harte, the whyche is more excellente than the reste, whereof they do occupie moste, so that then the 
Portingales
 broughte home their shyps laden there∣wyth. And synce that wée haue hadde the knowledge of yt, thereof is made a verie greate trade. The 
Por∣tingales
 can not abyde that any other people or Nation


should trade thether, for that they were the first that discouered that countrey which is of a truth. This bra∣sill trée beareth leaues like vnto boxe, so litle but very thicke, it rendreth no gumme as others doe, neyther beareth it any fruite: It hath bene better estéemed thā it is at this present, specially in the east countreys: at the first it was thought, that this was of that kinde of wood that the Quéene of 
Saba
 brought to king 
Salomon,
 as is shewed in the first booke of the Kings.
 Also the great Captaine 
Onesicritus,
 in a voyage that he made into the Ilande of 
Tabroban,
 lying in the Ocean sea, towarde the east 
Indies,
 brought a greate quantitie of this wood and other things requisite, the which his ma∣ster 
Alexander
 did highly commende and estéeme. As touching this Brasill, that whiche is on the side of the riuer of 
Ianaria, Morpion,
 and 
Caape de Fria,
 is better than that of 
Caniball,
 and on the coast of 
Marignan.
 When that the Christians are there for to laade Bra∣sill, the wylde men of the countrey cut it them selues, and sometimes they bring or carie it thrée or foure lea∣gues to the shippes. I leaue to youre iudgement their paine and trauel, and al for to get some poore or course wéede and shirt. Moreouer in that countrie is founde an other wood yellow, with the which some make their swordes. Likewise an other of the coloure of purple,
 wyth the which to my iudgement may be made faire and goodly woorkes. I am in doubte whether it bée that woodde whiche 
Plutarke
 speaketh of, saying that 
Caius Marius Rutilius,
 the first Dictatour of the publike weale among the 
Romanes,
 caused to bée drawne in a purple woodde a battayle,
 wherein the personages were not greater than my thrée fingers. And thys woodde was brought from hye 
Affrica.
 Furthermore,


there are founde other trées, of which the woodde is as white as paper,
 and very tender, and therfore the wild men sette not by them. The propertie of which trées I coulde not otherwyse learne, sauyng onely it com∣meth to my remembraunce of whyte woodde, wherof 
Plinie
 speaketh,
 the whiche he nameth 
Betula,
 white and tender, of the whiche were made the wandes that were borne before the Magistrates of 
Rome.
 And euen as there are found and sene diuers kynds of trées diffe∣ring in forme, color & other propreties, so in like ma∣ner is found diuersitie of grounde and earth, some fat∣ter than others.
 Also clay grounde, of the which they make earthen vessells, after their maner as we do for to eate and drinke. Thus much as touchyng our 
A∣merica,
 though not so much as I haue and might haue séene, but so much as I thought worthie to bee noted and written, for to satisfie and content the gentle good will of the louyng Readers, if that it please them to take as great pleasure and pacience to reade it, as I haue taken paines after so many trauailes and paines in this harde and daungerous voyage to sette it forth. I am sure that some will fynde this my discourse t
 long, others to shorte. Therefore I séeke to kéepe a meane to satisfie and contente euery mans desire.






Of oure departyng from Fraunce An∣tartike, or America. Capit. 60.


WE haue here before gathered together, and shewed amply and at large of these nations, the which of auncient Historiographers was


vnknowne. Nowe therefore after we had remained there in that countreye, as long as oportunitie dydde serue, and also needefull for the contentation of the mynde, we beganne to make prouision for oure re∣turne, beyng not mynded to remayne there any lon∣ger. Therefore vnder the conducte of 
Mounsieur Al∣bois
 the Countie,
 Captaine generall of the Frenche kings shyppes into 
America,
 a worthie Gentleman, and well séene in nauigation, as if all hys life time he had exercised it, beside other vertues. We toke a clean contrary way to that whiche we came, bicause of the windes that are propre to retourne: but oure returne was longer by fiue hundreth leagues than the waye we went, and more dangerous: so the last day of Ia∣nuarie at foure of the clocke in the mornyng, we toke shypping with those that caried backe the shippes, we sayled oute of the Riuer of 
Ianaria,
 into the greate sea on the other syde, drawyng towarde the Weste, lea∣uyng vpon the ryghte hande the coaste of 
Aethiopia,
 the whiche we coasted thytherwarde. At the whyche departure, the wynde was to vs very fauourable, but not of long continuaunce: for sodainly the winde dydde chaunge euen ryght a heade to the North, and Northwest, the whyche wyth the sea ragynge and vnconstant in those partes, kepte vs from our right course, castyng vs nowe here and there, vntyll at the last with greate difficultie, we discouered 
Cape de Fria,
 where as we came a lande at our first comming thyther. And agayne, we stayed there the space of eyght days, And the nynthe daye the Southe wynde beganne to blowe, the whyche dydde conducte vs nynetie Leagues into the Mayne sea, leauyng the lower countrey, and coastyng a farre off 
Mahouac,



bicause of the daungers. For the 
Portingals
 kéepe that quarter, and the wilde men, which vnto vs are bothe enimies (as I haue shewed) where as within these .ij. yeares, they haue founde Mynes of golde and syluer, which hath caused them to buylde in that place, and to strengthen them selues there to inhabite. Nowe we sailyng continually vpon the sea wyth greate perill, vntill we came to the heigth of 
Caape saint Augustine,
 the which to double we remained the space of two mo∣neths or therabout, beyng very great, lying farre out into the sea:
 And no maruell, for I know some of good memorie, that haue bene doublyng of this 
Caape
 thrée or foure moneths: and if the wynde had not bene fa∣uourable, we had bene in daunger to haue stayed lon∣ger, although there had hapned no other inconueniēce. This 
Caape
 is of length .8. leagues distant from the ryuer from whence we be departed .302. leagues. It entreth into the sea nine or tenne leagues at the least, and therfore it is as muche feared of the nauigants or sailers on that coast, as the Caape of good hope, on the coast of 
Ethiopia,
 the which for this cause they haue na∣med Lyon of the sea, as I haue alreadie, shewed: Or like to that which in the sea 
Aegee,
 in 
Acaia,
 the which is nowe called Moorelande. Also 
Caape S. Angell,
 the whiche also is very daungerous.
 This Caape was so named by those that first did discouer it, which was as some say, one Pynson, a Spanyarde. Also it is so mar∣ked in our Card 
Marins.
 This Pynson with his sonne haue maruellously discouered vnknowne countreyes, not before founde out. The yeare .1501. 
Emanuell
 kyng of 
Portingale
 sent him into the base 
America,
 for to find the straight of 
Forna,
 and 
Daryen,
 that they might passe more easier to 
Moluques,
 without going to the straight


of 
Forna,
 and 
Daryē,
 that they might passe more easier to 
Moluques,
 without going to y
e
 straight of 
Magellan.
 And they sayling on that coast discouered this fayre 
Promen∣tary,
 whereas setting foote on lande they found the place so fayre and temperate; although it be but .340. Degrées of longitude minute .0. and eight of latitude, mynute .0. that they there stayed, to the which place since are gone other 
Portingals,
 with a number of ships and people, and by succession of tyme, hauinge allured the people of the countrey by giftes, and pacified them, they made a holde named 
Castell Marin,
 & since they haue edified another néere vnto this named 
Fermanbow,
 trading there one with another. The 
Portingals
 laade cotton, wild beastes skynnes, spices, and among other things prisoners that the wild men of the countrey take in the warres of their enimies, the which they carrie into 
Portingall
 for to sell.






Of the Canibals as well of the mayne lande as of the Ilands, and of a tree named Acaion. Cap. 61.


THis greate 
Promentary
 being this doubled and af∣fronted with greate difficultie it behoued vs to at∣tempt fortune and to shorten our way as much as was possible, not keping farre of from the mayne land, chiefly ceasting somewhat néere to the Iland of 
S. Paule,
 and other little Ilandes not inhabited neere to the main lande, whereas are the 
Canibals,
 the whiche countrey deuideth the King of 
Spayns
 lande from the King of 
Por∣tingall,
 as hereafter shalbe shewed. Seing that we are come to these 
Canibals
 we will speake our worde. This


people from the 
Caape S. Augustine,
 and beyond, néere to 
Marignan,
 is the moste cruellest, and inhumayne peo∣ple that are in 
America.
 These imps eat most common∣ly humayne flesh, as we do biefe or mutton, & haue there∣vnto more appetite and delight: and this is of a truthe, that when they haue any of their enimies in their hands, it is hard to get them from them, for the great desire that they haue to eate them, like Rauening Lyons. There is no beast in the wildernesse neither in the desartes of 
A∣frica
 or 
Arabia,
 that longeth so sore or that is so gredie of humayne flesh, as these wild and brutish people. Also ther is no nation that can be acquaynted w
th them, neither Christians nor others: And none can trade into their countrey without leauing of pledges, so mistrustfull they are, thinking themselues of more credit than others. For this cause the 
Spaniards
 and 
Portingals,
 haue played them some ill tricks, in memorial whereof, whē that they may get any of them, God knoweth how they are handled, for there is no other way but death, and so to be eaten and deuoured of these imps. Therefore there is continuall warre betwene them and these people, and many Chri∣stians they haue deuoured. These 
Canibals
 haue on their lips,
 stones gréene and white as the other wild mē haue, but without comparison more longer, for they descende euen to their breast. Moreouer the countrey is fruitefull ynough, better than belongeth to such wicked beasts, for it beareth great quantitie of fruits, hearbes and whol∣some rootes, with a great nomber of trées, named by them 
Acaion,
 bearing a fruit as big as my fist, fashioned lyke a Goose egge: some of them therewith make a kind of be∣uerage, although the fruite is not good to eate, at the top of this fruite groweth a kynde of nuts, made lyke a Cun∣neys tayle, & the kernel within is very good to eate, after


it hath had y
e
 heat of the fier. The shel is very ful of oyle, hauing a sharpe taaste, with the which the wilde men maye make more store and plenty, than we can of our nuts: the leafe of this trée is lyke to the leafe of a peare trée, a little more pointed and red at the ende: the barcke of this trée, is tauney and bitter, the wilde men put this woode to no vse, for that it is somewhat tender and softe. In the Ilandes of the 
Canibals,
 whereas there is greate plenty of these trées, they cut the woode to burne, for that they haue little other wood, and also 
Gaiac.
 This much as touching this trée 
Acaion.
 There are also other trées whereof the fruite is daungerous to eate, among the which there is one named 
Haouay.
 Furthermore this countrey is full of hills & mountaynes,
 with good mynes of golde. There is a high and riche mountayne, where these wilde men get their gréene stones, that they beare at their lips, and therefore it is not vnpossible, but that there may be founde emerauldes and other riches, if this obstinat people woulde permit, that we might go in sa∣
egarde: lykewise, there is founde white Marbell,
 and blacke, Iasper, and Porphire. And in al this countrey from the 
Caape S. Augustine,
 vnto the Ryuer of 
Marig∣nan,
 they vse all one manner of liuing, as the others doe, at 
Caape de Fria:
 the same Riuer separateth the lande of 
Perou,
 from the 
Canibals,
 and hath in bredth at the mouth fiftene leagues or thereabout, with some Ilandes peo∣pled and riche in golde, for the wilde men haue founde, a meane howe to trye it, and to make broade rings lyke to buckles, and others, that they hang on their no∣strels, and on their chéekes, the whiche they carrie for magnificence. The 
Spaniardes
 say, that the greate Ry∣uer that commeth from 
Perou,
 named 
Aurelane,
 and this,


do méete: vpon this Riuer there is another Iland named the 
Trinitie,
 distant ten degrées from the lyne, hauing in length about .30. leagues, & in breadth about .8. leagues, the which is the richest Ilande that may be found in any parte, for that it beareth al kinde of mettals. But for that the 
Spaniardes,
 landing there many tymes for to bring it to their subiection and obedience, haue cruelly handled the inhabitantes, therefore they haue bene rudtly repul∣sed, and the better parte destroyed. This Ilande brin∣geth forth abundance of a certaine fruite,
 the trée where∣of is lyke to a Palme trée, with the which they make drinke. Furthermore, there is founde good 
Frankin∣sence,
 and 
Gaiac:
 lykewise in many other Ilandes néere to the mayne lande. Also there is betwene 
Perou,
 and the 
Canibals,
 many Ilandes named 
Canibals,
 some∣what néere to 
Zamana,
 of which the chiefest is distant from the Spanish Iland .30. leagues, al the which Ilands are vnder the obedience of a King, whome they call 
Sassi∣que,
 of his subiectes he is wel obeyed. The greatest Iland hath in length .60. leagues, and of bredth .48. rude and ful of mountaynes, almost comparable to the Iland of 
Corsa,
 in the which their King kepeth customably. The wilde men of this Ilande are mortall enimies to the 
Spaniards,
 after such a sorte, that they can by no meanes trade.


Also these people are vglie to beholde, hye minded, and couragious, very subiect to thefte, there are many trées of 
Gaiac,
 and another that beareth a fruite of the great∣nesse of an Egge, very fayre to behold, neuerthelesse it is venemous, therefore they temper therewith their ar∣rowes, that they vse to ayde them selues with againste theyr enimies in the iuyce or lykor of this fruite.


There is yet another, of the whiche the lykor that commeth forth is poyson, notwithstanding the roote


is very good to eate, and therewith they make breade as in 
America,
 although that the truncke, the branches, & the leaues do not greatly differ. The reason why this trée shoulde beare bothe sustenance and poyson, I leaue to the Philosophers to iudge & contemplate. Their vsage in warre is, as the 
Americans
 and other 
Canibals,
 of which we haue shewed.






Of the Riuer of Amazones, otherwise named Aurelane, by the which ye maye sayle into the countrey of Amazones, and into Fraunce Antar∣tike. Cap. 62.


WHilest that I haue pen in hande for to write of places discouered and inhabited beyonde our 
Equinoctiall,
 betwene the South and the West, for to bring things to light, and to giue more euident knowledge, I am determined to set out in writing a vo∣yage as farre, as difficile and hard and most dangerously aduentured of the 
Spaniards,
 as wel by water as by lande vnto the Territorie of the peaceable sea,
 otherwise called 
Mare Magellan,
 or the sea of 
Magellan,
 wheras are the Ilandes of 
Moluques
 and others. And for that ye shall note this better, ye shall vnderstande, that the King of 
Spayne
 hath vnder his obedience much lande in the West 
Indies,
 as wel in Ilands as mayn land at 
Perou
 & 
Ame∣rica,
 the which by succession of time he hath obtained and gotten, by which meanes at this day he receiueth great profit from thence. Now among others, a Spanish Cap∣tayne being in his princes behofe at 
Perou,
 minded on a day to discouer as wel by lande as by water to the Riuer of 
Plate,
 the which is distant from 
Caape S. Augustine.
 700. Leagues beyonde the line, and from the sayd 
Caape



to the Ilandes of 
Perou,
 about thrée hundreth leagues. This Captayne not waying the difficultie that there was in the long way, neither in the excessible high moun∣taines, neyther yet in the people nor in the wilde beasts, but onely in the executing of this high enterprise, beside the wonderfull riches, wich being done he should get him selfe an immortall fame, for him and all his posteritie.


This Captayne hauing therefore made all things in a redinesse, and in good order as the case required, carying with him certayne Marchandise whereby to get vittails by the way, and other munitions, hauing in his company fiftie 
Spaniards,
 with a certayne number of slaues, for to labor and to doe other seruice, with certayne 
Indians,
 that had bene made Christians, as well for to conduct them, as for to intreprete the languages set forward with certaine Caruels or smal Skifs on the Ryuer of 
Aure∣lana,
 the which I may well testifie is the moste longest and largest, that is in all the worlde, hys breadth is .59. leagues, and his length more than a thousande. Many call it the swéete sea, the which procedeth from the sides of the high mountaynes of 
Molubeba,
 with the Ryuer of 
Marignan:
 notwithstanding their entrie or beginning is distant .104. leagues one from another, and they are mixed aboue sixe hundreth leagues, within the playne countrey, the sea or floode entering in aboue .40. leagues.


This Ryuer increaseth at certayne tymes of the yere as doeth 
Nill,
 that passeth by 
Egypte,
 proceding from the mountaynes of the Moone, according to the opinion of some, the which also I thinke to be so. It was named 
Aurelana,
 by the name of him, that firste made vpon it a long Nauigation.
 Neuerthelesse, before it was disco∣uered by some, that haue named it in their Cardes, the Ryuer of 
Amazones:
 it is very dangerous bicause of cer∣tayne


rockes, and other inconueniences which cannot be auoyded but with greate difficultie. Being entered somewhat farre into the Ryuer, there are certayne fayre Ilands, of whiche some are peopled, the others not.


Moreouer this Riuer is dangerous all a long, for that it is peopled as wel in the Ilandes as on the banckes, with many strange and Barbarous people, the whiche of a long tyme haue had enimitie and hatred to 
Spanyardes,
 and others strangers, fearing leaste they shoulde aborde theyr countrey, and spoyle them. Also if that by misfor∣tune they get any, they kill them without remission. And eate them rosted and boyled, as they doe other flesh.


Therefore taking ship in one of these Ilandes of 
Perou,
 named the 
Holy Crosse,
 in the greate Sea, for to get the straight of this floode or Ryuer, with a fayre winde they set of, coasting néere ynough to the lande, for to vew and knowe the countrey, the people, and for many other commodities. Coasting then in their Nauigation nowe héere now there as the commoditie did permit, the wilde men of the countrey shewed themselues in greate num∣ber on the bankes, with certayne signes of admira∣tion, séeing this strange Nauigatiō, and array of people, vessels and munitions proper for warre. In the meane tyme, the Nauigantes were not a little astonyed for their parte for to sée such a multitude of vnciuill people and al∣together brutish, which by their countenance shewed, that they would destresse them, the which occasion caused them to sayle & rowe a long time without casting anker, or setting foote on lande. Notwithstanding, at the last, fa∣mine and other necessities, caused them in the ende to strike sayle and let fall anker. The which they hauing done, about a handgunne shot from the lande, there re∣sted no other thing, but with flattering signes, and


other meanes to winne the fauor of the wild men, for to get some vittails, and space to reste their weary bones. So that some of the wild men being in their little boates made of the barcke of trées, being allured with these fayr shewes, did ieopard themselues to approch, not with∣out some doubt, hauing neuer sene Christiā come so néere to their limites. Notwithstanding their feare, the 
Spa∣niards
 made signe of more friendship, shewing them kniues and other small Iron workes shining, the which caused thē to approche. And after y
t
 they had made vnto them presentes of small value, this wilde people went with al diligence to purchase and get them some vittails, so at length they brought them great plenty of fish, fruits of maruelous excellencie according as y
e
 coūtrey brought forth. Among other things one of these wild men hauing bene the day before in skirmishe,
 had taken foure of his enimies 
Canibals,
 and presented to them two members rosted, the which the 
Spaniards
 refused. These wild men as they sayde, were of high stature, fayre bodied and all naked as others are, bearing on their stomackes broade péeces of Golde, the others greate péeces shining of fine Golde well poolished in forme of rounde looking Glasses. Ye nede not demaūde, if that the 
Spaniards
 change their marchandise for such riches, I beleue truely they esca∣ped not so, at the least they did their good will. Now these poore Pilgrims, being thus refreshed and vitteled for that tyme, reseruing somewhat for after claps, before they tooke their leaue, they gaue more presentes as before, and then for the continuance of their voyage it was nedefull to set sayle and to shorten waye. From thence they sayled more than a hundreth leagues, before they tooke lande, beholding about the Riuer side diuers kindes and a mul∣titude of wild people, as before, the which I wil not staye


to describe for to auoide prolixitie: but it shall suffice to vnderstand the place, where as at the seconde time they aboorded.






Hovv certaine Spanyardes arriued into a coun∣trey, vvhere they found Amazones. Cap. 63.


THe saide 
Spanyardes
 did so much by their iourneys, that they arriued in a Countrey, where as were in∣habiting 
Amazones,
 the which would neuer haue bene thought, for that Historiographers haue made ther∣of no mention, bicause they knew not this countrey late found out. Some may say, that they are not 
Amazonists,
 but as for me I iudge them suche, séeing that they liue euen so, as we finde the 
Amazonists
 of 
Asia
 to haue li∣ued. And before passing further, ye shall note, that these 
Amazones
 of which we speake, are retired, inhabiting in certaine Ilands which are to them as strong holdes, ha∣uing alwayes perpetuall warre with certaine people, without any other exercise, euen as those of whom haue spoken the Historiographers. Nowe then these warlike women of our 
America
 being fortified in Ilandes, are most commonly assailed of their enimies that séeke them on the water, with barkes and other vessels, and there they fight with bowes and arrowes: contrariwise, the women defend them with the like couragiously, with threatnings, noise and countenaunces, the most fearfull that is possible: they make their bulwarkes of defence with mighty great shelles of Torterels. And bicause it commeth to our purpose, to speake of the 
Amazonists,
 we will write somewhat in this place. The poore people find no great comfort among these rude and sauage women.


I finde by the histories, that there are .iij. sorts of 
Ama∣zones,
 all a like, differing only in places & dwellings. The most anciest sort were in 
Affrica,
 among y
e
 which were 
Gorgonists,
 that had 
Meduse
 for their Quéene. The other were in 
Scythia,
 néere to the riuer of 
Tanais,
 which since haue raigned in a part of 
Asia,
 néere to the riuer of 
Her∣modoon:
 and the third sort of 
Amazones,
 are those which we do treat of. Ther is diuers opinions why they were called 
Amazones.
 The most common is, for bicause that these women did burne their brests in their youth, to be more apt in the warre.
 The which I finde very straunge, and reporte me to medicines whether they can burne those partes without death, knowing that they are ten∣der, and also néere to y
e
 heart, neuerthelesse the most part are of this opinion. If it were so, I wold thinke that for one that escapeth death, there dieth a hundreth. Others take the 
Etymologie
 of this vowell 
A.
 priuatiue, and of 
Maza,
 that signifieth bread, for that they liue not with bread, but with other things, which is as absurde as the others: for in that time they might call many that liued without bread 
Amazones,
 as the 
Troglodites
 and many o∣thers, in like maner all the 
Indians.
 The others of 
A.
 pri∣uatiue & 
Mazos,
 as those that haue bene norished w
t
out womans milke, the which is most likeliest to be true, of which opinion is 
Philostratus,
 or else of a nimphe named 
Amazoni,
 or of an other named 
Amazone,
 virgin to 
Dia∣na,
 and Quéene of 
Ephesus,
 which I do better beleue, thā burning of their paps or brests, let them that list, dispute of the contrary.
 Wel, how so euer it is, these women are named warlike: and moreouer ye shall note that the 
Sci∣thians
 which we name 
Tartarians,
 being driuen out of 
Egipt,
 subdued the better parte of 
Asia,
 and made it all tributary, and vnder their obedience. In the meane time


whilest the 
Scythians
 remained in this long cōquest, and expedition of 
Asia,
 their wiues being wearied of their so long absence, (as the good 
Penelope,
 of hir husband 
V∣lixes,
) did admonishe them by many gracious letters and messages to returne, otherwise, that this long & vntolle∣rable absence wold cōstraine them to make new aliances with their next neighbors, considering that the auncient lignage of the 
Scithians
 began to decay. Notwithstāding without hauing regarde to the swéete requestes of their wiues, kept & inhabited 
Asia
 with an obstinate corage,
 yea vntil the time that 
Ninus
 did deliuer it from this mi∣serable thraldome & bondage. During which time, these women neuer made aliaunce of Matrimonie with their neighbors, esteming and thinking that Matrimonie was not a meane of libertie but of thraldome. But they with one accord & vertuous enterprise, consented to take their weapons & begin warre, thinking y
t
 they were descended of that mighty 
Mars,
 god of warres, which they executed so vertuously vnder y
e
 gouernement of 
Lampedo
 & 
Mar∣thesia,
 their Quéenes y
t
 gouerned one after another,
 that they not only defended their coūtrey frō inuasion of their enimies, in mainteining their liberty, but also made ma∣ny goodly conquests in 
Europe
 & 
in Asia,
 euen vnto y
e
 riuer of which we shewed before. In which place, specially at 
Ephesus,
 they caused to be made many castles and holds. This being done, they sent some of their bāds into their countrey, with the riches, bootie, and spoile of their eni∣mies, and the rest remained in 
Asia.
 Finally these good women for to kéepe their stocke and posteritie, did willingly offer them selues to their neighbors, with∣out any other kind of mariage. And of the fruit that pro∣céeded, they killed the male children, kéeping alwayes the female for the warres, the feat wherof they wold learne


them with al diligence, they exercise the feats of chiualry and hunting aboue al other things. Their weapōs were bowes and arowes, with certain bucklers, of which 
Vir∣gill
 speaketh of in his 
Aeneidos,
 when that during the siege of 
Troy,
 they went to helpe the 
Troyans
 against the 
Greekes.
 Some say also that they were the first that begā to ride a horsse, and to fight on horsebacke. Well, now it is time to returne to the 
Amazones
 of 
America,
 and to y
e
 
Spanyards.
 In that part they are seperated from men, and frequent them very seldome, but at sometime secrete in the night, or at some appoynted time. These women in∣habite in litle lodgings and caues against the rockes, li∣uing with fishe and wilde beasts, with rootes & some good fruits that this land bringeth forth. They kil their male children incōtinently after they are deliuered, or else they deliuer him to y
e
 mā, to whom they think it doth pertain. If it be a female, they retaine it to them selues, euen so as did the first 
Amazones.
 They make warre ordinarily against some other nation.
 And those whom they take in the warre, they vse most cruelly and inhumainely for to make them die, they hang them by one leg on a trée, and leauing them after this sort, they goe their wayes, and if it happen that they be not dead, when they returne, they will shoote at them aboue ten thousande times, but they eate them not as others doe, but they burne them vntill they be consumed to ashes.
 Furthermore, these women when that they approche to fight, they make maruellous cries & shootes for to affray their enimies. Of the origi∣nall of these 
Amazones
 in that countrey, it is vncertain: some thinke that after the warre of 
Troy,
 for thither they went (as we haue before shewed) vnder the conducte of 
Pantasilla,
 they scattered abrode, and wandred héere and there. Others think that they are come from certain pla∣ces


of 
Grecia
 i
 
Affrica,
 from whēce a cruell king chased them. We haue many histories of their acts and feats of warre, and of other women, the which I will leaue for to continue our purpose: for there are many Histories, 
Greekes, Latines
 and others, that shewe thereof at large. We haue begon to shewe how that the 
Spanyardes
 re∣mained there but a while, for to rest them onely,
 and to get victuals, for that these women as all amazed to sée suche an aray (which vnto them was straunge) came to∣gether aboue ten thousand of them, in lesse space than thrée houres, maids and women all naked, sauing bowes and arrowes in their fastes, beginning to make a great noise, as though they had séene their enimies, so that they began to loose of their arrowes: the which the 
Spa∣nyards
 séeing, wold make no resistance but retiring, way∣ed their ankers, and hoised saile: but at their departing saying 
Adew,
 they saluted them with certaine gunshot, among the thickest of them, so that these women esca∣ped not without some losse and detriment.






Hovv the Spanyardes continued their voyage to Morpion, and of the riuer of Plate. Cap. 64.


FRom thence they continuing their way, wel a Cxx. leagues, they knew by their 
Astrolobia,
 what height the place was where they were. The which is so ne∣cessary for the good Nauigation, that those that saile into farre Countreys, can haue no assurance of their voyage, if that this practise faile them: wherfore this Arte of the height of the Sunne excéedeth all other artes. And this cunning our elders haue greatly commended and practi∣zed, also 
Ptolome
 and other great authors. These 
Spani∣ardes
 leauing their skiffes and caruels they sunke them,


then euery man laded them selues with the rest of the victailes, munitions, and other marchaundise, chiefly the slaues that were there for that purpose, they went for the terme of .ix. dayes, by and ouer mountaines and dales decked with all sortes of gréene trées, herbes, floures and fruites. In so much that at the last by their iorneys, they came to a great riuer procéeding from the highe Moun∣taines, wheras they found other wilde men, among the which some for feare fled their wayes, others climed vp∣on trées, and there remained in their lodgings none but a fewe olde men, to the which in signe of friendship and fauor, they made presents with certaine kniues and glas∣ses, the which to them were agréeable, so that they went and called the others, shewing them that these strangers newe arriued were some great Lordes, that in no wise would hurt them, but make to them presents of their ri∣ches. The wilde men being moued with this liberalitie went to fetche them victails, as fish, venison, and fruites according as the countrey brought forth. The which the 
Spanyardes
 séeing, were minded there to passe away the winter, & in the meane time to discouer the commodities of the countrey, and to sée if that there might be foūd any Mine of golde or siluer, or any other thing wherby they might gather any profit. By this meanes they remained there .vij. months together, and séeing things fell not out according to their mind, they tooke their iorney forward, hauing to guide them .viij. of these wild mē, that brought them on their way about .lxxx. leagues, passing alwayes through the midst of other wilde men, more rude & lesse tractable thā they before, for the which their guides wer vnto them as necessary as profitable. Finally, they knew of a truth, that they were come to y
e
 height of a place na∣med 
Morpion,
 then inhabited of 
Portingals,
 some of them


being weary of so long a voyage, were determined to re∣paire to the place before named: others to y
e
 cōtrary, said it were better to perseuer & goe forwarde to the riuer of 
Plate,
 distant farther by land .300. leagues. In which,
 for to make agréement according to thaduise of the captain, the one part kept their way to 
Plate,
 and the others drue toward 
Morpion.
 Néere to which place, these poore pil∣grims beheld if they could espie any booty, vntil that they found a riuer running at the foote of a hill, in which they that dranke,
 did perceiue certaine stones shining like sil∣uer, of the which they bare a certaine quantitie to 
Mor∣pion,
 distant frō thēce .18. leagues, which place after proofe was found to bear good & natural siluer. And since y
e
 king of 
Portingall
 hath had from thence an infinite deale of sil∣uer after that he had soūded the Mine, and brought it to good perfection. After that these 
Spaniardes
 had rested thē selues at 
Morpion,
 with the 
Portingall
 their neighbors, they set forwarde to folow the others, & to kepe the way to 
Plate,
 being distāt from 
Morpion,
 by sea .250. leagues,
 and by land .300. wheras the 
Spanyards
 haue found ma∣ny Mines of golde and siluer, and haue named it 
Plate,
 which signifieth in our language, siluer. And for to inha∣bite there, they haue edified certaine castles and holdes: and since some of thē with other 
Spanyards,
 newly come to that place, not content with this fortune, haue enter∣prised to saile euen to the straight of 
Magellan,
 so named by him that first found it out which ioyneth with 
Ame∣rica
 toward the South. And from thence entreth into the peaceable Sea on the other side of 
America,
 where as they haue found many faire Ilands: and in the end they came to 
Moluques,
 which they kepe and inhabite
t this day. By the which meanes there cometh a great tribute of golde and siluer vnto the King of 
Spaine.
 This muche in effect of this voyage, the which I thought good to note


by the way, being shewed me in my Nauigation, by those that of a truthe had bene in the voyage.






Hovve the landes of the king of Spaine, and of Portingall are separated. Cap. 65.


THe kings of 
Spaine
 and of 
Portingall,
 after that they had obtained many happy and fortunate victories, as well in the East, as in the West in places by sea and land, not before knowne or discouered, deliberated for the greater assurance to deuide and limit al the coun∣trey that they had conquered,
 and also to auoide quarels that héere after might rise, as they did of the mine of gold that they had at the 
Cape
 of thrée points which is in 
Gui∣ney
 as also the Ilands of 
Cape verd,
 and many other pla∣ces. Also euery one may know, y
t
 one kingdome wil not haue two kings, no more than the world wil receiue two Sunnes.
 So it is that from the riuer of 
Marignan,
 be∣twene 
America
 and the Ilands of 
Antilles,
 that ioyne at 
Perou,
 vnto 
Terra Florida,
 néere to newe found lande, be∣longeth to the King of 
Spaine,
 the which hath also great Lordship in 
America,
 comming from 
Perou
 toward the South, on the West side towarde 
Marignan,
 as is before shewed.
 To the King of 
Portingal
 did befall all that is from the said riuer of 
Marignan
 towards the South vn∣to the riuer of 
Plate,
 which is .36. degrees from the 
Equi∣noctiall.
 And the first place towarde 
Magellan,
 is named 
Morpion,
 the second 
Mahanhoc,
 in the which place hath bene found many mines of golde and siluer. The thirde 
Port Sigoura,
 néere to 
Caape 
S. Augustine.
 Fourthly the point of 
Cronest Mon
ou,
 castel 
Marin,
 and 
Fernanbow
; bordering the 
Canibals
 of 
America.
 To declare particu∣larly


the places from one riuer to an other, as 
Curtana, Caribes,
 néere to the swéete or freshe riuer, and royall. Likewise their lyings with other things, I wil forbeare at this time. It shall suffice onely to know, that in those places before named, the 
Portingals
 are inhabited, and cā¦tel how to entertaine the wilde men of the countrey, so that they liue togither in peace, & trade many riche mar∣chandise. And there they haue bartered and builded hou∣ses and castles to resist their enimies. Now to retourne to the Prince of 
Spaine,
 he hath done the like for his part,
 the which is as we haue shewed from 
Marignan
 to∣wards the West vnto 
Moluques,
 as wel on this side, as beyond in the West, & in the sea peaceable, the Ilands of these two seas, and 
Perou
 in the maine land, so that alto∣gether extendeth of a great compasse, beside the countrey adioyning that in time may be found out, as 
Cartagera, Cata, Palmaria, Parisa,
 great and little. The which two nations, specially the 
Portingals
 haue discouered muche land in the East countrey for their trade, the which not∣withstanding they enioy not, as they do many places of 
America
 and 
Perou:
 For to beare rule in that Countrey, they must get the loue and fauor of the 
Indians:
 other∣wise if that they reuolt, they will destroy all that they finde, so y
t
 they must frame themselues so to their wayes, that they by no wise may be offēded. Now ye must note that their attempts and discouerings, was not without great bloudshed: specially of poore Christians, that haue ieoperded their liues without hauing respect to the cruell inhumanitie of these people. To be short, there is no dif∣ficultie be it neuer so daungerous, that withdraweth a mannes manly heart. We sée in our 
Europe,
 how muche the 
Romaines
 at the beginning, minding to enlarge their Empire but with a litle land, to the respect of that which


hath bene gotten within this sixtie yeares, haue shed the bloud as well of them selues as of their enimies. What furious and horrible dissipations of lawes, disciplines & honest conuersation hath raigned throughout the world, biside the ciuile warres of 
Sylla
 and 
Marius, Cina,
 and of 
Pompey,
 of 
Brutus,
 of 
Anthony
 & 
Augustus,
 more hurt∣full than the rest: also hath folowed the ruine and decay of 
Italy
 by the 
Gothes, Hunns,
 and 
Wandallians,
 which also haue inuaded 
Asia,
 and ouerthrowne the kingdome of 
Grece,
 to the which purpose, 
Ouid
 séemeth to haue spoken these woords.


We see hovv things doe chaunge and come to passe,


And novv a people raigne that nothing vvas.


And he, the vvhich had might and poure,


Dothe them homage, obey, and eke honoure.


To conclude, all humaine creatures are subiecte to chaunge more or lesse according as they be, rich or poore, high or lowe, little or great.






The deuision of the West Indies in three partes. Cap. 66.


BEfore that I passe any farther to describe this coun∣trey by good right (as I thinke) named 
Fraunce An∣tarctike,
 or before 
America
 for the reasons that we haue alleaged, bicause of his largenesse which is with∣out comparison, I am minded (for that I would the rea∣der should the better vnderstand it) to deuide it in thrée parts: for since the time that other Countreis haue bene discouered, all the Countrey of 
America, Perou, Florida,
 and 
Canada
 and other places adiacent, to goe from the straight of 
Magellan,
 haue bene cōmonly called the west 
Indies,
 and is for bicause the people liue al naked, barba∣rous


and rude, as those that are yet in the East 
Indies.
 The which Countrey meriteth well the name of 
India,
 of the floud or riuer 
Indus,
 as we haue before shewed. This fair riuer entring into the East sea called 
Indique
 by seuen mouthes or openings, as 
Nyll
 doth into the sea 
Meditarium,
 taketh his originall of the Mountaines 
Arbiciennes
 and 
Beciennes.
 Also the riuer 
Gangis
 in like case entreth in by .v. openings into this sea, deuiding 
In∣dia
 into two partes, separating the one from the other. Therfore this region being so farre from 
America,
 for the one is in the East, and the other comprehēdeth from the South vnto the west, we cannot say that others thā those that haue first discouered these landes, haue added this name of 
India,
 séeing the beastly behauior and cruel∣tie of this people, so brutish without faith & without law and not vnlike to diuers people of the 
Indies
 of 
Asia
 and of 
Ethiopia,
 of which 
Plinie
 maketh most ample mention in his natural history. By this meanes hath 
America
 ob∣tained the name of 
India
 to the likenesse of that which is in 
Asia,
 for y
t
 they agrée in maners, beastly brutishnesse, & other things, as we haue before shewed of the 
Occidē∣tal
 people, to those of the East parts. Therefore the first part of this land, containeth toward the South vnto the straight of 
Magellan,
 which is .52. degrées .30. minutes of the 
Equinoctiall
 line, I meane of the 
Austreall
 line, comprehending no part of the other land that is beyond the straight, the which was neuer knowne nor inhabited of vs, sauing onely from that straight comming from the riuer of 
Plate.
 From thence drawing towarde the West, far betwéene these two Seas, are the prouinces of 
Patalia, Paranaguacu, Margageas, Patagones
 or region of Giaunts, 
Morpion, Tabaiares, Toupinambou, Ama∣zones,
 the countrey of Brasil, vnto y
e
 
Cape
 of 
S. Augustin,



the which is .viij. degrées beyonde the line, the Countrey of 
Canibals, Anthropophages,
 the which regions are com∣prehended in 
America,
 compassed with the Ocean sea, and on the other side toward the South of the peaceable sea, which is otherwise the sea of 
Magellan.
 We will therfore ende this 
Indian
 land, at the riuer of 
Amazones,
 the which euen as 
Ganges
 maketh the seperation of one 
Indies
 from another towards the East: also this notable floud, the which hath of bredth .50. leagues, may make se∣paration of 
India, America,
 and of 
Perou.
 The seconde parte shall begin from the sayde riuer, containing many kingdomes and Prouinces at 
Perou,
 the straight of land containing 
Daryen, Furna, Popaian, Anzerma, Carapa, Quimbaya, Cali, Pasta, Quito, Canares, Cuzco, Chila, Pa∣talia, Parias, Temistitan, Mexica, Cataia, Panuco,
 the 
Pigmeis
 euē to 
Florida,
 which lieth .25. degrées of latitude on this side the line. I leaue the Ilands out, not compre∣hending them, although that they are of no lesse cōpasse and greatnesse, than 
Sicilia, Corsica, Cypris
 or 
Candia,
 nor yet of lesse value, therefore shall this parte be limitted to∣wards the South to 
Florida.
 There resteth now only to describe the third parte, the which shall begin at 
Noua Espania,
 or new 
Spaine,
 comprehending all the prouinces of 
Anauac, Ʋcatan, Eulhuacan, Xalixa, Thalco, Mixteca∣pan, Tezeuco, Guzanes Apalachen, Pancho, Aute,
 and the kingdome of 
Micuacan,
 from 
Florida
 vnto the land of 
Bacalles,
 which is a great Region, vnder the which also is comprehended the land of 
Canada,
 and the prouince of 
Chicora,
 (which is .33. degrées on this side the line) the land of 
Labrodor,
 newe found land, compassed with the frostie Sea on the Northe side. This Countrey of the West 
Indies
 being thus deuided, not specifying many things from the one ende to the other, that is to witte,


many things frō the one end to the other: that is to wit, from the straight of 
Magellan,
 at the which we haue be∣gon, vnto the ende of the farthest land of the 
Indies,
 it is more then .4800. leagues of length, and by this ye may descerne the bredthe, excepting the straight of 
Parias
 be∣fore named, therfore they are now called y
e
 great 
Indies,
 being without comparison more greater than the East 
Indies.
 As touching the rest, I desire the reader to take in good parte this little deuision, vntil it please God to giue vs meane to make one more greater. Likewise to treate more at large of this countrey, but thus much I thought néedefull in the meane time to bring to light.






Of the Iland of Rats. Cap. 67.


LEauing these 
Canibals
 for the small comfort y
t
 there was to be had, hauing the winde at South, we sailed to a very faire Iland, distant frō the line .iiij. degrées, the which is very daungerous in the aboording of it, for it is no lesse daungerous to a front thā some great 
Cape
 or 
Promentary
 for that it entreth farre into the sea, and for rockes that are about it, and ranged on the coast side. This 
Iland
 was vnluckely found out to the mishappe of those that first did discouer it. Some 
Portingall
 ship pas∣sing by on that coast, for default of good gouernment,
 stri∣king against a rocke néere to this Iland, brake in pieces and drowned, excepting .xxiij. mē that saued them selues in this Iland, in which place they remained the terme of two yeares, wheras they died only two excepting, which in the meane time liued with Rattes; Birdes, and other beastes. And as on a time there passed by a ship of 
Nor∣mandie,
 that returned from 
America,
 they set their skiffe out for to rest in that Ilande, whereas they found these


two poore 
Portingalls,
 that were onely lefte of this ship∣wrake,
 the which they brought away with them. And these 
Portingals
 had named it the Iland of Rats, bicause of the multitude of Rats of diuers kindes that there are, so that they say, that their companions died onely being vexed with these vermin. These beastes liue with egs of 
Torterels,
 that they make on the Riuage of the Sea, and with birds egs, wherof there is great store. Also when we went for to seke fresh water, whereof we had such greate nede, that some amongst vs were constrayned to drinke their owne water or bryn, the which dured the terme of thrée monethes, and the famyn foure moneths, we sawe there so many birdes, and so priuie, that we might haue laden therewith our ships, neuerthelesse we coulde not recouer fresh water, vnlesse we had entred very farre in∣to the coūtrey. As for the rest it is fayre decked with ma∣ny fayre trées, being gréene the moste parte of the yeare, euen like a goodly gréene medowe in the moneth of May, although it be within foure degrées of the lyne. Though that this Iland is not inhabited,
 yet it is not vnpossible no more than others in the Zone, as the Ilandes of 
S. Homer,
 vnder the 
Equinoctial,
 & others. And if it wer in∣habited, I am wel assured, that it would make one of the fairest places in al the Worlde and riche, there might be made very good Suger, Spices and other things of great value.
 I know well that many Cosmographers haue had this opinion that the Zone betwene the two Tropickes was vnhabited for the extreame heate of the Sunne, not∣withstanding y
t
 experience sheweth the cōtrary without any farther contention, euen as the Zones to the twoo Poles, bicause of the colde. 
Heroditus
 and 
Solon,
 affir∣meth that the hils 
Hiperbores,
 are inhabited, and likewise 
Canada,
 drawing néere to the North: and other count yet


more néere approching the colde Sea,
 of the whiche we haue alredy spoken. Therefore let vs returne to our Ilād of Rats. This place by good right is so named, for bicause of the abundance of Rats that lyue there, of the whiche there are diuers kindes, one kinde among the reste that the wilde men of 
America
 eat, named in their language 
Sohiatan,
 and they haue their hayre gray,
 the flesh good & delicate, like a little leueret. There is another named 
Hiexousou,
 greater than the others, but not so good to eat, they are as great as those of 
Egypt,
 called 
Pharaos
 Rats. Others there are as greate as Wezels, that the wild mē eate not, for bicause that when they are dead, they stinke like carion, the which I haue sene: also there are founde diuersitie of Serpentes named 
Gerara,
 the which are not good to eate, but there are others named 
Theirab,
 that are good, for of these Serpentes there are diuers kindes, that are nothing venemous, nor like to those of our 
Europe,
 so that their biting is neither mortall, nor any thing dan∣gerous: there are to be sene redde ones scaled of diuers coloures: lykewise I haue sene gréene ones, as gréene as the bay leafe, they are not so greate of body as the others, notwithstanding they, are very long. Therefore it is not to be marueled at, how these wild men there aboutes eate these Rats without daunger, and Serpents euen as they do Lezardes, as before we haue shewed. Likewise néere to this Ilande is founde a kynde of fish, and also v∣pon the coaste of 
America
 very daungerous, also much feared and redoubted of the wilde men, for that she is a rauening fish, and as daungerous as a Lyon or a Woulfe famished: this fish is named 
Houperou,
 in their language, and eateth other fish in the water, excepting one that is as greate as a little Carpe,


the which foloweth him alwayes, as if there were so
 
Sympathia
 or secrete loue betwene them, or else he folo∣weth him for to be preserued and kept sure from other fishes. So that the wilde men fishing all naked, as they do alwayes feare him, & not without a cause, for if he catche them, he will either drowne them, or strangle them, or looke where he toucheth, he carieth away a piece with his téethe. Also they will take héede how to eate of this fishe: but if y
t
 they can take him aliue, as they doe many times, for to be reuenged of him, they kill him with arrowes. Being therefore there a certaine space of time, turning héere and there, I behelde many straungs fishes that are not in 
Europe
: among the which, I saw two very monste∣rous,
 hauing vnder the throte like two Goates dugge
, a thing on the chin; that for to sée too, was like a Goates beard. Beholde how nature the great workemistresse, taketh pleasure to varifie hir workes, as well by water as by land, as the cōning workman beutifleth his work, excéeding the common trade of his Arte and science.






Hovv vve continued our course, vvith a decla∣ration of the Astrolabia of the sea. Cap. 68.


FOr bicause that we found no great consolation, nor comfort of our trauails in this Iland. It behoued vs without any tarying, to hoise sail with an indifferent winde,
 vntill we came vnder the 
Equinoctiall,
 whereas the sea and the windes are also vnconstant. Also the aire is alwayes séene there troubled: if one side be faire, the other is troubled, and threatneth fowle weather, so that for the most parte there is raine and thunder, which can not be without danger to y
e
 Nauigants. Now before they


come néere to this line, the good Nauigantes, Pilots, and Mariners, being expert, take counsel or beholde alwayes their 
Astrolabia,
 for to knewe the distance and lying of places from thence where they are. And bicause this so necessarie an Instrument for Nauigation commeth now in talke, I will speake there of lightly by the way, for the instruction of those that wil folow the sea, being so great that the vnderstanding of man cannot well comprehend it. And that which I speake of the 
Astrolabia,
 as much may I say of the Rule or nedell of the sea, by the whiche they may also conduct right the ship. This Instrument is so politike, that with a little paper or parchement, as broade as the palme of my hand, and certayne lines mar∣ked which signifieth the windes, and a little Iron with the which this Instrument is made, by his onely natural vertue that a storie giueth him, and bloweth in his pro∣per mouing, and without any touching, sheweth where is the Easte, the Weaste, the North and the South, and also al the thirtie two windes belonging to Nauigation, & it sheweth them not onely in one place, but in al places of the worlde beside other secretes, that I omit for this present, wherby it plainly appeareth that the 
Astrolabia,
 the nedell or compasse, with the 
Carde Marin,
 are well made, and that there shewing and perfection as is a wō∣derfull thing, for that a thing so great as the Sea, is pi∣ctured in so little a space, and so agreable that by the same men vndertake to sayle rounde about the worlde.
 Then the good and perfect 
Astrolabia,
 is no other thing than the Sphere pressed and represented in a playn, accomplished in his compasse with .360. Degrées, that answere to the circute of the World, deuided in like number of degrées, the which agayne must be deuided into foure equal parts in our Instrument, that is .90. in euery parte, the whiche


afterwarde ye muste parte by fiue and fiue, then holding your Instrument by the ring, rayse it or hold it towarde the Sunne, so that the Sunne beames may enter in at the hole, then looking to your declination in what year
 moneth and day ye are in when ye take the height of the Sunne. And if the Sunne be towardes the South which is on the coast of 
America,
 and ye be towards the North, ye muste take from your height as many degrées as the Sunne hath declined, from the line of y
e
 which we speke towarde the South. And if that in taking of the height of the Sunne, ye be towardes the South beyonde the 
Equinoctiall,
 and the Sunne be in the North, ye muste in lyke manner take away so many degrées, as the Sunne hath declined from the lyne towarde our 
Pole,
 as for ex∣ample: if ye take your height the Sunne being betwene the 
Equinoctiall
 and you, when ye haue taken the sayde height, ye muste for to knowe the place where ye are, be it in sea or lande, adde your degrées which the Sunne is declyned from, farre from the lyne with your height, and ye shall finde that which ye demaunde, the which is to be vnderstanded as much of the 
Pole 
Artike,
 as 
Antartike.
 Thus much by the way Gentle Reader of our 
Astrola∣bia,
 leauing the rest of the knowledge and vsage of this Instrument to Astronomers and 
Astrologians,
 that make dayly profession thereof. It shall suffice that which I haue spoken, the which I knowe to be necessary and nedefull to Nauigation, chiefly for those that are ignorant and not yet exercised therein.








Of the departing of our Equator or Equi∣noctiall. Cap. 69.


I Thinke there is no man of Spirite, but that knoweth that the 
Equinoctiall
 is a trace or circle, imagined by the midst of the Worlde, from the East to the Weast, in equall distance of two, so that from the fayde 
Equino∣ctiall
 to eche one of the Poles, it is .90. Degrées, as we haue at large treated before, and of the temperatnesse of the ayre, that is there about, of the Sea and of the fishes. There resteth nowe somewhat to speake in our returne, of that which before we left out, passing therefore about the firste day of Aprill with a fauourable winde kéeping our right course with sayle spread right to the North,
 ne∣uerthelesse we were molested with one ill commoditie, the which was, that daye and night it ceased not to raine, the which notwithstanding came well to passe for vs to drinke, considering our necessitie, for the space of two monethes and a halfe, enduring thyrst for that we colde get no fresh water.


And God knoweth whether we drancke not our fill euē with open throte, considering the extreame heat that burned vs: it is true that the rayne water in those parres are corrupted for the infection of the ayre, from whence it commeth: for that whereof the rayne engendreth, is de∣praued in such sort, that if a body wash their hāds there∣with, there wil ryse pushes & bladders.
 I knowe well that many Philosophers hold opinion, that some rayne water is vnholsome, & they set difference betwene these waters, with y
e
 reasons which at this time I wil not allege auoy∣ding prolixitie: wel what corruptiō so euer came of it, yet neuerthelesse it behoued vs to drink therof though it had


cost vs our liues. Furthermore this water falling on a clothe woulde stayne it and leaue a spot that scant would be gotten out. Nowe therefore after we had passed the lyne, it was néedfull for our conduct, to beginne to counte our degrees, from thence vnto our 
Europe:
 as much muste be done of them that goe thither, after that they are come vnder the sayde-line. The Ancient Cosmographers, mea∣sured the earth the which we may also doe, by stades, pa∣ces, and féete, and not by degrées as we doe, as affirmeth 
Plinie, Strabo
 and others, but 
Ptolome
 did since inuente degrées, for to measure bothe the Sea and the land, which before was not a lyke measured, and this is much more easy. It is then 
Ptolome
 that hath compassed the whole worlde by Degrées, as wel in length as in bredth, finding 360. Leagues, and in euery degrée .17. Leagues & a half, as I vnderstande of our Pilots, that are expert in Naui∣gation. So that the whole world hauing the Firmament and the Elementes in his conference, contayneth .360. de∣grées equally by twelue signes, whereof euery one hath 30.
 degrées, for .12. tymes .30. make iust .360. A degrée con∣tayneth .60. minutes, a minut .60. thirdes, a thirde .60. fourthes, a fourth .60. fifthes, vnto .60. tenthes. For the proportions of the firmament, may be parted in so many partes, as we haue sayde. Then by the degrées we find the longitude, latitude and distance of places, the latitude from the line to our 
Pole,
 whereas there is .90. degrées, and so much beyonde,
 the longitude is taken from the fortunate Ilands to the Easte. Wherefore I saye to con∣clude, that the Pilot that woulde sayle, ought to consider thre things, the firste in what hight of degrées, he findeth himselfe, and in what hight the place is that he will goe to, secondly the place where he findeth himselfe, and the place whether he hopeth to goe, that is to know, what di∣stance


and length there is from one coaste to another. Thirdly to knowe what winde or windes wil serue for Nauigation, all the whiche he may knowe and sée by his compasse and other Instrumentes of the Sea. Folowing alwayes our course sixe degrées at this side our lyne, kée∣ping the 
Caape
 on the North of vs vntill the .15. day of A∣prill, at which tyme we knewe the Sunne to be directly vnder our Zenith, the which was not without enduring great heat as ye may wel thinke, if ye consider the heat y
t
 is hetherwarde the Sunne, being in 
Cancer,
 whiche is far from our Zenith to vs that inhabit in 
Europe.
 Nowe afore going any farther, I wil speake of certayne flying fishes, that I left out when I spake of fishes vnder the lyne. It is therefore to be noted, that vnder the lyne ten degrées on this side, and beyonde there is founde aboun∣dance of flying fish, that flyeth hye in the ayre, being folo∣wed of another fish that woulde deuoure him. So that by the quantitie of him that flyeth, ye may easily conie∣cture the quantitie of the other lyuing by praye. Among the which the 
Dorade
 (of whom we haue before shewed) doeth folowe hym aboue all others, for that his flesh is very delicate and tender: of the which also there are two kinds, the one is lyke a herring, the which is, that which is so chased of others, this fish hath foure wings, two great ones, lyke vnto the wings of a bat, and two other little ones néere to the tayle: the other is made lyke a Lampron, of the which kindes there are fewe found, but onely .15. degrées on this side, and beyonde the lyne, the which to my iudgement is the cause that those that haue set out bookes of fishes,
 haue left them out beside many o∣thers. The 
Americans
 name this fish 
Pirauena
 he flieth lyke a Partrige, and the little one flyeth much better and higher than the other, and sometymes they are so néere


chased and folowed, specially by night, that many tymes they strike againste the ship sayles by heapes, and there remayne. There is another fish, which is called by them 
Albacore,
 much more greater than the Porpas, the which is also a deuourer of the flying fish as wel as the 
Dorade,
 and he is very good and excellent to eate aboue all other fishes in the sea, as well of the Weast as of the Easte. He is vneasy to be gotten, and therefore they make a coun∣terfet fish of white linnen, the which they make to spring aboue water, as doeth the flying fish, and by this meanes he is most commonly taken.






Of Perou, and of the principal places contayned in the same. Cap. 70.


NOw kéeping our course, hauing the wind very faire we coasted the lande of 
Perou,
 and the Ilandes being on the coaste of the Weast Sea, called the Ilandes of 
Perou,
 euen to the heigth of the Spanish Ilande, of the which we will speake hereafter particularly. This coun∣trey as we haue deuided it, is one of the thrée partes of the Weaste 
Indies,
 hauing in length .700. Leagues, ta∣king from the North to the South, and in bredth .100. Leagues, from the Easte to the Weaste, being a firme lande, from 
Themestitan
 passing the straight of 
Daryen,
 betwene the West and the sea,
 which they name pacifik, and it was so named of a Riuer called 
Perou,
 which is in bredth about a little league, as many other prouinces in 
Africa, Asia
 and 
Europe,
 haue takē their names of their most famous Riuers, as also we haue shewed of 
Senega.
 This Region is then inclosed, with the Weast and the South Sea, garnished with thicke forestes and moun∣taynes,


the which make the countrey in many places vn∣accessible, so that we cannot there driue our Cartes,
 and Horses loden there as we do héere. In this countrey of 
Perou,
 there is many faire prouinces among the which the most chiefest towardes the North is 
Quito,
 the which extendeth in length from the Easte to the Weast aboute 60. Leagues, and in bredth .30. Next to 
Quito
 is the pro∣uince of the 
Canaries,
 hauing towardes the Easte the Ri∣uer of 
Amazones,
 with many mountaynes and hills, and inhabited with a Barbarous and wilde people not yet conuerted: besides this there is the prouince that the 
Spa∣niards
 haue named 
S. Iames of olde port,
 beginning with∣in a degrée beyond▪ the lyne 
Equinoctiall.
 The fourth which they call in their language 
Taxamilca,
 extendeth to the greate Citie of 
Tongilla,
 the which after that their King 
Atabalyba
 was poysoned, 
Pizare
 seing the fruitfull commodities of the countrey, caused there to be edified a Town and a Castel There is yet another named 
Cuzco,
 in the which the 
Iugies
 haue long tyme raygned, being a people so named, whiche haue bene in tymes past mighty Lords. And this worde 
Iugies
 is as much to say as Kings. And in their time their Kingdome & limits was so greate and large, that it contayned aboue a .1000. Leagues from one end to another. Also this countrey beareth the name of the chiefest Citie, as doeth 
Rhodes, Metelin, Candia
 & other countreys taking their names of the most renomed Townes and Cities, as I haue shewed. Furthermore being on a tyme at 
Caape Finistra
 in 
Spayne,
 a 
Spaniarde
 shewed me, that in this countrey of 
Cuzco,
 there is founde a people that haue their eares hanging downe to their shoulders, hauing hanging on their eares, greate pieces of fine and pure shining Golde, well polli∣shed and better than any other Golde in 
Perou,
 to whose


wordes I will sooner giue credit, than to many Historio∣graphers in these daies, that writ by heare say, reporting to vs things that they neuer sawe. To this purpose I re∣member that they woulde perswade vs, that in high 
A∣frica,
 there was people that had eares hanging downe to there hales, the which is nothing so but a manifest fable and lye.
 The fifth prouince is 
Canar,
 hauing on the west side the South Sea, the which is a maruelous cold coun∣trey, for the Frost and Snowe lyeth there all the yeare long. And although that in others Regions of 
Perou,
 the colde be not so violent, and that there commeth and pro∣cedeth great plenty of good fruites, yet there is not such tēperatnesse in Sommer, for in Sommer in other places the ayre is extreme hot & vntemperat, the which causeth a corruption chiefly in the fruites. Also that venemous beastes are not founde in colde countries as they are in hote regions. Therefore al being considered, it is harde to iudge which of these countries ought to be preferred before the other: to this we may replie that there is no commoditie, but that hath his incommoditie. Moreouer there is yet another named 
Calao,
 wherein is more tra∣ding and occupying than in any other countrey in 
Perou,
 the which also is the cause, that it is better peopled. It extendeth from the Easte coast, to the mountaynes of 
Andes,
 and from the Weaste to the mountaynes of 
Na∣nades:
 the people in this countrey is named 
Xuli, Chilan, Acos, Pomata, Cepita
 and 
Trianguauaco.
 Although it be wilde and Barbarous, yet it is neuerthelesse very tracta∣ble, bicause of the marchandise and trade that there is v∣sed, otherwise, it woulde not be lesse confirmable than the rest of 
America.
 In this countrey there is a great laake named in their language 
Titicata,
 whiche is to say,


Iland of Fethers, for that that in this Lake there are certaine lyttle Ilands,
 in the which are founde a great number of byrds great and small, and of such diuers kyndes as is almost vncredible. Now the last coūtrey that is in 
Perou,
 named 
Carcas,
 next adiacēt to 
Chila,
 in the which standeth the famous and rich Citie of 
Platte,
 the countrey being very rych, bicause of the fayre Ri∣uers and Mynes of Golde and Siluer. Therefore this great countrey containeth, & is called all that is com∣prehended from the Riuer of 
Platte
 vnto 
Quitto
 as we haue already shewed, and of which we haue declared y
e
 eight principall countries and prouinces. This maine land being so long and broade is like to the fygure of a triangle, although that many call it an Ilande, the which cannot, or else will not make a difference be∣twene an Iland & that which we call almost an Iland. By this meanes ye nede not to doute that from the straight of 
Magellan
 .50. degrees of latitude, and .30. minuts, and .303. degrées of longitude beyond the lyne, being more than .68. degrées, on this syde is the maine lande. In dede if that this little lande betwene new 
Spaine
 & 
Perou,
 hauing in bredth but .17. leagues from the Ocean to the South, were cut from the one Sea to the other, then 
Perou
 might be called an Iland, but 
Daryen,
 a straight of lande,
 so named of the Riuer of 
Daryen,
 doth let it, yet it behoueth somwhat to speake of 
Perou.
 As touching the Religion of these wyld men of that countrey,
 which are not yet reformed to our Fayth, they holde a very straunge opinion of a great 
ttell that they kéepe secretly, saying that the Sea in times past passed out thereof with all his Fishes, and that out of a nother thing proceded the Sunne & the Moone, the first Man, and the first Woman, the


which their false and deceitfull priestes haue persua∣ded and shewed them, named 
Bohitis,
 and they haue be∣leued and giuen credit thereto a long tyme, vntil that the 
Spanyards
 haue dissuaded the most parte of these dreames and delusions. Besides this these people are very idolatrous aboue others.
 One worshippeth accor∣ding to his minde what pleaseth him. The fishers wor∣ship a fish named 
Lyburon,
 and the rest worship certain beasts and byrds: Those that labor the ground & make gardens, worship the Earth, but they all in generall take the Sunne to be a great God, lykewise y
e
 Moone & the earth, thinking that by the Sunne & the Moone, all things are ruled and gouerned. In swearing or ta∣king an othe, they will lay theyr hand on the Earthz & beholde the Sunne, they also holde opinion that there hath ben a Deluge as those of 
America,
 saying that there came a Prophet from the North parts, that dyd maruels, the which after he was put to death, had ne∣uerthelesse power to lyue.
 The 
Spanyards
 occupy all this mayne land from the Riuer of 
Marignan,
 vnto 
Furna
 and 
Daryen,
 and yet more further on the west coast, which is the straightest or narowest place of the mayne lande, by the which the way lyeth to 
Moluques.
 Furthermore it extēdeth to the Ryuer of 
Palme,
 wher∣as they haue so well edified and peopled all the coun∣trey, that it is a maruellous thing to sée the riches that at this day, that countrey bringeth forth, lyke vnto a great kingdome. First to begin almost thoroughout al the Ilands of 
Perou,
 there are Mynes of Gold or siluer, with certaine Emerauldes and Turkesses, neuerthe∣less e hauing not so lyuely a color as those y
t
 come from 
Malaca
 and 
Calicut.
 The most welthiest people of all the countrey of 
Perou,
 are those y
t
 they name 
Iugas,
 va∣liant


aboue other nations, they worship cattell and all other kynde of domesticall beasts, in greater number than we doe here, for the countrey thereto is giuen in such sorte, that beastes hydes and skyns of all sorts, is their chief marchandise, and they kill the beasts onely for theyr skynnes. The greatest number of these do∣mesticall beasts are become wylde, bicause that there are so great multitude, so y
t
 they let them stray in the woods day & night, for that they haue no place to harbor thē in their houses. And for to take: thē, they set snares and chase them as we doe Venison.
 As for Corne as I vnderstand, it cannot profit there nor grow in no part of 
Perou,
 no more than in 
America.
 Therefore aswell gentlemen as others, lyue with a kynde of sustenance y
t
 they name 
Cassade,
 which is a kinde of cakes made of a roote named 
Manihot.
 Furthermore they haue great plenty of 
Myll
 & fish. As touching wine there groweth none, in stede whereof they make other kyndes of be∣uerege. This much as touching the circuit of 
Perou,
 the which with his Ilands of the which I wil treat here∣after, is brought to such a forme, that at this presēt ye shal finde townes, castels, cities, b
oughes, houses, bi∣shopricks, cōmon weales, & all kende of liuings, so y
t
 ye will iudge it to be a nother 
Europe.
 By this we know how great the power & goodnesse of our God is,
 & his prouidence to all people, for euen as y
e
 
Turks, Mores
 & heathen people seke to destroy Christes religion, so cō∣trarily, in other places it doeth more increase. Thus far touching 
Perou,
 which in our retourne we coasted on y
e
 left hand, as in sayling thether we costed 
Africa.






Of the Ilands of Perou, and chiefly of the Spanish Iland. Cap. 71.


NOw y
t
 I haue shewed of y
e
 lande of 
Perou,
 seing y
t
 in y
e
 course we haue in oure returne costed certaine


Ilands on the Weast Sea,
 called the Ilands of 
Perou,
 for that they border the lande, I thinke it good in lyke case somewhat to write thereof, for bicause we were some to the heigth of one of these Ilandes named the Spanish Iland by those that first did discouer it, being before named 
Haiti,
 which is as much to say, as sharpe or sower land.
 Also it was named 
Quisqueia
 the great, and of a truthe it is so faire and great, that from the east to the west, it is .50. leagues long, and of bredth from the North to the South .40. and in compasse or cyrcuit more than .400. and is beyond the 
Equinocti∣all
 lyne .18. degrees, hauing toward the East the Iland of 
Saint Iohn
 with many other small Ilands, much to be feared and dangerous for Saylers, and toward the West, it hath the Ilands of 
Cuba
 and 
Iamaica,
 on the North syde the Ilands of the 
Canibals,
 and toward the South the 
Cape
 of 
Ʋela,
 planted on the mayne land. This Iland sheweth lyke to 
Sycilly,
 in tymes past that first was named 
Trinacria,
 for y
t
 it had .3. promētaries very eminēt, lyke vnto that of which we speake, the which hath thrée standing very farre into the Sea, of the which the first is named 
Tyburon,
 the second 
Hig∣ney,
 y
e
 third 
Labos,
 which is a syde of y
e
 Iland, which they haue named 
Beata,
 almost full of y
e
 wood 
Gaiac.
 In this Spanish Iland, are found many fayre Riuers, among y
e
 which y
t
 chiefest named 
Orane,
 passeth rounde aboute y
e
 chiefest Citie named by y
e
 
Spaniards 
Sainst Dominick,
 the others are 
Nequa Hatibonice & Haqua,
 full of very good fishe and pleasant to eate, the which is bicause of the temperatnesse of the Ayre and goodnesse of the ground and of the water: these Riuers runne about into the Sea almost all on the East syde, y
e
 which mée∣ting together, make a very large Riuer bancked on


both sydes, before that this Iland was discouered of y
t
 Christiās, it was inhabited with wilde men that were Idolaters, worshipping the diuel, who shewed him self to them in diuers similitudes & lykenesse. Also they made many & sundry Idols, according to the visions & sights that they had, as they do at this present in many Ilands & maine land of that countrey: the others wor∣ship many gods, chiefly one aboue the rest, the which they esteme to be a maker of all things: and they re∣presēt his figure in an Idoll of wood, being set in some trée garnished with leaues and fethers. Likewise they worship the Sunne & the Moone, & other celestiall cre∣atures, the which now the inhabitāts that are there do not vse, for that they are reformed to y
t
 Christian faith and to all kynde of ciuilitie: I know wel that in times paste there haue ben some y
t
 haue not regarded it.


We reade of 
Caius Caligula,
 an Emperor of 
Rome,
 though he dispraised & hated y
t
 diuine power, yet neuer∣thelesse he quaked & trembled for feare, when y
t
 there appeared any shew or tokē of gods wrath. But before y
t
 this Iland of which we speake, was brought to sub∣iection vnder the 
Spaniards,
 (as I haue ben enformed of those that were at the conquest) the wylde men killed aboue ten thousād Christians, vntil y
t
 the 
Spaniards
 had fortified thē selues in certain places: after which time they killed a great multitude of y
e
 inhabitants, y
e
 rest y
t
 were left they led captiue into diuers countreys, and made them slaues. And after this sort they haue vsed them of y
e
 Ilands of 
Cuba,
 of 
S. Iohn Iamaique,
 the holy crosse, & the 
Canibals,
 with many other Ilands & maine countrys. For at the first the 
Spaniards
 & 
Portingals,
 for that they would haue the better dominion & rule, lear∣ned to liue after their maner, alluring them by gifts


and faire woordes, always keping them in their fauor, vntill that in proces of time they saw how that they were able to mate and ouercome them, then they began to reuolte from their former vse, taking this rude people and vsing them lyke slaues, they prouoked them to labor the earth, otherwise they had neuer come to the perfection of their enterprise. The mightiest kings of this countrey, are in 
Casco,
 and 
Apina,
 rich and famous Ilands, aswell for the Golde and Siluer that there is founde, as for the fruitfulnesse of the land. The inhabitāts weare nothing but Golde about them, as large bouckles of two or thrée pound waight y
e
 péece, hanging at their eares, the weight whereof maketh their eares to hang halfe a foote long, the which causeth the 
Spaniards,
 to cal them greate eares. This Iland is very rich in Mynes of Golde,
 as are ma∣ny others of that countrey, for there are founde few or none but either hath Mynes of Gold or Siluer. Further∣more, it doeth abounde with horned beastes, as Oxen, Kyne, Shéepe, Goates and an infinit number of Hogs, also very fayre Horses, the which beastes for the most parte are become wylde as we haue shewed of the maine lande. As touching Corne and wyne they haue none but that which is brought from other places, and therefore in stede of bread, they eate much 
Cassade,
 made of the meale of Rootes, and in sted of wyne, they haue very good and swéete drynks made of diuerse fruites, as the Syder of 
Normandy.
 They haue an infinit number of good fish, of the which some are very straunge, among the which there is one named 
Manaty,
 the which is taken in the ryuers, and also in the Sea, but the greatest store are in Ryuers. This fish is lyke to a Bucke or Goats skynne, being fylled wyth oyle or wine, hauing two féete on both sydes of the shoulders, with the which he swimmeth, and


from the brest to the tayle deminisheth of greatnesse,
 his head is lyke to the head of an Oxe, hauing a slender face, the chyn ful & great, and very lyttle eyes: this fish is ten foote broade & twenty foote long, hauing a graye skynne, heary lyke to an Oxe hyde, so that with his skynne the people of the coūtrey make showes accor∣ding to their maner: his féete are all rounde, garnished eche one with foure long clawes lyke to the féete of an Oliphant. This fish is more disformed and mishapen, than any kynde of fish in that countrey. Notwithstan∣ding very good to eate, hauing a tast more lyke to vele, than fishe. The inhabitans of that countrey do gather the grease of the sayde fishe, for that it is very good for their Goate skyns of the which they make very good marokyns: the black slaues or 
Neigers,
 do anoynt their bodies there with to make them better disposed & their ioynts to be playable, as the 
Africans
 doe with oyle of Olyue. Within the head of this fish are found certaine stones, of the which they make great store,
 for y
t
 they haue proued them to be good against the colyke, be it in the Raynes or in the bladder. The femals of this fish bring forth their yong ones quick, with out egge, as doth y
e
 Whale & the Grampyn, also she hath .ij. rothers lyke beasts on y
e
 earth, with y
e
 which they giue suck to their yong ones. A 
Spaniard
 that had dwelled long time in this Iland shewed to me, y
t
 a gouerner of y
e
 coūtrey did norish one in a cesterne, y
e
 terme of .30. yeares, the which in proces of time became so priuie, y
t
 she wold al∣most suffer one to lay his hand vpō hir.
 The wyld men will take this fish hard by y
e
 shore as she féedeth vpon y
e
 grasse. I leue to speake of many byrds clad with diuers rich coloured fethers, w
t
 which they make tapissary, & figurs of mē, & womē, beasts, birds & other things, they


trim them vpon some lynnen clothe, & therewith they garnish hats, caps and gounes, the which is very fayre & pleasant to beholde. Of strange foure footed beastes there are none founde, but onely those of which we haue spoken. Neuerthelesse there is founde two kynde of lyttle beastes,
 as little as Coneys, the which they name 
Hulias,
 and 
Caris,
 good to eate. That which I haue sayde of this Iland, I may in lyke maner speake of the Iland of 
S. Iames
 before named 
Iamaica,
 on the east side it hath y
e
 Iland of 
S. Dominike.
 There is a nother faire Iland named 
Bouriquan,
 in their countrey spech, but in the carde 
Marius,
 it is named 
S. Iohns
 Iland, y
e
 which on the East side hath lying the Iland of the holy crosse, and other little Ilands of the which some are inhabi∣ted, the others are deserte. This Ilande from the East to y
e
 west containeth aboute .52. leagues, of length .300. degrées no minutes, and of latitude .18. degrées no my∣nutes. To be short, there are many other Ilandes in those parts, the which bicause of the multitude I omit. Also for that I could haue no particular knowledge of them, I will not here forget, that in all these Ilandes there are founde no rauening beastes no more than in England, and in the Ile of 
Creta.






Of the Iland of 
Cuba,
 and of 
Lucaiae,
 Cap. 72.


NOw there resteth of all the Ilands of 
Perou,
 to re∣herse some secrets of the Iland of 
Cuba,
 & of cer∣taine others adiacēt, & yet to say the truthe there can be little more spoken than that which hath ben al∣redy sayd of y
e
 
Spanish
 Iland. This Iland is more grea∣ter & larger than the others, for it is reckned from the 
Promontarie
 that is on the East syde, to the other that


is on the west syde thrée hundreth leagues. And from the North to the South seuenty leagues. As touching the disposition of the aire, there it is temperate, so that there is no excesse of heate, nor yet of colde. There are found rich mines of Gold & siluer, likewise other met∣tals. On y
e
 sea side are found faire riuers that procede from the high hills, the waters whereof are excellent, with great quantitie of good fish. Moreouer before it was discouered, it was better peopled with wyld men than any others, but at this day the 
Spaniards
 are lords and masters. The myddest of this Ilande hath two hūdreth nintie degrées of longitude, no minuts, and of latitude twenty degrées no minutes. There is a hyll harde by the Sea syde that is all salte,
 more higher than that of 
Cipris,
 greate number of trées of cotton, brasyll, hornebeame, also salte of the earth proceding out of a nother mountaine very high and brackishe. And of this kynde there is founde in lyke maner in the Iland of 
Cipris,
 named of the Grekes, 
Oryctos,
 the which also is gotten in a mountaine hard by the Sea. Furthermore, there is founde in this Ilande great store of Azer, Vermilion, Alume and other things that are taken out of the bowels of the Earth.
 As touching byrds and foules of the Ayre, there is a kynd of Par∣trige very little, being of a red color, and also of dy∣uers other colours, their fleshe is very delicate. The rusticall people of the mountaines do nourish a num∣ber of them in their houses, as we do here pullein, and many other things worthy to be noted and written. First there is a valley that is in length thrée leagues betwene two mountaines, where as are founde an in∣finite number of bowles of stone, great and little, be∣ing naturally engendred in that place, although some


wold iudge them to be made artificially. Sometimes there is founde some so great, that foure men wold be combered to cary away one, the others are lesse, and some so little that they excéede not the quantity of a little egge.
 The seconde thing worthy to be noted is, that in the same Ilande there is a mountaine néere to the riuage of the Sea, out of the which runneth a licor like to that which is made in the fortunate Ilandes named 
Bre
 as we haue before shewed, the which run∣neth doune into the Sea. 
Quintus Curtius
 in his bokes which he hath made of the Iestes of 
Alexander
 y
e
 great, sheweth that he being come to a citie named 
Memi,
 was desirous to sée a great pitte or caue, in the which there was a fountaine that rendred great quantitie of gumme very strong, being vsed with other thinges, so that the authour thinketh for this onely reason the walles of 
Babilon
 to haue ben so strong,
 for that they haue bene made of such thinges, the which is not onely founde in the Ilande of 
Cuba,
 but also in the countrey of 
Themistitan,
 and on the coast of 
Florida.
 As touching the Ilands of 
Lucaia,
 (being so named for that they are many in number) they are northward of the Ilande of 
Cuba,
 and of 
S. Dominike,
 they are more than .iiij. hun∣dreth in number, all little ones and not inhabited, vn∣lesse it be the greatest that beareth the name of all the others named 
Lucaia.
 The inhabitants of this Ilande commonly goe to trafficke on the maine lande, and to other, Ilands. They that inhabite there, as well men as women, are whiter and more fairer than in any of those parties or countreis. Séeing that I am in talke with these Ilands & of their riches, I will not forget somewhat to speake of the riches of 
Potossi,
 the which taketh his name of a highe mountaine y
t
 hath in height


a great league, & halfe a league compasse.
 This moun∣taine is maruellous riché, bicause of the great Mynes of siluer, tyn, and brasse which hath ben found almost at the top of the mountaine, and this Myne of Syluer hath ben found so good that in one quintall of the Mine is found halfe a quintall of pure Syluer. The slaues do no other thing but worke & fetch Syluer from the Myne, & they cary it to the principall and chief towne of that countrey, the wich was edifyed at the bottome of the hyll by the 
Spaniards.
 Synce this Myne was found out, all the countries, Ilands & mayne lands be Inhabited with certaine wylde men all naked as in other places of 
America.
 Thus much as touching 
Pe∣rou,
 and of his Ilands.






A description of Noua Espania, and of the great citie of Themistitan edified in the vvest Indies. Cap. 73.


FOr bicause that it is not possible for all men to sée sēsibly all things during his age, be it either bicause of the continuall alteration and changing of things that are here in this world, or bicause of y
e
 long distāce of places & countries, God hath giuen the meane to re∣present them not onely by writing, but also by picture by the industry & labor of those that haue sene them. I haue sene set out by figure, many auncient, as those of 
Iason,
 of 
Acteon, Eneas, Hercules,
 & many other things y
e
 which we may dayly sée in their proper forme, with∣out figure, as are many kynds of wild beasts. For this cause I mynd to set forth & rehearse vnto you, y
e
 great & large citie of 
Thimistitan,
 as nere as is possible,
 being sure & certaine y
t
 few among you haue sene it, neither can ye well go & sée it bicause of the long & dangerous


nauigation that it behoueth ye to make. 
Themistitan
 is a citie edified in newe 
Spayne,
 the which taketh his be∣ginning at the straight of 
Ariana,
 and endeth on the north side at the riuer of 
Canuca.
 In times past it was named 
Anauak,
 and since because it was discouered and inhabited of 
Spaniardes,
 it hath receiued the name of newe 
Spaine.
 Among the which landes, the first in∣habited was 
Iucathan,
 the which hath a point of lande lying out into y
e
 sea like vnto the lande of 
Florida,
 not∣withstanding that those which make the Cardes 
Ma∣rius,
 haue forgottē to make the best, the which setteth out their shew or description. Now this 
Noua Espania,
 on the East, West, and South side, is compassed with the west sea, and on the North side to the new world, the which being inhabited, is séene beyond in the same North, an other lande not known of the 
Modernes,
 for the which I will not stand therein. 
Themistitan,
 which is a strong Citie, great and very riche in the countrey before named, is founded on a greate Lake, the way that goeth to this Citie is not broader than the length of two speares, being so named of him that laide the foundation, named 
Tenuth,
 sonne to the Kinge 
Iztac∣mixcoatz.
 This citie hath onely two gates, the one to enter in, the other for to come out at. And not farre from the Citie is a bridge of wood, a tenne foote broad, the which was made for the encreasing & diminishing of the waters: for that Lake riseth and falleth like vn∣to the Sea. And for the defence of the citie there is yet many others like in maner to 
Ʋenice,
 edified in the sea. That countrey is cōpassed with very high mountains, & the plaine cuntrey hath in circuit .150. leagues, in the which is foūd .ij. lakes that occupy a great part therof, for bicause y
t
 these .ij. lakes haue of circuit .50. leagues,


of the which thone is fresh water,
 in the which is ma∣ny good small fishe, and the other is salte water, the which besyde his bitternesse is venemous, and there∣fore it can nourish no fish, the which is against the opi∣nion of those that thinck it to be but one Laake. The playne is separated from the sayd Laakes by certaine mountaynes, and at their farthest parte they are ioy∣ned with a straight or narow land, by the which men are conducted with barkes and boates euen into the Citie, the which is standing on the salt water, & from thence to the mayne land on the causy side, it is foure leagues. And I cannot compare the greatnesse thereof better than to 
Ʋenise.
 For to enter into the sayd Citie there is foure ways made of stones artificially, wher∣as there are two cundits or fountaines of y
e
 greatnesse of two paces, and of a mans heigth, from one of the which is conducted fresh water into the Citie, y
e
 which is of the heigth of fiue foote, and the water runneth a long euen to the middest of the Citie, of the which they drynke, and vse it in their nedeful businesse. The other Chanel they kéepe emptie for this reason: when y
t
 they will 
lense that same wherein the fresh water is, they bring all the filth of the Citie with the other to y
e
 land, and bicause that the chanels passe by the bridges, & by the places whereas the salt water entereth & goeth oute, they conduct the sayd water by swéete and cleane chanells the heigth of a pace. Vpon this Laake y
t
 com∣passeth the Citie, the 
Spaniards
 haue made many fayre houses & places of pleasure, some vpon little Rocks & others vpon pyles of woode. Moreouer 
Themistitan,
 stādeth a .xx. degrées of eleuation aboue the lyne 
Equi∣noctiall,
 and hath .272. degrées of longitude.
 It was ta∣ken by strength, by 
Ferdinand
 of 
Cortes,
 being captaine


generall for the Emperor in those partes of the yeare of grace .1521. containing than .70000. houses little and great.
 The kings palaice which was named 
Mutuezu∣ma,
 with those of the lords of y
e
 towne, was faire, great and large. The Indians that then did inhabit this Ci∣tie, had a custome to kepe euery fyue daies the market in places thereto appointed, their trade was fethers of byrds,
 with the which they made diuers and sundry things, as gounes fashioned after their maner, Tapi∣stry woorke, and other things. And to these sciences were the oldest sorte occupied. When they would go worship their great Idoll, the which was erected in the myddest of the Citie, lyke vnto a theatre, who when they had taken any of theyr enimies in the war, did sacrifice them to their Idolls, and then eate them, holding this for a kynde of religion. Furthermore, their trade was beastes skynnes, of the which they made gounes, hose, and a kynde of hoodes for to kepe them as well from the colde, as from stynging flyes. The inhabitans at this daye, which before were cruel and vnhumaine, by succession of time haue so well changed their maners and conditions, that in stead of barbarous and cruell, they are ciuill and gratious, in such sort that they haue left all theyr former naughtie and wicked doings, the which they were wont to vse: as in killing one another, eating humayne fleshe, to haue company with the first woman y
t
 they met, with∣out hauing regarde either to kindred or degrée, with other lyke vices and imperfections. Their houses are sumptuously buylded. Among other things there is a fayre palaice where as the Armour of y
e
 Citie is kept: the streates and places of this Citie are so straight, that from one gate one may sée to the other without


any let. To be short, this citie at this present is so for∣tified and compassed with strong walls and rampers, lyke in forme and fashion to oures in 
Europe,
 and it is one of the greatest, fayrest and rychest that is in all the prouinces of y
e
 west Indies, taking from y
e
 straight of 
Magellan,
 which is beyond the lyne .52. degrees, vnto the last & furthest land of 
Abrador,
 y
e
 which holdeth .51. degrées of latitude on this syde y
e
 lyne on y
e
 North side.






Of Florida. Cap. 74.


SEing that in writing this discourse we haue made mention of this lande called 
Florida,
 although that in our retorne we approched not so neare, conside∣ring that our course lay not altogether so low, neuer∣thelesse, we sayled close by to take an easterly wynde. It séemeth to me not out of the way, to write thereof some thing. Lykewise of the land of 
Canada
 that is next to it toward y
e
 North, being onely certaine moū∣taines betwene bothe. Therefore keping our course of the height of new 
Spaine,
 on y
e
 right hande to attaine to 
Europe,
 not so sone nor so right a course as we wi∣shed to haue gone, we found the sea fauorable ynough. But as by chaunce I put out my head for to beholde it, I saw it as farre as I could extend my sight, all coue∣red with herbes and floures, the which gaue me occa∣sion to think that we were nere to y
e
 land, considering also y
t
 in other places of y
e
 sea I had not so much séene, notwithstanding I found my selfe incontinently fru∣strate of my opinion,
 knowing that they proceded of y
e
 sea, so y
e
 we saw the sea strawed with those hearbs for y
e
 space of .20. days. The sea in y
e
 part hath smal store of fish, for th
se places séeme rather to be marishes, than


otherwise.
 Shortly after appeared another signe, and forshewing of a starre, with a long tayle from y
e
 East, into the North, the which forshewings, I leaue to the iudgement of Astronomers and to the experience of those that haue knowledge therein. After this which was worse, we were troubled with a contrary wind, the terme of nyne dayes, euen to the heigth of our 
Florida.
 That place is a poynt of lande entring into the full Sea, a hundreth leagues, being .25. leagues a shelfe or shallow .25. degrées and a half on this syde the lyne, & a hundreth leagues from 
Caape de Baxa.
 Ther∣fore this great land of 
Florida
 is very daungerous for those that sayle of the coast of 
Cataia, Canibalu, Panu∣ca,
 and 
Themistitan:
 for to sight a farre of, it would be iudged an Iland lying out in y
e
 mayne Sea. Further∣more this place is dangerous bicause of the running waters, wyndes and tempests that are in that coast commonly. As touching the mayne lande of 
Florida,
 it hath on the east syde the prouince of 
Chicoma,
 and the Ilands named 
Bahana
 and 
Lucaia.
 On the west syde lyeth 
noua Espania,
 the which diuideth in the land that is named 
Anauae,
 of the which we haue before she∣wed. The best and most fruitfullest countries that are in 
Florida,
 is 
Panuae,
 y
t
 which bordereth 
Noua Espania.
 The people of the countrey are naturally cruell and mightie men, being all Idolaters, who when that they haue néede either of water or sunne, for their gar∣dens and rootes, with the which they dayly liue, then they will fall doune before their Idolls, that are ma
 to the similitude of men or of beastes. Besides this these people are more and better practised in the feats of warre than the people of 
Perou.
 When they go to the warrs, they beare their king on foure mens shoul∣ders


in a beastes skinne, and they that beare him, are clad and garnished with riche feathers. And when that they come to hande strokes, they set their king in the middest of them, clad with fine skinnes, and he will neuer depart from thence, vntill the battell be ended: Also if that they feele them selues to bée the weaker sort, and that their kyng beginneth to flée, they wyll not fayle to kill hym, the which order the 
Persians
 and other barbarous nations in the East parte obserue at this day: their weapons of defence are bowes and ar∣rowes made of wood enuenomed, the whiche in stede of Iron heades are garnished at the ende with bones of fishes or wilde beasts, the whiche is very sharpe. Some of them will eate their enimies, as the 
Ameri∣canes
 will doe, of whom we haue spoken. And although this people as we haue before shewed are Idolaters, neuerthelesse they beléeue the soule to be immortall. Also that there is a place appointed for the wicked, the whiche is a very colde land, and that the Gods permit that the sinnes of the wicked shall be punished. Also they beleue, that there is an infinite numbre of people in the skies, and as many vnder the earth with many other folies, the which may better be compared to the transformations of 
Ouide,
 than to any other thyng. Furthermore, they beleue these things to be true, as 
Turkes
 and 
Arabians
 do that which is writen in their 
Alcoran.
 This countrey towarde the sea is not verie fruitfull, the people are very rusticall more than those of 
Perou,
 or of 
America,
 for that they are traded wyth strangers. This lande was named 
Florida,
 in the yere 1512. by those that first dyd discouer it: for bicause that by the sea side it was flourishing with gréene trées, and with an infinite number of 
cures of diuers & sundry


colours. Betwene this 
Florida,
 and the riuer of 
Palme,
 are to be seene diuers kinds of monstrous and strange beastes,
 among which ther is a kind of great Bulles, hauing hornes a foote long, and on the backe a croupe like to a Camell, the heare long all about the bodie, ha∣uing a dunnish colour. Of these beasts there were once two, that were broughte quicke into 
Spayne,
 of one of the which I saw the skin, and not otherwise, and they liued there but a short time. This beast (as it is said) is perpetual enimie to the horsse, & can not abide him to be by him.
 In 
Florida,
 toward the 
Caape
 of 
Baxe,
 there are certaine litle riuers, where as the wylde men ga∣ther oisters,
 that haue pearles. Now seing that we ar come to the gathering of oysters, I will not forget by what meanes they get out these pearles, as wel in the east 
Indians,
 as in the West. Ye must note that euery chiefe or head housholder, hauyng a greate number of slaues, knowing not to what labour to set them about they sende them to-gather oysters, of the whiche they gather baskets full for their masters, putting them in∣to certain great vessells, which being halfe full of wa∣ter, is an occasion, that the oysters beyng conserued therin certaine dayes do open, and the water clensing them, leaueth these stones or perles within these ves∣sels. And to get them out they first take the oisters out of the vessell, and then they lette the water oute by a hole, vnder the which they lay a linnen cloth, least that with the water the stones or pearles that mighte be, should runne out. As touching the figure of these Oy∣sters, they differ much from ours, as well in colour as in shell, hauing eche of them certain litle holes, which would be thought to haue ben made artificially, in the which holes are these pearles. Thus muche thought I


good to speake of by the way, the like also are found at 
Perou,
 and certaine other stones in good number: but the finest are founde in the Riuer of 
Palme,
 and in the riuer of 
Panuco,
 the which are distant the one from the other .32. leagues, but the christians haue not libertie to get them, bicause that the wilde men of that coun∣trie, are not yet conuerted to our christian faith.


Now therfore coasting 
Florida
 on the left hand, the winde beyng to vs contrary, we sayled very néere to 
Canada,
 and to an other countrey that is called 
Bacca∣los,
 which was against our wills, and to our great dis∣pleasure, bicause of the extreme colde that molested vs the terme of eightene dayes,
 although that this lād of 
Baccalos
 entreth farre into the full sea in forme of a point welnigh two hundreth leagues on the north side distant from the line onely fortie eight degrées.
 Thys pointe was named 
Baccales,
 bicause of a certaine fishe that is found thereabout in the sea, whiche they name 
Baccales,
 betwene which and the 
Cape Delgado,
 there is diuers Ilāds peopled, very dāgerous to aboord, bicause of the multitude of rocks that compasse the sayd Ilan∣des, & they are called the Ilands of 
Cortes.
 Some iudge them not to be Ilands but mayne lande, hangyng vp∣on the point of 
Baccalles.
 These places were first disco∣uered by an Englishman named 
Sebastian Babat,
 who informed Kyng 
Henry
 the seuenth, that by that waye he would sayle into the countrie of 
Catia,
 towards the Northe, and that by this meanes he woulde fynde spi∣ces and other thyngs as well as the Kyng of 
Portingal
 dyd in the east 
Indies:
 Neuerthelesse his mynd was to go to 
Perou,
 & 
America,
 for to people that cuntrie with Englishmē, but his purpose toke no effect. True it is y
t
 he landed toward the coast of Irelād in y
e
 north .300. mē


where as bicause of the extreme colde the most part of his men dyed, thoughe it were in the moneth of Iuly. And since 
Iames Quartier
 a Briton made thither two voyages, as he hym selfe shewed me in the yeare .1530. and .1535.






Of the lande of Canada, before named Bacca∣los, being discouered in oure time, and how the inhabitants liue. Ca. 75.


FOr bicause that this countrey lying in the Northe was discouered in oure time,
 first by 
Sebastian Ba∣bat
 an Englisheman, and then by 
Iames Quartier
 a Briton, beyng well séene in nauigation, who toke vpon him the voyage at the commaundemente of the kyng of 
France, 
Francisce
 the first, I think it good ther∣fore somewhat to write, the which semeth to me most worthie to be noted: although that accordyng to the order of our voyage homewardes, it ought to go before the next Chapter. Moreouer, that which moueth me so to doe, is that I haue not séene any that hathe treated otherwise, although to my iudgement the thyng doth merite it, and that I haue surely learned it of the sayd 
Iames Quartier.
 This lande being almoste vnder the Pole artike, is ioyned towarde the Weast to 
Florida,
 and to the Ilandes of 
Perou,
 and since is coasted by the west toward 
Baccalles,
 of which we haue spoken. The which place I think be the same, that those which late∣ly haue discouered and named 
Canada,
 as it happeneth many times that some will giue name to that whiche is out of others knowledge, the which toward the east extendeth to the sea called 
Hyperbores,
 & on the other side to a mayne lande called 
Campestra de Berga,
 to the


Southeast ioyning to this countrey. There is a Caape called 
Loraine,
 otherwise by them that discouered it, the lande of Britons, being nere to new founde lande, hauing not in distance aboue .x. or .xij leagues betwene them. This new founde land bordreth this hie lād, the which we haue named 
Caape Loraine,
 and towards the northeast betweene both lieth an Iland,
 which hath in compasse about foure leagues. The said lād beginneth euen at the sayd Caape towards the Southe, and ex∣tendeth east northeast, and west Southwest, the most part thereof extending to the lande of 
Florida,
 lying like an halfe circle, drawing towarde 
Themistitan.
 Now to return to 
Caape Loraine,
 of the which we haue spoken, it lieth to the lande towards the north, whiche is ranged with the sea 
Meditarium,
 as 
Italy
 betweene the sea 
Adriatike,
 and the sea 
Ligustike.
 And from the sayd Caape going towards the West, and west south∣west, the shore is to be séene about two hundreth lea∣gues, and all sandie and silte, without any port or ha∣uen. This region is inhabited with many people of an indifferent gret stature, very malicious, hauing most cōmonly their faces disfigured & couered with vizards of red and blew, which colours they haue of certayne fruites: This lande was discouered by 
Iames Quartier
 a Bryton, borne at S. 
Maloes,
 in the yeare .1535. At that time besides the number of shippes that he had, for the performaunce of his voyage, with certaine barkes, some with .60. and 80. men a piece, he fought out this vnknowne countrie, vntill he came to a great & brode riuer, to the which they gaue a name, in the whiche is founde very good fish, chiefly Salmons, and that great plentie: then they traded into so many places adiacēt with kniues, hatchets, hookes and lynes to fishe with,


and such like, for Hartes skinnes and skinnes of other wild beastes, wherof there is great store. The wilde men of the countrey gaue them good entertainement, shewing them selues well affectioned towardes them, and glad of their comming, knowledge and amitie, and with their practise in bargainyng with them. After this, they passyng further, founde other people, contrary to the first, as well in their language, as in their maner of liuyng,
 the which people sayd that they came from the great riuer 
Chelogua,
 for to make war against their neighbors, which afterward was known of a truthe by 
Iames Quartier,
 who toke one of their skiffes with seuen men, wherof he reserued twaine, which he brought into 
Fraunce,
 and at his second voy∣age did carie them backe againe, and also they retur∣ned againe, and were made Christians, & ended their liues in 
Fraunce.
 Moreouer the sayde 
Quartier
 coulde not learne the maner of liuing of the first 
Barbariens,
 neither what commoditie is in their countrey and re∣gion, bicause that it was not before frequented nor traded.






Of an other countrey of Canada. Cap. 76.


AS touching the other part of this Region of 
Cana∣da,

where as remayne and inhabite the last wilde men: It hath ben since discouered beyond the sayd riuer. of 
Chelogua,
 being more thā thrée or four hūdreth leagues by the said 
Quartier,
 wheras he foūd the coun∣trey well peopled, as well in his second as first Naui∣gation: the people of that countrey is as obediente, and as amiable as is possible, & as familiar as though that alwayes they hadde bene broughte vp together


without any signe of yll will, or any other rigour. And there the sayd 
Quartier
 made a certaine hold or castle for to winter him and his, likewise for to defend them against the colde weather, the which there is very ri∣gorous. He was very wel intertained, considering the time & seson: for the inhabitants brought them dayly boates ful of fish, as Eeles, Lampreys and others: like wise fleshe and venison, wherof there is great plenty. Also they are greate hunters, be it either sommer or winter with snares and otherwise: they vse a kinde of rackets sette together, with cordes of two foote and a halfe of length, and one foote broade, they were them on their féete in the frost and in the snow,
 chiefly when they go to hunt wild beasts, to y
e
 end that in folowing of their chase their féet sinke not into the snow. These people ar clad with y
e
 skins of these wild beasts, being corried & trimmed according to their maner.
 Nowe to take these beasts they wil assēble .x. or .xij. together, be∣ing weponed with iauelins or boare speares y
t
 are xv. or .xvj. foote long, and garnished at the ende with the horne of some harte, or tooth of some other wild beast, the head wherof is at least a foote long, the which they vse in steade of yron, and Bowes and Arrowes, gar∣nished wyth the same. Then they follow the footing of the Déere, and other wylde beastes in the Snowe,
 the whiche is common all the yeare long: and after that they haue founde out their trayne or footyng, they wil plant their braunches of Cedre which is gréene there all the yeare long, the which they plant in manner of nettes, and there they wil hide them being weaponed as before is shewed, so that the déere séeing the gréene boughes, drawe thytherwarde, and then they come forth, and cause the déere to quit and forsake that way,


and enter into the déepe snowes euen vnto the belly, where as they can not easily runne nor goe: and so by this meanes they are taken and killed, and opened in the fieldes, and so being wrapt in his skin, they drawe him to their houses. And after this sort they broughte them to the castle or hold that 
Iames Quartier
 did kepe both fleshe and skinne, selling them for no other recō∣pēse than kniues hatchets, and other yron tooles. Also I will not lette passe one thyng very singular, that is, when that these people are sicke either of an ague, or any other inward disease, they take the leaues of a cer∣taine trée, which is lyke to a Cedre, with the whiche they make a water that they drinke, so that there is no disease, be it neuer so festred in a mans body, but that this drinke will heale within .xxiiij. houres, which also Christians haue tried, and haue brought the plantes therof into this countrey.






What religion these Canadians vse with their ly∣uing, and how they resist the cold. Ca. 77.


THese people in their liuyng and gouerning do not farre differ from the lawe of Nature,
 their matri∣monie is, that a man may haue two or thrée wiues withoute any other solemnitie, as the 
Americans,
 of whiche we haue alreadie spoken. Of their Religion, they kéepe no meane, nor ceremonie in worshyppyng or praying to God, sauyng that they contemplate, the newe Moone,
 called in theyr language 
Osannaha,
 say∣eng that 
Andouagny
 dothe so call it, and then causeth it to spreade by litle and litle. Moreouer, they doe be∣leue, that there is a Creator more greater than the Sun or the Moone, and that hath all vnder his power,


and it is he whome they call 
Andouagny,
 and yet they neither knowe what waye to inuocate nor call vpon, to praye to him, nor to worship him, although that in some partes of 
Canada,
 they worship Idols,
 and wyll haue them sometimes in their lodgings aboue fortie or fiftie, the which was shewed me of a truth by a 
Por∣tingall
 pylote, the which did on a time visite two or thrée villages or hamlettes with the lodgyngs of the inhabitants. They beleue that the soule is immortall,

and that if a man doe euil, when he is dead, a byrd bea∣reth awaye his soule: Contrarywise, if that they doe well, the soule goeth into a place condecorate wyth goodly faire trees and floures, where as there are birds singing melodiously: of the which the lord of the coun∣trey of 
Canada
 dyd informe vs,
 beyng named 
Donaco∣ua Aguanna,
 who dyed in 
Fraunce
 a good Christian, and spake good frenche, for he had ben kept there foure ye∣res. And for bicause that I will not be tedious in this historie of these 
Canadians,
 ye shal note that these peo∣ple vniuersally are afflicted with continuall colde,
 by∣cause of the absence of the Sunne, as ye may wel vn∣derstande, they inhabite in certaine villages and ham∣lettes, made like to halfe a circle, in greatnesse twen∣tie or thirtie paces, and ten of breadth, couered with barkes of trees, & some with réedes. And God knoweth whether that the colde doth greue them,
 hauing suche yll lodgings, yll couered, and worse holden vp, so that many tymes the pillers with that which vpholdeth the house,
 for the waight of the snowe that most common∣ly lieth vpon the house falleth down: yet notwithstan∣ding this extreme colde, they are mightie strong and vnreasonable great trauailers. Also all the people that dwell Northe are the lyke some more and some lesse,


euen as those that dwell towarde the 
Equinoctiall
 and south pole, are contrary, bicause y
t
 the vehement heate of the aire draweth out the naturall heate, fo that they are only hot without and cold within: the others haue their naturall heate enclosed, & prouoked to keepe in, bicause of y
e
 outward cold,
 which maketh them strong, stoute and valiant: for the force and facultie of all the parts of the body, dependeth of this natural heat. The sea that is aboute thys countrey is frosen, bicause that it is so farre from the Sun, which from the east to the west, passeth through the midst of the world: And the greater that the naturall heate is, the better is a mās appetite, and the better doth he brooke and digest mea∣tes: so that these people towards the north eate more and haue a better stomacke than those in other parts:
 for the which cause oftentimes there is in 
Canada
 Fa∣mine: also for that their fruits, rootes, and other thin∣ges, wherwith they sustaine them, is frosen the moste part of the yeare, likewise their riuers. We haue she∣wed how that they couer their houses with barkes of trées: also they make boates to fish in, both for the salt water and the fresh. Those of the lande of 
Labrador
 their neighbours,
 the which lande was discouered by the 
Spanyardes,
 thinking that by this coast they mighte finde a way more néerer to sayle to 
Moluques,
 wheras spices are in lyke maner subiecte to these coldes, and they couer their lodgyngs with the skynnes of fishes and of wylde beastes, as also do other 
Canadians.
 Fur∣thermore the sayd 
Canadians
 liue together in common as doe the 
Americanes,
 and they labour and worke ech one that whiche he can do. Some make pots of earth, others platters, dyshes, spoones, and other thyngs of woode, others bowes and arrowes, baskets, panniers


and other apparell of the skinnes that they doe vse to weare to couer them from the colde. The women they labour the earth, and tourne it with certaine in∣struments of stones made long: and they sow graine, specially 
Myll
 as great as peason,
 and of diuers co∣lours, the which they plante as we do Melons & gour∣des, the stalke groweth like to Suger Canes, bearing thrée or foure eares, of which there is alway one more greate than the other, in manner like to our Articho∣kes. They plant also flatte Beanes,
 as white as snow the which are very good, there are of that kind both in 
America,
 and in 
Perou.
 They haue also good plentie of Cucumbers, the which the eate roasted in the imbers as we doe Peares and Wardens. Furthermore there is a litle sede very small like to Marioram séede, which bringeth forth an herbe somwhat great. This herbe is maruellously estéemed: also they drie it in the Sunne,
 after that they haue gathered a greate quantitie, and customably they hāg it about their neck, being wrap∣ped in leather with a kinde of thorne, hauing a hole in one end, where as they put an end of this herbe,
 being this dried, which after that they haue rubbed it a litle betwene their hāds, they put it to the fire, & so receiue the smoke by the other end of y
e
 horn into their mouths and they take therof in such quantitie, that it cometh forth both at the nose, and at the eyes. And after that sorte they parfume them all houres in the daye: The people of 
America,
 doe parfume them after an other maner, as we haue before shewed.






Of these Canadians apparel, how they weare their haire, and howe their treate their chil∣dren. Cap. 78.


THese 
Canadians
 hauing much more ciuilitie thā y
e
 inhabitants of 
America,
 know the meane how to couer and cloth themselues in beastes skins with their haire being trimmed after their manner, where∣of wee haue here before spoken, peraduenture being constrained bicause of the extreme colde, and not o∣therwise, whiche occasion being not shewed to others that inhabite 
America,
 causeth them to remaine na∣ked without any shame one of an other. And yet the men of 
Canada,
 are not altogether clad, but only wrap∣ped in these rough and heary skins like to an apron for to couer the shamfast parts of nature, brynging it be∣twixt their legs, & buttoned with buttons, on both the thighs, & thē they gird them with a brode girdle, which couereth all their body, and they haue their armes and legs bare, sauing that vpō this they wear a long cloke with furred skinnes, sowed so wel together, as if some master furrier or skinner of our countrey had thereto set his hand. Their clokes are made of Badgers skins Beares skins, Marterns, Panthers, Foxes, Hares, Ratts, and Coneys, & other skins corryed after their maner with haire & al: which to my iudgemēt hath cau∣sed this argument, that some think y
t
 the wilde men ar all hearie.
 Some writers haue set out that 
Hercules
 of 
Lybia,
 comming into 
France,
 founde the people ly∣uing almost like to the wilde men that are as well in the east 
Indies,
 as in 
America,
 without any ciuilitie, & the mē went almost al naked. Others were clad with beasts skins of diuers colors. Such was the state and condition of the first humaine kynde, being at the first rude & altogether out of frame, vntill y
t
 by successiō of time necessitie hath cōstrained mē to inuēt many thin∣ges for y
e
 preseruation and maintenance of their life.


Well now the poore wylde men wonder at our appa∣rell, of what and howe it is made, demaundyng what trées heare suche things? as was demaunded of me in 
America,
 thinking that wooll dyd growe on trées, as doth their cotton: The vse wherof was long time vn∣knowne: And as some writers doe affirme,
 the firste vse thereof came from the 
Athenians,
 and by them it was first put in vre: others haue attributed it to 
Pal∣las,
 for bicause that wooll was vsed before that 
Athens
 was builded. For this cause the 
Athenians
 haue great∣ly honored and worshipped the goddesse 
Pallas,
 for that they haue receiued of hir this greate benefite. And by this may be known that the sayd 
Athenians
 and other people of 
Grecia,
 doe clothe them selues with skinnes like to these 
Canadians,
 and to the similitude of our first parentes 
Adam
 and 
Eue,
 as witnesseth Saint 
Hierom,
 leauing an example to all his posteritie for to vse the like, and not to go naked. For the which thing we can not giue sufficient praise and thanks to God, the which of his prouidence farre aboue all other partes of the worlde, hath shewed fauour to our 
Europe.
 Now there resteth to shewe how they weare their haire, the which is otherwise than the 
Americanes
 vse.
 These people as well men as women haue their haire black and ve∣rie long: and they haue this difference, that the men haue their haire trussed on their heades lyke a horse taile, with certaine pinnes of woodde, that kéepeth it trussed, hauyng besides to couer their heads a Tygres skynne, or of a Beare, or some other wylde beast: so that to sée them attired after this sort, ye would iudge them to be some stage players: for that they lohe more like to the picture of 
Hercules,
 that the auncient 
Roma∣nes
 were wont to make for their recreation and plea∣sure,


and as he is set out nowe a dayes, than like any other thing: Others there are that couer their heads, and girde their bodies with marten sables, beyng so named by the name of the religiō that is vsed in those partes, where as this beast frequenteth, the whyche Furres we estéeme very precious and riche, bicause they are rare and scant, and therfore these skins with vs are for princes and great lordes to weare, for they are very scant. The 
Canadians
 haue no beards no more than those of 
Bresseill,
 for they shaue it of as soone as it buddeth.
 As touching the women, they are clad wyth Bucke skinnes, béeing trimmed with the haire after their maner: and being therewith wrapped or couered they girde or bynde them selues wyth a girdell, that goeth thrée or foure tymes aboute, hauing always one arme and one pap or brest out of the skinne at libertie the which skin couereth one of their shoulders, cōming crosse their bodies like a pilgrims scrippe. Moreouer these women of 
Canada,
 weare hose of tawed lether, being well made after their maner, and painted or co∣loured with certaine herbes or fruites after their ma∣ner, their shoes are after the same sorte. They obserue matrimonie faithfully,
 eschuing adulterie, and hating it aboue all things. True it is, that these men haue .iij. or .iiij. wiues, as we haue before shewed: the Kyng of that cuntrey may haue as many wiues as he wil, they name him 
Agahanna:
 the maidēs of that cuntry are not hated bicause they haue shewed pleasure to yong men before that they haue ben maried (as they do in 
Ameri∣ca,
 and therfore they haue certaine houses in their vil∣lages, where as the men and women mete, being se∣parated from the yong men & maidens. Women that are widowes do neuer marie again, after the death of


their husbands, but liue in sorow the rest of their life, and haue their face all blacked with the dust of coales mingled with trayne oyle, with their haire hanging al about their face, and not trussed vp behind, as y
e
 others vse: and after this sort they go euen to their death.
 As touching the vsage of their yong children, they wrap them in .iiij. or .v. marterne skins being sowed toge∣ther, and then they haue a certain holow thing of wood which cōmeth betwene their legs without hurting thē in which the childe maketh water, & fileth, so that he neuer fileth nor toucheth his body, nor yet the skinnes that he is wrapped in. And this thing or gutter that is betwene their legs, is made of some tender and thinne barke of a trée. If this people were néerer 
Turkey,
 I wold thinke they had lerned this of the 
Turkes,
 or else that they had taught it them. I will neither saye nor iudge, that these wilde men thinke it to be sinne, that their children shold weat them with their vrine, as the superstitious nation of the 
Turkes
 do, but rather for a ciuilitie that they haue aboue others. And by this may be knowne how much these poore brutish people do ex∣cell others in honestie. They plante or set a planke of wood for the childe bicause of the inferiour extremitie pointed into the earth, and the childe shall stand or lye vpright to sleape with his head hanging downe.






Howe these people make warre. Cap. 79.


AS these people séeme almost to haue like maners and vsage, as other barbarous people haue:
 also there is no nation more prompt & readie to make warre one with a nother thā they are, & that vse their feates of warre most likest vnto them, onely certaine things excepted. The 
Toutaniens,
 the 
Guadelphes,
 and



Chicorins,
 make warre commonly against the 
Canadi∣ans,
 and other straunge people that descende from the great riuer of 
Ochelagua
 and 
Saguena,
 which Riuers are verie faire and great, bearing very good fishe, and that great plentie. Also by these riuers ye may enter aboue three hundreth leagues into the countrey, and also into the land of theyr enimies with small boates, bicause of the rockes. And the olde people of the coun∣trey say,
 that they which were minded to folow these two riuers, they should in a fewe moones (for so they do recken) finde diuers kindes of people, and abundance of gold and siluer: besides this, these two Riuers being separated the one from the other, they mete and ioyne together in one place, and being thus together thei en∣ter farre into newe 
Spayne,
 for they border one another as 
Fraunce
 doeth and 
Italie.
 And therefore when that they haue warre in 
Canada,
 theyr greate 
Agahanna,
 which is as much to say, their King or Lord doth com∣maunde all other Lords vnder his authoritie, for eue∣ry village hath his superior, that they make them rea∣die to come before him in their best araye, with men, victuals and munitions of warre, as their custome and maner is to doe: and then euery one will make them selues readie to obey their lordes commandement: and so they will come together on the water with their li∣tle barkes and skiffes, made of the barkes of trées, as they doe in 
America,
 and in other places. Then the as∣semblie being made, they goe to séeke their ennimies: and when they knowe that they shal mete them, they put them selues in aray to giue the onset, in as good or∣der as is possible, with many feats and policies, accor∣ding to their custome. If that they tarry at home for their enimies, they fortifie their lodgings with certain


pieces of woode, fagots and braunches, being daubed or smeared with the grease of a Seawoulf, or with some o∣ther poyson, to the ende that they may poyson their eni∣mies, if that they come néere, the which they set on fier, from the whiche procedeth such a thicke blacke and dan∣gerous smoke to smel on, bicause of the extreme stincke, that it killeth those that smell it, and besides this it so blindeth their enimies, that they cannot sée one another. And they vse such a policie with this smoke,
 that what winde so euer bloweth, they will cause it to flye towards their enimies. Lykewise they vse to make fishes of the leaues of certayne trées and of hearbes, the which being dried in the Sunne, they mingle amongste these fagots and braunches, then they set fire thereon, when that they sée their enimies comming a farre of. After this sorts they did defende themselues against the firste Christians that discouered their lande, doing their good willes with certayne of the foresayde grease to set fire on their ships: but they were enformed of this enterprise, and therefore they gaue such order that the 
Canadians
 were preuented. Neuerthelesse as I was enformed, these poore wilde men had not conspired this enterprise, but iustly and in a good quarrell, considering the wrong, that they had first recei∣ued of others. For our men being descended a land some yong men among them for their pleasure, moste wicked and foolish, vsing themselues more lyker Tyrantes than Christians, dyd cut of bothe Armes and Legs of some of these poore people, bicause that they woulde proue whether their swordes woulde cut well or no: And yet the poore people receiued them gently. And for this occa∣sion they haue not permitted since any Christian there to aborde nor set foote on lande, neither yet to trade or traf∣fick as by experience hath ben knowen. Now to our pur∣pose:


these 
Canadians
 set forwarde in the warre foure and foure,
 and when they are redy to ioyne battell, they make a great noyse with exclamations and other fanta∣sies, euen like to the 
Amazones,
 of which we haue spokē, for to giue feare and dreade to their enimies, they carry many standards made of braunches, being decked with Penons and Swans fethers.
 Their drummes are of cer∣tayne skins being borne of two men, and one commeth behinde and layeth on with two stickes, as harde as he can, their flutes are made of the shanke bones of a bucke, or some other wilde beaste. And after this sorte the 
Cana∣dians
 fight,
 with Bowes and Arrowes, rounde Clubs of woodde, foure square Staues, Launces, Morispikes, and others, the which are headed with bones in stede of Irō & stéele. They vse also targets, & some of them vse to haue and weare a coyfe made of a thicke Beares skin for the defence of their heades,
 ye shall note that the elders in times past vsed as the wilde men doe to fight with their fistes, spurne with their fete, to bite with their téeth & to pull one another by the hayre with such like. And since they vsed stones in their fight, the which they threw one at another,
 as it appeareth in the holy Byble. Further∣more 
Heroditus,
 in his firste booke speaking of certayne people,
 that fought with Staues and Clubs, saith that the Virgins of that countrey had a custome to fight eue∣ry yeare with stones and Staues one agaynst the other, in honor of the Goddesse 
Minerua,
 on that day that was celebrated to hir. Also 
Diodorus
 in his firste booke sayeth, that clubs and Lyōs skins were good for 
Hercules
 to fight with, for before that tyme other Armors was not vsed. Who so euer will reade 
Plutarchus, Iustinus
 and other Authors, shall finde that the Ancient 
Romaynes
 did fight naked: the men of 
Thebes
 and the 
Lacedemonians,
 did re∣uenge


themselues of their enimies with Staues & clubs of woode. And ye shall note that the people were then as hardy as they are at this day, and yet they were naked, hauing no more clothing thā the 
Canadians
 haue of their skins, and they are also destitute and know not the feats & policies of warre, with the which these 
Canadians
 can shifte and helpe themselues. Wel these people of 
Canada,
 do not with their enimies as the 
Americans
 do, the which eate them (but that which is much more tolerable) but if that they take any of their enimies or otherwise remayn victors, they pull the skin quite ouer their eares and then drie it, and so they carrie it into their countrey, shewing it with greate glorie to their wiues, friends and olde peo∣ple, which for age cannot go to the warres in signe of vi∣ctorie. To conclude, they are not so prone to make warre, as those people of 
Perou
 and 
Bressill,
 peraduēture bicause of the difficultie that the frost and snow causeth, with in∣conueniences that they haue in those partes.






Of Mynes, precious Stones, and other secretes that are founde in Canada. Cap. 80.


THe land and countrey of 
Canada,
 is faire and vnder a good clymate, and very good of it self, excepting the vntemperatnesse of the ayre, the whiche doeth hurte it as ye may easily coniecture, it beareth many trées and fruites, the which we knowe not with vs. Among the which there is one trée of the greatnesse and lyke to one of our greate nut trées that we haue, the whiche hath re∣mayned a greate tyme vnprofitable and not knowne, vntill such tyme that one by chaunce cutte hym, and then there ranne forth a Iuyce, the whiche was


founde to haue so good taste and as pleasant, as the beste wine in 
Fraunce:
 also it was so iudged by our men that then tasted thereof, euen the Captayne with certayne Gentlemen of his company, and at that tyme they ga∣thered of the sayd Iuice aboue fiue or sixe pots ful. Ther∣fore iudge you if that the 
Canadians
 since that tyme haue not made great store thereof, séeing that it is so good and excellent to drinke. This trée in their language is cal∣led 
Cotton.
 Also there is another almoste vncredible to those that haue not sene it. There is founde in 
Canada,
 many places and countreys that beare very good vynes, euen of their owne nature, growing out of the earth, without mans labor, bearing great quantitie of Grapes, faire great and good for to eate, but yet I know not whe∣ther that the wine be good or no. It is not to be doubted, but that those that first did discouer this land, foūd these things very strange. In this countrey is goodly hils and valeys,
 and in these hye hills and mountaynes be founde certayne stones, being in weight and colour like a golde mine, but whē it was tried, it was found good, for it brake & turned into ashes. It is not vnpossible, but that in those places may be founde mynes, as good and as perfect, as those of 
Perou,
 if that the grounde were vndermyned. As touching mynes of Iron and Brasse,
 there are store. Moreouer there are stones made and fashioned lyke to a Diamond, whereof there are some in the valleys, and others in the hills. They whiche firste founde them, thought to haue bene made rich for euer, thinking that they were perfect Diamonds, wherof they brought home a greate number.
 And from thence came this prouerbe or common worde, (it is a Dyamond of 
Canada
) it is lyke to the Diamonds of 
Calicut,
 and of the Easte 
Indies.
 Some say that these Diamonds are a kind of fine


Cristall, of the which I can giue no other conclusion,
 but to say as 
Plinie
 sayeth, that Cristall procedeth of Snow and water, that is excedingly frosen, therefore in those places that are subiect to frost and snow, it may be made that some parte thereof by processe of tyme conuerteth, and turneth lyke to Cristall. 
Solon,
 thinketh this opi∣nion to be false, that Cristall shoulde not engender of snowe, for if it were so, it shoulde be founde onely in colde places as in 
Canada,
 and in other colde countreys, but the experience sheweth the contrarie as appereth in the Iland of 
Cypris, Rhodes,
 and in many places of 
Egypt,
 and of 
Graecia,
 as I my self haue sene when I was there, that there was founde, and is founde at this present great plenty of Cristall, by the whiche argument we may iudge, that Crystall commeth not of frosen water, considering that in those countreys of whiche we speake, the heate is more vehement (yea without comparison) than in 
Canada,
 whiche countrey as afflicted with conti∣nuall colde. 
Diodorus
 sayth,
 that Crystall is engendred of pure water, and not frosen together by colde, but ra∣ther dryed by vehement heate. Notwithstanding the Cri∣stall of 
Canada,
 is more resplendent and more finer than that of 
Cypris
 and other places. In times past the Em∣perours of 
Rome
 did greatly esteme fine Crystall,
 and therewith caused their vessels to be made wherein they did eate. Others made therewith similitudes the whiche they kept closed in their closets and treasuries. Lyke∣wise the Kings of 
Egypte,
 in those dares when the great Citie of 
Thebes
 flourished, dyd beautifie their sepulters with fine Crystall, the which was brought from 
Arme∣nia
 the greate, and from the coaste of 
Siria,
 and of Cry∣stal was the pictures and images of Kings made to their lykenesse, for to remayne as they thought and to be in


perpetuall memorie. By this ye may sée how much Cri∣stall hath ben estemed, and to what vse it was employed. And now a dayes it is bestowed to make cups & vessels, a thing greatly estemed, if that it were not so weake. To conclude,
 in 
Canada
 is founde great store of 
Iasper
 stone and 
Cassidonies.






Of Earthquakes and hayles to the which this countrey of Canada is very subiect. Cap. 81.


THis Region of 
Canada
 is greatly subiect to earth∣quakes and to hayles,
 and therefore these poore peo∣ple being ignorāt of natural things, yea much more of heauēly things, are greatly afrayd, although that these things are common, they think that these things procede from their Gods, for that they haue offended them. Not∣withstanding, earthquakes commeth not but of windes that are shut in in certayn crasses of the earth, the which by greate power causeth it to shake, as in lyke manner it causeth many times great trées to shake, yea and bloweth them vp by the rootes, of the which 
Aristotle
 doth shewe. As touching hayle,
 it is not to be maruell though it be rife bicause of the vntemperatnesse and vnconstancie of the ayre, being very colde in this Region, bicause of the distāce of the Sunne, the which commeth no néerer than when it commeth to our Tropicke. And therefore the water that falleth from the Firmamēt is alwayes frosen, bicause that the aire is alwayes colde, and therefore it is alwayes haile or snow. Now these 
Canadians
 when that they féele such incommodities, for the affliction that they receiue, they kepe thēselues in their houses with certaine domestical beasts that they nourish. And there they make


their mone to their Idols; whose forme and lykenesse is not much vnlike to the fabulouse picture of 
Melusin
 of 
Lusignam,
 being halfe a Serpent and halfe a Woman: for the heade of their Idoll with hir haire representeth according to their brutish maner a woman. And the rest of their body is lyke to a Serpent. The which may cause Poets to fayne that 
Melusin
 was their Goddesse. The earthquakes be dangerous, although the case be euident.
 Séeing that we are come to speake of earthquakes, we will shewe thereof one word, according to the opinion of naturall Philosophers, with the inconueniences that fo∣lowe. 
Thales Milesius,
 one of the seuen wise men of 
Gre∣cia,
 sayde that water was the beginning of al things, and that the earth floting in y
e
 middest of this water was in a continuall quaking, sometymes more, and sometymes lesse. Of this same opinion was 
Democrites,
 and fayde furthermore, that the water vnder the earth being burst out by rayne, coulde not bicause of his excesse quantitie, be contayned in the vaynes and compasse of the earth, but caused these earthquakes, and of this procedeth the Springs and Fountaynes that we haue. 
Anaxagoras
 sayd, it was fier the which coueting (as it is his nature) to rise hye and to ioyne with the fier Elementarie, cau∣seth not onely this quaking, but certayne openings, goulfes, and such lyke in the earth, as we may sée in cer∣ta yne places, and confirmed his opinion in that the earth burneth in certayne places. 
Anaximines
 doeth affirme the earth it selfe to be the cause of this quaking, the whiche being opened bicause of the excessiue heate of the Sunne, the ayre entereth in greate quantitie, and with vyolence, the whiche after that the earth is closed agayne, hath no issue: And by this meanes


the belly of the earth beginneth to moue, & this causeth the earthquake.
 The which semeth more to agrée with reason and trueth than the others, according as we haue folowing 
Aristotle,
 also that the winde is no other thing than an ayre that riseth rangingly. But leauing these o∣pinions of naturall causes and of earthquakes the which may come by other reasons only by the permission of the most highest vnknowen to vs.
 The inconueniens and mishaps, that come thereby, is ouerwhelming of Towns and Cities as happened in 
Asia,
 of seuen Cities in the time of 
Tiberius Caesar,
 and of the 
Metropolitane
 Citie of 
Bithinie,
 during the raigne of 
Cōstantinus.
 Many also haue ben swallowed vp by the earth, and others drow∣ned with waters, as was 
Elicea
 and 
Aura
 at the ports of 
Corinth.
 And for to be short, this earthquake commeth sometimes with such vehemence that beside the inconue∣niences afore shewed, it maketh Ilandes of mayne land, as it hath done 
Sicily,
 with certayne places in 
Siria
 and others, it ioyneth sometymes Ilandes to mayne land, as 
Plinie
 saith, to be happened of those of 
Doromscia Parua,
 in millites. In 
Africa
 many playnes and valleys are at this day turned to lakes and riuers.
 Also 
Seneca
 sheweth that a flocke aboue fiue hundreth Shepe and other beastes and foules were on a tyme swallowed vp and lost by an earthquake. And for this reason the moste parte kepe them by the Riuers sides for to eschewe this earthquake, being taught by experience and not by rea∣son, that marish grounde and wet places, are not so sub∣iect to earthquakes, as the mayne and the hyelande, and therefore this reason is very easy to those that vnderstād the occasion of the earthquakes before alleged. And for this cause the riche and renomed temple of 
Diana
 in 
Ephesus,
 the which continued more than two hundreth


yeares, being so strongly edified that it meriteth to be in the number of one of the spectacles of the world,
 was set on piles of woode in a marishe place, for bicause that it should not be subiect to Earthquakes, vntil such time as one 
Heluidius,
 or as some terme him 
Eratosthenes,
 being foolishly minded, for bicause that he would be knowne, and that his memorial might be shewed, did set it on fire, and consumed it to ashes. Also for this cause the 
Romains
 had edified a Temple to 
Hercules,
 by the riuer of 
Tyber,
 and there they did pray and offer sacrifices.
 Nowe this earthquake is so vehement and contagious in 
Canada,
 that within .v. or .vj. leagues of their houses within the Countrey, there shall be found more than two thousand trées ouerthrowne to the earth, as well on hils as on va∣leys, rockes ouerthrowne one vpon an other, the ground to sinke and to be swalowed vp, and all this hapneth not, but of mouing and stirring of the earth. The like may happen to other Countreys that are subiecte to earth∣quakes. Thus much thought I good to speake of earth∣quakes, without straying farre from our matter.






Of the Countrey called New found land. Cap. 82.


AFter that we were departed from the heigth of the gulfe of 
Canada,
 it behoued vs to passe further, kée∣ping our course right North, leauing the lande of 
Labrador,
 and the Ilands called the Ilands of Deuils,
 and the 
Cape
 of 
Marco
 distant from the line .56. degrées, we coasted on the left hand the Countrey that is named 
Newe founde lande,
 the which is very colde, and therfore those that did first finde it out, made there no long abi∣ding, nor those neither that goe thither oftentimes for


fishe. This new found land is a region, that is one of the farthest partes of 
Canada,
 and in the same land there is found a riuer, the which bicause of his bredth and length séemeth to be almost a Sea, and it is named the riuer of the thrée brethren, being distant from the Ilands of 
Esso∣res
 foure hundreth leagues, and from 
Fraunce
 nine hun∣dreth: it separateth the Prouince of 
Canada
 from this New found land. Some iudge it to be a narow Sea, like that of 
Magellan,
 by the which ye may enter from the West sea, to the South sea. 
Gemafrigius,
 although he was expert in Mathematike, hath herein failed & erred, for he maketh vs beleue, that this Riuer of which we speake is a straight, the which is named 
Septentrionall,
 and so hath he sette it out in his 
Mappa Mundi.
 If that which he hath written be true, in vaine then haue the 
Portingals
 bene, and 
Spanyards
 to séeke a new straight di∣stant from this, aboue .3000. leagues, for to enter into the South sea, to goe to the Ilands of 
Moluques,
 where as the spices are. This Countrey of New found land is in∣habited with barbarous men, being clothed in wilde bea∣stes skinnes, as are those of 
Canada:
 this people is very frowarde and vntractable, as our men can well testifie that goe thither euery yeare a fishing. They that dwel by the Sea, liue with little kinde of other meate than fishe, which they take in the sea, wherof they take a great mul∣titude,
 & chiefly sea Wolues, of which they eate the flesh, which is very good. With the fat of this fish, they make a certaine Oyle, that after it is come to his perfection, hath a redde colour, which they drink at their tables as we do wine or béere. Of the skin of this fish which is strōg and thick, as if it were of some wild beasts, they make clokes & garments according to their maner, which is a meruel∣lous thing, that in a element so moist as that is, which is moist of it self, cā be norished a beast or fish, that hath the


skin hard and dry, as beasts of the earth haue. Likewise they haue other fishes that haue hard skins, as y
e
 Gram∣pas & the Dog fish and others with strong shels, as Tor∣terels, Oysters, Muscles, & suche like. Besides this, they haue great plenty of other good fish bothe smal and great, of which they liue daily. I maruell that the 
Iewes, Turkes,
 
Grekes,
 & many other natiōs in the East eat no Dolphins nor of many other kinde of fishes, that are without shell, as wel in the sea as in fresh waters, which maketh me to iudge that these people are more wiser & better aduised to finde the tast in meats more delicate, than wheras are 
Turks, Arabians,
 and other superstitious people. In those parts there is also found Whales, (I meane in y
e
 hie sea, for such fish neuer cometh toward the shore) to liue with such little fish. Notwithstanding,
 the fish that the Whale doth most commonly eate, is no greater than a Carpe, a thing almost vncredible considering hir greatnesse, the reason therof as some say, is for bicause y
t
 the whale hath but a litle throte in cōparison of y
e
 greatnesse of his body, & therfore he cannot deuour a greater fish. The which is a wonderfull secrete, & vnknowne as well to our elders as to vs, although that they haue treated of fishes, the fe∣male hath but one yōg one at a time, which she bringeth forth as a beast of y
e
 earth without egge, & that which is more wōderful, she giueth suck to hir yōg one after y
t
 she hath brought it forth. And therfore she hath .ij. rothers vn¦der hir belly vnder y
e
 nauel, which no other fish hath, nei∣ther in the sea nor in fresh water, but only y
e
 sea Wolfe, as witnesseth 
Plinie.
 This whale is dangerous to méete on the sea, as the 
Bayones
 cā wel tel by experiēce, for they vse to take them. To the purpose, ye shall note when that we wer in 
America,
 some Marchantes ship y
t
 passed from one lād to another for marchādise was ouerthrown, & all y
t
 was within hir lost by a whale y
t
 touched hir w
t
 hir tail.


In the same place wheras the Whale frequenteth,
 there is found moste commonly a fishe that is his mortall eni∣mie, so that if she méete the Whale, she will pricke the whale vnder the belly, which is the softest and tenderest place, with hir tong that cutteth like a Barbars raser, so that he being thus hurt, cannot saue himself, but that he dieth as the inhabitants of New found land do shew, and the common fisher men. In this Sea of Newe found land, there is a kinde of fishe that the people of the coun∣trey call 
Hehec,
 hauing a bil like a Popengay, and other fishes with shell. There is found in the same place great store of Dolphins, that shewe themselues many times a∣boue water, leaping and floting; the which some iudge to be foreshewings of tempests and fowle weather, from the part or coast that they come from,
 as 
Plinie
 sheweth, & 
Isidorus
 in his 
Etymologies,
 which I haue also knowne by experience, the which is more surer than the witnes∣sing either of 
Plinie
 or of any other. Some haue written that there is fine kindes of signes and forthe wings of tē∣pests and stormes on the Sea, as 
Polybius
 being with 
Scipio Aemilian
 in 
Affrica.
 Furthermore, there are great plenty of great muscles: and as for beastes of the earth, there are a great number very wilde and daunge∣rous,
 as great Beares, the which are almost all white, and bisides beastes, there are foules of the aire, of which the fethers are all white, the which I thinke happeneth bicause of the extréeme coldnesse of the Countrey: but these Beares which I spake of, are day and night about the houses of this people, for to deuoure their Oyle and Fishe. As touching these Beares, although that we haue treated thereof at large in our 
Cosmographie
 of 
Leuant,
 yet notwithstanding we will speake somewhat thereof by the way, howe the inhabitants of the Countrey take


them, being afflicted with y
e
 importunitie that they make them. Therfore they make certaine pittes in the ground very déepe, néere to trees and rockes, and then they couer them finely with leaues and braunches, and this they vse where as are hiues or multitude of Hony Bées, which these Beares séeke and follow with all diligence, & there∣of they are very desirous, not only so much for to fil them therewith, but for to heale their eyes, the whiche they haue naturally blemished and all their braine: also that being stinged with these Hony Bées, there falleth from them a bloud, specially from the head, wherby their paine is eased, so that they are comforted thereby. There is al∣so séene a kinde of great beastes like to Buffles, hauing hornes very great, their skin is grayishe, of which they make garments, and of many other beasts, whose skins are very riche. This Countrey is full of hils and moun∣taines, and very barraine, as well for bicause of the vn∣temperatenesse of the aire, as of the condition of y
e
 lande smally inhabited, and ill tilled. As for birds, there are not found suche quantitie as in 
America,
 or at 
Perou,
 nor yet so faire. There are two kinde of Egles, of which the one kinde kéepeth the waters, and liueth onely with fishe,
 chiefly with shell fishe, the which she taketh vp, and flieth into the aire, and so letteth it fall, and breaketh it, for to get the fishe out: this Egle maketh hir nest in great hie trées by the sea side. Also in this Countrey there is many faire riuers, and a multitude of good fishe. This people prepareth for nothing, but that which is néedefull to su∣staine nature, so that they are not curious in meates, for they goe not to séeke any thing in farre Countreys, and yet their nourishment is healthsome, and therefore they know not what sicknesse meanes, but they liue in peace and in continuall health, so that they haue no occasion


to conceiue enuie one against an other, bicause of their goods and patrimonie: for they are in a maner all equall in goodes and riches, being in one mutuall contentation and equalnesse in pouerty. Also they haue no place ordai∣ned for to minister iustice, for bicause that among them, they do nothing worthy of reprehension. They haue no lawes no more than the worthy 
Americanes
 & other peo∣ple, but only the law of nature. The people that dwell to∣ward the sea as I haue shewed liue with fish, and others that are farre from the sea, are content with fruits of the earth that commeth forth, the most part without labour of mannes hands: and after this sorte liued the people in the first age as 
Plinie
 witnesseth:
 also we sée in our dayes how the earth bringeth forth fruit without labor. 
Virgill
 sheweth that the Forest 
Dodana
 began to die bicause of his age, or else for bicause that it could not satisfie the multitude of people that then did multiply, and therefore they began to labor and till the earth, for to receiue the fruits therof for the sustainmēt of their liues, so that they began husbādry.
 Moreouer these people make not warre vnlesse that their enimies come to séeke them, & then they put them al to defence like to the 
Canadians,
 their instru∣ments that giue men corage to fight, are beastes skinnes spread in maner of a circle, which serueth them in steade of drummes, with fluites of bones of Déere like to the 
Canadians,
 if that they perceiue their enimies a farre of, they will prepare to fight with their armors and weapōs which are bowes and arrowes. And before y
t
 they enter into battell, their principall guide the which they honour as a King, shal goe the first, being armed with faire skins and fethers, sitting on the shoulders of two mighty men, to the ende that euery one should sée him, and know him also to be ready to obey him, what so euer he shall com∣maund.


And when they obtaine victory, he shall lacke no honor, & so they returne ioyfull to their houses with their banners displayed,
 which are braunches of trées garni∣shed with fethers of swannes wauering in the aire, and bearing the skin of the face of their enimies spred in litle circles in token of victorie.






Of the Ilands of Essores. Cap. 83.


THere resteth now nothing of all our voyage,
 but to speake of certain Ilands that they call 
Essores,
 which we coasted on the right hand, not without great dā∣ger of shipwracke. For .iij. or .iiij. degrées beyond, and on this side there bloweth alwayes a winde so cold & conta∣gious, that for this respect it is feared of the Pilots & Na∣uigants, as the most dangerous place that is in the voy∣age, be it to goe either to the 
Indies
 or to 
America:
 by this ye may know y
t
 the Sea in those parts are neuer calme, but alwayes rough & growne, as we sée many times the winde to blow vp the dust into the aire, the which we cal a tempest or fowle weather, which is as well vpon y
e
 land as on the sea, for in the one and the other, it riseth like a poynt of fire that raiseth the water of a heigthe when it plaweth or boileth, as I haue many times sene. And ther¦fore it séemeth that the wind hath a mouing vpward like a whirle wind of which I haue spoken in an other place. For this cause these Ilands wer so named, bicause of the great 
Essor
 that causeth this winde in the said Ilands,
 for 
Essores
 is as much to say, to dry or to wipe cleane. These Ilands are distant from 
Fraunce,
 about .x. degrées and a halfe, and they are .ix. in nūber, of which the best of them are inhabited with Christians 
Portingalles,
 whether as they did send many slaues for to laboure the ground, the which by their great paine and diligence they haue made


fruitfull with all good fruits necessary for mannes suste∣naunce, chiefly with wheat, the which groweth there so plentifully, that therewith all the land of 
Portingall
 is furnished. The which they transport in their ships, with many good fruits, as well naturally of the Countrey, as other where: but there is one amongst others, named 
Hyrcy,
 the plant wherof was brought from the 
Indies,
 for there was none thereof found before, euen as in the 
Ca∣naries.
 Likewise in our 
Europe,
 before they began to la∣bor the earth, to plant and to sowe diuers kinds of fruits men were contented onely with that the earth brought forthe of his nature, hauing then to drinke nothing but cléere water, and for their clothing the barks and leaues of trées with certaine skins of beastes, as we haue alrea∣dy shewed. In the which we may cléerely sée a wonderful prouidence of our God, the which hath placed in the sea great quantitie of Ilands bothe little and great, which doeth abide and sustaine the brunt of the waues of the sea, that goeth not beyonde their compasse or limits, nei∣ther hurteth the inhabitaunts: for the Lord as the Pro∣phet sayth, hath appoynted his limits, the which he doeth not ouerpasse. Of these Ilands, some are inhabited that before were desert, and many are forsaken, that in times past were inhabited and peopled, as we sée hath hapned to many Cities and Townes of the Empire of 
Greece, Trapezande
 and 
Egipt,
 such is the ordinance of God, that things héere in earth shall not be perdurable, but subiect to chaunging. The which being considered of our 
Cos∣mographers
 in our dayes, they haue added to the Tables of 
Ptolomeus
 newe matters of our time, for since y
e
 time and knowledge that he hath written, there hath happe∣ned many newe things. Now these Ilands of 
Essores;
 were desert, before that the 
Portingalls
 knew them. Ne∣uerthelesse


they were full of woods of all sorts, among the which is founde a kynd of Ceder named in their speach 
Orcantine,
 with the which they make fyne kar∣ued works, as tables, cofers and many vessels for the Sea. This wood hath a very good smel, and wil not rot neither be worme eaten, be it dry or wette as other wood wil. Of the which also 
Plinie
 speaketh,
 that in his time was found at 
Rome,
 in an old Sepulcher certaine bookes of Philosophy betwene two stones within a lyttle chest made of Ceader wood, the which had ben vnder the grounde aboue fyue hundreth yeares.
 Fur∣thermore, I remember that I haue read in times past, that 
Alexander
 the great, passing into the Iland of 
Ta∣broban,
 founde a ship of Ceder wood on the borders or coast of the sea,
 whereas it had remayned aboue two hūdreth yeares without rotting. And thereof this pro∣uerbe in Lattin came 
(Digna Cedro.)
 These Ceders are not so hye neither of such a sauor as those that are in the straight of 
Magellan,
 although it be of the same highnesse as are these Ilands of 
Essores.
 Lykewise ther is found many other trées small & great, bearing faire fruite, chiefly in the best & most notable Ilande, the which they haue named the Iland of 
S. Michael,
 and it is the best peopled. In this Iland there is a very faire towne lately builded with a castle, where as the ships aswell of 
Spayne
 as 
Portingal,
 at their retourne from the 
Indies
 do harbor, before that they sayle home into their countries. In one of these Ilands there is a hyll or moūtaine almost as high as that of 
Teneryf,
 of which we haue spoken, where as groweth great plenty of 
Pastel
▪ of Suger, and some wyne, there is no rauening beasts to be found, but there is certaine wylde Goats & many foules in the woods. From the heigth of these


trées it behoued vs to sayle forwarde, vntill we came to the 
Caape Finistra,
 on the coast of 
Spayne,
 where as we landed very late for to recouer victuals, whereof we had great néed for to sustaine vs, vntill that we ar∣riued into Britayn, which is a countrey vnder the po∣wer and obedience of 
Fraunce.


Here haue I louyng readers, shewed the discourse of this may farre and long voyage to the 
Ponent,
 the which I haue set forth as well as God hath gyuen me grace, for that I woulde not be founde vnprofytable, neither that this my enterprise should be in vayne, peraduen∣ture not so eloquently, as your delicate eares and ripe iudgement doth require. Therefore seing that it hath not bene the pleasure of God, that I should bestow my youth in learning, nor to obtain so much perfection as others, but rather in nauigation, I moste heartily be∣seeche you to excuse me. In the meane tyme if that it please you to take in good part this present worke, the which I haue gathered together being in the tempests and other discommodities of the sea, you shall encou∣rage me, after that I haue rested my selfe, and recon∣ciled my spirites, whiche are as scattered here and there, to set forth more fully and at large the lyeng and distāce of places, the which I haue obserued by eye as well in 
Leuant,
 as in the 
Ponent,
 and in the South, the which I hope to shew you by eye, & represent by liuely figures besides the Carde Marins, the which to speake the truthe, without offence or hurt of any man, do erre and fayle in many things, whether it be the faulte of those that pricke them or set them out, I leaue you to iudge. Furthermore, as it is vneasie so is it also vnpos∣sible for any one iustly to represent the most notable places their lyengs, and distances, without hauing


séene them, the whiche is the surest knowledge of all, as all men may well iudge and vnderstande.


By this ye may sée how long tyme we haue bene igno∣rant of many countreys, as well Ilands as maine landes, beleeuyng onely that, whiche oure Elders hadde set forth, vntyll that since of late yeares men haue ieoparded them selues in the Na∣uigation: So that nowe all our 
Hemispherie
 is dis∣couered and founde inhabited: of the which 
Ptolomeus,
 and others knewe not the halfe.


FINIS.












¶The Table of the Chapters of this present Boke.




HOvv the Author toke shipping. cap. 1


Of the straight auncien∣ly named Calpe, and novv Gebaltary. cap. 2


Of Africa generally. cap. 3


Of Africa particularly. ca. 4


Of the fortunate Ilands, now called the Canaries. ca. 5


Of the hie mountaine of Pyke properly called Pike hil. ca. 6


Of the yle of Yron. cap. 7


Of the Ilands of Madera. ca. 8


Of the vvyne of Madera. ca. 9


Of the Promentary Verd, and of his Ilands. cap. 10


Of the vvine of Palme trees. cap. 11


Of the Riuers of Senega. ca. 12


Of the Ilāds Hisperides other∣wise named Caape Verd. cap. 13


Of Torterells and of an herbe that they call Orseilla. ca. 14


Of the Iland of Fyer. cap. 15


Of Ethiopa. cap. 16


Of Gynney. cap. 17


Of the Equinoctiall lyne, and of the Ilandes of S. Homer. cap. 18


That not onely all that is vn∣to the line is inhabited, but also all the vvorld is inhabi∣ted, contrary to the opinion of our Elders. cap. 19


Of the multitude and diuers kyndes of fishes being vnder this lyne Equinoctiall. ca. 20


Of an Ilande named the As∣sention. cap. 21


Of the Promentary of good hope and of many secrets obserued in the same, lyke∣vvise our aryual to the Indi∣ans of America, or France Antartike. cap. 22


Of the Iland of Madagascar otherwise named S. Laurēce. cap. 23


Of our aryuall to France An∣tartike otherwise named A∣merica, to the place named Caape de Fria. cap. 24


Of the Ryuer of Ganabara, othervvise named Ianaria & how the land where we ary∣ued was named France An∣tartike. cap. 25


Of the fish that is in this great Ryuer before named. ca. 26


Of America generally. cap. 27


Of the Religion of these A∣mericans. cap. 28


The maner and custome of li∣uing of these Americans, as∣vvell men as women. cap. 29


Of their eating and drynking cap. 30


Against the opinion of those that thynck the wylde men to be heary. cap. 31


Of a tree named Genipat in the American tong, vvith the vvhich they make col∣lours. cap. 32


Of a tree named Paquouer. cap. 33


How these Americans or wyld men do difforme thēselues, esteming it a great glory. cap. 34


Of visions, dreames and dellu∣sions that these Americans haue, and of the persecution that they receiue of vvycked spirits. cap. 35


Of false Prophets and Magi∣tians that are in this coūtrey of America, the which inuo∣cate and call vpon vvicked spirits, and of a tree named Ahouai. cap. 36


How these Americans beleue the soule to be immortall. cap. 37


Hovv these wylde make warre one agaynst a nother, speci∣ally against those vvhome they name Margageas Tha∣baiares. Also of a tree which they name Hairy, of the which they make their wea∣pons for warre. cap. 38


Their maner of fighting aswel on the land as on the water. cap. 39


How these barbarous and wild men put their ennimies to death that they haue taken in the warres, and howe they eate them. cap. 40


Howe these wilde men couet greatly to reuenge their har∣mes and iniuries. cap. 41


How these wild men of Ame∣rica are maried. cap. 42


Of the ceremonies, burial, and funeralls that they vse to the deceased. cap. 43


Of Mortugabes, and of the charitie that they vse towar∣des strangers. cap. 44


The description of a sicknesse named Pians, to the whiche


are subiecte those people of America, as wel in the Ilan
∣des as the main land. cap. 45


Of the Diseases most ryfe in America, and the meane that they obserue to cure them. cap. 46


The maner hovv to trade a∣mong these people: of a byrd named Toucan, & of the Spicery of that coun∣trey. cap. 47


Of byrdes most common in America. ca. 48


Of Venison and wyld beastes that these wylde men take. cap. 49


Of a tree named Hauorahe. cap. 50


Of a tree named Vhebehafou and of the honey Bees that frequent it. cap. 51


Of a straunge beast named Haute. cap. 52


How these Americans kyndle fier, of their opinion of the vvorld, and of their Yron works. cap. 53


Of the riuer of Vases, lykewise of certaine beastes that are found there about. And of the land named Morpiō. 54


Of the Ryuer of Platte, and of the countrey ad
acent. ca. 55


Of the straight of Magellan, and of Daryen. ca. 56


Hovv that those that inhabit from the Ryuer of Platte vnto the straight of Ma∣gellan are our Antipodes. cap. 57


How these wylde men excer∣cyse husbandry, and make gardens of a roote named Manihot, and of a tree that they name Penoabsou. ca. 58


How and after vvhat sorte the land of America vvas dys∣couered, and Brassyll wood found out, with many other trees not seene else vvhere, but in that countrey. cap. 59


Of our departing from France Antartik or America. ca. 60


Of the Caniballs, aswell of the maine land as of the Ilands, & of a tree named Acaiou. cap. 61


Of the Ryuer of Amazones, otherwise named Aurelana, by the which ye may fayle into the country of Ama∣zones and into France An∣tertike. cap. 62


How certayne Spaniards ary∣ued into a countrey vvhere


they found Amazons. ca. 63


How these Spaniards con∣tynued theyr voyadge to Morpion, and of the Ryuer of Platte. cap. 64


How the lands of the kings of Spayne and of Portingall are seperated. cap. 65


The deuision of the West In∣dies in thre partes cap. 66


Of the Iland of Rats. cap. 67


How we continued our course w
h a declaratiō of Astro∣labia of the Sea. cap. 68


Of the departing of our Equa∣tor or Equinoctiall. cap. 69


Of Perou and of the principal places cōtained in the same. cap. 70


Of the Ilandes of Perou, and chiefly of the Spanish Iland cap. 71


Of the Ilands of Cuba, and of Lucaia. cap. 72


A description of Noua Espa∣nia, and of the great citie of Themestitan, edified in the vvest Indies. cap. 73


Of Florida. cap. 74


Of the Ilande of Canada be∣fore named Baccalos, being discouered in our tyme, and how the inhabitans lyue. cap. 75


Of a nother countrey of Ca∣nade. cap. 76


What Religion these Canadi∣ans vse, with theyr lyuing & how they resist the Colde. cap. 77


Of these Canadians apparell, how they weare theyr haire, and hovv they treate their children. cap. 78


Hovv these people make war. cap. 79


Of Mynes, precious stones & other secrets that are found in Canada. cap. 80


Of Earthequakes & hayles, to the which the countrey of Canada is very subiect. ca. 81


Of the countrey called Nevv found land. cap. 82


Of the Ilands of Essores. ca. 83








¶Imprinted at London, in Knight∣rider strete, by 
Henry Bynneman,
 for Thomas Hacket. 1568.









