(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A13665)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 11759)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 360:1)
A translation of: Thevet, André.  Singularitez de la France antarctique, autrement nommée Amérique.
Translator's dedication signed: Thomas Hacket.
Publication date from colophon.
Running title reads: The newe founde world or Antartike.
With three final contents pages.
Reproduction of the original in the Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery.
Al things haue bene made for man.
A difference of Art and of Nature.
How Nauiga∣tion profiteth.
The cause of the Authors Nauigation.
How the Au∣thor toke ship∣ping for to sayle to India America.
Why it was called new Hauen.
The superstitiō of the elders before they would go on the water.
Ilandes and o∣ther singulari∣ties of Gibal∣tar.
Ebusus. Ieniza.
Frumentaria.
Malue. Sala.
Diuers opiniōs of the erection of the pillers of Hercules.
The maner & custome of no∣ble and valiant men in tymes paste.
What Hercules it was of whō are named the columns Tar∣tesse and aun∣cient Citie of Africa.
Gibaltar a place of Trafficke from Europe to Africa.
Cap. de canti.
The fourth parte of the world as some writers affirme the opinion of this word A∣frica.
The situation of Africa.
Pillers of stone where as are writings, of the Phenicians.
The maners & Religiō of the Africans.
The cause why there are in Africa so many strange kind of beastes
Barharia parte of Africa and why it was so called.
The Religion & ceremonies of the barba∣riens.
In Mecha the se¦pulture of Ma¦homet: the vo∣yage of the Turkes to Mecha.
The Egyptiās were the first that inuented writing and letters.
The holy Crosse a town in Barbarie.
How the For∣tunate Ilandes lye nowe na∣med the Cana∣ries.
Why they wer named of our elders the For∣tunate Ilandes.
The number of these Ilands.
Ca. 3.4.5. & 6.
Why the for∣tunate Ilandes are now na∣med the Cana∣ries.
Ombrion.
Strange trees.
Iunonia.
The Ile of Snowe. Canaria.
The inhabitāts of the Canaries conuerted to the Christian faith.
The bountie of the Ilandes named Cana∣ries.
Suger of Ca∣naria.
Suger of Egypt
Suger of Ara∣bia.
The fruitful∣nesse of the Canaries.
Smal trees na∣med Paper.
Oriselia an herbe.
Bre, blacke gumme and howe it is made.
The wonder∣full hight and circuite of Pikehill.
The height of the hill Etna.
Ptolomeus hath knowen this hill.
Strange sort
The Ile of Irō and why it is so called.
The fruitful∣nesse of the Ile of Iron.
Milke and Cheese grauel∣ly.
Diuers nou∣rishmentes of diuers people.
Milke is very good suste∣nance.
The Ile of Irō is right vnder the Diametrial line.
The value of euery degree.
Scorpions of Canaries.
The Ilandes of Madera not knowē of our elders.
What Madera signifieth.
Suger of Ma∣dera, celebrated aboue others.
Comfets of Madera.
The fruiteful∣nesse of the I∣lands of Ma∣dera.
Gumme.
A kinde of Gaiac.
Dragons blud.
Dioscoridus Cinaber.
Wine and Su∣ger of Madera.
Wine of Cādia
Wine of the Ile of Palme.
The profit of Wine being moderatly ta∣ken.
A Promentary is, that which we cal a Cape.
Ialout now called Caape verd, & why it was so named.
Dargina gowlf. Promentarie of Ethiopiae.
Barbazins and Serretsa people of Affrica.
Almadies.
Nigritis nowe called Senega.
Iland neare to Caape verde, not inhabited.
A straunge tree.
Diuers kindes of Palmes.
Plinie. lib. 13. cap. 4.
Phoenix a bird, and why she is so named.
Prouerbe.
The property of the Palme.
Lib. 7. Lib. 8. Lib. 16. Chapt. 42▪ Lib. 5. of plantes.
The manner how to make Wine of Palmes.
The property of the Wine of Palme trees.
Another kinde of drinke.
The King∣dome of Se∣nega.
The opinion of some of our elders vpon the originall of Nill and of Se∣nega Hills of the Moone and of there lying. The originall of Senega.
Hills of Libia.
None in times past hath had perfit know∣ledge of Afri∣ca in generall.
The newe worlde.
The Iles His∣perides disco∣uered by the Carthaginians in times paste. The Ile Atlan∣tike in the time of Plato.
The diuisitie of the countrey & the inhabitants maners in Se∣nega.
A fruitfull tree and Oyle of diuers proper∣ties.
The lying of the Ilandes of Caape verd.
The Ile of S. Iames.
The Ile of S. Nicolas, others as Flera, Plinta∣na, Pintoria, and Foyon.
Marokins of Spaine.
Foure kinde of Torterels.
Lib. 9. cap. 10.
How to take the Torterels.

A historie of a Portingal gen∣tleman.
A Portingall healed of the Leprosie.
Orselie a herbe.
The Ile of fire, and why it was so named.
The Hill Pu∣sola.
Lib. 2. cap. 106.
The spreading of Ethiopia.
Senega floud, in times past named Ni∣gritis.
The descrip∣tion of Ethio∣pia.
Miroa an Ilande.
The realme of Etabecke and Ickthiophages.
The loue of the Anthropo∣phages to∣wards their King.
Meroa the chief towne of Ethi∣opia, auncient∣ly named Saba.
Why the Ethi∣opians, and o∣ther are black.
Indians and Ethiopians vse Magique.
The Inhabi∣tants of Gin∣ney, to the Cape of good hope, are all I∣dolaters.
Castor and Pol¦lux, called the bright starres, and lanternes of the sea.
The maners and order of liuing of those of Ginney.
The aire of Ginney, is vn∣holesome.
Maniguetta, a fruit much e∣stemed among spices.
The trade of Iuorie.
Eliphāt, a beast approching to humain reson.
A riuer or flud bearing Mines of golde and siluer.
Cania and Rhe¦gium riuers.
Two sea mō∣sters like to man and wife.
The descripti∣on of the E∣quinoctiall line.
From whence commeth the name Equi∣noctiall.
The tempe∣ratenesse of the aire, vnder the Equinocti∣all line.
The Ile of S. Omer, or of S. Thomas.
Abundance of diuers fishes vnder the lyne.
The sea water is sweet vnder the Equino∣ctiall.
Man hath great desire to knewe and se things.
The opinion of many Phi∣losophers, that say all the world is not inhabited.
Fiue Zones by the which the worlde is measured.
The cold zone.
The temperat Zone.
Zone Torida.
Another tem∣perat zone.
Another colde zone.
The zone To∣rida and hills Hyperbores are inhabited.
The zone To∣rida, more cō∣modious and wholesom thā the others.
Marsouin and why it is so named.
A foūtaine that sheweth fish lyke golde.
Aristotle and Plinie of the Dorade.
Lib. 6. cap. 16.
The descriptiō of the Dorade.
Dorade the fish hath bene greatly este∣med in tymes paste among the Romaines. Among these Dorades those were most set by that were brought from Tarenta being made fat at the lake Licryn as witnesseth Martiall in the thirde boke of his Epigrams.
The Ile of the Ascention, an why it was s. named.
Diuers kinds of strāge birds and in great number.
Aponars birdes.
Caape of good hast Ile of A∣ponards and why it is so na¦med.
The Ile of thascention not yet inha∣bited as many others.
India Meri∣dionall.
Caape of good hope, why it is called Lyon of the sea. Rhino∣ceros or beasts of Ethiopia.
The spreading of East India.
Sea Indique.
A signe to the Nauigants that they drewe neere to Ame∣rica.
The hills of Croistmourō.
Maqueh.
Caape de Fria.
Gekan.
The maner of these Barbaro{us} men is to eate their enimies.
The fruitful∣nesse of the Ile of S. Laurence.
Chicorin, a fruit that we name nuts of India.
The Ile of Prince.
Seuen sortes of Palme trees in the Indies of America.
Spagnin a kind of herbe.
Pa a straunge birde.
The Asse of India, Orix.
Gray Amber very cordiall.
Caape Defria.
Cahonin, a drinke in A∣merica.
The supersti∣tion of these Indians in making this drinke.
A Riuer of salt water.
Birdes with diuers colou∣red fethers.
A gown made of fethers brought from America.
Arat a red bird.
Ganabara so called, bicause of the likenesse to the lake.
Manihot a rote that the wilde men vse to eate.
A pleasant and comfortable Iland, in the which the Lord of Ville∣gagnon forti∣fied him selfe.
A rocke from whence proce∣deth a lake.
Oysters ha∣uing pearles.
The maner of these wild mē to take fish.
Panapana a kinde of fish.
A kinde of thornebacke.
Ineuonea.
Trees bering oysters.
America not known of the Cosmogra∣phers in times past.
Americus Ve∣spucia did first finde out A∣merica.
The lying of America.
What the in∣habitants of America are.
America is a very fruitfull countrey.
What parte of America is in∣habited by the Spaniards and Portingals.
The Religion of the Ameri∣cans.
Toupan.
Hetich rootes.
Charaiba.
America first discouered in the yere. 1497
The Canibals are a people that liue with humaine flesh.
HoWe these Americās liue.
Adamians a kinde of here∣tikes, that main∣tained naked∣nesse.
The opiniō of the Turlupins, and the Philo∣sophers of Ci∣niques, cōcer∣ning naked∣nesse.
Iulius Ca
The stature and naturall coloure of the Americanes.
The wilde me liue without lawes.
The Ameri∣canes detest and abhorre salte meates.
The Lezard of America.
How these A∣mericans kepe silence at their meat.
Auaty a drink.
The more de∣licate a man is nourished the lesse strength he hath.
A kinde of herbe that cut∣teth like steele.
A monstrous forme of a childe couered with scales.
Abantes a peo∣ple in Asia.
The maner of the Athenians.
Genipat a tree, and the fruite.
The maner how to make colour of this tree Genipat.
The maner of these wild mē to colour their bodies.
Vsub a kinde of Gumme.
An other tree named Geni∣pat.
Petun an herb, and howe it is vsed.
A fountaine at Lyncestis, and his propertie.
The discripti∣on of a tre na∣med Paquo∣uere.
Pacoua the fruit.
A dead Co∣codrill. Iacareabson.
A stone of the coloure of an Emerauld.
Why the A∣mericanes are tormented of wicked sprites
Aguan a euill sprite in their language.
Grigri.
The opinion of the wilde men, as tou∣ching their naturall dreames.
Pages. Prophets.
Pages or Cha∣raibes.
What these pages and Charaibes are and of their deceit.
The ceremo∣nies of these Prophetes to cal vpon the wicked spirit.
What the in∣torrogations are that they make to the wicked spirit.
Houioulsira.
Two kindes of Magike.
Against those that beleue sorceries and witchcraftes.
Thurgia a dānable Ma∣gike.
Zabulus, Which is the right Magike.
What Magus in the Persian tōg signifieth
Zalmoxis Zorastria.
Cherepicouare The opinion of the wilde men on the immortalitie of the soule.
Pindahouson a King in the wilde coūtrey.
This Toupan is to be vnder∣standed, the almighty God
The supersti∣tion of the wilde men.
Hairi a tree.
Hornebeame a tree.
The buckler that they vse.
The cause why the wilde men fight one a∣gainst another
The wilde mē obstinate and couragious.
The custome of the Ameri∣cans is to eate their enimies.
A prouerbe.
The inhabi∣tants of Mor∣pion are eni∣mies to those of Ianaria. Almadies made of the barcke of a tree.
The supersti∣tion of the men in taking of the barks of the trees.
A foolish opi∣nion of the wild men and of the Turkes and Moores.
Drummes Flutes & other Instrumentes do stir vp the spirites.
How they in∣treate their prisoners.
The wilde men feare not death.
How the wo∣men and mai∣den prisoners, are intreated.
Cerimonies a∣gainst the exe∣cution of their prisoners. Cahouin a drinke.
The Canibals are mortall e∣nimies to the Spanyardes.
Vengeance is defended to Christians.
A history of a Portingall, be∣ing prisoner to the wildemen.
The faithful∣nesse of the wilde men, but not to Christi∣ans.
How they of America do marry.
The deflou∣ring of maids, before they be maried.
A defēce made by the Lord of Villegagnon, that the Frēch men shold not acquaint them selues wyth the wilde wo∣men.
The auncient custome of the Lydians Arme¦nians, and the inhabitants of Cypris.
The wyld mē haue many wiues.
The maner of the wilde men to burye the dead.
The opinion of Diogenes for the buriall of the bodie.
The funeralles of the deade is approued by holy scripture.
The vse and custome of the Romanes and others at the funeralls of a Citizen.
Alexander the great.
Mortugabes, lodgings of the wilde men and how they be builded.
The Arabians and Tartariās haue no place to remaine in.
Trees that beare cotton.
Iny. Manigot.
Arat a byrde.
Hennes.
Popingayes.
No vse of gold nor siluer a∣mong them.
The charitie of the wilde men one toward an other.
Pians a sicke∣nesse in Ame∣rica, and his oirginall.
The wildmen are very leche∣rous and car∣nall.
The true origi¦nall of the French pocks, as the Frenche men write.
The curing of this disease.
Hiuourahe a tree.
The wilde mē are afflicted with ophthal∣mies, and from whence they proceede.
All the paines of the eyes with ophthal∣mies.
The southe winde and yll token.
The foolishe opinion of the wilde men in their prophets and of their diseases.
A methode meane to heal the disease ob¦serued of these wylde men.
How the paci∣ent liueth whē he is sicke.
Naua, an ex∣cellent fruite.
Tom, a kinde of wormes.
Hibonconhu a fruit, and for what vse.
The trafike of the wild men.
The descripti∣on of Toucan, a bird of Ame∣rica.
A straunge hat made of fethers
Secretes brou∣ght by the au∣thor into Fraunce or America.
The order of the world, be∣fore the vse of money.
What the chri∣stiās and Ame∣ricans do trade together. A kinde of spice.
Of the spice of Calicut. The I∣lād of Corchel.
The Iland of Zebut.
Aborney. The Ilands of Moluqus, and of the spice that commeth from thence.
The descripti∣on of Carinde, a birde of ex∣cellent beauty.
Aiouroub a greene birde.
Marganas.
Who it was that first caged birdes.
Great plenty of Popengayes in America.
The exclama¦tion of Marcus Cato, against the abuses of his time.
Ierahuua, a kind of Palme. Quiapian a birde.
Annon a bird.
Another kinde of birde.
Hiuourahe a tree.
Gouanbuch, a bird very litle.
How the Americās take wilde beastes.
The wilde Bore of Ame∣rica.
The Harte of America.
The property of a Harts horn
A fond opiniō of the wilde men.
The descriptiō of Coary a strange beaste.
A kinde of Fesantes.
Macouacanna. a kind of Par∣triges, Tapihire a beaste.
The descriptiō of Tapihire.
A kinde of strange fish.
Hyuourahe a tree.
The vsage of the barcke of this tree.
The excellency of the frute of this tree.
Loth in Ho∣mer.
The descriptiō of a tree na∣med Vhebeha∣son.
Two kinde of honey Bees.
Hira honey Bees.
Hirat a beast.
The vsage of honey much commended of diuers people.
Melissus King of Creta.
Why the Poets haue fayned that the honey Bees flied into Iupiters mouth.
Red gumme.
America not knowen of the anciēt writers.
The descriptiō of a beast na∣med Hauthy.
Chamellion.
The wonder∣full workes of Nature.
The maner of the wyld men to get Fyre.
Thata. Thatatin.
The first in∣uētiō of Fyre.
Vulcan inuen∣tor of Fyer.
The opinion of the wylde men against a deluge.
How the wild men do num∣ber.
The original of these Ame∣ricans.
How the wild men did first vse to cut wood.
Dedalus the first inuenter of a Forge. Pedris inuen∣ter of the Saw A kinde of Fish.
The lyeng of the Ryuer of Vases.
Cacuycu.
Sagauius a beast.
Tatton a beast.
Quoniambe
Peroes.
How many it is to bee thought that Iulius Caesar hath slaine in his battailes.
The discripti∣on of the land of Morpion.
The fruitful∣nesse of Mor∣pion.
Nauas.
Piraipouchy.
The riuer of Platte, & why it is so named.
The first voy∣age attempted by the Spany∣ards to the Ri∣uer of Platte▪
The seconde voyage.
A slaughter of Spaniards.
The third voyage.
The fourth voyage.
The policie of Captaine Ar∣uall.
Wylde men as great as Gyāts.
The richesse of the coun∣trey about the riuer of Platte.
Saricouieme a daintie beast.
The lyeng of the straight of Magellan.
The voyage o
The Caape of Virgins.
Therea.
Atorizo.
The straighte of Daryen.
The Ilandes of the Moluques.
The lande of Australl.
To know that there are two worlds or no.
Diuers opini∣ons of the An∣tipodes.
What people the Antipodes and Antichto∣nes the one to the other.
A difference betwene An∣tipodes and Antictones.
Anteci.
Pataeci.
The maner of going of the Antipodes was not well kno∣wen nor ap∣proued of the elders.
Saint August. lib. 15. of the Citie of God.
The common occupations of the wild men.
Howe these wilde men la∣bour the earth
Myll white and blacke.
Hetich.
In America no vse of corne. Husbandrie hath bene of a long time.
The first vse of Corne.
Meale of rotes Manihot.
The straunge maner of ea∣ting of the wylde men.
A kinde of white beanes
How they make salte.
Bread made of spice and salte.
Bread of drie fishe.

A birde of a strange and wonderfull beautie.
Gerahuua. Iry.
The lande of Brasile disco∣uered by the Portingales.
Oraboutan, the brasile tree.
A voyage into the east coun∣trey by Onesi∣critus captaine to Alexander the greate.
Yelow wood. Wood of the color of purple
A battaile dra∣wen in purple wood.
white wood.
L
Diuersitie in earth.
How the Au∣thor returned from America.
Caape Saint Augustine.

Verie daunge∣rous lands dis∣couered by cap¦taine Pynson.
Castel Marin. Fermanbow.
The Ilrude of S. Paule.

Haouay a ve∣nemous tree.
The riches of the countrey of Canibals.

A kinde of tree like to a Palme tree.
The seapacifick or peaceable or the sea of Ma∣gellan.
Mhe lying of the Riuer of Plate.
The lying and wonderfull greatnesse of the Riuer of Aurelana,
The originall of Nyll.
Aurelana or the Riuer of Amazones.
The Ilād of the Holy Crosse.
The stature of these wild mē.
Amazones of America.
Thre sorts of Amazones.
Many opiniōs on the naming and Etimology of Amazones.
Philostratus.
Amazones are warlike womē
Asia tributarie to Scithia, the terme of .500. yeares.
Lampedo and Marthesia, the first Quenes of Amazones.
How the Ama¦zones of Ame∣rica liued.
Hovv these A∣mazones put their enimies to death.
The originall of the Ama∣zones of Ame∣rica are vncer∣taine.
How the Spa∣niardes arriued into the coun∣trey of Ama∣zones, and how they were re∣ceiued.
How the Spa∣nyardes conti∣nued their voi∣age to Morpiō.
Deuision of their company, for to k
A very good Mine of siluer.

The straight of Magellan.
The peaceable sea.
Ilands of Mo∣luques inhabi∣ted by the Spa∣nyardes.
The cape of three poynts.
The lands of the king of Spaine in the Indies.
The lande that the king of Portingal hath in the Indies.
Countreys not yet discouered.
The shipwrak of a Portingal.
The Ilande of Rats & why it was so named.
The cōmodites of the Ilande of Rats.
The Zone be∣twene two Tropickes are inhabited.
A boundance of Rats.

Gerara a kinde of Serpent. Theirab.
A kinde of straunge fishe.
The euill dis∣position of the aire by the E∣quinoctiall.
The significa∣tion of the Astrolabia.
How the Au∣thor departed from Thequi∣noctiall.
Certayne rayne water corrup∣ted.
The diuision of a degree.
How ye may know the lati∣tude longitude and distance of places.
Pirauena.
Albacore a fish
Perou a thirde part of the Spa∣nish Indies.
Of whence Pe∣rou tooke his name.
The moste re∣nomed prouin∣ces of Perou. Quito a Regiō.
The prouince of the Canaries
S. Iames of olde porte. Taxamilca.
One Cuzco. The kingdome of the Iugies.
Canar a very cold countrey.
The prouince of Calao.
Titicata a Lake
Laake. Carcas a coun∣trey of Perou, Platte a large and rych Citie. The lande of Perou, is lyke the figure of a Tryangle.
Daryen a straight of land.

The Idolatry of these people
The Spaniards are lords of all Perou.
The riches of the Ilandes of Perou.
Iugas a valiant and riche people.

Perou may be thought to be a new Europe.
The Ilande of Spaine before named Haiti & Quisquia.

C. Caligula Emperour of Rome.
Casco, & Apina rich & plenti∣full Ilands.
The fruitful∣nesse of this Iland named Noua Espania.
Description of Manati a strange fish.
Stones good for the colyke.
Diuers fayre workes made by the wylde men with fe∣thers.
Hulias and Ca¦ris a kinde of strange beasts.
S. Iames Iland. S. Iohns Iland.
The descripti∣on of the Ile of Cuba.
A salte hill. Salt of the Earth.
A kinde of Partriges.

Why in times past the wales of Babylon were so strong The Ilands of Lucaia.
The moūtayne of Potossy, very rich in Mynes.
Themistitan.
The opinion of two Laake.
A comparison of Themisti∣tan.
Ferdinand of Cortes.
Mutuezuma.
How they vse to trade.
The Sea lyke a marishe.
A starre with a tayle.
The lying of Florida.
Why Florida was so named
A wylde bull.
Caape of Baxe.
Oisters hauing pearles.
The countrey of Baccalos.

The Ilandes of Cortes.
A voyage by Sebastian Ba∣bat, English∣man.
A voiage made by Sebastiā Ba¦bat and Iames Quartier into Canada.
How the land of Canade ly∣eth.
Caape de Lo∣raine, or the land of Britōs
The lying of Caape de Lo∣raine.
Chelogua, a ryuer.

A kinde of rackets.
The vse of these rackets.
How these Ca¦nadians doe chase the dere & other wilde beastes.
Howe these Canadians marrie.
Osannaha.
Andouagny, a God of the Ca¦nadians.
The opinion of the Canadi∣ās as touching the immorta∣litie of the soule.
Donacoua A∣guanna, king of the Cana∣dians.
The extreme colde of the countr
The Canadi∣ans lodgings.
Why the peo∣ple toward the north pole are more couragi∣ous and hardie than those to∣ward the south
A sea that is frosen.
Oftentimes there is famine in Canada and why.
The countrey of Labrador founde out by the Spanyards.
How they la∣bour the earth
Myll.
White beanes.
Cucumbers and how they vse them.,
A kinde of herbe.
The vse of this herbe in parfume.
The Canadi∣ans clothing.
The auncient Galles in the time of Hercu¦les wer like to wylde people.
The vse of wooll, and by whome it was inuented.
How these Ca¦nadiens weare their haire.
The clothyng that the wiues of Canada vse to weare.
Howe the Ca∣nadians marry
Agahanna.
How they vse their children.
A superstition vsed by the Turkes.

Of Ochelagua and Seguana.
How they pre¦pare them to make warre.
These Cana∣diens vse feates and policie in their warre.
Another policy
How these Ca∣nadians march in the warre.
A kinde of Drummes that they vse.
Howe they vse to fight.
Howe our el∣ders in times past vsed to fight.
Heroditus.

How these Ca∣nadians treate their enimies.
The goodnesse of the countrey of Canada.
The iuyce of a tree hauing a taste like good wine.
Cotton a tree. Naturall vine rootes in Ca∣nada.
Stones like in colour to a mine of golde.
Mynes of Iron, and mynes of Brasse.
Diamonds of Canada. A Prouerbe.
Opinions on the creation of Crystall.
Solon.
Diodorus Cry∣stal of Canada.
How greatly Cristall was estemed in tymes past of the Ancient Emperours of Rome, and to what vse it was put.
Iasper stones & Cassidonies.
The countrey of Canada is subiect to earthquakes, & why.
Hayle rife in Canada.
Earthquakes are dangerous. The opinion of some Philoso∣phers as tou∣ching earth∣quakes.
What the wind
The inconue∣niences that folowe earth∣quakes.
Seneca.
Why the Tēple of Diana was edified on a ma¦rish ground.
Earthquakes in Canada very violent.

Oyle of the fat of fishe.
The superstiti∣on of diuers nations in Le∣uant.
With what fish the Whale li∣ueth.
Plinie sheweth that a Whale is dangerous on the sea to mete.
A fishe that is perpetuall eni∣mie to the Whale.
Hehec a fishe.
Foreshewings of tempests. Isidorus.
Straūge beasts.
Two kindes of Egles.

Howe the men of Newe found land do warre.
Strange bāners.
The Ilandes of Essores why it is so named & feared of the Nauigantes.
Essores.
The fruitful∣nesse of the I∣lāds of Essores.
Hyrcy.
Orcantine a kinde of Ceder.
Plynie.
A chest of Ce∣der.
A ship of Ce∣der.
A Prouerbe.
The Iland of S. Michel.
Cape Fynistra.
The Authors conclusion.
The Authors Cardes, contay∣ning the lyeng & distances of places.