Newes from Vienna the 5. day of August. 1566. of the strong towne and castell of Tula in Hungary xi. myles beyond the riuer Danubius, which was cruelly assaulted by the great Turke, but nowe by Gods mighty working relieued, the sayd Turks marueilouslye discomfited and ouerthrowen. Translated out of hye Almaine into English, and printed in Augspurge by Hans Zimmerman.
Approx. 8 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 4 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A14397




STC 24716



ESTC S102092





99837892




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Newes from Vienna the 5. day of August. 1566. of the strong towne and castell of Tula in Hungary xi. myles beyond the riuer Danubius, which was cruelly assaulted by the great Turke, but nowe by Gods mighty working relieued, the sayd Turks marueilouslye discomfited and ouerthrowen. Translated out of hye Almaine into English, and printed in Augspurge by Hans Zimmerman.
[8] p.   


Imprinted at London :


By John Awdeley, dwelling in litle Britaine streete without Aldersgate,


The 21. of Septmember. 1566.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Vienna (Austria) --  History --  Early works to 1800.
Turkey --  History --  1453-1683 --  Early works to 1800.
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Anne Simpson
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Anne Simpson
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






24716


S102092


99837892


2239














¶ Newes from Vi∣enna the .5. day of August .1566. of the strong Towne and Castell of Iula in Hungary, xl. myles beyond the riuer Danubius, which was cruelly assaulted by the great Turke, but nowe by Gods mighty working relieued, & the sayd Turke marueylouslye discomfited and ouer∣throwen. Translated out of hye Almaine into English, and printed in Augspurge by Hans Zim∣merman.




woodcut of a battle




Imprinted at Lon∣don by Iohn Awdeley, dwelling in litle Britaine streete without Alders∣gate. The .21. of September. 1566.














¶ Newes from Vi∣enna the .5. day of August .1566. of the Turkes ouerthrow:


A
Fter that the Emperour of Turkie had besieged with an army of thirty thousand horsmē and footemen, the famous town and strōg Castel of Iula in Hun¦gary, lying .xl. dutch myles beyōd the ryuer Danubius, which City had by the space of .vj. weekes sustayned many greuous assaultes: God through his great mercy and goodnes so com¦forted the sayd towne of Iula and the poore Chri∣stians therein, at their earnest praiers, that the Turke with all his host was driuen backe, by the handes of the General called Keretshim Laslawe and hys valiant company. Who not onelye defen∣ded the sayd Towne, but also constrayned the cru∣ell Turkes to retyre, to their great shame and con∣fusion, w
t
 the slaughter of a great nomber of their Turkish rable. For the which the euerliuyng God be praysed for euer. The manner of their ouer∣throw was thys.


As the foresayd Generall Keretshim did se his aduauntage, wyth Captayne George and other horsmen of Schesians and Hungary, he set vpon the arereward of the Turkes, and kylled about .8. thousand of them, and tooke also some of their ar∣tillery,

 and followed them so fast, that the Turkes were constrayned to flee into a marrish grounde, and to breake the wheeles of the rest of their artil∣lery, to saue them selues: which the Christians al∣so tooke, and haue rescued and taken besydes from the Turkes a great nomber of Christiā prisoners, and th
rewyth a very rych bootye.


The like also hath done that valiant man Ma¦gotsrhie the Captayne of Erla, the which making toward the Turkes, did encounter with the Ter∣tarians, setting most valiantly vpon them, and kil¦led about eyght hundred of them.


A few dayes past the Earle of Serin did en∣counter with a Turkish Capitayne called Begen, the which Capitaine then had with him a thousād fresh horsmen then comming out of Turkye, to go to a towne called Fynffekyrchen. Which Earle did set vpon them in the night, and killed the Captain, and tooke .vjij. Camels, and .viii. Moyles laden wyth treasure, and got also twoo read Gwydons, wyth a whole great peece of rych cloth of gold, and also a very fayre and straunge Iewel or token of the field. This foresayd Earle dyd sende vnto the Emperours Maiesty to Vienna for a present, the foresayd Captaynes horse, the which was not one 
y a v
ry fayre one and good, but also betrapped & decked moste rychly. For fyrst the poniel & the back part of the saddel was couered ouer with plate of fine Arabick gold, and the rest of the saddel besyde the sytting place, was drest wyth syluer plate very

 fyre gilded, which sitting place was couered with a fine purple veluet, and y
e
 trappers & bridle beset w
t
 litle Turkies and Rubies. The Earle would very fayne haue saued the sayd Capitayne, but the tur∣kish Ianyssery defended them selues so manfully, thinking to haue caryed away safelye their Capi∣taine, y
t
 the said Earle w
t
 hys company was con∣strayned to kyll both them and their Captayne.


Also this valiant Earle of Serin hath got a∣mongest other great prices from the Turkes .xv. thousand Turkish and Hūgarish Ducates, which money was brought for the payment of the Tur∣kishe men of warre, which are in the towne called Fynffkyrchen. Thus not onely this said Earle had got to himselfe rich and great prices, but also hys Souldiours haue met with very rich prayes and spoyles.


And now to declare the Mahometical and tur∣kish cruelty of these hellish Turks, which they vse agaynst the Christians (which cannot be declared without weeping and sorowfulnes of mynde) is this in effect. Where euer they ouercome the Chri∣stians and take them captiues, they take the yong and lusty men tying them to their horses & famishe them to death. The old men and women they cut in peeces, deflouring the maydens and young wo∣men very villanously. The sely Infants and yong Babes lying in their cradels smyling vpon them, they take out very cruelly and sticke them on long poles and so gore them to death without pitye or

 mercy, and this very spitefully they do in the sight of the Infantes Parentes. The residue of them which they keepe alyue being men, they vse as be
¦ites for all kynde of drudgery and toyle, more cru∣elly entreating them then their brute beastes. To the women and children whych they keepe alyue, they vse such Sodomish abhomination and tyran¦ny as may not for shame be knowen, nor wythout harty sorow be declared. Wherefore it behoueth al Christian Princes and good Christians to wyth∣stand thys cruel Turckish enemy, & to set to theyr helpyng handes, such as can to helpe to resist hym with some power of warre: and suche other good Christians as cannot helpe these our Christian bre¦thrē (so cruelly assaulted) by this kinde of meanes: yet at least to helpe them with their godly praiers. For if thus he proceede forwarde to take the vpper land, it wyl redound to the great plague and ruine of whole Christendome. Wherefore that thus it may not come to pas, let vs not cease to cal vp∣on our heauenly father for his mightye de∣fence, who so mercifully hath heard the praiers of his poore afflicted children. And also geue him hartye thankes for this great o∣uer∣throw of thys his Christes and our cruell e∣nemy.












A Prayer & thankes¦geuyng, for the defence of the Chri∣stians agaynst the cruel Turke.


O
 Eternal God and most mercyfull father we geue thee harty thanks for this thy mightye woorking in ouer∣throwing that cursed and cruell Turke, the enemy of thy deare sonne Christ Ie∣sus, and hys deare Christians, and for re¦lieuing his poore afflicted members, in deliuering them from his and their bloo¦dy handes: Wherefore (deare father) we beseche thee to continue in this thy mer∣ciful defending them, and in ouerthrow∣ing his tirannical power, that they here∣by may wel feele and know, that ther is none other God besides thee & thy sonne Iesus Christ our Sauiour. Preserue (O Lord) those godlye & Christian Princes which venter their liues against this thi enemy, as namely the Emperours Ma∣iesty with his two brethren, and all hys whole nobility, geuing them prosperous succes & victorious conquest. Graūt this O Father for thy deare sonnes sake Ie∣sus Christ our Sauiour. So be it.









