Certaine wholesome obseruations and rules fo [sic] inne-keepers, and also for their guests meet to be fixed vpon the wall of euery chamber in the house, but meant more especially for the good of Mr. Henry Hunter and his wife, of Smithfield, his louing brother and sister, and of the guests which vse their house.
T. W.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 1 1-bit group-IV TIFF page image.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2008-09 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A14605




STC 24916.7



ESTC S3136





ocm 33143051




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Certaine wholesome obseruations and rules fo [sic] inne-keepers, and also for their guests meet to be fixed vpon the wall of euery chamber in the house, but meant more especially for the good of Mr. Henry Hunter and his wife, of Smithfield, his louing brother and sister, and of the guests which vse their house.
T. W.
1 sheet ([1] p.).   


[London :


J. Beale?,


ca. 1615]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Travel etiquette --  England --  Early works to 1800.
Hospitality --  Early works to 1800.
Broadsides --  London (England) --  17th century.
2007-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2007-08
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2007-09
Elspeth Healey
Sampled and proofread
2007-09
Elspeth Healey
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2008-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






24916.7


33143051


28195












¶ Certaine wholesome Obseruations and Rules fo Jnne-keepers, and also for their Guests, meet to be fixed vpon the wall of euery Chamber in the house; but meant more specially for the good of M
r
. 
Henry Hunter
 and his wife, of 
Smithfield,
 his louing brother and sister, and of the Guests which vse their house.


1. 
W
E Reade of Inkeepers that they were of ancient time, as in 
Ios.
 2. 
Iudg.
 19. verse. 21. 22.


2. Our Sauiour in the Gospel commends the vse of Innes. 
Luke
 10. ver. 34. and brought to an Inne.


3. Yea Christ himselfe by his owne presence did sanctifie the vse of Innes by eating his passeouer there. 
Mat.
 26. 18.


4. In 
Acts
 28. there is expresse mention of an Inne with approbation and liking. They came to meet vs at the market of 
Appius,
 and at the three Tauerns.


5 Common experience sheweth all men what vse there is of Innes for case of Trauailers, that their bodies which are the members of Christ, and Temples of the holy ghost appointed to a glorious resurrection, may be refreshed after wearisome labour.


6 It must not be accounted a small matter to affoord house roome, lodging, rest and food to the comforts of Gods children.






Rules for Innekeepers.


1. THough your house (as an Inne) bee open for all men to come vnto, yet account honest men your best guests: euer hold their company better then their roomes.


2 Amongst honest men, let such as be religious withal, be most welcome. The feet of the Saints are blessed, and often leaue blessings behind them, as we read of 
Ioseph. Gen.
 39. 4. 5.


3. Of religious and godly men let faithfull Ministers haue heartiest intertainement. The feet of such as bring glad tidings of peace and good things, oh how beautiful are they. 
Rom.
 10. Such as receiue a Prophet in the name of a Prophet shal haue a Prophets reward. 
Mat.
 10. Be not so glad of your gain▪ as that you may pleasure such.


4 Because your guests be Gods children, and their bodies the members of Christ, let their vsage for meat, lodg∣ing, diet, and sleepe bee such as becomes such; worthy personages, as bee heires with God, euen fellow heires▪ with Christ. 
Rom.
 8.


5. In seruing and louing your guests, remember you do serue and loue God, who takes all as done to himselfe, which for his sake is done to his. 
Mat.
 25. 34. 33. 36.


6. Content your selues with an honest gaine, so vsing your guests as they may haue an appetite to returne to you when they are gone from you.


7 Make choice of good seruants, such as know God and make conscience of their waies: for these are likeliest to be true, faithfull, diligent, and cheerefull in their seruice; also such will best please your best guests, and will not iustly offend your worst. Moreouer, God will cause your busines to prosper best in the hands of such.


8. Giue your seruants no euill example in word or deed, beare not with their lying, deceit, swearing, propha∣ning of the Sabbath, or wantonnes. Cause them to keepe the Lords day holy, going to the Church by turnes: ex∣amine them how they profit by Sermons; loue such seruants best, as most loue Gods word.






Rules for Guests.


1. VSe an Inne not as your owne house, but as an Inne; not to dwell in but to rest for such time as ye haue iust and needfull occasion and then to returne to your owne families.


2. Remember ye are in the world as in an Inne to tarry for a short space; and then to be gone hence.


3. At night when ye come to your Inne thanke God for your Preseruation: next morning pray for a good Iourney.


4. Eat and drinke for necessity and strength, and not for lust.


5. At table let your talke be powdred with the salt of heauenly wisedome, as your meat is seasoned with mate∣rial and earthly salt.


6. Aboue all abhorre all oathes, cursing and blasphemy, for God will not hold him guiltlesse which taketh his name in vaine.


FINIS.


T. W.









