Novem. 24 Num. 7. The weekely newes containing these particulars. The surprising of tvvo tovvnes by the Prince of Oranges forces, and the manner of their taking, vvith the seuerall pasages of Spinolas armie lying before Breda, and our campe at Rosendale: as also the death of the Earl of Southampton and his sonne at Bergan-vp-Zomme. The taking of many places in the Grisons countrey by the French kings forces. Likewise the entertainment of many thousands of men by the State of Venice; vnder the command of Colonlel Ouentuant once one of Count Mansfields chiefe commanders. The Hollanders fortunately meeting with one of the King of Spaines plate ships comming from the West-Indies the which in a short time they ouercame and tooke: with a great victorie obtained by the Duke of Tuscans gallies, against the pirats of Argles. The disagreement which is like to happen betweene the emperour and Bethlem Gabor, and the Turke and the Emperour ...
Approx. 31 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 12 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A14896




STC 25199



ESTC S102712





99838482




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Novem. 24 Num. 7. The weekely newes containing these particulars. The surprising of tvvo tovvnes by the Prince of Oranges forces, and the manner of their taking, vvith the seuerall pasages of Spinolas armie lying before Breda, and our campe at Rosendale: as also the death of the Earl of Southampton and his sonne at Bergan-vp-Zomme. The taking of many places in the Grisons countrey by the French kings forces. Likewise the entertainment of many thousands of men by the State of Venice; vnder the command of Colonlel Ouentuant once one of Count Mansfields chiefe commanders. The Hollanders fortunately meeting with one of the King of Spaines plate ships comming from the West-Indies the which in a short time they ouercame and tooke: with a great victorie obtained by the Duke of Tuscans gallies, against the pirats of Argles. The disagreement which is like to happen betweene the emperour and Bethlem Gabor, and the Turke and the Emperour ...
[2], 20 p.   


London :


Printed by W. I[ones] for Thomas Archer and are to be sold in Popes head Ally, ouer against the signe of the Horse-shooe,


1624.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Europe --  History --  1517-1648 --  Early works to 1800.
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






25199


S102712


99838482


2863














Nouem. 24. Num. 7. THE VVEEKELY Newes, containing these particulars. The surprising of two Townes by the Prince of 
Oranges
 forces, and the manner of their taking, with the seuerall pasages of 
Spinolas
 armie lying be∣fore 
Breda,
 and our campe at 
Rosendale:
 as also the death of the Earle of 
Southampton
 and his Sonne at 
Bergan-vp-Zoome.
 The taking of many places in the 
Grisons
 Coun∣trey by the 
French
 Kings forces. Likewise the entertainement of many thousands of men by the State of 
Venice,
 vnder the Command of Colonell 
Ouentuant,
 once one of Count 
Mansfields
 chiefe commanders. ¶ The 
Hollanders
 fortunately meeting with one of the King of 
Spaines
 Plate Ships comming from the 
West-Indies
 the which in a short time they ouercame and tooke: with a great victorie obtained by the Duke of 
Tuscans
 Gallies, against the Pirats of 
Argier.
 The disagreement which is like to happen be∣tweene the Emperour and 
Bethlem Gabor,
 and the 
Turke
 and the Emperour: the receiuing of many thousands of men, being newly dismissed by 
Monsier Tillie,
 into the pay of the 
French
 King.


LONDON, Printed by W. I. for THOMAS ARCHER, and are to be sold in Popes head Ally, over against the Signe of the Horse-Shooe. 1624.














The Weekely Newes from 
Italy, Germany, France, Spaine,
 and the 
Low-Countries,
 &c.




From Vienna 
the 
24.
 of October.


W
Ee vnderstand here how that the 
Turkish Chiany
 who is come to the Imperiall Com∣missioners which are at 
Commora,
 hath brought with him some hard points and Articles, which are proponuded by the 
Grand Signieor,


The conditions of peace which the Ambas∣sodors of 
Bathlem Gabor
 hath offered vnto his Imperiall Maiestie in the name of his Maister, they are likewise very hard and intollerable, so that there is little or no hope at all, that any peace or truce shall be concluded betwixt the Emperour, or any of them.


They write out of 
Silecia,
 that the 
Cossacks
 haue quite left both 
Silecia
 and 
Morauia,
 and that the lye vpon the frontiers of 
Polonia
 and 
Silecia,
 expecting the mercifull resolution and pardon of the King of 
Poland,
 that they may come safely home.








From Vienna 
the 
26.
 of October.


Concerning the 
Turkish
 treatie of peace, wee haue yet no other tidings, but that there is come a 
Turkish Chiany
 (being accompanied with few persons) to the Imperiall Commissioners, to salute and receiue them: and that he hath pro∣pounded some few Articles, which the Empe∣rour is not to admit in any manner of wayes, although the 
Grand Signieur
 would moderate them.


They write from 
Raba,
 that they stand there in feare that the 
Turkes
 will come and pillage the Countrie there about, and that they keepe strong watches, and have planted their Ord∣nance vpon their walles and bulwarkes, to sa∣lute them at their arriuall: as likewise how that there being a house fired by casualtie, the In∣habitants and Souldiers which are in 
Commora
 were mightilie afraid, and suspected that it had beene done by the 
Turkes
 to surprise the place the better.


In the beginning of this Moneth was a Pro∣clamation at 
Linty
 in the vpper 
Austria
 procla∣med in the name of the Emperour, to cite all such as haue beene guiltie in the former Rebel∣lion, to appeare within the space of sixe weekes and three daies in the head Towne of 
Linty,
 be∣fore the Emperiall President and Counsell Namelie, the Count of 
Neggaw,
 Gouernour of the lower 
Austria,
 the Lord of 
Hoyes
 Presedent of the Counsell of the lower 
Austria,
 the Lord of 
Reck,
 one of his Maiesties Imperiall Counsell,

the Lord 
Heggenmiller
 Chanceler of the lower 
Austria,
 the Doctors 
Mosmiller,
 and 
Barthold,
 and to cleare themselues. But the Preachers are authors of the Rebellion (as they write thence) are some 8. dayes agoe dismist of their charge, and commanded to depart within the space of 8. daies, which expired yesterday: At the same time was not onely the preaching forbidden to the Ministers, but also the ringing and sounding of Belles to the Sextons, vpon paine of death.


On the 15. of this Moneth were the Booke-sellers Shops viewed in this Citie, and the sel∣ling of Protestant Bookes forbidden. On the same day arriued here the Count 
Nicolas Wolsky
 Great Marschall of the Kingdome of 
Polonia,
 and it is rumored that he is to goe thence into the 
Low-Countries
 to the 
Infanta,
 which lieth at 
Brussell.


Two daies agoe perrished two Barkes in the Riuer of 
Donaw,
 that were sailing with Corne to the frontier Townes and Castles of 
Hungarie.


The tidings which wee had heare lately, how that Monsieur 
Tilly
 had taken the bridge of 
Strasbourg
 is false, but it is sure that he hath stopt the passages of the 
Rhyne,
 that nothing can come vp or downe without his leaue.






From Vienna 
the 26. of October.


The 19. of this Moneth departed the great Marschall of 
Pelonia
 hence, and went as it is ru∣mored towards 
Florence.


On the same day came his Imperiall Maiestie here backe againe from 
Ebersdoof,
 and gaue on

the next Sunday after he had heard the Masse audience to the Ambassador of 
Bethlem Gabor;
 he did the like on the following Munday to the Ambassador of the Elector of 
Cullen,
 and graun∣ted on the next Tuesday the Regalia and Fulde to the Commissioners of the Abbot of 
Fulden,
 which demanded them in his name. On the next Wensday, as likewise yesterday went the Em∣perour abroade to hunt the wilde Bore.


Fewe dayes agoe arriued here the Arch-bi∣shop of 
Pragne
 comming here poste, and it is ru∣mored that the 
Land-graue Charles
 of 
Lichten∣stayn
 is likewise to come hitherwards with great speede.


The Count 
Serin Banus
 of 
Croatia,
 who came here likewise fewe dayes agoe, reporteth that he hath not onelie slaine many 
Turkes,
 which were pillaging the same Country, but that he also himselfe hath made an inroade on the 
Turkish
 Dominion, and gotten there rich booties. The 
Turkish
 treatie of Peace is not begunne as yet, by reason that the 
Turkish
 Commissioners are not come together, and especially seing that the chiefest of them all is yet at 
Constantinople.


They write from 
Prague,
 that there are put in prison three men of them which robbed the Duke of 
Saxon Lawenborg
 when he was riding towards this Citie of 
Vienna.


This weeke was a Postillion or Messenger slaine, when he had taken the 9. post horse be∣twixt 
Prague
 and 
Vienna,
 the lttters being found by a husband man, he carried them to the next

post, but wee cannot learne as yet in what. man∣ner this happenned, nor who was the author.


We vnderstand by Letters written from 
Lin∣ty,
 that the Protestant States of 
Austria
 haue promised to pay the wages to the protestant Preachers which are banished, for two yeares, and that they gaue to euerie one of them 1000. Rix-Dollers before their departure, and that moreouer the Protestant Burgurs gaue them when they tooke their leaue of them 1.2. yea. 3. Rix-Dollers, and some of the richer sorts whole hand fulls of Rix-Dollers, and Duckets.


They write out of 
Hungaria,
 that the Lord 
Bosniach
 hath surprised the small Towne of 
Waith,
 which was in the bounds fo the 
Tu ke,
 and hauing slaine there 2000. 
Turkes,
 tooke moreouer 70. of them as prisoners, & got there 970. 
Turkish
 horse, besides many other rich bo∣ties: Hee rescued likewise all those Christians which the 
Turkes,
 as we mentioned heretofore had taken at 
Ferrels.


The Lord 
Esterhasi
 who is Gouernor rf 
New∣hensed,
 hauing sinck fortified 
Ferrele,
 the 
Grand Signiour
 hath sent him word, that he should dis∣mantle the place againe, seing it was against the treatie of Peace, to make any new fortifications vpon the frontiers. But he the Lord 
Esterhasi
 re∣turned this answere, namely, that seing he had suffered his cosin, and diuers other Christians to be taken thence as prisoners, after his 
Trukish
 Souldiers had pillaged the place, which was di∣rectlie against the treatie of Peace, he had forti∣fied

the fame place, that the Christians might liue there securle, and out of danger to be surpri∣sed at the pleasure of the 
Turkes.






From Vienna 
the 
30.
 of October.


The Ambassadors of 
Bethlem Gabor
 are not as yet dispacht, nor haue vnderstood the Empe∣rours resolution vpon their propositions which they haue made in the name of 
Bethlem Gabor.
 In the meane time they are dayly feasted by seue∣rall Lords, and amongst others the Count of 
Meggaw
 feasted them fewe daies agoe in great Pompe and State, not sparing any cost vpon Players and Musitians. It is thought that for this time (seing they brought some presents to the Emperor) that they shall likewise be sent home with some presents.


There is yet small likelihood of the treatie of peace, seing that the 
Basha
 of 
Ossen
 hath decla∣red himselte, that hee will not suffer the Lord 
Curty
 the Ambassador of his Imperiall Maiestie, to goe thence before the Peace be concluded. And the Emperour on the other side will not suffer this treatie to beginne, vnlesse he the Lord 
Curty
 be at libertie; and may come to it.






From Vienna 
the 
31.
 of October.


We receiued here to day tydings, how that 12000. 
Turkes
 which haue laine a while about 
Osten,
 were marcht vp to meet againe an inrode either in 
Hungaria
 or 
Styria:
 And his Impe∣riall Maiestie hath thereupon giuen order that 12000. foote shall with great speede march to∣wards 
Hungaria.








From 
Prague
 
the 2 of Nouember.


Although the Emperour hath now many times giuen order, that the souldiers should be sent out of this Kingdome into the Empire, they will not obey his order: by reason of their want of payment which they expect from the Empeour, and if they continue heere any longer, we are likely to haue a generall dearth in this Kingdome; for they haue already in many places of this Kingdome consu∣med the Victualls.


One who came lately from 
Olmits
 in 
Morauia
 brought heere tiding, how that the most part of the Cossacks which haue layne in 
Selesia,
 and 
Mo∣rauia,
 (when they were in the pay of the Emperor) are now entered into the seruice of 
Bethlem Gabor;
 and many are therefore of opinion that he (
Bethlem Gabor
) is not to be trusted.


The Elector of 
Saxony
 is with 500 horse gone to 
Berlin
 to assist there at the Christning of a child of the Elector of 
Brandenburgh.
 But there are some which hold that they are to treat there more∣ouer of some matters of great importance.






From 
Siuill
 
the 
20.
 of October.


We haue receiued tidings that the 
Hollanders
 haue taken the Admirant which is one of the Ships of our siluer fleete.








From 
Amsterdam
 
the 9 of 
Nouember.


The tyding is confirmed againe out of 
Spaine
 how that the Generall 
le Hermite
 hath taken and pillaged the Towne of 
Lima,
 and gotten there rich booties. And they write likewise thence that there is no hope that the siluer fleet shall this yeare come out of the West-Indies, and that the King of 
Spaine
 his Factors can therefore hardly take any money vp for the seruice of his Maiesty.


Moreouer they aduise vs thence that the fleete which is to be sent against the 
Hollanders
 to reco∣uer the 
Bay
 of 
Todos los Sanctos
 out of their hands, cannot soone be made ready for want of money, ships, munition, and men, although there walke dayly many Spanish Signiors by the steetes, with their feathers vpon their Hats, and threaten the 
Hollanders
 mightily.


Likewise we vnderstand by seuerall letters writ∣ten from 
Siuill,
 how that by thunder and light∣ning the golden Crowne was stroaken from the head of the Image or statua of the King of 
Spaine,
 that was erected there to honour him vppon his arriuall, without doing any other hurt, so that there are made many strange Prognostications, and that the rather seeing that the Confessor of the Queene, who was a very learned man, sayd before his death, that hee was very happy to leaue this

world before such miseries, as were to fall vppon 
Spaine
 happened.


They write from 
Liuorno,
 that on the 11 of October there ariued the Arch-Duke 
Charles,
 the brother of the Emperor, who was to goe with the Gallyes of 
Gemia
 into 
Spaine;
 he was euery where very stately entertayned, and it is thought that he shall bee made Vice-Roy of 
Portingall,
 amongst his folowers is one of the Dukes of 
Saxon-Weymar
 who is released out of his imprisonment.


Foure Gallyes of the great Duke of 
Toscana
 with 3 Gallies of the 
Popes,
 and 8 Gallyes of 
Naples,
 hauing assaulted the Famous Pyrat of 
Algire, Calefare, Aller,
 they set so hard vpon him, that he was compelled to put the fire in his gun-pouder.


But neuerthelesse they tooke the Captaine and two other Pyrats, besides 3 prises of French and Low-countrymen, which they thought to carry to 
Algires,
 and some 150 Turkes which were vpon them are sent to the Gallyes.


The King of 
Denmarke
 hauing beene in 
Gotland
 and viewed his siluer mines, is (God be thanked) againe safe arriued at 
Coppenhugen.


And we vnderstand that the most part of the Souldiers which the Kings of 
Sweden
 and 
Den∣marke
 haue dismist aswell horse as foote, are en∣tred in the seruice of the High and Mighty Lords, the States of the vnited Prouinces. The horse are

to come through the landes of 
Oldenborg,
 and 
Em∣den
 vnder the conduct of young Count of 
Thurne,
 and the States haue therefore sent prouision in those partes for them.


It is rumored that the Imperial Souldiers which lye yet in 
West-phalia,
 are speedily to march vp, and to go to the Marquis 
Spinola
 before 
Breda:
 But such as come thence, reports that they haue no minde to go to his Campe, by reason of the great Death and bad payment which is there made, and haue caused already many Souldiers to forsake it, so that there came dayly many of them out of 
West∣phalia
 to serue the States of these Vnited Pro∣vinces.


They of the Bishoppricke of 
Osnaburg
 haue this yeare slaine many Souldier of Monsieur 
Tilly,
 and the Baron of 
Anholt,
 which pillaged the Coun∣trey.


And the Baron afore mentioned, hath thereup∣pon hauing receiued order from Monsieur 
Tilly,
 written to them of the Towne, and vrged that they should receiue some Imperiall Souldiers with∣in their Walles. But they haue refused it flatly, and are not afrayde for him.


The Cardinall of 
Hohensolleren
 would likewise sine as Bishop of 
Osnaburg
 make his entrie in the same Towne.


In the County of 
Rauensberg,
 are now many Souldiers leauied for the King of 
Spaine,
 and are to be sent to the siedge of the Marquis 
Spinola
 be∣fore 
Breda.








From 
Rome
 
the 29 of October.


We haue receiued now more particular tidings from the Sea-fight that was lately betwixt 16 gal∣lyes of the Christians, and 6 pyrats, in the Sea a∣bout 
Sardigna,
 not farre from the Isle called St. 
Peter,
 for they write from 
Liuorno;
 that there were three Gallies of the Pope, eight of 
Naples,
 and fiue of 
Toscanus
 that fight with them, and that they had two Pinasses, and two other great Ships with them, which they had taken from some Low-Country-men.


And they relate how that the greatest Ship of the Turkes, which was prouided with 50. peeces of Ordinance, and 300. men, hauing lost her maine Maste, through the shot of the Ordinance of our Gallies, the Pirates put the fire in the gun-dowder, and blew it vp, that they might not bee taken a liue: This ship beeing thereupon presently sunke, the rest fled to saue themselues.






From 
Venice
 
the 25. of 
October.


They write from 
Thurin
 that the Duke of 
Sa∣uoy,
 and the Signiory of 
Gennu
 are yet both leaui∣yng more Souldiers, and that the Duke (a fore mentioned,) granted yet lately a Patent to leauie 2000. men: As likewise that his Highnesse is

resolued to purchase yet more lands and Lordships to the Marquisate of 
Succarello.


On the last Twesday arriued here two ships with souldiers of 
Albania,
 which are to bee sent into our Fronter Townes in 
Terra ferma.


This weeke sayled the two great Gallions hence being appoynted to conduct our Merchants Ships going and comming in, and from diuers seuerall places.


The Coronells 
Obertront,
 and 
Schibilischy
 are here arriued, and are entred into the pay of this Signiory, which is resolued to leauy 2000. 
Albe∣neses,
 2000. 
Swissers,
 and 2000. Italian horse.


We vnderstand by letters written from 
Millane
 how that the Gouernour of that Duke-dome hath sent many souldiers without any sound of Drum toward 
Come;
 and that the Paragor or Pay-maister Generall, hath furnished 5000. 
Veltoliners
 with armes and other necessaries to defend it.






Letters from 
Emerick.


Wee haue intelligence by letters from the town of 
Emrick,
 that the Captaine of the horse Sirnamed 
Quait,
 the Lord of 
Sippenbrook
 hauing made passag into the Land of 
Marke,
 with a 100 horse and 500 foote, which were vnder the command of 
Iohn Whitelme
 of 
Schorteneere,
 surprised and tooke the the Knight Marshall out of the Towne of 
Haltin∣gen;
 where out of the walls of the Citty, he forced

him to shake hands and take his farwell of this life shooting him to death against a Tree: the which punishment his bad vsage of many of our souldi∣ers moued him to inflict vpon him.


But as yet heere was not a period of their power nor an end of their conquest, for they proceded in the acquiring of a farther victory, laying siedge to the Towne of 
Vima:
 where having encamped, they sent some shot to the Towne, as an Ambassador to tell them thundring in their eares, the scope of their approach, notwithstanding the Towne made some small resistance; but to small purpose: for it did but procrastinate, not mittigate their misery, in fine it was taken, from whence they carryed 5 peices of Ordinance, by the assistance of which they went on yet further, and they besiedged the towne of 
Lunnen,
 and that not without as hapy successe, as they had formerly done the other: for haueing discharged some Cannons vpon it, the towne not very well likeing of such language as the Cannon noyse, nor approouing of such messengers as dead∣ly bullots, submitted themselues vnto them, and yeeld their persons and their purses, their goods & themselues into their hands, which being accom∣plisht with without further delay (which allures great danger in martiall matters) they posted let∣ters to 
Emerick,
 the contents of which were to this effect 
viz.


That they would send them more ayde to the intent they might scoure away the spaniards which like rust hung about the countrys, and constrayne them to flye out of that corner.




I doubt not but this will be a 
Habeas corpus
 for 
Spinola,
 from the siedge of 
Breda:
 for me thinks it stands with reason that when he sees his owne house on fire, he should looke to the quenching of that rather then fircing of others, he sees a certainty of losse in the parting with those Townes, but as yet no assurance of gayne in the possession of others, for hee hath not as yet attained it.


But to returne to our former discourse, Fame which is more swift then 
Pegasus,
 certifieth the Spanish Commanders, which lyeth in the Town of 
Wesell
 of these proceeedings who immediatly, selected of their and the other adioyning Garrison of 
Sterelen, Gelder, Rhyneberg,
 and marched after∣wards with them vp into the Land of 
Marke,
 tak∣ing with them, certaine number of peices of ordi∣nance: with an intent to make resistance against the afore mentioned Captaine 
Quait,
 and to en∣ter into battaile with him.


But on the contrary side the States of the Vni∣ted Prouinces, together with the Counsaile of Marquis 
Brandenburg,
 sent multituds of souldi∣ers to defend and mayntaine the Townes which were surprised by them.


Of late there arriued in our Campe eight companyes of 
Freizland,
 each of them being some 150 men strong: and they had a further expectati∣on of other 8 companies which were coming out of the Bishoppricke, and the Land of 
Greuinger.


The Prince of 
Orange
 hauing receiued intelli∣gence of Count 
Mansfields
 approach to 
Seuern∣bergen
 sent his owne Coach accompaned with

foure others, 30 waggons, 2 Troopes of horse to feth him in pompe, with no lesse honour then magnificence.


On the 4 day o this month the Count of 
Stirum,
 and the Count of 
Hellaine,
 being departed out of our Campe, and intending their course to 
Bergen vp Zoome,
 in the interim Count 
Mansfild
 ioyd our campe with his arriuall, hauing in his Society, the as good as old Count of 
Thinna
 the Count 
Ernest
 of 
Nassaw,
 with many other Lordes, Commanders, and Genelemen, who rod abroad to meete, salute, and congratulate his comming in the name of the Prince of 
Orange,
 who receiued him with Pompe and State, bee∣seeming the wellcome of such a noble, vertuous, and vallient, personage.


The Prince of 
Orange
 likewise made no long stay after them, but being accompaned with ma∣ny Earles, Barrons, and Nobles, very Princely, and Nobley shewed him much countenance, and Entertayned him with much curtesie: long may they bee so hounoured, which haue so nobly fought it.


Our Camp is very fortunately, and daily en∣richt, with multitudes of Prisoners, and prizes, taken from the Enemies: to the no lesse aug∣mentation of our ioy, then the demunition of

their solace; for as meat doth feed the body, so mony doth flesh and incourage the heart: but the most memorable booty that blest our Camp, was Lieutenant 
Roland Vanos,
 who was a Captaine of the company of their enemies foot, who was taken with seauen horses, and three mules, laden with Truncks of a great Spanish Commanders, was carryed into 
Bergen vp Zoom
 where as yet he lyeth in the Towne.


All the Trenches, Ditches, Batteryes, and Fortifications, in our Camp, are now fully fini∣shed, and absolutly compleat.


The Prince of 
Orang
 likewise, hath recalled his sauegards, granted to the villages, scituated in the 
Kempen:
 and hath also giuen very strickt and streight probition in Proclamations, or fixed Bills at 
Bergen vp Zoom, Seuernbergen,
 and other adioyning places: that they shall neither make sale, or carryage of any kind of Grayne to the Camp.


Through which meanes the dearth and fa∣mine in the Spanish Camp doth daily encrease; for a pound of Butter is vallued, and sold there for ten and twelue Stiuers, a pound of Cheese

is at the same price, and a quart of Beere for eight pence.


Moreouer they haue as little store of money, as of meate stirring in their Army, in so much that men in generall haue conceiued a hope, and are strongly opinionated that Marquis 
Spinoloa
 hath more will then power to continue the siedge of 
Breda;
 and it is thought that if not the Warres and spoyle done in other places, yet the hunger at home in his owne Campe, will force him to forsake the siedge, for if hee hath not money to get meate, nor meate to stay his Souldiers sto∣mackes, it is easie to bee coniectured that they will follow their appetites; and if hee leaue not the siedge, his Companies will forsake him; 
Et sic famem non famam habent,
 they haue more hunger then honour, and report hath given vs to vnderstand, that they haue stomackes like Lyons, but it is 
Magis ad passendum quam pugnandum,
 ra∣ther to feede then to fight, but to leaue the siedge and to come to the besidged.


This weeke were fiue Souldiers which made an escape by night out of 
Breda,
 by whose re∣lation wee vnderstood that the Towne is as yet reasonable well prouided for victualls, and suffici∣ently furnished with other sustinance and necessa∣ries, for it is their assertion that howsoeuer they bee destitute, and haue want of Butter, yet

they are fully furnished with Corne, and haue great store of Cattle, aboundance of salt, bread, Cheese, Honey, Oyle, Syrrop, and other pro∣uision requisite for the sustenance and maynte∣nance of this our weake and frayle life: And wee learne by particular Letters sent 
Breda,
 that some three weekes since, there beeing a suruey made of the sustenance, and prouision in the Towne, they found and vnderstood that there was yet remay∣ning 40000. quarters of Corne vnspent or vn∣toucht, which doth still adde to the former ex∣pectation of 
Spinolaes
 relinquiching the siedge, for if the Towne bee so well furnished with men, meate, and munition, it is probable that 
Spinola
 being so defectiue in purse and prouision doth but 
littus arare,
 as they say, or 
Aethiopem lauare,
 la∣bour in vaine, as the sowing on the shore, or the washing of a Blackamore; but to leaue this to the censure of sound iudgements, I proceede in my discourse.


Count Henry
 of 
Nassaw
 hath lately likewise fully finished all his Quarters, with all the workes appertayning and belonging to them: Hee hath also prouided, and taken order that none of our victualls or any other of our adherents shall trans∣port or carry any sustinance to any of our enemies or foes forces.


Count 
Mansfield
 and the old Count of 
Thieru


hauing had long conference, and large consul∣tation with his Excellence, the Prince of 
Orange,
 tooke their leaue and farewell of him, who as fame tells vs, are after the expiration of a small time, are to meete the English at the places by them appoynted, although from vs concealed, and heere of late haue beene great summes of money gathered, and sent ouer into these prouin∣ces out of 
France.


Neither is it buryed in concealement, that the 
French
 King hath receiued into his pay 2800 Horse, the which haue formerly serued 
Mounsier Tilly,
 who became humble and carnest suitors to serue vnder Count 
Mansfield,
 and there are yet expected 1000 Horse more which will come to offer their seruice very speedely, and to enter into the pay of the King of 
France,
 who is still encreasing his Forces, whose power as it is not yet in the full, so yet it is not in the Wayne: For euery day there bee more addi∣tions to it.


We haue likewise intelligence, and vnderstand further more by letters, that the Constable 
Lon∣guiare
 hath with no lesse speed then successe ariued amongst the Grisons, for he is not onely already there, but he hath subiected to the yoake of his o∣bedience many places and passages, the which hee

hath effected, wrought and brought to passe, as well by his owne proper forces as by the assistance of the Duke of Sauoy, moreouer the French king hath sent ouer also three regiments to ayde him.






From 
Bergen vp Zoame.


Our eares of late haue beene the wofull obiects of vnsortunate news from 
Bargaine vp Zoame,
 viz. that the Earle of 
Southampton
 falling sick, according to somes false relation, of the plague, but according to truth, of the bloudy fluxe at 
Roscindale,
 from whence he was carried to the Towne of 
Bergen vp Zoame,
 where his soule forsooke that earthly man∣sion place, and departed out of this wretched world: but as who should say, death had an intent to make a second part of our sorrow, with his im∣partiall axe he cut downe both tree and fruit toge∣ther: for the Earle of 
Southamptons
 hopefull sonne followed his father in the shadie paths of death, who had also in the same place, and at the same time a period imposed vnto his life.




FINIS.











