A true discourse vvherin is set downe the wonderfull mercy of God, shewed towardes the Christians, on the two and twenty of Iune. 1593 against the Turke, before Syssek in Croatia. Truly translated out of the high Dutch coppie. Printed at Vienna.
Approx. 11 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A18694




STC 5202



ESTC S109846





99845489




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A true discourse vvherin is set downe the wonderfull mercy of God, shewed towardes the Christians, on the two and twenty of Iune. 1593 against the Turke, before Syssek in Croatia. Truly translated out of the high Dutch coppie. Printed at Vienna.
[8] p.   


London :


Printed by [J. Windet for] Iohn Wolfe,


1593.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Turkey --  History --  1453-1683 --  Early works to 1800.
Syssek (Croatia) --  Siege, 1593 --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






5202


S109846


99845489


10394














A true discourse vvher∣IN IS SET DOWNE THE WONDER∣full mercy of God, shewed towardes the Christi∣ans, on the two and twenty of Iune. 159
. against the Turke, before Syssek in Croatia.


Truly translated out of the high Dutch Coppie. Printed at Vienna▪


LONDON Printed by Iohn Wolfe, 1593.














A TRVE DISCOVRSE, WHEREIN IS set downe the wonderfull mercy of God, shewed to∣wardes the Christians, on the two and twentie of Iune. 1593. against the Turke, before Syssek in Croatia.


V
Pon the 14. day of Iune, that Chri∣stian enemie, and Common violator of peace 
Hassam Bassa
 of 
Bossna,
 with the rest of his Lordes and souldiers, to the nomber of thyrtie eight thou∣sand and two hundred, surprised the castle and towre of 
Trentschina,
 som∣times belonging to the Bishopricke of 
Agram.


From thence, vppon the 15. following, he marched before 
Syssek,
 and played vpon it with his artillerie, vntill the eightenth day, with such force, that he ouer∣threw euen to the ground, the towre thereof, and two peeces of ordinance, together with the master gunners which were appointed, for among such field peeces as he there vsed, he had three in chief, which shot bollets of fortie, four and fortie, & fiue and fortie pound weight.


Vpon this the borderers of the Empire, drawen thereunto partly by necessitie, and partly through de∣sire to relieue 
Syssek
 aforesaid, assembled their forces together ouer against 
Agram
 as namely 
Rupertus
 Ba∣ron of 
Eckhenberg
 generall of the field: 
Andrea Awer∣sperg
 chief commander in 
Croatia: Erdody Baan
 Lord of 
Carlstat
 in 
Windismarke,
 the Lord of 
Graswein,
 Co∣ronell of the horsemen of 
Styria
 and 
Carniola,
 and 
Mel∣chior


 of 
Roderne
 Chieftaine of the Ruitters of 
Sylesia,
 to the number of fiue hundred the 
Kopprainitzers
 also, and the Estates of 
Windismarke
 were present likewise: who leauing two hundred footemen for the defence of 
Agram,
 and two hundred were for the Sconce (made vpon the bridge), marched forwarde in the name of God: & about midnight (being the eightenth of Iune,) came before 
Syssek,
 to the number of foure thousand fiue hundred men.


Vpon the ninetenth following, the Turks assaulted it: but effectuated nothing, onely they lost some three score Turkes: at which instant, our men behaued themselues manfully.


Vpon the 20. day 
Bassa
 sent out three hundred men, to see if they could intercept any person, by whom they might be enformed of the state of our Campe: against whom the Baron of 
Ecke
berg
 made out some foure hundred horses, who presētly put the Turkes to flight, of whom, they slewe some, some other were takē priso∣ners, and brought home about some fortie horse.


Vpon the 21. day, there issued out agayne on th'other side of the water, some foure hundred of the enemy, likewise to learne and harken of our precee∣dings, who were in like manner beaten backe, and for∣ced to retire to their Campe.


Who because they could not passe the water, with conuenient speede, lost many of their companie, 
viz:
 two shippefulls in the water, which were drowned, at which time our men tooke two enseignes, and one 
Agga,
 or Coronell, (who had the leading of seuen en∣seignes).


Vpon the two and twentith of Iune, our men mar∣ched

 neere 
Syssek
 & entred the Islande, against whom, th'enemy presently made head: whose great power and force, when our men had perfectly viewed and ex∣amined, some were of opinion to make a retraitte, e∣steeming it, no point of wisedome to put themselues into such an apparant and manifest daunger. But the Baron of 
Eckenberg,
 with certaine other of the Lordes and Chiefe Commaunders, were of a contrary aduise, and thought it more conuenient (in Gods name) to try the fortune of the Battaile, especially, because the ne∣cessitie vrged, & they of 
Syssek
 were not able one howre lōger to endure the siege. Besides, it was to be feared, lest th'enemy, in making their retraicte, would vn∣doubtedly set vpon them. Which aduise allowed and approued of the rest, they put themselues in order of battaile. The enemy did the like. And as 
Hassam Bassa
 of 
Bossna
 made head against our men, with some ten thousand horse and more, and was now entred the Is∣land and brought all his Ruitters before 
Syssek,
 he cau∣sed his Turkish footemen to be placed vpon th'other side of the Riuer (where a bridge was made of shippes) and the greater part of the Armie kept it selfe close in a Troupe.


The fight began about eleuē or twelue of the clock: And the L. 
Baan
 with his 
Hungarians,
 and the people of 
Windismarke
 gaue the first assault: who through the force and multitude of th'enemy, and namely of the 
Ianizaries,
 who were placed next the riuer, issued out vpon them so forcibly, that they were fayne to retire, who neuerthelesse were rescued and relieued by the Lord 
Graffen
 of 
Monte Kukulle,
 and the harquebusi∣ers of 
Carniola.




Vpon th'other side the 
Koppreunitzers,
 they of 
Carle∣stat,
 the 
Stirians,
 and 
Carniolans,
 to the number of three hundred horse, brake vpon th'enemy: emongst whom was the L. Generall of 
Eckenberg,
 with the Lordes of 
Roderne
 and 
Silesian
 Ruitters, and the Cheefe Com∣maunders of the horse, who likewise made their fight.


Now as sone as the Turkes espied them, and found them by their manner of riding, to be of 
Carlstat,
 High Almaines, and of the Confines (for they were at the first persuaded, that they had beene, as in times past, but Boures and Pesants) they tooke their flight to∣wardes the Bridge, right ouer against their Leaguer on the other side of the Riuer of 
Kulpa:
 amongst whom our people brake in with a great fury. As soone as the 
Hassam Bassa
 espied this he ran in all hast to the Bridge made vpon the Riuer 
Kulpa,
 hoping there to make his people (who were now in Flight) presently to retourne to the Fight, but all in vaine: for there were about two Ensignes, or fiue hundred Turkes, which had allrea∣dy past the Bridge, vnto the Footemen there, and the rest endeuoured to follow with all their might and maine: who were intercepted by them of 
Carlstat
 and the 
Koppreunitzers,
 & forced them to leaue the Bridge: And the Turkes, which were on the other shoare, la∣bored in the meane while to breake down the Bridge, whome our people with their shott forced to retire.


When the Turkes perceiued, that the Bridge was taken from them, they tooke the water, which at that tyme was great, and ranne so still, as if it had bene a standing lake. In which many a stately, worthy and renowned Turke and horse, lost his lyfe; for they no sooner entred it, but were presently drowned.




Of all these Turkes, very fewe or none escaped the water, by reason of the shot which continually plaid vpon them, all that day and night.


Hassam Bassa
 of 
Bossna,
 him selfe with certayne o∣ther 
Beegen, Aggen, Spahyen, Sayen,
 also other renow∣ned Turkes, were forced to take the water euen vn∣der 
Syssek,
 and were there drowned.


The high Almains would not take any Turke pri∣soner, but slewe them all: but they of 
Windesmarke,
 tooke some and brought them from thence.


The Turkes which were on thother syde of the wa∣ter greatly lamented, and entreated that if their 
Bassa
 were taken prisoner, they would not touch his life, but rather honorably entertaine him, for their Emperour would assuredly ransome him.


The Turkish Emperoures sisters sonne, called 
Me∣hemet Beeg,
 stretched forth his hand in the water (cra∣uinge as it were to be relieued) but he was presently slayne with a shott.


The bodyes of 
Bassa, Ernot Beeg: Rhustan Beeg: and Mehemet Beeg:
 who was cheefe Generall of the Tur∣kish Cauallerie, were taken out of the water, and the said 
Mehemet
 had his head presently strooke of.


The Almaine footemen, & such as were vnder the conduct and leading of 
Ferdinand Werdners,
 were not present at this encounter: but were left behinde to guarde th'Artillery: who forced th'ennemie to leaue eight Field peeces vpon carriages (which were vnder the charge of the 
Kazianerins,
 and taken from vs by th'ennemy 
Anno
 33. before 
Essek
) and also certaine f
 conetes, with thirty shippes of Victual: they tooke spoyle likewise of the whole Campe and riffled 


 tyltes.


Thus hath almightie God wonderfully protected the christian soldiers (which in number were nothing comparable to those of the Turkes.




ACCORDING TO THE REPORT
 of the Turkes, which were taken prisoners, the Bassa had then of his owne souldiers, men and houshold people, as followeth.




FIrst. In men. 4000


Rhamathon Beeg. 1000


Berth Beeg of Kliss. 3000


Zeiueri Memy Beeg. 1500


Seffer Beeg of Zerink, brother to the Bassa in Bossna. 700


Beeg of Hertzoguina, sonne to Achmat Bassa of the Portes. 3000


Kurth Beeg, sonne to Ferhat Bassa. 1500


Rhustan Beeg, of Petrina. 500


Ibrohim Beeg, of Likaw. 2000


Captaine of Gratischko. 1000


The number of the other Spahyen, Sayen and land people were. 20000






FINIS.











