A letter vvritten to the right vvorshipfull the Gouernours and assistants of the East Indian marchants in London containing the estate of the East Indian fleete, with the names of the chiefe men of note dead in the voyage.
Approx. 10 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 6 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-04 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A21083




STC 7448



ESTC S120985





99856176




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A letter vvritten to the right vvorshipfull the Gouernours and assistants of the East Indian marchants in London containing the estate of the East Indian fleete, with the names of the chiefe men of note dead in the voyage.
[4], 9, [1] p.   


At London :


Printed [by R. Read] for Thomas Thorppe, and are to be sould by William Aspley,


1603.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
East India Company. --  Early works to 1800.
Voyages and travels --  Early works to 1800.
Ascension (Ship) --  Early works to 1800.
East Indies --  Early works to 1800.
2009-05
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2009-06
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2009-07
Lauren Proux
Sampled and proofread
2009-07
Lauren Proux
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2009-09
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






7448


99856176


21703














depiction of ship






A LETTER VVRITTEN TO THE RIGHT 
WOR∣SHIPFVLL THE
 GO∣VERNOVRS AND ASSISTANTS OF THE EAST INDIAN 
MAR∣CHANTS IN LONDON: CONTAINING
 THE ESTATE OF THE EAST INDIAN: 
FLEETE, WITH THE NAMES OF
 THE CHIEFE MEN OF NOTE 
DEAD IN THE VOYAGE


AT LONDON Imprinted for 
Thomas Thorppe,
 and are to be sould by 
William Aspley.


1603.














A LETTER 
VVRIT∣TEN TO THE RIGHT
 worshipfull the Gouernours and 
Assistants of the East Indian Mar∣chants
 in London; containing the estate 
of the East Indian Fleete, with the names
 of the chiefe men of note dead 
in the Voyage.


R
Ight Worshipfull my dutie re∣membred. It may please you to vnderstand, that we wayed An∣chor the 20. of Aprill 1601. and set saile out of 
Torbaye
 by 
Dart∣mouthe.


The 21. of Iune following, being in the heigth of three degrees to the Northwards of the line, wee tooke a ship of 
Vianna
 bound for 
Brasill,
 of the burthen of 130. tunne, her lading was Wine, Oyle and Meale, which hath stood vs in

great steede in this our voyage: fiue or sixe dayes after we turned her off after we had pillaged her as we thought good.


The 20. day of Iuly we turned away the 
Guifte
 beeing in the height of 19. degrees to the South∣ward of the Line, the 24. day we came vnder the Tropicke of 
Capricorne.


The 19. day of September we came to Anchor at 
Saldaiua,
 beeing in very great distresse by reason of the scuruy disease then raging among vs. The 
Ascention
 and 
Susans
 company were scarce able to let fall their Anchors without the helpe of other ships, there we staied and refreshed our men with fresh victuals, as Beefe and Mutton in great aboun∣dance which cost vs little or nothing, there we stai∣ed about seauen weekes, and had staied there lon∣ger if the inhabitantes had continued to bring vs fresh victuals, so we departed thence the 9. of Oc∣tober.


The 29. of December we came to Anchor in the baye of 
Antoga,
 here we trucked with the inha∣bitants for Rice, Lemmans and Plantaines & such like fruite, we sette vp one of our Pinnaces: here al∣so we lost diuerse of our men which dyed of the

Filx by reason of the great heate, and feeding of the Plantaines and Lemmans which they did de∣uoure immoderately.


This Baye is the Inland of 
Saint Laurence
 and standeth in the height of sixeteene degrees.


The 4. day of March we departed thence in the euening, and the first day of Iune 1602. we discried the land 
Sumatra.


The 3. day we Anchored in the Roade of 
A∣chin
 in seauen faddome water. To make any large discourse of matters which passed whilst wee lay in the Roade of 
Achin
 I omitte, because time will not permitte: But in few wordes you shall vnderstand, that heere wee found little Pepper, not sufficient to loade the 
Ascention,
 hauing in her little aboue eight score tunnes, we could not I thinke in all the East 
Indiaes
 haue come to a worser place for loading.


The 30. of Iuly the Generall sent away the 
Su∣san
 to 
Priaman
 to seeke her loading, being an Iland which lieth towardes the southwardes eight score leagues, a little distance from 
Sumatra,
 and about 20. dayes before our comming to 
Achin,
 the little

Pinnace came from her and certified our generall she was almost loaden, that we hope she will not be long after vs.


The 11. of September we departed out of the roade of 
Achin
 for the straights of 
Mallaca
 to seeke purchase: The Red 
Dragon, the Assention,
 the 
Hector
 and a Flemming which came into the Roade os 
A∣chin
 but 4. dayes before.


The 3. of October beeing Sunday about fiue of the clocke in the afternoone we saw a saile and gaue her chase, about nine of the clocke wee fetched her vp and hayled her, and found her to be a Ship come from 
Goa
 and bound for 
Mallaca
 laden with 
Portingals
 goodes, as 
Pintados, Calicottes
 and other stuffes great store, a great part of her loading was Rice and victualls, and in her about seauen or eight hundred persons men women and children, we had out of her 
958.
 Fardils: and diuers chests with other things as 
Canistees:
 wee were forced from her by force of weather beeing put from our Anchors.


The 25. day we Anchored in the roade of 
A∣chin.


The 11. day of Nouember being Thurseday we waied our Anchors and set saile from 
Achin, viz.


the 
Dragon,
 the 
Hector,
 and a little Pinnace, and the 
Ascention,
 they did keepe vs company till the next day being bound for 
Priaman
 vnto the 
Susan,
 and so from thence they were purposed to goe for 
Ban∣tam,
 God grant they may get thither in safety, for then it is not to be doubted they shall get their full lading of Pepper according to their desires, as shall appeare vnto you hereafter: So wee leauing them the day aboue said, departed for 
England,
 to the great reioycing of vs all that were to goe home into out Country after so tedious a pilgrimage.


The 3. day of Februarie about 10. of the clocke afore noone, wee had sight of the 
Cape Bona esper∣anse
 a Frenchman which we left in the roade of 
A∣chin
 being in our company, which came out a day after vs, who together had determined to goe for 
Saldauia
 if two Flemmings who came then into our company had not altered our determination, for af∣ter wee had hailed them, wee vnderstood they were vnwilling to put in for that place, but to goe for 
Saint Hellena,
 so we stoode along with them, and altogether ariued at 
Saint Hellena.


The 21. day of the same month, the 
Ascenti∣on
 and the Frenchman called the 
Creset
 of 
Saint Mallowes,
 the two Dutchmen, the Admirall was called the Amsterdam about the burthen of

300. 
Last,
 and the other called the 
Tergow,
 of the bignesse of the 
Ascention:
 which shippe hath beene almost thirty three monethes from home, and as they tould vs laden at 
Petauia,
 most of her lading beeing Pepper, and in their way homeward they touched at 
Banton,
 the people of 
Banton
 were glad when they came thither because they thought they woulde haue laden Pepper, hauing great store lying vpon their hands and being chea∣per then ours is.


The generall of the Flemmings whose name is 
Iacob Cornelius Van Neskes
 toulde vs that there is Pepper enough to lade foure or fiue Ships, so that if the 
Dragon
 came there in any time con∣uenient it is not to bee doubted but they are vppon the waye homewardes full laden with Pepper, &c.


The Frenchmen haue determined suddaine∣ly to leaue our companye to depart homewardes, which hath made mee to trouble you with this discourse, although not so large as willingly I would it were, for that time will not per∣mitte mee to doe otherwise, hoping that it will not bee any thing displeasing vnto you, hauing as I thinke not before this heard any cer∣tainety

of vs since our departure out of England beeing verie willing it should come to your hands before you heare of vs any more, the better to prepare your mindes for the setting foorth of a new voyage. Wee shall bee readye to de∣parte from hence the fifteenth day of this moneth of March, GOD send vs home in safetye.






The names of the chiefe men
 of note which are dead in the Voyage.


THere was 182. men which were dead out of our Fleete before we parted from our Gene∣rall, three of our men dead since. Men of note which are dead, are these: 
William Leake
 Purser of this Shippe, 
George Parsons
 Purser of the 
Hector,
 Maister 
Casell,
 Maister 
Horton
 who married Alder∣man 
Wattes
 his daughter, which foure dyed before we came to 
Saldauia.


Brad
ncke
 Maister of the 
Dragon,
 Maister 
Pullion
 our Preacher, Maister 
Winter
 Maisters mate, Maister 
Napper
 Maister of the 
Hector,
 these foure dyed at 
Antogill.


Maister 
Brand
 Captaine of the 
Ascention,
 go∣ing a shore in his Boate to the buriall of Maister 
Winter,
 very vnfortunately by a shotte that was made by the Gunner of the 
Admirall,
 was slaine, with another called 
Iohn Parker,
 who steered the Boate.


The 27. of Februarie being Satterday, Maister 
Haward
 Captaine of the 
Susan
 dyed in the Roade of 
Achin,
 Maister 
Stradling,
 Maister 
Winchcombe,

Iohn Iland, Iames Chamley,
 dyed in the Roade of 
Achin,
 Maister 
Robert Pope
 in the straights of 
Mallaca,
 Maister 
Thomas Saltin
 in the Roade of 
Achin.






Thus being inforced to cut short, I cease for this present, praying for your prosperities in all your intended enterprises, according to your disires.




Fare you well,


from aboard the 
Ascention
 at S. 
Hellena,
 
the 9. of 
March,
 1602.









