(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A21201)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 5753)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1475-1640 ; 528:5 or 1943:8)
Imprint from colophon; dated and signed at end of letter "...new yeares day and the first of ye kalenders of January. 1555 ... Iohn Elder"
Includes, following letter: "The copy of the Quenes Magesties letters patentes. ... Westminster the foure and twentieth daye of October, in the fyrste yeare of oure reigne."
Signatures: A-F⁸.
Reproductions of original in: Henry E. Huntington Library and Art Gallery.
The kynge landed at southamptō the. xx. of Iu ly▪ M Diiiii
How lōg he remayned at Southhamp ton.
His cum∣ming to the Citie of

His humi∣litie and re uerence in syght of the most bles∣sed
Howe he was brought by the Lordes of the coun∣sell to the Quenes maiestie a priuy

How ioyful ly the Que∣nes mage stie recea∣ued hym in presence of all the peo ple.
The day of their moste Noble ma riage.
The quenes magestie and the king were shre∣uen before they were maried.
Howe the Emperour resigned the kyng dome of Naples and Hierusalē to the kiges highnes his sonne.
The sweard
How
The hy
The kin∣ges high∣nes and the quenes▪ magesties new Stile and title.
Their
Mirth, ioy & pastime at and af∣ter their maryage.
The riche apparels of then obi litie of England. and Spai
All kynd of verses set vp by the scol∣lers of winchester colledge in commē dacyon of their most noble ma∣riage.
Laudes and priui legis geuē to the Ci∣tie of win chester & Southhāp ton.
The day of their depa
Their cū∣ming to windsor & how they were there receaued with pro∣cession & the kyng installed.
Their cū∣ming to Richemōd
Their cū∣myng to London.
Their most tri∣umphing entries in∣to London
The lord
The firste staye.
These ver ses were set vp a∣boue the drawe bridge of London.
The secōd Staye.
The firste pagiant in Gracious
The third Staye.
The secōd pagent at the west ende o
The forth Staye.
The thirde pageant at the east ende of Chepe.
Their fift Stay.
The fourth pagiant on the west en
They wer receaued at poules with pro∣cession by the Bis∣shop of London.
The la
The fifte and laste pagent.
The effecte of an oraci∣on set vp aboue the porte of
Two prin cely and most excel lent pre∣sentes.
The be∣gynnyng of the Parlamēt
The cum∣myng of my Lorde Cardinal.


My Lorde Cardinal was an ex∣ile out of hys country xxi. yeares.
The cau∣ses wher¦fore he was exiled
Diuers noble men haue suf∣fred in Englande for hys sake.
The que∣nes ma∣gestie hath restored the Lorde Cardinal to the ho∣nour of hys house
My Lorde Cardu
The three Estates of Englan
My Lorde Chauncel∣lers wordes.
My Lord
Englande of al Ilan des recey∣ued fyr
Two po¦wers in earth, the Ecclesias∣ticall po¦wer, and y
The three Estates assembled agayne be fore the kynge and Quenes magesties and my lord Car∣dynall.
How they dyd exhi∣bit a sup∣plicacyon to theyr magesties
The
How the kynges magesty and the Lord,
My Lord Chauncel
What mi∣series eng lande hath sustayned sins it swar ued from the vnitie of the Ca
How king Henry the Light. xix. yeares agon thoughte to haue ge uen ouer the supre∣macye.
How he sēt to the Em perour for the same e
The kiges forme and stature.