By the Queene. Forasmuche as it is notorious, in what sort, sithence the publicke arrest first made of the Queenes Maiesties subiectes, and of their shippes and goodes in the lowe countreys of the kyng of Spayne ...
Proclamations. 1572-01-14
England and Wales. Sovereign (1558-1603 : Elizabeth I)
Approx. 9 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A21741




STC 8041



ESTC S112337





99847592




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the Queene. Forasmuche as it is notorious, in what sort, sithence the publicke arrest first made of the Queenes Maiesties subiectes, and of their shippes and goodes in the lowe countreys of the kyng of Spayne ...
Proclamations. 1572-01-14
England and Wales. Sovereign (1558-1603 : Elizabeth I)
2 sheets   


Imprinted at London :


In Powles Churchyarde, by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood, Printers to the Queenes Maiestie,


[1572]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
England --  Proclamations --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  History --  Elizabeth, 1558-1603 --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  Foreign relations --  Spain --  Early works to 1800.
Spain --  Foreign relations --  Great Britain --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






8041


S112337


99847592


12631












By the Queene.


F
Orasmuche as it is notorious, in what sort, sithence the publicke arrest first made of the Queenes Maiesties subiectes, and of their shippes and goodes in the lowe countreys of the kyng of Spayne, in the later ende of Decem∣ber, in the yeere of our Lorde God. 
1568.
 her Maiestie hath ben pleased to geue sundry orders for the preseruation of the goodes of the subiectes of the sayde kyng, beyng afterwarde arrested in this Realme, for the indempnitie of her Maiesties subiectes, without yeeldyng to make any sale of them, sa∣uyng some smal portions, which otherwyse would haue perished, although sale was before made generally in the lowe countreys of the goodes of her Maiesties subiectes there arrested: and howe also afterwarde her Maiestie was wel pleased, that certayne of her marchantes should repayre into the lowe countreys, to treate with the Duke of A
lua, Lieuetenant to the sayde kyng, who had already solde theyr goodes, for some treatie of a mutual restitution of al manner of thynges arrested or stayed in any of the kyngdomes and countreys of both the sayde princes, whereby not only the subiectes of both partes, beyng owners, myght be relieued by recouerie of their owne, but thereby th occasion of vnkindnesse, that myght for lacke of restitution ensue betwixt both the princes, myght also be auoyded. Whereupon dyd also folowe, that certayne persons in the name of both the princes, haue treated for the manner of restitution, wherein many delayes haue ben vsed by the ministers of the part of the sayde kyng. And yet when by the frequent solisitation of her Maiesties ministers vsed, it was thought that al the great difficulties of the treatie had ben fully past, and that the articles and couenantes were ordered to be faire written, or, as the common speache is, put into 
mundum,
 so as it was on the Queenes Maiesties part dayly looked, that the same shoulde haue ben subscribed and sealed by the ministers on both sides, and so or∣der for restitution to haue folowed without delay: her Maiestie notwithstandyng this her preceadyng, fin∣deth that contrarye to her expectation, the ministers that treated on the part of the kyng of Spayne, not only lacked sufficient aucthoritie to conclude, as reason was they shoulde, and as they had from the begyn∣nyng thereof ben oftentymes remembred, to procure sufficient commission: but also they dyd, when the con∣clution was looked for, newly offer before her Maiesties counsel, to adde such other strange clauses and con∣ditions, as coulde not be accepted in any reason, without the manifest preiudice of her Maiesties honnour, and principally, without a playne and open gate or way to defeate the very certaintie of restitution to her Maiesties subiectes, with a special prouision notwithstandyng for a certaintie for the subiectes of the kyng of Spayne. Whereof, though the sayd ministers were playnely and at good length enfourmed by her Ma∣iesties counsel, & most earnestly required to refourme the same, and to make al the couenantes equall & reci∣proke for both partes: yet they woulde not be induced thereto, pretendyng that without further aucthoritie from the Duke of Alua, they coulde not alter those theyr newe clauses. Wherfore, her Maiestie consyderyng the long delayes herein vsed, the decayes of the goodes here arrested, the lamentable complaintes of her mar∣chantes for lacke of reliefe, with this also, that in the lowe countreys the goodes of her Maiesties subiectes were already solde, by order of the Duke of Alua long tyme sythence, and that in Spayne also such as were of any value, were solde by order of the kinges ministers there, and the rest, for the most part, wasted for lacke of keeping: hath by aduise of her sayd counsel, as it were thereto vrged by very necessitie, determined to cause a publicke sale to be made of the goodes of the sayde kynges subiectes arrested in any of her Maiesties domi∣nions. In whiche sale, her Maiesties determination and pleasure is, that al dexteritie and sinceritie shalbe vsed: and for that purpose, her Maiestie hath by aduise of her counsel, caused a competent number of expert, skilful, & honest marchantes, aswel Englishe men, as straungers of sundry nations, to be appoynted, where∣of also suche of the subiectes of the sayde kyng of Spayne, as conueniently coulde be founde, haue ben na∣med, called, and offered to be parties yf they wyl, who vpon their othes shal make open sale of al the shippes, goodes, wares, and marchandizes arrested, to the most aduantage and aduauncement in price they can or may, without shewyng any affection therein directly or indirectly, to them selues, or to any other person whatsoeuer. And for the better execution thereof, her Maiestie is pleased, and doth licence euery proprie∣tarie or owner of any the sayde shippes or goodes so arrested or deteyned here, as is aforesayde, or the factour, or lawful atturney of any suche owner, safely and freely to come into this Realme, at any tyme within thir∣tie dayes after the publication hereof, presenting them selues with al conuenient speede after their arriual, to suche as shalbe appoynted to sell the sayde marchandizes, and not doyng or attempting any thyng to the

 derogation or hurt of her Maiestie, her subiectes, or Realme, but to depart after the said sales made to them without they shalbe otherwyse licensed: and that they may also lawfully buye al suche goodes, wares, an marchandizes, as by theyr markes, or otherwyse may be proued to belong to them, geuing as muche as any other reasonably wyll for the same, and that all and euery person and persons buying any of the sayde shyppes, goodes, wares, or marchandizes, may carry and transport the same into any place or countrey beyonde the seas, where it shal seeme good to them, yf the same can not as profitably be solde here, pay∣ing al dueties and customes due and payable for the same. And for the further declaration also of her Ma∣iesties good disposition and intent, her Maiestie doth by these presentes notifie to al persons, that notwith∣standyng the proceadyng of this sale, none shalbe refused that shal come from the sayde kyng fully auctho∣
ed by commission, but shalbe wyllyngly heard to treate further, and conclude any thyng that may tende to the benefite and good of both theyr kyngdomes and countreys, and to the weale of the marchantes and subiectes on both partes. And forasmuche as it is suspected, that diuers persons haue imbecelled and conueyed, and yet doo witholde diuers goodes, wares, and marchandizes belongyng to the subiectes of the sayde kyng of Spayne: her Maiestie doth straightly charge and commaunde al manner of persons within her dominions, whiche haue sythence the tyme of the foresayde arrest had any shippes, goodes, or money, belonging to the subiectes of the sayd kyng of Spayne, in his or theyr custodie or possession, whereof there is no report yet made, accordyng to a proclamatiō set foorth the last of Iune. 
1570.
 shal within fourtie dayes af∣ter the publication hereof, bryng or sende a tuft report thereof, to suche persons as shalbe assigned or appoin∣ted for the sale of the wares and marchandizes, vpon payne that any makyng default of suche reporte, shal not only incurre her Maiesties displeasure, but shal also after this admonition, be charged & punished as concealors and deteynors thereof with felonious mindes and intentes.


Yeuen at her hyghnesse pallace of Westminster, 
the fourteenth day of Ianuarie, in the fourteenth yeere of her Maiesties raigne.


God saue the Queene.










❧ Imprinted at London in Powles 
Churchyarde, by Richarde Iugge and Iohn Cawood,
 Printers to the Queenes Maiestie.


Cum priuilegio Regiae Maiestatis.









