By the Queene. A proclamation to forbid all maner of persons to resort to any townes held by the French Kings rebels, or to traffique with any of them, vpon paine to be punished as traitors with a declaration of the iust causes of the said prohibition. Giuen vnder her Maiesties signet at Greenwich the xiiij. day of Aprill 1591, and of her Maiesties reigne the xxxiij. yere.
Proclamations. 1591-04-14
England and Wales. Sovereign (1558-1603 : Elizabeth I)
Approx. 9 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A21872




STC 8202



ESTC S115443





99850662




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the Queene. A proclamation to forbid all maner of persons to resort to any townes held by the French Kings rebels, or to traffique with any of them, vpon paine to be punished as traitors with a declaration of the iust causes of the said prohibition. Giuen vnder her Maiesties signet at Greenwich the xiiij. day of Aprill 1591, and of her Maiesties reigne the xxxiij. yere.
Proclamations. 1591-04-14
England and Wales. Sovereign (1558-1603 : Elizabeth I)
Elizabeth I, Queen of England, 1533-1603.
2 leaves   


[Imprinted at London :


By the deputies of Christopher Barker, printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie,


[1591]]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History --  HenryIV, 1589-1610 --  Early works to 1800.
France --  History --  HenryIV, 1589-1610 --  Early works to 1800.
England --  Proclamations --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






8202


S115443


99850662


15883












❧ 
By the Queene.
 A Proclamation to forbid all maner of persons to resort to any Townes held by the French Kings rebels, or to traffique with any of them, vpon paine to be punished as Traitors: with a declaration of the iust causes of the said prohibition. Giuen vnder her Maiesties signet at 
Greenwich
 the xiiij. day of Aprill 
1591,
 and of her Maiesties reigne the xxxiij. yere.


T
He Queenes Maiestie considering the continuance of the vnnatural rebellion of a multitude of the French kings Subiectes in Fraunce, against their most lawfull king, heretofore king of Nauarre, and now iustly entituled Henry the fourth king of Fraunce and Nauarre, being recommended to the realme by the last king before his death, in presence of all the Princes of the bloud, and of the rest of the Nobilitie of the Realme, to be his most lawfull successor of the Crowne, and so immediatly vpon the death of the saide late French king, accep∣ted and acknowledged by all the saide Princes of the Bloud, inheritable to the crowne, without exception of any one of the same princes Ecclesiastical or Tem∣porall: And in like maner from the death of the last king, serued and obeyed by all the auncient officers of the Crowne, and namely by all the Marshals of Fraunce, the principall officers of that Realme, and by the grea∣test part of all the Noble men, gouernors of the Prouinces. And that it now manifestly appeareth, that this vnnaturall rebellion is fauoured by none of the auncient byrth of Fraunce, but by a very fewe of a strange bloud, lately brought in, and planted by marriages in Fraunce, being onely branches depending of the house of Lorraine, which is no naturall member of the Crowne of Fraunce to possesse the same: Therefore her Ma∣iestie hath for these and many other causes in the sight of Almightie God very iust, and to the world most hono∣rable, bene moued to yeelde to the said king her good brother and confederate, her fauour, both in approbati∣on of his right, and wishing to him prosperitie against his rebels, as she thinketh there is no Monarch, nor any Soueraigne Potentate in all Christendome but doth the like, sauing onely one: who not contented with all the kingdomes and dominions which his most noble father left him, by reason of his aboundant riches brought to him out of his Indies, attempteth to augment his estate by encroching to himselfe the dominions of his neighbors. And for that purpose, her Maiestie hath also according to such power as God hath giuen to her, and as she may conueniently yeelde with regarde to her owne estate, giuen to the said most Christian king some succours, and so mindeth to continue her fauours, as manifestly hath, and dayly is seene, both to all stran∣gers, and to her owne people, and by none misliked but by the rebels and the king aboue described, who at this day is manifestly seene, that if he were disposed to liue in peace, and be contented with his owne dominions, and not seeke the dominions of any others, Christendome were to enioy an vniuersall peace, without any noyse of warre in any countrie or corner of Christendome. And now her Maiestie finding that this populer rebellion against the said king, is fedde and maintained in sundry Port Townes of Fraunce, and specially in Norman∣die and Britaine, where the people liue by bringing to them forreine marchandize, and by vent of their owne, and by receiuing of succours of victuals & munitions of warre from forraine countries, without which the re∣bels in their Ports could neither continue their rebellion, nor yet relieue their fellowe rebels within the land: Hath thought it meete, that although her subiects ought in reason of themselues to haue considered as much, to will and charge, and so she doth expressely will, charge, and commaunde, all maner her owne naturall Subiects, and all other persons resorting to her realme, to forbeare from repayring to any Porte or Creeke of Picardie, Normandie, or Britaine, where the Rulers of the same Portes or Creekes doe not manifestly obey the French king, and that in no manner, directly or indirectly, they doe cary or send any Marchandize, victual, or munition to any Port or Towne, that doeth disobey the French king, or doe vse any trade of buying or sel∣ling by bartering or by exchange with any of the kings rebels, or with their adherents either in Fraunce, or fraudulently here in England or elsewhere: vpon paine that whosoeuer shall attempt the contrarie, the same shall be punished as Traitors, and relieuers and succourers of her Maiesties enemies. For such her Maiestie doth iudge the said kings rebels to be, in that they haue and doe to their power, declare themselues to be ene∣mies

 to her Maiestie and her Subiectes, as by their hostile actions against her Maiesties subiectes, hath in many partes manifestly appeared. As in like sorte also the king of Scottes her good brother, and a friend and auncient Allie to the Crowne of France, hath publiquely declared himselfe an enemie to the said rebels, and 
 prohibited his Subiects from trading in any sorte with the rebels of Fraunce: notwithstanding some of the heads of the rebellion, to his great misliking, are by the house of Lorraine of kinred to him.


And because her Maiestie is informed, that though many of her secretly euill disposed subiects do outward∣lie shew themselues not to haue a minde to repaire to the ports possessed by the foresaid Rebels, but colourably doe in her Maiesties ports lade their wares, and make their entries with the officers of the Customehouses, and take their cockets, as thereby to carrie the same to the ports of France which are knowen to obey the French king: Or sometimes lading of vitailes, make their entries to repaire only to other ports of the realme, and sometimes to the isles of Iernsey or Garnsey, and yet most corruptly, and against their loyaltie, for gaine or other corruption, they doe craftily repaire with the said merchandise and vitailes, yea and by stealth with munition, as pouder, shot, copper, and other habislements of warre, to the ports manifestly held by the Rebels: For repressing of which abuse, her Maiestie chargeth and commandeth all her officers of her Cu∣stomehouses, to haue good regard to the conditions of all that shall lade any wares to be transported out of the realme by sea, or of vitaile from port to port. And if they shall haue any suspition that the said wares or vitailes so to be laden, might be carried to the Rebels townes in France, they shall not suffer any such to depart with their lading, except the owners and laders shall both by their corporall othe, and by bond with sureties to the double value of the things laden, giue assurance, and cleere themselues of all suspition, that no part of their la∣ding shall by them, or by any for them, be carried to any towne of the Rebels in France. And if any offi∣cers of the ports shall hereafter know, or be informed of any being either the merchant, the owner, or the ma∣ster of the shippe, or sailer, that shall offend to the contrary of this her Maiesties proclamation, and shall not speedily giue notice thereof to the Lord Treasurer of England, or to the Lords of the Priuie councell, to the in∣tent the persons offending, and the ships also may be apprehended: such officer for concealing thereof, shall lose all offices in the port for euer, and shall suffer close imprisonment one whole yeere without baile, and yeeld such fine to her Maiestie, as his condition may endure. And if any Viceadmirall or his deputie, shall know, or be informed of any person that shall offend to the contrary of this proclamation, and shall not speedily giue notice thereof to the Lord Admirall, or in the Fiue ports to the Lord Warden, or to the Priuie councell: the same per∣son so concealing the same, shall loose his office for euer, and suffer close imprisonment the space of one whole yere, and likewise yeeld such fine, as his condition shall endure.


God saue the Queene.










Imprinted at London by the Deputies of Christopher Barker, Printer to the Queenes most excellent Maiestie.









