By the King whereas by an acte of Parliament made in the two and twentieth yeere of the reigne of our most noble progenitour King Edward the Fourth, it was ... ordeined that all merchants which should carie or bring any merchandize out of Scotland, or the isles of the same into this realme of England ...
England and Wales. Sovereign (1603-1625 : James I)
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A22067




STC 8466



ESTC S3702





ocm 33150800




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the King whereas by an acte of Parliament made in the two and twentieth yeere of the reigne of our most noble progenitour King Edward the Fourth, it was ... ordeined that all merchants which should carie or bring any merchandize out of Scotland, or the isles of the same into this realme of England ...
England and Wales. Sovereign (1603-1625 : James I)
James I, King of England, 1566-1625.
2 leaves.   


Imprinted at London :


By Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most excellent Maiestie,


Anno Dom. 1611.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Tariff --  England --  Early works to 1800.
Tariff --  Scotland --  Early works to 1800.
England --  Commerce --  Scotland --  Early works to 1800.
Scotland --  Commerce --  England --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  History --  James I, 1603-1625.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






8466


S3702


33150800


28761














blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family encircled by the order of the garter and topped by a rose and a thistle


HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE


 ¶ By the King.


W
Hereas by an Acte of Parliament made in the two and twentieth
 yeere of the Reigne of Our most noble Progenitour King 
Edward
 the fourth; It was (amongst other things) ordeined, that all Merchants which should carie or bring any merchandize out of Scotland, or the Isles of the same into this Realme of England or Wales, first should bring the same merchandize to the Towne of 
Berwicke:
 And that none of the Kings liege people, nor none other person vnder the Kings obey∣sance should carie any merchandize, or cause it to bee carried into this Realme of England, or any other place vnder the Kings obeysance: But that the same merchan∣dize should be customed at the same Towne of 
Berwicke,
 except to the Citie of 
Carlile,
 and the Ports or Creekes pertaining to the West Marches: And that no merchandize should bee shipped in any Creeke, or other place betwixt 
Tinmouth
 and the said Towne of 
Berwicke;
 but onely in the Port or Hauen of the said Towne of 
Berwicke:
 And that if any person or persons should offend, or do with any maner merchandize aforesaid, contrary to any of the said ordinances, the same person or per∣sons should forfeit all the said merchandize, and that it should be lawfull to any of the Kings liege Subiects to seize all such merchandize so forfeited, or else to pursue in his owne name an Action of debt against the same person or persons which so should forfeit, conteining the summe of the va∣lue of the said goods, and the King to haue aswell the one halfe of all such merchandize forfeited and seized, as the one halfe of all such summes of money, which should be recouered by the Action in the forme aforesaid, to bee pursued for the value of any such goods so forfeit, and the person or persons which should seize, and pursue in the forme aforesaid, to haue the other halfe of the same, as by the same Acte of Parliament (amongst other things) more at large appeareth.


And whereas We were giuen to vnderstand in the first yeere of our Reigne of our Realme of England, that since our entrie into this Kingdome, many of our subiects of our Realme of Scot∣land, and some also of England did not obserue the same Acte of Parliament, but to the intent to defraud vs of our said Customes, did goe with their goods and merchandizes ouer the Felles, and other by-passages, whereby great damage was then done to vs:


And whereas Wee, for that cause at that time did by our Proclamation straitly charge and command all Our Subiects, aswell of the one Realme as of the other, that none of them should presume after that time to passe any goods from each Realme to other, but either shipped at some knowen Port, or else through Our said citie of 
Carlile,
 or Towne of 
Berwicke,
 as by the same Procla∣mation may also appeare.






And whereas We haue beene pleased of long time to forbeare to take any Customes, or other Duties, of any of Our Subiects of Scotland, for any goods passing betwixt Our said King∣domes, vntill now of late: During which time, Our Subiects did obserue aswell the said Acte of Parliament, as the said Proclamation: And forasmuch, as We are now againe informed, that Our said Subiects, since We haue giuen order to Our Officers to receaue Our Customes, for goods so caried betweene both Our said Kingdomes, doe now againe goe with their goods and merchandize ouer the said fels, and other by-passages, and ship the same at secret, obscure, and vnknowen places, aswell to the great damage and losse vnto Vs, in Our Customes and Subsi∣dies, as vnto Our Subiects, both of this Our Realme of England, and also of Our Realme of Scotland, both by carying of goods prohibited to be caried out of this Our Realme into Our said Realme of Scotland, and from thence into the forreine parts: and also by bringing of goods prohibited to be caried out of Our said Realme of Scotland, into this Our Realme of England, and from hence carying the same into other forreine parts.


We minding to take away all such excuses as may be made in that behalfe, doe therefore by these presents make it knowen to all Our louing Subiects, that We doe intend to haue the same Acte of Parliament, and all others of like effect put in strait execution in all things aboue menti∣oned, for and concerning land carriages, and such goods as shall be shipped at such secret, obscure, and vnknowen places, and to haue the same very carefully obserued, performed, fulfilled, and kept, to the onely end, that We, or Our Fermours may be truely answered of Our due customes, Subsidies, and other duties due for such goods.


And for that purpose, We doe heereby authorize, and straitly charge, will and require, aswell Our Customers, Comptrollers, Searchers, & other Our Officers, in Our Ports and Custome houses; As also all Our Lieuetennants, Deputie Lieuetenants, Maiors, Sheriffes, Bayliffes, Constables, and other Our Officers, Ministers, and Subiects whatsoeuer, whom it shall con∣cerne, not onely to see to the due execution of the same Acte of Parliament themselues, to their best knowledge and skill: but also to be aiding and assisting to all others, that shall endeauour to see the same put in execution, as is fit; as they will answere the contrary at their vttermost perills.


Giuen at Our Pallace of Wesminster
 
the
 17. 
day of May, in the ninth yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.


God saue the King.










❧ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most excellent Maiestie. 
Anno Dom.
 1611.









