By the King. A proclamation prohibiting the Merchant Aduenturers charter from henceforth to be put in practise or execution, either within the kingdome, or beyond the seas
Proclamations. 1614-12-02
England and Wales. Sovereign (1603-1625 : James I)
Approx. 7 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A22107




STC 8510



ESTC S100816





99836643




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the King. A proclamation prohibiting the Merchant Aduenturers charter from henceforth to be put in practise or execution, either within the kingdome, or beyond the seas
Proclamations. 1614-12-02
England and Wales. Sovereign (1603-1625 : James I)
James I, King of England, 1566-1625.
[2] sheets   


[Imprinted at London :


By Robert Barker, printer to the Kings most excellent Maiestie,


Anno Dom. 1614]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Company of Merchant Adventurers of England --  Law and legislation.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






8510


S100816


99836643


927














blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family encircled by the order of the garter and topped by a rose and a thistle


HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE


 ❧ By the King. ❧ A Proclamation prohibiting the Merchant Aduenturers Charter from henceforth to be put in practise or execution, either within the Kingdome, or beyond the Seas.


A
S there is no great action, which tendeth to the aduancement of a
 publique good, but it requireth certaine degrees of timely proceeding, and neuerthelesse meeteth with diuers impediments; some by accident, and some by practise: So is there nothing that doeth more adorne the true Maiestie and greatnesse of Soueraigne Princes, then to be con∣stant in their wel-grounded Resolutions, and by their policie and law∣full power, to scatter and beat downe all difficulties, and vndue opposi∣tions, vntil they haue conducted their Actions to a good and happy end: Wee therefore, hauing propounded vnto Our selues; as a principall worke of Our times, to or∣deine and prouide, that the great commoditie of Broad-cloth, being one of the principall Dowries of Our Kingdome, may receiue the due Manufactures of Dying and Dressing within the Realme; did to that end publish Our Royall Proclamation, dated the three and twentieth day of 
Iuly
 last, prohibiting and ordeyning, That no Broad-cloth, of what sort soeuer, made here within this Our Kingdome of 
England,
 should be Exported Vndied and Vndrest, after the second day of 
Nouember
 next ensuing the date of Our said Proclamation: Which time was giuen, aswell for the Merchant Aduenturers, to vent their Whites, which might be vpon their hands, as for the preparing of di∣uers things, necessary to the setling of the new Trade of Died and dressed Clothes. And We did further by Our said Proclamation promise 
in the Word of a King
 to all Our louing Subiects, that should vndertake to Export the said Broad-clothes in their true Manufactures, that neither the Charter of the Merchant Aduenturers, nor any other Licences or Dispensations by 
Non obstantes,
 contrary to Our Lawes, heretofore granted by Vs, or any Our Predecessors, should be any maner of preiudice, impeachment, disturbance, or interruption to such, as should after the time aforesaid vent the said Clothes Died and Dressed, according to Our said Royall Ordinance and constitution; but should be from the said second day of 
Nouember,
 declared to be annihilated, & made void to all in∣tents and purposes. At which time of the publishing of Our said Proclamation, We did expect that the said Charter of the Merchant Aduenturers should, before the said second day of 
Nouember,
 haue bene in due forme of Law surrendred: But after, finding the said Company of Merchant Aduentu∣rers to make difficulty concerning the Surrender of their Patent; We haue bene enforced through

 their wilfulnesse and inconformitie, aswell to order a Legall course to be taken for the ouerthrowe of their said Patent: as also to license diuers of Our louing Subiects, that haue very worthily, and with great alacrity, vndertaken to set vp and manage the said Trade of Dyed and Dressed Clothes, to export also Whites in the meane while, vntill such time as the said Patent of the Mer∣chant Aduenturers shall be by iudgement euicted, and some respite of time afterwards, lest there might haue ensued some stand of the vent of Cloth before the new Trade were setled: But for as much as the course of a iudiciall proceeding, though in a Case neuer so cleare & plaine, must haue due formes & times obserued according to the rules of Law, & for that time in this case is exceeding pre∣cious, and that it is not possible for the new intended Company, to goe on with that confidence and incouragement, that in so great a businesse were fit, as long as the Charter of the Merchant-Aduen∣turers is put in vre, and practise:


Therefore to remoue and discharge all discouragements and impediments: Wee doe by these presents prohibite, forbid, constitute and ordeine, That from henceforth the Charter of the said Mer∣chant aduenturers, and all powers, Lycences, authorities, priuiledges, formes of gouernement contained in the same, or otherwise all vsages, holding of Courts, meetings, assemblies, and all o∣ther proceedings, by colour or vertue thereof, together with all the dependances, be not from hence∣foorth put in any manner of practise or execution, either in the parts beyond the Seas, or here with∣in Our Kingdome. And to that end, Wee doe not onely notifie and publish this Our Royall pro∣hibition and ordinance, aswell to all Forreiners, as to all Our louing Subiects, to whom it may ap∣pertaine: But doe furthermore straitly and expresly charge and commaund, aswel the Gouernour, Deputie, or Deputies, and Assistants of the said Company of the Merchant Aduentu∣rers, as the whole bodie of them, and also euery of them in particuler, and all their Factors, Ser∣uants and Ministers, aswell beyond the Seas, as on this side, within Our Kingdome and Domi∣nions; That from this time forwards, they doe in no wise presume, directly or indirectly, to doe, performe, or execute any Trade, Traffique, or Marchandizing, into, or from any the Countryes, or places where the said Merchant Aduenturers, are, or haue beene priuiledged, or any point or thing whatsoeuer, by vertue or colour of their said Charter, or by vertue of any former treatie or treaties, betwixt any Our noble Progenitors, or Predecessors, and any Prince or Potentate, Citie or politique Gouernment, or former vsages, vpon paine of Our High indignation, imprisonment, and other pu∣nishment, which by Our Lawes or Prerogatiue Royall, may bee inflicted vpon them: Letting them know, that We shall proceede against euery such offender, as a contemner of Our Royall Commandement, and a disturber of so excellent a worke, wherein We haue so farre declared Our selues for the Vniuersall Weale, and comfort of Our people.


Prouided neuerthelesse, that where Our Treasurer of England hath directed his Letters to the Officers of Our Custome-house, and Ports, giuing libertie of importation, onely vntill the last of this present Moneth of 
December:
 That these presents shall not any way countermaund the said limitation of time so prefixed, & no longer: But that the said Merchant-Aduenturers, may during that time importe accordingly; any thing before in these presents, to the contrary notwithstanding.


Giuen at Our Court at Newmarket
 
the second day of December, in the twelfth yeere of Our Raigne of England, France, and Ireland, and of Scotland the eight and fourtieth.


God saue the King.










❧ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. ANNO DOM. 1614.









