By the King a proclamation for the transportation of any kinde of corne, graine, or victuals for the supply of the nauie, or armie in the parts of France.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Approx. 5KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2016-02 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A22448
This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the King a proclamation for the transportation of any kinde of corne, graine, or victuals for the supply of the nauie, or armie in the parts of France.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Charles I, King of England, 1600-1649.
[2] leaves.   


Imprinted at London :


By Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers  to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie,


M.DC.XXVII [1627]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Buckingham, George Villiers, --  Duke of, 1592-1628.
Military supplies.
Military readiness.
Great Britain --  History --  Charles I, 1625-1649.
Great Britain --  History, Military --  1603-1714.
2014-02 
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images 
2014-04 
Kate Allen 
Sampled and proofread 
2014-04 
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited 
2015-03 
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion 






8866


S122720


33150017


28519














royal blazon or coat of arms


HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


DIEV ET MON DROIT




❧ By the King.


❧ A Proclamation for the Transportation of any kinde of Corne, Graine, or Victuals for the supply of the Nauie, or Armie in the parts of 
France.


W
Hereas Our Nauie and Army are now at, and in the Isle of Ree,
 vnder the Command of the Duke of 
Buckingham;
 And that it is fit Our Subiects and Allyes, seruing and assisting Vs in Our said Na∣uie and Armie, should bee supplied with all prouisions conuenient for their reliefe: Wee by the Aduice of Our Priuie Counsell, haue thought fit to publish and declare, and doe hereby publish and declare, That it shall, and may bee lawfull for all, or any Merchants, beeing Our owne naturall borne Subiects, or Denizens of either of Our Kingdomes of 
England,
 or 
Ireland,
 to transport, or carie any Corne, Graine, or Victuals, of any sorts or kinds out of either of Our said Kingdoms, vnto Our Army in the sayd Island of 
Ree,
 or elsewhere, or vnto the Towne of 
Rochell,
 and not elsewhere, they first putting in good and sufficient security of knowen Merchants, to the Officers of Our Customes, in the same Port where the same shall bee shipped to Our vse, That they shall transport all such Corne, Graine, and Victuals, either vnto the sayd Armie, or vnto the sayd Towne of 
Rochell,
 and not else∣where; And that they shall bring backe to the Officers of the sayd Port, where such security shall be entred, within sixe Moneths then next following, a true Certificate of the deliuery of all such Corne, Graine, and Victuals at one of those places, vnder the hand of the said Duke of 
Buckingham,
 Generall of Our Armie, or vnder the hand of the Duke of 
Soubize,
 or of Sir 
Allan Apsley,
 Knight, Commissary generall of the Victuals, or of Sir 
William Beecher,
 Knight, Se∣cretary of the sayd Armie: And also making an entry in the Office of Our Admiralty, of e∣uery such Shippe.


And further, Our will and pleasure is, and so Wee doe hereby publish and declare, That it

shall bee lawfull for any Merchant of 
Rochell,
 being a Frenchman, to transport or carie in any Ship or Vessel, being either an English or French Bottome, any Corne, Graine, or Victual, of any kind whatsoeuer, out of these Realmes of 
England
 or 
Ireland,
 or any part of them, or either of them, vnto Our Army in the sayd Island of 
Ree,
 or elsewhere, or to the sayd Towne of 
Rochell,
 vpon good and sufficient security, of knowen Merchants, English or Denizens, residing in 
England
 or 
Ireland
 respectiuely, first giuen to the Officers of the Customes of that Port, where the same shall bee shipped to Our vse, That they shall not transport the sayd Corne, Graine, or Victuals, or any part thereof, to any other place, then to Our Armie in the said Island of 
Ree,
 or elsewhere, or to the said Towne of 
Rochell;
 And that they shal procure a true Certificate of the deli∣uery or discharge of the said Corne, Graine, and Victuals, at, or in the said places, or one of them, vnder the hand of the said Duke of 
Buckingham,
 Duke of 
Soubize,
 Sir 
Allan Apsley,
 and Sir 
Willi∣am Beecher,
 or one of them, as aforesaid, and making an entry likewise in the Office of Our Ad∣miraltie, of euery such Shippe, as aforesaid; And this to bee done notwithstanding any Law, Proclamation, or restraint to the contrary.


And Our further pleasure is, and Wee doe straitly charge and command, all and euery the Officers of Our Customes whom it may concerne, that they doe duely certifie all the Bonds which shall bee taken by them respectiuely, into Our Exchequer, within eight Moneths after the date thereof, vnlesse in the meane time there shall bee such Certificate returned of the deliuery, and discharge of the said Corne, Graine and Victuals, according to the tenour and true meaning of the said Bonds, and the Conditions thereof.


Giuen at Our Court at Bagshot, 
 
the eighteenth day of August, in the third yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.


God saue the King.










¶ Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. M.DC.XXVII.









