By the King a proclamation to preuent the furnishing of the king of Spaine and his subiects, with prouisions for shipping, or munition for the warres, and with victuals.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A22436




STC 8854



ESTC S122710





ocm 33150437




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the King a proclamation to preuent the furnishing of the king of Spaine and his subiects, with prouisions for shipping, or munition for the warres, and with victuals.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Charles I, King of England, 1600-1649.
[2] leaves.   


Imprinted at London :


By Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers  to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie,


M.DC.XXVI [1626, i.e. 1627]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History --  Charles I, 1625-1649.
Great Britain --  Commerce --  Spain --  Early works to 1800.
Spain --  Commerce --  Great Britain --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  Foreign relations --  Spain.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






8854


S122710


33150437


28608














blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family encircled by the order of the garter and beneath a helmet and plumes, crowned, topped by a crowned lion, and with a lion and a unicorn on either side


HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE


DIEV ET MON DROIT


 ❧ By the King. ❧ A Proclamation to preuent the furnishing of the King of Spaine and his Subiects, with prouisions for Shipping, or Munition for the Warres, and with Victuals.


W
Hereas His Maiestie by His Royall Proclamation, bearing date
 the one and thirtieth of December, in the first yeere of His Highnesse Reigne, for speciall causes therein at large expressed, did notifie to all manner of persons of all conditions, that should send or carry into 
Spaine, Portugall, Burgundie,
 or any other of the King of 
Spaines
 Countries or Dominions, any manner of Graine or other Victuals, or any man∣ner of Prouisions, to Serue, Build, Furnish, or Arme any Ships of Warre, or any kinde of Munition for the Warre, or materials for the same, being not of the nature of meere Merchandize; That Hee would not onely authorize His owne Admiralls and Captaines of His owne Shippes of Warre, but would also allow and ap∣prooue all other His Subiects to Arme their Shippes, and with them to impeach and arrest all Shippes that should Saile, either out of the East parts, or out of the 
Low-Countries,
 or from any other Parts, with intention to passe to 
Spaine, Portugall, Burgundie,
 or any other of the King of 
Spaines
 Countries or Dominions, or to any the said King of 
Spaines
 Ships being on the Seas, ha∣uing on Board any such Graine, Victuall, Prouisions of Warre, or Furniture for Shipping, or materialls for the same; and the same to bring into the next good Port, there to bee ordered as goods duely forfeited; the causes whereof being not onely notoriously knowne to be most true, but also much conducing to the common good of all His Maiesties Confederates and Allies in Christendome, as in the said Proclamation is set foorth, His Maiestie well hoped would haue produced that good effect which was desired.




But because it is found by experience, that in all States there will be some ill disposed persons with whom priuate and particular gaine and aduantage will more preuaile then any publique respects, of what consequence soeuer; His Maiestie intending to remooue all pretexts of ignorance or other exceptions, which may be taken against the proceedings of His Iudges and Officers, with any the Subiects of His Friends, Confederats, or Allies, who shall hereafter offend in the Premisses, hath thought fit by these Presents to make further declaration aswell of the Species or kinds of the things so Prohibited, as of the penalties to be suffered by the parties delinquent in supplying the Enemies with the same prohibited things. Concerning therefore those kinds wherewith His Maiestie may not suffer His said Enemies to be furnished, His Maiestie doth by these presents publish and notifie, that He holdeth these things following to be of that qualitie and condition; 
viz.
 Ordinance, Armes of all sorts, Powder, Shott, Match, Brimstone, Cop∣per, Iron, Cordage of all kinds; Hempe, Saile, Canuas, and Dantse-Pouldauis, Cables, An∣chors, Masts, Rafters, Boate-Oares, Balcks, Capraues, Deale-board, Clap-board, Pipe-staues, and Vessells and Vessell stuffe, Pitch, Tarre, Rozen, Okam, Corne, Graine, and Victuals of all sorts, all Prouisions for Shipping, and all Munition of Warre, or of Prouisions for the same, ac∣cording to former Declarations and Acts of State, made in this behalfe in the time of Queene 
Elizabeth
 of famous memory.


And therefore if any Person whatsoeuer after Three Moneths, from the publication of these Presents, shall by any of His Maiesties owne Ships, or the Ships of any His Subiects Autho∣rized to that effect, be taken Sayling towards the places aforesaid, hauing on board any of the things aforesaid, or returning thence in the same Voyage, hauing vented or disposed of the said Prohibited goods, His Maiestie will hold both the Ships and Goods so taken for lawfull prize, and cause them to be ordered as duely forfeited; whereby as His Maiestie doth put in practise no Innouation, since the same course hath beene held, and the same penalties haue beene heretofore inflicted by other States and Princes vpon the like occasions, and auowed and maintained by publique writings and Apologies; So now His Maiestie is in a manner inforced thereunto by Proclamations set forth by the King of 
Spaine
 and the Archduchesse, in which the same and grea∣ter seuerity is professed against those that shall carry or haue carried, without limitation, the like Commodities into these His Maiesties Dominions.


Giuen at Our Court at New-market
 
the fourth day of March, in the second yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.


God saue the King.










¶ Imprinted at London by Bonham Norton and Iohn Bill, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie. M.DC.XXVI.









