By the King a proclamation forbidding the disorderly trading with the saluages in New England in America, especially the furnishing of the natiues in those and other parts of America by the English with weapons, and habiliments of warre.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A22536




STC 8969



ESTC S3585





ocm 33150522




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the King a proclamation forbidding the disorderly trading with the saluages in New England in America, especially the furnishing of the natiues in those and other parts of America by the English with weapons, and habiliments of warre.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Charles I, King of England, 1600-1649.
[2] leaves.   


Imprinted at London :


By Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie: and by the assignes of Iohn Bill,


1630.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Indians of North America --  Commerce --  Great Britain --  Early works to 1800.
Indians of North America --  History --  17th century.
New England --  History --  Colonial period, ca. 1600-1775.
Great Britain --  Colonies --  America.
Great Britain --  History --  Charles I, 1625-1649.
Great Britain --  Colonies --  Commerce --  Early works to 1800.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-09
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






8969


S3585


33150522


28644














blazon or coat of arms of the British royal family encircled by the order of the garter and beneath a helmet and plumes, crowned, topped by a crowned lion, and with a lion and a unicorn on either side


HONI SOIT QVI MAY Y PENSE


DIEV ET MON DROIT


 ¶ By the King. ❧ A Proclamation forbidding the disorderly Trading with the Saluages in New England in Ame∣rica, especially the furnishing of the Natiues in those and other parts of America by the English with Weapons, and Habiliments of Warre.


W
Hereas a Proclamation was heretofore publi∣shed
 by Our deare Father King 
IAMES
 of blessed memorie, in the twentieth yeere of His Reigne, for the better supportation and Reiglement of the Plantations within Our Territory of 
New England
 in 
America,
 whereby, amongst diuers other things, the in∣sufferable abuses committed by diuers Interloping and irregular Merchants, and disobedient Fishermen and Mariners, were pro∣hibited, who seeking only their present and priuate profit, did Trade with the Saluages of that Countrey, and to the great preiudice and danger of Our louing Subiects the Planters there, did Barter away to the Saluages, Swords, Pikes, Mus∣kets, Fowling Pieces, Match, Powder, Shotte, and other Warlike Armes, Weapons, and Munition, and teach them the vse thereof, not onely to their owne present ruine (di∣uers of them hauing been slaughtered by the barbarous people with their owne Weapons formerly sold by them) but also to the great hazard of the liues of the English already, plan∣ted there, and to the apparant destruction of that hopefull Plantation.


Wee, being informed that these abuses are still continued to the indangering of that Plan∣tation, and that the like abuses are also practised in other Forreigne Plantations: Out of Our Princely care for the prosperity of these Colonies, which being well gouerned may be of great vse to this Nation, for the reformation and preuention of these and the like enor∣mities for the future.




And to the end that the Royal Grant of Our late Father to the President and Counsell of 
New England
 aforesayd, may bee maintained and vpholden, and that the Planters there, and aduenturers thither, may bee encouraged by all good wayes and meanes to proceede in their worthy designes, haue thought it fit, and doe hereby straitly charge and command, That none of Our Subiects whatsoeuer (who are not Aduenturers, Inhabiters, or Plan∣ters, authorised by Our President and Counsell for 
New England,
 according to the sayd Let∣ters Patents) doe presume from hencefoorth to frequent those Coasts to Trade or Traf∣fique at all with the Natiue people of those Countreys, or to intermeddle with the Woods, or Grounds of any of the Planters, or English Inhabitants there, otherwise then by the Licence of the sayd President and Counsell, or for the necessary vse of their Fishing on those Coasts, in which case of Fishing, or vnder colour thereof, they are not to vse any Trade or Traffique there, nor to challenge any Right to the Soyle there, or the Woods growing or beeing thereon, and especially Wee doe charge and command, that neither any Interlo∣pers, Fisher-men, or Mariners, or any other of Our Subiects whatsoeuer, being of the said Company of 
New England
 or otherwise, doe at any time hereafter dare to Sell, Barter, or any wayes to deliuer or conuey vnto any of the Saluages or Natiues of 
America,
 where any of Our English Colonies are or shall bee planted, any Weapons or Habiliments of Warre of any kinde whatsoeuer, or to teach them or any of them the vse of Gunnes, or how to make or amend them, or any thing belonging to them, vpon paine of Our high indignation, and the Confiscation, Penalties and Forfeitures expressed in the said Royall Graunt of Our sayd Father, wherein Wee shall proceede against those who haue offended, or shall offend in any of the premisses, in such manner and measure as the qualitie of their Offences shall deserue. And yet further Wee leaue it to the discretion of the said President & Counsell for 
New England,
 and to other the Gouernours and Counsell in any other Forreigne English Colonie in their seuerall places respectiuely, to proceede against the Offenders in any the kindes aforesaid, ac∣cording to the powers already granted vnto them, and according to Our Lawes in that behalfe.


Giuen at Our Court at Whitehall,
 
the foure and twentieth day of Nouember, in the sixt yeere of Our Reigne of Great Britaine, France and Ireland.


God saue the King.










¶ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie: and by the Assignes of Iohn Bill. 1630.









