By the King a proclamation for better ordering the transportation of clothes and other woollen manufactures into Germany, and the low-countreys.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A22581




STC 9026



ESTC S3484





ocm 33150288




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the King a proclamation for better ordering the transportation of clothes and other woollen manufactures into Germany, and the low-countreys.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Charles I, King of England, 1600-1649.
[2] leaves.   


Imprinted at London :


By Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie: And by the Assignes of Iohn Bill,


1634.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Company of Merchant Adventurers of England.
Exports --  Great Britain --  Early works to 1800.
Wool industry --  Great Britain --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  History --  Charles I, 1625-1649.
2013-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






9026


S3484


33150288


28543














HONI SOIT QVI MAL Y PENSE


DIEV · ET · MON · DROIT


❧ By the King. ❧ A Proclamation for the better ordering the Transportation of Clothes, and other Woollen Manu∣factures into Germany, and the Low-Countreys.


W
Hereas We haue taken into Our Princely consideration the mani∣fold benefits that redound to this Kingdome, by the Manufacture of Woollen Clothes, and the Transportation, and Venting thereof in Forraine parts: And finding, how much good gouernment, and managing the said Trade in an orderly way, will conduce to the increase and aduancement of the same: Wee, for the better setling of order therein for the time to come, haue thought fit, with the aduice of Our Priuie Councell, to declare Our Royall pleasure herein: And doe therefore hereby strictly will and command, that no person or persons, Subiect or Subiects, of this Our Realme of 
England,
 shall at any time from, and after the Feast of the Purification of the blessed Virgin 
Mary
 now next comming, Shipp, Transport, Carry, or Conuey, or cause to bee Shipped, Transported, Carried, or Conueied, either from Our City and Port of 
London,
 or from any other City, Towne, Port, Hauen, or Creeke of this Our Realme of 
England,
 by way of Merchandise, any white Clothes, coloured Clothes, Clothes dressed, and died out of the Whites, Clothes called Spanish Clothes, Bayes, Kerseys, Perpetuanoes, Stockings, or any other English Woollen commodities, vnto any the Cities, Townes, or places in 
Germany,
 or the seuenteene Prouinces of the 
Netherlands,
 saue onely, and except to the Mart, and Staple-Townes of the Fellowship of Merchant-aduentures in those parts for the time being, or to one of them.


And further, to the end that the said Trade may be hereafter reduced and continued in an orderly and well gouerned course; We doe hereby declare Our Royall pleasure to be; That the Fellowship of Merchant-aduenturers, shall admit into the freedome of their said Trade,

 all such Our Subiects dwelling in Our City of 
London,
 and exercised in the profession of Mer∣chandise, and not Shop-keepers, except they giue ouer their Shops, as shall desire the same, for the Fines of fifty pounds apeece, if they shall take their Freedome before the Feast of Saint 
Iohn
 the Baptist now next comming: And that the said Fellowship shall likewise receiue, and admit into their Freedome, such Our Subiects of the Out-ports of this Our Kingdome, as being exercised in the Trade of Merchandise, shall desire the same, paying them fiue and twenty pounds apeece for their Fine or In-come; if they shall take their said Freedome before 
Michaelmas
 next: And that the sonnes, and seruants of such as shall be so admitted, as afore∣said, shall pay to the said Fellowship at their seuerall admissions thereinto, the summe of twenty nobles apeece: And that all such persons, as shall not accept, and come into the said Freedome before the dayes herein prefixed, shall pay the double of the Fines before limited respectiuely, in case they shall afterwards desire to be admitted into the said Fellowship.


And Our further will and pleasure is, and We do hereby command and inhibit all, and eue∣ry Our Subiects, not being free of the said Fellowship of Merchant-aduenturers, that they, or any of them, shall not presume to Trade in any of the forenamed Commodities into any of the parts, or places of 
Germany,
 or the 
Low-countreys,
 from, or after the said Feast of the Purifi∣cation of the blessed Virgin 
Mary
 next ensuing, vpon paine of Our high displeasure, and of such punishments, as Our Court of Star-chamber, whom We especially charge with the execution of Our Royall pleasure herein, shall thinke fit to inflict for such contempts.


Giuen at Our Court at Whitehall,
 
the seuenth day of December, in the tenth yeere of Our Reigne of England Scotland, France, and Ireland.


God saue the King.










¶ Imprinted at London by Robert Barker, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Maiestie: And by the Assignes of Iohn Bill. 1634.









