An account of Saint Sebastian in relation to their government, customs and trade with a draught of the place / by one lately come from thence.
One lately come from thence.
Approx. 27 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 16 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A24610




Wing A221



ESTC R9688





ocm 12925293




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
An account of Saint Sebastian in relation to their government, customs and trade with a draught of the place / by one lately come from thence.
One lately come from thence.
[5], 22 p. : folded plan  


London :


Printed by Hugh Newman, and are to be sold by A. Baldwin ...,


1700.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
San Sebastián (Spain) --  Description and travel.
2010-07
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2010-07
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2010-09
Simon Charles
Sampled and proofread
2010-09
Simon Charles
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2011-06
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






a221


12925293


95515














AN ACCOUNT OF 
Saint Sebastian.












prospect of the castle of San Sebastian, Spain


A PROSPECT of the Castle of S
t
 Sebastien from the South & Groundplott of the Town and Harbor:




D the Harbor or Mole


E the Peer Gate


F the Pa
age Gate


G the Market place


H the Town house and Magazine


L y
e
 hor














AN ACCOUNT OF 
Saint Sebastian,
 IN Relation to their 
GOVERNMENT, CƲSTOMS
 and 
TRADE.
 With a Draught of the Place.


By one lately come from thence.


LONDON:
 Printed by 
Hugh Newman,
 and are to be sold by 
A. Baldwin,
 near the 
Oxford-Arms
 in

Warwick-Lane.
 1700.














AN ACCOUNT, 
&c.


SAint 
Sebastian
 in the Province of

Guiposcoa,
 in the Kingdom of 
Castile,
 is a free Town, in man∣ner of a Republick; subjected to the Crown 
Castile,
 on Conditions approved on by the Kings of 
Spain:
 And in all their Writings, they style it,


The Most Noble and Most Loyal City of Saint
 Sebastian.


The Kings of 
Spain,
 have given them this Ti∣tle for services they did the Crown.


The Province of 
Guiposcoa
 enjoys great Frivi∣ledges, and do not obey the Kings Orders, when that which is required of them, is contrary to
the Priviledges and Liberties of the Province. Which is Governed thus,


Every Year there is a Convocation or Assem∣bly, whether every Town does send their De∣puties to Concert Affairs relating to their County or province. Their Meeting is in four different places by turns, and they are call'd.


Saint 
Sebastian, Toloza, Aspeytia
 and

Ascoytia.


The head or chief of such that are chosen for the Governing this Province, is a Judge Call'd 
Cor∣rigidor,
 who is as Lord

Lieutenant
 of a County, or 
Intendant
 of a Province. It's to him the King sends his Orders to be Executed in the County. Besides this

Corrigidor,
 There is chosen for the Governing the said Province a

Deputation
 (so cal∣led by the 
Spaniards
) consisting of several re∣presentatives of the several places in the said Pro∣vince, who have Power of refusing the Kings Orders served to them by the

Corrigidor,
 if that any such Orders or Commission presented them are against the Rights of the 
Deputation,
 or pla∣ces whom they represent; But if the Kings Com∣mission or Orders to the

Corrigidor,
 does not con∣tradict the Rights of the

Deputation,
 they let him put them in Execution to the full. For Ex∣ample,


When the King asks of the said province to supply him with a certain number of Men, ei∣ther Landmen, or Seamen; The

Corrigidor
 serves the Kings Orders to the Province and acquaints the

Deputation:
 They tell him they are a free People, and that they cannot oblidge any Inha∣bitant to leave his Family to serve the King: But when they find that the demand is not against their Liberties and Rights, they are so civil to give the King leave to order Drum to be beat, and they will not oppose it; otherwise they do as in the Case of the 
Corrigidor
 Duke 
Corsano
 a few years ago, who requiring of this province of

Guiposcoa,
 and in particular of the City of Saint

Sebastian,
 some things contrary to their Priviledg∣es (which I shall not mention) They present∣ed their 
Leij Secundo,
 or Charter in one hand and a Sword in the other, with Orders to him in four hours to leave the Province, the Duke was fain to scowr for it.


The Government of the City of Saint 
Sebastian,
 whose Magistrates are chosen once a Year, about a week before

Christmas,
 is thus.


There is about an hundred Electors, who must be qualified as you'll hear hereafter (for no bo∣dy can be of the Government of Saint

Sebastian,


nor of the province, nor indeed of the least Vil∣lage, till he has proved his 
Higuidalquir, Viz.
 (That he is Noble).


Their Magistrates are chosen thus.


There is a great Silver Bowl, into which is put confusedly all the Electors Names: The first eight that a Boy (like one of our Blew Coat Boys) takes out, are those who are to be 
Alcai∣jde, Subalcaijde, Syndect,
 Magistrates and Jurates for the following Year.


These eight Name every one of them, one to be 
Alcaijde
 and 
Subalcaijde,
 the first two of these eight, the Boy takes out, are 
Alcaijd
 and 
Subalcaijde,
 the first 
Alcaijde,
 the second 
Subal∣cajde,
 and so after the same manner of the

Syn∣dect
 and other Officers.


Notwithstanding this fair way of choosing their Magistrates, there is Faction and Interest made to get in their friends into the Magistracy, they are generally very poor, dispising Industry and Arts; and when they come to Govern or to be 
Alcaijde,
 have opportunities of exacting even up∣on their own people as well as strangers, and which they make no scruple of doing in the face
of the World. I could relate several particulars to my Knowledge, but that I should expose them too much: and indeed, it would hardly be be∣lieved that such tricks and little things were pra∣ctised in 
Spain,
 where every one from the highest to the lowest, value themselves on their Families, Nobility and

Punctilio's
 of Honour.


In order to be thus qualified to get into the Government (as I said before),


They must be Noble.


Their Nobility is thus, not to have had any of their Kindred a

Jew, Moor, Turk,
 or 
Here∣tick.


And to prove this, the Person that would be of the Government, presents a request to the Pro∣vince of 
Guiposcoa,
 in which is explained his in∣tention, and asks to be a 
Cavallero Dillegenzero, Viz.
 That his Birth and Estate may be enquired into, in order to his being made a Noble∣man.


The Province or Town orders their 
Syndect,
 whose business it is to enquire into his Family (and for which he has a Pistol a day) to go to
the place of his Birth along with him, and there take both private, as well as publick informati∣ons of his Family, which afterwards he reports to the Province or Magistrates of the place, where such a one would be of the Government; if the report is allowed, the

Cavallero Dilligenzero,
 is declared Noble.


Besides these qualifications already mentioned.


There is one yet very remarkable and with∣out it, if they were descended from 
Caesars
 or 
A∣chilles
 Race, they cannot be Noble, 
Viz.


If they live, or are to live in Town, they must have a House of their own, or else they must have Land enough in the Province where∣on they have two Thousand Apple-Trees, or whereon they may raise two Thousand Apple-Trees, and then the 
Cavallero Dilligenzero,
 is ad∣mitted and made Capable of being admitted into the Government. No Man can be Noble by his Wife, or by her Estate:


The Town of Saint 
Sebastian,
 is seated, as you see by the Draught, on the 
South
 side, and at the bottom of a high Hill of Freestone in a square form, the Town is hid by the Hill as you make

towards the Land and is not to be seen, till you are in the Road.


There are two Gates, that of the 
Peer,
 and the other that's called the 
Passage Gate,
 from which, goes a Road to

Passage,
 a Noble Harbour; There is a Horn work with a Ravelin before it that co∣vers the 
Passage Gate,
 and but very ordinary and in ill repair, and out of all due Propor∣tion.


The Castle upon the top of the Hill stands prettily, a Noble Prospect from it all along that part of the 
Bay
 of

Biscay,
 from 
Cape Martinchauco
 to 
Arkason
 and

Cabritton
 in 
France.
 The going up, or access to this Castle is difficult, which adds to the strength of it, and I think all that can be said justly of this Castle is this, and that is all Altho the

Spaniards
 are extream Proud of it, and quote you 
Charlequin,
 who said in Praise of it (if you'll believe them) that if he should loose all 
Spain,
 and had only the Castle of Saint

Sebastian,
 he would recover it.


The Castle was blown up by the 
Magasines
 ta∣ing fire, but is now rebuilt and in good repair; all the Water in the Castle is rain Water, which is Conveyed into a Well by Leaden Pipes from
the Roof of the Guard Room, and 
Barraques,
 which are indeed very fine and capable of Lodg∣ing two Thousand Men Conveniently.


The Garrison at present, consists of a Sergeant and six Men, which by detachment from the main Guard (which does not consist of above twelve, besides a Governour, Captain, Lieutenant and Ensign) is relieved every day by the like num∣ber, and by sometimes a lesser. The Souldiers are all beggars, and if a stranger refuses to give them something, they contrive to do him mis∣chief.


There are two Platforms mounted with Guns, I suppose designed to secure the Harbour and Play on Ships that would force themselves into the Road, they are too high to be of any use to them, as well as the Castle for this purpose.


In the mouth of the Harbour there is a Hill called Saint

Claire,
 where there was three months ago a 
Hermit
 of the order of Saint 
Francis,
 who tells twenty Legends and Stories, and helps to fill the Casks with Wine, as he mud live by begging, so the Poor old fellow will be every day as drunk as a beggar; for this reason they say, they turned him out of his. Cell, but it's believed
rather it was to make room for one that is now there, a Gentleman of a considerable Estate in the Kingdom of 
Castile,
 for reasons, he has his Estate Men from him, and is confined to this 
Island
 as a 
Hermit,
 to beg his Bread for four∣teen Years, and then returns to his Estate again: The Church and Clergy enjoys his Estate in the mean time.


All that Dye 
Hereticks
 are buried here; when the Corps is carried out of Town to be waft∣ed over to this 
Island
 to be Buried, the Mob of Men and Women follow Insulting over the Corps, Crying aloud,

He goes to Hell.
 The 
Hermit
 has the benefit of the ground on his 
Island
 and sells it as he thinks fit.


To give the Clergy their due, they are not so troublesome to strangers when they are sick and a dying, altho 
Hereticks,
 with their extream Unction and Wafers as in 
France.


The coming into the Road, and over the 
Bar
 of Saint

Sebastian
 is difficult, unless with a leading Wind, a great Rock lies under Water in the middle of the 
Bar.


But to run no hazard, the Pilots will force them∣selves on board of you, which is commendable e∣nough if it was not on design to impose upon you, and make one pay what they please and no help for it, nor no Justice done if you complain. The 
Consul
 and

Merchant
 strangers residing at Saint 
Sebastian,
 have brought them to some bet∣ter reason and to Composition, but for all that, it is still as they please, every Fisherman looks upon himself as good as 
Signior Alcaijde
 himself; So that a Man must sit down under all affronts and hardships and be quiet.


Their way of living at Saint 
Sebastian.


People that are of the better sort and distinguish∣able, after having enjoyed the Musick of 
Serenading
 little before day, they get up and drink Chocolet, without which they would not stir abroad if their house was on fire, then they take, both Men and Women, a great deal of pains with their hair, dress themselves and go to Church, they and their Priests understand what they Pray to God for much alike, for not one of twenty of their Clergy understands 
Latin.


After Mass the Men go to the 
Peer,
 where they tarry till eleven of the Clock, then they go to the middle of the Town called the four 
Corners,
 where they stay till twelve, after it has struck, if it was to save the Town they would not stay a minute longer, and oftentimes break off in the middle of a Story or sentence, to go home to their 
Olio.
 The first thing presented at their Tables is a Chocolet Cup of Soup, or the gravey of meat boiled and Bread crumbled into it, served upon Earthen Platters, then comes the Roast Meat, then the Boiled, and at last the desert.


They give this reason of bringing the Roast Meat before the Boiled (which seems plausible e∣nough) the best of the Boiled Meat say they is in the broth, and there is more substance and nourishment in the Roast than in the Boyled, for that reason, this would pass if they did not spoil their Roast Meat and Fowl by over-doing of them, and Roasting them dry as they do their Boiled Meat, by Boiling it to Pieces.


But most People think it's rather in opposition to the rest of the World, for they show it almost in every little thing else; Syder they have cheap, and abundance of sweet Apples very large all

round the Country. The Corn of the Country is

Indian
 Corn and no other, with Wheat they are supplied from the

Sound
 and sometimes from 
Bar∣bary,
 and often from

England;
 They have been so hard put to it this last Year, that they have been forced to make Bread of Chesnuts, which is the reason they are Prohibited to be Exported. They have extraordinary good Rabbits of

Na∣var
 and Wild Fowl plenty, their Pidgeons are much esteemed, and their red Partridge of 
Arra∣gon,
 are excellent and large.


Fish they have plenty and of good sorts, if they'll be at the pains to catch it, and if the Sea, (which with a 
North-West
 blowing wind flyes high on the 
Bar,
 and even up almost to the top of the

Island
 Saint 
Clair,
 about six hun∣dred Foot) will permit; the Sea oftentimes in the Harbour flyes to the top of the Walls forty Foot high and more.


When the Fishermen come from Sea with their Boats, their Wives are sitting on die 
Peer
 with their Husbands Cloaks and long Spadas, or long Rapiers, the Husband walks in State into the Town, and his Wife carries the Basket of Fish on her head to the Market place and sells them. Billings-gate Language and Noise is nothing to
what the Fisher-Men and Apple-Women make at Saint 
Sebastian,
 they are always Quarrelling and will Cuff heartily, and will not be friends under a Week. Their common language is 
Basque,
 which is as much different from 
Spanish
 as 
Welch
 from 
English.


Their Houses are Lofty and Stately, only covered with Pan-tiles, and because of great unexpected Squales of Wind which happen here often, they lay great stones on the Pan-tiles to keep them fast, sometimes both Stones and Pan-tiles are fetched down by Storms of Wind, and their streets being narrow, it is dan∣gerous then to walk the streets. Their rooms are large, but only one Chimney in a House of five rooms of a floor, and four or five stories high, and that at the top of the House. They live all Winter in the up∣per Stories to enjoy the benefit of the Sun, and in the lower Rooms in Summer. It is very hot here, the re∣flection of the Sun from the Castle Hill on one hand, and from the Sand in the Vale on the other, is the cause that it is hotter here than in many places of a more 
Southern
 Latitude. Their Beds are finely Carved and Gilded, but very hard to lye on, their Curtains, are of Linnen Laced at every half yard broad, but not wide enough to draw round the Bed, they have few or no Glass Windows, only Latices, their Beds stand all in 
Alcoves.


Merchant strangers unless Married with a

Spanish
 Woman, have not the Liberty to hire Houses, but must get one of the Town to hire them, and live in it with him, and they generally go snacks with the Merchants in their profits.


From Dinner they go to sleep till two or three, and then go out of Town between die 
Horn-Work
 and the 
Town Wall,
 there they tarry all the After∣noon, either Playing, or looking on those that play at Tennis and Ninepins: Their Tennis Court is in the open Air and rough Paved, yet they are very expert in tossing the Ball.


In the Winter they pass their time till eight of the Clock at Night in private Houses, or at an Assem∣bly, where every one that comes in, Pays six pence; he may either pick up a party to Play at Cards, or sit and see others Play, and Talk, and Call for three or four Glasses of Wine; if they stay beyond eight, the Mayor sends his 
Algosins,
 and makes Money of the Company, as well as of him that entertains them after such an hour. Sometimes the Clock strikes eight when it is but seven, if the Mayor wants a little Money.


The Men are very tight in their

Spanish
 Garb, their long Spadas, their silk stockings and slash'd shoes; the Women modestly and odly attired, all of them go Vailed, their Vails very large, gathered at the bottom in such a manner, that as they walk their Vails sit as full blown about them as the Sails of a Ship before the Wind; their petticoats are proportionable, and the Ladies, who generally all sit on the ground or floor, have such an address when they sit down to sling their Petticoats out in a round, that modestly speaking, they take, up more room than any Mil∣stone in 
England
 does in circumference, and the Wind gathered under their Coats by the turn they make, is so long of getting out, that by degrees as their Coats fall, they find a cool breese that is very refreshing to them in so hot a Climate: They sel∣dom stir abroad, the better sort but to Church, and even then without a great deal of Jealousie of an ill natur'd Husband; they have pretty Faces, black Eyes, and would look about them, as Women do in other Countreys if they durst.


The Priests are the only happy Men that enjoy the Ladies Company; Who are about eighty in all, their revenue is but small, they live merry lives, eat and drink of the best, in private Houses, where they are

always welcome, few or none of them, but have three or four Children and no reflection on them.


When a Priest would lay with a Woman, he ob∣solves her from the great scruple Women make of Whoredoms being a great sin, he tells her he'll take that sin to himself; as for the other scruple that Wo∣men have of loosing their reputation and spoiling their fortunes, there is no such thing amongst them, for if a Man gets a Woman with Child, that does not pass for a Prostitute, he is only to keep the Child and give the Wench a Portion (if she has nothing of her own) who Marries and is not a bit the worse looked upon.


Women have another advantage in this Coun∣trey, for after they are Contracted and all mat∣ters settled, and the day of Marriage agreed on; she has the Liberty to desire her Bridegroom to come and show himself a Man: and if she does not find him to her satisfaction the Contract is void, and she's a good Maid still.


They bring up some of their Young Women to Play on the 
Spanish
 Harp, for which they let their Nails grow so long that it looks strange∣ly.


They do not allow of any Bawdy Houses, but e∣very street, in a dark Night, serves their turn, and he must look to himself that disturbs them, or spoils sport.


Every Sunday and Holiday, the ordinary sort of them have a Dance on the Market Place, thus,


There are three Drums and Pipes, the Drum Major who has the bigest Drum, which is about the bigness of a childs Drum, is the common Hangman; there they whistle with one hand, and beat their Drums with the other, till there is a Ring made, when one of the nimblest of the fellows goes into the middle of the Ring, a shows his Activity, takes out of the Ring a Wench, she her Mate, and so it goes round; the first fellow leads the brandle, and all Dance and show their Parts for an hour. The Coopers, who are numerous here, on Saint 
Andrews-Day
 their Pa∣tron, go a Maskquerading all Day, and Play twenty tricks ridiculous enough, and would not work that

day for any reward, but they make it up at other times, for they are at work before day.


The Country all round abounds with Oak, proper for the Staves, and Chesnut Trees, of which they make the Hoops, for Cask; there is also great Numbers of Cask made in the Country, and at 
Passage,
 and brought to Saint 
Schastian
 empty on Mules.


There is near to the Town the Convent of Saint 
Austin,
 a Nunnery of Women, where there is to be seen the Corps of a Woman dean hun∣dreds of years ago, her Arms, Legs and Face, ap∣pers as full as if she had been Buried but ye∣sterday; she looks Tawny, and I believe has been served 
Mummey
-like; when they were digging the Foundation of this Monastery they found this Corps, which they pray to.


The chief Trade of the Town is Iron, Wine and Oyl.


Their Iron Mills are near to the Town, and their Iron Bars are brought to the Town on Horses or Mules, on Crooksaddles to the publick

Magasine,
 which is under the Town, Hall, where
constant attendance is given for receiving it out of the Country, and delivering and weighing it to the Buyer. Our Tin Men in 
Cornwall
 are here supplyed with their stamps, and other Utensils for the carrying on their work.


All other Merchandises, except Iron, are drawn on Sledges, by two Oxen, in and out of the Town.


They deal somewhat in train Oyl and Whale∣bone, they have some Ships that go to the 
North-ward
 a Whale fishing, besides they catch some in sight of the Castle; and in order to this, some Months in the Year, they hire a Man that looks out continually from the top of the Hill, betwixt Saint 
Sebastian
 and 
Passage,
 who when he sees a Whale or Bottlenose, makes a sign to the Castle, the Sentinal from the Castle advertises, by his Bell, the Town, immediately the Fishermen upon that go forth to the Prey; There was a Botlenose, about the bigness of that which was brought up to 
Greenwich,
 brought in to Saint

Se∣bastian
 in 
November
 last, out of whom they got a great quantity of that which they call 
Sperma Ceti;
 the flesh was boy led to Oyl.


They have also some Trade to 
Newfound Land,
 but with that sort of Fish (
Cabelau
 they call it) they are better supplyed from other Nations than by their own Ships.


The great quantity of 
Pilchards
 caught on the Coast of

Galicia,
 is a mighty help to this part of 
Spain,
 of which they are great 
Lovers,
 and are in more esteem with them than

Herrings.


But the more remarkable Trade of the Town at present, and that which brings most Money to the Town, is the Wine Trade.


The late War with 
France,
 from whence we were supplyed with their excellent 
Grave Medoc
 and 
Pontack
 Wines, occasioned our Parliament to put such a great Duty on 
French
 Wines, and o∣ther Liquors of the Growth of 
France;
 that Mer∣chants have looked out how to be supplyed o∣therwise, that they may pay easier Duties; and luckily they have light upon a spot of ground, Called the

Spanish Navar,
 of which 
Panplone, Ab∣litas
 and 
Villa Franka,
 are the chief Towns, that affords us as good Wines as any

French
 Wines; and the 
Spaniards
 of late both at Saint

Sebastian, Passage, Fonteravia
 and 
Guitaria,
 finding such a
demand for Wines, and considerable profit by them, have improved their Vineyards to so great a degree, both in quantity as well as quality of good Wines, that their improvement equals, if not exceeds that of 
Portugal;
 which before the War was not able to furnish us with above three or four hundred Pipes in a Year, and now there is above ten Thousand Pipes a Year Imported from thence, which appears from the Custom House Books.


This will not be allowed by some, but it is ve∣ry true: one shall fee at Saint 
Sebastian
 Mules by hundreds Loaded with Wine in Hogskins, three skins upon a Mule containing ten Gallons each, come every day into Town (Sunday not excep∣ted) all this is unloaded in the

Magasines
 and sor∣ted, and next day put into Cask, the Mules car∣ry away the empty skins into the Country for more.


This is not only done at Saint 
Sebastian,
 but also at

Fonteravia, Passage,
 and 
Guitaria,
 from these places they come to Saint 
Sebastian
 in 
Bar∣ques,
 and 
Bargo Longos,
 (because of the Conveni∣ency of Sea Carriage) in Cask, and are Lodged in Merchants Cellers ready for the buyer.


The truth of all this is so well known in

England,
 from the care the Commissioners of the Customs took, in sending over two of their Officers to examin into the truth of it, and from some Tryals at the 
Exche∣quer Bar,
 that it cannot be further questioned.


Besides, for all wines Ship'd off from Saint

Seba∣stian,
 the Masters of Ships are obliged to take Cer∣tificates from the Mayor and Consul, as a sufficient Testimony that their wines are of the Growth of 
Navar,
 in his Catholick Majesties Dominions, given under the great Seal of the


Most Noble and Most Loyal City of Saint
 Sebastian.


And undesigned by their Sworn Matter Cooper, 
Signior Nicola
 and his Assistants, that the very Cask are made by them.


FINIS.











