An Account of the late action and defeat in Waterford-Bay in Ireland, by three of Their Majesties men of war as also, of their taking a French ship of 70 tuns in the river, and of their landing men near Dungannon, and of their releasing several Protestant prisoners : with a large and full account of the state of King James's affairs in Dublin, and his late proclamation about Protestant churches.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A25336




Wing A306A



ESTC R1285





ocm 12953904




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
An Account of the late action and defeat in Waterford-Bay in Ireland, by three of Their Majesties men of war as also, of their taking a French ship of 70 tuns in the river, and of their landing men near Dungannon, and of their releasing several Protestant prisoners : with a large and full account of the state of King James's affairs in Dublin, and his late proclamation about Protestant churches.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


London :


Printed for R.H. ...,


1690.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
James --  II, --  King of England, 1633-1701.
Ireland --  History --  War of 1689-1691.
Broadsides --  England --  17th century.
2012-05
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-06
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-08
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2012-08
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






A306A


R1285


12953904


96021












AN ACCOUNT OF THE Late Action and Defeat, IN 
Waterford-Bay, in Ireland.
 By Three of Their Majesties Men of War.


AS ALSO, Of their Taking a 
French
 Ship of 70 Tuns, in the River; and of their Landing Men, near 
Dungannon;
 and of their releasing several Protestant Prisoners.


WITH A large and full Account of the State of King 
James's
 Affairs in 
Dublin,
 And his late Proclamation about Protestant Churches.


A Vessel arrived at 
Milford,
 on 
Saturday
 last, the Master whereof brings this following Account: That Three of Their Ma∣jesties Men of War, the 
Dover,
 St. 
Alban
's, and the 
Experiment,
 with Tenders, steering their Course for the Bay of 
Waterford,
 having a fair Wind that came up with it; and after a small time, they put Sixty chosen resolute Men on Shoar, within a Mile of a small place called 
Horkter,
 which had Fifty Soldiers in it; which on the Lan∣ding of our Men, (it being a Place of no Strength,) they immediately fled to 
Waterford:
 After which, our Men return'd to their Ships, bringing off with them, besides a great Booty, several Protestants: Our Men verily believed, that had they had but Five Hundred Men, they could at that Juncture ea∣sily have surpriz'd and taken the strong Fort of 
Dungannon.
 We could not descry the appearance of any Parties, either of the Garrison of 
Waterford,
 or 
Dungannon,
 'till some time after our Men were abroad again, they suppo∣sing, as we imagine, that we had some

considerable Force to Land. At our putting to Sea again, we took a 
French
 Ship of Seventy Tuns, Laden with Brandy and Salt; she was just steer∣ing for 
Waterford.


On 
Saturday
 last passed through 
Chester,
 for 
London,
 two Gentlemen, who lately made their escape from 
Dublin;
 by whom, among other Re∣lations, we have it confirmed, that Three Regiments of 
French
 marched into 
Dublin;
 upon whose arrival, King 
JAMES
 ordered Coll. 
Dar∣rington,
 and Coll. 
Fitz-James,
 to march their Regiments towards 
Droghedagh,
 and to deliver their Posts to the 
French;
 which so alarm'd the Chief of the 
Irish,
 that after a short Consultation amongst the Principal of their Officers, it was agreed, That 
Darrington,
 accompa∣nied with some others, should wait upon the Late KING, to know, if by this His Majesty's Orders, it was intended the 
French
 should have the Guard of his Person: Which, after some small time of 
Cabinet-Consultation,
 The KING declared it to be His Pleasure: Which Words so surprized and incensed 
Darrington
 and his Party, that immediately himself, Col∣lonel 
Baker,
 and about Twelve other Chief Officers went to the KING, and delivered up their Commissions; telling him withal, that many more resol∣ved to do the like. The Procee∣dings starttled the Late KING and his Council; and put them on t
 
Medicum,
 to prevent the evil Con
¦quences of disobliging either Faction That the Oldest Battalion of 
Ir
 Guards should keep their Place, as b
¦fore, and that a Battalion of 
Fren
 should join with them. But this D
¦cision pleased neither Party; and som
 high words happened, even almost 
 blows, though 
Tyrconnel
 did not Pu
¦lickly appear in these Disturbance neither was he imprisoned as has bee said.


King 
James,
 to sooth up the Prote¦stants in order to put a new face on h
 Proceedings, hath lately issued forth 
 Proclamation, commanding many 
 their Churches in 
Dublin
 to be restore
 again: According to which, Dr. 
Li
¦bourn
 Dean of St. 
Patricks
 ascending his Pulpit to Preach, was pulled down by the Priests, and his Vestments tor
 from his Back: On which, Complain
 being made to King 
JAMES,
 th
 principal Rioters received a slight Re∣primand: But the Doctor attempting to Preach the 
Sunday
 following, wa
 treated with the like, or rather wors
 Barbarity, and the Authors vindicate
 their Actions to King 
JAMES;
 and declared, That if in the least he coun∣tenanced, or pretended to Counte∣nance Heresie in the Nation, he could never expect a Blessing on his Army neither could or would adhere to hi
 
Interest.










London,
 Printed for 
R.H.
 in 
Little Britain,
 1690.









