An Account of the joyning of Major-General Kirk's forces with Duke Schomberg's and the taking the town and castle of Carrickfergus as also an account of the Irish army under K. James / by several persons lately arrived from Ireland.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A25307




Wing A302



ESTC R1177





ocm 12953581




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
An Account of the joyning of Major-General Kirk's forces with Duke Schomberg's and the taking the town and castle of Carrickfergus as also an account of the Irish army under K. James / by several persons lately arrived from Ireland.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


London :


Printed for J. Green ...,


1689.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Kirke, Percy, 1646?-1691.
Schomberg, Friedrich Hermann Schomberg, --  Duke of, 1615-1690.
James --  II, --  King of England, 1633-1701.
Ireland --  History --  War of 1689-1691 --  Campaigns --  Sources.
Carrickfergus (Northern Ireland) --  History --  17th century --  Sources.
Broadsides --  England --  17th century.
2012-05
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-06
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-08
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2012-08
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






A302


R1177


12953581


96015












AN ACCOUNT Of the Joyning of MAJOR-GENERAL 
KIRK
's Forces with DUKE 
SCHOMBERG's
 And the taking the TOWN and CASTLE of CARRICKFERGUS: As also an Account of the IRISH ARMY under K. 
JAMES:
 By several Persons lately arrived from 
Ireland.




Licensed and Entered 
August
 the 30
th
 1689.




Chester
 
August
 the Twenty eighth. 1689.


SIR,


SINCE my last several Ships are returned from Major General 
Kirk,
 who gives this Account, That Major General 
Kirk
 had Joyned his Grace the Duke 
Schomberg
 with Fourteen Troops of Horse, three of Dragoons, and Horse for three or four Troops more; and that the 
English
 Forces are Battering 
Carrickfergus
 with Eight Men of War by Sea, and likewise by Land, and 'tis not doubted but they will soon be Masters of it.


Major 
Tiffen,
 after the great Defeat near 
Inniskilling,
 march'd towards Co∣lonel 
Sarsfield
 with one Troop of Horse, one of Dragoons, and two Com∣panys of Foot; but finding him Decampt, and hearing he fled toward 
Sligo,
 marched after him thither; but when he came he found a clear Stage, the Enemy being fled, and left behind them Fourteen Pieces of Cannon in the Town, of which the said Major is now in Possession, and is Fortifying of that Place.


Yesterday at Noon sailed from 
High-Lake
 the 
French
 Regiment of Horse-Guards, commanded by the Right Honourable Colonel 
Schomberg,
 and like∣wise the Earl of 
Devonshire
's Regiment of Horse. This day the Duke of 
Bolton
's Regiment of Foot set Sail from 
High-Lake,
 and—
Herbert
's Troop goes from hence this day to the same place. Two Troops of Colonel 
Villar
's

Regiment of Horse are come in, and the rest will follow this day, in order to their imbarking for 
Ireland
 with the first fair Wind. We likewise hear from 
Dublin,
 by a Ship come into 
Beaumaris,
 laden with Hides, Tallow, and Lea∣ther, wherein were several Passengers, as Mr. 
Berton,
 Servant to Alderman 
Fletcher
 of 
Dublin,
 Mr. 
Smith,
 and Mr. 
Smallman,
 Linnen-Drapers, with Monsieur 
La Rue,
 Silk-Man, who gives this Account, That King 
James
 had formed a Camp at 
Rathmine,
 on the South side of 
Dublin,
 composed of a∣bout 7000 Foot, being all new-rais'd Men, that they had neither Shirts nor Shoes, for the most part, and a great Multitude of Women and Children that followed them; and that King 
James
 had given Orders to all the Parish-Priests, to take an Account of all Persons from Sixteen to Sixty, and the place of their Abode, that they may be listed in that Kings Service; and that upon the News of Duke 
Schomberg
's landing, the Camp was ordered to march on the North side of the Town, intending to form an Army to go and fight him; but the Horse that return'd from 
Derry,
 as well as the Foot, were misera∣bly Harass'd; and a 
French
 Officer that was in the Engagement before 
In∣niskilling,
 saith, That the 
English
 behaved themselves to a Wonder, but he never saw such Cowards as the 
Irish,
 some of them running Sixteen or Eighteen Miles without staying to look behind them; insomuch that King 
James
 was so enraged that he caused a Captain and a Corporal to be hang∣ed for running away, for Example sake: he also gives Account of a Ship arrived from 
France,
 with a 
French
 General and Twenty Officers, with some Arms, and that they had secured most of the considerable Protestants in the West, not daring to trust them, and are forming a Camp near 
Kinsale,
 as fearing the Earl of 
Torington
 may Land there, being now in despair of the 
French
 Succours; and that they have laid up a great Magazine in 
Ath∣loane,
 and Fortified 
Gallway
 for a safe Retreat: But we hope the Victori∣ous and Renowned General 
Schomberg
 will soon cool their Courage, ha∣ving as we hear taken the Town and Castle of 
Carrickfergus
 by Storm; so that he will be at liberty to march towards 
Dublin,
 having receiv'd the 
English
 Horse, who already forage up as far as the 
Newry
 and 
Charlemont.
 In our next we expect to hear of some Considerable Action, in the mean time I am your Humble Servant.






POSTCRIPT.


On Munday and Tuesday last sailed out of 
Highlake
 Eighty Sail of Ships all Horse, and Fifty Ships with Foot, Ammunition and Necessaries.










LONDON,
 Printed for 
J. Green
 near 
Temple-Bar.
 1689.









