Articles against the Lord Mandevill, Mr. Iohn Pym, M. Denzell Hollis, Sir Arthur Hazelrig, Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Strowd also the French and Spanish fleet arrived at Ireland, for the assistance of the rebels there : being a true relation of the Spanish fleet arrived in Ireland to ayd and assist the rebels there against the Protestants, speaking of their inhumane cruelty : with a description how the Popes nuncio came unto the King of Spaine, and instigated him thereunto : as also, of the Spanish oath, which they tooke at the first arrival against all Protestants whatsoever : likewise a relation of the French navie now lately arrived at the Irish coast, with the full number of both fleets, in a most true and exact relation.
Approx. 9 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A25912




Wing A3803



ESTC R2043





ocm 12369446




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Articles against the Lord Mandevill, Mr. Iohn Pym, M. Denzell Hollis, Sir Arthur Hazelrig, Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Strowd also the French and Spanish fleet arrived at Ireland, for the assistance of the rebels there : being a true relation of the Spanish fleet arrived in Ireland to ayd and assist the rebels there against the Protestants, speaking of their inhumane cruelty : with a description how the Popes nuncio came unto the King of Spaine, and instigated him thereunto : as also, of the Spanish oath, which they tooke at the first arrival against all Protestants whatsoever : likewise a relation of the French navie now lately arrived at the Irish coast, with the full number of both fleets, in a most true and exact relation.
[8] p.   


London :


Printed for John Gr,


1642.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Hampden, John, 1594-1643.
Holles, Denzil Holles, --  Baron, 1599-1680.
Manchester, Edward Montagu, --  Earl of, 1602-1671.
Hesilrige, Arthur, --  Sir, d. 1661.
Pym, John, 1584-1643.
Great Britain --  Politics and government --  1642-1649.
2012-05
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-06
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-07
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2012-07
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






A3803


R2043


12369446


60527












ARTICLES against the Lord Mandevill, Mr. Iohn Pym, M. Den∣zell Hollis, Sir Arthur Hazelrig, Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Strowd.


ALSO THE FRENCH AND SpANISH FLEET Arrived at Ireland, for the Assistance of the Rebels there.


BEING A true Relation of the Spanish Fleet Arrived in 
Ireland
 to ayd and assist the Rebels there against the Protestants, speaking of their inhumane cruelty. With a Description how the Popes Nuncio came unto the King of Spaine, and instigated him there∣unto.


As also, of the Spanish Oath which they tooke at the first Arrivall a∣gainst all protestants whatsoever.


Likewise a Relation of the French Navie now lately arrived at the Irish Coast, with the full Number of both Fleets, in a most true and exact Relation.


LONDON, Printed for
 John Gr, 1642.














THE FRENCH and SPANISH FLEET Arrived at Ireland.


THe French-men having great and plenary intelligence of the Papists proceedings in 
Ireland,
 after long debate and private confe¦deracy concerning the same effect, they sent with∣out any intermission of longer time a Herauld of Armes to 
Tyrone
 (that Arch-rebell in 
Ireland
 cer∣tifying him, that if they were defective, or had any need of auxiliary assistance, they would instantly conjoyne with unanimity, and defend their party with constant puissance, Whereupon 
Tyrone
 grati∣ously returned an Answer, that he was much respe∣ctive towards them, and promised the uttermost of their intents, and indeavours to performe the best courtesie for their so gratious a Message con∣cerning the demolition of protestant Religion, and withall beseeched, and earnestly requested them to raise some sudden force, and to send a Navie with great expedition unto them, that they might fully subdue the whole kingdome of 
Ireland.
 This Em∣bassage being re
urned, they (after mature, and seri∣ous

 
long and conected with a re∣gular aggregation the number of sixe thousand men of Arms to goe speedily into 
Ireland,
 with 9 ships fully loaden with Armes, Ammunition, and strong fortification for the same purpose and intent. And being thus provided for 
Ireland,
 they seemed to go on with great alacrity, untill they came to the full ohject of their unanimous expectation: where they were very nobly entertained, and with great favour and affectionate respection. Wherefore they being landed at the Port of 
Cavarre
 marched on still, un∣till they came beyond the 
Territories
 of that king∣dome to 
Armagh,
 where they began a promiscuous rnd tumultuous clamar among the people, slaying, and destroying whomsoever they could meet with, of what sect, degree, or Age soever.


When as they met with the Rebels, they had great and singular congratulation, who immediatly conducted them with great expedition to that fa∣mous, renowned, and honourable City of Dublin, who incontinently besieged the same, and most ty∣rannically assaulted, whensoever they met.


The said Castle of Dublin they intended to take the eighteenth day of December, and without any humane partiality they did put the poore prote∣stants to the intolerable miserie, and deplorable ca∣lamitie.


There was great and unexpected solemnity, tri∣umph, and celebration at the French fleet arrived in

the p
 
Territories
 of 
Ireland,
 who came to as∣sist the Rebels in so divellish and diabolicall a de∣signe, and to auxiliate then against the protestants, that professe the true and sincere purity of religi∣on: but I hope in Gods omnipotencie that all their plots will be emolished.




The Spanish Fleet arrived in Ireland.


SIR 
Patricke Devons
 collected a numerous mul∣titude out of 
Spaine
 to goe into 
Ireland,
 for the assistance of the said Papists there congregated, and plotting the utter subversion of true Christian religion.


He had under his command five thousand men in Armes, who came in a Navie into 
Ireland
 to the auxiliation of the rebels.


Where at their arrivall, Tyrone and his confede∣rats joyfully entertained him. The cause of their first commotion, and furious insurrection was this.


The Popes 
Nuntio
 transported such Newes into 
Spaine,
 that his supremacie was pleased to supplant the Kingdome of 
England,
 and all their Adherents: and because they were Hereticks.

Therefore his Primacie wold vouchsafe to depose them all. After this Nuncio's message reported to the King of 
Spaine,
 he imposed, and committed all the subsequent to Sir 
Patrick Devons
 in 
Ireland,
 who immediately by the command of the King of 
Spain
 went under the conduct of 5000. souldiers, who ar∣riving at the Irish Coast were royally entertained by some of the chiefe of the Rebels.


They seemed to be very inhumane, and withall they tooke a private Oath among themselves, that whatsoever Protestant they should meer, or any inclining to the Protestant Religion, hee or they should be incontinently slaine without any partia∣lity at all, and he or they, or any of them that should deny the same shuld be expel'd as a traytor to their party. Thus they proceeded in their vnchristian and tyrannicall slaughter, putting all to the sword, that they could meet obviously of the Protestant religi∣on and profession.


We see therefore, and may apparently perceive how bloudily these rebels proceed in their cruelty and therefore we ought not to sleepe in the chaires of security, and suffer our poore Brethren to suffer there in great violation, and miserable calamity,


For securitie is the very doore that opens the ve∣ry plaine way to destruction. And I pray God whilst many of us doe thinke our selves safe on the sleeping beds of security, that the enemy doth not cut our throats.


While Esau prolonged the time, Jacob stole away his birth-right: And I pray God, while were

procraitinate and deferre the time in helping out 
Brethren
 in 
Ireland,
 that a forreine enemy doe not steale away the renowned Prerogative of this Kingdome, and so consequently it become a con∣quered Nation.


While the men in the holy Gospell slept, the Enemy sowed tares amongst the wheat, and I am sure while we neglect the proper time, many teares of Discord, and schismaticall dissention are sowne amongst us. But I hope that God, who heretofore have alwayes defended, and preserved this King∣dome of his singular mercy, and favourable omni∣potencie, will still defend the same for ever, to the propagation of his Truth and Gospell.




FINJS.








ARTICLES O
 High treason against the Lord Mandevill, Mr. Pym, Mr. Denzell Hollis, Sir Arthur Hazelrig, Mr. Hambden, and Mr. Strowde.


THat they have traytorously indeavoured to subvert the fundamentall laws, and govern∣ment of the Kingdome of 
England,
 and to deprive the King of his royall power, and to place in subjects in arbitrary power over the lives, liber∣ties, and estates of his Majesties liege people.


2. They have indeavoured to lay many foule a∣spersions upon his Majesty and his government to alienate the affections of his people, and to make his Majesty odious vnto them.


3 They have indeavoured to draw his Majesties late Army into disobedience to his Majesties Com∣mands, and to side with them in their trayterous designes.


4. They have trayterously invited, and incoura∣ged a forreine power to invade his Majesties King∣dome of 
England.


5. They have traytorously indeavoured to subvert the Rights, and very Being of parliaments.


7. For compleating of their treacherous designs, they have indeavoured as far as in them lay by force and terror to compell the parliament to joyne with them in their traiterous designs and to that end hath actually raised and countenanced Tumults against the King and parliament.


7. That they have traiterously conspired to levie and have actually levied power against the King.




FINIS.







