An historical relation of the first discovery of the isle of Madera [sic] written originally in Portugueze by Don Francisco Alcafarado, who was one of the first discoverers, thence translated into French, and now made English.
Qual foy o azo com que se descobrio a ilha da Madeyra. English
Alcoforado, Francisco.
Approx. 64 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 20 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2006-06 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A26631




Wing A888



ESTC R7591





ocm 12028072




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
An historical relation of the first discovery of the isle of Madera [sic] written originally in Portugueze by Don Francisco Alcafarado, who was one of the first discoverers, thence translated into French, and now made English.
Qual foy o azo com que se descobrio a ilha da Madeyra. English
Alcoforado, Francisco.
Mello, Francisco Manuel de, 1608-1666.
[2], 37 p.   


London :


Printed for William Cademan ...,


1675.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Madeira (Madeira Islands) --  Discovery and exploration.
2006-02
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2006-02
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2006-03
Judith Siefring
Sampled and proofread
2006-03
Judith Siefring
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2006-04
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






A888


12028072


52694












AN HISTORICAL RELATION Of the First DISCOVERY OF THE ISLE OF MADERA.


Written Originally in 
Portugueze
 by Don 
Francis∣co Alcafarado
 (gentleman of the Bed-Chamber to the Infanta Don 
Henry
 younger Son of 
John
 the first King of PORTUGAL;) 
Who was one of the First Discoverers, thence transla∣ted into French, and now made English.


—Barbaras bas Segetes


Imposuit Tartar—


LONDON,
 Printed for 
William Cademan
 at the sign of the of the Popes-Head at the Entrance into the New Exchange in the 
Strand.
 1675.














AN HISTORICAL RELATION OF THE DISCOVERY Of the ISLE of MADERA.


A
Fter a tedious War, 
England
 enjoying a profound Peace, under the reign of her victorious Monarch, 
Edward
 the third. 
London
 her Metropolis (where then resided the King) surfeiting in Ri∣ches and Plenty, did allure the young Gentle men to participate of her pleasures: These, having now no imployment for their swords, did betake themselves to such Recreations as best suited


with their natures.) Amongst whom 
Lionel Machin
 a younger Brother, of a good but a decayed Family, (impoverisht in the former wars) slighting the Vanities and Feastings, to which his Companions (who were thereunto addicted) might by their examples invite him, did deport himself with a more reserved behaviour. His Beauty and Cou∣rage, together with the good Fortune, which usu∣ally attended his generous undertakings, rendered him more considerable than was usual for Persons of his Age and Estate.


Thus generously demeaning himself, Love insen∣sibly crept into his heart for 
Arabella Darcy,
 a most fair and beautiful youn g Lady, the non-paril not onely of the Court, but Kingdome famous for such wonders; he publickly made his addres∣ses of love unto, which Passion he unadvisedly cherished, without considering that his Mistress be∣ing in the prime of yourh and Beauty, Heir to a great Estate, and allied to a most honourable Fa∣mily, had by these motives attracted many Lords and Noble-men to be her Servants: Notwithstand∣ing 
Lionels
 merit made him more kindly be receiv∣ed by 
Arabella,
 than any of his other Rivals, who had submitted themselves under the Empire of so fair and charming a Sovereign.


But I intend not to write the particular History of their Loves; and therefore shall omit by what means he at length arrived to so much happiness: Let it suffice to know none of the Lords addresses were acceptable to 
Arabella,
 she desiring nothing more than to make 
Lionel
 her Husband. This was not well rellished by her Relations, by whom, her


Father and Mother coming to understand the re∣ciprocal kindness of our Lovers, which they in vain saught to obstruct, they immediately made their complaints to the King, representing what a detriment such a marriage would prove to their Family, they having before concluded a very ad∣vantagious match for their Daughter (which she now refused to embrace) and therefore they most humbly besaught his Majesty to use his Royal Au∣thority to hinder it. The King thought the best means was, that 
Lionel,
 by his Order, should be arrested, and that during his imprisonment 
Ara∣bella
 should be compelled to marry the Nobleman her Parents had before designed her. At the same time both the one and the other was executed, 
Lionel
 being sent to Prison, and 
Arabella,
 in spight of all her repugnance, forced to take the Lord for her husband: Who presently after the wedding retlred with his Wife from 
London
 to his house at 
Bristol,
 a Sea-port Town scituate on the River 
Avon,
 which joyning with another River called the 
Se∣vern,
 coming from the Province of 
Gloucester,
 both together disemboug themselves into the Irish O∣cean.


Lionel
 hears the news of this Marriage with a great deal of Sorrow, and being assured, that 
Ara∣bella
's affection toward him was not diminished, he lost all patience to be detained in Prison, and therefore imployed his Friends to supplicate the King for his liberty, which was not very difficult to obtain, his Majesty having no farther end in the business, than to content the Ladies Parents (whose marriage being now solemnized) and she removed


a great way off) he at small entreaty granted 
Lio∣nel
 his liberty. 
But as the violence, which others use to hinder our desires, doth rather augment than diminish their force.
 So 
Lionells
 passion by his im∣prisonment grew stronger, revolving in his mind, during his restraint, divers wayes how to be re∣venged of those he thought had done him wrong; and resolved, being now at liberty, to execute them. For this purpose, secretly gathering to∣gether such of his Friends and Kinsmen in whom he put the most considence, judging it necessary with some reasons to perswade them to be assistant to him in his designs, he thus expressed himself.


You cannot but think, that the resentment I have for the late affront put upon me is the cause of your pre∣sent convention. And I am perswaded, if I were so base a Fellow to forget it, yet you have so much honour as not to let me neglect a revenge. The apparent injustice done me in forcing the Lady 
Arabella
 contrary to her inclinations to espouse him, who it at present her Hus∣band, is no doubt a great affliction to her, but more to me, who was and still am her Lover. Revenge and love hurry me on strange undertakings, for I am re∣solved to take her from him, and free my Mistress out of the hands of a man she hates, The action, I con∣fess, is both bold and dangerous, but I should think my self unworthy of such Friends, if I had not cou∣rage to attempt it with your assistance. I would wil∣lingly undertake this concern alone, and not expose you, my Friends, to the dangers that attend this en∣terprise, but I should be unjust to you my worthy Kins∣men, not to let you participate in the revenge, for though the injury is only done me, yet the affront is put


upon our whole Family. I were therefore much too blame, if I went singly to retort abuses done us all. Were the enterprise solely on my account, I would not doubt your aid, since enemies who openly offend us are more pardonable, than those complemental Friends, who in time of necessity refuse us their help, should therefore any of you abandon me, I have more reason to complain of him, than of a professed Enemy. But since I doubt not thereof, let us, Dear Friends, consi∣der how we may make our affronters sensible of the In∣justice they have done us.


This Harangue of 
Lionell
 produced all the desir∣ed effects in the minds of them who heard it, they unanimously promising not to leave him, but resol∣ving to run his Fortune. Whereupon it was thought necessary, they should then part, and take several Roads to 
Bristol,
 there to watch all means, and take necessary measures to relieve 
Arabella.
 The vici∣nity and commodity of the Sea did seem greatly to facilitate their enterprise. 
France
 being pitched up∣on as a commodious retreat, the great antipathy between that Crown and 
England,
 promising them all the security they could desire. They did not question good success, it depending on their cou∣rages, which were highly excited by divers hero∣ique actions, which had been gloriously atchieved when Love was the cause of undertaking them.


This resolution taken was instantly put in execu∣tion, and being all safely arrived at 
Bristol,
 as they had before projected; they there again consulted how farther to prosecute what they had begun, and it was thought convenient by them all, that one of their Company should endeavour to procure


a service in the house of 
Arabella
's Husband, my Lord—but we know not his name, for the 
Eng∣glish
 to whom we are beholding for this Relation, held it discretion to keep it secret. Their eyes were instantly upon one judged most proper for that purpose, who willingly undertook it, and was entertained by the Lord as his Groom. It was his good fortune to have assigned to his care a fair pi∣ed Horse, on which 
Arabella
 often rode, when she went to take the Air, either in company of her Husband or alone. The innocence of those times esteeming a Ladies honour to be a sufficient guard, though the present Age is not of that opinion.


Bristol
 being as great a Town of Trade as most in 
England,
 there were always in the Harbor many Ships ready to set Sail. One of the best sailing and strongest Vessels 
Lionel
 and his Companions resolv∣ed to seize; the negligence of the Commander, and vigilence of 
Lionel
 gave them great hopes there would not be much difficulty in effecting their de∣sires: The better to carry on their work they bought a Shallop, with which they every day rowed out to Sea, as on their pleasure, so that when they should seize on 
Arabella
 and the Ship they might do it with more facility and less suspition, both on the People a shore and those aboard the Vessels, which rode at an Anchor near the Ship they intended to make use of.


Whilst these things were doing by the Conspira∣tors, 
Arabella
 had hourly notice from her new do∣mestick of what ever was resolved on in their Cabal, and accordingly took her measures: in a short time all things being favourable, and the wind come fair at North 
Arabella
 had notice, that, in a day or two,


they intended to put their design in execution.


The place 
Lionel
 had chosen daily to come to with his shallop was behind a Cape of Land very convenient for his purpose, because little frequented, and by reason of the solitariness of the place not at all subject to any rancounter might unluckily hap∣pen in that juncture of time, the Groom also to fa∣vour the business, had omitted for three Days to give any Drink to the pyed Horse which was his Charge.


Arabella
 (when she knew all things were in readi∣ness and that 
Lionel
 and his Companions waited for her in the shallop, with impatience expecting that happy Hour they had so long waited for) mounted on Horseback on pretence of taking the Air, and rode towards the Cape before mentioned, the Horse being extream thirsty, hearing the Waves beat against the Shoar, and thereby knowing the nearness of the wa∣ter rushed furiously on in spight of the bit or those that led him, all that the pretended Groom could do was to catch hold on the reins seeming thereby, to stop him when indeed he only guided him towards the Shallop, which he might the easier do because the Horse, seeing himself led towards Water which he much desired, did not unwillingly submit to be so guided. 
Lionel
 and his Comrades seeing what was done a Shoar leaped out of the Shallop (where they attended the beginning of that good fortune should put an end to their Disgrace) and most officiously, laying hold on the Horses bridle dismounted the 
La
dy, and immediately with the cunning Groom em∣barqued in the Shallop, so that before the other Ser∣vants could come to the Sea side. Our adventurers


were got a good distance thence having with Sails and Oars dilligently endeavoured so to do.


The Day appointed to put this Action in execu∣tion was also designed for seizing the Vessel we be∣fore spoke of, which was the easier accomplished in regard that at the same time the Owners made a fare∣wel feast a Shore, to which the Master, Mariners, Officers, and Souldiers were invited, so that the Ves∣sel being in a manner empty, was without difficulty surprized by 
Lionel
 and his Friends, upon which so soon as they were embarqued loosing the sails, and cutting the Cable, they steered their Course for 
France,
 the Wind blowing a brisk gale carried the Ship swiftly away, which was very happy for our Lovers. What a noise the recital of this adventure made, not onely in 
Bristol,
 but also throughout all 
England,
 what descants was made thereof, or what dangers the Actors underwent, and what punishment they deserved, let the Reader imagine, for we intend not to particularize them in our Relations.


The Eyes of Love are not always blind, for 
Lio∣nel
 considering the quality of the offence he had com∣mitted, & against whom, soon bethought himself that the Husband of 
Arabella
 was a person of such Qua∣lity, as having not only his own power but also the Authority of Justice in his behalf, would not fail to make all the Ships then in Harbor pursue the Ra∣vishers of his Wife and Honour, 
Lionel
 therefore to prevent being overtaken, made all the sail he could not caring how soon he lost the sight of Land. At Night he altered the Course that in the Day he had steered, the better to blind any that should pursue him; all that Night they sailed with such a swiftness as


usually accompany's them that run headlong into their own ruine, the Day ensuing he found himself out of danger of pursuit. But the Wind, which hi∣therto had continued favourable and gentle, now began to be so impetuous that it seemed rather to blow a Storm then a fair gale.


Arabella
 now began to reflect on what was past, and consider her former and present condition, mu∣sing on these things she came upon the deck, the bet∣ter to divert her melancholy, where seeing no∣thing but a Tempestuous Sea, and an Air she had not been accustomed unto, she then perceived what a miserable estate she had reduced her self unto; the poor Vessel being now become the sport of the Sea and Wind was a general grief and affliction to them all.


After five Days of Navigation, without discover∣ing the Land they looked for, the wind became so cross and vehement as it quite forced them from the coasts of 
France
 whether their desires tended; the Friends of 
Lionel,
 who were not so amorous as him∣self, soon became sensible of their deplorable estate, perceiving how equally fortune treated them mak∣ing no distinction between the innocent and guilty, and that they were all like to share in the common danger. But 
Lionel,
 was most extreamly tormented to consider, that he was not only the means of bringing himself into that ruin but also his Friends, and chief∣ly her whom he Loved more dear more than his Life.


Thirty Days were they in this Calamity running through the vast and dangerous deserts of the O∣cean, destitute of all Hope and Hourly expecting


death: when one morning about Sun-rising, they be∣gan to have some Hopes for they thought they ken∣ned Land, which in a little time they plainly disco∣vered, it shewing it self to be an Island▪ High, craggy, and covered with trees; this gave all the Company a great deal of Joy, though 
Arabella
 received the most consolation, for she now hoped after so dangerous and wearisome a Navigation, to find that repose which was necessary for her, an end of all her pains and a new manner of living.


Lionel
 was very much troubled to find a safe Port in this unknown Land, fearing to be split against some Rock, he therefore sounded, and not without a great deal of circumspection, came safely to an An∣chor. They could not perceive any humane Crea∣ture on Shore, and those which were best skilled in Navigation thoughtit not inhabited, which they were the more induced to believe, because a great number of Birds differing in bigness, sort, and colour came and perched themselves upon the Yards, Masts, and Shrouds of the Ship without being any thing afraid of the Men, or endeavouring to avoid their being taken.


To be more fully informed both Curiosity and necessity made the most hardy to get out the boat and go a Shoar, 
Lionel
 would fain have been one of them, but neither 
Arabella
 or his Companions would suffer it, not thinking it convenient he should stir out of the Vessel till the return of his other Friends, which they soon did filled with very good news, re∣porting though the Island was uninhabited yet the Air was good and the Earth fertile. Upon these ti∣dings 
Lionel
 and 
Arabella
 with most of the Men


(leaving the rest aboard to look after the Ship) went into the Boatand landed on the banks of that Land where never before any man had set his Foot.


It being very fair weather & a clear season, the Sun as it rose higher discovered to our Voyagers a most dainty and delicious Country, the Mountains and Hills all covered with shady Trees, the Valleys filled with small Currants, & many bubling Springs of pure and clear Water. The Island was also filled with sun∣dry Beasts, who, unacquainted with the sight of man, the presence of our adventurers did not affright, find∣ing all things thus accord to their wishes it incou∣raged them to proceed to a further discovery with a great deal of confidence: some distance from their first Landing they found a place surrounded with Lawrels & other shady Trees (though they knew not how to call them) whose branches filled with large leaves were so conjoyned as they made a perfect Ar∣bor pleasant and shady, from the Mountain 
Adjacent
 descended a fine River which formed a most curious Pond close by the Arbor. This our Voyagers thought a convenient place for their refreshments and so with Boughs and the like Materials they made it fit to re∣ceive them, resolving for some time after such hard∣ships as they had indured to take the pleasures so sweet a Country did afford them. Now therefore every one betook himself to what his Fancy prompt∣ed him, some imploying themselves more exactly to search into the Woods. Others to run over the Hills and Dales to find what might be further worth their discovery. Whilst the rest betook themselves to carry Necessaries aboard and bring others a Shore from their Ship.



But the misfortune which attended our fugitives was too great to let this tranquility last long, for the Night which succeeded the Thirteenth Day after their arrival there, hapned so horrible a storm which came from the North-East that all the force and industry of those who found themselvs on board the Ship, which was then at an Anchor, could not withstand the fury of the Wind and Sea. But they were forced to abandon her to their rage, and for two Dayes they were in the same Jeopardy they so lately were delivered out of, at the end of which they once more discovered Land; the Vessel being leaky and they unskilful Marriners they were forced to run her a shore, which was but the beginning of new Miseries, for they no sooner were Landed but they found themselves on the Coast of 
Africa
 in the Kingdome of 
Morocco.
 The Mores who from the Mountains beheld this pitiful shipwrack descended and seized upon the poor Christians, haling them into slavery and imprisoning them in the Jayl of their Capital City. Thereby making it appear that these Monsters of Men were more cruel then the E∣lements, for the latter intended to spare their lives when the former were so unmerciful as to make them undergo a perpetual bondage.


The day light which succeeded this unhappy night, was more uncomfortable to those ashore than the dark∣ness had been terrible, or the storm frightful to them aboard, for there appearing no ship in Port, neither when the Tempest was over any returning (for they till then had hoped, that the extreamity of the wea∣ther had only forced her out to Sea) notwithstand∣ing their valour, all the courage they had could not


draw them out of dispair, for now they saw them∣selves destitute of any means ever to return from that unknown part of the World. The most under∣standing of them judging, that by reason of the few people on board, and their unexperience in Mari∣time affairs, the Vessel must of necessity be swallow∣ed up of the waters.


After this deplorable accident, those amongst them, who had been the chief Instruments of bringing them∣selves and friends into this miserable estate, began se∣riously to repent of their folly, though the Lady was the most concerned, well knowing this sad Voyage was chiefly made on her account, so that she fell in∣to a deep melancholly, but dangers being infinite more horrible in themselves than we can paint them; it is impossible for us to describe the grief which pos∣sessed her breast, for so deeply was she afflicted that from that moment to the time of her death she utter∣ed not one word: 
Excess of sorrow is alwayes mute, rejecting the common way of easing it self by sighs and lamentations.


Three dayes was death in killing so amiable an in∣fortunate, she expiring with all manner of contri∣tion and repentance, 
Lionel
 had some further time granted him by God, that his sorrows might be in∣creased, and he afflicted; for it was but just, that he who was the most criminal, should undergo the greatest sufferings. After the death of his beloved Mistress, with many groans and deep complaints he lay at her feet, refusing either sustenance or comfort from his Friends, though they pitying his sad dis∣asters, endeavoured with their best rhetorick to suc∣cour him▪ notwithstanding which, all their charita∣ble


Offices could not prolong his life more than five Days, at the end of which he dyed in their embraces after he had desired them to bury his body in the same grave with 
Arabella,
 which they did at the Foot of the fair Tree (we before spoke of) The branches serving for the Pall and the Trunk for his monument They adorned this poor and Rustique monument with a great Cross made of Wood as a mark of his Religion, and on the Tree made an inscriptionre∣lating his Love and Adventures, at the end of which Epitaph they requested, that if ever any Christians came to inhabit that solitary place they would over his grave erect a Church, and dedicate it to our Sa∣viour 
Jesus
 to worship and adore his holy name, and pray for the Souls of our unhappy Lovers.


Lionel
 and 
Arabella
 dead, the other gentlemen re∣solved not to stay any longer in that place, but im∣ployed themselves, some to fit up their Shallop, o∣thers to prepare water, and the rest to kill birds and make provision for their Voyage, they thinking it a great deal better to commit themselves to the mer∣cy of the Sea in their small Shallop, than spin out a lazy and idle life in that, to them unpleasant place. They soon had left the Land, but by misfortune steering the same course the storm beforementioned obliged their freinds in the Ship to take, they con∣sequently fell in with the Coast of 
Africa,
 which they looked upon as a Land of comfort. But they had only escaped the danger of the deep to be slaves to the Barbarians, and passing through divers hands they at length came to be bought by the King of 
Morrocco,
 where they found their companions, whom before they thought ship wrackt, and this was


their only consolation to find them in the same Cap∣tivity with themselves.


The Prison for Slaves in 
Morocco
 was like that which is this day used at 
Algiers:
 in it were alwayes many Christian Slaves of divers Nations, and a∣mongst others there was a Spaniard, born at 
Sevile,
 by name 
Jean de Morales,
 a man very skilful in Na∣vigation, having been for many years a Pilot. His curiosity was mightily pleased with the Narrative our captive English made him of their adventures, the many years they were together gave him the lar∣ger means to know, what he so much desired, for he not only learned the marks to find, but the situation of this new Land, and also all the miraculous pas∣sages had happened to the English, in their unhappy Voyage, of which Relation he hoped to make good use for a discovery, so soon as the time of his Slavery should be at an end.


But the better to apprehend those things, which are necessary to be known in our History, I must make a small digression, and let me not be thought tedious, if I spend some time on so profitable a sub∣ject.


The King Dom 
John
 the first, of happy memory, having made an end of his Wars with 
Castile,
 and not judging it convenient to abandon his Sub∣jects to idleness, which peace might very much prompt them unto, he resolved to imploy his arms against the avowed enemies of our Religion. Pur∣suing this generous resolution, he set a foot a good Army, with which he invaded 
Africa,
 and conquer∣ed the Town of 
Centa,
 situate precisely in the Streight of the 
Gibralter,
 which he made himself


Master of, in the year of our Lord one thousand four hundred and fifteen. 
In which Expedition his Subjects served him as if his Children, and his Chil∣dren, as if they had been his meanest Subjects.
 The Prince of 
Portugal
 and all his Brethren were in this Expedition, amongst whom Dom 
Henry
 the young∣est, Grand Master of the Order of Christ, did signa∣lize himself by many glorious undertakings, among which none redounded more to his honour than the furtherance of this action we are now about to re∣late.


This Infant was alwayes much addicted to the Mathematical Sciences; and more particularly to Cosmography, which made him when at 
Centa
 in the African Expedition often converse with divers Moors and Jews, who had Cognizance of remote places, by them he understood their Coasts and Seas and upon such information did conceive an extream desire to discover and conquer them, not so much out of Ambition to enlarge his own Dominions, as to encrease the Kingdom of God. With this resolu∣tion, after the Conquest of 
Centa,
 he retired to the Algarves, and built on a convenient place of Cape Saint 
Vincent
 a Town to serve him as an Arsenal for his Shipping, which he named 
Terca Nabal,
 and it was also called 
The Town of the Infant.
 Hence he began his new discoveries and Conquests, setting out his Fleets from thence for the Atlantick and Occi∣dental Oceans, which were then held innavigable, and had it not been for him might have so continu∣ed. Albeit the Greeks to elevate their own actions say, by 
Herodote
 with more Ostentation than truth that the Inhabitants of the Euxine Sea held for cer∣tain


that the Atlantick had communication with the Red or 
Arabian
 Sea, and they also affirm, that it is writ in the Annals of 
Egypt,
 that one of their Kings named 
Necus,
 caused certain Phoenicians to set out upon a coasting Voyage, who sailing from the Red Sea, ran through the Ocean, passing by the Pillars of 
Hercules▪
 and so come back to 
Egypt,
 which Voyage he saith they made in two years. The same Greeks likewise report that in the time of 
Xerxes
 a certain Captain named 
Sataspes
 doubled the Cape of 
Good Hope,
 and so returned into 
Egypt
 by the Straight of 
Cadize.
 And 
Strabo
 writes upon the Faith of the Grammarian 
Aristonicus,
 that 
Menelaus
 did sail from 
Cadiz
 to the Indies. 
Pomponius Mela
 also affirmes that 
Eudoxus
 flying from 
Jatythius
 King of 
Alexan∣dria,
 sailed from the Arabian Gulph, till he came to 
Cadiz.
 This is the same, 
Pliny, Solin, Makian, Ar∣timedore, Zenophon, Lampsacene,
 and others write. But this is certain that at the time of our first Con∣quest and discoveries there was not any cognizance either in 
Europe
 or 
Africa
 of any such dangerous na∣vigations, and the 
Portugals
 affirm, that the People of 
Asia,
 whom they have likewise lately discovered, know no more thereof than the other, which doth not at all strengthen the Relations of the abovesaid Authors, but rather diminish them, if we believe the credit of what we have now alledged.


Jean Gonsalve Zaxoe
 Gentleman of the Bed-cham∣ber to Don 
Henry,
 was the principal Person served the Infant in his discoveries, about which he did em∣ploy the Revenues of the Order of 
Christ.
 This Gentleman was the first that King 
John
 made Knight at the taking of 
Centa,
 he served the Infant with


very good success in all his African expeditions, and 'tis held he was the first man which introduced the use of Artillery aboard Ships. Having the command of the Princes navy he passed the straights in search of some parts of 
Africa,
 in the Year, One Thousand Four Hundred, and Twenty, he had before in the Year, One Thousand, Four Hundred, and eighteen, discovered the Island of 
Porto Santo,
 upon which he was cast as he went in search of Cape 
Ba∣jador.


The fifteenth of 
March
 in the Year One Thousand Four Hundred, and Sixteen, 
Don Sancho
 (the youngest, Son of Don 
Fredinando
 King of 
Arragon
 and) great Master of the Order of 
Calatrava
 died in 
Castile,
 and left by his Testament considerable sums of Mo∣ney to redeem Christian Spanish slaves in 
Morocco,
 with which Money a Foist was sent to 
Africa,
 and and was returning thence for 
Tariff
 with some num∣ber of redeemed Christians, amongst which was our 
Jean de Morales,
 At that time was 
Gonsalve
 cruising in the Straights with his Masters Fleet, and whereas the Differences betwixt the two Crowns of 
Portugal
 and 
Castile
 were not yet so fully reconciled but that there remained some misunderstandings between them. This made the Subjects of each King as they found themselves stronger, to plunder the wea∣ker, as they met one another at Sea, and 
Gonsalve
 discovering the Foist, wherein were the redeemed Captives, sent after her some light Vessels, who after a small Chase came up with her, boarded, and with∣out resistance took her; 
Gonsalve
 seeing the misery of those whom he had now made Prisoners and know∣ing the Clemency of his Prince, gave them all their li∣berty


except 
Jean de Morales,
 because it had been told him he was a man of great experience in Mar∣time affairs, thinking him a fit present for Don 
Hen∣ry
 and that he would be very useful in the Discove∣ries the Prince was then a making▪ 
Jean de Morales,
 being informed of his new imprisonment and the cause for which he was detained, did not grieve, but on the contrary freely offered to serve the Infant and promised to endeavour to answer the Hopes they had done him the honour to conceive of him, and to ren∣der himself more gracious with 
Gonsalve,
 communi∣cated unto him some part of the secret of the New Island he intended to discover, and to gain the more Credit to his relation told him the History of 
Lionel
 and 
Arabella. Gonsalve
 no sooner understood this nar∣rative but he returned to 
Tarca Nalbal
 more rich in Hope than in the prizes during his Voyage, he had taken, being there arrived he told the Infant what a lucky rancounter he had met, presenting him 
Jean de Morales,
 giving to him an account of his profession and secrets. Don 
Henry
 received him with a great deal of kindness, and having heard what he could say conceived an extream impatience to execute an en∣terprise so agreeable to his nature. To his effect he resolved 
Gonsalve
 should go to 
Lisbon,
 where the King his Father, was to communicate to his Majesty, what he knew in the premises, and the better to con∣tent the King, and satisfie his Ministers, he sent with him 
Jean de Morales,
 to the end he might answer all Objections which might be made by those who hav∣ing neither mind nor courage to undertake such Actions are accustomed to thwart them, who are the propounders by alledging the difficulties, and im∣possibilities


such discoveries bring along with them, thereb y endeavouring to perswade others, that things of this nature will never be attained un∣less they appear extream feasible.


Whilst 
Gonfalve
 was on his journey to Court, ac∣companied with the Captains 
Jean Laurence, Fran∣ces Carvalail, Ruy Paes, Alvare Alfons,
 and 
Francis de Alcafarano
 (who writ this History) and also with two other Gentlemen very skilful in Navigation, called 
Antony Gags,
 and 
Laurence Gomoz▪
 Don 
Henry
 gave order to equipy a Fleet to follow this discove∣ry. which he resolved, in case the King denyed him assistance, himself to prosecute.


The favourable reception, which the King made 
Gonsalue
 and the Pilot, occasioned by the great ad∣vantage and the smallness of the risque and charge, which the Infant propounded as sufficient for the en∣terprise, were not sufficient motives to some States∣men to forward the business, but on the contrary envying the grandeur of the Infant, did what lay in their power to obstruct the design.


Though 
Gonsalve
 was received with a great deal of honour at 
Lisbon,
 yet the King making no haste in the affair, he gave the Infant notice of the great impediments his pretensions met with, and what pains he was at to perswade those Ministers to receive the treasures he freely offered the King, and that the difficulty was made greater, because it was ap∣prehended he would convert them to his particular advantage. On this advice, the Prince being reso∣lute not to leave the discovery, came himself to Court, where he was no sooner arrived, but he re∣moved all obstructions, which hindred the Expedi∣tion;


so that in the beginning of 
June
 in the year 1420, 
Gonsalve
 was set to set to Sea with one Ship very well equippied, and another Vessel, which row∣ed with Oars, with which on such occasions they us∣ed to serve themselves. So inconsiderable was the Fleet which parted from 
Lisbon,
 for a discovery of so great importance.


There ran a rumour among the 
Portugals,
 that off the Island 
Porto Santo
 (to which place 
Gonsalve
 in∣tended first to steer) towards the North-east there usually appeared a perpetual obscurity, which al∣wayes extended it self from the Sea to the Sky, and never diminished, but alwayes did appear in the very same manner, this every one knew to be true that lived in 
Porto Santo,
 and because in that infan∣cy of Navigation, they wanted the use of the 
Astro∣labe,
 and other instruments since invented, it was judged miraculous, if not impossible to go and re∣turn from that black place or Cloud, but that they, who should venture, must of necessity for their bold∣ness lose their lives. This ignorance of the Sea and its secrets was the cause, that this obscurity was ge∣nerally called an Abyss. Some said it was the mouth of Hell, and were upheld in their opinions by Di∣vines, as simple as themselves, who offered to prove both by Argument and Authorities, that it might very well be so. The Historian who pretend to be more knowing than the others, did esteem it to be the Island anciently called 
Cipango,
 which God had wonderfully hidden in the Clouds to protect the Spanish and Portugueze Bishops and Christians, who had retired themselves thither, out of the persecu∣tion of the Moors and Saracens. And that it was di∣rectly


contrary to God's pleasure to endeavour a clearer discovery, for if he had pleased to have it performed he would have manifested his approbati∣on by such miracles as usually precede his allowance, and that besides divers such ancient Prophecies under severe penalties, forbid the further search into this Mistery.


Gonsalve
 sailed towards the Isle of 
Porto Santo
 in very fair weather, and proper for his voyage; but fearing in the dark he might pass something wor∣thy of note, he made them every night lower their Sails, and lie at Hull, proceeding onely in the day, that he might the better see any land they should ac∣cidently discover. This was no such hindrance un∣to him, but that in a little time he arrived at 
Porto Santo;
 where he and the rest of his company were shewed the black Cloud beforementioned (which 
Jean de Morales
 judged to be the beginning of that Land they saught after.


Here they held a Counsel, and resolved to stay in the Isle that quarter of the Moon to see if that cloud of Darkness did either vary its shape or diminish its bigness, but it alwayes continuing in the same form and magnitude gave them a great deal more cause to dispair, than hope for a good effect.


The Pilot 
Jean de Morales
 was of opinion by the information he had received from the English, and the course he had made them steer, that the Island he saught after was not far from thence, and told 
Gon∣salve
 that the rayes of the Sun lying very hot on the Earth, and drawing thence the humidity (of which there was a great quantity, by reason of the multipli∣city of Trees) made a gross vapour to ascend, which


filling the Skie with its foggyness was the reason of the obscurity they saw, and that he was confident by these tokens, the Land they so much coveted to dis∣cover, was not far from that place.


All of them were of a contrary opinion to 
Morales
 and tumultuously cryed, how that he being a Casti∣lian, and by consequence an Enemy, was very well pleased to see their Nation exposed to evident dan∣gers, that it was enough for men to encounter men, without commencing a war against the Elements, that it became only Heathens and Infidels to pene∣trate into the secrets of God, that they were to ex∣pect nothing but death from that cloud, and that to proceed further was only to dare the Almighty, that the Infant was ill served to have his Servants ex∣posed to such unprofitable dangers, but the King was worse used in regard they were his most faithful Subjects, who might serve him in more feisible un∣dertakings, than to search after a supposed Land on no other ground than the Pilots vain imaginations.


They farther argued that 
Gonsalve
 was a Nobleman of great merit, he might expect large recompences from his own deserts without precipitating himself and them into such certainty of peril; that valour was never shewn in pushing forward despair, that it was no charity under pretence of Religion to find out people and seize on their Countries, whereby they shewed themselves rather covetous of their own than God's glory, but that they ought to be con∣tent with those Lands they already possessed, and finally affirmed they were but men, and therefore would not undergo what seemed to be above Mor∣tals strength.



All these clamours did not stagger their Comman∣ders resolution, he therefore for the present gave them good words, resolving (because he was of greater courage than all of them) to surmount the difficulties, which now seemed greater, by reason of the averseness of these men, and communicating his thoughts only to 
Jean de Morales,
 he hoisted his sails, and weighed anchor, steering his course directly towards the Bug-bear shadow, making all the sail his Vessels could bear, by that means the sooner to obtain the Land he hoped to find. The nearness of the obscurity did augment their fears, it appearing higher and bigger as they nearer approached to it. About mid day the Sea seemed altogether darkned, an unusual blackness filling the whole horizon, nei∣ther was there any sign of Land, for the gross cloud, into which they where now entered, covered both Sea and Skie. This was the cause of a strange con∣fusion, and the vicinity of their supposed danger, made them all cry out and earnestly entreat 
Gonsalve
 that he would not proceed, which if he did, they looked upon themselves as dead men, beseeching him not to be the destruction of so many innocents.


Their outcryes did not at all startle their Captain, but calling together the Officers, Mariners, and Soul∣diers, and placing himself to be heard by them all, more to justifie his constancy, than satisfie their de∣sires, he made them this Oration.


Do you think, my Friends, and Comrades, that I e∣steem my life less than you do yours, if not, none cer∣tainly ever went about to perswade you, that if you mis∣carry I have any means to save my self; that indeed would be the greatest injustice in the World, that I


should reap the Glory, and you the Hazards of this en¦terprise, but equally we are to participate in both, if therefore I at present appear more hardy then suits with your content. It is because I highly esteem you, for I am insinitely glad you understand what perils you ex∣pose your selves unto, that it may hereafter be fam∣ed, you deliberately and of purpose, not by chance, did confront these more than humane dangers, I do not therefore at all wonder at your fears, but I do not by a∣ny means approve of the way, you would put in executi∣on to remove them, with what justice can you pretend, to more glory than other Nations, if you do not thus ex∣pose your lives, if you follow but the footsteps of your noble Ancestors, you may trace them in such adventures as we are now a making. For what reason did we come from our Countrey? for what reason did our Master send us hither? wherefore among thousands, which ten∣dred themselves for this employment, did he make choice of us? wherefore doth he shew himself a father to our Families? wherefore doth he take so kindly our Devoir? 'tis not surely that we should do our business by halfs, or leave off our adventures, before finished: Consider, that as there is but one life, so there is but one death, and it is neither without reason, that you should fear the Elements more than men for twice, by either of them, you cannot dy. If you do not refuse to hazard your lives against the Enemies of your King, what is it that you dread in the wind or water, do you think a wave or a gust of wind, more cruel then the Sword or Lance of an Enemy, is not the peril the same you meet with, in any rancounter, seeing you cannot but once receive your deaths. Think upon that grounds we are entered into the service of our King and Prince, is it


not to make discovery of unknown Provinces, which your courages are to conquer and lay at their feet, this ought not to be abandoned by your disobedience and fear, especially being commanded on this Voyage, by their immediate orders. Truely, Friends, 'tis more scandalous to return home, and dy with shame at 
Lisbon
 then unhappily perish in the Sea, if so ill fortune should attend as. Let us bravely then undergo this risque, for be you certainly assured, when once our resolutions are fixed to proceed, we shall find all things as easie as we can wish. The Night is never more dark, then when day approaches; the strange consternation we are now in, is the greater sign our lock'd for good fortune, draws near: Couragiously, Friends, examine the cause of your temerity, reason will soon inform you, the Cloud which is the cause, is but a shadow, if both nature and for∣tune did expose us, I would be the first should take the care of our lives, but seeing we have nothing but our foolish fancies to fear, which is misbecoming valiant men to dread, let us in the Name of God proceed.


This discourse worked so powerfully, on those to whom it was addressed, that it made all their fears vanish and composed their minds so firmly, that un∣animously they protested 
Gonsalve
 should not only govern them as their Chief, but command them as absolute Master of their Lives, and Liberties, they resolving to obey him blindly, and without dispute in all things,


Though the weather was fair, yet the Sea, being extream rapid, the current carried the Vessels con∣trary to their Course, to prevent which 
Gonsalve
 fitted out two Shallops to tow them committing, one


to the Care of 
Anthony Gago,
 and the other to 
Gonsalve Lovis,
 Men of Known Valour and Expe∣rience, they rowed directly towards the cloud which they approached nearer and nearer, as the Current permitted them.


The Voyage continuing for some time in this man∣ner, the Cloud, into which they where now entred, seemed to lessen and decrease towards the East, but the waters made a terrible noise, notwithstanding they passed the obscurity, and having so done (a Cloud, which hung on the Earth, hindring their clearer prospect) they thought they discovered land, and saw many armed men of a prodigeous bigness thereon. But they after found, that the Shore be∣ing full of high Rocks was the occasion of their mi∣stake. The Air presently clearing, and the Sun shi∣ning out, they plainly made the Land. This happi∣ness they received with the greater joy, because not by them expected; The first place presented it self to their view was a high point of Land, to which 
Gon∣salve
 gave the name of Cape St. 
Laurence.


Which point having doubled, they saw a brave and fertile Country, full of fair and high Trees, which in Woods and Groves extended themselves from the Mountains through the Valleys, to the ve∣ry Sea-side. The Cloud was now so far retired, as it seemed only to crown the heads of the Mountains. This pleasant sight gave the minds of our Voyagers a great deal of content, the dangers and hazards they had formerly mutined about being now forgot they imbraced one another with joy, rendring thanks first to God, and then to their Commander by whose encouragement and perswasion, they were now


come to so glorious an end of their labours, highly praising their Pilot, who had so successefully conduct¦ed them, Sailing on they saw a large Bay, which 
Jean de Morales
 judging to be the place, where the English had formerly resided, came there to an An∣chor. Some were instantly preparing to go a shore, but the Sun, being then set, 'twas thought fit to de∣fer it till the morning. 
Gonsalve
 commanded a good Watch to be kept that night, because sleep is a Rock, and the more dangerous, because no Pilot finds it in his Sea charts.


The day following 
Ruy Paes
 by order of 
Gonsalve
 made himself ready to go a shore, which he did (in one of the rowing shallops beforementioned) with a well armed company of souldiers, he landed on the the very same place 
Lionel
 before had done, and by certain tokens 
Jean de Morales
 had given him, found with much satisfaction the footsteps of the English, and divers trees notched with a hatchet, which he knew to be infallible signs of men having been there, passing thence into the Forrest he saw the great Tree, and coming nearer perceived the Cross, and read the Epitaph of out Lovers, which absolutely confirmed the Pilots relations. This spectacle caused a great deal of compassion in 
Ruy Paes,
 and his Companions, ma∣king them shed some tears, thereby confirming what long since 
Seneca
 wrote, that 
Pity is the first de∣gree of Kindness among men.


After these recognizances the same day they re∣turned to 
Jean Gonsalve,
 and assured him that they had met with all things, as 
Jean de Morales
 had be∣fore related, upon which knowledge he disposed himself to disembarque, which he did with all the


precaution and solemnity imaginable, taking pos∣session of the place, for and in the Name of Don 
John
 King of 
Portugal,
 and of the Infant Don 
Henry
 Master of the Order and Knight of Christ, the water was blessed by two religious, and with it the Air and Earth cleansed by calling on the name of God. An Altar was also erected, and Mass said where 
Lionel
 and 
Arabella
 lay buried. This Ceremony was per∣formed on the Feast day of Saint 
Elizabeth.


Now, because 
Gonsalve
 would not omit any thing whereby he might attain the perfect knowledge of the place, he commanded his people to make the Tower of the whole, and strictly search Hills, Dales, and Woods to see if they could discover ei∣ther man or beast, commanding them if they found any they should bring them a live or dead: But they who were sent on this errand found no living creature, but divers Birds of differing sorts, shapes, and colours, who suffered themselves to be taken by the hand without any pain or trouble.


Jean Gonsalve,
 esteeming himself rich in so easie a purchase, returned aboard, where calling the chief∣est of his Men to counsel, it was resolved they should not part from thence without a more particular examining the place▪ which they had then leasure enough to do: Now because the shore was full of Rocks, which did not in many places shew themselves above the water, 'twas thought convenient to make further discovery in their Shallops, as they had alrea∣dy begun; than in their grearer Vessels, for fear some of the Currents might force them on the Rocks. So 
Gonsalve
 taking the Shallop of his own Vessel, and committing the charge of the other to Captain



Alvare Alfons,
 they passed the point which was to∣wards the West, seeing four fair Rivulets run into the Sea, the water of which being extream clear and good, 
Gonsalve
 caused some bottles to be filled to carry to the Infant.


Passing still on they saw another Valley, which was likewise watered with a dainty Rivulet, here they they landed some Souldiers, who found no∣thing, but a great many Fountains, and a huge grove of Trees, which grew together in form of an Arbor, on of the biggest whereof 
Gonsalve
 took and made a great Cross of, since which this place is called 
Holy Cross,
 sailing on they weathered a point of Land ex∣tending it self farther than ordinary into the Sea, memorable for the many large Birds, the multitude of whom was so great, that the men in the Shal∣lop was fearful of being devoured by them, they therefore called this place 
Punt a dos Gralhos,
 a little further was another Valley full of Cedar Trees, which made a goodly shew. On an adjacent Hill there grew one much higher than the rest, which Na∣ture seemed to have set there for a Beacon.


From this Valley of Cedars they came to another, where was a spatious Lake, which forming it self by the Sea-side into a large Bason or Pond, promised something extraordinary; 
Gonsalve Ayvez
 was there∣fore with a good number of Souldiers ordered to go a shore; who, having by the Valley ascended the Mountain, returned without any further knowledge then that by the Valley they could discover the place from whence they first set out, and thereby knew it to be an Island, and no part of 
Africa,
 as many of them had before conjectured.




Gonslave
 however not yet content, but still ima∣gining there might be yet some Inhabitants, ordered his people daily to go from place to place, to see if they could make any further discoveries, by this means they found a very fair and large plain free from Trees (which covered in a manner all other places) and onely over-grown with most beautiful Fennel, called in Portugueze 
Funchal,
 upon this Place afterwards was founded a Town, to which was given the name of 
Funchal,
 heretofore the Me∣tropolis of the Eastern Islands as to Spiritualities, and still so as to temporalities.


The Portugueze more modest than other Nati∣ons, who vain-gloriously give great Names to their Plantations and discoveries; have alwayes been con∣tented either to continue the old names of their Co∣lonies, or if they gave them new appellations to bestow such on them, as were most agreeable to the nature of the Place, as for instance this famous City is called 
Funchal
 from the abundance of Fen∣nel there found growing, before ever the Town was built.


Three large Rivers, having their Randevouze in this Valley, just at disembouging themselves into the Sea, make two small Islands, which do in a man∣ner land lock the Haven, and secure the Port from the Wind and Sea, as if it were a Mole.


Notwithstanding the great peace and tranquillity 
Gonsalve
 found, yet would he not permit his people to be idle, but alway busied them in some employ∣ment or other, he himself still coasting the Country, came to a large Rock, which he called 
Praya Fermosa,
 or the Fair Rock, because of its greatness, and the


delicate water issuing thence, which gently break∣ing its waves against the stones made a sweet melo∣dy. Passing still on, they found between two points a furious Torrent, the waters whereof were so clear, that it oblidged the curiosity of them all to look thereon: In the company were two souldiers of 
Lagos,
 (for whom the General had a great esteem) these being very skilful in swimming resolved to pass the Torrent, but they were no sooner in, but in spight of all their resistance they found themselves carried down the stream by the strength and swiftness of the current, and had undoubtedly there been drowned, had not their Companions succoured them. This adventure gave the Torrent the name of 
Soccorides
 more happily than that of 
Agravados
 was given to the Arabian Sea, of which our Historians make men∣tion.


Being now come again to Cape St. 
Lawrence,
 by which ran a River, making the appearance of a Port, into it 
Gonsalve,
 with his Shallop entred, imagining he might there find somewhat more of moment than hitherto he had seen, because on the sand he thought he saw the traces of certain Animals, which search∣ing for, of a sudden, a great number Sea-wolves came rushing out of a hollow place, which they found at the bottom of a great Mountain, close by the Sea. This concavity served these Creatures, as a den to which they retired themselves, when they left the Sea. This being the most remarkable thing they found in the Island or their Voyage.


Gonsalve
 afterwards took the name, and Title of 
Comerados Lobos,
 as 
Scipio
 and 
Germanicus
 assumed theirs from the Provinces they conquered to the Ro∣man


Empire, this name and Title 
Gonsalve
's 
 own and are called by to this day.


The Night after, they had come into this place the Wind came so strong as it forced the very rivers back again, and made so hideous a tempest, as they were afraid, they should have lost their Vessels, and there∣by all the good success they had had in their new discovery, but it clearing up towards day, the Ge∣neral, for fear of such an after-clap, and having now seen all that he could desire, retired with his Ves∣sels close to the aforesaid small Isles or place of safe∣ty, and there he made provision of wood, water, birds, plants, and the Earth it self, not only for Sea accommodation, but also to present the King and In∣fant, which having done he embarqued all his peo∣ple, and set sail for 
Portugal,
 where he safely arrived in the end of the month of 
August
 in the same year one Thousand four Hundred and Twenty, he made no anchorage at 
Algarues
 but directly entered the River and Port of 
Lisbon
 (where he found his Master the Infant expecting him) having not lost one man in this Voyage, but having added to his Majesties Dominions the best Island in the Oriental Ocean.


The King and Infant, received 
Gonsalve,
 with a great deal of Joy, and made him a welcome propor∣tionable to the service he had rendred them, for the which, having given publick thanks to God for his mercies, in giving them leave to discover new Seas and Lands, wherein to glorifie his most holy Name, they thought it convenient that the relation of the Voyage of 
Jean Gonsalve Zarco,
 should be made in a publick Audience, and therefore invited all the Embassadors and Ministers of forreign Princes to


hear the relation of what he did so highly esteem.


Which day of audience being come the King▪ Roy∣al Family▪ Grandees of the Kingdome, Ambassadors, and forreign Ministers being present▪ 
Gonsalve
 was introduced into the Hall accompanied with the most considerable persons that were with him in his Voy∣age, when, having kissed his Majesties Hand, and paid the Infant what respects were due unto him, the King commanded 
Gonsalve
 to speak, he then made an exact accompt of his Navigation, and what befel him at 
Porto Santo,
 of the great fear had possessed his men on sight of the dark Cloud, notwithstanding which, and their Mutiny, how he perswaded them to go on their Voyage by informing them how much it imported the service of his most sacred Majesty, and how much detriment it would prove to the whole Nation, should they abandon it: In what manner afterwards they discovered the Island, he informed the King of the bigness, fertility, and situation there∣of, he also told the King the History of the English, of the solitude and plenty of the place to which the King without any meditation gave the name of 
MA∣DERA,
 by reason of the great quantity of Wood, 
Gonsalve
 had told him was growing thereon. He then presented the King and Infant, the Trunks of the Trees, the Birds, Water, and Earth, he had brought from thence. It was soon after resolved by his Majesty and Councel that the Spring follow∣ing, 
Gonsalve
 should return with a plantation to 
Madera,
 as Governour of the place: which together with Title of Count the Eldest of that Family hitherto enjoy.


This Voyage was began in the Month of 
May Anno



one thousand, four hundred, twenty and one, the King gave 
Gonsalve
 leave to take all the criminals and condemned persons throughout the whole Kingdome, but he would not accept of them, but took all manner of care to provide necessaries for his Voyage, which having done he parted from 
Lis∣bon
 with his Wife 
Constance Roderiquez de Sa
 (who was descended from the antient Family of 
Almeyda) Jean Gonsalve
 his Heir, and 
Hellen,
 and 
Beatrix,
 his two Daughters. In few days he arrived at 
Madera,
 and having moored his Anchors in the place from whence the English first, and after he landed, in ho∣nour of 
Lionel Machin,
 who was the first discoverer he called that Harbor 
Porto Machico
 or 
Machino,
 which Name to this day it retains.


Gonsalve
 immediately began to lay the foundati∣on of a Church resolving that the first Edifice should be Dedicated to our Saviour Jesus Christ, as 
Lionel
 in his Epitaph had desired of the future Inhabitants of the Isle, and to be more just to his memory raised the structure over the grave where he and his Mistriss lay buried, and cutting down the great Tree he built there an Altar. Our unhappy Lovers bones having at length this honourable repository.


But the Town he thought more convenient to build in the aforesaid, Valley of 
Funchal,
 because near it were the two small Isles, with made so convenient a Harbor for shipping, and also allured thereunto by the beauty of the place, most proper for situation, such a small original had the Town of 
Funchal,
 which soon after became so illustrious, and in which the first Altar was erected in a Church dedicated by 
Gonsalve
 to God our Saviour, and the second commended to


the Patronage of Saint 
Catherine
 by 
Consiance
 his Lady; contrary to what 
Jean de Borros
 hath written, who supposeth the founding of two other Churches. This mistake makes me not credit what h e writes▪ that 
Gonsalve
 should set fire to the Woods, which lasted for seven years and could not be quenched so long as any trees were left to feed it, which hath since made fewel excessive scarce in the Island, for it appears plainly a fable since there is Wood and Trees still there in abundance, enough to boil Sugars to set awork one hundred and fifty Mills, for so many are now in the Isle, wherefore his relations seem fabulous and incredible.


After the death of Don 
John
 his Son and Succes∣sor, Don 
Duart,
 considering what great expences his Brother the Infant Don 
Henry
 had been at to dis∣cover and people the Isle of 
Madera,
 gave him the issues and profits thereof during life. This dona∣tion was made at 
Cintra
 the six and twentieth day of 
September,
 one thousand four hundred thirty and two: And also for the same Reasons, the King gave in perpetuity the Spiritual Jurisdiction thereof to the Order of Christ, which was afterwards confirm∣ed by King Don 
Alphonso,
 in the year one thousand four hundred thirty and nine.


As also to encourage such other of his Subjects, as should endeavour to deserve it: He gave 
Jean Gonsalve Zarco,
 and his descendants a Title of honor, and new Coat of Arms (now let it not seem strange that the Gentleman should alter his blazon, since the Kings of 
Portugal
 themselves have changed their Royal and ancient Arms, which were a Cross Argent in a Field Azure, to those which they now bear.)


The Escutcheon therefore his Sacred Majesty bestow∣ed on him▪ was a Castle Argent in a Field Sinople supported with two Sea-Wolves. And his Title of Honour. Marquess 
de Camara dos Lobos,
 from the Sea-Wolves we formerly mentioned, which Coat of Arms and Title, still belong to the Posterity of this our worthy Discoverer.


FINIS.









