Evangelical repentance unto salvation not to be repented of upon 2 Cor. 7, 10 ; and as most seasonable, Short considerations on that great context Hebr. 12, 26, "Yet once more I shake not only Earth, &c." : upon the solemn occasion of the late dreadful earthquake in Jamaica and the later monitory motion of the earth in London, and other parts of the nation and beyond the sea ; whereunto is adjoined a discourse on death-bed repentance, on Luc. 22, 39 / by T. Beverly.
Beverley, Thomas.
Approx. 526 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 163 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A27606




Wing B2148_PARTIAL_CANCELLED



Wing B2140_CANCELLED



ESTC R17858





ocm 13400671




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Evangelical repentance unto salvation not to be repented of upon 2 Cor. 7, 10 ; and as most seasonable, Short considerations on that great context Hebr. 12, 26, "Yet once more I shake not only Earth, &c." : upon the solemn occasion of the late dreadful earthquake in Jamaica and the later monitory motion of the earth in London, and other parts of the nation and beyond the sea ; whereunto is adjoined a discourse on death-bed repentance, on Luc. 22, 39 / by T. Beverly.
Beverley, Thomas.
[36], 160, [14], 114 p.   


London :


Printed by R. Smith for W. Miller ...,


1693.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Bible. --  N.T. --  Corinthians, 2nd, VII, 10 --  Criticism, interpretation, etc.
Bible. --  N.T. --  Hebrews XII, 26 --  Criticism, interpretation, etc.
Bible. --  N.T. --  Luke XXII, 39 --  Criticism, interpretation, etc.
Repentance --  Early works to 1800.
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






B2148_PARTIAL


R17858


13400671


99379
















Evangelical Repentance
 UNTO SALVATION Not to be Repented of, Upon 2 
Cor.
 7.10. And as most Seasonable; Short Considerations on that Great Context 
Hebr.
 12.26. 
Yet once more I shake not only Earth,
 &c. Upon the Solemn Occasion of the Late Dreadful 
Earthquake
 in 
Jamaica;
 and the Later Monito∣ry Motion of the Earth in 
London,
 and other Parts of the Nation, and beyond the Sea. Whereunto is Adjoined a DISCOURSE on 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 On 
Luc.
 22.39.

Now God commandeth every one every where to Repent. 
Acts xvii. 20.
 By 
T. Beverley.


London:
 Printed by 
R. Smith,
 for 
W. Miller
 at the 
Gilded Acorn
 in St. 
Paul
's Church-yard, where Gentlemen and others may be furnished with Bound Books of most Sorts, Acts of Parliament, Speeches, and other sorts of Discourses, and State-Matters; as also Books of Di∣vinity, Church-Government, Humanity, Sermons on most Occasions, 
&c.
 MDCXCIII.








Licensed and Entred According to ORDER.








THE Epistle Dedicatory TO THE 
KING
 and 
QƲEEN.


TO Their 
Majesties
 is most Humbly presented These Discourses of 
Repentance,
 exten∣ding to 
National Reformation,
 in order to the 
Kingdom of Christ.
 Into which are inserted Considerations upon the late 
Earthquake
 in 
Jamaica,
 and the later Motion of the Earth in 
Lon∣don,
 and other Parts in the Na∣tion,

 and beyond the Seas: And all this on greatest Right and Due. For who, as Religious Prin∣ces, are so concerned in Publick 
Reformation
 according to all the Precedents of Scripture? Who, as Protestant Princes, are Interest∣ed in the 
Kingdom of Christ?
 of which the 
Protestation
 against 
Papal
 and 
Antichristian Abo∣minations,
 and 
Usurpations,
 was a Preparation; even for that 
Kingdom of Christ;
 tho at the distance of 
180
 Years, styled in 
Prophecy, Half Time,
 near expi∣ring into the Succession of that 
Kingdom;
 when 
Reformed Princes,
 truly so, shall not lose, but highly gain in Glory; Who,

 as Good, and, indeed Gracious Princes, are so deeply affected in publick Judgments, unhappy Re∣volutions; or general Mercies and happy Revolutions; foreboded by 
Earthquakes
 or Gentle Moves of the Earth? For they are 
Nur∣sing Fathers
 and 
Nursing Mo∣thers
 of their People. And of what Princes can we hope or promise our selves better than of their so Ʋnited 
Majesties,
 Two-One in True Religion? As there∣fore the 
Supream Majesty
 was pleas'd to give particular Dire∣ctions to Themselves of those 
Tremblings
 of 
Earth;
 whether for Judgment and Repentance; or for Mercy; in their 
Port
 in

 
Jamaica;
 styl'd 
Royal;
 and in this their 
Capital City;
 and not only so, but peculiarly in the 
Camp Royal
 in 
Flanders;
 So All these Discourses upon All, are most Humbly and with profound Obeysance first laid at their 
Ma∣jesties
 Feet; as having the first National 
Episcopacy
 committed to them from God in Succession to 
Constantine
 the first Christian Prince; in much greater and tru∣er Right, than the 
Popes
 have their Primacy from 
Peter;
 or his 
Hierarchy
 their 
Episcopacy,
 from the 
Apostles;
 And next it is Presented to the National 
Episcopacy
 so Constituted by their 
Majesties;
 even as an 
Evan∣gelical

 Ministry,
 is, I hope, more immediately committed to them by Christ; wherein being near to Christ; as in their National 
Episcopacy
 to their 
Majesties;
 they can, and I doubt not, will Represent to them what is accor∣ding to his Gospel by this Mi∣nistration. For wherein have we in the History of Scripture found a greater Configuration of the happiness and stability of Times? than when 
David
's, and 
Na∣than
's; 
Jehosaphat
's, 
Micaiah
's, and 
Jehaziel
's; 
Joash
's and 
Iehoiadah
's; 
Zerubbabel
's, and 
Joshuah
's; 
Nehemiah
's and 
Ez∣ra
's have been conjoin'd! And in 
Church History,
 than when

 
Constantine
's and 
Athanasius
's; 
Theodose
's and 
Ambrose
's; the 
Protestant Princes
 and 
Luther
's 
&c.
 and in our Nation; than when such as K. 
Edw. VI.
 and 
Cranmer,
 &c. or Q. 
Eliz.
 & 
Jewel, &c.
 have been Ʋnited in 
Pub∣lick Reformation.
 And oh that at such a time as this, 
General Reformation
 by Both might be tinctur'd with the Knowledge of the 
Kingdom of Christ;
 when (by the 
Sure Word of Prophecy
 (deeply to be search'd,) it is so near; How great Honour would be return'd from hence! All which is most Humbly Prayed by


Their Majesties most Humble and Obedient Subject and Servant in the Kingdom of Christ,
 T. BEVERLY.








TO THE READER, BY A Friend of the Authors.


WE live in an Age, where∣in Names and Professi∣ons are many Thousands; and ten Thousands are distinguished thereby, every one saying, 
Lo, here is Christ,
 and 
Lo, there; that thou hast a Name, that thou livest,
 may be said to the National Church, and to all the Dissenting Churches a∣mong us; the 
Temple,
 the 
Tem∣ple,
 saith the one, and saith the o∣ther; yet may it not be said to the most of these Churches; 
But thou

 art dead, be watchful
 and 
strengthen the things, that re∣main, that are ready to Dye,
 Rev. 
3.2, 3, 4.
 God hath (I am per∣swaded) a 
few Names
 in all, and every the said Churches, 
who have not defiled their Garments,
 but do indeed repent, and turn to the Lord; who are born 
not of Flesh, nor of Blood, nor of the will of man, but of God;
 such to whom the 
kindness and love of God our Saviour hath appeared,
 not 
by works of Righteousness,
 which they 
have done,
 but according 
to his mercy
 he hath 
saved
 them by the 
washing of Regeneration,
 and 
renewing of the Holy Ghost;
 and for others, let them be of the lowest, or of the highest form, such that have made the first step to

 Reformation, or higher and greater steps thereto; they are but the leaves of the 
Fig Treee
 that is 
cursed
 of Christ, and shall 
soon wither a∣way:
 It is no matter what name you have (I would there were not any Name among us but Christian); It is the Nature and Power of Christiani∣ty: What is the Chaff to the Wheat? It is said in the Phrophesies of 
Isaiah
 and 
Micah,
 that the 
Mountain
 of the 
Lord's House
 shall be 
exalted to the top of the Mountains,
 and 
all Nations
 shall 
flow unto it;
 I do not think by 
Mountain
 in these places is meant any one particular Church, by what Name soever they be dignified or distinguished: But the true Living, Mistick and Catho∣lick Church; such, who having been in the Apostacy, with others, do Repent,

 and turn to the Lord; and that you may the better know them, you have these following Discourses to help you in so great a work; some Despise this great Grace, and stumble at this mighty work of God upon the Heart, as too high, too hard, and too difficult a work; but God hath his 
Fire in Zion,
 and his 
Furnace
 in 
Jerusa∣lem
 and he will 
throwly purge his Floor:
 There must be a 
cut∣ting off a right Hand, a pluck∣ing out a right Eye;
 and it is better 
going to Heaven
 with 
one Eye,
 and with 
one Hand, maimed
 and 
Halt,
 than 
to go to Hell with both.
 Others say, Repentance is a legal work, fit only for old Testa∣ment Saints; There is indeed a sor∣row, a rapentance that 
worketh Death;
 but the Repentance here

 called for, and exhorted to, is such, 
that is never to be Repented of;
 That which brings the Soul poor and naked, trembling, and melting to Christ, the Prince and Saviour, that gives Repentance to 
Israel,
 and For∣giveness of Sins; And blessed you: For ever Blessed are they, whose 
sins are forgiven, and whose Iniqui∣ties are pardoned;
 here are the Rivers of the 
Waters of Life,
 the Tree in the midst of the 
Paradice of God;
 Jesus Christ thus Revealed, and thus received, and heartily em∣braced, will put an end to all differen∣cies, debates and controversies; He that hath this 
Anointing
 from a∣bove; this 
well of Life springing up in him unto Everlasting Life;
 will not 
Bless
 himself in an 
Idol,
 nor be pleased with any pompous Wor∣ship,

 knowing the 
King's Daught∣er is all glorious within,
 and 
Cir∣cumcision
 is 
that of the Heart;
 he knows not, nor acknowledges any, as 
Lords, over God's Heritage;
 but is assured, That the 
Son of Man
 came not to be 
Minister'd
 to, but to 
Minister.
 The things contained herein are the 
true sayings of God,
 according to the Holy Scriptures, making the 
man of God perfect, throughly furnished to every good work;
 Did all men that have the worthy Name of Christian, profess, and practise, what is herein pressed to, and called for, we should see 
Jerusalem a quiet Habitati∣on, a sure Dwelling Place;
 for none shall then indeed harm us, if we are followers of that which is good: Here are plain Gospel Truths, that

 whosoever stumbles thereat, it is, be∣cause Christ is to him a 
stumbling stone,
 and 
rock of offence;
 and yet misterious and deep, that one can never find the bottom; a River that men may swim in: O Christian! when∣ever thou art so conversant in these things, let thy 
profiting appear to all men; let the Dead bury the Dead;
 but 
go thou and follow Christ,
 as soon as ever he calls thee; Never go to thy 
Father's House,
 and bid them there 
farewel;
 go to Christ, whensoever in the Gospel he calls thee, or speaks to thee by any private whispering; Go in all thy rags; say with the 
Prodigal,
 Tho I have spent all upon 
Harlots,
 and am Starving, having fed upon 
Husks; I know in my Father's House,
 there is 
Bread enough, and to

 spare,
 and here I perish with hun∣ger; 
I will arise, and go to my Father, and will say unto him, Father I have sinned against Heaven, and before thee; yet Take me into thy Family, tho I be but as one of thy Hired Servants:
 To whom the Father will say; Don't stand Doubting, come in, come in to my House, 
bring forth the best Robe and put it on him,
 &c. I think no∣thing too good for thee (my Son) now thou art returned, not a word what thou hast been, now thou art returned, I will receive thee; tho thou hast not a penny in thy Purse, nor any good quality in thee, but this thy coming back to me; Thou must starve if thou keep wandring from thy 
Father's House;
 If I

 don't feed thee, thou perishest; thou hast be-thought thy self at last, and art come home; stand not at the door any longer starving in the cold, and for hunger; Away, Away, with thy provious Dispositions, and good qualifications before coming Welcome, Welcome, come in, come in, do not stand at the door, I am glad thou art come; Who ever thought to have seen thee returning again? Bring hither the 
Fatted Calf,
 kill it, and eat, and be merry; How merry (sinner) canst thou be? And they now begin to be merry, yea, and all the Angels stand by, and re∣joyce: O! here is a Feast indeed. But this makes the 
Elder Bro∣ther,
 the 
proud Pharisee,
 to stand off 
powting
 and 
grum∣bling;
 And he will never more

 come into his Father's House; For he was never so kindly dealt with, yet never 
Trasgressed
 at any time, he was qualified, and deserved En∣tertainment, he had done many a good Work, he had bore the 
Bur∣then and Heat of the Day,
 and therefore expected to have received more than they that came at the 
Eleventh Houre;
 to whom God will say, 
Is thine Eye evil be∣cause mine is good?
 Let us then all be deligent to lay up for our selves 
a Treasure
 in 
Heaven;
 we see, or may see, All things here Perish 
with the using.
 This is a 
shaking time,
 God is now 
shak∣ing all Nations, and it is, that the desire of all Nations may come.
 He that Epistolizes this, is

 a Friend to the Author, and well ac∣quainted with his endeavours to press after, (and Witnessing for him, as well skilled in) the truth and the inside of Religion; That he is a man 
taught of God,
 and wishing well to all that are gone beyond him; and hoping the Lord will not 
despise the day of small things;
 knowing, 
the hum∣ble he will teach his way, and the meek he will guide in Judg∣ment.
 I have pressed the Author to permit these things to come to light, which at last is condescended to: If God bless it to they Edificati∣on, Conversion, Reformation, say, It is not 
in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in God that shews mercy;
 for neither is he 
that planteth any

 thing,
 nor he that 
watereth Any thing; but God that giveth the Increase; to him be glory, and praise for ever, and ever,
 Amen.








To the most Reverend, THE EPISCOPACY OF THE Church of 
ENGLAND.


I Do not arrogate to my self 
(Most Reverend in our Lord)
 in Present∣ing to your Hands this following Discourse, to offer you any thing but what you have before receiv'd from the most 
Excellent Master,
 and 
Teacher,
 the 
Holy Spirit,
 in the

 
Scriptures,
 and 
Word of God;
 Given by the 
Great High Priest,
 and 
Apostle of our Profession,
 that 
One Shepherd,
 the 
Chief Shepherd,
 and 
Bishop of our Souls, Christ Jesus;
 and what 
you your selves
 have often, I have greatest Rea∣son to hope, and believe, Dis∣cours'd, with clearest 
Evidence
 to the 
Understandings,
 and 
Convi∣ctions upon the Consciences
 of them, that heard you.


This notwithstanding I have very great Reasons, for ma∣king 
this Humblest Offerture
 to you.


1. That by discoursing and arguing a point so acknow∣ledgly Great, so Fundamental and Essential, not only to Chri∣stianity,

 but to Natural Religi∣on, and all Morality: If it shall be acceptable to you, as I can∣not but trust it will, because it is so agreeable to Scripture; I may reconcile my self to your more, not only Favour∣able, but Deep 
Consideration
 in 
so great Points
 of 
the sure Word of Prophecy,
 as I have hereto∣fore presented to you; and have made some Reference unto, in this very Doctrine of Repentance, as most Connatu∣ral to it.


For though I know there is a Difference between such a plain, and uncontestable Truth of Scripture, as Repentance is; and what lies in the darker

 Folds and Plaits of Scripture, in the 
Hieroglyphick Figures,
 and 
Prophetical Numbers
 of it; and it may seem therefore 
impossi∣ble,
 or 
highly improbable,
 that 
I especially
 should attain 
the Cer∣tainty of the Words of Truth,
 to 
answer
 and 
apologize the Words of Truth,
 in 
the great dependencies of Prophecy, to them that send to me for them.


But, as it is well urged a∣gainst the 
enemies of the Natu∣ral Religion,
 as well as 
Revealed;
 that though there cannot be 
Mathematical Demonstration
 of those 
Great Truths,
 as of 
Eu∣clid
's 
Propositions;
 yet there may be 
as Convictive Proofs,
 in their kind, and 
as satisfactory to

 true Understanding:
 Even so I affirm, that 
the Prophetick Ima∣ges, and Numbers,
 if they are 
attently eyed,
 and 
compared,
 may be as certainly Assur'd; and In∣tellectual 
enquiries
 even 
satia∣ted
 with 
the evidence
 of them; Though they are not under such Proofs, as the plain Do∣ctrines and Precepts of 
Scrip∣ture,
 yet by such a 
Probation,
 as is most proper to them, they are certain in their 
kind:
 As the 
proof
 of so plain a point in its kind, as 
Repentance
 is, is as cer∣tain in its kind, as the 
proof
 of 
Natural Religion,
 in its 
Kind;
 which is as certain, as a 
Mathe∣matick Proposition,
 in its kind: So sure is 
Prophecy:
 In the 
Good∣ness

 of our Creator,
 and 
Mediator;
 in 
giving, and sustaining
 our 
Faculties
 in the true use of themselves; so sure are 
each of these;
 and 
each of them,
 in their kind, as sure the one, as the other; even the 
Word of Prophecy,
 sure as any.


For as I have often said, e∣ven these 
Enigmatical parts of Scripture,
 are most 
certainly,
 as will be 
easily allowed,
 infallibly true in their own sense: They are therefore to be under∣stood; For so is all Truth: They are Revealed; and therefore it is intended by God, they 
should be understood.
 If to 
be understood,
 they may 
be known, they are truly understood,
 by the 
Consciousness to ones self
 of

 
the evidence
 of those 
Critierions,
 and 
Marks of Truth,
 most 
Con∣natural to them;
 that 
All Parts
 answer one to another; that they answer to what must be most 
apparently
 the 
main Scope and Intention
 of the 
whole;
 and that 
Historical Matter of Fact
 answers all along; which makes 
all certain;
 As he that hath 
a Key to a Cyphar,
 or to 
Hi∣story
 in 
Picture
 or 
Emblem, may be assur'd he hath it, when he
 Finds all agree, one part with ano∣ther; and the whole with what was reasonable to be expected, and supposed to be the 
Design.


And if any one should say, 
Why should this be Revealed to me

 so unworthy; so little prepared with all the Advantages of Learning and Books.


I do most humbly 
Acknow∣ledg
 the 
Dint
 of this 
Prejudice;
 and can only 
Answer,
 as I have done 
: So it pleased him, and to 
humble
 me to lowest 
Abasement
 (How∣ever I most 
humbly Confess
 wholly by my own 
sin,
 and 
guilt
) as in a solitary 
Patmos
 for it; And I cannot but 
hope,
 now I look upon my 
Testi∣mony
 as near 
Finished,
 and that things are just now upon their 
Complement,
 he may be pleas'd also to 
Disconfine
 me when his 
Witnesses
 are so near, 
Comming out of their

 Sackcloth,
 and that I shall in their 
Rising,
 rise out of this 
Civil Death:
 But 
not my will, but his will be done.


I have therefore, I say, up∣on the whole, presented this 
Discourse,
 as upon one 
Rea∣son;
 that by it you may look upon my other 
Treatises,
 as not the 
Performances
 of a 
Fana∣tick
 or 
Phantastick;
 or one that would 
 but 
. Much less, 
, or 
what is Written,
 but to 
speak forth the words of Soberness and Truth,
 as well in the one, as the other.


2. That from the 
Conjuncti∣on
 of the one part with the o∣ther, the 
Prophetick
 with the

 
Doctrinal,
 you may be, (as however I 
Hope;
 and am 
Per∣swaded
 you are) more 
excited,
 and may move more 
Vigorous∣ly
 and 
Zealously
 in the Promot∣ing 
National Repentance
 and 
Re∣formation;
 as I have also in the 
Inferences
 of the 
discourse, press'd;
 seeing therein is most certain∣ly the greatest 
Magnification
 of your 
National Office,
 or 
Episco∣pacy;
 that as having greatest nearness to the 
Affairs,
 and 
Per∣sons,
 that are at the 
Top;
 and who, as Springs, move what is below them; you do therein 
 
minister
 in 
Offering them up to God;
 For not 
Worldly Gran∣dieur,
 nor any of the 
Cathedra∣lities
 of your State, nor an

 
Animal
 or 
Sensitive,
 (however not 
Sensual) Hospitality
 will 
sustain
 you; but this is the best 
Account
 that can be given of such 
a Pre-eminence;
 when it is indeed of 
National Superi∣ority
 in an 
Elijah
 Like Fervor, and Influence for 
National Reformation;
 seeing it is certain in an 
Union
 in 
true Religion; a National Episcopacy
 Devoted to its 
true ends,
 tho in it self but Civil, may be service∣able to 
National Godliness.


Hereon I have set my Foot in this 
Dedication
 to you, and 
Acknowledgment
 of you; that if you are indeed for, and with God in your 
Pre-lations;
 you will be 
Blessed,
 not only with

 
Good Wishes, and Endeavours,
 but with 
happy Successes;
 not only in 
Word,
 but in 
Power,
 in such your 
Character
 and 
Sta∣tion.
 For all 
Wise and Good Mens Eyes are now upon you,
 to know not your 
Names
 or 
Titles,
 or 
Speech,
 but your 
Power
 in 
Ho∣ly Influences
 upon the 
Nation
 from you.


But the very 
want of Blessing
 from 
Heaven
 and 
Success therein,
 and to find that 
National Vices,
 and 
Irreligion surmount your Sphere, and grow up above it to Heaven,
 is 
reason
 for 
great Humiliation,
 and even 
Jealousy
 over your 
Constitu∣tion;
 tho without 
your guilt.


But this will bear you in so 
great a Revolution,
 so near, as

 I 
declare
 to you. For even as that 
Building,
 call'd 
Pauls,
 that is 
rising so Sumptuous,
 e're it 
climb
 to its 
top,
 shall only 
stand,
 if it can be any way 
Serviceable
 in that 
Kingdom's Succession
 so nigh; so it 
may be supported;
 else 
its goodly Stones
 and 
Building
 will not, at least, to such 
an use,
 as 
Cathedral only, be one Stone left up∣on another,
 with how 
magnificent a Zeal
 soever it be 
carried on:
 It is 
begun too late
 to such a 
pur∣pose, if it be so intended:
 Even so a 
National Episcopacy
 suffer∣ing the 
Loss
 of all that is but 
Hay and Stubble in it,
 as by 
Fire,
 may yet be 
Sav'd,
 or 
Continue
 in its 
National Presidency,
 if it can be 
found
 as such, 
Service∣able


 for 
Offering
 up whole 
Na∣tions
 more speedily to 
God,
 and 
Christ;
 else it will 
vanish away as Froth,
 and 
empty Bubbles;
 For let us all be sure, 
the Kingdom of God is coming upon us,
 which is not 
Word
 but 
Power;
 Although therefore, you 
do not smite the men-servants, or Maid-servants, or eat and drink with the Drunken;
 Yet I humbly beseech you to 
take heed, that as Wise,
 and 
good Stewards
 set over the 
Houshold,
 you give 
diligently that portion of Meat in due Season,
 all the most 
efficacious Perswa∣sions, and Influences for Repentance,
 and even 
National Reformation.


And herein what can be so mighty to 
perswade,
 as if with

 
United Applications to it,
 You would 
search,
 and 
encourage
 all 
that do search,
 and hold out 
that sure Word of Prophecy; that hath shone so long,
 and yet 
shines in the Dark place of this Apostacy,
 till the very 
day dawn, and the day Star arise;
 Because I most 
Hum∣bly Assure
 you in the 
Name of the Great Master of the Family, he will no longer delay his Coming,
 but he is 
very near at hand.
 I hope 
Providence
 hath 
Introduced
 you to such 
a purpose; and as I humbly hope, this Doctrine
 of 
Repentance
 is presented to your Hands, to∣gether with so many Discour∣ses, 
that the Kingdom of Heaven is nigh at Hand;
 that upon that very 
Consideration
 you may be

 most 
Zealous
 in it: So I earnest∣ly Pray, you may be 
Blessed
 in your 
Lord finding you so doing:
 Verily, I say unto you, 
he shall make you greater
 Rulers 
in a truly
 Evangelical Sense, 
than now you are: And as to the black and dark side I make no mention of it; be∣cause I am
 perswaded better things of you, 
and such as
 Ac∣company 
the
 Salvation, 
and
 Glory 
of that
 Kingdom.


Herein I am Your most Humble and Affectionate Orator,
 T. BEVERLEY.












A Discourse upon Evangelical Re∣pentance to Salvation, not to be Repented of, and the Godly Sor∣row working it.




2 Cor. 7.10.
 For Godly Sorrow worketh Repentance to Salvation not to be Repented of, but the Sorrow of the World worketh Death.




THERE is no more Universal Notion in the Soul of Man in those Things, wherein he hath to do with God, or even with Man, or with Himself, then to Repent; that is, to be sorry for what he hath done Amiss, and wherein he hath Offended: and to Resolve, and Promise to Amend, and to do the Evil he hath done, no more; It is fitted as a great Instrument of Reconciliation, and a second state of Innocency; a Reserve after the Ruin and Shipwrack of our First Innocency, a Remedy, a Reparation after, the first Advantages of doing well, are lost; And it is the infinite Grace of God in a

 Mediator, that there is such a Notion in the World; It preserves it from being a Hell in regard either of the extremity, and utmost Rages of Wickedness; or of the Horrors, and Fury of Despair. It is the infinite Grace of God in a Redeemer, That there is a 
Place of Repentance,
 as the Apostle calls it, 
Heb.
 12. that is, place, and room for it in mans Heart, and that there is place for it in the Acceptance of God; that God does not scorn, and utterly reject it, against him, that hath once sinned; That he is not inexorable, and not to be intreated concerning it; For how woful, and even Hellishly Miserable would man be without it? That the Nature of Man is inclin'd to offer, and accept such Repen∣tance, one towards another, and so, that there are mutual Forgivenesses among men, and not unap∣peasable hatreds; and that there is in a mans own Conscience a preparedness to acquiesce, to be satis∣fied, to Rest, and to be Appeased upon finding in the Soul, and Action, a sorrow for sin, and Refor∣mation from it: All this keeps the World from be∣ing absolutely Hell.


For Sorrow, Dislike, Trouble, Remorse, for what a Man hath done evil, move a man to review, to acknowledgment, to bewailing, to confession, to change, and reformation, to a new course of Life, and Action.


Seeing then Man is such a fallen, such a Peccant, and offending Nature; it is infinite grace in God, that there is such a Notion, such Action in mans Soul, as Repentance; and that there is not an utter irreconcilableness, an unpardonableness after Offense committed: neither in Heaven nor on Earth; not in the Court of Heaven, nor in the Court of Human

 Nature one towards another; nor in the Court of a mans Conscience within himself. If it were not so, every sin would be like the 
Blasphemy against the Holy Spirit,
 Matt. 12. Unpardonable; and be∣cause Unpardonable, Impenitable, 
or not to be Re∣pented of;
 and that 
not only in this World,
 but in 
that which is to come;
 the World would become a Theater of sin, and damnation; even a Hell, without any Chancery, any Appeal to Grace, to Mercy; or Relenting of Repentance from the hopes of Mercy, the reverence and awes of Goodness, and Forgive∣ness.


Now that which lies loose and scattered, or dis∣seminated, sown through the whole human Creati∣on; That, the word of God, especially in the Gos∣pel, in the 
New Testament;
 that the Spirit of God hath collected into a more full, and solemn Doct∣rine, and open'd the Foundation, and laid bare, and in view the root, or the great place of it; How it hath room, and reception; what are the Sources, springs of Efficacy, from which it Rises: even in the Sacrifice, Blood, and Redemption of Christ; and the mighly Efficacy, and Grace of the Divine Spirit; what is that 
godly sorrow,
 which is given by God, as the 
Elaboratory
 or the Instrument of God for the Operation of it; what are the Laws and Rules of it; the true form and constitution of it; what are the motives, and inward considerations mooving to it; what are the signs, and evidences of its Truth; what is the proper time, and space for it; It resolves the Scruples or Cases of Con∣science, that may arise in the Soul of Man concern∣ing it; it shews the great Fruit, certain Benefit, and Advantage of it.




And all these are either most innately residing or some way reducible to this great, and excellent Context of the Apostle; in which regard I have chosen it, and shall endeavour to bring Light ac∣cordingly to it; and according to these heads, I will by the grace of God endeavour to Discourse it.


1. In regard it is 
Repentance to Salvation,
 and that 
Salvation is no other, but in Christ alone,
 Acts 4.12. it plainly shews, That the whole 
Redemption
 and 
Salvation
 of 
Christ,
 is the proper Basis, and Foun∣dation of it; the whole 
Area,
 Court, Space and most 
proper place
 of it; and that the whole Notion and Spirit of it, as any way Commensurate to, or extended upon the whole human Nature, hath its Rise, and Original; flows from some Communicati∣on to the human Nature from Jesus Christ, the Re∣deemer; and that yet the word of God and his Gospel only Reveals it fully and genuinely; and his spirit is the supreme Operator of it.


2. Here is plainly laid down to us the Elabora∣tory, or Instrument God hath prepared in infinite Wisdom, and Grace, and inlay'd the Soul with, in order to Repentance. First, as it is a Natural Af∣fection subservient to it; and then as it is Sanctified by God to so great an end. 
Godly sorrow,
 or 
sorrow after,
 and 
according to God worketh down Repentance,
 or brings it forth; a sorrow opposed to the 
sorrow
 of 
the World,
 that 
worketh Death.


3. In that it is, 1. 
Repentance to Salvation,
 ef∣fectual to it.


2. 
Repentance
 not to be 
Repented of.




1. Not as a false counterfeit Repentance to be 
Repented of.


2. Always to be carried on, and promoted; and not recall'
, repeal'd, or revers'd, but confirm'd by progressive, repeated Acts, and renewed after Falls.


3. In that it is, to, or 
lays hold of Salvaetion.


4. In that it rises not from an earthly spring, or any 
sorrow,
 not 
after God.


In all these Regards, it yeilds just reason to Dis∣course the true Laws, and Rules; the Frame, and true constitution; the motives, means and conside∣rations for; the signs, and evidences of sincere Re∣pentance.


4. The admirable Fruit and Benefit of it is most visibly, and illustriously set forth before us in those words, 
It is Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of.


1. It is 
to Salvation;
 It is a great and certain se∣curity against Ruin, Damnation, Perishing for ever.


2. It shall not only be a security from Damnati∣on, but an assurance of a state of Life, Glory, Blessedness.


3. There shall never be the least cause to Repent, to look back with Sorrow, or Regret, that we have 
Repented.
 For we shall find, we have lost no good, we have run upon no evil, in having 
Repented.


4. It shall give us Reason of everlasting Joy, Rejoycing, Triumph, Blessing and Adoring God in Christ, we have so by his grace 
Repented to Sal∣vation.


5. I will Reduce to the Doctrin of Repentance the s
ruples, and Cases of Conscience that may arise concerning either the true Doctrinal State of it, or the grace of, or practise it self of repentance,




These are the heads, I Propose by Divine Grace, and Assistance, to Discourse the Doctrin, and grace of Repentance upon; but I find it is in the first place necessary to give some short descriptions of the thing, 
Repentance,
 according to the very impor∣tance of the word; and of the General Importance, and Nature of the Notion, or the thing it self.


The words us'd by the Spirit of God in the Old Testament, are either that strict word 
, a word that also signifies Consolating a mans self; shewing, after sin, and offense reflected upon, 
viz.
 with G
ief, and Trouble supposed; the greatest con∣solation is recovery of a mans self by 
Repentance:
 Or else, it is a word, that signifies 
Turning
 from what a man has b
en 
Turn'd
 and 
Posited,
 and set himself 
o before. On this Account we meet so often with the words of Turning in the Old Testament, and being Converted, and Turning in the New.


The most proper and strict words in the 
New Testament,
 are either an 
After Care,
 a Reflection with sorrow, and sollicitousness upon what a man hath done, with Trouble, He did so; and a care, a caution not to do so any more for the time to come; or an 
after-mind,
 an 
after-wit,
 an 
after un∣derstanding, a transmentation, a new Mind, a new Heart and Spirit.


To speak of it therefore in the general; Repen∣tance is given by God, as a mighty Spiritual Instru∣ment, or Engine in the hand of his Grace, in the 
Arm of God made Bare,
 by which the sinful Na∣ture, in every true Penitent, is unhing'd, uncen∣ter'd from sin, and corruption. It is a return of the Soul home to it self, after a Spiritual Phrensy, and Madness; The 
Prodigal
 is said 
to come to him∣self:


 It is a return to its 
Fathers House,
 after a long bewildred State; 
This my Son was lost, and is found.
 But beyond all this, it is a Spiritual Resurrection, a return from Death to Life; 
This my Son was Dead, and is A Live,
 Luke 15.


And indeed, as there is no notion of Scripure, that is more suited to express the corrupt Nature of Man, than Death; so the first Threat Ran, 
In the day thou eatest thereof,
 
thou shalt dye the Deatb. Death hy sin passed upon all. Dead in Trespasses,
 
and sins. Ʋniversal Death.
 And so in the 
Levitical Law,
 there was no greater 
uncleanness
 than the 
Touch of a Dead Body.
 Accordingly when the Apostle, 
Heb.
 6. names Repen∣tance among the grand Fundamentals, or, 
Principles of the Doctrin of Christ,
 He calls it 
Repentance from Dead Works,
 or Re-enstating the Soul in Life after sin, or Works, as Unclean, and Loa
hsome, as a Dead Body removed from the sight of the Living. Or as a Dead Body was in the Eye of God under the 
Levitical Law.


This is the general Notion of Repentance; but it may be further Explain'd in these three Particu∣lars, and yet in a general way.


1. Repentance is an inward, sincere, habitual Change of the Heart, and of the design, and pur∣pose; and so of the outward Action, and Course of Life, and Conduct of a mans ways; arising from an utter dislike of his, former Counsel, Purpose and Design, and the course of Conversation, Life, and Action proceeding from it; so that it becomes wholly New: This is the generel Nature of Re∣pentance,

 as it looks to the government of a mans self, and of his Actions: Now this in Scripture, and Evangelical Repentance is the change from sin to Holiness, from a worldly state, and conversation to an Heavenly; and from the Creature, to God, and to Christ; an utter dislike of, and trouble at the former Regiment, and steerage of a mans course, so as utterly to forsake it; and with sorrow, shame, and astonishment, to say to his sinful ways, so con∣trary to the Rules of Holiness, Righteousness, and Purity, 
Get ye hence, and what have I to do any more with you?
 I will now guide my self by the word of my God, and hate every false way, 
Psal.
 119. This is that, o
 which Scripture is full every where; the 
through amending she ways, and doings, which were not good;
 the wicked man 
forsaketh
 his way, and the unrighteous man his thoughts, and 
returns to the Lord;
 
Christ blesses in Turning us every one from our Iniquities. Cleanse your Hands, you sinners; and Purify your Hearts, you double minded. What profit had you in these things, where∣of you are now ashamed? For the end of those things is Death;
 
such were some of you. But now ye are washed.
 &c.


2. Repentance, as it looks to an offended Person, is full of sorrow, that it hath offended; moves ear∣nestly to Pardon, and Reconciliation; and is rea∣dy to make use of any powerful Mediator, in order to Reconciliation; and desires ever after to please, and to offend no more; and herein the Affections are all mov'd according to the degrees of obligation. Now in Scripture and Gospel Repentance, the of∣fending

 person, the sinner, hath 
o do with God, the offended person, in 
d through Christ; and so bewails offence, and moves earnestly to Pardon, and Reconciliation with G
d by the Mediation of Christ, and with Christ 
or his own 
Names sake.
 I beseech thee, O Lord! 
Take away the Iniquity of thy Servant.
 
ake away all Iniquities: Receive us g
aciously.


And here also 
ises an ingenuous sorrow, shame, and confusion, 
hat we have offended a God so Good, so Holy, so Wise so Tender, and Compas∣sionate a Father, and despis'd so gracious and oblig∣ing a Redeemer. David's 
Heart sm
te him; and he said to the Lord, I have sinned in that I have done; I have done very foolishly,
 2 Sam. 24.10. 
I was a∣shamed, yea, even confounded. I smote on my thigh,
 
becaus
 I did bear the Re∣proach of my youth.
 We are 
ashamed, and blush to lift up our Faces.
 They shall under a 
spirit of Grace, and melt∣ing sense of God,
 
look upon him whom they have peirced, and mourn. It is meet to be said to God, If I have offend∣ed, I will do so no more. Oh foolish peo∣ple, and unwise, do you ihus requite the Lord our God. This is a faithful saying and worthy of all Acceptation; that Je∣sus Christ came into the World to save sinners, of whom I am chief.
 The deep and duly Affecting conside∣ration of God, and of Christ, the infinite excel∣lency of their Nature, their so great Benefactions and loving kindness towards us; and that God pro∣fesses, 
He is Grieved, Vexed, Provoked, pressed with our sins, as a Cart with sheaves; wearied, made to

 serve;
 that he cries out, as one that would move compassion; 
Oh! do not that abominable thing that I hate;
 These so enkindle all the Affections of shame, sorrow, gratitude, holy desire, zeal, revenge upon our selves, that there is such a change wrought, as is always found in true Repentance.


3. In Repentance in general, there is found, as motives and perswasives of it; self-preservation; a desire of happiness, and an avoidance of, and fly∣ing from misery; Men, dearly, as we say, Repent it, when the folly of their own ways is seen in the bitter Fruits; the loss of their Health, loss of Estate,
 loss of Friends, of Re∣putation, and of all Enjoyment; and when they see all manner of distress,
 anguish, and misery, come upon them; then they 
mourn at the last, when they see all consumed,
 and say, 
How have we hated Instruction, and despised Reproof!
 Thus in Scripture, and Evangelical Repentance; there is a fear of Hell, and an Eternity of Misery; 
A cutting off the right hand, and Foot, a pulling out the right Eye,
 when any of them are understood in Repen∣tance, to have 
offended,
 and to continue to 
offend;
 under the sense; 
It is better to enter into Life, blind, halt, than having two Hands, Eyes, Feet: maimed, rather than to be cast into Hell
 whole; where 
their Worm dyeth not, and their Fire is not quenched. There is a seeking Honour, Glory and immortality,
 By ingaging in Repentance into a 
patient continuance in well doing;
 on the other side 
tribulation, and anguish, indignation, and wrath,
 vehemently Agitate the Spirit, and Thoughts, against a continued course of doing evil. 
What shall it profit a Man if he gain the whole World,

 and loose his own Soul; or what shall a man give in ex∣change for his Soul? I say unto you, my Freinds, fear not them that Kill the Body, and have no more that they can do; but I will forewarn you, whom you shall fear, fear him, who after hath killed, hath power to cast into Hell, yea,
 I 
say unto you, fear him: Oh! that they were wise, that they understood this, that they would consider their latter end: I say unto you, repent, else you shall likewise perish; who hath forewarned you to fly from the wrath to come; God hath commanded all men every where to Repent; because he hath ap∣pointed a day, in which he will Judg the World: Re∣pentance unto Life: Repent, and turn your selves, that Iniquity may not be your ruin; Repent, and be Converted, that your sins may be blotted out, when the times of Re∣freshing shall come forth from the presence of the Lord; Repent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.
 Thus Scripture having these two handles of the Soul, Fear of Evil, and desire of happiness, mightily moves it to Repentance by them; it holds these two great Globes, the World of Happiness, and the World of Misery, both present, and to come; and so with a Scepter so Potent, it sways the Spirits of Men; as the Divine Spirit, that dwells in it, plea∣ses.


I have thus far given the Nature of 
Repentance
 in general, that it may be the better understood, what we are now to Discourse: I begin therefore with the first Head: that 
Repentance,
 which is so Com∣municated to the very inward sense of mankind, springs from, and hath its whole place in the Re∣demption of Christ. The Apostle speaks of 
Esau,
 that he 
found no place for Repentance;
 there is a pro∣per

 
place for Repentance.
 And this, I say, is the Re∣demption of Christ, that hath laid the 
Basis,
 the Foundation of Repentance; that hath spread over Human Nature, the notion and sense of Repentance. And where it is truly wrought, the Spirit of Christ takes it from Christ, and gives it to the Soul, and it is accepted only in, and through Christ.


It is therefore to be understood, that there had no 
Place
 been Found for 
Repentance,
 had it not been for the undertaking of Christ; For Repen∣tance being a rational Act, it must have a Rational Foundation, and Encouragement. If there were then no Mercy, no Forgiveness, no Salvation; there could be no Repentance but that of fruitless sorrow, horror, and despair: the Repentance of 
wailing
 and 
Gnashing the Teeth:
 that is, the Repentance that is in Hell, a Repentance without being chang'd or made better. Seeing then Salvation, Forgiveness, Mercy are all bound up in the Name of Christ; For they are no where else; the Redemption of Christ is the only foundation of Repentance, such a Repentance as hath in it a change from sin to Holiness: 
David
 gives us this great Instruction, Psal. 130. 
There is forgiveness with thee, that thou maist be feared;
 that 
thou maiest be feared
 with the Awes, with the Re∣verences of 
Repentance,
 there is Forgiveness with thee; there had been no place for such Fear of thee, if thou 
hadst been so extreme to mark what is done a∣miss,
 as that there had been 
no Forgveness with thee.


And this is most evident also in that Doctrin of the Apostle before mentioned, concerning the Re∣pentance in the case of 
Esau:
 When he had 
despis∣ed
 and 
sold
 his 
Birth-right,
 and would after 
Inherit

 the Blessing,
 he was 
Rejected, or Reprobated
 from it; and he 
found no place of Repentance,
 tho he sought it, that is, the 
blessing carefully with Tears;
 Heb. 12.17. He found no 
Place
 of 
Repentance,
 because he was 
re∣jected.
 Whether we understand it of 
Isaack's,
 or of 
Esau's Repentance,
 it is much at one: If we un∣derstand it of 
Esau
's 
Repentance,
 finding no place in himself; so it hath this sense; That 
Repentance
 flies into Despair, if it be not accepted, when we tender it: Or if we understand it of 
Isaac
 not 
Re∣penting,
 when 
Esau
 wept to procure it, but still fixed the blessing on 
Jacob,
 it is still the same thing; for if God did not please to accept our Repentance, or himself, to 
Repent
 in a sense worthy of him; our 
Repentance
 would be to no more purpose, than 
Esau
's 
Tears,
 or than the weeping in Hell; we should be 
Rejected,
 and 
Reprobated
 in our 
Repentance.


The 
Law,
 that says, 
cursed is every one that hath not continued in all things, to do them,
 Gal. 3. and 
Do this
 in the first Act, and Live, leaves no room for 
Re∣pentance;
 but the 
bringing
 in a 
better
 hope even pardon of Sin, Attonement, and Reconciliarion in the Blood of Christ, does, 
by this we draw nigh to God in Repentance,
 and are not 
Re∣jected
 but 
Accepted.


Here then there is Rational Foundation, and Encouragement for 
Repentance;
 because it shall not be thrown upon, and into Despair; there is 
Hope concerning this thing in the Gospel;
 let us therefore by 
Repentance
 press home, and return to God in Christ.


2. Again, 
Repentance
 is the gift of God, a Grace given by him; If God, 
peradventure, will give Re∣pentance,
 and, then 
hath God granted unto the Gentiles

 Repentance unto Life;
 Christ is a 
Prince and Saviour raised up by God to give Repentance,
 
and Remission of Sins.
 So Repentance is a Gift or a Grace; It cannot be Educed, it cannot be drawn out by an
 Powers of Nature; It is not 
of Man,
 or of 
the Will of Man, It is not of Bloods:
 It is not by Derivation, or Descent from 
Adam;
 It does not run in the Chan∣nel of Human Blood. God therefore does not give such Grace in Vain; but when he hath settled a Fund of Pardon, Reconcilement, and Salvation: He first settled that; else Repentance had been in Vain, as the Eye would have been, if God had not first made Light; Light is alone in Christ: He does not give Grace that shall be to no purpose, he gives no man the 
Repentance
 he will not Accept and Par∣don upon: He does not expose his own Grace to Damnation, or to the Flames of Hell; nor does he give any Grace, but in the Mediator, in the Redeem∣er: So the Redemption of Christ must needs be the Foundation of Repentance; there had never been else the Notion the possibility of Repentance; there had never been the sound, or report of it heard in the World.


This then being the Foundation, let us take the true degrees of the state of Repentance in two 
Po∣sitions.


Posit.
 1. God hath wri
ten in the very Heart of Man the excellency of this Grace, 
nd Duty of Re∣pentance; tha
 it is not far from him, that he should 
go up into Heaven,
 or 
down into the Deep,
 or 
beyond the Sea for it; It is in his Heart:
 So the Knowledg of it is

 very near him: God hath also put a Tenderness, towards it, a Flexibleness, he hath made the Soul of Man, the Conscience, and Affections plyable to it: And this, we shall see, is from the Mediator.


I confess, this may seem hard to be understood; seeing Repentance is fitted and prepared for a sin∣ful fallen Creature: Now in that man was at first Created upright, and perfect, and good; and what 
was written in mans Heart,
 was 
written
 there in his Creation; what place could there be for Re∣pentance? 
Adam
 was so 
righteous a person
 he could 
need no Repentance,
 why then should 
repentance be written in his Heart?


And yet notwithstanding, we find by experi∣ence, and universal Observation; It is a notion very intimate to every mans Soul, and even in∣dear'd to his Thoughts: Every man seems to be glad, there is such a notion, such an Idea in his Soul; and they that hear of it, and know it from Scripture, acknowledg immediately the goodness and reasonableness of it, and rejoyce in it: And tho a man do not fall down right upon the Practise of it, yet he is pleased with the promise to him∣self, he will at some time repent, and reform, and grow better; and there is proportionably a general Faith, Repentance will be accepted, and the repent∣ing Offender Pardoned. If men are told, they must of necessity change, repent and reform from their sinful courses: If they are perswaded to become o∣ther men, they are not so apt to be Angry, but rather say,
 
They will take a convenient time for it;
 tho Temptati∣on carry them away, yet they heartily Embrace the thing it self, as to the assent, and submission,

 and acknowledgment, that it ought to be so. Men are convinc'd, that while they defer to enter into the Practise, that yet they ought to 
repent.


This I assert is through the Grace of the Redeem∣er; I would therefore endeavour to find out, how this notion of repentance comes to be so very inti∣mate and connatural to mans Soul; and with such a Engraven, Engrafted Hope, and belief of Pardon upon it? How it comes to pass, that the demands of Natural Conscience do so wonderfully lead to Repentance; and are like those of Natural Justice, and common Honesty; of Soberness, and Temper∣ance, of Truth, Mercy, and Compassion, or what∣ever is accepted in the World as morally good and excellent; and even as the deep impressions of natural Religion, sense of God, and obedience to him? All these give an honour 
o Repentance, exert and urge the Soul to it. By the same senti∣ments of Soul, we allow the one, we allow the other also: If the remains of natural Conscience call a man out to the one, they summon him to the other also: And yet all this, I affirm, is from the Grace of the Redeemer. And this I would make out by two things.


1. The Lord Jesus Christ, the 
one Mediator,
 be∣tween the 
one God,
 and man; who is 
the Light that Lighteth every Man that commeth into the World,
 hath natural Conscience under his hand, and 
uphold∣eth all things,
 
ven as Redeemer, by the 
word of his Power:
 He th
n bears up that Law of Holiness, engraven on mans Heart in Creation; he holds up that rational Moral Frame; he keeps that

 Light, that 
Candle
 or 
Taper of God
 in mans Spirit, 
that
 it may not be a 
Lamp put out in obscure Darkness;
 Through him therefore, there are remains of that excellent 
Image,
 wherein 
Man was first Created;
 even in that 
Knowledg, Righteousness, and true Holi∣ness;
 so that Man does not sink, either into that blackness of darkness, an utter Ignorance of God, and insensibleness of him; or into an extreme ha∣tred, and enmity to God, and all Goodness, as damned Spirits do: Here is the great Efficacy of the Mediator, that he shores up, and staies this Law of 
Original Goodness
 and 
Holiness
 in 
Mans Heart,
 that it does not slide utterly away, nor sink.


2. Through the Redeemer, there is yet so graci∣ous an Administration of the Government of the World; the Vengeance of God, his just Indignati∣on and Fury against a sinful World, and against 
particular Sinners,
 is 
restrained;
 God 
Refrains
 him∣self in, and through Christ; and does not speedily 
execute Judgment:
 He 
Exercises
 an 
ad∣mirable Patience
 and 
long Suffering,
 and 
loving Kindness in the Earth. The Earth is full of his Goodness
 in the midst of much Pro∣vocation;
 It is of his 
tender Mercy
 we are not 
Consumed,
 and 
because his Compassions fail not. I am the Lord, I change not;
 therefore 
you the Children of Men are not Consumed: The Lord is gracious, merciful, long-suffering, slow to wrath,
 
and of great mercy;
 And all this is very Visible, 
every Man may see it,
 
Man may behold it afar off.
 The Hea∣ven and the Earth, the Sun and the Moon, and the Stars Proclaim it; every motion of Nature within

 and without us,
 tell us, 
that his mercy endureth for ever.


Now these two laid together, explain to us how 
Repentance
 is through the Grace of the Mediator, 
written:
 even as all natural Religion, and Morality in the very Heart of Man, and discernable by that Light: For when the first Commands and Emoti∣ons of 
Natural Conscience
 are to do the things that are Holy, and Righteous, and Good; and we find, that tho we have violated and perverted the thing that is right; yet we retain a love to those Laws of 
Eternal Righteousness
 and 
Goodness;
 we have not lost all sense of them, of desire of likeness to, and a∣greement with them; thus we find a sorrow in and trouble within us, that we have offended; and that the wrath and justice of the supreme Ruler, and Governor, and Judg of all the World is not so sud∣den and immediate in his Revenges upon us; but that we have space and time for return to God, and to Holiness: There is by the very same Authority of natural Conscience, that requir'd Holiness in our first Acts, and thereby to please God: a close obli∣gation to return to him by Repentance, and to a∣mend what we have done of evil against him, and to beseech Pardon and Reconciliation with offended Justice: Now when on the other side, the 
Patience
 and 
long-suffering
 of God gives encouragement, and even Assurance, he will accept Repentance by his giving scope, space and opportunity for it: Here is great ground for Repentance: For the Soul and Mind of Man finding still in it self that Primitive Love to, reverential sense of Righteousness, and that it cannot bid defiance to it, as lost Spirits do, there imme∣diately rises in it an earnest endeavour to 
Self-re∣stitution,


 to restore, and recover ones self by 
Repen∣tance;
 thus that Light given to a Man in his first Creation, and the 
state
 of 
Innocency
 (the grace of Christ sustaining it by an Universal Grace to human nature) does not loose it self by sin; but as it points and directs it self, first to H
liness without sinning or falling from it; so it now points and directs it self to 
Repentance,
 when it hath 
fallen by Iniquity;
 and, as first, it mooves it self to the Favour of God by not offending, or sinning against him; so after sin finding him not presently executing wrath, and taking vengeance, it beseeches him to 
Receive it. Graciously,
 and to 
take away its Iniquities,
 that may not Die: For that God is a most good, and gracious, and merciful Being in himself is a clear principle in the Law of 
Natural Religion;
 even where ever God hath not awaken'd that 
Na∣tural Conscience,
 to find it self in the Chains of everlasting Displeasure, as the Devils and Damned are; against whom he 
hath in Anger shut up for ever his Tender Mercies;
 when therefore a man finds, notwithstanding the so great degeneracy, and bold∣ness in sin, that every where 
Testify to our very Faces,
 and that we so well know; yet that God leaves not himself without so great 
Witness
 of his goodness,
 
giving fruit∣ful Times and seasons; filling mens Hearts
 with 
Food
 and 
Gladness;
 and that in Rela∣tion to himself in particular, he hath spared, and forborn, it draws out 
Natural Conscience
 to return to him by 
Repentance;
 For the 
riches of Goodness, the long Suffering and Forbearance of God lead to Repentance,
 Rom. 2.4.




Thus the 
King of Nineveh
 by Natural Light rea∣son'd, even when God had positively declared, 
Yet forty Dayr, and
 Nineveh 
shall be destroyed:
 Sure∣ly in that there are forty Days allowed, they are 
allowed
 as a Quarantine, as a time of Trial and Probation whether they would 
Repent,
 or not; else why not presently Destroyed? Why 
forty Days
 delay, if there were not Hope of Pardon in such a 
Repentance;
 so they 
humbled themselves
 in that extraordinary manner, and turned to God by 
Re∣pentance;
 and 
God saw it
 and 
Repented of the evil, 
e bad said, he would do unto them, and he did it not.
 Jonah 3.5. &c.


How much more have the generality of Man∣kind, against whom no such positive Denounci∣ation hath gone forth from God, and to whom the time of Patience is not so limitted and de∣fin'd: How great reason have they to look upon the time of God's forbearance, as a most 
gracious Call, and Opportunity,
 and space for 
Repentance.


Thus we see 
Repentance,
 in some light and sense concerning it, runs through the whole World, so that the very 
Heathen,
 who have not had, nor so much as heard, many of them of Scripture, yet have great sense of some way of expiating sin, and turning from evil; and the very seeing, God hath made 
Repentance
 and 
Forgiveness
 a most necessary and useful expedient of 
mutual Conversation
 of Men one with another; without which 
Human So∣ciety
 could not support it self; it shews very plainly there is a Mediator between God and Man, a Re∣demer of lost Man▪ that hath for the great pur∣poses of his Redemption inlay'd the Soul of Man with the intimate and inward notices of Repen∣tance;

 and that men 
shew the work of it written in thei
 Hearts,
 and that their 
Consciences
 accordingly, either 
Accuse,
 or 
Excuse;
 to allude to 
Rom.
 c. 2.14, 15. and hath given assurance from Providence, and the manner of God's Government of the World; That 
Repentance
 shall be accepted, and therefore hath given the same motions of 
Natural Conscience
 to 
Repentance,
 when a man hath sinned, as to Holiness and Righteousness before sin; and hath manifested them, both alike, 
within man,
 and hath 
shewed it to them;
 and by the 
visible things
 of Human Pre∣servation hath made 
clearly known
 the 
eternal Good∣ness
 and 
Mercy,
 that pardons sin through the 
Re∣deemer,
 to allude again to 
Rom.
 1.20.


Thus we read in the Book of 
Joh,
 a Book treat∣ing much of Natural Religion; assisted by such mea∣sures of Divine Revelation concerning Christ, as God had vouchsafed to 
Job
 and to his Friends; very high expressions on this great point, c. 33.27. 
God looketh upon man, and if any say, I have sinned, and perverted, that which is right, and it profited me not; he will deliver his Soul from going down into the Pit, for he will say, I have found a ransom for him, and his life shall see the Light. A man,
 any of mankind have just reason to say thus, have great occasion to say so; 
I have sinned, and perverted that which is right,
 and do find, 
it hath not Profit∣ed.
 It is very near to any man to say so; and if this take place in them, and they do from their Hearts say so, and ratify it by Action; 
God looks upon them, he beholds them
 with Acceptance, 
he Deli∣vers through the great Ransom, Jesus Christ, &c.
 It is 
repentance to Salvation;
 so c. 34.31, 32. 
surely it is meet to be said to God, I have born Chastise∣ment;

 I will not offend any more; That which
 I 
see not, teach thou me; If I have done Iniquity, I will do no more.
 Even according to the sense of Natural Religion, and natural Cnnscience, 
It is meet to be so said to God;
 All this is meet to be done. This is even the 
Discipline
 of 
Natural Conscience,
 as God is said 
to open the Ear to Discipline,
 and to 
seal In∣struction,
 c. 33, 16. c. 36.10.


This is that earnest motion of 
Natural Conscience;
 to take fast hold of Repentance, to return all it can, after it hath lost its Inocency, Purity and 
erfection, of Righteousness and Obedience; even as it should have mov'd, first powerfully and effectually against sin, and to good: and the same motion of 
Natural Conscience,
 that is to the one, is to the other also; when it is stirr'd up by further G
ace from the Spi∣rit of God; and there are generally such motions as argue this work in the Heart, when the Consci∣ence is not depriv'd of sense, Feeling, Vigor, not 
twice Dead, pull'd up by the roots, deliver'd up to a reprobate sense;
 and when God hath given so great, and gracious Aussrance, that Repentance shall 
find Pl
ce
 for it self; That this state is not Hell, either in regard of the height of Wicked∣ness or unpardonableness; it is an easy and very Intelligible Declination of Conscience from the 
Azimuth,
 the highest point of Innocency to the next point Repentance: which by the righteous∣ness and obedience of the Redeemer shall transcend the very first heighth; But that indeed is known by Revelation, and not by Natural Light: But take Repentance, as it is the necessary reserve after sin, and that God hath provided it a 
Place;
 so it is near, and even next to 
Natural Conscience.




Posit.
 2. The second position I lay down con∣cerning Repentance, and that gives the truest de∣gree of its Elevation through the Redeemer, is; That the word of God in the Old and New Testa∣ment gives the clearest and fullest knowledg of Repentance, and of the Divine Spring of it; the grace of God in Christ, and the blessed operation of the Holy Spirit through his Redemption: Re∣pentance therefore is found to be one of the prin∣cipal Doctrines of Scripture, whein it is conveyed unto us under all the variety, and complex of Notions, that can express so great a point to us, 
viz. remembring, bethinking, turning, converting, renewing, amending, searching and Trying our ways, turning to the Lord, bringing forth fruits meet for Repentance.
 The Rev
lation of the word of God beyond all expres∣sion excells 
Natural Knowledg
 concerning it: It opens to us the 
great Prince,
 the 
Redeemer
 and 
Me∣diator;
 who gives it a place, a possibility; he is the 
Prince,
 whom 
God hath raised up
 to make this supreme Donation,
 
re∣pentance, and forgiveness of Sins,
 and blesses in 
turning us away from every one of our Iniquities:
 Scripture opens to us that great and blessed Spring, 
d 
fficient of it, 
viz.
 the true grace of God; and the blessed Spirit is the effici∣ent of it; It lays before us the great motives of it, the sense of the favor and goodness of God who will 
have mercy,
 and 
a∣bundantly Pardon;
 seal'd to us by so great an 
Attonement,
 as the 
Blood of Jesus speaking better things than the Blood of
 Abel; and on the other side, a dread of him, 
who is a consuming fire; the living G
d,
 into

 
whose hands
 in his wrath and displeasure, 
It is a dreadful thing to fall; the wrath that is to come,
 and ever to come; it gives us all the qualifications of it, Repentance with the 
whole Heart, turning from all our evil ways,
 and all the 
evil
 in our 
evil ways;
 it moves us with all manner of Applications, that may stir us up to it; commands, exhortations, counsels, Threats; it never leaves speaking,
 and crying out to us, 
Re∣pent;
 it says to us, 
Repent, and turn your
 selves;
 so 
Iniquity shall not be your Ruin:
 It preaches, 
Repent,
 for the 
Kingdom of Heaven is at hand;
 it even weeps over us, that we would do it;
 
Turn you, turn you, for why will ye Die?
 It weeps, when we have not known, 
even we, in our day the things of our peace;
 It offers it as the only remedy against Eternal Mise∣ry; Repentance is advised expresly to five of the 
seven Churches,
 Revel. c. 2. c. 3. to shew the univer∣sality and necessity of its use: It is one of the great principles of the 
Doctrine of Christ,
 Heb. 6.1. and thus Repentance is the most Native, Domestick Doctrin of the Word of God, and of the Gospel of Jesus Christ; so that what is found in the Light of Nature, serves to these lower purposes only:


1. It serves to the purpose of Human Order, Go∣vernment, and preservation of the World from falling into a perfect Hell; for were there not some sentiments of God, of his Mercy, and readi∣ness to forgive, tending to make men better; were there not a sense of the goodness of Righteous∣ness, Temperance, Mercy, and of all Virtue;

 not only as what we should first be, but also, what we should endeavour to return to, when we have Fallen; were there not such a thing, as Vicious Men being restrain'd from running into utmost ex∣cess and extremity; and as, being reclaimld, cor∣rected, reform'd, moderated, and cultivated by precepts of 
Natural Religion, Wisdom,
 add 
Morali∣ty;
 all which flow from, and are specimens of the Scripture Doctrin and grace of Repentance; the World would be a stye of sensualists and im∣pure Creatures, wallowing in bruitish, and worse than Swinish Lusts: And did not this Notion sweeten men one to another, the World would be a Desert or Wilderness of Savage, and Wild Beasts, tear∣ing in peices one another; and both ways a Hell of a World.


2. Hereby God will justify himself in the con∣demnation of the 
Pagan World;
 that they have not only the 
Law Written in their Hearts,
 but so much of the Gospel also, as this great notion of Repen∣tance Teaches; For when the Respit of 
forty Days
 imported it to the King, and City of 
Nineveh;
 why should not that Patience, wherewith God governs even the 
Pagan World,
 Preach Repentance to it? Why should they not be 
led to Repentance
 by the 
Wit∣ness
 they have of God, and of his goodness in giv∣ing them fruitful times and seasons, and silling their Hearts with food and gladness; which he would not 
leave himself without
 in his great Wisdom, and Righteousness, as well as Mercy and Grace? How does this 
riches of Goodness, Long-suffering,
 and 
Forbearance,
 
if not lead them to Repentance,
 justify their 
Con∣demnation;
 who after their 
hardness and Impenitent

 Hearts
 Treasure up to 
themselves wrath, against the day of wrath?
 So that as 
Niniveh
 shall 
rise up in Judgment
 with those, who 
repented not at the Preach∣ing of Christ, the greater than
 Jonah; so it shall 
rise up in Judgment
 with other Heathen Nations, Cities and People, who might by the same propor∣tion have been argued to Repentance; so that tho God hath in his supreme Dominion and Justice, thought fit to deny them, what Christ says, They would have 
repented in Sack-cloth
 and 
Ashes
 upon; yet even by the standard of 
Nineveh's
 Repentance, they'r not Repenting by that Light they have, will be Condemned at the 
manifestation
 of that 
righteous Judgment
 of 
G
d
 the Apostle speaks of in that fore∣nam'd, Rom. 2.


3. The great Goodness of God, in Christ, giving the Notion of 
Repentance
 into the Heart of Man; (seeing the Original of whatever is worthy, or Ex∣cellent in 
Man,
 is but a 
Transcript,
 or Copy taken from the sup
eme Excellency and Goodness) hath thereby dlspos'd the Hear
 of Man to a 
Readiness to forgive,
 one 
man to forgive another;
 and thereby to be engaged to an 
Acknowledgment of Of∣fences
 one again
t ano
her: to desire 
Pardon,
 and to offend no more: Wherein much of the 
Peace
 and 
Happiness
 of Humane Nature, in this 
present state,
 is supported and preserv'd: And herein, and by these very mutual 
Repentances
 toward, and 
For∣givenesses one of another,
 is there a greater Illustrati∣on of the Grace and Goodness of God, in 
Pardon and Forgiveness
 upon 
Repentance,
 and thereby an 
Invitation, Encouragement,
 and 
leading to Repentance
 towards God. For in that the 
Gospel-Command,
 to 
forgive them,
 who having 
trespassed against us,
 tho

 
seven times a day,
 turn again, and say, 
I repent:
 and that if we 
forgive not men their trespasses,
 neither will our Heavenly Father 
forgive us:
 Our Lord both appeals to the 
Sense of Mankind,
 and 
excites
 and 
encourages
 unto 
Repentance
 towards God, in hope of Forgiveness; as well as to 
mutual Repentan∣ces,
 and 
Forgiveness
 for the 
Peace
 and 
Good of Man∣kind;
 to which our Lord had great Regard in all he said, and did.


4. The Natural Light God hath given concern∣ing 
Repentance,
 and the Sense in Man's Soul con∣cerning the 
Goodness
 and 
Reasonableness
 of that Grace and Duty; upon which the Redeemer hath pointed the Law written in the Heart; is as a Ground, and Rude Draught, that the 
Knowledge
 of 
Repentance,
 by the Word of God, and 
Divine Revelation,
 accom∣plishes, and fills up; and that the Spirit of God plants his Supreme Operations upon; even as 
San∣ctification
 is engrafted into that 
Sense
 of 
Good
 and 
Evil
 that is found in the Soul of Man; and those Irritations, and Provokings of Natural Conscience, to do the Good, and fly from the Evil.


For thus Jesus Christ hath, as our Creator and Redeemer, our Preserver and Mediator in one, ta∣ken Care to secure a 
Remnant, and Remainder,
 of whatever was excellent in his first Creation; that it may be taken hold of, and be applied to in Redemp∣tion.


And thus I have 
deavoured to discourse the 
Ground-work
 and 
Foundation
 of this 
Grace, Duty and Doctrine
 of 
Repentance;
 That it is all setled in the Grace and Mercy of God in the Redeemer, without which it had been an utter Impossibility, and there

 had been no more, nor any other 
Repentance,
 than what is in Hell. I come therefore to the Second Head:


Head
 2. Here is plainly laid down to us the great 
Elaboratory,
 or 
Instrument
 God hath prepared in in∣finite Wisdom, and Grace, and 
in-laid
 the Soul with in order to 
Repentance: Godly Sorrow,
 or 
Sorrow af∣ter,
 and 
according to God,
 worketh down, or brings into Effect this 
Repentance:
 This God hath prepar'd as a Natural Affection of it self, and in its own Ge∣neral and Original Form, fit to such a purpose; and then God sanctifies it to rhis Great Purpose,
 to 
work this Repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of.
 It is an immediate 
Instrument in the Hand of God,
 to ope∣rate under his Spirit, to so great an Effect: Of this I shall discourse in Three Generals:


General
 1. I begin therefore with a 
Description
 of 
Sorrow,
 first, as it is a Natural Affection, or Passion of the Humane Nature; and then as it is sanctified by God, or as it becomes a 
Sorrow after God,
 and is fitted to so great an End and Purpose; and as it is so, it is counterdistinguish'd to 
worldly Sorrow, that worketh Death.


General.
 2. I will consider the excellent Use and Service of 
godly Sorrow,
 to so great an End and Put∣pose, as 
the working Repentance to Salvation.


General
 3. I will open the Wisdom of God, and the 
Reasonableness
 of his making use of Sorrow, and fitting it as 
after himself,
 or 
according to himself,
 to so great an End and Purpose; and that according to the very 
Reason
 and 
Nature of Things,
 it could not

 be otherwise, but that 
godly sorrow
 must be so made use of above, and before any other 
Affection;
 and that it becomes him, 
by whom, and for whom are all things
 so to make use of it.


General
 1. For the 
Description
 of this 
Affection
 of 
godly Sorrow:
 First, as it is a 
Natural Affection,
 or 
Passion
 of the Humane Nature; and then as it is sanctified by God, or becomes 
Sorrow ofter God,
 and is counter-distinguish'd to the 
sorrow of the World,
 that 
worketh Death.


Sorrow
 then, as it is an 
Affection,
 or 
Passion
 of the Humane Nature, must be considered Two ways; and each of them must be applied to the 
Sorrow
 that 
works Repentance,
 or to 
Sorrow according to God;
 and so a different and opposite Sorrow to the 
sorrow of this World.


1. Sorrow, that is a Humane Passion, or Affection, must either begin in the Body, and so passeth from the Soul, and ascends up to the Spirit of a Man; or it begins in the higher Region, the Spirit, and de∣scends by the Soul into the Body, and makes Im∣pressions suitable to its own Nature there; and the Body is govern'd according to this Affection, and to its Place, Estimation, Power with, and Interest in the Spirit.


Now indeed 
all Affection,
 and even 
Passion,
 to speak most strictly and properly, is in the Spirit; For it is all one to matter, how it be used; or into what Form it is made to pass: or out of what, or in dis∣junction from what Form it is forc'd to move: So that All we feel, by way of suffering, or Enjoyment, is by the Spirit's having a Pleasing, or an Afflicting Sense of Things: But this I wave, as not so necessa∣ry

 to the Practical Discourse of Repentance I intend. It is plain and certain, the sense of some things be∣gins in the Spirit; 
viz.
 those things which are pro∣per to the Narure of a Spirit, and which are so, pro∣per to a Spirit, whether it dwelt in a Body or not: But yet when the Spirit is affected with them, be∣cause it inhabits a Body, the Affection of the Spirit, even whether the Spirit will or not, works upon the Matter and Fr
me of that Body; and thereby the Truth, and Reality of the Spirit's being affected, is discovered to it self; and it may also be thereby dis∣covered to others: On the other side, there are Pas∣sions, or Affections, that the Spirit is affected with, as finding it self mov'd and concern'd; as that Frame of Body, wherein it dwells, is either more or less fit∣ed for its Enjoyment of it self in that Body; or put, quite out of Order; or is in pain, and afflicted so, as to afflict the Spirit: And both, and each of these is in some Degree serviceable 
to godly sorrow,
 though the first is the Chief and Principal in 
godly sor∣row.


1. The Spirit of Man affected with the 
considera∣tion of sin,
 as it hath all 
the Reasons of sorrow in it;
 as it is a foul, and impure, and shameful thing; and as it is an Offence against the Holy, and only Wife and gracious Majesty of God; and as it brings Wrath, and Ruine, and Condemnation upon it; contemplates, considers, and weighs those 
Reasons,
 and thereby finds it self affected with 
sorrow and af∣fliction,
 as if it were after the manner of a 
broken Bone,
 or 
bruised Flesh:
 Thus we read of 
a broken and contrite Spirit;
 and of those who are 
bruised in Spi∣rit, and grieved in Spirit;
 and of a 
wounded and a troubled Spirit;
 and of 
a sorrowful Spirit:
 And this

 when it eyes God, as a Father in Christ, Gracious, and Good, and ready to be Reconcil'd, and to for∣give, is 
a true godly Sorrow,
 or a 
Sorrow after God:
 For it is in the 
True Region of godly sorrow,
 the Spi∣rit; and it hath the Right Sense and Affection, even such 
an apprehension of God:
 And such a 
Sorrow
 the Spirit communicates to the Body in which it dwells, so as to make the Appearance of it Solemn, Hum∣ble, and Lowly: It denies it those 
Ornaments
 or 
Refreshments,
 that it self at other Times desires for it; it bridles, and curbs 
its own appetites
 and 
desires
 of 
pleasure and satisfaction in it;
 it humbles it by 
Fasting,
 it lays it in the Dust, it keeps it waking, it dissolves it into Tears; and if it be very great, as sometimes, it dries up the 
Benign Juices of it,
 and it carries all the Marks of the Spirit so affected. And because these arise from 
a sorrow within, after God,
 God is 
pleased with them,
 and 
accepts them,
 as 
signs
 of such sorrow, and calls for them.


2. The 
Sicknesses,
 or 
Wants,
 or 
Pains,
 or 
Notes of Disgrace,
 that the Wise, and Holy Providence of God sends sometimes upon the Body, that make it 
an uneasie,
 or 
a dishonourable Habitation of the Spirit:
 These the 
Spirit
 takes Notice of with 
troublesome and unquiet thoughts;
 the 
thoughts
 being in a 
Motion, a Conflict,
 and 
Agony;
 if by the Grace of God, they are guided to search the 
Causes of these Strokes on the Body;
 and finds them to be 
an offended Justice, a pro∣voked and displeased Holiness,
 upon the account of 
Sin and Iniquity;
 and that it apprehends These are but the 
Beginnings of Sorrows;
 and that they are 
Indications and Fore-bodes of Wrath to come,
 and of 
further Judgments
 from Heaven, even at the present, upon both 
Body and Spirit,
 if there be not that course

 taken, of 
seeking Pardon and Reconcilement in Christ,
 and 
turning from Iniquity:
 These 
thoughts sanctified,
 and 
conducted by God upon himself thus,
 upon the oc∣casion of 
outward affliction,
 become that 
sorrow after God,
 of which the Apostle speaks, and often works 
that Repentance to salvation, never to be Repented of.


Thus Scripture very often speaks of 
Outward Af∣flictions,
 made serviceable 
to Conversion,
 to 
returns to God: Famine,
 and 
Pestilence,
 and 
War,
 and 
Capti∣vity in the Land of Enemies,
 are Represented in the Prayer of 
Solomon,
 as 
great Motives,
 and even 
procu∣ring,
 and 
exciting Causes
 of 
Humiliation, Bethinking our selves, turning to the Lord.
 The Afflictions of Men are often spoken of by God, and used as Argu∣ments to such Resentments as call to 
Self-judging,
 and so to 
reforming:
 
ven often not only in the 
Old
 but in 
the New Tectament:
 We are 
Chasten'd of the Lord, that we might not be condemned with the World; Affliction yieldeth the peaceable Fruit of Righteousness
 to them, who are 
exercised thereby,
 1 Cor. 11.31. Heb. 12.11.


Both these Operations of 
godly sorrow,
 seem to be Represented with a great Ele∣gancy,
 and Holy Eloquence, 
Job
 33. the first, when this Sorrow begins in the Spirit of a Man, and Thoughts arising therein. God speaks once, and twice; in a 
Dream, in a Vi∣sion of the Night; He opens the Ears of Men, and sealeth their Instruction; That he may withdraw Man from his purpose, and hide Pride from Man: He brings him to such Humiliation, as keeps him from going on in his former purpose.




Again when sorrow begins in the Body, 
v.
 19. 
He,
 a man, any man upon whom the methods of God for Repentance are so laid; is 
chasten'd with pain upon his Bed, and the multitude of his Bones with strong Pain; so that his Life abhorreth Bread, and his Soul dainty meat; his Flesh is consumed away, that it cannot be seen, and his bones that were not seen stick out; yea his Soul draweth near unto the Grave, and his Life to the Destroyers; if there be a Messenger with him, an Interpreter one among a thousand, to shew to man his uprightness, then he is gracious unto him,
 and saith, 
deliver him from going down to the Pit; I have found a Ransom; his Flesh shall be fresher than a Childs; He shall pray unto God, and he will be Fa∣vourable unto him; and he shall see his Face with Joy, he will Render unto man his Righteousness.


And now 
this sorrow,
 thus 
after God,
 sanctified thus, to have Respect to God, and carried out after him, is Counter distinguish'd; it is most different from the 
sorrow of the World, that worketh Death.
 The sorrow, that hath no higher spring, than this 
World, works Death;
 that is, however the Mind, or the Body be Affected; when it does not mount up to a consideration of God, offended for sin; when it does not seek pardon of him, and Recon∣ciliation to him in Christ; when it only pores upon the things of this World, and agitates it self about them; it runs down into the dead Sea of Sorrow, that 
weeping,
 and 
wailing,
 and 
gnashing
 of 
Teeth
 that is in Hell. It is an Idolatrous Sorrow, arising from an Heart deeply set on this World, and glew∣ed to it; and so goes down into the Vault and Pit of eternal Sorrow: It tends to the Death of the Body; it brings down the 
Head to the Grave:
 It

 tends to wear, and grind bodily Nature to the Dust; every such sorrow not after God, that hath no tincture from him on it; If it be not Antidoted by 
sorrow after God,
 and by Repentance to Salvati∣on, It tends to eternal Death, and is the Inlet un∣to it; For it is certain, all sorrow here, that comes from Heaven, ascends up to Heaven, as Water as∣cends as high as its Spring; But that which is of a terrene, earthly Nature, sinks down to the Center, which is the 
neathermost Hell.


I come now to the second Head, to shew the ex∣cellent use and service, sorrow after God, yeilds in this wise, and holy preparation of it by God to that 
Re∣pentance to salvation, not to be Repented of.


1, In that, so great, and principal an Affection of the Soul is given up to God; It hath an use, and a service to steer the Soul to God; For the Affecti∣ons are, as the Rudder of the Soul, as the Helm of it, guided by the judgment, as by a Pilot: And these affections are all in a Linck, and in a chain: If any one of the principal Affections are mov'd, that mighty Vessel of the whole Soul is turn'd this way, or that way by a very small thing, as it may seem; even by one Affection, because all are joyn'd and united with it: For where Sorrow goes, Love goes, because sorrow is for the want of some good, the Souls desires; If then sorrow 
be after God,
 and for Holiness; It assures, the Soul hath a spring∣ing Love for God and Holiness, and in the distance it apprehends it self from these, it laments. Where sorrow goes, there hatred also goes: For sorrow arises from some evil that the Soul hates and abhors,

 that presses in upon it: In sorrow 
after God,
 sin, and the wrath, and displeasure of God, is, what the Soul hates; and it finding these near, and closing upon it, it sorrows and laments that 
they may be cast out
 and removed. And how do these, the Love of God, and hatred of sin 
work to Repentance?
 And thus also it might be shewn, How 
Fear, Hope, Joy, Delight
 move as sorrow moves. The Apostle knowing with what a strength, and force, and pre∣sence the Affections move, writes to the 
Colossians,
 c. 2. 
To set their Affections on things above:
 For if the Affections are so set, the Spirit and Soul will be so set, and therefore the whole man will be so set. O
 the contrary, the 
sorrow of the World
 carries the strength of the Soul, the Affections on the World; which not able to sustain and bear up an Immortal Spirit, it often destroys the Body by Violence; and leaves the Soul to sink also, the Spirit to fall down from God, which is the Death of it.


2. The Affection of sorrow, is the Affection that is most properly conversant about sin, and the con∣sequences of it; the wrath, and displeasure of God, the curse, and evil. Now then, as sin is a depar∣ture from God the fountain of Life, and happiness, the supreme good, and so ushers in, and introduces all unhappiness: so 
sorrow
 that is after God, begins in the apprehension of God, and of his Law; and so descends on all the evil consequential, or follow∣ing on the loss of God: But the 
sorrow of the World,
 not beginning with God, fetters it self with the Evils which press upon it, with relation to the pre∣sent World; which can never be well removed with∣out removing the principal cause, sin, and the dis∣pleasure

 of God for it: But to this the 
sorrow of this World
 hath no regard, and so is never cured, but becomes of a peice with the sorrows of the second Death: For so all sorrow here not Healed by the 
repentance to Salvation, not to be repented of,
 (which Heals the 
sorrow after God
) becomes one with the sorrows of Hell, and 
everlasting wailing:
 By god∣ly sorrow therefore, sorrow is made to be its own Death, and Plagues. 
For working repentance to Sal∣vation, never to be repented of, When it is sorrow after God, it is the Destruction of all sorrow.
 For it can be no longer, but, as Scripture speaks, 
forrow and sighing shall flee away, and there shall be no more sor∣row.
 As it came in by sin, so by sin Repented of, and Pardoned, it for ever ceases, and vanishes a∣way: So sorrow is conversant about its proper ob∣ject, and cause, and it hath the great effect of re∣moving it self; and of it self loosing it self in that Joy, that follows upon the 
Salvation
 of that 
Repentance
 it self hath wrought; which must needs make an end of Sorrow, or Perfects it into it self 
never to be Repented of.


3. The serviceableness of 
godly sorrow to Repen∣tance,
 is, that this Affection of all the Affections, or Passions of the human Soul, is that which makes it wise, and considerative; seeing 
Repentance then, that is to Salvation,
 is a most Wise, and prudent grace; This Affection of sorrow is most prepara∣tory, and contributary to it. The sorrow after God is no Ignorant, or unreasonable Passion, or Affection; call'd 
Attrition;
 no superstitious Pen∣nance, or ceremony of Sorrow, not a mere soft∣ness, and dissolving into Tears; not any desultory Passion, that falls into some 
morning Dew,
 or as it

 were, 
heat Drops;
 but a deep inward trouble, that we have offended God, and sinn'd against him, and endangered our selves to Eternity by our sins: And however, there may be at first some sudden stroke, or Impression, and a Passion upon it, that may go off; yet it is indeed a spring that dis-em∣bogues it self through the whole course of a Chri∣stians Life: There is a sorrow, and a relenting of Soul, that is a soft Dew, or Distillation from the Soul upon it self, that makes it very tender, hum∣ble, and Apprehensive of the Evil of Sin; of the Ingratitude, and unthankfulness of having sinned against God, and given Offence to the Eyes of his Holiness, and of his Glory. And as this arises from understanding, so it begets understanding, and close Consideration; It is observ'd in Nature, that sorrow and sadness encline to Wisdom, and attentness of Mind; 
Vexation gives understanding,
 is a saying: And hereunto the wise King 
Solomon
 agrees,
 
sorrow is better than laughter. It is better to go to the house of Mourning, than to the house of Feasting; for the Living will lay it to Heart. And by the sadness of the Countenance, the Heart is made better. In the day of Adversity consider,
 that is the proper season of it; Generally, our Mirth and Rejoycing is too lighr and flashy; it scatters, and sets the Spirits in wandring; I said of 
Laughter, it is Mad,
 and of 
Mirth, what does it?
 As the 
crack∣ing of Thorns under a Pot, so the Laughter of Fools is Vanity.
 Sorrow is like a shade that congregates, and gathers up the Spirits to think, and weigh, and poize things. Sorrow loves solitude, and so the Repenting Person is described; 
he sitteth alone,

 and keepeth silence, because he hath born it upon him.
 Vanity, and folly, 
the pleasures of sin, that are but for a season,
 cannot endure the tedious∣ness, and melancholly of an Hour alone: And this is the unhappiness of mankind, they cannot endure to be alone, and to speak with themselves; 
I hearken'd and heard, but no man spake aright,
 
or said, What have I done?
 We are so naturally for Diver∣sion, They that are not so mad, as to to be for the roar, and madness of Company; yet they cannot be content, without what, we call Divertisement and Merryment, and cannot endure sorrow and sad∣ness.


Let us now but ask our selves, whether we think 
Solomon
 was a Wise Man, or not; and whether he was not in circumstances of greatest advantages to rejoyce in all the Pleasure, Mirth, and Enjoyment of this World? which he calls, 
Laying hold on folly;
 while yet he 
acquaint∣ed his Heart with Wisdom
 to under∣stand, what was the utmost amount, or to be had from all the Entertainments of that kind: And when he assures us, as he does, that 
Mirth
 is but 
Madness,
 and the 
Laughter
 of this World so unreasonable; that no Man can tell, what it serves for, or to what purpose it is; and that he so much commends sorrow to us; let us then take Counsel with our selves, whether he spake wisely, or not? And what shall we think of the words of our Lord, 
Luke
 6.21. 
Blessed are you that Weep, and you that Mourn; and, woe to you that Laugh.
 Now it is not to be supposed that so

 Good, and so Merciful, and so Gracious a Saviour, as our Lord Jesus Christ is, should envy to man any thing, that could be to the Good, and Wel∣fare of his Nature. But he knew how much the Carnal Joy, and Mirth, that is so common, and so much valued among Men, lavishes out those Thoughts, and Spirits; and that Time, that should be laid out upon so serious, and great things, as 
Reconciliation to God, Pardon of Sin, Newness of Heart, and Life;
 and that 
Sorrow,
 and 
Mourning,
 and 
Weeping
 are prepared by God, as fitted in their Nature to make us more Grave, and Pon∣dering of Things; and that being Sanctified, and in the Hand of his Grace, are made use of to bring us home to himself: For when men are under sadness, finding the prints of the Wrath, Justice, and Displeasure of God upon them, they enquire after the Reason; Their sins, as to 
Joseph
's 
Brethren,
 come to their Remembrance; They are provoked to move to God by 
Humiliation, Confession of Sin, Prayer for Pardon, Desire of his Grace, and Spirit to enable them to Reform;
 they enquire into his word, how they may 
cleanse their way, order their Conver∣sation aright to please him;
 they are moved to con∣sider by these drops, and Touches of Sorrow, what that state of sorrow without Banks or Bounds or Bottom is, where there is 
weeping,
 and 
wailing,
 and 
gnashing of Teeth:
 They are taken off from that Pride, and Self-Conceit; they find so little in all things here below, and in this present State, that they enquire for those better, and greater Things that are Above, and in Eternity: When sorrow, that disposes to strong, and serious enqui∣ries becomes 
sorrow after, and according to God;
 Oh!

 how excellently does it work? How do men 
search,
 
and try their ways that they may turn to God.


Now because of the Order, that God hath plac'd sorrow in to all these great Effects; therefore our Lord pronounc'd a Blessing upon 
Weeping,
 and 
Mourning.
 For else he loves our Joy, when it is Spiritual; he commands to 
Rejoyce in the Lord all way;
 and again he 
says, Rejoyce:
 He spoke many great things,
 that 
our Joy might be full;
 that he might fill our 
Mouths with Laughter,
 and our 
Tongues with Singing.
 But our carnal, our sensual Joys, he knows, are our Death, and Destruction; he knows we are in no better case in our prophane, foolish, sinful Laughter, than they who are stung with the 
Taran∣tula,
 and Dye Laughing: Thus we have greatest reason in the 
midst of such Laughter
 to be 
Sorrowful,
 and the 
end of that Mirth will be heaviness:
 Thus it will be 
bitterness
 in the 
latter end,
 therefore he warns us of it before, and in greatest Love to us, declares a 
Woe
 on such 
Laughter.


But now to conclude this particular, 
The sorrow of the World,
 How different a thing is it? For tho it causes Thoughts and Enquiries, yet it is only how to be rid of the Worldly Causes of Sorrow, and it turns only to Worldly Remedies: And it is very often in a rage at the causes it finds; and when either the Remedies are not to be found, or fail in their Success, it is in a Rage, and flies out too often against God, and Providence, and so it 
works Death:
 It begins that Hatred of God, that Blasphemy, and Rage, that is in Hell; or if it does not thus, it is a sullen, despondent, unactive

 state of Mind, that shuts, and seals up all Activity; like the 
Night wherein no Man can Work;
 and so goes down into utter 
Darkness.
 It either say
, 
This evil is of the Lord,
 
why should I wait any longer?
 Or like 
Cain,
 My 
Iniquities are greater, than can be Forgiven;
 and so hastens out from the 
Presence of God;
 or it recoyls upon it self, as 
Saul, Achilophel, Judas;
 or the Heart under the Power of it 
Dies as a stone
 within it self, as 
Nabals Heart died within him.
 Thus it every way 
works Death,
 because it hath nothing to do with him, who is the 
Fountain of Life:


For the Being of God is infinitely happy, and blessed, and all light, and lustre; and in him is no 
Darkness at all
 of sorrow as not of Sin; he therefore when 
sorrow
 is after him, springs a Light into it; that whereas, the Dark and Black part arises from sin, and the sinful Creature; yet because it is after him, it shall ne∣ver set in the darkness of Death, and H
ll; It receives from him as a Tincture of Holiness, so a Tincture of Life, a Ray and Beam of it; It works 
Repentance unto Life
 and 
to Salvation,
 and so it springs up aft
r into Jo
 in his Favour in the Light of his Countenance, in the assurance of his Love.


But the 
Sorrow of the World
 is like a Night, that no kind of 
Light at all Enlightens.
 Like the Night 
Job Cursed,
 it does not turn to the Light, because it is not turn'd to God; and so is a shade of Hell. 
e∣fore Hell it self, a valley of the 
shaddow of Death:
 and the horrors of it are the beginnings of the hor∣rors

 of Hell: As therefore Carnal Joys are 
sparks of our own kindling,
 Esay. 50. notwithstanding which we shall 
lye down in sorrow,
 even so is 
sorrow
 not 
after God,
 as a black shade of our own.


4. The service of 
sorrow after God
 to 
Repentance unto Salvation,
 is, that it breaks, and forces a∣sunder that sinful Frame in our Hearts, of sin, and contrariety to God, and to Holyness: The very Natural Affection of sorrow loosens, and Divides the Heart, from that which is the Cause and occa∣sion of such sorrow: Because that great Self-love, the force of that Law of Self-preservation is so strong upon us; that seeing sorrow is an Affection, that stands in an enmity to our Peace, Comfort, and Enjoyment, and to our Life it self; if it be extreme, or too long continuing; we therefore come off from what is the occasion, or that gives reason to our sorrow; though we had exceedingly lov'd it before. This we find in all Cases, and through the whole Nature of Things; when there∣fore sin, and loss of the favour of God because of it, is made by the grace of God the just Reason, and most sensible, and prevailing reason of our sor∣row; It dissolves the Frame of sin in our Heart, that had been before compact, as the Adamant, and as the 
neither Mill-stone;
 Now this sorrow divi∣ding, and separating between sin, and the Soul; it brings forth that 
broken
 and 
contrite Heart,
 that 
God will not despise.


Again, This sorrow is a spiritual melting, soft∣ning and dissolving Thing. It separates the Soul every particle as it were from other; so that it is supple, soft, and ready to t
ke any figure, tha
 God,

 would have it take; It brings the Soul to quick, and lively sense, which is as it were 
taking the stone out of the Flesh,
 and 
giving a Heart of Flesh;
 It is that 
Spirit of Grace,
 of Ingenuous sense of our In∣gratitude, and unworthy carriage towards God, mentioned before out of 
Zech.
 12. and 
Ezek.
 36.


Hereupon the 
Apostle James
 presses to a great 
Mourning after God,
 or exercise of 
Godly sorrow,
 James 4.8. 
Draw nigh to God, and he will draw nigh to you; cleanse your hands you sinners, purify your hearts you double minded:
 How should this great Self-Purification be Effected? By 
being Afflicted, by mourning
 and 
weeping; by having the Laughter turned to Mourning; and the Joy to Heaviness.
 This 
Godly Sorrow,
 like washing and rubbing the Hands with Water, and the close Application of it, softens and loosens the Filth that cleaves so close, adheres and sticks so fast to the Hands. And it arises from that Love, and Compassion, that is seated towards our selves in our own Natures, which, when it is by the Hand of Grace pointed aright; It is made a mighty Instrument, a mighty Efficacy for Conversion, and Repentance; because when our great Disgust, our Sorrow and Self-Af∣fliction is pitch'd upon sin, we cast it off, as that, which is the reason of our sorrow; and that stands in our Eye, as hateful, loathsome filth, and impu∣rity, that we can by no means endure; and therefore we say to it, 
get ye hence,
 Oh! you Foul and abominable Lusts, 
what have I any more to do with you?


But more particularly, two ways this Godly sor∣row works to Conversion, Repentance, Self-Purifi∣cation.




1. By being so prevailing upon the Soul, as to drink up all the impure, and unholy Affections in our Hearts. God giving it therefore by that his 
Spi∣rit of Grace,
 and ingenuous sense, an ascendency, a superiority over all other Affections in the Heart, at this time, he is working Repentance; it drinks up all the pleasurable sensual Affections in a Man: when 
a man is in bitterness, as one is in bitterness for his first Born,
 and for an only 
Begotten Child;
 He hath no more Appetite nor Emotion of his Spirits to Lust, and Sensuality, and sinful Pleasures, than such a one hath to do the usual Entertainments, and Pleasures of Life; when God therefore calls for this sorrow, he looks upon it as a great Of∣fence; when there is 
slaying of Oxen, and drinking of Wine,
 
lying upon beds of Ivory, Chaunting to the sound of Viols, Inventing Instruments of Musick, like
 David; when there is 
putting on Apparel,
 and the Furniture of Pride: For then he commands us, as he did the Children of 
Israel
 after the sin of the 
Golden Calf, to put off their Ornaments,
 
that he might know what to do to them,
 whether the
 should, as true Penitents, be spar'd, or destroyed in their Impenitency; And indeed when any are un∣der the power of this 
Godly Sorrow,
 in such a po∣sture to 
Repentance,
 all such Ornaments are nothing; All such pleasures are quite out of Tast. The Soul hath no relish of them.


2: Godly sorrow thus made an Instrument in the H
nd of Grace for working Repentance, hath by that its ascendency and superiority, an engagement

 upon all the other Affections with it self, to the 
working Repentance
 also; this the Apostle shews in the very next words to these, we are Discoursing upon, 2 
Cor.
 7.11. For 
this very self same thing, that ye sorrowed after a Godly sort; what carefulness it wrought in you,
 how great is the care and sollicitude it works in all, that so sorrow, to get out of their Sins, and to return home to God? What 
Apology
 for 
Holyness,
 for 
God,
 and against 
Sin?
 what 
Judg∣ment
 against sin? What 
Fear
 and 
Awe
 of God striking to the very Heart of sin? what vehement desire after God, after true Grace, and perfect Re∣formation? and this boyling up to 
Zeal,
 or the heigth of Desire; that Powerful Religious Affecti∣on, under the Operation of which a Man cannot 
bear Evil,
 no, not for a moment. And lastly, there is an 
holy Revenge
 upon sin, 
Sathan,
 lust, even a man's sinful self; by which the Irreconcilable Hatred to every sin is Discovered, and a Monument of that Hatred set up in the Soul.


Thus works 
godly sorrow to Repentance;
 but the 
forrow of the World
 having nothing to do with God, with sense of his Displeasure for sin, with sin, as so great a reason of sorrow and trouble; the Spirit re∣mains in all its former Frame of union to the world, and to sin; and so with the whole state of sin, and of the World, and of sorrow, it sinks down to the center, to the place of sorrow for ever; For when sorrow that is the Instrument of God in working 
Repentance,
 does not prevail to that God's end; it more certainly sinks down to its Center, and that with great Violence; as we see in those fore-nam'd Examples of 
Cain, Esau, Saul, Akito∣phel, Judas,
 who not 
sorrowing to Repentance
 went

 down with greater violence to the 
Chambers of Death
 and 
Sorrow,
 even everlasting sorrow.


5. The efficacy of 
godly sorrow to Repnntance,
 is, that it makes the Soul very humble before God; the natural effect of sorrow is to meeken, and bow the Spirit; 
heaviness in the Heart of Man makes it stoop, Prov.
 12.25 the guise and mein, or Posture of sorrow, is to 
bow down the head like a Bull-rush.
 The 
Hipocritical
 mourner does so, to imitate true sorrow, 
Esay.
 58.5. Now this indeed, except it turn to God, and have Relation to him, is the meanness and pusilanimity of a Man; but it is the true greatness of Mind to lye down before God, and 
Tremble in his Presence,
 as the melted Metal trem∣bles and quivers before the Founder: This dis∣solving, melting Efficacy of 
godly sorrow
 is that, which turning to God makes the Heart 
submit it self,
 as the Apostle 
James
 speaks in the same Con∣text, c. 4.10. 
Ʋnder the mighty hand of God,
 
that he may lift it up;
 it says to God, 
Lord what wilt thou have me to do?
 It says, 
what shall I do to be sav'd?
 What shall I do, what shall I do in obedi∣ence to God? It 
treads softly before God,
 as if it said to him, Lord, which way wilt thou have me to go? Which 
Ahab
 doing, tho not with a per∣fect Heart, receiv'd some degree of Favour by, 1 
Kings
 21.27, 29.


Now this Humility, how acceptable is it to God! How yeilding to his Command! 
God gives grace to it;
 God looks off from 
Heaven and Earth to look to that man that is of a contrite Spirit, and trem∣bles

 at his word:
 He that is the 
high
 and 
lofty one,
 that 
dwells in the high and holy Place,
 and 
Inhabits E∣ternity,
 will 
Dwell
 also with 
the hum∣ble spirit to revive the Spirit of the Humble.
 
This sorrow hides Pride from man,
 as the expression is in 
Job,
 and so fits it to all 
holy returns to God
 by 
Repentance:
 It 
with∣draws man from his purpose:
 It chan∣ges the purpose of Man;
 that which was the full purpose of the Heart be∣fore, was to cleave to sin, and the world, now the 
heart cleaves
 to God with its 
full purpose.


This 
humble broken Spirit
 is the 
Sacrifice of God, the Sacrifice he will not despise,
 because it is ready to yeild up it self in all obedience to him.


But the 
sorrow of the World,
 not eying God, nor having regard to him, never changes the Heart, nor Life into obedience to him; and so leaves a man in the same lost undone state; and so becomes 
desperate Sorrow
 and 
Anguish,
 as the Scripture calls it, 
Esay
 8.22. and may be most fitly described by 
Jer.
 c. 4.28. 
They are all greivous Revolters; they are Brass and Iron; they are all Corrupters; the Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed of the Fire; the Founder melteth in vain; for the Evil of the Heart is not pulled away; reprobate silver shall men call them, because the Lord hath rejected them.
 When God therefore, as the great 
Founder,
 Casting men as in∣to the 
Furnace
 of sorrow, they are not purged f
om Evil; the 
Melting
 is in vain, and they are therefore 
Rejected
 by God, as 
Reprobate Silver.
 When Sor∣row and Affliction, which are as the 
Chirurgery,
 or Blood-Letting of the gracious Hand of God,

 Effects nothing of Good; it is as the Corruption of the whole Mass of Blood, and is certainly to Death.


6. When sorrow is placed upon offence against a Person, and upon unthankful, and disingenuous Treaty of him, there arises a Love and Compas∣sion to that Person, a shame to offend further; a resolution to make him all the reparations we are able, and the greater the 
Bitterness,
 the greater the 
Effect:
 And though these cannot be properly placed, as issuing from the Creature towards the Creator; yet Scripture representing God, as hath been said, Grieved, Peirced, press'd with Sin, it represents the grieved sorrowing, relenting sinner, so Affected, as if there were an Ingenuous, even Compassion and Love towards God the Creator; and unwillingness so to grieve, and provoke any further; It represents therefore the highest degrees of Bitterness, and a sorrow as for a 
First Born,
 and for an 
only begotten Child,
 or 
Son;
 or like that most com∣passionate 
Lamentation
 for the excel∣lent Prince 
Josiah,
 
slain at Megiddo,
 that was so continued a sorrow, as to be spoken of in 
Lamentation to that day,
 as Scripture uses to speak; now seeing Re∣pentance it self, as hath been shewn in the general Nature of it, hath so much of this; The sorrow, that is Affected like it, is most fitted, and prepard to work it; and it is so blessed by God to work it; whereas the 
sorrow of the World
 is like 
Clouds
 without this 
Rain of Heaven,
 and 
Wells
 without this 
Water of Sal∣vation,
 and therefore settles, as into the 
Lake of the

 second Death, and smells of its Brimstone.


And thus far 
I
 have proceeded, to make out the serviceableness of 
godly sorrow,
 or 
sorrow after God, that works Repentance to Salvation never to be Re∣pented of.


General
 3d. I come now to the third General, concerning sorrow for Sin, 
viz.
 To shew the Wisdom of God, and the Reasonableness of his making use of sorrow; and fitting it, as 
after
 him∣self, or 
according
 to himself, to so great an end and purpose; and that according to the very Reason, and Nature of Things, it could not be otherwise; but that godly sorrow must be so made use of a∣bove, and before any other Affection; and that it 
becomes him, by whom are all things, and for whom are all things,
 so to make use of it.


1. There can be, according to what the Apostle says, no other object of Rational, Intellectual Sor∣row, but only the loss of the Favour of God, or his displeasure for sin, or subordinated to it; which makes it 
sorrow after God.
 For if on one side the sorrow so plac'd, and fix'd, hath so blessed Effects, that he that so sorrows, receives no iniury by it, but so great good, 
as Repentance to Salvati∣on, never to be Repented of;
 that it is not so much Lost, as chang'd into 
Fulness of Joy,
 and so per∣fected; and on the other side, that sorrow laid out on any other object, (which is 
sorrow after the World) works Death:
 Then it must needs become the wise, and gracious God, 
of whom, by whom are all things in bringing many Sons to Glory, to bring them to Perfection,
 by such a sorrow as this.




For if God was pleas'd to make such a Rational, Intellectual Nature, as man, that might, though made Holy, fall into sin; It must needs be, that it must have a fitness to turn it self with sorrow up∣on such an evil, and reason of sorrow, as God of∣fended and displeas'd for sin; supposing a man, by that sin had not lost either the use of his Under∣standing, or not lost the sense of God, Holiness, and Goodness; seeing if it did not lye Dead, and Benummed, or strongly diverted and turned off from its Object; or that God does not appear an Irre∣concileable Judg, and Revenger, and give up man to the wickedness and rage of Death. It must so turn.


Whenever therefore God by his grace in Christ, and by his Spirit, turns any sinner to himself, and stirs up those Powers of understanding, and Con∣science after himself; The very order of the Cre∣ation of God Requires, that the understanding and Natural Conscience, and Affection of Man should be turn'd upon him, displeas'd by Sin, by this hum∣ble sorrow of Love; even as upon his wrath, and Vengeance, with a sorrow of Pain, Fear, and Ter∣ror; so that both the 
Bondage of Fear of Death,
 and the 
Reverence of godly Fear,
 and Love move to this sorrow, and the wise order of Things settled by God, cannot allow it otherwise.


On the other side, if the turn of the Rational Nature, and Affection, be drawn out upon the sense of any evil with trouble, and dislike, and re∣flection on its disagreeableness and inconveniency, and yet its pressure upon it; which is sorrow, grief, and sadness; it must either be turn'd upon God of∣fended, and displeas'd by sin; or it is to no pur∣pose

 of good, that there is such a Passion or Af∣fection in man: For if it be plac'd on any other object, it is but sorrow of this World, how just so ever, in regard of any evil of suffering, it may seem to be: It is but 
sorrow to Death,
 and so of no good at all to us, but evil, till it be deriv'd into a higher and more excellent Channel: So that it may be said of this 
sorrow,
 as 
Solomon
 says of 
Laughter. It is madness, and what doth it?
 And in place of 
Thorns crackling under a Pot;
 It is as the 
slow Fire,
 of too near a∣greement with that of 
Brimstone
 of the 
Lake:
 It is not of any merciful or gracious use, but for the manifestation of the wrath, and displeasure of God against sin.


2. Let us consider seriously, what Jesus Christ our Lord suffered under the sense of sin; and then think whether it be reasonable; that the whole should fall on him, and none of the drops, and end of it, come to us, and so be 
fill'd up by us?
 We should never read that part of Sacred History of the 
Agony of Christ,
 but we should deeply take it to Heart, Luke 22.44. 
He being in an Agony, Prayed more earnestly, and his sweat was as it were drops of Blood:
 Christ was not at this time seiz'd upon, and in the hands of those that Crucified him, but was in perfect Meditation, in an entire solitude of Thoughts: He was in Contemplation of the great evil of sin, and of the wrath and justice of God upon it:


We may then say, 
Dyed Christ as a Fool? Or was Christ in an Agony,
 as a Fool, or as a weak person?

 Did he not pursue the true Reason of Things? Did he not follow sin by his holy and wise consideration of it from its beginning to its end? Did he not see it, as God looks upon it, and as the Nature of sin requires, it should be looked upon? Did he not behold it in the ruin, and damnation of mankind, in the everlasting horror of Conscience in Hell? If not, why this Agony? Did he not behold our sins in all the aggravations of them? Else why was our Lord under a sorrow, that no ones sorrow was like to it: He might justly say, to all that Read of it, behold, 
was any mans sorrow like to mine?
 Ought we not therefore, though we cannot suffer, as he did, nor to such an effect of Suffering? Yet ought we not to be Conformed to our Head? If these things were 
done in the green Tree, ought there not to be a Conformable Sense of them, upon us, who are as the dry Tree,
 and much more reason∣bly to be so affected?


3. The great disadvantages that come upon the profession of Christianity, in the want of this 
godly sorrow, press for it.


1. Either Men rest and center in a false Repen∣tance: The 
fallow ground
 of the Heart is not truly 
broken up,
 so that they 
sow on the Rock, or among Thorns,
 and 
build in the Sand;
 and their Repentance is not this Repentance, the Apostle speaks of; they do not go down to the bottom of the Heart, nor dig deep to find the Springs of true Repen∣tance:




2. Or, 2dly, Suppose the Repentance not False; such are yet in Danger of Falls after Conversion; for no man is so truly, and continually afraid of sin, as he that hath found the smart and evil in pro∣foundest sorrow for it.


3. There is Danger, when 
godly sorrow
 hath not had its 
perfect work,
 there should arise after per∣plexities of Conscience, either upon the surprisal of outward Afflictions, or on the 
Death Bed;
 and sometimes with great Agonies, because we have not gone through the exact course of Repentance in 
sorrow for sin, and after God.


4. Oftentimes God leads through outward Cha∣stisements, to bring us through a more solemn sense of sin, and the evil of it; and to closer acts of 
self Judging,
 and more exact Reformation of our Hearts and ways.


4. That we may be under the full efficacy of 
godly sorrow,
 God hath made that gracious promise, 
Ezek.
 36.25. 
That he will take away the Heart of Stone, and give the Heart of Flesh:
 Thus that 
Ada∣mantine
 and 
nether Millstone
 Temper is removed, an
 a soft 
tender Heart,
 that fears the first ap∣proach of sin, is Introduc'd.


It may seem an objection against this Doctrine of sorrow for sin, as if the pressing of it is a De∣rogation from the 
Blood of Christ,
 and the fulness of his 
Redemption;
 as if his 
sufferings, sacrifice,
 and 
satisfaction
 were not enough, without our sorrow, as a kind of Penance.




But this I shall endeavour fully to remove here∣after, as the same Objection may seem to lye against the whole 
Doctrine of Repentance.


I will therefore conclude this part of the Dis∣course, 
viz. concerning sorrow for sin by giving some practical inferences by way of Application from it.


Infer.
 1. Let us be content to 
suffer in the Flesh,
 as the Apostle 
Peter
 speaks, 1 
Peter
 4.4. by deep sorrow for sin and 
after God,
 as it were the 
Death of th
 Flesh.
 and of the corrupt part; that we 
may Live according to God in the Spirit: arm your selves with the same mind, that was in Christ:
 Be willing to be as Condemned, and 
put to Death
 in the sense of sin; desire to know Hell, and everlasting Mise∣ry as he did, in your own sense of it; he went down to Hell in the Contemplation of it, though not Locally: Let us be in the 
, in the 
Communion
 in the 
Fellowship of his Sufferings:
 It is better to know it now, and here, while it may be es∣cap'd, than to know it hereafter; when there will be a gulf between it, and the state of Life, that cannot 
be passed.


Infer.
 2: Let us possess our selves with the mighty Reasons and Arguments of 
godly sorrow,
 the Motives, and inward operative Influences of it; the serious consideration of the great evil of sin, the foulness of it, the dishonour, the neglect, the contempt of God, that is found in it; the unrea∣sonable 
ingratieude,
 and 
unkindness
 of it to the 
Lord our God,
 and to 
Jesus Christ the Saviour,
 and 
Re∣deemer;


 but especially let us earnestly beg that Spirit of Grace, and Ingenuous sense, that may cause us to 
be in bitterness, as he that is in bitterness for his First Born;
 that we may thus 
sorrow after God.


Infer.
 3. Let us sweeten to our selves, that which may seem very harsh, and contrary to Flesh and Blood; this 
sorrow after God;
 with the consi∣deration of this; that Christ hath established a Blessing upon it, the blessing of an everlasting 
Consolation,
 Luke 6.21, 25. 
Blessed are you that Mourn, and that Weep; for you shall be Comforted:
 And on the other side, 
there is a Woe on them that Laugh now; Consider; Christ the Captain of our Sal∣vation,
 and all the Saints of God have passed through the 
Vally of Baca,
 this 
Valley of Weeping,
 the way to the 
Heavenly Jerusalem,
 while the mad roaring merry World are going that broad way down to Destruction: This works that 
Repentance to Salvation never to be Repented of.


Head
 3d. I come now to the 
Third Head in the Doctrin of Repentance,
 and that is to Discourse the true Laws and Rules of Repentance, the Frame, and the true constitution of Repentance; the Mo∣tives, and considerations for it; the signs and evidences of true Repentance; all which must needs be very great; in that, it is 
Repentance to Sal∣vation,
 not a false, or counterfeit Repentance, or but 
to be Repented of;
 not to be recall'd, revers'd, or re∣pented, but to be confirm'd by progressive, repeated Acts, and renewals after Falls, even till it lays hold of 
Salvation.




General
 1. In the opening the grand 
Doctrin
 of 
Repentance,
 as on this head, I sh
ll endeavour to guide the Discourse of it, by keeping to the strict, proper and precise Nature, and notion of Repen∣tance; For I know it does not really, and sub∣stantially differ from other grand Evangelical No∣tions of a through change of Heart, and Life; as 
Regeneration, the new Creation; a new Heart, a new Spirit: the Laws of God put into our Hearts,
 
and writ in our minds, that we may never depart from him; the Heart of Stone taken out of our Flesh, and having Hearts of Flesh; a being caus'd to walk in his statutes and judgments, and to do them: His fear put into our hearts and his spirit; within us;
 It is Mortification, and Sanctification; It is Conversion, and turning to the Lord; 
a being cleans'd from secret sins and kept back from presumptuous sins, a cleansing our way, by taking heed thereto according to the word of God; the ordering our steps in his word,
 
that no Iniquity may have dominion over us:
 Nay, It dif∣fers not from Faith in the Blood of Christ by any Essential Difference; from seeking Pardon and Reconciliation by Faith in that great Attonement, and Sacrifice; nor from the 
Love of Christ, constraining
 all those, who 
Live;
 that is, have their Lives given to them, through his Death, 
to Live to him, who dyed for them:
 All these are, as I have said, Essentially, and substantially the same: But yet there is a very Distinct, and even 
Critical
 consideration of Repentance, that I shall apply to in the present Treaty, under these three heads.




Particular
 1st: Repentance carries always a Notion of severe, and rigorous Acts in relation to our selves upon account of our Sins, and high Of∣fences against God:


Particular
 2. Repentance imports very close, and particular Negotiations, and Transactions with God in Relation to Forgiveness; and such, as ex∣press our particular shame, and sorrow, that we have offended him; and earnest desires, that he would shew to us, that he is at Peace with us, and hath Pardon'd all, that is past in Christ:


Particular
 3. Repentance is a hearty an univer∣sal Change of our inward Thoughts, Counsel, Pur∣pose, and Design; and of our outward Conversa∣tion, out of a true, and real Hatred, and dislike of what we have been, done, and chosen; and a Love, Choice, and Delight in what we have not been, and have not done, nor delighted in.


Particular
 1. Repentance consists of many great, and severe Acts in Relation to our selves; up∣on Account of our sins, and High Offences against God; under which I will in every one of them, shew the great excellency, and usefulness of this duty, and the acceptableness of it to God.


1. The seriousest, closest, and most deep exa∣mination of our Hearts, and Thoughts, and Lives, so as to know them, and to sit in Judgment upon them, is found in true Repentance: This is a won∣derful Power, and grace that God gives, when he gives Repentance; that a Man shall be made to sit upon himself, and to call himself to an Account,

 to 
search himself,
 as it were, 
with Candles,
 and to say, 
what have I done? To search, and to try his ways, and to turn to the Lord,
 to think of his 
ways, and to turn his Feet to God's Testimonies; to declare his ways in God's hearing;
 and because his own search cannot be close, and exact; to cry out to God, 
to search,
 and 
to try him, and to lead him into the way everlasting:
 And this is performed by 
laying
 a mans Actions to the 
Line
 and 
Rule
 of the 
Law of God,
 and entring into the p
rticulars of every Com∣mand; of every Age, and, as much as may be, every great and r
markable Action.


Now this is evidently a very supernatural 
ffi∣cacy; for we see how afraid we are all of it; a Man in this way of Inquisition, and Visitation of himself, is in a manner, as afraid of himself, as he is of God; and hides himself from himself, even as from the Eyes of God; it is true, when men are in the cariere of sin, they are bold enough with themselves; they 
devise mischief upon their Bed, the secret Thought and Heart of every one of us is very deep in sin;
 and we know it, and are willing enough to know, we know it, when all is of a Peice; to go on in sin: But when a Man finds him∣self coming, as a Judg upon himself; he is pre∣sently aware of himself, and desirous to hide him∣self from himself, and to start away from himself; when any therefore come to say to themselves, I will find out all the secret ways of my own sin∣ful Heart, of my Pride, of my Lust, of my Hi∣pocrisy, of my Deceit, of my Formality, and vain shews in Religion, and the worship of God; that I may Reform all, and cast out all that is

 evil: I will be known to my self, even the worst of my self I will make known to my self, to hate and to loath it; we may certainly say, It is very hopeful, God is giving 
Repentance to Life:
 For I would not walk in Disguise, under a Vizor, and a Mask to my self; we hear therefore so often this Voice of Scripture, 
Examin your selves, prove your own selves,
 
know ye not your own selves?
 except we are in a state that as to its present, is reprobated by God. 
So let a man Examin himself, let him prove his own work,
 Gal 6.


There are certainly many Truths of God, and parts of Religion, and of the Action, and Duty of it, that a
e more smooth, and agreeable to Men of Reason, and Ingenious Temper; that do not, though seemingly complyed with, search the carnal unregenerate Heart to the bottom: These therefore will not give such Evidence of the Truth of Grace, and of the mighty Operation of the Divine Spirit: But this Duty of Self-examination, it can serve no Carnal Interest; so far as a man is led in it, he is led by the mighty Hand and Power of God: For in this Point, he is else ready to be 
Merciful to himself, to spare himself.


W
n God causes a man to search himself, that what is lowest, and at the bottom in him, may rise up; when he makes a Man pursue himself, and all his sins, till he can find none that he hath not had his E
e and his Search upon; surely, there is nothing that more assures a sincere work of God upon a mans Heart, nor nothing, more than the want of this, Discovers Insincerity.




2. In true Repentance there is an Authoritative and down right Self-Judgding, a Condemnation of what is Evil, and contrary to the Word of God, and the Laws of Holiness, and Rules of the Gospel of Christ; In Repentance, a man must plainly say with, and in the Authority of God upon himself,
 
Thou art the Man,
 Thou art such a sinner, such an un∣clean, sensual, voluptuous Person: Thou art such a Covetous, Worldly, Griping, Ex∣torting Person: Thou art such a deceitful, unjust Cheat, or Lyar: Thou art such a Hipocrite, that art more afraid of the Eye, of the judgment of the censure of Man, than of God: Thou art he, that choosest any, or such, and such a 
Sin,
 rather than 
Affliction:
 This plainly, and in the Name of God, and of Conscience, that is made a Judg with∣in a Man, and the Soul hearing it with Terror, and Awe upon it, is the true Work of Repentance: This is a severe Discipline, a day of Terror in∣deed upon the Soul, when it is carried home by the Hand▪ and Finger of God.


Now this Scripture calls a 
Judging our Selves,
 and this 
Self-examination,
 and 
Self-judging
 are re∣commended to us, as what would save 
Gods Judg∣ing us:
 If we would 
judg our selves,
 we should not be 
Judged of the Lord;
 and surely if it be done to the purpose, and so as strongly to affect the Heart; it is a very great Effect o
 the Spirit of God, and and of Christ, 
convincing of Sin, and of Righteousness,
 
and of Judgment;
 And I should rather choose it, as an Evidence 
of the Grace of God,
 than

 some 
fair appearances,
 that corrupt Nature can bet∣ter bear.


3. In 
Repentance
 there is a real Trembling, and Afflicting, and Grieving, and Shaming a Mans self; a smiting on a Mans Thigh, a being 
Asham'd and Confounded by bearing the Reproach of our ways; a loathing our selves, an abhorring our selves in dust and ashes; a not opening of our Mouths in any self Apology, or Justification, but a smiting on our Breast, as so great sinners, as the chief of sinners.
 This is the true, and real work of Repentance in this part of it: This is a truly Spiritual Penance, in comparison of which all imposed Bodily hardships are nothing; and yet 
if God
 lays 
Affliction
 upon us, though it be very severe; there is an 
Accep∣tance of the Punnishment of our Ini∣quities.


Oh! that God would enable us to these secret Acts upon our corrupt selves, 
to rend our Hearts, and not our Garments, to Sacrifice to God broken Hearts, and contrite Spirits, to Tremble at his word, to humble our selves,
 and to lye down before him, with our very 
Souls
 and 
Spirits,
 as well as to roll our Bodies in the Dust. Oh! that God would give us these proofs of true unfeign'd Repentance.


4. There follows in a true 
Repentance,
 a real ex∣ecution upon our corrupt, impure selves, a 
cutting off the Right Hand,
 
and the Right Foot, a pulling out the Right Eye, a true Spiritual being put to Death, a slay∣ing, a crucifying our selves in the Flesh,
 that we may 
Live to God in the Spirit; a suffering the Spirit of

 Judgment, and of Burning, a salting the Saorifice,
 not only with 
Salt,
 but with 
Fire.


Now All these Things are of great use, as they are Acknowledgments of the Righteous Judgment of God, due to us in our Eternal Condemnation, as they are Judging our selves to the very Fire of Hell; As they declare the exceeding Evil of Sin, and the Foulness of it; as they shew us the abso∣lute Necessity of a Redeemer; as they lay a Foun∣dation of separating our selves from sin, and of the utter Hatred of it. And lastly, They are such, as must needs result from Rational Nature, endued with most powerful Principles of the Law of Righ∣teousness, Knowledge of God, and of his Righte∣ous Judgment, written in the 
Hearts
 and the 
Thoughts
 he hath made; the Conscience he hath created, either for 
Accusing
 or 
Excusing;
 and espe∣cially all these mightily set home by the power of the Spirit of God; that so he may have, though not 
Real Satisfaction
 from the 
Sinner;
 for that is 
a∣lone from Christ;
 Yet such an 
Honorary satisfaction,
 and 
Acknowledgment;
 as is due from a sinner, even in his very Soul, and from the bottom of his Heart; in the 
Day,
 wherein rhe Lord is 
pacified towards him,
 that 
flies for Refuge to the hope set before him.


Particular
 2. The 
second Particular
 in this Head, concerning 
Repentance,
 in the 
strict consideration
 of it, is, 
That it imports very close and particular Negoti∣ationn, and Transactions with God, in relation to For∣giveness; and such, as express our particular shame, and sorrow, that we have offended him; and earnest Desires, that he would shew us, that he is at peace

 with us, and hath pardon'd all that is pass'd in Christ.


Under this I will Discourse these following Parti∣culars:


1. In 
Repentance:
 The Humble, Repenting Soul casts it self down in the most lowly, and Self-aba∣sing Acknowledgment of sin, and confession of it. Scripture therefore points so much at 
Confession: He that confesseth, and forsaketh:
 He must first 
confess,
 and then 
forsake his sins,
 and 
he shall find mercy,
 Prov. 28.13. And 
David
 describes a 
Penitent,
 as one, 
in whose Spirit there is no guile:
 that is, he makes an open, sincere, hearty Confession. This is one Branch of the Description of the 
Blesled Man, whose Iniquities are forgiven, and whose sins are co∣vered;
 and to whom 
the Lord will not impute Iniqui∣ty:
 And after, it follows, 
I acknowledg'd my Iniqui∣ty unto thee, and my sin have I not hid: I said, I will confess my transgression unto the Lord, and thou forga∣vest the Iniquity rf my s n.
 But before I did this, and while 
I kept silence, thy hand was heavy upon me;
 so that 
my moisture was tu ned inio the drought of summer,
 Psalm 32.1, 
&c. I acknowledge my tnans∣gression, and my sin is ever before me,
 Psalm 51.3. 
Ezra thus made confession,
 c. 9. So 
Nehemiah.
 c. 9. So 
Daniel,
 c. 9. And the Apostle, 
John,
 Ep. 1. c. 1.9. says, 
If we confess our sins he is f
ithful and just to forgive us our sins, and to cleanse us from all un∣righteousness.
 Thus we see how much Scripture puts upon 
Confession
 throughout.


Now 
Confession of sin
 is not accepted of God for it self: For what can we suppose, the Relation of

 our sins can be to God, the 
Eyes
 of whose 
Holiness,
 and 
Glory,
 are so 
p
ovok'd
 by our sins? But he hath only Regard to us, that we should in hatred of our sins, and of our sinful selves, expose them with ha∣tred, and abhorrence of our selves; and because we are resolved to have no more to do with them, we discover and detect them, without any thing of 
Guile,
 without any 
Reserve:
 For, as the Expres∣sion is in 
Job,
 when we 
spare our sins,
 we 
roll them under our Tongues.
 The more therefore we con∣fess them with trouble of Mind, and in bitterness of Spirit, and with Resolutions of having no more to do with them, the more acceptable is our Confession to God; because thereby our Confession the more attains God's Ends, and what he is most pleas'd with in our Confession. For therein is our sincerity, when we confess sin, because it is Reason∣able to expect we will not be reconcil'd to the sins we confess: For that is for 
the Dog to return to his Vomit.
 Confession of our sins, with Loathing and Abhorrence, is 
vomiting them out of our mouths.
 And sherefore to 
return to them again,
 is to return to our 
Vomit:
 and Confession is like Washing and Purify∣ing our selves: To retturn therefore to the sins we have confess'd is 
wallowing our selves in the mire,
 af∣ter 
washing.
 This seems so Reasonable, and even Necessary, that when it is first said, 
He that hideth and covereth his sins, shall not prosper:
 Then, he that 
confesseth, and forsaketh, shall find mercy.
 It is sup∣posed, if any Man does not 
confess,
 he will not 
for∣sake;
 but if he confesses, he does it in order to 
for∣saking.
 But yet because Men are so apt to deceive themselves with Formality, and to think, God may be so put off, and pleas'd, he adds; He that not on∣ly

 
confesleth,
 but does that which is so necessary with Confession 
forsakes; shall find mercy.


Thus 
Solomon,
 all along his Pray∣er, joyns many Expressions, that are the undoubted Acts of 
sincere Repentance,
 to∣gether with the 
Confession of sin.
 And if Confession be thus joyn'd with Sorrow, Shame, Trouble, Ha∣tred of sins and utter separation from them; it could not deservedly fall under that Ridicule, and Contempt, that prophane men put upon it; as if it were the telling God only the Story of our wick∣ed Hearts, or Lives: But without other sincere, effective Powers of Repentance, it too justly 
falls under that Reproach;
 but any such 
Reproach, our Lord will return upon us, and our Confession.


2. In 
Repentance
 there is an earnest and most ve∣hement, but also most humble Application to the 
Throne of Grace,
 in Jesus Christ, for Pardon and Re∣conciliation; and with such a Continuance and Per∣severance, as till there be some Answer, that God is our Gracious Father in Christ; that we hear the 
Joyful sound,
 that 
our sins are forgiven us.
 It is not only that 
common
 and 
formal way of asking Pardon,
 whether we mind it or not; but to make it our Bu∣siness, the Aim and Design of our Souls, till we re∣ceive some gracious assurance, that our Desires are answered, and our Prayers heard. The truly Re∣penting sinner 
sitteth alone,
 and 
keepeth silence;
 that is, he is in a 
waiting,
 and 
earnestly expecting posture;
 He 
putteth his mouth in the dust, if there may be hope;
 He saith of God, 
He is my portion;
 he hath pro∣mised pardon, 
the
ef
re will I hope in him:
 For in∣deed the Lord is 
good to all that
 thus 
wait for him; to the soul that
 thus 
seeketh him:
 It is 
good therefore

 for a man, that he both hope,
 and 
quietly wait for the salvation of the Lord; It is good for a man to bear the Y ke 
n his youth:
 Till G d is pleas'd to say to him, 
Be of good cheer, I am 
y salvation: Fear not. I have blotted out thy Trans
ressions as a clo
d, and thy sins as a thick cl
ud:
 When they are 
sought f
r, there sh
ll be none;
 and though they are 
s
a
ch'd for, they shall not be found.
 For thus the trul
 repenting sin∣ner 
f
ll
ws hard after God:
 Repentance is a Grace on purp
se for the suing out 
ardon and Reconci∣liation. And because it is moved and acted by Faith▪ it seeks this Pardon in Christ, and through the Mediator, 
y whom alone 
Repentance bath place,
 and 
from whom alone the Notion of it springs,
 as hath been shewn: Thus 
David
 in his Repentance 
renewed,
 through the whole 
Psalm
 51. 
repeats
 and 
redoubles his pra
er f
r pardon;
 as if he would not cease, n r be quiet, till he had the a 
urance of it: He turns himself therefore every way to God, and all the Efficacies of his Grace for Pardon, and with a Respect to the Blood of Christ, under the 
Hy∣sop.


Particular
 3. In 
true Repentance,
 the Soul makes 
Full and F
m Resol
tions of New Obedience,
 and 
A∣mendment of Life;
 and such as are ready to issue out into A
ti
n; and this through the Grace, and Power, and assistance of the Divine Spi∣rit.


And herein, indeed, is the very great Point of 
Repentanc
,
 an
 that gives Evidence to the Truth of all that goes before: When there is such a 
; such an 
after sollicitude,
 and 
serious

 afflictive Concernedness
 for the 
sinfulness and unholi∣ness of our former Actions and Life;
 that we can no longer endure that State, or Course, in regard of the very 
anguish,
 and 
trouble of Thoughts
 upon us; as it also issues into a strict Care and Government over all our Future Actions, to keep them within the Holy Rule and Government of the Word of God, the Laws of Holiness, and of Obedience to him: And herewith is joyned a 
; such an 
Af∣ter-mind,
 such an 
After-counsel,
 such 
Second Thoughts
 as change the 
whole Purpose
 and 
Manner of Life:
 such an engaging the Heart to 
approach to God,
 So that the True Penitent is prepared, and actually 
brings forth Fruits meet for Repentance,
 and 
amendment of life.
 There is a 
turning from Darkness;
 that is, from the whole Night of Ignorance, Injudicious Mind, Un∣holiness of Action, Sinfulness of Life, under a con∣tinued Night, and 
Darkness;
 to 
Light;
 that is, to a 
true sound Judgment and Mind,
 
ven the 
Spirit of a sound Mind,
 and rightly 
Inform'd Ʋnd
rstanding;
 to an high and 
perfect sense of things,
 and to an 
u∣niversal Holiness, Purity and 
leans
dness from all fil∣thiness of Flesh
 and 
Spirit;
 and so a 
perfecting of Holiness in the fear of God:
 a just Account of 
he Time 
past,
 as that which may have much more than 
sufficed,
 to have 
wrought the Will of the Gentiles,
 and to have spent in the 
Lusts of our Ig∣norance,
 and now we are wholly Dedicated to God.




This is the Noble Grace of 
Repentance,
 that is, indeed, 
to salvation,
 and 
never to be repented of:
 So wonderful and admirable a Contrivance of the Grace of God, and such an Illuststration thereof, that 
Angels,
 even the 
whole Heaven. Rejoyceth over one sinner
 that 
repents,
 more than over 
Ninety Nine just persons that need no Repentance:
 That is, there is a greater Resplendency, and shining out of the Glory of the Divine Compassion, and Efficacious Power of his Spirit in 
Repentance,
 than even in an Innocent State. It is the Joyful Astonishment of Angels and Saints: They adore, and 
throw their Crowns before God,
 even the 
Crowns of Angelical Perfection;
 and adore the Infinite and Incomprehensible 
Myste∣ry of the Divine Will;
 that when the sinning Angels had no allowance of 
after,
 or 
second thoughts;
 of 
after-care;
 or 
judging better,
 of an 
af∣ter-mind,
 but are under Final Impenitency, and in 
Chains of Darkness,
 to the 
Judgment of the Great Day, when
 Repentance to Life 
is granted to men.


The Lord hath been pleas'd to bring out of that 
Reprobate Silver
 in it self such 
Vessels of Mercy,
 which 
he had before Prepared to Glory;
 mak∣ing them by 
Repentance Vessels meet for the masters use, prepared to every good Work;
 and who herein yeild this great Glory to Righ∣teousness, and H
lyness, that upon full J
dgment and Experiment made; They imcomparably pre∣fer Holyness to all the 
Pleasures of Sin,
 that are but for a 
season;
 and choose even the bitter Draught, if I may so speak, the bitter Waters of Repen∣tance,

 before the Intoxicating Cup of the 
Pleasures of Sin
 that are 
but for a season;
 and stand for ever obliged and deeplyest indebted to 
true Grace,
 that not only their after thoughts, and Judgment in Repentance are accepted; but that they are Re∣triev'd by the E
cacious Operations of it to 
New∣ness of Life.


General
 2d, I have thus far open'd the Nature of Rep
n
ance, by considering the strict, and pre∣cise Notion of it, and shewing how excellent, ad∣mirable, and even noble a Grace, this Evangelical Grace is, even in that strict and precise Notion: I will now go on to consider it in the excellent motives, and Incentives to it; that will further shew the excellency of its Nature, and then the signes of its Truth, that it is Repentance of the true Alloy; the truly excellent Nature under that great sign, 
It is Repentance to Salvation,
 and that is 
never to be Repented of,
 which is the Second Gene∣ral under this Third Head in the Doctrin of Re∣pentance.


Particular
 1. I begin with Motives to this true Repentance, wherein I Record these following, of which I will but briefly speak, having already comprehended much of them: And as they are motives, so they are to be look'd upon as the highest means, and instructions, fitted by God for Repentance; and the Soul accordingly is to apply and stretch forth it self in the use of them.


1. The principal, not Motive, but 
Mover
 is the Supreme Grace and Operation of the Divine Spi∣rit,

 who si
s as a 
Refiners Fire,
 and 
F
llers Soap
 within the 
Temple
 of the 
Soul;
 is a 
Spirit of Grace, and of Sup∣plication, a Spirit of Judgment and Burning, washing away the Filthiness of the Flesh, and of the Spirit;
 The divine Spirit is the great Superintendent of the Grace, and Work of Rep
n
ance, by his inward Motives, and Overshaddowings of the Soul; For seeing Repentance is the 
Gift and Grant of God;
 the Divine Spirit, that is the 
Power and Finger of God,
 must needs be the Supreme Operator: What the Love of God is the Fountain of in the Divine Operation; that the Spi
it of God, by whom, the last Operation, and 
ffect is in every thing perfected, is the immediate Hand and Finger that b
ings it to p
ss; and so what Jesus Christ is a 
Prince to Gi
e;
 that which is his, the Riches, the P
chase of his 
Redemption; his Spirit is sent,
 
he sends him in the Fathers Name, to take of it, and to give it to 
is R
d
emed.
 Repentance therefore being the 
urchase of the Re
emption of Christ, he gives it as 
he Fruit of that Redemption, and whence else should Repentance arise? For except by ver∣tue of the Redemption of Christ, it were Created and Lorn with us, It is no
 in a
y Created Power to raise, or to bring it forth; That belongs to the all Crea
ing Power: That Christ hath shored up the Moral Faculties so far, as to preserve the possibilities of Repentance is Evident; and to his Glory be it declared; That by him the same mo∣tions and endeavours; that Natural Conscience hath

 to Holyness, and Righteousness before sin; the same it hath to Repentance after sin; and so even as in sinning, so in not Repenting the Impenitent Sinner is most righteosly Condemned.


But even as a Man cannot exert, nor put forth his Faculties to Holiness, and Righteousness be∣fore sin without a Reg
neration, and new Creati∣on; even so can he not after sin, either, as it is habitu
l in his Nature, or as he is fallen by innu∣merable Actual Sins, return by Repentance, except by the speci
l Assistances of Divine Grace, and Almighty Power.


For surely, as nothing lies for ever in a state of nothing, except an almighty moover gives Being from himself; so Impenitency lies for ever in a state of Impenitency, except an infinite Spirit of Grace give Repentance to 
ife; which shews, that mankind stands in no other state for Repen∣tance, than it does to Holiness, and Righteousness; There is that preserv'd in him, that shews the goodness of both, and moves him to both; but how to Perform in either he finds not, but as he is Assisted by Infi
ite Grace, and by an Infinite Spirit: And this shews Supremacy of Grace, di∣stinguishing between those, to whom it 
gives Re∣pentance unto Life,
 and to whom it does not give; even 
s it destinguish
s between those, to whom it gives Regeneration, Renovation, new Creation to Holiness, and Righteousness; and to whom it does not give.


For except these, even Repentance, new Crea∣
n, Reg
n
ra
ion, were so by Christ communicated to our very Natures; that every man had them by the very Grace of con
i
ing Cre
tion; except he

 Lost it for himself (as 
Adam
 did Original Righte∣ousness for himself, and his Posterlty) which no man will dare to assert; it is so evident to the con∣trary; else what is not, never will be; and what is at Rest will never move, except an Almighty Mover give it Motion.


For though, it is true; the Engrafted Notions of Righteousness, and Holiness, first; and then of Repentance in case of sin, or Fall have a Residence in the very Spirit of Man, or Human Nature; ex∣cept utterly quench'd by a Malice even Diabolical as in the sin against the 
Divine Spirit;
 yet they can∣not rise beyond themselves to true Repentance, without a new Donation from God and Christ by the Holy Spirit; and only shew the exceeding first Corruption, and Degeneracy of Human Na∣ture and aggravate Condemnation, in that they reach not that end, they should reach to, nor in∣deed to their own utmost possibility; but men are condemn'd, and depriv'd of further Grace by not improving the 
Talent
 given to them, so far as they indeed might.


But from all this it arises, that the Supreme Mover in true Repentance, is the Holy Spirit of Grace; and if there be any appearance of Repen∣tance, that is not a Repentance given from the Divine Spirit; it is not the 
Repentance to Salvation, not to be Repented of,
 but a semblance and Counter∣feit only of it.


Now in this point, I have been the larger, be cause I had not before spoken to it: I shall but just name th
se following, because I have before comprehended them in former Particulars.




2. The sense of our own lost condition without Repentance is generally the first motive to Re∣pentance; in which regard our Lord pronounces once, and again; 
except ye Repent, you shall all Perish,
 
uke 13.3.5. 
Repent, and turn your selves, so iniquity shall not be your ruin: Cast away your Trans∣gressions, make you a new Heart and a new Spirit; for why will you Die?
 Implying this as the great motive to Repentance; that without it we must needs Die, Ezek. 18.30. Acts 17.31. 
God com∣mands all Men every where to Repent; because he hath appointed a day, wherein he will Judg the World:
 The consideration of a Judgment, to wit, of Condemnation upon an Impenitent Person as one great motive to Repentance.


God is pleas'd therefore generally to usher in Repentance by a shaking, an Earthquake in the Soul, shewing it the Horrors of Wrath and eter∣nal Punishment; which is call'd the 
Spirit of Bon∣dage,
 Rom. 8.15. For that Law of Self-preservati∣on being seated so deep in Man; the fear of an evil so Destructive to 
our Beings, as 
wrath to come,
 and the eternal Displeasure of the Supreme Being; Nothing moves so strongly and powerfully, nothing makes so violent concussions in the Heart of Man, as these deep apprehensions, or tears up the very Roots of that old sinful Frame, and make it fly every way, to change its Scituation, and Posture for the avoiding of that Displeasure: Thus 
Nine∣veh
 affrightned with that present dreadful D
nuncia∣tion of Judgment, turn'd it self every way to Attone∣ment with God; although the Judgment then De∣nounc'd did not r
ach to Everlasting Punnishment; how much more do the Apprehensions of 
Wrath

 to come,
 and ever to come, as was before observed of it, move? And though this is not the high∣est, and noblest Kind of Motive; yet it is such as our Lord earnestly, and doubly recommends to his 
Friends.
 I say unto you 
my Freinds, fear not them that kill the Body,
 and have no more that they can do;
 
but I will forewarn you whom you shall fear; fear him that after he hath kill'd, hath power to cast into Hell, yea, I say unto you, fear him.


3. The so gre
t Assurance God hath given in Jesus Christ the Mediator, and Redeemer, that our s
s shall be Pardoned upon our Repentance, is a most excellent motiv
 to Repentance, and follows the former; as that 
still Voice,
 wherein God is, did the 
arthquake,
 1 King
 c 19.12. This Assurance is that, which gives Life, and Spirit to Repentance, and also the true Eva
gelical Sweetness, and Di∣vine Temper to i
; which else would turn into the Horrors of 
Cain
 and 
Esau,
 which afterwards relaps'd into a Wor
ly s
curity, senselesness▪ and sensi
ility; for 
Cain went out from the P
ese ce of the Lord▪
 
and dwelt in the Land of
 Nod, 
and fell to Building: Esau
 b
came a grea
 Earthly Prince, and Fa
her to many 
D
kes,
 without any further thought of the 
Birthrig
t,
 or 
Blessing;
 or else the ho 
ors arising from the sense of sin, and Divine D
spleasure turn into the D
spair of 
Saul,
 and 
Judas,
 
at are but the for
casts of Hell, and everlasting s
p
 a
ion from the presence of God, and the 
light of his Countenance.
 This sense of the

 Love, and Favor of God in Christ, is that which draws the Soul, by the melting, and dissolving that 
Stony Heart,
 and making that 
stiff Neck,
 and 
Iron Sinnew
 to be ready, and pliant to all Holy Rules, and Heavenly Motions; and sweetens fear, sorrow, and horror into Love, and Reverence, and filial disp
sitions to Obedience; while there are any beginnings of 
shedding abroad the Love of God in the Heart, and when the Love of Christ begins to Constrain us:
 This glance of the Eye of Christ on 
Peter
 wi
h Love and Grace, made him 
go out and weep bitterly;
 this sense of Mercy humbled 
David,
 and Distill'd into all those Heavenly Peni∣tential Expressions, we have 
Psal.
 51.


4. When, by the grace of God, the Heart is deeply Aff
cted with the sight of the great Evil, abominable Foulness, and Hatefulness of sin; and with the 
Beauty of Holiness;
 this is a most effective motive to Repentance; when we are struck with the sense of the Intrins ck shamefulness of 
every evil way,
 the falseness of those appearances of good, that a
e found upon sin, but wer
 an 
Inheri∣tance of Lies;
 it makes us 
hate every false way,
 and cast away 
the Things,
 that can yeild no true good or prof
; and of which we have reason for ever 
o 
be asham
d; the end of which is Death,
 Rom. 6. 
Through the word of thy Lips I keep my s
lf f
m the Paths of the Destroyer.
 Psal. 17.4. 
Through thy Precepts I get understanding, therefore I hate every false way. Thy word is very pure, theref
re thy s
rvant loveth it. I h
ve found thy Precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every false way. The righteousness of thy Testimonies is everlasting,

 give me understanding, and I shall live,
 Psalm 119. 
The Law of the Lord is right, converting the soul; the testimony of the Lord is sure, making wise the simple; the Statutes of the Lord are right, rejoycing the heart. How sweet are thy words to my taste? sweeter than ho∣ney to my mouth. Moreover, by them is thy servant warned, and in the keeping of them there is great re∣ward,
 Psalm 19, All these are Expressions of the mighty Power of Holiness moving to Repentance; from the Beauty and Amiableness of it self, and the Odiousness of Contrary Sin and Evil.


5. The Word of God, throughout all these, is the Instrument of the Holy Spirit; and with the Variety of its Divine Representations, Collects, and Diffuses into the Soul, and Univers
l Spirit of a Man, being suited to every Faculty and Affection, the Reasons and mighty Efficacies 
oth of Fear and Hope; 
viz.
 the Wrath and Indignation a∣gainst sin; of Grace and Mercy in Christ to the tru∣ly Repenting sinner; and together with them, the Beauty of Holiness, and the Hatefulness of Sin. For the Word of God is the 
Sword of the Spirit,
 execu∣ting Vengeance on sin, and yet sparing the Humble Returning sinner, and effectually 
moving
 him by it to Repentance.


6. The sixth, and last Motive I shall use, is the true Consider tion of the Gospel state, both as it is now, and as it shall be in its Glorious Manifesta∣tion: For that being a state so New, and so diffe∣rent from the present state of Sin, and Flesh, and Corruption, we can never be suited to it but by this great Change, by Repentance for it: 
the putting off

 the Old Man, which is corrupt, accord∣ing to its deceitful Lusts,
 
and putting on the New Man,
 which is 
renewed after God, in Knowledge, Righteousness, and true Holiness,
 is most absolutely necessary to enjoy this Kingdom: And this is the Truth of Repen∣tance; It is the having such an Eye upon him,
 who is 
Risen from the Dead,
 and to the 
Resurrection of the Dead it self,
 as to know neither Per∣sons, nor Things, as we knew them before, 
after the Flesh.
 On this account our Lord sent 
John
 as an Herald before him, 
preaching,
 and 
saying, Re∣pent, for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand.
 And as soon as 
John
 had finish'd his Ministry of Repen∣tance, to shew it was not only the 
Message of the Fore runner,
 but 
of the Lord himself,
 whose 
way he was to prepare.
 Jesus 
himself
 from that time, 
be∣gan to preach, and to say, Repent; for the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,
 Matth. 3.1. c. 4.17. he shewed to us, this New state requires New Persons, New Hearts and Spirits, New Lives and Actions, to lay the Foundations and Beginnings of it here, and now; and that it may break out into Salvation, and Glory, at the Glory of that Kingdom: That it may be so 
tryed now,
 as 
to be found unto Honour, Praise, and Glory, at the appearance of Jesus Christ.


I come now to the second part of this General, 
viz.
 to discourse the signs of the sincerity of this Repentance, under that great Note, and most sig∣nal Character of it, That 
it is Repentance to salvati∣on, never to be repented of.
 Which gives these Four great Characters as signs of it.




1. 
Repentance
 that is not to be 
Repented of,
 must leave no known evil or sin unrepented of: For then that sin so eats into the very heart of such Repen∣tance, that it needs to be begun a-new, and to be entred upon a-fresh, being not through, and sin∣cere, and therefore false and counterfeit: This makes Scripture so often insist upon the 
through a∣mending our ways and doings;
 and 
re∣turning to God,
 
not feignedly, but with the whole heart.
 And Christ 
blesses in turning away from every one of our I∣niquities. If I regard Iniquity, viz.
 a∣ny Iniquity, 
in my heart, the Lord will not hear me.
 The leaving of one sin unrepented of, makes a man 
d
uble-minded, and so unstable in all his ways,
 
who can ob∣tain nothing of the Lord.
 He misses that Great Wisdom, that 
after-mind,
 or 
Wisdom
 of True Repentance: 
David
 in the sense of this so earnestly prays; 
Search me, Oh God, Try my Reins,
 
and my Thoughts; and see if there he any evil way in me, and lead me in the wa
 everlasting:
 And to shew his sin∣cerity, he says, 
All my ways are before thee:
 As he therefore that breaketh one Command, is Guilty of all; so he that repents not of all, truly re∣pents of none:
 He that 
breaks one of these least Commands, and teacheth men so shall be call'd least in the King∣dom of Heaven I was upright before him, and kept my self from my Iniqui∣ty.
 By all this, and many mo
 such like Scrip∣tures, it is most evident, 
a Repentance not to be Re∣pented

 of,
 requires 
Ʋniversality:
 For willfully mis∣sing in one sin, or Duty, it betrays it self insincere throughout, 
every way;
 it hath forgotten it self, if it neglect any one known Grace. Such a Repen∣tance is 
blind,
 and 
cant look affar off and see every way.


2. It is a persevering continuing Repentance, that is 
never to be repented of.
 It must go on; it Renews and repeats it self, but never is so to be re∣pented of, as to be revers'd, repented, or recall'd. It goes on even till it touches, and even enters in∣to salvation it self: For 
it is better not to have known the ways of Righteousness,
 
than having known them, to depart from the holy Commandment given to us. For to such it happens, according to the true Proverb: The Dog is returned to his Vomit, and the Swine that was washed, to her wallowing again in the mire.


He that hath truly repented, finds such satisfacti∣on in his Repentance, that as the 
up∣right man, he holds on his way,
 
and grows stronger and st
onger in it.
 And in case of any Falls or Returns to former sins, there is both a daily Renewal, and p
rf
c
g of R
pen∣tance for lesser Failings, and s
 
et Faults; and more solemn for greater Sins and 
alls. The true Repenting Soul is 
as the 
ight th
t shines more and more to the perfect Day.
 But the false Penitent 
washeth in Darkness, and kno
s not at what he stumbles.


Thus true Repentance knows not, finds not any Reason of calling 
ack, or Repenting of it self, ei∣ther as if there had not been Reason, or greatest advantage in Repenting in General; or as if it had

 nor been true, of the right kind, 
like precious Re∣pentance
 (as the Apostle speaks of Faith) with that of all Saints.


There may be indeed in the sincere Servants of God, some Fears, Misgivings, Suspicions arising from 
Godly Jealousie;
 but in such Tryals sincere Re∣pentance, after some time, comes forth, as 
Silver out of the Furnace,
 more pure and refined. Or these Doubts may arise from Temptation, or Gods seeming forsaking, or Desertion, or from the Weak∣ness of Repentance in its Beginnings. But this is but as the 
smoaking Flax,
 or the 
Bruised Reed,
 which 
Christ will not quench,
 nor 
break,
 but will 
send forth Judgment to Victory,
 in the behalf of such his Servants.


So this Repentance is not to be begun again, and to be 
repented of,
 as a false, insincere Repentance is; but to be vindicated and cleared, as the 
Sun
 covered with a Cloud, that is yet the true Light of the World; however it have been shaded, or obscu∣red; and as the true Fire, that shall never be put out, or reputed False, as a Glow-worm Light, or Foolish Fire, however it may be hidden sometimes as under the smo
k.


3. 
Repentance not to be repented of,
 is effective, and produces that great Change; that as heretofore men yeilded up their 
Members, as Instruments of Ʋn∣righteousntss to unholiness, and unclean∣ness, and to Iniquity unto Iniquity;
 so 
now the
 yeild their Members, as Instru∣ments of Holiness unto Righteousness:
 and as hereto∣fore 
they were Free from Righteousness, as being the Servants of Sin;
 so now 
they are free from sin,
 and

 
become the Servants of Righteousness:
 Such an effe∣ctual Repentance, of which, not the 
Speech,
 and 
Word,
 and 
Profession,
 but the Power is known; needs not to be begun, but to be proceeded in, to be consummated. But a Repentance that can do nothing, that cannot change a man's Way, nor Course, but he remains under the same sins; so that he hath 
forgotten
 (he can 
forget
 it,) that 
he was purg'd from his old sins:
 such Repentance needs indeed to have the 
Foundations laid anew:
 and as a great Error, a great sin in Repentance, to 
be repented of indeed;
 as most 
Ruinous,
 as well as most 
False and Deceitful;
 and 
starting
 from its 
End,
 as a 
broken Bow
 from the Mark.


4. The Repentance not to be repented of, gives some of the F
retasts, and happy Dawns of salva∣tion it self; siilling the Soul with the Joy unspeak∣able, and full of Glory.


For when t
e Apostle describes 
Repentance unto Salvation;
 it does not only shew the blessed Fruit, and consequence of Repentance; but it also de∣fines and distinguishes Repentance, that is true, and sincere, from what is False and Counterfeit: Now seeing Repentance, tho it be to 
Salvation,
 cannot be known to be so, till it lay actual 
hold
 of 
Salvation;
 except it have some what of the 
Joy of Salvation;
 except there 
e a 
Life in the Hope it gives;
 except there be a 
Witness
 rising from it: Therefore herein there must needs be a distinguish∣ing Character of true Repentance, and a sign of it, that contrary to the 
sorrow of the World, that

 worketh Death,
 and casts a shade of Death; 
Re∣pentance
 to 
Salvation
 hath some Precursory, or before Hand-Rayes, and Dawns of that Salvation; the 
Effect
 of the 
Righteousness
 of Re∣pentance is that 
particular Fruit of Righteousness,
 even 
Peace and Assu∣rance for ever.
 There is some Por∣tion of the 
hidden Manna,
 and cast of the 
white Stone,
 some of the 
Fruit of the Tree of Life in the midst of the Paradise of God;
 and even in any of the sad∣nesses of the Servants of God, by reason of Af∣flictions, Temptations, any Agonies of Conscience, Desertions; there is 
Light
 in the midst of that 
Darkness;
 whereas in the false Joys of counterfeit Repentance, there are such either presumptuous sensual Intermixtures, or such a want of true Spi∣ritual Light, that the midst 
of that Joy is Heaviness.
 But the Fruit of this Repentance is that 
Peace of God that passeth all un∣derstanding;
 
guarding the Heart and Mind through Jesus Christ.


5. To all these, both Motives, Means, and Signs of Repentance, must be always added, 
Prayer;
 even, 
all Prayer, and Supplication with Perseverance, and continuance therein;
 even 
to extraordinary Watch∣ings and Fastings,
 as occasion requires, Ephes. 6.18. Colos. 4.2. Luke 11.9. For as the Soul in 
Prayer
 and 
Supplication
 feels the strong motions, and excitations of Repentance by; setting before our selves, and making close Applications of our selves to; the great considerations of God, of Christ, of Sin, of Holiness, of Eternal Happiness, and Misery; so herein is the earnestness of Suppli∣cation,

 
asking, seeking,
 and 
knocking,
 for the 
Holy Spirit,
 engaged, and employ'd; as knowing him the supreme Mover, Principle, and efficient of Re∣pentance; and the Divine Spirit, coming down to Dwell in the Spirit of the true Penitent, and shedding its efficacies, and operations in it, as a 
Spirit of Grace,
 and 
Supplication,
 seals to the Soul the truth of Repentance, and becomes a spiritual visible sign, and evidence of the Truth of it; as Christ says of 
Paul
 upon Repentance, 
behold he Prayeth,
 Acts 9.11.


6. Some Great, and Heroick Acts, and Effects of Repentance according to the Ability, and Op∣portunity of Persons; and according to the Sins, persons have been guilty of, before Repentance, are sometimes absolutely necessary Evidences of the Truth of Repentance; and sometimes Illustri∣ous, and extraordinary Signals of the mighty Power, and Force, and largeness of Efficacy in this grace of Repentance; where it meets with Subjects, whom God by outward enablements of Providence, as well as inward Grace, and Power hath fitted hereunto. Such are in cases of great Scandal, and publick Offence publick and open Confessions of sin; endeavours, and close Applica∣tions upon Persons, that have been of the knot, and fellowship of our sins, or private Parties, and confederates in them, moving them by all the Sen∣timents of our Minds, and the Affections of our Hearts to Repentance; sollemn Fastings and Humi∣liations, with usual 
Watchings,
 not only for the Taming, bringing Down, and Abasing of our selves, and by the acknowledgment of our own unworthi∣ness

 of the least of Mercies; and that we are wor∣thy of Wrath, and Judgment only, and to be strip'd of all Enjoyments; but because the Heart is so taken up, and engag'd, that it can mind, nor attend, nor be at leisure for the most ne∣cessary Refreshing of Bodily Nature; which is made, and taught, and disciplin'd, as heretofore to serve sin; so now to cry out for Mercy, and Pardon, and to undergo the severities of Repen∣tance; and to be brought under to them in extra∣ordinary Weepings according to the most Affecti∣onate Emotions of the Soul, and suitable Tem∣per of Body.


And such as these are also the Acts of just Re∣stitution to persons injured according to our ut∣most Abilities; or great Alms-givings and acts of Mercy; of which 
Zaccheus,
 Luke 19. is a great Example. Great Acts of Service to Jesus Christ in the Salvation of Souls, either by our own personal Ministry, as 
Paul so zealously Preach∣ing the Faith,
 
he once destroyed;
 or private endeavours, by Holy Dis∣courses, and 
Declarings, what God hath done for our Souls;
 by Exhortations and good Counsels, by Holy Examples, by great Liberali∣ties for the promotion of Christianity, and the Powers of it in 
Repentance,
 and general 
Reformati∣on,
 and bringing in Souls to the most publick, open, and notorious renunciations of former sins, and the very instruments of them; of which we have a great example in the 
burning
 their 
Magical Books
 of so great valew, 
Acts
 19.19. 
Job.
 34.31.




These are not to be Bound, as 
heavy Burdens
 to the entanglement, and enthralment of Conscience, upon All; but according to the opportunities, and advantages Persons have, their state of Body, tem∣per of Mind, freedom of Time, abilities of E∣state; and leaving to supreme Grace, the giving of various degrees of Grace, and making among the 
Pleiades,
 the watry Weeping Stars of Repentance, 
one Star to differ from another in Glory.
 But when there is a meeting, and concurrence of all these, or an eminency in any; they who can shew forth the truth of 
Repentance
 in these Fruits,
 
purchase to themselves good Degrees,
 in the Academy, or School of Repen∣tance, and bring great Honour to Christ, and to it; and according to our 
Talents
 receiv'd, sincerity in each of them is essential to the truth of our 
Re∣pentance;
 and if 
they are in us, and abound,
 they make us to be neither 
Barren,
 nor 
Ʋnfruitful
 in this great Gospel Grace, given from the Lord Jesus; but without any trurh of them we are as a 
Well without Water, Clouds without Rain, frothy Waves,
 driven of some Imaginary, or Earthly 
Winds
 and 
Vapors,
 and tossed; and in great danger of prooving 
falling Stars;
 for whom is 
reserv'd the blankness of darkness for ever.


4th, I come now to the Fourth Head in this Head of the Doctrine of Repentance, 
viz.
 The great saving benefit, the blessing of this Grace, and Gift of Repentance; which hath the 
upper,
 and the 
neither Spings;
 from the 
neither Springs
 all gracious Affections, and Fruits of a sollemn,

 and serious Resipiscency, or growing Wise upon sad Afflicting Remembrances, and reviews of sin∣ful ways; and the 
upper Springs
 of Joy, Peace, Happiness, and Blessedness for ever; and eternal Rejoycings, we have so Sorrowed, so Repented: Of this I will give but a very short Representati∣on, because the enlargement upon it more pro∣perly belongs to another grand principle in the Doctrine of Christ; and yet what I do say, I will endeavor distinguishingly to Discourse it to the Doctrine of Repentance, and with a peculiarity to it.


1. In that it is 
Repentance to Salvation,
 wrought by a 
sorrow after God;
 it is ordain'd by God, as a security, and preservative by his especial Grace in Christ from everlasting 
Weeping, Wailing, and gnashing of Teeth:
 a Repentance without any Fruit, or Effect, but a continual Circulation of it self in Horrors, and fruitless renewals, without ease, or remedy, without possibility of Amend∣ment, of recovery to God, and Holiness; For in Hell there is no such: 
Woe therefore to you that Laugh now,
 without this true Repentance; For you shall weep, and weep for ever; it is the state of 
utter Darkness, extremity of Darkness,
 and to extremity of Duration, even 
Eternal Duration:
 But true Repentance hath had its Proportion here 
 this World, of sorrow that God Accepts in Christ and through his 
Agonies
 for sin.


2. It is not only a security from Damnation, but an assurance of a state of Life, Glory, and Blessedness; For upon this very reason, because

 God hath Sanctified Repentance to Difference, and separate his Servants by, from all the lost, and perishing, Repentance is so eminently call'd 
Re∣pentance unto Salvation;
 and 
Repentance unto Life:
 For when the miserable, and undone shall com∣plain, and endeavour to Impeach the Divine Justice, with the Salvation of Sinners, as great, or greater than themselves, 
Publicans
 and 
Harlots,
 such as the Apostle speaks of, 1 Cor. 6.


When many sober moral Men, both Heathens, Jews, and Christians are 
shut out
 from Heaven, Salvation, Life,
 and Happiness; and fall into the 
Condem∣nation of Hell;
 God justifies and Vindicates him∣self by the vast Distance between the one, and the other, Repentance hath made; which, as it should engage our Thoughts in deep search, what kind of Repentance we have, whether it can make such a Difference; so it assures us, there is a great excel∣lency and Dignity in true Repentance; when it shall be seen in the Glory of the Righteousness of Christ, wherein it shall be display'd, as in its chief Light, Life, and Lustre.


3. There shall never be any cause, the least cause to look back with sorrow, or regret, that we lost any of the pleasures of Sense, or of this World; or that we pass'd through the Severities, or Ri∣gors or Sadness of Repentance, or that 
sorrow after God,
 by which it was wrought: And which ex∣presses the Blessedness and Grace of this Repen∣tance much more; we shall not look back upon any of the Imperfections, and impure Allays of it, the Vacuities, and Emptinesses of it, that were

 not fill'd up now. For it shall, in every regard be filled up to the Highest Complement of Perfection. because it is surrounded with the Righteousness of Jesus Christ, and Adorn'd with its Rays, and Per∣fections; and the mighty Operations of the Spirit of Christ, holds them fast in that very moment wherein his servants go out of this World; 
He apprehends them,
 he holds them in his mighty Hand, and Arm, to perfect them to the 
Mark,
 both in their Repen∣tance, and in all other Graces.


4. There shall be Everlasting Joy, Rejoycing and Triumph in the Acceptance of our Repen∣tance by Christ: So that all truly Repenting Sin∣ners shall say with everlasting 
Hallalujahs;
 bles∣sed be God, who hath given us 
Repentance to the Acknowledging of the Truth; whereby we recovered our selves from the snare of the Devil, when we were taken Captive by him at his Will. Blessed be God,
 
who hath granted us Repentance unto Life. Blessed be the Lamb, who hath loved and washed us from our sins;
 and even our 
Repentance from sin
 in his own 
Blood;
 that it might, how ere Imperfect, be accepted be∣fore him, 
who sits on the Throne:
 Blessed be he who as a 
Prince and Saviour hath given us Repen∣tance and Remission of sins,
 Revel. 5.6. Blessed be the Eternal Spirit, who as 
seven Spirits before the Throne
 hath Diffus'd his Graces, and among them this Grace of Repentance, as 
the Spirit of Grace, and Supplication; Blessed be the word of his Grace,
 that held out Repentance in its whole Circumfer∣ence and Center: Blessed be God for all the Preachers and Ministers of Repentance; and Bles∣sed

 of God are our Spirits, and all the Faculties, God hath given them, that Ministred each in their courses to this great Grace, and exercise of Repentance; 
Hallelujah, for ever, and ever.


Head
 5th, I come now to the Fifth, and last Head in the Doctrine of Repentance, that is, to reduce the Discourse of the Scruples, and Cases of Conscience, concerning Repentance; that have not yet fallen under any proper resolution; to this great Doctrine, as I have now laid it down:


Herein I shall propose only these three as neces∣sary to be more fully Debated; any other, that have Represented themselves to my thoughts I have already laid in Provision for the satisfying them, in the plain Doctrine of Repentance; easing the scruples, without express naming them.


Quer.
 1. Whether 
Repentance,
 wrought by 
sor∣row after God,
 be not either unnecessary; seeing there is full satisfaction for sin, and Redemption for it in the 
lood of Christ: Or, 2dly, If it must be acknowledged necessary, whether it does not derogate from the Freeness of Grace, and the Ful∣ness and Perfection of Redemption in that Blood; and so entrench upon Faith alone in it.


Quer.
 2. Whether our Repentance is not made subject to Human Judgment in two Cases?


1. To the Judgment of Ministers, or (as men speak of the 
Church
) seeing so many expressions of Christ seem to suspect it there; 
whose sins so

 ever you remit,
 
they are remitted, and whose sins you retain, they are retained.


2. When our sins are 
Trespasses,
 and Injuries a∣gainst Men, whether, if they do not forgive us, it be not a prejudice, and Bar to Divsne Forgiveness; yea though we have but 
griev'd, scandaliz'd;
 or especially drawn them into sin by our example, or even sollicitation, and temptation to sin, seeing some Scriptures command us to 
Agree with our Ad∣versaries,
 &c. 
To leave our gift before the Altar,
 Matt. 5.23, 24, c. 18.15. &c.


Answer
 1. Sorrow for sin, and Repentance are by no means to be look'd upon as separate from the Blood and Redemption of the Lord Jesus; but as flowing from it, and 
Ordain'd by God, in the hand of the Mediator;
 who truly gives it, 
washes it in his own Blood,
 and as the 
great High Priest,
 Offers it with the 
Incense, Oyntments,
 and 
rich Perfumes
 of his own Holiness, Righteousness, and Purity. He Promotes, Advances, and gives Grace of a conti∣nual Renewing of it. And this is the true account of the room and place all Graces have in the 
Co∣venant of Grace;
 so that though they are required of us, as indispensable Duties, and even, as it were, Conditions of the 
Covenant of Grace
 on our parts; and we are spoken to in a way of Rational and Intellectual manner of Exhortations, Counsels, Reproofs, Promises, Threatnings; yet these are all but instrumental Conveyances of the Efficacies of the Spirit of our great 
Melchisedec, who blesses his People in turning them every one from their Iniquities.

 Even from every one of their own Iniquities;
 and makes up, whatever is wanting in the severities, or Powers of Holiness in Repentance, by his own 
Sufferings and Obedience.
 And thus the weight of the 
Covenant,
 that shall never be 
found fault with,
 because the Covenantees brake it, is suspended upon him, that is 
mighty;
 the 
Nail fasten'd in a place so sure,
 that the 
weight
 of not only 
Cups,
 but 
Flagons, Vessels,
 of all 
Quantities,
 both the 
Issue,
 and 
the Off-spring,
 rest secure upon him, even to Eternity, 
Esay
 22.23. And thus Discoursing of Re∣pentance, it can be no derogation, either in the sorrowing, nor the Reforming Parts of it.


Answ.
 2. The Administration of the Church, or of the Pastors, or Elders (who are also the Evan∣gelical Bishops,) hath no other Power but of Mi∣nistry in the Declaring, and Applying, as they find just occasion, all the Promises to the True and sincere Repenters; and the Denunciations, and threatnings to the Obdurate, Obstinate and Impenitent Sinners, and on Insincere Repentance; and if they do this 
Errante Clave,
 not according to the Truth of the Gospel, it neither 
Binds on Earth, nor in Heaven;
 else the Power of the Church, or the Ministers were 
Despotic,
 and 
Lordly;
 they would 
Exercise Authority
 to purpose, which Christ says, They shall not; nor be accounted 
Evergetae
 Indulgers of a Repentance, however but Counter∣feit, or Insincere; or on the other side Dominate over true Repentanc, 
Luke
 22.25. They have no 
Dominion over their Faith,
 no more have they over their Repentance; but are 
helpers of their Joy,
 or 
Godly sorrow;
 and the Publishers of the Wrath to

 come on all 
obstinate Sinners,
 or 
Hypocritical Re∣penters,
 2 Cor. 1.24. c. 10.6.


Answ.
 3. Although it is indeed the Duty of a sincere Penitent to Ask Forgiveness of those, whom they have offended, either by Injury, or Scandal; and to make all the Spiritual Reparations, they can in case of Scandal; and in and 
by this Worlds goods,
 as they are able, in case of that Kind of Injuries; Yet it is also the Duty of those, who are, or have been so 
Trespass'd
 upon either way, to 
Forgive
 and under that highest Obligation; that except they so forgive, as They are Commanded, 
their Heaven∣ly Father will not forgive them their Trespasses.


But whether they do according to their Duty, or do not; God retains those supreme 
Keys
 of Par∣don of sin, and Absolution of the Penitent in his own Hand; and he hath the right, and just Title so to do; For he is the not only 
Law-Giver
 Pa∣ramount, and if there be no 
Law
 of his broken, there is no 
Transgression;
 but if he Pardons, and Justifies, none can condemn; 
Transgression
 is 
Cover'd, and taken away,
 whether men forgive, or not; else they could not be 
Blessed,
 to whom 
he imputes not sin,
 if men had power still to Impute it: And lastly he is the Sovereign Proprietor; the Of∣fender, and the Offended are alike his: They are both not only his Vassals, but have Forfeited themselves and their All, to his Justice; upon all these Accounts, 
David
 said, 
against thee,
 
thee only have I sinned,
 and not against 
Ʋriah;
 but in such an Inferi∣ority, as that my offence against him is 
Bound
 or

 
Loosed,
 as thou Pardonest; so then if God Pardons, though 
Ʋriah
's Family, or Posterity, or himself (if he could have surviv'd) had not Pardon'd; yet God would be 
Justified in Speaking,
 or de∣claring, 
David
 a Pardon'd Sinner; and 
clear in Judging
 him so, in so 
taking away his Iniquity,
 that he should not Dye for it. And this is the true sense of that great 
Penetential
 acknowledgment of 
David,
 and not any intention of setting himself up in his Royal Dignity, as above the general, and or∣dinary Rank of Sinners, or Offenders. He had something else to do, when he was thus humbling himself before God, and beseeching mercy, than to Magnify himself above his fellow Creatures: He was laying fast hold of Infinite Power, and Grace, and Pardon; and from which there was no Appeal: For unto thee 
Lord, belongs Mercy
 uncontrollable, who hast the Ultimate Judicature of 
Rendring
 to the 
Trespassor,
 and 
Trespassed according to their Works.


Now, Seeing the generality of Christians, trust to 
Death-Bed-Repentance,
 I should give a Resolution to that great, and concernful Question; whether there be a possibility of a Sinner, and saving 
Death-Bed-Repentance.
 But in answer to that there is added unto this Treatise of Repentance a Dis∣course Printed several years ago of the same sense and Spirit with this Doctrine of 
Repentance;
 and is therefore under review, and as in second Editi∣on presented with it: I will therefore conclude this with some few and short Practical Inferences, the whole being compos'd to Use and Practise.




Infer.
 1. How admirably Wise, and Holy is God in his Grace, Mercy, and Pardoning Goodness! He is not Loose, or Prodigal in his Forgiveness, but hath provided this Admirable Grace, and Duty of Repentance, to shew; that as he does not cut off Awes of him, and Reverential Returns to him, by offering no Mercy, but giving up to Despair; so he does not turn Wild the Hearts, and Con∣sciences of them, whom he Pardons, by Licentious Forgiveness, but so stated, and bounded that 
his Grace may not be turn'd to Wantonness.


And this is the 
Name of God
 in the 
Redeemer,
 he is a Holy, and wise Redeemer; he does not Redeem without Repentance, he hath upon him 
the Spirit of Wisdom, and Ʋnderstanding, and of the Fear of the Lord; he is quick of Ʋnderstanding in the Fear of the Lord; he does not judg after the sight of the Eyes, nor Reprove after the hearing of the Ears.
 But 
righteousness is the girdle of his Loyns, and Faithfulness the girdle of his Reines,
 Esay 11.2. Let us then aright understanding this Wise Grace of the Gospel, as not take Sacriregiously out of it these Richest Jewels of its Wisdom, and Holy∣ness; denying Repentance in either our Doctrine, and Principles, or in our Lives and Practise.


Infer.
 2. Seeing God hath not only in his Gos∣pel, but by the very Law, and, as 
I
 may call it, 
Gospel of Natural Conscience, Commanded all Men every where to Repent;
 and Because, that is, not full enough, clear enough to lead to true saving Repentance; he hath therefore written it to us with the Sun-beam of his Gospel; let us therefore

 think, If it be 
Intollerable for Tyre and Sidon;
 for 
Pagans,
 and 
Indians,
 in the 
Day of Judgment;
 How much more will it be for us in that day? For if they are 
Condemned,
 who have not Com∣ported with so clear, so absolutely necessary, so Wise, so Holy, so every way Rational, Gracious, Inviting Doctrine, made known to be so, by a much dimmer Light, what will be done to us, who have not been 
drawn
 and 
led
 to it by so 
Glorious Rayes
 of 
the Sun of Righteousness;
 whom such Riches of Goodness have not led to 
Repen∣tance?


Infer.
 3. How 
Adorable
 is the 
Grace of God
 in 
Jesus Christ,
 who hath not only given us the 
Doctrine of Repentance,
 but by his 
Spirit
 gives the very 
Grace
 it self! He hath put no 
Trust
 in our own 
Powers
 of 
Ʋnderstanding, Will, Affections, Natural Conscience, Reason,
 or 
Morality,
 but only in his own 
Spirit,
 and 
Grace
 in his 
Son;
 nor doth he Accept our 
Repentance
 upon its worth, valew, perfection; but wraps it up in the 
rich Robes
 of the 
Righteousness of Jesus Christ,
 and so it is plea∣sing in his sight; so he does not lessen, nor de∣rogate from the graciousness of his 
Gospel
 by Im∣posing such a Duty; But he magnifies it by giv∣ing so high, and admirable a 
Grace
 and 
Divine Power
 within us.


Infer.
 4. Seeing 
Repentance
 is a 
Grace
 of such truly 
Evangelical Excellencies;
 so agreeable to the 
Infinite Wisdom,
 and 
Holiness,
 as well as 
Mercy,
 and 
Compassion
 of the 
Redeemer;
 let us trie this 
Gold
 in the 
Fire
 of severest search, and examination by the

 
Gospel Light,
 that we may not be pleased, and contented with a Counterfeit, with any other 
Repentance,
 than that 
unto Salvation, not to be Re∣pented of;
 Least we for ever Repent of our Re∣pentance, in Hell, where there is no place of 
Evan∣gelical, saving Repentance;
 but of that only, which is a barren Fiery Horror, and Despaire scorching the Conscience for ever, and not al∣laying it with a 
Drop of Water
 to 
Cooll
 outragious Tongue;
 Blasphem∣ing at the same time God, and Christ; and our impenitent selves, who would not 
Repent,
 while we had space, and place for our 
Repentance.


Infer.
 5. Let us by all the most moving Conside∣rations of the Evil of sin, the hatefulness and un∣reasonableness of it; the sense of the Goodness, and Grace of God in Christ; all his Judgments, all his Mercies; the sense of an Eternal Misery, and Punnishment from his Presence; be strongly mov'd, excited, stirr'd, and 
led to Repentance.


Infer.
 6. Let us rejoyce in the sweet Reposes of Conscience, when we have truly Repented; in the infinite Power, Authority, and Supreme right of God to Pardon upon Repentance; not dependent upon, 
Man,
 nor upon the 
Will of Man;
 Who is a God like unto him, who 
Pardons Iniquity, Trans∣gression,
 and 
Sin,
 and 
casts it into the depth of the Sea; who makes by his Pardon, sins, as Scarlet, and Crimson to be White as Snow, and Wooll, that blots out Iniquity as a Cloud, and a thick Cloud
 with the same Potency, and Ease, that the Sun does off a Cloud; and with infinitely greater.




Let us Rejoyce in the great Efficacies of the Redeemer, 
Pardoning sin upon Earth, as the great High Priest of our Profession, and the Bishop of our Souls;
 Absolving truly Repenting Sinners, by the 
Witness of his Blood, sprinkling the Heart from an evil Conscience, and speaking better things than the Blood of
 Abel; 
The Blood as of a Lamb without spot, Offer'd by the Eternal Spirit, Purging the Conscience from dead works,
 together with, and even as the 
Author,
 and 
Finisher
 of 
faith
 and 
repentance
 from 
dead works, to serve the Living God,
 Heb. 9. c. 10. c. 12.


Let us rejoyce in the Witness of the Divine Spi∣rit, 
Sealing,
 and 
Witnessing
 to us by 
Repentance, washing the Body,
 the whole Conversation, as with 
pure water.


Let us rejoyce in all the Blessed Promises, and Assurances of the Word of God, made by it to sincere Penitents, which are 
yea
 and 
Amen in Christ.


For all these are of far greater Authority, Truth, Certainty, than All 
Bindings,
 or 
Loosings on Earth,
 whether by the Ecclesiastical, as we call it, Ad∣ministration of the 
Keyes;
 or by Men 
forgiving one Another,
 however necessary these may be in their place.


Infer.
 7th. Seeing the 
Kingdom of God,
 and of 
Heaven
 is the great Motive to Repentance, as hath been before on great Reason made out; The high Reason we have, to believe, that by the Apostles calling it the 
Last time, the last hour, the ends of the World,
 so many Hundreds of Years ago; we must needs be now upon the very last issue, and determination of that Time; when the Kingdom shall appear in Glory, and all other kind of 
Time

 shall be no more;
 How great a 
Cloud
 does therefore 
Encompass
 us, that we should, by no means, be willing or able, to Rend; to Engage, us to run with Patience the 
Race
 of 
Repentance set before us;
 and to that End, 
to lay aside every weight, and the sin that doth so easily beset us; looking unto Jesus, the Author and Finisher of our Repentance,
 that it may be to 
Salvation,
 and 
never to be Repented of;
 Hearing him who in the 
days of his Flesh,
 because the offers, and first appearances, and 
First Fruits
 of his 
Kingdom,
 were then 
begun, Preach'd
 saying, 
Repent, for the King∣dom of Heaven is at hand:
 so the full 
Harvest
 of that 
Kingdom,
 being now ready to appear, he does by the 
Voices of all his Prophets
 in the Old, and New Testa∣ment, instantly Preach to us; 
Repent for the King∣dom of Heaven is at Hand.


And of how strong, and close Connexion the Kingdom of God, and of Christ, and Repent∣ance, are, I shall more fully, and largely at this time Represent, as a most solemn Conclusion of this Discourse.


There is a fixed space given, and a peculiar Interval Appointed: Lying between the time of the 
Apostacy,
 call'd, 
the Time, Times, and Half Time,
 or the 1260 Days, and the Time of the Vials. And it is 30 years making the 1260, 1290 Years, 
Dan.
 12.11. even as the 45 Years of the 
Vials
 to the Absolutely 
blessed state of the Kingdom of Christ in Glory,
 when the Saints shall 
all stand
 in their Lots, fill up to that very 
Fulness of Times.




Now at this space of the 
Thirty Years,
 the 
Spirit
 shall be 
powred out from on High:
 The 
Song of the Lamb,
 which hath been so long out of use, that it becomes, 
as it were, a new Song;
 and can be at first learnt only by the 144000 shall be 
Taught
 by them immediately; and the 
Everlasting Gospel
 shall be without delay upon it, 
Preach'd to every Nation, Tongue,
 and 
People under Heaven;
 and then there shall be as in preparation to the 
Glory of the King∣dom of Christ,
 but under the Influence of that 
Kingdom in Succession,
 a mighty Spirit of 
Godly Sorrow working Repentance to Salvation, never
 then indeed 
to be Repented of, pour'd out upon all Flesh.


Now because this is a point of great moment to the Doctrine of Repentance, and sets forth much of the Excellency of Repentance: I shall give very great Scriptures, and argue upon them for the truth of ir.


Scripture
 1. The first Scripture I would insist upon, shall be from a consideration of that great Ordinance of God concerning 
the Day of Attone∣ment among the Children of
 Israel: 
This Ordinance We find,
 Levit. 23.27. 
In the tenth day of the se∣venth, the Sabbattical Month, there shall be a day of attonement: It shall be an Holy Convocation to you: and you shall afflict your Souls: And you shall do no work in that same day: For it is a day of Attonement to make Attonement for you before the Lord your God: for whatsoever Soul it be, that shall not be afflicted in that same Day, he shall be cut off from among his People: And whatsoever Soul it be that doth any work in that same day, the same Soul will I destroy from

 among his People: It shall be a statute for ever through∣out your Generations in all your Dwellings: It shall be to you a Sabbath of Rest, and you shall Afflict your Souls.
 And on that day there were the great rites of 
Sacrifice;
 the 
Bullock,
 the sin Offering; the Blood of which was carried into the Holy of Ho∣lies, to make an attonement for the 
Ʋncleannesses
 of the 
Priests
 and 
People,
 and to reconcile the 
Holy
 of 
Holies,
 and the 
Mercy Seat,
 and the 
Ta∣hernacle
 of 
the Congregation,
 and the 
Goat
 that was to be Kill'ed in the same Manner; and the 
scape-Goat,
 throughout c, 16.


Now that which I lay in the Foundation, is, That God never appointed any of these great Rites, but they had a Solemn signification; a sig∣nification, as sollemn, as the 
Type
 was: So that there must be some great sense of this 
day of attone∣ment;
 I know it had a great fulfilling in Christ; and in him, as an 
Offering once for all,
 that imme∣diately 
Entred into the Holy of Holies,
 with his 
own Blood to appear in Heaven for us,
 It had very great parts of its accomplishment: But there are other great Parts that are to be fulfill'd in his Saints and for them, as in themselves: And especially in this solemn 
Affliction:
 So that as if any did not 
afflict their Souls,
 they were to 
be cut off
 so now.


And in these things, this day had many very remarkable Lines of the sollemn 
affliction
 and 
attone∣ment,
 that shall be in the very last parts of Time, and near the state of 
the Kingdom of Christ.


1. It was an 
Ordinance throughout the Generations
 of both Natural, and Adopted 
Israel.
 A 
Statute for ever,
 that is, until the very 
Kingdom of Christ.




2. It was in all parts of it 
Sabbattical;
 prepar'd for the great 
Sabbatism
 of the 
Kingdom of Christ.


3. It was when the 
Holiest of all,
 and the 
Taber∣nacle
 of 
the Congregation,
 and even the 
Mercy seat,
 and 
Altar,
 were 
Purified
 and 
Reconcil'd;
 not in themselves; for they were separate and pure, especially the 
Holy of Holies;
 much more the 
Hea∣venly Antitypes:
 But in regard of the 
Ʋncleanness
 of the 
Children of Israel:
 For with relation to all the Saints, and Servants of Christ, even to the very last of them in this corrupt World of the 
First Adam,
 they must be 
Purified
 and 
Reconciled;
 that so God and the 
Lamb
 coming down with the 
Holy
 of 
Holies,
 and 
Tabernacle
 to be 
with Men,
 and to 
dwell among them,
 may appear in visible Glory.


4. That peculiar 
Sacrifical
 Rite of the 
Scape Goat
 on this day sent 
away into the Wilderness,
 was a most lively signification of the final act of Obli∣vion, and act of 
Amnesty upon all sin,
 and the 
Curse
 for it born away into the 
Land of Forgetfulness,
 and so perfect 
attonement
 made, and all former Evils of the Curse Forgotten, 
Esay
 65.16, 17.


5. It was followed immediately by the 
Feast of Tahernacles;
 So great a 
Type of the Kingdom of Christ,
 in the Trees of 
Paradise,
 and the 
Paradisiac Branches;
 when the 
Tabernacle of God is with Men,
 as before.


When thus the Glory of the 
Attonement
 and 
Re∣demption
 of Christ shall come into open View, and the Holy State fully purified 
from all Ʋncleannesses
 of the Saints, and perfectly 
reconcil'd,
 above, ma∣nifest, and reveal it self: Before that, there shall be

 a general 
Afflicting the Soul,
 the most solemn, Peni∣tential, that ever was in the world.


Script.
 2. The Second Scripture I urge to this purpose, is, 
Psalm
 84.6. 
Who passing through the Val∣ley of Baca, or weeping, make it a Well. The Rain also filleth the Pools: They go from strength to strength: every one of them in Zion appeareth before God.
 So 
Jerem.
 50.4, 5. 
In those Days, saith the Lord, the Children of Israel shall come, they and the Children of Israel together: Going, and Weeping; they shall go, and seek the Lord their God; they shall ask the way to Zion with their Faces thitherward.
 This speaks a solemn 
weeping
 and 
mourning,
 immediately before the 
going up to Zion:
 as if the Rivers overflowed in this Day of 
Mourning
 with the 
Tears
 of the Servants of God, as after some great slaughter, with Blood; or as the 
Blood
 at the 
Battel of Armageddon
 shall come up to the 
Horse-Bridles of Christ,
 and of 
his Saints,
 upon their 
VVhite Horses of
 Triumph: So before this, the Pools and Wells shall be fill'd with the Tears of Saints in their Day of Great 
Mourning
 and 
Repentance.


Script.
 3. A Third Great Scripture I insist upon, is, 
Zech.
 12 12. 
In that Day there shall be a great mourning in Jerusalem, as the mourning of Hadadrim∣mon, in the Valley of Megiddo:
 And 
the Land shall mourn, every Family apart, and the Families that re∣main, apart.
 This 
Prophecy
 is most apparently, by all that went before, and follows after, a 
Prophecy of the Kingdom of Christ;
 and for that 
Kingdom of Christ,
 there is so great a 
mourning,
 as in preparati∣on to it; There shall be a 
Spirit of Grace
 and 
Sup∣plication;


 an admirable universal Grace of Repent∣ing, in all parts of Repentance, 
poured out upon the Israel of God in Jerusalem, looking on him whom they have peirc'd,
 and so long Rejected; and a joynt mourning of Convert-
Gentiles,
 represented by the 
Mourning of Hadad-Rimmon,
 or of the very glory of 
Assyria;
 known by the name of their God 
Rimmon,
 and their Dedication to his Glory; this Mourning of the Gentiles shall be in 
Megiddo,
 as in 
Israel
 for all their Idolatries, and 
Crucifying of Christ in his Witnesses
 slain in 
Spiritual Egypt;
 of which that excellent Prince 
Josiah
 slain in the Cause of 
Assyria,
 by 
Pharoah King of Egypt
 was a Type, and so 
lamented
 by both 
Israel,
 and 
Assyria: Israelites
 by Nature, and Adoptive 
Israel,
 in that great 
day
 shall 
mourn;
 and it shall be so deep, and sincere that all 
Families
 shall Mourn, not only together, but apart: They shall not Mourn for shew, form, and Company, or need that Natural Excitation of Mourning, the seeing one another Mourn; but they shall 
Mourn apart.
 The 
Royal Family, signified by the House of David;
 the 
Prophetick Families,
 signi∣fied by the 
House of Nathan;
 the 
Priestly Family
 signified by the 
House of Levi,
 and 
Scribal Families
 signified by the 
House of Shimei;
 and the converted 
Gentiles,
 signified by the 
Families that remain;
 the usual Character for the 
Heathen Nations:
 Because 
Israel,
 in God's account, is the principal; The 
Remnant,
 whom the 
Lord our God shall call,
 Joel c. 2.31. and the 
Residue of Men,
 even all the 
Gen∣tiles,
 as the Apostle 
James,
 Acts 15.17. interprets, 
Amos
 9.11.


Now in this Day of the great 
mourning, and affli∣cting the Soul, this Day of attonement,
 there shall be

 
an opening the Fountain for Sin, and for Ʋncleanness;
 for 
the washing of the Robes of all Saints, and ma∣king them white in the Blood of the Lamb:
 that as it is 
granted to them,
 they may be arrayed in 
Linen white and clean;
 which is the 
Righteousness of the Saints,
 Rev. 7.14. c. 19.8.


4. The last Scripture, wherein I will draw up, and sum this Point, is 
Revelations
 14.6. 
I saw another Angel fly in the midst of heaven; having the everlasting Gospel to preach to all,
 &c. say∣ing, 
Fear God, and give glooy to him,
 by Confession, Humiliation, and Repentance. At which time the 
Gentiles shall come from the ends of the Earth,
 and say, 
Our Fathers have inherited Lies,
 and things, 
wherein there is no profit:
 Shall 
a man make himself Gods of them who are no Gods;
 who have not made the 
Hea∣vens, nor the Earth, the Sea, nor the Fountains of Wa∣ter.
 This shall be when God this once (that once, when he is just ready to 
shake Heaven and Earth
) and 
this once
 signifies the doing it so, that it shall ne∣ver need to be done any more; and they shall know that his Name is 
Jehovah;
 that 
he is the true God,
 and 
all other Gods shall perish from the Earth, and from under these Heavens,
 Jerem. 10.11. c. 16.19, 20, 21.


Thus, as at the first preaching of the Gospel, there were so great Conversions, 
prickings in the heart,
 and Repentances, 
Acts
 2, 
&c.
 Because that was the 
fullness of time:
 So there shall be much greater, when the 
fullness of times,
 eve
 of All Time shall be: For whatever was done by way of Inchoation, and Beginning, in the 
fullness of time,
 shall be much more done at the 
fullness of times,
 or

 of all time: For That Gospel, that was alway the everlasting Gospel, shall then appear in that stile, and be known by it. The 
everlasting Gospel,
 and therefore its Force, Effect, and Success, shall be much greater than ever.


And it immediately follows upon this Preaching the 
Everlasting Gospel, another Angel proclaim'd with a loud Voice; Babilon is fallen, is fallen;
 before this it could not be done. The Church of 
erga∣mus
 was blam'd for 
having them,
 that 
held the Doctrine
 of 
Balam;
 and who 
taught to eat things Sacrificed to Idols;
 and 
Thyatyra for suffering them;
 They had not 
Mourned,
 that they might be 
cast out,
 as the Apostle speaks, 1 
Cor.
 5.2. and therefore they were Commanded to Repent, and draw to Repentance all such among them, 
that belonged to the Election of Grace,
 Rev. c. 2. and here is that great 
Repentance,
 by which 
Babylon
 is utterly 
cast out,
 and 
fallen,
 as it follows in the next 
Thunder,
 or 
Voice from Heaven,
 to that of the 
everlasting Gos∣pel:
 And then, as it was in that Apostolic time, they brought out their 
Books of curious arts,
 and burnt them publickly, even to the value of 50000 
Peices of Silver,
 so shall the curious arts of 
Ido∣latry, Sorcery
 and Impurity be expos'd and for ever devoted at that time to the Flames, 
Acts
 19.19.


Now how does this Recommend to us the Doctrine of Repentance 
throughout all our Genera∣tions,
 and through the whole course of our Lives, seeing the World 
of the Sav'd
 shall be thus 
Bap∣tised
 with the 
Baptism
 of 
Repentance
 for the 
Remis∣sion of Sins,
 just before 
Salvation.




And into this Treasury, all ages of Saints in the World, before this time, have cast by 
Mourning, God∣ly Sorrow,
 and 
Repentance:
 For have not their 
Tears been put into God's Bottle,
 and 
are they not in his Books?
 And at what time are they more likely to be Produced to their Etternal Account, and Ad∣vantage, than in such a day of 
Attonement,
 and 
Reconciliation?
 When the days of 
Refreshing,
 that 
Blessed,
 and 
Happy Age shall come forth from the presence of the Lord,
 his immediate Appearance, even the same 
Appearance
 that shall utterly abolish the 
man of sin,
 2 
Thes.
 2.8. and revive and re-enliven the Saints, that have 
Dyed and Slept in Je∣sus,
 into the 
First Resurrection,
 upon whom 
Blessed∣ness
 is then Proclaim'd; when 
all sins shall be perfect∣ly blotted out,
 and their 
holy Works
 alone shall 
follow them
 (among which 
Repentance
 is one of the Prin∣cipal) in the 
Day of the Restitution of all things,
 in the 
day of Salvation
 when it shall appear, true 
Evangelical Repentance
 is never to be 
Repented of,
 Acts 3.19, 21. 
Rev.
 14.13.


And to move us therefore all, and to 
provoke us
 to either the first Repentance, if we have not yet Repented; or to Renewed and advanced Repentance;
 let us con∣sider, how far the 
Night
 of the Apostasy is pass'd, and the 
Day of Salvation is at hand?
 How very near it grows? How much more we see the Day ap∣proaching?
 For we are now in the 1255th day of 
the Witnesses
 1260 
days of Years,
 of their 
Mourning
 and 
Sackcloth;
 and upon the 25th day of the Last 
Month
 of the 42 Moons of 
Apostacy:
 and when they end, the 
Kingdom

 of Christ
 shall be immediately Proclaim'd: How near then is the Kingdom of Heaven at Hand?


Infer.
 8. Because, I know, there is so great an unwillingness to believe such an Approach of the Kingdom of Christ; Let us take, as we stand in the National Community, whereof we are, this great Doctrine of Repentance into deepest and closest consideration. For we find Scripture, when∣ever it speaks to a Community, as to the Kingdom of 
Judah,
 and 
Israel,
 in the 
Prophets
 it still speaks to them, as such Communities, as in the Language, and Doctrine of Repentance; and when it speaks to the Churches, as in the second and third Chap∣ters of the 
Revelation,
 it speaks to them as such Communities, and commands them to 
Repent,
 as was before observ'd.


How necessary therefore to the National Body is the Doctrine of Repentance, taken as relating to a Community? How necessary must it needs be to every one of us, not only as for our own Immor∣tal Souls, but as Parts and Members of the Nati∣onal Community, and to the Church, or Church∣es of this Nation; that of the 
Church
 of 
England,
 or the 
National Church,
 as so, many love to speak? or to the 
Churches,
 that are in 
England,
 or 
Churches of England;
 as others agreeably enough with Scripture, speak as of the 
Churches of Ju∣dea;
 of 
Galatia;
 and thus undoubtedly there is a truth in both ways of speaking.


For when God hath given a Nation an univer∣sal consent in the Profession of the Name of God, of Christ, and of the Gospel, they do in many great Regards, and Accounts of Scripture, come

 under such an Obligatory representation, as a 
Na∣tional Church;
 as 
Judah
 and 
Israel
 in the times of the 
Old Testament
 came under. And all particu∣lar 
Churches,
 wherein so ever they differ in many particulars, and make distinct Associations of them∣selves, may be look'd upon, as particular 
Churches;
 and so Scripture vouches for them; because they do in a Particular Union 
give themselves to the Lord, and to one another;
 yet notwithstanding, they cannot, what ever they may think, put off their Relation to the whole Nation, whereto they are United as parts; nor to it, as United with them, in the substantial Essential Points of Christi∣anity, not so Adulterated, but that such Church is look'd upon as a true Church, by God, and by Christ.


Nor can the more general or National Church Dis-interest it self in any of the more particular and 
Dissenting Churches;
 seeing in God's account they are within it; even those that are purest, and have most of the Spirit, and Power of Chri∣stianity, and truly Purer than it self, as in the ge∣neral; as the more general 
Church of Sardis
 had within it self, 
the few purer Names
 that had not 
Defiled their Garments.
 This is when a more general Church is pure in substantials of Doctrine, Worship, and Laws of Holy Conversation; it is otherwise when what is call'd a 
Church,
 is 
Anti∣christian
 and 
Idolatrous
 in its substantials; as in those of the 
Papacy;
 and have no more Right to the Name of a 
Church,
 than that Idolatrous assembly, that 
cried up
 Diana 
of the
 Ephesians, 
Acts
 19. though it be there call'd by the same Name

 of a 
Church,
 or 
Ecclesia,
 that the 
Churches
 of the Saints are. 
v.
 32.41.


Now this I have Premis'd, to shew, how necessary the Doctrine of Repentance is to be Of∣fered, and to be Receiv'd by the generality of the 
Church, Churches,
 and 
People
 of this Nation; ac∣cording to the Doctrine of both the 
New
 and 
Old Testament,
 even that Repentance that hath been Discours'd; the 
Repentance to Salvation, never to be Repented of,
 and to be wrought by a 
Godly sorrow,
 or a 
sorrow after God.


It may look like a Difficulty; how a Nation Composed of such Variety of lesser, and distinct Communities, one from another; and much more so many single persons, should be brought to Unite in Repentance; or a Church, that hath so many lesser, and different Churches; or, How such a Repentance can be 
a Repentance to Salvation;
 seeing Nations are not so much sav'd as Nations, but particular Persons, of those general Commu∣nities are the Saved.


This may be three ways Reconciled.


1. By considering, there is the Face of a Nati∣on, and of a National Profession of Christianity, in the Princes, Rulers, and Councels of it: and When these set themselves to Repentance, of Refor∣mation: How greatly necessary therefore is it to Represent with greatest Efficacies of Perswasion to them the duty to Reform themselves; and to be ex∣amples of the same to the Nation: We find therefore Universally in Scripture, there is so much applica∣tion to the Kings, and Nobles, the Counsellors, and Judges of 
Israel;
 and Remonstrances against their sins, and not Reforming.




And this lies with especial Obligation upon those, who are Exalted into the most publick Stations of the Christian Ministration; those, who are the most publick 
Seers.
 So we find 
Nathan,
 the King's 
Seer,
 was chosen out by God to speak to 
David,
 in those two great services of shewing 
David
 his sin, and moving him to Repentance, 2 
Sam.
 12. When he had so fallen; God sent to move him to Repentance by his own 
Seer,
 or, as I may Express it, 
Bishop.
 And so in the Case of 
Numbring the People;
 God sent to 
David
 by 
Gad,
 another of his 
Seers,
 2 Sam. 24.11.


Again, when God declared to 
David
 the 
Building the Temple,
 not by himself, but by his Son 
Solomon;
 to encourage his Preparation for it; but to Countermand his Building it; he did it by the same 
Nathan, his Seer,
 1 Chron. 17.3.


And thus when God, by his Providence, Ex∣alts any to a Precedency, or Presidency in the 
Gospel Ministry,
 so as to be near Princes, and Councels, and Senates in that high Administra∣tion; when they are Zealous, and Successful in their 
Preaching Repentance;
 and such 
Higher Powers
 are mov'd by it: This generally goes down from such 
Heads
 of a 
Nation,
 to the 
skirts of the Garment,
 viz. The subordinated Ministry of a Nation, and its Magistracy, and so to the ge∣nerality of the People: And it becomes in God's gracious acceptance through Christ, and Ac∣count, a 
National Repentance,
 though there may be many particular Persons, both in Ministry and Magistracy negligent of their Duty, and much more many unreformed Persons among the Multitude.




And such Repentance may be called 
Repentance to Salvation,
 For it does not only, as in the 
King of Nineveh's
 Case, give a Reprieve from presenr Judgments, and bring in great Blessings, and prosperity to a Nation at the present; but there is very great Reason to believe in the visible Glory of the 
Kingdom of Christ:
 There are, as I may so speak, Constellations of Saints, who have joyn'd together in the same Nation, and time in Repentance, and earnest Endeavours for 
Reforma∣tion;
 for, as 
Daniel
 says, 
The Wise,
 and 
they that turn many to Righteousness, shall shine as the Stars,
 and as the 
brightness of the Firmament for ever, and ever,
 Dan, 12.3.


Now how does the present state of the Nation require the joyning of all that fear God, to re∣trench that boldness, and insolency of wickedness that rages throughout the Nation; and to necessi∣tate the Vices and Prophanesses of Men, who have no fear of God, to keep within, and not to shew themselves, as they do openly, and abroad! and in the mean time, to give such an Honour to 
God∣liness, Righteousness, and Soberness;
 that the con∣trary to these may not be charged as National sins; and therefore herein, those that are principal 
Seers
 of the Nation, and have opportunity to do it to Princes, and Councels, are under greatest obligations of Duty, Love, Honour, and Service to God, and our Lord Jesus Christ; to move with light, and Heat in their Orb, and Sphere; to make due remonstrances of the absolute neces∣sity, that there is, to discharge the Nation of that great weight of Publick Guilt, that lies upon it by the Enormities; that not being restrain'd, and

 Punish'd, Redoun'd from particular Offenders (whom they have first invested, and cover'd all over) upon the Community, to which they be∣long; and to incite, and greatly to encourage all whatever denomination, or distinction soever they are of, to Unite in this; to give a stop to the overflowing wickedness, that there be not 
wrath
 against the 
Royal Family,
 the 
supreme Powers
 of the 
Nation,
 the superior 
Episcopacy
 of it; and against the whole 
Nation;
 which 
Episcopacy
 above all, ought to 
cry aloud, and not to spare,
 but to shew to the Court and Councels of it, the sins and transgressions of the Nation; which they make their own by not turning their whole Power a∣gainst, and to exhort all to joyn 
with one shoulder
 against them.


For the present state so Unreformed, so Lux∣urious in Wickedness, shews, that according to all the word of God, and the general course of his Providence, that hath ever been in the world; some one of these three things must needs be.


1. That there must be an Universal, National Reformation from those sins, that being of a pub∣lick, and sensible appearance; sins that may be felt, and that are so palpable to the common sense of 
Natural Conscience,
 and so cognisable, and ought to be taken notice of by the Courts of Human Judicature, may be restrain'd; and kept from Dying the Nation in so Crimson, and Scarlet a Guilt, such a Purple Hiew by the abominations, now it is, all over stain'd with; the horrid Oaths, or Swearing, for the great commonness of which,

 even on seeming better accounts, 
Lands mourn ve∣ry often;
 the noise of which bellows in all streets, and publick places, as well as in private Families; the dreadful 
Cursings and Dammings
 that every where resound; the 
fearful Sabbath-breakings,
 that turn it not only into a Day of Idleness and sloath, but of leisure to all manner of Wickedness; the Excess of Pride, and Vanity in apparel, which the very Prudence of 
sumptuary Laws
 should reform; the Impudence and Outrage of Lust and Luxury, 
de∣claring,
 and not 
hiding it self,
 as in 
Sodom
 of Old; the 
Great Ʋnmercifulness to the Poor,
 of all Kinds, and not 
strengthning their hands
 to such profitable service, and employment in their Places, as might abound, not only to their own private (which ought to be) but to publick Good.


These things, with all Care and Zeal, not only ought, but must be reduc'd and redress'd in Towns and Cities, and in all our Villages; and most parti∣cularly in our 
Camps and Navies,
 where they more than any where else (if possible) abound; and where there ought to be greater Guard, and Watch against them, than any where else; according to that Great Precept, 
Deut.
 23.14.


2. If this be not done, It cannot be, except God hath left the Earth more than ever yet he hath done; and forsaken it; and walks in the Galleries of Heaven, without Regarding; but that there must be a 
Visiting for these things;
 and that his Soul must be avenged of such 
a Nation
 as this; 
Jer.
 5.9. whether by Plague, or Famine, or War, or evil and noisome Beasts, or by a Complication of these Four: yea, though it be by a Fire yet un∣blown,

 that is ready to flame out; or by an Ar∣my of Wounded Men, that our Destruction must come; and much the more because the Light of his Truth is so open and clear among us; be∣cause his Mercies and Deliverances have been so-Great, and the Methods of his Providence so un∣usual; in his unhinging for us the General Laws of 
Nature,
 in Dethroning, and setting on the Throne for our preservation. Now if These his Great Acts and Wonderful Doings do not work to Re∣formation, They certainly shall justifie God in our Destruction. And yet we daily see our sins and Transgressions 
Growing
 up to the very Hea∣vens:, so that that our Destruction cannot but be speedy.


3. Except the Kingdom of Christ be as I have declared, very near us; And that we are not yet under some most dreadful Judgments, it is an ar∣gument to me, it is certainly so, that the King∣dom of Christ is very near us; when he will take to himself his own great 
Power,
 and 
Reign,
 and Re∣form by a through 
Purging his Floor;
 either by 
pouring out his Spirit,
 and 
perswading
 by his 
everlasting Gospel;
 and sitting as by a 
Refiners Fire,
 and 
Fullers Soap,
 throughly to 
purifie; that Baptism
 with 
Fire:
 or by 
the Day,
 that 
shall burn as an Oven,
 and 
consume the Wicked, Root and Branch;
 and because of this, not∣withstanding our 
great Transgressions,
 and 
mighty provocations;
 even though he hath 
lifted up his hand,
 that he 
would destroy us,
 yet he hath wrought for his Great Names sake; that is, his Kingdom's sake and hath done nothing yet so remarkable against us.




Let us then, that 
fear the Lord, speak often one to another,
 that 
a Book of Remembrance may be writ for us,
 as for 
them that have feared the Lord, and thought on his Name,
 and that we may be 
spared in the day, when he makes up his Jewels;
 and 
gather'd as Wheat into his Garner,
 when he 
shall burn up the Chaff with fire unquenchable,
 Mal. 3.16. Matth. 3.12.


Infer.
 9. Seeing Nations and Persons are under so strict Commands to 
Repent with that Repentance to Salvation;
 the contrary whereof is expressed by 
Death.


There is therefore in the Kingdom of Christ a City of Life, and under it a City of Death; a 
Ci∣ty of Salvation,
 whose 
Walls and Bullwarks
 are 
Sal∣vation;
 and 
a City of Destruction,
 distinct from it, and opposite to it, 
Esay
 19.18. c. 26.1. The one is the Residence of those who have 
Repented with that Repentance to Salvation, not to be Repented of.
 The other is the dark and dismal Receptacle of those, who have either been wholly dissolved into the worldly Laughter and Mirth; or been Sorrow∣ers only after the 
worldly Sorrow,
 that 
worketh Death.


The 
New Jerusalem
 is the City of 
Life and Sal∣vation;
 the 
City
 that hath the 
Tree of Life,
 and 
the River of the Water of Life;
 and the 
Nations of the Saved walk in the Light of it;
 and are 
healed
 from any possibility of Dying by the 
Leaves of the Tree of Life;
 and the 
Living are written in it; Whatever liveth in it, shall live,
 even for perpetu∣ity: The 
Second Death hath no power over them,
 Esay 4.3. 
Revel.
 c. 20.6. c. 21.24. c. 22.1, 2.




On the other side, there is the 
City of Destructi∣on,
 Esay 19.18. when 
Five Cities shall speak the Language of Canaan,
 being of the 
Nations of the Saved:
 There is one 
City,
 that shall be called, 
the City of Destruction;
 the contrary to Salvation; being of those appointed to Death.


This is the 
Congregation of the Dead,
 Prov. 21.16. This is the 
City of Gog;
 that is, of 
the dead, slain with the sword of Christ's mouth,
 who hath a 
place of Graves, the Valley of Hamon Gog,
 of the 
Multitude of Gog.
 Ezek. 39.11, 
&c.


These, though they are 
the dead,
 that is 
slain with the sword of Christ's mouth;
 yet they are as in a Community, in a Polity; for though they are condemn'd by the Word and Sentence of Christ, they are yet the Wicked rais'd to Condemnation; and so are in the State of Living, but of a Living Death: Therefore these 
dead
 have a 
City,
 and the Name of it is 
Hammonah;
 as the Name of the 
New Jerusalem
 is 
Jehovah-Shammah, the Lord is there;
 so the Name of this City is 
, 
its multi∣tude,
 or 
a multitude is there; For broad is the way,
 and 
wide is the Gate that leadeth to
 this City of 
He∣res, to destruction; and many there be which go in thereat,
 Matth. 7.13. These are the 
multitudes
 that are gathered together to the 
Battel of Arma∣geddon;
 the 
Day of God Almighty,
 shaded by a 
Bat∣tel;
 the 
multitudes
 in the 
Valley of Jehoshaphat;
 the 
Valley of the Judgment of Jehovah;
 the 
Valley of De∣cision,
 of the Doom and Sentence of Christ, as the 
Sword of his Mouth;
 and 
the Valley of Excision, of Destruction,
 Joel 3.74. 
Revel.
 c. 16.14, 16.


Now these 
dead,
 in their 
City of the dead,
 lye dead during the 
Thousand Years,
 bound Hand and

 Foot for that space; The 
Rest of the Dead, slain with the Sword of Christ's mouth.
 But when the 
Thousand Years
 are expired, they are let loose into the Appearance of Life, Motion and Action: They 
whose multitude are as the Sand of the Sea,
 under their Name 
Gog Magog,
 come up against the 
Belo∣ved City,
 and the 
Camp,
 or 
Tower,
 and 
Castle of the Saints,
 and 
cover the breadth of it;
 shewing them∣selves the same 
Impenitents
 they were, and had been before the 
Thousand Years
 began; the Never-Repen∣ting Enemies of God, and of Christ, and of his Kingdom: So they are finally judg'd;
 
cast with Sathan,
 who had alway de∣ceived them, with 
Death
 and 
Hell,
 in∣to the 
Lake. This is the second Death.


Thus in the opening this dark Scripture, Be∣hold in these two Cities the 
Repentance to Life and Salvation never to be repented of;
 the Impenitency to Death and Destruction, never also to 
be repented of;
 that we may chuse the first, perswaded by Eter∣nal Grace and Love; and abhor the other, as the Black Mark of being the 
Esau
 hated by God, who 
found no place for Repentance;
 as the 
Vessels of his Wrath,
 the 
Border of Wickedness, against whom he hath Indignation for ever,
 Malach. 1, 4.


Infer.
 10. Upon all this, I conclude with that great Scripture, 
Hosea
 10.12. 
Sow we to our selves in Righteousness, the Righteousness of Repentance,
 springing from 
Faith in the Blood of Jesus: Let us break up all our Fallow Grounds:
 For the Just and proper 
time
 is near for an 
universal seeking God; till

 he come, and rain Righteousness,
 upon us, 
upon all the Earth.


This is indeed prepar'd peculiarly for 
Israel,
 the 
Ten Tribes
 at their Conversion, after the so long Cap∣tivity; shadowed under 
riding, ploughing, breaking the Clods,
 till the 
sowing in righteuusness,
 at their restora∣tion. It is now near, that they who have been so long lost, that it shall be said of them, 
These where have they been?
 shall with the whole 
Gentile
 World, 
seek the Lord.
 Let us count which way we can, the 
time
 must be near, exceeding near. 
Whoso is wise, and he shall understand
 the Scripture concerning 
these things; prudent,
 and 
he shall know them: For the ways of the Lord
 are all righteous and true con∣cerning them. 
Ʋpright men
 shall know how to 
walk in them,
 while 
transgressors fall
 most disho∣nourably and finally therein.


And when this is, there shall be a great 
Rain, a Rain of Righteousness,
 that shall come down upon the World. This shall make a mighty Change, as the Earth is changed by a mighty coming down, a 
pour∣ing down of Rain,
 after a long Drought: so this 
Rain
 shall refresh the 
Inheritance of God,
 that hath been so long 
weary: Righteousness shall come down, as show∣ers upon the Grass,
 and as the 
soft Rain upon the mow'n Grass;
 as the 
former
 and 
latter Rain
 in their 
seasons.
 It is prophesied of Jesus Christ coming in his 
King∣dom,
 he shall come down so, 
Psal.
 72.6, &c. 
So that in his days Righteousness,
 For the Righteous shall 
flourish,
 and 
abundance of peace, so long as the Moon en∣dureth:
 and then, as 
Psal.
 85.9, 10, 11. 
His salvati∣on shall be nigh all them that fear him, that Glory may dwell in all the Earth. Mercy and Truth shall meet together; Righteousness and Peace shall kiss each other;

 Righteousness shall look down from heaven;
 or 
as the Rain from heaven, shone upon with the healing wings of the Sun of Righteousness,
 It shall represent the 
bow of the Covenant
 in the Clouds, in the Day of this Rain, 
Ezek.
 1.28. 
Rev.
 10.1. and 
Truth
 shall then 
spring out of the Earth in abundance.


This State shall be as irresistable as the 
Rain;
 a∣gainst which, tho Princes, Powers, Councils, and all their Armies should conspire, they cannot help it; yea, the 
Heavens
 themselves, commanded by God, cannot 
withhold,
 or 
restrain
 their 
showers,
 any more than they can give them, till the time appoin∣ted by God. So it shall bring into the 
ways of Righ∣teousness,
 when 
Righteousness
 shall come down thus from Heaven. All the prophaness, and wickedness that is at this time, shall not be able to hinder it, a∣ny more than we can hinder the Rain. It will 
not stay, nor tarry for the children of men.


All the 
Promises
 and 
Prophecies
 shall come to pass at this time, that God hath appointed, and shall tar∣ry no longer: 
the windows of heaven shall be opened,
 the 
waters above the Firmament shall come down; the deep shall be broken up.
 And whatever shall not then be rained upon, shall be 
given to salt for ever.
 And This shall be sudden as 
Elijah's Rain,
 sudden, and at an Instant; beginning in a 
Cloud,
 about as 
big as a man's hand,
 and so 
covering the whole heaven.


But it cannot be, till after the 
Apostacy,
 till the 
droughty Moons of the Gentiles,
 and of the 
Beast,
 are expir'd. It cannot be while the Days of the 
VVit∣nesses Sackcloth Prophecy
 last: For they have pow∣er 
to shut heaven, that it rain not in the days of their Prophesie;
 That is, it is determined by God, It 
shall not rain
 in those Days. 
Rev.
 11.6.




There was some of this 
Rain
 in the very beginning of the 
Reformation,
 when the 
Thunders uttered their Voices:
 But it stopped at their 
sealing;
 yet the Ef∣fects remain to this Day, in so much enjoyment of the Gospel as we have. The 
heavens
 opened so far, because it was the Morning of 
half time:
 It stopp'd, because it was but 
half time
 begun, and not r
n out: At the end of 
half time,
 or 1697. there shall be a full and effective 
Thunder,
 and a much greater Rain of 
Righteousness,
 even preparing for the 
Harvest;
 Then he who sits upon the 
white shining Cloud,
 shall bring forth even the 
harvest
 it self in the Glory of his 
Kingdom;
 when he will 
weary,
 as the Expressi∣on is in 
Job
 c. 37.11. the 
thick Cloud of Righte∣ousness,
 by so abundant a 
watering the Earth,
 and scatter the 
bright Cloud,
 by dispersing Righteousness in so great an abundance. And it shall be 
turned a∣bout by his Counsel, to do whatsoever he commandeth upon the face of the world in the Earth.
 He 
causeth it to come,
 whether for 
correction,
 or 
for his Land; Judgment upon his Enemies, Mercy for his Kingdom: Hearken unto this,
 Oh, 
whoever we are that profess the Name of Christ; Stand still,
 and 
consider these wondrous works
 of God, as held out to us in the 
Prophecies
 of 
Scripture.
 And then shall be 
held
 that great 
Feast
 of the 
Thousand Years to the Lord,
 in which all the 
Feasts of the Lord,
 that were the Types, shall concur, meet and unite: the 
Feast of Weeks,
 or 
Harvest;
 the 
Feast of Passover,
 the 
Day of Trumpets and Attonement;
 the 
great Feast of Tabernacles.








Brief Considerations OF THE Late 
Trepidation
 of the 
Earth,
 so sensible in 
this City,
 and other Parts of this Nation; and 
beyond the Sea,
 particularly in the 
Kings Camp:
 TOGETHER With that Tremendous Judgment on our 
English Plantation
 in 
Ja∣maica,
 and so, as 
upon our Selves,
 by an 
Earthquake;
 as both an earnest 
Persuasive
 to 
Repentance,
 and 
Prognostick
 of the 
Kingdom of Christ.




UPON Hebr. xii. 25, &c.
 
See that ye refuse not Him that speaketh,
 &c. 
Whose Voice then shook the Earth,
 but now he hath 
promis'd, Yet once more, I shake not only the Earth, but Heaven also,
 &c.




I Hope it will not be thought impertinent, if I take advantage of the fresh Providences, that have given an Alarm to this Nation by the late Concussion of the Earth, most gently and by

 way of Admonition in this 
Chief City,
 the 
Royal Camp,
 and with so much dread and terror in that 
Colony
 of it self,
 in 
Jamaica.
 Because the Things are very great, as they reveal from Heaven either the Power and Wrath of God in the Deso∣lation he made by the last men∣tioned; and of his Power and Goodness in the first mention∣ed within our selves immediate∣ly; that he did so much, and no more; and so both ways move to Repentance, and to 
Serve him
 with more 
Heed-taking
 of him; with 
Reverence
 and 
Godly Fear,
 as being a 
consuming Fire.
 And also because this Warning God hath hereby given in this 
Nation,
 and its 
Camp,
 and the full Accounts of that De∣solation in 
Jamaica
 and 
Port-Royal
 were so just upon the Finishing the foregoing Discourse of 
Repentance,
 as to give leave to take a very short notice in the 
Introduction,
 Printed last, and no more. But it is of so great Concern and Interest to a 
National
 and 
Personal Repentance,
 and 
Re∣formation;
 that it could not in such a Discourse be passed over, without a great 
disregard
 to 
the Works of the Lord and to the Operation of his hands,
 which is so branded an Evil in Scripture-Account, 
Psal.
 28.5. 
Esay
 5.12. that an 
Appendix
 con∣cerning it was even demanded. And lastly, be∣cause 
Earthquakes,
 the 
Shaking, Trembling,
 and 
Moving the Earth
 is us'd as so constant a 
Symbol
 or 
Emblem
 of the 
Kingdom of God
 and Christ; 
Bowing the Heavens, Coming down,
 and making

 a change in the 
Heaven
 and 
Earth
 that 
now are,
 and in their whole State and Administration, as appears by this 
Context,
 I have therefore chosen to discourse upon: And seeing as I have all man∣ner of ways endeavoured to demonstrate, and do not doubt I have by divine Assistance, according to Scripture attain'd to do it; that that Kingdom of Christ by Computation upon Times given by the most 
Sure Word of Prophecy
 is nigh at hand; These Motions of the Earth in any parts of the World, and more particularly relating to our selves, and in this City, where such a Symptom so generally observ'd, as to be uncontestable, is very rare; ought to be taken notice of, as calling aloud to us to 
Repent, because the Kingdom of Heaven is at hand,
 and a Forerunner of the change that 
Kingdom
 is to make.


That therefore which I design in this Discourse upon this Text, is to shew, That the great 
Sym∣bol
 or Representation of the 
Kingdom of Christ
 in this so great Text 
of the Kingdom,
 is the Uni∣versal Shake, Concussion, and Convulsion of 
Hea∣ven
 and 
Earth;
 and that therefore, all the 
Shakes
 of this 
Earth
 ought to be taken notice of, as par∣cels and pieces of that Greatest and Last Shake, and as Pledges and Assurances of it; and especi∣ally when by the 
Sure Word of Prophecy,
 and the concurrent Judgment of most sober thinking Men concerning this matter, (who will not yet pitch upon the Time,) it is concluded it cannot be far off; It is known, that the 
Kingdom of Christ
 is so near.


I will therefore endeavour to comprise this short Discourse in these Heads:




1. To observe how throughout this Text the 
Kingdom of Christ
 is shaded by the 
shaking Hea∣ven and Earth once for all.


2. From thence to make Remarks upon the na∣ture of such Motions, or 
Trembles of the Earth,
 and their fitness to be such a Shade of the 
King∣dom of Christ,
 and wherein they are so according to the Light of Scripture concerning these things.


3. To observe the holy use that is to be made upon such Motions of the Earth in general, and particularly in these propos'd to our Observation now; and that with relation to 
Christ's Kingdom.


To begin with the first: The occasion of this Context is thus; The Apostle having given the Description of the 
New or Heavenly Je∣rusalem-state
 in the former Verses,
 he makes that great practical Application; 
See that ye refuse not him that speaketh
 in order to the setting up a 
King∣dom;
 for so, by what follows, must needs be in∣tended, that the 
Speaking
 is in order to the set∣ting up a 
Kingdom: For if they escaped not,
 who 
refused
 the same great Prince when he would form a 
Kingdom
 on Earth among the People of 
Israel,
 to be a Type of much a greater 
Kingdom; How shall we escape,
 who 
refuse
 him, who now 
spoke from
 Heaven in the Effusion of his 
Spirit,
 as a 
First-Fruits
 of his 
Kingdom?
 and who is to be the Great 
Prince,
 and who will appear in the Glory of his 
Kingdom, the Lord from Heaven,
 as he is called 1 
Cor.
 15. and then will set up a 
Kingdom
 in the 
New Heaven
 and the 
New Earth,
 in a far greater Glory. For though Christ came

 in great State then, the 
Chariots
 of 
God
 were then 
twenty thousand,
 &c. As great Princes come with mighty Retinue, of Horses, and Chariots; so did Christ on 
Mount Sinai:
 yet that was but Christ, as on 
Earth;
 this from 
Heaven.
 Psal. 68.


For his (even the same Lord's) 
Voice shook the Earth; Mount Sinai,
 and the Parts about it, did 
exceedingly shake.
 But now, as he is setting up a Kingdom both in the 
New Heaven
 and the 
New Earth,
 so he hath 
promis'd; I shake not on∣ly the Earth,
 but the 
Heaven also.


It may seem strange, an 
Earthquake
 should be given in 
promise;
 it is rather a Threatning, and Denunciation: but because it is a close Forerun∣ner of the Redemption of the 
Servants of Christ,
 and even of the whole 
Creation;
 therefore it is given in 
promise.
 And because so blessed a State is not in present, and immediately, but to come; therefore also 
it is promised,
 as a thing future, and to come; 
I will shake.
 And because this whole frame of Nature is defiled with Sin, and 
Apostasie,
 up to the very 
Heaven of God
 and 
his Saints;
 therefore Christ promises to 
shake
 not on∣ly the 
Earth,
 but the 
Heaven.
 For there are 
spiritual Wickednesses in High Places,
 or 
Heaven∣lies, Sathan,
 and his 
Host,
 who are the 
Princes
 under him of the 
Power of the Air,
 as well as the 
Ru∣lers
 of the 
Darkness
 of this 
World;
 and so the 
Heavenlies,
 or 
Heavenly Places
 are more defiled than all the wicked Men on Earth can defile the Earth, though they defile it so much; but then 
Sathan shall fall as Lightning from Heaven;
 All must be dislodged, and dismounted; For that Heaven shall be the Residence and Palace of

 Christ and his Saints, and shall shine down into the new Earth beneath, purified by Fire from the Defilements of Men; so Heaven and Earth must both be shaken. And therefore the 
shaking of Heaven
 and 
Earth
 may well be by 
promise,
 since a new Heaven and Earth rise from hence by 
promise.


And, Because all this is fulfilling of 
Promise,
 therefore the Servants of Christ at so great a 
shake
 of the 
Powers of Heaven
 and 
Earth,
 shall be less afraid than they are of a small 
Earthquake
 now; they shall receive it with Triumph, and re∣joycing, they shall say, Oh blessed Day! Oh bles∣sed Appearance! They shall 
lift up their Heads with joy,
 because 
their Redemption draweth nigh.
 Let us not therefore say, That Day will be so ter∣rible, how shall we endure it! It 
shall be gi∣ven
 us in that 
Day
 to Rejoice, who are his Re∣deemed.


And this Christ will do 
once more,
 even at his 
Kingdom,
 as if he should say, I have 
shaken,
 or permitted, or ordered the 
shaking
 of the 
Earth
 many Times, in various Places, and on sundry Accounts, I have shaken 
Nations
 and 
Kingdoms;
 but now, saith he, I'll do it 
once more,
 and 
once
 for all: And we may be sure, this 
shaking
 hath never been yet; for there hath not yet been a 
sha∣king
 so universal, and things have never yet been so 
shaken,
 but they have gotten again into their old posture, state, and, as we say, wont, so as to need to be 
shaken
 again. But this 
once
 is like the Ex∣pression 
Jerem.
 16.21. 
Behold, I will for this once, I will cause them to know my might:
 I will do it so at the Great Conversion of the 
Gentiles
 then spoken of; It shall never need to be done any

 more; They shall know by 
that once,
 for ever,
 that 
my name is Jehovah.
 God hath done these things in a Degree, and in some measure a Hun∣dred and a Hundred Times. But now they shall be done 
once
 for all.


I am fully assured, we shall All be at this 
sha∣king of the Earth:
 You may think you may be in your Graves; but you shall certainly be brought forth, to see, and 
feel
 God's doing this thing 
once. The Earth shall cast out it's Dead
 by the beginnings of it, that all may see it in its Fulness.


Now this Doing the Thing shall make a great Change, a 
Transpose
 of the Things, that are, or have been 
made,
 or 
done.
 The Word 
Metathe∣sis
 signifies a Dispose of Things out of the Places where they had been, into Places where they had not been before; or into a different Order or State. And it is of very great importance, because it may be a Transpose for the better, or for the worse: 
Enoch
 was thus 
Transpos'd;
 the same Word is us'd several times concerning him, 
Heb.
 11.5. and it was highly for the better, he was 
Translated
 to Heaven without 
Dying;
 So 
Trans∣pos'd.
 It is used for the 
Galatians
 being 
Re∣moved to another Gospel,
 and that was for the worse, 
Gal.
 1.5. This 
shake
 of the 
Earth
 shall make a great 
Transpose
 of Things; Many poor Persons, that have feared God, and yet 
embrac'd

 Dunghils,
 who have been forc'd to lye on the Earth, in the Dust, and in the filth of Things, shall be 
Transpos'd;
 for they shall 
Inherit the Throne of Glory,
 1 Sam. ch. 2. The Bodies of Saints, that lye in the Earth, or wherever, in the Dark, the 
Dust of Death,
 shall be 
Transpos'd;
 they shall shine above: But on the other side, the Great, the Rich, and the Brave, and the Ho∣norable, that have been High and Honorable, they will be wofully 
Transpos'd;
 they shall be turned down into a State of 
Everlasting Contempt.
 And so there shall be a 
Translation,
 a 
Transpose,
 of the very Creation, out of this Earth, as under the Curse and Defilement, into a 
new Earth,
 and of the 
Heaven
 into a 
new Heaven;
 not where 
Spiritual Wickednesses,
 but 
Christ
 and his Saints, shall in∣habit. Things shall not cease to be, but shall be changed, and removed, some for the better, some for the worse, as to themselves.


But all Things of this World shall then be chang'd and remov'd; All the Things that have been 
made
 or 
done,
 
. There are great Things in the World of all kinds made or done, Great Palaces, great Cities, great Temples or (as we call them) Churches, Great Castles, Fortifications, Navies. There are other great Things 
made
 and 
done.
 There are the several Laws and Constitutions of Government, great Volumes of Books, great Furniture of Palaces and Houses, Bravery of Equipage and Apparel, ex∣quisite Engines and curious Pictures; all these are Things that have been 
made,
 or 
done.
 There are the heaps of Gold, and Silver; so impressed, so minted, so coined: All these, and an unexpressible

 variety more, shall be 
Transpos'd,
 for the 
Day of the Lord
 shall be upon them all, 
Esay
 chap. 2. It shall be upon the 
High
 and 
Lofty,
 every one that is 
lifted up
 shall be 
brought low:
 It shall be upon all the 
Cedars of Lebanon,
 and 
upon all the Oaks of Bashan,
 both in a natural and figu∣rative Sense; and upon all the 
High Mountains,
 the mountainous Towers, and Piles of Building; upon all great 
Ships,
 those floating Palaces; the 
Loftiness
 of Men shall be 
brought low,
 and the 
Haughtiness
 of 
Men
 shall be 
humbled,
 and the 
High Looks
 shall be 
bowed down.
 And they shall 
cast their Images of Gold,
 and 
Silver;
 he means not only their 
Idolatrous Images,
 but their mint∣ed Gold and Silver, bearing the 
Images
 of Princes, which 
Gold
 and 
Silver
 they commit Idolatry with also; to the 
Bats
 and the 
Moles;
 to go into the 
Caves,
 and the 
Rocks,
 and the 
Tops of the rug∣ged Rocks, for fear of the Lord,
 and 
for the glory of his Majesty;
 and all this in the 
Day
 when he 
rises to shake terribly, once for all, the Earth.
 Oh how great will this 
Transpose
 then be!


And then all the 
Religion
 that 
Men
 have 
made
 shall become a perfect Transpose into a Nullity; and indeed, there is not a greater 
Poema
 or more made thing, than False Religion, and particularly the Religion of 
Popery:
 it is a strange kind of Fabrick, a strange kind of Frame; so indeed is 
Mahometanism,
 and so was 
Paganism
 heretofore, but none like that of 
Popery.
 But yet, what∣ever hath been of the Substance of either true Natural or Revealed Religion in any False Religi∣on adulterating it; shall be then 
Transpos'd
 back

 into Truth; and all else shall be abolished.


And lastly, That 
Heaven
 and 
Earth
 that 
are now,
 viz. since the 
Flood,
 to which 
Flood
 this 
once more
 may refer, shall be changed and 
trans∣posed
 by 
Fire;
 all shall be 
removed by Fire,
 as I remember, that most Learned, and Ingenious, and Christian Philosopher Dr. 
Bur∣net
 of the 
Charterhouse
 shews;
 How much the State of our 
Hea∣ven
 and 
Earth,
 as before the 
Flood
 was chang'd, and 
Transpos'd
 by the force of 
Water,
 the 
Water of the Flood,
 for the worse; But they shall by the force of 
Fire
 be Purified, and Renewed and Rescituated for Beauty and Glory; as he also asserts: All shall be Transpos'd; All shall come under a new Make: It is called 
 the Work of God; it is 
, What hath been already 
made;
 It shall be chang'd by him, that will 
say from the Throne upon which he sits, Behold, I make all new,
 Rev. 21.5. They had been 
made
 before; but saith he, Now I come to 
make All
 over 
anew.
 I will bring them to that Excellent State, wherein they shall continue, till 
God be All in All.


For only the 
Things
 that 
cannot be shaken
 shall 
Remain:
 Now what are those Things that cannot be shaken? They are the 
Blood, Sacrifice,
 and 
Redemption of Christ;
 his 
Redemption
 and 
Inter∣cession,
 these are 
for ever.
 They remain in his 
Priesthood for ever after the Order of Melchise∣dech,
 after the 
Power
 of an 
Endless Life.
 The Spirit of God in his Grace upon his Servants, in Conversion, Faith, Repentance, Holiness, shall re∣main as in the Glory and 
Salvation
 they are un∣to.

 This is an 
incorruptible Seed
 from the 
Word
 and Truth of God, that 
abideth for ever; He that doeth the Will of God abideth for ever;
 No Saint shall be 
Transposed
 out of his Saintship; 
He that is Righteous, let him be Righteous still; He that is Holy, let him be Holy still.
 These Things are 
Asaluta,
 not to be shaken.


And then on the other part, it must be sadly said, that 
Wickedness
 shall not be 
Transpos'd;
 in regard of its Guilt; in regard of its Filth; If not 
removed in this World
 by Faith and Repentance; not 
in the World to come;
 Wickedness shall be Wickedness still; it shall have 
a House builded;
 it shall be established, 
Zech.
 5.11. and it shall be 
setled on its own Base,
 and wicked Men shall be wicked Men still: When once it is come to that Time, there shall be no Transposal; 
He that is Ʋnrighteous, let him be Ʋnrighteous still; He that is Filthy, let him be Filthy still,
 Rev. 21.11.


Now seeing all this great Doctrine of the Apo∣stle is conveyed to us under this 
Symbol
 or Re∣presentation of an 
Earthquake,
 or the 
Shaking of the Earth,
 and 
not only of the Earth,
 but of the 
Heaven also;
 let us enquire into the Scripture-Accounts of an 
Earthquake,
 and apply it to the present Occasion, that it may bring us to a serious holy sense; and that what we have seen in a 
hand breadth,
 may move us to consider, what we shall see, and feel, as in the whole Heaven and Earth, in large and in full: For if what we have been sensible of, as in a Glance, or in Passage, hath af∣fected any with Fear; especially what was done in a part of our Nation beyond the Sea, which is but a very little Thing, yea a Nothing in com∣parison

 of what shall be in its 
own Times,
 in its 
proper Times;
 How much more ought we to be affected with the Assurances God hath given us of a Change so much greater? For as it may be said to us, 
If we have run with the Foot-men, and they have wearied us, How shall we contend with Horses?
 If in the present State, which is as a 
Land of Peace,
 and 
wherein we trust,
 we have been so affrighted, 
What shall we do in the swel∣ling of Jordan!


I come therefore to the second Head; 
viz.
 To make Remarks upon the nature of such 
Motions
 and 
Trembles
 of the 
Earth,
 and their Fitness to be a Shade of the 
Kingdom of Christ;
 and wherein they are so. And herein I propose three things:


1. To consider the strict nature of Earthquakes according to the Scripture-Foundations of Dis∣course concerning them.


2. To enquire into the Causes, why God is pleas'd to make such Concussions, and Convulsi∣ons in Nature.


3. To observe upon the great Metaphorical or Figurative 
Earthquakes,
 that is, Changes in the present State of the World, that have been since the 
Death
 and 
Resurrection
 of our Lord; and how the Observation of them may be made sub∣servient to the due Improvement of our Thoughts in regard to the late 
Earthquakes,
 we have heard of, or been at all sensible of more of late.


I begin then with the first Head, in Four Points.


Point I. The Scripture teacheth us, This great Globe of Earth and Water is hung by the 
mighty Wisdom,
 Skill, and Power of the great

 
Geometer
 of Heaven and Earth,
 as a Ball in the Air: So we read 
Job
 26.7. 
He stretcheth out the North over the empty Place,
 (for so to our eye and motion the meer Air seems to be) and 
he hangeth the Earth upon nothing.
 I know this is a Point proper to 
Philosophical
 Discussion, that it may go as far, as it can, upon: But those Questions God asked 
Job
 38.4. 
&c.
 would pose the wisest of the World; 
Declare, if thou hast understanding, Who hath laid the Measures of the Earth? If thou knowest, who hath stretched the Line upon it so, that it is in just number, weight, and measure. Whereupon are the Foundations thereof fastned? or who laid the Corner-stone thereof?
 There may be handsome and plausible 
solving the Phenomenae
 (as they speak) before Men, who know as little, the best of them, one as another; but before God, all is but 
darkning Counsel by Words without Knowledge.
 Now when it is so, that the Earth 
hangs
 thus, How must it needs be, that God as he pleases may shake the 
Earth out of its place
 with a touch of his hand, and 
all the Inhabitants
 thereof, and his Enemies particularly be 
shaken out of it,
 or off from it, or whither, or how he pleases: For if that bold Man of 
Mathematicks
 durst say, 
Give me where to set my foot, and I will remove the Earth,
 what can infinite Under∣standing and Power do? or if he does but slacken his hand from holding the Ballance even, keeping the Scales of Earth and Air just; or if there be such a

 one; as with great Reason hath been thought; the Poize of the Central Fire, Even, all would be in immediate Confusion.


On this Consideration then, any kind of Earth∣quakes is no wonder; the wonder is, they are not every day, and not to the utmost. The only se∣curity is, the unchangeableness of Divine Ordina∣tion for such a time as he hath decreed, since the Flood; wherein, in all appearance of Reason as well as Scripture, there was even in this regard a Jog, as one may say of it.


2. The Ballance is in this regard yet so Even, and just, that nothing we account most surely founded, stands so fast, so firm, and secure, as the Earth, that it cannot be moved: So that al∣lowing it to have a 
Diurnal,
 or every days Revo∣lution from 
East
 to 
West;
 yet it is with such e∣quality, that it disturbs all upon it, no more, than a Fly sitting it self fast on a Globe, is un∣settled by its being turn'd round. Notwithstand∣ing this motion, the 
Earth
 is 
founded on the Seas,
 and 
Established on the Floods;
 that is, the Waters are so every way compacted, under, and about, and over it, that it is as it were 
founded
 upon it, as on 
Pillars of Marble,
 which may have been understood, first according to the excellent forementioned 
Theory
 of the 
Earth:
 2. As the Cement and Fixation of the upper Parts of the Earth is the moisture it receives from the Waters: 3. As the ambient or round-about Air hath a more immediate force upon the Waters to crowd and keep them close to the Earth, than the Air it self could have upon the Earth, the Water being a middle Body between Air and Earth, even as

 the Air is between that subtile Matter we call 
Ether,
 and Air. So that the Earth hath 
Foun∣dations, Pillars, Corner-stone
 in Scripture-Lan∣guage. And this is indeed absolutely necessary for such kind of Bodies, and Works, as are to move and rest upon this Earth; which is as a 
Sea
 in regard of the variety of Creatures in it, where∣in are 
Things creeping innumerable,
 and 
both great
 and 
small Beasts;
 and 
Man
 the highest Or∣der of 
Animals.
 Now these require such a solid Floor and Pavement to move upon, such a Bed to rest upon: Upon this Earth is the whole Ve∣getative Nature, both nourished and supported, as in a Nursery; even from the 
Cedar in Leba∣non
 to the 
Hysop
 that 
grows in the Wall:
 Hereon have all the Great Buildings, the Palaces, Castles, Towers, multiplied into Cities and Towns their Foundations.


Now seeing all these have their Order, their Quiet, their Safety by the steddiness of the Earth; whenever it is moved, there is an immediate Shatter, Confusion, Disorder, Desolation, an A∣maze, a Horror upon all Creatures of Sense, and especially of Reason; an Affrightment and Ter∣ror upon Nature it self; because hereby the great Laws, and Sanctions of Creation, and Providence, are violated. For concerning the Earth, 
God spake, and it was done; he commanded, and it stood fast,
 Psal. 33.9.


3. The Earth is stuff'd with variety of Matter, Humours, and Vapors in its Bowels; Fire, Water, Vapor, Air, Minerals, Sulphur, Piceous Matter. Now it self is so made, as to lye close, and to lye still; every clod of Earth compacts it self, and would

 lye in as little room as it can. It is heavy, and sluggish, and unapt to move; whereas all the rest of its Inmates are for Motion and Action, some of them of very earnest and vigorous Motion, and for Propagation and Enlargement of themselves: The Earth will not move, but on some great vio∣lence and force; so when those working and active Parts find they are fettered, and imprisoned, and cramp'd, they grow furious and outragious, and rend and tear every thing, to make and force their way; and all on the sudden and at once ve∣ry often; for being either gather'd together in great Caverns and Hollows of the Earth; their Room grows too strait and little, and so they are forc'd to transplant themselves; or having, as one may say, very often a Spirit of Contradiction one to another, they fall into Feuds and Wars one with another, and they that are overcome and fall under the Mastery of others, are forc'd, and driven, and made to fly, out with great violence: and the very same thing may fall out in divers lesser Veins and Tubular Passages or Pipes in the Earth; where though the Stores of these Vapors or Mineral Spirits are lesser; yet if it be in many of them together, the Contest may be very great, and the Fury very discomposing to the Earth.


Thus there are within the Earth those Bombs and Mortars, those Cannon and Ordnance, those Battering Rams and Engines, those Mines oft sprung, and natural Gun-powder and fiery Bul∣lets, those lesser Screwed Guns: all which are the Ammunition of Nature, or rather of the God of Nature: Thus when they are discharg'd, and let off, it is with great Noise, Dread, and Astonish∣ment,

 and oftentimes Destruction to the Inhabi∣tants of the Earth. Who almost hath not heard of 
Aetna
 and 
Vesuvius,
 and other the Mountains spouting Fire in several Parts of the World? And as there are such constant, known, and open E∣ruptions in Nature, so are there secret, sudden, and extemporary ones.


And thus in the Heavens over us there are like Contests and Collisions, falling, and clapping of Clouds, Thunders, Lightnings, fiery Meteors, and flaming Balls, and these often corresponding, and as it were holding Intelligence, with the same in Earth. And these are certainly often Causes one of another by the Tone or Link of Air being broken, and the 
Elastic
 Force or Spring of it flying this way and that way; as lately in 
Ja∣maica
 according to the most prudent Accounts from thence: Every thing then must needs be torn and havock'd, as those Motions hurry this way or that way, Persons, Animal Creatures, and Things, at such times.


And as these are in the World of Nature; so are they in the 
Political
 World; when Nations or People are too full for their Place, and transplant themselves by forcing into other Nations; when Wars, those great Disputes of Nations arise; when People or Armies fall into Mutiny; these are Political Earthquakes; and when Men are op∣pressed in Religion by domineering Superstition, and Laws of 
Ʋniformity,
 and imposing on the Consciences and Faith of Men; There are Religious 
Earthquakes:
 The Psalmist puts them altogether, Psal. 65.7, 8. 
Which setteth fast the Mountains being girded with Power; which stillest the noise

 of the Seas, the noise of their Waves,
 and the 
multitude of the People.
 This God does in Mer∣cy, when he keeps all quiet; but there are Times when all these being in Hubbub and Mutiny, 
the Mountains shake
 and 
roar
 together with the 
Seas
 and 
Waves;
 and the 
Multitude
 of People in their 
Strivings;
 who are therein emphatically called 
the Mobile;
 that 
They that dwell in the utter∣most Parts are afraid of these Tokens;
 thus from one end of Nations, or even of the World, to another, there arise dreadful Fears at the 
Tokens of God,
 unhinging the World; called therefore 
Prodigies
 and 
Portents:
 For what Interest God hath in these, shall be spoken in the next Parti∣cular.


I only observe further, There are in the Little World by the wrestling of contrary Humours in the Bodies of Men, such Spoutings of Fire, as in Fevers; such Deluges of Water, as in Dropsies; such Earthquakes in violent Diseases; such sulphu∣reous Vapors in horrid Melancholies or Fits; or in the Arteries and Sinews, as in Gouts and Rheuma∣tisms; in those Arthritical Pains in the strait and close Tubes of the Body; such Swimmings of the Head, as resemble what hath been spoken of in the outer World; but above all in Consciences.


4. Let all these things be trac'd, as much as they can to their natural Causes; yet Scripture ascribes all to God, 
Psal.
 148.8. 
Fire, Hail, Snow, Vapor, all fulfil his Word: He worketh his Signs and Wonders among the Armies of Heaven and the Inhabitants of the Earth,
 and 
none can stay his hand;
 (for all the 
Inhabitants of the Earth are reputed as nothing
 in such a Case, 
Dan.
 4.35.)

 except he pleases to stay it himself; or 
can say to him, What dost thou?
 As if they should say What dost thou mean, who hast 
made Heaven and Earth,
 and preservest it; to put it into these Disorders? But he gives 
no Account of his mat∣ters
 in these Things. And seeing he holds all natural Causes in his hand, and ballances them every moment; what is it to say, All these Things have their proper Causes; but to say in true sense, that God does all These; for all Nature is indeed Miracle, constant, and as we say 
in ordinary.


But God indeed does in more lofty Style, and Elegancies, and Eloquences of Language, assume to himself the Government of these affrightful Motions in Heaven, or Earth; 
Thun∣ders, Lightnings, Earthquakes
 throughout Scri∣pture; as if they were immediately done by his own hand, as if he took this Globe of Earth and Sea, which he hath 
Hung upon nothing,
 and 
shook it out of its place;
 or as if he immediately shot off his great Pieces either in the Bowels of the Earth, or in the Skies, or sprung a Mine in the Earth: And it must needs be so; if all natural, voluntary and fortuitous (as we Poreblind think them) Causes work in and out of his hand. For if in the Killing 
King Ahab a man drew a Bow at a venture;
 or as in the Margin out of the 
He∣brew; In his Simplicity,
 without Design, with∣out Aim, and yet it was directed to 
Ahab,
 as by God's immediate Hand to fulfil his Word up∣on him, How much more are all natural Causes directed by him! 1 
Kings
 22.34. And those Things which he knows will with such extraordi∣nary Amazes change the World; he ascribes them

 more emphatically to Himself; 
His Thunder, his Lightnings; I shake Heaven and Earth.


Let us then consider, Why God does thus dis∣order Nature; And I shall instance in these fol∣lowing Reasons.


1. That when we see these Contests, and Jars in Nature, we may adore and praise the infinite Wisdom, Power, and Goodness of God, who keeps All so much in Peace and Quiet: For as great Engines or Machines, that have various and cross Wheels and curious Works in them; it requires as great Art, to harmonize them at first, so great care to keep them in order; and as vast Armies call for the highest Spirit, Wisdom, and Conduct of the 
Generalissimo,
 as Men speak, to inspire them with Order, Peace, Regular Action, in their seve∣ral Stations; so it is said of God, 
Job
 25.2. 
Do∣minion and Fear are with him. He maketh Peace in his high,
 (and in his 
Deep) Places also. Is there any number of his Armies?
 All which he yet keeps in Peace, as he pleases. Oh therefore that (as in that 
Song of Praise,
 Psal. 107.) Men considering All these Things well, would make it
 the Foot of every Thing! 
Oh that Men would praise the Lord for his wonderful Works to the Children of Men!
 For we see by a little what great Things he can do. 
Whoso therefore is wise,
 and will observe 
these Things, even he shall understand the loving kindness of the Lord.
 For indeed, That on which the Pride, and Pro∣phaneness, and Insolency of Men is grounded, is, That God will still from Time to Time keep Things in the Quiet and Peace he generally does:

 And if he does not, they fall down into Death and Ruine immediately in his doing otherwise: He therefore shews sometimes by such Disorders, what he always does, how he exercises 
Long-suf∣fering, Loving kindness in the Earth;
 for if he did otherwise, Nature would be always cracking in pieces; and if it were so, What could the greatest 
Monarchs
 say to it? Would 
they stay his hand,
 or would 
they render him a Recompence
 for not doing as they think he should and ought to do? 
Their Recompence he would speedily re∣turn upon their own heads.
 God therefore shews, How all the 
World
 is bound and beholden to him by shewing at such Times, what he can do with∣out any Controul, and yet does not; and what he does in maintaining Order and Peace when none can compell him to it, if, He did not please to do so.


2.
 That he may give Witnesses and Demonstra∣tions of his Wrath, Justice, and Power to; either, as he pleases; punish, and ex∣ecute Judgment from Hea∣ven; or move to Repen∣tance: For as he gives 
Fruitful Times
 and 
Sea∣sons
 that he might not 
leave himself without wit∣ness of his Goodness lead∣ing to Repentance;
 so of his Wrath and Justice to necessitate Men that way; For all these Things Preach Repentance, and Re∣formation

 aloud; and for that End I have thus superadded to the Discourse of Repentance.


3. That God may give notice of any great Chan∣ges he will make in the World, that are near at hand, and which within any little Time he will make in it, he gives Warning by 
Earthquakes
 and other unusual Things: For so in spight of all that can be said to the contrary, God hath ge∣nerally usher'd in any great Changes, he hath made in the World, by such 
Signs
 and 
Wonders
 in 
Heaven,
 and 
Shakings of the Earth
 beneath: and therefore with great Right he cloaths his De∣nunciations and Threats of such great Judgments in such Language of 
Thunder
 and 
Lightnings,
 and 
Earthquakes.
 A very remarkable Instance we have of this in the 
Prophet Amos.
 When God was about, as it were to Ride a Circuit in Judg∣ment upon the Nations for 
Three Transgressions,
 and for 
Four
 even upon each single Nation or Peo∣ple, 
Amos
 dates his 
Prophecy two Years before the Earthquake in the Days of
 Uzziah.
 How general that was, is not known to us. But there is plain im∣portance, God first began to give notice of his Judgments by 
Amos
 his 
Prophecy
 in his two first Chapters. That not prevailing to Repentance, he gave a loud Alarm by the 
Earthquake,
 which it is most probable, was as general as those Na∣tions threatned by 
Amos.
 Then follows the Judgment it self on the several People nam'd and executed by the 
Assyrian
 and 
Babylonian
 Con∣quests. And why was there a mention of the 
Earthquake two Years
 after; if God had not pleased to give that Intimation, that an 
Earth∣quake


 was a fit Forerunner of that Judiciary Pro∣gress, that follows in those two Chapters of 
Amos;
 so our Lord 
Matt.
 24. makes 
Earthquakes
 in 
Di∣vers Places,
 the certain Forerunners of the Deso∣lations of 
Jerusalem.


4. The 
Lord Jehovah
 is pleased to suffer 
Earth∣quakes,
 because he hath determined upon this one 
Earthquake,
 wherein he will 
shake
 not 
only the Earth,
 but the 
Heaven also;
 a 
great Earthquake, such as hath not been since men were upon earth; so mighty an Earthquake, and so great; wherein every Island shall flee away, and the Mountains shall not be found,
 Revel. 16.18.20. And of this God foretold 
Hagg.
 2.6. 
Yet once I will shake Heaven and Earth,
 &c. And in this Text, 
Yet once more I shake not only the Earth, but the Heaven also.
 Where though the Apostle oppo∣ses the 
once more
 to the 
shaking of the Earth
 at Mount 
Sinai,
 because that was to his present purpose; yet it leaves room for that most sagaci∣ous Interpretation of Dr. 
Burnet,
 in the fore∣named Discourses, That it is oppos'd to the 
sha∣king
 not only the 
Earth,
 but the 
Heaven
 also, in and by the 
Flood;
 for in that he says 
once more,
 it supposes, that not only the 
Earth,
 but the 
Heaven,
 had been 
shaken
 before: And when could that be, but in 
the Flood
 the on purpose-Type of this, as appears by what that excellent Person hath said on 2 
Pet.
 3. Although This shall be greater, and to far greater purpose in 
the new Heaven,
 and the 
new Earth
 to perfection: Whereas That 
Flood
 brought forth 
a Heaven and Earth
 for the worse; and Men grew as, and more wicked; but here 
Righteousness shall dwell,
 and

 This shall be the greatest since 
Man was on Earth.
 This is the 
Time of Trouble,
 of deep 
Tribulation
 and 
Temptation,
 such as none 
ever was before,
 to All, but the Servants of God and Christ, 
Dan.
 12.1. 
Mat.
 24.21. 
Rev.
 3.10. 
c.
 7.14.


Now therefore, It 
becomes him, by whom are All things,
 and 
for whom are All Things;
 seeing he hath determined so great an 
Earthquake
 at last, to give such 
Terellaes
 of it; such little Parts, Pieces, and Models of it, that might Inlighten, Awaken, and Assure the World concerning it; and to have set up such a Pyramid of it by the 
Flood,
 in general to all the World; and to 
Sodom,
 and the Cities about it in more particular, in the Beginning of the World; and to speak in the Elo∣quence of what he will do, on every occasion of a greater Judgment on any Nation or People; and to ioyn with it the 
Thunder
 and 
Lightnings
 of his 
Power
 and 
Voice,
 that are as the 
Shakings of Heaven;
 and generally fall in with the 
Sha∣king of the Earth.
 And thus we find all along the Scripture, and with great Relation to this ve∣ry 
Earthquake
 ushering in the 
Kingdom of Christ,
 and the 
Destruction of Babylon,
 the great Symbol of his Enemies; so 
Psal.
 18.7. 
Esay
 13.13. with very many Pieces more. And this is to make the Thoughts of it familiar to Men, and to ac∣quaint them throughly with God's great purpose herein; for hereby a 
short Work will God make on Earth;
 yet every Man, Woman, and Child, shall be rais'd on purpose to see this great Sight, and to feel it; The 
Earth shall cast out her dead for it,
 and no more cover them. This is that 
Earthquake
 in which God arises to 
shake terribly

 the Earth,
 Esay 2. wherein it shall be indeed as a 
cha
ed Roe,
 and as 
a Sheep no man cares to take up,
 tho now they are so greedy of it. Then the Lord will make 
it empty
 and under the great De∣solation overthrowing, and 
turning upside down
 Persons and Things, and all distinction of 
Ser∣vants, Masters,
 and 
Mistresses, Purchasers, Sel∣lers, Lenders, Borrowers,
 as is describ'd 
Esay
 24. which shall end in the 
Sun's being confounded,
 the 
Moon asham'd,
 when 
God comes to Reign be∣fore his Ancients in Glory.


And in the 
New Testament;
 we find at the Death of our Lord Jesus Christ, 
Mat.
 27.50. when he gave up that mighty Breath, and with that loud Voice commended that immortally bles∣sed Spirit into the Hand of God; There was a 
Great Earthquake,
 and the 
Rocks rent,
 and the 
Graves opened;
 and after his Resurrection, 
many Bodies of Saints came forth, and appeared to many in the Holy City;
 a most admirable Type of the Last 
Great Earthquake.
 At the 
Resurre∣ction
 of Christ there was again an 
Earthquake.
 Matth. 28.2. At the 
Pouring out of the Spirit,
 Acts 2.1. There was from Heaven a 
mighty rushing Wind,
 that 
fill'd the House,
 and so must needs 
shake
 it, and as the 
Appearance of Fiery Tongues:
 when the Apostles Pray'd after that so∣lemn 
Conference
 with the 
Elders of the Jews,
 the 
House shook.
 c. 4. When 
Paul
 and 
Silas
 had prai∣sed God in Prison, there was an 
Earthquake,
 and the 
Foundations
 of the 
Prison
 were 
shaken,
 the 
Doors opened,
 and the 
Chains
 of 
every
 one were 
loosed,
 Acts 16.25. All these were real 
Histori∣cal Earthquakes,
 or Matters of Fact; and they

 are also great Types, and Emblems with Relati∣on to what shall be at the 
Kingdom of Christ,
 and even Predictions and lively Assurances there∣of.


In the 
Revelation,
 that most 
August Prophecy
 of the 
Kingdom of Christ,
 we read of Four great 
Earthquakes,
 that were so many Advances of the 
Kingdom of Christ.


1. That grand Deturbation of, or dismounting 
Paganism,
 or the casting down the 
Dragon
 or 
Devil
 inhabiting it from Heaven, who was wor∣shipped in 
Paganism
 as a God; and all his 
Host
 in the 
Fourth
 or 
Roman Empire,
 were cast down with him, when that 
Empire
 in 
Constantine
 became Christian. And this was celebrated by those lof∣ty Expressions concerning it, as a great 
Shaking even of Heaven and Earth,
 Rev. 6.12. c. 12.5. as shall be at the 
Kingdom of Christ.


2. The final Extirpation of Paganism, or Root∣ing it out; though with that unhappy Revolution of 
Antichristianism,
 ready to come in with the 
Barbarous Nations
 into that 
Empire,
 and so un∣dermining the 
Kingdom of Christ.
 This was at the famous Victory of 
Theodosius;
 And this was as Church Historians tell us, with a very great 
Tempest
 of 
Thundring
 and 
Lightning
 and 
motion of the Earth
 in the Letter, as well as the 
Pro∣phetic
 Representation of the 
Thunder, Lightnings, Voices
 and 
Earthquake,
 the great 
Emblems
 of the 
Kingdom of Christ.


3. The 
Earthquake
 that shall be at the 
Rising of the Witnesses,
 when that Great City, whose 
Emblem
 is 
Ten,
 or 
Tenth;
 in regard of the 
Ten Kings,
 who give their 
Kingdom to the Beast,
 that

 
carries it,
 shall fall. 
Rev.
 11. cap. 17.


4. The whole Time of the 
Seventh Trumpet,
 shall in regard of the mighty Effects, and Events be a continual 
Earthquake;
 even till the great and real 
Shake
 of 
Heaven
 and 
Earth,
 the 
once more
 in the Text; that 
what cannot be shaken may remain,
 as hath been explained. 
Rev.
 16.18.20. compared with c. 11.


Now that 
Earthquake
 nam'd last, but this last, 
viz.
 the Fall of the great 
Antichristian
 State, I affirm to be so near as 1697. approaching; wherein the Kingdom of Christ shall be in its Suc∣cession.


Now what arises from all this,
 but that it may both urge the Ne∣cessity, and give all Invitations and Incitements to Repentance; which cannot be higher express'd than in the Apostle's own Words, as 'tis us'd in this Context. Let us 
have Grace,
 or rather Take Hold, lay earnest Hold of Divine 
Grace,
 and Pow∣er in Christ; that we may 
serve him with Reve∣rence,
 or all Holy Awes of Modesty and Shamefa∣cedness, as the 
Angels
 that 
cover Faces
 and 
Feet,
 lest we give distaste; and with good 
Heed-taking,
 as the 
Israelites
 that kept within bounds, lest God should have broken out; And this Service of God with holy 
 
Modesty
 and shame of our own Unworthiness and horrid Nakedness; This Good 
Heed-taking
 not to run into God as a 
Consuming Fire,
 is most shewn, exercis'd and practis'd in timely Repentance. For all at that Day of 
Earthquake, Thunders
 and 
Lightnings, once for All,
 All must be near; for God will 
come near to them,
 as a 
swift Witness;
 and to

 All not Repenting and Reconcil'd in Christ, he will be a 
Consuming Fire,
 Mal. 3.5. With this Heb. 12.


And to this purpose, Let these very late 
Moti∣ons of the Earth
 be consider'd in all the forego∣ing Discourse; for I cannot but be perswaded, they are Pledges of that great Change, that shall suddenly be in the World in the Fall of the whole 
Papal
 and 
Antichristian State;
 besides their ge∣neral strong Motive to 
Repentance,
 as they speak God, both in his Divine Power, and Ability to execute Wrath; as also in his 
Goodness, Long-suffering,
 and 
Patience, leading to Repentance;
 and how much more, if the Approach of his Kingdom it self, the greatest 
Motive to Repen∣tance
 be by it declar'd so near.


That I may therefore improve so remarkable a Providence upon the 
English Plantation
 in 
Ja∣maica,
 (which is therefore to be reputed a part of 
England
 it self) and the so gentle and tender Admonition of that Motion of the Earth among our Selves (as also on other Parts) I would dis∣course them first, as an Argument to Repentance, and then, that they are a Prediction of a great Change on the World.


1. I first consider that of 
Jamaica,
 which, we must needs acknowledge a part of our Selves; and therefore it is to be looked upon as 
Eng∣land,
 though beyond the Sea; and so we are all equally therein concerned, particularly that many of us had Interests, and Relations that suffered in it; we are therefore nearly concern'd; and so are strongly called upon to Repentance by it; and the more, that it fell so particularly upon that Town or Port, that bore the Ensigns of So∣vereignty

 and Government, called 
Port Royal;
 that was the 
Key of the Island
 and Plantation, the Port and Harbor, the Seat of the 
Kings
 House, and of the Houses of the most considera∣ble 
Merchants
 and Traders; and of the Defence and Strength of the Place, by its 
Bastions
 and Fortifications.


2. I consider, that the Judgment bears a very great Resemblance to the Judgment on 
Sodom
 and 
Gomorrah;
 For the Thunder, and Lightning, and Balls of Fire that came down from Heaven; according to the most credible Accounts of Eye-witnesses; though the Town was not, that I have heard, touched by the Fire, carry the Signatures of 
Sodom
's Judgment after a serene 
Rising
 of the 
Sun,
 which must be by an 
Earthquake
 and 
In∣undation;
 for the 
Earthquake
 and 
Inundation
 was in the Suddenness, and dreadful Desolation, and Destruction that it made, How like to that which turn'd 
Sodom
 into a 
Lake
 or 
Dead Sea
 to this day! And herein what was short of 
Sodom
's Judgment in the Fire, was made up in the Dread of the 
Earthquake:
 and so many, about 2000 Persons perished, as by that newly sober publish∣ed Account before nam'd appears; 
A Shade of the Place, and of the Parts on which the Earth∣quake had greatest Power is given in it.


From hence then I argue;


1. That it is not to be ascrib'd to natural Cau∣ses any other way, than as the supreme Counsel and Being hath all Causes in his Hand, and at his Dispose. If it had been only an 
Earthquake
 and 
Inundation,
 there had appeared less of God, and of his Supream Dominion; But when there was

 a Correspondence, and as it were Intelligence be∣tween Heaven, and Earth, and Sea, above and be∣low; It leads us to consider Him, 
Who does whatever he pleases in Heaven and in Earth, and in all Deep Places.
 He causeth the Vapors to ascend from the Earth, He maketh Lightnings for the Rain, He bringeth the Wind out of his Treasures, 
Psal.
 135.6, 7. Were not Men resol∣ved, as 
Pharaoh,
 to 
stand
 up like 
Rock
 against God they must needs acknowledge Him in this: The Works of God, his Judgment on 
Sodom
 of old, is an 
Ensample
 to all After Ages; How much more This so upon our own Times, on whom the 
Ends of the World are come;
 though we had no share in it, but it was upon another People; How much more when so upon our Selves, though in another Climate!


2. I consider, as a further Argument to Re∣pentance herein that great Scripture 
Amos
 4.6. That it comes upon this Nation in a Train, and Connexion of Judgments; all within less than half the 
Age of a Man
 at 
Moses
's Computation:
 The Pestilence and Dreadful Plague in the Year 1665. The Fire on this City in 1666. The several Intestine Commotions, and Wars a∣broad: And now it is come to this Judgment, though but on some of us; yet it was but so up∣on 
Israel,
 v. 11. 
I have overthrown some of you,
 as 
God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah.
 And this is the last, till God come to a Judgment so great, he would not name; 
Therefore will I do Thus, or this, unto thee. Therefore prepare to meet thy God, Oh Israel,
 in his severest Judgment,

 if thou 
return not.
 And so according to the ge∣neral course of the Word and Dealings of God, especially with a People under such a clearness of Divine Revelation as we are: It must needs be, whether Men will 
Hear or Forbear.
 It must end in utter Destruction, if upon this we do not 
Re∣turn to God,
 according (I say) to the General Rules, and Standards of his Word.


3. That great Admonition of our Saviour's is an utter Prohibition of our sheltring our selves under such an Imagination, that they were 
greater Sinners
 than we are; for he hath solemnly de∣nounced, That whoever does not 
Repent,
 shall not only 
Perish,
 but shall 
Perish
 
 
in like manner
 with those, who have 
Perish'd
 by extraordinary, and most eminent, and remarkable Judgments, 
Luc.
 13.3, 5. So that without 
Repen∣tance
 we are always under the Impendency, the hanging over of so great Judgments upon us; as came indeed upon the 
Jews
 in the 
Roman Desola∣tions
 soon after; and must upon this Nation ac∣cording to ordinary Rules, and Standards of the Word, and Providence of God, as I have said: But if not; seeing that Word of Christ shall be true, that we shall 
likewise perish,
 if we do 
not Repent;
 We must be raised to that Greatest 
Earthquake, Thunder,
 and 
Lightning,
 and the Dreadful 
Tempest,
 the 
Snares, Fire
 and 
Brim∣stone
 God will then Rain, and the 
Horrible Tem∣pest,
 that shall be the Portion of every wicked and impenitent Person's 
Cup,
 Psal. 11.6. at that Time, that Day, that shall 
burn as an Oven,
 and 
consume the Wicked Root and Branch;
 at that 
Battel
 of the 
Great Day of God Almighty
 in the

 
Valley of Jehosaphat
 and 
Armageddon,
 when he will 
go through,
 and 
burn up all together;
 What Cause have we therefore to 
look diligently,
 we may be 
found of him in Peace
 at that Day, and not in a 
State of War,
 of that 
War,
 that is a 
War
 in 
Righteousness
 or a 
War
 of 
Just
 and 
Righteous Judgment
 in the 
Day of Judgment.


4. I observe from so many Persons, taken away so suddenly in 
Jamaica;
 How great an Argu∣ment it makes against Trust to a 
Death-Bed-Re∣pentance,
 when the very Possibilities of a 
Death-Bed
 to 
Repent
 upon may be so snatch'd from us: and therefore with how great Force and Evidence, and with what a just Timousness, the Observati∣ons on these Providences There, and Here, are to be adjusted to these Discourses on the general ne∣cessity of Repentance, and the great Hazard of committing our selves to the Adventure of a 
Death-Bed-Repentance;
 when so suddenly Provi∣dence, that is as in a Course of 
Earthquakes,
 and hath given us such Warnings, may take us 
away living,
 and, if we Repent not, 
in his Wrath.


5. As between those two Dispensations of Provi∣dence; the Dreadful Earthquake in 
Jamaica,
 and that here; I consider with what a Goodness, and yet with a Faithfulness to move to Repentance, God hath shewn us both the Tenderness and the Skill of his Hand in the Motion of the Earth we were sensible of. For as in the most admirable Know∣ledge of his Almighty Hand, he took up our Earth, and poiz'd it; and in the Doing of it, did as it were say, 
How shall I give thee up,
 London? 
How shall I make thee as
 Admah 
and
 Zeboim, 
the

 Cities the Lord overthrew, as
 Jamaica, 
or
 Port-Royal? 
My Heart is turned within me, my Re∣pentings are kindled together; I will not execute the fierceness of my Wrath; I am God, and not Man; I will not enter into this City,
 Hosea 11.8, 9. as into 
Jamaica.
 Behold then on Them 
Severity,
 to Us 
Goodness,
 if we 
Turn to him
 in his Goodness, and so 
abide
 in it; or else accor∣ding to ordinary Rules we must be cut off also.


And there is indeed most of the Power and Wisdom of God in doing so much, and no more; For a rude and unskilful Hand can Throw Down, Spoil and Destroy; but only an Understanding and Almighty Hand could 
weigh the Earth as in Scales;
 and as in a 
Ballance,
 lift up and set down in the very same place and state. And how much more of Love and Grace to melt and soften us! as if he had said, Behold what I am able to do, to Ruin you in a moment! But I will only shew what I can Do, and I will 
Do you no hurt.
 Oh that this 
Riches
 of 
Goodness, Long suffering
 and 
Patience,
 might 
lead us to Repentance!
 who himself 
staid his own Hand,
 and said to Himself, 
What am I doing?
 (when none else could) and 
He did it not.


I come now to the Second Head I propos'd, for the Improvement of our Thoughts on these 
Earthquakes
 in general, but particularly of that but just, a 
Motion
 of the 
Earth
 in this City, and the Royal Camp, and other parts beyond the Sea; That it is predictive, and foretelling of a great Change in the World: And of this I give these following Arguments.


1. It is beyond all denial most evident, that Scripture makes use of 
Earthquakes,
 as the Con∣veyance of its Description of the great Works and

 Changes God will make for the 
Kingdom of Christ,
 till it appears: That course of Earthquakes Providence hath been in of late years, is surely a Declaration of those great Changes he is about to make, first by the Succession of that 
Kingdom,
 and then by its own Appearance: For if first Christ convey his 
Kingdom
 by 
Earthquakes,
 as 
Types
 and Pledges; it is but reasonable to expect, when he alarms the World with 
Earthquakes,
 he has something to do more than ordinary in the Advancement of it; else his so great use of them in his Word would be but as the 
sounding of the Mountains,
 and 
Amuse
 in vain. By the so often use of 
Earthquakes
 he teaches us to expect by them; Seeing as on one side he uses 
Earth∣quakes
 in his Word to express great Things for his 
Kingdom
 by; so on the other side he uses 
Earthquakes,
 that are so in Fact to and in his 
Pro∣vidence,
 to foretell some Changes for his 
King∣dom
 following them, according to his Word.


2. The Nations, and Places, where this Moti∣on of the Earth came, are such, as are closely concerned in the Change, that God is about to make; being either of the 
Protestant
 Profession, or of the 
Ten Kings,
 that yet 
give their King∣dom to the Beast.


That God was pleas'd therefore to guide the Motion of unquiet Vapors over so many Coun∣tries and Cities, it was like the sending the 
Cup
 and 
Yoke
 in 
Jeremy
 to so many Nations, on whom he would execute his Displeasure by 
Nebuchadnez∣zar,
 Jerem. c. 25. c. 27. so now he hath sent by this 
Earthquake,
 as it were by a Messenger, to make known to the Nations his 
Kingdom
 so near. For so mild and gentle a Motion, that had no∣thing of Wrath, and execution of Vengeance

 in its Commission, seems entrusted only with so great a Notice. And I cannot but hope, and am even assured, That this City is to bear so happy a Part in the 
Kingdom of Christ,
 that it shall be 
preserved
 for his 
Servant
 David
's sake,
 and that God in Christ is the 
Holy one in the midst of it.


3. That which above all assures me so, is That 
Sure Word of Prophecy;
 that Time is so near for the Succession of the 
Kingdom of Christ,
 (which is by 
Prophecy
 describ'd by a great 
Earth∣quake
) that I can understand nothing by this Move; but that Introducing, or Bringing it in with the 
Call of the Witnesses,
 and the 
Fall of the Tenth
 of 
the Great City:
 For I cannot understand that there is Space or Room for any other Change but of That to the 
Kingdom of Christ,
 entring into its 
Succession;
 wherein all shall have the Ad∣vantages of Repentance and Reformation by the 
pouring out of the Spirit,
 and the 
Preaching of the everlasting Gospel;
 even to all the World; and the Converts of that Time shall be, as the 
Drops of Dew from the Womb of the Morning:
 A Change of so great advantages to the World, that none have any reason to be offended, or to complain of the Tydings; except They, 
who hate to be Reform'd.
 I desire no other 
Beauty of Feet
 or 
Face
 than to 
bring
 and 
pub
ish
 it. It is all holy, pure, spiritual, benign, and beneficent, to those who have but any Desires after God Christ, and Goodness, both in inward and outward Boun∣ties: There is greatest reason it should be 
dai
y prayed for,
 and 
daily it is to be praised; Verily,
 It may be said, 
Many Kings, Prophets,
 and 
Righteous Men have desired to see the Things
 that shall then be seen; and 
have not seen them;
 and to 
hear the Things that shall then be heard,


 and have not 
heard them.
 Oh therefore, that this may be what this gracious Heave of the Earth does presage; (as I have great Assurance it does,) That there is no more danger by it, than this, That we should take notice; This Earth with great Sedateness gave a Motion with joy, as 
John Baptist in the Womb
 to foretell; It is 
with all its King
oms
 soon to become 
the Kingdom of the Lord
 and of 
his Christ,
 wherein 
Righteous∣ness shall dwell:
 That soon after, upon a Purifi∣cation from all Defilements the 
Heavens
 over it, and it self, may become a 
New Heaven
 and a 
New Earth;
 and the 
Will of God done
 as in parallel, as in that 
Heaven,
 and upon 
Earth.


But though I have endeavoured to make good my way all along; yet I would in the Conclusion give a more solemn Answer to the chief Objecti∣ons, I have taken notice of.


Objct.
 1. Some of the sagacious Observers of Nature have so trac'd extraordinary Events to their Causes, that they have foretold particularly Earth∣quakes, by observing the Ripeness of natural Cau∣ses for them.


Answ.
 1. Whatever Observations the wisest of Mankind have made, they are not able, so far to penetrate the Screws of Natural Causes, fitted to the necessitating one another to such Effects; but that supernatural Agents may give a 
Lift
 to the 
Wheels
 of Second Causes, that usually 
move,
 but 
on Earth,
 viz. in a natural way; to move much 
above Earth,
 that is, Supernaturally: and in the same manner to set Bars to, or hinder their Motions. 
Ezek.
 1.19.20.


Now that there are such Supernatural Agents; the very Evidences of rational, and even sensible Experiments compel the stoutest Gainsayers to

 confess, but as they bid defiance to all Things for the sake of their 
Atheistic
 Sentiments.


Answ.
 2. He that 
Knows all his Works
 from 
the very Foundation of the World,
 and foresees All Causes and Effects, could with the same Ease ballance them for their just Time, both as to par∣ticular Persons, and Nations with their Sins 
filling up their measure;
 and so that All should roll down to their highest Effects at that time when he will 
once more shake, not only Earth
 but 
Heaven also;
 even at that 
Time of Trouble,
 and 
Day of Battel and War,
 as it is most 
Prophetically
 call'd 
Job
 38.22.23. compar'd with 
Dan.
 12.1. 
Mat.
 24.21. and 
Revel.
 16.14. the same Spirit that dicta∣ted All, Fitting the very Words one to another in these Scriptures.


Object.
 2. But still, If this be allowed, that such natural Causes and Effects are adjusted for the Purposes of Divine Judgment, and even for that Dissolution of this present Frame, Why at this Time?


Answ.
 1. Such a Time according to all Scripture and Reason must be at some Time; and why may it not be now so near?


Answ.
 2. The very Time since the 
Coming of Christ
 first 
in the Flesh
 being almost 1700 Years ago, was call'd the 
Fulness of Time;
 what then can be after it, but the 
Ends of the World,
 the 
Last Day,
 the 
Last Hour,
 running apace to the 
Fulness of all Times?
 Gal. 4.4. and Ephes. 1.10.


Answ.
 3. Mens Heats in all the Business of this World, 
Buying, Selling, Planting, Building;
 the 
Little Faith on Earth,
 it is near; are no Argu∣ments it is not near; for these are foretold to be even at the nearest Approaches of 
that Day.


Answ.
 4. But in sum; 
The Sure Word of Pro∣phecy,


 and 
Line of Time
 according to Scripture, in full Agreement with 
History,
 as I have so of∣ten affirm'd, is my Grand Assurance.


Object.
 3. But those Words of our Lord's 
Marc.
 13.32. 
Of that Day and Hour knoweth none,
 &c. contradict any such Calculation making known that Time.


Answ.
 I affirm upon greatest Evidences of Scripture Reason; The 
Son having all Judgment committed to him,
 and the 
Spirit resting upon him without measure;
 did know of that 
Day,
 and of that 
Hour;
 but in that Par
bolical Speech Christ acknowledges the Supreme Dominion of the Divine Being, which is so often said to have the 
Panto-Cratorate,
 the Almighty Ordination of that Day, and the so unfathomable stupendious Pro∣cess of it; As 
the Revelation,
 or 
Bringing All Things to pass
 in order to it, is said to be 
given by God to Jesus Christ to shew to his Servants:
 and the Conduct of them, originally in God, is gi∣ven to him; even so the Knowledge of the Time and the Administration of that Day.


Object.
 5. But the contrary Prevalencies of that 
French
 Prince, the so great Enemy of the 
Witnesses,
 who keeps them now from 
Rising,
 shews, That Time is not so near.


Answ.
 As God gives in all Ages such Dominion and Greatness to some Princes, that no Confede∣racies can withstand it; as to 
Nebuchadnezzar, Alexander, Caesar, Mahomet;
 so hath he given much Greatness to that Monarch: but when such Time of those Princes came, and so of this Prince, that they must have End; At that very Time, as they, so he must end; and none shall help it; nor any precedent Greatness stay him up.


Answ.
 2. An Universal 
Monarchy
 is Embarras∣sed

 to him; He shall never be more than one of the 
Ten Kings,
 till he, or his Successors with the Rest shall 
hate the Whore.
 As Prophecy, so Pro∣vidence hath Embarrassed him, as with a 
Band of Iron;
 and so far the 
Confederacy,
 or some o∣ther certain Interposal shall prevail, till then


Answ.
 3. We are not earnest enough in Prayer, we curtail the Time of Humiliation, and seeking God; especially, in that strongest Argument of his 
Kingdom.
 Oh that this 
Counsel
 might be 
ac∣ceptable to the King,
 and to the 
Counsels
 of the Nation, and the Ministry of all Names! that we might by earnestest and loudest Prayers of a Win∣ters 
Humiliation,
 and seeking him by Fasting and Supplication prepare for a Summers Action, and not grutch God the Time.


Answ.
 4. He hath had the usual Space allowed to such notorious Enemies of the People of God; And give me leave to use it as an Emblem, tho not as a Forebode; As Divine Providence com∣manded so great a 
Leviathan
 or 
Whale;
 which he calls 
King over the Children of Pride;
 from 
Play∣ing
 in the 
Ocean,
 where he had room enough in the pursuit of his Prey; to come, and strand him∣self, and dye on the Shore of 
Scot
and,
 the 
Twin Island
 of our 
Great Britain;
 even so he will shortly work his 
Signs
 and 
Wonders
 in 
Heaven
 and 
Earth,
 that he may abase such 
Tyrannick Leviathans walking in Pride.


For the Time is near, and All, however it seems otherwise, shall be ready. 
A King shall Reign in Righteousness;
 and Persons compar'd to the Basest, Vilest, shall no more be called 
Most Christian, most Serene, Magnificent, Beneficent.


But there shall be a Breaking out of the Glo∣ry of the Gospel, The Tongue of the 
Stam∣merers


 shall 
speak plain, The Lame shall leap as an Hart.
 The 
Ears of the Deaf
 shall 
hear;
 The Esay. 29. c. 32 c. 35. 
Eyes of the Blind shall see out of obscurity;
 The very 
Ears of the Deaf shall hear the Words of that Book
 of 
Prophocy,
 which the 
Learned
 will not now meddle with, because, say they, It is Sealed; nor the 
Ʋnlearned,
 because they are not 
Learned.
 Abundance of Converts shall be brought in; 
Foolish Virgins
 shall be 
made Wise,
 and not Err in 
the way
 called 
the way of Holiness;
 and no 
ravenous Beast shall be there any more for ever.


Let us then, to sum up all, Seek him who 
made the Seven Stars and Orion,
 who makes the Day 
dark
 with 
Night,
 and yet 
turns the shadow of Death into Morning,
 who calls for the 
Waters of the Sea,
 commands them out, and 
pours them on the face of the Earth;
 who 
rends the Rocks
 with his 
mighty Winds,
 and 
shakes the Earth out of its place,
 and 
Thun∣ders down with his Fire upon the wicked;
 and comes himself in the 
Still Voice of his Kingdom.


And hereof he hath given notice, as he 
saw good,
 with dread of Wrath on 
Jamaica,
 as an Emblem of the 
Day of Judgment
 on the 
World
 of 
Ʋngodly;
 which, as it should stir up the 
Rem∣nant
 that are there 
escaped,
 even as our Selves, to deep Repentance; so it should excite us to all Acts of Mercy to them, and Prayers for them.


To us he hath sent, as it were the 
Still Voice,
 to let us know he is 
coming
 himself; to which the Earth mov'd it self, in token of Obeisance.


FINIS.
















THE GENERAL INEFFICACY AND INSINCERITY Of a Late, Or 
Death-Bed Repentance.
 WITH Earnestest Dissuasives from committing our Eternal Condition to that Un∣speakable Hazard. AND A full Resolution of the Case, how far a 
Death-Bed Repentance
 is possible, to be Sincere and Effectual. By 
T. Beverley.


.


To Day, whilst it is called, to Day; Lest any one be hardned through the Deceitfulness of Sin, 
Heb. 3.7, 13.


LONDON.
 Printed by 
R. Smith,
 for 
William Miller
 at the 
Gilded Acorn
 in St. 
Paul
's Church-yard, where Gentlemen and others may be furnished with Acts of Parliament, Spee∣ches, and other sorts of Discourses, and State-Matters; as also Books of Divinity, Church-Government, Huma∣nity, Sermons on most Occasions, 
&c.
 MDCXCII.










THE PREFACE TO THE READER.


IT may seem unseasonable, and mo∣rose, to deny the value of any kind of Repentance, in such an Age as this; wherein there is a Generation arisen, Oh how lofty are their Eyes, and their Eye-lids lifted up with Scorn and Disdain of all Reli∣gion! An Age so irreligious, that it seems necessary to gather up all the Frag∣ments, tho but of a seeming Piety, and make the most of them, rather than to call things to so strict a Ballance: A thinner, and more dilute Repentance, than would formerly have admitted a Man into a visible Church, may at

 such a time as this, hope for Heaven.


To all this I must answer, 
First,
 The Looseness of an Age does not slac∣ken or dissolve Eternal Laws; Wis∣dom abates nothing of its price, of that timely and early search after it, whether Men think good to give it, or whether they will forbear. It hath no meaner Esteem of it self, because Folly, that is, simple, and knoweth nothing, sitteth upon the high places of the City, full of Noise and Clamor, and entices to its Entertainments the Multitude, and Grandeur of the World.


All the Severities of Scripture, that make the way to Heaven narrow, and the Gate strait, stand like a Rock, from Generation to Generation, alike in all times. Nothing that is prodi∣gally loosed on Earth, in compliance with a licentious Age, will be there∣fore loosed in Heaven.


The goodly price of a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 at which God is priz'd by Men, even then, when Religion is at the lowest, is rejected oftest with Indigna∣tion,

 and the everlasting State pur∣chased by it, may be sadly called 
an Aceldama, a Field of Blood.


If this Severity of Divine Truth offend any one, The Resolution is that of our Saviour.
 Every Plant, whether Person or Thing, that our Heavenly Father hath not planted, shall be rooted up.


2.
 It is no improbable way of Con∣testing against Atheism, and general Irreligion, by the strict Doctrins of Christianity, as well as by Argu∣ments of Reason: Nay, Authorita∣tive Applications of the Truth of God, often strike the Conscience with∣in the Reason, sooner and quicker than industrious Attempts upon the Reason: as Lightning melts the Steel, and neg∣lects the Scabbard. Pressings of Faith, Repentance, Holiness, Eternal Judg∣ment make Men (even Ʋnbelievers) fall down upon their faces, when the Se∣crets of their Hearts are discovered, and confess God is there




For the Soul of Man is more easily wrought upon by those domestick Re∣bukes, God gives it by his Word, than by more solemn Treaties.


Especially, corrupted Reason takes upon it self to be a lawful Authority, when an honourable War is commen∣ced against it by the better Reason on the other side; It contemns Laws of Discourse, as precarious, and makes account, it gives Reason for Reason. But the Rod of God shaken over it makes it tremble, and confess it self a Slave: Thus the Slaves in the Sto∣ry were more easily reduced by the ser∣vile Chastisements they were acquainted with, than by the force of Armies. Atheism grows the prouder generally for being reasoned with: It does but dissemble, while it pretends its disease to be in the Head, which it knows in∣deed to be in the sensual Heart. And therefore is pleased to be struck in the Head; but cannot endure to be wounded in the Heart, which the Word of God especially aims at.




Not, but that it is indeed a most generous and honourable Atchieve∣ment to shew Religion to be the high∣est Reason; and to detect those pre∣tending Sons of Reason, of the great∣est Irrationality. But it is still to be acknowledged, the plain preaching of the Gospel, which the Apostle calls the Foolishness and Weakness of God, is alone wiser and stronger than Men: The Reason of that, couched under an Heavenly Authority of Truth, car∣ries those 
, those migh∣ty Weapons, whereby every high Ima∣gination and Reasoning is to be sub∣dued, that lifts up it self against God.


Ʋpon this occasion, I cannot, but bewail those unhappy Divisions, that have separated the Preachers of the Gospel one from another, and there∣by opened a Lane for that Black Troop to advance in, and made the Trum∣pet of the Gospel to sound so incertain∣ly, that it hath rather scattered Men, than prepared them to the Battel.




Our Saviour foreseeing the Conse∣quences hereof, according to that great Maxim of his,
 
Every Kingdom divided against it self is brought to Deso∣lation,
 did so earnestly command Ʋnity and Love of one another to his Disci∣ples in general, and more particularly to the Ministers of his Word, as the most effectual Demonstration;
 He was sent from God, and his Doctrin from Heaven. From whence it follows, where ever this Ʋnion is broken, Chri∣stianity is liable to the Imputations of being a great Cheat and Fraud. Ʋpon which advantage loathsome Irreligion enters, and spreads it self in those empty spaces, begotten by our Distan∣ces, and removes from one another: All divisions in Christianity are Scan∣dals to it, and weaken it. This we see verified in our days; the differences in Religion, and the prophane scorn or stupid neglect of it, being alike visible, and notorious throughout the Nation.




Yet upon just Accounts: the Irreli∣gion consequent upon Divisions in Re∣ligion, turns to the advantage of Chri∣stianity, that thus it must be, else how should the Scriptures be fulfilled? But this abates nothing of the Sinfulness and Ʋn∣happiness, or Necessity of Amendment.


To guide us then into that; It is ve∣ry observable, the venom of this Di∣stemper falls not so much upon the seve∣ral Parties in Religion, as upon Reli∣gion it self; while we 
wound
 one ano∣ther, Religion is the 
Martyr,
 lies a bleeding, and even dying. And while good Men lament it, the Enemies of it 
make merry and send
 
gifts
 one to another, in to∣ken of Triumph.


The method of Cure therefore, is not, for every Party to weigh up it self, and press down others, but to buoy up Re∣ligion it self; and that is best done, by Preaching and living 
the very Thing,
 without distinction of Names. If we did but yield it its own Integrity and Ʋniversal Goodness, it would soon

 rise into that Honour it hath lost, by being captivated to Opinions.


For as our human Nature would be much more beautiful and happy, if cemented by that 
Philanthropy,
 or general love of Mankind, so indear∣ingly charged upon us by our Saviour; who demonstrated, that he embraced within his own Immensity, the whole latitude of our Nature, without con∣tracting it into the narrowness of a human Person, by the great care he took; That this Nature should not be dishonoured, abused, and torn by it self through that bitter Censorious∣ness, Revenge, and Contempt, Men exercise upon one another, even there where Christ is professed.


So would our Christianity, that is now evil spoken of, appear, as it is in it self, Acceptable to God, and appro∣ved of Men, if we could unite in those comprehensive Interests of Righteous∣ness, Peace, Joy in the Holy-Ghost, that substantial Christianity; Those healing Wings of the Sun of Righ∣teousness,

 in the Rays of which our little differences about Meat and Drink would play up and down, as smallest Motes of Human Frailty, easily ob∣taining a mutual Pardon; and that black and most abhorred Vapor of Ir∣religion, be forced to dislodge at so Illustrious a Presence.


If there be any Interest to keep afoot these Divisions, it is an Inte∣rest of Dishonour, that dares not name it self; it is not only, 
; but 
. It is not barely to serve an Opinion, (much less the Lord Jesus) but the Belly.


3.
 But to return from whence I have digressed, upon so great a Cause. Lastly, we may find, in the very No∣tion of a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 e∣nough to defend the seasonableness of this Discourse, notwithstanding spread∣ing Irreligion. For it imports a de∣sign to Dye well: and we see very 
Few,
 and 
those Few
 deprived of the common Modesty and Sobriety of Man∣kind; and who thereupon become an hor∣rid

 Story, but dye at least in a fair and calm Temper towards Religion. Now if we join to this, that of many Millions for one, every one dies as he lives, not only as the Tree falls, so it lies; but as it hath inclined along its growth, so it falls. How great is the ne∣cessity then of living well, that we may dye well! For this 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 that rises and sets at the same time, generally proves but a falling Star. That Repentance only wheels orderly into a higher Orb, that hath given proof; it was a true Light, by shining here for some considerable space.


A good Death receives Being from a holy Life, else there is not such a thing in Nature, no not in Grace, ex∣cept by Miracle of Grace.


Thus far I have made Apology for the Seasonableness of this Discourse. In the Discourse it self, I am not con∣scious of having wandred from the Ʋniversal Doctrin of Divines in this Point; except it should seem too high a strain to place this Repentance,

 (when true) among Miracles. To justifie that, I have the warrant of Sacred Story, 
the Dying Convert,
 which being the only Example of such a one in Holy Writ, was in the days of the Messias, 
that great Period of Miracles,
 singled out upon that great∣est occasion, 
viz.
 To display the power of the dying Mediator, to forgive Sins, not only upon Earth, but in his lowest Humiliation, his very descent into Hell; which argues it a very great Mi∣racle.


Yet I have not trusted the weight of the Discourse to any thing that looks like a private Opinion; but to most avowed Principles, and have therefore reserved my particular Sense as the Conclusion of the whole.


I have only to add, there is a Na∣tional late Repentance, as appears by the Ʋnsuccesfulness of that unparal∣lell'd
 Reformation of 
Jo∣siah;
 sincere indeed in him, and of full Effect: but not in the Body of the

 Jewish Nation, as appeared by their Relapses under the following Kings; and therefore, notwithstanding that seeming Return, the Lord turned not from the Fierceness of his Wrath, wherewith his Anger was kindled against 
Judah,
 for its guilt in the Sins of 
Manasseh;
 which the Lord would not Pardon, and therefore would not give a true Repentance of those Evils, they had so long continued in, against all the early Admonitions of the Prophets: 
This is the just Paral∣lel of a Death-Bed Repentance.


The due Application of all these Considerations, to every one, into whose hands they may fall, is the earnest and affectionate Prayer of,


T. B.












THE GENERAL INEFFICACY AND INSINCERITY OF A Death-bed Repentance, 
&c.




Luk. 23.39, 40, 41, 42, 43.
 And one of the Malefactors that were hanged with him, railed on him; saying, if thou be the Christ, save thy self and us. But the other answer∣ing; said, dost thou not fear God? Seeing that thou art in the same condemnation. And we indeed justly, for we receive the due re∣ward of our deeds, but this Man hath done nothing amiss. And he said unto Jesus, Lord remember me, when thou comest into thy Kingdom. And Jesus said unto him; verily I say unto thee, this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.




THE generality of Men that have been at all acquainted with the name of Repentance, and understood in any Measure the im∣portance and signification of the thing, acknowledge it beyond all dispute necessary: Yet they allow

 themselves a leisure for the Performance of it, and such a leisure as swallows the whole time of Life, and leaves only the last and lowest part of it, for the discharge of so great a Business; so that their Repentance, if any at all, falls out to be a 
Death-bed Repentance.


The inconveniencies of which are unexpressibly great, because the lives of Men are left naked of that Holiness and Purity, that should adorn them, and all over blotted with Sin and Vanity. Their Conversation wants 
that light of good Works, that should shine before Men, and glorifie God in Heaven. Their Life is without form, and void, and darkness is upon the face of it.
 And in the end they are cast upon the great Sea of Eternity, as in a Vessel of Paper, a thin and superficial Repentance.


It is therefore most necessary to use all means, to shew the Insufficiency of this Refuge, which most of those, that live in common under the Pro∣fession of Christianity, design while they live to fly to when betimes they dye. To demolish 
this House upon the Sand;
 that Men may not by hopes of shel∣ter at it, conceived long before hand, be kept off from laying 
their Foundation upon a Rock;
 which possibly they would do, if these hopes were cut off.


And because this piece of Sacred Story hath been generally taken, as an Instance of great Favour to a late Conversion, not that it is indeed so, but that it seems to be so, let it be the Ground of the pre∣sent Discourse.


For I observe Divines, in their Doctrin concern∣ing the danger of a Dying Repentance, are careful to wrest out of the hand of presuming Imagina∣tion,

 this Example, and to allay the vain Confidence built upon it.


Indeed the Mistake of it is very fatal, seeing if it be duly considered, there is nothing more forcible against what it is pretended for, than it. It is true, it is a Relation of a dying Man returning from great Sins to God; but so circumstantiated, so defended on all hands against Boldness upon it, that there might have been more reason to hope well of Last-Breath-Penitencies, if there had not been a Pat∣tern of such a one in all Points, as much above the imitiation of those of our days, as the Heaven is above the Earth. It is such a one, as if God had said of it, if I accept a Dying Repentance; be∣hold this, consider it every way, and take notice by it,
 what a one I will have it. God putting the Case, and resolving it thus, hath given a much more positive De∣termination concerning it, than if the Case had never been put.


The End therefore I aim at, is to make it evident upon general Reasons, and particularly from this Instance.


That a 
Death-bed Repentance
 is a hazard so un∣speakably great, that no Man can without Folly ex∣treamly prodigious commit to so much adventure an affair of so great importance to an eternal condition.


Hereunto I will raise this Treaty by these degrees.


1. By observing the Judgment of Divines con∣cerning this Case, and balancing the most favour∣able with the more severe.


2. By detecting the Follies that have given a Re∣putation to a 
Death-Bed Repentance.




3. By examining the most hopeful Appearances of this kind of Repentance, and shewing there are plain Causes of them very much below the Nature of true Repentance, wherewith I will compare them.


4. By observing the Extraordinaries, of which the Repentance of this Dying Malefactor was com∣posed, because of which it can hardly be drawn into a Precedent.


To all these I will subjoin pressing Considerations on every side; that Men should not delay their re∣turn to God, to the latter Times of Life.


For the First, the Judgment of Divines in the Point, I begin with that severer one;
 yet built upon great Piety and Reason, that asserts it a plainly impossible thing, a Man on his Death-Bed should Repent with that Repentance, the Scripture so oft Discourses of, and promises Pardon to, and threatens the neglect of, with Perishing; and there∣fore concludes, a Dying Man that hath not already repented, must needs fall, not into the Sin of Despair. For who is bound to hope, that hath not the reasons of his hope given him by God? but into the Misery of Despair: For how miserable is he whom God hath left to the boiling Sea of his own Horrors, and thrown him out no Anchor of Hope?


However this Sentence seem rigorous, yet when we consider the ponderous Arguments it uses, it may rather amaze us, than provoke our Censure: For First, it is very irreconcileable with the Glory of God, that Men who have had the knowledge of God, and been called upon all their Lives to give

 up themselves to him, should be accepted, when they pour out to him the Lees and Dregs of Life, instead of the generous Spirits of it. That he that hath had in his Flock a Male, should vow, and Sa∣crifice to the Lord a corrupt Thing, and yet escape the Curse of the Deceiver. The Expressions of Scripture are innumerable in which God Disavows such Prostitutions of his Grace, (as is hereafter to be urged) but seals such, e're they are aware, un∣der Hardness of Heart, and a Reprobate Sense, to Destruction.


2. It appears impossible, there should be a dis∣charge of the Duties of Repentance, when Men are a Dying; that they should draw within the hollow of that little Span, that is also otherwise incumbred, the vastness of that Action, that is necessary to take off the Brawn of a long Impenitency.


That a Man should live the life of Holiness that is just a Dying; that the Tree that hath been al∣ways barren, should bring forth good Fruit, now it is a hewing down: These things are very con∣tradictious; how can Repentance plant it self in the Soul, and settle gracious habits there in so short a space? Or in an instant by Mortification root out those Lusts, and sinful Affections, that have been many years eating into the Heart? Repentance must have a time for Fruits, and those Fruits for Ripening and Concoction, which a Death-Bed will not afford: So that it cannot be 
that Repentance of the Gospel,
 but at the best, only some first strokes of it.


3. There must be a living to God before a Man dyes to God. It is the Supream Law, every one must 
glorifie him here on Earth, and finish the work he hath given them to do in the World. They must

 work the works of him that sent them while it is day, before the night cometh, in which no Man can work.
 After this Men are received into the glory of God.


4. In Repentance, we must be in the same Cir∣cumstances of Temptation we were in, in the time of Sinning. But it will be hard to find in what the state of a Dying Man differs from that of him, that is already dead, as to this business of Repentance; but that he may as well be allowed to Repent, that is entred into Eternity, as he that stands on the very brink of it.


This Censure cannot be injurious to Men living, and in their full Opportunity; suppose in Specula∣tion, it stretches Principles of great weight and truth too far, yet it recompenses for it self by the wholesomness of it to practice; for who can suffer by being necessitated to an early Repentance, so much his Duty, so much his Safety?


Further it is most Prophetick, most undoubtedly true of most Mens late Repentance; That it is too sudden, too Mushrom a Birth to have any worthi∣ness in it. This Repentance almost universally wi∣thers afore it grows up, and proves an Abortion; whether it comes to the tryal of a longer Life, where∣in it vanishes as a Cloud, and former Impiety re∣turns; or whether it pass immediately into Eter∣nity, where it sinks down into Misery; for attempt∣ing the Regions of Life, and wanting the Purity that rises thither, it is beaten back with all its Preten∣sions, as a Foggy Exhalation, that would climb to Heaven, but is forced down, and made to rest be∣low; so that for the Universality of 
Death-Bed Re∣pentances
 this Judgment is truly calculated.




If it should seem too Cruel to the dying Condi∣tion, to smother Men alive with the second Death, (as 
Hazael
 spread upon the dying King a thick Cloath dipped in Water) to stifle and benum at once all motions towards God, let us consider what advice it offers against the Stupidities of Despair.


When we are fallen into so unhappy a Condition, that the whole weight of Eternity depends upon a very little Moment; it perswades Men would do all they can in return to God, though that all must be trusted with the Prerogative of Mercy; for that Mercy which is stated in the Promises of the Gos∣pel, and is in ordinary, cannot help them in the great point of Salvation, however it may alleviate their Condemnation, and lessen their Torment.


I mad add, if that which appears a Messenger of Death should have secret reprieve in its Instructi∣ons, and what seems a Death-bed, prove only a Dis∣cipline: It may be a happy beginning of a true Re∣pentance to him, who lives, after his being near the Grave, to perfect it, according to that of 
Job,
 33. 
ver.
 22, 23.


Thus this Opinion doth not cut off the Action of its desperate Person; and if by that Action, he pass 
the needles Eye,
 and get through the 
strait Gate
 of Repentance and Regeneration, it will be able to give him no Resistance: For those to whom the 
two-leav'd Gates
 of Faith and Repentance open, this Air of Discourse cannot bar, that they should not enter into life.


But on the other side, they that are confident, and make themselves sure of Repentance and Mer∣cy; cannot when they meet the solid Obstacles of things, force their way by the Breath of their Mouth;

 but they and their intended Repentance are together locked up in the closeness and compactedness of those Decrees; First; They cannot Repent, Then they cannot be Saved.


To conclude; let such a Decision of this Case be never so austere, it is a thousand times more Just than the delay of our return to God in the Contem∣plation of doing it at the last can be; and the Rea∣sons upon which it is planted, are such, that though they may not reach the height designed, yet do they exclude thousands from Eternal Happiness; and although they may not make good the Comple∣ment of the Censure, yet are they of so awful a regard, and so worthy of all Observation, that they are most vehemently to be pressed to the main scope; that Men would by no means trust to this Extreme Re∣pentance, to which purpose I shall hereafter take further advantage of them.


But let us come to that tenderer apprehension of the generality of Divines, with which I will con∣cur, that all things of Opinion and Dispute may be taken away in so great a Point. Let it then be allowed, that a 
Death-Bed Repentance
 is no im∣possibility.


First, in regard of infinite Mercy, that cannot be limited, but by it self: Now long Impenitency, though it be often doomed irrevocably by God in particular Generations of Men, or Persons; yet is not that Sin, that 
shall never be forgiven.
 Nor is it upon that account, that the Scripture saith of some; 
It is impossible to renew them to Repentance.
 So that though there be many Examples of such Im∣penitency, that have proved in the Event unpardon∣
ble, yet not from the precise Nature of the thing

 it self: We may rather believe, that as the unmea∣surable Being of God hath delighted it self in so ma∣ny varieties and gradations of the Creatures down from Angels to the darkest foot-steps of himself in the World; so the unsearchable Riches of his Grace are made known in all kinds of Pardons. As there∣fore it hath chosen some of the worst of Sinners for the sorts of their Sins, chiefest of Sinners, and brought them home; so some that have made the utmost adventure of continuance in Sin, that in these manifold Glasses it might be seen, 
Where Sin hath abounded, Grace hath abounded much more.


2. Though the time of this Repentance be short and narrow, and the Duties of Repentance exceed∣ing long and broad; yet where there are found the true signatures of Repentance unfeigned, God be∣holds the Fruit in the Seed and Root, he knows the Perfection of his own Creation, though Infant, or we may conceive such 
 in Repentance, Repentance born out of due time, as 
Paul
 was in the Apostleship, suddenly accomplished, though they had not the regular time of forming, like 
a Nation brought forth in a day.


Thus thou Lord anointest in a Moment Herdsmen into Pro∣phets, Shepherds into Kings, Publicans thou ordainest Apo∣stles, nor doth their Disease take leisure to remove, whom thou recoverest, but in that very Moment thou makest them every whit whole, wherein they have thee for their Physician.


3. Although there be according to the general Rule, a necessity of living to God here in the World; yet God may dispense with the Continuation, or

 drawing out of the Action of it in these late Peni∣tents, as we easily allow in the case of Infants, or Men dying within short space after a Repentance begun upon sad Consideration, and not in the Exigency of a Sickness.


In the mean time, it is not at all supposed, that God dispenses with the sincere Preparations and Resolvedness of the Mind to that Action; but that they must be most true, sound and unfeigned, and the very Action it self, according to the time, high, full and most significant; and as extraordinary as the Repentance it self.


4. Although the Condition of a Dying Man do in many regards nearly resemble the state of him, that is already in Eternity, as he is under a necessity of leaving Sin and the World, and set at a distance from Temptation; yet it differs in that great Circumstance, that he is not 
in Termino,
 he is not fixt upon his un∣changeable Point, he hath not undergone that Sen∣tence that immediately passes upon the Soul removed, and so may not either have suffered that more secret one, conceived by God upon long Provocation. The whole time of Life may be a time of Grace, and he that hath not yet been concluded by the incommutability of Eterni∣ty may hear the Voice of Christ, and enter into his Rest.
 
Cyprian,
 who is positive, 
That whenever a Man is launched into another World, he finds no room for Re∣pentance; he is out of the cli∣mate of Repentance, who is be∣yond the line of Time. All kinds of Penitencies which are a secondary Satisfaction under the Suf∣ferings

 of Christ are then desperate and fruitless.
 Yet he allows the greatest liberty to Repentance in this Life; For he says,
 
No Repentance is late, that is ear∣lier than the Grave. He says, Here a Man takes hold of Life, or loses it for ever. Yea he grants,
 It is possible by Repentance, though we are just a Dying, to be safely landed in a blessed Im∣mortality. And
 when the Soul hath left its inward Residences, and is now sitting upon the dy∣ing Lips, before its last farewel to the Body, and when in haste to be gone, yet even then infinite Clemency disdains not Repen∣tance, nor accounts that late that is true, nor deprives that of par∣don, which hath the free and full act of the Soul in return to him. 
Et quaecunque necessitas, &c.
 Yea though, as he goes on, this Repentance had its first rise from Necessity, yet neither that, nor the Immenseness of Guilt, nor Straitness of Time, nor the Lateness of the Season, nor the Foulness of former Actions fore-prize from Pardon when the Humiliation is sincere, and the Soul exchanges impure Delights for those of Holiness, without Counterfeit or Dis∣simulation.
 It may seem in all those Discourses, that he had forgot to enter a Caution against Pre∣sumption; but it is to be considered while he thus frankly pours out himself, he was one while inviting



 Persecutors of Christianity into the Confessions of it, whom he would not have debarred with the sense of so great past Offen∣ces against it. Another while de∣signing against the 
Novatian
 He∣resie, which took upon it to tie up the freeness of Grace, as he says, 
In spight of the Heretick 
No∣vatus,
 the Throne of Grace is early and late accessible to true Repentance.
 This therefore is not to be pressed beyond the de∣sign of the excellent and holy Writer, but will very well agree with all that I am presently to add as a Ballance to this favourable Judgment for such a Repentance.


For as that most prudent Discourse of the right use of the Fathers teaches us; we must always attend their scope, in the pursuit of which they were often transported towards the other extreme.


But that a dying Repentance in the nature of the thing is no Incompossibility, we have fullest Assu∣rance in the Example of the Text, wherein we see one in a moment conceived, brought forth, and even a grown Man in Repentance, one passing through some short Instants of holy Action, and entring into Paradise, like 
Aaron
's Rod budding, blossoming, and bringing forth ripe Almonds in a Night, and laid up in the Sanctuary for ever.


That it was most probably the first Call he had to Repentance, agrees fully with the Intention of my Discourse, which granting so much as a Possibility, would yet take all advantage against the easie Con∣fidence

 of those, that living daily under the offers of Grace, and yet despising them, commit themselves first to the Intentions, and at last to the faint moti∣ons of a late Repentance. To whom that Admoni∣tion of 
Austin
 is most seasonable concerning the Instance we have in hand.
 
If we respect his Opportunities for attaining Faith, his Repentance was not late, but early and soon, he took the very first Season; as soon as ever he descried Christ and Religion, he embraced them. He did not wretchedly cheat him∣self of the Remedies of his mi∣serable Condition by adjourning the Ʋse of them to a late and incertain Futurity, which seldom or never succeeds well.


This Consideration leads me therefore from the most favourable, the light side of this milder Sentence, to the black and dark part of it.


That is to say, There is an Extreme peradventure, whether God will give Repentance at the last or not; for this Grace being acknowledged extraordinary, if it were common, it would cease to be extraordinary.


It is most undoubted in Scripture, God is often 
provoked
 against Men to 
swear, they shall never enter into his rest,
 when they 
have long tem∣pted him, and Erred from his ways.


The Heart is daily hardened by the deceitful∣ness of Sin, till it grow to that the Apostle calls

 
, a Heart that is Irrepentable,
 or that cannot be repented of: Customs in Sin long setled become like the 
Ethiopi∣ans Skin,
 
and the Leopards Spots,
 that cannot be changed. And though it is true, the Spirit of God is not hindered in its Inspirations, but that it bloweth where it listeth; yet the course of it is so attemper'd to the state and motion of the Soul it self, that it most usually takes the opportunity so generally requisite to the setling a Constitution and Temper in us; that is; the freest and most unpreju∣diced, and larger spaces of a Man's Life: So that whenever it works upon Dying Men, I mean those that have had the free use of the means of Grace of old; It works by such a Prerogative, that a Man may as well expect a Prerogative of Providence to bear him walking upon the Sea, because it did once so to 
Peter,
 as this.


Most even of the fairest Appearances of this kind of Repentance miscarry, having no true Virtue in them; and though in regard of their vehemency they are called early Seekings of God, yet (which is horrible to be spoken) they are as it were prepa∣red for the Triumphs of the Justice and Indignation of God over those,
 who would have none of his Counsel in former times, but despised all his reproof.


Lastly, Whoever seeing and knowing calls him∣self with design upon Repentance at Death, is like to fall headlong by tempting God, and expecting he should stand ready for him with that Grace at last, he hath so long resisted and refused.




And now when this Judgment of Divines with this Ballance upon it is compared with the former, the result will be only this, the kindest Divinity in the point, and that seems to do the most favor, is very dreadful, and leaves such Men in a Condition next to desperate, which is but an Aggravation of the dan∣ger, when what Men would choose to appeal to, so far condemns them.


It is then agreed on all hands, that for any Man to live so as if he did contrive and forecast a Dying Re∣pentance (altho it be yielded him, it is no impossibi∣lity) as the safe expedient, first of an Irreligious Life, free from the troublesome Thoughts of a present Amendment, and then of a secure Passage into Eter∣nity; It is first an exceeding Irreligion and Immorality in it self; and then to run so desperate a Risque and Adventure for an Immortal Soul; that he is a par∣donable Mad-man, in comparison of such an one, that drinks a deadly Poyson, because he hath heard there is a certain Antidote in the World, that will expel it, though he cannot tell whether he can have it at all, much less whether time enough for his necessity; and lastly, whether the Endeavors he uses for it will not be deluded with the Counterfeits of it, it being supposed they are thousands for one of the true kind; and he thereby perish, pleasing himself with the hopes he hath it, when he hath indeed but a like∣ness of it.


2. 
Head.
 I come now to the second Proposal, which is to make inquiry, seeing the Case is thus, as it every way appears to be, How the name or notion of a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 as such an universal Refuge, came up in the World; for it is a new Repentance, (
much like those new-come-up

 Gods Moses
 speaks of, 
Deut.
 32.17.) that Christianity and the Gospel know not. The Scrip∣tures that treat most professedly of Repentance, al∣ways insist upon it as a reformed course of Life, to be undertaken even now, while the Proposals of Grace and Reconciliation are made to us; and only by very silent Intimations, the track of which is hard∣ly discerned, leave it possible, that God should by miracle save some very few out of the Fire, and pull them as Brands out of the Burning, by giving them Repentance at the last. Whereas this is now become the only Repentance in use, and hath devoured the other; as if to press Men upon it were to torment them before their time, and to lessen the Validity of this were to take away the Mercy of God, and deny the Grace that is so free and universal. Let us search therefore how this sort of Repentance hath come into such Repute. And if we observe, we shall find it first rising from the intimate Sense the Conscience hath of the necessity of Repentance; For were it not so clear and evident a Duty, 
a Death-Bed Repen∣tance
 had never been heard of; most would choose to go out of the World as they have lived in it, not suffering any degree of the trouble of Conscience, or vexing themselves with Reflections upon an unholy and ill-spent Life. As Men have chose to live freely and uninterruptedly in forgetfulness of God, and an Eternal Condition 
days without number,
 Jer. 2.32. so would they choose to die, were there not a Law within, that however it hath lain covered with the Dust of Sensuality, yet is now restored to its Autho∣rity, and urges the Soul with the Terror of Punish∣ment for so long Disobedience.




And secondly, this necessity of Repentance, though secretly understood, yet was not sufficiently consi∣dered in the time of Health, for had it been equally regarded, it had not been now to begin. He that had rightly measured it, would not for a thousand Worlds so have adjourned it.


These two things then meeting so oft together, 
viz.
 The necessity of Repentance; and the neglect of it all along our Life: the necessity it should be performed some time, ere Men go out of the World; and the neglect of it in the freer Opportunities of Life; These, I say, bring forth hasty motions of it at last: For it losing nothing of its necessity by its delay, it must be done, as well as it may be at that time; even as the last Moments, wherein Businesses of great Consequence are to be dispatched, press for Expedition the more earnestly, because they must be done then or never, though it often falls out, the time is so far past, they suffer not only much disad∣vantage, but even defeat by the delay.


The Notion of a 
Death-Bed Repentance
 then we may perceive rising from the great Indisposition to Repent, while the Pleasures of Sin are in their Sea∣son, and flourish, and Men in Health and Strength to enjoy them; and from the necessities of Repentance falling upon them at the last, and wringing from them sometimes very high Acknowledgments of God and an Eternal Condition, passionate Expressions of the folly, evil and vanity of former Life, desires of Mercy, Professions of strong Resolvedness to serve God, and if they had many Lives to give God, they would give them all. All which being so unusual to hear formerly out of such Mouths, and coming from Dying Men, for whose Sayings we have a na∣tural

 regard, Charity towards them, and willingness to hope well of them, gives these Semblances, the Reputation of Repentance. To which may be ad∣ded, That those who are Guides and Seers in Reli∣gion too often, 
errante Clave,
 by too Liberal an Ab∣solution open the Kingdom of Heaven to such, and taking the Instruments of a foolish Shepherd to themselves, heal the hurt of their Souls slightly; so that their Repentance is saincted here, and though it miscarry in the other World, yet the miscarriage is hid also in that other World.


From all this hath arisen a down-right Opinion of this kind of Repentance, as the only 
 the Prudent Expedient, that compounds two so dif∣ferent Interests, first that of a worldly Conversation, to which it gives no hinderance; then that of Eter∣nal Life in appearance, because it assumes the Pro∣mises of Mercy to it self, especially those gracious Assurances in 
Ezek.
 18. 
Chap.
 33. it reckons as made on purpose for it. All which argues a very vile Sense both of the Justice and Mercy of God; of his Justice as if it had no authority, of his Mercy as if it had no sense of Honour.


And lastly it is grown into a general Expectation, rhat however ill and carelesly of God Men have lived here, yet they should go out of the World with good words of him and Religious Professions, as an In∣balm to their Memory and a Dirge to their Souls in∣to the Happiness of an Everlasting Condition.


Thus they call Repentance and Heaven 
after their own name. This their way is their folly;
 
yet their Posterity, men of like Inclinations, approve their sayings;
 because such Men 
(as

 they speak)
 go away like Lambs, 
but as the Scrip∣ture says, like sensless Sheep are laid in the Grave, and Death feeding upon them,
 the Error is not discovered 
till the morning: when the upright have dominion over them;
 that is, infinitely excel them, and their counterfeit Repentance, 
which can∣not stand in judgment, nor they in the congregation
 of sincere Penitents, 
Psal.
 1. 
vers.
 5.


Now this account I have given of a 
Death-Bed Repentance
 obtaining among us, is too comprehen∣sive; yet I must acknowledge, that there are many whose Judgments are more enlightned, and the Senti∣ments of their Consciences quicker than to be satisfi∣ed at so easie a rate, who yet fall into the common unhappiness of not having repented, till they come to die: I will therefore enquire further, why many who are able to feel before-hand the necessities of a speedy Repentance, and also to draw their Death so near them, as to die daily in the sense of Death; and thereby further perceive those Necessities, do not yet Repent daily, but betray themselves to an 
Even∣ing or Twilight Repentance.


The Resolution of this lies not only in the immo∣derate love of Sin and its Pleasures, and the too low apprehension of God and Eternal Things, (though these are always present in the case) but chiefly it lies in the great Confidence such Men have in the pre∣sent time, not sensible of the continual waste of it; Under the favour of which they 
put away the evil day far from them, and stretch themselves
 upon this moment, 
Amos
 6.3. 
&c.
 that they may take their full Ease and Satisfaction: In the mean while stifling the Thoughts of Dying and Judgment. Were it not for this, no other Reason would encourage them to de∣lay

 their Repentance; for when this Fails, all others generally fail also, and therefore none are so passio∣nately moved, as such, when they come to die.


This Cloud that is but as big as a Man's hand (
our days are as an hands breadth,
 Psal 39.6.) yet looks like the whole Heaven; It stands as a Firmament over their heads, It looks like an Eternity to Men. In this time Repentance finds as little place with them, as it is like to do with God in the Evening of Life.


In this occasion the wild Asses of the Wilderness snuff up the wind at their pleasure, and none can turn them,
 Jer. 2.24. 
The lust of the Flesh, the lust of the Eye, and the pride of Life
 swallow all and can spare nothing; Yet in the midst of all this the Soul promises it self, it will ere long take a Sea∣son of recollecting it self, and that it will do it time enough, so timely as to leave space sufficient for a large Exercise of Repentance; for although it is but upon the edges and skirts of Time, yet it seems to it self to be upon the Center, and in its Imagination commands the future, as if it were in its own hand; so that through the endless returns of Pleasure and Business, through Indisposedness to holy and serious Action, through Intentions and Purposes of being better hereafter, it slips down, e're ever it is aware, into the lowest of Life, and hath the business of Re∣pentance lying whole and undiminished upon its hand: 
Yet a little sleep, a little slumber, a little fold∣ing of the hands to sleep, deceives men, till their last end comes as an armed man,
 Prov. 24.12. The hopes that 
to morrow will be as to day, and much more abundant,
 Isa. 56.12. so as to leave enough for sadder Thoughts, befools Men, till the very Course of Time rows them before they think of it upon Eternity.




Of great moment therefore it is 
to number our days rightly, that we may know how frail we are,
 Psal. 39.4. 
And to apply our Hearts to Wisdom,
 Psal. 90.12. For this time of Life though it be but little, yet 
it boasts great things,
 Jam. 3.5. This Vapor stretches out it self as far as it can: 
It rejoices in its own boastings which are evil,
 Jam. 4.16. In the mean while the Moments of it are winged, and fly from us; they glide away, and we cannot, ex∣cept we bring them to strict Account, take hold of them to graft any thing upon them: How does to day like 
an Egale, or Poast, or swift Ship, or Arrow
 get from us, 
leaving no path?
 Wisd. 5.9, 
&c.
 And if we offer to take the Account, how many things snatch it from us, as an impertinent Disturber from him that is catching slippery numbers? 
Here is Wis∣dom, let him that hath it count the number of Life, for it is the number of a Man,
 Rev. 13.18. A short number. 
It is all but Dying Man,
 Eccl. 6.10. And yet it requires great Ingenuity, The Ingenuity of a Man, 
that is indeed a Man,
 to find it: But he that misses it, is found 
at the end of his days a Fool,
 and finds that 
dreadful reward of a Fool,
 Jer. 17.11. That 
the great God, that formed all things, gives to the Fool
 as well as to the 
Transgressor,
 Prov. 26.10. 
But those that are wise shine as the Sun in the Firmament,
 Dan. 12.3.


Thus far I have insisted upon the Accounts, how this 
Baptism of Repentance for the Dead,
 1 Cor. 15.29. came in upon Christianity, that is, How it comes to pass that Men will not be 
baptised with this Baptism
 till they are given over for dead Men, like those 
Clinici
 of the first Times, that delay'd their Baptism to their last Bed, of whom some Expound

 that place, 1 
Cor.
 15.29. 
Vid.
 Estium 
in lo∣cum.


But the Mistake in this Case (though that passed not without some note of Disgrace) is in a point of much higher Consequence, and so far more dange∣rous, and hath also less of reasonable Pretence; for while they thought, Baptism washed away all past Sins, and was but once to be done; it seemed a ne∣cessary Providence to take the full Benefit of it at the last, upon which account 
Tertullian
 even Ex∣postulates, 
Quorsum festinat innocens aetas ad re∣missionem peccatorum?
 while he Discourses of In∣fant-Baptism.


Whereas the 
Water of Repentance is never for∣bidden,
 Acts 10.47. but may be both evenly drawn through the whole course of Life, and often renewed to supply the Defects of it self; which is one Signification of that 
, 2 
Cor.
 7.10. that Repentance, which is always pro∣moted, but never retracted. Nor do I indeed doubt, but the Water of Baptism, wherever it hath effect, as a Spring, that from the first Moment wherein it is truly received, runs down with a free Current upon the whole Course of Life, and is therefore universally
 to be applyed. And whenever Converting Grace works, it leads back the Soul, though through many Years past, to the Virtue of that Sacramental Foun∣tain.


But to return: Although these Accounts I have now given of a 
Death-bed Repentance,
 obtaining among us, infold the whole Multitude of dying Pe∣nitents,

 yet according to the former state given I do not deny, but that some very rare Example there may be, giving a better Sense to this sort of Repen∣tance; Examples of the Grace of God, acting in a way of Prerogative, as hath been said, and working effectually the truth of Repentance in some; upon whom he lays the hand of his Salvation and Rescue, while they stand upon the very last minutes of the Season of Grace, and are just dropping down into Hell; and guides them to take their Latest steps in the ways of Life, wherein they had hitherto been strangers; upon whom a great Miracle is wrought, that they should in their almost perfected motion to endless Ruin be stopt, and when they had just finish∣ed their Course thither, they should yet be trans∣planted into the way Everlasting.


But I proceed to the Third Head. To examine the most hopeful appearances of this kind of Repen∣tance, and to shew there are plain Causes of them, much below the nature of true Repentance.


And first in the general: It is no wonderful thing to find Men in a Paroxysm, in a high Passion of seeking after God, when they are a Dying. It is in∣deed more strange to find any so sotted, so sear'd, 
That their spirits seem only to go downward: They are Beasts while they live, and as such they go down to the dead,
 Eccles. 3.18, 
&c. There are no bands in their Death,
 Psal. 73.4. 
They go down in a Mo∣ment,
 Job 21.13. There is not a Moment between the first and second Death of the Soul, not a Moment of Life between, not so much as of the Life of na∣tural Conscience. 
They are twice dead,
 Jude 12. dead in the common Corruption of Nature wherein they are born. Dead in the loss of Natural Principles:

 
pulled up by the roots,
 there's nothing to quicken or move in them. This is amazing Stupor: 
They die like a stone,
 Exod. 15.5. 1 Sam. 25.37. they plunge down with the whole weight and force of Impenitency.


This way of Dying hath certainly greater Punish∣ment, and heavier Condemnation; and though it seem more chooseable than a fruitless Repentance, yet doubtless Eternity makes a difference, though not such an one, as should give any one Confidence to imbarque into it in a 
Coffin-Repentance.


But whether it be rather to be chosen or not, this is past question; It is unavoidable to some; whether they will or no they are surprized with Thoughts, what will become of them for ever, and few Men but have thoughts this way at such a time above ordinary.


But I intend to speak of the fairest and best spread Repentance that is found upon a Death-bed. That which gives the liveliest Hopes of it self, that it is true and sincere; not such an one that to a serious Ob∣server betrays it self; not either that forced compo∣sure, to the Expectation of the World, which looks for a solemn Profession of God from every one that dies; nor an ignorant and formal Repentance; but a Repentance that hath much of Vigor, and inward Affection, and is driven on by great knowledge and light; that is accompanied with much Sorrow, and very considerate Apprehensions of Eternal Things: And if such an one be so questionable, what can be∣come of others?


There is no reason any Repentance should be the better esteemed because Men are Dying, but much the less. Now while Men are living a thousand of these seeming Changes for the better, are evidently

 confuted without more ado, by after returns to Wickedness; and they that have to do with such shews of Reformation, have no regard of them, nor of the Persons for them.
 Now God, who is the exact Searcher of Hearts, can much less be imposed upon by the fairest appearances; nor can Men wise according to the Rules of Scripture be easily well perswaded of them, and when they are best perswaded, there must needs be a very trembling Consideration of so great a hazard.


But to come more particularly to what I have pro∣posed, 
viz.
 To shew that Repentance is a Height, to which these general Motives of this late Repen∣tance can never mount the Soul. In which I will begin with the Descriptions of true Repentance, in that wherein it is most difficult (not to say impossi∣ble) to rise to it upon a Dying Bed.


Repentance in all the parts of it, is the fullest, clearest act of the Soul and Judgment, wherein it is most perfectly it self. Remove a Man never so far from all kind of Fears, from the Appearances of Death, if he were to live Ages, he would be of the same Sense. He that truly Repents, doth not snatch up Repentance, as an Expedient for a present Extremity,
 but choo∣ses it as an entrance into the best state of Life, and lives always, and rests himself in this choice. For however this may be introduced by very troublesom and tumultu∣ous Motions, yet it is it self the easie sitting down of the Soul with

 abundant Pleasure and Satisfaction in the abhorrence of Sin, and love of Holiness, in the dislike of Vani∣ty and Sensuality, in the Approbation of heavenly Purity of Heart and Life. It is not a Trance where∣in Sin lies dead, and a Man is in a Rapture of Good∣ness for a time, but a most setled State. 
Godly sor∣row, that worketh Repentance, worketh Careful∣ness, Fear, Revenge, Desire,
 2 Cor. 7.11. 
and by
 these accomplisheth 
a Repentance to Salvation,
 that hath no after-pain or trouble, no 
. Vers. 10. These Affections are Preparations. Repentance en∣ters as a Soul into these, which is a still, solid, clear Act of Reason renewed, and a Mind which gives an uniform Vote at all times. A Change that is never changed back again, no more than things can put off themselves, or evil it self become good. It is therefore upon fullest Deliberation to choose with 
Joshuah, I and my house,
 those whom 
I
 can govern, 
will serve the Lord,
 Josh. 24.15. It is 
Engaging the Heart to approach to God, the joining our selves to him by an everlasting Covenant, never to be forgot∣ten,
 Jer. 30.21. and 50.5. 
The cleaving to him with full purpose of Heart,
 Acts 11.23. When all forerunning Affections are laid and quiet, or worn out, this Judgment still remains, and raiseth other Affections like it self, that ever remain with it; into which the Spirits of the former are extracted, and wherein they exercise all the true power they had. But now on a Death-bed there is often a great Commotion raised, a loud blustre of Passion never arriving at this point, at this Settlement: But if a Man should live after, it would go off, as Clouds and Storms, that when they have spent themselves, va∣nish and lie down: And when a Man dies, it is to

 be fear'd, that as they were raised by approach to the unappeasable Tempests of Darkness, so they are hurried with their Violence.


2. It is carefully to be observed, that there is in true Repentance a due Proportion betwixt the con∣trite Indignation of the Soul against past Sin, and the love and zeal it hath for Holiness: whereas in 
Death-bed Repentances,
 it is oftenest found, that there is either a terrifying Presence only of former Sins, ap∣pearing to the affrighted Conscience, without a more hopeful Indication of the Soul truly composed to Righteousness: or else some high flying Resolutions of better Life afterward, offered, as a kind of Bribe to the Patience and Mercy of God, in hopes of pre∣sent Deliverance, or at best, as a Ransom from Hell and Eternal Damnation; but without a deep sense of the guilt and evil of past Sins, or the just appre∣hension of that continually running issue of Corrup∣tion, that is still defiling anew: Either of these is a main Error, and pernicious; For if on the one side the Heart in a Rage be forced to cast out some Sins for the turbulency of them, if it be not imme∣diately filled with better Guests, 
Seven other Spirits are ready to enter, and make the last state of that Man worse than the first,
 Mat. 12.43. For Repen∣tance is no void space, no silent, or unactive state, but when it hath dislodged Lusts, furnishes and fills the Soul with the best things, and carries the vigor of a Man's Action to the best effect; 
When by re∣pentance a Man ceases to do evil, he learns to do Well,
 Isai. 1.16, 17. 
And brings forth fruits meet for repentance, and amendment of life,
 Mat. 3.8.


On the other side, he that seems to make a hasty motion to Holiness without due sense of Sin, first

 thinks to overrule the method God hath set, who requires Humiliation, godly Sorrow, Anger, Revenge, Fear, as preparing to Repentance: And further, he conceits a freedom to himself, when he is fetter'd and bound; without a power given him from God, he offers to cast out 
Devils with ease, that cannot be cast out, but by fasting and prayer,
 Mark 9.29. (that is) severe courses of Self-abasement, and low∣liest dependences together with earnestest Applica∣tion to the Grace of God. These unclean Spirits therefore, that dissemble a retreat, return immediately, and make a Prey of the deluded Soul, 
Acts
 19.14, 
&c.


3. Although Heaven and Hell, Happiness and Mi∣sery, take up the thoughts of a true Penitent, yet not separated from God and Christ, but as it were compounded into the Sense of God angry, and the desire of Attonement with him in 
Jesus Christ.
 Hap∣piness and Misery considered apart are not the ob∣ject of the gracious Soul: But God and Christ con∣sidered apart are an infinitely sufficient Reason of Repentance. The clear love of God upwards the Soul, as a Father in Christ without Reflections upon Happiness, is, though not the single, yet the para∣mount Consideration in Repentance unfeigned. But Men a Dying are generally so over-possessed with the Terrors of an Eternal Suffering, and meer desires of Freedom from pain; and of well-being, and so in haste, that they generally miss these higher Consi∣derations, which being further off, not only from corrupt Nature, but even from natural Conscience, are not commonly espied, but therefore argue great∣er Sincerity, and truth of Heart.


4. The truest Repentance lies in the bosom of Faith, the apprehensions of the Love and Goodness

 of God in Christ melt the Soul, and give it most perfect Separation from Sin, the most effectual Pu∣rification of the Heart; all which express the height of Repentance. Upon the soft Fire of the pardoning Goodness of God, the Soul most kindly distils into repentant Tears. Here flows that Spirit of Grace, and ingenuous Goodness, which bringeth forth the clearest and holiest Affection towards God.


But at the time we are now speaking of; It is very seldom, that either Horror or Presumption do not swallow all: Presumption, where there is little Sense or Judgment of the Case; Horror, where the Judg∣ment is clearer and the Sense quicker; for evey thing disposes now rather to Fear, 
and to the Spirit of Bon∣dage,
 Rom. 8.15. and a Man naturally does all he does under a servile dread of God, and his Eternal Justice, And though there may be much mention of Christ, and desire of Mercy through him; yet it is but as a Malefactor convicted, beseeches the Mercy of the Judge, no otherwise than as of a Judge: So such call out for the Mercy of God to par∣don them, but still as a Judge, not with the 
Spi∣rit of the Son sent into the Heart, the Spirit of Adoption crying Abba, Father.
 Nor 
with that love that casteth out unworthy Fear,
 Gal. 4.6. And in∣deed how can it be otherwise, there having been 
no acquaintance with God in the way,
 Job 22.21. but a long Enmity; and the time now too strait for a free and full Consideration of the riches of Grace, such as may still an awakened Conscience: Fear presses in every way, and shuts out Faith. What can now redeem the Soul from this hellish Terror, but a light from Heaven immediately darting into it, a Grace above that Grace, that ordinarily saves Men? For a

 well setled Trust and Confidence in Mercy according to the general Rule, is not, but after some sad de∣bates, and experimental Consultations, that have passed between the sense of Sin, and the affiancing Acts of the Soul upon Christ. This Repentance then is in great danger of missing the Spirit of the Gospel, and falling into the Rank of those Repen∣tances of 
Cain, Esau, Judas.


This I have endeavoured to shew, that though we suppose a Dying Man to spread his Soul and Thoughts every way, and to all the parts of Repentance; yet it is extremely to be suspected, there will want the true and right quality of them; in regard of the ve∣ry disadvantageous Circumstances, wherein such an one is found; and the great unfitness of the Soul at that time, to begin to do anything worthy, to which it hath not been before inured; or if it did begin, it would be much more unlikely 
to bring forth fruit
 (as our Saviour speaks) 
to perfection,
 Luke 8.14.


I add nothing of the Exercises of a full and well grown Repentance, whereby it is daily espying the risings of Sin, and suppressing them, and filling up the Defects of Holiness and Obedience; because they are not to be thought possible in the point I am now speaking of, and I have already given a Resolution in that Case.


I shall now set my self to find out the low Causes, that are alway to be suspected to have the great In∣fluence upon such a 
Latter-end Penitency.


In general therefore, we must take notice, that there are several vapors of misapprehension, rising upon the Soul, when we are a Dying, that do so disguise it to it self, and disfigure the true face of it, that from thence arise dangerous Mistakes concern∣ing a Mans Condition towards God.




We see into how many shapes upon ordinary Oc∣currences we change, and how easily we exchange them for quite different, without any good Cause; what continual Ebbs and Flows there are of the Hu∣mours, and how do these cast the Ballance of the Superiour Soul? One Man is every hour some several sorts of Men.


How much more do great Accidents, and removes out of one Condition into another, alter us? Which yet are but the sudden and just now state of our Minds upon such Alterations, which not continuing we return to our former Figure, 
Ʋnstable and weak as water,
 Gen. 49.3. we take the form of every Vessel we are put into. Who knows then whether his Dying Repentance be any more than the Mould, not of his Mind, but of his Dying Condition approaching him big, with so great a Change? We know many things befal us in our Lives, which put a greater sense of Religion upon us, than we find at other times; and yet how variable are we? 
our goodness at such times is as the Morning Dew, and as the early Dew it goeth away,
 Hose. 6.4. How often are we from the occasions of Mercies, Afflictions, Fears, Hopes, good Discourses, carried into high Apprehen∣sions of God? And we lose them again we know not how: Now out of doubt a Dying Condition of any thing we meet with in the World is most apt to move us upon God, and a Sense of him. But can we think, Those fleeting Shoots of the Soul, that have no certainty, are accepted for Repentance?


How strangely doth Melancholly, and Oppressions of that transform Men? which when it falls upon the Motions of Conscience, gives us strong Imagina∣tions of Eternal Things; which yet being nothing

 but the cast of that Melancholly upon the Thoughts; when that is removed, they are quite of another hue.


It is evident the Mind sees much through the Bo∣dy, and the Representations are coloured by its Temper. As the Eye sees through yellow or green Glass, differently from the things themselves: So the Serenity or Cloudiness of the Humours makes a different Reflection of things upon the Mind, and the liveliness or heaviness of the Spirits incline us to very varying Apprehensions.


Now what time is more like to be so incumber'd with these Clouds and Vapours than a Dying Hour? When every thing is ready to contribute them, and nothing to scatter them? If then Natural Conscience, and implanted Sense of God together with the No∣tions given us from Scripture pass through these, they become very impressive, and affecting for the time; and yet he much mistakes Repentance, who thinks it no more, than a fit of Religious Melancholly.


But let us enquire after some more setled, and constant Causes of these Penitential Motions near Death, and we shall find many very likely to be so, that are not yet worthy of true Repentance, and therefore what springs from them, is not accepted before God.


1. When Men find all their Being in the World at an end, and feel themselves falling, they know not whither; It is no strange thing they should catch at God, and that they may take hold of him, at Ho∣liness also; Seeing ingraffed Principles together with general Discourse teach every one, how dear Holiness is to God.


If God and Goodness were no more than Imagina∣ry things: It would be no wonder, if they who are

 tossed off the World, and thrown over-board from it, should snatch at them; if there were no more in the Case than this, that every one hath heard so much speech, and talk of them among Men. For to him that hath nothing in reality, even a Shadow, a Phan∣cy are valuable. Men that are dropping through the Air, or sinking under Water, without Consulta∣tion offer at every thing they meet with.


In great Extremities short of Death, they that are bereft of all worldly Assistance, fly to the Divine Succours, though as 
Jonah
's Marriners they pray to an Idol instead of the true God, and their Devoti∣on is no better than Superstition, which is but a Phancy in Religion. What strange thing then is it, for nature to cry out for God, and Christ, for Par∣don of Sin, to be delivered from Hell, and to have Heaven for an everlasting Rest, when all things else evidently fail as they do in Death; and when not only Phancy, and general Opinion, but most sub∣stantial Reason inlightned by the Scripture provoke up a Man to it, even for Self-preservation?


Yet this differs but little 
from howling upon our Beds for Corn, and Wine, and Oyl,
 Hos. 7.14. for though the things differ much in their Nature, yet the Esteem Men have of them, and the desire they have after them is much upon the same ground; for these Spiritual things appear to that natural Sense of Self-preservation, as necessary in Death, as the other do in Life and Health.


But if the approaches of Death happen to be again drawn off, the value of Spiritual things removes with them, and the things of this World, with all the sensual and sinful Delights of it, return to their former price: which argues the ineffectualness of

 this cause of Repentance, and the Unacceptableness of the Repentance it self to God, that flows from it; God disclaims Men, that have never come to him before their Extremity, and come then only because of it. 
In the time of their trouble they will say, Arise, and save us: But where are thy Gods that thou madest? Let them arise if they can save thee,
 Jer. 2.27, 28. Thus to such Dying Men crying out to him, God says, Let your former Lusts and Plea∣sures now be your Happiness. 
Fools and scorners,
 that would not be warned, 
call upon God in their calamity, and seek him early, when the whirlwind of their destructions hurries them, but cannot make him hear, cannot find him,
 Prov. 1.14.


2. Suppose the desires after God, and Eternal Happiness, with all the Retinue of those Desires rise not, so much, from the Necessities of remove from this Life, and sensible Supports, but immediately from the sight of Eternal things themselves: yet will not this conclude the Repentance sincere. For we may easily pitch upon several so plain reasons of these quick Apprehensions of another World, that it is much more strange, if any Man be not struck with them; and they that are, are not in greater Extasies of these Considerations, than that most die in some fair inclinable Temper towards them, and others are extraordinarily surprized with them, yet without true Repentance.


For First, If it were no more, but the leisure, and uninterestedness of the Mind in all worldly things, that Death brings: It is no wonder that the Action of it should immediately, and necessarily flow upon God; for it being always in action, and motion from its very Nature, and God having made it for himself;

 and the manner of its living here in the World being a slavery willingly undertaken for the Service of the Body, and the Enjoyment of this present Life, in its being fallen from God: It is nothing strange, that that Drudgery being now at an end, and the chains wherein it was held, just a breaking, it should fall upon God, and Spiritual Objects, whither the stream of it was prepared to run, and which are most truly its own business. For the distance being so wide, and irreconcilable between Man, and this Earth in Death; the very having nothing else to do must car∣ry him upon the Future State; seeing his Soul is such a Being as cannot naturally lie still, and that State is all, that it hath to work upon, and further than that, it is so nearly allied to it.


Secondly, The very loosening and uncementing the Soul from the Body, wherein it dwelt, and wherein the Motions of it were re∣strained,
 hath been thought very probably to give Men lesser de∣grees of those Advantages near their Death, which naked and free Spirits not inclosed and pent up in Bodies have, whereby they have been able to make Conjectures of future things, and to speak pro∣phetically. The less the Soul is bound to work by the Body, the higher are its Operations. All ex∣traordinary Motions of the Soul are a kind of Ravishment from Sense. Those great Prophetick Blessings of 
Jacob and Moses
 were near their Dying.
 It is therefore very easie

 to be thought, that when the Soul and Body are ready to cleave asunder, and the Spirit to be separa∣ted from Flesh, that it should make an higher flight towards Eternal Things.


The nearer every thing is to its own Residence, the more vehement is its motion said to be thither. So there may very well be quick sallies of the Soul to∣wards Eternity, before it enters into it, when it is so near that everlasting Receptacle of it self.


Thirdly, We may observe in the Experience of all times, every appearance of the other World hath strange effects of Fear, and affrightment upon Mens Minds: When any one is entring then into that whole World, it may well put him upon purifying himself, more than they that fall upon 
Leviathan,
 Job 41.25. When Men are just upon that Region of Spirits, what appalements of Mind and strong work∣ing of Thoughts must there needs be? Much more if the Soul have any sense of its approach to the in∣finite Holiness of God, at whose rebuke the Pillars of Heaven tremble; whose presence astonishes the purer Spirits of Angels, and beats down the Souls of good Men to the Dust, as of 
Moses,
 
Job, Isaiah, &c.
 in his interviews with them. How much more of those that have never thought of God, and now must come near his Seat?


Nothing so composes the Soul to this amazing change of Condition and Converse, as long continu∣ed Treaties with God through Christ: when though Men change their place, they do not change their company:
 Others, when this great 
light strikes

 them, are in the very terrors of the shadow of death, and shaken out of their place,
 out of all the Security, and quiet Sensuality they lived in.


Let us now take the estimate or avail of these things to true Repentance, and we shall find, when the Soul lies thus uncovered to the things of Eternity, it hath natural Reasons for all, it may seem to do like return to God, and so that all argue nothing of the true Grace of God; but if a Man were again in his former State he would be the very same he was: For first, as one thing strikes upon another with a na∣tural Effect, Light upon the Eye, Sound upon the Ear, so Eternal Things upon the Immortal Spirit, when there is nothing between to intercept the stroke. Further,
 when 
the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eye, and the pride of life
 are as a Scene remo∣ved, and a Play at an end; and instead of them another World drawing near, just as Men defeated in all their attempts for Riches, and Honours, and beaten off from them to a private Life, call all these things Cheats; not out of true Reason, but because they cannot reach them: on the other side they praise Retirement and a Cloyster, not that they like it, but because they must live so, which begets some kind of Contentedness so to live. Thus and no otherwise do many Dying Men call all this World Vanity, and profess an high Esteem for all things pertaining to that to come.


Cause
 3. There is yet a more pressing Account of the most notable motions that were ever found in any of their Repentances, 
viz.
 The awakenings of Conscience usual at this time, because of the Sense of a Judgment: while common Experience tells

 Men, 
It is appointed, to all Men once to die,
 Heb. 9.27. and sinking Nature gives notice, This is the time: Conscience lifts up to the next thing. 
After that the Judgment.


Now no Man sees Judgment, a Judgment Omni∣scient, Omnipresent, Eternal, without great shakes of Soul, especially that hath done nothing seriously 
to agree with the adversary in the way,
 Luk. 12.18. Conscience then rising up with the Awe of a Tribu∣nal upon it, stirs up all the Powers to fly from the Wrath that is to come, by desires of Pardon, and Resolutions of Amendment. The very hearing of Judgment made such a one as 
Foe∣lix tremble.
 When Judgment seems to us, at the other end of Heaven, all is quiet; but when Death brings us to the very seat of it, how loud may be the cries for Mercy? The bewailing the former evils of Life? Now Men pour out their Complaints for the want of God, the misimprovement of former time: Now they make large offers of a strict and severe Mortifi∣cation, and Devotion to Religion. Now they would give 
the thousand Rams, the ten thousand Rivers of Oyl, their first born for their Trasgression, the fruit of their Body for the sin of their Soul,
 Mic. 6.6, 7. And yet all but the Eye opened to see the flaming Sword of Justice, that makes even a 
Balaam
 wish to die the death of the Righteous,
 and to have a latter End, Sober, Just, Religious.


The very Suspition of a Judgment inclines Men thus far universally almost, that hardly any choose to die in a Rant, in a Madness; but had rather by

 virtue, and Religion be consigned over to another World; and have their Eyes closed by Mercy, and Grace in Christ: They would see the Salvation of God, and so depart in Peace.


Object.
 1. But it may be objected: Seeing these granted to rise from true Conviction, and not to be Dissimulation, or counterfeit Pretence, Why may not they have the worth of true Repentance?


Answ.
 1. To answer this: Let me consider, pure Conviction, and enlightned Apprehension, and the Affections begotten of them, are no Argument of true Goodness, where the Light hath not a benign, and free Operation upon the Judgment, an Allure∣ment upon the Will, an Indearment upon the Affections, to turn them to a full Delight, and Sa∣tisfaction in God and Holiness, and to a dislike and abhorrence of Sin. For else, the Devils, 
who believe and tremble,
 must be thought Converts. For who have clearer sight of things than they? 
Balaam,
 whose Eyes were opened, and spoke so great things of God, and his People, must be concluded a good Man. 
Esau
 and 
Judas,
 who had so sad apprehensions of Sin,
 and their loss by it, must be affirmed to be Penitents. 
Nebucadnezar
's and 
Darius
 his acknowledgments of God must be taken for true Grace. 
Herod
 his hearing 
John Baptist
 gladly. 
Felix
 his trem∣bling at 
Paul
's Discourse, may be thought Eviden∣ces of true Repentance.


Object.
 2. But Secondly it may be supposed, be∣cause these very Convictions and Affections are not

 universal; but we see multitudes go out of the World without them, carrying little better than a decent and civil Respect to Religion, that therefore there is something of God, something Heroick in them, that have them.


Answ.
 2. This indeed may be no other, than the wise and good Government of God over the World; whereby he takes care, there should be Testimonies of himself, and the Goodness of his ways; that Athe∣ism, and Wickedness may not carry it, as if all were their own, as if there were an unexceptionable Con∣currence on their side against God and Holiness. For as he receives witness from the constant, gracious and religious Lives of good Men, so he constrains some of them, that have lived contrary to him all their lives, to give him glory at last, for the good of others, though without saving benefit to themselves. Which he may justly do, and without any injury to them. Seeing all the Service every Creature can do to him, is infinitely due, he may make use of that which is his own, so far as he pleases. And because 
what the word God puts in their mouths,
 is not their own, not arising out of the 
good treasure of their hearts
 (as appears in 
Balaam
) therefore their everlasting Condition is not determi∣ned by it, but by their constant Course of the for∣mer Life, the true Image of their Hearts, as we see in the same 
Balaam,
 who after died by the 
Israelites
 hand,
 whose greatness he had prophesied. Yet I will not deny, but they may have their reward in miti∣gation of Punishment for any Service done to God.


If God did not interpose thus sometimes, he might

 seem wanting in something that concerned him, at least as a gracious Ruler of the World. He therefore over-rules some, who have lived so, as to make a con∣stant Argument against him, and a future State (so far as Wickedness could do it) to retract the whole Course of their Life, and give their Vote, for what they had so long withstood.


I will yet further add another Cause of a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 that sometimes falls out to have a most powerful Influence, and yet the Repentance that springs from it, is very unsafe to confide in.


Cause
 4. Dying Men are oft under the play and force of other Mens Reason and Religion. For it is a general, and necessary Charity of Men affected to Religion themselves, to offer the sense of it to others, in a time when they think it likely to be accept∣ed, and so infinitely necessary; which Practice how∣ever needful, and most commendable in it self, yet by accident may have raised higher the opinion of a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 and is often the occasion of great Error in the thing it self.


For suppose a Man followed with sound and affe∣ctionate Perswasions, to do all that may be done for his Soul in this exigent; how conceiveable is it, that Man may be so far wrought upon, as to enter∣tain a present sense of Religion, and yet have no true Life, no Life that arises from a true intimate Principle. But as those Bodies of Air taken, and moved by Angels seem to perform the Functions of living Bodies, yet do but seem to do so, for they have no Principle of Life natural to them; but as soon, as they are forsaken by the Spirits that made use of them, they fly abroad, and disperse themselves. Thus that general sense of Conscience, that lies scat∣tered

 through the Soul, and unable for action, being gathered together and united by good and holy Ap∣plications, and acted thereby, may have force so long, as that Union continues; but that Discourse that holds it together ceasing, it immediately falls asunder, and loses its Efficacy.


The Stone that receives motion from the Hand, that throws it, goes on whilst that motion lasts, when that is spent, it falls to the ground: so the force of Exhortation ceases too often, when he that gives it, leaves those to whom it was given.


The Instrument to which the Musician's Hand gives tune and voice, lies dead when he deserts it: Mans Soul is made by God capable of religious tune and motion, and while a skillful hand plays upon it, it may give that sound very distinctly, and yet have no Life in it self.


The striking of Conscience makes the Sparks fly out, yea and sometime kindle in a flame, and yet it presently dies, because not supplied with a continual Oyl to feed it.


The Mind of one Man is very apt to receive Im∣pressions from another; we see what Passions and Motions are raised by an Eloquent Speaker; how the Understanding is carried captive, while the Orator works upon it: and yet all the Affection thus blown up falls flat again, when the Breath that swell'd it lies still, and is apt to be carried the contrary way by cross Perswasions equally insinuated.


How much more may this be in religious things? Conscience being so easily stirred by such Applicati∣ons, as we see in 
Felix,
 though it is as easily be∣calmed, when sinful Lusts, through the Efficacy of Temptation, are loud and high.




And all this is certainly much easilier done near Death, when Men are so soft, that they are apt to take any stamp; so melting, as to be gathered into any mould.


It is possible for one Man's Spirit to carry another for some considerable space of time, as we see in 
Jehoiadas
 influence upon 
Joash,
 who was not yet all that time possessed with the things themselves,
 whereunto he was directed.


But true Repentance is a Frame set up by the Spi∣rit of God in the Heart, subsisting by that Spirit up∣on it self, and makes use only of all Helps subordi∣nated to it, by the Wisdom of that Spirit; but doth not live from that Help, but from it self through that Spirit, its supreme Life.


To draw these things therefore to a Sum, It will appear, after all these Causes have done, what they can, these great Errors following are generally found, and always to be suspected in a 
Death-Bed Repentance.


1. In a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 There is only a Judgment made of the Case of Eternity, considered by it self, and without a Conterpoise: The Excel∣lency of God and Eternal Things are minded, as they stand out of the Air of Temptation. Now though this be a good Opportunity for the first con∣sideration, yet that Consideration must grow so strong, as to retain the same sense, in the midst of all Pretences from the World and Sathan. Else in the time of Temptation this Re∣pentance falls away.
 
For there may be many true Appre∣hensions, which may make deep

 Impression not only in the Brain and Phancy, and upon our Affections, whilest these are calm, and unprovok'd, and yet both the Apprehension and Impression quickly vanish upon the starting, or provocation of contrary Fancies or Affections.


When the Blood cools in the Veins, and the Spi∣rits are ready to stand still, when a Man is no lon∣ger to live in the World, 
the season of the pleasures of Sin is over,
 then to cast out his Lusts, 
What excellent thing does he? does not even nature,
 
whether he will or no, the same?
 True Repen∣tance encounters Temptation, and resists unto Blood, when those Pleasures of Sin are at the height, and the tide of Corruption from within swells most. 
As
 Moses 
chose to suffer affliction with the people of God rather than to enjoy the pleasures of sin for a season,
 Heb. 11.25. although they were in their growing, and ascending Morning. Repentance will not worship that Sun in the East. It is a very small thing to despise it in the West, and just a setting; to choose Religion, when there is nothing to vie with it.


2. It is not a Consideration of heavenly Things in their true worth, but only as recommended by the present Necessity. For who would not die the Death of the Righteous, and have his latter end like his? Every Man at that time would be glad to find, he hath lived well; and he that hath lived worst, except he be outrageous in Prophaneness, will wish he had lived better. Eternity at hand gives value to all Holiness and sense of God, in spight of the World; and lessens all things else to 
a nothing, and less than nothing;
 imprints a Ghastliness and Horror upon all Wickedness and

 Sensuality. 
The thirty pieces are nothing worth,
 and the 
innocent blood above all value,
 when Men suffer in the Agonies of Conscience, and Fears of the approaching Judge. 
A House full of Silver and Gold
 will not buy a Man to resist God, when in∣deed he appears to him; 
when the terrible Majesty
 opens it self,
 what is so precious, that Men 
will not fling to the Bats and Moles?
 When the Breath is go∣ing out of the Nostrils, how precious is Repentance, Faith, a Pardon in Christ, a happy Eternity, to those, who have heretofore slighted them, as the off-scouring of all things?


But these things are always so rich, Wisdom is always so precious, that it disdains to borrow Esteem from a minute of Extremity; and therefore it most often falls out, that those who would none of its counsel, but despised all its Reproof, when they come to seek it early, cannot find it, but it laughs at their Calamity, as Men laugh at the unhappiness of Fools, that would not be corrected in their Folly, till their Misery confute their Confidence.


3. From hence it follows, That this Repentance is a Choice, when there is no other Choice: If a Man loved his Sins, or the World never so passion∣ately, he must leave them; if he disliked God, and his Holiness, and an everlasting Abode with him, to the utmost; yet he is even forced upon them, or dashed upon an Eternal Misery, and Unhappiness, which it is impossible to choose: And therefore though he would not choose the holy ways of God, if he might still enjoy former Vanity, yet that being

 out of his reach and way, he must take what is to be had. The Sense therefore is no more than this, All these things are good, when a Man is just a Dy∣ing; but while he lives, and can have the World, they are troublesom and unprofitable: Death makes them good, upon this account only, because else there would be something worse, and there can no longer be any thing better. A Man is now willing to offer a Life he hath not to give, but Eternal Life is not worth any part of that Life he thinks in his power to do any thing else with. Let us then ob∣serve at what rate it is set; for to use 
Tertullian
's words in another Case, we may thus Reason.
 
What a mean sort of good is this, that only excels Punishment, which needs the worst of States for a Foil to it self, that it may be thought Good? It is good to repent, and be saved, because who can dwell with everlasting Burnings? But if it must purchase the Reputa∣tion of being Good from Evil, it is not so much a Good, as a lower degree of Evil; which while the greater Evil Eclipses it is compelled as it were to accept the name of a good, being dri∣ven upon the confines of Good∣ness by the Violence of greater Evil.


4. This Repentance is not the Free, but inslaved Judgment and Choice of the Soul; as Men cast out

 Goods in a Storm, and receive a Power to Rule over them, that they cannot endure, but that it is too strong for them. Men are afraid what God will do to them, therefore they submit. His Enemies in Heart are found Lyers to him, they flatter him with their Mouth, as 
Julian
 oppressed by the Almighti∣ness of Christ, is storied to have cried out, 
Vicisti Galilaee,
 Thou hast overcome me, 
Galilean.
 Thus they are overcome by Death, and the apprehension of Judgment. In the sight and view of the Danger Men resolve to part with their Sins. Let but that re∣move, they call for their Sins again, as Mariners wish for their Goods after the Storm. They throw up their Lusts in their sickness, but drink them in when their trouble is past, 
as the Dog returns to his vomit,
 2 Pet. 2.22. In all this there is nothing of the love of God.


5. In this Repentance, the Soul of it is generally a pitiful mean Self-love, even the meanest kind imaginable, wherein a Man considers himself as a Creature in being, and likely, or at least possible to be for ever; without any apprehension of himself, as a rational Creature made for God, and the Enjoy∣ment of him, in conforming with whom his Happi∣ness consists, and in the resting for ever in his love. Of this part he hath no distinct apprehension, only he would be happy though he knows not what it is, or rather he would not be miserable; yet even that he truly understands not. But as the Jews said to Christ, when he spake to them of the Bread of Life, 
Lord ever more give us this bread;
 and yet were scandalized at his Explanation of himself to be that Bread, so far as to leave him.
 And the Pharisees hearing 
of the Vineyard to be let out to other Hus∣band-men,


 and the Judgment up∣on themselves to be executed,
 Cried out, 
God forbid,
 yet run on in the Sin, that brought it upon them.


This little point of Self-love into which all is crowded is ennobled with no sight of the Excellency of the things themselves, or a due Estimation of them, as the true pleasure, and joy of an Immortal Spirit.


This is not that allowable love of a Man's self, which incircles it self within the love of God, as the lesser Circle is comprehended by the greater, but this either leaves out that love wholly, or debases it to basest self.


Let us now compare both sides together, and see how much true Repentance differs from that, which is always to be feared, lest it should be the height of the Death-Bed: And of that which hath been spoken, this is the Sum,


True Repentance is the most free Election of the Soul inabled by the Grace of God, upon a clear, and just Dictate of the Judgment, attended with sin∣cerest Affection, to give up it self to God through Jesus Christ, and when it is most it self, not under any irregular fear or constraint, and (at least would be the same) in a time, when it hath all the probabi∣lity that can be to lay hold upon things present.


The other Repentance arises from a Soul all trou∣bled, and discomposed with the throws of Death, the fears of Hell, the Doubts what will become of it in another World, the Uproars of a guilty Consci∣ence; when it supposes it self necessarily at the full stop of its former Courses, by being cut off from longer Life, in the midst of all which arise vehement Resolutions to turn from Sin to God, and possibly

 with many fair Apparences, but without opportuni∣ty to give proof of themselves.


Let any one Judge between these two Repentan∣ces, and accordingly even counsel himself concern∣ing them.


Yet I must acknowledge this Discourse subject to these following Limitations.


1. That the Arguments I have insisted upon pre∣vail not only against a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 but against all Repentances, that have no higher Spirit to move them, than what I have now represented; from hence therefore we may take the trial of our Repentance in general, for though a Death-Bed is most subject to these mistakes, yet whatever Re∣pentance falls under them, is by reason of them in∣valid; and the later any Repentance is, or the more it is occasioned by any Extremity, which it doth not out-live, the more subject it is to them.


2. What I have said is not at all to be understood of the perfecting and consummating Repentance, by higher and fuller Acts towards God at Death, though enforced by the present Circumstances of the Case. For true Repentance running through the whole life, takes advantage of every thing, much more of so con∣siderable an Opportunity to unite all our strength for God, as a Death-bed brings with it. All that hath been spoken is designed against trusting to the 
Extreme Ʋnction
 of a dying Repentance, just then begun.


3. I have before resolved upon that tenderest Do∣ctrin, that it is possible among all the unhappy Cir∣cumstances of a Dying-Bed, there yet may be this true Act of the Understanding, Will, and Affections turning to God; and if there be this, it would be the same and alike, however these Circumstances

 alter, and then it excels those temporary Amend∣ments undertaken in the freest times of Life. But because it is but possible and so almost impossible, so unhappy a Case, (as not to have repented till just we die) should fall out so happily, the Intention of this Discourse stands good notwithstanding.


4. I acknowledge, the choice of the Soul can never be so free, but it must be subject to infinitely the most worthy and preponderating considerations of the love and goodness of God, the Redemption of Christ, the greatness of eternal Happiness most indear∣ing on one side; of the fear and terror of the Lord, the loss of a Soul, everlasting perdition, most per∣swasive on the other side; so that if a Man cannot be free in his choice of Religion, except he choose it without the force of any such consideration, he can never be at all free, for these are on all sides of him: And further, there is always the supream motion of the Grace of God, which does not lessen, but steer and exalt the freedom of the Will towards God.


The difference then between true and false Re∣pentance in this particular is the same, that is, be∣tween just and rational consideration of all the mo∣tives of Hope and Fear; and the hurry of them moving us not intellectually, but as a Tempest, or with the force of a meer Engine. 2. Between the highest reasons carrying the chiefest force, and leading along with them the lower ones, and the lower doing all without the higher, for want of which they are Sensual or Hellish. 3. Between the government of meer Providence, and of the Spirit of God. 4. Between the Repentance of 
Cain, Esau, Saul, Judas,
 and the Repentance of 
David, Manas∣seh, Peter,
 and 
Paul.




5. I acknowledge the first Preparations of the Soul by God for himself, may be with a great deal of noise and confusion; 
Clouds and Darkness are the Dust of his Feet, Storms go before him to prepare his way;
 while these last, there cannot be a serene calm Act of the Soul, and he that doth not live till he 
hear that still Voice,
 in which God is, is in great danger of being lost in the Storm. But if out of this Darkness and Confusion, a holy and gracious Settlement pro∣ceed, it is not the worse for being so introduced, but is agreeable with the usual method of God.


The fourth Head I proposed, is to weigh the Re∣pentance 
of the Crucified Malefactor
 against our common 
Death-Bed Repentances;
 which duly per∣formed will be of great force against Presumption, rather than minister it any Confidence.


For we shall find so much gathered together, and pressed down into it, that as Jewels have their Rich∣es in a little room, so his short Life of Penitency had an Age of Repentance in it.


It is so composed of Extraordinaries, that it can give very little encouragement in ordinary Cases, except just thus much; that Repentance at Death is no absolute impossibility.


1. Let us observe how his Repentance look'd to the several parts of Repentance; for though it had but little time in this World to breath in, yet with extraordinary diligence, it was busie in all the great, and most concerning Points. Yet I account this of the least Remark in the History of his Repen∣tance, because it is easily imitable, That in which it Excelled, was the Evidences of Sincerity it car∣ried.




1. Yet take notice of his Sense and Acknowledg∣ment of Sin, which was not only a Confession of Words, but of his very Soul; for, deliberating things in a Moment, he pronounced him∣self self worthy of the Condemnation and Punishment he endured.
 I confess this is not so infrequent in those, who forfeited their Lives to Justice, but how oft is it rather a Formality, than the inward sense of the Mind condecently affected? and possibly if we look upon the out-side of things, we can find no great difference between him and others. Yet it is a necessary part of Repentance, 
The sacrifice of God is a broken and contrite heart,
 Psal. 51.17.


2. In his Repentance lay a lively Faith in Christ; first resting upon the principle, And truth of the thing; That 
Christ was a just Person,
 that he 
had a Kingdom;
 and then a particular Application to him for Mercy, 
Lord remember me when thou comest in thy Kingdom.


3. A quick sense of Eternity supplied Vigor to his Repentance, an evident sight of something be∣yond this world. For what more excites the Soul, and shews it the necessity of a gracious Change, than an everlasting Condition appearing to it? To this end hath 
Jesus Christ brought life and immortality to light,
 2 Tim. 1.10. of which this Penitent made a very full Confession; 
Lord remember me when thou comest in thy Kingdom.
 He saw a Kingdom beyond the Cross and Death.


4. An earnest desire to promote and propagate a sense of God into the Hearts of others was the im∣mediate fruit of this Malefactors Repentance. He

 admonishes the Impenitent Thief on the other side, 
Dost thou not fear God?
 He had such a Reverence of God, that he expostulates the want of it in the other as monstrous and horrid. His design was also exceeding Compassionate, as well as Pious: For it was an Endeavour full of Charity, desirous his guilty Fellow-sufferer should be brought into the same Condition with himself. We want much of the Compassion due to the Souls of others, because we are so insensible of the misery of our own; and taste but little of the sweetness of Reconciliation and Grace: But when we drink largely out of these Fountains, we derive the Streams upon others, that have flowed upon our selves.


All these things were evidently much to the pur∣pose, if we look upon themselves: Yet were there nothing more extraordinary in them, we might doubt whether they were any more than the good Mood, into which Principles of Conscience excited by the unhappiness his Condition might put him: Let us then consider the Evidence, that all this was truly Supernatural; for I account it no Injury to so memorable a Repentance to suppose, that as great and fair an out-side may have fail'd of Paradise, into which he entred. But,


2. The acknowledgment he made of Christ gives testimony to him in two things.


1. That it was made, when Christ was under all the Infamy, and Misery of a shameful and painful Death, and nothing to make such a Greatness, as he ascribed to him probable. Among us that in gene∣ral Language speak honourably of Christ, Professi∣ons of him are cheap, and prove nothing. But if one bred in Turcism, or Judaism, should confess him,

 it would argue much more; yet not so much as in this Malefactor, who saw him in so despicable a State: Whereas now so great a part of the World acknowledging him,
 hath carried him up to Heaven, as it were 
in that Cloud, wherein he ascended long ago,
 and hid 
the reproach of his Cross
 in so high a Glory, especially among us.


To confess him in his worst estate, and before any thing of the Consequence was known, was very great:
 
Christ was revealed to him,
 
not by Flesh and Blood;
 but by God himself. Such an Heroick∣ness is indeed necessary to assure a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 which had need be as great, as it is late, when Men do not live to see the ordinary fruits of it.


He that could see Christ, and his Glory, through so dark a Vail, had 
his Eyes anointed with that Eye-Salve,
 Christ speaks of.


We find the Apostles, who had seen his Miracles, heard his Divine Discourses, made long Acknow∣ledgments of him, were fearfully shaken by this Assault 
of the power of Darkness upon him;
 even to a Despair, that he was the Christ. But while they were in a swoon of Faith,


 this Faith with Christ triumphed over Principalities and Powers, even on the Cross.


We looking upon the things of Christianity in the common Profession of the Nation, It is a hard thing for us to see them otherwise, than that casts them; as it would be for those that have known nothing but the Religion of 
Mahomet,
 Paganism, or the Jewish Synagogue, to take up upon the sudden the Doctrin of Christianity against their own.


We believing not with our own Faith, but Vul∣gar Opinion, easily make a Confession of Christ; yet oftentimes the Power and saving Effect of it is far from us, as from those that are Strangers to him: sometimes they that come from the East, and from the West, sit down in the Kingdom of God, when the Children of the Kingdom are thrust out.


The Acknowledgment of Christ in those Times, was a much fairer Evidence, than it can be now; yet without inward Grace was nothing then; much less must it needs be to us, who have it made ready to our hands by Education and common Consent in it; we must therefore the more narrowly observe, what Characters the Truth of Christ imprints upon our Hearts.


2. This Acknowledgment was made without any manner of In∣ducement, or Temptation to it,
 from outward advantages, it could possibly afford; but rather an in∣crease of Shame and Scorn was to be expected from it; and that if it were possible, he should suffer

 the second time for such a Confession, and become of a Malefactor a Martyr. Nay further, there was no Dictate of Natural Conscience, that could in∣cline him to it; for that runs not into the Confession of Christ, nor is any way quieted concerning former Sins through such a Confession; but eyes God only, and Moral Righteousness: Lastly, no general Tra∣dition prompted him to it, the Jews at that time condemning him. But in us, all Applications to Christ are securing our selves in the common Barque, and keep us from being censured, as prophane, and irreligious Persons. For to die without any address to Christ, is accounted very ungodly, and sensless of a Future State; but to deny him, monstrous and desperate. Further, Christianity is incorporated with our natural Principles, so that they never move, or heave themselves in us, but that also rises with them.


Now it is of great Importance in the tryal of Sin∣cerity, upon what Grounds and Motives we do, what do; and the more we can clear it from inferiour Springs, the more certainly it is 
Grace descending from above, and resting upon us,
 Jam. 1.17.


Every one therefore that would justifie a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 must exceed all common sorts of Repentance, else he cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. N
y he must do something, that in the little space of time, he hath to do it in, must equal a Course of amendment of Life; must be as great in him, as this Repentance of the Thief.


And do but think, if our Faith were to cut those waves, his was to pass, to row against such a Stream, 
to remove such mountains,
 among how many thou∣sands

 there would be found a Faith to do it; we should immediately be stopp'd; or sunk, and cast away, and lost. Yet such are they we are to pass through into Eternal Life, though of different Cir∣cumstances from his.


But after all I will allow it possible, there might be a secret flaw in this whole Penitent's Deportment, we now insist upon; and that it far'd with him as with some among us, who after a wicked and de∣bauched Life fly to the Sanctuary of the Romish Re∣ligion (
as
 Joab 
to the horns of the Altar,
 1 King. 2.28.) To Reconciliation wherewith Hopelesness of any good from that they have so long sinned against, and natural Superstition hurry them. So this Person hearing a great Fame of Christ, and ob∣serving his pretence high, might lay hold upon him in a desperate Case, if peradventure any thing of good might follow on it: It being very incidental to the Nature of Man to cast himself upon Religion, when all else fails, and upon one new to him, when he hath offended against the old one, beyond hope of Pardon; whence Men generally receive this Recom∣pence, that Conscience is put into amuse, having nothing at present to say against it.


And had this been the top of his Case, that it had been thus, could it have been saving? Nay, that it might possibly have been thus, though indeed it had been otherwise, yet this very liableness to such a mistake had unspeakably abated the rational Secu∣rity, and safety of his Condition, so that there had remained good cause for Conscience to have mi∣strusted which way his Condition would have fallen to Eternity.




3. The Third thing therefore, that gave him, and gives to all Ages undoubted Testimony of the Truth of his Conversion, is the immediate attesta∣tion to that Truth and Sincerity of it, 
This day shalt thou be with me in Paradise.
 Now that Repen∣tance which enters into Heaven, that passes into Pa∣radise, not hinder'd by those 
flaming Cherubs of Divine Truth;
 that which is 
within the Door, be∣fore the Master of the House is risen up and hath shut it to,
 that is true Repentance and prosperous, and successful, how late soever. But to know that it is true, when it is so late, needs a Voice from Heaven, or something proportional to it, to verifie it, as is after to be urged.


The last thing I take notice of in this Repentance, is the unparallellable Circumstance of time wherein it was accepted.


1. It was in the time of a pub∣lick act of mercy to the World,
 
God was in love to Mankind giv∣ing his only begotten Son.
 
Christ was giving himself at this time.
 Therefore that there should be an Instance and Mo∣nument of this Mercy, seem'd condecent to so great and solemn a time.


2. This Penitent stood close to that Sacrifice, that was offering it self up to God: He stood within the Savour, the Odor, the Incense of it: That Sacrifice, 
that purchases men from a vain conversation;
 that draws down all the Blessings of Salvation; that therefore the force of it should reach so near it self, is not strange: I know no nearness of place signi∣fies

 at all. How many saw his Miracles, heard him Preach, look'd upon him Dying without benefit? yet was his Presence also, as he pleased, full of Divine effects. That therefore there should be an experiment of so great a Balsom, just as it was pre∣paring, was most suitable.


3. It was in the time that 
Christ was triumph∣ing over Principalities and Powers, and making a shew of them openly upon the very Cross.
 That he should bear off in the Field the prey taken out of the mouth of the proud Foe, was very agreeable to the expectation so great a Conqueror raises. 
Colos.
 2.15.


But whoever considers the Thief on the other side not converted, or saved, will find Cause to observe; The Salvation of Christ doth not sweep the World, but is rarelier vouchsafed than we think; That a man may die without going to Heaven; That the mercy of the Gospel is most arbitrary and sovereign, chusing and leaving; That it de∣pends not on humane Expectation, or any Super∣stitious phancies, that have been raised about the Cross of Christ; for so much appears by one only taken here, the other left, though upon the Cross together with Christ, and near him in the great and mediatory Act; who that considers will not tremble to think of one left in his sins, falling

 down into Hell from such a Heaven as Christ in his great Act of Redemption.


And although it may be truly said, it was the fault, and negligence, and obstinacy of the Unconverted Malefactor, that he did not use aright the Grace of∣fered, or the Light vouchsafed him; yet it doth not alleviate the danger, for it still remains very uncer∣tain to whom God will give a Heart to use Oppor∣tunities aright, though they have them from God with an equal Liberality, as those that do so improve them.


But indeed, the Supremacy of Grace is here very much acknow∣ledged by all, that a Ray of the Divinity of Christ with infinite kindness smote his Soul.
 I infer nothing from that increase, the Evangelist 
Matth.
 c. 27.44. gives the Miracle, That he was Convert∣ed after he had joined with the other Malefactor in reproaching Christ; Because
 some Interpre∣ters question it.


Upon the whole then of this Example, let Men that would be befriended by a 
Dying Repentance,
 ex∣amine whether these things found in this Example, are like to meet upon them. I will not say, till there be a time,
 a fulness of time, wherein Christ shall again die for Sinners, such a Repentance is not to be expected; but I may safely say, he that in the Observation of this Example trusts himself to a 
Dying Repentance
 should startle

 his Presumption with this Interrogation, Will there ever be such a Conjunction, as was here, again, while the World endures?


I come now to the last Head of down-right Argu∣ments against committing our Eternal State to a 
Death-Bed Repentance.


1. It is against all the Prudence and Providence of a Man, seeing no Man knows what kind of Death he shall die; whether it will afford him the possibili∣ties of Repenting: How many die suddenly, and in so short a Breath, that they have not time to desire Mercy in general? How many of Apoplexies seizing upon the very Top of Sense at first? Many by Phren∣sies have no rational Motions of themselves; innu∣merable Accidents (and oft-times made dreadful by the Wickedness wherewith they have been accom∣panied) have snatch'd away Men in a Moment. 
Such are taken away living and in his wrath before the Pots can feel the Thorns,
 before ever those ha∣sty flames of Motion towards God blown up for such an Extremity can be raised. Such are taken in the very manner without so much time as to put off the Every-Day Habit of Sin, 
like those that were carried out dead in their Coats,
 Lev. 10.5.


And though from the ordinary manner of Dying, we may hope for the warning ordinarily given; yet we see others surprized, who have had the same reasons of Hope with our selves. We cannot then without madness trust our selves to accident, 
or boast our selves of to morrow,
 of which we know not what is with∣in it,
 seeing the future is wholy concealed from us: 
They that make a Covenant

 with death, and are at an agreement with Hell, meet with nothing but Perfidiousness, when the overflowing Scourge approaches them, and the storm of Hail rends their refuge of lies,
 Isa. 28.18. 
&c.
 If we were provided against all, but one single Ac∣cident, even that may fall upon us with the ruin, that all the rest could bring.


Let a Man examine, whether he can choose his Death, and design the Circumstances of it, and place every thing just as he would have it, and there∣by afford himself the Season he thinks necessary for such a purpose. But who is so foolish as to under∣take this? He that builds upon Ground that is none of his own, is like to have all his Frame overturned at the pleasure of another: God derides this Folly, who hath all things in his own hand, and disposes them without our knowledge: 
Go too ye that say,
 
To day or to morrow we will go to such a place, and buy,
 
and sell, and get gain:
 But oh miserable is he that thinks, as God, 
to lay the Beams of his Chambers,
 that he builds for Eternal Rest 
in the Waters,
 the flowing incertainty of future Time, where he hath nothing to do: and oversees the proper Rest appointed him by God▪ seeing both his Presumption, and his prophane Ne
ligence are likely to be punished tog
er. For indeed 
 that is wickedly prodigal, of 
t Go
 aff
ds him, as his, and is bold to e
t
c
 
p
 the future which is Gods, when he co
s to 
t, 
inds it full and possessed already, w
 wha
 God 
th provided for i
; so there is no roo
 for his Project, but he perishes for ever in the Disappointment.




2. It is against our Duty, and all the Obligations, that lie on us; For it is as if a Man should say to God, I know it is my Duty, and the end of my Life,
 and the Pro¦vidence thou exercisest towards me, that I should now serve thee, and give up my self to thee; But I beg of thee, that while I live, I may live in my Lusts and Sensua∣lities, and when I am to die and go out of the World, and shall have no more time and leisure for any thing else, I shall then have nothing to do, but to look towards thee, and beseech thy Favour, and leave my Sins: I desire thee therefore to stay for my Repentance till then, and when I can no longer enjoy the World, then to grant me a Kingdom with thy self, and the Fruition of thy own Happi∣ness: For though I shall dishonour thee in the tract of my Life, yet I will retract it all in a Breath. How horribly contemptuous of God doth this ap∣pear, how Affronting and Blasphemous? and yet this is the very sense of Deferring Repentance, till Death.


This is the greatest Immorality and Irreligion; for it destroys the reason of our Being on Earth, which is 
to serve our Generation,
 or 
the course of our Life accord∣ing to the Will of God,
 
to glorifie him here on Earth.
 It destroys the Service, yet flies upon the Re∣ward; as if God were bound to make Men happy, because he had made them, and that he had made them, first to take the Delights he most abhors, to

 dishonour him, by deforming his Workmanship, and violating his Laws, and the good order he hath set in the World; and yet after all because he had made them, to give them a Blessedness so insupera∣bly great, that he could find no greater; and by no means to hurt or punish them for Sin, though all the Justice, that ever was known to Man, requires Punishment of Offenders, as much as the reward of Desert; else all Government would be lost.


Thus therefore to imagine of God is to bring down in our own Thoughts those great Attributes of Justice and Wisdom, into a foolish and unreason∣able Pity, and only for this end, that there may be a Licentiousness in Wickedness and Impiety.


And seeing upon the same account, all the Men in the World may adjourn their Love and Obedi∣ence to God to their going out of it; it might come to pass, that this State should have been prepared only as a Stage for the Vices and Exorbitancies of Men to have acted themselves upon, and then they to have removed to Heaven; when as though these have large scope indeed now, as things are, yet their Licentiousness is daily rebuked by the threats of the Gospel, by the holy Conversations of those, that have left their Sins by Repentance, and punish∣ed by an Eternal Judgment hereafter.


But who that considers the infinite Goodness and Greatness of God, 
that in his hand is our life, and breath, and all our ways,
 can think it equal, that God should have only the faint and feeble Services of a Death-Bed, for all the Preservation and Mercy vouchsafed through the course of our lives?


Or who can think it consistent with his Honour to give Men Laws, that point upon the Government

 of themselves here, and that he should at so general a rate, as the necessity of Mens manner of living re∣quires, accept of such a Commutation, or exchange for the Obedience due to them, as a 
Death-Bed Repentance?


Or least of all, who can believe? that Jesus Christ should come a Redeemer into the World, 
a Redeem∣er from all Iniquity, a purchaser from a vain Con∣versation, that he might have a peculiar People zealous of good works;
 
who should look for the great day,
 
and his glorious ap∣pearance, by a patient expectation and continuance in well-doing;
 to which he hath also tied them by the most strict Obligations, that created Nature is capable of, and yet that this in a manner should be wholly frustrated, even in those supposed to be redeemed by him?


How shall such a Man then be able to look God or Jesus Christ the Saviour in the face, that hath but just begun to acknowledge him by some weak De∣votions to him, extorted even of necessity, and gi∣ven the bulk of his time to Sin; that hath sacrified the 
Male
 of his Flock to Lust,
 and even with impious design kept the corrupt thing for God?


3. If we truly understand the nature of Repen∣tance, and that it is the Gift and Grace of God: It is,


1. A great Presumption upon that Grace, to think we can call it down from Heaven at our own need, who have offered so much Injury to the motions of it, vouchsafed in the time of our Life; we do not consider, that this Grace designs its own Glory,

 and teaches to live 
Godly, righteously, soberly, now in this present World,
 and there∣in to wait for the Manifestation of everlasting Glory;
 and thus we are 
seek for honour,
 
glory, and immortality.


Now that they that have bidden defiance to this Grace so long, should bring it down from the Clouds in their Dying Moments, to con∣vey them to Happiness,
 is to make so cheap of that infinitely precious Goodness, that whoever aright considers the Case, must needs infinitely abhor the thoughts. Yet this is the necessity of such Mens Condition, that they must either think themselves worthy thus to becken the Grace of God, or they must perish for ever. They enter then a contest of Pre∣cedency and Superiority with this Grace, and de∣cide against it: That it is fit for that to stoop and humble, yea to prostitute it self, rather than they should be for ever Miserable: yea rather than they should have been obliged to a Holy Life.


2. It is for a Man to desire God, to Mis-time his Grace, for the Season of it is the present offer in the Gospel. 
Now is the time accep∣ted,
 
now is the day of Salvation.
 It is to desire God to give him a Spring in Autumn, or Winter; when the time of the Patience of God is over, to expect the Salva∣tion of God, now God who hath with infinite Wisdom and Equality weighed out Times and

 Seasons,
 and made every 
thing beautiful in its time,
 doth not reverse his own Appointments to serve the Folly of Man, who have not 
known their times,
 and the 
things of their peace in their day.


For can it seem reasonable, that Mountains should remove out of their places? and Rocks wander from their Situation? That Man more unin∣telligent, 
than the Swallow and Crane that observe their appoint∣ed times,
 
might not be insnared by the evil times that fall sudden∣ly upon them:
 He that trusts then to such a Repentance, doth, as it were; resolve to be saved by Miracle, or else perish.


3. Men do not consider the Jealousie of God, nor are afraid 
of his Oath
 against them, that 
harden their Hearts and do not hear his voice to day;
 so that some,
 who have trifled with the Grace of God, 
seek him early and do not find him.
 The 
Israelites
 that said, 
Whither shall we go up, when they were commanded to go up, and possess the land;
 when they would have gone up afterwards and fought for it, were rejected by God. So in 
Zechary,
 God gives account of that great Judgment of their Cap∣tivity, concerning which, though 
Moses, Samuel
 and 
Job
 had interceded, he would not have heard. 
As when I cried they would not hear, so it came to pass that they cried, and I would not hear,
 Zech. 7.13.


Many fail of the Grace of God that prophanely sell their Birth-right for a transitory Satisfaction,

 and find no place for their Re∣pentance,
 
or of Gods Repentance
 in favour towards them, though they seek it care∣fully, and with Tears. While Men are busie in ful∣filling the corrupt Desires of their sinful Flesh, and make slight of the Mercy, that so freely presents their Souls; a silent Decree passes against them; that though it makes no noise in their Ears, yet seals them in blindness, and hardness, so that their Souls are for ever closed therein: For who can open what is shut by so powerful and awful a Hand?


4. It is impossible to a Man to die with good com∣posure of Mind, that trusts to a Dying Repentance; for let the Case be thus stated, That Repentance, which will not inable a Man to a holy Life, is not saving; suppose a Man then in a Dying Sickness, ma∣king great acknowledgment of Sin, full of Resolu∣tions of leaving Sin, and this Man recovering and peforming nothing, but sliding back into the for∣mer Wretchedness of Life; this Repentance how∣ever serious, and earnest it seemed, would not have saved him, if he had died; he had perished in his Sins, and his false Repentance together: For that his Repentance was truly inferior to his Sins, appears, in that as soon as ever that is over, which gave it a seeming Advantage, his Sins throw off that Repentance;
 but true Repentance always 
overcomes;
 that Repentance therefore could not be true.


And if Repentance be false and counterfeit, there is no amendment of it in Eternity; when once the 
Master of the House is risen up, and hath shut to the Door,
 there is no entrance: While the 
foolish

 Virgins
 too late understanding the Error 
of Oyl in their Lamps only, and not in their Vessels,
 went to correct it, by buying Oyl, 
They were shut out,
 and 
no knocking
 powerful enough for their Admission.


Yea though a Man may seem to be well quieted, and comforted, and to have the Testimony of the Spirit of God, yet all this may be but a Delusion, and 
Satan in an Angel of light;
 for though they that have truly this Testimony, may be supposed to know it is that true Spirit; yet they that have it not,
 may have some∣thing, they so strongely imagine to be it, that thereby they may be deceived. This Testimony therefore must be proportionable to the assurance, this Dying Man had from Christ; else even a Man that dies safe, must die in such an un∣expressible Torment of Mind, that it had been much better he had enjoyed no such seasons of Sin, than only endure that. And who can presume so upon God, as to promise himself such a train of Miracles to carry him not only to Heaven, but without those Agonies of Horror that are like Hell, after so long Impenitency?


Thus on all sides it is most necessary for every one to Repent while he may behold the Truth of his Re∣pentance in the ordinary Fruits of a holy Life; and see himself in all the Circumstances of Temptation, change of Condition, Varieties, which Life and the Course of it carry along with it: For that is often by length of time cast up, and appears upon the Surface, that lay concealed at the bottom, till such a Concurrence of things gives it the advantage to rise.




I understand nothing that can be objected to this last Argument I have used to disable the Confidence of such a Repentance, except this.


It may be supposed, the Repentance that is full of passionate and affectionate Motions towards God, though amidst the fears of Death, may be good, till it be blotted out by returns to Sin, and therefore if it be taken in the just time, while it is good; that is, if a Man dies before it be reversed, it may serve the great purpose of Eternity.


This Supposition I must confess hath a seeming Countenance from that particular place, 
Ezek.
 33.12. 
The righteousness of the righteous shall not deliver him in the day of his transgression; as for the wick∣edness of the wicked, he shall not fall thereby in the day that he turneth from his wickedness.


But if the scope of Scripture-Discourse in general, or the very sense of Morality be taken in the Case, no Man may trust so great a weight here; For Christ looks upon 
the stony ground
 with the same Eye, 
while it receives the word with joy,
 
as when by and by it is offended;
 and it was therefore truly no better at first than at last.
 
The House that is not foun∣ded upon the Rock,
 is as ill founded in the Calm, as in the Storm, only the Storm discovers what it was. Morality it self requires a better rooting of virtuous Habits, than that they should be set only in loose Ground, thrown up by Extremity of Condition, and not in the Soil it self.


That Repentance which will not bear the trial of time, will much less sustain the Test of Eternity, wherein every thing that stands, must be solid and

 substantial: Things that suffer the loss of themselves, when they are tried 
by mans day,
 will suddenly be consumed by the hotter Beams of God. 1 
Cor.
 4.3.


That hath need of good Founding, that must un∣dergo an Eternity, and have all advantage of Con∣coction, that must be laid up for ever; which the short Moments of a Death-Bed without a miraculous Assistance will not allow. The Fruit of it general∣ly, like 
that Hasty-ripe, perishes while it is in the Hand:
 This Repentance gives up the Ghost, as soon as it is born.


Now as for that place in 
Ezekiel,
 so much vexed with Controversie, I do not think it convenient for me to intangle a Discourse intended wholly for pra∣ctice with the Perplexities of it.


Only I am concerned to shew, that it doth not afford the favour supposed to this kind of Repen∣tance. For first, We must not mistake 
the day
 it speaks of, as if it signified so strait a compass of Time, as a Day; but that Season wherein either the righteous Man wasts and destroys his Righteousness; or a Sinner over comes his Vitious Customs and In∣clinations, neither of which are usually done on the sudden. Secondly, 
The turning from Wickedness
 intended is certainly a sincere and impartial one, and not such as we have rendred this Dying Repentance suspicious to be. Thirdly, It must be justified 
by a walking in the Statutes and Judgments of God, and doing that is right;
 that is, by a continued Re∣formation, which will least agree to this Repen∣tance, and therefore this place of Scripture will not protect this Supposition, but rather damns it.




Having now in the foregoing Discourse, in a pra∣ctical and perswasive way, endeavoured to engage Men to a timely Repentance, by setting out the hazard of a late one: I have thought it necessary, to make the state of the whole Doctrin, as exact as I can, by considering whatever might with fair appearance of Scripture-Reason call into question and scruple, what I have grounded my Perswasions upon.


I will therefore, as a Supplement to all I have said, First recollect what I have intended all along. And then cast all, I can possibly suppose against it, into 
Objections
 and 
Answers,
 that by closer atenti∣on to the Case it self, every one that will be at the cost to consider it, may be convinced to the main End, 
viz.
 A present Religious Life.


1. First then I make it not the question, Whe∣ther a true Repentance, how late soever, be a Re∣pentance to Salvation?


2. Nor Secondly, Whether God hath reserved it to the Prerogative of his Grace, to give a true Re∣pentance at last?


3. Nor Thirdly, Whether a Repentance that is true and sincere, though but in the Seeds, being surprized with a Death-Bed, may not then break out and shew it self more fully?


4. Nor Lastly, Whether a Man that hath the light of the Gospel brought to him, but just before his Dying Condition, may not expect the Grace of God working with it then, even as in the freer times of Life?


All these I do
 with great Confidence acknow∣ledge: The Substance of what I have said against a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 will be comprised in these

 following Assertions, which I restrain wholly to Men, that have lived under the Light, and Exhor∣tations, and Applications of the Word of God, with all usual Freedom; and yet have not begun sin∣cerely to Repent, till they come to die.


The First is, That a 
Death-Bed Repentance
 how fair soever, it may appear, hath yet the greatest Doubt imaginable upon it, whether it be true.


The Second, There is greatest Reason of Fear, God will not give his Grace to such a Dying Man, to Repent.


The Third, That a Repentance at Death is not that 
general Repentance,
 the Scripture Discourses of, makes promises of Pardon upon, offers the As∣sistances of the Spirit to, enjoins the Duty of, with so many pressing commands. For that Repentance immediately to be begun is supposed to govern a following Life. It must therefore be an extraordi∣nary, and miraculous Repentance, if true.


Lastly, That it is therefore against all rules of Pie∣ty and Prudence, by mispending Life to cast our selves upon the necessity of Repentance at Death.


This, I say, is the Substance of what I have de∣signed all along, and which I would now further clear, and vindicate from these following Objections.


Objection
 1. Doth not the Parable of calling some Labourers into the Vineyard at the Eleventh Hour, imply, That God doth in ordinary Convert some at the last Hour, as well as sooner?


Answer.
 The main scope of Parables is only argu∣mentative, and 
so far as the scope of
 that Parable relates to this Case: It is no more, than what I acknowledge, That God gives Eternal Life to true

 Repentance, if true, at last, even as to the first and earliest Repentance. The reward being to all of 
Grace, and not of Debt.
 It is also to be considered, there remained an Hour of working, representing rather old Age, than a Death-Bed, if the colours of a Parable prove any thing, and so are rather against this Repentance, than for it.


In the 
Second Objection,
 I suppose Men taking Sanctuary at infinite Mercy and Power in this man∣ner.


Although no thought of Man can reach the Mercy, that accepts or gives Repentance at the last: yet Mercy being as much above our Thoughts, as the Heaven above the Earth, what can we define con∣cerning it? And though there are so many Circum∣stances of Impossibility, according to our measure of things; Yet the things that are impossible with Men, with God are possible; for with God all things are possible: How can we then determine in this Case? 
Can we by searching find out the Almighty
 in his Mercy and Power? 
Can we find him out to perfection? It is high as Heaven, what can we do? It is deeper than Hell, what can we know? The measure thereof is longer than the Earth, and broa∣der than the Sea.


Answer.
 Now because in this 
Objection,
 the si∣news of all Hope and Expectation from this late Re∣pentance meet; I will endeavour to give the most punctual 
Answer
 to it. And though I know after all, that is, or can be said, Men will not quit it: Yet I shall rest upon this 
Answer,
 as my last Reso∣lution of this Case; and by it raise the disswasions from a trust in such a Repentance to the height; the greatness of the hazard appearing most fully from it.




In general therefore it hath been noted, The que∣stion is not whether God accepts a true Repentance, how late soever; but whether God will give a true Repentance so late; and herein the question is not of the limits, the absolute limits of infinite Mercy and Power; But what limits it hath set to it self? and what Seasons it hath limited to us? and whether ac∣cording to these a 
Death-Bed Repentance
 be not almost, if not altogether an Impossibility? I'll therefore lay down several degrees of Impossibility, notwithstanding infinite Mercy and Power, that must necessarily abate the Irregular Confidence of such a Repentance, and under one of them I shall be bold to place it.


1. The highest degree of Impossibility is, of those things, that are utterly and absolutely 
impossible with God,
 because they are irreconcileable with his Na∣ture, and such wherein if they were, 
he must deny himself,
 which he cannot do. For though there is nothing above God, not so much as any Goodness, or Righteousness abstracted from himself, that should give him Law; Yet he being himself that su∣preme Goodness and Righteousness, He is a Law to himself; His Nature is his supreme and inviolable Law; And his Will stands always even with his Na∣ture: For his Will is himself reciprocal with his Na∣ture; And all his Actions keep perfect Correspon∣dence with his Will. Upon this immutable Reason 
God cannot lye,
 he cannot do any thing weak, or that argues Imperfection: He cannot but be righteous in all his ways, and holy in all his works. Upon this Reason also he cannot, 
he will not acquit the guilty.
 He cannot, he will not save or make Men happy in their Sins. God himself speaks this

 Sense, 
Ezek.
 18.31, 32. and 
c.
 33.11. 
As I live saith the Lord, I have no pleasure in the Death of him that dieth, why will ye die? Turn your selves and live ye.
 As if he should say, except ye turn, all my Mercy can do you no good. For such a Mer∣cy as God the 
Father
 of 
Mercies,
 will not give, would not be a Mercy, but either a foolish Softness, or loose Indulgence to Sin. Such a Power were not a Power, but an Impotency, or turning all things to Confusion. These therefore are as inconsistent with God, as Folly, Imperfection, Sin. The Gos∣pel, the highest display of Mercy rests upon this Principle, being not a Salvation of Men in Sin, but a most effectual Redemption of Men from Sin. Of all that God can be supposed to do for Men, there is nothing more impossible than this, more repug∣nant to all the true Sense of Man, more overthrow∣ing of the undertaking of Christ, more contrary to the Nature of true Happiness. An Opinion of the damned in Hell being annihilated, or recovered to Holiness and Happiness after some Ages of Torment, were a high Probability compar'd with this. He that can tempt himself to believe this, may believe any thing, and needs no Confutation, but his own Unreasonableness. Against this I have been thus large, because it secretly lurks in Mens Hearts, that God may save them without so much ado about Faith and Repentance, though being afraid to speak a thing so monstrous, they disguise it under the Pre∣tence of a faint Repentance at last.


But from what I have said, It is plainly to be in∣ferred, First, That some things which God cannot, will not do, are not the reproach either of his Mercy or Power, but the Glory and Greatness of both. And this, that He neither can, or will save Men

 without sincere Faith and Repentance (that is with∣out a recovery to Holiness) is one of these things. The 
Death-Bed Repentance
 then, that is 
unto Sal∣vation,
 must without all dispute be a sincere Change from Sin to Holiness.


2. There is an Impossibility, that arises from the peremptory, and absolute, and irrepealable determi∣nation of the Will and Council of God concerning any thing. In this degree of things I account,
 
the unpardonableness of the Sin against the Divine Spi∣rit. The unrenewableness of total Apostates from Christianity to Repentance. The impossibility of Repentance after this Life:
 Now though these carry not their own Evidence of being inconsistent with the Divine Nature, as the former; yet the Declaration of supreme pleasure against them is so effectual, that we must needs look upon them, as impossible. And we may see a great consent, a high Congruity be∣tween the things themselves, and the Determination of God concerning them, which Reasons are yet clearer with God. For in the Sin against the Holy Ghost there is so mature, so perfect, so concocted a Wickedness, so high a contumely against the God∣head it self, that it is very irreconcileable with Re∣pentance, and so with Pardon. The total Aposta∣cy from Christianity, and the Evidences of it men∣tioned 
Heb.
 6. from the very Nature of the Case ap∣pears irreparable, because there is no other or high∣er Grace, than that of the Gospel, for the Apostates to remove to; 
no more sacrifice for sin,
 nor are

 there any higher Evidences of that Gospel, than those he is supposed to revolt from; and no more perfect Acts of Contrariety to the Gospel, than 
the crucifying the Son of God afresh and putting him to an open shame, the doing despite to the Spirit of Grace, the treading under foot the Son of God, and counting the Blood of the Covenant an unclean thing, in the Parallel place.
 Heb. 10.29.


Besides all other Reasons, the unchangeable State of Eternity is so consolidate with, so fixed into our very Being, that the Perpetuity of it is very account∣able to our Reason; so that there can be no Change after this Life.


From hence then, we derive thus much farther against a 
Death-Bed Repentance:
 First that some things, wherein we cannot find an express Impossibi∣lity in their Nature, are yet made so by Gods abso∣lute Resolution concerning them; into the Reason of which he also is pleased to give us some light: And that many Expressions of Scripture (as, 
They shall seek me early but shall not find me,
 the Parable of the foolish Virgins, with many others) make this Repentance very dangerous, with which also the very Reason of the Case concurs; Yet not a∣mounting to this kind of Impossibility.


3. There are some things impossible according to the Rules, and general Laws of the Creation, and Government of the World, which we call Na∣ture, and which Rules, infinite Wisdom and Power hath so prescribed to it self, that he hath yet reserved to himself freedom to shew himself above them, as Founder and Lord of Nature.


Thus it is impossible for the Sun to stand still, to raise the Dead, that the Fire should not burn: That

 is, It is impossible at all times, but when infinite Power is pleased to be seen riding in the Heavens, far above all Nature, that is, when he is pleased to work Miracles: suitable to these Laws of the first Creation, there are also Laws of the new and second Creation, 
viz.
 the Redemption of Christ.


It is true, the new Creation, compared with the old, is so far as it is new, 
All Miracle.
 Such is 
Righteousness without Works,
 Re∣generation;
 Such is the Incarna∣tion, the Resurrection. Even as the first Creation and daily Preservation are Miracles compared with 
that nothing,
 out of which all things were drawn, and are still upheld.


Yet this very miraculous Frame of the Gospel is bounded with certain Laws and Rules, and when these are transcended, it is a Miracle in this miracu∣lous state of things.


Now all Instances of miraculous Power are rare and extraordinary, and the Reasons of them, when they have been, have always been great and so∣lemn; and when they have been more plentiful in any Age, the Reasons have been great for that also. And in Miracle it self, there hath been always regard to the natural state of things. Miracle hath for the most part lifted up Nature only, wherein it was ei∣ther decayed, or not planted so high, as the very effect to be wrought, and just then designed; not minding the flourish of it self, but the main In∣tention only: We read of no other Circumstances but those of ordinary Mortality, into which they that were raised from the Dead in Scripture were exalted; only that they were raised to Life.


In the new Creation, so much of the old, as would serve in it, is generally taken in; and the

 Constitutions that will agree with the design of Grace are upheld for the most part; as were easie to manifest. Divine Inspiration did not disannul the natural Temper of the Prophets or Apostles; but they are easily observable in their Writings. Con∣version doth not destroy, but sanctifie and renew Nature. For what doth all this serve, but to shew, God does as little as may be, decline from the first Model of things, His Wisdom so deeply con∣trived?


Further, the new Creation in all things excelling the old; as the whole State of it is never antiquated by a higher Revelation, so the Laws of it are sel∣dom exceeded by any thing extraordinary; yet I acknowledge, Instances there are of Extraordina∣ries, even here also.


The Apostleship was in a manner wholly mira∣culous, yet the calling of the Apostle 
Paul
 was something higher than that; for whereas the Twelve were trained, and educated in the Discipline and Conversation of Christ; and express care in the Surrogation of one into the place of 
Judas,
 was had of such a Pre∣paration, yet the Apostle 
Paul
 was suddenly born into that high Function and Au∣thority, into which they were gradually admitted. But the reason also was very high, That there might be so great a Proof of the Power of the Gospel, as a Persecutor and Blasphemer Preaching that Faith,
 he had so no∣toriously persecuted; and on the sudden, that it might be without the Suspicion of a Confederacy.




His very Conversion was a Su∣perabundance of 
Abundant Grace:
 He was not only in a deep Humility of Expression, but in the thing it self, one of the 
chiefest of Sinners
 saved by Christ:
 His Sin had been the unpardonable Sin, had not 
Ig∣norance
 abated it.


But upon that solemn account 
he obtained mer∣cy; That in Him Jesus Christ might shew forth a Pattern of all long-suffering,
 1 Tim. 1. 
vers.
 16.


This of the Dying Malefactor, I Esteem of the same kind, and the Reason was extraordinary, as I have before observed.


I have now thus fully discoursed this Particular, because it brings me to the ultimate Resolution, I can make of this Case; that is,


A 
Death-Bed Repentance
 whenever it is true, is a Grace and Favour vouchsafed to the Soul, in which it is found, above the ordinary and general Grace that gives Repentance. For it is above these four great Rules of the Gospel, wherein also the fundamental Nature of things much conspires.


1. That God is jealous of the Glory of his Grace, and gives it by the same rule, he prescribes to us. 
To day, while it is called to day, hear his Voice.


2. God attempers his Grace to the state of Man's Soul, so as not to permit to such a long hardning, and accustomedness in Sin, those whom he intends to Convert.


3. The Ingenuity and Freedom of the Soul ne∣cessary to Repentance is not ordinarily possible, amidst the Fears and Necessity of Death.




4. 
Fruits meet for Repentance, and amendment Life, and the glorifying God upon Earth,
 by a ho∣ly Conversation are universally required. Such a Repentance then must be proportionable to 
a Mira∣cle, a Miracle in Grace.
 Now Miracles are seldom, and not but upon such Reasons as exceed the value of those Rules (at least) in that Case, wherein they are over-ruled; Reasons of greater Eminency than what daily fall out; but it is a daily Reason, that Men must either Repent or Perish. Such Repentances therefore are very rare, and doubtless when they are, God gives a lustre to the Reasons why they are; In such a measure, that Men may say, 
Here is the finger of God,
 ingraving his Wisdom upon his Work. And with such a Freedom as our Saviour expresses, 
Luke
 4.25, 26, 27.


The practical Conclusion then from hence is this, It is as presumptuous a 
Boast
 for a Man to think, He shall Repent when he comes to die,
 because the Mercy and Power of God are infinite; as for him upon the same accounts, to leap into Seas, or roll himself in Flames, without fear of danger.


Nay, It is such a kind of prophane Insolency, as some Interpreters give that of 
Lamech
 to be, 
Though I should slay a Man in my anger, or a Young-man in my Sense of an Injury:
 
Yet if
 Cain 
notwith∣standing his Murther, was secu∣red by a sevenfold Vengeance from God upon him, that should slay him, I shall be secu∣red in mine, by a Vengeance seventy sevenfold.
 Thus Men say, if ever any one for all an irreligious Life, was preserved from Hell by a Repentance at

 last, I need not fear, but I shall: Both agree in a bold claim of the Sovereign actings of God for their own safety in Sin.


4. Below all these Impossibilities; as in Nature there are great difficulties, that are not usually over∣come, and yet in things possible without a Miracle; so there are also in Grace. Our Saviour tells us, 
It is easier for a Camel to go through the eye of a needle,
 
than for a rich man to enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. His prejudices and prepossessions are so many, his temptations and intanglements are so great.
 The Prophet says, 
Can a Blackamore change his skin?
 
or a Leopard his spots? then ye that are accustomed to do evil, may learn to do well.
 All delay'd Repentances are very uneasie; some Divines observing few Conversions after the fortieth Year of Life. But of these, though all Men ought to ap∣prehend the danger; I should say, (that no Man might be insnared) as our Saviour speaks in these Cases, 
The things impossible with Men, with God are possible.


Objection
 3. But according to this state of the Case, What should a Dying Man do, that hath not yet repented? Should he expect a Miracle, or do no∣thing through despair?


Answer.
 Have ye not read, what 
David
 did when he was an hungry and had need? He adventured over Laws, and was blameless: If any Man feel the necessities of a Soul perishing, let him lay hold upon Mercy and Grace to help. There is a Faith in this Case, like the Faith of Miracles, that removes Moun∣tains, and divides Seas. 
He that can receive it, let

 him receive it,
 Mat. 19.12. But let every Man take heed how he falls into these Necessities; For mul∣titudes not having the right Faith, 
like the
 Egyptians, 
Essay this,
 and are drowned, 
Heb.
 11.29.


It is a very hard thing to distinguish between 
mi∣rum,
 and 
miraculum,
 a Wonder, and a Miracle; so is it between a saving Faith, and Repentance that may have wonderful effects, through the Conviction of a Death-Bed, and this true saving Faith, this Faith of Miracles; and for any thing I know, Eternity only can make a Man safe concerning it, and sure that he had it. Doubtless many like 
Joab
 perish, catching hold of the Horns of the Altar.


Objection
 4. But what? If Men having made a Profession of Religion, have done many things reli∣giously and soberly, and yet through the prevalency of some Lusts, it appears they have not truly repent∣ed? May not the Conversation they have had with Religion, so prepare things, that their Repentance may be dispatched in the Instants of Death?


Answer
 1. It is dreadful to consider, how the un∣happy pleas of some upon such kind of accounts reci∣ted by Christ, are also rejected by him. 
Many shall say in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not eaten and drunk in thy presence, and thou hast taught in our streets?
 
In thy Name have we cast out Devils, and in thy Name done many wonderful Works.
 
Yet he shall profess unto them, I never knew you, Depart from me ye work∣ers of iniquity.


Besides all the Doubts already insisted upon, such Men have made a Custom of deluding Religion, and have great cause to fear they should do so at last.




God also is 
so provoked by such,
 as have 
long tempt∣ed him, proved him, and seen his works, and yet err from him in their hearts, and do not know his ways, that he comes to his oath against them,
 Heb. 3.9, 10.


Answ.
 2. But lest this should discourage and suffo∣cate all motions after God, either in Life or at Death; and they seem in as good condition, that never mind Religion, as those that do: I add,


Any good thing found in Men, either in their Life or Death, though it have not the worthiness of 
Re∣pentance to Salvation,
 yet shall certainly 
have its re∣ward
 in mitigations of Punishment; which Conside∣ration fully explained at the Day of Judgment will assoyl many of this sort of Doubts concerning the ways of God. I believe those 
very early seekings
 of God, notwithstanding which, he is said 
to laugh at the Destruction
 of those, from whom they come, when they have first served the gloryings of Justice, obtain lessenings of Pain: as conquered Enemies, after they have been led in Triumph to wait on the Conqueror's Glory, may have even that Service recompensed with a more compassionate Captivity.


Answer
 3. If there have been solidity and sincerity in any religious Exercises in the time of Life, where∣by the Heart by the Grace of God is prepared for further Grace; as very often Conversion is by de∣grees: It is hopeful God may use Death, as a Sea∣son of compleating his Work; yet this is to be regi∣stred among the seldomer disposes of God, and both those Preparations, and the Complement of them is under the caution of our Saviour: 
Strive to enter in at the strait gate, for many, I say unto you, shall seek to enter, and shall not be able,
 Luke 13.24.




Objection
 5. Is it not at all times a great Folly, to promise 
a to morrow
 to Repentance, how long soever we may live after that to morrow? because we daily 
harden through the deceitfulness of sin.
 Is it not also always a curious Point, and that requires a great jea∣lousie over it, whether our Hearts are at any time sincere in returns to God? Is it not lastly, always to be feared, lest our 
to day,
 the time of Grace slip from us? Why then are the dangers placed so industriously upon this Repentance at Death?


Answer
 1. First as concerning the time of Repen∣tance, It is to be acknowledged; Every Man, that is come to the strength and fixedness of his Under∣standing, to the poize and inclination of his Will and Affections, to the habit and custom of his Life and Actions, and hath not determined for God, hath great reason to fear; lest as there is a deep print of the high hand of Nature upon his unconverted state, so there should be a Seal of Justice also, and this Doubt increases every day.


Notwithstanding this; All Doubts and Scruples, that have an appearance of insnaring and intangling the minds of Men with fears, they begin too late, are to be avoided; if it be not so late, that it is 
just now dark, and their feet stumbling upon the dark mountains;
 And these things being written especially for the 
living,
 who have in ordina∣ry probability time to lose, the dan∣ger is best placed here, where it takes them every way.


By the way of Encouragement; that the time is not yet past, while they have the spaces of Life, and of the Patience of God; which is not 
a slackness of Justice
 but 
a designed Salvation.
 By the way of

 Caution, because they know not how soon they may be cast upon a Death-Bed, and this Patience be at an end: With Dying Men the case is otherwise, who are already in the thickest of the Danger, and must work themselves out in that moment, or perish for ever; without any Injury therefore to them, 
the liv∣ing
 are thus to be warned. 
Isa.
 38.19.


Further,
 It is evident, all delays of Repentance roll down hither, however Men propose a stop; yet hither the generality come at last: So that in effect, it is all one, whether Men are disswaded from trust∣ing to a Dying Repentance, or from delaying their Repentance. For if they are given to delay; It comes to this, They repent and die together. But if a Man be afraid to venture Eternity upon his last Breath, he will repent presently.


2. For the difficulty of being sincere in Repen∣tance, I place it here, because, though every Man should by drawing the parallel lines of Delusion, and mistake upon himself, try his Repentance when ever it is; yet these Errors fall in greatest numbers upon that point of Extremity, and with least possibility of rectifying them: But seeing there are at all times such deceits in this Case, there is nothing so neces∣sary, as to repent in a clear light, and full leisure.


3. For the severity of God in denying his Grace, though I acknowledge his Indignation condemns many, who have dallied with him and their own Souls to be suck'd in again by the whir-pool of their Lusts, when they would have risen out of them; yet this Indignation is never so certainly at the height, as when Men have provoked it as long as they could: It is most miserable therefore to make our last motions within the command of such a hor∣rible

 Pit, lest they prove only the struggles of sink∣ing Men: yet this we must do, if we are not before got out of it. There is much greater hope (how bad soever their Condition may be) to them, who are yet in the hand 
of patience lifting and leading them to Repentance,
 
and do not despise it, but account it Salvation.


Objection
 6. This Doctrin does not savor enough of the Grace of the Gospel, that would have all Men come to Repentance.


Answ.
 To discourse the Severities of the Gospel, to the ends of the Gospel, is most Evangelical Dis∣course. For as the Gospel doth with all clearness declare its own Rigors, that Men might not mistake it, for a loose and careless Doctrin, and so miss the Salvation of it; so have I discovered the great ha∣zard of a Dying Repentance, that Living Men might be perswaded not to cast themselves upon it, and Dying Men excited to an Action suitable to the ex∣tremity of their Case.


And this is indeed preaching the Gospel; and to be moved 
upon it with fear, to prepare an Ark to the saving our Souls
 before the flood come,
 is as true an effect of Faith, 
as to be constrained by love to live to him,
 
that hath
 died for us. I say as true, and gives us a Title to the 
Inheritance of the Righteousness, which is by Faith,
 together with the other. For the Prudence of Faith makes us apprehensive of the Reasons of Danger, and so to Fear, even as the Gratitude of it ties us with the Obligations of Love. This is not that Fear that Love casts out, but that it self quickens,

 and is also both quickned and guarded by it: nor 
is it the bondage, but the wisdom of Fear.
 Rom. 8.15. Job 28.28.


Objection
 7. But is the general Judgment of Di∣vines thus?


Answer.
 All judicious Divines are very tender of binding the Prerogative of Grace, or clipping off the Action of Men towards God, even at this time;
 in Observation whereof I have desired to be cau∣tious herein also: But in their cau∣tions against Presumption, their Expressions amount to the utmost I have spoken.


Infer.
 1. But setting aside the whole danger of a 
Death-Bed Repentance,
 Let me now lastly thus reason, and thus expostulate; Why should we de∣sire to Repent so late? It is good to be betimes do∣ing that which is most comporting with our truest Happiness; Reconciliation with God, return to Him, his Favour, to obey Him; these are the truest Free∣dom and Peace of a Man at all times: 
Great Peace have they which love thy Law, and nothing shall offend them.
 He lives in the least pain, that lives holiest; 
I made haste therefore and delayed not to keep thy Commandments;
 I seized upon so great an Enjoyment, as soon as I could, afraid to be kept off from it too long.


To fear God and keep his Commandments is the whole duty of Man,
 Eccles. 12.13. When a Man

 considers Life, and that he hath but a Moment of it, and that therefore he would live that Moment, as much as may be he; shall find the highest of Life, the top of Life to be 
Godliness, which hath all the promi∣ses of this life, and of that which is to come,
 1 Tim. 4.8.


To pursue this World, and the Vanities of it is not only with greatest folly, and impertinency to lanch our selves in a great Vessel, the Greatness of our Affection; and with solemn Preparations, our strongest Action, into the low water, the shallow of Life; which because it cannot carry so great a bulk, increases the Toyl and Vexation, as well as enhanses the Vanity and Folly of doing nothing at so great an expense: But worse than this, it is the loading our selves with guilt under a delusion of Pleasure; that gives us secret disquiet and torment, while we are laying it on; and cannot be laid down as we please; but with more sensible and industrious Anguish, than we heap'd it upon us, I mean, the sense of our mis∣doings, and Contrition for them, so necessary 
to work Repentance.


To conclude, Seeing 
to die is the end of all Men,
 Eccles. 7.2. Repentance is to be chosen while we live, that we may die with the greatest quiet; with∣out those Agonies of Conscience, those cold Sweats, those sinking Eyes, and fainting Spirits; for he dies with most ease, that most surveys Death, and looks into all the Retirements of it before-hand; that knows it perfectly, and all its strength; such an one governs himself in it, as in a most important Action with Decency and Freedom. He is not hal'd by Death, but received by it: 
Into thy hands I commend my spirit;
 he

 lays himself orderly into the shade of Death: Where∣as so long adherence to the Pleasures of Sin gives Death a Violence. It makes Men both unwilling, and afraid to die. 
This night thy Soul shall be required.
 Life is exacted of a Sensualist, and torn from him, that is resigned by a Spiritual and Mortified Man; Good Men die in an active Sense, they know how to die; others die passively, they are forced to die.


This great difference prefers to us Dying daily, before that forcible Dying at once.


The wisdom of Dying was accounted by Heathens one of the worthy Businesses and Imployments of Life, and that required much study. Christianity gives us the true Rules of it, and they lie 
in waiting till our change come; Time is short,
 
they therefore that use
 this World, should not use it down to the Bran, sensually; but only take the advantages of it to a higher Life: Else being met on the sudden by Death, they are like those that fall off from Life with Violence, that is, Headlong; but they that live in the Sense of God, and an Eternal Condition, alight with care and ease.


It is therefore not only greatest Safety, but truest Frugality and Improvement of Life to Repent be∣times; and when we come to die, the easiest and sweetest way of dying. Not indeed a Dying, but a Translation into Immortality and Blessedness.


Inference
 2. Seeing the 
Wise,
 and 
their works are all in the hand of God;
 and that he giveth 
Wisdom
 to 
the Wise Man's Heart,
 to 
discern
 both 
Time
 and 
Judgment;
 and not to be 
taken
 as 
Fishes
 in an 
evil Net,
 and as 
Birds in a Snare,
 when it falls sudden∣ly

 upon them, having 
not known their time;
 Let us most humbly commit our selves to Him by earnest seeking his Grace in the Redeemer, in whom all his Grace is Treasur'd up; Thus by the Efficacy of his Spirit we shall 
know in our day, the things of our Peace,
 that 
they may not be for ever hid from our Eyes; we shall seek the Lord, while he is to be found,
 and 
call upon him while he is near:
 And so shall be secured from having the 
Door shut
 upon us.


Infer.
 4. This may be to us a close and determi∣native Test in this point of 
Death-Bed Repentance;
 If our Repentance be such, and so real; that it is not a 
Lamp
 of Profession only, but 
Oyl in the Ves∣sel,
 that will bear up the 
going forth to meet the Bride-Groom;
 and that we are ready, and have not our 
Oyl to Buy,
 but can 
enter
 with 
Him
 into 
the Wedding,
 before the 
Door be shut;
 This, how late soever it may seem, is 
Repentance to Salvation, and not to be Repented of,
 and shall be with 
Christ in Paradise.


Such a Repentance, when the Spirit goes out of the Body, will be before-hand entred 
into that within the Veil;
 whether the 
Fore-runner being for us entred
 Ministers in the 
Holy of Holies,
 not made with Hands; in that 
Sanctuary,
 which the 
Lord
 hath 
pitched,
 and 
not Man;
 in that 
more perfect Tabernacle; that is to say, not of this Building;
 a 
High-Priest for ever, after the Order of Melchisedec;
 a 
Saviour to the utmost, or to All Perfection.
 He fills up with the valew of his own 
Sacrifice
 and 
Intercession,
 and by the 
Power of his Endless Life,
 whatever is wanting in the Repentance, He hath given; either in re∣gard of its Valew as being so Late, and in the Re∣fuse

 of Life; or of the deep Rooting and Habituation, or of the abundant Fruits: and having 
Apprehend∣ed,
 the Spirit He enables it 
in a Moment,
 in 
the twinkling of an Eye,
 every way enables it to 
Ap∣prehend that state
 of Holiness, which agrees to the Resurrection of the Dead; first in the Life of Spi∣rits with Himself; then in the Raising the 
Body Incorruptible.
 For this appertains to his 
Melchi∣sedecian Priest-hood,
 wherein He is now; and wherein He is 
King of Righteousness, King of Peace,
 a 
Priest
 set 
down on the Right Hand of the Majesty on High.


If therefore the Repentance be such, as He, as this 
Great Prince
 hath given; There is in it a 
Com∣ing to God by Him,
 and then his 
Salvation
 is to all 
Perfection
 to it; For as going into the Heavens in his Spirit, He took in his Passage this Prey, the Dying Malefactor out of the Mouth of the Lyon; So as He pleases, out of the same Power, the 
power of the Dog,
 He rescues those Souls that he hath made dear to Himself; for He living ever, quickens whom He will, and He can by his Spirit seal this his Grace in a Moment.


For this 
Great High Priest-Hood,
 being the 
Eternal Priest-Hood of Christ;
 whatever is said of Him, as a 
High-Priest,
 must be said of Him; as this 
High-Priest,
 which He is alway, or with∣out least Intermission: And as such an 
High-Priest
 therefore it is, that He 
succours the Tempted,
 be∣ing in 
All things Tempted,
 as we are, yet with∣out Sin; now even as his Great 
Temptation
 was at 
Death;
 yet without the Sin of having defer∣red his 
strong Cries,
 and 
Supplications
 to Death, though then He was most Earnest: He can there∣fore

 Succour, and be infinitely Compassionate, even to those who are Tempted, though with, and in this Sin of having delay'd Repentance to the last. They therefore, whom He graciously moves to it, may 
come,
 even then, 
boldly to the Throne of Grace,
 and 
obtain Mercy,
 and 
find Grace,
 even in this 
just Season,
 and as it were indivisible Point of Time: 
These Things I write,
 that we may 
not Sin
 this 
Great Sin of Delaying our Re∣pentance
 to the last; But if any Man do 
so Sin,
 we have this 
Great High-Priest over the House of God;
 an 
Advocate,
 and a 
Propitiation;
 and if such a one be under his Charge, and 
given to Him
 by God, He is a 
Faithful
 and a 
Merciful High-Priest:
 He is therefore Faithful, because Mer∣ciful to make 
Reconciliation,
 and to Succour in so great a Temptation, as even This is: This He can do, because He is a Fore runner within the Veil; and by his Blood appears, as he that hath obtained Eternal Redemption, a Redemption always ready.


This is the great Security and Cordial against the Fear of Death in general, to the Saints and Servants of Christ; and if by its 
Hyper-Pleonasm,
 its exceeding Abundance, and Affluence, it may and does over-flow to some, upon whom the 
Grace of Christ Abounds,
 much more where 
Sin
 hath so much 
Abounded:
 How great is this Miracle of Grace! But who? How few are they who shall thus Live? whom God and Christ will please to make thus to Live, When it is come to this; for if they are 
Few
 that are 
Saved,
 how much 
Fewer
 are the 
Saved,
 at this last Point.

 
Strive then to enter betimes at the strait Gate;
 for many shall then 
seek; at last of any Time; to enter in, and shall not be Able.


There is too much of (especially the Death-Bed) Repentance, at is Repentance of the 
Lamp
 only, that makes a shew only; that is but only of this World, and from beneath; which is able for once to give or yield a fair and lightsome Flash at parting with the World: But because without a Treasure to Enter into an Eternal Du∣ration, That which is but a 
Lamp,
 fails in the very time of Tryal, and becomes 
a Lamp put out in obscure Darkness.
 Let your Lamps be always Shining, and your Lights Burning, such as are Able to be always so, and so to Shine even into Eternity.


Infer.
 5. From what hath been spoken con∣cerning the Great 
Mourning
 and 
Repentance,
 that shall be before the End of this state of the World; even before the 
pouring out of the Vials,
 in that Miraculous state of Things, that shall be after the 
Apostacy
 ended, and the 
Kingdom of Christ
 in Suc∣cession; I conclude there shall be a 
Death-Bed Re∣pentance
 of the World, if I may so call it; but after that, 
viz.
 in the time of the 
Vials
 we read of no 
Repenting,
 but a 
Repenting not;
 no more than in the state of 
Everlasting Punishment,
 in our ge∣neral Apprehension of that State: even as 
He that is Righteous,
 shall be 
Righteous still,
 that is, for ever 
Righteous,
 and in no possibility of for ever Falling from it; any more than from the Glory, and Happiness of Eternity, in our General No∣tion of that State.




And this strongly Argues to us the Possibili∣ties of a 
Death-Bed Repentance;
 seeing all the Prejudices that lie upon and against a 
Death-Bed-Repentance
 now, lie against that late Repentance of the World; but yet it limits and guards against the Ordinariness and Easiness of a 
Death-Bed Repentance
 in General; in as much as this late Repentance is in a miraculous state of things, 
viz.
 of the 
Spirit poured
 out; of such a Glori∣ous 
Kingdom of Christ
 come into its Successi∣on; and at the time when 
our Lord
 shall immedi∣ately 
Come in his Kingdom.


But then at the same time is cut off all possibi∣lity of Repentance after this Season of Repen∣tance; For as soon as the time of the Vials en∣ters, all possibility of Repentance is fore-doom'd, as hath been said.


Now this Late Repentance shall be ex∣cited and stirred up to by the 
Preaching
 of the 
Everlasting Gospel;
 and of this there were two great 
Symbols
 or 
Figures
 given in the very first Appearance of the Gospel, 
viz.
 the 
Apostle∣ship
 of 
Paul,
 who was, as hath been obser∣ved, 
Born out of due Time
 into that High 
Mission;
 agreeable to which is the 
Preaching of the Everlasting Gospel:
 and the 
Repentance
 of the 
Dying Malefactor,
 just as Christ was 
en∣tring into his Kingdom;
 And they are each a 
Hypotyposis,
 or 
Pattern
 for them who shall 
Hereafter Believe on Him to Life Everlasting;
 and 
Repent
 with 
the Repentance to Salva∣tion,


 never to 
be Repented of;
 and especially at that Great Futurity of the 
Coming
 and 
King∣dom of Christ,
 or the 
Coming of Christ in his Kingdom.


FINIS.










Books Printed for, and Sold by 
William Miller,
 at the 
Acorn
 in St. 
Paul
's Church-yard, where Gentlemen or others may be furnished with the best Collections, either in whole or in part, taking all the State-Matters, Church-Government, Ser∣mons, Divinity or Humanity.




In Folio.


ASSemblies Annotations, in two Vol.


Ainsworth
's Annotations.


Book of Martyrs, in three Vol.


Ben. Johnson
's Play, 
Bartholomeur
-Fair.


—His Staple of News.


—Devil is an Ass.


Boyle
's Wall-Flower.


Charlton
's Phisiologia, or a Fabrick of Science, Na∣tural upon the Hypothesis of Atoms.




Downham
 of Justification.


Extravagant Shepherd, the Anti-Romance.


Elton
 on the 
Colossians.


Gusman
's Life.


Goad
's Aphorisms and Discourses of the Bodies Ce∣lestial.


Spanish Baud.


Herbert
's Travels.


Heylin
's Cosmography.


Heywood
 of Angels.


—His Love and Revenge, a Romance.


Jones
 on the 
Hebrews.


—His Reports.


Kellet
's Miscellanies of Divinity


Lloyd
's Memoirs.


Orlando Furioso.


Paraeus
 on the 
Revelations.


Pryn
's History of King 
John.


Ramsey
's Astrology.


Reconciler of the Bible.


Violet
's Proposals.


Venn
's Military Discipline.


Ward
 on 
Mathew.


Bishop 
Wilkins
's Real Characters.


Willet
's 
Sinopsis Papismi,
 on 
Genesis
 and 
Exdous.






In Quarto.


Allin
's Scripture Chronology.


Arraignment of the whole Creature.


Barclay
's 
Argenis,
 with the Cuts.


Ball
 against 
Cam
 of Separation.


Bolton
's Works.


Belmon
's Pieces.




Baxter
's Works.


Brisket
's Discourse of a Civil Life.


Blunt
's Voyage to the Levant.


Lord 
Bacons
 Essays.


Cradock
's Knowledge and Practice.


Clark
's Life of 
William
 the Conqueror.


—Black Prince.


—Sir 
Francis Drake.


Cooper
's Heaven Opened, 
Rom.
 8.


—Life and Death.


Carpenter
's Pragmatical Jesuit, a Comedy.


Declaration of Nusances in Cities, Towns and Corporations, by Four Famous Sages of the Common Law. 
Mounson, Plowden, Manwood;
 with the Resoluti∣on of the Judges of Assize.


Dod
 on the Commandments.


—On the Sacrament.


—On the Lord's Prayer.


Dike
 on the Heart.


Digges
 Tectonicon, or the Art of Mea∣suring.


Euphues
 Anatomy of Wit.


English, Spanish,
 Pilgrim, by 
Wadsworth.


—Second Part or further Observations.


Essex
's Ghost.


English
 Villain.


Extravagant Shepherd, a Comedy.




Gullimeas
 Midwifry.


Gost, or the Woman wears the Breeches.


Heywood
's Life of 
Henry
 the Fourth.


—Life of 
Edward
 the Sixth.


Hooker
's Souls Preparation for Christ.


—Souls Humiliation.


—Souls Ingrafting in Christ.


—Souls Exaltation.


History of King 
Arthur.


History of Precious Stones.


Jackson
's Concordance to the Bible.


Killigrew
's Conspiracy, a Tragedy.


Leigh
's Saints Rest.


Mereton
's Sermon before the King. 76


Medice cura teipsum,
 or the Apothecaries Plea against Dr. 
Christopher Merret.


Du Moulin
's Moral Reflections on the Number of the Elect.


—Appeal.


—Conformity of the Discipline and Government of Independents, to that of the Ancient Primitive Christians.


—Account of the several Advances the Church of 
England
 hath made to∣wards 
Rome.


Papists Younger Brother, or the Vileness of 
Quakers
 detected.


Squier
 on the 
Thessalonians.




Struther,
 on King 
David
's Choice.


Sibbs
 his Fountain opened.


Thomas
 of 
Reddings
 History.


Tarlton
's Jests.


Fishing-Tables.


Sir 
Hen. Vane
's Retired Mans Meditations.


Voyage of the Wandring Knight.


Weemes
 Works.


Webster,
 The Judgment Set, the Books Opened.






15795.
 A Collection of State-Matters, in all Volumes, as,


ACTS of Parliament. Answers for and against one another. Advices. Apologies. Army for and against. Ap∣peals. Animadversions. Articles of War and Peace. Allarms. Accounts. Addres∣ses. Agreements. Arguments. Almanacks.


Bishops for and against. Charges of High-Treason. Considerations. Collecti∣ons of Papers. Characters. Conferences. Commissions. Cases. City Affairs. Ca∣talogues of all sorts. Decrees. Declarati∣ons. Desires. Discourses. Discoverers. Dialogues. 
England,
 several sorts 
English.
 Fights, divers. 
France.




Good Old Cause. Grand Cases. 
Great Britain.
 Hue and Cries. Histories. Im∣peachments. Instructions. 
Ireland.
 Inte∣rest. Divers Informations. Kings. Knights. Lists. Levellers. Letters. Majesties. Mes∣sages and Answers. 
Lilborne
's Tracts. Mercuries. Monarchy. Mysteries. Me∣morials. Murders. News of most sorts, as also to supply Gentlemen that want any 
New Years Gifts. Needham
's Tracts, Narratives. 
New England,
 no Protestant Plot, all the Grants, Observations, Or∣ders, Ordinances.


Parliament, for and against. Procla∣mations. Plots. Protestations. Plain 
Eng∣lish
 Proverbs. Problems. Politick Powers. Propositions. Pleas. Present States. Pro∣ceedings. Papers. Petitions. Peace. Princes. Tracts. Questions. Queries. Relations. Re∣ply. Reasons. Representations. Royalists Defence. Resolutions. Replications. Re∣monstrances.


Sedgwick. Strafford.
 States. 
Stubbs.
 Speech∣es. Tryals. Travels and Voyages. Trea∣tises. Transactions. Triumphs. Treason. Tests for and against. Votes of Parliament. 
Vox Populi, Coeli, Regis, Dei. Civitas Plebis Militis Clamantis.
 Vindication. Victories. War. Warnings.








3578.
 Church-Government and Divinity.


Articles of Religion. Visitation. 
Bag∣shaws. Burtons. Baxters. Bayly.
 Baptism for and against it. Callings. 
Cotton. Craftons. Cannes.
 Confessions of Faith several. Church Affairs. Cases. Discourses. Dia∣logues. Duties. Exhortations. Ecclesiasti∣cal Discipline. 
Edward
's Episcopacy.


Forms of Church-Government. Forms of Prayer. 
Gallaspie. Gilbert. Gerre. Gauden. Goodwins. Heylins. Hammonds. Hall.
 Inde∣pendency. Indulgencies. King 
James.


London
 Ministers, Liberty of Consci∣ence. Liturges for and against. 
Mather. Marten.
 Majesties. Non-Conformist. 
New-England. Owen
's Ordination, for and a∣gainst. 
Pearson.
 Pleas. Presbytery. Propo∣sals. 
Pagitt. Penington.
 Injunctions. Queries. Questions. Reformation. Reason. Replies. Synod of 
Dort.
 Articles. Sacrament. 
Smect∣ymnus. Smith. Sherlock. Sprat.
 Sufferage of the Divines of 
Great Britain. Stewart.
 Scandalous Ministers, 
Saltmarsh.
 Sabbath, for and against. 
Taylor
's Testimonies, Toleration, Tythes for and against. Vindications. 
Usher
's. 
Vickers. Whitfield. Wickens. Warmstry. Wilkins. Webster. Wal∣ker.
 Several Tracts.








3472. 
Sermons on most Occasions, as,
 Assizes, Artillery, Christmass, Passion, Resurre∣ction, Funerals, Feasts, Fifths 
of
 No∣vember, Consecration, 
Thirtieth of
 Ja∣nuary, 
Twenty ninth of
 May, Latine Visitation, Weddings, 
&c.


Ailsbury, Andrews, Abbot, Adams, Ashe, Arrowsmith, Alestry, Annesley, Baxter, Bur∣net, Burroughs, Bould, Beveridge, Burgess, Bonde, Bridge, Byfield, Burton, Barker, Brin∣sley, Bagnes, Bolton, Bagshaw, Benefield, Bowles, Bayley, Brockes, Barnes.


Calamy, Cleynell, Cooper, Clarke, Caryl, Case, Cotton, Carter, Carpenter, Coleman,
 Bishop of 
Chester, Cawdrys. Dod
 and 
Cla∣ver, Dells, Downame, Duglas, Duppa, Donne, Dike Durham. Estwicke, Edwards, Ellis, Elborrough,
 Bishops of 
Ely, Exeter.


Fathers, Faircloth, Featly, Fuller, Fullwood, Ford, Fawkner, Farmer, Freeman, Flower. Goodwins, Gatakers, Gouges, Gores, Gee, Glanvill, Gardiner, Griffeth, Gauden, Gell, Gregory, Geree, Gilbert, Good, Gillaspie. Homes, Holdsworth, Hering, Hodges, Hornes, Hickeringalls, Hesketh, Hughes,
 Dean 
Har∣dys, Henderson, Herle, Horton,
 Bishop of 
Hereford.




Joynes, Jackson, Jessop, Jenkins, Ja∣combs, Johnson, Jeanes, Knell, King, Ken∣tish, Kidder. Love, Lawrence, Laud, Loyd, Littleton, Lincoln, Locker, Lyford,
 Bishop of 
London, Lightfoot. Marshall, Mede, Maynard, Mocket, Maine, Meriton, Ma∣son, Moore, Meggott, Newcomen, Nevill, Owen, Preston, Palmer, Pierce, Poole, Pa∣trick, Reynolds, Reading, Ramsey, Rich∣ardson, Randol, Rutherford.


Sutton, Stoughton, Sterry, Scott, Spur∣slow,
 Bishop 
Stillingfleet, Strong, Smith, Sibbs,
 Bishop 
Sheldons
 Sermons for Fire, and Ninth of 
September; Slator, Staunton, Seaman. Taylor, Temple, Turner,
 A. Bishop 
Tillotson,
 Bishop 
Usher, Valentine, Vinnes, Vennings
 Visitation. 
Wheatley, Whitaker, Watson, Wilkinson, Woodcocks, Walker, War∣ren, Ward, White.


5693. 
Humanity of Several Sorts, as, Husbandry, Histories, Law,
 Lilly, L'Estrang, 
Physick
 and 
Surgery, Playes, Poetry, Popery for and against, Prophesies, Schools, Sea, Trade, Usury and Witchcraft Books,
 &c.


158. Catechisms of several Sorts.










Octavo Large and Small.


ARcana
 of Astrology.


Archer
's every Man his own Doct-


A New Light to Alchymy.


Ball
's Catechism.


Burrough
's Spots of the Godly and Wicked.


Bernard
's Seven Golden Candlesticks.


Boteler
's Art of War.


Bagshaw
's Rights of the Crown.


Bunworth
 of the French Disease.


Bradley
's Grounds of Christian Religion.


Bramhall
's Loyal Prophet.


Buscon
's Life.


Basire
 of Sacrilege.


Baxter
's 
Cain
 and 
Abel.


Betto
 de Ortu & Natura Sanguinis.


Beverly
's Great Soul of Man.


Countess of 
Arundel
's Secrets.


Childrens Dictionary, 
Latin
 and 
English.


Continuation of Sir 
Philip Sidney
's Arcadia.


Cotton
 on the Covenant.


Bishop 
Downam
's Abstract on Command.


Drake
 Revived.


Dent
 on the Revelations.


—of Repentance.


Drake
's Bar to Sacrament.


Daphnis
 and 
Chloe,
 a Romance.


Emblems Divine, Moral, Natural and Historical.




Enchiridion
 of Fortification.


Epicurus
's Morals.


Elborow
 on the Common-Prayer.


Ferne
 on the Romans.


Ferrarius
's Epistles.


Fort Royal of the Scriptures.


Franclin
's Orthologia.


Grace leading to Glory.


Gouge
's Word to Sinners and to Saints.


— Catechism.


Gundebert,
 a Poem.


Government of the Tongue.


How
's Delighting in God.


—Blessedness of the Righteous.


—Marks of Salvation.


Hopton
's Concordance of Years.


Holyday
's Satyr on 
Juvenal.


Hooper
 on the Commandments.


Heywood
's Dialogues and Dreams.


Hill
's Cateches or Principles of Religion.


History of the Great 
Mogul.


Hippocrates
 Aphorisms.


Herbert
's Child-bearing Women.


Hume
's Stedfast Christian: Being a Per∣swasive to Constancy in the True Pro∣testant Religion, against all Objections, Temptations, Oppositions and Sollici∣tations to the contrary.




Harrington
's Art of Law-giving.


Heath
's King 
Charles
 the Second's Glory.


— Loyal English Martyrs.


History of 
Daphnis
 and 
Chloe,
 Thorny.


Juan de Luan,
 Spanish and English Gram∣mar.


Justini Historia.


Jewel
's Golden Cabinet of Treasure.


Idol of the Clowns: Or 
Wat
 the 
Tyler.


Janua Linguarum Reserata.


Knolly
's Rudiment of the Hebrew Gram∣mar.


—Parable of the Kingdom of Heaven.


Kerhuel Eloque Rhetorick.


Lower 
de Corde.


Latin Apprentice made Free-man.


Loves Dominion.


Lucius Florus
 in English.


Lespines
 Three Treatises of Comfort to the Sick against the Fears, of Death, of the Resurrection.


Ladies Calling.


Merry Drollery Compleat: Or, a Col∣lection of Jovial Poems, Merry Songs and Witty Drolleries.


Monarchy Asserted, in a Conference at 
White-hall,
 with 
Oliver
 late Lord Pro∣tector, and a Committe of Parliament.




Moral Philosophy.


Morison
's Everlasting Gospel.


Matthews
's Missia Magnified.


Nomenclatura
 Grammar, Lat. and Engl.


Natural and Artificial Conclusions.


Nasmith
's Divine Poem.


Ovidii Epistolae,
 Lat.


— Art of Love, English.


— 
De Tristibus,
 English.


Ramsey
 of Poyson.


Ransom of Time, being Captive.


Roxana Tragaedia.


Solomon
's Proverbs, Latin and English.


Scudder
's Christians daily Walk in Holy Security and Peace.


Smith
's 
David
's Blessed Man.


— 
David
's Repentance.


School of Vertue.


Shakespeer
's Rape of 
Lucrece.


Shepheard
's Office of Constable.


Sharp
's Art of Midwisery.


Shelton
's Tachygraphy, Latin.


Syntaxis Erasmiana.


Touch-stone of Truth.


Tallei
 Rhetorick.


Times Silver Watch-Bell.


Timme
's Description of 
Jerusalem.




Templum Musicum:
 Or the Musical Sy∣nopsis.


Ward
 of Wit, Wisdorn and Folly, describ∣ing the Nature, Use and Abuse of the Tongue and Speech.






Twelves Large and Small.


ARistotle's
 Art of Rhetorick.


Bishop 
Andrews
's Pattern of Cate∣chistica. Doctrin.


Abbot
's Young Mans Warning-piece.


Ars Aulica
 or Courtiers Art.


Amesius de Conscientia.


— 
Coronis.


— 
Medulla Theologia.


— 
Bellarmine
's 
Enervatus.


Abernethie
's Dignity and Duty of a Chri∣stian.


Bolton
's Prayers,—Helps to Humiliation.


Bradshaw
 and 
Hildersham
 on the Sacra∣ment.


Barclaei Poemata.


— 
Euphorm—Argems.


Brinsley
's Rule of Life.


St. 
Bernard
's Meditations.


Lord 
Bacon
 of Life and Death.


Corbet
's Self Imployment.




Corbyn
's Call to the Unconverted.


Bishop 
Cooper
's Two Treatises.


—Dialogues between the Lord and the Soul.


Carpenter
's Wicked Politician.


Cotton
's None but Christ.


Capel
 of Temptations.


Coral and Steel their Vertue.


Cato Major
 of Old Age.


Clark
's Looking-glass for Persecutors.


—Duty of every one that intends to be Saved.


—Comfort.


—Life of Mrs. 
Clark.


—Phrases.


—
Formulae Oratoriae.


Combachii Metaphysicorum.


Dent
's Path-way to Heaven.


Doctrin of the Bible.


English and French Cook, Compleat.


— Dictionary.


Father's Blessing.


— Legacy.


Fettiplace
's Christian Monitor.


—His holy Exercises of Heavenly Graces.


—Sinners Tears.


Fuller
's good Thoughts in bad Times.


Granada
 of Prayer and Meditation.


Golden Mean.




Garden of Spiritual Meditations, or Flowers


Garbutt
 on the Resurrection.


Help to Prayer.


Hinshaw
's Meditations.


Holy Sinner.


History of the Bible.


Heavenly Academy.


Herl
's Wisdom's Tripos.


Help to Prayer. 
T. V.


History of Thieves.


Instructions for Noblemen.


Jefferies
 New-Years Gift


Ignoramus.


Countess of 
Kent
's Manual.


King
's Works in French.


Leach
's Grammar Question.


—Grain of Salt.


Lucius Servius
's Serious Pastime.


Lucius Florii Stadii.


Lessius
's Right preserving Life and Health to Old Age.


Martial
's Epigrams, 
Busbey.


Mothers Blessing.


— Legacy.


Midnight's Trance.


Moral Practice of the 
Jesuits.


Meditations Divine and Moral. 
Tuck.




Norden
's Poorman's Rest.


Pensive Mans Practice.


Oxford
 Jests.


Owen
's Epigrams.


Practice of the Faithful.


Parr
's 
Abba
 Father.


Practice of Piety.


Pink
's Tryal of a Christian Growth.


Preston
 on the Sacrament.


—Doctrin of Saints Infirmity.


Pacii Logica Rudimenta.


Pelham
's Meditations.


Petter
's Legacy to his Daughter.


The Tryal of Sheriff 
Cornish,
 in 
Folio.








18936.
 Broad Sheets.


RIch
's Pen's Dexterity in Short hand. Divine Examples of God's Severe Judgments upon Sabbath-Breakers, in their Unlawful Sports: Collected out of several Divine Subjects, 
viz. H.B.
 Mr. 
Beard,
 and the 
Practice of Piety.
 A fit Monument for our present Times.


A Brief Remembrancer,: Or, The right Improvement of 
C
ist
's Birth-day.


A Second Sheet of Old Mr. 
Dodd
's Sayings: Or, Another Posie gather'd out of Mr. 
Dodd
's Garden.




Hunting for Money, the First Part. —Match For Money. The Second Part.


Vennings
 Allarm to Unconverted Sin∣ners.


Muse
's Fire-works upon the Fifth of 
November:
 Or, The Protestant Remem∣brance


Perkins
's Whole Duty of Man.


Mr. 
Richard Baxter
's Serious Sayings concerning the great duty of Charity.


Bishop 
Hall
's Sayings concerning Tra∣vellers to prevent Popish and Debauched Principles.


Bacchanalia Coelesta:
 A Poem in praise of Punch.






21459. Other Broad Sheets, and Sheets on several Subjects.






12796—As also in Half sheets.




FINIS.













