A true account of a letter sent from Vienna, August the 23rd 1683 declaring the rasing the seige and the total overthrow of all the Turkish army / sent in a letter from an eminent English officer under the Duke of Lorraine, to his father at White-Hall.
W. B.
Approx. 7 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A27738




Wing B234



ESTC R2681





ocm 13174456




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A true account of a letter sent from Vienna, August the 23rd 1683 declaring the rasing the seige and the total overthrow of all the Turkish army / sent in a letter from an eminent English officer under the Duke of Lorraine, to his father at White-Hall.
W. B.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


London :


Printed by Geogre [sic] Croom ...,


1683.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Europe --  History --  17th century --  Sources.
Vienna (Austria) --  History --  Siege, 1683 --  Sources.
Broadsides --  England --  London --  17th century
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






B234


R2681


13174456


98341














A TRUE ACCOUNT OF A LETTER SENT FROM VIENNA 
August
 the 23d 1683.


Declaring the rasing the SEIGE and the Total Over∣throw of all the 
Turkish
 Army, sent in a Letter from an Eminent 
English
 Officer under the Duke of 
Lor∣raine,
 to his Father at 
White-Hall.


Honoured Sir,


AS I am in duty bound to give you Account of my being, as you are the Person from whom I derive it, so I ac∣knowledge my self obliged (next after God, from whose infinite Mercies I do from the bottom of my Heart con∣fess to receive my preservation and well-being) to let you, and my Friends in 
England
 understand, as well as of my self, the preservation of a great part of Christendom, from the fury, rage and threatning Ruine, of that implacable and universal Enemy the 
Turk,
 who under the Command of the Grand 
Visier,
 with a very power∣ful Army, consisting of near an Hundred and Fifty Thousand men, had a very considerable time Beseiged the Imperial City of 
Vienna;
 for the relief of which the Emperour had confederated all the Friends and Allyes he could in all the adjacent Territories, among which indeed I must say the chiefest was th
 King of 
Poland,
 whose Conduct and Valour had been sufficiently proved against the 
Turks,
 by the several considerable overthrows he hath given them, in Defence of that small Kingdom of 
Poland,
 and together with him the Dukes of 
Bavaria, Saxany,
 and others of the Princes; of the Empire had joyned as they were able to bring up their Forces so that in effect, with the Duke of 
Lorraine,
 who Commanded as General all the Im∣perial standing Forces, they had compacted a prety considerable Body with which it was advised they might, with the blessing of God, relieve this miserably distressed City. And thus we marched on to try what could be done, but the King of 
Poland
 desired First, that he might be a little ac∣quainted with the posture of the Enemy, and to that purpose drew out a considerable party of Horse, and marched on till he came within view of their Leaguer, the Army, especially of Horse, following after with all di∣ligence and Expedition, so that although the 
Turk,
 had by his Scout and Spies Intelligence, that there was a powerful Army approaching him, yet he drew leisurely out of his Trenches, not dreading, any great Opposition, especially because he was informed of a strong body of the 
Bours
 of the

Country, who had gathered to an Head not far from him, Now indeed these poor people having been so long oppressed, and driven from their Habita∣tions by the 
Turks,
 ever since they came before 
Vienna,
 hearing of the Conjunction of so many good Christian Princes, drawing towards 
Vienna
 to relieve it, thought it was now time, not to hide themselves any longer in Holes, and therefore addressing themselves to some old Commanders, who were in an equal condition with themselves, they marched on a little too hastily towards the Enemy, who supposing these the greatest Force com∣ing upon him, sent presently a party to dissolve them, which fell with such Violence upon these poor Men, but half armed, and at the First worsted them, and as is supposed destroyed above 1500 on the place; but just at the same Instant the King of 
Poland
 assisted by the Emperour himself and the others, with a full Body of resolute Horse, fell violently upon the 
Turks
 Army, who by this time had clearly left their Trenches, and fell upon them with that Conduct, valour and resolution, especially upon the 
Janisaries,
 that they were soon disordered, and in a short time became a Prey to the Swo
d, by which means the 
Turks
 main Strength and relyance was quite disa
ed, and all the rest, who were very numerous, being now bravely as∣saulted on all hands, (for by this time the 
Bours,
 who had before suffered, some little discomfeiture, by the conduct and advice of their Leaders had rallyed and made considerable Opposition) submitted to a General defeat. Tho I mention onely the conduct of that Heroick King of 
Poland,
 whose Honour can never be enough applauded, yet his Imperial Majesty was in person an Actor in this memorable Battle, as also several Princes of the Empire, whose Catalogue would swell my Letter to an unpleasing length. It is not computed to be a less Number of the 
Turks
 slain than 90 or 100000, amongst which is the Grand 
Visier
 himself, and so many of the 
Janisaries,
 that 'tis beleived there will hardly escape Twenty of them to carry the News to 
Constantinople,
 to comfort the Grand 
Signiour,
 the pursuit is so violent∣ly Prosecuted, and all the passages so warily Guarded. I cannot descend at present to any further particulars, taking advantage of this 
ssenger, whose hast is such that I cannot more nicely inform my sel
 being in a great Hurry, as most are at present here, but within few days you shall have a further Satisfaction from,


Honored Sir,
 
Your most obedient Son 
W. B.






POSTSCRIPT.


I Have been so intent in relating the Proceedings of the Armies, that I had quite omitted the condition in which we found 
Vienna,
 who th
 suffici∣ently couragious, yet was in very great distress. The last Storm the 
nemy made upon them was forced on with such Violence, that the account the people of the City gave of it, seems, in their own words very proper as they render it, that they came upon them like Mountains of Men, as they appeared, more then Armies, for the 
Turk
 forced his men on so fast, that they run over one another and those that were slain or beaten down, were but Footsteps and degrees of advantage, to mount the successive Troop to that height, that they could in a manner overlook the City-Walls, and in that manner came pouring on with such a desperation, it was very hard to withstand them. Yet by the Blessing of God, and the weak endeavors of the besei∣ged, they were repelled with a very great loss to the 
Turks,
 and 'tis thought near 5000 of the Beseiged. Which caused the Governour to send to the General, that he could not possibly withstand such another Assault, which In∣telligence hastened our Army to the relief of it, as you have in this L
ter.










LONDON,
 Printed by 
Geogre Croom
 at the 
Blew Ball
 in 
Tham
s street
 over against 
Baynards Castle.
 1683.











