An account of several travels through a great part of Germany in four journeys ... : illustrated with sculptures / by Edward Brown ...
Brown, Edward, 1644-1708.
Approx. 372 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 103 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A29825




Wing B5109



ESTC R19778





ocm 12258735




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
An account of several travels through a great part of Germany in four journeys ... : illustrated with sculptures / by Edward Brown ...
Brown, Edward, 1644-1708.
[4], 179 p., [3] folded leaves of plates : ill.  


London :


Printed for Benj. Tooke ...,


1677.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Germany --  Description and travel.
Vienna (Austria) --  Description and travel.
2013-01
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-01
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-05
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-05
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






B5109


R19778


12258735


57700














AN ACCOUNT OF Several Travels Through a great part of GERMANY: In Four Journeys.



I. From 
Norwich
 to 
Colen.


II. From 
Colen
 to 
Vienna,
 with a particular Description of that Imperial City.


III. From 
Vienna
 to 
Hamburg.


IV. From 
Colen
 to 
London.


 WHEREIN The 
Mines, Baths,
 and other 
Curiosities
 of those Parts are Treated of. 
Illustrated with Sculptures.
 By 
EDWARD BROWN
 M. D. Fellow of the College of Physicians of 
London,
 and of the 
Royal Society.


LONDON,
 Printed for 
Benj. Tooke,
 and are to be sold at the Sign of the 
Ship
 in St. 
Paul
's Church-yard. 1677.








Imprimatur,


G. 
Jane
 R. P. D. 
Hen.
 Episc. 
Lond.
 à Sacris Dom.


Sept. 26. 1676.








TO THE READER.


H
Aving given the English World an Account of some remote and seldome travelled Countries of 
Europe,
 in the Year, 1673. I remained indifferent, as to the publishing any thing more, concerning nearer, or bet∣ter known places; a great part whereof hath been delivered by some good, and observing Writers; upon which conside∣ration, though written some years since, these Papers have not come abroad, and had still remained private, had not the desires of Friends solicited this Publica∣tion, and also a Promise in my former Book oblig'd me to say something of 
Vi∣enna;
 as likewise my Journey unto that Place from 
England,
 by the 
Belgian Pro∣vinces


 and 
Germany;
 and of my Return from 
Vienna
 by 
Austria Trans-Danu∣biana, Moravia, Bohemia, Misnia, Saxonia,
 unto 
Hamburg;
 hereof I have therefore given some Account in this Work, not much engaging into the Policy and State Government of Places, which have been so largely delivered, as to make up just Volumes, but have rather set down what is Naturally, Artificially, Histori∣cally, and Topographically remarkable; together with some Customes and Occur∣rencies which might be acceptable unto the Inquisitive Reader, or serve as hints of further Enquiry, to such Persons as may hereafter Travel into those Parts.












A JOURNEY FROM NORWICH TO COLEN in 
GERMANY.


I
N the year 1668. I left the large and pleasant City of 
Norwich,
 and went by land to 
Yarmouth
 a Port Town in 
Norfolk,
 at the mouth of the River 
Hierus
 or 
Yare;
 large, fairly built and populous, very considerable for the great Herring fishing in the Au∣tumn, and the commerce it maintain∣eth in the Streights; 
Baltick, British
 and 
German
 Seas: With 
Italians, French, Spaniards, Dutch, Danes,
 and 
Swedes.
 I was here nobly entertained by that worthy and obliging person, Sr. 
Iames Iohnson,
 who also fur∣nish't me with letters of Credit, to 
Amsterdam, Franck∣fort, Venice
 and 
Vienna;
 Whereby I was readily and handsomely accommodated in all Parts where I had af∣terwards occasion to travel.




August
 the 14. about six a clock at night I went a∣board the 
Angel-Ketch
 in 
Yarmouth
 Road, a Vessel of a∣bout 55 Tuns, and we immediately set sayl for 
Rotter∣dam;
 we left St. 
Nicholas-Sand
 on the Larboard, and after that the 
Nowles,
 a new Sand, not taken notice of to be raised above twelve years before. We kept our course all night, East and by South and East South East. The Sea burned at the head of the Ship at the beginning of the night, but the Moon rising there appeared nothing but froth. In the morning we discovered 
Gravesandt
 Steeple. It is the custom upon all this coast to send out Pylot-boats continually to meet all Ships at Sea, and furnish them with Pylots to bring them through the sands, and no Ship is to refuse one: Having taken in our Pylot, we soon discovered 
Goréé
 Steeple, and then the 
Briel.
 We entred the River 
Mosa,
 or 
Maes,
 a Large and noble Stream, which arising in the Mountaines of 
Vauge,
 or 
Vogesus,
 passing by 
Verdun, Dinant, Namur, Liege, Maestricht, Ruremond, Venlo,
 and many considerable Places, doth here fall into the Ocean, we had a very pleasant passage up the River, sayling by many neat Vil∣lages, as 
Maese-sluys, Schedam, Delfshaven,
 and hand∣some rowes of Trees upon the shore, and arrived at 
Rot∣terdam
 about six at night. This is one of the three chief passages by Sea into 
Holland,
 the other being by 
Flushing
 and the 
Texell.
 The nearest cut out of 
Eng∣land
 into 
Holland
 is from 
Laistoffe
 Point to 
Grave∣sandt,
 which is 28 Leagues, and the deepest part of the Sea is about 28 Fathoms. There lay two of the grea∣test Ships in 
Holland
 at that time near 
Rotterdam,
 the 
Crane
 and the 
Wassenaer;
 this latter built in lieu of that in which Admiral 
Opdam
 was blown up, fighting against his Royal Highness the Duke of 
Yorke.
 The Heads or Keyes between which we entred the towne by water are

 handsome, and Ships of great burden are received into the middle of divers streets without difficulty, (their Channels being deep and large) the houses are well built, and the town Populous, they have an Exchange or place for Merchants to meet at, the streets are so clean that the Women goe about in white Slippers, they being paved with Bricks laid edgwise. The 
Landthuise
 hath a fair front. In the great Church the Organs, the Tower and the Monument of 
De wit,
 upon the Bridge the Statue of 
Erasmus,
 as also the house where he was born, and the Pleasure boats of the States are worth the seeing. It be∣ing then the time of their 
Kermis
 or Faire, there were playes acted and many rarities shewn, as 
Lions, Leopards,
 &c, and a great noise was made about a tall Woman to be shewn of seven foot high; but the Boor of 
Leckerkir'k,
 not far from this town, was higher. 
Parsons
 and 
Evans,
 porters to King 
Charles
 the first, did also exceed her, but I have seldom heard of any that was taller than 
Martin Wierwski
 a Polander, who at the age of forty two years was presented to the Emperour 
Maximilian
 the second, as a rarity of nature, and was full eight foot high, whose picture, as big as the life, I saw, near to the 
Franciscans
 Con∣vent at 
Vienna
 in 
Austria.


From 
Rotterdam
 I passed by 
Overschee
 to 
Delft,
 by the Powderhouse, which is a handsome one, built now at some distance from the towne to prevent the like acci∣dent which befell when the former took fire and blew up part of the town. The 
Piazza
 or market-place is a very fair one, having the front of the town house at one end of it, and the high steeple of the new Church at the o∣ther. In the old Church, 
Van-Tromps
 Tombe is very well carved upon the side of the Wall, himself lying up∣on a Canon encompassed with Arms and trophies. In the middle Isle of the new Church there is a noble

 monument, the Tombe of 
William
 of 
Nassaw
 Prince of 
Orange,
 together with his Wife and Son, Prince 
Maurice;
 his 
Statua
 is in armour with his Dog at his feet, and four Obelisks are supported by ten Marble pillars. In a house of this Town there were shewn me in a Wall the marks of the bullets shot at Prince 
William,
 who was thereby murthered 1584. and in another Church which was broad and spacious I saw a handsome Tomb for Sr. 
Charles Morgans
 Lady, and the Monument of 
Peter Hein
 the Admiral, who took the 
Spanish
 Silver∣sleet.


The 
Hague, Haga Comitis,
 the ancient place of Resi∣dence of the Counts of 
Holland,
 and now of the States ge∣neral; is about an hours-going distant from 
Delft;
 in which passage, at some distance, we had a sight of two of the Prince of 
Orange's
 houses. This place is well built; the Prince's Court handsome; The 
Piazza
 by it full of green trees; many fair Houses. The Course where the Coach∣es meet, the Pall-mall, the Wood, the Park, do much beautifie it, and the way from hence to 
Scheveling,
 from whence his Majesty returned into 
England,
 is very remark∣able, it being a streight way cut through the Sand-hills, and paved with Brick for three miles, having on each hand four or five rows of Trees, and 
Scheveling
 Steeple at the end of it.


The 
Hague
 and 
Mad rid
 in 
Spain
 are accounted the greatest Villages, or open unwalled places, in 
Europe,
 and the 
Hollanders
 have thought it more honour to be Masters of the greatest Village, than of a place which, if it were walled, would come short of many Cities; but this may prove a dangerous resolution, for formerly upon this ad∣vantage, 
Martin van Rossem,
 Captain to the Duke of 
Gueldres,
 sacked the 
Hague;
 and it was lately in the like danger when the 
French
 Forces lay at 
Utrecht
 and 
Wor∣den,


 if they had forced a passage into that part of 
Holland.


Leyden
 is three hours or three 
Dutch
 miles from the 
Hague,
 at present one of the nearest Towns in 
Europe;
 Well built, hath divers large Streets, beautified with rowes of Trees, and the water passing through the middle of them, and also well fortified after the modern way; I took notice of that Antiquity called 
Hengist
 Castle, or the 
Berg,
 said to be built by 
Hengist
 the 
Saxon,
 and went up to the top thereof: Upon the top there is now an Arbour, and a Maze or Labyrinth round it, and a Well, out of which, they told us, they took a Fish alive when the Town was almost famished during the siege, which was shewed to the Enemy over the wall, endeavouring to make their condition to appear better than it was, and to dishearten the besiegers. There are now handsome stairs from the top to the bottom, and a good house built by it, where they have their publick sales and en∣tertainments. But a nobler Antiquity lieth under the Sea, than any above ground; not far from hence near 
Calwyck
 is a square fortress called 
Arx Britannica,
 built by 
Caligu∣la;
 in the declining of the 
Roman
 Empire ruined in part by the 
Normans,
 and afterwards neglected, & over whelm∣ed by the Sea. But in some years, and great retire of the Sea, the ruines have been discovered, and many no∣ble Antiquities brought from it, some having this in∣scription 
Ex. Ger. Inf. ex Germania inferiori.
 The 
Stadthuise
 hath a fair front towards the street. In the Anatomy Schools are a very great number of 
Skeletons.
 Two legs of an 
Elephant.
 The 
Skeleton
 of a young 
Whale,
 of a 
Horse, Deer, Cow, Cat, Fox,
 and many other Animals; divers 
Skeletons
 of Men and Women, some bodies preserved with their Muscles, and one intire, the flesh, skin and all parts defended from corruption. I saw also here what Monsieur 
de Bils
 pretended towards

 the preservation of Bodies, but more accurately after∣wards at Dr. 
Ruisch
 his house at 
Amsterdam
 The Physick-garden, although but small, is well filled with Plants, where are also many other both natural, and artificiall Curio∣sities to be seen, and many sorts of 
Optick glasses.
 Near the garden are the Schools built of Brick with the 
Officina Elzeviriana
 on the top. In the Churches I saw the Monuments of many famous men. There is a Picture in the Chamber for the Burgermasters, represent∣ing the day of Judgment, drawn by 
Lucas van Leyden,
 so much esteemed that, it is said, the Emperour 
Ru∣dolphus
 would have given for it as many Ducats of Gold as would have covered it. The Table also upon which 
John
 of 
Leyden
 wrought whilst he was a Taylor, is a Curiosity, because he proved afterwards so considerable a disturber of 
Germany,
 and came to be King of the 
Anabaptists.


This City endured a hard siege by the 
Spanish
 forces, and they were reduced unto great extremity, but they saved themselves by overflowing the Country, and so forcing the Enemies to make away with great loss; and afterwards coyned a memorial-Medall with this Inscrip∣tion.


Ut Senacherib à
 Jerusalem, 
sic Hispani a Leydae noctu fu∣gerunt.
 1574.


From 
Leyden
 I came to 
Haerlem,
 a neat City, plea∣santly seated and having a Grove near it. The great Church is esteemed the largest in 
Holland,
 with a very high Lanthorn upon it. Within are many Inscriptions and Monuments, most of which are transcribed and set down in 
Gotfr. Hegenitii Itinerarium Hollandicum.
 In the Prin∣ce's house are all the Earles of 
Holland
 Painted upon the wall, and in the Garden in the Summer-house, the Pict∣ure of 
Laurentius Costerus,
 who is said to have first in∣vented the art of Printing in this Town; but others attri∣bute

 it to 
Johannes Gottenberg,
 a 
German.
 On the o∣ther side there is a Picture of a Ship with Saws, in memo∣ry of the manner how 
Damiata
 in 
Egypt
 was formerly ta∣ken by those of this Town, who, as they report, accom∣panied 
Frederick Barbarossa
 in an expedition against the 
Saracens,
 and when the men of 
Pelusium
 or 
Damiata
 had chamed up their Port, by this invention of fastning strong Saws to the keels of their Ships, they cut the chains in sunder, and so took the Town. In the rooms are very good Paintings by 
Hemskerk,
 and 
Goltzius,
 as his 
Prometheus
 and other Peeces; but 
Cornelius van Haerlem
 most delighted me, in his peeces of 
Herods
 kil∣ling the Innocent Children; his feast of the Gods, in which 
Vulcans foot
 is esteemed at a great rate; and ano∣ther Picture of a Frier and a Nun at a Collation, not inse∣riour to the rest.


The old Mens house, or an Hospital for sixty aged persons, is large and handsome; having a good Qua∣drangle and a Garden in it. The Hospital also for the sick is very cleanly kept.


Here I first saw the manner of punishing Malefact∣ours by whipping them with rods, which is more se∣vere than I imagined; they lead them to a Post upon a scaffold, their hands tyed and by a pully drawn up as high as they can be extended, and then an Iron fastned a∣bout their wast to keep them steady; in which stretched∣out posture they receive sometimes fifty or sixty stripes or more, according to the merit of their offence.


Not far from this place there is a great Water, or no∣ted Lake called 
Haerlem Meere
 about twenty miles in length, which is frozen over in hard Winters, and men swiftly travel over it by sliding, or in sleds. When 
Haer∣lem
 was besieged there was a Naval sight upon it; The 
Dutch
 having about an hundred and fifty Vessels, and the

 
Spaniards
 not many fewer. The Town was afterwards taken by Composition, but such cruelty was used by the 
Spaniards
 that they have not yet forgot it.


From 
Haerlem
 I went to 
Amsterdam,
 a City at pre∣sent for Riches, Trade, Shipping, fair Streets, and pleasant habitations, scarce yielding to any other of the World. It is seated upon the River 
Ye,
 and hath its name, as 'tis reported, from a Castle appertaining long since to the Lords of 
Amstel,
 to whom this place also belonged: At the beginning, the seat of a few fishermen; but after∣wards increasing, it received many priviledges from the Counts of 
Holland,
 and was made a Town or City by the favour of their Grants and Charters. In the year 1470. it was walled about with a Brick-wall, to defend it a∣gainst the Citizens of 
Utrecht,
 they having been in great danger to have fallen into their hands, if those of 
Utrecht
 had pursued their victories. In few Months after also, the whole Town was almost reduced to Ashes by fire, but by the increase of their Traffick they easily overcame these losses, waded through all difficulties, and rendred good services to their Counts, and received the honour afterwards from 
Maximilian
 the Emperour to have the Imperiall Crown over their Armes, which are three 
Cros∣ses
 on a 
Pale


About the year 1525. 
Gelen,
 sent from the new King of 
Munster,
 passed through 
Friesland
 and came to this City; where having made a party, and communicated his de∣sign, he resolved to surprize the Town by night, at the time of the sounding of the Bell; to which intent they were already entred the Market place, had set upon the Town house: and cut in pieces those who resisted them. When by great providence the rope to the great Bell was taken away; the Magistrates had notice of it, and caused all the streets and Avenues leading to the Market-place to

 be stopped up with Woolsacks and Hopsacks, whereby they were hindred in their design of taking the Town by night, and the next morning their number being discover∣ed to be inconsiderable, they were set upon, driven into the 
Stadthuis,
 and defeated.


Of late years this City is mightily encreased and en∣compassed with a new Wall, and fortified after the modern way. The new Streets are large and uniform: and the whole Town being in a low Marshy ground, the water is let in through all the considerable Streets. The River 
Amstel
 passeth through the City, being let in under a handsome well-contrived Bridge of Eleven Arches, which is so built as to make part of the Wall and Rampart, and is 26 paces broad. The whole Town is built upon Piles, or high Firr-trees, driven down perpendicularly into the Earth so thick together, that nothing more can be forced in between them: And by this means they build Houses in the Sea, and lay Foundations strong enough to support the greatest Buildings whatsoever, in places where no solid bottom is to be found. But they must needs be at a great expence and labour before they can lay the first Stone: And the number of Trees required to each Foundation is considerable; since for the Foun∣dation of one Tower or Steeple alone, over against the Church of St. 
Katherine,
 Mr. 
J. de Parivall,
 who wrote 
Les Delices de la Hollande,
 reckoneth that there was ram∣med into the ground a 
Forrest,
 as he calls it, of Six thou∣sand three hundred and thirty four great Trees. About this manner of work, for the fixing their Foundations, I saw them employed in divers places, particularly at the 
East-India-house,
 and at a place where a 
Lutheran
 Church was then designed to be built, So that it was not improbably said, 
That if a man could see all under this City, he could hardly behold a greater Forrest.




The 
Stadthuis
 or 
Town-house,
 is the noblest Building in all these Countries. A Pile of Freestone of an hundred and ten paces in Front, being larger than the Magnified Front of the Church of St. 
Peter
's at 
Rome,
 and eighty one paces deep, or on the sides. The Chambers in it, the Pictures and Statues, are worthy to be seen and admi∣red. The first Room on the right hand, or 
Judgment∣hall,
 where the Malefactors receive their Sentence, is a∣dorned with large Statues, hanging down their heads in mournful postures, as if concerned or grieving at what was then pronounced. The Floors are of Marble; the Roofs are richly gil't and painted. Upon the top of all stands 
Atlas
 or 
Columlus,
 holding a Globe upon his shoul∣der made of Copper, of about ten foot Diameter, which is as large perhaps as any Ball or Globe whatsoever em∣ployed to this ornamental use. That upon St. 
Peter
's at 
Rome,
 as having been in it, I judge to be less; as like∣wise that at 
Florence.
 The 
Turkish
 Ornament to the Tower of their 
Mosques,
 is three Balls one above another, and an half Moon over them, but they are less by far, at least such as I have seen: and by relation from Eye-wit∣nesses, the largest of the three noble gilded Balls at 
Mo∣rocco
 are inferiour to this. But I will say nothing more of this great building, the 
Stadthuis,
 since there is a peculiar description of it in Folio, with Cuts and Figures of the most remarkable Curiosities in it. The 
Exchange
 is fair and large, and above it are Shops: it is very well frequented, and he that cometh after twelve payeth six stivers.


Divers of their Churches are fair: In the new Church, the partition with Ballisters of Brass, and the carved Pul∣pit, are noble. In the old Church the Tomb of 
Van Hulse
 and 
Heemskerk
 are remarkable. 
Heemskerk
 did his Country great Services in their first attempts upon 
In∣dia:


 for the King of 
Spain
 having consiscated some of the 
Hollanders
 Ships, who traded to his Dominions, which were then the Staple for the 
India
 Trade. It was resolved by the permission of Prince 
Maurice
 and the States, to set out a Fleet of eight ships for the 
Indies;
 four of which were to pass by the way of the 
Atlantick
 Ocean, and the Cape of 
Good-hope:
 And the other four were to search a passage towards the Kingdoms of 
Cathay
 and 
China
 by the North-east, whereby the passage also into those parts might be expected much shorter than that which was known to the 
Spaniards.


To this intent these four last vessels sailed out of the 
Texel, June
 5. 1594. and returned in 
September,
 not be∣ing able to proceed by reason of the Ice. But upon the relation of the Voyage by 
William Barenson,
 there were two other Expeditions afterwards to 
Nova Zembla;
 in the last of which they wintered there, and 
Barenson
 lost his life. 
Heemskerk
 was the chief of the twelve which returned from that cold habitation, where none but Bears and Foxes could well endure the Winter, where he had been twice, and afterwards made two rich Voyages into 
India.
 Upon whose happy returns the 
Holland East-India
 Company was first established, and a prohibition made for any other of that Country to trade thither for the space of One and twenty years.


But to proceed to other publick Buildings in this Ci∣ty. The 
Tuchthuis
 or 
Raspelhuis,
 or House of Correction for debauched young men, such as are incorrigible and dis∣obedient to Parents or Laws, hath at the entrance of the Gate two Lions bridled, a proper Embleme, with this Inscription, 
Virtutis est domare quae cuncti pavent.
 This was formerly a Monastery belonging to the Nuns of the Order of St. 
Clare,
 and converted to this use 1595. They who are put in, are forced to work and gain their Bread

 with hard labour. I saw those who rasped 
Brazil,
 having a certain task set them every day, work so hard, that be∣ing naked and in a sweat, and the dust of the 
Brazil
 wood flying upon them, they were all over painted of a beau∣tiful red colour. Which odd sight made me call to mind the Phansie of my Lady Marchioness of 
Newcastle,
 of a Nation wherein the People were of Orange-tawny colour, and the King of Purple.


They told us that some that were committed to their charge, and not to be brought to work by blows, they placed in a large Cistern, and let the water in upon them; placing only a Pump by them for their relief, whereby they are forced to labour for their lives, and to free themselves from drowning. One we saw put into a narrow Dungeon, and kept from meat. Some are put into this House for a longer time, some for a shorter. It hath been a punishment for such as have drawn their Daggers, or offered to stab any one. And some Citizens, though able and rich enough, contrive it so, that when their Sons are extravagant and masterless, the Officers seize upon them, and carry them into this House, where they are not forced to any hard labour, but kept in till they see suf∣ficient signs of a mending their life.


This way of Correction may seem severe to many, yet is not comparable to that which is said to have been for∣merly used in 
Germany.
 Particularly at 
Colen,
 in the 
white Tower,
 at the North end of the Town, near the 
Rhine;
 where it is reported, that such Youths who were not otherwise to be reclaimed, were in a barbarous manner shut up in the 
white Tower.
 The height and thickness of the walls secured them from escaping, or from their complaints being heard. Near the top was placed out of their reach a loaf of bread, the last remedy against starving, which while their bold necessity forced

 them to reach at, they executed their last sentence upon themselves, and miserably brake their own necks.


Somewhat like the 
Raspelhuis
 is the 
Spinhuis,
 or House of Correction, for the young women who live loosely, are taken in the night, or can give no account of their living. They are put in for a certain time, according as their fault meriteth, and are bound to make lace, sew, or employ their time perpetually in some honest labour.


Those of the better sort are permitted to have Cham∣bers apart. In one large Room I saw about an hundred of them, and some very well dressed and fine, which was an unexpected sight to me, and would sure be more strange to behold in 
France
 and 
England.


The 
Weeshuis,
 or Hospital for Children, where there are Six hundred Orphans carefully looked after, and well educated.


The 
Dolhuis,
 or a House for such as are Delirious, Ma∣niacal, or Melancholical of both Sexes.


The 
Gasthuis,
 or Hospital for the Sick, being large, and hath a great Revenue.


The 
Mannenhuis,
 or Hospital for old Men, and such as are no longer able to labour towards their own sup∣port.


Besides all which, there are great Sums of mony col∣lected for the poor, so that there is not a Begger to be seen in the Streets, and upon all assignations or appoint∣ments of meeting at the Tavern, or elsewhere, and upon many other occasions, whosoever faileth to come at the exact time, forfeiteth more or less to the use of the Poor.


The 
East-India-houses
 are remarkable, and the great Stores of their Commodities, 
Cinamon, Green-ginger, Camphire, Pepper, Calecuts, Indico, &c.
 The ships are of a great burden: their House was then enlarging, although

 it was great before; and a perfect Town for all Trades within it self.


The 
Admiralteyt,
 or Admiralty where their Stores for War and Shipping are laid up, is encompassed with wa∣ter; near to it there lay then 72 Men of War. In the House we saw their Cables, Grapling irons, Pullies, Oars, Char∣ges for Powder, Lanthorns for ships, &c. At the en∣trance of the Gate hangeth up a 
Canoe
 with a man in it, dryed up, so as to be preserved from corruption, and a Paddle in his hand: he was enclosed up to the waste in the 
Canoe,
 in such sort, as the Fish-skins, which were the cover to it, being so sewed together that no water could get in, he might keep the Sea in the greatest Storms with∣out danger. The top of this House, as of divers others also in this City, is a Reservatory for Rain-water, which they have the more need of, because they have little good water hereabouts.


The fairest Streets in the Town are 
Harlem-street,
 the 
Cingel, Princes Graft, Kaisers Graft,
 and the New Build∣ings in the Island towards 
Gottenburg.
 And if they con∣tinue to build with Freestone, they will still surpass these, which, I'le assure you, are in no small measure beauti∣ful.


I saw a Globe to be sold, made by 
Vingbomes,
 between six and seven foot Diameter, valued at Sixteen thousand Guldens: The Meridian alone, being of brass, cost a thousand Guldens. The Globe is made of Copper-plates excellently well painted, with all the new Discoveries in it, as that of 
Anthony Van Dimons
 Land, found out 1642. in 42 degrees of Southern Latitude, and 170 of Longitude, those towards the Northwest of 
Japan,
 and those places both about 
N. Z.
 and also in the 
Tartarian
 Sea beyond the Streights of 
Voygats, New-Holland, West-Friesland, Cape d'Hyver, &c.
 but I have since met with a Book, which

 doth somewhat contradict this; entituled 
A Voyage into the Northern Countries by Monsieur
 Martiniere, who went in one of the three ships belonging to the Northern Company of 
Copenhagen,
 in the year 1653. and by that means had occasion to converse with the 
Norwegians, Islanders, Lap∣landers, Kilops, Borandians, Siberians, Zemblians,
 and 
Samojedes,
 who are Neighbours to the 
Tartars
 and 
Tin∣gorses,
 in his 46 Chapter he expresseth himself after this manner. There having fallen into my hands several Geo∣graphical Charts of sundry eminent and much celebrated Authors, I am much amazed to see how they are mistaken in the position of 
Zembla,
 which they place much nearer the North Pole than really it is; they divide it likewise by the Sea from 
Greenland,
 and place it far distant from it, when as indeed those two Countries are Contiguous, the Coasts of 
Greenland
 butting upon the Coasts of 
Zem∣bla,
 so as did not the great quantity of Snow, and the violence of the cold render those Borders uninhabitable, the passage would be very easie by Land from 
Greenland
 to 
Zembla,
 and from 
Zembla
 passing the 
Pater-noster
 Mountains to enter into 
Samojedia,
 from thence into 
Tar∣tary
 or 
Muscovy,
 as one pleased: But of the truth of this we shall be further informed at the return of Captain 
Wood.


I was amazed likewise to see they had described the Streight called 
Voygat,
 not above ten French Leagues in length, whereas it contains above five and thirty Dutch Leagues, which is six times as much. Again, they would perswade us that through that Streight our ships might pass into the great 
Tartarian
 Ocean, which is a mistake. And although they indeed do affirm that in the time of Prince 
Maurice
 of 
Nassau,
 a Dutch Vessel passed that way into that Ocean, yet it is a manifest errour, that Streight being bounded, as I said before, by the 
Pater-noster


 Mountains, which are half a League high, and the tops of them covered with perpetual Snow, which never dis∣solves. And of this I can give a positive testimony, ha∣ving been my self in that Streight under those Mountains in the Dog-days, which is the hottest time of the year.


From the Steeple of the Old Church of 
Amsterdam,
 I had a good prospect of the Town, and the great number of ships lying upon one side of it, like a Wood; and all the Towns about it. The Roofs of the Houses being sharp, it is a most uneven Town to be looked upon downward, as it is a handsome one to be looked on up∣ward; and is not so divertising or pleasing to the sight, as some Towns in 
France
 and 
Italy,
 which have flatter Roofs, or else are covered with a fine black Slat or Ar∣doise. Upon this, and all other Towers of the Town, a Trumpet is sounded at Midnight, and in other parts of the City at six a Clock night and morning. At eleven a clock, the time of going on to the 
Exchange,
 there is good Musick at the 
Stadthuis,
 given by the Earl of 
Lei∣cester.
 They make good Harmony also every hour in playing upon their Chimes and Bells in most Steeples. And there is a Musick-house or Entertaining-house, where any one is admitted for a Stiver, hears most sorts of Mu∣sick, seeth many good Water-works, and divers motions by Clock-work, Pictures, and other Divertisements.


During my stay at 
Amsterdam,
 I had the opportunity of seeing divers Learned Men, and Persons of Note. Dr. 
Ruish
 shewed us many Curiosities in Anatomy, as the 
Skeletons
 of young Children, and 
Faetus's
 of all A∣ges, neatly set together, and very white; the 
Lympha∣tick vessels
 so preserved, as to see the 
valves
 in them. A Liver excarnated, showing the Minute vessels, all shining and clear. The Muscles of Children dissected and kept

 from corruption: entire Bodies preserved; the face of one was very remarkable, without the least spot or change of colour or alteration of the lineaments, from what might be expected immediately after death: he had then kept it two years, and hoped it would so continue. Dr. 
Swammerdam
 shewed us divers of his Experiments which he hath set down in his Treatise 
De Respiratione;
 and a very fair Collection of Insects brought from several Countries; a 
Stagg-fly
 of a very great bigness; an 
Indi∣an Scolopendria,
 or 
Forty-foot;
 a fly called 
Ephemeron,
 and many other Curiosities. Old 
Glawber
 the Chymist shew∣ed us his Laboratory: And we received much civility from 
Blasius
 the Physick Professour who hath wrote a Comment upon 
Veslingius.


The Jews live more handsomly and splendidly here, than in any other place: Their chief Synagogue is large, adorned with Lamps of Brass and Silver. We happen∣ed to be there at the Feast of their 
New-year;
 so that their blowing of Horns, showting and singing was not omitted: Some of them understand divers Languages. I saw one 
Moses di Pas,
 a Learned young Man, and 
Orobio
 a Physician of Note. And I was sorry to see divers here to profess themselves publickly Jews, who had lived at least reputed Christians, for a long time in other places: One who had been a 
Franciscan
 Frier thirty years: and another who had been Professour some years at 
Tholouze,
 and before that Physician to the King of 
Spain. Juda Leo
 a Jew, hath taken great pains in making a Model of the Temple of 
Solomon,
 of 
Solomon
's House, the Fort of the Temple, the Tabernacle, the Israelites encamping, and other Curiosities. I was present at the Circumcisi∣on of a Child; which is performed by thrusting a Probe in between the 
Glans
 and 
Praeputium,
 and separating it, or dilating the 
Praeputium,
 so as the inward Skin may be

 drawn forward as well as the outward; then by apply∣ing an Instrument joynted like a Carpenters Rule, or a Sector, the Skin is held fast beyond the 
Glans,
 and with a broad Incision-knife, or Circumcision-knife, the Foreskin is cut off close to the Instrument; and what remains of Skin is immediately put back, the blood stop∣ped with Powders, and a Plaister applyed; the Relations and Acquaintance singing all the while, whereby the cries of the Infant are less heard.


Leaving 
Amsterdam,
 I passed by a peculiar Burial∣place of the Jews, who are not permitted to interr their dead within the Walls, by 
Overskerk, Bamburg,
 and in six or seven hours arrived at 
Utretcht,
 in a Boat drawn with Horses through artificial Cuts of Water, which is the way of Travelling in 
Holland, Utretcht,
 and divers other Provinces of the 
Low-Countries.


Utretcht
 is an ancient, large, handsome City, and chief of the Province of the same name, called formerly 
Anto∣nina,
 and afterwards 
Ultrajectum.
 Long famous for its Episcopal See founded by 
Dagobert
 King of 
France,
 who endowed it richly with Lands and Possessions: 
Willebald,
 or 
Willebrode
 an Englishman, was their first Bishop, who converted these Countries unto Christianity; and the following Bishops grew so powerful, that they were able to bring many thousand men into the field, and to wage great Wars against the Counts of 
Holland:
 Their Suc∣cession also continued for above Nine hundred years. It is now an University, founded by the States in the Year 1636. I shall not trouble you with the Names of the Pro∣fessors; the Learned Mr. 
Ray,
 whom I had the honour to meet in divers places abroad, having already caused to be printed the 
Series Lectionum
 of this and many other Universities in the 
Low-Countries, Germany,
 and 
Italy,
 in his 
Observations Topographical, Moral. Physiological,


 set forth 1673. The great Church hath a very high Tower, or three Steeples one above another: From the highest of which I had not only a good sight of the Town it self, which lay under mine Eye like a Platform, but of many others also; 
Utretcht
 being in a plain flat Country, and so well seated, and encompassed with so populous a Country, that in a days Journey a man may go from hence to any one of fifty walled Towns and Cities. The 
English
 Church here is an ancient Building; the Pillar in the middle of it, whose Foundation could not be laid but upon Bulls-hides, is much taken notice of: It was built 1099. and hath the Picture of a Bull upon it with this In∣scription;


Accipe Posteritas quod per tua saecula narres,


Taurinis cutibus fundo solidata columna est.


There is an old Library belonging to this Church, which containeth divers old Books and Manuscripts. A large Bible in six Volumes, painted and gilded after a very ancient manner: Two Idols taken (in time of war) long since in 
Germany,
 and given to this place by the Emper∣our 
Henry
 the Fourth, are worth the seeing, not so much for their neatness, as their Antiquity and odd shape: As also a Horn made out of a Tooth, said to be given at the same time. There are also three 
Unicorns
 Horns, little differing in length; the longest being five foot and an half: I drank out of one of them, the end being tipp'd with Silver, and made hollow to serve for a Cup. These were of the 
Sea-Unicorn,
 or the Horn or long wreathed Tooth of some Sea-Animal much like it, taken in the Northern Seas; of which I have seen many, both in Publick Repo∣sitories, and in Private Hands. Two such as these, the one Ten foot long, were presented not many years since

 to the King of 
Denmark,
 being taken near to 
Nova Zem∣bla;
 and I have seen some full fifteen foot long; some wreathed very thick, some not so much, and others al∣most plain: Some largest and thickest at the End near the head; others are largest at some distance from the Head: Some very sharp at the end or point, and others blunt. My honoured Father Sir 
T. B.
 hath a very fair piece of one which was formerly among the Duke of 
Curlands
 Rarities, but after that he was taken Prisoner by 
Doug∣las
 in the wars between 
Sweden
 and 
Poland,
 it came into a Merchants hands, of whom my Father had it, he hath also a piece of this sort of 
Unicorns
 Horn burnt black, out of the Emperour of 
Russia
's 
Repositorie,
 given him by Dr. 
Arthur Dee,
 who was Son to Dr. 
John Dee,
 and also Physician to the Emperour of 
Russia,
 when his Chambers were burned, in which he preserved his Curiosities. I have seen a walking Staff, a Scepter, a Scabbard for a Sword, Boxes, and other Curiosities made out of this Horn, but was never so fortunate as from experience to confirm its Medical Efficacy against Poysons, contagious Diseases, or any other evident effect of it, although I have known it given several times, and in great quanti∣ty. But of these 
Unicorns
 Horns no man sure hath so great a Collection as the King of 
Denmark;
 and his Fa∣ther had so many, that he was able to spare about an hun∣dred of them, to build a Magnificent Throne out of 
U∣nicorns
 Horns.


I had the honour to see divers Persons of Note in this City; as 
D. Cyprianus ab Oostergo,
 Dr. 
Regius, Voetius,
 the only Member then left alive of the Synod of 
Dort,
 and others; but missed the sight of the Learned 
Anna Maria Skurman,
 who was then gone out of Town, and was for∣ced to content my self with beholding her Picture, well drawn by her own hand, with this Inscription of hers un∣der it:




Ceruitis hic pict â nostros in Imagine vultus,


Si negat ars formam gratia vestra dabit.


The Painters Hall is considerable, wherein are many good pieces to be seen of several Masters: Amongst which there are good Heads by 
Van Colen
 and 
Tuart;
 Land∣skips by 
Soft-lever;
 and good Drapery, especially in some Turkish Habits, by 
Van der Mere.


This Town is also beautified with a fair Piazza or Market-place, divers long Streets, and a 
Pall-mall
 with five rows of Trees on each side. In the Church of St. 
Katherino
 is the Tomb of my Lord 
Gorge.
 Though I had seen 
France
 and 
Italy,
 and the Noble Cities thereof, which are worthily admired by all, yet I was much sur∣prized upon the first sight of the 
United Provinces,
 espe∣cially of 
Holland,
 and the adjoyning places. He that hath observed the easie accommodation for Travel there∣in, both by Land and Water, their excellent order and regular course in all things; the number of Learned men; the abundance of Varieties in all kinds; the industry, frugality, and wealth of the people; their numerous good Towns; their extraordinary neatness in their Build∣ings and Houses; their proper Laws and administration of Justice; and their incredible Number of Shipping and Boats, will think it an omission to rest in the sight of other Countries without a view of this. A Country of little extent, and soon travelled over, but so replenished with People, with good Cities, fair Towns and Villages, as not to be met with upon so little a compass of ground, except perhaps in 
China.


From 
Utrecht,
 in two hours, I came to 
Friswick,
 and passed over the River 
Leck
 to 
Viaenen,
 where there is lit∣tle remarkable besides the House and Gardens of Count

 
Brederode,
 one of the Ancient Nobility of 
Holland,
 or, according to common esteem, of the most Noble Family of all; the Family of the 
Egmonds
 being formerly esteem∣ed the Richest; the 
Wassenaer
's the most ancient, and the 
Brederodes
 the Noblest. The Mount in this Garden ser∣veth for the Rampart to the Town, and on a round 
Bull∣wark
 are divers small brass Guns planted. The Statua's of the twelve 
Caesars,
 of 
Aristotle,
 the Pyramids and Par∣titions, with the Paintings upon the wall, are the rest of its Ornaments.


From hence I passed still by Boat through the Land of 
Arkel,
 some say, derived from 
Hercules;
 belonging for∣merly to the Lords of 
Gorchom
 and 
Arkeland,
 till by 
Ma∣ry,
 daughter to the last Lord of 
Arkeland,
 it sell to 
John
 Lord of 
Egmond,
 and afterwards was sold to 
William
 the sixth Earl of 
Holland
 I arrived this night at 
Gorchom,
 a Town well seated, near three Rivers, the 
Ling,
 the 
Wael,
 and the 
Maes.
 The Market-place is fair; the 
Stadt∣huis
 is sunk somewhat on one side. The Governour hath a good House, and the Church a very high thick Steeple: the Works are of Earth; the Water-gate is handsome, and over it in Great Letters is this Inscription;


Civitas in quâ maximè Cives legibus parent, & in pace beata, & bello invicta. 1642.


The more remarkable because it made good its Inscrip∣tion in the year 1672. when 
Louis
 the Fourteenth, King of 
France,
 came down with so powerful an Army into the 
Low-Countries,
 that in that Summers Expedition he took thirty walled Towns and Cities, this Water-gate being the Limit to his Conquests this way, beyond which his Forces were not able to attempt any thing.




Leaving 
Gorcum,
 I passed by 
Worcum,
 on the other side of the River, and then by the Castle of 
Lovesteyn,
 strongly seated and well fortified; and therefore hath been often made use of to secure Persons of Note. Sir 
George Ascue
 of late years suffered his Imprisonment here∣in, and formerly 
Barnevelt;
 upon which occasion this Castle hath been much spoken of, and hath given the name to that whole party who sided with him, well known at pre∣sent by the name of the 
Lovestein
 Faction. Passing on fur∣ther up the 
Maes,
 I left 
Proye
 on the left hand, and 
Huesden
 on the right, and the next day morning arrived at the 
Bosch.


Hertogen Bosch, Sylva Ducis, Boscum Ducis, Boisle∣duc, Bolduc,
 takes its name from a Wood belonging to the Dukes of 
Brabant:
 It is a strong pleasant City, seated upon the River 
Disa
 or 
Deese,
 which entreth the 
Maes,
 about two Leagues below it; one of the greatest Cities in 
Brabant;
 and for its strength, for which 'tis be∣holden both to Nature and to Art, the States of the 
Uni∣ted Provinces
 possess not any one more considerable, and is a very good Frontier against all Enemies on this side: It is encompassed on all sides with Fenns and Marshy Grounds. The 
Avenues
 to it are by narrow Causies, made turning and winding, to be commanded in all pla∣ces by one or other of the six Sconces or Forts built at some distance without the Town for its greater Security. Besides which, the Hollanders having some reason to be jealous of the Inhabitants, whose affections might incline them towards the neighbouring Princes, of whose Reli∣gion most of them are, they have built a Citadel within the Town, a Briel or pair of Spectacles to look more ac∣curately into their Affairs. It is a handsom regular Fort of five Bastions, each Curtain is 84 ordinary paces long; the Faces of each Bastion 63; and the Flank or Neck 24. There is a handsome House of Stone for the Centry

 at the point of each Bastion, and the middle of each Cur∣tain, every one of which cost Seven hundred Guldens. Here is also a Field Canon of an extraordinary length, said to be able to fling a Bullet almost as far as 
Bommel.
 The Piazza in this Town is Triangular.


This City was made an Episcopal See, 1559. The Ca∣thedral is Dedicated to St. 
John.
 In the Quire are paint∣ed the Arms of many of the Knights of the 
Golden Fleece.
 And over the upper Stalls or Seats, an Inscription in 
French,
 which contains the History of the first Instituti∣on, and Model of this Order, by the most High and mighty Prince 
Philip
 the Good, Duke of 
Burgundy, Lo∣rain,
 and 
Brabant:
 Besides divers Statua's and Pillars. There are also several Monuments of the Bishops of 
Bosche
 and others.


This Town was taken from the King of 
Spain
 by the Forces of the Confederate Estates, in the year 1628. af∣ter a long and chargeable Siege; in which the little Sconce, one of the Forts towards the South, did excel∣lent Service.


Divers of the Nuns were still alive in this Town, but at 
Utretcht
 they were all dead.


From the 
Bosche
 we travelled through a plain Country, somewhat Sandy, to 
Breda
 upon the River 
Merck:
 A place very considerable, pleasantly seated, and well∣fortified. It hath formerly had more Outworks than at present: For they have taken away the Crown-works, and left only the Half-moons and Horn-works, and Con∣serves or Contregards about the Half-moons. There is a large Ditch of Water round the Counterscarp, and a small Ravelin between each Bastion, joyned to the Ram∣part within side of the Ditch. There is also a double Haye or Quickset-hedge almost quite round the Town, be∣sides Palisados. The 
Parapet
 is very thick, and strengthned

 with a row of Elms, and seconded with another row at three or four yards distance, round the Town; the bo∣dies of the 
Bastions
 are sunk down or h
llowed away, and filled with a thicket of Elms. The Half Moons are the like without the Town, and after all, a brest-work between the Town and the 
Bastions;
 and Cavaliers upon several places of the Rampart.


This Town belongeth unto the Prince of 
Orange,
 un∣to whom it hath descended by the right of the house of 
Nassaw,
 by the Marriage of 
Engelbert
 the seventh Earle of that house, with 
Mary
 daughter and Heir of 
Philip
 the last Lord thereof, about the year 1400. It was taken by the 
Spaniards
 in the beginning of the Low Country Wars, and was afterwards Surprised by the 
Dutch,
 by a stratagem performed by eighty men hid in a Boat covered over with Turf, and so let into the Castle. In the year 1625. the 
Spaniards
 took it again, as by In∣scriptions and 
Chronograms
 are to be seen in divers places, as that over the door of the Church.


a MbrosI spIno Lae VIg ILantIa bre Da e XpUgnata.


As also this,


PhILIppUs hIspanlae reX gUbernante Isabe LLa CLarâ EUgenIa Infanta, obsIDente spInoLa qUaternIs regI∣bus frUstra ConIUrantIbus breDa VIGtor potItur.


Afterwards it was besieged and taken by 
Frederick Hen∣drick
 Prince of 
Orange,
 as an Inscription at the Westend of the Church sets it down.


Auxilio solius Dei, Auspiciis confederati Belgij, Ferdinan∣do Austriaco Hispaniae Infanta cum ingenti exercitu frustra




succurrente, a Iulij 23 obsessamad 19 Augusti oppugnatam. Fredericus Henricus Princeps araUsIUs bre DaMe eX∣pUgnat seXta OCtobris.


The Church is fair and hath many good Monuments, as 
Renesse's
 Tombe; a Monument for Sir 
Thomas Alesbury
 set up by the Lord Chancellor 
Hide;
 an old Tombe e∣rected 1349. for 
John
 Lord of 
Lech
 and 
Breda;
 the Tombe of Grave 
Engleberg Van Nassaw
 and his family on the side of the Wall; the 
Here Van Horne
 and his three Wives; but the Principal Monument is that of Grave 
Hendrick Van Nassaw,
 whose Armour is support∣ed by four Warriers upon their Knees; he built the Ca∣stle of 
Breda,
 which is at present both strong and beau∣tiful: I observed the place where the Turfe-Boat came in, and where the Prince came over into the Town. The Gallery, the Garden, the Walks, and Dials are worth the seeing, the Town in handsomely built, populous, and generally hath a great Garrison in it.


Leaving 
Breda
 we soon came by Land to St. 
Gertruyden∣berg
 the last Town on the North of 
Brabant,
 where it joyneth to the Province of 
Holland,
 a small place, but a good Town for fishing, lying upon a Hill near the great broad Water called 
de Waert,
 made by the falling of the 
Maes
 and many other Rivers into it. This Town is fortified and Garrisoned. The Church and Steeple have been Large and fair, and the ruines of the latter are observable, in regard that this Steeple was shot down by a Stratagem of the Prince of 
Orange,
 while the Governour and chief of the Town were upon it, to observe a false a∣larm in the Prince's Camp, and so lost themselves and the Town. We Passed from hence over a large Water which hath overflow'd a great part of the Country upon one side of it, no less than seventy two Parishes being

 drowned at once, the Village of 
Ramsdun
 onely escaping, and so by an old Tower called the house of 
Murney,
 to the 
Maiden
 Town of 
Dort,
 or 
Dordrecht.


Dordracum,
 so called by some from 
Duri
 or 
Dureti forum,
 at present 
Dort,
 being seated in the Waves of those great Lakes made by the 
Maes
 and 
Waal,
 is not unaptly from its situation compared to a Swans nest, it is reckoned the first and chief Town of South 
Holland,
 in respect of its antiquity, as having served to secure 
Odo∣cer
 in his retreat almost eight hundred years since, and also in respect of its Priviledges, in having the Mint here, and being the Staple for Rhenish wine and English Cloath.


In this Town are many fair houses and pleasant Gar∣dens. The great Church is large, the Steeple 312 steps high; the top thereof being made of four large Dy∣alls. There is also an Exchange or Place for Merchants to meet. The 
English
 have two Churches, and the 
French
 one. The Key or Head to the water side is handsome, and the Country about very pleasant; we saw the Chamber wherein the 
Synod
 of 
Dort
 was assembled 1611. a large fair room; and took a collation in the same house, in a high turret overlooking the Town and Coun∣try: Our seats Moving round about the Table continu∣ally; so as the diversity of the prospect made it more delightful. The great Vessels round-bellied, which trade between 
Coln
 and this City seemed strange; as also the long 
Luyck
 or 
Liege
-boats; and the number of Peo∣ple that continually live in them. At my going away from hence I embarked in a Vessel bound for the Island of 
Walcheren,
 sayling by most of the Islands of 
Zealand
 and in sight of divers good Towns. as 
Willemstadt, Zirick∣ze, Tergoes;
 observing in some places where the Sea had overflow'd the Land; and in others where the Industry of

 the Inhabitants still keep it out, by keeping up their banks, and thatching the Shoars of the Sea. We Land∣ed at 
Ter-Vere,
 where there is a good Haven and Harbour for Ships, the Walls were built in the year 1357, to∣wards the Sea are round towers. The 
Piazza
 is long. The 
Scotch
 have had a Factory here for above two hun∣dred years, and the 
Marquiss
 of this Place did formerly make one of the three States, by which 
Zealand
 was Go∣verned. The Abbot of St 
Nicholas
 in 
Middleburg
 re∣presenting the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, and the Towns of 
Middleburg, Zirickzee, Ter-Veer, Flussing, Tolen, Martins-dike, Romerswal
 and 
Tergoes,
 supplying the Third: over against this place where a Town had former∣ly sunk into the Sea, the Steeple only remaineth to be seen. From hence to 
Middleburg
 the way is Paved with Brick; as it is also from Town to Town in most places of 
Holland.


Middleburg
 is the chief Town in the Island 
Walachria,
 seated almost in the middle of it, being well built, large, rich, and Populous, it is the fourth Port for the 
East-India
 trade: hath a large, broad Water within the Town, and a streight cut through the Land to carry Vessels out to Sea, the whole is very well Fortified, the Officers here are chosen by Strangers or Foreigners, the Churches are many and remarkable, the new Church is of an eight∣square figure with a 
Cupola,
 the Tower of the old great Church very high, the 
Stadthuise
 with the old statuas, a∣bout it, the round 
Piazza,
 and many private buildings are Considerable, and the whole Country about it is fruitful; either divided into Gardens and Orchards, or Planted with 
Madder, Pompions,
 or Grain and Fruits. The 
Zealanders
 are generally addicted to the interest of the Prince of 
Orange,
 and great Lovers of his Person. I found them not a little delighted that the Prince had been

 with them some days before, and was made 
Premier
 Noble, or chief of the States of 
Zealand;
 which was chiefly brought about, as I was informed, by 
Pensioner Hubert, Le Sage, Duvelaer
 and 
Vriebergen,
 formerly no great friends to the Prince, especially 
Vriebergen,
 who was the most earnest of any to bring him in, in despite to the 
Hollanders,
 for General 
Worts
 his sake, who be∣ing set over the 
Zealand
 forces by those of 
Amsterdam,
 lately affronted 
Vriebergens
 Son who was a Colonel, at the head of his Regiment. I was entertained at 
Middle∣burg
 very courteously by Mr. 
Hill
 the Minister, who also sent his Kinsman with me to 
Flussing. Flissinga
 or 
Vlus∣sing,
 hath Stone-Wals towards the Sea, and Mudworks towards the Land; a very good Port, and a strong Town; the waves of the Sea washing its walls; it was one of the first Towns which the Low Country men took from the 
Spaniards,
 in the year 1572, and was made Cautionary to Queen 
Elizabeth
 together with 
Rammakins
 and the 
Briel.
 1585. The renowned Sr. 
Philip Sidney
 be∣ing the first Governour of it, and surrendred by King 
James
 to the United states. 1616. The Sea shoar here a∣bouts is not only faced with rushes, flaggs and reeds staked down as high as the Tide usually ariseth, but it is also strongly bound over with Osiers and hurdles and great Posts driven in to break the force of the Water, and secure the Piles which make the Harbour or Havens mouth. The Town-house is handsomely built, standing in the 
Piazza,
 having three rowes of Pillars in the Front one above another; the Lower 
Dorick,
 the second 
Io∣nick,
 and the highest 
Corinthian;
 and on the top there is a Gallery or Balcony to Discover ships at Sea. This is the third Port for the East-
India
 trade; 
Amsterdam
 and 
Rotterdam
 being the first and second: here lay many great ships in the middle of the Town, and considerable

 men of War, as the St. 
Patrick,
 and the Admiral of 
Zealand:
 we saw them also building of divers ships, and when the Prince was here, they Lanched one to diver∣tise him, to which he gave the name of William 
Frederick,
 they also presented him with a Golden Bottle; that be∣ing the Arms of the Town: the Prince Landed at 
Ar∣muyden
 and went from thence to 
Tergoes,
 and thence to 
Breda;
 they reported his entertainment in 
Walcheren
 a∣mounted to fifty thousand 
Guldens.
 The Women in this Island wear most of them red Cloth and straw-Hats, if a Man dies a great bundle of Straw is layd at the Door, if a Boy, a little one, if a Woman, the straw lies on the left side of the Door: when any Woman is brought to bed; they fasten a piece of Lawne to the ring and rapper of the Door; and make it up into a little baby or puppet finely pleated, and in such manner, as to distinguish of what sex the young Child is.


Returning to 
Middleburg
 by Land I observed there was a row of Trees round the Town between the moat and rampart, where ordinarily there is only a breast∣worke or a hedge, and embarked at 
Middleburg
 again, and passed down the River by the fort 
Rammakins,
 and so for the 
Schelde,
 Sayling up that noble River till we had passed the Fort 
Frederick Henrick
 and came to 
Lillo;
 where we stayd till the Vessell was searched. Over a∣gainst 
Lillo,
 lyeth another Fortification, called 
Lifgens hock;
 the Fort 
de la croix
 is the last that belongeth to the 
Hollanders,
 and lieth on the North side of the River; the Banks are cut nigh to it, and the Country drowned for its greater security. The 
Spanish
 Forts hereabouts to defend the Frontiers, are the 
Philip,
 the 
Pearl,
 and the 
Maria.


The River 
Scaldis
 or 
Scheld
 mentioned by 
Caesar
 is a gallant River, affording plenty of fish, and convenience

 for Navigation and passage unto several noted places: It ariseth in the Country of 
Vermandois,
 passing to 
Cambray, Valencienne,
 so to 
Tournay
 or 
Dornick, Oudenard, Gaunt, Rupelmond
 and 
Antwerp,
 and pursuing its course is afterwards divided into two streams, whereof the Southern is called the 
Hont;
 the other runs by 
Bergen ap Zome,
 and so into the Sea between the Isles of 
Zea∣land.


The next day morning we went on our Voyage still up the 
Scaldis
 or 
Schelde,
 and arrived at 
Antwerp.
 Where I had the good fortune to see Mr. 
Hartop;
 one very well known in all those parts and of high esteem for his perso∣nal strength and valour. A Gentleman also so courteous that he makes it his business to oblige strangers; he shew'd me many curiosities in this City, carrying me with him in his Coach.


The Walls of 
Antwerp
 are very large, faced with Brick and freestone, having divrs rows of Trees upon them, broad walks, and conveniences for the Coaches, to make their tour upon. The 
Bastions
 are not so large as generally they build now a dayes, yet after the modern way. The Ditch is very broad and deep, the Country about it, all Gardens. The 
Cittadel
 is a regu∣lar fortification of five 
Bastions,
 wherein lies alwayes a Garrison of 
Spanish
 Soldiers: upon every curtain there are two mounts or Cavaliers; and between them below, a row of building or lodgings for the Soldiers; the ears of the 
Bastions
 are cut down, and 
Casamates
 made, and Palisados set round upon the 
Esplanade;
 the Walls are lined with excellent Brick and stone, nor is there any where a more regular beautifull Fortification of five 
Ba∣stions
 that is finished: it commands the City, the Ri∣ver and the Country: besides this 
Cittadel
 there is ano∣ther Fort within the Town near the 
Scheld,
 to command

 the River, having eight Guns in it, called St. 
Laurence
 Fort.


The Exchange is handsome, supported by 36 Pillars e∣very one of a different carving, four streets lead unto it, so that standing in the middle we see through every one of them. The 
Meer
 or Largest street is considerable for the water running under it, and for the meeting of Coaches upon it every evening to make their tour through the streets of the City, which are clean and beautiful; at one end of it stands a large Brass Crucifix upon a Pedestall of Marble. The 
Jesuites
 Church goeth far beyond any of that bigness that I have seen out of 
Italy.
 The Front is noble, with the Statua of 
Ignatius Loyola
 on the top, A great part of the inside of the Roof was painted by 
Rubens,
 and some of it by 
Van Dyke:
 there be many Excellent peeces of flowers done by 
Segers
 a 
Iesuite;
 the Carving and gilding of all the works is exquisite: The Library of the Colledge is great, & the Books disposed handsome∣ly into four Chambers; the Founder hereof was 
God∣fridus Houtappel,
 whose Monument, together with his Wife and Children are worth the seeing, in a Chappel on the South side of this Church. In the Church of the 
Carmelites
 is a large Silver Statua of our Lady, and models of Cityes in stone. 
Onsar Lieven Vrowen Kerck,
 or 
the Church of our blessed Lady
 is the greatest in the City; and the Steeple one of the fairest in the World, five hundred foot high: one of their feet is eleven of our inches; so as it is 459 of our feet. In this Church there is much Carving, and a great number of Pictures highly esteemed, among which one piece is much taken notice of, drawn by 
Quintin,
 at first a Smith, who made the neat Iron work of the Well before the West door; and afterwards to obtain his Mistress, he proved a famous Painter; his head is set up in Stone at the entrance of

 the Church, with an inscription and this verse.


Connubialis amor de Mulcibre fecit Apellem.


I was at the famous Abby of St. 
Michael,
 pleasantly seated upon the 
Scheld;
 where among other curiosities, I saw a glass, which represented the Pictures of our 
Sa∣viour
 and the Virgin 
Mary,
 collected from the Putting together of divers other heads: One was represented from a Picture wherein were thirteen faces, and another from one of twelve; over the blessed Virgin was this In∣scription.


Diva nitet variis expressa Maria Figuris.


The Countess of 
Brabants
 Tombe, who was drowned, and her 
Statua,
 as also the Monument of 
Ortelius,
 are here shewn. 
Macarius Simoneus
 was then Abbot, the Monks 63. Near unto the Wharf-gate is the Church of St. 
Wal∣burgis
 an English Saint, who contributed much towards the conversion of these Countries.


The Town-house is fair, the House built for the East∣country Merchants is very stately and large, but runneth now to ruine, in this I saw among other curiosities, divers strange Musical instruments, which at present are not understood, or at least not made use of: The 
Hessen
 house hath been also formerly considerable. The water which they make use of in Brewing, is brought by an Aqueduct from 
Herentall
 about thirty miles distant from hence; and is conveyed into the Town by a large Chan∣nel, peculiarly walled in by it self where it passeth the Ditch; in this City are many good Collections of Pict∣ures both Ancient and Modern, and excellent Mini∣ature or Limning by 
Gonsol,
 one fine piece, which I

 saw was peculiarly remarkable, it being the work of 35 several Masters.


From 
Antwerp,
 I passed to 
Brussels
 by water, chang∣ing Boats five times, and going through divers locks, by reason that the Country is so much higher about 
Brussels,
 and the water above two hundred foot lower at 
Antwerp.
 At 
Fontaine
 a league and half from 
Brussels,
 three Rivers cross one another: one of them being carried over a bridg. The 
Piazza
 of 
Brussels
 is fair. and oblong in fi∣gure upon one of the longest sides stands the Town∣house, and over against it the Kings-house, where upon a Scaffold hanged with Velvet, Count, 
Fgmond
 and 
Horne
 were beheaded, the whole 
Piazza
 being hanged with Black Cloth. Upon the top of the Town-house, stand: St. 
Michael
 the Patron of the City in Brass, Count 
Marsins
 house formerly belonging to the Prince of 
Orange;
 hath a fair Court, and overlooks a good part of the City, but a quarter of it is ruined by Lightning. The Thunder bolt or Stone which they affirm to have effected it, is bigger than two Mens heads, and hangs up upon the door at the entrance. The 
Iesuites
 Church is handsome, and in it the fair white Tower is beautifully gilded at the top. The 
Carmelites
 Church hath a noble Altar, and near unto the Church is the 
Statua
 of a pissing boy, which is a con∣tinual Conduit. The Armory was well furnished, as we were informed, before the Governours of the low Coun∣tries sold the Arms; and 
Cassel Roderigo
 the Governour left it very bare. There remains the Armour of 
Charls
 the fifth, of Duke 
Albert,
 of the Prince of 
Parma, Er∣nestus,
 and of the Duke 
d'Alva
 and of the Duke 
Alberts
 horse who being shot saved his Master, and died the same day twelve month; Spears for the hunting the wild Boar, one with two Pistols; The Armour of Cardinal 
Infan∣te,
 and of an 
Indian
 King; A 
Polish
 musket which carri∣eth

 six hundred paces; 
Charles
 the Fifth's Sword for the making the Knights of the 
Golden Fleece,
 and 
Henry
 the Fourth's Sword sent to declare war; Good Bucklers for Defence, and some well wrought; especially one with the Battel of 
Pyrrhus
 and his Elephants; and Banners ta∣ken with 
Francis
 King of 
France,
 at the Battel of 
Pa∣via.


Somewhat like 
Godfrey
 of 
Bouillons
 shooting the three Pigeons near the Tower of 
David,
 is the shot which 
Infanta Isabella
 made, when with an Arrow she killed a Bird, in memory whereof, a Bird pierced with an Ar∣row is set upon the top of a Tower in the Count, which is large; and if the New Buildings and Design were con∣tinued, it would be very handsome. Before the Court stand five brass Statues. The Park is pleasant, with Trees set in order, and adorned with Grotto's, Foun∣tains, and Water-works, which come very near the 
Ita∣lian;
 one piece somewhat imitating 
Frascati,
 in which all Musical Instruments are imitated, and a perpetual mo∣tion attempted: and on the Front of the Buildings stand the 
Caesars
 head. But the Eccho is most remarkable; which may perfectly be distinguished to ten or twelve Replies. The greatest Church is that of St. 
Gudula;
 in which is her Statua, the Devil striving to blow out the Light of her Lanthorn. Two Chappels therein are re∣markable; the one built by 
Leopoldus,
 very fair on the outside: the other towards the North, hath been visited by five Kings, in which is the Host which bled being stabbed by the Jews. In the 
Dominican
 Church is the Monument of the Duke of 
Cleve
 and his Dutchess, in 
Go∣rinthian
 brass. But for a New Church that of the 
Be∣gennes,
 or Pious Maids, is very considerable; there be∣ing Eight hundred of them in this City, who have a par∣ticular place allotted to them, where they have built this

 milk white Church. The Plague was much in this place at that time, three hundred Houses being shut up, and a Garland placed on the doors, in the middle of which † was written IHS. I saw the 
English
 Nunnery, and o∣ther considerable Buildings. And after I had refreshed my self at the Fish-Tavern, which is worth the seeing, especially for two Rooms in it, furnished from top to bottom with very good Pictures, I returned to 
Ant∣werp.


Octob.
 4. I travelled through an open Country, and lodged at 
Molin bruslè.
 The 
Spanish
 Souldiers met us upon the Road this day, some of them well mounted and armed, and begged of us, and were well satisfied with a small Benevolence. The next day we entred the Country of 
Liege,
 and passed great Heaths, and on the Sixth, in the morning, arrived at 
Maestreicht.


Trajectum ad Mosam,
 or 
Maestreicht,
 is a strong Town, seated upon the 
Maes,
 four Leagues below 
Liege.
 The Out-works are very considerable; the Wall is old. To∣wards the South-east lyeth a Hill, which ariseth gently, and overlooks part of the Town. Under this Hill is one of the noblest Quarries of Stone in the World. To se∣cure the Town from the disadvantage it might receive from this Hill, there was formerly a Fort built upon it, but it hath been long since slighted; and they have made out an Horn-work within Musket-shot of it, and the Ba∣stion answering to it is made very high, to cover the Town. On the other side of the River standeth 
Wicke,
 very well fortified also, and rather stronger than 
Mae∣streicht,
 into which they might retire if the Town should be taken by Storm, it being united to 
Maestreicht
 by a handsome Bridge over the 
Maes,
 consisting of Nine Ar∣ches. All about 
Wicke
 the Country is flat: there are

 many Inhabitants in it, and a handsome Glass house.


The private Houses of 
Maestreicht
 are generally cove∣red with a black Slat, or Ardoise, otherwise not very beautiful. The Town house is fair, seated in one of the 
Piazza's,
 built of white Stone; it hath Nine large Windowes in a row on each side, and within is very well painted by 
Theodorus van der Schuer,
 who was Painter to the Queen of 
Sweden.
 In another 
Piaz∣za
 is a Fountain, rows of Trees, and the great Church. This Town was besieged and taken from the King of 
Spain
 by the Confederate States, in the year 1632.


October
 the Seventh I dined at 
Gallop,
 a small place, and came that night to 
Aken, Aix la Chapelle,
 or 
Aquis∣grane,
 an ancient noble City, the Inhabitants Courteous, and much frequented by reason of its hot Baths, of which I shall speak more particularly in my Journey from 
Colen
 to 
London.
 Leaving 
Aken
 I travelled to∣wards 
Juliers
 or 
Gulick,
 but it being late before we arrived, the Gates were shut up, so as we went on∣ly under the Walls, leaving it on our right hand. Near unto 
Gulick
 runneth a shallow swift River, called the 
Roer.
 At the Mouth of it, where it fal∣leth into the 
Maes,
 is seated a considerable Town, called 
Roermonde,
 through which I passed in the year 1673. when Sir 
Lionel Jenkins
 and Sir 
Joseph Wil∣liamson
 were sent Plenipotentiaries to 
Cologne,
 in our Journey from 
Antwerp
 to that City. We then pas∣sed the Country of 
Brabant,
 by the way of 
Thornhaut, Weert, Roermonde,
 and the next Night passing by 
Erke∣lens,
 lodged at 
Castro,
 or 
Caster,
 in 
Gulickland,
 where there are still the remains of an old Castle, formerly built for the Defence of that part of the Country. 
Roermonde
 is seated upon a rising Hill, near the River

 
Roer,
 hath a Colledge of Jesuits in it, a handsome 
Pi∣azza,
 and an old Abby with divers Monuments very ancient, founded by 
Gerard
 Earl of 
Guelderland.
 From this Town their Excellencies were saluted with the Guns from their Walls, charged with Bullets. The 
Spaniards
 in most places striving to express the highest of their respects.


From 
Gulick
 I travelled to 
Cologne,
 where I arrived 
October
 the 
10th,
 1668.








A JOURNEY FROM COLEN TO VIENNA.


C
Olen, Coln,
 or 
Colonia Agrippina,
 was anciently the Capital City of the 
Ubii,
 a people who were at first possessed of the Countries now called 
Berg
 and 
March,
 but being over run by the 
Ger∣mans
 next to them, 
Agrippa,
 Lieutenant of 
Gallia,
 received them into protecti∣on, and placed them upon this side of the 
Roman
 shoar of the 
Rhine,
 where they built this place, and called it 
Oppidum Ubiorum,
 and the 
Romans
 seating themselves here for the defence of the Country, in Honour of 
A∣grippina,
 daughter to 
Germanicus,
 and wife to 
Claudius,
 whose Birth-place it was, gave it afterwards the Name of 
Colonia Agrippina.
 It is at present one of the largest, if

 not the greatest, of any City in 
Germany,
 secured to∣wards the Land by a high Wall, and two deep Trenches, and towards the Water by a Wall of Stone. The 
Rhine
 renders it delightful upon one side, and divers rows of Trees enclose the Town towards the Land. They have some Out-works, as Half-moons and Ravelins, but their best security is in the great number of men which they are able to raise within themselves. Many of the Streets are broad, and paved with broad stones.


It received the Christian Faith very early, and 
Ma∣ternus
 was their Bishop above 1350 years since, who subscribed, amongst others, to the Council of 
Arles.
 They have a great number of Churches, and well endowed, which take up a great part of the Town; The Prebends and Canons Houses having in many places Vineyards, and large Gardens adjoyning. Towards the North end of the Town, the Church of St. 
Kunibald
 is considerable. The Convent of the 
Dominicans
 is fair, and newly built, with a Garden in the Court, and all the Chambers uniform. The Jesuites Church is well built and stored with rich Copes, Altar-pieces, and other Ornaments. In the Church of St. 
Gereon,
 a Saint of great name here, marty∣red about 
Colen
 in the time of 
Maximianus,
 are about a thousand Saints heads, and on each side of the Altar a large Statua, whereof one is of a Moor; and under the Quire another Church. The Convent of the 
Carmelites
 is also considerable, wherein the Treaty of Peace was held with good accommodation in it, though with no success, in the year 1673. In the Church of St. 
Ursula
 is her Tomb, and the Tombs of divers of the Eleven thousand Virgins, martyred by the 
Huns.
 Upon the Monument of St. 
Ursula
 is this Inscription;

Sepulcrum Sanctae Ursulae indicio Columbae detectum.


 Upon many of the Tombs which are old are Crosses and Lamps. Many Bones and Heads of the Martyrs are also kept in this Church. The Cathedral is dedicated to St. 
Peter,
 and is very large, but not finished. The Body of the Church hath four rows of Pillars within it. The Quire is handsome and very high: behind it are believed to be the Tombs of the three Wise men which came from the East to worship our Saviour, or the Kings of 
Arabia,
 of whom it was prophesied that they should bring Gifts, commonly called the three Kings of 
Colen: Melchior,
 who offered Gold, 
Gaspar
 Frankincense, and 
Balthasar
 Myrrhe. Their Bodies, as the account goeth, were first removed to 
Constantinople
 by 
Helena
 the Mother of 
Con∣stantine
 the Great; then to 
Milan
 by 
Eustorfius
 Bishop thereof; and they have now rested at 
Colen
 for above five hundred years, being translated from 
Milan
 hither by 
Rainoldus
 Bishop of 
Colen,
 in the year 1164. There are also divers other Monuments of Bishops, and Noble Persons in Brass and Stone, and one in the shape of a Castle with six Towers. The Canons of this Church are all Noblemen; among whom the Duke of 
Newburg,
 who ordinarily resides at 
Dusseldorff,
 about twenty 
English
 miles below this City, upon the 
Rhine,
 hath two Sons. In a Church dedicated to all the Apostles, they shew a Tomb, which being opened by Thieves, intending to plunder it, the woman buried in it arose up and went home, and lived with her Husband divers years after. In one of the Streets is a Tower, or rather one Tower upon another, which seems to be ancient, now made a Prison. Upon another Ruine also in the Streets lies a Tombemade out of one Stone; of which sort of Tombs there are ma∣ny in this City and other places; but the greatest number of them I ever saw was at 
Arles
 in 
Provence.


The Senate House is Noble, having a fair Tower upon

 it, from whence there is a good prospect over the City. Upon the Front of the Senate House is a Man in 
Basso re∣lievo,
 fighting with a Lyon, who, as it was related to me, was formerly one of the Consuls, who having had a contest with some Clergy-men about the Government of the City, on a suddain they caused a Lyon to be let in up∣on him: upon which occasion he behaved himself so well, as he delivered himself, and slew the Lyon.


The Elector or Archbishop of 
Colen
 hath two Palaces in the City, but by agreement between him and the Town, he is not to stay here above three days together. Only this present Archbishop, upon the coming down of the Im∣perial Forces, and his loss of 
Bonna,
 took Sanctuary here in the Convent of St. 
Pantaleon,
 where he continued a great while.


The City is Imperial and Free, and yet it doth Ho∣mage to the Elector, much after this Form: 
We free Ci∣tizens of
 Colen 
promise to the Archbishop, to be faithful and favourable unto him as long as he preserves us in Right and Honour, and in our ancient Priviledges, Us, our Wives, our Children, and our City of
 Colen. Most of the City are of the 
Roman
 Church, and the whole Town so full of Convents, Churches, Church-men and Reliques, that it is not undeservedly styled the 
Rome of Germany.
 The 
Lutherans
 have also a Church within the Walls, and the 
Calvinists
 at 
Mulheim,
 half a League down the Stream on the other side of the 
Rhine.


Over against 
Colen
 lieth 
Dútz,
 a small Village, inhabi∣ted chiefly by Jews. The Vessels which come out of the 
Low-Countries
 hither are long, round bellied, and of great burden. Near to the Wall of the Town, upon the Quay or Key, is a kind of Harbour made for them, into which they may be drawn, and escape the Injuries they would otherwise suffer by the Ice in Winter.




Besides the rich Clergy, there are many wealthy Citi∣zens and Merchants here, and they maintain a Traffick and Correspondence with divers Countries, especially by the convenience of the 
Rhine.
 They speak not the best 
High-dutch;
 but 
Latin
 and 
French
 are understood by many: Divers Hosts in Inns speak 
Latin,
 and the Ser∣vants 
French;
 which proves a good help unto Travellers. It was made an University about the year 1388. Besides the General Hospitals for young and old persons, there are two for the Sick, and well accommodated. They have a 
Pharmacopaea Coloniensis,
 or a 
Dispensatory
 proper to the place, whereby 
Apothecaries
 compound their Medicines. I was acquainted with one of the best, Mr. 
Elburg,
 a knowing and obliging person, who was his Majesties A∣pothecary while he resided at 
Colen,
 and whom my honoured Friend Sir 
Alexander Fraser,
 his Majesties chief Physician, made use of, who lived in great reputation in this City.


Two hundred years since 
Aeneas Sylvius
 left an high expression concerning this place, 
Coloniâ quae de conjuge
 Claudii 
matre
 Neronis, Agrippina 
dicta est, & trium Magorum ossibus illustrata, nihil magnificentius, nihil orna∣tius, totâ
 Europâ 
reperias:
 which though, if strictly construed, will hardly be admitted by any who hath be∣held 
Paris, Naples, Venice,
 &c. yet doth it declare the no∣bleness of this City, even in former times.


We left 
Colen
 about four a Clock in the Afternoon, be∣ing drawn up the Stream with Horses, they being made fast by a very long Rope to the Mast; we lodged in a small Village, having had a good prospect of 
Colen
 all this Evening from off the water. Near to this Place 
Ju∣lius Caesar
 made his Bridge over the 
Rhine.
 The next day we came to 
Bon,
 the Seat of the present Archbishop and Elector of 
Colen, Maximilianus Henricus,
 Duke of

 
Bavaria,
 Bishop of 
Hildisheim
 and 
Liege,
 and Arch-Chancellor of the Empire throughout 
Italy.
 This place was formerly called 
Bonna,
 or 
Castra Bonnensia,
 the win∣tering place, in the time of 
Tacitus
 of the sixth Legion. It was not long since very well fortified by the order of the present Archbishop, and the direction of Colonel 
Bi∣ser,
 a blind man, having 
Cataracts
 in both his eyes. The Archbishops Palace is very Noble, and there is a Cham∣ber seated a good way into the 
Rhine,
 to which they pass thorow a Gallery. This Night we lodged at the foot of the highest of the seven Hills by the 
Rhine,
 which are seen at a great distance; and upon divers of them stand old ruined Castles. On the 
15th
 we passed by a pleasant Island with a Convent in it: at 
Remagen
 is also a Con∣vent upon a Rock, fortified with round Towers. In the Evening we lodged near to a Castle, ruined four years before by the Electors of 
Triers
 and 
Colen,
 it belonging at that time to the Duke of 
Lorrain.
 On the 
16th
 early in the Morning we came to 
Andernach,
 where the plague was very much at that time, and they kept a great many of their sick in Boats upon the 
Rhine.


Andernach,
 of old 
Antenacum,
 was one of the 
Roman
 Fortresses. Upon this River, some think that 
Caligula
 was born, and that 
Valentinian
 was buried hereabouts. Near unto this place are also Mineral Springs, well fre∣quented, and much made use of. The Town is encompassed with an old Wall; and the Gates were shut up by reason of the Plague: Notwithstanding, there being divers Fri∣ers in our company, several of the Towns-men sent out dishes of Meat to them, which we eat in the Field upon Trees which were laid along near the Town. This day the passage by water seeming tedious to us, Mr. 
Mulstroth,
 a worthy 
German
 Gentleman, with whom I travelled as far as 
Spire,
 was willing we should hire a Coach toge∣ther,

 which we did, and invited the Friers with whom we had breakfasted, to go along with us in it to 
Coblentz.
 We passed through a very pleasant Country, between rows of 
Walnut-trees,
 in sight of two of the Elector of 
Triers
 Houses, and near to a House belonging to the Count 
de Wert.


We passed the 
Mosella
 over a hand some Stone-bridge of thirteen Arches, built by Archbishop 
Baldus,
 or 
Baldui∣nus,
 in the year 1344. and coming into the Town, we went to the 
Dominican
 Convent, which is pleasantly seated near the Banks of the River 
Mosella;
 but the Pri∣or of the Convent, whom we had brought with us, was so obliging, that he would not part with us that night; and we were very civilly entertained by him in his Lodg∣ings: He invited also some of the Convent to bear us company; and after a handsome Supper, with plenty of excellent 
Moselle
 wine, we went to bed between two Feather-beds.


Coblentz,
 or 
Confluentia,
 is a Town of a Triangular Figure, seated at the meeting of two great Rivers, the 
Rhine
 and the 
Mosella,
 which make two sides thereof, and the third is made by a Line drawn from one River to the other; which is now well fortified after the most re∣gular Modern way. The Wall within these Works had many old high Towers; and formerly there was another still nearer to the uniting of the Rivers, and consequent∣ly containing a less space of ground. This Town is un∣der the Elector and Archbishop of 
Triers, Carolus Caspar,
 of the Noble Family of the 
Leyen,
 Arch-Chancellour for the Empire in 
Gallia Belgica,
 and the Kingdom of 
Arles.
 It was given to the Church of 
Triers
 when 
Me∣doaldus
 was Archbishop above a thousand years since, in the time of King 
Dagobert.
 The Situation is pleasant and convenient, and lieth over against the Castle of 
Her∣manstein,


 or 
Ehrenbreitstein,
 that is, 
The Stone of far extended Honour;
 at the foot of which Castle, upon the shoar of the 
Rhine,
 under a great Rock, stands a very Noble Palace of the Electors, two large Wings and the Front with five Pavilions standing towards the River, and from it a long Bridge of Boats over the 
Rhine
 to 
Cob∣lentz:
 when any great Vessel passeth by, they let slip three Boats, whereby the passage lieth open, and make them fast again afterwards. In the 
German
 wars the 
Spa∣niards
 thrust in a Garrison into this Town; which was af∣terwards beaten out by the 
Rhinegrave
 for the King of 
Sweden;
 and the strong Castle of 
Ethrenbrietstein
 being put into the hands of the 
French,
 the Emperours For∣ces seized upon the Archbishop of 
Triers,
 who then was 
Philippus Christophorus,
 and carried him away to 
Vienna.


In places where the 
Rhine
 runneth through a low Coun∣try and a fat Soyl, it washeth away the Banks: to secure which, in divers places they have made great Works of Wood, and also to secure Vessels from the danger of the Ice. And I remember, riding near the Banks of the Ri∣ver 
Loire
 in 
France,
 I observed them in some places to be handsomly defended for a long way together with Free∣stone.


Near unto 
Coblentz,
 upon a Hill, is a Convent of 
Car∣thusians. October
 the 
17th
 we went up the 
Rhine
 to 
Bop∣part,
 a walled Town, upon the western bank, where 
Van Trump
 was at that time: It is a very old Town, one of the 
Roman
 Fortresses against the 
Germans,
 called anci∣ently 
Bodobriga;
 some would have it called 
Bopport
 from 
Beauport, Fair-haven,
 or 
Bonport,
 a good convenient place for Vessels to retire into, or to ride in.


On the 
18th
 we dined at St. 
Guer,
 a pleasant Town belonging to the 
Landtgrave
 of 
Hesse,
 who hath a Castle

 here. Coming on shoar we met with an odd custome: for upon the Wall side there is fastned a Collar of Brass at present, but was formerly of Lead, and given by 
Charles
 the Fifth; into this most Strangers that come put their Necks, at which time they ask them, 
Whether they will be sprinkled with water, or drink wine?
 and if they choose the latter, they give an entertainment of wine to the Company. The Queen of 
Sweden
 passing by this place, gave a great Silver Cup, out of which they now drink at this Ceremony. We lodged this night at 
Wesel,
 a Town situated between a high Hill and the River, belonging to the Archbishop of 
Triers.
 Here in the Market-place they shew us the print of St. 
Huberts
 Hor∣ses foot in a Free-stone.


On the 
19th
 we came to 
Baccharach,
 or 
ad Bacchi aras,
 belonging to the Elector 
Palatine;
 a place famous for Ex∣cellent Wines. We passed by an old Castle seated upon a Rock in the middle of the 
Rhine,
 being of an irregular figure, called 
Pfalts,
 where formerly the Prince 
Pala∣tines
 of the 
Rhine
 were born, the Princesses being sent hither to be brought to Bed. We came this night to 
Dreickshausen;
 the next day we went by a dangerous Pas∣sage, there being many Rocks under water, which cause the River to run very rapid and unequally. A little a∣bove this we came to a round Tower, on a Rock in the 
Rhine,
 called the 
Mouse-tower,
 built by 
Hatto
 Archbi∣shop of 
Mentz,
 in the year 900. who, as the Story goeth, in a time of great Scarcity, pretending to relieve the poor who wanted bread, invited them together into a Barn, where he burnt them all, saying, 
They were like the Rats and Mice which would devour the Corn.
 After which he was so persecuted with Rats and Mice, that to avoid them he caused this Tower to be built in the middle of the 
Rhine,
 which did not avail him, for they followed him

 thither also, and at last devoured him. A little above this lieth 
Bing
 upon the Western shoar; a considerable Town, belonging to the Elector of 
Mentz:
 here our Boat stayed to pay Custome, as it had done also at 
Bonna, Liutz, Hammerstein, Andernach, Coblentz, Lodesheim, Bopport,
 St. 
Gower, Cub,
 and 
Baccharach.
 For the trade of the 
Rhine
 being great, Princes and Lords, who have Towns upon it, make use of that advantage, which, though it abateth the gains of the Merchant, brings considerable profit to themselves.


Bing,
 or 
Bingium,
 was an old 
Roman
 Fortress upon the 
Rhine,
 where the River 
Navus
 or 
Naw
 entreth into it; over which latter there is a handsome Stone-bridge: In this Town were many of the Duke of 
Lorrain
's Army sick and wounded, who three weeks before had main∣tained a fight against the Forces of the Elector 
Palatine,
 near this place. From 
Bing
 we continued our Journey to 
Mentz:
 at 
Rudesheim
 in 
Rhinegaw,
 a place noted for good Wine, they shewed us a Boy, whose hair was thick and woolly, like to the 
African-
Moors, but of a fine white colour, which being somewhat an odd sight, I took away some of his hair with me.


Mentz, Moguntia, Moguntiacum,
 and by the 
French Mayence,
 is seated over against the Confluence of the Ri∣ver 
Main,
 with the 
Rhine,
 or rather a little below it; in a fertile Country, abounding in all Provisions and good Wine; it lieth at length, and is most extended towards the River; and that part excelleth the other towards the Land, which is not so populous or well-built: It is a strong place, and well guarded; it hath many Churches and Monasteries, and some fair Buildings, especially those of publick concern, as the Palace of the Elector, and o∣thers: But the narrowness of the Streets, and many old Houses, take away much from the beauty of the City.

 It is an University, begun about the year 1486. or as o∣thers will have it 1461. This place also challengeth the Invention of Printing, or at least the first promotion or perfection thereof: And the Territory about it is famous for the destruction of the 
Roman
 Legions under 
Varus,
 by the 
Germans. Gustaphus Adolphus,
 King of 
Sweden,
 was wonderfully pleased upon the taking of this City, 1631. entring into it in State upon the 
14th
 of 
December,
 it be∣ing his Birth-day, which began the 
38th
 year of his life, and kept his Court and 
Christmas
 here; where at one time there were with him six chief Princes of the Empire, twelve Ambassadours of Kings, States, Electors, and Princes; besides Dukes and Lords, and the Martial men of his own Army. At the taking of the Town, they found great store of Ordnance and Powder; and the City re∣deemed it self from Pillage by giving the King a Ransome of Eighty thousand 
Dollars;
 and the Clergy and Jews gave Two and twenty thousand more, of which the Jews paid Eighteen thousand; Archbishop 
Wambold
 saving himself upon the 
Rhine,
 and retiring to 
Colen.
 The King caused also two great Bridges to be made, one over the 
Main,
 founded upon fifteen great flat bottom'd Boats, the rest being built upon great Piles of Wood: Another over the 
Rhine
 supported by sixty one great flat Boats, each lying the distance of an Arch from one another; and many Families of people living sometimes in the Boats un∣der the Bridge. The Bridge over the 
Main
 is taken a∣way; but that over the 
Rhine
 is still continued: Upon which I saw the present Elector passing in his Coach; a Person of great Gravity, of a middle Stature, having long grey Hair, and was very Princely attended; his Name 
Joannes Philippus
 of the Noble Family of 
Schoen∣burg,
 Elector and Archbishop of 
Mentz
 Bishop of 
Wurtz∣burg,
 and Bishop of 
Worms,
 Arch-Chancellour of the

 Empire for all 
Germany;
 the first of the 
Electoral Colledge;
 in all publick Conventions he sits at the right hand of the Emperour, and is a Successour of the famous 
Boniface,
 an 
English
 man, Bishop of 
Mentz,
 who so much promo∣ted the Christian 
Religion
 in these parts. But though his Dignity and Place excelleth the two other Ecclesiastical Electors of 
Colen
 and 
Triers,
 yet his Territories come short; and they lye not together, but scatteringly with those of the 
Palatinate, Spier, Franckfort,
 and divers places in 
Franconia.
 But of late he hath much encreased his Power, by seizing the great City of 
Erfurdt
 in 
Turingia,
 which he hath since much beautified and strength∣ned by a Citadel built upon St. 
Peters hill.


From 
Mentz
 I passed by water up the River 
Main,
 to 
Franckfort,
 a free City of the Empire, called 
Trajectum Franconum,
 a Passage or Ford of the 
Franks,
 as serving them for a Retreat, when they entred or returned from 
Gaul;
 at present 
Franckford
 upon the 
Main,
 to differ∣ence it from 
Franckford
 upon the River 
Oder,
 which is an University: It is a large Town, divided into two parts by the River; the lesser called 
Saxonhausen,
 or 
Saxon∣houses,
 united to the other by a Stone-bridge over the 
Main,
 of twelve or thirteen Arches. It is a place of good Trade, and well seated for it, as having the ad∣vantage of the River 
Main,
 which passeth by 
Bamberg, Schweinfurt, Wurtzburg, Guemund,
 or 
Gaudia mundi;
 and also the 
Tauber,
 and other Rivers running into it, af∣fordeth conveniency for Commerce with the remoter parts of 
Franconia;
 and the 
Main
 running into the 
Rhine,
 makes a large communication both up and down that Stream.


But this place is most remarkable for the Election of the Emperour, which, by the Laws of the 
Golden Bull,
 should be in this City, as also for two great Marts or

 Fairs kept in 
March
 and 
September;
 at which times there is an extraordinary concourse of people from remote parts, in order to buying and selling of several Commo∣dities, especially for Books, as well printed here as in other parts, whereof they afford two Catalogues every year, and have no small dealings that way, by the Fa∣ctors of the 
Germans, Hollanders, Italians, French,
 and 
English:
 although at other times their trading in Books seems not great; for when I was there out of the time of the Mart, the 
Stationers
 Shops being shut up, made but a dull show. Here are also a great number of good Horses bought and sold: and on the North-side of the City there is a spacious place for a Horse-Fair. The City is strong and well fortified; and most part of the Town are 
Luthe∣rans.
 In the 
German
 wars, the King of 
Sweden
 having taken 
Hanaw,
 sent a Messenger to 
Franckfort
 to know whether the City would peaceably and speedily set open their Gates unto him, and accept fairly of a Garrison, or stand to the hazard of a Siege: And although they were unwilling to yield, yet for fear of the worst, they con∣sented, That the King should have free passage for his Army through the City; and that for the better assurance of it, six hundred of his men should be received for a Garrison into 
Saxonhausen;
 and also that the Magistrates and People should take an Oath unto his Majesty. So that upon the 
17th
 of 
November,
 1631. the King's Army pas∣sed through 
Saxonhausen
 over the Bridge, quite through the Town. Colonel 
Vitzthumb
 was left Governour in 
Saxonhausen;
 and the King himself rode bare-headed through the Streets: and by his obliging behaviour did generally win the affections of the beholders; and three days after returned thither again with the 
Landtgrave
 of 
Hessen-Cassell,
 and the 
Landtgrave
 of 
Hessen-Darmstadt,
 where they met the Seventeen Earls of the 
Wetteraw,
 or

 
Veteravia,
 and were feasted in the same room where the Emperours at their Coronation use to be entertain∣ed.


In 
Saxonhausen
 there is a House anciently belonging unto the Knights of the 
Teutonick
 Order, which hath the priviledge of a Sanctuary for Man-slayers and Bankrupts; but it is a security but for fourteen days. Upon this side there is the largest portion of Land belonging to 
Franck∣fort;
 on the other side very little.


This being a trading place, it is no wonder that there are so many Jews in it; for a distinction they wear great Ruffs, their Sons Bonnets, and their Wives a peculiar dress of their Head.


The Collegiate Church of St. 
Bartholomew,
 where ma∣ny of the Emperours have been crowned, is large, hath a high Steeple, and is built of a red stone. There are divers handsome Fountains in the Town, and good Hou∣ses; in one of the best of which liveth Monsieur 
Pierre Neufville,
 a great Merchant, and a civil worthy person, well known in most places of Commerce; who obliged me with Letters to 
Venice,
 and other places.


From 
Franckfort
 I continued my Journey through the 
Bergstraes,
 passing by 
Darmstadt,
 which belongs to one of the Brothers of the House of 
Hessen,
 commonly known by the name of the 
Landtgrave
 of 
Hessen Darmstadt;
 and afterwards through a fruitful plain Country, in the sight of Hills, and sometimes near them: the whole Country planted with Wallnut-trees, Vines, Corn, and in some places with Tobacco; till I arrived at 
Heidelberg.


In coming into this Town we passed over the River 
Neccar, Nicer,
 or 
Necarus,
 upon a Bridge covered over from one end to another, with a large Roof of Wood: in the same manner is the long Bridge covered at the en∣trance of the City of 
Alessandria della paglia
 in 
Italy.




The River 
Neccar
 ariseth near the 
Sylva Martiana,
 now 
Swartzwald,
 or 
Black Forest,
 and passing through the Territories of the Duke of 
Wittenberg,
 runneth into the 
Rhine
 at 
Manheim:
 This, though none of the great∣est, yet is a considerable River of 
Germany;
 and hath di∣vers good Towns upon it and near it, as 
Sultz, Tubingen, Wirtingen, Essingen, Stutgard, Canstat, Lauffen, Hallbrun, Heidelberg.


There being wars at that time when I was in this Coun∣try, between the Elector 
Palatine
 and the Duke of 
Lo∣rain:
 The Elector resided for the most part at 
Franken∣dale,
 to be near his Forces.


Heidelberg
 is seated on the South-side of the River 
Neccar,
 between it and a ridge of high Hills, so as it cannot well admit of a modern Fortification, or hope to be extraordinary strong, as being over-looked by the ad∣jacent Mountains: It lieth most at length from East to West: It hath been an University since the year 1346. at which time it was begun by 
Rupertus,
 Count 
Palatine,
 and at present is much frequented. In the great Church was kept the famous Library, which, after that the 
Spa∣niards
 had taken this Town 1620. was carried to 
Rome,
 and added to the 
Vatican,
 where I saw it in the year 1664. being placed upon one side of a very long Gallery be∣longing to the 
Vatican
 Library; and the Duke of 
Urbin
's Library placed on the otherside, over-against it: both which made a notable addition to the Papal Library. In this Church and the Church also of St. 
Peter,
 are divers Monuments of Princes of the 
Palatine
 Family, and of Learned and Famous Men. The 
French
 have a Church here, and the present Elector is of the Order of the 
Holy Ghost;
 and his Son a Mareschal of 
France:
 and good 
French
 and 
High-dutch
 are both generally spoken here. The 
Lutherans
 have also a Church in this Town, by the

 favour of the present Elector; although he himself be a 
Calvinist:
 and to express his generous kindness the higher in this point, the first Stone was laid by himself and his Son; and it is called the 
Church of Providence,
 according to the Elector's Motto, 
Dominus Providebit.


Upon the Town-house is a Clock with divers Moti∣ons, and when the Clock strikes, the figure of an Old man pulls off his hat, a Cock crows, and shakes his wings, Souldiers fight with one another, and the like. The Prince's Stables for above a hundred Horses are seat∣ed upon the River very conveniently, but were fairer formerly, above half thereof having been ruined by the Imperialists; as also divers of the Statues on the out∣side of the Castle, which is seated high above the Town.


The present Elector is 
Carolus Ludovicus,
 Son to the King of 
Bohemia, Frederick
 the Fifth; he was born in the year 1617. and passed his Youth an Exile from his Fathers Kingdom and Electorate: and at the pacification at 
Prague
 1635. he was excluded from any restitution to be made to him. But at length, in the Treaty of 
Mun∣ster
 1648. he was restored to the lower 
Palatinate,
 and 1652. returned to the possession of his Fortunes: a highly accomplished Prince, much honoured and beloved by his Subjects. In the year 1650. he married 
Charlotta,
 Daughter to 
William
 the Fifth, 
Landgrave,
 and to the famous 
Amelia Elizabeth, Landgravess
 of 
Hassia;
 by whom he had the 
Chur
 Prince, or Electoral Prince 
Charles,
 and a Daughter, the Princess 
Charlotta Elizabetha;
 but up∣on some discontent the Princess Electress since returned to her own Friends and Country. This Elector is also Knight of the most Noble Order of the Garter, Great Treasurer of the Empire, and together with the Elector of 
Saxony,
 Vicar of the Empire.




In his Palace or Castle at 
Heidelberg,
 are divers things remarkable; a very great Tower to be equalled by very few; within which is a Theatre for Comedies. This was formerly called 
Trutzkaisar,
 or the Tower that bad Defi∣ance, or threatned the Emperor; but since the Restaura∣tion of the Elector, there are some Works drawn about it in the figure of a Star, and the old disobliging Name is by Proclamation forbidden to be continued, and it is at present called the 
Sternschanz,
 or the 
Star-fort.
 By it is a handsome Garden; in the Ditch whereof there was then kept a great Bear, and a very large Wolf. The Grotto's and Water-works are very handsome: they were also making divers others, having the advantage of the side of the Hill to bring down the water, and to make Grots and Caves in the Rock. Amongst other Fountains, that of the Lions head with a Frog in his Ear, is taken notice of. The Cellars are very large and cool, filled with Vessels of no ordinary size; yet inconsiderable, if com∣pared to the great Tun kept in a great Building joyning to the Cellars; it was built by this present Elector's Or∣der, 1664. and goeth far beyond any made before: It contains 204 Faiders and odd measure, or about two hundred Tuns: instead of Hoops it is built with large knee Timber, like the ribs of a Ship, which are painted and carved, and have divers Inscriptions upon them, and supported by carved Pedistals. Upon one side of it is a handsome Staircase to ascend to the top of the Ves∣sel; upon the top of which is a Gallery set round with Ballisters, three and forty steps high from the ground.


About an 
English
 mile from 
Heidelberg,
 between the Hills, is a solitary place, where three large Streams or Springs gush out of the Mountain, and presently fill five Ponds, have three handsome Cascates or Falls, and after run into the Plain, and are strong enough in a

 small space to turn four Mills; this is called 
Wolfsbrun,
 or the 
Wolfs Fountain,
 from a Princess who formerly re∣tired into a Cave in this desart place, and was here de∣voured by a 
Wolf.


While I was at 
Heidelberg,
 two 
English
 men came kind∣ly to me, Mr. 
Villers,
 and 
Timothy Middleton,
 belonging to 
Lobensfeldt Cloister,
 a Convent formerly of the Jesu∣its, but since let out to about an hundred 
English,
 who left their Country 1661. came up the 
Rhine,
 and by the permission of the Elector, setled themselves a few miles from hence, living altogether, men, women, and chil∣dren, in one House; and having a community of many things: They are of a peculiar Religion, calling them∣selves Christian Jews; and one Mr. 
Poole,
 formerly li∣ving at 
Norwich,
 is their Head. They cut not their Beards, and observe many other Ceremonies and Duties, which they either think themselves obliged to from some Expressions in the Old Testament, or from some New Ex∣position of their Leaders.


From 
Heidelberg
 I made an excursion, and had a sight of 
Spire,
 seated in a Plain, on the West-side of the 
Rhine;
 a place of Antiquity, conceived to be 
Urbs Nemetum
 of old; a large place and populous. The King of 
Sweden
 in the 
German
 wars demolished the Works about it, not willing to spare so great a number of his Souldiers as was required to Garrison it, and make it good. It is an Episcopal See under the Archbishop of 
Mentz:
 there are many fair Houses in it, divers Churches, and a fair Cathedral, with four large Towers. The 
Romanists,
 the 
Lutherans,
 and 
Calvinists
 preach in it at several hours. It is the more populous, and filled with people of good quality, by reason of the concourse of persons from o∣ther parts of 
Germany,
 for the decision of Law Suits: For here the Imperial Chamber is held, and many differ∣ences

 which arise in the Empire are determined, and the Electors and other Princes, in some tryals at Law, may be called hither. It is a settled Court, which 
Maximi∣lian
 the First, for the better ease of all persons, placed first at 
Worms,
 and not long after it was fixed at 
Spire,
 from whence it cannot be now removed, but by the con∣sent of all the Estates. Things Cognoscible in this Court are determined by an Imperial Judge, and sealed with the Emperours Arms, so that there lieth no appeal unto the Emperour.


Another day I went to 
Manheim,
 formerly a Village, seated at the Confluence of the 
Rhine
 and 
Neccar;
 but walled about by the Elector 
Frederick
 the Fourth, and since is much encreased; all the Streets being large and uniform, and a Noble Citadel built; within which, over∣against the Gate, the Elector designs a Palace, the Model of which I saw: and at present, on the right hand, there are three Pavilions of Lodgings: in one of which lodgeth the Elector 
Palatine;
 in another the Prince his Son; and in the third the Princess his Daughter: behind these there is a handsome Garden and Lodgings for 
Degen Felderen,
 the 
Churfursts
 Mistress. Here are some good Pictures, as a Head of 
Hans Holben,
 and a Landskip with the Sto∣ry of the Union of the 
Swissers.
 The Bridge over the Moat of the Citadel into the Town, is also remarkable, as having six Draw-bridges upon it, three great ones, and three small ones on the side. There are Palisado's all a∣long the bottom, in the middle of the Ditch, and with∣out upon the 
Esplanade.


From 
Heidelberg
 I travelled to 
Nurnberg
 in the Compa∣ny of Captain 
Wagenseyl,
 who had been in the 
Polish
 and 
Hungarian
 wars, and was employed a little before in blowing up the Castle of 
Launsteyn,
 belonging to the E∣lector 
Palatine,
 to prevent its surprisal by the Duke of

 
Lorrain.
 He was then employed to raise a Company at 
Nurnberg,
 for the Service of the Elector 
Palatine.
 I had a good advantage in my Journey by his Company; for he travelled with Authority, and was a generous, knowing, and courteous person.


The first day we travelled near to the 
Neccar,
 in stony and rocky way; and it being dark before we came to 
Mospach,
 the Peasants conducted us from Village to Vil∣lage with bundles of lighted Straw.


The next day we came to 
Poxberg,
 where there is an old Castle, and in the afternoon reached 
Morkenthal,
 or 
Mergetheim,
 the Seat of the Grand Master of the 
Herrhn Deutchern,
 or the 
Teutonick Order.
 The Town is well∣built, hath a fair 
Piazza,
 with a large Fountain in it, and a Statue of one of the Grand Masters, with a long 
Corridore
 from his Palace. This Order hath been of great Fame, and hath had large Possessions, as may be seen in the exact Account of the 
Teutonick Knights
 of 
Prussia,
 made out from the best Authors, by my worthy honoured Friend Mr. 
Ashmole,
 in his Noble Description of the Order of the Garter; and as 
Lewis du May,
 Counsellor unto the Duke of 
Wirtenberg,
 hath set it down. 
For the Knights Templars and of St.
 John, 
having fought prosperously against the Infidels, raised an Emulation in some
 German 
Gentlemen, who waited upon the Emperour
 Frederick 
the First, in his Expedition to the
 Holy Land, 
to take the
 Croisado. 
And because they were installed in the Church and Hospital of St.
 Mary 
at
 Jerusalem, 
they were called
 Marianites. 
Their Order differed nothing from those above-mentioned, but in the form and colour of their Cross, and was approved by Pope
 Celestin 
the Third. Afterwards when
 Jerusalem 
was ta∣ken by
 Saladin, 
those Knights betook themselves to
 Ptole∣mais, 
from whence the Emperour
 Frederick 
the Second, sent them back into
 Germany, 
and employed them against the


 Prussians 
and
 Livonians, 
who at that time were still Pa∣gans. But by the Valour and Piety of those Knights, their Souls were brought into subjection to Christ, and their Bo∣dies to the Order which began that war in the year 1220. a little while after these Knights found themselves Ma∣sters of a Country of very large Extent, which obeyed the Order, till the year 1525. at which time
 Sigismond, 
King of
 Poland, 
gave the investiture of
 Prussia 
unto
 Albert 
Mar∣quiss of
 Brandenburg. 
In the year 1563. the Great Ma∣ster became Secular again, and took a part of the Lands sub∣ject to the Order, with the name of Duke of
 Curland. 
And
 Livonia 
having been the Subject and Theatre of many wars between the
 Polanders, Muscovites, 
and
 Swedes; 
these last did at length become Masters of it, and have it in possession still. So that there is no more remaining of the
 Teutonick Order, 
but some Commanderies scattered here and there in
 Germany. 
And the Great Master hath his Seat and Resi∣dence at
 Mergenthal.


They wear on a white Mantle a plain black Cross. The Dignity of Grand Master is generally held by some Great and Honorable Person; and in the Great Assembly he ta∣keth place of all Bishops. The present is the Baron of 
Am∣ring;
 and the Grand Master before him was 
Leopold Wil∣liam,
 only Brother to the Emperor 
Ferdinand
 the Third.


From hence we travelled to 
Lauterbach,
 near which we passed through a Wood, and found a Noble Church up∣on the top of a high Hill, which being much frequented by Pilgrims, they have made handsome stone Stairs from the bottom to the top: then to 
Rotenburg,
 and lodged at 
Burgperner,
 and the next day by 
Schantzbach
 we came to 
Nurenberg. Rotenburg
 is an Imperial City, which some have likened unto 
Jerusalem
 for its Situation upon hilly places, and many Turrets in it. It is Situated near

 the head of the River 
Tauber,
 which may be accounted the second River of 
Franconia,
 passing by 
Rottingen, Lan∣den,
 and 
Werthaim,
 where it runneth into the 
Main.


Nurenberg
 is the fairest City that I saw in 
Germany;
 the Houses most of them of Free-stone, very high; and divers of them painted on the outside, and adorned with gilded Balls on the top; many are of six or seven Stories high. 
Der Herr Peller
 hath one of the fairest. The City is very populous and full of Trade, although it stands in a barren Country, and wants a Navigable River. The three best Churches are the 
Hospital Church,
 lately built very fair; St. 
Laurence,
 which is very large, with two high Steeples in the Front; and St. 
Sebald
 the best of the three. The Body of St. 
Sebald
 being laid upon a Cart drawn with Oxen, in that place where the Oxen stood still, they buried the Body, and erected this Church in his memory. In this Church is a Crucifix of Wood, very well carved, and esteemed at a high rate. The Cru∣cifix without the Church is very great, and of a black colour: and some fancy that the 
Raht Herrn,
 or Magi∣strates of the Town, have reposited a Treasure within it. The Pulpit is well carved and gilded, and the whole Church so stately, that it may pass in the first rank of 
Lutheran
 Churches; that Religion being here practised in its splendour. The Priest every morning reads the Scripture to the people for half an hour, or preacheth a Sermon. The Town-house is well worth the seeing: In it the Hall is spacious, as also the Chambers, and furnish∣ed with good Pictures, and Stones well gilded and pain∣ted with white and gold, green and gold, dark coloured and gold, and the like. There is one Picture of most of the Great Persons in 
Germany
 entertained in the Great Hall; another of the three Brothers of 
Saxony;
 one of an Elephant as big as the life; a piece of St. 
John
 and

 St. 
Mark,
 and another of St. 
Peter
 and St. 
Paul,
 both by 
Albert Durer:
 but the most rare piece is that of 
Adam
 and 
Eve,
 by the same Master, with this Inscription:

Albertus Durer Almang faciebat post Virginis partum, 1507.
 Another excellent one is that of St. 
Luke
 drawing the Picture of our Saviour and the blessed Virgin. Over the Gate at the entrance of the Shambles is a large Oxe carved in Wood, and painted over, with this Inscrip∣tion:


Omnia habent ortus suaque incrementa, sed ecce


Quem cernis, nunquam Bos fuit hic, Vitulus.


The Castle standeth upon a high Hill, from whence the Town makes a handsome show: In it are observable a very deep well, the Emperors Chappel, his Picture, and the Pictures of the Electors; good Night pieces; and one of a man behind a white Curtain transparent, very well expressed. The Armour of 
Hebbele van Gailinghen
 the great Sorcerer is here shown; and in the Wall of the Ca∣stle the marks of his Horses feet, when he leaped from thence over the 
Town ditch.


The new Fountain was not then finished; but the Sta∣tua's in Brass made for it were excellent; the Sea-Horses large, the Sea-Nymphs much bigger than the life; and 
Neptune,
 who was to stand on the top, is above three yards and a half high. When I came first into this place, I was not a little surprized to behold the fairness of the Houses, handsome Sreets, different Habits, industrious People, and neatness in all things, more than I had ob∣served in 
German
 Cities before; and no place hath grea∣ter number of curious Artificers in Steel, Brass, Ivory,

 Wood, wherein they work at an extraordinary cheap rate; and there are Officers to inspect and enquire into the works of Artificers, that they be true, perfect, and without fraud: they make strong and handsome Clock∣work. The King of 
Poland
 presented the Grand Signi∣or with a very noble Clock, who took so much delight in it, that when it required some mending (the 
Turks
 be∣ing ignorant in Clock-work) he sent it from 
Adrianople
 as far as 
Nurenburg,
 to be set in order again.


Gustavus Adolphus,
 King of 
Sweden,
 was more magnifi∣cently received and entertained in this City, than in any other of 
Germany;
 which so incensed 
Wallensteyn,
 that he afterwards encamped before their Town, and did great spoil upon their Territories: But the King of 
Sweden
 marched thither towards their Relief, and from thence towards 
Lutzen,
 where in a bloody Battel he lost his life.


The River 
Pegnitz
 runneth through 
Nurnberg,
 and hath divers Stone Bridges over it; and below the Town, joyning with the River 
Rednitz,
 runneth into the River 
Main
 at 
Bamberg;
 and the 
Main
 runs at last into the 
Rhine.
 The 
Reduitz
 ariseth at 
Weissenberg,
 and is not far from the River 
Altmul,
 which runneth into the 
Da∣nube,
 towards 
Regensburg.
 Upon this convenience, 
Charles
 the Great designed to make a Communication of passage between the 
Danube
 and the 
Rhine;
 and made a 
Canale
 thirty paces broad between the 
Rednitz
 and the 
Altmul,
 to joyn those Streams for the commodity of Pas∣sage by Boat; but after he had proceeded two 
German
 miles in this work, Boggs, Rains, and his warlike Di∣versions made him give over that noble Design, whereby there might have been a Commerce by water, from the 
Low-Countries
 to 
Vienna,
 and even unto the 
Euxine Sea.




The 
Roman
 Lieutenant in 
Nero
's time, had a desire to unite the River 
Soane
 and the 
Mosella;
 and to make a passage between the 
Mediterranean
 and the 
German
 Oce∣an; having been at the mouth of the 
Mosella
 by 
Coblentz,
 and passed from 
Chaalon
 upon the soft and noble River 
Araris
 or 
Soane
 unto 
Lyon,
 I cannot but think these ve∣ry goodly Streams, and fit for such a purpose. The present King of 
France
 hath a design to unite the River 
Aude
 with the 
Garonne,
 and so to have a passage by Boat from the 
Mediterranean Sea
 by 
Tholouse
 and 
Bourdeaux,
 into the Ocean. When I travelled in those parts, view∣ing the Country well, I thought it would be a difficult work, and so it proveth: but the King hath proceeded already very far therein.


About four Leagues from 
Nurnberg
 lyeth 
Altdorff,
 be∣longing unto it, made an University in the year 1623. con∣taining, when I was there, about 150 Scholars. The Physick Garden is handsome, and well stocked with Plants, to the number of two thousand. Dr. 
Hoffman
 the 
Botanick
 and 
Anatomick Professour,
 shew'd me many of the most rare of them; and presented me with divers. The 
Anatomy
 School is not large; yet the only one in those parts of 
Germany:
 And they have divers Curiosities pre∣served in it, as the 
Skeleton
 of a Hart, of a Horse, of a Man, of a Bear bigger than a Horse: And some Pictures, as one of a 
Ninivite,
 and another of 
Moses,
 which they take to be Ancient. Dr. 
Wagenseyl,
 Professour of Law and History, brother to Captain 
Wagenseyl,
 who travel∣led with me from 
Heidelberg,
 invited us to lodge at his House, and shew'd me his Library, and all his Rarities and Coyns, whereof he hath a good Collection, having lived in most places of 
Europe,
 and speaks many Lan∣guages well; he gave me a piece of the first mony that was coined in 
Germany.
 In the University Library I

 saw a fair 
Hortus Eystetensis,
 and 
Youngerman
's Colle∣ction of Plants by his own hand.


At 
Nurnberg
 I met with the Son and the Secretary to the 
Holland
 Ambassador in 
Turky,
 who had travelled hi∣ther over-land from 
Constantinople,
 in their return into the 
Low-Countries,
 travelling in 
Greek
 Habits.


From hence I went to 
Newmarkt,
 a good Town in the upper 
Palatinate
 belonging to the Duke of 
Bavaria,
 and the next day through 
Heinmaw,
 subject to the Duke of 
Newburg,
 to 
Regensburg.


Ratisbona, Regensburg, Augusta Tiberii, Colonia Quarta∣norum,
 the chief place of the 
Roman
 Forces in this limit of the Empire, where the fourth 
Italick
 Legion had a constant station; was made a Colony by 
Tiberius
 in the year, as some conceive, of the Passion of our Saviour. It was much augmented and adorned by the Emperour 
Arnulphus,
 who had a great affection for this place, so pleasantly seated, and in a good Country. Here the River 
Regen
 runs into the 
Danube;
 from whence it was called 
Regensburg.
 There are two Bridges, one of wood below the Town, and another Bridge of stone of about fifteen Arches; which is the fairest stone Bridge o∣ver the 
Danube.
 It is an Imperial City, but not with∣out some acknowledgment to the Duke of 
Bavaria:
 And although it be strongly fortified, yet it was taken by the 
Swedes
 in the 
German
 wars. There are many fair build∣ings in it, both private and publick; and though I am not able to confirm what some report, that there as many Churches and Chappels in this City, as there are dayes in the year; yet are there many fair Churches and Convents: As the Cathedral of St. 
Peter,
 in the South-side of which is the Picture of St. 
Peter
 in a ship; and on the North a∣other of the Apostles first Mission. In the 
Piazza
 stands a neat little Church, the Convent of St. 
Paul,
 founded

 by St. 
Wolfgangus
 Bishop of this place, the Convent of St. 
Emerammus
 Bishop of 
Ratisbone,
 a Saint of great Ve∣neration here, though but of little mention or name in o∣ther parts. The name of 
Albertus Magnus,
 Bishop of this place, hath also added unto the Fame of 
Regensburg.


But that which chiefly promoteth its lustre, is the General Diet or Parliament, which is often held in this City, and is not to be called in any part out of 
Germany;
 and the place is not unfit for the accommodation of such a noble Convention, as are the Estates of 
Germany.
 The Vice-Marshal taketh care to provide Lodgings respe∣ctively to their persons, and seeth that all things be brought hither, and at a just price; that the Hall or Place of Assembly be furnished and adorned sutably to the dignity of the Persons convened, and hath an especi∣al eye and regard towards the Publick safety. By this Convention the great Concerns of 
Germany
 are much secured, and their peace and quiet Established. Wherein 
Germany
 seems to have a better advantage than 
Italy;
 For 
Italy
 being likewise divided into many Dominions and Principalities, hath no Common Diet or Great Council, whereby to proceed for their Publick safety: Which makes them often so divided in their common Concerns in times of Danger, and when they most need a joynt Combination.


I entred the notable River 
Danubius
 at this place, which hath already run a good course, and passed by ma∣ny fair Towns or Cities; as the large City of 
Ulme
 in 
Swabenland,
 where it beginneth to be Navigable; as also 
Donawert, Neuburg,
 and 
Ingolstadt,
 and hath already received the considerable River of 
Licus
 or 
Leck,
 where∣by the Commodities of that great Trading City of 
Augs∣burg
 are brought into it. When I first embarked at 
Re∣gensburg,
 I thought I might have taken leave of the 
Da∣nube


 not far below 
Vienna,
 but an opportunity made me see this great Stream beyond 
Belgrade,
 as I have declared in another Account of my Travels.


The first day we passed by 
Thonawsteyn,
 where there is a Castle seated upon a high Rock, and came to 
Pfeter
 or 
Vetera Castra
 of old, now but an ordinary place. The Boats upon the 
Danube
 are generally painted black and white, are flat bottom'd, and broad at the Head and Stern; there is a Chamber built in the middle; and the Rudder is very large, to be able to command the Boat where the River is rapid, and of a swift Course.


The next day we came to 
Straubing,
 a handsome walled Town, belonging to the Duke of 
Bavaria;
 the Streets are streight; and there is a Tower in the Market-place, painted all over with green and gold-colour: There is also a Bridge of wood over the 
Danube.
 We passed by 
Swartz
 in the Afternoon, where the Church is seated up∣on a Hill, and is frequented by Pilgrims, and lodged at 
Deckendorff,
 where there is another Bridge. Near this Town comes into the 
Danube
 that considerable River 
Iser,
 or 
Isara,
 having passed by divers considerable Towns; as 
Landshut, Frising,
 and 
München,
 the Seat of 
Ferdinan∣dus Maria,
 Elector of 
Bavaria,
 Great Steward of the Empire, and at present the first of the Secular Electors, and he is to take place immediately after the King of 
Bo∣hemia,
 it being so concluded on at the Treaty of 
Munster,
 where 
Maximilian
 Duke of 
Bavaria
 was allowed to hold the Electorship, which was confirmed upon him by the Emperour 
Ferdinand
 the Second, when he excluded 
Frederick
 the Fifth, Count 
Palatine,
 and in lieu hereof there was an eighth Electorship erected for the 
Palatinate
 Family, who also, if the 
Bavarian
 branch doth fail, are to re-enter into their ancient Electorship, and the other newly erected is to be abolished.




Thursday, November
 the fifteenth, we came by 
Wilsho∣ven
 to 
Passaw, Patavia,
 or 
Boiodurum,
 a long and no∣ble City in the lower 
Bavaria,
 or 
Bayern,
 made up of three Towns, 
Iltstadt, Passaw,
 and 
Innstadt,
 at the con∣currence of the River 
Inne,
 the 
Danube,
 and the 
Iltz.
 As Towns are commonly of great Antiquity which are built at the Confluence of great Rivers, for the Strength of the Situation and convenience of Commerce; so is this accounted ancient, as being a 
Roman
 Co∣lony, and the place of the 
Castra Batava
 in old times.


The Church of St. 
Stephen
 is stately, besides other fair Churches. The Bishop, who is Lord of the City, hath a strong Palace upon a Hill; his Revenues are large, and besides what he possesseth hereabouts, he hath the tenth part of the notable great Lead-Mine at 
Bleyberg
 in 
Carinthia.
 This place had lately suffered much by fire; but a good part was rebuilt, and very fairly after the 
Italian
 manner: So that this may well be reckoned as one of the ten considerable Cities, which are upon the 
Danube,
 accounting from 
Ulme
 unto 
Bel∣grade,
 as 
Ulme, Ingolstadt, Ratisbone, Passaw, Lintz, Vienna, Presburg, Strigonium, Buda, Belgrade;
 all which from 
Ratisbone
 I had the opportunity to see be∣fore the end of my Journey. Near to a Wall over a∣gainst the great Church at 
Passaw,
 which was then re∣pairing, I saw a vast Head cut in stone, the Mouth whereof was two spans wide, and the rest proportion∣able. The River 
Iltz,
 which runneth in here from the North, is considerable for the Pearls which are found in it; and the noble River 
Inne
 or 
Oenus,
 from the South, is the greatest River which hath yet entred the 
Danube;
 having passed by 
Insbrug,
 and taken in the River 
Saltz,
 upon which stands 
Saltzburg;
 and a∣rising in the 
Alpes
 in such a high Country as 
Tirolis,


 it runneth in here with a great force, and addeth much unto the swiftness of the 
Danube.


Upon the Sixteenth we came to 
Lintz,
 the chief City in the higher 
Austria,
 not very great, but as neat and handsome a City as most in 
Germany.
 There is in it a very great Market-place, with never a bad House in it, the whole Town built of a very white Free-stone; and the Castle upon the Hill is of Modern Building, and very large. There is also a Bridge o∣ver the 
Danube.
 The Imperial Forces rendezvoused here when 
Solyman
 came to 
Vienna.
 This was also besieged by the Peasants of 
Austria
 in the time of 
Fer∣dinand
 the Second; they having got a Body together of Forty thousand men, and many pieces of Ordnance, but were stoutly repulsed after many Assaults, and at last overcome by 
Papenheim.
 Not far below 
Lintz
 the River 
Draun
 enters the 
Danube;
 this cometh from the 
Gemundner Sea,
 or 
Lacus Felicis,
 passing by 
Lam∣pack, Weltz,
 and other Towns, and hath a noted Cataract or Fall of Waters.


The next day we passed by 
Ens, Anisia,
 upon the River 
Anisius,
 or 
Onasus,
 which taking its original in the Borders of 
Saltzburgland,
 runs into the 
Da∣nube,
 and divides the higher from the lower 
Austria,
 having received into it self the River 
Saltza,
 upon which standeth 
Cell,
 or 
Maria Cell,
 a place of the greatest Pilgrimage in 
Austria.
 Near this Town are many 
Roman
 Coyns and Antiquities found, and 
Lauria∣cum
 stood of old, a 
Roman
 Garrison, and afterwards a Bishop's See: we came to a Village on the North shoar of the 
Danube,
 called 
Greim,
 where the 
Graff von Leichtensteyn
 hath a House. A little below this are two dangerous passages in the River; the one cal∣led the 
Strudel,
 where the River running amongst vast





depiction of two flat boats or barges near a whirlpool in a river; on the left bank is a castle ruin; on the right bank is a church; in the background is a cross on top of a mountain


The Whirle-poole in the Danvbe.


I. Olivor Fe






 Rocks, some under water, and some above, the waves are broken with great force, and the Current is ra∣pid, foaming, and troublesome; and some skill is re∣quired to pass between the Ledges of Rocks which are under water, and when the water is low the pas∣sage is very difficult. The other is the 
Wurbel,
 or a kind of a Whirlpool, where the water turneth about with great force, being hindred in its direct Course by a great Rock. Upon the top of a high craggy Rock stands a large Cross, and at the foot a little Church, dedicated to St. 
Nicholas,
 who is Patron of this dangerous place, and is believed to take peculiar care of such as pass this way, and therefore a little Boat comes to you as soon as you are out of danger, and receives what Acknowledgment you please, or what perhaps you may have promised to give, when you were in some fear. This night we lodged at 
Ips, Ipsium,
 or 
Ibissa,
 a Town on the South-side of the 
Da∣nube:
 over against it lieth 
Besenbeug,
 or 
Usbium Ptolo∣maei.
 Two 
German
 miles below 
Ips
 stands 
Pechlarn,
 conceived to be 
Arlape
 in former times; and here the River 
Erlaph
 entreth the 
Danube:
 A mile and a half below this lies 
Melcke, Nomale,
 or 
Mea dilecta,
 in former days the Seat of the Marquesses of 
Austria,
 until St. 
Leopold
 removed to 
Kalenburg,
 and his Suc∣cessours to 
Vienna.
 The Town lieth at length upon the South-side of the River; but the noble Cloister of 
Benedictines,
 which taketh place of any other in 
Austria,
 stands upon a Hill which over-looks the Town, the River, and the Country about; is richly endowed, and remarkable for the Monuments of many great Per∣sons, and the Tomb of St. 
Colman,
 much honoured in these parts. We dined at 
Steyn,
 where there is a Bridge over the 
Danube.
 Near to this lieth 
Crembs,
 another

 walled Town; and over the water 
Mautern;
 and not far from it the rich Convent of 
Ketwein;
 After this the River 
Traisn,
 or 
Tragisama,
 cometh in from the South. Having passed by the noted Town St. 
Pold,
 or St. 
Hippolitus,
 we lodged this Night at St. 
Eldorff,
 and the next day passed by 
Thuln, Stockeran,
 and 
Cloister Neuburg,
 to 
Vienna.








THE DESCRIPTION OF VIENNA.


V
IENNA,
 or 
Wien,
 which the 
Turks
 call 
Berch,
 is the chief City of 
Austria,
 in the Latitude of forty eight Degrees, twenty Minutes, not much differing from the Latitude of 
Paris.
 The old Seat of the Dukes of 
Austria,
 and for a long time of the Emperours of 
Germany.
 Ac∣cording to ancient account it standeth in 
Pannonia supe∣rior,
 the Bounds of 
Pannonia
 extending unto 
Kalemburg,
 or 
Mons Cetius,
 five or six miles Westward of 
Vienna;
 beyond which still Westward all that lieth between that Hill and the great River 
Oenus,
 or 
Inne,
 which runneth into the 
Danube
 at 
Passaw,
 or 
Castra Batava,
 was anci∣ently called 
Noricum.


It was an ancient place of Habitation in the time of the 
Romans,
 and called 
Vindobona,
 as the Learned 
Petrus Lambecius
 hath at large declared, where the 
Classis Istrica


 sometimes lay, and the tenth 
German Legion
 had its sta∣tion; all this shoar or side of the 
Danube
 being famous for the actions of 
Roman
 Emperours against the 
Marco∣manni
 and 
Quadi,
 who possessed the Country on the o∣ther side of the River, and especially for the wars of 
Marcus Aurelius Antoninus Philosophus,
 who notably de∣feated those Nations, and who, as 
Aurelius Victor
 (who was Governour of 
Sirmium
 in 
Pannonia inferior,
 in the time of 
Constantius
) affirmeth, fell sick at 
Carnuntum,
 now 
Petronel,
 and died at 
Vindobona,
 now 
Vienna.
 And to confirm the Antiquity hereof, besides what 
Wolfgangus Lazius
 hath delivered, not many years since some Anti∣quities were found. For in the year 1662. when a wall was digged up near the old Palace, the workmen digging still on below the Foundation, found a Stone Trough or Coffin, containing hard Earth and Bones, with a small Gold Coyn, a Glass Urn enclosed in a Brass one, an Iron Knife like a 
Sicespita,
 or Knife used about Sacrifices, a little Roll or Scroll of pure Gold, shut up with a Gol∣den cover at both ends, wherein was an Inscription in strange Characters: Not far from the Sepulchral Monu∣ment were found a Head in Brass, a Brazen 
Patera,
 Lamps, Lachrymatories, and other Vessels, and a Copper Coyn of 
Antoninus Caracalla.
 The writing in the Golden Scroll, which no man could read, was conceived by the Learned 
Lambecius
 to be the old 
Pannonian
 Character, and that this might be the Monument of some 
Pannonian
 Priest in the days of 
Caracalla,
 who, as good Authors deliver, spent some time about these parts.


It is seated on the South-side of the 
Danube,
 on the 
ripa Romana,
 that side nearest to 
Rome,
 and many 
Roman
 Colonies, according to the usual position of 
Roman
 Sta∣tions, both upon this River and the 
Rhine,
 as may be ex∣emplified in 
Colen, Bonna, Andarnach, Coblentz, Ments,

 Wormes, Spier,
 and 
Strasburg.
 And in like manner in the old 
Roman
 Stations, on the South or 
Roman
 side of the 
Danube,
 which were in no small number in or near the 
Austrian
 shoar, as 
Carnuntum,
 or 
Petronel, Vischmund,
 or 
Aquinoctium, Ebersdorff,
 or 
Ala Nova, Melck,
 or 
No∣male, Arlape,
 or 
Pechlarne, Lentia,
 or 
Lintz;
 for here∣by they better secured their Conquests, and hindred the incursions of the Barbarians before them.


It is not seated upon the main stream of the 
Danube,
 but by a branch thereof; for the River running through a low Country; it is divided into several Streams, and maketh many Islands. A small River named 
Wien,
 run∣neth by the East part of this City, and entreth the 
Da∣nube
 below it, which upon floods doth often much hurt, yet sometimes low and very shallow, so as I have stepped over it; some will have it to give the Name unto this Ci∣ty: it divideth part of the Suburbs from it, and hath divers Bridges over it. For that we may have a distinct apprehension of 
Vienna,
 we must consider the City and Suburbs thereof; the Suburbs are very great, and not without fair Houses, Gardens, Walks, and all Accommo∣dations at large.


The City it self is that walled and fortified part, de∣signed not only for convenience of Habitation, but also to sustain a Siege, or any Attack from the 
Turk,
 and is now separated from the Suburbs by a fair 
Esplanade,
 or open Ground, above a Musket shot over. The Houses near the wall were pulled down since the last Fortificati∣on in the 
Turkish
 war, when they were in some fear that the 
Turkish
 Forces about 
Gran
 and 
New-heusel,
 would move towards them. It is fortified 
a la moderna,
 with ten Bastions towards the Land, and a very deep Ditch, into which they can let the 
Danube:
 and with two other Bastions towards the water, on that part of the River

 which lieth on the North-side of the Town. The Bastions are large; upon one of them I saw Count 
Souches
 muster a good part of the Militia of the City. The Ditch is large and very deep, into which although they can let in the River, yet it is commonly kept dry, lest they might incommode their deep Cellars. There are two walls, the one old and inward, little considerable at present, built at first with the ransome of our King 
Richard
 the First, who in his return from the Holy War, was detained Prisoner by the Duke of 
Austria
 upon the 
20th
 of 
Decem∣ber,
 1192. The 
Austrians
 pretending they had received some affront from the King at 
Joppa,
 and that he had taken down the Ensign and Banner of Duke 
Leopold
 in a con∣temptuous way. The other outward of a great breadth, made of Earth, and faced with Brick, edged with Free∣stone, so well built, as to render this City one of the most considerable fortified places in 
Europe.
 The 
Espla∣nade
 gently descendeth from the Town for three hundred Paces; there are very few Out-works.


It is very uncertain who was the first Builder of 
Vien∣na,
 and after it had been long built, it ran to decay a∣gain for Four hundred years together, till 
Henry
 the First, Duke of 
Austria,
 in the year 1158. did much re∣pair it; and the ransome afterwards of King 
Richard
 beautified it.


The whole compass, taking in the Suburbs, makes a very large Circuit, but the City it self, which is walled in, may be about three miles in Circumference, and is exceeding populous, as full of People, for the bigness of the place, as most of the great Cities. And I could not but take delight to behold so many Nations in it, as 
Turks, Tartars, Graecians, Transylvanians, Sclavonians, Hunga∣rians, Croatians, Spaniards, Italians, French, Germans, Polanders, &c.
 all in their proper Habits.




The chief Gates are six: 1. 
Stubnthor,
 or the 
Stuben Gate
 towards the East. 2. 
Karnterthor,
 or the 
Gate of Carinthia
 towards the South. 3. 
Burgthor,
 the 
Town Gate,
 or 
Castle Gate. 4. Schottenthor,
 or the 
Scotch Gate. 5. Newthor,
 or the 
Newgate;
 these two last to∣wards the West: And 6. the 
Gate of the red Tower
 to∣wards the North, which leadeth unto the Bridge over the 
Danube:
 and towards the water side, there is also a Port by the Emperours palace, and a Cloyster or Nunnery in the Town hath the Name of a Port called 
Himmel port,
 or the 
Gate of Heaven.
 The five first of these Gates are vaulted and arched with long passages through the Town∣wall, and have good Bridges of Wood, with Draw∣bridges to pass over the Town ditch: The sixth is un∣der a Tower, and leads to the Bridges of the 
Danube:
 For that River running here in a flat low Country, divi∣deth its streams, so that to pass it quite over, there are at present seven long Bridges made up of many thousand Tree laid one by another, after their way of making Bridges. There is also a Bridge within the City of 
Vi∣enna,
 called the 
Hochbrug,
 or 
High-bridge,
 which is made by the crossing of two Streets at equal Angles; the ground of one street being as high as the tops of the Hou∣ses of the other, so that to continue it, they were for∣ced to build a Bridge or Arch in the 
Lower-street,
 to let the upper pass over it.


The City is fairly built of stone, and well paved; ma∣ny Houses are of six stories high; they are somewhat flat roofed after the 
Italian
 way; the Streets are not narrow, but the compass of ground will not admit them to be very broad; and their Buildings are remarkable both above and below ground; their Cellars are very deep. To sa∣tisfie my curiosity, I went into some of them, and found four Cellars one under another; they were arched, and

 had two pair of Stairs to descend into them. Some have an open space in the middle of each roof, to let the Air out of one Cellar into another, and from the lowest an 
adit
 or 
tube
 unto the top, to let the Air in and out from the street, somewhat after the manner of the Mines.


Aenaeas Sylvius,
 about two hundred years since, com∣mending the City of 
Nurnburg,
 among other expressions lets fall this: 
Cuperent Scotorum Reges tam egregiè quam mediocres Cives
 Norinbergenses 
habitare.
 The Kings of 
Scots
 would be content to dwell so well as the middle sort of Citizens of 
Nurnburg.
 I must confess, when I first entred 
Nurnburg,
 I was much surprised to see such a noble, large, spruce, rich, and well built City: But 
Vi∣enna
 doth also deserve the commendation which he af∣fordeth it: 
Ubi Palatia digna Regibus & Templa quae mi∣rari
 Italia 
possit.
 Where there are Palaces fit for Kings and Churches, which 
Italy
 may admire. And this being spo∣ken so long ago, is now better verified of it.


The Imperial Palace is very Noble, Substantial, and Princely furnished, consisting chiefly of two Courts; the one very large, the other lesser, wherein the Emperour lodgeth. At the Entrance over the Gate, are set in Ca∣pital Letters the five Vowels, 
A, E, I, O, U;
 whereof the Phancies of men make various Interpretations. That which was told me was this, 
Austriae est imperare Orbi Universo;
 or, 
Alles Erdreich Ist Osterreich Unterthan, i. e.
 All the World is subject to 
Austria.
 Although I could hardly believe this was the first intended meaning. Be∣sides these two Courts is another small one, where some of the Pages lodge. I took notice of a large rough 
Jaspis
 stone lying upon the ground, little regarded or observed: it is about nine foot Diameter; it was presented unto the Emperour by the Archbishop of 
Saltzburg,
 whose Coun∣try affordeth notable Quarries, and stones of many sorts;





depiction of the Mariensäule or Column of Our Lady in Am Hof, Vienna, featuring Mary and four angels


A noble copper Columne Standing before the Iesuites College in Vienna


Iohn Oliuer Fecit






 a little piece of it polished, affordeth fine yellow, red, black, and white Veins. The Palace of the Count 
de Draun,
 and that which Count 
Rothal
 hath lately built and nobly furnished, are very considerable; with many others.


There are also many fair Churches, rich Convents, and Conventual Churches; as that of the 
Carmelites,
 of the 
Franciscans,
 of the 
Benedictines,
 of St. 
Nicholas;
 In this Church I could not but take notice of the late Sepul∣chral Monuments of Count 
Strozzi
 and Cardinal 
Ha∣rach.
 The 
Dominican
 Convent is very fair. The 
Au∣gustines
 have a large Church, in the middle whereof they have built a Chappel after the manner of the Holy House at 
Loretto;
 upon the top of which hang the Colours ta∣ken from the 
Turks
 and 
Tartars,
 many of which Ensigns are not square like ours, but made Escucheon-wise, some fil∣led with Circles, wherein are expressed half Moons. The 
Jesuites
 Colledges are large, who seldome fail of noble Convents, especially in places where they have so good footing as in this. The Front of one of their Colledges openeth into a fair 
Piazza,
 in the middle whereof stands a large and high composite Column of Copper upon a Pe∣destal of white stone, with four Angels with Escucheons, and on the top the blessed Virgin; Inscriptions also, in which the Emperour dedicates 
Austria
 unto her Patro∣nage and Tuition. In another Market-place, where the Town-house is, there is a handsome 
Statua
 of Justice in Copper.


I could not but observe the 
Scotch
 Church and Cloy∣ster, which gave also the name unto the 
Scotch
 Gate of the City, because I somewhat wondered how the 
Scots
 in old time should be so considerable in this place, but I found by Information, and the Account of 
Lazius
 and 
Matthaeus Merian
 in 
High-dutch,
 that this Convent was in

 former times a great Receptacle for the 
Scots
 in their long Pilgrimage unto 
Jerusalem,
 founded and endowed by Duke 
Henry
 the First, in memory of St. 
Gregory:
 and it may seem less strange that the 
Scots
 should have a Convent here, and be numerous in these parts in former Ages, if we consider that St. 
Colman,
 one of the Saints of the greatest Veneration in this Country was a 
Scotchman,
 and said to be of the Royal Blood of 
Scotland,
 who, in his passage to 
Jerusalem
 was murdered by the 
Baurs
 or Coun∣try people at 
Stockerau,
 four 
German
 miles from 
Vienna,
 and hanged on a Tree, where, as the Story goes, his Body remained uncorrupted for a year and a half, and divers Miracles being affirmed of it, it was taken down, and honourably interred near 
Stockerau;
 but by 
Meginhard
 Bishop of 
Aichstadt
 it was translated unto 
Melk,
 and af∣terwards sent into 
Hungary,
 and his Head kept a long time at 
Stullweissenburg,
 or 
Alba Regalis,
 according to the Account which is here given of this Saint.


The Church of St. 
Peter
 is also considerable, not for its Splendour but Antiquity, as being accounted the ol∣dest in the City, standing in a place where in old time there stood an Altar in honour of 
Domitian,
 called 
Ara Flaviana.
 In this Church lieth the Body of that famous and learned Person 
Wolfgangus Lazius,
 with this Epitaph or Inscription:


Magnifico Nobili Clarissimo atque summâ eruditione or∣natissimo viro Domino
 Wolfgango Latzio Vien. 
Philoso∣phiae atque Medicinae Doctori & Professori Primario, Ce∣leberrimi Archigymnasii
 Viennensis 
Rectori & Superinten∣denti
 Caesareo, 
& ejusdem Sacrae
 Caesareae 
Majest.
 Fer∣dinandi 
Sanctissimae memoriae Consiliario & Historico Pe∣ritissimo, defuncto Anno Domini
 MDLXXXVI.




In the Church of the 
Capucines
 Convent, are interred the Emperour 
Matthias
 and his Empress, and the Em∣press 
Maria,
 wife to 
Ferdinand
 the Third, who out of their Devotion and Humility, chose to be buried in a Church of this poor Order. And the 
Capucines
 not ad∣mitting of Magnificent Monuments in their Churches, as in the Churches of other Orders, no Tombs are erected worthy so great an Emperour, and such Empresses.


But the Cathedral Church of St. 
Stephen,
 containeth divers Monuments of many Princes and Great Persons, and is a large stately Building, but somewhat dark by reason of the thick painted Glass: not covered with Lead, but with Tiles of wood, which is the only blemish thereof, yet makes a good show. The Steeple and Spire are very remarkable, as being high, large, strong, and handsome. On the top or Weathercock-place of the Spire stands a Cross under a Star and half Moon, according to the Figure I have elsewhere set down, which the People think to be of Gold, or at least very well gilded: and in the time of Thunder and Lightning it looked pale and whitish.


They have this Account how these came first to be set up in this place: That when 
Solyman
 the Magnificent be∣sieged 
Vienna,
 perceiving the Forces in the City to be obstinate, he had an intent to batter down the Steeple a∣bout their ears: But some of the 
Bassa's
 and great Com∣manders, advertising him how unprofitable a business it would prove, and withal when he took the City, what an honour it would be unto him to have such a Noble Py∣ramid in his Dominions: He sent word into the Town, That he was willing to spare the Steeple, upon condition that they would set up the half Moon and Star (the 
Tur∣kish
 Arms) upon the top thereof. They returned An∣swer that they would, if he would send the same

 unto them, which he did, and they placed it where it standeth.


This Spire hath the largest Crockets I have observed in any, they being above a yard long, and adorned with foliage work. The Spire of 
Landshute
 in 
Bavaria,
 is accounted the highest in 
Germany;
 that of 
Strasburg
 the neatest and fairest; and this of 
Vienna
 the largest and strongest. And therefore it is no wonder that when the Ambassadours of 
Bosna
 formerly came unto 
Vienna,
 they so often viewed and admired this Fabrick, and plainly said that all the mony in their Country was not sufficient to have built it.


This Steeple is accounted about four hundred sixty and five foot high, being about half way up three hundred and thirty eight steps. Besides other Hills, I could see 
Haimburger
 Hill within two miles of 
Presburg,
 and a great part of 
Austria,
 which the long Course of the 
Da∣nube
 rendred very pleasant and delightful unto the eye. In the Chamber or Room from whence I had this prospect, there is a Clock, whose Case being of wood, was in part burnt down by Lightning, and therefore there is water always kept in this place to extinguish the fire, and a man continually watcheth in the place where the Bells hand. There is also an Instrument of wood, or wooden Bells or Hammers, which they make use of from 
Good∣friday
 till 
Easter-sunday,
 all the time that our Saviour was in the Grave, during which time they permit no Bells to ring.


At one of the doors of the Church there is a stone pla∣ced in the wall, which is generally conceived to be one of the stones wherewith St. 
Stephen
 was stoned. It seem∣ed to me some kind of pebble, and is worn and polished by the hands of the people, who when they enter at that door, do touch it with their fingers. I was also shewed





depiction of St Stephen's Cathedral, Vienna


The Cathedrall Church of S.
t
 Stephen in Vienna






 one of the stones which killed St. 
Steven
 at St. 
Sernine,
 or St. 
Saturnine
's Church in 
Tholouse
 in 
France,
 which is a Church abounding with Relique-Rarities, and where they also think they have the Bodies of seven of the A∣postles, of St. 
George,
 of our King St. 
Edmund,
 and of forty Saints.


In this Church of St. 
Stephen,
 besides many Monu∣ments of great Princes and famous Persons, divers learn∣ed men have Sepulchral Inscriptions; as 
Johannes Faber Bishop of Vienna; Johannes Cuspinianus,
 and 
Sebastianus Tengnagelius,
 formerly Library-keeper, Historiogra∣pher, and Counsellor to the Emperour, an extraordina∣ry learned man, and skilful in fifteen Languages, as the Inscription delivers; as 
Hebrew, Syriack, Chaldee, Persian, Arabick, Turkish, Aethiopick, Greek, Latin, Italian, French, Spanish, German, Belgick,
 and 
Eng∣lish.


The University of 
Vienna
 is also remarkable, if we conssider the Antiquity thereof, the number of Scholars, their course of Studies, their accommodations, privi∣ledges and advancements. This is said to have been be∣gun by 
Albertus
 the Third, above three hundred years past; and their Rules, Orders, and Statutes to have been borrowed from the University of 
Paris,
 and the Students were distinguished into four Divisions or Nations; who, besides the General, have their particular Rules and Officers, and were comprehended under the 
Classis
 of 
Austrians,
 Nations of the 
Rhine, Hungarians,
 and 
Saxons.


In the 
Austrian
 Division were contained the 
Friulians,
 all of the Diocese of 
Trent,
 all 
Italy,
 with the other Pro∣vinces beyond the Mountains. 
 
vian
 the 
Classis
 of the 
Rhine
 were comprehended 
Sue∣
, Alsatians, Franconians, Hassians,
 d all the Pro∣vinces

 to the South-west, as 
France, Spain, Navarre, Holland, Brabant.


In the third 
Classis,
 or 
Natio Hungariae,
 were contain∣ed 
Hungarians, Bohemians, Polonians, Moravians, Scla∣vonians,
 all that speak the 
Sclavonian
 Tongue, and also 
Germans.


To the 
Classis,
 or 
Natio Saxonum,
 were reduced 
Sax∣ons, Westphalians, Frislanders, Turingians, Misnians, Brandenburgers, Prussians. Livonians, Lusatians, Pome∣ranians,
 with the 
Ultramarine
 Kingdoms of 
England, Scotland, Ireland, Sweden, Norway,
 and 
Denmark.


These Divisions take up all the Nations of 
Europe;
 and indeed there are Students here of many Nations: and upon Contentions and Differences the several 
Classes
 will hold unto their own, and take parts, and bandy against each other, but will all unite and hold together in differ∣ences with Towns-men or Jews, which happen sometimes unto an high degree.


They follow here the old beaten way of Knowledge: and I met with few who had any good insight in new 
Phi∣losophy;
 but there are many good 
Philologers,
 and are well versed in Languages, History and Antiquity: and there are many Learned Men either educated here, or come from other parts. Some who had taken notice of the 
Royal Socie∣ty
 in 
London,
 were very inquisitive after it; and when I had satisfied them in all particulars, were very much pleased therewith. If they should fall into the way of 
Experimental Philosophy,
 being very industrious, 'tis ve∣ry probable they may do much therein, and they were sure to have the countenance of the Emperour. I found them also much affected with the 
English
 Society in other parts of 
Germany.
 At the University of 
Altorff
 I was much enquired of concerning it: and a Magistrate of 
Nurnburg,
 who had got a 
Telescope
 from 
London,
 invited

 me to his House, to practise the way of using it. 
Der Herr von Adlershelme
 of 
Leipsick,
 a Person of great Cu∣riosity, was very inquisitive after the same 
Society.
 And of late years the 
Curiosi
 of 
Germany
 have held Learned Con∣ventions and Correspondence, and printed their 
Obser∣vations
 at 
Leipsick.
 And since my Return into 
England,
 I have been solicited from 
Cassovia
 in 
Upper Hungary,
 to send the 
Transactions
 into those Parts.


During my stay at 
Vienna,
 I went unto a publick Ana∣to my of a Woman that was beheaded: the 
Lecture
 lasted so long, that the Body was Nineteen days unburied. It was performed by a Learned Physician, Dr. 
Wolfstregel,
 who read in 
Latin
 to the satisfaction of all persons. What I most particularly observed therein was this, The 
Pyra∣midal Muscles
 very plain and large; the 
Uterus
 larger than is usually observed; the 
Cartilago Ensiformis
 double; the 
Lungs
 very black; the 
Eye
 was very well shown; he produced an artificial Eye of Ivory, and another large one of Pastboard and Paper, contrived and made by him∣self; the 
Muscles
 of the 
Pharynx, Larynx, Os Hyoides,
 and the 
Tongue,
 after their dissection, he reduced very handsomely into their proper places again, to shew their natural situation and position. The 
Anatomy-Theatre
 was of capacity to receive above an hundred persons; and according to the custome of other places, to avoid imper∣tinent Spectators, a piece of Mony was given for admis∣sion. Of 
Anatomy-Theatres,
 until of late, there have been few in 
Germany,
 or none. And when I was in the 
Anato∣my-School
 at 
Altorff,
 near 
Nurenburg,
 that learned and ci∣vil Professor, Dr. 
Mauritius Hoffmannus,
 told me that the same was the First in 
Germany.


Paulus de Sorbait,
 Prime Professor, Physician unto 
E∣leonora
 the Empress Dowager, and Knight of 
Hungary,
 was the 
Rector Magnificus. Zwelfer,
 who writ 
Animad∣versions

 upon the Dispensatory of Ausburg,
 was in great re∣pute in 
Vienna,
 and had built for himself a noble House in the City, but he died some time before my coming thi∣ther.


In fine, the University is noble, their Advancements considerable, their Priviledges great, and they have the power of life and death, from ancient and latter Conces∣sions of their Dukes and Emperours.


But the greatest lustre unto 
Vienna
 is the Residence of the present Emperour 
Leopoldus;
 he was born in the year 1638. he was Son unto the Emperour 
Ferdinand
 the Third; he was baptized by the Names of 
Leopoldus, Ig∣natius, Franciscus, Balthazar, Josephus, Felicianus.
 His eldest Brother 
Ferdinand,
 King of the 
Romans,
 died of the Small Pox in his Fathers time. His Brother 
Carolus Josephus,
 Master of the 
Teutonick Order,
 dyed 1662. He married 
Margareta
 Infanta of 
Spain,
 daughter unto King 
Philip
 the Fourth, whose Children died Infants; a ver∣tuous, affable, grave, and worthy Prince, and seemed to me to live very happily here, in the love and honour of his People, Souldiers, and Clergy.


His Person is grave and graceful; he hath the 
Austrian
 Lip remarkably, his Chin long, which is taken for a good Physiognomical mark, and a sign of a constant, placid, and little troubled mind. He is conceived to carry in his Face the lineaments of four of his Predecessours, that is, of 
Rudolphus
 the First, of 
Maximilian
 the First, of 
Charles
 the Fifth, and 
Ferdinand
 the First. He was very affecti∣onate unto his Empress, who, though but young, was a modest, grave Princess, had a good aspect, was zealous in her Religion, and an Enemy unto the Jews. He shewed also great respect and observance unto the Empress Dow∣ager 
Eleonora,
 who was a sober and prudent Princess, well skilled in all kind of curious Works, and delighted

 sometimes to shoot at Deer from a Stand, or at other Game, out of her Coach. He was also very loving unto his Sisters, beautiful and good Ladies; whereof one, the eldest, was since married unto that Noble Prince 
Michael Wisnowitzski,
 King of 
Poland.


He speaks four Languages, 
German, Italian, Spanish,
 and 
Latin.
 He is a great countenancer of Learned Men, and delighteth to read, and when occasion permitteth, will pass some hours at it. The worthy 
Petrus Lambe∣cius
 his Library Keeper, and who is in great esteem with him, will usually find out some Books for him which he conceiveth may be acceptable. While I was there he re∣commended a Translation of 
Religio Medici
 unto him, wherewith the Emperour was exceedingly pleased, and spake very much of it unto 
Lambecius,
 insomuch that 
Lambecius
 asked me whether I knew the Author, he be∣ing of my own name, and whether he were living: And when he understood my near Relation to him, he became more kind and courteous than ever, and desired me to send him that Book in the Original 
English,
 which he would put into the Emperours Library: and presented me with a neat little 
Latin
 Book, called 
Princeps in Com∣pendio,
 written by the Emperours Father, 
Ferdinandus
 the Third.


He is also skilful in Musick, composeth well, and de∣lighted much in it, both at his Palace and the Church, which makes so many Musicians in 
Vienna;
 for no place abounds more with them; and in the Evening we seldom failed of Musick in the Streets, and at our Windows: And the Emperours delight herein makes the Church-men take the greater care to set off their Church-musick, for he goeth often to Church, and not to one, but divers, e∣specially the best Conventual Churches: and in his own Chappel some of his own Compositions are often play'd.

 He hath also excellent Musick in his Palace, both Vocal and Instrumental; and his private Chappel is well ser∣ved, where besides the excellent Musick, there are al∣ways eight or ten Counts, Pages to the Emperour, who serve at the Altar with white wax Torches in their hands; and after the manner of the 
Italian
 Princes, divers 
Eunuchs
 to sing.


For his Recreations abroad, he delighteth much in Hunting, especially of the wild Boar in due seasons; I have known him bring home six Boars in a morning. Some stout persons, particularly Count 
Nicholas Serini,
 would encounter a wild Boar alone, but at last he unfortunately perished by one, which hath made others more wary since; and therefore when the Boar is at a Bay, the Hunts∣men so stand about him, that the Emperour, or other great persons, may more safely make use of their Boar∣spears upon him.


Surely there are great numbers of them about the Country, for they are no unusual or extraordinary Dish in the City, though of a delicious and pleasing taste. They feed upon 
Acorns, Beech-mast,
 and 
Chesnuts,
 upon the spring or sprout of 
Broom, Juniper,
 and 
Shrubs,
 and up∣on the roots of 
Fern,
 and will range into Corn-fields, and come out of Forrests into Vineyards. The Hunts∣men are notably versed and skilful in that Game; for though they see it not, they will distinguish a wild from a common Swine, and ghess whether that which they hunt be Male or Female, old or young, large or small, fat or lean; and this they chiefly conjecture from their tread or foot, and the casting their hindfeet out of the track of their forefeet.


The Emperour being so good a Huntsman, it is the less wonder that he is esteemed a good Horsman. Certain it is, that he hath a very noble Stable of Horses, procured

 from all parts, 
Turkish, Tartarian, Polonian, Transylvanian, Saxon, Bohemian, Hungarian, Naples, &c.
 and they are well managed; and they ride them to the satisfaction of the Beholders.


Having seen the 
Arsenal
 at 
Venice,
 the 
Stores
 at 
Chat∣ham,
 and the 
Naval Provisions
 at 
Amsterdam,
 I am not like to admire any other, especially so far from the Sea, and looked for nothing of that nature in this place. Not∣withstanding I found an 
Arsenal,
 and place for Naval Vessels to be set out upon occasion, and some thereof were employed in the last 
Turkish
 war, when they at∣tempted to destroy the Bridge of Boats which the 
Turks
 had made over the 
Danube,
 a little above 
Gran
 and 
Bare∣han.
 They are built somewhat like 
Galleys,
 carry great Guns, and a good number of Souldiers, and will make a sight upon the broad deep stream of the 
Danube,
 and may be handsomely brought into the Town behind one of the Bastions, when the River is high; and hereof there are some at 
Rab
 and 
Komora,
 as I have declared elsewhere.


The Emperour hath many Counsellors, great Souldiers and Courtiers about him; among which these seemed of greatest Note.


Eusebius Wenceslaus
 Duke 
de Sagan,
 Prince 
Lobko∣witz,
 Pirme Counsellor, 
Hoff-meister,
 of the Or∣der of the 
Golden Fleece,
 a person of a grave and sober Aspect, somewhat blunt in conversation, but of a gener∣ous temper, and free from all covetousness, who spent his Revenues nobly, and unto his great reputation: He was chief Favorite unto the Emperour; and though some had no great opinion of his Abilities, yet he was the first that discovered the last 
Hungarian
 defection and revolt, whereby those Noble Persons, Count 
Peter Serini
 and 
Nadasti
 (whom I saw at 
Vienna
) were brought unto their ends.




Henricus Gulielmus,
 Count of 
Stahrenberg, Ober-hoff-Mareschal,
 or 
Lord Marshal of the Court.


Johannes Maximilianus,
 Count of 
Lamburg, Oberst-Kammer-Herr,
 or 
Chief of the Chamber,
 a Person of great esteem. The Gentlemen of the Bed-chamber are numerous, and many are in extraordinary; there may be an hundred of them, all 
Barons
 and 
Counts.
 Every one of them wears a Golden Key before his Breast: and the Grooms of the Bed-chamber wear one of Steel: Two of each attend every Night.


Gundakerus,
 Count 
Dietrichstein, Oberst-Stall-Meister,
 or 
Chief Master of the Horse.


These are the Chief. These following are also consi∣derable.


Count 
Sinzendorff, Oberste-Jag-Meister, Grand Ve∣neur,
 or 
Hunts-Master,
 a Person in good favour with the Emperour, who very much delighteth in Hunting, as have most of his Predecessors.


The Count of 
Aversberg Oberst Falken-Meister, Chief Falconer,
 who hath twelve Falconers under him.


The Count of 
Paar, Chief Master of the Emperours Post.


Leopoldus Wilhelmus,
 Marquiss of 
Baden, Captain
 of an hundred 
Hartshires,
 who are the 
Horse-guard,
 and ride with 
Pistols
 and 
Carabines
 out of the City; but within 
Vienna
 they cary 
Launces
 and 
Javelins
 with broad points.


Franciscus Augustinus,
 Count of 
Wallensteyn, Captain
 of an hundred of the 
Foot-guard,
 of a good Personage, and well esteemed of by the Emperour.


Sixty, or more, 
Pages,
 for the number is uncertain, and not limited; most of them 
Counts
 and 
Barons.


Raymundus,
 Count 
de Montecuculi,
 was his 
General,
 President of the Council of War, Governour of 
Rab
 and

 the Confines about it, and of the 
Order
 of the 
Golden Fleece;
 a tall Person, somewhat lean, but hath a spirit in his look: he is one of the oldest Commanders in 
Europe,
 and performed good Service in 
Poland, Hungary, Ger∣many
 in many places, and is esteemed a prudent, valiant, and successful Commander.


The Count 
de Souches
 was also a 
Commander
 of great Fame, and in high esteem with the Emperour. He was a Native of 
Rochelle:
 he first served the 
Swedes
 in the 
German
 wars, and was a Colonel, but upon some disgust he forsook the 
Swedes,
 and served the 
Imperialists,
 and was made Governour of 
Brin,
 the second Town in 
Mo∣ravia.
 After the taking of 
Crembs
 in 
Austria,
 General 
Torstenson
 besieged 
Brin,
 and sent word unto the Govern∣our 
de Souches,
 That if he refused to deliver up the Town he would give him no quarter. Who answered him, That he would not ask any, and also give none: and defended the place with such resolution, that after many Assaults, Underminings, and Attempts by 
Granado's, Torstenson
 was forced to rise, after a Siege of four months, which was so advantagious unto 
Austria
 and the 
Imperial
 affairs, that the Emperour took especial notice of him, made him a 
Baron,
 and of his 
Privy Council.
 He commanded also all the Forces in 
Vienna,
 and did notable Service in the last 
Turkish
 wars. He took the City of 
Nitra,
 or 
Nitria,
 not far from 
Strigonium
 or 
Gran;
 and took and slew six thousand 
Turks
 which were sent by the 
Vizier
 of 
Buda
 a∣gainst him: a worthy Person, and of a good Aspect. Count 
Souches
 the younger his Son, an Heroick Com∣mander, is Governour of the strong fortified place 
Leopold∣stadt
 by 
Freistadt,
 a Person of great Civility, unto whom I was much obliged.


Count 
Lesly,
 Nephew unto Count 
Lesly
 who was sent Ambassadour to 
Constantinople
 to the 
Sultan
 from the Em∣perour,

 is a Commander worthy of that esteem he hath with the Emperour; a Person of great Courage, Civility and Humanity, which I must ever acknowledge.


The Courts of the Empress, and of the Empress Dow∣ager, are filled with Persons of Note; and there are a great number of Souldiers in this place of great Fame, as the Marquiss 
Pio, Spork, Cops,
 and many more. Many of the Clergy and Men of Learning, are in good esteem with the Emperour; but the 
Jesuites Milner
 and 
Bocca∣bella
 are his near Favorites. Many Strangers, both Soul∣diers and Scholars, have built their Fortunes here. And surely Strangers of parts and industry, so they be of the 
Roman Church,
 are not like to raise their Fortunes any where better than in these parts.


Though the Emperour goeth not to war in Person, yet hath he been successful in his wars, especially in the last Battel with the 
Turks
 at St. 
Godart,
 where the business was handsomly and actively managed, to set upon the body of the 
Turks,
 which had passed the River 
Rab,
 before the whole Forces of the 
Vizier
 could come over, to the great slaughter of the 
Janisaries
 and 
Turks,
 who fought stout∣ly, and were first put to a Retreat by the 
French
 Caval∣ry. For at first the 
Turks
 seemed to prevail, and had slain a great part of two Regiments of the 
Auxiliaries
 which came out of 
Franconia,
 and after their custome, had cut off their Heads.


Among the many notable things in 
Vienna,
 the 
Imperi∣al
 Library is very remarkable. He who hath seen the 
Bodleian
 Library at 
Oxford,
 and the 
Vatican
 at 
Rome,
 would be much surprised to find such a notable one here, as may compare with them; especially upon the extreme Borders of the Learned part of 
Europe.


The number and nobleness of the Books doth much ex∣ceed the receptacle or place which containeth them, as

 making no fair shew at the entrance, and somewhat want∣ing light. But as for the number and value of the Books, they are of opinion here that it yieldeth unto none, but rather excelleth any other Library in 
Europe.
 There was a place designed for the building of a fit receptacle for them; but, I know not how, a Theatre for Comedies is now built in that place.


It is divided into eight Chambers or Rooms, which are so well filled, that many Books are fain to lye upon the Floor; and the Shelves stand so close, that there is but just room to pass between them. The Manuscripts stand distinct from the printed Books, according to their Languages, being divided into six 
Classes, Theological, Juridical, Medical, Philosophical, Historical, Philologi∣cal.
 There can scarce be a more admirable Collection than the Manuscripts in part of the first Chamber, of 
He∣brew, Syriack, Arabick, Turkish, Armenian, Aethiopick,
 and 
Chinese
 Books.


It was begun, at least the Books began to be placed in this receptacle, by 
Maximilian
 the First, but hath been much encreased by succeeding Emperours, most of them, since 
Rodolphus
 the First, being much addicted unto Learning, there having been large accessions from many noble Libraries, and most upon the cost of the Emper∣ours. The choicest Books in the famous Library of 
Bu∣da,
 of King 
Matthias Corvinus,
 Son unto 
Huniades,
 are now in it. The notable Library of 
Wolfgangus La∣zius,
 who was Library-Keeper, was brought hither, and Three thousand Books of 
Johannes Sambucus
 are now in this Repository.


Augerius Busbequius,
 sometime Library-Keeper hereof, added much unto it; and in his two 
Turkish
 Embassies procured great number of noble 
Greek
 Manuscripts at 
Constantinople,
 which are inscribed with his own hand,

 
Aug. de Busbeck. emit Constantinopoli.
 A great many were added from the Library of the Learned 
Johannes Cuspini∣anus,
 Library Keeper, and Counsellor unto the Emper∣our. The notable Libraries and Mathematical Instru∣ments of 
Tycho Brahe, Kepler,
 and 
Gassendus,
 were pur∣chased for it. But the largest accession was made by the noble Library of Count 
Fugger,
 which consisting of six∣teen thousand Volumes, was purchased by 
Ferdinand
 the Third. Many were brought, some few years past, from the 
Ambrasian
 Library by 
Inspruck,
 by the Learned 
Pe∣trus Lambecius,
 Library Keeper, Historiographer, and Counsellor unto the present Emperour; who hath also an excellent Library which is like to be added unto the 
Imperial.
 He then reckoned the Volumes in this great Library to amount at least to Fourscore thousand; and by this time that number may be increased, for he ad∣deth some yearly. And the number might almost be endless, if they would make use of their priviledge, for the Emperour hath a right to have two Books of all that are printed in 
Germany.


They have also a great advantage at 
Vienna,
 to acquire good 
Manuscripts
 from the 
Turkish
 Dominions, for the Emperour is obliged to have a Resident with the Grand 
Signor
 wheresoever he moveth or ordereth him to be; even at the last sight of St. 
Godart,
 the Emperour's Resident was in the 
Turkish
 Camp. And when I was at 
Larissa
 in 
Thessaly,
 the Resident 
Signor di Casa Nova,
 was inquisi∣tive after Books to be found among the 
Greeks
 in Mona∣steries and other places. And this Emperour, like his Father, will spare no cost toward such Acquiries.


By the especial favour of my noble Friend 
Lambecius,
 I went many times into this Library, and he was so cour∣teous as to let me have what Books I desired unto my pri∣vate Lodging: He would shew me divers Books upon

 what Subject I required, and offered me a sight of what Books he thought rare and estimable; and amongst others I could not but take notice of these following.


A 
Letter
 of the present Emperour of 
China,
 in the 
Chinese
 and 
Tartarian
 Languages, unto the present Em∣perour of 
Germany,
 weaved in a very fine 
Roll.


Another old 
Roll
 written in unknown Letters, yet a little resembling the 
Greek.


A 
Book
 in the 
Runick
 Language.


A very fair 
Manuscript
 of 
Ptolomy,
 with the Mapps drawn in Colours.


The 
oldest Manuscript
 and 
true Exemplar
 of 
Livie,
 in large Letters, without distinction of 
Words
 or 
Sentences,
 very uneasie to be read, a thousand years old, and brought, not many years since, from the Library near 
Inspruck.


An old fair 
Greek Manuscript
 of 
Dioscorides,
 written eleven hundred years since, in very large 
Letters,
 without distance of 
Words,
 or 
Accents,
 wherein all the 
Plants
 are lively painted; also the 
Pictures
 of 
Dioscorides, Galen, Pamphilus, Cratevas,
 and other ancient 
Physicians,
 bought of a 
Jew
 at 
Constantinople
 for an hundred 
Ducats
 by 
Bus∣bequius.


A 
Book
 of 
Geometrical Propositions
 demonstrated in the 
China
 Language.


Another fair one in the 
China
 Tongue with 
Pi∣ctures.


A noble old 
Greek Manuscript
 in great uncial 
Letters,
 without stops, points, or distance of words.


An ancient 
Greek Manuscript
 of the 
Book
 of 
Genesis,
 in large 
Letters,
 without distance or accents, thirteen hun∣dred years ago; wherein are Forty eight 
Pictures
 or 
Draughts
 in 
Miniature
 or 
Water colours,
 much conducing to the knowledge of 
ancient Habits,
 the manner of 
Feast∣ing,


 postures at 
Meals,
 waiting of 
Servants
 and 
Musical Instruments:
 Wherein I could not but take notice of the 
Golden Spot
 upon 
Josephs
 breast; and the manner of the 
Execution
 of 
Pharaoh
's Baker, his 
Head
 being put through a forked piece of wood, and his 
Hands
 tyed behind him.


A fair 
Book
 of 
Albert Durer,
 wherein are many fine 
Paintings
 in 
Miniature
 or 
Limning;
 as also a 
Sphere,
 and within it a 
Globe
 carved and painted by him.


A fair 
Book
 of 
Michael Angelo,
 wherein, besides many rare things in 
Architecture,
 are all the 
paintings
 and 
de∣signs
 of the 
Belvedere
 in little.


A fair 
Alcoran
 in 
Arabick,
 interlined with the 
Turkish
 to explain it.


The 
Bible
 in the 
Coptick
 and 
Persian
 Languages.


Luther
's own 
Bible,
 marked with his own 
Hand,
 and interlined by him with 
Notes
 in many places.


A fair 
Greek Manuscript
 of the 
New Testament,
 fifteen hundred years ago written in 
Letters
 of 
Gold
 upon 
Pur∣ple.


There was also a 
Magical Glass,
 obtained by the Em∣perour 
Rodolphus,
 whereby to see 
Apparitions,
 and con∣verse with 
Spirits;
 which some conceive to be the same, or of the like nature with that used by 
Kelly.


Of ancient 
Greek, Roman,
 and 
Gothick Medals
 and 
Coyns,
 in 
Gold, Silver,
 and 
Copper,
 to the number of six∣teen thousand. Among the 
Copper Coyns
 they pretend to have two of the Emperour 
Marcus Otho.


I let fall some 
Drops
 into this 
Ocean,
 adding some 
Coyns, Intaglia's,
 and 
Inscriptions
 not to be found in that large work of 
Gruterus;
 which having found in the Em∣perours furthest Dominions and 
Turkish
 parts, long out of his possession, where there had been no great enquiry af∣ter them; were shewed unto his Imperial Majesty by 
Pe∣trus

 Lambecius,
 and so well accepted by him, that he said I might have the use of what Books I desired: and at my return into 
England
 he gave me a formal Pass in 
Latin
 for my safe Travel, and that my Trunks or Goods might not be searched, which takes off a great deal of trouble in passing so many 
Principalities
 and free 
Cities,
 Command∣ing all in his own Dominions, and Requesting all Princes in 
Germany
 to favour me, and permit me to pass freely without molestation: It was thus Subscribed,


Leopoldus


Leopoldus Gulielmus Comes in Kinigseggs.


Ad mandatum Sacr. Caes. Majestatis proprium Beüer.


The 
Rarities
 of the great Duke of 
Tuscany,
 The 
Trea∣sure
 of 
Loretto,
 St. 
Mark,
 St. 
Denis
 in 
France,
 of the Duke of 
Saxony
 at 
Dresden,
 and others, were very sa∣tisfactory to me. Yet having a fair opportunity, I would not leave 
Vienna
 without a sight of the most noble 
Trea∣sury
 or 
Repository
 of his Imperial Majesty; especially ha∣ving heard so much thereof, and knowing it to be the 
Collection
 of many succeeding Emperours. I therefore took a fit opportunity to remain divers hours in it, and was extremely delighted with the rich and magnificent Curiosities thereof. To set down all I saw, were a work too large for this Volume; and the Catalogue of them, which is kept in this place, taketh up a large Volume in 
Folio.
 I shall therefore only mention these following,

 whereby some conjecture may be made of the rest.


In the first 
Cupboard
 or 
Case
 were many noble Vessels, turned and shaped out of 
Ivory,
 a 
Cup
 turned by the Emperours own Hand; another turned by 
Ferdinandus
 the Third. Gallant 
Cups
 of 
Amber; Spoons
 and 
Vessels
 of 
Mother of Pearl;
 many noble works in 
Coral;
 a fine 
Galley
 in 
Ivory,
 and 
Cups
 made out of 
Rhinocerot's
 horn.


In the second,
 An 
Elephant
 of 
Ivory
 with a 
Castle
 upon his back, and over the 
Castle
 a 
Ship,
 with much other fine work in the same piece. Two fair 
Pillars
 of 
Ivory;
 good 
Basso Re∣lievo
 in 
Ivory;
 a fair 
Cranium
 or 
Deaths-head,
 and much other variety of 
Ivory
 work. A 
Picture
 in 
Oyl
 of 
Ga∣nimede,
 by 
Corregio.


In the third,
 A fine 
Picture
 of an 
old Man's head
 in 
Oyl
 by 
Albert Durer:
 great Variety of 
Watches
 and 
Clock-work
 in 
Sil∣ver:
 a fine 
Centaur
 in 
Silver,
 which is a curious 
Watch.


In the fourth,
 More 
Watches
 and 
Clock-work;
 a gallant 
Ship
 of 
Silver,
 a 
Triumphal Chariot,
 a 
Turk
 riding and attended, a 
Globe
 and a 
Sphere
 in 
Silver,
 a curious 
Landskip
 in 
Oyl
 by 
Cor∣regio,
 a 
Cupid
 by the same hand, with a fine Copy of it.


In the fifth,
 A curious 
Filigrane Handkerchief,
 and two fair 
File∣grane Plates
 brought out of 
Spain
 by the Empress 
Mar∣garita;
 an 
Indian Basket
 of an 
Indian
 sort of 
Filegrane
 mixed with 
Birds;
 a 
Bason
 of 
Agate
 finely wrought with silver 
Craw-fishes
 in it.




In the sixth,
 Is contained a strange 
Collection
 of 
Intaglie
 and old 
Ro∣man Stones,
 admirable for their work and largeness. A large 
Agate
 whereon is wrought the History of that 
Victory
 which 
Augustus Caesar
 obtained over the 
Dalmatians
 and 
Pannonians
 in the ninth year of our Lord; about five inches long, and four broad, highly valued.


An 
Onyx
 with the 
Head
 of 
Alexander
 and 
Olympia.


A 
Shell
 with a 
Battel
 carved in it.


A 
Chain
 with the 
Heads
 of all the 
Austrian Family.


A 
Dog
 in a very large 
Sardonyx.


In the seventh,
 A noble 
Head
 in 
Oyl
 by 
Hans van Ach.
 The 
Head
 of 
Maximilianus
 the First in 
Plaister,
 with a 
lock
 of his own 
Hair. Mother of Pearl
 in many shapes. Fine 
Bas∣kets,
 and the twelve 
Caesar
's Heads.


In the eighth, most of 
Chrystal,
 A noble 
Vessel
 about a yard and half high, made out of one piece of 
Chrystal.
 An 
Urne.
 The 
Head
 of the Empress. A fair 
Dragon.
 The 
Head
 of the Queen-Mother of 
France.
 A 
Chrystal
 in which the 
Picture
 of our 
Saviour
 may be seen thrice one way, and once another way.


The ninth of 
Chrystal
 also,
 A noble 
Ewer.
 A fair 
Vessel
 of very clear 
Chrystal,
 lately bought. A large 
Head.
 Fair 
Crosses,
 and other Varieties.


The tenth of 
Gold
 and precious 
Stones.
 Five 
Crowns.
 The 
Imperial Crown;
 rich in 
Jewels,
 and hath a very large 
blew Saphir
 on the top. A 
Model
 of that 
Crown
 with which the 
Emperour
 is crowned, much

 richer than the Original. A 
Paragon Diamond
 of seven∣teen 
Carats
 and a half. Very large 
Rubies.
 A 
Scepter
 of 
Unicorns
 horn, set with rich 
Stones.
 A 
Locket
 of the greatest 
Diamonds.
 A magnificent 
Scepter, Globe, Cross,
 and 
Crown,
 which cost seven hundred thousand Crowns. An 
Opal
 bigger than my hand, as it was taken out of the 
Mine;
 and many other fair 
Opals.
 A very large 
Emerald.
 A 
Ship
 in an 
Emerald.
 A fair 
Ring-Dial.


The eleventh of 
Gold.
 A noble 
Bason
 used at the 
Baptism
 of the 
Austrian Fa∣mily. Scepters, Scimeters, Knives,
 and other rich 
Pre∣sents
 from the 
Turk.
 Three rich 
Dog-Collars,
 sent with three 
Dogs
 out of 
England,
 with this Mark on them ƆC ƆC. A large lump of pure 
Gold,
 as it was taken out of the 
Mine,
 as broad as my hand. A fair piece of 
Gold Ore,
 wherein the pure 
Gold
 shooteth upon a 
white Stone.
 Divers great 
Basons
 of 
Gold
 and 
Coral.


In the twelfth.
 
Vessels
 of 
Jaspis, Agate, Lapis Lazuli, Oriental Granates. Cups
 of 
Onyx, Sardonyx.
 Large ones of 
Lapis Nephriti∣cus:
 and a great one of an 
Amethyst.


In the thirteenth.
 A large high 
Vessel
 of 
Bohemian Topaz. Flowers
 well made out of 
precious Stones.
 A 
Cup
 of an 
Hungarian Dia∣mond.
 A piece of 
Ambergreece
 as big as a mans head, sent from the 
Grand Signor.
 A noble 
Jaspis-stone.
 A large 
Stone
 of 
Agate
 on the outside, and a bed of large 
Ame∣thysts
 naturally in it in the middle, which is an extra∣ordinary and pleasant Rarity.




In the rest,
 Noble 
Chrysolites, Jacynths, Oriental Granates, Berylt
 or 
Aquamarines.
 The notable rich 
Smaragdus,
 or 
Eme∣rald,
 or a 
Cup
 out of that 
Stone.
 Three great ones ha∣ving been already taken out, valued at three hundred thousand Crowns. A 
Picture
 in 
Oyl
 of the little King 
Uladislaus Lokeli,
 King of 
Hungary.
 Ten rich 
Turkish Saddles
 with 
Furniture
 for 
Horses,
 set with fair 
Turcois Stones.
 A great number of 
Gold Vessels
 and fine 
Figures
 in 
Coral, Turkish Knives, Gauntlets,
 and 
Table men
 of 
Gold.
 Delicate 
Pictures
 in 
Wax.
 Very large 
Bezoar-stones, In∣dian-gold Cards
 and 
Counters.
 A vast 
Medal
 of the 
Em∣perours Arms,
 weighing two thousand two hundred 
Du∣cats,
 or a thousand pounds 
English.
 A 
Cup
 out of 
Solo∣mon
's 
Temple.
 Fair 
Amber,
 Rare 
Inlaying
 in 
Wood. Bac∣chus
 and other 
Statua's
 out of a very high 
Rhinocerot
's horn. A fine 
Picture
 of the Mountain 
Vesuvius. Jewels
 with 
black Feathers
 given by the 
Turkish Ambassadours.
 A notable 
Picture
 of a lean 
Skeleton Priest,
 who lived so four years. A noble 
Cabinet-clock
 with large motions. A fair 
Bason
 and 
Ewer
 of carved 
Ivory.
 King 
Philip
 the Second of 
Spain
 in 
Diamond
 Armour, set in 
Gold.
 A neat 
Picture
 of an 
old Man
 courting a 
young Woman,
 with this 
Motto:


Arctum Annulum nè gestato.


A 
Knife
 swallowed by a 
Peasant
 near 
Prague,
 which was nine months in his 
Stomach,
 and safely cut out 1602. The like happened also to a person in 
Prussia,
 of which 
Daniel Becker
 hath written a peculiar 
Tract
 under this Title, 
De Cultrivoro Prussiaco.
 A fair 
Crucifix
 of 
Pearl. Indian Pictures
 made of 
Feathers.
 The King of 
Sweden, Gusta∣vus Adolphus
's 
Buff-coat
 in which he was killed at the Bat∣tel of 
Lutzen. Tilly
's Sword. An 
Angel
 in 
Ivory
 with

 Hair and Clothes of 
Filegrane
 of 
Gold.
 A neat 
Crucifix
 of 
Wood
 by 
Albertus Durer,
 Two very large 
Looking∣glasses
 with the 
Frames
 of 
Silver.
 All the 
Gospels
 writ∣ten and painted. Many brave 
Statua's
 and 
Pictures
 e∣very where. The 
Head
 of 
Charles
 the First King of 
Eng∣land,
 in 
white Marble.
 A 
Pedistal
 of 
Amber,
 over which a 
Cross.
 The 
Head
 of St. 
Valerius
 Bishop of 
Triers.
 The 
Picture
 of St. 
Katherine
 of 
Sienna,
 drawn by 
Sigismund
 King of 
Poland.
 A Picture of the 
Emperour
 as he giveth 
Audience,
 to be looked upon through a little round hole. A neat 
Table
 of 
Inlay'd Stone
 made by the present Empress Dowager 
Eleonora.
 A 
Nail
 of our 
Saviour
's 
Cross
 almost a foot long; our 
Saviour
's 
Blood;
 and two 
Thorns
 of his 
Crown,
 the one whiter than the other. 
Priests Garments
 covered all over with large 
Pearl.
 The great and high esteemed 
Agate Dish,
 between three and four spans Diameter, with XRISOS naturally in it. Unto which one applied that of St. 
Luke, Dico vobis quia si hi tacuerint, lapides clamabunt.


Unto which magnificent Rarities there is one more added, the noble 
Chain
 of 
Pearl
 of eight yards long, ta∣ken from the 
Graff Tokoly
 in the late 
Hungarian
 war, as I understand since my Return.


I went unto divers noted Places about 
Vienna:
 I walk∣ed unto the Hill of 
Vienna,
 two 
English
 miles distant from the Town, going up all the way by an easie Ascent; from whence I had a prospect of the City, and the Campagnia about it, together with the high Mountains in 
Steirmark
 covered with Snow: and in my return saw the Palace of the Empress Dowager without the Town, called 
la Favo∣rita,
 and passed by the Convent of the 
Paulini.


About two 
English
 miles Eastward from 
Vienna,
 there is a very noble Garden-place belonging to the Emperour, built by 
Rodolphus
 the Second, which hath been formerly

 well furnished, and provided with Plants, but now seems to be neglected, and somewhat ruinous. It consisteth of an inward and an outward square Garden: The inward is two hundred ordinary paces square, about the same big∣ness with the Place Royal at 
Paris:
 It hath a 
Portico
 or 
Cloyster,
 supported by Forty Pillars of white Stone on each side, and is covered with Copper; as are also the Pavilions which the common people think to be Gold. Besides this, there is an handsome row of Buildings well seated, called 
Néw-gabaú,
 in which at present are many wild Beasts kept. Lions and Tigres breed here, and have young ones. Some say this was the place of 
Solyman
 the Magnificents Tent when he besieged 
Vienna.


There is also, about two or three miles from 
Vienna,
 a noted place of Devotion, called 
Arnols,
 much frequen∣ted, especially in 
Lent,
 divers carrying Crosses very heavy all the way upon their shoulders. There is here a little House built exactly after that of the Sepulchre at 
Jerusalem;
 and also a handsome Copy of the Picture of our Saviour and the Virgin 
Mary,
 with their exact heights. That of our Saviour is about two yards high; that of the blessed Virgin three or four singers breadth lower: These are taken from the Original in St. 
John de Lateran
 at 
Rome.
 Hither the Empress desired to go one morning from her own Palace on foot, out of Devotion, which she perform∣ed, though with a great deal of difficulty, she being not used to walk, and the way was dusty. The Emperour accompanied her, and all the Court followed on foot, which made a handsome shew.


Nearer unto 
Vienna
 there is also a remarkable place for Devotion, called 
Itzing:
 and in the way from 
Vienna
 unto it, the twelve Stations of the Cross are marked out in imitation of what is observed near 
Jerusalem,
 in the 
Via Crucis,
 or 
Dolorosa,
 in our Saviours proceeding from

 the City unto Mount 
Calvary;
 the Figures thereof are printed, and the several paces between every Station set down. The Emperour hath a handsome Park near 
Vien∣na,
 called the 
Brater,
 wherein I beheld the effects of the great Lightning and Thunder which happened three days before, upon many great Trees which were torn, split, or twisted. There is a House of Pleasure in it, where among other things, I could not but take notice of a Musical Instrument which I had not seen before, a 
Seat
 or 
Chest-drum;
 it hath a Cord like that of a 
Sea-trumpet,
 but soundeth like a 
Kettle-drum.


I went also unto 
Laxambourg,
 whither the Emperour often retireth; he hath a House in this place, but it is old, and not large. There is also a House of Pleasure in the Mote, into which there is no other passage but through a high 
Gorridore.
 The Castle is commodiously seated for the Emperours recreation; and there is an eight-square House in the 
Marsh,
 from which the Nobility and the Empress Dowager sometimes used to shoot, she being very expert therein. Over the Gate of the Emperours House hangs a great Rib and Jaw-bone, whereof I could get no better account, then they were the Rib and Jaw-bone of a heathen-maid. They seemed to me to be Bones of an 
Elephant
 But many things that are old or obscure, they call, in this Country, Heathen: as 
Roman
 Coyns, they call Heathen mony. And the Peasants brought me, in a place which had been formerly an old 
Roman
 Station, part of the bit of a Bridle digged up, which they concluded to be a Heathen Key.


From hence I went unto 
Mannersdorff,
 seated not far from the River 
Leyta,
 where there is a natural 
hot Bath,
 called the 
Wildebath;
 it ariseth under a Church, the Church being built over the Spring-head. The water of it is but Lukewarm, and therefore when they desire it hotter, they boyl it, and so bathe in Tubs in a large room.

 From that Substance which sticketh to the sides of the Coppers in the boyling of it, they judge it to be impreg∣nated with 
Sulphur, Salt-peter,
 and 
Chalk.
 The water colours the stones, and makes them look, when wet, like fine 
Turquoises.
 And the vapour of the Bath hanging up∣on the Moss on the sides, gives it an Amber or Gold co∣lour. The Physicians of 
Vienna
 have given a good ac∣count concerning the use of these Baths in 
High-dutch.
 Not far from hence is a noted Quarry of Stone, out of which a great part of 
Vienna
 is built. The Stones being large they cut and square them at the Quarry.


From hence I proceeded to the 
Newsidler-sea
 or 
Lake,
 so called from 
Newsidle,
 which is a Town seated upon the Northern part of it, consisting of one street and some back-houses, and a small, square, old Castle upon a Hill, from whence I had a good prospect over the Lake. It is about three 
German
 miles broad, and seven miles long. The fairest Lake in these parts, affording plenty of Fish; encompassed and thickly set about with small Towns and Villages; and hath no River, at least not considerable, running into or out of it. A little way from the Gate of 
Newsidle
 they dig out a black earth, out of which they make 
Salt peter.
 In this Journey, not far from 
Himburg,
 we passed by a place called 
Rauckward,
 which, though it seems not high, looks over a great part of 
Austria,
 and as far as 
Brin,
 the second City of 
Moravia,
 a part also of the Kingdom of 
Bohemia,
 and a part of the Kingdom of 
Hungaria.
 I went afterwards four 
English
 miles up the Stream of the 
Danube,
 to see a noted Quarry of Stone in a Hill called 
Altenburg.
 The beds, rows, or cases of the Stones lye not horizontally, but rather elevated Northward, about the height of the Angle forty, yet are not always so regularly placed, but rather follow the shape of the Hill, and according to that are differently

 situated. Here I also observed a Substance between a Clay and a Stone called 
Leberstein,
 or 
Liverstone;
 and upon many of these Stones I found the figures of Trees and Leaves, though not so deep or neat as upon the Stones by 
Florence;
 yet very prettily marked, and often with broader Leaves than I had elsewhere observed. I passed forward to 
Closter-Neuburg,
 a Town most of it belonging to that notable rich Monastery seated here, founded by St. 
Leopoldus
 Marquess of 
Austria,
 and since much enriched by succeeding Donations.


Matthaeus Merian
 hath a goodcut of the Prospect of the 
Danube
 here abouts, and in what manner it passeth down∣wards between the two great Hills of 
Kalenburg
 and 
Bisn∣burg.
 Upon one Peak of 
Kalenburg
 live divers 
Camal∣dulenses,
 of an Order the most severe of any, living most upon Roots and Herbs, in the manner of 
Hermites.
 Near their Cells they had paved the ground with those Stones I mentioned, which were naturally marked with the shapes of Trees and Plants.


After an open Autumn there followed a sharp Winter at 
Vienna,
 in the months of 
December
 and 
January.
 The branches of the 
Danube
 were soon frozen over. The main Stream, by reason of its swift Current, held out longer, but was afterwards also frozen. Some have thought that this River is more apt to freez than others. And we read of Battels which have been fought upon this River frozen; but I could not make any regular Observation thereof. This hard weather the ground being covered with Snow, afforded handsome Recreations unto men, and some unto the Ladies, in running Courses in handsome Sleds and Devices upon the Snow. Their Sleds were well contrived in the shape of 
Gryphins, Tigers, Swans, Scallop Shells, Dolphins, Peacocks,
 and the like Curiosities, carved, paint∣ed, and gilded. The Lady sits in one of these, richly ha∣bited

 in Velvet, lined with rich Furrs, set off with Lace and Jewels, in a Velvet Cap lined with Sables. The Sled is drawn by a Horse, dressed up with Feathers of all co∣lours, and Bells hanging about him, a pair of Stags horns behind his head, Ribbons and other Ornaments: one or more Pages ride by on Horse-back with Torches in their hands. And after this manner they perform their Course upon the frozen Snow about the streets of 
Vienna
 in the night, with good speed one after another. A Gentleman sits behind the Lady and guides the Horse. But the Frost breaking up put an end to these Recreations. The Frost began and ended here the same day that it began and end∣ed in 
England.


The Festivity of 
Christmas
 was observed much after the same Manner, Ceremonies, and Solemnities as in 
Italy.
 On 
Christmas-day
 the Emperour dined publickly, attend∣ed with many Nobles and great Persons, and three re∣markable low Dwarfs. Upon St. 
Stephens-day
 he went to the Cathedral of St. 
Stephen,
 and went up to the Altar, kneeled, and kissed the Plate whereon the 
Hostia
 had lain. At the 
Epiphany
 or 
Twelfth-tide,
 the old custome of choo∣sing King and Queen was observed at Court. Count 
Lesley
 happened to be King, the Emperour laid the Cloath, and the Empress filled out Wine, together with other old Customes.


Before 
Christmas
 there was extraordinary mirth and jollity at the Court upon occasion of a Marriage: For Count 
Serau,
 Governour of 
Gratz
 in 
Styria,
 married a natural Daughter of 
Philip
 the Fourth, King of 
Spain,
 which was observed with many noble Solemnities and Bravery. And the Nobility and Ladies were so sub∣stantially splendid, that I was much surprised there∣at.




This was followed by a Funeral Solemnity for the Count of 
Draun,
 who was Colonel of the Forces in 
Vienna,
 and who had one of the noblest Houses in the City; his Corps was brought out of 
Italy,
 and interred in the 
Dominican
 Church, where he formerly built a very fair Altar, there was raised for him a 
Castrum Do∣loris,
 handsomely contrived and set round with white Wax Torches and Candles.


While I was in 
Vienna,
 the Empress 
Margarita
 was delivered of a Daughter, which was Christned by the Name of 
Maria, Antonina, Josepha, Benedicta, Rosalia, Petronella,
 but she lived not many months. When the Empress came abroad, she brought the Child to the 
Au∣gustines
 Church, where Cardinal 
Carlo Caraffa,
 the Pope's Nuncio, received it, blessed it, and laid it upon the Altar.


During my stay here, the Election was in readiness for a King of 
Poland,
 after the voluntary resignation of that Crown by King 
Casimir;
 and Couriers often passed be∣tween that Country and this. There were Competitors the 
Czar
 of 
Muscovy
's Son, the Duke of 
Newburg,
 and the Prince of 
Lorrain.
 The 
French
 moved actively for the Duke of 
Newburg,
 the Emperour for the Prince of 
Lorrain,
 who was then at 
Vienna,
 in great favour with the Emperour, who greatly promoted his interest; a Person of great esteem, and who, if General 
Lubomirski
 had been living, who was his intimate Friend, in all pro∣bability might have obtained the Crown; and thereupon it was conceived that he should have married the Emper∣our's Sister. But the 
Poles
 made choice of one of their own Country, who was no Competitor, 
Michael Wisno∣witski,
 lately deceased, who also married the Sister of the Emperour.




When I was here, there were many Ambassadours of Note, 
Don Balthasar de la Cueva,
 Marquiss of 
Malagon,
 and brother to the Viceroy of 
Naples,
 was Ambassadour for 
Spain.
 Cardinal 
Carlo Caraffa
 was the Pope's Nuncio. The 
Venetian
 Ambassadour Extraordinary, solicited for assistance for 
Candia,
 and he obtained the Regiment of 
Porcia
 under Marquiss 
Pio.
 Count 
Souches
 the younger, who was Governour of 
Leopoldstadt,
 and many noble and valiant Souldiers were preparing for that Expedition. The 
Turks
 gave assurance of the 
Grand Signor
's intention to maintain the Peace inviolably; and requested the Em∣perour not to assist the 
Venetians
 or 
Transilvanians,
 nor to promote, but rather hinder, the Election of the Em∣perour of 
Muscovy
's Son to the Crown of 
Poland.
 The Bishop of 
Beziers,
 sent by the King of 
France
 to the E∣lection of the King of 
Poland,
 came not hither, but pas∣sed through 
Nurenburg,
 where I lodged at the same Inn: They were generally here against the 
French
 Interest, and so were a great part of the 
Polish
 Nobility. An Ambassa∣dour came also from the 
Cham
 of 
Tartary,
 to confirm a Peace, and afford mutual Assistance upon occasion. 
Cha Gagi Aga
 was the Ambassadour, who brought a Present of the best 
Tartarian
 Horses, which are of high esteem for swiftness, hardiness, boldness in passing frozen Ri∣vers, and taking and swimming over great Streams. He was dismissed with noble Presents of Plate. The Em∣perour presented the 
Cham
 of Tartary with a fair Silver Bason and Ewer, and a curious Watch; and sent Presents unto the 
Chammine
 his Wife,; and also to his Sister and four Brothers. His Followers were stout men, of good stature, course Complexions, wearing long furr'd Vests and Calpack's, or furr'd Caps. Some of them had silver Rings with the same Signatures of the 
Turkish
 Seales. They took much Tobacco in very long Pipes. Their

 Tobacco is not in Rolls, but in Leaves, and dry. They went about wandring and gazing at most things, as Chur∣ches, Houses, Shops: And took much delight to be in the Fair, where they would take much notice of small trifles. Yet these are the men that make such sad Incur∣sions into the Eastern parts of 
Europe,
 and carrying away so many thousands, sell them to the 
Turks,
 and so repair the defect of People in 
Turky.
 And now after the Con∣sumption of men in 
Constantinople,
 and the Country about by the Plague, are like to be active in that Trade, ho∣ping to find better Markets for their Plagiaries and De∣predations.


There are divers 
Greeks
 who trade to 
Vienna,
 and ma∣ny live in the Town, among which I met with three con∣siderable persons. One a grave Abbot, who was forced from his Convent by the 
Turk,
 upon suspicion that he cor∣responded with those of 
Candia.
 Another who went by the name of 
Constantinus Catacuzenos,
 and was of the Blood Royal of the 
Catacuzeni.
 The third was 
Jeremi∣as
 a 
Greek
 Priest, who had travelled through 
Italy
 and 
France
 into 
England,
 and from thence through the 
Low-Countries
 and 
Germany
 to 
Vienna,
 and intended for 
Con∣stantinople.
 He came into 
England
 to enquire after a young man who was in a Ship which was first taken by an 
Algerine,
 and afterwards by an 
English
 man of war in the 
Levant.
 He was very kindly used in 
England,
 and particu∣larly at 
Cambridge.
 He did a great deal of honour at 
Vienna
 unto the 
English
 Nation, declaring that they were the most civil, generous, and learned people he had met with in all his Travels, and that he no where found so many who could speak or understand 
Greek,
 or who gave him so good satisfaction in all parts of Knowledge: And as a testimony of his respect and gratitude, requested me to enclose a 
Greek
 Letter unto Dr. 
Pierson,
 now Lord

 Bishop of 
Chester,
 and Dr. 
Barrow,
 now Master of 
Tri∣nity Colledge
 in 
Cambridge.


Most men live here plentifully, there being abundance of all provision. They have great quantity of Corn, which upon Scarcity, by the help of the 
Danube,
 might be brought unto them from remoter parts. The Country affordeth such plenty of wine, that they send a conside∣rable quantity up the River. They have also rich wines out of 
Hungary
 and 
Italy,
 and such variety, that there are more than thirty several sorts of Wine to be sold in 
Vien∣na.
 They are not also without good Beer. 
Halstadt
 in 
Austria
 affordeth them Salt, where they make it by letting in water into the hollow parts of a Mountain, where it drinketh in the Salt of the Earth, and is afterwards let out and boiled up. This affordeth great profit to the Emperor, and therefore the 
Hungarian
 Salt is not permit∣ted to be brought higher than 
Presburg.
 They have also plenty of Sheep and Oxen; but for Oxen at present they are also supplied from 
Hungary,
 nor only from the Coun∣tries in the Emperours Dominions, but from the Turkish parts, by permission of the 
Grand Signor;
 and they are brought hither by the Eastern Company of 
Vienna.
 They eat much wild Boar, whereof the Fat is delicious, like that of Venison with us. They want not Hares, Rab∣bets, Partridges, Pheasants. A Fowl called 
Hasenhendal,
 or 
Gallina Corylorum,
 is much esteemed by them, which made me the more wonder to meet with some odde dishes at their Tables; as 
Guiny-pigs,
 divers sorts of 
Snails,
 and 
Tortoises.


The 
Danube,
 and many Rivers which run into it, afford them plenty of Fish, extraordinary 
Carps, Trouts, Ten∣ches, Pikes, Eels,
 several sorts of 
Lampries,
 and many Fishes finely coloured; the white Fish, 
Crevises
 very large; the best come out of the River 
Swechet,
 not far

 from 
Vienna.
 They have also that substantial large fish, called a 
Scheiden,
 or 
Silurus Gesneri,
 larger than 
Pike, Salmon,
 or any of our River Fishes; but the great Fishes called 
Hausons,
 or 
Husones,
 in 
Johnstonus,
 for largeness ex∣ceed all others; some being twenty foot long. Some think this to be the same Fish which 
Aelian
 nameth 
An∣tacetus,
 and speaketh largely of the fishing for them in 
Ister.
 I was at the fishing places for 
Hausons
 in 
Schut
 Island, between 
Presburg
 and 
Komara,
 for they come not usually higher, especially in shoals; and it is much that they come so high, for they are conceived to come out of the 
Euxine-sea,
 and so up the stream. They eat them both fresh and salted; they taste most like 
Sturgeon.
 It is a Cartilagineous Fish, consisting of gristles, and they have a hollow nervous chord all down the back, which being dried serveth for a whip. When they fish for them they blow a Horn or Trumpet, and know where they go by the moving of the water. From 
Venice
 they are supplied with Oysters, with salt 
Sturgeon,
 and some∣times with red 
Herrings,
 and great variety of other Fishes pickled up: as also with 
Oranges, Limons,
 and other Fruits. Observing much freedom, musick, and jollity in the City. I wondered how they could content them∣selves without Plays, for there were few while I was there, till the Players came hither out of 
Saxony,
 and a∣cted here for a time. The Jesuites would sometimes en∣tertain the Emperour and Empress with a Comedy at their Colledge; and I had once the favour to be at one when they were present.


But they have Dancing and Fencing often, and every 
Holy-day
 after dinner, the people flock to some Inns where there is Dancing in the inward Rooms, and Fencing and Playing of Prizes upon a Stage in the Yard; and at the Windows, or from the Galleries, behold the Fencers







depictions of four fish


Rutten out of the Danube


Koppen


Grondel


Biscurn


I. Oliuer Fe.






 playing at several Weapons; and commonly pass the rest of the day in delights and merry Company.


In Treason and high Crimes they cut off the right Hand of the Malefactor, and his Head immediately after. I saw a Woman beheaded sitting in a Chair, the Executioner striking off her Head with a Fore-blow, she behaved her self well, and was accompanied unto the Market place by the 
Confraternity
 of the 
Dead,
 who have a charitable care of such Persons, and are not of any Religious Order, but 
Lay men,
 among whom also in this place there are many Fraternities and Orders; as of the 
Holy Virgin,
 of the 
Holy Cross
 and others. Another person also executed after the same manner; as soon as his Head fell to the ground, while the Body was in the Chair, a man ran speedily with a Pot in his hand, and filling it with the Blood yet spouting out of his Neck, he presently drank it off, and ran away; and this he did as a Remedy against the 
Falling Sickness.
 I have read of some who have ap∣proved the same Medicine; and heard of others who have done the like in 
Germany.
 And 
Gelsus
 takes notice, that in his time some Epileptical persons did drink the Blood of the 
Gladiatours.
 But many Physicians have, in all times, abominated that Medicine. Nor did I stay after∣wards so long as to know the effect thereof, as to the in∣tended cure. But most men looked upon it as of great uncertainty: and of all men the Jews, who suffer no Blood to come into their Lips, must most dislike it.


At 
Presburg
 they have a strange way of Execution, still used at 
Metz,
 and some other places, by a Maid, or En∣gine like a Maid finely dressed up with her hands before her. The Malefactor salutes her first, and then retireth. But at his second salute she openeth her hands and cuts his Heart in sunder.




Though the Winter was sharp, yet the advantage of Stoves, and lying between two Feather-beds, made it tolerable: For they use Stoves here as in other parts of 
Germany,
 where they lodge and eat in Stoves; and great Persons have Stoves in the Church, or such as look into the Church. There are Stoves also in the publick Schools where Lectures are read. And this way of ly∣ing between two Feather-beds, with a neat laced sheet spread over, is more convenient in a cold Country, than most others they make use of. For in the common Inns in 
Germany
 they generally sleep upon Straw, and also in 
Hungary
 almost every where; and more Easterly upon the ground, spreading a Carpet or Saddle-cloath under them: and more Northerly they content themselves with the Skins of Beasts, 
Bears, Elks,
 or the like; upon which they sleep in the night. Those that sleep lowest are coolest in a Stove; those that lye upon Tables, Benches, or higher, are more exposed to the heat. The Citizens of 
Vienna
 are well attired, and use Furs very much. The Women wear a high Velvet Bonnet, lined or faced there∣with. The Place seemed to be healthful; but they speak much of the 
Colica Austriaca,
 as an Endemial and Local Disease, very hardly yielding unto good 
Medicines.
 They speak good 
German
 at the Court and in the City; but the Common and Country people seemed to speak grumb∣lingly, and besides their accent, have divers words different from other parts.


They have a Custome upon St. 
Nicholas-day
 to put some small Gift into the Childrens shoes; among other things they put in Medals and Dollars made of paper and flower gilded and silvered over, yet scarce worth a penny. They sell 
Trochies
 or 
Tablets
 in the Markets, made of the pulpe of the Fruit of 
Hip-briar,
 made sharp with 
Spirit
 of 
Sul∣phur,
 very refreshing. Some carry about them a 
Thunder∣stone,


 as a defence against Thunder: and they rub their Chil∣drens Gums with a 
Wolfs
 tooth instead of 
Coral.


When I was at 
Venice
 in the time of the 
Carnival,
 I ob∣served many Recreations and Shews, as Rope-dancing, flying down the Rope, cutting off Bulls-necks with Swords, and many other. But at 
Vienna
 a notable trick which I saw there pleased me much: A man of a middle Stature laid down upon his back, and a heavy Anvil was placed upon his Breast, as much as two men could well lift, then two other men with great Hammers laid on, un∣til they had given almost an hundred blows, and cut in sun∣der a great Horshoe of iron, about half an inch thick.


Here is no Christian Religion publickly permitted but the 
Roman,
 and therefore those of the 
Protestant
 and 
Re∣formed Religion
 are fain to resort unto 
Presburg,
 Forty miles off, for which they have some convenience by the 
Danube,
 and a 
Coach
 which goeth every day. In the time of 
Maximilian
 the Second, they were permitted the Ex∣ercise of their Religion in the Church of the 
Holy Cross,
 in the City of 
Vienna.
 But afterwards were prohibited by 
Rodolphus
 the Second. The Emperour 
Matthias
 gave them permission to meet at 
Hernals,
 a little more than an 
English
 mile from 
Vienna;
 and gave leave to their 
Mini∣sters
 to come into the City, and there to 
christen, marry, baptize,
 and 
visit
 the 
sick.
 From which time they encrea∣sed very much, till 
Ferdinand
 the Second, returning from the Battel of 
Prague,
 banished their 
Minister
 from 
Vi∣enna
 and 
Arnols;
 sent the 
Freyherr Jorger,
 to whom the Castle of 
Arnolds
 belonged, Prisoner unto 
Lintz;
 and never gave over till he had taken away their Priviledges and Freedom of meeting publickly in any part of 
lower Austria.


But here are no small number of 
Jews,
 who have a di∣stinct Habitation assigned them over the Water. They have

 also a Street allowed them in the City for the day time, but they must all depart at night beyond the River into the Suburbs.


They are much distasted by the Citizens and Trades∣men, and the Scholars agree but ill with them. While I was at 
Vienna
 there was a quarrel between them to an high degree. For the 
Scholars
 assaulted the 
Jews
 Town, beat, wounded, and threw divers of them into the Ri∣ver. Divers 
Scholars
 were wounded, some killed, and also some Souldiers who were commanded out to com∣pose the Fray: and the 
Jews
 Town was guarded many days by the Souldiers of the City. This begot such ill Blood and Complaints; that a good number of the 
Jews
 were to be banished at a certain day. The 
Jews,
 to in∣gratiate with the Empress, then with Child, presented her with a noble 
Silver Cradle,
 but she would not receive it. And there was great danger of the general banishment of them when I left that City, which was afterwards effe∣cted, they being severely prohibited from living, not on∣ly at 
Vienna,
 but in any part of 
Austria,
 where there were formerly whole Villages of them, so as they were forced to betake themselves into the Dominions of the 
Turk,
 unto 
Venice,
 into 
Poland
 and 
Bohemia.
 They be∣ing not permitted to dwell in the Neighbour Countries of 
Hungary
 subject to the Emperour, 
Styria,
 or 
Carinthia.


I must confess they seemed useful unto the place for rea∣dy accommodation of any thing, either by sale or ex∣change, but the people looked with an evil eye upon them, as taking away much of their Trade and Employ∣ment. They also looked upon them as useless in war for defence of the place; and were not without some jealou∣sie that they held correspondence with the 
Turks,
 and gave Intelligence of their Affairs unto them. Yet the Souldiery dealt much with them, and Captains for the suddain ha∣biting,

 furnishing, and accommodating of their Compa∣nies. And dining one day with a Commander at a 
Jews
 House, amongst other Discourse I asked the 
Jew
 con∣cerning the 
ten Tribes,
 and where they were? He said 
they were far off in
 Asia, 
beyond a great Lake which was continually stormy, and scarce passable, but upon their Sab∣bath-day, upon which days the Jews do not willingly travel.


I have seen their 
Circumcision
 at 
Rome, Padua,
 and o∣ther parts. Their 
Physicians
 ordinarily profess great skill in 
Urines;
 and the common people resort unto them rather than unto 
Christians,
 and are so credulous, and have such an opinion of them, that they might be made to believe they have some old 
Receipts
 of King 
Solomon.


There are many 
Jews
 in 
Italy,
 yet they seem to me to be in greater numbers in 
Germany.
 In 
Amsterdam
 they are also grown very numerous. At 
Franckfurt
 they told me there were seven thousand of them, which seemed scarce credible. At 
Colen
 they are in great numbers: at 
Ham∣burg
 not a few. But the greatest number surely is in 
Prague.


Though they be permitted in many Countries, yet di∣vers 
Christian Princes
 and 
States
 have assigned them some mark in their 
Habits,
 to distinguish them. In 
Avignon
 their 
Hats
 are 
yellow.
 In 
Italy
 their 
Hats
 are covered o∣ver with 
Taffate.
 In 
Germany
 they wear 
Ruffs
 and 
Gowns
 with great 
Capes.
 In 
Holland
 I observed no distinction. But the 
Jews
 there, most of them having come out of 
Portugal,
 there may be some suspicion of them from their Complexion.


Lastly, when I consider the old strength of 
Vienna,
 consisting in an old 
wall
 and a deep 
ditch,
 I cannot much wonder that 
Matthias Corvinus,
 King of 
Hungary,
 took this City. And I must ascribe it, under God, unto the singular valour and resolution of the Defendants, that

 
Solyman
 the Magnificent, with two hundred thousand men, was not able to take it, and though he made large brea∣ches, could never enter it, but lost some thousands at an Assault, and departed at last with the loss of a great part of his Army. But this place is now in a far better con∣dition, strongly fortified, and able to resist the greatest Forces of 
Turky.
 The 
houses
 are cleared from the 
wall;
 and yet for better security, when I was there, Count 
Souches
 advised the Emperour to pull down part of the 
Suburbs
 upon the other side of the nearest branch of the 
Danube,
 lest the 
Turks
 might take advantage to play up∣on the two 
Bastions
 on that side.


It would be a sad loss for 
Christendome
 if this place were in the hands of the 
Turk;
 and no man knows where he would rest. If he should begin with this place, and take it, the strong holds of 
Rab, Komara,
 and 
Leopold∣stadt
 would want their support, and soon fall into his pos∣session; and if he were Lord of 
Austria,
 a great part of 
Germany
 would lye bare unto him: and probably it would not be long before he visited 
Italy,
 into which Country he would then find other ways than by 
Palma nova.








A JOURNEY FROM VIENNA IN AUSTRIA TO HAMBURG.


T
Aking a farewel of the 
Imperial City
 of 
Vienna,
 I ordered my 
Journey
 for 
Prague
 in 
Bohemia,
 which is usually six days Journey by Coach in the 
Summer,
 and eight in the 
Winter.
 I went over the great Bridge of 
Vien∣na,
 upon the large Stream of the 
Danube,
 passing by the 
Chappel
 of St. 
Bridget,
 of an eight-square Figure. This 
Bridge
 is a

 very great and massy work, supported by many high 
Trees,
 and 
Timber,
 and hath between two and three thou∣sand 
Trees
 laid upon it cross, or side by side, from one side of the 
Bridge
 to the other, for the passage over it, af∣ter the 
German
 manner of making 
Bridges.
 At 
Ratisbone
 there is a handsome 
Stone-bridge
 over the 
Danube,
 and between that place and 
Vienna,
 divers of 
Wood;
 but from 
Vienna
 to 
Belgrade
 I observed none but what were made with 
Boats.


Having passed the 
River,
 I entred into the 
Trans-Danubian Austria,
 or that part of 
Austria
 which lieth between the 
Danube
 and the River 
Theya,
 and came unto 
Corneuburg,
 a pretty Town, about which place the Em∣perour often hunteth; it is near the Hill 
Bisneberg,
 which is opposite unto 
Kalenberg.
 The 
Swedes
 advanced far when they took this place in the last wars, and held it so well, that they were not easily forced out of it. From thence I came to 
Stockerau,
 near the mouth of the River 
Mida,
 where it runneth into the 
Danube.
 A place much noted for the death of St. 
Colman
 a 
Scotch
 Saint, highly honoured in these parts. From thence to 
Guntersdorff,
 so to 
Colnedorff
 or 
Koldorff,
 which although it be on the South of the River 
Theya,
 is accounted the first 
Village
 of 
Moravia,
 and then came unto 
Znaim.


In all this part of 
Austria,
 which extendeth a great length on the North-side of the 
Danube,
 conceived to have been anciently inhabited by the 
Marcomanni
 and 
Quadi,
 there are few or no 
Towns
 of 
antiquity, large∣ness,
 or 
note;
 for the 
Romans
 made their Stations and Colonies upon the South-side of the 
Danube;
 but the Country is full of Villages, and populous. One of the chiefest Towns is 
Crembs,
 which some call 
Cremona Au∣striae,
 which I saw as I came down the 
Danube.
 A great part of this Country was notably harrassed and plunder∣ed

 by the 
Swedes.
 The 
Soyl
 is light, and easie to be ploughed.


Znaim
 is a handsome place, with many painted Houses in it, and accounted the fourth chief 
Town
 in 
Mahren,
 or 
Moravia; Olmütz, Brün,
 and 
Iglaw
 being the other three, famous for the death of the Emperour 
Sigis∣mund.
 It is seated by the River 
Theya,
 which divideth 
Moravia
 from 
Austria,
 and running at last into the River 
Mark,
 affordeth accommodation of passage into the 
Da∣nube.


From thence we passed by 
Ulverskirken, Paulitz,
 and 
Moravian Budweisse
 to 
Zimmaw,
 and by 
Byrnitz
 came to 
Igla,
 or 
Iglau,
 upon the River 
Igla,
 which at last run∣neth into the great River 
Marck,
 a very pleasant place, seated upon a Hill, on the Frontiers of 
Bohemia.
 It is well fortified 
à la moderna,
 upon one side, and hath one of the largest 
Piazza
's that I have seen.


Moravia,
 is a pleasant and fruitful Country affording plenty of necessaries for life; the people are plain-dealing, stout, and make good Souldiers. It is commodiously furnished with Rivers, the greatest whereof is the 
Mora
 or 
Marck,
 which arising in the Northern part thereof, runneth quite through the Country, and entreth the 
Do∣naw
 not far from 
Presburg.
 The other considerable Streams are the 
Theya
 or 
Thaisa,
 the 
Swarta,
 the 
Schwitta,
 which run into the 
Marck.
 In the last 
Turkish
 wars the 
Tartars
 having passed the 
Wag
 in 
Hungaria,
 made incursi∣ons into 
Moravia,
 and carried away some thousands of the Inhabitants.


Leaving 
Igla,
 we soon came into 
Bohemia,
 first coming into 
Stecken,
 then to 
Teutchin Broda
 by the River 
Sac∣zua,
 formerly a strong place, taken by 
Zisca
 the famous 
Bohemian General,
 who then forced the Emperour 
Sigis∣mund
 to fly out of 
Bohemia
 by the way of 
Igla.
 From

 thence we came to 
Heberne,
 and so to 
Janikaw:
 At this place, upon the 
24th
 of 
February,
 1643. was fought that memorable Battel between the 
Swedes,
 commanded by 
Leonard Torstenson,
 and the 
Imperialists
 under Count 
Hatzfield, Goetz,
 and other 
Commanders.
 The 
Imperi∣alists
 had the better at first; but falling upon the Enemies Baggage, and being too greedy of Booty, they were de∣feated, three thousand slain, four thousand taken prison∣ners, with their General 
Hatzfield,
 and six or seven Colo∣nels. The success hereof gave the 
Swedes
 advantage to proceed further, and into 
Silesia
 and 
Austria.
 In this Town meeting with a Gentleman who came from 
Schaclitz,
 which is not far from the 
Risgeburg,
 or 
Mountain of Gy∣ants,
 about the Head of the River 
Elbe,
 I enquired of him concerning the spirit 
Ribensal,
 which is said to infest that Country, but he could say nothing therein of his own knowledge; and though he was confident that there was such a Spirit, yet he confessed that for twelve years it had done no hurt. In 
Hills, Mountains,
 and places of 
Mines
 such reports are ordinary. It is reported that a Spirit haunts the 
Silver Mines
 of 
Brunswick:
 And ano∣ther to be in the 
Tinn Mine
 of 
Slackenwalde
 in this Coun∣try of 
Bohemia,
 and to walk in the shape of a 
Monk,
 who strikes the 
Miners,
 sings and plays on the 
Bag-pipes,
 and doth many such Tricks. And 
Agricola
 in the latter end of his Sixth Book 
Dere Metallica,
 gives this for one reason why 
Mines,
 or 
passages
 in 
Mines,
 are given over.


From 
Janikaw
 I travelled to 
Czaslaw,
 a good Town, and the chiefest in the 
Czaslawer
 Circle: In this place they say that 
Zisca
 was buried, that famous 
Bohemian Ge∣neral;
 he lost one Eye by an 
Arrow,
 and was at length blind of both, yet gave not over the war, and proved successful in it. He wished his 
Friends
 to make a 
Drum
 of his 
Skin,
 which should serve to fright away their E∣nemies.

 And though he cared not for any Sepulchral Monument, yet he had one in this place.


From 
Czaslaw
 we came to 
Guttenberg,
 or 
Cottenberg,
 about eight 
Bohemian
 miles from 
Prague,
 every mile be∣ing five or six 
English
 miles. A large Town, and much frequented, not far from the River 
Albis
 or 
Elbe,
 of e∣specal note for the 
Silver Mines
 about it: The 
Hills
 near it are not high, and consequently the Mines are not so deep as those of 
Hungary,
 and some others in 
Germa∣ny;
 yet some are above seventy or eighty 
Fathoms.
 They have wrought at these 
Mines
 seven hundred years, and there are about thirty of them. I went down into that which was first digged, but afterwards left for a long time, but they work there now again, it is called the 
Cot∣na,
 or 
Auf der Cotten,
 upon the 
Cotten,
 or 
Coat-hill;
 and as the Story goeth, a 
Monk
 walking over this Hill found a kind of a 
Silver Tree
 sticking to his Garment, which was the occasion that they afterwards digged and built these 
Mines,
 and the place retains the name of 
Cotten∣berg.


The 
Mine
 into which I descended near the Town, is but nineteen 
Fathoms
 deep; the chief 
Vein
 of the 
Ore
 runneth South, and is about a foot in breadth: the 
Ore
 holdeth or containeth in it 
Silver
 and 
Copper,
 so that out of an hundred pound weight of 
Ore,
 they ordinarily get an Ounce of 
Silver,
 and eight, nine, or ten ounces or more of 
Copper,
 even to pounds, but it is not well known, for the 
Copper-works
 are the Emperours. The 
Undertakers
 get out what 
Silver
 they can, and afterwards sell the 
Ore
 unto the Emperours Officers; but some 
Ore
 is sorich as to contain eight or nine ounces of 
Silver.
 A blew 
Earth
 which they meet with in digging, affords the best hopes of 
Ore.
 Two men lately perished in this 
Mine,
 having made a fire in it, being either choaked with the smoak, or,

 as they thought, by the poysonous exhalations forced out of the Minerals by the fire. I have read that 
Libussa
 the Princess, and reputed Sorceress of 
Bohemia,
 foretold many things concerning these 
Mines;
 but certain it is, that for the advantage and profit these bring, the Town hath suffered much in many wars. The Emperour 
Sigis∣mund
 made haste out of it upon the approach of 
Zisca,
 and seeing he could not hold it, burnt the Town; but it was soon rebuilt and possessed by 
Zisca,
 whose party called it the 
Purse of Antichrist.


Leaving 
Cottenburg,
 I came to 
Colline
 and to 
Bohemi∣an Broda,
 so named to distinguish it from 
Dutch
 or 
Teu∣tonick Broda
 before mentioned, a considerable good Town, and from thence came to 
Prag,
 or 
Prague,
 the Capital and Royal City of the Kingdom of 
Bohemia.
 The 
Walls
 of this City seem to enclose the greatest Citcuit of ground of any I have seen in 
Germany,
 but the Hills and void spaces within it take up a large Tract, and therein it is like the City of 
Lyon
 in 
France;
 it is seated upon the River 
Muldau,
 by the 
Bohemians
 named 
Ultaue,
 a large rapid River, arising in the South part of 
Bohemia,
 and before at arriveth at 
Prague,
 receiveth the River 
Sarsua
 and the 
Watta
 into it; and Northward of 
Prague
 the River 
Egra,
 and joyneth with the 
Elbe.


This great place consisteth of three Towns, named the 
Old,
 the 
New,
 and the 
Kleine Seitten,
 or 
lesser Town.
 The 
old Town
 lieth upon the East of the River 
Muldau,
 is very populous, full of Buildings, private and pub∣lick. Very considerable in this part is also the Universi∣ty, wherein are great numbers of Students and Scholars, there being but one University in 
Bohemia;
 many persons also resorting thither from other Countries. It is scarce credible what is reported of the number of Scholars in 
Prague
 in former Ages, as hath been delivered by divers

 Authors. And 
Lewis du May,
 Counsellor unto the Duke of 
Wittenburg,
 affirmeth, That there are at present scarce so many Students in all 
Germany,
 as there were at 
Prague
 in the year 1409. when they reckoned above Forty thousand under the 
Rectorship
 of 
John Hus. Charles
 the Fourth, Emperour, and King of 
Bohemia,
 founded the 
University
 of 
Prague,
 giving equal priviledges to the 
Bohemians, Polanders,
 and 
Germans:
 and when he would re∣trench his favours towards Strangers, there went out of the Town in a weeks time twenty four thousand Scholars, and a little after, sixteen thousand, whereby we may judge there were more Scholars in 
Prague
 than other persons in some great Cities. There are also in this 
old Town
 di∣vers 
Colledges
 and 
Cloysters.
 The 
Jesuites
 have a fair, handsome 
Colledge,
 near unto the 
Bridge,
 but the 
Build∣ings
 of the 
old Town
 are inferiour to those of the 
lesser Town.


The 
new Town
 is large, and together with the River, encompasseth the 
old,
 and is divided from it by a large 
Trench
 or 
Ditch,
 in o which they can let in the River. The 
Irish
 have a 
Cloyster
 of 
Franciscans
 near unto an old 
Tower
 in the 
Wall
 of the 
old Town.
 The 
Jesuites
 have also be∣gun a large 
Cloyster,
 which, if finished according to its beginning and design, will be very spacious and noble. They are now making 
Bastions
 about the 
Town
 at one end thereof; there is also a 
Citadel,
 but not finished, at 
Wisse∣raht,
 or 
Wissegrade,
 formerly the Seat of the Princes of 
Bohemia,
 and also of the famous Princess 
Libussa,
 the Daughter of 
Crocus,
 and Wife unto 
Primislaus.


The 
Kleine Seitten,
 or 
lesser Prague,
 far exceedeth the other for pleasantness and beauty of Buildings and fair Palaces. This part lieth Westward of the River 
Mul∣daw,
 which between this and the 
old Town,
 is passable by a strong 
Stone-bridge,
 consisting of sixteen great Arches,

 being about Seventeen hundred foot long, and Thirty five foot broad, and two open Gates under two high Towers of Stone at each end. A great part of this Town lieth high, and upon the Hill standeth 
Hratschin,
 or 
Upper Prague,
 and a Summer House of the Emperours, besides a Magnificent Palace of the Emperours, as King of 
Bohemia;
 and by it a fair 
Cathedral Church
 dedicated to St. 
Veit,
 first built by St. 
Wenceslaus,
 Duke of 
Bohemia,
 923. from whence the Town and River is best viewed. In this Church are divers 
old Monuments
 for great Per∣sons; as for 
Pogiebrachius
 a 
Bohemian
 King, 
Wenceslaus, Rodolphus
 the Second, 
Charles
 the Fourth, 
Ladislaus, Maximilian
 the Second, and other 
Arch-Dukes
 and 
Em∣perours.
 There are also many Houses of the 
Nobility
 in this part of the City. The Palace and Garden of 
Colare∣do
 is exceeding neat, though small. But I was most plea∣sed with the Palace of Count 
Wallensteyn,
 Duke of 
Fried∣land,
 General unto the Emperour 
Ferdinand
 the Second, who being suspected to Usurp that Kingdom, was after∣wards killed at 
Egra.
 This Palace was built upon the Ruins of an hundred Houses, purposely plucked down to make room for it; wherein the Hall is large, the Gar∣den handsome; upon one side whereof there is a place to manage Horses, and near unto it a Fish-pond: in ano∣ther part there is a noble 
Aviary
 with a Garden and Trees in it, after the manner of the 
Aviary
 of Prince 
Doria
 at 
Genoa,
 which is eighty paces long, and eighteen broad. The Stable is large, and worth the seeing, wherein there is a 
Marble Pillar
 between each Horse, and for every Horse there is placed in a nich of the Wall a Rack of Steel, and Manger of Marble, and over his Head hangeth a Picture of the Horse, as big as the Life, with his Name under it. Among the rest, I observed that a Bay-horse had for his Name 
Monte d'Oro,
 a Mare, 
Bella donna,
 ano∣ther

 
Espagnoletta,
 and his most beloved Horse was named 
Mas Querido.


Some have thought that the best 
high German
 is spoken in this part of 
Prague;
 and there living so many of the Nobility and great Persons, it is not to be wondred at, that their Language is better than ordinary. But the common Language of 
Bohemia
 is a Dialect of the 
Sclavoni∣an,
 though very many speak also 
High dutch,
 as we found in all our passage through that Country. 
Koningsmark
 being with his Forces on the Frontiers of 
Bohemia,
 a discontented Colonel of the 
Imperialists
 came unto him, making it probable that he might surprize 
Hratschin,
 and the lesser side of 
Prague,
 which he suddainly attempted, and so successfully, that he surprized many Officers, and old 
Colaredo
 in his Bed, getting so great a Booty, that he could scarce carry it away.


A part of 
Prague
 is inhabited by Jews, and called the 
Jews Town;
 there are no small number of them, and ma∣ny rich, as trading in all Commodities, and have good skill in Jewels, and several sorts of Stones digged out of the 
Mines
 in 
Bohemia:
 I bought some 
Bohemian Topazes
 of them, neatly cut and well-figured, and some which were very large and clear, were at the rate of seven or eight 
Dollars.
 During my stay here, I had a great desire to have saluted 
Johannes Marcus-Marci,
 a famous Physici∣an and Philosopher of 
Prague,
 and also to have induced him to a Correspondence with the 
Royal Society,
 but I understood that he had left this World, to the great grief of Learned Men in these and other parts.


Many here do speak still of 
John Hus
 and 
Jerome
 of 
Prague,
 and I have seen 
Silver Medals
 of them. They were surely very notable men; and I shall only set down what 
Aeneas Sylvius,
 or Pope 
Pius
 the Second said of them. 
Jo∣hannes aetate major & authoritate, doctrinâ & facundiâ su∣perior

 Hieronymus, pertulerunt ambo constanti animo necem, & quasi ad Epulum invitati ad incendium properarunt, nul∣lam emittentes vocem quae miseri animi posset ferre indicium: ubi ardere ceperunt, hymnum cecinere quem vix flamma & fragor ignis intercipere potuit, nemo Philosophorum tam forti animo mortem pertulisse traditur quam isti incendium. In Hist. Bohemica. John
 was or greater years and autho∣rity, 
Jerome
 of more Eloquence and Learning: both of them endured their Death with great constancy, and went unto the fire as though invited to a Banquet: when they began to burn, they sung an Hymn, which the flame and fire could scarce intercept. None of the old Philosophers endured their death with such a courageous mind as these the fire.


The same Author compareth 
Prague
 unto the City of 
Florence
 in 
Tuscany,
 wherefore having seen both places, I cannot omit to say something. I had a view of the Ci∣ty of 
Florence
 from the top of the 
Domo,
 or 
Cathedral,
 and of 
Prague
 from the Church of St. 
Veit,
 upon the Hill in the lesser Town: 
Prague
 seemed to my eye to contain a far greater Circuit than 
Florence;
 it seemed also more populous, and to exceed it very much in the number of People, the Streets larger, and the Windows of Palaces and fair Houses being of Glass, looked not so tatterdly as the ragged Paper Windows of 
Florence.
 The River 
Arno,
 which runs through 
Florence,
 is not to be compa∣red with the 
Muldau
 at 
Prague,
 having run about an hun∣dred miles from its Head. The large, massy, long Stone-Bridge exceedeth any of, if not all, the four Bridges of 
Flo∣rence.
 The Emperours Palace also upon the Hill is very stately: But as for the well-paved Streets of 
Florence,
 the 
Domo
 or 
Cathedral
 with black and white Marble, with a 
Cupola,
 second only to that of St. 
Peters
 of 
Rome,
 for the incomparable 
Chappel
 of St. 
Laurence,
 and the 
Dukes

 Gallery
 and 
Rarities,
 I must confess I saw not any thing in 
Prague
 which answered them. At 
Weissenberg,
 or the 
white Hill
 near 
Prague,
 that deciding Battel was fought 
Novemb.
 8. 1620. between 
Frederick
 Prince 
Palatine
 of the 
Rhine,
 elected King of 
Bohemia,
 and the Forces of the Emperour 
Ferdinand
 the Second, which gave such a deep blow unto the 
Protestant Party,
 wherein so many of 
Frederick
's Forces were slain and drowned in the River in their slight, wherein also that famous Commander 
Pa∣penheim
 was found lying among the dead, who notwith∣standing died not of his wounds, but was reserved to end his days with the King of 
Sweden
 in the memorable Battel of 
Lutzen.


From 
Prague
 I designed to pass by water down the 
Muldaw,
 which uniteth with the 
Elbe
 about 
Melnick,
 and so down the 
Elbe
 unto 
Hamburg.
 But the Winter advan∣cing, and the Weather proving cold, the Boats did not go as in Summer, and therefore I took my Journey by Land, and leaving 
Prague
 and the 
Muldau
 on the right hand, I passed the first day to 
Zagethal,
 the next to 
We∣luerne,
 and so to 
Budin
 and 
Labasitz
 upon the 
Elbe.
 Ha∣ving passed over the 
Egra,
 a considerable River, arising not far from the City of 
Egra,
 and at last running into the 
Elbe;
 the next day by the Castle of 
Kriegstein,
 or 
Warrestone,
 seated upon a high steep Rock, I came to 
Ausig,
 a small City not far from the 
Elbe,
 having little remarkable in it, like many other small Cities of 
Bohemia,
 and so forward to 
Nolndorff,
 where we lodged upon Mount 
Kninsberg,
 the day after we entred into 
Misnia,
 passing by 
Peterswald,
 and 
Hellendorff
 the first Village in 
Misnia,
 and 
Kisibel,
 where are 
Iron Mines
 about eigh∣teen Fathoms deep, and 
Iron works.


We now understood that 
Bohemia
 was a larger Country than we expected; it lieth round, and some say it is three

 days postage over; others that the Diameter extendeth two hundred miles. From 
Igla
 upon the Confines unto 
Hellendorff,
 it took me nine days Journey in 
November
 by 
Coach,
 not reckoning the time I staid at 
Prague.
 In many places there are very ill Passages, and so rudely mended with great Trees, laid side by side, that they are often very troublesome to pass.


We travelled afterwards towards 
Dresden,
 in a fruitful Country, wherein were many 
Deer
 in most parts of the way, in sight of the Castle of 
Pilnitz,
 a strong place, and seated high. I could not but cast an eye on the 
Rocks
 behind us in the Forest of 
Bohemia,
 which looked like the Ruines of a Wall which formerly enclosed 
Bohemia,
 which Country is described with a Forest or Woods round about it. But I confess I did not really perceive that there was such a Wood round about it as is common∣ly set forth in 
Mapps;
 only both within, and also in many parts of the Borders, there are great Woods which are conceived to have been part of the 
Hercinian Forest.


The 
Bohemians
 are a strong, stout, and hardy People, make good Souldiers, and have made great wars both at home and abroad; and 
Histories
 are full of their warlike Exploits. The chief 
Magazine
 of the King is at 
Egra,
 a strong City, accounted the Second of 
Bohemia.
 The Country affordeth also lusty and strong Horses. The common sort of People are boysterous, rough, and quarrel∣some, especially in drink, whereto they are too much addicted. The Nobility and Gentry are civil and kind unto Strangers. There are many great Families of the Nobility, among which that of 
Rosenberg
 and 
Popel
 is an∣cient, and of high esteem. Since the unhappy accepting of the Crown by 
Frederick
 Count 
Palatine,
 and the ill success upon it, there hath been a great alteration in this Country, both as to People and their Manners; for there∣upon

 many thousands left the Kingdom, and many who re∣mained, turned their Religion. And the Emperours have used the like severity upon others in their Hereditary Dominions.


The next considerable place we came unto was 
Dres∣den
 in 
Misnia,
 as well worth the seeing, as almost any Town in 
Germany. Dresden
 is the Seat and Residence of the Elector of 
Saxony,
 seated upon the River 
Elbe,
 over which there is a very noble Stone-bridge of Seventeen Arches. The City is very well fortified after the Mo∣dern way, the 
Bastions Revestues,
 and in each 
Bastion
 a 
Cavallier:
 It hath also a large 
Trench
 or 
Ditch
 about it, in some places double; and the River 
Elbe
 addeth unto its strength. The Walls are very strong: and they say, that when the first Stone was laid to build them, there was placed in the Earth a 
Silver Cup
 gilded, a 
Book
 of the 
Laws,
 and another of 
Coyns,
 and three 
Glasses
 filled with 
Wine.
 It hath also three Gates. The places most worth the seeing are these: The 
Italian
 Garden in the Suburbs; the 
Hunters House
 in the 
old Town
 beyond the 
River;
 the 
Electors Palace;
 his 
House
 for 
wild Beasts;
 his 
Stable∣house
 and 
Arsenal,
 of which I shall set down some things observable in their kind. In the 
Electors Palace,
 the 
Hall
 is very large, and handsomely painted with Cities, Gy∣ants, and the Habits of several Nations, and set out with seven large branched Candlesticks: But that which af∣fordeth the greatest delight is his 
Kunstkammer, Art-Chamber,
 or 
Collection of Rarities,
 both of 
Art
 and 
Na∣ture.
 In the first Partition are to be seen all manner of well-made 
Instruments
 belonging to most 
Trades,
 as 
Joyners, Turners, Barbers, Smiths, Chirurgeons,
 and o∣ther 
Artificers: Instruments
 to force open 
Doors, Chests, &c.
 In the other Chambers these and the like are obser∣vable.




A 
Tube-glass
 four Ells long. A large 
blew Turkish-glass.
 Variety of 
Coral
 and 
artificial Works
 of it. 
Fowls
 made out of 
Mother of Pearl. Drinking Cups
 in the shape of 
Dragons, Elephants, &c. Castles
 of 
Gold
 and 
Mother of Pearl.
 Many 
Fowls
 and 
Cups
 made out of 
Nautili,
 and other 
Shells,
 and out of 
Oestrich-eggs.
 A fine 
Oestrich
 made out of its 
Egg,
 with the 
Feathers
 of 
Gold.
 A 
Cup
 made out of the 
Ball
 taken our of an 
Oxes Stomach,
 richly set, about a foot long. A 
Stone
 as big as my fist, like a 
Bezoar-stone,
 taken out of a 
Horse.
 A 
Purse
 made out of the 
Linum Incombustibile. Silver Ore
 from the 
Mines
 of 
Freiberg,
 almost pure, in 
strings
 and 
shoots.
 A Natural 
Cross
 of 
Silver Ore.
 One hundred and twenty one 
Heads
 carved on the outside of a 
Cherry-stone.
 A 
Religious Man
 or 
Frier
 of 
Japan
 carved in 
Box.
 A 
Chrystal Cabinet,
 sold by 
Oliver Cromwell,
 wherein is kept a 
Ring
 which hath 
Stones
 in it in the shape of a 
Castle.
 His Majesty King 
Charles
 the Second on Horsback, carved out of 
Iron.
 A 
Head
 of King 
Charles
 the First. A 
Glass Organ, Topazes
 unpolished, ten Inches in 
Diameter.
 A 
Cup
 out of a 
To∣paze. Emeralds
 an inch in 
Diameter,
 as they grow in the 
Rock,
 resembling the 
Vitriolum Nativum,
 as I saw it in 
Paradise-hill
 by 
Schemnitz
 in 
Hungary. Stones
 named 
Thunder stones,
 smelling of 
Fire. Rocks
 made out of all sorts of 
Ore,
 and the 
names
 of the places written upon them from whence they were digged.


The Figures of 
Fishes
 in 
Stones
 out of 
Mansfield;
 the 
Stones
 are dark-coloured, but the 
Fishes
 of a Gold or Copper colour. All sorts of 
Stones
 which are to be found about 
Saxony
 and 
Misnia
 polished. Two large pieces of pure 
Virgin Gold
 out of the 
Mine.
 A 
Cabinet
 of all sorts of 
Apothecaries Instruments
 and 
chief Druggs.
 A 
Hart
 with a 
Cabinet
 made in his side, containing all Me∣dicines taken from a 
Hart.
 A 
white Hart
 as big as the

 
Life,
 made out of the 
shavings
 and 
filings
 of 
Harts horn,
 and looking like 
Plaister. Figures
 printed in 
Trees.
 A 
Spur
 in part of a 
Tree. Horns
 in 
Trees.


A Chamber of all manner of 
Mathematical Instruments
 and 
Charts.
 A good 
Library
 of 
Mathematical Books
 An 
Unicorns-horn,
 which they will have to be of a 
Land U∣nicorn,
 being neither wreathed nor hollow. A Dart of 
Unicorns-horn.
 Among the 
Pictures
 in the same Cham∣bers these seemed remarkable: A 
Picture
 by 
Colier,
 of the Siege of 
Jerusalem,
 with great number of 
Figures,
 and highly esteemed. Four 
Heads
 of the 
Elements
 made out of the 
Creatures
 which belong to them in 
Caricatura.
 A painting of 
Merchants Letters
 stuck behind 
green Tape.
 A 
Storm
 by 
Rubens.
 Two 
Nuns
 by 
Lucas van Leyden.
 A 
Picture
 of Dr. 
Luther
 in the 
Cloyster,
 in his 
Gown,
 and after his 
Death.
 There is also great variety of excellent 
Clockwork,
 and an attempt for a 
perpetual motion
 by a 
rowling bullet.
 A 
Cuckow
 singeth by 
Clockwork,
 a 
Hors∣man
 rideth, a 
Ship
 saileth, an 
old Woman
 walketh, a 
Cen∣taur
 runneth and shooteth, a 
Crab
 creepeth upon a Table so well as to amaze and delight; but among all, the 
Crab
 seems to be most naturally imitated.


In the 
Stable house,
 besides the extraordinary noble Stable of Horses, wherein every 
Horse
 eats out of a 
Rack
 of 
Iron,
 and 
Manger
 of 
Copper;
 and on a 
Pillar
 by him his 
Comb, Bridle
 and 
Saddle,
 and other Necessaries, hang; besides a handsome Window with a Curtain before him. There are observable a very fair 
Fountain
 and 
pond
 set a∣bout with handsome 
Ballisters,
 where the 
Horses
 are wa∣tered. A 
long walk
 arched and painted with 
Horses;
 over which is a 
Gallery
 with the 
Pictures
 of all the 
Dukes
 and 
Electors
 of 
Saxony,
 both in their 
Military
 and 
Electoral
 Habits. Two 
Beds
 of 
Marble.
 Drinking 
Cups
 which seem not great, yet so contrived as to hold divers quarts.

 A 
Spring
 which causeth a 
Horseman
 in 
Silver
 to come ri∣ding in, bringing a Cup of 
Wine
 in his hand. A pair of noble 
Pistols
 with all the 
Stories
 of the 
New
 and 
Old Te∣stament
 upon them. A 
Glass Gun.
 A 
Gun
 which shoots off Forty times without charging again. A 
Piece
 which sheweth the manner of the first invention of 
striking Fire
 in 
Guns.
 A 
Lock
 without a 
cock.


A Chamber of rich 
Sleds
 for 
Horses,
 made use of in Jollity and pompous Courses upon the 
Snow.
 A 
white Bears skin
 stuffed. 
Tigers
 and 
Lyons
 Skins. A 
Cassowares
 Skin. Good 
Armour
 for 
Men
 and 
Horses.
 Many sorts of 
Indian Mony, Duntans,
 and other sorts. A 
Picture
 of 
Laplanders
 and their 
Customs.
 A 
Lapland Drum
 with 
Figures
 to conjure by. A Chamber of all 
Hunting Arms
 and 
Necessaries.


The 
Armamentarium-Armory
 or 
Arsenal,
 is a long, square Building, wherein are about Four hundred 
brass Pieces
 of 
Ordinance,
 great number of 
Muskets
 and 
Armour
 in the Upper Room. 
Silver Coats
 of 
Male. Pieces
 of 
Ordi∣nance
 to be charged behind. 
Retorts
 and 
Alembicks
 in the shape of 
Granados.
 The 
Steeple
 of the chief 
Church
 was lately burnt by Lightning, and the 
Canon
 melted which were upon it.


In the 
Hunting-house,
 in the 
old Town,
 are fifteen 
Bears
 very well provided for and looked unto. They have 
Fountains
 and 
Ponds
 to wash themselves in, wherein they much delight: And near to the 
Pond
 are high 
ragged Posts
 or 
Trees
 set up for the 
Bears
 to climb up, and 
Scaffolds
 made at the top to sun and dry themselves; where they will also sleep, and come and go as the 
Keeper
 calls them. The 
Horn Gallery
 is also remarkable in this place, out of which there are three Chambers; one painted with seve∣ral sorts of 
Hunting;
 another with all sorts of 
Fowl;
 and a third with great variety of 
Beasts.










depiction of the bear garden at Dresden, Meissen, Germany, featuring five bears, three on poles or platforms, one on the ground, and one swimming in a pool or pond


The Elector of Saxony his Beare Garden at Dresden in Misnia.


Oliuer. Fe








In the 
House
 for 
wild Beasts
 I took notice of a 
Marian,
 which is a four-footed Beast, that hangeth upon 
Trees
 by the 
Tail.
 Also a 
wild
 or 
Mountain-Cat
 of a large size. Five 
young Bears.
 Five 
old black Bears.
 A 
white Bear
 very large; the 
feet,
 the 
head,
 and the 
neck
 are longer than those of the 
black,
 but not so thick. Two 
Lyons.
 Ten 
Luekses;
 very fine 
Beasts,
 in 
bigness, colour,
 and 
shape
 between a 
Tiger
 and a 
wild Cat;
 the tips of their 
Ears
 and 
Tails
 are 
black,
 their 
Eyes
 lively, their 
Skin
 Lyon coloured, and spotted, especially about their 
Eyes.


The 
Italian Garden
 and 
Summer-house
 in the 
Suburbs
 is very noble, wherein are two 
Obelisks,
 two gallant 
Fountains,
 a 
Theatre
 and good 
Landskips.
 This 
Garden
 and 
Summer house
 were built by two of the Prince Ele∣ctour's 
Eunuchs,
 and afterwards sold unto the Prince for Six and twenty thousand 
Dollars.


Dresden
 is but a late City, and was formerly a Village. The 
Churfurst,
 or 
Elector,
 was not in the Town; but the 
Chur-prince
 his Son was there: A Person rather of low than middle 
Stature,
 his Hair long and yellow, his Face ruddy, his Body well set and active, and he is very well beloved. The present Elector of 
Saxony
 is 
John George
 the Second, 
Grand Marshal
 of the 
Empire,
 a great and powerful Prince, who keeps a 
Royal Court
 and 
Attendance,
 having his 
Guards
 and 
Officers
 after the manner of 
Kings.
 His 
Dominions
 lye in 
Misnia, Thuringia Voytland,
 and part of 
Lusatia.
 His 
Revenues
 are large, from 
Impositi∣ons
 upon 
Commodities.
 His 
Profits
 great, from the Tax upon 
Beer,
 which ariseth to no small sum, especially in 
Wittenberg, Torga,
 and 
Leipsick.
 And his 
Silver Mines
 are considerable. And the 
Funeral
 of the last Electour 
Joannes Georgius
 the First, was very magnificent 1657. at which there were twenty four 
Horses
 of 
State
 covered with 
black,
 and the Electoral 
Escutcheon
 embroydered

 thereon, and every one led by two Gentlemen, and three thousand five hundred persons in mourning.


Dr. 
Luthers
 Holiday was kept when I was there. The chief Church is very fair: They preach every morning at seven a Clock. The 
Lutheran
 women mourn in 
white,
 as others do in 
Black:
 and the woman of the House doth ordinarily say Grace instead of the man. The best 
High∣dutch
 is spoken in this place, and other parts of 
Misnia,
 which is a very pleasant fruitful Country, and full of good Towns and Villages.


Leaving this noble place, I took not the nearest Road, but turned out of the way unto 
Freiberg,
 a place noted for 
Silver Mines;
 whereof I had read something in 
A∣gricola,
 and heard very much in these parts. About an 
English
 mile or two from 
Freiberg,
 there are many remar∣kable 
Mines.
 I took notice of three of them: One called 
Auff den hohen berg,
 or 
upon the high Hill,
 which is the deepest in these parts, as being seventy seven of their 
Fathoms
 deep; each of their 
Fathoms
 contains twelve of their 
Ells,
 and three of their 
Ells
 makes one of our 
Fa∣thoms.
 So that the depth of this 
Mine
 exceedeth any of those wherein I was in 
Hungary.
 There is another 
Mine
 called 
Himmelfurst,
 or the 
Prince of Heaven,
 where∣in not long since there was 
Ore
 found so rich, as in an hundred pounds weight to contain an hundred and thirty Marks of 
Silver,
 or sixty five pounds in the hundred, but there was not much of it: And where the 
Veyns
 are richest, they are observed to be thinest, about two sin∣gers broad; but the ordinary 
Ore
 is but poor, holding an ounce, or an ounce and a half, in an hundred pounds weight; and if it holdeth but half an ounce they work it. Nor is this much to be wondered at, for in the vast rich 
Mines
 of 
Peru
 and 
Chili,
 they will work the 
Silver Ore
 which containeth four or five ounces in a hundred pound

 weight, and ten or twelve ounces is the ordinary rate of the common 
Ore
 of that rich Mountain of 
Potosi,
 out of which Hill alone, if we believe 
Albero Alonso Barba,
 Cu∣rate of the Parish of St. 
Bernard
 in that City, there hath been more 
Silver
 taken than would cover all 
Misnia
 o∣ver and over: For thus he saith, Potosi 
hath already yielded between four and five hundred Millions of pieces of Eight.
 A quantity sufficient to make such another Hill of 
Silver:
 It is hard to form a conception equal unto so exorbitant a heap of Riches; but the better to help our imagination herein, know, that if the Ground were cove∣red with so many pieces of Eight, laid as close to one another as is possible, they would take up the space of six∣ty Leagues square.


Here at 
Freiberg
 they have many ways to open the 
Ore
 whereby it may be melted; as by 
Lead
 and a sort of 
Sil∣ver Ore
 which holds 
Lead
 in it. They have also 
Sulphur Ore
 found here, which after it is burned, doth help much towards the fusion of 
Metals:
 And besides these, 
Slich,
 or pounded and washed 
Ore;
 and 
Slacken,
 which is the Dross or Cake, or Skum taken out of the 
Vortiegel,
 or 
Pan
 which receiveth the 
melted Minerals
 let out at the bottom of the 
melting Furnace.
 Their 
Treibshearth,
 or 
driving Furnace,
 where the 
Litharge
 is driven off, agreeth better with the Figure of it in 
Agricola,
 than those of 
Hungary;
 some of the 
Litharge
 is green: Their 
Buck∣work
 and their 
Engines
 which pound the 
Ore,
 the 
Coal,
 and 
Clay,
 are also very neat. Much of their 
Ore
 is washed, especially the poorest, and that which is mixed with 
stones, quarts,
 or 
sparrs.


This is peculiar in their working, that they burn the pounded and washed 
Ore
 in the 
Roasthearth,
 before they melt it in the 
Smeltzoven,
 or 
melting Furnace.




At these 
Mines
 of 
Hungary
 where I was, they used not the 
Virgula divina,
 or forked Hazel, to find out 
Silver Ore,
 or hidden Treasure in the Earth; and I should little depend thereon: but here they have an esteem of it. And I observed the use thereof, and the manner how they did it. But I shall omit the Description of it, because it is set down in divers Books, and it cannot be so well de∣scribed as shown to the Eye.


I saw also another 
Mine,
 called 
Auff der Halsbrucker,
 about eighty of our 
Fathoms
 deep, and much worked: They have divers sorts of 
Ore;
 but they contain either 
Silver
 and 
Copper, Silver
 and 
Lead,
 or all three; but they work them only for 
Silver.
 They have divers 
damps
 in these 
Mines,
 where it is deep. The 
Mines
 are cold where the outward Air comes in; but where not, warm. The greatest trouble they have is by dust, which spoileth their 
Lungs
 and 
Stomachs,
 and frets their 
Skins.
 But they are not so much troubled with water; and have ve∣ry good 
Engins
 to draw the water out.


The 
Sulphur,
 or 
Brimstone Ore
 which is found here, is also rich; it is hard and stony, as other 
Ores
 are: that which hath 
red spots
 is accounted the best. They use a peculiar 
Furnace
 to melt the 
Brimstone
 from the 
Ore;
 some whereof yieldeth three pounds of 
Sulphur
 out of an hundred weight of 
Ore,
 which as it melteth runneth out of the 
Furnace
 into water, or the Exhalations from the 
Ore
 near or in the Fire, are condensed into 
Brimstone
 by the Surface of the Water placed to receive it; this is once again melted and purified. Some of the 
Brimstone Ore
 containeth 
Silver,
 some 
Copper,
 and some both in a small proportion.


After the 
Sulphur
 is melted from the 
Ore,
 the remain∣der serveth for two uses; that is, either for the melting of 
Silver,
 or for the making of 
Vitriol:
 To the former only







depiction of two German miners and their tools


Two Miners in their habits


Virgula Divina


The figure of an Iron retort such as are vsed at the quicksilver worke at Idria.






 thus; A proportion is cast into the melting 
Furnace
 of the 
Silver,
 to this end, to use the 
Miners
 expression, to make the 
Silver
 which is hard, fluid.


The other use, and which is more considerable, is for the making of 
Vitriol,
 or 
Copperose
 in this manner: They take the 
Ore
 out of which the 
Brimstone
 hath been already melted, and burn it once again, or let it still burn in the open Air; then putting it into a large Fatt, they pour water upon it, so as to imbibe and drink in the 
Vitriol;
 this Water is afterwards boyled to a sufficient height, and let out into the Coolers, where sticks are set in it, as in the making of 
Sugar Candy:
 The purest Chrystallized 
Vitriol
 sticks unto the wood, the rest to the sides and bot∣tom. Thus the 
Sulphur Ore,
 after the 
Sulphur
 is taken out of it, still worketh upon the 
Silver Ore,
 and openeth the Body of it in the Fire; but when this 
Ore
 is also de∣prived of its 
Vitriol,
 it worketh no more upon 
Me∣tals.


Friberg
 is a round well-walled City; hath handsome Streets, a 
Piazza,
 the Elector's Castle, and five Gates. the Church of St. 
Peter
 is fair, where many of the Dukes and Ducal Family have been buried, and have fair Monu∣ments; especially Duke 
Mauritius,
 Elector of 
Saxony,
 whose Monument in 
black Marble
 is raised three piles high, adorned with many fair 
Statua's
 in 
Alabaster
 and 
white Marble,
 and esteemed one of the noblest, if not the best, in 
Germany.
 And when this Town was surrendred unto 
Holck
 and 
Gallas, Octob.
 5. 1632. the Duke of 
Saxony
 paid 80000 
Dollars
 to save the Monuments of his Prede∣cessours from being ransacked and defaced, it being the fashion of divers 
German
 Princes to be buried in their 
Robes,
 with their 
Ensigns
 of 
Honour, Rings, Jewels,
 and the like, which would have been booty, and probably have run the same fortune as the 
Cloister
 of 
Haibron,
 within

 twelve 
English
 miles of 
Nurenberg,
 where some of the Marquisses of 
Onspach,
 who are of the Electoral House of 
Brandenburg,
 lye entombed, where 
Tillie
's Souldiers brake open the 
Vault,
 and robbed the 
dead Corpses
 of the Marquisses, 
George Frederick,
 and 
Joachim Ernest,
 of the 
Jewels, Rings,
 and other rich 
Ornaments
 with which they were entombed.


There are some Vaults and Subterraneous Cavities in the City, by which there are passages into the 
Mines.
 This place was formerly streightly besieged by the Em∣perour 
Adolphus,
 for the space of a year and a month, and at last betrayed by a 
Fugitive,
 who let in a party of the Emperours into the Town by a Subterraneous Pas∣sage near St. 
Donats
 Gate, and upon the continual Batte∣ries made at the Town, and concussion of the Earth a∣bout it, the Earth sunk down in many places, and swal∣lowed great numbers of the Emperours Army.


These 
Mines
 afford great benefit unto the City, and also unto the Elector; They are said to have been found out in the year 1180. But there have been other 
Silver Mines
 discovered since; as at 
Schneeberg,
 at 
Anneberg,
 and at 
Joachims Dale,
 1526.


Having passed some time at 
Friberg,
 I ordered my Journey for 
Leipsick,
 and travelling by 
Waltheim
 and 
Col∣dick,
 came unto it.


Leipsick
 is seated upon the River 
Elster,
 which arising in 
Vortland,
 or 
Terra Advocatorum,
 passeth by it, and afterwards runneth into the River 
Sala.
 It is a rich and great trading City; hath three 
Marts
 in the year, and great resort unto it from many parts: It is well-built, and divers 
Houses
 are seven stories high. The 
Castle
 is strictly guarded, and hath in it a strong white Town: But the Works about the Town are not very considerable, al∣though they might be made strong.




The Church of St. 
Nicholas
 is well adorned, and hath the name to be the fairest within side of any 
Lutheran
 Church in 
Germany;
 they have also a remarkable 
Burial∣place
 or 
Godtsaker,
 walled about, and cloystered near the Wall, wherein the better sort are buried, as the rest in the middle and open part. Which put me in mind of that noble 
Burial-place
 which I saw at 
Pisa
 in 
Tuscany,
 called 
Il campo Santo,
 because the Earth which the Em∣perour 
Frederick Barbarossa
 brought from the 
Holy Land,
 for the Ballast of his Ships, was laid upon that Ground.


Leipsick
 is famous for two great Battels fought near unto it in the last 
Swedish
 wars; one between 
Gustavus Adolphus,
 King of 
Sweden,
 and Count 
Tilly,
 General of the 
Imperialists,
 1631. wherein the 
Swedes
 obtained a great Victory. 
Tilly
 was wounded, fled, and lived not long after. Another some years after in the same place, wherein 
Leonard Torstenson
 the 
Swede,
 overcame Arch∣duke 
Leopoldus Gulielmus,
 and 
Octavio Piccolomini,
 Gene∣rals of the 
Imperial Army.
 And about a mile and a half from hence, at 
Lutzen,
 another great Battel was fought, 1632. between the King of 
Sweden
 and the 
Imperial Ar∣my,
 commanded by 
Albert Wallensteyn
 Duke of 
Friedland,
 wherein the 
Swedes
 obtained the Victory, but the King of 
Sweden
 was slain; and on the 
Imperial
 side that famous Commander, 
Godfrey
 Count of 
Pappenheim.


There is also an 
University
 at 
Leipsick,
 first occasioned by the 
German
 Scholars of 
Prague,
 who in the troubles of the 
Hussites
 came hither, to the number of Two thou∣sand in one day; and is still one of the 
Three Universities
 in the Elector's Dominions; the other being 
Jena
 by the River 
Sala,
 and 
Wittenberg
 upon the 
Elbe.
 In this 
Uni∣versity
 they are much addicted to the study of the 
Law,
 but there are also Learned men in other Faculties.




The Magistrates of 
Leipsick
 are also considerable. 
Der herr von Adlershelme
 was the 
Burgomaster,
 a courteous Learned Person, and great 
Virtuoso,
 who had collected and observed many things: He hath had five fair Daugh∣ters brought up in all commendable ways of working, 
Drawing, Painting, Inlaying
 with 
Flowers,
 with 
Mother
 of 
Pearl, Stones,
 and other pretty 
Works.
 And they speak divers 
Languages,
 which they learned at a School in 
Holland:
 So that his House hath a great deal of excel∣lent Furniture of his Childrens work, and is one of the most considerable Curiosities to be seen in 
Leipsick.
 His 
Summer-house
 is handsome, painted both within and with∣out: And in the Water about, are 
Muscovy Ducks, Indian Geese,
 and divers rare 
Fowls.
 In his 
Chamber
 of 
Rari∣ties
 there are many things considerable: But I have seen divers of them in other places, and lately set down some 
Varieties
 of the Elector of 
Saxony,
 I shall mention but a few.


An 
Elephants Head
 with the 
dentes molares
 in it. An 
Animal
 like an 
Armadillo,
 but the Scales are much larger, and the Tail broader. Very large 
flying Fishes.
 A 
Sea∣horse. Bread
 of 
Mount Libanus.
 A 
Cedar-branch
 with the 
Fruit
 upon it. Large 
Granates
 as they grow in the 
Mine.
 A 
Sirens hand.
 A 
Chameleon
 made out of a 
Fish.
 A piece of 
Iron,
 which seemeth to be the 
head
 of a 
Spear,
 found in the 
Tooth
 of an 
Elephant,
 the 
Tooth
 being grown about it. The 
Isle of Jerscy
 drawn by our King. A piece of 
Wood
 with the 
Blood
 of King 
Charles
 the First upon it. A 
Greenland Lance
 with a large 
Bell
 at the end of it. Much 
Japan
 painting, wherein their manner of 
hunting
 and 
work∣ing
 may be observed. A 
Picture
 of our 
Saviour,
 the 
Hatches
 of which are writing, or written, and contain the 
story
 of his 
Passion. Bevers
 taken in the River 
Elbe.
 A 
Picture
 of the 
murther
 of the 
Innocents,
 done by 
Albert

 Durer. Pictures
 of divers strange 
Fowls.
 A 
Greenland Boat.
 The Skins of 
white Bears, Tigres, Hilves,
 and other 
Beasts.
 And I must not omit the 
Garter
 of an 
Eng∣lish Bride,
 with the story of it; of the Fashion in 
England
 for the Bridemen to take it off, and wear it in their Hat, which seemed so strange to the 
Germans,
 that I was obli∣ged to confirm it to them, by assuring them that I had di∣vers times wore such a 
Garter
 my self.


Leaving this busie and trading City of 
Leipsick,
 I di∣rected my Journey unto 
Magdeburg,
 and travelled through a plain Country, between the River 
Sala
 and the 
Elbe,
 by 
Landsberg,
 nigh to 
Petersdorff,
 where there is a small Hill which overlooks all the Country, so to 
Kihten,
 the Resi∣dence of the Prince of 
Anhalt,
 then to 
Caln,
 and over the River 
Sala,
 before it runneth into the 
Elbe,
 which arising at 
Mount Fichtelberg,
 now hastneth towards it. 
Fich∣telberg
 is a considerable Mountain, near which are divers 
Mines, Bathes,
 and 
Mineral-waters,
 of which 
Gaspar Bruschius
 hath written a Description. And from it arise four Rivers, running to the four quarters of the World. The 
Maine
 or 
Moenus,
 towards the West; the 
Nab
 or 
Nabus,
 towards the South; the 
Aeger
 towards the East; and the forementioned 
Sala
 towards the North. These four afterwards fall into the three greatest Rivers of 
Ger∣many,
 the 
Danube,
 the 
Rhine,
 and the 
Elbe.
 Then to 
Sals
 or 
Saltz,
 a placed noted for Salt-springs, and that night to 
Magdeburg.


Parthenopolis,
 or 
Magdeburg,
 is seated by the River 
Elbe,
 formerly the Metropolitan City of 
Germany,
 now under the Marquiss of 
Brandenburg,
 of very great Circuit, but little more than half built again, since it was sacked and burnt by 
Tilly,
 and Thirty six thousand persons put to the Sword and destroyed. I could not but observe the ruinous and destructive effects of the late wars in many

 parts of 
Germany,
 but not in any so great and flourish∣ing a place as this: And a man might think, that after this great destruction of Houses and People, this place should not be able to stand a Siege; yet a few years after it was besieged by General 
Hatzfield,
 unto whom (
Bannier
 the 
Swede
 not being able to relieve it) it was yielded. The 
Cathedral Church
 is very fair, and built like an 
English
 one, by the Emperour 
Otho
 the First, and his Empress 
Editha,
 an 
English
 woman, Daughter unto King 
Edmund,
 whose 
Effigies
 in Stone I saw in the Church, with nine∣teen Tuns of 
Gold
 by her which she gave thereto. And to say the truth, 
English
 mony hath done great things in 
Germany,
 for hereby, or with a good part thereof, this Church was built or endowed. 
Leopoldus,
 Duke of 
Au∣stria,
 built the old 
Walls
 of 
Vienna
 with the ransome of King 
Richard
 the First, whom he detained in his return through 
Austria
 from the 
Holy Land.
 King 
Edward
 the First sent a great Sum of Mony unto the Emperour 
Adol∣phus,
 for the raising of Souldiers in 
Germany,
 which the Emperour employed in purchasing a great part of 
Misnia
 for himself.


The 
Lutheran
 Churches are handsome, and their Pul∣pits are extraordinary noble, and richly set off, as I ob∣served, through all 
Saxony, Norimberg.
 And where they are Masters of the Places, and have not their Chur∣ches only by permission; here they shewed me in the 
Cathedral Church
 of St. 
Maurice,
 the 
Statua's
 of the 
five wise Virgins
 smiling, and of the 
five foolish Virgins
 lament∣ing, which are very well expressed: They shewed me al∣so two odd Reliques, which they still kept as 
Rarities;
 that is, the 
Bason
 wherein 
Pilate
 washed his hands, when he declared himself free from the blood of our 
Saviour;
 and the 
Ladder
 whereon the 
Cock
 stood when he crowed after St. 
Peter
's denying of Christ.




In the 
Ruines
 of the 
Cloister
 of the 
Augustines,
 there is still to be seen 
Luther
's 
Chamber,
 his 
Bedstead,
 and 
Table,
 and upon the 
Door
 are these 
German
 Verses.




Dis war 
Lutheri
 Kammerlin,


Waner in's Closter kam herin,


Gedachnis halb wird noch it zund


Herin gesehen sein Bettespund.




i. e.




Luther
 did lodge within this little Room,


When first he did into the Cloister come;


In memory whereof we still do keep


The Bedstead upon which he us'd to sleep.




I lodged at 
Magdeburg,
 in an old man's House, who would tell me many stories of the 
burning
 of the 
Town,
 the 
cruelties
 and 
bloody usage
 of the 
people,
 who were destroy∣ed without exception: The 
Nuns,
 many of them being drowned in the River 
Elbe.
 After which some observed that Count 
Tilly
 never prospered in his wars. He told me also that 
Dureus
 lodged with him, who was employed by King 
Charles
 the First, to endeavour a reconciliation between the 
Lutherans
 and 
Calvinists
 in 
Germany,
 and to unite them if possible. We were now in the Territory of the Elector of 
Brandenburg, Fridericus Wilhelmus,
 Great Chamberlain of the Empire, who is in effect pos∣sessed of 
Magdeburg,
 and next unto the 
Austrian Family,
 is the most potent Prince in 
Germany,
 being able to raise great 
Armies,
 and his 
Dominions
 so large, that they are reckoned to extend two hundred 
German
 miles in length, from the further part of 
Prussia
 unto 
Cleve,
 but they lay not together, but interspersed with many other Princes

 Countries: Howsoever, a Horse-man may so order his Journey, as to lye every night in one of the Electour's Towns, in travelling from one end of his Territories to another.


I had now left the 
pure German Language
 behind me, for at 
Magdeburg
 comes in another kind of 
German,
 called 
Plat-Deutch, Broad-Dutch, Nidersachsische,
 or the 
Lan∣guage of lower Saxony;
 a great 
Language,
 spoken in the North part of 
Germany:
 They speak it at 
Hamburg, Lubeck,
 and many great Cities: But they can converse with the other 
High-dutch,
 and with some difficulty also with the 
Netherlanders;
 the one speaking in his 
Language,
 and the other replying in his.


At this City of 
Magdeburg
 was performed the first 
Turnament
 that was in 
Germany,
 which was opened in the year 635. by the Emperour 
Henry,
 Surnamed the 
Fow∣ler,
 who coming from the war of 
Hungary,
 exceedingly satisfied with the 
Nobility,
 would oblige them to exercise themselves in handling their 
Arms,
 and managing their 
Horses,
 and therefore instituted these 
Sports,
 whereby the 
Nobility
 was powerfully attracted to 
Valour
 and 
Gallan∣try,
 and induced to perfect and accomplish themselves in all kind of 
Chevalry.
 No new 
Nobility,
 no 
Bastard,
 no 
Usurper,
 none guilty of 
High Treason,
 no 
Oppressor
 of 
Widows
 and 
Orphans,
 none born of 
Parents
 whereof one was of 
base Extraction
 and 
Ignoble,
 no 
Heretique, Mur∣derer, Traytor,
 no 
Coward
 that had run away from the 
Battel,
 nor 
indiscreet Person
 that had given 
offence
 to 
La∣dies
 by 
word
 or 
deed,
 were admitted to this 
Honour,
 nor above 
One
 of the same 
Family
 at a time. 
Princes
 came into the 
Lists
 with 
four Squires
 a piece, 
Counts
 and 
Ba∣rons
 with 
three,
 a 
Knight
 with 
two,
 and a 
Gentleman
 with 
one.




The hour and place for the 
Turnament
 being appoint∣ed, he that had a desire to break a 
Lance
 there, came to the 
Presidents Lodgings
 to have his 
Name
 written down, which was done in the presence of three 
Heralds,
 to whom the 
Champion
 delivered his 
Helmet
 and 
Sword,
 and after he had been at Confession, presented himself in the 
Lists
 with one or more 
Squires,
 according to his quality. The 
Horses
 of the 
Combatants
 were to be without fault or exception; the 
Caparisons
 and 
Furniture
 such as gave no offence; their 
Saddles
 without any extraordinary ri∣sing before and behind, and all things equal. After which they performed all kind of 
Exercises
 on 
Horse-back:
 and after the 
Jousts
 were ended, every man repaired to the 
President
 of his 
Nation,
 to wait for the 
Sentence
 of the 
Judges;
 and he that best deserved the 
Prize,
 received it either from the 
hand
 of some 
Lady,
 or from the 
Prince
 that gave it.


These 
Pastimes
 were afterwards disused, upon the E∣mulation it caused between the 
Princes
 and 
Nobility,
 who strove to outvie one another; or upon wars, in which there was no leisure for such 
Exercises;
 or perhaps upon con∣sideration that divers 
brave men
 lost their 
lives
 in these 
Encounters:
 And no less a 
Prince
 than 
Henry
 the Second, King of 
France,
 neglecting to wear his 
Beaver
 down, was slain in a 
Turnament.
 And at 
Darmstadt
 also, in the year 1403. at the Three and twentieth 
Turnament
 which was held in 
Germany,
 the Gentlemen of 
Franconia
 and those of 
Hesse,
 drew so much blood upon one another, that there remained dead upon the place seventeen of the for∣mer, and nine of the latter.


The 
Winter
 growing on called me to make haste to 
Hamburg,
 from whence I intended to pass by Sea into 
England,
 and therefore I took the advantage of the 
Stage-Coaches
 at 
Magdeburg,
 and in four days came to 
Ham∣burg;


 I travelled through a Country for the most part barren, of little accommodation, or scarce any thing ve∣ry remarkable, through part of the Electour of 
Branden∣burg,
 and then through the Duke of 
Lunenburg
's Coun∣try, passing by the City of 
Lunenburg,
 a handsome wal∣led City, beautified with divers fair 
Churches,
 with high 
Spires.
 The 
Church
 of St. 
Lambert,
 the 
Town-house,
 and the 
Duke
's 
Palace,
 are fair. Here are 
Salt-springs
 in the 
Town,
 very beneficial to the place, and supplying the 
neighbour Countries.
 The 
Town
 is commanded by a 
Hill
 near to it, called 
Kalkberg,
 which lieth on the North-side.


In this Road through 
lower Saxony,
 I could not but take notice of many 
Barrows
 or 
Mounts
 of 
Earth,
 the burial 
Monuments
 of great and famous 
Men,
 to be often observed also in open Countries in 
England,
 and some∣times rows of great 
Stones,
 like those in 
Wormius
 his 
Da∣nish Antiquities:
 And in one place I took more particu∣lar notice of them, where three massy 
Stones
 in the mid∣dle, were encompassed in a large square by other large 
Stones
 set up an end.


Hamburg
 is a fair 
City,
 and one of the great ones in 
Ger∣many;
 it is seated in a 
Plain,
 being populous, rich, and remarkably strong: It is fortified 
a la Moderne,
 much after the way of 
Holland,
 with 
works
 of 
earth,
 but in no place yet 
Revestues,
 or faced with 
brick
 or 
stone:
 The 
Territory
 belonging to it is but small; it is divided into the 
new
 and the 
old Town.
 There are five 
Gates:
 The 
Stone gate,
 leading towards 
Lubeck;
 the 
Dome-gate;
 the 
Alten-gate,
 or which leadeth unto 
Altenaw,
 a place near the 
Town,
 belonging to the King of 
Denmark,
 where the 
Romanists
 and 
Calvinists
 have their 
Churches;
 the 
Bridge-gate;
 and the 
Dike-gate.
 The 
Buildings
 of this City are handsome, and commonly have a fair entrance

 into them. The 
Senate-house
 is noble, adorned with carved 
Statua's
 of the 
Nine Worthies.
 The 
Exchange
 or place of meeting for 
Merchants,
 was then enlarging, it being too small to receive those 
Numbers
 which frequen∣ted it. Many of their 
Churches
 are very fair, with high 
Steeples,
 covered with 
Copper.
 The Front of St. 
Kathe∣rines
 is beautiful. The 
Steeple
 of St. 
Nicholas
 is sup∣ported with great gilded 
Globes.
 The other great 
Churches,
 are the 
Dome-Church,
 St. 
Peters,
 St. 
Jacob.
 The greater and less, St. 
Michael,
 the 
New-Church
 in the 
New town.
 The lesser 
Churches,
 are St. 
Gertrude,
 St. 
Mary Magdalen,
 and the 
Holy Ghost.
 They have a 
Sermon
 every day, as in other 
Lutheran
 Cities.


The River 
Alster
 runs through it into the 
Elbe,
 and turneth many 
Mills:
 and the 
Tide
 comes up into divers Streets through 
Chanels,
 although it be distant eighteen 
German
 miles from the 
Sea,
 or Mouth of the 
Elbe.
 This place aboundeth with shipping, and many of good Bur∣den, and is well seated for 
Trade,
 as having an open 
pas∣sage
 into the 
Ocean,
 and being but a days Journey from the 
Lubeck
 on the 
Baltick Sea,
 and being seated upon the long River 
Elbe,
 the third great River of 
Germany,
 whereby it may have Commerce with a great part of that Country, and as far as 
Bohemia.


Hamburg
 is full of 
Strangers
 and 
Merchants
 of several Countries. The 
English Company
 have good 
Priviledges
 and a rich 
Trade,
 and 
Ships
 come laden thither with 
Cloath
 to the value of an hundred thousand pounds 
sterling;
 and they live here in good Reputation, and to the honour of their Country: they are 
Persons
 of 
worth, courtesie,
 and 
civility;
 and I heartily wish them all success in their 
Af∣fairs.
 I must not omit the acknowledgment of my par∣ticular Obligation to that 
learned
 and 
worthy Person,
 Mr. 
Griffin,
 Preacher unto the Company, Mr. 
Free
 the Trea∣surer,

 Mr. 
Banks,
 who hath been in many places of 
Na∣tolia,
 and the 
Holy Land,
 Mr. 
Jenkinson,
 and my very obliging Friends Mr. 
Catelin
 and Mr. 
Townly.


This place hath the happiness to be quiet when the great Princes of 
Europe
 are at war; for it desires to hold a strict 
Amity
 with Princes, and declines all 
Dissention
 with them.


I found a Ship at 
Hamburg
 bound for 
London,
 and while it was fitting for Sail, I made a short 
excursion
 into part of the King of 
Denmarks
 Country; and returning to 
Hamburg
 again, I ordered my affairs for 
England
 upon the first wind, and hoped the next 
Tide
 to get over the 
Altenaw sand,
 and to pass the 
Blanckness,
 but a cross wind prevented, so that I left not 
Hamburg
 till the tenth of 
December,
 and then I had the good Company of Mr. 
Hoyle,
 who came from 
Narva,
 and set Sail in a new Ship; but the days being at the shortest, and the nights dark in the 
New Moon,
 the 
Tide
 falling also in the day time, we were able to get no further the first day than 
Stadt,
 or 
Stoade,
 upon the River 
Zwingh,
 a strong 
Town,
 belonging to the King of 
Sweden,
 where the Ships that come up the River pay Custome, and where the 
English
 Merchants had formerly their 
Residence,
 when they left 
Hamburg
 upon a Discontent.


December
 the 
11th.
 we came by 
Gluckstadt,
 belonging to the King of 
Denmark,
 where the 
Castle,
 the 
King
's 
Palace,
 and the 
Church
 are handsome, and Anchored that night before the Mouth of the River 
Oast,
 which ariseth in 
Bremerland,
 and falleth into the 
Elbe
 a mile from 
Bruns∣büttel,
 on the other 
Holsatian
 shoar.


December
 the 
12th.
 we lost sight of the Northern shoar, and passed 
Cook
's 
Haven,
 in full hopes to put out to Sea that night; but about Three in the Afternoon we were becalmed a League and a half below it, where we were

 forced to come to an Anchor again, lest the strong 
Ebbe
 should set us on ground among the 
Sands:
 So we lay that night between 
Thicksand
 on the North, and 
Newark
 on the South, right over against a 
Light-house.


December
 the 
13th.
 the wind turning Westernly, and blowing hard, we returned to 
Cook
's 
Haven,
 and came to Anchor. Here I came a shoar, and went up the Land to the Fort in this place belonging to the City of 
Ham∣burg:
 It is a high square Work, with a double Ditch, and some 
Vessels
 come up to the Fort; but the 
Ditch
 or 
Chanel
 which comes thither out of the 
Elbe,
 is dry at low water. The 
Town
 is called 
Reutsbüttel,
 not far from the Lands end. Two or three days after, with a cold North-East-wind, we set Sail for 
England.
 Coming out of the 
Elbe,
 we were all the Afternoon in sight of an Island, cal∣led 
Heilige-landt,
 or 
Holy-land,
 belonging to the Duke of 
Holstein,
 which being very high Land, is to be seen at a good distance, and is of excellent use to direct and guide Ships into the Mouth of the 
Elbe,
 without which they would be at a great loss, the Country about that Rivers Mouth being all very low Land.


Heiligeland
 is a small 
Island,
 having about two thou∣sand 
Inhabitants,
 and six or seven small 
Vessels
 belonging to it, which are imployed a great part of the year in bring∣ing 
Lobsters
 and other 
Fish
 to 
London
 or 
Quinborough,
 the 
Inhabitants
 living most upon 
Fish.
 We bore out to Sea all night, and the next day made towards the Land again, and sailed in sight of 
Schiemoniekeoghe, Amelandt,
 and 
Schelling:
 in the Evening we saw the Lights at the 
Vly
 and 
Texel;
 when we were near the Land, we were much troubled with the Frost and cold Weather, and less when we were off at Sea. The next day we had a fair wind, and made such way, that in the Evening we took down our Sails, and let the 
Vessel
 drive, not being wil∣ling

 to deal with the shoar in the night. The next morn∣ing we soon discovered the 
Northforeland
 covered with Snow, and came to an Anchor in 
Margarite
-Road, where the wind growing very high, we rode it out for two days and two nights, and came safe on shoar (praised be God) upon 
Christmas-day
 morning.


Now having made so long a walk in 
Germany,
 I must confess I returned with a better opinion of the Country, than I had before of it; and cannot but think it very considerable in many things. The Rivers there∣of are noble, and seem to exceed those of 
France
 and 
I∣taly.
 Of the Rivers of 
Italy,
 the 
Padus
 or 
Po,
 is the most considerable, which notwithstanding, hath no very long course, before it runneth into the 
Adriatick Sea.
 And 
Italy
 being divided by the 
Appennine-hills,
 running from West to East, the Rivers which arise from either side, cannot be long, neither on the South-side, before they run into the 
Mediterranean,
 as the 
Arno, Garigliano,
 and others: Nor on the North side, before they run into the 
Adriatick,
 or the 
Po.


The chief Rivers of 
France,
 as the 
Loyre,
 the 
Seine,
 the 
Rhosne,
 and the 
Garonne,
 I cannot but highly com∣mend, having passed upon them for divers days. There are also four great Rivers in 
Germany;
 the 
Danube,
 the 
Rhine,
 the 
Elbe,
 and the 
Oder,
 but none of 
France
 seem comparable unto the 
Rhine
 and 
Danube. France
 having the Sea upon the North, the West, and the two large Pro∣vinces of 
Languedoc,
 and 
Province
 upon the 
Mediterra∣nean Sea,
 hath the opportunity of Noble Cities and Sea∣ports: But some doubt may be made, Whether any there∣of do exceed 
Hamburg, Lubeck,
 and 
Dantzick.


The great number of populous, large, and handsome Cities, doth afford great content unto a 
Traveller
 in 
Ger∣many;
 for besides about Sixty six free Imperial Cities,

 are many more of good note belonging to particular Princes, and divers highly priviledged. And surely a true Estimation of the Cities and Towns of these days, cannot be duly made from the Accounts and Descripti∣ons thereof left an hundred years since or more, for since those times, Buildings have been better modelled and or∣dered; Fortifications and Out-works more regularly contrived; Convents and Publick Houses more neatly and commodiously built; and the fair Colledges and Churches of the 
Jesuites,
 which are now to be seen in most, do much set off the Beauty of great Places. Every where we meet with great and populous 
Towns, Villages, Castles, Seats
 of the 
Nobility, Plains, Forests,
 and plea∣sant 
Woods.
 And besides the satisfaction we may have from Objects above ground, we may find no small con∣tent in the wonders thereof under it, in 
Mines, Minerals
 almost of all sorts, of 
Gold, Silver, Copper, Iron, Tinn, Lead, Quicksilver, Antimony, Coal, Salt, Sulphur, Cad∣mia,
 and others, where there are also singular 
Artificers
 and 
Workmen,
 in the several Artifices thereof. Con∣versation with the People is easie, they behaving them∣selves without much Formality, and are plain-dealing and trusty, so that a 
Traveller
 needs not to be so so∣licitous and heedful of what he hath, as in some other Countries, which are esteemed of greater Civility. The Women are generally well-complexioned, sober, and grave, and they have not yet learned the custome of their Neighbours of 
France
 and 
Holland,
 to admit of being saluted by Men: faithful to their Husbands, and careful in the affairs of their Houses.


They make good provision against the cold of their Country, by sleeping between two Feather-beds and Stoves.




The common 
Stoves
 in 
Inns,
 wherein there are for the most part several Companies eating, drinking, and in the night sleeping, are convenient, considering the great cold, or at least tolerable; but they being rooms close shut up, the smell of the meat, and especially of 
Cabbage,
 an usual Dish amongst them, makes them un∣pleasant, so that sometimes I preferred the course of hot Countries, while I called to mind, that in 
Pro∣vince
 and 
Italy
 we drank frozen 
Julebs,
 which we dis∣solved with the heat of our hands; slept upon a sheet, on the outside of the Bed, with all the Windows of the Chamber open; and as we sate at dinner, there was a Fann in the middle of the Room, hanging over our Heads, about two yards broad, which with a string was pulled backward and forward to cool us, and divers had Pans filled with Snow, to cool the sheets when they went into their Beds.


Germany
 is a great 
Hive
 of men, and the mighty de∣struction of men made by the last 
German
 wars, and by the Plague is so repaired, that it is scarce discernible. They are fruitful, and full of Children: They are not exhausted by 
Sea,
 Colonies sent forth, or by peopling 
A∣merican Countries;
 but they have some consumption by wars abroad, when they be at peace at home: few wars being made in other parts of 
Europe,
 wherein there are not some Regiments of 
Germans;
 the People being na∣turally Martial, and persons well descended, very averse from a Trading course of Life.


While I read in 
Tacitus
 of the old barbarous and rude State of 
Germany,
 how poorly they lived, that they had their Houses at a distance from one another; how igno∣rant they were in Arts; and it was doubted whether their Country afforded 
Mines;
 that they lived by exchange of things, making little or no use of mony, and the like,

 I may justly wonder to behold the present advance and improvement in all commendable Arts, Learning, Civili∣ty, splendid and handsome Cities and Habitations, and the general face of things incredibly altered since those ancient times; and cannot but approve the expression of a Learned Man, though long since, 
That if
 A
v
stus, Civilis, 
and those old famous men of
 Germany, 
should re∣vive in their Country again, and look up to Heaven behold∣ing the Constellations of the Bears and other Stars, they might probably acknowledge that these were the same Stars which they were wont to behold; but if they should look downward, and well view the face of all things, they would imagine themselves to be in a new world, and never acknowledge this to have been their Country.








A JOURNEY FROM COLEN IN GERMANY TO LONDON.


D
Uring the Treaty of Peace at 
Colen
 in the year 1673. between the 
United States
 of the 
Netherlands,
 the King of 
Great Britain,
 and the 
French
 King; many 
English
 Gentlemen ha∣ving accompanied their Excellencies the Lords Ambassadours and Pleni∣potentiaries in their Journey, had a desire also to view some of the Neighbouring Territo∣ries,

 and to divertise themselves during the heat of the 
Summer,
 at the 
Spaa,
 the 
Baths
 of 
Aken,
 and other pla∣ces. Having therefore, in order to our Journey, obtain∣ed a 
Pasport
 for our Safety from Count 
Blondel,
 one of the 
Spanish Plenipotentiaries,
 and from their 
Excellencies
 Sir 
Joseph Williamson,
 and Sir 
Leoline Jenkins;
 we left 
Coln
 on Munday the Fourth of 
July,
 and upon the 
Road
 overtook my Lord of 
Peterborough,
 who had been at 
Dusseldorp,
 at the Duke of 
Newburg
's Court, and went afterwards into 
Italy
 to 
Modena,
 and brought over her 
Highness
 the present Dutchess of 
York.
 We dined at a small walled 
Town,
 called 
Berckem,
 which some think to be a name corrupted from 
Tiberiacum,
 where we stay∣ed a great part of the Afternoon, to accommodate an un∣lucky 
Accident
 which happened: A 
Servant
 of one of the 
English Gentlemen
 having casually shot a 
Horse,
 which belonged to a 
Commander
 under the Duke of 
Newburg,
 lying at that time with a party of 
Horse
 at this 
Town,
 so that we travelled in the Evening through the 
Woods,
 and came late to a place called 
Steinstrasse,
 and the next day morning we went to 
Juliers.


Gulick,
 or 
Juliers,
 is a small 
Town
 by the River 
Roer,
 but very ancient, and called by the 
Romans, Juliacum,
 conceived to have been founded by 
Julius Caesar;
 the 
Seat
 sometimes of the Dukes of 
Gulick,
 before the uni∣ting hereof with 
Cleve;
 and since the dissolution of that Estate, possessed by the 
United Provinces;
 and then a∣gain by the 
Spaniards;
 but at present in the hands of the Duke of 
Newburg.
 It being agreed at the conclusion of 
Peace
 between the 
Spaniards
 and the 
Hollanders,
 That the Marquess of 
Brandenburg
 should have 
Marck
 and 
Cleve,
 and the Duke of 
Newburg, Gulick
 and 
Berg.
 This is a handsome well fortified 
Town,
 the 
Streets
 streight, and the 
Houses
 of 
Brick.
 The 
Citadel
 consists of four 
Bastions,


 of a regular 
Fortification;
 within which is the Princes 
Palace.
 The 
Piazza
 in the 
Town
 is handsome; and the whole considerable for its 
beauty
 and 
strength.


July
 the 
5th.
 we came to 
Aken,
 or 
Aquisgranum,
 sive Leagues distant from 
Gulick;
 the 
French
 call it 
Aix la Chapelle,
 from a 
Chappel
 in the great 
Church,
 much visited by 
Pilgrims
 from many parts; and famous for the great number of 
Reliques
 preserved therein. When the 
Ro∣mans
 made war upon the 
Germans,
 they possessed them∣selves of divers places between the 
Rhine
 and 
Maes.
 And 
Granus,
 a noble 
Roman,
 being sent into these parts of 
Gallia Belgica,
 about the year of our Lord Fifty three, discovered among the 
Woods
 and 
Hills
 these hot 
Springs,
 which to this day are so much celebrated in many parts of 
Europe;
 who afterwards made use of them, and a∣dorned them after the manner of the 
Roman Baths,
 and built a noble 
Habitation
 near them; part of which the 
Inhabitants
 would have still to be standing, retaining the name of 
Turris Grani,
 an old 
Tower
 at the East-end of the 
Town-house;
 a noble 
Antiquity:
 But the manner of its 
building
 gives suspicion it cannot be so old. Hence these 
Thermae
 from their Discoverer have been named 
Aquae Graniae,
 and came to be frequented; and the 
Town
 of 
Aquisgrane
 built and flourished, till 
Attila,
 the King of the 
Huns,
 or 
Hungarians,
 destroyed it.


About four hundred years after, 
Charles
 the Great ri∣ding out a 
hunting
 in these parts, as he passed through the 
Woods,
 his Horses Foot strook into one of these 
Hot∣springs;
 near which he also took notice of the 
Ruins
 of 
ancient Palaces
 and 
Buildings
 long before forsaken; and being still more and more delighted with the pleasant Si∣tuation of the place, and conveniency of these hot 
Ri∣volets,
 he renewed and adorned the 
Baths,
 built his 
Royal Palace
 near them: and appointed that the King of

 the 
Romans
 should be crowned with an 
Iron Crown
 here as with a 
Silver
 one at 
Milan,
 and a 
Gold
 one at 
Rome.
 He also built a noble 
Collegiate Church,
 dedicated to the 
blessed Virgin,
 in the presence of many 
Princes
 and 
Bi∣shops,
 in the year 804, and endowed it with 
Revenues
 for the maintainance of 
Canons,
 who lived together in a 
Colledge
 at first, but at present separately in the manner of 
Prebends.
 He built also the 
old
 or 
inward Wall
 of the 
City,
 so that it flourished till the year 882. at which time it was again ruined by the Fury of the 
Normans,
 and the 
Emperours Palace
 burnt to the ground. This 
Ci∣ty,
 besides these Devastations from the Irruptions of the 
Huns
 and 
Normans,
 hath been divers times since de∣stroyed by 
Fire;
 as in the year 1146. which loss it overcame in such manner, that Twenty six years after, it recovered not only its former greatness, but was so much increased, that the large 
outward Wall
 was built by the command of the 
Emperour Frederick
 the First.


In the year 1224. happened another great 
Fire,
 in which, not only the 
Buildings,
 but many of the 
Inha∣bitants
 perished. And the 
Roof
 of the 
Church
 was burnt in another 
Fire
 1236. And now of late, for it is not long since it hath recovered its losses by the 
Fire
 in the year 1656. when twenty 
Churches
 and 
Chappels,
 and about five thousand private 
Houses
 were destroyed.


The 
Town-house,
 or 
Senate-house,
 was built 1353. being all of 
Free-stone,
 handsomely adorned with the 
Statues
 of the 
Emperours.
 The 
first
 and 
second Story
 of this 
Building
 is divided into 
Chambers;
 but the highest is all one entire 
Room
 or 
Hall,
 162 Foot long, and 60 Foot broad. It is well 
painted
 in divers parts by 
Ami∣saga:
 Two Pieces of whose 
drawing
 are much esteemed here; one of the 
Resurrection,
 and another of 
Charles


 the Great, giving the 
Charter
 to the 
City
 of 
Aken.
 Here the 
Emperours,
 at the time of their 
Coronation,
 used to keep their 
Feasts,
 together with the 
Electours
 and other 
Princes.
 The 
Roof
 is supported by 
four Pillars;
 through the middle of which, the 
smoak
 of all the 
Chimneys
 of this 
Building,
 is by a handsome contrivance conveyed away.


Over against this 
House,
 in the middle of the 
Piazza,
 is a 
Fountain,
 considerable both for 
largeness
 and neat 
structure,
 contrived by a great 
Artist, Gerard Coris:
 where four 
Springs
 perpetually empty themselves from above into a large 
Bason
 of 
Copper,
 of thirty Foot 
Dia∣meter;
 from whence again it descends by six 
Pipes
 into a 
Cistern
 of 
Stone,
 handsomely engraved, and passeth to many other 
Fountains
 in the 
Town.
 On the top of this 
Fountain
 stands a large 
Statue
 of 
Charles
 the Great, 
Patron
 of this 
City,
 made of 
brass,
 and gilded over. He is in 
Armour,
 and looketh towards 
Germany.
 About the edges of the great 
brass Bason
 is this 
Inscription:


Hic aquis per
 Granum 
Principem quendam
 Romanum, Neronis 
&
 Agrippae 
fratrem inventis, calidorum fontium
 Thermae 
à Principio constructae. Postea verò per D.
 Caro∣lum 
Magnum Imp. constituto ut locus hic fit caput & regni sedes trans
 Alpes, 
renovatae sunt: quibus
 Thermis 
hic ge∣lidus fons influxit olim quem nunc demum hoc aeneo vase il∣lustravit S. P. Q.
 Aquisgranensis, 
Anno Domini
 1620.


The 
Church
 of our 
Lady,
 built by 
Charles
 the Great, is of an odd 
Figure.
 At the West-end is a 
Steeple
 adorned with divers 
Pyramids;
 and on the top a large 
Globe
 and 
Cross.
 From hence, higher much than the 
Church,
 passeth a 
Gallery,
 supported by a large 
Arch
 to a 
Cupola
 near the

 middle of the 
Church.
 At the East-end is also a small 
Turret
 or 
Lanthorn.
 The inside of the whole is adorned with 
Marble Pillars
 of divers sorts, with 
Pillars
 of 
brass,
 gilded 
Statues, brass Doors
 and 
Partitions,
 and much 
Mosaick
 work.


In the middle of the 
Church,
 where 
Charles
 the Great was buried, hangeth a very large 
Crown,
 given to this Church by the Emperour 
Frederick
 the First. This 
Crown
 is made of 
silver
 and 
brass
 gilt, adorned with sixteen little 
Towers,
 and eight and forty 
Statues
 of 
silver,
 of about a Foot high, and thirty two which are lesser. Be∣tween these stand eight and forty 
Candlesticks
 to receive the 
Lights
 burnt here upon 
Festivals.


Of these large 
Crowns
 I have seen at 
Colen,
 and other parts; and it hath been an ancient Ornament in 
Churches.
 The 
Greeks
 have a 
Crown,
 or large 
Circle
 much like this, in the middle of most of their best 
Churches;
 on which they hang many 
Ostrich
 Eggs, and the 
Pictures
 of the 
A∣postles
 and 
Saints.
 The 
Turks
 do likewise imitate it in their 
Mosques,
 but instead of 
Pictures
 place Lamps.


Frederick
 the First took up the 
Body
 of 
Charles
 the Great out of its 
Sepulchre
 in the middle of the 
Church,
 and afterwards buried it again; partly in a 
silver Coffin
 under the 
Altar
 of the 
Quire,
 and partly near the 
Wall
 of the 
old Building,
 covering it with the same 
Tomb-stone,
 as before; which is here reported to have been first ta∣ken from the 
Tomb
 of 
Julius Caesar.
 It is of 
white Mar∣ble,
 and hath the 
Figure
 of 
Proserpina
 upon it. Out of this 
Tomb
 of 
Charles
 the Great, were taken up a great number of 
Reliques
 and considerable 
Rarities,
 which he had got together in his life time; some of them given him by 
Aaron
 King of 
Persia,
 by the 
Patriarch
 of 
Constanti∣nople,
 and others; divers of which are still preserved here: and these following we had the opportunity to see.

 Some of the blessed 
Virgins hair.
 One 
ring
 or 
link
 of the 
Chain
 with which St. 
Peter
 was chained in 
Prison.
 The 
Head
 of 
Charles
 the Great. The 
bones
 of his 
Arm.
 His 
Sword
 which the Emperours wear at the time of their 
Co∣ronation.
 The 
Picture
 of the 
Virgin Mary,
 with our 
Sa∣viour
 in her 
Arms,
 embossed upon a 
Jaspis,
 done by St. 
Luke,
 hanged about the 
Neck
 of 
Charles
 the Great, and so found in his 
Tomb.
 A Noble 
Manuscript
 of the 
Gospels
 found in the same 
Tomb. Charles
 the Great's 
Horn
 which he used when he went a hunting. His 
Crucifix
 made out of the 
wood
 of the 
Cross.
 Our 
Saviour's Girdle
 of 
Leather,
 with the 
Seal
 of 
Constantine
 the Great at each end. A piece of the true 
Manna.
 Some of the 
Bones
 and 
Blood
 of St. 
Stephen,
 richly enchased, upon which the Emperours are sworn at their 
Inauguration.
 A piece of one of the 
Nails
 of the 
Cross.
 An 
Agnus Dei
 sent from the 
Pope
 to 
Charles
 the Great; and many other 
Reliques.
 Here is al∣so the 
Tomb
 of the Emperour 
Otho
 the Third, in 
black Marble,
 who in the year 1000, first constituted the Ele∣ctors of 
Germany.


Near to this 
City
 are many sorts of 
Minerals
 found; as 
Lead ore,
 the 
Sulphur,
 and 
Vitriol-stone, Iron, Coal,
 and 
Cadmia,
 or 
Lapis Calaminaris:
 With this latter we saw them make 
Brass,
 or multiply 
Copper,
 in this manner. They take calcined 
Cadmia,
 or 
Calmey,
 as they call it, 
Copper
 from 
Sweden,
 and the melted dross of both; to twenty eight pounds of 
Copper
 they put an hundred pound of 
Calmey:
 They put first into very large 
Crucibles,
 some old pieces of 
brass
 and 
slacken,
 or the dross, and after∣wards the 
Calmey
 and 
Copper,
 and let them stand in the Furnace twelve hours; after which, they put eight 
Cru∣cibles
 full into one, and let what will run over, the best sinking always to the bottom; and then cast it into a Frame made of stone, bordered with bars of Iron; and

 so run it into brass Plates, which are afterwards cut in pie∣ces with large 
Cissars.


The 
hot Bathes
 are very much frequented at present. Within the inward Walls are three convenient ones: The 
Emperours Bath,
 the 
Little Bath,
 and the 
Bath
 of S. 
Qui∣rinus.
 The 
Emperours Bath
 is in the same place, and fed with the same Springs with that in which formerly 
Charles
 the Great took so much delight, that he frequently used to swim therein; in which Exercise few were more ex∣pert than himself; and spent the latter end of his days here, and would often invite to the 
Bath,
 not only his Sons, but his Nobles, his Friend and Guards; so as it was customary to Bathe a hundred together in those days. But now they are divided into lesser Partitions. The 
Emperours Bath
 having five Bathing Rooms; and the 
Lit∣tle Bath
 which cometh out of it three. These are reckoned to be 
Nitro-Sulphureus;
 and arise so hot, that they let them cool twelve hours before they use them. From un∣der a great round Stone which covered a Well, in which there were some of these 
Hot Springs,
 I saw 
Brimstone,
 hard, above an inch thick, and 
Salt-peter,
 and a petri∣fied Substance finely variegated, taken out.


Besides these, near unto the inward Wall of the City, there are 
Baths
 which are not so hot as the former, esteem∣ed to be 
Sulphureo-nitrous:
 The smell of them is some∣what offensive, and the water in the 
Cisterns
 not transpa∣rent. The first is the 
Bath
 of St. 
Cornelius,
 which hath two Receptacles. The second, the 
Rose Bath,
 so cal∣led from Mr. 
Rose,
 a Citizen of 
Aken,
 who built it. The third, 
Compus Badt,
 or the 
Poor man's Bath.
 Of this sort of warm Water there is also a 
Fountain,
 much resorted to, and drank of every morning in the 
Summer
 for many 
Chro∣nical Diseases.
 About a Furlong out of the South-gate of 
Aken,
 is a Village called 
Porcetum,
 or 
Borset,
 from the

 great number of wild 
Hoggs,
 which formerly frequented that place; in which are many 
Hot Springs
 upon both sides of a little 
Rivolet,
 and let into 
Houses,
 where they are distributed into several 
Baths
 of 
Stone.
 There are fourteen of these 
Houses,
 and twenty eight 
Baths;
 the 
Baths
 holding ordinarily about fifty Tuns of Water, each of them: the Water is clear and pleasant, without any offensive smell; excessive hot when it cometh first out of the Ground, hotter than the hottest of 
Aken,
 and is left to cool about eighteen hours before they use it. They use also an Instrument of Wood, pierced with many holes, to help to cool them sooner, or to stir the Water when any one goeth in, whereby he is not so sensible of the heat. There are many cold 
Springs
 rise near these hot ones, whereby they might be tempered; and surely the quantity of the hot Water being so great, no place might be made more delightful, nor no 
Baths
 more noble. The 
Turks
 in our times, do most of any Nation beautifie their 
Baths,
 and render them serviceable to their health and pleasure.


In 
Austria
 at 
Baden,
 the 
Sawer Bath
 is built after the 
Turkish
 manner, with a 
Cupola
 over it: and if any one hereafter shall build or beautifie these, they will yield to very few in 
Europe.
 At present most of them are of a square Figure, of about five or six yards over; and the Houses in which they are, very near one another. The first House hath the name of the 
Ladies Bath;
 the second is the 
Snake;
 the third and fourth the 
Sword;
 the fifth the 
Golden Mill;
 the sixth the 
Fool;
 the seventh the 
Cock;
 the eighth the 
Great Bath;
 the ninth the 
Fountain;
 the tenth the 
Crab;
 the eleventh the 
World Inverted;
 the twelfth the 
Glass;
 the thirteenth the 
Angel;
 and the fourteenth the 
Rose.
 There is also another in the open Air, called the 
Poor man's Bath.
 In the Street is a 
Well


 or 
Fountain
 of these 
Hot-springs,
 of as great a heat as any I have seen; perpetually boyling or bubling. But of all these 
Baths
 Dr. 
Blondel
 and Dr. 
Didier
 have writ∣ten so particularly, as I need not to add any thing more, and particularly of their Uses.


Within two Leagues of 
Aken,
 in the Country of 
Lim∣bourg,
 is a 
Mine
 of 
Lapis Calaminaris,
 which we went to see, having a 
Corporal
 and eight 
Musquetiers
 for our Security to pass the 
Wood.
 This 
Mine
 heth over a∣gainst the Castle of 
Einenberg.
 As soon as I had delive∣red a 
Letter
 to Mr. 
John Franck,
 Comptroller of the 
Mine
 for his 
Catholick Majesty,
 he went along with us, to shew us the manner how the 
Cadmia
 groweth in the Earth, and other Curiosities. This 
Mine
 having been wrought Three hundred years, and being one of the most remarkable of that kind, it may not be impertinent to set down some particulars concerning it. It is about eighteen or nineteen 
Fathoms
 deep, lying all open like a 
Chalk Mine,
 of an Oval Figure; they digg at present in several places, and the best 
Calmey
 lieth between the 
Rocks,
 in the deepest part of the 
Mine:
 They have now found an excellent 
Veyn
 so placed, of eleven or twelve Foot thick, which they digg out with 
Pickaxes,
 with some difficulty, by reason that the 
Lapis Calaminaris
 is so very hard. The 
colour
 of this 
Stone
 is of a dark 
yellow
 and 
red,
 and hath 
Veyns
 of 
natural Brimstone
 mixed thin∣ly in it. The 
Veyns
 of the 
Lapis Calaminaris
 being so large, they follow them not only in one place, but digg over one anothers heads, and frame their work into the shape of large 
Stayrs,
 and one throws up what another diggs, and so upward till they lade the 
Carts
 with it. Some of the 
Cadmia
 is blackish and dark brown; and there are 
Fluores
 between the Cavities of the 
Stone
 hand∣somely figured, but most of a 
blackish colour.
 The 
works


 about the 
Mine
 the most remarkable, are these: 1. An 
Overshot-wheel
 in the Earth, which moves the 
Pumps
 to pump out the 
water;
 and this not placed in the 
Mine,
 but on one side of it, and a 
passage
 cut out of the 
Mine
 to the bottom of it, by which the 
Mine
 is drained; and another 
passage
 or 
cuniculus,
 out of the place where the 
wheel
 is turned, which lets out the 
water
 which turns the 
wheel,
 and also the 
water
 which cometh out of the 
Mine
 into the Neighbouring 
Valley.
 2. The 
washing
 of the 
Ore
 or 
Stone,
 which they perform, as at other works, by letting the 
water
 over it, and stirring it; and this they do wheresoever they begin to work near the 
Superficies
 of the 
Earth,
 for there the 
Calmey
 is less, and more mixed with 
Clay
 and 
Earth:
 but the most remarkable 
work
 is the 
calcining
 of the 
Ore
 (for all our 
Lapis Calaminaris
 of the 
Shops
 is the 
calcined Calmey
) and it is worth the see∣ing; for they place 
Faggots
 in a handsome order first, and cover a large round 
Area
 with them, of about For∣ty or Fifty yards 
Diameter,
 upon which they place 
Char∣coal
 in as good an order, till all be covered and filled up a yard from the ground; then they place ranks of the largest 
Stones
 of 
Calmey,
 and after them smaller, till they have laid all on; and then by setting 
fire
 to the 
bottom,
 the 
fire
 comes to each 
stone,
 and all is handsomely 
calci∣ned.
 From hence we went to 
Limburg,
 meeting with di∣vers 
Souldiers
 upon the 
Road,
 who desired mony of us, but did not attempt any thing against us, we being many of us together in Company.


Limburg
 is seated upon a high 
Rock,
 which overlooks all the Country, and a little 
River
 runneth almost round it at the 
bottom.
 The 
Avenue
 to the 
Town
 on the North∣side is difficult all along upon the edge of the 
Rock;
 and the 
Gate
 of the 
Town,
 over which is the 
Governour's House,
 spreads it self from one side of the 
Rock
 to the

 other, and locketh up the 
passage.
 Here we shew our 
Pasports
 from the 
Spanish
 Plenipotentiaries; and in the Afternoon had a pleasant Journey to the 
Spaa.
 In the way we saw where the 
French
 Army had passed the Country towards 
Metz,
 having lain about a Fortnight at 
Vichet,
 after the taking of 
Maestreicht.


Spà
 is a neat 
Villedge
 in the 
Forest
 of 
Ardenna,
 seated in a 
bottom,
 encompassed on all sides with 
Hills,
 and on the North with steep 
Mountains.
 So that it happening to 
rain
 while we were there, the place was, in some hours time, filled with 
water,
 the 
Hay
 washed out of the 
Mea∣dows,
 the 
falls
 in the 
River
 made even, and 
Pohunt,
 one of the 
Mineral Fountains,
 was drowned. There was not much Company when we were there, although it were in the hottest time of the year, which is most seasonable for drinking the 
waters;
 by reason of the wars, and the danger of coming through the Country to them. But in 
Spà
 it self all people are free from 
danger,
 all the Neigh∣bouring 
Princes
 protecting it, and would count it very dishonourable to disturb a place, which by the 
virtue
 of its 
Mineral Springs,
 is so beneficial to 
Mankind.
 These 
Waters
 are not only drunk upon the place, but are also sealed up in 
Bottles,
 and sent into many parts of 
Europe.
 And Mr. 
Coquelet,
 at whose 
House
 we lodged, told me that he sent it as far as 
Saragossa
 in 
Spain:
 and that he had at that time Thirty thousand 
Bottles
 empty, and waited for a good season to fill them, which is the 
hottest, dry∣est
 time of the 
Summer,
 and the 
hardest Frost
 in 
Winter;
 at which times the 
water
 is 
strongest, sparkling,
 and 
brisk,
 The chiefest of these 
Mineral Fountains
 are these, 
Geron∣ster, Saviniere, Tonnelet,
 and 
Pohunt.


Geronster
 is in the middle of a thick 
Wood,
 about an 
English
 mile and a half Southward of the 
Spà;
 it is the strongest of any, and the best adorned, being built up

 with 
stone,
 and a 
Pavilion
 over it, supported with four handsome 
stone Pillars.
 There is a green place cleared in the 
Wood
 near to it, and a little 
House
 for the 
Patients
 to warm themselves in early, in the 
morning,
 or in 
cold wea∣ther.
 The 
Arms
 of S
r
 
Conrad Bourgsdorff,
 who adorn∣ed this 
Fountain,
 are placed over, on two sides; and on the other two this 
Inscription
 in 
French
 and 
High-dutch,
 in a handsome 
Oval.


Le Reverendissime & Excellentissime S
r
 S
r
 Conrade Bourgsdorff, 
Grand Chamberlan, & premier Conseiller d'Estat, Colonel & Gouverneur General de tous les Forts & Forteresses du Serenissime Electeur de
 Brandebourg 
dans son Estat Electoral, Grand Prevost des Eglises Cathedrales
 d'Halberstadt & Brandebourg, 
Chevalier de l'Ordre de St.
 Jean, 
& Commandeur du Baillage de
 Lagow, 
de gros
 Machenau, Golbeck, Bouckow, Oberstorff, 
&c. &c. &c.


This 
Fountain
 smelleth very strong of 
Brimstone,
 and causeth 
vomiting
 in a great many, yet passeth chiefly by 
Urine,
 as they do all; and strikes a 
purple
 with 
Nut∣galls
 more inclining to 
red,
 than the 
waters
 of 
Tunbridge.
 The 
Sediment
 is of a 
light blew
 in the 
Fountain,
 but of a 
dark dirty red
 every where else. Not far from this is a∣nother large 
Spring
 in the 
Wood
 much like it, but not as yet built and beautified.


Saviniere
 is another 
Fountain,
 almost as far from the 
Spà
 Eastward, and built after the manner of a 
Tower:
 the 
Acidulae
 are not so strong as the former. There is another 
Fountain
 hard by this, almost the same, held to be par∣ticularly good for the 
Stone
 and 
Gravel.




The third is 
Tonnelet,
 arising in the 
Meadow,
 and built up with 
stone:
 But being there are no 
Trees
 nor 
Shades
 a∣bout it, it is not so delightful as the others. And 
Hen∣ricus ab Heers
 in his 
Spadacrene,
 saith that this is more 
ni∣trous
 than the rest, and causeth such a coldness in the 
mouth
 and 
stomach,
 that few can drink of it.


The fourth is 
Pohunt,
 in the middle of the 
Town,
 from whence most of the 
water
 is drawn which is sent abroad, if no particular one be sent for. This was beautified with handsome 
Stone-work,
 by the Bishop of 
Liege,
 to whom this place belongeth, and this 
Inscription
 set over it, 
Sa∣nitati Sacrum.
 It is also called the 
Fountain of St. Remaclus,
 to whom it was dedicated; and these 
Verses
 are likewise engraven upon it:




Obstructum reserat, durum terit, humida siccat


Debile fortificat, si tamen arte bibis.




i. e.




This opens all Obstructions,


And wears away hard Tumours;


This strengthneth much the weaker parts,


And dries up cold moist Humours.




Being at the 
Spà,
 we visited 
Franchimont
 one After∣noon, passing through a thick 
Wood,
 there is an old Ca∣stle, and good 
Brimstone
 and 
Vitriol-works,
 the same 
Stone
 affording both; and I presume may also make the 
Spa-water
 under ground, or at least be a principal 
In∣gredient
 in it. We saw the manner here how they mel∣ted, and cast their 
Brimstone
 first into great 
Pails,
 the florid and clear parts remaining at the top and middle, the thick and more obscure subsiding and adhering to the

 bottom and sides, and is that which is sold for 
Sulphur Vivum.
 We saw also the manner of casting the 
Brim∣stone
 into 
Rolls,
 or 
Magdaleons:
 And near unto this place a smoaking, burning, little 
Hill,
 which is thus caused: They throw out the burnt 
Pyrites,
 out of which 
Brimstone
 hath been distilled, and the 
Vitriol
 drawn out by infusion, upon this 
Hill,
 which consists all of the same matter, which ferments in time, grows hot, smoaks, and burns perpetually, and withal, drinks in a new 
Vitriol
 into its self.


From the 
Spà
 we crossed over to 
Frapont,
 a 
Village
 seated upon the pleasant River 
Uta,
 or 
Ourte,
 where we took Boat and went down a rapid 
Stream,
 yet one of the pleasantest I ever saw, winding and turning between so many green Hills, in part of the 
Forest
 of 
Arduenna.
 We descended afterwards thirty or forty small Falls in a long Boat made on purpose. The 
Oar
 or 
Paddle
 being only a square piece of 
Board
 fixed to the end of a 
Pole,
 the 
Pole
 standing perpendicularly in the middle of it. The delightful River 
Vesa,
 or the 
Wesdret,
 soon met us, and joyning together, we fell down with them into the 
Maes
 near 
Liege.
 Upon the Banks of these Rivers all the 
Arms, Guns,
 and other 
Instruments
 are made, for which the Country of 
Liege
 is remarkable.


Liege, Luick, Leodium,
 or 
Augusta Eburonum;
 Learned Men think this City to be seated near that 
Val∣ley,
 wherein two Legions of 
Julius Caesar,
 under 
Sabi∣nus
 and 
Cotta,
 were destroyed by 
Ambiorix,
 chief Com∣mander of the 
Eburones.
 It is seated upon the River 
Mosa,
 which entring with two 
Streams,
 makes some pretty 
Islands.
 Three other small Rivers arising in the 
Forest
 of 
Ardenna,
 are also here received into the 
Maes,
 whereby they have plenty of Fish and other Conveniencies. The City is very populous, and so it

 hath been in former Ages, when as 
Charles
 Duke of 
Pur∣gunay,
 sacked it, and destroyed an hundred thousand of the people.


It aboundeth with fair 
Churches,
 stately 
Convents,
 and 
Religious
 Foundations, richly endowed, so that it hath been called the 
Paradise of Priests,
 and is in that kind the most notable in all these parts. The Palace of the Bishop is a noble Fabrick, built by Cardinal 
Erardus,
 Bishop of 
Liege.
 The 
Cathedral
 beareth the Name of St. 
Lambert,
 who being Bishop of 
Maestreicht
 was murder∣ed by 
Dodo
 and others, about the year 622. The See was afterwards translated unto 
Liege
 by 
Hubertus,
 as it had been formerly from 
Tongres
 to 
Maestreicht,
 and the Bo∣dy of St. 
Lambert
 removed unto this Church, which is at present very noble, being built of a reddish Stone, very much carved without, and handsomely adorned within. Between the 
Quire
 and 
Sacristy,
 is this 
Inscrip∣tion
 in very large 
Letters:


D. O. M.


Intemeratae Virgini
 Mariae, 
Sancto
 Lamberto, 
Eccle∣siae & Patriae Divis Tutelaribus,
 Maximilianus Henricus 
utriusque
 Bavariae 
Dux, Archiepiscopus & Elector
 Colo∣niensis, 
Episcopus & Princeps
 Leodiensis, Ernesti 
&
 Fer∣dinandi Bavariae 
Ducum, Episcoporum & Principum
 Leodi∣ensium 
Nepos & Successor in sui & Praedecessorum memori∣am Ponebat.
 MDCLVIII.


The Canons hereof are of great riches and power, and have the Election of the Bishop and Prince, who hath also had the Titles of Duke of 
Bouillon,
 Marquiss of 
Fran∣chimont,
 and Count of 
Lootz
 and 
Hasbania.
 In the

 Coin of 
Maximilian,
 the present Elector of 
Colen
 and Bishop of 
Liege,
 I find this Inscription:


Maximilianus Henricus 
Dei gratiâ Archiepiscopus
 Colo∣niensis, 
Episcopus & Princeps
 Leodiensis, 
Supremus
 Bul∣lonensis 
Dux.


Speutus
 the Bishop of 
Liege,
 bought the Principality of 
Liege
 of 
Godfrey
 of 
Bouillon,
 when he went to the 
Holy Land:
 And in the Treaty of 
Cambray,
 1559. the pos∣session of 
Bouillon,
 and precedency of Title, was gran∣ted to the Bishop of 
Liege,
 although at this time also the Houses of 
La Tour
 and 
Mark
 do bear the same.


Of the Parish Churches that of St. 
John,
 and of St. 
Servasius
 are fair. Of the Abbies that of St. 
Jacob
 with∣in the Town, and of St. 
Lawrence,
 built by Bishop 
Ra∣ginardus
 upon an Hill out of the Town, are noble. There is also a Colledge of 
English
 Jesuites, well-seated upon a Hill, where the Garden is handsome, and the Dyals made by 
Franciscus Linus,
 are worth the seeing: And an 
Eng∣lish
 Nunnery handsomely built. In the Church of the 
Gu∣lielmites,
 out of the Town, lieth the Body of our famous Country-man Sir 
John Mandeville,
 who, after he had travelled through so many parts, took an affection unto this place, and here passed the remainder of his life, and whose Epitaph, and some Rarities of his, are still to be seen.


Bishop 
Notger,
 who was consecrated by St. 
Gereon,
 Arch-bishop of 
Colen,
 and died in the year 1007. built the walls of this City, and being Tutor to 
Otho
 the third, he found means very much to beautifie it, to repair and build divers Churches, and endow them with rich Re∣venues, and let the River 
Maes
 into the Town, which be∣fore ran upon one side of it.




As their Churches are fair and numerous, so are their Bells and Chimes remarkable. In the Cathedral of St. 
Lambert
 there are eight large Bells, and twelve lesser; and there is one so great, as it is said to require Twenty four men to ring it. In the Church of St. 
Paul
 the Bells and Chimes are considerable; as also at St. 
Lawrence
 and the 
crossed Friers.
 It is also an University, and was so famous in former Ages, that they still take notice that at one time there have been Nine Sons of Kings, Twenty four Dukes Sons, Twenty nine of Counts, besides many of great Barons Students therein.


Their Speech here, as also at 
Spaw,
 is called 
Roman,
 and is a kind of old 
French,
 or Dialect of that Language, a great part of which is made up of 
Latin,
 or 
Roman
 words: and they call the Neighbouring Language of the 
Dutch, Tuiscon.
 But many speak very good 
French.
 They have some Vineyards affording a small Wine. The Hills about furnish them with Quarries of good Stone, and of several kinds. They have also divers Mines and Minerals, and great quantity of Pit-coal for Fire, in some places fetched deep out of the Earth, in others nearer the Surface: and in one place I saw them beginning to dig where they immediately found Coal. Their Pumps and Engines to draw out the water, are very considerable at these Mines; in some places moved by Wheels, at above a Furlongs distance, to which they are continued by strong Wood-work, which moves backwards and for∣wards continually.


The 
Citadel
 standeth upon a Hill, and is of great Strength; It was built to keep the City of 
Liege
 under Subjection. For 1649. there being some disturbances in the City, 
Ferdinand,
 the Elector of 
Colen,
 offering to come into the Town to appease it, was opposed by the Consul, 
Ja∣cobus

 Hennet,
 who was soon after surprised and behead∣ed, together with 
Bartholomaeus Rolandus;
 the Consul ha∣ving sworn the Elector should never come in whilst he were alive. And the 
Citadel
 soon after was ordered to be built. The Bridges are handsome: that over the great Stream of the 
Maes
 is very broad and fair, and hath large Arches. From hence we could read the Elector's name upon the Citadel, 
Maximilianus,
 although it were at a very great distance, the Letters were so large.


From 
Liege
 we had a pleasant passage down the Water to 
Maestreicht,
 passing by 
Argentau,
 a Castle seated up∣on a high Rock on the right side of the River, belonging then to the King of 
Spain,
 afterwards by 
Vichet
 in the half way, and then by 
Navagne,
 a strong Fort in the 
Maes,
 which commands the River, and at that time did the 
Spaniard
 service; then by pleasant Rocks on our left hand, wherein many Cuts and Passages have been digged, till we came in sight of 
Maestreicht.


This Town having been a little before taken from the 
United States
 by a sharp Siege, was full of 
French,
 and had a Garrison in it of about Ten thousand men; and in the 
Market-place
 stood about Two hundred large Field∣pieces. We saw the places where they had their Batte∣ries and their Mines, and the Half-moon which the Duke of 
Monmouth
 took: the Out-works were very nume∣rous, and many of them undermined. Colonel 
Storff
 shew'd us a handsome Draught of all the Works, Ap∣proaches and Manner of taking of the Town.


About a quarter of a Mile out of the Town we went into the great Quarry of Stone, which is one of the no∣blest sure in the World. Between 
Padoa
 and 
Vicenza
 I had formerly seen the famous Cave of 
Custoza,
 or 
Cubola,
 said to be above Five hundred Fathoms in breadth, and

 Seven hundred in length, but this doth far surpass it: the Roof is very high and stately in most places, the Pil∣lars not to be numbred, all very large; we passed two miles under ground amongst them: No 
Labyrinth
 can be contrived more intricate, and yet all parts are uniform. The 
Floor
 all in a level, and the 
Roof
 in most places of the same height, and so much hath that uniform rule, which I suppose was set to those who first digged, and so hath successively been observed, added to the beauty of this place, that there is scarce any thing more noble. It put me in mind of the 
hundred Chambers of Nero,
 which he caused to be made under Ground in the 
Rocks
 at 
Baiae.
 And the 
Water
 which we met with in one place, made me think of 
Nero
's admirable 
Fish-pond,
 built in the like manner within the 
Earth.
 We came out again near to a 
Convent
 upon the 
Banks
 of the 
River,
 and returned by 
water
 to 
Maestreicht.


The next day we parted Company. Mr. 
Newton,
 Mr. 
Ettrick,
 Mr. 
Grove,
 Mr. 
Carlton,
 and Mr. 
Newcomb
 went for 
Aken
 and 
Colen;
 Mr. 
Bates
 and Mr. 
Daston
 went up the 
River
 again to 
Liege,
 at which place, staying a day or two to find a convenience to pass to 
Brussels,
 we were nobly entertained at a Dinner with 
Venison, Wild-boar,
 and other 
Dishes,
 by that worthy Person and Learned Mathematician 
Franciscus Slusius,
 one of the great 
Canons
 of 
Liege,
 who also continued his high 
Civilities
 to us to the last 
Minute
 we stayed in 
Town.


Leaving 
Liege
 we soon came in sight of 
Tongres,
 or 
Tungrorum oppidum,
 the most ancient place in all these Countries. 
Ortelius
 would have it to be called of old 
Atuatuca:
 It was a strong hold before the coming of 
Julius Caesar
 into 
Gaul,
 and was afterwards made a 
Ro∣man Station,
 and in process of time became so great,

 that 
Attila
 the 
Hun
 destroyed an 
hundred Churches
 in it, it being at that time a 
Bishops See,
 which in the year 498 St. 
Servatius
 removed unto 
Maestreicht.
 Many old 
Coins
 and 
Antiquities
 are still found here; and part of an old 
Chappel,
 said to be built by St. 
Maternus,
 Disciple to St. 
Peter,
 is still remaining. When the King of 
France
 made his great inroad into the 
Low Countries,
 1672. he borrowed this Town of the Elector of 
Cologne,
 and then passed on to 
Maseick,
 where crossing the Country to the 
Rhine,
 by the sides of these great Rivers, 
Rhine
 and 
Maes,
 he made that notable 
Incursion,
 and quitted not 
Tongres
 till he had taken 
Maestreicht
 the year following. We dined this day at 
Borchloe,
 and lodged at St. 
Trurn,
 or St. 
Truden,
 a handsome little 
Town,
 so called from a 
Church
 and 
Abby
 herein dedicated to that 
Saint.


The next day we dined at 
Tienen,
 or 
Tilmont,
 on the little River 
Geet,
 once one of the chief Towns in 
Bra∣bant,
 but long since decayed. In these 
Plain Countries,
 in many places we saw small 
Hills,
 or 
Sepulchral Eminen∣ces
 of the 
Ground:
 And near unto the 
Walls
 of 
Yienen,
 are three very remarkable ones, said to be the 
Tombs
 of great 
Commanders.
 In the Evening we came to 
Lo∣vain.


Lovain
 is the chief 
City
 of that quarter of 
Brabant,
 which comprehendeth 
Arschot, Halen,
 and 
Judoigne;
 an ancient and large City, pleasantly seated upon the River 
Dele;
 it is of great 
Circuit,
 and the 
compass
 of the 
wall
 accounted above 
four miles
 about: but there are many void 
Spaces, Hills, Fields,
 and 
Gardens
 within it, which makes it very pleasant and delightful. There are herein divers good 
Buildings, Convents,
 and 
Chur∣ches:
 the chief whereof is the stately 
Church
 of St. 
Peter,
 the 
Convent
 of the 
Carthusians,
 the 
Hospital.


 The publick 
Palace
 or 
Senate-house
 are also No∣ble.


It is the great 
University
 of these parts, said to have had its beginning about 926. but endowed by 
John
 the Fourth, Duke of 
Brabant,
 and confirmed by Pope 
Mar∣tin
 the Fifth, 1425. There are Forty three 
Colledges
 in it; whereof the four chief are 
Lilium, Falco, Castrum, Porcus. Goropius Becanus,
 a Learned Man, and Native of 
Brussels,
 affirmeth, That no 
University
 in 
Italy, France, Germany,
 or 
Spain,
 is to be compared unto it for its e∣legant and pleasant Situation. The 
University
 is under the Government of 
Rector,
 who is in great esteem and honour among them. This 
University
 hath produced many Learned Men: But neither the 
Buildings
 of the 
Col∣ledges,
 nor their 
Endowments
 do equal those of our 
Uni∣versities,
 and the Situation thereof seems not to exceed that of 
Oxford.


We travelled from hence to 
Brussels,
 being most part of the way in the sight of the very high Tower of the 
Church
 of St. 
Rombald
 at 
Machlin.


Count 
Monterei
 was then Governour of the 
Low-Countries,
 and resided at 
Brussels,
 the ordinary Seat of the 
Governours
 of the 
Spanish Netherlands;
 which 
City
 he had taken care to fortifie, and to make it more tena∣ble, if it should be attempted by the 
French.


From 
Brussels
 we passed to 
Antwerp,
 where we were handsomely treated by Mr. 
Wauters
 and Mr. 
Hartop,
 and having visited some of our Friends, the next day we passed the River 
Schelde,
 and took Coach in the morning, travelling through a fruitful, plain, flat Country, set with rows of 
Trees
 in most places, and arrived in the e∣vening at 
Ghent.




Gaunt, Gandavum,
 or 
Ghent,
 is esteemed to be the greatest 
City,
 not only of 
Flanders,
 but of all the 
Law-Countries,
 and challengeth a pace amongst the greatest in 
Europe;
 but at present it decreaseth and decays ra∣ther than encreaseth. And if 
Charles
 the Fifth were now alive, he could not put 
Paris
 into his 
Gant,
 a greater Glove would not fit that City, which is so much increa∣sed since his time. In 
Ghent
 are many noble 
Convents,
 among which the 
Jesuites
 is one of the fairest: There is a 
Cloister
 also of 
English Nuns.
 The 
Cathedral
 is stately, and the 
Tower
 belonging to it being very high, gives a prospect of a pleasant and fruitful Country round a∣bout it. There are divers 
Piazza's,
 large and fair; in one of which stands a large gilded 
Statua
 of 
Charles
 the Fifth, Emperour and King of 
Spain,
 who was born in this City. The whole 
Town
 is generally well-built, and the 
Streets
 are fair and clean. The 
Inhabitants
 hereof have been taken notice of to be extreamly given to 
Se∣dition,
 and for their sakes a great many other 
Cities
 in 
Europe
 are punished, and have in a manner totally lost their 
Liberties:
 For the 
Spaniards,
 to curb the Sediti∣ous humour of the People of 
Ghent,
 were put upon the Invention of building 
Citadels
 in 
Cities,
 whereby a few 
Souldiers
 are able to suppress any 
Commotion,
 or beat down the 
Town,
 so that here I saw the first 
Citadel
 that was built in 
Europe
 by 
Charles
 the Fifth: It is not large, and the 
Bastions
 little, and though of a Regular Figure, yet not so convenient as those of latter days, since that Art hath been improved.


From 
Ghent
 we passed by water about Twenty 
Eng∣lish
 miles to 
Bruges,
 a very elegant large City, and for∣merly a place of very great Trade, being within three Leagues of the Sea; so that from the tops of their high∣est

 
Buildings,
 the Ships under Sail are visible, and at the same time a Fleet of Ships, and a large Territory of a fruitful, pleasant Country, cometh under your eye. It is fortified with Works of 
Earth
 and deep 
Ditches.
 The 
Convents
 are numerous: The artificial Cuts of 
Wa∣ter
 from this Town to all places, maketh it of easie ac∣cess; and though it hath no 
Port,
 the 
Passage
 from hence to 
Ostend
 by 
water
 is short: And they are at present up∣on a Design of bringing Ships up to this 
City.


Ostend
 is about Ten 
English
 miles from 
Bruges,
 seated upon the waves of the 
German
 Ocean, which wash it continually on one side: And they have now contrived it so, as to let the Sea in almost round the Town for a great space, whereby it is become much more strong and de∣fensible than before. For when I looked upon it, and considered what it was when it was besieged by Arch∣duke 
Albertus,
 and taken by Marquiss 
Ambrosius Spino∣la,
 1604. with an honourable Surrender after three years Siege, I cannot but ascribe very much unto their Sup∣plies from 
England,
 and the obstinate Valour of the De∣fendants, especially the 
English
 under Sir 
Francis Vere. Sluys
 being in the hands of the 
States
 of the 
United Pro∣vinces,
 and 
Dunkirk
 under the 
French.
 The 
Spaniards
 possess no other 
Port
 in 
Flanders
 but this and 
Newport;
 and this being the most considerable, they are now ma∣king the 
Haven
 large, and are upon a considerable Work in order to the carrying of their Ships over into that Cut which goeth from 
Ostend
 to 
Bruges,
 out of their Har∣bour, by the means of a very great 
Lock
 or Receptacle of 
Water,
 which is to communicate with both; which, when it is finished, may be very advantageous to the 
Traffick.
 of the 
Spanish Netherlands.
 This 
Town
 stands very low, but the 
Streets
 are streight, large, and uniform




From hence I went all along upon the Sea-shoar to 
Newport,
 a handsome 
Town,
 with large fair 
Streets,
 but low built. There were then a great number of small Ships in the 
Harbour.
 This place is famous for the Bat∣tel of 
Newport,
 fought here by 
Albertus,
 and Count 
Maurice,
 wherein the 
Spanish
 Forces lost the day, and much of the honour of the Field was due unto the 
Eng∣lish
 under Sir 
Francis Vere;
 since which time, although there hath been much blood shed in these Quarters, yet there hath not been so considerable a Battel ever since, al∣though the 
English
 had also the fortune to do great Ser∣vice hereabout at a fight called the Battel of the 
Sandhils,
 when a part of the Army of 
French
 and 
English,
 which besieged 
Dunkirk,
 fought with the 
Spanish
 Forces by 
New∣port,
 and overthrew them.


From 
Newport
 we put to Sea, sailing out of the Har∣bour, and intending for 
England;
 but the wind being ve∣ry high and contrary, after having been at Sea all the night, and had leisure to take notice of the great number of 
Sands
 upon that Coast, in the morning we put into 
Mardike,
 where at present there is only a Fort of Wood just above the High-water mark, with some few Guns mounted. The other Fort, more into the Land, being demolished.


Dunkirk
 is much increased of late, and the King of 
France
 hath not spared mony to render it considerably strong. He hath very near finished a noble 
Citadel,
 begun by the 
English
 while this Town was in their possession, which hath the 
Sea
 on one side of it, the 
Haven
 on another, and the 
Sandhills
 towards the Land, which when the wind is at South-west, doth somewhat annoy it: To prevent which, the 
French
 have made divers Cuts and Chanels through the 
Sands,
 into which the Sea entring, doth moi∣sten and fix the Sand, so as they are not so apt to fly. And

 every 
Bastion
 is sprucely kept and covered within with green Turf. Beyond the old Wall of the Town, there are now great Works drawn, which encompass so large a space of Ground, that the Town is made bigger by half: And in this part stands the 
English
 Nunnery, and many handsome Buildings. The new Fortifications are very large; and the Bastion towards the North the most stately, upon which the King of 
France
 entertained the Duke of 
Monmouth.
 The Port is large, and capable of receiving a great number of Ships, but at low water it is almost dry; and there are so many Sands before it, that at that time the Sea comes not in any depth within a mile of it.


From 
Dunkirk
 we travelled by Land to 
Graveling,
 where the Works are of Earth, large and high, the Church stately, the Streets broad, but the Houses low, and at present not populous.


From 
Graveling
 I came to 
Calais,
 from whence setting Sail in the morning, we came to 
Dover,
 and the same day to 
London.


FINIS.












A Catalogue of some Books Printed for 
Benj-Tooke
 at the 
Ship
 in St. 
Paul's
 Church-yard.




THe Works of the Most Reverend Father in God,
 John Bramhall, 
late L. Arch-Bish. of
 Ardmagh. Fol.


Several Chirurgical Treatises, by
 Richard Wiseman 
Serje∣ant Chirurgion to his Majesty.
 Fol.


Skinneri Etymologicon Linguae Anglicanae.
 Fol.


Bishop
 Sanderson'
s Sermons.
 Fol.


Bentivolio 
and
 Urania, 
by
 N. Ingelo, 
D. D.
 Fol.


Mr.
 Faringdon'
s Sermons compleat, Three Vol.
 Fol.


Dr.
 Heylin 
on the Creed.
 Fol.


Lord
 Bacon'
s Advancement of Learning.
 Fol.


Lightfoot. 
Horae Hebraicae in Johannem.
 Quarto.


Dr.
 Brown'
s Travels in
 Hungaria, Servia, Bulgaria, Mace∣donia, Thessaly, Austria, Styria, Carinthia, Carniola, 
and
 Friuli, 
with Sculptures.
 Quarto.


A Representation of the State of Christianity in
 England, 
and of its decay and danger from Sectaries as well as Papists.


Langhornii Elenchus Antiquitatum Albionensium.
 Oct.


Batei Elenchus Motuum Nuperorum in Anglia.


Johannis Stearne de Obstinatione Opus Posthumum. Praefixa sunt Prolegomena Apologetica.
 Octavo.


Two Letters of Advice; 1. For susception of H. Orders. 2. For Studies Theological, especially such as are Rational.
 Oct.


Some Considerations of present Concernment, how far the Ro∣manists may be trusted by Princes of another Perswasion.
 8.


Two short Discourses against the Romanists. 1. An Account of the Fundamental Principle of Popery, and of the Insuf∣ficiency of the Proofs they have for it. 2. An Answer to Six Queries, 12. These four by
 Henry Dodwell 
M. A. sometimes Fellow of
 Trinity 
Colledge near
 Dublin.













