Virginia impartially examined, and left to publick view, to be considered by all iudicious and honest men under which title is comprehended the degrees from 34 to 39, wherein lyes the rich and healthfull countries of Roanock, the now plantations of Virginia and Mary-land ... / by William Bullock, Gent.
Bullock, William, b. 1617?
Approx. 148 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 41 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2006-06 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A30076




Wing B5428



ESTC R4071





ocm 12246553




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Virginia impartially examined, and left to publick view, to be considered by all iudicious and honest men under which title is comprehended the degrees from 34 to 39, wherein lyes the rich and healthfull countries of Roanock, the now plantations of Virginia and Mary-land ... / by William Bullock, Gent.
Bullock, William, b. 1617?
[12], 66 p.   


London :


Printed by John Hammond ...,


1649.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Virginia --  Description and travel.
Virginia --  Economic conditions.
Maryland --  Description and travel.
Maryland --  Description and travel --  Early works to 1800.
2005-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2005-11
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2006-01
John Latta
Sampled and proofread
2006-01
John Latta
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2006-04
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






B5428


12246553


56957











VIRGINIA Impartially examined, and left to publick view, to be considered by all iudi∣cious and honest men. Under which Title, is compre∣hended the Degrees from 34 to 39, wherein lyes the rich and healthfull Countries of 
Roanock,
 the now Plantations of 
Virginia
 and 
Mary-land.


Looke not upon this BOOKE, as those that are set out by private men, for private ends; for being read, you'l find, the publick good is the Authors onely aime.


For this Piece is no other then the Adventurers or Planters faithfull Steward, disposing the Ad∣venture for the best advantage, advising people of all degrees, from the highest Master, to the meanest Servant, how suddenly to raise their fortunes.


Peruse the Table, and you shall finde the way plainely layd downe.


By WILLIAM BVLLOCK, Gent.


19 
April,
 1649. 
Jmprimatur,
 Hen. Whaley.


LONDON:
 Printed by 
John Hammond,
 and are to be sold at his house over-against S. 
Andrews
 Church in 
Holborne.
 1649.










To the Right Honourable, the Earle of 
Arundel
 and 
Surrey,
 and the Lord 
Baltamore.


Right Honourable,


H
AD those worthy Gentlemen been so happie, to have laboured for the set∣ling a iust & equall Government, and designing the best advantages, as in discovering the Countrey, this labour had beene spared; Wherefore he humbly prayes, that you'l looke on this Piece as through a Prospective, by which you have these places rendred at a neerer distance, & you may easily find the impediments of their happinesse; which, with as much ease as turning of the Glasse, you may remove farre off, or out of sight: I must confesse, 'tis some bold∣nesse for a private person to deale with Govern∣ments; but when you shall finde I speake your thoughts, for having lustice impartially dealt, and this from a smarting sence of iniustice done, I am confident you'l excuse me, and the rather, for that I have shortned your Lordships studies, which as I have often heard, are for settling such a Government in these places, as might keep the Ballance even: and if your Lordships, upon per∣usall, shall find me onely to aime at the Generall good, I am confident you'l owne me to be,


Your Honours humble servant,

WILL: BVLLOCK.








TO THE GOVERNOVR AND Councell of
 Virginia, 
Health and Prosperity.


Gentlemen,


WHat your rules of Government or Justice now are I know not, but what they were you'll find in the ensuing discourse, wherein I strike at no mans person, but at the generall abuse. I can speak knowingly of some of your indeavours in former times for Reformation; to which you'll find the way laid down, which may be done without eclipsing any power above you: it is proposed for absolute Freemen, or a people under a higher power; 'tis a becomming garment, and strongly put together: if you shall put it on, it will beautifie the body of your little Common-Wealth, and make all men in love to dwell with you. When you have read this over, you'll find my love hath swallowed up my losse, and that there's nothing more desired, then the flourishing prosperity of unpara∣lelled 
Virginia,
 by


Your loving friend and Servant,

William Bullock.








To his much esteemed Friends, 
M.
 Samuel Vassell, 
Captaine
 Richard Cranley, 
Captaine
 Thomas Davis, 
Captaine
 Benjamin Cranley, 
Captaine
 William Ryder, 
Captaine
 Peter Andrews, 
and the rest of the Gentlemen Adventurers to the
 English 
Plantations beyond Sea.


Most loving Friends,


DIvers of you having been pleased, to think me able to advise in Cases of this nature, (when in truth, I have been more inabled by your questi∣ons put, then you could by my resolves) I determined to joyn my own experience with such Collections I had made from you, to compose a Tract, which might be usefull; wherein I intended to shew, how Love, Profit, and Pleasure might be raised, and after maintained by a sweet and orderly Government; and this is that which I present yee: sure I am, if you weigh it well, 'twill be like a pleasant Garden, where you may gather sim∣ples for many speciall uses: and although the Scene be laid in 
Virginia,
 yet it may be applied to divers other places. Pray believe, I have not done this for the ad∣vantage of telling you in Print, I am your Servant; but the necessity of a Work of this nature, at this time, there never being any before, spur'd me on: And since in this, I do but trace your steps, in labouring for the publick good, I doubt not but you'll entertain it kindly, and give the Author leave to style himselfe,


Your truly loving friend,

Will: Bullock.








To his much honored Friends, the Knights and Gentlemen that impor∣tuned this Worke.


HAD you given me more time, I should have been larger in your satisfaction, but this is what six nights could produce, which time you know is all I had; and of this, the recollecting and reading my ancient studies took up much: but what is done (upon examination) you'l find is clear and true: and having finished the work, feare (lest some materiall thing should be omitted) would not let me sleep, when at last I found I had forgot to tell you that I am,


Your faithfull friend and servant,

William Bullock.






TO THE READER.


Courteous Reader,


THis small Worke is undertaken for the gene∣rall good, as well of the Inhabitants, as the Adventurers, and therefore requires a familiar pen, and plain matter, more then height of style: the Author had rather do good, then be commended; there∣fore refused to let the Work be ushered in by the com∣mendation of others: he is not ignorant, what a slight esteem this place hath amongst the generality of the people, and knowes a good name is sooner lost then recovered, and that when men joyn with common fame to destroy a good Work, the Devill hath got a victory;


wherein 'tis extreamly considerable, how great an ene∣my he hath alwayes been to the Planting of the Gos∣pell, especially, in places where (as here) the Natives own him for their God: Therefore let no man won∣der, the good of this place hath been so much obstru∣cted, since now they know by whom. I have in this place lost some thousands of pounds, yet cannot har∣bour an ill opinion, since I am fully satisfied, the fault was onely in the men I trusted, and this hath been every losers condition: wherefore let the Countrey suffer no longer under our hard censures; Good Laws duly executed, will make good men, and quickly change the aspect of these places, there wanting nothing else under God to make them flourish. Ambition, amongst other things, hath been none of the least hinderance: Therefore he doth advise all such as intend to be la∣bourers in this Harvest, to study meeknesse, and the generall good: for if it be well considered, 'tis much better to be equall to, then a Justice of Peace, in which sense he speakes himself; and if thou beest such, then he's thine,


William Bullock.






The principall Motive, that drew the Author to this Worke, was,


THat finding many Gentlemen have unsetled them∣selves, with a desire to better their fortunes in re∣mote places, and in this condition, inquisitive after the severall Plantations abroad, to the end they might make choice of the best, in which they are much troubled with the various relations both by books and men, whose onely aime is to draw all men to themselves; and to further that Work, are liberall to abuse all other places but their own: by which means men are disperst abroad in severall small numbers, at great distances from each other, which is very


uncomfortable and disccusolate, whereas if they had been all directed to any one good place, they might have been in this time a great and flourishing people: and finding al∣so (without disparaging of other places) that this Coun∣trey of 
Virginia
 is abundantly stored with what is by all men aimed at, 
viz.
 Health and Wealth, so that there wants nothing to their happinesse that go over, but good Instructions, which were never yet endeavoured, more then to shew the place; I thought that man that should kindly take the stranger by the hand, and lead him to it, shewing him not onely the richest Mines, but also how to dig them, would deserve much thanks.






I cannot omit, by way of Caution to my deere Countrey-men, to admonish them,


That at this time there is much strugling to draw men to new Plantations, never yet seated; and if they will peruse the books that have been set forth in the Infancy of the most of our 
English
 Plantations abroad, they shall see with what losse and dangers they have beene setled; 
viz.
 by having their ships cast away, for want of know∣ledge of the place; by want of food, till supplies; by strange diseases, never before heard of; by Divisions and Facti∣ons amongst themselves, and an innumerable of other Inci∣dents happening to them, wherely the places have beene severall times deserted, and again Planted, before ever we could keep our footing.


Wherefore, I shall advise all men to make use of other mens wofull experience, and to dispose themselves to such places as are already Planted, where all difficulties are now overcome.








THE TABLE.




SECTION I.






THe Lands and Bounds—


in


1. 
Reanock.


page 2.






2. 
Virginia.






The temperature of the Ayre—


3. 
Mary-land.










What this Coun∣trey affords, of Beasts, Fowles, Birds, and Fish, for foode, and commoditie.—


viz.


1. Beasts for foode. 
p.
 4.






2. Beasts of prey. 5






3. Fowles and Birds for foode. 
ibid.






4. Birds for delight. 6






5. Birds of prey. 
ibid.






6. Fish, for foode and com∣moditie. 
ibid.






7. For present use, and spending. 
ibid.






What Trees, Fruits, Rootes, and Plants, are naturally found in this Countrey.


What 
English
 Provisions, and what stores are there at this time. 
ibid.


What Commodities are here found, growing from Na∣ture. 8






SECT. II.






The true reason, how this Coun∣tries prosperitie hath beene hin∣dered, which is tearmed the Countries Dis∣ease, which hath beene—


viz.


1. By the Government. 
p.
 10






2. By the Commoditie that they have alwayes made their Staple. 11






3. By not raysing Commodi∣ties, to drive a Trade for Ships. 
ibid.






4. By miscarriage of good designes for Staple Com∣modities. 12






5. By the 
Indians. ibid.






6. By malitious slanders. 13






7. By the unfitnesse of the people transported. 14












SECT. III.






How the Coun∣trey may be re∣covered.—


viz


1. By an equall Government; and that Government pro∣posed. 
p.
 18






2. By raysing Commodities, for the constant imploy∣ment of Shipping; which hath made 
New-England
 and 
Barbado's
 flourish, and will quickly doe this, there being much more advan∣tage in the place. 30






3. By fixing upon Corne, Rice, Rape-seed, and Flax; and all the rest of the rich Com∣modities examined, & how and when to be falne upon, but for the present layd by, with the reasons. 33










SECT. IV.






A Scale, where∣by, after the proportion of 60. li. stock, all men may know how to lay out their money for advantage.—


viz.


1. How they shall lay it out in 
England. p.
 35






2. How they shall dispose of themselves when they come over into the Countrey. 36






3. What & how much ground they shal plough and sowe, and with what. 38






4. What their first years Crop may produce in the Coun∣trey. 40






5. If they will send it for 
England,
 what it shall pro∣duce there, and how to in∣sure it. 42






6. What they may be worth the third yeare. 
ibid.






A great incouragement to people of all degrees. 43








SECT. V.






How Passengers may bee best transported, for Health, and Charge.—


viz.


1. By the old way, with the convenience and inconve∣nience. 
p.
 46






2. How to goe in the old way, and yet save a third part of the Charge. 48






3. A Victualling proposed for the Planter, in his Voyage thither. 49






4. To goe by 
New-England
 Ships. 50






5. The best, and the neerest way, to goe by the 
New∣found-land
 Ships, in 
March, April,
 or 
May,
 where you may goe at halfe the old Charges. 
ibid.






When the Gentlemen are over in the Countrey, how they shall dispose of themselves till they be setled. 51






A great Incou∣ragement both for Masters and Servants.—


Shew∣ing,


How Masters shall imploy their Servants to their best profit, without their over∣sight, or trouble. 53






How Servants shall worke for their Masters, and them∣selves, without hard la∣bour. 54










SECT. VI.






How to reclaime the 
Indians.
—


viz.


1. Wherein is first considered Love 
p.
 54






2. Force. 55 
It being not to be done either of these two wayes,






3. A third way is proposed. 
ibid.












SECT. VII.


An Advice to the Adventurer. 
pag.
 60


An Advice to the Planter. 
ibid.


An Advice to Servants. 62








The Authors offer to all men; by which they'l finde he's unbyast, and in this Worke hath no private ends.


He freely offereth to all that shall be desirous to be further satisfied, concerning any particular mentioned in this Booke, or shall meet with any Objections to any thing therein propounded, to repaire to the Author, who will cleare all Doubts, and shew them the best and newest Draught, or Plot, of the Coun∣trey.












Reade this first, the VVorke next.


B
Efore you cast your eye upon the Worke it self, look stedfastly upon the Author (and as thou likest him give him cre∣dit) whilst he tells thee that he was never in this Place himself he writes of with such considence; and therefore before he be∣gan, he had many strugling thoughts within him, perswading and disswading. But when he consi∣dered, it is no new thing, out of collections to make up the Historie of a Kingdom; And that the Work is not so much to set out the Country (it having been already done by many experienced men) as to take off that
 Odium, 
that malitious tongues have thrown upon it; By discovering the true grounds and rea∣son why the prosperitie thereof hath beene so long ob∣structed, and to apply a perfect cure to it: As also having Warrant, that the Places are what he sets them forth, from the discoveries of M.
 Heriot, 
M.
 Laine, 
and Captaine
 Smith, 
Printed neere forty yeares since, and divers severall Bookes lately Prin∣ted; and also, having discoursed severally, and at severall times, with Captaine
 Mathewes, 
Captaine
 Peirce, 
Captaine
 Willoughby, 
Captaine
 Cla∣bourne, 
and divers others the principall men of that Country, here in
 England, 
about nine yeares since,




and his own father living there above twelve years, besides Captaine
 Andrewes, 
Captaine
 Douglas, 
Captaine
 Pryn, 
Captaine
 Russell, 
and divers other Captaines and Masters of Ships, that have con∣stantly used that Trade; and lastly,
 20 
yeares expe∣rience of his own, bought with
 5000. 
li. he hopes all cause of doubt will be layd aside.




SECTION I.


T
Here having beene already so many Bookes publisht of Gods blessings upon these Places both for Health and Riches, I shall not need to trou∣ble the Reader therewith; the ra∣ther, for that the principall end of this Worke is, Man-Midwife like, to preserve the Mother already in Tra∣vell, and bring the Child lively into the World, advising how to cherish it in the growth, untill it have strength to provide it selfe, wherefore I shall but give a short touch of them: And first,




Of the Lands and Bounds.


THe Continent is upon the East bounded with the North and East Sea, garnished with many delicate Islands of severall Magnitudes, and to the West it hath no bounds, untill you come to the West and South Sea, which is many miles over: on the South side is many thousand miles of Land; on the North is Land to 
New-England,
 and many thousand miles further: the distance betweene 
Mary-land
 and 
New-England,
 is not above 200 miles by Land, and in this distance there are many 
English
 planted, insomuch, that there are Posts which go by Land betweene 
Virginia
 and 
New-England.


The Country is full of Hills and Dales, and fine Pro∣spects, and towards the Sea in 
Virginia
 very levell, yet not without pleasant ascendings, and descendings, but not of height to be called Hills: the body of the Country


from the River is generally woody, but not like ours in 
England,
 for they are so cleare from Under-woods, that one may be seen above a mile and a half in the Wood, and the Trees stands at that distance, that you may drive Carts or Coaches between the thickest of them, being clear from boughs a great height, yet in the Sum∣mer they agree that the Sun shall injure none that puts himself under their protection, whilst he refresheth him∣self with 
Strawberries
 & 
Grapes
 of a most delicious taste, which grow there in abundance. There be many fair Na∣vigable Rivers, Rivelets and Springs, imbrodered with fresh Marshes and Medows, very delightfull to the pro∣spect, sending forth exceeding sweet and pleasant savours that perfume the Ayre, from the 
Sasafras, Strawberrie,
 & naturall Flowers; all which well considered, this place may well deserve the name of the New
-Paradice.


Whosoever desires to see the Draught of this Coun∣try, may looke into 
Smiths
 Travells, or into 
Mercators Atlas,
 and there he shall see the whole Continent.


The soyle is a rich black Mould, for two foot deep, and under it a Loame, of which they make a fine Brick, and with it plaister their Houses within, & cover it over with Lime made of Oyster-shells, which is much harder and more durable then our Lime in 
England,
 made of Chaulke, and of which there is plenty: the out-side of their Houses they commonly cover with Board, or case them with Brick.






The next in consideration, is the temperature of the Ayre.


TO speak first of the most Southerly Climat, 
viz.
 from the degree of 34 to 36, the Aire is extream pleasant & wholsome, as it was found by M. 
Ralph Laine,
 M. 
Heriot
 and others, who with their Company sat down upon the Island of 
Roanock,
 which is a little to the Southward of that place in 
Virginia,
 where now the 
English
 are plant∣ed, in the year 1585, and continued there one year: the Winter is very little, but 'tis to be observed, that as you passe from one degree to th' other Northerly, the Winter growes stronger and longer; this place is but now upon Planting.



In that part of 
Virginia,
 where now the 
English
 in∣habite, which is under the degree of 37, and part of 38, the Ayre is pleasant and wholsome, especially to those that are seated above the flowing of the Salt water.


But for such as are set downe within the flowing of the Salt water, it is much like in health as here in 
Eng∣land
 upon the Salt Marshes, which are subject to Agues and Fevers: the 
Winter
 is not much above six weekes, which begins in 
December,
 and ends about the first of 
February.


Mary-land
 is also very pleasant and wholsome, and is further Northerly, 
viz.
 part of 38, and 39, and there∣fore more cold; the 
Winter
 longer then in 
Virginia,
 but nothing like our 
Winter
 in 
England:
 whence it is, that some men, in the Months of 
June, July,
 and 
August,
 finding their constitution of body not so well agreeing with heat, retyre themselves in those Months to 
Mary-land,
 which is but twelve houres passage by Boat from 
Virginia,
 and there enjoy perfect health, although sick when they left 
Virginia.






What is in this place found, of Beasts, Fowles, Birds, Fish, Trees, Fruits, both for Food and Commoditie.




Beasts for Food.


Elkes,
 bigger then Oxen, excellent good meat, and the Hide good to make Buffe.


Deere
 in abundance, excellent Venizon, and the Skinnes good Cloathing.


Racoones,
 very good meat.


Hares, Coneys,
 very good meat.


Beaver,
 excellent meat, and the Furre Rich.


Squirrells
 two sorts, good meat.








Beasts of Prey, yet some of their Skinnes are valuable.


Lyons, Beares, Leopards,
 But these and the 
Elkes
 are but seldome seene neere our 
English
 Plantation, their range being up in the Mountaines.


Foxes, Wild Cats, Otters,
 Warme Furres.


Martens, Minkes,
 Rich Furres.


Wolves,
 but very few.


Poulcats.


Weasells.


Musk-Rats,
 so called, for that their Codds are stronger sented then 
Musk-Codds
 from 
East India,
 and never to be worne out.




There are other sorts of Beasts, but their names are not knowne to the 
English.




Fowles and Birds for Food.


Turkeys
 wild innumerable, weighing above 50. li. weight.


Heath Cocks, Pigeons, Partridges, Black Birds, Thrushes, Dottrells, Cranes, Hernes, Swans, Geese, Brants, Ducks, Widgeons, Oxeyes,
 Abundance, and exellent meat.








Birds for delight, some for singing, others for sight.


A 
Bird
 that sings after any Birds noat.


Nightingales
 that sing sweetly.


Red Birds.


Blew Birds.






Birds of Prey.


Eagles.


Hawkes
 of six severall sorts.


Owles.




There is many more that have no 
English
 names.




The next is Fish.


First, of those that are both Foode, and may be made a very good Com∣moditie, there be∣ing in their sea∣sons infinite plen∣tie.



Drummes


Codd


Herrings


Sturgion


Salmon.




Fish for present spending, and these are,



Base


Sheepshead


Conger


Eeles


Trouts


Mullets


Playce


Soales


Mackerell


Brett


Shadd


Perch


Lampreyes


Lobsters




Shell Fish.



Shrimpes


Crey-fish


Crabbs


Oysters


Cockles


Muskles






All these Fish for delicacie farre exceed the Fish in colder Climates: There are divers other Fish excellent good for foode, but for that they are strange to us, I omit them.



And that you may not want Bread to all this good Cheare, there is plentie of 
Indian Wheat, Beanes,
 and 
Pease.




Trees above twentie kindes, many no
 English 
names.


Two sorts of 
Okes,


Ashes,


Walnut
 two sorts,


Elmes, Cedar, Cipres, Mulberry
 trees,


Chesnut
 trees,


Plumme
 trees,


Puchamine
 trees,


Laurell, Cherries, Crahes, Vines, Sasafras.






Fruits.


Grapes, Plummes, Strawberries, Raspices, Maracokes; Puchamines, Muskmelons, Pumpions, Apples, Peares, Quinces, Apricocks, Peaches,
 &c.




There is all sorts of 
English
 Fruit trees, insomuch, that out of one Orchard hath beene made in one yeare fiftie Butts of 
Perry,
 and out of another thirtie Butts of 
Cyder.




For Roots,
 there is,


Potatoes, Parsnips, Onyons, Sparragras, Carrots, Turneps, Hartichokes,
 all sorts of Herbes for Physick or Pot; all which grow without any such trouble as is taken for them in 
England,
 and for delicacie farre ex∣ceeding the best Gardens here in 
England.






For English Provisions.


There is above thirtie thousand Head of Cattell, and an infinite number of Hogges, in such plentie, that you may buy Beese and Porke under sixteene pence a Stone: Wheat and Barley is very cheape;


most of them brew their owne Beere, and have divers publique Brew-houses, that brew excellent Beere and Ale: Goats flesh, and Mutton, but not yet so plenti∣full, by reason they have not beene suffered to en∣crease, till of late yeares: There is all sorts of tame 
English
 Fowle.


There is above two hundred Horses and Mares, and above seventie Asses; these came thither but of late yeares.






Naturall Commodities of the Countrey are,


1. 
Silke grasse.
 Of which, I have seene here in 
England
 drest, exceeding strong, and pure, fine like Silke, which without question would make strong Stuffes. A piece of Grogram was made of this Silk-grasse, and presented to Queene 
Elizabeth.


Silke.
 In 
Roanock
 they found Silk-wormes bigger then Walnuts, and were informed by the 
Indians,
 that higher in the Countrey there were abundance, and bigger.


Flax,
 and 
Hempe.
 Which differs something from ours in the Leafe and Stalke, but thought to be every way as good.


Allum, Nitrum, Alumem plumeum. Are all to be had from a mightie Veine of Earth, that runnes all alongst the Sea Coast, on the Southermost part of 
Ʋir∣ginia.


Wapock,
 Of the same value with 
Terra Sigelata.


Pitch, Tarre, Rosin, Turpentine;
 many 
Drugs; Wine
 from three sorts of Grapes; 
Oyle
 from Walnuts, and excellent sweet 
Oyle
 from three sorts of Berries, about the bignesse of 
Acrons;
 divers sorts of 
Firre, Sivet Cats
 up 
Roanock
 River; where is 
Pearle
 also to be had, 
Iron, Copper, Tynne, Lead,
 divers kinds of sweet 
Gummes,
 severall sorts of 
Dyes, Woad,
 and 
Sugar Canes,
 in 
Roanock.





To which you may adde, they being now there, and which yeelds wonderfull increase, 
English
 Corne of all sorts, 
Rice, Flax,
 and 
Hempe, Pot-ashes, Rape-seed;
 and to say no more, you shall not finde the Earth ungratefull for any thing you trust her with.


And to encourage Gentlemen, that are desirous of winning honour, by making Discoveries of such places as may bring the greatest Wealth and Riches to their owne Countries, in which they shall not onely very much enrich themselves, but eternize their Names; let them peruse M. 
Henry Briggs
 (that famous Mathema∣tician) his Booke printed about 28 yeares since, wherein he makes it plaine, that a Trade from 
Virginia
 may be easily driven into the South and West Sea, lying on the backside of 
Virginia,
 not farre distant from thence, and so consequently to the 
East Indies,
 and this by Rivers that have their Rise in the same place, with the great Rivers of 
Virginia;
 but as the 
Virginia
 Rivers empty themselves into the East or North Sea, so the other Ri∣vers empty themselves into the West or South Sea.


In the degrees of 34, and 35, they receive three Har∣vests in five Moneths of the 
Indian
 Corn from the self∣same ground, 
viz.
 they sowe in 
Aprill,
 and reape in 
June;
 sowe in 
June,
 and reape in 
July;
 sowe in 
July,
 and reape in 
August.


Virginia
 yeelds two Harvests in one yeare, 
viz.
 they reape their Wheat in 
July
 and then sowe Barley, and reape in 
October.


Their increase is generall from 8 quarters to 12 quar∣ters of an Acre.


Their 
Indian
 Corne yields them above 250 quarters for one.


English
 fruits that have been transported bear wonder∣fully, and twice as fair as in 
England,
 and in deliciousnesse farre exceeding what they were before; their 
Apricocks
 and 
Peaches
 grow all on standing Trees, and not against Walls: Let this suffice for the Countrey.










SECT. II.


I Am in the next place, in order to the Cure, first to discover the Disease of this Country, and how con∣tracted; 
 of which,


The Government is the greatest of all; for no wise man will either transport himselfe, or send his estate to such a place where is no setled Government, and whol∣some Lawes to preserve mens lives and estates, and to maintaine honest commerce.


The Government is, by Governour, Councell, and Assembly.


The Governour is commonly a Stranger, sent from 
England,
 and is to last but three yeares, in which time, he must not be blamed, if he doe his owne Worke.


Amongst other things, he can call Trustees and Deb∣tors to be of the Councell, which puts the Adventurer to a stand.


And this well considered, hath gone a great way in the Disease.


For, by it Justice is stifled, and the Adventurer must never hope for Justice, since the Debtor is by the Go∣vernours favour, made both Judge and Party; by which meanes 'tis cleare, the greater the Aduenture the surer lost, for the Trustee shall be the sooner a Councellor.


In these things I speake experimentally of such as were before, but doe not charge the present Gover∣nours, for by their care the Plantation is in some rea∣sonable condition of recovery.




Next, by the People.


The Assembly in manner as it hath beene chosen, hath been mischievous, for they have not beene elected for their honesties and abilities, but by their great Port, although maintained with an Adventurers purse; and such was the Assembly, when most of them being bound to pay Mony-Debts, made an Act of Assembly, that they should pay their Debts in 
Tobacco
 at 12. d. 
per
 li. when


it was sold at the same time in the Countrey for one penny.


The Laws were bad, and worse administred, by which meanes industrie was discouraged, and strifes counte∣nanced.


The Councells time, that should be better spent for the encouraging of others, taken up in hearing, but not determining unnecessary strifes.


Next, the Disease growes by the Commoditie they have and doe make their Staple; which,


First, from the very infancy of the Plantation, they have made 
Tobacco
 their Staple, which hath been sent for 
England
 in such quantities, as many yeares there hath beene some hundred thousand pounds weight, not worth the fraught and custome, and by this means many a poore Planter hath been destroyed.


Secondly, 
Tobacco
 being once in the ground, is never out of hand till in the Hogs-head; and, which is the misery of it, the Moneths of 
June, July,
 and 
August,
 being the very height of the Summer, the poore Ser∣vant goes daily through the rowes of 
Tobacco
 stooping to worme it, and being over-heated he is struck with a Calenture or Feaver, and so perisheth: This hath been the losse of divers men.


Thirdly, the 
Tobacco
 is ripe but once in the year, and Ships goe for 
Virginia
 at that time when they may have the 
Tobacco
 for their home-ward fraught, there being nothing else to lade them, which makes many here in 
England
 thinke, that it is a yeares Voyage to 
Virginia,
 whereas if there were other Commodities to lade Shipping, they might go and return in four or five Moneths at the most, by which meanes many a man that would willingly have gone away in 
March,
 had there beene Shipping to transport him, is of another minde, or hath otherwise settled himselfe before 
Sep∣tember
 comes, which is the usuall time of going.



Fourthly, that by ships going in this manner, they are pestered with people, who thereby are very much indangered in their healths, and the passenger is at as much more charge in his transportation as otherwise he should be, for he payes 5 l. 10 s. for a mans pas∣sage, and keeping his men at charge in the Cookes Shops in Saint 
Katherines
 five or six weekes, stands him neare in 3 li. a man more, whereas, if ships were con∣stantly going, it would not stand him in above 4 li. 10 s. a man.


The 
Indians
 Treachery, like a malignant disease, hath hindred many friends from visiting it, for the massacre in 1622, wherein was slain 350, hath scared many peo∣ple from coming to it, which if truly understood would not fright the meanest spirit, since the 
English,
 by repo∣sing trust and confidence in the 
Indian,
 gave the op∣portunity, for it was not the strength of millions could injure them. And whosoever shall reade the re∣lation of the massacre, set out 1622, will find there is no danger in them, except you give them weapons, and stand still whilst they destroy you.


And next, the miscarriage of good designes for Staple commodities hath added much, wherein I could instance in particular, by whom the designes of making 
Pot-ashes, Rape,
 and 
Walnut Orle,
 and other Staples, as also setting up Saw-Mills, were set on foot, and the particular reasons how they came to fail; which was not for want of the Countries being plentifully stored with materialls, but by other casualties: the particu∣culars would take up too much room in this place; My desire being to make this so short as the very essence of the matter will beare, that it may not tire but de∣light and fully satisfie the Reader: wherefore I will give you some few generalls, whereby such may be admi∣nished, as shall come after, how to avoid the mis∣chiefes they fell under.



1. The first is, that this Country being in it self so rich as is before set forth, many men ayming from small stocks to be suddenly rich, have spent themselves in courting their designs, and when all parties were agreed, not so much money left, as would procure the Licence to marrie.


2. Next, having built their designes upon some one Artificers life, his death hath brought destruction to the Worke.


3. Or the Worke being here formed and sent over, some principall part hath beene lost, or broken, and none in that Countrey able to repaire the losse, the Worke hath suffered.


4. Or else having fully outed themselves at the first, what they intended to adventure, and upon that ex∣pecting a suddaine and certaine returne, when in stead thereof they have beene saluted with a Bill of Ex∣change to pay, or a particular to provide a second sup∣ply; and being put by their confident expectation, they fall into despaire, and since it will not come at the first pull, give it over.


5. They goe in partnership, and upon some pettie difference draw severall wayes, and let the designe to the ground.


6. A sixt is, that when men come fresh over, their Credits are sound, and so soone forget wherefore they came, idling out their time, till their new-contracted Debts overtake them, and so they and their designes are lost: And this I have knowne to be the losse of many a good designe.


Malitious tongues hath impaired it much: For it hath beene a constant report amongst the ordinarie sort of people, That all those servants who are sent to 
Vir∣ginia,
 are sold as slaves: whereas the truth is, that the Merchants who send servants, and have no Plantations of their owne, doe onely transferre their Time over to


others, but the servants serve no longer then the time they themselves agreed for in 
England:
 and this is an ordinarie course in 
England,
 and no prejudice or hurt to the servant.


And lastly, the unfitnesse of the people transported for the Worke, or being fit, not well ordered, hath hin∣dred the Countries recoverie very much.


The usuall way of getting servants, hath been by a sort of men nick-named 
Spirits,
 who take up all the idle, lazie, simple people they can intice, such as have professed idle∣nesse, and will rather beg then work; who are perswaded by these 
Spirits,
 they shall goe into a place where food shall drop into their mouthes: and being thus deluded, they take courage, and are transported. But not finding what was promised, their courage abates, & their minds being dejected, their work is according: nor doth the Ma∣ster studie any way how to encourage them, but with sowre looks, for which they care not; and being tyred with chasing himselfe, growes carelesse, and so all comes to nothing. More might be said upon this subject, were it fit: 'tis most certaine, that one honest labouring hus∣bandman shall doe more then five of these.








SECT. III.


HAving thus considered the Disease, and how contracted, I shall prescribe a plaine and easie way for the Recoverie, which shall be, first, by a wholsome and equall Government, that may incourage, delight, and secure all men.


Before you enter into the Government, observe the Proposer, whom you shall finde more imployed about the Foundation then the Building, since 'tis found, that the first failing, the second cannot stand: And that he may not appeare altogether ignorant of what he under∣takes, 'tis fit you should understand, that amongst other things he lookt into the Fabrick of 
Englands
 Lawes, and


finding Reason the Key, he endeavoured to enter, where at the very first, his Reason quarrelled with that part of the Building. wherein the dissent of fee-simple estates was lodged, since the doore onely opened to let in the brothers of the whole bloud, but was shut against the bro∣thers of the half, although they were the children of one father; and that rather then let them in, though so neere, the estate must look an heire of the whole bloud, though he can but call Cousin at never so great a distance, who as it were shall snatch the estate away, as if the half bro∣thers were all Bastards. And prying further into this part, he found many mischiefes depending on it; to instance one for all: A man in povertie marries as poorely, and hath a sonne; the Wife dyes, he after marries richly, and hath many children, purchaseth a fee-simple estate, then dyes: the sonne by the first venture, enters and dyes; his Cousin, it matters not in what degrees distant, shall wipe the rest of the children of the estate which was brought by their owne mother. My reason told me, that the fa∣thers owne children should be successively let in before the Cousin of the whole bloud: but being satisfied in knowing the harsh reason of this Law, which was onely to preserve the estate in the whole bloud in a right line; he ventured further, desiring to understand the unifor∣mitie, but met such contrarieties of Judgements & Opi∣nions, both in Law and Equitie, upon the selfe-same Ca∣ses, occasioned by the strength of Reason, more prevay∣ling with one Judge then another, & Rules in Pleading, accompanied with various Circumstances and Niceties, full of Intricacies, and multitudes of Officers and Offi∣ces, (to know which severally, requires an Age) had swell'd these Buildings to that vastnesse, that he plainely saw, it was not one mans whole lives studie could make him Master thereof; all which proceeded from the mix∣ture of the Laws of other Nations, who in severall times had power over this Kingdom: all which consider'd, made


him retire, and to content himself in seeking upon what foundation this strange and Labyrinth-like building was erected, which he discovered to be politick reason, and then he thought whether (since the ground-work in the general was so good, & those who had the Government so minded) those parts of the foundation, that are so harsh and rugged, might not be altered and made more smooth and equall, and the building made to answer: but he found it could not be, without apparant danger to the whole, since so many with severall titles had built their estates upon it.


Next, he apprehended to take the whole building down, and the foundation from the best of the materi∣alls new laid, and then, whether men might not in the mean time, and untill the fabrick should be again erected, lodge their estates in some safe hand, to be de∣livered them back, after the structure finisht, by some generall and free title: he was presently answered; That happily many in possession would willingly consent, but those interessed in estates Tayl, the heires of the whole bloud, and of the half, the heires according to se∣verall Customes, the Lords of Manours, and their Customary Tenants, and many more of like nature, would never agree about the redelivery of them back. By which he perceived it was impossible to alter any of 
Englands
 Lawes, with Justice to all interests, onely some thing might be done to prevent the mischiefe that lay upon the Subject in the course and proceed∣ings of the Lawes, and this no better way, then having in all times faithfull and able Lawyers, and that there might be some better way found out to make such as in∣tend to professe the Law, to spend more time in their studies, before they undertake to advise men how to lose their estates.


All which being weighed, he was resolved, that no structure could be so commodious and delightfull, as


when it is carried up intire, with consideration, that in case the Family increase, there might be additions without defacing.


Wherfore having by the means aforesaid a little know∣ledge of the foundation of 
Englands
 Laws, & having by experience found many mischiefs and inconveniencies to grow from severall parts thereof, he considered, whether he might not venture from thence to design a pleasant and intire building, wherewith all men (not otherwise clog'd and fettered with estates, held by Ancient and in∣tricate titles & Customes) might be taken, and chearfully contribute to the work: & upon enquiry after a place to set his Frame upon, he found the forraigne Plantations were already hard at work about it; but having surveyed their Draught, he clearly saw they had left too many doors for inconveniences, & which was worse, the foun∣dation was mistaken, and so the higher they built, the more dangerous. All which was easy to be rectified, since in respect they were as yet but pin'd together with their interest under a common title, and slightly fastned with personall ties: being glad of this advantage, that possi∣bly he might be the Author of so good a work, he chear∣fully undertooke the Modelling the same. And find∣ing that Government is no other then the extraction of power into the hand of one or more, to the end it may be dispenced upon all occasions for the peoples good & safety, he considered, that those in whom the power rest∣ed, ought to be for wisdome, justice, and integrity, drawn from the very quintessence of the people, which must be done by a through knowledge of each other, whereby they would be able from amongst themselves, to set the best, the first step towards the Government, and they presently to have power over those that chose them, but not to be in the Chusers power to call back; the highest power, after, shall by steps raise them accor∣ding to their abilities, which you'l find more plain in the following Government.














The Medell of Government proposed.


First, Before the going over of the Companie, they together with the Adventurers, to chuse thirteene able and fit men to be of the Councell.


Secondly, That these shall from amongst themselves 
 make choise of an able man to be Governour; and this to be done by a Balletting Box, that it may never be knowne who was for, or against the Election.


 Thirdly, That the Governour shall be elected in manner following; 
viz.
 the eldest of the Councell to stand first singly for Election, but he to have no hand in it; and in case the Election goe on the Negative, then the next of the Councell in senioritie to stand, and so every man of the Councell shall stand, untill the Governour be fixed. And in case the Electors shall be even, 
viz.
 six to six, it shall be taken in the Negative: But if through Faction the Negative shall goe round, so that no man be elected, then the eldest of the Councell, that first stood for the Electi∣on, shall be Governour; 
 And he at the yeares end shall surrender up the Government, and sit at the Table as eldest of the Councell: 
 And then the Councell shall proceed to a new Election of the Governour for the ensuing yeare; which shall be done in manner afore∣said, beginning first with him that was the late Go∣vernour.


Fourthly, The Governour and Councell to agree up∣on some knowing man of the Law to be Secretarie.








That the People may be satisfied of the equalitie of the Government, and that all men may be encouraged to studie the good of the Countrey, they shall finde steps raysing them to the Government.


Wherefore I propose, That untill the Countrey shall be in a condition to be divided into Shires, Hundreds, and Parishes, the People shall be numbred by Free∣holders; and every fortie or fiftie Free-holders, more or lesse, according to the number that are neerest neighbours, shall be called a Division, by the name of the chiefest man inhabiting amongst them, or by some other name, as shall by the Councell be thought fit: And these to have power at a certaine day and place in every yeare, to meet within their owne Divisi∣on, and then to make choice from amongst themselves of six able and fit men; and their names being presented to the Governour, he 
 by himselfe, in the presence of the Coun∣cell, shall appoint three out of the said six, who for the yeare following shall be stiled the Superintendents of that Division, and shall have such power as is hereafter pro∣vided: And at the yeares end, the people of every Division shall in like manner meet, 
 and shall make choice of three more from amongst themselves, whose names, together with the last Superintendents, shall be pre∣sented to the Governour, and he shall out of them, in manner aforesaid, appoint three that shall be Superintendents for the fol∣lowing 
 yeare: By this, the three first Su∣perintendents, if found honest, may still continue.



The Generall or Great Assembly shall 
 consist of the said Superintendents, who at a certain day and place, every yeare, as shall be most convenient, without further Sum∣mons, shall meet in the Assembly, and in this Assembly, the Governour shall have the chief place, and the Councell to have places there according to their degrees. The Secretarie of State shall have a place 
 under the Governour, and shall be Speak∣er in these Assemblies: the Governour, for that he is the Head, and hath a power a∣bove them all, shall not Vote; but hearing the Debates, and making Objections, he will be the better inabled to use his power in his Negative voice.


But when the Countrey shall be so well 
 peopled, that there may be 50 of the Divi∣sion aforesaid, then all the Superintendents shall not come to the Assemblies in manner aforesaid, but the people shall chuse one of their three Superintendents, in every Di∣vision, to come to the Assembly.


No Assembly shall sit longer then twentie dayes.


Before the rising of the Assembly, the Go∣vernour 
 shall appoint twelve men of the Assembly to be Assistants to the Councell, for the yeare following.




There shall be a Judge, or Judges.


There shall be a Treasurer.


There shall be a Surveyer.




It must be agreed, when the number of Assembly men be knowne, what number of Assembly men, and what of the Councell shall make a Court.








All Lawes shall be made in manner following.


They shall be proposed and debated in the Great 
 Assembly: And if the Vote of the Assembly be for the Law, then the Governour and Councell by themselves shall debate it; and if it be agreed by them, then the Governour (who is also not to Vote with the Coun∣cell) shall consider of it; and if he assent to it, then to be a Law, otherwise not.






The Power of the Great Assembly.


Besides their consents to the Lawes, they shall have 
 Cognizance of Appeales from the Governour and Councell, and shall examine and punish all Briberie that any of the Councell or Secretarie shall be found guiltie of; and the Governour shall also be answerable to them for Briberie or injustice done by him: But the Governour shall not be questioned, untill the Charge, if it be Briberie, shall be proved by Oath; and none of the Councell shall be questioned for any the matters aforesaid, unlesse the Plaintife make Oath of the truth of the Charge: And then the Charge being upon debate thought fit to be taken into consideration, the partie charged shall not be admitted to sit in the Assembly till he be cleared, nor have any Vote upon the debate of his Charge. No single Oath shall charge any more then one man of the Councell, but there shal be two mens Oathes to charge two, and three men to charge three, and so for more. The fame of the parties swearing the Charge, ei∣ther against the Governour or Councell, shall be first considered, if desired by the partie charged; and upon that, the Charge to be accepted, or throwne out.


The Secretarie, Treasurer, and 
 Surveyor, shal not be displaced, but by the Assembly.



None of the Assembly, except he be 
 of the Councell, shall begin any Moti∣on in the Assembly against any Law al∣ready made, upon paine of being dis∣mist the Assembly, and his other pla∣ces of trust in the Colonie.


All Assembly or Councell-men that shall presume to move any thing tend∣ing to the subversion of the Govern∣ment, or the apparent disturbance thereof, shall be pu∣nished according to the merit of the offence, as the Assembly shall thinke fit.






The Power of the Governour.


Besides his Negative voyce in making of Lawes, he shall have power to command the due execution of the establisht Lawes.


He shall on a certaine day every yeare, in the pre∣sence of the Councell, chuse out of the six presented to 
 him by every Division, the three Superintendents, and in case any of them dye, or upon complant be discharged, then out of the three that shall be presented to him by the Division, whereof he was a Superintendent that was discharged, he shall chuse one to supply the place of the dead or discharged Superintendent.


The people shall not present one man twice in one year to be a Superintendent; all Warrants shall issue out in his name.


He, by the assent of the major part of the Councell, shall give such titles to men of desert, as shall be war∣ranted by the Law.


He shall by himselfed etermine all Causes of Appeales in equitie under 50. li.


He shall have an Arbitrary power in all matters con∣cerning the peace, not otherwise provided for by the Lawes.



He shall have such allowance, and in such manner for the defraying of his charge, as shall be agreed on by the Assembly.


He shall have power upon complaint, to discharge a∣ny Superintendents, and to send a Warrant to the Divi∣sion to elect new men, but the partie discharged may ap∣peale to the Councell, by delivering his Petition to the Secretarie.


If any Division cannot agree about the chusing men to be Superintendents, then he at the time and in manner aforesaid shall appoint three of that Division, as he shall thinke fit to be Superintendents.


He shall treat with all Agents and Messengers from other Colonies, and after advice had with the Councell shall give answers.


He shall on a certaine day, in manner 
 aforesaid, appoint out of the Assembly twelve to be Assistants to the Councell for the ensuing yeare.


He shall in manner aforesaid, nominate every forty or fifty Free-holders of the neerest neighhourhood, that shall chuse men to make Superintendents.


He shall take care of the Adventurers estates in such manner as is hereafter provided.


He shall, with the advice and consent of the major part of the Councell, call Assemblies so often as shalbe thought fit.


Upon complant of the Superintendents, he shall ex∣amine the Trustees of the Adventurers Plantations, and shall prescribe such rules for the prevention of the abuse of the Adventurers, as shall be thought fit, and shall re∣ferre the punishment of the Trustees to the Councell.


Upon the complaint of the Adventurers, he 
 (without notice first given to the Trustees) shall appoint three of the Assistants to audite and examine the Trustees Accompts, and report it to the Councell, who shall see Justice done betweene the Adventurers and Trustees.



The Secretarie shall be assisting to him in all the matters aforesaid, to informe the Governour what the Law is at all times, as occasion shall require.


No Appeale from the Governour, but to the Gene∣rall Assembly, except in case of turning out a Superin∣tendent, who shall appeale to the Councell.


He shall determine all differences concerning place either in the Councell or elsewhere.


He advising with the Councell, shall pardon death, but the Judge before whom the matter was tryed shall first certifie.


He shall appoint two or three of the Assistants to audite any Accompts that shall be in difference.






The Power of the Governour and Councell Joynt.


They shall determine all Appeales that shall be brought before them.


No Appeales from them to the Generall Assembly shalbe admitted, untill obedience be first given to their Decree.


These, in all cases that concerne the good of the Co∣lonie, except raising men and money, shall have an Ar∣bitrarie power, except in such cases as are provided for by the Law.


These, together with the major part of the Assistants, 
 shall have power for the raising and levying of men and money for defence of the Colonie, and an accompt thereof shall be given at the next Generall Assembly, which shall be reported there by the Secretary.


These to have power over their Members, without the consent of the Governour, and put out and take in by the former manner of elections, whom they please of the Assistants, but shall not exceed their number, & they shall refer the punishment of a Councellor to the Great Assembly, except imprisonment, which they shall have power to doe.



They, together with the Governour, shall have power to elect Judges, and remove them, as they shall see cause.


They shall elect all Officers as are not otherwise pro∣vided to be elected.


They shall have power to question and punish all in∣ferior Officers.






The Power of a Judge.


He shall keepe his Courts upon such dayes, and in such places as shalbe appointed him by the Councell.


He shall issue out his Warrants to the Superinten∣dents, to impannell Juries to attend the Court, and in case the difference happen to be betweene two men of two severall Divisions, then a Jurie to be made up e∣qually out of both the Divisions.


He shall sit in Court in the fore-noones, and try all Causes properly tryable by Juries, and in case any mat∣ter of equitie that he shall thinke fit be offered, he shall after Verdict respite Judgement, and in the after-noone of the same day, shall sit Judge in equitie, where the Witnesses being all ready, as may be presumed because of the tryall at Law, he shall determine the equity of the Cause: but if it shall appeare to him that Witnesses, or papers were wanting, and not by default of the par∣tie; Then he shall leave the Cause to the Governour, if under 50. li. if above, to the Councell.


He shall for discoverie of the truth, examine the par∣ties upon their Oaths if desired, but in this case the par∣ties Oath shall conclude the Cause.


If any captiall Offender be tryed before him, and he shall thinke the Prisoner capable of mercie, then he shall certifie the Governour thereof, and for the present re∣prieve the Prisoner.


He shall refer all accompts to be audited by such men as the Governour shall appoint.








The Power of the Superintendents.


They shall once in a Weeke or a Fortnight keepe a Court.


They or any two of them shall finally determine all Causes arising within their Divisions, not exceeding 10. li. in which cases no Appeale shalbe but for apparent Injustice.


They shall call the parties before them in all other Causes, and end the businesse if they can, but without coercive power.


None shall be admitted to sue or petition, unlesse he alleadge that the Superintendents have had the hearing of the Cause, and could not end it. and in case the Sug∣gestion be false, then the Petitioner shall pay costs, and be dismissed back to the Superintendents.


They shall appoint a fit Officer to attend them, who shalbe as a Constable, to execute all Warrants.


They shall have power joyntly and severally in all Cases of the Peace, as a Justice of Peace.


They shall command before them any Trustee of an Adventurers Plantation within their Division, and ex∣amine him concerning frauds, or other indirect courses taken, whereby the Adventurers may be in danger to suffer and reprehend him, or certifie the Governour, as occasion shall require.


They shall immediately take care of any Adventurers estate, upon the death of a Trustee, and secure it un∣till the Governour can be certified thereof, and he take further order in it.


They shall cause all such Warrants to be executed, as shalbe directed from the Assembly, Governour, Coun∣cell, and Judges to them.


No Appeale from any Court, but for Injustice, which must be made good in some one particular, otherwise the partie appealing, to make reparation to the parties


from whom he did appeale, as shalbe thought fit by the Court appealed to.






Concerning Adventurers,


All Adventurers that send any Adventure, may direct a Coppy of his Adventure to the Governour and Coun∣cell, together with the names of the Trustee; who shall before the Governour acknowledge himself to be trusted with the estate, & from this time the whole Colonie shal take care that he be not injured, by any indirect practice of his Trustee: and without this the Colonie shall take no care of the estate.


No Bond or Bill shall bind any Trustee, unlesse the same be acknowledg'd before the Superintendents and entred by them into a Book, to whom such Trustee shall give satisfaction for his so running into debt.


None shall buy or take any Servants, Cattle, Carr, Plough, or Utensills belonging to the Plantation of any Trustees to pawne, unlesse it be in manner as aforesaid.


No Trustee shalbe compted a Free-holder, unlesse he have 100 Acres of his owne Land stock't and manned, and a Plough going in it.


None but Free-holders shalbe Superintendents.


All debts to be paid by any Planter in the yeare to come, shalbe acknowledged before the Superintendents of the Division wherein the Planter lives, otherwise not to be recoverable which acknowledgement shall have the force of a Judgement.


If a Merchant complaine of his Factour, the Gover∣nour in presence of the Councel, shall appoint either two Assistants or any Superintendencie to take the accompt and certifie the Councel that Justice may be done.


If any Planter or Merchant dye the Superintendents of the place shall at the perills of their Divisions, im∣mediately seize upon the estate, and shall inventorie and appraise it, & if the Executor or he that hath right to the Administration


be not in the Countrey to receive the same, then they shall send a Duplicate subscribed by them, of the Inventorie and Appraizment to the Governour, that the same may be entred into the Register.


The Superintendents may put in such persons to ma∣nage the estate and take such security from them, as they shall thinke fit for the whole Division shall be an∣swerable for the estate to the Governour, and the whole Colonie shalbe answerable to the partie interes∣sed.


But if the Governour, upon perusall of the Invento∣rie, shall find the estate too weake to beare the charge of management, or that there is any deade Com∣moditie therein; then he shall direct his Warrants to the Superintendents, to make sale of both, or of the Commoditie onely, as he shall thinke fit, who shall ap∣point a day in the ensuing weeke for the selling thereof. But on the 
Sunday
 before the day of sale, the said day, together with the particulars to be sold, shalbe publish∣ed in their owne Church, and three more of the neerest neigbouring Churches, and the same at the day aforesaid shalbe sold to the fairest bidder, and a Du∣plicate of their doings herein subscribed, they shall send to the Governour, which shall be also entred as a foresaid.


The Superintendents (for that the Division is to be charged) shall have power to command all debts due to the defunct, to be levied or wel secured, so that nothing be lost by their negligence, otherwise the Division to be answerable for it.


All money that shalbe received, shalbe paid to the Treasurer for the use of the interessed, who shall not deliver it but upon the Governours Warrant.


By this meanes, the whole Colonie is chargeable to make good the estates that shall fall in manner afore∣said.



Oathes to be drawne for Governour, Councell, As∣sembly, Judge, Superintendents, Overseers, and other Officers.


This Modell will serve, either for a free people that shall sit downe of themselves, without any Superinten∣dent Power over them for their protection, or it may well agree with Superintendent Power in any Planta∣tion alreadie setled (unlesse the Owner of that Power intend to rule by Will) if the Election of the Gover∣nour be onely altered in this manner; 
viz.
 That those who have the Power, shall nominate the first Gover∣nour, and he not to be displaced but by the Great As∣sembly; and after the Councell, in manner as is set downe before, to chuse three from amongst themselves, out of which, such as have the Power may appoint one to succeed, and till his or their pleasure be knowne therein, the Councell out of themselves to elect a man to supply the Governours place.


The mischiefe, by sending strangers to governe this Countrey, who neither knowes the people nor their customes, neither they him, must be prevented, if ever the Countrey prosper.


Studie this Modell of Government, and compare it with any other that hath been, or is now in being, and you shall finde prevented those mischiefes, that like so many degrees of poyson make some giddy, others deadly sick, swelling them to bursting. In it you may, see every man harmoniously working, according to his severall indowments of minde and body: first, to preserve it in health, by stifling in the infancie all conten∣tions and love-breaking strifes; next, to feede, clothe, and enrich it, resolving with speed to make their Common∣wealth flourish; which cannot be doubted, since in it all are so much pleased and delighted: the common people fitting and chusing the stones for this strong and sump∣tuous Building, the Governour and Councell laying and


setting these stones (so provided) for the best advantages, whilst the Adventurer is searching for, and sending ma∣terialls from all places.






Another good meanes to the Recovery must be by raising Commodities for the constant imploy∣ment of Shipping; and although this speak it self, yet examples will doe well.


And first let us look upon New 
England,
 a Plantati∣on begun thirteen yeares since 
Virginia,
 viz. in the yeare 1620, the ground no more comparable to 
Virgi∣nia,
 then the North of 
Scotland,
 is to the South of 
England,
 they have no Sugar, Indigo, Ginger, or any other of the rich Commodities before spoken of, nei∣ther will they grow there; yet in this little time of 28 years they are become a flourishing people, and with many gallant Ships built, and every way fitted with ma∣terialls raised out of their own Countrey; and also ladden with their own Native Commodities, drive a Trade with all the world, insomuch as men shall sel∣dome misse passage for New 
England
 from 
London,
 once in two Moneths; and by this means, have many fine Towns, and are full of people.


Next look upon that little Island of 
Barbado's
 not much bigger then the Isle of 
Wight,
 which lay languish∣ing of the disease 
Virginia
 now grones under, (till with∣in this five or six years past,) you may see how by the strength of an indifferent Staple Commodity, 
viz
 Sugar, Indigo, Cotton Wool, & Ginger, it is strangely recover∣ed, that there's whole Fleets of Ships constantly going & coming between it and 
England,
 so that Passengers are going, thither constantly, and they are grown to that height of Trade, that it hath been affirmed to me from very good hands inhabiting in that place, that the last


yeare there was from all places imployed thither above onehundred Sail of Ships, and they are seldome without twenty, or thirty Sail in their harbour.


Yet I can well remember the time, when their fame was much worse, then 
Virginia's
 now is.


By this means, they have great numbers of men trans∣port themselves of all degrees.


And all this is forst, by the commodity; for their Government is not so good that any wise man should be in love with, nor is this Island so extraordinary plea∣sant to intice men above other places, also the Adven∣turers have had as indifferent measure there.


And this well and wisely considered, how much more shall that place flourish, whereby a sweet and harmonious Government all men shall have faire and honest dealing, in a land full of pleasure and delight, yielding abundance of the best Staple commodities in the whole world.






The next help to the Recovery, must be by the commodity, we are to fix upon, wherefore, we will examine all, and make choice of the best.


There is without question in this Country, store of Gold, and Silver Mynes, which I could clearly demon∣strate, but the discovery will bring ruine to the place, for all Princes, and Potentates clayme an interest in Gold and Silver, which they will reach with their swords. I shall say no more of them.


The next is Sugar, Indigo, Cotton Wool, and Ginger, the very Commodities of the said Island; all which will grow on the Southermost part of 
Virginia,
 but yet they will not do the work, for first the Sugar Canes


and 
Indigo
 seeds to plant, must be brought from the 
Barbado's
 or some other place, and then they are two or three yeares before perfect; and experienced men will also be wanting, and will be a work in respect of the charge, that but a few can compasse: and which is worst of all, the said Islands having gotten the start, will make those commodities drugges, before our Harvest; for in this little time, 
Indigo
 is fallen from nine shillings 
per
 pound, to three shillings six pence, and I have heard some of the Gentlemen them∣selves say, that 
Indigo
 in a very little time will not quit cost.


These are fine commodities for wise men to be do∣ing with, indifferent quantities, but not to be the Staples that must do the work.


The next in consideration, will be Wine, Reisons, Dyes, and Drugges; truly great quantities of these, will make them Drugges indeed: besides, the time and money spent before they can be brought to per∣fection, may happily make the poore Planter, with the horse starve, whilst the grasse grows.


Yet I confesse all these are very good to be brought on by degrees, without prejudice to the main De∣signe.


The next that offer themselves, are Mynes of Copper, Tinne, Iron, and Lead, of all which, there is plenty in 
Virginia.
 These are clearly of the best sort of Staples, but they require a great deale of charge and time to bring them to perfection, and there is much of casualty happens in the working raised.


Therefore, if we run greedily upon them, they may chance to be too heavy for us, either in lifting, or carrying.


Wherefore my advice is, that these things may be stoln upon, at most leasure time, and when we have


built a sure foundation upon Staple Commodities of a quicker production.


And now will I think of Silk, Pot-ashes, Rape, and Walnut oyle: and these are very good Staples. But yet when I consider, we are not all Pot-ashes, nor Oyle∣makers, nor Masters of the Silk-worme mystery, nor can presently be at the charge, these are not such as must be built upon for the present Staples.


I will not say, but a single, double, or treble purse, so as they be strong, may easily with great advantage effect any of the aforesaid Staples; and by degrees, the rest may follow.


Then we find in the Countrey Masts for Ships, Pitch, Tarre, Rossine, Turpentine, Clapboard, and Pipestaves: These are good Staples, but grosse Commodities, and most of them fitter to be made use of in the Countrey for building ships, and will do well when there are no other Fraughts.


These in their proportions are sure Commodities, and will helpe exceedingly, after better Staples are set upon.


I will now present you with 
Englands
 Staples, amongst which I find Corn, Hemp, Flax, Rape-seed, Cattle, Wool, to which I will adde one more, that cannot be had in 
England,
 and that is Rice, I am sure we can all be ma∣sters of the Plough, and shall soon be Masters of the rest.


And here I fix for these reasons.


First, for that we may all fall to these workes so soone as we are landed, and the season come.


Secondly, because Flax, Rice, and Rape-seed will grow all the Countrey over, and Wheat in all places, where the ground hath beene broken up before, of which there is plenty upon every Plantation which is past bearing of Tobacco, yet the best for Wheate; and there be divers other places, where VVheat will prosper


exceedingly, that are not over-rich; for in many places, where the ground was never broke up, 'tis too rich for our 
English
 Corn, sending up the Stalk so high, that the wind layes it: and Cattle are there already in abun∣dance.


The principallest reason is, that many Ships may be yearely laden by a few hands imployed in Corn, Rice, Rape-seed, and Flax, and if you observe but the following Scale, you shall find three hands to make yearly above twenty two tunnes of Corne, and Flax: and so proportionably a thousand hands imployed in Wheat, Rice, Flax, and Rape-seed, will yearely lade fifty Sail of Ships, of one hundred and fifty Tunne a Ship; by which it is evident that an infinite Trade by Sea might be suddenly driven, there being alrea∣dy in this place above 15000 men, besides women, and children, and such numbers of Ships constant∣ly comming and going, would quickely people the Countrey: and it is not from the purpose to shew the failings of the first Adventurers for want of this foundation, for if you peruse their books Printed 1622, you shall find after they have told you, what the beauties are of the place, that their Commodi∣ties they intended, were Cordage, Pot-ashes, Iron, and the like; in all which many hands can make but slow worke, as to the lading of Ships, for the advantage of this place is, to raise the best of rough Commodities to be transported. Where hands are plenty, labour is cheap.


And for the greater incouragement, there is in this Countrey all materialls for the building and com∣pleat finishing Ships, to carry these Commodities to their Markets: Before I go further, let me recollect my selfe, and thinke what a blessed Countrey must this be, where Gods blessings severally distributed upon other Countries meet all in one.










SECT. IIII.


A Scale, whereby after the proportion of 60. li. stock all men may know how to imploy their money upon this worke.




This Scale is made for a Master and his two Servants.






 


li.


s.


d.






A Plough every way fitted


02


00


00






Three Spades, three Shovells, three Mattocks, two Felling-Axes, two Hatches, one two Hand-Saw, and 1 one Hand-Saw.


01


08


00






Three gallons of Strong Water, and a Case.


01


00


00






One Fowling-peece, powder & shot


01


15


00






A Casting Net


01


00


00






Hookes and Lines to fish.


00


05


00






One Iron Pot, one Pry∣ing Pan, one Spit, wood∣den Platters, Dishes and Porringers.


01


00


00






To be invested in Linnen or Woollen Clothes, Shoes, Iron-worke, or Stuffes, to be carried o∣ver.


20


00


00






 


28


08


00






This 20. li. thus invested you may be confident to make 40. li. in the Countrey, since you are to deale with them for Cattle, Corne, and Flax-seed; this Ad∣venture shall provide Cattle for the Plough, Corne, Sow, Pigges, and Poultrie for your House, and to sowe.








For Cloathing the two Servants.






Two Cloath Suites


01


10


00






Two Canvas Suites


00


14


00






Two woollen Drawers & two Wast-coats


00


14


00






Six Shirts


01


00


00






Foure paire of Stockings


00


07


00






Foure paire of Shoes


00


12


00






Two Monmouth Caps


00


04


08






Six Neck Handkerchiefes


00


04


00






Eight ells of strong Canvas to make Bed and Boul∣ster.


00


10


00






One Rug and two Blanckets


01


00


00






The abovesaid charge of Servants is


06


15


08






The passage of three will be


16


10


00






Head money to the Chyrurgion of the Ship.


00


07


06






The fraught of a Hogs-head in tonnage


00


15


00






 


24


08


02






brought from the other side


28


08


00






the totall is


52


16


02






Remaining of the 60. li. to be disposed of as he shall thinke fit, or he may carry another Servant.


07


03


10










How the Planter shall bestow himself when he first comes over, untill he can settle; and what he shall im∣ploy himselfe upon, with a reasonable proposi∣tion what in a yeare, God assisting, may by his labour be produced.


Now having thus fitted our small Family, I shall


advise them, when they come over, how to settle, which shall be in this manner, either for the first yeare joyn strength with some Planter there, where he shall find them all willing to receive him, either to diet, or he diet himself, and lodge with them; yet it will be best for him to board; for he may board himself, and his two men for twenty pound a year, and in this I speak much with the most; for my self was offered eight yeares since, by Captain 
Matthewes,
 Captain 
Pierce,
 and di∣vers others, to board all my Family at five pound a head, and to have better entertainment then any Gentleman in 
England
 for thirty pound a year, and now diet is much cheaper, and of this let no man doubt, since in the North of 
England, Wales,
 the Isle of 
Man,
 and in the West he may diet at the same rate, and cheap∣er the reason is, where money and Trade is not quicke, diet is cheap, so that if he resolve this course, which is far the best, then much of the abovesaid charge might be saved, insomuch as he might carry over another servant for the same charge, and being thus fitted, I shall advise him, to fall upon some piece of the Planters ground, that is cleared, and left by the Planter, because hee hath wrought it out of heart with Tobacco, and is to him of no use, yet the best for this Designe, of which grounds, there are great quantities, the Planter will give him leave for nothing, or for a very inconsiderable matter, and when his seed is in the ground, then he shall have good time to look out where to fix, and after he hath taken his first years crop, then to remove to that place he intends to settle, where he shall have one hundred, and fifty Acres, for ever; that is to say, fifty Acres for each man he transports; and his Crop by Gods blessing, will then inable him to build a pretty house, and treble his strength in Servants; and next yeare a Gentleman.



Let not our young Planter fear that he shall want a∣ny thing for being new come over, and uningaged in the Countrey, his credit for any thing he shall want, will be as good as the best mans in the Coun∣trey, but let him not be bold with it, lest he forget his errand, and loiter out his time in good fellowship, then which, there can be nothing more dangerous, since he is but now entring into his preferment: This Caveat is good, for it hath lost many a man.


And now having fitted him to his work, I will advise him in it.


He shall plough but twenty three Acres, twenty whereof he shall sowe with Wheat, and three with Flax, for which work I will allow him eight weekes with two hands, which may with much ease be done, the ground being light: but if the 
Dutch
 plough∣ing comes in use, as I doubt not but this yeare it will, then one man doth the work of ploughing, and the two spare hands shall fall upon the inclosing the ground that is a ploughing, and after the seed is in the ground, the third hand falls in, there being nothing else to do till Harvest; long before which, I doubt not, but the enclosing 23 Acres will be done, when they may fall to building their new house, or preparing of ground against the next year by inclosing.


The Harvest being come, the Flax is first to be reap∣ed, which I should have told you before, must not be sowne till 
May,
 for which worke and the beating out the seed, I allow three weeks; then comes the twenty Acres of Corne to be reaped, for which I allow three weeks; there needs no trouble of carting till it be thresh∣ed, for it shalbe threshed or trodden out with Oxen in the Field; I shall allow six dayes in worke for watering of the Flax; for the threshing of the Corne I allow ten weekes, but if it be trod or rubbed out as in the Islands with Oxen, a fortnight and lesse will doe it; I allow


twenty five weekes for dressing nine hundred stone of Flax, in which a man shall dresse but two stone a day, in this worke the year is compleatly spent; in 
England
 I know it would be done in two thirds of the time, but I had rather value it as I doe, that every man may be sa∣tisfied of the truth of the proposition.


Now, notwithstanding what is so confidently report∣ed of the great increase of this Country, of which truth I am satisfied, I shall onely esteeme it equall with the best of our 
English
 ground; and then five quarters from an Acre of Wheat, and three hundred stone at 4 li. to the stone of Flax, and sixteene bushells of Flax-seed from an Acre shall well content me; if there be more; it will discourage no man, and it is well known, we have some ground in 
England,
 that beares neere six quarters of Wheat, on an Acre: and divers of the Flax-masters about 
London
 have confest the Proposition for Flax, to be true. Now let us turne our Commodity into money, and see if our labour be not sweetly recom∣pensed.






 


li.


s.


d.






The 20 Acres produceth me at 5 quar∣ters an Acre, 100 quarters, which I value but at 2. s. 6. d. 
per
 bushell, which is 20. s. 
per
 quarter, and is in 
toto


100


00


00






The 3 Acres of Flax at 300 stone 
per
 Acre is 900 stone, which I value at 1. s. 4. d. 
per
 stone, and is


60


00


00






48 Bushells of Flax-seed at 5. s. 
per
 bush∣ell.


012


00


00






By which it is plaine, selling of the Commoditie in the Countrey, his yeares labour produceth


172


00


00







What a strange Adventure that man runnes, that puts himself in Print, he is sure to be judged with∣out hearing. Pray Gentlemen, speak out: but not altogether; and I shall endeavour your satisfaction: you object, that the Corne, lying so long in the field, before threshing, must be spoiled, or in great danger; if you will enquire of the honest Gentry of that Countrey; they will tell you the weather at that time is not inconstant, however, with little labour, it might be stackt safe; your second is, who shall buy it?


Truly Sir, since it is for the Advantage of the work, I will admit your objection, and so am driven to seeke a Market, and for want of other Shipping, am forced to send it for 
England,
 which in the common opini∣on, will be sending Sugar to 
Barbado's.


But we are bound to see it, and now






I lade 100 quarters of Wheat shot in Hold, which is 20 Tunnes, and pay 3. l. 
per
 Tunne fraught, which is


60


00


00






Nine hundred stone of Flax, for which I allow three Tunne, at 4. l. 
per
 Tunne, which is


12


00


00






The Flax-seed I keep in the Country, for that will sell there.


72


 


00






It is ten to one you have not lesse then 4. s. 6. d. a bushell for it in 
London
 which is 36. s. 
per
 quarter, and is in all


180


00


00






The 900 stone of Flax of 
Virginia,
 be∣ing far beyond other Flax in colour and strength, I doubt not but it may yield 22. d. 
per
 stone.


082


10


00






the totall is


262


10


00






Fraught deducted


72


00


00






the ramainder is


190


10


00








The price I would have taken in 
Virginia
 for the Wheat and Flax was,


160


00


00






Cleared by this bad Market to petty charges and profit over and above the mony I would have sold it for in 
Virginia,


030


10


00






And I am confident a worse Market cannot be had, I hope having proposed every thing we buy at the high∣est rate, and every thing we sell at the lowest rate, and in the worst Market; you will be satisfied of the reality of the proposition, and that it is a sure Foundation for a greater building.


I see you have something else, pray what is it? you would know what the poore Planter shall doe to supply him till the returne of his Adventure, and then what shall become of him if his Adventure miscarrie?


Truly you have give me that advantage by your ob∣jecting of dangers, that I shall insure the Adventure and the new Planter at the end of the two first yeares, shall insure him selfe to be in a better condition then the Gentleman that in 
England
 hath 200. li. 
per annum,
 and shall every yeare double his estate at the least, and this with much ease.


Wherefore I must tell you that our Planters credit is strong, either in the Countrey with the Planters, or with the Merchants, for so much if not more then his commoditie is worth; his old stock is still the same, and therefore wants nothing, but to pay for his and his mans diet and their wages for the fore-going yeare, which is 30. l. yet I will allow him to spend the over∣plus above 100. li. which in the Country was 72. li. or in 
England
 will be more, & this 100. l. in goods he shal send by the last Shipping that comes for 
England,
 he needs not fear to have his Market forestall'd since his commoditie is so Staple, and his advantage will be, that hee may


send his letters of advice to his friends by the first Ships, that they may in 
England
 before hand know, what Ships the Adventure comes in, and cause the 100. l. Adventure to be insured, which hath been usually done for 50. s. and the Adventure being arrived in 
England,
 I propose it to be laid out for the Planters good in manner following.


50. li. for the passage and cloathing of six men, which it will plentifully doe, since they will need nothing but cloathes and to pay their passages.


06. li. In two Guns, powder and shot, Plough, Irons, and Iron-tooles, as he shall appoint.


30. li to be invested in Commodities as he shall di∣rect to buy more Cattle in the Countrey.


02. li. 10. s. paid for the Premio of the first ensu∣rance.


11. li allowed for petty charge, and content his friends that shall doe his buisines.


02. li. 10. s. to ensure the Adventure to 
Virginia.
 100—00


And now is our Planter secure of his estate, and when the Adventure comes over, he is nine men strong, and by their reasonable endeavours may against the next return, in the follwing year by the rule aforesaid, have an estate of above 600. li. 00. s. besides his stock, which shews him he is in a happy condition.


And to encourage the new Flanter, let him consider with himselfe that it is but two or three yeares care, to bring him to this safe harbour, and what paines and la∣bour is taken by the poore Farmer in 
England,
 getting his bread with the sweat of his browes, and after eating it with care and sorrow, & all this but to pay his Land-Lord's Rent, and to procure some small subssistance; whereas here is no Rent to pay, and yet the Land twice as good as the best in 
England,
 food plenty, cost nothing but taking, which is done with much ease.



Rice, and Rape-seed are farre richer Commodities, and done all with the same or lesser care and labour, these grow best upon the richest ground, and therefore most fit for the Countrey, the increase and profit much greater then those I have taken to illustrate the Propo∣sition by, for my desire was, to examine the meanest of the said Staples; and let the best alone to help them∣selves.


If all this will not make 
Thomas
 a Believer, let him then enquire of the principallest straights and 
Spanish
 Merchants, walking the 
Exchange,
 and they shall tell him, that when they can be satisfied that there is ei∣ther Corne, Rice, Hemp, or Flax to be had, there shall be no want of ships, and ready money paid for it, at the rate that I propose, they will tell him a hundred pound hath been usually assured from 
Virginia
 for 50s.


Thus having brought the Planter to happinesse in this life, I shall with some few admonitions shake hands and leave him to the God of mercies prote∣ction.


First, that God be by him and his Family truly ser∣ved, and before and after work his blessing be duly implored.


Secondly, I shall advise him that he let not his mind rise with his riches, for that is the ready way to forget that God that gave them, and to make them like the sweetest sinnes that delight the body, but poyson the soul.


Thirdly, That he halt not between this and a∣ny other designe, let it appeare never so beautifull, but fall close to this, till he hath put himselfe past danger.


Fourthly, that he make no use of his Credit, but for absolute necessity.


For other advise, he shall find them under the title of advise in the end of the book.



And now let me turn back, and look upon my poore Spirited Countreymen in 
England,
 and examine first the meanest, that is, the poore ploughman, day-labourer, and poore Artificer, and I shall find them labouring, and sweating all dayes of their lives; some for fourteen pence, others for sixteen, eighten, twenty pence, or two Shillings a day; which is the highest of wages to such kind of people, and the most of them to end their dayes in sorrow, not having purchased so much by their lives labour, as will scaace preserve them in their old dayes from beggery: where by adventuring themselves, in a foure, or five weekes voyage (at most) over the Seas; which is nothing; they may with lesse labour, and care, in foure or five yeares see themselves in a condition never again to want; but to live like Gentlemen, and that by their owne Trades they have been bred in, for where a great Merchant-like Trade is driven, as will be suddenly in this place; all Artifi∣cers and handicraft labour is dear, which will appeare more plain, if we here in 
England,
 consider the diffe∣rence, betweene the North parts, where you may have a labourer for foure, five, or six pence the day, and 
London
 where we pay twelve, fourteen, or sixteen pence the day, the reason is because of the great Trade that's driven at 
London
 by Merchants, and the little or Trade in the North.


Next I shall look upon the poore Yeo∣man, 
 with ten, fifteen, or twenty pound 
per annum
 land, or the value thereof in his purse; which with continuall care helps him to eat bread; yet this Estate weigh∣ed by the aforesaid Scale, will truly tell him, that being transported to this place he is a Gentleman of three hundred pound a yeare at least.



Then come I sadly to look upon the poore Gen∣tleman of fiftie, sixtie, or a hundred pound 
per an∣num,
 who was happily the youngest Sonne of some Gentleman, of a great Estate, which was settled upon the eldest son and this to keep up the Familie, one∣ly that the younger Children might be quiet, there is some superfluities thereof, thrown amongst them, which together with their Gentility, and the expe∣ctation of an elder Brothers death, holds them up; till Children and Charge sucks them under miserie: Let these men timely bring their estates to this ballance, and they shall make themselves Elder Brothers.


The Merchant is ready for receiving the Com∣modity, 
 and to performe his part; but that is to be done without the Scale: yet I must joyne him with the Adventurer; for which I know in time he will give me thankes: and my Advice shall be to him, and the Adventurer to bring foure or five hundred pound to the Scale, and they will finde it profitable without danger: for the Govern∣ment will make the Scale go true.


The man of money too, if his heart will serve him, may weigh two or three hundred pound at this Scale, and he will finde it in two yeares, more then ballance the yearly use of foure or five thousand pound, and the Government for his secu∣rity, will assure him, that his money is placed secure.


And lastly, I propose to the Gentlemen or Elder Brothers, (who have had or now have great Estates) that it is good policy to have two strings to their bow, for it hath been a thing taking very much with wise men not to adventure all their estates upon one title, nor in any one County, and their wisdome never appeared so much as in these distracted times; for when the enemy had possession of their estates, in one County they have


happily been free in another which was enough to sup∣port 
 them in the storm during the War, but how mise∣rable are the vanquished, it had been happy for them, had their estates been divided in two or three King∣domes, for there is many a gallant Gentleman, who before these Warres, had some one, others two, and some three thousand pounds 
per annum;
 and now not able to feed their Families: and others living upon their estates have had their bread taken from them to feed taxes, and in the best condition have been content, to receive the ordinary Revenue of their estates, and being full of Children, have beene glad to set downe under; that their Estates mihgt grow over them, and if they shall bring part of their Estates to this Scale, they shall not onely find a safe harbour to retire to, in the worst of the storme; but till then, that little part will be growing, and in a short time swell bigger then the bulk of all the rest.








SECT. V.


THe next thing that I am in order to handle is, that untill Commodities bee raised, for a constant Trade of Shipping, how Passengers may be transport∣ed with the best convenience, both for health, and Charge.


And first I will tell you of the ordinary way, with the Conveniences, and inconveniences, both for health, and Charge.


The ordinary time of going, is about 
September,
 or 
October,
 which times Ships have made choice of, in respect the Crop of Tobacco will be ready for their homeward fraught, which is alwayes in, or about 
December,
 and so they lade, and returne in 
Februa∣ry, March,
 or 
Aprill.






The Charge.






 


li.


s.


d.






The Servants are taken up by such men as we here call 
Spirits,
 and by them put into Cookes houses about Saint 
Katherines,
 where being once entred, are kept as Prisoners untill a Master fetches them off; and they lye at charges in these places a moneth or more, before they are taken away. when the Ship is ready, the 
Spirits
 charges and the Cooke for dieting paid, they are Shipped, and this charge is commonly


03


00


00






The Passage Money for a man is


05


10


00






Head Money to the Chyrurgion


00


02


06






So that a Servant stands them com∣monly in


08


12


06






They pay for a Tun of goods fraught


03


00


00










Health.


The Ships taking of men by the Pole is extreame Unhealthy, for by this means to make the greater fraught they take so many, that their Ship is pestured, and sub∣ject to diseases, which hath happened very often.


And they being onely bound to land the Passengers in 
Virginia
 at large, or else in some particular River; they take no further care, but at the place where they them∣selves design their Ships to go, they set their Passengers on land, which many times falls out to be distant from the Plantations, to which the most of the Passengers are bound some thirty, forty, or fifty miles and more, and some of the Passengers being sickly at their landing, per∣ish before they arrive at their home. And the latter the Ships come to 
Virginia
 the worse, for then they are set a


shore in the very strength of Winter, which is about the last of 
December,
 and being weake are spoiled with cold, whereas if they had been set down at their Plantations, they would soone recover their healths.


The best and cheapest way for those that intend to go at these time, which for the reasons aforesaid are the worst, as also being longest, in that they go above 200 leagues out of the way, hauling over to the 
Azoras
 or Westerne Islands, for the advantage of the wind.


Let them upon the 
Exchange
 inquire what Passengers are going, and there make a consortship of those who live nearest together in the Countrey, and having made themselves up a considerable number of thirty or forty, let them then bind the Master to set them downe with his Ship, at or so neere that particular place they designe to go to, as the Ship can come.


But the better way will be, if they can make up so many Passengers a will give a Ship a fraught, then to hire a Ship amongst themselves, to set them downe at their place in 
Virginia,
 which will make the Planters stock go further by a third part, then it would doe by transporting himself as aforesaid; which I demonstrate in manner following.


Suppose I had 120 Passengers, and 100 tuns of goods.


I look out for a Ship of 150 Tuns, which will doe it very well, and hire her either by the Month or the Voy∣age, which I shall find best cheap; this Ship I can have for 100. li. a Month, but in respect they will not let her for a lesse time then five or six Months, and I having no commoditie as yet to relade her home, I will therefore agree for the Voyage outward, and after I am set down, let him make his best advantage of any imployment he shall meet with, and to performe this service I can have him for 300. l. at the most, the Owners victualling their owne Company, and finding all things perteining to the Ship; but you may observe, if you will take upon you a



Flemish
 bottome, she will goe cheaper, which in case a Fleet of Ships went together, I would do.


Now for that I have observed salt meates which is the Sea diet, doth not so well agree with Land-men, and besides that manner of victualling is very deare, I shall for the Passengers propose a better and more pleasant diet & far cheaper which will not stand you in at above three fourths of the usuall charge.


And first I propose a meat with which the 
Dutch
 victuall very much, and call it Gruts, which like Oate∣meale thickens extreamly in boyling, and being buttered is a very pleasing and satisfying dish, which I have ex∣perienced in 
Dutch
 Ships, or otherwise you may have Rice and a little Spice, with Butter or Bag-Puddings with Plumbs, with a little Flesh, Butter, Cheese, and Fish, which well proportioned will both please and fill the Passenger; in diet if the mind be satisfie, the stom∣acke soone agrees.


And after this rate let us examine the Accompt.






Victuall for 120 men for two Months at 16. s. a man 
per
 Moneth is


192


00


00






For freight of the Ship


300


00


00






So that the charge of transporting 120 men and 100 Tunnes of goods is


492


00


00






The former way it will cost you 
viz.
 5. li. 10. s. 
per
 man for 120. men is


660


00


00






For freight of 100 Tunnes of goods at 3. l. 
per
 Tunne is


300


00


00






The totall of the charge of 120 men and 100 Tnuns of goods by this course is


960


00


00






By which it is plaine you may carry your men and goods, at a very little more then half the charge that you give the other way.


And I shall desire you to consider what an advantage 'tis to the poore Planter, to have his stock made twice as good as 'twas.



All this considered, let it justifie the Scale, in the charge of Passage.


The next way is upon New 
Englands
 Ships, which go and come almost all the yeare, but this will be af∣ter the old Charge, except you take her wholly to Freight, or have a very considerable number toward the same, the difference, which is much will be, you may take your own time to go over.


But within one year or two, I doubt not, but the Sta∣ples aforesaid, will be there in such quantities, men shall passe all the year long at the forementioned easie rate.


But the last, and best way, will be in the Moneths of 
February March, April,
 by our Shipping that go to 
New-Found-Land,
 those that go first, go to Fish: the last go to take in that fish, all these Ships go light to 
New-Found-Land,
 except some of the Fishers, who lade salt for the Fisherie.


And I am confident, you may have one of those Ships, (and they are commonly of the best, and most warlike Ships of Merchants) of 300 Tunnes for 400 l., and one of these will carry handsomly 200 Passengers and 200 Tunnes of goods; and let us see our condi∣tion now.






The diet of the 200 Passengers for the time in manner afore∣with fresh meat is


320


00


00






The Fraught of the ship is,


400


00


00






The totall Charge of transport∣ing 200 Passengers, and 250 Tunnes of goods is,


720


00


00






Should you carry them by the old course, the Passage of 200 men at 5. li. 10. s. 
per
 man is


1100


00


00






The Fraught of 200 Tunnes of goods, at 3 l. 
per
 Tunne is


600


00


00






The charge in the old way of 200 men, and 200 Tunne of goods is


1700


00


00







By which it is plain all parties very well satisfied, the Planter is not at much above one third part of the usu∣all charge.


Pray marke it, that whereas our Planter by the old way could carry but five men, he may by this carry thirteene.


Besides which it is extreamly to be considered that the Freight being so cheap, there may be store of good horses carried over in a short time; there being as yet in the Countrey, not much above 250 horses and Mares, and that would quickly make them do, what is not fitting every man should know


Besides that, the Passage is so cheap, it is exceding 
 advantagious; especially, if you get away in 
March,
 your Passage will be pleasant, both for fair weather, and shortnesse, since now you go not out of your way to the 
Azores
 as in the Winter voyage: But you go the straight way: for these two wayes differ just as the Bow and string, and your voyage, is sometime under a Moneth, seldome above: for in this time of the year the winds hang Easterly from our Coast, which follows you all the way; nor is this all: for you shall come into the Countrey, the pleasantest time of all the yeare, when being in the splendour of her beauty, shee'll ra∣vish you with delight for welcome.


Nor are you come at this time to pleasure without profit, but if the pleasures will let you retire to your businesse, you may fall presently into the ground and before 
August
 have a Crop of Flax, Rice, Corne, Beanes, and Pease.


Having now brought the Gentlemen and Yeomen into the Countrey, Ile be their Harbinger, and provide them good quarters till they shall be setled.


I know it is a common opinion received, that such as go to 
Virginia,
 come to a wildernesse, and they must lie in the fields, till they can build them a house, such


false rumours hath lockt up this paradice of the earth from many a deserving man, but the truth is let thy titles be what they will, thou art but a Gentleman, and very many such thou shalt find there, who to prevent thy asking will freely and with all sweet respects invite thee to be their Guest, and compt themselves sufficiently re∣warded that you'le entertaine their Motion; men of lower condition shall find the like with as heartie wel∣come to their Beefe, Bacon, and Bag-pudding, as ever 
Tom
 gave 
Dick,
 or 
Winifred
 gave 
Parnell
 in our Coun∣trie; and being thus fitted they will willingly leave you their ground for a crop, or you may looke out to seate your selfe upon your owne, which so soone as you have made choice of, will by the Court be confirmed to you and your Heires for ever.


I should have fitted you with Servants, before your comming into the Countrey, but since it is onely our fancies have beene there to take a view against our per∣sons come, wee'le not goe without Servants.


And of Servants the best are best cheape.


Therefore Ile not advice the Spiriting way, which sends Drones to the Hive, in stead of Bees, but that you take stout Labourers and good Worke-men, giving them honest wages from 3. li. to 10. li. a yeare accord∣ing to the quallity of the men, for if we in 
England
 can pay 2. or 300. li. 
per annum
 rent for a Farme, and give great wages, we may much better give wages where our ground is twice as good, and no rent paid.


Besides it keepes a Servant in heart, and makes him at all times willing to put forth his strength in that Masters service, that gives him meanes to thrive, and taking this course you may pick and chuse your Ser∣vants.


Onely this I must advise, that you agree with your Servant for foure yeares at least, and considering that you pay his passage, and are at other charges with him,


let the charge be proportioned upon the foure or more yeares wages that he is to serve you, and so deduct it every yeare.


And for Servants encouragement, they shall finde themselves at the very first in the condition of Journy∣men for foure or five yeares, and before seven yeares end he shall have a faire estate.


I will in the first place helpe the weakest to avoid the trouble of the strongest, whom I suppose may have three pound the first yeare, and presuming for that he went well cloathed out of 
England,
 it will be all his owne at the yeares end, with this three pound Ile buy him a Haifer, and send twenty shillings of it into 
England
 in some commoditie of the Countrey, as to say three or foure flitches of Bacon or the like, which he may well doe with twenty shillings and more; and for that the Bacon of 
Virginia
 surpasseth our 
Eng∣lish,
 which I have often experimented here in 
England,
 I doubt not but at the least (for I love to value all things of this nature at the least) it will yeeld him eight groates a stone, and supposing his foure flitches way but twenty stone which they'le doe (and ten more) he hath here in 
England
 for his Bacon two pound three shillings foure pence, and this lade out in Pins, Laces, & Combes, for the Maids shall in 
Virginia
 be double, and now his Cow hath Caved, and he hath five pound in his purse, besides his yeares wages to receive, which tells him he hath now served his Master two yeares.


And following this course if I find him at the end of his time with lesse then sixty pound in his purse, besides his Stock of Cattle, I shall say he hath either been an extraordinary ill Husband or a negligent simple Fellow which if he have not.


Let him bring his 60. li. to the aforesaid Ballance and then (if he looke up to God) he may see himselfe fit to wooe a good mans Daughter.



Besides this there are better things, for men will plant very little Tobacco, and at leisure time he may without any prejudice to his Master, plant 50. li. in Tobacco a yeare, which as the quantitie faules will rise in price, and may be worth to him 2. s. 6. d. 
per
 li. I have knowne it sold at 5. s. and 3. s. 6. d. the worst, so that here is 6. li. 5. s. gotten every year, and the imployment of this mony will rise to a good fain in two or three returnes.


Nor is this all, for he will find in the end of this Book, I shall advise his Master to give him something else.


Truly I would say something to Maid-Servants, but they are impatient and will not take advice but from a Husband, for if they come of an honest stock and have a good repuce, they may pick and chuse their Husbands out of the better sort of people, I have sent over ma∣ny, but never could keepe one at my Plantation three Moneths, except a poore silly Wench, made for a Foile to set of beautie, and yet a proper young Fellow must needs have her, and being but new come out of his time and not strong enough to pay the charges I was at in cloathing and transporting her, was content to serve me a twelve Moneth for a Wife.


To conclude this, whereas in 
England
 many Daugh∣ters makes the Fathers purse leane, the Sonnes here make the leane pursgs, wherefore to avoid this danger, I shall advise that man that's full of Children to keepe his Sonnes in 
England,
 and send his Daughters to 
Vir∣ginia,
 by which meanes he shall not give but receive portions for all his Chlidren.








SECT. VI.


The next in order is, how be Gods assistance the
 Indians 
may be reelaimede wherein I shall first bigin with love.


ANd when I consider this way hath been attempt∣ed but the successe: for by it divers honest men


have been lost, I shall let love alone to worke with Christians, for with 
Indians
 it cannot, since there must be an acquaintance to procure familiaritie upon which trust and confidence is reposed, which is the common foundation of love, but the 
Indians
 being a wild people and of a subtill and treacherous nature, as sad experience tell us we must not acquaint our selves with them to trust.


Next I will consider force and that hath bin fatall to the 
Indians,
 there having beene great numbers of them slaine.


And this will not doe till they be wholy vanquished, which is a worke (although a small number of 
English
 may, and can deale with great numbers of 
(Indians
 not, to be effected, but with a vast expence both of money and time, in respect of the largenesse of the Conti∣nent, wherein the Countrey is, being much bigger then many 
Englands, Scotlands
 and 
Irelands
 together.


Wherefore and for that this course agrees not with the profession of Christianity, I shall not think of it.


I will therefore consider of a third way, in which (not leaving our dependance upon God for his assistance) I shall look upon nature.


And I will examine the ordinary course of taming wild and fierce beasts, these differing from them in no∣thing, but that they are endued with naturall reason.


It must be observed, the more you thwart nature, the fiercer you make it: And therefore we are first to study, what they are most enclined to: and having found it, then to fit them with those things they naturally are delighted in, and so by degrees you take from them all feare; which is the principall abstacle, and at last reclaime them: this is enough for the Generall.


Now to come to our wilde people, who being en∣dued with naturall reason, I doubt not, but they may more easily reelamed.



First, therefore I will inquire what most predommi∣nates in nature, and I find ambition to be to the princ∣pall marke that nature aymes at.


For all men are naturally ambitious either of know∣ledge, honour, or of wealth, to attaine which the great∣est dangers harshest studies and the hardest labours are made pleasures.


Therefore we must make use of ambition being the universall net of nature to take these men.


Now let us looke what it is that drawes us to this net and we shall find it to be a sence of our own naked∣nesse, and it was the case of 
Adam
 and 
Evah
 our first Parents, wherefore I shall say, that if the Devill could by this meanes worke upon them, to so bad an end, God will assistus by the same meanes (since it is to a better end) to work upon these it being to his glory.


Now in order to the reclaming of these men we must consider.


First, that they are ignorantly naked in the know∣ledge of all things, but what they are prompt to by na∣ture for selfe preservation.


Secondly, that the Countrey affording plenty of pro∣visions to sustaine nature, they take little care for the future.


Thirdly, that being thus provided, they seeke not nor care for comerce.


Fourthly, that for the reasons aforesaid they are in∣dependent upon any other people, and care not to con∣verce with any but themselves.


Wherefore if ever they be reclaimed it must be.


First, by making them sensible of their nakednesse.


Secondly, By taking them off from their confidence upon nature, whereby they may take care for the fu∣ture.


Thirdly, that they may desire comerce.


Fourthly, that they may be brought to depend.



And for that they cannot be talkt into a sight of themselves, I shall propose that we gently steal through their nature, till we can come to pull off the scale from their eyes, that they may see their owne nakednesse; which must be done in manner following.


Either by making them ambitious of Honour, or by making them ambitious of Riches.


In the first we must take their Werowances or great men: they already being at that lock of being one better then another.


In the second, let us not doubt but we shall take them all, for there is but a very few men in the World either Christian or Heathan, that are not taken with it.


First, I shall advise that slight Jewells be made at the publique charge of thirty or forty shillings price, and one better then the rest, of some such toyes as they shall most affect, which fitted with Ribands to weare about their necks or their heads, as their custome a∣mongst them is; shalbe sent from the Governour of the Plantation in his own, and also in the name of the People and the Governour to distinguish them by some pretty titles, which should be alwaies after observed; as also to make some of them favourites, and to sollicite their preferment with their King, & this by degrees will kindle the fire of Ambition, which once in a flame must be fed, and then is the time to worke.


For the second I shall advise, that their nature be observed what way it most poynts at, and then fit them with what they most desire, and if by degrees you can bring some of them to weare slight loose Garments in Summer, or to keep them warme in the Winter; which if you can effect, the worke is halfe done, and this I am confident is very easie: for a little to the North∣ward of the place I write of, they are fallen into a way of cloathing themselves without course 
Welch
 cloath of


Blew and Red colours, and the better sort of the 
In∣dians
 in this place do weare Coats of Skinnes, with the Furre side next to their bodyes in the Winter, and the Skin side in the Summer: and that you may perceive them already comming, they have for the most part al∣tered their old Fashion, of making their Coats, and now in imitation, make them like 
English
 Cloakes; but this must be at the publick charge, they having few valuable Commodities to purchase them, yet the charge will not be great, for I shall advise that this be not practised up∣on the generallity, but upon some one King and his People that are most tractable, and of the nearest neig∣bourhood, and they are commonly about two hundred or two hundred and fifty 
Indians,
 and five or six shil∣lings a man will do it; besides, there will be something to retribute the charge, 
viz.
 Beaver, Otter, and other Skinnes, 
Indian
 Corne, Beanes, and Pease, with other things, so that it is possible the charge may be defrayed, and having won these, you need not fear the comming in of the rest.


The poore 
Indian
 being cloathed, his sight is cleared, he sees himselfe naked, and you'le finde him in the snare.


For now they begin to vye who is the better man, which must be determined by their Cloathes, and to purchase them, they'le be at their wits end, since they have nothing valuable, and if you draw the net wisely they are sure.


But it must be considered, that although their minds be fetter'd, yet their nature is not tamd, wherefore you must thinke of proposing some thing to them, that may inable them to be Masters of Cloathes, which must in no wayes trench upon their liberties.


Therefore in the first place you may propose easie workes, and draw them on by degrees, and you shall finde, that for themselves they will worke, but not for you.



You shall likewise propose to their King, that if hee'l send thirty or forty men to helpe in your Harvest, hee shall have a Cloake, or Breeches and Doublet, or the like, and his men should have every one some∣thing.


Or otherwise, set them to peeling of Hempe, or brak∣ing of Flax in Winter, where they should for the pre∣sent, to incourage them, have more then they earned, and then bring them to drive the Plough, or thresh Corne, or the like, but in no wise let them continue at any one worke to a dislike, but play with them, you still fitting varietie of workes to their fancies; thus by degrees (God assisting) you shall make them con∣quer themselves: by this meanes in two or three yeares you will draw them to a confidence in you, to trust their Children to be brought up by you, and they'l learne 
English,
 which will be a good step to bring them to Christianitie. Having brought them thus farre, you need not be directed how to leade them further, your owne reason and profit will doe it; never feare their fal∣ling back, for their owne ends shall keepe them to you, because their minds will prompt them to pride, and they'l cover to be finer then their fellowes.


And now have you opened their eyes, made them care for the future, drawn them to commerce, and made them depend.


And in the end, by Gods mercy to them, make them good Christians.


Thus have I done with the 
Indians:
 onely this take notice of, I do not advise that at any hand you suffer them to come into your house, or any further then your field or out-working houses, neither admit more of them to come then you can master, and that they alwayes come without their armes, untill you see them so sensible of their poverty, that they come necesi∣tated to worke.








SECT. VII.


I Am now to advise the Adventurer, Planter, and Ser∣vant, of such things as are proper to them.


Having before advised of the mischiefe of procuring of Servants, and of the convenience and inconvenience of the usuall passage to 
Virginia,
 and how to prevent the inconveniency, as also of a better way of passage, and like wise to dispose of your selfe in the Countrey when you come first there, and what commodities to fall presently upon, I shall now advise.




First to the Adventurer.


First, that whatsoever his designe be, not to depend upon the life of any one man for the perfecting the worke, but to send two at the least of equall abilitie, and one to succeed the other in case of death.


Secondly, that for whatsoever belongeth to Art, that it be here made in 
England,
 least when the worke comes over, none be found there able to do it, and so it pe∣rish, or if there be any principall in it, that may be indan∣gered to be lost or broken, that he send two of the same for feare of falling.


Thirdly, that if there be Parteners in the busines, they so Article that the fayler to supply his part, shall for∣feit it to the rest.


Lastly, whatsoever the designe be, yet send over a Plough or two, for this if their designe faile, or untill the designe be perfected, will turne to accompt, and make them great gainers.






Secondly to the Planter.


First, that they take the Planters leave where for the present they shall reside, and doe not neglect the


opportunitie of falling into the ground with the Plough so soone as the seasons come.


Secondly, that when the Corne is in the ground, then 
 is the time to looke out for the place, they shall after settle themselves upon, in which they must take care not to settle on the places neere the ebbing and flow∣ing of the salt water, for they are there, as here in 
Eng∣land
 all aguish, next that they make choice of some place neere a navigable River, where they may have the conveniency of fresh Marshes, Meadows, and Fish, and if they can where some pleasant rising Hills be, but at no rate doe not strugle too farre from Neighbours, for that's disconsolate.


Thirdly, let them build their Houses of Brick, or o∣therwise with Timber, let it be done with substantiall 
 compleat lengths (since they have Timber enough) which will save halfe charges in Carpenters worke, line it on the inside thick with Loame, and cover it with Lime, for that will make it warme in Winter, make your modell or plate-forme such that when your family shall increase you may adde to your buildings without defacing or inconveniencing any roomes.


Fourthly, examine the ground and sowe proper seed in the proper parts, sowe not Wheat in the richest, for 
 that will be too rich, and will not turne to accompt, but in your richest sowe Rape, Rice, or Flax-seed, and two or three crops of this, will bring the ground to beare Wheat your life after.


In 
England
 chuse good Servants, able Worke-men; and give them good wages, fear not the wages: of every 
 ten Servants let foure be Boyes, and ever after send for good lusty Youths, for they will serve eight or nine yeares, whereas men will hardly be gotten to serve a∣bove four or five, and taking this course the Boyes wil be Men when the Mens times expire, and being trayned up in the service under good men, they will prove excel∣lent Servants.



Fifthly, That the servants may do their work with∣out trouble in over-seeing, or without fretting or vex∣ing their Masters patience, I shall advise such a 
 way, as they may worke for themselves, and their Ma∣sters together for be well assured, the best of them; will work more to get themselves a Shilling, then to get you ten, and that they may with much content, and profit to themselves, make their Servants shew the best of their abilities, it were good to consider what or how much of any worke to be done by a Servant in a day would be satisfactory, and then that being done, he should have an allowance for what he should do more. As for Example; two stone, or two stone and a half of Flax to be drest in a day is indifferent, I would then give him foure pence a stone, for what he should do more: this will extreamly incourage the Servant, and very good use may be made of it, or let him have the remainder of the day to plant a little Tobacco for himselfe, or for any other thing; I have tried all wayes, but never found the like.


Sixthly, That for such Servants as are above the age of twenty yeares, who can deserve wages in 
England,
 give them wages in manner following, 
viz.
 three pound the first yeare, and so increase the wages twenty shil∣ings a year to the end of their time.


Seventhly, and for youths, when they shall attain to the age of twenty one years, to give wages, and in∣creasing to the end of their time, in manner aforesaid.


Eighthly, and to undertake to give the Servants. 30 actes of land, at the end of their time, to them and their heirs for ever: which land shall be given the Master, by the Court, for them.


Ninthly, That they agree with Artificers for shares.


Tenthly, that they enquire after all advantagious Commodities that are produced from the Earth, and learn how to bring them to perfection.


Eleventhly, that they enquire after all manner of


slight Engines, that will save hand-labour, there being nothing dear in the Countrey but labour.


Twelfthly, and for that the Masters will be at charge of transporting and cloathing them; let that charge be deducted proportionably every year out of their wages.


Thirteenthly, they must be carefull to Covenant with their Servants, to forfeit for every dayes work they shall neglect, double the value of their dayes labour: but for neglect in harvest, ten times the value.


Fourteenthly, the difference that may arise between the Master and Servant, upon their Covenants, to be de∣termined by the Superintendents.


Lastly, They must shew their Servants Indentures to the Court, and then they shall have 50 Acres of land for every servant setled upon them, and their heirs for ever, which fifty Acres, is over and above what the Servants shall have.






For Servants.


First, they to Covenant with their Masters, not to plant above two hundred weight of Tobacco 
per an∣num:
 whereas heretofore a Servant planted 1500.


Secondly, this will take off all mens depending on Tobacco, which hath been the fatall commodity of that Countrey, and Masters will find a better way to employ their Servants.


Thirdly, that they looke their Masters Covenant, to give them thirty. Acres of land, and pay them the wages they shall agree for in money, or the Commo∣dity of the Countrey, money worth.


Fourthly, let the Servant agree with his Master upon the sum laid our for him before his transportation, that he be not abused therein when he contes into the Coun∣trey, and let the same be set down in the Indentures.


Fifthly, this carefully observed, with the rules be∣fore prescribed in this book, will assure the Servant, that at the end of his time, he shall be in a flourish∣ing condition, never more to serve any man.



A single man that can but pay his passage, may have ten pound a yeare for his service, and be found meat and drink.


Lastly, if any Gentlemen or others with their Fa∣milies, and also Artificers in any Trade, Labourers or Servants shall be desirous to transport themselves for the bettering of their fortunes, either to this place, or any other of the 
English
 Plantations abroad, let them repair to the Authour, who for the love he bears his Countrey, will freely advise them how to dispose of themselves for their greatest advantage, which shall in∣able them to do much more with one hundred pounds then they could heretofore do for one hundred and fifty pound, of which benefit the Planter shall also have the Advantage, and Servants shall be upon sure termes knowing their work, and their conditions, and they shall see plainly that in a little time, they shall by Gods blessing, become men of good estates, he will also advise how they may transport themselves with the best safety in these times, from any danger of being taken.


And if any Gentlemen that shall not go themselves, but are desirous to adventure, he will direct them how they may best dispose thereof for their advantage, and that in eighteen Moneths they shall be reimbursed their principally money, and after shall, constantly receive much above fifty pound for every hundred pound they adventured at first, and owners of Ships shall have good imployment, for their Ships not letting them lie rotting by the Walls, as 
 now and heretofore they have done. The Authour is sensible that these offers are something large, yet let no man doubt of the truth thereof, the being inabled thereto by his deare bought experience, and all men may be satisfied, that it hath been rarely found, that any one particular good work hath been faln upon, but some one man hath


originally been the Authour, or the originall motion hath proceeded from one mans breast. Those rich Mines of the 
West Indies
 were first offered by one man to 
Henry
 the seventh: but he not having faith enough to believe, or not willing to venture a little money to be satisfied of the truth, refused it: and after, it was of∣fered by the same man to the then King of 
Spain,
 who hearkened to him; and all the world knowes, that from this one mans motion, the Kings of 
Spain
 have within this 150 yeares received from thence many thousand millions of pounds: besides, it hath extreamly in∣riched the Gentlemen, and Merchants of that Kingdom. Many of the like examples might be shew∣ed, but they are so generally known to all men, that Ile say no more, onely that there was some time spent, after the King of 
Spain
 had set footing in the 
West Indies,
 before he could come by travell to the Mynes; and these places the 
English
 have inhabited much more time then the King of 
Spains
 Subjects had done in the 
West Indies,
 before they discovered that Countries wealth. But God, that is the Au∣thour of all good things, hath not in all this time beene pleased to let any man looke further then Tobacco; and no man can say, but that he is now pleased freely to offer his blessings bestowed upon these Countries, in the riches thereof, to us, since all this time, there was never any man that had the heart to labour for the Generall good in this nature before.


Reader I cannot let thee goe till I have againe put thee in mind of my Epistle to thee, in which I discovered the great Obstructor of this Countries prosperitie; who I know being now againe alarm'd, will fiercely send his Spirits abroad with lyes and calumnies to abate the peo∣ples courage, since his Kingdom will be so much indan∣gered, by the through planting of this place with Chri∣stians;


and I am confident he shall no longer prevaile: for my Spirit would not let me rest, till I had by this, bid defiance to him and all his subtill practises.


Therefore be not led by any false reports, for thou shalt find me ready with all freenesse to give thee full satisfaction in the truths that any way concernes this Place, or is conteined in this Book; and this I freely offer to men of all conditions, whether Masters or Servants. You have my name in the Title Page, and you shall be directed to my Chamber in the Middle-Temple, either by M. 
Collinson,
 an Iron-monger in Cornehill, M. 
Pol∣lington
 a Haberdasher in Lumbard-Street, or M. 
Beadle.
 Stationer in Pleet-Street, next to the Middle-Temple Gate, or the Shops under the said Gate.














My time would not permit such care of the Presse, in Correcting, as was fitting; but since it is right in the mat∣ter, I shall desire the Reader to excuse the Printers slips in the manner.


Pag. 7.
 joyne Plants with Roots, and then read for Roots and Plants.


Pag. 40.
 the Summe of 
72 l.
 next under 
12 l.
 and 
60 l.
 is onely the totall of the Fraught, and not the value of a particular, as by the placing you may suppose it.


FINIS.











