(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A30001)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 29993)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1641-1700 ; 1791:6)
Marquis of Normanby =  John Sheffield, Duke of Buckingham.
Authorship of anonymous works in this collection from Wing.
Begins with the 1691 second edition of the Essay on poetry (Wing B5337); includes the Epistle to the right Honourable Charles Earl of Dorset and Middlesex, Lord Chamberlain by Charles Montagu, earl of Halifax (Wing H287); An epistle to Charles Montague Esq; on His Majesty's voyage to Holland by George Stepney (Wing S5467); An epistle to Monsieur Boileau by Edm. Arwaker, the younger (Wing A3907); A poem on the late promotion of several eminent persons in church and state by Nahum Tate (Wing T207); A poem occasion'd by the happy discovery of the horrid and barbarous conspiracy to assassinate his most Sacred Majesty, which is anonymous (Wing P2680). All of the above have separate dated title pages and register and all also issued separately. An ode in memory of her late Majesty Queen Mary by John Sheffield, Duke of Buckingham (Wing B5342); and On the late horrid conspiracy by George Stepney have caption titles and continuous register; they may not have been issued separately.
In verse.
Reproduction of the original in the Harvard University Library.
Divisio Poe∣matis.
Horatius.
Pro quavis Tragoedia.
Carmina pro∣priè dicta vel Cantilenae.
Summae artis cantilenam componere.
Elegi.
Panegyris Walleri Cro
Poema Den∣hamii equitis elegantissi∣mum,
Pindarica.
Couleius.
Lemma prae∣fixum Pi
Satyra
In Satyra verborum & numerorum ratio habenda.
Petronius.
Dr—nus celeberrimus Poeta Anglus, in Satyra faci∣le princeps.
Falsò suspe∣ctus, vulnera∣tus, & lauda∣tus ob Poema Satyricum cu∣jus revera auctor non fuit.
Remittit Ho∣ratius Deme∣trium Ti∣gellium ad Di∣scipularum Cathedras.
Dictum de apibus apud Virgilium.
De Solilo∣quiis: ut bre∣via, & rara sint
De Figuris & Metaphoris.

Ob
Resp.
Ironicé.
Precepta & exempla Dialogorum è

Qui nun∣quam risisse perhibetur, & inde cogno∣mentum ha∣buit.
Vetitum Stoicis flere.
De Fabula.
Non quae∣tendi sunt per∣fecti Chara∣cteres, Stoico∣rum in mo∣rem, qui nul∣lum omnino naevum sapien∣ti suo inessepa∣tiuntur.
De Scenis prae∣cipuis
De Lumini∣bus quae vo∣cantur, Orati∣onis.
De Actori∣bus formandis.
De Characte∣ribus novis ut ne Comoe∣diae veteris in morem unum quemvis de∣fignent.
Pro quovis inepto.

Miles,
Modus dicte∣riis adhiben∣dus.
Imago ridicu∣la Tragoediae recentioris.
Object.
Re
Poema Epi∣
Homerum & Virgilium.
Criticus Gal∣licus celeberri∣mus.
Coulcius.
Miltonus.
Tasso.
Spencerus.
Songs.
Elegy.
Waller's.
Denham's.
Pindarick Odes.
Satyr.

A famous Sa∣tyrical Poem of his.
A Libel, for which he wa
Plays.
In
An admira∣ble Character in a Play of
Epick Poetry.
A late Au∣thor.
William

William.
His present Majesty.
The
Foul-Wea∣
Alexander.
Danius.
Bessus.
Ptolemy.
Pompey.