(EEBO-TCP ; phase 1, no. A30076)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 56957)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1641-1700 ; 130:9)
Reproduction of original in British Library.
Item incorrectly listed in reel guide with location 130:10.
The Coun∣tries Disease.
This pre∣vents strife about electi∣ons.
This election being simple, gives way, that if there be one man in all the Councell, al∣though the youngest in degree, fitter then the rest, he may as soon arive at the Government as any of his Seniors, by which 'tis possible that this Com∣mon wealth may be Governed by the wisest and justest men in the Country, which cannot be, when two stand in compe∣tition for it, then the one must have it: and this will draw e∣very man to be ambitious to studie the good of the Coun∣trey.
This is a tie upon the Go∣vernour, to walk equally and justly before the people.
By this the Governour, if just, able, and good, may continue his life in the Go∣vernment.
By this 'tis possible, that the ablest and ho∣nestest of the people shall alwayes be in Au∣thority: for this is the first step to the Go∣vernment.
The people will be carefull to chuse good, and able men, since those they chuse shall immediately exercise a power over them.
This will encourage men to be just and de∣serving.
By this means the peo∣ple shall have an Ac∣compt of the Gover∣nours and Councels carriage for the gene∣rall good.
By this a good under∣standing will be had between the Governour and the people, and no∣thing in probabilitie may be presumed shall be moved, whereby the Common-wealth shall be in danger.
This provides, there may be a good Councel of the wisest & honestest of the people, and by it a confusion of Coun∣cell and Councellours is avoided.
These 12 are next in degree for Councellors, and in the Interim serve for excellent uses, as you shall see hereafter.
By this course there can be no surprisalls in making Lawes, but all Lawes will be truly under∣stood & wey∣ed, before con∣firmed.
By this, the people have a tie up∣on the Go∣vernour and Councel, and yet they be not indanger∣ed by the peo∣ple, but upon just & cleare grounds.
By this they are Servants immediatly to the Common-wealth, and not so easily drawne to serve ends.
It Lawes established may upon some fond conceit of a self-wise man be struck at, the Lawes will be alwayes totter∣ing: but if there be any Law inconvenient, let it be shewed to the Governour, and Coun∣cell, who should best under∣stand the Lawes, and they be∣ing made sensible of it, let them move it.
This may be either by himself, or with the Councell, as shall be thought fit.
Out of these 12 shall be alwayes chosen men to represent the Adven∣turers, in examining the Trustees accompts,
By this the Trustees shall not prevail with the Gover∣nour, to get his friends nominated to take the ac∣compts.
By this, the danger of laying conti∣nuall bur∣thens upon the people is taken away. This prevents the Gover∣nour for ma∣king a Coun∣cell of his fa∣vourits, which if admitted, might be de∣struction.
For if 60. li. aforesaid shall produce above 170 l.
Adventurer is in the sense of the book him that sends to plant The Govern∣ment wil pre∣serve this e∣state with the increase.

And if you will look in∣t
Chusing of ground.
Building of Houses.
What seed to sowe, & upon what ground.
Carrying of Servants.
Servants re∣ward.