The late travels of S. Giacomo Baratti, an Italian gentleman, into the remote countries of the Abissins, or of Ethiopia interior wherein you shall find an exact account of the laws, government, religion, discipline, customs, &c. of the Christian people that do inhabit there with many observations which some may improve to the advantage and increase of Trade with them : together with a confirmation of this relation drawn from the writings of Damianus de Goes and Jo. Scaliger, who agree with the author in many particulars / translated by G.D.
Baratti, Giacomo.
Approx. 201 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 141 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2008-09 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A30860




Wing B677



ESTC R11736





ocm 11910597




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The late travels of S. Giacomo Baratti, an Italian gentleman, into the remote countries of the Abissins, or of Ethiopia interior wherein you shall find an exact account of the laws, government, religion, discipline, customs, &c. of the Christian people that do inhabit there with many observations which some may improve to the advantage and increase of Trade with them : together with a confirmation of this relation drawn from the writings of Damianus de Goes and Jo. Scaliger, who agree with the author in many particulars / translated by G.D.
Baratti, Giacomo.
G. D.
Góis, Damião de, 1502-1574.
Scaliger, Joseph Juste, 1540-1609.
[6], 238 [i.e. 230], [2] p.   


London :


Printed for Benjamin Billingsley ...,


1670.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Ethiopia --  Description and travel.
2007-01
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2007-01
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2007-04
Jonathan Blaney
Sampled and proofread
2007-04
Jonathan Blaney
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2008-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






B677


11910597


50809














THE LATE TRAVELS Of S. 
Giacomo Baratti,
 An 
Italian Gentleman,
 Into the remote Countries of the 
Abissins,
 or of 
Ethiopia Interior.


Wherein you shall find an exact account of the Laws, Govern∣ment, Religion, Discipline, Customs, 
&c.
 of the Christian people that do Inhabit there, with many Observati∣ons which some may improve to the advantage and increase of Trade with them.


Together, with a Confirmation of this Relation drawn from the Writings of 
Damianus de Goes,
 and 
Jo. Scaliger,
 who agree with the Author in many particulars.


Translated by 
G. D.


London,
 Printed for 
Benjamin Billingsley
 at the Printing-Press in 
Broad-street,
 and at the same sign in the 
Piazza
 over against 
Popes
-head-alley near the Royal Exchange in 
Cornhil,
 1670.










To the Worshipful
 Thomas Windham 
Esq


SIR,


HEre are the Travels of our 
Italian Gentleman,
 that you have so long desired to peruse in our Language. It is an ex∣cellent description of that Great Em∣pire that is so near related unto us by Religion, and nevertheless at such a distance from us. I hope it will fully answer your expectation, for you shall find in it most delightful passages, with an exact account of the Man∣ners, Laws, Government, and of all other particulars in the Dominions of 
Ethiopia,
 worth the notice of an Inge∣nious


Traveller. It may be that this small Treatise may meet with the ill fortune which such are to expect that thwart or disapprove of grand de∣signs and furt
us enterprises. It matters not what aspersions may be raised to darken its Truth, and hinder its appearance and credit; I hope the probability of all the matters▪ related, & that may be also gathered from the place where it was first published, will dissipate all envious vapours, and cause 
Ethiopia
 to appear amongst 
s in its own shape and form. Our Gentleman had committed an act not agreeable to that Judgment that he shews in his writings to publish things of a Kingdom so well known to most parts of 
Italy,
 by reason of the conti∣nual correspondency that the Princes of it do entertain by their Factors with the 
Grand Neguz
) had there been any thing in his Relation not re∣al, 
r untrue. His Book had not found


that universal applause to be twice honoured with the Press, had it not found amongst his Country-men a re∣ception suitable to its worth. Let the ill-natured and pe
vish minds, that credit nothing but what they see, e∣steem of this I ra
slation, and of the original as they please; I know Sir, that all sober-minded Persons as your self, will find both Sweetness and Profit in the Reading of it; however I should desire, that you will look upon these labours as a Confirmation of tha Title that I shall alwayes covet, I mean of


Sir,


Your most faithful and ob∣liged Servant, G. D.














A DESCRIPTION OF THE COUNTRY OF Precious John, Vulgarly called 
PRESTER JOHN.


THe Empire of 
Aethiopia,
 is not inferiour to the lar∣gest in the World, if we consider that vast Continent that


was anciently, and should be now under the Command of the law∣ful Heir. It contained above thir∣ty large Kingdoms, and many fruitful Provinces well furnished with Men, and stored with Rich Commodities; but the late un∣happy Wars with the Neighbour Kings have much weakned this growing Empire, and reduced it to a little number.


The Turks, the 
Gialas,
 the King of 
Mozambique,
 the 
Moors,
 and several others that surround this Christian Principality, have dis-membred the Provinces and Kingdoms that were anciently subject to it, and submitted them to their several Jurisdictions. The 
Moors
 have seized on the Sea∣coast, the 
Turks
 have conquer'd the most fruitful Kingdoms that confine upon 
Egypt,
 the 
Gialas
 a war-like Re-publick of 
Africa,



command several large Ter∣ritories that belong unto this Imperial Crown. The King of 
Mozambique
 and the rest have robbed it of its chief Jewels and Ornaments, so that at present it is nothing so large, nor so considera∣ble as formerly it was. The cause of these great Losses must be at∣tributed to the Cowardise and unexperience of the Inhabitants more inclinable to Superstition than war-like feats, and to the diversity of Religion in which these Nations differ much from the Abyssins. The 
Turks
 and 
Moors
 are nourished up in the Ma∣humetan, the 
Gialas
 and they of 
Mozambique
 in the Heathenish I∣dolatrie (which cannot comply with the Christian Truth.) The Professors of the former, have a natural antipathy against the Pro∣selites of the latter; insomuch,


that they can scarce suffer them to breath in the same air. This hatred entertained by the different ways of worshipping the Creator, hath fomented all these wars and troubles that have for many hun∣dred years shaken the Abyssin Empire, and separated from it the most excellent, and the largest Provinces that did belong unto it; so that at present it is reduced to a very narrow Circuit in com∣parison of what it was. The Em∣perour nevertheless maintains the same State as he did formerly, and claims a right to all those King∣doms that he hath lost. His pre∣sent Dominions are not above 800 English miles in length, and 600 in bredth; they contain these Kingdoms, 
Amara, Tigre∣mahon, Angot, Xoa, G
ama, Baga∣midri, Damut, Fategar, Barnagaez, Baru, Tigrai, Vangue,;
 so that


they are limited on the North by 
Nubia,
 and the Mountains and Sands that separate them from 
E∣gypt;
 on the East, by the Kingdoms of 
Zangebara, Aiana
 and 
Adel,
 which lie upon the red Sea; on the South, the Provinces of 
Cafutes
 and 
Fungi
 do shut it, and on the West this Empire confines upon 
Congo, Medra
 and the 
Blacks.
 This Rich and In-land Country I have discovered by my Travels, and now that I am so happily returned to my own Native soil, after so long and troublesome a Journey, I owe to my Country a Relation of those things that I have learned, which I may say, never any knew so much of this place before, as the Reader may find in this Book. In the year 1655. some Mer∣chants of 
Florence
 were preparing to sail for 
Alexandria,
 I resolved to adventure my self in their


Company, out of a great desire to visit the Holy-Land, and see for∣rein places. I had then received some discontent at home, which made me seek my satisfaction a∣broad; having therefore furnish∣ed my self with large sums of mo∣ney, and a Man Servant, I embar∣qued with them in a Dutch bot∣tom, and in a fortnights time we landed in that ancient City which 
Alexander
 had built. The plague was then very hot in that place, which obliged us to a short stay there. Some French Merchants were then going for Grand 
Cairo;
 my company perswaded me to take my journey with them, and visit the curiosities of that large City; I was not willing to take that Road so soon, for I desired first to pay my devotions at the Sepulcher of our Lord, but the perswasions of my friends forced


me to leave that journey until my return, because we could not find a fit opportunity to travel in∣to the Holy-Land I went there∣fore with the French Merchants to 
Catro,
 and spent some days there in viewing all the Rari
es of that Great City; we had a sight there and in our way of many An∣tiquities which are so well known to all the world, that I shall not so much as mention them. I had not been there a month, but a 
Ca∣ravan
 was preparing for the Red Sea. The French Consul, at whose house I lay, encouraged me to take that occasion of discovering those Parts where Christians of of Quality seldom adventure themselves; assuring me, that it would be worth my while to see those remote places, and discover something to the Christian world, which was not known before. It


happened that as I was medita∣ting upon this journey, an 
Abuna
 or a High Priest of the Abyssins came to the Patriarchs house from 
Jerusalem,
 in his journey to∣wards 
Ethiopia,
 intending to take the same way as the 
Caravan,
 be∣cause it was the safest. This acci∣dent I lookt upon as an invitation of providence amongst those 
A∣frican
 Christians that are not well known to our Northern Climates. Having therefore furnished my self with Moneys and Bills of Ex∣change for so long a journey, I sought the acquaintance of the 
Abuna
 before my departure. It was no difficulty to obtain, for he was learned in the 
Italian
 Tongue, and well versed in the manner and Customs of the 
Franks;
 he was a Man of a swarthy countenance, both pleasant and grave, of a high stature, about 60 years of


age, very lusty; he had not many to attend him, for he was not wil∣ling to discover himself amongst the 
Turks,
 who might have made advantage of him, by obliging him to larger disbursements than his Estate could allow: I was re∣solved to accompany him into his own Country, and visit the Court of the great 
Neguz
 so famous all over the world; we therefore en∣gaged our selves in the 
Caravan.
 I went for an 
Italian
 pilgrim, whose Person is much respected amongst the Heathens themselves, and least subject to the affronts and insults of strangers. The 
A∣buna
 was also in the disguise of a Merchant, he had with him some Goods of a small value; we began our journey in the moneth of 
March,
 and through several mis∣fortunes we arrived at the Port Town of the Red Sea called 
Suez,



a famous place for Trade, it is the passage into 
Arabia Indostan
 and all other Countries of 
Asia.
 Here are therefore a great company of Merchants of all Nations that en∣rich this place, which otherwise would be very unconsiderable. It is a City fortified with a Castle and a Fort upon the mold as big as 
Pisa.
 The buildings are large, fitter for Merchants than Noble∣men; some are beautified with black and white Marble curiously wrought. Here is a Synagogue of the 
Jews
 much frequented on the Sabbath day, here is also an Idol Temple for the 
Gentiles,
 but the poor Christians have no other place appointed for their Devoti∣ons, but their Chambers and Hou∣ses. The 
Abuna
 found here some Abyssin Merchants, at whose dwellings he was courteously re∣ceived, and honouraby entertain∣ed;


they invited me to share with him in their Hospitality; I accepted their kind offer, because I had no mind to separate my self from him, seeing my design was to accompany him as far as his Emperours Court. Here we re∣mained several months, because we heard of an Army of 
Turks
 and 
Moors
 that were making an In∣road into the Territories of the Abyssins, we were advised to ex∣pect with patience their return, for otherwise we might have met them in the way and been brought back into Captivity, our liberty was too precious a thing to be un∣considerately ventured we; there∣fore remained a long while in this City expecting a fair opportuni∣ty to be gone. At last one pre∣sented it self not unworthy of our acceptance, the 
Turks Basha
 of 
Egypt
 sent an Ambassadour to the



Precious John,
 who coming to 
Suez,
 we thought we could not meet with a greater happiness if we could be admitted into his re∣tinue. We had some difficulty to obtain this favour, but upon the offer of 200 Crowns, it was rea∣dily granted. He took his leave of this City with a great Train, and we accompanyed him upon Mules, we passed through many different Soils, some fruitful, e∣specially of Date-trees, others ve∣ry barren. The most part of our way was over craggy Mountains, where nothing did present it self to our view but wild Beasts far different from those that I have seen in 
Europe.
 We passed through some inhabited Land, where very strong Castles were e∣rected to defend the Country from the enemies, the 
Moers
 did possess them, for this Nation is


dispersed all over this Country, we found also some stragling Tents of 
Arabians
 that wandred up and down, we met with no∣thing remarkable, but Poverty and Misery, that seem to have taken up their Residence amongst the people that inhabit in this part of the world far in the Country. Their diet is such things as this barren habitation will afford them; their bread is a root, their flesh is of such wild Creatures as they can happily kill, their Cloathing proclaims their needy condition, it is made of a large leaf of a Tree that grows in the Forrests and Woods, neither is it sufficient to cover the back, so it hides the 
pu∣denda hominis,
 they are abundant∣ly content; for that purpose a string is ty'd above their middle unto which these leaves are faste∣ned, so that like so many Pen∣dants


they fall down and cover what nature teaches to hide. They have one conveniency and advan∣tage which they enjoy above our common people, as our Princes and Noblemen of 
Europe
 they wear not their Apparel long, they change often, almost every day. These rascally sort of people that nature hath brought forth a∣mongst these mountains, did ap∣pear unto us almost like Savages, they did not willingly come in our company, nor are they desirous to change their habitation, their bo∣dies were big, and their Members thick and swarthy, they spoke a mixt 
Arabian,
 not well to be under¦stood but by those that know all the dialects of that language; those that live in the fortified places are far more sociable, they had chosen the most convenient seats for their residence, some of the ground was


fit to Sow and Plow, and to feed Cattel. We were admitted into one of these Castles that was e∣rected in the passage of a mountain very conveniently to hinder and stop the course of any enemy; the Commander in chief was a 
Moor,
 he received us with some expres∣sions of affection, but before we deparred we were forced to pay dear for our entertainment, ten Dollers a piece, for that is a Coin that is currant over all the world. The Embassadour and those that did wait upon him were free, but for all strangers that did follow him in his journey, they were ob∣liged to lay down the money or return back again. This little Ty∣rant had gathered together some numbers of men, who lived thus in this difficult place upon all passen∣gers, forcing them to contribute to the maintenance of their lazy bo∣dies.


There are many such peo∣ple that exact upon strangers, the Governors for the 
Turk
 do wink at them, because at a certain time of the year they send a sweet per∣fume unto them, a Purse full of Gold and Silver, and in considera∣tion of this yearly tribute, they suffer them to exact, cheat and rob the poor Travellers and Mer∣chants. We advanced far into the Country many days journey be∣fore we came to the 
Turks
 Army, they were upon their return from pillaging the Christians, they were laden with spoils and slaves. They made as much haste as they could in their march, for the 
Pre∣cious John
 had gathered his Army together, and was in the pursuit of them from 
Suez;
 we came first into the Country called by the In∣habitants 
Ganfila,
 next to 
Dafro∣ha,
 and so through 
Barnagasso, Lacca



and part of 
Dangali;
 we arrived at last upon the borders. The bo∣dy of the 
Turks
 Army when we met it was near a large lake full of excellent fish. The people of this Country are ignorant of all kind of Arts, they have not the address of fishing; with Bows and Arrows, they kill Birds and Beasts upon which they feed and live; they own the 
Turks
 for their Ma∣sters against their will. This lake is in the Kingdom of 
Bamagasso,
 which was lately conquered and taken from the Great 
Neguz,
 the people retain some Reliques of Christianity, but with that igno∣rance, that one can scarce distin∣guish them from the Heathens, unless it be by the name, up and down the Country some sorry houses are erected, fitter for wild beasts than men. The walls are of mud and stones, the roofs of a


sort of slender Cane and Reeds which grow near the water side, and in low places, the middle of it is supported by a Pillar of wood that stands in the huts, and keeps the whole Fabrick from falling to the ground, for this miserable peo∣ple are not acquainted with the Art of Architecture. The Towns are composed of this sort of dwel∣lings, there are not many of them, but those that are, have chosen the best Land for their scituations near some fresh waters or lakes; for unless it be in these places the ground is parched up all the year long, but during the time of the Rains. In 
Egypt
 they never fall, but in 
Aethiopia
 they are very ex∣traordinary about the month of 
January
 and 
February.
 Such vio∣lent showers do pour down, that no creature is able to abide with∣out a shelter, several parties of


the 
Turks
 Army were stragling up and down, but the main body was at the lake 
Gueresh.
 When we came up to them they were com∣posed of Horse and Foot about six thousand, not able to abide a a combat with the Abyssins; there∣fore they thought upon nothing else than a safe retreat. They had plundred the Country people that were yet subject to 
Prester John,
 and had carryed men, wo∣men and children into captivity. A sad sight it was unto us that were Christians, to behold our brethren and our Christian name so miserably abused by the enemy of Christ, our 
Abuna
 could not refrain from tears, he laboured to relieve some of them, and to com∣fort them in their affliction, but for fear of discovering himself, he was not willing to express too much grief or kindness to them. The


Embassadours credit saved us from all affronts, we lodged two nights with them; for during that time they expected the coming up of some Troups that were sent to pillage. It is the custom of the people that border upon the A∣byssins, once a year to visit their Territories, for they meet with a considerable deal of plunder with little or no hazard. The Abyssins are more superstitious than war∣like, they have been renowned for Valour, but at present they are Cowards, they suffer every petty Nation that is daring to destroy their borders, which is the fault chiefly of their Governors; for having so much Riches as they have, so many Mines of Gold, and other considerable Commo∣dities, they might allow a part to some war-like people to fight un∣der their banners, and assist them


against their troublesome Neigh∣bours. At present they have little communication with people of their Religion, which if they had, it would be a mighty support to them and their interest; When the 
Portugueses
 were sent with an unconsiderable party into those Dominions, the 
Abyssin
 Empe∣rour felt the benefit of forrein succours, for the enemy was bea∣ten in two battels, and forc'd to yield to the Christian Valour. Amongst the Prisoners several Noblemens children were seen, who by their Meen and Garb were distinguishable from the or∣dinary sort. These poor creatures were led to be sold in 
Turky
 and other places as beasts, and the worst is, they were to be forced to renounce their Religion. What a grief was it to their Christian Parents, to suffer such a loss, to


have their Sons and Daughters a∣mongst the Infidels? This in∣conveniency might be prevented, did these In-land Christians keep a strong Guard upon their con∣fines, or with a stout resolution labour to drive these Robbers far from their habitations, or labour to revenge themselves, by carry∣ing the War into their own Land, or by seizing on the Sea coast, and the passages of the mountains that limit their Country, where they might place such strong Castles and numerous Guards as might keep the 
Turks
 and 
Moors
 from all such attempts: But when we have fully taken a view of 
Abassia
 or 
Aethiopia
 Superiour, and of the Emperour and Go∣vernment, we may be better able to see the cause of these disorders that happen almost every year in some corner of the Land. Having


therefore spent some days in the view of our Christian brethren that were led into Captivity, we took our leave of them and of the 
Turks
 Army, and marched on our journey towards a large Town of the Kingdom of 
Tigremahon
 called 
Bashaw▪
 it lies beyond a large Ri∣ver that runs through 
Africa,
 it receives the tribute from other small Rivers, and then it runs through many Countreys until it discharges it self into 
Nilus,
 the people of the Country call it in their language 
Togassi
 and others 
Guekrahock.
 Were it not for this River, it were not possible to sub∣sist in this In-land Country, but it divides it self into so many bran∣ches, and waters so large a Terri∣tory, that no part of the Empe∣rours Country is without some benefit that it brings unto it. The Country round about did hear


the Marches of the enemies rage and fury, the Towns were burnt to the ground, the people either fled or carryed into captivity, the land and trees were not spared in some places, for they had cut down a great quantity to facili∣tate their passages over some Ri∣vers. Here we came into a Coun∣try far more fruitful than any o∣ther I had seen in 
Africa,
 it was capable of more improvement; did the Inhabitants skill and in∣dustry answer the goodness of the soil, I do not find but this part might bear as excellent Fruits as any other place of the world. The heat of the climate quickens na∣ture in the production of all Ve∣getatives, so that it is blessed with two Springs every year, or at least with two Crops of every thing that is sown or planted, un∣less it be in those places that


want the benefit of water; we met here with some flying parts of the 
Turks
 Army riding apace after the main body, for they were pursued by several troops of the 
Abyssins.
 Those thieves had adventured almost near the Im∣perial Tents without resistance, not without considerable plunder able to reward them for their labours; we proceeded on our way about two leagues before we came to meet with the inhabitants of the Country, the first were a party of horse-men very well mounted pursuing their enemies, they complained unto the Embas∣sadour of the 
Turks
 violences, we were afraid that they would have violated the Law of Nations upon him, they received us with that rage; the presence of the 
Abuna
 hindred them from offering injury to his Person; Him they received


with all expressions of honour and kindness, and suffered some of them to return back to guard him, the rest continued on their way. They overtook the 
Turks
 at the ford of a little River very busie to get over their Captives and Goods, we heard that they fell upon them with a wonderful fu∣ry and recovered much of the spoils, killing great numbers of them. They returned afterwards in triumph with much honour, ha∣ving so successefully encountred with their enemies. In the mean whiles we proceeded in our jour∣ney towards the Emperour of 
A∣bassia,
 who hearing of the 
Abuna
's arrival, sent some of his Court to Complement him and bid him welcome; where ever he passed the Clergy & people came to receive him with more signs of kind∣ness than pomp, the processions


of the people came to meet us at the entrance of the towns, and when we came within sight of the Emperours tents, he sent all the Court to receive the 
Abuna.
 I did carefully observe all the cere∣monies of Reception and Instal∣ment. The 
Abuna
 as soon as he came within the tents, went to kiss the Emperours Girdle. He was standing in a stately tent e∣rected in the middle of the rest, about it was a large place much like to a Market, where the Courtiers are accustomed to walk, at the right hand is another very beautiful, where the Emperours Wives and Concubines dwell; at the top of the Princes tent is a Golden Cross with an Angel holding it in his left hand, with a drawn Cymeter in the right. The 
Abuna
 went to change his habit and put on another, according to


the 
Abyssin
 custom. It is a very singular one, none but the High-Priest hath the liberty to wear it, for it is the badge or character by which he is distinguished from the other 
Papa
's or Bishops of that Country, and from the rest of the Clergy, he was conducted next, to pay his respects to the Empe∣rour, he was in the Kingdom of 
Beleguaze
 near a town very well peopled and scituated in a plea∣sant plain called 
Ikroah,
 about six leagues distant from the River 
Tagassi,
 I had the satisfaction to accompany the 
Abuna,
 for he was a man of a very mild and kind spirit, very pleasant in company, yet grave and serious, he was led by the Master of the Ceremonies into the Inner room where the Emperour lay upon a curious Bed of White Cotton Bed with a large fringe of Gold, behind him


stood his naked Sword, and round about were the Lords of his Pri∣vy Councel; above was a Canopy of cloath of Gold, with green silk interwoven, the room it self was hung with the same stuffe; as∣soon as the 
Abuna
 enter'd the room he kneel'd three times on the ground, and then ascended the steps to the Bed to perform his respects; In the mean whiles the Emperour rose from his couch and half up embraced the 
Abuna,
 wish∣ing him much felicity in his Em∣pire, they discoursed some time together, and then he was dismist with all honour and civility; the Emperour was pleased to take no∣tice of his retinue, and particular∣ly of my self. I was also admitted to the honour of kissing his Gir∣dle, a ceremony only due to the Prince. I followed the 
Abuna,
 who received me into his own


lodgings, and would not suffer me whiles I was in that Country to be obliged to any other place for my retreat. Now I have brought my Reader into the Imperial tents of 
Abassia,
 it is convenient that we should take a view as from a high place of all the inferiour orders of men, and of all particulars which his curiosity may be inquisitive. And first




Of the Emperour.


THe Emperour of the 
Abys∣sins
 is a Prince highly hono∣red of his subjects, because they fancy him to be lineally descend∣ed from that noble and Religious King that first planted the Chri∣stian Religion amongst them; and as they are extreamly devoted to it; so much, that they appear al∣most extravagant in many of their


practises, they have no small re∣spect to his Posterity, who first brought them the advantage of the Christian Faith. None hath access to him of his subjects unless it be upon solemn occasions, but the chief Officers of his Crown, when he rides or is carryed abroad in a Royal Throne, all his people fall upon their knees and adore him; this throne is a kind of Se∣dan, but far more stately, with steps ascending to it made of wood gilt over, covered with Gold, it is carryed upon mens shoulders, or between four Horses, the Empe∣rour appears in it with much state, and with more glory than in any o∣ther thing that I have seen; He never stirs out of his tents, but 600 men do follow him at his heels, they are his daily guard, they wear a Livery and a Habit distinct from all other people, on


their head a Scarlet bonnet with three white plumes fastned be∣hind with a blew cross on their shoulders, they have a very con∣venient Coat that comes down to their middle, with a Girdle or Sash, over it a Roman Mantle hangs, more proper for State than action; the colour is green, it is not very long, nor troublesome when they are obliged to make use of their hands; sometimes they ride, sometimes they go a∣foot, as the Emperours occasion requires; for that purpose he hath always ready in his Stables great numbers of Horses. The Empe∣rours Person is whiter than any of his Kingdom, for the 
Abyssins
 are tawny, a colour drawing near to black. I never saw any others of his Relations or kindred, but I hear they are all of the same co∣lour. The people interpret this


to his advantage, that God by this distinction, hath singled out that Family that is to Reign amongst them, out of which they always chuse their Emperour; their cu∣stom is, that he should never mar∣ry until he be crowned; then, with the consent of his Nobles he chu∣seth two Wives out of his King∣dom, he entertains besides as ma∣ny Concubines as he pleaseth. They are always with him in his tents with all their Attendants. The first Male-child usually suc∣ceeds the Father in his Kingdom. Assoon as the children are named, they are carryed to a very delici∣ous place in the middle of a large mountain called 
Amarak,
 where a stately Castle is built encom∣passed with the River 
Borohr,
 and fortified with a strong wall. There they are kept with the o∣ther precious things belonging to


the Emperour, they never go out unless it be in the Gardens and places of Recreation, with which this territory is abundantly fur∣nished; and then they never loose the sight of their governours and guard; when the Father is dead the chief Officers of the Empire come to this place, and unless the eldest be uncapable of the honour, they take him to succeed in his Fathers room. If there be no Sons, the eldest Daughter takes the Scepter. During their Fathers life, they are kept here as in a 
Se∣raglio,
 to learn all exercises proper to their Sex and age. They are taught the 
Hebrew
 and 
Arabick
 tongues, humane Philosophy and the Principles of Christian Reli∣gion. Here is for that purpose a large Library of above ten thou∣sand Volums all in Manuscripts, some told me that they had there


the most ancient Books of the world written by the 
Aegyptian
 Sages in the time of 
Moses,
 by 
Phaenicians
 afterwards, and by the Learned of all Ages. I saw some in the Library (into which I had the leave to enter) that were made of the 
Aegyptian
 leaf called 
Papy∣rus,
 and others made of old Parchment that did bear the marks of antiquity. I ask'd the 
Subdi
 an Officer that led me in to see the curiosities, how they did to preserve the Books so many years from consuming, he told me that they do usually transcribe them when the leaves are worn or likely to decay, and that for that intent there are twenty three Persons appointed with a good maintenance for them by the for∣mer Emperours; their imploy∣ment is only to transcribe and co∣py out the books that age threa∣tens


to spoil; they have not the excellent use of Printing, for want of communication with their 
Euro∣pean
 brethren. Hither are also sent the chief Noblemens sons of the Empire to keep company with the Royal bloud, and to receive with them the instructions which this place only affords, for here is maintained a Learned Bishop with: several inferiour Priests that have the charge of instructing and tutering the Children that are committed to their custody. The Bishop is Governor of the Castle, and Overseer of the Diocess o
 Kingdom of 
Amara;
 here is his Pa∣lace and place of abode, he sel∣dom stirs to Court. The Empe∣rour visits this place oncea year with his Wives. When he is cho∣sen, then all his brethren accom∣pany him to his Coronation; a great solemnity in this place as well


as amongst our Christian Princes; afterwards the Males are sent to govern Provinces, the Maids are disposed of in Mariage to Noble∣men, who commonly expect this time as an opportunity to advance themselves by such an alliance. The Emperour is first crowned with thorns before he puts on the Imperial Diadem, in imitation of our Saviour, or to express the troublesome employment that he is to undertake. The 
Abuna
 puts both upon his head, in the place appointed for the devotions of the people, in the presence of all the Nobility of the Country. At that time the Prisons are opened, a thousand slaves are released at the Emperours charge, and the poor are relieved, actions that be∣come a Christian Emperour, be∣sides a great Feast is kept several days with all the splendor that


becomes so great a Prince, and s
 large a Fortune and great Reve∣nue. The present Emperou
 name is 
Abraham,
 he is a young man about thirty years of age, his Meen is comely and pleasant, his body is streight and tall, the fea∣tures of his face are very wel
 proportioned; so that he passet
 for a great Beauty amongst them his eyes are quick and large, he i
 much delighted with the sport o
 hunting the wild Beasts, for tha
 intent he keeps excellent Horse and great Mastives that are fetch
 out of 
Indostan
 and 
Arabia;
 th
 chief Officers that are near his Person, are his 
Bishur,
 the Lieute∣nant General of his Armies; the 
Zoroah,
 the Treasurer and super∣intendant of his revenues; the 
Bikir,
 the grand Marshal of the Kingdom who is also the su∣pream Judge of Affairs of conse∣quence;


the 
Huloh,
 the Secretary of State; 
Diriharvah Neguz,
 the Captain of the Guard, or preser∣ver of the great Emperours Per∣son; 
Satyrhab
 is the Chamberlain of his Houshold; the 
Grashun
 is the keeper of his Horses; several o∣ther Officers are in his Court, whose names I omit; when they come to their Emperour they bow their knee three times to the ground. The Embassadours of the Infidels do never receive the honour of speaking to him, but they are dealt with by the media∣tion of some appointed for that purpose. The 
Abuna
 is much respected at Court; what he speaks, is received by all as a Law. The former Emperour was a man of War, but this is a Peace-maker to his own prejudice, and that of his Subjects. He hath this good quality, that he is severe against


all vices, against Swearing and Drunkenness, 
&c.
 He is fitter to sit upon a peaceable Throne than to govern one that hath so many watchful enemies about it as his hath. He is very inquisitive into all Affairs, he suffers none to be dispatcht without his knowledge. He is not easily over-ruled by Councel, but sticks fast to his own opinion and resolution, sometimes to his prejudice; he is very Religi∣ous, and a great observer of the Ceremonies of his Church, ha∣ting all things that appear with the face of Innovation; by this means it happens that all about him look so serious in their Reli∣gious duties, and shew less pro∣faness in their Practises, their Princes example encourages them. If any be named debauch'd, he is certain to be disgrac'd as soon as the fame hath reach'd his


Masters ear. A great favourite of the Emperour, one that attend∣ed on him continually, was su∣spected to have some familiarity with anothers Wife, the suspici∣on was blown by some envious persons into the Emperours ear, who presently sent for him, and dismissed him his service. This good severity causeth his Laws to be well obeyed. Did this Emperour know as well how to deal with his enemies, as he doth know how to govern his Subjects, he would be as much feared a∣broad as he is reverenced at home, and all his Neighbours would stand in aw of him. I doubt not but the Empire of 
Ethiopia
 would be again restored to its former Greatness, could he but as well manage a Sword as a Scepter. But that weakness is to be attributed to the manner and place of his


Education, he hath been shut with∣in the narrow limits of a little Territory unto which he did con∣fine his ambition when he was produced in the world; his larger fortune did not increase his pre∣tentions, but being content to what he then enjoyed, the increase was look'd upon as a super fluity, besides this manner of Education weakens the spirits that should have a compass and a larger scope to act than a narrow mountain or a small Territory. He was there so accustomed to a Pedantick life, that he knew not how to handle the helm of State, and act supream in the business of the Empire. His Governours I conceive did so domineer over him, as it is their custom, that he was ignorant in any other thing but how to obey. As therefore our Countryman 
Machiavel
 wisely advises, let the


Prince that is to succeed his Fa∣ther be nursed up in the Camp, and in the midst of business a∣mongst men of courage and reso∣lution, that he may take impres∣sions sutable to the employment he is to have in the world; for were a Prince to judge of a propo∣sition of Divinity, or to compose a piece of Latine or Greek, I would then shut in the wandring thoughts of his youth, and not suffer them to see the world a∣broad: but seeing he is to com∣mand men, rather than Schollars; and to compose those Affairs up∣on which depend his Subjects quiet and happiness, I think it is wisdom to train him up according∣ly, and let him see the face of Souldiers as well as of Pedants, a Gun and a Sword as well as Books, that he may not only be a Master, but a King. My business


is not to enlarge upon the manner of Education proper to a Prince, only I take notice of the defaults I have mark'd in 
Ethiopia
 in the bringing up their young Nobility, and the Person that is to wear the Crown, that if these Memoirs have the happiness to fall into the hands of any of our Princes of 
I∣taly,
 they may not make their Children so bookish that they may not be able to handle a Sword. This present Emperour of 
Ethio∣pia
 is the most Learned of all his Dominions, he speaks 
Arabick, Persian, Hebrew,
 and many other Languages; he is read in Philo∣sophy, in Astrology: He is fitter for contemplation than for action.








Of the Imperial Court.


UNder so Religious and Learned a Prince we may look for Courtiers of the same temper, for although some may follow their inclinations, it is com∣mon to see them frame themselves according to their Princes will and disposition. Never any Court was better modelled. 
Solomon
 from whom this Emperour gives out to have derived his Pedigree, did never order his Houshold in a more excellent manner. Every Officer is to be dil igentin his place, if any be careless or cor∣rupt, the 
She
va
ous,
 the Comp∣trolers and Officers appointed to take notice 
 all misdemeanours; lesser offences are punished with the discredit of losing the place, greater with imprisonment and


loss of Estate and life. The 
Ne∣guz
 himself is so severe, that late∣ly at the request of his Mother he would not pardon a murderer, one of his Attendants, when he had killed a child of an Inferi∣our birth and Parentage, but cau∣sed him to be forthwith banished out of his Territories.


Besides the Bishops that wait upon the Court, here are ten Chaplains, Ministers of the Infe∣riour Orders of the Clergy, who do on the Sabbath day expound before the Emperour in their turns, some Text of Scripture ac∣cording to the ancient manner of the 
Jews
 who had their Synago∣gues, where the Law was read and explained to the people every week. The Saturday is the day appointed in this place for publick Devotion. The manner ob∣served at that time, I shall set


down in its place; all Orders of men do resort to their Churches to assist in the service of God.


In the Court are entertained all the Princes sons that have any dependency upon this Empire; when they come of age whiles they are young, they are kept in the Castle of 
Amara,
 and there brought up with the young Em∣peror; a policy not unuseful to this State, for by this means they are taught be time to know and re∣spect their future Prince, and when they are of age to manage and govern the Affairs of their several jurisdictions; they are more faithful to his interest, for whom they have had a kindess from their Infancy, for nothing nourishes love so much as an early acquaintance; and nothing lays a better foundation to a sincere friendship and loyalty, as a fami∣liarity


from their tender years. They are there taught to honour and respect the Emperours Chil∣dren, and he is also obliged to a loving correspondency with them. But assoon as they come of age, the Emperor calls them to Court, and there they are further in∣structed and tutored before he commits unto them their Fathers Estates and Kingdoms. This ob∣liges also the Parents to stick close to the Emperour, for their sons are as pledges in His Court of their fidelity and obedience.


The Emperour is not to dwell in any house, nor to make any long residence in any Town, for they look upon it as beneath his Gran∣deur to be confined within the Walls of any habitation; and they judge it not consistant with the benefit of the publick, that one place should constantly enjoy


him; therefore it is provided by the Statute Law of that Nation, that the Prince shall never stay a∣bove four days in any Town, for that reason, when he hath been beaten by his Neighbours, he shut not up himself in Cities or Fortresses, but saved himself into the remotest and Desart places, where none did offer to seek him out, or to adventure themselves but the wild beasts. The people of the Country that hold from him all their Lands and Tene∣ments, do never suffer him to be long in that distress, but they flock about him out of a fear to lose the right or privileges of his pro∣tection; so that if he loseth one battel and his people be destroyed whiles there are any remaining in the Land, he is able to make a head against the enemy, for all are obliged in such cases to appear in


Arms from sixteen years old to
 sixty, unless sickness doth furnis
 them with any reasonable excuse.


There is one practice remarka∣ble in this Court, every morning
 all the Officers of the 
Neguz
 d
 pay their respects unto him abou
 eight a clock, not to his Person
 but to something that represent
 it. In the Anti-Chamber of the Emperour is a couch of Stat
 standing under a glorious Canopy
 upon three steps above the couch
 is a Golden Scepter richly set with precious Stones and Pearls, it commonly leans against the hanging of the room. Before this empty seat are always waiters to observe all that omit to pay their daily homage. It is the duty of every one to present himself, and kneel three times to the ground before it every morning whether the Emperour be there or not.


The 
Abyssins
 never stir their hats, nor discover their heads, but in the Churches at their devoti∣ons, then they observe the pra∣ctice of all other Christians. Les∣ser civilities are paid only with a bow of the body, and an inclinati∣on of the head, holding the right hand close to the breast; greater respects are expressed with the bow of the knee, the kissing of the girdle or the thigh, and of the ground upon which the person that we intend to honour walks.


Women are rarely seen a∣mongst the men at Court, they have a private place unto which none is admitted but the 
Abuna,
 and some of the most Religious Persons. They have Eunuchs that wait upon them, usually Blacks, they appear at the Churches, but in a place separated from the rest. Sometimes when the Emperour


will shew his Grandeur and hap∣piness to his Courtiers, he sends for his Chief Queen, who must appear in all the State and Glory that her Industry or Beauty can produce, she is received by the Emperour with some expressions of kindness, and then she is ad∣mitted to sit down on his right hand, for the left is the place of honour in 
Abassia.


Once every year he hath a great Feast kept at Court, with wonderful expressions of joy, it is the day of the Emperours Birth. It is the custom that the 
Neguz
 should give entertainment to all that will be pleased to accept of his kindness, he is the next day after requited with Presents of the most considerable Persons of his Court.


This Imperial Court is never fixed in any one place, but Mar∣ches


with the Emperour, about 6000 Tents do always pitch a∣bout him, in such an excellent order, that in a moment, from the farthermost tent one may come to that of the great 
Neguz,
 where a strong guard watches about his Person day and night. The Soul∣diers of the Kings guard are very neatly attired, and well furnished with Bows and Guns; they are mixed at present, since the use of Powder was introduced amongst them by the 
Portugueses.






Of the Government.


THe Emperour hath several great Kingdoms that ac∣knowledge his jurisdiction, and seven or eight crowned heads that are under him; His name is 
Giam




Belul,
 that is, 
Precious Giam
 Or 
John,
 a name of the same signifi∣cation as Illustrious Serenus, Ex∣cellent, 
&c.
 Titles that we give to our Princes. When he writes, this is his stile,


In the name of God, the Father Almighty, Creator of Heaven and Earth, of things visible and invisible; in the name of God the Son Jesus Christ, who is the same with the Fa∣ther from the beginning of the world, Light of Light, true God of true God, and in the name of God the Holy Spirit, who is also a living God pro∣ceeding from the Father.


This Letter you shall receive from a mighty King, whose name the Lions do respect, by the grace of God I am call'd 
Athani Ting∣hib;
 that is, the Incense of the


Virgin, the son of K. 
David,
 the son of 
Solomon,
 the Son of the King by the hand of 
Mary,
 the Son of 
Naw
 according to the flesh, & the son of S. 
Peter,
 & S. 
Paul,
 according to grace, the beloved of God, the Pillar of the Faith, who hath ta∣ken upon him the name of 
Abra∣ham
 Emperour of the Great and upper 
Ethiopia,
 and of large Kingdoms and dominions, King of 
Xoa,
 of the 
Cafates,
 of 
Fatigar,
 of 
Angote,
 of 
Baru,
 of 
Baliganze,
 of 
Adea,
 of 
Vangue,
 of 
Goiame,
 where is 
Nilus
 source of 
Damaraa,
 of 
Vaguemedri,
 of 
Ambea,
 of 
Vagne,
 of 
Tigremahon,
 of 
Sabaym,
 the Coun∣try of the Queen of 
Saba,
 of 
Ba∣magaes,
 and Supream Lord as far as 
Nubia
 that confines upon 
E∣gypt,
 &c. Many Titles and King∣doms are heapt together to ex∣press his Grandeur; at present he enjoys but the Titles alone of


many of those Kingdoms, whiles others do eat up the reversion, eleven or twelve of them do re∣main faithful to him, sometimes the Inhabitants are disturbed by their war-like Neighbours, but they could never be subdued by any other Prince, for his sake they endure the loss of their Goods, Estates, Children, and oft times they are driven into extream Po∣verty, because they cannot leave their lawful Prince; but they must also renounce Religion with him before they can be accepted of by their enemies.


This consideration ties them fast to the 
Neguz
 interest, and obliges them to be most faithful unto him notwithstanding all their losses.


The Government of this Great Prince is partly Arbitrary, and partly Subject to the written


Laws that are contained in two Volums, written as they say by the Apostles themselves. The first they call 
Manida,
 the other they name 
Abethilis,
 they comprehend the Rules of Government, rela∣ting to right or wrong; they fur∣ther observe much of the politick Law of 
Moses,
 which he command∣ed the 
Jews.
 In those other oc∣casions of which these Books are silent, the Emperours or the Judges pleasure and reason passeth for a Law. The first Books called 
Manida
 and 
Abethil,
 are full of most excellent Rules and Statutes. Some wise man of that Empire composed them for to direct the Prince in the execution of his Of∣fice: and that they might receive more credit, he caused it to be bruited abroad, that these books had been found in the ruines of the Church where St. 
Lycanon,
 who


was sent into 
Ethiopia
 by St. 
Phi∣lip
 the Apostle, did teach and that they had been composed by the Disciples of our Saviour assem∣bled together in a general Coun∣cel. Assoon as this religious lye had been divulged, every one was desirous to see and hear the Con∣tents of this Book, when they saw therefore that the matter was an∣swerable to the fame of it, they began really to credit it, so that they do as religiously obey the commands of these Books as the Gospels, and the word of God. When the Emperour dines or sups, some small portion of it is read before him after the Musick, which in this country is very plea∣sant and grateful to the ear, more than in any other place out of 
I∣taly,
 although the instruments upon which they play be not like ours.


The Emperour hath one Judge called 
Bikir
 over all his domini∣ons, to judge of matters of right or wrong, under him are the 
Sudh
∣drie
's, provincial Judges that are to give up an account of their actions to him, they are often removed at the least complaint, and others placed in their rooms. It is a great disgrace to receive a bribe, they all do follow the dictates of reason in pronouncing their sentences, in proportioning the penalties accor∣ding to the nature and hainous∣ness of the offences. These Judges have only a power over the peo∣ple, the Clergy and Monks have other Officers and Superinten∣dants that do judge of their mat∣ters.


Besides these inferiour Judges, every other year the grand Mar∣shal or Supream 
Bikir
 sends men into several Provinces to hearken


after the behaviour, and examine the deportment of the Judges. If any be found guilty of any crime, he is severely punished and shamefully thrust out of his Of∣fice with a mark of Infamy, that renders him incapable of having any publick employment in this Country. Such seldom remain there long, for the shame and ob∣loquy of the people forces them to be gone and seek other habita∣tions in a remote Country. The 
Bikir
 hath also his Lieutenants, like unto our Colonels, disposed of in all the dominions of grand 
Neguz,
 each Lieutenant gives him account of all the men he is able to provide for the service of the Prince in case of necessity, and he governs the people, keeps all things in order, assists the 
Bikir
 and all his inferiour Officers in the execution of their Offices, when


they are requir'd; for that purpose, they have so many men ready upon all occasions to obey their orders; these receive a continual salary from the Emperour, al∣though they are otherwise em∣ployed in several Trades. At the least summons they assemble at the Rendezvous, and follow their Leaders, who by this means keep all the Country in awe, and appease the tumults and disorders that may happen amongst a mix∣ed multitude.


In the time of the Wars, these Lieutenants of distinct places ga∣ther their men together at the place appointed, and then march with them according to order, u∣sually to the place where the great 
Neguz
 is himself, to guard and de∣fend his Person. They carry with them their Provisions and Victu∣als proportionable to the time


appointed for them to stay in Arms. These officers have places allotted to them for their mainte∣nance by the Emperour, who is Lord and sole owner of all the Land within his great Empire. All the people are but his slaves, their substance and goods are his when he will require them; unto persons more eminent than the rest he appoints certain Lands and pla∣ces for to recompence them for the pains they take in his service. All the people pay the tenth part of all fruits to the King, that Re∣venue belongs to the Crown: they always pay the tribute and taxes in the Commodities of the Coun∣try, in Salt, Gold, Silver, Corn, Hides, Elephants Teeth, the horn of the 
Rhinocerot,
 slaves and such like.


Now this manner of Govern∣ment is only in the Territories,


more immediately subject to the 
Neguz,
 the others, where tributary Kings do Reign, are not thus sub∣ject to his power, the Kings give no account of their actions to him, or to his Officers, but play the soveraigns in all their jurisdictions, causing money to be stamp'd in their names, tributes and customs to be levyed according to the publick wants, disposing of all of∣fices and places within their ter∣ritories at their will.


Of late they have brought in stamped Coin, which before was not known in this Empire. The name and titles of the 
Neguez
 is Printed in one side, and a large Cross on the other, with some Characters signifying that he is a defender of the Cross. There are yet some little pieces of Gold, Brass and Iron, with Pepper, and all other Merchandises, that serve


instead of Coin in the places far from the Imperial Court, and where Coin cannot so easily be obtained nor made. Those that are found guilty of crimes, are not ordinarily punished with death (they use to deprive them for their offences of some of their Limbs) of their eyes, hands, or feet, forcing them to a continual sufferance the rest of their days. If any commit sacriledge, he is burnt without mercy in the fire; and those that murder, by their Law are to lose their lives, unless the Prince will mitigate the pu∣nishment by a perpetual prison or banishment.


In the 
Manda
 are several penal Statutes, amongst the rest, that if a Priest be guilty of any crime, as of murder, of perjury, adultery, 
&c.
 he is to be punished in the same manner as the rest of the


people, that he is to be called be∣fore the common Judge after that the Bishop hath notice of the fact, and that both together are to pro∣nounce the sentence that he de∣serves without any mercy.


It is commanded in that book, that all, both Secular and Eccle∣siastick persons are to abstain from all carnal Copulation during the space of twenty four hours next immediately before they enter in∣to the Churches.


There is in it a very wholsome Law that concerns the good of the publick: It is that two times every year there shall be an As∣sembly called of the most Reve∣rend and Eminent Persons of the Nation to consult of the Affairs of the Church, and establish Laws according to the occasions and times. That then the 
Abuna
 shall sit as President with the Empe∣rours


chief Judge, and that of the Clergy and Fryers, there shall be called out of all parts to make Decrees for the good of the Em∣pire.


Adulterers are punished with death in this manner. The Man and the Woman are stript naked and ty'd up by the legs to some high tree, where they are to re∣main to feed the Fowl of the air, until their bones and flesh fall to the ground. It is no less than death to touch them, or to offer to shew favour to their dead Car∣kasses. By this exemplary punish∣ment of these offenders, men grow more wary how they ven∣ture to defile their Neighbours Bed, and Women are not so free of their Tailes as amongst our jealous 
Italians.
 Men in this Coun∣try pretend not so much Court∣ship and Gallantry, and Women


dare not countenance the declara∣tions or passion of a secret Lover. Custom here teaches women as much privacy as in any other place, but not with that strictness that might render them ridicu∣lous, but they abuse it not as other people do, the better to hide their foul actions, and the meet∣ings of their Gallants. There is more innocency in the behaviour of the women; as much modesty, but less craft and subtilty; as much freedom, but little debauchery.


Murder is no less hateful in this place, it hath a punishment allot∣ted to it no less grievous: The murderer that knew how to de∣stroy others, is forced to destroy himself also; in this manner a Sword is put into his hands, and he is laid upon a large piece of I∣ron flat, as long and as broad as a mans body, it is supported with


four feet under it, a gentle flame is entertained that heats it, and puts him by degrees to cruel tor∣ments, the pain & rage forces him to thrust the weapon into his own bowels, by that means to deliver himself from the unmerciful fury of the fire, and abridge his tor∣tures. This kind of death is pra∣ctised in 
Tigremahon
 and 
Angote,
 in other places, the murder is exe∣cuted in another manner, they flea him alive, and cut his eye lids, and then they expose him to the Sun in that raw condition in some e∣minent place, rubbing him over with honey to invite the Bees and Wasps to feed upon him. This kind of death is the most inhu∣mane that I ever beheld. The pain is both grievous and tedious, death creeps upon them by de∣grees, and suffers them not to die till they have endured a world of misery.


The Noblemen and Grandees of the Court that offend the 
Ne∣guz,
 or commit any other crime worthy of death, are not executed in the common manner, nor in the usual places appointed for that purpose. There is in the King∣dom of 
Damut
 a high Mountain naturally well fortified with a steep ridge of hills on every side, a narrow passage leads up to the top, where a Castle is erected kept by the Souldiers of the 
Ne∣guz
 guard. There all noble men are brought that venture to break the Laws of the Land, or to displease their Soveraign Lord. The Ter∣ritorie round about is very bar∣ren, and the place extream cold most part of the year; whether it be the nature of the Soil, or the elevation of the Mountain into the second Region of the Air, none could tell me, but here these Per∣sons


of Quality are famished to death, imprisoned, and put to suffer several other sorts of pu∣ments according to the pleasure of the 
Neguz.
 This place is very convenient for that purpose, for the Friends and Acquaintance of the offenders cannot come to learn the miseries that they endure, nor the cruelties that they suffer; which if they did know, might oblige them to a revenge, or ill will against their Emperours.






Of several Customs of the Abyssins.


THe Emperour and people have so great a respect for the Churches, that they never ride by them upon their Horses, as soon as they come within a hun∣dred paces, they alight and walk a foot bowing at the publick pla∣ces


of their Devotion, in honour of that great God that hath na∣med them his Houses of Prayer, as they pass by.


When the Emperour makes a∣ny progress far from the usual place of Residence, certain Reli∣gious men do carry before him up∣on their shoulders, a banner with some pious representation in it, with an Altar or Table of Stone, upon which they use to Celebeate their Communion, before them marcheth a fellow with a Censer in one hand, and a little Bell in the other, at the sound of it the horse∣men come down, the people stand by, and all do prepare themselves to let their Prince pass.


They never use to send their thoughts one to another in wri∣ting, but by messengers, either out of ignorance or superstition, for they fancy the use of writing so


sacred, that they will not profane it in ordinary business, because God hath been pleased to commit his Holy Word in writing; yet of late, seeing the inconveniencies their scrupulous fancies have re∣duced them to, they have made use of writing in several occasions, as in Registring the Affairs of the Kingdoms, in setting down the expences, disbursements and Re∣ceits of the Emperours Revenues, 
&c.
 But the characters are di∣stinct from those of the Bible, or of their Sacred Books. And when the Emperour sends an Embassa∣dour, he then dispatches with him some Credential Letters.


They are not to make Wine but by stealth, none but the 
Abu∣na
 and the King may cause the Grapes to be strained; for they are afraid that if Wine did grow common, it would introduce much


debauchery and many disorders, which could not find a remedy. They do not forbid it out of su∣perstition as the 
Turks,
 but for some politick considerations that Wine may not grow so common amongst them, that they might neglect the other drinks which en∣courage Husbandry, for they use a sort of drink made of a leaf which they sow, it is of a pleasant taste, much like unto old 
Mede,
 a drink made of Honey. They drink also water steeped with Barley, & other Grains. The Emperour and the 
Abuna
 have liberty to drink and make Wine by their Laws. All the Wine of this Country is very black, but a great Cordial, it burns not so much the stomach as others do in hot places, but che∣risheth and refresheth the body.


The towns in this Country are not numerous, in Houses they sel∣dom


contain above 2000. I never 
aw a walled City, some Castles of late have been built for plea∣sure rather than for defence.


Their houses are but mean and low, covered with a thick thatch, their beds are Hides tied up at the four corners. They eat upon cou∣ches, with a little round and low table placed before them that sup∣ports a large dish; they have some Vessels made of earth of a shining black very beautiful, these are their cups to drink; of late they have the use of Gold and Silver in their houses.


They have several sorts of weapons, short Lances, Swords, Bows and Arrows without Fea∣thers, Helmets and Head-pieces; they have got some field Guns purchased from Merchants at an extraordinary rate, to encourage them to import more.


The 
Abyssins
 are natural lyars and deceivers, they seldom speak truth when they swear, unless they be brought to take a solemn Oath, or be forced to swear by the Head of their 
Neguz,
 or be scared with the thoughts of Excommu∣nication, for they apprehend that above all corporal punishments.


This is their manner of admini∣string an Oath, the party that is to swear follows two Priests to the Church-door, they carry before him Fire and Incense, as soon as the party comes, the Priests cause him to lay his hand on the door, saying unto him these words: 
If thou swear an untruth, as the Dra∣gon devoureth the beasts of the For∣rest, so let the infernal Devils de∣vour thee, as the Grapes are bruised in the Wine-press, so let them bruise thy body, and as the fire consumeth the wood, so let thy soul for ever burn




in hell.
 The party that sweareth answers to every one of these im∣precations 
Amen.
 But if thou speak the truth, let thy life be pro∣longed with honour, and thy soul at last be received into heaven; and again he answereth 
Amen,
 which being ended, he tells what he knows of the business required from him.


They have not the liberty to kill an Ox without the Gover∣nours leave, although it belong to them, for they are careful to pre∣serve Cattel in that place from the excess of Luxury; here are no shambles therefore in the towns, as in 
Europe;
 their ordinary victu∣als are Mutton, Herbs, Fruit, Fowl, wild Beasts, and such like. The wild Goats do increase here in such a manner, especially near the Mountains, that they eat up all the Corn and Grass, other wild


things are here in great numbers; they do not therefore suffer their tame Cattel to be destroyed (whiles they have so many wild, that they threaten the Fruits of the earth with destruction) to en∣courage the hunting of them, they forbid the ordinary use of Beef. This Inland people is naturally of a lazy disposition, they have there∣fore many Laws to quicken them, and oblige them to labour and provide for their own preservati∣on. As the not killing of their Oxen without License, the refu∣sing alms to beggars, they are not to suffer any in the Kingdoms of the 
Neguz
 that will not work, un∣less they be so sick and maimed, that they are not able to help themselves, then the Religious houses do administer comfort to them, for they are endowed for that purpose with many Lands and Reversions.


The 
Abyssins
 are very devou
 in all holy duties, & in holy places they pay unto them a great re∣spect, they'l neither spit nor sit down in their Churches, nor suffer any Dogs nor Cats, nor any other unreasonable creature to enter into them; but instead of seats, they use Crutches very conveniently made to lean upon. At the Church door there stands a multitude of them, every one takes his own, and draws as near the Preacher as possible he can. They perform their prayers sitting, confess their sins standing, hear the expositions and Lectures of the Bible lean∣ing.


They often use washing, espe∣cially before prayer, they wash face, hands and feet, for they love to appear before Almighty God with decency, they will not touch any unclean or dead thing, and if


they do by chance, they dare not present themselves in their Churches till they have made use of washing.


Their women are employed a∣bout all servile work, but are not reduced to that slavery as other women, their Neighbours amongst the 
Moors
 and 
Gentiles.
 The ordi∣nary work of those that necessity constrains not to be industrious, is to spin Silk and Cotton to make the excellent stuffs that come from thence and the 
East Indies.


Their Marriages are very plea∣sant, before the door of the bride∣groom a bed is prepared according to his estate, then come three Priests with a silver Cross which they lay upon it, followed by the Bridegroom, Bride, and all their Friends; they altogether walk three times about the bed, crying Allelujah, and then they com∣mand


the young couple to set down, cutting off a Lock of the head of the Bridegroom, and ano∣ther of the Bride, which they sprinkle in water sanctified, then they tell the Bridegroom, laying their hands upon his head, do that which God hath commanded in his Gospel, and think now that you are not two but one flesh; which is no sooner said, but they all depart, and a tent being erect∣ed about the bed, they presently obey the Commandment. Then follows a three days Feast, where all magnificence is expressed a∣mongst the great ones.


Polygamy
 is permitted and much practised amongst them, but those that wait upon their Churches, or that perform any office in them, are by no means suffered to have two Wives, whosoever of the Clergy keepeth a Concubine or


two Wives, is degraded 
ipso facto,
 and loseth his title to all Spiritual promotion or employment in the Church, thereby they recommend a greater degree of abstinence from fleshly lusts to men of the Holy function, than to others; they require them to live accor∣ding to the strictest rules of Chri∣stianity, and to be exemplary in their conversations.


They have another frequent a∣buse in the matter of Marriage, they do grant unto the woman a Letter of divorce upon slight oc∣casions: But the Priests do not approve of this practice, therefore they provide against it as much as lies in their power; they lay upon that person that shall break first the Marriage-bond a grievous pe∣nalty, or a curse to oblige the par∣ties for fear of being liable unto it, to be faithful and constant to


one another. Nevertheless the great ones many times find se
 pretences to excuse their dissoy
¦ty, and to procure a separati
 when they do not agree. Among
 them it is also lawful to marry the Brothers Wife, if she be Child less according to the Law of 
Mo∣ses;
 but this is only practised by the Grandees. The other sort of people are more Christian in t
 customs, they suffer not any to marry before the age of 18. the reason they give of this Law, i
 that by early Marriages nature 
 brought to decay, which they la∣bour to hinder, by appointing 
 moderate age capable of the trou∣ble and inconveniencies of that estate. They fore-see also that i
 Marriage were permitted before▪ it would both lessen and weak
 the next Generation of men.


There are here two sorts of Re∣ligious men, the Priests whose business is to reach and instruct the people, whereof some are disper∣sed all over the Country, having their particular precincts; the o∣ther live together in a Fellowship and Society in Buildings appoint∣ed for that purpose; the chief bu∣siness of these is to Visit the sick, provide for the poor, and perform charitable deeds. The other sort of Religious men are Monks and Fryers that live a retired life, as the 
Anachorets
 did; for that intent they have Covents built at some places distant from the towns, up∣on delicate Mountains, and in plea∣sant Valleys. Neither of these sort of people are useless in that Em∣pire, they are not to beg as our Fryers in 
Italy
 and 
Spain,
 they have no need of it, for the former Emperours have appointed a con∣siderable


Revenue, and great ter∣ritories to the maintenance of these Houses, and of their owners besides, they have the liberty to traffick and increase their Riches every one hath a trade to employ himself, some spend their life i
 Contemplation, and in discovering those things and Secrets that may be for the publick benefit, others do till their own ground, sow, reap and dress their Gardens.


These places were not first founded in vain, they were for the benefit of the publick, e∣specially of Strangers and Pil∣grims that are there to be received and entertained without any charge to them. And if any wa
 become an extravagant in wasting his Estate, it was laid up for him in these Religious Houses, and employed to the best advantage by these Fryers. But that th



Revenue may never be wasted, they are never to marry whiles they remain in the Covent, if the fancy of marrying seizeth upon a∣ny man, he is to depart with a small portion, and to dispose of himself at his own pleasure. These men live such pleasant lives, that none can think of marrying whiles he remains amongst them; they have plenty of all things provided for them, brought out of all parts of the world by means of their traffick; they have excellent company among themselves, free from all troubles of the world. Some time they spend in their de∣votions morning and evening, they are constantly together at their Church-offering, their prayers to Almighty God for the Empe∣rours person, and the Empire. The rest of their time they spend in the improvement of their talents, and


in their several affairs for the bene∣fit of their Covent; they do n
 weary themselves late in the
 works, but at a convenient ho
 towards the evening they repair 
 their lodgings, and there take to∣gether such civil Recreations as an innocent and retired life will af∣ford. I look upon the condition of these men the most happy i
 the world, they are neither bur∣thened with commands, nor vexed with taxes, nor disturbed with suits in Law, nor tormented with the cares of this world, nor consu∣med with the unlawful pleasure
 of it, nor disquieted with many miscarriages which do naturally attend men of business; but here they live neither idle nor useless, but having employed themselves moderately, they have time to re∣vive their spirits with some Re∣creation. If there be a Paradise on


earth, I think it is in 
Ethiopia
 a∣mongst these Monks and Fryers; they are so far from begging, that at solemn times of the year, at the Nativity of our Saviour, at Easter, Pentecost, 
Michaelmas,
 and the birth-day of the Emperour, they send their liberalities to all the poor people round their Covents, especially to those that are burthe∣ned with numbers of Children, and have nothing to make them subsist but their daily labour. Were our Fryers, our Franciscans, Mendicants, and the other Orders of Religious men of this dispositi∣on in his Holiness dominions, the people would honour and respect them, and they would gain much credit to the Roman Church by such practises, and to themselves. These Fyers that are thus retired out of the great concourse of the towns and people, are of several


fraternities, some are called the Moncks of St. 
Anthony,
 these are the most numerous. Their foun∣der was an 
Anachoret
 of 
Egypt
 that spent his latter days in the desart places in tilling and dressing the ground. He drew unto him such numbers of people that were wea∣ry with the toil and troubles of the great world, that he saw ma∣ny thousands imitate his example before he dyed. The other fra∣ternities are those of St. 
Paul,
 of St. 
Maconius,
 whose employment is the same with the Monks of St. 
Anthony,
 they differ only in their names. In every Covent they e∣lect every year a Superintendant whom they call 
Loucana;
 he is to keep good orders, and to an∣swer all the miscarriages that are committed by the Society, if he allows of them.


These blessed places are to pay no Revenue to the Emperour, but of their prayers. All other Lands are at his disposal by the Statutes of the Empire, he is the Lord of them, but these that belong to the Fryers are none of his, and free from all impositions. So are all the other Lands and places that belong to the Clergy; for we may take notice that the tythes of all things belonging to the Emperor, the Clergy and those that attend in the worship of God have a maintenance appointed unto them out of certain Lands and territo∣ries: which they must see manured as well as the rest of the people do theirs, for they receive little or no benevolence from the Country, they depend not upon them for their maintenance: so that by that means they are highly honoured of all men, and beloved because


they rather give to them, than take from them; and although they are well rewarded for their pains from the Lands allotted to them, their good Offices look as favours and kindnesses done to the people, because nothing proceeds from their labours or Estates to reward the Priests instructions and Attendance.


The Churches are separated into three distinct places or rooms according to the manner of the 
Jews.
 At the entrance of the Temple, about six paces there is a Curtain drawn that makes the first separation, every body may go into the Church, but none but those that have been sanctified by the 
Abuna
 have liberty to go into that place, and pass the first Cur∣tain. This was wisely enacted to oblige all the Nobility and Per∣sons of Quality to receive that be∣nefit


from the High-Priest, and by tha
 means to endear him unto them. Next to this place before the Altar-table, is drawn another Curtain, beyond which none hath liberty to pass but the Priests themselves when the Communi∣on is administred. These curtains are drawn, but the people keep themselves in their several distinct places until the time of the Com∣munion.


The Churches are very neatly adorned with Pictures, which these people do not worship, but only as Ornaments to their Religious Houses, they place them there. The Churches are built of Lime and Stone, which they use not in their common buildings; for they think it decent that the places set apart for the Service of God should have no common materi∣als. None therefore but some se∣lect


houses of the Emperour are built in this manner, and with the same substance.


When the Priest hath lost his Wife by death, he may not mar∣ry again unless he wil lose the power of executing his function, yet the Patriarch may give a Li∣cense to marry again, but without that License it is altogether un∣lawful.


They bury their dead with the greatest ceremony imaginable, they cloath them in all their most gaudy attire, and carry them in a Chair with their faces and hands uncovered, if the dead hath been a Souldier, he hath the honour to go armed into the grave; before, march the Priest and the Religi∣ous men, saying some good sen∣tences, advising the people to pre∣pare to depart; then comes the Corps seated in his Chair of State


trimed with Garlands and Flow∣ers, and with some white Feathers, if he be young, with yellow if he be of a middle age, and with black if he be old. The sight is so plea∣sant, that it would almost give e∣very one a mind to be in the room of the dead; the Parents follow with a badge of mourning upon their heads, a handful of ashes, the next come their friends and ac∣quaintance; thus they proceed to the Grave in order, where the first ch. of the Gospel of S. 
John
 is read, & the noble Actions & vertues of the dead are rehearsed, all hearing with much devotion, then the Priest as they put the body in the Grave pronounceth these words, 
Dust thou art, and to dust thou shalt return.
 The next day they give alms, and send gifts to their friends in the name of the deceased, and bring upon his Grave a banquet


according to the Quality of the Persons. And every day for a moneth they continue to visit the Sepulchre of the dead, and to of∣fer up some prayers for him to Almighty God, for they imagine something of purgatory, and of the unsealed estate of the Soul im∣mediately after its departure out of this life, which obliges them to intreat for them, that they may enter into the joys of the bles∣sed.










THE DESCRIPTION OF THE Several Kingdoms Subject TO THE NEGUZ.




Of Barnagasso.


THis Kingdom is as fruitful as it is large and popu∣lous: It is limited on the South by a pleasant River called 
Abagni,
 that discharges it self into 
Nilus,
 on the West it hath an


Island called by the Inhabitants 
Souhador,
 by our people 
Gueyter
▪
 which Island the River 
Nilus
 for∣meth as it runs through 
Ethiopia
 towards 
Egypt;
 on the North is the Kingdom of 
Dafila,
 and on the East the Red Sea, where there is a very convenient Port for Ships, now possessed by the 
Turks
 and 
Moors
 called 
Erc
cc
.
 This King∣dom is full of little towns, the most considerable places are 
Fi∣nash, Carne, Timei, Bara, Barvo;
 there is over it a Lord or a King that commands in chief, and hath it by inheritance, he that is there now is called 
Ishmael,
 he pays tri∣bute both to the 
Turks
 and to the 
Neguz;
 the Country abounds in Silk, Cloath of Silver that is made by the Inhabitants, and in Cottons. It is fruitful, of Dates, Pomgranates Peaches, Apricocks, Corn of all sorts, especially Oats, the people


make of it a drink very pleasant. Here are also many Vineyards, the Wine they make by stealth, as in other places of the dominions of the 
Neguz.


The Country is for the most part Champaign, unless it be to∣wards the Red sea, there a ridge of hills stretches it self all along the Coast and encloseth many lakes and pools of water enriched with excellent fish, that which is called 
Mazamo,
 is the most consi∣derable because of its pleasant sci∣tuation that hath invited thither many Religious men that have planted upon the sides of it six Monasteries. It lyes convenient for trade, for near unto it is the Red sea, from whence these holy 
Anachorets
 do fetch their Mer∣chandise, to convey them to the rest of the Kingdom; and because they border upon the 
Moors,
 they


pay unto them a yearly tribute to have the liberty of passing through their territories unmolested by their means, the Kingdom receives a considerable benefit; they have great numbers of Mules, Asses, Camels, Rhinocerots, Elephants especially in the Mountains where these creatures are wild.


There is one thing very remar∣kable in the mountains near a little town called 
Abbarah,
 is a large fountain of such strange nature, that whatsoever is cast into it, turns within a days time into a hard stone, whether it be Wood, Flesh, Earth, or any other sub∣stance.


And not far from it at certain times, amongst the common peo∣ple it is reported, that there are appearances in the mountains ve∣ry dreadful, when I passed by that place my curiosity carryed me to


it; I did really hear strange voi∣ces and names in the air, but saw nothing, but I did attribute the cause to the wind, and the dispo∣sition of the mountains that are so placed, that when a strong gale blows upon the Rocks there are unusual names heard; the wind strikes also through several Caves, and at the entry many shreiks and crys are heard, so that the Coun∣try people dare not adventure in to know the cause of them. The vulgar opinion is, that this place leads into hell, and that the Souls of the damned tormented in these lower-parts of the earth, do send up here their complaints. I did visit these Caves, near them none would come with me for fear of mischief. I perceived the cause of the wonder, and did discover it to some of the Fryers, but their ig∣rance and superstition would never


believe me; from their infancy they had been bred up with an ap∣prehension of these dark Caves, which no reason could possibly remove from them: I went to see all the curiosities of this Country with my guard, being ac∣companyed by some Persons be∣longing to the Emperours Court, they led me into a deep valley, where we heard nine Eccho's or returns of our voices one after another. At the end of it near a large fountain, the ground being very stony, we found several slates very white that had Images of Beasts and men imprinted in them in a blew character, so perfectly, that no hand could ever paint them better.


Nature sometimes delights to shew her Industry or Art amongst the most contemptible trifles, and to cast her Gold and Pearls in


vessels and places not answerable to the price of these things. The Prince of this Kingdom received us with much civility, but not with more State than is proper to such remote and barbarous people. The 
Abuna
 made his progress all over his Diocese, he visited the Court of this King amongst the rest, and in his company I went to see much of 
Ethiopia,
 he had a traine suitable to his estate, several of the Grandees out of curiosity did accompany us; His business was in every place to see to the behaviour of the Clergy, to ap∣point Bishops careful of the Pub∣lick Interest, and to look that they that were already appointed might do their office without respect of persons: He displaced three during our progress, and establish'd others in whom he confided; they were


the Bishops of 
Balgada,
 of 
Abugu∣na,
 and 
Fungi,
 men that had not behaved themselves well in their function.






Of the Kingdom of Tigremahon.


IT is the best territory of 
Ne∣guz,
 but much ruined by the Wars of the 
Turk,
 it is watered with many little Rivers that run into 
Nilus,
 so that all the Summer it yields a pleasant Prospect, and as great advantage to the Inhabi∣tants, for in most places they reap two Crops of every thing that is sown or planted: It contains about sixty leagues in length, from the River 
Nilus
 to 
Darngali,
 and thirty in breadth. The Emperour lives here for the most part, and there∣fore he appoints Governours over several places of it. Three Provin∣ces


it contains, 
Sabami, Torrates, Balgada;
 In that of 
Sabami
 are se∣veral Mines of Gold, out of which the 
Neguz
 digs five Millions of Dollars every year; over this Province is a 
Sebesh,
 a Governour that takes care to gather the Em∣perours Revenue, and to keep good order in every place: It is not so fruitful as the other Pro∣vinces, but in recompence, it fur∣nishes a great quantity of that Rich Metal that others do want. This place is said to be the country of the Queen of 
Saba
 that visited 
Solomon;
 the 
Abyssins
 do tell many stories of her Voyage to 
Jerusalem,
 and of her return that caused all the Kingdoms that ac∣knowledged her jurisdiction to become 
Jews.


In this Kingdom was a famous City called 
Caxumo,
 it was the Metropolis of all 
Ethiopia,
 but it


hath been mightily ruined by the Wars, so that at present it shews but a few houses that serve to receive Shepheards and Graziers, for here is abundance of Cattel of all sorts, round about stand many old Ruines over-grown with herbs, but yet they declare the im∣portance and greatness of the Ci∣ty that did give Laws to this part of the Country, although it is so near the line the air is very tem∣perate, not so much by reason of the continual brises that blow very fresh from three a clock till the afternoon, as because of the abun∣dance of fresh water Springs that are very cold in the hottest time of Summer. Near this City is a fountain that contains much wa∣ter, but never yields any until the Beasts do come to drink, and when they do approach it flows over, and gives a very plentiful stream


of clear water very grateful to the Palate. We had here a sight of a strange sort of a Cat, about the bigness of a Leopard, the In∣habitants do use the dung in many sort of medicines, and to dye their Cloath and Cottons in blew. It is not so fierce as other beasts of that bigness, but extream fearful, it keeps for the most part in inac∣cessible mountains and Rocks, and seldom adventures it self in the plain Country, although it runs as swift as any creature I have seen. Here are also great quantity of Rhinocerots, Tygers, Leopards, Wolfs, 
&c.
 for here are many Woods that serve for a retreat to these furious kinds of creatures.


I must not omit a memorable story that is spread amongst the people of a certain hill that is sci∣tuate between 
Dongali
 and 
Tigre∣mahon,
 where a Saint, very much


respected by the Country people, was shut up in prison and condem∣ned by the Pagans that possessed this place to die in the beginning of Christianity: He was to be fa∣mished to death in a high moun∣tain on the top of a rock unto which he was ty'd hand and foot: he continued there many days ex∣posed to the fury of the Eagles and Vultures, and other ravenous Birds without any harm. These cruel fowl instead of feeding upon his naked body unable to defend it self, did bring up to him of the choicest meat that they could steal in the lower Country, and on the top of that hard Rock there burst forth a large stream of living water so near his head, that he had the liberty to sup some up, and re∣fresh himself when he was dry.


The spring continues yet to run, it falls down above sixty fatham


high from a steep rock down a precipice. They say that their fore-fathers when they saw this miracle, and that at the end of two or three months he was in perfect health, as formerly, they embraced the Christian faith. They shew besides the Tomb of this Saint that dyed amongst them in a very old age. It is visited by several pilgrims that come from the other Kingdoms of the great 
Neguz.


The Inhabitants are excellent Marks-men, they have been try∣ed in the wars against the King of 
Adel,
 so that they have approved themselves the best Souldiers of the Emperours dominions. They use Bows and Arrows, a long lance much like to a 
Roman,
 of late they have fire Arms, and some few pieces of Artillery.


The Emperour chuseth out of this Kingdom his common guards, because that they are not only good Souldiers, but have a meen more manly than the ordinary sort of people of these Regions.


In this Kingdom that is the lar∣gest, and the best belonging to the 
Neguz,
 great numbers of 
Jews
 are dispersed. The Christians treat them with much civility, they suf∣fer them to trade amongst them to reap the fruit of the earth to enjoy the liberty of their Religi∣on, by that means great numbers have embraced that profession that did teach love and kindness to strangers, hoping to meet with greater advantages when they should become brothers, for there is no invitation more powerful up∣on the spirits of a man to oblige him to initiate himself in Religion than a sincere affection expressed


by the professors of it. The ad∣vantages to be expected in Chri∣stianity are sufficient to perswade us, violence better becomes a 
Mahomet
 than Christ, he never made use of his whip, but to drive men out of his Church.


The 
Jews
 have here their Sy∣nagogues, but they are at present so little frequented, that I think the name will be one day lost by reason of their great numbers that daily turn Christians.


It was in this Kingdom that I saw a Black-a-moor with two heads joyned one to another, and two faces, one behind and another before, the rest of his body was very well proportioned. It was a monster of about twenty years of age, he was way strong in his Limbs, he discoursed unto us with one Tongue, sometimes with the other, and sometimes both to∣gether;


he was obliged to feed
 behind and before, he eats as much as two men. The heads were di∣stinct and separated until they came to the neck bone there they joyned together. This irregulari∣ty in nature happens more fre∣quently amongst the beasts than amongst the men of this Country, for the heat that commands their inclinations moves their bloud, and carrys them to unlawful Copula∣tions when they meet together, as they often do at the Springs of fresh water.






Of the Kingdom of Angote.


IT is not so large as the former, but no less populous: 
Bele∣quanze
 is on the South of it, 
Tigre∣mahon
 on the West and North, and the Kingdom of 
Adel
 on the


East, it stretcheth it self about twenty leagues in length, from 
Fatigar
 to 
Dangali,
 it contains two fruitful Provinces, 
Buguna
 and 
Guanamora;
 they are full of all manner of Fruit-trees, especially of Dates and Pomgranates, for here the Inhabitants are far more industrious than their Neighbours in improving their ground to the best advantage.


Here are many Religious houses built as they say upon the Sepul∣chers of their Saints, that were there interred, several good towns do belong to it, 
Demars, Angote,
 and 
Buguna,
 are the chief near the latter, which is not far distant from a large River that bursts forth of the lake 
Barceum;
 scituate beyond the mountains of 
Ainora
 is a large Pool of water called the Pool of 
Pontius Pilate,
 if any should cast into it a stone, or any other thing


the water would rise, swell, grum∣ble, and in an impatient manner run over the sides, although that which is cast in be never so incon∣siderable; but if the water be let alone, it remains without motion. About 15 leagues from that place towards 
Adel
 is a little Town call∣ed 
Bachlar,
 where in the Church at one end of it grows a Vine, the Inhabitants name it the 
Holy Vine,
 it grows within the walls of the Church in a room that is made a purpose for it; It is planted upon the Sepulchre of one St. 
Maximin
 that was buryed here. The peo∣ple told me it was above a thou∣sand years of age, and would sub∣sist until dooms-day, that the Saint at his death commanded it to be planted there, telling them, that as often as any twig should wither, they would receive a con∣siderable loss from the enemies,


and that when it should dry up, Christ would come to judge the world, or the Infidels would over∣power the Christians; I was ad∣mitted to visit and pay my devo∣tions to it, the cluster of Grapes that it yields are very big, I could not see whether they grew natural∣ly upon the branches, that curiosi∣ty was unseasonable amongst a peo∣ple that would admit of no con∣tradiction, and that did find a great benefit from this belief, for both Heathens and Christians are pos∣sessed with this vulgar errour, that the story is true. I that was not so apt to receive such unusual tales upon trust, did desire to touch the Grapes and examine their reality, but the Priest forbad me, telling me, that it was an impurity that never any had been yet guilty of, and that he wondred how I that waited not upon the Altar did


dare to handle such holy things. I did not offer to examine further the business after this severe re∣prehension. It discovered to me as much as I was desirous to know, that 
piae fraudes
 are in use in that Climate as well as in ours; a continual profit makes them nourish this opinion, and cherish it in themselves and others.


The Priest sells the leaves, and the Grapes he says that he keeps them for the Wine in the Sacra∣ment, the leaves are good for ma∣ny sorts of diseases, as Agues, Fea∣vers, Consumptions, 
&c.
 Many cures are said to have been effect∣ed by them, but I think that the fancy of the sick hath rather cured them than the vertue of the leaf.








Of Beleguanze.


THis Kingdom is more bar∣ren than the rest, the King∣doms of 
Fungi, Amara, Bagami∣dri, Angote, Tigremahon,
 do shut it in on all sides; It is a plain Coun∣try, but full of sand, only on that side where the River passeth is fruitful, the most considerable Towns are 
Dahrab, Shubi,
 and 
Gro∣char,
 all three in sight of the Cur∣rent; there is nothing memorable in this Kingdom, but some places where the Inhabitants do pick up golden sand, which they refine and sell to the Merchants of 
Melinde
 that bring hither their Camels.


This Country hath no Barley, nor Wheat, but instead of those grains they have 
Tafo Daguza,
 seed with which they make a bread very pleasant to the taste,


but much more sweet than ours. It grows in any ground, the worst as well as the best, nature hath thus provided for all Countries and people a means to supply them∣selves by their industry, if they will make use of it. This Country is extream hot, and the most unfit for dwelling of any one that I have seen in the Territories of the 
Ne∣guz,
 the beams of the Sun beat a∣gainst the sandy ground▪ and meet∣ing there with an obstinate resi∣stance, they return back into the face and uncovered part of the body; so that it is not possible to walk here abroad about noon by reason of the excessive heat, there∣fore the inhabitants do keep themselves within their Houses from ten of the clock, until two. In the Houses that are all thatcht and supported with posts, it is ve∣ry cool, the Sun-beams have not


the power to enter in through the Reeds.






Of Amara.


ALthough this Kingdom is directly under the Line, there is not a more pleasant place to dwell in all over the world. It is full of Mountains and Valleys about twenty leagues in circumfe∣rence, adorned with high Woods and Forrests, the ground is ex∣tream fruitful, the people very civil, the Clergy devout, the No∣bles gallant and brave. In the mountains are many little Villages planted in the low ground, and in the midst of them is a strong Ca∣stle that looks like a Town, for the outmost wall contain about two miles in circumference. Here the Kings Children are kept with


the Emperours as Hostages of their fidelity. They are all train∣ed up in several exercises, the only inconveniency is that they are here confined to live, which it may be to them is no inconveniency, for they never see any thing else but these mountains, and think the world hath no other place for a dwelling but here. The Bishop of 
Amara,
 a very grave man introdu∣ced us into the Castle where the Emperours Children were kept, they were then but young, the eldest was not above four years of age. His countenance was promi∣sing, we had a sight of the Gar∣dens and Walks full of pleasant Fountains and Rivulets, artificial∣ly brought into these high places. The Walks were covered with a Tree not usual in our Country, the branches were twisted one with another in such a manner that no


Sun could penetrate them, they were entertained always green, for at the root of the Trees on both sides of the Walk a little Cur∣rent of fresh water doth always run, that refresheth the roots, and preserveth them from the droughth of Summer. It is as de∣licious a place as any I have seen in 
Europe,
 the Children have the liberty to hunt and divert them∣selves out of the Walls of this Castle, but they are never to go out of the mountains while their Father lives; for that purpose a strict guard is kept at the passage where no man can go or come without leave. It is both narrow and steepy, made with the hand, a few persons are able to keep it from all the world; in the castle are places appointed for the exercise of the youth, and over them they have Masters learned and experi∣enced


in all those Sciences and Disciplines that they are to know. Here are excellent Astrologers▪ for that is a Science unto which this Country people is addicted. They have some here learned in the 
Arabian
 and 
Indian
 Tongues, others that give themselves over to the study of Philosophy and Nature, but very few do trouble their brains with Divinity; this makes them less notional, but more practical, for they know no niceties in Cases of Conscience to excuse their actions and inclinati∣ons


The other Kingdoms are less remarkable, only that of 
Damut
 and 
Goiame
 are full of Mines of Gold. The Emperour keeps them with above 6000 men in Arms continually. 
Tegrai
 and 
Vangue
 are mountainous, and peo∣pled with wild beasts & trees more


than with men. 
Xoa
 is rich and fruitful, but in it nothing else re∣markable.






Of the Religion of the Abyssins, and of the manner of their Disci∣pline.


THey do all profess the Christian faith with much zeal, the Church of the Queen 
Candaces,
 whose name they say was 
Indich,
 first brought this Re∣ligion into their Country, that was for the most part possessed with the Jewish. St. 
Thomas
 af∣terwards went into that Country, and there did confirm them in the Christian Religion, obliging all the inhabitants by the greatness and number of his Miracles to em∣brace it. Some opposition he met with from the Grandees that had


always retained the Pagan super∣stitions, especially in the Kingdom of 
Damut,
 where there is a moun∣tain that bears yet his name. The Heathens subject to the Empe∣rour of 
Aethiopia
 had got him into their possession, and were resolved to make him suffer for the destru∣ction and neglect of their Idols, they had often attempted upon his life, but neither Sword nor Poison could injure his Person, they sought therefore to drown him in a lake, and when that could not procure his death, they shut him up in a Tower built in the top of these unpleasant moun∣tains, where he remained prisoner until an Angel took him from thence, leaving all his keepers dead on the ground, and brought him again to the Imperial Court, where he complained of the vio∣lence and unjustice that had been


done unto him, which the Emperor going about to revenge, raised an Army to seize upon the King of 
Damut
 that had consented to the imprisonment of the Apostle. He remained here many years, un∣til he departed into the 
Indies,
 where he preached also the Go∣spel. He left behind him many thousand Christians, and as they say, he brought unto them the two books, 
Abelil
 and 
Menda,
 and established here the Discipline that is used amongst them, with all the Ceremonies practised. They and the Capties of 
Egypt
 differ much in point of ceremony, but in belief they are 
Eutycheans
 as for the most part. Some there are that have true and Orthodox opinions of Christ.


Here is the form of their belief published in writing amongst them, by which we may judge of them further.




WE believe in the Name of the Holy Trinity, the Fa∣ther, the Son, and the Holy Spirit, who are but one Lord; three names, but one Divinity; three faces, but one similitude. The conjunction of the persons is equal in the Divinity, for there is but one Kingdom, one Throne, one Judge, one Charity, one Word, and one Spirit; The word of the Father, & of the Son, and the word of the Holy Ghost and the Son, is the same word; The word with God, and with the holy Spirit, and with himself is the son of the Father, and from the Fa∣ther without the least deficiency or division, without 
y beginning he was the son of his Father without Mother; no body can know the Myste∣ry of his filiation, unless it be the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit. Now this Son was in the beginning the Word, and this Word was the


Word with God, and the Word was God. The spirit of the Father the holy Spirit, the spirit of the Son is the 
ame divine Spirit, the holy Spirit is without diminution or increase; this Divine Spirit is called the Comfor∣ter, a living God, who proceeds from the Father and the Son, he spake by the mouth of the Prophets, he descen∣ded in a flame of fire upon the Apo∣stles in Sion. They published all over the world, and preached the word of the Father, and this word is the Son Besides, the Father is not first, be∣cause he is the Father, nor the Son the last because he is Son, so the Holy Ghost is neither the first nor the last. They are three Persons and one God, that sees all, and is seen of no body, he hath by his own counsel created all things, afterwards the Son for our Salvation, with the consent of the Father, and of the divine Spirit de∣scended from the highest Heavens



 incarnate by the Holy Ghost of the 
Virgin Mary,
 who was adorned with a twofold Virginity, with a spiritual and carnal. He was born without an
 corruption, his Mother 
Mary
 re∣maining a Virgin after his Birth, fo
 by a great miracle she brought her Son Jesus Christ without effusion of bloud or pangs. He was a just man without sin, perfect God, and perfect man, having but one Person; whe
 he was a Child he grew up by degrees, sucking the Milk of his Mother the 
Virgin Mary,
 and when he came to be thirty years of age, he was bap∣tized in the River 
Jordan;
 As o∣ther men he walked, sweat, hungred, thirsted, and was weary. He suffered all things willingly, and shewed ma∣ny miracles. By the power of his Divinity, he restored sight to the blind, he healed the lame, cleansed the lepers, raised the dead; at last of his own accord he was taken prisoner,


whipt, buffeted, crucified, he languish∣ed and dyed fo
 our si
s; by his death he did overcome death and the De∣vil; by his sufferings, he satisfied for our sins, and bore our infirmities; with the Baptism of his bloud which is that of his death, he baptized the ho∣ly Patriarchs and Prophets; he de∣scended into Hell, where were the Souls of 
Adam,
 and of his Sons, and of Christ himself which is of 
Adam.
 This soul of 
Adam
 Christ did re∣ceive from the Holy 
Virgin Mary,
 by the power and Authority of his Divinity, and efficaciousness of his Cross, he broke the strong gates of hell, and of death; he confined Satan to his chains, and redeemed 
Adam
 and his Sons. All this Christ did be∣cause he was filled with the Divinity, and the Divinity itself was with his soul, and with his most holy body, which Divinity hath granted vertue to the Cross, this Divinity he enjoys


common with the Father as he 
 ways did; At last he was buryed, 
 the third day, Jesus Christ the f
 of the Resurrection, our greatest de∣light, the chief Priest Jesus Christ▪ the great King of 
Israel
 rose 
 from the dead by his own strength and power. And when all was ac∣complished that had been fore-told by the holy Prophets, he ascended into Heaven with glory, and is sate down at the right hand of the Father; he shall come again with glory, having before him a Cross, and in his hand the Sword of Justice to judge both the quick and the dead, of whose Kingdom there shall never be any end. We believe one Catholick and Apostolick Church, we believe one Baptism for the remission of sins, we hope 
or the Resurrection of the dead, and the life of the World to come. 
A∣men.


This is their Creed, they of∣ten do repeat it in their Churches, especially every new Moon, with many gests which they have re∣tained of their former Religions. The Priest that officiates says it a∣lone, and three or four times the people do repeat these words, 
This is our Faith.


Since they have had knowledge of the 
Roman Catholick Religion,
 they have added something to their Creed by the consent of one of their general Assemblies, for they were careful to hinder their people from receiving any other Opinions than those that they had formerly embraced; for when they saw that our Priests and Je∣suits were busie in drawing them to the faith of the Church of 
Rome;
 they published a little ad∣dition to their Creed, to inform e∣very one of their judgments, & hin∣der


them to receive any opinions which they do not approve of.


We believe that the 
Virgin Mary
 is a pure Virgin, before and after the Birth of Christ; as she is the Mother of God, she ought to be loved and respected according∣ly, but we neither worship Her nor pray unto Her. We believe that the Cross of Christ is a useful sign, it was upon it that he suffer∣ed for our sins, and purchased unto us Salvation with his own bloud; His Cross is a scandal to the 
Jews,
 and a folly to the 
Gentiles,
 but to us Christians it is in much esteem and honour, we believe that the Cross of Christ is sufficient to re∣deem us, as S. 
Paul
 hath taught us, but the outward sign and use of it we employ more for distincti∣on, than out of duty: And that we may never think it a scorn to


wear the badge of our Professi∣on.


We believe that S. 
Peter
 was the first of the Apostles, that the Stone that Christ mentions upon which his Church is built, is his Law and Faith; which Law is e∣stablished upon the Prophets and Apostles, unto them was granted the power of governing the Church, of binding and loosing, and to them was committed the keys of the Kingdom of Heaven. But we do not acknowledge the Superiority that his Successors the Popes of 
Rome
 do derive from S. 
Peter;
 nor do we believe that he ever had any priviledge which the others did not enjoy. We be∣lieve that the holy Apostles, Saints, and Martyrs that are in glory did follow the foot-steps of our Saviour Christ, and that they have received from him the par∣don


of their sins, as we do. We believe that we must honour them with the holy Angels, but we do not approve of prayers made unto them, nor of the sufficiency of their Merits to benefit us, or the Church of Christ. We believe that it is well done to confess our sins before the Ministers of the Church, for by their prayers we may be assisted and comforted▪ We receive all the books of the Old and New Testament, as they were delivered unto us by S. 
Tho∣mas,
 without any addition or inno∣vation. We believe that our Clergy have liberty to Marry, as the Apostles and Disciples of our Saviour were, but that it is not lawful for a Priest to have two Wives or a Concubine. We be∣lieve that we are bound to obey in Conscience cur Supream Lord 
iam Belul,
 and under him the



Abuna
 of our Church, with all the rest of our Ecclesiastical and Civil Magistrates and Superiours, but no other. We religiously be∣lieve that there is a place where the less Regenerate persons do go after this life, which is neither Hell, nor Heaven; what it is, and what the souls do suffer in it, we are not able to define. We be∣lieve that none can be saved with∣out the bloud of Jesus Christ, that it is sufficient to cleanse us from all our sins, without any other as∣sistance, and that we are not to trust upon the Merits of the Apo∣stles and Saints that were but sin∣ful men as we were. We believe that there shall be a day of Judge∣ment where Christ shall appear in glory to Judge all men; that we must all appear before him to give an account of our actions, and that after that we shall all either go to


hell or heaven; the wicked to e∣verlasting burning, and the Righ∣teous to eternal bliss. 
Amen.


This is the faith that the sub∣jects of 
Precious Giam,
 which we are to maintain until the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. God grant us grace that we may never forsake it, notwithstanding all the persecutions and perswasions of the enemies of Christianity.


This addition was lately made, since the 
Portugueses
 and other 
Europeans
 have travelled into those parts; for when some Re∣ligious men did endeavour to per∣swade the Emperour to submit to the See of 
Rome,
 and joyn with the other Christian Princes in their obedience to the Popes power. He would never do it, not would never suffer the divulging the opinions which we do embrace in 
Italy.


They do believe whatsoever is in their Books called 
Manda
 and 
Abetil,
 as the Gospel it self; they do fancy that the Apostles and Disciples being assembled toge∣ther at 
Jerusalem,
 did cause them to be written for the benefit of Christianity. In them are con∣tained these precepts.


To fast every 
Wednesday
 in re∣membrance of the wicked resolu∣tion of the 
Jews
 made upon that day to crucifie Christ.


To fast every 
Fryday,
 because on that day Christ was crucified for our sins, on these days it is commanded to fast untill the even∣ing.


To observe forty dayes Lent, especially the Passion week, and then to feed upon nothing but bread and water.


To meet together on the Lords day, and then to hear the Reading


of the holy Writings of the Apo∣stles and Prophets, which are to be expounded by some appoint∣ed for that purpose.


To meet also upon the Sab∣bath-day, and then to spend the time in prayer and holy duties, in which days it is not permitted to do any servile work. The 
Satur∣day
 they keep because God on that day had finished the great Work of the Creation of the world; The Lords-day is also set apart for Religious duties, because Christ on the first day of the week did rise from the dead.


Several other days of the year are kept holy, some are those that are observed in our Church, others are particular days appointed to continue the Memory of some great deliverances and particu∣lar favours which that Church and Empire have received.


They do believe that in their Festival days; and in the Sabbath and Lords-day, the souls of the damned are released from their torments until the Evening, but that they can never come out of that place of darkness.


Some thoughts they have of Purgatory, but not as we in the Catholick Church; they do not think that Masses, Prayers, or any other pious actions can convey any benefit to the miserable souls that are there frying in the subterrane∣ous ovens; therefore they never bestow their Estates for the dead, but when they are departed, they leave them to their fortunes, as they do us to ours. One thing is very commendable amongst them; when any are dead that have left some visible estate, they send for the poorest persons of that place, & offer unto them gifts in the name


of the deceased; they make a Feast for others better qualified, and spend two or three days in Mirth and jollity at the expences of the dead; a custom derived from the 
Scythians,
 who did thus rejoyce when their friends depart∣ed out of the world, and did cele∣brate their entrance into it with the effusion of tears, or rather this practice is derived from the belief of a Resurrection, and the assu∣rance that the party that is dead is free from all the sense of mise∣ry and affliction, unto which the living are exposed daily.


They do not believe that Mas∣ses can redeem the souls of men from the punishments unto which they are liable by their miscarria∣ges, therefore they never see the Priest to huddle up before the Al∣tar any prayers for them, nor do the dying persons leave any an∣nual


rents for Masses to be said in remembrance of him, or to fetch him out of the flames of Purgato∣ry.


The Sacrament of the Eucha∣rist they do administer, sometimes every Sunday or Sabbath-day, but as it was anciently practised by the the Christians of Primitive times in both kinds. They are not afraid of that inconvenience that the wise men of our latter days have thought upon, of profaning the bloud of Christ upon every unhal∣lowed lip, or by spilling it on the ground, therefore the people do receive with the Priest in a most humble manner, almost prostrate to the ground, before they take it into their hands, they make three bows to express the sacred Trinity of persons, and then with lifted up eyes and hands they eat the wa∣fer, or the bread, and drink of the


cup, kissing it before they part with it out of their hands. They have as much reverence for that Sacrament, as we in 
Italy,
 but they do not think the bread to be Transubstantiated into flesh, nor the wine into bloud, nor do they pay any respect unto it, but only when they do receive it. I did en∣quire of some of them why they did eat it with that reverence, see∣ing they did not fancy it other than our ordinary bread; the answer was, that it was consecrated to a holy use, and that some respect was therefore due unto the Ele∣ments of Bread and Wine; but when that should not be, the most humble posture was most decent for those that received from Al∣mighty God, so great a favour as the signs of Christ Crucified. They do not preserve either the Bread or Wine upon their Altars (that


are much like ours) to another day, nor do they send it to comfort the sick; that custom they do not approve of, because they may so frequently receive it every where, that they do not stand in need of it in so short a time as their sick persons do continue in their crazie estate.


This custom they have amongst them, that when any hath recei∣ved the Bread and Wine, he ne∣ver ventures to spit all that day, but retains all the humidity that flows into his mouth, and swallows it for fear of casting to the ground any part of that Cup that was in∣tended for to increase their faith. This custom is kept so Religiou∣sly, that there is a great penalty put upon every one that is seen to suffer any water to go out of his mouth that day, untill the eve∣ning; he is forced to pay to the


poor, and towards the reparations of their Church a large summe of money, and to suffer an imprison∣ment six days, during which time he hath scarce enough of water allowed unto him to drink. Thus they punish excess or want of ab∣stinence by want of necessaries, a good way to make a man sober. They give the Sacrament not only to men grown up in years, but also to Babes and Children, for they do imagine, that seeing Christ and his Apostles do esteem them holy, of the body of the Church, and commands them to be admitted into the Communion of Chri∣stians, that therefore it is lawful to grant unto them the priviledges of Christian people, as if they had an actual faith as those that are more aged have. They are igno∣rant of those great disputes that have lately allarm'd 
Europe,
 and


are not acquainted with theniceties that have put us together by the ears about the Eucharist. They know nothing of Transubstantia∣tion, the words of the Consecra∣tion they understand, without any interpretation, that they declare unto us the use and benefits that we are to receive by this Sacra∣ment in the Christian Church. They do not trouble their heads whether personally or virtually, whether corporally or spiritually Christ is present in his Ordinance. They hope for salvation without the knowledge of these curiosities, and I think they will attain unto it before us that are carryed by these disputes of the Schools to deadly animosities against our brethren; we had been in 
Europe
 very happy, if the liberty of be∣lieving in this particular had been left to every one of us, but the


Devil cannot fish but in troubled waters, and turbulent men have raised these disputes for their own interest, but could never bring any benefit to the publick by them, but ruine and destructi∣on. If like the 
Abyssin
 Church, we had not troubled our selves a∣bout trifles, we had spared the bloud of many Christian Nations, and might be more ready to op∣pose the 
Turk,
 that daily incroaches upon us. In the celebration of the Sacrament, they use no cere∣monies, nor insignificant gestures at the Consecration, but as Chirst commanded, so they practice; the Bread is of the ordinary bread that they use in those Kingdoms, they take of the better sort for this use, and lay it in a large plate of Gold or Earth of a blew colour, and the Wine is of the juice of the Grape squeezed out of it on purpose.


They place both very handsomely upon a Table or Altar at the end of the Church, and after the Con∣secration, the Priest followed by some Attendants, goes to the se∣veral Separations, where he deli∣vers both kinds to them, and they receive them with the greatest expressions of humility and thank∣fulness imaginable; after all is done, they sing a Hymn in the Church, and the Priest gives them leave to depart with a blessing.


They baptize both Male and Female, the Male on the tenth day, the Female on the eighth. This Sacrament they often do rei∣terate, but not out of necessity, but out of a custom that hath continued many hundred years derived as some do conceive from the practice of the 
Jews,
 that thought the bodily washing able to contribute to the salvation of


the soul. These people therefore that were zealous Professors of that Religion, do yet retain many of their customs, although they do not believe those things that occasioned them at first for that reason they circumcise, they often wash, and to render their washing more beneficial, the Priest on the day of 
Epiphany
 repeats over to the persons sprinkled the words of Baptism, 
I baptize thee in the Name of the Father, &c.
 All of them do declare that they retain this cu∣stom not out of the belief of its necessity, but only because it hath continued so long time amongst them for so many hundred years, they know not how to reform it. But I think that they have no mind to reform or leave it, be∣cause it flatters the interest of both Priest and people; for on that day the Princes officers do


make a Feast, and give gifts in the name of their Emperour to seve∣ral persons, they rejoyce and suf∣fer none to do any servile work. This custom is strengthned by a Law very ancient, that whosoe∣ver is then baptized should be free from some small impositions that are laid upon them by the Prince. Their former Kings have thus in∣teressed the people in the obedi∣ence to their pious commands, so that although they see how the performance is insignificant and useless, nevertheless they do as Religiously observe this custom, as if upon it did depend their e∣ternal salvation; when the Chil∣dren are baptized, they give the Bread of the Sacrament softned in some Liquor to them.


Their Religion in general is a mixture of the Jewish and Chri∣stian, for they observe many of


the Ordinances of the Law of 
Mo∣ses
 that were meerly ceremonial, only because their fore-fathers did so. This people hath always had a great Veneration for that which is derived unto them by in∣heritance, and in which they were first educated, so that they dare not venture to alter what was re∣commended unto them by their Ancestors practice, they wisely fore-see the disorders that change would bring amongst them, e∣specially when the customs and ceremonies observed are in them∣selves indifferent.


If any be polluted according to the Law of 
Moses,
 they forbid him to enter the Church until twenty four hours be past, and then he must cleanse himself with water.


For their Churches they have a great Veneration, insomuch, that


in them they neither spit nor suf∣fer any unclean creature to enter, when they do go in, they take off their shooes, the reason that they do alledge is this, because 
Moses
 was commanded to appear before the bush with naked feet, their Temples being as holy as that place on which he did tread, they think themselves obliged to fol∣low the same Religious practice. They will not also suffer any to walk up and down in their Chur∣ches, nor to discourse of their pri∣vate business, nor to laugh, so highly do they reverence them; our people in 
Italy
 do profess as much outward respect, but they bear less to the Houses of prayer, for it is ordinary amongst us to make the great Churches a Ren∣dezvous of Lovers instead of praying to a Saint, many whisper their devotions to their Mistres∣ses


that are at their sides; and they do return answers accordingly; thus they cheat the world that fancies them at their prayers, and they profane the holy places with unhallowed and lascivious actions. The 
Abyssins
 do shew unto such an excellent example of piety and and devotion. They are no l
ss Religious in the other observances of Religion; the water in Baptism it is true they do not sanctifie by exorcisms, nor do they mingle any other ingredient, but as the Eu∣nuch of Queen 
Candaces
 was Bap∣tised by pure water, so do they dip or sprinkle with the same element free from mixture; all that are bap∣tised, they either dip or sprinkle them, that is left to the pleasure and choice of the Minister as he sees convenient, or as the con∣dition of the child requires he accordingly deals with it


And when the child is but be∣sprinkled with water, he is lookt upon as well baptized as if he had been washed in the main Ocean over head and ears, for they think not that the quantity of water does bring any advantage to the soul, nor that an entire washing is essential to the Sacrament of bap∣tism, but rather so much only as may suffice to signifie the inward washing and clensing of the mind from all filthy inclination.


Their circumcision as we have said, they will not leave, but they do not esteem themselves for it, nor do they dis-esteem other Christians for wanting it, for they are sensible that the ceremony doth not render them more ac∣ceptable to Almighty God, nor doth it give them a pre-emi∣nence above others. It were to be wished that Christians over all the


world were of their disposition, they would not then curse and damn their brethren for trifles, nor send them to hell because they do not jump with them into the same opinions, and follow the same frivolous customs invented by themselves. A Christian con∣descention becomes us, we should not rack and send to the flames, men of the same profession, be∣cause only they do not joyn with us in indifferent performances; but my design is not to shew the un∣justice of the Court of Inquisiti∣on, nor the cruelty of our Prelates against the dissenting persons that are scattered all over 
Italy
 and 
Spain,
 but to declare the practice of the 
Aethioplan
 Church, and their moderation.


They have not that uncharita∣ble opinion of unbaptized Infants as we have, they do not judge


them in hell or any other place out of Paradise, because they have not had the happiness to receive the Seal of the Covenant, but they name them half Christians here, and think that heaven is pre∣pared for them as well as for the rest of mankind hereafter, because that they are born of Christian Parents, sanctified from the womb and in the womb, by drawing some nourishment from the Sacrament of the Eucharist when their Mo∣thers do receive it, the least part of that being sufficient to sanctifie them.


They often make use of Con∣fession, not as we do, but in a man∣ner that commends their mode∣ration, their wisdom and modesty. The persons that are to confess do meet the Priest at certain days in the Church before prayers do begin, where they privately con∣fess


unto him in general all those sins of which they are guilty; they name them not unless they be heavy upon their consciences, then they consult him about the reme∣dies proper to satisfie themselves, and about the means to avoid such miscarriages for the future. I could never learn that they were tyed to this by any other Law, but that which is derived from their own necessity and good; they are not tyed to particularize their crimes unless they see it conveni∣ent for their comfort and refor∣mation. The Priest assists them in this occasion, assures them of the mercy of God, of the pardon of their sins if they continue in that repentant, sorrow, and if it can produce the amendment of their lives. He prayes for them, and then sends them away with a bles∣sing. The woman that is near the


time of her travel is wont to seek this comfort from her Ghostly Father. The man that is to under∣take some long or perillous jour∣ney unloads and discharges his conscience thus to render himself more ready to undergo the hazard. Those that march out with the armies, take with them some word of exhortation and comfort from their Priests, they esteem this cu∣stom necessary to them for the maintenance of Christian Religi∣on, and stir up from time to time mens drowsie and sottish spirits in the duties of Religion. By this means also the Priests do creep into the favour of every one, and become necessary in their Gene∣ration. We are naturally prone to contempt and sloathfulness in devotion, this practice is most proper to remove and rid us of those vices. Their confessions are more modest, more bene∣ficial


and Christian-like than ours are. The Priest doth not by any power granted unto him pretend to absolve them, but he shews them the gracious promises of God in his word, and tells them how pleased he is at repentance, what hopes there are of his mer∣cy, he also warns them to forbear from ill company, and other temp∣tations that do endanger our e∣state; after confession they receive the Eucharist.


They acknowledge the Old and New Testament without any addition to them 46 of the old 35 of the new are the number of the books; unto these they think it not lawful to make any additi∣on, but they observe many other things that are not contained in these books. Their 
Menda
 and 
Abetil
 directs them in the manner of Discipline and Order that is to


be observed in those Countryes; besides, they obey the constituti∣ons and degrees of their 
Abuna,
 and his Clergy, who commonly assemble once in two years at the Imperial Court to consult about the publick business, and give such orders as may prevent the mis∣chiefs that the 
Mahumetans
 and 
Gentiles
 do daily plot against them; for their Priests and Religi∣ous men do labour to incroach upon the simplicity of the 
Abys∣sins,
 and to abuse their good na∣ture, by making it a means to in∣crease the Professors of their Re∣ligion; they disguise themselves into Merchants and other necessa∣ry persons, that they might have the liberty to convey, with less difficultie, their venemous Doct∣rines to the sillypeople whom they Court with all manner of civility. To prevent therefore their de∣signs,


and to give order to all the contingencies that do happen in a large Empire very often. This great assembly meets in the pre∣sence of their Emperour to con∣sult about the preservation of themselves and of Religion; the 
Abuna
 sits in the Chair, unless when the Emperour appears a∣mongst them himself, then the 
Abuna
 sits at his feet, and a Throne is erected a purpose for the 
Neguz,
 the Clergy, Bishops and other persons called from all the Kingdoms, are round about in a Ring in several ranks; when any is to speak, he riseth from his place and goes forth into the middle, and after an humble obeisance to the 
Abuna
 or Emperour, he declares his judgment, the plurality of voi∣ces determines the business in hand.


The affirmative part do lift up their fore-finger, and profess at the same time their consent, and if the plurality be on their side a∣bove two or three persons, their judgment is good and lawful, o∣therwise the business is debated untill that number be found in ei∣ther side. Their decrees are con∣firmed by the Emperour and his Privy Counsel, and nothing is lawful without his consent. He is the only Prince that governs in his dominions, none dares but by force of Arms pretend any jurisdiction over his subjects but himself, therefore he suffers nothing either in Church or State to be obeyed or imposed without his cogni∣zance. The Bishops and Clergy have a power to execute their of∣fice, teach the people their duty, and see to their several charges, but they dare not innovate or


command the least new thing al∣though it be very necessary, with∣out the Emperors leave. He com∣monly declares his pleasure by granting a writing, unto which his Picture is annexed as a Seal, with a great Cross in his left hand, and a sword in his right. This Proclama∣tion is conveyed into those parts that it concerns, where the people do in a most humble manner re∣ceive it. When P. 
Clem.
 sollicited him to submit to the See of 
Rome,
 he would never do it, but com∣manded the Embassadour that had made that proposition, to depart out of his dominions, where he had created a great disturbance, by divulging Doctrines that were not known in those parts before.


Thus the Emperour is sole Lord of both Spiritual and Tem∣poral, and will not give an account of his actions to any one upon


earth. He is respected according to his Authority or Power, none dares oppose or contradict his commands, but they all yield a blind obedience unto them, pro∣fessing their willingness to submit by kissing on their knees the wri∣ting that is brought unto them.


They make little conscience in the choice of their meats, but because it hath been the custom of their fore-fathers to abstain from some sorts of flesh, they do ima∣gine that they had some reason to do it which they do not under∣stand, therefore they continue the same customs to this day, they will not eat of any Beast prohibi∣ted by 
Moses
 to the 
Jews,
 nor will they suffer any of them to be kill∣ed amongst them unless it be in hunting. If any such creature be dead, they bury him immediately; they will neither eat of flesh torn


in pieces, nor that hath been hang∣ed, stifled, or of which some o∣ther beast hath been suffered to feed; they will not eat any bloud nor flesh where the bloud remains; in these particulars, they are Re∣ligious observers of the Law of 
Moses,
 not out of conscience, but they know not how to leave cu∣stoms unto which they were bred up from the beginning.


They have no corporal penal∣ties imposed upon them by their Confessors, unless it be in the Co∣vents and Religious Houses. In the Country those that commit any sin, do suffer for it the re∣proach of his Neighbour and sepa∣ration from the Eucharist, untill he professes his repentance, which commonly is done at the door of the Churches when the people and the Priest go out, the Peni∣tent presents himself with ashes


upon his Head, and a sorrowful countenance confesseth his guilt, promiseth an amendment and re∣stitution of the damage if any be received by the Neighbour, then the Priest absolves him, by decla∣ring that for the time to come he shall have liberty to come to the Lords body. Those that are re∣fractory and obstinate they punish by forbidding their Neighbours to converse with them. Every one observes this so Religiously, that they flee from an excommu∣nicated person, as from a Pestilen∣cious body, so that he is forc'd un∣less he will become an 
Anachoret
 and run from the conversation of the world, to reconcile himself a∣gain to the Church by begging the pardon of his offence. The power of Excommunication is in the Bishop of every Diocese, who is informed by the Priests of eve∣ry


Region or Precinct, of the misdemeanors of the people; when he is rightly informed, not only by the Priest, but also by the congregation, he dispatches an offi∣cer called a 
Shimcru,
 to give leave to Excommunicate the offending person. The Priest in a full assem∣bly informs the people of his com∣mission, declares unto them the ill behaviour of the person, his wicked life, and the scandal that he had given to his Neighbours, he makes a long discourse of the means employed to recal him of his obstinacy, in despising the Fa∣therly admonitions that had been made to him; and further shews the danger to let him continue in their Communion. He concludes with an Excommunication, and to render this action more dreadful, he gives leave to the infernal spi∣rits to seize upon such a person,


casting into the Air a fire-brand▪ with some kind of execration.


☞ But this kind 
 of severity is not often used, the offences must be very grievous to oblige the Church to cast upon them her thunder∣bolts, and when she doth it, is done with that precaution, and with that time, that the offender hath leisure to repent, and every one is fully satisfied that it neither proceeds from malice nor design. When men by their open profane∣ness and horrid crimes do disgrace the Christian profession, when they continue in this manner of life, and declare their contempt of God and his power; It is then only time to separate such from our Communion, who have alrea∣dy separated themselves from Christ, and declard their unwor∣thiness to participate with us in


the privileges of Christian Religi∣on. This was the practice of the Apostles, and of the primitive Churches, they did shut them out of Heaven who declared they had no desire to come thither, and published to the rest the esteem that every one was to have of their persons. Amongst them the power of Excommunication was sacred and holy, it was only em∣ployed at the extremity when no other means, neither reprehension nor shame could recal men from their abominable vices; It was then esteemed accordingly, men were as fearful to fall under it, as to be cast into the flames of hell. And then it was followed by such effects as did declare the dreadful power of it; the evil spirits did take the excommunicated person into their possession, and did begin to torment him in the same man∣ner


that he shall be in hell, so that many times people being sensible of their woful condition did fall upon their knees, and beg the par∣don of the Church. It was also the custom of old Christians never to come near an Excommunicated person, all his acquaintance and friends did shun his company; so that when he did see himself aban∣don'd by every one, shame & grief did work upon him and obliged him to an amendment of life. In the time of the Christian Empe∣rours this power of Excommuni∣cation began to be horribly abu∣sed and profan'd in civil Matters, to satisfie hatred and vengeance, some Bishops did Excommunicate others; at the least displeasure, they would send their adversa∣ries to hell, and suffer no corre∣spondency to be further enter∣tained between them on earth;


by this means they did proclaim a publick war one against another, and made use of the sacred wea∣pons of Excommunication to make good their quarrel, as if God were bound to espouse their par∣ticular interests and sins with them against those for whom they had conceived a displeasure. 
Victor
 Bishop of 
Rome
 with one thunder∣bolt of the Vatican was resolved to cast all the Eastern Churches from the hopes of arriving to Heaven. The Bishops of 
Constan∣tinople
 Excommunicated those of 
Alexandria,
 and they excommu∣nicated them of 
Constantinople;
 and in the same City these thun∣der-bolts of Excommunication were heard against several facti∣ons, meer scar-crows when ill ap∣plyed; when Excommunication is abused to promote our secular in∣terests, it is like the 
, of


the Heathens, or the Canonisa∣tion of the Papists, a 
Chimera,
 a vain and frivolous action, if that may be so named, that profanes or disgraces one of the most sa∣cred parts of Religion, and mis∣apply that divine power with which Christ hath intrusted the Rulers of his Church. Let them take heed how and upon whom for the future they employ this holy weapon, for they may by the abuse of it bring a contempt up∣on themselves and Religion, that all their policy and severity will never be able to remove; I pray God to grant unto those amongst us such Christian wisdom and mo∣deration, that piety may be cherish∣ed, and the profaneness discoura∣ged; that peace and unity may Reign amongst us, and that they may advance the interest of Chri∣stianity as well as of this or of that faction.


The 
Abyssins
 never burn an ex∣communicated person, nor do they use any violence against his Person or Goods, unless he offers to break the publick peace, or to pronounce something to the pre∣judice of the Government, then they lay hold of him and secure him in a convenient Prison. They never make use of excommunica∣tion, but in cases that concern the customs and manners of a man, and never then, unless he continues in his evil practises after admoniti∣on; when they restore a man to his former privileges, at his repen∣tance, they do not impose any pecuniary or corporal penalty, as we do in 
Rome,
 but he is admitted after the Bishop hath been ac∣quainted with it, only by declaring it unto the Congregation with the signs of his repentance; for as much as I could learn they do not


think that our purses or our bodi∣ly punishments can further our Reception into Gods favour, un∣less the soul be really humbled and contrite. The flagellations and macerations of the body usual in many of our Cities of 
Spain
 and 
Italy,
 were never seen amongst them unless it be upon the borders of their Kingdoms amongst the 
Mahumetans
 and 
Gentiles,
 whose Religions do recommend unto the Professors of them voluntary pe∣nances as high expressions of de∣votion; but this kind of devotion is not in practice amongst these Christians of 
Abassia,
 therefore they know nothing of indulgen∣cies and pardons granted by the Rulers of the Church. This trade was never introduced amongst them.


They have an excellen order a∣mongst them in the Church. The



Abuna
 is the chief, he is as the Pope in 
Rome,
 or as the Arch∣bishop, his power is to command over all the Kingdoms subject to the 
Neguz
 in matters of Religion, and to see that the Orders or De∣crees of the assembly that meets every other year be obeyed under him. Bishops are appointed in the several Kingdoms, but they do not receive any into holy Orders; That Office belongs to the 
Abuna,
 but these Bishops have the power of excommunication, and of re∣proving the Clergy 
er them that behave themselves not well in their function; every Bishop is usually seated in the most consi∣derable place of the Kingdom, where he hath so much Land be∣longing to him and his office as is able to maintain him in that de∣gree of honour.


The rest of the Priests owe no∣thing to him out of their allow∣ance; he officiates as the rest, and is no otherwise distinguished from them but by his habit, that is not the same with theirs, and by the respect that every one pays to his gravity, for never any young men are admitted to that honourable place in the Church, only merit assisted by the esteem the people and their Prince have for them, when they come to such an age, that all their youthful inclinations are past, d
ise them to the Epis∣copal Chair.


The 
Abuna
 hath some depen∣dency upon the Patriarch of 
Alex∣andria,
 Resident at Grand 
Cairo.
 When he is dead the Emperour sends to the Monks of 
Jerusalem,
 of the Order of St. 
Anthony
 the Hermite; they immediately pro∣ceed to the chusing of one fit for


so great an employ when he is pitcht upon and sent away, he pas∣seth by Grand 
Cairo,
 salutes the Patriarch in 
Egypt,
 and then Mar∣ches on his journey to the Impe∣rial Court, where the Emperour and all the Nobles do welcome him with all expressions of respect and honour. He seldom remains in one place, but often Visits the Kingdoms of the Emperours do∣minions, to see and provide to all disorders that do daily happen. The rest of the Bishops are placed or displaced by him, but with the Emperours consent and appoint∣ment, unto whom they may ap∣peal in case injury is done unto them. When there is any vacancy the Emperour grants the Lands and the Office to whom he plea∣seth, the 
Abuna
 must afterwards approve of the choice; all the de∣grees of the Clergy are distin∣guished


from one another, and from the people by some badge or habit, which signifies the office that they have undertaken.




The Translator.


THis Relation is agreeable to the account that we have formerly received of the 
Abyssins,
 written by 
Damianus Deo Ges
 a 
Portuguese,
 and received from 
Za∣ga Zabo,
 the 
Abyssin
 Embassadour sent from the 
Neguz
 into 
Portugal
 to King 
John
 about the year 1526. 
Damianus de Goes
 contract∣ed a Friendship with this Embas∣sadour, and obliged him to disco∣ver unto him the customs and Re∣ligion of the Christians in 
Abassia,
 both Relations do agree in many things, I conceive that 
De Goes
 doth favour the interest of the


Roman Religion in many particu∣lars, but in others he declares how the 
Abyssins
 are different from the Papists; the Reader may consult the Author, a piece of it is here translated for puklick satisfacti∣on.








Zagazabo the Emperour of Abassias Ambassadour in Portugal.


AFter that I was come into 
Portugal,
 I had often many disputes with certain Doctors, e∣specially 
Didacus Ortifius
 Bishop of the Isle of St. 
Thomas,
 and Dean, of the Kings Chappel, and with 
Peter Margalho
 about the choice of Meats. It will not therefore be amiss to speak now something a∣bout it. First you must know that according to the Old Testament were observed the Rules for to


chuse our Meats, which was com∣manded by Gods Word, that did afterwards take flesh of the 
Virgin Mary,
 he did walk and converse amongst his Apostles. This word of God is alwayes the fame and ever living, never subject to change, therefore what he com∣manded should not be eaten be∣cause of its uncleanness, he never gave leave afterwards in his Go∣spel to eat it. It is true, he tells us that what enters in by the mouth; doth not defile the man, but that which proceeds from the mouth, but he doth not say it, that he might contradict what he had be∣fore established, but only that he might refute the superstition of the 
Jews
 that did reprove the A∣postles for eating with unwasht hands. And the Apostles them∣selves whiles they lived with our Saviour Christ Jesus, never made


use of unclean beasts, nor did ever taste of those things that we
 prohibited in the Law, and no
 of them did offer to transgress i
 this particular. After our Saviou
 Passion when the Apostles beg
 to preach the Gospel, none 
 ever prove by the Sacred Record
 that they did ever eat or kill 
 unclean beast. It is true, St. 
P
 saith, whatsoever comes in t
 shambles eat, inquire not of it 
 conscience sake; after that 
 saith, if any unbeliever doth inv
 you to a Feast and you have 
 mind to go, of whatsoever is p
 before you eat, inquiring after no¦thing because of conscience. A¦gain, if any shall say this was sacri¦ficed to an Idol, do not eat of 
 because of him that told thee, an
 because of conscience, 
&c.
 Al
 this St. 
Paul
 saith to please the
 that were not sufficiently confirm∣ed


in the faith, because between them and the 
Jews
 there were many disputes and contentions; to the end that he might appease them, he sided with, and labour∣ed to please the Christians that were not confirmed in the faith. This he did not to break the Law, but only by granting some∣thing of the ceremonies, he might win them to the faith. The same Apostle saith, Let him that eat∣eth not despise him that eateth, 
or him that eateth not judge him that eateth; for he that eateth, eateth to the Lord, and he that eateth not, eateth not to the Lord.


Therefore it is an unworthy act to reprove forrein Christians so fiercely and in a hostile manner, as I have been for this and other matters that concern not true faith. It were more wisely done


to bear with such Christian men as the 
Greeks, Armenians,
 and 
E∣thiopians
 are, to treat them with kindness and charity, and to suffer them to live and converse with o∣ther Christians, for we are all baptized in the same baptisme, and subscribe unanimously to the same belief. There is no cause where∣fore any shold so furiously dispute about ceremonies, let every one observe his own without hatred and railing one against another, for that the correspondency between Churches should not be interrup∣ted, if afar off they use customs in those Provinces proper to the place and genius of the people. Besides, we have in the 
Acts
 of the 
Apostles,
 how 
Peter
 saw the Heavens opened, and a certain vessel come down like a great sheet bending on the four corners to the earth, in the which were all


sorts of four-footed Beasts and Serpents of the earth, with the Fowls of the Air, unto him the voice did say, 
Rise
 Peter 
and eat,
 unto whom 
Peter
 answered, 
Far be it from me Lord, for I never did eat any common or unclean thing.
 The voice answered him, 
What God hath purified do not thou call it unclean;
 which being often repea∣ted, the vessel was taken up into Heaven.


These things being done, the spirit sent him to 
Caesarea
 to 
Cor∣nelius
 a pious man, and one that did fear God, unto whom as 
Peter
 did preach: 
The Holy Ghost fell upon all that heard the word of God, and
 Peter 
did baptize,
 &c.


This Vision is thus interpreted by us in 
Ethiopia,
 the clean Beasts are the Children of 
Israel,
 the un∣clean the 
Gentiles,
 who are thus called, because they are worship∣pers


of Idols, and act the unclean works of the Devil. And whereas the voice said unto 
Peter, Peter rise and kill,
 we thus understand it, 
Pe∣ter, Baptize, Eat;
 that is, preach and publish the faith and the Law of our Lord Jesus Christ to the peo∣ple of 
Israel,
 and to the 
Gentiles.
 It is certain that it can never be found, that 
Peter,
 or any other of the Apostles did either kill or eat unclean Beasts after this Vision. Now when the Scripture menti∣ons food, in several places it in∣tends to signifie unto us Christ and his Doctrine; we must not therefore understand it of any cor∣poral or nourishing food. All the learned do agree that this sheet that was shewn unto 
Peter,
 did teach him high and sublime mat∣ters, and not the inferiour things of the world that relate not to our salvation, neither are we to ga∣ther


from thence that we have liberty to eat of unclean things, seeing that can never be gathered out of Scripture; wherefore do the Apostles amongst the Decrees of their Council command us not to eat of creatures hang'd, stran∣gled, 
orn in pieces, or half eaten by other beasts, or of bloud; for God loves cleanness and sobriety, and hates glutton∣ness, and uncleanness. God loves them also that abstain from flesh, and much more them that feed upon bread and herbs, and are content with water, as St. 
John Baptist
 that lived a Hermite be∣yond 
Jordan,
 he always fed up∣on herbs, St. 
Paul
 the Hermite led a sparing life in the desart 80 years, St. 
Anthony,
 and St. 
Maca∣rius,
 and many of their followers never tasted any flesh. Therefore my brethren you must not con∣temn, nor revile us, for St. 
James



saith, he that speaks evil of his bro∣ther, or Judges his bother, speaks evil of the Law, and Judges of the Law; and S. 
Paul
 advises to be con∣tent with our own traditions, and not to dis-pute about the Law of 
Moses
 with Christians, wherefore it is not handsome to quarrel with our brethren about the Law, or the choice of Meats, for meats do not render us more or less acceptable to God; therefore let us seek af∣ter the heavenly food, and set aside these frivolous disputations about meats.


These things that I have here written about traditions, proceed not out of an itch of disputation, nor out of contention, but only that I might justifie my own peo∣ple from the cruel accusations of many who having no respect for my Master the most Potent Em∣perour 
Precious Giam,
 
or for us


his subjects, do revile us and call us 
Jews
 and 
Mahumetans,
 because we observe the 
Saturday
 as the 
Jews,
 and fast till Evening as the 
Mahumetans;
 they say these things should not be done by Christians, they do also complain against us for the Marriage of our Clergy, who have the same liber∣ty as the other people: and be∣cause we are re-baptized every year, as if we did distrust the effi∣cacy of the first baptism, because we circumcise men and women, which custom the 
Jews
 do not ob∣serve so punctually; because we keep the Law of 
Moses
 in the choice of meats; and because we judge more charitably of Christi∣an children before baptism than they do, and esteem them not as Pagans, but as half Christians. I have been forced to publish this that I might justifie my own peo∣ple


from their slanders that accuse us, and that I might oblige the Doctors of the Church of 
Rome
 to be the more kind to us. I know not by what Religious instinct they have been moved to forbid me to participate with them in the Body and Bloud of Christ in the Sacrament, since I am come into 
Portugal,
 neither do I know where∣fore I am esteemed amongst my Christian brethren as a Heathen and an excommunicated person which hath caused me much grief, but to him that sees and Judges all things I remit my cause.


I am not sent by my most migh∣ty Lord the Emperour of 
Ethio∣pia,
 to the Bishop of 
Rome,
 and the most Serene Prince 
John
 King of 
Portugal,
 only to entertain them with disputations; but to con∣clude a firm league, and open a correspondency between them,


not to discourse about humane traditions, but to inquire about the errours of 
Arrius
 the Prince of Hereticks, and know whether the Christians of 
Europe
 do joyn with us in opposing his opinions; and further, that I might know whe∣ther it be the custom of the 
Euro∣pean
 Christians to assemble in Counsel twice every year about Matters of faith, as the Apostles have commanded in their Synodi∣al book, the first assembly they order to be met on the day of Pentecosts, the second on the tenth of 
October.


Besides, I am come to know how we agree about the errours of 
Macedonius
 of 
Nestorius,
 and of 
Eutiches;
 about the last the Coun∣cil of 
Calcedone
 assembled, but the Bishops broke up the assembly before any Conclusion, retaining their own opinions; My Lord, the


most Mighty Emperour hath-all the books of the General Coun∣cel's, and is much grieved, so are all his subjects; for the discords and errours, these Tares that the Devil hath sown in the Lords field; the Bishop of 
Rome,
 we have always 
est comedus,
 the first and most powerful Bishop of the world, and were it not for the 
Mahumetans,
 whose Country be∣ing between us, do hinder our passage, & for the great distance of places, we should send to his Court very often. King 
Ema∣nuel
 of blessed Memory did first open a way to us from the Red sea, 
&c.


Having spoken of these things, I will say something of our Empe∣rour, & of our Patriarch. You must know first, that our Patriarch is thus solemnly elected by and out of our Monks of 
Jerusalem
 that


there do dwell at the Sepulchre of our Lord. When the old Pa∣triarch is dead, the Emperour di∣spatches away with all speed an express to the Monks that live at 
Jerusalem,
 as soon as they have received the news of the death of the 
Abuna
 with the Presents that the Emperour sends to our Savi∣ours Sepulchre, they proceed to the election of another 
Abuna,
 whom they chuse by the plurality of voices. It is not lawful to pitch upon another for that office, but only upon an Inhabitant of 
Alex∣andria,
 and upon one whose life is irreproachable. When they have chosen him, they give unto him his dispatches with the messenger that came to give them notice of the former 
Abuna
's death. They go together to Grand 
Cairo,
 to meet the 
Egyptian
 Patriarch that hath there his ordinary residence,


to the end that he may be ac∣quainted with the election. The Patriarch when he approves of the sufficiency of the person for so e∣minent an office; he sends him in∣to 
Ethiopia
 with the messenger, who must always be according to the ancient custom, a Monk of the Order of St. 
Anthony
 the Hermite, with him this messenger hasten
 towards 
Ethiopia,
 wherewith all ex∣pressions of joy and honour they are received of all men. Some∣times a year or two passes before this business can be dispatched. In the mean while the 
Neguz
 disposes of the great Revenue of the 
Abu∣na
 according to his pleasure. Now the chief office of an 
Abuna,
 is to confer Holy Orders, none but he can give them, or ought to take them away, or degrade the Priests. He never affects to meddle with the giving of Bishopricks, or of


Benefices that do belong to the 
Precious 
iam,
 who may do with them according to his pleasure. And when the Patriarch or 
Abuna
 is dead the Emperour is the Heir of his Estate, which is very great. It belongs also to the Patriarch to excommunicate contumacious of∣fenders. He never grants any In∣dulgencies of those penalties that are imposed for grievous faults. The Sacraments of the Church are never prohibited to any unless it be for the crime of Murder. Our Patriarch is called in our lan∣guage 
Abuna,
 he that is at present in this place is called at his baptism 
Mark;
 a man aged of about 100 years. Moreover it is to be noted that we begin the year the first of 
September,
 which is with us the Eve of St. 
John Baptists
 day, the rest of the Feast days we keep at the same time that they are kept


by the Church of 
Rome.
 We must not omit that St. 
Philip
 the Apo∣stle came into our Country, and did there preach the Gospel of our Saviour Christ.


You must further know the name of our Emperour, that it is 
Precious John
 or 
iam,
 and no
 
Priest John,
 as here it is falsly re∣ported; for it is written in our language 
iam Belul,
 that is, 
Pre∣cius
 or high 
John
 in the Chaldai∣que Language, it is written 
John E
coe,
 which hath the same inter∣pretation 
Precious
 or excellent 
John.
 He is not to be named Em∣perour of the 
Abyssins,
 as 
Matth.
 hath written, but of the 
Ethiopi∣ans.
 He being an 
Armenian,
 could not know our affairs perfect∣ly, especially those that concern our Religion; for that reason he declared many things to King 
E∣manuel
 of happy Memory, which


are not so amongst us, not out of any design of deceiving him, for 
e was a good man, but because 
e was well acquainted with our Religion.


The Empire many times doth 
ot fall to the share of the Eldest Son of the Emperour, but to him 
nto whom the Father will give 
. He that now governs is the 
hird Son of the last Emperour, 
e hath deserved that honour by 
is piety and respect which he had 
or his Father; for when he was 
pon his death-bed, he command∣ed all his Sons one after another 
o sit upon the Imperial Throne, which they did, he only excepted; Far be it from me, said he, that I 
hould ascend to the Seat of my Lord and Father, which pious mo∣
esty procured him the Empire 
om his Father; his name is 
Da∣vid,
 his Empire is very large, and


contains both Christians and Hea¦thens. In it are many Kings and Princes, Earls, Barons, Grandees and much Nobility, that is mo
 obedient to him. Gold and Sil∣ver are given and exchanged by weight. Amongst us are many Towns and Cities, but not such as I have seen in 
Portugal,
 because 
Precious Giam
 doth always live i
 a flying Camp, and in Tents▪ This Custom is observed, that the Nobility might exercise them∣selves continually in Military A∣ctions, for we are surrounded on all with sides the enemies of our faith with whom we have often many Conflicts, always, or for the most part with success, through the goodness of God.


This is the account 
Zaga Za
i
 gives of his own Country, his Re∣lation may be consulted by those that desire more satisfaction; for


brevity sake, much of it is omit∣ted. 
Scaliger
 in the eighth Book of his 
de Emendatione temporum,
 speaks thus of the 
Ethiopians.


We have not been the first that have heard of the 
Ethiopian
 Chri∣
ans, for they have Churches, not only in 
Constantinople,
 but also at 
Rome
 and 
Venice,
 where for a while they have had liberty to perform their devotions. From the Voyages of the 
Portugueses,
 and the Journal of 
Francis Alvarez,
 who passed into the heart of 
E∣thiopia,
 many things may be known of them, and of their cu∣stoms; until this time we have heard only of the name of 
Ethio∣pia,
 but it is strange that in the time of our fore-fathers, we first heard that there were 
Ethiopians
 from those of 
Asia;
 for about 300 years ago they did command in 
Asia,
 especially 
Drangiana
 upon


the confines of 
Sufiana,
 also in 
India,
 and amongst the 
Chinenses
 a great Continent, until the Em∣perours of the 
Tartars
 did drive them out of 
Asia;
 for the 
Abyssins
 being vanquished, were driven out of 
China
 by 
Cingi
 King of the 
Tartars,
 when 
Uncam
 the great Emperour of 
Ethiopia
 was kill'd Afterwards 
Cincan
 Son of 
Cingis,
 and his Son 
Bathin Can,
 Empe∣rours of the 
Tartars,
 pursued the 
Abyssins,
 and forced them out of 
Moni
 and all the Region of the 
Chinenses,
 and obliged them to return into 
Africa.
 We may at present wonder that this Nation should be so ignorant of the Art of Navigation, who was so powerful by Sea, and by Land, that it commanded from 
Ethiopia
 as far as 
China;
 from that time we have heard of the Emperour of 
Ethiopia
 by the name of 
Prestegi∣ani,



which in the 
Persian
 language (that is in 
Asia
 as universal as the Latin is in 
Europe
) signifies Apo∣stolick. 
Padescha Prestegiani,
 the Apostolick King, that is, the Christian King. The 
Arabians
 call him 
Melich Ressuli,
 and the 
Ethiopians, Negusch Chavvariav∣vi.
 There are many Crosses yet standing in 
Asia,
 in 
Japan, China,
 and other places, that declare how large the Empire of the 
Ethiopians
 was in that Continent; besides, in 
Malabar
 there is a Temple of St. 
Thomas
 yet to be seen, that is of the Structure and manner of building of the 
Ethiopians.








A Continuation of Segn. 
. Barat
 Of the Growth and Commodities of the Country.


THis Country stretches 
 self about eight degrees North, and as many South from the Line; So that it lies exposed to the fury of the Sun beams. The soil nevertheless in many places is extream fruitful, and the ay
 temperate, especially towards the Evening, then the great Dew
 come to refresh the herbs and fruits that the parching Sun had injured. Part of this Country is very barren and incommodious for habitation, sometimes we have felt such extream heats, that it was not possible to subsist out of the shade, and about sixe miles further between the Mountains


and amongst the trees, we had such a pleasant ayr, that I never saw any more temperate in 
Eu∣rope.
 I met with a great many Lakes and fresh Rivers, especially upon the borders of 
Tigremahon,
 where the ground yields all man∣ner of Fruit, Trees, and Corn; Pomegranates of extraordinary bigness, Apples, Pears, Peaches, and Apricocks are very small, but of a very pleasant taste. They have here a Fruit that they call 
Cavashau
 that grows in their Gar∣dens, it is very delicious, and much like unto our little Muskmellons▪ but of a contrary taste. The 
Abys∣sins
 make a great account of it in their Feasts.


The Corn of this Country is very good, bigger than that of 
I∣taly
 in most places. They have Beans, Pease, Lentils, Barley, Wheat, and all sorts of Grains,


but where the Country is so dry and barren that it will not answer the labour of the Husbandman nature hath provided instead o
 Corn, a wild Grain called 
Taf
 Deguza,
 of this the Inhabitants make a Bread which is as course and unpleasant as the Climate.


In many places Oranges and Li∣mons grow naturally in the Woods; here is also many Trees that yield an odoriferous smell▪ and a great deal of Brazil-wood, Sugar Canes in great abundance, which the Inhabitants do make use of not as we do, for they have not the Art to extract the Sugar, but they feed upon them raw.


They have no Oil nor Olive Trees, but an Herb that serve
 them instead of Olives, it is call∣ed 
Henar,
 they steep it and draw out the juice that looks like Gold, very beautiful to the eye, and n



less pleasant to the taste, for the Oil or Liquor extracted from it hath neither smell nor taste, and is very fat as Oil uses to be; so that the Inhabitants are by that means supplyed with that which serves them as well as the best Oil of 
I∣taly.


The Woods and Rocks are full of Bees, so that they have much Honey and Wax, with which they make Candles, for they have no Tallow, because they do not kill many tame Beasts. Here is a great Trade of Raw Silks and Stuffs which the Blacks fetch from hence to carry into their Country, where no Trees are to be found to harbour the Silk∣worm. Upon the confines of the 
Neguz
 dominions near the King∣dom of 
Damut
 are Mines of Gold about the lake, out of which the River 
Niger
 proceeds, so that this


river carrys away some of the sandy part, and rowls it with the stream that is extream fierce, (for it falls from high Mountains) and runs with a great impetuosity to the main Ocean; upon the sand the 
Negers
 do pick up much Gold which crumbles from the Rocks, and proceeds out of the Mines that are dispersed all over the Country.


The N
 hath people daily at work in them, they are com∣monly men taken Captives from their Enemies. When the 
E∣thiopians
 go out to War, they save the lives of all those that submit themselves to their mercy, and send them to these places to pre∣pare the Gold, and fit it for the use of the people.


Some Silver Mines are also here, but not so many as of Gold, for the hot country is not so proper


for that kind of Oar. The parch∣ing Sun is more powerful in this Climate in the bosom of the earth, so that all the ground that is proper for the substance of Gold, it turns it into this Metal. The Mines are not so deep as in other Kingdoms, they are much like unto our Quarries of Stone in 
Italy.
 The Stone or Rock with which the Gold is mingled is very sandy, so that it will crumble with∣out any difficulty. The mine doth usually run in a vain, it is easie to distinguish it by the colour, which is distinct from the other part of the Rock. The Inhabitants say that all along the River that bursts forth of the Lake 
Laira,
 many such Golden Quarries are to be found, so that the violence of the stream doth sometimes un∣loose the more precious part from the rest, and carry it away to the


great benefit of the Inhabitants, who gather it up along the shoar after great Rains; and afterwards they carry it to 
Gui
y,
 or to 
Mo∣zambique,
 and other places of note where Merchants resort. In the Land towards the Country of the Blacks, lives a people very de∣formed and mishapen, different from the rest of men, not in the main composition of the body, but in the disproportion of the parts. They do not love to appear amongst persons that have the true form of men; necessity con∣strains them to entertain a Trade, which they do in such a strange manner, that they are not like to the rest of Nations. They inha∣bit the Country called 
Guangara
 and 
Media,
 it is mountainous and inconvenient for passengers, whom they never suffer to go through their dominions. The River 
Niger,



so full of Gold passeth along their Territories, and furnishes them with that Commodity, to ex∣change for those other Commodi∣ties that nature requires, and that they have not in such plenty as their Neighbours. It is a business of difficulty to speak with some of them they are so savage. Those that Trade upon the River, may Land their Goods and see them afar off, but they seldom do shew themselves. They are very just in their dealings, and will not wrong strangers of a farthing, which if they did, it might put a stop to their Trade, without which they cannot probably live▪ They seem to have some Govern∣ment amongst them, for upon the mountains, places are fortified, and the passages blockt up, and they have been seen to observe a De∣corum in their manner of Life and behaviour.


From this place many Nations of 
Europe
 have their Golden dust, for the ships go up the River ma∣ny hundred leagues to Trade with this obscure sort of people, who shew themselves afar off, leaving with their Merchandise such to∣kens and signs, that may express their demands, but they alwayes retreat at the same time into the Woods, and will not suffer any to come near. This hath been re∣lated to me for certain by many eye-witnesses, and by persons of Credit and Worth; this is a strange sort of people, which none of their Neighbours can certainly know.


Ethiopia
 yields many other Commodities, Hides are very plentiful, especially of the wilde Beasts and Buff-skins, which in this Country are bigger and thicker than in any other. Here are stuffs


made of the Bark of the 
Indian
-tree that grows also here in every place; the common people are employed to fit it for sale and work. Some Spices, Drugs, and Roots do naturally come forth in this Climate called by the anci∣ents the 
Torrid Zone.
 The Mer∣chants of 
Adel,
 and 
Mozambique,
 and of other places adjoyning to the Sea do enter into the Land in times of Peace to Trade with the Inhabitants and fetch from them their Commodities, to convey them afterwards to the Sea-side, where the 
Moors,
 the 
Arabs,
 and 
Banyans
 of the 
Indies
 do meet them, with the Factors of other Nations, to take from them their Goods. Now this is the policy of all the Princes that keep the Sea shoar, not to suffer an 
Abyssin
 unless he be an Apostate to have liberty to Trade out of the Coun∣try


of the 
Neguz,
 of whose power they are very jealous, least he should recover again the Domini∣on of the Sea, which he hath lost, with all his Ships and Sea-port Towns, some few years since. When he offers to stir, all his Neighbours do joyn together to force him into his bounds, for he is lookt upon as their common enemy. Some nevertheless of the 
Abyssin
 Monks have correspon∣dency with the 
Indians
 and 
Chine∣ses,
 but it is only for those Mer∣chandises that are for the supply of their own territories.








A short Relation of some of their Emperours found in an ancient 
Ethiopian
 Record▪ that the Author hath brought with him into 
Ita∣ty.


THis Empire is very ancient, and was as large in its first beginning, the people were war∣like, incroaching daily upon their Neighbours, especially upon those that live in 
Egypt,
 and about the River 
Nilus.
 The 
Egyptians
 have had continual wars with them. In the time of the 
Pharoes
 our Emperours were famous; 
Moses
 the Lawgiver of the chil∣dren of 
Israel
 was the General of 
Pharaoh,
 or of King of 
Egypt,
 he was ordered to march with a party of 
Israelites
 against 
Mouchadir
 Emperour of 
Ethiopia,
 he readily obeyed, and with a


small party he routed the great Army of our Emperour, not s
 much by valour as by the assistance of a divine power; the King of 
Egypt
 was grown jealous of him and of his people, and therefore he sent them to this war, hoping to free himself from his fears by the swords of the 
Ethiopians,
 who were become terrible to all their Neighbours, but God caused that which was intended for the mis∣chief of the 
Israelites
 to turn to their advantage, for by the Vi∣ctory, they purchased unto them∣selves the esteem and admiration of all their enemies. It is true, that the King did then begin to vex the Children of 
Israel
 with hard bur∣thens and grievous taxes, thinking by that means to weaken their spirits, and disable them from in∣
uring either himself or any other, but this also turned to their bene∣fit,


for it procured their freedom, and the ensuing miracles that for∣ced it from those that kept them in bondage. When the 
Egyptians
 were overthrown, the 
Ethiopians
 had wonderful success against them, they subdued all the Country as far as 
Thebis
 border∣ing upon the Red Sea, but about thirty years afterwards there rose a King of 
Egypt
 that was valiant in war that recovered with his small numbers of men, all the domini∣ons belonging to his Predecessors, as far as the Mountains where the River 
Nilus
 hath a terrible down∣fall. In his race it continued until the time of 
Cambyses
 who enter∣ed 
Egypt,
 and conquered it, but could never subdue 
Ethiopia;
 for when he sent his Embassadours to our Emperor, they were sent back with a defiance of his Power, as he was passing over some of the


sandy hills between 
Ethiopia
 and 
Egypt
 with some of his Troops, they lost a great number of men in a storm of wind, for they were there buryed alive; some of them saved themselves with their King out of the violent storm, but this overthrow prevented his coming into our Country, where our Em∣perour expected him with all his people. The wind did fight for us against our enemies, it saved us the trouble and hazard of venturing against them with our swords.


In the time of King 
Solomon,
 our Empire was governed by Queen 
Maqueda,
 she sent Embas∣sadors to him, and afterwards went to visit him her self, she was kind∣ly entertained at her return, she was brought to bed of a Son which she had by 
Solomon,
 called 
Melich,
 she brought Circumcision into the Land, and laid the foundations of


the Jewish Religion, which her Son afterwards when he was come from 
Jerusalem
 did establish, commanding all people under his command to receive it. After him many Kings did Reign in 
Ethiopia,
 the most famous was 
Ubsharem, Habraini, David
 the 1 
Solomon,
 the 1 and many others. The Scepter hath always continued in the same race since that time until now. 
Ubsharem
 was a warlike Prince, he conquered all the Provinces as far as the Sea-coast South-wards, and made all the Kings his Neigh∣bours to send Presents to him, but when he was forty years old he grew amorous and wanton, so that his new conquered subjects took advantage of him in a Battel, where he lost all that he had con∣quered with his life, his successour laboured to revenge this affront, but in vain, until the days of 
Da∣vid



the first, none ever did recover the vast dominions that did for∣merly own the 
Ethiop.
 Scepter. This Prince was wise and very politick, sufficiently qualified to fit at the Helm of State, but he was no Warrior for want of Courage; to manage the affairs in desperate occasions, he appointed a General, 
Zecharia,
 a stout man that did per∣form the Office of his Prince in this particular. He was very suc∣cessful against all our Neighbours, especially against the Blacks that inhabit beyond the sands, their Princes came to do homage unto our mighty Emperour, and to pay their yearly tribute; they conti∣nued in their obedience many years, until the Reign of 
Joseph
 the third, a Prince that was given to all manner of debauchery, he Reigned ten years, and was after∣wards killed by his chief Officers▪


who were willing to preserve the State from total ruine; which would have happened had he con∣tinued longer upon the Throne, for he did not only permit, but also invite the enemies of the Em∣pire to enter into his dominions, that they might revenge him of those Princes that he did not love, and that he did not dare to pu∣nish himself, therefore he made use of the strangers weapons to vex them that he could not other∣wise overcome. From that time we have nothing remarkable, until Christs death at 
Jerusalem;
 for all the Princes that did rule until that time were neither good nor bad, they contented themselves with their own limits, and if they did lose any part of their possessions, they never made any great noise by raising their Armies to retake them. Queen 
Candace
 was a most


pious and Religious Woman, her Eunuch of the Race of Black a-Moors did follow her steps, he made his Pilgrimage to 
Jerusalem
 every five years from that place, he brought the Christian faith that did daily increase, insomuch that not one was found opposing it within two hundred years after. The eldest Son of 
Candace,
 for whom she did govern was 
Shedi∣ahr,
 a mostvertuous man, he encou∣raged Christian Religion in his do∣minions, but would never suffer the old ceremonies to be abolish∣ed, so that since, the Jewish and Christian are mingled together; he pull'd down many Idol Tem∣ples upon the borders, which cau∣sed the revolt of some of his most superstitious subjects, but one bat∣tel brought them under his com∣mand again. His Son was 
Adres∣chek,
 he succeeded his father


when he was but sixteen years of Age. A certain Heathen Priest had crept into his favour so much, that for his sake he did labour to oppose the success of the Christi∣an and the continuance of the Jewish Religion in 
Ethiopia.
 His Princes could not suffer him long, they conspired against him, and placed his young brother in his place, but him they sent into the Kingdom of 
Damut,
 into a close Prison that hath always been in those parts; he did afterwards e∣scape out of it and fled to the Blacks, who did come against 
E∣thiopia
 with a strong Army, but they were vanquished and forced to suffer their Fugitive Prince to become a Prisoner again. The el∣dest Son of this King was an ac∣complished Prince, so that his Uncle had some jealousie of him, & therfore clapt him in a close pri∣son


with his Father, but when he was dead, the Grandees fetcht him out of his confinement, and raised him to the Throne during the life of his Father, who consent∣ed to the promotion of his Son. After him 
Absalom
 was a famous Prince, renowned for his careful provision against the enemies in∣cursions, for he caused certain Forts to be built in convenient places to bridle them in. They were afterwards neglected and ruinated by the Wars. He first began to encourage Shipping, by offering great advantages to the Mariners and men that did study the Art of Navigation. This good policy caused all the idle persons to render themselves ex∣cellent in the Sea affairs, and laid the Foundation to that greatness, unto which the 
Ethiopian
 Empire did afterwards rise.


Benjamin
 Reigned forty years, about the year 600 after Christ, from his time we have a good ac∣count of all our Kings, but before none are named but those that have been excellent for some ver∣tue, or infamous by their notable vices. This Prince was full of piety, he reformed the disorders of the Clergy, and put them in that form of Government in which they are at present; before, the persons that did wait upon the Worship of God, had no set∣led allowance; the people gave them what they pleased, so that unless they did work as other peo∣ple for their livings, they were reduced to great necessities, which nevertheless did happen in many places, for he that depends upon his peoples kindness, shall be en∣entertain'd with course Diet; unto this great evil that entroduces


many others in a Nation; this Religious Prince did bring a Re∣medy. As he was the sole Lord of all the Lands of his Empire, and that none enjoyed them but from him, he caused such a quan∣tity of ground to be set apart for the maintenance of the Priests and Bishops, as might entertain them with the yearly Revenue, and caused this Land to be sepa∣rated from the rest, by granting unto it the priviledge of immu∣nity from all saxes and Imposts, so that they depend no longer up∣on the Crown. This liberality redeemed the Clergy from con∣tempt, and raised them in the e∣steem of the people, that usually treats them, not according to their desert, but according to that State that they maintain.


After the good Prince, his se∣cond Son 
Hechakiah
 did Reign,


he followed his Fathers footsteps, therefore he was blessed with a prosperous Reign, his greatest e∣nemies did respect him, he conti∣nued in the Throne about thirty five years, and a few moneths.


His Brother 
Abraham
 the first, succeeded, he held the Scepter ten years, and then left it to his Son, with all the Wealth his Brother had gotten.


His Sons name was 
Haroahki,
 a Warlike Prince, he began to leave the Cities, and to pass his time in Tents, for in the begin∣ning of his Reign all the Nations subject to the 
Neguz,
 began to re∣volt from him, he could not ap∣pease the tumult so soon; he was therefore forced to live in the Camp, and to be in continual action all the time of his Reign. He caused it to be enacted for the security of the State, that the



Ethiopian
 Emperour should never spend above six days in a Walled Town at a time, but should live in the open Field. All the Nobili∣ty that doth follow the Princes custom, imitates him in this parti∣cular. They look upon it as a great expression of weakness and fear to run into a fortified place. This hath caused them to neglect such places, and suffer them to be dis∣mantled by time, so that at pre∣sent in all the Empire there are but few Walled Towns, and they are so pitiful that the weakest e∣nemy might storm them. In the time of this Prince, Trade and Shipping did mightily increase, so that he was dreadful to his Neighbours, when he had gover∣ned the Empire twenty six years, he dyed.


H
li
 his Son succeeded him, he was the youngest, his Father had


for him a great kindness which was increased by his address and handsome behaviour. His elder brethren were set aside, and he was raised upon the Throne, he was very happy all his time, and enjoyed a firm peace with most of his Neighbours, he continued Emperour forty seven years and three moneths. After him 
Hell
 the second 
Melach, Charvah, Bou∣
i, Grimshach, Habraim 
. &c.
 with about thirty Kings are to be rec∣koned from that time to the year, 936. In which year the 
Ethiopian
 Emperours that were grown so potent by Land, adventured to en∣large their dominions by Sea in 
Asia;
 for that intent 
David
 Em∣perour of 
Ethiopia,
 prepared a Fleet of above 500 Sail of ships small and great to transport his Army, composed of 60000 Men, both Horse and Foot; with this


numerous Army he Landed in 
A∣rabia,
 and conquered all that part of the Country that lies upon the Sea-shoar. The 
Abyssins
 found their abode in 
Asia
 far more plea∣sant than in 
Africa,
 therefore great numbers of men went over and passed the Seas into the new conquests. The 
Persians
 and 
Ara∣bians
 did oppose their designs, but our Emperour being there in per∣son, did so order his business that all the Forces that were sent a∣gainst us were routed, many bat∣tels were fought between us with various success.


The last was near the place where the River 
Euphrates
 dischar∣ges it self into the Sea, seven Kings were met upon the place with all the men that they could conveni∣ently bring to withstand our Em∣perour. The enemies reckoned about two hundred thousand men


in their Army; we had then about forty thousand, this unequal num∣ber did encounter them, and by the wonderful goodness of God they did overcome them. This Victory opened a way to our suc∣cess in 
Asia,
 for it rendred the name of 
Ethiopia
 most terrible, so that none did dare to meet us with equal numbers of men, every year our people sent great numbers of men with their Families, to inhabit in 
Asia,
 and by that means to secure their interest from the ancient Inhabitants by force of Arms. The next that succeeded in the Empire was 
Un∣can
 I. A man no less Valarous than his Father, a great lover of Learning and of the Learned men, he enlarged his dominions beyond the River 
Indus,
 and conquered all that part of the Country that is so fruitful, that the 
Asiatiques
 esteem it the best and most fruitful


Province of that part of the world. This Prince had several encounters with his Neighbours 
 
Asia,
 where he made for the mo
 part his residence. In one the King of 
Malabar
 came against him with 40000 Foot and Horse▪ The 
Ethiopians
 were full of valoue and courage, but the numbers of their enemies put them to great straits, so that they offered to ren∣der themselves into their hands in case they would suffer them qui∣etly to depart with their lives sa∣ved. The enemy would not ac∣cept of that offer, to his own de∣triment, for ours being refused the condition proposed, and seeing no∣thing but death, or at least but bondage and misery prepared for them and their Prince, they tool courage, encounter'd the enemy with a great resolution broke the first ranks of them, and then pur∣sued them with that fury, that


they left not killing until the whole multitude with their King at their head fled away, leaving all their own spoils, and the Goods that they had taken in the former advantages they had had against our Emperour. Several Empe∣rours did succeed him, but not to his Fortune and Success unless it be 
Joseph, 3. Judahr, Macarius,
 and 
Paulus.
 They carryed the terrour of our Arms into 
China,
 and there possessed themselves of many large Provinces which we enjoyed until the year 1436. The Tartars about that time made some In-roads into 
China,
 and finding the Climate good, and the Country fruitful, they invited their Countrymen into those Re∣gions. Some few years after they had gathered a numerous Army to enter 
China,
 they conquer'd the Emperour of that Country,


who had desired our assistance a∣gainst them, we complyed with their desires, our Emperour sent 30000 men to their assistance, but by the stratagems and valour of the Tartars, our men were almost all slain. The 
Chinenses
 being de∣stitute of that succour, yielded themselves to the mercy of the Conquerours, who thought upon nothing but how to revenge themselves upon us; they came therefore with their own forces, & with those that they had gathered in the Country, and drive out our people out of 
China,
 giving no quarter to those that submitted to them. There arose some dispute between some of our Generals at that time, that assisted the Tartars against us, so that when 
Uncan
 was kill'd in a battel by 
Cingi
 the Tartar Prince, all our Countrymen left 
Asia,
 with all


hopes of returning thither again. Since, we have had many grievous encounters with our enemies the 
Mahumetans
 and 
Gentiles,
 who have sometimes persecuted us in∣to the heart of the Country when they took us at an advantage. A∣bout the year 1434 the King of 
Adel
 with many of our Neigh∣bours stormed our Sea-port Towns when our Emperour was but young, and so shut us in, that we have no place to entertain Commerce with any Nation without their leave.


In the year of our Lord seve∣ral 
Portugueses
 came from 
Goa
 in∣to our Country, our Emperour dispatcht away some Embassa∣dours with them to 
Rome
 and 
Por∣tugal,
 1486 came into 
Ethiopia
 from 
John
 King of 
Portugal, Pedro de C
ilham ec a lenzo de Pavia
 to 
Alexander
 our 
Neguz,
 that treated them well.


Claudius
 succeeded 
Alexander,
 and after him 
Adamas,
 who was inclined to favour the Heathens superstitions, he persecuted the Christians, but met at last with a just Reward of his Actions, for he was kill'd by his enemies in a bat∣tel.




FINIS.












Books sold by 
Benjamin Billingsley
 at the 
Printing-press
 in 
Broad∣street,
 and at the same sign near the Royal Exchange in 
Cornhil.


BArtholinus Anatomy Eng.
 by 
Culpe∣pers fol, 10 s.


Riverius
 Practice of Physick 
fol. 20 s.


Schroders
 Dispensatory 
Eng.
 by 
W. Row∣land 10 s.


Lord 
Bacons
 Nat. History 
fol. 7 s.


Reynolds
 Gods Revenge of Murther. 10 
s.


Culpepers London
 Dispensatory 
Octa∣vo. 4 s.


English Physician 
Octavo 3 s.


Directory for Midwives 
Octavo 4 s.


Last Legacy 
Octavo 2 s. 6 d.


A Treatise of Wind offending Mans Bo∣dy, with its speedy and easie Remedy 
Octavo 1 s.


A Touch-stone for Physick 
Octavo 1 s.


A Discourse touching Generation col∣lected out of 
L
vinus L
mniu
 Twelves 1 s. 6 d.


Edlins Observationes Astrologicae Octa∣vo 1 s.


Pharmacop
ia Londinensis
 twenty-four, Latine 1 
s. 6 d.


Burrows
 Rare Jewel of Christian Con∣tentment 
Quarto 2 s. 6 d.


The 
Vulcano
's or Fire-Vomiting Moun∣tains, 
&c. 1 s.


Hudsons
 Vindication of the Church-Catholick 3 
s.


Bourns
 Directions concerning Mar∣riage 1 
s.


The Epitome of the whole Art of Hus∣bandry, the second edition much en∣larged 
Octavo 2 s.


Loveday's
 Letters Domestick and For∣reign 
Octavo 2 s. 6 d.


Janua Linguarum, Latine
 and 
Eng.
 a∣dorned with Copper Cutts 2 
s. 6 d.


Present State of Europe 
Quarto 3 s.


Now in the Press, 
Culpepers Semioti
a Ʋranica,
 or his Astrological Judg∣ment of Diseases.


The late Travels of Signior 
Giacomo Barati
 an 
Italian
 Gent. into the re∣mote Countries of the 
Abyssines,
 with a description of the Kingdoms Subject at this present to the Great 
Neguz
 of 
Ethiopia.


FINIS.

















































































































































































