His Maiesties gracious ansvver to the proposition of both Houses of Parliament from Ireland, sent the 24. of February, 1641 with newes from Nottingham, being the copie of a letter sent from a man of good quallity there residing, to a merchant of London, February 18. 1641 : whereunto is added the copie of a letter sent from the Lord Digbie to Colonell Lunsford, and by mistake of the bearer, delivered to one Mr. Langford in Covent Garden, and so by him discovered.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Approx. 9 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A31919




Wing C2321



ESTC R35847





ocm 15565227




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
His Maiesties gracious ansvver to the proposition of both Houses of Parliament from Ireland, sent the 24. of February, 1641 with newes from Nottingham, being the copie of a letter sent from a man of good quallity there residing, to a merchant of London, February 18. 1641 : whereunto is added the copie of a letter sent from the Lord Digbie to Colonell Lunsford, and by mistake of the bearer, delivered to one Mr. Langford in Covent Garden, and so by him discovered.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Charles I, King of England, 1600-1649.
[8] p.   


London printed :


For J.T.,


1641.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History --  Charles I, 1625-1649.
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






C2321


R35847


15565227


103813














His Maiesties Gracious ANSVVER, To the Proposition of both Houses of Parliament for 
Ireland,
 sent the 24. of 
February,
 1641.


With Newes from NOTTINGHAM,


BEING The Copie of a Letter sent from a man of good quallity there re∣siding, to a Merchant of 
London, Febru∣ary,
 18. 1641.


WHEREUNTO Is added the Copie of a Letter sent from the Lord 
Digbie
 to Colonell 
Lunsford,
 and by mistake of the bearer, delivered to one Mr. 
Langford
 in 
Covent Garden,
 And so by him discovered


London,
 Printed for 
J. T.
 1641.














A Copie of a Letter sent from a Gentleman of good worth in 
Nottingham,
 to a Merchant of worth and Quality li∣ving in 
London.


Worthy Sir,


H
Aving the opportunity of this bearer a Gentleman my neare Neighbour, I could not let him passe without a sa∣lute in a line or twaine, hoping of your health and welfare with the rest of your Family; as thanks be to God, mine are herein, at this present.


For Newes I doe earnestly desire you to impart such of probability, as shall come to your hearing, besee∣ching the Almighty God, to guide and direct all pro∣ceedings in that Honourable and High Court of Par∣liament, to his glory, and the content and happinesse of all his Majesties Kingdomes. I desire much to heare how the Papist Rebels proceed in 
Ireland,
 for we have too many ill-affected Papists amongst us here in our Countrey.


And for our Castle of 
Nottingham,
 it was of late in the custody of one Mr. 
Traford
 a Papist, whereby great jealousies were in most mens minds raised, for

for the Castle is a place of a most impregnable strength, and Scituated upon a Rocke, with infinite store of Vaults and hollow Caves underground, able to receive infinite store of men, and horses, with all o∣ther furnitures of Ammunition for Warre, which the Governours of the Towne taking into their considera∣tion, caused a very strong guard and watch to be kept about it night and day, in which posture it stands yet, Messengers bein
 sent up to the Honourable House of Parliament, there is a Vault in the Castle called 
Mortimers
 Hole, which is wide and very spacious, and a great dis
nce from thence. Another Cave cal∣led 
Mortime
 watering-place, in all which places it is supposed above two thousand men with Horses and Furniture may be kept and concealed.


The suspition of all which was much more increa∣sed by a Rumour of great quantities of meate killed by Mr. 
Trafords
 appointment against 
Christmas,
 with a great many of Beefes, Muttons, and Hogs, he him∣selfe being a neere Gentleman, and keeping ordinarily but a small Retinue of Servants about him, since the Officers of the Towne have taken that strict Course of watching and warding about the Castle, he hath removed his dwelling into a Lodge of a Parke neere adjoyning, where he keepes very privately, and some suppose he is gone away from thence secretly, we are so distracted at these occasions here about us, that no man almost (for feare of treacheries, and Plots from the Papists) dares goe to the Church without his Pistoll, and sword by his side, I beseech God that Peace and quietnesse may be setled amongst us.




Sr. I desire to heare from you what is newes, and of the I
te
 
ssage
 concerning our Country-man Sir 
Iohn 
iron,
 who we heard was chosen Lievtenant of the Tower, and also what newes concerning the Bishops, here is expectation dayly of new furnishing, and recti∣fying all the strong Holds of our Countrie.


Sir.


I am sorry J have beene so tedious in my re∣lation, which J feare hath a little troubled your patience, but I trust you 
ake all in good part, and so I take my leave, 
nd rest.


Your ever assured friend till death, 
J. T.


Nottingham
 
this 14. day of 
February,
 1641.








The true Copie of a Letter sent from the Lord 
George Digbie
 to Col. 
Lunsford.


Most worthy and noble Colonell.


Y
Our fidelity & constancy have bound me unto you, and although our de∣signe tooke no b
tter effect, I shall with the lesse value, or prize your Reall disposition. For I am none of those men, who by the successe in their proceedings, and who thinke none deserving, but those whose actions are crowned with happy and prosperous event, and so measure the event, and not the c
use. Let us not be discouraged because our Ad∣versaries have given check unto our proceedings, but let us play our game valiantly and discreetly, and I am confid
nt, that if we can but keepe them from giving of us check mate, the game will be ours. Our power is daily encreased and strengthened in 
Ireland,
 and I am certaine, that had we as much opportunity as strength, we might obtaine our desires here in 
England,
 but we must waite and expect for our best advantage, and not be like your too hasty Mothers, who whilest they doe too much hasten the birth of their issue, they bring forth abortives. Patience will mature and produce what rashnesse and too much hast would otherwise de∣stroy

and ruinate. We have yet done nothing that we need feare, onely that our Adversaries as yet are the stronger, if to be Loyall and faithfull to his Majesty be culpable, we must plead guilty, who yet have done nothing, but what was for the secu
ity of his Crowne and Priviledge, if it be dema
ded why I have absented my selfe, I shall not be wanting of sufficient reason for their satisfaction. Let me vnderstand from your owne hand the condition of the times, as soon as I arrive you shall have intelligence of it, I could wish you with me, but I hope and am almost confident, that you are se∣cure, where you now abide, for they have not any pow∣er for what hath yet been enterprized any way to pu∣nish, or question, nothing being acted either against the King or Common-wealth. Bee carefull in your carriage and discourse, for you have many which daily lye in waite to entrap you; But I shall not need to counsell you any further, but for the present, take my leave, and rest.


Your faithfull friend. 
George Digbie.


From the 
Downes
 aboard the 10. 
Whelpe,
 
Febru∣ary,
 20. 1641.








HIS MAJESTIES GRACIOUS Answer,
 To the Proposition of both Houses of Parlia∣ment for 
Ireland,
 sent the 
24.
 of February, 
1641.


HIs Majesty being Glad to receive any proposition that may repaire the Calamity of his distressed King∣dome of 
Jreland
 especially when it may bee with∣out burthen or Imposition, 
nd for the ease of his good Subjects of this Kingdome, hath graciously considered the Overture made by both Houses of Parliament to that purpose, and returnes this Answere.


That as he hath offered and is still ready to venture his own Royall person for the recovery of that Kingdome, if this Par∣liament shall adv
se him therevnto, so he will not deny to con∣tribute any other assistance he can to that Service, by parting with any profit or advantage of his owne there, And therefore (relying upon the wisedome of this Parliament) doth con∣sent to every proposition now made to him, without taking time to ex
mine whether this course may not retard the redu∣cing of th
t Kingdome, by exasperating the Rebells, and ren∣dring them desperate of being received into Grace, if they shall returne to their obed
ence.


And his Majesty will be ready to give his Royall assent to all such Bills as shall be tendred vnto him by his Parliament for the confirmation of every particular of this proposition.


FINIS.











