The Kings Maiesties speech to the Lords for raising of forces to preserve the peace and safety of his subjects, June 29 likewise a report of Mr. Hambden and Mr. Fines concerning a conspiracy intended against the Parliament : whereunto is annexed joyfull newes from the Queene in Holland, sent from Mr. Cayne Her Majesties servant to Mr. Sanders neere Charing-Crosse, concerning fourteene messengers which are gone from the states in Holland to His Majesty at Yorke, whose names are expressed in this ensuing relation : together with the message the States sent to His Majestie with their determination concerning the Lord Strange.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Approx. 7 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A32135




Wing C2814



ESTC R29204





ocm 10856404




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The Kings Maiesties speech to the Lords for raising of forces to preserve the peace and safety of his subjects, June 29 likewise a report of Mr. Hambden and Mr. Fines concerning a conspiracy intended against the Parliament : whereunto is annexed joyfull newes from the Queene in Holland, sent from Mr. Cayne Her Majesties servant to Mr. Sanders neere Charing-Crosse, concerning fourteene messengers which are gone from the states in Holland to His Majesty at Yorke, whose names are expressed in this ensuing relation : together with the message the States sent to His Majestie with their determination concerning the Lord Strange.
England and Wales. Sovereign (1625-1649 : Charles I)
Charles I, King of England, 1600-1649.
England and Wales. Parliament.
[6] p.   


London :


Printed for I.H. and T.R.,


1642.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History --  Civil War, 1642-1649 --  Sources.
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






C2814


R29204


10856404


46126














The Kings Maiesties SPEECH To the LORDS for the raising of For∣ces, to preserve the peace and safety of His Subjects. 
Iune.
 29.


Likewise a Report of Mr. 
Hambden,
 and Mr. 
Fines,
 concerning a Conspiracy intended against the Parliament.


Whereunto is annexed Joyfull Newes from the Queene in 
Holland.
 Sent from Mr. 
Cayne
 Her Majesties Servant, to Mr. 
Sanders
 neere Charing-Crosse.


Concerning fourteene Messengers which are gone from the States in 
Holland
 to His Majesty at 
Yorke,
 whose Names are expres∣sed in this ensuing Relation.


Together with the Message the States sent to His Majestie.


With their Determination concerning the Lord 
Strange.


Ordered that this be printed and published.


Jo. Browne, Cler. Parl.


Iuly, 5. 
London,
 Printed for 
I. H.
 and 
T. R.
 1642.
















The Kings Majesties Speech to the LORDS for the raising of For∣ces to maintaine the peace and safety of His Sub∣jects.


My Lords,


T
He last time I was in this place I minded you to make what speed you could to raise Forces to reduce the ty∣ranising people, which will not obey my command to a Loyall subjection, the same I shall now include, for I a∣bove all things in the world prize the peace and safety of my good Subjects, and of all Rebellion J hate that of the Popish Faction, I heare daily of the wo∣full estate of my People, and doe under∣stand how my House of Commons

have passed a Bill for the raising of For∣ces, and that the Bill stickes with you my Lords, for whach I give you no thanks, as to the Declaration, J have no pleasure in that, but that Actions may be transacted, in matter of such conse∣quence, this is the full effect of the Speech.






The Roport made by Master
 Pym.


Still doe the Protestants eccho forth lameetable complaints, and as it were dispaire of safety, for it was reported to the committee for 
Irish
 affaires, that that more Counties have collected their Forces, and joyne with the Rebels,


They are marched within 4. Miles of 
Dublin,
 pillaging of Houses, and dri∣ving away Cattell, and stop the passa∣ges

from whence they received provisi∣on, to the great griefe and feare of his Majesties good Subjects, the Protestants of 
Ireland,
 the Rebels made publique proclemation, and maintained it, with a generall Oath for to be all true to the Church of 
Rome.
 also they proclaime and confesse that King 
Charles
 is their lawfull King and governour, making a Vow and Protestation.


They tooke up Armes in defence of their Religion, not in contempt or malice against his Maiesty, to which intent they spake to the Lord 
Dillon,
 to send Letters to the Kings Majesty, but this can be no better dissem∣blation, for they which love the King will not persecute his Loyall people by fire and Sword, as they have and daily doe, and yet will make us be∣lieve they love the King, 
from their pow∣er Lord keepe him for ever,
 and never let him be so unfortunate as to fall into their

hands, for then upon my life J am per∣swaded they would exile from their hearts both duty, love, and mercy, two Sunnes must not shine in one climate, 
Tyrone
 must have nothing to doe where King 
Charles
 hath Authority.


Although now he exalt himselfe as his Father did before him, let him quick∣ly returne to his Spanish preferment, from 
England, Scotland,
 or 
Jreland.


Other Letters came that the Rebels expected Ammunition from forraigne parts, that the old Proverbe may∣be made true, the Devill helpes his ser∣vants.


Wherefore the Lord chiefe Iustices of 
Jreland,
 desired the Parliament to send their poore Subjects and friends some reliefe of Men and Money, about which there did arise some debate con∣cerning sending of men out of this Kingdome, I meane also concerning a presse unlesse it was done by Act of Parliament, but now it is resolved up∣on

the Question that ayd shall be spee∣dily sent unto the poore afflicted Pro∣testants in 
JRELAND,
 the Com∣manders in 
London
 looke every day when their Commission should be sea∣led up, and then they enter into pay.






A Conspiracy discovered against the High Court of Parliament.


VPon the 17. of 
June,
 Mr. 
Fines
 made a Report to the Honou∣rable Court, that there was a great Treason discovered against them, the Plotters whereof were, first. That Captaine 
Goring
 should be a great Commander in the Army, and the Lord of 
Newcastle
 to meet them in 
Notting∣hamshire
 with 1000 Horse. In which Conspiracy Sergeant Major 
Wallis
 saith, That the 
French
 would assist them, and the Clergie would at their own charge send 1000 horse, this Army was to be

brought from the North against the Ho∣nourable Houses of Parliament. As it was Reported to both Houses by Mr. 
Hambden.






A Letter sent from the Queenes Court in Holland, sent from Mr. 
Cayn
 her Maie∣sties Servant, to Mr. 
Sanders
 neere 
Chee∣ring-Crosse.


SIR,


I Having such a fit opportunity to present my Service unto you not knowing when to have the same again by reason of the great distempers which are with you. Therefore J thought by this Messenger to certifie you of the proceedings betwixt the Queens Majesty, and her Royall Soveraign the King of great 
Brittain,
 Vpon the 22. of 
Iune
 there went to the King at 
York
 P
ce 
Robert,
 
rince 
Maurice,
 the Lord 
Dunby,
 Sir 
Edward Stradly,
 Sir 
Lewes Dues,
 Mr. 
Smith,
 Mr. 
Whalcy,
 Mr. 
Foxe,
 Mr. 
Bacon,
 Mr. 
Grand,
 Mr. 
G
ffery,
 Captaine 
Cade,
 Captaine 
Bankly,
 the which were commanded by the States of 
Holland
 to present a Mess
ge to His Royall Majesty of great 
rittain,
 intimating the great danger which is like to ensue▪ unlesse he be pleased to tecide to his Parliament, and so agree in Concord, and unity together. So I rest.


From the 
Hague
 
June, 28. 10
2.


Your loving Friend, 
John Cayne.
 Servant to the Queens most Excellent Majestie.






FINIS.









