(EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A32664)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 60737)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1641-1700 ; 653:2)
"Reprinted and published by His Majesties [i.e. James II] special command."
Reproduction of original in Huntington Library.
A perfect Friendship and Peace.
Free Passage and Trade.
Letters of Marque, when to be granted.
Free Trade and Com∣merce.
No Customs to be paid but what the Na∣tives pay.
Tables or Lists of the Duties to be put up.
All kind of Goods freely to be Import∣ed into
To pay onely for the Goods Landed.
Prize Goods to be esteem∣ed as

The
And to have all the Privi∣ledges granted to the


Goods Land∣ed which have paid Custom, and shall after∣wards be car∣ried to any other Place, to pay no sur∣ther Duties.
Ships to An∣chor freely in any Port or Road.
Ships how to be visited at Sea.
Prohibited Goods Ex∣ported, to be Confiscated.
In case Coin, Wooll or Ful∣lers-Earth be Exported, the Laws of the Country to take place.
Ships to re∣main freely in each others Ports, and de∣part again.
Concerning Men of War coming into Ports.
No Merchants, Pilots,
Merchants, Seamen,
About Diffe∣rences be∣tween Ca∣ptains and Masters of Ships, and their Men.
Concerning Trading to
Freedom of Trade to Pla∣ces in Amity or Neutrality with either Party.
Not to be di∣sturbed in that liberty.
Contraband Goods, and no other, to be Confiscated.
What are Contraband Goods.
Exceptions to the above-mentioned Article.
Goods belong∣ing to either Party found on Enemies Ships, to be Confiscated.
The power of the respective Consuls.
Merchants not to be molested for Religion.
Merchandises to be paid for onely in such Coin as shall be agreed up∣on.
Merchants,
To employ such Proctors, Agents,
Books of Ac∣compt not sub∣ject to any Inquisition.
About Con∣fiscation of Estates.
Estates of those that die, to be kept for the Heirs.
Concerning the Estates of those that die Intestate.
The
In case of any Difference be∣tween the Crowns, Six months notice to be given.

How to pro∣ceed in case any Dispute happen about these Articles.
About the Ratifications.
Peace and A∣mity restored.
Cessation of Hostilities.
All Injuries to be forgotten.
Freedom of Trade and Navigation.
Prisoners re∣leased.
All Acts made against the liberty of Trade, Re∣voked.
Restitution of
If any person have sold his Goods there, he shall repay the Money be∣fore he be re∣stored.
All things in that Island to be put in the same state as they were in 1665.
Restitution of
Such Inhabi∣tants as shall desire to leave the Place, may.
Reciprocal Restitution of Places taken.
Slaves and Servants may return to their Masters, if not sold.
Souldiers, La∣bourers,
Articles of Re∣stitution to extend to all Places.
Letters of Marque re∣voked.
Not to be granted but four Months after the de∣nial of Justice.
This Peace, when to take effect.
In case of a fu∣ture War, Six Months to be allowed the Merchants to Transport their Goods.
Who shall be comprehend∣ed in this Treaty.
Ratifications Exchanged.
Perpetual Peace.
Hostilities to cease, when and where.
Restitution of what shall be taken after these Terms respectively.
Injuries to be forgotten.
Prisoners to be released.
Concerning the Goods and Debts that have been Confiscated.
Abolition of a Debt due from
Restitution of Places.
Who shall be comprehend∣ed in this Treaty.
These Arti∣cles to be ob∣served by both Kings.
Ratifications to be Exchan∣ged.
A firm Peace concluded.
Enmities to cease.
Injuries to be forgiven.
Both Parties to keep what they have.
Ships, Goods,
All Actions, Suits, and Pre∣tensions, re∣nounced.
Places taken since the 10/20 of
Hostilities, when to cease.
Letters of Marque revo∣ked.
Liberty of Trade resto∣red in
All Prisoners set free.
Mutual De∣fence.
Not to Treat or Attempt any thing a∣gainst each o∣thers preju∣dice, nor any way to favour the same.
Rebels not to be Assisted.
To Assist each other against Rebels.
Rebels and Fugitives not to be recei∣ved.
Rebels or Fu∣gitives, upon notice, to be Banished.
Rebels not to be received or harboured.
Freedom of Passage and Trade.
No more Cu∣stoms to be paid, but what other Foreign Nations pay.

No Pirates to be Protected.
The Subjects of either Par∣ty not to take Commissions from any Prince in War with the other Party.
Concerning other Priva∣teers and their Prizes.
Notice to be given of any Treaty with any other Prince.
If any thing be done in Contraventi∣on to this Treaty by any of the Sub∣jects of either Party, he or they shall be punished.
The Subjects of either Par∣ty to Travel freely in each others Terri∣tories in
Freedom of Ports.
Seamen,
Seamen,
To Convoy each other.
About Ships taken in either Parties Har∣bours.
Searchers,
No Letters of Marque to be granted but upon denial of Justice.
In case of a future War, Six Months to be allowed for Ships,
Privateers to give Caution.
Each Party to to have free access to the others Ports.
Concerning Men of War coming to any Port.
This Treaty to be obser∣ved.
Stateholder of
Who to be comprehend∣ed in this Treaty.
About the Ratifications.
Preface.
All Acts,
What Goods the
Commission∣ers for the Regulation of Trade to be appointed.
Freedom of Trade with Places in Peace, Amity, or Neutrality.
Contraband Goods.
Wheat, Corn,
Ships entring into Port with intention to pass to an E∣nemies Port, not to be Scarched up∣on shewing their Pass∣ports.
The same con∣cerning Ships coming into Roads, not to give an ac∣count of their Lading.
Nor to shew Passports but in case of su∣spicion.
Ships at Sea, how to be Vi∣sited.
Contraband Goods found on Board, to be Confiscated onely, and no other.
Goods found in an Enemies Ship, to be Confiscated.
Free Ship free Goods, except Contraband.
All Rights and Exemptions to be enjoyed reciprocally.
Captains of Ships not to molest the o∣thers Subjects.
Captains and Privateers to give Security.
About Prizes Laden with Contraband Goods.
Judgments upon Prizes to be given with all E∣quity.
Upon com∣plaint of Judg∣ment, a Re∣view to be granted with∣in Three Months.
The Goods reclaimed, not to be unladen but by con∣sent.
Persons inte∣ressed in a Ship taken, obtaining a favourable Judgment, to have its Exe∣cution upon Security.
Ratifications Exchanged within Four Weeks.
Preface.

To extend to all Goods but Contraband.
What Goods are Contra∣band.
Corn, Wheat,

Ships coming into Roads, not obliged to give an ac∣count of their Lading, but upon suspici∣on of carry∣ing Contra∣band Goods;
In which case to shew their Passports.
Concerning Searching Ships at Sea.
Upon produ∣cing their Passports, not to be mole
Contraband Goods found on Board, to be Confiscated onely, and no other, nor the Ship.
Free Ship free Goods,
All Priviledg∣es to be en∣joyed reci∣procally.
Captains and Privateers lia∣ble to make good any Da∣mage they shall do.
To give Se∣curity to that end.
Contraband Goods taken, not to be o∣pened but in presence of the Officers of the Admi∣ralty.
Judgments up∣on Prizes to be given equi∣tably.
Upon com∣plaint of Judg∣ment, a Re∣view to be granted with∣in Three Months.
The Goods reclaimed; not to be sold or unladen but by consent.
The interes∣sed in a Ship taken, obtain∣ing a favoura∣ble Judgment, the same to have its Exe∣cution upon Security.
Commission∣ers to be ap∣pointed for the supplying of what shall be found wanting in this Treaty.
Ratification within Four Weeks.
The Peace Confirmed.

To Reexport what they cannot sell.
Goods sold, and sent else∣where by Sea, to pay no Im∣position.
But such as are carried by Land, to be exempt for Ten years only.
After which, to pay one half of what is Imposed by the
Goods coming from any of the Kings Do∣minions, to be freely sold in all the Dukes Territories.
What Goods excepted;
Which may yet be sold to the Farmers of the Liberty of selling those Goods.
All other extracted to be sold, to pay half Custom of what is speci∣fied in the
All Woollen Manufactures, or other Goods, not specified in the
Ships arriving with Bills of Health, to be admitted to immediate
But without such Certifi∣cates, to be subject to the
The
The Kings Subjects to enjoy the Pri∣viledge of Pro∣tection against Strangers, not one another.

Not to be Sub∣ject to Arrests,
Liberty of Conscience.
About the De∣ciding of Con∣troversies.
A Judge to be chosen, and called the De∣legate of the
To Decide all Controversies.
No Appeal but to the Tri∣bunal of the Consuls of the Sea.
Controversies amongst the
If any

About Mari∣ners lying on Shore, or run∣ning in Debt.

Victuals for the said Ships to pay no Cu∣stom but the first Cost.
The said Ships being in Port, to be protect∣ed against all Violence.

Officers of the Customs ex∣acting any thing more then what by the

Preface.
The Treaty of 1667 Con∣firmed.
An Universal Peace as well in
All Enmities and Deprada∣tions to cease.
Letters of Mart Reve∣ked.
Reslitution for Losses con∣trary to this Treaty.
Renunciation of all Leagues,
Prisoners re∣leased.
All Injuries to be forgotten.

Sailing to, or Trading in each others Ports in
Except by Li∣cence.
In case the Ships of either Party be sor∣ced into the others Har∣bours in
In case of Shipwrack, Persons saved not to be kept Prisoners.
In case three or four Ships come together into any Port, not to stay without leave from the Go∣vernor, nor to Trade.
Both Parties shall cause this Treaty to be kept.
No Reprisals but in case of denying, or unreasonably delaying Ju∣stice.
This Treaty not to preju∣dice eithers Dominion in those Seas.
Ratification.
A perfect Peace and Friendship.
Not to con∣sent to any thing prejudi∣cial to each other.
Not to Assist each others Enemies, if Aggressors.
To Assist
Each Party to be compre∣hended in any Treaty made with others.
Freedom of Trade.

Nor the

The like liber∣ty to the
In case any Strangers have hereafter li∣berty to bring all sorts of Goods into Prohibited Ports, both Parties respe∣ctively to have the same Pri∣viledge.
The

Leave to bring all Goods into their proper Storehouses respectively.
Neither Party obliged to come into any Port where he is nor bound, nor (being forced in) obliged to un∣lade or sell a∣ny part of his Goods.
Concerning Timber pro∣hibited to be Laden on Board any

Goods Landed at

Either Princes Subject dying in the others Dominions, his Estate to be preserved,
Freedom of Trade with each others Enemies, un∣less in Ports Besieged, and Contraband Goods.
Any Merchant to reside free∣ly where he Trades.
Duties to be paid accord∣ing to the Printed

Passports and Certificates to be given to Ships.
Form of the Pass.
Form of the Certificate.
Ships not to be Searched upon produ∣cing their Certificates.

Any Injury done to either Parties Sub∣jects in the o∣thers Territo∣ries, to be pu∣nished accord∣ing to the Laws of the Country.
No Ships, or Goods Laden on Ships be∣longing to ei∣ther Party, to be adjudged Prize, but by due form of Law.
Justice to be Administred according to the Laws of each Country respectively.
In case of Shipwrack, the Goods to be preserved for the Own∣ers.
Ships, Com∣manders of Ships, Goods,
Merchants, Mariners,
Benefit of each others Con∣voys.
Pirates not to be protected.
Freedom of access to each others Ports.
But Men of War not to exceed six in number, ex∣cept forced in, and then to give notice to the Magistrate.
Neithers Sub∣jects to take Letters of Mart from any Prince or State in War with the other
Ships taken in in Port by a third Party, to be restored.
Seamen taken on Board any Prize, and be∣ing Subjects of either Crown, to be set free.
A Ship Laden with prohibi∣ted Goods, if taken, no Bulk to be broken till an Inven∣tory made in the Admiralty.
No Injury to be done by a∣ny Men of War to the o∣ther, in case of any, the Causes to be Tried in the Admiralty Courts, or by Commission∣ers to be ap∣pointed by the Kings.
Sentence con∣cerning Prizes to be given ac∣cording to Justice.
Upon com∣plaint of any Sentence, a Review to be made.
No Goods to be sold before Sentence, but by consent, or to prevent perishing.
Consuls to be appointed.
No private Injury to break this Treaty;
Nor Repri∣zals to be granted, but upon denial or delay of Ju∣stice.

Former Trea∣ties not con∣trary to this, Confirmed.
Ratifications to be Exchan∣ged within Three months.
An Amnesty and Freedom of Trade.
Freedom of Ports.
To pay no Duties but for what is vented.
Exaction at
Ships to pass quietly.
Passengers and Goods of o∣ther Nations on Board

Goods of Ships cast away, and Persons, to be free, and sa∣ved.

Those that a∣buse the Sub∣jects of either Party, to be punished.

No
Freedom of Ports for Re∣pairing,
And to buy Victuals and Necessaries without pay∣ing Custom.


A Slave get∣ting on Board any
This Treaty to be perpe∣tual, and in Particulars not mentioned here, the Ca∣pitulations with the Grand Signor to be observed.
The Treaty in 1662, Re∣newed.
A perpetual Peace.

To pay Cu∣stoms only for the Goods they sell.
All Persons and Goods belonging to the Subjects of other Na∣tions on Board the Ships of either Party, to be free.
How Ships shall be Visit∣ed at Sea.
No person whatsoever to be taken out of any
Goods of a Ship cast a∣way, to be saved.
The Men not to be made Slaves.
No
No
No

Not to pay Custom.
May buy Pro∣visions,

Estates of
No one
Differences of the

The Consul not answer∣able.

And a Place to Pray in.
The

Renewal of the Peace.
All
8000 Dollars to be paid to Sir
If upon de∣mand and de∣nial of satis∣faction to the King for Inju∣ries, a War happen, the King is to be paid the Charge of the War.
No

Amnesty for all Injuries past.
Satisfaction to be made for Injuries com∣mitted before the Notifica∣tion of this Peace.
Satisfaction to be immediate∣ly made for all Injuries, and the Peace not to be broken till Satisfacti∣on be denied.
Confirmation of the former Peace.

The Consul to have leave to put the Kings Flagg on the Top of his House, and in his Boat.
Particulars not mentioned here, to be ac∣cording to the Capitulations with the Grand Signi∣or.
A firm Peace.
All Hostilities and Letters of Mart to cease upon the Pub∣lication of this Treaty.
When Hosti∣lities shall cease in the several Parts of the World.
Article for Striking.
Concerning
The Articles made by Co∣lonel

Concerning the restitution of Places.
All preceding Treaties to continue in force.
Marine Treaty of 1668 to continue in force for Nine months, and the Conside∣ration of a new one to be referred to Commission∣ers.
In case the Commission∣ers shall not Agree within three months, it shall be left to the Arbi∣tration of
Concerning a Regulation of Commerce in the
Commission∣ers to be sent to
800000 Pata∣coons to be paid to his Majesty.
About the Ra∣tification;
And Publica∣tion.


This freedom to extend to all Commodi∣ties not pro∣hibited.
What Goods are prohibi∣ted.
What Goods are not prohi∣bited.
Liberty of Trade unto Places in En∣mity with the other Party.
Ships only to shew their Passports.
How to be Visited.
Ships going to Enemies Ports, to shew their Concquets besides their Passports.
If prohibited Goods be found to be in any Ship, what to be done.
The Ship and the other Commodities not forfeited therefore.
Free Ship free Goods;
Goods Laden before War is Declared by either of the Parties against a third State, in whose Ship the said Goods are, not to be for∣feited.
Privateers and Companies to make Restitu∣tion in case of a Contraven∣tion.
Privateers to give Security.
Judgments up∣on Prizes to be given ac∣cording to Justice.
Upon com∣plaint against Sentences, the same to be Reviewed within Three months.
Goods not to be sold before Sentence, or during the Review.
Sentence in case of Prizes being given for the Re∣claimer, shall be put in Exe∣cution not∣withstanding the Appeal.
No Master or Mariner of a Ship taken, to be used cruel∣ly, or tortured.
If they have been Tortu∣red, the Ship and Lading shall be free.
Neither Par∣ties Subjects to take Com∣missions from a third Party.
To be Ratified within Two months;
And Copies to be sent to all Colonies,
Our Ships may Trade in all Parts,
Travel freely.
The same.
Distress of Ships.
Freedom to take Provisi∣ons.
Cases of Ship∣wrack.
The
One
In all Busines∣ses nothing of force without Hoget.
No Plea to be made against an
No

No
The Ambassa∣dors power to coustitute Consuls.
No Process without the Interpreter.
The
Our Ships not to be detained at Sea by the
All Priviledges granted to o∣ther Nations, granted also to the
Against
No Custom to be taken on Moneys. None to force change of Mo∣neys.
No Ammuni∣tion to be carried in our Ships.
Provisions may be bought for our Ships.
No Process to be made with∣out presence of the Ambas∣sador,
Suits of Law above 4000 Aspers, to be heard above.
No Consul to be imprison∣ed, nor dis∣missed,
The Goods of
In cases of Death, the Caddee not to meddle.
No
For making Wine.
Customs paid in one Port, are not to be demanded in another.
No
All Strangers to come under the
No Imperial Command contrary to these Articles to be granted.
For enforcing Consulage.
Permission to Trade in all Parts of the
Three
Vessels forced by Weather.
Goods not Landed, to pay no Cu∣stom.
Idem.
Matters of Manslaughter.
Foreigners Consulage to be paid.
Silk to pay the Custom as
Interpreters to have Li∣cence to speak the sence of the Ambassa∣dor, or Con∣sul.
Druggermen dying,
No Command valid against the Capitula∣tions.
Such Com∣mands to be taken away.
Against the Pyrates of
No Rest to be taken.
The Discharge of one Custo∣mer a suffi∣cient Acquit∣tance against him that suc∣ceeds.
No Custom to be paid twice.

No Duties to be raised a∣bove the ac∣customed Usance.
No Goods to be forced vio∣lently out of the Ships.
Abuses to be redressed in Customs.
In hearing of Law-Suits.
No Customs upon Money.
Raw Silks.
A greater number of Guardians not to be put A∣board our Ships then usual.
The Pyrates of
Customs being paid, the Cu∣stomer not to deny the Tes∣chere.
A second Cu∣stom not to be demanded.
All Goods in
Without Pledge or Suretiship one
Bill of Ex∣change not ac∣cepted, cannot be enforced.
Druggermen free of all
Ten of the Ambassadors Servants free of Harach.
The Estate of Principals in the hand of a Renegade, to be delivered to the Ambas∣sador or Con∣sul.

The like to the
To extend to all Commodi∣ties but Con∣traband.
What Goods are Contra∣band.
What Goods shall not be looked upon as Contraband
Freedom of Trade not on∣ly from one Place in Neu∣trality to an∣other, or from a Neutral Place to one in Enmity, but also from one Port in Enmity to another like∣wise in Enmi∣ty with either of the Parties;
Enmity to another like∣wise in Enmi∣ty with either of the Parties;
Except Places Besieged or Invested.
Ships coming into any Port, and intending to go further, only to shew their Passports
Ships how to be visited at Sea.
Ships going to Places in En∣mity with the other Party, to shew their Cocquets be∣sides their Passports.
If prohibited Goods be found in a Ship, what to be done.
The Ship and the other Goods not to be forefeited.
Free Ship free Goods,
Goods Laden before War is Declared by one of the Par∣ties against a third Party, not to be for∣feited.
Privateers and Companies to make Satisfa∣ction in case of Contraven∣tion.
Privateers to give Security.
In cases of Prizes, Justice to be admini∣stred.
In case of Complaint a∣gainst Senten∣ces upon Pri∣zes, the
And the King of
Sentence a∣gainst a Pri∣vateer to be put in Execu∣tion, notwith∣standing his Appeal.
No Master or Seamen to be Tortured.
Upon proof of Torture, the Ship to be forthwith Discharged.
Those that take Commis∣sions from the Enemies of ei∣ther Party a∣gainst the o∣ther, to be punished.
This Treaty to be Ratified in Two Months.
Firm Peace.
Liberty of co∣ming in, or Trading to
Contraband Goods to pay no Duties at

Manner of Vi∣siting Ships at Sea,
No person to be taken our of any
No Ship∣wracks to be Prize, nor the Goods or Men to be Seized.



Kings Ships may sell their Prizes at
Not to pay a∣ny Customs.
May buy Pro∣visions.
The Kings Ships coming to
No
The King not obliged to Re∣deem his Sub∣jects now in Slavery.

Goods of
Their Estates to be kept for their Heirs.


No Ships to be obliged to lade or carry Goods against their will.



Liberties of the
The


All Injuries to be forgotten, and Satisfa∣ction to be made for Da∣mages com∣mitted after∣wards.
This Peace not to be broken in case of any Contraven
Locus Sigilli.