By the King, a proclamation touching passes and sea-briefs
England and Wales. Sovereign (1660-1685 : Charles II)
Approx. 4 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A32650




Wing C3587



ESTC R37630





ocm 16992471




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the King, a proclamation touching passes and sea-briefs
England and Wales. Sovereign (1660-1685 : Charles II)
Charles II, King of England, 1630-1685.
[2] leaves.   


London :


Printed by the assigns of John Bill and Christopher Barker ...,


1675.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History, Naval --  Stuarts, 1603-1714.
Great Britain --  History --  Charles II, 1660-1685.
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






C3587


R37630


16992471


105644














HONI ❀ SOIT ❀ QVI ❀ MAL ❀ Y ❀ PENSE ❀


DIEV · ET · MON · DROIT


 By the King. A PROCLAMATION Touching Passes and Sea-briefs.


CHARLES R.


H
His Majesty having taken into His Royal Consideration the manifold Evils arising from the Liberty taken by His Subjects Trading into the 
Mediterra∣nean
 Sea, of imploying the Passes or Sea-briefs granted for the Securing the Ships and Vessels of His Subjects, to the Protecting and Securing Fo∣reign Ships and Vessels; to His Majesties great dishonour, the offence of His Allies, and the prejudice of the Trade and Navigation of this King∣dom, Is Graciously pleased by this His Royal Proclamation, (with the Ad∣vice of His Privy Council) to Publish and Declare, That no Pass or Sea-brief whatsoever, which bears Date before or since the First day of 
January
 last, shall remain in force any longer then until the First day of 
May
 next coming; His Majesty having been pleased to Direct, That other Passes in the Form now established, shall upon demand, and without

 Charge, be delivered forth by the Secretary of the Admiralty of 
England
 for the time being, to the parties Interested therein, upon Security by them given, for delivering their former Passes within Six Moneths after their receiving such new ones. And His Majesty doth also further Delare, That no Pass or Sea-brief hereafter to be granted, (saving where the Ships to which the said Passes shall be so granted, shall be bound to 
Guiny,
 or the 
East
 or 
West Indies,
 and so exprest to be in the Body of the said Pass) shall remain in force longer then for the space of one entire Year from the day of the Date thereof; And that all Passes and Sea-briefs from henceforth to be granted to the Ships and Vessels of His Majesties Subjects Tra∣ding in the 
Mediterranean
 Sea, shall be Printed and Indented in the same Form wherein they were heretofore Issued by His Royal Highness, 
James
 Duke of 
York,
 when Lord High Ad∣miral of 
England,
 with the Day, Moneth and Year of their respective Dates expressed there∣in, in words at length, and not in figures; And that such Passes or Sea-briefs as shall be produced after the said First day of 
May
 next, in any other Form, shall be Deemed, and are here∣by Declared void, and of none effect: And His said Majesty doth strictly Charge and Command all persons concerned, to take notice of His Royal Pleasure herein Declared, and to yield all due Obedience thereunto, at their perils.


Given at Our Court at 
Whitehall


the Two and twentieth day of 
December
 1675. In the Seven and twentieth year of Our Reign.


God save the King.










LONDON,
 Printed by the Assigns of 
John Bill
 and 
Christopher Barker,
 Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1675.









