By the King, a proclamation touching manners, sea-men, and souldiers, which are to serve in His Majesties navy
England and Wales. Sovereign (1660-1685 : Charles II)
Approx. 4 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A32649




Wing C3586



ESTC R35969





ocm 15584210




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the King, a proclamation touching manners, sea-men, and souldiers, which are to serve in His Majesties navy
England and Wales. Sovereign (1660-1685 : Charles II)
Charles II, King of England, 1630-1685.
1 broadside.   


London :


Printed by John Bill and Christopher Barker ...,


1664.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History, Naval --  Stuarts, 1603-1714.
Great Britain --  History --  Charles II, 1660-1685.
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






C3586


R35969


15584210


103939














HONI · SOIT · QVI · MAL · Y · PENSE


DIEV · ET · MON · DROIT


 By the King. A PROCLAMATION Touching Mariners, Sea-men and Souldiers, which are to serve in His Majesties Navy.


CHARLES R.


W
Hereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty, for many weighty and important rea∣sons, hath prepared a Royal Navy, which is now ready to set to Sea, and to be employed on such designs as His Majesty, by the Advice of His Council, hath or shall direct, for the Honour and Safety of His Majesties Realms and Dominions. And whereas by the Laws of this Realm, every Mariner, Sea-man and Soul∣dier, receiving Press-money to serve the King in any of His Ships, and after re∣fusing to serve, or absenting himself at the time and place appointed unto him for his Service, doth incur the danger and penalty of Felony, and is to be punished, and forfeit as a Felon. Nevertheless His Majesty is informed that several Mariners, Sea-men and Souldiers Pressed for His Service, and having received Press-money, do neglect to repair to, and disert the said Service, whereby His Ships may be unfurnished, and His Service disappointed, to the Dishonour of His Majesty, and danger of His People, especially in this time when Foreigners are ready prepared to infest His Dominions, and deprive His Subjects of their priviledge of Trade, and

 other Interest. His Majesty therefore in His Princely Wisdom and Providence, foreseeing the incon∣veniences which may ensue, hath thought fit, with the Advice of His Privy Council, to publish this His Royal Proclamation, and doth hereby straitly Charge and Command all Mariners, Sea-men and Souldiers, who are, or shall hereafter be Pressed for His Service in any Ships or Vessels belong∣ing to the said Navy, and have received, or shall receive Press-money for that purpose, That they duely repair and come to the places, and at the times appointed unto them, and there continue in the Service unto which they are or shall be respectively Commanded, upon pain of death, and all such other Pains, Penalties and Forfeitures, as by the Law can be inflicted or imposed upon them: And for the speedy and effectual prosecution of such Offenders, His Majesty hath thought fit, and doth intend forthwith to issue Commissions of 
Oyer
 and 
Terminer
 for their Legal Tryal and Punishment according to Iustice. And for the better execution of this His Royal intention, doth hereby Charge and Command all and singular Lieutenants, Deputy-Lieutenants, Mayors, Sheriffs, Iustices of the Peace, Bayliffs, Constables, Headboroughs, and other His Officers, Ministers and Subjects whatsoever, within any of His Realms or Dominions, with all care and diligence to make search for, discover and appre∣hend all and every person and persons offending as aforesaid; and such as shall be apprehended, forth∣with to Commit, or cause to be Committed to the next Goal of the County, City, or place where they shall be so apprehended, there to remain until they shall be duely proceeded against, and delivered by course of Law: And that the names of the persons so Apprehended and Committed, be forthwith sent to His Majesty or Privy Council, that care may be taken for their speedy prosecution accordingly.


Given at Our Court at 
Whitehall


the 23
d
 day of 
November,
 1664. in the 16
th
 year of His Majesties Reign.


God save the King.










LONDON,
 Printed by 
John Bill
 and 
Christopher Barker,
 Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty, 1664.









