A brief relation of a vvonderful accident a dissolution of the earth, in the forest of Charnwood, about two miles from Loughborough in Leicestershire ; lately done, and discovered, and resorted to by many people, both old, and young / published by two lovers of art, I.C. and I.W.
Approx. 10 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-04 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A33452




Wing C47



ESTC R7539





ocm 11633078




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A brief relation of a vvonderful accident a dissolution of the earth, in the forest of Charnwood, about two miles from Loughborough in Leicestershire ; lately done, and discovered, and resorted to by many people, both old, and young / published by two lovers of art, I.C. and I.W.
I. C.
I. W.
[2], 6 p. ;  20 cm. 


[London] :


sold by Nath. Ponder,


1679.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Charnwood (England) --  Description and travel.
Loughborough (England) --  Description and travel.
2009-03
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2009-04
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2010-03
John Pas
Sampled and proofread
2010-03
John Pas
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2010-04
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






C47


11633078


47939












A Brief Relation OF A 
VVonderful Accident,
 A DISSOLUTION OF THE EARTH, IN THE Forest of CHARNWOOD, About Two Miles from LOUGHBOROUGH in 
Leicestershire;
 Lately Done, and Discovered, and Resorted to by many People, both OLD, and YOUNG.


Published by two Lovers of Art, I. C. and I. W.


Sold by 
Nath. Ponder
 at the 
Peacock
 against the 
Stocks Market.
 1679.








To the READER.


TO your ingenious Acceptation, we communicate these our Observations; not for fil
hy Lucres s
, but for publick Sa
sf
ction, and T
uth s
ke, (be∣ing provok'd thereto by some Pe
sons of Quality:) con∣sidering he evil custom of erroneous Reports, and the fearful Rumors of ignorant People.


Read and judge charitably, without critical, or in∣credulous Censure; here is no wand
ing Prol
y, nor superfluous embellishm
nt of El
q
nce, but a S
y into the proper 
Antithesis,
 appar
ll'd with necessary Language. Be candid, not canine.


Vale.












THE DESCRIPTION OF THIS Wonderful BREACH.


THE Figure is almost circular, posited in a declining condition to the Horizon, it being the end or fragment of a hilly body, and contains about two Acres of ground. In its upper Divison, or primary Breach, the lower, or 
 p
 of it, lies a Yard (in some places) beneath the u
moved body: ab
 three parts of this c
ar won∣der
 shews s
mpton
s of the efficient cause; and the rest shews little, or no defect.


About three paces from the upper Breach, (or prime Divison) is a second Trench all down one Curve of the Circle, (aforesaid) and some second Fractures on the other side these be over the prime Trench or Breach li
th a narrow path way; the fa
n part, whose Hypo∣tenusal should fall upon the true Angular Point, (i
 it

had a Perpendicular Fall:) is subverted, and turned aside on Foot, or more.


Between the Prime Breach, and second Curvery Fra∣cture, the Earth shews a Perpendicular Decent, or Down∣right Falling, because it doth thrust it self within its for∣mer bounds; on the other side of the Curve, which is higher Ground, the parts of the Earth fallen, and un
al∣len, shews the distance of a Foot; which if it should be raised to a Parallel with its former Bounds, would dif∣fer half a Yard. The Sine for these Curves, is the Ra∣dius, or total Sine.


The lower part of the Periphery, (or Arch opposite to the Primary Breach) is rolled in, with an overshoot∣ing of his Bounds; as if it were driven, being light in substance, and stones (in some places thereof) thrusts forth themselves. This lower Curve contains about half the Radius for its versed Sine.


The unbreached part of the Periphery lies on the lower side of the Hill, in respect to the Hills ridge.




Some Persons judge WATER to be the cause of the BREACH; others, say WIND.


The latter we account proper, and consider both, in method and manner following.




1. 
That it was not WATER.


2. 
That it was occasioned by Wind.










REASONS Negative, and Affirmative,
 That it was not WATER.


Reas.
 1. Water doth naturally run in a Channel, hast∣ing forward, yea, and that where the Ground is level: but where the Ground descendeth through which it's to pass, there it forceth with a more direct course, and speedy stream; not dilating it self, but rather drawing its Body more close into narrow Bounds.


Reas.
 2. If Water had been the cause, then it should not have run in a round Figure, where the Hill is so much descending; unless some artificial Pipes had been laid, which by the attractive power of the Air should draw the Water up again; which if Fancy, or any persons Supposition should incline to, yet nevertheless it would have more powerful force in its Descent, than Ascent.


Reas.
 3. Had Water (by its violent Billows) caus'd this Accident, it would either have done it by an Erup∣tion outward, or a Dissolution of the Earth within, where∣by the upper Superncies should have fallen in, or sunk within its counterminal Sides. Indeed, some part of the Ground we allow to be depressed, but another part is not, but rather heightned, by rolling up. And how any thing should produce contrary effects to its nature, is marvellous!


Reas.
 4. Had Water been the cause by demolishing the intrels of the Earth, then (running in a Channel) the Breach should be opposite to its Current; and should from hence the current of Water be guest to fall where the Ground is fallen in all down one Curve of the Circle, then should not other Breach considerable appear from its Production, and the Earth would have been overshot or carry'd that way as the Current of Water past; but the Earth is carried that way where no such salling in appears.








That it was WIND.


Reas.
 1. Because it's so improbable to be Water; but we judge Wind 
gh
 be the Ca
, fora
much as it is its property to produce 
ch 
.


Reas.
 2 For Wind being gathered, and streightned within the Bowels of the 
arth, in order to an Earth∣quake, doth at last (by a vo
tile motion) break or burst forth in some plac
, or other, with g
at violence, rending, tw
ing in, and burying the ea
 within is own b
vels: and in 
s motion, arc
ng, flying, and searching about, might (very naturally) cause this Breach.


Reas.
 3. Because the lower part of the Periphery which is oversh
 lies rolled in, hu
, or blown▪ dar
ing from its swo
n (or enlarged) Pores, Stones o
 a consi∣derable weight: as also the root of a Tree, which is turned up in the Primary Breach.


Reas.
 4. This being at the Front of a hilly Range, the Earthquake might come running along, and there dis∣burden it self: and that moreover that it's free from Rocks, the Ground solvable; and consequently the Pores more easily extended.








Arguments corresponding with the former Reasons.


1. 
Arg.
 If Water had been the cause, then from a slant Descent, or Ascent, the Breach would have shewed it self in a right lined, or serpentine Figure, and more especially in a right lined Figure, its Surface having Declination.


But this Breach is circular, and declining, contrary to a right lined, or serpentine Figure.


Therefore the Cause could not be Water.


2. 
Arg
 Water was not the Cause, but rather Wind; for Wind is volotile, light, and forcible, and known to be of circular motion; where it's streighten'd, and wants liberty to disburden, or disperse it self into its own Element, it searches a passage, and by Operation, is (by Philosophers) accounted the cause of Earthquakes, it vents, and turns up the Earth in its delivery thence.


But, in this Breach the Figure is circular, diversly fra∣ctured, blown or hu
 up, writhed, which are the Sym∣ptoms of an Earthquake.


Ergo.
 Wind was the proper and true Cause.








Now it remains that we answer three Objections, and conclude.


1. 
Object.
 May some say, Had there been an Earth∣quake, why was it not discerned, felt, or discovered by one or other?


2. 
Object.
 Though Towns be not very nigh, yet there be some Inhabitants on the 
orest nigh resident, and would not they have been sensible of some motion or noise which accompany Earthquakes?


3. 
Object.
 There be many Trees not far off, would not some of them have receiv'd prejudice by overturn∣ing, or Rocks where you suppose the windy commotion ran along.






Answers to the Objections.


Ans. 1. 
Had there been any Inhabitants dwelling on the said Hill, they might then have felt it.


Ans. 2. 
As for them that dwell nigh, they might very well be unsensible of noise, or motion, which might hap∣pen in the Night; and because Earthquakes (more general ones) have been experienced to operate in one part of the Town, and not in another part of the same; or in a various manner, in little distance; no wonder then if such Inhabitants perceive it not.


Ans. 3. 
As for Trees, how should they be prejudic'd, where the Earthquake came not? but had Trees stood where the Breach was made, they would probably then have been overthrown (as the roo
 of a Tree aforesaid) and as for Rocks being not removed over the windy pas∣sage, they might be spar'd for the same reason that the ground in those places was; and both spared, because the disturbance hastens along to the Front, as a Stone to its Centre.






FINIS.







