A sermon preached before the King, Aug. 14, 1666 being the day of thanksgiving for the late victory at sea / by J. Dolben ...
Dolben, John, 1625-1686.
Approx. 44 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 17 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A36272




Wing D1833



ESTC R15031





ocm 12542660




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A sermon preached before the King, Aug. 14, 1666 being the day of thanksgiving for the late victory at sea / by J. Dolben ...
Dolben, John, 1625-1686.
XXXII p.   


London :


Printed for Timothy Garthwait,


1666.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Anglo-Dutch War, 1664-1667 --  Sermons.
Sermons, English.
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Enrique Valdive
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Enrique Valdive
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






D1833


R15031


12542660


62993














A SERMON PREACHED BEFORE THE KING, 
Aug.
 14. 1666. Being the Day of Thanksgiving for the late VICTORY at Sea.


By
 J. Dolben, 
D. D.
 DEAN of 
WESTMINSTER,
 and Clerk of the Closet.


Printed by His
 MAJESTIES 
especial Command.




woodcut of a ship




London,
 Printed for 
Timothy Garthwait,
 1666.
















Psal. 18. Ver. 1, 2, 3.


1. 
I will love thee, O Lord my strength.


2. 
The Lord is my
 Rock, 
and my
 For∣tress, 
and my
 Deliverer, 
my
 God, 
my
 strength, 
in whom I will
 trust; 
my
 Buckler, 
the Horn of my
 Sal∣vation, 
and my high
 Tower.


3. 
I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be
 Praised, 
so shall I be
 saved 
from mine
 Enemies.




AMong the Laws of the 
Roman
 Tri∣umphs, as some were very Bloudy and Barbarous, so others were wise and worthy our Imitation. In all those ostenta∣tions of their Glory, there was ever a mix∣ture of Religion, such as it was; a ceremonious and pompous application to their imaginary

Deities,
 
Ut ob res bene gestas Diis immortalibus honos habeatur sibique Triumphanti urbem invehi liceat,
 was the form of their Petition who sued for that honour. 
Idolatry
 (the great Mother of 
Athe∣isme
) was not able to extirpate the natural Conviction which every one hath in himself of an Almighty Power governing the Uni∣verse. But it kept a room; even in those mens Breasts who were so full of themselves, that they expected to be adored by the rest of Mankind. That Triumphant 
Dictator,
 who lorded it over the Lords of the world, before whose Axes 
Consuls
 and 
Pretors
 trembled, while he trod proudly on the necks of Captive Kings, and dragg'd them chained like slaves after his Chariot, would at the same time fall down before a Captive Stock or Stone; 
lower
 his 
Rods
 and 
Lawrels;
 Prostrating himself with all the Ensigns of his Power and Honour, to a rotten deformed 
Idol
 which he had brought home in a Cart. This was another Triumph in and over their Triumphs, a victory of Re∣ligion over Infidelity in its greatest strength and exaltation; for though the Devil did so far debauch the understandings of reasonable Creatures, as to make them worship him in∣stead of God; yet while some worship was practised, and they chose rather to adore a ri∣diculous abominable Deity then none; Even

by these Prophane sacrilegious Rites, the Prin∣ciple of a 
God
 was kept alive and warm in the minds of men; for a 
Handle
 whereby 
in ful∣ness of time,
 Christ and his holy Doctrine took hold on a lost World, and pull'd them back to the service of the True God. Another thing I observe which will be more to our present purpose; They admitted not a 
General
 to tri∣umph, unless he had finished the design upon which he was imployed,
 and so broken the enemy that he might bring his army home with him, leaving the 
Province
 quiet to his Successor. But upon any considerable suc∣cess they would make solemn and publick 
sup∣plications
 to all their Gods and Goddesses, in the name of their absent Commander, that he might by their favour perfect the Conquest which he had already happily began or ad∣vanced. This is 
our
 case. We are not yet rea∣dy for a 
Triumph,
 but have matter enough for Supplications and Thanksgivings. Our Ene∣mies are not subdued, but by Gods help they are in good measure broken and defeated; Our Noble 
Consuls
 are not yet sailing homeward with Lawrels on their 
stems,
 but they are very conveniently 
posted
 on the Enemies Coast, as Pregnant instances to 
them
 of one 
victory
 already obtained, and hopeful 
Pledges
 to 
us
 of another to follow. And therefore although our joy

be bounded and circumscribed, to keep us modest, and sober, and humble; yet have we not onely ground sufficient, but many high obligations that our Thanksgivings be hearty, and zealous, and universal; full of Devotion and sense of our Duty to God; expressed by ardent Love to his Goodness, Trust and affi∣ance in his Mercy, worshipping his Majesty by constant Prayers and Praises: the onely means to bless and consecrate our past suc∣cesses, and to procure his assistance in our fu∣ture undertakings. All which (that I may not seem to teach a Christian Congregation onely by 
Heathen
 examples) you will find re∣commended to your imitation in the Practice of 
David
 upon a like occasion. So the Title en∣forms us, both here, and 2 
Sam.
 22.


The Text look two ways, 
Backward
 upon all the Mercies and Deliverances which God had bestowed upon 
David,
 which he acknow∣ledgeth in the many glorious Titles ascribed to God, in the first and second Verse, My 
Strength,
 my 
Rock,
 and my 
Fortress,
 and my 
Deliverer;
 my 
God,
 my 
Buckler,
 and the 
Horn
 of my Salvation, and my High 
Tower.


Forward,
 in the returns of Duty, to which he engageth himself: Of 
Love,
 vers. 1. 
Trust,
 vers. 2. 
Praise
 and 
Prayer,
 vers. 3. Upon all which he] grounds to himself a firm Hope

of being saved from his Enemies; 
So shall I be saved from mine Enemies.


I begin with 
Davids
 acknowledgment of Gods mercies, expressed in the Titles of 
Strength, Rock, Fortress, &c.
 Of all these words I shall not need to speak Particularly, they be∣ing but so many 
Synonymous
 Phrases, signify∣ing one and the same thing, That God had often with great Demonstrations of his Power and favour succour'd, and saved 
David.
 Where∣fore the Greek Translaters have chosen rather to deliver the mind and intention of the Psal∣mist in plain words, then to render literally the metaphors of the original. Yet must we not take this meerly for the exuberance of a 
Poetical
 style, much less can we imagine 
Da∣vid
 to be guilty of that 
Battology,
 and those 
vain repetitions
 in his Devotions which our Sa∣viour condemns in the 
Heathens,
 Matth. 6.7. It was their practice to worship Vanity with Vanity, heaping in their Prayers a multitude of empty insignificant names upon their vain and more insignificant Deities. But this ex∣aggeration in 
Davids Hymn
 flows from the a∣bundance of a devout and grateful heart, la∣bouring to empty and discharge its fulness, strugling with 
Human
 infirmity the narrowness of our Conceptions, and the poverty and bar∣renness

of Speech, and endeavouring by any means to intimate, if not express those trans∣ports and extasies which possessed his soul up∣on the contemplation of Gods Majesty and Goodness. Besides (as the 
Title
 both here, and 1 
Sam.
 22 directed to observe before) this 
Hymn
 was made in commemoration of all the great things God had done for 
David,
 and so 
many
 various mercies could not be compre∣hended under any 
one
 Notion: His 
dangers
 and distresses had been so numerous, and both in their kind and circumstance so 
different,
 and 
Gods
 ways of 
vindicating
 his servant so 
unlike
 one another; sometimes by 
warning
 him of trea∣cherous designs, that he might avoid or coun∣terwork them; sometimes by 
defeating
 dange∣rous Councels, and turning pernicious wis∣dom to folly; By 
diverting
 his Enemies, By defending him against their force, or by ena∣bling him to 
overcome
 it. And as so many and so different things could not be put together in one 
stanza
 of a 
Psalm,
 otherwise then in gene∣ral terms, so 
David
 could not satisfie himself but by crowding in all the general words and 
Appellatives
 which plain or figurative speech afforded,
 accompanying doubtless every se∣veral word with a proper distinct act of Devo∣tion, a new heat and flame of love and zeal; so that all together (like the 
Milky way
) they

seem one Celestial fire, but are many.


That we may see how well such a full acknowledgment would become us, how well all these Names and Titles attributed by 
David
 to God would sound in our mouths, if we would ascribe them with 
Davids
 Devotion and Affection; Give me leave to look back, not so far as he does, to the 
whole life
 of a Man, but to that new 
Epocha
 of our lives, the new Birth and 
Restauration
 of all things to us. Me∣thinks that should be remembred every 
Thanks∣giving-day,
 without which we should never have had any Thanksgiving day at all. Consi∣der then in what condition we were this time 
seven years,
 when the last 
Effort
 we could make, or Project for the recovery of our Country, was miserably defeated; Shall I say by the Trea∣chery of some, the folly and cowardize of o∣thers, or rather by the good Providence of God? who designed to shew us the vanity of all our contrivances, and the impossibility of our being saved by any other means, then the miraculous interposition of his help, and there∣by make us humble enough for such a De∣liverance. You cannot but remember, That we did not then draw our Breath, otherwise then 
Precariously,
 and at the mercy of impotent 
Fanatical,
 and now enraged Tyrants, from whose 
Principles,
 as well as malice, nothing

was to be expected but Robberies, Massacres and Desolations; private mischiefs and pub∣lick Ruine. Men that could not possibly agree to establish themselves, and besides that they conspired to undo all but themselves; their very disagreement (had they designed nothing towards it) must necessarily have de∣stroyed the Nation.


Who would have expected, that through this black Cloud, a comfortable light, and day of Salvation, should dawne and break upon us within a few Months? Who durst hope, or almost Pray, (in so deep a despair) that out of this horrid 
Chaos,
 a World of Beau∣ty and Order should arise so soon, and we be surprised (as in a dream) with a perfect re∣scue from all we feared, and a quiet enjoy∣ment of whatsoever we could wish? This was clearly the 
Work
 of 
God,
 and God alone; a meer miracle of Mercy, wrought in despight of so much actual 
force
 at home, so much 
Councel
 of all States and Princes abroad, and the yet more dangerous oppositions of our own 
Provocations,
 perversly and insolently contending against Gods goodness, and ma∣king it far more reasonable for us to look for a 
hand upon the Wall,
 writing a visible inrever∣sible sentence of extirpation, then secretly and powerfully working our deliverance behind

it. And therefore were there nothing else in our case, we must confess that this alone hath filled all the expressions of 
David
 in my Text, and we shall think our selves bound for ever to celebrate our Good God as our 
Refuge and Defence, our Deliverer, the Horn of our Salvation, and our High Tower, &c.


TO come close and home to our present bu∣siness; When the impudent injustice of our 
Neighbours
 made this 
War
 necessary, we soon saw we should be engaged to contend with the most powerful enemies in the World, without the assistance of any friend; And, perhaps this little world of ours, were it una∣nimous and entire, vigorously exerting all its force, might be able to defend it self against so much of the greater. But we are full of 
Ca∣price,
 and humorous Emulations and 
Piques,
 which trouble and discountenance, and worse things which hinder and obstruct Publick En∣terprises. The infirmities of some, and the wickedness of others weaken our hands, and make us little more then 
half
 our selves: 
One
 sort do no good, and 
others
 all the harm they can. So desperately mad are they,
 that like 
Ap∣pius
 his Legions, they would rather be destroy∣ed by any Enemy, then live to see their 
Prince
 have the honour of saving and defending them.




These things shame us, and disadvantage our Cause; but they exalt the Glory of God, and make his help afforded us more conspicu∣ous: For notwithstanding all this, He gave us the 
last year
 a glorious 
Victory,
 which brought forth good fruit and great effects. And 
this
 year he hath not been wanting to us. In the 
First
 Fight he brought us off without disho∣nour, nay, perhaps with more honour (the circumstances of the Battle considered) then a 
full
 Victory could have challenged, had we been evenly matched. And your Enemies Beha∣viour 
then
 will teach you how to value the Vi∣ctory you have 
now.
 Lord! how did they in∣sult and brave it all over 
Europe?
 How un∣able were they to govern themselves, when they pretended to have mastered 
us?
 If 
Bonefires
 and 
Dutch
 Wit, 
French
 Brags, and some 
English
 Despondence could have conquer'd us, we had been utterly undone. But now behold how the 
Scene
 is changed; we have seen our Con∣querors fairly beaten; and they who lately told the World that the 
narrow Seas
 were be∣come as subject to them as their own 
Ditches,
 and talked, as if like 
Xerxes,
 they would bri∣dle and fetter the Captive Ocean, are shame∣fully fled like him broken and shatter'd through 
those
 very Seas, and left them to the possession of their ancient rightful owners.

And now their countenance is alter'd with their fortune: Heretofore they were like the 
Grecian Wrastler,
 who being thrown, would spring up nimbly from the ground, and con∣fidently aver, that he had given his adversary the fall. Now they are more ingenuous and modest, but not more quiet; their Rants and Huffs are exercised among themselves: And having by a calm escaped an imminent ruine at Sea, they are shaken by Tempests and Storms at Land; Revilings and accusations fly like 
Broadsides
 among their great Captains, and the 
wise
 men cannot make the 
valiant
 ones agree which of them contributed most to their be∣ing beaten. That all this hath been done for us, and in a time while the devouring 
Pesti∣lence
 rageth in our bowels, and kills far more at home, then our Enemies can abroad; That the spreading Contagion, which hath seized all quarters of our Land, hath been restrained from hindring our great business, either in the 
Fleet,
 the 
Court,
 or this 
City,
 is of the won∣derful goodness of God, who though he will chastise, will not destroy us, though he take us into his 
own
 hand to correct us for our a∣mendment, yet suffers us not to 
fall into the hands of Man,
 but both in Judgment and Mer∣cy approves himself our 
Strength,
 our 
Deliverer,
 the 
horn
 of our 
Salvation,
 and our 
high Tower;


and all this, to try us by one experiment more, whether when we have found him as good to us as he was to 
David,
 we will be as thankful to him as 
David
 was; 
Love
 him, 
Trust
 in him, 
Praise
 him, and 
Pray
 to him.


1. 
Love him.


VVHo can do other then love God, in whom he lives, and moves, and hath his Being? How can we refrain loving that Infinite Wisdom, and Power, and Good∣ness, which hath made the Universe, and wonderfully disposed it in a beautiful Harmo∣ny, and mutual correspondence, and doth so sweetly govern, and carefully sustain all the parts of it? Beside 
David
 knew 
Love
 to be the sum of Gods Law, and the 
Compendium
 of mans Duty to him, and could not be a 
Man after Gods own heart
 without doing this before, and then what new thing doth he promise in my Text? Further, To love God for his Be∣nefits onely, is but to love our selves, and our own conveniences; to love him as we do fair weather, and sweet air; as we love meat, drink, and sleep; And the insincerity of such a love would be sure to appear upon the tryal which Satan desired to put on 
Job:
 While 
God maketh a hedg about its, and blesseth all that we have,


perphas we shall love him; But if 
he put forth his hand, and take all we have,
 our Love being grounded on no other Principle, will go away with our goods, and we shall be in danger of 
Cursing him to his face.


We are to love God for his own 
Excel∣lencies;
 We are to love him because he 
re∣quires
 it; and the more, Because having a just Right and Power to exact from us the most painful hard services: He is so gracious, as to demand no more, but that we love him; that we be not so much his 
Servants,
 as his 
Friends.
 This is our standing ordinary Duty; Indeed, this is all we can perform; We can do no more then love God; That is both the Perfection of our Obedience here▪ and shall be of our Happiness in Heaven. But yet this love is capable of degrees; The 
affection
 may and must be at sometimes, and on some occa∣casions more intense then at others, and the 
acts
 more lively and vigorous, when our hearts are impregnated, and our services called forth by signal extraordinary demonstrations as in∣stances of Gods love to us. We ought ever to love God with all our 
Souls.
 that is, 
heartily
 and 
entirely;
 yet this hinders not, but that the love which was always 
true,
 and void of Hy∣pocrisie, proceeding (as S. 
Paul
 derives it) out of a 
pure heart,
 
and a good conscience, and faith un∣feigned,


may now be more ardent then usual. That the fire which was alive in the 
Embers
 be∣fore, may now burn out, and flame with a 
Seraphick
 heat and brightness, when God hath descended thus to stir it up, to invite, and court, and even ravish our affections with the abundance of his favours. This 
David
 inti∣mates in the very Text; For though we have it onely, I 
will love,
 yet the Original expres∣sion signifies, I will 
ardently
 or affectionately love thee: 
 out of my 
Bowels,
 or from the bottom of my heart will I love thee,
 and so some of the best 
Translations
 render it.


Well then, if this be the Scale and Standard of our Duty in this behalf, that our Love ought to rise in proportion to the Benefits we receive; As our Saviour indeed sets it in the 
Gospel,
 where he tells us, that the most ob∣liged person 
will love most;
 and were it not so, there could be no such sin as 
Ingratitude
 in the World; that odious inhumane Crime would lose all the ground and reason both of its guilt and shame. Then it will presently be evident to all men, how much we of 
this
 Nation ought to love God, who hath so a∣bounded in his favours to us. But how much we do love him is hard to say; for the expres∣sions of our affection are very untoward: L
ke the Course and rude 
Caresses
 of 
Russian
 Hus∣bands

to their Wives; our kindness looks much more like to 
Anger
 and ill nature, then Love. If to disobey, dishonour, injure, and affront, to do every thing that will displease God, and 
grieve
 his 
Holy Spirit,
 be Love; then we love him extreamly.


But if there be any Truth, in what Com∣mon Sense, and the Uniform Voice of Man∣kind affirm of 
Love,
 That it is an active vigo∣rous Principle, working 
mightily
 in the hearts of Men, Provoking, and even constraining them to do every thing which may be agree∣able to those they Love, and accordingly hath produced wonderful, Prodigious effects in Hu∣mane Friendships. If the Holy Scriptures and Histories of Times truly Christian, deceive us not, in representing the sincere Love of God, as an affection which can neither be 
dissembled,
 nor 
suppressed,
 being always cheerfully and in∣defatigably employ'd in his service. If it de∣voureth 
Difficulties,
 casteth out
 
Fear,
 Ren∣dreth 
Labour
 easie and desireable, delighting not onely in the 
sweat
 of its Brows, but in the most 
Bloudy Agonies
 and 
Conflicts;
 breaking through the Briars and Thorns of an accursed World, and the many flaming swords which Satan draws against it; making it self a Paradise, and Heaven upon Earth, in the doing Gods Will, in walking with, and
 
dwelling
 in him: For

which reason Love is called, The
 
fulfilling
 of the 
 
Law;
 The keeping God's 
 
Com∣mandments;
 That whereon all the Law and the Prophets 
 
depend;
 The 
 
knowing
 God, and being 
known
 of him: The 
 
Root
 and 
Ground
 of Religion, and the choicest, most ex∣cellent 
 
F
uit
 of the 
Spirit.


If this be the true Character of that Divine Vertue (as indeed these are the Lineaments and Features by which it was most eminently discernible, in the unparallell'd Example of our dear Lord and Saviour, and in the first Copies taken from thence, the Primitive Mar∣tyrs and Confessors) Then may something like to it be found in our Fancies, our Dis∣courses or Professions, but not the least sha∣dow of it appears in our Lives and Conversa∣tions. Unhappy Nation that we are! for whom the essences of things, and the Defini∣tion of Duty must be quite changed, ere we can pretend to that disposition towards God, which Nature dictates, and the bare apprehen∣sion of a Deity exacts! I am not willing to utter words of ill 
Omen
 this day; but thus much I cannot refrain from saying, That had God expressed his kindness to us, no otherwise then we have done our returns of Love to Him, we had not now been here.




Surely 
David
 lov'd God at another rate; else we should not have found him in one Psalm 
panting
 and 
languishing
 after him like an em∣boss'd spent Dear;
 Grieved and afflicted for being kept from his presence;
 Languishing and fainting, with desire to get into his Tem∣ple; burnt up, and devour'd with Zeal for it in others. Not onely his Book of Psalms, but his whole life could not otherwise have been so full of jealousie for God's Honour, Delight in his Commands, and every thing that may express a Will knit and united to that of God (as the 
Chaldee
 hath it here) which is the true and proper effect of Love.


Indeed 
David
 could not without such a love of God, have perform'd well those acts of Pi∣ety and Devotion which he promiseth in my Text; Could not Trust in him, Praise him, or Pray to him acceptably, with hope to be sa∣ved from his Enemies. Nor can we (how∣ever our Fancies and Dreams of Religion de∣ceive us) and therefore must be sure to take it along with us throughout▪ And first to help us, and give us ground and foundation for our Trust in God; the next thing in my Text.


TRust, we know is an act of Friendship, and the greatest fruit it yields, Mutual Confi∣dence, springing naturally from Mutual Affecti∣on.

I can safely rely upon that Person whom I therefore love, because I esteem him so good, that he will not fail any just expectation, and whose affection to me is my double Pledg that he will surely answer mine. But if I doubt either of these two things, Love and Trust vanish to∣gether; so that we must both love God, and be∣lieve that he loves us, before we can Trust in him: For though God's Goodness be Infinite, and have wonderfully abounded to us, yet being free in its exercise, it will be presumption and folly, not trust, to expect any thing further from him but according to the methods of his Wisdom revealed unto us in his Promises, and he hath promised his favours onely to those that love him; And if we love him, then shall we Trust in him, both with a 
steady
 and 
humble
 Confidence: Not murmuring when we want the success we expect, nor growing insolent when we have it. Love will not suf∣fer us to suspect his Goodness if every event come not up to our wishes; Nor censure his Wisdom, though sometimes we discern not the reason of his Providence: Much less shall we justle him out of his Throne, and put in for our share in governing the World, setting up a Counter-Deity of our own Coun∣cel and Force. These are generally the two great faults of men in our Condition; Not

submitting to the Wisdom and Goodness of God; And relying too much upon the Arm of Flesh▪ And have we never been guilty of either of them? Have we never quarrelled and grum∣bled if there were a ship less taken then we had predestined in our Fancy? Any thing fallen out otherwise then we had set it down in the Gallery, or the Coffee-house? Do we not in the computation of our strength for the War, make false Musters, passing our own Force and Courage twice over upon the Rolls, and leaving God quite out? Imagine our selves sufficient Deliverers and Saviours to our selves, and forgetting that God is our 
Strength, The Rock of our Defence, and the Horn of our Sal∣vation.
 I fear something of this may have been the Provocation which hath mov'd God to Discipline us with his own Sword, the Plague, at home, while he saves us from that of the Enemy abroad. Lately to shew us dan∣ger in an unequal Encounter, and even now to check our Victory, and snatch much of its fruit out of our hands when we were just grasping it, and seem'd to our selves almost possess'd of a full and final Conquest: And this hath he done, not by animating our droop∣ing Enemies with new Courage, or strength∣ning their feeble hands with fresh force and activity; but meerly by withholding the

Breath of his Wind, that we may be convinced upon how Particular and constant attendance of Providence upon us, our felicity depends; which if it be suspended but for one moment, we presently falter; if the influence of God's Power and Goodness (that soul of our affairs) do not exert it self in every instance, immedi∣ately our nerves are relaxed, and our spirits damp'd, and we begin to languish without strength or motion. This being duly consi∣dered, I hope will engage us not onely to Love God more ardently, and Trust in him more en∣tirely and firmly, but doing both, to Praise and Pray to him more affectionately, That so we may both now and always be safe from our Enemies. 
I will call upon the Lord, who is worthy to be praised; So shall I, &c.


I fear there is not so much of my time left, as of my Subject; Wherefore I will join these two Duties of 
Prayer
 and 
Praise
 in my Exhortation, as the 
Chaldee
 and 
Greek
 do in the Text it self, who read both of them; 
Praising I will Pray:
 And they cannot be more joint and united in any Expression, then they are in their own natures, 
Praise
 being one, and the most noble Part of Prayer, that which is most peculiarly and eminently the Worship of God; For though when we Petition him for the Benefits we desire; or against the Evils

we fear▪ we do tacitly and by consequence ac∣knowledg both his Power and his Goodness, yet do we more expresly and directy Honour and Glorifie God, when our souls are pour'd out in cheerful Hallelujah's, hearty and joyful celebrations of his holy Name, who is the Lord 
Blessed for ever. Whoso offereth me Thanks,
 and Praise, he
 
Honoureth
 me, saith 
David;
 and how much 
David
 thought so, appears by this that all his Psalmes are so full of those ob∣lations, as in the Original they are justly cal∣led, 
The Book of Praises:
 And why are not our lives as full of them too? We mistake our selves, if we think this Duty confined to great Festivals and solemn Thanksgivings, to de∣pend upon our Calendars, or the Kings Pro∣clamations; Holy 
Job,
 in the depth of his sor∣rows, and the midst of his great distresses, when he had at once lost both his Wealth, and his Children, all the supports and comforts of this life, Even upon the Dunghil
 
Blesseth the Name of the Lord his God, who had both given, and taken away;
 To teach us, that we can never be in a condition so wretched and uncomforta∣ble, wherein we may not find somewhat, for which we ought to Praise God, and adore and magnifie his goodness towards us; not onely although we be afflicted and cast down, but even because we are so.




Would we allow our selves some time to meditate seriously on the incomprehensible Ex∣cellencies of the Divine Nature; To consider how all God's Attributes have been employed and exercised for our Good, To understand what it was at first to be created out of no∣thing, and put into a capacity of hapiness; What need we had of Mercy, and how unwor∣thy we were of it, when by a foolish Disobe∣dience we had obliged and confined our selves to endless wo; and then at what a rate our Re∣demption was procured; That by the Bloud of Christ, not onely Pardon, but Eternal Hap∣piness was purchased for us; Would we recol∣lect the several instances of God's Care and Pro∣vidence in the preservation of our lives, and all our worldly concernments; but especially the continual endeavours of his Grace and Ho∣ly Spirit, to conduct us safe to the enjoyment of that Blessedness which his Infinite Wis∣dom and Goodness have prepared for us: Such Reflections as these (would we suffer them to settle and fix upon us) must needs fill our souls with the 
Love
 of God, and our mouths with his 
Praises:
 This would kindle in us a zealous Concern and Passion for the Glory of God, and we should apprehend no happiness upon Earth, but in the promo∣ting his honour among men; Our hearts

would be like 
Altars
 of Incense, with a per∣petual Heavenly fire burning on them, and sending up continually our Eucharistial obla∣tions, that odour of sweet smell made of holy Oyl and fragrant Spices, Love and Joy in the Lord, and the Cloud of this Incense would co∣ver the 
Mercy Seat;
 The assistant Angels would (as the 
Jews
 say) go up in this Cloud to offer our Lauds unto God, and bring back from him Grace, and Peace, and Salvation in returns unto us. 'Tis for want of this (because we are such strangers to God and our selves) that the life of every Christian is not a continual Eucharist; That we come so seldom, and with such coldness and Indevotion, to join with the Church Militant in her Sacrifice of Praise, the Holy 
Communion,
 that great peculiar instance of our Religion, wherein Christ hath commanded us to continue a perpetual thank∣ful remembrance of all God's Mercies, and particularly of his Death (which comprehends them all) and there to connect our poor Pray∣ers to his powerful eternal intercessions, that so both our Petitions and Praises may be ac∣ceptable to God. 'Tis for want of this that the Children of God are so unwilling to have their Conversation in Heaven, to join and commu∣nicate in this Honourable, delectable Duty of Praising God with the Church Triumphant,

where Saints and Angels incessantly Praise God, having nothing to ask or beg of him, but in behalf of us. We deceive our selves grosly and dangerously, while we think we can be Religious without Praising God often, and heartily, and cheerfully, in Private as well as Publick. Alas! our loud and clamorous Pray∣ers, how many or importunate soever they be, separate from this, are but Hypocritical Devo∣tions, terminated in our own interests, not in God, or his Glory: And our Prayers would be as few as our Praises, but that the love of the world and our selves, which damps the love of God in our hearts, and suffers us not to delight and rejoice in Praising him; some∣times prompts us to call on him, to fly to his help in distress; make us look up (like the 
Jews
 in the Wilderness) when we feel our selves 
stung.
 And this strange fire on the Al∣tar, looks like the True, burns and blazeth for a while, and makes us think our selves ve∣ry Religious, when alas! we are onely very fore, or very fearful, and our 
necessities
 and 
distresses
 are devout, not we. I need not Press that fur∣ther, whereof every one hath a sufficient con∣viction in this, that while our case is thus, De∣votion comes upon us onely by 
catches
 and 
starts,
 and even as in an 
Ague,
 we have as many 
cold Fits as hot.
 When the violence of that im∣pulse

pulse which warm'd us, is spent, we freeze a∣gain, when the Calamity or terror which put us into a hasty fermentation is taken off, im∣mediately we settle upon our lees; VVhen he 
kills
 us, 
then we seek him;
 we turn early and en∣quire after God, when we remember that 
God
 is our 
strength,
 and the most High God is our 
Redeemer;
 but as soon as the 
Judgment
 is re∣moved, and we have swallowed and 
digested
 the 
Mercy,
 we turn back and tempt the Holy One of 
Israel;
 VVe think no more of his 
Hand,
 and of the Day wherein he 
delivered us
 from 
our Enemies:
 VVhereas were a habit of Reli∣gion firmly setled in us, rooted and grounded on the love of God, and conscience of our Duty, it would be both Permanent and Uni∣form in all its exercises, VVe should not think to use God onely as a Property or Conveni∣ence, but adore the Majesty of our Almighty Soveraign Lord, and delight as much to Praise him for the Benefits we have received, as to re∣ceive any new ones from his hand! VVhat then shall I say? Shall I reproach a Christian Congregation, by exhorting them to love God? I am ashamed to do that, and I have said enough already, (if any thing be enough) by telling you, that without Loving God, you 
ought
 not to 
Trust
 in him, you cannot 
Praise
 or Pray to him; your Praises will be but 
Flatteries,
 and

your Prayers 
indignities
 and 
affronts.
 Shall I desire you to be more frequent, and more zea∣lous in your Praises? Sure I need not request you (if you mean to go to Heaven) to practice that beforehand here, which must there be your onely Employment; to beseech you not to think that a trouble now, which then will be your Happiness and Glory: I will rather tell you, that God needs none of all these things from you; Your Love does not 
benefit,
 nor your Praises 
exalt
 him; 
He
 is the same Omni∣potent Majesty, Infinitely happy in Himself, whether you depend on his Protection, and beg your daily Bread and all other good things at his hands; or whether neglecting both those Duties, you live as 
without God
 in the 
World:
 But 
He
 is pleased, when you 
love
 and 
honour
 him, because he is delighted in the obedience of his Creature; and nothing is so agreeable to him, as that we should give him those 
oc∣casions
 to 
love us,
 and do 
us good:
 which if you thus qualifie your selves to receive his favour, I can assure you he will do, as the Prophet 
Da∣vid
 here assures himself. Upon these Terms we shall be safe from our Enemies. 
So shall I, &c.


SO 
shall I be safe,
 otherwise 
I shall not:
 VVe cannot promise our selves to be safe by our own strength, For were it never so great, it may

be 
matched and exceeded;
 And were we never so much Masters of our 
Enemies,
 we are not Ma∣sters of 
Occasion;
 We may, and have been o∣bliged to fight upon 
disadvantage;
 We are not Commanders of the 
Seas,
 nor of the 
Winds,
 which God keeps in his 
Treasure.
 Last year they were helpful to us, They were otherwise this year. And if we cannot protect our selves, Who shall protect us? I have heard, that one of our ene∣mies hath said with 
contempt
 and 
scorne
 enough, We have no Friend 
But God! Does he make such But's?
 I pardon his 
raillery,
 and heartily embrace the good 
Omen
 of it. If we have no Friend but God, then we have him, and if he be our Friend, I am sure we need not fear what man can do against us. Neither they, we have so oft conflicted with, nor they who hover fur∣ther off, expecting an opportunity to fall upon us when we are 
sore,
 can be able to do us harm. He is too much a Coward, that dreads any Enemy, when he hath Omnipotence it self to 
second
 him. But he is more a fool who may have such a 
Se∣cond
 and 
Patron,
 and yet will be so far want∣ing to himself, as not to procure his favour and assistance; Especially, when the terms upon which it is to be had, are so easie, nay so desire∣able, that the 
Condition
 of acquiring it is more valuable then the 
thing
 it self, it being a far greater happiness to 
love
 and 
serve
 God as we ought, then

to be secured by him from all the harm this world can do.


For my part, it shall suffice me that I have brought the business 
home,
 and laid it at your own doors. I dare say there is no Person in this Con∣gregation, who wisheth not all safety to his 
Coun∣trey, Honor
 to the 
King
 and 
Victory
 to his 
Armes.
 You must therefore think it an advantage to be directed how your selves may have the satisfacti∣on to bear a part in the atchieving all this, which you do (and are so much concerned to) wish. I will presently take of that regreat which your gallantry hath raised in many of your thoughts, for your being detained by employment, or a∣ny other circumstance of your Conditions, from shewing your courage, and gaining a share in the honor of the late 
Engagements. Courage!
 break off your 
Sins
 by 
Repentance,
 live a 
Christian, devout, holy life and pray earnestly
 for Gods gracious favor and succour, so shall you serve the King as con∣siderably as any 
Volontier
 in the Fleet. Here is a Project to raise an 
Army easily, speedily,
 without 
charge
 or 
trouble,
 and such a one as could I see formed, I should be so much tempted to despise all our Enemies: No 
Age
 or 
Sex
 but are fit to be listed in it. The impotent 
Old man
 on his 
Couch,
 the 
Lady
 in her 
Closet,
 the 
Sick
 and 
Weak
 upon their 
Beds,
 without 
Danger
 or 
Fatigue
 at 
Sea,
 every one in their own station, where infirmity

or tenderness hath ranked them, may fight and be certainly 
victorious.
 Whoever can but morti∣fie a 
Lust, forsake a Sin;
 kindle an ardent 
love
 to God in his heart, shed a 
Tear,
 send up a 
Prayer,
 a 
sigh or groan
 to Heaven; may thereby with∣out any other Artillery 
reach
 and 
gall
 the 
Enemy
 at what distance soever. By the secret invisible influence of your Devotion, you may streng∣then the hearts and hands of your Friends. While your hearts are right with God, and you hold up 
pure hands in Prayer
 (like 
Moses
 in the Mount) theirs will be victorious in Battail. But then remember that though, when 
Moses
 his hands were up, 
Josua
 prevaild, yet when they were set down, 
Amalek
 prevail'd. Success va∣ried and shifted from the 
People
 and 
Army
 and 
Cause of God,
 to the 
accursed Nations
 whom he had vowed to 
destroy,
 upon every 
intermission of Mo∣ses Prayer.
 And therefore unless we think Gods honour more concerned in our affairs, then in theirs whom he had chosen and promised, and avow'd to all the world that he would give them the spoils and inheritance of their Enemies. Unless we think our adversaries more accursed then those whom God had 
sworn
 to have 
War
 with for 
ever,
 whom he had 
devoted
 to 
ruine
 and 
extirpation;
 We cannot hope to prosper and pre∣vail upon other Terms then 
Josuah
 did. And truly you are too unkind, if while your Coun∣try-men

fight
 for you, you will not Pray for them; While they patiently endure 
Toil, Sick∣ness, Wounds,
 nay, 
lose
 their 
Lives,
 you will not 
amend
 yours, will not do so delightful, so pro∣profitable a thing, as to 
love
 and 
serve God,
 both for 
their sakes
 and 
your own,
 to procure 
Peace
 and 
safety
 in this 
World;
 and eternal 
Happiness
 in that to come. Which God grant us all for the merits of Jesus Christ our Lord.


FINIS.











