Atlas Chinensis being a second part of A relation of remarkable passages in two embassies from the East-India Company of the United Provinces to the vice-roy Singlamong and General Taising Lipovi and to Konchi, Emperor of China and East-Tartary : with a relation of the Netherlanders assisting the Tarter against Coxinga and the Chinese fleet, who till then were masters of the sea : and a more exact geographical description than formerly both of the whole empire of China in general and in particular of every of the fifteen provinces / collected out of their several writings and journals by Arnoldus Montanus ; English'd and adorn'd with above a hundred several sculptures by John Ogilby.
Montanus, Arnoldus, 1625?-1683.
Approx. 2109 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 404 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2004-03 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A36730




Wing D242



ESTC R5629





ocm 11283434




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Atlas Chinensis being a second part of A relation of remarkable passages in two embassies from the East-India Company of the United Provinces to the vice-roy Singlamong and General Taising Lipovi and to Konchi, Emperor of China and East-Tartary : with a relation of the Netherlanders assisting the Tarter against Coxinga and the Chinese fleet, who till then were masters of the sea : and a more exact geographical description than formerly both of the whole empire of China in general and in particular of every of the fifteen provinces / collected out of their several writings and journals by Arnoldus Montanus ; English'd and adorn'd with above a hundred several sculptures by John Ogilby.
Montanus, Arnoldus, 1625?-1683.
Dapper, Olfert, 1639-1689.
Ogilby, John, 1600-1676.
Nederlandsche Oost-Indische Compagnie.
United Provinces of the Netherlands.
[2], 723 p., 27 leaves of plates : ill.  


London :


Printed by Tho. Johnson for the author ...,


MDCLXXI [1671]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Zheng, Chenggong, 1624-1662.
China --  Description and travel.
China --  History --  1644-1795.
2003-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2003-09
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2003-10
Jonathan Blaney
Sampled and proofread
2003-10
Jonathan Blaney
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2003-12
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






D242


11283434


47286














The SECOND & THIRD EMBASSIE to y
e
. EMPIRE of TAYSING or CHINA. 
with Previledge A
o
. 1672.










ATLAS CHINENSIS:


Being a Second Part of A RELATION OF Remarkable Passages IN TWO EMBASSIES FROM THE East-India Company OF THE UNITED PROVINCES, TO THE VICE-ROY SINGLAMONG AND GENERAL TAISING LIPOVI, AND TO KONCHI, EMPEROR OF China and East-Tartary.


WITH A Relation of the 
Netherlanders
 Assisting the 
Tartar
 against 
Coxinga,
 and the 
Chinese
 Fleet, who till then were Masters of the Sea.


AND A more exact Geographical Description than formerly, both of the whole Empire of 
China
 in general, and in particular of every of the fifteen Provinces.


Collected out of their several Writings and Journals, By 
ARNOLDUS MONTANUS.


English'd, and Adorn'd with above a hundred several Sculptures, By 
IOHN OGILBY,
 
Esq


Master of His MAJESTY'S REVELS in the Kingdom of 
IRELAND.


LONDON,
 Printed by 
Tho. Iohnson
 for the Author, and are to be had at his House in 
White Fryers.
 M. DC. LXXI.










TO THE Supream, Most High and Mighty Prince HARLES II.


By the Grace of God, OF 
GREAT BRITAIN, FRANCE,
 and 
IRELAND
 KING, DEFENDER of the FAITH, &c.


THIS ATLAS CHINENSIS, CONTAINING Remarkable Passages IN TWO EMBASSIES FROM NEW BATAVIA TO KONCHI, EMPEROR OF China and East-Tartary.


WITH A MORE EXACT GEOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTION THAN FORMERLY, DEDICATED with all HUMILITY, LIES PROSTRATE AT THE SACRED FEET OF YOUR MOST SERENE MAJESTY, BY THE HUMBLEST OF YOUR SERVANTS, AND MOST LOYAL SUBJECT, 
IOHN OGILBY.








DIRECTIONS FOR PLACING The Whole-Sheet Prints IN THIS SECOND CHINA.




TItle.


The City and Castle
 Zelandia 
in the Island
 Taywan Fol. 39


Matzou 42


The Idol
 Sekia 43


Quantekong, 
a Half sheet
 44


Castrum à Meinjaceen 77


The City
 Quemoey 134


The City
 Aimuy 138


Hocsieu 
with its Suburbs
 192


The Royal Presents given to King
 Singla∣mon 232


The Departure of the Emperor from
 Hock∣sieu 
to the Imperial Court at
 Peking 259


The City
 Kinningfoe 264


The City
 Jemping 262


Pouching 265


Hitsiu 277


Hanchieu 278


Lankin, 
or
 Nanking 284


Paolinxie 
Pagod
 286


Pecking 319


The Imperial Palace where the Presents were received, Marked
 A. B. C. D. 223


The Royal Banket
 334


The Station of Ceremonies used at the Fune∣rals of great Persons
 388


The Station used by the great Mandarins
 414


The Marks of the Mandarins, Figure
 1. 
a Half-sheet
 417


Idem 
Figure
 2. 
a Half-sheet
 418


Divers sorts of Bonnets, Figure
 1. 
a Half∣sheet
 419


Divers sorts of Caps or Bonnets, Figure
 2. 
a Half-sheet.
 420


Gods and Goddesses, Number
 1. 569


Idem 
Numb.
 2. 570


Idem 
Numb.
 3. 571


Idem 
Numb.
 4. 572


The Idol
 Sechia 574


The Idol
 Vitech, 
or
 Ninifoe 582


Directions for building of Pagod-Temples in two Divisions
 600






PLANTS.


RHabarbarum Witsoniarum, 
a Half-sheet.
 680


Li-Ci, Kia-Giu, Arbor Papaya 681


Su-Pim, Po-Lo-Mie, Cieu-Ko 685


Cinamonium, Ya-Ta, Du-Liam 686


Pi-Pa▪ Man-Ko, Giam-Bo 687














A SECOND EMBASSY OR APPLICATION TO THE Emperor of China.


M
Any Years are past since several 
Europeans,
 especially the 
English, Spaniards, Portuguese,
 and 
Hollanders,
 have with indefatigable Endeavors persever'd towards the acqui∣ring a free and unmolested Trade in 
CHINA:
 Yet though they have variously attempted what might seem probable to this Effect, their whole Undertakings have prov'd little better than a Labor in vain; for the 
Chineses
 priding in the Subsistance of their own Pro∣duct, and too strictly observing an Ancient Law, prohibiting the Admission of any Strangers into their Countrey, excepting such onely as bringing Tributes from the adjacent Borders, paid Homage to their Emperor, as Supreme Lord of the World; or else Foreign Embassadors, under which pretence many drove there a subtile Trade, have shut out and abhorr'd all Correspondency abroad; which 
Trigaut
 affirms, saying, 
The
 Chineses 
have a Law that forbids Strangers to come amongst them; but if any such be found, the onely Penalty is, That he must dwell there, and never return: Yet these are not suffer'd to go where they please, but limited in the Entries and Out-skirts of the Empire, mov'd by a Superstitious Fear, from a Prophecy, That they shall be supplanted by Stran∣gers.


But the Interpretation or Suspition extends not onely to remote and un∣known People, but their Neighbors, with whom they have some Converse, and use the like Customs, Habits, and Religion; for the 
Coreans,
 the nearest of their Neighbors, were never seen in 
China
 but in the condition of Slaves.


Father 
Martinius
 also, in his 
Chinese Atlas,
 relates, That 
China
 is lock'd up so
 close and cunningly to keep out all Strangers, that scarce any, unless by way of Embassy, are once suffer'd to come in. The 
Turks, Tartars, Moguls,
 and


other adjacent People, address themselves as Embassadors, when indeed are disguis'd Merchants, and so drive there a profitable Trade; for feigning fantastick Names, for several Princes that never were, nor are, present Gifts to the Emperor, which they buy at low Rates; cheap, but fit Commo ties to be transported thither: Nor can they be Losers; for they receive atleast twice the Value as a grateful Return; the Emperor counting it a high disho∣nor to do otherwise.


Besides this, all Embassadors, during their stay, going, and coming through the Countrey, are with their whole Retinue maintain'd at the Publick Charge, and their other Goods, whatever, that are not Presents, in stead of Customs and Taxes, are brought on several Carriages, at the Emperors Expence, to the Palace, where they are permitted to expose them to Sale, or Barter: But al∣though this care be taken concerning their Expences, and that they shall no way be Losers in making their Addresses to the Court; yet whatever Ambas∣sadors they be, though the Negotiation be never so serious, and of greatest im∣port; nay, though they come loaden with Treasure, to be pour'd into the Em∣perors Exchequer, and be ancient Friends and Allies, yet they are entertain'd like Spies and Enemies, not suffer'd in their Journeys to see the Countreys, but hood-wink'd, have no more Prospect than the Road they tread upon; and in like manner are as close Prisoners, lock'd up in their Inns, and Places of purpose for such Reception; and when come to Court, not onely secur'd, but never permitted to Publick Audience, or to see the Emperor, but manage all their Business by the 
Mandarins,
 or Officers of State.


Besides, 
Trigaut
 also tells us, 
That they severely punish their own People, that hold any Commerce or Intelligence with Strangers, without especial Licence from the Emperor.
 And what is of more remark, If there be occasion to send any Person of Qua∣lity forth by way of Envoy or Embassy beyond the Limits of the Empire, it is a Work of difficulty to procure them; but when prevail'd upon by Per∣swasions, at his departure all his Acquaintance, Kindred, and Relations lament, as if going to suffer Execution; but at his return he is receiv'd with as much joy, and specially advanc'd by the Emperor; which is no wonder, the 
Chineses
 having such a reluctancy to whatever seems strange, nay, scorning to learn out of any Books but their own, believing, that all Humane Knowledge is within the Sphere of their Activity, and looking upon all Outlandish as ig∣norant Animals, and when they mention them in their Writings, take notice of them no otherwise; for their Characters that spell 
Beast,
 anagrammatiz'd, signifie 
a Stranger,
 also stigmatizing them with some Mark or Accent, that may interpret them worse than Devil.


These Orders were more than strictly observ'd towards Strangers, while the 
Chineses
 were Govern'd by their own Native Princes; but the 
Oriental Tar∣tars,
 which so lately by Conquest are become Masters of the Empire, let loose the Reins of that part of their Ancient Policy, and less scrupulous, are more indifferent, leaving opener Doors to the admittance of Trade and Commerce.


The Chief Council of 
New Batavia
 still watching all Opportunities for Im∣provement of Traffick, being inform'd by Father 
Martinius,
 That the Con∣quering 
Tartars,
 now setled in 
China,
 would more readily receive Addresses concerning Trade, than the former 
Chinese
 Princes, resolv'd to make Tryal thereof, by sending a Vessel laden with several Merchandises from the Island 
Tayowan;
 to which purpose 
Frederick Schedell,
 being order'd with a Ship call'd the 
Brown-Fish,
 from 
Tayowan,
 came within nine days after his departure from


thence, to an Anchor in the Mouth of the River 
Canton,
 near the Island 
Hay∣tomon.


His Business at first was so well resented, that the Vice-Roys of 
Canton
 grant∣ed him under their Hands Licence to sell and barter the Contents of his 
Cargo,
 and also to build a Store-house in 
Canton,
 for their better Accommodation; al∣though they were advis'd and perswaded to the contrary by the 
Portuguese
 Sta∣ple at 
Macao,
 who in their Letters to the Vice-Roys gave but a sad Account of the 
Hollanders,
 saying, That they were Traytors and Rebels against their true Prince, scarce having any Countrey of their own, or Religion, but liv'd by Pyracy, robbing and plundering whatever they light upon, either by Sea or Land; hoping by thus decrying their Reputation, to set a stop to their begun Proceedings, and new Factory. In like manner the 
Chinese
 Philosophers, great Students of their Countreys Antiquities, by the Instigations of the 
Portuguese Iesuits,
 inform'd also the Vice-Roys, that the 
Hollanders
 were a Nation odious, and through all Ages detested by the 
Chineses,
 and never upon any account had the least admittance into their Empire.


But though this Intelligence did something, yet it had not the expected efficacy, and the 
Hollanders
 had gone on, and carried the Business, when ac∣cidentally a great Person coming from the Imperial City 
Peking
 to 
Canton,
 first disswaded the Vice-Roys from what they intended therein, saying, It was quite another thing to permit any one free Egress and Regress into their Dominions, than to give them a Place of Residence on the Shore, without the knowledge of the Supreme Authority; but that he ought to acquaint the Emperor there∣with, if he intended not to incur his displeasure: Upon which the old Vice-Roy, changing his Determination, civilly sent to 
Schedell,
 desiring him for that time to depart with all his Company, lest his abiding there so long, might be misconstru'd by his King 
Matsuyker,
 as a deterring, or some restraint upon them; although 
Schedell
 urg'd much, that there could be no such cause of mis∣trust there, using many Arguments. The Vice-Roys presenting him at his departure, gave him also two Letters to 
Nicholas Verburgh
 Governor of 
Tayowan,
 first complementing, and then advising him, that the best and onely way for the 
Hollanders
 to obtain liberty for setting up a Factory at 
Canton,
 and licence to Trade in 
China,
 was by Address to the Emperor, by way of Embassy, carrying rich Presents to the Emperor at 
Peking.


The Council at 
Batavia,
 observing the Advice they receiv'd, would not of themselves undertake so great a business, unless so order'd from their Masters of the 
East-India
 Company; which asking some time to bring about, they in the mean time resolv'd to venture out another Ship, to try her Fortune at 
Can∣ton:
 To which purpose they chose 
Zacharias Wagenaer
 a Merchant, and the same 
Frederick Schedell,
 who with two Ships, the 
Brown-Fish,
 and 
Whiting,
 laden with Merchandize, arriv'd a Month after they left 
Batavia,
 in the Mouth of the River 
Canton,
 and from thence went to 
Wangsoe,
 a Village three Leagues from the City.


Wagenaer
 at last arriving at 
Canton,
 deliver'd his Letters from the Council in 
Batavia,
 by the old Vice-Roys Secretary (having no admission to the Vice-Roy) and receiv'd for Answer, 
That since the
 Hollanders 
had neither brought Letters nor Presents for the Emperor in
 Peking, 
of which they were expresly advis'd, the more to fa∣cilitate their business; therefore lest he should be question'd, he neither would nor could see or speak with them.
 So that 
Wagenaer
 and 
Schedell
 return'd, having made a fruitless Voyage, without any success, to 
Batavia.


Soon after they having receiv'd Expresses from the Governors of the 
East-India
 Company in 
Holland,
 to set forth an Embassy, according to the Advice of the Vice Roys of 
Canton,
 sent 
Peter de Goyer,
 and 
Iacob de Keyzer
 Embassadors 
Peking,
 to the Emperor of 
China,
 with Letters of Credence and Presents, to obtain his Imperial Licence that they might Trade in 
China.


These Embassadors arriv'd 
Anno
 1656. in the Chief City 
Peking.
 The next day some of the Council, and the Prime Secretary 
Thouglauja,
 with two other 
Tartar Mandarins, Quanlauja,
 and 
Hoolauja,
 came to complement the Embassa∣dors in the Emperors Name, to inquire after their Health, the number of their Attendants, concerning what their Presents were, and from whom, and whence they came? To all which Questions, the 
Mandarins
 receiving particular An∣swers, listed all those Persons that attended the Embassy (which according to the Information sent from 
Canton
 were in all twenty four) which they set down one after another by their several Names; nor did they leave out those Hang∣ers on which were not included in the List.


After that, they turn'd and look'd over several Presents; then inquir'd, whence they came, how and who made them, for what use, and in what part of the World? And lastly, How far, or how many Months Sail 
Holland
 lay distant from 
Peking?
 To which the Embassadors having return'd fitting An∣swers, the 
Mandarins
 inquir'd further, Whether they were a People that dwelt only upon the Seas, and had no Land-Habitations (which the 
Portuguese Iesu∣its
 put into their Heads) or if they inhabited any Countrey, what they call'd it, and where it lay? From whence, and to what purpose they were sent? What was their Kings Name, and of what Age? All which the Embassadors answer'd. Yet they were not so satisfied; but interrogating, forc'd them to recount the same Answers again. But after they grew more curious, and be∣gan to inquire concerning their manner of Government, and if the Embassa∣dors were not of the Blood Royal, and of Kin to their Prince: 
For no For∣reign Embassadors (said they) if they be not of Consanguinity with their King, are admitted to appear, bowing their Heads with all humility, before the Imperial Majesty.


Whereupon the Embassadors reply'd, 
That they were not of the Blood Royal; for the manner of their Countrey was not to send Princes of the Blood on such remote Embassies, but imploy'd other Men of good Quali∣ty, and well esteem'd at home, upon such Foreign Negotiations.


The 
Mandarins
 further inquisitive, came at last to ask, What Offices they bore in their Princes Court? What their Names and Titles of Honor were? How many Men they had under their Command? All which the Embassadors answer'd very punctually.


Then they inquir'd again, If they came directly from 
Holland,
 or 
Batavia?
 If from 
Batavia,
 What kind of Place it was, and what manner of Person the General? Which being resolv'd, the 
Mandarins
 went away satisfied.


The next day the Embassadors, with the Presents, appear'd by order of the Chancellor before the Council, without which they were not to be admitted; where the Chancellor sate uppermost, on a high Bed, cross-legg'd: Next him, on the right Hand, sate two 
Tartar
 Lords; and on the left, a 
Iesuit
 call'd 
Adam Schal,
 an ancient and venerable Person, and being close shaven, look'd like a 
Tartar:
 he had dwelt above forty six years, in the several Reigns of 
Chinesy
 Princes, in the Court at 
Peking.


The rest of the Council sate promiscuously, without any Order or State,


one among another, upon Benches onely cover'd with old white Linnen.


The Chancellor welcoming the Ambassadors in few words, Commanded them to sit; then laying the Presents on a Table, he ask'd upon the matter all the Questions which the 
Mandarines
 had formerly; whereto the Ambassa∣dors, by the help of Father 
Adam
 their Interpreter there, gave ready An∣swers.


Mean while Order came from the Emperor to the Council, wherein the Je∣suit was desir'd to write down, and to deliver to his Imperial Majesty that night, if the 
Hollanders
 possess'd any Land; and also where, and how far it lay distant from his; and also how their Prince was call'd, and what kind of Go∣vernment they maintain'd? All which 
Schal
 deliver'd in Writing to the Chan∣cellor: Adding, that their Countrey did formerly belong to the King of 
Spain,
 from whom they keep it unjustly, 
&c.


But the Chancellor perceiving that the Jesuit had no kindness for them, scrupling, made him put in, and put out, and write the whole matter twice over; then ordering him to Transcribe it fair, he refus'd, excusing himself by age, and weakness of sight; Upon▪ which, he commanded one of his Un∣der-Clerks to write it over; which done, it was immediately with some small Presents carry'd to the Emperor. Who soon after having receiv'd this advice, sent a Mandatory Letter to the Council, signifying, That he receiv'd the 
Hol∣landers
 as Ambassadors, and permitted that they might be brought into his pre∣sence, so soon as he should sit upon the Throne in his new Court. The Let∣ter to the Council was written in these words:


Most Honorable, and our great Lords, the 
Holland
 Ambassadors are come hither with their Presents to Complement the Emperor, and shew their obedience to Us, which no Record shews, nor any remembers, that they ever did to this Crown in thousands of years before: Therefore, since this is their first Address, We receive them as Ambassadors, and permit, that they, when We shall sit on Our Imperial Throne, in Our New Palace, may be brought into Our presence, to shew their obedience to Us, that afterwards they may be well entertain'd, and dealt withal according to their own requests, and also be speedily dispatch'd for their better departure; and the rather, because out of respect to Our Fame, they are come an unimaginable vast way by Sea, and also by Land; nay, as if they came out of a shadow from high Mountains, to rest their Feet at 
Peking;
 there with open Eyes, to behold the clear Sun in the Firmament; therefore how can We with∣stand and deny the Requests of such Persons, after their long and tedious Voyages?


But after, when the Ambassadors Letters of Credence, Translated by 
Schal,
 were read to the Emperor, he sent to the Chancellor a second Order in these words:




Having on the sixteenth day of the sixth Moon read over the 
Hollanders
 Letters a second time, and gotten a right understanding thereof, We find that their Embassy which they have undertaken is freely out of their own kind∣ness and inclination towards Us, and that from a Countrey lying beyond the great Sea; just like a Bird that takes a voluntary flight through the Air, and cannot be forc'd to come down: And since We esteem this Embassy higher than ought else, and would befriend as Our self, therefore We charge you, Our Chancellor, and the rest of Our Council of State, upon their Re∣quests which they shall make by way of this Embassy, to permit them


egress and regress through Our Empire; and what other Agreements you drive with them, you acquaint Us therewith.




This Letter being read, the Chancellor ask'd the Ambassadors if they could in like manner make annual Addresses, if not, every three year; whereupon the Ambassadors answer'd, That they could with more certainty and Cere∣mony wait on the Emperor with their due obeisance in 
Peking
 every fifth year, so that they might be Licens'd yearly with four Ships to come and Traf∣fique at 
Canton:
 Which Proposal the Chancellor put to the Vote, and the 
Tar∣tars
 with one voice judg'd, their Designs were fit, just, and reasonable: But the 
Chineses
 thought it sufficient, if they made their Addresses to the Emperor but every ninth year, to save the trouble and danger of so long a Journey, supposing what the 
Tartarians
 did not observe, that it was not fit the 
Hollanders
 should Trade all that while at 
Canton.


Moreover, they urg'd that these that call'd themselves 
Hollanders,
 might be 
English,
 neither they nor their Shipping being much unlike, which would be a high scandal upon their Government, to suffer that Nation that had done them such prejudice within memory, when they came but with four Ships into the Haven 
Heytamon,
 and ruffled their Fleet there, sinking some, and taking others, and so batter'd the Castle, that they took the 
Mandarine
 himself Prisoner, fight∣ing more like Furies than Men, for which they were ever since declar'd Ene∣mies, nay, according to an Edict made at that time, never after to be permit∣ted to Trade in 
China;
 so that they ought to have greater proofs, whether the 
Hollanders
 were not 
English,
 before they should be suffer'd to Traffique upon their Coasts.


And also (besides that, it was contrary to their ancient Laws and Customs to grant to any Nation a free Trade in the Empire) they could not perceive any thing concerning this Request in their Lettrrs of Credence; therefore, according to their opinion, the Ambassadors went beyond their Orders.


This stop of the Council so unexpected, seem'd very strange to the Ambas∣sadors, who thought of nothing more, but that all things had been done, and a free Trade granted, and that they were onely to return him their humble Thanks.


All which was brought thus about by the influence of Father 
Adam Schall,
 and some other 
Portuguese
 at 
Peking,
 foreseeing the undoing of their Factory at 
Macao,
 if the 
Dutch
 set up at 
Canton,
 and also there wanted not a less Sum than 300 Tail of Silver, which was to be dispos'd to Bribe the Council, with pro∣mises of more: The 
Tartars
 also now adding, that the 
Hollanders
 under pretence of Trade, sought to get footing in the Empire, and then to Ransack the Coun∣trey, and Pillage, and make Prize of what e're they could lay hold on.


All which was more confirm'd as a positive truth, by the Allegation of a Commissioner that had dwelt at 
Canton
 three years before; and also by the 
Tu∣tang
's Letters, which at that time was at 
Canton,
 and Brib'd for that purpose by the 
Portuguese
 at 
Macao,
 had wrought such an opinion in the Hearts of the Peo∣ple, that they look'd upon the 
Hollanders
 no otherwise than a company of Out∣laws and Exiles, which had no home or abodes, but dwelt on the Sea, their whole subsistence drawn from Spoil and Piracy.


Lastly, The Ambassadors found that the Chancellor and other Councellors could not without Bribes understand, that these words in their Letters of Cre∣dence, 
To have leave to go and come,
 could signifie nothing but a free Trade: which seem'd very strange to them, since they knew no otherwise but that the


five and thirty hundred Tail of Silver, which they had oblig'd themselves to pay to the Vice-Roy at 
Canton,
 was to be distributed amongst the Council. Therefore being thus deceiv'd by the Vice-Roy, they were forc'd to fall to new Consultations to obtain their desire.


First, They Declar'd to the Chancellor and Council more at large, what was intended by that Point concerning their Annual Trade in 
Canton,
 and de∣sired earnestly to obtain it.


Next they offer'd by the old Vice-Roy of 
Cantons Mandarin,
 to the Chancel∣lor, that they would stay in 
Peking,
 till his Majesty was fully assur'd, that they were 
Hollanders
 and not 
English.
 They also requested, that the Emperor would be pleas'd to give them a Seal, with some peculiar Mark Engrav'd in Brass, therewith they might Seal Passes for all Ships that either Sail'd by, or put into the Harbors of 
China,
 thereby to distinguish them from others of their neighboring Nations.


At last they exhibited a Proposal, drawn by one of the Clerks of the Coun∣cil; wherein they urg'd, that they might as Loyal Subjects Trade in 
China,
 upon the Grant whereof, they would undertake to pay all Taxes and Customs whatsoever, like those of 
Licukieu, Ainan,
 and 
Siam;
 and when those three Na∣tions made their Addresses, being every third year, they would in like manner attend the Emperor with peculiar Presents.


But all their Proposals were to no effect, wanting at least ten thousand Tail of Silver, there being no other means in that Court to make their way, for what party Brib'd most, abnubilated their understandings, and gave them a sense of their Cause, which Sum they being then not able to raise, for none could be took up upon any Security whatsoever, under ten, or eight at least 
per cent.
 a Moneth Interest: Which exaction the Ambassadors judg'd no way fit or rea∣sonable, because if they were at this Expence, it lay still doubtful, whether their business should be effected.


The Emperor at last inform'd of all the Proceedings by his Council, and how the 
Hollanders
 were inclin'd to come in an Embassy to his Majesty, every fifth year; and that they had made it appear, that in less time they could not go and come: Therefore his Majesty, out of a respect to the 
Hollanders,
 and for their better accommodation, order'd them to come but every eighth year, 
For, said he, otherwise they would not be able to hold out; and why should We lay an unnecessary Obligation on a People which We neither need, nor fear? and who of their own inclination come to tender their. Obedience to Us with Presents? No, We have resolv'd to Treat them so tenderly, that af∣ter they have ended their great Journey, they may have two or three years rest at home.


By this Declaration of the Emperor, they saw plainly nothing more was to be done, but to apply themselves onely to patience, and to put off the Design till another more fit opportunity; for the Councils chief Secretary had told them, that too much pressing, and eager sollicitation, would rather hurt than help the Business.


Amongst others, having made their Addresses concerning this matter, by the Vice-Roys of 
Cantons Mandarins,
 they receiv'd this Answer:


Is it not enough, that at this first time they are admitted as Ambassadors to tender their Presents to the Emperor, and notwithstanding the bad fame which hath rendred them odious in the Eyes of the most eminent Persons in 
China,
 they were now accepted as Friends, and had leave to dispose of their


Goods which they had brought; let them not urge too much for a free Trade, lest perhaps for the future they be deny'd all.


They must not think nor imagine that We are oblig'd to grant them all things at first; if they come the next year, or so soon as they can, and with Presents return the Emperor thanks for his kind accepting of them; then perhaps there will be better Conveniencies to effect their desires.


At last the Ambassadors having shew'd due reverence to the Emperor's Seal, appear'd before the Throne, and been at three of the Emperors Feasts, where they were very nobly Entertain'd, receiv'd their Dispatch, together with his Imperial Majesties Letter to his Excellency 
Iohn Maetzuiker,
 in 
New-Batavia.




The Emperor sends this Letter to the 
Netherlanders, Batavia,
 and to their King 
John Maetzuiker.


Ur Countreys are as far distant as the East from the West, so that We can∣not easily visit each other; Many Ages are past since the 
Hollanders
 have been seen amongst us, but you have done very prudently, in that you sent to Us 
Peter de Goeyer,
 and 
Iacob de Keyser,
 which in your Name have brought Us Presents. You have shew'd your good inclination, by remembring Us; wherefore Our heart is also much inclin'd to you; and as a testimony there∣thereof, We send you two Rowls of Sattin, four Rowls of Flower'd Sattin, four Rowls of blew Sattin without Flowers, four Rowls of 
Kin,
 four Rowls of Camlet, ten Pieces of 
Peelings,
 ten Pieces of 
Parsu,
 ten Pieces of light Colour'd Stuffs, and three hundred Tail of Silver▪ You have desir'd to come and Trade in Our Countrey, to bring Commodities thither, and carry others out, by which a private Man might reap good profit: But because your Countrey is so many thousand Leagues distant, and here blow very hard Winds, so that the Ships run great danger which come hither, and for that also it is very cold here ashore, by very great Hails and Snows; it would be no small trouble to Us, if any of your People should come hither and mis∣carry; but if this satisfie not, unless they have permission to visit these parts, then let them come every eighth year once, with a hundred in their Train, of which twenty may come to the Palace, where we keep our Imperial Re∣sidence; and you may lay your Merchandize ashore in your Store-house, without disposing of them at Sea before 
Canton.
 This We have thought good out of Our inclination for your benefit, and believe that it will likewise be to your satisfaction. This is that which we intended to advise you.


In the thirteenth Year, the eighth Moneth, the nine and twentieth Day of the Reign 
Xunchi.

Somewhat lower stood
Hongtee Thoepe.




The 
Hollanders
 thus frustrated of their expectation, having obtain'd nothing else than to come every eighth year once, with Merchandize to Trade in the Countrey, left off prosecuting the Design with so much eagerness for a consi∣derable time.


But since the loss of the Islands 
Tayowan,
 and 
Formosa,
 taken from the 
Hol∣landers
 by 
Koxinga,
 or 
Iquon,
 and his Associates, 
Anno
 1661. they renew'd their Suit to the 
Tartar
 for a free Trade, on promise and assurance, that if they


should meet with 
Coxinga,
 either at Sea or Land, they would endeavor to de∣stroy him, as a common Enemy both to the 
Tartars
 and 
Hollanders.


Therefore since the Isles of 
Tayowan, Formosa,
 and 
Coxinga
 will be often made mention of in this our Relation; and that from the loss of those places, the 
Hollanders
 renew'd their old Request, under pretence of help to ruine the ene∣my; it will be necessary, and this our Business seems indeed to require a brief Description of them in the first, and withal, a Relation how 
Coxinga
 took them from the 
Hollanders.




Of Formosa.


THe 
Formosan
 Isle, formerly call'd by the 
Chineses, Paccande,
 extends it self
 in length from the South to the North, and in breadth East and West, being an hundred and thirty Leagues in Circuit: the Prospect shews you much rising Ground, and a Hilly Countrey, which abounds with Deer, great store of Wild Goats, Hares, Coneys, Swine, Tygers, and the 
Luvasey,
 whose flesh hath a delightful and excellent relish. The Woods also have no want of Pheasants and Pigeons. The Ground being fruitful, produceth store of Sugar, Ginger, Cinamon, Coco-Nuts, and several other Necessaries fit for humane sustenance; besides, full of populous Villages. They are Govern'd by several Lords, not de∣pending on, nor acknowledging any Superior, so that each Town being a Re∣publick, they still have Wars, and are at difference one with another, Town against Town, Village against Village, insomuch that Peace never set Foot in that Isle.


Of their many Villages, the prime and of chiefest note, are 
Sinkan, Mandauw, Soulang, Backeloang, Taffacan, Tifulucan, Teopan,
 and 
Tefurang;
 the last in a Valley near the High-lands, where 
Fort Zelandia
 stands, formerly call'd 
Tayovan.


The Inhabitants of this Village are rude and salvage, robust, and almost of a
 Gigantick size, not black like the 
Caffers,
 and count it no immodesty to go stark
 naked. Their Women, well built for Stowage, short, and inclining to gross∣ness, wearing Apparel; yet twice a day they strip themselves, and are not asham'd to bathe and wash in publick.


These, though a barbarous People, are kind to the 
Netherlanders,
 heartily en∣tertaining them with their own, though mean, yet wholsome Fare.


Soulang
 breeds a needy, spiteful, inhospitable, and bloody People. Not∣withstanding
 the fruitfulness of the Soil they commonly live in want, being extreme lazy, Tilling no more than they suppose will supply their necessity; which often falling short, they are so hardly put to it, that when they per∣ceive Provision growing scant, they live sparingly many days, or else they might be utterly famish'd; for in such exigencies they never help one ano∣ther: nay, they are so supinely slothful, that the Women do all the business of the Field, Plough, Sow, and Reap, having neither Horses, nor any other Cat∣tel to help them; the Drudgery being the more, because they make it Gard∣ners work, for onely with Spades they dig and turn the Glebe; and where their Corn grows thickest, especially Rice, they pluck it out with their Hands, and set it where they find the Blades come up thinner; and in Harvest know∣ing neither Scythe nor Sickle, which tries their patience, crop with a Tool like a Pruning Knife, Stalk by Stalk, a Span below the Ear; which with∣out Threshing, they store up in their Houses, hanging it in the Evening in


small Bundles over the Fire; and early in the Morning the Women rise and
 Pound so much as will serve them that day for their lazy Lord and Family Besides Rice and other Grain, they Sow Carrots, Set Water-Melons, 
Pinang, Quach, Taraum,
 and 
Pting.


This Isle is not stor'd with such Wines as other places in 
India
 have, which their Trees produce; but they have another sort of Liquor, that inebriates no less than the 
Indian,
 or Juyce of the 
Spanish
 Grape; which they prepare in this manner: They take a quantity of Rice, which they put in a Vessel made for that purpose, and boyl it; which turning out, they knead into little Balls, or Pellets; when they are well chew'd, they put them into another Pot, there let∣ting it stand till grown sowre; to this they pour a good quantity of Spring-Water, which being so put together, works a Moneth or two, for so long it will ferment; then it becomes a clear, pleasant, wholsom, and strong Li∣quor: which the longer kept, the better grows, for it will hold good thir∣ty
 years. The top of this Drink is thin and clear, the bottom or sedi∣ment thick like our Pap: the thin makes their Drink, with which they often Fuddle; the thick makes their Cawdle to recover them, which Crop-sick, they eat with Spoons. This they carry with them to the Field, and take a Dose thereof when they think fit: and thus yearly they spend most part of their Rice.


The Women when their Cultivation or Land-work is done, then they be∣take
 themselves to the Sea, and Launch out their Boats, which they call 
Cham∣pans,
 and fall to Fishing, where they catch great store of Crabs, Oysters, and Gurnets, which they Salt without Gutting, and therefore, though Pickled, keep not long, but are apt to putrifie and breed Worms; yet they like it never the worse, but look upon their Dish as the greater Dainty, the rancker the Hogooe.


Their Youths, though strong and of able Bodies, spend their time in idle∣ness and sloth; and when forty years old, then they settle themselves to Lazi∣ness, as if it were a Trade or Handicraft, spending twenty years in a metho∣dical doing of nothing, in a small Hut or Hovel, dandling their Children, or Dalliance with their Wives, seldom or never stirring out of their own Limits, or Patch of Ground, unless invited either to a private or publick Feast, or Hunting-Matches, in which pleasure they take some pains, using several, and
 indeed ingenious ways to catch the Game, sometimes practising deceit, laying Snares and Traps of complicated Rushes and Reeds so artificially, that they look fresh, as if growing and ungather'd, setting them in the Haunts of wild Boars, Lays of Deers, and the like, and so catch them, wondring who made their new Lodges and Beds so soft, and lay Meshes in other inviting places, which if they take not willingly, nor observe such Allurements, they drive them in, where they also make them their Prey; and they trapan them into Pits, digg'd and spread over with a light Swarth, or Turf of Grass, supported with brittle Twigs laid athwart the Holes: here to make them sure from get∣ting out, they place a Snare, which suddenly arrests them, taking them Priso∣ners by the Neck or Legs, and then they with a shout fall upon the so taken Quarry.


Besides this, they use Hostility and open Arms, whole Villages march out
 together, nay, two or three Townships, joyning their Forces, taking the Field; where drawn out in a single File, they stretch a Ring, which extends four or five 
English
 Miles in compass, every one brandishing in each Hand a Javelin,


some carrying three or four: thus all prepar'd, with a rally of Hounds they rouse the Prey, then contracting their wide Circumference by degrees into a narrower▪ Circuit, closing up at last Man to Man, Shoulder to Shoulder; this done, if any one of their thrown Spears hit and fasten into the Body of the Game, they never lose him, for their Launces being short, not above six Foot long, and Pointed with Iron, having three retorted Hooks, stick so fast, that though flying to shelter amongst the Bushes and Shrubs, will not, when impe∣ded by intangling Branches, drop out, and also having ty'd at the But▪end of the Staff a long String with a Bell, so that if by chance the Beast thus impark'd break the Pale, yet they never lose him, for they follow not only by the scent, but by the sound, both which seldom fail.


They use also Arrows, especially when they hunt wild Deer. The remain∣der of the slain Venison, when they have Feasted themselves, they barter for Clothing and Raiment with the 
Chineses,
 seasoning with Salt the Humbles, to keep for their own private Store; but if by chance they kill a pregnant Doe, they unlace her, and Feasting upon the Slinck, eat up Skin and all.


To this their Manly Divertisements, and Exercises of 
Saiha,
 pleasing Labor, as pursuing their Game, they have also rougher work, and serious engage∣ments, which, when successful, brings no less delight to such a barbarous People, that is, a Civil War, ancient Feuds, or fresh Animosities, still upon new occasions fermenting, so that Town against Town, and Village against Village all the Countrey over, are in open Hostility, either publick Slaughter, or private Murder being their Sports, which thus they carry on: First one Town begins, sending the other a bold Defiance; this is follow'd by twenty or thirty in a Party, which Row in their Boats, or 
Champans,
 to their Enemies Village, near which they lie as if in Ambuscade till Night, then growing dark, they Landing, march up and down and explore the Fields, culling out private Huts, and such like Houses, where the Graver sort, the Marry'd People, as we said before, at their ease and pleasure dwell: Those that be thus supinely careless they suddenly surprise, and off goes their Heads, Hands, and Feet; some∣times more cruelly they slice out their whole Bodies, each one carrying a Col∣lup in triumph home, as an evidence that he had no small share in that bloody Slaughter, but, as they suppose, honorable Action: But finding no small Game, or such single Adventures, then they attempt secretly the next Village, where silently breaking into a House or two, they spare none, but salvagely kill Men, Women, and Children, carrying their Heads, Hands, and Feet home, as Trophies of their Victory: But sometimes falling short of their De∣sign, are glad to escape to save themselves; and often, the whole Town so suddenly taking the alarm, they with as little mercy are all cut off: at other times in their flight so few appearing, that the Enemies in hopes of revenge, are trepann'd to their Boats, where in greater and unexpected numbers they Fight so valiantly, that they put them to the Rout; yet these though seeming Furio∣so's, receiving the least Wound, basely Retreat and quit the Battel.


Their Defensive Arms are Shields, so large, that they cover their whole Bo∣dies;
 their Offensive, Darts and Faulchions.


It often happens, that two or three Villages joyn against one or more asso∣ciated Towns: these have no Commission-Officer, or Commander, but who∣soever shews most Men, they make their General, and hath the prime Autho∣rity to rule over the others according to their numbers. Neither are their Warlike Stratagems common, for when they intend to Attaque some Village


by a sudden surprisal, for they have no Works to storm, opposite to the way that they appear upon, and ready to enter the Village; on the contrary side they lie in Ambush, which when they Charge in, giving a smart alarm, the▪ People struck with a sudden fear, in a confus'd manner, betake themselves to their Heels, and flying from, fall just into the Mouth of the same Enemy, who suddenly starting up, are not sparing, but oftentimes make a general slaughter, whilst the others ransack and pillage the Houses. Sometimes in the Night they break into a House or two, which leaving, their business being done, two of the Par∣ties stick fast in their likeliest way to return, so to stop the Pursuer, sharp-poin∣ted Reeds, about half a Yard long, they making their Retreat by another im∣probable way. Each Conqueror that shares for his own part a Head, carries it through his Village upon a Spear, insulting and singing in praise and glory of his God, to whom he solely ascribes his Victory; thus proudly vaporing, they are joyfully receiv'd every where, and entertain'd with the best Liquor the Town affords.


Every sixteen Houses have their own Chappel, to which they carry this
 their bloody Spoil, which afterwards he boyls till the Flesh comes from the Bone, then drying it in the Sun, they pour strong Liquor (a Custom which they never omit) upon the bare Scalp: fourteen days they keep Holy, Feast∣ing
 and Sacrificing to their gods, who gave them so great and glorious a Victory.


Of these Heads, who e're enjoys one, looks upon it as his greatest Treasure, prizing them beyond Gold or Silver, or the most precious Jewel, and when any sudden accident of Fire, or the like happen, this they take most care of, how to carry it with them, or leave in safety.


This Isle, as we said before, hath no King, nor Supreme Governor, but eve∣ry
 petty Village is a small Republick, Ruling it self under twelve Magistrates, chosen every second year; whose chief Qualification is to be fifty years old:
 these when going out, in Honor and Commemoration that they were once prime Rulers, have all their Hair pick'd off from their Temples, and each side of their Heads with Tweasers; which baldness is the well-known Badge of their former Authority. But these Governors Power hath but small Limits,
 for in every Exigence all the Villages meet in the Temple there, having no Representatives, every Man speaks to the purpose according to his abilities, or as he is biass'd; which done, the Twelve take into their consideration, and from the general result of their various opinions, give their special Verdicts, which the People as they like or dislike, ratifie or refuse. But they have abso∣lute Power to seize the Clothes of whomsoever wears Apparel in that three Moneths, when by their Laws they are commanded to go naked, and Pray to their Idols for Rain, being about that time always a dry Season. This also in part they inflict upon the Women that go too gorgeously in that Quarter. This their Court of twelve Aldermen suffer great hardship or Penance, not be∣ing allow'd by their Laws to taste any strong Drink, as 
Pietang,
 use Sugar, or eat any Fat of their Meat, till such time as their Rice is half ripe, believing that onely preserves the sprouting Blade from the harrase of wild Beasts, as Deer, Swine, and such like.


Their chief Practise, and special Vertues, are Theft, Murder, and Adultery,
 at which they are very dextreous, either by Stratagems, or down-right vio∣lence, and he that reckons up the most of such dire Actions, appears amongst them the bravest Fellow.


These People▪ though they have no superiority amongst them, neither by the
 honor of Birth, nor their own acquir'd Riches: yet the Seniors keep the Ju∣niors at a greater distance than we in 
Europe;
 the old Men exacting a greater Respect from the younger by far, over whom they exercise absolute Authority, and Arbitrary Power, without any limitation, Youth being no better than a Slave to Age; for wheresoever a young Man sees one more aged than himself (though at a great distance) he must start suddenly out of the way, as if a Prince were coming with all his Train; and if he chance to call and beckon to him, then sending him of an Errand, he dare not refuse, though to the farthest part of the Isle; neither dare they once offer to come near, or intrude into any Room where Parents are together; so that to be young, is to be a Slave▪ and when old, a Prince, having no honor of Superiority but by their years.


The Males must not Marry before their one and twentieth Year, nor wear
 long Hair till the seventeenth. Their ceremonious Rites of Matrimony are on∣ly consummated thus: The Suiter, who by the advice of his Parents or his own Affection, hath cast his Eye upon a Mistress, begins his Courtship or Gal∣lanting with a Present, which his Mother, or a near Relation, carries to her House, there presenting in her Servants Name, with all Complements, and Manifestations of his Affection. These Gifts are commonly eight Skirts or Pet∣ticoats, as many Wastcoats, or Upper-Bodice, four hundred Armlets of pleited Rush, a dozen Rings for their Fingers, either Copper, or white polish'd Harts∣horn, and so many Laces of red Dogs Hair, five Linnen Girdles, twelve Dogs Hair Coverlets, thirty 
Chinesie
 Pieces of Cloth, a great Box full of Dogs Hair, with which they make a Border, or Love-shade, to beautifie their Forehead and Temples, which they call 
Ayam Maniang,
 and five pair of Hart-skin Stock∣ings. These Presents are sent onely by the Wealthiest; and those that are less able according to their abilities. If what they thus present is receiv'd, the busi∣ness is concluded, and Marriage presently confirm'd by the Nuptial Bed.


Notwithstanding the concluding Ceremony, the Husband and Wife dwell
 not together, but live apart by themselves; but in the Night he is allow'd in a clandestine way to steal to his Enjoyments; whither making his approaches, he is neither allow'd Fire nor Candle, but with all silence and secrecy steals in∣to the Bed; neither there must he speak to his Bride, but if he want any thing, that he signifies by Coughing; upon which, guessing what it may be, his Wife administers, and her Houshold-business being done, she comes to Bed; a hard Lodging, where indeed they have no Bed, neither Pillow nor Bolster, but a Buck-skin spread upon the Floor; yet others have a Bedstead spread with Rushes. These hardships, as they suppose, makes them fitter for the encoun∣ters of 
Venus,
 and more stirs up Loves fervor than warm dalliance in softer ac∣commodations: Neither may he linger there, but e're the Dawn visibly ap∣pear, thence he must, that so his departing with an appetite, he may be the more earnest for a second fruition: But all this while neither of them are a burthen to one another, but each provide for themselves, and follow their own affairs; and if they meet by chance in the Day, they pass by like Strangers, the Husband
 not daring to speak to his Wife without her License. The Charge of bring∣ing up of the Children is left to her Care, till they are above one and twenty years of age, then their Father receives and keeps, or disposes of them as he thinks fitting.


But the 
Formosan
 Women have a barbarous Custom (void of all Motherly af∣fection, and humane reason,) for whoever proves with Child before thirty


seven years of age, when the Fruit of her Womb waxeth ripe and fit for Delive∣ry, they cruelly and in unspeakable manner destroy: for in stead of a Midwise that should assist them in their Labor, or Childbed-throws, they employ a cruel Dame, who laying them in a fit posture on their best and softest Bed, crushes
 and kneads the tender Infant in the Womb, till it become like a lump of Dough, which departs from them with more extreme torture, than if they were natu∣rally deliver'd.


Georgius Canidius,
 a Minister of the Gospel, residing in 
Formosa Anno
 1628 re∣lates, that he knew a 
Formosan
 Woman, who was deliver'd of sixteen Children in that horrible manner, her first Abortion being in her seventeenth Year; and he being inquisitive to know why she thus made away what would have been her own dear Issue, and to be esteem'd most of all worldly joys by her, receiv'd this answer from her, That her shamefac'dness and modesty forbad her to be a Mother before she was of age of discretion, being accounted amongst them thir∣ty seven Years.


The Husband (as we said before) in the fortieth Year of his Age, forsakes his
 solitary abode, and lives with his Wife, spending the remainder of their days to∣gether in small Huts or Hovels in the Field: but upon the least jangling or fall∣ing out, they part; so that sometime they change their old for new Wives once a Moneth. If he can clearly convict her, shewing just reason for his separation, he recovers her Dowry, seizing those Gifts which he presented before Marri∣age; but failing either in his Arguments or Proofs, the Divorc'd Wife preserves her own Estate. Some Marry two Wives, but they are look'd upon as commit∣ting Fornication or Adultery; but of late, Custom, and the common practice, makes the offence not altogether so hainous.


Their Youth and Batchellors have their peculiar Residence; for in every Vil∣lage,
 as we said before, sixteen Houses have their Chappel, in which they have distinct Lodgings, as in a Colledge, where they keep their Batchellors Place, though Marry'd, till such time as they go to live with their Wives.


The 
Formosan
 Houses are the handsomest, and exactest built of any after the
 
Indian
 manner; for in stead of digging deep, they raise a Foundation six Foot high of firm Clay; the Walls of the Fabrick are rais'd onely with Reeds and Rushes, artificially strengthen'd with interweavings, having four Doors open∣ing
 to the four Winds; but the prime Buildings have eight: The Ornament without, and Furniture within, are Stags Crested Heads, and wild Boars, 
Chi∣nesie
 Raiments, and Deer-skins; and also 
Assagays
 or Javelins, Shields, Swords, Bowes and Arrows, Cattel, Axes, Cans, Pitchers, and Troughs, Vessels of Barks of Trees, and Earthen-Ware. But they pride most in the Bones, Sculls, and hairy Scalps of Enemies Conquer'd by their own Hands.


They use no private, but publick Feasts, to which every sixteen House-Parish
 repair, being kept in their little Temple, or Chappel, where after their Devoti∣on to their gods, they spend the rest of their time in Feasting, Singing, Dan∣cing, and all manner of Idolatry; and he that appears there in a Dogs Hair Coat, is the bravest Fellow.


The manner of disposing their Dead, and Funeral Obsequies, are thus:
 When any dies, the Corps being Laid out, after four and twenty hours they elevate it upon a convenient Scaffold, or Stage, four Foot high, Matted with Reeds and Rushes, near which they make a Fire, that so the Corps may by degrees dry: to which place the Friends of the Deceased daily flock toge∣ther, and that they may keep up Sorrow the better, bring along with them


store of Mans Flesh, and several strong intoxicating Liquors. But before the sick Person departs, being just ready to give up the Ghost, thus they begin their inebriating Grief: One beats on a Drum made of a hollow Tree, which gives notion of a Person deceas'd; at which Summons the Women come from all Parts near, bringing their Pots and Vessels of Strong Drink with them, and making themselves, and the Relations of the Deceas'd, drunk. They Dance all Night before the Door after this manner: They take a Trough like a Chest,
 but longer and broader, and turning the bottom upwards, the Women get up, and two by two, Back to Back, move their Legs and Arms in a Dancing time and measure; which pace, or taboring tread, sends a kind of a murmur∣ing, or doleful Sound, from the hollow Tree; when these mounted Couples are weary, they come down, and others supply the Place: Thus the Maudlin-Drunkards dance nine Days together, whilst the Body lies parching by the Fire, sending forth a very noisom Stench; then having bath'd the Corps nine times over, they wrap it up close in a Mat, and lay it higher than before, so co∣vering it with a fitted Canopy from all Light, there lying three years, till such time as nothing remains but a Skeleton, all else being consum'd to Dust; then they Interre him in his own House, with all the Ceremony of Feasts, as if lately departed.


The ordering of their Sick is no less unnatural and preposterous; for they
 use them worse than if the Devil were their Doctor; for in stead of Potion or Pill, and the like, they have but one Medicine for all Diseases, and that's a dry Halter, especially in the Village 
Teopan;
 for as soon as any Person falls sick, and begins to complain, lying down, and not able to walk about, and follow his Business, they presently prepare a tough Cord, in stead of Cordial; so putting the Noose about his Neck, they hoise him up to the top of the House with a Pulley kept for that purpose, then let him suddenly fall with a Jolt, which commonly proves an immediate Cure, by killing them; yet some mend upon this choking Medicine, either by the strength of Nature, or their Spi∣rits irritated by the fright.


The 
Formosans
 neither Write nor Read, using no Books, Letters, nor Cha∣racters:
 but yet that Law and Religion which they have amongst them, they observe without alteration, deliver'd by Tradition from Generation to Generation: For certain young Men are appointed to be instructed from the elder; and faithful Memories are their onely Registers and Records.


First, They believe the Universe, Heaven and Earth, to have been without beginning, and shall be without end.


Secondly, they acknowledge the Immortality of the Soul; for which rea∣son, they build a little Place, in which they put a Tub of Water with a Dish in it, before the Door of the Deceased, supposing the Spirit thereof comes dai∣ly thither to bathe or cleanse.


The next Article of their Faith is, That there are several Punishments af∣ter this Life, according to the equality of their Crimes, and Rewards of Eter∣nal Happiness for those that have, when living, merited by doing well: there∣fore they dig broad and deep Trenches, filling them with Mud and Slime; over which they make a floating Bridge of bundled-up Rushes, which leads to the most delightful and luxurious Vales in the Countrey: Over these, as they affirm, the Souls of the Deceased must pass, which the Wicked endeavoring to cross, the unstable Truss, or rowling Bridge, tumbles them over into their Sty∣gian Lake; but the Just and Godly walking in safety over, enjoy there all Pleasure in an everlasting 
Elysium.


Those Sins which they account most hainous, are but frivolous Toys, built
 upon Superstition and sleight Observation, as not to go naked (as we said be∣fore) at their set and appointed times; to wear Clothes or any thing of Silk▪ Women to bear Children before their seven and thirtieth year; to fetch and eat Oysters not in due season; and to venture to undertake any Business; though of little or no consequence, before they have observ'd good Auguries from the Notes or Language of the Birds: All these are Capital, and, as they hold sorth, unpardonable Offences; but Murder, Theft, Lying, and Forswear∣ing, these have their Qualifications; for some may commit them, and some may not, without any scruple; but in general they are look'd upon no more than Peccadillo's, and venial Offences.


When they take an Oath, they ratifie it by breaking a Straw. To be a pub∣like and common Drunkard, and to be an Adulterer, and Debaucher of young Women, if carried privately, is no harm.


Though they believe the Immortality of the Soul, yet they utterly deny the Resurrection of the Body.


Amongst their several gods which they worship, the chiefest are 
Tamagisan∣hach,
 who Governs and Inhabits the South; his Celestial Spouse, 
Taxankpada Agodales,
 commands the East, where when it happens to Thunder, they be∣lieve that she exercises her Tongue, the Females best Arms, scolding so loud at her Husband in the South, because he neglects his Office, not sending Rain when the Earth needs; who being nettled with his Wives bitter and sharp ex∣pression, not enduring to hear her any longer, opens his Mouth, sending, and dispersing with his Breath abundance of Water.


Another Deity which they worship out of fear, because 
Tamagisanhach,
 as they say, creates Men with comely Visages, and well-proportion'd Bodies; this being an angry and ill natur'd Power, delighting in mischief, makes it his whole Business to spoil and mis-shape what 
Tamagisanhach
 hath made fair and handsom, disfiguring their Faces with Pox and Blasting, bunch∣ing their Backs, withering and crooking their Limbs, and the like, then deriding at their Lameness and Deformity: so this 
Sariafing
 they hold in great Veneration, that he would be pleas'd to spare them, and do them no harm.


When they take up Arms, and proclaim Hostility, they offer Sacrifices to
 
Talafula
 and 
Tapaliape,
 their two gods of War.


Their Priests, or rather Priestesses, which they call 
Inibs,
 are Women, the
 whole Function in Divine Service, or Worship, belonging to them; for they not only Pray to their gods, and Preach, but also Sacrifice: Their chiefest Offerings are Stags and Boars Heads, presented in a Charger, upon boyl'd Rice, 
Pynang,
 and other strong Drinks, as a Condiment: This perform'd, two of the Female Order stand up before the Congregation, and make a Sermon, in which they set forth the Praise and Honor of their gods, going on with that vehemency of expressions and loud declamations, that at last their Hair stands upright, and their Eyes rowling, seem ready to start out of their Heads; then
 near the Conclusion of these their dire Exhortations, they fall down in a Trance, and oftentimes lie so for a whole Hour, whilst the People gathering near them, tear their Throats, and cleave the Air with hideous shrieks and cries; when coming to themselves, in a cold and faint Sweat, their Limbs trembling, their Teeth chattering, strangely discompos'd, they tell the Peo∣ple, That in their Trance the gods appear'd to them, unfolding mysterious


things for their good, not yet to be express'd; besides, two others of these Women mount the Battlements of the Temple, and standing at the gable ends, they make afresh loud, and long Supplications to their gods: At last they strip themselves, and thus denuded, crying more earnestly to their gods, and first shaking, then taboring, or clapping with their Hands, raging as in a phanatick distraction. All the Women, following their impudent example, throw off with their Weeds all Shame at once, and so Tope and Deboush, till
 they disgorge their too plentiful excess.


Besides this their publick Worship in the Temple, they Offer in the open Streets, and exercise private and domestick Devotions, performing Family∣duties daily in their own Houses, to which those that please may repair, and joyn with them in this their Idol-Service.


With these 
Inibs
 also they consult concerning fair or foul Weather, when
 they have any Business abroad; also of future Events, which they seem to foretell, and if bad, advise how to prevent, or at least to mitigate: They also profess Exorcism, to drive away Evil Spirits, and to charm and confine the Devil, and all such deceitful Tempters; which they perform in a Rant, with loud Hectoring Acclamations, drawing a 
Iapan
 Faulchion, with which they Fence, Strike, and Thrust, flourishing it in the Air, making them believe, that thus they Fight the Fiend, and slice Satan out in Sippets, forcing him, thus being mangled, and cut almost into Attoms, to dive for his better safety into the Sea.


Yet these so salvage People, and blind with an over-grown ignorance, have
 lately (since the 
Hollanders East-India
 Company setled here, and built a Fort for their Defence, and conveniency of Trade) without any great difficulty embrac'd the Doctrine of the 
Christian
 Faith; which was the easier introduc'd, the Inhabitants being their own Governors, and under no Supream Authority,
 who exercising a Tyrannical Power, would, as other Persecutors, force them back from Gods true, to their false Idol-Worship, as at that time most part of 
India
 was, being either under 
Heathen
 or 
Mahumetan
 Governors, who with great fury obstructed the Gospel, which else might have flourish'd through the Oriental World: Besides, the 
Formosans
 kept no Books, wherein the Bounds of Religion were fix'd, and a setled maintain'd Doctrine, which still caus'd great variance, and hot Disputes amongst themselves, the whole Conduct of their Divine Laws being left to a few frantick and ignorant Women, who know nothing but by Tradition. This made it the more easie to reduce them from their 
Paganism
 and 
Idolatry;
 and finding little in their frenzied 
Inibs,
 that might perswade them to persist in their former Superstitions, many of them, with small difficulty, became good 
Christians.
 Thus far 
Candidius,
 which we have acquainted you with in our 
Iapan.


David Wright
 a 
Scots-man,
 and later than 
Candidius,
 who dwelt in the Isle seve∣ral years, hath thus enlarg'd more particularly in every part.


This Island is not under the Jurisdiction of one peculiar Governor, but
 stands divided into eleven Shires or Provinces, all lying to the In-land, of which every one hath several Towns and Villages belonging to them, be∣sides divers Lordships on the Mountains.


Under the 
Hollanders
 Command, (with which we will begin first) were for∣merly in the Northern Confines 
Sinkkan, Tavakan, Baklawan, Soelang, Mattou, Ti∣verang, Faberlang, Takhais, Tornap, Terenip,
 and 
Assoek.


The second Province is 
Kabelang,
 a Territory by the 
Netherlanders
 call'd 
The Bay of Kabelang,
 and contains seventy two Towns and Villages, every one govern'd by their own peculiar Laws, and in amity with each other. The 
Hollanders
 never being able to subdue the Inhabitants thereof, were forc'd to make Peace with them; after which they not onely Traded with several sorts of Merchandise, but also sold their Sons and Daughters to them for Slaves, taking commonly for a Youth of thirteen years old, ten Rix-Dollars.


The third Dominion belongs to the King of 
Middag,
 lying against the North-East of 
Tayowan,
 Southward of the River 
Patientia.


This Prince hath seventeen Towns that obey him, the biggest whereof, call'd 
Middag,
 is his chief Seat, and Place of Residence: 
Sada, Boedor, Dere∣donesel,
 and 
Goema,
 are four other of his eminent Towns, which last is a hand∣som place, lying five Miles from 
Patientia,
 in a Plain, whereas all the other are built on Hills. He had formerly twenty seven Towns under his Jurisdiction; but ten of them threw off the Yoke. He keeps no great State, being at his going abroad accompanied onely with one or two Attendants. He would never suffer any 
Christians
 to dwell in his Dominions, but onely allows them to Travel through his Countrey.


About seven Leagues to the Northward of 
Middag,
 and four Leagues from the Sea, lies Mount 
Gedult,
 so call'd from its difficult and hard Ascents: It ap∣pears square like a Table, so even and smooth, as if it were the Work of Art, not of Nature, having the advantage of adjacent Plains round about, and is over-grown with Brambles. On the South-side, at the Foot of this Hill, glides a River with so strong a Current, that the stoutest of the Natives, which are Men of able Bodies, dares not adventure to wade through it in any place; so that to make it fordable, they never attempt with less than twenty or thirty together, holding fast one by another; wherefore the 
Spaniards
 have by an 
Irony
 call'd it 
Rio Patientia, The Patient River;
 because to pass that rapid Stream, asks not only a great deal of Labor, but also some Patience.


The fourth Jurisdiction is that of 
Pimaba,
 comprehending eight Towns, and several Villages, the chiefest whereof is 
Pimaba,
 the Residence for the Go∣vernor. The Inhabitants thereof are a stout and warlike People, and most ex∣pert in their manner of Arms, of all the 
Formosans.
 This King, look'd upon as a brave Person, keeps a constant Guard, and is always quarrelling, and making War with his Neighbors. He was formerly in Friendship with the 
Hollanders,
 and proud to serve under them as Serjeant of a Company.


The fifth is 
Sapat,
 lying quite on the other side of 
Formosa,
 and commands over ten Towns; the Governor whereof is in League with 
Pimaba.


The sixth Dominion is call'd 
Takabolder,
 and hath eight Towns, besides se∣veral Villages under its Jurisdiction.


In 
Takabolder
 appears an exceeding high Mountain, which may be seen from 
Tayowan.


The seventh Lordship is that of 
Cardeman,
 govern'd by a Woman, who for her kind reception of the 
Christians,
 was by the 
Hollanders
 call'd 
The Good Woman:
 She commands over five Villages. When the 
Hollanders
 march'd into the Field, she sent them Provisions, had a great Authority over her Subjects, and being a Widow, married to one of the Princes of the Countrey.


The eighth Territory hath twelve Villages, of which the chiefest are 
Dere∣dou, Orrazo, Porraven, Barraba, Warrawarra, Tannatanna,
 and 
Cubeca.


The ninth is call'd 
Tokodekal,
 and hath seven Towns, and seven Villages;


the chief whereof is 
Tokodekal,
 where the Governor hath his Residence.


The tenth, nam'd 
Pukkal,
 consists onely of one handsom City, and main∣tains a continual War against the seven Villages of 
Tokodekal,
 and likewise against 
Percuzi
 and 
Pergunu,
 two Towns, which make the eleventh Dominion.


Besides all these foremention'd Places, there are abundance of Lordships in the Mountains; but we will not trouble the Reader with naming them, because they are so numerous, and for that every one is for it self, and conti∣nually make War one against another: But those Places which formerly the 
Hollanders
 had reduc'd, they kept in good order and quiet.


These Islands of 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 especially the Coasts, suffer much 
 Storms and Tempests; for oftentimes the Wind blows down whole Trees and Houses, rending both Walls and Roofs from top to bottom: Besides by these Huricanes yearly many Ships are lost that approach near the Coasts.


Both these Isles also endure terrible Earthquakes. 
Anno
 1654. hapned a mighty Earthquake, on the fourteenth of 
December,
 which continu'd, with short intermissions, almost seven Weeks together. It also rains here very much; wherefore none can travel above two Months, being 
December
 and 
Ianuary,
 for then is generally the fairest Weather; but their greatest and per∣petual Rains happen onely in 
Iuly
 and 
August.
 There are two 
Mousons,
 o
 Stormy Seasons; the one the Northern, and the other the Southern 
Mouson:
 The first begins in 
October,
 and continues till 
March;
 the second begins in 
May,
 and holds till 
September,
 which the 
Hollanders
 call'd 
The unconstant Month,
 because of its often change of Weather.


The circumjacent Sea, that washes the Skirts of these Isles, abounds with Fish, especially the 
Harder,
 or 
Shepherd-Fish,
 and another call'd the 
Kings-Fish.
 The 
Chineses
 come yearly towards 
February,
 from the Main-Land, with thousands of Jonks, to take these 
Shepherds,
 some of the Jonks being able to carry five or six hundred Tun. There sail also another sort of Vessels amongst these Jonks, which they call 
Koiaes,
 or 
Wankans,
 somewhat smaller than our Cock-boats.


This 
Harder,
 or 
Shepherd,
 is a Fish about the bigness of a 
Whiting,
 which when taken, is slit to the Back like 
Habberdine,
 then salted, and pack'd up in Barrels, is sent in Pickle all over 
China,
 as we and the 
Hollanders
 send our Her∣rings through 
Europe.
 The Rows of these Fishes are also salted, and put into Pots, which remaining very red, are accounted for a great Dainty amongst the 
Chineses.


For the Priviledge of Fishing under this Island, the 
Chineses
 us'd to pay the Tithes of all Fish for Custom, to the 
Hollanders
 there resident.


The Soil hath in it a natural Fertility, yet lies most part waste, through the ignorance and sloth of the Inhabitants: The fruitfullest Tract the King of 
Middag
 possesses, which produces abundance of Rice, Wheat, Barley, Rye, 
Kayjang,
 Ginger, Sugar, several sorts of Trees, and great variety of Fruits, as Lemmons, Oranges, Citrons, Pumpeons, Water-Melons, Cucumers, 
Ananasses, China
-Roots, 
Kadjang, Fokkafoka,
 Potatoes, 
Ubes,
 Sweet-Herbs, Cabbage, Car∣rots, and abundance of Physical Herbs, and Cane-wood. 
Kadjang
 is a certain small Seed, green, and about the bigness of Coriander, which boyl'd with salt and fresh Fish, gives a more pleasant taste. 
Fokkafokas
 is a Fruit like a Pear, but thrice as big as one of our greatest; white on the shady side, and on the other, in stead of Red, of a Purple Colour, and shines on the top like Glass. It is first cut into four Quarters, then boyld with Flesh or Bacon, like Turneps,


Carrots, or Coleworts: Of the Broth, sweetned with Sugar they make good Drink.


They also have some few Sheep, and store of Harts, Goats, stags, Conies,
 Hares, tame and wild Swine, Tygers, Bears, Apes, and the like : But they have there also another kind of Creature, by the 
Hollanders
 call'd 
Tayowans Devil,
 about an Ell long, and five Inches broad▪ it is full of Scales, both un∣der his Belly, and on his Back; hath four Feet, a long sharp Head, very sharp Claws, and a Tail thin at the end; his Food nothing but Pismires; for be∣ing hungry, they put forth their Tongues, which when they perceive creep upon it, they draw in again, and so swallow their Prey: It is an Enemy on∣ly to the Ants, and is very fearful of Men, from whom it flies upon the first sight, into any hole, or else winds it self together; but if taken by the Tail, and shaken, opens again; so that the 
Hollanders
 have by an 
Irony
 nam'd it the 
Tayowans Devil,
 being so harmless, that it will neither offend another, nor defend it self. None of these are found in all 
Asia,
 but on this Isle, where they have all manner of Fowl else, except Parrots. There are also Serpents, 
Millepedes,
 Scorpions▪ Hedgehogs, and many other monstrous Creatures. They likewise oftentimes see great Swarms of Locusts.


Anno
 1655. abundance of Locusts spread themselves over these Islands of 
For∣mosa
 and 
Tayowan:
 At their first appearance in 
Tayowan,
 they fell down from the Sky, like a great Snow here with us, and cover'd the whole Ground: Af∣ter two days they directed their way to 
Sakkam,
 multiplying in such manner, that no place was free of them. The People endeavoring to destroy the young Locusts in 
Sakkam,
 in four or five days got thirty thousand 
Picol
 weight: But
 all prov'd in vain, and they were forc'd to give over, when they saw their prodigious increase, utterly destroying their Sugar and Rice Fields every where.


Against the North-East part of 
Formosa
 lies a great and rich Golden Mine, surrounded by many other Marble Quarries: At the Foot thereof runs a Ri∣ver, with many winding Reaches; so that any one which intends to go in quest of the Gold, must cross this Stream above twenty times, and not with∣out great danger, because of the Stones, which frequently tumble from the Rocks. In 
August
 the great Rains sweep down an incredible Store of this rich Metal, which falls into Pits made on purpose at the Foot of the Hill, which the Inhabitants draining, gather the pure Oar from the bottom.


These Mountains are inhabited by a People which know no Prince, nor hitherto have been conquer'd by any. The 
Hollanders
 have often endeavour'd to gain some Ground in these High-lands; but were always repuls'd.


The Men of 
Formosa
 are very large and strong Limb'd, especially those in the Plain Countrey; for those of the Mountains are generally of lesser Stature, and the Women yet smaller than either. They are full-fac'd, and without Beards, not naturally, but by continual plucking out of the Hair so soon as it buds: They have great Eyes, flat Noses, large Breasts, and very long Ears, which they count a great Ornament, and are bored through, and tenter'd out broad with a Horn; some hang a round Tablet in the Hole, painted and carv'd after their manner; others, colour'd Shells; but chiefly on Festival days, and when they are to appear before their Idols; for on other days they leave their long extended Lugs, which cover their Collar-bone, naked and without Ornament, then no beautifying Addition to take Strangers, hanging almost half way down to their naked Breasts: Their Hair as black as Jeat,






is also very long, and by most worn as they do in 
Europe;
 but some, after the ancient 
Chinese
 manner, tye it on the top of their Heads, or braid it into one Lock. They are of a Tawny or Olivaster Complexion, not much fairer than the 
Mulatto.
 The Women of 
Midag
 are bright, like the golden Yellow, as likewise like those of 
Soetan Nouwe,
 and the Island 
Lamey.


They are ingenious, of subtile Wit, and great Memories, and none of the 
Indians
 are fitter to understand the Mysteries of, and readier to embrace the 
Christian Faith.


Their Habit or Summer-Garment, is only a thin Cotton Coat, made wide,
 tied fast on the Breast by two Corners, and then put under one of their Arms; so that generally one side of their Bodies is cover'd, and the other bare; about the middle close girt, and hanging down below their Knees. They neither wear Shoes nor Stockins; but sometimes a kind of Pumps or Sandals, made of Goat-skins, which they fasten on the top of their Feet.


In the Winter time they wear Tygers, Leopards, Bears, and other Wild∣beasts Skins. The People of 
Soulang
 went habited like the 
Dutch,
 being still conversant among them; but all the rest, like the 
Chineses.


Before the 
Spaniards
 and 
Hollanders
 coming thither, the Inhabitants went na∣ked; which Salvage Custom those that live in the Mountains still continue, wearing onely a small Cloth before.


The Womens Habit agrees almost with the Mens, onely with this diffe∣rence, that they tie Clouts about their Legs, like Spatterdashes, and have short Coats, like a Half-shirt without Sleeves, which reach down to their Middle, and under that a Cotton Cloth, falling down to their Knees. Their Heads are filleted with a piece of Silk, about a Yard and half long, whose two ends stick out like Horns, on their Foreheads; and none of them ever wear Shoes: But every Woman hath commonly a great Pig running after her, as we use to have a Dog.








The Men paint the Skin of their Breasts, Backs, and Arms, with a Colour which remains in the Flesh, and will never be got out, and by them account∣ed a great Bravery: about their Necks and Arms they hang Glass Beads strung, and Iron Armlets, which sit very straight, like an Elbow-Gauntlet, so narrow in the Wrist, that it seems impossible almost how they could be put over the Hand; and on their Legs they have Anclets of white Shells, joyn'd together like a Scallop Lace.


The Men of 
Tokdadekol
 wear as an Ornament a long Cane, which they stick behind their Backs at a Girdle, the other end bowing over their Heads, having a white or red Flag about two Handfuls broad.


Their Heads on Holydays are gay with Cocks Feathers, and their Arms and Legs with Bears Tails: The Women also use Glass, and Stones, and sometimes also Rix-Dollars. The Skins of Deer, spread on the Ground, serve them for Beds and Blankets. They have no Societies of Artificers, or Ma∣nufactory; but every one is his own Work-man, and Seamster, making what is necessary or useful for themselves to wear: They are very dexterous and rea∣dy in handling their Bowes and Arrows; and such excellent Swimmers, that they will bear on their Backs another Person through the swiftest Current.


They exercise themselves much in Running, and are very swift of Foot; so that some of them are able to beat a Horse at full speed: When they run, they hold a kind of a Bell about six Inches long in their Hand, which tinkles slower or faster according to their motion.


They never venture out to Sea, but Fish in Rivers with small 
Canoos.


The Inhabitants neither understand to brew Beer, as in 
Europe;
 nor press Wine, having no Grapes: But they use a certain Liquor call'd 
Musakkauw,
 or 
Machiko,
 made of Rice and Water, after this manner. A Vessel about the bigness of a Hogshead, or a Barrel, they fill two third parts with chaw'd and boyl'd Rice, and then fill'd up with Water to the top: This being a Brimmer, luted up, is put seven Foot deep under Ground, where it stands a whole Year; then






'tis again taken up, and the Moisture press'd out of the Rice (for most of the Water is soak'd into the Rice) with their Hands: After eight days the Juyce works it self into a very wholesom Liquor, which may compare with the strongest Wine, and will remain good twenty or thirty Years; for the older it grows, the stronger and pleasanter it tastes, being preserv'd in the same Pots it was made in, and cover'd over with Earth. There are some Houses which have stow'd in their Butteries two or three hundred of these Vessels. At the Birth of a Child, the Father prepares two or three Pots of this Drink, and preserves it till the Childs Marriage. All the Wild People, both Men and Women, are great Lovers of this Liquor, and account it the chiefest 
Regalia,
 when they are caress'd with this Cordial.


They have yet another sort of Drink, by them call'd 
Cuthay,
 made of the same press'd Rice (which they preserve, and through not away) in this man∣ner: They take a Handful of this Rice, and put it into a 
Callabash,
 which con∣tains about two Gallons, which they fill up with Water: This is a cool Drink, not strong, and hath onely a smatch of the 
Masakauw.


In the Northern Part of 
Formosa,
 between 
Kelang
 and 
Tamsay,
 and between 
Tamsay
 and 
Mount Gedult,
 they make another Drink of Wood-ashes, which is also very strong, but unwholesom for the 
Europeans,
 because 'tis apt to excori∣ate, breeding the Bloody-Flux: But the Natives, though so well stor'd with these several Liquors, yet for the most part satisfie themselves with Water.


Their usual Diet is dry'd Venison, Flesh of Wild Swine, and Fish; all which they eat raw, without Seething or Rosting: Boyl'd Rice serves them for Bread, which they take with their four fingers, and toss into their Mouthes. They seeth not their Rice in Water; but putting it into a Cullender, hang it over a Pot fill'd with boyling Water, from whose ascending Steam and Heat, the Rice grows moist and warm.


In the Southern Parts of 
Akkou
 and 
Zoetanau,
 they make Cakes of Rice, and prepare their Venison after a strange manner; 
viz.
 The Flesh cut from the






Bones in Slices of two Inches thick, is salted in a Trough, and pack'd very close; and after lying thus one Night, they set it on the Roof of their Hou∣ses to dry in the Air, where it becomes so hard as Stock-fish, yet tastes better than Mutton, and is generally sold for about a Shilling a 
Cattay,
 that is, a Pound.


The Inhabitants also take Tobacco▪ although it grows not there, but is brought to them from 
China:
 Their Pipes are thin Reeds or Canes, with Stone Heads: That which the 
Hollanders
 often smok'd there, was brought from 
Iapan;
 which though strong, is but like the Refuse of other Tobacco.


Their Houses are all built of Wood and split Canes, which because of their
 ignorance in preparing of Lime or Stone, and the decaying of the Canes, seldom last above four or five years, at which time they pull down the old, and build new ones in the same place, though not without great charge, oc∣casion'd by the unsatiable drinking of the Work-men all the time of their Building; so that an ordinary Man is scarce able to build a House. They generally stand six Foot from the Ground, on a Hill of Clay: When the Foundation is first laid, they raise several Steps from the Street to go up to it: The foremost part of the Foundation resembles a Semicircle, or Half-Moon, and likewise the Roof over the Front; the rest thatch'd with Straw, and other such like Materials, is above twenty, and sometimes above thirty Foot high, jutting four Foot over the Front, that in rainy Weather they may stand dry. Every House is almost sixty Foot broad, and two hundred Foot long, with onely one Room, and one Story. Their Penthouse, or Front-Roof, they hang full of Swines Teeth, Glasses, Shells, and such like Baubles, strung on Thred, which by the Wind being stirr'd and blown one against another, make a ging∣ling noise, very pleasant. The Roof, which they finish on the Ground, is by the Builders divided into two parts, one on one side, and the other on the other laid upon the House. They begin their Buildings at a certain time of the Year, 
viz.
 in 
Ianuary
 or 
February,
 because those are dry Months; but before


they build, they make Observations of their good Success by Dreams, which they tell to one another every Morning: If they dream of a Post, or 
Pisang
 Tree, or short Cane, they look upon it as a good signification, and begin their Building▪ but if they Dream of a long Reed on Cane, in their Language call'd 
Foerik,
 they take it for an ill Omen, and defer the Work till they have better Visions. When they begin to build, they thus invoke one of their Idols: 
Oh Father, be with us; when we go to cut Canes, and we will build an Edifice for thee, and pull the old one down; which done, we will serve thee with more Zeal than ever we did before.


Coming into the Cane Thicket, they first cut off one of the slenderest of all, speaking these words: 
Ipatahoang, Tuataki, Maganich, Maling;
 that is, 
To your Honor, O ye gods, we cut this Cane, because you have made good our Dreams.
 This Reed or Cane is not strip'd of its Leaves, because the gods may see what it was cut off for, and is Planted on the North side of their Temple; for on the South side is the Burying and Offering places for their Dead; but on the North side they offer all living things.


After they have cut as many Canes as they want, they pull down the old House, having before made a small Hut, just big enough to hold their Goods; before they go to work upon the main House, they offer to their gods a Box of 
Pinang,
 boyl'd Rice, and a dry'd 
Shepherd,
 or some other the like Fish, with en∣treaties that they would not be angry at it; for say they, 
We will build you a new House, we pray you preserve us; O you that help us in all our troubles, defend us against our Enemies, and provide for us in necessity; We pray you be not offended with us; receive our Offerings, and enter with us into our new Houses.
 Which done, enquiry is again made amongst themselves, what appear'd to every one in their sleep the Night before, and he who is judg'd to have had the best Dream, begins the Work first, and offers strong Drink, and 
Pinang
 to the gods, praying them to grant him two quick Hands to perform his Labor. When the Walls are made, the Master of the Work first entring the House, makes an Offering to the gods be∣fore all the People.


When they raise the Roof, three or four Women stand ready with 
Calliba∣shes
 full of Water, out of which drinking, they spit some part into the Mouths of each other, which if deliver'd cleanly, and receiv'd without sprinkling, they count it a good Omen, that their Houses will prove stanch and long lasting. But the Women must be very quick in this performance, for according to their thinking, the more exquisite and nimbler they are in performance, the sooner they believe the whole work will be ended; which when effected, and the House perfectly finish'd, then they Tope at such a free and plentiful rate, that they conclude these Ceremonious Rites in the heighth of Ebrity. After this, some distance from the House, sit two or three Men, every one holding a black Pot, which they call 
Tatak,
 and Worshipping, say, 
Here is Liquor, come let us drink up all, neither be offended with us, O you gods, but assist us now, and always, in our Buildings.
 Lastly, They ask again for every ones Dream, and he that hath Dreamt best, must lay the Floor, and kindle the first Fire.


But concerning their Superstition in Divine Worship, they give to each Priestess a Box of 
Pasie,
 that is, a Peck of Rice in the Ear, desiring them about Noon to come to their Houses, to make an Oblation to their gods, which they perform in this manner:


First, A fat Porket being brought to the place, is laid with his Head to∣wards the East, then the Priestess strikes him with all her strength on the back






with a Pestle, such as they beat Rice with, for they touch not the Head, for fear of bruising the Brains, which must remain whole, and without any confusion; if the Pestle chance to break with the blow, they take it for a certain sign, that they shall die that year. With the Hog they offer 
Pinang, Siri,
 and scalded Rice; on the Head they pour 
Masakhaw,
 and cut the Belly into handsome slices, where∣of they lay one on a Chest in the House for an ornament, praying their gods to fill it with costly Goods. In like manner, they lay another piece on their Swords and Shields, and then pray to their gods to strengthen them against their Enemies; nay, they leave not a 
Callabash
 in the House without Sanctify∣ing it by laying a piece of the flesh upon it; but all the Inwards are offer'd to their gods, with these words: 
This we give to you, our gods, to keep our Swine, and make them fat;
 for this trouble the Priestess, as a reward, hath ten Boxes of 
Pa∣sie,
 and two yards of Painted Cloth, the right shoulder of every kill'd Pig, a piece of the Belly, a piece of the Heart, Liver, Kidney, some of the Guts, and 
Masakhaw;
 then they desire her to come every day to their Houses, there to Implore, that they may stand a long time: And such a prevailing power do the 
Formosans
 ascribe to these Sacrifices, that they believe no evil Spirit after can hurt them or theirs.


If any House accidentally happen to be set on fire (by which oftentimes whole Streets, nay whole Villages, by reason of the combustible Materials, are burnt to Ashes) they Apprehend, Accuse, and without Examination, as if Con∣victed, punish that Man whom they first find in the Street, forcing him to make good, if able, the damage towards the Re-building, which if he refuse, his House is immediately set on fire; but if they find no body in the Street to accuse, then as if all were guilty, they lay their hands to the work, and at their own Costs and Pains finish it.


The chief Power and Strength of this Island consists in its People, the Coun∣trey being wonderfully populous.


The Towns which War continually one against another, are fortifi'd with


all manner of Inventions for strength; and in stead of Walls, surrounded with great Woods, Planted on purpose, and much stronger than any Walls, for the Trees stand exceeding close, and above three hundred Paces in breadth.


The Passages in and out are onely little cross Paths, with many turnings and windings, onely wide enough for one Man to walk, so that they must fol∣low each other: On both sides of the narrow Ways are some little Out-lets, in which they may lie in an Ambuscade, so that no man can pass by them, but they command him with their Bowe. In the Night they stick them full of Spikes like our 
Galthrops,
 which they make of a very hard Wood; sometimes they use Snares and Traps, which whoever comes amongst them is caught be∣ing intangled; these Paths thus made, as occasion offer, they can change and desert, and make new ones when they please.


In 
Middagh
 and 
Pimeba,
 nay, in every Town are three or four very high Towers built of Canes, on which Men Arm'd watch with Bowes and Arrows Night and Day.


They continually maintain War one against another, Lord against Lord,
 and Village against Village: In like manner, before they March into the Fields they Superstitiously observe their Dreams which they had the Night preceding; and augury, from the singing and flying of a certain small Bird, call'd 
Aydak;
 if this Bird meets them flying with a Worm in his Bill, they take it for an in∣fallible sign, that they shall conquer their Enemies; but if the Bird flies from them, or pass by them, they are so much dishearten'd with the ill Omen, that they return home, nor will Engage till they have better signs: They chuse always one most approv'd for Valor as their General, whom they stile 
Tama∣tuwa,
 who never takes the Field, or Engage in Battel, before he hath by Of∣ferings endeavor'd to pacifie and implore the gods for good success.


They shew no Mercy, nor give any Quarter, but Slaughter all, not sparing Women and Children; neither are they satisfi'd with killing them, but carry home the Heads of the Slain as Trophies of their Victory, being receiv'd at their return by their Wives and Children, with great rejoycing express'd by Singing and Dancing, and enter the Towns with the Heads of their Ene∣mies erected upon long Poles, which they present to their gods seven succeed∣ing Nights; after having taken off all the flesh, they hang up in their Houses the Sculls as Ornaments, as we in 
Europe
 use Paintings or Statues.


When they draw forth again to the like bloody Work, they take the before∣mention'd Sculs with them, and stop their Mouths full of Rice: And when thus cramb'd, invoke after this manner: 
You Reliques, though of our Enemies, O let your Spirits departed from you, march with us into the Field, and help us to obtain the Vi∣ctory; which if you please to grant, and we have the day, we promise to present you with continual Offerings, and reckon you among the number of our favoring gods:
 But if they be routed and some slain, whose Bodies they could not bring off, they return to their Towns with great lamentations, then feed their fancies with represen∣tatives, dress'd up as Babies in Clouts, like those that were lost in the Field, whom they Interr, as if the very same Persons, and get the Priestess to make Offerings to the Deceas'd Souls, conjuring them not to go amongst, nor by in∣telligence help their Adversaries: Then the Priestess goes by her self to the ap∣pointed place, and offers to the Souls of the Deceas'd a Swines Liver, Heart, and one or two of the Feet, together with scalded Rice, 
Pinang,
 and 
Masakhaw;
 at her return she relates what a sad complaint the Souls departed made, and that they were almost starv'd.


Their Arms are Bowes, Arrows, Shields, Swords, Faulchions, Spears, of
 Darts, about the length of a half Pike, headed with pointed Steel, and having four Rings of Barbs, close to which hangs a long Line, wherewith when they have discharg'd the Dart, and wounded any, they hale to them by the Line and Staff of the Javelin the struck Enemy, whom when within their reach, taking hold of the Hair with their left Hand, with the right they whip off their Heads, and leave the Corps neglected.


They fight not always, though drawn up in battel array, but when the two Armies are in view, often from each Party a bold Champion steps forth, Arm'd with a Shield, two short Swords, a Spear, and half a dozen lesser Darts; thus provided they fight valiantly till one is slain, and the Victor returning with his Head upon his Lance, about whom his Friends flock, Rejoycing, Dancing, Singing, and Drinking 
Masakhaw;
 then returning home, he fixes his bare Scull as a Register and Trophy of their Victory; and this Duel, for that time decides the Quarrel, and all march off in quiet.


If any of the Natives of this Isle happen to fall sick, they apply themselves on∣ly
 to Women-Doctors, for no other officiate there; who finding out the part affected by inquiry, they rub and chafe it very strongly, and if that cure not, which seldom happens, they are at a loss, being utterly ignorant of the know∣ledge of Physick, or how to make any application, either by Herbs or other Compound Medicines fitting for Distempers, or in any manner how to rectifie the Diet of the Sick. But before the 
Tamatatah
 (for so they call their Doctress) comes to the Patient, she Sacrifices to their gods; if the Distemper be small, then only with 
Masakhaw;
 but if the sickness be dangerous, with 
Pinang
 and 
Siry;
 if the Disease be stubborn, then the Priestess being sent for, makes Offering to the gods 
Tagitelag
 and 
Tagesikel;
 but if the Distemper doth not remit, then the Do∣ctress and Priestess come both together, and seek by Charms and Incantations to find out whether the Person shall Live or Die, which they perform after this manner: The Priestess pretending to speak with the Sick Mans or Wo∣mans Spirit, pulls them by their Fingers, which if they crack, she comforts them with hopes of recovery; but if not, they look upon it as a certain sign of Death. Secondly, they take a Leaf from a Tree, by them call'd 
Fangack,
 which putting before the Sick Persons Lips, the Priestess comes with a Mouth full of Water, and spurts on the Leaf; if the Water runs off towards her, it is a sign of Life; but if it remains with the disaffected, or fall on the other side, they expect certain death; but if at last the Sick recovers, he is not permitted to come into their Congregation during their 
Karichang,
 for that is a testimony of his Thankfulness for the preservation of Life; and then he brings to the Prie∣stess a Pot full of 
Masakhaw,
 an Offering to the gods 
Takafocloe, Telumalum,
 and 
Tapali Appe,
 saying, 
Accept this as a token of Thanksgiving from my Hands; you have well done to give me Life.
 While they are going to the Priestess about this affair, they must take heed that they meet with no Blind or Decrepit Person, for if they should, they must return, lest they be punish'd with another Sickness. They also account it a strange Omen, to hear any one Sneese in their going: But if the Distemper increase daily to a greater height, either by Convulsions or other acute Pains, they lay the whole blame upon the Devil himself, as being the Author, whom they call 
Schytinglitto;
 whom to expel, they send for the Priestess, who conjures him in this manner: First, after some Oblations, she prays to the gods to strengthen her against the Devil, and banish all man∣ner of fears from her; then calling for a Sword, and a Pot of 
Masakhaw,
 at∣tended


with some of the stoutest Youth, which are so valiant as to venture with her, hunts through all the corners of the House after the Devil; whom when she hath found, as she crys out, she drives away, assisted by the young Men, making a most terrible noise. Having thus driven him a considerable way to the Bank of a River, or some running Water, or to the Woods if there be no Water near, then she takes the Pot with 
Masakhaw,
 and first drinking a good Soope out of it, throwing the remainder Pot and all after the Devil, and says these words, 
Take that, and return not to the Patient from whom I expell'd you.
 This done, she plants a Cane in the Ground, of which (as they report) the Devil stands in great fear.


When the Fiend (as she saith) approaches her, she strikes very fiercely at him, and shows some Hair hid about her for that purpose to the People, which she makes them believe (and they credit) that she hath broke the Devils Head, and pull'd those Locks from it; and for this her trouble she receives a Red Strip'd Garment, and so departs: But if the Distemper still continues, and that there is no sign of amendment, they send again for the Priestess, who coming thither, saith, 
That the Devil loves the House, and therein intends to dwell;
 Whereupon, being desir'd to drive him from thence, and also her Re∣ward shew'd her, she takes a Spade, Digs a Hole in several places of the House, and pulls out some more Hair which she hath hid, crying aloud to all the standers by, that she hath had the Devil by the Head, and that that is his Hair; then seeming to force him out of the House, with many scurrilous Exclama∣tions.


After all endeavors us'd in vain, and that their Stiches and Pains no way abate, then they commit them to their gods; but when they are ready to yield up the Ghost, they pour so much strong Liquor down their Throats, that run∣ning out at their Mouth and Nostrils, it drowns and suffocates: Thus having fetch'd the last Gasp, all those that are about him cry out with a lamentable voice, making strange Gesticulations, clapping, and stamping with their Hands and Feet; and to give notice that one is dead in the Town, they go up and
 down Tabering upon one of their Drums; which done, and the Corps wash'd in warm Water, his best Clothes are put on, adorn'd with Bracelets and other Ornaments, his Weapons laid by him, and Rice and 
Masakhaw
 proffer'd to him, all which lie two days by the Body; which if they should not do, his Soul (they say) would be angry: Likewise they kill a Hog for his Provision, to supply his long Journey, and then they offer the Corps up to their gods: Before the House they set up a long Cane, with a Pennon on the top, and near it a great Tub with Water, for the Soul to Bathe in: Against the Even∣ing, all the Friends come thither, accompany'd with most of the Towns-men, every one with a Pot of 
Masakhaw;
 the nearest of Kin to the Deceas'd, lay themselves down by the Corps, and making a mournful complaint, utter these words; 
Why didst thou die? why didst thou leave us? What hurt, what harm have we done thee? O my Son, my loving Child come hither to us, and stay with us; If you will not, take us to your self, since we are ready to die and follow you; What shall we do without you? what do we do here after you?


To increase their sorrow, the Women make a very doleful noise, by tram∣pling and tabering with their Feet on a hollow Trough before the Door, at which the standers by cry, 
Hark, how the Trees bemoan the loss of this Man.
 This stamping on the Trough, is by them call'd 
Smaghdakdaken:
 They also hire se∣veral Women which sit constantly crying by the Corps, and sometimes make


sad Complaints, and Sing mournful Elegies which they name 
Temulidid▪
 These Women likewise pray to the gods, that the Soul may have a good place in Heaven, and find a new Wife and Friends there: The young Men, in the mean time running up and down with Rattles in their Hands.


After the Corps hath lain two days on Rushes, they bring it to a place call'd 
Takay,
 where they wash it several times with warm Water; but if a rich Per∣son, with 
Masakhaw,
 then scrape it so long, till pieces of Flesh and Skin hang▪ dangling about it. Lastly, they make a gentle fire nine days under the Corps▪ which Roasting by degrees, occasions a horrible stench.


The Body thus Broyl'd is wound up in a Mat, and laid again on the Rushes as before; then they make a great Feast call'd 
Gahalhal,
 killing ten or twelve Swine, some for offerings to the gods, others for 
Taghimihe,
 or Provisions for the departed Souls Journey.


Some of this Pork is cut in small pieces, and serv'd about to the Mourners; at that time the House is fill'd with Men and Women, every one with a Pot of 
Masakhaw,
 all which sometimes Weep, and sometimes Drink, till they are all Maudlin-Drunk; they mix a strange complaint with horrid confusion: Then the nearest Relations go again to the Corps, and make the foremention'd com∣plaints, 
why he dy'd, &c.
 If it be the body of a rich Person, it is kept some years before it is Bury'd, and serv'd every day as if living, setting fresh Meat and Drink before it.


If the Deceas'd dy'd a Batchellor, then they relate all the Heroick Exploits which he perform'd in his Life time, and the number of his slain Enemies; over his Head they hang a Cane, with as many Notches in it as he hath kill'd Men. Lastly, they carry the Dead to the common Burying-place, close by their Temples, where some must watch nine or ten days, for they certainly be∣lieve that the Devil watches about him all that time; after the ten days expired, their Friends go thither with Rattles, and Boughs of 
Pisang
 Trees, with fire in their Hands, making a terrible noise, under pretence to hunt the Devil from thence. The Wife to the Deceased (if he leaves one behind him) Prays before him so long as he lies in the House, desiring the gods, that they would be kind and merciful to him. And while the Corps is above the Ground, the House may not be swept, but when the Corps is carry'd out, and the House swept, the Woman that did it must throw away the Broom towards the South, saying, 
Who owes the House?
 whereupon answering her self, 
It doth not belong to me nor us, what then have we to do with this House?


These People observe seven Solemn times as Festivals with great Ceremo∣nies:


The first call'd 
Trepaupoe Lakkang,
 which begins at the latter end of 
April,
 and is kept by the Sea side, whither both Young and Old, Rich and Poor, flock in great multitudes: Here their Priestess pretends to speak with, and re∣ceive Answers from their gods, offering them Swines-flesh, Rice, 
Masakhaw,
 and 
Pisang,
 with Prayers to send them store of Rain for the forwarding the growth of their Corn, or if it be already grown, to keep it from hurtful Winds.


After their Sacrifices ended, they sit down about the same place, and fall a Drinking to excess; while the ancient men standing on a row every one with a whole Reed in one hand, and a Lance in the other, sprinkle them with 
Masak∣haw.
 In their Huts they discourse of all their Villanies committed, or brag who hath slain the most of their Enemies, and brought home their Heads as


Trophies; but he that hath done the most work in Harvest, is accounted the bravest Fellow.


The second Feast call'd 
Warabo Lang Varolbo,
 that is, 
Tying Fast,
 they generally
 hold in 
Iune,
 against which they observe their Dreams, and Singing of the Birds.


At the day of Offering they rise very early, and make themselves ready for the Work, both Men and Women, with great Zeal; the Women first Conse∣crate the Irons with which they Weed; the Basket in which they carry their Caps, likewise the 
Callabashes,
 Rings, Bracelets, Chests, the Front of the House and Bridge; Praying also to the gods 
Tamagisangak,
 and 
Tekaroepada
 for good Fortune, and security against Fire, and to be their Defence against Poysonous and Voracious Beasts; all which they do before they go out.


The Men Pray to the gods 
Topoliap
 and 
Takavoelie,
 and offer them 
Masakhaw,
 boyl'd Rice, 
Pinang, Siri,
 and Swines flesh, begging of them in time of War, to defend them against their Enemies, to sharpen their Swords, Arrows, and 
Assa∣gays;
 and lastly, to harden their Bodies against their Adversaries, Darts, and Arrows.


Then both Men and Women, but most of the Female Sex go to their Priestess call'd 
Ibis,
 to whom they shew great Reverence and Obedience; some years ago there was a certain 
Ibis
 call'd 
Tiladam Tuaka,
 which was us'd to per∣form many abominable Ceremonies at this Feast, 
viz.
 She climb'd on the Roof of the Temple, where she stood in sight of all the People, then began to tell them, that the gods would have taken her to them from the Temple; which done, she call'd for the Drink-Offerings, and holding a great Pot with Liquor in both Hands, said, 
That the gods, unless she did so, would not drink;
 then being drunk, she pull'd off all her Clothes, 
Because the Children of God,
 said she, 
cannot enter into Heaven with any Earthly Robes.
 Thus standing in sight of all People, she began to evacuate what she had so greedily swallow'd, saying, 
That the gods, according to the quantity of her Vomit, would send them Rain;
 whereupon the People force upon her more Liquor, that they may have plenty of Rain: If the Priestess chances to Urine thorow the Roof of the Church, then the Spectators promise to themselves a fruitful year, but if not, great scarcity, so that they often drink the more to satisfie the People; then bidding the whole Congre∣gation look up, she Tabors on her private parts a considerable time, which Taboring the Spectators observe with as much Zeal, as in our Countrey the Auditors give ear to the Preaching of a Sermon.


Lastly, coming down, she falls flat on the ground, and begins to roar and foam, rolling too and again, and spreading her Hands and Feet, then lies still a while, as in a Trance; her associates come to lift her up, but seem to have met with too weighty a burthen; yet at last recovering, after she hath made a small Speech to the People, her Companions lead her into the Temple, where she drinks her self dead Drunk; all which impudent debaucheries, as they say, are done to the honor of their gods, to grant them store of Rain, and a plentiful Harvest.


All the Women must appear naked at this Feast, except their Privacies, which they cover with a 
Kagpay,
 that is, a little piece of Cloath; so also must the Men: When they have drunk out all their Liquor at the Temple, the Congregation goes home, where they Drink till the Morning, and walk from house to house, committing all manner of Villanies, not fearing to lie with, or vitiate their Sisters and Daughters.


The third Feast call'd 
Sickariariang,
 they keep in 
Iune;
 the manner thus:


After every one hath done their Private Devotions in their Houses, and as they say, spoke with the gods, they make themselves ready to go to the general place of Sacrifice near the Sea. The Men walk stark naked, but the Women have a small Clout before them. At their general Assembly, the Priestess offers to the gods, of whom they now request, that they may be strengthen'd against their Enemies; and the Women, that the Corn be preserv'd from Tempests and Wild Beasts.


Amongst all other, this is the most Celebrated, because it is as one of 
Bacchus
 and 
Venus
's Feasts; so that it differs much and exceeds the rest, in perpetrating unheard of Abominations, both night and day: The young Men are comman∣ded by the Magistrates of the Town, to go naked to this Feast, and to exercise themselves with Running, and Martial Discipline, which they willingly per∣form.


The fourth nam'd 
Lingout,
 begins in Harvest, and kept also on the Sea shore,
 near the mouth of a River: Hither also both Men and Women going naked, pray to the gods for Rain, to keep the Corn in the Ears, to banish Storms and Tempests, which very frequently rise in that Moneth. Great villanies are committed at this Feast. The Youths are stuck and hung with green Boughs and Garlands, and so adorn'd, must run Races with Rattles in their Hands; he that gets first to the River wins the Wager, and by the Maidens is conducted and carry'd over, where he enjoys the handsomest of them at his pleasure.


The fifth Feast call'd 
Piniang,
 is kept in 
October,
 at which time the Magistrates
 have a piece of Wood cut in the fashion of a Tortoise-shell, ty'd to their Bo∣dies, whereupon in the Night, with their whole Congregation, they walk Drumming and Shouting up and down the Town. At this Feast they come all clothed to their place of Offering, to run about with the artificial Shell, which is first perform'd by those whose Parents are yet living, then by those that are Orphans. This Feast is no less polluted by vicious performances than the other.


The sixth they name 
Itaoungang:
 At this Feastival the old and young Men ap∣pear
 in peculiar Habits, and have a pretty way of moving their Hands and Feet, Capering, and hitting their Feet one against another, and likewise act se∣veral Postures with their Hands; besides many other Ceremonies, too long here to relate. This continues two days, meeting both Morning and Evening, at the sound of the artificial Tortoise-shell; after they have perform'd their se∣veral Offerings to their Deities, they fall a Drinking, in which they spend the whole Night.


The seventh Feast call'd 
Korouloutaen,
 is kept in 
November
 with great Solem∣nity.
 At the time of this Feast they adorn their Arms and Heads with white Feathers.


The 
Formosans
 (except those by the 
Hollanders
 converted to 
Christianity
) believe not in God, the Creator of Heaven and Earth, but Worship thirteen Idols.


The first and chiefest is call'd 
Tamagisangak,
 and resides in the West part of Heaven.


The other his Wife, 
Takaroepada,
 and dwells over against him in the East: both these are by them accounted for their powerfullest gods, and reverenc'd with great Devotion; for if any War lay desolate their Cities, or Sickness and Famine oppress the People, they say all proceeds from the neglect of their duty in worshipping these gods.


The third God call'd 
Tamagisangak
 reigns in the South, and shapes handsome People, as the fourth his heavenly Consort 
Teckarupada,
 in the East gives growth to Corn and Field-Fruits; they say, these Deities have the ordering of Mans Life, wherefore the Women present them with Seeds and Plants: They believe likewise that Thunder is the Goddess 
Teckarupada
's voice, chiding at her Hus∣band for not sending Rain timely upon the Earth, and he always, when thus ratled up by his thundering Wife, delays not to send Rain in abundance.


The fifth God call'd 
Tugittellaegh,
 and his Queen 
Tagisikel
 the sixth, have the cure of the Sick, and are worshipp'd by them.


The seventh Deity being 
Tiwarakahoeloe,
 and the eighth 
Tamakakamak,
 are chiefly reverenc'd by such as frequent the Woods and Forest, to hunt and kill wild Beasts.


The ninth call'd 
Tapaliat,
 and the other 
Tatawoeli,
 govern all Martial Affairs, and are for the most part invok'd by Soldiers.


The eleventh nam'd 
Takarye,
 and the twelfth 
Tamakading,
 preside their annual Feasts, and punish the omission of their long setled Customs.


The thirteenth 
Farikhe,
 they say resides in the North, they esteem him a cross∣grain'd and ill natur'd God, whose business is to deform what ever nature makes Comely, and therefore onely worship him that he may not mis-shape them.


The Natives relate, that this last God was formerly a Man living in 
Sinkam,
 very fierce, and of a stern Countenance, with an exceeding long Nose, which caus'd the People so to mock at him, that growing impatient to bear such in∣dignities any longer, he desir'd of the Gods to take him amongst them, which was immediately granted; that after some stay there, he descended again, and gave his Countrey-men twenty seven Articles or Commandments, charging to observe them strictly, threatning, that if they neglected, he would send upon them many and great Plagues. These Commandments they keep ten days together every Month, beginning when the Moon enters 
Aries,
 which time is by them call'd 
Karichang▪
 of which Laws more hereafter.


The 
Formosans
 are very slothful, and Till but little, although they possess much fruitful and rich Land. None dare be so bold to Sowe his Ground, be∣fore he hath offer'd two Hogs at 
Tamacuwalo
 and 
Tamabal,
 chief Houses belong∣ing to the third and fourth Gods, 
Teckarupada,
 and 
Tamagisangak;
 and this Ob∣lation is requir'd by one of the Priests belonging to the same Houses. In like manner, the Oldest of the Village, when it Rains, bring a Hog, and abun∣dance of 
Masakhaw
 to the Priests that dwell in those two Houses, to be offer'd to their Gods.


If at their going to Sowe their Fields, they chance to meet a wild Beast, and kill it, they carry the Liver and Heart as a Victim, to their Gods in the two Houses; and when all the People are assembled, the Priests of the two Houses must first Sowe a small spot of Ground, and then all the rest may proceed, ha∣ving first laid between two Bundles of Straw, by them call'd 
Tenguro,
 a 
Pisang
 Leaf, a little 
Siri
 and Lime, to be offer'd to their Gods.


The Seed being put into the Ground, a Rice Pot, in their Language call'd 
Sangi,
 is placed on the North side of the two Houses, and left there till the Rice hath attain'd its full growth.


If the Corn near the Pots (for close by them they Sowe a little) grows well, they take them away with great joy, and freely believe, that they shall have a kindly and plentiful Harvest.


They are not permitted to take Tobacco in the Seed-time, lest (as their


Priestesses tell them) all their Seed should turn into that stinking Vapor. The are forbidden in that time to throw the Bones of Salt Fish, or Peels of Onions on the Ground; but must carry them in a 
Talangack,
 or Pot, into the Woods, to prevent the devouring of their Corn by Poysonous Serpents.


They must keep no Fire, lest the Corn should be burnt. Sugar-Canes or Pomegranates they may eat onely in the Evening; but they may not during that Season taste any Roast-meat, for fear the Corn should be set on Fire by wild Swine; nor any 
Mahall,
 that is, Powder'd Flesh, lest it should be devour'd by Worms: They must also abstain from 
Kanging
 and a 
Hay,
 both Fishes, because they believe, if they should eat of them, that the Corn would have no Ears.


They conceit, That if they should sleep in the Field during their Seed-time, their Corn would not grow upright, but lodge on the Ground; and if they drink any Water, except mix'd with 
Masakhaw,
 that the Grain would never ripen, but be green and watery.


If the Dust or Sand happen to light in ones Eyes, he may not endeavor to get it out by rubbing, or otherwise, till he has quit the Field they have sown.


They never cut their Corn before they have made Offerings to their Gods.


If a Thorn chances to get in any ones Foot, he must not pull it out in the Field, but must leave the Place.


No Woman may turn her back Parts to a Man, nor go naked.


Many more ridiculous Customs they use during the Seed-time, which are strictly observ'd by them; as, when the Corn is ready to be cut, they thresh one Bundle, and laying a Lump of Earth upon it, implore the Gods to fill and make weighty the Ears of all the rest.


After they have brought in the Corn to their particular Houses, they offer a Swine, and use many Ceremonies in the killing of it; amongst others, they lay a great piece of Clay on a large black Pot, which they firmly believe makes their Corn grow more full and weighty.


Their Hunting, which is never less than twelve days together, is perform'd
 sometimes by few, and at other times with many People, who for the most part use Snares and Canes, and also 
Assagays,
 Bowes, and Arrows. When they have appointed a great Match, they build a House in the Fields, which they call 
Cadelang,
 wherein they hang all their Implements.


And as they have their third and fourth Gods that look over their Tillage, so their seventh and eighth, nam'd 
Tawarakakoeloe,
 and 
Tamakakamak,
 bear the sway in Hunting. Before they go out, they tell to one another the Dreams they had in the Preceding Night, and also neglect not Augurial Observations; insomuch that if the Bird 
Aydak
 meet them, they count it a good 
Omen;
 but if it flies either on the right or left side of them, they put off their Venating Sport till some other time.


Others also go to a River side, where they make a peculiar kind of Sacri∣fice to their Gods, with these Words, 
If the Devil, or any other Evil Spirits follow us, we beseech that you would drive and banish them from us.


From the first Quarry of every sort of Wild Creatures, they take a snip from the Tail, Mouth, Heart, and Kidneys, which with a 
Pisang
 Leaf, scalded Rice, and 
Masakhaw,
 they present to their Deities.


Coming back from their Recreation, they return thanks to the Gods, in the House which they built to put their Arms, and Hunting-necessaries in, praying, That those which come after them may have no success, nor kill any thing.


Lastly, They pull down and burn the House, having first sent for the Wo∣men to carry home the taken Venison, who coming thither, bring abundance of cheering Tope to make merry with.


They often kill at one of these great Hunting-Matches, eight hundred, a thousand, nay, sometimes two thousand Head of Deer; so that the 
Nether∣landers
 could buy there the best and fattest Hanch of Venison for a Shilling.


All the 
Formosans
 much differ from one another in their Speech, so that you
 shall seldom find two or three Villages, though but three or four Leagues di∣stant from one another, but their Dialects vary so much, that they are forc'd to use Interpreters.


They have neither Letters, Writings, nor Books, neither were willing to learn, although both the 
Spaniards
 and 
Hollanders
 have offer'd to teach and in∣struct them.


The Islands 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan
 lay very convenient for the 
Netherlanders Chinese
 Trade, because at most Seasons of the Year they could sail to them from the Coast of 
China,
 out of the River 
Chinch,
 or 
Chinchieu.


The chiefest Merchandise which the 
Hollanders
 got at 
Formosa,
 consisted in Sugar, Goats and Deers Skins, which they transported thence to 
Iapan.


The Companies Merchandise was carried in 
Chinese
 Jonks to the River 
Chin∣chieu,
 and the City 
Eymuy,
 to their Factors or Merchants residing there, and also to other peculiar 
Chinese▪
Merchants, whose Credit was good, to send them such Returns as were desired at 
Iapan, India,
 and the 
Netherlands,
 which Trade was conniv'd at by the 
Koabon
 of the Territory 
Fokien.
 There also came some pe∣culiar Merchants out of 
China,
 with their own Vessels, to dispose of their pri∣vate Merchandise, though of small concern: Therefore when the time ap∣proach'd, that the Ships were to go Annually to 
Iapan
 or 
Batavia,
 and that the Goods came but slowly from 
China,
 they were necessitated to go themselves with two or three Vessels to 
China
 or 
Eymuy,
 where the Goods were brought, weigh'd, and receiv'd aboard in several Parcels, and were forc'd to give eight or ten 
Tail
 more on a 
Picol
 of Silk, than▪ otherwise; each 
Tail
 valued at about five Shil∣lings 
Sterling,
 and a 
Picol,
 a hundred twenty five Pound weight.


The 
Formosans
 observe a Time, which they call 
Karichang,
 very strictly, ab∣staining from several things while it lasteth.


This 
Karichang
 comes every Month once, which is when the Moon (as we mention'd before) enters our Vernal Sign 
Aries.
 It was, they say, first consti∣tuted by one that liv'd in 
Sinkan,
 call'd 
Fariche Fikrigo Gon-go-Sey,
 being of a very stern Countenance, with a long Nose, for which, mock'd and derided by all his Acquaintance: He therefore tyr'd with their continual gybes and jeer∣ing, having still one fling or other at his Nose, desir'd the Gods that they would please to take him from this wicked World, and place him in Heaven; which being, as they say, granted, after some time he descended again on the Earth, where he commanded the People, as a punishment for their former de∣rision, strictly to observe the following twenty seven Commandments, which if omitted, he threatned them with severe Punishments.




I. Thou shalt not in the time of 
Karichang
 build either Houses, Walls, or Resting-places, by them call'd 
Taekops;
 nor any Hedges or Fences in the Field.


II. Thou shalt neither buy nor sell Skins, Salt, 
Gangans,
 Painted Clothes, nor any thing else of that kind.


III. No Married-men shall sleep with their Wives in the time of 
Kari∣chang,
 neither shall a Young Man espouse, nor bring his Houshold-stuff or Goods to his Bride, nor enjoy her, lest he die soon after, have a lingring Sickness, or live at debate.


IV. Thou shalt not manure new Lands, nor lay Straw or Grass upon them, nor sow any Seed upon them, lest all thy Labors, and what thou hast done, be destroy'd.


V. Thou shalt not make Bowes, Arrows, Shields, Swords, 
Assagays,
 or Snares; neither shalt thou catch any Beast. If any Woman make Brace∣lets, they shall have great Pains in their Arms.


VI. Thou shalt not put on any new Garment, nor use any new thing whatsoever, lest thou lose that, and suffer also a great Sickness.


VII. Thou shalt make no Bridges, lest they fall, or be broken down, and thy Swine die.


VIII. No Clothes, 
Gangans,
 Rice, Rice-Stampers, Black Pots with two Ears, nor any other Drinking Vessels, shall be brought into the Houses: None shall cut green, but onely dry Canes; and those they may not put into their own Houses, but into one of their Neighbors.


IX. Thou shalt not plant 
Pinang,
 nor 
Clapper
-Trees, nor Canes, nor Pota∣toes, nor any other Plant.


X. Thou shalt kindle no Fires on thy new Place of Assembly, which is call'd 
Kavo,
 nor sleep in them, lest thou be punish'd with great Sickness.


XI. No young Men shall exercise themselves in running the Race call'd 
Tragaduwell.


XII. No Child born in that time shall be taken from his Mother; lest it die immediately.


XIII. Let no Man wear any Armlets call'd 
Salahim,
 lest their Arms should grow sore.


XIV. Thou shalt not kill any Swine, though one of thy chiefest Friends come to visit thee, unless at Obits.


XV. Thou shalt not Fish or Hunt for more than thy own Provision.


XVI. Thou shalt not put any Swine in the new Houses made before the 
Karichang,
 if there were none in before.


XVII. Thou shalt not name the Child that is born in that time, till the 
Karichang
 be over, lest the Child die:


XVIII. Nor shall the Mother stir with her Infant from the Child-bed Chamber, further than the next Neighbors.


XIX. A new 
Tamatawa,
 or General, shall not march into the Field till the 
Karichang
 is over.


XX. A Bridegroom shall not walk with his Bride, except he hath gone abroad with her before, lest some dangerous Sickness ensue.


XXI. No Parent shall knock out their Daughters two upper Teeth be∣fore (as it is customary with them) nor bore Holes in their Ears during the 
Karichang.


XXII. No Man that never travell'd before, shall then begin his Journey.


XXIII. No Maid shall taber with her Feet on a Funeral-Trough, if she never Danc'd before.


XXIV. Young Children, call'd 
Taliglig,
 shall wear no Armlets, lest some hurt should befal them.


XXV. None shall go in Pilgrimage, call'd 
Zapuliung,
 to the City 
Mattou,
 in this time, except they have been there before.


XXVI. Thou shalt not receive into thy House any 
Chinese,
 or other stranger; but carry them to thy Neighbors. And if thou make any Con∣tracts or Alliance, thou shalt do it with a Straw in thy Hands over a Chost, saying, 
Shall I gain by this, or not? If I speak angerly, will he be patient?
 Which said, thou shalt pay the Gods the usual Offering.


XXVII. Thou maist not make any 
Mariche thad Kaddelangang,
 either in thy
 Towns, Houses, Fields, or at thy Hunting, nor no 
Vagacang,
 in the time of 
Karichang.




ANno
 1652. the seventh of 
September,
 the 
Chineses
 of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa
 being then under the 
Hollanders
 obedience, depending on the great numbers of their People, broke out into Rebellion, led by 
Fayet,
 a Ruler of 
Smeerdorp,
 lying two Leagues from 
Sakam,
 with a design to surprise or force the Castle of 
Tayowan,
 which thus they contriv'd, 
viz.
 To invite the Governor 
Nicholas Verburgh,
 with all the Officers and chiefest of the Merchants residing in the City 
Zelandia,
 to their Full-Moon Feast, resolving when they were in the midst of all their Mirth, to dispatch them in a general Massacre.


This done, they intended to march to the Castle, under pretence to bring the Governor home, and upon the opening of the Castle-Gate, to press in upon them, and so Master it.


But one 
Pau,
 a 
Chinese
 Commander, who dwelt in 
Zelandia,
 and Brother to 
Fayet,
 the Chief Leader of the Conspirators, disputing with his Brother the probability of carrying on the Plot, said, 
The Design is good, very good, and may be brought to effect; but if we should fail, and the Plot be discover'd, and these Devils the
 Hollanders 
get the better, what will become of us then? You shall not suffer onely, and the Party that you have engag'd; but thousands of Innocents, that knew nothing, shall scarce satiate their Revenge with their miserable Slaughter.
 To which their Ge∣neral 
Fayet
 replied, 
Brother, if you are not satisfied, and your Fear overcome your Iudgement, you are at your Liberty to dispose of your self; be Neuter, go to your Ha∣bitation, and which way soever the Victory falls, there you may in safety, and unsuspected, enjoy your Freedom.


Pau
 having receiv'd this Reply, departed, musing as he went, but at last re∣solv'd to discover the Plot, and make himself secure indeed. Coming there∣fore to 
Tayowan,
 near the Castle, he desired the Serjeant to admit him to speak privately with the Governor; but the negligent, left 
Pau
 waiting with a slight Answer, the Governor and the rest being then at Prayers: But he more im∣portunate, and big with so great a Business, by earnest solliciting was let in to the Governor, to whom he discover'd all: At which 
Verburgh
 the Governor being startled, first commanded to secure 
Pau
 in the Castle, and sent an Officer with eight Men to 
Smeerdorp,
 as Spies, and to inquire News; who brought word back, that the 
Chineses
 were already gotten into a Head, and that setting upon them, they had escap'd by flight. At this Alarm, the 
Hollanders
 that had setled in 
Sakam,
 being to the number of thirty, in great fear fled for safe∣ty to the Forts.


Fayet,
 who judg'd Delays dangerous, and doubting that his Brother would, or had discover'd the Plot, march'd with his Forces to 
Sakam,
 where falling without mercy upon the Town with Fire and Sword, he gave no Quarter to any.


A Gardener belonging to the 
Dutch,
 going on that 
Sunday
 Morning early with a Basket of Fruit to the Governor, in the Castle 
Tayowan,
 the Revolters


overtaking him, cut off his Head, and taking out the Fruits, laid it in the Bas∣ket, designing to have sent it before them; but the Humor altering, they cast both it and the Body under a Bridge. The News of this Massacre spreading a strange Fear seiz'd all the 
Hollanders,
 where-ever setled through the Country, so that dispersing, they hid themselves where-ever their Fear carried, or their Hopes led them, to escape the Slaughter. But one Captain 
Marine,
 well mounted, with three more, with their Swords in their Hands, broke through the Enemy, and killing the first that oppos'd him, came safe to 
Tayowan.


Verburgh
 the Governor well knowing how untowardly the Business stood, and the hazard wherein the 
Hollanders
 abroad were, lying open to destructi∣on, immediately sent out a hundred and twenty Men, commanded by Captain 
Danker.
 This Handful, in comparison of their Enemies great Forces, went in one Sloop and a Boat from 
Tayowan
 to 
Sakam,
 whither being come, the first that endeavor'd to Land, being Captain 
Hans Pieters,
 leap'd Breast-high into the Water, by which Example, the rest encourag'd, forsook their Boats, and resolv'd wading to fight their way to the Shore; which the Enemy observing, sent down with the Lieutenant-General a thousand Men, to oppose their Land∣ing. While they were thus drawing up towards the Shore for the Service, 
Fayet
 the General gave his Lieutenant 
Loukegwa
 new Orders, thinking it more fit to suffer them to Land, saying, 
It would be a higher pleasure to him to see the Christian Dogs die on the Land, than in the Water, which would be much the better sport, having them there inviron'd with his Army, as in a Net.
 But 
Loukegwa
 not so perswa∣ded, nor willing to receive these new Commands, earnestly advis'd the Gene∣ral that he might go on, and set upon them in the Water, averring, That these being the 
Hollanders
 choicest and pick'd Men, if they did not cut them off at this Advantage, they should never have the like: But however the Generals Opinion prevailing, he obey'd, and retreating, gave the opportunity of Land∣ing in safety; where a little towards the left Hand of the Enemy, he drew up his small Party into a Body, when a 
Negro
 that had married a 
Hollander,
 com∣ing out of a Wood where she had hid, running for her safety towards them, they intercepting, ripp'd up her Bowels, and cutting the Child in pieces, threw the Limbs at them, vaporing aloud, 
That so they would serve them all.
 But the 
Hollanders
 not replying, march'd boldly up to the Front of the Enemy, where in the first Charge killing fortunately their Prime Commander 
Fayet,
 which presently nois'd through the Army, all struck with a Panick fear, threw down their Arms, and disbanding, fled, shifting for themselves; but the 
Hollanders
 pursu'd, firing at their Heels through 
Sakam,
 and the Town clear'd, they sate down in their Enemies Head-Quarters: But before Night, while yet they were triumphing for the Victory, came two thousand 
Christian Formosans,
 rais'd by the Governor 
Verburgh,
 to their Aid, who, according to present Orders, march'd together in pursuit of the Enemy, some few of whom the next morn∣ing they spied drawn together upon a rising Ground, but a River betwixt im∣peded their present Charge; but soon after the 
Formosans,
 who knew the Fords and Avenues, got over, and charging them smartly, one being slain, they were suddenly dissipated; which Victory they and the 
Netherlanders
 pursu'd, making Execution till Sun-set, from whence returning to their Camp weary and hun∣gry, they found store of fresh Provisions, boyl'd and roast, with which they feasting, were refresh'd.


Thus the Enemy dispers'd, and their whole Design frustrate, 
Fayet
's Lieu∣tenant, having sculk'd in the Mountains eight days, enforc'd at last by necessi∣ty












to venture to 
Toukoya,
 seven Leagues from 
Tayowan,
 was there apprehended by the 
Dutch,
 and thence carried to 
Tayowan,
 where he was Executed, being, to the Enemies great terror, roasted alive, then taken off, and having been dragg'd at a Horses Heels through the whole Town, his broyl'd Head was fix'd on a Pole before the Castle: And those that ripp'd up the Bowels of the before-men∣tion'd Woman, were broke alive upon the Wheel, and afterwards Quarter'd.


This Tumultuary Commotion was in fourteen days thus concluded, in
 which, of the Enemy were slain four thousand Men, besides as many more Women and Children, and not one 
Hollander
 so much as wounded.


Two Years after this War, 
Anno
 1645. in 
May,
 came abundance of Locusts
 out of the North-West of the Isles, which devouring all the Fruits of the Field, occasion'd so great a Famine, that eight thousand Persons died of Hunger. These Locusts were of a strange shape, having a Back and Breast like a Pike∣man, and an Helmet on their Heads, such as Soldiers wear. They made an affrighting noise with their Wings in their flight, as if it had blown a Storm.


They flew from the Island 
Tayowan
 to 
Formosa,
 where they staid three Months, and at last took their Progress from thence, towards the North-West, from whence they came at first, on 
Sunday
 the ninth of 
August
 about Sun-set: Yet though they were gone, the fear of that Plague was no ways abated; for they left young ones behind, which were far worse than the old▪ eating up all that remain'd; yet by the Industry of the Inhabitants, with the Governors Order, most part of them being not fledg'd, were taken and destroy'd.






The Island TAYOWAN.


THe Island 
Taywan,
 or as others call it 
Tayovan,
 and 
Tayowan,
 lieth South from 
Formosa,
 the uttermost North-Point being distant almost a League, but the Southermost Point within a Bowe-shot of the Land, over which at low Water they wade to and again; but between the North and 
For∣mosa,
 it is at least thirteen Foot deep at Low Water.


It spreads South-East and North-West, and hath two Leagues and a half in
 length, and a quarter of a League in breadth, being naturally a spot of barren Sand, rather than a fertile Isle, producing onely Pine-apples, and other wild Trees; yet here resided above ten thousand 
Chineses,
 who liv'd by Merchan∣dize, besides Natives.


On the North-side, upon a Sand-hill, stands the Fort 
Zelandia,
 built by the
 
Hollanders, Anno
 1632. surounded with a double Wall, one investing the other, whereof the outermost fortified with Sconces and Redoubts.


Under the Castle, Westward, lies another Fort, square, guarded by two Points of the Sea.


A Bowe-shot distant lies a strong Out-work, being the Key to the Castle
 call'd 
Utrecht,
 rais'd sixteen Foot high with Stone, and defended with se∣ven Pallisadoes: Eastward from which stands a Town, built also by the 
Ne∣therlanders,
 call'd by the name of the Isle, and about a Mile in Circumference; adjoyning to which, is a Haven, call'd by the 
Chineses, Loakhau,
 and by the 
Dutch, The Straights of Tayowan.
 On the other side of the Castle lies a rising Sand, call'd 
Baxemboy,
 where a few scatter'd Villages appear.


Since the 
Chineses
 possess'd 
Tayowan,
 under the Pyrate 
Coxinga,
 and his Son 
Sepoan's
 Jurisdiction, they made a new Gate to the Castle, between the 
Amster∣dam
 and 
Guelderland
 Points; and near the new Point, a Moat of a Fathom


wide, Wall'd in on both sides, and joyning to the Wall strengthned with Iron Rails, through which the Water and Fish passing, rendezvouz in the Castle, before the Governors House, in a Pond, on which a Banquetting-house being built, which the old 
Koxin
 oft frequented, taking his Pleasure in Fishing there.


Anno
 1664. according to the Information of the 
Netherlanders,
 which then lay with a Fleet before 
Tayowan,
 under Command of the Admiral 
Balthasar Bort,
 sent thither to obtain the 
Netherland
 Prisoners from the Enemy, and like∣wise to conclude a Peace with him, the Castle was every where well fortified with Guns, and the Breast-works strengthned with new Canes, besides the Platform before the Haven, which was planted with twenty four Pieces of Cannon. In the Castle dwell onely the old 
Koxins
 Wives, with a Guard of Soldiers.


On the other side, in the Main of 
Formosa,
 stand the Fort and Village of 
Sakkam,
 well planted with Cannon: The Village near it was inlarg'd with Houses to the number of five hundred; but not all of Stone. The way to∣wards the South was also more built and inhabited than formerly; but they could see but twenty four small Vessels, which were most 
 
Koyaes,
 that lay within the Haven, under the Forts.


Most of the Inhabitants of 
Tayowan
 are at present Out-law'd 
Chineses,
 which
 first rebell'd against their Native Emperor, and since will not acknowledge the 
Tartar;
 who taking both 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa, Anno
 1661. from the 
Hollan∣der,
 brought all under the Subjection of their General 
Coxinga.


The 
Chineses
 on both these Isles, and those that live in 
China,
 differ onely in the wearing of their Hair long, and braided, after the old 
Chinese
 manner; which following the 
Tartars,
 they now wear short in 
China.


And as the 
Formosans
 have several Gods which they worship, so have like∣wise the 
Chineses
 inhabiting these Islands: Our Author, 
David Wright▪
 reckons seventy two in the following Discourse.


They acknowledge one Almighty God, Governor of Heaven, Earth, Sea, Sun, Moon, and Stars, whom they call 
Ty,
 and look upon him as the Supream and first Deity. They make Offerings to this great God, yet but once a year, at which time they sacrifice a Wild Boar, burning alive with 
Sandal
-wood; for to offer this their Almighty any thing but Swines Flesh, they account Abomination.


The next whom they worship is call'd 
Tien Sho,
 and 
Ioch Koung Shang Tee,
 who is the second Person or Governor of Heaven; wherefore he is nam'd 
Tien Sho,
 that is, 
The second Person of Heaven;
 and 
Ioch Koung Shang Tee,
 that is, 
Governor of the Earth.
 He commands three ministerial Spirits more: The first is 
Heu∣oung,
 that is, 
The Ruler of Rain.


The second Aerial Spirit, 
Teoung,
 hath Power over all Living Creatures, whether Rational, Sensitive, or Vegetative.


The third Spirit, and eighth Deity, call'd 
Tsuy Zyen Tei Oung,
 that is, 
Com∣mander of the Sea, and of all that is therein, or upon.


The third Person in Heaven the 
Chineses
 call 
Iok Tie,
 who was formerly a Prince on Earth, but so righteous, that he was taken up to Heaven for his Pi∣ety and Justice.


The fourth God they stile 
Quanoung,
 who also was formerly a Prince; and likewise the fifth, whom they call 
Iamoung;
 but both of them were after∣wards for their meritorious Actions taken up to Heaven.


To these five Gods, being as Chief in the Government of Heaven, belongs


the three foremention'd ministring aerial Spirits, and are indeed, though Dei∣ties themselves, subservient to the first five, making up eight Gods.


Besides these eight Gods, there are twenty eight Councellors, or Ministers of State, which have formerly been Learned Philosophers, and now preferr'd to the Government of the Stars.


Moreover, the 
Chineses
 have many Demy-gods, or terrestrial Deities, which ascend every year to Heaven, there to intercede and gain Indulgence for the sins committed by Mankind all the year past.


The first of these is rather a Nymph, or Demy-goddess, and being the thirty seventh, goes by the Name of 
Potsou,
 and is represented in the shape of a Wo∣man with a Child in her Arms, and was, as the 
Chineses
 believe, a Kings Daughter, a great Prophetess, and a Virgin that bore a Child and not impreg∣nated: which Fatherless Child they nam'd 
Bachu;
 who coming to years of perfection, was also a great Exemplar of Prudence and Magnanimity; yet not so much look'd upon, or worshipp'd as the Mother. They make her also to have a Servant call'd 
Pausat,
 a very antient Man.


There are some Traditions amongst them, that this 
Heroine
 is not a Native of 
China,
 but born in a foreign Countrey: Others again conjecture, that she is the same with the Virgin 
Mary,
 and the old Man, her reputed Servant, is in∣deed her Husband 
Ioseph;
 but the vicissitudes of affairs and time have left us nothing of the truth of this fabulous Tradition.


The thirty eighth terrestrial 
Numen
 they instile 
Quanien;
 but 
Paulus Venetus▪ Quamina;
 and 
Iohannes Gonsales, Quianira,
 who said that she was the Daughter of the 
Chinese
 Emperor 
Tzonton,
 which built the Wall between 
China
 and 
Tartary.
 But this Opinion 
David Wright
 explodes, making her the Daugh∣ter of the Emperor 
Biou Tsongong,
 which Reigned many years before the first Emperor 
Quantekong,
 presently after the Deluge, which he thus endeavors to prove.


This
 Biou Tsongong (says he) 
had three Daughters, two of which he had bestowed on Husbands, but the third,
 Quanien, 
he could not prevail with to enter into that Estate, although her Father had selected for her a Companion worthy her Love and Esteem: but seeing her no ways inclin'd to it, he resolv'd to put her into a Cloister; where to humble her, he commanded the Overseers to put her to do the Drudgery of the House,
 viz. 
fetch in Wa∣ter and Wood, and make it clean. But the Swans, as the Chronicles of
 China 
relate, came from the Mountains, and the Angels from Heaven to help her to carry Water, and the Beasts out of the Forrests brought Wood for her. Her Father inform'd thereof, judging she did those things by Magick, was very much enraged, and commanded the Cloister to be set on fire. The Daughter observing that she onely was the occasion thereof, thought to make her self away. But the Heavens pittying her innocency, commanded
 Hevong 
the God of Rain, to send down such an impetuous Shower as might quench the Fire, now beginning to rage in the Cloister as bad as her Father in his frantick fury, which was accordingly per∣form'd. Nevertheless
 Quanien 
sled to the Mountains, where she continued a great while. Her Father in the interim by Divine Providence was struck with Leprosie, and almost de∣vour'd alive by Worms, no Physitians or Medicines being able to cure him: Of which his Daughter having at last some knowledge, touch'd with a natural affection, and feeling as it were in her self her Fathers misery, came and cur'd him; which so wrought upon the old Man, that through an excess of joy converting his rage into a contrary passion, he would have worshipped her; but she refusing such honour, bad him return thanks to Heaven and the Gods; which he ceased not to do, after that becoming a zealous Penitent. Not long af∣ter
 Biou Tsongong 
dy'd, and
 Quanien 
betook her self to
 Lamhay, 
a Place in
 China,



where she spent the remainder of her Life in great Piety. After her Death they built a stately Temple in honor of her, and Interr'd her Corps in the middle, which remains at this day (as the
 Chineses 
believe) as fresh and sound, as if it had been buried but a day. Every year the Priests go thither to celebrate the Anniversary of her Death, in the sixth Moon, on the eighteenth day, with Sports and Feasting, which hath won so much esteem, that the
 Chineses 
implore her help and assistance in all Tribulations.


The thirty ninth Goddess is call'd 
Nioma,
 or as others will have it, 
Matzou;
 she was born in the City 
Kotzo,
 in the Territory of 
Houkong,
 where her Father was Vice-Roy. This 
Nioma
 resolving also to live and die a Virgin, to that end went to dwell in the Island 
Piscadores,
 or 
Fishers-Isle,
 otherwise by the Inha∣bitants call'd 
Pehoe,
 lying to the Northward, twelve Leagues distant from 
For∣mosa,
 where she spent her Life in a Pious and most Religious manner. Her Image not long after was set up in the Temple with two Servants, one on the right, and another on the left-side, each of them holding a Fan in their Hands, which cover'd the Goddesses Head. She hath also (as they say) Spirits under her command, and is highly honor'd amongst the 
Chineses
 for so great and powerful a Deity, that all the Emperors at their Inaugurations must not omit to pay their Devotions in the Temple of this 
Nioma.
 Her greatest Festival is on the three and twentieth day of the third Moon; when the Priests repair from all Places of the Empire to her Tomb, because she knows (as they believe) when any Strangers shall address themselves to that Countrey, and whether their intentions be good or evil; nay more, will give certain Responses to any that consult her, in what affair soever; so that they are so perswaded and superstitious concerning her admonishments, that they think all is lost if she advise not thereunto. The original of her Adoration sprung hence (as the 
Chinese
 Records have it;) One 
Campo,
 a 
Chinese
 Admiral, going out with an Armado to Engage with a foreign Enemy, being driven by contrary Winds, was necessitated to anchor under the Lee of this Isle: but afterwards the Storm ceasing, and the Wind and Weather growing fair, the Fleet weighed, and hoi∣sing Sail, set forward; but all the Sea-men with their conjoined strength could not get up his Anchor; which while they wondred at, this Goddess appear'd to the Admiral; whom imploring, she advis'd to take her aboard: for the Peo∣ple against whom he had Commission to Fight were great Magitians, practi∣sing the Black Art, and could raise or lay Spirits at their pleasure, but she was able to frustrate their diabolical practises. Thus perswaded, the Admiral with great reverence took her into his Ship, and coming to the Shore where they intended to Land, these Masters of occult Sciences us'd their skill as 
Nioma
 had foretold; but she baffled them in their own Arts, and so made their powerful∣lest Charms of no effect: wherefore the King that trusted to his Necroman∣cers, being necessitated to Engage with the 
Chineses,
 was by her direction and assistance, contrary to his confidence, utterly defeated and brought under sub∣jection. The Admiral, though sensible of the wonderful Service which she had done by her power, desir'd that she would do something in his presence that he might relate, having so many eye-witnesses, to the Emperor. And having accidentally a wither'd Cane in his Hand, 
Nioma
 took it, and upon his Request immediately made it grow and blossom, and to yield a sweet smell: Which signal Prodigy the Admiral fix'd on his Stern, and coming to the Emperor, related to him all his Adventures: whereupon he in honor and commemoration of her favors, commanded that they should worship her as a Goddess through the whole Empire. Since which every Ship bears her Image in the Stern, and the Sea-men are strangely devoted to her.


















The fortieth God call'd 
Sikjaa,
 born in the Kingdom 
Tantaico,
 opposite to the West of 
China,
 they held for the first inventer of that Religion which the 
Chineses
 observe to this day. He always went bare headed, neither eating Flesh, Fish, or other Creature that had life▪ and lived single. This 
Sikjaa
 Drawn or Carv'd to the life, stands upon the Altars in their Temples, and on the right-side at the entrance of the Door. Over against him, and in some Tem∣ples round about him, stand long Tables; at which the Priests sit reading and muttering to themselves Prayers to 
Sikjaa,
 to receive them into Heaven. Two Priests watch day and night before his Altar, often bowing to the Ground, and lifting up their Heads equally together, whilst their Tabors and Pipes, consor∣ted with other Wind-Instruments, makes no unpleasing harmony. In their Diet the Priests follow the strict Life of 
Sikjaa,
 eating nothing but Rice, Grapes and Herbs: they live some in the Wildernesses like Hermits; others frequent the Temples abroad, and spend their time for a small gratuity in making Offer∣ings in peoples Houses, having no allowance either from the Emperor, or Charity of the People: They never pare their Nails, some of them growing six, eight, ten, and twelve Inches long, which the 
Chineses
 count a great Or∣nament. The Doctrine of this 
Sikjaa
 is at large declared in the following Description of 
China.


The one and fortieth God is call'd 
Ang-jaa,
 and is carried from House to House on the eleventh day of the third Moon on an Altar by six Priests, where∣of three go before and three behind; before him stands a Perfuming-pot with burning Incense, and other Aromaticks. The Mendicant Priests stop at every House, and never leave Singing and Praying, tinckling two small Basons one against another, till the Master of the House comes and brings them some Mo∣ney in a piece of Paper, as an Offering to this God.


This 
Ang-jaa
 is not Clothed like the other Gods, but quite naked, having onely a Cloth about his Middle, which reaches down to his Heels, and over his Shoulders a Scarf: his Hair, Beard, Mustacho's, and Face, differ much from the other 
Chinese Numens,
 the Hair of his Face more resembling an 
European
 than an 
Asiatick;
 concerning which dissimilitude the 
Chineses
 themselves are al∣together silent.


The two and fortieth Deity call'd 
Tontekong,
 is represented in the shape of an antient Man with a white Beard, and said to be a great abhorrer of Gaming and Adultery, which by all means possible he sought to extinguish; wherefore the 
Chineses
 have placed him in Heaven, and also invoke him daily to defend them from Thieves.


The three and fortieth God, nam'd 
Teiton,
 a valiant Heroe, represented with a drawn Sword in his left-hand; whose Services in redeeming the Empire, like to be lost by the Invasion of the Enemy, have listed him in special rank amongst the number of their Gods.


The four and fortieth 
Schercong
 next takes place, adored for the invention of Tragedies and Comedies, and other Enterludes Acted on the Stage.


The five and fortieth God, nam'd 
Amkong,
 hath obtain'd the like honor meerly for his great Merits and Vertues.


The six and fortieth 
Tswajong,
 was in his life-time a mighty Man, of a Gi∣gantick Stature: his Club, which he could flourish with one Hand, weighed ninety two pounds, so that for his strength and valour he was very famous in 
China,
 and therefore worshipp'd as a God.


The seven and fortieth 
Hangoe,
 another Giant, whose Helmet weighed one


hundred twenty five pound, whose strength and valour made him living, a Vice-Roy, and after death, a Deity.


The eight and fortieth 
Hanzing,
 with whom none could stand in competiti∣on either for Prudence or Science (except 
Quantecong
 and 
Sodejong
) who per∣form'd with a few Men greater Acts by his subtile Stratagems, and politick Conduct, than others with vast Armies, and therefore the 
Chineses
 worship and hold him for a God.


The nine and fortieth 
Sodejong,
 a wise and politick Prince, yet meek and loving to his Subjects, look'd upon as superior in his Character to 
Hanzing,
 but much inferior to 
Quantecong.


The fiftieth 
Sjengoesoeng,
 also a very strong Giant, and much reputed for ser∣ving his Countrey against the common Enemy.


The one and fiftieth 
Goumatzintzing,
 signifies 
Pastor Gregis, The Shepherd of the People, and a Servant to God.
 He had (if you will believe the 
Chineses
) five Eyes, two in the right places, and two above them, and the fifth in the middle of his Forehead, like the Cinque upon a Dye; two of these were alway sawake, or open, whilst the other three were shut, for which they implore him as their Watch in Heaven.


The two and fiftieth 
Soumanoaom,
 had four Eyes, two in his Neck, and two in his Forehead: when those two in his Forehead closing slept, the other two kept open watchful; wherefore he being General, was never defeated, whom for his never-sleeping Care and Conduct they worship as a God.


The three and fiftieth 
Zjenzucung,
 a Lord of small Stature, wearing short Hair, but of an acute Wit and profound Understanding, and abominator of Gaming and Drink.


The four and fiftieth 
Quantecong,
 though by 
Iohannes Gonsales
 and others call'd 
Vitie;
 whom the 
Chineses
 honor'd more than any of their Gods, being reckon'd the first Emperor in 
China:
 for Valour, Subtilty, and Science, unpa∣ralell'd, and not to be match'd: such was his wonderful and Gigantick Sta∣ture, being as they fable, twelve Foot and eight Inches high, and his Shoulders four Foot broad; his Sword weighed ninety two pound, which he us'd with one Hand. In the beginning of his Reign he possessed onely one Province, but by his Conquests and Atchievements became Master of the fifteen which now make the Empire. He established many Laws and Ordinances, especial∣ly one against Idleness. He first invented Clothing, and Dying of Stuffs, which they use to this day, for before they went naked like the 
Indians.
 He al∣so modell'd and invented Ships, made Saw-Mills, Gun-powder, and Guns, and improved Architecture. Some Buildings and Edifices are yet to be seen, whereof, as they say, he was the Contriver. He made a Law, That all Me∣chanicks should continue their Parents Trades from Generation to Genera∣tion. He erected Cities, Towns, and Villages, and commanded the People to inhabit them. And as their Chronicles relate, this 
Quantecong
 with his own Hand slew in one Battle three thousand, some say four thousand Men. He had a 
Negro
 for his Squire, or Armor-bearer, who was no less valiant than himself, for he accompanied him in all dangers whatsoever, and was called 
Tzicutzong;
 he perform'd great Exploits in his Masters Service, by conquering many Peo∣ple and several Countreys: but besides 
Quantecong
 had another Servant, a 
White,
 call'd 
Quanpiong,
 yet no Martialist.


This 
Quantecong
 is so highly esteem'd and honor'd amongst the 
Chineses,
 that most of them, except Sea▪men and Fishers, and they also make him weekly










Offerings, and burn every Night a Lamp with sweet and odoriserous Oyl be∣fore him. Their Oblations consist in two pounds and a half of Hogs-flesh, three quarters of a pound of Deers-flesh, one boil'd Hen, nine Cakes of Meal-Flour, half a pint of a certain Liquor call'd 
Aoytziu,
 a Cup full of the Drink 
Lotchin,
 another full of 
Souchin
 and of the good Tope 
Samsoe,
 and lastly two Dishes of Rice; all which is set before the Image 
Quantecong,
 and stands three hours; after which time it is taken away again: both which are perform'd with great Ceremony, as bowing of Heads and Bodies; afterwards the Meat is eaten by the Offerers.


In every City is also a Temple erected to the honor of 
Quantecong,
 in which stands his Image: On one side of him stands his black Squire, with a Sword by his Side, and a large Knife, like a Mowers Scythe; four Paces from him on the other Side his white Page 
Quanpiong.
 Nor was he invocated onely by his Countrey-men, but also by the 
Tungkins
 their Enemies: for as soon as any War broke out, they set a Guard before his Temple that none might hurt him; for they believe he would punish their neglect with the loss of their Army. Nay farther they say, That mounting his red Horse 
Angbea
 (for he onely us'd a red Steed, there being none of that kind else in 
China
) he Rid against their Enemies, and destroy'd their whole Army, in revenge of the damage done to his Temple.


The six and fiftieth 
Kongsou,
 is held for the first inventer of Printing, which the 
Chineses
 have us'd eight hundred years and upwards, insomuch that they say the 
Christians
 learn'd that art from them; because at that time they Traded with 
Christian
 Merchants.


This 
Kongsou
 stands on a Throne, environ'd with People of several Nations, every one holding a Book; of all which the 
Germans
 stand nearest to him, be∣cause they (according to the testimony of the 
Chineses
) have greater Judgment, and Print better than any other Nation.


The seven and fiftieth 
Tegoe,
 that is, 
Transitory Bull.


The eight and fiftieth they nominate 
Kjenke,
 that is, 
Crow,
 or 
Chicken-Thief.
 A strange fancy and belief possesses the 
Chineses
 about these their two Deities: for, say they, when 
Tegoe
 hath the Earth on his Shoulders, then 
Kjenke
 comes from Heaven and pecks 
Tegoe
 on his Body; whereby necessitated to shake him∣self, the Earth trembles and shakes with him: and as soon as any such trepi∣dation begins, they fall a laughing, saying, 
Now is
 Tegoe 
peck'd by
 Kjenke.


Father 
Martinius,
 in his 
Chinese
 History saith, That the Soil of 
China
 is very
 little subject to Earthquakes: yet the Chronicles of that Countrey mention, That the Year before the Birth of our Saviour 73. hapned such a great Earth∣quake, that several Mountains were swallow'd up: from whence the 
Chineses,
 a People much inclin'd to Superstition, prognosticated the destruction of their Empire, such things, say they, proceeding from an angry and threatning Heaven.


The nine and fiftieth 
Luikong,
 or 
The God of Thunder,
 for 
Lui
 is Thunder, and 
Kong
 a Governor. They represent him with a Head like a Crane, Feet and Hands like an Eagles Claws, and large Wings, wherewith he seems to flye through the Clouds. When this 
Luikong
 (say they) intends to Thunder, he stands between four Clouds, with a Drum on every one, on which he beats continually with two great Iron Pestles: And when any one is struck by a Thunder-bolt, they say that 
Luikong
 is much enraged against that Person, and therefore struck him with the foremention'd Pestles: so that they are very


fearful of him, and when it Thunders creep on their Hands and Feet under Benches and Tables.


The sixtieth is the Ruler of Lightning, and represented by the 
Chineses
 with a Straw Wisp in her Hand, which when it Lightens she spreads abroad.


The sixty first 
Kieugkong,
 the God of Rainbows: the 
Chineses
 nick-name him 
Omho,
 that is, 
Mischievous,
 because at his appearance he spoils all their Fruits of the Field; so that they honor him onely because he should come but seldom.


The sixty second 
Pankun,
 according to the Chronicles of 
China,
 finished and compleated the World; for they say that the World when God Created it was without shape or form, but was by 
Pankun
 brought to its full perfection in four years time. They represent him with many Iron Instruments, such as the Stone-cutters use. He was the first that invented the Art of Stone-cutting, and therefore is the peculiar God of Bricklayers, Stone-cutters, and Potters.


The sixty third 
Houngkong,
 rules Winds and Spirits, and is figur'd like a great Bird with huge long Legs and Feathers, sticking up like Hogs Bristles. The 
Chineses
 say, that the fluttering of his Wings occasion great Winds, Storms and Tempests: therefore Fishers, Sea-men, Gardners, and other People that fear too much Wind, adore him.


The sixty fourth 
Khuotquan,
 in his life-time was a Vice-Roy in 
China,
 and the first that made Salt, which he accounted the richest and best Commo∣dity in the World. Another Vice-Roy having at the same time found out Sugar, esteem'd that above Salt: upon this they fell at variance; but both sides appealing to the Emperor, he commanded a Proof to be brought him of each sort, and having tasted both, he preferred the Sugar, as being more plea∣sant. But 
Khuotquan
 contradicted this sentence, saying, That there never was a thing of greater value than Salt, which gave a rellish and savoury taste to all things. The Emperor angry at 
Khuotquans
 petulancy, commanded him to go out of his Presence: who thereupon much discontented, went instantly and drown'd himself in the River 
Melo,
 which flows by the City 
Siangin,
 in the Territory of 
Huquang;
 but highly advanced him that made the Sugar. The next day (saith 
Wright
) after which 
Khuotquan
 was drown'd, being the fifth Day of the fifth Moon, in the Morning (as the 
Chinese
 Chronicles affirm) there began an extraordinary great Rain, which without cessation continu'd twelve Moneths, wherefore for want of dry Weather no Salt could be made, by which means a third part of the People died, and some that lay just upon the point of Death, having but one Corn of Salt put into their Mouths presently reco∣ver'd: The Emperor inform'd of this Calamity by his Substitute Governors, commanded him that had made the Sugar to be kill'd, and that none should dare to make any more mention of him, that thereby his Name might be for∣gotten: whereupon the Rain immediately ceasing, the Emperor sent strict Edicts through all his Dominions, that they should worship the foremention'd 
Khuotquan
 as a God. On the day of his decease, which is kept with great so∣lemnity, and call'd 
Tuonu,
 the Houses are hung round with Garlands of Roses, Palm-Boughs, and the Ships adorn'd in like manner; and every 
Chinese
 wears a green Sprig on his Head: neither do they any Work in five days, all which time they hold his Festival. The second day they represent 
Wayangs,
 or Stage-plays. On the third they go with hundreds of curious Gilt and Carv'd Boats, hung with all manner of green Boughs, Flowers and the like, and full of People up and down the River, seeming to look for the Corps of 
Khuotquan;



coming to the Place where they say they find 
Khuotquan,
 they lift up their Oars, and take hold of their Flags and Pendants, and then beating on their Drums, cry with a loud voice, 
We have found him.
 This Ceremony, which is observ'd in all Places and Rivers in 
China,
 continues three days one after another.


This 
Khuotquan
 died about three thousand years since, and being taken up two days after his Decease, was kept ten years Embalm'd before he was Buried.


The sixty fifth 
Schante,
 was in his life-time a valiant Man, and a great pitier of the Poor, to whom he was very charitable.


The sixty sixth 
Naon,
 was an Assistant to the God 
Tegoe
 before mention'd: he is represented with a Ball on his Foot; for (as they fable) when 
Tegoe
 grow∣eth weary with carrying so great a burthen as the World, then this 
Naon
 helps him to support it with his Foot: wherefore they place this 
Naon
 in Heaven, and worship him, because when displeas'd he should not let the World fall by taking away his Foot.


The sixty seventh 
Atzion,
 was Conceiv'd after a strange manner by his Mo∣ther 
Lintion,
 who walking in the Field, and casting her Eyes up toward Heaven, espi'd a Lions Head in the Clouds; by which Vision she Conceiv'd with this 
Atzion,
 without knowing Man: for which his wonderful Conception he is by the 
Chineses
 honor'd for a God.


The sixty eighth 
Alsa,
 taught the People first to Boil and Roast their Meat: for before his time the 
Chineses
 did eat both Flesh and Fish raw. He instructed them also to build Huts of Wood for a defence against wild Beasts; and to make Clothes to cover their nakedness.


The sixty ninth 
Huntzuihoykong,
 they say first invented Fire, and taught them to Buy and to Sell.


The seventieth 
Otzoe,
 was Conceiv'd after as strange a manner as the be∣fore-mention'd 
Atzion;
 for his Mother 
Hautzibon
 going to the Garden for an Onion, she saw some Foot-steps of a Man that had been there before her, in one of which she put hers, to try how much bigger it was than her own; which she had no sooner done, but a great Light encompassing her, she imme∣diately Conceiv'd this 
Otzoe,
 who was the first that established Matrimony amongst the 
Chineses,
 and invented Musical Instruments.


The seventy first 
Ezolon,
 the first Finder of Medicines and the Vertue of Herbs; had great knowledge in Astronomy, Soothsaying, and Magick; in∣structed Men in Agriculture by the use of the Plough and Spade, and all sorts of Ploughing Tools.


The seventy second 
Skadingkon,
 was the first, as they say, that taught them the use of Arms, and Martial Discipline.


Besides these five Governors of Heaven, three Spirits, eight and twenty Councellors, and thirty six earthly Deities, in all seventy two, the 
Chineses,
 ac∣cording to the foremention'd 
Wright,
 have three 
Cacadaemons,
 or evil Spirits.


The first is call'd 
Tytsoequi,
 that is, 
Prince of Devils,
 for 
Tytsoe
 signifies 
Prince,
 and 
Qui
 the 
Devil:
 and as their Stories would make out, he was first an Angel in Heaven, but the supream God observing the wickedness of Mankind on Earth, he call'd 
Tytsoequi
 to him, saying, 
I have seen the wickedness of Men on Earth, and their hearts are inclin'd to evil; wherefore none of them shall come to me in Heaven: Therefore do you descend; I have prepared a Place for you, and an everlasting Prison of torments for them. I elect you as our Substitute to Govern Hell; take them to you and punish them; they shall stay with you for ever, and never come near me.








The 
Chineses
 are of opinion, and believe, that this Prince of Devils knows all future things, and that he sends out his Spirits to fetch vitious People to Hell, where he torments them for ever; therefore they worship him that they may not be tortured.


They also firmly believe, That the Souls of the Wicked return again on Earth to plague and terrifie those alive, which, they say, appear to them in se∣veral Visions.


On the fifteenth day of the seventh Moon they present him a well drest Swine whole, and likewise Hens, Ducks, 
Pinang,
 and Cakes of fine Meal, 
Keekieuw,
 that is, 
Arak,
 or Brandy, and Sugar-Canes. The Hog they lay down on his two foremost Knees, with his Head on his fore-Feet opposite to the Image 
Tytsoequi;
 and use afterwards so many extraordinary Ceremonies at this Offering, that beginning early in the Morning, it continues above an hour after Sun-set.


Several Gilded pieces of Paper, made like a Boat are also burnt in honor to him; and they are very zealous in their Prayers to this 
Tytsoequi.


In Hell, they say, he is served like a King, having two Councellors and twelve Spirits, which wear mighty Knives, and wait upon him continually like Halberdeers, to receive and execute his Commands; besides several other Spirits which serve him as Gentlemen.


The second, or Vice-Roy of Hell, they call 
Iamkoen,
 who Commands with great Authority, wherefore they worship and fear him.


The third 
Iamtouwi.


The 
Chineses
 also observe a certain day in the Year, on which they Offer to all the happy departed Souls, calling it 
Chinkbinch,
 and is kept Annually on the third day of the third Moon the Year after Leap-year, but in the Year be∣fore Leap-year on the twentieth day of the same Moon. Thus far 
David Wright.


In Valour and Warlike Policy the 
Chineses
 of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa
 far exceed


those on the Main Land, most of them at all times wearing Skeans by their sides, except when at Meat in their own Houses.


They use no Knives, Forks, or Spoons to eat withall, but take it up with two small Sticks made of Ivory or Ebony-Wood, Tipt at the ends with Sil∣ver or Gold.


Women of mean Capacity maintain themselves with Spinning and Twist∣ing of raw Silk, which is brought thither from the Territory of 
Chickinny.


The Women eat not constantly with their Husbands at Meals; and when heretofore the Men found no Women according to their minds on the Islands, they sent for them out of 
China,
 and barter'd for them as other Commodities.


Lastly, it is requisite in this place to give a short account how 
Coxinga
 and his Associates, 
Anno
 1661. took both these Islands from the 
Netherland East-India
 Company; but first we will shew his Extract, strange Rise, with the Ruine of his Father, who was call'd 
Chunchilung,
 and by Foreigners 
Iquon,
 or 
Ikoan
 and 
Equan:
 a Man of mean Descent, born in a small Village on the Sea∣shore, in the Territory 
Fokien,
 near the City 
Annay,
 his Father very poor, and as some say, a Taylor by Trade: He first Serv'd the 
Portuguese
 in the City 
Makao,
 and afterwards the 
Hollanders
 on the Island 
Formosa;
 where soon after he be∣came a great Merchant by the 
Iapan
 Trade, and at last a Pyrate. Having from this small beginning gotten a great Fleet of Ships, and obtain'd by his po∣litick Designs and grand Undertakings, to so great Treasure, that the 
Chi∣nese
 Emperor was not able to stand in competition with him; for he onely of all the 
Chineses
 ingrossed the Commodities of all 
India
 in his own hands, driving therewith a vast Trade with the 
Portuguese
 at 
Makao;
 with the 
Spaniards
 on the 
Philippine
 Islands; and with the 
Hollanders
 at 
Formosa
 and 
Batavia;
 and likewise with the 
Iapanners;
 besides other Oriental Kingdoms and Islands. He onely Transported the 
Chinese
 Commodities by his own People, bringing back the 
Indian
 and 
European
 in Returns for them; so that he began to grow so exceeding∣ly rich, that he could fit out a Fleet of three thousand Sail.


Yet this 
Chinchilung,
 or 
Iquon,
 not contenting himself herewith, began to Plot how to be Emperor of 
China;
 but well knowing that he could never effect it, so long as any of the Imperial 
Tamingian
 Family was in being, which at that time held the Royal Seat, therefore he made choice of a time to extirpate that Family, which was 
Anno
 1644. when the 
Tartars
 over-ran the whole Empire, except three Provinces, being 
Folnien,
 otherwise call'd 
Chincheo, Quantung,
 and 
Quangsi;
 and the more closely to hide his Design, he pretended to take up Arms against the 
Tartars,
 as Enemies to the 
Chineses,
 and defend that Empire with all his Forces. And without doubt under this Disguise he would have been taken for the Redeemer and Protector of that Crown, had he not held Correspondence with the 
Tartars,
 to whom he gave what Intelligence he thought good for his advantage. At the same time when the 
Tartars
 fell into the Countrey of 
Fokien, Iquon
 was declar'd General by the Emperor 
Lungun,
 of all his Forces; the Officers also were either his Brothers or Friends, so that being able to do what he listed, he permitted the 
Tartars
 to come into the Em∣pire; for which they gave him the Title of 
King,
 making him King of 
Pingnan,
 which is in the Southern part of 
China,
 and sent him many great Gifts, the more easily to delude him: and though perhaps not ignorant of his De∣sign, but fearing his formidable Power, they durst not use any rigorous course against him, but rather Treated him very honorably with Presents, high En∣tertainments, and large Promises of the Government over the Territories of



Fokien
 and 
Quantung;
 so that he thought easily to get an absolute Command over the Southern Countreys. But when the 
Tartar
 intended to return to the Imperial City 
Peking,
 and all his Vice-Roys according to custom came to attend and accompany him some part of the Way; 
Iquon
 also not suspecting any danger, came to shew his Respects in like manner, and went with a few, having left his Fleet in the Haven before the City of 
Focheu:
 but now being ready to depart, having perform'd his Complements, and desiring leave to re∣turn, the 
Tartar
 Prince requested him to go with him to 
Peking
 to the Empe∣ror, where he promised him the highest Preferments: and although 
Iquon
 sought with many Arguments to put off this Journey; yet was he at last for∣ced to go; so that by this Stratagem he was taken, which could not be by force of Arms, or any Device whatsoever. Coming to 
Peking
 he was put close Prisoner, not onely under a strict Guard, but the Door of the Place wherein he was kept, made up with Stone, and himself loaded with Fetters about his Neck and Feet; and if any new Troubles hapned by his Son 
Coxinga,
 and the News thereof brought to the Court at 
Peking,
 as it did 
Anno
 1657. (at which time the 
Netherlanders
 were there in an Embassy) they laid fifteen Chains more upon him. His Son 
Coxinga
 and Brothers inform'd of his Imprisonment, be∣took themselves again to the Fleet, and made all the Seas near 
China
 by their Pyracies almost useless.


Upon this account 
Coxinga
 with his Associates, and a crew of Rebel 
Chine∣ses,
 kept the 
Tartars
 on the Coast of 
China
 in continual Alarms, and had his chiefest Residence on the Islands 
Ay, Quemuy,
 and others lying under the Conti∣nent of 
China.
 The 
Chineses
 themselves on the Main Coast, who had submitted, and in token thereof shav'd off their Hair, conform'd to the 
Tartars,
 brought them all sorts of Provisions, and drove also a private Trade with them. The 
Tartars
 at last, to stop all Provisions from going to the Enemy, commanded all the Villages, Towns and Hamlets that stood along the Sea-shore, or the Main Continent, to be burnt to the Ground, and the Countrey laid waste, and no People suffer'd on pain of death to live within three Leagues of the Sea. By this means, and likewise by the great Losses which 
Coxinga
 sustain∣ed from the 
Tartars,
 assisted by the 
Netherlanders,
 who set upon them both at Sea and Land, he found himself so straightned, that 
Anno
 1660. he Sail'd with all his Forces to 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa,
 both which Islands, and also the Castle 
Ze∣landia;
 he took in 
March, Anno
 1661. after a Siege of ten Moneths. Very cruelly were several of the 
Netherlanders
 dealt withall, especially the Ministers 
Anthony Hantbroel, Aren Vincenius, Leonard Campen, Peter Muts
 and others, and at last put to death: others against Agreement kept in Prison, without hopes of attaining their Liberty, notwithstanding the great trouble the 
Hollanders
 took upon them to procure their enlargement. Therefore in revenge of 
Coxinga
's Cruelties, and also to regain the conquer'd Places, a Fleet was sent out the next year af∣ter, under the Command of the afore-mention'd Admiral 
Balthazar Bort,
 and Vice-Admiral 
Iohn van Campen,
 with the Ambassador 
Constantine Nobel,
 with Letters from his Excellency 
Iohn Maetzuiker,
 to 
Singlamong,
 Vice-Roy of the Ter∣ritory 
Fokien,
 and the General 
Taisang Lipoui
 for the same purpose, and also to request liberty for a free Trade.


Since the Letter to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 in brief contains the Reasons and Intentions for sending out the Fleet to the Coast of 
China,
 and the dispatching of an Ambassador thither, and may also serve for a small declaration of our fol∣lowing Discourse, I judge it no way amiss to set it down before-hand, being to this effect:






This Letter comes from 
John Maetzuiker,
 chief Governor, and the Councel for the 
Ne∣therland
 State in the Countreys of 
India,
 to 
Singlamong,
 Vice-Roy, or Governor for the Mighty Emperor of 
Tartary
 and 
China:
 of the Territory 
Fokien,
 whom the God of Heaven grant long Life, and Prosperity on Earth.
Great and Powerful Sir,


THe Letter sent some time since from Your Highness to our Governor of 
Tayowan
 he hath receiv'd in due time, and also not been negligent to Answer according to Request, and with all speed sent five Men of War with some Soldiers, to the Bay of 
Engeling,
 that according to Your Highness's noble Proposal and Request they might, bidding defiance to 
Coxinga,
 fall upon him. But We were so unhappy, that as soon as the Ships set Sail from 
Tayowan,
 they were surpris'd by a mighty Storm, which separated them one from another, so that some of them came back to 
Batavia,
 and others were forc'd to return again to 
Tayowan,
 which is the onely Reason that We could not perform Our good Intentions according to Your Highness's Pleasure. Since which time 
Coxinga
 hath joyn'd all his Forces together to Master our Castle in 
Tayowan,
 having Besieged it ten Moneths, rais'd great Batteries against it on all sides, and so straitned the Besieged with his Army, that the Governor and his Councel concluded to deliver him the Fort; which We have resented very ill of our People, because, as We suppose, they have not as they ought to have done, manfully resisted the Enemy; which as an Example to terri∣fie others, We will not pass by unpunished. Yet since We have suffer'd so great a Loss and Damage, and chiefly for that against his Promise he hath most cruelly Murder'd several Unarmed 
Christians
 on the Island 
Formosa;
 God who is a hater of such Villanies, and a righteous Judge, commands Us to take Revenge for our sustained Wrongs; so that we are resolv'd with all our Forces to prosecute this Tyrant, and not leave, till by force of Arms We have brought him to nought. And since we are inform'd, that Your High∣ness also intends and endeavors the like Ruine towards him; so at once to free the Empire of 
China
 from the Oppression which it hath suffer'd so many years by his Means: Therefore We think it now the most proper time to obtain as well Your Highness's, as our own Desires: to which end, accord∣ing to Your Highness's own Proposal, We are inclin'd to joyn all Our Land and Sea-Forces with Your Highness's Militia, against which We suppose 
Coxinga
 will not be able to subsist long. And to shew that We really intend it, We have sent from hence under the Command of Our Admiral 
Balthazar Bort
 to the Bay of 
Hossien,
 the number of twelve well prepar'd Men of War, which, considering their strength and fit posture for defence, may justly be term'd 
Floating Castles,
 and will be able to make 
Coxinga
 quit the Sea, which will not a little trouble and disable him: of which We hope Your High∣ness shall in a short time see the Event. We therefore fortifie Our selves, (hoping that Your Highness will do the like) that We may enter into a firm League with the Empire of 
China,
 with Promises faithfully to assist one ano∣ther against 
Coxinga,
 and to hold him for our mortal Enemy, and with all Endeavors, if it be possible, bring him and all his Party to utter Ruine, so to make him taste the sharpness of Our Revenge for his committed Villa∣nies. But since at present, having lost 
Tayowan,
 We have no convenient Har∣bors to preserve Our Ships in stormy Weather, Our humble Request is, That


your Highness would please to do us that favor, as far as your Commands reach along the Sea-Coasts, to Permit and Order us a place wherein our Ships, if they should chance to be necessitated, may come to an Anchor, and that they may be kindly receiv'd, and our People entertain'd as Friends, and buy Provisions and other Necessaries for Money.


China
 and 
Batavia
 (as your Highness very well knows) lie a great distance one from another, therefore it is very necessary and requisite, that we had a convenient place of Rendezvouz near 
Coxinga
's Channel, there to keep our Ships together, and watch for his Jonks; so that we desire of your High∣ness, that you would be pleas'd to direct us to such a place, and to give us leave likewise to Fortifie the same against 
Coxinga
's Assaults; for we do as∣sure your Highness, if this cannot be granted us, it is altogether impossible for us to do the Enemy that damage which may be expected: Therefore if we intend to manage this War with Prudence, we must be there to wait on our business continually, or else we shall not be able to clear the Sea of 
Cox∣inga
's Ships.


And as the driving of Trade makes all Nations and People flourish, and we are us'd from Antiquity to promote the same, for the benefit of the pub∣lique good, we thought fit to make our inclination known to your High∣ness, that we heartily desire to furnish the Emperor of 
China
 with our Com∣modities, which formerly the same 
Coxinga
 hath prevented by his wicked Practices; therefore to perfect all our good Undertakings, we desire that we may be permitted to come into the Empire of 
China,
 and have Passes from the great 
Cham,
 which we intreat your Highness to procure for us, not doubt∣ing, but they may easily be attain'd; because when two years ago the Em∣peror was Complemented by two of our Ambassadors with Presents, he in part promis'd it to us; which your Highness having at that time the Com∣mand over 
Canton,
 and conversing much with our People, may perhaps re∣member.


We send to your Highness with this Letter our peculiar Friend Captain 
Constantine Nobell,
 humbly to Complement your Honor; and at large de∣clare our Intentions, with Request, that your Highness would favorably be pleas'd to hear him, and speedily to dispatch him: We also promise, that whatever your Highness agrees with him about, we will approve of, and stand ingaged to: And for a Present, we here send to your Highness these un∣der-written Commodities, desiring your Highness to accept them in good Friendship.




One Piece of



Scarlet


Green Cloth.


Black Cloth.


Blue Cloth.




One Piece of



Red Crown Serge.


Grass Green Crown Serge.


Blue Crown Serge.


Musk Color Crown Serge.


Black Crown Serge.




A handsome Musquet, Guilded and Varnish'd.


A Fire-Lock or Snaphance, adorn'd like the first.


One pair of Pistols and Holsters, like∣wise well Varnish'd and Gilt.


Twenty Ounces of Blood Red Coral, upon one String, in an hundred and one pieces.


Sixteen Ounces and a half of Branch Coral, of the same Color, in one Polish'd Branch.


Three Pound and three Ounces of


Amber, in four great pieces.


One Pound and four Ounces of Am∣ber Beads, in fifty five pieces.


One great 
Bengael Alkatiff.


Ten pieces of fine 
Moereisen,
 or white Linnen.


One 
Pikol
 of Cloves.


Half a Case of Rose-Water.


Two hundred and sixty 
Katty
 of 
San∣dal-wood,
 in three pieces.




From the Castle of 
Batavia, Iune
 21. 1662.


Iohn Maetzuiker.




The Letter to the General 
Taisang Lipovi,
 was writ almost after the same manner, with the same Requests and Promises; 
viz.
 A League with the Em∣pire of 
China,
 to help to ruine 
Coxinga,
 upon condition, that the 
Netherlanders
 should be free to enter any Haven, and take possession of a convenient place on the Coast of 
China;
 as may be seen in the same Letter in its proper place, where it is set down 
Verbatim.
 Hereupon the Grand Commissioners at 
Batavia,
 the General 
Iohn Maetzuiker,
 and the 
Indian
 Council began to prepare and make ready several stout Men of War, storing with plenty of Ammunition, and Provisions, and Manning them also with Soldiers and Sea-men.


The whole Fleet that lay thus ready at 
Batavia
 for any Engagement, fitted
 out to retake the Islands 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa,
 consisted in twelve Sail, eight Frigats, 
viz.
 the 
Naerden, Zierikzee, Domburgh, Hogeland, Meliskerke, Overveen,
 the 
Sea-Dog, Ankeveen;
 and four Pinks, the 
Vink, Loenen, Breukelen,
 and 
Ter-Boede,
 every one well Arm'd with Guns and Ammunition, and Mann'd both with Soldiers and Sea-men. The 
Naerden
 Commanded by the Admiral 
Balthazar Bort
 carry'd four Brass, and twenty eight Iron Guns, and an hundred and ninety Men, whereof an hundred and thirteen Soldiers, and eighty four Sea∣men. 
Zierikzee,
 Commanded by the Vice-Admiral 
Iohn Van Campen,
 had also four Brass, and twenty eight Iron Guns, with an hundred ninety one Men, 
viz▪
 eighty one Soldiers, and an hundred and ten Sea-men. 
Domburg,
 Com∣manded by Captain 
Constantine Nobel,
 and Captain 
Ysbraent Boumeester,
 had four Brass, and twenty one Iron Guns, an hundred forty seven Men, to wit, sixty two Soldiers, and eighty five Sea-men. The 
Hogelande,
 Commanded by 
Har∣men Symons,
 carry'd twenty four Iron Guns, and an hundred and six Men, twenty nine Soldiers, and seventy seven Sea-men. The 
Meliskerke, Dirk Ger∣ritsen
 Captain, had five Brass, and sixteen Iron Guns, an hundred and two Men, thirty six Soldiers, and sixty six Sea-men. The 
Overveen,
 Commanded by 
Ba∣rent Iochemz,
 carry'd one Brass, and twenty Iron Guns, an hundred and sixteen Men, thirty five Soldiers, and sixty one Sea-men. The 
Sea-Dog,
 Commanded by 
Iohn Hendrikson,
 had twenty four Iron Guns, an hundred twenty nine Men, fifty three Soldiers, and seventy six Sea-men. The 
Ankeveen, Iohn Ysbrandsen Van Bank
 Captain, with one Brass, and seventeen Iron Guns, had ninety three Men, twenty eight Soldiers, and forty five Sea-men. The 
Vink,
 under Captain 
Dirik Valk,
 with two Brass, and eleven Iron Guns, had sixty eight Men, twen∣ty five Soldiers, and forty three Sea-men. The 
Loenen,
 Commanded by 
Iacob Hors,
 with eleven Guns, had sixty six Men, that is, twenty six Soldiers, and forty Sea-men. The 
Breukelen, Abraham Ben
 Commander, carry'd eight Iron Guns, and fifty eight Men, twenty five Soldiers, and twenty three Sea-men. The 
Ter-Boede,
 Commanded by 
Auke Pieters,
 had two Brass, and eight Iron Guns, one and fifty Men, fifteen Soldiers, and thirty six Sea-men. In all the Ships, were twenty three Brass, and an hundred and sixteen Iron Guns; five


hundred twenty eight Sea-men, and seven hundred fifty six Soldiers; in the whole, one thousand two hundred eighty four Men: With these twelve Ships of War, three Merchants, being the 
Leerdam, Singing-Bird,
 and 
Loosduinen,
 set Sail, richly Laden for 
Iapan,
 under the Command of Captain and Admiral 
Henry Van Indiik,
 having Command to keep company with the Fleet, so long as they did not go out from their Coast.


The day on which they were to set Sail, the Admiral 
Bort,
 and Council of
 War, for certain reasons, divided the Fleet into three Squadrons, and every Squadron under one chief Commander, 
viz.
 The 
Zierikzee, Meliskerken, Hoge∣lande, Ter Boede,
 with the Fly-Boat 
Leerdam,
 under the Command of the Vice-Admiral 
Campen.
 The 
Naerden, Overveen, Sea-Dog,
 and 
Vink,
 with the 
Singing-Bird
 Pink, under Captain 
Balthazar Bort▪
 The 
Domburgh, Ankeveen, Breukelen, Loenen,
 with the Pink 
Loosduinen,
 Commanded by 
Constantine Nobel.


When his Excellency, General 
Iohn Maetzuiker,
 and the Council 
Charles Hert∣zing,
 and 
Ryklof Van Geuns,
 went aboard the 
Naerden
 Frigat, Commanded by the Admiral 
Balthazar Bort;
 and the Vice-Admiral, 
Iohn Van Campen;
 and the Rear-Admiral, 
Constantine Nobel,
 and there impower'd every one in their seve∣ral Offices and Places, by taking their Oaths; and delivering them their Com∣missions and Orders the Fleet Weigh'd Anchor from 
Batavia,
 and on Satur∣day
 Morning, 
Iune
 the 29. 
Anno
 1662. firing their Guns, set Sail, and Steer'd North-East, bending their Course directly towards 
China.


About Noon, the Fleet being be-calm'd, cast Anchor on the North of the
 Island 
Van Hoorn,
 lying in sight of 
Batavia,
 near several other Isles, which bear the Names of divers Cities in 
Holland,
 as 
Amsterdam, Enkuizen, Medenbleck,
 and the like.


All these Isles, though desolate and uninhabited, are Planted along the Shores, and up into the In-land, with several sorts of excellent Trees, which make a pleasant Prospect off at Sea, and stand in such order, as they had been the Workmanship of Art, and not the meer Dress of Nature.


And likewise the Vallies, Plains and Hills upon them afford, divers sorts of Flowers, Herbs, and Drugs.


Under these Islands the 
Iapanners
 and 
Chineses
 that dwelt on 
Batavia,
 us'd to fish, and catch abundance of Breams, 
Shepherds,
 and other sorts of Fishes, un∣known in 
Europe.


The Trees are loaden with all manner of Singing-Birds, whose Harmonies are so pleasing, that the Inhabitants of 
Batavia
 often go to this Island in Boats, to recreate themselves with their Musick, as we to our Wood sides, to hear the Thrush and Nightingale.


On the same day, the Council concluded to Sail first to the Islands 
Laver
 and 
Timon,
 lying in their way close by one another, that there they might supply themselves with fresh Water, all sorts of Provisions and Fuel, Anchor∣stocks, Hand-spikes, and other Materials of Wood, which that place yields in abundance.


In the first Watch of the Night, the Wind coming gently out of the South, they Weigh'd Anchor, and Steer'd their Course, though but slowly, towards the North-East.


The twenty fifth, the Fleet Sail'd in the depth of thirty one or thirty two Fathom, Tacking up and down, having the Wind against them out of the North-East, yet blowing gently.


On Munday morning, being the twenty sixth, the Fleet came near 
Thou∣sand-Islands,
 having the Wind Easterly, and fair Weather, in twenty two and twenty three Fathom Wather, and hard Ground; and were at Noon in five Degrees and eighteen Minutes South Latitude, the Ground still the same, but the depth only fourteen or fifteen Fathom.


The same day, the Admiral 
Balthazar Bort,
 and the Council of War made an Order, which the Commanders of every Ship in the Fleet in their Sailing were to observe as followeth.








During the Voyage, or till such time as it is order'd otherwise, the good Ship 
Ter Boede
 (being under 
Iohn Idze de Vinke
) shall carry a Light on his Poop, and in the day time Sail before, because the Master of her is experienc'd in these Seas.


Therefore all the Captains of Ships are expresly Commanded, continually to observe his motion, that when he Anchors, Sails, or Tacks, they do the like, so the better to keep the Fleet together, and prevent separation.


None shall offer in the Nght to Sail by the same Vessel, much less alter his course on forfeiture of four Rix-Dollars for the Master, chief, or Under-Mates, in whose Watch soever this misdemeanor shall happen.


If the Pilot thinks it fit to Tack in the Night, either for the Winds shrink∣ing, or otherwise, he shall put Candles into two Lanthorns on his Poop, and all the other Ships one, that thereby it may be known, whether they see the Sign or not.


In the Night, the altering of the Course shall be left to the discretion of him that carrys the Lanthorn.


When they have Sea-room enough, they shall not Tack, for the Winds shrinking of one or two Points, for the prevention of all dangers, and keeping together.


If he that carries the Light, thinks fit to Anchor in the Night, he shall set two Lights, one over another on his Stern, which sign being seen, the other Ships shall instantly come to an Anchor, and likewise set a Candle on their Sterns.


When it is thought fit to set Sail again, he shall fire a Gun, and make a sig∣nal by another Light from the Poop; which the other Ships seeing, shall also put out a Light, and then Weigh Anchor.


If it should happen that any Ship or Ships should by accident either prove leaky, run a-ground, strike upon a Rock, Land, or ought else, he shall unfurle a Pennon from his Fore-Mast, and fire a Gun; whereupon, every one shall be oblig'd to come with his Boat and Pinnace, and assist the Vessel according to the utmost of their power, on forfeiture, as in the Council it shall be judg'd fit.


If an accident shall happen by fire, they shall discharge two or three Guns presently one after another, that with Buckets and Pails the rest may come and help the Ship in distress.


And that the Ships in dark or misty Weather may not straying loose each other, they shall sometimes speak to one another with their Guns, and as often reply. If the Lanthorn Ship judges it fitting to Tack, he shall fire a great Gun, which the rest hearing, shall answer him, and Tack to∣gether.


If in a dark Night they are forc'd by stress of Weather, or an overgrown Sea to lie at Hull, or carry no Sail, the guide shall set forth two Light
 of one


height, and the other Ships one apiece, the better to keep together.


In a calm, with a rowling Sea, they shall take great care that the Ships do not fall foul one upon another, by endeavoring to keep as far distant as they can.


When it grows light, and they from Sea descry Land, Sounding for Ground, they shall unfurle the Princes Flag or Colours, and also fire a Gun; if in the Night they chance to discern Land, or Fathom Ground, he shall light two Can∣dles by one another, and fire two Guns.


If any Ships stray from the Fleet, and afterwards appear in sight, they shall hoiss up their fore-Sail three times, and then let it down again; then fire a great Gun, and draw back the fore-Sail, till probably the rest have seen it, and also furle up his Sprit-Sail and Mizzen; after which signs he may come again to his company.


If this should happen in the Night, they shall call to one another, by the word, 
Holla, Ship,
 if it be one of our Fleet, he shall answer, 
Victoria,
 which if he does not do, it is a certain sign that it is a strange Ship, and either a 
Chi∣nesy
 Jonk or Vessel; and if it be possible, give notice of it to the Admiral, Vice- or Rear-Admiral, who ever of them be nearest, however, to keep within shot; and if it be an Enemy, to give notice to the rest, by the firing of Guns.


He that descrys any strange Ships, or Jonks by day, shall let his Colours flie from his Stern, and 
Veare
 his fore-
Shete,
 and soon after hale it up; if by night, he shall light two Candles together, without making chase after it, before he hath spoke, and receiv'd order from the Admiral, except it be a 
Portuguese,
 or 
Chinesy
 Vessel, which by that means might make his escape.


In this exigent, though the Enemy be never so powerful, let him fall on, and if he can possible make himself master thereof; afterwards to do accord∣ing to the Orders given in Martial Affairs.


If any Frigats should be separated from the Fleet, either by Storm or other accidents, they shall according to an express Order from his Excellency the Lord General, and Lords of the 
Indian
 Council, come to the place of Meet∣ing or Rendezvouz chosen by them, being 
Isla de Lemas,
 one of the most Eastern Islands of 
Makao,
 which lies in the way of our Voyage, and we may touch at without prejudice or loss of time; and also because his Excellency hath receiv'd information, that there is not onely a good Haven, but fresh Water; so that the separated Ships are strictly Commanded, not to pass by the foremention'd Island 
De Lemas,
 but put in to it, and there wait for the Fleets coming, that so they may proceed on together in their Voyage, and the more resolutely bid the Enemy defiance, if they should Rancounter.


After leaving the Island 
De Lemas,
 and coming on the Coast of 
China,
 they shall first put in for the Bay of 
Engeling,
 or rather that of 
Hoksiu
 (they being the safest and convenientest Harbors in the Southern Bay or 
Mouson
) and with the whole Fleet (except those bound for 
Iapan,
 which will part from us be∣fore) run into them, to inquire how the Affairs of War stand between the 
Tartar
 and 
Coxinga,
 and whether he be in 
China,
 or 
Formosa;
 therefore if in the way from 
Lemas
 to the Coast of 
China
 any Frigats should be separated from the Fleet, let them put in for the foremention'd Bays of 
Engeling,
 or 
Hoksiu,
 where they shall joyn with the Fleet again.


When the white Flag shall be set up at the Admirals Stern, and a Gun be fired from his Ship, then the General Council of War shall meet, consisting of these following Persons to consult with the Admiral, 
viz.


Henry Indiik
 of the Ship 
Loosduinen, Iohn Idze de Vink,
 or 
Van Campen▪
 Vice-Ad∣miral of the Fleet; but so long as 
Indiik
 is by the Fleet, the 
Finch
 shall carry the Flag as Rear-Admiral of 
Zierikzee.


The Merchant 
Constantine Nobel;
 who carries the Light before the Fleet, af∣ter 
Indiik
 hath taken leave, shall bear the Flag of 
Domburgh.


Peter Iansz Veldmuis,
 Captain of the 
Naerden: Ysbrand Bowmester,
 Captain of the 
Domburgh: Barent Iochemsz,
 Captain of the 
Overveen: Harman Symonsz,
 Commander of the 
High-Land: Iohn Hendriksz,
 Master of the 
Sea-Dog: Dirk Gerritz,
 Commander of the 
Meliskerke: Iohn Ysbransz Van Bank,
 Captain of the 
Ankeven: Valk,
 Master of the 
Vink: Christopher Edwartsz,
 Secretary.


If the Admiral lets flie his Red Flag from his Poop, then all the remaining Commanders of the Fleet, as 
Brukelen, Loenen,
 and 
Ter-Bode,
 shall also come a∣board with the foremention'd persons; and likewise their chief Officers of War, as the Ensigns and Serjeants: But if the Admiral will have his Privy Council to come aboard, he shall put out his white Flag with a Bend from the Poop.


The Privy Council shall consist in the following Persons: 
Henry Indiik, Iohn Idze de Vink, Constantine Nobel, Peter Iansz, Veldmuis
 Commander of the 
Naerden, Ysbrand Bowmester
 Captain of the 
Domburgh.


If the Admiral is desirous to speak with the Captain of the 
Loosduine,
 he shall let a Pennon flow from his 
Mizzen
-Yard; if with the 
Zirikzee,
 a Pennon from the Fore-Yard; if with 
Domburgh,
 a Jack from the Sprissel-Yard.


If any one be found to neglect these Orders, he shall be put in mind of it by the Secretary, and after examination of the cause, receive all due punishment.


All these were made, and agreed on in the 
Naerden
 Frigat, Sailing about the 
Thousand Islands,
 the 26. of 
Iune,
 1662.


Balthazar Bort, Iohn Idze de Vink.








On Thursday morning, being the twenty seventh, the Fleet having the same Weather, found themselves to be in four Degrees and eighteen Mi∣nutes South-Latitude; and in the afternoon, beyond the Point of 
Boomy's Riff,
 in nine and ten Fathom Gravelly Ground; in the Night, on fourteen and fif∣teen Fathom, the same Ground, they spy'd the Banks of the foresaid 
Riff
 at a pretty distance.


On Wednesday Morning the twenty eighth, the Fleet (being in thirteen and fourteen Fathom Water, the Wind Easterly) saw the Island 
Lucipar,
 or 
Lu∣kapar,
 lying to the South-West, about a League and a half from them. This Island lies near 
Sumatra,
 in the Mouth of the 
Straights
 of 
Banka,
 and is fourteen Leagues in Circumference. It is uninhabited, yet Wooddy, and yields a plea∣sant Prospect with its high Trees towards the Sea; it is interlac'd with many murmuring Streams, which abounding in Fish, and the Woods with Beasts, makes it a fit place for the Sea-men to refresh in.


In the afternoon, being in three Degrees, and seven Minutes, 
Lukapar
 lay three Leagues South South-East from the Fleet; and having got the first Point of 
Sumatra
 on their Starboard, their Course being North-East and by East, they Sail'd along the Coast of 
Sumatra
 in ten and thirteen Fathom Water.


The twenty ninth about Noon, the Fleet Sail'd by 
Poele Nancha,
 lying in the 
Straights
 of 
Banka,
 thirty Leagues to the In-land, in two Degrees and twenty five Minutes Southern-Latitude, and were got within a small League from the third Point of 
Sumatra.


Poele Nancha,
 that is, 
The Isle Nancha,
 (for 
Poele
 is Island, and 
Nancha
 the pro∣per name of the place) and signifies 
Round Island,
 so call'd, being indeed al∣most Circular, and hath eight Leagues in Circumference, very barren, being onely Sandy Ground, having on the Shore nothing but a few Turtles.


In the Evening, about Sun-set, they came up with the high Promontary 
Monapien,
 on the North of the Island 
Banka;
 and the Fore-Land of 
Sumatra
 ly∣ing West South-West, about a League from them.


Banka,
 an Island about a League from 
Sumatra,
 is inhabited, fruitful, and
 full of Woods.


The thirteenth, being Friday, the Fleet was at Noon gotten into one De∣gree and twenty two Minutes South-Latitude; and had 
Poele Toutyon,
 that is,
 seven Islands, East and by North, four Leagues from them in sixteen and seven∣teen Fathom Water. These Isles, though they lie close by one another, yet are uninhabited.


Close by 
Poele Toutyon,
 towards the East, lies the Isle of 
Linge,
 Inhabited on
 the Shore by Fishers and Rusticks; but in the Countrey by a People who came thither from the Mountain 
Passarvan,
 which is in 
Iova;
 for these People opprest by the King of 
Passarvan,
 with great Tributes and other Inconvenien∣cies, fled for their better accommodation to several places; most of them being Licens'd by the King of 
Bantam
 to have setled behind the City, on the Coast of 
Sunda,
 at the foot of the Mountain 
Gomon Bezar,
 where they have built the Ci∣ty 
Sura,
 and several Villages, Electing a King of their own, which pays Tri∣bute to the King of 
Bantam.
 Others have setled themselves on this Isle, and built Towns and Villages, which they enjoy'd in Peace a long time, but sub∣mitted themselves at last, either out of kindness, or force, to the King of 
Sura.


These People live peaceably and friendly, maintaining themselves with Husbandry or Tillage; and observe the old 
Pythagorean
 Doctrine, concerning the 
Transmigration of the Soul;
 therefore they neither kill nor eat any animated Creature.


They go clothed in white Paper made of Trees, of which they tie only one piece about their Head, and another about their Middle, for decency.


This Isle hath all manner of good Provisions, though not in very great plenty; but abundance of Birds, which are from thence Transported to 
China
 for a great Dainty.


The first of 
Iuly,
 about Noon, the Fleet finding it self in twenty five Minutes South-Latitude, spy'd the East Point of the Isle of 
Linge,
 North-West from them; and 
Poele Zay,
 South-West and by West, in eighteen and nineteen Fa∣thom grey Sandy Ground, mixt with little Shells; their Course North and by East; the Wind at South-East and by South.


Poele Zay
 are several small Rocky Isles, and uninhabited, lying in a Train
 one by another.


The second, being 
Sunday,
 the Fleet Sail'd about Noon in fifty three Minutes Northern Latitude.


In the afternoon the Pink 
Loosduynen
 being seven Leagues to the Eastward of the Island 
Poele Panjang,
 ran on unknown Rocks, not specifi'd in the Maps, to which the Vice-Admiral 
Iohn Van Campen
 Rowing with his Boat, and some Tackle, giving speedy assistance, helpt the Pink off from the Rocks without any Damage.


Poele Panjang,
 signifies, 
Long Island,
 so call'd from its narrowness and
 great length, it is uninhabited, but full of Woods, where a Bird by the 
In∣dians







call'd 
Emy,
 or 
Emeu,
 breeds. He hath a long Neck, which when he stretch∣eth out, makes him at least four Foot high; before at his Throat hang two Lappets, like slips of Parchment, two Inches long, and red. His Neck, as 
Clusius
 relates, is about thirteen Inches long, and his Body two Foot broad, and three Foot long from Breast to Stern; his Legs seventeen Inches long: The Feathers with which his whole Body was cover'd, were all double, being grown out of one little and short Quill, and lying one upon another, were thick at the ends, and thin and small at the Root, and of several lengths. These Feathers resembled rather a Bears Fur than Plumes: His Wings consist∣ed chiefly of four long black Quills; but the upper part thereof had the same kind of Feathers that grew on the Breast; for it is to be suppos'd that with these Wings he helps himself in running, not being able either to fly, or lift himself from the Ground. The Head holds no proportion to the Body, be∣ing little, and almost bald: The Eyes, a little above the opening of the Bill, were very big and sparkling: Upon the top of his Head grew a Crest or Comb, hard as Horn: The upper part of his Bill five Inches long; the fore∣part of the Neck, about four Inches below the Bill, had two fleshy Gills, two Inches long, of ruddy colour; the hindermost part of the Neck also bald, and from the Head to the Back reddish, and the lower part cover'd with a few red Feathers, mix'd with some black. And although this Bird seems to resemble the Ostrich, taking all things that are thrown before him, yet he hath not cloven Feet, but three very strong Claws, with which side-ways he seizes his Prey. But though he swallow'd what-ever was cast to him, as whole Oranges, and the like; yet his usual Food was Wheaten or Rye-Bread, which broken in great pieces, he gobbles up; and mad after new-laid Eggs, which went down Shells and all; but if they were hard, or lay heavy upon his Sto∣mach, he muted them, and then taking them the second time, digesting, put them well over. These Birds, they say, breed not onely on the 
Molucco
 Islands, but also on 
Sumatra, Taprobane,
 and in the neighboring Countreys.


On 
Munday,
 being the third, the Fleet proceeded on her Course North-North-East, full before the Wind, and reach'd about Noon in two Degrees and three Minutes Northern Latitude, and in sight of the Island 
Poele Tingi▪
 which lay North-West from them. In the first Watch the 
Zierikzee
 and 
Ter-Boede
 Frigats came to an Anchor on the West side of 
Aura,
 in thirteen Fathom Water, and put each of them a Light in their Lanthorns, for a Sign to those Ships that were behind.


The fourth, being 
Tuesday,
 the Admiral with the 
Naerden
 Frigat, accompa∣nied with the 
Overveen, Sea-dog, Singing-bird, High-land,
 and 
Vink,
 came to an An∣chor in the same place; for the 
Domburg,
 and six more, took their Course to the Isle of 
Timon,
 according to Order when they set sail: Their Boats going ashore to fetch fresh Water and Wood, brought also many Baskets of Fish and Fruits, besides some Hens and Goats, which they either bought for Money, or barter'd for.


Next Morning, being the fifth, the 
Singing-bird, Sea-dog,
 and the 
Gold∣finch
 weigh'd their Anchors, and sail'd to 
Poele Pisang
 for fresh Provisions and Wood. This Island is Populous, and full of Villages. All the In∣habitants observe strictly their Fishing and Tillage, being bred to such Drud∣gery from their Childhood. Here, as also on the Coast of the Kingdom of 
Sampan,
 and on the Island 
Lingen,
 a kind of Birds-nests are plentifully found
 which at Feasts and Entertainments are look'd upon as a great 
Regalia;
 nay, the Inhabitants on their New-years Feast, which they keep with great Solemnity, commonly present one another with these Dainties, as an infallible sign of unfeigned Friendship. They are also transported, as a great Delicate, to 
Chi∣na,
 and every Pound thereof sold for half a 
 
Tahers,
 they being a great Cordial, much relieving both the Stomach and Brain.


A Bird like a Swallow, about the time of the year when they chuse Mates, and fall to coupling, yields a kind of glutinous or slimy matter, which lying on the Rocks, is the first Material of these Nests, and by a daily additional Moisture, or Morning-dew, gather'd on their Wings, and sprinkled on it, at last becomes both large and perfect, which when dry, resembles the Bowl of a Spoon, with high Edges, and are found here in such abundance, that they gather some Hundred weights of them yearly.


When their Coupling time is past, and the Nests finish'd, which happens all at one time, they lay their Eggs, and Brood upon them; which Father 
Kir∣cher
 thus describes.


Between 
Cochinchina
 and the Island 
Hainan,
 lie in a long Ridge a Series both of great and lesser Rocks, to which in 
March
 flock abundance of strange Birds like Swallows, there building their Nests, but of what, or how, not known; and having bred up their Young fit for flight, they quit their Birth-place, and leave their empty Nests, which Ships coming thither from 
China
 and other places, transport from thence, and sell at home at great Rates, because they are esteem'd as the onely Condiment either to Fish or Flesh, which be∣ing handsomly season'd with it, gives a delightful 
Hogooe.


Philip Martyn,
 in his Relation of the Kingdom of 
Tunking,
 saith, That in that Province are many strange Birds and Fowls, especially some little ones, that fly like a Swallow, making their Nests on the Rocks, which are ga∣ther'd, and sold at no ordinary price, because they believe that they owe their Health to the use of them mix'd in their Dishes, and that it is a certain Cure for the loss of Appetite.


They are of a bright colour, and hard, like Sea-horn; and they esteem the greatest Feast no Entertainment without this Dainty, which they prepare af∣ter this manner: First they lay it a whole Night in warm Water, till it grows soft and mellow; then again dried in the Sun, mince it very small.
It hath of it self almost no taste; but, like Mushrooms prepar'd in Sal∣lads, provokes an Appetite; and as other Food asswages Hunger, and sa∣tisfies the Stomach, this, on the contrary, makes the Appetite greater, and still desirous of more.


There is also much 
Ager
-Wood, and Cotton.


On 
Thursday
 the sixth, Admiral 
Bort
 firing a Gun from the 
Naerden
-Frigat, signified his intention to set Sail; but no sooner had he weigh'd his Anchor, but the Ship was strongly driven by the Current towards the Shore, so that he was forc'd to let it fall again, and firing several Guns, the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 coming thither with his Pinnace, Long-boat, and Tackling, found the 
Naerden
 Frigat to ride about three Cables length from the Rocks, on good Ground, able enough to hold out a great Storm: But carrying out a small An∣chor, and weighing the other, at last got under Sail, and was follow'd by the rest of the Ships.


The seventh, being 
Friday,
 the 
Zierikzee, Highland,
 and 
Ter-Boede
 Frigats came about the East side of the Isle of 
Timon
 (for the 
Naerden
 and the other Ships lay at the North-East Point) to an Anchor in thirteen Fathom, where they took in Water, Firing, and fresh Provisions, as Hens, Goats, Fish, Potatoes, and the like.


The eighth, being 
Saturday,
 the 
Zierikzees
 Men going into the Woods, cut Anchor-stocks, Oars, Hand-spikes, and Leavers; and fishing in their Sloop, took some 
Shepherds
 and 
Breams.


About Noon hapned a great Thunder-shower.


The ninth day, being 
Sunday,
 the 
Zierikzee, Highland,
 and 
Ter-Boede,
 weigh∣ing their Anchors, ran to the North-East Point of 
Timon,
 to the 
Naerden,
 and the other Ships.


Admiral 
Bort
 putting out his white Flag to call a Council, they judg'd it convenient to steer further out from the Shore, and also seal'd their Orders.


The Admiral here complaining that he had many young and unexperienc'd People in his Ship, Order was immediately given, That two of the stoutest Sea-men should be taken out of each of the other Ships, except the 
Gold-finch,
 and put aboard of him.


In the afternoon the Fleet set sail, and took their Course North-North-East, and saw the Isle of 
Timon
 about Sun-set, bearing South and by West, and South-South-West, about five or six Leagues distant.


The tenth in the afternoon, under three Degrees and eight Minutes, the Fleet had thirty eight Fathom Water, sandy Ground.


But by the eleventh at Noon they had reach'd five Degrees and four Mi∣nutes Northern Latitude, and in forty and forty one Fathom Water, gravelly Ground.


The next day at Noon they were in five Degrees and fifty six Minutes, and had thirty nine Fathom Water.


The thirteenth, the Fleet being in seven Degrees and six Minutes, had twenty nine, thirty, and thirty one Fathom Water: But the 
Naerden
 sailing with his Squadron about the East, had almost lost sight of the 
Zierikzee.


The fourteenth about Noon the Fleet was in eight Degrees and sixteen Mi∣nutes,


and had twenty two and twenty three Fathom Water, fine sandy Ground, mix'd with white Gravel. At Night, about the latter end of the first Watch, appear'd the two Isles lying to the West of the Island 
Poele
 or 
Candor,
 a League from the Fleet, which had eighteen Fathom Water. This 
Poele
 or 
Candor
 lies in the Bay of 
Siam,
 near the Coast of 
Vancinaer Cambodia,
 uninhabited, and about three or four Leagues in Circumference, surrounded with high Rocks and Mountains, crown'd with shady Trees, and abounding with good Provi∣sion, to the great refreshment of those Ships that put in there.


The fifteenth in the Morning the Fleet came up with the North-East Point of 
Candor,
 which bore South-East and by East about three or four Leagues di∣stance from them, in the depth of seventeen and eighteen Fathom Water, white Sand, mix'd with small Pebbles.


The sixteenth in the Morning they sail'd in fifteen and sixteen Fathom Wa∣ter, the 
Table-Mount
 being North-East, about three Leagues from the Shore. About Noon they found themselves by observation in ten Degrees and thirty one Minutes Northern Latitude, and had fifteen Fathom Water, about three Leagues from the Coast of 
Champa.


Champa,
 so call'd according to 
Texeira,
 from the 
Portuguese
 Pronunciation, 
Champa;
 by 
Martinius, Changpa;
 and by others, 
Ciampa,
 is a Kingdom, which hath the Principality of 
Camboya
 on the West, and, according to Father 
Lerin,
 that of 
Laos,
 from which it is separated by the vast Desarts and Mountains of 
Samao;
 the East respects 
Cochinchina
 and 
Tunking,
 and reaches with its Coasts to the main Continent of 
China,
 before you come to the Shore against the Island of 
Makou.


The chief City, which lies up in the Countrey, hath its denomination from the Kingdom: The other Towns are 
Varella, Penaria,
 and 
Tauchonarella.
 This Countrey abounds in all sorts of Provisions, and the Hills with Elephants, which are transported from thence to several Places. There is also store of the best 
Calamback
-Wood, by some call'd 
Calampart,
 by 
Linschot, Calambu,
 and 
Ca∣lambes,
 or 
Lignum-Aloes;
 by the 
Arabians, Agalugen,
 and 
Haut;
 and by the Inha∣bitants of 
Zaratte
 and 
Dekan, Ud,
 which hath a most sweet and odorife∣rous smell, said to proceed from its rotting under Ground; for the sound Wood hath no smell at all. 
The Tree
 (saith 
Garzias
) 
resembles that of an Olive, but somewhat bigger; and the firm and sound Wood hath no kind of smell; but with the putrifying of the Bark and Wood, the fat and Oily Moisture may also communicate of its Sweetness to that likewise.
 This Wood they prize so highly, that they equally value it with Gold; yet much us'd by the 
Chineses
 in their Offerings to their Gods. The Countrey, though badly stor'd with Gold and Silver, yet is en∣rich'd with excellent Drugs, costly Woods (as the 
Sampan
 and 
Ebon
-Wood) Rice, Lint, and Cotton: There is also plenty of a Fruit call'd 
Oaby,
 which is very great, weighing ten or twelve Pounds apiece, and by the 
Chineses
 us'd for Bread, and sometimes mingled with Meat like the Bottoms of Artichokes: They also have a very large Fruit, by the Inhabitants and other 
Indians
 call'd 
Nankussen,
 and by some, according to 
Garzias
 and 
Acosta, Iaka.


The Countrey is Govern'd by a King, that Rules, neither acknowledging Subjection to the Emperor of 
China,
 the 
Cham
 of 
Tartary,
 or any other Supe∣rior. The Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 spoke with the King himself, who sate in a great Court, in a very large Hall, hung with rich Tapestry; but was not permitted to enter the Presence, till he pull'd off his Shoes and Stockings, be∣cause none may appear before the King unless bare-footed, such was their Custom of due Reverence.


The Grandees or Persons of Quality there, are mounted on Steeds, with Bells in their Ears, like our Cart-Horses.


The seventeenth, in the Night, the Fleet doubled the South Point of the
 Bay of 
Pangerang,
 which bore West and by South about three Leagues from them. In the bottom of this Bay, being a most convenient Harbor for Ships, stands a great City, whose Jurisdiction extends a vast way into the Countrey, and Govern'd by a peculiar King. The Vice-Admiral going ashore, spake with him with his Shoes and Stockins on, and was presented by the King with soms Fans and Stuffs. The Countrey thereabouts abounds with 
Calamback
-Wood.


The Fleet steering North and by East, found her self about Noon to be in eleven Degrees and thirty five Minutes, about three Leagues from the 
Champan
 Shore. In the Morning they plied about the five Islands, close by the foremen∣tion'd Coast, the Southermost part of which appears like a round Hay-stack.


The eighteenth, at Noon, by Observation they found themselves in twelve Degrees and thirteen Minutes, two Leagues from the Shore, in seventy Fathom Water.


On 
Wednesday
 about Sun-rising the Fleet made 
St. Iohn de Fyks,
 on the Coast of 
Champan,
 North-East and by North, about three Leagues from them, and at Noon were in thirteen Degrees and five Minutes Northern Latitude; and Coasted about Sun-set 
Cabo Avarelles,
 which lay Northerly from them, steering North and by East.


Cabo Avarelles
 being a very high Mountain, appears a great distance off like a Man on Horse-back, and serves for a Beacon.


The twentieth they found themselves in thirteen Degrees and forty nine Mi∣nutes, and saw the Point of 
Poele Candor,
 North and by East, a good distance from them.


The one and twentieth, in the Day-watch, the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 (for the Admiral 
Bort
 going that Night with seven Ships about the East, was by break of day gotten quite out of sight) with the Ships belonging to his Squa∣dron, came opposite to the Northermost of the 
Box-Islands,
 and spied four Sail,
 bearing North-East and by East, near the Coast of 
Champan,
 or 
Quinan;
 whe∣ther he, and those that belong'd to the 
Ter-Boede,
 row'd with their Sloops well Mann'd and Arm'd; but three of them escaping, they took only one, which they carried aboard the Vice-Admiral, and found him to be laden with Rice, Honey and strong 
Arak,
 Mann'd with seven Men, and having also five proper Women aboard, that coming from 
Poeyan,
 intended to sail from 
Taywan,
 not far from thence. They judg'd it convenient to let them pass with their Vessel; but the Women would rather have staid with the 
Netherlanders,
 if they might have had their desires; yet at their departure, they were presented with three Pieces of course white Linnen, which they receiv'd with great thank∣fulness.


The City 
Poeyan,
 lying on the Coast of 
Quinan,
 at the foot of a Mountain, between two Rivers, is surrounded with high thick Walls of Stone, fit to plant Guns upon. Their Fortresses are not fortified with Towers, but here and there with some Galleries eighteen Foot high, to which they ascend by a Ladder, and from thence assail their Enemies.


The City hath three straight and long Streets, which all concenter before the Royal Palace, from whence one leads to the Sea, the second to one of the City-Gates, and the third to the Mountain-Gate. None of the Streets are


pav'd, except those three; for the other By-Lanes and Alleys are Sandy. And notwithstanding the whole may be Navigated by Channels that run through every Street, which receive their Waters from the foremention'd Rivers, yet are they very foul, because when the Water falls, it goes off so slowly.


Near the Court, on the West side of the City, stands a spacious Temple; on the East-side, the Arsenal; and on the South side, the Kings Palace, artifi∣cially built, with spacious Courts and Walks within. At the end of the Street that leads into the Countrey, stand the Mayor or Chief Magistrates House, wherein all the Kings Servants or Slaves reside, and where are also his Stables, and other Offices.


The City stands divided into four parts, over every one of which a No∣ble-man hath the chief Command in time of War, Fire, or other Accidents. In each of these is also a Drum, as big as a 
Rhenish
-Wine Fat, whereon they beat with a Hammer, which always hangs near it, when any Uproar happens.


The Merchandise to be had there, are all sorts of Wrought and un-wrought Silks, flower'd and plain, of divers Colours; as 
Peelings, Hokiens,
 and the like: They trade also in white Linnen.


At Noon the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 found himself in fourteen Degrees and forty Minutes Northern Latitude, and in the Morning came up with Ad∣miral 
Van Bort,
 with seven Ships and a Jonk.


The twenty second, about Sun-rising, the Fleet spied 
Poele Canton,
 North-West
 and by North, about five Leagues from them, and were in the Latitude of fifteen Degrees and thirty one Minutes, their Course North-East.


The twenty third the Fleet was in sixteen Degrees and fourteen Minutes North Latitude.


The twenty fourth, being 
Munday,
 they discover'd the Island 
Hainan,
 at a
 good distance from them; and taking observation at Noon, were in eighteen Degrees and fifteen Minutes, about four or five Leagues South-East from 
Hainan.


The twenty fifth about Noon they reach'd nineteen Degrees and fifty one Minutes.


The twenty sixth they had twenty one Degrees and seven Minutes North Latitude, and were within four or five Leagues, bearing South-South-West, from the Southermost Island of 
Macao,
 or 
Macau,
 in twenty six and twenty se∣ven Fathom Water.


The twenty seventh the 
Zierikzee
 and 
Ter-Boede
 cast Anchor in the Evening near the Island of 
Macau,
 by the 
Box-Heads,
 being separated from the rest of the Fleet by Misty Weather, that being the appointed Rendezvouz, where they were to meet, if by any Accident they should lose one another.


The next day in the Forenoon 
Indiik,
 accompanied with the 
Loosduinen, Sing∣ing-bird,
 and three Frigats, 
Domburgh, High-land,
 and 
Meliskerke,
 came to an An∣chor in the same place, under the Coast of 
Macau,
 in thirteen Fathom Water, gravelly Ground, which made up their Number eight.


The Islands of 
Macau
 receive their Denomination from the City of the same name, scituate on a small hanging Islet, joyn'd to one that is somewhat bigger; a Ship may without danger in Stormy Weather Sail betwixt, and there lie Land-lock'd, riding in an always smooth Sea, where they never want store of Fresh-water from the living Spring.


The twenty ninth, being 
Saturday, Indiik
 by putting out a white Flag, gave the Signal to the Commanders of the other Ships to come aboard to Coun∣cil,


where it was judg'd convenient, because 
Indiik
 suppos'd that the staying with the Ships bound for 
Iapan
 would be chargeable, to weigh Anchor in the Morning, put again to Sea, and sail through the Isles of 
Macau,
 ordering every Ship now and then to fire a Gun, in hopes thereby to meet again with the other five. Their Course being Nor-East by East, and Nor-Nor-East, in six∣teen, seventeen, and eighteen Fathom, gravelly Ground, about nine of the Clock they bore up with one of the greatest of the 
Macau
 Islands, in 
Portu∣guese
 call'd 
Ilhas de Lemas,
 where they saw five 
Champans
 or Jonks lying neer the Shore, which had a few Houses. Here also eight of the Fleet dropp'd An∣chor; for 
Indiik
 with two laden Flyboats steer'd for 
Iapan.


The Boats went ashore well Mann'd, where they found five great 
Champans
 with their Fishing-Nets, and above five thousand dried and salted 
Shepherd-Fish,
 with two hundred Pots of the Rows of the same Fish pickled.


The 
Chineses
 taking their flight into the Woods, so left all their Goods to the disposal of the 
Hollanders;
 onely three were overtaken by the Sea-men, and carried aboard the Vice-Admiral, who asking them from whence they came, they told him, 
From Xantung,
 and also inform'd him of 
Coxinga
's Death, who were glad of the News, and paid the poor Men for their Fish.


In the Afternoon they joyn'd with the Admiral 
Bort,
 and the other lost and separated Vessels, which lay at Anchor full three Leagues to Lee-ward of the most Easterly 
Macaan
 Isles, where they were not able to row ashore with their Boats, because of the swiftness of the Current.


The Admiral making the usual Signal, the rest of the Captains came aboard, where he ruffling a little, and chiding them for not keeping their Rendezvouz according to Order, he set upon each of them the Penalty to bring him aboard eight Hogsheads of Water.


The one and thirtieth in the Morning the Fleet setting sail, was at Noon in twenty two Degrees and twelve Minutes, a League and a half North-East and by East from 
Pedro Branke.


About Noon spying five Sail in the North-East, the Vice-Admiral 
Van Cam∣pen
 made Chase after them, and coming up with one in the Evening, took it, with three 
Chineses
 from 
Tamsua,
 and some fresh and salt Fish.


On 
Tuesday,
 the first of 
August,
 the Vice-Admiral went aboard the 
Naerden
 Frigat, to know what he should do with the three 
Chineses
 and their Vessel: 
Bort
 replied, 
That he should let them go.


At Noon the Fleet was in twenty two Degrees and thirty six Minutes, in twenty and twenty one Fathom Water, fine Sandy Ground, mix'd with Shells; and the next day at Noon, in twenty three Degrees and thirty eight Minutes, bearing about three Leagues West-South-West from the Island 
Tang Goie,
 in
 twenty two and twenty three Fathom Water, Sandy Ground, mix'd with small Shells, their Course North-East and by East.


In the Afternoon they spied several Fisher-Boats in the North-East, which the Admiral and Vice-Admiral order'd to be chased: The 
Loenen
 Pink overta∣king one of them, found onely one Man in her, the rest escaping by swimming.


The third, the Fleet came up with the Point of 
Puthay,
 lying on the main
 Coast of 
China,
 Northward from them, their Course North-East and by North along the Shore. This Point of Land appears in Prospect Mountainous, yet full of Valleys and Plains, planted with Trees of a wondrous height, whose Wood is as black as Pitch, and as hard and smooth as polish'd Marble or Ivory; some resembling Ebony; some a reddish Colour, and others yellowlike Wax.


The Admiral putting out the Signal, commanded all the Officers to come aboard, and caus'd the 
Chinese
 Prisoners to be ask'd in their presence, From whence they came? If they had no knowledge of the 
Tartars
 Army? And where 
Coxinga
's Fleet lay? Whereupon they replied, That 
Coxinga
 was dead, that the 
Tartars
 had a great Army near 
Chinkzieu
 and 
Zwansifoe;
 and that they were fitting out abundance of great and small Jonks in all the Havens, to War against 
Coxinga.


In the Night the Fleet sail'd by the Island 
Quemuy,
 to the great dislike of the Admiral 
Bort,
 and contrary to the General and 
Indian
 Councils Order, which notwithstanding none of the Commanders knew, onely that the Vice-Admiral 
Campen
 had direction, That if the Ships should be separated from one another in the Southern 
Mouzon,
 they should stay at the North Point of the Island 
Que∣muy;
 and in the Northern 
Mouzon,
 at the Promontory of 
Puthay,
 lying about two Leagues North-East from 
Quemuy;
 or else, in and before the River 
Hok∣sieu.
 On this Island 
Quemuy
 appear two Towers; the one with a Spiry Point; the other, being that of the City 
Engely,
 flat and broad.


The City 
Engely,
 which stood on the Island 
Quemuy,
 was pull'd down, to prevent that 
Coxinga
 might not possess or harbor there; and at present there appears onely some few Ruines of it, not far from the Sea-side.


In the Afternoon the Fleet rais'd twenty four Degrees and forty six Minutes, about two Leagues and a half from the Coast of 
China,
 where in the South-South-East they spied three Jonks, which the Admiral and all his Fleet chas'd, but they escap'd by their nimble Sailing. About Sun-set they were three Leagues distant from an Isle lying at the South Point of the 
Storm-bay,
 where∣on stands a Tower built like a Pyramide.


This 
Storm-bay
 makes a convenient Harbor for safety in bad Weather, or to
 take in Provisions. On the Shore are divers Towers, with several Entrances, adorn'd with Images of their Gods, and before whose chief Gate by turns one of their Priests keeps continual Watch.


On 
Fryday,
 being the fourth, about Noon, the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 de∣scried the 
Cape of the Cavalles,
 in twenty five Degrees and thirty seven Minutes,
 about two or three Leagues East and by North from the 
Rough Isle,
 in the depth of thirty four and thirty five Fathom Water, their Course North-North-East.


This Point of 
Cavalles
 is a great Promontory, full of many handsom Towns and Villages, and exceeding fertile; for besides the great conveni∣ences of Rivers, all sorts of Provisions may be purchased there at a cheap rate, as Sheep, Swine, Poultrey, and the like; there are also Oranges, Lemons, Citrons, and several other Fruits of that kind, especially one shap'd like a Pear, with a thin Shell, resembling the outward Husk of a Chesnut, white within, and of a delicious taste; they preserve it in Sugar and Oyl, because if boyl'd, it loseth the relish: The Horses of this place are generally very small.


Near this Point lye certain desolate and barren Isles, which by the 
Nether∣landers
 are generally call'd the 
Cavalles.


The fifth the Vice-Admiral was by a Storm and hollow Sea separated from the other Ships, when he saw three Isles not appearing in the Maps, about three Leagues South-West and by South from him, in the depth of thirty one and thirty two, and sometimes twenty seven, twenty five, and twenty four Fa∣thom Water, muddy Ground. About Noon they found thirteen several Isles in the Latitude of twenty seven Degrees, all which the Vice-Admiral sup∣pos'd to be the Isles of the 
Old Sayer.


Thither the Vice-Admiral sail'd, to wait for the Admiral and the other eight Ships, where he was so ruffled by a sudden Storm, that his Main-Mast had like to come over-board, his Sails and Rigging much torn; yet at last he came to an Anchor, with his four Ships, in twenty seven Degrees and nine Minutes Northern Elevation.


The sixth the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 commanded the Officers of the Ships that were with him to come aboard, to know of them if they were inclin'd (not to spend any time in vain) to seek for the Admiral, with the other eight Ships, by sailing Southerly or Northerly, because his Orders on the third of the same Month were to meet in the Latitude of twenty seven Degrees and thirty Minutes before the City 
Hoksieu
 (if possible,) if they should happen by Storm to be separated one from another, and there to inquire after the state of the 
Tartars.


Van Campen
 judg'd it convenient to sail but fourteen or fifteen Leagues to∣wards the South, along the Coast of 
China,
 and if he miss'd of him there, to take his Course back again towards the North, or to stay there till they came to him, and then go together to find out their Admiral, which was agreed on.


The eighth 
Van Campen
 weigh'd Anchor with his Squadron, sailing a pretty way to the 
Offin,
 and then stood in towards the Coast of 
China,
 there to dis∣cover some Haven or River, but saw a little to the Northward of a Cape on the Coast of 
China,
 six or seven Isles, which passing by, and plying several times from and towards the Shore, they came again to an Anchor behind the Isle where they had lain before.


The ninth the Vice-Admirals Pilot went ashore, to seek For Water, which he found running out of the Rocks, between the Hills: About Noon they weigh'd Anchor, and sail'd to a high Isle, unknown to them, and not found in the Map. In the Evening they spied ten or eleven Sail of Fishermen, to reach whom 
Van Campen
 sent his Pilot with a Sloop well Mann'd, and one who spoke some broken 
Chinese;
 but they onely overtook one of them, which they brought aboard, where they question'd them, From whence they came, and whereabouts 
Hoksieu
 was? They answer'd, From 
Kita,
 and that 
Hoksieu
 was about six or seven Leagues Southerly from them: And selling their taken Fish to the 
Netherlanders
 for three 
Spanish
 Rials, promis'd the next Morning to bring them Hens, Swine, and 
Chinese
 Apples aboard.


With Sun-set they came between the Main Coast of 
China,
 and four unknown Isles, and dropp'd their Anchors in thirteen Fathom Water, about Cannon∣shot from the Shore. On the greatest stood a Light-house, with Burning Candles in it.


The tenth, being 
Thursday,
 the Vice-Admiral set Sail in the Morning to∣wards the South-South-West, between the main Coast of 
China
 and the Islands, a Cannon-shot from the shore. On the Main Continent appear'd a House in a Bay. About Noon they were come back into twenty six Degrees and twen∣ty seven Minutes, and in the Evening by calm, yet contrary Tides, enter'd the Bay of 
Kita,
 half a League Southward from an unknown Island.


The eleventh in the Morning 
Van Campen
 setting sail again, spied two Jonks lying before 
Tenhay,
 to which he sent 
Iacob Black,
 with a Boat and Skiff, Mann'd with armed Sea-men and Soldiers, to fight them; but the Jonks by swiftness of their Sails got clear off; yet in the Pursuit they saw in the North-West, near the Coast of 
China,
 three or four unknown Isles, and seven Ships at an Anchor near the Shore, which were the lost Ships, with the Admiral, that they were in quest of.


About Noon the Vice-Admiral was commanded aboard of the Admiral 
Bort,
 by Captain 
Auke Pieterson,
 Master of the 
Ter-Boede
 Frigat, and inform'd by him, That he had taken nineteen Jonks, great and small, near 
Tenhay,
 six or seven of which they had fetch'd from the Shore, and burn'd the rest, except one, which was blown up by its own Powder.


The Booty of the taken Jonks consisted in forty one square Packs, nineteen Fardels, and five Bales of fine white Silk, a hundred and thirteen Pieces of 
Spiljauter,
 sixty seven Pigs of Lead great and small, two hundred sixty eight Bags of Pepper, besides sixty nine Guns and Blunderbusses.


The twelfth, being 
Saturday,
 the Fleet setting Sail, steer'd their Course to the River of 
Hoksieu,
 to perform the Orders of the General and Council of 
India;
 but was forc'd by calm Weather, and contrary Tides, to come to an Anchor again in seven Fathom Water, a little to the Westward of the Bay, not far from the Land, border'd with a white sandy Shore.


In the hanging of the Mountain appear'd a great and well-built City, call'd 
Sotiha,
 whereof the Walls of one side were wash'd by the Sea.


Near the Shore, and against the Gates, lay some small Jonks, and many other Vessels, that were hall'd up above the Water-mark; whither the Admi∣ral 
Bort,
 and Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen,
 in the afternoon sent ninety seven Sea∣men, and one hundred and fifty Soldiers in five Boats and seven Sloops, with Command to set them all on fire (for they belong'd to 
Coxinga,
) but to spare all Houses.


The 
Hollanders
 coming near the Shore, were roughly entertain'd by the 
Chineses,
 with great Guns and Musquets; but being once Landed they met with little resistance, for the 
Chineses
 fled unto the Mountains: whereupon 
Van Campen
 entring the City with his Men, set a Watch in a great House near
 the Gate, and sent the rest of his People in three Parties through the City.


This City 
Sotiha
 had been ruin'd and burnt by the 
Tartars
 about a year be∣fore, but since that rebuilt with many handsom Houses, wherein they found good quantities of Rice, Salt, and dri'd Fish. Three 
Chineses
 were also taken, with four Women, but set at liberty again immediately. A young Woman was found Murder'd, but how none knew.


This Place is now inhabited chiefly by 
Chineses,
 short-hair'd like the 
Tartars,
 that maintain themselves with Fishing and Husbandry, being Licenced there∣to by the Governor of 
Hoksieu.


After the firing of twenty seven small and great Vessels Laden with Pepper, Silk, and other Commodities to be Transported to 
Iapan, Van Campen
 with his People in the Evening leaving the Shore went aboard, where he related his Adventures to the Admiral. Hence the Fleet Sail'd somewhat Southerly, and Anchor'd before the City 
Tenhay
 in nine Fathom Water.


This 
Tenhay
 hath no Walls, and inhabited onely by Fisher-men, and some Merchants.


The thirteenth being 
Sunday,
 the Fleet between 
Tenhay
 and the River 
Hoksieu
 came to Anchor in eight Fathom Water, where in the Bay of 
Linkun
 they espi'd some small Fisher-men with their Nets.


This Bay of 
Linkun
 lies also between the River 
Hoksieu
 and 
Tenhay,
 where some Priests coming to the 
Netherlanders,
 requested of them a Pass, that they might go free if any of their Ships should meet with them at Sea, promising to do the same to them, if the 
Hollanders
 had occasion to travel by Land or Water.


The Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 sent to the Admiral 
Bort,
 to know if the six Jonks should stay near 
Tenhay,
 or go into the River 
Hoksieu,
 that if a Storm should happen they might not be driven from their Anchors, with which they were but meanly provided, and had scarce Provision for six or seven Days. In the Night they saw many Fires upon the Mountains.


The fourteenth being 
Monday,
 in the Morning the Fleet Anchor'd near the Banks of 
Hoksieu,
 about a League from the Shore, and to make their coming known to the 
Tartars, Bort
 commanded seven Guns to be fir'd from the 
Naerden
 Frigat, five from the 
Zierikzee,
 three from the 
Domburgh,
 and one from all the rest of the other Ships.


Here it was concluded, that Captain 
Abraham Pon,
 Commander of the 
Breukelen,
 with six Men, one Quarter-master, and the Interpreter 
Lakka,
 with three 
Tartars
 that came to the 
Hollanders
 at 
Tayowan
 the year before, should car∣ry a Letter to the Governors and Vice-Roy.


On 
Tuesday
 the fifteenth the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen,
 according as order'd the day before, Sail'd with two Frigats, three Pinks, besides the six foremention'd Jonks, towards 
Hoksieu
 or 
Chancheu,
 commonly call'd 
The River Chang,
 Steering his Course West and by South between two Sands near the 
White Rocks,
 which appear like Pyramids, and close by the North-east 
Foreland:
 and bringing the Pyramids on his Starboard, he alter'd his Course towards the South-west, through a narrow Channel six, seven, or eight Fathom deep gravelly Ground. Thence he Steer'd his Course East North-east, and Anchor'd in eight Fathom Water between two pleasant Isles, and left on his Starboard two other within Cannon-shot, which serv'd as safe Harbors for all Ships against foul Weather. Near the Evening 
Van Campen
 fell down with the Ebb out of the River, to∣wards the Bar of 
Hoksieu,
 and came about four Glasses after Sun-set to the rest of the Fleet; where going Aboard the 
Naerden
 Fregat, he gave an account to the Admiral of Affairs, to his great satisfaction.


The sixteenth being 
Wednesday,
 the Fleet pass'd into the River 
Hoksieu,
 and came presently after Noon with the Flood, by the high North-east Point of the Eastermost Island, having the 
White Rocks
 on their Starboard, and work∣ing through a strong Ebb in a narrow Channel, they came to an Anchor in five Fathom Water, where immediately three handsom 
Chinese
 Vessels, with five grand 
Mandarins,
 came Aboard of the 
Naerden
 Fregat to the Admiral 
Bort,
 and with much Ceremony and Complement welcom'd both the Admiral and Vice-Admiral. At Low-water the 
Naerden
 Frigat sitting upon the Sand much troubled the Admiral, who call'd to 
Van Campen,
 telling him that he had brought the Ships to a bad Place to Anchor in; but he little regarding such a danger, repli'd, To Morrow, if it be the Admiral's pleasure, I will carry the Ships out of the River again.


The seventeenth in the Morning the Fleet weigh'd Anchor, and Sail'd along in five, six, seven, and eight Fathom Water: thence they Sail'd North∣west up the River along the Northermost Island; against the middle of which being a safe Harbor, the Ships came to Anchor.


Not far from hence lay four Islands, formerly peopled, but now laid waste, and depopulated by the 
Tartars.
 A whole Moneth the 
Netherlanders
 lay near these four Islands, where they got all things in a plentiful manner, though the ordinary Sea-men were not permitted to go ashore without leave, and onely six at a time, because they should not be burdensom, nor affright the Inha∣bitants.


On 
Friday
 the eighteenth 
Van Campen
 went ashore with his Sloop, and came
 to the South-west Point of the smallest Island at a Stone Cawsey, along which he walked to a deserted Place, wherehe saw many large Ruines of former Houses, and under the jutting of a Hill several Towns, besides two fair Temples, and in them, on a row, many Chests with dead Corps standing against the Walls above the Ground: There also were two Light-houses, fur∣nish'd with many Images, sitting on Stools at a Table, before which they burnt Offerings, imploring indulgence to departed Souls.


The nineteenth Admiral 
Bort
 sent 
Philip Mew,
 who had some smattering of the 
Chinese
 Tongue, to the Fort of 
Minjazen,
 three Leagues from 
Hoksieu,
 to the Governor, with Desire to permit them with Boats, and two of the taken Jonks, to Sail up the River for fresh Water for the Ships, and to buy Provisi∣ons. He brought Answer, that they might go with all their Boats and Jonks, and fetch as much Water as they pleas'd.


The twentieth and one and twentieth nothing hapned of any remark, eve∣ry Ship being busie to take in Water.


The two and twentieth being 
Tuesday,
 five 
Mandarins,
 with a considera∣ble
 Train, came in great 
Tartar
 Vessels Aboard the 
Naerden
 Frigat to the Ad∣miral, where they were welcom'd with the firing of Guns, and three Vollies of small Shot: Upon the Admiral's Order the 
Naerden
 fir'd seven, 
Zirickzee
 five, 
Domburgh
 three, and all the rest of the Ships two Guns apiece, and three Vollies of small Shot more. The Pilot of the 
Naerden
 Frigat carried in a 
Tar∣tar
 Vessel, aboard of the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 (who at that time being troubled with an Ague, could not be at the 
Mandarins
 Entertainment in the 
Naerden
) one fat Calf, five Hens, five Ducks, three Water-Lemons, with a great Pot of 
Chinese
 Beer, all sent as a Present to 
Van Campen,
 from the Governors of 
Hoksieu
 and 
Minjazen.


The twenty fourth a Corporal with four Souldiers was sent ashore with a Flag to the Island, being on the North side of the River, with Command to go to the top of the Mountains, and see if he could descry any Ships or Jonks: if they saw Ships, then they were to wave their Colours as many times as there were Vessels; if Jonks, betwixt every Flourish to fire a Gun.


In the Afternoon 
Ysbrant van Banke,
 Commander of the 
Ankeveen,
 who dy'd the Night before, was Buried on the Island, and 
Iacob Swaert
 put in his Place, being the Pilot to the Vice-Admiral in the 
Zirickzee.


The twenty sixth and twenty seventh nothing of remark hapned.


The twenty eighth three 
Chinese
 Vessels came with three 
Mandarins
 from 
Hok∣sieu
 aboard the 
Naerden
 Frigat, and brought a Letter from the Governor there∣of, and Commander of the Castle 
Minjazen:
 The Contents consisted in ma∣ny Complements, with promise of Favors and all kindness from them both; likewise a free Grant to go unmolested up the River, and buy Necessaries for their Money for the Fleet; and lastly, wishing them a kind welcom into 
China:
 by which it appear'd, that the 
Tartars
 intended to joyn with the 
Nether∣land
 Forces. The Letter being read, several Guns were fir'd from the 
Naerden.


At Noon the three 
Mandarins
 taking their leave went away in the same Ves∣sels, whilst five Cannons were fir'd in honor to them, and also three Vollies of small Shot: they carry'd with them a Letter from the Admiral 
Bort,
 written by the 
Chinese
 Interpreter 
Lakka,
 to the Governors of 
Hoksieu,
 with many civil Expressions of thankfulness.


The twenty ninth, thirtieth, and one and thirtieth, nothing hapned of any note.


The first of 
September
 all Officers were commanded by the Admiral to Land their Soldiers on the middle Island, and take up their Quarters in the best Houses of the ruin'd Town, with Order, that every Officer should furnish his Soldiers with all Necessaries for the Dressing of Meat, and to give them double allowance on the Shore of Rice, Pork, Oyl, Vinegar, and 
Arak,
 which daily occasion'd a murmuring amongst the Sea-men, who said, That they did the worst Work, and hazarded their Lives as well as the Soldiers, and there∣fore ought rather to have the greatest allowance.


The second, being 
Saturday, Auke Peters,
 Commander of the 
Ter-Boede,
 and Captain 
Constantine Nobell,
 came back from 
Hoksieu
 (whither they were sent by Order of the Admiral on the thirtieth of the last Moneth) and brought with them to the Admiral in the 
Naerden,
 five Cows, thirty six Ducks, five great Pears, with some Pot-herbs.


The third, being 
Sunday,
 Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 went ashore in his Sloop, where he saw divers Burying-places defaced by their own Soldiers, who out of hope to find Gold, Silver, or Jewels buried within, broke open the Chests, and threw out the Corps, which lay in all their Apparel, as Caps on their Heads, Coats, Breeches, and Shoes, and in their full shape, but as firm as a Mummy.


On the fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh days nothing hapned worthy of relation.


The eighth, being 
Friday, Iohn Melman
 with two Soldiers, and three 
Tartars
 that came with the Fleet from 
Batavia,
 besides the 
Chinese
 Interpreter and Secre∣tary 
Lakka,
 came back from 
Sinksieu
 through 
Hoksieu,
 after a Journey of twenty four days, accompanied with a 
Mandarin,
 sent to the Admiral 
Bort,
 with Let∣ters from the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and from the next Person to him, the Ge∣neral 
Taysing Lipovy,
 besides a Letter from a great Lord call'd 
Santing Hoube∣thetok,
 Governor of the great City 
Zwansyfoe;
 in all which they express'd them∣selves in a handsom Style, signifying the 
Hollanders
 kind welcome thither. The two chief Commanders, the Vice-Roy and General, desir'd moreover, that the Admiral would please to repair to them, or some other he should Depute (for they would be glad of some People of Quality to Confer with) and likewise, that they would be pleas'd to send the Letters from the Lord-General and Councel of 
Batavia,
 by a special Envoy by Land to the Camp at 
Sinksieu,
 that so they might better know, by communicating their Intentions, how to carry on the grand Affair; and that they should in the interim leave the Presents for the Vice-Roy in their Ships till farther order; and accordingly he Commission'd the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 and 
Constantine Nobell
 (yet their Letters did not so earnestly require it as the Interpreter 
Iohn Melman
 related to the Admiral,) with Commands to deliver the Lord-General and 
Indian
 Councels Letters to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and the Person next to him in State, the General 
Tay∣sing Lipovy,
 and withall, to Treat and conclude with them concerning the grand Affair: This being concluded on, they sent advice concerning it to the Go∣vernor of 
Hoksieu,
 who return'd this Answer:








THe dispatching of the Vice-Admiral 
Iohn van Campen
 and 
Constantine
 
Nobel,
 with Letters from the Lord-General and Councel of 
Batavia,
 to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and the next Person to him, 
Taysing Lipovy,
 will, according to my Judgment, come to a good issue; but to joyn with You, and make a League to go against 
Coxinga
 or his Adherents, is beyond my


Commission: but I will prepare my self, if the Ambassadors and Letters are ready, to assist them, and provide them Attendants, and all Necessaries which they shall want on their Journey to 
Sinksieu
 to the Vice-Roy and General. About Matters of War and Merchandise I am not permitted to Treat with You, but You must expect Your Answer concerning it from the Vice-Roy, or Court at 
Peking.








The eighteenth, being 
Monday,
 in the Morning two Jonks, with the Inter∣preter 
Melman,
 and the 
Chinese
 Interpreter and Secretary 
Lakka,
 sent from the Governor of 
Hoksieu,
 with permittance from the Commander of the Fort 
Min∣jazen,
 to the Fleet to fetch the Vice-Admiral 
Iohn van Campen
 and 
Constantine Nobel,
 with their Goods and Retinue, and conduct them up to 
Hoksieu,
 and from thence by Land to travel to 
Sinksieu
 to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and General 
Lipovy.


Van Campen
 and 
Noble
 making themselves ready for their Journey, went at∣tended each with six Men, besides a Trumpet, Interpreter, and two Soldiers, in all eighteen Persons: the Commands and Orders which they were to ob∣serve, and were deliver'd them by the Admiral 
Bort,
 were 
verbatim
 as fol∣loweth:








THe Reasons and Occasions are known, which have forc'd and mov'd
 Us and the Councel to send you to the chief Governors of the Terri∣tory of 
Fokien,
 wherein 
Hoksieu
 is the Metropolis, and the usual Place of their Residence and Court, though at present they are not there, but lie Encam∣ped with their Army near the City 
Zansifoe,
 about nine or ten days Jour∣ney Post from 
Hoksieu.
 I say to you both, because 
Constantine Noble
 hath Order from the Lord-General and 
Indian
 Councel, to Negotiate and Con∣clude that Affair with those great Officers, according to their Excellencies Order, and the Letters to the same Governors, 
viz.
 the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and General 
Taysing Lipovy:
 the Copies of which you having between you, must serve for your full Directions, without needing any rehearsal to be made of them; so that We onely to obtain their Excellencies favor, entreat you to obey and observe these following Orders.


I. After you have taken leave of Us you shall go to 
Hoksieu,
 and at your arrival there, obtain Licence to repair to the Governor 
Haitingkong,
 and prof∣fer him great Presents, and inform him that you are ready to travel to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and 
Taysing Lipovy,
 with Letters to him from the Lord-General and Councel of 
Batavia,
 with a Request, that he would help you by a quck dispatch to go thither. In the Letter which he lately Writ to Us he he hath promised to provide all things fit for the Journey: whereupon We have Answer'd according to the Copy which you have, containing chiefly Our taken Resolution of the 
Domburghs
 staying here with the Presents to the fore-mention'd chief Governors; Our setting Sail with the other seven Ships about the North, to infest and gawl the Enemy, and Intentions to be here against your Return; and amongst other things, a quick Dispatch for your Journey: so that I hope you will find all things there in a readiness.


II. When you have left 
Hoksieu,
 and come to 
Zansifoe,
 Commanded by the Lord 
Santing Houbethetok,
 who seems to favor Our Designs, you shall deli∣ver Our Letter to Him, and also these Presents, because with the Return of the Interpreter 
Iohn Melman
 (who hath already been with the said chief Go∣vernors,) he Writ to Us, and thereby express'd his good Inclinations to∣wards Us.


The chiefest, nay the sole occasion of your Journey, is to deliver the Letters of their Excellencies before-mention'd to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and General 
Taysong Lipovy;
 and if they are so inclin'd, to Treat and Con∣clude with them all those Affairs which they desire of them in their Letters, and authoris'd us to Agree on, consisting chiefly in these Points.


First, to make an inviolable League with them, for the best and most ad∣vantage of the 
Hollander,
 and destruction of theirs and our Enemies, being the Pyrate 
Coxinga
 and his Adherents.


Secondly, to obtain a free and unmolested Trade through the whole Em∣pire of 
China.


To which two chief Points are joyn'd some others which our Masters have commanded us, 
viz.
 to permit us to chuse some convenient Place for Factory, where there is a good Harbor for the securing of our Ships, and fit to fortifie against 
Coxinga
's assaults, and to that end keep a small Garrison of Soldiers there.


To promise to procure a Grant from the Great Emperor of 
China
 for that which they shall Conclude with you about.


That if they joyn with us against 
Coxinga,
 we will follow their Advice and Resolution: Nay, if they are inclin'd to drive 
Coxinga
 from 
Formosa,
 we will assist them, and carry part of their Forces in our Ships thither.


Yet nevertheless, that we at present will use our Ships to seize and con∣quer 
Coxinga
's Jonks, which Sail to and from 
Iapan,
 and likewise to hinder his Fishing behind the Mountain 
Tankoia
 on the South-side of 
Formosa,
 which begins every year with eighty or a hundred Jonks in the latter end of 
No∣vember,
 and ends about the middle of 
Ianuary.
 But these Articles are strictly to be insisted upon, as of most concern for the destroying and disabling of the Enemy.


After delivery of your Letters you must wait for their Answers. If they should ask you if you have ought else to request of them that is not menti∣on'd in the Letters, then tell them, That if they grant those, there is no other Business of any consequence to Treat about. But if you observe them not to be willing to consent to the chiefest Articles, you must ask them im∣mediately what they resolve to grant us. Then accept of all things which redound to our Profit, and by all means extoll our Strength, and what we are able to perform by force of Arms, and the faithful Service which we shall be ready to do them when time requires, in assisting them with all things, whereby they may see our fidelity: nay, lend them our Ships and Men against the Enemy 
Coxinga,
 and all other Enemies of the Empire; for recom∣pence of all which they desire nought else but a free Trade. If they should speak of Custom and other Taxes, desire them to tell you what they amount to, if reasonable, consent to it; for our People ought not to pay either more or less than their own Natives, which you are to take notice of. We are afraid, that at present they will not permit us to Traffick, nor Conclude on any thing concerning it, but deny the Request, and onely speak and debate about the business of War. If so, and observing that to press it on any long∣er, or more, all other Business might be neglected, we judge it convenient to take no Cognizance of it at this time; yet if any hopes be, to procure leave for the Sale of those few Merchandise laden in some of the Ships: what they are we desire you to see in the general Inventory of all the Goods. It may be that they will direct you to the Court at 
Peking,
 there to obtain


the liberty of free Trade from the Emperor, and also to advise us to send another Embassy from 
Batavia,
 which you may assure them shall be done the next year. Yet nevertheless, if you cannot attain to our Desires, leave off further Suit, that so we may avoid such vast Expence and Charge: but if they be inclin'd to send to 
Batavia,
 you may seem to be very well pleas'd at it, and promise to Transport them thither in our Ships, except they will send one or two of their Jonks, which would be the better for us. Concern∣ing the possessing and fortifying of a peculiar Place, you may also desist from▪ if you see them not to favor the Request, but to be satisfi'd that our Ships may lie in the Haven of 
Hoksieu,
 and there drive a Trade, provided they can be assur'd to lie safe, and without danger there. When you come to Agree with them concerning the War with 
Coxinga
 and his Party with our joynt Forces, take care that they oblige themselves thereto by Writing, and with us declare themselves Enemies to the same 
Coxinga
 and his Adhe∣rents, and that they shall not without our knowledge, much less to our preju∣dice, agree with the Enemy, which we will do also on our part. Moreover, make a strict enquiry, whether or no they have not already Treated, and are inclin'd to be reconcil'd to him, if he should submit himself to the Em∣peror; this may be suspected, because they say 
Coxinga
 is dead, and his Son in 
Ayanny
 not concern'd at it: Which if you observe, let them by no means detain you, but hasten your self from thence and come to us; for the Vice-Admiral ought on all occasions to be in the Fleet, because his Presence is continually requir'd there: wherefore if he can come away before, let 
Nobel
 tarry there so long till he thinks he can effect no more by staying. If they desire us, with them, to agree with the Enemy, you may easily under∣stand on what Articles, and with what advantage and satisfaction it may be done, though you conclude noton any thing.


If you can find out any means for the delivery of our Prisoners in 
Eymuy,
 let nothing be wanting to procure their liberty, because the General and Council in 
Batavia
 have highly recommended their Release to us; but that we should do nothing without acquainting them with it, and their consent. The Hostage with his Retinue shall be kept so long in the 
Domburgh,
 till perhaps by the advice of his Friends he may do something that may be requisite for that Business, because he also longs for his Liberty. The Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and General 
Taysong Lipovy
 have every one sent us a Letter by the Interpreter 
Melman;
 we now therefore send an Answer to every one of them, to the same effect and purpose as theirs were, with some small Presents, as appears by the Copies which you have, to which I refer my self, desiring you to deliver them at a convenient time, either with their Excellencies Letters, or afterwards. The Presents which belong to them, and are signi∣fi'd in their Excellencies Letters, I have caus'd to be taken out of the 
Naerden,
 and put into the 
Domburgh:
 By the same Copies you may see how they are Pack'd, and wherein they consist, which at all times shall be ready upon your Order, whose Acceptation you must in a manner press, although hither∣to they have not been willing to receive. Of the Merchandise which are onely aboard the 
Domburgh,
 I also give you Patterns, if they should chance to fancy any of them; and likewise of the Goods sent along with you, that thereby you may see what Presents to give to one or other, as you shall think fit.


Lastly, I desire you to promote and advance His Excellency's and Councels


Desires, which at present so highly concerns the Publick, with all care and diligence imaginable; and think, that if all things fall out successfully, you will get no small honor and advancement by it, which God grant, into whose Protection I commit you.


Aboard the 
Naerden
 Frigat, lying with the Fleet before the River of 
Hoksieu,
 
the 19th of 
Septemb.
 1662.


Balthasar Bort.








The next day after, having Shipp'd all their Necessaries for the Journey, and put the Presents into the Jonks, they took their leave of the Fleet, and Sail'd South and by West up the River of 
Hoksieu.
 Presently after Noon they pass'd by a Town call'd 
Quanto,
 lying on the North-west Shore, about a Mus∣quet-shot up in the Countrey.


This 
Quanto
 is Wall'd, being about half an hours Walk in circumference, fortifi'd with Bulwarks and Watch-Towers, and strengthned with a great Garrison. Here, as in most Towns in 
China,
 are several 
Parades,
 for the Meet∣ing and Exercising of Foot and Horse, and to Train them up in all sorts of Martial Discipline. There are also Exchanges, or Burses for the Sale of Mer∣chandise, besides Markets where the Countrey People bring their Fruits and Provisions to sell.


A little farther the Agents pass'd by a populous Village call'd 
Sanwan,
 near the Shore.


The Inhabitants of 
Sanwan
 are ingenious Artificers, 
viz.
 Weavers, Smiths, Coopers, and other Labouring Trades, who live in peculiar Places of the Vil∣lage apart one from another, and every Precinct under a particular Governor, who gives an account of all Differences and Misdemeanors to the chief Ma∣gistrate.


All the Villages through which they pass'd in the Territory of 
Fokien
 are wild, and have daily Markets of Herbs, Fish, and Oysters.


After they pass'd on Southerly with their Retinue to the River which flows East and by South into the Sea, and hath a small Island in its Mouth, with a Sandy Shelf in the Channel, where they found on the North-west Shore the Village 
Sayon,
 and came after a little Sailing to the strong Fort 
Benantien,
 or 
Minjazen,
 which is fortifi'd with Towers, Walls, Bulwarks, and a broad Mole: it lieth three Leagues from 
Hoksieu,
 hath the bigness of a small Town, with several Streets and fair Houses, set forth with divers Tradesmens Shops, and in the middle a very large open Court, where on one side stands the Go∣vernors House, and on the other a 
Pagode.


Here 
Van Campen
 and 
Nobel
 went ashore with their whole Retinue, to Com∣plement the Governor, and were receiv'd into the Fort by three 
Mandarins
 with the usual Ceremonies, who conducted them into a great Temple; but they could not speak with him by reason of his indisposition. After they had pre∣sented them Bean-broth mix'd with Milk (which is accounted the greatest honor they can shew to any Person) they return'd with their Train into the Jonks, and after many Complements took their Leave. Being got about half a League high, there appear'd a most delightful and pleasant Place on the South-east side, call'd 
Plethoeu,
 or 
Pethou;
 and opposite to it on the North∣west Shore, a large 
Pagode,
 nam'd 
Possang,
 by them held for one of their Wonders.


On the other side of the River appears a spacious 
Area,
 built about with fair Edifices, and planted with Gardens, and Banquetting-houses in them. About four a Clock in the Evening they came to the South-east side, near a Stone-Bridge, built over the Water on Pillars and Arches, and cover'd close on the top with long and thick Planks, from Arch to Arch on each side thereof are Rails of blue Stone, here and there adorn'd with Dragons and Lions, Hew'n and Carv'd out. Over this Bridge four Horsemen may conveniently ride abrest.


The twentieth, being 
Wednesday,
 they went in two 
Pallakins,
 or Horse-Litters,
 carry'd by four Horses, over the Bridge to the City 
Hoksieu,
 there to Comple∣ment the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
's Wifes Mother, and to present her with an Am∣ber Necklace, and to speak with the Governor: Being pass'd over the Bridge, they found the High-ways built, the Streets pav'd, and crowded with thousands of People all along the City to the Palace, insomuch that they were scarce able to pass for the Throng.


The Vice-Roys Palace, in which at that time his Wifes Mother resided, was
 a handsom Edifice, surrounded with Walls of Free-stone, with great Portals and fair Gates, and guarded with Horse and Foot. At their entring they were courteously receiv'd by the Vice-Roy's Mother-in-law, who conducting them into a Hall furnish'd with Pictures and Stools, desir'd them to sit down. When seated, they were entertain'd each of them with a Cup full of Bean-broth, and afterwards they were all plac'd before a little Table, to eat both boyl'd and roasted Meats, serv'd up in Plate of Massy Gold. The Vice-Roys Brother (for he was also there) discoursed with them about several affairs, and amongst other things, ask'd of them if they had as great and well built Towns in 
Hol∣land
 as they had in 
China?
 and if they had Horses, Cows, and Sheep there? to which they answer'd, that they had: Then he inquir'd how long they were coming from 
Holland
 to 
China?
 they reply'd, Six or seven Moneths. Then the Vice-Roy's Mother, who had many Women waiting upon her, came to them, saying, 
That she intended to have eat and drank with them, but her indisposition had hindred her; but would Write in their behalf to her Son the Vice-Roy, and at their return sit at Table with them: for you are
 (said she) 
in a strange Countrey full of People, and therefore had need be careful to Travel circumspectly, that you may meet with no inconveni∣ence: Nay, she admir'd that they durst venture themselves where they knew no Place, nor any Person. Van Campen
 being ask'd what Place he bore, and how qua∣lifi'd, answer'd, He was Vice-Admiral of the Fleet: whereupon she reply'd, 
Then your Princes and Lords must needs wear rich Apparel, and go bravely,
 being much taken with the Velvet Jump he had on. This pass'd, 
Van Campen
 and 
Nobel
 civilly taking their Leave of the Lady, parted from her, and went to the City Governor's House, Guarded both with Foot and Horse; by which pas∣sing, and being entred, they soon return'd, upon a Servant's saying that his Lord was troubled with an Ague, and lay at rest in his Chamber, so that at present there was no opportunity to speak with him, wherefore he desir'd they would please to come again the next Morning: whereupon they were carry'd in 
Pallakins
 out of the City, the Streets being so crowded with Men, Women, and Children quite to the Bridge, where their Jonks lay, that they were scarce able to make their way through.


The one and twentieth, being 
Thursday,
 they were Visited in their Jonks by
 the Governor of the Fort 
Engely,
 and several Grand 
Mandarins,
 who giving them a courteous welcome, Drank to each of them in Bean-broth. The Governor invited them to Dinner; which they not daring to refuse, Rode with him to












his House; where after a noble Treat he presented 
Van Campen
 with a cu∣rious Tent to use in his Journey, which folded, was but one Man's work to carry and pitch. When they had all Feasted very plentifully, the Governor led them over a Bridge towards the West-side of the Island whereon the Fort stood: near which lay a great Village, and well peopled. Here, being conduct∣ed by the Governor, they saw several great Temples hung round with burning Lamps, and adorn'd with Altars and Images; into which entring upon curi∣osity, the Priests presented them 
Tea,
 or 
Thee,
 and other Sweet-meats with more than ordinary respect. After a little stay they were brought into a de∣lightful Place, where with a Bowe and Arrow they shot at a Mark: and from thence as they pass'd towards their Vessels, they went to the House of 
Han∣lavia,
 Governor of the Fort 
Minjazen,
 where they were again Treated. In the Evening they came to their Jonks, to take their repose as they had done the Night before.


The two and twentieth in the Morning going again to 
Hanlavia,
 they pre∣sented him with some red Cloth, thereby to obtain his favor and assistance in their speedy dispatch to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong.
 From thence they Rode to the City Governor's House, that he might furnish them with People for their Journey: where coming, they found him somewhat indispos'd; yet never∣theless they had Audience in the same Place where he generally sits with the chiefest of the Countrey, consulting about publick affairs. Upon their asking if he would be assisting to them in their Journey to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and 
Taysing Lipovy,
 he answer'd, That he would be ready to do all things that lay in his power, saying he had Writ in their behalf to the Emperor at the Court at 
Peking,
 and to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 in 
Sinksieu,
 and provided two 
Mandarins
 with ninety Men to Travel thither with them. Being ask'd if he thought it convenient for the Admiral to put to Sea with eleven Sail, to Cruise up and down to the Northward, if there he could, to annoy 
Coxinga
 and his Party, and leave one Frigat, in which the Presents were, in the River 
Hoksieu:
 he reply'd, That he durst not advise about it, but their Admiral in that case might do what he thought fit; yet as he suppos'd, it were better that the Ships stay'd there till the Vice-Roy's coming home, that there might be a better un∣derstanding: However, you may go (said he) to the Governor of 
Minjazen, Hanlavia,
 and he will be better able to inform you in these punctillio's what to do. Hereupon they leaving 
Hoksieu,
 went about Noon to 
Hanlavia,
 by whom they were invited to Dinner; when taking opportunity to ask the same Que∣stion, they receiv'd the like Answer, 
viz.
 That the Admiral might do what he thought fittest: all which 
Van Campen
 and 
Nobel
 writ to the Admiral 
Bort,
 with their Opinions. A little after Dinner they went with their Retinue into their Jonks, to proceed in their Journey to 
Sinksieu,
 and came about three a a Clock after Noon to the Fort 
Aulavia,
 or 
Lavyt,
 near a Ferry, where on the the Shore they were courteously receiv'd by the Governor, and entertain'd with the customary honor of Bean-broth.


The Fort 
Aulavia,
 surrounded with high Walls, hath a strong Garrison both
 of Foot and Horse, and stor'd with all sorts of Ammunition and Provisions. Here whoever pass over, they pay Custom for all those Goods and Commodi∣ties that are after sold and dispers'd through the Countrey.


Several Troops of Horse are daily sent out of this Fort, to keep the Ways clear from Thieves, which have their lurking-places in the neighboring Mountains.


After some stay here they set Sail again, and in the Evening came to the
 Village 
Lanpon,
 where they stay'd all Night. This 
Lanpon
 is a Place of good Repute, being inhabited by many rich 
Chineses,
 which drive a Trade through all the Countrey; and also much frequented by the neighboring People, be∣cause of a Temple wherein they worship an Idol, said to give good and com∣fortable advice in great misfortunes or adversities, and therefore visited daily both by rich and poor, that in their Troubles they may receive some consola∣tion from him.


The twenty third, being 
Saturday,
 at nine a Clock they leaving 
Lanpon,
 went by Land in 
Palakins
 along a Cawsey pav'd with blue and gray Free-stone. This day they travell'd through abundance of Rice-Fields, and Plains full of Fruit-trees, and all manner of eatable Plants, scatter'd with many populous Villages, and moistned by murmuring Streams, that flowing out of the Moun∣tains made it a most delightful Prospect. They also saw several antient Mo∣numents, all Sculpt out with Imagery resembling Men, Horses, Lions, and Dragons; over which stately Arches rais'd high, like our, Triumphal with Inscriptions in 
Chinese
 Characters of Gold, being antient Epitaphs in honor of the Deceased. About Noon they came to two great Forts, and about six a Clock in the Evening into the City 
Hokzwa;
 which entring, they were receiv'd by the chiefest of the Town, and carry'd into a great House, provided for the most eminent Persons of the Countrey in their Journeys.


Here they had sent them for Presents three Pigs, twenty Hens, and four Geese; which they requited by returning some small Trifles. In the Night, by Order of the Magistrates of the Town, a Guard was set about their Lodgings, that they might suffer no injury by the Common People.


The twenty ninth, being 
Sunday,
 though they prepared for their Journey, yet they could not set forward for want of Convoy, because a strong Party of three hundred Horse was sent by the Vice-Roy's Mother, with Money and other Goods to the Army at 
Sinksieu,
 to her Son 
Singlamong,
 for the paying of the Souldiers, so that being forc'd to stay in 
Hokzwa
 all that day, they were visited by many great and eminent 
Mandarins
 of the City, and presented with Oranges, Pears, Chesnuts, Coco-Nuts, besides several other Fruits, two Pigs, five Geese, and ten Hens, in requital for Money and Goods worth full as much. The People seem'd to be very obliging, when they heard that the 
Hollanders
 lay with a Fleet on the Coast of 
China
 to joyn with them against the Islanders of 
Quemuy,
 and the rest of 
Coxinga
's Party. In the afternoon they view'd the Town.


This City 
Hokzwa,
 lying in a pleasant Place, encompassed with many de∣lightful
 Gardens, contains several Markets and great Plains, and appears beau∣tiful with divers Triumphal Arches, and stately antient Buildings, rang'd close together with Party-walls, not being usual in 
China.
 It hath thick and strong Walls, or rather Bulwarks, continually Guarded by many Horse and Foot. About an hours walking from thence are many pleasant Groves, with Arbors, and other like Receptions for such as Walk to refresh themselves in, where they call for all sorts of Fruit whatever they have a mind to, so making themselves merry.


The twenty fifth, being 
Monday,
 they began their Journey anew about day∣break, with a Convoy of fifty 
Tartars;
 and passing by several strong Holds, and through many Villages, they came to two Rocks, which so straiten the Passage, that two Carts or Wagons can scarce go between: at each Entrance stands a


Block-house, so that none can pass without leave. Upon the top of these Rocks, where there is no kind of Mould to be seen, grow many Cypress and Ash-Trees. About Noon passing by another Hold, the Governor invited them to Dinner, which they modestly refus'd by their Interpreter; yet their Reti∣nue had as much strong 
Chinese
 Beer given them as they pleas'd to drink. Then proceeding on, in the Evening they pass'd through a Wall'd City, and well Garrison'd; and a little Southward from the City they took their repose in a 
Pagode,
 where several of the chief Citizens visiting, for welcom present∣ed them with several Provisions, such as the Countrey afforded: in return whereof they gave them some 
Spanish
 Ryals, and four Pieces of course white Linnen: Besides, their Followers were entertain'd with two great Pots of strong 
Chinese
 Beer, a Drink very pleasing to their Palats.


The twenty sixth about Sun-rising, being ready for their Journey, they had such a concourse of Men, Women, and Children, which came to see them from all places, that they were scarce able to pass along the Streets, for the 
Palakin,
 or Sedan, in which the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 was carry'd, was often stopt and held by the People to see his Face and speak with him: but because he could not answer them, and his Interpreter not being able to come to him through the Crowd, they let him pass. This Day they went by and through more Forts and Villages, and in the Evening came to the City 
Hokexcho,
 where they stay'd all Night, being Entertain'd by the eminentest of the Town, and visited by many antient Merchants, which stay'd with them so late, that they took but little rest.


The City of 
Hokexcho
 lies but a days Journey from 
Hokzwa:
 whose Inhabi∣tants maintain themselves for the most part by Husbandry, (for there are few Merchants) being a kind and hospitable People: for 
Hok
 signifies 
Good,
 and 
Zwa, Bad.


Between 
Hokzwa
 and 
Hokexcho
 lies a Village, in which they make great quan∣tities of Porcelin.


The twenty seventh before Sun-rising they betook themselves to their Jour∣ney, accompany'd with several Troops of Horse and Foot; and pass'd most by and through several great strong Towns and Villages. About three a Clock in the Afternoon they Rode through a great Town, and in the Evening arriv'd at a strong Castle, where they were courteously receiv'd by the Governor, and first entertain'd with Bean-broth, afterwards caress'd both with Meat and Drink; which kindness they requited with other Presents.


The twenty eighth they proceeded again on their Journey very early, and in the Afternoon, about three a Clock, arriv'd at another City, where they were welcom'd and presented by the Magistrates with Provision, and receiv'd again in a bartering Return, as others had before: after which they drank 
Spanish
 Wine and Brandy with the Agents, shewing a great liking thereunto, having never tasted such Liquor; so that it was mid-night before they went away.


The twenty ninth, being 
Friday,
 they set forward again with the Dawn af∣ter Day-break, beholding very many large and sumptuous Tombs, and stately antient Buildings, besides several Triumphal Arches, adorn'd with Horse∣men, Tygers, Bears, Lyons, and Dragons, hew'n out of Free-stone, and the Arches beautifi'd with Golden Characters: Then they pass'd a long Bridge over the great River 
Loyang,
 consisting of divers Stone Arches, Pav'd with Free-stones of an incredible size, some of which being about seventy Foot long,


three and a half broad, and half a Foot thick, on each side Rail'd in, and ac∣commodated with Benches of blue Stone, with the Honors of the Empire, as Lyons, Dragons, and the like, on several Pedestals.


The 
Chineses
 report this Bridge to have been built in one Night by the An∣gels, and look upon it as a great Wonder.


At the Bridge-foot stood an old House, and in it several Figures of Men gilded with Gold. In the same House also was a great blue Stone, inscrib'd with the antiquity of this wondrous Bridge.


The middle Arch of this Bridge had lately been broke down, to hinder the Enemy's Passage, about which they were then busie in mending, laying great Beams of Timber over the Gap.


A little before Noon they came to the City 
Zwansifoe,
 where at the Gates they were kindly welcom'd by three 
Mandarins
 (sent thither to meet them by 
Santing Houbethetok,
 Admiral of the Sea, and Governor of the Place,) and con∣ducted into a great 
Pagode,
 where they were civilly entertain'd with a Draught of honorable Bean-broth: after having stay'd a little while, they entred the City in company with the same 
Mandarins,
 who carry'd them into a fair House, whither many of the eminentest Citizens out of curiosity came to visit them.


The Letter from the Admiral 
Bort
 to 
Santing Houbethetok,
 with the Presents, being a pair of Snaphance Pistols with Holsters, four Yards of Scarlet, and four Pieces of fine Linnen, were by the Agents two Interpreters 
Bedel
 and 
Lakka,
 sent to him: but he told them, That he durst not receive any Letters or Pre∣sents before they came back again from 
Sinksieu,
 and had spoke with the Vice-Roy and General 
Lipovy:
 but he intended to have visited them, had not his present indisposition hindred him.


But 
Houbethetok
 caus'd his Servants to carry them Oranges, Nuts, Chesnuts, besides some Porkers, Hens, and Geese; for which they return'd the Servants good 
Spanish
 Coyn.


The next day, being the thirtieth, they with their Retinue went to see the City, whilst the Convoy made all things ready for their farther Journey.


Zwansifoe
 is a Place of great Trade, full of Shops and Merchandise, adorn'd
 with several Triumphal Arches made of blue Stone, whereon Men, Women, Horses, Dragons, Tygers, Lyons, Bears, Apes, were all presented in Graven Work, to the Life, in their various Colours, and on the top the Names of those in honor of whom they were erected. It hath also three high Steeples, with Galleries about them; besides many inferior Temples.


The Wall about the City being twenty seven Foot high, and of equal thick∣ness, is fortifi'd with many Bulwarks, Moats, and Breast-works: upon the top of it always lie heaps of Stones and Timber, for defence against sudden Storms or Assaults.


This City hath three Gates with winding Entrances, rais'd of great blue Stones, and was never Conquer'd by the 
Tartars,
 but deliver'd up by Collonel 
Houbethetok,
 conditionally, That he should still possess the Place of Governor: and likewise because of this free Surrender, the old Magistrates kept their seve∣ral Offices, and the City their antient Priviledges and Liberties: yet as a sign of Conquest, the 
Tartars
 caus'd all the Steeples to be pull'd down, except the three before-mention'd. 
Coxinga
 once laid Siege to it, but was forc'd to leave it, and depart with the loss of many Men.


In the Morning about nine a Clock they proceeded on their Journey,
 and at Noon travel'd by the ruin'd City 
Engeling,
 and all the day long past


thorow, and in sight of divers strong Castles built of Stone, and many Villages.


About the Evening, they came to two great Forts, call'd 
Twaia,
 distant from
 each other a quarter of an Hours walking, whose Walls built of Free-Stone, were twenty five Foot high, and twenty eight thick.


The first of 
October,
 in the Morning, the Agents leaving these Forts, came about three a Clock with their Retinue, which consisted of above a hundred Persons, 
Hollanders, Chineses,
 and 
Tartars,
 to the City 
Tanwa;
 surrounded with a Stone-Wall, and Fortifi'd with high Bulwarks and deep Trenches.


Tanwa
 is accounted one of the most delightful and populous Cities of all 
Chi∣na;
 seated in a rich Valley, abounding with plenty of all things, so that ma∣ny Merchants resorting thither, take up their Residence, to enjoy the benefit and pleasure of the adjacent Countrey.


Without the City are many stately Monuments, where the Towns men make daily Offerings to the Souls of their deceas'd Parents.


Three grand 
Mandarins
 well Mounted, and follow'd by a great Train of Servants, bidding the Agents welcome, carry'd them into a stately Inn, to which they ascended by seven Marble Steps; in it were many Chambers, all the floors neatly Pav'd, and furnish'd with Chairs and Stools, Benches, and costly Bedsteds, to accommodate Persons of Quality when they travel'd; with Stable-rooms for an hundred Horse, and Lodgings for twelve hundred Men: Here the Agents choosing one of the most convenient Chambers, took their re∣pose that Night.


The second being Munday, about nine a Clock, the Agents with all their Attendance left 
Tanwa,
 and passing a large Stone Bridge, saw several Ruin'd Towns and Villages, besides others yet in their Splendor, but commanded by Garrisons.


A little before Sun-set, they came to a Fort on the top of a Hill, which whilst they ascended, they were met and courteously welcom'd by the Go∣vernor; from whom they understood, that the 
Islanders
 of 
Eymuy
 and 
Que∣muy
 were upon a Treaty of Peace with the 
Tartars,
 but he fear'd, that it would come to nothing: This Night they Lodg'd in the Castle, where they had good Entertainment for their Money.


The third, being Tuesday, the Agents set forward about three a Clock in the Morning, and travel'd by and through many Villages, coming at last to a Stone Bridge, at each side Guarded with a Fort.


In the afternoon, the Agents pass'd by several 
Pagodes,
 where the 
Chinesy
 Priests seem'd to shew them great Respect, Presenting them with Sweet-Meats and 
Tee:
 After some stay, proceeding on their Journey, came at last in sight of 
Sinksieu,
 whither they were sent, not far from whence, they were met by
 three 
Mandarins
 with their Attendants, sent from the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and the General 
Lipovi,
 to Complement and welcom them.


After the Ceremonies were past on both sides, the Agents were by the 
Man∣darins
 carry'd to a great 
Pagode,
 from whence after a short Treat, they were con∣ducted through the City into a spacious Court, the usual place of Reception for their travelling Grandees. This House was of so large Reception, that it not only afforded Stable room for above a thousand Horse, but also Lodgings for as many Men; having divers large and handsom Chambers, furnish'd with stately Bedsteds, Stools and Benches. Here the Agents took their repose, seve∣ral Soldiers being sent to Guard the House, from the overpressing intrusions of


the common People, which by thousands out of curiosity came thither to see and gaze upon the 
Hollanders.


The Agents immediately gave notice of their arrival by their Interpretors,
 
Pedel
 and 
Lakka,
 to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and General 
Taysing Lipovi,
 with request to grant them Audience, and suffer them to speak with him, that they might deliver the General of 
Batavia
's Letters, that so time might not be lost in imploying so stout a Fleet, as lay at present in his own River. Whereupon, the Vice-Roy and General reply'd, That they were come a great and long Voyage by Sea and Land, and were weary with travelling, thefore they should stay till the next day, on which they should have Audience.


Mean while, several 
Mandarins
 came to Congratulate their welcome, bring∣ing with them divers sorts of Fruit, as Oranges, Nuts, Chestnuts, and Pears; besides Hens, Geese, and two Swine, for which they return'd them Thanks, and gave their Servants Money.


The fourth in the Morning, the Agents made themselves ready to deliver
 the small Presents and Letters from 
Batavia,
 to the Vice-Roy and General in the Camp. About eight a Clock, twelve Horses were brought to their Lodg∣ing, which they and their Attendance Mounted, and with two 
Mandarins
 Rode thorow a great part of the City 
Sinksieu,
 by many fair and large Tri∣umphal Arches. A little Southward from the City ran a River, which ha∣ving cross'd, they came into the Army, which lay about a Mile and a half distant, consisting of sixty thousand Horse and Foot; five grand 
Mandarins
 attended by a File of Musqueteers, conducted the Agents with great ho∣nor to the Secretaries Tent, who hearing of their coming, immediately carry'd them to a great Pavilion, where the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 sate in Council with the General 
Taysing Lipovi,
 besides two other great Lords, the one being 
Santing Hou Bethetok,
 and the other 
Haitankon,
 Governor of 
Sinksieu.


The Floors of this Royal Pavilion were Matted; had three publick Gates or Entrances close by one another; thorow the middle most and greatest the Vice-Roy passes only, and his Attendants thorow the other two. Coming close to the Vice-Roy and General, the Agents were order'd to sit down and deliver their Letters, which they did with great Ceremony; the Presents also were presented and deliver'd to the Lords; all which were receiv'd very courte∣ously, but they would not accept their Presents, before they had a Warrant for so doing, by an answer from the Emperor at 
Peking.
 But they kindly ac∣cepted of the small Presents which the Admiral 
Bort
 had sent them; being twelve Pound and two Ounces of Amber-Beads, strung on a Thred, to the number of twenty five; one Amber Hour-Glass, and an Amber Cup.


The Presents from the Lord General and Council of 
Batavia,
 sent to the
 Vice-Roy, were these following:




One Piece of



Scarlet


Green Cloth.


Blue Cloth.


One half Piece of Red Cloth.




One Piece of



Red Crown Serge.


Grass Green Crown Serge.


Blue Crown Serge.


Musk Colour Crown Serge.


Black Crown Serge.




One Musquet, Gilt and Polish'd.


One Fire-Lock, Gilt and Glaz'd.


One pair of Polish'd Pistols, Gilt, with Holsters.


One pair of Pocket Pistols.


One Sword with a Golden Hilt.


Twenty Ounces of Blood Coral, upon one String, in an hundred and ten pieces.


Sixteen Ounces of Blood Coral, in one Polish'd Branch.


One Pound and four Ounces of Am∣ber Beads, in fifty five pieces.


One great 
Bengael
 
 
Alkatiff.


Ten pieces of fine white Linnen.


One 
Pikol
 of the best Cloves.


One Case of Rose-Water.


Two hundred and sixty 
Katty
 of 
San∣dal-wood,
 in three pieces.




The Vice-Roy and General falling in Discourse with the Agents, ask'd how long they had been from 
Batavia?
 Whereupon they answer'd, about seventy days: Then they ask'd, in what time they could come from 
Holland
 to 
China?
 Answer was made, in about eight Months; at which they marvel'd exceed∣ingly, and likewise at their answer to the question, If there were any Horses, Cows, Hogs, Sheep, Fruit, and Herbage? and they reply'd, By thousands, and more than in 
China.
 Next they enquir'd, Why they came with such a Fleet on their Coast? Whereto the Agents said, To serve the mighty Emperor of 
China,
 and to prosecute that great Pyrate 
Coxinga,
 to do him all the damage they could, both by Sea and Land; because, said they, He without ever giving any no∣tice or reasons thereof, came with an Army, in a Warlike Fleet, the last Year in 
April,
 and set upon the 
Netherlanders
 in the Islands of 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 and in nine Months time, not only made himself Master of the Countrey, but also took the Castle 
Zelandia
 from them into his own possessi∣on; therefore we seek to unite with the Emperor of 
China
 his Forces, and make a League with him, to Engage 
Coxinga,
 both by Sea and Land, till we have Conquer'd and brought him under the subjection of his Imperial Ma∣jesty: Whereupon the Vice-Roy and General Reply'd, The 
Islanders
 of 
Que∣muy,
 and 
Eymuy
 have already Treated on Peace, and made ready their Ambas∣sadors to come to the Court of 
Peking,
 to obtain the Emperor's Ratification. Being ask'd upon what Articles, they began to smile, and answer'd, they could not tell.


Then the 
Hollanders
 enquir'd, if they knew where their Prisoners were? and if there was no likelihood to get them releas'd? They reply'd, they were in 
Quemuy,
 and that they would use their best endeavors in a short time to send them to their Ships. Then the Ambassadors propos'd, if they might not take possession of some place on the Main Continent of 
China,
 or on some Island, for the Harboring their Ships? They answer'd, you are free to choose any good place, either on the Main, or any Island where you please, and to take possession of it; and likewise to put into all Havens, Bays, and Rivers on the Coast of 
China,
 to take in Water and Firing, buy Provisions, and in bad Wea∣ther seek for a safe Harbor. To which purpose We will Command Our Sub∣in all Havens, Bays, and Rivers, to aid and assist you, which We doubt not but they will perform.


The Agents asking them to Grant them leave for the disposing those few Merchandize for Money, which were loaden in their Ships, to pay and refresh their Men with. The Vice-Roy and General answer'd, That they had no


Power, but they must have Order from the Emperor at 
Peking;
 but had they moved it before, they might perhaps have had Authority to Grant.


After these Discourses ended, every one according to the fashion of the Countrey, was placed by himself at a Table; 
viz.
 the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 the General 
Taysang Lipovi,
 the Admiral 
Santing Houbethetok,
 the Governor of 
Zwam∣sifoe,
 the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen, Constantine Nobel,
 and 
Bodel
 the Assistant, beside several 
Mandarins.
 Their Meat was all brought and set upon the Ta∣bles in Golden Chargers; and their Drink fill'd out in Cups of Gold, rare∣ly Imboss'd; so that their Entertainment was very splendid. After Din∣ner, the Vice-Roy carry'd them through his whole Army, and shew'd them his Forces, making some of his Soldiers to be Exercis'd before them. Towards the Evening, the Agents taking their leave, returning humble thanks for the Honor they had receiv'd, they Mounted their Horses, and Rode towards their Lodgings, where the remainder of the Feast and Banquets which they had left at Dinner was brought after them; and according to the manner of the Countrey, they were visited and Complemented by divers Persons of Quality.


The fifth being Thursday, the Agents prepar'd themselves to deliver their
 Excellencies Letters from 
Batavia,
 to the General 
Taysang Lipovi,
 with the Let∣ter, and small Presents sent to the same Lord, from Admiral 
Bort; viz.
 One Pound and four Ounces of Amber; one String of fifty five Corals; one Am∣ber Hour-Glass; with a tender of the other Presents sent from 
Batavia,
 which were yet on board.


About eight a Clock, the 
Tartars
 brought eight Horses to the Agents Quar∣ters, with which, they Rode with their Attendants into the Field, about a Ca∣non shot from the Vice-Roy, to the General 
Lipovi.


Coming into his Presence, the Agents made their Obeisance, delivering the Letter, and were commanded to sit down; with the Letter they also proffer'd him the Presents, which were for the same reasons as the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 gave, refus'd. The Contents of the Letter were thus.




John Maetzuiker
 Governor, and the Council for the 
Netherland
 States in the Countrey of 
India,
 send this Letter with our kind Salutation, to 
Taisang Lipovi
 General, and Deputy Governor of the Territory 
Fokien,
 for the Great Emperor of 
Tartary
 and 
China.


SO soon as Our Governor of 
Tayowan,
 had receiv'd Your Highness's Letter, and understood that You would in a short time March with a great Ar∣my against 
Coxinga,
 that all means possible might be us'd thereto; so by Our Order, he prepar'd five Men of War, which he sent to the Bay of 
Ingeling,
 to Engage with the foremention'd 
Coxinga;
 but the Ships were by unexpected bad Weather stopt in their Voyage; after which We also had the Misfor∣tune, that 
Coxinga
 after a ten Months Siege took Our Castle of 
Tayowan;
 but had the Commander of it been a Valiant Soldier, (who is to be sufficiently punish'd for his Cowardise) it could not possibly have fal'n into his Pos∣session.


All these Accidents and Misfortunes have occasion'd, that We have not been in a condition to serve you, and satisfie 
Singlamong
 and Your Highness's Desires: Therefore We entreat You not to take it ill, nor think that We have been wanting in Our Endeavors; for We heartily Declare, joyntly


with the Emperor of 
China,
 to seek and use all means to Ruin 
Coxinga
 and his Party; with this Proviso, that We may put into all Harbors, and drive an unmolested Trade; and also to take a place in possession on the Continent of 
China,
 without which We should not be able to do 
Coxinga
 the intended Da∣mage: So that We desire Your Highness to be assisting to us in this Business, and We promise if that may be perform'd, to clear the 
Chinesy
 Seas from that Pirate.


And to shew that We on Our part, really intend what We Propose; We have at present sent to the Bay of 
Hoksieu
 twelve Men of War, and a con∣siderable number of Soldiers, furnish'd out with all things fit for the Service, in whose sight, We believe 
Coxinga
 will not dare to venture forth to Sea. The Admiral 
Balthazar Bort,
 whom We have made Chief Commander of them, hath Order to joyn with Your Highness's Forces, and prosecute all such Adventures as shall happen; to which, God grant a good and happy Event.


To Salute the Lord 
Singlamong,
 and Your Highness, in Our behalfs, and to speak with You about several Affairs; We have expresly sent with these Letters, Our Agent 
Constantine Nobel,
 whom We desire Your Highness to re∣ceive Courteously, and Credit his Words; for all things shall be to Our Content, what he shall Treat with Your Highness about; and as a sign of Our good Inclination towards You, We send to Your Highness the under∣written Presents, with Request, that Your Highness would be pleas'd to accept of.




One Piece of



Green Cloth.


Blue Cloth.


Black Cloth.


Half a Piece of Scarlet.


Half a Piece of Stammel, in one Case.




One Piece of



Red Crown Serges in a Bale.


Grass Green Crown Serges in a Bale.


Blue Crown Serges in a Bale.


Musk Colour Crown Serges in a Bale.


Black Crown Serges in a Bale.




One long Fowling-Piece.


One pair of Pistols and Holsters.


One Sword with a Gilded Hilt, in a Case.


Eighteen Ounces and a half of Blood Coral, in an hundred and eight pieces.


Three Pound and three Ounces of Am∣ber, in four pieces.


One Pound and an Ounce of Blood Coral, in fifty four Pieces, in a Box.


Six Pieces of fine white Linen, in a Pack.


Half a 
Pikol
 of Cloves, in a Bag.


A Case of Rose-Water.


An hundred eighty five Pound of 
San∣dal-Wood
 in three Pieces.




From the Castle in 
Batavia,
 
June the 21. in the Year 1662.
 
Iohn Maetzuiker.




The Letter to the Vice-Roy was written almost after the same manner, 
viz.
 to Request a Free Trade through the Empire of 
China.


After delivery of the Letters, and Complements from the Lord General and Council, with Wishes of long Life to his Highness 
Lipovi,
 that he might Tri∣umph over his Enemies; they fell into Discourse about business concerning the occasion of their coming thither; as in the Audience the day before, the


General had understood already: They Requested him that he would be assist∣ing to the Vice-Roy, in the releasing of the 
Hollanders,
 in number thirty nine, thirteen Men, six Women, seven Children, and thirteen Slaves and Slavesses) which were said to be Imprison'd on the Islands 
Euymuy,
 or 
Quemuy,
 and ex∣change them for a 
Mandarin,
 and his Servants, being of 
Coxinga
's Party, and came over with the Agents from 
Batavia;
 whereupon General 
Lipovi
 promis'd to do his best Endeavors, and send the releas'd Prisoners aboard.


The General being also ask'd, If the 
Netherlanders
 might not Sail in and out of the Bays, Havens, and Rivers on the Coast of 
China,
 to fetch Water and Wood, and buy Provision for their Money, or in time of bad Weather, to come into any Harbor. He answer'd, All Havens, Bays, and Rivers are free∣ly open for you, to fetch Water, Wood, and buy Provision; nay, that which is more, said he, We will from this time forward, send to all Harbors, Bays, and Rivers, that are inhabited by the Subjects of this Empire, to aid and assist you in all things; and if you want Money, We will furnish you with it.


Lastly, being ask'd, If his Excellency could not assist the 
Netherlands
 in the permitting of a free Trade through the Empire: He reply'd, That to promise such a thing was not in his Power, but must be granted by the Emperor at the Court of 
Peking;
 yet promis'd, that he would write in their behalf about it to the Emperor, if possible, to grant them a free Trade, which was a business that the Merchants in the City 
Hoksieu
 much Requested and long'd for. But the Ge∣neral 
Lipovi
 wonder'd extreamly, that the Admiral 
Bort
 should go out of the River 
Hoksieu
 with twelve Men, leaving only one behind with the Presents, when as, said he, the Admiral 
Borts
 intentions are not known to the Vice-Roy nor my self; which seem'd very strange to the Agents themselves.


This Discourse ended, they were Treated and Serv'd in Silver Dishes, Plates, and Goblets, Emboss'd after the same manner as at the Vice-Roy's.


Dinner being ended, the Agents desir'd leave to depart, but the General 
Lipovi
 modestly intreated them to stay, and be Merry a little longer; asking them likewise if they had ought else to impart to him; whereupon they an∣swer'd, Nothing but what they had already acquainted his Excellency with, 
viz.
 the releasing of their Prisoners; On which he made answer, that he would loose no time, but do his best endeavor, and shorly send them aboard.


Then the Agents enquir'd about 
Coxinga
's Death; to which the General reply'd, That he had been Deceas'd a considerable time, and that those of the Isles of 
Quemuy
 and 
Eymuy
 had Treated with them about a Peace, and were send∣ing Ambassadors to 
Peking,
 to get the Emperor to ratifie it.


Lastly, Seeing their importunity for dispatch, he said, Why are you so hasty in all your Business? every thing must have its time. About eighteen days hence, I am to be at 
Hoksiu,
 with the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 then We will con∣sult together with the Governor of 
Hoksiu,
 if you may sell those Commodities that are in your Ships, which to my judgment may be done by the way of connivance.


The Agents having thus receiv'd answers, rewarding the Servants, took their leaves, and Rode to the Inn, whither all the Meat that was left on their Tables was brought in 
Chinesy
 
 
Suebas.


About the Evening, nineteen Jonks came thither from the Isles of 
Quemuy
 and 
Eymuy,
 Laden with Pepper, Cloth, and other Merchandize; wherefore none of the 
Netherlanders
 were permitted to go that day, nor the next out of their Lodgings.


Yet the Agents sent out Ships to enquire what those of the Isles Barter'd their Commodities for, who coming back, inform'd them, that they ex∣change Rice and other Commodities; for the Inhabitants on those Isles, want∣ed Provision extreamly, because the 
Tartars
 had Burnt and Ruin'd all the Towns, Villages, and Hamlets, which stood along the Shore, on the Main of 
China,
 leaving nothing but heaps of Rubbish to testifie their former being.


Neither were any People allow'd to live within three Leagues of the Shore, for those that were found in the foremention'd Limits, were put to Death without Mercy, so to prevent all manner of supply, either of Provisions or Merchandize to go from those or the Main to their Associates, the publick Enemy.


In the Evening came three 
Negro
's, who could speak 
Portuguese,
 and running away from 
Makou,
 a Factory of 
Portugal,
 were now in service amongst the 
Tar∣tar
 Horse; these entring the Agents Lodgings, fell upon the 
Hollanders
 with re∣proachful Language.


The seventh being 
Saturday,
 the Agents Rode in the Morning with their
 Attendants to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and General 
Lipovi
 into the Army, with Request to both, That they would be pleas'd to Sign what they had in words promis'd them, that they might give it to their Masters, the Lord Ge∣neral, and the Lords of the 
Indian
 Council, and to the Admiral 
Bort, viz.
 that they promis'd to do their best endeavors, if it were possible, to send the Pri∣soners aboard the 
Hollanders
 Ships; and secondly, that they may put into all Harbors, Havens, and Rivers, on the Coast of 
China
 with their Ships, and to Sail to and from all Islands, to get Water, Firing, and Provisions for Money, for their Sea-men; and in bad Weather, choose any good Harbor to secure their Vessels in. Thirdly, That those Goods which were in their Ships, might be privately sold in 
Hoksieu;
 whereto the Vice-Roy answer'd about eighteen or twenty days since, (as I said before) I am to be in 
Hoksieu,
 then I will con∣sult with the Governor, if you may sell those Goods there, which you have brought in your Ships, which I no ways doubt.


But as to what concerns the Journey of your Forces with ours, to Ruine 
Coxinga
 and his Party, there is no more to be said of it, for those of the Isles are now Treating with us concerning a Peace, so that the Admiral must be si∣lent therein; yet if he should chance to meet with any of their Jonks, or Ves∣sels at Sea, or in Harbors, Havens or Rivers, he may take and carry them away; nevertheless, it would be better to let them pass, rather than to disturb the Coast of 
China
 with such sudden Alarms.


Then the Agents made a complaint to the Vice-Roy, and General of the three 
Negro
's, that abus'd them the other Night; whereupon they were im∣mediately brought, and severely punish'd before them.


Lastly, The Vice-Roy desir'd the Ambassadors, that their followers would stay and be merry with them, and shew some skill in their way of Dancing, but they making excuses for them, and taking their leave, went to 
Sinksieu.


The eighth being 
Sunday,
 in the Morning, the 
Chinesy
 Interpreter 
Lakka,
 with the two 
Hoksiean Mandarins
 (belonging to the Vice-Roy's Mother) were sent to the Vice-Roy in the Army, to request, that the Agents might return to 
Hoksieu.


After some stay, the Vice-Roy sent some of his Servants with fifteen Hor∣ses Sadled and very richly furnish'd to their Lodgings, to carry them thorow the City to the Army.


Having therefore made ready some small Presents, they mounted, and rode directly to the Army, addressing themselves in an humble manner to the Ge∣neral, and the rest of the Captains, giving them thanks for the Honor they had receiv'd. Hereupon, according to order, the Interpreter 
Lakka
 appearing, prof∣fer'd the Vice-Roy, in the Vice-Admiral 
Iohn van Campen
's Name, a great Case with fifteen Flasks of Brandy, sixteen Rummers, sixteen Beer-glasses, six hand∣som Knives, with a Bever Hat.


The General 
Taising Lipovi
 receiv'd from the Hands of the same Interpreter, in the Admirals Name, a Bever Hat, a pair of Pistols and Holsters, eight Flasks of Brandy, eight with 
Spanish
 Wine, three Knives, three Rummers, and three Beer-glasses.


The Presents given to 
Haitangkong,
 Governor of 
Hoksieu,
 was a Castor, six 
Dutch
 Knives, three Rummers, three Beer-glasses, six Flasks with 
Spanish
 Wine, and six with Brandy.


The Lord 
Santing Houbethetok,
 Admiral of the Sea, and Governor of the City 
Zwansifoe,
 was also presented with a Castor, five Flasks of 
Spanish
 Wine, and five of Brandy, three Rummers, three Beer-glasses, and five 
Dutch
 Knives; all which, though of a small value, were accepted with extraordinary kind∣ness.


After this, the Agents had a long Discourse with these four Great Ministers, who promis'd to assist them in all that lay within their Power, alledging, as a proof thereof, That they had already sent their Generals Letter to the Empe∣ror, and written in their behalf; so that they did not doubt to get them Li∣cence for a Free Trade through the whole Empire: But at last the Vice-Roy added,


 You 
Hollanders
 must not be too hasty; for We are not to be forc'd
 to grant any thing to you; much less can We joyn our Forces, and make a League with you, against the grand Pyrate 
Coxinga,
 both by Sea and Land, before We have Order from the Emperor at his Court in 
Peking.


We have (continu'd he) Power to perform what We have promis'd you; As, Freedom to put into all Havens, Bays, and Rivers lying on the main Coast of 
China
 and the adjacent Isles, to fetch Water, Wood, and buy Provision, and furnish your selves with other Necessaries; nay, We will accommodate you with it upon a free Accompt: Nay more, you have full Licence to take a convenient place in possession, which is pro∣vided of a good Harbor, either on the main Coast of 
China,
 or on one of the Islands in the River 
Hoksieu,
 or on one of these Places, 
Tenhai, Sotiha, Kitat,
 or 
Onkia,
 every one of which have large and safe Havens for the accommodati∣on of many Ships.


As to what concerns your Prisoners, We will speedily send away Letters to the Governors of the Islands 
Quemuy
 and 
Eymuy,
 to inquire if they be there? If so, We promise to procure their Liberty, and send them aboard your Ships.


Lastly, The Vice-Roy and General caus'd the Interpreter 
Lakka
 to tell them, 
That if they would stay four or five days in 
Sinksieu,
 they should have an Answer of their Letters from the Governors of the Islands, and so hear if the Prisoners be there, or not: But if they would depart, they must tarry six∣teen or seventeen days in 
Hoksieu,
 for the Vice-Roy and Generals coming thither, because they were desirous to see their Forces and Fleet; mean while they would consult with the Provincials of 
Hoksieu,
 and then give their Resolution by the Governor, Whether the several 
Cargoes
 which they


had in their Ships might not be sold in private.
 Likewise the Interpreter be∣ing so commanded, further told them, 
That it had been better that their Ad∣miral had staid in the River 
Hoksieu,
 and not gone to Sea, because he would effect little by so doing; for along the Sea-Coast we have nothing but ru∣in'd Cities and Villages, where some poor Fishermen, with their Vessels and Nets, with leave of the Governors, live to maintain themselves, because all the greatest Towns and Villages in those Parts were by the Emperors Order pull'd down to the Ground, to prevent the sending of Provisions and Merchandise to the Islands 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 by which means 
Coxinga
 and his great Forces being much straightned, he betook himself, with all his Ar∣my and Jonks, to 
Formosa,
 and not onely won that, but 
Tayowan
 also, leaving onely some small Garrisons of Soldiers on those Isles; yet if by the Treaty now on Foot a Peace be concluded, the 
Hollanders
 may easily obtain it of us again.


Hereupon the Vice-Admiral 
Campen
 directed the Interpreter to tell the Vice-Roy, 
That the 
Hollanders
 hoped, that now would have been the onely time to enter into a League with the Great 
Cham
 of 
Tartary,
 and Emperor of 
China,
 that joyning their Forces, they might reduce all under the Subjection of his Imperial Majesty.


Whereupon the Vice-Roy return'd, 
That is done already, and needs no more to be spoken of: We are now at a Cessation of Arms with the Gover∣nors of the Islands; but if the Emperor hath or will accept of the Peace, We know not; yet it hath proceeded thus far, that young 
Coxinga
 and all his People will obey, and submit themselves to the Emperor, by shaving off their Hair, except one Tuft, and also become Tributaries; onely they de∣mand a peculiar Government, and Garrisons for their own Soldiers; which whether the Emperor will grant, is much to be doubted: However, you must stay sixty or seventy days for an Answer from the Emperor at 
Peking, viz.
 If you shall have a Free Trade granted through all 
China?
 Which We suppose may be done.


But 
Van Campen
 order'd the Interpreter 
Lakka
 to tell the Vice-Roy and Ge∣neral, 
That in 
Peking
 were many subtile Jesuits and Priests, who bore great spleen to the 
Hollanders,
 and sought to scandalize and make them seem odious to the Emperor, because of their difference in Religion among themselves, and likewise for the War maintain'd by the 
Hollanders
 against the two Mighty Kings of 
Spain
 and 
Portugal,
 to whom these Jesuits and Priests were Confessors.


The Vice-Roy and General made answer, 
That for the same Reason must the 
Tartars,
 who under their Emperor the 
Great Cham of Tartary,
 have by force of Arms subdu'd and taken the whole Empire of 
China,
 be accounted a despicable People by the Jesuits, because they had done the same thing with the 
Hollanders;
 adding, That the 
Hollanders
 were the welcomer to them in 
China,
 and that they would look to the Priests and Jesuits somewhat better than they had done heretofore.
 Thus ended the Discourse.


Then the Vice-Roy and General, in the presence of many great 
Mandarins,
 entertain'd the Agents and their Retinue, who sate every one at a particular Table, furnish'd with variety of Meat, serv'd in Gold and Silver Dishes, and being very merry, drunk the Emperors, and the 
Hollanders
 General 
Iohn Maet∣zuiker
's Health.


Then the Vice-Roy presented each of them with two Pieces of Silk Stuffs,






and a Silver Plate, whereon their Names were engraven in Characters or Let∣ters
 of Gold: These Plates serv'd them as a Pass, with which they might, without danger, travel through all the Empire of 
China,
 and every where be acknowledg'd as 
Lavyaes,
 that is, 
Lords.


The General likewise gave them each two Pieces of 
Chinese
 Silk Stuffs, and one Silver Plate; for which the Agents humbly return'd them both thanks, and likewise for the Honor and Favor which they had been pleas'd to shew them.


The Plate given by the General to 
Van Campen
 was the biggest and thickest, weighing above twenty Ounces, and eight or nine Inches in Diameter: The undermost or greatest part is quite round, and neatly imprest in the middle with six gilded 
Chinese
 Letters; the Edges about it embost with Flowers, and gilt. On the top, for an Ornament, was like a Handle, a piece Scallop'd, the Edges gilt, and the middle wrought with Leaves and Flowers.


The other Plate, being the Vice-Roys, was much lighter, weighing not above six Ounces, very thin, and no way so well gilded or flowr'd at the Edges, but onely on the Handle, having in the middle sixteen or seventeen 
Chinese
 Characters.


Besides these, every one of the Attendants had a Silver Cognizance given them; but much lesser and lighter than the other.


Upon the 
Hollanders
 first arrival, the Vice-Roy sent a Letter to the Empe∣ror, informing him of their Intention; and likewise another to the Admiral 
Bort,
 whom he desir'd to stay for his coming, because he was very desirous to see their Fleet, and to that end, for encouragement, proffer'd to furnish them with Provisions at his own Charge: But 
Bort
 being gone with the Fleet to∣wards the North, before the Vice-Roys Letter came to his Hands, and the Vice Roy coming afterwards in vain, it was resented very ill; yet at last he seem'd pacified, when told, That it hapned through the mistake of not deli∣vering the Letters in good time.


And now the Ambassadors having leave to return, took their Farewel with many Ceremonies, complemented by the Vice-Roy and General after the manner of the 
Tartars,
 then wishing them a safe Return, they commanded seven 
Mandarins
 to conduct them through the Army, beyond all the Guards: From whence they rode over a great Bridge, into the City, to their Lodgings.


The City 
Sinksieu,
 lying eleven days Journey into the Countrey, is cut
 through the middle by a River, which takes its Original out of a Mountain, about an Hours walk beyond the Fort 
Lantyn:
 It stands inviron'd with a Stone Wall, broad enough for a Cart and Horses to go upon, and set full of long Poles, pointed with a sharp Iron like a Scythe, with which they can cut a Man asunder at one stroke.


The City hath handsom Streets▪ pav'd with Free-stone, high Buildings, large 
Pagodes
 or Temples of blue Stone, several Houses and Shops well furnish'd with all manner of Silks, Pourcelan, Linnen, and other necessary Commodities.


All the Windows of the Houses were fill'd with Spectators, and the Streets on both sides crowded with thousands of People, who out of curiosity came to see the 
Hollanders,
 many of whom, as they pass'd by, wish'd them all happi∣ness, and a prosperous Journey.


Being past through the City with all their Train, which consisted in seven∣teen 
Hollanders,
 about a hundred to carry their Baggage, and fifty Horse and Foot, sent by the Vice-Roy as their Guard and Convoy, they rode in four days to 
Zwansifoe,
 from whence in the Evening they came to a great Village nam'd 
Chinhoe,
 where they were welcom'd by three 
Mandarins,
 and conducted into a spacious 
Pagode,
 wherein the Images sate on Stools and Tables, being there kindly entertain'd and treated by the Priests.


The ninth the Ambassadors set forth very early out of 
Chinhoe,
 and travel∣ling all day, at night arriv'd at a strong Hold, where they intended to take up their Lodging for that night; but they were carried into a 
Mandarins
 House, and accommodated very generously, where amongst others they saw three La∣dies, one of whose Feet (with Shoes and all) were but six, another five and a half, and the third five Inches long, occasion'd from the straight swadling of their Legs and Feet in their Infancy, after the 
Chinese
 manner; for Women with great Feet they account homely, and those that have little Feet, Beauties; so that the bigger they are, the lesser they strive to make their Feet.


The tenth setting forward again, they travell'd by several ruin'd Villages; They saw also nine strong Castles, and many long▪hair'd 
Chineses
 Heads, hanging in Baskets on Trees; for all the 
Chineses
 of 
Coxinga
's Party, which re∣fus'd to cut their Hair, were (when found) by the Emperors Command de∣collated, and their Heads hang'd up in that manner.


In the Evening they came to the City 
Tamwa,
 where they were receiv'd by
 three 
Mandarins,
 conducted to a great House like a Court of Guard, and enter∣tain'd with variety of Meats.


The Eleventh in the Morning they left 
Tamwa,
 and proceeding on their Journey, went through several other Villages and Fortifications; in the af∣ternoon coming to the Castle 
Tamhoe,
 they retir'd thither to rest themselves,
 because 
Constantine Nobel
 was much troubled with an Ague, where the Governor entertaining them with variety of Dishes, they made by several Presents a ci∣vil Return.


The twelfth they left 
Tamhoe,
 and travell'd that day by five great Villages, and many Garrisons, and at Noon arriv'd at the City 
Zwansifoe,
 where met by



the 
Mandarins,
 and conducted into an antient Building: After a little stay, they pass'd on to 
Santing Houbethetok
 his House, a Man of great Quality, and Go∣vernor of this City, whom they proffer'd the Presents sent him by the Admi∣ral 
Bort, viz.
 A pair of Pistols, five 
Dutch
 Ells of Scarlet, and four Pieces of fine Linnen; but because they seem'd to 
Van Campen
 and 
Nobel
 too little, they added a Demy-castor, five 
Dutch
 Knives, three Rummers, three Beer-glasses, five Flasks of Brandy, and five of Sack; all which 
Santing Houbethetok
 re∣ceiv'd, and caus'd to be brought to him by his Servants; and having treated the Ambassadors very splendidly, gave each of them two 
Chinese
 Rolls of Silk, and a great Silver Medal, whereon with Golden Letters his Name was engra∣ven, which was a Pasport, signifying, That whoever bore it were Persons of Quality, and so to be look'd upon as no less than 
Lavyaes,
 that is, 
Lords,
 or 
Fa∣thers.
 This done, they began a long Discourse about the 
Dutch
 and 
Chinese
 Wars, and also that of 
Coxinga.
 Lastly, they desir'd his Assistance in the pro∣curing for them a Free Trade in 
China;
 of which he seem'd no ways to doubt, saying, 
Were your Ships here hard by, or in the River, I would buy all your Commodities.
 Having discours'd a little while, and been plentifully feasted, they took their leaves, and rode to their Lodging, where divers 
Mandarins,
 out of curiosity, came to visit and speak with them, and bringing Fruit and Sweet-meats, kept them company most part of the Night.


The thirteenth at day-break the Agents left 
Zwansifoe,
 and travell'd until they reach'd 
Zwansehoo,
 a Place of very considerable strength, into which they
 were receiv'd by three 
Mandarins,
 who gave them a very handsom Entertain∣ment.


The fourteenth, being 
Saturday,
 they left 
Zwansehoo,
 and going on all day, came towards Evening to a well-guarded Place call'd 
Enwacho,
 where they took their Repose that Night in a Temple, in which they were nobly accom∣modated by the Priests.


On 
Munday
 Morning, the sixteenth, the Agents set forward again, and that night reach'd the City 
Enwa,
 into which being conducted by three great 
Man∣darins,
 they were brought into a great Wall'd 
Pagode,
 wherein above fifty 
Chi∣nese
 Priests having their abode, gave them a welcome Reception.


Many Apartments were in this 
Pagode,
 every one furnish'd with various Images, which being as big as the Life, sate cloth'd in rich Apparel, on Stools, round about Tables: All the Priests offer'd Incense to these their Idols, before whom also burnt many Lamps, with taboring on a Drum, and singing.


The next day the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 presented the Priests with twen∣ty Crowns of Silver Coin, for which they return'd him many complemental Thanks, after the 
Chinese
 manner.


The same day proceeding further on, they pass'd a most delightful and rich Countrey, which had not been wasted by the War, but remain'd still in its full Glory: Here they saw divers well-built and wall'd Villages, and likewise many antient Structures, and beautiful Tombs, each of which had a conveni∣ent Entrance, and within that an arched Passage leading to the Grave, where they burnt Offerings to the Dead. There were also Tombs on which lay great Turtles carv'd of blue Stone, and others adorn'd with Columns, and arch'd above.


In the Evening they arriv'd at Fort 
Lantongzwa,
 standing on Mount 
Tishoo,
 into which they were introduc'd by three 
Mandarins,
 and conducted to the Go∣vernors House, who entertain'd them nobly, and had a long Discourse about the 
Dutch, Tartar,
 and 
Chinese
 War.








The eighteenth they began their Journey about Noon, not able sooner to get Men to carry them and their Goods, and travell'd towards the Evening through a great unwall'd Village, where they were invited to a civil Treat by a grand 
Mandarin.


Here the Agents found five 
Chineses,
 which a few days before were fled with a Jonk from 
Tayowan,
 amongst which was one who smatter'd so much broken 
Dutch,
 that 
Van Campen
 could understand when he told him, That 
Coxinga,
 and the General 
Bethekok,
 two such Leaders that 
China
 afforded not the like, being overpower'd and straightned by the 
Tartars,
 both despairing, ended their days in 
Tayowan,
 where since hapned such a Famine, that many died, suffering by extremity of want.


At the Evening arriving at the City 
Hokzwa,
 three 
Mandarins
 led them to a spacious House, whereto all Governors, when they travel about Publick Af∣fairs, are conducted; for these Houses, as we said before, have many large Chambers▪ furnish'd with good Beds, and all manner of Furniture, both for their Lodging and Diet, with large Out-rooms for Servants, and Stables for Horses. The Governor of the Town sent the Agents good store of fresh Provisions. After Supper many Grandees of the City, and two 
Mandarins
 that came lately from 
Peking,
 visited them, who told them, that all the News there was, that the Peace between the Emperor and 
Coxinga
 would not be con∣cluded, because the Islanders of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy
 would have their own Go∣vernors and Soldiers. They also acquainted them of the sudden Death of 
Coxinga
's Envoy in his Journey to 
Peking,
 and that there was no News of send∣ing another in his stead.


Thursday,
 being the nineteenth, a great Train of People rode through the City, that came from 
Hoksieu,
 and were going to 
Sinksieu,
 to the Vice-Roy, with Clothes and other Goods, and also with News of his Wives Mothers Death, which forc'd the Agents to stay for Men to carry their Necessaries. Mean while the Vice-Admiral 
Campen
 went to view the City, and walking


along, met with a Slave that was run away from 
Macaw,
 and serv'd now in the 
Chinese
 Army as a Soldier, who leading him out of the City, shew'd him a 
Christian
 Temple, where, according to the Slaves Relation, Father 
Martinius,
 famous for his Writing of the 
Chinese Atlas,
 and other remarkable Antiquities of that People, died thirty seven days before.


Anno
 1653. this 
Martinius
 came with a 
Portuguese
 Frigat from 
Macasser
 to 
Ba∣tavia,
 after having been ten or twelve Years in the Empire of 
China,
 where he preach'd the Gospel, and converted, as they say, above two thousand Souls, and went the same Year from 
Batavia
 in the good Ship the 
White Elephant,
 com∣manded by the foremention'd 
Iohn Van Campen,
 to 
Holland;
 but the Ship run∣ning into 
Bergen
 in 
Norway, Martinius
 travell'd from thence through the 
Sound
 to 
Amsterdam,
 where he publish'd the foremention'd Works.


At Noon leaving 
Hokzwa,
 and proceeding on their Journey, in the Evening
 they enter'd a Village, and according to custom went into a great 
Pagode,
 where they were courteously entertain'd by the Priests, and took repose that Night.


On 
Friday
 Morning, being the twentieth, setting out very early, they rode through a Village abont an 
English
 Mile and a half long, which the Night be∣fore was the greater part burnt down by Thieves, and in the Fire about a hun∣dred Men, Women, and Children consum'd to Ashes, or otherwise murther'd.


About Noon having pass'd the Village, they were brought to a great House where the 
Chineses
 kept Watch. Here was but one 
Mandarin,
 who receiv'd the Agents very friendly, and seem'd heartily to rejoyce that they had not shared in the last nights Calamity. In the afternoon they took their leave, and went, being guided by the 
Mandarins,
 to the Shore of an In-land River, where they and their Retinue Embarqu'd themselves in a Vessel that lay ready for to carry them to 
Hoksieu.
 Towards Night they came to 
Lavyit,
 or 
Anlavja,
 a Strong∣hold,
 built on the top of a Mountain: Near which was a Ferry for the ease of Travellers.


The one and twentieth, being 
Saturday,
 in the Morning they came to 
Lamthay,
 belonging to 
Hoksieu,
 where they were kindly receiv'd by divers 
Mandarins,
 and the Governor of the City 
Engeling,
 who nobly entertain'd them. After Dinner they were conducted through the City, and shew'd may antient Edifices, and spacious 
Pagodes,
 or Temples. At Night they return'd to their Vessel, not∣withstanding the Governor of 
Minjazen
 proffer'd them his House for their Lodgings.


The two and twentieth they sent the 
Chinese
 Interpreter 
Lakka,
 with two 
Mandarins,
 to the City 
Hoksieu
 before them, and prepared themselves with some Presents of Scarlet, Crown-Serge, and Bays, to give to 
Han∣lavja
 the Governor of 
Minjazen,
 and likewise to the Ruler of 
Hoksieu:
 who hearing of their arrival by the Interpreter 
Lakka,
 sent them fifteen Saddle-Horses: But 
Van Campen
 not being very well dispos'd, staid in the Barque, ordering 
Constantine Nobel
 to take the Presents, and ride with all their Atten∣dants to 
Hoksieu,
 where after a kind Reception, towards Evening he return'd to 
Lamthay,
 to the Vessel.


The next day, being the twenty third, the 
Mandarin
 of 
Lamthay
 invited the Agents to Dinner, which they would willingly have put off; but fearing his Displeasure, they granted his Request. Many great 
Mandarins,
 besides the Go∣vernors of 
Minjazen
 and 
Engeling,
 were present at this Feast, which was ended to the general satisfaction of all, with great jollity and good cheer. The 
Chi∣nese



Lords advis'd the Agents to stay seven or eight days longer, to congratu∣late the Vice-Roys Return, and for the farther accomplishing their Business; promising them their Assistance in their Request, for selling those Merchan∣dizes that were in the Ships.


The twenty fourth, being 
Tuesday,
 in the morning 
Van Campen
 and 
Nobel
 rode both to 
Hoksieu,
 to complement the Governor and other 
Mandarins,
 and likewise to present them with five Ells of Scarlet, a piece of Crown Serge, and a Demy-Castor; which the foresaid Lords receiv'd very courteously, pro∣mising to be assistant to the Agents in the procuring a Free Trade for them, provided they were not too hasty.


About Sun-set the Agents took their leave, and mounting their Horses, rode through a great Throng of People out of the City, and came at Night to their Vessel, lying at 
Lamthay,
 where they took their Repose.


The City 
Hoksieu,
 otherwise call'd 
Changcheu,
 hath many stately Buildings of blue Stone, and several great 
Pagodes
 or Temples; being inviron'd with a high Wall, fortified with Bulwarks and deep Ditches, and the Streets well pav'd.


The twenty fifth the Governor of the Fort 
Engeling,
 accompanied with se∣veral very eminent 
Mandarins,
 came to visit the Agents in their Jonk, where they were welcom'd by the 
Hollanders
 with 
Spanish
 and 
Rhenish
 Wine, which having drunk, they spent some time in discoursing about the War.


This Fort of 
Engeling
 stands on the Sea-shore, before which is a safe Harbor for Ships: Near the Bay stood formerly a great Town of Trade of the same Name, but was quite ruin'd and raz'd by the 
Tartars.


But during the 
Mandarins▪
 and Agents Discourse together in their Jonk, came a 
Tartar,
 a Soldier of 
Hanlavia,
 with a Letter from the Admiral 
Bort,
 to the Agents 
Iohn Van Campen,
 and 
Constantine Nobel:
 The Contents thereof to this purpose.




THis Morning I have understood of your coming back to 
Hoksieu,
 from Our Secretary 
Iohn Melman,
 sent from Us to the River of 
Hoksieu
 to inquire for you, and deliver a Letter to the Governor of 
Minjazen.
 Since that being inform'd, as likewise by your Letter written in haste, That the 
Tartars
 have concluded Peace with those of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 from whence We may suppose that they will begin nothing with Us to their prejudice, but rather prevent it (if they have but any opportunity) and to make Satisfacti∣on for all Damages (because with this Peace they are become their Subjects) done already, and which hereafter we may do them: To prevent all, We wish that We had the 
Domburgh
 Frigat here with us.


Yet nevertheless, We give no such Order by these Presents, that by such sudden alterations we may create no suspitious thoughts in them: But We do hereby send you Our good Sailer the 
Sea-dog
 Frigat, that upon the receit hereof you may come to us. This we desire you to observe, that We may hear your Adventures, and what you have effected in your Business, that then We may consult and resolve one with another, what is best to be done in this Affair, for the Benefit of the Publick, and prejudice to the Enemy.


From aboard the 
Naerden
 Frigat in the Fleet before 
Tinghay,
 
October
 25. 1662.


Balthasar Bort.




The Governor of 
Engeling,
 with the 
Mandarin
 of the Fort, at the Agents Re∣quest, provided instantly thirteen Saddle-Horses, whereon they rode to 
Hok∣sieu,
 to obtain Licence to return to their Ships; whither they came about Noon, and went to the Governor and 
Mandarins,
 of whom they desir'd leave to depart to their Fleet; whereto the Governor reply'd, 
Why so hasty, when you are still weary of your Iourney? It is better for you to stay till the Vice-Roy
 Singlamong 
and General
 Lipovi 
come hither: Your Business hath a good face, and We have writ to the Emperor, at his Court in
 Peking, 
on your behalf; and in all likelihood We shall have an Answer back in fifty or sixty days; and in nine or ten days, at farthest, the Vice-Roy and General will be here: It will be requisite that you stay so long, and be present to fetch in the Vice-Roy, which he will take as a great Kindness: Mean while you may come daily to visit the
 Mandarins, 
which will much promote your Desires. We do certainly believe, That the liberty of a Free Trade will be permitted you, and likewise to dispose of all those Goods in your Ships.
 Whereupon the Agents return'd their humble and hearty Thanks, but told them by their Interpreter 
Lakka, That their Admiral had writ to them to make what haste they could to the Fleet, which lay near the Cape of
 Tinghay. Whereupon the Governor made Answer, 
Will they go? Let them do what they please: But first we will eat.
 Upon which, Meat being brought, every one was set at a distinct Table, according to the fashion of the Countrey, and serv'd in Gold and Silver Chargers. Dinner being past, they had a long Discourse concerning the 
Chinese
 and 
Dutch
 War; which ended, the Agents took their leaves; then mounting, they rode through the City, and came at last to 
Lam∣thay
 to their Barque, where having given the Governor and 
Mandarin
 of the Fort a Visit, they went aboard their Jonk.


The twenty sixth, being 
Thursday,
 the grand 
Mandarin, Hanlavia,
 Governor
 of 
Minjazen,
 came in the Morning to the River side, and fetching the Agents with great Ceremony out of the Jonk, invited them to a Treatment: They fearing to incur his displeasure if they refus'd, accepted of his kindness, where they were courteously welcom'd, and saluted by the Servants with loud Accla∣mations, crying out, 
Fueet,
 that is, 
Long live;
 a peculiar Ceremony of great Honor in this Empire, and us'd by none but Persons of great Quality, which generally command their Servants to do it. The Feast ended, they began a long Discourse about the War in 
Holland
 and 
China,
 which last continu'd twen∣ty Years, in which 
Hanlavia
 always perform'd great Service for the 
Cham
 of 
Tartary,
 and was a main Assistant in his Conquests.


He also told them, 
That he prepar'd himself to bring that grand Pyrate
 Coxinga 
under the Emperors Subjection; to which purpose
 (said he) 
I am by the Emperors Order sent towards the Sea, not seeing any hopes at all of a Peace between the
 Cham 
and
 Cox∣inga, 
who by Ambassadors sent to the Emperor in
 Peking 
much desires it. I also under∣stand, That the
 Hollanders 
coming into the River
 Hoksieu, 
is very acceptable to the Great
 Cham; 
so that to obtain liberty for a Free Trade for you through all
 China, 
is not to be doubted: Why then
 (proceeded he) 
are you so hasly to be gone? You ought rather to have stay'd in the River
 Hoksieu, 
till the Vice-Roy and General
 Lipovi 
were come, since the Peace with
 Coxinga 
will come to no effect.


This Discourse and their Entertainment being ended, the Agents took their leave of the Governor 
Hanlavia,
 and other eminent 
Mandarins,
 who, according to the manner, wish'd them a Boon Voyage.


Whilst they were sitting at Table, they heard the Word 
Fueet
 several times repeated, whereat some of their Attendance bow'd, and others fell flat on the Ground.


The 
Tartars
 being ask'd if the Word 
Fueet
 signified 
Holy,
 they answer'd, 
No, but it was a Word of Ceremony, by which they partly express'd how their Servants obey'd them, and partly how welcom their Guests were.


The Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 having gratified the Servants for their Atten∣dance, went immediately with his Jonk aboard the 
Sea-hound
 Frigat, Com∣manded by 
Iohn Hendrikson,
 who the next day, being the twenty seventh, weigh'd Anchor, and fell down with the Ebb to the Mouth of the River, that so he might with the first fair Wind sail to the other Ships at 
Tinghay,
 where he arriv'd the following day in the Evening, when the Vice-Admiral and 
Nobel
 caus'd themselves immediately to be put aboard the Admiral, in the 
Naerden
 Frigat, there to give him an account of their Affairs and several Adventures, and especially deliver him the Letters sent him from the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and General 
Lipovi;
 the Contents of which consisted most in the Pro∣mises already mention'd by the same Lords to 
Van Campen
 and 
Nobel,
 of their kind proffer of Friendship, License to put into all Bays, Havens, and Rivers on the Coast of 
China,
 with their Ships, either in foul Weather, or otherwise; and likewise to take Water and Wood, and buy Provision for their Sea-men.


The thirtieth, about Noon, 
Constantine Nobel
 was sent with the 
Sea-hound
 Frigat, and 
Ter-Boede
 Pink, from the Fleet to the River 
Hoksieu,
 there to pro∣mote the Business, and strictly to observe all Passages.


The one and thirtieth the Vice▪ Admiral, though surpris'd with a Pestilen∣tial Fever, and great Sickness, was commanded to Sail about the East with six Ships.


The second of 
November,
 being 
Thursday,
 the 
Finch
 went from 
Tinghay
 to the River 
Hoksieu.


The third, by the Admirals Order, two hundred Soldiers were put ashore to drive the 
Chineses
 out of 
Tinghay
 into the Mountains; but finding them in a good posture of defence, they retreated without effecting any thing.


The fourth the 
Sea-hound
 Frigat came again from the River 
Hoksieu
 to the Fleet at 
Tinghay,
 as also the 
Finch
 the next day; and then all the Ships took in Wood.


The sixth the 
Breukelen
 Pink set Sail for 
Batavia,
 with the Goods that had been taken at Sea, and Letters of Advice concerning the Agents Adventures at 
Sinksieu,
 being convey'd beyond the Islands by the 
Sea-hound
 Frigat, and 
Ter-Boede
 Pink, who on the next day came again to an Anchor with the rest of the Fleet near 
Tinghay.


The eighth in the Morning 
Van Campen
 put to Sea with the 
Zierikzee, Ankee∣veen,
 and 
Loenen
 Frigats, to Cruise Northerly; but being hindred by a Storm and contrary Tides, came to an Anchor again about Noon in ten Fathom Water.


Fryday,
 the tenth, the Vice-Admiral weigh'd Anchor again, to steer Nor∣therly, but came back without any effect; yet soon after they spied fifteen or sixteen 
Chinese
 Jonks in the South-West, at a great distance, to chase which, they presently sent the 
Sea-hound
 and 
Calf
 Frigats, with the 
Zierikzees
 Boat, and those of the 
Ankeveen,
 full of armed Men; but the 
Chineses
 escap'd by their nimble Sailing, onely one 
Champan,
 with a few Fish, was taken by the Vice-Admirals Boat near the Shore; and another larger Vessel, deserted by all her Men, was sunk by the 
Hollanders.


The eleventh, being 
Saturday, Van Campen
 went out again with his Frigats, to sail towards the North; but being driven Southerly by a strong contrary


Current, he cast Anchor in fourteen Fathom Water, near one of the nether∣most Islands of 
Pakka▪


On 
Sunday
 Morning, being the twelfth, they saw two Jonks in the South-West, seeming to steer towards 
Tinghay,
 which 
Van Campen
 chasing, endeavour'd to get to the Northwards; but labour'd in vain, because of contrary Winds and Tides: at last he was forc'd near the Islands of 
Pakka,
 which although
 pretty large, yet are for the most part waste and untill'd, and inhabited by none but Fishers and poor Rusticks: Nevertheless there is good Harbor for Ships, and Refreshments of Water, and Provisions to be had.


The thirteenth, being 
Munday, Van Campen
 with the Ebb set Sail North∣wards, between the Islands 
Pakka,
 in eighteen, nineteen, and twenty Fathom Water; but came, after the Tide spent, to Anchor in thirteen Fathom Water, under the Eastermost Island.


About Noon the Fleet weigh'd to get more towards the North, and against the Evening Anchor'd in eight Fathom Water, about half a League Nor-East∣and-by-East from the Eastermost Isle before 
Pakka.


The fourteenth 
Van Campen
 set Sail again with a Nor-Nor-East Wind, in six, seven, and eight Fathom, between the Isles of 
Pakka▪
 and about Noon, forc'd by contrary Tides, came to an Anchor in seven Fathom: Towards Evening weighing again with the Ebb, he let fall his Drag about midnight in eighteen Fathom, gravelly Ground, not far from the place where the Coast of 
China
 hath many high Mountains, and broken Land; yet behind them very pleasant and fertile Meadows and Rice-Fields.


The fifteenth setting Sail again, he Anchor'd about Noon under an Isle, in thirteen Fathom Water, gravelly Ground, about Cannon-shot from Shore, whither he sent his Boat to see for Water.


From hence setting Sail, he came into a Bay behind 
Campens Point,
 so call'd
 from himself, where he dropp'd Anchor in five Fathom Water, there being a convenient Harbor, and safe Retreat against hollow Seas and turbulent Winds. On the North side of this Point, lying in twenty six Degrees and fifty one Minutes Northern Latitude, may be seen the Ruines of the City 
Tikyen,
 or 
Ty∣kin,
 formerly a place of great Trade, but lately destroy'd by the 
Tartars.
 Here the 
Zierikzee's
 Boat was sent ashore, with the Pilot 
Auke Pieters,
 and thirteen Men, to fetch Water. Near the Shore, between the Mountains, appear'd a pleasant Valley, flourishing with Rice, Carrots, and all manner of Fruit. You may freely, without fear or danger, sail between the main Coast and these Isles; yet not without some care, because divers Shoals lie near the Coast.


The eighteenth, being 
Saturday, Van Campen
 set Sail with his Squadron, the Wind Nor-Nor-East; and laveering it between 
Campens Point
 and the fore∣mention'd Isles, between seven and thirteen Fathom Water, gravelly Ground, they discover'd the old 
Zajer
 Isle East-Nor-East, four or five Leagues distant, in twenty seven Degrees and fifteen Minutes Northern Latitude, and about Noon came to an Anchor in ten Fathom Water, gravelly Ground. In the Night set∣ting Sail again, they ran the next day about Noon behind 
Campens Bay,
 where they were forc'd to lie till 
Friday
 the twenty fourth, by contrary Winds, Tides, and Calms. Towards Night the 
Finch
 came also to an Anchor there.


Friday
 the twenty fourth the Ships went to Sea together, and with a Nor-Nor-East Wind endeavor'd to sail Easterly; but being driven back by the Tide, they came to an Anchor in eight Fathom, and had the North Point of the Island with 
Brests,
 South-West, and the old 
Zajer▪
 East and by North. At


Night, in the second Watch, when the Tide was almost spent, they weigh'd Anchor again, and the next Evening rode in eight Fathom Water, having the 
Chinese
 City 
Samzwa
 Nor-East and by East, and the Isle 
Old Zayer
 Sou-Sou-East, and Sou-East and by South, and the Isle with Breasts Sou-Sou-West.


The City 
Samzwa
 seated on the hanging of a Mountain, and planted round
 about with high Trees, was ruin'd by the 
Tartars:
 It boasts a safe Harbor for Ships, to defend them from the Southern and Northern stormy Seasons. The 
Hollanders
 going ashore here, found one 
Pagode
 or Temple, with divers Images, about fifteen Leagues from 
Tinghay.


The twenty seventh the Point of 
Samzwa
 bearing Westward two Leagues from them, they descry'd a white Cliff in the Sea, about three Leagues from the Shore, and three Isles in the East-Nor-East, and by Observation found themselves at Noon to be in twenty seven Degrees and thirty nine Minutes Northern Latitude.


In the Evening 
Van Campen
 came to an Anchor with the 
Ankeveen
 Frigat in eleven Fathom Water, gravelly Ground; but the 
High-land
 and 
Meliskerk
 Fri∣gats, with the 
Loenen
 and 
Finch,
 went behind the Isle of 
Good Hope. Van Campen
 in the Night, the Tide favoring him, set Sail again, and was follow'd by the 
Ankeveen
 Frigat onely, the other four lying still behind the Isle, without making the Reason thereof known.


The next day, forc'd by Storm to come to an Anchor again in ten Fathom Water, he was driven from two Anchors, towards the seven Rocks a little Southward of 
Zwatia,
 not without great danger of Shipwrack.


The City 
Zwatia,
 lying in the mouth of a River near the Sea, and also ruin'd
 by the 
Tartars,
 is inhabited by mean and poor People, which are very slow in rebuilding the same. Opposite to the Nor-West side of the River lies a Village call'd 
Zwatho,
 whither most of the Citizens fled, it being not laid waste by the 
Tartars.


The first of 
Ianuary, Van Campen
 concluded, upon Advice of the Ships Coun∣cil, by force of a Storm out of the Nor-East and by East, to set Sail again, to get from the Shore; so that he drove down Sou-West and by South, to 
Brest-Island,
 and in the afternoon came to an Anchor in the Bay behind 
Campens
 Point in nine Fathom.


The other Frigats, and the 
Finch,
 lay still at Anchor, contrary to their Orders.


The third, the 
Ankeveen
 Frigat, commanded by 
Iacob Swart,
 having been bu∣sied about getting his Anchors aboard, came and rode by the Vice-Admiral.


The fourth in the afternoon they spied in the Sou-Sou-West between seven∣ty and eighty Fisher-Jonks, and other Vessels, standing towards the North, which they let all pass: About the evening they stood to and again, yet were got out of sight next Morning, on which the Captain 
Auke Pieters
 was com∣manded to go ashore, with fifty Men, to gather Sallad-herbs and Potatoes to refresh their People.


The sixth in the Evening the four other Ships came to an Anchor near 
Van Campen,
 having before lain behind the Isles Northward of the River 
Zwatia.


The eighth in the Morning they spied six Jonks fishing in the Sou-East and by East, behind the 
Breast-Isle;
 and in the afternoon, two Ships in the Sou-East, in the Bay of 
Pakka,
 and also heard the Report of several Cannon▪ shot from thence; whereupon a Council being call'd, 
Harmans Symonsz,
 Comman∣der of the 
High land
 Frigat, was sent thither, with Order, That when he came


to them, he should fire five Guns one after another, if he needed 
Van Campen
's Assistance; if not, to fire none, but come back to the Fleet.


Against the Evening the 
High-land
 Frigat came to an Anchor South-West and by South, three Leagues distant from the Fleet.


The ninth in the morning they saw above twenty Fisher-Jonks near the Shore of 
Pakka,
 who were putting to Sea to fish; but not being able to get out, were by the Current driven towards the South: 
Van Campen
 chas'd them between the Islands; yet the Jonks by their swift sailing, escap'd him.


In the afternoon the 
Hollanders
 came again to an Anchor behind 
Campens Point,
 in nine Fathom Water, about a small Cannon-shot from the Shore.


The tenth they saw two Frigats in the Bay of 
Pakka, viz.
 the 
Sea-hound,
 in which the Admiral 
Bort
 was, (as they understood the next day) and the 
High∣land,
 which on the eighth was sent thither for Intelligence.


The eleventh in the morning the Admiral 
Bort
 came in the 
High-land
 Frigat to an Anchor about half a League from the Vice-Admiral.


Mean while the Admiral 
Bort
 had by Storm taken the Fort 
Kitat,
 lying in
 the Bay of 
Pakka,
 and with it plunder'd all the Towns, Villages, and Hamlets, being twenty in number, belonging thereto: All which he had written to the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen,
 the tenth of the said Month, from the Bay of 
Pakka;
 adding thereto, That had he not been detain'd eight days by tempestuous Wea∣ther, he had been with him before that time, to find out 
Zwathia,
 lying about the North, in hopes there to find several Trading Jonks.


The same day 
Harman Symonsz
 went aboard the Vice-Admiral, being sent thither by the Admiral from the Bay of 
Pakka,
 with the Letters before-men∣tion'd, bringing also with him a small Supply of fresh Victuals, which was equally distributed amongst the Ships.


They found in 
Kitat
 nothing but a little Rice, Salt, and a little Lumber, besides twelve Women, and fifteen Youths, which were transported for Ser∣vants to 
Batavia.


The 
Hollanders
 fell upon this Place, because some of 
Coxinga
's Party resided there.


The twelfth they descried three Jonks and a Fishers Boat in the North-East, one of them being without a Mast: 
Van Campen,
 by the Admirals Order, set Sail towards them with five Ships: That Jonk which had lost her Mast was onely taken, the rest escaping by the advantage of the Tide. In the taken Jonk they found no more but onely Salt, Rice, and Wood. Towards Evening the Frigat came again to the Prize-Jonk, and about eight at Night tow'd her along with them to 
Campens Point.


In the afternoon the 
Sea-hound
 and 
High-land
 Frigats, and 
Ter-Boede
 Pink, came up to the Vice-Admiral, and at Night Anchor'd South and by West about a League from them.


Wednesday,
 being the thirteenth, the 
Ter-Boede
 was sent from the Fleet to the River 
Hoksieu,
 there to stay till 
Van Campen
's Squadron came back from the North.


Against Noon the 
Overveen
 Frigat came out of 
Kitat
-Bay, near the Fleet, and turning up Northerly, in the afternoon was forc'd by contrary Winds to lie in seven Fathom water.


About midnight the Fleet weigh'd Anchor, and hearing several Cannons fired, and 
Van Campen
 fearing some of the Frigats to be run ashore, sent his Boats thither, and found the 
Calf
 to be drove very near the Shore, on which


the 
High-land
 Frigat had also been fast, but was got off again: whereupon 
Van Campen
 return'd.


Ysbrant,
 Pilot to the Admiral, and another, were sent aboard of the Vice-Admiral, to enquire how many healthy persons he had in his Ship, of Sea∣men and Soldiers; and what number of Sea-men he could be able to send ashore fit for Service: whereupon he reply'd, about thirty.


Thursday
 about Noon the Fleet was in twenty seven Degrees and nineteen Minutes Northern-Latitude, two Leagues and a half from West and by North from 
Zwamzwa
 Cape.


In the afternoon about two a Clock the Fleet weighed Anchor again, and in the Morning were within four Leagues North and by East of 
Zwatia,
 three Leagues East Nor-East from 
Cape Elephant,
 and three Leagues and a half West and by South from 
Zwamzwa.
 About Noon the Fleet, forc'd by contrary Winds and Tydes, cast Anchor in eleven or twelve Fathom Water, about three Leagues Nor-West, and Nor-West and by West from the River 
Zwatia,
 and two Leagues and a half South-east and by East from 
Cape Elephant;
 where Ri∣ding all Night, they Sail'd next day toward the North, and soon after turn'd Westward up the River of 
Zwatia,
 where the Vice-Admiral had Cruised with six Sail the twenty eighth and twenty ninth of the last Moneth.


The Marks whereby Sea-men may know this River, are towards the North a great white Shelf, and on the Shore many Cliffs.


A little more to the Northward of it lie two Islands, behind which is a safe Harbor.


About Noon the Fleet found themselves in twenty seven Degrees and thirty five Minutes Eastward from the South-Point of the River 
Zwatia,
 from whence Sailing West-South-west into the River, they had from six to twenty three Fathom Water, being the shallowest gravelly Ground; and with the same Course they came before 
Zwatia,
 where they cast Anchor in seven Fa∣thom Water, about a Musquet-shot from the Shore: on which the short-hair'd 
Chineses
 stood with Red Flags, (a sign of Peace by them, as the White is with us) in great companies, expecting the 
Netherlanders,
 without any offering to come to their Ships. This continu'd a whole hour, when the Admiral 
Bort
 Commanded the Guns to be fir'd upon the Town. The 
Chineses
 thus rudely saluted, immediately let flie their White Flag in sign of War, and shooting with Musquets and Blunderbusses, flourish'd their Faulchions and Scythes over their Heads, yet betook themselves with all their Movables which they were able to carry out of the City, to flight towards the Mountains; others with their Vessels ran up the River; whereupon the Admiral 
Bort
 Commanded the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 to go ashore with eight Boats and seven Shallops well Man'd and Arm'd, which 
Bort
 himself promis'd to follow. 
Van Campen
 Land∣ing without any resistance on the Shore, found the City Re-built, and the Houses furnish'd with Tables, Chests, Stools, and Benches, besides abun∣dance of Thrash'd and Unthrash'd Rice, call'd 
Bady,
 Salt, great store of dry'd and Salt Fish, and also Nets: There appear'd seven large Temples, every one apart in a pleasant Grove, Wall'd round about, and within Pav'd with Blue Stone, where stood many Humane Figures, Cloth'd in all sorts of Stuffs, Caps, Coats, Breeches, Shoes, and Stockings, all, as alive, about Tables on Wax'd Benches or Stools, Gilded; on each Table stood two large square Vessels, or Pots, wherein the Priests burn Incense to their Idols, with perfum'd 
Calambak, Agar,
 and 
Sandal-Wood,
 which yield a most fragrant smell.


On the Tables also lay four pieces of Wood, each a large half Foot long, round on the top, and flat at the bottom, which, to know future events, they throw three times one after another before the Idols.


Towards Evening 
Van Campen
 leaving the Shore went aboard again with all his Men, loaden with the best Plunder, and many Images not spoil'd by the 
Tartars.


Here it is to be observ'd, that many Native 
Chineses
 are to be understood by
 the Name of 
Tartars, viz.
 those who by shaving off their Hair, leaving onely a long Lock, have yielded themselves to the subjection of the 
Cham
 of 
Tartary.


The seventeenth, being 
Sunday,
 in the Morning the 
Ankeveen
 Frigat, and the 
Loenen
 and 
Finch
 Commanded by 
Ysbrant,
 Pilot of the 
Naerden,
 besides four Boats and a Sloop, Mann'd with Armed Soldiers and Sea-men, Sail'd up the River to surprize five Jonks laden with Goods, and said to lie for their safety a great way up the River, and if possible to bring them to the Fleet; but if not worth the trouble, to burn them. About Noon they came up with seven Jonks and three 
Coya's
 (which are a kind of Vessels lesser than Jonks, as our Mackrel-boats,) which Boarding, many 
Chineses
 with their Coats of Mayl, Helmets and Arms, leap'd over-board and swam, and others escap'd ashore in their 
Champans,
 and the rest, being most of them Women and Chil∣dren, were taken by the 
Netherlanders;
 but all soon released, except five Women. Towards Evening the Master of the 
Finch
 went aboard the 
Naerden
 Frigat to the Admiral, with Tydings that their Vessels had conquer'd three great, and five small Jonks, amongst which some carry'd seven Guns of a side; whereup∣on he was again sent withthe 
Meliskerks
 Boat and Pinnace, well Mann'd and furnish'd with Tackling, which he said was wanting for the taken Jonks; all which having aboard, he left the Frigat, and Sail'd up the River again in the Night.


Monday
 the eighteenth about Day-break they heard a great Cry, made by the Men of the 
Meliskerks
 Boat, which was over-set near the Shore: whereupon 
Van Campen
 and the Master of the 
Sea-hound
 Sailing thither, found five Men sit∣ting on the Keel of the Boat, so benumm'd with Cold, that they were not able to give account what was become of their Fellows; but Rowing up farther where the Boat had been over-set, they found another Man sitting on the Shore, which had been driven three times that Night into the River by the 
Chineses:
 He told them that he had not seen one of his Fellows; so that ten Men (they having been sixteen in number) were either drown'd or kill'd. At Night the 
Finches
 Pinnace went aboard the 
Naerden
 to the Admiral with a Letter of Advice, that they had taken eight Jonks, of which they had burnt four, and brought away the other four.


The nineteenth, being 
Tuesday,
 the 
Chineses
 made a Sign, by setting up their red Flag, inviting the 
Netherlanders
 to come to them: Whereupon 
Van Cam∣pen
 and the Master of the 
Sea-hound
 went ashore to know what they desir'd, and Landing found a great number of 
Chineses
 with five red Flags of the five neigh∣boring
 Villages, with the chief Governor from every Village, and five 
Chinese
 Priests.


These being carry'd aboard to the Admiral, begg'd and intreated, that he would save their Houses and Temples, that they might make Fires, and shelter themselves from the cold Winter; and likewise not to spoil their little 
Cham∣pans
 and Fishing-nets; which if it might be granted, they would serve him in all things possible, and within four days bring him out of every Village twenty


five Porkers, one hundred twenty five Hens, fifty Ducks, and as many Oranges, Raddishes, and other Herbage as they could gather: whereupon, in consideration they would keep their Promise, he assur'd them to save their 
Pagodes,
 Houses, 
Champans,
 and Fish-nets; after which three onely return'd ashore, for the other two were kept aboard, as Hostages till the three return'd in four days with the Provisions before-nam'd, and all things else they could get out of the five Villages. Those 
Chineses
 which stay'd aboard being ask'd by the Admiral, If no Jonks were expected that Season from Japan to 
Zwatia?
 they reply'd, That not one had Sail'd thither that Year; which afterwards he found to be true.


The twentieth, being 
Wednesday,
 the two Pinks and 
Ankeveen
 Frigat, sent up the River the seventh with four Boats and one Sloop, came to an Anchor with the six taken Jonks, 
viz.
 two great and four small: in which they found a lit∣tle Rice, 
Pady,
 or unthresh'd Rice, Salt-petre, Indigo, several Priests Coats, Helmets, Swords, Scythes, ten Blunderbusses, besides several 
Chinese
 Men, Wo∣men and Children, whereof five young Women, and four young Men were kept aboard, and the rest released. Seven other Jonks were also set on fire and sunk in the River, out of which many 
Chineses
 leaping were either drown'd and kill'd. The next day two of the small Jonks were broke up and us'd for fewel, but the biggest of them were new Trimm'd.


The two and twentieth they had a general Thanksgiving in all the Fleet for their Victories over their Enemies. The day after the Admiral by put∣ting out the Companies red Flag, commanded all the Officers of the Fleet aboard, where the Ships Councel (for certain Reasons) propos'd, yet did not conclude, that the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen
 with his Frigat, the 
Zierikzee,
 ac∣company'd with the 
Highland, Meliskerke, Ankeveen,
 and the 
Loenen
 and the 
Finch,
 should Cruise out at Sea before 
Zwatia,
 to see for the 
Iapan
 Trading Jonks which come from thence, till the middle of 
February,
 and the Admiral 
Bort
 should put to Sea the twenty sixth with the 
Naerden, Calf, Overveen,
 and 
Sea-hound
 Frigats, besides the five Jonks, two great and three small, and cross over to 
Kitat
 and 
Tenhay,
 and from thence Sail to the River 
Hoksieu,
 there to enquire how affairs stood. It was also judg'd convenient, that the 
Ankeveen
 Frigat, and the 
Loenen
 and 
Finch,
 should immediately weigh their An∣chors, and Sail to the Mouth of the foremention'd River, to look for some Jonks that were daily expected; but these Proposals never were put into exe∣cution.


The twenty fourth in the Morning, 
Van Campen
 was by 
Borts
 Order sent ashore with a hundred and ten Soldiers, and fifty Sea-men, to burn 
Zwatia.
 No sooner was he Landed, but they saw five Priests, with a great many 
Chineses
 standing about a red Flag, which all fell down at his Feet, and humbly begg'd him to save their Temples, 
Champans,
 and Fish-nets, which if he did not, they should perish with Cold and Hunger; and promis'd against the next Morning (according to their first Proposal) to bring them the Porkers, Hens, Ducks, Oranges, Raddishes, and Pot-herbs: 
Van Campen
 mov'd with compassion, was perswaded to forbear.


The twenty fifth, being 
Christmas
-day, 
Van Campen
 going aboard to the Admi∣ral in the 
Naerden
 Frigat, ask'd him what was best to be done with 
Zwatia?
 whereupon 
Bort
 reply'd, 
That he should lay it in Ashes:
 which said, 
Van Campen
 went ashore with three Boats and three Sloops well Mann'd, where he found lying on the Shore five Hogs and fifteen Baskets of Oranges, brought thither


by five Priests and fifteen 
Chineses:
 two of the Hogs, and five Baskets of Oranges were by 
Van Campen
 carry'd aboard to the Admiral, who remitting somewhat of his anger, gave him order to do with 
Zwatia
 what he pleas'd and thought convenient: But before 
Van Campen
 came ashore again, the Houses were all in a Flame, occasion'd through the wilfulness of the Sea-men. Out of the Houses and 
Pagodes
 came divers sick Men and Women creeping on their Knees to escape the Flames.


The same day the Admiral leaving 
Zwatia,
 according to their agreement in the Councel, with the 
Naerden, Ankeveen, Calf,
 and 
Sea-hound
 Frigat▪ two great and two small taken Jonks, went to the Bay of 
Kitat
 and 
Tenhay,
 to go from thence in some of the Frigats to 
Hoksieu,
 as was before design'd.


The twenty sixth 
Van Campen
 put also to Sea with four Frigats and two Pinks, wherewith steering about the Shore towards the North, they came to an Anchor in the Evening near an Island (by them call'd 
The Good Hope,
) three Leagues Northerly from the River 
Zwatia,
 in twenty four Fathom Water, gra∣velly Ground, about Cannon-shot from the Shore.


The Admirals Order to 
Van Campen,
 was to keep that Course, or to Cruise for the 
Chinese
 Jonks that Traded to 
Iapan,
 till the middle of 
February,
 and then to fall down Southerly to 
Tenhay.


The twenty seventh the Councel in 
Van Campens
 Squadron Consulted, whe∣ther according to 
Bort
's Order they should keep at Sea, or lie still near the Isle of 
Good Hope,
 and to place six or seven Men on one of the highest Hills, there to spy what Jonks were out in the Offin: To which last Proposal they all agreed, from thence Sailing early the next day, with intention to get up higher, yet were by contrary Winds and cross Currents forc'd back to their former Road.


The twenty eighth, being 
Thursday,
 seven Men were sent ashore, as they had before agreed, up to a rising Ground, there with their Glasses to descry what Traffickers that Sea afforded. In the afternoon six 
Chineses
 came in a 
Champan
 aboard the Vice-Admiral, bringing with them a fat Swine, nine Hens, twenty four Ducks, eleven Baskets with Oranges, and fourteen Pum∣peons, not having a greater store: Amongst them were two of their Priests, which they kept aboard till they should return with more Provisions, which they promis'd in three days; but they fail'd, not coming the third day, yet 
Van Campen
 set the Pledges ashore on the twenty sixth, who afterwards return'd to inquire for one 
Chilo,
 a 
Chinese
 Merchant, whom they fear'd was slain, or their Prisoner: 
Van Campen
 answer'd, That he knew of none such, but would enquire of the Admiral, and if he found him alive in the Fleet, he should be set ashore at 
Tenhay;
 they humbly thanking him, and having receiv'd satisfa∣ction for their Provisions, departed.


The twenty ninth some of the Vice-Admiral's Men went ashore for Wood and Water; where also they Shot a great Hart, and therefore call'd it 
Harts-Isle.


The one and thirtieth, being 
Sunday,
 they espi'd two Fishers-Jonks in the East, which 
Van Campen
 chasing took, with thirteen 
Chineses,
 some fresh and salted Fish, which were taken out, and carry'd aboard the Vice-Admiral. The 
Chinese
 Prisoners being examin'd in the presence of the Commanders from whence they came? reply'd, From 
Zwatia:
 If they had seen any 
Holland
 Ships? answer'd 
No:
 and being demanded if no Jonks were expected that Season from 
Iapan
 at 
Zwatia?
 they also reply'd, 
No:
 and being farther ask'd if none went that Year from 
Zwatia
 to 
Iapan,
 and if some Jonks about two days


before had not Sail'd from 
Zwatia
 towards the North? they again answer'd 
No:
 so that the 
Netherlanders
 could get nothing out of them: whereupon they were order'd to be kept aboard the Vice-Admiral, till he thought fit to send them out a Fishing for the Fleet.


After the Admiral's and Vice-Admirals parting at 
Zwatia
 the twenty fifth of 
December,
 the Admiral arriv'd before 
Hoksieu
 the twenty seventh of the same Moneth, having in his Way, especially in the Bay of 
Succor,
 otherwise call'd 
Siang,
 in the Rode of 
Pakka,
 and likewise in that of 
Good Fortune,
 seen and met several Jonks, which all escaped from him by flight, except five. But at 
So∣thun,
 a Town which 
Bort
 sent out a Party against, having one Man kill'd, and five wounded; yet the next day with better success Charging the Enemy out of Town, he Commanded that, and likewise all the Houses in 
Tenhay
 to be burnt.


At the earnest Requests of those of 
Hoksieu,
 and the Agents Letters to the Admiral, he went thither the seventh of 
Ianuary, Anno
 1663. with the 
Overveen, Seahound,
 and all the Prize-Jonks; but the 
Calf
 and 
Naerden
 Frigats had Order to stay at 
Tenhay,
 and not upon any occasion to go ashore, for the prevention of all Mischiefs; yet in fair Weather they sometimes sail'd to the neighboring Isles, to see for the Enemies Jonks, especially those that come from 
Iapan:
 all which the Admiral gave advice of to the Vice-Admiral by the fore-mention'd Letters, adding that the small taken Jonks were fitted and made ready to Sail with News to their Excellencies the Lord-General and Councel at 
Batavia:
 to which purpose he had given a Pacquet of Letters to Captain 
Barrents Io∣chemse,
 which he had Order immediately to send away by the Jonks, and then come to him with all speed. But if upon the 
Tartars
 desire he should re-deli∣ver the Jonks, he intended to make use of the 
Ter-Boede;
 and to that end at his coming into the River of 
Hoksieu,
 where it now lay, he would send it away to the other Ships.


The sixth, being 
Tuesday, Van Campen
 summon'd the Commanders of all the Ships in his Squadron to come aboard, where after Consultation they conclu∣ded, if that day, or early on the next, they had no News out of the River 
Hok∣sieu,
 to send the 
Highland
 Frigat to the Admiral in that River, there to enquire how affairs went, which they were very desirous to know, because they had receiv'd no Advices, nor heard from them since the twenty fifth of the last, to the seventh of that Moneth.


The seventh they resolv'd (the time to Sail back to 
Batavia
 drawing near) to send the 
Loenen
 and the 
Finch
 to fetch Water, as well for themselves as for the other Ships, which were to carry their empty Casks aboard them, and at their return when fill'd to fetch them again: Mean while the Boats of those Ships that stay'd should go ashore for Fewel, that when part or all the Fleet should put to Sea, there might be no want.


The same day the 
Terr-Boede
 coming from the River 
Hoksieu,
 in the Evening anchor'd behind 
Van Campen
 at 
Tenhay,
 from whence according to 
Bort
's Order he was to go by 
Siam
 to 
Batavia,
 but first to speak with 
Van Campen
 at 
Tenhay.


The tenth, being 
Saturday,
 the 
Ter-Boede
 set Sail, being sent as an Advice-Boat, under the Command of 
Nanning Claesz
 to 
Batavia,
 the same day the 
Highland
 Frigat, Commanded by 
Harmon Simonse,
 and the 
Ankeveen
 by 
Iacob Black,
 went to the River of 
Hoksieu,
 according to the Admiral's Order, Dated the seventh.


The eleventh they saw four Sail in the River 
Hoksieu:
 and now the Crui∣sing


up and down with the Frigats for Jonks that Traded to 
Iapan
 was laid quite aside by reason of bad Weather, and till further Order from the Admiral, which 
Van Campen
 by Letters of the seventh of 
Ianuary
 advised him of from his Fleet lying before 
Tenhay.


The fourteenth in the Morning the 
Ankeveen
 Frigat came out of the River 
Hoksieu,
 into the Bay of 
Linkun,
 to turn about the North to 
Tenhay,
 but the Tyde being spent he could not get forward; which being seen by 
Van Campen,
 he immediately sent the Pilot, 
Iohn Cortz,
 with a well Mann'd Sloop thither to enquire after affairs, before whose return seven Glasses were run; yet at last he return'd with 
Iacob Black,
 Master of the 
Ankeveen,
 who brought a Letter with him from the Admiral, Dated the seventh of the same Moneth in the 
Ankeveen,
 then Riding in the Channel of 
Hoksieu;
 the Contents were these: 
That 
Nobel
 with all his Attendants were detain'd in 
Hoksieu,
 and not permitted to come aboard; That himself was come with all the Ships down to the Mouth of the River, where stopp'd by contrary Winds from coming to him, he had lay'n three days, but would have come in stead of the Letter, had not the Night before three Vessels come down the River with 
Melman,
 two 
Man∣darins
 and Letters from 
Nobel
 and the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and General 
Lipovi,
 who still desir'd the stay of all or some of the Fleet fifteen or twenty days longer for an Answer from 
Peking;
 which if he would not do, 
Nobel
 and all his Retinue must be forc'd to wait there, and mean while Trade in private, selling some of their Merchandise, and buying others; about which he was to resolve the next day with the two 
Mandarins
 that were sent to him, there∣fore he desir'd 
Van Campen,
 on receipt of the Letter, to come to him with all speed in one of the Frigats that least drew Water, that he might consult with him about it, and resolve what was best to be done: 
Bort
 desir'd 
Van Campen
 also to leave Order with the Ships to store themselves plentifully with Wa∣ter and Firing at 
Tenhay,
 that when the other Ships came to them, they might furnish them also, that then they might proceed on their Journey to 
Batavia
 without any hinderance.
 Whereupon 
Van Campen
 went in his Ship aboard of the 
Ankeveen
 Frigat, lying at Anchor about half way at Sea, between the River 
Hoksieu
 and 
Tenhay,
 and came about four hours after Sun-set West and by North right against the Pyramids, but being forc'd by a contrary Tyde to cast Anchor in fourteen Foot Water, hapned to be aground; yet soon after was by the Tyde put afloat again, and the same Night came to the Admiral; who be∣ing fetch'd aboard the next Morning, he understood that the Secretaries Clerk, or Interpreter, 
Iohn Melman,
 was the Night before gone to 
Hoksieu,
 from whence he was to come the eighteenth of the same Moneth, with the Merchant 
Constan∣tine Nobel,
 and that then all things would be in readiness for them to put to Sea. Five 
Tartar
 Jonks came with three 
Mandarins,
 and cast Anchor near 
Van Campen,
 sent thither by the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and the General 
Taysing Lipovy,
 with two hundred Picols of Rice, twenty Porkers, and twenty great Vessels of 
Chinese
 Beer, which were sent to be divided as a Present amongst the Sea-men.


The sixteenth the 
Ankeveen
 set Sail out of the River to the Ships at 
Tenhay,
 and came thither again the next day with some Goods for the Admiral, and a Chest for the Secretary of the 
Naerden
 Frigat, who was to stay ashore in 
Hok∣sieu.
 The same day 
Van Campen
 Embarq'd himself with his Necessaries.


The eighteenth in the Morning the 
Domburgh
 and 
Overveen
 set Sail out of 
Hoksieu
 to the Ships at 
Tenhay:
 In the afternoon the Admiral receiv'd a Letter from 
Constantine Nobel,
 cóntaining, That the Admiral should stay ten


days longer for the Emperors Letters from 
Peking,
 and that they requir'd also two Hostages, 
viz.
 the Vice-Admiral 
Van Campen,
 and the Captain with one Eye, not knowing his Name, which was 
Ysbrant Builder:
 but neither the Ad∣miral nor Vice-Admiral thought this advice fit to be follow'd.


The twentieth the Deputy-Secretary, 
Iohn Melman,
 came in a 
Tartar
 Vessel from 
Hoksieu
 to the Ships, but it was so foggy, that those of the Fleet, being not able to see him, but hearing him Row, hal'd him aboard: 
Van Campen
 also Rowing in his Sloop to meet him, was three hours before he could either find the 
Tartar
 Vessels or his own Frigats again, notwithstanding they were very near, and had it not been for the sound of the Trumpets, it had been impossible to have found one another that Night.


The one and twentieth 
Van Campen
 hoised Sail, and with a gentle Gale out of the North North-east came to the Channel of 
Hoksieu,
 where he lay by the Ad∣miral in five Fathom gravelly Ground.


The two and twentieth in the Morning the 
Sea-hound
 Frigat set Sail with a fresh North-east Wind; but 
Van Campen,
 advised by 
Iacob Swaert,
 and the chief Pilot 
Claes Iohnson,
 who told him that in such blustering Weather their Ships could not be rul'd, because of their fresh experienc'd Sea-men, and that they had better stay for fairer Weather, stirred not: In the afternoon, the Wind blowing very hard out of the same Quarter, and the Sea growing very rough, drove the 
Ankeveen
 towards the Pyramids from her Anchor, and enforc'd them to cast out another; which done, they weighed the first Anchor, supposing it to be incumbred; then the Frigat dragg'd the other; and being engag'd among the Rocks, had neither time nor distance to drop another; whereupon the Master loosned his Fore-sail and Mizzen, so bearing up to the wind to keep her from what they were almost upon, the 
Rocky Shore;
 but all endeavors were in vain, for with the headiness of the Stream, the violence of the Wind, and hollowness of the Sea, she was driven upon the cruel Shore, and carry'd where she was hemm'd in with Rocks; when to prevent the mischief they sent a Boat from the Ship with Tackling; but that also not able to keep off, was with the Frigat driven among intervening Rocks beyond the Ship, while she bilging against the Pyramids was split: when to save the Men a Sea-man was order'd to swim to Shore with the Plumming-line, to which they fastned a stronger Rope, by which help they might betwixt swimming and wading get ashore; but he was so bruised and beaten by the Billows upon the Rocks where he Landed, that he was not able to draw the Halser to the Shore: but about two hours after Sun-set the Sea did with her impetuous Waves so batter the Frigat, and she rol∣ling so much, that they look'd every Minute to be stav'd, they were forc'd to cut down their Masts by the Board for the preservation of their lives. About two hours after Sun-set 
Van Campen
 sent one or two ashore on the West-side of the Pyramids, to make fast a Halser on the Rocks for the purpose before∣mention'd: after that 
Van Campen
 Sail'd up the River 
Hoksieu
 to look for his Boat, but could not find her.


The twenty third, being 
Thursday, Van Campen
 went ashore with a Sloop on an Island lying close by the Pyramids, to see if any sweet Water was to be had there, which they found in a Pit or Well. A Tent also was carry'd ashore and set up, into which they brought Rice, Beef, Pork, and fresh Water for those that were Ship-wrack'd, where two by Cold and drinking of Brandy, misera∣bly lost their Lives in the Night.


The twenty fourth in the Morning some 
Chineses
 coming to a Jonk by 
Van












Campen
 on the Island, proffer'd to carry him to the Fort 
Minjazen,
 saying that the Governor 
Hanlavia
 would entertain him nobly; for they suppos'd the Fleet to have been gone to 
Batavia:
 they also gave him some fresh Pork, Eggs, and Rice, and shew'd him other Civilities.


The Admiral by Letters advis'd 
Van Campen
 the same day, that all his expe∣ctation and stay was for him, that they might set Sail together, but suppos'd that the bad Weather had hindred him from coming out; and that in the Morning when he heard him Shoot, he was about weighing Anchor with all the Ships that were with him at 
Tenhay,
 of which he had sent him the 
Finch
 and 
Sea-hound,
 and desiring him, that if any more Tydings came from 
Hoksieu,
 that he should Fire three times, and for a little while keep in his Flag.


The same day the 
Sea-hound
 Frigat and 
Finch
 came to an Anchor near the Wreck in the River of 
Hoksieu,
 whither 
Van Campen
 went immediately with his Boat, to see what Goods could be sav'd; which to do was almost impossible, because of the raging Billows, which beat so violently that no Boat was able to come near her. In the interim the Fleet which lay at 
Tenhay
 also setting Sail, fell down towards the Wreck; yet afterwards changing their purpose, Tack'd about, lying Northward.


The twenty fifth the Admiral's Sloop, with his chief Pilot, went aboard the the Vice-Admiral in the 
Sea-hound
 Frigat; from whence after midnight he was sent again to the Fleet with News concerning the Wreck. Little was per∣form'd that day, no Vessels being able to lie near the foundred Ship: but the next day they recover'd some Cordage, Lead, Tin, and 
Sandal
-Wood, which was put aboard the other Frigats.


The twenty seventh, fetching the last Cables that lay on the Deck, they car∣ry'd them aboard the 
Sea-hound
 in the Night; and then likewise sav'd the Guns and some Shot.


The next day seven 
Tartar
 Jonks came to an Anchor near the Wreck; to which 
Van Campen
 Rowing, put one 
Mey
 aboard to look to the Pepper, and other Goods that were yet remaining; which at last being given to the 
Tartars,
 was by them esteem'd a great Prize.


In the afternoon the 
Sea-hound
 and 
Finch
 weighed and set Sail to get out of the Channel of 
Hoksieu,
 and came towards Evening to an Anchor by the Fleet in the Bay of 
Linkun,
 where 
Van Campen
 immediately went aboard of the 
Naer∣den
 to the Admiral 
Bort;
 to whom having given a Relation concerning the loss of the 
Ankeveen,
 he Row'd aboard the 
Zirickzee.


The first of 
March,
 being 
Thursday,
 the Admiral at Day-break fir'd a Gun, as a Signal that the Fleet should all weigh Anchor, and putting to Sea, proceed on their Way to 
Batavia.
 In the Evening about Sun-set they came up with the South-Point of the Isle of 
Crocodiles,
 which bore South-west about five Leagues, and the South-Point of 
Carellos
 Nor-Nor-east about six Leagues from them, their Course West-South-west.


The second they saw several Fishers Jonks near the Coast, and about Noon came into twenty four Degrees and fifty three Minutes Northern Latitude, and had the Southern Island 
Makau
 North-west and by West about five Leagues from them, they steering South-west, and West and by South.


Saturday,
 being the third, the Fleet at Sun-set was about three Leagues and a half from another Isle; and on the next day at Noon in twenty two De∣grees and thirty eight Minutes Nor-Nor-East, about four Leagues from the 
Sandy Banks;
 and against Evening came up with the 
Black Hill
 on the Coast of



China,
 about four or five Leagues from them, their Course being South-west and by West, and West-South-west.


The fifth the Fleet was about five or six Leagues from 
Ilhas dons Viedos;
 and at Noon in twenty one Degrees and twenty nine Minutes; the next day in twenty Degrees and thirty Minutes; and the day after, being 
Wednesday,
 at Noon in nineteen Degrees and fifty Minutes.


On 
Thursday Van Campen
 was got out of sight of the Fleet in nineteen De∣grees and thirty six Minutes; and the next day reach'd nineteen Degrees and twenty Minutes.


The tenth in the Morning he came up with the East-Point of the Island 
Ainan,
 but at a great distance from him, and found himself at Noon in nineteen Degrees and twenty four Minutes Northern Latitude, the East Point West and by South, and West-South-west, about four or five Leagues, and 
Poele Tayo,
 North-west, about three or four Leagues distant: The East-Point of 
Ainan
 ap∣pears like two Isles as you come about the North.


The twelfth about Noon 
Van Campen
 was in eighteen Degrees and twenty seven Minutes, three Leagues from the South Coast of 
Ainan,
 which is found to be six or seven and forty Minutes more Southerly than it is placed in the Maps; and in the afternoon coming near the Shore, he espy'd the Fleet stand∣ing South-South-east; and the next Morning he descry'd the Admiral 
Bort
 with seven Sail, to lie a little to Leeward on his Larboard. About Noon be∣ing eighteen Degrees and thirty two Minutes, the Mount 
Tinhosa
 bore West and by North, about four Leagues from him, appearing like three Isles, whereof the middlemost is the biggest: More into the Countrey are two other Hills to be seen; and in the South-west and by West many Highlands: The South-west Shore was seen in the South-west and by South, about four or five Leagues from him. This Countrey is not rightly placed in the Maps, neither in its due Latitude nor Longitude; for it lies forty six or forty seven Minutes more Southerly in the Maps than it stands.


The fourteenth in the Morning the Admiral 
Bort
 with all the other Ships were behind in the Channel East-North-east, and about Noon in eighteen De∣grees and seventeen Minutes Sail'd Northerly up to the Fleet, which in the Evening came up with 
Tinhosa:
 The next day at Noon they came to seven∣teen Degrees and fifty nine Minutes, and the day after to Fifteen Degrees and forty Minutes Northern-Latitude, their Course South.


The seventeenth about Day-break they espy'd the Coast of 
Champan,
 which is very high Land, lying South-west and by West from them: Six hours after they discern'd the Isle call'd 
Round Holm,
 near the Coast of 
Champan,
 and about Noon were in the Latitude of twelve Degrees and ten Minutes; and Sailing along the foremention'd Coast, in the Evening they past by the Bay call'd 
Ba∣gerang,
 and about Sun-set they descry'd 
Poele,
 or the Isle 
Cicier de Terra,
 West∣wards about a League from them.


The eighteenth 
Van Campen
 being about midnight separated from the Fleet, found himself about Noon in nine Degrees and nine Minutes, and about Sun∣set saw 
Poele Candor
 West-Nor-West, five Leagues from him, his Course South-West and by South.


The nineteenth he came into six Degrees and twenty nine Minutes; the twentieth, in four Degrees and thirty Minutes; and on the one and twentieth, in the Morning seeing 
Poele Tymon
 South-west and by South about three Leagues distant, he made towards it, and dropp'd Anchor at the South-Point


eighteen Fathom Water: and soon after the Admiral 
Bort
 with all his Ships, coming also to an Anchor, put their Pennon under their Vein, except the 
Loe∣nen
 Pink, which after a little stay steer'd her Course for 
Batavia.
 In the after noon the whole Fleet setting Sail again to proceed onward of their Voyage, steer'd South South-east.


The next day about Sun-rising 
Panyang
 bare about four Leagues to the South South-East from them: At Noon the Fleet found themselves to be in forty six Minutes Northern-Latitude, and saw 
Panyang
 West and by North; and about Sun-set they saw 
Pismires-Isle
 in the South-west about four Leagues di∣stant, and the Island 
Lingen
 South-west, and South-west and by South, about six or seven Leagues off: and about Noon the next day 
Van Campen
 was with the Fleet in six Minutes Southern-Latitude, and saw about Sun-set 
Poele,
 or the Island 
Saya,
 South and by West, and the Cape of 
Lingen
 Nor-West and by West, three or four Leagues from them.


The twenty fifth they discern'd the 
Seven Islands,
 or 
Poele Toutyons,
 in the South-east and by South, and 
Poele Saya
 in the Nor-West, and Nor-West and by West: about Noon the 
Poele Toutyons
 were Eastwards four or five Leagues from the 
Zirickzee.


The twenty sixth they descry'd the Mountain 
Monapin
 about Sun-rising to lie South-east and by East, about five Leagues distant, and at Noon about three Leagues from thence they were in two Degrees and nine Minutes South-Lati∣tude: At Night about Sun-set they saw the third Point of the Island 
Sumatra
 South-South-east, two Leagues from them, and 
Poele Nanko
 East and by North, about three Leagues from the 
Zirickzee;
 and 
Monapin
 in the Nor-West, and Nor-West and by North, all lying along the Coast of 
Sumatra.


The twenty seventh at Sun-rising they descry'd the first Point of 
Sumatra
 South-east, and South-East and by East, about two Leagues and a half from the 
Zirickzee,
 who at Noon was in three Degrees and five Minutes South Latitude; and having the Island 
Lucipar
 South-east about three Leagues from him, Sail'd close along the Coast.


The next day about Noon the 
Zirickzee
 was in four Degrees and twelve Mi∣nutes Southern Latitude, and on the twenty ninth in the Morning coming up with the 
Thousand Islands,
 which lay Westward from him, he espy'd the Admi∣ral 
Bort
 with seven Sail in the Nor-East and by East, and one lying at an An∣chor near the Island 
Agnietes.
 At two a Clock in the afternoon the Fleet came to an Anchor before 
Batavia,
 where they found the following Frigat and Pinks, 
viz.
 the 
Stadthouse
 Frigat of 
Amsterdam,
 the 
Holland Remedy,
 the 
Nightin∣gale
 Pink, the 
Arms of Batavia
 a Frigat, the 
Griffin,
 being the Reer-Admiral of the Harbor.


The thirtieth, being 
Friday,
 the following Ships arriv'd there from 
Holland:
 the 
Kennemerland, Orange, Rhynland,
 and the 
Kogge.


The next day the 
Flushing
 Frigat came also to an Anchor from the Coast of 
Malabar,
 with News, that 
Rykloff van Gouns
 had taken the City 
Coessien,
 and likewise the 
Rising-Sun
 Frigat from 
Rekkam.


On 
Tuesday
 the third of 
April
 a Thanksgiving Day was kept for the Con∣quest of the City 
Coessien,
 and in the Evening Bon-fires were made, and all the Guns fir'd from the Fort, and round about the Walls of the City 
Batavia,
 and likewise from all the Ships.


The eleventh the 
Ter-Boede
 Pink came also to an Anchor before 
Batavia
 from 
Sian;
 and the Agents related their Adventures to the Lord-General.










A CONTINUATION OF THE Second Embassy;




Being a Journal of the Adventures that happened to the two Fleets sent from 
Batavia
 to the Isles of 
Formosa, Tayowan,
 and the Coast of 
China,
 under the Command of 
Balthazar Bort,
 as Admiral, and General of the Land-Forces, since the Year 1663. 
Iune
 the 27. until 
Anno
 1664. 
March
 the 21.




T
He great Damage which the 
Netherlanders
 suffer'd, 
Anno
 1661. by the loss of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa,
 taken from them by the Pyrate 
Coxinga,
 not only staining their Honor, but also damnifying their Estates, and preju∣dicial to their Trade, was not satisfi'd by the Fleet and Land-Soldiers, sent out the last Year, as was expect∣ed, because the 
Tartars
 were not only wanting to joyn their Forces for the Defeating of the common Enemy, but also detain'd them most of the time idly at 
Hoksieu,
 feeding the Admiral with fair Promises, without any performance, although a fit opportunity seem'd to be presented to the 
Hollanders,
 because the Enemy by the death of their General 
Coxinga
 were all in confusion; yet notwithstand∣ing, as our former Relation mentions, the 
Hollanders
 Fleet at several times took thirty three Jonks, besides many lesser Vessels which they burnt, and also the strong Fort of 
Kitat,
 leaving whole Towns and Villages in Flames, whose Inhabitants fled to the Mountains, whilst the 
Tartars
 took not the least Cog∣nizance thereof, although they knew that 
Coxinga
's Party made Overtures of Peace, and had to that purpose sent Ambassadors to their Emperor at 
Peking,
 as it was reported at the departure of the Fleet; though his Majesty having put them off with dilatory answers, signifying altogether, that they should shew the first Point of their Obedience, by wearing short Hair, as himself and all his Subjects did, which (as the 
Hollanders
 suppos'd) might procrastinate the business; and besides all this, the 
Tartars
 did not perform what they promis'd concerning the inlargement of the 
Dutch
 Prisoners, yet confin'd in the Isle 
Ey∣muy,
 although they shew'd all outward Civilities in their Entertainments, still Complementing their Ambassadors, yet would not grant them a free Trade before they had full Orders from the Emperor, with which they held so long


in suspence so long, that they would not any longer attend with their whole Fleet such continual delays; but having done little or nothing, set Sail from thence the first of 
March,
 and came safe on the twenty ninth of the same Month before 
Batavia,
 leaving the 
Ankeveen
 Frigat behind them, which suffer'd Ship-wrack before the Channel of 
Hoksieu,
 as before mention'd; and the Mer∣chant 
Constantine Nobel,
 with eight 
Netherlanders
 which were kept by the 
Tartars;
 and as their Governors pretended, in kindness to them, that they should not return until they carry'd from the Emperor what should give satisfaction to their General 
Maetzuiker;
 all which cast up together, amounted to more Jea∣lousie, than Hopes, so that Ballancing their Actions, they could not positively say, that either they were Friends or Enemies whom they Treated with: Yet howsoever, let them be what they will, whither against the General 
Maetzuiker
 and his Council in 
Batavia,
 pitch'd resolutely upon, that with all their Forces they would prosecute those that had done them their Injury, 
viz.
 the 
Coxingans,
 and would never hearken to any accommodation, until by reprisal or other∣wise, they had fully satisfi'd themselves of the Damages sustain'd in 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa.
 Which Decree of theirs was luckily confirm'd by Letters from their Masters at 
Amsterdam,
 bearing Date 
October
 the 22. 
Anno
 1662. Whereby they were inform'd, that a Peace was concluded between 
Holland
 and the 
Por∣tuguese,
 which giving them more liberty, they prepar'd to equip their Navy with greater speed and diligence, and send forth once more, under the Com∣mand of 
Balthazar Bort,
 to the Coast of 
China;
 and if by Treaty with the 
Tar∣tars
 they could not obtain their desires, they would try what they could do by force of Arms, and look upon both as one Enemy.


In this their great Expedition, sixteen Ships were appointed, and fitted out with Men and Arms according to the following Schedule.






Names of the Ships.


Mariners


Land-Men


Volunteers had no Pay


Reformadoes


Iron Guns


Brass Guns






Nut-Tree


151


139


17


1


32


10






Tertolen


106


96


2


3


27


4






Ulaerdingen


95


94


4


 


30


 






Mars


112


106


1


 


28


3






Naerden


92


102


3


 


28


8






Flusshing


105


96


4


 


30


3






The Arms of
 Zealand


100


117


1


 


28


 






Kogge


90


105


3


 


30


2






Sea-Hound


62


69


1


1


19


2






Zierikree


107


93


1


1


28


4






Overveen


75


74


1


 


26


 






Ionker


77


41


2


 


26


 






Meliskerke


64


55


1


 


18


3






Buiksloot


64


51


 


 


20


 






New Dam


48


24


 


 


16


 






Finch


34


22


 


 


10


1






Together


1382


1234


41


6


399


44






Which make in all 16 Ships, bearing 2653 Men, and 396 Iron, and 44 Brass Guns.


All which Vessels were Victual'd for twelve Moneths, and furnish'd with Necessaries of War accordingly.


At the same time, four Merchant-Men, 
viz.
 the 
Venenburg, Pepper-Bag, Grave-Land,
 and 
Amstelland,
 all Laden with rich 
Cargo
's, and Bound for 
Iapan,
 were order'd to go and continue with the Fleet, till they came in sight of 
Formosa.


The Soldiers in 
Batavia
 were divided into twelve Companies, which had three Captains, twelve Lieutenants, twelve Ensigns, thirty eight Serjeants and Corporals, every Company according to the Councils Order, consisted at first of an hundred Men, that afterwards if need requir'd, they might be divided in∣to fifty or seventy in a Company, and then choose new Officers for them.


The several Commissions to the Officers of the Fleet, were first given them ashore in the presence of all the Militia in Arms, by the Lord General, and afterwards by the Governor of the Company, 
Charles Hertsing,
 accompany'd aboard by the Lords 
Adrian Vander Moyden,
 and 
Iacob Hutzaerd,
 where their Commissions and Orders were publickly read before all the People.


The chiefest Orders in their Letter of Advice, given in Writing to the Ad∣miral and his Council, from the Grand Council at 
Batavia,
 consisted in the following:








AFter you have furnish'd your self with Water and Wood, at 
Laver
 and 
Ty∣mon,
 you shall Steer your Course directly to 
Formosa.


Your first place of Rendezvouz shall be at the Isle of 
Pehoe,
 otherwise call'd 
Piscadores,
 about twelve Leagues Westward from 
Formosa.


If any Ships run beyond the 
Piscadores,
 they shall Sail on to 
Hoksieu,
 lying on the Main Coast of 
China,
 and there expect the Fleet.


Coming in sight of 
Formosa,
 five or six Ships shall Sail to the South Shore of 
Tayowan,
 to enquire how Affairs stand there, and bring a speedy account of it to the 
Piscadores.


If the present Possessors should proffer freely to deliver up 
Tayowan
 and 
For∣mosa,
 do not refuse, but make the best advantage of the opportunity.


You shall Sail with the whole Fleet from the 
Piscadores
 first to 
Hoksieu,
 and put all other affairs aside, till such time as you have made inquiry, in what Po∣sture our business stands with the 
Tartars.


Let the absolute knowledge of the 
Tartars
 well meaning, or otherwise, be a guide to the Admiral and his Council, what seems fit to be done.


Take all 
Chinese
 Jonks which you meet with by the way, or on the Coast, not regarding from whence they come, or whither they go; neither make any distinction, whether they belong to the 
Tartars
 or 
Coxinga.


Send peculiar Ships to Cruise up and down for those Jonks that Trade to 
Iapan,
 and let them not Sail to the South of 
Cabo de Sumber;
 but to the North∣ward of it towards the Gulf of 
Iapan.


When it's convenient, let them put into the Isles of 
Meaxima, Gotto,
 and 
Co∣ray,
 lying to the Westward of 
Iapan;
 and if it may be done without any consi∣derable hinderance, to make Inspections, and enquire what convenient Harbors there are for Ships.


If two or three Jonks be taken, send them with the Cruisers.


To use no Hostility to the 
Portuguese,
 because of the concluded Peace.


Let the Merchandize which are distributed in the Fleet, if the 
Tartars
 will not permit a free Trade, be sent to 
Iapan;
 and likewise keep the four Mer∣chants Freighted thither in your company, till you come within sight of



Formosa,
 then let them proceed on their Voyage, except the 
Amstellant,
 which shall Sail with you to 
Hoksieu,
 to take in the Merchandize for the 
Chinesy
 Trade, out of the several Ships (but if they will not allow it) then carry them to 
Iapan.


Make your first coming at 
Hoksieu
 known to the Governor of the Fort 
Min∣jazeen,
 and sending a 
Chinesy
 ashore, ask for the Merchant 
Constantine Nobel,
 de∣siring him to come aboard.


If all things stand well in 
Hoksieu,
 send their Excellencies Letter by some per∣son of Quality to the Governors, and desire their Answer to it.


If the 
Tartars
 are united with the 
Coxingans,
 and would perswade you not to use Hostility, by no means condescend, except they will consent to make good the Damage which the 
Hollanders
 had suffer'd in 
Tayowan,
 and Surrender up 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 with all the Forts and Castles; and also procure the Emperors Letters to forbid the 
Chinesys
 to Trade with any, but with our Peo∣ple in 
Tayowan:
 Neither should any 
Chinesys
 Sail with their Jonks Southward of the Isle 
Ainan,
 nor to 
Iapan;
 and that those which were found there, might be taken by them; and also to release the 
Netherland
 Prisoners.


The 
Chinesys
 shall be permitted to Sail to 
Batavia
 and 
Malakka,
 provided they have our Pastports, if the Article of their not Sailing to 
Iapan
 be too hard for them, pass it by.


But all the other Proposals must be perform'd, which if not, no way to agree with them; and that they should also get the Articlrs concluded upon Sign'd and Seal'd at 
Peking.


If they should request an Embassy to be sent to the great 
Cham,
 and there to make our Addresses; by no means agree to it, but promise them, if satisfacti∣on be made of all things, to send a Honorable Embassy in recompence to his Majesty.


If the 
Tartars
 and 
Coxingans
 are joyn'd in a League, and do not regard the 
Netherlanders
 as much as formerly, neither will make satisfaction, declare them both Enemies, and use Hostility to one as well as the other, by Burning and Ruining all places on the Main Continent of 
China:
 Then also Steer to the 
Chincheu
 Isles, and there endeavor to destroy the two Towns, 
Que
 and 
Aymuy.
 If there be a conveniency there for a strong Hold that might be kept by a small Garrison, to take it in Possession; for which purpose the Isle 
Kolong
 lies very convenient, and likewise the 
Piscadore's,
 but barren and unfertile, where also a Fort might be erected for our better Guard.


Not to accept to take any other place in possession, if you can get 
Tayowan
 again.


Endeavor to Conquer 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan
 by force of Arms, if it cannot be done by Peaceable means; yet take not so much Ground in possession as formerly.


The lower Castle of 
Zelandia
 being a good Garrison, would be a sufficient Defence against the Assaults of the 
Chineses.


The upper Castle shall be Dismantled, and left ungarrison'd, that after∣wards on farther Order it may be pull'd down, and build a strong Redoubt in its place.


To keep the Fort 
Provintia,
 and Garrison it with a hundred Men; as also that of 
Quelang.


To begin somewhat in more safety in 
Tayowan,
 the Forces ought to be brought ashore through the 
Straights
 of 
Lakge Moey
 on the main Land, and there


first to Attaque and win the Fort 
Provincia,
 and likewise endeavor to get the Inhabitants there, to joyn with our People; to which purpose it will be re∣quisite for you to take flat bottom'd Vessels from the 
Chineses,
 because our Boats cannot carry so many Men in those shallow Waters; neither could the requir'd Forces be brought ashore together; and if they wanted those Vessels, it would not be convenient to attempt any thing on that side, but be better be∣hind 
Tonkoya,
 about six Leagues Southward of 
Tayowan,
 where in the Northern 
Mouson
 the Water is very smooth, and a higher Shore to break off the Winds.


From thence they should March up in two or three days by Land to the Fort 
Provincia
 at 
Sakkam;
 and besides the convenient Landing there, the Inhabitants of the South might perhaps joyn with the 
Hollanders,
 which if they should, all the 
Chineses
 in 
Formosa
 would not be able to withstand them.


If the 
Tartars
 should deny the Trade, and that those of the Isles 
Ay
 and 
Que∣muy
 live apart from 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 and are in friendship with the 
Tartars,
 and also inclin'd to agree with you, do you likewise seem willing to it, nay, seek to joyn with them, provided they procure us those Articles demanded of the 
Tartars,
 and use their assistance towards the regaining of 
Formosa
 and 
Tayo∣wan;
 nay, to fall upon the 
Tartars
 themselves, if occasion should require.


No time is limited you to come with the Fleet from the North to 
Batavia,
 but is left to the Discretion of the Admiral and his Council.








After the Admiral 
Balthazar Bort
 had on 
Iune
 the 30. 
Anno
 1663. been con∣ducted by several Friends aboard his Ship, he set Sail the next Morning three hours before Day, with all the Fleet, consisting in sixteen Men of War, and four Merchants, bound for 
Iapan,
 out of the Haven of 
Batavia,
 with a South East Wind, and running between the Isles of 
Hoorn
 and 
Edam,
 they stood to the North-East. At Noon, the Fleet had the Isle 
South-Wayter
 South West and by West three Leagues from them, in five Degrees and thirty Minutes Southern Latitude; in the Evening about Sun-set they had the Isle 
North-Wayter,
 about West-North-West, four Leagues distant.


The second at the usual Signal of a White Flag, and firing of a Gun, all the Commanders and Chief Officers of the 
Militia,
 came aboard the Admiral, who according to the Lord General, and 
Indian
 Councils Order, chose out of them all for his Privy Council the Persons under written, which the rest were to follow in Order, 
viz.
 next to the Admiral 
Balthazar Bort,
 who is to be always Chief: was


Huybrecht de Lairesse,
 Vice-Admiral.


William Volkersz,
 made Commander of those Ships that were to go to 
Iapan,
 and Rere-Admiral as long as he stay'd with the Fleet.


Bartholomeus Verwei,
 who at 
Volkersz
 departure was to carry the Rere-Admi∣ral's Flag; and in that Degree take place in the Council.


Peter Coker,
 Master of the Admiral's Ship.


Ernest Van Hogenhoek,
 Merchant in the 
Kogge.


And the first Captain 
Christian Poolman,
 Commander of the 
Nut-Tree.


These having taken their places, the Fleet was by them order'd to be divided into three Squadrons, as had already been consider'd by the Admiral, and approv'd of by the Vice-Admiral; and the Orders which the Fleet was to fol∣low, being read were also affirm'd, and likewise the proportions of Diet was agreed on.


At Noon the Admiral was in four Degrees and five Minutes Southern Lati∣tude, and had the 
High Island
 with the Trees, West-North-West, about seven Leagues from him.


The third about day-break, they spy'd the Coast of 
Banka;
 at Noon they Sail'd Eastward of the Isle 
Lucipa;
 and in the Evening past within two Leagues and a half by the first Point of 
Sumatra,
 South and by East from them.


On 
Thursday,
 being the fifth, they saw the Mountain 
Monapyn,
 and were within two Leagues of the Shore of 
Sumatra;
 towards Evening, they Sail'd by the River 
Palimboang,
 and between 
Poele Tousjou,
 and 
Poele Sayo.


The sixth, they saw the Isles 
Tousjou,
 and were at Noon in one Degree and sixteen Minutes South Latitude.


The seventh, the Fleet found 
Poele Sayo
 North-West and by West, about three Leagues and a half from them, in nineteen Minutes Southern Latitude; and in the Evening descry'd in the North the Isles which lay near 
Lingen.


On 
Sunday
 they discover'd 
Dominies Island,
 West-South-West, four Leagues from them; and crossing the Line, saw the 
High Isle
 of the 
Box-horns,
 about se∣ven Leagues distant.


The ninth at Noon, the Admiral was in fifty four Minutes Northern Lati∣tude, and in sight of the Isle 
Pangang,
 West and by North, about three Leagues and a half from him.


On the tenth appear'd the Isles 
Tinghy,
 North-West and by West, and 
Laver
 North and by West from them; in the Morning, the Fleet being near 
Laver,
 cast Anchor on the West side of it. 
Tymon
 hath no Wood, neither for Firing nor any other use, with which 
Laver
 is plentifully supply'd: This Isle is pretty high, and hath two rising Promontories, one on the South, and the other at the North end, which make a Plain in the middle.


The twelfth about Noon, five Ships upon the Admiral's Order set Sail from 
Laver
 to 
Poele Tymon,
 to take in Water, Fuel, and other Wood; and likewise to Barter for Provision, according to their agreement of the eleventh.


The Bay on the South-East Point of this Island lies very convenient for the fetching and taking in of fresh Water, Firing and other Wood, which is to be had ashore in great plenty; but Provision is somewhat scarce here, because the People of this Countrey have their Habitations more towards the South-West side; and also that which is to be had, is much dearer than at 
Poele Laver.


The nineteenth, the Admiral about Sun-rising set Sail from 
Poele Tymon,
 and came in the afternoon to an Anchor, with the whole Fleet, by those Ships that were sent out before from 
Laver.


The Fleet thus furnish'd with all Necessaries, Weigh'd Anchor on the twen∣tieth about Day-break; and in the Evening had the Isle 
Poele Tymon,
 about four Leagues Southerly from them.


The one and twenty, they kept a Fast.


The twenty two, twenty three, twenty four, and twenty fifth, nothing hap∣pen'd of any remark.


The twenty sixth, the Isles 
Candor
 bore Easterly about seven Leagues from the Fleet.


The twenty seventh, and twenty eighth, nothing happen'd, only a strong Gale of Wind blew from South-East out of the River 
Cambodia.


The twenty ninth, the 
Finch
 Sailing before, made a sign that she saw Land, which was afterwards found to be the two Sand Hills on the Coast of 
Champan,
 about six Leagues Northerly from the Admiral; who in the Evening descry'd 
Poele Cecier de Mare,
 three Leagues in the South-South-East; and 
Cabo Cecier
 in the North-East and by North, three quarters of a League from them.


The thirtieth, the Bay of 
Padaran
 bearing West-North-West, they came by



Avarella Falso
 about Noon, and were in twelve Degrees and seven Minutes Northern Latitude; their Course North and by East.


The first of 
August, Poele Cambir
 was East and by North from the Admiral, and in the afternoon the Isle 
Canton,
 North-North-East, about six Leagues.


The second, the private 
Iuncto
 being assembled, the Admiral read to them some peculiar Orders, chiefly about the putting in at the South of 
Tayowan
 with four or five Ships, and the manner how they should best get knowledge con∣cerning the condition of their Enemies, according to his Excellencies Order in 
Batavia;
 and also in what time it was best to Cruise for their Jonks, that Sail richly Laden to and from 
Iapan;
 and likewise how they should dispose of those Jonks which they should take on the Coast of 
China, Manilhas, Makkaw, Tunking, Quinam, Ciam, Ligoor, Patany,
 and other places; and also of those which they might find in the Haven of 
Tayowan,
 and in the 
Piscadores.


Lastly, It was judg'd best to refer it till the next meeting, and in the mean time to give every one a Copy of it, as was perform'd by the Secretary on the fourth of the same Month; who also put in what was consider'd before∣hand, and concluded on, That 
William Volkers,
 before his departure to 
Iapan,
 might see their resolution chiefly concerning the Cruising for 
Iapan
 Jonks, and giving an account of it to the 
Netherlanders
 there, they might make use thereof when occasion serv'd.


The fifth and sixth they saw the Isles 
Tinhosa,
 and 
Ainam;
 though 
Tinhosa
 lay five Leagues distant from the Admiral.


Mean while on the sixth, according to their last Intentions, an Order was made in the Council, concerning the written Proposals, and newly added Ob∣servations, taken by the Admiral and Council at that time; of which every one had a Copy given them: which the better to understand, it is requisite that we also give a Transcript thereof, as follows:


The Admiral according to Order, when he came in sight of 
Formosa,
 sent four or five Ships to the Southermost Harbor of 
Tayowan,
 that there they might enquire some News; and first propos'd what Ships and Persons out of the Fleet might be fittest for that purpose; and if the 
Chinesys
 did not come aboard of their own accords, whereby they might attain to the desir'd Informati∣on, they should put out a White Flag to invite them, or fire now and then a Gun; but if they could not attain their desire by these two means, they should send one or two Hostages, which they had brought with them from 
Ba∣tavia,
 (which if they did no good, could do no harm;) and there ask the Go∣vernors for whom they kept the Forts and Castles on 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa,
 whether for themselves, or together for those of 
Ey
 and 
Quemuy,
 or for the 
Tartar,
 as being his Subjects? and whether it were best to be done in writing or by word of Mouth?


If they should make answer to the foresaid Demand, and desire to know our Intention, whether it would not be convenient to intreat them to send some of their People with us to the greater part of the Fleet at the 
Piscadores,
 promising there to acquaint them with our Design. If they should be thereto inclin'd, leaving them Hostages, whether they should consent to it? Also how many days the Ships should stay on the South part of 
Tayowan?
 likewise if du∣ring that time, they should use any Hostility, as taking of their Jonks and other Vessels, because the 
Indian
 Council had Commanded them to use none till they knew how they stood affected to the 
Tartars;
 but on the contrary, Commanded again, That nevertheless all 
Chinesy
 Jonks (from whence soever


they came, and whither soever Bound) which they met withal in their Chan∣nel, they should endeavor to take without any distinction, whether they be∣long to the 
Tartars
 or 
Coxinga.


And in regard the Intentions of their Excellencies in 
Batavia
 are declar'd to us, that we may take all 
Chinesy
 Jonks coming from other Countreys, if it would not be convenient to take out the Goods, whether Skins or ought else, and sending them for a tryal to 
Iapan,
 to see how the 
Iapanners
 would refent it, whether well or ill; and whether it relate only to the Jonks, on the Coast of 
China,
 or also to those which they might find on the Coast of the 
Manilhas, Mak∣kau, Tunking, Quinam, Cambodia, Siam, Ligoor, Patany, Iohoor,
 and 
Formosa,
 which if they should not be set upon at our first coming thither, might easily escape from us.


On the contrary, they consider'd that the Enemy by such harsh actions might alter from their good Resolution, if perhaps they had any before, and then not suffer the 
Netherlanders
 to speak with them, much less freely proffer to surrender up 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa
 into our possession again, as their Excellencies would willingly have it: and to that purpose Commanded to take hold, and make good use of such an opportunity; otherwise, if the Enemy should make fair Promises, and thereby detain us from taking their Jonks, or doing ought else; when perhaps, being forc'd by sudden Invasions, they might sooner come to an agreement, and do what we should demand of them.


Therefore it was Propos'd, if they ought not to take all the Jonks and Ves∣sels which they should find in the 
Piscadores,
 at the Admirals coming thither.


Secondly, Since their Excellencies had commanded to send peculiar Ships to Cruise up and down for the Jonks that Trade to 
Iapan,
 without expressing in what time it is best to be done; nay requir'd, that according to their Or∣der, it should be done before 
William Volkerts
 went from the Fleet to 
Iapan,
 to carry News also thither concerning it, that in case ought should happen there he might govern himself accordingly; therefore the Admiral Propos'd, if it were best to be begun in the Southern or Northern 
Mouson;
 if in the Southern, the only time would be about the latter end of 
August,
 or the middle of 
Septem∣ber,
 to get to the Northward of the 
Cape Sumber;
 and moreover, in the 
Iapan
 Sea, in which the foremention'd Jonks were best to be taken.


But then again was to be consider'd, the Cruisers would be forc'd to spend three or four Months, without any likelyhood of meeting with any Jonks; and likewise to consider, that the Ships aforemention'd would not be able to en∣dure there long, if they should be surpris'd by Northerly Winds, want Water or Wood, and their Men happening to fall sick and die, which would force them to put into some Harbor or other; and also, that it was very uncertain, if by their Cruising they should meet with any thing, because that the 
Nether∣land
 Ships could not always Sail in that Channel, for the Reasons aforemen∣tion'd, which the 
Chineses
 use: Nay, if they should keep there continually, they might let them pass by in dark or misty Weather; and though the 
Netherland
 Ships did perhaps see some Jonks, yet they might loose them by their nimble Sailing: Adding moreover, that their Excellencies in this concern had thus exprest their opinion in the Orders which they had given to them: 
viz.


As We are inform'd, there may be more assurance made of those Trading Jonks that Sail to 
Iapan,
 than when they return in the Northern season, at which time it is very uncertain to wait for them, because they generally re∣turn late in the Year, and Our Ships can scarce stay so long there.


But on the contrary, it is also to be observ'd, that if the 
Netherland
 Ships do not go at the foremention'd time, but later, they cannot get beyond the 
Cape de Sumber,
 and no likelihood to meet with any Jonks to the Southward of it, whereby we should be depriv'd of those rich Booties, that is to be had out of the 
Iapan
 Jonks; of which their Excellencies make mention in their Or∣ders, saying,


And since the richest Prizes are to be had out of the Trading Jonks which Sail to, and from 
Iapan,
 therefore it is requisite that you use your chiefest en∣deavors about them, and send out expert Cruisers to frequent the North Pas∣sage, and not the South of 
Cabo de Sumber,
 Sailing quite to the 
Iapan
 Sea.


Provided this Cruising thus order'd, with hopes to take something, could be perform'd; yet there are no reasons to perswade us to it, for the uncertainties, if it must be perform'd by our Ships only, their Excellencies make mention of in these words:


We put it to your consideration, if it would not be convenient to take two or three 
Chinesy
 Jonks that are good Sailers (which perhaps may fall in∣to your hands on the Coast of 
China
) along with you thither, thereby to de∣ceive the 
Chineses,
 and the easier take their Trading Jonks, which Our Fri∣gats, because of their sluggish Sailing, are scarce able to do, since We know the 
Chineses
 commonly out-Sail them.


About this the Council ought chiefly to consider, if We had best undertake so uncertain a Design this Year, because the Fleet would not only be much weaken'd thereby, but also abated in its Power and Forces, when it should go against the Enemies; neither would they esteem nor regard us so much, as if we had all our Forces together; and we should also thereby be bereav'd of our nimblest and best Ships, which would be more assisting to us in all Affairs, than the biggest.


It may also happen, that falling on so many things together, nothing might be effected; therefore it ought to be consider'd, that all uncertain Designs which cannot be perform'd, without separating the Fleet be laid aside, and see what could be done to the Enemy with our whole Fleet together, and accord∣ingly defer the sending of Ships out to Cruise up and down the Coast; the ra∣ther, because in 
October, November,
 and 
December,
 it is better to get along the Shore to the Northward, as it happen'd to us the last Year; besides, their Ex∣cellencies themselves have little hopes this Year to get any Jonks that come from 
Iapan,
 as by these following words more plainer appear, speaking of this concern in their Advice and Orders.


And to be ready so soon, that We may take them in their going thither, is not to be done from hence; by which We should understand, that all other Designs ought to be laid aside, and begin first with Cruising; therefore to consider what number of Ships We shall send out to that purpose, and how they shall be Man'd; and also if they shall put into the Isles of 
Meaxi∣ma, Gotto,
 and 
Koray,
 to enquire if there be no safe Harbors, Bays, and other conveniencies for Ships, that in time of need, they might make use of them according to their Excellencies Order, if it may be done without prejudice or hinderance.


But it is again to be consider'd, that this Enquiry and Cruising cannot be done both in one season; and likewise to be suspected, that our Cruising Ships might be kept in the Havens aforemention'd by the 
Chineses;
 yet this might be excus'd in Stormy or Tempestuous Weather; however, We ought not to trust


our Forces in their Hands; also that Cruising from 
Hoksieu,
 they might by Sayling along the Shore run beyond 
Cape de Sumber,
 nay, to 
Nanking,
 to see for convenient Havens and Bays, for the getting of Wood and fresh Water, of which in bad Weather, they might also make use, and at once take all those Jonks which they could meet with: On all which Proposals, they resolv'd and agreed as follows.


First, That the Admiral in person, according to his request, should go to 
Tayowan,
 with the 
Nut▪Tree, Vlaerdingen, Kogge, Sea-Hound,
 and 
Ionker,
 there to enquire concerning all Affairs, that on all accidents he might give speedy Or∣der: If the 
Chineses
 do not come aboard of their own accords, he shall fire some Guns leasurely one after another, and also set up a 
Chieuw;
 if nothing be effected that way, to send the two 
Chinese
 Hostages, brought along with them from 
Batavia,
 (if they can get no Prisoners) ashore with Letters; by whom some Questions should be ask'd, 
viz.
 For whom they kept their Forts and Ca∣stles in 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan?
 whether for themselves, or joyntly with those of 
Ey
 and 
Quemuy?
 or for the 
Tartars,
 as being their Subjects? with promises, if they should truly answer them, that then the 
Netherlanders
 would also declare their Intentions; if thus they obtain'd their desire, the Admiral shall ask them to send some of their People along with him to the rest of the Fleet at the 
Pis∣cadores,
 with promise, there to declare his Design, without leaving any of our Men as Hostages in their custody. If they are not inclin'd thereto, the Ad∣miral shall do what time and convenience shall advise him to: For the per∣formance of which, he shall only spend two or three days, in which time no Hostility shall be us'd ashore; but nevertheless, not only endeavor to make Prize of all Vessels there, but also in the 
Piscadores.


Concerning the second Proposal about Cruising for the Jonks in the 
Iapan
 Channel, It is thought fit that it be undertaken after the business be done at 
Hoksieu,
 if they are not prevented by receiving satisfaction for their sustain'd In∣juries. But if they should not, then to wave their Cruising so long in the South∣ern 
Mouson,
 but return to the Enemies chief Towns and Places; and Sailing to the North with the whole Fleet, do all the Damage possible, both by Sea and Land, and then against the time comes, to send the Merchant 
Ernest Van Hogenbook
 as Admiral with three of the best Sailers, Man'd as they were at that present, and three nimble Jonks (if they could be Masters of so many be∣twixt that time) to Cruise beyond 
Cabo de Sumber,
 nay, if possible, as far as 
Nanking,
 that in their way thither, they might seek for some convenient Bays and Harbors wherein Ships might be safe in bad Weather, and be furnish'd with Water and Wood. Moreover, to flie up and down in thirty two and thir∣ty three Degrees, and seize on all Ships they could light upon. They should also for that purpose, put in at the Isles 
Meaxima, Gotto,
 and 
Koray,
 provided they could do it without prejudice, according to their Excellencies Order in 
Batavia:
 In performance of which also, the Cruisers should again come to the Fleet, either at 
Ey, Quemuy,
 or 
Formosa
 in 
February,
 that then with all their Forces they might undertake such Adventures as should be thought con∣venient.


The two chief Articles aforemention'd thus agreed on, it was also thought fit, after their former refusal, to Sail with the foremention'd Ships from 
Pe∣dro Blanko
 to 
Formosa,
 towards the 
Cape
 of 
Tankoya,
 so to reach the South Harbor of 
Tayowan,
 and Anchor there; and likewise although 
William Volkerts,
 Admiral for the 
Iapan
 Merchants, had purpos'd with his Ships to proceed on his Voy∣age


from 
Pedro Blanco
 along the Coast of 
China
 to 
Iapan;
 yet the whole Fleet consisting of twenty Sail should first appear in sight of 
Formosa▪
 and that then three of the 
Iapan
 Ships should go on without the 
Ankeveen,
 between 
Formosa
 and the 
Piscadores,
 and the Vice-Admiral with the remaining twelve Ships, should immediately Sail to the 
Piscadores,
 and there stay and expect the Admi∣ral with his five Ships; but if bad Weather, all the Men of War should go to the 
Piscadores,
 and the three Vessels that were bound for 
Iapan,
 without staying any longer by the Fleet, proceed on their Voyage.


The same day, according to agreement, the Admiral set Sail with his five Ships, the 
Nut-Tree, Vlaerdingen, Kogge, Sea-Hound,
 and 
Ionker
 to 
Formosa,
 to∣wards the 
Cape
 of 
Tonkayo,
 from thence to steer for the South Harbor of 
Tayowan,
 and there drop Anchor.


The eighth, the 
Sea-Hound
 and 
Ionker
 return'd from their fruitless chasing of a Jonk, since the sixt, which in calm Weather had escap'd them, taking only a 
Chinese Champan,
 in which the 
Ionker
 had five Men wounded, and the 
Sea-Hound
 one.


The Politick 
Chineses
 first set adrift a Pot with 
Arak
 in a Tub▪ and after∣wards a 
Chinese
 Water-Vessel, on which stood a Cane with a Letter; and lastly, the aforemention'd 
Champan,
 which was taken by the 
Netherlanders,
 but the Pot with 
Arak
 the Commanders would not permit the Seamen to take up.


Whilst the 
Sea-hound
 and 
Ionker
 were yet busie chasing the foremention'd Jonk, they spy'd another under Sail, toward which, accompany'd with the Vice-Admiral and his whole Squadron, they made with all the Sail they could possible; and soon after the Admirals Sloop was put out Arm'd with six Blunderbusses, and other Necessaries of War, and Man'd with the Boats Crue, be∣ing twelve Soldiers, one Ensign, and a Corporal, all Commanded by his Pilot.


In the taken Jonk, which on the tenth was brought close aboard the Admi∣ral, they found seven small Guns, Sythes, Pikes, a parcel of Fire-Balls and Arrows, and likewise good store of Gun-Powder and other Ammunition; the rest of the Lading consisted in several kinds of Wood.


The Admiral first caus'd some of the 
Chineses
 to be mildly examin'd, then threatning, that if they would not speak the truth, they should die for it; to which purpose a Soldier was put behind one of them with a naked Sword, and then ask'd, To what intention they ply'd there, yet (partly supposing, that they would not confess, and partly, because the Interpreters could not well under∣stand what they said) they could get but a slender account from them; but that which they agreed in most was, that they belong'd to the 
Tartar,
 and with twenty Jonks had carry'd 
Tartar
 Soldiers from 
Canton
 to the Island 
Ainan,
 to re∣inforce the Garrison, and had now been in company with five of the same Jonks in their way towards 
Canton;
 besides, they made mention of their Pass, which the Vice-Roy of 
Canton
 had given them to that purpose, and deliver'd it to the 
Netherlanders,
 which were not able to understand it: At this time the Admiral was about the 
Craeke Deep,
 off from the 
Makaw
 Island.


The eleventh, the Council being assembled by the Admiral, caus'd the two Commanders of the taken Jonks, nam'd, 
Onghing,
 and 
Ongkeeyn,
 to be brought before them and examin'd; but could learn nothing from them, but what agreed with that which their People had told two days before, 
viz.
 that they had carry'd Soldiers from 
Canton
 to 
Ainan,
 and were now on their return; and reply'd when ask'd, That 
Coxinga
 had been dead a year, and that his Son 
Kim∣sia
 had the chief Command in 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa;
 but how it was with the


Wars between the 
Tartars
 and 
Chineses
 they knew not. When ask'd if they knew the 
Champan
 taken by the 
Netherlanders
 of the second instant, and now be∣hind the Admiral's Stern; they answer'd, after having see it, 
Yes,
 and that it belong'd to 
Canton;
 but if the Jonk to which it belong'd came along with them from 
Ainan,
 they could not resolve.


The Letter which they found also in the said Jonk was given them to read; but they gave another construction than the former: Neither could the 
Hol∣landers
 be rightly inform'd of the Contents, because their Interpretors could not explain it; so that in stead of satisfaction, they found themselves more per∣plex'd than before.


Hereupon the Admiral desir'd the Council to consider if these shaven 
Chi∣neses,
 with their Jonk and 
Cargo,
 since they had shew'd no manner of Hosti∣lity to the 
Netherlanders,
 ought to be clear'd and discharg'd, or if it were bet∣ter to be sure by taking them along with the Fleet to 
Hoksieu,
 and put their free∣dom to be judg'd by 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi
 Chief Governors there; or if by tor∣tures, they should make a farther examination.


Which being consulted on, it was suppos'd that by tortures they might perhaps draw from them the truth, and what the 
Netherlanders
 expected, 
viz.
 That they were of 
Coxinga
's Party, and Sail'd with false Passes, and yet be sent out by the 
Tartars,
 and be under their jurisdiction, whom by the taking of these Jonks, they ought no ways to displease; the more, because their Ex∣cellencies Order in 
Batavia,
 concerning the taking of Jonks, was not specifi'd to relate to those which Sail'd to places that belong'd to the 
Tartars,
 but those that drove a Trade to 
Iapan:
 But because this Jonk thus prepar'd for Piracy was much suspected, and also the rough entertainment which they had from the small Vessel, six of their Men being Wounded, they resolv'd after consideration to declare the Jonk with the foremention'd Goods, and all her Men free Prize, and carry them to 
Hoksieu,
 there to make further inquiry concerning the truth. This being told them, they seem'd to be satisfi'd, only fearing at their return to be taken by 
Coxinga
's Jonks.


In the Morning about Day-break, the Fleet had the North-Point of 
Ilha dos Viados,
 or the Island 
Lemas
 North and by West, two Leagues and a half from them.


About Noon, the 
Nut-Tree, Cogge, Zierikzee, Overveen, Naerden,
 and 
Mars,
 came at the firing of some Guns, from the Admiral to an Anchor, on the North-side of 
Lemas,
 within Cannon shot of the Shore. A good distance be∣hind the Admiral, they saw the 
Bucksloot
 and 
Nieuwendam
 also lying at Anchor. So on the twenty ninth, the Admiral came with ten Ships safe to an Anchor, in the Road of 
Hoksieu;
 the rest of the Fleet were order'd to Sail to the Bay of 
Tenhay,
 and the 
Good Fortune
 soon after sent notice of her arrival by Letters to the Governor of the Castle 
Minjazeen,
 lying at the Mouth of the River 
Hoksieu;
 and likewise to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and General 
Lipovi.


The twentieth of 
October,
 after long stay, and many Consultations, con∣cerning the Commencing the War against the 
Coxingans,
 the Vice-Admiral 
Hui∣bert de Laresse,
 and 
Hogenbook
 came aboard the Admiral again at 
Soanchefoe,
 with a Letter from the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 containing these words.






Singlamong
's Letter to the Admiral▪


YOu are come hither from a remote Countrey, with mighty Ships, to serve Our Empe∣ror, which is a certain Sign of your good Inclinations. How shall We return Kindnesses sufficient to such your Deserts? It is needless to shew Thankfulness for the small Trisles sent you. You write to have it Seal'd, what hath pass'd between us: But how can I possibly do it? because you (if it be onely Written in Our Language) cannot un∣derstand it. Therefore I desire you to let the Business of the War be written in Paper, both in the 
Dutch
 and 
Chinese
 Tongues, and send it to Me, that I may also rightly appre∣hend it.


When We together shall have regain'd the Isles of 
Ay
 and 
Quemuy,
 We will joyn Our Ionks and Forces to your Ships, to set upon 
Tayowan,
 and so utterly root out their whole Party.


It is most true, that Our Emperor will requite the good Service which you have done to this Empire, by permitting you a free Trade; for I and the General 
Lipovi
 will write expresly about it to his Imperial Majesty.


The Ionk which you desire to carry News to 
Batavia,
 shall be sent you, when you please to advise Us, whether you will have it Mann'd with 
Tartars
 or 
Hollanders:
 We desire you to employ none of your Ships in it, that your Forces may not be weakned, because they will be wanting in the War. If you please, We desire you to stay a little longer before you depart; for I expect an Answer from 
Lipovi,
 which so soon as I have, We will ap∣point the day. This is in short an Answer to your Letter; for all things cannot so well be express'd on Paper.


Written 
in the second Year of the Emperor 
Conghi,
 the ninth Moon, and the nineteenth Day.




The one and twentieth, according to the Vice-Roys Request, the Articles and Agreement were written in 
Chinese
 and 
Dutch,
 on Flower'd Paper, and both Sign'd and Seal'd by the Admiral and Secretary, with the Companies Seal in Red Wax, and sent ashore about Noon by the Merchant 
Ernest Hoogenhoek,
 who was also commanded to request, That the Vice-Roy would in like manner Seal that for the 
Netherlanders
 with his Seal, and return it with him. The Ar∣ticles were these.




I.
 There shall be an inviolable League between us and the Subjects of his Imperial Ma∣jesty of 
China
 and 
Tartary.


II.
 Faithfully to assist one another against the 
Coxingans,
 our Enemies, till they are brought under Subjection.


III.
 That Writings shall be deliver'd on both sides concerning the Flags and Colours, whereby to distinguish each other from the Enemy.


IV.
 That the Expedition against the Enemy shall be hastned on both Parties.


V.
 That the Emperors Ionks and Vessels shall be under Our Flags, and as Ours divi∣ded into three Squadrons, shall keep under them, till their coming to 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 that when Our Ships, which draw more Water, cannot come near the Shore, We may run with the Ionks into the Havens; to which purpose, We desire 
Chinese
 Pilots.


VI.
 That We Land and set upon the Enemy together.


VII.
 That the 
East-India
 Company shall drive a Free and unmolested Trade in 
Chi∣na
 and 
Tartary,
 and all other his Imperial Majesties Countreys, for ever; but the disposing of those Goods which We brought along with Us, shall be referr'd till with joynt Forces We have conquer'd 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy.


VIII.
 That when We have subdu'd those Isles, upon Our Request We may take Posses∣sion of one of them, or any other thereabouts, which may be convenient for Us, to keep a Garrison, to defend Us from Assaults of the Pyrates.


IX.
 That on the Conquest of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 your Highness Ionks and Forces shall Sail with Us to 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 and upon Conquering of those Places, deli∣ver them with all the Forts and Castles, and what is found in them, into Our Possession, that We may inhabit that Countrey, as formerly.


X.
 That the Vice-Roy shall accommodate Us with a good Ionk, which we may send with Information to 
Batavia.


XI.
 That his Highness also take care that all this be approv'd of, and confirm'd by the Emperor in 
Peking,
 and a Grant thereof procur'd under his Imperial Majesties Signet, to the 
Hollanders.




About these Articles, as the Admiral was inform'd by Letters of the twen∣ty third from 
Nobel
 and 
Hoogenhoek,
 the Vice-Roy made great scruple, saying, That he could not sign them, before he had made the General 
Lipovi,
 and the Emperors Deputies in 
Chinchieu,
 acquainted with the seventh and eighth Arti∣cles, and had their Approbation concerning them, which at farthest within two or three days, on the Word of a King, should be perform'd; to which purpose he had already sent the foremention'd Articles, written by the 
Nether∣landers
 in form of an Agreement, by Post to 
Chinchieu.
 And likewise the other Ar∣ticles, especially that of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa,
 which upon the taking of it with joynt Forces, should be left in possession of the 
Netherlanders,
 was already grant∣ed without contradiction by the Vice-Roy. Nay, he had protested to them, That upon the taking of 
Ay
 and 
Quemuy,
 the free and unmolested Trade through all the Empire of 
China
 should not onely be granted to the 
Hollanders
 for a few years, but for ever, for which he would stand oblig'd; onely he de∣sir'd them to stay the foremention'd three or four days, as we said; when they answering, told the Vice-Roy, That in that Point they could not satisfie his desire; but that one thing or other thereof must be Seal'd: He again re∣peated what he declar'd before.


The twenty third the Admiral sent 
Lairesse,
 and the Rere-Admiral 
Bartholo∣mew Verwei
 ashore, with Order to go with 
Nobel
 and 
Hoogenhoek
 to the Vice-Roy, and desire him to Sign and Seal the Covenant for performance of all those foremention'd Articles, and also for that of the Free Trade, which his Highness had granted; and then declare to him, That the 
Hollanders
 would at present be satisfied with it, and stay the limited three or four days for the granting of that Article concerning 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy;
 but that in the mean time he would be pleas'd to hasten the sending of the Jonk which was to be dispatch'd for 
Batavia.


The twenty sixth the 
Vlaerdingen, Nut-tree, Tertolen, Naerden, Mars, Zierikzee, Flushing,
 and the 
Cogge,
 being under the Rere-Admiral 
Bartholomew Verwei
 his Squadron, set Sail from before the River 
Soanchieuw,
 steering directly for Cape 
Tsombou.


The twenty seventh a Servant came with the Interpreter 
Melman
 from his Highness 
Singlamong,
 who had himself been with the General 
Lipovi,
 and brought the long-expected Seal'd Agreement; as also two Letters, one from the Vice-Roy, and another from the General. The Conditions aforesaid were to this effect.








SInglamong
 Chief Commander, and King of the Territory of 
Fokien,
 hath concluded in his Council as followeth.


Singlamong
's Jonks shall carry a black Flag, in the midst of which shall stand a red Full-Moon.


Matthithel'avia,
 Governor in 
Soanchieuw,
 a yellow Flag with a white Pennon: The Jonks under his Command, a white Flag, and a red Moon: His 
Man∣darins,
 a green Flag, with a red Moon, and a white Pennon.


Tonganpek,
 a black Flag, and a white Pennon: His Officers, a black Flag, with a Silver Moon.


Soensinpek,
 a black Flag, and a red Pennon.


Iantoetek,
 a black Flag, with a yellow Pennon.


Loylavia,
 a green Flag, with a Silver Moon in it: His Officers, a green Vane, with a red Moon, and a white Pennon.


Thelavia,
 a green Flag, with a red Moon, and a black Pennon: His Offi∣cers, a green Flag, with a red Moon, and red Pennon.


Yoejoeng,
 a green Flag, with a red Moon, and a white Pennon.


The 
Holland
 Ships shall set Sail from hence with Our Jonks: The smal∣lest, and those that draw least Water, coming before the Enemies Countrey, shall run up into the Harbors; and the greatest Ships, as likewise Our big∣gest Jonks, shall follow. If the 
Holland
 Ships, or Ours, be in any danger, they shall not desert, but each be ready to assist the other as much as possible. We promise therefore to be faithful, as People of one Heart ought to be; and from hence forward no Hostility shall be shewn on our Part to the 
Hol∣landers. Tonganpek
 shall also set out two convenient Vessels, furnish'd with experienc'd Sea-men, which shall sail before the 
Holland
 Ships, and be at their Service. Likewise he shall furnish the 
Hollanders
 with three good Pi∣lots, that understand and know this Channel, which also shall serve the 
Hol∣landers.
 When they set Sail from hence with Our Jonks, they shall keep to∣gether, till they see if the Enemy with his Sea-Forces will come out to meet Us: If not, Our Ships shall with the 
Hollanders
 come to an Anchor at the 
Cape of Laetjen,
 which shall be the Station where the Jonks of Our Kingdom shall meet, and from thence besiege the Enemies Forts and Islands by Sea, when 
Singlamong
 shall give Order what his People are to do when they come ashore. The 
Hollanders
 shall the day before receive a Letter from 
Singlamong,
 when they shall set Sail from hence. After the Conquering of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 the 
Hollanders
 shall by Our Emperor be accepted as Subjects, and his Imperial Majesty shall acknowledge their faithful Assistance, and grant them their Requests, which I and 
Lipovi
 promise with all speed to procure, when once We have seen the Valour of the 
Hollanders.
 Furthermore, you may sell those Merchandizes which you have here aboard in that Ship which lies in the 
Hoksieu:
 But since the time is short that the Ships must Sail against the Enemy, it will be better that the Goods be reposited in 
Hoksieu,
 and the sale thereof deferr'd till We shall have conquer'd 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy:
 Yet if you will sell any thing before, you may, it being freely permitted.


Our 
Tartar
 Jonks shall all have a black Circle in their Sails, in which shall stand a black Character.


This We have Seal'd with Our Royal Signet: 
In the second Year of the Emperor 
Conghi,
 the ninth Moon.












The Letter writ to the Admiral by the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 was to this purpose.


THe last Year you were sent hither from the King of 
Batavia,
 and came with your Ships before 
Hoksieu,
 and have acquainted by Letters and Word of mouth, That you come to serve Our Empire, and assist Us against 
Coxinga,
 which We have already made known to his Majesty at 
Peking.:
 And seeing you resolve to be fully satisfied and reveng'd to the height for all the Losses you have sustain'd, and never to desist until you have utterly extirpa∣ted those Pyrates, therefore We have been the more earnest in Our Sollicita∣tion: And since you are come hither again this Year to the same purpose, to joyn with Us, We have read your Letter, which We receiv'd some days since, concerning the War, with the Government and Order thereof, which We shall observe when We come to engage with the Enemy; but We find thereby, that you make more Proposals than the last Year, and those such as I and 
Lipovi
 (though Chief Governors of this Territory) cannot conclude on, before we have made it known to the Emperor, and receiv'd his Approbation. As to what concerns those things for which We have receiv'd Orders and Command from the Emperor to conclude with you heretofore, We have sent you in this Letter, and they shall also be strictly observ'd by Us.






The Letter from the General was to this purpose. Lipovi
 General of the 
Tartars
 in the Territory of 
Fokien,
 to the Admiral of the 
Hollanders,
 sends Greeting.


TWo days since I receiv'd 
Singlamong
's and your Letter concerning the Agreement to be concluded between you and Us, which I have strict∣ly perus'd; but finding some weighty Articles in it, I thought it not conve∣nient to answer your Proposals. It is true, I am plac'd by the Emperor here as Chief Commander; yet I am not impower'd to treat about such Affairs, according to my desire; but must first acquaint his Majesty with it, and ex∣pect his Confirmation: But I have very well understood your desire, and you must expect an Answer to your Business from the Court at 
Peking,
 whi∣ther I have already sent a Letter. As to your going with Our Ships to 
Ey∣muy
 and 
Quemuy, Singlamong
 will acquaint you with Our Intentions, and give 
ou order concerning all things else. You have inclos'd in your Letter the Agreement We have mention'd, 
viz.
 That after the Conquering of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 Our Fleet and Forces shall sail with yours to 
Tayowan;
 and likewise that here in 
Hoksieu,
 or elsewhere, a Place shall be granted wherein you may drive a Trade; I have also written about it to the Court at 
Peking,
 from whence We expect a sudden Answer, which so soon as We receive, We will send you, together with the Emperors Pleasure concerning your last Articles. You request also three Pilots, which 
Singlamong
 will dispatch to you. Here in∣clos'd I send you an Express of the Flags in those Ships which shall go out of this River, to 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 by which they may be distinguish'd.


Santokquon, Lipovi
's Admiral, shall carry a blue Flag, with a black Moon, and a white Pennon.


Cheytinquon,
 a black Flag, with a Moon Argent.


 a green Flag, with a red Moon.


Schuluwan,
 General of the 
Militia,
 a red Flag, with a black Moon.


Captain 
Yoeloewan,
 a white Flag, with a sable Moon.


Captain 
Ian Sumpin,
 a green Flag.


Captain 
Goo Sumpin,
 a black Flag, and a blue Pennon.




This Seal'd Writing, being compar'd with that sent by the 
Netherlanders
 to his Highness, to be Seal'd by him, was found to differ in the principal Arti∣cles, 
viz.


The taking possession of the Isles of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 was not mention'd, but left out.


No mention was also made, That if they conquer'd, then they would go with them to 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa.


Concerning the Free Trade through the whole Empire, and also to get the Emperor to ratifie their Agreement, they express'd thus: 
That upon the Conquering the Isles of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 the 
Hollanders
 should be receiv'd into the Emperors Subjection, and that his Majesty should acknowledge their Assistance, and grant their Request, to which 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi
 would be means that it should be perform'd.


Besides, although the King and Councils Writing agreed for the most part with that of the 
Hollanders,
 yet they had inserted many new things, about the carrying of their Flags, and other unnecessary Matters.


The last Exception was, That the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
's Letter was sign'd with his Seal; but 
Lipovi
's was not.


The Admiral 
Bort,
 in Answer to their Highnesses 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 writ back, with an Account of what Flags and Colours the 
Netherlanders
 us'd to carry, and should carry in that Expedition, as follows.




BEsides the Letter from your Highness and the General 
Lipovi,
 I also re∣ceiv'd yesterday the Result made in your Highness Assembly about Our Business, in which we are permitted to sell those Commodities at this time onely which We brought along with Us, being but few, and such as Captain 
Nobel
 can at any time give your Highness an Inventory of: We accept of this Grant, provided it may be forthwith publish'd, as well here in 
Soanchieuw,
 as 
Hoksieu,
 and made known to the People by divulging the Proclamation; and that Captain 
Nobel
 may go about it to 
Hoksieu,
 and there at his coming open his 
Cargoes,
 and expose the Goods to sale. And though this be but a small Requital for the great Service which We intend to do, yet We will firmly hope and believe, That his Imperial Majesty hereafter will not refuse to grant us a Free Trade for ever, through his whole Empire, it being onely what agrees with his Royal Bounty, to requite all such who to their great Charge come to his Service. We declare, That Our Fleet of Ships stands Our Masters in above a hundred thousand 
Taile
 to fit out, and forty thousand 
Taile
 a Month to maintain: That Fleet which return'd last Year with ill success to 
Batavia,
 cost also a great Sum of Money, which your Highness must needs be sensible of, and likewise what damage We sustain'd by the loss of two Ships that came to his Imperial Majesties Service. If therefore the Sale of those few Goods which We have brought along with Us, can make any satisfaction for the great Charges which We have already been at, We leave to your Highness consideration. Therefore We cannot but be still importunate in our first Request, That the Free Trade may be ratified to Us for ever through the whole Empire, and Writings seal'd in confirmation thereof.


But as concerning 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 upon whose Conquest We desire










some adjacent Isle to plant in; and also about your Sailing with Us from thence to 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 and surrendring that Countrey upon the re∣taking of it to Us, your Highness makes no mention; neither of the Article to procure Us Letters from the Emperor for the confirming all things.


Yet We are confident that your Highness will be so favorable as to pro∣cure what We so oft and so long have requested; upon which account We are ready and willing to venture Our Lives and Fortunes for the Emperor, and use Our uttermost Endeavors to ruine that avaritious and insulting Py∣rate, so We stand ready to joyn Our Forces with yours, desiring all celerity in the Expedition, and that the time for Our setting Sail from 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy
 may be appointed and publish'd, because the time limited for Us to be there, by Our General and Council, is already past.


There are yet some Prisoners of Ours, whom We desire your Highness to remember, and to send them to Us, if you hear where they are, or find them. In 
Canton,
 as We understand, are two of Our Men, that went over to the Enemy, which We desire may be sent fetter'd to Us, because such as are un∣faithful to their Trust, as the worst of Men, should suffer by condign Pu∣nishment.


The Flags and Colours which your Highness Fleet shall carry in this Our intended Expedition, We are sufficiently inform'd of their differences by your Highness▪ Ours also you may be pleas'd to take notice of, here inclos'd.


From the good Ship the 
Nut-Tree,
 
the twenty seventh of 
October
 1663
. from 
Soanchieuw.


Balthasar Bort.










The 
Hollanders
 Colours, when joyn'd with the 
Tartars,
 shall be as follows.


First, All the Vanes and Flags which constantly flow from their Ships, are Red, White, and Blue.


When a white Ensign appears on the Stern, and a Gun is fir'd, it signifies the calling of a General Council: This Ensign also signifies Peace, as the Red War, and the beginning of a Fight.


At the putting on of a red, white, and blue Pennon from the Admirals Ship, all the Ships must follow him.


The Admirals Captain shall carry a green Flag, in which on the upper end near the Staff stands a gilded Lion with a Bunch of Arrows in his Paws.


The several Inferior Officers shall be distinguish'd by their several Co∣lours of Red, Blue, Yellow, and Green.


The Rere-Admiral shall carry a blue Ensign, with a Lion near the Staff; and his Inferior Officers Watchet, Blue, White, and Yellow Colours.


All other Martial Officers shall carry their Colours mingled, by which, together with their Sails and Yards, they may very well be distinguish'd from the 
Tartars.








The second of 
November, Constantine Nobel
 came from 
Soanchieuw
 aboard the Admiral, and brought an Answer from the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 in which the time of their setting Sail, and all other things were mention'd, as appears by the following Contents.




IN the tenth Moon, the first day, I have given Order to the Agent 
Nobel
 to tell the 
Holland
 Admiral, That Our 
Tartar
 Jonks shall set Sail out of the River 
Soanchefoe
 on the ninth of this Our tenth Moon, and shall ride close by


the 
Hollanders
 in the Haven of 
Schoeni,
 and if Wind and Weather serve, to set forth with your Ships the same day, and set Sail to the Bay of 
Wettauw.
 Let five of your best Sailers, that draw least Water, go before with Our nimblest Jonks, and so run into the Haven of 
Wettauw;
 and the remaining ten Ships, with Our great Jonks, Anchor in the Mouth of the Harbor. If We should meet with any of the Enemies Jonks in the Bay of 
Wettauw,
 as also in the Haven of 
Kinsakia,
 as We may expect, let us joyntly assail them.


Concerning your Landing on the Enemies Coasts, 
Bethetok
 and I have re∣solv'd about it, which must be known onely to us two; but We will give you timely notice thereof.


I have order'd the Agent to bring me the List of the Merchandises which you have brought along with you, and I will send them by him to the Go∣vernor of 
Hoksieu,
 with Orders to him to sell them in Publick, to which pur∣pose the 
 
Conbon
 will be very serviceable.




Nobel
 also brought a Letter from the General 
Lipovi,
 in answer to that which the Admiral had sent to him, containing the following Lines.




THe twenty ninth of this ninth Moon I receiv'd your Letter, and per∣us'd the Contents of it, taking notice of the several distinctions of the 
Hollanders
 Flags and Colours, which We have approv'd, and at this instant acquainted Our Officers with, and order'd them to govern themselves ac∣cordingly.


You are here sent from your King in 
Batavia,
 with your Ships, to assist and sail with us to 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy:
 Therefore We believe that you will shew your Valour, in setting upon the Enemies Countreys and Vessels, that when they are Conquer'd, you may return with Honor to 
Batavia,
 and there give an Account of your Adventures to your King, That here you have ob∣tain'd your long wish'd for Desire of Free Trade, for which you have come hither two Years.


You write that We should send you Letters of Assurance, that you might for ever Trade through all this Empire, besides the appointing you conveni∣ent Houses and Places; which is not possible to be granted, till we are im∣power'd from his Majesty at 
Peking,
 to whom I have already writ concern∣ing it, who by this time understands your Requests: But as for those Wares which you have brought with you, you may dispose thereof at your pleasure. But after the Conquest of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 when you shall return with Us again to 
Hoksieu,
 We shall by that time have, We hope, a pleasing Answer to all your other desires, from the Emperor.


You propose also, That if any of your Countrey-men, being Prisoners with the Enemy, should fall into Our Hands, we would not kill them; which We not onely promise, but further also, that We will send them to you; and to that purpose I have already strictly commanded both My Of∣ficers and Soldiers. The day on which the Ships shall set Sail with Our Jonks, 
Singlamong
 will privately advise you.




The eleventh the Admiral Sail'd out of the Mouth of the River 
Soanchieuw,
 and with three Ships, 
viz.
 the 
Nut-Tree, Cinnamon-Tree,
 and 
Yonker,
 he came to the Cape of 
Sombou,
 although not followd by the 
Tartar
 Jonks. The Rere-Admiral 
Verwei,
 who had since the twenty sixth lain in the River 
Soanchefoe,
 set Sail also from thence with three Ships, the 
Vlaerdingen, Naerden,
 and 
Sea-hound.


The thirteenth the Admiral was inform'd by Letters from 
Tonganpek,
 That his Jonks were the day before come out of the River of 
Soanchefoe,
 into the Bay of 
Schoeni;
 and that Morning a Letter was brought to him from the Ad∣miral 
Matitoe
 (who three days before was gone to the Cape of 
Wattauw
) in which he was advis'd, That he should be with all the Jonks of the Realm at 
Wattauw
 on the fourteenth day of that Moon, and also acquaint the 
Holland
 Admiral with it, that he might Sail thither with his Ships.


According to this Advice from 
Tonganpek,
 and also perceiving the Jonks sail∣ing before, the Admiral set sail with fourteen Ships from the Cape of 
Sombou
 to that of 
Puthay,
 behind which he came to an Anchor about the Evening, in nine Fathom Water.


Here 
Iacob Gommers,
 Commander of the 
Zierikzee,
 came aboard the Admiral, bringing with him one of the 
Dutch
 Prisoners, call'd 
Maurice Ianzen Vis,
 born in 
Mauritius-Isle,
 who not long before was taken by the Enemy 
Coxingans,
 and by them sent to the 
Netherlanders:
 He also deliver'd the Admiral a Letter from the Enemy, dated the tenth Instant, written by 
Summimpesiou,
 otherwise call'd 
Sioubontok,
 the second or next Person to the young 
Coxin Kimsia,
 who had the Supreme Command over the Isles of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 and other Islands lying thereabouts. The Letter was to this effect.




Summimpesiou,
 alias 
Sioubontok,
 Commander and Governor of 
Quemuy,
 sends this Letter to the Chief Commander of the 
Holland
 Fleet.


YOu have understood and know, that 
Coxinga
 two Years ago conquer'd 
Tayowan,
 which formerly was his Native Countrey.


This was done because he was forc'd to provide a Settlement and strong Fortress for his Soldiers, which he us'd in his War against the 
Tartar.


And two Years since 
Coxinga
 coming to 
Formosa,
 at 
Sakkam, Iacob Valencyn
 surrendred upon these Articles, That the 
Hollanders
 should be alotted a Place in 
Sakkam,
 or elsewhere, to go on with their Trade, and settle their Facto∣ry in.


As to what concerns the 
Tartars,
 they are very much disabled, and their Forces so broken, that they have lost the Territories 
Huquan
 and 
Nanquin;
 therefore they have desir'd you to make War upon Us with your Ships, as We are inform'd; which We fear not, having Soldiers enough, all indispu∣tably valiant: As for your Ships, they are very large, but draw a great deal of Water; so that they cannot penetrate the River, but must always live at Sea. You also know very well, that when We were in 
Tayowan
 We were stor'd with Soldiers, and Ammunition; therefore have a care of your selves, that these Eastern 
Tartars
 deceive you not; for they are cowardly and deceitful, as you perhaps will find too soon, when you shall see, that in the Battel, and in the greatest need, they will forsake you, shifting basely for themselves: But admit they should stand stoutly, they will always be ca∣villing; sometimes they will pretend, that you have not assisted them as you ought, but that in all their Engagements they were forc'd to resist 
Coxinga
's Forces alone: Nay, if you should conquer us, which we no ways fear, they will never grant you a setled Factory; for 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi
 have assur'd Us, That the 
Hollanders
 should never obtain a Free Trade in 
China,
 if We would come in. And besides, the Emperor in 
Peking
 hath not so much as once heard of your Business; for if he did, he would never put you upon a War against Us; therefore I advise you in good time to look to your selves,


nor Engage for a false Friend against so potent an Enemy: for your Ships, of which you boast so much, are rather for Burthen than War: and if you come to Traffick with us, then know, that the Coasts you intend for have many Rocks, Sands and Shelves, where your Ships may easily suffer. But in 
Tayo∣wan
 we have Sugar, Deer-skins, and other Merchandises which you desire, in far greater abundance: therefore if you will turn your Business to a friendly Commerce, intimate your Intentions to 
Kimsia,
 and he will provide a Place for your Merchants, and a Harbor for your Ships. I have with yours sent some of our Men to you to know further your Mind; and if you desire to Treat with me about any thing, send three of your Men to me, and we will first consult: we will send you aboard 
Valencine
's Wife, your Minister 
Leo∣nard
 with his Wife, and all the other Prisoners. What we Write is plain, but serious, not ambiguous, and free from all dissimulation. The 
Hollander Assam
 was Interpreter two years since in 
Sakkam
 to 
Iacob Valencin,
 therefore I have sent him with this Letter to declare to you all things, and to acquaint you with the condition of our Affairs.


In the 17th Year of 
Yunlie,
 the 10th Moon and the 9th Day.




The Commander, 
Iacob Gommers-back,
 sent in Writing by the same 
Champan
 which brought 
Maurice,
 an Answer to the young 
Coxin,
 That neither he nor his Officers could give any Answer upon it; but that they must first acquaint their Admiral with it, and have his Order: therefore it would be requisite for his Highness to send a 
Coya
 with Oars to him, to carry the Messenger (by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Assam,
 and by the 
Netherlanders, Maurice
) to receive his Answer on their Proposals.


This 
Maurice Ianzen Vis
 inform'd the Admiral and his Councel, as well of his own accord as by Examination, That the Enemy was five or six thousand strong in the Island 
Eymuy,
 and that there were no other Castles or strong Holds, but one round Stone Wall, without Batteries or Guns: That the Island 
Lissoe
 was inhabited onely by Rusticks, and that the Enemy had no Fortifications there; but on the Island 
Goutsoe
 was a small Castle: That 
Anpontek
 Command∣ded in 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 yet lived on 
Sakkam,
 which was no way fortifi'd: That in the Castle there were no Soldiers, nor any but 
Coxin
's Wives and Chil∣dren: That the 
Militia
 were Quarter'd all about the Countrey, yet much decrea∣sed by divers running away, and many cut off daily by the 
Formosan
 King 
Mid∣dag;
 for neither he nor the People of the Mountains would submit to the 
Chinese
 Government; but all the Villages did: That before 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy
 lay about eighty great, and twenty ordinary Jonks with Soldiers; moreover, above two hundred and sixty Jonks Unarm'd, in which their Women and Children, and Housholdstuff, had their abodes: Lastly, that the Towns on 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy
 were most of them deserted, and the 
Chineses
 preparing to flie to 
Formosa.


Upon this Intelligence the Admiral and his Councel conceiv'd, that their dilatoriness about the Islands would strengthen 
Formosa,
 all the rest flying thi∣ther, which by all means ought to be prevented. Hereupon it was thought convenient and concluded, to send the Vice-Admiral and Captain 
Poleman
 as authoriz'd Persons, to 
Tonganpek,
 General of the 
Tartar
 Fleet, lying at the 
Cape of Pathany,
 to demand of him peremptorily, If he did not intend with all his Jonks and Forces that very day, to joyn and set Sail with them, and so together fall upon the Enemy: which if he refus'd, then tell to him, That they would


undertake the Work themselves. And that it might appear they dealt upright∣ly, 
Maurice Ianzen
 was sent with the two Captains to acquaint him, That they had Overtures of Peace from 
Summimpessiou,
 yet they would not desist from their Intentions.


But they returning told the Admiral, That he was very unwilling to Engage till he heard from 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 and therefore desir'd three or four days respite, alledging that it was not according to the Agreement, which was, That they should assail the Enemy together: but if they would go, then to leave two or three Ships for their Convoy to follow them.


The fifteenth he sent a 
Mandarin
 with Letters to the Admiral, persisting in his former Desire, that he would please to tarry but two days longer. But the Admiral suspecting delays, and the change of their Councels, and that the time expir'd they might have other Orders, pitcht upon the next day to set forward with eight Ships to 
Quemuy,
 and to leave seven small Frigats to con∣duct them; of which they sent him word by his own 
Mandarin;
 desiring also, that for the more easie Landing of their Men they lend them twenty five of their 
Coya's,
 or small Boats.


In the Evening the 
Hollanders
 espy'd fifty or sixty little 
Tartar
 Jonks and 
Coya's
 to stand directly for 
Quemuy,
 to whom the Admiral immediately sent his Lieutenant 
Hendrick van Dalen,
 with the Interpreter 
Iohn Melman,
 to demand the reason thereof, and why they Sail'd thither? to which they return'd an∣swer, That the 
Tartars
 had that Night taken a 
Coya
 with three Men from the Enemy, who inform'd them that there were many more at 
Quemuy,
 therefore they had sent out those 
Coya's
 to watch their motion; adding moreover, that the next Morning they were to come again to the Fleet.


The sixteenth about Day-break they saw the same Vessels according as they told them, returning from 
Quemuy,
 but seem'd to be a greater Fleet; to meet whom, upon a Signal, many more Boats set out from the 
Tartars
 by fifteeen or sixteen in a Company, which might easily be discern'd very much to decrease the Fleet; and observing they went all of them thither full of People, and re∣turn'd in a manner empty, they were jealous that the 
Tartar
 either had, or would privately agree with the Enemy: whereupon they chang'd their in∣tention, and resolv'd to wait another day for the 
Tartar
 Fleet, whilst they sent to them to be better satisfi'd concerning the former Passages.


In the afternoon a 
Mandarin,
 chose by 
Tonganpek,
 brought the twenty five 
Coya's
 to the 
Dutch
 Fleet, with a Letter to the Admiral, desiring some farther de∣lay; but he not altering his resolution, distributed the 
Tartar
 Vessels amongst his Fleet as he saw fit: and immediately the Admiral and the Councel agreed, that the next Morning he should Sail from thence with eight Ships to the South Point of the Island 
Quemuy;
 and in the mean time the Rere-Admiral 
Bartholo∣mew Verwei
 should with his Ship and the other small Frigats, being seven in number, stay with the 
Tartar
 Fleet, and Sail with them towards 
Quemuy;
 but if the General 
Tonganpek
 did not follow the Admiral with all his Forces within five days, that then the Vice-Admiral, no longer delaying, should follow to joyn with the Admiral, that so together they might fall upon the Service, the better to endamage the Enemy. Mean while came another Letter from 
Singlamong
 the Vice-Roy, to the Admiral, by all means desiring him to tarry a little longer; but he persisting, and not enduring delays, the next day with his Ships reaching to 
Erasmus Bay,
 the twenty five 
Coya's
 running in, lay behind the 
North-Foreland:
 the Admiral not doubting but that the 
Tartars
 would






follow him, Sail'd nearer the City; and about ten a Clock the next Morning anchor'd before the great City 
Quemuy:
 where after some difficulty in chusing their Ground, the rest of their Fleet being now joyn'd with the other seven, Rode as near the City as they could: then the Admiral sent some Boats to discover fit Landing-places, with Orders also, that if they saw any conveni∣ence to Land a Party; which 
Coker
 their Captain perform'd, putting ashore fourscore Men; but the 
Chineses
 coming out of the City gave them a smart 
Camisado:
 yet the 
Hollanders
 behav'd themselves so well, that they put the Enemy, though twice their number, to flight with the loss of one Man, and some few wounded. During this Skirmish, the 
Hollanders
 having gotten some Ground, and the 
Chineses
 retreated, the one was recruited from their Ships, and the other from the Town, who after a while facing each other, came to a second Engagement: but these also, as the former, were repuls'd, and forc'd to retreat with loss; and had the later Landed 
Hollanders
 been drawn up and setled in a Body, they had probably, by a total rout in their confused flight, broke in with them into the Town; but they seeing the 
Hollanders
 ad∣vance no farther, fled not in, but lay sculking behind a natural Breast-work of Rocks that lay before the Town, whence they gawl'd them very much with continual flights of Arrows. The Admiral from Sea observing the difficul∣ty of the Service, sent Order that Captain 
Poleman
 should Command in chief upon the Shore to prevent all disorders and confusions, ordering them to stand upon their Guard, and not venter too near the Town, while he should Land and plant some Cannon to facilitate the Storming thereof: But whilst the 
Hollanders
 made good their Ground all that Night, next Morning the Admiral himself Landed; then consulting what was best to be done, or whether they should Storm the City that day, Letters were presented them from 
Singlamong, Matithelavia,
 or 
Bethetok, Tonganpek,
 and other Commanders, in which they advis'd, That the 
Tartar
 Forces would set forth with their Fleet that very day, therefore they desir'd them to forbear Storming till their whole


Force were conjoyn'd, that they might first together set upon the Enemy at Sea, and having routed them there, attended with Victory, next assault the Town, alledging, That when they had taken the City, all the adjacent Places and Isles would of themselves surrender. The Admiral, though well satisfi'd by this, that the 
Tartars
 were punctual to their Promises, yet thought it better not to lose time by suspending their Motion (which would ask some days) re∣solv'd to give them a present Assault: whereupon it was unanimously agreed, with two Companies of Soldiers and some Sea-men with Hand-Granado's, to draw near, having a good Reserve upon all occasions: this no sooner conclu∣ded, but they march'd up to the Walls, where while some ply'd the Defen∣dants
 with Volleys of Shot, that they could not peep over the Wall, and others threw Hand-granado's, some set up Scaling-Ladders, on which they mounted very resolutely; but they being made of Canes, and over-burden'd with the Assailants, broke when they had in their hopes swallow'd the City; which the Admiral observing, and that they were like to do no good at present, sounded a Retreat; and so they drew off in some confusion, though with no considera∣ble damage.


This Design falling out so unfortunately, the Admiral commanded all his Men aboard, and the next day set Sail to meet the 
Tartars,
 and the remainder of his Fleet, according to 
Singlamong
's Desire, having sent Letters before him to that purpose.


Whilst the Admiral made these Dispatches, and went with the Vice-Admiral went aboard the 
Ionker
 Frigat, a 
Chinese
 Messenger arriv'd with a Letter from 
Somminpesiou,
 in 
Coxin Kimpsia, Coxinga
's Son's Name, who had the chief Com∣mand over his Forces. The Letter being interpreted, was found to be of the same Contents as that of the tenth instant, which we mention'd before. Be∣sides this was another written by a 
Dutch
 Prisoner, 
Iohn Ianse
 of 
Bremen,
 who al∣so desir'd them to agree with the 
Chineses,
 who, if the 
Netherlanders
 were inclin'd to Trade, were best able to serve them; and to that end they might chuse a Place where they pleas'd, and it should be given them; and also that their King 
Kimsia
 did with the first opportunity expect the first Messenger 
Maurice,
 who he hop'd would bring him news, that they would agree with him; in hopes of which they intended to send them their Prisoners from 
Tayowan.


Whereupon the Admiral sent word again to 
Tsioubontok,
 That he had re∣ceiv'd his Letters too late, because the 
Netherlanders
 had entred into a League before with the 
Tartars,
 by which they were oblig'd to maintain Wars against them, unless the 
Tartars
 gave any new occasion of breach; but as concerning 
Assam,
 or 
Maurice,
 he intended to send him by some other opportunity.


All things being now ready and in order, they weighed Anchor, and had not Sail'd far before they descry'd behind the Point of 
Quemuy
 two of their other Ships at an Anchor, by which they absolutely concluded, that the 
Tartars
 whole Fleet was there with them, because they also saw a great many Jonks Sailing behind the Island 
Lissoe;
 but in stead of coming on they dropp'd An∣chor: when in the Evening the Admiral receiv'd another Letter from 
Ton∣ganpek
 to this effect:




THe eighteenth of our tenth Moon eight of your Ships Sail'd about 
Quemuy,
 which is very well done. This day I have receiv'd Letters from 
Singlamong
 to set Sail with your and our Ships on the one and twentieth of the tenth Moneth, from 
Wetauw
 to 
Tathaen:
 wherefore I and 
Matithelavia
 have set forward with the remainder of your












Ships to the West Point of 
Quemuy,
 that on the twentieth in the Morning they might be at 
Tathaen,
 Wind and Weather favouring: You mention in your last Letter, that the 
Coya's
 which were sent to your Service did not perform as they ought; the Business shall be examin'd, and their Officers shall suffer condign punishment. On the closing of this Let∣ter we came with our Ionks and two of your Ships, to the Point of 
Osatauw,
 where we have taken some of the Enemy's Vessels, and with the slaughter of a few put the rest to flight: nothing now remains, but that we may▪ conjoyn Forces at 
Lissoe,
 hoping there to meet you, that the next morning we may fall upon the Service.


Which the Admiral presently answer'd, and sending Orders to his Reer-Admiral to be in a readiness, prepar'd for the Rendezvouz at
 Lissoe.


The nineteenth he receiv'd other Letters, both from
 Tonganpek 
and his Reer-Admiral, giving an account onely of some small Actions, and a little jea∣lousie of his Reer-Admiral concerning the
 Tartars; 
which he answer'd no otherwise, but that he would meet them at
 Lissoe.


About day-break the Admiral receiv'd a Letter, brought in a
 Coxingan 
Vessel, from
 Tsioubontok, 
or the second Person to
 Kimsia; 
in which, in
 Kimsia's 
Name, was written to this effect:






Summimpessiou
 sends this Letter to the 
Holland
 Commanders in their Ships.


YOur Letters which I receiv'd yesterday I partly understand, 
viz.
 that you have made a League with the 
Tartars;
 in so doing you have done well: for we know by experience, that you 
Hollanders
 never break your Words, and inviolably observe all Covenants and Promises. Whereas the 
Tartars
 were ever a perfidious and treacherous People: for it is common with them, after Articles of Peace, and Acts of Oblivion, whom they receive under their subjection, and should honorably protect, they without mercy murder, butchering in a manner, whole Provinces; and those great Persons that were able to withstand them, after they had invited them with golden Baits of Promotion, having once got them in their power, have first loaden them with Fetters, and after murder'd, witness my Grandfather 
Equon
 and others, whereof we have had woful experience these twenty years. They have threatned to destroy us and our Fleet with Fire and Sword, and take in 
Eymuy,
 and those Isles we stand possess'd off, but never durst look us in the face, till by the like dissembling arts they have drawn you in to their assistance; for which they promise you (if you will believe them) a free Trade for ever through the whole Empire: But they are onely pleasant with you, and intending no such matter. Besides, whensoever you with your Ships shall Engage ours, they will, to keep up their character of cowardise and treachery, leave you singly either to be over∣thrown, or work out a hard, and at the best, a disputable Victory: but if by your sole Prowess and Power you subdue us, which we little fear, yet they will not onely take into their possession what you have won, but assume the whole honor of the Victory unto themselves: but we will not insist further on this Point. Your Nation we have a kindness for, because we know you to be honest, therefore we, as an honorable Enemy, hoping our selves to be suffici∣ent enough to fight you, advise you to beware of Rocks and Shoals, whereof there are many in our Harbors: yet if upon better advice, and surer, you will come in to us, we have in 
Formosa
 at present twenty thousand 
Chineses,
 which make abundance of Sugar yearly; for which your Ships may come into the Haven of 
Tayowan,
 and there Traffick: to which purpose we will give you 
Tamsuy
 and 
Kelang,
 formerly inhabited by the 
Hollanders,
 and provide you with a good Harbor for your Ships: If these please you not, you may take 
Lamoa,
 or any other. We therefore desire you speedily to send a Person of Quality with 
Assam,
 with whom I may Communicate and Treat concerning the whole Affair, who, if we
 come to a right understanding, shall bring you all your Prisoners, of what quality soever.


The Heavens, Sun and Moon, are witnesses, that what I offer is truth, and desire Peacē; but if it must be War, let us know your determination: for we have a Fleèt five hundred strong, besides two hundred Fire-ships, with which we shall put you to it, try your Valor, and know how well you 
Hollanders
 can fight, not doubting when we come to trial, but to sink, rout, and burn you all.


In the seventeenth Year of our Emperor 
Iunglie,
 the tenth Moon and the nineteenth Day.




The Admiral onely answer'd, That he was engag'd already to assist the 
Tartars,
 and they never made any breach with their Allies without many and just Provocations: therefore he could serve him no otherwise but by return∣ning thanks for his kind proffers; and that they would continue their civility to their Prisoners, as he had done to theirs.


About nine a Clock in the afternoon the Admiral set Sail with his eight Ships to Engage with the Enemy's Forces, which consisted in a thousand as well great as small Jonks, and the day before anchor'd near the Island 
Lissoe:
 Then he Sail'd to the Southward of 
Quemuy,
 where he met with the remainder of his own and the 
Tartar
 Fleet: about Noon they fell in with some of the Ene∣my's Jonks between 
Lissoe
 and 
Quemuy;
 and although they endeavor'd to hin∣der them from running away, yet some of them made their escape, creeping close under the Shore, and steer'd their Course to 
Eymuy:
 however, they hemm'd in about fifty great Jonks of War, which after some resistance, and the sinking one of their biggest, us'd all means possible to break through, and to fall upon the 
Tartars,
 which lay without Shot, and not once offer'd to En∣gage; which after some difficulty they effected, and immediately Boarding them, before the 
Hollanders,
 by reason of a Calm, could come to their assistance, behaved themselves with so much courage, that after a little resistance the 
Tar∣tars
 were forc'd to flie up to the 
Netherland
 Ships, and leave two of their Jonks behind, one Commanded by the Admiral 
Bethetok,
 Governor of the City of 
Soanchieuw,
 and the other by the General 
Iantetok,
 which the Enemy took and plundred, but were afterwards by the 
Netherlanders
 regain'd, which the Enemy could not prevent, because upon the 
Hollanders
 approach they had enough to do to secure their own Jonks by flight; for their nimble Rowing (the Ships not being able by reason of the calm Weather to follow them) was their preserva∣tion, onely one running on the Shore of 
Quemuy,
 was forsaken by her Men. Against the Evening the Enemy being much scatter'd, Tyded towards the South; but part of them chased along the Coast of 
Quemuy
 by the Rere-Admi∣ral late in the Evening, made their escape. The Enemy thus fled, the Battel ended for that Night. The 
Tartar
 Jonks went to the North from whence they came, but the 
Hollanders
 anchor'd at 
Lissoe;
 whereupon search he found himself no way damnifi'd, but onely in his Sails, having but one Man kill'd, and about sixteen wounded.


The 
Hollanders
 were now fully satisfi'd of the 
Tartars
 cowardise, for that with their whole Fleet, which was four times as strong as the Enemy's, they durst not Engage with seven or eight Jonks, but fled, as we said, for safeguard under the 
Netherlanders
 Guns, leaving their Admiral 
Bethetok,
 and the General 
Iantetok,
 which last was kill'd: whereas the Enemy, when he came near the great Ships, defended himself with Bowes and Arrows, and Darts, which in great abundance they shot and threw into the Sails, and likewise with small Shot and fiery Darts, yet did little damage.


In the Evening the Interpreter 
Melman
 was sent aboard 
Tonganpek,
 to enquire how it hapned that his Men had not defended themselves better? whereto he made this Answer: 
That a sudden fear had surpris'd them; but desir'd him that he should be pleas'd at the rising of the Moon, to Sail between the Isle of 
Goutsoe
 and the other small Isles thereabouts to 
Eymuy,
 where he would meet him.


The twentieth, two hours before Day, the Admiral with his whole Fleet set Sail for 
Eymuy,
 and Rowing along to the Southward, so passing by 
Goutsoe;
 not far from whence they spy'd 
Coxin'gas
 Fleet: whereupon the 
Hollanders
 made up towards them, as they on the other side did towards the 
Tartar
 Jonks, and about ten of the Clock came into the Channel between the Westermost Island of 
Toata
 and the Northern, or third of 
Goutsoe:
 but the 
Hollanders,
 because the Current was against them in that 
Straight,
 spent two hours in approaching the Enemy; by which time they had Engag'd the 
Tartars:
 but at the 
Hollanders
 coming in they quitted their Design, and shifted for their safety; which, though the 
Hollanders
 had them as in a Pound, that either they must be taken, sunk, or run ashore, they perform'd with such activity, skill and courage, that they broke through the midst of them, running their low-built Vessels close under their Guns, so fighting their Way, that of a hundred and eighty Ships of War, three onely were taken, the rest all entring with small damage into 
Quemuy
 and 
Goutsoe.


Lipovi,
 greedy to hear of the Success, came down the River 
Chinchieu,
 and sent a 
Batsiang,
 or Messenger aboard the Admiral, to know the news and ad∣vise concerning the Landing of the 
Tartar
 Horse at 
Eymuy:
 to all which he return'd an Answer in Writing by the same 
Batsiang,
 relating at large the whole circumstances of the Battel.


In the afternoon the 
Netherlanders
 saw four 
Chinese
 Jonks coming from 
Que∣muy,
 which designed passing by them to go to the 
Tartars,
 but they were pre∣vented in their Course by the Guns, and forc'd to Anchor near the Ships, of which the Commanders that lay nearest, went aboard, and according to the Admirals Order brought them into the middle of the Fleet; who being exa∣min'd by the Commanders, told the Admiral, That they had onely six Fami∣lies aboard, and Provisions for their Voyage: Whereupon he declar'd the Jonks to be free Prize, and gave all what was in them to be distributed amongst the Sea-men. Notwithstanding, some 
Tartar Mandarins
 came to intreat the Admiral to let them be discharg'd, alledging, that they had an Invitation by Letter from 
Geitonkok,
 Governor of 
Chinchieu,
 to make an escape over to them: but he having a Letter from 
Soanghieu,
 to spare none upon any pretence, but to make all Prize and Prisoners, made seizure, sending two of them, and keep∣ing the other two for himself.


But 
Lipovi
 not long after sent another Letter to the Admiral, acknowledg∣ing, that though he desir'd to be inform'd from his Excellency, yet he had seen the Fight, though at great distance from a Hill, and acknowledg'd the honor of the Victory belong'd only to his Ships. His Letter Translated was to this effect:




Lipovi,
 Chief Commander and General of the 
Tartar
 Forces in the Territory of 
Fokien,
 and Admiral of the Fleet before 
Eymuy,
 by this Letter sends kind Salutations to his Excellency the Admiral of the 
Hollanders.


THe one and twentieth in the Morning, from a Mountain I saw the co∣ming of your Ships, and with joy beheld the driving away of the


Pyrates Jonks with the Thunder of your Cannon. Now I see the integrity of your Nation, and that you mean as you say, and perform what you promise. I will not be negligent with the first opportunity, to signifie to my Master the good Service which you have done to his Imperial Majesty, and how bravely you have behav'd your selves in the Fight, routing yours and our Enemies. 
Soanghieu
's Supplies will be ready to joyn with us to morrow. What I have more to write, I hope ere long, Sir, to deliver by word of Mouth.


To which the Admiral return'd in brief, That he was much rejoyced that he was pleas'd to present their Business to the Emperor with such favor, that he should be the better prepar'd to requite their good Service.


With 
Lipovi
's Letter, 
Bort
 also receiv'd one from Admiral 
Sitetok,
 who sent him four fed Oxen which he had taken in 
Eymuy.


The same day the Rere-Admiral brought 
Iohn Ianz,
 one of the 
Dutch
 Prison∣ers aboard the Admiral, who had written the two fore-mention'd Letters, and was come in a 
Champan
 with four 
Chineses
 aboard the Rere-Admiral the day of the Fight, having on purpose misconstrued the Admiral's Letter to the 
Chineses
 desire, as if he had granted what was but in Proposal, 
viz.
 That the 
Nether∣landers
 would Charge their Guns onely with Powder, and that he must go in Person to acquaint the Rere-Admiral with the Design: By which means he got his Liberty, and the rest were taken Prisoners.


Mean while, the Enemy being dispatch'd at Sea, the 
Tartars
 under 
Lipovi
 having Landed their Horse, which put the People under great consternation, they suddenly took the City of 
Eymuy
 by Storm, slaughtering the Inhabitants, and plundering their Houses.


The same day a 
Mandarin
 came with a Letter from the General to the Admi∣ral, expressing his joy for having taken the City 
Eymuy,
 and desiring that on the Morrow he would be pleas'd to favor him so much as to come thither and speak with him. The Admiral congratulated his Victory, but excus'd himself as to waiting upon him, because of the distance of the Place.


The one and twentieth he receiv'd Missives from 
Tonganpek
 to this effect:






TWo days since I saw with great admiration, how valiantly your Ships behav'd themselves in the Engagement against the Enemy, which will so amaze the Pyrate himself, that he will never dare to look you in the Face. I for my particular part humbly thank you for such kind Service, in dissipating the Enemy. About three days since I sent you the Vice-Roy's Order, wherein he commands us to Sail with all our Fleet to 
Eymuy;
 but be∣ing on my Way thither, I was by another Order detain'd at 
Liutien.
 Now in regard his intentions are to come in Person to 
Eymuy,
 I humbly desire you, according to his Request, that you will please to send five of your Ships to 
Liutien,
 and with the other ten lie at an Anchor before 
Eymuy,
 to prevent the Eenemy from making an escape, and in so doing you will oblige me. At present I have little of fresh Provision to send you; yet be pleas'd to accept this small Present, 
viz.
 five Porkers, fifty Capons, fifty Ducks, five Pots with Liquor, some Crabs, and ten 
Picols
 of Radishes.




To this Letter he answer'd, That on 
Singlamong
's Request, to secure him and his Jonks from the Enemy, he would command eight of his Ships to Sail to 
Lissoe;
 and that they would not fail with the rest of their Fleet to come to the 
Tartars
 assistance.












No sooner was this Answer on Shore, but 
Lipovi
 sent a second Request, and that he need not trouble himself, for he was sufficiently Guarded by 
Tonganpek
 with his Forces: therefore if he would be pleas'd to come ashore, he and his 
Mandarins
 would entertain him in the fairest House in the Island.


Upon which Invitation, first chusing two Jonks for his own use out of those which he had taken, he went ashore, accompanied with the Vice-Admiral 
Hui∣bert de Lairesse,
 and Captain 
Poleman.


The General being assembled with his principal 
Mandarins
 in young 
Coxinga's
 House, receiv'd the Admiral with great courtesie and real joy. 
Lipovi
 also ascrib'd the honor of the Victory to the 
Netherlanders,
 telling them, That it was not themselves, but they that had put the Enemy to the rout; that he had seen the Engagement at Sea before 
Eymuy,
 and sufficiently heard of that at 
Quemuy:
 for which much rejoycing, he highly extoll'd their Valor. Where∣upon he assur'd the Admiral, That though he was not able to make satisfaction for the Service which they had done to his Countrey, he would endeavor that the Emperor should.


Lipovy
 having ended his Discourse, the Admiral return'd in like manner, how glad he was for his Victory at 
Eymuy,
 wishing him many more, not doubt∣ing but he should scowre the Sea, and clear the Port and Harbors from the 
Coxingans,
 that Pyratick Rabble.


After this the Admiral made three Requests to the General:


First, 
That he would be pleas'd to write a Letter to the
 Konbon 
in
 Hoksieu, 
and give Order in it, that the Goods which Captain
 Nobel 
and the Merchant
 Hogenhook 
had in
 Hoksieu, 
might be sold off.


Secondly, 
That they might not stay long there, but prosecute the Enemy on
 Quemuy 
and the other Isles.


Thirdly, 
That the
 Tartars 
should then go with the
 Netherlanders 
to
 Formosa, 
and assist them in driving the Pirates from thence.


The first and second Request 
Lipovi
 absolutely granted the Admiral, pro∣mising more, That he would not fail to get them what they so much desir'd, a free Trade through the Empire, and that within two days they would Sail together to 
Quemuy.
 But concerning the third Proposal of going with the 
Ne∣therlanders
 to 
Tayowan,
 he made no promise; but said, 
That perhaps would follow, after the rest of their work was finish'd.


Then 
Lipovi
 recounted to him what purchase they had upon the Isle, con∣sisting only in a few Cattel and Sheep, of which he sent forty Oxen and some of the Sheep aboard the 
Netherland
 Ships; promising them the whole Plunder of the other Isles, that his Men might not be discourag'd, but might venture their Lives for something.


Whilst the Admiral was ashore, three 
Champans
 with 
Chinese
 Rusticks came amongst the Fleet, which dwelt on the Main Land near 
Goutsoe,
 with Request to the 
Netherlanders,
 to grant them a Pass to go to the 
Tartars,
 and submit them∣selves to his Subjection, by cutting their Hair like the 
Tartars,
 and paying of Tribute, which the Admiral so soon as he came aboard granted them; in re∣quital whereof, they gave him four Hogs, and five Pots of 
Chinese
 Beer.


The Rusticks being ask'd concerning the condition of the 
Chinese
 Enemies, declar'd, 
That they were all fled away from thence in the night, none knowing whither they were gone.


The two and twentieth, the Admiral receiv'd a Letter from his Highness, and the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 in Thanks for his gotten Victories over the



Chineses,
 with Intreaties, that he would Sail with the Fleet to the Isle of 
Goutsoe.


The same day Captain 
Poleman
 and the Secretary were sent ashore to deli∣ver to the Vice-Roy and General, what so long had slept, and would not be at first receiv'd, the Letter and Presents from 
Maetzuiker
 and the Council at 
Bata∣via,
 and to request of 
Lipovi,
 that he would be pleas'd, according to his pro∣mise the day before, to write to the 
Conbon,
 and with it send a Letter, which the Admiral had given to 
Poleman
 and the Secretary, and directed to 
Constantine No∣bel
 at 
Hoksieu.


The Agents having receiv'd their Orders, went in two Sloops to the Gene∣ral, whom they found on the Main Land, opposite to 
Colongsoe;
 and after a kind Salutation to him from 
Maetzuiker,
 they deliver'd him the Letter, which the General having perus'd, declar'd, that their Excellencies Letters were very acceptable; yet it seem'd strange, that they should send Presents, when they knew it was not his Custom to receive any; but if they were useful in War, he would accept of them; to which being soon perswaded, he requir'd them as they were brought before him, and commanded them, without open∣ing, to be carry'd to his Tent, only returning the Complement of Thanks; promising also to unite to the 
Conbon
 in 
Hoksieu,
 in the behalf of the 
Hollanders
 there: After this, the Agents having been nobly entertain'd by 
Lipovi,
 took their leave and departed.


The three and twentieth the Fleet having fir'd three Guns, set Sail to the Isle of 
Goutsoe,
 accompany'd with the 
Tartars;
 and about Noon they came to An∣chor, a League and half South-West from the Island, not being able, by rea∣son of a calm and contrary Tide, to double the North Fore-land, while the 
Tartar
 Jonks Anchor'd before 
Lissoe;
 from whence, the Admiral was desir'd by 
Sietetok
 and 
Tonganpek
 to come ashore, whither (having resolv'd to go be∣fore) he went with 
Lairesse,
 Captain 
Poleman,
 and three Companies of Soldiers to the Isle of 
Goutsoe;
 from whence the Enemy was fled, and they took possession of three new rais'd Forts which were deserted, one of them with a Castle, and though not very beautiful, yet strong, for the Walls and Breast-Works which were twenty three Foot high, were made of firm Stones, and the Curtain on the Walls six Foot broad; the whole in Circum∣ference, as big as the Castle at 
Batavia;
 but nothing was found in it, except Stools, Benches, (the 
Tartars
 having been there and Plunder'd all) and thirty nine unserviceable Iron Guns, which lay about; of these the 
Hollanders
 making themselves Masters, plac'd Centinels to look over them, till they had opportu∣nity of Shipping.


The Admiral coming out of the Castle, was met by the 
Tartar
 General, who earnestly invited him aboard his Jonk to a small Treat, which he mo∣destly excus'd, desiring them to take a slight Sea-Entertainment upon the Land, which he thought would not be inconvenient for either; so giving Or∣der while the Meat was a Cooking, they view'd the other two forsaken Forts; one of which for the most part was cut out of a Rock, and built very strong on a Rivers side, whither oftentimes Armies of Hornets, thick like a Thun∣der-Cloud, appearing cover the adjacent Countrey, devouring Plants, Fruits, and whatever they find where-ever they come; which before their lighting, to prevent, the Rusticks come arm'd with Canes, and Flags at the ends, and fight them by flourishing and waving them about their Heads, which fetches them down in thousands, where thus destroying some of them, the rest not ventu∣ring to light, flie in their great bodies to other places, and so often clear the






Countrey. Here the Admiral having spent some time, they were call'd down, where on the Sea shore they Eat, Drank, and were Merry; and well-pleas'd each departed to their own Quarters.


The next day there came Letters from 
Lipovi,
 that he had given Order to dismantle the three Castles, excusing it from the infertility of the Countrey, as unfit for the 
Hollanders
 to make any thing of, either to improve or Garrison; and that 
Formosa
 was much better for them to resettle upon, which they need not doubt, but the 
Tartars
 should help them to regain, and then they should possess it as formerly; but the Admiral sent word, that he would not suffer them to touch it, until the next day he had spoken with their General 
Lipovi.


Soon after the Admiral receiv'd a Letter from 
Lipovi,
 which was to this effect:


At present you have had much trouble, but now there is nothing left but the Isle
 Que∣muy, 
which I desire you will Sail to with
 Setetok 
and
 Tonganpek, 
that there you may fully take satisfaction for your losses; and therefore let your Soldiers first Pillage the Countrey, and then ours shall be contented with the Gleanings: This done, We will burn and pull down the Towns, because we do not desire to keep them; when we have won
 Quemuy, 
then we will consult of further Proceedings.


The twenty fifth in the Morning, the Admiral, and the 
Mars,
 and 
Zirikzee
 Frigats, setting Sail with all the 
Tartar
 Jonks to 
Quemuy,
 Anchor'd in the Afternoon between 
Lissoe
 and 
Toata,
 where he call'd a Council, to consult if they should take the Island 
Goutsoe
 in Possession, because of the Forts al∣ready built upon it, and Garrison them, or not? Whereupon after some debate, they unanimously agreed, not to settle on that Island, nor Garrison the Forts, but suffer the 
Tartars
 to burn and destroy them, because it was little, barren, and not improvable by Cultivation; but their special reason was, that it would too much weaken them, having design'd so suddenly to fall upon 
Formosa.


The twenty sixth in the Morning, the Admiral set Sail again, being fol∣low'd


by nine Frigats to the West side of 
Quemuy,
 where he Anchor'd amongst several 
Tartar
 Jonks, which Sail'd thither the day before.


The Rere-Admiral 
Verwei
 stay'd with five Ships at the Isle of 
Goutsoe,
 to bring away the remaining Guns, and make those that could not be brought unfit for Service by Cloying; with Orders also, that when he had done, he should come up to 
Quemuy.


The Admiral and his Men going ashore, found the Enemy likewise fled from thence, and the 
Tartars
 pulling down, tearing, and rifling the City, which was contrary to 
Lipovi
's promise, who not only in his Letters, but per∣sonally assur'd the Admiral, that the 
Netherlanders
 should have all the Plunder; but after this they set a less value upon the 
Tartars
 promises.


But however, the Admiral, Vice-Admiral and Captain 
Poleman
 went to see this little City, whose Walls were of an incredible thickness, yet not so strong as those of 
Aymuy,
 and an hours walking in Circumference, with four Gates, besides fifteen or sixteen Iron Guns, which the 
Tartars
 made Prize of. More∣over, the City consisted all of Stone Houses, but thinner built than 
Aymuy,
 yet all were desolated, the Inhabitants being all fled, only here and there the 
Tar∣tars
 pick'd up some miserable Creatures out of Holes and blind Recesses, whom they us'd Salvagely, killing some, cutting, slashing, and driving them like Cat∣tel, which the Admiral observing and pitying, towards Evening went thence aboard.


The twenty seventh, the Admiral receiv'd several Letters, but that of most concern was this from the Vice-Roy and General, 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 which were written before, but hinder'd by bad Weather, came not till now, being in effect the Contents of all the rest.




YOu worthy 
Hollanders
 have had great care and trouble to beat the Pirate Our Enemy, which is very well known to Us; We may certainly say, that you have been a Terror to them, and put them to flight by your Valor and Conduct; I and 
Lipovi
 Thank you for the Service done to Our Empire. Three days since We desir'd you in a Letter to come to see Us at 
Cinwe,
 that there We might Communicate Our Consultations; to which We have re∣ceiv'd your Answer and Resolution, that you intend to cleanse your Ships at 
Quemuy,
 which We are very well pleas'd with. But the Pirate out of fear of your Forces is fled, and hath settled on the Isle 
Tongsan,
 which place belongs to the Province of 
Fokien;
 therefore if he be not now prosecuted, he will soon return to the deserted Islands and sculking places which he hath for∣saken. You write after you have cleans'd your Ships, that you will Sail to the 
Cape
 of 
Wetaw,
 or to 
Soanchefoe,
 to speak with Us; which if the Enemy should hear of, he would soon come and find the Island, which is now Guar∣ded by you, in its full state as he had left it; because you desir'd that the Forts there should not be pull'd down, nor the Houses in the City be burnt; if therefore the Enemy should find your People gone and his places no way ruin'd, he might perchance soon be Master of all again; wherefore We keep Our Forces in Arms near the Enemies Borders, lest that after your departure he should return.


The twentieth of Our tenth Moon, one of Our Commanders inform'd us, that in the last Month he took near 
Tongsan,
 in the Haven of 
Yuntzaw,
 an hundred and sixty Jonks and Vessels; and also that he took and kill'd five thousand Men, of which two hundred are yet kept Prisoners, whereof one


is an eminent 
Mandarin
 Therefore since the Pyrate is so near, and it is not to be doubted but that he will settle himself again on the foremention'd Isle, We desire you to take this trouble upon you, and do so much Service more for this Empire, as to Sail with Our Jonks to 
Tongsoa,
 that there the Foe may also be dislodg'd. To which purpose, 
Lipovi
 and I are together at 
Cinwe,
 to give Order, that all Our Jonks, as well great as small, may be in readi∣ness; and being furnish'd with Men and Provisions, may Sail with your Ships to 
Tongsoa.
 We very well know, that your People understand better how to fight at Sea than Ours; therefore I and 
Lipovi
 wish, that you be in∣clin'd to go thither, that We may have it from your own Mouth; where∣upon We will rely, and desire that We may know your answer by these two 
Mandarins;
 but if it be possible, take the trouble upon you, and come to Us in 
Cinwe,
 that We may consult about this and other Affairs.




The Interpreter and Secretary brought also a Copy of the Letter sent by 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 about their business to the Emperor in 
Peking,
 which being Translated was to this effect.




THe 
Holland
 Ships having set Sail with Our Jonks from 
Soanchefoe,
 and Anchor'd again at 
Wetauw,
 on the twelfth of the tenth Moon, the eighteenth of the same, eight Ships Sail'd to 
Quemuy,
 and seven 
Holland
 Ships with Our Jonks the day after pass'd thorow, and Anchor'd by Our Jonks on the West side of 
Quemuy.


The nineteenth, Our People drove away some Jonks from 
Quemuy,
 but on the twentieth, We saw the Pyrates Jonks, being almost two hundred, com∣ing from 
Goutsoe,
 towards Us and the 
Hollanders,
 who inclos'd the Enemy, and made such a rout amongst them, that they were forc'd to flie, having left many Men, as We understood of some that came over to Us from 
Eymuy.


The one and twentieth day of the same Moon, the 
Holland
 Admiral went with a couragious Heart with his fifteen Ships to the Enemy at 
Taota,
 and stoutly Ingag'd him on the Isle 
Eymuy;
 from whence the Pyrate, to his great shame and disgrace, was also forc'd to flie to 
Goutsoe,
 whither the 
Hollanders
 and Our Jonks also Sailing on the twenty fourth, they found the Enemy fled thence Southwardly to 
Lamoa
 and 
Tangsoa.


The twenty sixth, the 
Holland
 Ships Sail'd with Ours to 
Quemuy,
 and there caus'd by Our People, all the Towns and Forts to be burnt and pull'd down. The 
Hollands
 Admiral hath behav'd himself very Valiantly against the Ene∣my; they are all a People of great Resolution and Valor, to fight with their Ships at Sea, and Musquets on the Shore; they have had a great deal of labor and trouble, for they carry many great Guns in their Ships, which require much trouble to Charge and Discharge them.




The Admiral writ in answer to their Excellencies, That he intended to send a Jonk to 
Batavia,
 with advice to the Lord General and 
Indian
 Council, of their Adventures concerning the Routing of their Enemy, and his deserting of their chief Cities, 
Eymuy, Quemuy, Goutsoe,
 and others; which done, and that he had cleans'd his Ships, he would in Person come to their 
 Highnesses, that then they might consult one with another concerning all their Affairs.


Moreover, the Admiral told the two foremention'd Messengers, how he was displeas'd, that their People had taken all the Booty on 
Quemuy,
 and given


his Men not so much as an Ox, which was contrary to 
Lipovi
's promises, not onely in Person, but in his Letters also; alledging, that it no ways suited with their Natures to be serv'd so; which he desir'd them to tell 
Singlamong
 and 
Li∣povi:
 Who reply'd, 
The Messengers had to their sorrow already understood it out of the Admirals Letter, and would not forget to make satisfaction for it.


The same day the 
Vlaerding
 and 
Buiksloot
 came to an Anchor near the Island 
Quemuy,
 before 
Goutsoe;
 for the three other, 
viz.
 the 
Cogge, Flushing,
 and 
Naerden
 could not get out. Here the Rere-Admiral 
Verwei
 told the Admiral, 
That since his depar∣ture from thence, according to his Order, he had gotten twenty Iron Guns out of the Forts on the Isle
 Goutsoe, 
besides an hundred ninety eight Bullets, which were distributed amongst the
 Flushing, Buiksloot 
and
 Nieuwendam.


The third in the Morning, they saw one great new Jonk, one 
Wankan,
 and two 
Coyaes
 coming about the South-West Point of the Isle, to which most of the Ships sent their Boats and Sloops, to take them, which accordingly was perform'd by the Rere-Admiral, who took the Jonk, and also the three other Vessels, who yielded without the least resistance, all of them Loaden with Bal∣last, Rice, and 
 
Padije.


The Admiral and Rere-Admiral Rowing aboard the Jonk, found in her eight Iron Guns: The 
Chineses
 aboard inform'd them, that in the seventh Moon of the Year, they were sent by the young 
Coxin
 from the Isle 
Quemuy
 to 
Pakka, Kitat,
 and other adjacent Isles, and places lying to the Northward of 
Hoksieu,
 there to Load as much Rice as they could get, and then return with all speed, because those places were in great want. They also related, That in the eighth Moon, they had found about the North several Bills of 
Singlamongs
 and 
Lipovi
's sticking up, whereby all the 
Chineses
 that kept out of the Empire were invited to come in to the 
Tartars.
 Thus the 
Chineses
 in the great Jonk inform'd the 
Hollanders,
 perhaps on advice of some 
Tartars
 that had been with them be∣fore; For those of the other three Vessels declar'd, that they thought all things had still been there in their former state and condition, and expected to have found their Families at 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy;
 neither did they know any other, but that their Fleet had remain'd ready to have Ingag'd the 
Tartars:
 But com∣ing about the South-West Point of 
Quemuy,
 and spying the 
Hollanders
 Ships, they would fain have fled, but were necessitated by reason of the calm, and seeing they could not get clear from them, to surrender themselves without any re∣sistance; therefore they desir'd that their Lives might be spar'd, which they ob∣tain'd. They also said, That they expected twenty Sail to follow them, which on the second instant they had left to the Northward of the Isle 
Ongkoe;
 from whence they came with six Vessels, of which, four were now in the 
Ne∣therlanders
 Possession, and two Sail'd about the South, as they judg'd, to the Isles of 
Tangsoa
 and 
Lamao,
 where they dwelt: Being ask'd if they had not seen any of the Enemies Jonks coming from 
Iapan,
 at Sea, they reply'd, 
No, but that in this Moneth some were daily expected from thence.


Soon after, 
Tonganpeks
 Admiral came aboard the 
Dutch
 Admiral, to ask what Vessels they were which he had taken, and from whence they came, and also if they had resisted the 
Netherlanders;
 of which they inform'd him as beforemention'd: Then he inquir'd when the Admiral intended to go to 
Sin∣glamong
 and 
Lipovi;
 and if he would Sail with them to 
Tangsoa?
 To the first Question the Admiral reply'd, That he knew not the certain day: And to the second, That he did not know what his Ships should do there, because their Highnesses had advis'd him, that one of the 
Tartars
 Commanders had some


days since taken from the Enemy an hundred and sixty Vessels, and kill'd and taken Prisoners near five thousand Men. This, reply'd he, was not of the young 
Coxin
's power, but of another Pyrate, who kept about the Isles 
Tongsoa
 and 
Lamao,
 and was formerly neither subject to the 
Tartar
 nor 
Coxin,
 but set up for himself, and maintain'd Pyracy.


Then the Secretary related, That young 
Coxin
 had sent Agents to this Py∣rate, to crave his assistance against the 
Tartars;
 and also that he was gone with all his Forces to 
Tangsoa
 and 
Lamao,
 there to joyn with him, because he did not know (being driven from the Isles 
Eymuy, Quemuy, Goutsoe,
 and others there∣abouts) what he should do.


The same day they sent the conquer'd Jonk, by them call'd, 
The Good Tidings,
 to 
Batavia,
 with eight 
Chinese
 Prisoners, Letters, and Papers.


This day also the three remaining Ships which staid at 
Goutsoe
 to help take in the Guns, came to the Fleet at 
Quemuy;
 so that the whole Fleet consisting in fifteen Men of War, were all in a Body together.


The fourth, a 
Tartar
 Vessel with two 
Mandarins
 came to the Admiral with a Letter from 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 in which they earnestly desir'd him, that he would repair to them at 
Cinwe.
 Whereto the Admiral reply'd, That so soon as his Ship was clear'd from the Rocks (for the day before it was driven within half a Musquet shot to the Rocky North-West Point of 
Quemuy
) and lay out of danger amongst the other Ships, he would wait upon them.


Mean while came 
Maurice Iansz,
 whom the 
Netherlanders
 us'd as their Inter∣preter in the 
Chinese
 Tongue, and told the Admiral, That he had heard by some 
Tartar Chineses
 which came aboard with the 
Mandarins,
 that young 
Coxin
 had sent Agents to 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 with proffers, that they would submit themselves to the 
Tartars
 Jurisdiction, by cutting off their Hair, because he was not able to maintain War against them any longer; but especially, by reason of those great losses which he had lately sustain'd.


The Admiral to learn the Truth of it, Order'd the Interpreter 
Melman
 to in∣quire of the two 
Mandarins,
 who affirm'd it, with alledging, That the Enemy had lately so many wounded and slain Men by the 
Netherlanders
 Guns, that none of his Soldiers would fight any longer; nay, that all his Forces in 
Tayo∣wan
 came flocking to the 
Tartars,
 and would freely surrender both 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa
 to the 
Hollanders:
 Therefore the Vice-Roy and 
Lipovi
 desir'd to speak with him; also that 
Tonganpek
 was to go to 
Tayowan
 with some Jonks to fetch all that would submit themselves to their Emperor, and from thence bring them to the Main Land.


The next Morning, about five a Clock three Jonks came to the Fleet, and in them one 
Mandarin,
 who came aboard the Admiral, with request from their Highnesses, that seeing it was fair Weather, he would be pleas'd in those Jonks to come to them, or at least to appoint a day, because they might not wait in vain at 
Cinwe,
 from whence they were minded to go with the first con∣veniency.


The Admiral having consulted with his Council, resolv'd to go thither the next Morning; whereupon the 
Mandarins
 went in one Jonk to carry the News to their Excellencies, leaving two behind amongst the Fleet to convey the Ad∣miral to 
Cinwe.


The sixth, the Admiral went according to his promise attended with Cap∣tain 
Poleman,
 Secretary 
Ysbrantsz,
 and some other Retinue in the two 
Tartar
 Jonks sent for that purpose to the Fleet.


In the Evening, the Vice-Roys Interpreter came to them, and in his Masters Name entring the Jonks, bad them welcome, with promises, that he would take care the next Morning to provide that they should be well Mounted for 
Cinwe.


The seventh, the Admiral Landed between the 
Straights
 of 
Eymuy,
 and the main Coast of 
China,
 where he was presented with a Copy of a Letter, by a 
Batavian Chinese,
 call'd 
Seko,
 from 
Nobel
 and 
Hogenhoek
 in 
Hoksieu,
 dated the twenty eighth of 
November,
 (of which the true Letter and Post was sent by the 
Conbon
) in which they inform'd the Admiral, That they could not go from 
Soanchieu
 before the twentieth of the same Month, and that seven days after they came into 
Hoksieu,
 where they were not permitted to Vend their Com∣modities according to the 
Conbon
 or Governors promise, till he had further Order from 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 that when they told him that it was granted by the Vice-Roy and General, he reply'd, That he had no such advice.


The Letters and Presents of the Admirals he had receiv'd, and sent a Mes∣senger to their Highnesses, to know their intentions concerning the Trade; further requesting, That they would be pleas'd to send him the Originals, writ∣ten by 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi
 concerning the same. This Copy being deliver'd to the Admiral in his way, riding to the Vice-Roy, he would not read it till he had been receiv'd in the Vice-Roy's Tent; after which, he perus'd it in the Vice-Roy's presence, and three of his Council, and explaining it to them, ask'd them, Why against their written Obligation they kept their Merchandize un∣sold? But the Vice-Roy excusing himself, said, That he had sent Letters of License to the 
Conbon;
 but 
Lipovi
 had Countermanded it, and first desir'd an Inventory of all the Merchandize which they had brought with them, that he might send it to 
Peking;
 but since that he and 
Lipovi
 joyntly had given free leave to sell those, and bring in other Goods; whereupon the Admiral de∣sir'd, That he might have such a Letter of Command then given him, that he might send it with one of his own to 
Nobel
 and 
Hogenhoek
 in 
Hoksieu,
 which the Vice-Roy immediately granted.


This Discourse being ended, 
Singlamong
 propos'd to the Admiral, and de∣sir'd that he would send his Ships with their Jonks against the Enemy, who on the Isles 
Tongsoa
 and 
Lamoa
 did now fortifie himself; whereupon the Admi∣ral reply'd, That he had heard and understood, that the Enemy had sent Agents to his Highness, and proffer'd to submit themselves to the 
Tartars,
 and therefore (said he) how shall we understand your Proposal? The Vice-Roy pausing a little answer'd, 'Tis true, but there is no assurance in these Villains, neither do I believe them; therefore he judg'd it convenient, still to prosecute the War against them. The Admiral reply'd, That he intended to Sail to 
Tay∣owan
 and 
Formosa,
 and therefore intreated him to send his Forces and Jonks first along with him thither, and then they would go joyntly, and drive the Enemy from 
Tongsoa
 and 
Lamoa;
 also that he had receiv'd Orders from his Ma∣sters in 
Batavia,
 that when he had beaten the Enemy from 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 he should not go to 
Tongsoa
 or 
Lamoa,
 but to 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan:
 Besides, the Admiral added, that he had understood that the 
Coxingan
's were not in 
Tongsoa,
 but having Pillag'd the Rusticks, and taken what they could find, were gone to 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa;
 and though the Vice-Roy perswaded the Admiral that he was assur'd to the contrary, yet he stood firm to his Proposal, that he might go from thence to 
Tayowan;
 whereupon, the Vice-Roy obser∣ving the Admiral to be in earnest, said, That the present routing of the Ene∣my


could not be taken for a Conquest, for they still had their Forces together, and therefore without doubt, as soon as the 
Netherland
 Ships were gone, they would return to their Receptacles again, and invest the Coasts as formerly. Whereupon the Admiral reply'd, That it was impossible to kill them all, be∣cause where e're they came, they fled from them, and got away by the nim∣bleness of their Jonks; and if the 
Netherlanders
 should go with the Vice-Roy's Jonks to 
Tangsoa
 and 
Lamoa,
 and drive the Enemies thence; yet the Coast would not so be clear'd of them, but that there would still be some in one place or other: To which the Vice-Roy said, that if the Enemy were but driven thence, he would be satisfi'd, because then he would be hunted out of the Territory of 
Fokien,
 where he was Chief; and then (proceeded he) my Jonks shall go with yours to 
Tayowan;
 therefore he desir'd the Admiral to consult with his Vice and Rere-Admiral about it; which he promis'd to do, and so ended that Consultation.


Moreover, 
Singlamong
 excus'd himself concerning the forty promis'd Oxen; because he had no Vessels at 
Eymuy
 to bring them aboard the Admirals Ships; therefore he desir'd him to accept them now, and with them five hundred 
Pi∣cols
 of Rice, which he had given Order to be carry'd before. The Admiral thanking him, said, That he needed not the Rice so much as the Cattel, how∣ever, he would accept his kindness; but when they were brought aboard, half of them were dead, which they were forc'd to throw into the Sea, whereof the Vice-Roy having notice, promis'd, that for every dead Beast, they should have one alive.


Soon after, the Admiral having been well entertain'd, took his leave, and went to the Tents set up on purpose for them, near the Sea-side on a high Hill. No sooner was the Admiral come thither, but he receiv'd the promis'd Letter of Command to the 
Conbon,
 for selling the Merchandizes in 
Hoksieu,
 that he might send it himself with his Letter to 
Nobel,
 who was only to shew it to the 
Conbon,
 and then make Sale of his Goods, which contain'd to this effect.




Singlamong
 sends this open Letter of Command to the 
Holland
 Admiral of the Sea, to be sent by him to their Agent in 
Hoksieu.


SInce the 
Hollanders
 with their Ships and Forces have done so good Service to Our Realm, in the routing their and Our Enemies, and the wish'd for Victory remains on Our sides, therefore I and 
Lipovi
 have resolv'd to Grant them to Sell all those Merchandizes, which they have brought with them in 
Hoksieu,
 for the maintaining of their People, as We have by Letters already inform'd the Emperor in 
Peking:
 Therefore We Command the 
Conbon
 in 
Hok∣sieu,
 that he assist them in the same, and provide them a Person who may be present to look that they may not be cheated by Our Merchants.


This Letter We have sent open, that the 
Holland
 Agent, upon the receipt of these Our Orders, may immediately begin to dispose of his Goods that are ashore in 
Hoksieu;
 as also those that are yet in their Ships lying before the Magazine. The 
Mandarin,
 who by the 
Conbon
 is order'd to be at the selling of the Commo∣dities, shall take an exact account of what Goods and Moneys the 
Hollanders
 receive in return for their Merchandize, that they may not be deceiv'd or de∣frauded by any; and he shall also inform Us of what shall be done herein.


Under 
Singlamong
's Seal was written: 
In the second Year of the Emperor 
Conchi
's Reign, the eleventh Moon, and eleventh day.




In the Evening the Admiral sent the forty Oxen which had been given him by the Vice-Roy, to be distributed amongst the Ships.


Soon after the Vice-Roy sent to tell the Admiral, That if he was desirous to see the Countrey, he would send Horses to his Tent; for which Proffer he return'd thanks, and sent word, That he would expect them. Mean while it began to grow wet Weather; but the Rain again ceasing, the Admiral and his Company walk'd afoot to the Camp, where the 
Tartars
 had intrench'd them∣selves very handsomly within several Batteries: Here getting on Horse-back, they were conducted to the Vice-Roys Tent, who desir'd the Admiral to come in, where having sate a while, he inquir'd if he had sent Letters to his Vice-Admiral, and also his Letter of Command to 
Nobel
 and 
Hogenhoek
 in 
Hoksieu;
 to which he answer'd, 
Yes.


Then the Vice-Roy told him, That he hop'd the Vice-Admiral would com∣ply with his Request, to sail to 
Tongsoa:
 The Admiral answer'd, He suppos'd there was no doubt; and withal added, That 
Nobel
 and 
Pedel
 desir'd they might go to 
Batavia,
 and therefore he had order'd 
Hogenhoek,
 who had liv'd many Years in 
Iapan,
 and the Factor 
Bartel
 (both Men of whom the 
Netherlanders
 and his Highness might expect good Service) to stay in 
Hoksieu:
 To which 
Singla∣mong
 answer'd, That it was all one to him who staid, so they were People of good conversation, and he believ'd the Lord General would not send any other into that Empire. After this, they discours'd about the cleansing of the 
Ne∣therland
 Ships, and the Island 
Colongsoe,
 which the Admiral desir'd he might see, and that if it lay convenient for the 
Netherlanders,
 they might take it into pos∣session, and Garrison it with Soldiers, the situation being near the Main Land, and before the Mouth of the River 
Chincheu,
 which whatever the 
Netherlanders
 wanted, they might have from thence, and likewise drive their Trade all under one. Whereupon the Vice-Roy replied, That they had always made choice of 
Goutsoe;
 What then would they do with 
Colongsoe?
 Whereupon the Admiral replied, That if he would permit them to drive their Trade, that then they would leave six Ships there, take the Island into Possession, and Garrison the Forts with their Soldiers: Whereto the Vice-Roy suddenly said, That that was not his meaning; for he durst not give away any Lands that belong'd to the Emperor, but that they must expect his Imperial Majesties Order for that, as well as the driving of their Trade in 
Hoksieu:
 Yet at last, after many Ar∣guments, he granted the 
Hollanders
 on the Emperors allowance to take and Garrison the Isle of 
Goutsoe,
 conditionally, That if the Emperor should not approve of it, then to desert it again. But concerning their Traffick, Whe∣ther it would be granted them for ever or not, they must expect an Answer in five Weeks time.


Thus the Business rested; and the 
Netherlanders,
 after having been plentifully entertain'd, taking their leave, in the Evening rode to their Tents.


Towards Night the Admiral receiv'd a Letter from the Vice-Admiral 
Hui∣bert de Lairesse,
 and his Council, in answer to one sent to him the day before, wherein he advis'd him, That their Opinions agreed with his, not to go with the Fleet to 
Tongsoa
 and 
Samoa;
 yet they referr'd themselves wholly to what the Admiral pleas'd to do.


The ninth the Vice-Roys Interpreter went to the Admiral, to know whe∣ther he had receiv'd an Answer from the Vice-Admiral; whereupon the Admi∣ral inform'd him, That he could not perswade his People to it, because it was impossible for them with their Ships to go from 
Tongsoa
 to 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,



whither they had strict Order first to Sail; according to which, after six days, he resolv'd to set Sail thither with his Ships that lay at 
Quemuy,
 desiring that his Highness would be pleas'd to send his Jonks with him; as after the subduing of the Isles of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 he had promis'd; with which Answer the Interpreter return'd. But soon after he was sent back with the Vice-Roys Ex∣cuses, That he could not send his Jonks with him to 
Tayowan,
 because they wanted Sails and Rigging for such a Voyage; but if they would please to stay a little longer, they would endeavor to fit themselves out: And as an Induce∣ment to it, he granted them the Isle of 
Goutsoe,
 which they might freely take, and Garrison as they thought fit. But the Admiral much dissatisfied, answer'd, That he delighted not in such Procrastinations, nor would any longer be de∣lay'd; for he plainly saw, and must be bold to say, That the Vice-Roy mind∣ed not either what he said, or what he writ; and therefore they would no longer rely upon him: But as for 
Goutsoe,
 it was not then convenient for them to take the possession thereof, because they should thereby weaken their Forces design'd for the taking in of 
Tayowan,
 but if they would preserve the Forts and Houses from ruine till their return, then they would Garrison it.


Many other like Expressions he had to the Interpreter, concerning his not being satisfied with the Vice-Roys waverings and unconstancy; who relating it all to the Vice-Roy, he seem'd very much netled, to hear from the Admirals Mouth such his Character, and sent him back suddenly with several Comple∣mental Excuses: But the 
Hollanders
 continuing firm to their Resolution, after many Messages toss'd too and fro, at last it was brought so far, that he not on∣ly excus'd them from going to 
Tangsoa
 and 
Lamoa,
 but also consented, that with all the Fleet they might go to 
Formosa;
 promising likewise, that he would send two Jonks, Mann'd with two hundred Soldiers, to 
Formosa,
 under the Command of two 
Mandarins,
 with Letters to demand that Countrey for the 
Hollanders:
 But if the Enemies would not surrender to the 
Hollanders,
 nor sub∣mit to the 
Tartars,
 that then one of their Ships should come back with the two Jonks and 
Mandarins
 to inform him of it, that he might send all his Navy and Forces to their assistance, which, according to the Admirals Request, they should have confirm'd under his Sign Manual before they set Sail.


In the Evening Admiral 
Bort
 advis'd the Vice-Admiral 
Lairesse,
 in a Letter, of all that had pass'd ashore.


The tenth, he having resolv'd to go aboard the next Morning, desir'd his Goods might be put into a Jonk, and that he might be furnish'd with 
Coelyes
 for that purpose.


These 
Coelyes,
 by others call'd 
Poelyes,
 are a mean sort of Laboring People, that for small Wages will serve any Person whatsoever, in the Carriage of Bur∣dens and Commodities from Place to Place, as our Porters or Carriers: They wear Shoes of Straw or Leather, which they tie about their Ancles with a String made fast at their Toes; and are so swift of Foot, that they can match a Horse in his full speed.


In the Afternoon Captain 
Poleman
 was sent to 
Singlamong,
 to thank him for the Kindnesses shewn to them while they had been on Shore, and also to ac∣quaint him, that they would wait five or six days longer for the two Jonks and 
Mandarins,
 with two hundred Soldiers, and also the Letter to the Gover∣nors of 
Tayowan:
 Lastly, to present his Highness, in the Admirals name, a Pair of Pistols and Holsters, and a Sword with a guilded Hilt.


At his Return 
Poleman
 related what he had receiv'd in answer, That his


Highness was sorry he could give no better Entertainment; but he hoped they would excuse it, as being in a Camp, and not a City; That he would send the two Jonks and 
Mandarins,
 with the Soldiers, and also the Letter to the Gover∣nor of 
Tayowan,
 at the appointed day: That he accepted the Presents, because they consisted in Arms, pretending to be asham'd, because the 
Ong
 or King of 
Batavia
 had twice sent to him, and he had not made one Return: But he would not forget to present him by the 
Finch
 some of the Products of his own Coun∣trey, with a Letter, and humble Thanks for his good Inclination towards him.


The eleventh the Admiral and all his Retinue took their leaves, and soon after went to the Fleet, and 
Singlamong
 with his Army to 
Soanchieuw.


The twelfth in the Afternoon the Admiral came near the low Point of 
Que∣muy,
 aboard of the 
Zierikzee
 Frigat.


The thirteenth, several Jonks went from thence to 
Eymuy
 and 
Soanchieuw,
 whither 
Tonganpek
 was gone four days before, in which time he had written a Letter to the Admiral, to this effect.




I Thank you for the Honor and Kindness which I have receiv'd from you since We joyn'd Our Fleets. Now the Enemy is fled, there is great hopes that you may easily regain your Countreys of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa.
 The Py∣rate is retir'd to 
Tangsoa,
 whither We must pursue him; to which purpose, I will fit out eighty great and small Jonks, under the Command of 
Choentsay
 and 
Goemtsin,
 which shall Sail to 
Eymuy,
 and there joyn with 
Sitetok
's Fleet, I would have gone my self in Person, but that I am oblig'd to go to 
Soan∣chefoe,
 to receive an Honor sent from the Court at 
Peking
 to be conferr'd up∣on Me, which I thought good by these to acquaint your Honor with.




In the Evening two 
Mandarins
 brought a Letter to the Admiral from the Ge∣neral 
Lipovi
 at 
Soanchieuw,
 and also five hundred 
Picols
 of Rice, which he had for∣merly promis'd to the Seamen and Soldiers.


The fourteenth in the Morning the Admiral went ashore in the Island 
Que∣muy,
 where he view'd some ruin'd Villages, and especially the Wall'd City 
Savja-Houpon,
 being built in a pleasant Place, and full of fair Houses, but burnt by the 
Tartars,
 before the 
Hollanders
 coming thither.


This Town, according to the Relation of the 
Netherland
 Prisoner 
Maurice Iansz,
 was first built by the foremention'd 
Savja,
 in the time when old 
Coxinga
 went from thence to besiege 
Tayowan,
 having before had his Residence in 
Ey∣muy,
 from whence he went to 
Quemuy.
 About six Months before 
Savja
 and his Brothers went thence, and Embarqu'd themselves to go over to the 
Tartars,
 be∣cause young 
Coxin
 continually oppress'd them by over-heavy Taxations.


Coxin
 having notice of this Flight of 
Savja,
 sent Messengers to him, with fair Promises not to molest him for the future, and to make him Chief Gover∣nor of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy;
 which Bait taking, he return'd, but was soon dis∣patch'd out of the way, and all his Goods seiz'd, which being told to his Bro∣thers, which were not yet come back (of which 
Tonganpek
 was one) they went over to the 
Tartars.


In the Afternoon the Admiral return'd aboard, whither in his way, going into the Boat, he found many dead Bodies, which had been cruelly Butcher'd by the 
Tartars.


The seventeenth two 
Mandarins
 came from 
Soanchieuw,
 to the Admiral, with the seal'd Letters from 
Singlamong,
 in which he advis'd the seventeen 
Chinese



Commanders on 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 to submit with their Soldiers and Coun∣trey-men. The Letter was this effect.




Lipovi's 
Letter sent to
 Tsiakoensin, Wetingwan, Toerlinpetensin, Posinso∣jau, Yogaukiloo, Yoewetsji-kay, Gautinong, Soanchyong, Nioetingli, Chuenkicin, Lioetsingoen, Kiwintsiwan, Suangi, Gautinghtoe, Yuensau∣gautingwan, Sinkintingjang, Ympincin, Lioetsinang, 
all Commanders in
 Tayowan.


THis is to let you understand, That the Heavens, Sun, Moon, and Stars, nay all the Elements, have hunted you from one Place to another, till at last you came with 
Coxin
 into 
Tayowan:
 Now I and 
Singlamong
 tell you by this Our Letter, That on the tenth Moon, the one and twentieth day, with Ours and the 
Hollanders
 Forces We have conquer'd the Isles of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 and all the other adjacent Places of your Generals, and drove them so long, till they are fled to 
Tongsoa,
 where 
Kimsia, Coxinga's
 Son, and all his Party, do now sculk, but cannot find Sustenance there for so many Peo∣ple: Who knows not that in short time he will die of Hunger? His Forces have already the last Month receiv'd a terrible blow; for one of Our Gene∣rals, call'd 
Wansumpin,
 slew above ten thousand Men, besides two hundred which he took Prisoners, amongst which are three 
Mandarins, Tsiausou, Syancin,
 and 
Rikkoe.
 We have also taken from them in the Haven 
Yuntzauw
 a hundred and fifty Jonks and Vessels. Yet since 
Singlamong
 and I know that you in∣tend and resolve to come to Us, and freely submit your selves to Our Govern∣ment and Realm, when a fair Opportunity is offer'd; therefore We have sent these Agents and Letters with the 
Holland
 Forces to 
Tayowan,
 to perswade you to submit your selves to the Emperor.


At the coming of the 
Netherland
 Ships to 
Tayowan,
 you and your Soldiers having corrected your long Hair, shall come over to Us with those Ships; but if you will not reform your exuberant Locks in 
Tayowan,
 We will de∣cline the so doing till you come on the main Land, under Our Government; but whether you pole your Heads, or not, the 
Hollanders
 shall transport you and yours in safety in their Ships; which if you distrust, upon notice given, I will send you of Ours, that shall Land you without doing you the least prejudice; and after assure your selves that you shall be preferr'd to the like Dignities and Imployments in Our Army, as you have in 
Tayowan,
 which We have already perform'd to others of your Party, as 
Tonganpek, Tuncinpek, Ian∣tetok,
 and many more that yielded.




The like Letter was sent to the same Commanders by 
Singlamong.
 Besides other Letters of several Advices and sleight Concerns, too long to be here in∣serted.


The twenty fifth the Council unanimously concluded, That since the Fleet was equipped and ready, to sail with the first fair Wind to 
Formosa
 and 
Tayo∣wan,
 and according to the States Order in 
Batavia,
 bring them under their Sub∣jection.


To this purpose the two Jonks, call'd 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 which were amongst the Fleet, were fitted out: The biggest, being 
Quemuy,
 was Mann'd with thirty 
Hollanders,
 and fifteen 
Chinese
 Captives; and the smallest with twenty five 
Hollanders
 and twelve 
Chineses.
 Then the Admiral gave order,


First, That the Fleet should steer to the 
Piscadores,
 and there Anchor near the


South Point of the 
Fishers-Isle,
 or the South-East Point of 
Pehoe,
 where the Rendezvouz should be, that from thence they might all go together. If any of the Ships should chance to miss the 
Piscadores,
 they should lose no time, but sail straight up to 
Formosa,
 and there attend the coming of the rest of the Fleet, which all should endeavor to get to the North Foreland of 
Tayowan.
 If any of the Ships, or the whole Fleet could not reach that Point, or come before 
Tayowan;
 nay, if they were got thither, or any where else on the 
Formosan
 Coast, and be necessitated to seek for a convenienter Anchoring Place, it was ordered, That they should go behind the Cape of 
Tankoya,
 from whence in fair Weather they might proceed forward in their Voyage to 
Tayowan:
 And that the Almighty might prosper them in their Undertakings, a Fast and Pray∣er-day was order'd to be kept in all the Fleet the twenty eighth of that Month.


The twenty ninth the whole Fleet set sail, consisting in fifteen Ships, besides the two Jonks taken from 
Coxinga,
 and two others that belong'd to the 
Tartar,
 which they sent with their own Letters and Interpreter to 
Tayowan,
 and steer'd their Course South-West, between the Isles of 
Lissoe
 and 
Quemuy,
 and Anchor'd about Sun-set a League from the South-East Point of 
Quemuy,
 where being hindred by foul Weather, they lay all the next day.


Mean while a Jonk from the Enemy came to the Admiral with an open Letter from the 
Netherland
 Prisoners in 
Formosa,
 sign'd by fifteen of them, and written on the sixth Instant, in the Village 
Loakhou,
 near the 
Straights of Tayo∣wan,
 which Letter inform'd them, That they not onely writ this from their own free inclination, but also by the express Order of 
Summimpessiou,
 who told them, That if the 
Netherlanders
 desir'd to treat with him, and drive their for∣mer Trade, he would give them 
Tamsuy, Kelay,
 or 
Lemao,
 alledging, That if they would not accept that proffer, their Prisoners should never expect to be re∣leas'd by him: Therefore they begg'd, That the Admiral would endeavor to work some means for their Liberty.


Hereupon the Admiral immediately call'd his Council, and read the Letter in the presence of the Messenger, who as he had peculiarly done to the Admi∣ral, so he proffer'd the Council the same Places. But he had no written Orders for so doing, neither was he impower'd to Treat; for he declar'd, That he was onely sent to deliver the Letter, and to see how they were inclin'd: And al∣though they endavor'd to draw from him some discovery of the Enemies Po∣sture, by variety of Questions, yet they could get nothing more, than that by the young 
Coxin
's permission he was sent from the Governors of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa,
 to 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 to make some Agreement with the 
Tartars.


Wherefore after serious Debate, the Admiral and his Council, with the five 
Tartar
 Agents approbation, answer'd the Bearer by Word of Mouth, That the 
Netherlanders
 would not be wanting on their parts, if they were inclin'd to agree with them, which they must manifest with the first opportunity, and to that purpose meet them in the 
Piscadores
 before 
Tayowan,
 whither they were now going. Likewise they gave him a Letter, in answer to that of the Pri∣soners; yet the Contents were such, that if the Enemy should translate it, he should not pick any advantage out of it.


In the afternoon the Fleet proceeded on to the 
Piscadores,
 but was forc'd by a strong North-East Wind to Anchor two Leagues Southerly from 
Quemuy.


In the Morning, being the first of 
February,
 the whole Fleet set sail again,
 and on the second reach'd the South Point of 
Fishers-Isle,
 South-East and by East five Leagues from them. At the tacking about the South Point, they heard three


Cannons fired in 
Church-Bay,
 which the 
Netherlanders
 suppos'd was a Sign to the Inhabitants, to give notice of the coming of the 
Dutch
 Fleet.


In the Evening the Fleet came between the 
Great Table
 and the South Point of 
Fishers-Isle,
 and the next Morning they all dropp'd Anchor in the Bay of 
Pe∣hoe,
 lying to the South-East.


In the Night the Weather grew very tempestuous, the Wind blowing hard out of the North-East.


The sixth the 
Sea-hound, Buiksloot,
 and 
Cinnamon-Tree
 Frigats, sail'd into the same Bay, close to the Shore.


In the Evening the Captains of the Ships were commanded early the next Morning to send their Boats full of Soldiers to those three Ships, but not to Land them till farther Order.


The seventh before day the Admiral and Captain 
Poleman
 went aboard the 
Buiksloot
 Frigat, from whence 
Poleman
 was sent ashore, with a Party of Men, to explore the Countrey, and bring off some Cattel if he could. Mean while the Admiral commanded the Captain of the 
Buiksloot
 to put a Cable out of his Stern, and bring all his Guns to one side, that, if occasion requir'd, they might fire at the Shore, which was immediately perform'd.


Whilst these things were doing, the 
Netherlanders
 were inform'd, That the 
Tartars
 had been ashore, and skirmishing with the Enemy, lost four Men; whereupon the Admiral sent word to Captain 
Poleman
 to be very careful, who immediately march'd with six Companies, each consisting of forty Men, up into the Countrey, and left one Company on the Shore. He had scarce march'd a League and half, when News was brought, That the Enemy had fallen up∣on him, and that in the Skirmish five or six of his Men were wounded, and an Ensign slain. Amongst the wounded was Captain 
Bitter,
 who with an Ar∣row was shot into the Foot, and also receiv'd two Cuts with a Sword through his Hat and Clothes, but not into his Flesh. The Admiral by this time being also landed, gave Order to all the Ships to send as many Sea-men ashore as they could spare, each arm'd with a Pike and Sword. Being now drawn up into Battalia, he sent two Companies more to Captain 
Poleman,
 and soon after a Company of Sea-men, who had not been gone above half an Hour, but a Ser∣jeant sent from 
Poleman
 brought word, that the Enemy was put to flight, and fourteen of them slain. The Admiral sent back the Serjeant with Orders to Captain 
Poleman
 to pursue the Enemy as far as was possible, and prosecute the already gotten Victory; yet not to go any farther than he would be able to come back in the Evening; for the Admiral would wait his coming upon the Shore: Whereupon the Serjeant, with another Company of Soldiers, and some Sea-men, march'd away.


In the Evening 
Poleman
 return'd, and inform'd, That he had pursu'd the Enemy as soon as he had put his Men in Order again, having seen much Blood along the way which he went, and found four more lying dead, but met no manner of Resistance, nor saw so much as one 
Chinese
 afterwards.


Poleman
 also brought a Horse and an Ass with him, but never an Ox nor Cow, notwithstanding he saw several hundreds, having no opportunity to fetch them.


The twenty eighth, about Day-break, six Companies of Soldiers and sixty Sea-men, under Captain 
Poleman
's Command, were sent to the 
Church-Bay;
 and two Companies of Soldiers, and twenty Sea-men, led by Captain 
Shim∣melpewy
 to the 
Hollands Fort,
 with Order, That if they could not meet with


any of the Enemy, to fetch some Cattel aboard of the Ships: In the Evening they return'd, having not met with any Opposition, but bringing with them about seventy Oxen, and some Sheep and Goats, which were distributed amongst the Ships and Soldiers.


The ninth in the Morning Captain 
Pooleman,
 with seven Companies of Sol∣diers, march'd towards the 
Church-Bay,
 and several Places thereabouts, to see for more Cattel, with order to stay there all Night, and return to the Fleet the next day. The same day also the Admiral, Vice-Admiral, and several others, march'd with two Companies into the Countrey; and in the place where the Battel was, they found the fourteen foremention'd dead Bodies, which were stripp'd of all they had by the 
Tartars.
 Soon after the Admiral return'd to the Place where they had incamped themselves.


In the Afternoon, being the tenth, the 
Eymuy
 Jonk and the three Boats came again from the 
Church-Bay
 to the Fleet; and according to the Relation of the Secretary, who the day before had march'd thither by Land, and was now re∣turn'd again with the Jonk, Captain 
Pooleman
 had given one whom he had ta∣ken Prisoner his Liberty, on promise that he would furnish them with Cattel, and bring the Rusticks to them; which he endeavor'd, though to little pur∣pose; for 
Pooleman
 got onely two Cows, a Calf, and a few Poultrey: But 
Peter Coker,
 who had been ashore with his three Boats full of Men before Cap∣tain 
Pooleman
 came thither, had found fifteen Iron Guns, twelve of which, that carried from three to eight pound Bullets, did formerly belong to the 
Holland∣ers;
 but the other three were made by the 
Chineses.


Not long after 
Peter Coker
 came to the Admiral with some Prisoners and 
Chinese
 Rusticks of the Countrey, as also twenty six Cows and Oxen.


Lastly, the Admiral sent the foremention'd Villagers and Prisoners home, with Command, as they priz'd his favor, to bring more Cattel; and then gave them a Sack of Rice, and a Cup of 
Arak,
 for which with their Heads bow'd to the Ground they cry'd, 
Camsia Compagnia,
 that is, 
We thank the Company.


In the Evening the Admiral went aboard, but came ashore again the next Morning.


In the Afternoon Captain 
Pooleman
 with his Soldiers having been a foraging, brought some 
Chinese
 Peasants, and twenty Cows, to the Admiral, who dismis∣sed the Men, upon promise of bringing in daily fresh Provisions.


The twelfth towards the Evening came about twenty five Countrey-men to the 
Netherlanders
 Camp, with Goats and Poultrey, for which the Admiral gave them two Bags of Rice, restor'd them the Prisoners, and granted them a free Pass, which was to this effect.




SInce the People of this Countrey have submitted themselves, and as an earnest of Subjection, presented Us some Cattel, Sheep, and such as the Countrey affords; therefore We have taken them into Our Protection; and We charge and command all Persons, and especially the 
Netherlanders,
 not to do them the least harm, when they of their own free Wills come with Pro∣visions, or anything else, aboard of Our Ships.


Dated on the great Island 
Pehoe.


Balthasar Bort.




The thirteenth, three Hours before day, the Fleet set Sail, and at four a Clock in the Afternoon dropp'd Anchor three quarters of a League North-East from the Castle 
Zelandia,
 with their fifteen Ships, besides the Jonk 
Eymuy,
 and the two 
Tartar
 Jonks.


And now in regard the 
Netherlanders
 receiv'd no Tydings from the Shore, much less Proffers as they expected of surrendring up the Countrey: there∣fore the Admiral on the fifteenth proposed to his Council what it was best to do in carrying on their design of recovering it; whether it were best first to Parly, or begin with the Sword. Hereupon they concluded, that they had ac∣cepted of the 
Tartars
 Proposition about sending their Ambassadors with Letters from 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi
 to the Governors of 
Tayowan,
 according to a Result taken the eighteenth of 
December;
 in which the 
Chinese
 Commanders in 
For∣mosa
 and 
Tayowan
 were desir'd with their Soldiers to come to the 
Tartars
 and deliver up the Countrey to the 
Netherlanders,
 as we have before related: To which purpose the Agents were also among the Council; there to desire their Order to let them go with their Jonks, and two of the 
Netherland
 Ships to 
Tan∣koya,
 and there to deliver their peculiar Letters, and advise them to come over to the 
Tartars,
 alledging, That they could never do it in a better time: where∣upon, after serious consideration, the Council granted their Request, and as Convoys, sent two Frigats along with them.


Soon after the two 
Tartar
 Jonks, conducted by the two Frigats, took their Voyage to 
Tankoya.


The next Morning, about two hours before Day, the Admiral set Sail with six Frigats more to the 
Cape
 of 
Tankoya,
 and two hours after Noon Rid by the Frigats that set Sail before, and the two 
Tartar
 Jonks lying Westerly about a League from the Point.


The 
Tartar
 Agents being Landed with their Letters, they immediately met with a great company of People; who soon after ran all up into the Countrey, so that they saw not one Man afterwards.


Towards the Evening the Rere-Admiral 
Verwei
 came aboard the Admiral, with news, That one of the 
Tartar
 Agents was return'd, who told him that they had deliver'd all the Letters, to which they expected a sudden Answer, and doubted not but they should attain their Desire, four hundred Soldiers be∣ing already prepar'd to come over to them; of which one hundred lay at the Mountain 
Tankoya,
 and three hundred at the River of 
Tamsuy,
 where the Ene∣my fear'd that the 
Netherlanders
 would Land.


In the Morning, being the nineteenth, the Jonk 
Eymuy
 came from 
Tayowan
 to the Admiral at 
Cape Tankoya,
 with Letters from the Vice-Admiral 
Huibert de Lairesse,
 and another from the Governors of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa,
 to the 
Netherlanders.


The Rere-Admiral, presently after the Admirals departure from him, Sail'd with all the small Frigats within Shot of the Castle 
Zelandia:
 which his ap∣pearance wrought such effect, that those on the Shore sent the foremention'd Letter to him; so that he did not think it convenient to make any farther pro∣gress with their Boats before they heard further from the Admiral. The Let∣ter was to this effect:




The Governors of 
Formosa, Kovia, Anghia, and Oenia,
 have receiv'd the Letter from the 
Hollanders,
 and return this Answer.


FOrmosa
 belongs to us of old. The young 
Coxins
 Father permitted the 
Hol∣landers
 to live and drive a Trade with them: after which the 
Hollanders
 made themselves Masters of the Countrey, and opprest the Inhabitants with Taxes, who complain'd of it to 
Coxin:
 Whereupon he came with an Army


and Conquering 
Tayowan
 took it into his possession, and after the 
Hollanders
 went from thence elected us to be Governors of it: and we have, according to the Articles of War, maintain'd your Prisoners, and furnish'd those that went to 
Batavia
 with all Necessaries. 
Coxin
 also sent a 
Mandarin
 with a 
Hol∣land
 Ship to 
Quemuy,
 to fetch the Governor 
Valentine,
 and other Prisoners from thence: but the 
Hollanders
 did not endeavor to get thither, but carry'd the 
Mandarin
 with the rest to 
Batavia;
 so that the Prisoners remain'd in our custody, where they have wanted nothing but Liberty: but you kept the 
Mandarin,
 and carry'd him to the 
Tartars
 your Allies, who are a very fickle and false People, which the 
Hollanders
 have had trial of in 
Canton,
 where they first granted them to Trade, and afterwards defrauded and deceiv'd them. Now you have receiv'd Promises from them in 
Hoksieu,
 that you may settle on 
Haythom
 and 
Colongsoe,
 and there drive a Trade. The old 
Coxin
 knew very well what treacherous People the 
Tartars
 were, therefore he would never agree with them. They have often sent Ambassadors to Treat about Peace, under which pretence some years since they had like to have taken 
Eymuy;
 but it fell not out according to their expectation, for they were beaten from thence, and all the Prisoners we took, we chopp'd off their Hands and Feet and so sent them home, which we suppose you are not ignorant of; but on the contrary, 
Coxin
 knows the 
Hollanders
 are a People that keep their Word, therefore he hath us'd the Prisoners well: but now you are joyn'd with the 
Tartars,
 and have taken the Countreys of 
Eymuy, Quemuy,
 and 
Goutsoe
 from us; yet nevertheless the 
Tartars
 dare not take them in possession, but have one∣ly burnt down the Houses; nay, they have sent Agents since that to the young 
Coxin,
 to desire him with his People to come under their Protection, which he hath refus'd. The 
Hollanders
 have a considerable time Sail'd up and down the Coast, and have not yet obtain'd from the 
Tartars
 a Place to settle on, by which they may plainly perceive their treachery. Your Letter we have receiv'd, and thereby partly understand your Request, to deliver your Prisoners, which we think very fit: they are all in good health, and have a good allowance. We know that you 
Hollanders
 seek nothing but Trade, yet we are not ignorant that you will not trust us, and therefore neither credit our Sayings nor Writings: nevertheless you may believe that 
Sepoan,
 or 
Kimsia,
 would agree with you. If you are so inclin'd, and desire to settle in any Place, send us Ambassadors, Persons of Repute, whom we will not de∣tain, if you do not keep ours: if you are hereto inclin'd, do it suddenly, that we may inform 
Sepoan
 of it, and make a League with you, that we may no longer stand in fear one of another, but Trade friendly together; for the 
Tartar,
 assure your self, will at one time or other delude you. This our Writing you may credit, taking the Heavens to witness the truth thereof.


In the twelfth Moon, the one and twentieth Day.




The same Morning the Rere-Admiral 
Verwei
 came Aboard the Admiral with four 
Tartar
 Agents, and two Persons belonging to the Enemy; who being heard in the Councel, declar'd, That they were sent from 
Siautongsiong,
 Com∣mander in Chief of the 
Chinese
 Forces in the South part of 
Formosa
 to Treat with the 
Netherlanders,
 and make them divers friendly Proposals. Whereupon the Admiral demanded, How many Men the Collonel 
Siautongsiong
 had? they answer'd, Seven thousand; which so startled the Admiral, that he knew not what to resolve upon. At last he demanded, What they would desire of the



Netherlanders?
 they reply'd, That they had no Order, but onely that they came thither to hear what the 
Hollanders
 would proffer. Lastly, having seri∣ously debated the Business, they resolv'd to proffer the Collonel five thousand Tail of 
Iapan
 Silver so soon as he should come to them, with a 
Proviso,
 That if the 
Hollanders
 should want his Men, they should assist them against the Ene∣my, which they promis'd, but insisted, that the Sum was too little; so that they desir'd, if the 
Netherlanders
 were really inclin'd to agree, they should send some Person of Quality to the Collonel, to Treat with him himself, proffering to leave one of their number, to stay as a Hostage till the Person whom they should send did return.


In the afternoon the Secretary, with the Interpreter 
Maurice,
 the 
Tartar
 Agents, and one of the Messengers were sent to 
Siautongsiong
 with a Letter, in which he promised him the foremention'd Sum; and another to the 
Dutch
 Prisoners, intimating to them the hopes of their Liberty.


After the Secretaries departure, a 
Tartar
 Jonk was sent to 
Tayowan
 to 
Lairesse,
 with Orders to send the two 
Chineses
 with a Letter to the Governors there, proposing the release of their Prisoners, and offering a Treaty upon honorable terms.


The same day the Soldiers in the eight Ships under the Admirals Squadron, consisting in eight hundred Men, were divided into sixteen Companies and put ashore, and the day after the Tents which were pitch'd under the side of a Mountain, were quite finish'd.


The one and twentieth about Noon, Secretary 
Ysbrant
 came back with the Interpreter 
Maurice,
 sent on the nineteenth to 
Siautongsiong,
 and related, That he had deliver'd him the Admirals Letter, and discoursed with him; whereby he found that the Collonel was inclin'd to come with four thousand Armed Men to the 
Netherlanders,
 that so he might be carry'd to the Coast of 
China,
 provided the 
Hollanders
 would give him ten thousand Tail of 
Iapan
 Silver; of which they should pay five thousand so soon as he had given them Hostage, that he might distribute it amongst his Soldiers, and the other half (being for him and his Officers) should be paid him so soon as he came aboard their Ships, alledging, that those of 
Sakkam
 and 
Tayowan,
 being about nine thousand Armed Men, would immediately after his deserting them, endeavor to agree with them; that for a little Money they should surrender up the Castle and Forts, with all the Countrey thereabouts, and go to the Coast of 
China.
 And further, he desir'd to keep five hundred Acres of Land, and two hundred Horses, that were his own, which he would lend the 
Hollanders
 till they were Masters of the Countrey. Besides, at the Secretaries Request he had underta∣ken to deliver the 
Netherland
 Prisoners, and to that purpose advis'd him to send one or two Ships more from the 
Cape
 of 
Tankoya
 to 
Tayowan,
 that those of the Castle might not send out Forces, and prevent the Design.


Whilst they were driving this Bargain, the Jonk 
Eymuy
 came to the Admi∣ral at the Point of 
Tankoya,
 sent by the Vice-Admiral 
Lairesse
 from 
Tayowan,
 with News, That the Enemy, as he perceiv'd with his Perspective Glasses, wrought very hard upon three Forts, which he had now finish'd, leading them cross from the Sea-shore to the In-land Water; and also that the Enemy before with eight or nine great Jonks set Sail thence.


The two and twentieth, being 
Tuesday,
 the Interpreter 
Maurice
 went again to 
Siautongsiong
 with a 
Chinese
 Letter, in which he was promis'd five thousand Tail of 
Iapan
 Silver, so soon as he brought the 
Netherland
 Prisoners from 
Sak∣kam



to their Camp, and that then he should with all his Soldiers come to the 
Netherlanders,
 and go over with them to the Main of 
China.
 And the same day two Ships were, according to his Request sent from the Fleet at 
Tankoya
 to 
Tayowan.


The three and twentieth in the afternoon the Interpreter 
Maurice
 return'd, with tydings, That the delivering of the 
Netherland
 Prisoners could not be ef∣fected, because 
Siautongsiong,
 before he would undertake it, would first receive five thousand Tail of Silver. But the Admiral and his Council no way appro∣ving of it, sent them and the former Hostages to their Masters, notwithstand∣ing the 
Tartars
 endeavor'd to perswade the Admiral to pay the five thousand Tail, alledging, That the 
Chineses
 at their coming over must leave their Estates behind them, therefore they ought to be perswaded thereto by Money. But the Admiral answer'd, That if they should have sent him the Money, they could not have been assur'd of his coming to them by his leaving those two in∣considerable Hostages, and thereupon resolutely declared, That if 
Siautongsiong
 desir'd Money, he should first deliver the 
Netherland
 Prisoners, and come to them.


The four and twenteth in the Morning, the 
Zierickzee
 and 
Tertolen
 Frigats, sent two days before to 
Tayowan,
 came again to the Fleet at 
Tankoya,
 with Let∣ters from the Vice-Admiral 
Lairesse,
 and the 
Chinese
 Governors in 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 in answer to the Admirals, written to them on the nineteenth. Whilst 
Lairesse
 lay with part of the Fleet before 
Tayowan,
 they perceiv'd that those which they suppos'd to have been Battlements before the Castle of 
Zelandia,
 as he had advis'd in his first Letter, were onely Nets, hung up there to dry. The 
Chinese
 Letter was to this effect:




YOu 
Hollanders
 write to us to send two Men to Treat with you, which we are not inclin'd to do before you send two Persons to Treat with us first: neither do you understand our Language, which made you send two 
Chinese
 Rusticks with Letters. As to what concerns the Letter written to your Prisoners, we have made them translate it in our Presence, and thereby understand your kind Salutation to them all, and also your inclination to agree with us, and cut off the League with the 
Tartars;
 with Requests more∣over, that the Prisoners should be set at liberty: if your meaning be so, we shall be very glad; but the contrary hath appear'd to us by a Letter brought to us ashore by 
Assam
 and another Person, 
viz.
 That the 
Hollanders
 are yet united with the 
Tartars,
 as is manifested also by 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovy
's Let∣ters written to us; so that we know not what to think of this contradiction. We believe what ever you do is meerly to deceive us, and to draw away our People, but we will prevent it with our greatest care. Besides, you have, according to the information of your 
Holland
 Prisoners to us, writ to them, That you are cozen'd by the 
Tartars,
 because you could not get a Place in possession to drive your Trade on, and therefore forc'd to Cruise up and down the Seas with your Ships: If this be truth, we will agree with you. If you are resolv'd, and desirous to Treat with us, send 
Assam
 and two other Persons of Quality to us, whom we promise to entertain nobly, and after having Treated with them, let them go freely away; and when we are agreed, we will also send your Prisoners, and give notice to the young 
Coxin∣ga,
 otherwise call'd 
Sepoan,
 that we are agreed.




The Council of War in answer to this Letter, writ to the Governors


of 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan
 the twenty fourth of 
Ianuary
 from 
Tankoya,
 to this effect:




WE thought to have had a better Answer from you, than your Letter, which we re∣ceiv'd this instant, makes mention of; for thereby appears to us, that you will not send any body to us, neither of your own nor of our Prisoners. When we lay before
 Que∣muy, 
before our coming hither, a Letter came from
 Sepoan, 
wherein you specifi'd your inclination to agree with us: and do you now require Agents from us to Treat with you? We positively declare, that you shall first send one to us, and hear our Answer to your Prof∣fer, to give us
 Quelang, Tamsui, Pehoe, 
or
 Lamoa, 
and then we will Treat further, and perhaps make a good Agreement: which if you will not do, and send us no Answer here∣upon, we will in the space of two days put our Flag of Defiance, and use Hostility against you every where. Our gotten Victories before
 Eymuy 
and
 Quemuy, 
with the ruine of both Cities, as also of the Forts on
 Colongsoe 
and
 Goutsoe, 
witness our Power: therefore since we cannot do any thing to you by fair means, we will try what we can do by force of Arms; for we have that God, who is Creator of Heaven and Earth, on our sides: neither are we at such difference with the
 Tartars, 
as you suppose. We drive a Trade again in
 Hoksieu, 
and their whole Countrey is at our Service, and stands open for us: we may put into any of their Harbors with our Ships: nay, they promise to assist us with all their Ionks and Forces, if you are stubborn and will not agree with us: Therefore consider with your selves, and do not refuse our good Proffers whilst you may have them. Here inclos'd is a Letter to our Friends, your Prisoners, which pray deliver to them: we observe that they have not well understood our meaning, of which at present we have given them better information.




These Letters were carry'd to 
Lairesse
 by the 
Zierikzee
 Frigat, with Orders moreover to him, that the sending to redeem the Prisoners was come to effect; and also that the Collonel 
Sautongsiong
 had already inform'd those at 
Tayowan
 concerning their Treating with him, as they had perceiv'd by their Letters.


Upon the sending of these Letters ashore, 
Lairesse
 was order'd to stay two days for an Answer; but if then he receiv'd none, to fire a Cannon with a Bullet on the Shore, and set up a red Flag from all the Ships, and then come together to the Admiral, that they might consult together what was best to be done: But if they should, according to the 
Netherlanders
 Request, send some of their Men to Treat with them, and should desire that some of the 
Hollan∣ders
 should go ashore again, that 
Lairesse
 should send the Factor 
Philip Mey.


The twenty eighth the Ensign, 
Christopher Iust,
 came to tell the Admiral, that the Enemy was that Morning come over the In-land Water on that Tract of Land, where their Men lay Encamp'd with a considerable Army; and be∣ing both Horse and Foot carry'd about seventy Colours, which he himself had told, and discover'd accidentally, going with five Men more the last Night to shoot some Venison, towards the South near the River of 
Tamsuy.


The Admiral immediately upon this Intelligence went ashore, where he caus'd the convenientest Place, about a Cannon-shot from the Hill (where the 
Netherlanders
 pitched their Tents,) to be Entrench'd, and some great Guns to be carry'd thither, that therewith they might put a stop to the Enemy, if he should march forward; who about two Leagues from thence had Encamp'd himself, and shown many Bravado's with his Horse, but yet durst not set upon the 
Netherlanders,
 who kept themselves in good Order at the fore-mention'd Entrenchment, that they might not lose their advantage.


The next Morning, being the twenty sixth, the Enemy sent three Men with a Letter to the Admiral, who gave them Audience, and read it without


the Works, which were not then finish'd, in a Tent. The Letter was to this effect:




Tathonling Totoksiau
 sends this Letter to the 
Dutch
 Admiral, from an upright heart and good inclination, to which I call the Heavens to witness.


THe Letter written by the Admiral I have receiv'd, and understand your meaning. Our Agents also have told us what you said to them; by which I gather, th
t you Hollanders are a People of noble Minds, and endu'd with Wisdom and Understanding, there∣fore we desire to enter into a League with you. My Intentions I have before declar'd to your Secretary and Interpreter 
Maurice:
 I am now come hither with my Army for my pleasure. According to a Letter sent to me from 
Sepoan
 at 
Tayowan,
 I have order to make Peace with you: To which purpose two 
Mandarins
 are sent to 
Tayowan
 to make an Agreement, and surrender such Places as you desire; so that I hope we shall be Friends: To attain which I send you this Letter, with Request, that you will send Agents to go with me by Land to 
Tayowan,
 that there they may make an inviolable League between us.


The twelfth Moon, the nineteenth Day.
 Underneath was his Seal.




Whereupon the Interpreter 
Maurice
 was sent with the two 
Tartar
 Agents to the Enemies Camp, fully to know their Intentions, and also to tell them the 
Netherlanders
 Resolutions. The 
Tartars
 returning before, were in the Evening follow'd by the Interpreter, who was immediately sent back again with a Mes∣sage, that the 
Netherlanders
 granted his Request, 
viz.
 To send two Persons of theirs to him, so soon as the six Hostages which he had proffer'd should come into their Camp, who that very Night came thither with the Interpreters.


At the same time a Rumor was spread, and the 
Chinese
 General had also told it to the Interpreter 
Maurice,
 That the young 
Coxinga
 was gone to the Coast of 
China,
 to submit himself to the 
Tartars,
 and accordingly had commanded his Soldiers in 
Formosa
 to come to him, and surrender up the Countrey to the 
Ne∣therlanders:
 But this quickly appear'd nothing but a bare Report.


The twenty seventh in the Morning, according to a Result taken by the Admiral and his Council, the 
Hollanders
 Agents were sent to the Enemies Camp, 
viz.
 the Lieutenant 
Hendrick Noorden,
 and Factor 
Iohn Renaldus,
 and 
Iohn Melman,
 as Interpreter, for their Assistant. They were fetch'd in on Horse∣back, and courteously receiv'd and entertain'd by the 
Chinese
 General, who ac∣cording to his Promise was ready with his whole Army, consisting in two thousand Armed Men, to break up that day, and go with them by Land to 
Tayowan.


The Agents had these following Orders given them in writing to Read to the 
Chinese
 Governors at 
Tayowan.




I.
 That they should deliver and surrender the whole Countrey of 
Formosa
 to the 
Ne∣therlanders,
 that it might be possess'd and Govern'd by them as formerly.


II.
 Especially the Castle 
Zelandia
 in 
Tayowan,
 and the Fort 
Provencia,
 in 
Sakkam,
 with all the Guns and other Ammunition, and also 
Quelang.


III.
 To restore the Companies Goods, Merchandizes, Moneys, and other things, which at the surrender of 
Tayowan
 they took possession of; and also satisfaction for the Charge which they had been at in coming two several years with a Fleet of Ships to their Coasts, which had cost above sixty Tun of Gold.


IV.
 All Debtors to the Company, whether their Servants or Free People, shall satisfie their Creditors.


V.
 Our Prisoners shall immediately be redeem'd, and sent with their Goods to our Ships.


VI.
 On the granting and allowing of these Articles, there shall be an everlasting Peace betwixt them and us, and all things past shall be forgotten and forgiven.




The Commissioners having Read the Articles severally to them, said, That the 
Netherlanders
 desir'd a speedy Answer, what they were inclin'd to grant or not, and also what they would have of the 
Netherlanders.


Three Sea-men, which were sent along with the Agents to carry some Goods, came back with two 
Chineses,
 sent from the Enemy with two live Hogs, and four Baskets of Potato's, for a Present to the 
Netherlanders;
 who gave the Bearers two 
Cangans,
 and as much Meat as they would eat, which they devour'd very greedily: He also gave them a Pass to bring Provision into our Camp.


After the Enemy had broke up with his Army, the Admiral, according to a Resolution taken a little before, also made himself ready to go with the Hosta∣ges from 
Tankoya
 to 
Tayowan;
 to which purpose towards the Evening leaving the Shore, he went aboard of the 
Vlaerding
 Frigat, and left the chief Command to Captain 
Poleman,
 the second to 
Schimmel Penny,
 and to 
Bittar
 the third, of the sixteen Companies then ashore, 
viz.
 six under the first, and five apiece under the other two. The Camp was also in good Order, their Sconces finish'd, their Guns planted, and a Breast-work rais'd with Planks, that if occasion should require, they might easily cast up Earth against it. The 
Nut-tree, Naer∣den, Mars, Flushing, Buiksloot,
 with the 
Quemuy
 Jonk, remain'd there at an An∣chor. In the Evening the Admiral, follow'd by one of the 
Tartar
 Jonks, set Sail, and the next Morning, without having gain'd much Ground, because of the strong Tyde towards the South, he came to an Anchor about half a League to the Southward of 
Tankoya.


The six 
Chinese
 Hostages, which were left in stead of the three 
Hollanders
 that went by Land to 
Tayowan,
 related and declar'd at the drinking of a Cup of 
Tee
 with the Admiral, That most of the 
Chineses
 which were then an 
For∣mosa,
 were not inclin'd to stay there long, but much rather would go to the Coast of 
China
 their native Countrey where they had Friends, and submit themselves to the 
Tartars;
 That the old 
Coxinga
 came to 
Formosa
 with his Sol∣diers, none was to be blam'd but one 
Pinqua,
 who was the onely Person that advis'd him to it: and since they did not find it on 
Formosa
 as they had been told; but on the contrary, lost a great many of their Men in the War and Sickness, occasion'd from the unwholsom Air: and besides, having now lost 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 therefore the 
Chineses
 do not at all esteem of this 
Pinqua:
 nay, the Soldiers and others have desir'd to cut his Flesh alive from his Bones, and every one eat a piece of it, if it might have been permitted.


In the Evening the 
Ionker
 Frigat, sent from the Haven of 
Tayowan
 by the Vice-Admiral 
Lairesse,
 brought a Letter to the Admiral from the 
Chinese
 Go∣vernors, which was to this effect:




We the Governors of 
Formosa, Gamia, Siautongsiong, Koulavja, Anglavja, Owilavja, Tanlavja,
 and another 
Tanlavja,
 write in their Names this Letter to the Lord Admiral.


WE desire nothing but Peace. We have receiv'd Letters from the 
Tartar,
 but will not hearken to it, nor have any thing to do with him. You write in Your Letter, which We have receiv'd, to send You two Agents. It is


true, We have lost 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 and also 
Goutsoe,
 but We care not for them; for we deserted them freely, and suffer'd the 
Tartars
 to come into them. We have fought against the same 
Tartars,
 and slain 
Bethetok,
 and other of their Officers. They have, 'tis true, destroy'd and burnt the Towns and Habitati∣ons upon the Islands 
Eymuy, Quemuy,
 and 
Goutsoe,
 and pull'd down some of the Fortresses, but have not had the courage to keep them, so that We very well know what People they are. In former times You 
Hollanders
 have En∣gag'd with Us in the 
Piscadores, Baxembay,
 and 
Loakkau;
 so that We know Your
 Customs, and You Ours. We have lost the Fight at 
Quemuy,
 and suffer'd Our Cities there to be taken by them, but this was done by Your help: We have lost a great many Men on Our part; but also know, that You likewise have had some loss. But now a Letter is brought to Me by two 
Mandarins
 from 
Sepoan,
 commanding that We shall endeavor to make Peace with You, and give You a Place to Trade in; Therefore if You are willing to agree with Us on that account, or not, let Us know with speed. As to what con∣cerns Us, We have order from 
Sepoan
 to agree with the Admiral, that We may live as Friends and Brothers. We have also understood by Your Letter, that if We do not send Agents to You in two days, that then You will use Hostility against Us; seeing Your Writing was somewhat harsh, We have thought Your Proposal to be of like kind. But if You are minded to agree, We will grant Your Requests, and make a beginning whilst the two Agents from 
Sepoan
 are here; therefore what the one hath to say to the other ought now to be known. The Letter written by the Lord-Admiral to the Prisoners We have deliver'd to them: If You will not credit Us, send 
Assam
 ashore to examine the truth.




This Letter was Seal'd with 
Owiden
's Seal, in the Title call'd 
Owilavia.


The twenty ninth the Admiral set Sail again with the 
Ionker
 Frigat, but the 
Tartar
 Jonks went back.


The thirtieth in the Morning the Admiral was got two Leagues to the Northward of the 
Cape
 of 
Tankoya,
 where by contrary Tydes he was again forc'd to an Anchor; and by two Persons that came from 
Tayowan,
 he recei∣ved a Letter from the young 
Coxinga,
 otherwise call'd 
Sepoan
 and 
Kimsia,
 who at that time resided on 
Tangsoa.
 They also proffer'd the Admiral as a Present, twenty Pieces of Silk Stuffs, four Frails of 
Iapan
 Tobacco, and ten 
Iapan
 Ap∣ples, which he modestly refus'd, except the Apples.


In this Letter nothing more was proffer'd the 
Netherlanders
 than the Island 
Lamoa,
 as appears more at large by the Letter it self, as follows:




TSiovan,
 a Servant to 
Tsioubontok,
 is come back, and hath brought good tydings from the Lord-Admiral with a Relation, That the 
Hollanders
 were inclin'd to make Peace with us. We have receiv'd the Letter from the Admiral written to the 
Netherland
 Prisoners, and understood the Contents of it. I much rejoyce at the great love which the 
Hollanders
 bear to their Prison∣ers. In the last Southern 
Mouson,
 the 
Hollanders
 coming with Ships into the 
Piscadores,
 they deliver'd a Letter to the 
Mandarin,
 who durst not of himself take upon him to grant what they desir'd, therefore he hath sent the Letter to Me, on which I sent one to the Admiral; wherein I desire to make Peace with the 
Hollanders.
 But my Letter coming to the 
Piscadores,
 they were gone from thence with their Ships to 
Hoksieu.
 On the Admirals coming with his Ships to 
Quemuy,
 a Servant was sent from 
Tsioubontok,
 or 
Tonbeenpek,
 with a Letter to the



Holland
 Admiral; to which he had sent Answer, That he had agreed with the 
Tartars,
 and therefore could not make Peace with the 
Chineses;
 nor that he had any reason to break the League with them; Therefore because we could not then agree with you we Fought together: in which Fight indeed a great many Rusticks were kill'd in 
Quemuy:
 but we suppose that some of the 
Hol∣landers
 were also slain. Our intentions were not to Fight with them, but we thought to have made Peace. All the Villagers on the Islands, and those which dwell along the Sea-Coast, have been under my subjection. I al∣so lov'd them, as I do your Nation. Therefore I send two 
Mandarins, Houpou-Thousou-Iapien,
 and 
Lungeugia Tsiouki,
 whom I have commanded to endeavor to agree with you; and we hope, you will not be backward in agreeing with us, which will be good for both, because we shall make good advantage by your Trade. If we agree, then you 
Hollanders
 must forsake the 
Tartars
 Friendship, that we may not fear them; and when the Peace is concluded, we will give you the Island 
Lamoa,
 and deliver you your Prisoners; then we can Trade to∣gether, and you come with your Ships to us, and we with ours to you; which to testifie that I mean it from my heart, I take the Heavens to witness.


Written 
in the twelfth Moon, the first Day.

Underneath was fix'd 
Sepoan
's Seal.




The Messengers that brought this Letter related, That they had first been in the 
Piscadores,
 and from thence, according to their Orders, came five days since to 
Tayowan:
 but they should have been there before, had not the bad Weather detain'd them some days at 
Tangsoa.
 Moreover, they had heard six days before, that the three 
Netherland
 Agents were on their Way to 
Tayowan;
 and also that all the Prisoners were in good health.


The Admiral told them, That if they desir'd the Island 
Lamoa,
 they could have that when they pleas'd, and needed not their Proffer: and also told them, That they did not maintain the War against them for 
Lamoa,
 but for 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan.


To which they reply'd, If their Master 
Sepoan
 did not rightly understand their Desires, it was not his nor their fault; for the 
Netherland
 Prisoners had so explain'd his Letter to them, that he demanded the Island 
Lamoa:
 alledg∣ing, If the 
Hollanders
 wanted 
Formosa
 and 
Tayowan,
 they should not have taken the Islands 
Eymuy, Quemuy, Goutsoe,
 and others thereabouts, from them.


Then the Admiral ask'd if they had no Commands besides the Letter, to declare any thing else to the 
Hollanders?
 whereupon they answering 
No,
 the Admiral told them, That the 
Netherlanders
 would on those terms never make Peace with them.


Whereupon they reply'd again, That they might do as they saw fit: for if they could not agree, they would go and submit themselves to the 
Tartar,
 and desire of Him not to grant them to Trade there. But these Threats the Ad∣miral not regarding, told them again, That if they were not yet weary of the War, the 
Hollanders
 would not be tir'd with using their Armes, till they had ut∣terly extirpated them.


Whereupon the 
Coxingans
 observing that they could avail nothing by harsh Speeches, after a little consideration desir'd the Admiral to pass by all those Discourses, for they would rather live in Friendship than at Variance, and therefore were sent to Treat; and to that end desir'd that he would be pleas'd to go with his Ship to the Harbor of 
Tayowan,
 where (after they had


consulted with the Governor) they doubted not, but they should give him full satisfaction; To which the Admiral made answer, That he would endeavor to get with his Ship to 
Tayowan,
 and that then he would expect their sudden an∣swer, what they intended to do; and if they would manifest their good in∣tention, they should bring some of their Prisoners along with them, that the Admiral might know the reason, why they had not written to him since he came thither, because it created suspicious thoughts in him of their Welfare. Then the Admiral as'd them, Why they did not send their Prisoners to them according to the Agreement at the Delivery of 
Tayowan:
 To which they re∣ply'd, That they were ready to have deliver'd them, if they had been deman∣ded; but because that was not done, they remain'd still in their power.


But after they had promis'd the Admiral at their return to bring one of the 
Netherland
 Prisoners with them, and had been kindly entertain'd, taking their leave, they went to the Shore, and so from thence to 
Tayowan
 by Land.


The six 
Chinese
 Hostages that were aboard the Admiral, and had the day be∣fore told him that most of the 
Chineses
 were not inclin'd to stay on 
Formosa,
 but would rather submit to the 
Tartar;
 inform'd the Interpreter 
Maurice,
 that some desir'd to stay and live there, of whom several were Persons of Quality.


The one and thirtieth, the Admiral came with the 
Vlaerding
 Frigat half a League Southward of 
Sakkam,
 and the next day Anchor'd in the Harbor of 
Tayowan,
 before the Castle of 
Zelandia.


The second against Noon, the Interpreter 
Melman
 came aboard the Admiral
 in a 
Chinese Champan,
 with a Letter from the Agents Lieutenant 
Hendrik Noorden,
 and 
Iohn Renaldus,
 written in 
Tayowan
 the Night before, in which they inform'd the Admiral, That after the twenty eighth of 
Ianuary,
 having remov'd with the Army under 
Siautongsiong
's Command, they Rode to 
Sakkam,
 where coming on the twenty ninth, on the thirtieth they were courteously entertain'd at 
Tay∣owan,
 but forbidden to speak with the 
Netherland
 Prisoners.


The next day after their arrival in 
Tayowan,
 they had Audience granted them from the Governor 
Ouwilavia,
 before whom they were commanded, ac∣cording to the 
Chinese
 manner to kneel, which they refus'd.


Whereupon 
Ouwilavia
 having caus'd them to be ask'd, to what end they came to him; and being told that it was to know how he was inclin'd to agree with them, he answer'd, That he referr'd himself to the Letter written by the 
Ne∣therland
 Prisoners, on the sixth of 
October
 last to the Admiral; and then ask'd the Agents, if they had any thing else to say? Whereupon the Agents, accord∣ing to their instructions read the Proposals, which he would no ways hearken to; but said, That they were unreasonable, and not fit to be answer'd, aver∣ring, that the Admiral himself had written to the 
Netherland
 Prisoners, that he would be contented with 
Lamoa,
 whereupon they parted at that time.


The first of 
February,
 the 
Holland
 Agents met with those of 
Sepoan,
 where the Letter written by the Admiral and his Council, the one and twentieth of 
Octo∣ber,
 to the 
Holland
 Prisoners, and in which they thought to shew, That the 
Hol∣landers
 would have been satisfi'd only with 
Lamoa,
 was produc'd, which the Agents explain'd quite another way, 
viz.
 That 
Lamoa
 in comparison to the other places that were proffer'd to the 
Netherlanders,
 signifi'd nothing, and that they were no ways satisfi'd with it.


Mean while, being met together, the 
Holland
 Agents said, That they had understood aboard of their Ships, how their Prisoners were us'd to hard labor, nay, that they doubted whether they were yet living; they to manifest


the contrary, brought them all out of the Castle into a Court, where the A∣gents look'd upon them at a distance, but were not permitted to speak to them. At last, the Agents were directed to tell the Admiral, that the 
Mandarins
 of 
Se∣poan
 were ready to go again to the Coast of 
China,
 and that he might now send a Letter with them to 
Sepoan,
 and make mention of some other place, and not speak any more of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa,
 for they were resolv'd not to hear any more of it.


While Affairs stood in this posture, the 
Chineses
 told 
Melman,
 That they would not deliver the Castle of 
Formosa,
 unless forc'd by necessity, which they concluded with a Challenge, That if the 
Hollanders
 would give them a meet∣ing at 
Sakkam,
 they would fairly try their Valor, and fight them Hand to Hand in 
Champain;
 and if they wanted Boats, would supply them with their own 
Champans,
 to Land as many as had a stomach to the Invitation; and if their fortune were such (which they did not fear) to loose the day, they would de∣liver up the Forts, and whatever else they desir'd; But if they got the better, which they could not doubt, yet they would be ready to a compliance; and laying all animosities aside, joyn in an everlasting League of Amity.


The 
Netherlanders
 seeing by this, that the 
Chinese
 Governors on 
Tayowan
 had sleighted the propos'd Articles, and commanded their Trustees not to make any further mention of surrendring, judg'd it convenient presently to send for their Agents, and break off the Treaty; only Commanding, that they should tell the 
Chineses
 at their departure, that since they had sleighted his Proposals, they must now make their Addresses to 
Batavia,
 and accordingly sent them this Letter.




BY the Letter of Our Agents which We receiv'd aboard this day, and also by the Relation given Us by the Interpreter, We understand, that you will not hearken to the surrender of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa;
 and since We are not impower'd without that, to conclude of any thing; therefore We desire you to send Our Agents, and to receive yours, desiring Almighty God to give you a righter understanding of your own good, that you may not deceive your selves, trusting too much in your own Strength and Valor.




This Letter the Interpreter 
Melman
 carry'd with Orders to answer their Challenge thus by word of Mouth, that if they were so hardy, to try their Fortune with the 
Hollanders,
 and put it to the hazard of a Set-day, thanking them for the offer of their 
Champans,
 they would (if they wanted Boats) rather swim to Shore, to give them their desir'd satisfaction; and though they knew their Valor, they should be allow'd to bring two thousand into the Field against their one; and also they would spare their trouble of coming to 
Sak∣kam,
 by giving them a meeting and smart Entertainment at the half way.


The 
Tartars
 Agents now resolv'd to return, sent one of their Servants to 
Baxemboy,
 with Order, to deliver some Letters there, and Demand answers of those sent from 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi:
 But he return'd soon after with an Ar∣row in his side; which the 
Chineses,
 when they perceiv'd that he was a 
Tartar,
 had given him ashore; nay, according to his own saying, they would have ta∣ken his Life, had he not sav'd himself by Swimming to his 
Champan.


On the fourth in the forenoon, the Interpreter 
Melman
 came a second time with a Letter from the 
Netherland
 Agents to the Admiral; and also one from the 
Chinese
 Governors, in Answer to that, written to them on the second in∣stant, which Translated, was to this effect.






The Governors of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa, 
 Koulavja, Siaulavja, Gom-lavja, Anglavja, Ouwilavja, Tanlavja,
 and another 
Tanlavja,
 send in their Names this Letter to the 
Dutch
 Admiral.
Worthy Sir,


WE have receiv'd three Letters from you, whose Contents We understand, being thereby well inform'd of your desires, heretofore you demanded only 
Quelang
 and 
Tamsuy
 to Trade in; but now, since Our Prince 
Sepoan
 hath condescended to give you 
Lamoa,
 nothing less will serve your turn than 
Tayo∣wan, Sakkam,
 and the whole Countrey of 
Formosa,
 which is Our antient Right and Patrimony; but do not deceive your selves to believe, that We will so part with what so many years hath belong'd to Us; but if you will comply, and take what you are proffer'd, well and good. The Prisoners are yet strong and healthy. Nor have We any thoughts to detain your Agents, for whether We conclude, or not, you need not fear but your Messengers shall be return'd, so well We know the Law of Arms; but send Our Agents first, because We sent them first to you, and then your own are free to depart. 
Sepoan
 hath sent a Letter heretofore, to which he desires a speedy Answer, which also is Our Request.


Dated 
the first Moon, the seventh Day
; underneath it was Subscrib'd,

Ouwiaen.




The 
Holland
 Agents now desiring to return, were not permitted, but in stead thereof, jealousies daily increasing, a Guard was set upon them; where∣fore the 
Dutch
 Prisoners earnestly desir'd in their Letters, That the Admiral would first use some mild way for their Deliverance, that they might not al∣ways live as Exiles amongst a Crew of 
Heathens,
 and their Wives and Children in 
Batavia,
 as miserable Widows and Orphans.


Melman
 the Interpreter, according to the Admiral's Directions, deliver'd the Challenge, but receiv'd no other answer than, 
Very well;
 and inform'd them, that at his return to the Fleet, without the Castle they had lately Planted along the Shore about twenty Iron and Brass Cannon. Upon this Intelligence, 
Siau∣tongsiong
's Commissioners perceiv'd that all things were not right ashore, and therefore believ'd, that the 
Hollanders
 would not send them before their Agents came back; neither did they desire them to go ashore there, but requested, that they might be sent to 
Siautongsiong
 at 
Tankoya,
 from whence they were brought, fearing their Landing there might cost them their Lives; the rather, because 
Siautongsiong
 refus'd to go to 
Sakkam
 or 
Tayowan;
 therefore if he deser∣ted those of 
Tayowan,
 the Agents believ'd that he would joyn with the 
Hollan∣ders;
 for the Letter from those of 
Tayowan
 to 
Siautongsiong
 seem'd to express, That 
Sepoan
 had submitted to the 
Tartars,
 reforming his Hair, and sending for all his Soldiers and Officers from 
Formosa,
 with Commands, that they should come thence, and surrender up the Countrey to the 
Hollanders.


But the contrary soon appearing, rais'd in the Agents a further suspect, and as many jealousies in the 
Hollanders,
 so that now the whole business was how to contrive home their Agents; and to that purpose, concluded to write to the Governors of 
Formosa,
 that since they could not surrender up the Castle in 
Tay∣owan,
 and the Fort in 
Sakkam,
 they would go to Treat with 
Kimsia
 or 
Sepoan
 him∣self at 
Tangsoa,
 and there to see if they could come to better terms with him:


This Message they sent, with design to get their Agents, but never intending any such matter as the performance of it; and accordingly the 
Chineses
 believing it, dismiss'd the Agents, who upon the sixth in the afternoon came at last aboard again, with the Interpreter 
Melman,
 and a Letter written to the Admiral from the Governors in 
Tayowan
 to this effect:




The Governors of 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa, Gam-lavja, Siaulavja, Koulovja, An∣lavja, Ouwilavja, Tanlavja,
 and a second 
Tanlavja,
 send in their Names this Letter to the 
Hollands
 Admiral.


WE have perceiv'd by the 
Hollanders
 Letter, that they are of an upright Heart, though they suspected We would detain those they sent to Treat with Us, as appears by their last, which is contrary to Our Custom, and their Opinion, who ever put it into their Heads, for We have sent them freely of Our own accords, without the Formality of meeting half way, and exchang∣ing Ours for theirs, whereby you may perceive Our Integrity, and that We never had any such design: We repose the like Confidence in you, and know that you will not fail Us in Our expectations.


You (as We have understood by your Letters) will intreat 
Sepoan
 to send a 
Mandarin
 with you to 
Batavia,
 and there to agree with your King, which We will acquaint 
Sepoan
 with, who knows best what is fittest for him in Honor to do: You have also receiv'd from 
Sepoan
 himself a Letter, to which be pleas'd to send an Answer, because he will not Treat without Letters of Credence.


We also advise, that if you intend to Treat at 
Tongsoa,
 with Our Prince, that you would inform Us punctually of the time, that We may give him notice of your coming, and that he may the better prepare Jonks to Convoy you in∣to safe Harbors, to prevent the loosing and endangering of your Ships.


We have no more to say, but desire Our Commissioners may be sent to Us in this Vessel.




Hereupon the 
Chinese
 Agents were sent ashore, not to 
Tayowan,
 but accord∣ing to their Request to the Southward of the fresh River in 
Formosa.
 The Ad∣miral also Order'd 
Melman
 to bid the Men that belong'd to the 
Champan,
 tell the Governors, That if they desir'd a Letter from him, they should send for it the next day.


The Agents 
Henrick Van Noorden,
 and 
Iohn Renaldus
 being come aboard of the Admiral again, inform'd them, That the Quarters in 
Tayowan,
 except two or three Houses, lay Ruin'd, and were nothing but a heap of Rubbish; but on the contrary, that 
Sakkam
 was much inlarg'd with Houses, and that they had seen few Cattel as they past along.


The seventh, two hours before day, according to their resolution taken the last Night, the Admiral set Sail with seven Frigats to the Point of 
Tankoya,
 where about Noon he Anchor'd amongst the rest of the Fleet.


Soon after the Admiral's arrival there, Captain 
Poleman
 coming to him, told him, That all things were well on the Shore, only some few Soldiers were sick, of which some dy'd, and the Distemper increas'd. He added also, that that very day, a Captain call'd 
Lita
 and twenty six Soldiers with their Arms, came from the 
Chineses
 with two Colours, and one Pennon to us, to go over with our Ships to 
Tayowan,
 and offer'd to fight for us against the Enemy; with promise also to get more to their Party.


This Captain 
Lita
 gave Information, that 
Siautongsiong
 did not in the least in∣tend
 to come to them, but at one time or other, would set upon them, if he could find a fit opportunity; and that the Enemies Forces on 
Formosa
 consist∣ed in ten thousand Arm'd Men, of which near five thousand belong'd to this 
Siautongsiong,
 whereof he kept about him a Guard of fifteen hundred Men, the rest were distributed, some about the River 
Tamsuy,
 but the greatest part a∣bout 
Iokan.


In the Evening, there came six Soldiers more, belonging to the foremention'd 
Lita,
 as on the next day twenty five more, furnish'd with Coats of Mail, Hel∣mets, and Scythes; and about Noon nine more, each of them only with a Scythe, who had stood on the Inland Water, making signs to be fetch'd over to the 
Dutch
 Camp; and as they related, had been forc'd to throw away their Coats and Helmets, or else they could not have gotten through the Woods.


The foremention'd Captain 
Lita,
 was according to Order Presented by Ca∣ptain 
Poleman,
 with four Pieces of 
Cangans
 or Clothing, to distribute amongst his Soldiers.


The tenth came ten other 
Chinese
 Soldiers, belonging to 
Lita
's Company, with Tidings, That the Enemy on the other side did fortifie and strengthen himself very much; to which purpose he had already gotten a great number of Baskets to be us'd as blinds, and plac'd them ready for the first opportunity to lay Guns betwixt them, and that then they threatned to come, and set upon the 
Netherlanders.


There also came four 
Chineses
 from 
Siautongsiong,
 into the 
Dutch
 Camp, and in their Masters Name, presented the Admiral with two 
Kings Fish,
 and a Bas∣ket with Potatoes; in like manner, two other 
Chineses
 came to the Camp, who brought some dry'd Fish and other Provisions to sell, which 
Poleman
 took in exchange for a 
Cangang;
 but because it was suppos'd that they were sent as Spies, none of them was permitted to come within the Works.


The eleventh came four other 
Chineses,
 who affirm'd what the ten which came the day before had related, concerning the Enemies Fortifying himself.


Those 
Chineses
 that came thus to the 
Hollanders
 (to prevent them from act∣ing any mischief) were divided amongst the 
Overveen, Buiksloot,
 and 
Cogge
 Fri∣gats, and their Arms taken away from them, 
viz.
 thirty in the 
Cogge,
 nine in the 
Buiksloot,
 and twenty six in the 
Overveen.


In the afternoon came a Person with a Letter from 
Siautongsiong,
 otherwise call'd 
Tatholing-Totoksiau,
 to the Admiral, which was to this purpose.




Tathonling-Totoksiau
 sends this Letter to the 
Hollands
 Admiral.


FOrmerly the Admiral sent his Secretary with the Interpreter 
Assam
 to My Army, who spoke with Me; My Inclinations have been for the 
Hollanders
 ever since they have been with Me; We then Discours'd of five thousand Tail to be distributed amongst My Souldiers, of which I have as yet not receiv'd one, so that I find My Expectations of receiving Money to be frustrated; nay fear, that by the long delay, My good Intentions which I have had in this bu∣siness, and still have, will be prevented; therefore I desire, with the first to know your Honors Intentions, for when I (which I would have the 
Hollanders
 take notice of) shall come to them with my Souldiers, they may be sure of the Castles and Forts, nay, the whole Countrey of 
Formosa.
 You formerly pro∣mis'd to give me five thousand Tail, when I should deliver the 
Holland
 Pri∣soners


in 
Sakkam,
 which I never undertook, neither think it needful, because they will fall with the Countrey into your hands.


And that your Honor may the better Credit Me, I promise hereby to deli∣ver My Grand-father to go in the 
Holland
 Ships to 
Soanchefoe,
 and there Treat with 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 concerning my coming over, and to that purpose Request, that they would be pleas'd to send some great Jonks hither with the 
Holland
 Frigats, which if they do, all things shall be well.


Pray Credit my Writing, for I mean all what is here before mention'd with an upright Heart, therefore I desire it may be kept private; please to send 
As∣sam
 to Me, that I may hear from him what your intentions are; if that can∣not be, send your Resolution in Writing, that I may Govern my self ac∣cordingly.


Written 
in the first Moon, the fourteenth Day
; and underneath stood

Tathonling-Totoksiau
 his Seal.




The same Messenger brought also two little Letters from 
Siautongsiong,
 as he pretended to the 
Tartar
 Agents; but being broken open by the Admiral, one was found to be to 
Tonganpek,
 and the other to 
Sibja;
 yet both of the follow∣ing Contents.




THe Letter sent to Me by your Servant 
Gom,
 I have receiv'd and under∣stood your meaning; My inclinations, as you very well know, were always to leave this State and come over to the 
Tartars;
 but to do it accord∣ing to your writing with the 
Holland
 Ships, I am something doubtful, fearing they might carry Me to 
Holland,
 or elsewhere: Besides there is no conveniency for My Wives and Children, neither for My Arms in those Ships, for I am near five thousand strong with My Soldiers and Officers, which are all ready and willing to come over to you; wherefore I hereby desire you, to be importu∣nate with 
Singlamong,
 that his great Jonks with the 
Holland
 Ships may be sent at farthest on the fifteenth day of the second Moneth, either to 
Tamsuy
 or 
Tan∣koya;
 upon whose timely appearance, I will immediately put aboard My Com∣manders, Wives and Children; as for the Soldiers it is no great matter, they may go in the 
Netherland
 Ships: I intend to send my Grand-father to speak with you farther about this Concern, which I desire you to keep secret.




The Admiral, by the Vice-Admiral's and Rere-Admiral's advice, return'd this Answer.




FRom your Writing, I understand anew your desire of five thousand Tail, which had you come to Us with your Soldiers, they had been paid be∣fore this time, according as We proffer'd: But to be plain with you, We sus∣pect all your Actions, which are clandestinely manag'd; you holding a Cor∣respondence at 
Tayowan,
 though you pretend and desire of Us, that your Letter may be kept private.


We had also thought to have found more fair Dealings in the Governors of 
Tayowan,
 and if you were really resolv'd to go to the Coast of 
China,
 you would not have trifled so long, but sent some Persons of Quality to Us, to have been carry'd in one of Our Ships to 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi;
 but since We cannot by fair means, We will endeavor to bring you and those of 
Tayowan
 both to bet∣ter Terms by force.


The twelfth in the Evening, Captain 
Poleman
 with eleven Companies being in Arms, the Guns and other Ammunition was in the Night brought aboard from the Point of 
Tankoya;
 and the next day all the Tents were pull'd down and put into the Ships; and soon after the Sea-men and Soldiers that had been appointed to stay ashore, came from thence aboard.


The thirteenth in the afternoon, the Admiral assembled his Council to con∣sult what they should do further, and Propos'd, That since they had no place of meeting there, nor on the Coast of 
China,
 whither they should go with the whole Fleet, to see what condition the Forts were in at 
Goutsoe,
 and if they could be repair'd with little cost and trouble, then to Pitch there for the present, that they might have a place of Rendezvouz upon any occasion, and also might leave there some Frigats, to go out in the beginning of the approaching Sou∣thern 
Mouson,
 to Cruise for the 
Iapan
 Traders.


Secondly, If they should fall short of 
Goutsoe,
 whether it were convenient, and the time would permit them to venture a design on the Isles 
Lamoa
 or 
Tang∣soa,
 and from thence send the Cruising Frigats.


Thirdly, If they should directly Steer from thence to 
Batavia,
 with the greatest part of the Fleet, and send only three or four Frigats with the hundred 
Chineses,
 and their Captain with the two 
Tartar
 Jonks to the Coast of 
China,
 ac∣cording to their promise to 
Singlamong.


These Proposals being duly weigh'd and consider'd, at last they Resolv'd,


First, To examine, how the Fleet was stor'd with Provisions, Ammunition, Soldiers and Sea-men, and then they might on better ground and with more safety, consult what they had best to do, and accordingly the whole Fleet were found to be two thousand and seventy eight Men, (nine hundred and sixty Sol∣diers, and one thousand one hundred and eighteen Sea-men;) besides an hun∣dred and two Soldiers, and an hundred and thirty Sea-men that were sick; the number of those that were dead, was two hundred and eleven in all.


The fourteenth the 
Tartars
 fetch'd twenty three more from the Shore that came running to them with their Arms, and in their 
Champans
 carry'd them aboard the 
Vlaerding
 Frigat.


The same day a Party of the Enemies Horse and Foot, consisting in about three or four hundred appear'd upon the Shore, but durst not come within Shot of the nearest Frigat; and towards Evening they march'd away again.


The fifteenth they agree'd to send four Frigats, under the Command of the Rere-Admiral 
Verwei,
 to the Coast of 
China;
 and that the Admiral should with the rest of the Ships go to 
Batavia:
 The Orders which 
Verwei
 was to observe, were to this Effect.






TO Conduct the two 
Tartar
 Ionks home that came with the 
Netherlanders
 from 
China
 to 
Formosa,
 and also to put ashore in 
China,
 the Renegade 
Chineses,
 being an hundred and two, besides their Captain; therefore to use all means to reach the Coast of 
China,
 and if possible, to get to 
Puthai,
 and Land them there; or if by con∣trary Winds be could not reach 
Puthai,
 then to run to 
Chinchieuw.


To stay on the Coast till the last of 
February,
 and wait for an Answer to the Admirals Letter, which he had given the Rere-Admiral to send by the Renegade 
Chineses
 to deliver to 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi;
 and if he receiv'd no Answer in that time, to go thence, without any longer delay towards 
Batavia,
 whither the Admiral would set Sail with the rest of the Fleet before.




The Admiral's Letter to
 Singlamong 
and
 Lipovi, 
from the Fleet before
 Tunkoya 
was to this effect.




The 
Holland
 Admiral 
Balthazar Bort,
 doth hereby present his kind Salutation to 
Sin∣glamong
 the Vice-Roy, and 
Taising Lipovi
 General of the Territory of 
Fokien;
 and wishes health to their Excellencies, with a happy and prosperous Government.


WE hop'd that the 
Chinese
 Forces which remain on 
Tayowan
 and 
Formosa,
 would have accepted of your Excellencies Proffer, and accordingly come over to Us to be conveigh'd to 
China.
 To the Letters written by your Highness to that purpose to them, We added another, to assure them of Our Integrity and Care, We would manifest in the carrying over and furnishing them with Provisions, which was deliver'd by your Excellencies Agents to 
Si∣autongsiong,
 General of the Forces in the South part of 
Formosa,
 who pretended to be satisfi'd therewith, and began to Treat with Us, and Demanded five thousand Tail of Silver beforehand. But We observing, that if he should once have gotten the Money, he would have deceiv'd Us, therefore We would not consent to it; however, upon his assurance, that 
Sepoan,
 otherwise nam'd 
Kim∣sia
 their Prince, had agreed with your Excellencies, and submitted himself to his Imperial Majesty, We dispatch'd Agents to him, and I also went from 
Tan∣koya
 thither by Sea. I receiv'd a Letter from 
Sepoan,
 whereupon he offer'd us the Isle of 
Lamoa,
 and to make Peace with us, provided We would immediately break Our League with your Highness, and joyn with them, which We look upon as a business no way suiting to Our Honor; therefore We immediately Commanded Our Agents from 
Tayowan,
 and refusing all Treaties about Peace, resolv'd to go to Arms; but a Sickness arising amongst Our Soldiers that lay Encamp'd some time in 
Tankoya,
 We were necessitated to remove. Mean while Captain 
Lita
 submitted, and brought with him an hundred Men, which We have sent your Highness with this Letter, had your Excellencies sent your Jonks with Us, many more would have come over; for they pretend, that they dare not venture themselves in Our Ships: We will be here again from 
Batavia
 (whither We are now going) with a strong Fleet and Forces in the Southern 
Mouson,
 when We hope your Highnesses will also be ready, that We may fall upon the Enemy in 
Tangsoa
 and 
Lamoa,
 or where ever else he shall be, that so We may at once make an end of the Work.




When 
Kitat
 or 
Lita
 the Commander was come aboard the Admiral, and told that he should go with four Frigats to 
China,
 with all his People, he shew'd great signs of joy; affirming, That 
Siautongsiong
 did not intend to come in, but only held them in Treaty to gain time, yet they might easily master 
Formosa
 and the Fortresses thereon, if they would suddenly set upon 
Lamoa
 and 
Tangsoa
 with a well Man'd Fleet, those being the only strong places which he had on the Coast of 
China.


The sixteenth, the Rere-Admiral 
Verwei
 set Sail with his four Frigats, and steering Northerly along the 
Formosan
 Coast, about Noon Anchor'd a League from 
Ape-Mountain;
 and likewise the Admiral with eleven Ships, and the Jonk 
Quemuy
 putting forth, came to an Anchor on the one and twentieth in the 
Piscadores.


In the Evening, the Rere-Admiral 
Verwei
 set Sail with the four Frigats to the Coast of 
China,
 to Land the 
Chinese
 Revolters, either on 
Puthay
 or about the Ri∣ver 
Chincheo,
 under the 
Tartars
 Jurisdiction.


The twenty fifth, a Letter written by the Admiral to the young 
Coxin,
 or 
Sepoan,
 in 
Tangsoa,
 was sent ashore by a 
Chinese
 Prisoner at 
Pehoe,
 that from thence he might go thither with the first opportunity, which was to this effect.




THe 
Holland
 Admiral 
Balthazar Bort
 wishes Health to 
Sepoan.


I receiv'd your Letter at 
Tayowan;
 but the sudden departure of your Messengers would not afford me Opportunity of sending an Answer. We did at your Request send Commissioners to 
Tayowan;
 but when they motion'd the Surrender of the Fort, they had a Guard put upon them. We always believ'd, that it was free for Us to ask, and you to deny, without such Af∣fronts. 
Tsiautongsiong
 made Us believe, That your Highness had submitted to the 
Tartars,
 and commanded all your Souldiers from 
Formosa,
 with Order to deliver the Countrey to Us: Whereupon We sent Our Agents, as afore∣mention'd: But when We receiv'd your Letter, We understood the contrary; for you advis'd Us to break Our League with the 
Tartar,
 and proffer'd Us onely 
Lamoa
 for a Factory, and the Releasing of Our Prisoners: In answer to which, We advise you to unite with the 
Tartar,
 and deliver 
Tayowan
 to Us, that We may live peaceably together, and Trade flourish afresh, which you very well know is Our chief aim. I much wonder why those of 
Tayowan,
 while Our Agents were there, sent not to Me, and why yours never return'd to speak with Me; perhaps they may pretend Fear, but they have no reason, for with Us 'tis usual in the midst of the sharpest War, to send Persons to Treat, and make Overtures of Peace: And themselves are able to make out, how honourably We protected them: Whereas on the contrary, those of 
Tayowan
 were so barbarously uncivil, that they would not suffer Our Agents to speak with Our Prisoners, nor take a Letter from them to Us. I have set Sail from thence, with intention to come to you at 
Tangsoa,
 in hopes to find more Civility, and withal to perswade you to send Ambassadors to 
Batavia;
 but the stormy Weather hath spent so much of the time, that to My great sorrow I could not effect My desire: Therefore I have left this Letter with the 
Piscadoreans,
 to be sent to you with the first opportunity. If you resolve to send, do it with speed.


Balthazar Bort.




The twenty sixth the Admiral set Sail again with his ten Ships, and ran by the high 
Western Island:
 The twenty seventh he saw the Sands; and the twenty eighth, the 
Macau
 Islands. On one of these 
Macau
 Isles stands the City 
Macao,
 of whose Beginning and Plantation this is the Account.


The 
Chineses
 at first permitted the 
Portuguese
 to Traffick on a desolate Isle
 call'd 
Sancham,
 or 
Sancian,
 thirty Leagues from the Continent, and ten from 
Macao,
 where they built themselves, in stead of Houses, Bowers of plash'd Trees, and meanly thatch'd on the top. Here the 
Chineses
 came to Trade with them, after they were thus setled, nor would suffer their nearer Approaches, being terrified with the remembrance of the former Calamities they suffer'd by Invasions, especially of the 
Tartar
 in the Year 1208. yet fresh in their Me∣mory. These their Fears and Jealousies increas'd upon them, by seeing and considering the 
Portuguese
 Ships, what huge Vessels they were, like floating Castles, big with Armed Men, and terrifying both Sea and Land with the Voice of their thundering Guns▪ Besides, the 
Mahumetans
 and 
Moors,
 which in great numbers daily resorted to 
Canton,
 reported, That these People (meaning


the 
Portuguese
) were 
Franks
 (for so they call'd all 
Europeans
) and were a mighty People of prodigious Valour, and Conquerors of whatever they design'd, and that the Borders of their Empire were extended to the Brims of the Universe. But though the 
Portuguese
 were thus represented, and appear'd themselves to be too formidable, yet the Avarice of the 
Chineses
 overpower'd their Fear; for the Benefit accrewing by this Commerce was so great, that it did not onely redound to the Emperors Advantage, but also the Magistrates and Common People were all Sharers; so that by Degrees they suffer'd it to be driven with∣in their Dominions, yet with this 
Proviso,
 That so soon as their time of Sale was done, they should go again to 
India
 with their Commodities.


The 
Portuguese
 Merchants had Annually two Markets or Fairs, to buy what the 
Indian
 Ships transported in 
Ianuary,
 or the 
Iapanners
 in 
Iune.


The Fairs or Markets were not kept in the Haven of 
Macao,
 nor on the Isle of 
Sancian,
 as in antient times; but in 
Canton
 it self, whither an infinite Com∣pany of People resorted; for the 
Portuguese
 went from the City 
Macao,
 with the Magistrates leave of 
China,
 to the Metropolis 
Canton,
 two days Journey by Water, against Tyde, and lodg'd at Night in their Vessels in the Haven: Yet all things were done with such circumspection and vigilancy, that it was easie to see they were not without jealous Fits, and grudgings of their former Fear. These yearly Fairs continu'd two Months, and sometimes longer.


By this means that Place which was before desolate, began to be inhabited not onely by the 
Portuguese,
 but also by many of the neighboring People; so that in few Years, by the great abundance of Commodities brought thither out of 
Europe, India,
 and 
China
 it self, it grew a famous and populous City: Nay, such was the 
Chineses
 Covetousness, seeing their Wealth, that they not on∣ly dwelt there, and Traded, but Married with them, and in a short time fill'd the whole Isle full of rich Habitations.


This Place is also famous amongst the Catholicks, for the great resort thither of Priests, and their converting the Natives to the 
Christian Faith.
 From hence all the Voyages for the Converting of 
Heathens
 were undertaken; as to 
Iapan, China, Tunking, Cochinchina, Cambaya, Laos,
 and other Countreys; where∣fore the King of 
Portugal
 gave it the Title of a City, and by the approbation of the 
Pope
 rais'd it to an Episcopal See. But since the banishing of the 
Por∣tuguese
 out of 
Iapan,
 this City hath much decreas'd.


The twenty ninth in the Night the Fleet reacht the East Point of the Isle 
Ai∣nan,
 which, according to 
Bartholomew Verwei
's Observation, lies much more Nor∣therly than it is plac'd in the general Map. On this Isle lies the City 
Ingly,
 otherwise call'd 
Ciunchew,
 being fortified with very strong Walls, full of hand∣som Buildings, and well seated for Trade; the whole Island being in a manner surrounded with Mountains and Woods, produceth great plenty of all Necessa∣ries for Humane Sustenance.


On the Mountains grows the sweet-smelling 
Craine
-Wood, and likewise Ebony, Roses, and 
Brasile,
 much us'd by the Dyers through all 
China.
 There are also many 
Indian
 Nuts, and a Fruit by them call'd 
Iaca,
 which grows not on the Branches, but the Body of the Tree. Amongst others, there also grows a certain strange Herb, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Chitung;
 for the Sea-men are of opinion, that they can find by its Joynts or Knobs, in what Month, and how many Storms there shall be in a whole Year, saying, The fewer Joynts this Herb hath, the less the number of Storms will be; and likewise from its Stalks that shoot out of the Joynts from the Root upwards, they judge in


what Month it will be tempestuous Weather. The Island also breeds many Harts, and other wild and tame Beasts, besides abundance of Birds.


Near this Island they also fish for Pearls on the Northern Shore, between this and the Main Land. There is likewise a very strange Fish caught here, with four Eyes, and six Feet, which the 
Chineses
 affirm produces also Pearls.


There is yet another Monster in this Sea, whose Head resembles a Birds, all the rest a Fish, and yields, as they say, several Precious Stones.


Between the City 
Coacheu
 and the Isle of 
Hainan
 they catch some Sea-Crabs, which differ not much from the other, except in this, that as soon as they come out of the Water into the Air, they are turn'd into Stone, yet still keeping their former Shape. The 
Portuguese
 and 
Chineses
 use them for Medicines against Burning Fevers.


On the Southside of this Isle the 
Chineses
 catch Whales, after the same man∣ner as we do at 
Greenland.


This Island hath divers Mountains towards the South side, whereof one call'd 
Kinim,
 hath a Quarry of red Marble.


Not far from 
Linkao,
 a little Town, there lies the Mountain 
Pisie,
 of which the 
Chineses
 tell strange Fictions; for they relate, That there was a Stag endued with Humane Reason, which conducted the Islanders Army through unknown ways, and brought them where they block'd up their Enemy, that came from 
Cochinchina
 to invade them, by which means they obtain'd a great Victory, and on the same place erected a Temple in his Honor.


Eastward of 
Cincheu
 is a Lake, where a City stood formerly, that was swal∣low'd up by an Earthquake.


By the little Town 
Iai
 rises a Mountain, said to be so lofty, that neither Wind nor Rain reaches the top; and therefore call'd 
Hoeifung,
 that is, 
Above the Wind.


It is very remarkable what the 
Chineses
 relate of the Sea near the Town 
Ci∣um, viz.
 That it neither ebbs nor flows, which is observ'd at the neighboring Places; but runs one half of the Month towards the East, and the other half to the West.


The City of 
Ingly
 is a Place of great Commerce, in which there are three Markets every day; one of which is held in a very large Place on the East side of the City, whither so soon as the Sun rises divers Merchants resort, as 
Arabians, Turks, Zurats, Malabars, Abyssines,
 and those of 
Pegu
 and 
Malaya,
 besides many of the Native Inhabitants, 
Indians,
 and 
Portuguese.


After this Market is ended, which continues till nine a Clock, begins a se∣cond, which is kept before the Governors Palace, and lasts till Noon, at which time every one retires home to their Dinners.


In the Afternoon about three a clock the third Market begins, in a Place at the South side of the City, where those Women (for the Females drive the Trade here, and not the Men) which sell several sorts of Goods, stand apart by themselves, and separated from one another; First stand in a row the Pepper-traders; next, those that sell 
Betel
 Leaves, 
Onekka,
 Water-Melons, and 
Anana's;
 and behind them the Book-sellers. In another Quarter are the Iron∣mongers and Brasiers Shops, furnish'd with Armor, Poniards, Swords, and all sorts of Weapons, and likewise 
Sandal
-Wood: Opposite to them stand such as vend Sugar, Honey, and all manner of Preserves: Not far distant is sold white, black, red, yellow, green, and gray Beans; and lastly appears a hand∣som Square, where all sorts of Herbs, either for Food or Physical use, may be bought.


Here also those Merchants which Trade in Linnen, and other Commodities by Whole-sale, have their Exchange; beyond which is a Market for Poultry, as Hens, Ducks, Pigeons, Parrots, and other Birds; and likewise of 
Cabrito's,
 or Goats.


Here are also three High Streets: In the first on the right side are some Jew∣ellers, which sell Rubies, Hyacinths, and the like; on the left side, many 
Chi∣nese
 Picture-drawers, intermix'd with such as sell divers Colours of Sowing-Silks, Silk and Damask Stuffs, Flannel, Sattin, Gold Wyre, Cloth of Tissue, Porcelane, Wax'd Baskets, Copper Basons, Pots, and Cans, great and small; Quicksilver, Chests, Writing-Paper of all Colours, Almanacks, Leaf-Gold in Books, Looking-glasses, Combs, Spectacles, Brimstone, 
Chinese
 Scymiters with wax'd Scabbards, 
China
-Roots, Fans, and other Trifles. The second is full of Picture-Shops. The third is onely for private use. Passing on somewhat fur∣ther, you come to the Fruit-Market, and through that into the Fish-Market; and from thence turning towards the left side, to the Shambles, beyond which is a peculiar Place, where the Women sell by Retail round and long Pepper, white and black Cloves, Nutmegs, Mace, Cubebs, Cinnamon, Cummin, Gin∣ger, 
Zedoar, Sandal
-Wood, Rhubarb, 
Galanga,
 Anniseeds, and the like: On the right side is the Rice-Market; close by which, the place where they sell Pots, Bags, Mats, and Salt; and opposite to it, on the left side, Oyl.


The first of 
March
 the Fleet sail'd by 
Tinhosa;
 the second, by the 
Cape de
 
Avarelles;
 on the third they pass'd over the 
Garden of Holland, Breda,
 and 
Acker∣sloot Sands,
 lying on the South side of the 
Paracelles:
 The fourth they sail'd by 
Candor,
 and on the seventh Anchor'd at the Isle of 
Timon.


The eighth was publickly read an Order of the Council, by which it was commanded, That none, either there or at 
Batavia,
 should sell any of the 
Chi∣nese
 Children which the Officers, Soldiers, or Sea-men had taken, either to 
Moors
 or 
Heathens:
 And for the better prevention thereof, it was order'd, That they should all be numbred; which Office was committed to the charge of 
Peter Suskens,
 Captain 
Adrian Mouldpenny,
 Secretary 
Henry Ysbrands,
 and 
Iohn Renaldus.
 This Order was 
verbatim
 as follows.




SInce there are many 
Chinese
 Children, as well Females as Males, in the Fleet which be∣long to the Officers, Sea-men, and Soldiers, whom We fear they may sell either here at 
Poele Timon,
 or when they come to 
Batavia,
 either to Idolaters or 
Mahumetans,
 which is neither fitting nor lawful for Us 
Christians,
 but strictly forbidden by Our Su∣perior Magistrates: Therefore We give every one knowledge and warning, not to dispose of any of the Maids or Youths, or other 
Chineses,
 either here at 
Poele Timon,
 or 
Batavia,
 to 
Mahumetans
 or Idolaters, neither to barter nor give them away to such, on pain of those Punishments decreed for such Offences: And that such Misdoers may be found out, every one shall be oblig'd to give an Account of how many they have, to Our appointed Offi∣cers, that they may take their Names in Writing: And this to be set up in all the Ships of the Fleet lying at an Anchor before 
Poele Timon.
 Dated the eighth of 
March,
 1664.




The tenth it was concluded in the Council, That since there was not Pro∣vision enough to be had for the Fleet, and that which was there, very dear, to go thence to the Isle of 
Laver,
 in hopes to be better provided: Towards which having weigh'd Anchor, they set Sail in the Evening, and about midnight ar∣riv'd there. On his departure the Admiral left a Letter with the Inhabitants of 
Poele Timon,
 to deliver to the Rere-Admiral 
Verwei,
 in which he advis'd him of all what had hapned since they parted.


The twelfth it was resolv'd in Council that Evening to proceed on their Voyage to 
Batavia;
 according to which, they weigh'd Anchor, and set Sail.


The thirteenth the Fleet sail'd by 
Poele Panjang;
 and on the fourteenth pass'd 
Lingen,
 and 
Poele Saya,
 and in the Evening 
Poele Toesjouw.


The fifteenth towards Night they pass'd by the Rock 
Frederick Hendrick,
 and towards Evening entred the 
Straights of Banka.


The twentieth the Fleet stemm'd the 
Thousand Islands,
 and in the Evening Anchor'd in twenty eight Fathom, and were about three Leagues distant from the Isle of 
Edam.


The next day, being the one and twentieth, the Fleet came to an Anchor at 
Batavia,
 with ten Ships. The 
Sea-hound
 Frigat, sent thither with the 
Quemuy
 Jonk, with Letters from the 
Piscadores,
 were also arriv'd there, and likewise two other Jonks.


Towards Evening the Admiral 
Balthazar Bort,
 Vice-Admiral 
Huibert de Lairesse,
 the Council of War, and Commanders of all the Ships, went ashore, and were courteously receiv'd by his Excellency the Lord 
Maetzuiker,
 who in∣viting them to Dinner the next day, the Admiral related all his Adventures to him, deliver'd him also his Papers, and a List of the Prisoners and the 
Chinese
 Children, which were in all two hundred forty three; 
viz.
 fifty nine Men, a hundred forty eight Male Children, and thirty six Female.


Mean while the Rear-Admiral 
Bartholomew Verwei,
 who on the twenty fourth
 of 
February
 set Sail with four Ships from the 
Piscadores,
 to the Coast of 
China,
 to transport the revolted 
Chineses,
 and land them about 
Puthay,
 or the River 
Chincheo,
 the twenty sixth came to an Anchor at the Island 
Colongsoe,
 where he desir'd the 
Tartar
 Agents, that they would with one of their Vessels fetch away the 
Chineses;
 to which purpose he put the Agents ashore at the City 
Eymuy.
 The next day they brought a Jonk, into which they were put with their Arms, and likewise the Letters given to the Agents, to be deliver'd the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and General 
Lipovi,
 with which the Agents went to the City 
Chincheo.


The twenty eighth a 
Tartar
 Vessel came aboard the Rere-Admiral, in which was a shaven 
Chinese
 call'd 
Hionko,
 which had formerly liv'd in 
Batavia,
 and spoke 
Portuguese,
 who told him, That he was sent by 
Sitetok,
 with Request to 
Verwei,
 That he would please to come to him to 
Haytin
 (a Place about a League and a half from thence) to a Treat; but 
Verwei
 being sickly, put it off. This 
Hionko
 also related, That the Enemy with his Forces lay yet in 
Tangsoa,
 and durst not go to 
Tayowan,
 fearing the 
Dutch
 Ships that lay before it; and that about fourteen days since, five thousand Men came to them in sixty Jonks, which then lay at 
Haytan;
 that the Commanders which came in the said Jonks desir'd to inhabit the Isles of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 which if it were permitted them, the Prime of the 
Coxingans
 would come over to them: But the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 had denied, and would not hearken thereto, alledging, That when another 
Holland
 Fleet should come again on the Coast, they would then with∣out any further trouble submit.


The first of 
March
 the 
Overveen, Cogge,
 and 
Buiksloot
 Frigats came to an An∣chor by the Rere-Admiral.


The third, being 
Monday, Verwei
 set Sail with his four Ships, that according to Order he might proceed on his Voyage to 
Batavia,
 and in the Afternoon found himself half a League beyond the Island with the Hole; his Course South-South-West.


The fourth he descry'd 
Lammo,
 an Isle in the North-West, four Leagues from the Fleet, in twenty two and twenty three Fathom Water; and in the Even∣ing the Sands, Nor-West and by West, within five Leagues.


The fifth, being 
Wednesday, Verwei
 came amongst a Company of 
Chinese
 Fish∣ers, of which he thought to overtake one, or by firing of a Gun make him strike; but in vain, for they by their nimble sailing got clear away.


In the Forenoon they saw 
Pedro Branco,
 and about Noon were in twenty two Degrees eleven Minutes Northern Latitude: Towards Evening they descry'd the Isles 
Lemas,
 Nor-West, three Leagues from them.


The eighth, being 
Saturday,
 in the Morning they had 
Tinhosa
 in the West, five Leagues distant, and at Noon in the Nor-West, his Course being South-South-West.


Munday
 the tenth, about Sun-rising, they saw 
Poele Canton,
 West-South-West four Leagues from them; and at Noon, by Observation, found themselves in fifteen Degrees and three Minutes Northern Latitude, and at Sun-set descry'd the 
Box Horns
 in the South-West and by South.


The eleventh they discern'd the Cape 
Averello,
 in the South and by West, six Leagues from them; and 
Poele Cambier de Terre
 in the Nor-West and by West, at three Leagues distance.


The twelfth in the Morning they reach'd the 
Round Holm,
 being three Leagues to the West and by North; and the Bay of 
Pangerang
 in the Nor-West, at the same distance.


The thirteenth early they saw 
Poele Cecier de Mare,
 in the South-East and by East, about six Leagues from them; and the fourteenth at Noon the Point of 
Sinques Iagues
 about five Leagues to the Nor-West.


The fifteenth, being 
Saturday,
 they had still sight of the high Land of 
Cam∣bodia.


On 
Monday
 they saw 
Poele Candor
 in the Nor-West, about three Leagues di∣stance.


The twentieth in the Morning they had the Isle of 
Timon
 in the South, towards which 
Verwei
 steer'd his Course with the other Ships, and in the Afternoon dropp'd Anchor on the West side of the great Sandy Bay, in eighteen Fathom Water.


The Inhabitants of this Place inform'd 
Verwei,
 That the Admiral 
Bort
 had been there ten days with the rest of the Fleet.


The same day 
Verwei
 set Sail again about Noon from 
Poele Timon,
 and was the next day in the South-West and by South, four Leagues from 
Poele Pan∣jang,
 which lay Nor-Nor-West two Leagues from him: The following Day the East Point of 
Lingen
 bore West-South-West from him; in the Evening, the Isle 
Poele Sayo
 Nor-West and by North; and the Northermost of the Isles, South-West and by South.


The twenty third, being 
Sunday,
 the Fleet descry'd the Mountain 
Monapyn,
 in the South-South-East, five Leagues distant, in fifteen Fathom Water. In the Af∣ternoon the 
Monapyn
 bore South-South-East three Leagues off. Here he sail'd directly towards the 
Straights of Banka,
 and on 
Munday
 Morning came up with 
Poele Nanko,
 driving with a Fore-Tide into the 
Straights,
 and in the Evening descry'd the Island 
Lucipar
 East-South-East, in five Fathom and a half, from whence he steer'd his Course directly South-West.


On 
Tuesday,
 being the twenty fifth, they saw the Isle with the High Trees in the West and by North, four Leagues from them: On 
Wednesday
 the 
North-Watchman▪



in the South-South-East, about three Leagues; and towards Even∣ing in the South-South-East, at one League.


The twenty seventh, being 
Thursday, Verwei
 sail'd West-ward, along by the 
Thousand Islands,
 and in the Afternoon ran safe to an Anchor in five Fathom Water, on the Road before 
Batavia,
 where going ashore, he went with the Com∣manders of the other three Ships to the Lord General 
Maetzuiker,
 and the Coun∣cil, and related such Adventures as had hapned to him since his departure; who for his faithful Services and valorous Conduct, gave him hearty Thanks, and promis'd him greater Rewards.


Thus much of the Relation concerning what hapned to the first Fleet, set out under the Command of the Admiral 
Balthazar Bort,
 and the Vice-Admiral 
Iohn Van Campen,
 to the Coast of 
China,
 and their Expedition to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and General 
Lipovi;
 and likewise what Adventures befel the second Fleet. Now it is requisite to give a brief Account of what hapned in 
Hoksieu,
 to the Merchant 
Ernest van Hogenhoek.


Till the first of 
March, Anno
 1664. Captain 
Constantine Nobel
 had resided in
 the City 
Hoksieu,
 as Agent; but then he came aboard the 
Finch,
 which he freighted with Merchandises to 
Batavia;
 in whose Place 
Hogenhoek
 was order'd to look after the Companies Business in 
Hoksieu,
 and to keep a Journal as well of State as Trading Affairs, and of all his Transactions and Services done for the Company, according to his Orders given him from the Admiral 
Bort
 and his Council.


The same day in the Morning the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 went to 
Chinzieu,
 to receive the Enemies of the Isles 
Tamswa
 and 
Lamoa
 into Favor, except 
Kimsia,
 who was said to be gone to 
Tayowan.


On 
Wednesday,
 the fifth, the General 
Lipovi
 went also to 
Chinzieu,
 that there with the Vice-Roy, he might receive the submitting 
Chineses
 into Favor; from whence he sent one of his 
Mandarins
 to the 
Netherlanders,
 to Complement them, and tell them in his Name, That some Letters written by the Council of State for that Empire, were come to his Hands, and that theirs would soon follow. Not long after the General 
Lipovi
's Chief Secretary came also with a Copy of the Council of States Letter, which was to this effect.




WE 
Lepous
 have shew'd your Letter concerning the 
Hollanders
 Trading
 here, to his Imperial Majesty.


We 
Ponpous
 have also made your last Years Writing concerning the 
Hol∣landers,
 known to his Majesty.


The 
Piejapous
 have also shew'd yours written to them, to his Majesty.


The 
Conbon
 likewise hath written a Letter to the Emperor, That the pro∣mis'd Ships were already come; and likewise the 
Hollanders
 Request concern∣ing Trade.


Povi
 hath also written to the 
Zoetaysins,
 That the 
Holland
 Admiral was come with his Fleet of War to 
Hoksieu,
 and that his Request was to come and Trade here once a Year, and also that he might have a Place granted for the building of a Store-house. The Express of the 
Conbon
 written to the 
Zoetaysins
 inform'd, That the 
Holland
 Admiral hath brought some Goods with him in his Ships, with Request that he may dispose of them to pay his Sol∣diers.


On all the foremention'd Writings his Majesty made Answer, You, my Lords, go and consult first about this Business; then let me know your Opi∣nions, and I will give you my further Answer.


The 
Zoetaysins, Puejapous, Lepous, Ponpous,
 in humble Obedience to Your Imperial Majesty do certifie our Opinions in manner following.


We have look'd over antient Records, and find that it was never us'd to permit any Strangers to live in our Countrey, or build a Factory, much less to drive a constant Trade; therefore We suppose it ought not to be granted.


We also find, That in antient Times it hath been accustomed, that when any Strangers came to Complement the Emperor, their Goods which they brought with them were put into one of the Emperors own Store-houses, erected for that purpose, where one of Our 
Mandarins
 taking an Inventory thereof, sold them: But without Addresses to the Emperor with Presents, nothing was permitted.


But since the 
Holland
 Admiral comes hither to assist the Emperor against his Enemies, We think that by way of Compensation he may this one time be suffer'd to sell his Goods brought along with him, first obtaining Licence from the General 
Lipovi,
 and the 
Conbon
 in 
Hoksieu:
 But hereafter the 
Hollan∣ders
 shall first make their Addresses to the Emperor, before they shall sell their Goods.


The Empeeor answer'd hereupon,


I 
Conghy,
 the twenty seventh Day of the twelfth Moon, in the second Year of My Reign, permit the 
Hollanders
 to come every other Year and Trade: The other Points I am of the same Opinion as You, my Lords. These are the Words of the Emperor, according to which, and this Letter, you may govern your selves.




In the translating of this Copy of the Council of States Letter, their man∣ner of Stile was as much as possible could be imitated.


The foremention'd 
Lepous
 and 
Ponpous,
 which had written these Letters to 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 are Judges and Councellors of Civil Affairs, as the 
Pie∣japous
 are of Martial: The 
Zoetaysins
 are four Guardians in the time of his Fa∣ther, plac'd over the young Emperor and Empire, to supervise Affairs during his Minority, being at the time of this Grant about twelve Years of Age.


The tenth, being 
Munday, Hogenhoek
 sent the Secretary 
Cheko
 with a Letter to the Governour of 
Hoksieu,
 who promis'd to speed it with his Post to the 
Nether∣land
 Ships.


On 
Wednesday,
 being the twelfth, the 
Netherlanders
 went all to the 
Pagode Con∣zan,
 being one of the greatest in all those lower Territories, situate in a most pleasant and delightful Place, about three Leagues from 
Hoksieu.


Monday
 the seventeenth, in the Afternoon, 
Lepora,
 one of the Vice-Roys Se∣cretaries, came to visit 
Hogenhoek,
 to whom, amongst other Discourses, he re∣lated, That the Enemies of 
Tanzwa
 and 
Lamao
 had alter'd their Opinions, ex∣cept 
Ziekautia
 Chief General of 
Kimsia,
 who staid with his Wives, Children, Soldiers, and Jonks, to know on what Terms he should come in, having first cut off his Hair after the 
Tartar
 Fashion.


He also related, That there was shortly expected a Seal'd Letter from his Majesty, with great Presents for the 
Hollanders.


The twenty eighth, being 
Tuesday, Hogenhoek
 went to visit the 
Conbon
 and Go∣vernor, and desir'd him to expound the meaning of those Words, 
That the
 Hollanders 
might come and Trade with their Ships every other Year:
 To which he courteously reply'd, That the Great Council of State at 
Peking
 would not yet permit the 
Hollanders
 a Free Trade for ever, nor grant them a Place for the


building of a Store-house, according to their Minds declared to his Majesty; but he was assur'd that his Imperial Majesty, on the Proposal of the Council, had made answer, 
That they might come once in two Years;
 which was as much as to say, That the 
Hollanders
 coming from remote Places, could come but once in two Years with their Ships to Trade, at which time they should have leave to drive their Commerce: And it seem'd by this Order, that Gifts and Pre∣sents were onely wanting to supple the Courtiers, and soften the Counsellors of State, through whose Hands all things of this nature pass'd, by reason of his Majesties Puerility: And if (continu'd he) you do hereafter order your Af∣fairs accordingly, I dare promise and undertake that you may not onely come once a Year, and Traffick; but twice, if you be able so to do. Whereupon, after several such like Discourses, he took his leave and departed.


From the nineteenth, being 
Wednesday,
 till the twenty second, nothing hap∣ned of any Remark, the 
Netherlanders
 being onely busie in building of one small, and two great Rooms, for the stowing their Commodities against the next Season.


On 
Sunday
 the twenty third, the General 
Lipovi
's Chief Secretary came to to visit the 
Hollanders,
 with whom they discours'd about the News sent from the Court in 
Peking;
 and he explain'd it just as the Governor had done, say∣ing, That he had discours'd with his Master about it, who had told him, The 
Hollanders
 are sure enough in this Countrey: The building of a Store-house is of small consequence; they have already a good House to Trade in. When his Majesty says, 
Once in two Years,
 they may come every Year, nay twice a Year, if they can, provided the 
Hobou
 (meaning 
Constantine Nobel
) went back to 
Ba∣tavia,
 and from thence were sent with a formal Embassy and Presents to the Court at 
Peking.


Against the Evening the Governor of 
Hoksieu
 sent the foremention'd Letter to 
Constantine Nobel
 back again, with information that the four Ships were gone.


On 
Munday
 the twenty fourth the Emperors Commissioners came from 
Pe∣king,
 to confer Titles of Honor on 
Tonganpek
 and 
Zibja,
 the Sons of 
Zovja,
 whom his Majesty had receiv'd into Favor.


On 
Tuesday,
 being the twenty fifth, 
Ongsamya,
 Secretary to the Vice-Roy
 
Singlamong,
 receiv'd the 
Netherlanders
 that came to visit him very courteously; and after having drank two or three Cups of 
Tee,
 and shewed them his whole House, he solemnly invited them to a Dinner, where they were nobly enter∣tain'd: And having pass'd about several Cups of their Liquor, he said to them, The 
Netherlanders
 may now be assur'd of a Free Trade for ever; but that they being so eminent Merchants, ought not to deal with the meaner sort of People, (as they had done the two preceding Years) who sold their Goods again by Retail, and then could scarce dispose of half of them; but that they should Trade with the Vice-Roy, General, and Governor, who if they wanted any thing in their Requests, might intercede for them at Court; and that then also they would be assur'd to carry out as much white Raw Silk (which his Majesty had prohibited on pain of death) as they desir'd: Whereas on the contrary, if their Highnesses were not pleas'd, they could not transport one Bale; therefore they ought to be wary.


Hereupon 
Hogenhoek
 made answer, That it was certain these Proposals might be advantageous, and that they agreed with the Opinions of his Ma∣sters; but if the 
Hollanders
 should Trade with their Excellencies onely, who ingross'd the Commodity, as they had done in 
Canton,
 that then they could


not subsist at that rate; on which account, and for no other Reason, they had left 
Canton:
 And he would rather prosecute the Design no farther, but go to a Place of Trade, where they might dispose of their Goods at Profit: But if their Highnesses would deal with them, they should have the Refusal, and they would be very reasonable, according as the Market went.


After this they fell into other Discourses, 
viz.
 That 
Ziekautya,
 a famous Sol∣dier, and General to 
Sepoan,
 was come to them, accompanied with six thousand of the chiefest 
Coxingan
 Soldiers; and that one of the chief Officers, 
Haytan's
 Brother, being ashore, and repenting, intended to make his Escape again in the Jonks that lay hard by, but was overtaken by some of the Vice-Roy's Sol∣diers, who would immediately have Beheaded him, had not his Brother, who had been Governor of 
Haytan,
 begg'd him; yet nevertheless he was put into Prison. This Discourse being ended, and having drank a chirping Cup, he desir'd 
Hogenhoek
 to bear him Company for two or three Hours longer, and then gave him leave to return.


On 
Wednesday
 the twenty sixth, the Governor of 
Hoksieu
's Secretary came to visit the 
Netherlanders,
 with Request, amongst other Discourses, for his Lords Cotton Quilt, promis'd by 
Constantine Nobel,
 which 
Hogenhoek
 immediately sent him.


The twenty eighth, being 
Friday, Hogenhoek
 went to the 
Conbon
 or Governor, with Requests to him, That since the Goods which he had left were not sold, he would grant him a Pass; for he intended to send some Goods to the Terri∣tory of 
Nangkin,
 or 
Chikiang,
 there to exchange them for wrought Silks; To which he made Answer, That he could not do it of his own accord; but that he would write to the General 
Lipovi,
 who was also concern'd in it, and let him know his Answer in a Fortnights time.


Besides, the Governor told him, that it was their own faults, that they had not sold their Merchandizes sooner, for he was a Man of sixty Years old, in all which time he never knew Cloves sold for an hundred and sixty, or an hundred and seventy Tail; and accordingly all their other Goods were set at too high Rates, so that they would not go off, unless they sold them cheaper, although there was neither want of Buyers nor Money. The 
Chineses
 sold the Goods which they brought with them much cheaper, 
viz.
 Bags of Pepper at nine or ten; 
Sandal-Wood,
 twenty two; and Quicksilver, at an hundred and ten, and an hundred and twenty Tail; Colour'd Clothes, at three, and three and a half the 
Dutch
 Ell; Scarlet, five and six Tail; which said he, are too great gains, according to what they are bought at 
Kalappa. Hogenhock
 answer'd the Governor hereupon, That it seem'd not strange to him, that the Revolted 
Chi∣neses
 sold their Goods so cheap, (for stoln Goods were always sold cheaper than those that were bought with ready Money;) at which the Governor Smiling, desir'd the 
Hollanders
 to excuse him, that he did not invite them to Dinner, because his youngest Wife lay a Dying, so that after having drank a Cup of Bean-Broth, they departed.


On 
Tuesday,
 being the first of 
April,
 the Governors Wife died, which occasi∣on'd that he gave Audience to none in fourteen days time.


Wednesday,
 being the second, the Vice-Roy's Secretary sent the Factor 
Lapora
 with a Letter to the 
Hollanders,
 informing, That two Agents, with two 
Manda∣rins
 stil'd 
Tzouzou
 (that is, 
Governors
) came the twenty eighth of the first Moon from 
Peking,
 and had brought with them the Emperors Letter and Presents to the 
Hollanders,
 for their faithful Service.


On 
Tuesday
 the twenty eighth, 
Haytankon
 Governor of 
Sinkzieu,
 with two Jonks, set Sail to the 
Manillaes:
 Their Lading consisted chiefly in Raw and Wrought Silks: And it was rumor'd, That the Vice-Roy and General in∣tended to send a Trading Fleet to 
Iapan,
 to which purpose abundance of Silk was already bought out of the upper Territories, which occasion'd so small Inquiry for the 
Netherland
 Goods.


About this time it hapned that no Rain had fallen for six or seven days: Whereupon the 
Conbon
 or Governor caus'd the killing or eating of Swine to be forbidden by Proclamation, on pain of death; because the young Rice-plants, that should be transplanted, dried up to nothing. And on the 
Thursday,
 being the seventeenth, the 
Conbon,
 with all his 
Mandarins
 and Nobles, went in Proces∣sion on foot, (which was never seen before) into several Temples, and carried Perfumes, making great Offerings to their Idols. The Priests also went up and down every day making great Lamentations and Prayers for Rain; the more, because the 
Conbon
 had threatned them, That if no Rain fell in ten or twelve days, they should be severely beaten with Sticks.


The sixteenth, being 
Wednesday,
 the Factor 
Lapora
 came with a Letter, co∣pied out of the Vice-Roy 
Singlamongs,
 written to his Secretary 
Ongsamya,
 the Contents of which were as followeth.




THe 
Holland
 Admiral hath by assisting Us against the Enemy gain'd great Honor, which I have made known to the Emperor, who hath sent two Agents from 
Peking,
 with an Imperial Letter and Presents to them: His Majesty hath also written to Us to go with your Forces and ingage 
Tayowan,
 and upon the Conquering of it, to restore it to you; and also that you may come every two Years to Trade. Acquaint the 
Holland Hobou
 with this joyful News, and that the Agents are also to be in 
Hoksieu
 within fifteen or six∣teen Days.




On 
Friday,
 the eighteenth, the 
Netherlanders
 were inform'd, That the Vice-Roy and General, attended with some of the Revolted 
Mandarins,
 were gone a Voyage with their Jonks to 
Tanswa
 and 
Lamoa,
 to meet 
Tziekautzia,
 who waited there to submit, as they had been inform'd; but coming thither, they found no body, 
Kimsia
 being fled with all his People; yet the 
Tartars
 not daring to stay, fearing his Return, took away the Villagers, with their Wives and Chil∣dren, ruining and burning all they could find.


On 
Saturday,
 being the nineteenth, some Merchants came with Tydings that 
Tziekautzia
 had brought a great many Merchandises with him from 
Tayo∣wan,
 and the other Islands, as Pepper, Sandal-Wood, Quicksilver, 
Iapan
-Wood, Cloves, Amber, Cloth, and the like.


About this time the Rice (by reason of the abundance of Prisoners and 
Coxingan Chineses,
 and likewise the Army which lay there) began to grow very dear; insomuch that a Sack was sold for thirty five or thirty six 
Maes:
 Their Highnesses therefore were necessitated for some time to give leave to those 
Chineses
 that were not Soldiers, to go to Sea with their Vessels, and seek to get a Livelihood, and also Till some Ground on the Sea-shore.


On 
Monday,
 the one and twentieth, News came that 
Houtin,
 one of the vali∣antest Soldiers belonging to 
Sepoan,
 was come to the 
Tartars,
 accompanied with eight thousand Men, whom he deliver'd all to the 
Tartars;
 and likewise, That 
Kimsia
 was gone to 
Tayowan,
 and 
Anpikya
 to the 
Piscadores;
 and that 
Kim∣sia
 resolv'd there to venture the 
Hollanders
 and the 
Tartars
 till the uttermost time, and was daily busie about fortifying and strengthning the Castle 
Ze∣landia,



and raising another Fort on 
Sakkam,
 so to make 
Formosa
 invincible.


On 
Thursday,
 being the twenty fourth, News came that the General 
Lipovi
 was gone from 
Sinchieuw
 to 
Soanchieuw,
 whence he was expected in ten or twelve days; likewise that a Post was come from the Court at 
Peking,
 with informa∣tion, That 
Lipovi
 was made 
Povi,
 or Governor of three Provinces, 
viz. Fokien, Kiangsi,
 and 
Chekiang;
 a thing seldom done, to give the Chief Command, both in Civil and Military Affairs, of three Territories, to one Lord.


Monday
 the twenty eighth, a 
Mandarin
 came in the Governors Name to com∣plement 
Hogenhoek,
 and to tell him, That the Emperors Agents were expected within five or six days in 
Hoksieu.


On 
Tuesday
 the twenty ninth, the Governor caus'd an Idol-Priest, because he had been negligent in his Prayers and Offerings for Rain (for the droughty Season still continu'd) to be miserably beaten with Sticks, threatning him moreover, That if none fell in five or six days after, he should be executed.


The first of 
May,
 being 
Thursday,
 it hapned to rain, to the great joy of the
 Idol-Priests; and the same day the Governor sent the 
Mandarin Tan-lavja
 to tell the 
Netherlanders,
 That the Agents were expected either that day or the next, and if they would not please to go and fetch in those Lords, because they were come so great a Journey about their Business, it being the 
Tartars
 fashion, and that which 
Nobel
 had also done the last Year. Hereupon, the 
Netherlanders
 prepar'd immediately to go to meet the Agents, and Congratulate their Wel∣come, as soon as they should have notice of their Arrival.


On 
Saturday,
 being the third, in the Evening the long expected Commissio∣ners came to 
Hoksieu,
 with a great Train of 
Tartar
 Soldiers and Servants; so that the 
Hollanders
 could not fetch them in.


On the fourth in the Morning, 
Hogenhoek
 went with all his Attendants to the Castle, to Welcome the Emperors Agents, who came to meet him in the Hall, and conducted him thorow two or three Chambers, where several Stools were plac'd, desiring him to sit down on the left hand, (by them ac∣counted the most Honorable, which 
Hogenhoek
 refus'd; yet after many Cere∣monies, he was forc'd to sit right against the Chief Agent, who would not take the Upper-hand, saying, 
The
 Hollanders 
are Mighty Lords;
 and that His Majesty rejoyc'd very much that they had assisted him with such a great Fleet and For∣ces, which was taken as a great kindness at Court, for to none else but the 
Hollanders
 did his Majesty ascribe that Victory: Wherefore he was sent from the Emperor to them, with returns of Thanks, together with Seal'd Letters and Presents. Then he signifi'd, that his Majesty had granted Licence to come thi∣ther, and Traffique every other year; and besides, had written to their Excel∣lencies the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 the General 
Lipovi,
 and Governor of 
Hoksieu,
 to joyn with the 
Netherland
 Fleet and Forces, and go with them to 
Tayowan,
 which after the Conquest, should be deliver'd to them, that they might as Neigh∣boring Friends, Trade with one another.


Then the Agents ask'd for the Admiral 
Bort,
 and the Fleet: Whereupon 
Hogenhoek
 reply'd, That for divers Reasons written to their Highnesses, he was gone to 
Batavia,
 but intended to return very shortly with fresh Recruits, and then with joynt Forces to set upon 
Tayowan.
 Whereto the Agents reply'd, That his Majesty and the Council of State knew not, but that the Admiral and the whole Fleet had been still upon the Coast; for which reason, they had with all speed written to their Excellencies, to go with them to 
Tayowan,
 that the 
Hollanders
 might be repossess'd of it, which his Majesty earnestly desir'd.


They would willingly deliver him his Majesties Letter now, but their High∣nesses, the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and General 
Lipovi,
 who were also concern'd in it, being absent, it could not be done: therefore they desir'd he would be pleas'd to have patience till their coming, which would be very shortly.


Hogenhoek
 having drank a Cup or two of 
Tee,
 took his leave, and was con∣ducted out at the Gates by the Agents, who profess'd great love to the 
Hollan∣ders.
 In his return home, 
Hogenhoek
 met with the 
Conbon
 or Governor of 
Hok∣sieu,
 accompany'd with divers Noblemen and 
Mandarins,
 who were all going to welcome and Complement the Agents.


On 
Monday
 Morning, being the fifth, one 
Mandarin
 came in the Agents name to salute 
Hogenhoek;
 and after having been entertain'd with Wine and Fruit, took his leave.


Soon after, 
Hogenhoek
 went to the Governor to ask, If the opening of his Majesties Letter must be defer'd till the Vice-Roys and Generals coming home? Who answer'd, That it was very requisite; and because the Letter must be broke open in the presence of the foremention'd Persons, and him, he had al∣ready sent an Express about it to their Excellencies: But that it would be eigh∣teen or twenty days before the Vice-Roy could return, till which time he must have Patience. Then 
Hogenhoek
 ask'd the Governor, if it was requisite to invite the Agents to a Treat, and some other Recreation? Whereupon he was an∣swer'd, That before they had done all their Commands and Businesses, they durst not come, but when that was done, he might do his pleasure. Asking moreover, If 
Hogenhoek
 did yet doubt, whether he was a true friend to the 
Hol∣landers?
 And told him, That they were too hasty in the going with their Ships, and had they staid but five or six days longer, they might (without doubt) have carry'd this News to the King of 
Iacatra,
 (meaning 
Maetzuiker.
) But the Admi∣ral, for two years together, was gone so hastily, that he did not so much as take his leave of any person, which was not well taken by them, and they had written their discontent concerning it to the General and Governor of 
India:
 Which 
Hogenhoek
 answering, said, That necessity had forc'd them.


After being handsomly entertain'd, the 
Netherlanders
 taking their leave, re∣turn'd to their Quarters.


The sixth being 
Tuesday,
 some 
Chinese
 Merchants came to the 
Dutch
 Store∣house to look upon the Commodities that were left; and afterwards ask'd, if the 
Hollanders
 would dispose of them by Parcels, or all together? To which 
Hogenhoek
 reply'd, That if they lik'd the whole quantity, that he would dispose of them all, and be paid for them as in 
Constantine Nobel
's time; at which the Merchants laughing, said, That then the Goods were sold the dearer, because it was the first time that the 
Hollanders
 drove a Trade there; and also, because the 
Chineses
 were formerly forbidden on pain of Death not to buy such Commo∣dities of Foraigners: But if they would abate something of their Price, consi∣dering the whole Parcel, then they would Treat with them; which if they would not do, they told 
Hogenhoek,
 that he might keep them a year or two lon∣ger. Whereupon 
Hogenhoek
 desir'd them to make a proffer, which was, an hun∣dred and forty Tail for the Cloves; an hundred and twenty for Quicksilver; for Amber of twelve Guilders, eight Tail; for that of eleven, seven Tail and an half; for that of six, four Tail; for that of five, three Tail; for that of twenty four 
Stivers,
 nine 
Maes;
 for the best sort of Camphier, of twenty three 
Ryals,
 eighteen Tail; for the second sort of twenty 
Ryals,
 sixteen Tail and a half; for Scarlet, six Tail the 
Dutch
 Ell; for Crimson, four Tail; for other Co∣lours,


three Tail; and if he thought fit to dispose of them at these Rates, they would deliver him White-Raw-Silk in the sixth Moneth at the Market Price which should be then; to which, 
Hogenhoek
 desiring some time of considerati∣on, they return'd.


On 
Thursday,
 being the eighth, the General 
Lipovi
 return'd with all his Train to 
Hoksieu,
 where he was nobly receiv'd by the 
Conbon
 or Governor.


Friday,
 the ninth, 
Hogenhoek
 sent the Factor 
Pedel
 to the General 
Lipovi,
 to Complement and welcome him in his Name, because the Chollick, wherewith he was sore afflicted, prevented him from doing it in Person.


Being come home, he related, That the General had accepted of the excuse, and ask'd, if he had sold all his Goods; to which 
Pedel
 had made answer, 
No,
 and that they remain'd without any enquiry for them; which the Governor said, was not strange to him, because they held them at so high a rate; and if they intended to dispose of them before more came, they must set a more mo∣derate Price, as they had done before, or else they would hereafter so stick on their Hands, that they would get nothing near so much for them as they might do now.


The tenth, being 
Saturday,
 the General sent for a piece of Crown Serge to 
Hogenhoek,
 which being carry'd him, he ask'd, What he must pay for it? 
Hogen∣hoek
 answering, said, Forty Tail; to which the Factor reply'd, If the Mer∣chants pay forty, my Master ought to pay but thirty eight, because he wants it for his own use, to make a Tent of it; whereupon 
Hogenhoek,
 according to his desire, let him have it.


On 
Sunday
 towards the Evening, the Governor sent his Servant to invite 
Ho∣genhoek
 to come to Dine with him the next day; to which returning Thanks, he sent word, that he would come, notwithstanding he was not well.


On 
Monday
 Morning, the twelfth, 
Hogenhoek
 went to the General 
Lipovi
's House, to Complement and welcome him; because at his coming he could not in Person do it, being prevented by Sickness, and now going to a Treat at the Governors, it might have been ill resented, if he had not first visited the General.


When coming, he had immediately Audience by the General, who before he sate down, ask'd him concerning his Health, and why he walk'd abroad so soon, and that he could see by his looks that he was not perfectly cur'd. To which he answer'd, That he did it for the Reasons aforesaid, fearing if he had deny'd, that the Governor might perhaps have resented it ill.


The General, after he had drank, and Presented 
Hogenhoek
 with a Cup of Milk mixt with Bean Flower and 
Peking
 Butter, he began to speak concerning the Letter that came from the Emperor, whereby he said, It appear'd how the Emperor lov'd the 
Hollanders,
 observing, he had Commanded his Forces to go to assist them out of his own Dominions, which was never done before, neither in the 
Chinese
 nor 
Tartar
 Government. Nay, that which is more, if the 
Hollanders
 desir'd 
Tayowan,
 they should possess it again, and then as true and faithful Friends, to Trade and assist one another; as for their Trading there, they were ascertain'd; and concerning their coming every other year, they need not to take any notice thereof, but that they might upon his word come and Traffique every Year.


But an Ambassador must without fail be sent to the Emperor, with humble Thanks and Presents for his gracious Favors; and that he had writ to his Ma∣jesty, that the old 
Hobou
 (meaning 
Constantine Nobel
) was gone to 
Batavia,
 to


be Commission'd to that purpose; and therefore it would not be convenient, that any other should come in his stead. But 
Hogenhoek
 answering, that he could not assure it; the General seem'd dissatisfi'd, however taking no further no∣tice, ask'd, When the Admiral 
Bort
 would come again, because they only wait∣ed for the Fleet to go to 
Tayowan,
 to ingage it with all their Forces: To which 
Hogenhoek
 reply'd, that he knew not certainly the time, but suppos'd, that the Fleet would either be there again in 
Iune,
 or the beginning of 
August,
 as the Admiral 
Bort
 had written at his departure to their Highnesses. But the Gene∣ral in return, onely declar'd himself unsatisfi'd with the 
Holland
 Admirals de∣parture, laying the whole fault of the Enemies not being totally subdu'd up∣on him, who (he said) pretended to be more bound up, and limited by his Commission than he was.


Hogenhoek,
 after many other Discourses, desir'd, That he might take his leave, which the General permitted, because he was invited by the 
Conbon
 or Gover∣nor; from whence as he was going, he met with a 
Mandarin
 by the way, sent by the 
Conbon,
 to tell him, That it was time to come, because the Agents were there already.


Coming to the Court, 
Hogenhoek
 was very courteously receiv'd by the Go∣vernor, and likewise by the Agents, which being pass'd, they took their places: The Governor sat below the foremention'd Lords. The Stools on which they sate were cover'd with Damask, Imbroyder'd with Gold. After having rested themselves a little, the Agents crav'd 
Hogenhoek
's excuse, that they had not vi∣sited him, alledging, That the chief reason was, because they had not fully effected all their Commands; which should no sooner be done, but they would wait upon him in his House.


Then having drunk a Cup or two of Milk, the Governor desir'd the 
Ne∣therlanders
 to rise, and sit down at the Table, as the Stools were plac'd, on which they accordingly went, and seated themselves.


Whilst they were at Dinner, the Governor had order'd some other Pastimes to be presented, so to make the Treat the nobler, which was very Magnificent of it self: After the several Chargers with variety of Meat, had been chang'd for greater Delicacies thirty six several times, and the Feast ended with Mirth and Entertainment, the Agents took their leave first, and afterwards the 
Ne∣therlanders.


On the twenty ninth, against the Evening, the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 return'd to 
Hoksieu,
 where he was receiv'd with great signs of Rejoycing, having Con∣quer'd 
Tamzwa, Lamoa,
 and other little Isles lying thereabouts, by which the whole Coast was clear'd.


The twentieth, the 
Mandarins
 belonging to the Agents came again to the 
Ne∣therlanders,
 to raise the Price of Silks, telling their Landlord, that they had understood by the way, that the 
Hollanders
 bought great quantities of Silk, which they sent to 
Batavia,
 a thing contrary to the Emperors Order. But be∣cause of their Services done to the Empire, it was conniv'd at; therefore their Masters had also bought Silk to deliver to them, which if they would not take, it might easily be wrought by the Agents means, to procure the Vice-Roy, Ge∣neral 
Lipovi,
 and Governor, to forbid them to buy any more, before they had leave from the Emperor, with several other such like Discourses; but 
Hogenhoek
 returning them the former answer, they went away unsatisfi'd.


About ten a Clock, 
Hogenhoek
 with all his Company, went to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
's Court, to Complement and wish him joy, of the Conquest gotten against his Enemies.


Coming thither, the Vice-Roy was gone about half an hour before, to visit one of his Chief Captains, that lay very sick. But his Interpreter desir'd the 
Netherlanders
 to stay a little in the base Court, and he would give his Highness notice; which being accordingly done, the Vice-Roy, after a little stay, re∣turn'd home, and immediately granted Audience to 
Hogenhoek,
 who Congra∣tulated his happy Return, and likewise his Victory, for which his Highness return'd him Thanks, and wish'd him Joy of the Letter and Presents sent to them from his Majesty. But after some short and Complemental Discourses, the Vice-Roy made fresh Complaints of the Admiral 
Borts
 sudden departure, without giving him the least notice of it, saying, it was true, that he had re∣ceiv'd a Letter from him, but it was just at his departure, when he had no time to answer it.


He ask'd moreover, if the Admiral would return, or another come in his place; to which 
Hogenhoek
 made answer, That it was at the King of 
Iacatra
's pleasure, and that he could not give his Excellency any assurance of it.


Then the Vice-Roy said, That in regard he could not agree with the Admiral therefore wish'd, that there would come another in his stead; for had the Admi∣ral (said he) observ'd my Advice, to have gone together to 
Tayowan,
 after we had Conquer'd 
Tamzwa
 and 
Lamoa,
 we had surely been Masters of it er'e this time. But the Admiral would never believe him; but there was now Order come from his Majesty to go thither; for He did not know, but that the Fleet was there yet, and therefore for their faithful Service done to the Realm, he had likewise granted them to come and Trade every Year, which they ought to take as a great Favor, and believe, that his Majesty was very graciously in∣clin'd towards them, and therefore when an Ambassador should come with Addresses to his Majesty, he doubted not, but what er'e else they desir'd at Court, they would obtain. They staid only for the Fleet, which should no sooner be come, but according to his Majesties Commands, they would go to∣gether to 
Tayowan.
 At last excusing himself, that he could not in person stay to Treat him, being still weary of his Journey, he Commanded two of his Coun∣cil to bear 
Hogenhoek
 Company, and Entertain him, and when it was time to open the Emperors Letter, they should give him notice; which said, he went in, and the 
Netherlanders
 soon after return'd to their Lodgings.


Against the Evening, being the one and twentieth, their Excellencies sent word to 
Hogenhoek
 by one of their 
Mandarins,
 that the next Morning about Sun rising, he should go to the Emperors 
Poetzienzie;
 and accordingly at the ap∣pointed time, 
Hogenhoek
 taking Horse, went thither with all speed; where coming, and finding the whole Court Guarded, he stay'd at an appointed place, till the Vice-Roy and Agents came with the Emperors Letter; where, also, the General 
Lipovi,
 with the 
Conbon
 or Governor, and all the 
Mandarins
 waited.


After they had staid some time, the General 
Lipovi
 sent to the Factor 
Pedel,
 to tell 
Hogenhoek,
 That since he could not help to fetch in the Emperors Letter at first; that now, when it came to the Court, he should fall on one of his Knees, to do it Reverence, because it was the Custom of the Country; 
Nobel
 ha∣ving also done it at the fetching in of the Letter the last Year.


Hogenhoek
 having staid an hour with patience, the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 ap∣pear'd with a great Train of his 
Mandarins,
 Nobles, and Courtiers, and soon af∣ter, the Agents with the Emperors Letters and Presents.


The Letter was carry'd by eight Persons, all in a Livery of Red and Yel∣low,






on two Wax'd Sticks, on which stood a Cabinet made like a Temple, richly Gilt and adorn'd with Imagery; in this Cabinet lay the Emperors Let∣ter, wrap'd up in a Yellow Scarf: Afterwards follow'd five or six Red Wax'd Tables, cover'd with Damask Clothes, and carry'd by four Persons, on which the Presents which consisted in Money, Gold, and Silks lay bare: Then fol∣low'd the Agents on Horse-back, accompany'd with divers Nobles.


Before the Emperors Letter walk'd above twenty Persons, beating on Drums, and playing on divers Musical Instruments; so that it rather seem'd to be a great Triumph, than for the reading of a Letter.


As it pass'd by, 
Hogenhoek,
 according to the Generals Request, shew'd Reve∣rence to the Letter, by Bowing of his Head and Body; which done, they fol∣low'd the Train into a great Hall, where their Excellencies were already Seat∣ed, and then rose up: After they had consulted a little together, 
Hogenhoek
 was again Commanded to Kneel, and so to continue Kneeling all the time, whilst it was reading.


After the Letter had been read publickly, it was laid on 
Hogenhoek's
 Arm by the Chief Agent; for which Honor, he was forc'd Kneeling to bow his Head several times together, and likewise for the thousand Tail, and Silk Stuffs.


After this, their Excellencies went to sit under a Canopy, and caus'd a great Tankard with Milk mixt with 
Peking
 Butter and Bean Flower, to be brought to them, whereupon they invited 
Hogenhock
 also to sit down by them; at last, the Vice-Roy rising and taking his leave, went to his own Court: Soon af∣ter follow'd the General 
Lipovi,
 and lastly, the two Agents, 
Netherlanders,
 and Governors, who advis'd 
Hogenhoek,
 that he should go the next day to Thank the Agents, which he accordingly promis'd to do.


The Emperors Letter 
Hogenhoek
 Commanded 
Lewis de Keizer
 to carry on his back, but the Presents were laid in 
Pallakins;
 all the way which they pass'd, several sorts of People, with Drums and other Musical Instruments, throng'd the Streets to see them.


Hogenhoek
 coming home, was welcom'd by two of the Emperors 
Poetzienzie,
 with three Volleys of Shot, and the Drums and Pipes play'd a whole hour be∣fore the Letter, which they did onely to get Money; for 
Hogenhoek
 was direct∣ed to give somewhat more than 
Nobel
 had done the Year before; and likewise the Vice-Roy and General Order'd 
Hogenhoek
 to go the next day to visit the Agents, and return them Thanks, because it seldom or never happen'd, that his Majesty gave such great Presents to any Person whatsoever.


After 
Hogenhoek
 had been at home some time, he caus'd the Emperors Letter to be Translated: Which was to this effect.




I 
Conghy
 Emperor, send this Letter to the 
Holland
 Admiral 
Balthazar.


I Love strangers who come from remote and far distant places, as an Emperor ought to do; and the more, because those that do us good, must receive good again; and those that deserve Honor, must be well rewarded. I have certainly understood that you have purchas'd Honor, therefore I have sent Pre∣sents to you. I have heard, that you 
Balthazar
 have justly and valiantly gone with my Officers to War, by which I perceive you mean honestly with me and my People, as appears by your subduing the Pyrats, and driving them away, like a Bird which hath made a Nest to Hatch in, and is now broken to pieces. The Honor which I always expected from the 
Hollanders,
 by Conquer∣ing the 
Islanders,
 and driving them away from thence, is perform'd; therefore I am Oblig'd to Gratifie you with some Gifts, and send this my Letter, desiring you to accept my Presents, and Honor my Letter.


Conghy.




The Presents that came with his Majesties Letter, consisted in a thousand Tail of 
Chinese
 Silver, and sixty Pieces of several Silks and Cloth of Tissue.


On 
Friday,
 the twenty third, 
Hogenhoek
 went in the Morning with all his At∣tendance to the Vice-Roy and General, and likewise to the Emperors Commis∣sioners, to acquaint them, that he was dissatisfi'd for that the Emperors Let∣ter made no mention of their Traffick, or about their staying there, much less, to go with their Fleet and Forces to 
Tayowan,
 as their Highnesses had long since promis'd him, as also the Admiral 
Bort,
 and Captain 
Nobel; viz.
 that there were Seal'd Letters expected from his Majesty about it; and likewise, that the Admiral and they had not without reason complain'd of their inconstancy, appear'd now plainly, because not one of their Verbal Promises and Assurances were found to be true, which would be very ill resented by the Lord General, that they had been detain'd two years, and now receiv'd nothing but words: To which the Vice-Roy answer'd with a Grim Countenance, that' tis true, his Majesty had permitted the 
Hollanders
 to Trade, but an Ambassador must every other year be sent to him; and as to the business of 
Tayowan,
 they would be ready to go with them thither to subdue it; if therefore an Ambassador should come, they would immediately dispatch him with Letters of Recommendation to 
Peking;
 Whereupon he durst assure them, that they would obtain the ever∣lasting Trade, and leave to go and come when they pleas'd, and also have an Island or piece of Land alotted them, on which they might reside without Molestation.


The like Answers 
Hogenhoek
 receiv'd from the Governor; but the General 
Lipovi
 seem'd to be highly displeas'd, saying, That so great honor of receiving


Presents, and a Seal'd Letter from the Emperor, in which he attributed the Honor of Conquering the Enemy to them, was never yet known; so that they ought to have been satisfi'd with that only. 
Hogenhoek
 reply'd, That they thank'd his Majesty for his Favor: But where-ever the 
Hollanders
 were per∣mitted to Trade, they receiv'd Seal'd Letters from the Princes, which serv'd as a safe-guard for their Governors: Nay further, (said he) the 
Hollanders
 Trade thorow the whole World, without being limited a time; but when er'e they came, they were Welcome, and Traffiqu'd as they thought fit: Whereupon the General angerly reply'd, Each Countrey had its fashion, and so accordingly had his; if they did not like the proffer of coming every two years once, they might stay away; and if they did not come in the time li∣mited, they should go away again without effecting any thing. 
Hogenhoek
 an∣swer'd, That this Discourse seem'd very strange, when as he himself had pro∣mis'd, that he would procure him Seal'd Letters from his Majesty for it, and indeed in Honor he could do no less, their Requests being so reasonable, 
viz.
 That after the Conquering of the Islands, they might for their great Charge and trouble, only enjoy the benefit of Trade.


The Vice-Roy having been silent some time, diverted the Discourse, ask∣ing 
Hogenhoek
 if 
Nobel
 would return, with Addresses and Presents to his Maje∣sty at 
Peking?
 Whereto he reply'd, That he could not assure it, in regard it was in the Lord General's choice, whom he would choose to Negotiate such an Affair.


Then the General told him, as he had often done before, That he had writ to the Emperor, and at 
Nobels
 return, they would grant the Company all what they would ask; for the Emperor affected the 
Hollanders
 very much, as appear'd by his Letters and Presents, which in his time had never been done to any Stranger; and the Agents must also be better gratifi'd than 
Nobel
 had done, and that without fail, the next day, because they were just upon their return to the Court.


Hereupon 
Hogenhoek
 ask'd the Vice-Roy, that he would be pleas'd to tell him, how much more he should give than 
Nobel
 had done? Who said, That it was at his pleasure: Then 
Hogenhoek
 taking his leave, went thence to the Agents, who courteously receiv'd him, and Discours'd with them concerning the constant Trade, saying, He hop'd that they would have brought Seal'd Let∣ters from his Majesty about it. To which they reply'd, That they had deli∣ver'd Seal'd Letters about it to their Excellencies, 
Singlamong, Lipovi,
 and the 
Conbon
 or Governor of 
Hoksieu;
 to this effect, that if an Ambassador came to thank his Majesty, he should immediately travel up into the Countrey, and the Trade take a beginning to come every other year.


The Agents also were of opinion, That if an Embassy was sent to the Court at 
Peking,
 that the 
Hollanders,
 if they requested any thing else, it would be granted them, in regard his Majesty bore a great affection towards them, (be∣cause they had so faithfully assisted in the War) and gave them the sole Honor of the Conquest of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy.
 They also promis'd 
Hogenhoek,
 that when they came to the Court, they would seek to obtain a Grant from his Ma∣jesty for the constant Trade, for which he thanking them, return'd to his Lodging, where he debated the General's Proposal of augmenting the Pre∣sents to be made to the Emperors Commissioners, and at last resolv'd to give the prime Agent twenty two 
Dutch
 Ells of Scarlet, half a Chain of Blood Coral weighing six Ounces, two Pieces of Colour'd Perpetuana's, six Pieces of Lin∣nen, with four rich Swords.


The second Agent they gave seventeen Ells of Scarlet, half a Chain of the like Coral, weighing four Ounces, two Pieces of Colour'd Perpetuana's, four Pieces of Linnen, and two Swords; and likewise in their Presence, their 
Man∣darins
 and other Attendants were also presented every one according to their Quality.


On 
Saturday
 Morning, being the twenty fourth, 
Hogenhoek
 with his Servants went to the Agents to deliver the Presents, who seem'd to refuse them, yet after having look'd them over, and deny'd them several times, they at last over▪perswaded by 
Hogenhoek,
 receiv'd them.


At parting, 
Hogenhoek
 desir'd once more, that they would be pleas'd to seek the 
Hollanders
 advantage, before the Emperor and Council of State, in the gaining of the constant Trade, and render such an account of them, as they had found and seen during their stay; all which they faithfully promis'd.


Besides, the 
Hollanders
 had some discourse about Trading into several parts of 
India,
 and what Goods were brought thither, and carry'd from thence by the 
Netherlanders,
 which they again Transported to other places.


The Agents seem'd to be much delighted in this Discourse, saying, If an Ambassador be sent to the Emperor, and the Enemy be driven from 
Tayo∣wan,
 they need not fear but all things would be granted them. Here the Dis∣course ended, and 
Hogenhoek
 returning Thanks, took his leave and departed.


On 
Monday,
 being the twenty sixth, the Governor or 
Conbon
 sent the 
Hollan∣ders
 a Present, being good Table-provision; for which 
Hogenhoek
 return'd him thanks by Factor 
Pedell.


On 
Thursday
 the twenty ninth, the 
Chineses
 kept the Feast in 
Hoksieu,
 by them
 call'd 
Peelou;
 and likewise on the same day through all 
China, viz.
 with long Boats with Oars, new Painted and trick'd with Silk Flags and Pennons of se∣veral colours, with which they Challenge and Row great Matches.


According to the 
Chineses
 relation to 
Hogenhoek,
 the Instituter of this great Festival 
Peelou,
 was formerly Governor of the 
Paracelles,
 a Countrey that is very fruitful, and abounds with Gold and Silver, who foretold, That that Island should be swallow'd up: wherefore he and some of his Friends, and others that believ'd him, several days before fled from thence in their Jonks to the Main of 
China;
 where they honor him as a God of the Sea: for as they report, soon after his departure the Island sunk; in Commemoration of which they keep this annual Holy-day.


The 
Hollanders
 to observe the Custom of this Feast, as also to recreate them∣selves, hir'd a Boat to go among the rest.


No sooner was 
Hogenhoek
 return'd home, but the General 
Lipovi
 sent his 
Mandarin
 to give him notice, that the Emperors Agents intended the next Morn∣ing to go for 
Peking,
 and that he and his Men should conduct them out of the City, and therefore to send him word what Horses he wanted, and they should be accordingly furnish'd.


On 
Friday,
 being the thirtieth, about Day-break, another 
Mandarin,
 sent from 
Lipovi,
 came to 
Hogenhoek,
 to desire him that he would be at the Agents House betimes: Whereupon he and his Men went immediately thither, some on Horses, others in 
Pallakins;
 where coming they found them busie Packing up their Goods, and linking and coupling of Slaves and Slavesses, to the num∣ber of six or seven hundred, taken from the Islands 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 and gi∣ven to them by the Governors of 
Zing
 and 
Sanzieuw,
 and other Officers; where∣fore the 
Hollanders
 desir'd to go out before, that they might not hinder the


Agents; which accordingly they did: and after having stay'd a considerable time at the Vice-Roys open House, the Agents came to them on Horseback▪ excusing themselves that they had made them stay so long: which they an∣swering again with a Complement, told them, That they had not accounted the time long, but took it for an honor to wait upon them.


Here the Emperors Envoys thank'd 
Hogenhoek
 for the Presents, saying, That they had receiv'd them very kindly, but knew not whether his Majesty would let them keep such great Gifts without ordering to return them again. They also promis'd, as they had done several times before, to speak in the behalf of the 
Netherlanders
 before his Majesty and Council, and give them an account of all they had seen and heard; and also would do their utmost endeavor, and assist the Ambassador when he should come to 
Peking:
 for which 
Hogenhoek
 re∣turning them humble thanks, Drank to them his Majesties Health in a great Glass of Sack that he had ready for that purpose, which went merrily round. The Envoy much admiring the excellent rellish of the Liquor, ask'd if it grew in their native Countrey? saying, That it must need be a brave Place, which not onely produces such excellent Wine, but divers sorts of rare Commodities, desiring him to give each of their chiefest Servants also a Glass, that when they came to 
Peking,
 they might say they had drank some 
Dutch
 Liquor. This done, and the 
Hollanders
 having taken their Leave, they return'd, and came to∣wards Evening to their Quarters.


The last, being 
Saturday, Hogenhoek
 was inform'd, that the General 
Lipovi
 had shut up his great Gates, because he would not grant any more Audience; and also that he would not trouble himself any longer about business concern∣ing his Office, being resolv'd to go to 
Peking,
 where his most pre-eminent Wife (Aunt to the present Emperor) resided, she having writ to him several times to come up to her.


The Council of State (as on the twenty fourth of 
April
 is related) endea∣vor'd preferring the General, to make him chief Governor of three Territo∣ries, which he modesty refused, being rather willing to give over all Offices of State, because (as he told 
Hogenhoek
) his Age requir'd case, and that to Go∣vern was a Work too great for him; and to that purpose expected his 
Writ of Ease,
 for which he had sent five or six Posts to his Majesty and the Council, whose Answer he expected daily.


On 
Tuesday,
 being the thirtieth of 
Iune, Hogenhoek
 sent Factor 
Pedell
 to the
 
Conbon,
 or Governor, telling him, That he had not receiv'd any allowance of Money for his Table from the 
Mandarins
 in two Moneths, and therefore desir'd that he would please to provide it for him. The Governor, to whom this seem'd very strange, said, That his Majesty had not yet forbid, but that it should be continu'd. But however, on 
Thursday
 Morning early, he with all his Company went to the Vice-Roy and General themselves, complaining that they had not receiv'd their Table Pension these two Moneths: whereat they were much dissatisfi'd, and immediately sent Order to the two 
Mandarins,
 not to fail to pay the Arrears next day, and so at every Moneths end punctually, at their peril, and thence-forward.


On 
Friday,
 being the sixth, the Grand 
Mandarin Tziekautzia,
 came from 
Sin∣chieu
 by Land to 
Hoksieu,
 with a Guard of between four and five hundred Sol∣diers, and the remainder of them were to come within a day or two after, with his Jonks. It was also reported, that he should go to 
Iemping,
 a Town about nine days Journey from 
Hoksieu
) to be Governor of it, though the Townsmen oppos'd it.














On 
Wednesday,
 being the eleventh, 
Tziekautzia
's Jonks arriv'd at Fort 
Minjazen,
 and were expected in three or four days to come up to the Bridge.


On 
Friday
 the twentieth, 
Hogenhoek
 went to the Vice-Roy and General 
Lipo∣vi,
 with Request in their General 
Maetzuikers
 Name, for the delivery of some 
Holland
 Prisoners, that were brought thither with 
Tziekautzia
's Jonks: where∣upon they promis'd to enquire if it were so or not, and would give Order that they should be sent to the General 
Lipovi,
 he having the Command of the sub∣mitted 
Chineses.


The 
Netherlanders
 heard this day the news of the death of 
Tonganpek, Zavja
's Brother, and one of the Admirals, as also of the great Court Messenger.


On 
Tuesday
 the twenty fourth, 
Zanzia,
 chief Secretary to 
Lipovi,
 came in his Masters Name to acquaint 
Hogenhoek,
 that he had sent to 
Tziekautzia
 concern∣ing the Prisoners; who answer'd, That they which came to him from the Castle 
Zelandia
 in 
Formosa,
 had told him, that they would rather chuse to be chopp'd in Pieces, than return again to their Countrey-men; and that the 
Negro
 Boys refus'd in like manner. To which 
Hogenhoek
 made answer, That it seem'd very strange to him, since every day one or other spoke to him to pro∣cure their Liberty. I hear, that since I mov'd the General concerning their Free∣dom, they have been in Fetters, and harder restraint than before. In brief, I am confident he has falsly inform'd the General, of which I desire you will please to acquaint him.


The twenty fifth and twenty sixth 
Hogenhoek
 sent a Letter to the General 
Lipovi,
 but it was not receiv'd in regard of his Infirmity: but on 
Friday
 the twenty eighth it was deliver'd, and Answer sent, That he had read the Letter, and finding mention'd therein, That unless the Prisoners were deliver'd, some trouble would arise thereupon, which he understood to be Threats; therefore 
Hogenhoek
 must know that he was 
Lipovi,
 and that it lay in his power to do the 
Hollanders
 good or hurt, and desir'd to hear no more such calumnious words, or else to forbear the Court.


The 
Sunday
 following the Master of the Lodgings where the Agents lay, de∣sir'd him to take 
Tziekautzia
's Goods and sell them for him, promising to give him a good Reward for so doing: The Cargo consisted in twenty four Pie∣ces of colour'd Cloths, ten 
Picols
 of Amber, three hundred of Tin and Lead, thirty Birds-nests, fifty of Pepper, three hundred of 
Iapan
 Wood, twenty of Quicksilver, twenty five of Cloves, and one hundred 
Picols
 of 
Sandal
 Wood, besides other Commodities. But 
Hogenhoek
 refus'd it, alledging they had not yet put off their own Goods; wherefore he durst not undertake another Mans Business.


The same day 
Lepora
 the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
's Secretary lying near, came to Visit the Agent, as his custom was, and discoursing with him concerning the Prisoners, and 
Lipovi
's rough Answer, proffer'd his Service to acquaint the Vice-Roy with the Business, well knowing that he had sent two or three days before to 
Lipovi
 to let 
Hogenhoek
 have them; to which he assented. After this, through the interposition of the Vice-Roy, 
Lipovi
 and 
Hogenhoek
 came to a bet∣ter understanding, and the distasteful Letters, and harsh Repertees, were melio∣rated into a Reconciliation.


The next day General 
Lipovi
 sent his chief Secretary to 
Hogenhoek
's House,
 with Orders to tell him, That there had been five 
Holland
 Ships seen about the Islands 
Heyton,
 by his Jonks which had brought Rice to 
Sinksieu,
 which caus'd great joy amongst the 
Netherlanders.


The first of 
Iuly
 the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 sent his Physitian to the 
Dutch
 Agent, who for three Moneths had been troubled with the Gripes, and also desir'd him to send him two Chains of Blood-Coral, which accordingly he did.


The sixth the Governor or 
Conbon,
 went to the Castle 
Tiolo,
 lying about three Leagues from 
Hoksieu,
 to Besiege 
Ovatunge,
 an old Soldier, that held out against the 
Tartars
 from the time of 
Iquon, Coxinga
's Father, being now of the age of seventy years, and having under his Command three thousand Men.


On 
Tuesday
 the eighth, 
Tziekautsia
 went to 
Iemping,
 to take the Government upon him, having four or five hundred Soldiers and eighty Jonks, with which upon the return of the 
Dutch
 Fleet they were to go to 
Tayowan,
 as the Vice-Roy and General had inform'd 
Hogenhoek.


From the tenth to the eighteenth nothing hapned of any remark: when the Merchants which came from 
Nanking
 out of the Territory 
Chekiang,
 carry'd all their Silks to 
Sinksieu,
 not coming to 
Hoksieu,
 which was to the great preju∣dice of the 
Hollanders,
 as well in the Goods which they Imported, as those which they intended to Export.


Haytankon,
 Governor of 
Sinksieu,
 and also others, might not publickly send any Jonks to 
Iapan,
 the 
Manilla's
 and 
Tayowan,
 but us'd this Invention, which 
Hogenhoek
 makes mention of in his Annotations, 
viz.
 those Jonks which they intended to send away, they load in publick at the Keys, and when ready to Lanch them, news comes in another, that some of the Enemies Jonks are on the Coast: whereupon the Merchant immediately unladeth, and the Cargo is car∣ry'd ashore, and their Jonk with others sent to Fight the hovering Enemy, while privately in the Night they load again with prohibited Goods, which get away by Day-break; but this could not be done, but by the connivance of the Searchers, knowing the Grandees are concern'd in the Freight.


From the seventeenth, being 
Thursday,
 till the twenty sixth, nothing hap∣ned but a prodigious Storm, mix'd with impetuous Showres of Rain, conti∣nually deluging for nine days, by which many Houses were torn down and wash'd away, and twenty People drown'd in 
Hoksieu.
 It rag'd also in the neighboring Parts; for in the Streets of 
Lamthay
 the Water was Knee-deep: and in 
Sinksieu
 the Water swell'd so high, that they lost above four thou∣sand People, which were overwhelm'd and carry'd away with the Torrent, and in some Places sweeping away whole Villages: In the Fort at 
Sinksieu
 the Land-flood did rise fourteen or fifteen Foot high. Amongst others the Vice-Roy lost four hundred 
Picols
 of white Raw Silk, which he thought to sell to 
Tonganpek,
 which made Silk to rise two hundred Tail; and as it was re∣ported, there was above two thousand 
Picols
 more carry'd away and spoil'd.


On 
Tuesday,
 being the twenty ninth, 
Hogenhoek
 gave the General a Visit;
 who, though much indispos'd, rejoyc'd to see him, asking him why their Fleet stay'd away so long? to which 
Hogenhoek
 made answer, That they had a Moneth good to the time of their arrival the last year: at which the Gene∣ral wondring said, You came in the sixth Moon: but he reply'd, It was be∣cause there were two sixth Moons that year; but if the General pleas'd to rec∣kon the days, he would find a great difference. The General seem'd to doubt whether any Ships would come thither that year, because they stay'd away so long, and ask'd if 
Hogenhoek
 would assure him of their coming? whereupon he reply'd, It was without doubt, and therefore desir'd the General to have patience; that their Ships wanted a great deal of Repair, which requir'd some


Moneths before they could be fitted to go to Sea. We, said the General, are all ready so soon as we receive tydings, that the Admiral is arriv'd at the 
Pisca∣dores,
 or before 
Tayowan,
 to send the great 
Mandarin, Tziekautsia
 Governor of 
Sinksieu,
 and 
Zietetok,
 and two other great Lords, to welcom and consult with him.


On 
Wednesday
 the thirteenth of 
August, Hogenhoek
 receiv'd news, That the
 General 
Lipovi
 had receiv'd his 
Writ of Ease
 from the Emperor, with Licence to come to 
Peking,
 and also that he was made a Councellor of State, for which Place he had given eight Tun of Gold, and many rich Presents: Nay, it was certain, that the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 at the same time gave twelve Tun of Gold, that his Son might succeed him in his Place.


On 
Saturday,
 being the sixteenth, 
Hogenhoek
 had news, That one of 
Haytan∣kon
's Jonks, the Governor of 
Sinksieu,
 in its return from the 
Manilla
's was taken by 
Anpikja
's Jonks, having a hundred and fifty thousand 
Spanish
 Ryals in her, and that 
Haytankon
 had on the contrary taken nine Jonks loaden with Rice, to carry to 
Zanchieu,
 in which Place Rice was very scarce. None was able to apprehend these kind of dealings, in the taking one anothers Jonks; yet never∣theless Traded with one another, the one is Silks and Cotton Clothes, and the other in Rice.


Till the two and twentieth nothing hapned of remark.


The three and twentieth towards Evening, the Vice-Roy's Factor came to
 invite 
Hogenhoek
 in his Lords Name to Dine with him the next day, which he promis'd to do.


The twenty fourth, being 
Sunday, Hogenhoek
 went with all his Attendants to the Court; where coming they were immediately call'd into the Hall of Au∣dience, fill'd with 
Mandarins
 and Lords, the Vice-Roy himself sitting very stately on a Stool, with a Chain about his Neck, and an 
Ave Mary
 fix'd to it, bad 
Hogenhoek
 kindly welcom. Having sat a little while, he related, That
 about three Moneths since he had sent a Letter to the Council of State in be∣half of the 
Hollanders,
 to be deliver'd to his Majesty, but would not tell him of it before, because he knew not whether his Majesty or the Council would grant his Request, as he was now inform'd; therefore he had invited him to be merry: for which 
Hogenhoek
 humbly thank'd the Vice-Roy. Yesterday (said the Vice-Roy) there came some Agents with two 
Mandarins
 from his Majesty to 
Hoksieu,
 onely to enquire if there were one or two 
Ongs,
 that is 
Kings,
 in 
Batavia:
 And they understood there were two from the Letters that came from 
Canton;
 for that of 
Canton
 was in the Name of the Governor, Gene∣ral 
Maetzuiker
 of 
Batavia;
 and that of 
Hoksieu
 written to their Highnesses, was in the Names of Captain 
Moor
 and 
Iohn Maetzuiker.
 He added also, that he had a Letter from the 
Lepous,
 or Council of State at 
Peking;
 in which was menti∣on'd, That his Majesty had granted his Request, which much rejoyced the Vice-Roy, who promis'd to send them the Copy of it: for which 
Hogenhoek
 return'd him humble thanks, answering, That the Lord General would think himself much oblig'd to hear of his great Favors. As to what concern'd the Names and Titles, 
Hogenhoek
 said they were all one, and that they had but one Governor-General, which was the Lord 
Iohn Maetzuiker,
 but by the 
Indians
 was Entituled 
Captain Moor,
 that is, 
Chief,
 or Governor over all others in 
India;
 so that both Titles were butone. Hereupon the Vice-Roy ask'd how many Councellors and petty Governors he had under him? to which 
Hogenhoek
 an∣swer'd, Seventeen or eighteen: at which the Vice-Roy seem'd to be much


amaz'd, saying, He never thought that the 
Ong
 of 
Batavia
 had had so many Rice-Roys under him, saying, Can it be possible? 
Hogenhoek
 smiling said, He hop'd that his Highness should find that it was true, and thereupon nam'd most of them: after which the Vice-Roy looking stedfastly on all his Coun∣cellors and 
Mandarins,
 who bowed their Heads, shewing him reverence. Then his Highness giving a Nod, all the Tables were brought in, furnish'd with Silver Chargers and golden Goblets, which fill'd with variety of Meats, made up a most noble Entertainment. The Vice-Roy was at this time more than ordinarily merry, beginning several Healths one after another.


Whilst they were at Dinner, to recreate their Eyes and Ears, as well as satis∣fie their Appetites, exquisite Musick was presented, with Masquing, Dancing, and other Princely Recreations.


After having drank very plentifully, 
Hogenhoek
 desir'd to take his Leave: whereupon the Vice-Roy commanded three great Bowls, Cut and Turn'd of a 
Rhinocerots
 Horn, to be fetch'd, one for himself, one for 
Hogenhoek,
 and a third for Factor 
Pedell,
 which they were to drink out three times one after another, before he would permit them to go, which accordingly they did.


Lastly, standing up to return Thanks and take their Leave, his Highness said, That the Discourse which he had had with 
Hogenhoek
 he must within three or four days advise the Emperor of, because his Majesty and Council ex∣pected it. And here again he warn'd him to take heed that all were truth, for upon the least prevarication his Majesty and Council would be very much dis∣satisfi'd: Upon which 
Hogenhoek
 assur'd the Vice-Roy, that all was true which he had related. Whereupon he departed, and coming home in the afternoon, he heard that the General 
Lipovi
 had on the Morrow invited him to be his Guest, and also to tell him that the Letters were come from Court.


On 
Monday
 the twentieth, 
Hogenhoek
 went with all his Train to the General 
Lipovi
's House, where he was Entertain'd with the like Discourse as he had with the Vice-Roy. Mean while, the Copy of the Letter which the Vice-Roy spoke of on the twenty fourth was sent to the Agent, which being transla∣ted was to this effect:




To His Highness 
Singlamong.


YOur Letter We 
Lepous
 of the Council have receiv'd on the twenty fourth of the sixth Moon, and in the third Year of Our Emperors Reign; which We deliver'd and read to Him. We have seen Your Letter and Request, and un∣derstood that the 
Holland
 Admiral is gone with his Ships, and hath left a 
Hou∣bou,
 or President, and a 
Tonpin,
 or Deputy in 
Fokien.
 Your Highness writes also that You have deliver'd the Presents for the 
Dutch
 Admiral to their Agents, he being gone before. You writ also, that the Admiral behav'd himself brave∣ly, having taken the Isles of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 for which good Service His Majesty hath Presented him: but he being subordinate to their King 
Maet∣zuiker,
 who Commission'd him to our Assistance, therefore he also must be Presented. This Your Highness's Request We have acquainted the Emperor with. We have all consider'd and made our Opinions known to His Majesty, and approv'd of Your Higness's Proposal; therefore We will Present the 
Ong
 of 
Batavia
 with two thousand Tail of Silver, and with a hundred Pieces of Stuffs wrought with Gold and Silk. We have already given order to Our Officers to make them up, and prepare them for Transportation, and one of Our 
Lepous,
 with the Emperors Secretary, to go with them to 
Fokien,
 where


they shall give the Silver and Stuffs to them, if they be there, but if not, then to leave them with Your Highness till their Return. We 
Lepous
 write this to Your Highness, that You may know how to govern Your self accordingly.


Dated 
the fourth Year of Our Emperors Reign.




On 
Tuesday
 the twenty sixth 
Lipovi
's Secretary, with some Commissioners and 
Mandarins
 came to Visit 
Hogenhoek;
 where after a Dish of 
Tee,
 the Com∣missioners said, They were come thither purposely to hear the Lord General of 
Batavia
's Name, and how he was styl'd, because there was some difference in the Name and Titles of the Letters, which were sent from thence to 
Canton.
 'Tis true (said he) their Highness's 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi
 had already satisfi'd me, but I must hear it from your own Mouth, that I may the better render an account of it to his Imperial Majesty; being therefore sent hither, and that his great Master desir'd to know his true Title, that he might address himself the better with Presents. Hereupon the Agent drew a Letter out of his Pock∣et directed to him, which contain'd the Lord Generals Title and Names, as 
Hogenhoek
 had given them to 
Singlamong
 and 
Lipovi,
 which was in these words: 
Captain Moor of India, Iohn Maetzuiker, residing in Batavia:
 but according to their manner of writing, they had writ 
Captain Moor of India, Maetzuiker Iohn,
 writing his Sur-name first, and his Christen-name afterwards. Then one of the Com∣missioners from 
Peking
 said, That 
Holland
 must needs be a fertile Countrey, from whence so many good things come; asking also some ordinary Questi∣ons, as it is usual there; which the 
Hollanders
 onely answer'd with a Smile: whereupon the Agents and 
Mandarins
 taking their Leave went home.


On 
Wednesday,
 being the twenty seventh, 
Coxinga
's Mother came with his Brother 
Sibya
 to 
Hoksieu
 (who had submitted her self to the 
Tartars
 that Year before the 
Dutch
 Fleet came thither) to desire their Excellencies to furnish them with Guides to go to 
Peking,
 the Emperor having sent for them to come and live there for the prevention of further trouble and inconveniences.


The twenty eighth General 
Lipovi
 sent a 
Mandarin
 to 
Hogenhoek,
 to tell him it would be necessary for him to conduct the Emperors Commissioners out of the City, because they had taken so great a Journey for his Business, and also to Pre∣sent them with something that was handsom. Whereupon 
Hogenhoek
 ask'd him if his Lord had not told him what he was best to Present: to which he said, With fifty or sixty Tail of Silver, and when he deliver'd them, to tell them, That all his Goods were sold, and that they would except of that Sum to buy Tobacco with on the Way. Hereupon 
Hogenhoek
 making himself ready, went to take Leave of the Agents and their Retinue, taking with him sixty Tail of Silver, 
viz.
 twenty five for the first Agent, fifteen for the second, seven for the Heralds, and five for some of the Attendants: Coming to them, he presented the Money as he had put it up handsom in Papers in several Parcels; which they receiv'd very thankfully, with promises, That when they came to 
Peking
 they would not fail to Serve the 
Hollanders
 in what they could possible: where∣upon 
Hogenhoek
 return'd to his Lodgings.


SInce the Province of 
Fokien,
 and the Towns and Cities belonging to it, have often been made mention of, and hereafter will be more, our Bu∣siness seems here to require a brief Description thereof.


This Province, one of the fifteen which make up 
China, Paulus Venetus
 sets forth by the Name of 
Fugui,
 taken from the Metropolis 
Focheu:
 It borders the


Sea from East to South; in the South-west, on 
Quantung;
 West and Nor-West conterminates 
Kiangsi;
 the remaining part from the North-west to the North∣east verges upon the Countrey of 
Chekiang.


This Province is the smallest in the Empire of 
China:
 the Southermost part of it lies in twenty four Degrees and forty five Minutes, extending to twenty eight Degrees and thirty Minutes Northern Latitude; a Tract of sixty one 
German,
 or two hundred forty four 
English
 Miles.


The Kingdom of 
Min,
 or rather several Dominions, over which the Free Lords call'd 
Min,
 Commanded, were antiently accounted into this Territory. They divide it into eight Shires or Counties, as we may call them, whereof 
Focheusu
 the chief, 
Cineucheufu, Changcheufu, Kienningfu, Ienpingfu, Tingcheufu, Hinghoafu, Xaounfu,
 besides the small Colony of 
Foning:
 every one hath seve∣ral Towns and Cities, to the number of fifty six, belonging to them, besides two fortifi'd Cities, and many Castles and Strong-holds at the Sea-side.


The first County 
Focheufu,
 borders Easterly at the Sea; on the North, at 
Fo∣ningfu
 and 
Kienningfu;
 on the West, upon 
Ienpingfu;
 and the South looks upon 
Hinghoafu.


The 
Chinese
 Records tell us, that this Countrey was first planted by a Fami∣ly call'd 
Cheu,
 and by them nam'd 
Min;
 notwithstanding it did not then be∣long to the Emperor of 
China,
 but to certain Free Lords which they call'd the 
Min.
 The first that joyn'd it to the Empire of 
China
 was the chief of the Fa∣mily 
Cheu;
 yet the Inhabitants soon shook off that Yoke, and kept themselves free, till the fortunate and valiant Emperor 
Hiaou,
 of the Family of 
Han,
 re∣duced and added it to 
China,
 with all the Southern Territories, setling them in Peace, and placed a Vice-Roy over it, call'd 
Veuching,
 who kept his Court in the Metropolis thereof. 
Cyn,
 the first King thereof, call'd the chief City, and the Tract of Land thereto belonging, 
Cyngan;
 the next King 
Sui
 nam'd the Coun∣trey, 
Mencheu;
 but the 
Tangs,
 of another Line, 
Kiencheu,
 and not long after 
Fo∣cheu;
 which Name the 
Taimingian
 Race kept ever since.


This Countrey 
Focheufu
 contains eight Cities, 
Focheu
 the Metropolis, and
 chief of all the Countrey, otherwise call'd 
Hoksieu,
 or 
Hokzieuw, Cutien, Mincing, Changlo, Lienkiang, Loquen, Iangfo, Focing.


The City 
Focheu,
 by 
Paulus Venetus
 call'd 
Fugui,
 lieth about fifteen Leagues Westerly from the Sea, on the Southern Shore of the River 
Min,
 which with a wide Mouth falls Easterly into the Sea, and brings both great and small Ves∣sels up to the City Walls. The convenience of this River makes the Town very populous and of great Trade: It is adorn'd with fair Buildings, and hath large Suburbs, call'd 
Nantai,
 otherwise, according to the pronunciation of the Inhabitants, 
Lamthay;
 for those in 
Fokien
 use in stead of 
N
 the Letter 
L.
 and often say 
Lamking
 in stead of 
Nanking:
 There are also many Idol Temples.


Cross the Bay near 
Nantai,
 lies a Stone Bridge, a hundred and fifty Rods long, and one and a half broad, built all of white Free-stone, resting on a hun∣dred very high Arches; on the top of each side are Rails and Benches; adorn'd at an equal distance, with Lyons neatly cut of Stone.


Next this Bridge, at the South end, stands a fair and large 
Pagode,
 or Temple.


Another Bridge not unlike this, being a hundred Rods long, may be seen at the City 
Focing.
 And many more are without and within the Walls of the chiefest Cities.


Three Leagues from 
Focheu
 stands a Temple call'd 
Kouzan,
 the largest of all in the Nether Provinces.


The second Division, 
Civencheufu,
 borders from the East to the South-east,
 and so to the South upon the Sea; and from the South-west to the West, tou∣ches 
Chancheufu;
 and on the North verges with 
Ienpingfu.


This Countrey formerly belong'd to the Princes 
Min:
 and hath seven Ci∣ties,
 
Civencheu
 the chief, 
Nangan, Hocigan, Tehoa, Ganki, Tunygan,
 and 
Iungehung.


The City 
Civencheu
 lies near the Sea in a delightful Plain, and admits by a large Bay the greatest Ships to Ride close under the Walls, not onely on one but both sides of the City, for it is built on a Promontory encompass'd with Water, except on the North and South-east sides.


On the opposite Shore are many populous and Trading Towns, and chief∣ly on a Place towards the North-west call'd 
Loyang,
 which may rather be look'd upon as great Cities. There also is a Bridge which hath the same denomina∣tion with the Town, the whole World not shewing the like; for it consists of a black Stone like Touch-stone, not supported with Arches, but above three hundred square Columns, sharp above Bridge and below, the better to break the impetuous egress and regress of the Current. These Pillars are Capp'd, to walk upon, with five Stones of an exact breadth, each eighteen Paces long, and two broad, which successively touch one another at either Foot of the Bridge; of which there are to the number of a hundred and forty: it is cer∣tainly a Miracle of Workmanship, not onely for its great number of Stones of such a bigness, that rest on those Columns, but most of all, where so many large and equal Stones could be had: on each side, to make the Passage the safer, are Rails of the same Stones, adorn'd with Lyons, standing on Pedestals, and other Imagery.


It is worth our observation what is written of one part of this Bridge, that is between a Village call'd 
Loyan,
 and a Castle built on the Bridge; for be∣yond the Village reaches another part, not much less than the former, and of one make: A 
Chinese
 Writer saith thus concerning it:


This part of the Bridge
 Loyang, 
and also call'd
 Vangan, 
lying on the North-west side of the City, cross the River
 Loyang, 
was built by a Governor, call'd
 Cayang: 
it extends in length to about three hundred and sixty Rods, and in breadth one and a half. Before this Bridge was built they cross'd the River in Boats; but because every year many Vessels were by Storm cast away,
 Cayang 
resolv'd, for the safety of Passengers, to build a Bridge; but seeing such a great piece of Work to be too much for Mankind to undertake, and also the Water too deep to lay a Foundation in it, he invok'd the Gods of the Sea
 (as he says) 
for some time to stop the Current of the Water; which
 (if you will believe) 
he ob∣tain'd. After the Essluxes were stay'd, and no Tydes swelling the River in one and twenty days, the Foundation was laid, and forty hundred thousand Tail spent in the building of it.


The third Province call'd 
Chancheufu,
 being the most Southern of all this
 Territory, borders in the North-East and East with 
Civenchufu;
 on the East South-East and South, with the Sea; on the South-West touches the Coun∣trey of 
Quantung;
 on the West and North-West, and North, at 
Tingcheufu.


It contains ten Cities, of which 
Chancheu
 is the chiefest; the rest are 
Changpu,
 
Lugnien, Nancing, Changtai, Changping, Pingho, Chaogang, Huicing,
 and 
Ningyang.


The Name of 
Chancheu
 was first given to this Metropolis and Countrey by
 the Family of the 
Tang,
 from the River 
Chang,
 on whose Western Shore situate, and was then allow'd the priviledge of a small City; but the 
Iuem
 made her afterwards a Metropolis; and at the same time built the small City 
Nancing:
 from whence Father 
Martin
 concludes, that then all these Places


were much frequented by Navigators, and that 
Paulus Venetus
 his 
Zerte
 must needs be thereabouts.


On the South-side, where the River also washes the City, is a large Bridge of Hew'n-stone, with thirty six high Arches, and so broad, that on each side are divers Tradesmen and Artificers Shops, in which they sell every day all manner of rich and foreign Commodities, which are brought thither from 
Hiamuen.


The fourth call'd 
Kienningfu,
 a very wide and spacious piece of Land, bor∣ders
 on the North and North-East, upon 
Chekiang;
 on the East, with 
Foningfu;
 on the South, at 
Focheufu
 and 
Ienpingfu;
 on the West, at 
Xaonufu;
 on the North; West and North, upon 
Kiangsi.


This Division belong'd antiently to the Princes 
Min;
 after which the Fa∣mily
 
Tang
 gave it the Name of 
Kiencheu;
 and 
Sung,
 another Race, that which it hath at present.


Here are seven Towns, whereof 
Kienning
 is the chiefest; the rest are 
Cungan,
 
Puchiang, Chingo, Sunghi, and Xeuning.


The City 
Kienning
 lying on the Eastern Shore of the River 
Min,
 is no way inferior, either in beauty or worth, or bigness, to the Metropolis. Father 
Mar∣tin
 affirms this City to be 
Venetus
 his 
Quelingfu.


In this last 
Tartarick
 War this City suffer'd much damage; for having re∣volted from the 
Tartars,
 it was taken after a long Siege, and laid in Ashes, and all the Inhabitants put to the Sword. The Fire consum'd here a Bridge over the swift River 
Min,
 the Pillars whereof were of an exceeding heighth of Free∣stone, the other parts of Wood, beautifi'd on the top with Houses and Shops on each side: but since by re-building it hath re-gain'd somewhat of former lustre. Beyond the Bridge, on the opposite Shore, stands a stately 
Pagode.


Most of the new Buildings fall short of their old beauty, notwithstanding the 
Chinese
 Towns that are consum'd by Fire, are much more easily re-built than those in 
Europe,
 because most of them are nothing but Wood.


Near the City 
Kienning
 is another fair Bridge, with Shops and Houses on both sides.


This City 
Kienning
 is a Place of great Trade; for all those Commodities that come either up or down the River must pass through it. When they come to the City 
Pucing,
 they are taken out of the Vessels, and by Porters car∣ry'd to a Village call'd 
Pinghu,
 belonging to the City 
Kiangxan,
 over high Mountains and deep Valleys four days Journey: In like manner they are car∣ry'd from 
Pinghu
 to 
Puching.
 The whole Way, as much as is possible to be done by the Art or Labor of Man, is made even, and Pav'd with square Stones, along whose sides are built many Houses and Villages, onely to entertain Travellers. The Merchandises being first weighed, are deliver'd to the Ma∣ster of the Inn, which send them for a certain Gratuity by Porters to other Pla∣ces, where the Merchant without any trouble receives them: If any thing chance to be lost, the Host is bound to make it good. Here are always above ten thousand Porters ready, which wait to receive the Goods, and carry them over the Mountains. Because of this Carriage of so many Goods, a House stands erected for the receiving a small Custom, or Duty, towards the main∣taining and reparation of the High-ways.


The fifth Tract of Land, call'd 
Ienpingfu,
 makes the Centre of this Territo∣ry, and borders in the East, at the chief County 
Focheufu;
 in the South and South-West, at 
Civencheufu
 and 
Kancheufu;
 on the West and North at 
Tingcheu∣fu, Xaounfu,
 and 
Kienningfu.


King 
Cyn
 was the first that call'd the chief City, and the Countrey thereto belonging, 
Ienping;
 the Family 
Tang
 nam'd it 
Kiencheu;
 that of 
Sung, Nankien;
 but 
Taiming
 restor'd its antient Name 
Ienping.


This 
Ienpingfu
 contains seven Towns and Cities, of which 
Ienping
 is the chiefest, next 
Cianglo, Xa, Yonki, Xunchan, Iungan,
 and 
Tatien.


The City 
Ienping
 lieth on the Western Shore of the River 
Min,
 from whence it rises with its Buildings up the Hills, rendring a delightful Prospect to those that pass by, and though none of the biggest, yet it is beautifi'd with several fair Houses: The Walls exceed in heighth the neighboring Ascents, which on the out-sides are inaccessible, making the City very strong, and indeed the Key to the whole Territory.


On the East-side is a Lake made by the Rivers 
Min
 and 
Si.
 Almost every House is furnish'd with Water, convey'd to them through Pipes from the Mountains, which Convenience no other Place in 
China
 hath.


Not far distant lay over the Rivers 
Min
 and 
Si
 two fair Bridges, near which are two Temples.


The Town of 
Xa
 lieth on the Northern Shore of the River 
Taisu,
 (though formerly on the Southern Shore) but was by the Emperors Order pull'd down to the Ground, and left desolate, because in it a young Man had Murder'd his Father.


The sixth Division being 
Tingcheufu,
 is the most Western of this Territory:
 borders Easterly on 
Ienpingfu;
 on the South-East, at 
Quantung;
 on the West, at that of 
Kiangsi;
 and on the North, 
Xaounfu.


This Countrey belong'd also heretofore to the Princes 
Min:
 King 
Cyn
 gave it
 the Name of 
Sinlo;
 and the 
Tang
 Family that which it bears at present: in which 
Tincheufu
 was only a small Town, but the 
Taimingian
 Family made it a chief City.


This Countrey contains eight Towns and Cities, 
viz. Tingcheu
 the chief▪
 
Winghon, Xanghang, Vuping, Cinglieu, Lienching, Queihon,
 and 
Iungting.


The seventh County, call'd 
Hinghaofu,
 is a small, yet fruitful Countrey, and
 borders on the East and South-East, with the Sea; on the South, at 
Civencheufu;
 on the West, at 
Ienpingfu;
 on the North, at the Tract of Land belonging to the Metropolis 
Focheu.


King 
Sui
 gave it first the Name of 
Putien;
 the Family 
Sung,
 that of 
Hinghoa,
 which signifies 
A Budding Flower;
 afterwards the same Family call'd it 
Hingan;
 but by the 
Taimingian
 the antient Name of 
Hinghoa
 was restor'd.


This Shire hath onely two Cities, whereof 
Hinghoa
 is the chief; the other
 call'd 
Sienlieu
 is but small: but the Countrey abounds with Villages and Hamlets. All the Ways, being sixty 
Stadia's
 long, and a Rod in breadth, are Pav'd with square Free-stone.


The City 
Hinghoa
 is very neatly built and adorn'd with many triumphal Arches, and full of Colledges for the training up of Youth in Literature, and encouragement of Learning.


At the Foot of the Mount 
Hocung,
 South-Eastwards from 
Hinghoa,
 lies a Village, in splendor and bigness of Buildings like a great City, but hath nei∣ther Walls nor any Priviledges belonging to it; yet many rich Merchants re∣side there, which Traffick through all 
China.


On the Shore of the Lake 
Ching,
 lying at the Foot of the Mount 
Chiniven,
 Northward from 
Hinghoa,
 stands a great Palace, with ten Gardens belonging to it; in which, before either Rain or tempestuous Weather happens, as the 
Chineses
 say, is a ringing noise heard like the sound of a Bell.


The eighth County, being 
Xaounfu,
 borders Easterly at 
Kienningfu;
 in the South, at 
Ienpingfeu
 and 
Tingcheufeu;
 in the West, North-West and North, at the Territory 
Kiangsia.


This Division reckons four Cities, the chief of which is 
Xaouw,
 the rest
 
Quangce, Taining,
 and 
Kienning.


The City 
Xaouw,
 the most Northern of this Territory, was antiently a mean Place, under the Princes of 
Mins
 Jurisdiction, and was first fortifi'd with Walls, and the Title of City given it by the Family call'd 
Tang;
 yet hath ever preserv'd its Name of 
Xaouw.
 It lies Westerly of the River 
Cu,
 and is cut through by the River 
Ciao,
 which poures its Streams into the 
Cu,
 and from thence by several small Channels waters the City.


Because this County is a firm and profitable Soyl, and on the Borders of Countreys, whose Passage is troublesom, it is fortifi'd with several Castles Garison'd with Soldiers.


The small Tract of Land belonging to the City 
Foning,
 a Mountainous
 Countrey, and the most Eastern of this Territory, borders in the East and South-East, at the Sea; in the South and South-West, at 
Fochenfu;
 in the West, at 
Kiennunfu;
 in the North, at the Territory of 
Chekiang.
 It contains three Towns, 
Foning, Fogang,
 and 
Mingte.


The Ways through the Mountains are very scraggy, and scarce passable, especially towards the North and South-East.


The City 
Foning
 it self is fair and large, lying near the Sea, to its great benefit and advantage, having to the pleasure of the Prospect an Idol-Temple.


On the North-side of the City 
Xaouw
 a fair Bridge leads over the River 
Cuyun,
 sixty three Rods long, of the same fashion as those mention'd before. There are also two large Temples.


This Province, or Kingdom of 
Fokien,
 hath many strong Holds, especially
 on the Sea-shore, against any Invasion of Enemies; the chiefest, built for∣merly by the 
Chineses
 against the Incursions of the 
Tartar,
 are two, 
Ganbai
 and 
Hiamuen.


The Castle 
Ganhai
 hath a convenient and safe Haven for Ships.


On the East-side of the City is a fair Bridge, two hundred and fifty Paces in length, built of black Stone, and supported with divers Arches.


The Garison of 
Hiamuen
 lies on an Island North-West from 
Quemuy.


Both these Forts, for the beautifulness of their Building, Populousness and Trade, exceed divers great Cities in 
China;
 for from thence all sorts of Com∣modities are Transported through all 
India,
 and foreign Goods brought thither.


Some years since the famous Pyrat 
Iquon,
 otherwise call'd 
Coxinga,
 (well known to the 
Hollanders, Portuguese,
 and 
Spaniards
) possess'd both these Places, and was also very powerful at Sea, having a Fleet of three thousand great 
Chinese
 Jonks.


The other Forts for a defence of the Sea-Coast, are 
Pumien, Foning, Tinghai, Muthon, Xe, Huckeu, Vangun, Chungxe, Tungxan, Hivenchung, Iungting.


Anno
 1662. the 
Tartars
 having Conquer'd the Empire of 
China,
 caus'd all the Towns and Strong-holds to be pull'd down, to prevent the Invasions of the Enemy, and hinder them from having any Supplies from thence by their Par∣ty which might reside in them.


Thus ends the Continuation of the second Embassy.








A THIRD EMBASSY TO THE EMPEROR OF China and East-Tartary, Under the Conduct of the Lord 
PIETER VAN HOORN,
 CONTAINING Several Remarks in their Journey through the Provinces of 
Fokien, Chekiang, Xantung,
 and 
Nanking,
 to the Imperial Court at 
Peking.




Sent from 
Batavia, Anno
 1666. the third of 
Iune;
 whither he return'd 
Anno
 1668. in 
Ianuary, &c.




W
Hat Troubles, Charges, and Endeavors the 
Netherland East-India
 Company, and their Magistrates in 
India,
 have some Years since us'd from time to time, on se∣veral Occasions, for the gaining of their so long wish'd for 
Chinese
 Trade, it would be needless here to describe, because we may plainly perceive it from other Dis∣courses, especially by the former Embassies and Expe∣ditions under the Conduct of 
Peter de Goyer
 and 
Iacob de Keizer,
 sent out 
Anno
 1655. and 1656. And likewise from those of 
Balthazar Bort, Iohn van Campen,
 and 
Constantine Nobel,
 in 
Anno
 1662.


Yet after long Referrings, Debates, and serious Considerations, it was at last again concluded, on the twenty eighth of 
May, Anno
 1666, by the Lord General and Council of 
India,
 to send a Magnificent Embassy, with rich Pre∣sents, to the 
Tartars
 Court, to the Great Emperor of 
China
 and 
East-Tartary,
 that if possible, they might at last attain to their so long desir'd Free Trade through the whole Realm of 
China.


To this purpose was elected and chosen his Excellency the Lord 
Peter van




Hoorn,
 Privy Counsellor and Chief Treasurer of 
India,
 as he was intituled in his Commission, given him the third of 
Iuly
 in the same Year.


Constantine Nobel
 was also chosen as Chief Counsel in the Embassy, and Prime Head and Governor of the Trade in 
Hoksieu,
 or 
Focheu,
 the Metropolis of the Territory 
Fokien.
 He also was commanded, for several Reasons, to travel in the Degree before-mention'd up to 
Peking,
 and upon the Ambassa∣dors Decease, to succeed him in his Place, and Negotiate that Affair to the Companies best Advantage.


Furthermore, the Embassy was by the Lord General and his Council order'd to consist in the following Persons.




The Lord 
Peter van Hoorn.


Constantine Nobel
 Chief Counsellor in the Embassy, and Governor of the Trade.


Iohn Putman
 Factor, and Master of the Ceremonies.


Iohn vander Does
 Secretary.


Gysbert Ruwenoort
 Steward.


Six Gentlemen, 
viz.




Banning,


Berkman,


Frents, 
and


Ruysser,


Van Alteren,


Van Doorn.




A Chyrurgeon.


Six Men for a Guard.


Two Trumpetters, and


One Cook.




During their Journey up to 
Peking,
 it was order'd, That 
David Harthower, Cornelius Bartelsz,
 and 
Maurice,
 should provide all things below in 
Hoksieu.


On the third of 
Iune
 before-mention'd, the Commissions were read aboard the 
Vlaerding,
 by the following Lords,




His Excellency the Lord General 
Maetzuiker.


Charles Hertzing
 Chief Comptroller.



Usual Counsellors of 
India.


Nicholas Verburgh,


Laurence Pit,


Matthew vander Brook,






Counsellors Extraordinary.


Iohn Thysz,


Iohn van Dam,






After a kind Farewell, the foremention'd Persons return'd ashore.


For the more Honorable carrying on of this Embassy, a Fleet of five Sail, Laden with Presents and Merchandise, and Mann'd with Soldiers and Sea∣men, was fitted out from 
Batavia,
 consisting in these Ships, 
viz.


The 
Vlaerding, Afen, Constance, Gilded Tygre,
 and The 
Blyswiik
 Frigat, Commanded by 
Iohn vander Werf. Iohn Naelhout. Iohn Hendricks. Henry Bommer. Peter Iansz.


Several 
Chineses
 also Shipp'd themselves in the Fleet, to return to their Na∣tive Countrey, from whence they came some Years before, and had setled themselves in 
Batavia.


The fourth, being 
Sunday,
 in the Morning the Fleet set Sail, and lying by the Lee about the Islands, they staid for some ready Moneys, and other Necessa∣ries, which about seven a clock were brought them by one 
Simon de Danser,
 Master of the Exchequer. Then the Fleet weighing Anchor again, ran East∣erly, between the Isles 
Edam
 and 
Alkmaer,
 that they might have the advantage of the Eastern 
Mouson
 (but the Wind, on the contrary, in the Afternoon came


about to the West) and then tack'd to and again, having the Wind about seven a clock at Night to the South-West; then they steer'd their Course Northerly, and so proceeded in the same Course as we have fully mention'd in their for∣mer Journals from 
Batavia;
 and therefore we think not fit to trouble the Rea∣der with needless Repetitions of the same things.


The fifth of 
August
 about Noon they came to the 
Netherland
-Haven, where a 
Tartar
 came aboard of the Ambassador in a small Vessel, who said that he was sent from the Governor of 
Minjazen,
 to inquire what People and Ships they were, and also from whence they came, and what Persons of Quality were in them? Whereupon being answer'd accordingly, the 
Tartar
 return'd ashore, to give an Accompt thereof, having first inform'd them of the General 
Lipovi
's Death.


The sixth in the Morning, while they still rode at an Anchor, waiting for the Fleet to carry them into the 
Netherland
 Haven, there also came a 
Tartar
 Vessel aboard, with the third Person of 
Minjazen,
 to ask in the Governors Name, What Ships they were, and if an Ambassador was come with them to the Emperor? Whereupon the Ambassador answer'd him accordingly, and also told him, That they intended to send the Master of the Ceremonies, and Mr. 
Ruwenoort,
 with the Interpreter 
De Hase,
 to 
Hoksieu,
 with Letters to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 and the new General which was come from 
Peking
 in the deceas'd 
Lipovi
's Place: To whom the 
Mandarin
 proffer'd his Service to carry them to 
Hoksieu,
 alledging, That he was sent from the Governor for that pur∣pose.


After having receiv'd Thanks from the Ambassador, he return'd with the foremention'd Persons aboard of the 
Blyswiik,
 where the Letter was translated into the 
Chinese
 Tongue: The Contents were to this purpose.


That this Letter was to advise their Excellencies from the Lord Ambassa∣dor, of the coming of five Ships, laden with several Merchandises, and Pre∣sents for his Majesty, and their Excellencies the Vice-Roy, General, and 
Con∣bon,
 or Governor, and likewise of his coming from 
Batavia
 in the beginning of the last Month, with the Merchant 
Constantine Nobel,
 and their safe Arrival in the beginning of the New Moon before the River of 
Hoksieu.


Their Highnesses also were desired to permit the Merchant 
Constantine No∣bel
 with the first opportunity to come to 
Hoksieu,
 to complement their Ex∣cellencies from the Ambassador, and acquaint them with his Intentions.


About Noon the 
Holland
 Ambassador arriv'd in safety in the 
Netherland
-Ha∣ven, where he drop'd Anchor with the 
Vlaerding
 and 
Blyswiik,
 and was visited by the chief Pilot of the 
Tygre,
 with a Letter from 
Hendrick Bommer
 Master of the 
Tygre,
 written to the Ambassador, signifying, That the Pilot beforemen∣tion'd, having been several times in the 
Netherland
-Haven, made no question to bring the 
Tygre
 thither; so that he desir'd his Order, because the Ship would be safer there than in the Bay of 
Sothia.
 On which the Ambassa∣dor made answer, That he ought to govern himself according to the Agree∣ment made on the fifth Instant, of which the Copy was sent him, and first steer his Course to the Bay of 
Sothia,
 till further Order came from above.


The Ambassador observing, That the entring into the Mouth of the River 
Hoksieu
 was dangerous, because of the Rocks call'd the 
Pyramides,
 commanded all the Masters and Pilots to consult about it, and give their Opinions in Wri∣ting, that other Ships that should come after, might make use thereof.


The seventh against Noon three 
Mandarins
 were sent from the new General



Siangpovi,
 to see how many Ships and Men were come, and likewise what Pre∣sents they had brought, from whence the Ambassador came, and what Retinue he intended should go with him to 
Peking.
 But the Ambassador did not think it convenient to inform him of all things, because the Master of the Ceremo∣nies and Interpreter were not yet come from 
Hoksieu;
 therefore he told the 
Mandarins
 onely, That he was come thither with five Ships, of which three lay in the Bay of 
Sothia,
 and two in the 
Netherland
 Haven; and that he had four hundred Men aboard: but as to the Presents, he could not readily give an Ac∣count, because he must first unpack them, and then draw an Inventory in 
Chi∣nese:
 neither could he yet tell them the Number of the Persons that were to attend him to the Court; but if they pleas'd to stay till to morrow (when he ex∣pected the Master of the Ceremonies and Interpreter would be there) he would resolve them. Then the 
Mandarins
 ask'd, If there were no more Ships that had put into other Harbors on the Coast of 
China?
 To which they were answer'd 
No.
 Then they demanded further, From whom the Lord Ambassador was ad∣dress'd? to which they receiv'd a suitable Answer. The Ambassador had also a 
Chinese
 Letter given him from the Governor of 
Minjazen,
 the Contents being onely to congratulate his Welcome, which the Ambassador answer'd civilly in like manner. Hereupon the 
Mandarins
 departed, saying, they would send one on the Morrow to know the Quantity and Quality of the Presents.


The Ambassador soon after was inform'd by 
Nobel,
 That the 
Mandarin
 which bore the chief Command over the Jonks that lay there, had understood the day before, that the Emperor was inclin'd to allow the 
Hollanders
 and 
Tartars
 the Isles 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 to set up their Factories and Trade.


The eighth the Master of the Ceremonies, Mr. 
Ruwenoort,
 and the Interpre∣ter 
De Hase,
 came aboard again, relating, That they had been at 
Hoksieu,
 and there deliver'd the Ambassadors Letters to the Governors: The General, who first granted them Audience, had after the reading of the Letter ask'd them several Questions, as amongst others, Whither they had a Design upon 
Formosa,
 or came onely upon Embassy? To which they answer'd, That the Ambassa∣dor was come thither but with five Ships, of which two lay in the 
Netherland
 Haven, and three at 
Tinhay;
 and that they had no other Design but to wait up∣on the Emperor, according to the Contents of their Credential Letters and Commission. After this, they gave the 
Conbon
 or Governor of 
Hoksieu
 a Visit, who shew'd himself very joyful at the news of their arrival. And next they visited the General, and gave him an Account of the Ambassadors arrival, who sent two 
Mandarins
 to go along them.


About Midnight in their Return they came before the Castle of 
Minjazen,
 where they lay till the next Morning, and then desir'd the Governor to fur∣nish them with a Vessel to carry them aboard, to which he very willingly con∣descended.


The ninth 
Nobel, Harthower,
 Secretary 
Vander Does,
 and the 
Mandarins
 which came down the next day in a Pleasure-Boat sent to the Fleet for that purpose, were carried aboard, having a Letter of Advice with them, to make use of when occasion should serve.


The same Day this Present was prepar'd for the Governor of 
Minjazen.




A Pair of Pistols,


A small Quilt,


Four Pieces of fine Linnen.


Two Swords,


Two great Pieces of 
Sandal
-Wood.




From that time nothing happen'd of remark, only some Jonks came to an Anchor close by the Ambassador, to watch the 
Netherlanders
 Transactions, as had been done from the beginning, ever since they arriv'd; sometimes fresh Jonks relieving others.


The eleventh in the Morning, the Ambassador sent the 
Blyswiik's
 Boat to the Bay of 
Sothia,
 with a Letter; by which he Commanded the Captains of the three Ships, the 
Alfen, Tyger,
 and 
Constance,
 to come to him with the first fair Weather, to consult once more about the bringing in of the Ships to 
Hoksieu.


The twelfth, the Captains came according to the Ambassadors Letter aboard his Ship in their Sloop, and just at low Water they went with Captain 
Vander Werff,
 and 
Peter Iansz Vlieg,
 to the River of 
Hoksieu,
 to know the Soundings and the breadth of the Channel.


Afternoon, 
Siangpovi
's Interpreter came aboard with some 
Tartars,
 to tell the Ambassador, that 
Nobel
 Landed the Night before in 
Hoksieu,
 and that Horses were provided against the Morning to carry him to the Governors to have Audience. Moreover he told him, that he was sent from the General 
Siang∣povi,
 to inquire about the Ambassadors Health, and if he wanted any thing, or if any surly People slighted or neglected, to supply them with what necessa∣ries were fit, and they requir'd.


The Ambassador caus'd his Interpreter 
De Hase
 to ask the 
Tartars,
 How the Governor of 
Hoksieu
 resented the 
Hollanders,
 and whether he should be civilly receiv'd? Whereupon he reply'd, That he needed not question his glad Re∣ception.


Furthermore, he doubted not but that they should have all their desires gran∣ted when so er'e they arriv'd at 
Peking.


The 
Tartar
 Interpreter also acquainted the Ambassador, that it would be convenient to invite the Captain of the Jonks that lay to watch to a Treat; which some hours afterwards was perform'd by 
Putmans,
 and the Interpreter 
De Hase;
 who coming to the Captain, and 
Mandarin,
 were kindly entertain'd, with answer, that according to their Requests, they and some other 
Mandarins
 would wait upon them the day following: They also sent a Present to the Am∣bassador, of Capons, Geese, and a Vessel of 
Chinese
 strong Drink.


Towards Evening, the Masters and Pilots came aboard again to the Am∣bassador, and told him, That he had search'd the Bay of 
Hoksieu,
 of which they would give an account in writing, how the Ships should get in and out with most safety, as was done the day following.


In the afternoon the 
Vlaerdings
 Boat brought a supply from 
Hoksieu,
 of Beeves, Porkers, good Liquor, and several Fruits, with Letters from 
Nobel, Harthower,
 and 
Vander Does,
 that on the eleventh they were arriv'd at the Bridge of 
Lamthay;
 and at their passing by, the Governors of 
Minjazen
 Treated them kindly; and at 
Hoksieu
 they were presently admitted to the Presence of the Ge∣neral 
Siangpovi,
 the Vice-Roy, and the 
Conbon
 or Governor.


All these Visits were past with many kindnesses, and upon the delivery of their Letters from 
Batavia,
 with an Inventory of the Presents, were told, That the Ambassador was Welcome, and according to his Request should be hono∣rably and kindly Entertain'd, and that he would be pleas'd presently to come ashore, that they might the better inform his Imperial Majesty of his arrival; with which, the Ambassador being acquainted, gave Order for his Landing the next day.


The next day they were to Treat about Commerce, which they suppos'd to be of great Consequence; the more, because by Proclamation every one was on pain of Death forbidden to Trade with the 
Hollanders
 without Licence.


When a rumor was spread in 
Hoksieu,
 that the Fort 
Quelang
 in 
Formosa
 had been Besieg'd two Moneths by three thousand 
Tayowan Chineses;
 but at last were forc'd to Retreat to 
Tamsuy,
 with the loss of their General, 
&c.


The fifteenth, being 
Sunday,
 nothing happen'd of remark to the Ambassa∣dor, but onely expected further Tydings from 
Nobel,
 and his other Friends in 
Hoksieu.


The sixteenth, four 
Mandarins
 came from the General 
Siangpovi
 and the 
Con∣bon,
 sent to the Ambassador to Present him with an hundred and twenty 
Cana∣sters,
 or four Tun of Rice, thirty couple of Capons, as many Ducks, forty great Vessels of their best Drink, six fat Beeves, twenty Porkers, a Score and a half of Geese, and a hundred Water-Lemons.


Because the Name of 
Chinese
 Beer will be often us'd, it will be requisite to give a short Description of it.


THe Drinks which the 
Chineses
 use are many: The first call'd 
Samfoe,
 or 
Sampe,
 made of Rice, is of a clear Colour, like white Wine; wherefore they also name it, 
Sampe,
 signifying pure White.


The second call'd 
Looszioe,
 is of a brown Colour like 
Dutch
 Beer, of a plea∣sant Taste, but very strong.


The third nam'd 
Tzonzui,
 and by some held for the best and strongest Li∣quor in all 
China;
 is of a bright Brown, very clear, and resembles 
Brunswick-Mum,
 yet tastes like Sack, and as strong in its Operation.


Which Liquor Vulgarly the 
Hollanders
 generally call 
Mandarins
 and 
Chi∣nese
 Beer.


The fourth being a sort of Distill'd Water, is call'd 
Hotzioe,
 and is not only clearer, but much stronger than 
Brandy,
 therefore by the 
Netherlanders
 call'd 
Strong Arak.


The fifth Drink is call'd 
Kietzjoe,
 and by the 
Hollanders Kniep;
 and is also a Water Distill'd, yet not so strong as the former, of a ruddy Colour, and much drank in the 
Chinese
 and 
Holland
 Ships, during their stay on the Coast of 
China.


Most of all these Liquors are made and Extracted out of Rice.


They say, That in the Emperor 
Yu
's Raign, above two thousand Years be∣fore
 the Birth of our Savior, this famous 
Chinese
 Drink, Extracted of Rice, was first made: The Inventer thereof was call'd 
Ilie,
 who having Presented the Emperor with the new and pleasant Liquor, when he had well tasted it, said, What great Misfortune hath brought this Drink into the Realm? Now I foresee the fall of my Family, and the ruine of the Empire by this inebriating Drink: Whereupon, he straight, instead of reward and honoring him for his happy Invention, being such an assistant to weaken Nature, banish'd him the Em∣pire for ever; and Commanded further upon pain of Death, that none should imitate or experiment the same: But though 
Yu
 Banish'd the first finder, yet he could not prevent the Art of making it, from spreading through his whole Dominions.


Besides these Drinks, there is an ordinary sort boyl'd of the Root 
Tee,
 or 
Cha;
 and likewise another, by the 
Netherlanders
 call'd 
Bean Broth,
 which, as some say, is Milk mixt with 
Peking
 Butter.


The 
Chineses
 also Press several sorts of Juyces, or Wines out of Fruit; as among other out of the Fruit 
Lichi.


Yet in no place, do they know any Liquor made of Grapes; that kind of Tope only belonging to the Province of 
Xensi,
 though they have store of Grapes and Vineyards in other parts of 
China;
 for the 
Chineses
 either dry or Preserve their Grapes, to eat them in Winter, which they do by Boyling in a great Pot, and then pour dissolv'd Sugar upon them.


Upon the delivery of the foremention'd Presents, 
Singlamong
 was not once made mention of, which occasion'd some jealous thoughts.


And now, because the Ambassador expected that he should Land shortly, he made an Order for his Attendants, and Information to the Comptroller, to be observ'd at his Landing, thereby to shun all Confusions, according to which every one was to govern himself.




Orders for the Attendants of the Embassy.


OF what concern this Embassy is, every one may apprehend: How circum∣spectly it ought to be perform'd, in respect to our selves; and also how much Honor and Profit our Nation may reap by it, cannot be sufficiently express'd.


Therefore since the good Orders, Vertue, and fair Carriage of the Persons that shall attend us, must be observ'd and maintain'd as the Chief Point, it may be judg'd what care and diligence ought to be us'd in it, that our bad Conversation may not hinder a good Event.


This being consider'd of, we have thought it necessary and fitting to pre∣scribe some short Orders to all our Followers, with express Commands, that every one shall exactly observe them upon their Perils.




I.
 Coming ashore, every one shall go to the appointed place, without separating himself, or going from the Train without special Orders from the Ambassador.


II.
 Every one shall look to his Office, and be diligent and careful in what he is imploy'd.


III.
 None shall go out of the Ambassadors Lodging, without his, or the Secretaries knowledge.


IV.
 The Comptroller 
Ruwenoort
 shall have the second Command over the Gentlemen and Soldiers, but no Power to send any one out, or Discharge him without the Secretaries knowledge, who shall, if it be requisite, acquaint the Ambassador therewith.


V.
 Every one, of what Degree soever, shall have a special care, and abstain from too much Drinking and Quarrelling, which oftentimes arise from it, on forfeiture of three Months Wages the first time, and the second, of all his Pay, loss of his Place, and be sent to 
Batavia;
 he that shall occasion a Quarrel or Contest between any Person, shall receive the same Punishment.


VI.
 Every person shall carry himself very humble, and be bare headed in the Ambassa∣dors Presence; as also, the Gentlemen, Soldiers, and other Officers shall be Dutiful and Obedient; but above all, be very Courteous and kind to the 
Chineses.


VII. Putmans
 being Master of the Gifts and Presents, shall have a great care of the packing and dividing of them, that they may be look'd after and secur'd from spoiling, or Rain, and keep an exact account of all, by entring them down in a Book of Presents; he shall also, as Master of the Ceremonies, observe that good Orders he kept in that concern.


VIII.
 On the Ringing of a Bell ashore, or by the way, every one shall come to Prayers


in his peculiar place, which shall be in the Evening at seven a Clock, perform'd by the Secre∣tary or some Person else, on forfeiture of a Rix-Doller, for those that without great reason stay from it.










Information for the Comptroller.


I. OF the Comptroller is requir'd, that he take upon him a Grave Formality, neither shew∣ing a lightness in his Behavior or Conversation, and justly to pay every one their Due; he is to be Governor of the Gentlemen, Clerks, Assistants, and Soldiers, and so necessarily requir'd to be a good Example in Vertue to others; and also to be Courteous and Civil to all Persons, especially to the 
Chineses
 and 
Tartars,
 with whom lies our greatest Concern.


II. The Comptrollers Office and Government shall consist in Domestick Affairs, that all things may be done orderly, and kept clean; to which purpose are allow'd him as Assistants, 
Frents,
 as Chief Butler, and 
Banning
 as Steward, who shall act in their Offices accord∣ing to 
Putman's
 Direction, and take care not to wast and lavish, but to see that nothing be lost: Also two Assistants more are allow'd 
Putman,
 to look after all the Travelling Utensils and Necessaries, 
viz. Cuiper,
 and 
Van Altern,
 which shall look to the Bed∣ding, Housholdstuff, and other things thereto belonging, and keep an exact account there∣of, at the Shipping or using, that they may not be damnifi'd, that when the Ambassador shall resolve to Land, or go, and come from one place to another, and the Secretary acquainting them with it, they shall presently order the getting of them ready.


Three Tables shall daily be kept and furnish'd at twelve a Clock at Noon, and eight at Night, 
viz.


The first Table being the Ambassadors, shall be Oval, with room for eight or ten Persons; at this shall Eat the Ambassador; at his right Hand 
Nobel, Putman
's, and 
Vander Doe's
 the Secretary; at his left Hand, 
Iohn Van Hoorn,
 the Ambassadors Son, and as many more Plates shall be laid ready for Strangers. This Table shall be attended by the Comptroller 
Ruwenoort,
 who must stand behind the Ambassador; besides two Gentlemen, 
viz. Frents,
 and 
Doornik;
 at every Course serving up, the Trumpeters shall Sound, and betwixt, the other Musicians play.


The second, being the Comptrollers Table, Mr. 
Ruwenoort
 shall sit, with six Gentlemen, who shall all be attended by the 
Negro
 Boys, except a Soldier to Wait upon the Comptroller.


The third Table shall consist in six of the prime of our Guard, the Inter∣preter and Master-Cook, who rising, the under Waiters shall take the re∣mainder.


About the Dressing of the Meat, and the quantity, great care must be us'd. To which purpose 
Putmans,
 the Secretary 
Vander Does,
 and the Comptrol∣ler 
Ruwenoort
 shall first consult about the Bill of Fare, and then give or∣der for it.


Every Week the Comptroller shall deliver a Bill of his Charge to the Secre∣tary, which when look'd over, shall be enter'd in their due places.


Berkman
 shall be as Master of the Horse, and therefore is to look over them, that they have their Provender in due season, and that it be good and not Musty; and likewise be careful of their Furniture, that all things may be kept clean and in repair.


At their Landing and going up to the Court at 
Hoksieu
 this order shall be observ'd:


First, Two Trumpets shall Ride before, then six Soldiers with Carbines and Swords, next Captain 
Vander Werf,
 and 
Pilot Peter Iansz de Vlieg,
 then the


Lord Ambassador himself; after him 
Bekmans
 and 
Iohn Dubon
 Halberdiers; 
Iohn Van Hoorn,
 the Ambassadors Son; 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans; Vander Does
 and 
Ruwenoort;
 after these the six Gentlemen, 
Banning, Ruysser, Berkman, Van Alteren, Frents, Van Doorn,
 and lastly, 
Hans
 and 
Sluiter.








The same day nothing happen'd of remark, only the General 
Povi
's Inter∣preter came to visit the Ambassador, and tell him, That the Vessels which were to take in the Steeds, would either come that Night, or early in the Morning.


The following day, soon after Sun-rising, the foremention'd Interpreter, with two Captains belonging to the Jonks, came aboard of the Ambassador, to acquaint him of the two Vessels arrival, to fetch the Emperors Presents, the Horses and Oxen.


After some Discourse it was concluded, That the foremention'd Captains should the next Ebb go and fetch the Horses with their great Jonks; to which purpose, the Comptroller 
Ruwenoort
 was sent with them.


In the afternoon, the Ambassadors Boat came again from above the River, with the Secretary 
Vander Does,
 who besides his own Relations, brought two Letters, one from 
Nobel
 alone, and the other Sign'd by three, in which was written, That they had acquainted his Highness of the Ambassadors intentions to Land, whereupon they had obtain'd leave to send the Secretary 
Vander Does
 with the Boat.


In which were also brought a dozen Porkers, four Baskets with Artichokes, two with Cucumbers, and fifty Pots of 
 
Chamchoe;
 and that it was conclu∣ded, that twelve Men should first go ashore with the Ambassador, and that he should bring the Emperors Letter with him.


By the same Letters they also inform'd him, That the General had desir'd them to procure some Glasses, Quilts, Blood-Coral, and several other things for him which they had aboard, and could have wish'd, that they had been Shipt uppermost, because his Favor was of great concern, and they might do some good with him by the way of Presents, as they were inform'd, he being of a more affable Character than his Predecessor. And 
Nobel
 and 
Harthower
 told him, That the Ambassador was not concern'd in the Trade, but it was intrust∣ed wholly to them; so that without doubt, the Ambassador would not be troubled about it; therefore they would on this first undertaking so prosecute their business, that it might tend to his Honor; so that they desir'd he would please to leave it to their care. They added further, that they esteem'd them∣selves happy by the Ambassadors grave counsel to be provided against the 
Chi∣neses
 Treachery. In the Trade nothing was to be done, but to use care and prudence, as in former times. If they intended to effect any thing, they must wait, yet not depend too much upon it. The Jonks which were should the Horses at 
Minjazen,
 were judg'd to be unfit to go to 
Sothia;
 therefore the 
Tar∣tars
 desir'd, that they might be brought into the 
Netherland
 Haven, in one of the Ships, from whence they would convey them up the River.


The Governors had lately chosen a place on the other side of the River, where they intended to request of the Emperor, that the 
Hollanders
 might build a Store-house; but they knew not whether it was done out of their own incli∣nation, or by the Emperors Order, (which perhaps had long since granted it.) They were inform'd, that about eight or ten days since, a Mastless Vessel ran into the 
Storm-Bay,
 and soon after went away again, and that the Comman∣ders of her said, that they were sent from 
Batavia
 to 
Iapan,
 and likewise that


an Ambassador was come thither with nine Ships; by which they suppos'd, that it was the 
Newpoort,
 because no other Ships knew of the Ambassadors coming.


There went also a rumor, That some 
Portuguese
 Ships were arriv'd at 
Makaw,
 and of an Ambassadors going to 
Peking,
 that came over in them.


The single Letter from 
Nobel
 was to this purpose: That Hopes and a good Heart was half their Business, and he much rejoyc'd at what the Ambassador had been pleas'd to write; but nothing more concern'd him, than the pro∣moting and making the Embassy more Honorable, that it might be perform'd with all fitting Splendor and Magnificence, of which there were fair appear∣ances. But because nothing could be assur'd from the 
Chineses
 looks, therefore time must produce it.


They declar'd, that all the Governors were exceedingly rejoyc'd at the Am∣bassadors coming, and had never shown such great incouragements to their Design.


The nineteenth, the great Jonk which went the same day to fetch the Hor∣ses, return'd, and brought a Letter from the Commander to this effect.


That that Morning he had receiv'd the Ambassadors Order, for the sending of the Horses and Oxen; according to which he had Shipt them in the Jonks, with three Chests full of Saddles, all in good condition, and that at their put∣ting off, he had fir'd seven Guns in Honor of the Emperor, and the Ambassa∣dor, which he hop'd he would opprove off.


His Excellency Commanded 
Ruwenoort,
 that so soon as it was Flood, he should go up with the Horses to 
Hocksieu,
 which was perform'd accordingly; and the Ambassador writ a Letter to 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer,
 advising them, that he had receiv'd theirs by the Secretary, and prepar'd himself to go in the expected Vessels to 
Hoksieu;
 and in the mean while, had sent the Horses and Oxen, as also their Saddles, and the Coach provided for the Emperor.


The twentieth, nothing happen'd of remark.


The one and twentieth in the Morning, two Pleasure-Boats came with three 
Mandarins,
 two from the Vice-Roy and General, and one from the Go∣vernor of 
Minjazen,
 to attend and bring in the Ambassador, who desir'd two days for the fitting and accommodating all things for his more convenient Landing.


The three and twentieth in the Morning, the two Pleasure-Boats before∣mention'd, that came with the three 
Mandarins,
 were ready to take in the Am∣bassador, but prov'd much too little to carry him, his Attendants and Goods up the River. And because they proffer'd as many Jonks on the one and twen∣tieth as he should need, therefore they were desir'd to procure one more, which they scrupling, he said he had been told, that they were a well Go∣vern'd Nation, and therefore wonder'd that they kept not their own promise, that he should have as many as he needed; therefore he would send one up to 
Hoksieu
 to fetch written Orders from the General, according to which he would Govern himself. Upon the news thereof, without any more ado, they sent a Jonk to carry his Goods, or any thing else; whereupon he gave Order for the Shipping of his Goods and Attendants.


At Noon, the Ambassador Imbark'd himself to go up to 
Hoksieu,
 and about three a Clock arriv'd at 
Minjazen;
 of which place the Governor sent him a Complemental Letter, informing him of his indispos'dness, which prevented him from giving the civility of a meeting. Moreover, he caus'd the Ambassa∣dor


and his Retinue to be Entertain'd with 
 Bean-Broth, and Bak'd Meats.


The Governor of 
Minjazen
 also sent to desire the Ambassador to stay some short time, because he would send a Letter with him; and soon after, some 
Mandarins
 coming aboard said, That they were sent from the Governor to search all Chests and Trunks, which was so ill resented by the Ambassador, that he said with a displeas'd Countenance, the 
Mandarins
 had promis'd him, That his Goods should without trouble or molestation be deliver'd; and if they could not, he would rather return aboar'd, than suffer such affronts, which words made them wave their receiv'd Orders; yet he went away in the Even∣ing without a Letter. The Ambassador, by reason of the Ebb meeting him, was forc'd to Anchor at 
Lamthay,
 and about Flood setting forward again, about Day light arriv'd at the Bridge of 
Lamthay.
 Here the 
Mandarins
 went to ac∣quaint the General of the Ambassadors arrival, and also to know, if it pleas'd his Highness, that he should first go into the 
Netherlanders
 Inn, or come to his Highness: The Ambassador also made his coming immediately known to 
No∣bel
 and 
Harthouwer,
 who came to welcome him; of whom he demanding, in what Postures Affairs stood; They told him, they had no present cause of dis∣satisfaction, because the last Night 
Singlamong
's Secretary had come and told them, that seven hundred Bales of Silk lay in store, which were to be ex∣chang'd for the 
Netherland
 Commodities, and also that 
Singlamong
 would have half a share in the Trade; The General two third parts in the other half, and the 
Conbon
 a third part.


The four and twentieth, after several Houses shewn, and deny'd, a 
Manda∣rin
 came to ask if the Ambassador would be pleas'd to send one of his Servants to see the House which was chosen for him. Whereupon he sent 
Nobel, Putmans,
 and 
Ruwenoort
 to the General, to desire him, to give Order for a House.


The 
Mandarins
 which had fetch'd the Ambassador, and were that Morning gone to the General, to make his coming known, return'd with Horses to con∣duct him to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong.


And 
Nobel, Putmans,
 and 
Ruwenoort
 came with the foremention'd 
Mandarins,
 to tell the Ambassador, that a House was making ready for him; also that his Highness expected him at Court, and before the Ambassador should have done his business with his Highness, the House would be ready.


The General also said, That if they had known of the Ambassadors coming from 
Batavia
 before hand, the Emperor would have given Order for the build∣ing a new House.


And accordingly, although it Rain'd very hard, yet the Ambassador prepar'd himself to go to his Highness.


First, between the sound of several Instruments, he was conducted to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 who bad him Welcome, and shew'd him to sit on a Bench at his left Hand, (by the 
Tartar
 accounted the upper) and next him 
Nobel, Harthouwer, Putmans,
 and the Secretary 
Vander Does,
 on a piece of Cloth spread on the Ground.


Then the Vice-Roy wish'd the Ambassador much joy, for which the Am∣bassador with many Ceremonies thank'd him; so that this first Visit ended on∣ly in Coplements.


He at last ask'd, If he had about him the Letter from his King to their Em∣peror; and also, that with the first opportunity, they should give an account to the General, how many Chests and Trunks they wanted to carry up their Goods, that they might be got ready against the appointed time.


And likewise, that the General might give Order for the Jonks and Vessels to fetch the Presents for the Emperor ashore: To which the Ambassador an∣swer'd, That he had not brought the Letter with him, because of the badness of the Weather, but his Highness might Command it when he pleas'd; the number of Cases and Chests, he would also give an account of, as they had occasion, and so soon as they could come at the Presents, acquaint his High∣ness with it.


Moreover, The Ambassador desir'd the Vice-Roy's advice, and instruction in this Embassy, which he would be sure to observe, and other such like Discour∣ses. To which the Vice-Roy answer'd, That he would invite the Ambassador to his Court, and then they would further consult concerning all affairs.


From thence they went to the General, who enquired after the Ambassadors Health, and how all Friends far'd in 
Batavia?
 To which the Ambassador an∣swer'd, and return'd him Thanks for sending the 
Mandarins
 to fetch him in, and also for the fresh Provisions. Then he ask'd the same question as the Vice-Roy had done before, whereon the Ambassador reply'd, That the Goods which were to be sold, lay upon the Presents; but he would give Order to 
Nobel
 to fetch them up, that they might be seen, and if they were damnifi'd, they should immediately be shown to his Highness; which said, his Highness was well satisfi'd, saying, That he would then write concerning it to the Court at 
Pe∣king.
 The Ambassador also desir'd his Highness's advice, because he knew not the Customs and Fashions of the Countrey.


Moreover the Ambassador said, That he would on the Morrow present his Highness with some Glasses, and other such like Rarities, which he desir'd he would please to accept. His Highness inquir'd also of the Ambassador, if he had left good Orders on board, that his People us'd no Outrages, nor carry'd any Goods privately ashore; to which, the Ambassador said, 
Yes,
 and if any one should break such Orders, he should be severely punish'd.


The General shew'd the Ambassador two 
Mandarins,
 which (said he) shall wait upon you, when I intend to acquaint you with any thing of consequence, therefore desir'd him to grant them Audience. On which the Ambassador ta∣king leave, was intreated by his Highness to Eat with him first, which was perform'd, and at Table said, That he would with the first opportunity in∣vite the Ambassador to his Court, to Discourse with him concerning the Embassy.


From hence they went to the 
Conbon,
 whither they came about the Evening, and were kindly receiv'd and bid Welcome by him.


Moreover, the 
Conbon
 said, That the Ambassadors coming would prove an advantagious business to them, promising to assist him in all things he would desire. Whereupon the Ambassador taking leave, came to his Lodging about eight a Clock; about ten arose a mighty Storm out of the North, which last∣ed till Midnight.


The twenty fifth in the Morning, they receiv'd the bad news, that the Jonks Laden with all their Travelling Necessaries was cast away, driven from the Anchor, and shatter'd in pieces against the Bridge of 
Lamthay.
 But 
Putmans
 and the Secretary were sent to see what could be sav'd of the Damnifi'd Goods. Towards Noon, the Vice-Roy and General sent them in all sorts of Kitchin Provision, of what the Countrey afforded, and some Vessels of their best Liquor.


The General sent likewise a Pass to the Ambassador, for the fetching ashore the Emperors Presents; to which the Ambassador reply'd, That it could not be done before he Traded: But the 
Mandarin
 answer'd, That it must be, or else the General could not write to 
Peking:
 Whereupon the Ambassador told him, That he would visit the General on the morrow, and discourse with him about it; on which he went away.


Next Morning Captain 
Putmans
 went to Complement his Highness 
Singla∣mong,
 and in the Ambassadors Name to present him with some Rarities, who himself was ready to repair to the Court, where a 
Mandarin
 gave him notice, That he was immediately expected; whither instantly going, and after some Complements had pass'd, he deliver'd him the Copy of the Letter to his Im∣perial Majesty, with a List of the Persons Names that were to go to 
Peking
 with him; and also a Schedule, being an Abstract of the Embassy, which was to this purpose.


That the Lord General 
Maetzuiker
 and the Council of 
India
 say, That the 
Hollanders
 look upon it as the best way of effecting Business, to be just, and endeavor Friendship; which hath been hitherto attested by all People that have dealt with us, either upon the score of Alliance, Commerce, or both: But the way of Traffique is look'd upon as the best Foundation, whence sprouting, it may grow up and branch like a Tree, so to enrich each other in Peace, and assist in all Exigencies of War.


That the 
Hollanders
 have many years endeavor'd both Traffick and Alli∣ance with the 
Chineses;
 to which purpose the General and Council of 
India
 ten years since sent their Ambassadors with Presents to the Emperor in 
Pe∣king,
 which were kindly receiv'd, and his Majesty accepted of the 
Hollanders
 as Friends, and declar'd them so publickly.


The 
Hollanders
 have now again by the Lord General and 
Indian
 Council address'd their Ambassador with Presents to the Emperor, with hearty wish∣es, That his Imperial Majesty may live for ever, and that this their desir'd Affinity may last as long as the Sun and Moon endureth.


The Ambassador desires of the Vice-Roy, General, and 
Conbon,
 That they would assist him in this Negotiation, because their Mediation may facilitate, and so the sooner effect the Business.


This being translated, was, together with a Copy of the 
Batavian
 Missives to the Emperor, presented unto the General, who after inquiry concerning the brave Horses and Oxen which were to be given to the Emperor, desiring to see them, they fell into other Discourses concerning the Presents, and about land∣ing the Merchandise, upon which there had like to have hapned some Con∣trast; but the Ambassadors discretion seasonably broke it off, and so depart∣ing, went from thence to the Vice-Roy, where they were conducted through another Gate than they went the day before, into the Inner Court, or Privy Chamber, in which the Ambassador, after having shew'd Reverence to the Vice-Roy, was by him bid to sit on his left Hand, on a small Bench, and next him his Prime Officers; to all whom the Vice-Roy seem'd to be somewhat more affable than the General, saying, That the 
Hollanders
 were now no Strangers, and that he had been acquainted with them in 
Canton,
 and done them several good Offices in their Negotiation there; and that he was as rea∣dy now to serve them as heretofore, especially because a Person of greater Quality was imploy'd with like Addresses to his Imperial Majesty. Where∣upon the Ambassador modestly reply'd, That he had been well inform'd of


his Highness former Affection and Favor to their Nation at 
Canton,
 and also of the late continuation of the same Civility and Goodness to 
Constantine Nobel,
 ever since his residing there, for which he return'd him especial Thanks, not doubting but he would keep up his Hospitable Character to Strangers, in as∣sisting them in this their present Embassy, in which they desir'd nothing but what was Just and Honorable, and might be beneficial to both Nations: Which he promis'd very seriously, and that he would write in the Ambassadors behalf to all his Correspondents in the Council of State at 
Peking:
 Then the Vice-Roy inquiring in the same manner as the other did about the Presents and the Lading, the Ambassador fearing that some Contest might arise, as formerly with the General, waved the Dispute, onely replying, That they would be all ready in good Season; but the Merchandise he did not concern himself with: Whereupon the Vice-Roy said, 
Well, let it pass;
 but desir'd the Ambassador to lend him his Chyrurgeon for a day or two, which he pro∣mis'd, when Dinner being upon the Table, breaking off all further Discourse, the Vice-Roy desir'd them to sit at his own Table, on his left Hand, which is there the chief place, where they did eat in the same Dish, and drank in the same Bowl with the Vice-Roy: So having been plentifully treated, they took their leave, and return'd to their Lodging.


At their going away, two 
Mandarins
 follow'd the Ambassador, telling him, That the Vice-Roy return'd him many Thanks for the Presents which he had sent in the Morning, but durst not receive them as yet; therefore he desir'd him to send for them home till they went to 
Peking:
 Whereto the Ambassador made Answer, That they were onely a few Trifles for his Children; and de∣sir'd that they would please to proffer them once more to his Highness, which they promis'd to do; but however, towards Evening they were return'd again with the same Excuse.


Next Morning, being the twenty seventh, the Ambassador consulted with his Council of what had hapned to him the day before, and ask'd what was further to be done for the advancing of this great Embassy; and also read over the Instructions given him in 
Batavia:
 after which, having seriously con∣sider'd, they unanimously concluded and agree'd, That 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 should that Morning go to the General, to tell his Highness, That the Ambas∣sador endeavoring to satisfie him in all Points whatsoever, therefore desir'd that the 
Blyswiik
 and two Jonks might come up thither with the Merchandise and Presents, and that then he should receive them.


But whilst they were yet busie about this their Resolution, three 
Mandarins
 came to desire 
Nobel
 to come to the Vice-Roy, where the General also expect∣ed him; thither he and 
Harthouwer
 went immediately.


At this time the Governor of 
Soansifoe
 sent the Ambassador as a Present a couple of fat Oxen, besides other good Kitchen Provision.


Mean while 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 came back from the Court, and related, That they still desir'd that the Merchandise and Presents might be brought ashore; which they excus'd, urging the several Inconveniences; but told them that all should be done in good time, when the Presents and Frigats might by unlading be least damnified, concerning which they would come and Treat with his Highness to Morrow.


The twenty eighth in the Morning, about day-light, the Secretary carried the Message to the General, who at his return told, That having staid an Hour ere he was admitted to his Presence, and having complemented his Highness


in the Ambassadors Name, he answer'd him roughly, saying in a teasty man∣ner, That he had spoke with the Ambassador two days since, and granted him as many Jonks as he desir'd, for the unloading of his Goods; and come you now to ask more? Let it be so (said he); I will supply them with Twenties, and if that will not serve, with Hundreds; but in brief, none of their Ships shall come up the River. Tell your Master (continu'd he) that I am a Man that keep my Word, no Promise-breaker; therefore what I grant, they may be as∣sur'd of. I know that you are come hither from remote Countreys, through long and turbulent Seas, with Ships freighted with Merchandise; How then should I be so inhumane as not to serve you in what I may towards the ac∣complishing of your Desires? But first land your Presents, and when I have seen them, I will write in your behalf to 
Peking.
 And the more to manifest my good Intentions, and the Love I have for the Ambassador, I will suffer one of his Ships to come up to the Bridge, but accompanied with my Jonks; for which Favor the Secretary return'd him thanks in the Ambassadors Name, promising to give his Master an Account thereof.


The Ambassador order'd 
Nobel
 and 
Harthower
 to go to the General so soon as it was possible, and thanking him for his Kindness, further to request a Pass to bring up the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat, and send two 
Mandarins
 to help them, that all things might be done according to his desire.


The twenty ninth in the Morning the Comptroller 
Ruwenoort
 went with the Chyrurgeon 
Hans Voorechter
 to the Court, to carry their Highnesses the follow∣ing Letters, and desire their Answers. The first being to the Vice▪Roy 
Singla∣mong,
 contain'd, 
That the Ambassador had sent his Chyrurgeon to his High∣ness Service.
 The rest was written to the same purpose with the other three, 
viz.
 
That the Ambassador desir'd to know when his Highness pleas'd to accept of a Visit, and treat about the Embassy.


The thirtieth nothing hapned of Remark.


Next Morning two of the Generals Officers came to the Ambassador, and in their Lords Name privately proffer'd him three hundred 
Tail
 (which they had brought with them) for the Chain of Blood-Corral and Quilt, Goods which he desir'd to be sent; on which the Ambassador smiling, return'd, That he was no Merchant, neither bought nor sold; but if the General would please to accept of those Trifles as a Present, he would take their Reception as a high Honor; and if his Highness hereafter might have a fancy to buy any Goods belonging to the 
Hollanders,
 that their Merchant 
Nobel
 should furnish him: With which Answers the foremention'd Persons return'd, to give an Account thereof to the General.


In the Afternoon the Vice-Roys Officers return'd with many Thanks to the Ambassador for his Presents, which his Highness had kindly receiv'd, and as a grateful Return, had sent him eight Pieces of 
Chinese Brocadoes,
 which they desir'd the Ambassador to accept, and he courteously receiv'd, though not va∣lued at above eighty 
Tail
 of Silver.


In the Evening after Prayer the Comptroller 
Ruwenoort
 deliver'd his first Ac∣compt of Charges and Expence, which the Ambassador gave to 
Putmans
 and the Secretary 
Vander Does
 to look over, and also to inquire if the Provision should be brought in by greater quantities than they us'd to have it before, it might not be had at a cheaper Rate; thereby to be as saving as they could.


The first and second of 
September
 nothing hapned worthy recounting.


The third in the Morning the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
's Intepreter sent the 
Chi∣nese




Gienso
 to ask the Ambassador when he pleas'd to come to visit his High∣ness, and shew him the brave Horses, that he might give his Lord an Account of it; Whereupon he was answer'd, That it was left to the Choice and Plea∣sure of his Highness, and that the Ambassador was always ready at his Com∣mand.


In the Afternoon two of the Vice-Roys chief Factors came to 
Nobel,
 and told him, That they had Order from his Highness to ask if the Company de∣sir'd to have much White Raw Silk; which if they had, his Highness would endeavor to perswade the General, because the Transportation was strictly forbidden by the Emperor; and that it might be observ'd, five Persons of Qua∣lity were sent into every Territory bordering the Sea, from 
Peking;
 so that it would be very difficult to get their Consents: Therefore they ask'd (a Price never heard of) two hundred and fifty 
Tail
 for a 
Picol,
 desiring to have an An∣swer upon it immediately, that they might give an Account to his Highness. Whereto 
Nobel
 made answer, That notwithstanding the time did not permit to send to 
Japan,
 yet they would exchange those Merchandises which they had brought with them, for a Parcel of Silk, to carry to their Native Countrey; but he would have them to know, not at such Prices; and therefore if they would not come nearer to the matter, he would neither Treat about it, nor make any Proffer, desiring them to be better advis'd: Whereupon they re∣ply'd, That they had no other Order, and therefore desir'd the 
Hollanders
 to consider of it, and so let it rest for that time.


Mean while the General and 
Conbon
's Factors also came thither, but made no mention of the foremention'd Business. The Ambassador to oblige them, and that they might seek to get their Masters to affect the 
Hollanders,
 invited them to Dinner; which ending, they, after they had been handsomly treated, with kind Thanks took their leaves.


Not long after the General also sent two 
Mandarins
 to tell the Ambassador, That he had been inform'd how the 
Hollanders
 in the 
Netherland
 Haven would not hasten the unlading of the Emperors Presents as they should, because they had onely loaden three Jonks full of Merchandise, and would not make use of the other Jonks, which made their Highnesses doubt (as they said) whether the Ambassador would go up to 
Peking,
 or not: They had writ to the Emperor of the Ambassadors arrival; but now they must assure him, that they had seen the Presents; therefore they desir'd a second time, that his Excellency would please to send Order to the Ships, with one of their Vessels, that they might immediately go about that Business: On which they were answer'd, That such Orders had already been given, and that their Highnesses need not doubt of the care and diligence that should be us'd in the Embassy; yet however, that he was inclin'd for their satisfaction to send another Letter thither, which they promising to tell the General, took their leave.


The fourth against the Evening four Jonks with Pepper arriv'd at the Bridge at 
Lamthay,
 which they had taken out of the 
Blyswiik
 and 
Vlaerding
 Fri∣gats. The Persons that came with them gave an Account, That the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat lay at Anchor between the Tower and the Bridge of 
Lamthay,
 and hop'd that before the next Morning she would also come up to the Bridge; and like∣wise that the 
Constance
 was come safe into the 
Netherland
 Haven, and that all things were in good Condition with the Ships, which the Ambassador was glad to hear.


The same day two 
Mandarins
 came to the Ambassador in the Generals name,


to inquire how many Men there were in the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat? If any Soldiers came in her? And why they brought so many? To which they were answer'd, That there were no Soldiers in her, and but forty seven Men in all, which were requir'd to govern the Ship, and other Employments: Whereupon they return'd.


Mean while two eminent 
Mandarins
 sent from the General came to look after the unlading of the Goods, for which the 
Hollanders
 prepar'd Boats and other Vessels. The foremention'd 
Mandarins
 said also, That if the Ship did not come up to the Bridge that day, they would on the morrow fetch out the Presents with their Barques, and then send her down again to fetch others.


All the Factors belonging to his Highness, except the chiefest, came likewise to tell 
Nobel,
 That their Masters had agreed to deliver their Silks to the Com∣pany; and that it was now time to Trade, because some Commissioners were expected daily from 
Peking,
 at whose coming there would be no likelihood to transport one 
Catty
 of Silk: Whereto 
Nobel
 made answer, That he would wil∣lingly deal with them, but he must first see the Silk, and likewise agree about the Merchandise; but if they demanded two hundred and fifty 
Tail,
 as they had done the third Instant, it would not be worth the speaking of it. They having (as they said) no other Order, departed.


On the twenty ninth of 
July
 a Fly-boat nam'd the 
Poelsnip,
 the thirtieth, the 
Nieuport
 Pink; and the fifth of 
August,
 the 
Overveen,
 came thither without their Masts, which they had lost in a Storm about the 
Macaw
 Islands, and going after∣wards to repair their Breaches at the Isle of 
Quemuy,
 the 
Tartar-Chineses
 told the Commanders, That the 
Coxingan-Chineses
 had Besieg'd 
Quelang;
 and many other things concerning that Isle.


The sixth in the Morning two 
Mandarins
 came to tell the Ambassador from the General, That the Governor of 
Minjazen
 had advis'd him▪ that another 
Dutch
 Ship had arriv'd in the 
Netherland
 Haven, which made his Highness de∣sirous to know what Ship it was, and if it came from 
Quelang,
 which if it did, it should immediately return.


In answer to which, they were told, That the Occasion of the coming of this Ship would be made known to his Highness by a Letter which was wri∣ting.


According to the Resolution taken the last Night, the Secretary went to the Court to deliver the Letter, the Contents whereof were to this effect.


That the Ambassador could not but acquaint their Excellencies, That a small Ship was arriv'd there from 
Quelang,
 bringing News, That four Months since the 
Coxingans
 had Besieg'd the Fort there, but were beaten off with great loss: Then he desir'd that he might send the said Ship again to 
Quelang
 with some Necessaries, as Tar, 
Kadjang,
 Timber, and the like Necessaries. And lastly, That all diligence was now us'd to get the Emperors Presents ashore, the greatest part of them being already arriv'd at the Bridge in the small 
Holland
 Vessel; concerning which, or ought else, he would be glad to speak with their Highnesses, when they pleas'd to command him.


The Secretary came first to the General; but he having some 
Mandarins
 with him, could not in Person grant him Audience, but sent one of his Factors to the Secretary for the Letter, which was given him, and a speedy Answer de∣sir'd upon it.


After an hours stay, the foremention'd Factor came to the Secretary, to present him in the Generals Name with a Cup of Bean-broth, and tell him in


answer to the Letter, That so soon as the 
Mandarins
 (that were with his High∣ness) went away, he would consult on their Request, and acquaintthe Am∣bassador with his Resolution by his 
Mandarins.


From hence the Secretary went to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 where the Let∣ter, as at the Generals, was receiv'd by a Servant, under pretence, That the Vice-Roy being indispos'd, could not grant him Audience.


An Hour after, the Interpreter came also to give the Secretary a Cup of Bean-broth, and tell him, That the Vice-Roy had understood the Ambassa∣dor's Mind by his Letter, and had granted his Request, nay, would have done it, had it been of greater concernment; but the 
Hollanders
 must first seek the Generals Consent, which he doubted not but they might easily obtain: Where∣upon the Secretary acquainted his Highness with the General's Answer, who said, That it was well, and he would speak with him about it.


His Highness also caus'd him to be ask'd, Why the Horses and Oxen were not brought to his Court, since he had a great fancy to see them? and to de∣sire that it might be done about two days after. To which the Secretary re∣ply'd, That it was true, they had promis'd his Highness; but he had sent word, That they should refer it till all the Presents were ashore, and that then he would see them together: Whereupon his Highness told them, That the Ge∣neral had made that Answer, and not He; and therefore desir'd, as before, to see them, whether the Presents were ashore or not, two days thence: Which the Secretary promis'd to acquaint the Ambassador with; and rising to de∣part, two 
Mandarins
 came from the General, to inform the Vice-Roy of the Ambassadors Request, so that he was commanded to stay a little. The 
Manda∣rins
 going away again, the Vice-Roy sent him word, That the General had un∣derstood that those of 
Quelang
 were by the 
Netherlanders
 furnish'd with Provisi∣ons and Water; but as for the transporting of Timber, Stones, Tiles, and Nails, it could not be granted: However he had prevail'd so much, (alledging that they were but Trifles, which since 
Quelang
 had been besieg'd, were wanting for the Repairing of the Houses) that by the said 
Mandarins
 they had in the Ge∣nerals Name granted the Ambassadors Request; for which Kindness the Secre∣tary humbly thanking his Highness in the Ambassadors Name, took his leave.


In the Afternoon two 
Mandarins
 came again to the Ambassador, to give him an Answer to his Request which he had made in the Morning, which they deliver'd, after some Complements, in this manner: That the 
Netherlanders
 were Licensed to transport what Provisions they had desir'd, Timber and Nails excepted, to which his Highness could not consent; which contradict∣ed that which the Vice-Roys Interpreter had told the Secretary, 
viz.
 That the General and the Vice-Roy had permitted it: But there were daily Commissio∣ners expected from 
Peking,
 to search those Havens; and that his Highness did not doubt but they would grant it him.


Towards Evening the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat arriv'd at the Bridge of 
Lamthay,
 with the Presents: The Ambassador also sent a Letter, with the 
Constance's
 Boat, to the Merchant 
David Harthouwer,
 informing him, That the four Jonks laden with Pepper out of the 
Vlaerding
 and 
Blyswiik,
 arriv'd there yesterday, but were not all weigh'd: The 
Blyswiik
 Frigat had also been in sight, but durst not come to the Bridge. The Proposal to unlade the 
Alphen
 into the Fly-boat, was lik'd very well, and that then she might be brought in with care, and more safety; to which purpose they should send the 
Polesnip
 to 
Sothia,
 to take in the 
Alphens
 Goods (so to give little or no suspition to the 
Tartars
) and take as much Pepper


and other Goods out of her, as they could conveniently carry, and then let her come up the River with it, because the fore-mention'd Vessel should in few days go with Provisions to 
Quelang.


The Ambassador judg'd it fit, and it would be convenient in that juncture of time, to have a strict Eye upon the Concerns of 
Quelang,
 and therefore ad∣vis'd them to Consult about it; to which purpose 
Harthouwer,
 Captain 
Vander∣werf,
 with the Commander 
de Vlieg,
 were sent for to come up in the 
Blyswiik,
 and likewise Captain 
Bitter.


The 
Blyswiik
 that Evening came up to the Bridge, and in the Morning in∣tended to Unlade her Presents, and two days after (if it were possible) she should be sent to fetch the rest.


The seventh about Sun-rising the Boat set Sail, and Orders was also given for the Unlading of the 
Blyswiik.


In the Afternoon a 
Mandarin
 coming from the General, ask'd the Ambassa∣dor if he would send the Provisions to 
Quelang
 by the 
Blyswiik,
 because his High∣ness had not known that that Ship would have come up so high? On which he was answer'd, That it should be done so soon as the 
Blyswiik
 had made one Turn more to fetch the remaining Presents.


Towards Evening all the Goods design'd for Presents were Landed out of the 
Blyswiik,
 but it being too late to bring them into the Merchants Lodge, they were forc'd under good Guards to lie in the Barques all Night: but in the Morning, being the eighth, they were all brought into the Lodge.


The same day 
Putmans,
 Master of the Ceremonies, and the Comptroller, went with the Horses and Oxen to the Court, to shew them to their Highnes∣ses, according to their Request two days since. Coming home again they re∣lated, That they had pleas'd their Highnesses exceeding well, and that 
Singla∣mong,
 to whose view they went first, ask'd if they were wild or tame? to which they had answer'd, 
Tame:
 He had also highly commended the Oxen, and had caus'd them to be carry'd and shewn to his Women, by whom they were beheld with great admiration: his Son had also been Mounted on one of the Horses. After which his Father ask'd concerning the Ambassadors Health; and also desir'd his Chirurgeon might come to him the next day. The Gene∣ral had also view'd and lik'd them; asking likewise about the Ambassadors Health, if he had any good Doctors? for if he had not, he would send his; and why the 
Hollanders
 sent down the Boat without leave, since he never had refus'd to grant them any of their Requests? and withal when the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat went again to fetch the rest of the Presents? Whereupon Captain 
Putmans
 reply'd, That the Ambassador was pretty well recover'd, and he knew not any thing to the contrary but that he had a good Doctor; yet humbly thank'd his High∣ness in the Ambassadors behalf for his kind Proffer: why the Boat went down without leave he could not give any account; but as to the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat, she was now Unlading her Pepper, and would at farthest be gone again within two days.


The Commander of the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat complain'd to 
Nobel,
 that the 
Tar∣tars
 hinder'd him in the Unlading of the Pepper, he having call'd two Barque∣men aboard, which accordingly came; but the 
Tartars
 seeing them took them, notwithstanding he interceded for them, and said that he was the occasion of their coming, and caus'd them to be carry'd to Prison in Fetters, which made 
Nobel
 send 
Ienko
 to complain to the Commission'd 
Mandarins
 about it.


Mean while a Factor was sent to 
Nobel
 from the General, to enquire about


the Ambassadors Health, and if he had any good Physicians, because his High∣ness would else send him his.


In the Afternoon the Interpreter 
Ienko
 came with some 
Mandarins
 and Mer∣chants to the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat, to redeem the Prisoners, and give order for the Unlading of her, which was begun immediately.


Next Morning, being the ninth, the Ambassador sent to the Vice-Roy 
Sing∣lamong,
 to excuse him, that he could not accommodate him with his Chirurge∣on, because he also was indispos'd, but so soon as he amended he should be immediately sent to him.


In the interim the 
Tyger
 Sloop arriv'd there with a Letter from the Mer∣chant 
David Harthouwer;
 in which the Ambassador was inform'd, that with the other Officers he had thought it convenient not to let the Ship 
Alphen
 come into 
Netherland
 Haven, because it was too dangerous to come thither against Wind and Tyde: which Resolution they acquainted the Commander of her with, that when he thought convenient he might remove from 
Sothia
 to 
Tinhay;
 who had sent an Answer, That he would observe it, and consider with his Officers about it, and then send his approbation.


The fifteen Chests brought hither by the 
Polesnip,
 were put into the 
Constance,
 and in the room of them they had Laden her full of Pepper out of the 
Constance
 and 
Tyger,
 which weighed forty nine thousand six hundred sixty eight 
Catties;
 by which means the Ships had made so much room, that they could not conve∣niently come at all the Goods design'd for Presents, so that they onely waited for the 
Blyswiik
 to Ship them in her.


The 
Polesnip
 Fly-boat was now ready to come up, if they had leave and a Pass for her; but the 
Povi's
 Commissioners would not permit it without Or∣ders from above.


The 
Vlaerding
 had on the sixth instant Unladen thirty two thousand one hundred forty five 
Catty
 of Pepper into a 
Chinese
 Jonk, which lay there still; so that at last with great trouble they got to the 
Sandal
 Wood that was to be Pre∣sented.


In the Afternoon two Merchants were sent from the General, to enquire af∣ter the Ambassador's health; which Visit he order'd his Comptroller to re∣quite, by giving them six Hens, five Gammons of Bacon, some Pomegranates, Chesnuts, and Pears.


The same day the Ambassador desir'd the General, that he might have the use of his Doctor but for a Day, because he was much troubled with Gripes in his Bowels; upon which Request he came immediately and prescribed him something, which he had no sooner taken, but found present ease.


The tenth in the Morning the Doctor came again to give the Ambassador some more Physick. A Factor came also to enquire of his health, and if the Medicines the Doctor had given had done him any good) to which he was answer'd, Yes, and that the Ambassador had found great ease by it, desiring the Factor to thank his Highness in his behalf; which he promis'd to do.


The 
Bliswyk
 and the 
Tigers
 Sloop were put off from going that day, and or∣der'd to stay till the next, because some 
Mandarins
 scrupled the carrying away of so much Provision; about which they would first speak with the General.


In the Afternoon two 
Mandarins
 came into the Lodge with a Pass for the 
Bliswyk
 Frigat, and the 
Tygers
 Sloop; and said also, That they were sent to Sail down with the Frigat.


The eleventh the Frigat and Sloop set Sail to 
Netherland
 Haven.












On Sunday Noon, being the twelfth, two Factors came to the Lodge, to present the Ambassador in the Generals Name with some 
 
Connemomy,
 and to tell him, That the Ambassador had been a considerable time ashore, and that the Emperors Presents were not yet Landed: then the Ambassador desir'd that his Highness would please to give order that they might be suddenly de∣liver'd, because he much longed to see them; nor that they could proceed in any Trade before the Goods were ashore, and likewise that then preparations should be made for his Journey to 
Peking.


Whereupon the Ambassador sent this Answer, That the rest of the Presents would suddenly be ashore, and that he thank'd his Highness for his 
Connemomy,
 and in requital of it desir'd him to take a few Conserves of Nuts, Cloves, and the like: So having been well entertain'd by the Ambassador, the Factors took their Leave.


In the Evening it was consider'd, That for several Reasons which the Governors had alledg'd by their Factors, it might happen, so soon as news came from 
Peking
 for the Ambassador to take his Journey thither, that their Highnesses might press his going, and that they (nothing being as yet in readiness, and all in a hurry) might be put to a great inconvenience; There∣fore the Ambassador, to begin betimes, proposed, If it would not be ne∣cessary to acquaint their Highness's to morrow, That most of the Pre∣sents were ashore, and the rest expected in few days; if therefore they might begin to Pack them, and cause Chests to be made for them; of what big∣ness the Chests must be, and how many Men must carry them, and also the Sad∣dles and Furniture for the Horses; and likewise if their Highnesses would please to send Commissioners before the Presents? if the 
Sandal
 Wood, being very big, could be carry'd by Land as it was, or in what Pieces it ought to be cut? that they must also carry several other Goods with them to 
Peking
 to give to the Council of State, and other eminent Persons; if they saw it conve∣nient, to desire their Highnesses to accept of the last Presents, being onely Trifles, sent to them by the Ambassador, because they had no Place in the Lodge to keep them; If their Highnesses should chance to speak of Trading, to press it forward, and to order that two Ships might about two Moneths hence be sent to 
Batavia,
 and from thence to 
Holland,
 to give an account of the Ambassador's Proceedings, and the like.


This the Ambassador and his Council agreed upon, and 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 order'd to go and acquaint their Highnesses with it.


The thirteenth in the Morning 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 (according to the Resolu∣tion taken the Night before) went to the Court to speak with their Highnesses. About Noon coming home again they related, That they had not seen them, it being their Full-Moon, and 
Singlamong
 indispos'd; yet they had sent their Bu∣siness to them by their Interpreters, and receiv'd in answer, That when all the Presents were brought ashore, their Highnesses must be inform'd of it, and that then they would send their Commissioners, to see and be present at the Packing of them; The Chests might be made for them, and about the bigness to contain a hundred 
Catty
 weight; The 
Sandal
 Wood must not be cut, but sent as it came from the Lord General 
Maetzuiker;
 The other Goods which the 
Hollanders
 would carry with them to give away when an occasion did present, should be set down with the Chests and Packs, that they might know exactly how many Porters they should want.


The fore-mention'd Trifles they could not receive before all the Emperor's


Presents were brought up. Because they did not speak with their High∣nesses themselves, they had not made any mention of the Business concerning Trade.


The fourteenth about Noon the 
Vlaerdings
 Sloop arriv'd there from 
Netherland
 Haven, with 
Harthouwer
 and Captain 
Vander Werf,
 who related, That all things as well in 
Sothia
 as 
Netherland
 Haven, were in good condition at their departure from thence, and that all the rest of the Presents were taken out of the 
Constance
 and 
Tyger,
 and put into the 
Bliswyk
 Frigat.


The fifteenth the 
Bliswyk
 arriv'd there with the rest of the Presents, and al∣so the Jonks with three hundred forty four Bags of Pepper out of the 
Vlaer∣ding.
 In the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat also came Captain 
de Bittor,
 who had been Gover∣nor in 
Quelang.


A general report also went, that nine 
English
 Ships were on the Coast of 
Chi∣na,
 about the Isles 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy,
 and that they had been in 
Canton,
 and desir'd to Trade there; but the 
Tartar-Chineses,
 not willing to take four hundred Tail for the granting of them their Trade, were sent away from thence, and were now come afresh to prosecute their old Design.


The Governor having sent word to the Ambassador by 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 on the thirteenth instant, That so soon as the Presents were all Landed, he should inform them of it; therefore he judg'd it convenient to advise their Highnesses of the arrival of the remaining Presents in a Letter by the Secretary, that if they pleas'd (about two days hence, when they were sorted) they might come and see them in Person, or send their Commissioners, that they might make fit preparations for them.


The sixteenth in the Morning the Secretary went first to the General, to de∣liver him the following Letter in the Ambassadors Name, that the rest of the Presents were now come ashore, and that the next day they would all be put in order; therefore if his Highness pleas'd to come in Person, the Am∣bassador would most kindly entertain him; or else send his Commissioners to see them.


In like manner he desir'd a Pass for the Boat, that she might go up and down without being stopp'd to enquire the certainty of the News concerning the 
English
 Ships.


No sooner was the Secretary's coming made known to the General, but he sent for the Letter, and an hour after gave this Answer; That it was not cu∣stomary for the General to come in Person to see the Goods, but he would send his Interpreter if the Presents were as the 
Hollanders
 had reported them, and then consult whom he should send: as to what concern'd the Boat, he would send a Pass for her by his 
Mandarins.


The rumor was at Court, that the General intended that Afternoon to see the 
Dutch
 Ship; to which purpose several Flags, Halberds, and the like, were stuck in the Street.


From thence the Secretary went to the Vice-Roy's Court, where after some stay he was brought into the Presence in a back Hall. His Highness having ask'd concerning the Ambassador's health, and the Secretary given him a re∣spective Answer, deliver'd his Highness the Ambassador's Letter, advising him that all the Presents were now Landed, and if his Highness pleas'd, to send Commissioners to see them. Whereupon his Highness made Answer, That he was glad to hear that the Presents were all safe ashore, and that he would not fail to send his Commissioners the next day to see them: And after having


drunk to him in a Cup of Bean-broth, and entertain'd some frivolous Dis∣courses within, the Vice-Roy gave him leave to depart.


Mean while the General's Interpreter came with some Factors into the Lodge, to bring an Answer on the Letter that was brought in the Morning to his Court, which was after this manner: 
That a Pass should be brought for the Boat the next Morning; but when she had made one Voyage, that they should always bring the Pass to his Highness again, and at her depar∣ture ask for a new one.
 Moreover the Interpreter said, That the General was not well pleas'd that the Ambassador should desire him to come and see the Presents in his own Person; yet the Interpreter had appeas'd and satisfi'd him.


Hereupon the Ambassador answer'd the Interpreter, That by the Discourse of the People he had heard that the General would come himself to see the Presents, and therefore had written, that he should esteem himself happy if it might be so; but had he known, that either the Vice-Roy or General would have been angry, he should not have done it. With which Answer the Inter∣preter took his leave.


The remaining Presents were this day all brought out of the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat into the Lodge.


The seventeenth in the Morning the same Interpreter that had been there the day before came to the Lodge, to ask if the Presents were Landed; on which he was answer'd Yes, and that they were brought thither the last Night, and they onely stay'd till the 
Mandarin
 saw them.


At Noon an eminent 
Mandarin
 came to tell the Ambassador from the Gene∣ral, That his Highness had heard that all the Emperor's Presents were going to be brought to his Court, therefore ask'd him how many 
Coelis,
 which are Porters, could carry them: Whereupon the Ambassador answer'd, That he knew nothing of it; and withall, that the bringing of them to the General's Court could not well be done, because of the bigness of the Packs of 
Sandal
 Wood, and other things: but if his Highness desir'd it, he entreated him to send a written Order by his 
Mandarins,
 they being not his, but the Emperor's Presents, and also that he would not bear the blame if any of the Goods should chance to be damnifi'd by their Carriage thither. Which Discourse prevail'd so much, that the 
Mandarin
 said, His Highness should onely send for a Piece of each sort to see them. To which the Ambassador answer'd, That all which his Highness should give order for in Writing he would obey. Hereupon the 
Mandarin
 rising up reply'd, That his Highness should send a written Order.


The eighteenth in the Morning, another Factor came into the Lodge, sent from the Vice-Roy, to ask concerning the Ambassador's health: and amongst other Discourses 
Nobel
 ask'd him what they should do concerning Trade? all the Presents were now ashore, and the time come which their Highnesses had limited: To which the Factor answer'd, That it would be convenient to send a Letter to 
Singlamong
 about it, and therein express, That his Highness had for three years together given them leave to Trade, and that he would also be pleased to do it now, and assist them in it; and that 
Nobel
 might be admit∣ted to speak with him more at large about it; so made no question but all things would fall out according to his desire. He ask'd moreover if the 
Hollan∣ders
 would sell the two hundred Bags of Pepper lying in the Storehouse to him. To which 
Nobel
 answer'd, Yes, if they could agree. Mean while two 
Manda∣rins
 came into the Merchants Lodgings from the General, telling them that all the Cloths, Perpetuana's, Crown-Serges, and other Goods belonging to the


Emperor's Presents, should on the morrow (if the Weather permitted) by an Order from the Governors be fetch'd to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong's
 Palace, where all the great Persons would be ready to see them; the Chests to fetch the Presents in were making ready, and as for the bulky Packs that were not so curious, they should not trouble themselves.


The foremention'd 
Mandarins
 were also impower'd by the General (as they said) to search the 
Holland
 Ships, if there were no more Pepper, or other Mer∣chandise in them, desiring that two of the 
Netherlanders
 would please to go along with them, who at their Return related that all things were according to the Cargo.


Since now, according to the Governors desires, the Emperor's Presents were brought ashore, and they had promis'd that the 
Hollanders
 should begin to Trade, of which as yet they saw no likelihood, therefore Captain 
Nobel
 was on 
Sunday
 the nineteenth sent with the following Letters from the Ambassador to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and General, being to this purpose, 
viz.


That the Vice-Roy had known the 
Hollanders
 several years, and always shewed them respect and favor, and assisted them in obtaining Dispatches in their Affairs. The 
 
Houpou
 understood the last year from the Vice-Roy and 
Lipovi,
 That an Ambassador must of necessity address himself to the Em∣peror this very year, whereupon they should immediately drive their Trade; which the 
Houpou
 gave account of to the General in 
Batavia;
 who thereup∣on hath sent a Person of Honor, one of his Council as Ambassador, and brought the Emperor's Presents ashore upon your Highnesses desire, and promise, that so soon as that should be done they would begin to Traffick; therefore the 
Houpou
 humbly desires, that his Highness would be pleas'd to permit it, and give order to the Factors and Merchants about it, that the 
Houpou
 may be the sooner ready to go with the Ambassador to 
Peking,
 and the rather, because that two Moneths after the Date thereof, two Ships must go to 
Batavia;
 by which the Ambassador must give an account to the Gene∣ral there, and also to the Province of 
Holland,
 of his success in that Empire. The 
Houpou
 was very desirous to send some Goods with those two Ships, which he would buy of the Factors; therefore he humbly requested that the Trade might now commence.


To which 
Nobel
 receiv'd an Answer from 
Singlamong,
 That he wonder'd at the 
Hollanders
 hastiness, since the Ambassador was not to travel up to 
Peking
 till the new Year, and that an Answer was expected from thence in twenty days; therefore they must stay till that time, because the Cargo that they had brought (which in respect of what the 
Hollanders
 carry'd into the Empire of 
Iapan
 was very small) could be sold in five days; and that the forementi∣on'd Ships might then go away time enough. However, his Highness by 
No∣bel's
 perswasions granted that they might conclude with the Factors about the Prices for the Goods which the 
Hollanders
 intended to Vend there, and for those which they should receive in Barter for them, and drive their Trade privately, without publishing it before Orders came from 
Peking,
 because he knew not but that the Emperor might desire all, or a part of their Commodities.


The General 
Siangpovi,
 to seem resolute and bountiful, promis'd to 
Nobel,
 That so soon as he had seen the Presents, he would send his Factors to the Lodge to agree with him concerning his Merchandise, provided the 
Hollanders
 ask'd modestly, and not more than the value for them. He also boasted much of his good inclination towards the 
Hollanders,
 because he had lent them his


Jonks to bring their Merchandise ashore, of which they had lost nothing; and that he resolv'd from that time forward to continue his kindness, and endea∣vor by all means possible to advance them. About the sending of the two Ships for 
Batavia
 he seem'd somewhat backward, because according to his judgment nothing of consequence could be advis'd by them: but being some∣what better inform'd about it, made answer, That the first Orders were expe∣cted from the Emperor in fifteen days, therefore would have them stay till then. Their Highnesses also ask'd courteously concerning the Ambassadors Health; and hearing of his Recovery, seem'd much to rejoyce at it.


The 
Mandarin Han lavja
 came also to the Lodge to tell the Ambassador, that the General had order'd him to go along with his Excellency as Guide to 
Peking,
 and that four Standards must be made to be carry'd before the Ambas∣sador in his Journey, out of which two must be mark'd with 
Dutch,
 and two with 
Chinese
 Characters; and moreover, that he had been inform'd the Gover∣nors in few days would grant the Trade.


The one and twentieth and two and twentieth nothing hapned worthy of note.


The twenty fourth in the Morning, a 
Mandarin
 came to the Lodge, asking if the Ambassador did not know when the 
Chineses
 that came from 
Batavia
 went away? and from what Place? if they were first carry'd over with the 
Holland
 Ships? and what was their native Countrey and Names?


The 
Mandarin
 receiv'd in answer, That some went over the last year as Ser∣vants with 
Nobel
 and 
Pedel
 to 
Batavia;
 and as to what concern'd the rest, they came thither from 
Canton, Tayowan, Chinkfieuw, Hoksieu,
 and other Places, both in Ships and Jonks, but the Places of their Birth and Names were unknown to him, because he had never enquir'd after them. They desir'd at 
Batavia
 to be Transported to their native Countrey again, which was accordingly grant∣ed them.


The same 
Mandarin
 had a Letter given him, in which a Pass was desir'd from the General, for the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat to carry down some Goods that were to be sent to 
Quelang,
 and come up again with Merchandise; and likewise from the 
Vlaerding
 Sloop.


The twenty fifth about Noon a 
Mandarin
 brought a Pass for the fore∣mention'd Ship and Boat to go up and down the River.


The twenty sixth in the Morning the Comptroller made several Com∣plaints to the Ambassador, That the 
Chineses
 at the buying of the Necessaries for 
Quelang
 (appointed by the General) had prevented the Person, who daily brought him Flesh, Fish, Herbs, and the like, into the Lodge, from bringing any more as he us'd to do, and had complain'd of him, and made him so odi∣ous to the 
Mandarins,
 that they had put him and the 
Coelies
 Master (which had assisted the 
Netherlanders
 in buying of Provisions for their Ships) into Irons; by which means the 
Coelies,
 and other labouring People that work'd in the Lodge, durst not come any more thither, which put the 
Hollanders
 to a great inconvenience.


There also came an eminent 
Mandarin
 to the Lodge, to give order for the Pressing of Jonks at 
Minjazen,
 to fetch the Merchandises out of the Ships.


In the Afternoon, it being fair Weather, the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat went away with the Necessaries that were to be sent to 
Quelang,
 and also for fresh Provisions for the Ships in 
Netherland
 Haven.


In the same Frigat Captain 
Vander Werf,
 and 
Vander Does
 the Secretary,


went down to take an account of those 
Chinese
 Goods which came over in the 
Dutch
 Ships from 
Batavia,
 and seize on all their Moneys and Merchandise of any value, because on the two and twentieth the Ambassador had found in one of the 
Chinese
 Chests to the value of a thousand Rix-Dollers in Money, con∣sisting in 
Spanish
 Dollers and 
Iapan
 Boat-Silver, which was strictly forbidden in 
Batavia.


The Merchants 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 went in the Afternoon by the Vice-Roy, General, and 
Conbon's
 direction, to Treat about the Trade. When among other things 
Harthouwer
 and 
Nobel
 proposed, That upon Sale they must fetch the Pepper and 
Sandal
 Wood out of the 
Netherland
 Ships in the Haven; which the Factors refus'd, saying, That the Goods should be deliver'd to them in the Ambassador's Lodge. But at last they agreed, That the Goods being fetch'd out of the 
Netherland
 Ships, and brought up the River in Jonks by the Gene∣ral's Order, were to be deliver'd on the Shore, on the hither side of the Bridge, after the same manner as in former years. Then they desir'd the particular Parcels of the Merchandise brought thither by the 
Netherlanders,
 and how ma∣ny, and what Goods they would have in Return of them; which they writ down accordingly in their Notes, as 
China Root,
 ordinary 
Tee, Galya,
 Allom, Preserv'd Ginger, 
Hatten,
 Gold, 
&c.


Seeing the great quantity of Allom and Gold Wyer, besides Gold which the 
Hollanders
 desir'd, they seem'd to be much amaz'd, and judg'd, that the two first sorts could never be afforded for the Prizes that were set down for them by the 
Netherlanders;
 and demanded, why the 
Hollanders
 had not ask'd for Silk: To which they were answer'd, That it could not be done before the Prizes were setled on the 
Dutch
 Commodities, and that then an account might be made of their Stock; which they seeming to approve of, soon after departed.


The twenty eight in the Morning, two of the General 
Povi
's Factors came into the Lodge, of which, one being 
Povi
's Intimate, went with the Interpre∣ter 
Apari
 to the Ambassador, and desir'd him to give him some account of what he had yesterday written to 
Povi:
 Whereupon his Excellency made an∣swer, That amongst other things, he would willingly speak with 
Povi
 con∣cerning the Trade, and also his going up to 
Peking:
 To which he reply'd, That he being his Favorite, could do much in it; but he would advise to pre∣sent him with some more Blood Coral, which he dust assure would not be lost, and that about two days after, the Ambassador might come to visit 
Lipovi,
 be∣cause that and the next were kept as Fast-Days of the first Moon. The Am∣bassador hereupon answer'd, That he depended upon the Noble and Heroick Disposition of the General, and therefore desir'd his Highness to repose Con∣fidence in him, as being a Person of so clear a Spirit, as would endeavor to re∣taliate the General's Favors. So the Factor being Presented with ten Yards of Red Cloth, and Vowing to serve the Ambassador to the utmost of his Power, took his leave and departed.


The twenty ninth in the Morning, 
Putmans
 went with the Interpreter 
Ienko
 to the General, to inquire if he was any ways busie, because that was the appointed time for the Ambassador to visit him: Whereupon they were answer'd, That the General was always imploy'd, but that the Ambassador might come when he pleas'd; which they at their return acquainting his Excellency, he instantly went to Court, and Presented some Blood Coral to the General. Whereupon his Highness told him, That he well knew the generous Nature of the Ambassa∣dor: Who reply'd, That he esteem'd the Favors and kind Receptions which


he had receiv'd from the General, that he was oblig'd to study Requital.


Then the Ambassador desir'd to know the time, when, and which way he should go to 
Peking.
 Whereto he answer'd, That it was now the ninth Moon, and that he might set forward on his Journey very suddenly.


Next, the Ambassador desir'd that they might begin to open Trade, that the 
Houpou
 (meaning 
Nobel
) might be ready to go along with him. To which was answer'd, That the Presents must first be view'd, and that the 
Mandarins
 there∣to imploy'd, had been four days busie about their Orders, which was now done, and the Presents should be look'd over in two or three days, and then the Trade should Commence. Their Discourse ended, after a handsome Treat, the Ambassador went very well satisfi'd to his Lodgings.


Coming to the Lodge, they were soon after visited by the Generals intimate Factor, to tell them, that the General had consider'd about the Coral Chain, and durst not accept of it; yet at length through his perswasions, and that it came from the Ambassadors own Hand, he had taken it. The Factor likewise desir'd a great Blood Coral, which was given him, in hopes that he might assist them in their Trade.


The thirtieth in the Morning, the Ambassador sent a Letter by 
Putmans,
 and the Interpreter 
Ienko,
 to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 to this purpose.


THe Ambassador had long since heard, and now understood, that 
Singla∣mong
 had a kindness for the 
Hollanders;
 therefore he hop'd, that he would please to assist him in all things hereafter, which would be no small Ob∣ligation only to himself, but also to his Masters, and desir'd to visit his High∣ness, to speak with him about the Journey to 
Peking.


Against Noon, 
Putmans
 came again to the Lodge, relating, That he could not speak with the Vice-Roy, but after delivery of the Letter receiv'd answer, That he should be busie four or five days, so that he could not give the Ambassador Audience, and that nothing could be said about the Journey to 
Peking,
 till the Presents were look'd over, which would be done in few days; with which answer 
Putmans
 took his leave.


Against the Evening, the General 
Povi
's Interpreter came to the Lodge to tell the Ambassador from his Master, that when the Presents were view'd, (which should be done in a day or two,) he would desire the Ambassador to be free as he would be to him, and to ask freely for what ever he wanted, who gave the Interpreter five Yards of Red Cloth for his Message.


The first of 
October
 in the afternoon, the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja
 came with Orders
 from the General, to fetch all the 
Chineses
 from the 
Dutch
 Ships with their Goods; and to that purpose desir'd a Note to the Commanders of them, to which he was answer'd, that the 
Netherland
 Secretary was gone thither to search their Goods, which 
Liu-lavja
 desir'd might be brought into the Lodge; whereupon the Ambassador gave the 
Mandarin
 two Letters, one to Captain 
Vander Werf,
 and one to the Secretary 
Vander Does,
 advising them, that the 
Chi∣neses
 might be deliver'd, provided they had been search'd and examin'd before by the Secretary, who if he found any thing of concern, should according to his last Letter, secure it aboard till further Order, with which the 
Mandarin
 departed.


The second and third being 
Sunday
 and 
Monday
 nothing happen'd of note.


The fourth, the Ambassador had Audience granted him by the Vice-Roy, who after Salutations, complain'd, that he was indispos'd, having great pains in his Head and Back.


The Ambassador first thanking him for the Honor he receiv'd by his pre∣sence; then desir'd to know the time when, and what way he should travel to 
Peking:
 To which his Highness answer'd, That if news came from 
Peking
 that day, he might go on the morrow; whereupon the Ambassador desir'd that the Trade might Commence, that 
Nobel
 and he might be in a readiness: To which the Vice-Roy answer'd, That the Ambassador need not to trouble himself about the Trade, because the sale of all the Goods they had brought might be dispatch'd in four or five days; but they must first Pack up all the Emperors Presents, and bring them to the Royal House, and that day on which they were brought they might begin their Trade on the next. On this the Am∣bassador reply'd, He would depend on his Highness's Royal Word, and there∣fore would not trouble him any farther, but that he would give Order, that the Presents should with all speed be brought into his Palace.


Then the Ambassador's Son presented him for his Daughters a great and small Chain of Blood Coral, which he accepted; yet said, he durst not receive, but that they were a Present from the Ambassador's Son, for his Children; and though himself was much indispos'd, yet he desir'd, that the Ambassador would stay and refresh himself a little; which being perform'd, after Dinner, just at his Departure, the Vice-Roy's Daughters, as a thankful return for the Coral, Presented the Ambassadors Son with six Rolls of Silk Stuffs.


Coming to the Lodge, the Ambassador gave Order for the making of sixteen Cases against the next day, to Pack the Presents in, and carry them to 
Singla∣mong
's Palace. Soon after, 
Liv-lavja
 came to visit the Lord 
Van Hoorn,
 telling him, that he should go with him to 
Peking,
 but the time when, was yet unknown.


The fifteenth in the Morning, 
 his Lordship sent a Letter by the Inter∣preter 
Ienko
 to the 
Conbon,
 advising him:


THat he knew very well the good Inclination which he bore to his Countrey-men, and also that he had always assisted them, which they would ever acknowledge with much Thankfulness, in regard the 
Conbon
 had for some time been very busie, that he could not have the Honor to speak with him; now he desir'd, that he might come to proffer his Service to him.


The Interpreter for all this civility, after their Proud manner, brought on∣ly in return, an excuse of indisposition, and that in three or four days he might give him a visit.


The sixth in the Evening, 
Ienko
 the Interpreter came to tell the Ambassa∣dor, that the 
Mandarin Liv-lavja
 was come with all the 
Chineses
 from the Ships up to 
Lamthay
 Bridg, and desir'd to know why he had detain'd some of their Goods; On which the Ambassador answer'd, that he had express Order from the General and Council of 
India,
 that he should do it, because the 
Chineses
 de∣sir'd that they might be only brought over with their Necessaries; therefore, if either Money or Merchandize was found by them, it was forfeited, as it was likewise with his own Men: Whereupon he reply'd, That the General resen∣ted, and that the 
Mandarin Liv-lavja
 would speak with the Ambassador about it the next day.


Nobel
 also inform'd the Ambassador, that the Factor had told him that very day, that he had privately been inform'd, that they would have suddenly news from 
Peking;
 and also that the Ambassador should not go thither him∣self, but that the Presents should be sent thither, and that he should stay in



Hoksieu,
 to Treat with the Governors about the Trade, which the 
Hollanders
 look'd upon as a Discourse without Truth or Reason.


The seventh and eighth, nothing happen'd of remark, but only some false rumors that troubled the Ambassador, that the Emperor had order'd the Pre∣sents to be brought to 
Peking,
 and he to stay at 
Hoksieu;
 and on the other side, 
Singlamong
 was as much concern'd at the seizure of the 
Chineses
 Money, which was forfeited according to the 
Maritime
 Law.


The ninth about Noon, they receiv'd an account, that all things remain'd in a good condition at 
Tinghay,
 and 
Netherland
 Haven, only some new Dis∣putes with the 
Mandarins
 and Messages concerning the 
Chineses
 forfeited Goods, which were for the most part Silver, Camphire, Coral, and Seed-Pearl.


The tenth, the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat arriv'd at 
Lamthay
 Bridge, laden with Pepper, taken out of another Vessel, and also the remaining Necessaries for the Ambas∣sador and his Retinue, likewise some Packs for his private occasions. The 
Mandarins
 (which as Commissioners) had been down with the Frigat, and re∣turn'd in her, coming to the Lodge, were by the Ambassador presented with as much Cloth, as would make each of them an upper Garment.


The eleventh, it was resolv'd in Council, to unlade the 
Tyger
 and 
Constance
 with the first, and send them to 
Tinghay,
 there to make themselves ready to go for 
Batavia,
 at the latter end of the Moneth.


Lapora
 the Factor inform'd the Ambassador, that the next day the Presents would be brought to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
's, there to be view'd; in order to which all things were prepar'd.


The twelfth in the Morning, about Day light, the 
Netherlanders
 prepar'd all the Presents in a fit manner to be carry'd to Court, expecting the 
Mandarins;
 but in stead of them, the Factor 
Lapora
 brought what they little expected, that they should not bring the Presents to Court, till further Order; by which Di∣latoriness, he perceiv'd, that they were not willing as yet, to suffer them to open and vend their 
Cargo:
 Therefore he propos'd to his Council, If it would not be convenient, for these Delays that he should shew his Dislike by Letter; and withal desir'd, that he might return aboard, until they had liber∣ty to Vend their Goods, or receiv'd Orders for their Journey to 
Peking,
 which they approv'd.


But next Day, while he was preparing the Letter, 
Lapora
 coming to the Lodge, he told him what he was about to Write, and resolv'd to send immediately; who desir'd him by all means to forbear two or three days longer, to which he was perswaded, which fell out the better; for the next Morning he sent for the Presents.


At this time, the Ambassador heard there were many Vessels making ready at 
Lamthay
 Bridge, whereby he judg'd, that they were preparing, that when ty∣dings came for him to come to 
Peking,
 then they might hurry him away upon a sudden, which made him ask what Vessels they were, and who was to go with them? To which the Interpreter reply'd, That they were in few days to go with some 
Tartar
 Lords, and perhaps with the Ambassador to 
Peking;
 for which, and that he might be the freer hereafter to acquaint him with the like, he made a Present of five Yards of Red Cloth.


The fourteenth, in the Forenoon, the Emperor's Presents were carry'd to the Vice-Roy's Court, accompany'd with the Ambassador, 
Nobel, Harthouwer, Putmans,
 the Secretary, and the whole Train, the Presents being carry'd before, were follow'd by the Ambassador and his Retinue; who coming to the Pa∣lace


were brought to the Common-Hall, to stay there while the General's coming, at last they were call'd into the Presence Chamber, where the Vice-Roy and General sate on Stools one by another, and next them on their left Hands, three Commissioners sent from 
Peking,
 to inquire what 
Chineses
 had car∣ry'd themselves valiantly at the Conquering of 
Eymuy
 and 
Quemuy;
 which also after the 
Hollanders
 were enter'd, took their leave, being Conducted by the Vice-Roy to the Stairs descending into the Court, by which they suppos'd them to be great Lords: The Ambassador was also desir'd to sit down on a low Stool at the Vice-Roy's right Hand, and his Attendants in order next him; opposite to them sate the 
Poetzjensy,
 the Magistrates of the City and other great 
Mandarins;
 the Chests with the Presents standing just without in a Gallery. When the Vice-Roy began with their usual Complement to inquire of his Health, afterwards the Chests and Packs with the Presents being open'd, the Goods were taken out in several Parcels, brought and laid before their High∣nesses to see them; seeming to be well pleas'd with them, especially some cu∣rious Lanthorns, and Celestial and Terrestrial Spheres and Globes: Having sa∣tisfi'd their longings, and pleas'd their curiosity with viewing and re-viewing, they commanded them to be laid up handsomly, and in good order again: Which done, after some familiar Discourses, they Treated them very pleasant∣ly with store of good Liquor; when on a sudden the General went away, being Complemented by the Vice-Roy to the middle of the Stairs descending into the Court. But the Vice-Roy returning again into the Hall, gave leave to the 
Ne∣therlanders
 to depart; whereupon they also went away: At their going out, 
No∣bel
 was desir'd by 
Singlamong
's Factor, that he and 
Harthouwer
 would be pleas'd to come to his House, that they might Treat with him concerning the Trade, which they promis'd to do. The Ambassador having sent a Rundlet of Sack to the Vice-Roy, desir'd him to accept of it, which he did, and return'd him Thanks.


According to the Factors Request to 
Nobel
 the day before, he and 
Harthou∣wer
 went the fifteenth in the Morning to his House, to Discourse with him about the Trade: Soon after their coming, the Factor Rode to 
Singlamong
's Palace; from whence he in an hours time return'd again, but could not come to any absolute Resolution, onely telling them, that he had a Parcel of Silk of about forty 
Pikol,
 which he would willingly sell: Who said, That it might be done, but that he would consider, that they could not send any Silk to 
Ia∣pan
 that Year, but that they must first carry it from thence to 
Batavia,
 and then send it to 
Iapan
 the next Year, so that they should run a great Risk in sending of it to and fro; yet nevertheless, if they would deal reasonably, they would take a considerable quantity; asking the Price, which the Factor durst not tell, because the Generals and 
Conbon
's Factors were not there present, but pro∣mis'd to consult about it, and let them know their resolution on the Morrow, when they would come to the Lodge, and let them know the Prizes of all their Goods, and so begin to Trade.


He also advis'd the 
Dutch
 Merchants, that they should go to the General, or to his Factors, and give him an account of what they had done, which the 
Hollanders
 did not think convenient, because they had not been with the Vice-Roy, but went to his Factors, who also promis'd to come to them on the Morrow, desiring that they would also acquaint the 
Conbon
's Factor with it, which was perform'd accordingly.


The Ambassador by the Interpreter 
De Hase,
 sent the General a small Rund∣let of Sack, which he kindly receiv'd.


Then calling to mind, that the 
Conbon
 was not at the looking over of the Presents, and also having understood that he was not well pleas'd, the Am∣bassador sending for his Factor, desir'd to know the reason: To which they reply'd, That the occasion was, because his Presents which were deliver'd on 
August
 26. were much less than the Vice-Roy's or General's, which he took ve∣ry ill, being as great a Lord as 
Povi.
 The Ambassador somewhat troubled at this Relation, intreated his Factors to desire their Lord that he would please to admit, that he might wait upon him, and endeavor to give satisfaction; with which they promis'd to acquaint him, and bring an answer the next Morning, as he did, letting the Ambassador know he might come to his Ma∣ster two days after.


The Interpreter 
Maurice
 having again been with 
Sibontok,
 to present him with three Swords in the Ambassadors Name, which receiving with Thanks, he promis'd to do the 
Hollanders
 what Service he could; and withal, gave no∣tice, that having Dined the day before at the Generals, He there understood of some 
Mandarins,
 that the 
Netherlanders
 were in ten or twelve days to travel to 
Peking,
 and that he had receiv'd his Commands to go before, and to wait for the Ambassador at 
Iemping,
 being his Dominion through which they were to pass. He therefore desir'd, that the Ambassador would please to bring with him some Coral, Amber, Sword-Blades, Pistols, Musquets, Cloth, Perpetuanaes, Linnen, Looking-Glasses, some Gold Rings, and Sparks or Pebbles, which he had an intent and desire to buy of him.


All the Governors Factors, except 
Singlamong
's chiefest, came that day to the Lodge to give the Prizes of their Commodities, and endeavor to make a Bar∣gain. 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 gave them account of these Merchandizes, 
viz.
 Pep∣per, 
Sandal-Wood, Arek,
 Cloves, Nutmegs, Lead, Tin, 
Calicutor-Wood,,
 &c.


The Commodities which the Factors gave the 
Dutch
 an account of, consisted in Gold Wyer, 
China
 Root, course 
Tee, Galiga,
 Allom, Quicksilver, 
Cubebs,
 Pre∣serv'd Ginger, 
Hatten,
 Gold: As for raw Silk, one of 
Povi
's Factors said, that the 
Netherlanders
 could carry none from thence that year.


Not long after, the Stewards appear'd with a Pass for the 
Constance
 Boat, and the 
Vlaerdings
 Ship, which set Sail at high Water, Laden with Provisions to the Ships in 
Netherland
 Haven.


The eighteenth, the Ambassador went to visit the 
Conbon,
 where he was no∣bly entertain'd; and after Dinner, the Cups merrily went round, Health pres∣sing Health, so long, till both sides began to yield to the Intoxicating Liquor.


The nineteenth about Noon, two Factors sent from the General, came to the Lodge to present the Ambassador in their Masters Name with six Pots of Liquor, in requital for the Rundlet of Sack, which they said was very accep∣table to him.


The Ambassador asking them if they knew not whether any News was come from 
Peking:
 They reply'd, That they knew of none, but that it was expected there in five days time.


The twentieth in the Morning, the Governors Factors came a second time to 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer,
 to agree about the Price of the Goods, but parted with∣out coming to a Conclusion.


In the Evening, a Sea-man came ashore from 
Minjazen
 without the 
Tartars
 knowledge, with a Letter sent from Captain 
Naelhout,
 who inform'd the 
Ne∣therlanders,



That yesterday he was coming up in the 
Vlaerdings
 Sloop, but was stopt at 
Minjazen,
 which necessitated him to go again to the Ships, and had in the Night undertaken the Journey anew, hoping in the Dark to have pass'd by 
Minjazen;
 but that also fell out contrary to his expectation, because the 
Chineses
 that kept the Watch in a Jonk that lay in the middle of the Water, had perceiv'd and kept them there; so that they were detain'd at 
Minjazen,
 therefore desir'd a Pass from the Ambassador to come to him, without which they saw no likelyhood of getting thither.


The Mariner further related, That all things about the Ships were in a good condition, onely the 
Tygers
 Men going ashore in the 
Crab-Hole,
 to cut Wood, one of them was suddenly seiz'd on, and devour'd by a 
Tyger.


The Ambassador causing the Interpreter 
Ienko
 to be call'd, commanded him to go betimes the next Morning to the Governor of 
Minjazen
's Lodgings (who was yet there) to ask him why he detain'd his People at 
Minjazen?
 And desire him, to give Order, that his Men might pass; which if he refus'd, the Ambas∣sador must be forc'd to complain to the General about it.


The one and twentieth in the Morning, the Interpreter 
Ienko
 brought an∣swer, That the Governor of 
Minjazen
 was gone thither the last Night. The Ambassador considering that the time appointed for the Ships setting forth to 
Batavia
 began to approach, thought fit the next day to send a Letter about it to the General; and also to desire a Pass for a Boat to go up and down the River, that they might hear daily from the Ships, which then much concern'd the 
Hollanders.


The two and twentieth, the Ambassador went to visit 
Singlamong
's Son, and present him with two Pieces of Black Crown Serge, four of fine Stuffs, four of Linnen; one Piece of Amber, weighing one Pound and an half, half a dozen of Sword Blades; one Pair of Pistols, and a Fire-Lock, the Stock In-laid with Silver. All which he receiv'd very courteously, and Entertain'd the Am∣bassador after a Princely manner.


Mean while, the Secretary 
Vander Does
 went according to the Resolution ta∣ken the day before, to deliver him the following Letter, 
viz.


It is very acceptable to the Ambassador to understand, that the 
Hollanders
 should by him be esteem'd as Children and Friends of one Family, of which the Ambassador did not doubt, because 
Talavja
's Word (from whom he had it) was like a Rock, never to be mov'd; therefore he desir'd that the little 
Holland
 Vessel might be deliver'd here, and sent down, because a Ship must be sent to 
Batavia
 in eight days. He also requested, that his small Boat may come up again; and to that purpose, that he might have a Pass, as in former Years.


To which the Secretary brought answer: That after he had made his co∣ming known to the General, he staid three or four Hours upon promise of Ad∣mission; yet at last the Interpreter came to tell him, that 
Talavja
 was so extra∣ordinary busie, that he could not give him Audience; and therefore if his bu∣siness was such that he could not send his Message, he must come some other time: Whereupon, the Secretary not being willing to loose his labor, gave the Letter to the Interpreter, to deliver to the General, and desir'd him to tell 
Talavja,
 that the 
Netherlanders
 at that time wanted a Pass, more than ordinary, for the free going up and down of their Boats.


To which the Interpreter brought answer from 
Talavja,
 That he had read and understood the Letter, but that some days since he had given a Pass for


the Boat and Sloop; which the Secretary answering said, That it was true, but that Pass mention'd nothing, but to go from thence down the River, but not that they might come up again; which appear'd by one of them who was returning to 
Hoksieu
 with the Commander of the Ship Riding at 
Tinghay,
 and was stopt at 
Minjazen;
 and withal told him, That if the Ambassador had a Pass for a Vessel to go and return, he must not deliver it but on an extraor∣dinary occasion.


The Interpreter having related this to the General, his Highness sent word to the Secretary, that he would send for the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja,
 and by him send the 
Netherlanders
 such a Pass as they had the last year, with which they might go and come when they pleas'd.


The twenty third, nothing happen'd worthy relating.


On 
Sunday,
 being the twenty fourth, because the promis'd Pass was not come to the Comptroller, 
Ruwenoort
 and Interpreter 
De Hase,
 were sent to the 
Mandarin Liv-lavja,
 to see if he had it ready, and if not, to repair to the General for it. These coming to the 
Mandarins
 House, not finding him at home, went to the General, and let him know the occasion of their coming; Who sent them answer, That they should go to the 
Mandarin Liv-lavja,
 he having Or∣ders to give out the Passes: To whom making application, the 
Mandarin
 told them, That he would come to the Lodge, and bring them a Pass for a Boat to Sail up and down the River; but when they intended to send any Provi∣sions down, they should onely send him word by their Stewards, and he would grant them a particular Pass for that purpose. The General also sent back his Interpreter with the 
Hollanders,
 to tell the Ambassador, that no Ships might go to 
Batavia,
 before they heard from 
Peking.
 But to this they answer'd nothing, as knowing, that the General could not prevent the going away of their Ships, but that they were highly prejudic'd by not having a Pass, they being desirous to know the condition of their Ships every day; and that he would please to make 
Talavja
 sensible of the injury he should suffer by it.


The twenty fifth in the Morning, 
Liu-lavja
 and 
Haykong
 came to the Lodge, bringing with them a Pass for a small Vessel or Boat to go and come empty, up and down the River, which they gave to the Ambassador, saying, That when a Vessel had been down, and up again, they must return the Pass to 
Liv-lavja,
 till another went away, and that then they need only to fetch it again, which the Ambassador promis'd to do.


About Noon, the Factor 
Lapora
 came with a 
Tartar
 to the Lodge, to acquaint the Ambassador, that a small Letter was come thither from 
Peking,
 and that his Excellency might now prepare himself for his Journey; because upon the coming of the Emperor's Letter he would immediately be sent away, and the Trade should Commence.


The six and twentieth in the Morning, the Secretary went to 
Singlamong
's Court, to request him, If 
Nobel
 might be permitted to speak with his High∣ness about some business of great Concern: He was also Order'd as he past by to go to the 
Conbon,
 and to Present him with some Elephants Teeth in the Am∣bassador's Name; Who refusing them, said, He durst not as yet receive them, but he humbly thank'd the Ambassador for his kindness.


At the Secretaries coming to the Court, he was inform'd, That the Vice-Roy was gone to the Generals, so that he return'd home without effect.


The twenty seventh in the Morning, the Secretary went again to the Vice-Roy, to intreat his Highness, that 
Nobel
 might come to visit him; whereof


being told by the Interpreter, he sent word, that being troubled with Gripes, he could not grant him Audience; and also that he should be busie for four or five days about extraordinary Occasions, and therefore could not let the 
Hou∣pou
 come to speak with him; but so soon as the News came from 
Peking,
 which was daily expected, the Vice-Roy would so order his Affairs, that the 
Houpou
 might come and see him when he pleas'd. The Secretary was also command∣ed to call on the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja,
 for a Pass for the 
Blyswiik
 to carry down Provisions for the Ships: To which 
Liu-lavja
 made answer, That he could give Passes for small Vessels to carry Provisions to the Fleet, but not for so great a Ship; yet he would go to the General to procure a Pass for her, which if he could get, he would send it by a 
Mandarin
 that should go down with the Frigat on the morrow following.


The twenty ninth in the Morning the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
's Chief Coun∣sellor came to the Lodge, with three other great Lords, to see the Horses and Oxen, which they were much pleas'd with, and were entertain'd very nobly by the 
Hollanders.


In the afternoon arriv'd the 
Vlaerding
 and 
Blyswiik's
 Sloops, from 
Netherland
 Haven, with Captain 
Iohn Naelhout,
 informing them, That all things were in safety and good condition, both in 
Netherland
 Haven, and at 
Tinghay.


The thirtieth, because the promis'd Pass for the 
Blyswiik
 did not come, 
Nobel
 went to the General to desire it, and also to give Order for the making a Ship ready to sail to 
Batavia
 (which ought to have been gone fourteen days before) that so soon as News came from 
Peking,
 she might set Sail, alledging, it requir'd two or three Weeks before she would be fit to go to Sea. He went likewise to the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja,
 to shew him the Pass which was brought back by the Sloop, according as they had promis'd him, and to desire it again, because another Boat was to be sent down the next morning.


But 
Nobel
 could not come to speak with the General, being very busie about other Occasions; but was inform'd, That the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja
 had Order to prepare the Passes: Whereupon 
Nobel
 going to the 
Mandarin,
 was told, That the Pass for the Ships had been writ some days, and was at the Generals to be Sign'd, which he would not fail to bring as soon as done.


The one and thirtieth, being 
Sunday,
 the Ambassador sent 
Ienko
 once more to desire the Pass for the Ships from the General, but could not come to speak with him, which made him go to 
Liu-lavja,
 who had promis'd to bring it.


The Vice-Roy 
Singlamong's
 Factor came the same day to tell 
Nobel,
 That his Highness for some days had been very busie, which had prevented him from granting Audience; but now being somewhat better at leisure, he de∣sir'd, That if he had any thing to request, he would come to him.


The first of 
November
 in the Morning 
Singlamong
's chief Factor sent a Messen∣ger
 to 
Nobel,
 that according to the appointment made the day before he might come to Court, where he was expected; whereupon he immediately went thither, with Captain 
Naelhout,
 that according to the Ambassadors Order they might acquaint his Highness, First, That they were inform'd no Silk could be transported from thence that Year; and also, that others, on the contrary, said, That the Factors should not Trade with the 
Netherlanders,
 unless they would take their Raw Silks at high Rates against the 
Dutch
 Commodities: Besides, that he understood, that the Ambassador upon the receipt of the Em∣peror's expected Letter, should immediately begin his Journey; and that therefore he must be in a readiness, which was impossible to be done, because



Nobel,
 who necessarily must go up to 
Peking
 with him, must first be there pre∣sent at the driving and finishing of the Trade; besides, that in the four fol∣lowing Months the River could not be Navigated, because of the Ice. Lastly,
 to desire his Highness, That he would be pleas'd to assist the 
Hollanders
 in the Trade, that so the Ships might be sent to their respective Places; the more, because two of them must on necessity go to 
Holland.
 After which, the Vice-Roy ask'd concerning the Ambassadors Health, and then answer'd, That the Emperor was very glad that the 
Hollanders
 came to Trade in his Domini∣ons: As to what concern'd Silk, it was forbid to be transported; but if the Factors could agree with the 
Hollanders
 for a Price that might be to their satis∣faction, they would allow the Transportation of it. He wish'd also, That the Prices of their several Commodities might be speedily agreed on. Here∣upon 
Nobel
 (in regard the Factors seem'd so shie in bidding a good Price, told the Vice-Roy, That if he had brought too much Pepper or Sandal-Wood thi∣ther, they might onely take as much as they wanted, and that he would carry the rest away again; adding moreover, That it was but reason the 
Hollanders
 should sell for advantage now, in regard of the vast Expence of their present Embassy. This was immediately answer'd by his Highness, saying, That they might be supply'd by him, as he had done in 
Canton
 to former Embassadors. Concerning the Ambassadors Journey to 
Peking,
 which will be in the approach∣ing Winter, he ought to furnish himself with good Furr'd Clothes; and where they could not go by Water, they should have Horses and 
Palakins
 to travel by Land: And that the 
Hollanders
 ought rather to bring more of their Commodi∣ties thither, than carry any away from thence. Whereupon 
Nobel
 presented his Highness, in the Ambassadors Name, with the Chain of Blood-Corral, which he so long desir'd, and accepted with many Thanks: Then taking his leave, he was conducted into another Chamber, and treated very nobly with variety of Dainties.


In the afternoon the Steward 
Onquemoy
 came to the Lodge to acquaint the Ambassador, That the Pass was brought for the Ship to go down with the Provisions; but that the Governor of 
Minjazen
 had it, to whom it must have been deliver'd at its passing by 
Minjazen:
 Whereupon the Ambassador sent the Interpreter 
De Hase
 to the foremention'd Governor, to ask if any thing was specifi'd in the Pass, for a Boat to come up again, to bring News from the Ships: To which the Interpreter 
Hase
 at his Return brought this Answer, That he could not speak with the Governor himself, but his Secretary had told him, That the Pass made mention of nothing else, but to let the Ship and Sloop go down, but not come up again.


The Ambassador not satisfied with such an answer, the next morning sent the Secretary 
Vander Does
 to know the Contents of the Pass; but not being permitted to speak with the Governor, he onely brought back word, That the Pass contain'd no more than what was told the Interpreter the day before; and therefore if the 
Netherlanders
 desir'd another Pass, they must go to the Ge∣neral for it. Whereupon the Secretary was immediately sent to the 
Mandarin Liulavja,
 to desire the standing Pass which he had promis'd to make, for the Boat to go up and down the River, and send it together with that for the Ship; and withal tell him, how necessary it was for them constantly to know the Condition of their Ships and People: But the Secretary coming thither, and being inform'd that he was gone to the Lodge, return'd home.


In the afternoon the foremention'd 
Mandarin
 came with the desir'd Pass,


drawn after the same manner as the former had been; but a while after the Interpreter 
Ienko,
 sent from 
Liu-lavja,
 came to fetch the Pass again, under pre∣tence that a Name was forgotten, which must needs be put into it, promising to return it immediately.


The same day the Factors came to the 
Dutch
 Merchants Lodgings, to con∣clude an Agreement about the Prises of their Merchandise; but parted again, without making an end.


In the evening the Ambassador sending for the Interpreter 
Ienko,
 shew'd himself much dissatisfi'd that he did not return the Pass for the Vessels to go to and again, he having promis'd, That so soon as a Name was put in, it should be re-deliver'd: To which he answer'd, That 
Liu-lavja
 had command∣ed him to ask for it, because the 
Mandarins
 Name which was to go down with it, was to be inserted; and why it was not brought again, he knew not.


The same day Captain 
Iohn vander Werf
 set Sail in the 
Blyswiik
 to 
Netherland
 Haven, where by the Ambassadors Election he was to bear the chief Com∣mand, and observe all Transactions, and keep things in good order.


The Treasurer acquainted the Ambassador, That the fifty 
Picol
 of 
Kadjang,
 and twenty Gammons of Bacon, were not yet brought for the Ships, because the Steward had told him, That there was an Order that no 
Kadjang
 nor Gam∣mons of Bacon might be transported: Whereby the Ambassador seeing, that seldom any Provision was sent to the Ships without the greatest trouble ima∣ginable, judg'd it convenient to write a Letter to the General, to this purpose.


That the Ambassador had always found 
Talavja
 kind and affable, and therefore thank'd him: That he likewise knew that he had much Business, wherefore he would not be troublesom to him: That the 
Holland
 Sea-men must in this 
Mouson
 be provided for with Meat and Drink, or else they could not live: That the Ambassador had continually been put to much trouble to get fresh Provisions; therefore he desir'd, that the Husband-men might every eight days carry Porkers, and the like fresh Provisions, with their own Vessels, and sell them to the Ships, which would save both him and 
Talavja
 a great deal of trouble.


This Letter 
Nobel
 and the Secretary 
Vander Does
 carried to Court, to deliver it to the General; but coming to the City Gates, they were stopp'd by the Watch, who said, That Order was come from the General, not to let any 
Hol∣landers
 into the Town; whereupon they resolv'd to return, which the Guards seeing, call'd them back, and suffer'd them to pass to the Generals, whither coming, they sent him word of their being there, for which he sent to know the Reason; whereupon they deliver'd the Ambassadors Letter to his Inter∣preter, who brought them this answer, That 
Talavja
 was very busie, and could not grant them Audience; but that he permitted the 
Netherlanders
 to carry as much Provision out as they pleas'd, first giving an account of it to the 
Manda∣rin Liu-lavja,
 that the General might afterwards sign it▪ But he did not under∣stand that any Person should buy all manner of Goods, and carry them aboard, without being willing that the Waiters should perform their Office, in search∣ing the Ship, whereby they should give an account of what they transported; and likewise, that they must use their own, and not 
Chinese
 Vessels.


Mean while the Interpreter 
Ienko
 brought back the Pass for the Sloop to go up and down the River. The 
Blyswiik
 Frigat, the Water being somewhat faln, stuck about a Cannon-shot from the Bridge, where she was forc'd to stay till High-water.


The fourth there was nothing done, but a Dispute concerning the Waiters stopping the Frigat, and clapping her aboard with four or five of their best Jonks, and that some 
Mandarins
 desir'd she might be brought back to the Bridge.


The next day all the Governors Factors came to the Lodge, but went away again without speaking any thing concerning the Trade.


In the evening the 
Vlaerding
 Sloop arriv'd there again from 
Netherland
 Ha∣ven, with a Letter from Captain 
Iohn Vander Werf,
 where he found the 
Pole∣snip
 that came from 
Quelang
 riding at an Anchor; wherefore he thought it con∣venient to send his Book-keeper thither, to acquaint his Excellency with it by a Letter, and to advise him, That all things about the Ships were in good con∣dition, and also that they had not seen any Ships either going to or coming from 
Iapan.


The fifth in the Morning the Ambassador sent the Interpreter 
Ienko
 to the General, to acquaint him with the Fly-boats arrival, and also to desire that 
Nobel
 might come and speak with him. The Interpreter returning with two 
Mandarins,
 told the Ambassador, That the General was so busie about some private Concerns of the Empire, that he could not give any publick Audience. Mean while a Ship did afterwards come thither from 
Quelang,
 which the General had privately permitted to go away again with Provisions and other Necessaries; but she was now return'd, which his Highness did not under∣stand, and therefore the Ambassador must give immediate Order for her to be gone. Hereupon the Ambassador answer'd the 
Mandarins,
 That it should be done; and desir'd them to bring a Pass for the Sloop to go to and fro to carry Tydings, which they promis'd without fail to perform.


The sixth, a Servant bringing a Pass from the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja,
 for a Ves∣sel to carry Provisions to and again, said, That the Sloop must at farthest go away the next Morning.


The seventh against noon, with the Ebb, the 
Vlaerdings
 Sloop went down with certain Writings, kept by 
Caroli
 their Clerk and 
Maurice
 the Interpreter; but they return'd again, telling, That the Governor of 
Minjazen
 would not suffer any fresh Provisions, as Hogs and Fruitage, to be carried down; whereupon the Ambassador commanded them to take nothing but the Papers and Writings.


The tenth in the morning 
Ienko
 the Interpreter related, That a 
Chinese
 Jonk sent from 
Batavia
 to 
Hoksieu
 with Pepper and 
Sandal
-wood, was forc'd (not being able for contrary Winds to reach her desir'd Port) to put into 
Huiting,
 there being about forty 
Chineses
 in her: The Master of her coming by Land, had been in 
Hoksieu
 to attend the General, but was return'd with his Letters, without effecting any of his propos'd Designs.


In the afternoon a Clerk belonging to the 
Conbon
's Secretary came to bring the 
Hollanders
 a Copy of what had been done concerning their Business in 
Pe∣king,
 and also said, That a Currier was come before with Letters, and that in a few days the express Orders would be there; which News he supposing would be very acceptable to the 
Hollanders,
 he had endeavor'd to be the first Person that should bring it. The Ambassador gave little credit to this Report, by reason of the meanness of the Person that brought it; but told him, If his News were true, he would remember him with a Present, which he suppos'd he wanted.


In the evening the 
Conbon
's Factor came, confirming the News which the Poor Man brought in the morning, and wish'd the Ambassador Joy in his Ma∣sters


Name with the Good Tydings: Whereupon the Ambassador immediate∣ly sent to the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja
 for a Pass for the 
Blyswiiks
 Sloop, that she might go and see if the Fly-boat which was order'd to stay at 
Tinghay
 till the twelfth Instant, could yet be found to carry this News to 
Batavia:
 To which purpose he immediately wrote a Letter, inclosing the Copy which came from 
Peking,
 to be Translated at 
Batavia,
 he having no time to do it himself: But the desir'd Pass came not.


The twelfth in the Morning the Ambassador sent the 
Blyswiik's
 Sloop down with the foremention'd Letter, to which he added the Reason why he could not send before. Mean while all the Governor's Factors came to wish the Am∣bassador Joy with the Good Tydings he had receiv'd from 
Peking,
 moreover desiring, that they might have leave to Trade with the first.


It was also reported, That Commissioners were come to Complement the 
Liquean
 Agents, and Present them in the Emperor's Name, because it was not thought convenient to let him come to 
Peking.


In the Afternoon the 
Vlaerding's
 Boat, with the 
Blyswiik's
 Sloop, return'd, coming too late to overtake the 
Polesnip,
 she having set Sail for 
Batavia
 that morning.


In the evening the Interpreter 
Ienko
 told 
Nobel,
 That he was order'd the next Morning to go to the Commissioners that were come from 
Peking
 to Comple∣ment the 
Liquean
 Agents; but what it was for, he knew not.


The thirteenth the Ambassador sent 
Ienko
 to the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja,
 to know the Reason why no Provision might be sent down in the Boat: In Answer to which, he brought word, That 
Liu-lavja
 promis'd on the morrow to go to the General in their behalf.


On 
Sunday
 in the evening, being the fourteenth, 
Ienko
 inform'd 
Nobel,
 That the General had sent for him to go to the Commissioners about the 
Liquean
 Busi∣ness, because he had not been there the day before, according to their Request: But now going thither, the Commissioners ask'd him if the 
Hollanders
 had no Blood-Corral, little Dogs, and other Trifles to sell: To which 
Ienko
 had re∣ply'd, That he knew not; but was sure they had Pepper, 
Sandal
-Wood, Cloth, Crown-Serge, and other such like Commodities.


The fifteenth against Noon, 
Singlamong's
 Interpreter came to the Ambassa∣dors Lodging, who ask'd him concerning the News that on the eleventh Instant came thither from 
Peking,
 and what the Vice-Roy thought of it; but he seem'd to be ignorant thereof, which made the Ambassador shew him the Letter, and ask him a second time whither it was true or not, desiring him to take the Co∣py, and shew it to the Vice-Roy.


And because the Pass for the Boat to carry down Fresh Provisions was not yet brought, and that the Steward which furnish'd the 
Hollanders
 with all such Necessaries, had so often deceiv'd them by delays; therefore it was judg'd fit to send a Letter to the General, and therein advise him what trouble they had continually before they could get any Provision sent down.


The seventeenth in the morning the 
Mandarin Han-lavja
 came to visit the Am∣bassador, who among other Discourse ask'd him, If when he desir'd to speak with the General, he must send notice into the City? To which he reply'd, That such was 
Talavja
 his Order.


Against Noon the Pass was brought for the Boat, so that the Provisions were immediately put aboard, That she might be ready to go off at High Water.


The Ambassador wrote a Letter with the Provision to Captain 
Vander Werf,
 advising him of the whole Intrigues of that Place: Notwithstanding all which, in the Evening 
Stulburgh
 and 
Smitsen
 came to tell them, That the 
Chi∣neses
 would not let the 
 
Kadjang
 pass, saying, It must first be grown'd, before the 
Netherlanders
 should transport it; supposing, since they carried such great Quantities out, that they might sowe it in some other place: Whereupon al∣though the Ambassador himself went to the Steward 
Onquemoy,
 yet he prevail'd no more, but that the 
Kadjang
 was weigh'd, and ten 
Picol
 sent aboard, with some other Provision for the Ships.


The same day the Commissioner sent from 
Peking
 to meet the 
Liquean
 Agents, came to the Lodge to see the Horses and Oxen, whom the 
Hollanders
 civilly entertain'd.


The eighteenth in the morning 
Hanlavja
 the 
Mandarin
 came to acquaint the Ambassador, That the General would speak with him as soon as he pleas'd, and that he might bring the Presents.


In the afternoon the General sent the Ambassador two Letters written from the Emperor at 
Peking,
 concerning his Business; which having perus'd, they consulted about the delivery of the Presents.


It was judg'd fit, that those intended for the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 should be deliver'd to him first, he being the Chief in Quality: Upon which Result, the Ambassador immediately sent Factor 
Lapra
 thither, to complement his High∣ness, and deliver him the Presents sent from 
Batavia:
 But the Vice-Roy being busied about entertaining the Emperors Commissioner, nothing for the present was done in it.


The nineteenth in the forenoon the 
Netherlanders
 preparing themselves, first went to the General with his Presents, where coming, and being seated as for∣merly, after complemental Salutes, the Ambassador thank'd him for his kind Writing in the 
Hollanders
 behalf to 
Peking,
 and told him, that they had brought the Presents along with them, sent to his Highness from the Lord General and 
Indian
 Council, which they entreated him to accept: But 
Siangpovi
 refu∣sing, said, That till such time as the Emperor had his, and they were return'd from 
Peking,
 he could not receive them; but advis'd the Ambassador to have all things in a readiness for his Repair to 
Peking,
 which he believ'd would be within ten or twelve days. Whereupon the Ambassador desir'd, That in re∣gard of the present Winter, and for that the Trade was not finish'd, it might be put off till 
February.
 To which 
Talavja
 answer'd, That in the Journey the Emperor's Orders must be follow'd and observ'd in all Points, and that the Ambassador ought to have all things in readiness: As to what concern'd the Trade, he would be assistant to him, that it might speedily be finish'd: And notwithstanding it was a Custom, that the Ambassadors must first deliver their Presents, before they were permitted to Trade; yet because the 
Holland∣ers
 were come from such remote Countreys, and also that they might the bet∣ter defray their Expences, he granted them to Trade before they went. Then after a handsom Treat, with many thanks to his Highness for his Kindness to∣wards them, they return'd to the Lodge.


The twentieth about day-break the 
Vlaerding's
 Boat arriv'd there from 
Nether∣land
 Haven, with the Commanders 
Hendrick Bommer
 and 
Peter Iohnz de Vlieg:
 The Pilots Mate also deliver'd a Letter to the Ambassador from Captain 
Vander Werf,
 advising him, That he had receiv'd all the Provisions sent with the Boat in safety; but he doubted that they lay in some danger, because several Jonks


of War came daily Cruising there, and several Guards were plac'd between the 
Straits
 of 
Minjazen,
 and more Guns planted every where.


The same day, according to Order, the Lord 
Hoorn
 went with the Presents to 
Singlamong's
 Palace; where coming, and some Complements pass'd, the Am∣bassador requested his Highness to accept of what he had brought; to which he answer'd, That since the Business went well at 
Peking,
 he kindly accepted of them, and order'd them to be deliver'd to him. Then he ask'd 
Nobel,
 who was there present, if he had not put them in the right way, when he told them, That if they sent an Ambassador to the Emperor, they could not miss their Desires? and that for the future they might rely on his Judgment. The Am∣bassador asking his Highness how he would please to Order his Journey, and when it would be? reply'd, That the Letter from the 
Hopous
 and 
Pingtouws
 was expected there in five or six days, to provide 
Coelies,
 which are Porters, Vessels, and other Necessaries for his accommodation, and that then he should know exactly when he was to set forth. After the Presents were open'd be∣fore him, and he seeming to be well pleas'd with them, he ask'd the Ambassa∣dor, spying some rich Furrs amongst the Goods, if there was cold Weather in his Countrey? who answer'd 
Yes;
 and pointing at the Furrs, said he should Clothe himself well with them. After a sleight Caress the 
Hollanders
 desir'd leave to depart, which was granted them, his Highness excusing himself, that because of his Distemper he could not be present to Entertain the Ambassador, who with all his Attendants went again to the Lodge.


The one and twentieth the 
Conbon's
 Factor came to tell the Ambassador, That if he pleas'd, he might that day come and speak with his Master: whereup∣on the Ambassador laying hold of the opportunity, went immediately thither; coming to his Palace, and the first Ceremonies pass'd, the Ambassador desir'd him to accept the Presents, which with much perswasions and many arguments he did. Then the Ambassador desir'd him, that since he had always assisted the 
Hollanders,
 he would now also be pleas'd to continue his favor by Letters of Recommendation to 
Peking
 in their behalf; which he promis'd.


The one and twentieth and two and twentieth the Governors Factors came again to 
Nobel
 to Treat with him about the Price of their Goods, yet return'd without making any Conclusion.


The twenty third nothing hapned worth observation.


The twenty fourth the Generals Factors came to fetch their Majesties Presents.


And now in regard the time began to approach when the 
Dutch
 Ships were to Sail from the Coast, and the Emperors Letter came thither the eighteenth Instant, yet the Ambassador had not receiv'd the least benefit of it more than be∣fore, because the 
Chinese
 Merchants, so long as no other Bills were put up before the Lodge than what had been there ever since his coming, they durst not come to buy the 
Netherland
 Commodities; therefore he wrote a Letter to the Gene∣ral, That since the Emperors Letter was come from 
Peking,
 he did not doubt but the Trade might be driven, and Proclamations of his Majesties Letters be put up, as in their former Years; and also that the little Ship might be suffer'd to go down to fetch some Merchandise. This Letter translated into the 
Chi∣nese
 Tongue the Interpreter would not carry; neither were the 
Hollanders
 suf∣fer'd by the General's Order to come into the City; wherefore it was unani∣mously concluded, That the Ambassador should immediately in Person go to the General, and tell him the Contents of it 
verbatim,
 with many other things; and


if his Excellency should be stopp'd at the City Gates, he should return without taking any further notice, and then send away the 
Blyswiik
 without a Pass.


The Ambassador hereupon made himself ready to go to the Court; but going to sit in his Sedan, or 
Palakin,
 there were no 
Coelies,
 or Porters to be had to carry it, the 
Mandarin
 that kept the Guard at the Lodge having forbidden them: Yet resolving to prosecute his Design, he went thither on foot, not∣withstanding it was above an hours Walk: coming to the City Gates he was stopp'd a little, because the Soldiers that were on the Guard would first send to acquaint the General with it before they would let him in: whereupon he going back a little, ask'd the Guards if they had order to keep him out? who though they made the former Answer, yet suffer'd him to pass; whereupon sending notice to the General of his being there, after several Excuses he was admitted and brought before him; by whom being plac'd, he desir'd him to excuse the 
Hollanders
 for being thus troublesom to him, as being forc'd thereto: for whereas they hop'd, that after the coming of the Emperor's Letter they should have been permitted to drive their Trade, and enjoy more freedom than before; on the contrary, it was worse and worse: for their Letters could not be deliver'd, nor their People admitted into the City: nay more, the 
Manda∣rin
 that had the Guard of the Lodge had forbid the 
Coelies
 to do their duty to himself. To which the General answer'd, That he never forbid the 
Coelies,
 nor had given order to keep him out at the Gates; but that it was onely meant to the Sea-men, that came to buy several things in the City which he would not suffer. Then the Ambassador deliver'd him the Letter writ that Morning; which having read, he answer'd, That the little Ship might go down freely; to which purpose he would send either a Pass or a 
Mandarin.
 The Trade granted by the Emperor he also permitted them in the same manner. Moreover he would order other Bills to be writ, and put before the Lodge, that the 
Nether∣landers
 might Trade with whom they would; but they must remember not to buy any Goods which in the Proclamation were forbidden to be Transported, 
viz.
 Silk, 
Pelangs, Panjes,
 and the like Stuffs. And as concerning their Mer∣chandise, they held them up too high, 
&c.


Nobel
 hearing him speak of Trade (which was his Business) answer'd, That they did not set too high a value on their Commodities, but that the Factors would not give so much for them now as heretofore, and if they should dis∣pose of their Goods at their Rates they should lose by them; therefore desir'd his Highness to send other People to deal with them, not being willing to have to do with his Factors.


Hereupon the General seeming to be somewhat displeas'd, diverted the Discourse, asking the Ambassador when he would take his Journey? he re∣ply'd, When the Trade was finish'd; also that several Goods to be given to the Council must be fetch'd from 
Netherland
 Haven: To which he made no Answer, but look'd strange when he heard the Council of State mention'd.


Then the Ambassador told him by his Interpreter, That as he would be obe∣dient to his Highness in all things, and govern himself, according to the Cu∣stom of the Countrey; so he hop'd the General would give order that he might not lose his Reputation, nor be sleighted; desiring his Highness to take notice, that he was the Representative of the 
Netherland
 Nation, and would rather die than his Masters, the States of 
Holland,
 should suffer any Reproach through his miscarriage. To which he reply'd, That no such thing was in∣tended, that should either be a prejudice to their Honor, or dissatisfaction to


himself as their Ambassador. Whereupon he requested, that his Highness would give order to his Factor for the sudden dispatch of the Trade, as he would also to 
Nobel.


In the Afternoon the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja
 came to the Lodge, being sent from the General to the Ambassador, with two exact Copies of the Letters from 
Peking,
 who ask'd him if he would sell all his Commodities there, or carry them to 
Peking?
 To which he answer'd, That he would vend them there. Moreover, the 
Mandarin
 desir'd to have a List of his Followers that were to at∣tend him in his Embassy to 
Peking,
 that he might provide 
Coelies
 for him. He promis'd also to bring a Pass for the Ship the next Morning; and likewise Bills to stick up before the Lodge.


The twenty ninth and thirtieth nothing hapned of note.


In the Evening the first of 
December
 the 
Blyswiik
 set Sail, Laden with several
 fresh Provisions for the Ships in 
Netherland
 Haven and at 
Tenhay.


Next Morning 
Harthouwer
 and 
Vander Does
 went with the Boat to 
Netherland
 Haven, to take an exact account of all the Money and Goods seized on and ta∣ken from the 
Chineses,
 and to send them with the ten Chests of Silver belong∣ing to the Company, with the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat to 
Lamthay
 near 
Hoksieu,
 where the Ambassador resided with his Retinue.


The fourth the Factors, after having some days before agreed on the Prices of the Goods, began in the presence of the two 
Mandarins, Liu
 and 
Liu-lavja,
 to weigh and receive the Pepper at the Lodge.


The Ambassador also the same day writ to the General to this effect:




THe Prices of the Merchandise are now agreed on, and the two Ships may come into the River up to the Town; but the great Ship at 
Tenhay
 must deliver her Goods there: That the Ambassador depends upon 
Talavja
's goodness; wherefore he was embold∣ned to request, that the two Ships might come one by one up to the Tower: to which purpose he desir'd they might have Passes, that so the Merchandise might be taken out of them with the more convenience and celerity: That if 
Talavja
 would please to order, that the Pep∣per and 
Sandal
 Wood might be weighed by the Factors below in the Ships, the Ambassador would take it as a great favor.




This being carry'd by the Interpreter 
de Hase,
 he receiv'd this Answer, That the General would speak with the Factors about it, and then send his Re∣solution.


The fifth they spent in weighing of Pepper.


The sixth the two 
Chineses
 from 
Batavia
 came to the Ambassador, desiring that they might go with him as Interpreters to 
Peking,
 having been detain'd with the rest of the Prisoners two Moneths in a 
Spanish
 Jonk in 
Hoksieu,
 and now set at liberty upon Security.


The seventh nothing was done.


The eighth in the Morning the Ambassador sent the Interpreter 
de Hase
 to the General, to have an Answer of the Letter sent to him the fourth Instant.


The same day 
Harthouwer
 and the Secretary 
Vander Does
 came with the 
Vlaer∣ding
 Boat from 
Netherland
 Haven, and gave an Account to the Ambassador, That they had done all things there according to his Excellencies Order; that the 
Vlaerding
 was Unladen of all her Pepper, and the 
Blyswiik
 Laden full with 
Calicutor
 and 
Sandal
 Wood, so that there was nothing remaining in the 
Vlaerding
 but a little of the fore-mention'd Woods, a small parcel of Tin, and some Lead, with which they had left the 
Blyswiik
 at the great Tower. The seized



Chinese
 Goods and Moneys they had open'd, and added the Coyn to the Am∣bassador's Accounts. When going down to 
Netherland
 Haven they saw War∣like Preparations, of which making enquiry, they told them that thirty 
Coxingan
 Jonks were seen hovering near the Point of 
Hoitang:
 whereupon the Gover∣nor of 
Minjazen
 receiv'd order, not onely to put himself in a posture of Defence, but also to drive them from the Coast. From thence being got to 
Netherland
 Haven, towards the Evening the 
Mandarin
 which kept Guard with the Jonks came aboard the 
Vlaerding,
 to inform them, That several 
Coxingan
 Jonks were come to 
Tenhay,
 who counterfeiting themselves carry'd the 
Tartars
 Colours, and that two of them had put in to 
Netherland
 Haven, and he left them there at his coming from thence: Wherefore the 
Vlaerdings
 Boat went thither with the Secretary by the Night-tyde, to give notice thereof to the 
Alphen,
 one of their Vessels, Riding at an Anchor there, to keep good Watches, and be very care∣ful. When the Secretary arriv'd at 
Tenhay,
 the Sea-men of the 
Alphen
 inform'd him, That the Night before fifteen 
Coxingan Coya's
 (which are little Vessels of forty and sixty Tun, with a single Mast) had view'd their Ship, but at the firing five Guns at them they all fled; besides twenty four great Jonks, which onely shewed themselves about the Islands, without making any attempt upon their Ship.


The fifth in the Morning fifteen 
Tartar
 Jonks coming out of the 
Hole,
 Sail'd to the 
Crocodile Islands,
 and return'd again in the Evening, with intention to run in at 
Tenhay;
 but those of the 
Alphen
 firing their Cannon prevented their Design.


The same day the Interpreter 
de Hase
 (who had been sent the fourth In∣stant to the General) came back with his Interpreter, to tell the Ambassador in his Masters Name, That the Ship might freely come up to the Tower, and that he would write about it to the Governor of 
Minjazen;
 and ask'd more∣over, if the Ambassador would be ready against the twenty fifth Instant to re∣pair to 
Peking:
 To which the Ambassador sent the following Letter as an Answer to the General, which was to this effect:




THe Ambassador thanks 
Talavja
 for his good Inclinations. The Pepper which was in the Lodge, being about two thousand three hundred 
Picols,
 hath been deliver'd to the Factors; therefore the Ambassador desires that 
Talavja
 will be pleas'd to order the Factors, that the Allom, Gold-wyre, and other Commodities may be deliver'd to the 
Hopou;
 that in a little time one of the Ships may Sail to 
Batavia,
 and the Ambassador make himself ready for his Journey to 
Peking.




About three days after the Ambassador and his whole Retinue were invited to come to the Vice-Roy on the eleventh Instant to a 
Wayang,
 desiring him also to bring his Musicians along with him, because he had a great desire to hear them.


The eleventh in the Morning 
Singlamong
's Factor came to the Lodge to wait upon the Ambassador according to the Invitation: who coming to the Court, and being conducted to the common Hall, there came some 
Chineses
 to him, which two years since had deserted 
Coxinga,
 and submitted to the 
Tartars;
 who with the 
Netherlanders
 were also conducted into the Presence, and plac'd opposite to each other on his right Hand. He having enquir'd after the Am∣bassador's Health, said that he had no time till then to entertain his Lord∣ship, but seeing so fair an opportunity, of relaxing from publick Concerns,


he desir'd that they might rejoyce and be merry together. Whereupon the Tables being spread with variety of Dishes, whilstt hey sat and pleas'd their Palats with diversity of 
Acates;
 their Eyes also were feasted with mimick Entries of several Antimasques; when the Vice-Roy desir'd some of their Mu∣sick, and to hear their Musicians Play, which fill'd up the Intermeans with great satisfaction. Thus having spent most part of the day with a continu'd Feast, and variety of Divertisements, the Ambassador returning Thanks, and they being all in good humor, took his Leave, and in the Evening went to his Lodgings.


About Noon the next day the 
Mandarins, Liu
 and 
Lavja,
 came to demand the detain'd 
Chinese
 Goods, urging many Reasons to that purpose. But the Ambas∣sador answer'd, That he neither could nor durst restore them, till he had Or∣ders from 
Batavia.
 Which Demand and Answer rais'd a great Heat on both sides: Whereupon the Ambassador, by the advice of his Council, sent a Letter to 
Talavja,
 the substance whereof follows:




THat the Ambassador hath always receiv'd favor and respect from 
Talavja,
 for which he is very thankful; yet he hath now sent twice to com∣mand him to restore the Goods belonging to the 
Chineses
 that came from 
Bata∣via:
 The General well knows, he was desir'd to take notice, that the 
Chineses
 have driven a private Trade formerly in the 
Holland
 Ships, and with their Com∣modities; therefore the Lord General had directed the Ambassador to observe them strictly and prevent it: That his Highness would be pleas'd to consider, that the Ambassador cannot restore them without order from his Masters; therefore he desires the General to have patience till he had writ to them and receiv'd their Answer: That he shall, according to 
Talavja
's Pleasure, use all means possible to perswade that the Goods may be restor'd, and then he shall be satisfi'd, and the Ambassador be blameless.




The General's Factor came the same day to invite the Ambassador to ano∣ther Feast or 
Wayang,
 and desir'd him in his Masters behalf that he would bring his Musick with him, because he was very desirous to hear them. To which he answer'd, That he would be there at the appointed time, and satisfie his Masters Request.


The fifteenth in the Morning the Interpreter 
Ienko
 went with the fore-men∣tion'd Letter to the Court, to shew it the General: from whence returning he brought in Answer, That his Highness expected him at Dinner, and then he would talk further. But before he went he advis'd with his Council, what was best to be answer'd, if the General should first move the Business, and ask where the Goods were? what they amounted to? where they would leave them while they took their Journey to 
Peking?
 and if they intended to re∣store them or not? 'Twas judg'd convenient, that to the General's Question, Where the Goods were? the Ambassador should answer, Aboard the several Ships: The value of them, and what they were? They would give an ac∣count of at convenient time: concerning the restoring them, he should say, That it could not be done without order from 
Batavia:
 and if he ask'd where they would leave them? to reply, That the Money should be made use of for their Expences; but withal to assure him, that no part of it should be dimi∣nished, but upon Orders from 
Batavia
 be repay'd.


Hereupon the Ambassador went to the Court with all his Attendants: where coming, and having stay'd a short space in the common Hall, they


were conducted into an Anti-Chamber near the publick Place of Audience: where the General sat on a Stool before a Table, with other Tables standing on both sides of him, furnish'd with several Dishes. The Ambassador was plac'd next 
Talavja,
 and his chief Followers on Benches on each Hand of him; when being all seated, they were serv'd very plentifully with variety of Meats and Drinks, and betwixt their Courses Farces presented to them, whilst the General drank very freely, and pressed the 
Hollanders
 to turn up their Bowls and be merry. After having spent some time, the Ambassador's Musick was order'd to Play; with which the General was much delighted. The time ap∣proaching for their departure, the Interpreter bid the Ambassador speak to his Highness about the 
Chinese
 Goods: which caus'd him to ask if he had receiv'd the Letter which he had sent to him in the Morning? who reply'd, Yes, he had, and understood the Contents. Moreover he said, That in the time of the War some of the 
Chinese
 Inhabitants fled, which now in time of Peace came to their Countrey again, bringing with them what by long trouble and labor they had got together: He had spoke with the Vice-Roy about it, who also thought it was an unhandsom action to detain their Goods; and therefore he would have them restor'd, having an Inventory of them from the poor Men they were taken from.


The Ambassador in answer thereto reply'd, That he would not contest with the General, but that he could not, nor durst restore them, but if he would take them by force he might. To which the General making no reply, chang'd his Discourse, saying, That a 
Chinese
 Jonk coming from 
Batavia
 was cast away before 
Canton,
 whose chief Commander very well knew the Ambas∣sador and 
Constantine Nobel:
 wherefore he ask'd if that Jonk came in company with them from 
Batavia?
 and if the Ambassador knew any thing concerning it? who answer'd, That he was ignorant of it, much less that they came with them from 
Batavia.
 Which Discourse ended, the Ambassador desir'd leave to depart, which was accordingly granted.


The same day the 
Conbon
's Factors came to invite him on the sixteenth to a Feast, or 
Wayang,
 to which he promis'd to come.


The sixteenth nothing pass'd worthy of observation, onely the Factors deli∣ver'd some Allom.


According to the Invitation on the fifteenth by the 
Conbon
's Factors, the Am∣bassador went thither with his Attendants; and coming to his Palace he was conducted into a Hall, when after a short stay, because some 
Mandarins
 were busie with the 
Conbon,
 he was call'd into the Presence Chamber, where the Ta∣bles were ready cover'd; and being bid Welcom, was desir'd to sit down at a Table, standing on the left Hand, and his Attendants each in their respective Place, where they pass'd the time in Feasting till the Evening, when the Am∣bassador took his Leave of the 
Conbon
 and departed.


BUt now to digress a little concerning their 
Chinese Wayangs,
 or Stage-plays;
 
Trigaut
 reports that they are strangely delighted with such Divertise∣ments; and the Actors on the other side have an extraordinary faculty therein, so that an incredible number of their Youth maintain themselves by Acting, every where shewing both Comick and Tragick Presentations.


The first Inventer of their Drammaticks, who (as they say) not onely writ, but taught them Action, and how to tread the Stage, was one 
Sheeking;
 who for his merits in such Poesie stands ranked in no mean Place amongst their






Gods, and held in especial Veneration by the Actors; for they never begin their Interludes before a solemn Invocation and Offering made to him their chief Deity; nay, so much are they devoted to his Worship, that the meanest amongst them wears his Effigies, or Medal, hanging by his Side, always imploring that he would please to strengthen their Memory, and quicken their Fancy, to Act and Personate well their Parts, never regarding to understand their Author, more than ours do: but in such esteem did the 
Chineses
 hold them, that all their Thanksgivings for their Deliverances and Victories, are instead of 
Christian
 De∣votion and solemn Praises, set forth in glad Eulogiums, adapted to the several Stories, with various Personatings on the Stage. Some are such as having a kind of Licence, strolling from Town to Town through the Empire to erect Stages; others have Theatres setled in the chief Cities, and sent for from thence upon all occasions, to Act such Plays as are desir'd, at all celebrated Feasts to height∣en their Entertainments: To which purpose they have a Book with a Cata∣logue of what they are ready to Act, being commonly true Stories set forth in a Poetical Dress. They deliver their Parts in a kind of Tone betwixt Speaking and Singing, such as we call Chanting, varying according to the Argument and Humor they present. Their Habits when they represent Tragicks are ve∣ry gawdy; their Comicks as ours, according to their Matters. But although they observe all the Decorums and Ornaments of the Stage as much as any in 
Europe,
 yet none, even of the meanest 
Chineses,
 in their Lives and Conversations are more debauch'd and vitious.


The eighteenth nothing hapned of any note, being spent onely in the recei∣ving of 
China
 Roots and Quicksilver.


The nineteenth the Secretary at his going out met accidentally with two 
Hollanders,
 which seem'd to be Strangers, and were carrry'd on travelling Chairs made of Canes, who saluted the Secretary with taking off their Hats, but passing by a great pace, as in 
transitu,
 he had no time to speak to them.


The Interpreter 
de Hase
 acquainted the Ambassador, that he had heard from


some 
Chineses,
 that a 
Holland
 Ship was arriv'd at 
Sincheu;
 who making enquiry after it, was inform'd that two 
Holland
 Ships lay at 
Sanchefoe;
 and also that two 
Hollanders
 belonging to the said Ships were that Morning gone to the General.


In the Afternoon the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja
 came to tell the Ambassador from the General, that he was to take but twenty of his Train with him to 
Hoksieu:
 whereupon the Ambassador ask'd if the Horses and Oxen should not be brought up to 
Peking▪
 for then more Men would be necessarily requir'd? but he would leave it to the General to order as many as he pleas'd. He also ask'd if there had been no 
Hollanders
 with the General? he reply'd, That when he came from 
Talavja
's Court he saw two 
Hollanders
 stand at the Door, which were come thi∣ther by Land from 
Sincheu,
 but that he knew not in what Ship they came thither.


The twenty fourth in the Morning the General's Interpreter came to the Lodge, to tell the Ambassador from his Lord, that the Vessels, Horses, 
Coelies,
 and all things necessary for the Journey were now ready, therefore ask'd when he would please to set forward? Moreover he said, That a 
Mandarin
 was come from the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 to know the time; and that he did m
h won∣der what made the 
Netherlanders
 so dilatory in the Journey, which at first they were so hasty for; therefore he desir'd them to appoint the certain Day, that he might acquaint his Master. Which the Ambassador thus answer'd, That there were some Goods yet remaining in the Ships which were for the 
Lipovies,
 that must be unladen and pack'd up before he could go; and also the Trade must be finish'd, and the Factors Goods be deliver'd, because the 
Hopou Nobel
 must go with him. On which the Interpreter ask'd, how long time it re∣quir'd before all could be finish'd? In a short time, reply'd the Ambassador, it may be done, if they ascertain their Weights, and deliver their Silk according to the Patterns.


While they were arguing these Matters, the 
Mandarins, Liu
 and 
Liu-lavja
 came to the Lodge with Orders from the General; in which he commanded that the 
Netherlanders
 should restore the seized 
Chinese
 Goods; which were to this purpose:




THe General of 
Fokien
 helps his Natives. 
Liu
 and 
Liu-lavja,
 both 
Manda∣rins,
 have acquainted the General in Writing concerning the 
Batavian Chinese
 Goods, detain'd in the 
Netherland
 Ships; which the General sends this 
Mandarin
 to fetch thence: To which purpose the Ambassador is hereby desir'd to send one of his Servants to go down with him to shew the Goods, that they may be taken away: When they are come hither, the 
Chineses
 shall set them down Piece by Piece, and shew them to the General; then after further Orders from the Emperor they shall be deliver'd to the Owners. The 
Chineses
 are also commanded to keep an exact account of what Goods are brought up of theirs in the Barque to 
Lamthay.




Hereupon the Ambassador told them, that 
Nobel, Harthouwer,
 and 
Vander Does
 should go to the General, to ask if that were his Will and Command: To which the 
Mandarins
 reply'd, That they would stay and go with them, to hear 
Talavja
's Order, and govern themselves accordingly. The 
Mandarin Liu-lavja
 also said, That two 
Hollanders
 which had been at 
Tayowan,
 were now at the Generals, and ask'd if the Ambassador knew them? who answer'd, How should he know them, when he had never seen them; but desir'd that they might be shewn to some of his Servants, who might perhaps know them.


Dinner being ended, 
Nobel, Harthouwer,
 and the Secretary 
Vander Does,
 went with the fore-mention'd Orders to the General; into whose Presence after some stay being admitted, they ask'd if that was his Highness's Writing and Order? whereupon he answering 
Yes,
 pointed to the Seal, saying, That it was his, and none else gave such a Mark; and therefore he wondred why they detain∣ed the Goods; but there were two 
Hollanders
 come thither, which he would give them. To which they reply'd, That as to what concern'd their Coun∣trey-men, if his Highness did restore them, they would be thankful for it; but they could not deliver the 
Chinese
 Goods without Orders from 
Batavia;
 that the Ambassador had seized them in the Lord 
Maetzuiker
's Name, being brought by the 
Chineses
 against his Order, in stead of Necessaries; therefore if the Am∣bassador could restore them again without his knowledge, they desir'd his Highness to consider: who reply'd, That he was a great Lord, and also one of the 
Lipous,
 he did not desire the Goods, but was oblig'd, they being his Sub∣jects, to speak for them: whereto was answer'd, That the Ambassador was also a Person of Quality, and one of the 
Indian
 Council, neither did he desire the Goods, nay, rather wish'd they had not been brought aboard; but since it was so, he could not let them go without Order: whereupon the General said, He should let the Business rest, till News came about it from the Empe∣ror; but when his Imperial Majesty commanded the 
Netherlanders,
 then they must restore them whether they were willing or not: then changing his Dis∣course, ask'd when the Ambassador would go his Journey; and all the 
Coelies,
 Horses, and Vessels being now ready, he could not imagine what was now wanting; he had writ to the Emperor three times that the Ambassador should come up, but he saw as yet no likelihood of it, therefore knew not what he might think; what-ever they had requested of him he had granted, yet still they came with new Desires, so that he knew not how to deal with them, nor could imagine why they came thither; and that they now gave him cause to think they were a People, on whose Words was no depending, saying one thing to day, and another to morrow. Hereupon he was answer'd, That they stay'd onely for the Trade, because the 
Hopou Nobel
 must go to 
Peking,
 but be∣fore he could go the Trade must be finish'd. To which the General reply'd, That he had granted them to Trade, he had provided Barques and Jonks for the unlading of their Commodities; nay more, that one of the Ships might come up to the Tower, that they might make the quicker dispatch: and it was true, that he had commanded no Quick-silver should be Transported, because the Emperor had forbid it; however, he would have wink'd at it; but because the 
Netherlanders
 had told some of his 
Mandarins,
 that they had got it from the Vice-Roy, he would have it taken away again, and not suffer one 
Conderin
 weight to be Transported. As to what concern'd the other Commodi∣ties
 which were not prohibited, the 
Netherlanders
 might carry out as many as they pleas'd. Whereupon he was answer'd, That they did not know who had told any of his 
Mandarins
 that the Quick-silver was bought of the Vice-Roy, but that the Factors were the occasion of all those Differences, because they hindred them in their Business: the Ship lying at the Tower would by this time have been unladen, if they had proceeded in weighing the Goods as they ought; but they us'd false Weights, which the 
Netherlanders
 finding out, left the Ship and went ashore. To which the General answer'd, That the Pepper in the Ship was mix'd with Sand, and therefore the Factors had us'd such Weights: The 
Netherlanders
 (said he) would have the repute of fair Dealers,


but they are none; for to mingle their Pepper with Sand and Water was no honest part. To which they answer'd, That they knew nothing concerning any such thing, therefore they would willingly go with any of his Factors Aboard to view the Pepper, in which if they found either Sand or Water, they would undergo both the penalty and scandal: In the mean time they urg'd that they might carry out the Quick-silver for that time, since it was al∣ready Shipp'd. To which the General made no Reply, but onely that his Fa∣ctors should the next Morning go Aboard and agree with them, that the Am∣bassador might the sooner go set forth to 
Peking.


The two 
Europeans
 were according to 
Liu-lavja
's Promise shewn to the 
Ne∣therlanders,
 and found to be Renegado's; the one being the first, that desert∣ing the Castle 
Zelandia,
 on the Island 
Formosa,
 went to the 
Chineses;
 which at the first questioning they acknowledg'd. And according to their Relation, they were on the eighth Day of the twelfth Moon, in 
Formosa,
 and were come in a 
Chinese
 Vessel from thence to Trade to the Coast of 
China;
 that onely one Renegado was alive in 
Tayowan.
 But the 
Netherlanders
 being just at that instant call'd to the General, had not time to examine them further; but taking their leave of him, they desir'd that they might take the Renegado's along with them to the Lodge; which the General refusing, said that he must first examine them.


The twenty fourth in the Morning came the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja
 to the Lodge, with Orders from the General to fetch the Quick-silver out of the 
Blyswiik
 Fri∣gat. Whereupon the Ambassador desiring him to stay a little, wrote the fol∣lowing Letter to the General.




THe Ambassador knows very well that 
Talavja
 is a Person of Honor, and just▪ and therefore he is assur'd, that when he shall be rightly inform'd of all things, he will be satisfi'd. And as to the Quick-silver and Pepper, he hop'd that Dispute was over; That the Ambassador wishes to go to 
Peking
 with the first opportunity, and therefore desires that the Factors may hasten the unlading of the Ships, that the Presents which are for the 
Lipous
 and 
Lavja's
 may be Pack'd, and put into a readiness.




With this Letter the Interpreter 
de Hase
 went to the General, but brought no other Answer than this, That the Ambassador should shortly know his Mind.


The Emperor's Factors having been with 
Nobel,
 they told him, That they would not deliver any Silk, but pay him for his Commodities with ready Money; and likewise that they would not go to the 
Tyger
 Frigat for any more Pepper.


A 
Mandarin
 came also to tell the Ambassador in the Generals behalf, That he must so order his Business, that within ten days he might go to 
Peking;
 and likewise ask'd for the Names of those that were to go with him.


The twenty fifth in the Morning the Council resolv'd to make preparation for the Packing of the Presents, according to the Inventory written by 
Nobel
 on the eleventh Instant, that the General might see the Ambassador resolv'd to go; and also that 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 should go to the Factors, and ask them if they would go down to receive any more Pepper or not? and likewise to speak with 
Singlamong
's prime Factors concerning the Silk, and tell him, That the Ambassador was to take his Journey a few days hence; therefore they must in short declare their Intentions, that the 
Hollanders
 might govern themselves


accordingly; and also endeavor to make them abate the Price of the course Silk; in which Case they should be impower'd to make an Agreement. More∣over it was concluded, that a List of the Names of those Persons that were to go to 
Peking
 should be sent to 
Talavja,
 being in number twenty seven 
Hollan∣ders
 and six 
Blacks;
 all which was accordingly perform'd.


In the Afternoon two Interpreters came to the Lodge from the General to tell the Ambassador, That the Quick-silver must be taken out of the Ships again, because it was publickly known, and would come to the Emperor's Ear, who had prohibited it: but hereafter if they kept it private, the 
Nether∣landers
 might carry out as much as they would. To which the Ambassador an∣swer'd, That there were 
Mandarins
 gone to the Ships to fetch it out; and if the Ship should chance to be gone to 
Netherland
 Haven, he would give order that the Quick-silver should be kept in it and brought up again; for which he pro∣mis'd to be Security till it was done. Moreover the Ambassador bid them tell 
Talavja,
 That they were now busily Packing up their Goods, to be ready against the limited time of ten days; therefore he desir'd him to command his Factors to make an end of the Trade.


In the Afternoon, a Sea-man came in a 
Batziang
 from 
Netherland
 Haven, with a Letter from Captain 
Iohn Vander Werf,
 Dated the twenty fifth instant, from the 
Vlaerding
 Frigat; by which he advis'd the Ambassador, that three 
Man∣darins
 were come from the General aboard the 
Vlaerding,
 and commanded him, that he should not take the Quicksilver out of the 
Blyswiik,
 till further Order; Wherefore he desir'd to know, what he was to do in that affair.


Hereupon the Ambassador wrote immediately an answer: That since the General had prohibited Quicksilver, he might let it remain in the 
Blyswiik,
 and with the rest of the Goods out of the 
Vlaerding;
 and what was more wanting, to make up her full Lading, he might take out of the 
Constance,
 and (as soon as he could) also come himself.


The six and twentieth, the Lord 
Van Hoorn
 observing that the sending away of the 
Vlaerding
 could be no longer put off, wrote a Letter concerning it to this purpose to the General.




THe Ambassador shall never fail to acknowledge 
Talavja
's Favors in all
 things, and accordingly, makes himself ready, that he may with the first opportunity go to 
Peking,
 and therefore as a token of his Respect, he gives notice to 
Talavja,
 that in four days time, a Ship shall go to 
Batavia;
 as also, two more a little after; therefore if his Highness will please to write to the Lord General and 
Indian
 Council in 
Batavia,
 it will be well, but it is at his own option.




With this Letter 
Harthouwer
 went to 
Talavja,
 who being busie about other affairs, so that he could not speak with himself, he sent the Letter by his Inter∣preter, and bid him tell his Master, that the reason why they had some days since desir'd that the other Ship might come up to the Tower was, because the Factors would not receive the Pepper out of that Ship there present.


The Interpreter coming back, brought this answer.




THat having receiv'd the Ambassador's Letter, and understood the Con∣tents
 of it, he would the next Morning send him an answer by some of his 
Mandarins;
 but let him know before, that not above twenty Persons in all could go with the Ambassador to 
Peking,
 because the Emperor had so Com∣manded.





He also caus'd the two 
Mandarins
 that were to go with the 
Hollanders
 to tell 
Harthouwer,
 that if they had ought else to request of the General, they should do it speedily, because they had Order to grant it.


Mean while, 
Nobel
 went to the Governors Factors to receive Money of them in stead of Silk; Who answer'd him, That they would pay their Debt within three or four days.


At the same time, the Vice-Roy and General's Interpreters came to tell the Ambassador, that it would be necessary to be ready for his intended Journey in five days. To which 
Van Hoorn
 answer'd, That he would endeavor (if pos∣sible) to obey their Highnesses Commands, having already put the business in good forwardness.


The two 
Mandarins
 which were appointed to go to 
Peking,
 came to have the List of the Names of his Attendants.


In the Morning, being the twenty ninth, 
Nobel
 according to their resoluti∣on taken the day before, went to the General with a Letter, to desire a Pass of him for the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat to go down again: The Contents of which were as followeth.




THe Ambassador hopes that 
Talavja
 will not be offended for coming again
 to beg a Request of him, being now ready to set forth towards 
Peking;
 in which regard, and for that he must write all his business at large to the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 in 
Batavia;
 therefore the Ambassador desires, that the small Vessel may go again to 
Tinghay,
 to take the Goods out of the great Ship, and that he will please to grant a Pass for her, and the Boat with fresh Provisions; and also that he will send half a dozen Jonks with them to fetch Goods from 
Tinghay
 to 
Lamthay,
 that then they might finish their Trade, and the Ships go away; for which the Ambassador shall most highly be oblieg'd to 
Talavja
 and the Emperor.


The Ambassador hath understood by the 
Hopou,
 that two 
Netherlanders
 are brought Prisoners to 
Talavja,
 which he desires may be permitted to come and speak with him.




Nobel
 coming back, related that he could not speak with the General, but sent him the Letter by his Interpreter; Who brought answer, That he should not fail to hear from him in the Afternoon; which was accordingly per∣form'd: for the 
Mandarins, Liu
 and 
Liu-lavja,
 came to the Lodge to tell the Am∣bassador, That the 
Netherland
 Ships must be unladen in five days, and the 
Con∣stance
 Frigat might freely come up to the Tower, that they might the sooner be unfreighted; but no Ship might go away before the seized on 
Chinese
 Goods were come ashore; that all things must be ready for their Journey in fifteen days; and that three and twenty 
Hollanders
 might go to 
Peking,
 but not more. The Secretary, because he was a Scholar, might not go to 
Peking
 with the Ambassador, but the General would give order for two Interpreters. For the unlading of the 
Alphen
 at 
Tenhay
 the General would send six Jonks thither with the 
Blyswiik;
 and likewise a Pass for the fore-mention'd Frigat to go down again.


To the rest of their Desires 
Talavja
 had sent them no Answer.


The General's trusty or chief Factor, call'd 
Liu,
 came two several times to
 
Nobel
 the same day with another Story, That if they would, they should one∣ly address themselves to him, and he would do their Business; and that his Master had so much ready kindness for them, that he aim'd at nothing more


than to please their King 
Maetzuiker,
 by giving them all the dispatch and satis∣faction he might.


To this civil Proffer (which the other Factors had chosen him to present)
 
Nobel
 reply'd, That they would willingly deal for some Silks, if they would let them have the best, as they would do by them. Whereupon the Factor reply'd, That he would consult with the rest, and doubted not but to please them.


But as to that part of 
Siangpovi
's Resolve, That nothing should be done un∣less the 
Chinese
 Goods were restor'd, the Ambassador and his Council consi∣dering, unanimously agreed, That the Goods should be put into such a po∣sture, that they might take them and convey them from thence, as if by force, leaving an outward Door lock'd, on purpose to be broke open.


The thirtieth in the Morning the Interpreter 
de Hase,
 according to yester∣days Resolution, went to 
Talavja
's Court to him with a Letter, which was to this effect:




THat the Ambassador congratulates 
Talavja
's noble Disposition, in granting that the Ships shall be unfreighted. The Ambassador will endeavor to be ready to go to 
Peking
 in fifteen days. He will satisfie 
Talavja
 about the 
Chinese
 Goods, that then the 
Holland
 Ships may go to 
Batavia;
 upon which he desires some private Conference.




This Letter was no sooner deliver'd, but there came Orders quite contrary, That the term of fifteen days was too long for their departure; That no Ships should Sail from thence before the Ambassador's return from 
Peking:
 At which the Ambassador much startled, reply'd, That it seem'd very strange to him; for yesterday the 
Mandarins, Liu
 and 
Liulavja,
 had told him quite other∣wise; so that he knew not what to say, or which to believe, for sure they could not both be the General's Order.


On the one and thirtieth the Ambassador sent 
Nobel
 and 
Vander Does
 to the General, to ask him if he would write any thing to the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 by the Ship that was the next Morning to set Sail for 
Batavia,
 and to assure him, that since he had been pleas'd to command no Ship might go to 
Batavia,
 before the seized on 
Chinese
 Goods were brought ashore to the Lodge, That the fore-men∣tion'd Goods were not in that Ship; but if he would please to send any of his 
Mandarins
 they should be shewn him where they were, that if he would he might take them, and they satisfie 
Talavja
 in all Points; and likewise that the Ambassador would be ready in eight days to go to 
Peking;
 in the mean while desiring him to give order for the six promis'd Jonks, and a Pass for the 
Blys∣wiik,
 that with the Jonks she might go to 
Tenhay,
 and there unlade the great Ship.


Nobel
 and 
Vander Does
 going to the Court, and having acquainted 
Talavja
 with their coming, he sent for his chief Factor 
Liu
 to receive their Message;
 of which having notice they were admitted, when the General told them, That as to what concern'd the Ship, it could not go away before the Ambassador went to 
Peking,
 it being customary there, that any Vessel which brought an Ambassador, could not be dismiss'd till he had made his Address in Person to the Emperor. To which they reply'd, That the Ship was sent to 
Batavia
 one∣ly to give an account of their Proceedings hitherto; which ought to have been done two Moneths since, according to their Orders, but it was put off upon his Highness's desire; but now it neither must nor could be any longer delay'd, because the Lord General, during the Ambassador's arrival there, having re∣ceiv'd


no news of his Excellencies Adventures and success in his Embassy, would not know what to think, and they coming to 
Batavia,
 suffer for their supine negligence.


The General reply'd, He advis'd the 
Hollanders
 not to let the Ship go away
 without his Order, because there were Jonks in 
Netherland
 Haven to prevent her; which would cause some clashing, and perhaps mischief might be done, which was much better to be avoided; neither should their stay be longer than two days at most: in which time the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 would come home again, with whom he would consult, and then send for 
Nobel
 to the Court, and give him their Resolution. Concerning the 
Chinese
 Goods, he de∣sir'd them not, they might leave them aboard, or bring them ashore as they pleas'd themselves, till Orders came from the Emperor. That he had given order for the Jonks, and also a Pass for the 
Blyswiik,
 but he made no mention of the time limited for the Ambassador's departure, onely that when he came to 
Peking,
 he should strictly observe what he said or did.


Then the 
Hollanders
 asking the General for the two Renegado's, he reply'd, That they were convey'd to 
Canton,
 where, they said, their Parents and Friends liv'd; and withal, that they were no 
Hollanders.


Whilst 
Nobel
 and 
Vander Does
 were at the General's, the 
Mandarin Liu∣lavja
 came again to the Lodge about the 
Chinese
 Goods, but was sent away again till their return; when they were inform'd of 
Talavja
's Order, and told, that it was convenient to take the Goods out of the 
Blyswiik
 (in which they were) and bring them ashore: whereupon 
Liu-lavja
 desir'd to go thither, that having seen them, he could give the better account thereof to 
Talavja;
 which being granted, he and two other 
Mandarins
 went with 
Nobel
 and 
Vander Does
 to the 
Blyswiik,
 lying about half a League from the Bridge; from whence they return'd with the Goods in the Evening.


The first of 
Ianuary, Anno
 1667. the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat set Sail, laden with Goods
 for the Coast of 
Coromandel,
 consisting in course 
Tee,
 Chests of Gold-wyre,
 Allom, and likewise Quick-silver, sent Aboard by the Factors the day before. The Commanders of the Frigat had order, that after the delivery of the Goods into the 
Vlaerding,
 they should immediately steer to 
Tenhay,
 to unlade the Ship 
Alphen
 into the six Jonks.


The second in the Morning Captain 
Iohn Vanderwerf
 went with a 
Batsiang
 to 
Netherland
 Haven, to make himself ready, and prepare the 
Vlaerding
 to Sail for the Coast of 
Coromandel
 so soon as the Ambassador should give order. He had also three Letters given him; one for the Master of the 
Alphen
 lying at 
Tenhay,
 to acquaint him of the six Jonks coming to unlade his Ship, and likewise to order him to hasten the Business; the second was to the Master of the 
Constance, Peter Iansz de Vlieg,
 by which he was commanded with all speed to come to the great Tower to unlade there, that the Ships might be clear'd for their departure; the third was to the Governor and chief of the Council at 
Malacca;
 by which he was advis'd of the Ambassador's arrival in 
China
 on the third of 
August,
 and his Landing on the twenty fourth at 
Hoksieu;
 on which day he also had Audi∣ence granted him by the three prime Governors; that an Order was come from 
Peking;
 the Trade driven, and so brought to pass, that the 
Vlaerding
 Frigat was got ready with her Lading on the first of 
Ianuary,
 to set Sail for 
Malacca.


About Noon the 
Mandarin Liu-lavja
 came to the Lodge, being sent (as he said)
 to see the 
Chinese
 Goods and tell their Money; which the Ambassador would not suffer him to do, saying, That if 
Talavja
 would take the Goods from him,


they might do what they would with them. Moreover, this 
Mandarin
 told them, that the 
Hollanders
 must be ready in eight days to go to 
Peking,
 and that not above twenty four Persons should go along with him; and that three days hence he would come and take an account of all their Packs and Chests.


The third nothing hapned, but that a Parcel of Pepper and 
Sandal
 Wood was deliver'd to the Factors, as also the next day after.


Furthermore, the General promis'd, so soon as the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 was come home, to speak about the Ships going to the Coast of 
Coromandel,
 and that then he sending to 
Nobel
 would give him an account of it: But this was hitherto not done, and three days already pass'd since 
Singlamong
's coming home, and no Person come from 
Talavja
 to call 
Nobel;
 Therefore it was judg'd convenient (since the utmost time for the Ships departure was at hand, and that it already was the fourth of 
Ianuary
) to send 
Nobel
 and the Secretary 
Van∣der Does
 the next Morning to the General's, to put him in mind of his Promise, and also tell him that the Ship must go away the day following, though no order was given, which they desir'd his Highness would not take ill.


The fifth in the Morning 
Nobel
 and the Secretary went to the General, but found him not at home, being gone to the Vice-Roy's; but having stay'd a little while, he returning: by his Interpreters they acquainted him with the occasion of their coming. To which he answer'd, That he had spoke with the Vice-Roy about the Ships going away, who would not by any means permit it; and advis'd them to go to him themselves, to see if they could perswade him to it, which they did; but coming thither could not be admitted to his Presence: for 
Singlamong,
 inform'd of their coming, sent them word, that they should come again the next Morning (because at that time he was troubled with the Gripes, and weary with Travel) and that then he would give them Audience. On which it was resolv'd to give their Highnesses full satisfaction, and to put off the 
Vlaerdings
 departure so long.


Mean while the General's Factor call'd 
Thesin,
 came to tell the Ambassador, That he had understood of his Master, that the Ship might be gone, but that 
Hogenhoek
 must first speak with the Governor of 
Minjazen
 about it.


In the Afternoon the two 
Mandarins, Liu
 and 
Liu-lavja,
 came to the Lodge with an Order from the General, to fetch all the 
Chinese
 Goods from thence, which was to this effect:




I Give order to 
Thesin
 and 
Haykong,
 that they carry the 
Batavian Chineses
 to the
 Ambassador, that they may see their Goods; and that then these 
Mandarins
 shall deliver them Parcel by Parcel to 
Tsiong
 and 
Sinshong,
 who shall be careful to look after them till farther order, that they may not be diminish'd. If the 
Hollanders
 have open'd the Chests, and taken any thing out of them, it is very ill done; therefore if any of them be missing, 
Thesin
 and 
Haykong
 must speak with the Ambassador about it, and desire him to restore them. Moreover an Order is expected from the Emperor, which when it comes, the Goods shall be again restor'd to the 
Batavian Chineses.




On which Order, without asking for them, they took away those Goods
 that were nearest at hand, and of small consequence, opening the Chests, and carrying them to their appointed Places; which they also thought to do with the Money and primest Commodities, standing in the Secretaries Chamber, had not the Ambassador prevented them; for the 
Netherlanders
 would not deli∣ver those themselves, but onely shew'd them where they were; from whence


they fetch'd their own Servants, and went to convey them out of the Lodge; which again was hindred by the Ambassador, who would first have the Goods weighed, and the Money told to them: He would moreover have a Receipt of them for so many several sorts of Commodities and Money for the use of the 
Batavian Chineses,
 which the 
Mandarins
 after having look'd them over per∣form'd, and then went away with them.


These Goods taken away by force, and the General's Order, it was thought convenient to Copy out the Receipt signed by the 
Mandarins,
 and carry it the next Morning when 
Nobel
 and 
Vander Does
 went to the Vice-Roy, to the Ge∣neral, and to tell him that the 
Mandarins, Liu
 and 
Liu-lavja,
 had by his Order taken the Goods out of the Lodge, of whose number and quantity they had, according to the 
Mandarins
 Receipt, brought him an account and Copy, that if the Goods hereafter should be diminished, the 
Netherlanders
 might be blame∣less.


The sixteenth in the Morning 
Nobel
 and the Secretary went to the Vice-Roy
 
Singlamong,
 to speak with him about the Ship; before whom after a little stay they were brought to have Audience. After he had, according to the 
Tartars
 Custom, inquir'd of the Ambassador's Health, 
Nobel
 and 
Vander Does
 told him the occasion of their coming, 
viz.
 That the next day a Ship must go to 
Batavia.
 To which at first he said nothing else, but that they must speak with 
Talavja
 about it, till which time they must defer her going. Whereupon the 
Netherlanders
 told him, that the Ship must upon necessity go to 
Batavia,
 and her going could not be put off any longer, because, according to the Lord 
Maetzuiker
's Order to the Ambassador, the Ship should have been gone two Moneths sooner, to carry news of their safe arrival, and what they had done in the Trade▪ and that the Ambassador was to take his Journey to 
Peking
 in four or five days, at which the Lord General would be highly pleas'd. To which the Vice-Roy reply'd, That they might let the Ship go away privately without telling any Person of it, and make themselves ready for their Jour∣ney; which done the Vice-Roy would impart something to them. More∣ver his earnest Request was, That nothing might be writ to 
Batavia
 of what had hitherto hapned.


From thence 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 went to the General, that according to
 yesterdays Resolution they might shew him the Receipt for the 
Chinese
 Goods; but before they went thither they sent a Soldier to the Ambassador, to tell him the Vice-Roy's Answer. Coming to the General's they were forc'd to stay a considerable time before any Person came to them; yet at last one pas∣sing by, they took occasion to send notice of their attendance: who brought them answer, That he knew of the fetching of the Goods by the 
Mandarins, Liu
 and 
Liu-lavja,
 in which they had done very well; and withall that he was busie about his Offerings, therefore could not grant them Audience, which
 made them not deliver the Receipt, but return home.


Van Hoorn
 being inform'd of the Vice-Roy's Answer about the Ship, re∣turn'd, being on his Way going to 
Singlamong
's prime Factor, who had invited him to a Feast and 
Wayang,
 or Play, in Person to send away the 
Vlaerdings
 Boat, which waited onely for order when the fore-mention'd Ship should set Sail. To which purpose he wrote a Letter to Captain 
Vander Werf,
 That the Vice-Roy had at last consented that he might set Sail with his Ship, therefore he should put to Sea with as much silence as he could, without looking for any thing.


The 
Indian
 Council at 
Batavia
 seem'd much concern'd to hear News of the Ambassador's success in 
China;
 whom at his coming from thence they had commanded, that he should endeavor from 
Peking
 by 
Moskou,
 if it were pos∣sible, to send advice to the 
States
 of 
Holland.
 Therefore it was judg'd conveni∣ent on the fourth to send with the 
Vlaerding
 (for because of the Differences be∣tween the Governors Factors and the 
Hollanders,
 about the receiving of the Goods and delivering of Silks, they had lost their hopes of sending the 
Tyger
 time enough to 
Batavia,
 that from thence she might Sail with the last Ships
 that were bound for 
Holland
) a Copy of the Letter written to 
Batavia,
 and sent by the 
Polesnip
 on the eleventh of 
October,
 that from 
Malacca
 it might be sent through 
Persia
 by Land to 
Holland:
 and likewise the Copies of the Letters which had been written were also sent to go thither with the 
Tyger.
 Besides which 
Van Hoorn
 also sent a Letter apart to the Lords before mention'd, which serv'd as a cover for all the other. The said Letters, though open, were sent to the Governors 
Balthazar Bort
 and 
Paviljon,
 with Orders to send them away with all speed. 
Bort
 was also commanded, that if an opportunity did present it self there, to send Copies of those Letters that were directed for 
Holland,
 to the 
Indian
 Council at 
Batavia.


After the Boat was sent away with the fore-mention'd Letters, 
Van Hoorn
 went again to the chief Factors House, where he was nobly entertain'd. At their departure 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 led the Factor into a private Room, and ask'd him if he would let them have any other Silk? which he much scrupled at, fearing lest it might be discover'd; yet if they would faithfully promise not to speak of any such thing, or make mention thereof at 
Peking,
 he would deliver them some: which the 
Hollanders
 on the other side as much scrupling, they broke off farther Discourse, and so parted.


The next Morning they went again to the Factor about the same Business, and told him, That before their Journey to 
Peking
 the 
Hopou
 must make all things even; that the 
Tyger
 being unladen, must go again to 
Netherland
 Haven; and the 
Alphen
 would also be suddenly deliver'd, therefore they must now ei∣ther receive Money or Silks to divide and lade into the Ships. Moreover, as they pass'd by they call'd at the Vice-Roy's, and ask'd him when his Highness would be at leisure to permit the Ambassador to come and confer with him about his addressing himself to the Court. Whereupon the prime Factor seem∣ing to be somewhat dissatisfi'd, ask'd if ever they remain'd in their debt, that the 
Hopou
 should so much press their setling and making even of Accounts be∣fore he went to 
Peking,
 with many other Discourses to the like purpose; yet at last promis'd they should have Money the next Morning, it lying ready for them: with this Answer the 
Netherlanders
 took their leave; and as they pass'd by went to the Vice-Roy's Court, who sent them word that the Ambassador might within two days come and speak with him about the Embassy.


Mean while two 
Mandarins
 came to the Lodge to tell the Ambassador from the General, That he must make himself ready for his departure at farthest in seven days, demanding a List of the Names of the Persons, and number of the Packs, Chests, and other things that were to go with him; which immediately was deliver'd to them.


The eighteenth two 
Mandarins
 came to the Lodge, to ask the Ambassador why he did not set forth on the twentieth of their Moon? To which he an∣swer'd, That all things had been and were ready, and that it was not his fault, having stay'd onely for an Answer to the Request about the Ships set∣ting












Sail. Then the 
Mandarins
 reply'd, The Generals do give leave that three Ships may depart, and also that the 
Blyswiik
 might fall down; wherefore they must prepare for their Journey, because the General was not satisfi'd that they stay'd so long. Neither did the 
Hollanders
 stay after these good tydings, but immediately Shipp'd off all their Goods, and prepar'd to begin their Voyage.


In the Morning, being the nineteenth, four 
Mandarins
 came to the Lodge, two sent from the General, and two from the Vice-Roy, to drink to the Am∣bassador's health and good success in their Journey, and at 
Peking
 also, inform∣ing them how they should carry themselves there: and also two Interpreters, 
Ienko
 and 
Liulako,
 which came with the 
Mandarins,
 being sent by their High∣nesses to observe the 
Hollanders
 Transactions; nay, they were to do nothing without their advice, because they knew the Custom of the Countrey, and al∣so what was best to be done, or otherwise. The 
Netherlanders
 willing to be led by them, answer'd, That they would endeavor in all things to give the Vice-Roy and General satisfaction: Whereupon the 
Mandarins
 took their leave, being Presented each of them with a Piece of Crown Serge.


The Merchant 
Harthouwer
 had a written Order given him, according to which he was to govern himself during the Ambassador's absence, and like∣wise the Names and numbers of the Persons that were to stay with him in 
Hoksieu.


The twentieth in the Morning, after all their Goods and Necessaries were
 Shipp'd in thirty eight Barques, they went away with the Flood, and came about Noon to 
Hoksantiouw
 Bridge, two Leagues distant from 
Lamthay,
 the Suburbs of 
Hoksieu;
 where they found the Vessels, with their 
Mandarin
 and Guides lying at Anchor. Here the 
Netherlanders
 were forc'd to stay till all their Barques came thither. 
Harthouwer
 and some other Persons which had accom∣panied the Ambassador to this Place, return'd in the Evening.


They were no sooner gone, but several 
Mandarins
 came to ask the 
Nether∣landers
 how many their Train consisted of, being two and thirty, whereof five were 
Negro
 Boys. To which they reply'd, That neither the Vice-Roy nor General would suffer above twenty four Persons in all to go, because it was written to the Emperor so many should come.


In the Afternoon about four a Clock the 
Hollanders,
 being twenty four in
 number, that belong'd to several Offices, went at the Flood with about fifty Barques Westerly up the River 
Min▪
 and came in the Evening about seven a Clock to an Isle, lying about a Cannon-shot from the Village call'd 
Unwono,
 where they stay'd that Night, being got a League to the Westward.


The two and twentieth at Day-break they set Sail again, and about nine a Clock pass'd 
Howtong,
 a Village lying on the right-side of the River, In the Af∣ternoon they Sail'd by 
Petjong, Hongia,
 and 
Tiksoya
 on the same Shore; they came in the Dusk of the Evening before 
Congimon,
 having that day by Rowing and Sailing gotten five Leagues more to the Westward.


All the fore-mention'd Villages were thick built with Houses, that were lit∣tle better than our Huts or Hovels, but the adjacent Fields abounding with Rice and store of other Grain.


The three and twentieth in the Morning they proceeded, (the Wind still favoring them) and about nine a Clock pass'd by 
Binkin,
 a Village by some call'd 
Mincing,
 three Leagues from 
Congimon,
 standing behind a Hill a little up in the Countrey, on the left-side of the River 
Min.


This Town is adorn'd with fair Buildings, and a high Steeple, which ap∣pears


with its Spiry top above the Mountain, and seen by all those that pass by it.


In the Afternoon they had in view 
Anike, Siaivang,
 and 
Twavigh;
 the first of which Towns lies on the right, and the other two on the left Hand, the last being about three Leagues from 
Binkin:
 at four after Noon they arriv'd at 
Chukaw,
 where they rested that Night, to get 
Coelies
 to Tow their Boats, because the Stream ran very slack, having that day made six Leagues and a half more Westerly.


The Verges of the River here are nothing but hilly and barren Cliffs.


The twenty fourth in the Morning, the Wind at North-East, they got two 
Coelies
 for every Vessel, and going on their Journey about eight a Clock pass'd by 
Caukawa,
 a Village on the left side of the River, a League from 
Chukaw,
 and in the Evening Landed at 
Poutcham,
 where they saw some decay'd Houses, ha∣ving that day gain'd, though with no small danger of Rocks and strong Water-falls, three Leagues.


The next Morning, being the twenty fifth, they left 
Poutcham,
 and about two a Clock in the Afternoon pass'd by 
Tiongopan
 and 
Iunchiam,
 both lying on the left side of the River, the last being two Leagues distant from 
Poutcham;
 and in the Evening they came over against 
Ukekaun
 near a Watch-house, ha∣ving not gotten above three Leagues all that day, because of the Sholes and contrary Current.


The twenty sixth in the Morning putting forward, they were drawn up over Sholes and Rocks, which by the violent Precipes and fall of the Stream seem'd very dreadful, and not without imminent danger, as appear'd by the Barque in which the Comptroller 
Ruwenort
 was, which Rowing about as they suppos'd for advantage, ran on a Rock and sunk immediately; yet most of the Goods were sav'd, though we
. In the Afternoon they reach'd 
Kantang
 and 
Poinpang,
 Villages standing on the right side going up, and in the Evening Landed near a Watch-house call'd 
Bokkay;
 where they reposed that Night, ha∣ving gone but two Leagues and a half that day, and with great trouble.


The twenty seventh about Day-break they weigh'd, and before Noon saw several Priests Houses and Hamlets, built on the hangings or declivings of the Mountains, and in the Afternoon about four a Clock they came to 
Seghia
 and 
Siong,
 two Villages opposite one to the other, about two Leagues from 
Bokkay;
 from whence passing on they arriv'd at another Watch-house call'd 
Soujong,
 where they stay'd the following Night, having with great danger got∣ten two Leagues and a half to the West.


The twenty eighth in the Morning they came between two great Towers about nine a Clock, each standing on a Summit fronting the other on the side of the River; behind which appears the City 
Iemping,
 or 
Ienping,
 or 
Ienpingsoe.
 The Ambassador passing through the Bridge, was by two 
Mandarins,
 sent from the General of that Place, call'd 
Sioubontok,
 invited to Dinner to his Palace; whither he went with some of his Attendants: So soon as he came with his Barque to one of the City Gates, he was kindly receiv'd by 
Sioubontok,
 and nobly Entertain'd after the 
Chinese
 manner with variety of Dishes, and several Entries of their 
Wayangs,
 or Stage-plays.


No Discourse of any concern hapned here, onely 
Sioubontok
 ask'd if the 
Ne∣therlanders
 had 
Quelang?
 and how many Men kept the Place? Which the Am∣bassador answering according, and taking his leave, went in the Evening Aboard; where they sound some fresh Provisions, sent thither by the General's Order,


consisting in Oxen, Swine, Hens, Ducks, and Herbs, for which the Beaters receiv'd five Crowns of Silver; and the Ambassador, according to the Custom of the Countrey, gave the 
Wayang
 Actors, and also the Servants that attended him at the Table, five Dollars apiece.


In the Evening 
Sioubontok
 came in Person Aboard, and a little after the Go∣vernor of the City, being a comely proper Man, with a long Beard, Habited after the 
Chinese
 manner in Mourning for a deceased Relation, both welcom∣ing the Ambassador and 
Haulavia
 the 
Mandarin
 that was sent with him as his Guide, who would not come to 
Sioubontok
's Feast, though invited several times. After the 
Netherlanders
 had given them a taste of their 
Spanish
 Wine, and they view'd the Horses and Oxen, and 
Sandal
 Wood that were to be presented to the Emperor, they took their leave and walk'd to their several Houses in the Dusk of the Evening. 
Sioubontok
 after his departure sent the Ambassador some Geese, and six 
Picol
 of Rice. After which he sent the Interpreter 
Maurice Iansz Vis,
 to the General 
Sioubontok,
 to enquire how the 
Netherlanders
 Business stood at 
Peking,
 because 
Maurice
 was very familiar with him, having been his Servant when he was a Prisoner amongst the 
Chineses. Maurice
 at his coming back brought word from 
Sioubontok,
 That the 
Netherlanders
 were in great esteem at Court, and that he doubted not but they would obtain what ever they desir'd: but there were some great Persons at 
Peking
 which they must seek to please and get their favor, by which they need not doubt to have all their Requests grant∣ed. Moreover he desir'd 
Maurice
 to entreat the Ambassador in his behalf, that when the Emperor should chance to speak with him about the conquering of 
Tayowan,
 (which without doubt he would do) that he would please to speak in his behalf, that he might go with them to the subduing of the Place, because he had a Wife and Children, and several Goods there.


The twenty ninth in the Morning, 
Sioubontok
 sent more fresh Provisions, as Poultrey, Swine, Sallet Herbs, and Provender for the Horses; for all which the Secretary 
Vander Does
 went and presented him in the Ambassadors Name with a Fowling-piece, a Pair of Pistols, a Couple of Knives, a Chain of Amber Beads, one Piece of Amber weighing ten Ounces, ten 
Dutch
 Ells of fine Cloth, and likewise an Inventory of the Presents design'd for him, which if he would not accept now, he might receive them at the Ambassador's Return. The Se∣cretary was also commanded to desire 
Sioubontok
 to instruct the 
Netherlanders
 how they should carry themselves to the four 
Zoetaysings
 which he had spoken of to the Interpreter 
Maurice,
 and likewise inform them of some other Lords that might assist them in their Business in 
Peking.


The Secretary at his Return related, That he had shewn 
Sioubontok
 the In∣ventory of his Presents, who said he would receive them with many thanks; proffering moreover his Service to assist the 
Hollanders
 in what ever they pleas'd to desire of him. After some Discourse the Secretary ask'd him concerning the four 
Zoetaysings,
 or 
Great Men,
 and what Lords they were best to address themselves to in 
Peking?
 Whereupon commanding all his Attendants to avoid the Presence, he reply'd, That when the 
Netherlanders
 came to 
Peking,
 they must endeavor to gain the four chief Councellors, or 
Zoetaysings
 favor, (who during the Emperor's Minority were Guardians, or Protectors of the Empire) which was very easily be done, if they did but employ some faithful Persons to intercede for them, and in their Name Present them with Money and Gifts, which they loved very well: To which purpose, that he might assist them, he would send a Letter with them to 
Peking,
 to a certain 
Mandarin
 which was in


great Repute there, and was formerly one of his Deputies, who would on his Recommendation be very serviceable to them; and that he had also Presented some prime Councellors each with a 
Negro
 Boy, which were also his Friends, and would aid the 
Hollanders
 in their Business; They should not repose too much confidence in the Proffers of several Persons pretending to belong to the Court; for many cunning Villains would come and perswade them to be∣lieve that they were such and such great Lords which they were not, as he himself had found when there in Person, therefore they ought to have a great care that their Followers were not talkative, which might prove a great disad∣vantage to their Business: but if they could get into the four Councellors of States favor, they could but ask and have; for what-ever they requested would certainly be granted them. There are also (said he) several Officers belong∣ing to the Councel, to which he would recommend them and their Business. Whereupon the Secretary taking his leave, thanked him for his good advice, and so went Aboard.


The Presents design'd for 
Sioubontok
 being brought to Land, though not without some difficulty, were by Captain 
Putmans
 carry'd to him, who sent the Ambassador twenty Pieces of Stuff for the Clothing of his Retinue, and some Fruits, in return for them; whereupon the Stuffs were immediately distribu∣ted amongst the Men.


In the Afternoon 
Lunlakko
 the Interpreter brought the Ambassador from his
 
Mandarin
 twelve Pieces of 
Chinese
 Boat-Silver, to bear his Expences, telling him it was by the Emperor's order; and also that the Ambassador was at such Places to have twelve 
Condarins,
 or fifteen 
Stuivers; Nobel,
 fourteen 
Condarins,
 or twelve 
Stuivers; Putmans,
 twelve 
Condarins,
 or ten 
Stuivers;
 all which Money it was thought fit to refuse: but because the 
Mandarins
 and Interpreters durst not receive it again, saying, That what the Emperor had commanded must be obey'd; and if they would not accept of it, they might keep it and return it in 
Peking:
 Whereupon it was deliver'd to the Comptroller 
Ruwenoort
 to keep till they came thither.


The City 
Ienping,
 or 
Ienpingfoe,
 the next to the prime City, or Metropolis of
 the Province of 
Fokien,
 lies at the going up of the Stream on the right Hand, or on the Westerly Shore of the River 
Min;
 from whence it maketh a handsom Prospect on the side of a Hill, the Edifices rising gently by degrees.


This Mountain is for the most part inaccessible, making the City rather a Fortress, and to be esteem'd as the Key of the whole Province.


The City is a League long, but not above a Mile and a half broad, full of fair and large Buildings. Every House is furnish'd with Water convey'd from the Mountains in Cane Pipes, the like not elsewhere to be seen in 
China.


All Provisions are to be had there in great abundance, and at a cheap Rate; the Streets and Houses also throng'd with Inhabitants.


On the East side of the City two great Rivers, the 
Min
 and 
Zi,
 uniting their Waters, make a great Lake; through which Ships come thither from all parts of the adjacent Countrey. Each of these Rivers hath a fair Bridge; and in the City are three beautiful Temples.


Most of the course 
China
 Paper is made here; but the whitest and finest sort in a Village call'd 
Siege,
 three Leagues beyond more Westerly, which is all that is there of remark; onely this City boasts that her Inhabitants speak the most elegant Phrase of all the 
Chineses,
 and therefore it is call'd the 
Man∣darins,
 or 
Court Language.


















That Night the 
Netherlanders
 lay a little from the City near the opposite Shore; from whence they Row'd and set Sail the thirtieth in the Morning to 
Honjong,
 a Village about a League from 
Ienping,
 where all their Fleet Rendez∣vouz'd, having had a narrow and dangerous Passage thither. Hence they set Sail again about nine a Clock, and in the Afternoon▪ pass'd by 
Louquon, Hoeyong, Linkentome,
 and 
Tafa;
 the two first of which lie on the right, and the two last on the left side of the River, about half a League distant one from another.


In the Evening they anchor'd before 
Ongsoutow,
 having that day gain'd three Leagues in a Northerly Course.


The one and thirtieth in the Morning setting Sail again, they pass'd by a long Village call'd 
Bonsjouko
 about eight a Clock, and at ten by the Village 
Liucuir, Posjen,
 and 
Ubaka;
 the first and last on the right side, and the second on the left.


In 
Ubaka
 much Paper is made, which appear'd by several Vessels that lay Freighted onely with such Goods to go up the River.


About Noon they saw 
Konchian, Sioeukke,
 and 
Tayping;
 the two first on the right, and the third on the left side of the Stream, close by one another.


In the Afternoon about three a Clock they came to 
Chiakiang,
 where they Rode till the next day.


The next Morning, being the first of 
February,
 they set Sail again, and in
 the Afternoon pass'd by five Villages, 
viz. Siejokaun, Itantauw, Bayapo, Siema,
 and 
Filictauw;
 the two first lying on the right, and the two last on the left side of the River; and about Noon they arriv'd at the City of 
Kienning,
 or 
Kienning∣foe,
 where the Horses were immediately put ashore, because the Barques in which they came were judg'd too big to carry them up any higher; but not getting any smaller that day, they were set up till the next Morning.


Here the 
Netherlanders
 had the Gates shut against them, being not permitted to enter the City; so that they were not able to get any fresh Provisions; nay, none were suffer'd to sell any thing to the 
Netherlanders
 without the Interpre∣ters


leave, who acted as Comptrollers where-ever they came, and especially 
Ienko,
 as appear'd by a Soldier that belong'd to 
Sioubontok,
 General of the City▪ 
Ienping;
 who having bought some Fruit for the Ambassador, and bringing it to him, was, so soon as the Interpreters were inform'd of it, taken by the 
Mandarins
 Order, and ty'd Neck and Heels together, and had not the Ambassa∣dor interceded for him, they had sent him a Prisoner to 
Hoksieu,
 where he would have been severely punish'd; but the Ambassador at last prevail'd so much that he was set at liberty.


The second, after the Vessels were prepar'd to carry the Horses, they were immediately imbarqu'd again, and all safely put Aboard; the 
Tartars
 being highly pleas'd with them, had dress'd them so neatly, that they were slick as Glass.


In the Evening the 
Mandarins
 which were the 
Netherlanders
 Guides, presented them with some boyl'd and roasted Meats.


Thus having gotten all things in a readiness, they left the City 
Kienningfoe
 on the third, the Governors thereof being so surly, that they not once bid the Ambassador welcom, or wish'd him a good Journey at his going from thence, nor presented him with the least Provision, which no way grieved them, who by that means kept their Chests lock'd.


This 
Kienningfoe
 being the fourth, and so one of the most eminent Cities in
 
Fokien,
 lying on the Eastern Shore of the River 
Min,
 is something inferior in Beauty and Riches, but not in bigness to the Metropolis 
Focheu,
 and larger than 
Ienping,
 but not so close built, because several Corn-Fields are inclos'd within her Walls. The Streets are all Pav'd with Pebble, and very full of In∣habitants, that drive no other Trade but making of course Paper. They are Rul'd by two Governors, which sway alternately, the one not so much as once daring to contradict the other in his time.


China
 affords several sorts of Paper, made of several Materials, 
viz.
 of the Body and Leaves of Cane-tree, Cotton, Silk, and Flaxen Clothes: that which is made of Cotton is not altogether so white as our 
French
 Paper.


In the County of 
Vuchaufu,
 belonging to the Countrey of 
Huquang:
 They make also great quantities of Paper, of the Canes and Leaves, which grow there in great abundance.


In the Forenoon having left 
Kienningfoe,
 they pass'd by 
Gaetchan, Maschetany,
 and 
Petchin,
 Villages lying close together on the left side of the River; the last lying about a League from 
Kienningfoe.
 In the Afternoon they saw by the Village 
Kekau, Vazoeo
 and 
Gautauw;
 the two first on the right, and the last on the left side of the River. Towards Evening they came before, and Landed at a ruin'd and decay'd Village call'd 
Chiaphong,
 where they remain'd all Night. Here they directed their Course almost North, having a little of the West.


The next Morning, being the fourth, leaving 
Chiaphong,
 they pass'd by 
Chincheuw,
 seated on the right side of the River, a League from 
Chiaphong;
 and in the Afternoon by several Hamlets, Houses and 
Pagodes,
 that stood here and there apart from the rest, along the Margents of the River. In the Evening they arriv'd at a ruinous Town call'd 
Sjovova,
 on the right side of the River, having that day gain'd but two Leagues with great trouble.


The fifth in the Morning setting Sail again, they left the Villages 
Tachoe
 and 
Pagou
 on their left hand, and in the Afternoon pass'd by 
Swinckin,
 situate on their right hand; and arriving at 
Suchiap
 about three a Clock they Landed, ha∣ving that day gain'd two Leagues and a 
.
























The sixth in the Morning leaving 
Sichiap
 (where they had chang'd their 
Coelies,
 or 
Pugs,
 for the Towing forward of their Vessels,) they pass'd by 
Tin∣tenna, Cholunga,
 and 
Leantong,
 three Villages seated on the right hand. In the Afternoon they ran by the Villages 
Losjouwa
 and 
Sichem,
 built on the same side; and towards Evening anchor'd opposite to the Village 
Hochiechien,
 having gain'd three Leagues that day.


The seventh proceeding on their Journey, they pass'd 
Hoesuna
 and 
Nagan,
 and at Noon arriv'd at 
Quiquan;
 where they stay'd for the Vessels that brought the Horses, which by reason of the shallow Water could not get up the River so fast; but at last arriving, the Masters of them complain'd, that by drawing over the Sands they were grown very leaky, and that it was impossible to go any further with them before they were mended and trimm'd up a new; for which cause it was judg'd convenient to put the Horses ashore, and send them by Land to 
Poutchin,
 by others call'd 
Puchin,
 a good Town not above five Leagues from 
Quiquan.
 The Horses being got safe ashore were set up till next Morning. The Comptroller 
Ruwenoort,
 Interpreter 
Maurice,
 and the four Grooms, were order'd to Ride them thither; and also twelve 
Chinese
 Sol∣diers by order of their 
Mandarins
 were sent to conduct them. That Night the Vessels lay at Anchor before 
Quiquan.


The eighth they left 
Quiquan
 at Day-break, and about Noon pass'd by the Village 
Souswenna,
 standing on the left hand: soon after they got sight of a great▪ Town call'd 
Swipia,
 near which appear'd several ruin'd Houses, and also a large, but broken and decay'd Stone Bridge; and about four a Clock they came before 
Chintewa,
 a Village lying on their left hand, a Mile from 
Swipia,
 and towards Evening dropt Anchor near a Watch-Tower, about which were built a few Houses, having that day with great danger gain'd three Leagues.


The ninth in the Morning weighing, they pass'd by two Villages call'd 
Gotanga
 and 
Quotinha,
 the first lying on the right, and the second on the left hand: at Noon they saw a Temple, which being built over a Moat, or Sluce


like a Bridge, under which at High-water Vessels might pass, was round about adorn'd, after the 
Chinese
 manner, with Imagery, to which they ascended by a pair of Stairs rais'd on one side of it. After Noon they pass'd 
Saloekia,
 and se∣veral other Places ruin'd in the last War, onely some Pieces of Walls remain∣ing. The Night approaching, they cast Anchor before a Sandy Plain, about a League from 
Poutchinfoe,
 having with much ado that day gain'd three Leagues.


The tenth in the Morning they set Sail about eight a Clock through a bro∣ken Bridge, formerly laid cross the River, and about Noon came to 
Poutchin,
 the fourth eminentest City belonging to 
Kienningfoe.
 Here the Comptroller 
Ru∣wenoort
 came to the Ambassador, to tell him that the Horses came safely thither the last Night, and were put into a Stable joyn'd to the House, prepar'd for them to stay in, till the 
Coelies
 were come to carry the Emperor's Presents. The Ambassador commanded the Secretary to ask the 
Mandarins
 that were come with him, because the Houses prepar'd for him and his Attendants were very old and rotten, and scarce fit to Lodge in, if he might stay so long in the Barques till such time as the 
Coelies
 were come up, and they ready to go far∣ther. But the 
Mandarins
 said that it could not be, because all the Goods must be taken an account of, that they might see how many 
Coelies
 they should want to carry them. Whereupon they found it convenient to Land all their Goods the next Morning, and put the Oxen ashore that Afternoon. In the Evening the 
Netherlanders
 were presented with some fresh Provisions, by some 
Mandarins
 belonging to the 
Conbon
 of 
Hoksieu,
 and likewise by their 
Mandarine
 Guides; for which 
Van Hoorn
 (they having presented him several times before) gave them a small Piece of Plate.


The eleventh in the Morning all the Presents were unladen and carry'd to
 the House prepared for that purpose, which was not onely very old, but of no convenience, the Rooms being so bad and so few, seeming rather a Hog∣stye than a Dwelling-house: but they no way able to better themselves were forc'd to be contented. In the Evening order was given to watch the Goods, because they were constrain'd to lie in open Places, incident to filching Pilfer∣ers. Every Person was also strictly commanded not to stir abroad without the Ambassador's leave, thereby to shew the 
Chineses,
 who had forbid the 
Hol∣landers
 from going into the City, that they did not value it, there being nothing to do for them.


The thirteenth the chief of the 
Coelies,
 as the 
Mandarins
 their Guides inform'd the Ambassador, came to his Lodging to take an account of the number of the Chests and Packs, and to see how many 
Coelies
 would be requisite to carry them: after the weight and number were written down, they found that they should want six hundred 
Coelies
 for the carrying of the Presents and other Goods.


The fourteenth in the Morning both the 
Mandarins
 came again, with 
Ienko
 and 
Liu-lako
 the Interpreters, to the 
Netherlanders
 in their Lodging, to tell them that the number of the 
Coelies
 for the carrying of the Goods far exceeded the number express'd in their Warrant given them by the General, because onely two Persons were allow'd for the carrying of a Pack or Case, whereas now there were several amongst them which two Men were not able to carry, and thereupon would want two hundred Porters: and moreover, that the 
Manda∣rins
 of the City durst not do contrary to the General's Order; in allowing them more 
Coelies
 than was express'd in their Warrant. Whereupon 
Van Hoorn
 reply'd,


That if the 
Hopou
 and 
Pimpous
 in 
Peking
 had given such Order, it was well: Moreover, he would pay for the Carriage of what was over and above that which was mention'd in the Pass; and that it seem'd strange to him, since in 
Hoksieu
 the number of the Cases and Packs that belong'd to the Embassy were deliver'd in Writing to the General's Officers, which had seen them, and might well have discern'd that there were several Chests amongst them which could not be carry'd by two Men: but it was no great matter, for if they got no 
Coe∣lies
 they were the less obliged: Nay, he knew the former Ambassadors never wanted Men to carry their Goods, and had also much more honor and respect shewn them than was done to him, never travelling through any Place but they were fetch'd in, and nobly entertain'd by the Governors thereof; whereas now on the contrary the Gates were shut up against him, and he forbid to come in∣to the City. To which the 
Mandarins
 made no Reply.


Mean while the City 
Mandarin
 who commanded the 
Coelies,
 came in Person to the Ambassador; whereupon a Contest began between him and the 
Manda∣rine
 Guides; which being no way pleasing to the Ambassador, he said that he would have no Quarrel about the Emperor's and his Goods, for he would pay those 
Coelies
 which were wanting above the number express'd in the General's Warrant: Whereupon as many 
Coelies
 were provided as they wanted; and the Ambassador wrote a Letter to the General in 
Hoksieu
 to this effect:




THat the Ambassador would never forget the many great Favors which he receiv'd from his Highness in 
Hoksieu,
 and doth not doubt but that he will continue the same: In return whereof, he desires that 
Talavja
 might be assur'd, that neither in the Court at 
Peking,
 nor any other Place in the World, he would seek or do any thing to his disliking or disparagement. That himself hath well arriv'd at 
Chinkon
 in 
Pouchin,
 and finds that he wants more 
Coelies
 than are express'd in the 
Pay
 or Warrant granted him, whom if his Ex∣cellency think fit, he will cause to be paid by the 
Hopou
 in 
Hoksieu.




This Letter deliver'd to the 
Mandarins,
 the Ambassador ask'd when they should proceed on their Journey? to which they answer'd, Two days hence. Then he enquir'd if the Horses and Oxen might not be sent away before, be∣cause the Oxen travell'd but slowly: which being granted, they prepar'd all things accordingly. But in the Evening a 
Chinese
 Secretary, call'd 
Sinko,
 said that the 
Mandarins
 caus'd Frames to be made to carry the Oxen, because it would be impossible for them to go over the Mountains: at which the Am∣bassador seem'd very well satisfi'd, and accordingly put off their going.


In the Morning, being the sixteenth, 
Hiu-lavja,
 one of the 
Netherlanders Man∣darine
 Guides came with the Frames for the Oxen to the Ambassador's Lodg∣ings; who asking him when they should go from thence? reply'd, Two days hence: Then he desir'd to know the reason why they must stay so long, because the 
Mandarin
 had on the fourteenth Instant also told him, That he should go two days hence: Whereupon he said, That it was because the 
Coelies
 which they wanted above the number mention'd in the Pass granted by 
Talavja,
 was not yet allow'd by the City 
Mandarins,
 who had promis'd, that within two days all things should be ready, himself wishing that the 
Hollanders
 were gone. To which the Ambassador reply'd, That he knew that the 
Lepous
 were some∣what displeas'd about their so long tarrying at 
Hoksieu,
 being detain'd there by the Vice-Roy, therefore it would be very inconvenient to lose more time there; so that if the 
Lepous
 should chance to ask him about it in 
Peking,
 he


could freely declare that it was not his, but the 
Mandarins
 fault, who made him wait for 
Coelies.
 Which Discourse prevail'd so much, that Porters were im∣mediately sent to carry the 
Sandal
 Wood, with which they walk'd before, it being very troublesom for its length and heaviness to be got over the Moun∣tains.


The eighth in the Morning an hundred 
Coelies
 came to the Ambassador's Lodging, to tie and pack up the Presents to be carry'd in Burthens, and to go with their Loads before with the Horses and Oxen; with which the Secretary 
Vander Does
 was also order'd to Travel before; the Ambassador, 
Nobel,
 and the rest intending to follow them in the Afternoon: but because one of the Horses had receiv'd a hurt on his Head above the left Eye, the Ambassador thought it convenient to stay a day or two longer in 
Poutchin,
 and to keep one Horse more besides the fore-mention'd, to see in that time what could be done to him, and then give order for his stay, or taking along with him. Whereupon the Se∣cretary, with two Horses, the Oxen, and the hundred 
Coelies,
 with their Loads went before, 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 being order'd to follow him in the Afternoon; but because the tying up of the Goods spent too much time, it was deferr'd till the next Morning.


The Horse being pretty well recover'd, the Ambassador went from 
Poutchin
 the one and twentieth in the Morning; and having travell'd half a League by the Village 
Olian,
 and in the Afternoon by 
Sisanly
 and 
Singan,
 and some 
Pa∣godes
 or Temples, towards Evening came to 
Guliaen,
 where they reposed that Night.


The next day being Snowy and Rainy, they rested themselves in expectati∣on of fair Weather.


The twenty third the Skye being pretty well clear'd, notwithstanding the Mountains were still cover'd with Snow, the Ambassador leaving 
Guliaen
 pro∣ceeded on his Journey, and in the Morning pass'd over a high Hill, and so through 
Huysjounton, Hangsion, Outangay, Ontongne, Kieumoe,
 and 
Ousalinga;
 from whence they saw divers 
Pagodes
 built on the Declivings of several Mountains. In the Afternoon they travell'd in sight of the Villages 
Movana, Loutiatona, Go∣linga, Longkia, Kiekova,
 and divers Hamlets and Temples, of which very many stand all along this Road; amongst whom they saw one on the top of the Mountain 
Liougtouw,
 and call'd by the same Name.


Here are the utmost Limits of the Province of 
Fokien
 and 
Chekiang,
 or 
Chet∣chiang,
 between both which the foremention'd Temple stands; so that now leaving 
Fokien,
 they entred into that of 
Chekiang,
 and going on came towards the Evening to a Village call'd 
Limathova,
 having that day travell'd five Leagues, four in the Territory of 
Fokien,
 and one in that of 
Chekiang.


This Province, though less than others, yet exceeds all the rest in fertility
 of Soil, delightfulness of Prospects and Riches, beginning in the South under twenty seven Degrees and five Minutes Northern Latitude, and extending Northerly to thirty one Degrees and twenty five Minutes, a Tract of sixty five Leagues, the greatest breadth from East to West being almost of the same length. It borders Easterly on the Sea, where the shortest Cut is to 
Iapan,
 and not above a days Sailing, as some say, with a fresh Gale of Wind; in the South and South-West, upon 
Fokien;
 in the West and North, upon 
Nanking,
 and like∣wise touches with a small part upon 
Kiangsi.
 It is divided into eleven great
 Counties, almost as large as some Provinces (for one of them being 
Hancheufu,
 and the chiefest of them, is ample and powerful enough to be a Province or


Kingdom) 
viz. Hangcheufu, Kiahingfu, Hucheugfu, Nienchufu, Kinhoafu, Kieucheufu, Chucheufu, Xaohiugfu, Ningpofu, Taicuheufu,
 and 
Vencheufu,
 having several great and small Towns, to the number of eighty three, belonging to them, be∣sides unwall'd Places, and an incredible number of Castles and populous Villages.


The chief Tract of Land call'd 
Hangcheufu,
 borders Northerly on 
Hucheufu,
 and 
Kianhingfu;
 in the East, at the River 
Chee,
 between 
Kianhingfu
 and 
Xao∣hingfu;
 in the South, at 
Nienchufu;
 and in the West, at 
Nanking.


In ancient times this County belong'd to the Vice-Roy of 
V.
 and was afterwards possess'd by the King of 
Cu,
 and by the Family of 
Chin
 nam'd 
Cien∣tang:
 by the Emperor 
Sui
 it was first styl'd 
Hangcheu;
 by the Family 
Tang, Iuhang;
 by 
Sung, Lingan;
 but the 
Taimingian
 Family restor'd this Country to its old Name.


This Division contains eight Cities, of which 
Hancheu
 is the chiefest, the rest▪ are 
Huining, Tiuquang, Inlang, Liugany, Yuum, Sinching,
 and 
Changhoa.


The second County call'd 
Kiahingfu,
 every where water'd with Rivers and Lakes, borders in the East, upon the Sea; in the South, upon a part of the Ocean, and part of 
Hangcheufu;
 Westward at 
Hucheufu;
 and in the North, at 
Sucheufu
 and 
Sungkiangfu,
 the Territory of 
Nanking,
 and a part of the Lake call'd 
Tai.


This Shire contains six Cities, 
viz. Kiahing, Kiaxeny, Hayeni, Pinghu, Cungte,
 and 
Tungchiang.


The Metropolis 
Kiahing
 was formerly a small City, and subject to 
Sucheu;
 but growing in Riches and Greatness in the Reign of the 
Taimingian
 Family, it was made the Head City, or Metropolis, and chang'd its former Name 
Siucheu
 to 
Kiahing.


The City 
Kiahang,
 being the most Northern of the whole Province, lies as if it were Moated about with Rivulets of Water, full of stately and well built Stru∣ctures, flourishing with variety of its own Product, having in all Places Riches and Plenty. All the Streets of the City are Arch'd, under which they walk as in a 
Piatzo,
 or Exchange, free from Wind and Weather, and sheltred from Sun and Rain. Without the City are several Triumphal Arches erected; and on the West side near the River, in one peculiar Place which they Sail by with their Ships or Vessels, stand sixteen of these Arches in a Square, all built of Marble. Athwart the River stands a Bridge of Marble, with many Arches, seventy Paces long, and likewise a Tower thrusting forth towards the Skye, nine Pinacles or Spires. All the Shores without the City are wharfed with square Free-stone; of which also the lesser Bridges are made that lead over them: There are forty more fair Bridges leading to several parts of the City, besides a great many less, scarce to be numbred.


The third County being 
Hucheufu
 borders in the East with 
Kiahingfu;
 in the South, upon 
Hangcheufu;
 in the West, verges the Province of 
Nanking;
 in the North, at the Lake 
Tai.


This was formerly a Kingdom of it self, and nominated 
Tung;
 which first was possess'd by King 
V.
 and afterwards by 
Ine,
 then by 
Cu.


The Family 
Cyn
 gave this County and its Head City the Name of 
Uching;
 that of 
Tang
 call'd it 
Hucheu,
 that is, 
The City of the Lake,
 because of the neigh∣boring Lake 
Tai;
 for 
Hu
 signifies a Lake, and 
Cheu
 a City: the Royal Line of 
Sung
 nam'd it 
Chaoking;
 but the 
Taimingian
 Family restor'd the old Name 
Hucheu.


Here are five Temples, the chiefest of which stands within the City Walls: they were founded in honor of the five first Emperors.


This Division contains six Cities, 
viz. Hucheu, Changhing, Tecing, Hiaosung, Unkang,
 and 
Gankie. Hucheu
 is not onely the chief, but reckon'd one of the biggest, and flourishes in Trade and Riches: It is adorn'd with many beauti∣ful and large Buildings.


The fourth 
Niencheufu,
 is a mountainous and rough Countrey, and borders Eastward on the River 
Chee;
 South, at 
Kincheufu;
 the West, on 
Nanking;
 and the North, on 
Hancheufu.
 It was formerly call'd 
Suntu;
 next by the Family of 
Han, Lecheu;
 and lastly by that of 
Sung, Niencheufu.
 It contains six Cities, 
Niencheu, Xungan, Tungliu, Suigan, Xeuchang,
 and 
Fuentui.


The Metropolis 
Niencheu
 stands upon a rising Ground, between the 
Singan
 and 
Chee;
 which two Navigable Rivers before the Walls conjoyn their Waters.


The fifth 
Kinhoafu,
 touches North and East upon 
Xaohingfu
 and 
Taiche
fu;
 in the South, upon 
Chuche
fu;
 in the West, conterminates with 
Kincheufu;
 and the remainder bounded by the River 
Chee.


King 
Loang
 call'd this with its Metropolis first by the Name of 
Kinhoa,
 that is, 
Venus Flower;
 for the 
Chineses
 say that the Goddess 
Venus
 striving here with another which they call 
Vuniu,
 (that is a Masculine Woman, and the same which the Poets call 
Pallas
) a Flower; which obtaining, they styl'd her 
King∣sing,
 that is, 
Golden Star,
 and the City receiv'd the Name of 
Kinhoa,
 that is, 
Venus Flower.


This City 
Kinhoa
 was formerly very populous, and full of well built Edi∣fices; but in the late 
Tartar
 War, in which they held out a considerable time, was in a manner buried in Ruines: yet nevertheless it is almost re-erected, and especially one Stone Bridge on the West side hath obtain'd its former lustre.


This County hath eight Cities, 
Kinhoa, Lanki, Tungagang, Yui, Iungkang, Vuy,
 
Pukiang,
 and 
Tanki.


Near the small City 
Lanki
 you may see another Bridge over the 
Chee,
 some few years since re-built, and now much better than the former burnt by the 
Tartars.


The sixth call'd 
Kincheufu,
 being the most Southern of all this Province,
 borders in the East at 
Kinhoafu;
 in the South-East, at 
Chincheufu;
 in the South-West, upon 
Fokien;
 in the West, on that of 
Nanking;
 and in the North, at 
Niencheufu.


In the time of the Kings Reigns, this Province with the two former suffer'd divers great Changes and Alterations: the Family 
Cyn,
 after they had taken all 
China,
 call'd its Metropolis 
Taimo; Han
 nam'd it 
Singuan;
 and the Family 
Tang
 gave it the Name which it now hath. It contains five Cities, 
viz. Kin∣cheu, Lungyeu, Changxan, Kiangzan,
 and 
Kaihoa.


The City 
Kincheu
 lies on the Eastern Shore of the River 
Changyo,
 three days Journey from 
Fokien,
 between steep and troublesom Mountains to pass over.


Paulus Venetus
 calls this City 
Kugui,
 according to the 
Tartar
 pronunciation, (with whom he travell'd in an Embassy thither) who in stead of 
Cheu,
 say 
Gui,
 both Words signifying 
Great City;
 wherefore 
Paulus
 may easily have made 
Kugui
 to be 
Kuicheu.


The seventh Division or Shire 
Chucheufu,
 inviron'd with several high Moun∣tains,
 borders in the East at 
Veucheufu;
 in the South-West, at 
Fokien;
 in the North-West, at 
Kuicheufu;
 in the North, upon the County 
Kinhaofu.


In the time of the Kings this Countrey was also subject to various Revolu∣tions and strange Alterations: The Family 
Tang
 gave it the Name of 
Hocheu;
 the 
Taimingian,
 that of 
Chucheu.


This 
Chucheufu
 contains ten Cities, of which 
Cheucheu
 is the Metropolis; the
 rest are 
Cingtien, Ciniquun, Sungyang, Sunchang, Lunguven, Kingyven, Iunko, Sivenping,
 and 
Kingning,
 besides three famous Temples.


The City of 
Chincheu,
 which is very populous, lieth upon the River 
Tung,
 which falls into the Sea, and able to carry Ships of good burthen.


The eighth Tract of Land, being 
Xaohingfu,
 borders in the East, with 
Ning∣pofu;
 North, upon the River 
Cientang;
 in the West, at that of 
Chee,
 and oppo∣site to 
Hangcheufu;
 in the South, at 
Kinhoafu
 and 
Taicheufu.


The Family 
Sung
 first gave this Countrey the present Name 
Xoahing;
 but it was formerly by the Family 
Tang
 call'd 
Iucheu.
 It reckons seven Cities,
 
Xaohing, Siaoxan, Chuki, Yuyae, Xangyu, Xing, Sinchang.


The City of 
Xoahing,
 though not so big, yet in handsom Buildings exceeds the Metropolis; being seated in a pleasant Plain Moated with fresh Water, ve∣ry much resembling 
Venice,
 the Water gliding through every Street, which are all curiously Pav'd, and the Walls of the Houses all built of Free-Stone, which in 
China
 is very rare, and scarce to be seen in any other Place in the whole Empire. The Bridges also over which they pass the River and Lake, are all built in the same manner, being very numerous. The Banks of the River, which extends it self to three days Journey, are on each side wharf'd and wall'd in with Stone of the Quarre: at the end of which appears a great Dam, that receives and keeps the Waters, which swelling to a convenient heighth, Vessels that come thither, are with little help floated over into another Stream.


This Current serves onely to bring small Vessels up to the City 
Ningpo,
 for the great ones go about by Sea.


Near this City are also many Triumphal Arches; for building of which they have ready accommodation, because the Quarres that serve all 
China
 are close by their Doors.


The ninth Division call'd 
Ningpofu,
 borders in the East with the Sea; in the
 West, with 
Xaochingfu;
 South, upon a River flowing between this and the County 
Tancheufu.


The Kings 
Iue
 gave this and its Metropolis the Name of 
Iungtung;
 the Fami∣ly of 
Yang, Nungcheu;
 those of 
Sung, Kingchyven;
 but at last by the 
Taimingian, Ningpo,
 that is, 
Reconciler of Strife.


The Kings of 
Han
 brought this Countrey under the Territory of 
Huiki.


Ningpofu
 hath five Cities, 
viz, Ningpo, Cuki, Funghoa, Finghai,
 and 
Siangxan.


Not far from 
Ningpo
 lies a Promontory, which the 
Portuguese
 formerly very
 much frequented, who corrupted the Name to 
Liampo.


Some say, that from this Point in serene Weather they can discern the Mountains of 
Iapan;
 whereas the most exact 
Chinese
 Cards or Maps make the Sea much broader than to discover any such Prospect.


The Metropolis 
Ningpo,
 situated close by the River 
In,
 boasts store of hand∣som Buildings. On whose Eastern Shore stand several Triumphal Arches, and two Steeples with seven Galleries one over another: The Banks of the said River are all rais'd of Free-Stone; at the end the Water is also stopp'd with a Stone Dam, over which they hale the Vessels into a larger Channel.


In the little City 
Cuky
 are two Bridges, one with Stone Supporters, and great Pieces of Timber three hundred Rods long: another which is very high, and all of Stone, stands on three Arches.


The tenth County call'd 
Taicheufu,
 being a great Tract of Land, verges
 Eastward with the Sea; Southward, with 
Vencheufu;
 Westward, with 
Kinhoa∣f
;
 Northward, with 
Xaohingfu
 and 
Ningpofu.


In the time of the Kings this Countrey belong'd to 
V.
 afterwards to 
Iue;
 but was at last by the Family 
Cyn
 brought under the Territory of 
Minching.
 The Family 
Han
 gave it the Name of 
Changan; Tang,
 of 
Haicheu;
 and soon after
 that of 
Taicheu,
 which it retains to this day.


This Countrey comprehends six Cities, 
viz. Taicheu, Hoanguien, Tientai, Cien∣kiu,
 
Ninghai, Taiping.


This City 
Taicheu
 is situate on a Hill, lying on the East side of the River 
San.


The eleventh call'd 
Veucheufu,
 conterminates in the East at the Sea; in the
 South, with the Territory of 
Fokien;
 in the West, at 
Cucheufu;
 in the North, at 
Taicheufu.


This Countrey is for the most part very mountainous, but hath in the South, before you approach the Hills of 
Fokien,
 a large and spacious Plain.


Formerly this Countrey belong'd to the Kings of 
Iue;
 afterwards to those of 
V.
 King 
Loang
 gave it the Name of 
Iungkia;
 and was by the House of 
Tang
 first call'd 
Tunkia;
 and soon after 
Voucheu;
 by 
Sung, Xuigan;
 and lastly by the 
Taimingian, Veucheu.


This Province 
Veucheu
 possesses six Cities, 
viz. Veucheu, Xuigan, Locing, Ping,
 
Yang,
 and 
Taixium.


The City of 
Veucheu,
 seated on the River 
Iungkia,
 because it is also like the Metropolis 
Hangcheu,
 standing on a Morass Soil, and adorn'd with many fair Edifices, is by the Inhabitants call'd 
Little Hancheu.


The City is very populous, and a Residence for many Merchants, whose Ships find good and safe Harbors in the great River 
Iungkia;
 the Sea ebbing and flowing up to the City Walls.


Near the Sea-shore in this Territory are fifteen Garisons, built against the
 Incursions of the 
Iapanners,
 and safeguard of the Sea, 
viz. in Veucheufu, Nan, Ningtung, Sining, Huigan, Tunchi, Cumen, Puohin, Xetic;
 in 
Taicheufu, Sinho, Cioki, Ninghai; in Ningpofu
 onely 
Tinghai;
 in 
Kiahinfu, Hiacing, Kinexan,
 and 
Chincam.


Several Isles neighbor this Countrey, inhabited by Husband-men and
 Fisher-men, of which 
Cheuxan
 is the greatest; the next are 
Chanque, Chaopao,
 besides several other lesser. 
Cheuxan
 lies directly East from the Metropolis 
Hancheu,
 opposite to the River 
Cientang,
 in thirty one and thirty two Degrees Northern Latitude, thirteen Leagues from the Main Land, and hath in length from North to South sixteen, and in breadth eight Leagues. When antiently the 
Chinese
 King 
Lui,
 worsted by the 
Tartars,
 and flying with his scatter'd For∣ces to this Isle, from all Parts many of the 
Chineses
 flock'd thither, so that ever since, what was before inconsiderable, hath been a populous and well planted Isle, for they number in this small Isle above seventy Towns and Villages, most of them verging the Sea in such Places where Inlets and Bays make convenient Harbors: neither wants their King a considerable Fleet, which keep his Coast safe from the Incursions and Landing of the 
Tartars
 Horse, wherein they are most formidable. And the 
Tartars
 as much in awe of the Islanders, keep con∣tinual Guard in the Fort of 
Tinghay,
 rais'd on the Main Land, with a Fleet of Crusing 
Chineses.


Before the Province 
Taicheufu,
 near the Garison 
Cioki,
 lies an Island call'd 
Ychoan,
 which is, 
Precious Circle,
 so call'd for its convenient Havens, the whole


being in a manner so surrounded with Mountains; it breaks off all Winds, leaving onely a Gap, or Entrance for Ships to come in at.


The whole Province of 
Chekiang
 is every where cut through with Rivers, Rivulets, and murmuring Streams, some brought in by Art, others of their own accord.


Most of the Channels of those Rivers which run Southward, fall in such order, as if Nature on purpose had contriv'd their Course; so that the Tra∣veller may pass through the whole Territory either by Land or Water which way he will, still supply'd with all conveniencies.


The River 
Che,
 from whence this Countrey hath its Name, runs from the
 South to the North, and divides it exactly in the middle, in an Eastern and Western 
Canton:
 but it changeth its Name at 
Hangcheu,
 and there is call'd 
Ci∣entang;
 and again where it takes its original out of the Mountains in the Pro∣vince 
Hoeicheufu,
 they name it 
Singan.


The eighteenth day of the eighth Moon (which is our 
October
) a prodigi∣gious Spring-tyde happens worthy of admiration; for it is onely on that day, and begins to flow exactly at four a Clock in the Afternoon, and comes with a Head at the first appearance, high and strangely mounted above the Waters, and suddenly turns Topsi-turvy what ever either by neglect or care∣lesness lies in the Way; roaring extremely in his ascent, beyond the loud mur∣mur of Cataracts or Water-breaches, to which, as a wonderful spectacle, where they have secure places, the Magistrates, Strangers, and a great number of Peo∣ple resort to see (though horrid) the annual Spectacle.


The River 
Ho
 takes its Original near 
Cinijuw,
 the third substitute City to the seventh Province 
Chucheufu,
 and from thence follows by the Metropolis 
Kuihoa
 to the City 
Lanki,
 where it disembogues in the Stream 
Che.


The Rivulet 
Lung
 begins Westward of the City 
Seuchang,
 from whence it flows to 
Chucheu,
 where it cometh with its Waters near the River 
Tung,
 and there is call'd 
Vonxa.


In the Prime County 
Hancheufu,
 near the City 
Changhoa,
 on the Mountain 
Cienking,
 is a Lake, though not very great, yet famous for the Golden-colour'd Fishes taken there, which the 
Chineses
 from their colour call, 
Kinyu.


In the same Shire, Eastward from the Metropolis, lies the famous Lake 
Si∣kin;
 between which and the City Walls is a fair Street, Pav'd with Stone, and almost a Mile long, where they divertise themselves, in stead of Walks of Plea∣sure. The whole Lake Wall'd in, comprises about five 
English
 Miles in compass, and upon the adjacent Hills, (supply'd with various Rivulets and Fountains) appear several Temples, Palaces, Cloysters, Colledges, and the like. The Banks of the Lake, which is the Foot of the Mountain, are Pav'd on the top with Free-Stone, and ath wart the Lake lie several Bridges, so that they may walk over it, and see the Lake in all places. The foremention'd Ways are all Plan∣ted with divers shading Trees, and accommodated with Benches, Arbors, and the like, for the conveniency of such as walk there, when they are weary to sit down and repose. The Water in the Lake being so translucent and clear, that they may see the smallest Stone in the bottom.


This Lake hath no Out or In-let for Vessels to pass, but only a Sluce, by which the Water swoln too high by assiduous Showres, is discharg'd: Yet ne∣vertheless, it bears many Pleasure-Boats, built on purpose, which may rather be call'd Golden floating Palaces, being so richly Gilt, and also curiously Pain∣ted; in which they accustom to keep their great Feasts, Revels, and other de∣lightful Pastimes.


These Vessels thus furnish'd, Sail about the Lake without fear of Wrack or Tempest, so that it is no wonder, why the 
Chineses
 call this place and City 
A Delightful Garden,
 or 
Earthly Paradise.


In the County of 
Kincheufu,
 near the City 
Kaihoa,
 is a little Lake call'd 
Pehiai,
 from the white Crabs which it produceth, for 
Pehiai
 signifies 
White Crabs.


In the Territory of 
Ningpofu,
 near the City of 
Tunghoa,
 appears 
Yapou
 a small
 Pool, but very deep, whose Water, if the 
Chinese
 Writers may be believ'd, has this quality, that when they have a mild and prudent Governor, it becomes much clearer than Christal; but if a Tyrant or an Oppressor of the People, dark and Cloudy.


In the County of 
Kiahingfu,
 the 
Chineses
 catch a Bird in Harvest which they
 call 
Hoangcio,
 that is, 
Yellow Bird,
 which being kill'd, they steep in Wine made of Rice, and is sold as a Dainty all the Year.


The Territory of 
Ningpofu
 hath by reason of its nearness to the Sea, great plen∣ty of Fish, which they dry in the Sun without Salting. They also have abun∣dance of Oysters, Crabs, and Lobsters, with which they supply the whole Em∣pire of 
China.
 The 
Shepherd Fish
 they catch all the year, and in the beginning of the Spring, another Fish call'd 
Hoang,
 that is yellow, which will not keep an
 hour out of the Water without tainting. But because the 
Chineses
 account them a great Dainty, and an excellent Fish, they preserve them with Ice, and so bring them to the Market.


The Countrey of 
Chekiang
 abounds with Tygers; those on the Mountains
 near 
Kutien,
 do no hurt to Humane Creatures; whereas on the contrary, those that frequent the Neighboring Woods are very Ravenous and Wild, which ta∣ken and brought to the foremention'd Mountains, become tame and innocent as the former.


In a Pond of about two hundred Paces in Circumference, lying on Mount 
Sienking,
 in the County of 
Hiangchefue,
 the 
Chineses
 catch Fish of a Gold Co∣lour, wherefore they call them 
Kinyu,
 for 
Kin
 signifies 
Gold,
 and 
Yu, Fish
) with a bright and glistering Skin; but chiefly their Backs are speckled as with Gold; they are never bigger than a Mans Finger, and have a three forked Tail, but not dangerous; the 
Chineses
 account them as a great rarity, preserving them in their Houses and Gardens, in several Vessels made for that purpose. The Grandees often take these Fishes with their own Hands, which in their presence (as if they knew who was their Lord, and what a pleasure they did to their owners, by sometimes shewing themselves) often play, and leap up and down above the Water. One of them though so small, costs commonly three or four Crowns.


In the eleventh County 
Veucheufu,
 are a strange kind of small Oysters, which
 are sow'd there in Marshy Grounds; for taking the Oysters they first dry, then stamp them small, which Powder they cast up and down the Fields like Seed, from whence grow other Oysters of a most delicious taste.


Through all the Countrey are plenty of Swine, Sheep, Poultry, and Fowl both tame and wild.


In the County of 
Kiahing,
 belonging to the Province 
Chekiang,
 grows in
 standing Waters, a round Fruit call'd 
Peu,
 which is not much bigger than a Chestnut; the Kernel lies cover'd with a grey Skin, but appears very White in the middle, full of Juyce, and of a pleasing taste, somewhat harder than an ordinary Apple, and tartish: If you put a piece of Copper with this in your Mouth, it will so mollifie the Mettal, that you may chew it with the Fruit, as we do Bread with our Meat.


In the County of 
Kinhaofu
 grows a small Tree with a Flower, which the
 
Portuguese
 in 
India
 call 
Mogorin;
 it is very white, not unlike the 
Iasmyn,
 though much fuller of Leaves, and of a more pleasing scent; so that a few of these Flowers perfume a whole House, wherefore it is not undeservedly held in great esteem by the 
Chineses,
 who in the Winter preserve the Tree in Pots fill'd with Earth. In the same Countrey grows another Plant, call'd 
Kieuyen,
 which
 produces a kind of Fat, of which like Tallow, very good and white Candles are made, not Greasing the Hands when touch'd like the ordinary Tallow Candles.


This Tree is of a pretty bigness, and in Leaves and shape not much unlike a Pear-Tree; it bears white Blossoms, which when fallen off, a round Cod succeeds as big as a Cherry, cover'd with a blackish thin Skin; under which is a white Pulp, which when grown Ripe, and the Skin breaks, appears; these being pull'd off, are boyl'd in Water, which melting, the Body turns to Fat, and when grown cold, becomes hard like perfect Tallow: From the remain∣ing Kernels, they Extract very good Lamp-Oyl, so that this Plant supplies them, both with Lamps and Candle light. In the Winter, the Leaves become red, which looks very pleasant, because many of them growing together, shew like a blushing Wood. Lastly, the Leaves falling off are a most ex∣cellent Food, because of their fatness, for Sheep and Cows, which by Eating them, thrive in an extraordinary manner.


In the County of 
Chucheufu,
 near the City 
Kingning,
 grow great Thickets of Canes and Rushes in the River 
Lupeu,
 by the 
Chineses
 with a general name call'd 
Che,
 (for there are several sorts of them) and by the 
Indians, Mambu,
 which the 
Portuguese
 have turn'd to 
Bambu,
 and the 
Netherlanders
 to 
Bamboes.
 There also grows in most places all manner of Herbage and Grain, and in the County of 
Kinhoafu
 many great Plums, which they Transport to other parts.


In the seventh Shire, being 
Chucheufu
 are many Woods and Wildernesses of Pine-Trees, whence the 
Chineses
 have their Timber for the Building of Houses and Ships: They say, that near the City 
Sunghiang,
 that is, 
Earth of Pine,
 there are such thick ones found, that eighty Men cannot Fathom; nay, some whose hollow Wombs contain thirty or forty Men.


In the County of 
Ninchufu,
 their Hills produce store of Copper Mines.


In 
Kinhoafu,
 they make the best Drink that is in all 
China
 of Rice and Water; and in the same place are also the chiefest Gammons of Bacon, which bear a great esteem through all the Empire. There is likewise a sort of Gum, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Cie,
 or 
Cia;
 and in the 
Portuguese, Cairo,
 which drops out of the Trees, and is very like Turpentine; the 
Chineses
 gather and colour it how they please, the best bears a Gold colour, and the next to that Black; be∣fore it is quite dry, it yields an infectious Smoak or Damp, which causes a swelling in the Faces of those that are not us'd to it.


The curiosity and excellency of this shining Gum, 
Europe
 hath long since been acquainted with by those Chests and Coffers brought thither out of 
Iapan
 and 
China,
 for they both colour all their Wood-work over with it, and also their Ships, Houses, Tables, Bedsteds, and other Houshold-stuff.


The Revenue which this Province pays yearly to the Emperor amounts to
 what may seem an incredible sum of Money, 
viz.
 two hundred fifty one thou∣sand two hundred ninety nine Bags of Rice; three hundred and seventy thou∣sand four hundred sixty six Pound of raw Silk; two thousand five hundred seventy four Roles of Silk Stuffs; seventy eight hundred thousand four hun∣dred


ninety one Bundles of Straw; besides the ordinary Customs paid to the two Custom-Houses, standing in the Metropolis 
Hangcheu:
 First, for the Mer∣chandize in the North part of the City. Secondly, for the Wood in the South part; for the 
Chineses
 use much Wood for the building of their Houses, Ships, Coffins, and the like; and the Wood-Merchants being vast rich People, pay no small part of their gain to the Emperor. Moreover, this Province sends yearly four Imperial Ships, call'd 
Lung-ychuen
 to the Emperors Court, laden with Silk Clothes or Stuffs, wrought after a peculiar manner.


These Silk Stuffs are interwove with Gold and Silver, and also with the Pictures of the Bird call'd 
Funguang,
 Dragons, and the like: None are per∣mitted to wear these Stuffs, but only the Emperor, and those of Imperial Blood; unless his Majesty out of a peculiar favor, gives them leave; and these badges of Clothes distinguish them from meaner People, as much as our Badges of the Cross and Garter, or the like, be marks of Noble Orders.


There are those that reckon the yearly Revenue of this Province to amount to above fifteen Millions of Crowns, fifteen hundred thousand Duckets, or se∣ven hundred and fifty thousand Pound 
Sterling.


BUt to return again to our Ambassador, who proceeded on his Journey the
 twenty ninth of 
February,
 travelling over the Mountains of 
Iakoling,
 which because of their steep ascent make carriage difficult and dangerous. On the tops and sides stood several 
Pagodes
 or Temples, built after a strange man∣ner, and surrounded with Trees: But at last leaving them behind, they past through the Villages 
Sambathova, Sagebatauw, Longhia, Longzango, Poangtiou,
 and 
Hachova,
 where they were drawn upon a float of Canes, over a River, which divided 
Hachova
 into a Southern and Northern part, in which last the 
Hollanders
 took their repose that Night, having that day gained a League and a half to the North.


The twenty fourth in the Morning, leaving 
Hachova,
 they travell'd the fol∣lowing part of the day through 
Kolontja, Quanimg,
 and 
Souzinhova,
 and in the af∣ternoon came to 
Pinhoea,
 where 
Putmans, Vander Does,
 and the rest that travel'd be∣fore, met the Ambassador, and told him of their safe arrival there the day pre∣ceding, and also that the Goods design'd for Presents were already Shipt in twenty seven Vessels, and that others lay ready to take in him, and the rest of the Goods: Whereupon, 
Van Hoorn
 was no sooner come into the Village before∣mention'd, but he gave order for all his Necessaries to be Shipt off immedi∣ately, and likewise caus'd the Oxen to be Imbarqu'd, that they might go for∣ward on their Journey the next Morning. The Horses were forc'd to go five Leagues further by Land, because there wanted convenient Vessels to carry them.


The twenty sixth about Noon, after all things were ready, they set Sail from 
Puchoeu,
 going North-East up the River 
Chang,
 with a Fleet of about forty Vessels, amongst which were ten that carry'd the 
Mandarins
 Guides.


About three a Clock, they came to the City 
Tjanchia,
 otherwise call'd 
Chang∣xa;
 and having 
Sunthia,
 a pretty Village on their Larboard, cast Anchor that Night about three quarters of a League from 
Tjanchia,
 before a Sandy Plain, ha∣ving gain'd two Leagues that afternoon.


The twenty seventh in the Morning, they Weigh'd, and pass'd between two Towers adorn'd with seven Galleries, one over another, built after the 
Chinese













manner, for a safeguard of that place; and likewise by the Villages 
Poetza, Sangsa, Singhia, Mocthauw, Ponvasa, Vanksivoe,
 and 
Vansoe;
 the first four on their Starboard, and the last on their Larboard: And in the afternoon Sail∣ing by eight Villages more, standing on both sides of the River, (of which the Pilots knew not the Names) they arriv'd at 
Sinkkia
 in the Evening, where they staid all Night, having gone that day with the Currents on several Courses above five Leagues.


The twenty eighth in the Morning about Day-break, they set Sail again, and at nine a Clock Landed at the City 
Kitsjouw,
 or 
Kutchieuw,
 otherwise call'd 
Kiucheu;
 here they chang'd their Vessels.


The first of 
March,
 all the Goods were Ship'd again into other Vessels. At
 Noon, two private Persons of the City presented the Ambassador with some fresh Provisions; in return for which, they receiv'd six Ells of 
Gingerline
 co∣lour'd Cloth, which 
Putmans
 carry'd them; for which, they again in the Even∣ing sent twelve Tail of ready Money, and three Silver Cups; but the Ambas∣sadors modestly refus'd the Presents, and thanking, sent them back.


Kiucheu,
 the sixth City of the Province 
Chekiang,
 lying on the Eastern-Shore
 of the River 
Chang,
 three days Journey by Land from the Territory 
Tiokien,
 over steep and difficult Mountains, seems pretty large, yet but meanly Inha∣bited, and of small Concourse, and so having little or no Trade, yet the Streets are handsomely Pav'd, and all Provisions very cheap.


The second in the Morning, they left 
Kiucheu,
 and about nine a Clock pass'd by 
Sigajum,
 a Village lying on the right side, at the going up the River, in a pleasant place, surrounded with Arable Grounds: The remaining part of the day, they Sail'd by abundance of Villages standing along the River, a little way up into the Countrey, and in the Dusk of the Evening arriv'd at 
Loujujenne,
 where they staid that Night, having that Day gain'd five Leagues on several Courses.


From 
Loujujenne,
 having gotten two 
Coelies
 to Tow every Barque, they Weigh'd again the third in the Morning; and coming a little way from the Village, they saw a stately Tower built after the 
Chinese
 manner, with jutting Stories.


The Countrey every where well Manur'd, was also full of populous Villa∣ges. In the afternoon they came to 
Lanqui,
 where their Goods and Persons were again to be put aboard other Barques. Soon after their arrival at this place, the Governor came to welcome the Ambassador, and present him with some fresh Provisions. This being the first Town where the 
Hollanders
 had receiv'd so much civility from the Governors; their Journey that day was three Leagues.


The Shipping of the Goods into other Vessels was referr'd till the fourth, because of the Rainy Weather. In the afternoon, the Lord Ambassador enter∣tain'd the Governor, who in the mean while sent him in a Calf and a fat Wea∣ther, and other Provisions, besides four Vessels of their Beer. This 
Mandarin
 shew'd himself very courteous to the 
Hollanders,
 for which kindnesses he was presented with five Ells of fine Cloth.


The fifth in the Morning, the adjacent Hills were all cover'd with Snow; but the Weather growing fair, their Goods were put aboard, and all things made ready to go away the next day.


The sixth, they left 
Lancqui
 before day.


This place, though not large, yet makes a handsome shew, being well built, and very populous, occasion'd by the many Trading Vessels that come thi∣ther.


It is pleasantly seated all along the River side: Hither abundance of Al∣lom is brought from 
Humsie.


In the forenoon, they pass'd by the City 
Sansjenne,
 a League and a half from
 
Lacqui:
 On the left side as they went up the River, the Shore near the Water rises very high, and not inhabited, but in the Valleys stand some few Houses and Villages.


In the Evening they came to 
Ponkousong,
 where they staid all Night, leaving the City 
Niencheufu
 on their left Hand a quarter of a League, having that day gain'd five Leagues.


The next Morning, two hours before day, the 
Mandarin
 Guides caus'd the Drum to be beaten, that all might be ready to be gone immediately, which they did; but the Vessel in which the Ambassador was, struck upon a Sand, so that the rest which were behind, were ready to fall foul upon his Ship, such was the force of the Current; but day-light coming on, they got off again, and pass'd by divers Villages, Temples, and Hamlets, and also by a 
Pagode,
 in which stands the Image of a Philosopher, call'd 
Nienchlin.


With the Dusk of the Evening, they arriv'd at 
Tungh,
 where they staid that Night, having gotten seven Leagues that day, by Steering several Courses.


The eighth in the Morning they set Sail again, and in the forenoon saw on their left Hand the River 
Tu,
 which glides towards the City 
Cinsung,
 or 
Sinc∣hung,
 which having pass'd it, divides into two Branches, and at last discharges his Water into the Grand 
Che.


This City being the seventh, in order to the Metropolis 
Hancheu,
 lies on the
 North side of the 
Tu,
 pretty close built, and surrounded with Plow'd Lands.


In the Evening they arriv'd at the City 
Fojang,
 or 
Fujang,
 scituate on the West
 side of the River 
Che,
 and Northward from the Stream 
Fuchun,
 which takes its Original a little Westward from the City 
Liengan,
 and joyneth its Waters South∣ward from 
Fujang,
 with those of the 
Che.
 The Ambassador having gotten five Leagues forwarder on his Journey that day, lodg'd in 
Fujang
 that right.


The ninth in the Morning, they left 
Fujang
 before day.


Here the River 
Che
 is about two 
English
 Miles broad, yet hath but few Villa∣ges on its Banks, most of them standing more up into the Countrey, by rea∣son of his overflowing in great Rains; every where Manur'd and Planted with Fruit-Trees.


In the Evening they arriv'd at the South Suburb of 
Hangcheu,
 or 
Hancsieuw,
 call'd 
Chankeeuw,
 half a Leagues distance from 
Hangcheu;
 here all the Goods were forc'd to be Landed, then carry'd to the North Suburb of 
Hangcheu,
 where they were again Shipt, so that they staid there the following Night.


The next Morning, being the tenth, 
Huilavja,
 one of the 
Mandarin
 Guides, went to acquaint the Governor of the City with the 
Netherlanders
 coming, and to desire Barques for their further Voyage: He returning again in the Evening, told the Ambassador, That the foremention'd Governor intended to invite his Excellency the next day to Dinner, and that the 
Pinghtouw,
 or third Person in Office would do the like the day after, and give speedy Order for the prepa∣ring of the Barques.


The same day, the 
Mandarin
 Guides, for the trouble they had already had, and to oblige them the more, were by the Ambassador, each of them, presen∣ted with five Ells of Cloth.


The next Morning, being the eleventh, the Ambassador and his Council
 considering, that the Governor would that day invite them to Dinner; and












also if they should obtain the free Trade, what good this person might do them, judg'd it convenient, if he did invite them to take and present him with the following Gifts.


Ten Ells of Red Cloth, two Pieces of Perpetuanaes, four Pieces of Linnen, a Fowling-Piece, a pair of Pistols, two Sword Blades, two Perspective Glasses, and a String of Blood Coral.


But the Invitation came not that day, because 
Huilavja
 said a grand 
Tartar
 was come from 
Peking,
 with whom the Governor was in private consulting about State Affairs.


Some 
Mandarins
 coming to visit and welcome the Ambassadors, were kindly entertain'd by him. The same day, above six hundred Horse were Ferry'd over the River 
Che.


The twelfth in the Morning, the 
Pinghtouw,
 or third Person of State in 
Han∣cheu,
 which had the Command over all the Vessels, came aboard the Ambassa∣dor to bid him Welcome, and also present him with a fat Weather, a Porker, some Poultery, Rice, and other fresh Provisions; desiring to be excus'd for his delay in not coming to visit the Ambassador sooner, being hinder'd by some grand 
Mandarins,
 that were lately gone up from thence to 
Peking,
 who had taken all the greatest Vessels with them, yet he should be careful, that the Ambassador should be well Accommodated, and that he would willingly invite his Excel∣lency to Dinner, but durst not, before he had been at the Governors, but then he would be bold to desire him to come and be his Guest; for which kind proffers, he was civilly Entertain'd; and having seen the Horses and Oxen, he took his leave.


In the afternoon, the Interpreter 
Genko
 came to tell the 
Netherlanders,
 that the Governor of 
Hancheu
 had enquir'd of him how the Ambassador was plac'd at his Entertainment by the General in 
Hoksieu.


The next Morning, being the thirteenth, several Horses came to the Am∣bassadors
 Vessel, to fetch Him and his Retinue to the Governor's Court, whi∣ther he went in a stately Equipage; taking those Presents with them, which they resolv'd to give him two days before. Coming to his Palace, they were after a little stay brought to his Presence, and the Ambassador Welcom'd by the Governor; who said, this Embassy would be very pleasing to the Empe∣ror. Then he ask'd where the Pepper and 
Sandal-Wood
 grew? How big 
Hol∣land
 was? How far distant from 
China?
 If there was any Silk in 
Holland?
 and many more such Questions, to which his Excellency answer'd him according∣ly. Then the Tables being spread, they were desir'd to sit, and plentifully entertain'd.


Thus having spent some time, the Ambassador deliver'd him a Note of the foremention'd Presents, and with a Complement, desir'd him to accept them; which having read over, he excus'd himself, that he could not accept the Pre∣sents, because he had never done the 
Hollanders
 any such Service, as the Vice-Roy and General in 
Hoksieu
 had done. Moreover, That they would have enough to do, in giving Presents at 
Peking,
 for there, every one gap'd for some∣thing; and thereupon gave the Note again to the Interpreter 
Genko,
 which was again taken from him by one of the Governor's Secretaries which stood by him, and kept it. Whereupon the Ambassador desir'd, that the Governor would only please to accept of the Presents, as a sign of his good Inclination
 towards him; and that hereafter, an opportunity might present, wherein he might assist the 
Hollanders.
 Moreover, the Ambassador Commanded the In∣terpreter



Gemko
 to tell the Governor, and desire him in his behalf, That when any of the 
Netherland
 Ships should accidentally by Storms or Tempestuous Weather, be forc'd to put into this River, or to 
Ningpo,
 that he would please to look upon them as Friends, and be assisting to them. The Interpreter seeming not to understand it well, was again Commanded by the Ambassador to Interpret it right, or else he would get another that should do it: Where∣upon, telling it to his Highness, he made answer, That this was also the Em∣peror's Haven and Countrey, and his Imperial Majesty's Order should be ob∣serv'd in it: Moreover, he could not accept of the Presents, but he would con∣sider till the happy return from 
Peking.


A little after, the Ambassador giving him many thanks for his kind Enter∣tainment, took his leave; and upon the Governor's advice, he went to visit the 
Conbon
 of the City, who courteously receiv'd him with many Comple∣ments, and a Cup of Bean Broth.


No Questions of remark did he propose to the Ambassador, only he related, That in their eighth Moneth, (which is our 
October
) the last Year a Ship was at 
Priests Island,
 he desir'd to know whether it was a 
Dutch▪
 Man or not? To which the Ambassador reply'd, That he knew nothing of it, but that perhaps it might be a 
Hollander
 Sailing to 
Iapan:
 Whereupon taking his leave, the 
Con∣bon
 advis'd him to go and Complement the 
Tartar Manchu,
 who had the chief Command over all the 
Militia
 in 
Hancheu;
 whither he accordingly went, but could not get admittance, being excus'd by his indisposition, so that in the Evening he return'd again to his Vessels.


The twenty fourth in the Morning, the Ambassador writ Complementing Letters to the Governor, 
Conbon,
 and 
Manchu,
 and presented the two last with some Gifts, thereby to win their Favor and good Opinion; the Letter to the Chief Governor was to this effect:




THe Ambassador is much oblig'd to the Governor, for his generous Incli∣nation
 and Nobleness to him, and hopes to express his Thanks, more by Deeds than Words; to which he doubts not, but the Heavens will grant him a fit Opportunity. He desires his Highness to accelerate his Journey to 
Peking,
 with the 
Chinkon,
 that he may the sooner return and find him in good Health.




The 
Conbon
's Letter was to this purpose:




THat the Ambassador did not expect so soon to have had an occasion to
 present his Service to him, and desires he would be pleas'd to accept of these Presents, as a sign of his good Inclination, and for such his Favor, he shall exceedingly rejoyce.




That to the 
Manchu
 was of the same effect.


With these Letters was sent an Inventory of the Presents; those to the 
Con∣bon
 consisted in five Ells of Cloth, one piece of Perpetuanaes, two pieces of Linnen, one string of Amber, one piece of Amber, and two 
Rhinocerots
 Horns.


Those to the 
Manchu,
 two Knives with Gilded Hafts, one Fire-Lock, one Car∣bine, one string of Amber, one Quilt, and five Ells of Cloth.


These Letters and Inventories, 
Nobel
 and 
Vander Does
 were order'd to go to the several places, and deliver; but because of the Rainy Weather, it was referr'd.


Mean while, a 
Mandarin
 came with one of the 
Conbon
's Factors, to present the Ambassador in his Master's Name with two Hogs, two Sheep, four Geese,
 eight Hens, two Pots of Liquor, Rice, and some other Provisions, which the 
Netherlanders
 receiv'd with many Thanks, and judg'd it convenient, to deliver the Notes of the Presents to them, to give to 
eir Masters: But the Factor and the 
Mandarin
 being scrupulous to take it without some of the 
Netherlanders
 went with them; it was judg'd convenient since it still Rain'd very hard, and it being above an hours walk, to keep it till dry Weather, that then it might be carry'd with the rest, as before mention'd.


In the Evening, 
Hiulavja
 came to tell the 
Hollanders,
 that he had been with the Barques lying on the other side of the City, which were all ready, so that the Goods might be sent aboard the next Morning: If there should not be 
Coe∣lis
 or Porters enough to carry them all in one day, they should send away as many as they could, and leave the rest till the day after: Whereupon, the 
Hollanders
 gave immediate Order, for the getting of all things ready against the next Morning, yet they were hinder'd by the great Rain, the Ways being made (in a manner) unpassable thereby.


Mean while, the Ambassador considering the Prime Governors answer to his Motion about Ships having liberty to put in there in Stormy Weather, Pro∣pos'd to the Council, If it would not be for their advantage, to make a trial of it, and Order one of the Frigats, which from 
Batavia
 were expected at 
Hoksieu
 to come to 
Ningpo,
 with a Lading of such Goods, as they should think conve∣nient, to be Barter'd for Silk; and this trial in his judgment could never be made in a better time, than whilst they were there present: Whereupon it was concluded, that 
Nobel
 and the Secretary, when they carry'd the Letters to the Governor and 
Conbon,
 they should again speak to them concerning the coming thither of a Ship, and then they might govern themselves ac∣cordingly.


The sixteenth in the Morning, the 
Hollanders
 were by the Chief Governor's
 Order presented with two fat Weathers, two Porkers, some Poultery, and other Provisions; which they receiv'd, and gave the Bearers some Money for a Gratuity. So soon as the Weather began to grow fair, as many Goods were unladen, as there were 
Coelis
 to carry them, with which 
Putman
's went to the other side of the City to give Order for their reimbarquing.


Mean while, 
Nobel
 and the Secretary 
Vander Does
 went to the Governor of
 the City, to deliver the foremention'd Letters. They took the Horses also with them, because one of the Guides had told the Ambassador, that his Highness was desirous to see them; whither being come, after a short stay, and the Go∣vernor having view'd the Horses with great delight, 
Nobel
 and 
Vander Does
 de∣liver'd his Highness the Letter, and return'd him humble Thanks for the Pre∣sents which he had sent the Ambassador the day before.


Then they also ask'd, (it suiting with their present Discourse) If it should happen that a 
Hollands
 Ship should come thither, if it would be Welcome to his Highness, and the People us'd as courteously as they were? To which the General answer'd, That such strangers as they, which come from remote Countreys, to seek Friendship, and Present the Emperor, ought to have kind∣ness shown them; therefore what reason should he have to deal discourteously with the 
Netherlanders,
 when ever they come thither? They might rest satisfi'd, for he assur'd them, that if they came into his Jurisdiction, he would take care for them, and shew them all the kindness he could.


After which answer, the 
Netherlanders
 taking their leave went to the 
Conbon,
 to whom they also deliver'd the Ambassador's Letter and Note of the Presents, telling him, that no Blood Coral was mention'd in the Note, because they had none at the present, but they hop'd, that a Ship would shortly come thither, and that then, they would furnish his Highness with what quantity he pleas'd; using this Discourse purposely, because they would have the better opportuni∣ty to speak of the Ship. Then they desir'd, that if a 
Holland
 Vessel should chance to come thither, whether he would be courteous to the 
Netherlanders?
 To which he answer'd as the General had done, adding, That the 
Hollanders
 must Command their People to use no Hostility where ever they came with their Ships.


The Presents design'd for him he would not accept of, till they return'd from 
Peking.
 From thence they went to the 
Manchu,
 but could not (because of
 his indisposition) come to speak with him, but sent them in answer to the Let∣ter and Note of the Presents, that he thank'd the Ambassador, but he durst not accept the Presents; with which answer, the 
Netherlanders
 return'd.


This foremention'd Reply of the General and 
Conbon,
 and that of the thir∣teenth
 instant, made to the 
Netherlanders,
 being consulted on in the Council, it was unanimously agreed on, to send for the smallest Vessel expected from 
Ba∣tavia
 at 
Hoksieu,
 to come to 
Ningpo,
 (under pretence, that she should go to 
Ia∣pan
) with a Lading of convenient Merchandize, as 
Sandal-Wood,
 Pepper, Fran∣kincense, Myrh, Cloves, Lead, 
Caliatur-Wood,
 Black Paragon, and Scarlet-Cloth, some Blood Coral in strings, and the like.


To which purpose 
Van Hoorn
 wrote a Letter to 
Harthouwer
 in 
Hoksieu,
 that
 he had found it convenient, that one of the smallest Vessels which were ex∣pected from 
Batavia
 in the Bay of 
Sothia,
 under a pretence to Sail to 
Iapan,
 should come to 
Ningpo:
 But however, the Ship was not to stay any longer than the first of 
September
 at 
Ningpo,
 and then, whether the Goods were sold or not, set Sail to 
Iapan,
 that the foremention'd Commodities might come time enough, to be dispos'd of in 
Iapan,
 and so prevent all manner of Losses or Da∣mages that might happen. Mean while, the Weather being pretty fair, the re∣maining Presents and other Goods were unladen and carry'd to the North side of the City.


The Ambassador, 
Nobel,
 and the rest of the Retinue following them through the City of 
Hanchu,
 and the Suburbs, came in the Afternoon to the places where the Barques lay, being above a League distant from the other in which they came.


The eighteenth, it was thought convenient to Present the 
Pingtow,
 which had furnish'd the 
Netherlanders
 with Barques; and likewise in requital for his Presents, sent them the twelfth instant, five 
Dutch
 Ells of Red Cloth, one
 Piece of Perpetuana's, one string of Amber Beads, six Flasks of Rose-Water, one Perspective Glass, and some Spectacles, which the Secretary setting down in a Note, proffer'd to him: Who returning, brought word, that the 
Pingtow
 would receive the four first sorts of Goods; but as for the Perspective Glasses and Spectacles, he knew not what to do with them; and sent also his Servant back with the Secretary, to Present the Ambassador with two Bottles of 
Tee,
 and to fetch the Presents, because he was fearful to receive them, if they should be brought by the 
Netherlanders,
 and deliver'd in the presence of other Persons, because the General and 
Conbon
 did not accept of theirs.


In the Evening, the Horse were Imbarqu'd in the prepar'd Vessels, and all things were made ready for their departure the next day.


The nineteenth in the Morning, the Ambassador leaving 
Hanchu,
 came in the Evening to 
Tangseeuw,
 a handsom Village, where they staid all that Night, having that day Sail'd three Leagues.


Soon after their arrival there, the Interpreter 
Ienko
 came to tell the Ambas∣sador,
 that he was inform'd, that the Emperor, besides his Order of not Transporting any Silk, had strictly forbidden, that no Silk should be carry'd out of the Province 
Chekiang
 to any other Territory.


The twentieth in the Morning they left 
Tangseeuw,
 and were that day Tow'd by many Rusticks Houses, which were built along the Banks of a deep Trench or Graff. The Countrey hereabouts is all Champain, well Manur'd, and in many places Planted with Mulberry-Trees, which yield food for their Silk-Worms,
 for no place in all 
China
 breeds more than this Province of 
Chekiang;
 for it not only furnishes its own Counties, and all 
China
 with all sorts of Silk Stuffs, but also the Neighboring Isles of 
Iapan,
 the 
Spaniards
 in the 
Philipines,
 nay, all 
India,
 and the remotest parts of 
Europe,
 for the 
Hollanders
 buy much Silk in 
Hoksieu,
 lying in the Province of 
Fokien,
 which is all brought thither from 
Chekiang.
 The Silk Stuffs made in this Province are esteem'd the best in all 
China,
 and are to be had at such low Rates, that ten Men may better be main∣tain'd there in Silk, than one Man with Cloth in 
Europe.
 They cut the Mul∣berry Trees generally once a year, as in 
Europe
 we do our Vines, and suffer them not to shoot up to any great height, because by long experience they have found that the Leaves of the smallest and youngest Trees produce the best Silk, which difference they know in the Spinning of the first and second Threds; for the first is that which comes from the fresh budding little Leaves, and the second comes from the strong and full grown Summer Leaves, which alteration of Food given to the Worms, makes the difference in the Silk. Which is also perhaps the reason, that the Silk which is made in 
Europe,
 is generally much thicker and courser than that in 
China.


Between the Prizes of the first and second Spinning, the 
Chineses
 make a great difference, notwithstanding the greatest Silk-Throsters in 
Europe
 have no knowledge to distinguish the one from the other: The best Silk they Spin in 
Lent,
 and the coursest and biggest in 
Iune,
 so that both sorts are made in one Year. The breeding of these Worms is all one trouble, and requires as much care as they do in any places of 
Europe.
 Wherefore it is a meer Fable, that all the Silk in 
China
 is made by the Silk Worms upon the Trees, without the labor or industry of Man.


Martinius
 tell us, That the breeding of Silk Worms, and the manner of ma∣king
 Cotton and Silk, is an ancient invention of the 
Chineses;
 for they say, that the Emperor 
Ya
's Consort, who Raign'd before the Birth of our Savior, 
Anno
 2375. was the first that us'd it, and afterwards taught it her Subjects: For though the breeding and ordering of the Silk Worms was not unknown to the 
Chineses
 before that time, yet they were ignorant of that Art, to make Silk Clothes of them, as generally at the first Discovery of things, we are unskilful in the proper use. But however, the 
Chineses
 may justly claim the honor, that from them, as the chief Fountain, the Art of making Silk was carry'd to other remote Countreys in 
Europe.


BUt to return: The Ambassador having pass'd many beautiful Stone Bridges, in the Afternoon they came to the City of 
Kunghti,
 or 
Cunghte,
 the fifth substitute City of the second Metropolis 
Kiahing,
 in the sixth Province, lying on the left side of the River, and in the Evening arriv'd at a Village call'd 
Sum∣mingsing,
 where they stay'd that Night, having that day gotten four Leagues further.


In the Morning, leaving 
Summingsing,
 they Sail'd, as the day before, by many Rusticks Houses; and about the Evening arriv'd at 
Chiangfoe,
 otherwise 
Kia∣hing,
 the sixth City in this Province, along which they ran Westerly to the North Suburb, where they staid that Night to get other 
Coelies
 to Tow them, having that day made four Leagues forward in a Northerly Course.


The two and twentieth in the Morning, they proceeded, and were Tow'd, coming about a Cannon shot from the Suburb of 
Kiating,
 between two For∣tresses, and so to the Village 
Iankanking,
 seaving it on their Lar-board; in the Afternoon, by 
Pinghaw;
 on the South side of which lies a small Lake call'd 
Fuen,
 which separates the Province 
Chekiang,
 from that of 
Nanking,
 so that they enter'd the Province of 
Nanking.


After the 
Netherlanders
 were arriv'd about Noon, in the Village 
Pingchwan,
 they from thence past by 
Ukiam,
 and leaving it about a Cannon shot from them on their left hand, they went up to the Suburbs, where they cast Anchor to stay that Night, and provide themselves with other Men to Tow their Barques, having that day pass'd four Leagues, of which, two in the Province of 
Nanking.


This great Province of 
Nanking,
 by the 
Tartars
 at this day call'd 
Kiangnam,
 being the chiefest of the nine Southern, Verges in the East and South-East with the Sea, in the South it borders upon 
Chekiang,
 in the South-West upon that of 
Kiangsi,
 in the West touches 
Huquang,
 in the North-West 
Honan,
 and the remainder, the Territory of 
Quantung.


Although the 
Chineses
 reckon (except the chief Province of 
Peking,
 wherein
 the Court and Seat of the Emperor is kept) that of 
Kiangnang
 the next in honor and order, yet setting aside the Emperor's residence there, it cannot be com∣par'd to this of 
Nanking,
 either in Magnitude, Fertility, or ought else; nay, their Histories affirm, that the ancient 
Chinese
 Emperors, as 
V, Cyn, Sun, Ci, Le∣ang, Chin,
 and the Family 
Tang,
 first Planted the Seat of the Empire in this Province, although afterwards, Transported thence to 
Peking,
 by the 
Taymingian
 Family, the better, and with the more ease to oppose the 
Tartars
 incursions, being nearest to their Borders.


The whole Province is divided into fourteen great Territories, 
viz. Kiang∣ningsu,
 or 
Nankingfu, Fungyangfu, Suchenfu, Sunkiangfu, Changcheufu, Chingkiangfu, Yancheufu, Hoaiganfu, Lucheufu, Gankingfu, Taipingfu, Ningquefu, Chicheufu, Hoei∣cheufu,
 besides four small Counties, as 
Quangte, Hocheu, Chucheu, Siuchtu,
 every one having great and small Towns in them, to the number of an hundred and ten.


The first County 
Kiangningfu,
 hath for boundaries on the North-East, 
Yancheufu;
 in the East, 
Changcheufu,
 and 
Sucheufu;
 in the South, 
Ningquefu;
 in the West, 
Taipingfu,
 and 
Hocheufu;
 in the North, and North-West, 
Cheuchufu.


This County contains seven Towns, 
viz. Nanking,
 or 
Kiangning,
 the chief
 and Metropolis of the whole Province, 
Kucyung, Lieyang, Lieuxui, Caoxun, Kiang∣pu,
 and 
Loho.


















The first Builder of the City of 
Nanking
 was 
Guoi,
 King of 
Cu,
 who call'd
 her 
Kinling,
 that is, 
Gilded Tract of Land,
 The first Raiser of the Family 
Cyn
 nam'd it afterwards 
Moling;
 the Kings 
V.
 which kept their Court there, 
Kienye;
 the House of 
Tang, Kiangning;
 but the 
Taimingian
 Family chang'd the Name of 
Kiangning
 to that of 
Ingtien;
 but at last the 
Tartars,
 after having harrased the whole Empire of 
China,
 restor'd it the ancient Name 
Kiangning.


This 
Kiangning
 lieth in thirty two Degrees and fifteen Minutes Northern Latitude, about six Leagues from the Eastern Shore of the River 
Kiang,
 in a pleasant and delightful Plain; for the River 
Kiang
 flows through broad and deep digg'd Graffs, not onely by the City Walls, but also into it with several Navigable Channels.


In like manner the East side of the City, lying in a pleasant Valley, is inter∣woven with broad Graffs, by which means they may as well come to this part of the City in Barges, as to that side which verges with the River 
Kiang,
 and may there likewise lade and unlade Vessels of ordinary Burthen.


Over all these Graffs lead several Stone Bridges, supported on divers Arches.


Over the fore-mention'd Channel, which runs from the River 
Kiang
 into the City, is a Bridge with fourteen Arches.


According to the opinion of the 
Chinese
 Geographers, this City doth not onely exceed all other Cities on the Earth in bigness, but also in beauty; and indeed she is inferior to few: for as to what concerns her inward part is most plain, except some pleasant and easie Ascents. It stands surrounded with a
 double Wall; the first and innermost of which is six 
German
 Miles in circumfe∣rence, or according to 
Trigaut
 and 
Martinius,
 eighteen 
Italian
 Miles; yet the City it self is not above six Leagues in circumference.


This Wall incloseth the Palace, and most part of the City.


The second, or outward Wall is much bigger, but not continu'd round, or joyn'd together in all places, but stands onely as a Defence in those places where the City is weakest. When two Troopers (for so the 
Chineses
 describe this Wall) are sent from one another in the Morning to Ride about the City, they meet not again till Night; by which may easily be judg'd the bigness of the Wall and City. Notwithstanding within the circumference of this Wall there are great and spacious Gardens, Lakes, Mounts and Warrens, yet the greatest part thereof is full of Inhabitants.


The first Wall, which is above thirty Foot high, whose under part consists of Free-Stone, but the upper onely of bak'd Stones, or Bricks, is rais'd very even, and hath Battlements, round about strengthned with Redoubts and Watch-houses. It reckons thirteen Gates, some of which have four, and
 others five Posterns, whose Doors are cover'd with Iron Plates. Every one of these Gates are continually Guarded by strong Parties of Soldiers. The chiefest Streets are about twenty eight Paces broad, and being as direct as a Line, are in the middle Pav'd with broad blue Stones, and on each side with Pebbles. The common Citizens Houses are neither fair nor costly, but mean and with∣out Conveniences, being but one Story high, standing all with their Gable∣ends towards the Streets, with onely one Door. The Front hath a square Hole in stead of a Window, before which they have a woodden Shutter, which they let down, and those that drive any Trade lay their Commodities upon them to sell, and to prevent People from looking in, they generally hang a Rush Mat before it in stead of a Glass Window. The whole House on the out-side


is from top to bottom Plaister'd with very white Mortar or Lime, and the sloaping Roof cover'd with white Tyles. In most of the Houses are Shops, fill'd with all manner of 
Chinese
 Commodities, as Cotton, Silk-Stuffs, 
Porcel∣lane,
 Pearls, Diamonds, and other rich Merchandises: others also have Pedling Wares. Before every Shop stands a Plank or Board, and before some two, on which the Master of the House his Name is written in Letters of Gold, and what Commodities he hath to sell: Next these Boards stands also a Post, or rather a Pole, which is higher than the House, on which they put a Penon, or Flag, whereby they may distinguish every ones Habitation, as here in 
Europe
 they do by Signs.


Here are also many fair Edifices, as Temples, stately Triumphal Arches, Palaces, and other publick Buildings.


There was formerly a very magnificent Palace, built square, being the
 Court and Residence of the ancient 
Chinese
 Emperors, but now lies ruin'd on the South part of the City; one side of it may still be measur'd, and bears an 
Italian
 Mile and two hundred Paces in length, and is inclos'd within the inner Wall, which encompasseth the greatest part of the City. It was formerly sur∣rounded with three Walls, and deep Moats. According to the remaining part of this Wall, the fore-mention'd 
Trigaut
 reckons the circumference to be four or five 
Italian
 Miles. In the middle there yet appears a broad Way Pav'd with Free-Stone, which runs through the whole Work like a Cross. On each side of it may be seen curious Carv'd Stones, which stand four Foot high, and behind them a little Rivulet of clear Water. The Tyles on the Roof were of hard Stone, wrought with Dragons, and the Emperor's Arms Painted in a Gold colour, so that when the Sun shin'd upon them they glitter'd like Gold.


In the last 
Tartar
 Wars this stately Edifice and Court was burnt and pull'd down to the Ground, so turning that which before was the wonder of the World into a heap of Rubbish; yet no other way bereaving the City of her ancient lustre: which was done out of a peculiar hatred that the 
Tartar
 bore to the 
Taimingian
 Family, because 
Hamvu,
 or 
Che,
 the first promoter of that Family, drove the 
Tartars
 out of the Empire, after they had possess'd it a hundred and eight years, and planted the Branches of their own Stock in the Throne in this fore-mention'd Palace, till such time as it was remov'd from thence to 
Peking.


The City is very populous, and said to be inhabited by ten hundred thou∣sand, or a Million of Souls, besides a Garison of forty thousand 
Tartars:
 for the Governor of the Southern Provinces Resides here in the Emperor's Name.


But above all we ought not to forget a Tower, built on a high Hill, which
 may justly be call'd 
A Tower of Art,
 because three artificial Pieces of Work are kept in it, the like of which are not in the whole World: The first a Celestial Globe, distinguish'd by its Equinoctial, and other equidistant Lines; the se∣cond is an 
Armilla aquatoria,
 consisting in a Perspective Glass, with two Circles, each movable upon their Point; the third is a 
Sphaera armillarii,
 very like our 
European;
 every one of them hath twelve Feet upon the Aequator, or middle Line, made of Copper, Gilt and curiously wrought: They stand upon Dra∣gons cut of Copper, and are so exact and artificially made, that the most ex∣perienc'd Astronomer cannot discern the least fault in them: and notwith∣standing the 
Tartars
 of the Family 
Iuen
 plac'd them there three hundred and seventy years since, yet they retain their ancient lustre, as if but newly made.


On the out-part of the City stands a famous 
Pagode,
 or Temple, by some













call'd 
Paolinxi,
 and by others 
Paulinying;
 for we may observe, that by the Name of 
Paolinxi
 the 
Chineses
 do not onely express the Temple it self, but also a great Plain at the Foot of a Mountain, adorn'd with many fair Buildings, 
Pagodes, Porcelane
 Towers, and other fair and stately Edifices; amongst all which one, being a Temple, exceeds all the rest: it is adorn'd with ten thousand Images, made of Mortar; and curiously Painted; the largest are as big as the Life, and the smallest not exceeding a Hand; both which stand in several Entries, or Gal∣leries round about the Wall, four or five Rows one above another, the greatest on the top, and the smallest at the bottom.


In the middle of the Plain, to which they ascend by twelve Steps, stands
 a high Tower of 
Porcelane,
 which for costliness and all manner of rare work∣manship, hath not its paralell in all 
China.
 It consists in nine (though ac∣cording to 
Semedo
 scarce in six) Vaulted Stories, to be ascended on the in-side by a hundred and four Steps. Round about every Story is a Gallery, curiously adorn'd with Images and Windows; on both sides of which are square Holes for the Light to come in at, with Ivory Bars; all the Work on the out-side Polish'd or Glaz'd with divers Colours, as Red, Green, and Yellow: The whole Structure made of several Pieces so curiously Cemented together, that it seems to be one intire thing. Between the Galleries are Juttings out, made like Pent-houses, and colour'd with Green; at each corner whereof hang small Copper Bells, which mov'd by the Wind make a continual and pleasant tink∣ling. The upper part of the Tower, to which none can get, unless they climb up the out-side, is Crown'd, as the 
Chineses
 say, with a great Pine-Apple of Massy Gold: from which upper Gallery they may see, not onely over the whole City of 
Nanking,
 but all the adjacent Plains, as far as the Eye can reach. They say, that when the 
Tartars, Anno
 1200. first conquer'd the Empire of 
China,
 they forc'd them to build this Structure in commemoration of their Victory: for which reason, as it appears, the 
Tartars,
 when in our Age they conquer'd the Empire a second time, they never offer'd to deface it, but let it stand in its full glory, when as they pull'd down all other antient Monuments, Buildings, and 
Chinese
 Emperors Tombs to the Ground.


Without the Walls of the City are the Tombs of the antique Kings; near which stands a Grove of lofty Pines, surrounded with a Wall of three 
German
 Miles in circumference.


Within this Inclosure also appears a Hill, whereon likewise are erected seve∣ral Tombs; and not far distant a most magnificent Temple, a Royal Building, as well for its Prospect as State: It consists for the most part of Wood, except the Walls, which are of Brick, and stands on a Summit inviron'd with Free-Stone: you go into it by four pair of Stairs, opening to the sour Winds: It hath five Galleries, about which stand two Rows of wooden Pillars, each thirty six Foot high, and above two Fathom thick: On these rest great Pieces of cross Timber, and on them stand other lesser Pillars, whereon lies the Roof, of Carv'd and Gilt Boards: The Doors are Figur'd with Laurel Leaves, and cover'd with Gilded Plates. The Imagery of the outer Galleries and Win∣dows are incircled with Gilded Wyres to keep the Birds from either making their Nests, or defiling them; yet the Wyres are so thin and wide, that they may easily see through: which is also observ'd in all great Buildings, espe∣cially the Emperor's Palaces. In the middle of the Temple stand two Thrones, wrought with great Art, and beset with Pearls, and all manner of Precious Gems; on them stand two Chairs, in one of which the Emperor sits


when he makes Offerings; to do which none else is permitted; and the other stands empty for their Deity, who they say, sits therein, and receives the Of∣fering. Without the Temple stand many Altars of Red Marble▪ which repre∣sent the Moon, Sun, Hills and Floods: and according to the 
Chineses
 Relati∣ons, all these Altars are plac'd without the Temple, that none might worship them, but that every one should know they are of the same Structure which the Emperor worships in the Temple. Round about are several Chambers, or rather Cells, which formerly, as they say, were us'd as 
Bannia's,
 in which the Emperor, when he went to Offer, Bath'd himself with his Attendants.


To this Temple, and to the Emperor's Tombs, lead very broad Ways, on each side planted with five Rows of Pine-trees, at equal distance, and in a direct Line; from which none might break a Bough on pain of death.


All these Buildings were ruin'd in the late 
Tartar
 Wars, the Trees pluck'd up, the Tombs defac'd, and the Temples and Palaces utterly laid waste.


The County of 
Fungiangfu,
 a great Tract of Land, gives Limits in the
 East and North-East to 
Hoaiganfu;
 in the East, to the Lake 
Piexe
 and 
Chucheufu;
 in the South and South-West to 
Hocheufu
 and 
Lucheufu;
 in the West, to the Territory of 
Honan.


This pleasant and fruitful Countrey, vein'd by several great Rivers, is fa∣mous, because two of her Natives of mean Extract were rais'd to the highest degree of Honor; the first call'd 
Lieupang,
 bred among the scum of the Com∣monalty, nay, among Robbers and Rebels, subdu'd the Imperial Family 
Cyn,
 and rais'd that of 
Han.


The second being 
Humvu,
 or 
Chu,
 was a mean Priests Son; who at first turning Robber, soon after the expulsion of the 
Tartars
 got into the Throne, and establish'd the Crown on the 
Taimingian
 Family.


The Emperor 
Yu
 also did not a little enrich this Countrey, when by his Predecessor 
Ya
 he was Crown'd King in the City of 
Mao.
 It is also said that 
Lahu,
 the first Inventer of the 
Epicurean
 Learning, which liv'd before the great Philosopher 
Confut
 was born in that City of 
Mao.


The County 
Fungyangfu
 contains eighteen Towns, of which 
Fungyang
 is the chiefest, the next are 
Liuhoai, Hoaiyuen, Tingyuen, Uho, Hung, Hokieu, Munching, Su, Hiutai, Tienchang, So, Lingpi, Ing, Tacho, Hao, Ingxan, Su, So, Ing, Hao,
 all great Places.


The Metropolis 
Fungyang
 lying on a Mountain, incloseth many Hills with∣in its Walls, built with fair Edifices, both publick and private.


This Division was by the Emperor 
Yu
 brought and joyn'd to the Province of 
Yang,
 to be Govern'd by 
Teu.


In the time of the Kings this part of the Countrey was call'd 
The Kingdom of Tuxam;
 which the Kings of 
Cu
 afterwards included in their Dominions: but the Family 
Han
 made it again Tributary, call'd 
Chungly:
 yet this Place was not honor'd with the Title of 
Teu,
 or Metropopolis, untill the fore-mention'd 
Chu,
 which rais'd the 
Taimingian
 Family, and was born in this City, enlarg'd it, building new and strong Walls, fifty Furlongs in circumference, and adorning the Tombs of his Predecessors, and gave it the Name of 
Metropolis,
 setting over it a Vice-Roy, giving it Jurisdiction over other Cities, intituling it 
Fungyang,
 that is, 
Nobleness of the Phenix.


The third 
Sucheufu,
 conterminates in the North and North-East with the Mouth of the River 
Kiang;
 in the East, with the Sea; in the South, with 
Sun∣kiang
 and 
Kiahingfu;
 the West borders 
Kiangningfu;
 and the North-West, 
Chan∣cheufu.


The first which inhabited this Countrey amongst the 
Chineses,
 was one 
Taipe,
 of the Family 
Cheu,
 who coming out of the North planted his Seat here, and reduced those that formerly were wild and savage, to be rational and under∣standing People.


In the Emperor 
Vu
's time this County obtain'd Royal Dignity, being call'd 
The Kingdom of V.
 after whose Death it was taken by the Kingdom of 
Iue,
 who possess'd it but a little while, being routed by 
Cu,
 who subdu'd the Countrey.


Lastly, the promoter of the Family 
Cyn
 conquer'd all those Kingdoms; and brought them under the Province of 
Hoeiki.


The first which call'd this Countrey and its Metropolis 
Sucheu
 was King
 
Sui:
 the Family of 
Tang
 gave it the Name of 
Changcheu; Sung,
 that of 
Pnkiang;
 but the 
Taimingian
 Family restor'd the old Name 
Sucheu.


The Countrey is in all Places interlac'd with Branches of Rivers and Graffs, along which they may Sail from the City to the Sea.


Sucheufu
 contains seven Towns, of which 
Sucheu
 is the chiefest; the rest are
 
Quengxan, Changxoe, Ukiang, Kiating, Taicing, Cungmung,
 and 
Cungming,
 which lies on an Island in the Sea.


The fourth Tract of Land being 
Sunghiangfu,
 is a small County, yet fruitful
 and a good Soyl, bordering in the North with 
Sucheufu;
 in the East, with the Sea and 
Hangcheufu;
 in the South and West at 
Hangcheufu
 onely; and the remainder on 
Sucheufu.


This Countrey, as the former, lies most in Water, the East part of it being wash'd by the Sea, and the rest surrounded by Rivers, which with their Bran∣ches cutting through the middle, and all Places else of it make the whole Na∣vigable: It contains onely three Towns, which in bigness, populosity, and
 variety of Commodities may stand in competition with many more eminent Cities; the first and chiefest is 
Sunkiang,
 the other two 
Langhai
 and 
Cingpai.


The City 
Sunkiang
 verges with the Sea on the Northern Shore of a River, which at its Mouth is fortifi'd with a strong Castle, from whence they may Sail to 
Iapan.


In ancient times this Countrey and City before mention'd shar'd also in the 
Tartars
 Cruelties. The Family of 
Tang
 call'd it 
Houting;
 the 
Tartars
 of the
 House of 
Iuen
 not onely gave it the present Name, but also the Title of 
Fu,
 or 
Great City,
 having formerly but the Priviledges and Name of a mean Town▪ and belong'd to the third County 
Sucheufu.


The fifth County 
Changcheufu
 reckons for Limits in the North and North-East,
 the River 
Kiang;
 in the South, 
Sucheufu;
 in the South and South-West, the Lake 
Tai;
 in the West, 
Yancheufu.


This County contains five Towns, 
viz. Changcheu, Vufie, Kiangyn,
 and 
Ginkiang.


There are also five Temples, of which one built near the City 
Vufie,
 in ho∣nor to 
Taipe,
 the Supporter of the People, exceeds all the other.


The City 
Changcheu
 lies near the fore-mention'd Moat, which runs from the City 
Sucheu
 to the River 
Kiang:
 the Stone Banks of which near this City, are much more curious and artificial than any where else. There are also some Triumphal Arches, which add a great beauty to the City. It hath receiv'd its Denomination 
Guihing
 from the exceeding fineness of the Earth, of which the 
Tee
 Cups are made, for 
Guihing
 signifies 
Rare Earth.


The sixth Territory 
Chinkiangfu
 borders in the North at the River 
Kiang;
 in the East, at 
Changcheufu;
 in the South, at the Lake 
Tai;
 and in the West, at 
Kiangnangfu.


This County reckons three Cities, 
viz. Chinkiang, Tanyang,
 and 
Kintan.


Chinkiang,
 by 
Martinius
 taken for 
Cingiam
 so call'd by 
Paulus Venetus,
 lies Northward from the River 
Kiang,
 on the East side of a Channel, which falls into the 
Kiang.
 On the other side of the Channel to the West lies a Suburb, neither lesser nor emptier of People than the City it self. Between these lie se∣veral Bridges, over which they pass out of one into another: beyond the Bridges the Channel extends it self to a greater breadth, and receives Water from several Places; which makes so great a Navigation by that City, that it cannot be express'd; for all the Ships or Vessels that come from the Province of 
Chekiang
 and the other Eastern Towns, to go to 
Peking
 and other Places, must stop here, to put up their Masts, and hold out their Sails, not being able hitherto to use them, because of the many Bridges in that Channel; for from hence to the Grand Metropolis 
Peking
 no Bridge is suffer'd excepting one to draw up.


This City by some justly call'd 
Kinkeu,
 that is, 
The Mouth of the Court,
 be∣cause there are continually Freighted Vessels going from hence to 
Peking.


The seventh Division call'd 
Yangcheufu,
 borders in the North, at the River
 
Hoai;
 East, at the Sea; Southward, upon the Stream of 
Kiang;
 West, on 
Nankingfu,
 and the little County 
Chucheufu;
 and the North and by West con∣terminates with 
Fungyangfu.


This contains ten Cities, 
viz. Y
ngcheu, Ychin, Taihing, Kaoyeu, Hinghoa, Paoyng, Tai, Iucao, Fung,
 and 
Haimuen,
 of which 
Kaoyeu
 and 
Tai
 are the biggest.


Northward over the River 
Kiang
 is a great Sluce near the Garison 
Quacheu,
 where the foremention'd Channel takes its beginning; along which they Row up to the City 
Yangcheu,
 which lies on the East-side of it, as on the West the Suburb, which formerly stretch'd a 
German
 League, but was ruin'd in the last 
Tartar
 War.


The City 
Yancheu
 is full of large and stately buildings and in many Places moistned with Graffs of fresh Water, over which lead Stone Bridges, consisting of twenty four Arches, besides many lesser, not to be reckon'd. There is also a Custom-house for the Emperor's use.


The chief Trade which the Inhabitants follow is the dealing in Salt; for in the East of this County near the Sea are many Salt-pits.


The eighth, being 
Hoaiganfu,
 Confines in the East, upon the Sea; in the South, with the River 
Hoai;
 in the South-West and West, with 
Fungyangfu
 and 
Sucheufu;
 and in the North, with the Province of 
Xantung.
 The whole Tract of Land is cut through with Rivers and Lakes. It contains ten Towns, 
Hoai∣gan
 the chief, 
Cingho, Gantung, Taoyven, Moyang, Hai, Canyu, Pi, Souven,
 and 
Ciuning; Hai
 and 
Pi
 are great Cities.


In the time of the Emperor 
Yu
 this County belong'd to that of 
Iancheu,
 un∣der the Government 
Ten,
 and belong'd first to King 
V.
 afterwards to 
Iue,
 then to 
Cu.


In the time of the Family 
Hun
 the City 
Hoaigan
 was onely a small Town
 call'd 
Hoaiyu;
 afterwards 
Han
 call'd her 
Linhoan;
 but the present Name and Title the House of 
Sung
 gave her.


This City lying on the Eastern Shore of the digg'd Channel is divided into two Parts, a Southern and a Northern, yet both inclos'd in one Wall; of which the South side bears the Name of 
Hoaigan,
 and the North of 
Yeuching.
 The one side is enlarg'd with a Suburb, which extends in length along the Banks of the Channel a 
German
 Mile; out of which they enter into the Yellow River.


In the Suburb are two Custom-houses, in the one the Customs for Goods are paid, and in the other for Ships according to their Burthen; all which Mo∣ney is kept and bestow'd upon the repairing of their Sluces in the Channel against the force of the Water (for to the Northward of this City are three Water-falls;) yet nevertheless a great part of it goes to the Emperor's Trea∣sury.


In this City the Vice-Roy, being the Emperor's Purveyor, hath his Resi∣dence; who Commands with arbitrary Power over the seven Southern Pro∣vinces.


The ninth 
Lucheufu,
 borders in the North at 
Fungyangfu;
 in the East, at
 
Hocheufu
 and the River 
Kiang;
 in the South, at 
Gankingfu;
 and in the West, at the Province of 
Huquang
 and 
Honan.
 It contains eight Cities, 
Lucheu
 the chief,
 the rest 
Xuching, Lukiang, Vuguei, Cao, Logan, Iugran, Hoxan,
 most of them lying on the Shore of the famous Lake 
Cao; Vuguei
 and 
Logan
 are the biggest.


In ancient Times this Countrey stood like the former, subject to the Family 
Cheu,
 under whom it became an intire Kingdom, and nam'd 
Lucu;
 but soon after was taken from them by the Kings 
Cu.
 In the time of the Family 
Han
 it was with its chief City call'd 
Lukiang;
 but the present Name given by the Emperor 
Sui.


Near the small City 
Logan
 are two stately Temples and a large Bridge.


The tenth County 
Gankingfu
 borders in the North at 
Lucheufu;
 in the East and South-East, at the River 
Kiang;
 in the West and North-West, at the Province of 
Huquang.


This Countrey contains six Towns, 
viz. Ganking, Tunchiang, Cienxan, Taihu, Sosung, Vangkiang,
 was formerly call'd 
Von,
 and subdu'd by King 
Cu;
 after which the Family of 
Tang
 nam'd it 
Sucheu;
 that of 
Sung, Ganking.


The City 
Ganking
 stands situate on the Eastern Shore of the River 
Ganking,
 and for Wealth and Trade compares with the famousest Cities in this Pro∣vince; for all that comes out of the other County to go to 
Nanking,
 comes first hither.


Because this Tract of Land joyns the three Provinces, 
Kiangsi, Huquang,
 and 
Nanking,
 and lies well for any Warlike Undertaking, it hath a Vice-Roy, who maintains a strong Garison in the Castle 
Haimusen,
 for a defence of the Lake 
Poyang
 and the River 
Kiang.


The Family 
Tang
 caus'd an Iron Pillar to be erected there of three Rods high, and of a proportionable thickness, Anvil'd out of an intire Piece.


The eleventh Shire, being 
Taipingfu,
 is surrounded with the River 
Kiang,
 or
 rather lies between two of her Branches; and moreover verges in the East with a part of the Lake 
Tanyang,
 where it borders with the County of 
Kiangning.


This County belong'd formerly to the Kingdom of 
V.
 afterwards to 
Iue,
 next to 
Cu,
 but was at last by the Family of 
Cyn
 reduc'd under that of 
Chang.
 The House of 
Han
 call'd it 
Tanyang; Tang, Nanyu: Sung
 first nam'd it 
Pingnan;
 and lastly, 
Taiping;
 which Name it retains to this day. It contains three Ci∣ties, 
viz. Taiping, Vehu,
 and 
Fachang;
 of which 
Vehu,
 the biggest and richest, hath also a Custom-house, and lies on an Island between the two Arms of the Ri∣ver 
Kiang,
 which afterwards joyn together at the City of 
Nanking.


The twelfth, being 
Ningquefu,
 borders in the North, at the River 
Kiang;
 in
 the East, at 
Quanghefu;
 in the South, at 
Hoecheufu;
 and in the West, at 
Chicheu∣fu.
 It is a mountainous Countrey, and contains six Towns, 
viz. Ningque
 the
 Great, 
and Ningque
 the Less, 
King, Taiping, Cingte, Nanling.


The chief City 
Ninque
 lies on the Eastern Shore of the River 
Von.


Within her Walls are pleasant Hills, Warrens, magnificent Buildings, and abundance of Chesnut and Pear-trees.


Nea
 the little City 
King
 stands a fair Chappel, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Hiangsi,
 that is, 
A sweet smelling Hart,
 and is Dedicated to five Maidens, which when they were taken by Pyrats, would rather endure death than suffer their Honor to be blemish'd.


The thirteenth County 
Chicheufu,
 borders in the East upon 
Ningquefu;
 in the
 South-East touches 
Hoeicheufu;
 in the South-West lies the Province 
Kiangsi;
 the North-West hath the River 
Kiang;
 and in the North, a Promontory at the same River for Boundaries.


This Countrey was formerly under the Kingdom of 
V.
 soon after under 
Iue;
 next under 
Cu.
 King 
Loang
 call'd it 
Nanling; Siu, Cieupu;
 and the Family
 of 
Tang,
 the present Name 
Chicheufu.
 It comprehends six Towns, 
viz. Chicheu
 the chief, 
Cinyang, Tungling, Xetai, Kiente, Tunglieu,
 and four stately Temples.


The City 
Chicheu
 stands seated on the Southern Shore of the River 
Kiang.


The fourteenth Division 
Hoeicheufu,
 being the most Southern of all this
 Province, conterminates in the East, with the Province of 
Chekiang;
 in the South, with a Promontory; in the South-West, with that of 
Kiangsi;
 in the North-West, with 
Chicheufu;
 and in the North, with 
Ningquefu.


This Countrey in the time of the Kings suffer'd the same misfortune as the
 fore-mention'd. The Name 
Hoeichu
 it receiv'd of the Family 
Sung,
 and posses∣seth six Towns, 
viz. Hoeichu
 the chiefest, the rest are 
Hicuning, Vuyveng, Kimuen,
 
In, Cieki.


This 
Hoeichu
 is a Place of great Trade, especially famous for making the best 
Chinese
 Ink and wax'd Chests.


The four small Territories of this Province are 
Quangte, Hochen, Chucheu,
 and 
Siucheu,
 every one call'd by the Name of their principal City.


The first of them being 
Quangte,
 borders Eastward upon the prime County 
Kiangningfu,
 and 
Hangcheufu;
 in the South, upon 
Hoeicheufu;
 in the West, looks at 
Ningquefu;
 and in the North runs with a Point to the River 
Kiang.


This County hath two Towns, 
Quangte
 the chief, and 
Kienping,
 both situate at the Foot of a pleasant Mountain call'd 
Hong
 and 
Ling.


The City 
Quangte
 is not onely fair, but also abounds with Silk.


The second call'd 
Hocheu,
 hath for Limits in the North, the third small, and twelfth great Territory 
Chucheu;
 in the East and South; 
Kiangningfu;
 and in the West, 
Lucheufu.


This Shire contains two Cities, of which 
Hocheu
 is the chiefest, and 
Hawxan.


The City of 
Hocheu
 is famous, because heretofore the Residence of a great Robber 
Chu,
 who 
Anno
 1368. drove the 
Tartars
 out of 
China.


The third little County in which the great City 
Cheucheu
 stands, whose De∣nomination it bears, verges in the North and West with the second Territory 
Pungyangfu;
 in the East, with the Lake 
Piexe
 and the seventh great Shire 
Yang∣cheufu;
 in the South, with 
Kiangningfu
 and the two little Territories of the City 
Hocheu.


This County contains three Cities, of which 
Chucheu
 is the chiefest and big∣gest, and the other two much less are 
Civenciao
 and 
Laigan.


The fourth small County, in which the great 
Siucheu
 is situate, is the most Northern of this Province, and borders in the East, upon 
Hoaiganfu;
 in the South, upon 
Tunyangfu;
 in the West, upon 
Honan;
 in the North, at that of



Xantung.
 In the middle it is cut through by the Yellow River, and is of great consequence, because it conterminates with four Provinces, and contains five Cities, 
Sieuchu, Siao, Tangxang, Fung,
 and 
Poi.


On the North-West side of the City 
Siucheu
 lies a Bridge, made of thirty five Ships linked together with Iron Chains.


Here also is another Bridge that runs athwart the River 
Pieu.


This City 
Sieucheu
 is also famous, because the Emperor 
Lieupang,
 promoter of the Family of 
Han,
 after he had taken the City of 
Poi,
 set forth from hence to conquer the Empire.


Thus much of the Province of 
Nanking;
 now we will return to our Embassy.


AFter the 
Netherlanders
 had gotten fresh Men to Tow them, they set for∣ward
 again over the River 
Sung
 on the twenty fifth, and Landed about ten a Clock at the City 
Sucheu,
 where they chang'd their Barques. No sooner they arriv'd at the West Gate of the City, where they were to Embarque again; but the 
Mandarin
 who had the Command of the Vessels, came to bid them wel∣com, and invited them to Dine with him the next day; and moreover, pre∣sented them with two Porkers, as many Sheep, four Hens, two Pots of Drink, several sorts of Fruit, and twelve Pices of Silk-Stuffs, which were all deliver'd to the Ambassador himself, with request that he would please to accept them. 
Van Hoorn
 thanking him for his good inclination and trouble which he had ta∣ken upon him; and also for the Presents said, That he would accept of the Provision (because he would not seem to despise them) but as for the Stuffs he could not do it, because it was not customary, therefore he desir'd them to ex∣cuse him: Moreover, that he could not possibly come to Dine with him the next Morning, partly for his indisposition, being tir'd with his Journey, and partly fearing to displease the 
Conbon
 of the City, if he went any where to a Feast before he went to him; with which Excuses they seeming to be satisfi'd took their leave.


The next Morning, being the twenty sixth, the Horses (being till that time prevented by Stormy Weather) were Landed and put in Stables ashore.


The twenty seventh nothing hapned of note, onely some 
Mandarins
 came from the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 (who keeps in this City to the number of twen∣ty five) to Complement and Welcom the Ambassador, whilst the 
Netherlan∣ders
 waited for fresh Vessels to be gone again, of which they then saw no likelihood, notwithstanding the 
Mandarine
 Guides had told them the day before, that without fail they should have them as that day. They also saw little hopes of their going, there being no convenient Vessels to be had to carry their Horses.


The 
Conbon
 having the day before sent to ask the 
Hollanders,
 if they had no Pistols, nor Sword-blades to dispose of? it was judg'd fit on the twenty eighth, (observing what Courtesies the fore-mention'd Lord might do them in their coming thither) to present him with a pair of Pistols, two Sword-blades, five Ells of Scarlet, one String of Amber, two Pieces of Linnen, and a Quilt: But the 
Conbon
 would not accept any thing of the Presents, which were carry'd to him by the Secretary, onely the Pistols and Sword-blades; so that the rest he brought back again.


In the Evening a 
Mandarin,
 sent from the 
Conbon,
 came to Present the Ambas∣sador,
 in requital for his Pistols and Sword-blades, with twelve Pieces of Silk-Stuffs,


four Porkers, four Goats, Geese, Hens, and other fresh Provisions, which were accepted, but the Silk-Stuffs sent back again.


The twenty ninth 
Genko
 the Interpreter inform'd the Ambassador, that at his coming an Envoy had been there, who just before was sent from the Empe∣ror at 
Peking,
 to bring the 
Chineses
 of 
Tayowan,
 under his Obedience.


The same day more Presents, and also the Oxen, were put into new Barques; and likewise the Horses were Embarqu'd again into the same Vessels which they came in, there being no convenient Vessels to be got for them there. Soon after they prepar'd all things to be gone the next day, onely staying for Fodder for the Horses, of which at this Place they were to provide themselves quite to 
Peking.


The thirtieth in the Forenoon the 
Conbon
 sent the Ambassador by one of his
 
Mandarins
 ten 
Picols
 of Hay for a Present, which since none could be bought for Money, was accepted with many thanks, and a reward to the 
Mandarin
 that brought it.


In the Afternoon a Grand 
Mandarin,
 who had the Command over the 
Mili∣tia
 and the Emperors Wardrobe in this City, came to Complement and Wel∣com the Ambassador; who having presented him with a Glass of Wine, and shewed him the Horses and Oxen, took his leave.


The one and thirtieth in the Morning, being furnish'd with all Necessaries,
 they left 
Siucheu,
 and were Tow'd along a digg'd Channel, which reaches from 
Siucheu,
 Eastward of the Lake 
Tai,
 to the City 
Chinkiang,
 and disembogues it self into the great River 
Kiang.
 Having stay'd eight days for new Vessels to Embarque themselves in, and yet not able to get enough, were forc'd to keep four of their 
Hanksieu
 Barques, two for the Horses, and two for the Presents.


The two Masters of the Havens, sent by the General of 
Hanksieu
 to conduct
 the 
Netherlanders,
 took their leave at the North Suburb of 
Siucheu,
 where lea∣ving the Ambassador they intended to Sail again to 
Hanksieu; Van Hoorn
 for their care which they had over the Vessels, gave each of them a Piece of 
Perpe∣tuana;
 and also with this opportunity sent the following Letter to the Gene∣ral of 
Hanksieu,
 and the 
Conbon.




GRatitude is accounted the greatest Vertue amongst the 
Hollanders.
 The
 Ambassador cannot forget the many Favors which the generousness and Civility of 
Talavja
 had conferr'd on him. The Ambassador cannot find words to express his hearty thanks, but hopes at his Return from 
Peking
 and for the future to manifest by Deeds, how much the Realm of 
Holland
 and the Am∣bassador are oblig'd to 
Talavja.




The whole City 
Siucheu
 hath its Situation on the Banks of a great standing River, which cuts through the City cross-ways, and is Navigable both for small and great Vessels. The Walls of the City, according to the 
Chinese
 Geo∣graphers, are forty 
Chinese
 Furlongs in circumference, and with the Suburbs above a hundred: As the 
Netherlanders
 were inform'd, the City covers a Spot of three Leagues in circumference. Without and within are many stately Bridges of Stone, resting on several Arches. It is but thinly built, and the Hou∣ses are erected on Pine-tree Masts, many of them being very sleight.


Siucheu,
 because of its nearness to the Sea and the River 
Kiang,
 is a Place of great Trade, and hath many Ships belonging to it; nay, the 
Netherlanders
 saw so many Boats in all Places, that there was scarce room to get through them.


Much Amber is us'd in this City: for the 
Hollanders
 passing through several Streets, saw none but Workers of Amber.


All things, not onely for the subsistence of Man, but also for pleasure, may be had here in great plenty. It is one of the famousest Places in all 
China,
 be∣cause all the 
Portuguese, Indian, Iapan,
 and other Commodities that come from foreign Countreys, are brought thither not onely by Strangers, but the 
Chine∣ses
 themselves. There also come many Merchants from 
Nanking
 and other Places to Trade, which makes, that from year to year there is a continual Trade here, and Ships going from hence to other Provinces and Cities: and because the Ships should not be in danger when they Sail cross the neighbor∣ing Lake 
Tai,
 there is a Channel made on the North side of the Lake, which runs from the City 
Sucheu
 to that of 
Chinkiang;
 so that it discharges its Waters in the River 
Kiang;
 but yet the Course of it is stopp'd up there by a Sluce, which is drawn up, or let down when they please. But as they travel from 
Sucheu
 to 
Ukiang,
 or from 
Ukiang
 to 
Sucheu,
 is a Stone Bridge, resting on three hundred Arches, by which the Channel is divided from the Lake 
Tai.
 On this Bridge they draw their Vessels along by a Line, it being built for that purpose, that they need not lie still there with their Ships.


Without the Walls of the City stands a Custom-house, where they pay no Custom for Goods, but for the Ships according to their Burthen: and it is said that this Custom comes Annually to ten hundred thousand 
Ducats,
 or five hundred thousand Pound 
Sterling;
 whereby it may easily be judg'd how ma∣ny Ships go constantly up and down this River; whereas all the Emperor's Vessels, or those that carry any thing to the Court, pay nothing.


Many of the Emperor's greatest Barques, call'd 
Lunchyven,
 past by whilst the 
Hollanders
 Rid at Anchor there.


The City is Govern'd by a 
Conbon
 or Governor, who at that time was a 
Leao∣hing Chinese,
 and highly belov'd by all Persons.


After the 
Netherlanders
 were gone about a League from the City they pass'd by 
Xuciquan,
 a large Village, and in the Afternoon saw two hundred of the Emperor's great Barques lying at Anchor. In the Evening they arriv'd at the South-East side of the Suburb 
Usie,
 having that day with Sailing and Towing pass'd six Leagues in several Courses.


Usie,
 the second substitute City to the fifth Metropolis 
Changcheu,
 signifies
 
Wanting of Tin;
 for formerly on Mount 
Sie
 near 
Fusie,
 the 
Chineses
 found a great deal of that Metal; but in the beginning of the Reign of the Imperial Family of 
Han,
 most of the Mines were exhausted, for which reason the City receiv'd that Denomination.


Here the 
Hollanders
 found many Stone Ovens, in which they Bake, or har∣den with Heat to that purpose, all manner of Stone.


In the Morning, being the first of 
April,
 they proceeded on their Journey,
 and Sailing about a Musquet-shot from the Walls of 
Usie,
 which leaving on their Lar-board, they arriv'd at the North-Suburb; where having stay'd some time for 
Coelies,
 or Men to Tow them, they went forward again. About Noon they Sail'd through 
Unquouw,
 a Village situate on both sides of the Channel, where they saw divers Vessels full of 
Indigo
 (which the Masters of them said was to be had at 
Sinchian
 and 
Sucheu,
) and towards the Evening arriv'd at the Village 
Gongling,
 where they stay'd all that Night, having that day Sail'd three Leagues and a half in a Northerly Course.


The second in the Morning leaving the Village 
Gongling,
 and after half a


Leagues Towing through the Village 
Syksiovyem
 they dropp'd Anchor in the Evening on the North side of the City 
Siucheuw,
 otherwise call'd 
Cbangcheu,
 that there they might furnish themselves with fresh 
Coelies;
 but none being to be had there so suddenly, they were forc'd to stay that Night, having not gain'd above two Leagues in a North-West Course all that day: The reason why they made no greater speed was, because the Channel was very full of the Emperor's Barques, which by reason of their Bulk and deep Lading made but little way, and the Channel so narrow, that they could not pass them.


The sides of this Channel near the City are rais'd with much braver Stone than the other parts.


The third in the Morning going on farther, and passing through the Vil∣lage 
Laytschem,
 they arriv'd at 
Luesinga
 in the Evening; where dropping An∣chor they stay'd all Night to get fresh 
Coelies
 to Tow their Vessels, with which they came that day but three Leagues, because of the slow progress of the Emperor's Barques.


The fourth leaving 
Luesinga,
 they came, after they had been Tow'd through the Village call'd 
Sucouw,
 to the City 
Tanyang:
 in the Afternoon Sailing along
 the Walls thereof to the East Suburb, where they stay'd that Night to get new 
Coelies,
 having that day Sail'd and been Tow'd in a Northerly Course three Leagues.


The fifth in the Morning they set forth again with fresh 
Coelies,
 and leaving the City 
Tanyang,
 pass'd by a Lake, which by three Sluces empties her Waters into this Channel. In the Afternoon they came to a little Village call'd 
Hongunpek,
 where they spent some time in resting themselves, being much tir'd by slippery Ways, and the Wind being against the Vessels, whose high build∣ing had the greater force of them. So soon as they had eaten they went away again, and in the Evening arriv'd at the Village 
Singfon,
 where they were for∣ced by tempestuous Weather to drop Anchor, having that day by several Courses been Tow'd two Leagues and a half.


The sixth in the Morning leaving 
Singhfon,
 they saw several Stone Ovens: about Noon passing by the Walls of the City 
Sinkiang,
 or 
Chinkiang,
 they dropt
 Anchor at the North Suburb, to make preparation for their going up the 
Nan∣king
 Stream, or River 
Kiang,
 and likewise (as their 
Mandarine
 Guides said) to exchange some Barques, having this day been Tow'd about two Leagues.


The seventh in the Morning several 
Tartar Mandarins
 came to Complement the Ambassador, and bid him welcom, whilst he entertain'd them with a Glass of Wine. One of them after his departure sent the the Ambassador a Porker, a Goat, and some Fruit, which he thankfully receiv'd, and in return sent him some counterfeit Pearls, which he would else have bought. The Ambassador
 was also by a 
Mandarin
 invited to Dinner with the Governor of that Place; whither he went in the Afternoon (another 
Mandarin
 coming from the fore∣mention'd Governor with Horses to fetch him) with 
Putmans
 the Secretary, and all his Retinue, except 
Nobel,
 who could not go because of his indisposition; and coming to the Governor they were courteously receiv'd and welcom'd.


This Lord gaz'd so exceedingly upon the 
Netherland
 Ambassador and his Retinue, that he forgot his Eating and Drinking; by which means also no Discourse hapned amongst them of any remark; so that the 
Netherlanders
 af∣ter a civil Entertainment took their leave.


In the Evening the Interpreters, 
Ienko
 and 
Liulako,
 came to tell the Ambassa∣dor, that they had a second time been sent for to the fore-mention'd Governor,


who ask'd them for the number and quality of the Emperor's Presents, which as far as they knew they had given him an account of in Writing, whereat he was exceedingly amaz'd, saying, That without doubt they would be very acceptable. Moreover, he ask'd them if the Ambassador had no Blood-Coral, Pistols, Sword-blades, counterfeit Pearls, and the like? because he would willingly buy some of them, and therefore desir'd that they would please to speak to the Ambassador: Which being consider'd by the 
Netherlanders,
 and observ'd that this was a 
Tartar,
 and a Man of great Quality, who in and about the City bore the Command over a great number of Soldiers, and that he might do much for their advantage at 
Peking,
 they judg'd it conveni∣ent in the Morning to send and present him with five Ells and a half of Stam∣mel,
 five of Sky-colour'd Cloth, a Perspective Glass, two Pieces of Linnen, one String of Amber Beads, and some counterfeit Pearls; and with them were sent a Complementing Letter to this effect:




THe Ambassador is extreamly satisfi'd with, and oblig'd for 
Talavja
's or his Lordships Civilities, and desires him to accept of these small Gifts as a token of Friendship; and in so doing will farther oblige the 
Hollanders:




Captain 
Putmans
 was order'd to carry the Governor the fore-mention'd Presents and Letter that Morning, but saw him come early Riding towards the Barques; so that it was thought fit to stay till his Return. Mean while the Ambassador's Son went with the Pilot and Interpreter 
Maurice
 a Fowling on the Banks of the River 
Kiang.
 The Governor returning, in the Afternoon came with four of his chiefest Lords to see the Oxen and Horses, and also to visit the Ambassador, protesting he could not avoid waiting on him, being so much pleas'd with his Conversation: Whereupon the Ambassador call'd for his Musick; with the pleasure of which he seem'd even ravish'd: After which being entertain'd with 
Spanish
 Wine and Sweet-meats, he departed.


The Gifts design'd for the Governor were now ready to be presented; but he modestly refus'd them, saying, He could not accept of them as yet, giving him many thanks in the mean time. Then asking 
Genko
 and 
Liulako
 the In∣terpreters, who were there present, if the Geueral of 
Hanksieu,
 and 
Conbon
 of 
Seucheu
 had receiv'd any Presents of the Ambassador? To which they an∣swer'd, That the General of 
Hanksieu
 had not, but the 
Conbon
 of 
Sucheu
 was pleas'd to cull out a couple of Swords: Whereupon he a second time refus'd the Gifts; but adding, That if any Swords had been mention'd in the Note, he would have been glad of them. Wherefore the Ambassador after his departure chose a Sword from a peculiar Parcel, (for they had but few) and in stead of a Pistol, of which also they had no great store, (for all the enquiring was for those two sorts of Arms) added a Carbine to the Presents. Which done, 
Putmans
 went a second time to the Governor with them. The Swords, Carbine, Sky-colour'd Cloth, and counterfeit Pearl he receiv'd, but the rest he sent back; when several of the Generals Children coming to see the Ambassador in his Barque, were in respect to their Parents presented with Amber Necklaces and other Trifles.


After the 
Netherlanders
 had stay'd till towards the Evening waiting for Ves∣sels to Ferry them over the River 
Kiang
 (for there were none but a great Boat, which the 
Mandarin
 Guide 
Hiulavja
 kept for himself, under pretence that that which he came in was grown leaky) they went with all their Vessels to the Mouth of the Haven before a 
Pagode,
 where they stay'd all that Night,


whilst the Guide 
Mandarins
 offer'd a Goat and a Swine to their Deity, before which, as they say, they durst not Sail up the River.


The chiefest of them went into the 
Pagode
 or Temple, carrying the slain Sa∣crifice to lay it on the Altar; when the Priest at their approach fell devoutly upon his Knees, and began to Mutter and Pray to himself. In the Temple, being Painted Red, hung several Lamps, which burnt Night and Day for the Deceas'd Souls: On one side of the Altar stood a Trough, wherein they laid the Victim; and on the other, a Rush Box with small pieces of Canes, which were the 
Sortes
 or Lots cast by the Priests, to know future Events.


Presently after Noon, the Governor of 
Sinkian
 came with a Train of great Lords to the same Temple; which he was no sooner enter'd, but he sent for the Ambassador, desiring him, he would Command his Musick with him, which the Ambassador did; and so repairing to the Temple, the Governor Entertain'd them with Bean-Broth, and the Ambassador on the other side, Cordiall'd them with Preserv'd Nutmegs, which the Governor and his 
Manda∣rins
 having never tasted of before, Eat with great delight, while the Musicians plaid on their several Instruments.


After some stay, the Governor desir'd to see the Horses, which the Ambas∣sador caus'd to be brought out of the Barques, which they all beheld with great admiration, saying, That they had never seen the like, therefore they doubted not, but they would be very acceptable to the Emperor; after they had seen the Horses, the Governor return'd again to the City, and the 
Hollan∣ders
 to their Barques.


On Sunday, being the tenth, and 
Easterday,
 they set Sail with a South-East Wind from the City of 
Sinkiun;
 the Ambassador with twelve Barques more, went Northerly cross the River 
Kiang,
 and after having Tack'd too and again about an hour, they arriv'd at the North-side of the River, about a quarter of a League distant from the Garrison of 
Quasieu,
 or 
Quacheu,
 through a great Stone Sluce, in an artificial Channel, running Northerly by the seventh Metropolis 
Xangcheu,
 to the Lake 
Piexe.
 This Trench is digg'd directly through the Coun∣trey, to make a way for Shipping out of the River 
Kiang,
 (which in that place sends no Branches to the North, but runs direct East towards the Sea) into the 
Yellow River.


It was at first in the Embassy of 
Peter de Goyer,
 and 
Iacob de Keys,
 by 
Nieuhof
 call'd, 
The Royal Channel,
 partly for her breadth and pleasantness, and partly, be∣cause it was built at the King's Charge.


They were Tow'd thorow the same in several Courses, having divers Reaches and Windings in half a League: At the end of which they arriv'd at a Village call'd 
Tongnanghong,
 where they rested a little, whilst the Ambassa∣dor walk'd ashore to see the foremention'd Sluces; and going also towards a Temple, was met by two 
Mandarins,
 (one a 
Sinksieuwan,
 and according to his own saying, the second Person of 
Quasieu,
 and the other a 
Tartar,
 and Gover∣nor of that Village) who both civilly welcom'd him, for which he return'd them Thanks. He of 
Sincksieuw
 being ask'd by the Ambassador concerning
 
Tayowan,
 whether it would be deliver'd, answer'd, That he was well satisfi'd, that this Embassy, and chiefly the Presents which the 
Netherlanders
 brought, would be very acceptable to the Emperor; and that he doubted not of their good success in their Business, and that all their Wishes were, that the 
Nether∣landers
 were enter'd into a League with the 
Tartars,
 in the Countrey of 
China,
 and that they might come there to Trade with them, and then they should


hope, that the Foraign Traffique would again be permitted as formerly; whereas, because of the strict Watches at the Sea-Port Towns, nothing could be done; and that the Countrey People could not put off their Commodities; and if you Fee the Courtiers well, nothing will be deny'd at 
Peking▪


As to what concern'd 
Tayowan,
 it was in a mean condition, because they were obstructed from Trading to any place in 
China,
 and likewise all their best People were gone; therefore if the Emperor would only joyn twenty Jonks to the 
Netherland
 Ships, it might easily be taken.


That about five Moneths since, a Messenger had been there from the Em∣peror, to bring all the 
Chineses
 there present under Subjection, who had also Order, that if those of 
Tayowan
 did not hearken to his Proposals, that then at his return he should destroy all the Sea-Port Towns which were yet in being, and to give strict Orders in all places, that not one Jonk should either come in, or go out, but if they would submit themselves to the Emperor, that then all places should be left as they were. Now this Messenger being return'd fruitless, there was such Orders given in all the Havens, that not one Vessel can either come out or in to them, which was formerly winked at.


Not many days since, another Messenger was sent to 
Tayowan
 (being the same of whom 
Ienko
 the Interpreter had inform'd the Ambassador at 
Sucheu
) whose return they much long'd for.


The Ambassador after this Discourse invited the 
Mandarins,
 with some other that came thither in the interim to this Barque, where they were entertain'd with a Glass of 
Spanish
 Wine, which having drank they departed.


This 
Mandarin
 of 
Sincksieuw,
 sent the Ambassador as a Present, one Porker, one Sheep, four Hens, two Geese, a Vessel of their Drink, and some Herbs, and the Governor of the Village some Dishes of Meat ready dress'd.


Afternoon, the Vessels going thorow the foremention'd Sluces, the 
Manda∣rin
 Guide 
Hiu Lavja
 came to an Anchor at the end of the Village, before a 
Pago∣de,
 and from thence Rode to make merry at the City of 
Quazieu;
 wherefore the Ambassador seeing that this day would be spent idly, went with the Barques wherein the Presents were Laden, to the Village 
Palipoe,
 and staid all Night; but the 
Mandarin
 inform'd of the 
Netherlander's
 departure, soon after follow'd them to the foremention'd Villages.


This day they gain'd about three Leagues.


The eleventh in the Morning, they set Sail again, and pass'd by several small Towns and Villages, and also by a great Tower, with seven jutting Galleries, standing on the South-side of 
Tongnaphan;
 between which and the foremention'd Tower, a Channel runs up Westward into the Countrey.


Against Noon they came to the South Suburb of 
Iamcefu,
 otherwise call'd 
Iancheu,
 the third City of Note in this Territory, where was also a Tower with four Galleries, by which being Tow'd to the City Walls, they resolv'd to change their 
Coelies,
 having given those that brought them thither, leave to go home, notwithstanding it was late before they got new Men; yet they went away, and pass'd through a Bridge with six Arches, opposite to a Custom-House, and so Eastward, having that day been Tow'd up the River two Leagues and a half.


In the Morning, being the twelfth, they proceeded on their Journey about Day-break, from 
Yancheu,
 against the Stream, by and through 
Wantoe,
 a Vil∣lage separated by a Channel that runs up into the Countrey of 
Wayopoe,
 or
 
Stone Bakers,
 from the abundance of Kilns that are there; the West part


of it being under Water, represented a great Pool, or Lake.


At Noon they pass'd by 
Sjopouzink,
 a Village that a far off seems a City, and also three Sluces, thorow which the Water runs out of this Channel into the Manur'd Grounds.


Towards the Evening, coming to a small Village of seven or eight Houses, call'd 
Louting,
 where was a Cloyster of their Votaresses or Nuns, they dropp'd Anchor, having gain'd five Leagues on several Courses.


The thirteenth in the Morning, leaving the Village 
Louting,
 they pass'd by many Cottages, standing on the East-side of this Channel, to the Westward of which the Countrey lay all drown'd.


In the Afternoon they arriv'd at 
Kayoven,
 or 
Kaoyeu,
 the fourth City of Note
 next 
Hangcheu,
 where they were forc'd to stay, because their 
Coelies
 could not pass, the Ways being so deep by continual falling of Rain.


The City 
Kaoyeu
 lieth on the East-side of this Channel, on the brinks of the Lake 
Piexe,
 which supplies the Stream with Water.


Formerly, all the Ships that would go from 
Nanking,
 and the other Sou∣thern Territories along the River 
Kiang,
 and this Channel up to 
Peking,
 and so to the Northern Province, were forc'd to cross the foremention'd Lake, to their great hinderance and inconveniency, being in Stormy Weather many times compell'd to stay at 
Kaoyeu
 for fair Weather.


But in process of time, to prevent this trouble, and that at all times the Ships might proceed on their Journey, and not be necessitated to cross the Lake, a broad Channel was digg'd of seventy Furlongs, on the East-side of it, and Wharff'd or Inclos'd on each side with Free-stone: The City stands on a Clay Ground, the same with the adjacent Countrey, very good for Rice, which they have there in abundance.


The Countrey to the West of this Channel lies most under Water, yet pro∣duceth abundance of Canes, which serve for Fuel, for no other Wood grows here.


The fourteenth in the Morning, they set Sail with a stiff Gale of Wind out of the North-North-East, from the South Suburb of 
Kayoven,
 and for a quarter of a League, they had the City on their Starboard, and the Lake on their Larboard, till they were past the North Suburb; then Steering a Northerly Course up the Royal Channel, they left the foremention'd Lake on their Larboard.


Between this Lake and the Channel, is only a narrow Bank of three Foot high, which separates the one from the other: On their left Hand, the Coun∣trey lay all under Water, yet in some places stood a few small Huts dry, being the Residence of Countrey People.


In the Afternoon, they past by the Village 
Loantsia,
 which lay on their Star∣board; here the Countrey on the East-side began to shew somewhat pleasanter, being Till'd in several places.


In the Evening they Anchor'd at a Village call'd 
Kuisjo.


The fifteenth in the Morning, leaving 
Kuisjo,
 they past by 
Laensui,
 and 
Lou∣japou,
 and in the Afternoon Landed at 
Paoing,
 the sixth City of Note under the seventh Metropolis 
Yangsheu;
 it lieth on the East-side of this Channel, and is surrounded with strong Walls, about a League and a half in Circumference: On the North-side of the City stands a fair Temple, neatly built after the 
Chi∣nese
 manner.


Here they staid sometime waiting for fresh 
Coelies,
 which having gotten, they went farther, and in the Evening arriv'd at 
Kinho,
 where they staid all Night, having that day by several Courses gain'd five Leagues.


Between the City 
Paoing
 and the Village 
Kinho,
 the Bank Westward of the Channel which separates that and the Lake 
Piexe,
 is broken in several places, through which the Water rushes with such a force out of the Channel into the Lake, that they had great labor to keep the Vessels from falling there into.


The sixteenth about Day-break, proceeding on their Journey, they past through and by many Villages and Hamlets, lying on each side of the Channel; and about Noon, arriv'd at the West Gate of the City 
Hoaigan,
 having by Noon
 been Tow'd and Sail'd three Leagues and a half in a Northerly Course. Here (as the 
Mandarin
 Guides told them) all their Vessels in which they came were to be chang'd; whereupon they immediately apply'd themselves to the Com∣missary of that place, that they might be dispatch'd with what speed possible.


No sooner were they come to an Anchor with all their Barques, but there also Landed the Masters of the Haven of 
Hanksieu,
 which on the last of 
March,
 went from 
Sucheu
 with the Ambassador's Letter to the General, which Letter they said, they had safely deliver'd.


Their business, for which they came thither, was to fetch back the four 
Hanksieu
 Jonks, which were yet amongst the Fleet.


Some 
Mandarins
 also came to Complement and bid the Ambassador Wel∣come, in the name of the Governor of that place; for which Civility they were Entertain'd with two or three Glasses of 
Spanish
 Wine.


In the Night there arose a great Storm out of the North mixt with Thun∣der and Lightning, which continu'd all the next day.


The eighteenth, the foremention'd Governor invited the Ambassador and
 his whole Retinue to a Feast, in a great House, at the West-Gate of the City, before which they lay with their Vessels, whither they accordingly went about Noon, and were no sooner come there, but they were brought to the Gover∣nor's Presence, who kindly Congratulated the Ambassador's Arrival and Health. After some other Complements were past, every one was plac'd at a peculiar Table, and plentifully serv'd.


Among their Table-talk at Dinner the Governor ask'd, What the Ambas∣sador thought of 
China,
 and if it was not a great Countrey? Who reply'd, Yes Sir, not only a great, but a very fair Countrey, full of Fertile Grounds, and Delightful Objects: Then he began to Discourse with the Guide 
Mandarins
 (which were there present) about the Vessels: Wherefore the Ambassador de∣sir'd the Governor (being inform'd before, that there were few Barques to be had there) that since he was come so far with the Emperor's Presents, having never wanted any Conveniencies, that he would be pleas'd to take care, to procure them good Vessels so soon as possible, (because he was yet to go the most dangerous part of the way) having already spent so long a time in their Journey. All which this Lord promis'd, and excusing the meanness of the present Treat, hoping when they came back from 
Peking,
 to be provi∣ded for their better Entertainment. On which 
Van Hoorn
 proffer'd to Present him with a parting Cup of 
Spanish
 Wine, which he modestly refusing, would not suffer.


Thus the 
Netherlanders
 taking their leaves, and departing to their several Barques, two 
Mandarins
 came to them, (which had, whilst the 
Netherlanders



were Entertain'd at the foremention'd Lords, sate just over against them) to ask in the Governor's Name, if their Entertainment had pleas'd them? where∣upon the Ambassador, in respect to their Master, Presented each of them with five Ells and a half of Red Cloth, which after some Complements they accepted.


The nineteenth in the Morning, according to the usual Custom, the Secre∣tary 
Vander Does
 went with a Complementing Letter to the Commissary, and to Thank him for his kind Entertainment: The Contents were these.




THe Ambassador so highly esteems 
Talavja
's Civility, that he cannot ex∣press
 his Thankfulness in these few Lines; but at his return from 
Pe∣king,
 He hopes to find Him in good Health, when he will manifest and confess himself much oblig'd by his Lordships Favors.




The Ambassador was inform'd by the 
Mandarin
 Guides, that notwithstand∣ing the Commissary had promis'd Yesterday, that he would take care to pro∣vide Vessels for his farther Journey: The 
Touwatja
 had said, That there were none to be had, therefore the Secretary was commanded, that when he came to the Commissary, to desire him a second time to assist them, that they might depart with all speed, and then to go from thence to 
Touwatja,
 and ask him if any Vessels were to be had? and if he answer'd no, he should acquaint him, that they would hire Vessels themselves, for they could wait no longer; and if he reply'd, there were, then to desire him, that they might be sent to them that very day.


The Secretary at his return, inform'd that he had been at the Commissary's House, but could not be admitted to speak with him; but that he had given the Letter, and whatever else he had to say, to his Servant, who presenting it to his Master, brought answer, That his Lordship thanked the Ambassador for his kind Wishes; as to what concern'd the Vessels, he knew no otherwise but that the Ambassador was already furnish'd, but since they were not, he would immediately send to the 
Touwatja,
 and Order him, to procure them; which if he did not do, he would complain to the Emperor of his neglect. The Secretary had also been with the 
Touwatja,
 and enquir'd of him concerning the Barques: To which he was answer'd, That there were Vessels enough, but they lay at 
Sinkianso,
 a Village at least three Leagues from thence, and that he would send some of his Men thither with the Guide 
Mandarins,
 to look upon them, and if they were Equipt and Tight, to hire them.


But because the Ambassador suppos'd the Guides 
Mandarins
 not to be very expert in Naval business, he sent his Secretary with them; who returning in the Evening, brought word, That he had chose two convenient Barques for the purpose, which 
Touwatja
 had promis'd to hire, but he could find none to carry the Horses, Oxen, and their Persons, therefore the 
Touwatja
 believ'd it con∣venient, that the Ambassador and 
Nobel
 should remain in those Barques which brought them thither, and go up farther in them; and the 
Touwatja
 would sa∣tisfie the Owners of them for it, and also furnish them with all other Necessa∣ries for their Journey.


As for Barques to carry the Horses, he would send for them from the other side of the 
Yellow River,
 which with the two Barques that the Secretary had cho∣sen, would be there the next Morning; to which purpose, 
Lakka
 the Interpre∣ter was left there, that he might come down with them.


The twentieth in the Morning, the 
Mandarins
 (which the day before had
 been Presented with five Ells and a half of Red Cloth) came in return to Pre∣sent the Ambassador with two Cowes, two Sheep, six Ducks, six Hens, four Steans of 
Chinese
 Drink, seven Pieces of Silk Stuffs, and two Silver Cups.


The Provisions were kindly accepted of, but the Silver Cups and Silk Stuffs he return'd.


In the Afternoon, the Interpreter 
Lakka
 came back without any Barques from the Village 
Sinkiansoe,
 with news, that the 
Touwatja
's People wrangled, and would not agree with the Owner of the two Barques which the Secretary had chosen, offering them less than their Fare; whereupon 
Nobel
 went immediate∣ly to the 
Touwatja,
 to ask him a second time, What he intended to do about the Barques, and withal tell him, That he if he did not suddenly provide them with Barques, they would go and hire some themselves, or else go away with them in which they were.


Nobel
 at his return brought the 
Touwatja
 along with him, who excus'd himself, that he could not yet provide Vessels for them; and desir'd, that the Ambas∣sador would please to have patience till the next Morning, against which, he would send to all places, and if he could find none, they might remain in those wherein they were, and so go on in them at least two days after.


The next day being the one and twentieth, no likelihood of any preparati∣on appearing, 
Van Hoorn
 judg'd it convenient to write to the Governor to this effect.




THe Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 hath earnestly desir'd, that the Ambassador
 should hasten his Journey to 
Peking,
 because the 
Lipous
 were somewhat dissatisfi'd at his long stay; now the Ambassador hath already been three Moneths from 
Fokien.


The Horses, Oxen, and other Goods of the 
 
Chinkon,
 are subject to hurt, and may suffer in their Transporting.


And because the Emperor's Favor is concern'd in this 
Chinkon,
 the Ambassa∣dor desires, that his Lordship would please to give Order for the speedy pro∣curing of Vessels for the 
Chinkon
 to go up to 
Peking,
 or that the Ambassador himself may hire, because he can neither well answer his long stay to the Em∣peror, nor his Master the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 in 
Batavia.




To this Letter carry'd by 
Putmans,
 the Governor answer'd.




THat he had just cause to complain; also that he himself had sent some Barges, and that he would take further care to accommodate the Am∣bassador so soon as it was possible.




In the Evening the 
Touwatja
 came again to the Ambassador, to promise and assure him, that he should be provided the next Morning for his Journey, and therefore intreated his patience till then: To which 
Van Hoorn
 answer'd, That if he perform'd his promise, he would take it kindly.


The two and twentieth, the 
Mandarin
 Guides came to tell the Ambassa∣dor, that the Vessels were come to take in the Horses, and Oxen, and that the Shipwrights were busie in mending and repairing the Decks. The Commissary having sent them as his own, and likewise a great Boat to put the Presents in out of those Vessels which were not in condition to go further.


The 
Netherlanders
 immediately going to see the foremention'd Barges, and


finding them to be pretty good, they immediately gave order for the remo∣ving of them into those Vessels, and so, all things being ready, they left the City 
Haoigan
 with seven Vessels, which carry'd their Goods and Persons, besides eight more for the 
Mandarins
 and Interpreters. Coming beyond the North Suburb of 
Haoigan,
 the Governor of the City, who was there busie receiving the Emperor's Customs and Tribute, Drank to the 
Netherlanders
 good Voyage in a Cup of Bean-Broth, which he sent Aboard by his own Servants; for which as they pass'd by him they return'd him many thanks, and gratifi'd the Servants with two Rix-Dollars.


Haoigan,
 the eighth City of prime remark in the Province of 
Nanking,
 lieth on the East side of the Channel on a Plain, being all a Morass, not far from the Sea, and in the North near the Yellow River. It is but one City, yet consisting of two Parts, both which are inclos'd within one Wall: that which lies to the South is properly call'd 
Haoigan,
 and that to the North-East 
Yenching:
 It is enlarg'd by a Suburb, which on each side of the Channel extends it self above a League.


In this City the Vice-Roy of that Province hath his Residence, who takes care, as Purveyor, for the Emperor's Annual Provisions, and Commands with arbitrary Power over the Southern Provinces. His Office is to send for Provisions and other Necessaries from the adjacent Countrey, which in an in∣credible number of the Emperor's Jonks are sent from thence to 
Peking.
 When they come to this City they are all search'd and measur'd by the Vice Roy's Order, who afterwards sends them to the Court.


In this Suburb are also two Custom-houses, one for Merchandises, and the other for Ships, but not for the Emperor's use. The Money which is hereby rais'd is bestow'd on the repairing of Sluces, Graffs, and Banks near several Water-falls; yet notwithstanding a great part thereof goes to the Emperor's Exchequer. On the North side of the City in this Channel are three Water∣falls, of which the first and nearest to the River 
Hoai
 is the most troublesom, because out of this River the Water comes with great force; which is stopp'd by nine great Banks, that it may not overflow the whole Countrey.


Not far from 
Haoigan
 the 
Netherlanders
 pass'd by 
Pantja
 and several other Villages, and also by a great number of the Emperor's Jonks laden with Tri∣butary Goods. In the Evening they arriv'd at 
Zinkhiunzoe,
 where they were to pass by a Sluce, having by Noon been Tow'd almost three Leagues.


The next Morning being the twenty fourth they got safely through the foremention'd Sluce, and from thence by a Village call'd 
Sinkjanzoe,
 which scattering extends it self along this Channel above a League and a half, and about Noon were in sight of the Village 
Namenno,
 or 
Namemio,
 or 
Neymemia,
 before which stood a Place of Execution, as appear'd by several Mens Heads stuck on Poles: Here they were also forc'd to pass another Sluce, which was somewhat dangerous; for coming near it, they were forc'd to stay till some of the Emperor's Barques, laden with Revenues, were gotten through. Mean while the Horses and Oxen were put ashore, for fear, as the Men pretended, when the Barques should come to the Sluce with them (where the Water, be∣cause of its narrow Passage makes a great roaring) they would not stand still, and thereby endanger the oversetting of the Barques. In the Afternoon all the Vessels got safe through, yet with much trouble; for every Vessel was forc'd to be drawn with two hundred Men; for the Water on the upper, or North side is above four foot higher than that below on the South: Thus they were






tow'd along till they came to the end of the Village, where they Anchor'd be∣fore a 
Pagode,
 where the Barque-men, according to their Custom, went to of∣fer and pray for a safe Passage through the 
Yellow River,
 which they were now to enter, having this day gain'd about three Leagues.


The twenty fifth about Noon leaving 
Namemio,
 they cross'd the 
Yellow River,
 which runs South-East and North-West by the foremention'd Village to the Western Shore, on which the 
Coelies
 were Landed, opposite to the Village 
Sing∣ho,
 and then tow'd them North-North-West up the 
Yellow River,
 till they came to the Village before-mention'd, where they stay'd for fresh Men.


Mean while a 
Siampan
 or Boat came aboard with a Priest, and two Persons
 calling themselves Magicians, or Cunning-men, one of them having a Bod∣kin stuck through his Cheek, and continually shaked their Bodies, as if they had been possess'd, which they made the poor People believe, also telling the Men in the Ambassadors Vessel, That they should have a fair Wind the next day, and a successful Voyage; whereupon the Master, who stood quaking be∣fore them, gave them some Silver (which was all they desired) and also some Gold and Silver Paper, which he entreated them to offer to their Deity: 
Van Hoorn
 also to be rid of them, gave them some Money.


There are many of these sort of People in 
China,
 which by strange Gestures, and scourging of themselves after a peculiar manner, so get Alms from the Charity of the People.


Some lay red-hot Cinders on their bald Heads, where they let them burn so
 long, till the stench of the Broyling offends the Spectators, whilst they by cry∣ing, wringing of their Hands, and the like, enduring so great Torment, move all that are present to a charitable Benevolence.


There accustom also in the chiefest Cities, and Places of greatest Com∣merce, especially at Annual Fairs, whole Companies of blind Beggars, which at the uttering of some Words which they mutter, strike themselves so violent∣ly with a sharp and cutting Stone on their Breasts, that sometimes the Blood trickles down their Bellies.


Others knock their Foreheads one against another with such violence, that they seem to crack one anothers Skulls; which they continue till fainting they fall in a Swoon, unless prevented by a considerable Alms. Some again lying along on the Ground, beat their Heads against the Stones till they have great Swellings as big as Eggs upon their Foreheads.


Besides these, there are many other Idle People in 
China,
 who by several Cheats maintain themselves by the Gifts of Charitable Persons. The Beggars amongst others go up and down in Companies, as our 
Gipseys,
 who for their debauch'd living are accounted as the most infamous of the Nation. Most of them are deform'd, either born so, or else made so wilfully by their Parents in their Infancy, with incredible Torture; for there are some with wry Necks or Mouths, crook Backs, long hooked Noses, or squint Eyes, and lame Arms or Legs.


There are likewise many Mountebanks, who use several wild Beasts, especi∣ally Tygers, made tame by Degrees, on which, to the admiration of the Be∣holders, they sit and ride through many Cities and Villages, which walk along the Streets very softly, with a Branch in its Mouth, which holding wide open, is very fearful to look upon, besides his Tail, which he swings to and fro, yet hurts none.


The Rider, who knows without either Bit or Bridle to govern the Tyger, onely by moving his Body and Feet, hath a wide Coat over his under Clothes, with Sleeves so large, that they hang down half way to the Calfs of his Legs: Over his right Shoulder comes a Girdle, which is made fast under his left Arm, in manner like a Scarf▪ In his left Hand he grasps a Sword, with which he cuts the Air, and now waves it over his Head, and then side-ways, crying and extol∣ling, like our Stage-Doctors, his Balsoms, Unguents, and Plaisters, good against all Wounds and Distempers whatsoever.


This Mountebank is generally accompanied with many deform'd People, some following him on Crutches, others with Rattles; most of them go na∣ked; others again wear wide Coats, full of Patches of divers Colours and Stuffs; others, which is strange to behold, have stiff Wings on their Temples, on each side of their Heads.


IT was late in the Afternoon before fresh Toers came from the Village 
Singo;
 nevertheless the 
Netherlanders
 going forward, pass'd by 
Sinkiazuan,
 and about Night arriv'd at another small Village, containing about ten or twelve Houses, call'd 
Ioupou,
 where they dropp'd Anchor, having that day been tow'd but two Leagues and a half.


The twenty sixth they went by break of day from 
Ioupou,
 and came, having pass'd 
Conghiveao, Tsantzan,
 and 
Govetchia,
 the two first on the East, and the last on the West side of a River, about a Cannon-shot Southward from the City 
Taujenjeen,
 where they were forc'd to stay for fresh 
Coelies,
 having that day gain'd
 three Leagues and a quarter, according to the Course of the 
Yellow River.


Taujenjeen,
 otherwise call'd 
Taoyven,
 scituate on the Western Shore of the 
Yel∣low River,
 is surrounded with broad and strong Mud or Earthen Walls, fortifi'd above with Stone Breast-works.


The twenty seventh they proceeded on their Journey with fresh Toers, and leaving the City 
Taujenjeen,
 went on Easterly, and at Noon pass'd by 
Suyt∣sien,
 lying on the East side of the 
Yellow River,
 and also by divers Rusticks Hou∣ses, which stood on each side thereof. At Noon they came to a nameless Ham∣let,


of seven or eight Houses, on the West side of the Stream, where they stay'd all Night, because the 
Mandarins,
 it beginning to blow somewhat hard, durst not venture further. This day they were got about three Leagues on∣wards of their Journey.


The next Morning, being the twenty eighth, they reach'd the Villages 
Goes∣jan, Pojancho,
 and 
Gousuntu,
 the one on the East, and two last on the Western Shore of the Stream. In the Afternoon they arriv'd at 
Tsinsing,
 where they lay still expecting fresh 
Coelies,
 being got three Leagues and a half that day on se∣veral Courses. Somewhat Easterly from 
Tsinsing
 appears a fair Castle, with∣in a Wall, which towards the North takes in a Mount.


The twenty ninth in the Morning weighing from 
Tsinsing,
 they came, ha∣ving sail'd a League Westerly, to 
Kousango,
 a Village where the Channel call'd 
Iun
 takes its beginning, and discharges its Waters through a Sluce; 
viz.
 This Channel 
Iun
 begins on the Northern Borders of the Province of 
Peking,
 in the Territory 
Hoaiganfu,
 Northward from the City 
Socien,
 on the North side of the Yellow River; out of which the Ships that go to all Places in the Nor∣thern part of the Empire, are brought into the Channel 
Iun,
 which spreads it self North-West from thence through the second County 
Iencheufu,
 in the Pro∣vince of 
Xantung
 to the City 
Cining,
 Southward of the Lake 
Nanyang,
 then through those of 
Tungchunfu,
 and through the 
Nanyang,
 and lastly at the end of that Territory it disembogues in the River 
Guei,
 which separates the Provinces of 
Xantung
 and 
Peking.


But because this Channel in many Places is too shallow for Vessels of Bur∣then, there are above twenty Sluces, which they call 
Tungoa,
 built artificially with Stone: every Sluce hath a large Water-gate, which is open'd when any small Boats or Vessels are to pass, and strongly barr'd up with Posts and Planks to keep up the Water. These fore-mention'd Gates are open'd with an Engine, or Wheel-work, with little trouble, to let the Water through, and so from one to another till they have past through, like the Sluces at our new River at 
Guilford.
 But half way before they come to the City 
Cining,
 they let as much Water out of the Lake 
Usianghoe,
 or 
Can,
 through a very great Water∣gate, as they have occasion for them, locking it again, that the Lake may not be quite exhausted.


When the Ships come to the Lake 
Chang
 they cross it not, but go with great∣er ease along a Channel made near the side, and Confin'd with two broad Banks. At every Water-gate are People, which for small consideration pull the Vessels through with Ropes. In this manner the Ships go out of the Yel∣low River to 
Peking.


Certainly if the 
European
 Builders, or Layers of Water-courses, did come along this Channel 
Iun,
 and behold the thickness and heighth of the Banks on both sides, and the stately Water-gates, which are also of Free-Stone, or the firmness of the Work, they would justly admire the Contrivance and Art of the 
Chineses
 in this their way of Aqueduct, not to be paralell'd by the prime Pieces of the best Masters in 
Europe.


After all the Boats were Tow'd through the fore-mention'd Water-gates, they Sail'd up the Channel 
Iun,
 in a Northerly Course with a fair Wind by the Villages 
Mochoctan
 and 
Uwtaotchou,
 the first on the West, and the last on the East side of the Channel, and in the Evening came to 
Maulovao
 on the Western Shore, having this day wrought out six Leagues and a half.


Here they they were forc'd to exchange their 
Coelies,
 because the other that


came from 
Sinsing
 (a Place two Leagues and a half distance from thence) had gone their Stage.


Van Hoorn
 no way satisfi'd with these delays, told the 
Mandarin
 Guides, that
 they ought to have sent 
Coelies
 before, that they might have been ready against his coming thither, and then rehearsed the long time which he had already spent, when as they might have finish'd their Journey in six Weeks; all which (said he) you can scarce answer in 
Peking,
 if the Emperor's Presents should be any ways damnifi'd, which they are subject to.


The thirtieth at Noon, no 
Coelies
 coming, they went with some Soldiers into the Countrey to Press some of the Rusticks; which was done so leisurely, that it was almost Night before they got from 
Maulovao,
 and Sail'd the whole Night, though with a slow pace, because their Vessels often rak'd upon the Sand.


In the Morning the first of 
May
 they past by 
Kiakio
 and 
Sankomiao,
 two de∣cay'd
 Villages on the East side of the Channel somewhat up into the Coun∣trey, and about Noon pass'd by 
Thoetsuang;
 beyond which they lay still a little while till their Toers had Din'd. Then going on again they arriv'd in the Evening at a small Village call'd 
Sjousincha,
 and Anchor'd before a Water-gate, having since the last Night gain'd six Leagues in several Courses.


The second in the Morning about nine a Clock they pass'd through the Water-gate, before which they lay the Night before, being hindred there by a strong North-West Wind. In the Afternoon coming to 
Twansingiao,
 they again lay before one of the Water-gates till the Wind was something abated. Whilst they lay there, one of the Emperor's Barques, laden with Tributary Goods, just to the Northward of the Village, was accidentally set on fire, but soon quenched, onely burning her Stern, and very little of her Lading. Towards Evening they pass'd the fore-mention'd Water-gate, and Sail'd in the Moon∣shine through 
Singhjamiao
 and its Water-gates, and about Midnight Anchor'd before 
Wansensua,
 having that day gain'd but a League and a half. About day-light they got through the fore-mention'd Sluce, and at Noon arriv'd at 
Milanchia,
 where they were to pass another, but because the Wind blew very hard they cast Anchor before it.


This Village of 
Milanchia
 separates the Province of 
Nanking
 from that of 
Xantung,
 being seated on their Borders. Against the Evening, the Weather growing more calm, they went with their Vessels through the Water-gate be∣yond the Village, at the end of which they stay'd, having the whole day not gain'd above three quarters of a League, and pass'd out of the Province of 
Nanking
 into that of 
Xantung.


The Province of 
Xantung,
 being the fourth of the Northern, verges South-East and North with the Sea; and on the West side surrounded with Rivers: in the North it borders upon the Province of 
Peking;
 in the South, on that of 
Nanking,
 from which separated by the Yellow River. The remainder thereof lies inclos'd within the Rivers of 
Iun
 and 
Guei.


The fourth in the Morning weighing again, they pass'd through 
Tsingchia
 and 
Hanghsuansa,
 and also through two Water-gates.


To the Westward, or behind this Village, a great Lake, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Yzianghoe,
 takes its beginning, and through two Sluces discharges Waters into those of 
Iun.


In the Evening, though late, they came to the Village 
Tzizang,
 where they stay'd all Night, being got three Leagues and a half farther in several Courses that day.


The fifth about Day-break they went forward, and about Noon reach'd 
Iaixinho,
 or 
Iaxhinno,
 a little Town consisting of thirty six Houses, all built like Forts, or defensive Towers. Here they stay'd some time for fresh 
Coelies,
 who being come they weighed again, and first pass'd through a Water-gate, lying in the fore-mention'd 
Iaixinho;
 afterwards through 
Tsonoiacha,
 and two Water∣gates more. In the Evening they arriv'd at 
Maaliaeao,
 where they stay'd all Night, having gain'd four Leagues that day.


Here, as before, began to appear a Lake on the East side of the Channel. The Countrey to the Hills seeming to lie thereabouts under Water.


The sixth in the Morning before day setting forward again they pass'd
 through ten Flood-gates, and also by and through 
Tsouteucha
 and 
Naeyang, Lout∣chiajeen, Tongnang-fong, Tsiongiaceen, Chinkio, Sinchia, Tsoufee,
 and 
Sohousum.
 In the Evening they arriv'd at the South Suburb 
Tzinningfoe,
 or 
Cinning,
 and Anchor'd
 before a Flood-gate, through which they were to pass. This day they had gain'd eight Leagues.


Here, according to the 
Mandarin
 Guides Saying, the 
Hoaigan
 Barques, which were in the Fleet, must be chang'd, and therefore they must stay till the Governor of the City had provided others for them.


Here the Ambassador, to oblige 
Hiulavja,
 one of his Guides, that he might make haste, gave him a String of Blood-Coral.


The eighth in the Morning the Governor of the 
Militia
 of that Place, being a 
Tartar,
 came to Complement the Ambassador; for which Civility he was entertain'd with a Glass of Wine, and at his going away saw the Horses and Oxen, which he much admir'd.


In the Afternoon the 
Mandarin
 Guide 
Hiulavja
 came with the two Vessels to shift and take in the Horses and Oxen, but the 
Netherlanders
 searching them, found them to be very old and crasie, and therefore sent them back again.


The ninth in the Morning a Grand 
Mandarin,
 a Native 
Chinese,
 came with 
Hiulavja
 to visit the Ambassador, who kindly entertain'd them: amongst other Questions the Ambassador ask'd them when they should go forward on their Journey; whereupon 
Hiulavja
 answer'd, That the City had not yet provided Toers, Rice, Money, and other Necessaries, which should be got∣ten with all expedition, that they might have the least hindrance possible. But the Ambassador suspecting it to be onely delays, judg'd it convenient to send the following Letter to the 
Conbon,
 or Governor of that Place, to this effect:




THe Ambassador is arriv'd here from a remote Ploce with the
 
 Chinkon, 
and therefore hopes that his Lordship will forward the Iourney; for they have been a long time on the Way, and the Presents are subject to receive hurt and damage, therefore the Ambassador desires
 Talavja, 
that he would please to give order that there may be good Barques prepar'd for the Horses and Oxen, and that the Ambassador may be dispatch'd to go with all speed to
 Peking.




This Letter being carry'd to the 
Conbon
 by the Secretary 
Vander Does,
 and read over, he reply'd, That it was never known, nor customary either go∣ing to, or coming from 
Peking,
 to change Vessels in that Place. To which the Secretary rnswer'd, That he hop'd he would excuse the Ambassador, because he knew not the Custom, as being a Stranger; he had made this Request on the advice of his 
Mandarin
 Guides, who made him believe that the 
Hoaigan
 Barges must be chang'd here. The 
Conbon
 after this Discourse said, That all the Emperor's Goods should remain in the same Barques in which


they came thither, and that he would give order that the Barques should be furnish'd with all Necessaries; that the 
Hollanders
 might depart when they pleas'd. He also in the Secretary's presence sent a 
Mandarin
 to the 
Touwatja,
 or Master of the Vessels, with Commands that he should immediately furnish the Barques with all manner of Necessaries, and by no means detain the 
Hol∣landers.


The tenth in the Morning a 
Mandarin,
 sent from the 
Conbon
 of that Place,
 came to present the Ambassador with two Hogs, two Sheep, two Ducks, six Hens, two Pots of 
Chamzoe,
 or 
Zamzou,
 that is, 
Liquor of Rice,
 and some other fresh Provisions; which were all kindly accepted of, and the Bearers rewarded with three 
Tail
 of Silver.


About Noon they pass'd through the Water-gates, before which they had lay'n with all their Vessels, and lay still before another Sluce till the eleventh in the Evening; then setting forward again they arriv'd at 
Cinning,
 or 
Tzin∣ning,
 or 
Cuningsiu,
 the fourteenth City of note under 
Yengche
.


This is a pleasant, though an ancient City, lying on the East Shore of the Channel 
Iun,
 in a plain and Morassy Soil. The Suburbs thereto belonging, which spread themselves on each side of the Channel, are very large and popu∣lous, and hath on each side of the Trench two strong Water-gates.


In the dark they Sail'd by the Villages 
Oeling, Siliphoe,
 and 
Ghansu;
 and in the Afternoon dropp'd Anchor at the Village 
Poetuen,
 a League and three quarters from the City 
Tzinning.


The twelfth in the Morning weighing again, they shot three Water-gates, and also pass'd by and through two Villages, 
Longhwanghmuao
 and 
Nangwangao,
 lying close by one another, near the Place where the River 
Onghoo
 runs into this Channel, so that the Current which had hitherto in this Graff been against them, was now somewhat with them, by which means they reach'd the Vil∣lage 
Poelcely
 that Evening; and not long after arriv'd at 
Koygoeva,
 where they Anchor'd before two Sluces, having that day gain'd about four Leagues.


The thirteenth they pass'd the Sluces, and so leaving 
Koygoeva
 they Sail'd through three Flood-gates, and by the Villages 
Inlako, Tsinti, Kingkiacouw,
 and 
Oesienno:
 coming beyond the last, the Wind began to blow very hard out of the North, so that they were forc'd to Anchor near the Shore to expect fairer Weather, having this day Sail'd four Leagues.


The fourteenth being calmer they weighed again, and Sail'd about three quarters of a League, when they came before a Flood-gate in the Village 
Oe∣sienno,
 where they lay till the Evening, because the 
Mandarins
 said there was not Water enough to float the Vessels. Towards Evening they weighed again, and in the Dusk pass'd by 
Siliphoe, Ulchelapoe,
 and 
Oeliphoe;
 and in the Afternoon arriving at 
Toukjamtuao,
 they dropp'd Anchor before a Water-gate, two Leagues and a quarter from 
Oesienno.


The fifteenth in the Morning about nine a Clock they pass'd the Sluces, and leaving the Village 
Tunkjamtuao,
 they came about Noon to 
Xantsuy,
 a City, where they stay'd a little while for fresh 
Coelies;
 which when come to them, they immediately went on.


The City of 
Xantsuy
 lies on each side of the Channel 
Iun,
 which on the West side at the going up of the Trench, and fortifi'd with strong Castles built square, and about an hours walking in circumference; the Walls of Stone, strengthned with Stone Breast-works: there are also many stately Buildings, which for want of Inhabitants are faln to decay. Amongst other Edifices ap∣pears


a famous 
Pagode,
 or Temple, 
Teywan Miao,
 inclos'd within a Wall rais'd half with Free-Stone, and the other half with red and green Bricks. The Tem∣ple it self consists all of Free-Stone; the Roof on the in-side is of a Vermilion colour, and on the top cover'd with yellow glaz'd Tyles; without the Walls is a standing Water, where, according to the Relation of the 
Chineses,
 some years since a stately Temple suddenly sunk, with the whole Congregation, Priests and People.


Towards the Evening they came to 
Kimonsa,
 and dropp'd Anchor before a Water-gate, having that day gain'd three Leagues and a half.


The sixteenth in the Morning they shot the Sluces with all their Vessels, before which they had lay'n that Night, and came to another about a Musquet Shot thence; through which they could not get till the Afternoon, because of the shallow Water. From thence they arriv'd before another in the Village 
Oasting,
 which they went through in the Evening; and in the Dusk arriv'd at 
Tsaotsing
 before a Flood-gate, having that day been Tow'd but three quarters of a League; it was very difficult too for the great Vessels to get through these Sluces, which were in a manner quite dry on the North side, and on the South side not above three Foot and a half of Water, which being let out, there would not remain a Foot and a quarter, when as the great Barges drew two Foot and a half so that the Water must at least be a Foot higher before they could get through; wherefore they lay still two days, 
viz.
 the seven∣teenth and eighteenth; but on the nineteenth they got through, and after a little Sailing coming to the Village 
Gihaatsysy
 they dropp'd Anchor before a Water gate, having this half day been Tow'd somewhat more than a League.


The twentieth in the Morning they went through the Sluce, and at Noon another; and also by the Village 
Zoatiajeen,
 In the Afternoon arriving at 
Lieg∣hayway
 they Anchor'd before a Water-gate, having gain'd two Leagues this day.


The one and twentieth in the Morning having shot the last Sluce, they ar∣riv'd about nine a Clock at the South Suburb of 
Tungjanfoe,
 otherwise call'd 
Tungchang,
 the third City of eminency in the Province of 
Xantung.


This little City of 
Tungchang
 stands in a Valley, built square, and about an
 hours walking in circumference, with defensive Walls. In it are two eminent Streets, which run cross through the Town, in the middle of which stands a Triumphal Arch, or a high Structure with four Vaulted Posterns, and as many Roofs one above another. The Gates are very strong, and have on each side four Bulwarks, which they can, when Storm'd, clear and make good. On the North side is a Bridge of a hundred and thirty Paces long, leading cross a Wa∣ter that incircles the City. On the South is a very populous Suburb of great Trade. On the East stands an Iron Pillar, four Fathom and a half thick, and about twenty Foot high, Engraven at the bottom with several 
Chinese
 Chara∣cters, which according to their Relation was set up there seven hundred years before, as a Monument; under which lay the Body of an Heroe, famous for his valorous Atchievements, and good Service done his Countrey.


The two and twentieth in the Morning they left the South Suburb of 
Tung∣hang,
 having gotten fresh Toers, for which they stay'd, and Sailing a Mus∣quet Shot Eastward by the City, came about Noon to 
Sinsia,
 where they An∣chor'd before a Sluce, having Sail'd above a League this half day.


Here they were forc'd to lie all the Afternoon and the next day, before they could get through for want of Water.








The twenty fourth in the Morning they shot the fore-mention'd Sluces, and about Noon another; and also pass'd by 
Xoesu, Liancotsue, Liancotza.
 In the Afternoon they came to 
Toetsao,
 where they Anchor'd before a Water-gate, ha∣ving been Tow'd above a League that day.


The twenty fifth setting forth again, they pass'd another Sluce, and about Noon they came to 
Woersjavaan;
 where taking fresh Toers they went away immediately, with hopes to reach the City of 
Linsing
 that day; but being past 
Ooetsjaven, Taykiasa
 and 
Tayhiaven,
 they saw that the Channel lay full of the Em∣peror's Vessels, laden with Tributary Goods; which by reason of its narrow∣ness and sholeness in some places they could not pass by, which forc'd them (though but half a League from 
Linsing
) to stay till the Water grew higher, ha∣ving that day gain'd three Leagues.


The twenty sixth in the Morning they went forward again, and about nine a Clock they arriv'd at 
Linsing;
 into which they went with their Barges (for the Channel runs through the middle of it) till they came before a Flood-gate, through which they were to pass, having this Morning been Tow'd half a League in a Northerly Course. All Places hereabouts lay full of the Empe∣rors Barges.


The Governor of this Place, as the 
Mandarin
 Guides related, was depos'd, and a new one expected in two or three days from 
Tungchianfoe;
 for which rea∣son they could not pass the Sluce before which they lay, it being lock'd up with Iron Chains.


The twenty seventh and twenty eighth nothing hapned of remark.


The twenty ninth, being 
Whitsunday,
 the Ambassador was told, that the Go∣vernor of 
Tungchanfoe
 was come, and had taken possession of his Place; so that he thought fit the thirtieth in the Morning, for the hastening of his Journey, to write the following Letter to him.






THe 
Holland
 Ambassador is come from remote Countries, and hath staid here at 
Linsing
 above four days. The 
Chinkon
 hath been a long time a coming, and by that means subject to be spoil'd; therefore the Ambassador desires, that they may with all speed go to 
Peking;
 and to that purpose the Sluces may be open'd, which will be service∣able to the Emperor, and a great kindness to the Ambassador.




Nobel
 carrying this Letter, related at his return, that he had been with the new Governor, who in answer to the Ambassador's Letter had told him, That he was sensible how far a Journey the 
Netherlanders
 were come, and that he knew (having two years since been at 
Emuy
 and 
Quemuy
) what service they had done for the Emperor; therefore he would not detain them, but send a 
Manda∣rin
 to search the Barges (because there being a Custom-house, no Goods but the Emperors were to pass through without paying) in which the Emperors Goods were, to see if any other private Commodities were in them, or not; which should no sooner be done, but he would give them leave to be gone, and accordingly a 
Mandarin
 was forthwith sent, who at first was very earnest about searching of the Goods: But when the Ambassador answer'd him, that he might do it and begin at his Vessel, but he would permit no Chests nor Ca∣ses to be open'd, he went away without looking upon them; being first pre∣sented by the Ambassador with two Pieces of Linnen, which was all he aim'd at.


The next Morning about Day-break, passing the Sluce with all the Vessels,
 they went through the City of 
Linsing,
 till they came to the River 
Guei,
 or 
Geu,
 which comes from the South to another part of the City.


Thus they left the 
Channel Iun,
 in which they had past through forty seven Sluces, or Flood-Gates, not without great trouble, and Expence of two and thirty days time; yet according to the 
Chineses
 saying, they were gotten hap∣pily and speedily out of it, because some years since, there was so little Water in that Channel, that the ordinary Vessels had been forty five, and fifty days coming from 
Tunchiangfoe,
 and 
Linching;
 which places are not above six Leagues distant one from another.


In the Afternoon they got beyond 
Linsing,
 which exceeds all other Cities in
 this County for Populousness, fair Buildings, (though on the West side it is much decay'd) and Traffique; nay, it need not give place to any City in the whole Empire, for it stands at the end of the 
Channel Iun,
 where the foremen∣tion'd Channel and the River 
Guei
 commix their Waters; by which means there is extraordinary Conveniencies for Shipping, the Vessels and Barques that come Laden to this City with all sorts of Merchandize, from most places in 
China,
 here pay Custom to three Treasurers chosen for that purpose.


On the North side, you may see a Bridge with nine Arches, over which they pass from one part of the City to the other; one of which Arches is made so artificially, that it may be remov'd, and give Passage to the biggest Vessels, after they have paid their Custom.


The City (seated in a plain and Sandy Soil) hath a Mud-Wall, Fortifi'd on the top with Stone Breast-works, having on the North side fifteen Bulwarks, and two Redoubts.


Half a League from the Walls, on the North side of the City, is an exceed∣ing high Tower, built with eight corners, rising from the Ground with nine Galleries, every one nine Cubits above another, so that the whole heighth amounts to ninety Cubits. The Out-Wall consists of fine Porcelane Earth,


curiously adorn'd with Imagery and Painting; the Inner, of various colour'd Marble, Pollish'd as smooth as Glass, especially the Black: The Ascent is by a pair of winding Stairs, not made in the middle, but betwixt two Walls, which hath its Entrance at every Story, and from thence to the Marble Gal∣leries, and Gilded Iron Rails, which as an Ornament are made round about the Galleries; at whose corners hang little Bells, in such a manner, that being mov'd by the Wind they make a pleasing sound: On the uppermost Story stands a great Image, thirty Foot high, Cast of Copper, and Gilt, to which, being a Goddess, the Tower is Dedicated: From the upper Gallery, the whole City, with the adjacent Countrey, yield a pleasing and delightful Prospect.


On one side of this Tower stands a fair 
Pagode
 or Temple, worth the seeing, for the great Gilded Images which are in it.


In the Afternoon they were Tow'd along the River 
Guei,
 through the Vil∣lage 
Wantouwo;
 and in the dusk of the Evening, they arriv'd at 
Ifong,
 a little Village, where they Anchor'd, being gotten three Leagues with the Tyde from 
Linsing.


This River 
Guei
 takes its Original on the West side of 
Gueihoei,
 the fourth Ci∣ty
 of Eminency in the Province of 
Honan,
 and from thence runs with many crooked Meanders, between 
Xantung
 and 
Peking;
 and at the Castle 
Tiencin
 dis∣embogues into a Bay call'd 
Cang,
 which borders on the great 
Indian
 Ocean.


The first of 
Iune,
 Weighing again, by break of Day they had sight of 
Oepoeye,
 and 
Wankelo,
 two pretty Villages; at Noon they were Tow'd Easterly by the City of 
Vohincheen,
 but without stay; so in the Afternoon passing 
Sangnes,
 about the Evening they arriv'd at 
Chianmaing,
 where they were to change their Toers, having that day gain'd five Leagues in several Courses.


The second in the Morning, having gotten fresh 
Coelies,
 they set out from 
Chiamaing,
 and past by 
Tsasuang
 and 
Singkiakouw;
 and in the Evening they ar∣riv'd at the City of 
Oesingjeen,
 or 
Uciening,
 otherwise call'd 
Vuching,
 the four∣teenth City belonging to the Metropolis 
Tungchang,
 in the Province of 
Xantung,
 where they cast Anchor.


Vuching
 lies Inclos'd with a square Wall on the East side of the River, having
 on the same a well-built Suburb.


This day they gain'd five Leagues and a half, according to the Course of the Stream, which thereabouts is full of windings and shallow Water.


The third in the Morning they reach'd the Villages 
Thunloo, Soenusoe,
 and 
Teckchiouw;
 and at Noon arriv'd at the City 
Taatchiouw,
 otherwise call'd 
Tachu.


This City lieth in a Square, (as most of the other Cities in 
China
) built on the right side of the River 
Guei,
 as you go up the same; it is inlarg'd with a fair and Populous Suburb: The City it self, though full of handsom Houses, yet hath lost much of his former Luster, suffering in the last 
Tartar
 Wars.


The Wall is about thirty Foot high, well built, and Fortifi'd with Bulwarks and Breast-works.


The chiefest Trade of the Inhabitants consists in the Brewing of (as we may call it) 
Chinese
 Beer, which the 
Tartars
 Transport from thence to other places. Here they lay still a little while, waiting for fresh Toers, which having got∣ten, they Weigh'd again, and came that Evening to 
Soukuntang,
 a Village, where they staid to change their Toers again, having this day gain'd six Leagues and a half.


The next Morning, being the fourth, having gotten other 
Coelies,
 they pro∣ceeded on their Journey, and past by some Vessels that were come from 
Pe∣king,
 in one of which was the General of the Province of 
Quantung,
 sent thither to succeed him that was then there, having (in regard of his great Age) desir'd a Writ of Ease.


About nine a Clock they Landed at 
Sangjueen,
 where they tarry'd some time; from thence going on in the Afternoon, they came to 
Ghanning
 and 
Seufeukhouw;
 and against the Evening at 
Lienuchoe,
 where they Anchor'd, having that day gone six Leagues.


According to the information of the Villagers, here the Province of 
Xan∣tung
 parted from that of 
Peking;
 though others will have it, that those two Pro∣vinces are separated by the City 
Taatchiouw.


The fifth in the Morning, they Weigh'd at break of Day, and Sailing down the River with a fair Wind from 
Lienuhoe,
 they past about eight a Clock by 
Taloeveen,
 at nine a Clock Westward, by the City 
Tonquangchien,
 or 
Tung∣quiang,
 on the South side of the River 
Guei,
 about a Musquet shot up into the Countrey.


This City (as the rest) built Square, contains about an Hours walk in Cir∣cumference, Inviron'd with strong Walls, and deep Moats: In the Market∣place, in the middle of the City stands a great Iron Lyon; and the Countrey about is planted with all manner of Trees, pleasant to behold.


At Noon they Landed at 
Ieusang;
 in the Evening, at 
Poethouw,
 where they dropt Anchor, waiting for new Toers, having this Day Sail'd four Leagues in the Province of 
Peking.


The next Morning, so soon as Day-light appear'd, they left 
Poethouw
 with a fair Wind and new Toers; and in the Forenoon, past 
Suskiajeen, Sjenzo∣ctan, Swykvao, Sakkiavoy, Siensiteen, Fonkiakoul, Sangui,
 and 
Suangcho;
 and at Noon arriv'd at the City of 
Siangchiouw,
 where they found other Toers rea∣dy, with which they immediately went away again, and past that Afternoon by 
Paliswang, Zaysisung, Ulchilitung, Soucoulthon, Suckiaswun, Sang, Isuang, Ul,
 and 
Vly,
 besides many 
Pagodes
 and Hamlets of decay'd Houses, and arriv'd in the Evening at the City of 
Chinche,
 where they lay still that Night, to be furnish'd with fresh 
Coelies.


The seventh, before Day-light, new 
Coelies
 coming, they immediately went on their Journey, and very early past by and through several Villages, 
viz. Sanquesucan, Iaquacouw, Tonchekouw, Palisuang;
 and about eight a Clock, they went Eastward along by the City 
Chingchee.
 By this City, a River running up into the Countrey, takes its Course to the South; soon after, they went by 
Sayetwang, Masang, Haysoemat,
 and 
Suang.


At Noon, they past thorow 
Lioucho,
 where they should have chang'd their Toers; but the Wind blowing very fair, they past by without striking Sail, which favoring them all the Afternoon, they went by nine Villages, 
viz. Sou∣coulthung, Koutche, Tankoulthung, Soutouwa, Gehockia, Chingsuan, Likiathue, Sincea∣theen, Canthea, Suatheen;
 and in the Evening, to the City of 
Chinchay,
 lying on the Eastern Shore of this River, where they dropt Anchor to stay all Night, having this day Sail'd eight Leagues and a half.


The eighth they set out again with fresh 
Coelies
 and a South Wind, from the City of 
Chinchay;
 and in the Forenoon, as they had done the day before, they past by many Villages, lying on each side of the River, as 
Oelifoang, Loulysuang, Thou∣liouw, Taywansuang, Oekiamiao, Boatsaac, t' Zongkiasuaan, Sangjue, Iangleotzing, Lie∣kiatwang,




Tzautsocauw,
 and 
Piechie;
 and in the Afternoon arriv'd at the City of
 
Tjensinghway,
 otherwise call'd 
Tiencin,
 where they dropt Anchor, having that day Sail'd six Leagues.


The General of the 
Militia
 in this place, being a 
Tartar,
 and a Man of great
 Quality, whose Sister was one of the present Emperor's Fathers Concubines, came to Complement and welcome the Ambassador, and also to invite him the next day to a Treat, for which civility the Ambassador returning Thanks, said, That he was tired and indispos'd, and therefore durst not venture to go out, but desir'd his Highness to excuse him. Whereupon the General reply'd, That he would prepare the Entertainment in one of his Barques, and come and lie with it by the Ambassadors, that he might not trouble himself to go ashore: On which, 
Van Hoorn
 seeing that it could not be otherwise, provided to come.


The ninth in the Morning, the General sent for the Ambassador, whereon, he, with 
Nobel, Putmans,
 and the Secretary 
Vander Does,
 went with some of the Retinue to his Barque, lying a little behind the Ambassadors, where they were courteously receiv'd, and immediately plac'd at Tables which stood all
 ready before their coming; soon after came also the 
Toya
 or Governor of the City, who also seem'd to be invited there, and was plac'd by the General at his own Table: Then the word being given, the Dishes were brought in, fill'd with variety of Meats, dress'd after the 
Chinese
 manner: The General urging no Discourse, nor asking the 
Netherlanders
 any Questions, only us'd his endeavor to perswade them to be Merry, and Eat and Drink freely.


After the 
Hollanders
 had well Feasted, and Thank'd the General for his kind Entertainment, they took their leave: When the Ambassador judg'd it con∣venient, in Requital of the General's kindness, to Present him with two Pieces
 of Linnen, a String of Amber Beads, five Ells of Stammel, one Piece of Perpe∣tuanaes, a Perspective Glass, and two Bottles of Rose-Water; all which, with a Letter, 
Putmans
 was to carry the next Morning: The Letter was writ∣ten to this effect.




THe Ambassador returns humble Thanks for his kind Entertainment, and lets his Lordship know, that since that, he is recover'd again, and in good Health.


The Ambassador shall always remember his Honors Favors; in Requital of which, and as a sign of his good inclination, he Requests, that he will please to accept of these Presents, which will highly oblige him.




Putmans
 returning, brought word, that the General would not accept of
 them, but had desir'd him to refer it till they came back from 
Peking;
 thanking the Ambassador with a Complementing Letter.


The City or Garrison of 
Tienein
 lies in a Triangular form, at the Promon∣tary of 
Xang,
 where all the Rivers of the Province of 
Peking
 meet; and after having pass'd her high Walls, disembogue themselves into the Sea.


The Inhabitants of this City Trade much, for which it stands very conve∣nient: all the Ships that come out of the Sea, or from any In-land places which will go up to 
Peking,
 must pass by it, wherefore there is always an in∣credible many Vessels; there is also generally the choice of all Merchandize, because this City is free for any one to Trade in, and pay no Custom.


The City it self is surrounded with high, defensive Walls, and defended by a strong Garrison.


Against Noon, leaving 
Tiensingway,
 after they had Sail'd a little way, though still in the Suburb, they left the River 
Guei,
 which had help'd them very much by her Ebbing Water, and went into another, which came out of the North in∣to that of 
Guei;
 so that they had both Wind and Tyde against them, and by that means went but very slowly; yet by Toing, they got past 
Quanfa, Sijkoelda, Iangsang,
 and 
Peytsang,
 lying on each side of this River; and in the Evening dropt Anchor at 
P'Hoekoel,
 having since their departure from 
Tiensingway,
 Sail'd about a League and a half.


The eleventh in the Evening, they left 
P'Hoekoel,
 and went that day with Sailing and Towing, by 
Thanquasue, Poecue, Ganchol, P'Hoekhouw, Hangchue,
 and 
Mactiachoa.


The Country hereabouts is plain, Manur'd, and full of Houses.


In the afternoon they arriv'd at a great Village, call'd 
Iangtzin,
 where they waited for fresh Toers, having this day gain'd three Leagues on several Cour∣ses, twice or thrice surrounding the Compass.


The twelfth in the Morning, the 
Mandarin
 Guide 
Hinlavja,
 sent to acquaint the 
Netherlanders,
 that there were no 
Coelies
 to be had there, therefore ask'd the Ambassador if he would hire Men. But 
Van Hoorn
 answer'd, That since he had not done it all this Journey, he would not do it now; so that they went away with a good Wind, which at first prov'd successful to them, but some turn∣ing, by reason of the crooked Windings of the River, they were forc'd by all the 
Coelies,
 to be Tow'd one after another; yet notwithstanding this, they past that day by 
Zeetiatwangh, Phinkoulutin, t' Zatzuen,
 and three other Villages. In the Evening they dropt Anchor at 
Gosathun,
 where they staid that Night, having this Day Sail'd two Leagues and a half.


The next Morning, being the thirteenth, the Wind blowing fair, they set Sail again; yet the Barques often sticking fast on the Ground, they made but little way; yet having past 
Wankafan
 and 
Sitiafoe,
 they came late in the Evening
 to the City of 
Gioechioe,
 where they staid all Night, having this day Sail'd but two Leagues and three quarters.


About nine a Clock in the Evening, the 
Mandarin
 Guide 
Hanlavja,
 and the 
Chinese
 Secretary 
Soukjen,
 and the two Interpreters 
Ienko
 and 
Liulako,
 came in a small Boat to the Ambassadors Barge, telling him, that they were going to meet the new General that came from 
Peking,
 and was hard by (as the 
Nether∣landers
 could see by the Lights in his Boats) going to 
Hoksieu,
 to Depose the there present 
Tziangpovi.


This news was not very strange to the 
Hollanders,
 having been often told by the Guide 
Mandarins
 and their Interpreters, that the foremention'd General in 
Hoksieu
 was Depos'd, and that the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 was condemned to pay two thousand Tail of Silver, because he had let the 
Netherland
 Ships go away without the Emperors leave, (which the 
Hollanders
 look'd upon (it being mixt with no true words) to be only a Tale; but that perhaps (since they saw that another came to Depose him) he might for some Misdemeanor or other, be sent for to 
Peking.


At Midnight, the foremention'd 
Hanlavja,
 the Secretary, and Interpreters came aboard to tell the Ambassador, That they could not speak with his Excellency that Evening, he being gone to sleep before they came, but they would go to him early the next Morning; as accordingly they did; desiring to know of the Ambassador what time he might wait upon him. But returning, they brought word, That his Excellency durst not permit it, because he had not


yet had Audience from the Emperor. Mean time his Highness Sail'd by the 
Netherlanders,
 accompany'd with twenty great Barges.


The City 
Gioechioe
 is a Ruin'd place, bury'd almost in heaps of Rubbish, oc∣casion'd by the last War.


After they had gotten 
Coelies,
 they left that City, though with slow advance,
 because the River (notwithstanding the Wind was good) in many places (as they had seen the day before) was full of dry Sands; yet at last, passing by 
Sanghkiatwangh,
 they could (because of the Night coming on) get no further than 
Wanghiapan,
 where they came to an Anchor, having, notwithstanding they had a good Wind, Sail'd but two Leagues and a little more.


The fifteenth in the Morning they Weigh'd again, and with Sailing and Towing, past by 
Ponsinghou
 and 
Googothien;
 and in the Afternoon arriv'd at 
Goe∣chin,
 where they staid all Night, having this day gain'd three Leagues.


About half a League from 
Goechin,
 lies the City 
Goeycen,
 North-West into the Countrey, which appear'd but little to the 
Netherlanders,
 (for they did not put in to it) but seem'd rather like a large Castle than a City.


A little before they arriv'd at 
Goechien,
 a grand 
Mandarin,
 a 
Tartar
 (as it was said) Nephew to the present Emperor, came to Complement and Visit the Ambassador in his Barge; where he was entertain'd with a Glass of 
Spanish
 Wine, which having drank, and seen the Horses, he took his leave.


The sixteenth, leaving 
Goechien,
 they proceeded on their Journey, and pass'd by many Houses, built on both sides of the River; and also by some Villages, as 
Kongidieen, t' Santan, Nainaimeao, Iaumeao,
 and 
Xantiento,
 the Suburb of 
Sang∣singhwey;
 and in the Evening, arriv'd on the East side of the same City, before a great Plain, lying between the City Walls and the River; having this day Sail'd three Leagues.


Here they were to lie (because the River being in a manner dry, they could get no higher) till the Emperors Order came to unlade the Presents, and go with them by Land to 
Peking,
 which was four Leagues distance.


The seventeenth, nothing happen'd of remark.


The eighteenth, several 
Mandarins
 came to Visit and Welcom the Ambassa∣dor; and likewise that 
Mandarin
 which was with him on the fifteenth, which was said to be the Emperors Nephew, who gave the Ambassador two Sheep for a Fire-Lock, which he much desir'd.


Amongst other Discourses, 
Van Hoorn
 ask'd this Lord, If no other Ambassa∣dors from any other place were in 
Peking?
 To which he answer'd, None, but some from the 
Corean Isles,
 which were shortly to return.


There happen'd little of note here, only the 
Mandarin
 Guide came to acquaint the Ambassador, that the next Morning Carts and 
Coelies
 would come to carry the Goods to 
Peking,
 and that one of the 
Lipous
 would be at a Town call'd 
Tonghsieuw,
 four Leagues from thence, to receive the Ambassador in the Empe∣ror's Name, and conduct him to 
Peking.


The next Morning, being the nineteenth, many Carts, 
Coelies,
 and Horses came to fetch the Presents, with all the Persons belonging to the Embassy, and their Goods, to 
Peking
 by Land; whereupon, the Ambassador gave immediate Order for the unlading of them, in which they spent all the Morning.


The Ambassador gave the Barge-men (though every one apart) which came with him and his Retinue from 
Sucheu
 and 
Hoaigan,
 eighty six Tail of Silver, with which they were very well contented.












About Noon, the 
Netherlanders
 set forward on their Journey to 
Tongsieuw,
 with the Presents and their other Goods, which were guarded by some Troo∣pers, and between a concourse of thousands of Townsmen, Rusticks, Women, and Children.


About three a Clock, coming to 
Tongsieuw,
 all the Goods were put into an
 old decay'd House, where the 
Netherlanders
 also Lodg'd, but found small con∣veniencies.


The twentieth, setting forth by Day-light, and having Rid thorow 
Palikua, Swango,
 and 
Kapucheen,
 they came within half a League of 
Peking,
 where they were Welcom'd by one of the 
Lipous,
 call'd 
Liu Lavja,
 a Native 
Tartar,
 who kindly receiv'd them; and after some Complements, conducted them to the City, which they enter'd just about Noon in good order.


Coming within the Gates of 
Peking,
 they thank'd God for his Mercy, in
 bringing them so great a Journey all in good Health, being a Way of many Leagues, in which they had spent six Moneths, Travelling both by Water and Land, by and thorow thirty seven Cities, three hundred thirty five Villages and thirty four Temples.


They were led by the Emperors Palace to the 
Tartars
 or Prime Chancellors Court, standing behind the Emperors, where all his Imperial Majesties Pre∣sents, according to order were to be left; and then the 
Hollanders
 to go to their Lodgings prepar'd for them.


The Streets through which they pass'd swarm'd with People, thousands standing on each side of the way, which made so great a Dust (to which incon∣veniency the Streets in 
Peking
 are very subject) that they could scarcely see; wherefore they were bid to sit down under the Gate or entrance of the Court, from amongst the croud of the People, which by thousands stood before it, there to stay for the Presents which were left somewhat behind in their Riding through the City.


Having staid about a quarter of an Hour under the Gate, and drank a Cup of 
Tee,
 the Goods came; whereupon the 
Hollanders
 were led into a Chamber, leaving 
Putmans
 and some of the Retinue to look to, and separate the Emperors Presents from the other.


The Ambassador and 
Nobel,
 with the rest, coming into the Chamber, they found some Secretaries sitting on a Table, which pointed to 
Van Hoorn
 to sit on the Floor; but he said, he could better stand, which they observing, bid him sit on the same Table where they sat, which he accordingly did.


Then the foremention'd Secretaries began to ask the Ambassador, by Order
 of the 
Lipous,
 the following Questions, 
viz.
 Concerning his Quality: From whence the Horses and Oxen came? How old they were, and how many Miles every Horse could go in a Day? To all which Questions he gave them fitting answers.


They likewise ask'd who was the chief in Quality? Whether the Ambassa∣dors Son or 
Nobel?
 because the General of 
Hoksieu
 had plac'd the Ambassadors Son first: To which was answer'd, That the Lord 
Van Hoorn
's Son, was accord∣ing to the Lord Generals Order in 
Batavia,
 to have the upper place; besides ma∣ny other frivolous Questions, not worthy rehearsal.


Mean while, the 
Lipou
 which had fetch'd in the 
Netherlanders,
 came to bring them some Meat dress'd after the 
Chinese
 manner, which they kindly accepted of, having eaten nothing all that day before.


Putmans
 also came to tell the Ambassador, that after the 
Netherlanders
 had ta∣ken nineteen Chests with the Emperors Presents out of the Carts, the 
Tatan
 or Prime Chancellor coming thither with another Person of Quality, had forbid them to unlade any more, and that they would have the Emperors Letter,
 which after much trouble, being found, having happily a day or two before been wrapt up in a yellow Cloth; the Ambassador bare Headed, bowing him∣self three times, laid it with both Hands on a Table cover'd with Red Cloth, (behind which stood the first and second 
Tatan
) not having time to deliver it in a Silver Charger, or any thing else of value; which done, the 
Netherlanders
 were again conducted into the Room in which they were before, without a Word spoke on either side.


Soon after, the remaining Presents, Horses, Oxen, and other Goods were dispos'd into proper places.


As they went to their Lodings, they were told that the Horses must be Sad∣dled,
 and the Oxen put into their Waggon, to be brought to Court the next Morning; because the Emperor had design'd to see them.


And now the Ambassador coming to his new prepar'd Lodging, was much amaz'd that there was not so much room as would hold the Goods, Horses, and Oxen, nor no convenience for himself nor his People; Whereupon chiding the 
Mandarins
 that brought him thither, he ask'd, if that was a House fit for an Ambassador which came so great a Journey, and had brought such Rich Pre∣sents, and whose Countreymen had done the Emperor such remarkable Ser∣vice; Withal, that it was impossible for him in that place, to take out the Sad∣dles for the Horses, and also the Coach; yet nevertheless he would do his en∣deavor, although he fear'd much that it could not be done.


The 
Mandarins
 observing the small conveniencies that the 
Netherlanders
 would have in that place, said, That they would acquaint their Master with it, and perswade them that they might have better Lodgings next day; mean∣while, the Ambassador must by no means fail to Saddle the Horses, and fit the Oxen, that they might be brought to the Court next Morning; but the Am∣bassador telling him that it was no way possible, unless they wrought the whole Night; The 
Mandarins
 took their leave.


About Midnight two 
Mandarins
 came again to the Ambassador's Lodging, sent from the 
Lipous
 to tell him, that the Horses and Oxen must be brought to the Court before Day, and if they could not be Saddled, to bring them without, for the Emperor would be there in Person to see them, which would be no small Honor.


The one and twentieth, about three a Clock in the Morning, one of the 
Li∣pous
 came to fetch the Horses and Oxen to the Court; whereupon, they were immediately Caparison'd and Harness'd, but the Chariot being fitted up, could not come out of the Door, so that being forc'd to leave it, 
Nobel
 and the Secre∣tary, conducted by the 
Lipous,
 went with the Horses and Oxen to the Court; from whence returning, at nine a Clock, they gave the Ambassador the follow∣ing account:


That entring the Emperor's Court at break of Day, they past through four strong Gates, then they walk'd along by the Walls of the foremention'd Palace, about a quarter of a Mile, at the end of which they went through a fifth Gate into the inner Court, where the Horses and Oxen were first view'd by the chief 
Zoutaizin
 or Councellor of State, who was a brown 
Tartar,
 with one Eye, and a White Beard, about sixty years old, who, as they said, by his con∣duct


Valor and Prudence, Govern'd almost the whole Realm. He also told 
Nobel
 and the Secretary, that they should go and stand back a little, for the Emperor was coming in Person to see the Horses and Oxen, and that when his Imperial Majesty came out, they should Kneel. But the Horses stood still, held by four 
Hollanders,
 in the same place where the before-mention'd 
Zoutai∣zin
 had seen them; and the Oxen also held by two, were about twenty Paces from the place where the Emperor afterward came to view them: The Grooms were likewise commanded to Kneel; a little while after, four Horses with Yellow Saddles came in at the inner Court Gate, on one of which the Em∣peror sitting, stood still, just without the middle Gate of the inner Court.


The Emperor, according to 
Nobel
 and the Secretary's Relation, was a Per∣son
 of a middle Stature, pretty White, and about sixteen Years of age, not gor∣geously Habited, having only a Blue Silk Damask Coat on, Imbroyder'd be∣fore, behind, and on the shoulders, with Yellow Boats, looking stedfastly up∣on the Horses for a considerable time; at length, drawing his Eyes from them, smiling, he spake to the foremention'd Governor about them, by which the 
Hollanders
 perceiv'd that his Majesty was well pleas'd with them. Then the Em∣peror gave Order, that two of the Horses should be Rid by the Commissary 
Berkman,
 and one Horse and an Ox be brought nearer him, where he look'd up∣on them with a more curious Eye.


After which, the Horses and Oxen being led a little way thence, his Im∣perial Majesty alighting, sate down on a little Bench, in the same place where he had stood with his Horse; and likewise the two first 
Zautaizins,
 or Councellors of State, sate down about four or five Paces from the Empe∣ror, on his left Hand, on Carpets of Cloth; the first of the two, was the Person that had seen the Horses and Oxen alone; the other was also a 
Tartar:
 When upon his Majesties Order a Cup of Bean Broth was given him, and also to the 
Netherlanders,
 who drank it on their Knees: Moreover, the Emperor Commanded to ask them, How far 
Holland
 was from 
Batavia,
 and 
Batavia
 from 
Hoksieu?
 and also, by whom the Ambassador was sent? To which they re∣ply'd, That 
Holland
 was eight Moneths Sailing from 
Batavia,
 and 
Batavia
 about six Weeks from 
Hoksieu;
 and likewise, that the Ambassador by Orders of their Prince in 
Holland,
 was sent from the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 in 
Batavia,
 which was all that was ask'd them; But the Horses and Oxen on the Emperor's Or∣der, taken from them, and led into a Stable, opposite to the Gate of the inner Court; after which, the 
Netherlanders
 had leave to depart (when to their full satisfaction, they had seen the Emperor above half an hour) the same way they came, leaving his Imperial Majesty sitting in the foremention'd place.


Soon after, 
Nobel
 and the Secretaries return with the remaining Attendance, two 
Mandarins
 sent from the Emperor, came to desire two 
Hollanders,
 one to dress the Horses, and another the Oxen, and shew his Grooms the manner of it, which the Ambassador immediately granted.


The 
Lipou Liu-Lavja,
 which had the day before fetch'd in the Ambassador,
 came also to his Lodgings to tell him, That the remaining Presents must im∣mediately be made ready to be carry'd to the Court; to which purpose Carts would immediatly be brought thither to fetch them; likewise, that the Lord Ambassador, his Son, and as many Persons more as he pleas'd, might come along with them, because he ought to be Present when the Goods were look'd over, to see if none were wanting, which was not needful at the Horses and Oxen, and therefore they were accepted of; whereupon, the Ambassador ma∣king


himself ready, Order'd the Presents to be put into the Carts, and went with 
Nobel, Putmans,
 the Secretary, and eleven Persons of his Retinue, towards the Court; but was first carry'd to the Council of State's House, where he had left the nineteen Chests with Presents: Here having sorted all the Goods (ex∣cept five Chests with White Pepper, which the 
Tatan
 said were needless) they were sent to the Emperor's Palace; whither soon after the 
Tatan
 (who Rid before through another Gate with the Goods) the Ambassador and all his Re∣tinue follow'd.


Coming to the inner Court, where the Emperor saw the Horses in the Morn∣ing, they found the Carts with the Goods there before them, and also the 
Tatan
 sitting in the open Court. Here the Ambassador and his Attendance were also shewn to sit down on the Ground behind him, which they accordingly did, on Coats brought with them for that purpose.


Having staid about half an hour, the two Prime Councellors or 
Zoutaizins
 of the Emperor, came also thither, and seated themselves on their Pieces of Cloth on the Ground; and having rested themselves a little, they call'd the 
Tatan,
 who kneeling before them, receiv'd their Commands, which was, to tell the Ambassador, That the Emperor ask'd if the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 in 
Batavia
 was in good Health? To which kneeling on one Knee, he answer'd, that he was.


Then the Councellors ask'd, If they were all four 
Persian
 Horses, and the Oxen 
Bengael?
 And also, If the 
Netherlanders
 were at Peace with the 
Persian
 and 
Bengael?
 To which the Ambassador reply'd, That they were, and had many years liv'd like Brothers, and real Friends. They also ask'd, What sorts of Grain there grew in 
Holland?
 To which they gave a fitting account. Then the Oxen were order'd to be put into the Chariot, and the Ambassadors Son to come and shew him Reverence.


Soon after the Presents, except the Lanthorns, were carry'd away again without the Emperor's coming to look upon them, and leave granted to the Ambassador to return to his Lodgings.


Mean while, 
Putmans
 and 
Ruwenoort
 staid in the Court to undo the Lan∣thorns, which the Emperor, after the Ambassador's departure came to see; and likewise the Oxen drawing the Chariot, in which he Order'd two of his Atten∣dants to sit, and be drawn in it; so that 
Putmans
 and 
Ruwenoort
 also saw the Emperor.


Several grand 
Mandarins
 went to Visit the Ambassador in his Lodgings; all which he Entertain'd with great kindness, and according to the convenien∣cy of the place.


The two and twentieth, early in the Morning a Secretary belonging to the 
Lipous,
 came to the Ambassador's Lodgings, to tell him, That 
Putmans
 must come to the 
Tatan
's House to unpack the Emperor's Presents, and look them over; whereupon, 
Putmans
 accordingly went thither.


This Secretary humbly proffer'd his Service to the Ambassador, saying, He would rejoyce, if by his advice, or ought else, he might be serviceable to his Excellency; for which he receiv'd many Thanks from the Ambassador, who answer'd him, That he would slip no opportunity to make use of him.


The same day, 
Ienko
 the Interpreter inform'd the Ambassador, That he had been told from credible Persons, that he should be brought within three days before the Imperial Throne, to have Audience granted him, which although he did not absolutely believe, yet he prepar'd all things in a readiness.


There also came a Commissioner with four 
Mandarins,
 sent from the Prime


Counsellor, or 
Zoutaizin
 of the Emperors, to ask the Ambassador if he had no Blood-Coral, 
Perpetuana's,
 or other Goods to Sell, because the Emperor would perhaps buy some of them? Whereupon the Ambassador reply'd, That the 
Ong,
 or General of 
Batavia,
 had strictly forbid him to sell any thing, but what he had was at the Emperor's Service: which said, they took their leave.


There likewise came two 
Mandarins
 to keep Watch in the Ambassador's
 Lodgings; so that the 
Netherlanders
 were then Guarded by four 
Mandarins,
 and twenty Soldiers, that every one was kept from going out (except those whom they pleas'd) or coming into the House. The 
Mandarin
 Guides also, which since their coming thither had been Lodg'd there, were remov'd to ano∣ther Place; but the 
Chinese
 Interpreter 
Soukjen,
 stay'd with them.


At Noon 
Putmans
 returning, said, That he had again been in the 
Tatans
 House, and laid a Piece of every sort of Goods to view, all which was Seal'd up in a Chest to shew the Emperor, and that the rest were left in Chests to be look'd over.


In the Afternoon one of the 
Lipous
 Secretaries came on Horseback to the Gate of the Ambassador's Lodging, saying onely to the Interpreters, That the Lord Ambassador must make himself ready against Midnight, to appear be∣fore the Emperor, and to deliver the Presents himself to his Majesty: which said, he immediately hasted away again without any Answer. 
Van Hoorn
 made himself ready against the fore-mention'd time.


The same Afternoon 
Putmans
 was again sent for to the 
Tatan,
 that he might (as they said) take the rest of Presents out of the Packs, that they might be shewn to the Emperor altogether the next Morning, and be in readiness to be deliver'd by the Ambassador to his Imperial Majesty.


Putmans
 returning very late in the Night related, That he had been with the 
Tatan,
 and had taken all the Goods out of the Chests, yet laid them in again. Moreover, he was commanded to tell the Ambassador, that he should make himself ready betimes to go to the Court the following Night.


The twenty eighth, two hours before Day-light, the Ambassador was with
 all his Retinue fetch'd to the Court by some prime 
Mandarins,
 being led through three other Gates than those which they pass'd the day before, to an inner Court: having pass'd the third Gate, they saw in a great Plain before the Portals of a stately House, all the Presents set on the Ground, and close by them the second 
Tatan,
 who also pointed to them to sit down by the Presents, which they did.


About half an hour after the Ambassadors from the 
Corean
 Isles, being three
 in number, came also thither with fifty Attendants, Habited after the 
Chinese
 manner, with long Hair, yet poorly Dress'd, and of mean Aspects; which were order'd to sit a good way behind the 
Netherlanders,
 on the left side of the going in at the Door.


In the interim, whilst the 
Netherlanders
 stay'd above two hours, some Dis∣course
 pass'd between the 
Lipou Lilavja
 and the Ambassador, about a Letter which the Interpreter 
Genko
 said the Ambassador would deliver to the Empe∣ror; which the 
Lipou
 advis'd him not to do, saying, That it was not customary there; for if they would Request any thing of the Emperor, they must first acquaint the 
Lipou
 with it, that they might again impart it at convenient times to the Emperor: Whereupon the Ambassador reply'd, That he would do nothing but what he advis'd him to, because he was a Stranger and knew not


their Customs. As to what concern'd the Letter which the Interpreter had told him of, it was nothing else but a Complement of thankfulness to his Imperial Majesty, which he design'd to speak to him, and whether it would be fit to de∣liver it to the Emperor before all his Business was done.


There likewise came another 
Lipou
 to the Ambassador, saying, That he had understood by one of the 
Zoutaisins,
 that it might happen, that the Emperor would ask the Ambassador some Questions, which if he did, he advis'd him to make short and brief Answers.


Lastly, the Ambassador was told, that he might again return to his Lodg∣ing, because the Emperor would not that day come out to see the Presents; yet that 
Putmans
 must stay there to see the Chests and Packs open'd, if any thing should be order'd to be taken out of them; all which was accordingly per∣form'd: But the Ambassador being in the last Gate to go out of the Court, was desir'd to stay a little, where 
Putmans
 came to him, saying, That 
Genko
 the Interpreter had demanded the Keys of the Chest in which the Presents were, which having open'd he was order'd to follow the Ambassador. A little after he was told, that he might go home with his Retinue, which he did, and was no sooner come thither, but he found a List written in the 
Chinese
 Tongue; in which was set down the Provision that the Emperor allow'd the Ambassa∣dor every day, 
viz.


For the Ambassador, his Son 
Iohn Van Hoorn,
 and 
Nobel,
 two Geese, four
 Hens, three Fish, six 
Catty
 of Meal, three 
Tail
 of black 
Tee,
 a pound and a half of 
Waetsjoe,
 one of 
Mesoe,
 one of 
Soya,
 one of Oyl, nine 
Catty
 of Herbs and Gar∣lick, six Cans of Liquor, and every five days a hundred Pears, five 
Catty
 of Grapes, or Raisins, five 
Catty
 of dry'd Prunes, a hundred and fifty Apricocks, and like∣wise every other day a Sheep.


For six Men every day twelve 
Catty
 of Pork, six of Meal, six of 
Tauwhoe,
 three 
Tail
 of black 
Woetsjoe,
 one 
Catty
 and a half of 
Misoe,
 the like of 
Soya,
 the like of Oyl, and six great Vessels of Drink.


For fifteen Persons every day seven 
Catty
 and a half of Pork, two of Herbs, one of Salt, five Jugs of Liquor.


In the Afternoon 
Genko
 the Interpreter came to acquaint the Ambassador, That all the Presents being taken out of the Chests and Packs, were brought before the Emperor in his Court, where his Imperial Majesty had seen them, and accepted of them; which did not a little rejoyce the 
Netherlanders,
 when they heard that all the Presents were deliver'd without any of them being dam∣nifi'd, except some flaws in the Lantern.


There also came two Commission'd 
Mandarins
 from the 
Lipous,
 to ask if the Ambassador could about two days hence go to 
Zamboie,
 that is 
Complement the Emperor?
 and withall, to go for the Emperor's Privy Seal the next Morn∣ing? To which he answer'd, That he was ready at all times to obey his Im∣perial Majesties Command.


The Ambassador also ask'd these 
Mandarins
 whether the Emperor had ac∣cepted of the Presents? and if he had done with them? To which they re∣ply'd, 
Yes.
 Whereupon the Ambassador said, That he was sorry, his House being so small, he could not entertain them according to his good inclination: To which they answer'd, That the Ambassador's good will was sufficient, and that three days hence he should remove into a great House, which was prepa∣ring for him.


The next day, being the four and twentieth, about nine a Clock a 
Mandarin



came to the Ambassador's Lodging, to tell him that it was time to go and shew Reverence to his Imperial Majesties Seal: Whereupon he went thither, with his Son, 
Nobel, Putmans,
 the Secretary, and five of his Attendants, whom the fore▪ mention'd 
Mandarin
 conducted into an old great 
Mandarins
 House that stood behind the 
Tatans;
 which when entred, they saw through one of the Palace Gates the Place where the Seal is kept, being a little eight corner'd House, and were directed to sit under the Gate, to defend themselves from the heat of the Sun; where, having stay'd half an hour, they heard a Voice bid∣ding them 
Ascend;
 having pass'd on about fifteen Paces they heard the same Voice crying, 
Kneel;
 and afterwards again, 
Bow your Heads three times together, which done you may rise;
 soon after it said, 
Kneel down again, and once more bow your Heads three times;
 so that they were to bow eighteen times and kneel six; all which being pass'd over, they cry'd, 
Stand up, and go to your Lodgings,
 which ac∣cordingly they did.


After the Ambassador had been at home about half an hour, he was told, that the chief Councellor of State, or 
Tatan,
 would be there presently: where∣upon they made themselves all ready to entertain his Highness, who soon after came thither with two 
Lipous:
 They ask'd the 
Netherlanders
 by an Interpreter several Questions, 
viz.
 How long 
Holland
 had been in being? Near what Kingdoms it border'd? What Goods and Merchandises were to be had from thence? To all which his Highness receiv'd satisfactory Answers: So having spent half an hour in asking Questions, and it beginning to grow very hot in the Ambassador's little House, it being about Noon, he said that he would go home, and leave the two fore-mention'd 
Lipous
 there, to be resolv'd of some more Questions by the Ambassador; who caus'd two Pistols, one Fire-lock, and two Sword Blades to be shewn to his Highness, with Request that he would take them with him in commemoration of 
Holland;
 but he excusing
 himself, said, That the Ambassador's good inclination was enough; which said, he departed.


The two 
Lipous
 ask'd him many frivolous Questions, not forgetting the least
 thing; nay, desir'd to know what Tails the Sheep and Hares had in 
Holland:
 in which Discourse they spent most part of the Day, the Ambassador giving them their desired Answers. After their Secretary had written down all things, they took their leave: The Ambassador proffer'd them some Presents, thereby to draw their inclinations towards him, but they refus'd them like the 
Tatan.


Mean while the Emperor sent eighteen 
Tartar
 Saddles, with all their Furni∣ture, to the Ambassador's Lodging, to use whilst he stay'd there.


The four Watch 
Mandarins
 were the same day presented by the Ambassador with a Piece of 
Perpetuana,
 and five 
Tail
 of Silver.


The twenty fifth the prime Secretary to the 
Lipous
 came with two 
Manda∣rins
 (all three Habited after a stately manner, fit to shew obedience to the Emperor) to the Ambassador's Lodgings after Midnight, to tell him, that it was time to go to the Palace: Whereupon the Ambassador went thither with most of his Retinue, which were all led through three Gates into the same Plain wherein they sat the Morning before, and there order'd to stay till Day∣light, when the Emperor would appear sitting in his Throne. Having spent two hours, and the Day beginning to appear, they saw the Plain full of 
Man∣darins
 richly Habited, that were come thither to 
Zamboie,
 or shew Obedience to the Emperor; so that the 
Hollanders
 divertis'd themselves with looking upon the Multitude. Having sat till half an hour after Day-break, they were con∣ducted


farther to a fourth Gate; about fifteen Paces from which they saw five Elephants, with Gilded Towers on their Backs, (three on the right, and two on the left side of the Entrance,) and likewise four of the Emperor's Wayns without Horses, standing on both sides of this Gate, which hath three Passages. They were conducted through the left Gate between the Elephants, which they had no sooner pass'd but they saw a fifth Gate, built like the fourth, but▪ somewhat higher; to which they went by an ascent, and found it also to have three Passages, through the middlemost of which (where on the right side stood the Emperor's 
Palakin
) they go directly to the Imperial Throne: but they were, as at the fourth Gate, led through the third Entry (because none dare go through the middlemost but the Emperor himself;) which having pass'd, they came in∣to a spacious Court; at the end whereof stood the Palace wherein the Throne was erected; to which they ascend by Marble Steps. The Court was full of 
Mandarins,
 Cloth'd after the best manner, sitting in Rows one by another. On each side of the Throne stood many Umbrella's, Flags and Standards, of yel∣low,
 blue, and white; below the Marble Steps, on each side of the Ascent of the Throne stood about thirty Persons in a Row, Cloth'd in the Emperor's Li∣very, being Yellow, and also ten white Horses with yellow Saddles, five on each side. The Ambassador and all his Retinue were plac'd on the left side of the Throne, at the end of the first Row of 
Mandarins;
 where having sat a ve∣ry little while, they were forc'd to rise up to make way for some Grand Lords that were going to the Throne. About half an hour after a small Bell was heard to Ring, and four Persons making a noise, or flacking with Whips, which was just as if a Field of Canes had been set on fire. Soon after they heard a Voice, which proclaim'd something in the 
Tartar
 Language; where∣upon many prime Lords and Great Persons went and stood directly before the Throne between some blue Stones (which were laid there about half a Foot high, to the number of eighteen or twenty) and upon the Proclamation of a Herald they shew'd their Obeisance to the Throne, by thrice Kneeling, and nine times bowing of their Heads: During this, a sweet Harmony was heard of several sorts of Instruments. When these Grand Lords had made their Obeisance, the Ambassador, being call'd by the Herald, was by two 
Lipous
 led with his Assistants between the fore-mention'd blue Stones, and plac'd just be∣hind the sixteenth, where they could neither see the Emperor nor Throne, yet made Obeisance in the same manner as the others had done before, the Musick beginning to Play when they Kneel. This done, the 
Lipous
 went again to their Places where they sat before; but the Ambassador, his Son, and 
Nobel,
 were through a by-way led up the Marble Steps that ascended to the House where the Throne stood; where they were plac'd next to the second 
Tatan,
 or Chancellor, from whence they saw the glittering Throne, and the Emperor in Cloth of Gold, the Imperial Stool not being above fourteen Paces from the Place where the Ambassador sat. Soon after 
Van Hoorn,
 his Son, and 
Nobel,
 were presented with a Cup of Imperial Bean-Broth; which they had no sooner drank, but the Emperor rising from his Throne, seem'd to come to them, but
 went out behind the Throne. He being a brown slender Youth, about sixteen years old, had, as the 
Netherlanders
 were inform'd, twelve Kings for his Guard. After his Imperial Majesties departure, the Ambassador also went soon after
 with all his Retinue to his Lodgings, not without great joy (because he found himself somewhat indispos'd) that he had made an end of this grand Business.


Having been at home half an hour, the prime Secretary to the 
Lipous
 came


thither, to ask him how far such and such Places were distant from 
Holland?
 and if there were any Tygers, or other ravenous Beasts in 
Holland?
 To which having receiv'd due Answers, he took his leave.


To the 
Mandarin
 that provided Horses for the 
Netherlanders,
 and conducted them to the Court, the Ambassador gave five Ells and a half of Stammel, which he accepted of, and us'd great diligence to get it out of the Ambbassa∣dor's Lodgings.


Since the Council in 
Batavia
 had expresly commanded, that when the Em∣peror had been Complemented, and his Presents deliver'd to him, they should also present the 
Taisins,
 or Councellors of State, therefore the Ambassador pro∣pos'd in Council, in what manner it was best to be done, and to which Per∣sons: whereupon it was judg'd convenient, that it should be to the following Persons, because they were to assist the 
Netherlanders
 during the Emperor's Mi∣nority, 
viz.
 the four 
Zoutaizins,
 being of his Imperial Majesties Privy Council,
 who Govern'd the Empire during his Nonage, should be presented with half a Piece of Scarlet, half a Piece of black Cloth, and half a Piece of Sky-colour'd Cloth, two Pieces of Crown-Serge, three of Cloth-Serge, ten Ells of 
Holland
 Velvet, one Quilt, ten Pieces of fine Linnen, two of fine 
Guinee
 Linnen, two large Carpets, two fine 
Chitsen,
 one Piece of 
Sandal
-Wood, twelve Pieces of Blood-Coral, four Pieces of great Amber, one Fire-lock, one pair of Pistols, two Swords with rich Gilded Handles, one pair of Pocket-Pistols, two Pieces of Whalebone, two Rhinocerots Horns, two Unicorns Horns, six pair of Spe∣ctacles, one Perspective Glass.


To each of the three other 
Tatans,
 or Chancellors, the chief in the 
Lipous
 Assembly, that they might impart the 
Hollanders
 Requests to the Emperor, were presented half a Piece of Crimson, half a Piece of black, and half a Piece of sky-colour'd Cloth, one Piece of black Cloth▪ Serge, one of Crown-Serge, one Piece of 
Sandal
 Wood, ten Ells of green Velvet, six Pieces of 
Adathiis,
 two of fine 
Guinee
 Linnen, two Carpets, one String of Amber Beads, three Pieces of great, and three of small Blood-Coral, two great Pieces of Amber, one Sword-Blade, one pair of Pistols, two Unicorns Horns, two Rhinocerots Horns, one Perspective Glass, six pair of Spectacles, and some Glass▪ works.


To each of the three 
Lipous,
 or Speakers for Strangers, acting in all Ambas∣sador's
 Affairs, were presented half a Piece of Crimson, half a Piece of black, and half a Piece of sky-colour'd Cloth, one Piece of Cloth-Serge, one of black Crown-Serge, ten 
Dutch
 Silk-Stuffs, four Pieces of 
Adathiis,
 one of 
Guinee
 Lin∣nen, one Carpet, one ordinary String of Amber Beads, six Pieces of Blood-Coral, one great Piece of Amber, one pair of Pistols, one Carbine, one Sword-Blade, and two Rhinocerots Horns.


Every one of the Secretaries belonging to the 
Lipous
 were presented with ten
 Ells of Stammel, one Piece of Cloth-Serge, one of 
Perpetuana,
 one Carpet, two Pieces of 
Adathiis,
 one of 
Guinee
 Linnen, one String of ordinary Amber Beads, one Sword-Blade, two Rhinocerots Horns, one Carbine, and one Piece of Crown-Serge.


And that the Inventories of the Presents should be safely deliver'd, and the Ambassador no way cheated therein, it was order'd that 
Nobel
 should go thither with the first opportunity, to deliver them in his own Person, and send a 
Dutch
 Letter with them, that they might shew it by such Person as they pleas'd the Ambassador should deliver their Presents to.


The twenty sixth in the Morning, 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 were sent for to the



Assembly of the 
Lipous;
 whither (having acquainted the Ambassador with it) they went, and at their Return related, That they had been before the three 
Lipous,
 who sat in Consultation of their Business; where they were ask'd if the Ambassador had ought to request of the Emperor, by order of the Lord 
Maet∣zuiker
 in 
Batavia?
 and if he intended to present the Emperor with any thing else? if so, he should write down his Requests, and the Presents which he would give, and come with 
Nobel
 the next Morning to their Assembly and de∣liver it himself, that hereafter he might not trouble them with any more Re∣quests. Moreover, they ask'd if the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 had written a Letter to the 
Pou
 of 
Hoksieu?
 To which they replying 
Yes,
 said that the Contents thereof was unknown to them, but that the Ambassador might perhaps inform them of it. They inquir'd also the difference in Quality between the Ambassa∣dor's Son and 
Nobel,
 which was answer'd according to the truth. The 
Lipous
 also said, that Carts and 
Coelies
 should come the next day to fetch their Goods out of their straitned Lodgings, and carry them to a greater.


Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 acquainting the Ambassador herewith, he call'd his Council, where they seriously consider'd their Instructions: whereupon it was first judg'd no way convenient to complain of the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 as was mention'd in them, because of the great Power which he had in that Place, by which means there might arise a confusion, and a hatred against them, and a great prejudice if the Trade should be forbid them in 
Hoksieu.
 Moreover, since the General there was already depos'd, and the Vice-Roy con∣demn'd to pay two thousand 
Tail
 for suffering the 
Netherland
 Ships to go away, they ought by no means to be the occasion to bring any more trouble upon him. Nay, though the Ambassador would have fulfill'd his Instructions he could not do it, because none (as fearing to incur displeasure) would have translated it into the 
Chinese
 Tongue.


Many other Complaints mention'd in the Instructions were thought fit not to be taken notice of till a more convenient opportunity, they being com∣manded to set down onely what they had to request of the Emperor. All which being rightly consider'd of, it was concluded to write the following Points, and get them translated into the 
Chinese
 Tongue, that the Ambassador and 
Nobel
 might the next Morning carry them to the 
Lipous,
 viz.


The Realm of 
Holland,
 and the General of 
Batavia
 have commanded the
 Ambassador to request of his Imperial Majesty the following Points:




I.
 THat the 
Hollanders
 may always, and every year come with as many Ships as shall be requisite, to Traffick in the Realm of 
Tayzing.


II.
 That the 
Holland
 Ships may come and Trade at 
Quantung, Singcheu, Hok∣sieu, Ningpo,
 and 
Hanksieu.


III.
 That the 
Hollanders
 may Trade with all Persons, and Buy and Sell without being forc'd to deliver their Merchandise against their wills.


IV.
 That the Silk and Silk-Stuffs may be Bought and Transported by the 
Hollanders,
 as also all other Merchandise, except those which the Emperor pleases to prohibit, of which the Ambassador desires he may have knowledge, that they may obey the Emperor's Will and Pleasure.


V.
 That the 
Holland
 Ships, so soon as they are arriv'd, may Trade and go away again when they are ready.


VI.
 That all manner of Provisions, and other Necessaries, may be bought by the 
Hol∣landers
 and carry'd to their Ships.


VII.
 That the 
Hollanders
 when they come to Trade, may have a convenient Habita∣tion for their Money, to stow their Merchandise in and sell them, and also to preserve them from Fire; because the 
Chinkon
 was in great danger at 
Hoksieu.


VIII.
 That the fore-mention'd Particulars may be ratifi'd with Seal'd Letters from the Emperor, and that his Vice-Roys may be commanded to observe and take notice of them: Which if the Emperor grant, the Ambassador hath Order to consult farther about the 
Chinkon.




Moreover, the Ambassador propos'd, if he ought not for his particular part to present the Emperor (because it was customary there;) which being approv'd of, they set down the following Presents, 
viz.
 four Strings of Am∣ber
 Beads, one Amber Box, one Silver Charger, one Silver Box with Mother of Pearl, four 
Casuaris
 Eggs, ten Pieces of yellow Cloth, two double Barrel'd Pistols, two Pocket Pistols, two Sword Blades, one Buff Coat, twenty Flasks of Rose-water, four Perspective Glasses, six Pieces of 
Calamback
 Wood, two Unicorns Horns, one Piece of Amber, one Copper Horse upon a Pedestal, one Copper Lyon, two Copper Dogs, one Copper Mount, one 
Persian
 Quilt, two small Mortar-Pieces.


The twenty seventh in the Morning the Ambassador and 
Nobel
 were fetch'd by a 
Mandarin
 to the 
Lipous
 Assembly; where coming, they were led into an Anti-Chamber, and from thence, after half an hours stay, to the 
Lipous;
 to whom, after the delivery of the several Requests, and Inventory of the Pre∣sents, they were again led to the fore-mention'd Chamber, without a word speaking on either part.


A little while after there came two 
Lipous
 to ask the Ambassador some
 Questions by the 
Tatans
 Order, 
viz.
 That the 
Holland
 Ambassadors were in the thirteenth Year of the Emperor 
Zungte
 order'd to come by 
Quantung,
 and he was now in the fifth Year of 
Conchi
 come thither from 
Hoksieu,
 why he did not come by 
Quantung?
 also which way was nearest, from 
Quantung
 or 
Hoksieu?
 The Ambassador answering these, desir'd that if they had any more Questions to ask him, they would please to deliver them to him in Writing, that he might answer them again in the same manner, that by that means all mistakes, which might happen to arise by the Interpretation of them, might be prevented. This the 
Lipous
 willingly consenting to, deliver'd them a Paper written in the 
Chinese
 Tongue, in which the Questions were all set down.


Van Hoorn
 and 
Nobel
 going from thence went to their new Lodgings, which
 were the same wherein the Ambassadors 
Goyer
 and 
Keizer
 had Lodg'd thirteen years before, and now also the four 
Corean
 Ambassador, who went from thence the day before, having been there a whole Moneth.


The Place whereon this House was built being of a large circumference, was surrounded with Stone Walls, and full of Chambers and other Apart∣ments; yet very inconvenient, though better than where they were before.


Soon after their coming into this their new Habitation, the 
Lipous
 which had been there before, came again with their Secretary, to tell the Ambassador, that the 
Tatan
 would come in Person and see those Presents which the Ambassador would present to the Emperor apart, that he might give the better account of them to his Imperial Majesty. To which the Ambassador reply'd, That so soon as the Goods came thither, he would lay them ready for him.


Not long after 
Putmans
 and 
Vander Does
 came thither with all the remaining Presents and other Goods: whereupon the Ambassador gave immediate order,


that those new Presents which he had design'd to give the Emperor, should be taken out of their several Chests: which was no sooner done, but the 
Tatan
 came with several great Lords; where looking on all the Goods, he ask'd from whence this or that came, and what use it was for? to which Question having receiv'd an Answer, he took his leave; but coming just without the Gate he sent one of his Secretaries to tell the Ambassador, that he must get the Presents all in readiness against the next Morning, if the Emperor should chance to send for them.


The twenty eighth about Day-break, a 
Mandarin
 came to the Ambassador to have a written Answer to the Questions deliver'd in Writing the day before by the Chancellor and 
Lipous
 to the Ambassador and 
Nobel:
 whereupon the Ambassador causing them immediately to be translated, found them to be as followeth; and thereupon judg'd it convenient to answer according to what was there written, under every Question.






The Emperor and 
Lipous
 ask of the Ambassador and 
Hopou
 these following Questions.


I. 
Question.
 In the thirteenth Year of the Emperor 
Zungte,
 the 
Holland
 Am∣bassadors came to 
Quantung.
 The 
Lipous
 in the same Year writ to the Empe∣ror, and he hath granted that the Ambassadors shall always come by the way of 
Canton.
 In the fifth Year of the Emperor 
Conghi,
 the Ambassador is come from 
Hoksieu;
 and why did he not come from 
Canton?


Answer. 
Because the
 Hollanders 
in the Wars, and routing of the Pyrate
 Coxinga, 
put into
 Hoksieu.


II. 
Qu.
 Which Way is nearest, from 
Quantung,
 or 
Hoksieu?


Answ. 
The Way from
 Quantung 
is three or four days nearer; yet that is according as the Winds blow.


III. 
Qu.
 If the Way from 
Quantung
 be three or four days nearer than from 
Hoksieu,
 why did not the Ambassador come from thence?


Answ. 
The reasons thereof are mention'd in the Answer to the first Question.


IV. 
Qu.
 In the thirteenth Year of the Emperor 
Zungte,
 the 
Holland
 Ships were in 
Quantung,
 and since there are many Shelves and Rocks, how did they get through them?


Answ. 
Concerning the Rocks, and being at
 Quantung, 
we can say nothing of them, because neither the
 Hopou 
nor Ambassador were there; but yet they both know that some of the
 Holland Ships 
were cast away there.


Whilst they were answering these Questions, two 
Lipous
 came to the Am∣bassadors
 House, asking a Pattern of each sort of the peculiar Presents which the Ambassador intended to give to the Emperor, that they might shew it; which being given them, they again ask'd some other Questions, from whence this thing or that came? and what use it was for? as the 
Tatan
 had done the day before. To which they receiv'd Answers as formerly. Soon after they be∣gan to Pack up all the Goods to be carry'd to the Court.


The Ambassador taking hold of this opportunity, judg'd it convenient (since two days before he could not have any time) to deliver the 
Zoutaizins, Tatans,
 and others, the Inventories of their Presents; which was done accor∣dingly, after the Ambassador had taken both of them apart from the other 
Mandarins:
 but they (notwithstanding all the arguments that could be us'd to perswade them to accept of them) excus'd themselves, saying they could not


as yet take them, alledging that they would stay till they had done the Am∣bassador's Business. This said, they ask'd if the Ambassador had brought any thing to sell? and also if any of his Retinue had any thing to dispose of, which if they had, they should give them the quantity of them in Writing, before they sold their Goods, which (as they said) was the Custom there of all Stran∣gers. Whereupon the Ambassador gave them the same Answer as he had done on the two and twentieth, 
viz.
 That they had nothing to sell, but that which they brought with them was to give away to Persons that assisted them in the obtaining of their Desires. Whereupon they looking upon one another, said nothing, but that they durst not accept of the Presents.


Moreover, the Ambassador requested that they would please to order him
 a certain Purveyor, to buy all his Provisions and other Necessaries for him and his Retinue, because they could not agree with those that were there then, by reason they were chang'd every day; and likewise that they might have a Carpenter to make some Conveniences for them. The first they granted, tel∣ling them of two Persons which should assist them; but the second they could not consent to, because (as they said) none might come into the Ambassadors House whilst the Emperor's Presents were there.


They also ask'd for an Answer to their Questions made the day before; to which the Ambassador reply'd, That it was ready to be deliver'd to them so soon as it was Translated: To which they answer'd, That when it was done they should deliver it to the 
Mandarins
 whom they would send; which soon after was perform'd: and they took their leave without taking any of the Emperor's Presents with them, which the Ambassador had Pack'd up: neither was it done till the twenty third, when by three Secretaries belonging to the 
Lipous,
 they were with the rest of the Presents (according as they said) to be deliver'd all together to the Emperor.


The thirtieth the Ambassador and 
Nobel
 were sent for to the 
Lipous,
 and car∣ry'd
 to the chief 
Tatan
's House, where they commonly assembled; whither coming, after a little waiting, they were ask'd by the 
Tatan
 if they had any Goods to buy or to sell? To which they answer'd, 
No;
 and that it was not customary for any Ambassador to trouble himself with Merchandizing. Whereupon the 
Tatan
 ask'd how it was with the Ambassador's Health: after which his Excellency and 
Nobel
 were carry'd into an Anti-Chamber; where being seated, they ask'd the Ambassador concerning his Sons Quality? and if
 he came upon order and knowledge of the Lord General. To which 
Van Hoorn
 reply'd, That his Son was of no Quality more than as being his, and that he onely came to bear his Father Company, which the General had given him leave to do. Moreover, they ask'd why this Embassy did not come by 
Quan∣tung
 and 
Canton,
 but from 
Hoksieu,
 alledging that they were not well satisfi'd in the written Answer to this Question, because they had not ask'd about the War with the 
Coxingans,
 and if they were come thither by that means; but why the Embassy did not now come by 
Quantung?
 and if they and the Lord 
Maet∣zuiker
 did not know that the former Emperor's Order was, that all Embassies must come from 
Quantung?
 Whereupon after consultation they answer'd, That they knew not of the former Emperor's Order; and that according to the Lord Generals Command they were come by 
Hoksieu,
 and whether or not he knew the former Emperor's Order they could not tell. Which Answer they said was sufficient, and accordingly written down. They also ask'd con∣cerning 
Putmans
 and the Secretary's Quality; which being resolv'd, the Am∣bassador and 
Nobel
 took their leave.


The first of 
Iune
 in the Morning one of the 
Lipous
 call'd 
Songlavja,
 and four
 Grand 
Mandarins,
 came to the Ambassador's House, with Request that he would command his Musick to Play, which they much desir'd to hear. He knowing the 
Lavja's
 to be very civil People, entertain'd them nobly, and or∣der'd his Musicians to Play their best Tunes; which pleas'd them so well, that they return'd him many thanks, and at last took their leave.


In the Evening the Ambassador propos'd, That they had made some In∣ventories
 of Presents for the four 
Zoutaizins,
 three 
Tartar Tatans,
 three 
Lipous,
 and four Secretaries; and that their Letter of Requests was, as they reported, already deliver'd to the Emperor, and that in a short time they might have an Answer; that also in their Instructions they were order'd to present the Coun∣cellors of State before their chief Business was done, as the Ambassador had al∣ready us'd some endeavor to deliver the Schedule of the Presents, without being able to do it; as also by one of their 
Mandarin
 Guides to the 
Zoutaizins,
 which likewise came to no effect: Whereupon considering, that they could trust none without being cheated, it was therefore propos'd what way would be best to present the Councellors: After serious Debate it was resolv'd, that 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 should the next Morning go to the 
Lipous,
 and acquaint them, That the Ambassador rejoyc'd at the Emperor's kind acceptance of all the Presents, and withal desir'd, there being some Presents for the 
Zoutaizins
 and other Grandees, sent them from the General, that they might be acquaint∣ed with it, and they admitted to deliver them. Whereupon the 
Mandarins
 of the Guard were call'd, and desir'd by the Ambassador, that they would go to the 
Lipous
 in the Morning, and request of them, that 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 might be admitted to impart something to them; which they promis'd to do, and said they would bring the Ambassador an Answer at their Return.


The second in the Morning the 
Mandarins
 return'd to tell the Ambassador, that 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 might freely go to the Assembly, and that a 
Mandarin
 was come to conduct them thither. Whereupon they immediately went, and at their Return related, That they were carry'd by the fore-mention'd 
Manda∣rins
 to the 
Tatans
 House into a Chamber, by the 
Lipou Songlavja,
 who had ask'd them if they would acquaint him onely with their Requests, or the whole As∣sembly? to which they answer'd, That they would do as he pleas'd: where∣upon he desir'd that they should onely impart it to him, which was done after the same manner as it was agreed on the Night before: which having heard, he went in, and after half an hours stay coming out again, and sending away all his Servants, he told them, That for that time the 
Lipous
 were risen, but the 
Tatan
 had promis'd to propose it to the Assembly in the Afternoon, and would send them an Answer the next Morning, whethe 
Nobel
 should come to the Assembly or not; and if no Messenger came, he migh tstay at home. 
Songlavja
 had also ask'd several times if the Lord General had sent the Presents? and if there were no Letters with them. To which 
Nobel
 replying, said, That there were none; but he knew that the Ambassador was commanded by the Lord 
Maet∣zuiker
 to present all the fore-mention'd Grandees: which said, they took their leave.


The third, two 
Mandarins
 came to tell the Ambassador, That the 
Lipous
 on the Proposal of the Presents made yesterday by 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans,
 desir'd that he would write the Persons Names which he intended to present, and if they were sent from the General, or given onely by the Ambassador: To which he sent an Answer in these following terms:






THe General of 
Batavia
 hath commanded the Ambassador, after the delivery of
 the 
Chinkon
 to the Emperor, also to Present the 
Taizins;
 for he being ignorant of the Customs here, hath order'd the Ambassador to do according as he shall find it con∣venient.




With which Letter 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 went to the 
Lipous
 Assembly, and at their Return brought word, That they had again, as yesterday, been at the 
Tatans
 House, and by two 
Lipous
 led into a private Chamber, where they deli∣ver'd the fore-mention'd Letter; which when they had read they deliver'd to 
Nobel
 again. Whereupon 
Nobel
 desir'd of the 
Lipou Songlavja
 (which was one of the two) that he would be pleas'd to assist the Ambassador, he not know∣ing their Customs, and advise him what was best to be done: At which seem∣ing not to be well pleas'd, he went to the Council, whither 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 was also call'd: There they saw three 
Tatans,
 being two 
Tartars
 and one 
Chi∣nese,
 to whom they again deliver'd the fore-mention'd Letter: The 
Tatans
 ha∣ving read it, ask'd to whom they would deliver the Presents? 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 desir'd that they might speak with the Ambassador about it: But they ma∣king no Answer went away without effecting their Business, the Letter being also by the 
Tatans
 demanded from the Interpreter 
de Hase,
 to whom they had first given it.


In the Afternoon a 
Mandarin,
 whom 
Van Hoorn
 had some days since present∣ed with five Ells of Stammel, came and brought it again, saying, When the Ambassador's Business was done he would take it, but now he durst not keep it. He also inform'd the Ambassador, that he was come of his own ac∣cord to tell him, that the Letter to the 
Lipous
 to present the 
Zoutaizins
 did not please them; nay, that they would perhaps send some 
Lavja's,
 to ask how and where the Ambassador heard of the 
Zoutaizins?
 and advis'd him to answer them, That he suppos'd the 
Zoutaizins, Tatans,
 and 
Lipous,
 were all one.


The Ambassador look'd upon this as a strange Discourse, because he had seen the 
Zoutaizins,
 and they ask'd him concerning the General's Health; so that he suppos'd the 
Lipous
 did this onely to prevent him from presenting the 
Zoutaizins,
 and get the Presents amongst themselves.


The twenty ninth in the Morning 
Van Hoorn
 and 
Nobel
 were sent for to the
 
Lipous,
 and carry'd before their Bench, where they were ask'd what Lords the Ambassador meant by the Name of 
Zoutaizins?
 and how they knew that there were any? To which he answer'd, That he had seen two of them in the Em∣peror's Palace, and they told him that there were two more, which were then sick; and also that he had spoke to them when they ask'd him about the Gene∣ral's Health. To which the 
Lipous
 said, Mean you them? Whereto 
Van Hoorn
 reply'd, So he understood his Orders.


Moreover they desir'd that the Ambassador would declare what 
Lipous
 he meant by the other, and that he would express the 
Lipous
 thereby; which was done accordingly. This pleasing them, the Ambassador was by some of the 
Lipous
 led out of the Council Chamber into a private Room, and there told, That in the second Year of the Emperor 
Conghi,
 a 
Mandarin
 call'd 
Tanghlavja,
 had been in 
Hoksieu
 impower'd as 
Taizin,
 and had brought word that they would every year come to 
Peking;
 whether or no that was true? To which 
Van Hoorn
 answer'd, That that was not the meaning, but that they would come every year to Trade. So after several other Questions of small conse∣quence, the Ambassador and 
Nobel
 took their leave.


The fifth in the Morning the Ambassador and 
Nobel
 were again sent for to
 the 
Lipous,
 and coming to the 
Tatans
 House were led into an Apartment, out of which after two hours stay they were call'd before the Assembly; where the 
Tatan
 first ask'd concerning the Ambassador's Health, and afterwards said, That it had often hapned that Ambassadors proffer'd to present the 
Zoutaizins
 and 
Lipous,
 but it was not customary there to receive them, therefore the Am∣bassador must not credit those which told him so, and that they had not ad∣vis'd him well: after these and such like Discourses were ended, they departed.


In the Evening the 
Mandarin,
 who had hitherto been chief Steward for the Ambassador's Provisions that were allow'd him and his Retinue by the Empe∣ror, came to tell him, That being preferr'd to a greater Place, he could not wait upon him any longer, but that another would supply his Room: The Ambassador to gratifie him for his former care, gave him five Ells of Stammel.


The sixth in the Afternoon came four 
Mandarins
 to the Ambassador, to tell him that they were expresly sent from the Emperor, to have his Answer to the following Questions, 
viz.
 First, from whence the Rose-water came, and
 what it was for? likewise the Unicorns Horns and the Copper Mount, which were amongst the 
Bengale
 Copper-works? Moreover, what Birds the 
Casuaris
 were? all which the Ambassador answer'd to the best of his knowledge; which they having set down, went away again.


The seventh and eighth nothing hapned, nor saw they any Strangers.


The ninth in the Afternoon 
Genko
 the Interpreter inform'd the Ambassador, That he and the 
Mandarin
 Guides were that Morning sent for to the 
Lipous,
 where they had understood that the Ambassador and all his Retinue should about three days after be invited to the Emperor's first Feast, and perhaps with∣in ten days go away again.


The eleventh nothing hapned of note; but on the twelfth in the Morning
 a 
Mandarin
 (which generally went with the 
Netherlanders
 to the Court) came to tell the Ambassador, That he and his Retinue should make themselves rea∣dy to go to the fore-mention'd Feast of the Emperor; which was immediate∣ly perform'd, and the Ambassador conducted to the 
Tatans
 House, to stay in the usual Chamber; from whence he was soon fetch'd, and by the 
Lipou Song∣lavja
 led into the Hall, where finding the 
Tatan,
 and having with him kneel'd down and bow'd their Heads three times towards the Emperor's Palace, they were seated after the following manner: The 
Tatan
 sat uppermost, and on his right Hand a little distant the Ambassador, behind him 
Nobel, Putmans,
 and the Secretary, and behind them the rest of the Retinue, to the number of seven∣teen; on the 
Tatan
's left Hand, at a pretty distance sat some 
Lipous,
 and other great Lords: When they were plac'd, a Cup of Bean-broth was fill'd round, and drank up kneeling with one Knee on the Ground; after which the Ta∣bles, Garnish'd with thirty three Silver Plates, were plac'd before the 
Tatan,
 Ambassador, and those of his Retinue that were of Quality, and before the other Retinue five and five to a Table, fill'd with all manner of Fruits, and Meal Bak'd in Oyl; then every one receiv'd a Cup of Imperial Liquor, which was also drank by those that lik'd it on the Knee, after they had bow'd their Heads; which done, they fell to eat, the 
Tatan
 giving the 
Lipous
 and other great Lords some from his own Table. After they had pretty well eaten, the 
Tatan
 ask'd the Interpreters, if the 
Netherlanders
 had brought no Bags to put the Offal, and what remain'd in? being answer'd 
No,
 and that it was not their












custom, he immediately caus'd some Bags and Clothes to be brought: But the Interpreters not long considering, threw in all that was left one amongst another into the Bags; which was no sooner done, but another Course was brought, 
viz.
 on the 
Tatan
's, Ambassador's, and other Persons of Qualities Table, were set two Dishes and two Plates; on the Retinues Tables, one Dish of boyl'd Rams flesh, and another of Lamb: Before the 
Lipous
 and other Lords, a Mat was spread on the Floor, without either Table or Dish, the flesh exceeding fat and good, though unhandsom to look on, weigh'd at least fifteen Pound a Joynt.


The 
Hollanders
 were much pleas'd to see the 
Lipous
 and other Lords eat so heartily thereof; also observing the manner us'd by the 
Tartars
 at Meals, which was rather like Beasts than rational Creatures: Having spent some time in Eating, the Souldiers taking away the Meat from the Tables, the 
Ne∣therlanders
 rising and kneeling, bow'd their Heads, with the 
Tartars,
 three times towards the Emperor's Court, and so return'd to their own Lodgings.


No sooner was the Ambassador come home, but 
Genko
 the Interpreter
 inform'd him, That he was Commanded to tell the Ambassador, that four days hence, (being the twentieth of ours, and the six and twentieth of their Moon) there would be a second Feast, and two days after, the last, or third: Moreover, that two or three days after that, he should depart, which being ob∣serv'd by the Ambassador in his Councel; and also, that it might be design'd, that just at their departure, the Emperor's Answer on their Requests might be
 made known to them; after which time there would be no opportunity to alter any thing that might not agree with their Instructions; therefore they thought fit to entreat, that the Merchandize which would come in those Ships that should fetch the Ambassador, might be sold at their arrival: Whereupon they wrote the following Letter to the Assembly of the 
Lipous.




THe Ambassador hopes, that the 
Lipous
 have well understood his Letter of Requests,
 and hopes for a good Answer from the Emperor: Now his further Desire is, that he may receive the Commands, and Answer of the Emperor, ten days before he goes away, that he may the better (having time to consider) understand his Imperial Majesties Will and Pleasure, and may faithfully render an account thereof to the General in 
Batavia;
 and that the 
Hollanders
 may for the future, Obey, and faithfully perform the Emperor's Com∣mands, as well in the 
Chinkon,
 as ought else.




Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 went with this Letter to the 
Lipous
 Assembly, and were directed to use such perswasive arguments, as they should think fit, to make them understand the Ambassador's Request; to which purpose, the 
Mandarins
 of the Guard were desir'd by 
Van Hoorn
 to go for him to the Assembly of the 
Lipous,
 and desire of them, that 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 might be admitted into their Presence; which they promising to do, related at their return, that the 
Lipous
 had told them, that the Ambassador on the twenty sixth of their Moon (which was the sixth of 
Iuly
) when he should be Entertain'd at the Emperor's second Banquet, might then acquaint them with what he had to Request.


The fourteenth, nothing happen'd of Note.


The fifteenth in the Forenoon, the 
Lipou Songlavja
 came with two 
Mandarins
 to the Ambassador's Lodging, to ask him what his Requests were about, which he desir'd to speak with the Council; Whereupon 
Van Hoorn
 gave him the Letter written two days before, but he was afraid to take it, until the 
Chinese
 Se∣cretary 
Soukjen
 had explain'd it to him: The Ambassador ordering him to read


it, which being done, he answer'd, The Ambassador is come hither with a Let∣ter to the Emperor, therefore his Majesty will not let him go away without another, and as soon as the Emperor had resolv'd on his Business, he should not fail to have his answer in Writing deliver'd him with the Emperor's Letter to the General; To which the Ambassador reply'd, That is all I desire, and therefore ask'd the 
Lipous,
 if he might to Morrow shew the 
Tatan
 the fore-men∣tion'd Letter, or not? Whereto 
Songlavja
 reply'd, That he might, if he pleas'd, but it was all one, since he knew the Contents of it; and that he would speak with him further about it to Morrow, at the Emperor's second Feast.


Mean while, six grand 
Mandarins
 more came to the Ambassadors House, at which the 
Lipou Songlavja
 taking his leave, advis'd the Ambassador to entertain the six 
Lavjas,
 which he perform'd, by keeping them to Dinner, and delighting their Ears with his Musick; after which they departed well satisfi'd.


The next Morning early, being the sixteenth, the 
Lipous Mandarins
 came to
 give notice to the Ambassador, to make himself ready to go to the Emperor's second Feast: Which the 
Hollanders
 immediately perform'd, and were again conducted thither, and entertain'd after the same manner, as on the twelfth instant, without any alteration, only they did not Kneel before the 
Tatan:
 Who by the Interpreter 
Genko
 told the Ambassador, that he need not deliver the Letter of Requests which he had brought with him, because he had understood the Contents of the same from the 
Lipou Songlavja,
 which made him keep it; and taking his leave, went away, without asking or speaking any thing else, with all his Retinue: Where he was no sooner come, but the 
Mandarin
 which in the Morning had fetch'd him to the Court, came and told the Ambassador, That he and his Retinue must make themselves ready, that they might go to Morrow Morning before Day-light, to the Emperors Palace, to receive his Imperial Majesty's Presents; which the Ambassador promis'd to do. This 
Mandarin
 said also, That his Excellency should on the thirtieth of their Moon (being the tenth of our 
Iuly
) come to the third Imperial Feast, and three days after that go away, which made the Ambassador long for the Emperor's reso∣lution on his Request.


The seventeenth in the Morning, two hours before Day, he was fetch'd with his Retinue to the Court, to receive the Imperial Presents, and conduct them through three Gates into the Emperor's Court, on a Plain, before the fourth Gate, which faces the Throne; where, on 
Iune
 the 23. they had seen the 
Coreans
 shew Reverence to the Emperor, and their Presents lie on a Table. Here the 
Netherlanders
 rested till Day-light; about an hour after they saw some 
Lipous
 drest after a stately manner coming into the Court; and soon after, a Table was brought in, cover'd with a Piece of Red Cloth, which was set in the same place where the 
Corean
 Ambassadors stood; only this stood before the Gate at the 
Tartars
 upper Hand; when as that of the 
Coreans
 stood on the left. A little while after, some Stuffs and Money was laid upon it, which done, the Ambassador, his Son, 
Nobel, Putmans,
 and the Secretary, were call'd and plac'd just before the midle Gate, which was opposite to the Throne; yet they could not there discern the least glimps of it; for that the fifth Gate stands so high, that although it be open, yet they can see nothing belonging to the Throne.


After they had fac'd the Throne, and upon the Order of a Herald, kneel'd thrice, and bow'd their Heads nine times; they brought the Ambassador first those Presents that were for the Lord General, which he receiv'd kneling; and


afterwards, those which were for himself: This done, 
Nobel
 receiv'd his like∣wise; next 
Putmans,
 then the Secretary, and the rest of the Retinue, every one what was order'd for them: Which finish'd, the 
Mandarin
 Guide, 
Hiu
 and 
Hui∣lavja,
 the 
Chinese
 Interpreters and Soldiers which came with them, receiv'd theirs.


The Presents which they receiv'd from the Emperor were as followeth:


For the Lord General three hundred 
Guilders
 of fine Silver, consisting in six
 Boats, two Pieces of 
Chinese
 Cloth of Gold, two more of the same with Dra∣gons, four Pieces of Flower'd Silk, with Dragons; two Pieces of Flannel, twelve Pieces of divers Colour'd Sattin, eight Pieces of Damask▪Silk, ten Pie∣ces of rich Flower'd Stuff, ten Pieces of 
Pelangs,
 and ten Pieces of 
Pansjes.


For the Ambassador an hundred 
Guilders
 of fine Silver▪ four Pieces of 
Pelangs,
 four Pieces of 
Pansjes,
 four raw Pieces of 
Hokjens,
 three Pieces of Blue single Sattin, six Pieces of single Damask, two Pieces of Cloth of Gold, with Dragons.


For his Son, one Piece of black Flannel, fifteen 
Guilders
 of fine Silver, two Pieces of Raw 
Gazen,
 two Pieces of single Damask Silk.


For 
Nobel,
 fifty 
Guilders
 of fine Silver, one Piece of 
Chinese
 Cloth of Gold, one Piece of Flannel, three of Damask Silk, one Piece of Sattin, two of 
Gazen,
 two of 
Pelangs,
 and two of 
Pansjes.


For 
Putmans
 and 
Vander Does,
 which had both alike, were forty 
Guilders
 of fine Silver, two Pieces of Damask Silk, one of Flannel, one of Sattin, one of 
Pelangs,
 one of 
Pansjes,
 one of single sleight Damask, and one Piece of White 
Goes.


The Interpreters, 
Maurice Iansz Vish,
 and 
Dirk de Hase,
 had each two Pieces of Black Sattin, two of White 
Goes,
 two of 
Pansjes,
 two of single sleight Damask.


For every one of the Retinue, fifteen 
Guilders
 of fine Silver, two Pieces of raw 
Gazen,
 and two of single Damask.


For the Guide 
Mandarin Hiu Lavja,
 one Horse without a Saddle.


For the Guide 
Mandarin Hanlavja,
 and the two 
Chinese
 Interpreters, one Silk Damask Coat, Edg'd about with Gold, which they were immediately to put on, and for each of the Soldiers that came with the Ambassador, one sleight Silk Damask Coat.


After every one had receiv'd what was laid out for them, the Ambassador was with his Retinue led back to the place where he Kneel'd before, and did it again, as a sign of thankfulness; after which he was by the 
Mandarin Song-Lavja,
 and some other 
Mandarins
 conducted out of the Court; whereat, the Am∣bassador ask'd of the 
Lipou Song-Lavja,
 when the Emperor's Letter to the Lord General, and his answer on their Requests would be deliver'd? To which he reply'd, All in good time, yet it should be three or four days before his depar∣ture: Whereupon, the 
Netherlanders
 return'd again to their Lodgings.


In the Afternoon, a young Vice-Roy, not above twenty years old, and Ne∣phew to the present Emperor, came to visit the Ambassador, and to hear his Musick; which having delighted his Ears, and tasted two or three Glasses of Sack, he took his leave, seeming very well satisfi'd.


The nineteenth in the afternoon, another grand Lord, who had the Com∣mand over the Nobility at the Court, came to the same purpose, which was accordingly granted him, and entertain'd with a Banquet; which ended, he departed.








The fourth instant, the 
Tatan
 told the Ambassador and 
Nobel
 expresly, that none there might receive any Presents, and those who told him otherwise did very ill: Wherefore the Ambassador seeing them to be in earnest, sent a Letter to the 
Lipous
 and 
Zoutaisins,
 to desire, that those Goods which he had brought with him to give away, since they would not accept of them, he might have leave to sell them; but he could get no answer upon it.


The twentieth, the Ambassador was fetch'd to the third Feast of the Empe∣ror, and again, as before, conducted to the third 
Tatans
 Court, where he was entertain'd after the same manner, as on the sixteenth.


The Ambassador, after all this trouble and Expence, both of time and other∣wise, gain'd no more, but to be at last dismiss'd, with a Seal'd Letter from the Emperor, to the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 in 
Batavia.


So on the fifth of 
August,
 he set forth from the Imperial City 
Peking,
 to mea∣sure back his former tedious Journey; and first reach'd a Temple about a League from the Town of 
Tonsjouw,
 and two from 
Peking,
 where they lay all that Night.


AS to what concerns the Metropolis 
Peking,
 it shall be with its whole Pro∣vince at large describ'd in our following Discourse of the Empire of 
Chi∣na
 or 
Taising.


The great Citizens, and other Prime Court-Ladies, are here, as also through all 
China,
 seldom seen to walk in the Streets, but are carry'd in close Sedans, or 
Palakyns,
 accompany'd by a great Train of Waiting-Women, and other Servants.


In the Houses, their Lodgings are apart from the Men, where likewise they have Wildernesses, Groves, and pleasant Gardens, where they delight themselves in Planting curious Flowers, and keeping all manner of Singing-Birds.


But the high-going Madams take another manner of State upon them, espe∣cially the Emperor's Concubines, who appear very rich and gorgeously Drest






in their Houses, (in manner, as are represented in the following Print, in Silk Coats, which trail on the Ground after them with very wide Sleeves; their Heads cover'd with a costly Cap, is round, and turn'd up before, cut and inden∣ted like the Points of a Coronet.


The sixth they proceeded on their Journey from 
Tongsjouw,
 and at Noon came to the Vessels lying at the City of 
Siensingway,
 where the same Boats re∣ceiv'd them that brought them thither.


The seventh, leaving 
Siensingway,
 and passing by many Hamlets and Villa∣ges, they Anchor'd before some Houses, about a League from 
Giochioe.


The ninth about Day-break, Weighing again, they arriv'd in the Forenoon at the foremention'd City, from whence, after they had gotten fresh Toers, they set Sail at Noon, and dropt Anchor that Night before the Village of 
Ianzin.


The eleventh, they came to the City of 
Siensingway
 about Noon, where they waited for more Toers, because the Current was against them, and the strong∣er, by reason of the Rain lately faln.


The next Morning, 
Putmans
 went to the 
Sienkin
 of that place, to proffer him the Presents which were laid out for him on the tenth of 
Iune,
 in their Journey up to 
Peking,
 which he had then refus'd, and put off the accepting of, till their return: From whence he sent the following Letter, with the Goods.




THe Ambassador is safely arriv'd here: The Civilities which he hath receiv'd of your Lordship, shall not be forgotten: The 
Lipous
 have Commanded the Ambassador to make what speed he could possible in this his Iourney for 
Fokien
 and 
Batavia,
 there to deliver the Emperor's Letter; therefore the Emperor desires 
Talavja,
 that he would give speedy order, and dispatch.




Putmans
 at his return inform'd, That the 
Talavja
 had accepted of the five Ells of Stammel▪ and two Flasks of Rose-Water, but sent the rest back again; and as to what concern'd their speedy departure, he took no notice of, because it


did not concern him, he having only the Command over the Soldiers.


Soon after, the 
Sionkins
 Interpreter came to tell the Ambassador, That his Master, in requital for the Presents, had sent him two Hogs, two Sheep, one 
Pikol
 of Rice, and some Fruit, with Request, That his Excellency would please to accept of them: Whereupon the Ambassador reply'd, That he would receive it, on condition, his Highness would also take the rest of the Presents; which the Interpreter promis'd to tell him, and at his return, acquaint the Am∣bassador with his answer. Not long after, coming back, he said, That 
Talavja
 was double satisfi'd with those Presents which he had already receiv'd; yet however, to please his Excellency, he would accept of a Piece of Green Perpe∣tuana, if they had it, which he gave immediate Order to lay out, but was for∣gotten by the Interpreter.


Also the Interpreter was Presented by the Ambassador, with two Pieces of Linnen, and two Flasks of Rose-Water, because he had ask'd to buy them.


The 
Netherlanders
 Weighing Anchor, went with their Vessels to the South side of the City, that they might proceed on their Journey the next Morning.


The 
Toya
 also sent them some Presents thither, 
viz.
 Sheep, Apples, Pears, and the like, for which he return'd him the Piece of Perpetuana, which 
Sion∣kins
 Interpreter had left behind him; But his Servants soon after brought it back again, saying, that their Master judg'd it too much, but if the Ambassa∣dor had any Sword-blades, Pistols, or such like things, he would willingly ac∣cept of them; Whereupon, the Ambassador sent him by the Interpreter 
Mau∣rice,
 a Carbine, a Sword, and a handsom Knife, which he receiv'd with many Thanks.


After Noon, having been nobly entertain'd in one of the 
Sionkin
's Barques, they Weigh'd from the Suburb, and the next Morning being the fourth, set Sail from the City of 
Tiensingway,
 and in the Evening Anchor'd at 
Sangjue.


The following day, in the Afternoon, they arriv'd at the City of 
Chinchay,
 where having staid about an hour and half, they set Sail again, and at Night dropt Anchor before 
Sincoacheen.


The seventeenth they proceeded on their Journey, and in the Evening ar∣riv'd at 
Chiuche.


The eighteenth at Noon, they past by the City of 
Siangsjouw,
 without put∣ting in, but in the Evening Anchor'd at the Village 
Talodueen.


The nineteenth they rested at 
Poethouw.


The twentieth in the Afternoon, they past by 
Tunquancheen,
 and staid all Night near 
Lienulhoe,
 where the Province of 
Peking,
 and that of 
Xantung
 is separated.


The one and twentieth, they Sail'd six Leagues in the Province of 
Xantung,
 and dropt Anchor at a Village call'd 
Lonkuntang;
 and next day, after Noon, staid for fresh Toers in 
Tuatchiouw,
 which having gotten, they set forward, and on the three and twentieth arriv'd at 
Chinjeen.


The twenty fifth, passing by 
Uchincheen,
 they dropt Anchor that Night at 
Oepoeso.


The six and twentieth, going on again, about Day-light they came in the Evening to 
Linsing,
 being got out of the River 
Guei,
 in the Royal Channel 
Iun;
 and that Evening past through the first Sluce, as in the Morning they did the second, made in 
Linsing,
 and dropt Anchor before the Custom-house, where a Chain was put cross the Channel, that no Vessels might pass without paying.


The Governor of this place came in the forenoon to visit the 
Netherlanders
 in their Vessel, and bid them Welcome; who, after having been well entertain'd, took his leave.


After his departure, sending the Ambassador some Presents, 
Putmans
 was or∣der'd to carry him a Pair of Pistols, a Sword Blade, a Piece of 
Perpetuana,
 and a Piece of Say in return.


The foremention'd Lord receiv'd many Letters in 
Putmans
 presence, advi∣sing him, that the Emperor had Raign'd three days, and that his own 
Chiap
 or Seal was abroad.


The Guide 
Mandarins
 inform'd the 
Netherlanders,
 that all the Governors, as well 
Povis, Conbons, Poutsensies
 or Farmers, which were up and down in the Pro∣vinces were sent for, and that 
Tartars
 were to be put in their places.


In the Afternoon, the Governors of this place came to invite the 
Netherlan∣ders
 to a Banquet, which they would willingly have refus'd; but that they being very importunate with them, were forc'd to grant their Request; so that the Ambassador told them, that so soon as the Chain was unlock'd, and his Vessels past through, he would come and wait upon them: To which they reply'd, That they would give immediate Order for it, as accordingly was done, and the Vessels permitted to pass.


Against the Evening, Messengers came to fetch the Ambassador to the Go∣vernors: But he excusing himself, said, That he could not go out of his Barque in the Night; wherefore the Governors sent him several Dishes with prepar'd Meats to his Vessel, which was distributed amongst the Barge-men. Mean while the chief Commander of this place sent the Ambassador some Silk Stuffs, which he return'd again.


The twenty ninth in the Morning, they set out from the City of 
Linsing.
 In the Evening they Anchor'd at 
Linancotsue,
 which leaving on the thirtieth, they past by 
Tungsjaufoe,
 and lay that Night before 
Gihautchie,
 having past through five Water-gates that day.


The one and thirtieth, Weighing Anchor, they came to 
Xansui;
 and in the Evening arriv'd at 
Gansjan,
 through six Sluces, which they all found open to their great advantage.


The first of 
September
 they left the 
Gansjan,
 and shooting that day four Wa∣ter-gates,
 they dropt Anchor in the Evening at a Village call'd 
Kaygoeva.


The next Morning, being the second, setting Sail again, they past that Fore∣noon by 
Namwang,
 and a 
Pagode
 thereto belonging, call'd 
Longwangmiao,
 where the River unites with this Channel; so that they had the Tyde with them, by which means they reach'd 
Sinning
 that Night, having past through three Sluces, when they Anchor'd before the fourth and last in the Western Suburb of the City 
Sinning,
 expecting when it should be open'd, that they might get through that also, which being not before the Afternoon, they went only a Canon shot from thence, and lay still for that Night.


In the Morning, the 
Toya
 of the City coming to Visit and Welcome the Ambassador, Presented him with some fresh Provisions, which he accept∣ing, sent 
Putmans
 after him with five Ells of Stammel, in Requital of his Favor.


The fourth in the Morning, leaving 
Sinning,
 and having a fair Gale of Wind, they got to a Village call'd 
Naogang
 that afternoon, where they waited for fresh Toers, having that day shot seven Sluces or Flood-Gates.


The fifth, setting Sail again, they arriv'd in the Evening at 
Iaxinho,
 passing through seven Water-gates that day.


The next day they lay still, wanting Toers.


The seventh in the Morning, leaving 
Iaxinho,
 they Anchor'd towards Even∣ing at the Village 
Miliancho,
 where the Province of 
Xantung
 is separated from that of 
Nanking.


The eighth they enter'd the Province of 
Nanking,
 and lay the next Night before 
Kiakia;
 which leaving on the ninth, they arriv'd that Morning with a fair Wind at 
Maulovao,
 three Leagues and three quarters from 
Kiakia,
 where they chang'd their Toers, which came not till the Evening, because they were fetch'd from 
Singsing
 a League and a half distant from thence.


The tenth in the Afternoon, setting Sail again, they arriv'd in the Even∣ing before the Mouth of the Lake 
Usantjouw,
 into which the 
Yellow River
 disembogues.


The Bank in this place being broken, they had made a Dam in the River 
Geu,
 which takes its Original in a Village a League and a half from thence; here the Ambassador dropt Anchor, to stay for some of his Barques to come up with him, which were a good way behind. Towards Night they arriv'd at a little Village, opposite to the City 
Taujenjeen,
 which leaving again in the Morning, they reach'd the Village 
Namemiao
 at Noon, and withal got out of the 
Yellow River,
 which has so swift a Current as creates much danger.


The thirteenth, putting forward again, they came to the great Village 
Sin∣kianpoe
 at Noon, where the 
Conbon
 of 
Hoksieu,
 according to the Information of the Guide 
Mandarins,
 arriv'd the same day, being on his own Request rid of his Office to come thither.


The Ambassador writing a Complemental Letter to him, he sent to invite his Excellency to come to him; Whereupon, he immediately going thither, was kindly receiv'd and entertain'd by his Highness; who told the Ambassa∣dor, that it was a great Honor, that the 
Netherlanders
 had been with and seen the Emperor, and that he had left some Presents in his Factors hands in 
Hok∣sieu
 for to be deliver'd to the Ambassador, for the Lord General and himself, which the Ambassador would find there at his coming: The 
Conbon
 also com∣mended himself for the good inclination which he had bore to the 
Hollanders
 in the time of his Governorship: To which the Ambassador answer'd, That he was very sensible of it, and that they should ever be oblig'd to his Highness for it. Lastly, The 
Conbon
 said, that he was desirous to make one small Pre∣sent more to the Ambassador, being only four Hogs, some Geese, and other Poultrey, which he desir'd his Excellency would be pleas'd to accept; whereon the Ambassador promis'd he would, provided his Highness would again receive the like Present from him: Which last the Interpreters durst not tell the 
Conbon,
 because several other Lords stood about him, so that there was no mention made of it.


So after a handsom Entertainment, the Ambassador took his leave.


The fourteenth in the Morning, the Ambassador in Requital of his Friend∣ly Reception the day before, sent a Letter to the 
Conbon,
 and judg'd it conve∣nient, since he might do much by his Recommendation in 
Peking,
 to the bene∣fit of the Company, to present him with ten Ells of Stammel, ten of black Cloth, ten of Blue, one Piece of Saye, one of Crown-Serge, four Pieces of Lin∣nen, two of 
Guinny
 Linnen, one fine Carpet, one String of Blood Coral, and two pair of Spectacles; and the Ambassador to oblige his Interpreter, and that


he might put his Master in mind of the 
Hollanders,
 gave him five Ells of Stam∣mel, one Sword-blade, and a pair of Spectacles.


This done, leaving the great Village 
Sinkianpoe,
 they past by the 
Conbon
's Barques, which consisted of fifty six great and small.


In the Afternoon they came to the North-Suburb of 
Haoigan,
 where they lay still before a Bridge, till the Townsmen had furnish'd them with Provisions.


The sixteenth, against Noon, the Ambassador was presented with some Pieces of Stuffs, by the 
Toya
 of that place, who was Brother to the new Gene∣ral at 
Hoksieu;
 which the Ambassador judg'd not convenient to accept, but sent them back again, and with them five Ells of Stammel, partly, because he might assist the 
Hollanders,
 and do much for them by writing a Letter in their behalf to his Brother; and secondly, that they might be speedily dispatch'd from thence; which prevail'd so much, that the 
Netherlanders
 left the City 
Haòigan
 in the afternoon, and arriv'd in the Evening at 
Paoing.
 The next Morning, going from thence again, at Noon they met with a Factor belonging to the General, call'd 
Tziang Povi Thesia,
 who according to his Relation, came from 
Hoksieu
 the fifth of 
August,
 and was going for 
Peking;
 who inform'd the Am∣bassador, that three Ships were arriv'd from 
Batavia
 at 
Sothia,
 and that four more were gone to 
Tamfui
 and 
Quelang:
 Moreover, that all things were well with the 
Hollanders
 in 
Hoksieu,
 only none might go to the new arriv'd Ships, nor any come ashore out of them, neither was any Provision permitted to be sent to them.


The Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 and General were coming to 
Peking,
 being sent for, because they let the 
Netherlands
 Ships go away, and that the new General which was to Depose his Master met him near 
Lancquy:
 The Ambassador ask∣ing him if he had brought any Letters from 
Harthouwer,
 he answer'd, No: but that fourteen days before he came from thence, two Letters were writ to the Ambassador by 
Harthouwer,
 and sent with that which the General dispatch'd to 
Peking,
 about the arrival of the foremention'd Ships: After his departure, the 
Netherlanders
 putting forward, they arriv'd in the Evening at the City of 
Kayo∣ven,
 where they staid all Night.


The next Morning, being the eighteenth, they left the City, and with Sail∣ing and Toing, reach'd the City of 
Ianchefoe
 about Noon, where they lay be∣fore a Custom-house.


The following day, the Ambassador judg'd it convenient to procure a spee∣dy dispatch, by Presenting the 
Toya
 of that place with five Ells of Stammel, one Piece of 
Perpetuana,
 two 
Adathys,
 and a Book Looking-glass; with these he sent a Complementing Letter by 
Putmans,
 yet he accepted of nothing but the two 
Adathys,
 and the Looking-glasses; in return of which, he sent one Hog, one 
Pikol
 of Meal and Rice, and a parcel of Fruit; of which the Ambassador accepted only the Fruit, and sent back the rest; yet the civility of their offer avail'd so much, that the 
Hollanders
 were permitted to pass by the Custom∣house, and in the Afternoon Sailing by the City 
Ianchefoe,
 arriv'd at 
Quasui.


The twentieth in the Morning, Weighing again, they cross'd the River 
Ki∣ang,
 and at Noon arriv'd at 
Singkiangfoe,
 where he sent his Secretary to the 
Sion∣kin,
 Brother to one of the 
Lipous
 in 
Peking,
 to Request his Highness, that he might be dispatch'd from thence with all speed: For which Courtesie, all that he had should be at his Command and Service: To which his High∣ness (according to the Secretaries Relation at his return) answer'd, The Ambassador not needing to exchange his Barques there, might go when he






pleas'd. Soon after the Secretaries return in the Barque, came his Highness Interpreter to give the Ambassador a Cup of Bean-broth in his Master's Name; for which he, by the Interpreter 
Maurice,
 Presented him with a pair of Pi∣stols, which he accepted with many Thanks; his Men also had a quarter of a Piece of 
Perpetuana.


A Captain who had the Command over a thousand Men in this City, and had Presented the Ambassador with some Provision, came to bid him Wel∣come; for which Civility he receiv'd five Ells of Stammel.


The one and twentieth, in the Morning, leaving the City of 
Sinksianfoe,
 they Sail'd along the outside of it, where they saw abundance of Jonks and 
Cojas,
 (as at 
Ianchufoe
) which were newly repair'd; of which, the 
Netherlanders
 ask∣ing the reason, receiv'd answer, that it was customary for all Towns to repair their Vessels once in three years.


In the Evening they arriv'd at 
Tayanchcheen,
 where casting Anchor for that Night, they Weigh'd again the next Morning, being the two and twentieth: Upon the way, the Ambassador was inform'd by some Barge-men that came from 
Suchu,
 that the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 was arriv'd there with his Train to go from thence up to 
Peking.


In the Afternoon they reach'd the City of 
Yanghsu,
 and the next day An∣chor'd at the City of 
Uchinopeen,
 and on the twenty fourth at 
Xuciquan,
 a Vil∣lage two Leagues from 
Suchu,
 before a Custom-house, where they lay all Night.


The next Morning passing the 
Boome,
 they arriv'd in the Afternoon at the City of 
Suchu,
 where two 
Blacks
 belonging to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong's
 two Sons, came aboard the Ambassador, to tell him, that their Masters were a Month since gone by Land to 
Peking,
 and that they follow'd with their Goods; adding moreover, that 
Singlamong
 was yet in 
Hoksieu,
 and was to remain there, so that the Barge-mens relation prov'd false. In the Afternoon about three a Clock, they arriv'd at the West-gate of the City of 
Suchu.


Here the 
Hollanders
 were met by two Conjurers, one a Man, and the other a Woman, both in handsom Apparel, of which there are great numbers in all parts of 
China,
 that for a small reward, proffer their Service to foretel all future Events, and procure a good Wind; they also came to the 
Netherlanders,
 to put their Art in practice, to hasten or shorten their Journey; but they not appro∣ving of such Magical assistance, sent them away with a small Gift.


This Conjuring is at large describ'd in the following Description of the Em∣pire of 
China.


The Governor of this place came to visit the Ambassador, and Present him and the chiefest of his Retinue, as 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans,
 with a well-tasted Li∣quor, for which he receiv'd some Ells of Stammel.


Divers sorts of Liquors made of Rice, are drank by the 
Chineses.


In the fifth▪ Territory, 
Fuencheufu,
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 is a very pleasant Drink, and not inferior to either 
French
 or 
Rennish Wine,
 being made of Rice and Kids flesh, which last being bruis'd, is laid to soke in the Juyce of the Rice. This Liquor is highly esteem'd by the 
Chineses,
 being strong of operation, and of a sweet and pleasing taste to the Palate.


In the fifth County 
Hinhoa,
 of the Province of 
Chekiang,
 they boyl the best Li∣quor in all 
China,
 of Rice and Water.


The six and twentieth in the Morning, the 
Netherlanders
 left the great City 
Suchu
 with a fair Wind, and came that Evening to the South Suburb of 
Ukia∣jeen,
 which City is neatly built, and though not very big, yet it is surrounded with strong▪ Walls. The Inhabitants thereof maintain themselves with Mer∣chandizing and Husbandry.


In the Morning setting Sail from thence, and having got about three Leagues and a half farther, they were forc'd, the Evening coming suddenly up∣on them, to make to their Harbor.


The twenty eighth in the Morning, they set Sail again from thence, and in the Afternoon past by 
Kiangfoe,
 where they went out of the Province of 
Nan∣king,
 into that of 
Chekiang,
 and in the Evening arriv'd at a Village call'd 
Sinning.


The twenty ninth, Weighing again, they had in sight the City of 
Ukiajeen,
 which having past, in the Evening they rested at 
Tangheg.


The thirtieth they came to the North-Suburb of 
Hanksieu,
 before a Custom∣house, where the Channel being shut up by a Gate under a Bridge, the Am∣bassador sent to desire that it might be open'd, and the Barques suffer'd to go through; but the Watch-men answer'd, That they must first have order from the 
Poutsjensy,
 or the Emperor's Farmer; so that the Secretary 
Vander Does
 was sent to the Governor and 
Conbon
 at 
Hanksieu
 with a Letter, in which the Ambas∣sador desir'd to be speedily dispatch'd, and if their Highnesses pleas'd, he would come to Complement them. Moreover, the Secretary was Commanded to ask them, If their Highnesses would permit the Ambassador to come and speak with them, and bring those Presents, of which their Highnesses had receiv'd the Inventory at their Journey up to 
Peking.


In the Morning, the first of 
October,
 the Gate being open'd, the Ambassador went through with his whole Retinue: Soon after, the Secretary coming aboard again, related, That he had been at the Generals the last Night, but could not be admitted to Audience. To the Letter which he sent him by his Clerk, he had return'd answer, That he would send a 
Mandarin
 early the next Morning, to let the Ambassador through the Gate, and withal, conduct him


to his House; but it being too late for the Secretary to go to the 
Conbon
 that Night, he went thither the next Morning, to deliver his Highness the Ambas∣sador's Letter, and met him as he was coming out of his Court-gate, (to Com∣plement a great Lord, which the day before came thither from 
Hoksieu
) and re∣ceiv'd in answer, that his Highness humbly thank'd the Ambassador for his Ci∣vility, and that he would expect him.


Mean while, the Vessels went so far into the Suburb, that they came to An∣chor against a Bank.


The second, the 
Toya
 of that place came to Welcom the Ambassador in his Vessel.


The third, nothing happen'd of remark.


The fourth, all the Goods were taken out of these, and put into six other Barques, lying on the other side of the Bank; with which 
Putmans
 and 
Vander Does
 went the next Morning to the other side of the City, there to Reimbarque; the Ambassador, 
Nobel,
 and some of the Retinue going before by Land, to give order for Shipping of the Goods.


On the seventh in the Morning, leaving the South-Suburb of 
Hanksieu,
 they arriv'd in the Afternoon at 
Foejenjeen;
 the ninth at 
Nienchefoe;
 and the tenth at 
Lanqui,
 where the great Barques were chang'd for small; because here the Ri∣ver began to be very shallow.


The Governor of this Village invited them to Dinner, which in regard they could not put off, they went thither, and were very kindly enter∣tain'd, with various Meats, Musick, and Drolls, towards Evening ta∣king leave.


On the twelfth in the Morning, they left 
Lanqui;
 and on the thirteenth came to the City of 
Longuen;
 as on the fourteenth, to 
Kietsieu.


The sixteenth in the Evening, the Ambassador came with his Vessel to 
Sin∣hoe;
 but the rest staid behind, not able to follow for the shallowness of the Wa∣ter, and strong contrary Tyde; yet on the seventeenth in the Morning, they ar∣riv'd there in safety.


The Ambassador and his Retinue were also lodg'd in the same House, where∣in they lay at their Journey going up.


Here all things were prepar'd to travel over the Mountains, when the Am∣bassador finding that there wanted three hundred and fifty 
Coelies
 to carry the Goods and People, he ask'd the 
Mandarin
 Guides how many 
Coelies
 were allow'd by the Emperor's Order, for the carrying of the Goods, and prepar'd by the 
Pimpous?
 To which they reply'd, an hundred and eighty nine; and because one of the General of 
Hanksieu
's People had told the Ambassador at 
Fojenjeen,
 that he should find so many Porters ready to carry the Goods over the Mountains, he sent the Secretary on the eighteenth in the Morning to 
Tjangtjen,
 a League and a half from thence, to enquire of the 
Mandarin,
 who had the Command of that Village, and there Resident, what Orders he had from the General of 
Hanksieu?
 Whereupon he declar'd, That he had no other Order concerning any 
Coelies,
 than what he had from the 
Pimpous;
 so that the Ambassador gave immediate Order for the hiring of an hundred and fifty 
Coelies,
 with which he went on the next day; and on the two and twentieth came to 
Poutchinfoe
 in the Province of 
Fokieu;
 and on the three and twentieth, 
Nobel, Putmans,
 and 
Vander Does,
 return'd Thanks to the Almighty, for helping them safe over the steep Mountains.


The twenty fifth, having Shipt their Goods, and Imbarqu'd themselves, they set Sail with the Tyde, from the City of 
Poutchinfoe,
 and rested before a Watch-House at the Village 
Siphea.


The twenty sixth, going forward, they came, having Sail'd two Leagues, to a Rocky place, where the River was very shallow; by the strong Current, one of the Ambassadors and one of the 
Mandarin Hiulavja
's Barques were beaten a∣gainst a Rock, whereby they grew very Leaky. This Night they also lay still before a Village, wherein was also a Watch-house.


The twenty eighth, they dropt Anchor again before another Watch-house, and on the twenty ninth arriv'd at the City of 
Kienningfoe,
 where staying till the next day, they set Sail again on the thirtieth, and arriv'd on the last at 
Ien∣pingfoe,
 which since their departure from thence in 
March,
 was above a third part consum'd by fire.


The first of 
November,
 the Ambassador and his Retinue proceeding on their
 Journey, were unexpectedly in the Afternoon about twenty 
Lys
 from a Vil∣lage call'd 
Sukauw,
 met by the Merchant 
David Harthouwer,
 and some other from 
Hoksieu,
 informing him of the condition of their Affairs. Towards Even∣ing they came to 
Sukauw,
 where they lay all Night▪


On the second before Day-light, going from thence, they came in the After∣noon to 
Lamthay,
 the Suburb of 
Hoksieu,
 after a Journey of nine Months, and twelve days.


Going all together to their old Inn, they found there the 
Toucy Liulavja,
 who told and shew'd them a written Order from the General, That all those Goods which they had brought with them must be search'd: Whereupon the Ambas∣sador answer'd, That this manner seem'd very strange to him, and that he had never heard of any that search'd an Ambassadors Goods; nay, that it was not done in 
Peking,
 nor any place else in all their Journey: But if the General would have it so, he might follow his Order, and begin with the Ambassador's Chest first.


This Answer somewhat chang'd his Intentions, granting moreover, That the Ambassador's, and other Persons of Quality's Chests, should not be search'd, but those of the Retinue, and in which the Presents were, could not pass with∣out; whereupon, they being all brought in and open'd, all things that were in them were set down; in which 
Toucy Liulavja
 spent all the Afternoon.


The fourth in the Morning, one 
Lapora
 and the 
Mandarin
 of the Inn came to tell the Ambassador, That the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 had sent for his Excellency to the Court, to bid him Welcome; wherupon they all went thi∣ther, and were kindly receiv'd by his Highness. After many Complements past on both sides, the Vice-Roy ask'd the Ambassador, If he had not told them the truth of all their Adventures before they went to 
Peking?
 They would not be∣lieve him then, but now having been in 
Peking,
 themselves might judge that he was a Man of Truth: To which the Ambassador answer'd, That his Majesties real Intentions had sufficiently appear'd, and the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 in 
Batavia,
 would without doubt be thankful to him for his Favors: They were also sen∣sible, that the King's Envoy in 
Peking
 had been a great instrument, and help'd much in their receiving of great Honors from the Emperor, 
Taisins, Kings, Li∣pous,
 and other grand Lords: Moreover, he hop'd that from this Embassy there would follow more Friendship, to the profit of both Nations, than had hitherto been: Whereupon 
Singlamong
 reply'd, That those were only outward businesses, but he had done so much for the 
Hollanders,
 that it cost him two


thousand 
Tail,
 and the General his Place. To which the Ambassador answer'd, As to what concern'd himself, he would do all that lay in his power to serve the Vice-Roy, but as for the two thousand 
Tail
 or the General, he knew nothing of it; but he was heartily sorry that no better News was come from above. The Vice-Roy reply'd, That he had onely told it cursorily to the Ambassador, and that they should henceforth speak no more of it. Soon after the Tables being furnish'd with Meat, and the Ambassador having eaten a little took his leave, the Vice-Roy advising him to go and visit the General. Coming into the Vice-Roy's base Court, a 
Mandarin
 that was to conduct him to the General told him, that if his Highness were not at leisure to speak with him, that then he might return to his Lodgings; so that the Ambassador staying in the Vice-Roy's Court, sent the Secretary 
Vander Does,
 with the Interpreter 
de Hase,
 to enquire if the General were at leisure to grant the Ambassador Audience: Not long after returning, he said that the General had sent Answer, That it was not customary to make an Address to him the same day that they had been at the Vice-Roy's, therefore his Excellency would do well to come the next Morning, and then he would grant him a Hearing. Whereupon the 
Netherlan∣ders
 going to their Lodging, found the 
Mandarin Liulavja
 with express Order from the General, That the rest of the Chests that were not search'd must be open'd, which the Ambassador suffer'd to be done without any contradiction.


At Night it was judg'd convenient for divers reasons, that their intended Visit to the General the following Day, should onely be Complemental, with∣out speaking a word of any Business; but to tell him, that what the Ambas∣sador had to impart to his Highness should hereafter be done in Writing.


The fifth in the Morning they went to the General, who after some stay per∣mitted them to come into his Presence; where the Ambassador was plac'd on his left Hand (but the upper among the 
Tartars
) on a Stool a little distance from his, and 
Nobel, Harthouwer,
 and others on his right Hand, on Stools and Benches. Being thus seated, the Ambassador (the General being silent) said, That he was very joyful to see 
Talavja
 in good health, and that he was permit∣ted into his Presence. To which he reply'd, That it was but his Duty to grant Audience to all Strangers. Then the Ambassador proceeding said, That the Embassy was now finish'd, and that he had the Emperor's and 
Lipous
 Let∣ters by him, which being Seal'd must be deliver'd to the Lord 
Maetzuiker;
 so that now, since 
Talavja
's Word was as much there as the Emperor's, they would seek in all things possible to obey him. To which the General ma∣king no Reply, after a little silence, ask'd for the Ambassador's Son: to whom the Interpreter said, That if the Ambassador had any thing to re∣quest of his Highness, he should acquaint him with it now. Whereupon he desir'd that the Merchants might fetch in their Debts, and balance their Accounts; and that the rest of the Goods of the last Year, and those which they had brought back with them from 
Peking,
 might be sold, that he might prepare himself for his Return to 
Batavia.
 To which the General said, He knew very well that the Debts must be paid; but he had receiv'd a Letter from the Emperor, in which the 
Hollanders
 were forbid to sell their Goods. Whereupon the Ambassador reply'd, That in 
Peking
 it was meant the new-come Goods, but his Desire was onely that the last years Trade which was granted by the Emperor, might be finish'd. Moreover, that they might lay out the Silver which they had brought from 
Peking,
 that by that means it might remain in the Countrey, which else would be carry'd away. The Ge∣neral


answer'd again, That he must observe the Emperor's Orders, as the Ambassador the Lord 
Maetzuikers,
 and that they might not sell prohibited Goods; not but that he judg'd it better for the Silver to stay in the Land, than to be carry'd out from thence. Lastly, the Ambassador desir'd that he might onely send some Provisions to the Ships; which the General granted, giving him a Note of them. Then the Ambassador saying he durst not detain 
Ta∣lavja
 any longer, desir'd to take his leave: The General reply'd, That he was glad to hear such civil Expressions from him; and so they parted.


The Ambassador coming to his Lodgings, judg'd it convenient, since he was permitted to send some Provisions to the Ships, to take hold of the opportuni∣ty, and to send the 
Hilversan
 Flyboat with all the Papers and Answers to 
Bata∣via,
 with a Letter to advise the Council there of their success. Likewise, that he might oblige the 
Conbon
 and General to be assisting in their Business, he thought good to present the General with half a Piece of Purple Cloth, one String of Blood Coral, six Pieces of Linnen, two of Says, two of Amber, two of Cloth-Serge, one Gun with a Stock of Palm-Wood, two Swords, a pair of Pistols, one Sword-Blade, ten Flasks of Rose-Water, and one Piece of black Cloth. To the 
Conbon
 they intended one Piece of red Cloth, six Pieces of Linnen, two of Says, two of great Amber, two of Cloth-Serge, one String of Blood Coral, one Gun, two Swords, one Piece of Perpetuana, ten Flasks of Rose-Water.


The same day 
Nobel,
 according to their Resolution, went to the Factor 
La∣pora,
 to enquire if any Silks could be bought for Silver or Merchandise; but 
Lapora
 telling him the difficulty of it, they attempted no farther.


The sixth in the Morning the Ambassador and the chiefest of his Retinue went to the 
Conbon
's Court to Complement his Highness; before whom being brought, having waited a considerable time, several Complements pass'd as at the Generals, 
viz.
 That the Ambassador was glad to see 
Talavja
 in health, and that he had the favor to appear in his Presence; adding, That the 
Hollanders
 had receiv'd many Civilities from the late 
Conbon,
 and hop'd that they should also participate of his Highness's Favors. Whereupon the 
Conbon
 ask'd if the Ambassador enjoy'd his Health in his Journey to and from 
Peking?
 whereto he answer'd 
Yes;
 and that he had receiv'd great Honor there, and was come away in Friendship, desiring nothing more, than to leave 
Hoksieu
 also in Love and Amity, for which he desir'd his Highness's assistance. The 
Conbon
 replying said, That the Ambassador had brought the 
Chinkon
 to 
Peking,
 wherein the Em∣peror had taken great pleasure, why then should not he be kind to him? he did not meet him by the Way, therefore he would now send him some Provisions for a Present. Soon after the 
Conbon
 ask'd the Ambassador when he intended to go from thence? To which he answer'd, When the General and 
Conbon
 pleas'd; and that he never doubted but the Goods of last Year might have been sold with freedom, and they might also lay out their Silver for Commodities; but since he understood that it could not be permitted, he therefore desir'd to avoid all trouble, that he might be gone so soon as it was possible, and would rather suffer damage, than do contrary to the Emperor's Order. Here∣upon the 
Conbon
 said, that he was not well inform'd therein; and withall ask'd the Ambassador if he would immediately be gone, or stay a little longer? To which the Ambassador reply'd, That so soon as the Merchants had receiv'd their Debts, and all things balanc'd, then he would be gone, the sooner the better. After which no other Discourse passing, the 
Netherlanders
 took their leave.


Mean while 
Putmans
 went to the Generals Court with an Inventory of the Presents which the Ambassador had design'd for him the Day before, to shew it to his Highness, but was forc'd to return without Audience, being order'd to come again the following Day: wherefore the Ambassador sent 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans
 again on the seventh, and also to proffer the 
Conbon
 his Presents, but they had as ill success as 
Putmans
 the Day before, for they could not be permit∣ted to Audience.


After the Interpreter had taken the Inventory of the Generals Presents from them, and shew'd it to his Highness, he brought Answer, That the General would accept no Presents.


Towards the Evening the Interpreter 
Kako
 came to the Lodge, with Com∣mands to search the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat.


The eighth in the Morning the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
's Interpreter, and his prime Factor call'd 
Iongsavija,
 came to bring the following Presents: First, for the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 sixteen Pieces of Sattin, twenty of Sarsnet, four 
Brokkado's,
 six hundred and ten Pieces of 
Porcelane,
 one 
Picol
 of 
Tee.


For the Ambassador, eight Pieces of Sattin, two 
Brokkado's,
 ten Pieces of Sarsnet, a hundred Pieces of 
Porcelane,
 and one 
Picol
 of 
Tee.


For 
Harthouwer,
 six Pieces of Sarsnet, two 
Brokkado's,
 eight Pieces of Sattin, half a 
Picol
 of 
Tee,
 and a hundred 
Tee
 Cups.


Moreover, they said that the Vice-Roy at that time had no such fine Goods by him as he could have wish'd for, to have presented the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 and the Ambassador withall; desiring that his Excellency would not refuse these Trifles; adding also, That their Lord was very sorry the 
Hollanders
 had no better success in their Business at the Court of 
Peking,
 and that he declar'd it was not his fault; but on the contrary, had us'd his utmost endeavor to assist them for the obtaining of their Desires: but since it so fell out that the Em∣peror would not grant them, they must have patience (because nothing could be done against the Emperor's Order) and hope for a better Event. To which the Ambassador answer'd, That he humbly thank'd the Vice-Roy, and since he could not refuse his Kindness, he would accept of the Stuffs: but as to their Business he knew nothing of it, because the Emperor's and 
Lipous
 Letters were deliver'd to him Seal'd, and he commanded in that manner to deliver them at 
Batavia;
 and that the Orders therein mention'd (whatever they were) should be strictly observ'd. Furthermore the Ambassador said, That he de∣sir'd nothing else now, but that he might sell the Commodities which were remaining of the last Year, and afterwards go away, without being willing to request the disposal of those Commodities which were come since, because he would not stay for an Answer from the Emperor; or that they might not write to him about it. To which they reply'd, That they would acquaint the Vice-Roy with it; yet it was a Business which did not concern him, but the General and 
Conbon,
 therefore the Ambassador must request it of them. The Ambassador replying said, That there would immediately be a Letter ready for that purpose, to be carry'd to the General and 
Conbon.
 Some Complements passing on both sides, and the Ambassador giving them a Gratuity, they return'd.


Soon after the Ambassador sent 
Putmans
 with the following Letter to the General, which was to this effect:




THe Ambassador hath understood by a Letter from your Highness, that three 
Hol∣land
 Ships are arriv'd at 
Tenhay
 to fetch the Ambassador; and also that a


Ship at her going by to 
Japan
 put in there for Letters from him. 
Talavja
 hath com∣manded that the Ambassador should send down thither to command the going away of the three Ships. The Ambassador hath acquainted the 
Lipous
 in 
Peking,
 that three Ships were to come from 
Batavia
 to fetch him. The Ambassador knew not but that the Trade granted the last Year by the Emperor might be finish'd; wherefore he desires that he may dispose of the rest of those Goods (of which he here sends an Inventory) in such manner as was done in 
Peking;
 and that then the Ambassador would immediately go away with all his Ships and Men. The Ambassador would be very sorry if any more trouble should happen. And to manifest that the Ambassador will not onely obey and serve 
Talavja
 in words, but in deeds, he humbly desires, that if the remaining Goods may not be sold, that he may obtain leave of your Highness to go away with all his Retinue and Goods with the first opportu∣nity, and that in few days after no more Ships should be seen.




Putmans
 returning said, That he not onely could not be admitted to Audi∣ence, but that the General would not take the Letter.


The ninth in the Morning the Ambassador sent a Letter by the Factor 
La∣pora
 to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong,
 being to return him thanks for the Presents receiv'd the Day before, which was to this effect:




THat the Ambassador hath found sufficiently since his Return to 
Hoksieu,
 his High∣ness's good Inclinations. That the Honor and Friendship which the Ambassador receiv'd in 
Peking
 he believes did proceed from the Vice-Roy's Recommendation. The Am∣bassador declares, that he hath endeavor'd in this 
Chinkon
 as much as possible he could, to preserve the Honor of the Realm of 
Holland,
 the General in 
Batavia,
 and also his own Reputation. The Ambassador is exceedingly rejoyc'd, that the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
's Heart is really inclin'd to him, and therefore esteems his Presents, being from so great a King, very much. That the King in 
Batavia
 hath been pleas'd to present the General is his High∣ness's Civility. The Ambassador is very well satisfi'd, and exceeding thankful for them; but he finds that this satisfaction is mix'd with a great desire to know how and after what manner he shall manifest his thanks; therefore wishes that he may be inform'd either by his Highness, or some Person else, if the Ambassador during his stay there, or in 
Batavia,
 or where-ever it might be, could do the King any acceptable Service, which if it be in the Ambassador's power, he will account it a great happiness, that he may manifest that he esteems more to do well, than to write or speak well.




The thirteenth in the Morning the Secretary 
Vander Does, Nicholas Berkman,
 and the Interpreter 
Maurice,
 went with a 
Chinese
 Vessel down to 
Netherland
 Haven and 
Tenhay,
 that according to their Resolution the Night before they might dispatch the 
Helverzum
 Flyboat, and the 
Pimpel
 Pink, and likewise take a view of the Ships.


After their departure the 
Toucy
 came to tell the Ambassador, That the Ge∣neral and 
Conbon
 would buy all the rest of the Goods, and that he should write down the lowest Prices of them on a piece of Paper, and that then their Fa∣ctors should come to receive and pay for them with ready Money. The Am∣bassador hereupon shew'd him to the Merchants, who were busie making an Invoyce of them, which when done was given to him.


The fourteenth and fifteenth nothing hapned of note.


The sixteenth a Servant sent from the 
Toucy
 brought a written Order (as he said) from the General, that the Store-houses must be searched, because some Counterband Goods were come with the Embassy, and the like▪ Whereupon


the Ambassador immediately sent the Merchant 
Harthouwer
 and Interpreter 
de Hase
 to the 
Toucy,
 with Commands to tell him,




1. That the 
Toucy
 would be pleas'd to pay that which he ow'd to the Com∣pany, being seven hundred 
Tail.


2. That the 
Toucy
 knew very well, that the Debt which was owing from the late 
Talavja,
 or General, and others, was above four thousand 
Tail;
 also that he should seek to procure the payment thereof, and bring the Silver to the Lodge.


3. That the Ambassador would henceforth suffer no more Searching, except by express Order from the General.


4. That if he had search'd the Ambassador's Chest by the General's Order, it was well; but if not, the Ambassador had suffer'd disgrace by it, because he had not been so serv'd in 
Peking,
 nor any other Place in 
China.




At his Return 
Harthouwer
 related, That the 
Toucy
 excus'd himself to the Ambassador, alledging that it was not his fault; the last written Order was not sent to him, but to the Interpreter, to see for some Bundles of 
Gazen,
 which were not set down by his People: Moreover, that he receiv'd nothing but civility from the Ambassador; and as for the Searching, it was by the Gene∣ral's Order; that he would come the next Morning to pay his Debts, and also lay out some Goods for the General and 
Conbon
 to buy; that the rest might be sold to other People; likewise that the other Debts should be brought to the Lodge.


The seventeenth the 
Toucy Liulavja
 came with a Note of the rest of the Pre∣sents, with the Prices at which the General and 
Conbon
 would buy the Goods.


The Ambassador order'd 
Harthouwer
 to tell the 
Toucy,
 That he did not cre∣dit him, neither would he have any thing to do with him, but would send to the General himself to know if those Prices were set down for them, and that then he should have an Answer. Whereupon the 
Toucy
 desir'd 
Harthouwer
 to come to his House the next Morning, and then he would go with him to the 
Conbon
 to ask the Question.


In the Afternoon the Secretary 
Vander Does, Nicholas Berkman,
 and 
Maurice,
 arriv'd from 
Tenhay
 and 
Netherland
 Haven, with relation of the good condition of all things about the Ships, and that the Men long'd onely for fresh Pro∣visions.


The twenty fourth the Ambassador commanded 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer,
 that they should go to the 
Toucy
's House the next Morning, that according to his Request they might go together to the General and 
Conbon,
 and to ask if the Prices were for their Highnesses? and likewise to whom they would have their Presents deliver'd, that they might not be defrauded, and in the last place earnestly to desire, that they might have liberty to send fresh Provisions to the Ships, otherwise the Ambassador would desire to be gone with all the speed possible.


The eighteenth in the Morning 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 went to the 
Toucy,
 and coming with him to the 
Conbon
's they stay'd till Noon, yet could get no Audi∣ence; but the 
Conbon
 sent them word, that they should deliver the Presents, and also the rest of the Merchandise to the 
Toucy Liulavja,
 except the Strings of Blood Coral, which they must deliver to himself the next day, when he would grant them Audience.


Against the Evening the 
Toucy Liulavja
 coming to the Lodge to fetch the fore-mention'd Goods, said that 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 need not come with the


Blood Coral the next day, but that the Ambassador must in Person appear at the 
Conbon
's Court about six days hence, and then bring the Coral, and also an Account of those Debts that were owing, along with him, and then the 
Ne∣therlanders
 would have Orders to be gone within ten days.


The remaining Goods with the Presents being accordingly deliver'd to him, for the most part he carry'd away that Night, and fetch'd the remainder the next Morning.


The nineteenth 
Poutsiensy, Assensy,
 and the General's Interpreter came to the Lodge, to ask when the Ambassador would be ready for his departure? Where∣to he answer'd, That so soon as the Accounts of the owing Debts, being Audited, were paid, he would give them no farther trouble, but take Shipping immediately. Whereupon they reply'd, Would he please onely to give them a Schedule thereof, and they would take care that satisfaction should be made in three or four days. The Ambassador answer'd, That if what they promis'd were cetarin, he should be clear for his Voyage within a Week. Then the Ambassa∣dor ask'd if the 
Hollanders
 might buy no manner of Goods? To which they answer'd, That he might buy course Commodities, as 
Porcelane
 and the like; but they must first acquaint the General with it; mean while the 
Hollanders
 should draw up what Provisions they wanted for their Voyage, which was im∣mediately done, and deliver'd to the 
Mandarin Liulavja.


The twentieth in the Morning the Ambassador sent 
Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 to Court with this following Letter.




THe Ambassador seeks in all things to obey 
Talavja,
 and give him satisfa∣ction. 
 The 
Poutsiensy
 and 
Assensy
 hav eask'd him what day he would be gone? to which he answer'd, That he could be ready on the twelfth of this Moon, and therefore desires that the Provisions for their Voyage may be brought according to the inclos'd Bill, and sent down to the Ship at 
Nanthay,
 and likewise the Silver and 
Porcelane.
 The Ambassador requests likewise that he may buy and carry the following Goods along with him, 
viz. China
 Roots, 
Tee,
 Anniseed, course 
Porcelane,
 some Stuffs, Stools, Cabinets, and other Trifles.




Nobel
 and 
Harthouwer
 returning in the Afternoon gave account, That they could not be admitted to Audience by the General, but after the Letter being deliver'd to him by his Interpreter, he permitted the Ambassador to buy the Provisions which he desir'd, but nothing else.


Soon after the 
Toucies, Liulavja
 and 
Hayongloja
 came again to tell the Ambas∣sador, That the General considering better on his Request, had granted that he might buy eight or ten 
Picol
 of 
China
 Root.


The one and twentieth nothing hapned of any note.


The two and twentieth the fore-mention'd 
Toucies
 came to the Lodge to tell the Ambassador, That his Retinue▪which came with him from 
Peking,
 must produce all those Stuffs which they had bought by the Way, because they would buy them again: This they said was the General's Order, which if they would not obey, he would search their Chests, and if he found any Stuffs in them, he would seize them as Forfeit.


The Ambassador hereupon calling his Attendants together, commanded them, whoever they were, excepting none (because he would not come in any trouble) to bring out all their Stuffs, and deliver them to the fore-mention'd



Lavja's;
 which being accordingly done, their 
Mandarins
 taking them, put them into a Chest, and carry'd them out of the Lodge.


At Noon, according to the Resolution taken the Night before, 
Nobel
 went to the Vice-Roy's Court, to proffer his Highness a String of Blood Coral; which he freely and kindly accepted in the Presence of all his Attendants.


Mean while the 
Mandarin Liulavja
 came to the Lodge from the General and 
Conbon,
 bringing Money with him for the remaining Goods which they had bought.


This 
Mandarin
 also inform'd, that the 
Overveen
 Frigat, and 
Balfour,
 who had brought some Renegade 
Chineses
 from 
Quelang,
 might not go away with the Ambassador, but must stay there till they had order from the Emperor concern∣ing it. Moreover, the Ambassador must go to the 
Conbon
 the next Morning, and afterwards to the 
Assensy,
 and two days hence to the General and 
Poutsiensy,
 to speak with them about the fore-mention'd, and what other Business else: which the Ambassador promis'd the next Morning to observe.


The next Morning, being the twenty third, the Ambassador went with 
No∣bel, Harthouwer,
 and others, to the 
Conbon,
 taking with him a Note of the sold Merchandise, and also the String of Blood Coral, which on the fifth Instan they resolv'd amongst other Goods to present to his Highness, as the 
Toucy Liulavja
 had told the 
Netherlanders
 on the eighteenth. Coming to the usual Hall they found the 
Toucy Liulavja,
 who soon after was call'd to the 
Conbon,
 and at his Return told the Ambassador privately, That because there were so many People with him, his Highness had judg'd it best, that the Ambassador should deliver the Chain of Coral to him, that he might deliver it to his Highness, who was afraid to receive it in the presence of so many Persons, and for the weight thereof, and Pieces of Coral, he might place in the Note amongst the other Merchandise if he would not trust him with them, which the Ambassador also did. His Highness, as 
Liulavja
 said at his return, had re∣ceiv'd the Coral with many thanks. Not long after the Ambassador was also call'd in, and seated by his Highness, who after some Complements said, That he would willingly have Entertain'd the Ambassador now, but because he had not been Treated by the General, he would stay till that was over. The Am∣bassador thanking him for his Civility, desir'd, that since he intended to be gone very suddenly, and his Servants were now busie Packing up their Goods, that his Highness would please to excuse him from coming to his Feast, and that he esteem'd this Visit as much as the greatest Entertainment. To which his Highness reply'd, That he would consider of it, and if he did not invite him, he would send the Dishes prepar'd to the Lodge. Then he ask'd when he thought he should be ready to go his Voyage? who reply'd, Against the twelfth of their Moon, or the twenty sixth of ours: which pleasing his High∣ness very well he said, That he could not assist the 
Hollanders
 in the Transport∣ing some Silk-Stuffs, alledging that it was none of his fault, but the Emperor's Order, who had strictly forbid it. Then the Ambassador gave him the Inven∣tory of the Goods that were sold, and an Account of the Moneys that were owing; likewise a Note of the Gifts ready to be presented, adding that he humbly thank'd his Highness for permitting him to sell the remaining Goods. After having look'd over the Note of the Presents, the Ambassador told his Highness, that the 
Mandarin Liulavja
 had the day before inform'd him, That the Ship come thither with the Renegade 
Chineses
 and 
David Balfour,
 might not go away with the Ambassador, but must stay in 
Netherland
 Haven, and 
Balfour



at 
Lamthay,
 till Order came from the Emperor about it, to whom they had written: The Ambassador therefore desir'd, since the Vessel was very old, not being fit to stay there, that she might go away with him; but if this could not be granted, he would be obedient, and press no farther, but leave her be∣hind. Whereupon his Highness in excuse said they had contriv'd to dismiss all the Ships together, but the 
Mansjuwee
 would not consent till they had an An∣swer from 
Peking.


The Ambassador also ask'd a second time if they would please to dismiss them all from 
Lamthay.
 Whereupon his Highness answer'd him, That the Am∣bassador should not trouble himself about the Ship, for he would take care that it should be furnish'd with all Necessaries; nay, if the Emperor would not be at the Charge, he would pay it out of his own Purse; asking besides, if the Person that came with the 
Chineses
 from 
Quelang
 was at 
Lamthay?
 To which being answer'd, He was, he said that he would consult with the General if any others should stay, or all have their Pasport.


Then the Ambassador demanded if he might not deal for some fine 
Porce∣lane
 or 
Tee?
 To which his Highness first answer'd as if he permitted it; but afterwards beginning to retract, he chang'd his Discourse, beginning to en∣quire how many Men they had, that thereby they might the better accom∣modate them with Provision: which said, the Ambassador took his leave, and went away.


Coming into the outer Court, he found the 
Mandarin Liulavja,
 whom he ask'd if he should now go to the 
Assensy?
 To which he was answer'd, No, be∣cause he had not been Entertain'd by the 
Conbon;
 but he must go to the Gene∣ral's Court the next Morning.


After this 
Nobel
 acquainted the Ambassador, that he had spoke with 
Lapora
 and one of 
Singlamong
's Factors, about Bartering for Silk, and that 
Lapora
 had told him the Vice-Roy would deliver Silk to the 
Netherlanders
 at 
Tenhay,
 pro∣vided they would leave Money for Security at 
Hoksieu.


The twenty fourth in the Morning the Ambassador went to the General, into whose Presence he was brought, after a stay of half an hour in the Court; being plac'd by him, the General said, That the Embassy now was compleat, and he might depart when he pleas'd; for he had receiv'd a Letter from the Emperor, in which he was commanded not to detain, but to dispatch him so soon as possible; so that his Excellency had already stay'd beyond the limited time. To which the Ambassador answer'd, He would now therefore endea∣vor to part in Friendship, and as he had said before, be gone by the twelfth of that instant Moon, which if his Highness judg'd too long, he would go sooner: who straight reply'd, That if the Ambassador went away by that time, it would be very well; but he must carry no Silk-Stuffs with him, because they were Counterband Goods: yet the Ambassador being come a remote Journey, he granted him to carry 
Porcelane,
 and the like Trifles; for which he return'd thanks: which pleasing his Highness, he said, That he knew not of the Am∣bassador's coming, which if he had, he would have prepar'd something for his Entertainment; but however he hop'd he would accept of a Collation at his Lodgings. Then the Ambassador thanking his Highness, and seeing that the General did not make mention of the 
Overveens
 stay, said (as he had done the day before to the 
Conbon,
) That the 
Toucies
 had told him, that the Ship which was come with the Renegade 
Chineses
 from 
Quelang,
 and likewise the Company that Mann'd it must stay there; therefore the Ambassador desir'd, if it were


possible, that the Ship might go along with him. The General having consi∣der'd a little answer'd, That the Ship must stay; but if his Lordship would leave any body at 
Lamthay,
 was in his own choice: After some Discourse con∣cerning it, the Ambassador said, That if his Highness would please to credit him, it was all one to him whether he left any one at 
Lamthay
 or not.


Mean while the 
Conbon
 coming thither went first into a private Chamber, and a little while after plac'd himself by the General. Then the Ambassador began again to speak of the staying of the Ship: To which the General an∣swer'd, The Ambassador need not be afraid, he would take care concerning the Vessel, that nothing of any harm should befall the 
Hollanders.
 Which An∣swer satisfying the Ambassador, he deliver'd such another List of the remain∣ing Goods that were to be sold, and his Presents, as the day before he had done to the 
Conbon;
 after which taking his leave he departed.


In the Afternoon the General's Interpreter came to tell the Ambassador, That the General, 
Conbon,
 and 
Manichuer
 would come in Person to the Lodge to search the Goods.


In the Evening it was resolv'd, since the General had put it to the Ambassa∣dor's choice, to leave any of his People there or not, to leave none; but if any farther mention should be made, to pretend as if they would willingly leave some there, because it was known that the 
Tartars
 always did contrary to the 
Hollanders
 Desires: Moreover that 
Nobel
 should the next Morning go to the 
Poutsiensy
 and 
Assensy,
 and proffer them each their several Presents; and be∣cause they had ask'd to buy some Blood Coral, 
Nobel
 should take two Strings along with him, and ask but an ordinary Rate for them.


The twenty fifth 
Nobel,
 according to the Resolution taken the day before, went with the Presents to the 
Poutsiensy
 and 
Assensy,
 to deliver them the two Strings of Coral; and at his Return related, That they had receiv'd the Pre∣sents with many thanks, and the Strings of Coral at a certain Price.


Mean while the 
Mandarin Liulavja
 came to the Lodge, saying that the Gene∣ral would not come that day, but the following Morning to see the Goods, and that the Ambassador might Ship off all his bulky Commodities. Concern∣ing the 
China
 Root which the Ambassador had requested to carry out, the Ge∣neral would permit him to Transport but six 
Picol.
 The Ambassador, accord∣ing to the 
Mandarins
 Request, Shipp'd of all his great Goods, but said, that if the General would not grant him to carry more than six 
Picol,
 he would not trouble himself with any.


The twenty sixth the Ambassador Shipp'd the Money, and all such Goods as could not be sold, and likewise their travelling Necessaries.


The 
Poutsiensy
 and 
Assensy
 came to the Lodge with some Grand 
Mandarins,
 to thank the Ambassador for the Presents which he had sent them, and withal to tell him, That all those who had Chests or Trunks in the Barques, must go to the Bridge to open them, because the 
Conbon
 was there in Person to see them, which accordingly was done. 
Nobel
 and some others going thither, at their Return said, That the 
Conbon
 causing some Chests to be carry'd into the Gover∣nor of 
Minjazen
's House, had open'd and search'd them there, and also look'd upon several Gifts which the Emperor had presented them with; which not satisfying, he went Aboard the 
Blyswiik
 Frigat, and open'd all the Chests there one after another, yet found nothing of any Counterband Goods. Then he said that the Ship which was come from 
Quelang
 should stay there, and that the Governor of 
Minjazen
 would tell the 
Netherlanders
 when they came thither,


whether 
Balfour
 should remain there or not. To which 
Nobel
 answer'd him, That he would acquaint the Ambassador with it: Whereupon taking his leave, the 
Blyswiik
 at his going away fir'd three Guns.


Because the Ambassador could not come to the Vice-Roy 
Singlamong
 the two last days, in regard he was told that the General, 
Conbon,
 and 
Manchuwer,
 would come to the Lodge to search his Goods, and that it was now done the day be∣fore by the 
Conbon
 onely, the Ambassador, 
Nobel,
 and 
Harthouwer
 went thither the twenty sixth in the Morning to take their leaves; where he was no sooner come, but had Audience immediately granted, and soon after dispatch'd; so that the 
Netherlanders
 took their leave without urging a word of any thing. Returning to the Lodge, they found the 
Toucy Liulavja,
 who hastned their de∣parture, because the limited time was already expir'd: Whereupon all things that were yet ashore were put into the Vessels, and they likewise Embarqu'd themselves to be gone at High-water.


In the Evening the old 
Conbon
's Factor came to deliver the Ambassador twenty four Pieces of Silk-Stuffs, which he said were left him by his Lord to give to his Excellency, being half for himself, and the other half for the Lord 
Maetzuiker:
 These Stuffs the Ambassador gave to several Persons.


Not long after the 
Chinese
 Secretary 
Soukjen
 brought a written Order from the General, that 
Balfour
 must stay behind. To which the Ambassador an∣swer'd, That so soon as they were Aboard the 
Blyfwiik
 Frigat, he would speak with the 
Mandarins
 about it.


In the Afternoon the 
Netherlanders
 arriv'd Aboard the 
Blyswiik,
 into which upon the 
Mandarins
 command all the Goods were Shipp'd out of the Barques, because the 
Mansjuwer
 (of whom they were very fearful) should not see, nor search the Goods a second time; which was accordingly perform'd on a sud∣den: but the Provisions they permitted to lie somewhat longer in the Barques, that the Cattel might the better be preserv'd alive, because the Ship was so full.


The twenty eighth in the Morning some 
Mandarins
 coming to the Barques with Provisions, caus'd all things that were in them to be thrown into the Ship, by which means a great many of the Cattel dy'd; all which the 
Nether∣landers
 endur'd with patience, stowing their Goods as well as they could.


Soon after the 
Hollanders
 set Sail with a fair Wind, and a Tyde of Ebb, which coming stronger in the Afternoon, they got within a quarter of a League from the 
Losantat
 or great Tower, where they came to an Anchor; which was no sooner done but several 
Mandarins
 came Aboard them, saying that 
Balfour
 must stay, and not go from thence before an Answer came from the Emperor. To which the Ambassador answer'd, That the General had left the staying of 
Balfour
 to his choice, on which he rely'd, therefore did not believe the 
Manda∣rins.
 Moreover, as to what concern'd the Ship, they should believe him, that she should stay there on condition they would furnish her with Provisions; which if they would not do, she should go. The 
Mandarins
 us'd many argu∣ments to perswade the Ambassador to let 
Balfour,
 or some Person else stay in his stead: But the Ambassador not varying from his first Resolution, they took their leaves.


The twenty ninth the 
Netherlanders
 weighing Anchor again, drove with the Tyde of Ebb by the great Tower and Fort of 
Minjazen,
 where they found them all up in Arms. Some 
Batsiangs
 coming from the Shore call'd to the 
Ne∣therlanders
 to come to an Anchor: but they not hearkning to them, went on;






just before they pass'd the Fort, the third Person of 
Minjazen
 came by the side of the Ship in a small 
Champan,
 to tell the Ambassador that the Governor would fain speak with him. To which he answer'd, Tha
 when he was come to 
Netherland
 Haven, the Governor might come and speak with him there when he pleas'd; with which Answer they went away again, not bringing word when he would come or not.


Moreover, besides several sorts of other Vessels (as is at large related in the Description) most of the Rivers are Navigated by 
Champan
 and 
Batsiangs,
 which are small Vessels. They rise up round with a broad Head; the Stern is not joyn'd together, but on the top is separated; between which a Mat holds an Oar, wherewith he makes swift Way; the middle is cover'd with a Mat of Rushes: He which Steers (as represented in the Sculp) is Habited in a Coat made of 
Coco
 Leaves, and he in the Head hath a kind of Umbrella on his Head against the Rain.


The 
Chineses
 also keep great Feasts in their Vessels on the River, making Merry with varieties of Meat and strong Liquor; in which manner the great∣est 
Mandarins
 often recreate themselves, but in bigger Boats than the common People use, with a fine Covering over them, on each end of which stands gene∣rally a Man with a crooked Horn.


Against the Evening the Tyde of Ebb being spent, they dropt Anchor about half a League from the 
Overueen
 Frigat, lying in 
Netherland
 Haven; whither the Ambassador immediately sent his Sloop, with Orders for her Boat to come and take out some of the Cattel, and likewise that the Sloop should go to the rest of the Ships to hasten their Boats to fetch Provisions.


In the Evening the 
Overveens
 Boat coming thither, they loaded her full of living Cattel, with which they sent her again Aboard.


The thirtieth about Noon they drove with the Tyde Ebb through the se∣cond 
Strait,
 and coming within a Cannon Shot of the 
Overveen
 they ran aground on the Point of the Western Shoal in 
Netherland
 Haven; from whence getting






off again, about Midnight at high Water they came to an Anchor close by the 
Overveen.


The first of 
December
 nothing hapned.


The second, the Ambassador hoping to put off some more of their Goods, wrote the following Letter to the General at 
Hoksieu,
 viz.




The 
Hollanders
 have sufficiently testifi'd their Reality; and the Ambassador esteems nothing more than to shew, that what he hath promis'd to 
Talavja
 may be perform'd. Your Lordship hath been pleas'd to command, that the Ship from 
Quelang,
 and the Com∣mander 
Balfour
 should stay here till an Answer came from 
Peking;
 now the Ambassador desires to know how long the Ship must stay. Besides, since his coming hither he hath found some Goods, 
viz.
 Blood Coral, Amber, Cloth, and other Merchandise, brought in the Ships from 
Batavia,
 and likely to be carry'd back again thither, unless Your Lordship will be pleas'd this one time to give leave to sell them, because they were included in this 
Chinkon.
 The Ambassador hopes that the Emperor's Letters to the Lord 
Maetzuiker
 will bring him good tydings, therefore he could not but acquaint 
Talavja
 herewith, and desire his Answer upon it, especially having seen by some Letters which he found in the Ships, that the General of 
Batavia
 might be mov'd to deliver the Castle of 
Quelang
 to the Emperor, if he would grant the 
Hollanders
 a free Trade in 
China.




Nobel
 and the Secretary 
Vander Does
 were sent to the 
Chinese
 Jonks lying in the 
Crab-hole,
 to enquire if there were none Aboard that could Translate the fore-mention'd Letter, and deliver it to the General, which if there were they should leave it with them. But their coming amongst the Jonks caus'd great amazement amongst them, neither could they be accommodated; so they went to the Jonks which lay within the second 
Strait,
 where finding some 
Manda∣rins
 and a Secretary with them, they did their Business according to their desire.


This Letter being Translated 
Nobel
 sent with a 
Batsiang
 up to 
Hoksieu,
 with promise to return with an Answer within two days; so that the Ambassador judg'd it convenient to stay so long with the 
Blyswiik
 in 
Netherland
 Haven.


The third in the Morning, the 
Mandarins
 of the Jonks came aboard the 
Bleis∣wyk,
 saying, That they durst not carry the Letter which 
Nobel
 had given them the day before, except a 
Hollander
 went with them to 
Hoksieu:
 Whereupon, the Ambassador answer'd, That if they would not deliver the Letters, they knew what they had to do; if any thing other than well did come of it, it was not his fault.


This, startling, made them change their resolution, asking if they should deli∣ver the Letter, and the General should desire, that a 
Hollander
 should come to him, if the Ambassador would then promise them to send one thither, of which they would willingly be assur'd, that they might give his Highness a positive answer.


The Ambassador, after serious consideration, judg'd it convenient to an∣swer, That they should Request of the Governor of 
Minjazeen,
 in the Ambassa∣dor's Name, if he would please to send any one with that Letter to the 
Sontok,
 and if they had an answer upon it, and that 
Talavja
 Commanded, that an 
Hollan∣der
 should come to him, that then they would consider of it; with which an∣swer going away, they took the Letter with them.


The fourth, it was thought meet by the Ambassador and his Councel, since they had nothing more to do there, only to wait for News from above, to set Sail for 
Tinghay,
 to make all things ready there; but 
Nobel
 was order'd to stay there with the 
Overveen,
 that if any News should come from 
Hoksieu,
 he might inform the Ambassador of it, and give such Orders as should be requisite.


In the Afternoon the Ambassador fell down with the 
Bleiswyk
 to the first 
Straight,
 behind the 
Pyramids,
 where they dropp'd Anchor till the next Ebb, but were forc'd by a strong Gale out of the North-East, to remove beyond the first Shole, and wait for better Weather.


The fifth in the Night, the 
Bleiswyk
 set Sail again with a Northerly Wind and Ebbing Water; and getting beyond the 
Calf Sands,
 came on the seventh in the Morning, by Day-light, before 
Sotias Bay,
 within the 
Turrets Isles,
 that in the Afternoon, with a Sea breeze, he might put into the Bay of 
Tinghay.


Having cast Anchor, the Ambassador went with the 
Bleiswyk
's Sloop aboard the 
Victoria,
 to stay and go over in her.


Here it was judg'd convenient, that 
Nobel
 and 
Putmans,
 with the Ship 
Bata∣via,
 and 
Harthouwer,
 and 
Bartolz
 with the 
Crane,
 if no other News came from 
Hoksieu,
 should set Sail for 
Batavia.


In the Afternoon, the 
Bleiswyk
 Frigat came also to 
Tinghay,
 where the Am∣bassador immediately unladed part of her, distributing the Provisions and Mo∣ney amongst the Ships 
Victoria, Batavia,
 and 
Crane,
 that so he might not run the hazard of all in one Ship.


The eighth in the Afternoon, the 
Overveen
's Boat arriv'd at 
Tinghay
 from 
Netherland
 Haven, with a Letter from 
Nobel,
 Dated the Night before, the Con∣tents of which were:


That two Commanders had been aboard him, with a Letter from the Ge∣neral of 
Hoksieu,
 to the Governor of 
Minjazeen,
 of which he had sent the Tran∣slation Inclos'd.


The Superscription they could not give to 
Nobel,
 for want of some to write it; the 
Povi,
 as they said, had accounted himself too good to answer the Am∣bassador, but had writ to the Governor of 
Minjazeen,
 not expecting any fur∣ther answer from the Ambassador, as might be seen by the last Clause.


To the Proposal of 
Quelang,
 he had sent no manner of answer, But that the


Lord General, according to the foremention'd Commanders sayings, must the ensuing Year write himself to the Emperor, concerning that or the like business.


And in like manner, about the selling of the Merchandize, as appears by the second Clause; by which they may plainly see, that the Ships with their Mer∣chandize must be gone again, which was strongly affirm'd by the third Clause, as appears by the Translation.


In the Translation, no mention was made in how many days an answer would be there from 
Peking,
 as the Ambassador had desir'd to know; besides, no body came to look after the 
Overveen,
 to furnish her with Provisions, which they had so faithfully promis'd, and to his judgment there was no staying for it: The Tydes and Weather were good, which with the approaching New Moon, according to the general course of that season, might turn to be bad and tempestuous.


Therefore he expected the Ambassador's Order, whether the 
Overveen
 should stay longer in 
Netherland
 Haven, or go to 
Tinhay:
 The foremention'd Transla∣tion written by the General of 
Hoksieu,
 to the Governor of 
Minjazeen,
 was to this effect.




I.
 THe 
Povi
 hath receiv'd the Letter from the 
Holland
 Ambassador, wherein he de∣sir'd to know, how many days 
Balfour
 should lie there with his Ship: My Answer thereupon is, that he shall stay till Order comes from the Emperor.


II.
 The Foreign Commodities are forbid by the Emperor to be sold, therefore I cannot grant the Ambassadors Request; but when the Lord General shall send Letters the following Year, then I will write to the Emperor about it.


III.
 According to the Emperor's Command, it is not well done, that the Ambassador stays so long, because it will not be good for their business the ensuing Year, when they would come thither again.


IV.
 Lastly, I Command you to deliver this Letter to the Ambassador, and to acquaint me so soon as he is gone from our Coast: Hereupon I expect a speedy Answer.




Nobel
's writing concerning the 
Overveen,
 being by the Ambassador and his Councel consider'd on, it was judg'd convenient to send for the Frigat to 
Tinghay.


Therefore the Ambassador inform'd 
Nobel,
 that he had receiv'd his Letter with the Translation, and thereby understood, that 
Povi
 had answer'd very slightly concerning 
Balfours
 and the 
Overveens
 staying, without being able to depend upon it; their hopes of venting their Merchandize, was also now quite vanish'd, so that he resolv'd, and had found it convenient to send for the 
Overveen
 to 
Tinghay,
 because the Governors did not keep their promise in fur∣nishing her with Provisions.


If the 
Chineses
 should ask him the reason of the Ships going away, he should answer them, that it should lie under 
Tinghay,
 so long as they had any Provisi∣ons left whereby he might see if they intended to keep her there any longer, and govern himself accordingly.


Theninth nothing happen'd of remark.


The tenth, three 
Chinese
 Jonks that came out of the North Sail'd by the Am∣bassador in the 
Victoria,
 up the Channel of 
Hoksieu.
 In the Afternoon 
No∣bel
 arriv'd at 
Tinghay
 in the 
Overveen,
 and having dropt Anchor, he went aboard of the Ambassador, to tell him, That the eighth instant in the Evening,


some petty Officers were come aboard from the 
Chinese
 Jonks, to ask when the Ambassador would set Sail, and 
Nobel
 go from thence with the Frigat? To which he had answer'd, That the Ambassador would leave that place with the first fair Weather, and that he would be gone from thence with the 
Overveen
 the next Morning, with which they seeming to be pleas'd, took their leave.


The twelfth, it was resolv'd in Councel, upon the Ambassador's Proposal on the seventeenth instant, if good Weather, to set Sail for 
Batavia,
 without urging the Governors any more to permit them to Trade, because they saw, by all Circumstances, that no good was to be done there that year.


The fourteenth, the 
Overveen
 Frigat set Sail by 
Siam
 to 
Batavia,
 according to their resolution taken on the twelfth: Soon after her departure, two 
Chinese Coya's
 came to 
Tinghay,
 where some Officers coming to the Ambassador said, That they were sent by the Governor of 
Minjazeen,
 to enquire when the Ambas∣sador would be gone: Who answering, said, That he had been indispos'd, or else he would have been gone e're that time, but that he resolv'd three or four days hence to set Sail from 
Tinghay.


Moreover, the Ambassador told them, that it was very strange to him, that no advice came from 
Peking,
 about the coming of the Ships, because he had ac∣quainted the 
Lipous,
 that he expected Ships to come to 
Hoksieu
 with Merchan∣dize, and also to fetch him, and that the 
Lipous
 had answer'd him, that so soon as they receiv'd advice from the General, they would consult, and give Order concerning it: But since no order was come from the 
Lipous,
 it was a sign that the General or Governor of 
Minjazeen
 had not yet written about it to 
Peking;
 and considering he had inform'd the 
Lipous
 of it himself, they would resent it very ill, when they should hear of the Ships being there, and they were not acquainted with it, and serve this General and the Governor of 
Minjazeen,
 as the former General had been; for it would be a business of great Consequence, to let the Ambassador go away with three such deep laden Vessels. Hereupon the Officers making no reply, said, That if the Ambassador did stay some days longer, that several 
Mandarins
 would come to him in great Jonks from the Ge∣neral in 
Hoksieu:
 To which the Ambassador reply'd, That they, and who e're else came, should be welcome to him, and receiv'd as friends, desiring that they would acquaint the Governor of 
Minjazeen
 with what he had said; which they promising to do, ask'd to know the day on which the Ambassador would de∣part, which he said, would be the third from that, and if any one came to him in the interim, it was well, but if none came, he would assuredly be gone; with which answer they return'd.


The fifth in the Morning, the 
Netherlanders
 saw four Jonks, and two 
Coya's
 coming out of the Channel of 
Hoksieu,
 which the next Morning were seen about the 
Wood-Bay,
 where they stood to and again without coming nearer to the Ships: But the 
Coya's
 came close to them, out of one of which, a Servant be∣longing to the Governor of 
Minjazeen,
 came in a 
Champan
 or small Boat aboard the Ambassador, sent to him from his Master, to enquire concerning his Ex∣cellency's Health, and when he would set Sail; and said moreover, that the 
Po∣vi
 had writ to the Emperor, that the Ambassador went away from thence the twelfth of the last Moon, and now it was publickly known, that his Excellency was not yet gone; therefore he came to know the certain time, when the Am∣bassador would set Sail, and withal, to tell him, that if he intended to stay any longer, he should go and lie between the Isles, without the sight of the main Land; and to declare his mind, whether he would be gone, or not. To which


the Ambassador answer'd, That he would set Sail from thence, but that the General and Governor of 
Minjazeen
 might perhaps answer for it, that they let the Ambassador go away with three such deep laden Vessels; with which an∣swer, the Servant took his leave.


When the 
Netherlanders
 saw that the Jonks which kept without shot from them, made into the Channel again with their 
Coya's,
 they according to their resolution taken on the twelfth, made Preparations to set Sail for 
Batavia.


The seventeenth in the Morning, the Ambassador set Sail with four Ships, 
viz.
 the 
Victoria, Batavia, Crane,
 and 
Bleiswyk,
 from the ruin'd City 
Tinghay;
 and Steering his Course East-South-East, between the 
Turret-Isles,
 close by the Island 
Naerd,
 and about Midnight, guessing themselves to be past the 
Rough-Isle,
 they Steer'd South-West and by West: In the middle of the Morning-Watch, the Wind began to rise, and the next day prov'd very Stormy, when as they sup∣pos'd they saw the Isle of 
Quemuy;
 as the following day they judg'd from their Soundings, that they were near the Sandy Banks.


The twentieth, passing the 
Makaw
 Islands, they Steer'd their Course to the Isle of 
Ainan,
 which was descry'd on the two and twentieth, having 
Tinhosa
 about Noon, two Leagues and a half Northward from them.


The Ambassador having been indispos'd for some days, and beginning daily to grow weaker, by reason of the hollow Seas, and small Breezes, which made the Ship roul much, he sent the 
Bleiswyk
 on the twenty fourth to the 
Overveen
 and 
Crane,
 to tell them, that they should keep together, and he would with the 
Bleis∣wyk
 go before to the Island 
Pulo Timaon,
 where he would stay for them.


In the Evening, there being a Serene Sky, the Ambassador saw the Moun∣tain of 
Sinesecuwe
 on his side, and in the Morning the 
Cape Avarelles Valze.
 The Wind being at North-East, and their Course along the shore South and by West, and South-South-West, they came in the Evening up with the Point of 
Holland▪
 from whence they Steer'd South-West and by South, to raise 
Paul Can∣dor,
 which Isle they saw in the West, on the six and twentieth in the Afternoon; and the next Evening, Anchor'd behind the 
Goats Horns,
 where the 
Crane
 also arriv'd the following day.


The last of 
October,
 the 
Batavia
 Frigat arriv'd at the South-East side of 
Paulo Timaon,
 but the Wind shrinking, she was forc'd to drop Anchor half a League from that wherein the Ambassador was aboard.


Here the Ambassador gave Order to take the Silver out of the 
Victoria
 and 
Crane,
 and put it into the 
Bleiswyk
 again, and likewise sent his Sloops to the 
Batavia,
 to fetch the Silver out of her: Whereupon, the 
Bleiswyk
 was according to their Excellencies Order in 
Batavia,
 sent with all the Silver, Gold, and other Commodities to 
Malakka,
 to the Governor 
Balthazar Bort,
 to be sent from thence to 
Bengale.


The Ambassador inform'd him by Letters, that he was receiv'd with all kindness at the Court in 
Peking,
 and left the same with much Honor and Friend∣ship; but could not inform him, what was obtain'd by this Embassy, because the Emperor had sent his Letters Seal'd to the Lord General; but that it was certain, that for the future they should Trade in 
Canton,
 and not in 
Hoksieu;
 in the removal of which, if all things else were well, he found little trouble.


The first of 
Ianuary,
 the Fleet left 
Paulo Timaon,
 and in the Afternoon, the
 
Bleiswyk
 taking leave of the Fleet, steer'd her Course to the 
Streights
 of 
Sinkka∣pura.
 In the Evening, the Ambassador saw 
Pulo Aura,
 a League and a half North-East from him.


The second in the Morning, he stemm'd the Mountain 
Monapyn;
 and on the third had 
Pulo Lingen
 on his Stern.


The fourth, entring the 
Streights
 of 
Banka,
 he arriv'd on the seventh before 
Batavia,
 where the Ambassador deliver'd the Emperor's Seal'd Letter to the Lord General, and gave him an account of all his Adventures.


Thus having brought the Embassy out of 
China
 to 
Batavia,
 we will return thither again, and declare what properly concerns the 
Chineses,
 and their Coun∣trey; and first begin with their Entertainments and Diet.






Feasts, or Entertainments.


THe 
Chineses,
 according to 
Alvarez Semedo,
 spend most of their time in Feasting, with extraordinary Costs and Charges. On the meeting of Friends, and good success in any Business, they prepare a Feast; and some∣times also in Troubles and Adversities, in which they come to comfort each other; nay, at Entertainments, are the Consultations of the 
Chineses,
 advising with one another at Meals what they shall take in Hand.


This is the usual life of the Common People, and especially of Handicrafts∣men, which are divided into Companies, which they call 
Mane,
 because in eve∣ry Company are thirty Masters, (as many as there are days in a Month) which make a Feast every day by turns.


If they have not Conveniencies in their own Houses, they may hire publick Halls, in which are all manner of Necessaries, being built for that purpose; or if they will keep their Feasts in their own Houses, without any further trouble, then they only set down the number of the Persons, Guests, and Re∣tinue, and what Dishes they will please to order, which are punctually serv'd in, according to the Bill of Fare.


The Northern 
Chineses
 differ much in their Customs from the Southern, who are in general, more civiliz'd than the other.


The Southern 
Chineses,
 in their Feasts esteem of a 
Quelque-chose,
 or of Minc'd Meats and Hashes, more than great Joynts and standing Dishes, entertain∣ing more upon the score of good Society than Debauches; yet they will do their parts well at their Trencher, and as sufficiently at the turning off their Glasses: They are entertain'd with Wine before Dinner, of which they take and taste till they refuse; then they fall to their Rice, and neither speak nor Drink till pretty well satisfi'd.


The manner of the Northern 
Chineses
 is quite otherwise, for they are not Ce∣remonious nor Complemental, but delight in well-fill'd Tables, with great and full Dishes.


After the usual Ceremony which is observ'd through all 
China,
 they begin first with Eating, every one taking as much as he can on his Trencher, of what he likes best, which they eat without Drinking.


Rice is their Banquet.


After Meals, they spend an hour in talking, which ended, they seat them∣selves again, at Tables fill'd with Potation-Dishes, and Salt-Meats, as Gam∣mons of Bacon, dry'd Tongues, and the like, which they do not without cause call 
Ushers,
 or 
Vehiculums,
 preparers of the way, that the Tope may the better go down; for they no sooner take a Relishing Bit, but a lusty Go∣down follows.


They keep their Breakfasts at seven a Clock in the Morning, and their Din∣ners at five in the Afternoon, but drink no Wine at either: Only at Night, at a light Supper of relishing Meat, they give themselves full liberty and fresh scope of good Fellowship; therefore their Feasts are Nocturnal, spending the Day upon their serious, either Business, Exercise, or Studies.


In the Winter Nights they use Candles made of Oyl mix'd with Wax, but their Summer Lights are of three sorts of Wax, one of Bees, another of certain Snakes, which is very white, and the third comes from a Tree call'd 
Kieujeu,
 but that is not so good as our 
European,
 yet much better than our Tallow, and their Candles likewise exceed ours.


Persons of Quality make great Preparations for their Feasts, Erecting Ban∣queting Houses for that purpose, both in the Cities, and at their Countrey Houses, furnish'd with Pictures and other Rarities: And though the use of Hangings be very rare, yet if those that are invited to a Feast be Officers or Noblemen, they furnish their Houses with Tapestry, from the top to the bot∣tom: The number of Tables is a testimony of the greatness of their Enter∣tainment: They generally place no more than four Persons at a Table; but at very grand Meetings, every Guest hath a peculiar and sometimes two Ta∣bles, one to sit at, and the other to set away his empty Dishes.


The Tables are neither cover'd with Clothes nor Napkins, but Varnish'd with the Wax of the Gum call'd 
Cie:
 They use no Knives, for all their Meat, except Eggs, Fish, and the like, is brought before them ready Hash'd: Neither use they Forks nor Spoons, but two small Sticks two handfuls long, with which they very dexterously and neatly take up their Meat; nay, put a single Corn of Rice, either raw or boyl'd to their Mouth, without letting it fall. They never put Salt, Pepper, nor Vinegar or Verjuice amongst their Meat, but Mu∣stard and the like Ingredients, which they Compound with extraordinary Art, having several of them of a curious relish.


Their common Dishes are Flesh and Fish, boyl'd, or broyl'd on Grid-Irons, and fry'd in Pans, with variety of Sauces, not unpleasing to the Palate.


Their 
Pottages,
 of which they are great lovers, are never made without either Flesh or Fish.


The Emperor 
Che,
 who began his Reign before the Birth of our Saviour, 
Anno
 1150. first us'd Sticks of Ivory to Eat with, and Ivory Dishes; but these Sticks are not always made of Ivory, but sometimes of Ebony, or some other such like Materials, and tipt only at the ends, with which they touch the Meat, with Silver or Gold; yet the Inhabitants of the Counties 
Iunningfu,
 in the Pro∣vince of 
Iunnan,
 a Rustick and Salvage People, use not the foremention'd Sticks, but put the Meat into their Mouths, sooping it down by whole handfuls.


The 
Chineses
 sit at their Tables, on high and artificial wrought Stools, and not cross-Legg'd like the 
Tartars.


Anciently they us'd neither Stools nor Tables, but sat on the Ground cross-Legg'd, after the same manner as most of the 
Asiatick
 and 
African
 People yet do, insomuch, that they have but one Character for a Table and a Carpet.


Tables were first brought in use among the 
Chineses,
 near the Raign of the Emperor 
Han,
 which ever since they have observ'd, and have them and their Stools very curious.


They use many Ceremonies, as well in the middle, as in the beginning o
 ending of their Feasts: The Master of the House, as their Taster, first sitting down, when he hath taken a Morsel and tasted the Liquor, then recommend∣ing,


invites his Friends to sit down, and do the like. In the middle of their Feast they change their small Dishes into great, and all present, Masters, and whatsoever, have the freedom of drinking what they please, but none inforc'd to more.


Persons of Quality make Feasts when they return from a Journey, and it often happens, that one Man will go to seven or eight Feasts in a day, only to oblige his Friends by his Presence. When they have time, they send some days before Letters to peculiar Friends, desiring them to come to their Feasts, which if they cannot, being otherwise ingag'd, then they excuse themselves again by a Letter, and they put off their Feasts till they can come; with which they ac∣quaint them by another Letter, call'd 
A Letter of Request:
 At the day appoint∣ed, those that are there first, stay without in a Hall till all the rest are come, then they go into the Dining-Room, where the Master of the House using some Ceremonies, puts all things in a readiness, which done every one seats himself according to his Quality; and the Invitor sits down in State, to animate his Guests to Eat and Drink: They sit a lo
g while at Table; for besides their Discourses, they have Musick and Comedians, who strait Personate whatever they call for or desire.


Their Feasts end in many Complements, which the Guests make to the Master, to whom they send a Letter the next Morning, extolling the noble Entertainment, and all things thereto belonging, and hearty thanks for the ho∣nor which they receiv'd by it.


The 
Chineses,
 as 
Trigaut
 witnesseth, eat all manner of Dainties which we have in 
Europe,
 and very well know how to dress and prepare them, but they bring but very little of a sort to their Tables; for they account the glory of their Feast to consist in the variety of 
Petits
 and Hotch-potches: neither do they eat Flesh and Fish apart, as we, but mix them together.


Moreover, no manner of Meat being once put on the Table is taken away till Dinner is ended; wherefore they not onely fill the Tables, setting one Dish by another, but heap them up like their own Turrets. No Bread nor Rice is set on the Table before the Guests, except at some small Feasts, or to∣wards the latter end; if there be, then they drink no Wine, for the 
Chineses
 drink not any before Rice.


They have also several Games at their Feasts, like ours, where every one that loseth is forc'd to take up his Cup, at which all the rest rejoyce and clap their Hands.


The 
Chineses
 are very mannerly at Meals, and keep their Dinners early. Mushroms they account a great Dainty, sending for them from the Mountain 
Tienno,
 lying in the County of 
Hancheufu,
 belonging to the Province of 
Chekiang,
 near the small City 
Lingan.
 They are carry'd through all 
China,
 and being Salt∣ed and dry'd last good a whole year: They steep them first in Water before they boyl them, by which means they become as fresh again as when first gather'd.


In no place in all 
China
 is more Butter and Milk us'd than in the City of
 
Sucheu,
 in the Province of 
Nanking;
 for 
Martinius
 relates, that he saw none in any place else.


The Inhabitants of this City exceed the other 
Chineses
 in preparing their Meats with Sugar, Salt, Vinegar, Wine, and Herbs.


The Inhabitants of the twelfth County 
Xunningfu,
 in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 a salvage People, stick not to eat, according to the foremention'd 
Martinius,
 all manner of Creatures that are not venomous.


The People of the fourth Territory 
Chingvenfu,
 in the Province of 
Queicheu,
 have no Salt, but use the Ashes of an Herb call'd 
Kine
 in stead thereof.


Amongst those of the Province 
Kiangsi
 are some, which all the year long ga∣ther up the Bones of dead Cattel, and lay them in 
Porcelane
 Dishes at their Feasts, to fill up their empty Platters, that their Dishes may be heap'd one upon another, according to the Custom of the Countrey.






Marriages and Matrimonial Ceremonies.


THree thousand years since to this day, according to an inviolable Law, Marriages have been observ'd in 
China.
 Antiently they us'd many Ce∣remonies in Betrothing each other; and amongst others, to give their Hands as we do; but most of them are chang'd, some quite extinguish'd, and others new. At this day they observe two kinds of Marriages, one firm, as with us, not to be dissolv'd but by the Death of one or both. In this the Woman is con∣ducted with many Ceremonies to her Husbands House. The second is a kind of Concubinate, yet suffer'd by that Countrey amongst such as have no Chil∣dren; but that limitation is a meer pretence, for the Rich take Concubines or Mistresses, without any scruple, though they have several Children.


In this the Betrothing differs much from that of a true and lawful Marri∣age; for here they Treat with the reputed Father or Fosters of a Maiden, which in truth having no Relation, but have onely brought them up with intent to sell them to the first amorous Chapman. But to speak properly this is no Mar∣riage, because neither any Promises, nor Matrimonial Ceremonies pass be∣tween them; for the Law of the Countrey permit all Women to take any other Man, if the first hath put her off. Besides, these Concubines eat apart by themselves in peculiar Rooms, and are under obedience of the lawful Wives, being at their Command as Servants on all occasions: Neither do their Chil∣dren shew that obedience to them, as those of the lawful Wives do, neither call them by the Name of 
Mother.
 At their Death those Children which are born of them, are not oblig'd to Mourn three years, nor desist from their Study, nor leave their Employment or Government, as the legitimate Issue do at their Fa∣thers or Mothers Death.


At the Man's Decease the legal Wife and Children possess the Estate in common; but if the Wife die, the Concubine still remains with the Husband, and so do the Children if she hath any.


There are some that take Mistresses onely to beget Sons; whom when grown and mature, if the lawful Wife do not affect, they are sent abroad, or else Marry'd to some other; yet the Child that is thus Begotten and Born, acknowledges no other Mother than the true and lawful Wife.


Widows are permitted to Marry if they please; but modest and chaste Wo∣men seldom do, though young and without Children, but live retir'd in their Father-in-laws House, for which they are highly esteem'd.


In lawful Marriages they commonly observe the Constitutions, Qualities, Conditions, and Likeness of the Persons; but in the other they look onely upon Beauty and Breeding.


None, according to their Laws, may Marry their Fathers Relation, in what Degree soever, nor with a Person of the same Name, but freely with their Mothers Friends, though never so near Ally'd.


A Virgin seldom Marries a Widower, they being call'd, 
The Bed and Plea∣sure of the House.


No Marriages are Contracted without a 
Procurator,
 though they have been never so great Friends; to which purpose one is chosen out of the number of those Men and Women who folllow no other Trade.


The Bridegroom never sees his Bride but at the going in of the Door, where he receives her as his Wife.


The Fathers bestow their Children in Marriage when they are very young, and sometimes in their Infancy, nay before they are Born, whether Male or Female: Their Promises in this kind are faithfully perform'd, notwithstand∣ing the Father dies before the time, except one of the betrothed happens to be defam'd and lose his Estate, or both Parties disagree. If the Son for some pri∣vate Reasons will not perform his Fathers Commands, he may be forc'd to it by the Laws of the Countrey.


No mention is made of the Bride or Bridegrooms Portion till their Fathers Death.


Amongst Persons of meaner Quality it is not customary to buy Women, but onely they give their Brides Father a piece of Money to buy her Garments and Attires, according to their Capacity; from whence perhaps some have averr'd by mistake that the 
Chineses
 buy their Wives.


Persons of Quality never speak of the Brides Portion, because her Father is oblig'd by the Laws of the Countrey to do what he can, and to provide them Housholdstuff from the Door (as they say there) to the top of the Chimney, except the Bed; all which seldom amounts to above fifty Crowns, so low a Price do Goods bear in 
China.
 Besides which the Father gives his Daughter two or three Maids to wait upon her, and some Silver, but never Lands or Houses, unless he be very rich, or else Marries her to a Person of Quality, or that he hath no Heir Male himself. After they are Betrothed, with their Pa∣rents consents, then begin their Complements and Courtships: And first, the Bridegroom sends the Bride a Present of some delicate Meat, Wine, and Fruit; Secondly, the Marriage-Day is pitch'd upon by Astronomers with great Ce∣remonies; Thirdly, the Brides Name enquir'd for; Lastly, the Bridegroom must send her some Jewels, Pendants, and Precious Gems.


The day before the Bride comes home to her Husbands House, her Goods are carry'd thither from her Fathers at Noon-day by certain People employ'd for that purpose, who walk two by two, some carrying Tables, others Chests, Curtains, Hangings, and the like.


The next day, as it is customary in some Provinces, the new Marry'd Man, his Father and nearest Relations, go to seek the Bride, whom having found, they conduct home in State in a Sedan.


In other Provinces more to the South, the Man sends one in the Evening to fetch his Bride in a Sedan made for that purpose, richly Lin'd; behind fol∣low a great number of People with Torches and Lanterns.


After the Mother hath done the last Offices for her that she shall do as a Maid, and bid her farewel, then she is lock'd up in the Sedan, and the Key sent before to her Husbands Mother. As she goes along, the nearest Relations walk before, and the Servant-Maids given her by her Father, go on each side of their Mistress. When they come thither, her Mother-in-law unlocks the Sedan, and desiring her to come forth, presents her to her Husband: Which done, they both walk to a private Chappel, in which the Images of their Pre∣decessors


are erected; where having kneel'd four times, according to the Custom in those Ceremonies, they come and shew the same Reverence to their Fathers, sitting in a large Hall on Stools.


Then the Bride goes away with her Mother-in-law, Chamber-Maids, and Match-makers, into the Womens Lodgings, which are kept so strictly that none dare offer to look into them, no not the Father-in-law himself, or her own Brothers; so that when a Father will punish his Son for an Offence, which is often done notwithstanding he is Married, he is safe as in a Sanctuary, if he can but get into his Wifes Chamber, because his Father dare not come thither, nor speak with his Son's Wife, except on some extraordinary occasions, such is their care for the preservation of Modesty, and the Honor of the Women.


They are also seldom permitted to go abroad, except on necessity, and then are carry'd in a Sedan, made for that purpose, and when lock'd up, not the least Cranny through which she can peep.


The Women in their Privacies, to pass away the time, entertain themselves with little Dogs, Birds, and the like pleasers of Fancy.


A Moneth after the Marriage Day the Bride returns to her own House, which they call 
Queinim,
 that is, 
Returning to Rest.


All the Sons have equal shares of their Fathers Goods, and those of the Concubines as the begotten of lawful Wives; for in this case the Father is the onely Person that is consider'd: but as for the Daughters, they receive nothing but what is given them on their Marriage Day.


If the Father dies before he hath Marry'd his Daughter, then her Brothers are to provide for her; and likewise if her Father hath wasted, or given away all his Estate by Marrying of his Children, then the Brothers are oblig'd to maintain themselves.


There are some peculiar Families, whereof the eldest Inherits, notwithstand∣ing he hath several other Brothers. The Children are call'd 
Quecun, Chu-Hui, Heupe Cheihei.


And with many Ceremonies, as 
Trigaut
 witnesseth, they Betroth one ano∣ther, which is done by the Parents when they are in their Infancy: But one thing they chiefly observe, which is, that the Bridegroom differs not many years in the age of the Bride. This Promising or Betrothing, the Parents make between themselves, without acquainting the Children, who nevertheless al∣ways consent.


All Persons of Quality Marry with their Equals, chusing their Wives of as good Families as themselves.


As to what concerns the Concubines, which every one keeps according to his pleasure, the fairest and most beautiful are in greatest esteem, not regarding Birth or Riches; for they buy them for a hundred 
Ducats
 a piece, and sometimes less.


The common People or the Poor buy Wives for a small Sum, and sell them again when they please; but the Emperor and his Family in their Marri∣ages look onely upon the Beauty of a Person, without regarding whether she be of Royal Extraction or not: But Women of Quality shun this Choice, partly because the Emperor's Women are of no authority for their life-times, being lock'd up in the Palace, and secluded from the Eyes of all Friends and Relations; and partly because the Magistrates of Marriages chuse but few out of many to be the Emperor's lawful Wives.


The Emperor hath one prime Wife, which may onely be styl'd 
Empress;







besides which he may Marry nine other, somewhat meaner, and then thirty six more, which all bear the Title of 
Wives.
 He hath also many Concubines, which are not call'd Wives, nor were ever Betrothed, whom he picks and chu∣ses at his pleasure. Those which bring forth a Son are esteem'd the most, and accepted of best; and she who hath the first Male-Issue takes place, because he is to succeed his Father in the Throne.


This is not onely usual with the Emperor and his Family, but likewise customary through the whole Empire. The prime Wife sits with her Hus∣band at the Table, and all the rest (especially those that are not related to the Imperial Blood) are Servants to the Husbands Father, and Waiting-Maids to the lawful Wife, not daring to sit in the presence of either. The Sons acknow∣ledge not their real Mother, but the prime Matron, and Mourn onely when she dies three whole years, and follow no Employment during that time, which they mind not at the Death of their Mother which bare them.


They strictly observe that no Man Marry a Woman that hath the same Sir-name which he hath, though they are no way ally'd to one another; not in the least minding how near they are a Kin to each other, if their Names do but differ; nay, the Fathers Marry their Sons to their Mothers nearest Re∣lations.


The Bride brings no Portion with her; and though at that day when she is carry'd to the Bride-grooms House, she takes so much Housholdstuff with her, that whole Streets are stopt up with it, yet all this is bought at the Bride∣grooms Charge, who some Moneths before sends her a Sum of Money to that purpose. Thus far 
Trigaut.


The Houshold generally consists in Stools, Benches, Chests, and Umbrella's. Moreover, the Bride must bring the Bridegroom a Horse and Bridle, four Ser∣vant Maids, and two Boys: The Bridegroom also furnishes the Kitchin with all Provision, presents the Bride with several Pieces of Silk-Stuffs, Cotton-Cloth, and a Garland of Flowers, with a Gold Bodkin; for which she, as a


sign of her constant Love, gives him a Sute of Cloth of Gold, or rich Silk. The Bridegroom also gives to her Father a hundred, and to her Mother fifty 
Tail
 of Silver: which done, the Wedding begins, first Entertaining each other eight days in the Bridegrooms House, and three days more at the Brides.


Their Weddings are very expensive, being celebrated in great State, and ended with Comedies, Masques, Musick, and the like, to the great admiration of Strangers.


The day after the Wedding, the new Marry'd Woman is conducted in a stately manner, attended by a great number of her Friends and nearest Relati∣ons to her Husbands House, either by Water in a Pleasure▪boat, or by Land in a Sedan, or Chair. Upon the side of the Shore walk several Musicians and Singers, Playing on Instruments and Singing. Upon the Brides approach the Priests hold up at a distance some Golden Half-Moons, which they give to the Bride, wishing she may not change like the Moon, but embrace him with a pure and constant Affection: A great assurance they have of these Half-Moons, believing that as long as the Woman keeps them, she will never change her Love to her Husband.


When 
China
 was Govern'd by several Kings and Lords, they took one ano∣thers
 Daughters to Wife as in 
Europe:
 but since those Governments were uni∣ted, the Emperor hath been forc'd in his own Realm to take one or other of his Subjects Daughters, it being contrary to their Law, that the Emperor should Marry any Woman out of his own Dominions. But though the Em∣peror be so bound up, yet Persons of Quality do not willingly Marry their Daughters to him, because upon trial and dislike he may send them home again. Neither may he Betroth himself to a Maid of his Alliance; therefore they search through the whole Empire for a Virgin of twelve or fourteen years of age, beautiful, and endu'd with all manner of Vertues and Breeding, after the same manner as sacred Writ testifies they sought for 
Abishag
 the 
Shunamite
 for 
David,
 and 
Hester
 for 
Ahasuerus:
 When they have found such a one according to their liking, she is put into the custody of two Ladies of Honor, antient Matrons, who search her, to see if she hath no imperfections about her Body. When those after all their Searchings have found her faultless, she is conduct∣ed to the Court with a great Train, and being accepted as a Person which from that time belongs to the Emperor, she is shewn to his Majesty in his Palace. The Emperor after the usual Ceremonies pass'd▪ gives her as Wife to the young Prince his Son, from which instant she is the true and lawful Queen. In the Palace also they order some chaste and vertuous Women to attend her; who being endu'd with all manner of Vertues, instruct her in all Courtly Behavior, that she may justly deserve the Name of a Queen, which they call 
Chemu,
 that is, 
Mother of the Empire.


If we would speak of them according to their Historians, all the Empresses thus brought up, have been Women of great Merits, charitable to the Poor, very Prudent, and of quick Apprehension.


Such a one was the Daughter of a Bricklayer, who being brought to the Dignity of Empress, always kept her Father's Trowel by her; and when the Prince her Son began to grow too ambitious, she shew'd him this Trowel which her Father had us'd, whereby she brought him to Obedience.


The Maidens Relations are immediately advanc'd to high Dignity, and Places of Honor, and her House and Family afterwards accounted Rich, and of great Quality, and the more she wins upon the Emperor's Affection, the higher their Friends are rais'd.


The Marrying of the Empero's younger Sons is much after the same manner, only they use not so much care in the choyce of their Wives: but the manner of bestowing their Daughters is several; for they send for twelve young Men of seventeen or eighteen years old, the tallest and handsomest that can be found, to come to the Palace, and set them in a Place where the Princess may see them; whom having view'd, she takes peculiar notice of two; which being shewn to the Emperor, he elects one of them for his Son-in-law.


When the Emperor 
Vanlie,
 Grandfather to the Emperor 
Theumchin,
 who Reign'd about 
Anno
 40. having two Youths brought before him on the fore∣mention'd account, saw one of them very richly Habited, and the other, though comelier, in poor Apparel, ask'd him why he was not so well Habited as his Companion? whereto he answer'd, 
O Emperor, the poor Estate of my Father will not permit me to appear in a better Condition:
 The Emperor reply'd, 
Because you are poor I will take you for my Son-in-law.


The other Youths are sent back again, and accounted Noble, because they were allotted to this Choyce.


The Emperor's Son-in-law hath immediately a 
Fumme
 set over him, being two Learned 
Mandarins
 of the Court to be his Tutors, and instruct him in all Princely affairs.


Till the Woman hath Children, the Man is bound to shew Reverence three times a day with bended Knees, but when she is Deliver'd of a Child this Du∣ty ceases: Yet there are many Ceremonies and Shews of Obedience that con∣tinue; for which reason Persons of Quality shun to be the Emperor's Sons-in∣law; and this Custom of chusing twelve is no more observ'd.


Is the Emperor accidentally casts his Eye on a Person of Quality, or a Learned Person, to make him his Son-in-law, they humbly desire and beg to be excus'd of it, fearing to live discontentedly all his life-time, if the Princess should take any dislike against him.


As to what concerns the Emperor's prime Wife, who is call'd by the Title of 
Hoamheu,
 which is 
Empress,
 she hath her Seat behind the Emperor: the other six, and the next in Degree, are call'd 
Queens,
 and in great esteem.


Besides these, the Emperor hath thirty Ladies of Honor, the rest being Con∣cubines, to the number of three thousand, are young and beautiful Women, brought thither from all parts of the Empire, whom the Emperor visits at his pleasure, as his Fancy leads, or their Beauty attract.


The Emperor 
Theumchim
 being a Chaste Man, they said of him, 
Pu yu cuin,
 that is, 
He goes not into the Palaces of Women;
 and some others such there have been: as on the contrary, there have been more, whose wandring Affections have been so unsatisfiable, that not pleas'd with their own Fancies to chuse a Mate, they kept a little Wagon, drawn by Goats, letting them run whither they would, and into what Chamber soever they went and stood still, there the Emperor pitch'd for his amorous Dalliance.


Another that would not take that trouble to go into the Womens Palaces, caus'd them all to be presented to him in Pictures, and her whom he lik'd best he sent for. Thus far 
Semedo.


The 
Tartar
 Emperor which at this day Governs, being a Youth of eighteen Years, hath twelve Empresses for his Service.












Funerals▪ and Mourning for the Dead.


ALl the 
Chinese
 Books which Treat of their Customs, endeavor nothing
 more than to incite Children to shew Obedience to their Parents, and Respect to their Ancestors; which they shew in nothing more than in their Fu∣nerals and Obsequies: for they not onely Habit themselves in Mourning, but bestow great Cost on a Coffin.


In the preparing for their Funerals, which may rather be call'd a glorious Show, they strive to exceed one another according to their State and Quality; nay, often go beyond their Capacity. They Mourn not in black, but White. The Sons at their Parents Death wear a course Flaxen Coat, or rather Frock, which reaches down to their Feet, their Hats and Shoes are also very pitiful to behold; and they tie a Cord about their Wastes like the 
Franciscan
 Monks. This Mourning, according to an inviolable Law, for Father or Mother is strictly observ'd by the Children three whole years, for this reason (as they say in their Books,) that they should requite their Parents, and as a testimony of thankfulness that they have carry'd them three years in their Arms, and brought them up with great trouble during their Infancy. But the time which they Mourn for other Relations is much shorter; for some leave off Mourning within the Year, others in three Moneths, as in 
Europe.


The lawful time to Mourn for the Emperor or Empress, is also three years, which all the Subjects observe through the whole Empire: But now upon the Emperor's permission, made known by Proclamation, Days are reckon'd for Moneths, and so the whole Realm in a Moneths time express their Sorrow for the Emperor's Death in Mourning.


The Funeral Ceremonies and Customs of the 
Chineses
 observ'd at Burials, are written in a large Book, wherefore upon any ones Decease, those that are to take care to Interr the Body repair to that, wherein their Mourning Clothes,


Shoes, Caps, Girdles, and the like, are not onely describ'd in it, but also re∣presented in Pictures.


When a Person of Quality happens to die, the Son of the Deceased, or nearest Kinsman, acquaints all the other Relations and Friends with it by a Book written in a mournful Style. Mean while the Coffin is made, and the Bo∣dy put into it, and likewise the Hall or Chamber in which the Corps stands, hung, and cover'd with white Cloth; in the middle of the Chamber is an Al∣tar, on which stands the Coffin, and the Effigies of the Deceased.


Into this Chamber on certain Days come all the Kindred of the Deceased clad in Mourning; whither they bring Rice, and setting two Wax-Candles on the Altar, burn Perfumes to the Honor of the Deceased. When the Candles are lighted, then they shew Reverence to the Dead by bowing their Bodies and Kneeling four times: but they first put Frankincense into a Perfuming Pot with Fire, which is plac'd against the Coffin and the fore-mention'd Image. Whilst these Ceremonies are performing, one or more Sons of the Deceased stand on each side of the Chest crying and lamenting; behind the Coffin all the Women of his Alliance, standing behind a Curtain, cry without ceasing. The Priests have ordain'd a Custom to burn Papers, cut after a peculiar fashion, as also white Silk-Stuffs; which is done (they say) that thereby the Deceased may be provided of Clothes in the other World.


The Children oftentimes keep their dead-Fathers and Mothers in a Coffin in the House three or four years together, without the least nauseating smell coming through the Crannies, being colour'd all over with the Gum which they call 
Cie.
 All which time they set before them every day Meat and Drink as if they were alive.


The Sons during this time of Mourning do not sit on their usual Stools, but on low Benches cover'd with white Cloth; neither do they sleep on Beds, but on Mats of Straw, spread over the Floor near the Coffin. They eat no Flesh, nor drink, but upon pure necessity, not being suffer'd to be at any Feasts, nor for some Moneths to go abroad publickly, but are carry'd in Sedans co∣ver'd with Mourning Cloth.


Many other things they observe, which would be too tedious to relate.


At the Day when the Corps is to be carry'd out, the Friends and Relations are invited by another Book, and meet all in white Apparel to attend the Fu∣neral; which is perform'd like the 
Romans
 Processioning; several Shapes of Men, Women, Elephants, Tygers, and Lyons, made of Paper, but curiously Gilt and Painted, being carry'd before, and afterwards burnt at the Grave. The Priests mumbling their 
Heathen
 Prayers, follow the Corps also in a long Train, and use several Ceremonies by the Way, beating on Drums, playing on Pipes, Cymbals, Bells, and the like. Before go likewise several Men, carrying of great Copper Perfuming-Pots on their Shoulders.


Lastly, the Bier on which the Corps lieth, is brought in great State under an Arch'd Canopy, made very artificially of Wood, and hung with Flannel, which is carry'd by forty, and sometimes by fifty Men.


Behind the Bier follow the Sons on Foot, every one leaning on a Crutch, as if fainting with sorrow. Next follow the Women Kindred in Sedans hung with white Curtains, so that none can see them. The other Women which are not so nearly Ally'd to the Deceased, are also carry'd in Mourning Sedans.


All their Curch-Yards and Tombs are near the City.


If it happen that the Sons at their Parents Deaths are from home, then the Funeral is deferr'd till their Return.


Also when a Son is inform'd of his Father's Death, he prepares, if he be a Man of an Estate, a great Feast, to which he invites, and makes mournful Complaints to all his Friends; then returning home with the first opportuni∣ty, he renews the same Ceremonies again in order as before; nay, a Son is ob∣lig'd by the Law, though he enjoy the greatest Office in the Empire, or be one of the prime Council in 
Peking,
 or of the 
Colaos,
 who is the next Person of the Emperor, yet he must come home and spend three years in Mourning, before he is permitted to go again to his former Employment.


But this is onely to be understood for their Parents, and not for any other Relations.


Onely Generals and Magistrates are free from this Law at the Death of their Parents.


If any one die out of his native Countrey, then he who is left to take care of the Corps uses all endeavors, without sparing either Cost or Charges, to carry it home, that there he may be Interr'd in the Grave of his Ancestors; for every Family hath a peculiar Burying place on some Hill in the Suburb of the City. The Sepulchres are large, built of Marble, and adorn'd with several Shapes of Men and Beasts. They also erect great and stately Tomb-stones, on which are Engraven in a noble Style the famous Acts of their Predecessors.


In this manner hath 
Trigaut
 describ'd their Mourning; but we will also an∣nex what 
Alvares Semedo, Adrianus de las Cortes,
 and 
Adam Scall
 have written con∣cerning the same.


In many things concerning the Life of Man, the 
Chineses
 agree with the 
Euro∣pean
 Philosophers, but differ much about the Concerns of the Dead. The 
Eu∣ropeans
 make little ado about their Funerals, whereas the 
Chineses
 esteem no∣thing more, and are very careful in their Life-time to give Order to their Children for them, who shew all obedience and dutifulness in performing the same after their Deaths.


It is a general Custom in 
China,
 not to bury the Dead naked, though a Child of two years old, but put it into a Coffin, according to every ones Capacity; in which the richer sort, notwithstanding the 
Chineses
 are of a covetous dispo∣sition, strive to exceed one another, endeavoring to get the best and sweetest Wood that grows.


Those that have no Children, spare not to give a thousand Crowns for the Wood of a Coffin, though it be nothing near so much worth; which being made and beautifi'd with Ornamentals of Gold, Silver, Painting, Imagery, and the like, is brought home, and oftentimes set in their Chambers to delight them by looking upon it. On the contrary, those which being stricken in years have no Coffins, are always sad and melancholy.


This Custom they generally observe through the whole Empire; and as they receiv'd their Religion from the 
Indians,
 they have likewise borrow'd many other things of them, imitating them especially in three sorts of Burials, 
viz.
 in the Earth, in the Water, and in the Fire; for the 
Iapanners
 will some throw themselves headlong from the tops of Mountains; others tying Stones about their Necks, leap into Rivers; and do many other things to shorten their Lives: But the 
Chineses
 have not such stout Hearts to bury themselves alive; but poor People, who have not wherewith to purchase a Coffin, burn the Corps, and bury the Ashes.


In the Province of 
Suchuen
 the Dead are burn'd, and the Ashes gather'd and put into Vessels, and so thrown into the Rivers or Brooks.


Their Coffins are made of hard black Planks, the Seams cover'd with 
Iews
-Glue, or Gum, by the 
Portuguese
 call'd 
Charan,
 or 
Giaro,
 and by the 
Chineses, Cie
 and 
Cia.


Every one hath his peculiar Place, or Tomb, without the Wall of the City, for they are not permitted within.


Some build handsom Houses there, walling them round, and planting Cy∣press, and other Trees, according to the nature of the Soyl.


These Places are valu'd according to the opinion which they have of the Ground; for if a Conjurer hath judg'd it to be lucky to Build on, they ex∣ceedingly enhanse the value thereof: nor do they ever buy any Land without the advice of those People.


At their Burials they observe one Order, to put the chief Corps of the Fami∣ly at the upper end, and set the other side by side according to their Degrees.


Their Graves are neatly hewn out of Stone, and on the top adorn'd with Shapes of Beasts, as Harts, Elephants, and Lyons, with Encomiastick Inscri∣ptions.


Persons of Quality, especially those that are single, bestow more Cost, building stately Palaces and Rooms under Ground like Cells; which are made very convenient to lay the Corps in.


Here all the Relations meet at the time of their Deaths, to do their Offer∣ings and other Ceremonies.


For the Poor which have not Money to buy a peculiar Burying-place, there is a common Church-Yard in every City, wherein they lie buried all toge∣ther.


They chiefly desire to be buried in their Predecessors Graves, though never so far from the Place where they die, as it often happens to Governors of re∣mote Provinces of the Empire, and thither their Friends, to do them the last honor, convey them.


The first Ceremony observ'd at any ones Departure is, that the Sick, when dying, is carry'd on a Mat to give up the Ghost in a Hall: Yet Persons of Quality are not remov'd, but die on their Beds.


When a Father dies, then the eldest Son plucks off his Cap from his Head, and comes with his Hair dishevel'd to the Bed, and tearing the Curtains and Sheets in Pieces, lays them on the Corps; then the Body (if a Male, by Men, if a Female, by Women) is according to their Custom wash'd; which done, they lay it in a Cotton Cloth, or else in Silk, and put on his best Appa∣rel; next to the Corps they lay the Badges of his Office, and Degrees of his Learning which he attain'd in his Life-time. The Body thus Garnish'd, is laid in a Coffin, which stands in a Hall hung round about with black. The Effigies of the Deceased drawn to the Life, with his Arms and Livery, are all plac'd at the Head of the Coffin, and at the Feet stands a Table cover'd with a Carpet, before which is a Curtain drawn for the Women to stand behind unseen. The Children and Nephews sit mournfully on Straw. In the first Gallery leading to the Entrance into the Hall, stand several Trumpeters on both sides, and two with Tabers at the Gate of the House in the in-side; before the House in the Street hangs a Bundle of Pieces of Paper made fast to a Stick which reaches down to the Ground, as a sign of their new-begun Mourning, and to give notice to their Neighbors: Afterwards the Children of the Deceased acquaint their nearest Relations and others by a Letter of their Loss; who thereupon come to visit them in this Order: First the Visitant walks into the outer


Court before the House, and there puts on Mourning, the Drums beating the whilst; which done the Trumpets sounds as he passes through the Gallery: so soon as he enters the Hall the Women behind the Curtain begin to cry, and then approaching the Table he lays a Paper Purse of Money upon it, to defray some of the Charges; after he hath bow'd his Head three or four times on the Corps, and kneel'd down, the Childring lifting him up, place him on their left sides, and shew the same Reverence to him: After all these Ceremo∣nies pass'd, every one seats himself without speaking a word.


All those Friends which come thither as Visitants are receiv'd by one of the Deceased's Relations, Clad in a Mourning Garb, who conducts them into an Anti-Chamber, where desiring them to sit, proffers them 
Tee,
 dry'd Fruit and Sweet-Meats, of which they eating but little, take and put it into their Nets and go away.


These Civilities are so strictly observ'd, that Friends, though they dwell not near, but in some other Cities, come Riding thither; or if it be too far, they send one of their Family to excuse them.


These Ceremonies ended, the eldest Son is oblig'd to go and visit every one in the City, which came to Mourn with him; yet to shun so much trouble he goes onely to their Doors, where leaving a Letter he proceeds to the next. Then they speak of the Funeral if their Purses be able to hold out, if not, they keep the Coffin in the House till the next opportunity, which happens sometimes not in a whole year. At the time appointed all the Friends are advis'd there∣of by a 
Thu,
 or Letter; who when met, go to the House: Before them are carry'd great Images of Men, Horses, Elephants, Lyons, Tygers, and other Beasts, made of Gilt Paper; then follow other Shapes, 
viz.
 of Wagons, trium∣phal Arches, Pyramids, and the like, adorn'd with Silk and Roses of divers colours: all which things are burn'd when the Coffin is put into the Ground, if it be a Person of Quality. These Images are follow'd by great numbers of People that come out of curiosity to see the Funeral: Next walk the Friends all in Mourning, then the 
Bonzi
 Singing their Prayers, and Taboring on Ba∣sons; who are follow'd by a second sort of 
Bonzies,
 that let their Hair and Beards grow, and play on several sorts of Instruments; these again by a third, that shaving their Hair, differ in their Doctrine from the rest; then come the Acquaintance, and the nearest Relations; the last are the Children and Ne∣phews all in close Mourning bare-footed, hanging down their Heads, and car∣rying a Stick of two Foot long in their Hands. All this Company walk before the Corps, which is carry'd (if of costly Wood, Gilt and Varnish'd with their 
Charan
) uncover'd, on a great Bier, by thirty, forty, or fifty Men, for the greatness of the Funeral consists in the number of Bearers. Behind the Coffin the Women follow Crying, being lock'd up in their Sedans, and cover'd with Mourning. When they are come to the Grave, they use many Ceremo∣nies before they put the Corps into the Ground; amongst which one, and none of the least, is a great Feast for all the Company in a stately large House; which done, every one returns home, and observes the time of Mourning and the usual Ceremonies, which are as followeth, 
viz.


First they Habit themselves in close Mourning, which is all in White, not onely 
China,
 but also in 
Iapan, Corea,
 and many other neighboring Countries, though in Reason it cannot be suppos'd, that that Colour was from the begin∣ning made for that use, but brought in fashion amongst them onely by Cu∣stom, without any other Reason, because the 
Chineses
 know that White is a






joyful Colour, which they also manifest at certain times: but to give our Opinion of it, we must know, that the 
Chineses
 make all their Stuffs of Cot∣ton, and Hemp; Silk and Cotton are much too fine for course Stuffs, therefore they can make use of nothing better than Hemp, for that is naturally of an unpleasing Colour, and therefore they have chose this last for that purpose: and as Hempen Cloth is generally white, it may be believ'd, that White onely was by them chosen to be the Colour of their Mourning.


Three whole years this Sorrow continues, during which time the Children sit onely on little Benches, cover'd with White. They eat not at Tables, nor sleep on a Bedstead, but on a Mat, laid upon the Floor. They also abstain from Wine and Flesh; neither do they go to Baths or Feasts, nor abroad but in a close Mourning Sedan. But that which is more, they never converse (as they say) with their Wives all that time; nor are employ'd in any publick Business of State: and if they have any Employment, though a Vice-Roy or 
Colao,
 they are forc'd to forsake it to attend the Obsequies, and spend their time in Mourning; which when expir'd, they not onely enjoy their Places again, but are after promoted to higher Dignities. This time they account so holy, that they receive no Pay, though Captains of Companies.


Some years since it hapned, that a Commander of the Province of 
Canton,
 who was more desirous to follow his Employment than keep the full time of his Mourning, made his Account so, that the time which he spent in his Jour∣ney to the Court should be part of his Mourning time, which he wanted to make up the three years: but coming to the Court with intention to enter into his Office again, he was sent back to his House, to spend the remaining time of his Mourning, before he might appear there.


The number of three years is strictly observ'd, for an acknowledgment that the three first years they were carry'd more in their Parents Arms than on their own Legs; wherefore as a sign of Obedience they may not erre from that Order which their Predecessors maintain'd.


The Women Mourn but one year, the near Relations three Moneths, and the Acquaintance three days: And because these accidents often happen, there are few but what have Mourning Coats lying ready by them. Thus far 
Semedo.


Father 
Adrian de las Cortes,
 makes mention of the 
Chineses
 Mourning for their Parents after this manner, 
viz.
 The ordinary Mourning Coat, which both Men and Women wear, is very wide, made of course white Hemp, ravel'd and full of Patches. The Sons carry a Cane in their Hands, on which they lean when their Fathers die; but when their Mothers die, a Stick or Truncheon of Wood. On their Heads the Men wear a Bonnet of course Linnen; from whence a great ravel'd Cloth hangs down over their 
aces. The Maids wear a Coif on their Heads of course Linnen; a Girdle of Towe 
y'd about their Middle hangs down with one end to the Ground.


Their time of Mourning for their Father and Mother is three years, in re∣quital (as we said) of their three first years, in which their Parents suckled, and carry'd them in their Arms.


For the Death of Friends they Mourn a longer or shorter time, according to their acquaintance and obligations.


The Friends of the Deceased go not with cover'd Faces, nor Sticks in their Hands like the Sons, as appears by the inserted Sculps and Directions of the following Letters and Figures.




Mourning Habit for Father and Mother.


A
 An ordinary wide Coat ravel'd, and with many Patches.


B
 A Mourning Cane, serving for a Crutch when a Father dies.


C
 A Mourning Stick for a Mother.


D
 A Mourning Cap or Bonnet of Hemp for the Death of Father or Mother.


E
 A Coif of the same.


F
 A Veil for Women for their Father or Mother.


G
 A Girdle of Towe for a Father.


H
 A Girdle of Towe for a Mother.






Mourning for Relations which are neither Fathers nor Mothers.


1 A course Coif of white Linnen.


2 Ordinary Mourning Stockins ra∣vel'd out.


3 A Bonnet like a Mitre, of course Hemp.


4 An ordinary Mourning Girdle.


5 Ravel'd Mourning Shoes.


6 A wide Coat much ravel'd.


7 An Apron much ravel'd.




After the Death of either Father or Mother, amongst other Ceremonies which they observe, especially at the Funeral, they have a Custom not to sit on Stools for a certain time, nor sleep on Beds, nor eat Flesh, nor drink Wine, keep from their Wives, speak not aloud, go not out of their Houses, except in Sedans cover'd with course Linnen, and many other things more, till time hath worn away Sorrow.


Except 
Militia
 Officers, all Persons are oblig'd, though the prime 
Colao's,
 to forsake their Offices for three years for their Father or Mothers Death, which time they are to spend in Mourning for them. Thus far 
De las Cortes.


In this manner the 
Chineses
 perform their Funerals, or Interr their Dead;


but the 
Tartars,
 who at this day Govern the Realm of 
China,
 observe quite ano∣ther manner. The 
Iesuit Adam Scall
 describes them both in the following words:


Both 
Tartars
 and 
Chineses
 (saith he) take a peculiar care for the burying of their Dead; for they imagine that all the happiness of their Successors de∣depends upon it: wherefore they often lay by three, four, five hundred, nay a thousand Crowns in their life-time to be bestowed on their Graves: To which purpose they also gather Planks of Cedar, and other like lasting Woods, which they send for two or three hundred Leagues off, to make them Coffins, wherein they may for ever, as they suppose, lie secure; which the 
Iesuit Martinius
 testifies in these words:


It is (saith he) by them accounted a great happiness for him, who before his
 Death makes himself a Coffin of the best and strongest Wood, some of which costs sometimes two thousand Crowns; for they send for the most du∣rable and best Wood out of remote Countreys, so that there is no City but there are Coffins to be sold in it, nay most People buy them before their Deaths, and keep them in their Houses.


The upper Planks (saith 
Scall
) of the 
Tartars
 Coffins are sloaping like a Roof, and Painted on the out-side, not regarding the thickness of the Planks, because they put their Coffins to no other use, than to hold the Body for a short time, and carry them out in; for coming to their Funeral Piles, they burn the Coffins with the Corps. But those of the 
Chineses
 are narrower at the Feet, and broader and higher at the Head, the upper Plank smooth, and reaching over the sides, that the thickness thereof may be seen, which is chiefly observ'd and taken no∣tice of. They are very careful to chuse a Burying-place; for if they have not Land of their own, then they purchase it at a great Rate. Those Places are principally made choice of in a dry Soyl, where no Rivers nor High-ways are near, nor any Temples or Towers, but must be on a Plain, which neither rises before nor behind. Such a Place being chosen, they surround it with a Bank of Earth lik a Half-Moon, which rises in the Middle, and runs sloaping down on both sides, yet not smooth but scollope-like; at the upper end of which they bury the eldest, and below him on each side the Sons and Nephews, not in one Grave, but every one apart under a little Hillock, and the chief of the Fa∣mily under the highest Hill: In the middle on a Stone Table are plac'd variety of Provisions, Perfumes, and other things, in honor of the Deceased.


Any one that amongst a Family is rais'd to a higher degree of Honor than his Predecessors, erects his own Tomb in his life-time; whereon they Carve the Shapes of Men or Beasts, according to every Mans Quality and Estate, Planting the remaining part of the Ground with Cedar Trees, and Wall'd round.


The 
Tartars
 differ herein; for though they, according to the conveniency and Place, require the same things as the 
Chineses,
 yet they observe not the same manner in their Burial; for the old People are buried apart, and the younger by themselves.


The 
Chineses
 also erect a Tomb-stone, on which is Engraven the Age of the Deceased, his Office, and the Emperor's Favors to him: and to prevent the Characters from being defaced, and the remembrance of the Deceased's Exploits from being worn out; besides the Tomb-stone they bury another square Stone in the Ground with the same Inscription, that when the first is worn out, that may appear perfect, and serve as a Memorial of all his Atchievements.


When any one dies, whoe're he be, all the Friends and Relations come about the Corps, crying and Mourning over it.


Persons of Quality send a piece of very thin white Linnen, with a Letter to their Friends, to acquaint them of the dead Corps, who at an appointed day come thither, bringing with them Perfumes, Wax-Candles, and Money; coming into the House they go to a Table, plac'd opposite to the Coffin in the midst of the Hall; having set fire on the Perfumes that stand upon the Table, they step a little backwardand shew Reverence to the Effigies of the Deceased, Painted at the Head of the Coffin, by kneeling four times, and bowing their Heads to the Ground, whilst they make a mournful Cry.


These Ceremonies being perform'd, the nearest Relations appear also on one side of the Coffin between the Curtains; and coming forth shew the same Reverence, also kneeling, and bowing their Heads four times to the Ground. The time of Visiting ended, the nearest Kindred come the next day into the House of Mourning, from whence they convey the Corps to the Grave, or at least to the City Gates; for which Kindness the Children go from House to House in Sack-Cloth, and with their Faces looking down on the Ground, re∣turn Thanks, by shewing Reverence to their Visitants, who on purpose stand at their Doors.


But the 
Tartars
 observe quite another way of Interring their Dead, 
viz.
 on the same day that any one dies, the Corps being put in a Coffin, and the Friends having Wept over it in the House, they carry it away, except the Deceas'd was a Vice-Roy or Governor.


The Relations accompany the Hearse, and afterwards placing themselves in Rows, on each side of the Funeral Pyre; those of her Family set fire of the Wood, and so burn the Body, whose Ashes on the third day are gather'd, and put into a 
Porcelane
 Urn, to be bury'd.


Yet far greater Honor is shown to the Vice-Roys, whether 
Tartars
 or 
Chi∣neses,
 for when a 
Tartar
 King dies, his Servants, after some formal Lamentati∣ons, are plac'd on each side of the Court-Gate, that they may be seen, holding his Atchievements; for some have Helmets, others Bonnets, those Girdles, others again Swords, Belts, Bowes, Quivers, and other like things in which he delighted. Thus order'd, they make a continual doleful noise all the time of their standing there.


In the same Order his Horses stand to be seen, held by his Grooms, with rich Saddles, and Caparisons of Velvet.


There stand also Camels handsomly Harnes'd, and loaden with the Goods that are to be us'd at the Funeral, and by them, under the Gates Drummers and Trumpeters.


At the appointed day the Corps is carry'd out, before which ride Trumpeters Sounding mournfully, then follow twenty or thirty choice Camels, with Silk Bridles and Saddels hanging at their Necks, and loaden with Tents and other Furniture, to be carry'd to the Grave; next follow such as bear Silk Umbrella's, and Painted and Gilded Fans; then Ensigns, Flags, Pennons, and the like, with Silver Chargers; after those, richly Caparison'd Horses, laden with his best Houshold-stuff, and led by Grooms; and lastly, the Sedans which the Vice-Roy us'd.


The place of Burial is encompass'd with a Mat in stead of a Wall, within whose Inclosure stand Tents, furnish'd with rich Goods, to be burnt. In the middle appears a great Hall, also made of Mats, to put the body in: Those


that were the last that attended the Train, appear by this Hall first, and behind them stand the rest, each, according to their Qualities: The remaining vacan∣cy within this Inclosure, and behind the Hall, being for the Women: When they are all within, standing for a considerable time, they make a hideous noise, more like howling than weeping; which done, and all things ready for the Offering, the Priests, or other Persons appointed, Garnishing Tables with Fruits and Preserves, and Meat in great Silver Chargers, they deliver a Cup with Wine to the chiefest Vice-Roy there present, who holds it up three times as an Offering to the Deceas'd.


Mean while, a Letter of Recommendation from the Emperor is produc'd, wherein the Merits of the Deceas'd are set forth, and he Honor'd with a Noble Title.


The chiefest of the present Councellors, having read this Letter with a loud Voice, throws it into the fire and burns it; so bowing their Heads three times, they rise again, and begin to cry: Then those of his Family set fire on a Pa∣per Mountain, cover'd all over with Purple Flannel, into which they throw the richest Clothes, Hats, Saddles, Gold and Silver Vessels, Sedans and Beds of the Deceas'd, which being consum'd, they gather the melted Gold and Silver, and putting it into Paper, on the third day throw it into the fire again, adding to it other Riches, till all be burnt: The Horses bereav'd o their Caparisons, are let loose, and bought by those that please for half their worth.


This done, all the Invited depart, being conducted by one of the Vice-Roy's, out at the Gate, where he thanks them.


But the 
Tartars
 are not satisfi'd with this one Funeral, for seven days after they renew it again, and a third time seven days after that, till all things be consum'd that the Deceas'd lov'd and esteem'd.


Moreover, if the Deceas'd had a more than ordinary belov'd Concubine, or Prime Favorite, they murther themselves; for the Concubine, whether willing or unwilling, is forc'd to Hang her self, to comfort, delight, and accompany (as these ignorant People say) the Deceas'd in the other World: Yet the more understanding Persons, being somewhat better instructed, have of late, dread∣ing such horrid Murthers, Petition'd the Emperor, by his Proclamation, to forbid such Cruelties; and likewise the wasting and burning of Houshold-stuff, and other Materials, which his Imperial Majesty hath accordingly Order'd, so that in stead of rich Cloth of Tissue, they only burn Gilded Paper, and have in a manner left off the Barbarous Custom of killing themselves at the Grave.


Having ended their Offerings, and crying a second or third time in the pre∣sence of all those that are afresh come to the Funeral-Pyre; they erect a Hall or Court, being the Tomb, (as if for a live Person) surrounding it with Walls, along whose sides are several Apartments, after the same manner, like those in which the Deceas'd in his life time recreated himself; in these they place the faithfullest Servants: In the middle thereof, they make the Tomb of Bricks, on a square Mount, round about which they place the Cushions and Sedans of the Deceas'd, on the Walls on each side hang his Girdle, Sword, Belt, a Quiver full of Arrows, and a Bowe: In this Hall, for a whole year, they bring Meat every day, which they put at the Foot of the Mount for the Deceas'd, as if he were to feed upon it, whilst those that bring it, stand on one side crying. These are for the Great Ones; but the 
Tartars
 of meaner quality, wanting Estates, build no Hall over their Graves, but placing only Meat, or 
Tee
 near the same, go away again.


The 
Chineses
 on the contrary, after their Friends and Relations are met, and having shewn the usual Reverence to the Deceas'd, go out of the House in this Order: Before on a long Stick is carry'd a Red Silk Cloth, whereon is written the Name, Titles, Age, and Quality of the Deceas'd, in Silver Chara∣cters; then follow a great number of Children, who carry all manner of Flowers, made of colour'd Paper, upon Canes, besides Representations of Men, Beasts, Gardens, Houses, and the like, Painted on Paper to delight the Eye: If the Deceas'd in his life time was famous for his Zeal in Religion, then his Images (curiously Painted) are born before him; after which comes next in order the Effigies of the Deceas'd, on a rich Bier, follow'd by the 
Bonzues,
 Play∣ing on Tabers, Cymbals, and other Instruments; then Anticks and Stage∣players come Riding on Horse-back, in the same Habits they are to Act in at the Grave, and all the way as they pass, shewing Tricks and using other Mi∣mick Gestures: The Orphans walk just behind the Corps, leaning on Sticks, and supported under their Arms by their Servants, as if excess of sorrow had thus weaken'd them: The Bier on which the Corps stands, cover'd with rich Silk Clothes, is carry'd by eight, sixteen, nay sometimes thirty two Bearers. When they come to the Grave, those that have attended the Funerals, throw what they have carry'd on a heap of Paper, which setting on fire, they go to the Tables that stand before the Corps, Garnish'd with several Fruits and Per∣fumes, besides a scalded Hogg and Lamb at each end; then three or four of the Eminentest set fire of the Perfumes before the whole company. Lastly, They step aside and make room for him who is to write on a Board made before, being three Fingers broad, and an Ell long, the Name and Quality of the De∣ceas'd, first they set down this Mark 
, which signifies 
Emperor;
 and for this cause they that are to do this, must be clad in such Apparel, as any of Qua∣lity might appear in before the Emperor. This Person with the Pencil in his Hand, craves pardon of all the Spectators, for his bold attempt, excusing his unworthiness of that Office; then he writes over the first Mark, on the upper end of the Board with black Ink, another in this manner 
 for then that which signifi'd 
Emperor
 is chang'd, and is as much as 
Lord;
 so that in this man∣ner, with the first under written Name of the Deceas'd, a full Sentence is made, 
viz. The Lord N. N.
 This Board the Deceased's Friends carry with his Image to his House, that it may be yearly Worship'd and remember'd by his Predecessors. So soon as this Inscription is finish'd, the Writer goes by them all, having Bow'd and Kneel'd four times: But before the Friends depart, they are either entertain'd in a House, rais'd of Mats, or in the next Chappel, at a Noble Treat, at which the first Cup is given to the Children, as they say, to wipe off their Tears. At their return home, some 
Tausus
 or Conjurers come to the Mourning House, that by the sprinkling of certain Water, they may drive away (as they say) evil Spirits, and bring Peace and Quiet to the House.


The 
Chineses
 and 
Tartars
 use one Colour, but not one Fashion for their Mourning.


All the 
Tartars,
 both Friends and Relations, wear a long Coat of Sack-Cloth, reaching down to their Feet, and gird it about their Middle with a Hempen Cord; they put on their oldest Buskins, and worst Hats, without the red Silk-Fringe, which at other times they wear for an Ornament.


The Hair of their Head or Beard is not shaven in all that time.


After the expiration of a Moneth, every one throws in a fire of Paper, and other such like Materials, their Mourning Girdle, with which they judge their


Mourning to be ended, and Habit themselves again in their usual Apparel.


Neighbors and acquaintance shew that they Mourn by pulling their Silk Fringe from their Hats.


The 
Tartar
 Women, in the time of Mourning, change their Apparel, being usually Black, into White; their Coifs, which else are cover'd with their Hair, resemble a White Cap, with Tassels that hang over their Shoulders.


The 
Chineses
 Mourning alters yearly, their first year, both Men and Wo∣men wear all over their Bodies a Sute of Sack-Cloth full of holes, with Shooes of White Cloth, and a Rope about their Wastes, seeming thus by the careles∣ness of their Garb, to express their sorrow for the Death of their Parents. The second year their Habit is made of sleight Cloth, their Hat of the usual Fashi∣on, but of another Colour, their Shooes handsomer, and their Girdles of Hemp left off. The third year they may wear Silk Clothes, and their Hats of the same Stuff, but White, or else of the usual Colour, which is generally Black.


In this time they follow no imployment, though of the greatest concern, nor may sit opposite to or by the Visitants, as others, but on a low Bench.


In the first Months, they not only abstain (as is usual in Fastings) from Flesh, Fish, Milk, Wine, and the like, but eat very unsavory things, neither season'd with Salt nor Herbs: And as the time of Mourning for a Wife, Bro∣ther, more distant Relations or Friends is much shorter, so is also their Apparel and Meat better.


The Childrens Mourning for their Parents is three year, which time the Wife must observe for the death of her Husband; the eldest Son, or his Wife, is by his Parents Mourn'd for a year, and as long a time the Man Mourns for his Wife, and one Brother for another.


This long time of Mourning, observ'd by the Children, for the Death of
 their Parents, hath (as 
Martinius
 tell us) been observ'd by the 
Chineses
 ever since the Emperor 
Xun
's time, who Mourn'd for▪ his Predecessor 
Ya,
 being his Fa∣ther, three whole years at his Grave, without stirring thence, and intrusting the care of his Realm (during that time) to his Vice-Roys; and as the same 
Mar∣tinius
 adds, from thence it is, that they Mourn in that manner for their Pa∣rents, always staying in their Houses, laying down all Offices, changing their Meat and Furniture to meaner, and always sitting on a low Bench; upon this account also they drink no Wine, but live only on Pot-Herbs: Their Clothes are very Fantastick, made of Sack-Cloth; their Lodging Rooms meaner, nay, they frame their manner of speaking to a much more sorrowful Tone, and whereas before they us'd to write with Red on Paper streak'd with Vermilion, now they use only Yellow or Blue Colours, as a token of their Sorrow.


It is very strange to observe the Duty and Reverence which the Children shew to their Dead Parents, wherein no other People may be compar'd to them, for many (though Magistrates) when observing that their Parents be∣ing grown very old, have need of their help, they desire the Emperor to ex∣cuse them from their Office, without urging any thing, but that according to their Duty they may go to assist their aged Father, which the Emperor seldom refuses.


As to what concerns their Mourning three years, the 
Chinese
 Philosophers give this reason, That it is most fit, those which in their first three years have receiv'd their Parents Love, should spend so much time after their Death in Mourning and bewailing their loss; therefore it is no marvel, that the 
Chineses
 count it the greatest misfortune in the world to have no Children, because they


know that no body will look after them in their Age, nor at their Death Mourn for them.


The reasons why they make White to be Mourning, and not Black, is, as themselves say, because White is Natural, when as all other things are Dy'd, or Artificial; by which, as they say, is signifi'd, that in Sorrow, neither Art nor Pride must be shewn, for where a true Sorrow is, Nature sufficiently ex∣presses it. Thus far 
Martinius.


With great preparation and Pomp the Emperor 
Zungte,
 Father to this pre∣sent Emperor 
 was Interr'd.


The next day being the eighth of their first Moon, after the Emperor's Death, his Corps was put into the Coffin about Noon: There was not one 
Tartar
 in all 
Peking
 that serv'd in publick Affairs, but he went thither with his Wife and Daughters, which so throng'd the Courts, that none were able to get thorow: The eldest were receiv'd into the first Court, next the Emperor's Lodging, where they all together bewail'd his Death, with many loud Shreeks and Cries; in which (to admiration) they obse
e an exact time, with stops and pauses, as in Musick.


After all, the 
Tartars
 divided into eight Companies, let into the Emperor's Hall by two and two, there bewail'd his Death, they went away, and made room for others, so that the Cry continu'd without any cessation, the Multi∣tudes still going out, and coming in.


Mean while, there were not a few that fasted three days, not daring to go out of the Gates, nor their Servants suffer'd to bring them any Refreshment.


Father 
Iohn Adam Schall
 at that time present, there taking compassion of the People, which were ready to perish for Hunger and Thirst, Petition'd the Go∣vernors, either to furnish them with Provisions on the publick Account, or else set the Multitude return home; alledging, that there were Women amongst them, and that their weak Sex was not able to endure such Inconveniencies, and likewise ancient People, that worn out with sicknesses, were not us'd to undergo such hardship.


No sooner was 
Schal
's Petition deliver'd, but the Governors looking upon his Request to be just, let all the People go away, with resolution, that all the 
Mandarins
 should every Morning for the seven following days, Weep half an hour in the Emperor's Chamber; after which, every one should retire and ob∣serve the establish'd Month of Fasting for the Emperor.


The fourteenth of the first new Moon, they gave the new Emperor 
Konchi
 his Oath, at the performance whereof, every Bench were in particular led into a Hall.


The chief of the first and second Order went to the upper Hall, where ha∣ving with the rest lamented over the Deceas'd Emperor's Body, the Oath was publickly read before them all; to which they all shew'd Reverence by thrice Kneeling and bowing their Heads to the Ground, and calling upon the Dead to witness the same.


Then going from the Court, they went to an Idol-Temple, where they gave him the Oath again, and finish'd their began Work with the same Ceremonies.


When on the seventh day, after the Emperor's Death, the sleight Roofs made of Mats were taken away, the chief Funeral-Priest seated himself in the open Court; after which, the chiefest being call'd into the Hall, and the rest stand∣ing at the Door, they began again to Cry, which dured longer than ordinary, because the Queen-Mother was there present, and began first with all her Wo∣men.


Then many Silver and Gold Vessels were brought out of a Tent erected for the Corps; and Tables being also set about the Coffin, richly Garnish'd with Sweet-meats in Silver Chargers, all which was thrown into the Fire. The remaining time, as from the first day when they went to lament, the City Ser∣vants and petty Governors holding all that had belong'd to the Emperor, as his Horses, Atchievements, Flags, and other things of State, stood in a Row at the Entrance of the Palace, from whence they stirr'd not till the 
Mandarins
 went away. On the first of the second Moon the Crying and fore-mention'd Ce∣remonies were again renew'd, early in the Morning in the presence of the Queen-Mother, and the Tables, which four Men could scarce carry, were again with Clothes, Carpets, and the like, thrown into the Fire. The last day they met to accompany the Corps, which was plac'd behind the Palace in a Hall on a neighboring Mount, which abounds with Deer, Harts, Stags, and the like Beasts for the Emperor's Recreations, till the Imperial Tomb should be made ready in some other Place. First the Way, which from the Palace runs to the Mount, was Grabell'd and laid plain, to prevent the rising of the Dust, to which inconvenience the Streets in 
Peking
 are very subject. Thither came all the Grandees Habited in white Mourning, to accompany the Corps; before went nine Elephants with Turrets on their Backs; forty Camels, capa∣rison'd with red Cloths and Bridles plated with Gold, and rich Symiters hang∣ing down by their Necks, were loaden with Tents and other Furniture: then follow'd an hundred Horses, led by yellow Bridles, without Gold, except the Buckles, which were onely Gilded: next in order were Drums, Trumpets, and others with Instrumental Musick to the number of a hundred; behind which were carry'd fifty Gilded Hammers, and above an hundred Flags of several colours, with wild Beasts, Birds, and twenty eight Stars, stitch'd with Thr
 of Gold; then again fifty Hammers, after which were led a hundred Saddled Horses, the last thirty laden with rich Flannel, and the Emperor's Clothes con∣demn'd to the Fire; next these came twenty Youths, every one holding an Im∣perial Quiver, imboss'd with Pearls and Precious Stones, besides Bowes and Ar∣rows, and just before them walk'd twelve Greyhounds; behind these came the Emperor's Sedan, born by sixteen Men, in which when living he us'd to be carry'd, richly Gilt, and on the top adorn'd with a Golden Ball; the Bearers were clad in a Livery of a Saffron colour, Embroider'd with Roses of Gold▪ next them were carry'd several Gold and Silver Chargers; behind which fol∣low'd the Bier with the Emperor's Corps, cover'd with Cloth of Tissue, Em∣broider'd with blue Clouds and Flowers, supported by thirty two Bearers, all in a Saffron-colour'd Livery, and adorn'd with Golden Roses; behind the Corps came Soldiers with Pikes and other Arms; then the Emperor's Mother in a Sedan cover'd with Purple-Silk; next hers, seven more cover'd with white Cotton, in every one of which was a Queen, or Concubine of the Emperor's; then follow'd many Grandees on Foot; lastly, all the Magistrates, and those that shew'd Reverence by kneeling and bowing to the Corps as it pass'd by, follow'd disorderly one among another to the Grave, which was inviron'd with a Wall, but the multitude pulling it down, quickly made room for all comers.


The Governors of the first Degree going into the base Court before the Hall, where the Bearers had set down the Corps, stood and cry'd all together, as likewise those that stood about them; at length one of the chiefest Vice-Roys lifting up a Golden Cup with Wine three times, they all bow'd their Heads


down to the Ground: then the Vice-Roy offer'd the fore-mention'd Cup as an Oblation: Before the Corps stood a Table strow'd full of Silver and Gold Flowers, and all sorts of Perfumes: Then they began again to cry till they all went away, leaving the rest of the Ceremonies to be perform'd the next Morning. At every Gate the chief Vice-Roy Offer'd before the Coffin a Cup with Wine, which he lifted up three times as before, and then deliver'd it to a prime Councellor, who put it aside to be Offer'd again at last with the rest.


The next Morning, being the twenty seventh day after the Emperor's Death, they all met again by the Corps, and every one standing in their ap∣pointed Places began their general Lamentation. Having perform'd all Ce∣remonies as on the day before, the Letter given by the Emperor to his Son, containing the Praise due to the Deceased, was publickly read; whereupon the Magistrates doubling their Shreeks and Cries, return'd into the base Court, whilst four of the chiefest Persons of Quality going to the 
Paper Mountain,
 co∣ver'd with yellow Silk, carry'd in an open Cloth, a Sable Sute of the deceased Emperor, with his Hat rais'd on the Crown with Pearls and Diamonds, and likewise a Sable Quilt whereon to lay his Head. Others in ten Carpets bore ten several Sutes more of the Emperor's; and Saddles and Caparisons for Horses were also laid on the Heap, besides Flags, Fans, Gold Plates, and the Emperor's Sedan; all which being brought to the Heap of Paper, cover'd with yellow Silk, they set on fire, and threw in the Tables full of Flannel Clothes, many Gold and Silver Vessels, which being melted stream'd down the Hill like a Rivulet. Then the Governors unty'd their Girdles, which being of white Cloth, they had fastned about their Middle, and so throwing them into the Flame they were released of their Mourning. Lastly, they pull'd off all their Mourning Habit, and leaving it there went home.


Three days after the prime Governors of the first Order came thither with the 
Tartars
 (the 
Chineses
 being lockt out) and prepar'd a new Funeral, at which they us'd the same Ceremonies, carrying Fans, and leading Horses and Cam∣mels. The same four Grandees brought another Sute of the Emperor's, and a Hat, having onely one great Pearl on the Crown, which they, as before, threw on Paper Heaps, and likewise some Saddles beset with Pearls and Diamonds, which done every one returned home.


All these Ceremonies are renew'd from day to day till the hundredth day; during which time no Musick may be heard, nor any Plays acted through all the City; and they continue mourning after the hundredth, for the 
Tartars
 watch by the Coffin continually.


After the expiration of two years, when the time was come to carry the Corps to the appointed Grave, twenty four Leagues from the City of 
Peking,
 all the 
Mandarins
 conducted the Corps on Foot out of the City, where they took leave of it on their bended Knees.


Zungte
 the Emperor of 
China
 and 
Tartary,
 made some years since a very great
 Funeral for one of his Concubines which was after this manner:


He accompanied the Corps in Person out of his Palace Gates, where the Body was laid in State till the expiration of a hundred days, at the end of which to be burnt, and by his Order to have Offerings made for it every fourth day; the Materials for which, besides the other Preparations, cost the Emperor above ten thousand 
Ducats.
 Amongst other wasteful Ceremonies he caus'd all the Ta∣bles, with their Silken Cloths to be thrown into the Fire. The Bier followd, as we said, before, by the Emperor, was cover'd with Velvet; before it were


carry'd three Sedans, seeming to be all Gold, though onely Gilt, which being beset with Precious Stones, made a glorious show; before the Sedans went three Wains drawn by Horses, which being cover'd on the top, were also richly Gilded: thousands of People made daily a great Cry, and the rest of the Ceremonies were all like the fore-mention'd, in which, they say, was spent eight hundred thousand 
Ducats.


With a peculiar magnificence and splendor was formerly solemniz'd the Funeral of a 
Chinese
 Emperor and Empress. 
Semedo
 describes that of the Em∣press, Mother to the Emperor 
Vanlie,
 who deceased 
Anno
 1614. on the last of 
May,
 in the following words:


IMmediately after the Death of the Empress, the Court and City, as well Noble-men as Burgesses, Habited themselves in Mourning, and chiefly the Empresses Officers left off the Badges of their Offices and put on Mourning, wearing a Hempen Cord in stead of a rich Girdle▪ for a black Silk Hat, one of 
Chinese
 Cloth. In this manner they went four Moneths till the day of the Funeral; but the common People wore onely a Mourning Hat for the space of twenty four days; which was so strictly observ'd, that none upon pain of being severely punish'd durst leave them off. The second day the Emperor went out of his Palace into that of his deceased Mother, which lay a little di∣stant, yet inclos'd within the same. Before the Corps was Dress'd in white Linnen, and put into the Coffin, the Emperor came every day in Person with his Attendants to visit and shew Reverence to it in the same manner as all Children do to their Parents, and Offering to her the most odoriferous Per∣fumes. The same Ceremonies were also strictly observ'd by all the Emperor's Wives and Concubines, Children, Nephews, and prime Persons of his Palace. The Emperor also commanded that the Deceased's Apparel, Beds and Furni∣ture should be burnt, judging it to be a disgrace to suffer any Person of a lower Degree to make use of them. The third day the Empress was laid in the Chest wherein she was to be bury'd. The Chest, or Coffin being very large, and of thick Boards, was made of the best and most costly Wood that could be got in the whole Empire, and made fast with Silver Plates and Handles in form of Dragons: the Boards, neither Painted nor Gilt, were curiously rubb'd, the Cover onely Plated with Gold. The Emperor himself laid out the Body on a Quilt with a Pillow made for that purpose, and threw an unvalua∣ble Treasure of Pearls and Precious Stones upon it, and plac'd fifty Pieces of Gold, and fifty Pieces of Silver Cloth on each side thereof. This being done, and the Coffin lockt up, the Emperor and his Attendants shew'd Reverence again to the Corps. The fourth day renewing their Ceremonies, they put on their Mourning Apparel; at which time the Coffin stood in a large Court on a rais'd Ascent, in a manner like a Throne, with fifteen Tables about it; the first stood before the Emperor, the rest before his Women, Children, and chiefest Allies, which all in their Qualities after the Emperor Offer'd Perfumes. The fifth day was order'd foe those that were without; first all the Nobility, or Gentry, call'd 
Que Cum Chu Cheu Heupi,
 Habited in their honorable Robes, came to the Palace; after them all the Empresses Favorites, 
viz.
 those that were Marry'd to her Daughters or Neeces; and lastly the 
Mandarins
 of the six Courts of Judicature, whose Authority extends through the whole Empire, every one Cloth'd according to his Quality, and what suted his Employment' Military or Civil. All these shew'd Reverence to the Corps in the same man∣ner












as is already related: which ended in the Palace, several Edicts were pub∣lish'd, the Contents whereof were as followeth, 
viz.




I. That all the Mandarins, as well Military as Civil, should on the fol∣lowing day appear in the Palace to Mourn for the Empresses Death, which being done, they should immediately go again to their Houses and Courts of Judicature, and there spend three days in abstaining from Flesh, Fish, Eggs, and Wine; that the following three days they should attend at the Palace Gate, and one by one come and visit the Corps, with due Reverence and shews of great Sorrow; after which every one might return home.


II. That all the 
Mandarins
 Wives of the four first Orders, should for three days be there present in Mourning Apparel from Head to Foot, and bewail the Empresses Death, strictly forbidding to Dress themselves, or wear Jewels in their Houses during twenty seven days.


III. That those of the Emperor's Council, call'd 
Hanlim,
 should make Epi∣taphs and Funeral Orations in praise of the Empress.


IV. That the 
Quanlosu,
 which are the Overseers of the Emperor's Treasury, should without delay pay all the Charge which would be requisite for the Offerings and Funeral.


V. That the 
Bonzies
 should Toll the Bells of their several Temples, as a sign of Mourning and Sorrow.


VI. That no Meat should be sold in the Markets for seventeen days, and every one Fast, according to the Emperor's Example, who for the three first days did eat onely a little Rice and Water, and all his Retinue nothing but Roots.


VII. The prime Councellor of their Laws was commanded to give Mourn∣ing to all Ambassadors and Agents then present at the Court, and bring them to the Palace to shew Reverence to the Corps according to the Custom of the Countrey.


VIII. That all the 
Mandarins
 which had Serv'd out the time of their Em∣ployments, or those that aim'd at other Places, should also come to the Palace and shew Reverence, and perform their Duty in Mourning over the Corps three days.


IX. That the Free-men of the City should come every Morning and Evening for the space of a whole Week to the chief Governor's Palace, and there shew Reverence.




They also sent Letters to all the 
Mandarins
 distributed through all the Pro∣vinces and Cities of the Empire, that after they had receiv'd tydings of the Em∣presses Decease, they should use all means possible to make their Relations, both Men, Women and Children shew Reverence, by three times kneeling and bowing of their Heads, and besides other Ceremonies Mourn twenty seven days.


This Order is expresly given to all 
Mandarins,
 as well those that are in Of∣fice as others, whether Civil or Military. It is likewise Order'd, that the Burgesses shall wear a Mourning Hat for the space of thirty days. They also forbid that any Instruments should be touch'd, either in the 
Mandarins
 Palaces or Houses, or in any Place wherein Travellers are Lodg'd upon the Empe∣ror's Charge. This was proclaim'd by certain 
Mandarins
 that follow no other Employment.


After all these Ceremonies before the Funeral, the great Magician at the Court in 
Peking,
 was commanded to chuse the Days wherein the remaining


Funeral Pomp was to be solemniz'd. After much study and care he pitch'd upon the ninth day of the sixth Moon, being four Moneths after the Empresses Death, for the Coffin to be carry'd out of the Palace, and the fifteenth of the same Moneth to the Grave. The time being come, the following Order was publish'd, to be observ'd at the Funeral.




I.
 That all the Mandarins of the Court should with the chief Councellors, six days be∣fore go out of their Houses into their several Chambers at Court, and there fast three days, as is before mention'd.


II.
 That the Receivers of the Emperor's Revenues should prepare all Neçessaries, as Torches, Perfumes, Images of Men, Horses, Lyons, Elephants, Silk Umbrella's, and other Ornamentals, to be burnt at the Grave: 
The Charge whereof was said to amount to thirty thousand
 Escu's.


III.
 That the Lords of the Council 
Hanlim
 should make new Funeral Elegies.


IV.
 Because the Emperor intending to accompany the Corps to the Grave about seven Leagues from the Palace, happen'd to be somewhat indispos'd, he would send a Grand Courtier in his stead, to perform that necessary Duty.


V.
 The Martial Officers must keep Watch in the City, and by the Grave, and also to guard the Corps thither.

At every Gate of the City (which were nine) stood a thousand Armed Men, from the Place where the Corps lay to the Grave, the way on both sides was Guarded by Soldiers. Three thousand conducted the Body, and forty thou∣sand were chosen to Watch by the Grave during the whole time of the Funeral Ceremonies.


VI.
 All the Streets from the Palace to the Grave must be Rail'd in, that there may be a free Passage on each side to prevent crowding; and likewise at the end of every twenty Paces must stand Baskets with yellow Sand, to damp the Dust from rising in those Places through which the Corps was to be carry'd, besides Tents and Pavilions for the convenience of those that follow'd the Horse.


VII.
 The Commanders of the Treasury had Order to provide Money to pay the 
Manda∣rins,
 Relations, Commanders, Soldiers, and all those that attended the Funeral.


VIII.
 That three days before the Burial they should renew their Mourning, shewing Reverence, and making Offerings as they had done at the beginning.




All things thus prepar'd, the Emperor and the Prince his Son, went with all his Officers to the Temple of their Predecessors, which is in the Imperial Pa∣lace, where the Emperor in close Mourning shew'd Reverence to the first raiser of his Family, and Offer'd many Silk Coats and Wine to the Deceased. Then he caus'd a Book to be read, which had been written in the praise of them; which being with many other Ceremonies perform'd, they return'd to the Palace, whilst by the Emperor's Order, Coats and other Ornamentals were thrown into the Fire and burnt.


During the eight days which were yet remaining they Offer'd to the Hea∣vens, Earth, Planets, Mountains and Streams. Then Reverence was also shewn by the Emperor's Order to the Spiritual Protectors of the nine Palace Gates, through which the Corps was to be carry'd. The like also was done to the six Bridges of the River which runs before the Palace, Offering at all those Places Beasts, Wine, and Perfumes.


The Coffin with the Corps was plac'd on a triumphal Arch, richly wrought and hung with Silk, interwoven with Gold, and in many places Plated with Gold, Engraven with Lyons, Dragons, and the like; about it stood a great many Torches, and Vessels with Perfumes. The fifth day appointed by the


Magician to carry out the Corps, the Emperor appear'd, with his Wives, Chil∣dren, and Allies, at the Place where the Chariot stood. Having cry'd for the Deceased, he Offer'd to their God of the Spirits so to conduct her, that she might have a happy Journey to the Enjoyments of Peace and Quietness. Those that were commanded to attend the Corps in the Name and Place of the Emperor, and to make Offerings at the appointed Places, were all in a readiness under the first Gate, where they no sooner receiv'd the Herse, but they began to walk in such a handsom Order, State, and Silence, as was wonderful to be∣hold: Getting that day no farther than without the Walls, where stopping at the appointed Place they put the Corps under a Pavilion, made Offerings on Tables plac'd for that purpose, burnt Perfumes, and perform'd all other Cere∣monies; which no sooner done, but a Messenger was sent to the Emperor, to inform him that they were got thither and had perform'd their Duties. The following day they began with those Ceremonies with which they had ended the last Night, and then proceeded on their Journey, which lasted thirteen days, because of the Offerings and stops which they made by the Way to the Mount, where the Emperors Tombs are. The concourse of People from all Places was so great, that they were past number. When the whole Train was come thither, the Corps was taken off from the Chariot, and plac'd upon another stately and triumphal one, no less costly than the first. Then they offer'd a Steer, which they sprinkled with Wine, besides Coats and Perfumes, to the honor of the Earth, with Prayers to the God of the Spirits, that he would receive the Corps. At the same time nine 
Mandarins,
 sent from the Emperor, observ'd the like Ceremonies, and Offer'd to all the Emperor's Predecessors that lay in that Place. On the Funeral day, being the fifteenth day of the sixth Moon, they made several Offerings to conclude their Ceremonies; of which, and what they had done by the Way, they gave an Account to the Emperor, who shew'd his bounty to those that had been careful in the observing of them, and ex∣press'd his Affection to his Mother in shewing Reverence to her after her Death, and for her sake released all Prisoners that had committed but small Crimes. It was also Order'd, that those Provinces which were too highly Tax'd should have an Abatement. He took off likewise many Impositions laid upon Imported Goods, and distributed with his own Hands many thousands of 
Ducats,
 wrapp'd up in Paper according to the Custom of the Countrey, be∣ing all in honor to the Soul of the Deceased.


With the same Ceremonies a 
Chinese
 Emperor's Funeral was solemniz'd.


When an Emperor lies on his Death-bed, and that the Physicians begin to
 despair of his Recovery, the 
Colaos
 or chief Relations, and the prime Con∣troller of the Palace, call'd 
Suikien,
 come to visit him, and to know his will and pleasure from his own Mouth, and the Contents of his Testament: Then they privately go to the Prince which is Heir to the Crown, and consult with him, that they may do nothing against his will, who is ready to enter on the Throne. Being thus inform'd of the one thing and the other, they write down the Will and bring it to the Emperor, that he may approve and allow of it: from thence they go and shew it to the prime Councellor call'd 
Hanhyuen,
 who ingrosses all the Emperor's Business; which being done, the Will is Seal'd with the Imperial Seal, and kept in the Star-Chamber belonging to the Emperor
 Council so long as the Emperor lives.: after his Decease they shew it to the Court of Judicatory, that they may proclaim it in all Places of the Empire, and observe it punctually.


Most of the Inhabitants in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 by reason of their Neigh∣borhood
 with the 
Indians,
 lay the dead Corps on Heaps of Wood, and burn it; but those that study the 
Chinese
 Philosophy observe the Customs of the other 
Chineses,
 and use Coffins. But though they burn their Dead, yet they consume not living Persons with them as the 
Indians
 do; for the 
Chineses
 account it bar∣barous, and not to be admitted amongst the Laws of civiliz'd Men.


The Inhabitants of the City 
Sintien,
 in the Province of 
Queicheu,
 express great sorrow for either Father or Mothers Death, by cutting off the Hair of their Heads.


The 
Chineses,
 as 
Martinius
 witnesseth, are no less curious than superstitious in chusing the Ground for their Graves, judging that all their Fortune and Hap∣piness depends upon it, because of a Being for the Dragon, to whom they ascribe their Salvation; wherefore they observe the shapes of the Hills on which they intend to make their Graves, and Dig up the Ground, not sparing either Cost or Charge, hoping to find the Head, Heart, or Tail of a Dragon: for they believe that thereby all Happiness and good Fortune will attend the Deceased's Successors.


Many People experienc'd in this Art, go through all 
China,
 and observe the shapes of Hills, just as the Astronomers take their view of the Stars.






Government.


IN the first Age before the general Deluge, the Government of 
China
 was divided amongst Tribes or Families, and the chief of every Tribe had his own Government, after the same manner as the ancient Fathers 
Abraham
 and 
Lot;
 but since 
Anno
 2952. before the Birth of our Saviour, they have been Govern'd by one sole Monarch or Emperor: for the Names of the two other Forms of Government, 
viz. Aristocracy
 and 
Democracy,
 the 
Chineses
 had never heard of: Nay, the 
Netherland
 Agents that were sent 
Anno
 1655. to the Great 
Cham,
 Em∣peror of 
East-Tartary
 and 
China,
 had great trouble with the 
Chineses
 and 
Tartars,
 to make them understand the two last Forms of Government, which they could not apprehend.


The Emperor of 
China
 is sole Master of the Lives, Goods and Chattels of all his Subjects, he onely being chief Lord of all; wherefore the Empire of 
China
 may justly be call'd 
A perfect and absolute Monarchy.


It is without doubt, that in ancient times under one supream Governor
 were several substitute Lords, as Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and the like; but eighteen or nineteen hundred years since those Titles of peculiar Governments and Power, were at once taken away and rooted out: onely in the Province of 
Iunnan
 are free Lords or Dukes to this day, that have their peculiar Domini∣ons, which is in no Place else in 
China:
 Yet they acknowledge the Emperor, but Govern with an arbitrary Power over their Countreys, and succeed each other in their Government.


The Emperors, according to an ancient Custom yet in force, regard not
 their Subjects, but look upon them as Slaves, though they are or have been never so great Magistrates: for because the sole Government consists in the Power of one onely, they esteem themselves Masters of every Mans Goods, and likewise of the Lives of their Subjects; therefore no Honor or Preemi∣nency is given but by the Emperor, neither is the ascent to the greatest Place of Dignity lockt up from any sort of People, though the scum of the Commo∣nalty,


but open'd to every one at the Emperor's pleasure▪ for which reason he is by every one honor'd as a God, on whom all things depend, and by his severe Government is terrible, and to be feared. From hence it often proceeds, that for the smallest occasion, the most deserving Persons are by him bereav'd of their Employments, and others punish'd with Death, especially those whose Valour and Experience in Martial Affairs may upon the least suspicion be fear'd. This is not unknown to Collonels and Generals, especially the Grandees which Command great Armies; who for that reason are no less mistrustful of the Emperor than he suspicious of them: from whence they often rise to a Rebellion or Mutiny; for if they after a Conquest against their Enemy have discharg'd their Soldiers, they know they cannot escape death: which not deserving, they will rather chuse to make themselves to be fear'd by their valiant and heroick Exploits: from whence in the time of War arise continual Mutinies in 
China;
 and the greater the Mutinies be, the fiercer they are maintain'd by every one without respect of faithfulness.


The 
Chineses,
 before the 
Europeans
 coming thither, firmly believ'd that their
 Empire contain'd almost the whole World: not reckoning their neighboring Kingdoms, they made their Emperor Governor of the whole terrestrial Globe and call'd him Lord of all.


According to 
Semedo,
 the Ladies of Honor, Relations and others belonging to the Palace, call the Emperor 
Chu,
 and sometimes 
Tienzu,
 that is, 
Son of Hea∣ven;
 not that they believe him to be born in Heaven, but that they look upon the Empire as the Gift of Heaven: and also to make the Respect due to the Im∣perial Majesty the greater, and to seem sacred.


The 
Chinese
 Emperor, saith Father 
Martin,
 is by his Subjects call'd 
Tienzu,
 that is, 
Son of Heaven;
 not that they derive his Original from thence, or that he was born there; but they call him 
Son of Heaven,
 because he is belov'd above all other Men, and hath on Earth given him (as they say) the greatest Dignity Heaven can afford: And because the 
Chineses
 oftentimes take Heaven, God, and the supream Godhead to be all one, therefore 
The Son of Heaven
 is as much as to say with them, 
The Son of God.
 Thus far 
Martinius.


But the common and most esteem'd Name of the Emperor is 
Hoangti,
 or 
Hoamti,
 that is, according to 
Semedo
 and 
Trigaut, Emperor,
 or 
Supream Emperor;
 but according to 
Martinius, Sole Emperor,
 or 
Emperor of the Earth;
 which they say is of a yellow colour, for a distinction from 
Zangti,
 that is, 
Supream Emperor,
 or 
God, the Governor of Heaven and Earth.


The first Emperor which was call'd 
Hoangti,
 Reign'd in 
Anno
 2690. before the Birth of our Saviour, for whose excellent Vertues and publick In∣ventions, the pleasing sound of his Name was so belov'd, that ever since all their Princes have been call'd 
Hoangti,
 as the 
German
 Emperors from their first, 
Caesar.


There are yet two other Names which have the same signification of 
King,
 or 
Emperor,
 the one being 
Kium,
 which they use to name strange Kings by; and the other 
Vam,
 which is a Name for the Emperor's Children; to which by adding the word 
Kium
 they make a compound word 
Kiumvam,
 which signifies 
Imperial.


It is also to be observ'd, that a new chosen Emperor changes his Name, like a new elected Pope, who takes upon him the Name of some of his Predeces∣sors in stead of his own.


This Name of the Emperors, which they write in all manner of Procla∣mations,


and on their Coyn, is taken from a peculiar Person, Extracted of Royal-Blood.


Martinius
 tells us, That all those of the Imperial Blood, or Family, are by
 the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Fansu,
 as also by the 
Tartars,
 only with addition of the Let∣ter 
r,
 which the 
Chineses
 cannot pronounce, and that 
Fansur,
 or 
Facsur;
 and 
Fan∣su
 or 
Fansur
 signifies a 
Royal
 or 
Imperial House.


The Empire of 
China,
 from 
Anno
 2207. before the Birth of our Savior, hath had a Successive and Hereditary Government; for at the Fathers Death, the eldest Son Succeeds; and if there be no Male-Heir, then the nearest Relation.


If the Empress, (saith 
Semedo
) the lawful Wife of the Emperor hath a Son, in what time soever he be Born, he takes place before all those that are Begot∣ten by his Concubines, though Born before him; but if the Empress hath no Son, then the First-born, or eldest of a Concubine (who e're she be) is always Elected.


But Anciently, from 
Anno
 2992. to 
Anno
 2207. before the Birth of our Sa∣vior, the nine first Emperors were elective and chosen by the most Voices, and took not by Succession; but after the Death of the ninth Emperor, 
Yu,
 his Son 
Khi,
 the Founder of the Family of 
Hia,
 was for his goodness and great Deserts, by general Suffrage, confirm'd Emperor in his Fathers stead; so that the Cu∣stome of Election was chang'd to true and lawful Succession by Birth.


Sometimes it hath happen'd (though very seldom) that the youngest Son, contrary both to the Laws of Nature and the Realm, was declar'd Emperor, either for his extraordinary Valor or Prudence; as 
Anno
 209. before the Birth of Christ, it happen'd to the Emperor 
Ulxi,
 who after his Father 
Cin's
 Death, was chosen Emperor in stead of his eldest Brother 
F
sa.


When the eldest Son hath taken Possession of the Throne, the rest only boast of their Princely Allyance, for they have not in the least any Authori∣ty; yet the Emperor gives them each a City to reside in, with a Magnificent Palace, Attendants, and Revenues, where they keep Court in great State, and are serv'd accordingly, yet have no Command of the Citizens; and that they might not have so much together, as to enable them to raise a Commotion, the Emperor's Allowance is paid them every three Moneths, and on forfeiture of their Lives, they may not stir out of the Limits of the City, so design'd for their subsistance.


The Empire hath sometimes also been Govern'd by a Woman, for 
Anno
 490.
 before the Nativity of Christ, the Emperor 
Lieupang's
 Consort, after the Death of 
Hoci
 her Son, Govern'd the Countrey eight years.


At the Election of a new Emperor, thirteen Contingencies are to be
 observ'd.


The first is the alteration of annual Accounts, for they begin to reckon from the Inauguration of their new Emperor, which they use not only in common Discourses, but in their Letters, and all manner of Writings: The Emperor also gives his Name to that Year in which he begins to Reign; for we must
 observe, that all the Years of any Emperor's Raign, when soe're they die, are reckon'd for whole Years, and so make his Coronation the 
New-Years-Day,
 that is, the beginning of the Year; and yet, though the 
Chineses
 immediately, and in the same Year have another, yet they still shew Honor and Obedience to the late Emperor, though Dead, till the Years end, doing all things in his Name; and likewise all Edicts and Proclamations are Seal'd and Mark'd with the same Signets, as if he were still living; but the Successor gives his Name to the following Year.


The second, they instantly Coyn new Money, with the Letters of his Name,
 which doth not abate any thing of the value of the old Coyn.


The third, his Lawful Wife is Crown'd Empress.


The fourth, they give the Name of Queen to six of his Concubines.


The fifth, they make Offerings to the Heavens, Earth, and Spirits.


The sixth, they bestow great Alms on the Poor.


The seventh, all Prisoners are set at liberty.


The eighth, all the Magistrates are nobly Treated.


The ninth, all the Women that were Concubines before, are put out of the Palace.


The tenth, the 
Seraglioes,
 which are four in number, are fill'd with fresh Beauties fetch'd from all parts of the Empire; during which time there are ma∣ny Marriages, because every one seeks to free his Daughter from such a re∣tired Life.


The eleventh, Persons of Quality, if not all, at least those of Cities, either come themselves, or send Agents to shew Obedience, and acknowledge the new Emperor.


The twelfth, all Officers from the Vice-Roys to the inferior Governors of Cities, go in Person to the Court, to shew the same Obedience, and take the Oath of Allegiance in behalf of their Towns and Provinces.


The thirteenth is, that the Emperor changes his own Name, as is before∣mention'd.


The Reverence which the 
Chineses
 anciently shew'd to their Kings, they per∣form'd in this manner.


They Prostrate themselves to him, bowing down their Bodies, and looking
 with their Faces to the North, for they say, that their Kings look always to the South; for which reason all the Gates of their Palaces, Doors of Cham∣bers, and all Draw-Bridges face the South; from whence proceeds a Proverb, 
That the
 Chineses, 
though at great distance, always honor their King, when with usual Ceremonies they receive their Guests.


They say, that the 
Tartar
 Prince, who at this day possesseth the Countrey of 
China,
 and resides in the Metropolis 
Peking,
 is not the great 
Cham
 or Lord of all 
Tartary,
 as hath hitherto been believ'd, but a mean Prince of the 
Tartars,
 whose Grand-father was the first King of his Family, promoted to that Dignity by the Inhabitants of his Countrey, which was only a small Province in 
Tartary
 call'd 
Muncheu.


The Father of this present Emperor, call'd 
Zunchi,
 was the fifth of his Fami∣ly; his Fortune seem'd to be so strange in the Eyes of other Princes of his Coun∣trey, that they compar'd him to 
 Lightning, when e're they spake of him, for they usually said, that the Gods and Heavens could only prevent him in any thing.


The present Emperor 
Zunchi
's Son is call'd 
Konchi,
 a Youth, of about six∣teen years.


The first Ruler, of whom the 
Chineses
 make mention in their Histories, was nam'd 
Puoncu;
 and after him 
Tienhoang, Ginhoang,
 and 
Yonjui;
 but in those times the Provinces were govern'd by the Heads of their Princical Families.


The first Emperors that before the Birth of our Saviour Govern'd 
China,
 and were Elected and set on the Throne by most Voices, were eight in num∣ber, 
viz.
 from the Year before the Nativity of Christ 2952. to the Year 2207. before which the 
Chineses
 allow of none in their Histories, which in that


time are stuff'd with many strange and fabulous Relations, as well concerning the Age of Men, as Years of the Governors; for if we will credit their Wri∣ters, the World stood many Thousands of Years before the Deluge.


The first Emperor was






Before Christs Birth.


Raign'd


Years.






2952


I. 
Fohi


115






2837


II. 
Xinnung


140






2697


III. 
Hoangti


100






2597


IV. 
Xaohau


84






2513


V. 
Chuenhio


78






2435


VI. 
Ko


70






2357


VII. 
Ya


90






2258


VIII. 
Xan


33






After 
Xun,
 the Empire was Go∣vern'd by Hereditary Succession, and the first House or Family 
Hia
 was rais'd under the Emperor 
Yu,
 which continu'd four hundred Years under seventeen Emperors, 
viz.






Before Christs Nativity.


Raign'd


Years.






2207


I. 
Yu


10






2197


II. 
Khi


9






2188


III. 
Taikang


29






2159


IV. 
Chumkang


13






2146


V. 
Siang


27






2058


VI. 
Xaokang


22






2057


VII. 
Chu


17






2040


VIII. 
Hoai


26






2014


IX. 
Mang


18






1996


X: 
Is


16






1980


XI. 
Pukiang


59






1821


XII. 
Kung


21






1800


XIII. 
Kin


21






1769


XIV. 
Cungkia


31






1848


XV. 
Ka


11






1838


XVI. 
Fau


19






1818


XVII. 
Kie


52






After the Family 
Hia,
 the House of 
Xang
 succeeded, being first rais'd by the Emperor 
Tang,
 from whom sprung twenty eight Emperors, 
viz.






Before the Birth of Christ.


Raign'd


Years.






1766


I. 
Tang


13






 


II. 
Taikia


33






1720


III. 
Voting


92






1691


IV. 
Taikeng


25






1666


V. 
Siaokia


17






1659


VI. 
Iungie


12






1641


VII. 
Taiu


75






1562


VIII. 
Chungting


13






1549


IX. 
Vaigni


15






1534


X. 
Hotankia


9






1525


XI. 
Zuie


19






1506


XII. 
Zusini


16






1490


XIII. 
Vokia


25






1464


XIV. 
Zuting


32






1433


XV. 
Nankeng


25






1408


XVI. 
Yangkia


7






1401


XVII. 
Puonkeng


28






1373


XVIII. 
Siaosini


21






3352


XIX. 
Siaoye


18






1324


XX. 
Vuting


59






1265


XXI. 
Zukeng


7






1258


XXII. 
Zukia


2






1225


XXIII. 
Linsin


63






1219


XXIV. 
Kenting


21






1198


XXV. 
Uvye


4






1194


XXVI. 
Taiting


3






1191


XXVII. 
Tiye


37






1154


XXVIII. 
Che


33






After the subduing of the House of 
Xang,
 rose the Family 
Cheu, Anno
 1122. and flourish'd till 
Anno
 247. before our Saviors Nativity, under thirty seven Emperors.


The first of them was a Prince call'd 
Fa,
 who when he enjoy'd the Crown, chang'd his Name to 
V,
 which signifies 
Valiant;
 and they say, that from him all the Emperors since, at their entring on the Throne change their Names.


He possess'd, in the Province 
Xensi,
 a Countrey nam'd 
Cheu,
 from whence the Family receiv'd their Denomina∣tion.






Before Christs Birth.


Raign'd


Years.






1078


I. 
Fa,
 or 
U,


7






1115


II. 
Ching


38






1122


III. 
Kang


26






1056


IV. 
Cha


51






1001


V. 
Mo


55






946


VI. 
Cung


12






934


VII. 
Is


25






894


VIII. 
Hia


15






896


IX. 
Is


16






878


X. 
Li


38






827


XI. 
Siveni


46






781


XII. 
Ie


11






770


XIII. 
Ping


51






719


XIV. 
Vou


23






696


XV. 
Chuang


15






631


XVI. 
Li


5






676


XVII. 
Hoei


25






651


XVIII. 
Siang


33






618


XIX. 
Hiang


6






612


XX. 
Quang


6






606


XXI. 
Fing


21






585


XXII. 
Kien


14






571


XXIII. 
Ling


27






544


XXIV. 
King


25






519


XXV. 
King


44






Between which was the Empe∣ror 
Menguen,
 who Raign'd scarce a Moneth.






 


Raign'd


 


Years.






475


XXVI.


Yuen


7






468


XXVII.


Chinting


27






440


XXX.


Ka


15






Ka
 is accounted the thirtieth, for after 
Chintung
's Death, his other Sons being 
Kiucie
 and 
Xocie,
 attempted for the Empire, and in that regard were accounted, as being two, 
viz.
 the twen∣ty eighth and twenty ninth, because they acted for some time; but at last. 
Ka
 mastering them, became absolute, and so was reckon'd the thirtieth.






 


Raign'd


Years.






542


XXXI Gueilie


24






401


XXXII Gan


26






375


XXXIII Lie


7






368


XXXIV Hien


48






322


XXXV Xicini


6






314


XXXVI Fo


59






254


XXXVII Cheukuni


9






After the House of 
Cheu,
 came the Family 
Cin,
 under their Advancer 
Ching,
 who was afterwards call'd 
Xi,
 in the Year 246. and continu'd but to 
Anno
 206.






 


Raign'd


Years.






246


I. 
Ching,
 or 
Xi


37






209


II. 
Ulxi


3






206


III. 
Ing


46






After the Family 
Cin,
 the House of 
Han
 follow'd, which flourish'd till 
Anno
 264. after Christ. The first Raiser of this House, was






Before the Nativity.


Raign'd


Years.






206


I. 
Lieupang,
 or 
Kaozu


17






194


II. 
Hoei


7






187


III. 
Liuheva,
 a Woman


8






179


IV. 
Veni


23






156


V. 
Hiaoking


16






140


VI. 
Hiaou


54






86


VII. 
Hiaoche


12






74


VIII. 
Ho


7






73


IX. 
Siveni


25






48


X. 
Iuen


16






32


XI. 
Ching


26






6


XII. 
Ngay


6






These are the Names of the Emperors, every one in their Families, before the Birth of our Saviour, according as they are written in the 
Chinese
 Chroni∣cles, Translated into Latin by Father 
Martyn;
 but those that have Raign'd since the Incarnation, I have receiv'd no account of, being not yet render'd to us in any other Language.


After the Family of 
Han
 arose that of 
Cyn,
 and flourish'd after the Birth of Christ, till 
Anno
 1419. At the same time were also five Kings, call'd 
Utai,
 which maintain'd War against one another, till by their Ruine, the Family 
Tang
 took upon them the sole Government of 
China,
 which they kept till 
Anno
 618.


In the Year 923. the Family 
Sung
 succeeded that of 
Tang,
 and Raign'd over all 
China,
 till 
Anno
 1278. when this House was utterly subdu'd by the 
Tartars,
 who set up the Family of 
Iuen,
 which Govern'd 
China
 till 1368. in which Year rose the House of 
Taiming,
 from a Priest call'd 
Chu,
 who drove the 
Tartars
 out


of 
China;
 but this Family was 
 
Anno
 1644. destroy'd, and by a huge Re∣bellion, the East 
Tartars
 of 
Munchu,
 were invited to Ayd the Prince, but the way once open'd, they swallow'd all, and from their Prince nam'd the whole Empire of 
China, Taising.


The Magistrates or Governors in 
China,
 taken in general, are of two De∣grees or Orders; the first are such, as not only in the Metropolis officiate the places of Privy Councellors, but from thence have influence over the whole Empire; the other are such as Govern peculiar Provinces or Cities.


The general Government, or that of the first Degree, are by 
Alvarez Semedo
 describ'd in the following words:


The Prime Government of 
China
 consists in six Benches, Chambers, or Courts, which by a general Name are call'd 
 
Pu,
 that is, 
The Kings Benches.


These manage not only the Affairs of the Realm, in the Courts where they reside, but like the Head, on which all the other depend, Rule, and give Or∣ders to them, according to their several places.


Every Councel hath his President, which they call 
Chamxu,
 with two Assi∣stants, the one nam'd 
Koxilam,
 who is the Chief, and sits on the left Hand, (by them counted most honorable;) and the other 
Yeuxilam.


These are the first and most profitable Offices of the Empire, except that of 
Kolao's;
 so that a 
Tutang
 or Vice-Roy of what Province so e're it be, after he hath given Testimony of his Capacity, if he would be Promoted, thinks him∣self well provided for, though not a Prime Councellor, to be only one of the Assistants, that sit on the left, or right Hand.


Besides these, there is a Councel of 
Ten,
 which are of equal Dignity, only distinguish'd by several Titles, and deciding of different Causes: To these are to be added, the vast numbers of greater and lesser Officers, as Notaries, Secre∣taries, Clerks, Servants, Officers, and such as we call Bayliffs, besides many others, not known in 
Europe,


The first Councel or Court which have the greatest Command, and receive the highest Presents and greatest Fees, are the Councel of State, call'd 
Lipu,
 that is properly, 
Councel of Magistrates,
 for 
Pu
 signifies a Councel, and 
Li
 Magistrates.


To these belong all the Offices in the Empire, to change or promote them; for he who is once in an Employment, rises continually by degrees to higher Dignities.


They have also Power to restore those to their Employments that are dis∣plac'd; as if a 
Mandarin
 is for some Misdemeanor put out of his place, he may easily obtain it again, if he be in favor with this Councel.


The second Bench is call'd 
Pimpu,
 that is, 
Councel of War,
 which have as great a Command as those of State, 
viz.
 over all the 
Militia,
 with the Schools and Academies, and for instruction of Youth in Martial Discipline, and the Exer∣cise of Arms.


The third is of the Customs, call'd 
Limpu,
 which though not of great Com∣mands, yet they are of no less Quality, for the 
Mandarins
 in which it consists, are chosen out of the Emperor's Councel 
Hanlin,
 which are next to the 
Kolao's,
 the Prime place of Honor in 
China.


This Council hath knowledge of all Letters, and likewise of Ecclesiastical Affairs, 
Bonzies,
 Strangers, and the like.


The fourth Councel is that of the Emperor's Revenues, call'd 
Hupu,
 which take care to get in the Emperor's Treasure, Customs, Farms, and in general, all things that bring in Money.


The fifth, call'd 
Cumpu,
 look after all business of Building and Architecture, and especially what belongs to the Emperor's Palace, or those of his Children and Officers; as also the Walls and Gates of the City, High-ways, and Bridges.


The same Council are also to take care that the Rivers be cleans'd, and Ships furnish'd with Necessaries, when sent out upon the Emperor's Service.


The sixth Chamber call'd 
Himpiu,
 that is, 
Councel of Iustice,
 are to punish Ma∣lefactors, and pass Sentence of Life and Death on Criminals.


The same Councels or Chambers the Jesuit 
Nicolas Trigaut
 hath describ'd al∣most after the same manner in the following words.


The Prime Councellors or Courts are six in number.


The first call'd 
Lipu,
 signifies, 
The Bench of the Magistrates.


This Councel exeeeds all the rest, for they name or choose all the Magi∣strates of the Philosophick, or Learned Order of the whole Realm, which are accounted the most eminent, and continually rise higher and higher, if they have in their Inferior Offices made but the least Proofs of their Vertue and good Behavior; and on the contrary, if they commit but one Fault, they are bereav'd of their Imployments, or put into meaner Offices.


The first choice consists in the excellent Writing in 
Chinese
 Characters, of which, this Court judges.


The second Councel (by 
Semedo
 the fourth) is call'd 
Hopu,
 that is, 
The Court of Revenue,
 or 
Exchequer,
 which have the Command of the Empires Revenue and Taxes, gathering Customs, paying Souldiers, and the like.


The third Councel is call'd 
Lipu,
 that is, 
The Council,
 or 
Court of Ceremonies,
 which takes care for Common Offerings, Temples, Priests, the Emperor's Wo∣men, Schools, examining of the Learned, Weddings, and other Ceremonies to be perform'd to the Emperor, on certain times and occasions.


The same Council also give Titles of Honor to deserving Persons; incou∣rage Artificers; send Noble-men to meet Ambassadors, and return An∣swers to Letters directed to the Emperor; who looks upon it as a great dis∣grace to write a Letter with his own Hand, either to one in, or without his Dominions.


The fourth call'd 
Pimpu,
 which signifies, 
Council of War,
 Command over Ci∣vil and Military Affairs, which concern the Safety and Defence of the Empire, yet they cannot resolve on any thing, without the Emperor's consent and know∣ledge.


This Councel bestows all Military Offices, removing Cowards, and putting in Valiant Men; and likewise, honor the deserv'd with great Titles.


The fifth call'd 
Cumpu,
 that is, 
The Councel over all manner of Buildings,
 look to the Erecting of publick Structures and Palaces, for the Emperor, his Allies, and Magistrates; and likewise to the building of his Ships, and Rigging out of whole Navies, and the repair of Bridges and Walls about the City.


The sixth Councel, call'd 
Humpu,
 are Judges, to Determine and Debate of Criminals, and all manner of Differences: The whole business of Judicatory in all the Empire depending on this Court, for they have in every Province and City, appointed Magistrates and Clerks, which advise them faithfully of all Transactions; so that they in this their Office, being of great concern, have no small trouble, but that the great number of Deputies which they imploy un∣der them, ease them of the most part; for there is a Chief-Justice of the whole Court, whom they call 
Ciamcui,
 which hath two Assistants, one sits on his


right, and the other on his left Hand, being nam'd 
Cilam,
 which three Persons in the Metropolis 
Peking,
 are accounted amongst the greatest in Quality, and according to their pleasure, every Court is divided into several Degrees; be∣sides these, all Courts have their Secretaries, Clerks, Messengers, and other Servants.


The Emperor 
Ya,
 who began to Raign before the Birth of our Savior, 
Anno
 2357. first establish'd these six Courts, according to the Relation of Father 
Mar∣tin,
 in his first Book of the History of 
China,
 wherein he says,


Afterwards the Emperor 
Ya
 brought the State of 
China
 to a new and better form, by establishing six Courts: One of which is call'd 
Lipu,
 which takes Cognizance of the Well-behaving, or Mis-behaving of the Magistrates, and to bestow on every one according to their Merits, either higher Dignities, or else bereave them of their Places.


The second is call'd 
Pingpu,
 that is, 
Councel of War,
 or 
Prime Martial Court,
 which have the same Command over the Martial Officers, as the former over the Civil.


The third is 
Lipu,
 that is, 
A Court of Ceremonies,
 or 
Customs,
 who Supervise Ec∣clesiastick Affairs, Offerings, entertaining foreign Ambassadors, and other such like Businesses.


The fourth is call'd 
Hupu,
 which Receive, and render an Account of the Em∣peror's Revenue.


The fifth is call'd 
Cumpu,
 which take care to look after the Repairing and Building of publick Structures, the Emperor's Palaces, Walls of the Cities, Ri∣vers, Ships, and High-ways, that they may not be Dirty or Incommodious.


The sixth is 
Hingpu,
 or 
Court of Iustice,
 where all Causes relating to Life and Death are Determin'd; which Courts being so Constituted by the Emperor 
Ya,
 Govern the whole Empire of 
China
 in good Order, and acknowledge no Su∣perior but the Emperor and the 
Kolaos.


According to others, the Privy-Councel consists in six Persons, who never Consult but about Weighty Matters of State. This Councel or Assembly is call'd 
Loepol;
 each of these hath his peculiar Chamber, and is also the Head of another Court, in which the businesses of his Camber are Debated: These Councellors take as many to their Assistants as they judge necessary.


The first of these is President of the Councel of State, and his Assembly is call'd 
Lipol.


The second hath Charge of all Warlike businesses, Revenues of the Empire, and hath also Power to give Commissions.


The third looks after Architecture, keeping an account of what Edifices are yearly built in the Empire; and likewise of the Charges expended in Repair∣ing of Towns, Forts, High-ways, Streets, and Moats: This is call'd 
Congpol.


The fourth, which takes care of the Customs and Taxes of the Empire, are nam'd 
Olpol.


The fifth is (as we may call him) Lord-Chief-Justice, and Pronounces the Sentences resolv'd on in his Court, call'd 
Ungpol.


The sixth and last hath the Command of all Places and Offices of the Magi∣strates, and gives them to those, who by their Learning, good Deportment, and civil Carriage, are accounted the most Worthy.


In this manner the Government of 
China
 hath continu'd many Ages, which after the first Conquest by the 
Tartars,
 under the Emperor 
Xunchi,
 was not chang'd; except, only adding to every one of the six 
Chinese
 Councellors, a Per∣son


of his own Countrey; so that the Grand Councel of the Realm consisted in twelve Persons, all equally Commission'd as before-said.


These Councellors of State before-mention'd, cannot resolve on any thing without a general consent; therefore no business is concluded on, but by Plu∣rality of Voices: When the Assembly is broke up, and every Councellor con∣sults with his private 
Cabal;
 then a 
Tartar
 (as we said) is added to them; but since that, in the Raign of the Emperor 
Konchi,
 the 
Chineses
 are put out of all Of∣fices, and the 
Tartars
 have wholly Appropriated them to themselves.


Besides these six, there are nine other Chambers or Benches, call'd 
Kieu∣kim,
 whose Offices are several, but they chiefly take care of the Emperor's Houshold.


The first call'd 
Thailisu,
 that is, 
The Grand Exchequer,
 consists in thirteen 
Man∣darins, viz.
 one Prime Councellor, two Assistants, and ten inferior Judges; This resembles the 
Chancery
 of the Realm, perusing all the Judgments given in other Courts, and according to Equity disallowing or confirming the same.


The second call'd 
Quanlosu,
 that is, 
Comptroler of the Court,
 taking care for the Emperor's Table, observing the Transactions of the Empress, Concubines, and paying Wages to all Court-Officers, and others that follow publick Im∣ployments; entertaining foraign Ambassadors and the like Persons of Qua∣lity, and consists of one Prime Councellor, two Assistants, and six petty Judges.


The third, 
Thaipocusu,
 is like the Master of the Horse, and takes care, not on∣ly for the Horses for the Emperor's Service, but likewise (as Post-Master-Gene∣ral) for all Posts, and in general, for all others which serve the whole Empire. This consists in one prime Councellor, and six Assistants.


The fourth is that of the Ceremonies, performing all manner of Duties, requisite at publick Treats of the Emperor, Festivals, and at all other times and occasions; and likewise those which are duly observ'd every Morning at the going in and out of the Palace; and consists in one Prime Councellor, two Grand, and six Inferior Assistants.


The fifth is that of the Customs in peculiar businesses; and though this differs from the first, yet they observe the same things by the help of their Assistants. They also take care to see due Offerings perform'd at the Emperor's Grave; for Artificial Hills, Woods, and all things else; as likewise for Singing-Boys, Musicians, and Beasts for the Oblations.


There is yet another Court of Justice, whose business is only to present the Emperor with all manner of Memorials, and bringing them all together into the 
Chancery,
 like the King's Remembrancers.


All manner of Businesses are shewn the Emperor in Writing, according to
 an antient Custom of the Emperor 
Suven,
 who Raign'd before the Birth of our Saviour, 
Anno
 73. that the Emperor having consider'd thereof, he might the bet∣ter return his Answer in Writing; for it often happend (said he) that People by fine Words, and pleasing Language, might perswade him to any thing, which granting in a sudden humor, they had often cause to repent: From whence it happens, that though the Emperors do seldom appear to their People, yet they continually converse with them by Petitions or Letters.


To the six Councellors are to be added three more, the same in manner or fashion, though differing in Offices and Imployments.


Besides all these, there are yet two more; the one call'd 
Qholi,
 and the other 
Tauli,
 and though both have their eyes over several Provinces, and every one


concern themselves with Businesses within their peculiar Spheres and Offices, minding all Transactions and Disorders in the Empire. These Councellors, as it is easie to tell of others Mens Faults, act them with great freedom, and of∣tentimes commit many unjust Actions. Their manner of complaining in this kind, is to make a Copy thereof, and to shew it to the Emperor: Immediate∣ly after the same (as they say, is 
Facheo
) that is, Coppied out and deliver'd to Clerks appointed for that purpose, which make several Writings of it, and send them by Messengers through all the Empire, so that it is immediately known by, and against what Person those Writings are publish'd, and a large Description of what he is. These Letters, which the 
Chineses
 call 
Iuen,
 thus publish'd, the Accused against whom it is written must immediately, 
Volens No∣lens,
 do two things, the first of which is to write a Petition, not to justifie or ex∣cuse himself, but to acknowledge that the 
Tauli
 had great Reason, and he in Fault; that he hath offended, for which he is sorrowful, and ready to undergo such Punishment as they please to inflict upon him: The next is speedily to be gone and leave his Place without farther intermedling, till the Emperor hath given his Answer to the Petition, which sometimes proves favorable, being permitted to re-enjoy his Office; but otherwhiles the Emperor commands him to be punish'd according to the greatness of his Crime.


It often happens, that a 
Mandarin
 by diligence in his Office, and observing his Business more than ordinary, begets Enemies; and if any of these be acquaint∣ed with, or ally'd to any Officers of these two Courts, then theydo his Bu∣siness immediately at Court, and send the Memorials from one to another, so that the poor 
Mandarin
 is in a miserable condition, and especially if he be a Judge, Deputy-Governor, or over the 
Militia.
 Yet far greater trouble they have with the 
Tauli
 and 
Qholi,
 who neglect not the least opportunity to prose∣cute to such heighth, that the Emperor himself, though he have an inclination, cannot free them.


Trigaut
 describes these two Councils, 
Qholi
 and 
Tauli,
 in the following manner:


Every one of them consists in above sixty Persons, all Philosophers, aged and wise People, which before have made no small proofs of their Loyalty to the Emperor and Realm.


These Consult of all private and publick Affairs, which they Judge and Determine, being thereto authoriz'd by the Emperor's special Commission, which makes them to be not a little honor'd and respected by the People. But above all, their chiefest Office is to inform the Emperor by Letters, if any thing be acted against the Laws, and also to tell the Emperor and his Allies of their Faults.


This Office, in my Opinion, differs not much from the 
Lacedemonian Ephori;
 for they never regard the Magistrates, nor miss to tell the Emperor of his Misdemeanors, such is their Authority and Respect: And notwithstanding the Emperor is often displeased with them, yet they cease not to admonish then by words, till they have perswaded and made them sensible of their Errors.


This is likewise by the power of the Law priviledg'd to all Magistrates, and not onely to them, but every particular Substitute; yet the Petitions of the 
Qholi
 and 
Tauli
 are most esteem'd, because they do it meerly as being their Employ∣ment. The Copies of the Petitions, and the Emperor's Answer thereon, are Printed in great quantities, whereby all Court Businesses are soon known in seve∣ral Places. There are those which make a Book of all the Petitions, Printed as be∣fore;


nay, if any thing be remarkable in them for their Predecessors, it is writ∣in the Chronicles.


These Governors us'd formerly an undaunted freedom and confidence in the admonishing of their Kings and Emperors, when they saw them wander from the way of Vertue, to the great admiration of the People of 
Europe,
 which are debarr'd of this freedom. It is certain that these Governors understand the Mysteries of Philosophy, and endeavor by all means possible to extol the Heavens by Praises, and other acts of Devotion. It was not onely in ancient times, but now also customary amongst the 
Chineses,
 that the Governors, when their good admonishment was not regarded by the Emperor, they laid down their Apparel and Badges of their Offices before him, declaring publickly, that they would no longer Serve in their Places; and the more boldly they throw them down, if the Emperor designs any thing which they fear may prove pre∣judicial to the Realm, and that he will not hearken to them.


It hapned some years since, that the Emperor 
Vanlie,
 who clouded all his Atchievements by his insatiably lustful desires; for notwithstanding he had a lawful Son, yet he would declare a Bastard to be Heir of the Empire: but the Peers and Governors being against it, said they would not suffer so base an Election; yet the Emperor not regarding their Saying, all the Magi∣strates that were in the City, being to the number of two thousand, went to the Palace, and forc'd him against his will, by laying off their Liveries, to de∣clare the lawful Heir to be Successor.


The like occasion hapned 
Anno
 1651. for when after the Death of the Guar∣dian and Unkle to the young Emperor, another 
Tartar
 would Govern, alledg∣ing that the Emperor's Age was not fit for such a Management, all the Gover∣nors laid down their Badges, whereby he was forc'd to desist: and in this man∣ner a Youth of sixteen years old call'd 
Xunghi,
 being the true Heir, took upon him the Government.


Besides these Magistrates, or Privy-Councellors at the Court, there are seve∣ral
 other Offices, or Council-Chambers, for divers Businesses, but the chiefest and most honorable is that which is call'd 
Hanlinyuen,
 into which none but Learned Doctors are admitted.


Those which are in this Imperial Office, do nothing but Read several Books, and may not trouble themselves with publick Concerns, when as nevertheless they exceed those that sit at the Helm, wherefore many endeavor greatly to get into their Society. Their Business is onely to write the Emperor's Letters, Annual Chronicles, and to make Laws and Ordinances. Out of these are also chose the Tutors for the Emperor's and Princes.


In this Society are several degrees of Honor, which every one attains to by their writing a good Style; after which they are rais'd to the highest Prefer∣ment within the Court. None are chose to be of that most eminent Office of 
Colao,
 but out of them.


Those that are in this Society make great advantages by writing Epistles and Encomiums of their Friends; nay, every one accounts himself happy if he can but get them, bestowing great Charge and trouble to that end: for if they have but the Name that they are made by them, they are accounted excellent, though never so bad.


Lastly, those that are of this Society, are chief Councellors and Judges in the Examinations of Causes, both Divine and Moral, and are by the Profes∣sors of Sciences accounted Masters of Literature.


Besides all these Courts, there is one supream Court, which is the chief in
 the whole Empire. None can be receiv'd into this, unless they have been of the Imperial Society call'd 
Hanlin,
 or 
Hanlinyuen
 before mention'd, and after they have a considerable time been in Places of Government, and made suffici∣ent proofs of their Mildness, Policy and Prudence, and that no Letters of Complaint have been set out against them. This Court consists of four, or at most of six Persons, which are call'd 
Colaos
 and 
Coglogs.


The Emperor 
Vanlie,
 Grandfather to the Emperor 
Zunchin,
 would never suf∣fer more than one 
Colao,
 alledging that the rest were needless.


The Quality of 
Colao,
 to speak properly, is no peculiar Office, because they take care of the general Government of the State, and are just like Supream Judges of all Courts and Dominions in the whole Empire, though they are never all together but when they dispatch grand Business for the Emperor, who being not always present upon the concluding, they are many times forc'd to be in the Palace to answer those Petitions which are hourly brought to the Empe∣ror. This done, they are necessitated to find out the Emperor, and inform him of their several Results; which having heard, he doth Justice to the Parties, and pronounces the ultimate Sentence, by either confirming or altering their Conclusions.


These 
Colaos
 are in the highest esteem, and above all the Councels or Magi∣strates, who at a certain time come and shew Reverence to them as their Supe∣riors, in an open Hall. The 
Colaos
 during this Ceremony stand up, and all the Officers according to their Degrees walk cross the Hall; coming before them they turn about, and bow their Heads down to the Ground: which Ceremo∣ny is call'd 
Quo Tham,
 that is, 
Passing through the Hall.


There is also a great difference betwixt the 
Colaos
 Robes and those of the other Magistrates, for their Girdles are beset with Precious Stones, which they call 
Yuxe,
 which none but 
Colaos
 may wear in the whole Empire; nay, they receive their Orders by the Emperor's own Hand, as the Knights amongst us their Honor from the King himself.


Father 
Nicholas Trigaut
 describes the 
Colaos
 Authority and Office in the fol∣lowing words:


Besides these six Courts there is another, the most eminent in the whole Realm and the Emperor's Palace: those which belong to it are call'd 
Colaos,
 and are generally three or four in number, and sometimes six. They have charge of no particular Business, but mind the general Concerns of the Em∣pire, and sit in private Consultation with the Emperor daily in his Palace. And in regard the Emperor at present doth not appear in Person at Treaties of publick Affairs of the Realm, which he formerly us'd to dispatch, they stay the whole day in the Palace, and answer Petitions, which in great numbers are brought, according as they think fit: with which Answers they go to the Emperor, who 
Regio Nutu,
 by his Beck either confirms or alters them. Thus far 
Trigaut.


The like Quality and Office Father 
Martin
 ascribes to them in the following
 words:


The six Courts, 
viz. Lypu, Hupu, Pingpu, Cungpu, Hingpu,
 are not concern'd in publick Matters of the whole Realm, but onely with private Consultations: for the Governors make their Requests to the Emperor by way of Petition, who having consider'd of the Business, sends them to every Court to which they belong, the Assistants whereof, after serious Consideration, acquaint the Em∣peror


with their Opinons in Writing, which he then, according to his pleasure,
 either vacates or affirms; which that he may the better be able to do, he chu∣ses some of the prime Philosophers in the whole Empire for his Assistants, who are call'd 
Colaos,
 or 
Caising,
 that is, 
Assistants in Government.
 These are in the
 next Degree to the Emperor, and aid him in dispatching of Business, Consult∣ing with him in Person, as being his Privy-Council, for he is seldom seen by any other Magistrates, Judges, Justices, or Councellors. Thus far 
Martin.


Those which the 
Chineses
 call 
Colao,
 we (if we observe the original of the Name) should term 
Assistants to the Emperor;
 partly for their honorable Em∣ployment, and partly as being next the Emperor, the prime Governors of the whole Realm.


Thus far of the general Government and Councils, or Offices of the Realm, which so long as the Empire was Govern'd by the 
Chineses,
 had their Residence at the Courts in 
Nanking
 and 
Peking,
 for all the Councils and Magistrates which are at the Imperial Court in 
Peking,
 were formerly (except the 
Colaos
) in 
Nan∣king,
 the Metropolis and Court of the ancient 
Chinese
 Princes; but they were far below those in 
Peking,
 because of the Emperor's absence, who held his Court in 
Peking,
 as at this day the 
Tartar,
 Emperor of 
China.
 The Court was remov'd from 
Peking
 on this occasion:


The Emperor 
Humvu
 having driven out the 
Tartars Anno
 1368. planted the
 Seat of the Empire in 
Nanking.
 After his Decease one of his Nephews call'd 
Yunlo,
 who in the Northern Provinces lay with an Army in the Borders of the Empire as Vice-Roy, there to be a Guard against the 
Tartars,
 concluded to be∣reave 
Humvu
's Heir of the Crown, and make himself Master of it: To which purpose having gotten the Northern Provinces to joyn with him, he came with his Army to 
Nanking,
 and got the other. Provinces either by Policy, Strength or Presents, and expell'd 
Humvu
's Son. But because 
Yunlo
's greatest Strength and Dependence was in the Northern Provinces, and that it was to be believ'd, that the 
Tartars
 to re-gain the Empire would fall in on that Place, he setled himself in that part of the Countrey, and in the same City in which the 
Tartar
 Emperors, when they Govern'd the 
Chineses,
 had their Residence, there to resist the Enemy if he should make any Attempt; yet still continu'd the Emperor's Palace and the Magistrates in 
Nanking.
 But after the Conquest of 
China
 by the 
Tartars, Anno
 1644. the City of 
Nanking
 was bereav'd of her Imperial Title, and all the Magistrates belonging to the Emperor's Court; nay, the Palace of the ancient 
Chinese
 Emperors, besides many stately Memori∣als were all pull'd down to the Ground, without any other damage to the City. The 
Tartars
 also chang'd the Name of the City and Province, and in stead of 
Nanking
 call'd it 
Kiangnan;
 and the City which formerly was call'd 
Intien, Kiangning.
 All which was done by the 
Tartars
 out of an inveterate hatred against the 
Taimingian
 Family, because 
Humvu,
 or 
Chu,
 the first raiser of that House, drove them or their Predecessors shamefully out of the Empire, after they had possess'd it a hundred and eight years.


All the Magistrates, as well belonging to the Learned Council as Martial Affairs, are by a general Name in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Quonfu,
 that is, 
To set before:
 but for their Quality and not their Office they are call'd 
Lavye,
 or 
Lausu,
 or 
Lavja's,
 which signifies 
Lords,
 or 
Parents.
 The 
Netherlanders,
 ac∣cording to the example of the 
Portuguese,
 call them 
Mandarins,
 that is, 
Comman∣ders,
 or 
Governors,
 deriv'd from the 
Portuguese
 word 
Mandarim,
 which is, 
A Com∣mander.


Notwithstanding all the Magistrates or Governors flie at the Emperor's Beck, and have Orders amongst themselves, yet every one Serves in his Office with full Power, except he be commanded to the contrary by his Superiors. There are so many Governors in 
China,
 and Magistrates (they being, accor∣ding to 
Martinius,
 to the number of eleven thousand) that it is hard to know their several Orders. For this reason five or six Books of a considerable big∣ness are to be bought through the whole Empire, containing the Names of the publick Magistrates, and Governors of Provinces, with the Places of their Birth, Employments and Quality. These Books, according to 
Martinius,
 are Re-printed every three Moneths; which must be done of necessity, for in such great numbers of Magistrates, without putting those into the Books that are of less Quality, are daily great Changes, some dying, others put out of their Employments, some degraded into lesser Offices, or losing their Parents; by reason of which last Accident they are forc'd to desert their Government, though never so great, and travel home, and there Mourn three years, and therefore great numbers are continually at the Court of 
Peking,
 in hopes to succeed in the vacant Places.


As to what concerns the Government of the Provinces in particular, it
 stands in this manner:


The supream Government of a Province is generally manag'd in the Me∣tropolis, and consists in Societies, that have a general Power over the whole Province. Amongst these are two prime Courts, to which all the other, as as well of Towns as Villages, must submit, because they receive their Com∣missions from the Imperial Court. This Court consists in one sole Judge, without any Assistants or other Officers, which is the Vice-Roy of the Province, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Tutham,
 or 
Kiu-Muen,
 whose Command extends over all the Magistrates and People of the Province. During his time of Go∣vernment, which lasts three years, he keeps several Messengers, which go to, and come from the Court at certain times, to give an account of what hath pass'd in his Jurisdiction. He is receiv'd with great State into his Dominions. After his departure from Court his Councellors and other Officers go before, and he is conducted from City to City by the Inhabitants. Some Comman∣ders with three thousand Soldiers, besides all the Magistrates and Commonalty come to meet and receive him three Leagues from the Metropolis, where he is to keep his Court.


The second 
Tutang,
 who is of no less Power, but stays but one year in his Employment, is call'd 
Chayven.
 He is much respected and feared, for he takes an account of all manner of Business, Military or Civil, Condemns or Re∣prieves Malefactors, and also looks after the Emperor's Revenue: He Exa∣mines all the Magistrates, nay the 
Tutang
 himself, and hath also Power to pu∣nish Judges, and put great and mean 
Mandarins
 out of their Employments: The Miscarriages of the grand 
Mandarins
 he informs the Emperor of by Letters, and puts them out of their Places till he hath receiv'd an Answer from his Majesty. He also pronounces the Sentences of Death which are given in all Places of the Province, and appoints for that purpose the Day and Town whi∣ther all the Malefactors must be carry'd, that he may know the number and Names of them, and marks six or seven with a Pencil, and if more, he is ac∣counted a blood-thirsty and tyrannous Man. Those that are thus mark'd are Executed in the Field, and the other carry'd again to Prison. He is also to look after the repairing of the City Walls, Castles and other Structures. He never


goes out but with a great Train, that carry Court Badges, and other marks of severity.


There is yet sometime another Extraordinary 
Chayven,
 made at the Em∣presses Request. He hath an absolute Power, but it extends no farther than to Pardon or Reprieve; for he Visits all the Prisons in the whole Province, sets those Prisoners at Liberty which for petty Crimes lie there, and have no Ad∣versaries; and likewise such as are not able to free themselves. He Pleads in all desperate Causes, and assists People that are helpless; recalls a rashly pro∣nounc'd Sentence, and is defender of the Poor. In short, his whole Office and Employment extends to Mercy. For which reason these Magistrates are du∣ring their time of Government much respected by the common People.


The third Employment is 
Treasurer,
 who takes care of the Emperor's Re∣venue in his Province, being Employ'd by the Court of Exchequer, which sit at the Emperor's Palace. He hath two Councellors allow'd him, one of which sits on his right, and the other on his left Hand, besides twenty six 
Mandarins,
 and several other Officers. His Business is to look after the Customs, Farms, and all Revenues whatsoever belonging to the Crown. He Seals the Weights and Measures, decides all Differences concerning Moneys, punishing the guilty, or sending them (if he think fit) to higher Courts, pays the Magistrates, Al∣lies to the Emperor, Commanders and Soldiers, provides Liveries and Marks of Honor which are given to famous Scholars, pays the Money for the repair∣ing of High-ways, Bridges, Courts or Palaces of the chief 
Mandarins,
 and Ships of War. Lastly, this Treasurer hath the Command of all what comes in or goes out of the Treasury. He also receives the Emperor's Presents from the Judges, Governors, and 
Tauli,
 which every one makes according to their Employ∣ments, being in Silver Coin or Bullion, all which is by him melted into Bars, each to the value of fifty Crowns, and stamp'd with the Imperial Mark and the Melter's Name, that thereby he may know whom to accuse, if the Silver should be falsifi'd. In this manner it is carry'd into the Emperor's Treasury.


The fourth Court is call'd 
Gandchasci,
 that is, 
The Court of Life and Death.
 In
 it are two Assistants, or 
Tauli,
 whose care is to Visit, and go from Town to Town to decide all Differences, punish the guilty, perform o
r Duties be∣longing to their Offices, which extend over the 
Militia,
 and Affairs, in such Pro∣vinces that lie near the Sea.


The fifth resembles a Colledge of Learned Men, ordain'd to Examine
 Youths how they profit in their Studies, and especially to observe their Masters of Art till such time as they have receiv'd their Bonnet and Orders to be Dire∣ctors. The prime of this famous Society is a Chancellor, who from time to time goes to Towns and Villages to enquire after the Carriage, Deportment and Conversation of the Learned, and to punish or chastise them according to their several Offenses.


There are yet two Persons in every City call'd 
Hioquon,
 that is, 
Mandarins,
 or 
Magistrates of Knowledge,
 which also belong to the fore-mention'd five Courts, whose Command extends onely over the Students of the City: and though they have not Power to give the Degrees due to deserving Persons, but onely to chastise them, yet nevertheless they are very strict and severe, because they continually reside in one Place, and like Proctors in our Universities, come and Examine the Scholars.


All these fore-mention'd Courts Command over the whole Province, and the Cities, Towns and Villages contain'd therein.


Moreover, every City hath peculiar Governors as here in 
Europe,
 being four eminent 
Mandarins,
 or Aldermen, as one of them is like a Mayor, which is by them call'd 
Chifu; Chi
 signifies 
Lord,
 or 
Governor,
 and 
Fu, A Mannor,
 or 
Tract of Land;
 the other three are his Assistants, and call'd 
Tumchu, Tumphuon,
 and 
Cheuquon;
 every one hath his pecular Court and Officers.


Besides these are nineteen lesser Magistrates, which look after the Towns: two of them have a prime Councellor and four inferior Assistants; the other nine onely one Councellor and one Assistant; the other eight have one supream Head, who Commands over their whole Society.


The Villages have also each of them a Judge and three Justices; the Judge is call'd 
Chihien,
 the first Justice 
Honchin,
 the second 
Chufu,
 and the third 
Tunfu:
 All these have their several Courts, or Council-Chambers, and likewise Secre∣taries, Clerks, and other inferior Officers. The Judge may pronounce Sen∣tence of Death, but cannot execute it.


Beside these 
Mandarins
 which reside in Towns and Villages, there are some which have neither power to Condemn nor Punish, but onely to give their Judgments to the Society.


The great Castles that lie distant from Towns and Villages, have also 
Man∣darins,
 or Magistrates, chosen from amongst the Clerks; for the least Office that any Person of Quality aims at, is to be Judge or Justice in a Village.


Trigaut
 declares the General Government of every Province, as it was in his time, after the following manner.


The Towns which belong to the prime Provinces of 
Peking
 and 
Nanking,
 are Govern'd after the same manner as all the Cities and Towns in the other Provinces. The Government of each of the thirteen Provinces consists in a Magistrate call'd 
Pucinsu,
 and another nam'd 
Nanganzasu;
 the first determines Civil Causes, and the other Criminal: They keep their Courts in great State, and reside in the Metropolis of the Province. To both these belong several petty Officers, and also the chief Magistrates, which are call'd 
Tauli;
 but be∣cause they Command over several Cities they are sometimes absent from the Metropolis.


Every 
Fu
 
r County (for a Province is divided into divers Counties) hath a peculiar Governor call'd 
Chifu,
 that is, 
Lord of the County;
 and likewise over every great City, or 
Cheu,
 and over each Town, or 
Hien,
 is a Governor, the first call'd 
Chicheu,
 and the last 
Cihien.


These Governors of all the Counties, and chief Rulers of Cities, have every one four Assistants, which aid them in all Businesses that happen in their Ju∣risdiction, being all their Deputies.


The 
Chifu,
 or Governor of the County, hath his Residence in one of the Ci∣ties, and determineth all things as Chief; for when any Businesses are consult∣of by the 
Chicheu
 and 
Cihien,
 they acquaint him therewith as their Superior, and in the first Degree.


It is to be observ'd, that the 
Chifu,
 or Governors of the Territories, and his Court, and the whole County receive their Denomination from the City in which they reside: as for example, the Governor keeps his Court in the City 
Nunciang,
 and that City gives denomination to the whole County, Governor and Court, so that they are call'd 
Nunciangers.


But because an account must be given of the Government of every peculiar Province to the Court at 
Peking,
 therefore they Commission two other besides the fore-mention'd Magistrates to every Province from the Imperial City, to Su∣pervisor






to the rest: one of them resides constantly in the Province, and is call'd 
Tutam;
 the other is yearly sent from the Court, and nam'd 
Ciayven.
 The Command of the first being great over all the 
Mandarins,
 Magistrates, Subjects, 
Militia,
 and other grand Concerns, may be compar'd to the 
European
 Vice-Roys. The last resembles a Commissioner of Enquiry; yet by the Emperor's Com∣mands he hath an Eye over the Business of the whole Province, viewing of Cities and Castles, Examines all Magistrates, punisheth the meanest, informs the Emperor of the Misdemeanors of the Grandees, and after what manner every one officiates his Place, and is the onely Person amongst all the Magi∣strates in the Province that pronounces Sentence of Death; he is fear'd and respected by every one.


Besides these Magistrates, there are many others in Cities, Towns and Vil∣lages, as also many Generals and Collonels through the whole Empire, but especially in Places bordering the Sea, and Garisons. Thus far 
Trigaut.


All the Magistrates (saith the same 
Trigaut
) are under nine Orders; all com∣prehended under the Philosopher and Military Man. Every one in these Orders receives his Revenue from the publick Stock either in Rice or Mony, though but little in respect of their Authority; for the Salary of the prime and chief Order amounts not to above a thousand 
Ducats
 yearly. Those which are of the same Order receive Wages alike, whether Philosophers or Military Persons; for the chief of the Soldiers get as much as the Supream of the Learned.


All the Magistrates have a private Seal of their Office, given them by the
 Emperor 
Humvu.
 What they write in their Law they Seal onely with Red, which is a kind of Earth, so Red, that it is like a Vermilion, and digg'd out of the Mountain 
Tape,
 near the City 
Lingkien
 in the Province of 
Xanso.
 This Mark the 
Mandarins
 keep with great care, for upon the loss of it they are not onely put out of their Employments, but severely punish'd; wherefore when e're they go out they carry it with them in a Box, or Cabinet, Lockt up and Seal'd, which they never suffer to be out of their sights.


There is an excellent harmony, as 
Trigaut
 witnesseth, betwixt the superior and inferior Magistrates, and between the Governors and Privy-Council, and other Grandees and the Emperor; which they not onely manifest by their rea∣diness in obeying him, but also by outward appearance: for they never neg∣lect their usual Visits at certain times, nor the Ceremony of Presenting. Nei∣ther do the meaner Magistrates speak with the higher before the Bench, or else∣where, but upon their bended Knees, and with peculiar Reverence. The same Ceremony the Subjects use to the Governors of their Cities, notwithstanding they know that they never took their Degrees in Learning, and before their entrance to be Magistrates were chosen from amongst the meanest of the Com∣monalty.


All 
Chineses,
 if they follow any honorable Employment, though they are 
Mandarins,
 put on the Bonnet of their Office when they will speak, shew Reve∣rence, or appear before any of a higher Quality; for to come without, would be accounted uncivil.


The 
Mandarins
 Stools are round like Chirurgeons Chairs, the Back and Arms thereof cover'd with a Tygers Skin, or some other Beast. Their Beards are also set after the same manner, as may appear in the Sculp, wearing them very thin, and letting them grow down without either Clipping or Shaving their Mustacho's hanging downwards; they also shoot forth close by their Ears, but grow not down to their Lips, nor under their Chin, but most fre∣quently with three Whiskers on each side, and one underneath.


The 
Mandarins
 and other Grandees, nay the Emperor himself, let their Nails grow long, which they account no small sign of Gentility and Ornament. Some Ladies, because they would not break them, wear little Cases over them.


None of the Magistrates Officiate above three years in a publick Employ∣ment, except he be new Commission'd by the Emperor, but is generally pro∣moted to a higher Dignity. This is done because none should get too many Friends, or gain too much upon the Hearts of the People, in dependency of which he might practise against the State, as it hath often hapned.


The chiefest Governors of the Provinces, Counties and Cities, as the 
Pucin∣fu, Naganzafu, Cifu, Ciceu, Cihien,
 and the like, must every three years, according to the Emperor's Order, appear at the Court in 
Peking,
 and there shew Reve∣rence and Obeisance to the Emperor.


At the same time a general Muster is made at the Court of all the Magi∣strates, which through the whole Realm are plac'd in the several Provinces, as well of those that are there present as of those that are absent, where a strict Enquiry is made of their Behavior: From which Enquiry they conclude whom to depose, whom to promote, and whom to punish, without regarding or re∣specting of Persons; and the Emperor himself cannot alter any thing resolv'd on by the fore-mention'd Judges in this general Scrutiny.


Those that are to be punish'd are not the meanest, nor the fewest, but some∣times to the number of four thousand, whose Names are set down in a Book, which is afterwards Printed and publish'd to the whole Empire. Moreover, the Condemned are, according to 
Trigaut,
 divided into five Parties, or accord∣ing to 
Semedo,
 the chiefest Misdemeanors for which the 
Mandarins
 are punish'd, are chiefly seven: The first contains the Covetous, which have violated the Law by Bribes, and defrauded the Commonalty, and appropriated the Lands, Goods or Chattels of their Subjects unjustly to themselves: for which Offence they are not onely bereav'd of their Employments for ever, but also all the


Marks and Priviledges of Magistracy. Amongst the second are reckon'd such as have not punish'd the Criminals according to their desert, but conniv'd for favor or affection: these are also bereav'd of their Places, Liveries and Privi∣ledges. The third are very aged People, and those that are too negligent and slothful in their Offices; for which they lose their Employments, yet not their Marks and Priviledges. Amongst the fourth are reckon'd those which are heedless and hasty, pronouncing Sentence without any consideration, and go unadvisedly about publick Affairs: these are put into meaner Offices, or else sent to such Places in the Realm which are suppos'd to be of a more easie Go∣vernment. Amongst the last are those which Govern others and their own Families indiscreetly, and live debauch'd, contrary to the gravity of Magi∣strates: these are bereav'd of their Office and Quality for ever.


The same Examination is also perform'd with the Magistrate at the Court but once every year: And after the same manner, and at the same time with great strictness the Officers of the Soldiers are likewise Muster'd.


None in the whole Realm is Commission'd to Rule in that Province where∣in he was born, except onely Military Officers: This is done because the first should not favor their Friends or Relations; but the last out of a love to their native Countrey should defend it more carefully.


When any Lord Serves as Magistrate, none of his Sons or Servants may go out of the House, make Visits, Converse with any Persons, or Treat about any Business, for fear they should be suspected to take Bribes; but he is attend∣ed by Servants given to all Magistrates upon the publick Account. When he goes out himself, he Seals the Doors (either of publick or private Houses, wherein Justice is administred) with a Seal, that none of the Houshold can come out without his knowledge.


The whole Realm in the time of the 
Chineses
 was Govern'd by Philoso∣phers; to whom all the Soldiers and Commanders shew'd great Reverence, and a peculiar Ceremony and Respect. Of these Philosophers consisted the chief Council of War, their Designs and Contrivances being better respected by the Emperor than those of the 
Militia
 Officers, which seldom or never were call'd to Council: Wherefore none that were of a noble Mind and respected, concern'd themselves about Warlike Affairs, but rather endeavor'd to have the least Degree in the Council of Philosophers, than to be the greatest Comman∣der in Martial Concerns; the Philosophers enjoying the greater Estates, and being held in much higher esteem by the People. But since the 
Tartars
 Conquest of 
China,
 the Military Affairs are in greater Request, and the 
Chineses
 exercise them∣selves so much in Arms with the 
Tartars,
 that they lay aside their Learning.


Very strictly they observe the Governors and Commanders; for besides the 
Tauli
 and 
Quauli,
 which according to their Offices take cognisance of all Trans∣actions, and inform the Emperor thereof. Every Province hath a peculiar Vi∣sitor, which is to punish or accuse Offenders.


The Emperor retrenches all his Officers Charges, by which he bereaves them of the opportunity of making Parties, and running into Debt. So soon as any one receives a Commission for Employment, when he goes to take possession of it, all Charges for his Person, Servants and Family, besides those of his Jour∣ney, as well by Water as by Land, (under which are reckon'd Vessels, Wagons, Horses, Men, and all the rest of the Retinue) are paid out of the Emperor's privy Purse. He goes into no Inn all the Way which he passes, but Palaces are made ready in the Towns and Villages, with all Necessaries, in which he takes







gaping Mouthes; one hath two Horns on the Crown of his Head, with Ears and Hair like those of a Hog, with their Hands ty'd together in a Praying posture, for both are said to be Servants to 
Hoaquan;
 the other, which hath no Horns on his Head, but one which behind turns with a sharp Point, holds in his right Hand a Pike or Lance, with a Serpent wound about the top of it.


Above on the left side of 
Hoaquan
 appears a Dragon, as it were flying out from the Clouds; besides, all manner of horrid Representations stand either at the Entrance of the Temple, or behind the Images.


Another Idol call'd 
Vitek,
 and by others 
Ninifo,
 whom they suppose to have been a very wise Man, the 
Chineses
 honor with peculiar Reverence and bended Knees, which is perform'd by the grandest 
Mandarins,
 placing his Image on the Altars in the Temples, with burning Lamps and Perfuming-pans round about him. The Idol, a deformed Monster, is often represented after that manner, as appears by the inserted Sculp, with his Breast bare, a very great Head, large Teats, and Tun-belly, the left hand holding a Garland, and great Iron Rings in the Ears, from whence, they say, the use of Ear-rings came first into 
China.
 Other Images are made sitting with their Legs across under them, after the Eastern manner: Some pick their Ears with an Ear-picker, under which they hide a great Mystery; others with a Tool like a Curry-Comb, scrape their Shoulders and Necks; all which the 
Chineses,
 especially the vulgar, wor∣ship for great Saints, and Offer Perfumes, Meat, and several other things to them.


The Priests of this Sect are call'd 
Ociams
 or 
Hoxons,
 which against the Cu∣stom
 of the Countrey continually shave their Beards and Hair, but go Cloth'd like others, differing in nothing but their Bonnets: Some wander like 
Men∣dicants
 up and down the Countrey, asking Alms; others live like Recluses in the Recesses of Rocks and Mountains, where they suffer hard Penance; others
 in publick make narrow Chambers of Boards, struck full of Nails on all sides with the Points inwards, in which they lock themselves for a whole Moneth,
















and stand without Supporters; some promise to eat no Flesh, but drink onely 
Cha
 or 
Tee,
 into which they put Balls made of Beef and dry'd in the Sun before they drink it. There are others of this Sect that belong to no Cloysters, nor are receiv'd into them as Guests but onely for one day, being Exiles, Vaga∣bonds
 and Robbers: But the greatest part of them, being to the number of two or three Millions, live in the Cloysters of the Temples, and are maintain'd by the Revenues allow'd them of old by the Emperors that were liberal Be∣nefactors to their Fraternity; nevertheless they endeavor by one thing or other to maintain themselves: They despise (according to 
Semedo
) a Marry'd Life, living five or six hundred cloyster'd together. They also live (saith he) very strictly, eating neither Fish nor Eggs, nor drink Wine. These beg Alms, Sing, and perform peculiar Ceremonies and Prayers against Fire, Tempests, com∣mon Calamities, and sudden Death: In which Services they wear onely a Hood and Fan.


These Priests are accounted the meanest of the People, and Raff of the whole Empire, because they are all Extracted from the Vulgar: for in their Infancy being sold as Servants to the 
Osiams,
 they become Scholars, and succeed their Tutors in their Office and Service, an Invention found out by them to advance themselves; for there is never any found, that of his own free will, resolving to live a holy Life, that will go into the Cloysters amongst such Company.


Through Ignorance and ill Breeding the Slave-Pupils seldom improve themselves beyond their Tutors, but are just the same in their whole Demea∣nor; and as by Nature we have a propensity to Vice, not being cultivated, so they from time to time degenerate, growing worse; wherefore they learn no Morality, nor attain to the knowledge of Literature, except accidentally some, though very few, which naturally inclin'd to Learning, endeavor the same by their own Industry. Notwithstanding they have no Wives, they are so inclin'd to the Female Sex, that they cannot be kept from conversing with


common Strumpets but by great punishments, 
viz.
 those that attempt it are, if taken in the Act, burnt with a hot Iron through the Neck or Leg, in which they put an Iron Chain of eight or ten Fathom long, besides great Shackles; in which manner the Offender must walk naked along the Streets till he hath begg'd ten 
Tail
 of Silver for the benefit of his Cloyster: And that he may per∣form this Penance, one of his Fraternity goes along with him, and with a Whip severely draws Blood from his naked Skin: The Chain by reason of its great weight is also so troublesom to his Wound, that Blood and Corruption gushes out of it. Others are for several days put into little Houses like our Cages, driven full of Nails with the Points inward, wherein the Offender not being able to lie down, is forc'd to stand upright, without either Meat or Drink.


The Cloysters of these 
Osciams
 are built in Inclosures according to every ones bigness: every Inclosure hath a constant Treasurer or Governor, whom his Scholars which he hath bought for his Servants (whereof he hath as many as he will or can maintain) succeed as by Inheritance.


They acknowledge no Superior in these Cloysters; and every one erects as many Huts or Booths in his appointed Apartment as he can, which is customary through the whole Empire, yet chiefly in the Metropolis of 
Peking.
 The Cells when built they Let to their great advantage, to Strangers which come thither to Trade, which makes these Cloysters rather seem publick Inns than Places of Sanctity, regarding nothing less than the worshipping of Idols, or teaching that wicked Doctrine.


Though the Condition of the Inhabitants of these Cloysters is mean and despicable, yet nevertheless they are by many hir'd for a small Reward to per∣form Funeral Ceremonies, and some other such like Offices.


Now at present this Doctrine is not a little come into request again, many Temples being erected for the same. All the Followers thereof are either Eunuchs, Women, or ignorant People. Yet besides these there are some which boast themselves the prime Maintainers of this Doctrine, and are call'd 
Ciaicum,
 that is, 
Abstinentiaries,
 for they refrain in their Houses all their Life∣times from eating either Flesh or Fish, and reverently worship with Offerings and Prayers a row of Images, and sometime are sent for to their Neighbors Houses to Pray with them.


The Women, separated from the Men, maintain this retir'd Life in Cloy∣sters, and shaving the Hair from the Crown of their Heads, despise Marriage. The 
Chineses
 call them 
Nicu,
 which signifies 
A Nun;
 but not many of them live together, and are far less in number than the Men. Thus far 
Trigaut.


These Cloysters (according to 
Semedo
) are very large; the Walls which sur∣round them makes them seem like a City, divided into Streets, open places, and inhabited Houses, in each of which two or three have their Residences, 
viz.
 a Master and his Scholars, which are sufficiently provided for; and also all the Houses receive an equal proportion of the Emperor's Allowance.


The Governor of the Cloyster, who hath the general Command over all, takes no cognisance but of peculiar Businesses which are brought before him; and what concerns other things, and the Government of their Houses, he leaves to themselves. Yet nevertheless he gives Offices, and Titles to those that are to receive Strangers, whoe're he be that comes to see their Cloysters, and beat on a Drum that stands at the Gate; they are oblig'd to go before him to the number of thirty in their Ceremonial Habit: Coming to him they Sa∣lute


him, and walk before him to the Place where he desires to be; which they do again at his Return. They are under the Jurisdiction of the 
Council of Customs;
 but upon the Executing of Punishments, when deserv'd, they are us'd more favourably than when Tri'd by the common Law.


The Disciples or Followers of this Doctrine, which at this Day are in great numbers, live together, never Marry, let the Hair of their Head and Beards grow very long, and wear ordinary Clothes, which differ little from the other in fashion, except in one thing, which shews that they are in Service; for in stead of a Bonnet they wear a little Garland, which covers just the Crown of their Heads. They account the last and greatest Good of Mankind to consist in bodily Goods, and the enjoyment of a quiet and peaceable Life, without toyl or trouble; They acknowledge two Deities, the one more powerful than the other; They allow one Paradice and a Hell: the Paradice, which (ac∣cording to their saying is joyn'd to the satisfaction of the Body) is not onely for another Life, but also for this on Earth, and consists herein, that by means of a certain Exercise and Obedience, some that are old may become young Children; others may make themselves 
Xinsien,
 that is, 
Happy on Earth,
 to pos∣sess what they please speedily with a wish, flie from one place to another, though very remote, and go to Feasts, and the like. They are lovers of Mu∣sick, and use several Instruments; on which account they are invited to Fune∣rals and publick Solemnities, and serve the Emperor and 
Mandarins
 in making their Offerings; They boast themselves to be Soothsayers, and promise to pro∣cure Rain, and clear Houses haunted by Spirits.


All the 
Chineses
 are strangely inclin'd to Superstition, but especially the Fol∣lowers of this second Sect, and give great credit to Sorcery, and Predictions of future things.


The Emperor's Astronomers (according to 
Semedo
) do not a little uphold this Superstition, because they foreshew ensuing Events from the colour of the Heavens and tempestuous Weather, Thunder out of Season, by several aspects of the Sun, which they reckon to be twenty two, and from sixteen other Appearances; with all which they acquaint the Emperor: And they chiefly employ their time in foretelling either Peace or War; as also Sicknesses, Death, Changes, Insurrections, and the like: to which purpose they make Almanacks, or yearly Prognostications, which are divided into Moons, and the Moons again into Days, the Days into fortunate or unfortunate Hours, either to undertake any thing or let it alone, as to go a Journey, remove out of a House, Marry, bury the Dead, build Houses, and the like.


By this manner of Cheating the 
Chineses
 are so deluded, and so strictly do
 they follow these Observations, that they govern themselves wholly thereby; for if the Almanack commands to do any thing on such a Day, though all the Elements were against it, they will not neglect it.


These Astronomers, according to a very ancient Custom, are punish'd with Death, if they through neglect do not foretell the Eclipse of the Sun and Moon, or accidentally commit any mistakes in their Prognostication: for the 
Chineses
 account it a deadly sin not to assist the Sun or Moon when they are darkned, with Offerings and beating of Drums, and other noise, fearing else they would be devour'd by a Dog or Dragon: wherefore the Emperor in∣form'd by People experienc'd in the Course of the Heavens, of the approach∣ing Darkness, immediately sends Messengers Post through all the Cities of the Empire to give notice of the Day and Hour on which the Eclipse will hap∣pen:


whereupon the Magistrates and Citizens carefully watch for the time, and prevent the threatning danger by beating on divers tinkling and Copper Basons.


They have Temples that are drawn or Carriages made for that purpose, in which the Women deliver out their Almanacks; wherein a Receipt is written how they may Conceive.


Trigaut
 saith, that no superstitious Custom hath spread it self so far through the whole Empire, as that in the observation of fortunate and unfortunate Days and Hours; so that the 
Chineses
 in all their Actions observe the time exactly: To which purpose two sorts of Almanacks are Printed every year, which upon the Emperor's Command are dispersed through the whole Em∣pire, which makes the Fallacy the more believ'd.


These annual Prognostications are sold in such abundance, that most Houses have them: In them they find what they too punctually observe, not onely the critical Days, but the precise Hours and Minutes at what time they shall begin or desist in any Negotiation or Business whatsoever. Besides, these Writers of the annual Predictions go higher, Composing for their profit Books more puzling and mysterious, with large Comments on the good and evil Days, with more accurate Directions, especially concerning Buildings, Marriages, or Travel, and the like Business of consequence; and though it often happens that the Weather fall out tempestuous, let it Thunder and Lighten, Blow or Rain, yet they will begin, though they make never so little progress.


Nasirodin,
 a 
Persian
 Author, who flourish'd 
Anno
 1265. tells us, that the 
Chi∣neses,
 by him call'd 
Katayans,
 have a Circle of twelve Days, which according to the Instruction of the Astronomers, they use in chusing the time to under∣take or delay any Business of consequenc.


These twelve Days are by the 
Chineses
 call'd as followeth:




Ching,
 that is, Perfecting.


Xeu,
 that is, Receiving.


Cai,
 that is, Opening.


Pi,
 that is, Locking.


Ting,
 that is, Affirming.


Che,
 that is, Serving.


Po,
 that is, Breaking.


Vi,
 that is, Running danger.


Kin,
 that is, Raising.


Chu,
 that is, Dividing.


Muen,
 that is, Exchanging.


Ping,
 that is, Making even.




Four of these twelve Days are call'd 
He,
 that is 
Black,
 and are accounted unfortunate; four 
Hoang,
 that is, 
Yellow,
 which are lucky, and promise some good; two 
Hoen,
 that is, 
Brown and Dark,
 and esteem'd ominous.


Others undertake to tell Fortunes by even and odd Numbers, and with white or black Representations of Men and Beasts, which they alter sixty four times to please the liberal Inquisitor. Some (after our manner) pick Pockets by Calculating Nativities, and from thence tell the Fortune that shall attend a Man in his whole Life; Others wheedle them out of their Money, by Phi∣siognomy and Palmestry, and such Gipsie-like tricks; others by Dreams; some from certain words which they observe in speaking; divers from the shape of the Body, or sitting of a Person, and an innumerable many actions more. Others go farther, selling the Winds, and fair or foul Weather, and take upon them the Dominion of the floating Element; for when any Mer∣chants have Ships at Sea, or some ready to set Sail, they address themselves to






these, who live on the Shores or Banks of the Rivers, that they may have a speedy and safe Voyage. They generally reside two and two together, as you may see by this Sculp; one sits on a Bench betwixt two great Bun∣dles of Rushes, wearing a flat Cap on his Head, and on his Body a wide Coat, carelesly folded about him, in his left Hand a Book, in which Reading he mutters a considerable time. Next him sits his Companion on two Fish-Baskets, likewise with a flat Cap, and the upper part of his Body almost naked, behind over his right Shoulder hangs a blown-up Bag, out of which he lets as much Wind as any one is minded to purchase; in his left Hand he holds a great Mallet, with which he strikes several times hard on the Ground, that the Spi∣rit of the Winds, (who, as they make them believe, appears in the Air, sitting on a great Bird in the shape of a Man, with a broad brimm'd Hat and a wide Coat) may descend. But this Fancy is not so much practis'd of late.


The 
Romans
 and 
Greeks
 agreed herein with the 
Chineses,
 and most of it is at this day us'd amongst them: one thing there is which may properly be said to be the 
Chineses;
 it consists in the chusing of Land to build private or publick Structures upon, or bury the Dead in, chusing it by the likeness of the Head, Tail and Feet of several Dragons, which they suppose to live under Ground, and believe, that on them the welfare, not onely of Families, but also of Ci∣ties, Provinces, and the whole Empire depends.


The 
Chineses
 account one Dragon, whom they call 
Lung,
 for the greatest fore-runner of good Luck.


Before the time of the Family of 
Hia,
 nay, the Emperor 
Fohi,
 who began his Reign 
Anno
 2952. before the Birth of 
Christ,
 it is said, That a Dragon was seen flying from a Pool; and to make the Business seem of greater conse∣quence and consideration, they added, That they had observ'd sixty four Marks or Characters on his Back, which, according to their Sages, have my∣sterious significations.


The 
Chineses
 in a manner ascribe all things to a Dragon, and believe, that


not onely all humane Fortune, but also Rain, Hail, Thunder and Lightning, are as that Monster orders. They also affirm, That there is a Dragon under the Earth, but chiefly under the Mountains; and this is the reason why with such great Care and Charge they observe the parts of the Dragon in the making of their Graves; for according to the goodness of the Earth they value the Riches and Fortune of the whole Family; just as the Astronomers, from the Conjunction of several Planets, prognosticate future Events. For this reason also the 
Chinese
 Emperors bear a Dragon in their Arms, as the 
Romans
 an Eagle; nay, the Emperor's Apparel is Embroider'd with Dragons, and like∣wise on all the Furniture for his Table and whole House is Engraven the same; nay, the whole Court is every where full of painted Dragons.


But above all it is to be admir'd, that the 
Chineses
 paint five Claws at the Feet of the Emperor's Dragons. None but those who are of Imperial Blood, or peculiar Favourites of the Emperor, may bear a Dragon in his Coat of Arms: yet if others do use this same Bearing, they must on pain of Death not give above four Claws.


They say that the Foam of a Dragon impregnated one of the Emperor 
Ie
's Concubines without the use of a Man: which Fable the 
Chineses
 thus relate:


In the time of the Family of 
Hia
 (say they) a Dragon was seen, which vanish'd on a sudden, and left a Froth on the Earth: This Froth being of a Dragon, was like a costly, nay, that which is more, a holy Relick, and lock'd up in a golden Coffer, and preserv'd till the Reign of the Emperor 
Siveni;
 when afterward at his Command, without knowing wherefore, the Chest was open'd, and this Slime leap'd forth as if it had been living, and ran to and again through the Palace, none being able to hold it, and at last got into the 
Seraglio,
 and there divirginated one of great Beauty, kept for the Emperor; from hence, after the full time (as the 
Chineses
 relate) she was deliver'd of a fair Female: The Mother fearing to gain an ill Name, and the Emperor's displeasure, laid down the Infant, which two Marry'd Peo∣ple, that accidentally walk'd by there, hearing it cry, took up, and carrying it home, brought it up as their own Child.


In the third Year of the Emperor 
Ie
's Reign the fore-mention'd Infant being grown Marriagable, her Foster-father was on some occasion accus'd of a certain Crime, and put in Prison: whereupon he proffering the Virgin (who was endu'd with incomparable Beauty) for his Ransom to the Emperor, was not onely released, but return'd home with great Riches. But the Em∣peror was so strangely surpris'd with the exceeding Beauty of his new Mistris, that he was in a manner distracted, and forsook the lawful Empress, and his Son born by her, and took 
Paosua
 (for so the Virgin was call'd) for his Spouse, and elected 
Pefo,
 the Son of 
Paosua,
 in stead of 
Ikie,
 the lawful Son of the Empress, to succeed him in the Throne, against the consent of all his Substitute Governors.


Ikie
 the true Heir, being enrag'd by the great wrong which he had suffer'd, fled from his Father to his Uncle King 
Xin,
 in the South part of the Province of 
Xensi,
 at the place where the City 
Nanyang
 stands at this day.


Paosua
 during this time dwelt with the Emperor in all prosperity; but one thing he observ'd, that he never saw her Laugh, which was very unpleasing to him; therefore he try'd several ways to win a Smile from her. At the same time a Difference arising, and overtures and threatnings of War being betwixt him and the 
Tartars,
 he put his 
Militia
 in a posture of Defence; which done,


and to teach them Alarms, he fir'd his Beacons when there was no need: whereupon the Palaces, and all places every where were throng'd with the gather'd Soldiers; which too often repeating, and no appearance of any Enemy, gave her occasion to laugh heartily, to the great joy of the fond Emperor: Which false Alarms being so commonly, when they came to be real, and not being believ'd, brought on that negligent carelesness in not obeying, that it lost him his Life and Empire.


Amongst other things also, 
Paosua
 took great delight in the noise which Silk makes when torn by force; wherefore the Emperor to recreate her, always spent his time in her Presence, with tearing and rending of Silk.


Mean while the Emperor sent a Party to King 
Xin
 to fetch his fled Son again; but 
Xin
 refus'd to deliver the Prince, unless he should be declar'd Heir to the Empire: The Emperor enrag'd thereat, march'd with an Army against 
Xin;
 who unequal to the Emperor, yet of greater Policy, joyn'd with the 
Tartars,
 and in the Night falls suddenly on the Emperor's Quarters: where∣upon the Beacons being fir'd as before, the Soldiers seeing the Flame, suppos'd that the Emperor as formerly was onely caressing of his Empress, neglected their Duties; and therefore making no resistance, most of them were taken sleeping by the Enemy, and the Emperor himself slain by his Brother and Son.


But to return; As 
Trigaut
 tells us, several eminent Persons Study this My.
 stery of Dragon-Knowledge, and are sent for from remote Places to advise withal when publick Buildings are to be erected, that they may so lay their Platform suting with the benevolent Signatures from the posture of the Dra∣gon, that the Edifice may for ever after be more free from Casualties: for these Astronomers, as our Astrologers, observe the good and evil Aspects of the Planets, with the several Configurations of the fixed Stars, so they take their Marks from the situation of Mountains and Rivers, and whatever else makes a variety, that signifies good success, on which they say, not onely the preservation of the House, but the welfare and Honor of the Family depends.


Semedo
 calls these Surveyors 
Tili.
 
Others (saith he) which they call 
Tili,
 endeavor to to observe, not onely the Situation of the Earth, but the Posi∣tions of the Planetary Aspects in the celestial Houses, so to make more hap∣py their terrestrial Habitations.


It is a very ancient Custom, and us'd to this day, to take their Observations of good or ill success, from the Colour, Spots, Motions, Legs, and Shell of a Tortoise. And likewise, as the 
Augurs
 of old, from the Notes of Birds, and noise of Beasts, and also whate're they meet with in the Morning, the reflect∣ing shadows of the Sun on peculiar Houses; for if at their going out in the Morning they meet any one in Mourning Apparel at their Door, 
Bonzies
 or the like, they look upon it as an ill Omen. In short, whatsoever inconvenience happens to peculiar Houses, Cities, Provinces, or the whole Empire, they ascribe it to their miserable Fortune, or something or other that is wrongly plac'd in the Houses, Towns, or the Emperors Palace.


All Streets, Shops and Markets, are full of these Astronomers, Surveyors, Soothsayers, Prognosticators, or in a word, Juglers and Deluders, promising good Fortune to all. Many of these are blind, and most of them poor People, yet notwithstanding they will still hearken to their cheating Fopperies. The blind Men run along the Streets playing on Pipes, but the Women beat on lit∣tle Kettles, whereby they give notice to all those that will be cozen'd and






know their Fortunes. Neither are obscure Hamlets onely full of these Delu∣ders, but also great Cities and Courts of Grandees swarm with them; with which Practice onely some maintain themselves, keep brave Houses, and ga∣ther great Riches; for High and Low, Noble and Ignoble, nay, the Emperor himself, and all the Magistrates respect them.


They say that some of these Fortune-tellers reside on desolate and solitary Mountains, between the Clefts of Rocks and barren Hills like Hermits; whi∣ther also great numbers of People resort to know the Events of future things. Some onely write strange Characters and▪ 
Chinese
 Letters on Boards, contain∣ing the future Condition of the Enquirers; yet their promising oftentimes hath a double meaning.


These Wizards have many times horrible Toads that sit near them, with a thick gray speckled Skin, and opening their Jaws, (as they say) with their poisonous Breath blast and wither the Grass round about them.


These generally sit bare-headed, being close shaven, and with their Feet naked, picking their Ears whilst they mutter several words to themselves.


In the time of the Emperor 
Hiaou,
 who Reigned 
Anno
 142. before the Nati∣vity of 
Christ,
 many Women, especially at the Emperor's Court, Studied Ma∣gick and Charms, by which making themselves to appear much fairer than they were, they subjected the Male Sex according to their pleasures. Of these some got into the Prince 
Guei
's Court, the Emperor's Son begotten by a lawful Wife, but without his knowledge, because he, according to the 
Chinese
 Wri∣tings, was of a good and pious Nature: but attaining to years, he betook him∣self, being ensnar'd by the fore-mention'd Charms, wholly to lasciviousness.


Amongst other things, they say there are certain Drugs, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Kuan,
 which if the Powder thereof be given any Man to drink by a Woman, it makes them mad after them, like our Love-Powders: But they had worse Ingredients, with which they occasion'd Distempers, nay, Death on whom∣soe're they pleas'd; by which means 
Li,
 the Emperor's Son, begotten by one


of his Concubines, was kill'd in the nineteenth Year of his Age, together with his Wife, Children, and most of his Family, except one Nephew.


But the whole Empire is strangely besotted with the study of 
Alchymie,
 there∣by
 to get the 
Philosophers-Stone,
 by which they not only Inrich themselves by turning all things to Gold and Silver, but also that 
Elixar
 makes them 
Immor∣tal,
 which many Emperors before and since the 
Nativity
 have endeavor'd to at∣tain to.


The 
Chineses
 affirm, That there are Rules and Commandments of both these Arts, found out first by very Ancient, Learned, (which the 
Chineses
 reckon amongst their 
Saints
) and afterwards from one to another, deliver'd to their Successors: They say also, that these first Inventors, after having▪ perform'd many excellent and soveraign Works, ascend both with Soul and 
 toge∣ther to Heaven, when they began to grow weary living on Earth.


They also tell us, That anciently a Person liv'd without the Walls of the City 
Nanchang,
 which assisted many needy People, and 
ast p
ntiful▪ Alms amongst the Poor, because he by the Art of 
Chymistry
 could make pure Silver. He also (say they) had by the help of Divine Arts, a Dragon, who threaten'd the Ruine of the City; after which, having Chain'd him to an Iron Column of an exceeding bigness, he, his whole House and Family ascended up to Hea∣ven; For this reason, the Citizens out of a Superstition, erected a great Chap∣pel for him; and the foremention'd Iron Column, the better to keep up the re∣putation of the Fable, is there to be seen at this day.


But however they decline the converting of Metals into Gold or Silver by the 
Stone,
 yet the Emperor himself, and most Eminent Persons of the Empire, make it a great part of their business to study 
Immortality,
 from the promis'd Restauration of Youth, by the wonderful Operations of this 
Elixar:
 To which purpose, as there are many Students, so there is no want of Masters; and the whole City of 
Peking
 every where pester'd with their Laboratories; and though never so much deluded, yet fresh hopes carry them on with a fervent desire to bring their Work to Perfection; being perswaded by these 
Mountebanks,
 that their failings happen'd from some mistakes, but now, if they would begin again, they make no question, being since better inform'd, to finish the so long expected and happy Work.


But before we leave our 
Alchymists,
 take this from 
Martinius,
 which he tells of the Emperor 
Hiaou,
 who had not his equal amongst the 
Chineses,
 He was as their Histories say, much transported with a belief, that by this Art he might not onely be the Wealthiest, the Happiest, and the Greatest of all Princes, but also be Crown'd with Immortality: From hence he receiv'd the Title of 
Van Sin,
 that is, 
Ten thousand Years,
 which hath descended to all the Emperors to this Day.


To this great purpose he built a new Palace accordingly, all of Cedar, Cy∣press, Camphire, and the like sweet smelling Woods; the scent of which, as they say, might be perceiv'd (
a
) twenty one 
Chinese
 Furlongs from thence.


Amidst this wonderful Structure, he rais'd a Tower all of Copper, of twen∣ty Rods high, (a marvellous piece of Work) with a winding Pair of Stairs in the middle, from the bottom to the top: There was also a Copper Bason, Cast in the form of a Hand, which every Morning was fill'd with early De
v, wherein the Emperor steep'd the Oriental Pearls to soften them, being part of the Preparations of the Medicines of 
Immortality:
 But at last they wrought up∣on his Belief so far, that the 
Elexar
 was ready, which Drinking, would so per∣petuate


Youth, that he should live according to his Title, 
Ten thousand Years,
 that is, 
He should be Immortal.


The Longevity-Potion being brought, was set on the Table, which should begin the Work of 
Youths Renovation;
 when one of his Councellors, a Minister of State, first disswading him from the taking of it, suddenly threw the Liquor down upon the Floor; at which, the Emperor much incens'd that he should lose his expectation of 
Immortality,
 which had cost so much time and treasure in Preparing, consulted with what Death he should punish so bold an Offen∣der; when he that stood thus liable to his fury, spake thus mildly and undis∣compos'd to him.


Sir, You cannot put me to Death, for I have drunk the same Medicine of
 Immortali∣ty 
already, and am
 Immortal; 
so if I die I am guiltless, because the Medicine wants the promised Efficacy, and therefore use your pleasure; yet I suspect, that if your Indignation fall upon me, what I have drunk will be of no Defence, and I feel I shall certainly suffer Death, being conscious of the Deceit of these that are Trapanners for Bread.
 Which mol∣lifying Speech so pacify'd the Emperor, that he gave him his Life; yet how∣soever, the Emperor prosecuted the same business, to make himself 
Rich, Hapyy,
 and 
Immortal.


There are also a third kind of Philosophers, by 
Semedo
 call'd 
Taokiao,
 and by 
Trigaut,
 from the first Promoter, 
Lonzu;
 as likewise by 
Semedo, Tunsi
 or 
Tusi,
 being the first broacher of this Doctrine, which agrees with the 
Epicureans,
 who affirm, 
 That there is no pleasure after death, and therefore they indulge what e're in their life seems to be easie and happy, so to prolong their lives, to continue their present welfare they use all means possible, and not onely study Longevity, but also how to be Immortal by ingenious discoveries for self-preservation.


But though 
Laotan
 accounts the 
Summum Bonum
 to consist in Pleasures, yet 
Martinius
 finds him to be no way Atheistical, but declares it every where pro∣bable, that 
Laotan
 hath acknowledg'd one Supream Deity, saying, 
Tao, or Great Understanding hath no Name; he hath Created Heaven and Earth, he is without shape; moves the Stars, though he himself is immoveable; and because I know not his Name, I will call him
 Tao, 
or Supream Understanding, without form.


The same Philosopher makes mention in another place, of 
The Creation of the Heavens.


It is not to be credited, what the Fathers report out of their Stories con∣cerning this Philosopher 
Laotan,
 that he lay conceal'd, being lock'd up in his Mothers Womb eighty one, or according to 
Trigaut
 eighty years; and after∣wards forc'd his passage into the World through her right side; wherefore ac∣cording to 
Trigaut
 he is call'd 
Lauzu,
 and by 
Martinius, Laosu;
 and and last of all, 
Laotan,
 that is, 
Old Philosopher:
 The time of his Maturation, or rather Im∣prisonment in the Womb, was (as they say) nine times nine Years, which the 
Chineses
 account the fulness of Perfection, and all things that are perfect: And because 
Laotan
 was one of their greatest and most learned Stages, they invented the foremention'd number, as if Nature had spent so many Years in perfecting of him.


This 
Laotan
 was born in the Kingdom of 
Zu,
 (for 
China
 contain'd anciently many and several Kingdoms) at this day the County 
Fungyangfu,
 of the Pro∣vince of 
Nanking,
 in the City 
Mao, Anno
 603▪ about twenty four Years before 
Confut,
 the Prime Philosopher amongst the 
Chineses.


The third Sect (saith 
Martinius
) is also like the 
Epicurean,
 they place Happi∣ness
 in Pleasures, and make it their chief studie to prolong their Life, expect∣ing nothing after Death. Amongst this are many Sorcerers, and such as use Magick, and is indeed the vilest of all Sects; the followers thereof nevertheless praise the Morality of our 
European
 Doctrine.


According to 
Trigaut, Laotan
 left not one Book of his Doctrine, nor as it ap∣pears, would teach no new Opinion; but some of his followers call'd 
Tansu,
 after his death, nam'd him, 
The Head of Learning,
 and Collected several Books in a handsome Stile, from divers other Opinions and Writings. These also live unmarry'd in Cloysters, in which they make their Pupils, and are as leud and wicked, as the followers of the foremention'd. They never cut the Hair of their Heads, but are distinguish'd from others, by wearing a Hat or Bonnet of Wood upon the knot which ties the Hair on the Crown of their Heads.


Other of this Sect that are Marry'd, with great Zeal observe the Tenets of their Fraternity at home in their own Houses: They Honor, as they say, amongst many other Images, 
The Lord, or King of the Heavens,
 but one that is Bodily, and as they say in their Books, hath had many troubles: They also affirm, That 
the King of the Heavens,
 which Reigns at this day, is call'd 
Ciam;
 but he who Govern'd them formerly, was nam'd 
Leu.
 This 
Leu,
 say they, on a certain time sitting on a white Dragon, descended to the Earth, and invited 
Ciam
 (who they affirm was a Magician) to a Dinner: But whilst 
Leu,
 making himself merry at the Table, 
Ciam
 getting upon the White Dragon, ascended up to Heaven, and took possession of the Celestial Realm.


Leu
 thus prevented from returning by 
Ciam,
 yet obtain'd a Grant from 
The new King of Heaven,
 for the Dominion over certain Mountains in this Countrey, where they suppose he still lives, bereav'd of his old Dignity.


They Worship therefore according to their own confession, a foraign Rob∣ber and Tyrant for their God.


Besides this their Supream Power, they Worship another, which is a triple Deity, one of which is 
Lauzu,
 the chief of their Sect.


These also hold forth Rewards after Death; and many of those which are most Holy, and observe their Rules, enter Soul and Body into Paradice, being capable of all Heavenly Joy; which to affirm, they shew many Images of the Departed, which were translated thither in the Flesh.


The peculiar Office of the Priests of this Sect is to clear Houses, which they believe are haunted with Evil Spirits, which they do by setting up Papers Painted with horrid Resemblances, and making a hideous cry and noise through all the Rooms, as if they were Possest themselves.


These Priests have their Residences in the Emperor's Temples, Consecrated to Heaven and Earth, and in Person attend the Emperor's Sacrifices, either when he Offers himself, or his foremention'd Magistrates, by which means they are in great esteem and request.


The Musick which fills up the Ceremony, the Priests perform themselves, Playing on several Instruments which may be pleasing to them, but seems very harsh to us of 
Europe.


They are also sent for to Funerals of the Grandees, before which they walk in costly Habits, Playing on Horns, Sagbuts, and other Instruments: They also spend their time in warming new Houses, and conduct new Marry'd People alongst the Streets in State, which at certain times is done at the charge and appointment of the Magistrates.




A Correct TIDE TABLE shewing the tr
e Times of the High-Waters at 
London-Fridge
 to every day in the Year, 1692. By 
IOHN FLAMS
EED,
 M. R. S. S.




1692.


Ianuary


Februar.


March.


April.


May.


Iune.


Iuly.


August.


Septemb.


October.


Novem.


Decemb.






Days.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.


H.


 


M.






1


M


7


 


18


8


 


55


8


 


40


10


 


18


10▪


☉


22


11


 


15


11


 


43


1


 


05


2


 


30


2


 


56


4


 


07


4


 


23






A


7


 


47


9


 


31


9


 


16


10


 


40


10


49


11


 


45


 


 


 


1


 


35


2


 


50


3


 


17


4


 


26


4


 


40






2


M


8


 


18


10


 


09


9


 


48


11


 


13


11


 


5


 


 


 


0


 


18


2


 


01


3


 


10


3


☉


37


4


 


47


4


 


58






A


8


 


51


10


 


45


10


 


19


11


 


39


11


 


41


0


 


17


0


 


52


2


 


25


3


 


28


3


56


5


 


09


5


 


16






3


M


9


☉


26


11


 


20


10


 


50


☉


 


 


 


 


0


 


50


1


☉


24


2


 


47


3


 


46


4


 


16


5


 


32


5


 


35






A


10


02


11


 


53


11


 


20


0


03


0


 


06


1


 


19


1


53


3


 


07


4


 


04


4


 


37


5


 


57


5


 


55






4


M


10


 


38


 


 


 


11


 


48


0


 


27


0


 


33


1


 


47


2


 


20


3


 


26


4


☉


23


4


 


59


6


 


1


6


☉


15






A


11


 


13


0


 


23


 


 


 


0


 


50


0


 


58


2


 


14


2


 


43


3


 


43


4


43


5


 


24


6


 


46


6


36






5


M


11


 


49


0


 


51


0


 


15


1


 


11


1


 


21


2


☉


39


3


 


03


4


 


00


5


 


05


5


 


51


7


 


11


6


 


58






A


 


 


 




 


16


0


 


42


1


 


33


1


 


44


3


01


3


 


22


4


 


18


5


 


29


6


 


19


7


 


35


7


 


20






6


M


0


 


3


1


 


39


1


☉


05


1


 


54


2


 


07


3


 


21


3


 


41


4


 


36


5


 


58


6


 


48


8


☉


01


7


 


43






A


0


 


52


2


 


00


1


26


2


 


14


2


 


30


3


 


41


3


 


59


4


 


53


6


 


27


7


 


18


8


29


8


 


07






7


M


1


 


19


2


☉


18


1


 


45


2


 


32


2


 


53


3


 


59


4


 


16


5


☉


14


6


 


57


7


 


48


8


 


55


8


 


33






A


1


 


45


2


34


2


 


04


2


 


50


3


 


14


4


 


18


4


 


33


5


37


7


 


31


8


 


18


9


 


20


8


 


59






8


M


2


 


08


2


 


50


2


 


21


3


 


07


3


☉


34


4


 


36


4


 


5


6


 


03


8


 


05


8


 


49


9


 


45


9


 


27






A


2


 


29


3


 


04


2


 


37


3


 


24


3


53


4


 


56


5


 


11


6


 


30


8


 


42


9


 


20


10


 


12


9


 


55






9


M


2


 


48


3


 


17


2


 


53


3


 


42


4


 


12


5


 


17


5


 


33


7


 


00


9


 


15


9


☉


48


10


 


39


10


 


26






A


3


 


04


3


 


30


3


 


08


3


 


59


4


 


32


5


 


38


5


 


56


7


 


34


9


 


48


10


17


11


 


07


10


 


57






10


M


3


☉


19


3


 


42


3


 


24


4


☉


18


4


 


53


6


 


03


6


☉


21


8


 


11


10


 


20


10


 


45


11


 


33


11


 


28






A


3


34


3


 


55


3


 


38


4


37


5


 


15


6


 


27


6


47


8


 


47


10


 


51


11


 


1


11


 


59


11


 


59






11


M


3


 


48


4


 


08


3


 


53


4


 


58


5


 


38


6


 


51


7


 


15


9


 


23


11


☉


21


11


 


36


 


 


 


 


☉


 






A


4


 


01


4


 


22


4


 


08


5


 


20


6


 


04


7


 


18


7


 


47


9


 


59


11


49


 


 


 


0


 


26


0


30






12


M


4


 


14


4


 


37


4


 


25


5


 


46


6


 


30


7


☉


47


8


 


21


10


 


35


 


 


 


0


 


00


0


 


51


0


 


59






A


4


 


28


4


 


54


4


 


43


6


 


14


6


 


57


8


17


8


 


57


11


 


11


0


 


16


0


 


25


1


 


15


1


 


29






13


M


4


 


42


5


 


14


5


☉


02


6


 


43


7


 


26


8


 


50


9


 


35


11


 


44


0


 


41


0


 


48


1


☉


38


1


 


56






A


4


 


56


5


 


35


5


24


7


 


15


7


 


57


9


 


24


1


 


14


 


 


 


1


 


03


1


 


10


2


01


2


 


20






14


M


5


 


11


5


☉


59


5


 


50


7


 


48


8


 


28


9


 


59


10


 


51


0


☉


15


1


 


24


1


 


31


2


 


23


2


 


42






A


5


 


27


6


25


6


 


18


8


 


22


8


 


59


10


 


35


11


 


28


0


43


1


 


44


1


 


51


2


 


44


3


 


03






15


M


5


 


45


6


 


54


6


 


48


8


 


56


9


☉


31


11


 


12


 


 


 


1


 


09


2


 


04


2


 


11


3


 


04


3


 


22






A


6


 


06


7


 


26


7


 


21


9


 


31


10


03


11


 


48


0


 


03


1


 


33


2


 


21


2


 


30


3


 


24


3


 


39






16


M


6


 


28


8


 


01


7


 


57


10


 


06


10


 


36


 


 


 


0


 


35


1


 


54


2


 


37


2


☉


47


3


 


42


3


 


57






A


6


 


52


8


 


39


8


 


34


10


 


39


11


 


10


0


 


23


1


 


05


2


 


13


2


 


53


3


04


4


 


00


4


 


14






17


M


7


☉


19


9


 


19


9


 


12


11


☉


12


11


 


43


0


 


56


1


☉


32


2


 


30


3


 


07


3


 


20


4


 


18


4


 


32






A


7


49


9


 


59


9


 


51


11


44


 


 


 


1


 


27


1


55


2


 


46


3


 


22


3


 


37


4


 


37


4


 


50






18


M


8


 


23


10


 


39


10


 


28


 


 


 


0


 


15


1


 


55


2


 


18


3


 


01


3


☉


37


3


 


54


4


 


57


5


☉


09






A


8


 


59


11


 


19


11


 


05


0


 


16


0


 


47


2


 


20


2


 


37


3


 


15


3


51


4


 


12


5


 


19


5


29






19


M


9


 


37


11


 


57


11


 


38


0


 


46


1


 


17


2


☉


41


2


 


55


3


 


29


4


 


07


4


 


32


5


 


41


5


 


51






A


10


 


18


 


 


 


 


 


 


1


 


14


1


 


46


3


00


3


 


11


3


 


41


4


 


24


4


 


49


6


 


05


6


 


14






20


M


10


 


58


0


 


32


0


☉


10


1


 


40


2


 


13


3


 


18


3


 


25


3


 


54


4


 


42


5


 


12


6


☉


31


6


 


38






A


11


 


38


1


 


03


0


40


2


 


06


2


 


37


3


 


34


3


 


39


4


 


07


5


 


00


5


 


36


6


58


7


 


04






21


M


 


 


 


1


☉


32


1


 


09


2


 


29


2


 


59


3


 


50


3


 


52


4


☉


21


5


 


21


6


 


03


7


 


25


7


 


33






A


0


 


16


1


57


1


 


36


2


 


50


3


 


18


4


 


06


4


 


05


4


36


5


 


45


6


 


30


7


 


52


8


 


05






22


M


0


 


52


2


 


20


2


 


00


3


 


11


3


☉


39


4


 


22


4


 


19


4


 


52


6


 


11


6


 


59


8


 


22


8


 


39






A


1


 


24


2


 


41


2


 


23


3


 


31


3


56


4


 


37


4


 


33


5


 


11


6


 


40


7


 


30


8


 


54


9


 


15






23


M


1


 


54


3


 


01


2


 


45


3


 


51


4


 


14


4


 


52


4


 


47


5


 


32


7


 


11


8


☉


02


9


 


27


9


 


51






A


2


 


20


3


 


19


3


 


05


4


 


11


4


 


32


5


 


08


5


 


02


5


 


55


7


 


45


8


34


10


 


10


10


 


28






24


M


2


☉


43


3


 


36


3


 


24


4


☉


32


4


 


50


5


 


24


5


☉


19


6


 


20


8


 


22


9


 


07


10


 


35


11


 


07






A


3


03


3


 


54


3


 


42


4


52


5


 


09


5


 


41


5


36


6


 


48


8


 


57


9


 


40


11


 


11


11


 


46






25


M


3


 


21


4


 


11


4


 


01


5


 


14


5


 


28


5


 


59


5


 


56


7


 


19


9


☉


34


10


14


11


 


46


☉


 






A


3


 


38


4


 


29


4


 


21


5


 


36


5


 


48


6


 


19


6


 


17


7


 


53


10


10


10


 


47


 


 


 


0


22






26


M


3


 


55


4


 


48


4


 


41


6


 


00


6


 


08


6


☉


39


6


 


40


8


 


30


10


 


46


11


 


20


0


 


20


0


 


56






A


4


 


12


5


 


10


5


 


03


6


 


25


6


 


30


7


01


7


 


07


9


 


08


11


 


21


11


 


53


0


 


53


1


 


28






27


M


4


 


29


5


 


35


5


☉


26


6


 


50


6


 


51


7


 


25


7


 


37


9


 


47


11


 


54


 


 


 


1


☉


25


1


 


55






A


4


 


46


6


 


02


5


52


7


 


16


7


 


13


7


 


50


8


 


11


10


 


26


 


 


 


0


 


23


1


54


2


 


20






28


M


5


 


06


6


☉


29


6


 


20


7


 


44


7


 


36


8


 


18


8


 


46


11


☉


05


0


 


26


0


 


53


2


 


21


2


 


42






A


5


 


27


6


58


6


 


48


8


 


16


8


 


00


8


 


50


9


 


23


11


41


0


 


55


1


 


21


2


 


46


3


 


03






29


M


5


 


51


7


 


30


7


 


18


8


 


36


8


☉


26


9


 


22


10


 


01


 


 


 


1


 


22


1


 


49


3


 


08


3


 


21






A


6


 


16


8


 


05


7


 


48


9


 


00


8


52


9


 


56


10


 


39


0


 


16


1


 


47


2


 


15


4


 


28


3


 


37






30


M


6


 


43


 


 


 


8


 


20


9


 


28


9


 


19


10


 


31


11


 


18


0


 


48


2


 


12


2


☉


39


3


 


47


3


 


52






A


7


 


13


 


 


 


8


 


51


9


 


55


9


 


47


11


 


08


11


 


56


1


 


17


2


 


34


3


04


4


 


06


4


 


06






31


M


7


☉


45


 


 


 


9


 


21


 


 


 


10


 


15


 


 


 


 


☉


 


1


 


43


 


 


 


3


 


26


 


 


 


4


 


20






A


8


20


 


 


 


9


 


51


 


 


 


10


 


45


 


 


 


0


32


2


 


07


 


 


 


3


 


47


 


 


 


4


 


34






M stands for Morning, A for Afternoon, ☉ for Sunday.


This Table may be made to serve the under-written places by






Adding


h.


m.






For 
Tinmouth-Haven, Hartlepool,
 and 
Amsterdam.


0


30






rest


1


00






Scilly


1


45






Mounts Bey


1


55






Bridlington Peer,
 and 
Humber


2


00






Fowey Looe
 and 
Plymouth


3


13






Dartmoutò, Harborow
 and 
Hull


3


30






Torbay
 and 
Tinmouth


3


40






Exmouth, To
sham
 and 
Lymt


3


50






Wey
outh


4


20






Bridgewater
 and 
Tex
l


4


45






Portland Harestew,
 and without the 
Ulit


5


40










Substracting.


h.


m






For 
Leith, Ma
s,
 and 
Gourits Gut


0


15






Gravesend, Rochester, Ramm
skins


1


00






For 
Bu
y
 of the 
Nort,
 and 
Fi
shing


1


20






Shoe Beacon, Portsmouth Red-sand
 and 
Ostend


2


30






Spithead, Harwict, Dover, Calis


3


00






Orfo
dness, Gunfleet, Hastings, Shortham, Diep


4


00






Needles,
 and 
armouth Peer


4


40






St. 
Hellens
 and 
Haver de Grace




0






But Note, That in such of these places as lie open to the Sea, and where no great Rivers are, the Quarter-Moon high-waters hold out longer than the times shewed by this Reduction, near half an hour.


As also that, When by reason of long Droughts in 
Summer,
 or continual hard Frosts in 
Winter,
 the Fresh Waters are low; or when the Wind blows hard at 
N.
 or 
N. W.
 the Tide
 may hold up longer in the River of 
Th
ts,
 than the times shewed in the Table. But when the Wind is strong at 
W.
 or 
W.
 by 
S.
 or there are great Freshes, they hold not out so long, but the difference is seldom above half hour.


London:
 Printed for 
William Co
t
 at the 
Marriner
 and 
Anchor
 on 
Little-Tower-hill
 near the 
Mi
ories-End.


Im
▪ 30 
Octobris
 16
1. 
Robert Southwell.
 P. R. S.






Names.


Longitude.


Latitude.






Metropolis


D.


M.


D.


M.






Nanking


1


26


32


40






Chief Cities


 


 


 


 






Fungyang


0


30


34


48






Sucheu


3


30


31


52






Sunkiang


4


30


31


10






Changcheu


2


50


32


45






Chinkiang


2


28


32


49






Yangcheu


2


15


33


6






Hoaigan


2


12


34


17






Lucheu


0


8


33


4






Ganking


0


20


31


20






Taiping


1


10


32


20






Ningque


1


10


31


40






Chicheu


0


10


31


36






Hoeicheu


0


55


30


18






Great Cities


 


 


 


 






Quangte


1


50


31


32






Hocheu


1


0


33


50






Chucheu


1


26


32


31






Siuchen


0


3


35


3








The tenth Province, 
Chikiang.




Names.


Longitude.


Latitude.






Metropolis


D.


M.


D.


M.






Hangcheu


3


10


30


27






Chief Cities


 


 


 


 






Kiating


4


0


31


15






Hucheu


3


3


30


57






Niencheu


2


24


29


33






Kinhoa


2


2


28


57






Kiucheu


1


37


28


42






Chucheu


3


5


28


12






Xaohing


3


30


30


16






Ningpo


4


46


29


40






Taicheu


4


25


28


38






Vencheu


4


4


27


38








The eleventh Province, 
Fokien.




Names.


Longitude.


Latitude.






Metropolis


D.


M.


D.


M.






Focheu


2


40


25


58






Chief Cities


 


 


 


 






Civencheu


2


9


25


0






Changcheu


1


10


24


42






Kienning


1


0


27


0






Ienning


0


57


26


34






Tingcheu


0


55


25


40






Hinghoa


2


35


25


27






Xaouu


0


2


27


10






The great City


 


 


 


 






Fouing


4


0


26


33






Garrisons


 


 


 


 






Phumuen


4


25


27


0






Foning


4


8


26


15






Tinghai


3


22


26


10






Muihoa


3


21


25


52






Xe


3


28


25


50






Haikeu


3


50


25


29






Ganhai


2


3


24


45






Hiamuen


1


59


24


35






Chungxe


1


26


24


30






Tungxan


0


57


24


15






Hivenchung


0


46


24


0






Iungting


1


18


24


33








The twelfth Province, 
Quantung.




Names.


Longitude.


Latitude.






Metropolis


D.


M.


D.


M.






Quancheu


4


2


23


15






Chief Cities


 


 


 


 






Xacheu


3


42


24


42






Nanhiung


3


10


25


32






Hoeicheu


2


46


23


9






Caocheu


1


0


23


30






Chaoking


4


45


23


30






Caoheu


5


40


22


33






Liencheu


7


12


22


0






Liucheu


6


20


28


58






Kiuncheu


6


36


39


40






The Great City


 


 


 


 






Loting


5


9


23


25






Garrisons


 


 


 


 






Taching


1


5


24


20






Tung


1


22


24


17






Hanxan


1


10


23


25






Cinghai


1


14


23


25






Kiazu


1


29


23


12






Kiexo


1


49


22


50






Hiung


6


30


21


30






Iungching


5


49


23


45






Ciungling


8


10


19


30










The thirteenth Province, 
Quangsi.




Names.


Longitude.


Latitude.






Metropolis


D.


M.


D.


M.






Queilin


7


32


25


54






Chief Cities


 


 


 


 






Liucheu


8


42


25


0






Kingyven


9


46


25


2






Pinglo


7


0


25


26






Gucheu


6


33


24


2






Cincheu


8


0


24


2






Nanning


9


30


23


20






Taiping


12


20


23


20






Iunning


12


7


23


8






Chingan


11


55


24


0






Tiencheu


11


30


24


11






Garrison Cities


 


 


 


 






Sungen


10


25


24


5






Vuyven


10


30


23


52






Funghoa


9


55


24


5






The great City


 


 


 


 






Suching


12


25


24


6






Garrisons


 


 


 


 






Xanglin


12


47


23


57






Ganlung


13


57


24


4








The fourteenth Province, 
Quoicheu.




Names.


Longitude.


Latitude.






Metropolis


D.


M.


D.


M.






Quoiyang


11


46


26


0






Chief Cities


 


 


 


 






Sucheu


9


2


27


53






Sunan


10


20


27


39






Chinyven


9


23


27


34






Xecien


9


42


27


55






Tungyn


8


45


28


20






Liping


8


35


26


42






Tuche


10


3


25


55






Great Cities


 


 


 


 






Pugan


13


5


25


52






Iunning


12


20


25


2






Chinning


12


5


25


0






Garrison Cities


 


 


 


 






Puting


12


7


26


4






Pingyve


10


32


27


0






Lungli


11


9


26


27








The fifteenth Province, 
Iunnan.




Names.


Longitude.


Latitude.






Metropolis


D.


M.


D.


M.






Iunnan


14


25


25


0






Chief Cities


 


 


 


 






Tali


16


56


25


27






Linyaw


14


19


24


6






Zuhiung


15


24


24


56






Chinkiang


14


4


24


29






Munghoa


16


38


25


23






Kinfung


16


30


25


52






Quangnan


13


25


24


0






Quangsi


13


35


24


14






Chinyven


16


26


24


37






Sungning


15


48


27


33






Xunning


17


18


24


46






Chief Garrisons


 


 


 


 






Kiocing


13


48


25


35






Yaogan


15


50


26


3






Cioking


16


40


26


28






Vutin


14


59


25


27






Cintien


13


52


26


4






Likiang


16


58


26


54






Iuenkiang


15


33


23


54






Iungchang


17


42


24


58






Great Cities


 


 


 


 






Pexing


16


8


26


44






Lanking


15


55


27


3










The manner of the Building of the Cities in China.


MOst of the Cities in all 
China
 are of one Model and Fashion, and ex∣ceed each other only in Bigness and Commerce; for most of them are square, with broad and high Walls of Brick or Free-stone, Fortifi'd round about at an exact distance, with high Watch-Towers, not unlike those of the ancient 
Romans;
 surrounded with broad Moats; and within, with 
Pal∣lasadoes.








The Entrances into the City have always double Gates, one before ano∣ther, with 
Portcullases,
 between those two Gates is a large Court, wherein the Soldiers are Exercis'd that belong to the Guard: These Gates are not oppo∣site but oblique, so that they cannot see through them both at once: The first hangs on a double Wall, which appears like our Bulwarks. Above the Gates, on the Arch are high Towers, which the 
Chineses
 call 
Muen Leu,
 in which the Soldiers keep Guard, and are Magazines where their Arms are kept.


Every Metropolis, and almost all the small Cities, have a little distance
 without the Walls in a pleasant and frequented place, or near the Road, a Tower, by 
Peter Iarrik
 and others call'd 
Chimes,
 which the 
Chineses
 look up∣on to be so auspicious, that no Man goes about any business of consequence, before he hath Saluted these Edifices, from thence expecting their better Fortune. One of these Towers, by which we may judge all the rest, is be∣fore discrib'd in the Province of 
Xantung:
 They have at least seven, nine, or ten Galleries of Free-stone, and very artificially built, in manner like a Pyra∣mid; they are not onely Erected in or near the Cities, but some of them on the highest Mountains.


These Towers are not much unlike other Structures, from their quality
 call'd 
Culeu
 (which here we should name 
Hourly Towers
) which are built at the Publick Charge, one or two in every City, according to the bigness thereof: On every one of these Towers is a Water-Glass, for in stead of Watches or Hour-Glasses, the 
Chineses
 use Water Glasses, which shew the Hour of the Day; for the Water falling out of one Glass into the other, lifts up a Board, Carv'd with the Figures of the Hours, and time of the Day: There is also one, who constantly observes the Hand which points, and by the beating on a great Drum, gives notice thereof to the People every Hour, what the Clock is; he also puts forth another Board out of the Steeple, on which the Hour of the Day is Painted with Golden Figures, of a Foot and a half long.


The same Person which Watches the Hours, hath an Eye also (because he looks over the whole City) if any Fire should accidentally happen in one House or other, and by beating on his Drum, raises all the Citizens to the quench∣ing of it: He whose House is set a Fire through his own carelesness, suffers Death without mercy, because of the danger which threatens the neighboring Houses, all built of Wood.


On these Time-telling Towers, the Governors often meet to keep their Festivals.






Pagodes or Temples.


NOt far from these Turrets stands generally a 
Pagan
 Chappel, besides a Temple Consecrated to the Spirit or good 
Genious
 of the City.


In these, all the Governors or Magistrates, on the entring into their Offices, take their Oaths of Allegiance, and the like, as if before the God or Protector of their City.


In former Ages, the 
Chineses
 in these Temples honor'd only the fore-menti∣on'd Spirits; but at this day Worship other Idols.


Great numbers of these 
Pagodes
 are through all 
China,
 and are likewise built in solitary places, on the tops and declinings of Mountains.


Most of these 
Pagodes
 are inhabited by Priests, who live there upon the an∣cient Revenues granted them of the place: The 
Pagodes
 also afford good Lodg∣ings and Entertainment for Travellers, who there find plenty of all things.


The 
Pagodes
 or Temples are within furnish'd with Images, to the number in some of above a thousand, and hung round about with black Lamps, which burn Night and Day, in Commemoration of those, as they conceive, which liv'd Piously, and dy'd Happily.


Some Images sit on Tables, as if they liv'd and were consulting together.


At the entrance, or behind the other Images stand horrible shapes, Horn'd Fiends, with open Mouths, and Hands with grievous Claws.


In the middle commonly appears an Altar, whereon sits an Image of some times thirty, forty, fifty, nay a hundred Foot high, to which the Temple is Consecrated, besides several lesser Idols on each side thereof; before the Image stands generally a thick, but hollow Cane, full of little Reeds or Pens, in∣scrib'd with 
Chinese
 Characters, which they believe foretel future events: On each side are Perfuming-Pots, which are continually supply'd, and in the mid∣dle stands a Woodden Charger, in which the Priest puts his Offerings, when he Invokes the God on some exigent, to grant him a favorable sign of good suc∣cess: The Altar is Colour'd Red, with which no common Houses may be Painted.


A 
Pagode
 or Temple, which was formerly the Hall of a Palace, belonging to a grand Eunuch, near the City of 
Peking,
 and afterwards on the Emperor's Command given to the 
Iesuits
 for a Chappel, 
Trigaut
 says, was before set forth after this manner:


In the chief Isle stood a great Altar of Bak'd and Hewn Stone, curiously Wrought, and Painted Red, after the manner of their Temples: Upon the middle of the Altar sat a great and horrible Monster, Bak'd of Clay, Gilt from top to bottom.


The 
Chineses
 call'd this Image 
Tuan,
 and suppose it Commands over the Earth and Riches thereof; wherefore we with the ancient Poets should call


it 
Pluto:
 It had a Scepter in one Hand, and a Crown on its Head, both not un∣like the Marks of our Kings. On each side of the Isle stood two great Tables, every one Guarded by five Infernal Judges, which were also Painted on the Walls, sitting on Seats of Justice, and Condemn'd (as they said) the Sinners to Everlasting Torments, every one according to his Condition: Before them stood many Furies, far more terrible (with tormenting Scourges) than those which we represent; and in such manner those Devils seem'd to punish the Criminals, that they struck a Terror to the Living; for some lay broyl'd on Gridirons, others boyl'd in Oil, others again rent to Pieces, some cut through in the middle, torn to Pieces by Dogs, bruis'd in Mortars, and other such like cruel Punishments.


The first of the fore-mention'd Infernal Judges seem'd to examine the Ma∣lefactors, which as the 
Chineses
 suppose, he re-views in a Looking-Glass; this done, he sends them to the other Judges, according to the several Punish∣ments which they are to suffer: Amongst them was one, whose Office was to Punish by Transmigration, sending the Souls of the Malefactor into worse Bodies than formerly they possess'd; transforming Tyrants to Tygers, de∣bauch'd Persons into Swine, others into such Beasts as best suit with their In∣clination: But for Petty Crimes, the Rich, they only became poor and despi∣cable People.


There were also a great Pair of Scales, in one of which stood a Sinner, and in the other a Prayer Book of the Doctrine of the Idols, which weigh'd down the Sinner, and releas'd him from Punishments.


In the middle, before the resemblance of Hell, flow'd a River of a strange Colour, into which many were dragg'd; cross the River lay two Bridges, one of Gold, and the other of Silver, over which pass'd those that had been true 
Pagan-Worshippers,
 and wore several Badges of their Offices and Service shewn to the Idols; and had for their Guides the Servants of the Idols, under whose Defence they past through the midst of all the Torments of Hell, and came at last to pleasant Fields, Groves, and Vallies.


In another corner were drawn the Jaws of Hell, belching out Flames, Ser∣pents and Furies, towards the Gates of Hell, which were made of Copper; many other more of that kind were also seen: In several places of the Temple was written on Scrols, 
That whosoe're calls a thousand times on this Image by Name, shall be freed from all these Tortures.


It will not be unnecessary to give you here two Platforms of two several 
Pagodes
 or Temples.




Directions for a little Temple or 
Pagode,
 cover'd all over.


1


THe Prime and only Gate of the Temple.


2


A Partition of Wood between two Pillars of Stone or Wood, on which two Gygantick Figures are Painted; By this means, the sight out of the Street into the Temple is prevented, though the Doors are open.


3.


An erected Stone, in form of a Consecrated Bason, in which the 
Romans
 keep their 
Holy-Water,
 in which lies Fire to burn the Perfumes that are put in the same.


4.


Body of the Temple.


5.


A great Table before the Altar, curiously Varnish'd, Painted, and Gilt, on which stand Tapers, and Perfumes always burning. On the Table stand al∣so two Cases, and a Cane full of little Pipes or Straws, wherewith they Cast Lots.











6.


A great Altar, on which some Images stand.


7.


Two lesser Altars, on each of which are other Representations.


8.


Pedestals of Stone, on which the Pillars of Wood or Stone rest, which hold up the Roof, and make three Divisions.


9.


Two small Pools or Ponds, with Water and Fish, open on the top, from whence the Light shines into the Temple, being in stead of Windows, for no other Light comes into the Temple, but from those places where they are, or through the chief Gate.


10.


Two Chambers before the Gate that leads into the Temple, in which stand two great shapes of Horses and other Images.


11.


Two Boards made fast to the Walls of the Temple, Ingraven with Su∣perstitious Directions, to throw their Lots before the Images, with the foresaid Straws, which stand on the Table.


12.


A great Drum on a Woodden Bench, on which they give several strokes, after having ended their Prayers to the Images.


13.


A great Bell hanging at the Wall of the Temple, made like ours, on which they also strike twice or thrice with a Stick, after they have ended their Devotions.


14.


A Bench with holes, wherein they put their 
Umbrelloes,
 or other Marks of Honor, which are carry'd before the 
Mandarins,
 and likewise before their Ima∣ges, when they go Processioning.


15.


The place where those that Kneel to Pray before their Images, and Cast Lots.






Directions or Draught of a Temple, one of the biggest and stateliest in all 
China.


1


THe chief Gate in the first Wall that surrounds the Temple.


2


Two Gates on each side of the foremention'd.


3


First Court before the Temple, open on the top.


4


A great Pool, with Water and Fish.


5


A Bridge to go over the Pool.


6


A great cover'd Hall, which spreads it self before the whole Structure.


7


A second open Court, much bigger, Pav'd with Free-stone.


8


Little Chambers on each side of the second Court.


9


The chief Hall or Chappel in the Temple, cover'd with a handsom Roof.


10


Pillars of the two Halls, which in some Temples are of Wood, and in others of one intire Stone.


11


Little Doors of the Chambers, with a Gallery, through which they pass be∣fore they go into the Chambers.


12


The place whither those repair to Kneel and shew Reverence to their Ima∣ges, and draw Lots.


13


A very curious and well-made Table, Gilt and Varnish'd, whereon in a Case stand Straws or little Canes, with which they draw Lots; and likewise Per∣fuming Pans, and burning Tapers; over it also hangs a lighted Lamp.


14


A great Altar with one, or several Images.


15


A Stone Pedestal close by the Wall, on which stand many whole and half Images.


16


A Stone, cut in manner of a Bason, in which stands a Chafindish with Coals, wherein Gilt and Silver'd Paper is burnt by those that come to Wor∣ship the Images: In some Temples generally stand, in stead of the fore-men∣tion'd Stone, many Copper Pans, large, and neatly made.







17


Two Boards made fast on the Walls of the Temple, Ingraven with their Su∣perstitious Belief.


18


A great Bell, made like those of 
Europe,
 but without a Clapper, on which they strike with a Staff three or four times, after they have finish'd their Prayers.


19


A great Drum on a Woodden Bench, on which they also strike, as on the Bell.


20


A Bench of Wood with holes, in which they stick the 
Umbrelloes
 and other Badges of Honor that are carry'd before the 
Mandarins,
 and likewise before the Images in time of their Precessioning.








Triumphal Arches.


IN several Cities, to their no small Ornament, are divers Triumphal Ar∣ches, most of them of hewn Marble, with great Art and curious Imagery, richly wrought, after the manner of the 
Goths;
 they are, as anciently amongst the 
Romans,
 built in Commemoration of those which have done some great Service to that City or Countrey; sometimes also for the Citizens, that have attain'd to the heighth of their Learning.


They are chiefly built in the Eminentest Streets and most Populous places, and consist in three Portals, the biggest in the middle, and the two lesser on each side, through which they pass.


On both sides stand Marble Lions, and other fine Imagery; on the Ceilings are Celestial Signs, Birds, Flowers, Snakes, Serpents, and the like, done very Artificially.


Those places that are void of Statues are curiously Carv'd or adorn'd with other Imagery, and are so Cut, that they seem Pendant in the Air. It deserves no small admiration, how such vast Stones could be Wrought and Cut through, that they seem rather like loose Chains of divers Links, than singly Wrought.


The whole Arch rests on high Pillars, and both before and behind of one fa∣shion; The upper part of the Roof generally consists in three Stories or Par∣titions, every one divided, with some 
hings resembling our Architecture; Upon the Summit of the Arch lies a blue Stone, cover'd with a small Gilded Arch, on which the Emperor's Name in whose Reign the Arch was built is Engraven; Beneath in the Front appears another broad Stone, whereon is an Inscription, with the Name of the Person in honor of whom, and for what good Service it was erected.






Buildings.


THe Artificers and Tradesmens Houses in the Cities are not built with any great art, because the 
Chineses
 regard more their Ease and Con∣venience than Ornaments; yet though they are not ver
 stately, they are convenient and sufficiently comely: But the Houses of the Grandees are very magnificent and large.


The 
Chineses,
 as 
Adam Schall
 witnesseth, use no Stone for their high Build∣ings, but onely Timber joyn'd and fastned to one another with Iron Rings, after the same manner as our Masts in great Ships are; which thus conjoyn'd is colour'd over with 
Chinese
 Varnish, or Wax call'd 
Cie,
 and sometimes Gilded, to the no small lustre thereof.


They take no delight in many Stories, never raising them higher than two,
 though generally but one, they counting it a hard labor to go up Stairs or Ladders.


The lower part of their House is onely inhabited, it being divided into handsom Chambers and Halls: As to the out-part of the House, it is but mean (except the great Gate and other lesser Wickets, which are stately built before Noble-mens Houses) but the inner part is pleasant, and very curiously wrought, all shining with the Varnish 
Cie.
 They are generally built of Wood, yea, the Emperor's Palace it self, though the Walls which separate the Halls and Anti-Chambers are commonly of Brick, but the Roof rests on wooden Pillars, and not on Walls, as ours do, and not cover'd with Tyles of Clay. They look not forwards through Windows, Persons of Quality accounting it ill Breed∣ing to open a Casement into the Street. Every House hath several Yards or Halls one behind another; the privatest or last of which is in habited by the Women, who are kept so close, as if in Prison.


The 
Chineses,
 according to 
Trigaut,
 when they begin to Build, erect first the
 Pillars of their Houses, which are all of Wood, for Stone is of no esteem amongst them; nay, the Pillars in the Emperors Courts and Governors Hou∣ses are also of Wood: On the rais'd Columns they lay great pieces of Timber, and on them the Roof: The Walls are made last of all of Clay or Mortar, which if they should chance to fall, yet the Timber-work would stand, and the Roof-remains firm and whole. The order in which the Pillars stand, is the same with all other open places; for every Court of the Governors is divi∣ded into several base Courts or Quadrangles pav'd with Free-Stone; the Floors of them being somewhat lower than those of the Chambers, they ascend a few Steps up to them and the Galleries.


And again in another place the same 
Trigaut
 saith, That the 
Chineses
 are not
 to be compar'd to us in Architecture, neither for beauty nor durance; for they build according to Mans life, and (as they say) onely for themselves and not for others; whereas we on the contrary build for future Ages.


The 
Chineses
 dig no Foundations, but lay on the Ground which they design to build on, very great Stones; or if they chance to dig Foundations, they are never above two or three Yards deep, though for exceeding high Towers, so that they seldom last one Age. Nor in like manner their Clay Walls, which give them the trouble of a constant and daily repairing; from whence it happens also, that their Houses are for the most part of Wood, or rest on wooden Posts; in which there is no small convenience, because the Walls may be repair'd without medling with the other parts of the Houses, for the Roofs rest not on the Walls, but on Columns. Thus far 
Trigaut.






Palaces, or Governors Courts.


THe Palaces are all built at the Emperor's Charge for Residences for the Governors, as well Civil as Martialist: And the Emperor doth not onely provide Courts and Ships for his Governors, but also all man∣ner of necessary Furniture, Provisions and Servants; nay, when a Governor (which is most remarkable) either goes to another Province, or serv'd out the time of his Office (which sometimes happens to be in half a year) he may take all the Furniture with him, and then again new is provided for his Successor.


The Houses of the Magistrates exceed all other in beauty, bigness, and Or∣namentals, and may justly be call'd 
Courts
 or 
Palaces.


In every Metropolis are fifteen, twenty, or more such publick Edifices, in the chief Cities; at least eight, and four in the lesse, all after one Model, except that the one is bigger than the other, according to the Quality of the Go∣vernors.


The great Palaces have four or five Halls, with as many Porches that stand before them.


At the Front of every Palace three Gates, the biggest in the middle, every one adorn'd on each side with great Lyons of Marble. Before the greatest Gate is a large Court Rail'd in, which glitters exceedingly with the 
Chinese
 Varnish. In the middle of this Court stand two Towers, or Musick-Rooms, ready pro∣vided with Drums, and all sorts of Instruments to play on whene're the Go∣vernor goes in or out to sit on the Bench of Justice. Beyond this Gate is a spacious Hall, wherein those that Plead, or have any Business with the Go∣vernor, wait; on each side thereof are small Apartments for the Judges of the lower Bench; beyond are two Rooms, wherein Persons of Quality, that come to visit the Governors, are received; in them are Stools and Benches, and all things necessary for Entertainment. In these also the right-Hand is given to the Civilists, or Citizens, and the left to the Martialist. Passing through these Chambers you come to another Gate, which is seldom open'd but when the Governor keeps a Court-Day. The middlemost is of an extraordinary bigness, and none but Lords and Noble-men are suffer'd to go through it, all other Persons walking through the side-Gates. Beyond this Gate is another large Court, at the end whereof stands a great Apartment rest∣ing on Columns, and is call'd 
Tang.
 In this Chamber or Hall the Governor sits on the Bench; on each side thereof Servants, Messengers, and other Offi∣cers, have little Houses for their Residences.


These Officers never remove with the Governor, but live there during their life-time, being maintain'd at the Emperors Charge, and serve one Lord after another, without changing their Habitations.








Behind this Apartment is another inward Chamber, much statelier than the first, which is call'd 
Sutang,
 that is, 
The Privy-Chamber;
 in which onely the greatest Friends to the Governor give their Visits, and pay Respects; about it on the out-side the Governors Houshold have their Dwellings; behind it opens the greatest Gate, where also are the Governors own Lodgings, and a little apart his Wives and Concubines, being all neatly built, and conveniently contriv'd. There are also Warrens, Gardens, and all things fit for Countrey Recreation.


A Palace belonging to an Eunuch, not far from the City 
Peking,
 is by 
Trigaut,
 with the following Platform, thus described:


On each side before the Gates stand two Marble Stones, in a manner like Steps to get on Horseback from; before the Entrance of the Palace runs a Wall about six Foot high; behind which opens a small Entry or Alley, in the middle whereof stands the prime 
Portico,
 or chief Stone Gate, to which they go mounted on Steps, with two Chambers on the right, and three on the left-hand, which have their Entrances into the little Alley; beyond this Gate opens a great Court, where on the right-Hand stand three, and on the left-Hand four Chambers; At the end of this first Court is another Gate, which they first ascend on Steps, and having pass'd through it, descend again on the other side into a second Court; in the middle whereof on each side, a Gate or Door with Steps leads to the Halls that are on both sides of this Court; behind which is also a great Hall, and beyond that a third Court of the same form as the second; and at last appears a stately Garden, surrounded with a Wall of twenty Hand high, and cut through in the middle with a pav'd Way.




A Draught of the first Ground-plat of a House for 
Chineses
 of indifferent Quality.


1


THe chief Door of the House under a small Gallery, which serves in stead of a Penthouse,


2


Prime Courts pav'd with Free-Stone.







3


Chief Halls in the House.


4


A wooden Partition, with a little Room in the middle in manner like a Chappel, in which stand Carv'd Images, and before them perfuming Ves∣sels and Lamps.


5


A narrow Entry behind the Partition, which hinders the sight into the chief Hall.


6


Two inner Chambers.


7


Two Halls or Dining-Rooms.


8


A great House for Poultrey, Cattel, and the like.






A Draught of the second Ground-plat of a House for a Rich 
Chinese,
 or 
Mandarin
 of ordinary Quality.


1


A Portal before the Gate.


2


The chief and onely Gate of the whole House.


3


The Entry or Gallery.


4


A Partition of Wood to prevent the sight from without into the House.


5


An open Court pav'd neatly with Free-Stone.


6


Cover'd Halls.


7


The chiefest Hall.


8


A Wooden Partition with a Chappel in the middle, in which the Images stand, as also Candles, Lamps, and Vessels to burn Perfume in before them.


9


A narrow Entry behind the wooden Partition, which hinders the Prospect into the Hall and open Court.


10


Chambers in which the Master of the House Lodges.


11


Narrow Entries, through which they go into all the Chambers and inner-


12


Apartments for Slavesses, and other Female-Servants.


13


Little Chambers for Slaves and Men-Servants.


14


A Stable for Cattel.












A Draught of a third Ground-Plat of Royal Houses, and the Houses of very rich 
Mandarins.


1


THe Front Gate.


2


The chief and onely Door of the House.


3


The Entry or Gallery.


4


A Partition of Wood, which prevents the sight from without into the House.


5


Open Courts cover'd neatly with square Free-Stone.


6 7


Chief cover'd Halls.


8


Little Entries, through which they go into all the Courts and Chambers of the House.


9


A Partition of Wood in the last Hall, with a Chappel in the middle, in which as before stand Carv'd Images, Candles, Lamps, and perfuming Vessels.


10


Narrow Entries behind the great wooden Partition, which hinders those from being seen that walk in the Hall.


11


A wooden Partition in the first Hall between the first chief Court, which stops the prospect into the other open places.


12


Pedestals of the Pillars, which support the Roof of the first Hall, which stands at the end of the first Court.


13


Handsom Chambers, in which the Lord of the House resides.


14


Lesser Rooms, in which his Concubines, Slavesses, and other Women dwell.


15


Small Apartments for Servants and Slaves.


16


The Stable. Thus much concerning their Houses.










Of their Shipping.


FRom the building of their Houses we may conjecture what their Ship∣ping may be, notwithstanding they are us'd in another Element, and serve for other occasions.


The 
Chinese
 Vessels are several, 
viz.
 Warlike, Imperial, Ships for the Gover∣nors, others that carry the Fish sent to the Emperor's Court, 
Longzons,
 Snake-Vessels, or rather Pleasure-Boats, and the like, besides floating Villages on Canes, joyn'd together with a tough Twig call'd 
Rotang.


An incredible number of Vessels are continually found in 
China,
 Sailing from one place to another; for the Countrey is Navigable in most parts, by convenience of the Rivers every where; for the Way from the City 
Makao
 to the Metropolis 
Peking,
 (being a Tract of about three hundred 
German
 Miles) may all be travell'd by Water, along Rivers or artificial Channels, except one days Journey, which is over the Mountain of 
Mintin,
 between the City 
Nan∣hang,
 of the Province of 
Quantung,
 and the City 
Nanking
 in the Province of 
Quangsi.


In like manner, they can go from the Province of 
Chikiang
 in their Barges along the Rivers through that of 
Suchuen;
 nay, there is scarce any City, either little or great in all 
China,
 to which they cannot come by Water, because the whole Countrey is not onely naturally full of Rivers, but are also divided and sub∣divided by industry into several Channels and Rivulets: But their Ships that lie in several Bays and Harbors resemble Woods.


Such an innumerable and vast number of Shipping are in the Province of 
Fokien,
 that the Inhabitants thereof proffer'd the Emperor of 
China,
 when on a time he resolv'd to War against the 
Iapanners,
 to make him a Bridge or Cawsey of Ships, that should reach from their Coast to 
Iapan,
 and well it might have been done, if they could have endur'd the turbulency of the Sea.


Amongst all other, the Imperial Ships belonging to the Governors are the
 best and stoutest, and indeed in curious Work and Ornamentals, exceed ours in 
Europe:
 they shew in the Water like Towers or Castles, and are on both sides divided into several Apartments; in the middle is a stately Room provided with all manner of Necessaries, and Hung with Tapestry, and furnish'd in State, with whatever belongs to a Princes Palace; in stead of Glass Win∣dows they have Silk varnish'd and painted with Flowers, Birds, Trees, and the like, which is so close that no Wind penetrates. Round about the Ship on the Deck are Galleries and Rails, between which the Sea-men or Mariners can do their Business without any trouble or disturbance. The whole Ship is varnish'd with the Wax by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Cie,
 which gives a great lustre, being also mix'd with divers Colours; the in-side is painted with Birds, Beasts, Cities, and the like, in Golden Colours (the proper Livery of the Emperor,) which are worthy of observation, and very delightful to the Eye. They use no Nails in all their Ships, because the Timber and Planks are pegg'd together with wooden Pins.


The 
Chinese
 Vessels are in length equal with our 
Mediterranean
 Galleys, but are not so high and broad; on a Ladder of Leather with twelve Steps they get into them. The Prow, where the Drummers beat and Trumpeters sound their Levets, is made like a Castle. Upon the sound of the Drums and Trumpets all the other Vessels give them the way, unless it be a 
Mandarin
 of greater Quality,


then the inferior gives way to the superior, without any the least disturbance or dispute, all which Cases being order'd by the Law, according to which every one must govern himself; wherefore on the Head of every Ship stands written in great Golden Letters of a Foot and a half long, the Quality of every Governor; from both the sides flie divers colour'd Silk Flags and Penons.


In calm Weather there are People, which in stead of Horses, Tow the Ves∣sels by a Line, or Row them: They also use their Oars just as the Fishes their Fins or Tails, with very great dexterity and swiftness, to the no little manife∣station of their Ingenuity. They also Steer a Ship with a single Oar after the same manner as we our Boats.


Exceeding stately are those Ships which every three Moneths to the num∣ber of five, come with Silk-Stuffs and Garments from the Metropolis of 
Nan∣king
 to the Court of 
Peking,
 and are by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Lungchychuen,
 as if they would say 
Ships of Dragons Clothes,
 because they are sent to the Emperor, whose Arms and Marks are Dragons; they are Gilt all over, and colour'd Red. To these all the Governors Vessels are inferior, and must give them the Way where∣soe're they meet them.


Swift Streams, which between the Hills and Valleys have great Falls, are Row'd up by the 
Chineses
 with a sort of little Boats with two Oars or Steerers, one before at the Head, and the other at the Stern; by means of which they guide their Boats between the Rocks with great dexterity and ease, as if they had a Horse by the Reins, though sometimes the Channel is so narrow, that the Vessels can scarce pass through the same, but are forc'd to go round about the Stones, which lie scatter'd and cumber the Channel every where.


This troublesom Rowing, though an ingenious Invention of the 
Chineses,
 hath rais'd this Proverb amongst them, 
That their Boats are Paper, and their Wa∣termen Iron,
 because they are made of very thin Boards, like our slit Deal, which are not nail'd, but fastned together with Withs, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Rotang;
 by which means the Boats, though often beaten by the strong Current against the Rocks, split not, but bend and give way.


In the third County 
Sucheufu,
 of the Province of 
Nanking,
 the Inhabitants keep many Pleasure-Boats onely for their Recreation, all of them being richly gilded and painted with several colours to the Life, so that we may rather call them stately Houses than Ships. Many oftentimes spend their whole Estates in these Vessels, being too indulgent to Wine and Women.


In a delightful Lake call'd 
Si,
 near the chief City 
Hangcheu,
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 are also very gallant Vessels, which Row up and down in the same in fair Weather for their pleasure. All things about these Vessels are either gilded or painted with various colours, where they always highly Treat, and are presented with Stage-Plays, and other such like Divertisements. The Ships in the interim furnish'd with all manner of Necessaries, Sail without fear of Shipwrack cross the Lake, notwithstanding many by sudden Storms or Tem∣pests are in the middle of their Mirth cast away.


They have also a kind of 
Gundelo's,
 in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Lungschen,
 that is, 
Serpent-Boats,
 from their resembling of Water-Snakes, and their be∣ing Painted and Carv'd all over with various Serpents; some over-grown with Hair, and hoop'd in with broad Iron Rings, are also joyn'd together with Ribbons of divers colours, very neatly, and with great art interwoven toge∣ther. The Masts, which are generally three, and hung with Silk Penons and Flags, have an Idol upon the top of them, as also one on the Prow of the


Ship; on the Stern are many Ensigns, hung full of Tufts of Hair, Silk Flags, and long Feathers; the whole Vessel is hung round about with Gold and Silk Fringe; under the Deck sit the Rowers, generally to the number of ten or twelve, richly Cloth'd in Silk, and Gilded Crowns on their Heads; at the sound of a Drum they strike their Oars (which are made like a Spoon) into the Wa∣ter, and make such quick way, that they seem to go as swift as Lightning; in a Gap in the Stern oftentimes hangs a Boy, a Jugler, who leaping into the Water, makes pleasant sport for the Passengers.


In the 
Yellow River
 are a kind of Carriages, or rather floating Villages, con∣sisting in great thick Reeds, by the 
Indians
 call'd 
Bambu,
 or 
Bambo's,
 which are so closely ty'd together with Withs, by them nam'd 
Rotang,
 that the least drop of Water cannot get through them. On these Floats are Huts and little Houses of Boards and other sleight Materials, cover'd with Roofs made of Mats, in which the 
Chineses
 dwell with their Wives and Children (in someto the num∣ber of two hundred) as on the Main Land, and never inhabit on the Shore: They drive along with the Stream down the Rivers, or else are Tow'd against the Current with a Line, for Sails they use none.


Those that reside in these floating Villages drive a Trade with all sorts of Merchandise, and carry them from one place to another on the River: at the Towns before which they stop, they run Stakes into the Ground, to which they make fast their floating Isle.


There are also some in 
China,
 which with their whole Families reside in or∣dinary Vessels, and Sail in Fleets of four or five hundred together, Trading through the whole Empire; so that from whence these Fleets remove, it seems as if a Forrest moved. They keep likewise all manner of tame Cattel in those Vessels, especially Swine; and wheresoever they arrive, they generally stay several Moneths.


Father 
Martin
 doubts not, but that the 
Chinese
 Merchants have anciently, as at this day, furrow'd the Seas as far as the 
Red Lake:
 for in these modern Times they build great Ships call'd 
Pancum da China,
 which in the 
Chinese
 Tongue signifies 
A Wooden Palace;
 neither have we small testimonies of it through all 
India.


That the
 Chineses (saith he) 
have antiently frequented the Seas, and Sail'd with their Ships to remote Countreys, doth not darkly appear by the Voyage of one
 Luseng, 
sent out by the Emperor
 Ching 
or
 Xi, Anno 214. 
before the Nativity of
 Christ, 
to discover the Northern Countreys; for he, amongst others, proffer'd the Emperor some Geographical Descriptions of several Countreys in the World, and especially of
 China, 
and the Islands lying in the
 East Sea, 
otherwise call'd
 Mare Eoum; 
from whence some will conclude, that the Name
 Cingala (
which signifies
 Sand-plats of the 
Chineses, on which a Fleet of Ships suffer'd Shipwrack
) 
hath its original: From hence is also deriv'd
 Ceilon, 
or
 Sin∣lan, 
that is,
 Inhabitants of China, 
or
 Chineses: 
Moreover, that the
 Chineses 
of the Island
 St. Laurence 
or
 Madagaskar, 
is affirmed by the
 Chineses 
that reside on this Island, especially at the Bay of
 St. Clare, 
where Men of white Complexions speak the
 Chinese 
Language.


This Negotiation of the 
Chineses
 extended it self to all the Islands in the 
Oriental Sea,
 and 
to India
 it self, till the time of the 
Portuguese
 first coming thi∣ther; but afterwards it was neglected, partly for the remoteness of the Places, and partly out of fear of the 
Portuguese:
 But 
Iapan,
 the 
Philippine Isles, Macassar, Iava, Camboya, Sion,
 and 
Cochinchina,
 the 
Chineses
 frequent with their Ships laden with Merchandise to this very day, especially those of the Province of 
Fokien;



for scarce any other 
Chineses
 frequent the Sea, or go to foreign Countreys against the Laws of the Empire.


The Emperor 
Hiaou,
 who 
Anno
 140. before the 
Incarnation
 began his Reign, after having by means of the General 
Chankieng
 subdu'd the Kingdoms of 
Ynpei,
 (at this day 
Tungking
 and 
Laos
) 
Tavon
 and 
Takia,
 lying near the West, sent a Fleet of Ships to the East through the 
Chinese
 Sea, or Bay call'd 
Sang.
 But those Places to which the fore-mention'd Fleet Sail'd, were not describ'd by the 
Chi∣nese
 Geographers, which is no wonder; for as these People have a great and high opinion of themselves, and account foreign things not worth their know∣ledge or description; therefore we cannot say whether this Fleet went to 
Iapan,
 or to the Isles 
Linson, Ceilon, Iava, Camboya,
 and the like Places.


The timely finding of the 
Magnet
 or 
Load-stone,
 and 
Compass,
 by the 
Chineses,
 give also no small testimonies of their Navigation.


As 
Martinius
 saith, the Properties of the 
Magnet,
 and its respecting the North and South, or the 
Compass,
 was known to the 
Chineses
 many Ages before the 
Incarnation,
 and before the People of 
Europe;
 for when in the Reign of 
Zing, Anno
 1115. before the Birth of 
Christ,
 the 
Cochinchineses,
 by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Kiaochi,
 had the first time sent an Agent to the Emperor, with a white Hen or Pheasant for a Present, the Agent was by the Emperor's Tutor call'd 
Cheu∣cung,
 a great Astronomer, presented with a piece of Workmanship artificially wrought, which of it self without ceasing pointed directly towards the South, not onely when it was carry'd by Land, but by Water also.


This Piece was with two Syllables call'd 
Zinan,
 which is like that where∣with the 
Chineses
 at this day call the 
Load-stone;
 which serves for an infallible testimony (as 
Martinius
 saith) that the use thereof was found out onely by the 
Chineses
 at that time. It is not like our 
Compass
 divided into thirty two Points, but onely into four, which respect the four chief Winds, as East, West, South, and North.


The 
Chineses
 are little experienc'd in the Mystery of Navigation, not being able to take an Observation of what Latitude they are in with a 
Quadrant,
 but govern themselves onely by their 
Compass
 and 
Evening-Star:
 At the rising of a Storm or Tempest they chuse not Sea-room as our Mariners, but running with their Ships ashore, leap over-board, and cry 
Sequa, Sequa.


I will here annex what I have receiv'd concerning the 
Chinese
 Ships, from the Writings of 
David Wright,
 who resided a considerable time in the Island of 
Formosa
 and 
China.


The 
Chineses
 (saith he) call their great Ships 
Zoen,
 and not Jonks, or 
Ioven∣cheu,
 as most have written, but by that Name understand our 
Christian
 Vessels; some of them carry a thousand one hundred Last, or twenty two hundred Tun, some a thousand, others six hundred, others two, and many less.


Their Men of War have a Fore-Castle, and another along the Quarter-Deck, which are higher than the sides of the Ship; in which the Soldiers keep in the time of a close Fight, and serve also for Gun-Rooms, wherein they keep their Arms and Ammunition.


Their greatest Ships of War carry not above forty Guns, some thirty, and others twenty, and ten; all the Guns which they carry in their Vessels being smaller than ours, some carrying not above eight pound Ball, others scarce four, three, two, or one; some are Cast of Copper, others of Brass.


Men of War with forty Guns carry eight hundred Men; those with ten, two hundred, and generally more Soldiers than Sea-men.


The Arms which they use are Musquets, Pikes, Darts, Bowes, Shields and Swords, with Fire-balls, and the like, besides many Fire-ships.


Their Men of War are made after another manner than ours, with broad Sterns; and also broad before, yet not above three Foot▪ and from the mid∣dle they run narrower towards the Head; they have no Keel, but are flat at the bottom; the biggest as well as the smallest carry two Masts, without Yards, Mizne, or Boltsprit. The Sails are made of Rushes and Cane Leaves in this manner:


First they make Net-work of split Reeds, as big as the Sail they intend to make, which spreading on the Ground, they lay five double Leaves of Canes all over it, and on these another Network made just like the undermost, all which is twin'd fast together round about and in the middle: which be∣ing thus made, are fastned to the Yard with Ropes, like those of the 
Dutch Hoys;
 they loose and fasten the Strings one by one, and the Sail when taken from the Yard, is rowl'd up and laid along in the Ship; the Ropes wherewith they tie them are made of Hair, but their Cables of Canes or Reeds; the Sails have neither Braces nor Bowlings, but abundance of small Ropes, which are fastned from the top down to the bottom of the Sail, and all knotted together about a Fathom distance from it.


The Anchors are made of a sort of exceeding strong Wood, which sinks in the Water like Iron, and fastens in the Ground, with Flooks like ours; but they have no Anchor-stocks nor Rings, but through the end where our Anchor∣stock is made fast, runs a Rope.


The 
Chineses
 carry no Flag-staffs, but in stead thereof a Mast, which stands in that part of the Ship where our Mizne-Mast stands: their Flags hang at the end of a long Stick on the top of the fore-mention'd Mast; which Stick is drawn up by a Rope that runs through the top, and is made fast about the middle thereof; on the other end is a Rope, with which they pull down the end of the Staff, and hoise up the other to which the Flag is fastned; they also carry Flags and Penons on their Fore and Main-Mast, according to the inser∣ted Sculpture.


The Men of War generally bear a round Circle in their Flags, and not (as 
Linschot
 tells us) three Crescents with seven Stars, after the 
Mahumetan
 manner, one half Red, and the other yellow: and the whole Circle is surrounded with forty three Specks.


When any Ships come to an Anchor, then their Rudder, which is of another fashion than ours, they hoise Aboard, and put on again when they set Sail.


They have another sort of Vessels, by those of the Province of 
Fokien
 call'd 
Koeya,
 which are much lesser, the greatest carrying not above fifty, and the smallest twenty Tun, bearing onely one Mast.


A third sort call'd 
Sampan,
 or 
Champan,
 have also one Mast, but six Oars.


A fourth nam'd 
Lantya,
 have neither Sails nor Masts, but are like Barges, and carry'd with sixteen Oars, eight on each side, and to every one eight Men. These Vessels are not onely long, but bear a breadth, and serve against the Py∣rats, which much molest the Rivers.


The Emperor keeps great numbers of these Vessels for the safeguard of Travellers and Merchants, and likewise keeps great Fleets of them upon the Sea-bordering Provinces, for defence of his Havens and Harbors.


All the Emperor's Ships and 
Lantayes
 carry in chief, the Imperial Arms in their Flags, being a Dragon with five Claws on each Foot.


When any of their Ships coming from a foraign Countrey, stands in for the Shore, they can immediately know from whence it comes, and what her Loading, never asking from whence, or what their Freight, for they give no∣tice thereof in this manner: The Pilot at the beating on Drums and Kettles, standing on the Stern, begins to make signs with the Staff in his Hands, and sometimes waves it over his Head, then behind his Back, then up in the Air, and annon down to his Feet; then laying the Staff down, he makes as many strange signs with his Hands and Arms, as he did before; which done, he takes the Staff up again, and begins a new, whilst the Pilots of those Ships that Ride at an Anchor in the Harbors, exactly observe his motions, and thereby know all what they desire concerning the Vessel; which strange kind of signs and tokens the 
Netherlanders
 believe are not to be done by Humane Reason, but by Necromancy and Arts of the Devil.






Common Roads, or High-Ways.


ALl strangers may justly wonder at the Roads and common High-ways that are so many, and withal, strangely and artificially contriv'd by Humane Industry, for the conveniency of the Traveller; especially in all the Southern Provinces, the Ways are first Levell'd and Pav'd with Stones, because they use not many Horses nor Wains: The highest Mountains are also turn'd into good Roads, by cutting and making Passages through the Cliffs on each side: Hills and tops of Mountains are Levell'd, and Vallies fill'd up therewith, to the great ease of Travellers.


There are also on certain places, as at every Stone, (lying ten 
Chinese
 Fur∣longs from one another) Messengers or Posts, which speedily convey all Let∣ters, the Emperor's and Governor's Edicts from one place to another, by which means, nothing that is strange or News happens, but in few days, it is spread through the whole Empire.


At every eighth Stone, being a Tract of a days Journey, are publick Houses or Inns, for Entertainment, call'd 
Cungyuon
 and 
Yhi,
 which entertain all Go∣vernors, Magistrates, and other Imperial Officers, of what Degree soever, with their several Trains, at the Emperor's Charge; but they must by a Harbenger pre-acquaint the Hoast or Master of their coming, with the quality and number of their Attendance, so that when they come, they find all things in a readiness, not onely Provisions, but also Horses, Sedans, Porters, and Vessels, if there be occasion for them; for whatsoever he desires to have, he gives notice thereof to the Inn-keeper, by a Letter, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Pai.


In like manner, the Shores and Banks of Rivers are like the High-ways, handsomly made up, without any Trees or other hindrances, within eight Foot from the Water, that those which Tow the Vessels by Land, may have a clear Passage.


And also the Walls of several places are rais'd from the ground with great square Stones, and over-laid with Stone Bridges of divers Arches, where oc∣casion requires it; so that the 
Chineses
 in this Point, not onely exceed the anci∣ent 
Romans,
 but may also with all other People strive for the Palm, for though the 
Chineses
 are not comparable to the 
Europeans,
 in the Building of stately and strong Houses; yet in the erecting of Stone Bridges of exceeding bigness, and many Arches, they far exceed them, as may appear by the Description of se∣veral before-mention'd.








Rivers, Streams, and Channels.


AMongst the Rivers which moisten the Countrey of 
China,
 the 
Kiang
 and 
Hoang,
 or 
Yellow River,
 deserve the first place, partly for their long course through almost the whole Empire, and partly for their greatness and abundance of Water.


The greatest Rivers are in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Kiang,
 but the less, 
Ho.


The 
Yangzu-Kiang,
 or for its excellency, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Kiang,
 as if they would say, 
The Son of the Sea,
 divides all 
China
 into a North and South part.


The River 
Kiang
 gliding from the West to the East, takes its Original out of the Mountain 
Min,
 which runs in a ledge of Hills, from the utmost Western Borders of the Province of 
Suchuen,
 into the Kingdom of 
Sifan,
 and extends Northward to the City 
Guei.


It hath several Names from the several Countreys through and by which it passes; its first Name is 
Min,
 from the Mountain 
Min,
 its Spring and Ori∣ginal, from whence it rushes with great force of Water, by the chief City 
Chingtu,
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 and divides it self by the spreading into seve∣ral Branches, and Incloses great part of the County 
Chintingfu,
 especially at and near the Metropolis 
Chingtu,
 in such a manner, with his Meandring Reaches and crooked Windings, that it lieth like an Island, and at the City 
Sincin,
 it changes its Name into that of 
Takiang,
 and passes from thence, inrich'd with the Wa∣ters of other Rivulets; as the 
Lunghoa,
 from the East-side, and 
Chocang, Cin,
 and 
Tatu,
 from the West-side, by the City 
Sui,
 into the Stream of 
Mahu;
 from thence going on Eastward to the City 
Liucheu,
 where it is call'd 
Linkiang,
 and gliding to the City 
Chunking,
 receives the great River 
Pa
 with this Name; then passes North, through the County of 
Chunkingfu
 and 
Queicheufu,
 Southward of the City 
Queicheu
 or 
Patung,
 in one and thirty Degrees Northern Latitude, out of the Province of 
Suchuen,
 into that of 
Huquang,
 and then takes again the Name of 
Takiang,
 not far from the City of 
Queicheu.


To this place it tumbles with many Gulfs, and great force of Water through crooked Vallies, amidst dangerous Rocks and amazing Precepices, which the 
Chineses
 in their Sailing, with great dexterity and nimbleness, know how to shun: But afterwards begins to glide more gentler, where on the North it falls in the Lake 
Tungting;
 and passing thence, this Lake and the chief City 
Vuchang
 enters the Province of 
Kiangsi,
 and there receives out of the Lake 
Poy∣ang,
 by which it passes on the North, great abundance of Water, and the name of 
Iang
u Kiang.


From thence falling into the Province of 
Nanking,
 a little after makes an Isle can 
Sango,
 Eastward from the City 
Sosing,
 where expatiating it self two Leagues, goes Northward through the whole Province of 
Nanking;
 and to the West and North by the City 
Nanking
 it self.


In the County 
Taipingfu,
 Southward from the City 
Nanking,
 the 
Kiang
 di∣vides it self into two Arms, and makes the Island on which the little City 
Vu∣hu
 stands situate, which afterwards against 
Nanking
 unite themselves again: On the South-West side of the City 
Taiping,
 the 
Kiang
 is press'd between two Hills belonging to the Mountain 
Tienmuen,
 through which it passes like a Gate; for which reason the Mountain is call'd 
Tienmuen,
 that is, 
Heaven Gate;
 then running by 
Chinkiang,
 at last disembogues it self through a great Bay into the Ocean; wherein lies in a small Isle the City 
Cinkiang,
 Garrison'd with Soldiers,


and Fortifi'd with Ships; on both sides the Shores, are for the most part built with great and small Cities, Villages and Hamlets.


Before its fall from the City 
Kieukiam
 into the Sea, a Tract of above a hun∣dred Leagues, the 
Kiang
 glides so gently, that the Ships may Sail up the same, with or against the Wind, and some Tides, especially Spring-Tides, (a strange thing to relate,) the Water running up so far in the Countrey, that Sea-Fish are there taken.


In this Stream lie several Isles, as 
Pequey,
 that is, of the white 
Tortel,
 in the third County 
Hoangcheufu,
 of the Province of 
Huquang.


In this County 
Kincheufu,
 of the Province of 
Huquang,
 a little Island call'd 
Peli,
 which signifies, 
An hundred Furlongs,
 lies near the City 
Chikiang,
 in the Ri∣ver 
Kiang:
 In ancient times, as the 
Chineses
 write, it was nine small Isles, which afterwards by the falling of the Waters and increase of Sands, became one in∣tire Island.


On the South-side of the City 
Kiangning,
 lies an Island call'd 
Pelu,
 famous, because not far from it, the Armies of the Southern Provinces were in the time of the Family 
Sung,
 beaten and utterly routed.


Near the City 
Kiang,
 lieth the Isle 
Chancung,
 and on the South-West side an∣other, call'd 
Tengxu.


The 
Yellow River,
 the second in Magnitude, and most famous in all 
China,
 and by them nam'd 
Hoang,
 is so call'd from the colour of the Water, occa∣sion'd by the Yellow Mud or Clay Earth, which from the Spring to the Sea it glides over: It is always disturb'd and made thick by a Yellow Soil, which it carries along; because this Mud, which gives the denomination, and doth not as in other clear Waters, shine from the Ground, but discolours, being rais'd by the swift and strong Current of the Water (after the manner of Rivulets which swell by Rains) the whole River, as hath often been found by experience; for when its Water is for a little while put into a Vessel, or Glass, the sediment sinks so fast down to the bottom, that it makes almost a third part; and in∣deed, this River at the first sight seems to be a Pool or flowing Mud, but the swift Current of its Waters manifests the contrary: Those that frequent this River, make the Water clear by casting in Allom, which drives the Lees to the Ground, and fills the fourth part of the Vessel. It is a great wonder, from whence such abundance of Clay or Mud proceeds, considering it hath never been seen clear or bright; nay, the 
Chineses
 say, That its Water cannot be clear in the time of a thousand Years, insomuch that they have a Proverb from thence amongst them, 
viz.
 when they speak of things that are never like to happen, as altogether impossible, they say, 
When the Yellow River shall be bright.
 Moreover, the 
Hoang,
 as a Foraigner, entering from without into 
China,
 takes Original out of the Southern 
Amasian
 Mountains, otherwise call'd 
Quonlun,
 and by the Inhabitants, 
Otunlao,
 which lie not far from the great 
Mogul's
 second Court, nam'd 
Laor,
 or from the Kingdom of 
Tibet;
 Nay, the situation of the places shew, that the River 
Ganges
 in 
Bengale,
 the 
Meson
 in 
Laor,
 and other fa∣mous Rivers which moisten the Countries of 
Siam
 and 
Pegu,
 have their Origi∣nals from these Mountains before-mention'd; for the 
Chineses
 also manifest, that many great Rivers, have their head Springs and Fountains there; leaving these Mountains, it runs by 
Sifan
 and 
Tanyu,
 a Tract of above 300 Leagues, with abundance of Water to the North-East, from whence descending to the East, it approaches 
China,
 near the County of 
Linyaofu,
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 at the West end of the 
Great Wall,
 along which it rushes, and passes on through a part


of the Kingdom of 
Tanyu,
 between the Desart 
Karacatay,
 otherwise 
Samo;
 after∣wards through the Desart it self, with a swift Course, and several Branches to the East and North, a Tract of two thousand Furlongs; from whence it turns South-West to 
China,
 and in forty Degrees and eighteen Minutes Nor∣thern-Latitude, runs through the Gate 
Se
 in the 
Great Wall
 of 
China,
 and shoots along between the Province of 
Xansi
 and that of 
Xensi,
 and in the Latitude of thirty six Degrees enters into the Province of 
Honan,
 and out of that into the Province of 
Xantung,
 near the City 
Cao;
 from whence it runs towards the South-East, and passes on through the Northern part of the Province of 
Nan∣king,
 and discharges it self at last with great violence into the Sea, in thirty two Degrees and a half Northern-Latitude.


The 
Hoang
 generally falls with such an incredible swiftness, that no Boats can Row against it, but are forc'd up with a far greater number of Toers than in the River 
Kiang.
 In some places it is above half a League, and others more, and extending it self in length above eight hundred Leagues, oftentimes rises above its Banks, and covers all the neighboring Countreys with Water and Mud. The 
Chineses
 describe the 
Hoang
 in these, or the like words:


The original of the River 
Hoang
 is between the Southern Mountains of 
Quonlun
 or 
Amasian
 Hills, by the Inhabitants call'd 
Otunlao.
 The Water which makes this River springs from above a hundred Fountains, which makes the Lake call'd 
Singcieu,
 which is forty Furlongs wide; the Water running out of it along a Channel makes another lesser Lake, from whence the 
Hoang
 runs Northward, through a little towards the East, and soon after washes the Province of 
Xensi,
 and runs direct East, then passing on Northward by the Sandy Fields or Wildernesses, from whence it streams Southward into 
China,
 and through the Province of 
Xantung
 discharges it self into the Sea. Thus far the 
Chinese
 Writer.


In former times this River us'd also to run through the Province of 
Peking
 and 
Xantung,
 but its Course is since by the art and labor of the 
Chineses
 led ano∣ther way, thereby to prevent the overflowing the fore-mention'd Countreys, which by reason of their Champain Lands that extend themselves a great way in breadth and length, should not be subject to its often inundating Streams; yet nevertheless the 
Chineses
 have left a little Branch thereof, as a testimony of its ancient Course thither.


After having given you an account of the two famous Rivers, the 
Kiang
 and 
Hoang,
 take a brief Relation of all the particular Streams, both small and great, which distinctly water every Province in the Empire of 
China.


THe River 
Io
 takes its original out of the Lake 
Si,
 lying Westward of the Mountain 
Iociven
 in the County of 
Pekingfu,
 from whence it passes through the Emperor's Palace, and gliding through it with many artificial Trenches, and meandring Inlets, waters the Gardens, and also makes several Lakes.


The Stream 
Lukeu,
 which is call'd 
Sangean,
 takes its beginning in the County of 
Taitungfu,
 in the Province of 
Xansi,
 out of the Mountain 
Iueny;
 from whence it runs North-East, and at the City 
Hoaigin
 receives the River 
He,
 which makes the Lake 
Kiuncun;
 and thence proceeding on its Course enters Northward of the Fort 
Guei,
 into the Province of 
Peking,
 where en∣larged by the Stream 
Guei,
 which hath its original in the same County 
Tai∣tingfu▪
 out of the Mountains near the City 
Quangchang,
 it divides the whole


Territory 
Pekingfu,
 and gliding Southward by the City 
Paogan
 with a broader Channel, passes under a large Stone Bridge, and receives the Stream 
Caoleang,
 which out of the 
Yellow Kiver
 through the 
Great Wall
 falls into the Province of 
Peking;
 from thence passing towards the South-East, rowls along South-West by the Metropolis 
Peking,
 where a Stone Bridge with many Arches lies over the same, then bending Southerly passes East by the Cities of 
Fungan
 and 
Iungein,
 where after having receiv'd the Rivers 
Yo
 and 
Pe,
 disembogues it self at last in the Bay of 
Sang.


The River 
Kiuto
 hath its original in the Province of 
Xansi,
 out of the Mountain 
Cinhi,
 from whence it glides Eastward by the Cities 
Tai
 and 
Kicchi,
 and aftewards Southerly receives by the way the Stream 
Linsui,
 with which to the Northward of the City 
Henping,
 it enters into the Province of 
Peking,
 which it almost cuts through, the Counties 
Chintingfu, Paotungfu,
 and 
Pe∣kingfu,
 and at last near the Garrison of 
Tiencin
 discharges its Waters, being joyn'd with the River 
Guei,
 into the Sea: It receives by the way several Brooks and Rivulets, as in the County 
Chinting,
 near the City 
Lingxui,
 that of 
Quei;
 more Eastward, the Stream 
Fi;
 near the City 
Tuilo,
 the 
Ta;
 in the County 
Paoting
 by the City 
Poye,
 the 
Kinguen;
 afterwards the Channel call'd 
In,
 which out of the Mountain 
Yekon
 stretching from the North to the West, glides round about within the City, and with its winding Arms makes the Island 
Pehoa,
 and at last the Streams 
Ye
 and 
Fan.


The River 
Ye
 divides Northward the County 
Paotingfu,
 beginning Westward in the Mountain 
Culeang,
 reaches towards the South by the City 
Ye,
 and re∣ceives by the way in the County 
Xuntienfu,
 the 
Fan;
 glides Eastward between the Mountain 
Non,
 and Southward by the City 
Paoting,
 where it unites its Waters with the River 
Kiuto.


The 
Chokiang
 hath its beginning in the Province of 
Xansi,
 out of the Moun∣tain 
Kieu,
 lying near the City 
Sin,
 from whence it runs Eastward through the utmost Northern Point of the Province of 
Honan;
 to the North, by the City 
Xe;
 and passing through the Counties 
Xuntefu
 and 
Quangpingfu,
 en∣ters the Province of 
Peking;
 from whence it glides through the Lake 
Talo
 into the County 
Chintingfu,
 and at last poures its Waters into the River 
Guei,
 in the Territory of 
Hokienfu,
 near the Mountain 
Si
 and the City 
Sing.
 This Stream 
Chekiang
 receives several Rivulets by the way.


The River 
Guei,
 which rises in the Province of 
Honan
 in the County 
Guei∣choeifu,
 on the West side of the City runs along to the North by the same; from thence entring the Province of 
Peking,
 glides to the North-East between the Borders of the Province of 
Peking
 and that of 
Xantung;
 receives near the City 
Lincing
 in the Province of 
Xantung,
 the Water of the Channel 
Iun;
 and in the County of 
Hokienfu,
 the River 
Chaohang;
 and at last with the 
Kiuto,
 disem∣bogues it self near the Garrison 
Tieucin,
 into the Bay of 
Sang.


The Water of this River hath a peculiar property at the place where it re∣ceives the artificial Channel 
Iun,
 as the 
Netherlanders
 in their Embassies to the Emperor of 
China
 have twice observ'd, that is, Throw nine Sticks of an equal length into the River, and six of them, after a little lying still, will move to the South, and three to the North.


This River in its Course receives several Rivulets, as the 
Si, Chang, Ki, Ming,
 and 
Fu:
 The 
Si
 takes its beginning in the Mountain 
Cu,
 Northward of the same City, in the County 
Chungtefu
 and Province of 
Honan,
 and passes through the County 
Quangpingfu;
 Southward, to the City 
Quangping;
 and Eastward, to the 
Guei.


The 
Chang,
 which hath its original near the City 
Lugan
 in the neighboring Mountain 
Sin,
 in the Province of 
Xansi,
 runs from thence through the Province of 
Honan,
 Northward of the City 
Changte,
 and accordingly into the 
Guei,
 and in the way thither by the City 
Luching,
 receives a small Rivulet, which hath its original in the Mountain call'd 
Lin.


The 
Ming,
 a Stream whose Fountain Head is Northward of the City 
Quang∣ping,
 takes its Course South-East towards the 
Guei.


The 
Fu,
 which begins in the Province of 
Honan,
 in the County of 
Lu∣ganfu,
 Northward from the City 
Liching,
 runs through the Province of 
Honan
 into the 
Guei.


The River 
Ki
 takes original with several Branches in the County 
Guehoei
 of the Province of 
Honan,
 especially in the Mountains 
Sumei
 and 
Choayang,
 from whence one Branch runs by the City 
Ki,
 and then glides North-East into the 
Guei.


The 
Hoei
 belongs properly to the Province of 
Pingyangfu,
 and springs from the Mountain 
Vanquo,
 near the City 
Ieching;
 from whence passing Westward, glides by the South-side of the Cities 
Hia, Vanciven, Lincin
 and 
Pu,
 where it falls into the 
Yellow River,
 and by the way Northward receives the 
Kiang.


The 
Sin,
 which waters the 
Ce,
 a City in the Province of 
Xansi,
 almost sur∣rounding the same, hath his Fountain in the County of 
Pingyangfu,
 Northward from the Mountain 
Mien;
 from whence it passes Southward into the County of 
Hoaikingfu,
 Eastward from the City 
Vucheu,
 and joyns with the 
Yellow River.


The River 
Tan,
 which cuts through a part of the little County 
Ce,
 in the Province of 
Xansi,
 beings to the Northward from the City 
Caoping,
 and runs Eastward in the Province of 
Honan,
 where it unites with the River 
Ki.


Tan
 signifies 
Red,
 for the Water thereof is of a bloody colour; notwith∣standing (as the 
Chineses
 relate) it hath been clear formerly, but hath receiv'd that colour from the Blood of a Loyal Governor call'd 
Pe,
 who was his own Executioner on the Banks of the fore-mention'd River.


The Streams 
Iang
 and 
Io
 begin Northward in the Mountains of the County of 
Ienping,
 and pass through the same to the South, but at the City 
Vunning
 unite themselves into one Body, which Eastward of the Garrison 
Yu
 discharges its Waters into the Bay of 
Cang.


Through the same County run also two other Rivers, 
viz.
 the 
Y
 and 
Cie;
 the first begins above the County 
Pekingfu,
 from the Mountain 
Petam;
 the other out of the 
East-Tartary
 without the 
Great Wall,
 where it divides it self into two Arms, the one call'd 
Hing,
 and the other 
Hoang.
 The Rivers 
Y
 and 
Cie
 make one Channel near the City 
Lo,
 and disembogue themselves in the Bay of 
Cang.


The 
Guei,
 a pleasant River in the Province of 
Peking
 in the Western part of the Province of 
Xensi,
 in the County 
Linyaofu,
 near the City 
Gueiyven,
 and runs from thence winding to the South-East through the Counties of 
Cungchangfu, Fungciangfu,
 and 
Siganfu;
 to the North by the chief City 
Sigan,
 where it re∣ceives the River 
King,
 and poures at last its clear Waters into the 
Yellow River,
 near the City 
Puching
 in the County of 
Siganfa.


The River 
King
 spreads it self with several Branches, as the Streams 
Kin
 and 
Haoting
 through the County 
Pingleangfu;
 from whence it goes on Eastward, leaving the City 
King
 to the West, afterwards Southerly poures its Waters East from the chief City 
Sigan,
 into the River 
Guei.


The Stream 
Yao,
 which takes original out of 
Sifan,
 otherwise call'd 
Prester-Iohns
 Countrey, or 
Tibet,
 descends Southward through the County of 
Linyaofu,



and with great abundance of Water, roaring like Thunder, rowls along Nor∣therly by the City 
Linyao,
 and at last enlarg'd with the Stream 
Tahia,
 falls into the 
Yellow River
 near the Mountain 
Ciexe.


The Stream 
Hoan
 (another besides the fore-mention'd great River 
Hoang
) springs up in the Mountains 
Taise
 or 
Ulum,
 in the County of 
Kingyangfu;
 from whence gliding towards the South by the City 
Hoang,
 and near the City 
Fun∣given,
 in the County 
Siganfu,
 unites it self with the River 
Kiang.


The 
Yung, Guei, Puon, Ring,
 and 
U.
 are Rivers, which glides through the County 
Fungyangfu,
 all of them contributing their Waters into the River 
Guei.


The 
Han,
 or 
Tungchan,
 a Stream which begins in the County of 
Cungchangfu,
 in the Mountains 
Cheuchi,
 through which falling Eastward, afterwards winds Southward, then enters the County of 
Hanchungfu;
 through which it cuts espe∣cially with two Branches, one Eastern, which begins about the City 
Fung;
 the other Western, which comes out of the Mountains about the City 
Mincheu;
 then both these Branches uniting, glides (enrich'd with Water Navigable for Ships, by the Name of 
Tan
) South-East, and pass through the County of 
Cing∣yangfu
 into the Province of 
Huquang:
 From thence the 
Han
 runs through the Counties of 
Siangyanfu
 and 
Chintienfu,
 and at last, after a long Course, poures its Waters into the Lake 
Yeuchi,
 and the River 
Kiang
 near the City 
Hanyang.


Several Rivulets discharge their Waters into this Stream, into which the River 
Guei
 glides out of the Mountains 
Io
 through the Counties of 
Siganfu
 and 
Hanchungfu.


The River 
Vuting
 runs out of the Mountains near the City 
Ganting
 through the County of 
Ienganfu,
 Southward by the City 
Cingkien,
 and poures its Waters united with the Stream 
Kiemo,
 into the 
Yellow River:
 It is generally by the 
Chi∣neses
 call'd 
The Unconstant,
 because in its Course amongst the Sands it is some∣times shallow, and sometimes deep.


The Stream 
Kiemo
 passes through the same County from the South to the North, and begins in the Mountains 
Kicinu;
 and gliding Westward by the Ci∣ties 
Paogan
 and 
Iengan,
 and with the 
Vuting
 falls into the 
Yellow River.


The Water of this Stream is said to be so thin and aerial, that no pieces of Timber nor wooden Vessels can swim upon it, but sink like Iron.


The River 
Io
 runs to the South by the Garrison 
Xaucheu,
 towards the East, and unites it self Southward of the Fort 
Culang
 with the River 
Hoanting,
 which comes out of 
Tibet,
 and running both through one Mouth, fall into the 
Yellow River.
 How far this River 
Io
 glides Westward, is not mention'd by the 
Chineses.


THe Stream 
Yo
 runs by the City 
Chaoykieu
 in the County of 
Cinanfu,
 and
 takes its original out of the neighboring Mountain 
Hosien.


The River 
Ci
 takes its beginning in the Stream 
Sun
 in the County of 
Yen∣cheufu,
 and passes North-Eastward through the County of 
Cinanfu;
 beyond which it divides it self into two Branches, the one call'd 
The Northern,
 and the other 
The Southern Cing,
 and both discharge their Waters in the 
Xangen
 Bay; at the dividing it receives the River 
Mingto,
 which glides Westward out of the Mountain 
Minxe.


The Stream 
Ven,
 which passes through the County 
Vencheufu,
 begins near the City 
Taigan;
 from whence gliding by the Cities 
Ningyang
 and 
Vengang,
 disem∣bogues near the City 
Cinning,
 Westward of the Lake 
Nanuang
 in the Channel 
Iun.


The River 
Si
 begins near the City 
Suxui;
 from whence running Westward, divides its self into two Arms, (the Eastern whereof is call'd 
Tang
) between which the City 
Kooheu
 lieth like an Island: both these Arms uniting them∣selves again, and enrich'd with the Water of the River 
Io,
 fall through one Mouth into the same Channel 
Iun.


The 
Pelang,
 a River which springs out of the Mountains near the City 
Sin∣tai,
 in the County of 
Cinanfu,
 passes Northward through the Territory of 
Cin∣cheufu,
 and gliding by the Cities 
Changlo
 and 
Xeuquan,
 discharges its Waters into the Bay of 
Xang:
 on the way the Rivers 
Hoaoquei
 and 
Chi
 flow into the same 
 the West side, and on the East the River 
Si.


The Stream 
Kiao
 runs from the South to the North through the middle of the County of 
Lucheufu,
 beyond the City 
Pinghtie,
 and poures its Waters Westward of the Fort 
Haicolang
 into the 
Cangang
 Bay: 
Kiao
 signifies 
Mud∣stream,
 because of the thickness of the Water.


The River 
Vi
 begins in the County 
Cincheufu,
 Northward of the City 
Mung,
 in the Mountain 
Tapico;
 from whence it descends Northward through the County of 
Laichenfu,
 beyond the City 
Camie,
 and disembogues into the Bay of 
Xang.
 This River being stopt in its Course by one 
Zansin,
 when his Coun∣trey was invaded, with Bags fill'd with Sand, which drowning the Champain defeated his Enemies.


The 
Y
 or 
Su
 begins in the Mountains, Westward of the City 
Kiu,
 belong∣ing to the County of 
Cincheufu,
 and Southward from the City 
Mungin;
 from whence gliding South by the East-side of the City 
Y,
 it enters the Province of 
Nanking,
 and then falls into the Channel 
Nun,
 Northward from the 
Yellow River.


The Stream 
Hucu
 springs in the West from the Mountain 
Lie,
 Northward from the City 
Po
 in the County of 
Tungchanfu;
 from whence gliding Eastward it unites with the Channel 
Iun,
 Southward from the City 
Iangco
 in the County of 
Iencheufu.


Eastward from the City 
Kao,
 the 
Si
 flows out of the Lake 
Lui,
 and runs towards the South into the 
Yellow River.


THe Streams 
Kinxui, Iu, Xeleang, Pien, Cu, Quei,
 and the 
Yellow River,
 cut
 through the County of 
Caifungfu.


The River 
Kinxui,
 which comes out of the Mountain 
Xeyang,
 in the County of 
Honanfu,
 goes Eastward through 
Caifungfu
 into the River 
Pien,
 which takes its beginning out of the 
Yellow River
 in the County of 
Caifungfu,
 Westward of the City 
Hoin,
 and glides East by the South side of the Kity 
Caifung;
 from whence running on to the South-East through the County of 
Queitefu,
 it passes by the West side of the City 
Ningling,
 then passes on through the County of 
Fungyangfu
 in the Province of 
Nanking,
 and by the City 
Lingpi
 unites it self again with the 
Yellow River.


The Stream 
Quei
 divides the County of 
Caifungfu
 with several Branches, and seems to take its original out of the Lake 
Si,
 Westward from the City 
Hiu;
 from whence it passes East, and afterwards South through the same County, and by the West side of the Cities 
Hiangching
 and 
Xinkian,
 then passing through the County of 
Fungyangfu
 in the Province of 
Nanking,
 where changing its Name, and taking up that of 
Ing,
 at last falls Southerly into the 
Hoai.


The River 
Cin,
 which begins in the County of 
Caifungfu
 and the Mountains 
Iuling,
 North from the City 
Iu,
 runs East to the City 
Ienling,
 then gliding Southward, unites with the Stream 
Quei.


The River 
Iu,
 takes Original out of the Lake 
Quanching,
 lyeth West from the City 
Iu,
 where it joyns it self with the River 
Scenal,
 and from thence flows through the County 
Iu;
 afterwards East, through the North part of the Coun∣ty 
Nanyangfu;
 and at last turning its course through the County 
Iunningfu,
 to∣wards the South, it falls into the River 
Hoai,
 near the City 
Quang.


The 
Xoleang,
 whose Head is in the County 
Honanfu,
 Southward from the Mountains 
Xeyang,
 flows from thence Southerly, to the West side of the Coun∣ty 
Caifungfu,
 and unites its self at the entrance into the County 
Iuningfu,
 with the River 
Iu.


Through the County 
Queitefu
 flows the Streams 
Pien;
 describ'd before the 
Cin
 and 
Hoang,
 or 
Yellow River.


The River 
Ciu
 begins in the County 
Caifungfu,
 Westward from the City 
Chinglieu,
 and runs Southward through the County 
Queitefu,
 by the South-side of the City 
Queite;
 afterwards East, and again South, by the Mountain 
Tang,
 and enters near the City 
Tangxan
 into the Province of 
Nanking,
 and soon after into the 
Yellow River.


The Rivers 
Lo
 and 
Ganyang,
 otherwise call'd 
Von,
 pass by the City 
Liu,
 where they loose themselves under-ground several Furlongs, but soon after appear again.


The 
Ki,
 which divides the County 
Hoaikingfu,
 comes out of the Mountain 
Vanno,
 where falling under-ground, soon after makes the Lake 
Taye;
 from whence gliding Eastward into the 
Yellow River,
 is call'd, the 
Ci.


Through the County 
Honanfu,
 the Rivers 
Chan, Kien, Ko,
 or 
Lo,
 and 
Y:
 The River 
Y
 begins near the City 
Luxi,
 in the Mountain 
Lu;
 and gliding Eastward, unites with the 
Co
 or 
Lo,
 near the City 
Honan.


The 
Lo
 or 
Co,
 an excellent River, comes out of the County 
Siganfu,
 from the Mountain 
Lo,
 in the Province of 
Xensi;
 from whence it passes North, North-East, by the East side of the City 
Iunning,
 where it receives the River 
Hivenhu,
 and unites it self at last near the City 
Hanan
 with the River 
Y;
 with which it glides from thence into the 
Yellow River.


The Stream 
Kien,
 which begins in Mount 
Pexe,
 to the Southward of the 
Yel∣low River,
 runs Eastward into the River 
Y;
 and Eastward from the City 
Honan,
 the River 
Chan
 glides to the North.


The Rivers 
Yo
 or 
Pe, Tan, Pie,
 and 
Hoai,
 through the Territory 
Nanyangfu.


The 
Pe
 or 
Yo,
 beginning in the North of this County in the Mountain 
Yu;
 from whence it runs South, and passes through the Territory 
Cingyangfu
 into the Province of 
Huquang,
 gliding Eastward by the City 
Quanghoa,
 and immediately after into the River 
Tunghan.


The 
Pie,
 which begins Westward from the City 
Yu,
 runs Southward, and unites with the Stream 
Pe,
 on the Borders of the Province of 
Huquang.


The 
Tan
 begins at the West side of the City 
Nuihiang,
 and shoots from thence South-East by the South part of the Towns 
Checheuen
 and 
Sinye,
 and at last falls into the 
Pe.


The 
Palu,
 which begins on the Northern Borders of the Province of 
Hu∣quang,
 glides North-East into the River 
Hoai,
 East from the City 
Quang.


The 
Sienul
 springs out of the Mountain 
Ri,
 near the City 
Tenfung,
 in the County 
Honangfu,
 from whence it glides South-West into the Territory 
Iu,
 Eastward from the Lake 
Quangching.


The 
Chu,
 which begins in the County 
Chintufu,
 Southward from the City 
Ginxeu,
 passes South through the same, and towards the West by the City 
Nin∣kiang,



unites with the Stream 
Yoyung,
 which coming out of the County 
Tung∣chuen,
 receives another River near the Mountain 
Loking,
 which hath its Original in the Territory 
Chintufu.


The 
Chu,
 thus inrich'd with Water, glides to the South, and takes the Name of 
Chung,
 and so passes on through the County 
Sincheufu,
 and at last towards the East, through the County of the City 
Lincheu,
 and disembogues Southward of the City 
Hokiang,
 into the River 
Kiang.


The 
Kiang,
 which from North to South runs through the whole County of 
Chingtufu,
 under the Name of 
Takiang,
 runs Southward by the West side of the City 
Muen,
 and receives on the East the River 
Yolung;
 after which it divides near the City 
Sinfung
 into several Branches, which about and near the City 
Chingtu,
 joyn together, and surrounding the City and adjacent Countrey, make it an Isle: One of these Branches which run to the Southward of the City, is call'd 
Kin,
 and generally also 
Damask River,
 because its Water gives a great Gloss to Silk, if it be wash'd therein: Another, more towards the West, is call'd 
Chia
 or 
Hoanglang,
 that is, 
Yellow Dragon,
 for it is said, that in the time of the Family 
Han,
 a Yellow Dragon was seen in the same; but glides towards the South, through the County of the City 
Muicheu
 and 
Kiating,
 and falls at last near the City 
Muicheu,
 into 
Kiang
 or 
Taking.


The 
Lungchoa
 running out of the County of the City 
Muicheu;
 to the South-West and North, by the City 
Gueiyven,
 discharges its Water in the 
Che
 or 
Cin.


The 
Cin,
 which begins in the Mountains 
Cinsing,
 in the Territory 
Yacheufu,
 falls Southward through the same County, by the East side of the City 
Yacheu;
 afterward through that of 
Kiating;
 and at last Westward, by the City 
Kiating,
 where it unites with the River 
To
 or 
Tatu.


The River 
Chocung,
 which hath its Original in the Territory of 
Kiungchoa,
 in the Mountain 
Gomui,
 passes through the Southern parts thereof, and through the County of 
Kiating,
 into the Stream 
Takiang
 or 
Kiang:
 This River is eminent amongst the 
Chineses,
 for a wonderful accident that happen'd to a Woman, who walking along its Bank, saw a great Cane standing on the Wa∣ter, from which hearing a noise, and pulling up the Cane, found a Child in∣clos'd therein, which she carry'd home with her, who breeding it up, not long after became a great Conqueror, and was call'd 
Yelang,
 and first on the West side of this River, Planted the Kingdom of 
Yeleang.


The 
To
 or 
Tatu
 which runs towards the Kingdom of 
Sifan,
 is a Branch led from the River 
Kiang,
 cut by Command of the Emperor 
Yu,
 to prevent the over-flowing of the River 
Kiang.


The 
Chexu
 washes the South-West side of the Province 
Suchuen;
 from whence it glides North-East, and falls on the West side into the Lake 
Mahu:
 Some∣what Northerly, the River 
Lu
 takes the same course and so ends.


The 
Pa,
 taking Original in the Northern Mountains of the County 
Paoning∣fu,
 moistens the same, and runs Eastward by the City 
Pa,
 to which it gives denomination; and afterwards passes Southward through the County 
Xun∣kingfu,
 and near the Mountain 
Iohoan,
 receives the River 
Chai;
 near the City 
Tacho,
 the River 
Lin;
 near the City 
Riu,
 the Stream 
Yu,
 and unites it self in the County 
Chungkingfu;
 near the Mountain 
Tu,
 with the River 
Sihan
 or 
Sung,
 and 
Feu,
 which all of them with their conjoyn'd Streams fall into the River 
Kiang,
 Southward from the City 
Chungking.


The 
Pa,
 a River which is so call'd, because with its Meandring Reaches it represents the 
Chinese
 Character call'd 
Pa,
 which signifies 
Enough.


The 
Feu,
 begins in the North part of the Province of 
Suchuen,
 in the Coun∣ty 
Lungganfu,
 on the South-West side of the City 
Lunggan;
 passing from thence South, through this and the Territory 
Chingtufu;
 and Eastward, by the City 
Tungchuen;
 from whence it bends East, and glides through the County 
Chun∣kingfu,
 where, near the Mountain 
Pu,
 it mingles with the 
Ta.


The 
Chuen,
 which springs in the Mountains Northward from the City 
Quang∣gan,
 in the County 
Xankingfu,
 and gliding South by the West side of the City 
Quanggan;
 more Southerly by the West side also of the City 
Gochi,
 at the end of the County, falls into the River 
Sung
 or 
Sihan:
 In it are thirty six deep Water∣falls, where it descends violently with great noise.


The 
Sung,
 by some call'd 
Sihan,
 begins in the Province of 
Xensi,
 in thirty Degrees and fifty Minutes Northern-Latitude, at the East side of the Garrison 
Mincheu,
 from whence it passes Southward, and in thirty three Degrees and forty Minutes North-Latitude, enters the Province of 
Suchuen;
 then running through the County 
Paoningfu,
 by the West side of the City 
Zangki,
 receives the 
Tung,
 falling out of the Mountain 
Xeyen;
 so gliding by the City 
Paoning,
 enters at last into the Territory of 
Chungkingfu,
 and near the Mountain 
Fu,
 joyns with the Rivers 
Pa
 and 
Feu,
 which all loose themselves near the City 
Chungking
 in the River 
Kiang.


The 
Xe,
 which rises in the Mountains, Westward from the City 
Kien,
 passes Southward through the Mountain 
Tapa,
 and with several Windings, glides Eastward by the City 
Lenting
 and 
Xehung;
 then passing on South-East, makes way through the County of 
Xunkingfu,
 and mixes at the South-end thereof with the River 
Sihan
 or 
Sung.


The 
Xemuen
 or 
Heng,
 runs through the South part of the Territory 
Siucheu∣fu,
 by the South-West side of the City 
Siucheu,
 with great force and Precipices, call'd the 
Bell,
 because it makes a noise like a Bell, re-sounding with Ec∣choes.


Lastly, the River 
Xemuen
 falls in the 
Kiang:
 The Stream 
Cingy,
 also passing on the East side of the same Territory, fills the River 
Kiang.


The 
Cing
 and 
Tosiang,
 cut through the Territory 
Queicheufu;
 the first which takes Original in the Lake 
Cingyven,
 and falls joyn'd with the 
Tosiang,
 which glides out of the Lake 
Cienking
 into the 
Kiang,
 Eastward from the City 
Quei∣cheu: Cing
 signifies 
Clear,
 because its water is clearer than any other Rivers in this Province.


The 
Tahoa,
 which passes through the South side of the County 
Chunkingfu,
 glides Northward by the West side of the City 
Vulung,
 and falls on the West side also of the City 
Changxu,
 into the River 
Kiang.


The 
Kiu
 or 
Kiukiang,
 begins with two Branches, the one call'd 
Piniao,
 in the South part of the Province of 
Queicheu,
 Westward from the City 
Luken;
 and with the other, in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 Southward of the Mountain 
Fu∣yung,
 from whence it glides North-East along the South-East side of the Pro∣vince of 
Suchuen;
 afterwards running Northerly into the County 
Chunkingfu,
 falls Eastward of the City 
Changxeu
 into the River 
Kiang:
 By the way, the 
Ciu
 receives on the North side of the Garrison 
Pingchai
 the 
Nanyang;
 and in the County 
Vunkingfu,
 the Stream 
U,
 Northward from the City 
Pengxui.


THe 
Han,
 which runs through the North part of the Countrey 
Vuchanfu,
 falls Westward of the little City 
Vuchan,
 into the 
Kiang:
 The water of the 
Han
 is exceeding cold, insomuch, that it makes the Air about the same


temperate in the 
Dog-Days;
 for which cause, the Kings in times past built a Palace over the same, to reside in the Summer.


The 
Io
 springs in the Mountains, Southward from the City 
Vuchan,
 and runs Northerly through the middle of the City into the 
Kiang.


The 
Sui
 takes Original in the Mountains, Eastward from the City 
Tangzan,
 and glides North-West into the 
Kiang;
 through the South part of this County passes another Branch, which also discharges in the 
Kiang.


The 
Cha
 divides the whole County 
Teganfu,
 and takes Original in the Moun∣tain 
Tahaung,
 from whence it passes Southward by the East side of the City 
Sui,
 and inlarg'd with the Stream 
Tuen,
 on the West side, and with others on the East side, out of the Lake 
Tuigmung,
 by the West part of the City 
Tegan;
 at last, mixt near the City 
Iungmuug
 with the River 
Hoan,
 which comes out of the Lake 
Tungmung,
 it falls by the Name of 
Hoan
 into the River 
Han.


The 
Ki,
 which glides through the County of 
Hoangcheufu,
 out of the Lake 
Uheu,
 Westward by the City 
Ki,
 falls into the River 
Kiang:
 The same Terri∣tory is also cut through by two other Streams, 
viz. Hi
 and 
Lungsiang,
 which both coming out of the North, mingles with the 
Kiang.


The 
Mie,
 which glides through the County 
Yocheufu,
 springs from the Moun∣tain 
Tienho,
 from whence it shoots North-West into the River 
Siang,
 and with that into the 
Kiang.


The 
Lieu,
 begins in the Lake 
Pexa,
 which produces four Rivers, and gliding North-West through the Territory 
Chanxafu,
 empties it self into the County 
Io∣cheufu
 in the River 
Siang.


The 
Mielo
 proceeds from the joyning of two Streams, 
viz. Lieu
 and 
Chao,
 originally springing out of the County 
Paokingfu,
 and passing Westward by the City 
Siangiin,
 at last falls into the River 
Taohao,
 or 
Siang:
 The 
Mielo
 re∣ceives by the way another Stream call'd 
Can,
 which comes out of the Lake 
Pe∣xa:
 This River is eminent, because it was the occasion of a great Feast, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Tuonu,
 which with all Solemnity, is kept on the fifth day of the fifth Moon, through all parts of 
China,
 in Commemoration of a Loyal Go∣vernor, who not able to serve his Master the Emperor any longer, Drown'd himself in this River.


The 
Siang
 rises at the conjoyning Borders of the Province 
Huquang,
 and that of 
Quangsi,
 in the Mountain 
Siung;
 from whence it passes North, through the County 
Iungcheufu,
 where on the West it receives the River 
Yu;
 and out of this Territory, entering into that of 
Hengcheufu,
 glides afterwards through that of 
Changxafu,
 where it also receives the Names of 
Mielo,
 by the West part of the City 
Siangyan,
 where it unites with the River 
Tahoa,
 but retains the Name of 
Siang;
 and at last, falls through the Territory 
Yocheufu
 into the 
Kiang:
 Its wa∣ter may compare with Crystal for clearness, and though it be very deep, yet the Stones that lie in the bottom may plainly be discern'd.


The 
Siao,
 which begins in the Mountain 
Kieny,
 at the South-West side of the City 
Ningyven,
 passes from thence close by the East side of the City 
Iung∣cheu;
 and towards the North, mixes with the 
Siang;
 receives by the way North∣ward, from the City 
Ningyven;
 on the West, the River 
Cin,
 and Rivulet 
Xu;
 on the East, the 
Hoang.


The 
Chinghiang
 and 
Ciencieu,
 glide from the South to the North through the County 
Ciencheufu,
 afterwards mixing their Waves together, pass along one Channel North-West, through the Territory 
Hengcheufu,
 thence pour their wa∣ters into the 
Siang.


The 
Lofeu,
 which comes out of the Northern Mountains in the County of 
Changxafu,
 runs to the South by the City 
Xeu,
 and to the Southward of the City 
Siatang
 falls into the River 
Siang.


This River is call'd 
Lofeu
 because of its excellency, and for the abundance of 
Lampreys
 that breed in the same.


The 
Gu,
 which begins in the Mountains near the City 
Vucang,
 glides from the South to the North through the County 
Paokinfu,
 and passes over many Rocky Falls, and receives on its West side, Southward from the City 
Paoking,
 the River 
Tuleang;
 and in the Territory 
Xincheufu,
 near the City 
Xopu,
 another Rivulet call'd 
Xo;
 from whence it passes along the West side of the County of 
Changxafu,
 where it is nam'd 
Taohoa,
 and winding towards the East, joyns at last near the City 
Siangyn,
 with the River 
Siang.


This River in the County of 
Paotingfu
 hath forty eight very troublesom and difficult places for Vessels to pass, and most of all on the North side of the City 
Paoting,
 where there are so many head-strong Falls from broken Rocks, that the 
Chineses
 have set up a Copper Pillar there, to make fast their Vessels to, till such time as they have furnish'd themselves with all manner of Necessaries for their Voyage, for it would be impossible else to get up their Boats by so many Rocks against the Stream.


The 
Ching,
 which passes from the Mountains Eastward from the City 
Pao∣king,
 glides to the North by the City 
Hencheu,
 where soon after it falls into the 
Siang.


The 
U
 begins in the Mountain near the City 
Iung,
 and runs by the City 
Changning.


The 
Lang,
 otherwise call'd 
Yvon
 and 
Kiu,
 takes original in the Province of 
Queicheu,
 Southward from the Garrison 
Taping,
 where it is call'd 
Tiechung,
 and passes from thence Northward through the County 
Sintienfu,
 then Eastward through the Territories 
Chinyvenfu
 and 
Sucheufu,
 and enters into the Province of 
Huquang,
 near the City 
Yveni;
 from whence gliding North-East through the Counties 
Xincheufu
 and 
Chatefu,
 it falls at last into the Lake 
Tungting.


The 
Xin,
 passing by the East side of the City 
Xincheu,
 falls into the 
Iuen.


On the South side of the City 
Lui
 are five Rivulets, 
viz. Hiung, Yeu, Yuen, Xin,
 and 
Muon;
 besides one of the same denomination, which runs by the City 
Cienkiang,
 and disembogues in the 
Tan.


By the City 
Kingling
 glides the River 
Y,
 which falls also into the fore-men∣tion'd 
Tan.


The 
Lungmuen
 passes by the East side of the City 
Chingyang,
 having its ori∣ginal in a Mountain of the like Name.


Westward from the City 
Choxan
 begins the River 
C
ngyang,
 and runs North∣ward by the City 
Fang;
 then by the Name of 
Tanghia
 bends Eastward, and dis∣charges its Waters also in the 
Tan.


The Water of this River suddenly takes all Spots out of Garments, and har∣dens the Edge of Iron and Steel.


By the City 
Choxan
 rushes also the 
Xangyang,
 which hath a very great Water∣fall; If any one throw a Stone into it, there immediately (as they say) arises a Thunder Shower.


The 
Hiung
 grows from the conjunction of nine Rivulets in the little County 
Cincheufu, viz. Lang, Vry, Hiung, Xin, Lung, Sui, Quei, Vu,
 and 
Hiung;
 from whence it glides along one Channel through the County of 
Xincheufu,
 to increase the River 
Yven.


The 
Y
 or 
Cing,
 which begins Westward of the Garrison'd City 
Xi,
 passes Northward, and going through the County of 
Kingcheufu
 falls into the 
Kiang.


The 
Can
 runs Westward by the City 
Nanchang
 into the Lake 
Poyang,
 as the River 
Licufan
 to the East.


THe 
Cau
 or 
Chan,
 which runs through the middle of the Province of
 
Kiangfu
 from the South to the North, takes its original in the County 
Cancheufu,
 Eastward from the City 
Xuiking;
 from whence it glides South ward by the City 
Hoeichang,
 and afterwards takes its Course Northerly; where, not far from the City 
Cancheu,
 to which it gives denomination, it receives the River 
Chang.


This River begins in the County of 
Nanganfu,
 Westward from the City 
Nangan,
 on the joint Borders of the Provinces of 
Kiangsi
 and 
Huquang.
 Both these Rivers commixing their Waters, make a great Channel on the North side of the City, and divide almost the whole Province of 
Kiangsi;
 then gli∣ding Northward first through the County 
Cancheufu,
 afterwards through that of 
Kiegan,
 Eastward from the City 
Kiegan
 it self; lastly, passing through 
Linki∣angfu
 and 
Nanchangfu,
 fall Westward from the City 
Nanchang
 into the Lake 
Poyang.


By the way the 
Can
 receives several Streams and Rivers, which all have their original in the Province of 
Kiangsi, viz.
 To the East in the Territory 
Can∣cheufu,
 the River 
U
 hath its beginning; near the City 
Utu,
 the 
Kien
 and 
Cang;
 near the City 
Cancheu,
 as in 
Kieganfu,
 the Stream 
Lu;
 near the City 
Kiexui
 to∣wards the West, the Rivers 
Tao, Sui, Xoin,
 and 
Sengting;
 in the County of 
Lin∣kiangfu
 Westward, the River 
Yven;
 in 
Nanchangfu,
 the 
Hoayang
 and 
Xo;
 by the City 
Kiegan,
 in the Stream 
Can,
 begins the dangerous Rock call'd 
Xotapan:
 for from this City the going down this River is very Craggy, and dreaded also for the many Vessels that have perish'd there on its Sands and Shelves, over which the Water hastes with great swiftness.


There are eighteen Places where they say the most danger is, from whence the Name 
Xopatan,
 which signifies 
Eighteen Water-falls,
 is derived.


Most Vessels take an experienc'd Pilot with them from the City 
Kiegan,
 to carry them through the fore-mention'd Places: The greatest danger is at the City 
Hoangcung.


The River 
Yven,
 or 
Yu,
 springs in the Mountain 
Yangchi,
 Northward from the City 
Iuencheu,
 and in the County of 
Linkiangfu
 falls into the 
Chan.


The 
Lu,
 which begins in the Mountain near the City 
Iungfung,
 runs not far from the City 
Kiexui,
 and receives near the Walls of the City two Rivers, 
viz.
 the 
Xanglu
 and 
Hialu;
 then gliding towards the West, bends afterwards a little to the North-West, and alters its Name, first into that of 
Luyuen,
 then in∣to that of 
Lap,
 and disembogues into that of 
Chan.


The River 
Kie
 or 
Ven
 passes through the Jurisdiction of the City 
Kiexui,
 and with its winding Course makes almost the 
Chinese
 Letter 
Kie,
 that is, 
Hap∣piness,
 from whence also the City hath the Name 
Kiexui,
 which is, 
Happy in Waters.


Out of the Mountains near the City 
Iungsin,
 springs the Rivulet 
Senting,
 which signifies 
Whistle,
 because its Waters gliding swiftly through the Rocks and Stones, make a pleasant noise like that of a Flajulet.


The River 
Xo,
 otherwise call'd 
Kin,
 springs near the City 
Vanca,
 in the County of 
Iuencheusu;
 from whence it glides Westward by the City 
Xancao,



and unites with the River 
Hoayang
 near the City 
Kuicheu,
 which both run into the 
Can.
 Its Water (according to the common Relation of the 
Chineses
) is good against many Distempers.


The 
Lungki,
 which springs out of the Mountain 
Pochang
 in the County of 
Nanchangfu,
 glides North-East by the West-side of the City 
Fungsin,
 afterwards through the Territory 
Nankangfu,
 and poures its Waters at last near the City 
Gang
 into the Lake 
Poyang.


The River 
Sieu,
 which running out of the County 
Iuencheufu,
 Northward from the Mountain 
Kinki,
 glides Eastward into the Territory 
Nanchangfu,
 by the South side of the City 
Ning;
 then gliding North-East, enters the County 
Nankangfu,
 and at last falls into the Lake 
Poyang.


THe 
Po,
 which springs out of the Mountains in the Territory 
Hoeicheufu
 in the Province of 
Nanking,
 and glides South-West through the same, passes through the County 
Iaocheufu
 into the Province of 
Kiangsi;
 then West∣ward, and enlarg'd with the Waters of the Stream 
Poyven,
 glides to the South by the City 
Iaocheu,
 and in the Territory 
Iaocheufu
 falls into the Lake 
Poyang.


Along this River the Earth is carry'd out of the fore-mention'd County 
Iaocheufu,
 of which the best 
Porcelane
 in all 
China
 is made.


The 
Kiencie,
 which begins Northward of the Mountain 
Suihan,
 runs West by the North-side of the City 
Yukan,
 where it falls into the Lake 
Poyang.


The 
Xangjao
 springs in the Mountains near the City 
Ioxan,
 and glides North∣ward by the City 
Quangsin,
 afterwards to the South through the same County, and disembogues, having wash'd several places in the County 
Iaocheufu,
 in the Lake 
Poyang,
 and by the way receives on its Northern Shore th
 Water of the Rivulets 
Se
 and 
Ko.


Almost out of the same place, though more Southerly, 
uns the 
Yo,
 and through this County takes the same Course towards the North by the City 
Iungfung,
 and to the South by the City 
Queiki.
 The Rivulet 
C
,
 coming out of the South, falls into the same.


The 
Hiui,
 which begins in the Mountains Southward fro
 the 
Quangchang
 in the County 
Kienchangfu,
 passes North-West by the North s
e of the City 
Kienchan;
 from whence it enters into the County 
Vucheufu,
 and falls into the River 
Lienfan.
 Near the City 
Kienchang
 the Rivulets 
Lung
 an
 
Kieukio,
 through one onely Channel, run into the same, both originally out of the Eastern Mountains of this Territory.


Two other Rivers, 
viz.
 the 
Lu
 and 
Cing,
 gliding from the South to the North through the County 
Vucheufu;
 by the City 
Vucheu,
 into the River 
Hiui,
 with which they fall into the Stream 
Lienfan.


The 
Lienfan
 runs by the North-West side of the City 
Veuche
,
 and afterwards cutting through the County of 
Nanchangfu,
 disembogues on the East side of the 
Nanchang
 into the Lake 
Poyang.


This River is remarkable for the use which the 
Chineses
 ma
 of its Water, for that not being subject to the alteration of the Weather, is properly made use of in their Hour-glasses, which run there with Water as ours with Sand.


The 
Hoai
 beginning in the Province of 
Honan,
 out of the Mountains near the City 
Funge,
 passes from thence into the Province of 
Nanking▪
 by the City 
Hokieu,
 through the Territory 
Fungyangfu,
 and crosses the same from the East to the West, then falls at last, near the City 
Hoiang,
 into the 
Yello
 River,
 and with that into the Sea.


By the way this River receives several others, 
viz.
 in the County 
Ienningfu
 of the Province of 
Honan,
 the 
Su;
 in this County of 
Fungangfu
 Southward, another call'd 
Hoai, Peca
 and 
Fi▪
 to the North, the River 
Ing, Co,
 and 
Vi;
 which three last have their original out of the Province of 
Honan.


The 
Fu
 rises in the County 
Fungyangfu
 near the City 
So,
 on the East side of a Lake which lies at the Foot of the Mountain.


Three Rivers surround the County 
Sucheufu,
 like an Isle, making it Navi∣gable in several places; the first is call'd 
Leu;
 the second, 
Sung,
 which glides towards the City 
Ukiang;
 the third, 
Ulang,
 runs towards the East: all of them have their original out of the Lake 
Tai,
 and discharge themselves into the Sea.


Leang,
 a little River, proceeds from the Fountain 
Hoci,
 lying on the Hill 
Hoei,
 in the County of 
Sucheufu,
 and near the City 
Vucie
 falls into the Lake 
Ta:
 The Water thereof is by the 
Chineses
 accounted the best, excepting one, in the whole Empire, and is in great esteem amongst Persons of Quality. Not a Vessel which passes this way but buyes of it, being ready Bottled, for a small Price, though any one that will stay, may freely take as much as he pleases for nothing. It is Transported to remote Provinces, nay, to the Imperial Court at 
Peking;
 for they account it the best to make their Drink 
Cha
 withal, by boyl∣ing it with the Herb 
Tee,
 and therefore it is much in request.


The 
Singan
 begins in the County 
Hoeicheufu,
 Westward of the City 
Hoeicheu;
 by which passing, it is afterwards increas'd with the Waters of several Rivolets; the first of which comes out of the City 
Hoeicheu;
 the second, out of those near the City 
Hieuning;
 the third, from those about 
Vuyen;
 and the fourth, out of those near▪ 
Cieki.
 The 
Singan
 runs straight along through Rocks and Val∣leys to 
Sungan,
 a City in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 and hath by the way three hundred and sixty Water-falls, of which the most troublesome to pass lies near the City 
Hoeicheu,
 and is call'd 
Liucung;
 then entring into the County 
Nien∣cheufu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 passes Southward by the City 
Sungan,
 and from thence towards the South-East, and to the South by the City 
Nieucheu,
 where bending Northward, it changes its Name into that of 
Che
 or 
Chekiang,
 (from whence the whole Territory, which it almost cuts through the middle from South to North, receives denomination) and accordingly through the County of 
Hangcheufu;
 towards the East, by the City 
Hangcheu;
 where ta∣king the Name of 
Cientung,
 it runs East, and at last in thirty Degrees North-Latitude falls into the Sea.


The 
Che
 receive
 several Streams out of the Territories 
Kinhoafu
 and 
Kiu∣cheufu
 from the South and East, as 
Ven, Chanyo, Kin, Tingyang, Co, Puyang,
 and 
Ho,
 which all through one Channel fall into the same near the City of 
Tunglin.


The 
Min
 begins on the Boundaries of the Provinces of 
Fokien
 and 
Chekiang,
 by the City 
gciveu
 of the County of 
Chuchenfu;
 from whence it passes Sou∣therly through the County of 
Kienningfu;
 Westward, by the City 
Puching
 and 
Kienning,
 as accordingly East by the City 
Yenping
 (where it receives the River 
Siki
) through the Territory 
Yenpingfu;
 from whence bending Eastward, it enters the County 
Focheu,
 and glides by the South side of the Garrison 
Xuikeu,
 where the 
M
 falls into the same; then Northward by the chief City 
Focheu,
 and at last on the North side of the Garrison 
Xeching
 disembogues into the Sea in twenty six Degrees Northern-Latitude. From the City 
Puching
 to the Gar∣rison 
Xuiken▪
 the same River falls with great force of Water through Valleys, Rocks and Cliffs, but from thence glides on but slowly: With how much


swiftness the Water runs between the fore-mention'd two Places appears by this, that they can go from 
Puching
 to the Metropolis 
Tiocheu
 with the Stream in three days, whereas they are fifteen days Toeing up against it: The Chan∣nel winding up and down is very dangerous, and dreadful by reason of the swift Current, abundance of Rocks, and narrowness of the Channel, which in many places between the Rocks is no wider than to permit a small 
Chinese
 Ves∣sel to pass through, from whence it oftentimes happens that several suffer Wreck. From the place where this River hath its original, to that where it terminates, it receives many Rivolets and Streams, as on the East, the 
Tung;
 on the West, the 
Kiao, Kieukio, Cu,
 and 
Siki;
 on the South, the Rivers 
Ionki, Min,
 and 
Tachang
 or 
Nantai.


The 
Tung,
 which comes out of the Mountain 
Vanche
 in the County of 
Kienningfu,
 falls Southward of the City 
Kienning
 into the 
Min.


The 
Kiao,
 which passes through the Territory of 
Focheufu,
 rises out of the Mountain 
Siuefung,
 shoots from thence Eastward to the North of the River 
Min,
 by the South side of the City 
Lienkiang,
 and at last discharges its Waters into the Ocean.


The Brook 
Kieukio,
 which begins in the Mountain 
Vuy,
 in the County of 
Kienningfu,
 runs from thence South-West, and unites with the Brook 
Hochung,
 which hath its original in the Hill 
Ukiun
 in the Territory of 
Xaounfu;
 from whence it passes South by the City 
Kienyang,
 and at last falls with its Waters into the River 
Min,
 near the City 
Kienning.


The 
Cu,
 which begins in the Mountain 
Ukiun
 in the County of 
Xaounfu,
 glides from thence first Southward, then Eastward by the East side of the City 
Xaonu,
 then bending to the South in the County 
Ienpingfu,
 it fa
s into the Ri∣ver 
Si,
 near the City 
Sianglo;
 from whence both these Strea
 run through one Mouth Easterly, then Southward, and poure their Wate
 united with the River 
Situ,
 Westward from the City 
Ienping,
 into the 
Min.


The 
Siki
 springs Northward in the Territory of 
Tingcheufu,
 out of the Lake 
Kiao,
 then runs Southward, so East, and enters into the County 
enpingfu,
 and to the North by the City 
Lunggan,
 and by the City 
Xu,
 whe
 it receives the Brook 
Taisu,
 and unites it self at last with the River 
Cu.


In the 
Siki,
 along which they Sail down to the City 
Ienping,
 
e many Water∣falls and dangerous Shoals, two especially near the City 
Cing
 namely 
Kieu∣lung
 and 
Chancung;
 in the passing by, the Sea-men to preven
 the danger of Shipwreck therein, tie Trusses or Bundles of Straw befor
 the Bowe of the Ship, which bear off the violence of the blow and keep her back.


The River 
Yeuki,
 which rises in the County of 
Ienpingfu▪
 out of the Moun∣tain 
Yucuang,
 takes its Course Eastward by the North side of the City 
Yeuki,
 and turning to the North, falls into the 
Min.


The Rivolet 
Tachang
 begins West from the City 
Iungfo,
 and r
ning East by the City 
Focheu,
 finishes Northward by the Name of 
Nantai
 into 
e 
Min.


The 
Chang,
 which hath its original Northward from the Ci
 
Lungnien,
 in the County of 
Changcheufu,
 runs East by the North side of the 
es 
Changping
 and 
Changtui,
 then from the East part of the City 
Chancheu,
 (which is also in the South) it falls at last Southward into the Sea with two Arms.


More to the South in the same County glides the 
Xeching,
 from the West to the East, and loseth it self Northward of the Garrison 
Tungxan
 into the Sea.


The 
Kieu,
 directing its Course from North to South through the County of 
Civencheu,
 discharges its Waters Southward into the Sea.


The Brook 
Lan
 and River 
Si,
 which run from North to South through the Territory of 
Foningfu,
 fall both into the Sea; the first towards the West breaks forth in the Mountain beyond the City 
Fogan,
 the other comes out of the Mountain 
Lan.


The 
Ting
 hath its beginning in the Territory of 
Tingcheufu,
 Northward from the City 
Tingcheu,
 and receiving Southward of the same the Brook 
Ven,
 pro∣ceeds by the City 
Xanghang;
 then entering the County of 
Chaocheufu
 in the Pro∣vince of 
Quantung,
 receives near the City 
Chingiang,
 the River 
Ching,
 with which at last it loseth it self Southward in the Sea.


THe Brook 
Iokio
 begins with a Branch in the Mountain 
Ho,
 in the Coun∣ty
 of 
Hoeicheufu,
 and with another out of the Territory of 
Chaocheufu,
 Northward from the City 
Pingquen;
 both joyning near the City 
Kieyang,
 run Southward by the East part of the City 
Chaocheu,
 and at last dividing into two Arms, fall into the Sea, which on the East side of the City is call'd 
Go.


The River 
Ly
 rises in the Mountain Northward from the City 
Changlo,
 and Westward of the City 
Haifung
 shoots it self into the Sea, opposite to the Island of 
Ciexing.


The 
Tung
 takes its original in the Mountains in the County 
Cancheu,
 in the Province of 
Kiangsi,
 tends on Southward into the Province of 
Quantung,
 through the County of 
Hoeicheufu,
 and at last terminates in the Sea.


Another River call'd 
Ceng,
 shoots out of the fore-mention'd 
Tung
 above the City 
Hoeicheu,
 and runs Southward through this and the County of 
Quang∣cheufu,
 and gliding through the Lake 
Go,
 dischargeth it self Northward from the City of 
S
an
 into the Sea.


The 
Siang▪
 also call'd 
Kio,
 springs from the Rivers 
Chin
 and 
Vu,
 Southward of the City 
ocheu,
 and bends its Course into the County of 
Quangcheufu,
 where near the City 
Cingyven
 it receives the River 
Talo
 coming out of the Lake 
Quen,
 and falls at last Westward from the City 
Quancheu
 or 
Ranton,
 into the River 
Ta.


The 
Chin
 springs out of the Mountain 
Muilin,
 beyond the City 
Nanhiung;
 the 
Vu
 out of the Mountain 
Chang,
 in the County 
Haocheufu.
 The Rivers 
Chin
 and 
Siang
 run 
oth quite through whole Province of 
Quantung.


The 
Tao
 flows out of the Lake 
Quen,
 Southward through the County of 
Quancheufu,
 and falls near the City 
Cingyven
 into the River 
Siang. Tao
 signifies a 
Peach,
 from the abundance of that sort of Fruit growing on its Banks. By the way the 
Tao
 takes in the River 
Hoang.


The Brook 
Yu
▪
 which hath its source beyond the City 
Cunhoa
 in the County 
Quancheufu,
 runs South-West, and thence Eastward from the City 
Canton.


The River 
Xangu
 passing through the County of 
Lotingfu,
 is receiv'd by the River 
Ta.


The River 
Mekiang
 glides through the Territory of 
Nanhiungfu. Mekiang
 sig∣nifies 
A River of Ink,
 because its Water is as black as Ink; notwithstanding which the 
sh is not the worse esteem'd.


The River 
King
 appearing first on the Boundaries of the Provinces of 
Quangsi
 and 
Quantung,
 passes on from the North to the South, but through the last Eastward by the City King, to which it gives that Name, and opens a wide Mouth into the Sea.


The River 
Lungmuen
 takes its source in the Western Mountains about the City 
King
 in the County of 
Liencheufu,
 and from thence passing through the King∣dom of 
Tungching
 loseth its self in the Sea


The River 
Lien
 springs out of the Mountains, near the City 
Linkan,
 and Southward by the East side of the City 
Liencheu,
 descends into the Sea, through the same County the 
Sanya,
 which hath its Original in the Mountains, North∣ward of the City 
Suiki,
 in the County 
Liucheufu,
 resigns to the Sea.


The River 
Tunglui,
 shoots from the North to the South through the County 
Caocheufu;
 the 
Xo
 likewise, though more Eastward, glides to the West by the City 
Xaocheu,
 where it receives the Stream 
Hencang.


THe River 
Ly,
 otherwise call'd 
Quei,
 takes its Original on the Boundaries
 of the Provinces of 
Huquang▪
 from whence it passes through the County 
Queilingfu,
 Westward in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 by the way taking in the Brook 
Quon,
 (which comes out of the East, Southward from the City 
Quonyang,
) and fall∣ing down with a great force and noise through Mountains and Vallies, half in∣virons the City 
Quelin;
 whence gliding Southward, it entertains the River 
Yang,
 which comes Northward out of the Mountain 
Sumo,
 West from the Mountain 
Ly;
 then turns with a Branch Eastward, to the City 
Yangeo
 (where out of the Northern Mountains, in the County 
Pinglofu,
 the River 
Pinghuen
 falls into the same) then turns again Southward, and runs again through the County 
Ping∣lofu,
 Westward by the City 
Pinglo;
 and at last unites its self with the River 
Ta,
 in the Territory 
Gucheufu.


The River 
Lieu,
 otherwise call'd 
Xo
 or 
Xokiang,
 and 
Kung,
 begins in the Province of 
Queicheu,
 near the Garrison 
Cinping;
 from whence it passes South∣ward through the County 
Tuchefu;
 thence Eastward, by the City 
Tucho,
 through the Territory 
Kingyven,
 Northward by the City 
Kingyven,
 and so turning and winding into the Province of 
Kiangsi;
 thence Eastward, into that of 
Lieucheu;
 at last, it unites with the River 
Talo,
 otherwise call'd 
Lieucheu,
 near the chief City 
Lieucheu.


The River 
Tolo,
 otherwise call'd 
Lieu,
 rising in the County 
Lipingfu,
 of the Province of 
Queicheu,
 near the Garrison 
Cheki,
 runs Southward through the same, by the West side of the City 
Lungeung,
 where a little more Southerly it meets with the River 
Yung,
 and enters Westward of the City 
Hoaiyven,
 into the County 
Lieuchefu,
 of the Province of 
Quangsi;
 at last, joyning with the River 
Lieu
 or 
Xo,
 near the City 
Lieucheu,
 it keeps on Eastward of the City 
Laiping,
 where it receives the 
Lui;
 then from the City 
Siang,
 it glides Southward, and at last augmented with the Water of several Rivers, it pours through the Coun∣ty 
Cincheufu,
 and Eastward of the City 
Cinchen
 into the River 
Ta.


The Streams 
Lie, Teng, Quei, Feu,
 and 
Lin,
 flow through the County 
Pinglofu,
 from the North (where, except the 
Quei,
 they all have their Original) to the South, and accordingly, through a part of 
Gucheufu,
 where they all discharge their Water into the River 
Takiang.


The River 
Yung
 extends through the whole County 
Gucheufu,
 rising on the East side of the City 
Hingye,
 out of the Mountains 
Ho;
 from whence it runs Southward, and soon after East, and returns from thence Northward, by the West side of the City 
Yung,
 to which it gives denomination; then passes East∣ward again to the West of the City 
Gucheu,
 into the River 
Taikiang,
 or 
Ta.


The Stream 
Ly,
 Springs out of the Lake 
Xan,
 in the County 
Quangsifu,
 of the Province of 
Iunnan;
 from whence it marches Southward, and enters next into the Province of 
Quangsi,
 by the City 
Lung;
 then proceeds on its Course East, with many Inlets through the County 
Taipingfu,
 where it receives the Rivers 
Leung
 and 
Tungly;
 from the North afterwards through that of 
Nanning∣fu;



and at last, near the City 
Nanning,
 unites it self with the Southern 
Puon.


The 
Mosale,
 or 
Moxale,
 or 
Xale,
 springs out of the Lake 
Siul,
 in the County 
Tulifu,
 of the Province of 
Iunnan;
 from whence it runs Eastward through the same County, and first South-East, afterwards South, through that of 
Zuhi∣ungfu,
 by the East side of the City 
Zuhiung,
 where it receives the River 
Lung∣chuen;
 then proceeding on its Course through the County 
Iuenkiangfu, Linganfu,
 and the Kingdom of 
Tungking,
 falls at last with the River 
Canlang
 into the Sea; In the Kingdom of 
Tunking
 it inlargeth it self, and becomes Navigable to the Metropolis 
Tungking.


The 
Mosale
 takes in by the way several Rivers and Brooks; as from the North, the 
Kio;
 from the West, 
Lungchuen, Polo, Tunghoa, Taolieu, Ta, Xanno, Iuen;
 and from the East, 
Singsien.


The River 
Kio,
 gushing out of the Mountain 
Suki,
 in the County 
Yaoganfu,
 passeth Southward through the same into the 
Masole:
 The 
Polo
 which comes out of the Lake 
Zinglung
 in the Territory 
Zuhiungfu,
 (joyning on the way by the River 
Tunghoa,
 out of the County 
Kiutungfu,
) and with the River 
Ta,
 falls into the 
Mosale.


The 
Ta,
 which riseth in the County 
Kintungfu,
 Southward from the City 
Kintung,
 stretches from thence Eastward through the County 
Chinyvenfu,
 and mixes first with the 
Polo,
 afterwards with the 
Moxale.


The River 
Xanno
 springs on the South side of the City 
Chinyven,
 and running South-East, dischargeth its Waves in the Confines of the Counties, 
Iuenkiung∣fu, Zuhiungfu,
 and 
Nanganfu
 into the 
Moxale.


The 
Iuen,
 takes its way from the West through the County 
Iuenkiangfu,
 Southward from the City 
Iuenkiang,
 and unites with the 
Moxale.


The River 
Singsieu,
 hath its scource out of the Mountain 
Yolung,
 in the Coun∣ty 
Iunnanfu;
 and somewhat more Southerly, the River 
Xanno
 unites with the 
Mosale.


To the Northward, near the City 
Fu,
 in the County 
Quanguan,
 runs a Brook or Rivulet, call'd 
Nanmo,
 into the River 
Ly;
 its Water is said to be continually warm, and good for many Distempers.


Westward from the Garrison 
Usa,
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 appears the River 
Ven, Puon,
 or 
Northern Puon,
 properly call'd 
Pepuon,
 that is, 
Northern Pu∣on;
 and passing from thence Southward into the Province 
Queicheu,
 is inlarg'd by the River 
Ciesing,
 which begins beyond the Mountain 
Cingping,
 in the Pro∣vince of 
Iunnan.


Another Northern Branch, also nam'd 
Pepuon,
 or 
Northern Puon,
 issues out of the Lakes 
Che
 and 
Ven,
 and unites with the Northern Branch before-mention'd, below the Fort 
Ganchang.


The River 
Pexe,
 which breaks forth in the County 
Kiocingfu,
 of the Pro∣vince of 
Iunnan,
 Northward from the City 
Kiocing,
 in the Mountain 
Fuking
 looseth it self in the 
Pepuon.


The 
Northern Puon
 thus united, passeth through the South part of the Pro∣vince of 
Queicheu,
 and joyns with the 
Southern Puon,
 which riseth in several Branches or Brooks out of the Province of 
Iunnan;
 besides which there are the 
Pepuon,
 which comes out of the County 
Iunnanfu,
 Southward from the Moun∣tain 
Cocing;
 the River 
Hikien,
 the Stream 
Von
 out of the Lake 
Fusien,
 and the Ri∣ver 
Lu,
 out of the Pool 
Ylung.


The 
Southern Puon
 thus augmented, runs on towards the East, and unites with the 
Northern Puon,
 in the little County of the City 
Iunning,
 of the Province


of 
Queicheu,
 by the City 
Tinging,
 in twenty five Degrees and twenty Minutes Northern Latitude.


The 
Southern Puon
 being thus united with the 
Northern,
 casts forth one Chan∣nel Southward into the Province of 
Quangsi,
 but retains the Name of the 
Sou∣thern Puon;
 after having run a considerable course, it entertains the River 
Mun∣gung
 and 
Chiugpi,
 the one from the North, and the other from the South; then proceeds on its way Eastward, through the County 
Tiencheufu, Singenfu, Nan∣ningfu,
 and by the South side of the City 
Nanning,
 where Eastward it takes in the River 
Lis,
 which comes out of the Lake 
Xan,
 in the Province of 
Iunnan;
 and somewhat farther two other Rivers, namely, the 
Go
 and 
Cieu,
 out of which it passes through the County 
Cincheufu,
 and near the City 
Cincheu
 unites with the River 
Lieu
 and 
Ta;
 for here the 
Puon
 looses its Name, and is call'd 
Ta,
 which holds the same Course through the County 
Gucheufu,
 where on the South it receives the River 
Iung,
 and runs through the Territory 
Chaokingfu▪
 into the Province of 
Quantung,
 glides Southward by the City 
Chaoting
 and 
Lo∣ting;
 and Southward from the City 
Quancheu
 or 
Canton,
 looseth it self.


The River 
Kinxa,
 takes its Original in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 out of the South side of the Lake 
Tien
 or 
Quienning,
 bends its Course Northward through the County 
Iunnanfu;
 in like manner through 
Vutingfu,
 and in twenty seven De∣grees and thirty Minutes North-Latitude, enters on the South into the Pro∣vince of 
Suchuen,
 Westward from the Garrison 
Le;
 and at last falls East from the Lake 
Mahu,
 into the River 
Mahu.


Another Branch also call'd 
Kinxa,
 runs by the City 
Tinghuen,
 of the Province of 
Suchuen;
 and Westward from the Mountain 
Ulang,
 finisheth its Course.


Another River likewise call'd 
Kinxa,
 issues out of the Kingdom of 
Sifan,
 and enters the Province of 
Iunnan,
 through the Territory 
Likiangfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Linsi;
 proceeds Northward by the City 
Likiang,
 then through the River 
Ciokingfu;
 from thence Eastward by the North side of the City 
Pex∣ing,
 where it sends forth a Branch towards the South, through the North part of the County 
Yagon,
 having its Channel inlarg'd from the several Rivers which it receives in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 near the Confines of the Province of 
Queicheu,
 and joyns with the River 
Kinxa,
 which comes out of the Province 
Iunnan.


Another River passes more Northward out of the Kingdom of 
Sifan,
 also call'd 
Kinxa,
 and sometimes 
Lekie;
 it passes by the Mountain 
Luyni,
 into the Province 
Iunnan,
 thence through the County 
Iungningfu;
 from West to East by the North part of the City 
Iungning,
 and through the Lake 
Lacu,
 where it re∣ceives the Stream 
Loye,
 which comes out of the South; and falling last into the Province of 
Suchuen,
 mixes with that 
Kinxa
 which flows out of the Pro∣vince of 
Iunnan,
 Southward from the Mountain 
Ulung: Kingxa
 signifies 
Gold-Dust,
 so call'd from its plenty of Gold.


Thus far of the Rivers and Brooks, which Water the Empire of 
China
 in se∣veral places, to its great fertility, and make it Navigable almost through the whole Empire; nay, in such manner, that several Counties and Provinces di∣vided and surrounded by them, lie like Islands separated from one another, by the Streams that flow between them.


There are also many deep-cut Channels, besides Lakes, Pools, and Springs, abounding in Fish.








Standing—waters, or Channels.


THe Countrey of 
China
 is cut thorow in many places with Moats or Ar∣tificial Channels, for the conveniency of Navigation from one City to another.


Among many others, one of these Channels call'd 
Iun,
 deserves no small admiration, being with an incredible Charge digg'd from the Province of 
Nanking,
 through that of 
Xantung
 to the Metropolis of 
Peking;
 by means of which, from most places in the Empire, all sorts of Goods are brought in Ships to 
Peking.


It begins on the Northern Borders of the Province of 
Nanking
 in the County 
Hoaiganfu,
 Northward from the City 
Socien;
 near the Northern Shore of the 
Yellow River,
 out of which Ships from all parts of the Empire are brought into it; from thence it extends North-West through the second Territory 
Ien∣cheufu
 of the Province of 
Xantung,
 to the City 
Cining,
 Southward from the Lake 
Nanyang;
 then through that of 
Tungchangfu,
 and the Lake 
Nanyang;
 from whence at last, at the end of the County, near the City 
Lincing,
 beyond the Lake 
Cang,
 it falls into the River 
Guei.


But because the Water in this Channel is too shallow in many places for great Ships, therefore there are above twenty Sluces or Water-gates in the same, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Tungpa,
 very strong and firm, of square Stone. Eve∣ry Sluce hath a Gate or opening, lock'd with great Planks to keep out the Wa∣ter, being by means of a Wheel and an Engine drawn up with little trouble, to give way for the Water and Ships, till you come to the second Gate, where they do the like, and so likewise at all the rest: But half way, before you come to the City 
Cining,
 they tap as much Water through a great Water-gate out of the Lake 
Cang,
 as they need; then Locking up the Gates again, keep the Wa∣ter from running out too much, and so leaving the Ground bare, for the Wa∣ter in the Lake is higher than the adjacent Countrey; so that in a small Tract of Land, they reckon above eight Water-gates, which resist the force and pow∣er of the Water.


When the Ships are come to the Lake 
Cang
 it self, they cross not the same, but with much more ease, pass along a Channel made by the sides of the Lake, with brave Banks on each side: At every Water-gate are People which Toe the Ships by a Line through the Sluces, for a small reward.


In this manner the Ships go out of the 
Yellow River
 to 
Peking.


Certainly, should the best Builders or Surveyors of 
Europe
 come and behold the length of this Channel, or thickness and heighth of the Banks on each side, and the ornament of the Sluces, which are all of hewn Stone, they would justly wonder at the wisdom of the 
Chineses,
 and their Industry, in undergoing that labor, which scarce any other People would be able to perform.


In the Province of 
Peking,
 in the County of 
Pekingfu,
 near the City 
Cho,
 there is also a very long Channel call'd 
Tocang;
 another in the eighth County 
Xao∣hingfu,
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 describ'd before; besides many more, which would be too tedious to mention.








Lakes and Pools.


IN the County of 
Pekingfu,
 Westward from the Metropolis, lies on the
 Mountain 
Iociven,
 a Lake call'd 
Lis,
 which is ten Furlongs in Circumfe∣rence.


On the South side of the Mountain 
Tienxu,
 Northward from the chief City, is a Lake, made by the confluence of several Springs, wherefore it is call'd, 
Kienlung,
 that is, 
Of nine Springs,
 which number, because the 
Chineses
 account it Fortunate, hath much increas'd their Superstitious Belief concerning the Em∣peror's Tombs that are there.


On the South-West side of the City 
Paoting,
 close by the City Moat, is a small, but very pleasant Lake, call'd 
Lienhoa,
 that is, 
Lien-Flower,
 whereon the Citizens and Neighboring People make great Feasts and Entertainments in Pleasure-Boats, built for that purpose.


In the County 
Hokienfu,
 near the City 
Hie,
 is a very deep Lake, nam'd 
Vo,
 the Water of which, at the throwing of a Stone therein, becomes of the Co∣lour of Blood: If the Leaves of the adjacent Trees chance to fall into it, in a short time Swallows flie out of it, insomuch, that the Leaves seem to turn into Birds, as is related of the 
Scotch Barnacles,
 or 
Soland Geese.


In the Territory 
Sintivyfu,
 Northward of the City 
Nangsin,
 begins a great Lake, call'd 
Talo,
 and extends as far as the City 
Kiulo,
 in the County 
Xuntefu.


Nor far from the little City 
Hanping,
 is another lesser Lake made by two Springs; the one with very hot, and the other very cold Water, though they lie both close together.


In the County 
Tamingfu,
 near the City 
Niuhoang,
 lies a Lake call'd 
Luece,
 eighty Furlongs in compass; near the City 
Taming,
 the Pool 
Caoki,
 and another bigger, call'd 
Chanfung
 or 
Moma,
 both brackish.


Westward from the Mountain 
Feukieu,
 is a Lake that proceeded there, from the sinking of a City, call'd 
Siun.


In the County 
Iungpingfu,
 near the City 
Changlei,
 lies a Lake of thirty Fur∣longs, call'd 
In;
 it is Oval, and extends almost to the Sea.


IN the Territory 
Pingyangfu,
 at the Foot of the Mountain 
Xevyang,
 is a Lake
 of a considerable bigness, on which the ancient Emperor 
Xun,
 as the 
Chine∣ses
 write, us'd to Fish.


Near the City 
Kiang,
 begins the Lake 
Iu,
 that is, 
Brackish,
 (for all the Water thereof is as Salt as that of the Sea) and stretches from thence to the Jurisdicti∣on of the City 
Ganye;
 it is in Circumference a hundred and forty Furlongs.


In the County 
Taitungfu,
 Westward from the City 
Taitung,
 lies the small Lake 
Kiuncu,
 that is, 
Honest Man,
 because hereabouts liv'd one that would ne∣ver accept Gold when offer'd; it is made by the River 
He.


On the Mountain 
Yenking,
 near the City 
So,
 is a deep Lake, of a Furlong in Circumference.


In the Territory 
Taiyvenfu,
 Westward from the City 
Che,
 lies the Lake 
Tien.


IN the County 
Siganfu,
 on the South side of the chief City, is a considerable
 large Lake, call'd 
Fan,
 which is made by the uniting of two Rivers; ano∣ther on the North-East side, not natural, but cut by Command of the Empe∣ror 
Hiaou,
 serves for a place of Recreation: It is moreover, adorn'd with a


stately Palace, to which belong pleasant Woods, and Flowry Meadows, where∣on, the Emperor also, to Recreate himself, caus'd Plays and other Pastimes to be Presented to him: The same Emperor also Commanded a Lake to be digg'd on the South-West side of the same City, calling it 
Queming;
 on which, he oftentimes caus'd his Soldiers in Vessels to make Sea-Fights, thereby, to make them experienc'd therein; for intending to invade the Southern Provin∣ces, which abounded with Ships, he instructed them by this Jesting Exercise, how to behave themselves in real Engagements.


On the South side, the Emperor made a third Lake, and near it a pleasant Court, call'd 
Silen,
 to solace himself in, after the end of those pretended Fights: He plac'd also in this Lake a great Stone▪ Fish, rais'd, and fasten'd in the bot∣tom of the Water like a Rock, that the Sea men Sailing by the same, might learn to shun Rocks and Shelves: Against Rainy weather (as the 
Chineses
 say) this Fish makes a hideous noise, the force whereof is imagin'd to be much ad∣vantag'd by a Neighboring Eccho. Moreover, the 
Chineses
 relate, that this Emperor on a certain time Dreamt, That this Fish being gotten with a Hook in his Presence, crav'd his Aid; and that he the next day, really taking a Fish in the Lake, remember'd his Dream, and freed the Fish; whereupon, throwing his Net in again, he found two inestimable Pearls, which the 
Chineses
 call 
Mingy∣ven,
 that is, 
Stones of a clear Moon,
 because on the Increase and Decrease of the Moon, they grow dimmer or brighter, as is generally reported of the 
Moon-Stones.


Moreover, there are some that affirm, that such like Stones are yet in 
China,
 and being kept in the Emperor's Palace, are accounted unvaluable; and that when the Emperor took up the foremention'd Pearls, he said, 
Certainly, this is the Gift of that grateful Fish which I set at liberty.


WIthin the City 
Cinan,
 in the County 
Cinanfu,
 on the West side, is the Lake
 
Taiming,
 out of which runs a Channel to the Lake 
Coyng,
 which is also within the Walls of the said City; Out of both which Lakes, there run through the whole City convenient Navigable Moats: This Lake 
Taiming
 also extends towards the Lake 
Cioxan,
 which is on the North-side, without the City.


Near the City 
Changkieu,
 is the great Lake call'd 
Peyun,
 which abounds in Fish, and inricheth the adjacent Grounds with excellent Fruit, 
Linko
 and 
Lien-Flowers.


In the County 
Yencheufu
 are five Lakes, namely, 
Nanuang,
 South from the Ci∣ty 
Ven; Toxan
 and 
Fauly,
 near the City 
Tingtao; Leangxan,
 near the City 
Tung∣ping;
 and 
Lui,
 which in the 
Chinese
 Language signifies 
Thunder,
 because in the mid∣dle thereof is a Stone, whose Body resembles that of a Dragon, and the Head, a Mans, and is by the 
Chineses
 call'd, 
The Spirit of Thunder;
 they affirming, that by striking on its Belly, they hear a noise or voice: There are likewise in this County many other Lakes, but of less note.


In the County 
Tengcheufu,
 near the City 
Laiyang,
 is the Lake 
Hiyang;
 and in 
Tungchanfu,
 the Lake 
Ho.


IN the County 
Kaifungfu,
 lies Westward from the little City 
Hiu,
 the small
 Lake 
Si,
 and another near 
Iengling;
 two other Lakes, call'd 
Lieu,
 from the abundance of Willows which grow on their Banks, lie one near the City 
Chin,
 and the other by 
Sincheu.


On the West side of the City stands the Lake 
Kiuming,
 made by the Imperial Family 
Sung,
 for a place wherein to Exercise the Naval 
Militia,
 and represent Sea-Fights: This Lake is exceeding pleasant, being built round about with many stately Palaces and 
Pagods,
 and also Marble Columns Inscrib'd with Verses extolling the Lake.


There are also other lesser Lakes, amongst which is one, call'd 
Tungmuen,
 near the City 
Chin,
 which is exceeding clear, and without any Weeds.


In the County 
Queitefu,
 on the South side of the City 
Queite,
 is the Lake 
Nan,
 over which lies a Stone-Bridge with many Arches; Westward from the City 
Ciu,
 is the Lake 
Si;
 and in the same County, a very small Lake call'd 
Chokin,
 about which many Silk-Weavers have their Habitations, invited thither by the goodness of the Water, from which the Silk receives an excellent Gloss; and thereupon, the Lake takes its Name: The word 
Chokin
 signifying, 
A Washing place for Silk Damask.


Eastward from the City 
Iuching,
 stands the Lake 
Menchu.


In the County 
Hoakingfu,
 Northward from the City 
Ciyven,
 is the Lake 
Tay,
 which is made by the River 
Ki.


In the Territory 
Iunningfu,
 Westward from the City 
Iunning,
 is the Lake 
Si,
 yielding a very pleasant Prospect, as being surrounded with many Buildings, for the Entertainment and Recreation of the Citizens.


Westward from the small City 
Iu,
 lieth a Lake of a hundred Furlongs; in the City of 
Iu,
 to the North, stands the Lake 
Quanching.


ON the Mountain 
Tienchi,
 near the City 
Mien,
 in the County 
Chingtufu,
 in the
 Province of 
Suchien,
 there is a Lake, which by Rain is not observ'd to increase, nor in dry Seasons to decrease.


On the South-East side of the City 
Chingtu,
 is a Pool call'd 
Yolung,
 which the Emperor 
Sui
 caus'd to be made for the exercising his Marriners and Souldiers in Ships of War, when he resolv'd to invade King 
Chin.


Vansui
 is a Lake of four hundred Furlongs, digg'd like a Moat round about the City 
Chingtu,
 but broadest on the North side; of the Earth which was digg'd out of the same, the Walls of the City were made.


Southward from the City 
Cai,
 in the County 
Queicheufu,
 stands the Lake 
Cin∣gyven,
 a hundred Furlongs square, being the source of the River 
Cin.


Westerly of which, and East from the City 
Ta,
 is the great Lake 
Vanking,
 whose Shore is all set with stately Trees, and inviron'd with Flowry Meadows, Fruit-Trees, and Populous Villages.


In the County 
Mahufu,
 Southward from the City 
Mahu,
 is a Lake also call'd 
Mahu,
 that is, 
Horse Lake;
 for the 
Chineses
 say, that in this Lake a Horse appear'd, Wing'd like a Dragon, from which the Family 
Tang
 gave the City, Lake and River that denomination.


In the little County 
Muicheu,
 whose chief City is of the same Name, stands a great Lake call'd 
Hoang,
 that is to say, 
Circular,
 because it surrounds the whole City, yet it is broadest towards the West: The Shore is built all along with handsome Houses, which standing round like a Ring, the City may justly be call'd, 
The Stone thereof;
 near it is a long Bridge call'd 
Sive.


On the East side of the City 
Kiating,
 is a small Lake call'd 
Ningyve:
 By the City 
Pukiang
 is another Lake nam'd 
Yotan,
 on which they say the Emperor 
Hoangti Anno
 2500. before the Incarnation, study'd Chymistry.




THere are two Lakes in the County 
Vuchangfu,
 one near the City 
Kiayn,
 and the other near that of 
Puki.


In the Territory 
Hanyangsu,
 part within and part without the Walls of the City 
Hanyang,
 is the Lake call'd 
Langquon.


On the West side, at the Foot of the Mountain 
Kieuchin
 is the Lake 
Taipe,
 two hundred Furlongs in bigness.


In the County 
Sianyangfu,
 near the City 
Nanchang,
 within a Temple, is a Pool call'd 
Chinchu,
 that is, 
Lake of Pearls;
 for if any Person walk apace round the sides thereof, the Water arises out of the Ground like Pearls, whether natu∣rally or artificially cannot easily be resolv'd.


In the Territory 
Teganfu,
 Eastward from the City 
Tegan,
 is a great Lake of nine hundred Furlongs, call'd 
Iunmung.


In the Province 
Hoangcheufu,
 near the City 
Hoangpi,
 stands a Lake call'd 
Vu,
 that is 
War:
 for in the time of the Kings it was a Place ordain'd for the Exer∣cise of Ships.


Near the City 
Hoangmui
 is another bigger Lake call'd 
Vihu,
 and not far from it the Lake 
Taipe;
 and Eastward from the City 
Ki,
 the Lake 
Kinxa.


In the Territory 
Kingcheufu,
 on the East side of the City 
Kongcheu,
 is the Lake 
Tung,
 forty Furlongs in bigness, pleasant and full of Fish, with which the Ci∣tizens often Feast and make Merry in Vessels on the same.


In the County 
Yocheufu,
 at the South-West side of the City 
Yocheu,
 is a great Lake call'd 
Tungting,
 which (as the 
Chineses
 say) had its original from a Deluge; and this seems to be confirm'd by the many Isles that lie in the same, namely 
Kiun, Kinxa
 (signifying 
Sand of Gold,
) 
Kiue,
 and 
Pecio,
 built full of 
Pagodes
 and Cloysters, which are inhabited by some poor Religious Order.


Amongst others is a floating Isle, on which is also a Cloyster built, for the Roots of Trees and large Canes knitted and joyn'd together keep up the Earth by their continual growing to one another, without the least danger of ever breaking.


In the County 
Changxafu,
 on the middle of the Mountain 
Taihu,
 near the City 
Lieuyang,
 lies a great fathomless Lake: On the Mountain 
Xepi
 another of thirty Furlongs call'd 
Pexa,
 out of which run four Brooks, of which one is the Rivolet 
Lieus;
 the rest fall into the River 
Iuping.


On the North side of the City 
Siangyn,
 lies the 
Cingcao;
 which moistning the County 
Iocheufu,
 unites it self with the Lake 
Tunting.


In the County 
Hengcheufu,
 Eastward from the chief 
Kity Hengcheu,
 is a very deep Lake; the Water whereof being of a green colour the 
Chineses
 highly esteem for the making of their Drink, or Wine call'd 
Sampsou.


In the Territory 
Chantefu,
 near the Cities 
Luugyang
 and 
Iuenkiang,
 lies the Lake 
Chexa,
 and unites it self with the Lake 
Tungting.


In the County 
Iengcheufu
 near the City 
Tan,
 is a great Water-fall, which im∣mediately turns to a Pool, in which grow yellow 
Lien-Flowers,
 which are sel∣dom found of that colour in any other place.


In the little Territory 
Cingcheufu,
 near the City 
Hoeitung,
 stands the Lake 
Cingpo,
 full of great Rocks and Stones, on which the 
Chineses
 often make Merry.


In the small County 
Chincheufu,
 not far from the City 
Hingping
 on the Moun∣tain 
Xemeue,
 is a small Lake call'd 
Yen,
 whose Water continues warm all the Winter. Twice a year great numbers of wild Geese flie thither out of the North and South; wherefore this Lake is call'd 
Ien,
 that is, 
A Goose.


IN the Territory 
Nanchangfu,
 in the Province of 
Kiangsi,
 on the South-East
 side of the City, stands the Lake 
Tung,
 very much noted for the clearness of its Water, and the abundance of Fish which is in the same.


The great Lake 
Poyang,
 otherwise call'd 
Pengli,
 near the City 
Nankang,
 North-East, is three hundred Furlongs long, and forty broad, borders West∣ward on the County 
Nankangfu;
 Eastward on 
Iaocheufu:
 part of it, which respects the City 
Yukan,
 is call'd 
Kanglang:
 It contains several Isles, as to the South, 
Langma, Xuihung,
 and 
Pipa,
 lying near the City 
Yukan;
 more North∣ward, 
Ingcu, Chuki, Checien,
 and the Mountain 
Ki,
 lying on an Island Eastward of the chief City 
Pehoa,
 and Westward of the little Isle 
Teuxu.
 It receives in the South, the River 
Kan;
 in the East, the 
Logan;
 and in the North, the River 
Kiang.


In the County of 
Kienchangfu,
 without and within the chief City, lies a Lake, the one part call'd 
Kinquei,
 and the other 
Kao.


Near the City 
Nangfung
 is also the little Lake 
Vansui.


In the Territory 
Linkiangfu,
 near the City 
Iuencheu,
 is the Lake 
Funghoang,
 which not being very big, neither increases by abundance of Rain, nor decrea∣sed by excessive Drought.


In the County 
Kieganfu,
 near the City 
Kiexui,
 lies the Lake 
Kien,
 and near 
Ganfo
 the Pool 
Mie,
 signifying 
Hony,
 so call'd from the exceeding sweet Fish which it produces.


In the Territory 
Xuicheufu,
 near the City 
Sinchang,
 there is a Lake, whose Water is never muddy, but always very clear.


In the County 
Iuencheufu,
 on the East side of the City 
Iuencheu,
 the Lake 
Tung
 spreads it self, and is call'd 
The Pleasure of the County,
 for the 
Chineses
 often make Feasts on the same, and have built several Retreats and Banquetting∣houses on its Banks.


The Lake 
Mingyo
 affords the City a Moat, through which it is brought with convenient and Navigable Channels, which on the East side run into the Lake 
Tung.


THe Lake 
Cienli
 is situate in the Territory 
Kiangningfu,
 Eastward near the
 City 
Lieyang,
 containing a thousand Furlongs, which to the South is united with the Lake 
Tai,
 in the County 
Sucheufu.


Without the Gate of the City 
Taiping,
 a small Lake call'd 
Hiuenuu
 lies on the South-West side, not far from the City 
Liexui,
 Westward from the Lake 
Tanyang,
 and extends from thence to the Borders of the City 
Taiping.


In the County 
Sucheufu,
 on the West and South-West side of the City 
Su∣cheu,
 is the great Lake 
Tai,
 which according to the Description of the 
Chineses,
 takes up the space of thirty six thousand Paces.


Near the City 
Changxo
 is the Lake 
Xang,
 united on the North with the Lake 
Cienli.


In the Territory 
Yangcheufu
 stands the Lake 
Piexe,
 Northward from the City 
Kaoyeu,
 where a digg'd Channel runs into it.


In the County 
Hoaiganfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Hoaigan,
 lies the Lake, or rather a great Pool, call'd 
Hing,
 full of Canes.


In the Territory 
Luchenfu
 is the great Lake 
Cao,
 and another less, nam'd 
Pe,
 which joyn near the City 
Lukiang:
 In the first lies the Mountain 
Ci,
 that is to say, 
Orphan,
 because it stands alone.


In the County 
Taipingfu,
 on the South-East side of the City 
Taiping,
 begins the Lake 
Tanyang,
 by the 
Chineses
 reckon'd to be three hundred Furlongs large, and extends from thence to the City 
Liexui.


In the little Territory wherein is the City 
Cheucheu,
 near the City 
Civenciao,
 begins the Lake 
U,
 and reaches to the City 
Laigan.


The little County 
Siucheu
 boasts of the Lake 
Ta;
 near which (they say) a Countrey Maid, afterwards Mother to the Emperor 
Lieupang,
 Conceiv'd by a Spirit, and brought forth the chief of the Family of 
Han.


In the County 
Hancheufu,
 near the City 
Changhoa,
 on the Mountain 
Cienking,
 is a Lake of two hundred Paces in bigness, famous for its Golden-colour'd Fishes, which the 
Chineses
 from thence call 
Kinyu.


In the Territory 
Hangcheu,
 Westward from the City of the same Name, is the famous Lake 
Si,
 between which and the Wall is onely a Stone Street of seven Furlongs for a convenient Walking-place. The Lake, whose Water for its pleasantness is much esteem'd both by Natives and Strangers, containeth forty Furlongs in circumference, and is surrounded with Hills in manner like a Theatre; round about the Hills (out of which flow many Brooks and Ri∣volets, distinguish'd by several Channels) are 
Pagodes,
 Palaces, Cloysters, Col∣ledges, Groves, Tombs, and very delightful Gardens. On its Shore are broad Ways Pav'd with Free-Stone; and across the Lake lie Bridges of Ships, over which they pass from one side to another, and in the passage take a view of the whole Lake. The Ways are all along shaded with Willow Trees, planted di∣rect in a Line, and ever now and then Seats or Arbors, with Benches for Pas∣sengers to rest on; insomuch that it is a question, which of the two are here most to be admir'd, the workmanship of Nature, or the artificial Adornments of the Place? The Water is clear as Crystal, the least Stone being seen in the bottom; but near the Shores the Water, being low, is over-grown with the Flower 
Lien.


This Lake hath no way for the Ships to go out or in at, for the Water is onely let out in time of great Rains, through little Rivolets, or through a Sluce which is Northward from the City; yet nevertheless there are many Ships built on its Banks, which may justly be call'd 
Golden Palaces,
 for their being so richly Gilded and Painted with various Colours. In these Pleasure-Boats they make Feasts, Plays, and other Entertainments; wherein the 
Chine∣ses
 have all things that can be invented to recreat the Mind. The Vessels thus stor'd with all manner of Necessaries for delight, Sail to and again in the Lake without fear or danger of Shipwrack; so that it is no wonder why they call this Place and City 
A delightful Garden,
 or 
Earthly Paradice.


In the County 
Kiucheu,
 near the City 
Kaihoa,
 lies the little Lake 
Pehiai,
 so call'd from the white Crabs which it produces, for 
Pehiai
 signifies a 
White Crab.


In the Territory 
Ningpofu,
 near the City 
Tunghoa,
 is a little Pool, but very deep, call'd 
Yapoi,
 whose Water (as the 
Chineses
 say) grows exceeding clear, when the City hath a pious and good Governor, but when a bad one, muddy and thick.


In the County 
Tingcheufu,
 near the City 
Vuping,
 lies the Lake 
Loxui,
 that is, 
Green Water,
 so call'd from its green colour, with which this Water is so deeply Dy'd, that it makes all things green which are wash'd in the same.


On the East side of the City 
Tingcheu,
 is a Pool call'd 
Cingcao,
 of one Furlong, but very deep; near which grow Trees, whose Leaves are continually green.


In the County 
Hoeicheufu,
 Westward from the City 
Hoeicheu,
 is the Lake



Fung,
 ten Furlongs in circumference; in the middle of it are two Isles, built with Banquetting-houses, wherein the Citizens Caress one another.


This Lake is surrounded with a Stone Wall, and a Bridge also, which not onely leads from one side to the other, but also from one Island to another. The Shore is planted with shading Trees, and built with Colledges.


In the County 
Liencheufu,
 five little Lakes call'd 
U,
 surround the City 
King.


In the Territory 
Tincheufu
 lies the Lake 
Kiao.


THe Lake 
So
 lies in the County 
Queilingfu,
 in the Province of 
Kiangsi,
 on
 the West side of the City 
Queiling,
 being seventy Furlongs in compass, and in it a Hill call'd 
In,
 makes a little Island.


In the Territory 
Gucheufu,
 on the East side of the City 
Gucheu,
 is a small Lake call'd 
Go,
 in which King 
Pegao
 is reported of old to have fed ten tame Crocodiles, feasting them onely with Criminals and Malefactors.


Within the Wall of the Garrison 
Cinping
 is a Lake call'd 
Ciseng,
 out of which the Inhabitants fetch their Water, the hard and stony Ground thereabouts not yielding them any Pits or Wells.


In the County 
Tuchufu,
 on the West side of the City 
Pingcheu,
 is a Lake which bears the same Name with the City.


In the Territory 
Iunnanfu,
 on the South side of the chief City 
Iunnan,
 is the Lake 
Tien,
 otherwise call'd 
Quinming,
 which extends Westward, and is five hun∣dred Furlongs in circumference: It receives increase of Water out of the 
Puon,
 which descends out of the Mountain 
Kaoming
 into this Lake; and on the South side makes the River 
Kinxa,
 which runs Northward.


In the County 
Talifu,
 Eastward from the City 
Tali,
 is a very long Lake call'd 
Siul,
 which abounds in Fish, it begins Southward near the City 
Tali,
 and ends Northward at the City 
Leankiang.


This Lake makes nine Creeks or Inlets, and hath three Isles which rise up into Hills, besides four others very low and fruitful.


The 
Mosale
 also takes its original out of this Lake, which after having run through this whole Countrey, falls into the Province of 
Tungking,
 where aug∣menting its Stream, it makes the Channel which carries Ships of great Bur∣then to the Court of 
Tunking.


In the County 
Linganfu,
 near the City 
Xeping,
 lies the Lake 
Ylung,
 above a hundred and fifty Furlongs in circumference, and hath three Isles in the midst of it.


Another call'd 
Tungha
 appears Westward from the City 
Tunghai,
 eighty Fur∣longs about; its beginning is near the City 
Hosi.


In the Territory 
Chinkiangfu,
 Southward from the City 
Chinkiang,
 is a great Lake call'd 
Fusien,
 a hundred thousand Paces over; and another lesser nam'd 
Ming,
 lies near the City 
Yangcung.


In the County 
Iungningfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Iungning,
 is a great Lake with three Isles of equal bigness, each having a rising Mount about two hundred Rods high.


In the County 
Kioungfu,
 near the City 
Koleang,
 at the Foot of the Mountain 
Kiechiung,
 is a Lake or Pool call'd 
Changyen.


In the Territory 
Kioungfu,
 near the City 
Kienchuen,
 lies the Lake 
Kien,
 which is sixty Furlongs in circumference. Out of it flow three Brooks call'd 
Chuen,
 which represented by these 
Chinese
 Characters 
, signifie 
Water;
 from whence the City hath also receiv'd its denomination.


In the County 
Vutingfu,
 on the North-West side of the City 
Vuting,
 is the Lake 
Hoeineao,
 which word signifies 
Breeding Birds;
 because the Leaves of a certain Tree which fall into it, turn into a sort of Birds, so black, that the In∣habitants look upon them as little Devils or Spirits.


In the County 
Cintienfu,
 between two Mountains, Westward from the City, is a great Lake call'd 
Che,
 otherwise 
The Sea Cingxui,
 into which certain little Rivolets descend out of the Mountains.


In the County 
Iunchangfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Iungchang,
 is the Lake 
Chinghoa,
 wholly cover'd with 
Lien
-Flowers.


On the South side of the City 
Pexing
 lies the Lake call'd 
Chin,
 which broke out from the Ruins of a great City, which (as they say) through the wickedness of the Inhabitants was swallow'd up in the Earth with all the People, onely one Child, by sitting on a piece of Timber in the Water, escap'd that general Destruction. Its chiefest Inhabitants were said to be of the House of 
Chin;
 from whence the Lake hath its denomination. It is also call'd 
The Starry Sea,
 from the Weeds, which, shap'd like Stars, drive upon the Water.






Springs.


IN the County 
Fuencheufu,
 in the Province of 
Peking,
 near the City 
Hiaoy,
 are many hot and boyling Springs, almost like the sulphurous Waters in 
Italy.
 If the 
Chineses
 observ'd and minded these things sufficiently, they might perhaps easily discover the same, if not greater Operations in them, than are found in any of ours in 
Europe;
 for having peculiar Tastes and Co∣lours, they may probably also have in them no less Vertue and Efficacy in Medicine.


Near the City 
Lo,
 in the County 
Chungpingfu,
 is a very pleasant Spring, re∣markable onely for the clearness of its Water.


Another like this in the Territory 
Kingyangfu,
 is call'd 
Xingxui.


In the County 
Cinanfu,
 in the Province of 
Xuntung,
 they reckon above seventy two Springs on the South side of the City 
Cinan;
 amongst which one call'd 
Kiuti
 exceeds all the other in excellency of Water.


In the County 
Yoncheufu
 of the same Province, near the City 
Ningyang,
 is the the Spring 
Tao;
 of which, because the word signifies 
Robber,
 the famous Phi∣losopher 
Confut,
 though he was exceeding thirsty, refus'd to drink, so much he abhorr'd the very Name of Vice.


In the Territory 
Tencheufu,
 in the same Province, near the City 
Chaoyiven,
 is a Spring call'd 
Hanuen,
 a Monster of Nature, out of which at the same time flows Water both cold and hot; wherefore it hath that Name, for 
Hanuen
 signifies 
Cold and Hot.


THere is a delightful Spring nam'd 
Ping
 in the Province of 
Honan,
 at the
 South side of the City of the same Name, near which stands an Ascent of Stone for those that please to stand upon, and behold the Fountain.


In the Territory 
Nanyangfu,
 in the Province before-mention'd, near the City 
Nuihan,
 is a Spring whose Water is highly esteem'd of by the 
Chineses,
 who believe it to have an Operation effectual to the prolongation of humane Life.


On the South-West side of the City 
Iu,
 is a Fountain, which for the hotness of its Water is call'd 
Ven,
 that is to say, 
Hot.


In the Territory 
Chintufu,
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 near the City 
Nui∣kiang,



is a Spring, whose Water is observ'd to ebb and flow at the same time with the Sea, though very remote from thence.


On the West side of the City 
Xunking
 rises a Spring call'd 
Tieyu,
 that is to say, 
Milky,
 from the sweetness of its Water.


NEar the City 
Kixui,
 in the County 
Hoangcheufu,
 in the Province of 
Hu∣quang,
 is the Spring 
Loyu,
 whose Water is particularly famous for making of good 
Tee.


On the Mountain 
Kingmuen
 appears the Fountain 
Sinlo,
 whose Water is esteem'd of great Vertue.


WEstward from the City 
Nankang,
 in the Province of 
Kiangsi,
 is the
 Spring 
Lien,
 whose Water in its fall glitters like Cloth of Silver, pro∣ducing thirty Rivolets.


In the County 
Vucheufu
 in the same Province, near the City 
Kinki,
 is ano∣ther pleasant Fountain; and another call'd 
Puensin,
 within the Walls of the City 
Xuicheu.


IN the County 
Sinkiangfu,
 in the Province of 
Nanking,
 within the City 
Xang∣hiu,
 is a Fountain of pure Water call'd 
Iung,
 in the midst of a Temple.


Out of the Mountain 
Kin,
 lying in the River 
Kiang,
 in the County 
Chinki∣angfu,
 issues a Fountain call'd 
Chungleang.


IN the Territory 
Choaking,
 in the Province of 
Quantung,
 near the City 
Singing,
 on the Mountain 
Tienlu,
 is a Spring or Pool, from which upon the throw∣ing of a Stone into the same a noise is heard like Thunder; soon after which the Skie overcasting poureth down Rain, wherefore it is call'd 
The Dragons Pool.


THe County 
Pinglofu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 hath two Springs, one
 Northward from the City 
Pinglo,
 call'd 
Caning,
 and the other near the City 
Xo,
 call'd 
Yoxan.


On the South-East side of the City 
Queiyang,
 a Fountain of very sweet and clear Water falls into a Pool, which is never perceived either to increase or decrease, how much Water soever is drawn out of, or let into it.


Near the City 
Pingtin,
 in the County 
Tungginfu,
 is a strange Spring call'd 
Can∣keng,
 out of which through one onely Mouth flows two several sorts of Water, the one clear, and bright, and the other thick and muddy, which after having forsaken their Spring, go each a contrary way, as if at enmity one against another.


On the East side of the City 
Chinning,
 is a Fountain of exceeding cold Wa∣ter, notwithstanding the adjacent Earth is heated by a Fire which continually burns under Ground.


Near the Garrison 
Picie
 is a Fountain of very pleasant Water, call'd 
Tro.


NOrthward from the chief City 
Iunnan,
 on the Mountain 
Xang,
 is a cold
 Spring, counted good to strengthen the Joynts or Limbs.


On the South-East side of the City 
Cioking,
 in the County 
Ciokingfu,
 rises a Fountain of warm Water, which cures by Bath those that are troubled with Swellings, proceeding from redundant Humors.


There is yet another Spring in this County call'd 
Hiangxui,
 that is to say, 
Sweet-smelling Water,
 because of its fragrancy, especially in 
Lent;
 at which time the Inhabitants make Offerings to this Fountain, and drink the Water mix'd with their Liquor made of Rice.






Mountains, Hills, and Valleys.


THe Empire of 
China
 is in many places flank'd with rows of Mountains to a vast length; not far from which are situate some or other of their chief Cities.


The 
Chineses
 hold all great Mountains in such high veneration, that there is nothing which they adore with a more superstitious zeal; and as our Astrolo∣gers make their Prognostications from the observation of the Course of the Heavens, so they from the Mountains; first from their situation and shape, then from the Gardens, Rivers, Springs and Lakes that are in and about them.


In the observation and chusing of Mountains they are no less curious than superstitious, imagining that in them all their happiness and prosperity con∣sists, because the Dragon, whom they account the chief Instrument of their fe∣licity, resides in a Mountain. But of this their Mountainous Superstition, a more particular account may be seen in Father 
Martin's Preface
 to the History of 
China.


FIve Leagues Northward from the Metropolis 
Peking,
 is a Mountain call'd
 
Thienxen,
 wherein the Tombs of divers 
Chinese
 Emperors are very richly and magnificently built.


On the South-West side of the City is a Mountain call'd 
Iociven,
 crown'd with most stately Palaces belonging to the 
Tartarian
 Family of 
Iven.


Here the 
Tartar
 Emperors us'd to retire, to shelter themselves from the ex∣cessive heat of the Sun in the Summer.


In the same County, near the City 
Changpling,
 is the Mountain 
Pefeu,
 out of which run two Rivers, which meet at the Village 
Feu.


In the same County, not far from the City 
Pa,
 is a Mountain nam'd 
Nan,
 overgrown with a Wood of Canes twelve Furlongs in circumference, in the midst of which is a noble Palace: and not far from thence is that high and steep Mountain nam'd 
Puon,
 having upon one of its tops a Stone, which though of a huge bulk, totters and shakes at the least touch; the like whereof we have in a certain Cave in 
Derby-shire.


Near the City 
Iungjung
 is the Mountain 
Chinquon,
 forty Furlongs about, and on its South side a Hill call'd 
The Flower,
 from the various colour'd Stones thereon.


Not far from the City 
Cunhoo
 is the Mountain 
Mingque,
 so call'd from a Fire burning within it, which seems to pierce it through in such a manner, that looking in at a Hole on the right side, there appears the form of a bright Half-Moon.


By the City 
Phingco
 are the Mountains 
Kie
 and 
Siuvu,
 out of which they dig a sort of Coals, that serve the Inhabitants for Fewel.


In the County wherein is the City 
Paoting,
 near the City 
Huon,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Yki,
 on which they say the Emperor 
Yau
's Mother resided.


Hard by the City 
Hiung
 lies the Mountain 
Tahiung,
 out of a Rocky part whereof springs a clear Fountain.


Near the City 
Ie
 is the Mountain 
Lungcie,
 on which appears the foot-steps of a Dragon.


Not far from thence is a Valley call'd 
Tunglo,
 which being surrounded with high Mountains, onely one narrow Passage left, is much resorted to, as a very secure place in time of War.


The County wherein is the City 
Hokien
 hath few and little Mountains; the onely remarkable one call'd 
Si,
 is near the City 
Ching;
 on the top whereof, spreading it self into a large and fruitful Plain, is built a pleasant Village.


In the County wherein is the City 
Chingting,
 and near the City 
Cinking,
 is a very high Mountain call'd 
Changuen;
 upon whose top, reaching above the Clouds, is a very soveraign Spring, and a stately Cloyster for Priests, built by Queen 
Xayang,
 in memory of a great Cure she receiv'd by drinking the Water of the fore-mention'd Spring.


Near the City 
Kioyang
 is another Hill, out of which gusheth also a healing Fountain, and whereon grow divers kinds of Physical Herbs.


By the City 
Ki
 are the Mountains 
Curi
 and 
Tiaopuon,
 eminent for the Defeat which 
Hansini
 of 
Chinya
 received there.


Not far from the City 
Chanhoang
 is the Mountain 
Ulna,
 so call'd from the Statues of five Horses Cut in yellow Stone, over which the Family of 
Sung
 built a rich Chappel.


In the County of 
Xantefu,
 near the City 
Xaho,
 is a Mountain, famous for its many Caverns; it is call'd 
Tang,
 that is, 
Bath,
 from a Fountain of warm Water thereon, exceeding good against all kind of Scurf.


Near the City 
Nuikeu
 is the Mountain 
Pungcio,
 producing divers Physical Drugs.


There is likewise the Mountain 
Cu,
 that is, 
Orphan,
 because it rises onely with one top, and stands distant from all others.


In the County 
Tamingfu,
 near the City 
Chinfung,
 lies the Mountain 
Cieu,
 fa∣mous for the Emperor 
Kau
's Tomb.


Near the City 
Siun
 is the Mountain 
Feukieu,
 having a Lake on the West∣side, which proceeded from the sinking of another City, call'd also 
Siun.


Nor far from hence is likewise the steep and high Mountain 
Cukin.


In 
Iungpingfu,
 on the South-East side of the City 
Iungping,
 is the Mountain 
Sang,
 of a dreadful heighth; out of which spring many Brooks.


Near the City 
Hiengan,
 is a Mountain call'd 
Lungciven,
 and upon it a Spring, whither the 
Chineses
 repair in dry Weather to Pray to the Dragon for Rain.


Eastward from the same City is that high Mountain nam'd 
Tu,
 surrounded with pleasant Woods.


Near the Garrison 
Iungcheu
 is one nam'd 
Lungmuen,
 that is to say 
Dragons Gate,
 so call'd, because the River 
Linhoang
 flows out of 
Tartary
 between those Mountains through the 
Great Wall
 into 
China.


Near the Garrison 
Xanghai
 are Mountains of a great heighth.


IN the County 
Taiyvenfu,
 are many Mountains, but none remarkable, except
 the Mountain 
Kiecheu,
 North-East from the City 
Taiyven: Kiecheu
 signifies 
Tying of a Ship,
 for it is Recorded, that the Emperor 
Yu
 ty'd his Ship to this Mountain, when he Sail'd up the Stream 
Fuen.


By the City 
Kioching
 is the Mountain 
Hukive,
 out of which they dig abundance of the best sort of Iron to make Working-Tools of.


Near the City 
Pingting
 is the Mountain 
Cio,
 eminent for a Chappel or Cloy∣ster of Priests.


By the City 
Kafau,
 is the Mountain 
Siue,
 that is, 
Mountain of Snow,
 because it is always cover'd with Snow.


The Mountain 
Xeleu,
 lying in the Jurisdiction of the City 
Chin,
 is notable for its heighth, in which some say, it exceeds all besides.


In the County 
Pingyangfu,
 near the City 
Siangling,
 lies the great Mountain 
Golung,
 which extends Northward by the Cities 
Fuensi
 and 
Fuensan,
 and runs South, to the Towns 
Kioyao
 and 
Yeching,
 where it unites with the Mountain 
Ulao,
 and stretches in a continu'd Ridge to the Province of 
Xensi,
 and further Westward.


In the Mountain 
Kiao,
 near the City 
Kioyao,
 they say the Crown and other Imperial Ensigns of the ancient Emperor 
Hiangti
 lie bury'd.


Near the City 
Pu
 is the Mountain 
Xeuyang,
 eminent for the Residence of two Philosophers of the Royal Extraction, who chose rather to quit the Pomp of Empire, and retire from the World, than to attend upon the wicked Empe∣ror 
Cheu.


Near it stands the Mountain 
Lie,
 where the Emperor 
Xun,
 extoll'd amongst the 
Chineses
 for his Pious Life, follow'd Husbandry, before he was advanc'd to the Crown. This Mountain to this day, produces neither Thorn nor Bram∣ble, nor any hurtful Plant; and this they imagine to be an effect of the said Emperors Piety.


In the County 
Taitingfu,
 near the City 
Henyven,
 is a part of the Mountain 
Heng,
 much resorted to for its rare Flowers and Physical Herbs; but there is one Tree thought to be of great Vertue, to which their Superstition will not suffer them to lay an Ax.


Near the City 
So,
 lies the Mountain 
Iueney,
 so call'd from a belov'd Female, Singer to King 
Guei,
 who is bury'd there.


By the City 
Quangchang,
 stands the Mountain 
Hiang,
 eminent for a great and old Wood of Pine-Trees; in the middle of which stands a 
Pagod
 Temple, and Cloyster for Priests.


Near the City 
Lingkieu,
 is the Mountain 
Tape,
 out of which they dig a sort of Vermillion, of which they make a kind of Red Ink to Print with.


Near the City 
So,
 is the Mountain 
Yenking.


In the County of 
Luganfu,
 near the City 
Changeu,
 is the Mountain 
Fakieu,
 so call'd from the abundance of Turtle-Doves that breed thereon; it is very Woody, and hath a strong Fort built upon it, which is the safeguard of the County.


By the City 
Tunlieu
 is the Mountain 
Lin,
 on which one 
Heuy,
 a famous Arch∣er, shot with seven Arrows seven Birds flying one after another.


Near the City 
Lucing
 is the Mountain 
Funieu,
 that is, 
Cow Rider,
 from an old Cow, which is reported to have there destroy'd several Men, till at last, by an unknown Man, it was dragg'd into a hole of the Mountain, neither of them be∣ing ever after heard of.


In the County 
Fuencheufu,
 on the West side of the chief City 
Fuencheu,
 is the Mountain 
Vanhu,
 remarkable for its heighth; it is so call'd from 
Ten thousand Men,
 which, they say, getting upon the same, escap'd the violence of a great Deluge.


Near the City 
Hiaoy
 is the Mountain 
Kaotang,
 in which are divers boyling Springs and Pits, by reason of Fire which burns within the Earth.


IN the County 
Siganfu,
 near the City 
Linchang,
 is the Mountain 
Limon,
 on
 which is a Spring of Water, clear as Chrystal, and of a strange quality, for though it hath not above five Foot Water in depth, yet it is extreme cold above, and at the bottom, so hot, that it is not to be indur'd.


Near the City 
Lantien,
 is the Mountain 
Io,
 out of which they dig a kind of Earth, which is us'd in the Dying of Clothes: Hard by, on a steep Mountain call'd 
Ciepuon,
 stands a Fort, for the securing of the High-way.


Not far from the City 
Nucung,
 is the Mountain 
Taipe,
 which, by the 
Chinese
 Astrologers, is accounted 
The eleventh Mansion of Happiness.
 They say, that beat∣ing on a Drum on this Mountain, causes Thunder, Lightning, and Tempestu∣ous Weather; wherefore all Persons are strictly Commanded not to touch a Drum near the same.


Near the City 
Xunghoa,
 is the Mountain 
Kanciven,
 so call'd from a Brook of exceeding sweet Water, which springs on the top thereof; where there is also a stately Garden and Banquetting-House.


In the County 
Fungciangfu,
 near the City 
Khi,
 is a very high Mountain, call'd 
Nan,
 which extends from thence into the County 
Siganfu,
 to the Cities 
Lantien
 and 
Hu.


On the North-East of the City 
Paoki,
 is the Mountain 
Chincang,
 whose top seems to represent a 
Turky-Cock:
 They said, that Thunder or turbulent Wea∣ther is foretold by a great noise, which is heard above thirty Furlongs off in the Vallies adjoyning to it.


At the same place is the Mountain 
Xecu,
 so call'd from ten Stone Drums, plac'd there by King 
Siven,
 that his Hunters might give a signal of Chase one to another.


On the East side the City 
Mui,
 is the Mountain 
Taipe,
 whose exceeding high tops are in the midst of Summer cover'd with Snow.


Not far from thence lies a Mountain call'd 
Quan,
 Fortifi'd with a brave Ca∣stle, for a safeguard of the County: Here Faulcons, and other such like Birds for the Game, are frequently caught.


In the County 
Hangcheufu,
 near the City 
Sihiang,
 begins the Mountain 
Tapa;
 and runs from thence into the Province of 
Suchuen,
 to the City 
Pa.


By the City 
Loyang,
 is the Mountain 
Yoniu;
 so call'd from the Effigies of a most Beautiful Maiden of Stone said to have grown Naturally in that place.


Near the City 
Siyang,
 is a very scraggy and steep Mountain, call'd 
Cuking.


By the City 
Fung,
 is also a Mountain nam'd 
Cuye,
 having in it seventy two Caverns; near which stands the Mountain 
Nanki
 which hath a great Lake upon it: Not far from thence is the Mountain 
Vutu,
 out of which they dig a Plant call'd 
Hiunghoang,
 good to expel Poyson and all Pestilential Virulency.


In the County 
Pingleangfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Cingyven,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Yo;
 on which are found Pebbles emulating Diamonds for clearness.


Near the City 
Hiating
 is a Valley of thirty Furlongs in length, but so deep and narrow, that it hath little Light; yet nevertheless, a High-way pav'd with Free-stone leads through it.


In the County 
Cungchangfu,
 on the North-West side of the City 
Hoeicin,
 is a very great and high Mountain, nam'd 
Sivi,
 from the Snow with which it is continually cover'd.


Northward from the City 
Fokiang,
 is the Mountain call'd 
Xecu,
 that is, 
Stone-Drum,
 because (as the 
Chineses
 write) this Mountain by making of a noise, fore∣tels War.


By the City 
Ching,
 is the Mountain 
Loyo;
 at the top whereof stands a great Image of a Lyon, out of whose Mouth runs a Spring.


There is also the Mountain 
Cheuchi,
 which extends to the Jurisdiction of the City 
Siho,
 and on its top hath a Plain of about twenty Furlongs.


In the South-East from the City 
Cin,
 is the Mountain 
Pochung,
 on which grows an Herb call'd 
Hoako,
 which eaten causeth Barrenness: There are many other Mountains in this County which are not remarkable.


IN the Territory 
Linyaofu,
 near the City 
Lan,
 Northward, is the Mountain
 
Kaolan,
 which makes an Arch about the City like a Stage, and gives a plea∣sant Prospect over all the adjacent Countries: Near it is the Mountain 
Pexe,
 whereon, they say, the Valiant General 
Leanghoei,
 Besieg'd by the 
Tartars,
 made Offerings to obtain Water for his Forces; whereupon, immediately a Spring appear'd.


Near the City 
Ho
 is the Mountain 
Ciexie,
 with two spiring tops, between which, as through a Gate, runs the 
Yellow River.


Beyond the City 
Lan,
 is a pleasant Valley nam'd 
Yu,
 which being Water'd by the 
Yao,
 a Branch of the 
Yellow River,
 inricheth the Grounds and Meadows thereabout.


In the County 
Kingyangfu,
 Northward from the chief City 
Kingyang,
 is the Mountain 
Taipe;
 in the middle of which is the Spring of the Stream 
He.


By the City 
Hoan,
 is the Mountain 
Ulum,
 Fortifi'd with a Castle for defence of the County.


Near the City 
Chinning
 is the Mountain 
Lo,
 whereon stood twenty seven Images, which, the 
Chineses
 affirm, grew there naturally, and were not made by Art.


In the County 
Ienganfu,
 North-East from the City 
Iengan,
 is the Mountain call'd 
Chingleang.


IN the Territory 
Cinanfu,
 near the City 
Changkieu,
 lies the Mountain 
Hoang,
 which spreads from thence to the City 
Cichuen,
 and runs through the Juris∣diction of the City 
Ceuping.


By the City 
Changxan,
 begins the Mountain 
Changpe,
 and extends to the City 
Cenping;
 on the top whereof stands a very noted Chappel.


Near the City 
Taigan,
 is a great Mountain call'd 
Tai,
 accounted forty Fur∣longs high; it is full of Caverns and very deep Precipices; there are built up∣on it many 
Pagod
 Temples, and indow'd Cloysters of Priests.


Near the City 
Laiu,
 is a Mountain nam'd 
Taxe;
 out of which they dig Iron.


In the County 
Yencheufu,
 near the City 
Kioheu,
 is the Mountain 
Fang,
 fa∣mous for the Tombs of the Ancient Philosopher 
Kungfuti
's Parents.


Hing,
 is a Hill near the City 
Nungyang;
 so call'd, from the abundance of 
Ar∣menian
 Plums which grow on the same.


By the City 
Cou,
 is the Mountain 
Chaugping;
 on which, some say, 
Kungni
 was Born, in a City of the same name; whereof, the Ruins are yet to be seen.


By the City 
Ie,
 is the Mountain 
Ie,
 Crown'd with divers Villages.


Near the City 
Tunping,
 a Mountain nam'd 
Fung
 is so interlac'd with Woods


and Fields, that it makes a most delightful Landskip: The 
Chineses
 compare it to Damask Silk.


In the County 
Tungchangfu,
 not far from the City 
Kaotang,
 lies a Mountain call'd 
Minxe,
 which signifies 
A Sounding Stone;
 for that on the top of this Moun∣tain stands a very high Pillar, which, on the least touch with the Finger, makes a noise like a Drum.


In the County 
Chingcheufu,
 near the City 
Chusing,
 lies a great Mountain call'd 
Langsie,
 which extends East from thence to the Sea: On it are many Villages built, the first when the Emperor 
Xi
 Encamp'd thereabout with thirty thou∣sand Men.


By the City 
Yxui
 is the Mountain 
Tapien,
 having a flat top of ninety Fur∣longs.


In the Territory 
Tencheufu,
 Northward from the chief City 
Tengcheu,
 lies the Mountain 
Tengheng;
 noted for the Defeat which 
Hansiu
 gave to King 
Si.


By the City 
Foxan
 is the Mountain 
Chifeu,
 which with a Promontory runs into the Sea: There is also another Mountain call'd 
Cheuy,
 from whence a round Stone runs into the Sea; which by the 
Chineses
 is call'd 
Cheu,
 that signi∣fies 
Pearls.


In the County 
Laicheufu
 lies the Mountain 
Hoang,
 so call'd from a certain Virgin who had here a Temple Consecrated to Her: On the Shore, near the City 
Siene,
 is the Mountain 
Lao.


WIthin the Walls of the City 
Kaifung,
 is a Hill call'd 
Y,
 full of Gardens and
 stately Palaces.


Near the City 
Siangching,
 is the Mountain 
Xeu,
 being in great Veneration among the 
Chineses,
 for its Fortunate shape and position, and is the first men∣tion'd in the Books of 
Tiungxu,
 which Treats of that kind of Divination which they deduce from the observation of the Mountains.


By the City 
Siuching,
 is the Mountain 
Kicu,
 in which is a stately 
Grotto,
 made by the Emperor 
Hoangti,
 for his Summers Recess.


North-West from the City 
Cu,
 is the Mountain 
Cu,
 on which King 
Si,
 ha∣ving hid much Treasure, afterwards put to Death all those that were privy to the burying thereof, that so he might keep it secret: Nevertheless, his Son, though then very young, taking notice of the Action, when he came to the Crown, caus'd all the Gold to be taken up.


In the County 
Gueichoeifu,
 near the City 
Ki,
 lies the Mountain 
Cinivien,
 out of which runs a Brook, whose Water both washes and shaves at once, that is, when apply'd, makes bare all Hairy parts of the Body.


In the Territory 
Hoaikingfu,
 Northward from the chief City 
Hoaiking
 is the Mountain 
Tai,
 which in former Ages Vomiting Fire, rent asunder, making a Gap of thirty Rods, from whence flows now a slimy unctious Water, serving for many uses in stead of Oil, and being not unpleasing to the Taste.


Towards the South-West is a double Mountain, call'd 
Iquan;
 between which, as through a Gate, the River 
In
 hath its Course.


About the City 
Hiang,
 towards the South, lies the Mountain 
King,
 out of which the Emperor 
Hoangti
 is Recorded to have all the Copper which he us'd, both for his Weapons of War, and his Houshold Utensils.


In the County 
Nanyangfu,
 on the North side of the chief City 
Nanyang,
 is the Mountain 
Yu,
 on which thirty six Pearls are constantly found, never either more or less.


About the City 
Niuhang,
 towards the North-East, begins the Mountain 
Tai∣pe,
 and extends South-East to the City 
Chechuen:
 There lies also the Mountain 
Tienchi,
 and upon it a Lake, whose Water is held for a great Cordial.


In the County 
Iunningfu,
 is the Mountain 
Tienchung,
 which they call, 
The Cen∣ter of the World.


By the City 
Simang,
 is a very high and pleasant Mountain, whose top, if co∣ver'd with a Cloud, the 
Chineses
 immediately after expect Rain; like the 
Table-Mountain
 at the 
Cape
 of 
Good Hope,
 and the 
Wrekin
 in 
Shropshire.


The other Mountains of this Province are in the County of 
Changtifu;
 by 
Tangin,
 the Hill 
Simeu,
 out of which runs the River 
Tang:
 West of the City 
Lin,
 the steep Mountain 
Yang.


In the Territory 
Hoaikinfu,
 North of the City 
Liyven,
 the Wooddy Mountain 
Voangae.


In the County 
Hananfu,
 near the City 
Hanan,
 the great Mountain 
Pemang.


In the County 
Nanyangfu,
 South of the City 
Quanxan,
 the Mountain 
Huy.


In the County of 
In,
 near the City 
Luxa,
 a Mountain of the same name.


IN the Province of 
Suchuen,
 Westward from the City 
Quan,
 begins the Moun∣tain
 
Cinching,
 spreading above a thousand Furlongs, and hath the fifth place of Esteem among the 
Chineses,
 who hold, that those which they call 
Xensiens,
 or 
Immortal People,
 meet often there.


By the City 
Gan,
 towards the East, lies the Mountain 
Lunggan,
 Crown'd with pleasant Woods and Fountains: There are also the Ruins of a Palace, built by the Kings of 
Cho.


Near the City 
Chungking,
 is the Mountain call'd 
Toyung,
 swarming with Apes and Monkies.


Not far from the City 
Xefang,
 towards the North, is a Mountain call'd 
Ta∣fung,
 whose Head pierces the Clouds, and sends forth from the top a River, which running down very steep, makes a great noise in the fall; from the top of this being reckon'd sixty Furlongs Perpendicular, you may take a Prospect over all the other Mountains, and see the City 
Chingtu;
 it extends from the ut∣most Western Borders of the Province of 
Suchuen,
 to 
Prester Iohn
's Countrey, or 
Sifan;
 and in a continu'd Ridge, reaches to the City 
Guei:
 Out of these Moun∣tains the great River 
Kiang
 takes its first Original.


By the City 
Cangki,
 towards the North, is the Mountain 
Iuntai,
 which for its heighth, is call'd 
The Throne of Clouds.


Near the City 
Pa,
 lies to the North-East the Mountain 
Iu,
 out of which, (though craggy and difficult to ascend) Precious Stones are digg'd.


Not far from thence▪ towards the West, lies the Mountain 
Pingleang,
 on whose top is a delightful Plain, surrounded with other higher Mountains of the County.


By the City 
Sike,
 lies the great Mountain 
Nannim,
 which rises aloft with twelve high Spiring Heads, upon nine whereof are Salt-pits.


In the County 
Chungkingfu,
 Northward from the chief City 
Chungking,
 on the Shore of the River 
Feu,
 is a Mountain, which for its shape is much Idoliz'd by the 
Chineses,
 by reason it represents (at least they imagine so) the Idol call'd 
Fe,
 who is Figur'd sitting with his Legs a cross, and his Hands on his Bosom a cross: This 
Mountain-Image,
 which whether Natural or made by Art, the 
Chi∣neses
 themselves have not under Record, may be judg'd by his Eyes, Nose, Mouth, and Ears, which are seen at half a Mile distance: A more particular Description is given by 
Athanasius Kircher,
 in his 
Atlas Chinensis.


Near the City 
Ho,
 towards the South, lies the Mountain 
Lungmuen,
 on which stood formerly a 
Pagod
 Chappel, with a Library of thirty thousand Books, call'd 
Siyali;
 first built by a Noble-man of that name.


By the City 
Fungtu,
 is the Mountain 
Pungtu,
 accounted amongst the seventy two Mountains; so highly extoll'd in the Book of 
Taosu.


Near the City 
Penxui,
 is the Mountain 
Fonien;
 on which are many Salt-pits.


In the County 
Queicheufu,
 Northward from the chief City 
Queicheu,
 is a Moun∣tain nam'd 
Chekia,
 on which are seen the Ruines of a Palace, once the Residence of the Kings of 
Sufo.


Northward, beyond the City 
Van,
 lies the Mountain 
Tulie,
 which reaches so high into the Clouds, that no Bird can flie over it.


On the Mountain 
Si,
 which lies Westward from the City 
Van,
 is yet a plea∣sant Garden of the Family 
Sung,
 with a Lake, pleasant Groves, and many Fruit-Trees.


On the Mountain 
Tunghoa,
 lies the City 
Ta.


Near the City 
Leangxan,
 is the Mountain 
Kaoleang,
 which extends a thousand Furlongs East and West.


The Mountain 
Xehiang,
 in the same County, is so call'd from its abundance of Musk.


In the Territory 
Lungganfu,
 Northward from the chief City 
Lunggan,
 lies the Mountain 
Cungtung;
 which from thence in a continu'd Ridge runs towards the Countries of 
Sifan,
 or 
Prester Iohn
's Countrey, and to the 
Damasian
 Mountains. Towards the South-East, lies the Mountain 
Xemuen,
 a Boundary between 
Sifan
 and 
China.


In the County 
Mahufu,
 Westward from the City 
Mahu,
 is the Mountain 
King,
 which signifies 
A Looking-Glass,
 so call'd from the Crystal Fountain which springs from its Foot.


South-East of the City 
Liucheu,
 is the Mountain 
Pao,
 on which the Air is of such a Nature, that those that have Agues upon them, going thither, are imme∣diately cur'd thereof.


In the little County of 
Yacheu,
 near the City 
Mingxan,
 lies a Mountain nam'd 
Mung,
 which rises with five Spires; on the highest of which is much 
Manna,
 by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Pinglu,
 that is, 
Frozen Dew.


By the City 
Pinchai,
 is the Mountain 
Pecui,
 on which, if Snow melts in the Winter, the 
Chineses
 have observ'd, a fruitful Year will follow, if not, the contrary.


Not far from the Garrison'd-City 
Kienchung,
 lies the Mountain 
Tiexe,
 so call'd from its abundance of Iron Oar.


The other Mountains of less note in the Province of 
Suchien
 are; In the Ter∣ritory 
Kingtufu,
 South of the City 
Kingtu,
 the Mountain 
Seking:
 By the City 
Mien,
 the Mountain 
Tienchi:
 In the County 
Paoningfu,
 East of the City 
Paoning,
 the Woody Mountains 
Paon
 and 
Menyping:
 In the County 
Xungkingfu,
 West of the City 
Xungking,
 the Mountain 
Co:
 In the County 
Sieucheufu,
 South from the City 
Sieucheu,
 the Mountain 
Xeching:
 By the City 
Kingfu,
 the Mountain 
Hany∣ang:
 South of the City 
Tiucum,
 upon the River 
Kiang,
 the Mountain 
Lingyuen:
 About the City 
Riexan,
 the far-stretching Mountain 
Chungpoe:
 West of the Ci∣ty 
Han,
 in the County 
Queicheufu,
 a high and steep Mountain: On the Shore of the River 
Kiang,
 the Mountain 
Co:
 West of the City 
Chuniking,
 the Wooddy Mountain 
Cyuyun:
 In the County 
Lungganfu,
 the Mountain 
Talo:
 In the Coun∣ty of 
Ziencheues,
 North of the City 
Chungkiang,
 the Mountain 
Tunquon,
 wherein


are Copper Mines: Near the City 
Lochi,
 the pleasant Mountain 
Ciepion:
 In the County of 
Muichen,
 the Mountain 
Gomui,
 and part of the Mountain 
Min:
 West of the City 
Muichen,
 the Mountain 
Peping,
 shining like a Torch in the Night: North of the City 
Kiatung,
 the Mountain 
Mienkiang:
 Near the City 
Iung,
 a high Mountain of the same name: South-West of the City 
Liuchen,
 the double-pointed Mountain 
Fiang:
 By the City 
Iunking,
 the Mountain 
Cunglai,
 on which Ice is found in midst of Summer: On the shore of the River 
Kinxa,
 a Mountain of a hundred Furlongs: By the City 
Ufa,
 the Mountains 
Tain
 and 
Umueu:
 Near the City 
Chinchiun,
 the Mountain 
Utung:
 Near the City 
Ly,
 the Woody Mountain 
Iuliang.


IN the Province of 
Huquang,
 in the County 
Vuchangfu,
 South-East from the
 chief City 
Vuchang,
 is the Mountain 
Tayuon,
 which hath Golden colour'd Stones and Earth.


Southward from the little City 
Vuchang,
 is a Mountain of the same denomi∣nation, on which they say, in the time of the Family of 
Cin,
 a Man appear'd all Hairy, and ten Cubits high.


North-East, near the City 
Kiayu,
 on the shore of the River 
Kiang,
 a Moun∣tain nam'd 
Chepie,
 is remarkable for the overthrow which 
Caocao
 gave to 
Cheuyu.


Southward by the City 
Kungyang,
 a Ridge of Hills extends two hundred Fur∣longs over a great Cave.


Southward from the City 
Hinque,
 lies the Mountain 
Chung,
 having on it a Lake with Water as black as Ink.


Southward from the City 
Tungxan,
 is the Mountain 
Kienyvon,
 that is, 
Of nine Palaces,
 so call'd from the nine Apartments, built on the same by the Sons of King 
Cyngan,
 for places of Retirement to Study in.


In the County 
Hanyangfu,
 South West of the City 
Hanyang,
 lies the Moun∣tain 
Kieuchin,
 or, 
Of nine Maids;
 so calld from nine Sisters that liv'd and dy'd Virgins there, and study'd Chymistry.


In the County 
Siangyangfu,
 Southward from the City 
Kiun,
 is a great Moun∣tain call'd 
Vutang,
 which with a great number of Spring-heads, rises up to the Skie; upon it are twenty four Lakes or Pools; there are also many stately Tem∣ples with Cloysters, the Residences of Priests.


Eastward from the City 
Ingxan,
 is the Mountain 
Tungting,
 with a great Cave of incredible depth: Not far from it, to the South, is a Mountain nam'd 
Kie,
 on which the Ruins of the ancient City 
Kieyang
 are to be seen.


Westward from the City 
Hoangmui,
 is the Mountain 
Sucu,
 Crown'd with a Chappel which is Consecrated to four 
Chineses,
 who were in high Veneration for their skill in Physick, and also a stately Tower with nine Galleries.


In the County 
Kincheufu,
 Southward from the City 
Changyang,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Fang,
 which is said to be of such a Nature, that in Spring and Harvest not the least breath of Wind can be perceiv'd thereon, but in the Summer continual Blasts blow strongly out of its Caverns, as in Winter they blow into them.


Westward near the City 
Sungki,
 begins the Mountain 
Kieucang,
 which ex∣tends to the River 
Kiang,
 and with a double row of continu'd Rocks, incloses the same, and makes the way between to be long and dangerous.


Southward from the City 
Quei,
 lies the Mountain 
Cutai,
 which is Crown'd with a Palace of the old Emperors.


In the County 
Yocheufu,
 on the South side of the chief City 
Yocheu,
 is the Mountain 
Pauo,
 famous for a stately Temple and Cloyster, situate between two Lakes.


In the Lake 
Tungting,
 at the South-West part of the City 
Yucheu,
 the Moun∣tain 
Kiun
 makes an Island; at the South-East end of the City the Mountain 
Uxe
 produces littles Stones, which by the Physicians, amongst other Medi∣cines, are given for sore Throats.


By the City 
Linsiang
 the great Mountain 
Tayang
 shoots up with seventy Spiry Heads; and another Westward from the City 
Hoayang
 nam'd 
Tung,
 that is a hundred Furlongs, full of Pine-Trees: There is likewise the Mountain 
Fangtai.


Eastward from the City 
Pingkiang
 lies the Mountain 
Tiengo,
 five hundred Furlongs in circumference, and is in the Book of 
Tausu
 accounted the twenty fifth amongst the famousest Mountains; and is likewise famous amongst the 
Chinese
 Physicians for the producing of many Physical Herbs.


By the City 
Gaukiang,
 towards the South, is the Mountain 
Hoang,
 that is, 
Yellow,
 for the Earth and Stones about it are of a yellow colour; wherefore it is call'd also 
Kinhoa,
 that is, 
Golden Flower.


In the County 
Changxafu,
 Westward from the City 
Changxa,
 lies the Moun∣tain 
Iamo,
 so call'd from the 
Muscovy
 Glass which is digg'd out of it in great abundance.


Westward from the City 
Ninghiang,
 towards the South-West, lies the biggest Mountain 
Taihiu,
 which rises with three Spires; the middlemost whereof hath on the top of it a great and fathomless Lake.


There is likewise the Mountain 
Xepi,
 and upon it a Lake of forty Furlongs call'd 
Pexa;
 out of which flow four Rivolets, the one nam'd 
Lieu;
 the rest glide towards the Stream 
Iuping.


At the same place is the Mountain 
Tungyang,
 the third in order amongst the famous Mountains, describ'd in the Book of 
Tausu.


By the City 
Xeu
 lies the Mountain 
Sucung,
 which hath a Spring of hot Wa∣ter, and thirty six rising Piques, besides many other large Mountains.


In the County 
Paokingfu,
 East from the chief City 
Paoking,
 the Mountain 
Lung
 riseth with four Spires, which are of such an equal heighth, that they seem every where to be one intire Head; in the middle of them is a Lake, out of which run two Rivolets, the one nam'd 
Lien,
 which glides to the City 
Siang∣kiang,
 and the other the 
Chao.


In the Jurisdiction of the City 
Vuchang,
 Easterly, lies the Mountain 
Chang∣mo;
 which extending a great way, and having very inaccessible Ways, is in∣habited by wild People, which are not under the Dominion of the 
Chineses,
 but live safe and secure amongst themselves.


In the County 
Hengcheufu,
 Westward from the chif City 
Hengcheu,
 appears the Mountain 
Taceu,
 where (according to the 
Chinese
 Writers) Silver Mines have been open'd in former Ages.


By the City 
Hengcan
 begins the Mountain 
Heng,
 which extends eighty Fur∣longs, with seventy two Spiry Hillocks, ten great Valleys, thirty eight Springs, and twenty five Brooks.


By the City 
Queiyang
 is the Mountain 
Xejen,
 sometime call'd 
The Stone-Swallow,
 because after Rain Stones are found upon it, exactly resembling Swal∣lows, which Physicians by their several colours distinguish into Males and Females, and use them in Physick.


The Mountain 
Hoayn,
 pleasant to the Eye, and for its fair Prospect call'd 
The Flower,
 rises up in the Jurisdiction of the Cities 
Linuu
 and 
Lanxan.


By the City 
Taoyven,
 towards the West, lies the Mountain 
Lolo,
 the forty se∣ond in order in the Book of 
Tausu.


On the North-West side of the City 
Changte,
 over a great Valley call'd 
Lung∣muen,
 a Bridge leads from one Hill to another; under which is a Rivulet.


In the County 
Xincheufu,
 North-West from the City 
Xincheu,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Tayeu,
 the twenty sixth in order in the Books of 
Tansu.


There is also the Mountain 
Siaoye,
 whereon a thousand Books were found, which they say were hid there in the time when the Emperor 
Xi
 commanded all the Books in 
China
 to be burnt.


By the City 
Kiuyang
 is the Mountain 
Locung,
 on which, they say, breeds a Bird that never Sings but before Rain; upon it is a Lake which takes up the compass of about a thousand Acres.


In the County 
Iungcheufu,
 Westward from the City 
Iungcheu,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Kiungyo,
 observable for the abundance of brave Cypress▪Trees which grow on it.


In the Territory 
Chingtien,
 near the City 
Kingmuen,
 is a Mountain of the same Name, which formerly serv'd for a Wall and Boundary between the Northern Provinces and the Kingdom of 
Cu.


By the City 
Tangyung
 lies the Mountain 
Cucai,
 the thirtieth in order in the Book of 
Tansu;
 upon it are Trees and Stones of a red colour, and a Rivulet of sweet-smelling Water.


In the County 
Chingyangfu,
 North-West from the City 
Chingyang,
 is the Mountain 
Tiensin,
 which hath a plain of a hundred Furlongs on its top, which is surrounded with other rising Hillocks in stead of Walls. The Physicians highly esteem this Mountain for the abundance of soveraign Herbs which they have from it.


By the City 
Chinxan
 is the Mountain 
Canglo;
 on which (they say) a Coun∣trey-man for several years gathering Chesnuts against an approaching Famine which he foresaw, thereby preserv'd himself and his Neighbors from perish∣ing with Hunger.


Not far from thence is the Mountain 
Nuiqua,
 so call'd from a Woman so Nam'd, whom the 
Chineses
 adore as a Goddess, for some great and publick Action done by her in her Life-time.


Southward from the City 
Tungtao
 begins the Mountain 
Fecu,
 and serves for a Boundary between the Province of 
Huquang
 and that of 
Queicheu.


To these may be added in the Territory 
Hangcheufu,
 North of the City 
Ho∣angcheu,
 the Mountain 
Pui;
 North of the City 
Machin,
 the wooddy Mountain 
Molin;
 near the City 
Ling,
 the large spreading Mountain 
Vanyang;
 in the Ter∣ritory 
Changtefu,
 West of the City 
Changte,
 the Mountain 
Lo;
 by the City 
Tang,
 the high Mountain 
Suvang;
 in the County 
Chincheufu,
 South of the City 
Chin∣cheu,
 the Mountain 
Hoanycung;
 by the City 
Iunghing,
 the high and steep Moun∣tain 
Pipa;
 North of the City 
Songing,
 the high and cold Mountain 
Kelyng;
 South of the City 
Nanquei,
 the fruitful and pleasant high Mountain 
Tuting;
 and some others.


EAstward by the City 
Funghing
 lies the Mountain 
Xifung,
 the thirty ninth
 in the Books of 
Tansu.


In the County 
Iaocheufu,
 Eastward from the City 
Iaocheu,
 is the Mountain 
Macie,
 the fifty second in the Book of 
Tansu.


By the City 
Yukan
 lies the Mountain 
Xehung,
 that is, 
Stone Rain-bowe,
 because the Water falling from the same represents a Rain-bowe.


In the County 
Quangsinfu,
 Northward from the City▪ 
Quangsin,
 the wooddy


Mountain 
Ling,
 the thirty second in order in the Book of 
Tausu,
 produces great variety of Flowers and Herbs, and also excellent Crystal.


By the City 
Yeyang
 the Mountain 
Paofung
 hath on its Summitie a Stone-House built, which pierceth into the Clouds.


Southward from the City 
Queili
 the 
Siang,
 a high and broad Mountain, di∣stinguish'd by the many Meadows, Woods and Villages which are upon it, affords a delightful Prospect.


Westward lies the Mountain 
Lunghu,
 the thirty second in order in the Book of 
Tausu;
 it rises with two Spiry Tops, which because they seem to oppress one another, the uppermost of them is call'd 
Lung,
 that is, 
Dragon;
 and the un∣most 
Hu,
 that is, 
Tyger.


In the County 
Nankanfu,
 North-West from the City 
Nankan,
 the Mountain 
Quangliu,
 the ninth in order in the Book of 
Tausu,
 spreads it self five hundred Furlongs, and is inhabited by many Orders of Religious Persons in their Way.


By the City 
Tuchang
 lies the Mountain 
Iuenxin,
 the fifty second in order amongst the famous Mountains describ'd in the Books of 
Tausu;
 and more Northerly the Hill 
Xepie.


Northward from the City 
Tegan
 is the Mountain 
Quenlun,
 on which is a Stone of that bigness, that a hundred Men may with ease lie on the same, with∣out touching one another.


Northward from the City 
Hukeu
 lies the Mountain 
Yechung,
 that is, 
Stone-Clock;
 for the Water of the Lake being driven by the Wind against this Moun∣tain, makes a noise like a Bell.


On the Shore of the River 
Kiang,
 by the same City, the Mountain 
Matang
 is noted for the many Ships that have been lost on the same; for if any Vessel chance to go never so little from the Shore, the Current being so exceeding strong, drives them against the Rocks, and splits them in pieces.


In the County 
Kienchangfu,
 Westward from the chief City 
Kienchang,
 the Mountain 
Masu,
 the thirty sixth in order in the Books of 
Tausu,
 extends four hundred Furlongs.


By the City 
Quanchang
 the Mountain 
Chunghoa
 divides it self at the top into several Hillocks, whereof all are barren, except one, which being green, and full of Trees, is crown'd with a Temple.


In the County 
Vucheufu,
 Northward from the City 
Vucheu,
 is the Mountain 
Sangkiu;
 on which (they say) is a strange Image, in the shape of a Man, which according to the several variations of the Air changes its colour; so that the neighboring People know certainly by it what Weather they shall have.


In the County 
Linkiangfu,
 on the North side of the City 
Linkiang,
 is the Mountain 
Comao,
 the thirty third in order in the Books of 
Tausu.
 Many Omens of good fortune the 
Chineses
 fancy to themselves in this Mountain.


By the City 
Sinkin
 is the Mountain 
Iosu,
 the seventeenth in order in the Books of 
Tausu.


In the Teritory 
Xuicheufu,
 on the East side of the City 
Xuicheu,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Tayu;
 in the midst of which is a pleasant Grove and a stately Chappel.


By the City 
Xangcau
 lies the Mountain 
Lungfung;
 on which, a day after Rain, there appears a great Flame of Fire in the Night, but never in dry Sea∣sons. The People thereabouts, being much inclin'd to Superstition, say that this Flame is the Spirit of the Mountains, and for that reason have built a fair Chappel on the South side of the City 
Sinchang,
 and Consecrated it to Fire.


In the County 
Iuencheufu,
 on the South side of the City 
Iuencheu,
 lies the Mountain 
Niang,
 so call'd because it is onely visible, but not accessible, by rea∣son of its dangerous Cliffs, which seem to fall every Minute; it is three hun∣dred Furlongs in circumference, and produces a Spring, whose Water is so ex∣ceeding cold all the whole year, that it cannot be drunk till it hath stood a con∣siderable time in the Sun.


In the County of 
Kancheusu,
 on the East side of the City 
Kancheu,
 is the Mountain 
Tiencho,
 on which, in the Night, appears a Light like that of kindled Coals. There are some which suppose it to be Serpents, which (as they say) vomit forth Precious Stones, (whereof they wear one on their Heads) and swal∣low up the rest again.


Near the City 
Ningtu
 lies the Mountain 
Kincing,
 the thirty third in order in the Books of 
Tausu.


The 
Chineses
 fancy that the neighboring Hills are peopled with Satyrs, and other strange Monsters in the shape of Men.


In the County 
Nanganfu,
 on the West side of the City 
Nangan,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Sihoa,
 that is, 
Western Flower;
 for 
Si
 signifies 
Western,
 and 
Hoa, Flower.


There are also in this Province, by the City 
Iaoicheu,
 on the Lake 
Poyang,
 the Mountain 
Cienfo;
 by the City 
Yukaw,
 the Mountain 
Hungyai;
 in the County 
Kieukiangfu,
 South-East of the City 
Kieukiang,
 the Mountain 
Taku;
 on an Isle of the same Name, in the Lake 
Poyang,
 East of the City 
Tegan,
 the Mountain 
Poye;
 by the City 
Pengie,
 in the Lake 
Poyang,
 the inaccessible Mountain 
Siaofu;
 near the City 
Kinki,
 the far-stretch'd Mountain 
Iunglin,
 having thirty six Tops; in the County 
Kieganfu,
 by the City 
Ganfo,
 the Mountain 
Uncung,
 in circuit eight hundred Furlongs; by the City 
Sinfung,
 the large Mountain 
Hiang,
 pro∣ducing Medicinal Drugs, and several others, of which there is nothing re∣markable to mention.


IN the County 
Kiangningfu,
 South West from the City 
Kiuyung,
 lies the
 Mountain 
Mao,
 which in the Books of 
Tausu
 is accounted the first for Pleasure and Happiness.


North-East from the chief City 
Nanking,
 the Mountain 
No
 bears on its Head a Temple, wherein are plac'd a thousand Images.


Towards the South-East from the City 
Nanking
 is the 
Fang,
 a Mountain onely remarkable, because on the Commands of the Emperor 
Xi
 it was by five thousand Men digg'd through, to prevent (as he thought) the Prediction which the Mountain-gazers gave out from their observation of this Mountain, concerning the subversion of his Empire.


On the South-West side of the City 
Nanking,
 the Mountain 
San
 juts into the River 
Kiang,
 and towards the River side hath divers Iron Chains fast∣ned to it, not (as the 
Chineses
 ridiculously affirm) because it should not run away, but that the Ships may take the better hold with their Hooks; other∣wise this Mountain being of very hard Stone, the Vessels must needs strike against it.


In the County 
Fungyangfu,
 near the City 
Linhoa,
 lies the Mountain 
Iunonu,
 so call'd from the abundance of a sort of Mineral, which we commonly call 
Muscovy
 Glass, digg'd out of the same.


Near the City 
Xeu
 lies the Mountain 
Cukin,
 whereon in former Ages a great piece of Gold being found, and proving good against many Distempers, the 
Chineses
 say that it was made by the art of Chymistry.


By the City 
Hutai
 lies the Mountain 
Moyang,
 or 
Shepherds-Hill,
 so call'd from a fair Virgin who kept Sheep on the same.


In the Territory 
Sucheufu,
 at the South-West side of the City 
Sucheu,
 near the Lake 
Tai,
 lies the Mountain 
Liguien,
 remarkable for the many fair Build∣ings which crown the same.


By the Lake 
Tai
 the Mountain 
Siu
 is coronetted with a stately Chappel and Cloyster.


Within the City 
Changxo
 the Mountain 
Yu
 extends to the West several Furlongs.


In the County 
Sungkiangfu,
 on the South-East side of the City 
Sungkiang,
 on the Shore of the River, is the 
Kin,
 onely remarkable in this County; upon it stands a great Fort, and at the Foot thereof a considerable number of Ships for the securing of the Havens thereabouts.


In the County 
Changcheufu,
 by the City 
Vusie,
 is the 
Si,
 a Mountain out of which they dig Tin.


In the Territory 
Chinkiangfu,
 on the North-West side of the City 
Chinkiang,
 lies the Mountain 
Kin,
 which makes an Isle in the River 
Kiang;
 upon it are several fair Temples and Cloysters for Priests: There also springs out of it a Brook call'd 
Chungleang,
 whose Water is much esteem'd amongst the 
Chineses;
 so that it is exceeding pleasant both by Art and Nature.


In the Territory 
Hoaiganfu
 lies the 
Yocheu,
 in the Sea near the City 
Hai,
 a Mountain very remarkable for a most stately Chappel and Cloyster, to which many People from all Parts in 
China
 come to make Offerings.


By the City 
Lukiang
 in the County of 
Lucheufu,
 the Mountain 
Taifu
 hath many pleasant Groves and delightful Ascents.


By the City 
Sosung
 lies the Mountain 
Siaoku,
 with two high Spiry Tops, between which being a Valley runs the River 
Kiang:
 on one of the Spires is a great Chappel and Cloyster.


Southward from the City 
Chicheu
 lies the Mountain 
Kieuhoa,
 that is, 
Nine Spires and the Flower,
 for it consists of so many Hills, and appears hanging down like a Flower.


In the County 
Hoeicheufu,
 on the West side of the City 
Hoeicheu,
 is the Mountain 
Hoang,
 the greatest in the whole County; it reckons twenty four Brooks, thirty two high Tops, and eighteen obscure Valleys.


In the little Territory of the City 
Quangte,
 near the Towns 
Quangté
 and 
Kienping,
 lie several great and pleasant Mountains; the most famous of which are the 
Hang
 and 
Ling:
 the first whereof, lying on the West side of the City 
Quangte,
 pierces the Clouds, yet nevertheless hath a Spring on the top thereof, which overflows continually.


The Mountain 
Ling,
 not inferior to the others in heighth, hath also a steep and craggy Ascent, and at the top is fifteen Furlongs in circumference. Near it, at the entrance of a Passage, stands the Image of a Priest, who (as they say) was thus transform'd.


Besides these above mention'd, there are in this Province, by the City 
Iung∣chiung
 in the County 
Gunkinfu,
 the steep and cavernous Mountain 
Feu;
 South-East of the City 
Taiping,
 the Mountain 
Tienmen;
 within the Walls of 
Ning,
 the pleasant Hill 
Lingyang;
 by the City 
Tung
 in the Territory 
Chicheufu,
 the Mountain 
Hing,
 very rich in Fruit-Trees, especially the 
Armenian
 Plum; by the City 
Hicuning,
 the Mountain 
Ki,
 a hundred Rods high; with some others which have not been thought worthy to be nam'd.


IN the Territory 
Hangcheufu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 on the South side
 of the City 
Hangcheu,
 the Mountain 
Funghoang
 divides it self upwards into exceeding high Spiry Heads; yet on each of them is a Steepled Chappel with nine Galleries.


On the Eastern Shore of the Lake 
Si,
 near the City 
Hangcheu,
 the Mountain 
Xeceng
 lifts up a Temple with a Turret, and about it nine Galleries.


By the City 
Lingan
 begins the great and steep Mountain 
Tienmo,
 extending above eight hundred Furlongs, and the thirty fourth in order in the Books of 
Tausu;
 it overlooks most pleasant Woods, and Fields of Rice, and hath grow∣ing upon it great store of rare Mushrooms, which, being Pickled, are from thence sent through all 
China. Tienmo
 signifies 
Eye of Heaven,
 because this Moun∣tain on two several Precipices hath two Lakes, which the 
Chineses
 call 
Eyes,
 with which it looks up to Heaven.


By the City 
Chung hoa
 the Mountain 
Cienking
 hath upon it a Lake which pos∣sesseth the space of two hundred Acres, very remarkable for yellow Fish, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Kinyu,
 that breed therein.


The 
Tiencho,
 a Mountain which lies South-West from the City 
Hangcheu,
 is partly very craggy, and partly pleasant and delightful; it hath one top call'd 
Filaifung,
 all of hard Rocky Stones, and within full of Holes or Caves; upon it also are several fair Temples and Cloysters, to which (they say) above three thousand Priests belong, most of them betaking themselves to a most solitary Life, and chusing to dwell in those dark Caves, out of which not being able to get without the assistance of some from without, they are upon occasion drawn up by Ropes; after which manner they receive Alms from those that pass by, which sometimes amounts to no small value; for this Place is all the year long (especially in 
May
) frequented both by Strangers and Natives. 
Tilaifung
 signifies 
To come flying;
 which Denomination it receiv'd from an 
Indian
 Priest, who so soon as he saw this Mountain said, 
This is the Hill which we miss out of
 India, 
certainly it is flown hither.


The County 
Kiahingfu
 is for the most part Champain, having onely one Mountain or Hill nam'd 
Utai,
 on the North-West side of the City 
Kiahing
 in the Lake 
Tiensing,
 which affords the City a Moat; upon it are five pleasant Gardens and Banquetting-houses, built by Persons of Quality for Places of Re∣creation; from whence also the Hill hath receiv'd its Denomination, for 
Utai
 signifies 
Five Altars.


To the North side of the City 
Niencheu
 in the Territory 
Niencheufu,
 lies the Mountain 
Ulum,
 which in a manner surrounds the City; it upholds two Lakes, one of which, though not far distant from the other, hath clear, and the other muddy Water.


The Mountain 
Tuichung
 rises out of the Valley 
Kieuli,
 through which flows a little River; upon it are the Chappels and Gardens of the famous Philoso∣pher 
Nienculin,
 to whom those that Travel that way pay their Visits, in com∣memoration of so eminent a Person. They say that here he made Fishing his chief Recreation when he hid himself from the Emperor, because he would not accept of the prime Place in the Government, which was so far urg'd upon him, that the Emperor himself coming to him, lay with him a whole Night in one Bed, so great an esteem did the greatest of the 
Chinese
 Emperor's set upon Learned and Pious Men.


In the County 
Kinhoafu,
 Northward from the City 
Kinhoa,
 the Mountain



Kinhoa
 extends it self rhree hundred and sixty Furlongs in circumference, and is the thirty sixth in the Books of 
Tausu;
 on which the 
Chineses
 say that the Contest was between 
Venus
 and 
Pallas.


By the City 
Yu
 is the Mountain 
Kiming,
 the biggest in the whole County, high and difficult to ascend; on the top thereof appears a fair Palace.


Near the City 
Pukiang
 lies 
Sunhoa,
 a Mountain whereon (according to the Relation of the 
Chineses
) the ancient Emperor 
Hoangti
's Daughter resided, and devoted her self to Virginity.


By the City 
Iungkang
 the Mountain 
Fangnien
 is by Stone Steps ascended to the top, where a great Bridge leads cross a Valley.


In the County 
Kiucheufu,
 on the South side of the City 
Kiucheu,
 lies the Mountain 
Lano,
 the eighth in the Books of 
Tausu.


Near the City 
Kiangxan
 begins the Mountain 
Civen,
 and from thence ex∣tends above three hundred Furlongs.


Through these Mountains a Way runs to the Province of 
Fokien,
 though over many Precipices, very troublesom to Travellers; but most of all in the steep and high Mountain 
Sienhoa,
 to ascend which are built three hundred and sixty Stone Steps like a pair of winding Stairs: On its highest Top is a fair Tem∣ple, and many Inns, or Houses of Entertainment for Travellers.


In the County 
Chucheufu,
 near the City 
Cinyun,
 begins the great Mountain 
Hocang,
 the thirteenth in order in the Books of 
Tausu,
 and spreads it self three hundred Furlongs towards the Sea, and according to the 
Chinese
 Geographers is a thousand Rods high, and not subject to Snow, Hail, Thunder, Rain, or any alteration of Weather.


In the Territory 
Xaohingfu,
 on the South-East side of the City 
Xaohing,
 is the Mountain 
Hoeiki,
 the eleventh in the Books of 
Tausu;
 from whence anciently the Province 
Hoeiki
 (which compriseth the Eastern Countreys) had its Deno∣mination.


The Mountain 
Suming,
 the ninth in order amongst the most famous in the Book of 
Tausu,
 rises with two hundred Spiry Heads, hath eight thousand Rods in heighth, and extends two hundred and eighty Furlongs: it begins about the City 
Yuyao,
 aud runs South-West to the City 
Ningpo.


By the City 
Xing
 lies the Mountain 
Tenchi,
 the twenty seventh in the Book of 
Tausu,
 which hath its Denomination from a Lake whose water is Blood-Red.


Near the City 
Sinchan
 is the Mountain 
Vocheu,
 the fifteenth in the Book of 
Tausu.


There is also the Mountain 
Tienlao,
 the sixteenth in the Book of 
Taoxu.


In the County 
Ningpofu,
 near the City 
Cuki,
 the Mountain 
Lu
 advances to sight a fair Temple, to which the 
Chineses
 often resort with Supplications to their Idols, to have their Dreams Interpreted.


In the Territory 
Taicheufu,
 Southward from the City 
Taicheu,
 the Mountain 
Kaicho,
 the nineteenth in the Book of 
Taoxu,
 is remarkable for the Stones there∣on, which are all perfectly square.


By the City 
Hoangnieu
 is the Mountain 
Queiyu,
 the second in the Book of 
Taoxu.


By the City 
Tientai
 is the red Mountain 
Cheching,
 the sixth in the Book of 
Taoxu;
 and near it, by a City of the same Name, the Mountain 
Tientai,
 ac∣counted eight thousand Rods high, and eight hundred Furlongs about, the famousest, and first in order amongst all those Mountains describ'd by



Taoxu,
 and, as they say, in happy 
Auspice:
 Upon it are many fair Temples and Cloysters.


More Southwardly in the Sea, is a Mountainous Isle, call'd 
Yohoan,
 which signifies 
Precious Circle,
 so nam'd from its convenient Harbor for Ships, being almost hem'd in with Mountains, and subject to no manner of Winds, having onely one Gap like a Mouth, for the entrance of Ships.


By the City 
Taiping,
 lies the Mountain 
Fangching;
 on which King 
Yue
 liv'd in a private condition.


In the County 
Vencheufu,
 South-West from the City 
Vencheu,
 in the River 
Lungyeu,
 lies the Mountain 
Cuyu,
 surrounded with Water; yet on the top there∣of is a Chappel and Cloyster.


By the City 
Suigan,
 is the Mountain 
Siennien,
 the twenty sixth in the Books of 
Taoxu.


Near 
Locing,
 is the Mountain 
Yentany,
 on which is a Lake of ten Furlongs, also nam'd 
Yentang,
 that is, 
A Bath for Geese,
 because the Wild-Geese, which ac∣cording to the several Seasons of the Year, change their Stations, generally make it one of their resting places.


ON the North side of the City 
Fokien,
 in the County 
Fokhenfu,
 in the Pro∣vince
 of 
Fokien,
 begins the high and large Mountain 
Sive
 or 
Fung,
 and runs from thence to another County to the Cities 
Cutieu, Mincing,
 and 
Leyuen;
 to∣wards the South side of the Metropolis, lies the Mountain 
Fang,
 which hath a Valley of forty Furlongs; and on the neighboring Hills many Orange, Ci∣tron, and Lemon-Trees.


About the City 
Iungfu,
 towards the North, a famous and high Mountain, nam'd 
Kaoca,
 the seventh in the Books of 
Taoxu,
 yields a delightful Prospect by its ancient Woods, and the stately Cloysters built on it.


In the County 
Civencheufu,
 Southward from the City 
Civencheu,
 is the 
Paocai,
 a Mountain, which on its top hath a Turret with nine Galleries, and serves for a Land-mark to Sea-men: Eastward lies the Mountain 
Siaoso.


In the County 
Changcheufu,
 towards the East side of the City 
Changcheu,
 is the 
Cio,
 a Mountain, on which (according to the 
Chinese
 Writers) stands a Stone of five Rods high, that before Rain or Tempestuous Weather, shivers and shakes like a Tree, blown by the Wind: Nearer the City lies another Mountain call'd 
Kieulang,
 which joyns to the former, and is remarkable for a Crystal Fountain.


In the Territory 
Kienningfu,
 on the North-East side of the City 
Kienning,
 lies the high Mountain 
Xin;
 from whose top the Sun-rising may be seen over all the other Mountains: There is also the 
Ciaoyven,
 the thirteenth in the Books of 
Tausu.


But that which exceeds all the other in Fame and Bigness, is the Mountain 
Vuy,
 near the City 
Zunggan,
 upon it are many 
Pagods
 or Cloysters, the Resi∣dences for Priests and solitary Persons; amongst which are divers Noble-men, who despising the World, live thus retir'd to serve their Idols with the greater Zeal.


By the City 
Pucing
 is the Mountain 
Yuleang,
 one of the ten greatest in all 
China.


Southward from the City 
Ienping,
 lies the Mountain 
Yuevang,
 on which the Kings of 
Iue
 us'd to have many Palaces for Retiring places, from the heat in Summer: more Southerly, are the Mountains 
Kieusieu
 and 
Yeuki.


In the Territory 
Zincheufu,
 is the Mountain 
Kin,
 or 
Gold,
 so nam'd, from its Gold-mines, which the Family 
Sung
 caus'd to be open'd: It lies South from the City 
Tincheu,
 near the City 
Xanhang,
 on the Eastern shore of the River 
Ting;
 it is so pleasant, that it appears like an excellent Landskip; upon it are three little Lakes, which, they say, turn the Iron that is thrown therein, into Copper.


In the County 
Hinghoafu,
 towards the South side of the City 
Hinghoa,
 lies the Mountain 
Hucung;
 upon which, the 
Chinese
 Mountain-Gazers make many Ob∣servations: Towards the South-East from the City, is the Mountain 
Goching,
 having a large Village at its Foot.


There are besides in this Province, in the County 
Ienpingfu,
 the Mountain 
Tung,
 which surrounds the City 
Sianglo:
 Through the Borders of 
Kiangsi,
 runs the great Mountain 
Pechang:
 West of the City 
Ienping,
 the great Mountain 
Hu∣on:
 By the City 
Singlieu,
 the high Mountain 
Tiung:
 West from the City 
Ning∣hoai,
 the Mountain 
Lungmien:
 South of the City 
Tinquien,
 the Mountains 
Leang
 and 
Linting:
 East of the City 
Tincheu,
 the Mountain 
Liensung:
 South-East of the City 
Xaonu,
 the Mountain 
Cietai:
 North from the City 
Taining,
 the Moun∣tain 
Kingoa:
 A little above the City 
Foning,
 the Mountain 
Lunxen:
 South of the same City, the high Mountain 
Hung:
 On the same side of the same City, the Mountain 
Nanquin:
 West of the City 
Ningte,
 the Mountain 
Hoeung:
 North of the City 
Foning,
 the Mountain 
Lunizen:
 North-East from the same, the Mountain 
Talao,
 having six high Precipices, with several others.


IN the Province of 
Quantung,
 the vast Mountain 
Talo
 begins near the City 
Cing∣quen;
 from whence it reaches to the Jurisdiction of the City 
Hoaicie,
 lying in the Province of 
Quangsi;
 upon it dwell a Wild and Salvage People, which are not under the Dominion of the 
Chineses:
 Within the Walls of the City 
Can∣ton,
 lie three Hills, Crown'd with stately Buildings; the first call'd 
Iuesieu,
 the second, 
Fan;
 and the third, 
Gheu.


By the City 
Xunte,
 is the Mountain 
Lungnien,
 out of which springs a Foun∣tain as clear as Crystal; it produces also Red Stones, of a strange and wonder∣ful form, with which, the 
Chineses
 build their Artificial Mounts.


Near the City 
Ungyven,
 is the Mountain 
Lichi,
 and in the middle of it a Lake which proceeds from eight Rivulets, whose Water is good against many Di∣stempers.


In the County 
Nanhyungfu,
 lies the noted Mountain 
Nuilen,
 on the top whereof stands a Chappel, Consecrated to the General 
Chankieuling.


In the Territory 
Hoeicheufu,
 near the City 
Polo,
 begins the Mountain 
Lefeu,
 one amongst the ten greatest Mountains in the whole Empire: It rises from the joyning of the Mountains, 
Lo
 and 
Feu,
 and extends to the Jurisdiction of the chief City 
Quancheu,
 and to the City 
Cengching:
 Its heighth is accounted to be three thousand six hundred Paces, and its Circumference three hundred Furlongs: It hath fifteen steep Hills, and above four hundred seventy two Holes or Caverns: The 
Chinese
 Mountain-Gazers look upon it as one of the chief Mountains for Divination.


By the City 
Lungchuen,
 near the City 
Kieyang,
 lies the Mountain 
Cangpu,
 which extends to the Sea, where on the Shore it ends in a most dreadful Pre∣cepice: They say that Flowers and Birds grow and breed on the same, of so strange a kind, as are found in no other places. By this City 
Kieyang
 lies a Moun∣tain of the same denomination, divided, as it were, into Arms or Branches; one of which extends to the City 
Hinning,
 of the County 
Hoeicheufu;
 and the other towards the City 
Haifung.


By the City 
Hoeilay,
 lies the Mountain 
Pehoa,
 so call'd from the Flowers which continually grow upon it, for it produces several Flowers, according to the season of the Year.


By the City 
Chinkiang,
 are also many great Hills which lie close together, and wherein there are many deep Caverns, but not pry'd into by the 
Chineses;
 for that, as it is said, many going to dig in them, never came out alive, none know∣ing what became of them, or whither they went.


In the County 
Chaokingfu,
 at the North side of the City 
Chaoking,
 lies the Mountain 
Ting,
 on which, according to the Writings of the 
Chineses,
 stands a Stone two hundred Rods high.


In the Jurisdiction of the City 
Suhoci,
 lies the Mountain 
Sin,
 that is, 
The Mountain of Chastity,
 so call'd from a Maid, who vowing Solitude and Chastity, Liv'd and Dy'd there a Virgin, in pure Devotion to the memory of one, who having been her Lover, and Bethroth'd to her, was accidentally devour'd by a Tyger; her Parents, in vain, endeavoring to force her to Marry some other Person, to avoid which constraint, she fled to this Mountain, on which are two Temples built and Consecrated to her.


By the City 
Teking
 lies the Mountain 
Koleang,
 eminent for its producing a sort of Trees, which because of the exceeding hardness of their Wood, are call'd 
Iron Trees.


In the County 
Kaocheufu,
 on the East side of the City 
Kaocheu,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Feu,
 which is of such a heighth, that this onely (as the 
Chineses
 say) appear'd with its Crown above the Water, in the time of their general Deluge, and that some were preserv'd alive on the same.


Near the City 
Tienpe
 lies the Mountain 
Koleang,
 which is said to be of that quality, that its Inhabitants neither feel excess of heat in the Summer, nor cold in the Winter, but enjoy all the Year long continual Spring.


By the City 
Hoa,
 lies a brave and pleasant Mountain, nam'd 
Pao,
 that is, 
Pre∣cious;
 to which the Inhabitants resort in great companies to Recreate them∣selves.


In the Territory 
Liencheufu,
 near the North side of the City 
Liencheu,
 lies in a private place the great Mountain 
Uhoang;
 famous amongst the 
Chineses,
 upon a supposition they have, that the Fruit which grows there, is found no where else, and that if any one should presume to carry any away with him (having liberty to Eat as much as he pleases there) he would never find his way out of the Mountain.


From the City 
King
 towards the West, the way through the Mountains is so troublesome to find, that 
Mayven,
 a General of the 
Chineses
 marching with an Army against the Emperor of 
Tungking,
 caus'd Copper Columes to be set up in the same, that thereby he might find that way out again at his return; to this day one of them may be seen, standing on a steep ascent call'd 
Fuenmoa,
 where the Boundaries are between the Kingdom of 
Tungkin
 and 
China.


In the County 
Luicheufu,
 Southward from the City 
Luicheu,
 is the Mountain 
Kingliu,
 on which, from a flash of Lightning, sprung a Fountain.


Another Hill nam'd 
Tatunglai,
 near the City 
Cuiki,
 on an Isle in the Sea, near the Shore; hath seventy Furlongs in Circumference, and eight Populous Villa∣ges, which maintain themselves with fishing for Pearls.


There are moreover in this Province, in the County 
Quancheufu,
 near the City 
Tunguen,
 the Mountain 
Heufu
 making an Isle in the Sea: Near the same City, the Mountain 
Tahi,
 on the Sea-shore: In the County 
Hoeucheufu,



the Mountain 
Lofeu,
 extending from the City 
Changing,
 to the City 
Polo:
 In the County 
Xaocheu,
 near the City 
Lochang,
 the Mountain 
Chang:
 North of the City 
Nanking,
 the high and far-spreading Mountain 
Tecafung:
 By the City 
Xihing,
 the fair and pleasant Mountain 
Sicung:
 Near the Moat of the City 
King,
 the Mountain 
Heng:
 About the City 
Linxan,
 the high Hill 
Loyang.


THe Province of 
Quangsi
 possesses an endless Ridge of barren and unacces∣sible
 Mountains.


In the County 
Queilufu,
 towards the North-East of the chief City 
Queilin,
 ap∣pears the 
Quei,
 a Mountain so call'd, from the abundance of Trees nam'd 
Quei;
 these Trees suffer no other to grow near them, nor in the same places where they have stood formerly. The Mountain 
Tosieu
 lies also near the City 
Queilin,
 and hath a very fine Colledge. More Northward, in the same Tract of Land, lies the Mountain 
Xin,
 with three high Precipices; on the top of one of them stands a Palace, so high, that the 
Chineses
 affirm it to be in the third or purest Region of the Air, above all the Clouds.


By the City 
Hingquan,
 lies the Mountain 
Haiyang,
 which reaches to the City 
Lingchuen;
 upon it is a Pool which breeds four Footed Beasts, and Horn'd Fish, which Monsters, the 
Chineses
 believe are to Recreate the Dragon, there∣fore dare not offer to kill any of them.


The Mountain 
Hoa,
 that is, 
Flower,
 so call'd from its pleasant Prospect, lies on the Shore of the River 
Quei,
 near the City 
Yangso.


By the City 
Iungfo
 lies the Mountain 
Fungcao,
 that is, 
Phenix Nest,;
 the 
Chi∣neses
 affirm, that the Bird 
Phenix
 bred, and made his Nest on the same, and that under the 
Phenix
 Nest, a very Precious and unvaluable Stone hath been found.


About the City 
Cyven
 lies the Mountain 
Siang,
 Crown'd with a fair Temple and Cloyster.


Northward, beyond the City 
Queilin,
 a Ridge of steep Hills runs along with seven rising tops, which exactly represent the shape of 
The great Bear,
 wherefore it is call'd 
Chiesing,
 that is, 
Hill of the seven Stars.


In the County 
Lieucheufu,
 lies Southward from the City 
Lieucheu,
 the Moun∣tain 
Sienie;
 from whose several observable things, as its deep Caverns, Spiry Point, which like a Pillar of one intire Stone, shoots up in a straight and Per∣pendicular Line, its Stone Image of a Horse, 
&c.
 the 
Chineses
 Draw in their Fancy many lucky Omens.


Northward of the City 
Siang,
 rises the Mountain 
Xintang,
 which is so high and steep, that it is almost inaccessible; yet on its top hath a pleasant Lake, full of Fish, and surrounded with Trees; whereupon the 
Chineses,
 who are ve∣ry curious to see such things, climbe up this Mountain with great labor and trouble; reporting, that for its pleasant Situation, it was formerly frequented by a People, which they say, never Die, and are call'd 
Xincien.


In the County 
Kingyvenfu,
 Northward from the City 
Kingyven,
 appears the Mountain 
Y;
 onely remarkable for its standing alone, for whereas others are very high, and extend a vast way, this stands alone like a Pyramid, and there∣fore eminent amongst the 
Chineses.


In the County 
Pinglofu,
 at the South-West side of the City 
Pinglo,
 begins the Mountain 
Kai,
 and extends to the City 
Lipu;
 on the East side is the steep and great Mountain 
Iung,
 which hath nine craggy Hills; on the West side lies the Hill 
Monica,
 that is to say, 
The Crown of Eyes,
 because it hath two great


Stones which appear like two Eyes on its top, so exactly form'd by Nature, that scarce any Artist could match them; the Ball of the Eye may easily be distinguish'd, for round about are two Streaks, one white, and another black, as in our Eyes.


By the City 
Fuchuen
 appears the Mountain 
Sin,
 on which by a flash of Lightning eight great Holes were made.


Not far from the City 
Ho
 lies the Mountain 
Kiue,
 so call'd from the abun∣dance of Golden-colour'd Apples that grow thereon.


Southward from the City 
Sieugin
 lies a pretty high Hill nam'd 
To,
 which is inaccessible one way, but towards the City ascended by Stairs made by Nature.


In the County 
Guchenfu,
 Northward from the City 
Gucheu,
 the Mountain 
Tayun
 begins near the Metropolis of the County.


By the City 
Teng
 lies a very pleasant Mountain nam'd 
Nan,
 from which the 
Chineses
 make many strange Observations.


By the City 
Yung
 begins the Mountain 
Tayung,
 which reaches to the Juris∣diction of the Cities 
Pelieu, Hinge, Yolin,
 and 
Cin.


Near the same place is the Mountain 
Tuki
o,
 the twenty second in the Book of 
Tausu;
 it hath eight steep Spires and twenty Caverns.


By the City 
Yolin
 lies the Mountain 
Han,
 that is, 
Cold,
 because it is so exceed∣ing cold, that no Man can live on the same, notwithstanding it lies under a very hot Clymate.


Soutward from the City 
Pope
 lies the Mountain 
Fiyun,
 remarkable because in the Rocks thereof appear Prints of Mens Feet, some four Spans long: The whole Mountain is barren and full of Caverns.


Northward from the City 
Pelieu
 lies the great Mountain 
Kilieu,
 which hath many Precipices, and is the twenty second in the Book of 
Tausu.


Westward from the City 
Yung
 lies the Mountain 
Ho,
 that is, 
Fiery,
 so call'd because every Night appears a Fire like a lighted Torch on the same.


They say that these Lights are little Insects, which we call 
Glow-worms,
 and that they run out of the River upon the Mountain, from whence they give that Light.


The great Mountain 
Xepao
 lies also in this County, hath great Woods of Trees and 
Indian
 Canes, and nourishes a multitude of Tygers.


In the County 
Chincheufu,
 at the South side of the City 
Sincheu,
 lies the Mountain 
Pexe,
 the one and twentieth in the Book of 
Tausu,
 and advances its Top call'd 
Toucu
 above the Clouds; on the North side is the Mountain 
Lungxe,
 the largest in the whole County, overspread with many pleasant Groves and Corn-Fields.


By the City 
Quei
 lies the great Mountain 
Nan,
 which thrusts up twenty four Spiry Hillocks.


In the County 
Nanningfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Nanning,
 rises the the Mountain 
Heng,
 so call'd, because in the middle of the River 
Yeu
 or 
Puon
 it receives the Water, which with great force is driven by the Stream: The Family 
Sung
 caus'd a Fort to be built on the same for a Defence of the Coun∣trey.


There are besides in this Province, North-East of the River 
Hung,
 the Mountain 
Hocio;
 North of the City 
Heng,
 the Florid Mountain 
Sieulia;
 East of the City 
Yunghung,
 the Mountain 
Suchung;
 having Iron Mines; West of the City 
Naning,
 the Mountain 
Moye;
 in the Territory 
Taipingfu,
 near the City



Lung,
 the very high Mountain 
Cieuling;
 East of the City 
Taiping,
 the Mountain 
Peyun;
 not far from thence, the Mountain 
Gomui;
 and near it, the Mountain 
Kin;
 by the City 
Co,
 in the County 
Sumingfu,
 near the Rity 
Hiaxe,
 the wooddy Mountain 
Pelo;
 in the Territory 
Chinyanfu,
 the high and pleasant Mountain 
Iun;
 in the Garrison'd County 
Sugenfu,
 East of the City 
Sugen,
 the Mountain 
Tosieu;
 by the City 
Vuyuen,
 the Mountain 
Kifung,
 and a little farther the 
Moye;
 in the Territory 
Suchingfu,
 near the City 
Suching,
 the high craggy Mountain 
Lengyum;
 by the Cities 
Fulo, Tukang,
 and 
Suling,
 the Mountains 
Tanping, Sie∣cung,
 and 
Lyfang,
 and not far thence the Mountain 
Xipi.


IN the Territory 
Queiyangfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Queiyang
 in the Pro∣vince
 of 
Queicheu,
 lies the Mountain 
Tengen,
 signifying 
Copper Drum,
 from the sound of a Drum (as the 
Chineses
 affirm) that is heard upon it against Rain.


In the Territory 
Sunangfu,
 on the South side of the City 
Sunang,
 rises the 
Vancing;
 to which there being no Ascent but onely one way, the Inhabitants find it a safe place of refuge in time of War. On the South-West side lies the Mountain 
Lungmuen;
 by the City 
Vuchuen,
 the great Mountain 
Tanien;
 on which reside many People unknown to the 
Chineses.


In the County 
Sinyven,
 near the Moat of the City 
Ciniven,
 rises the Moun∣tain 
Xeping,
 which signifies 
Stone Pillar,
 because an entire Stone is erected there, which, as they say, is a hundred Rods high.


On the North-West side of the City 
Sinyven,
 lies the Mountain 
Sikiung,
 on which anciently stood a City, whereof the Ruines yet remain.


In the Territory 
Tuchofu,
 near the City 
Pinglang,
 lies the Mountain 
Kaiyang,
 fortifi'd with a Castle.


On the North side of the City 
Hokiang
 is the Mountain 
Ching,
 to whose top leads onely a narrow Foot-path, which is guarded by a strong Fort.


About the City 
Fuiugning
 lies the Mountain 
Hinglang,
 ascended by Stone Stairs, which are guarded by the Inhabitants to secure the Passage.


By the City 
Pincheu
 lies the Mountain 
Lotung,
 which extends twelve hun∣dred Rods, and near the City 
Cinping
 piercing the Clouds with its Spiry Top, is call'd 
Hianglu.


In the little County of the City 
Pugan,
 on the North-East side thereof, ap∣pears the Mountain 
Puonkiang,
 which extends to the Kingdom of 
Gannan
 and the Fort 
Ganchoang:
 On the South-West side is the Mountain 
Tangpi,
 out of which they dig Quicksilver and the Mineral 
Hiunghoang.


In the little County 
Iunningfu,
 near the City 
Muy,
 rises the 
Hungyai,
 a very high Mountain, terrible to behold. There is also a Hill nam'd 
Lincing,
 over∣grown with 
Indian
 Canes.


By the City 
Tinging
 lies the Mountain 
Quangso,
 which extending a hundred Furlongs, hath a Fort for the safeguard of the Way.


In the little County of the City 
Chinning,
 near the City 
Xenk,
 appears the Mountain 
Magan,
 so nam'd from its resembling a Saddle.


The small Territory of the City 
Ganxun
 hath but one Mountain, which lies on the East side thereof, and is call'd 
Niencung,
 which though very high, is not above ten Furlongs in compass.


In the Garrison'd County 
Sintienfu,
 on the North side of the chief City 
Sin∣tien,
 is a very high Mountain call'd 
Pie,
 which pierces the Clouds, and runs up like a Pyramid, for which reason it is nam'd 
Pie,
 which signifies 
A Pencil,
 with


which the 
Chineses
 Write. On the North side lies the Mountain 
Yangpo,
 which for its pleasantness and variety of colours may be resembled to a Picture. The Mountain 
Caimiao,
 lies on the North-East side, from which Water falls, where∣on the Sun-beams reflecting continually, represent a Rain-bowe.


Westward from the Garrison 
Pingao
 lies the Mountain 
Loco,
 which signifies 
Harts▪horn,
 so call'd from the abundance of broken Stones which stick out of the same.


There are also in this Province, North of the City 
Queiang,
 the high craggy Mountain 
Nannang;
 In the County 
Suchenfu,
 South of 
Suchen,
 the inaccessible Mountain 
Go;
 West of the same City, the Mountain 
Tienyung;
 In the Terri∣tory 
Xecienfu,
 South of 
Xecie,
 the Mountain 
Pipa;
 East of the same, the 
Heu;
 In the County 
Tunganfu,
 East of 
Tungan,
 the Mountain 
Tung;
 South of the City, the 
Tungyai;
 On the South-East side, the Cloud-piercing 
Vienpi;
 On the South-West side, the wooddy Mountain 
Pechang;
 In the County 
Lipingfu,
 North of 
Li∣ping,
 the Mountain 
Patung;
 East of the same City, the pleasant Mountain 
Kin∣ping,
 call'd 
The Gilded Wall;
 East of the City 
Tanki,
 the high Mountain 
Tungquen;
 also the Mountain 
Taiping,
 with its rising Top 
Metien,
 and square Cavern 
Tun∣qui;
 In the County 
Putingfu,
 North-West of 
Puting,
 the high craggy Mountain 
Ki;
 and East of the same City, the 
Magan;
 East of the chief City of 
Pinguefu,
 the Mountain 
Pie;
 By the City 
Yangy,
 the craggy 
Mocing;
 In the County 
Lung∣tefu,
 by the City 
Pingtu,
 the high high Mountain 
Iunctao;
 By 
Taiping,
 the Rocky Mountain 
Cohai;
 East of 
Picie,
 the craggy Mountain 
Mohi;
 North of the Garrison 
Cingping,
 the Mountains 
Lochung
 and 
Cosung.


IN the County 
Iunnanfu,
 within the Walls of the chief City 
Iunnan,
 is the
 Mountain 
Uhao,
 adorn'd with many Cloysters and Temples, and divers other Buildings.


Westward from the Lake 
Tien
 and the City 
Iunnan,
 lies the far-spreading and high Mountain 
Kingki;
 and on the North side of the same City is the Mountain 
Xang,
 which produces a Spring with very cold Water, which ne∣vertheless is exceeding good against all manner of pain in the Joynts and Limbs.


In this County also is the Mountain 
Lo,
 being high and slender, appears like a Spire, and with the Mountain 
Kinki,
 riseth above all the other Mountains in the County. On the North-West side lies the 
Toyang,
 full of Cloysters, the Residences of Priests.


In the County 
Talifu,
 on the West side of the City 
Tali,
 is the Mountain 
Tiencang,
 which extends three hundred Furlongs, and rises up with eighteen high Spiry Heads: Upon it is a very deep Pool.


By the City 
Chao
 is the Mountain 
Fungy;
 where there is also an artificial Mount of Earth; under which two hundred thousand Men belonging to the King of 
Nanchao
 lie bury'd, they being all slain in a Battel against the 
Chineses,
 under the Conduct of the General 
Tangsiengu:
 After which Victory the King∣dom of 
Nanchao,
 which contains all that lies towards the South over the Ri∣ver 
Gangas,
 was by the Family of 
Han
 subdu'd.


By the City 
Tengchuen,
 towards the South-West lies the Mountain 
Kico,
 fa∣mous for many stately 
Pagods
 and Cloysters. From this Place the knowledge of the 
Pagan
 Religion is thought to have come first to the 
Chineses.


On one of the Mountains near the City 
Chao,
 a steep Spiry Hill call'd 
Tinsi
 shoots up a thousand Rods above the Mountain on which it rises: and at the


Foot thereof lies a Fort for defence of the Ways. The other Mountains of les∣ser remark are 
Xuimo, Chung, Tungi,
 and 
Lofeu.


In the County 
Linganfu
 the Mountain 
Uchung
 bears on the middlemost of three Spiry Risings the City 
Omi.


By the City 
Ning
 the Mountain 
Vansung,
 so call'd from the Pine-Trees it bears.


Near 
Tunghai
 is the Hill 
Siau,
 which (as the 
Chineses
 say) hath a Spring whose Water clears and whitens the Skin of those that drink it, and also makes lean People fat.


In the Territory 
Cuhiungfu,
 on the West side of the City 
Cuhiung,
 are the Mountains 
Minfung
 and 
Viki,
 from the last of which flow above a thousand Brooks, which makes it all over very Flowry and fruitful.


Northward from 
Quantung
 lies the high Mountain 
Cieupuon,
 which sinks in the middle, and makes a deep Cavern.


Near the City 
Nangan
 is the 
Piaolo,
 full of Silver Mines. The others are 
Heu,
 Southward from the City 
Sinhoa; Minfung,
 Westward from the City 
Cuhi∣ungfu;
 and 
Umung,
 Eastward from the City 
Tingyven.


In the County 
Chinkiangfu,
 on the South side of the City 
Chinkiang,
 near the Lake 
Vusien,
 the wooddy Mountain 
Yokeu
 thrusts up one Spiry Hillock.


On the East side of the same City is the Mountain 
Kinlieu,
 which at the ri∣sing of the Sun glisters like Gold.


By the City 
Kiangchuen,
 towards the South, the Mountai 
Si
 sends forth seve∣ral Rivulets.


Not far from thence is the Mountains 
Puon
 and 
Quen,
 in one of which stands a Temple and Cloyster, inhabited by Priests.


In the County 
Munghoafu,
 on the South-East side of the City 
Munghoa,
 the Mountain 
Guaipo
 over-tops all the other Mountains in the County. On the South-West side lies the Mountain 
Tunghoang,
 which is so call'd from the 
Chi∣nese
 Phenix, which (as they say) died on the same, after having Sung very sweetly a considerable time. On the North side lies the Mountain 
Tiencul,
 that is 
Ear of Heaven,
 because there is such a perfect Eccho on the same, that the Voyce, though utter'd never so softly, is repeated again.


In the County 
Quangnangfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Quangnang,
 is the Mountain 
Lienhoa,
 that is, 
Lien-Flower,
 because it represents the shape of that Flower.


Near the City 
Tai
 is the Mountain 
Yocyven,
 so call'd from a pure Spring which rises on its top; for 
Yocyven
 signifies 
An excellent Spring.


In the County 
Sinyvenfu,
 on the West side of the City 
Sinyven,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Polung,
 with many Hills, which running along in a Ridge, rise higher and higher, and appear like swoln Waves of the Sea; wherefore it hath the Name 
Polung,
 that is, 
Many Waves.
 On the North-East side lies the Mountain 
Nalo,
 which abounds with Tygers and Leopards.


In the Territory 
Iungningfu,
 on the South-East side of the City 
Iungning,
 is the Mountain 
Canmo,
 which being all a Rock, stands apart from other Moun∣tains in a great Plain.


By the City 
Volu
 is the Mountain 
Lopu;
 By 
Hinglo,
 the Mountain 
Pouo;
 By 
Lochuho,
 the Mountain 
Lovi.


In the County 
Xunningfu,
 on the North-West of the City 
Xuuning,
 lies the Mountain 
Loping;
 on the North side the Mountain 
Mengpa,
 which is inhabited by salvage People.


In the Garrison'd County 
Kioungfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Kiocing,
 is the Mountain 
Kuking,
 which hath a Spring, whose Waters (if we may believe the 
Chineses
) given to Children to drink, sharpens their Wit.


In the Territory 
Sokingfu,
 near the City 
Kienchuen,
 Westward, lies the 
Kin∣hoa,
 a Mountain which abounds in Gold, and extends from thence in a con∣tinu'd Line through the Kingdom of 
Sifan.
 One of the Hills belonging to it shines all over like Gold.


On the South side of the City 
Siking
 lies the large Mountain 
Fauchang.


By the City 
Kienchuen
 is the Mountain 
Xepao;
 on which on a Column of Stone is the Image of the Idol 
Fe,
 an Elephant, Lyon, Clock, and Drum, all of one piece, yet every Representation of a particular colour; but by whom erected is not known.


In the County 
Vutingfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Vuting,
 is the large Mountain 
Umong,
 rising with twelve Spiry Heads.


About the City 
Lokiven,
 Northward lies the Mountain 
Hinkieu,
 which is barren and craggy, yet plain on the top, and ascended onely by a long and narrow Path, just broad enough for one Man; so that it affords a safe refuge for the Inhabitants in the time of War.


By the City 
Hokio
 lies the Mountain 
Sokien,
 which is commonly call'd 
The continual Spring,
 because it feels none of the alterations which usually attend the several Seasons of the year. On its West side is a great Cavern like a deep Pit, in which stand two Images, one of a Man, the other of some kind of Beast.


The 
Chineses
 write, That if any one chancing to come near these Ima∣ges speaks aloud, there follows immediately Thunder and tempestuous Wea∣ther.


In the County 
Cintienfu,
 on the North side of the City 
Cintien,
 is the Moun∣tain 
Iuecu,
 fifty Furlongs in circumference; and on the North-West side the Mountain 
Into,
 the Air whereof is so very pure and wholsom, that those who inhabit there live very long, and free from all Diseases, nor are ever trou∣bled with that excessive Heat, with which in the 
Dog-days
 other places are infested.


By the City 
Kiucin
 is the Mountain 
Kiusna,
 so call'd from the divers-colour'd Stones thereon, being in the form of a Horse.


In the Territory 
Likiangfu,
 on the North-West side of the City 
Likiang,
 which looks towards the Kingdom of 
Tibet
 lies the Mountain 
Sieu,
 so call'd from the Snow, which never melting is always found upon it.


In the County 
Iuenkiangfu,
 on the North-East side of the City 
Iuenkiang,
 is the pleasant Mountain 
Lecekia,
 signifying 
Fair Tower;
 On the East side, the great Mountain 
Iotai,
 with twenty five Spiry Tops.


In the County 
Iunchangfu,
 on the East side of the City 
Iungchiang,
 is the Mountain 
Gailo,
 or 
Ganlo;
 upon which is a deep Pond, from which the Hus∣bandmen take Observations whether the approaching Year will be fruitful or not, by taking notice in the Spring-time, whether its Water falls or rises. There is also a Stone, which representing a Mans Nose, sends forth out of the Nostrils two Fountains, one with cold, and the other with warm Water.


Near the City 
Laye
 lies the 
Kaoli,
 a great and high Mountain.


By the City 
Iunping
 lies the Mountain 
Ponan,
 very troublesom and danger∣ous to ascend.


Near 
Xintien,
 is the Mountain 
Mocang,
 one of whose Tops seems to kiss the Skies.


The Mountain 
Funko,
 which lies Westward from the City 
Ienping,
 hath a Fort of the same Denomination.


These are the most remarkable Mountains of this Province; besides which there are North of the City 
Caoming
 the high Mountain 
Sieucao:
 By the City 
Synning,
 the Golden Mountain 
Kiuma:
 South of 
Queniang,
 the 
Pecio:
 North of the same City, the Mountains 
Yleang
 and 
Kocing:
 South of the City 
Lyngan,
 the high Mountain 
Puonchang:
 North of the chief City of the County 
Kingtungfu,
 the high and far stretching Mountain 
Munglo:
 And not far from thence, the Garrison'd Mountain 
Pingtai:
 North of 
Quangsi,
 in the County 
Quangsifu,
 the Mountain 
Fiaco:
 Within the Walls of the same City, the Mountain 
Chungfien:
 About the City 
Mile,
 the Mountain 
Siaolung:
 By the City 
Cheneye,
 the Woody Mountain 
Xingan:
 By the City 
Loleang,
 the Mountain 
Xemuon;
 through which runs a Road ten Furlongs broad: By the City 
Yeco,
 the Mountain 
Yceng:
 Near the City 
Malnug,
 the high topt Mountain 
Quenfo:
 West of the chief City, in the County 
Yaoganfu,
 the Mountain 
Kienlien:
 On the East of the same City, the Mountain 
Tung,
 o'respread with pleasant Groves: On the North of the Moun∣tain 
Lolo,
 and by the City 
Zayao,
 the Mountain 
Luki:
 South of the City 
Pexing,
 the high Mountain 
Rieulung:
 On the East side, the Mountain 
Tung;
 on the West, the 
Utung:
 On the North-West side of the City 
Sinhon,
 the Mountain 
Talung:
 On the North side, the 
Checung,
 on which is a warm Spring: By the Garrison 
Chelo,
 the Mountain 
Munglo:
 By the Garrison 
Taheu,
 the steep Moun∣tain 
Olun:
 By the Garrison'd City 
Mangxi,
 the high Stony and Cavernous Mountain 
Singxe:
 By the Garrison 
Mengyang,
 the high Mountain 
Queikive,
 so full of Holes, that it is said to have been Undermin'd by Evil Spirits.


As to what concerns the Temperature of the Air, and Quality of the Soil in the several Countries of 
China
 in particular, having heretofore spoken of it in general, we find in the 
Chinese
 Books of Geography this account given.






The Temperature of the Air, and Quality of the Soil.


IN the first little County, wherein stands the City 
Chin,
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 the Air, in regard of the Countrey, lies very high, and is much colder than in other places; but in most parts of the Province of 
Xensi,
 the Air is pleasant and temperate.


It Rains very seldom in the Province of 
Xantung.


In divers places of rhe Province of 
Honan
 the Air is very Temperate, and consequently Healthful; as likewise in the County 
Houiking.


The Air of the Province of 
Fokien
 is generally hot, but clear and Healthful; except in the County 
Tincheufu.


The Southern part of the Province of 
Quangsi,
 is under a warm Climate.


The Air of the Province of 
Iunnan
 is much hotter than that of the other Pro∣vinces, as being nearer to the Line, and for the most part agreeing with that of 
India.


The Soil of the Province of 
Peking,
 is in most places Barren and Sandy, though Champain; but in the second County 
Paotingfu,
 very pleasant and Fruitful of all things; and so likewise in the seventh Territory 
Tamingfu:
 In the eighth County of this Province grows the Root 
Gingten.


In the Jurisdiction of the City 
Yenking,
 the first of the three Cities without


the bounds of the Province of 
Peking,
 are store of Vines; yet the Inhabitants know not how, or rather (which is most probable) will not make Wine of Grapes, but content themselves with Liquors made of Rice, which are ex∣ceeding good, and so well approv'd of by the Jesuits, who went thither from 
Europe,
 that they us'd no Liquor else, except at Mass.


The Province of 
Xansi
 produces Vineyards and Grapes, much sweeter than in other parts in 
China;
 so that the 
Chineses,
 if they would, might make excel∣lent Wine in great abundance; but in stead thereof, they have a way of drying their Grapes like Raisins, which, when so order'd, are Vended in all parts of 
China.


The Fathers which Promulgated the Gospel in this Province, took a conve∣nient course to Press their Wine themselves which they use at Mass, and fur∣nish'd others of their Fraternity in the Neighboring Provinces therewith; whereas, formerly with great trouble and charge they sent for their Wine from the City 
Makao.


The second County 
Pingyangfu,
 of the Province of 
Xansi,
 is partly Cham∣pain, and partly Mountainous; but of the Champain, which is very Fruitful, not an Acre lies Untill'd.


The fourth County 
Luganfu,
 of the same Province, is very Pleasant, and though small, yet abounds with all manner of Provision.


The fifth County 
Fuencheufu,
 though Hilly, yet on the Hills themselves hath some places capable of Tillage; and beneath, divers thick Woods and Forests, stor'd with Venison, fruitful Corn-fields and Meadows for Pasture.


The Province of 
Xensi
 is more subject to Drought than any other Province, and very often infinitely endamag'd by swarms of Locusts, which like a vast Army devour the Fruits of the Earth, and lay waste all before them: This Pro∣vince particularly produces the Physical Plant 
Rhubarb.


The first County 
Siganfu,
 of the Province of 
Xensi,
 hath both Pleasant Moun∣tains and Fruitful Plains, producing all store of Fruits and other Provision: The second likewise is both Manur'd, and not behind in natural Fertility.


The third Territory 
Hanchungfu,
 hath many rank Pastures and rich Fields.


The fourth 
Pingleangfu,
 hath many pleasant Mountains, which are not alto∣gether barren.


The Soil of the whole Province of 
Xantung
 is inrich'd by the many Rivers, Lakes, and Brooks that are in the same, and hath plenty of all kind of Neces∣saries, as well Rice, Barley, and other sorts of Corn, as of Beans, 
Hau,
 and divers sorts of excellent Fruit, but Drought and Locust do often great hurt: Nevertheless, the Countrey is naturally so exceeding Fertile, that they say, the Harvest of one Fruitful Year stor'd them for ten Years, in such plenty, as to spare great quantities to other Countries: Particularly, it yields large Pears and Apples of several sorts, Chest-nuts, Small-nuts, and great abundance of Plums, which are dry'd and sent to other Countries.


The first County 
Cinunfu,
 yields not, for pleasure, to any other of the Nor∣thern Provinces, for all manner of Grain or Fruits, especially Wheat and Rice, which grow there in great abundance.


In like manner, the second County 
Yeucheufu
 hath many delightful Fields, Wooddy Mountains, and in most places, is well Cultivated.


The third County 
Tungchangfu
 hath a Plain and Rich Soil, produces great store of Grain, and wants in a manner nothing of what is requisite for the su∣staining of Mans Life.


The Province of 
Honan
 is in some parts Champain, and in others Moun∣tainous, especially Westward; yet the Soil being every where Fruitful, no place lies Untill'd, except towards the West, where several craggy Mountains ob∣struct the Husbandmans Labor: The Fields produce Rice, and all other sorts of Grain: They have all manner of 
European
 Fruits, and that in such abun∣dance, that they are bought at very cheap Rates; so that it is no wonder this Province is by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
A Paradice of Delight;
 for the Eastern part there∣of is so pleasant, and every where so improv'd by Tillage, that those who shall for several days Travel through the same, may fancy they walk through a most delightful Garden.


But above all, for richness of Soil, are the Counties 
Queitefu
 and 
Changtefu,
 as being for the most part Plain, without any Mountains.


The third Territory on the contrary is very barren and Sandy; yet that de∣fect is much supply'd by the conveniency of its Rivers. The fifth County 
Hoai∣kingfu
 again is exceeding Fertile; as also the sixth and seventh, being 
Honanfu
 and 
Nanyangfu;
 the last well Water'd with Rivers and surrounded with Moun∣tains, so abounds with Provision, that it is able to furnish whole Armies there∣with. In like manner the little County, in which stands the City 
Iu,
 is very Fruitful.


The Province of 
Suchuen
 hath many pleasant Pastures and rich Corn-fields, yet is Mountainous in several places: The Physical Drugs which this Coun∣trey produces, as well Herbs as Minerals, are much esteem'd, and from thence Transported to 
Europe;
 among others the true 
China-Root,
 and best 
Rhubarb.


The whole Territory 
Chingtufu
 is partly Champain, and in some parts with Mountains; the Plains are inrich'd by Natures Hand, and the very Moun∣tainous parts by good Tillage, are made Fruitful; all the Fields are Water'd by Rivulets, either Natural or Cut, insomuch, that whoe're Travels through them, hath, for three days, an exceeding pleasant Journey.


In the County 
Paoningfu,
 of the Province of 
Suchuen,
 in a 
Pagod
-Temple in the great City 
Kien,
 grows an 
Indian
 Fig-tree, in the 
Portuguese
 Tongue call'd 
Arvor de Rayes.


In the Country 
Xunkingfu
 grow great store of Gold-colour'd Apples, a Root call'd 
Soozanem,
 and Chest-nuts which melt in the Mouth like Sugar.


The Territory 
Siucheufu,
 though craggy and Mountainous, produces among many other things requisite, abundance of 
Indian
 Sugar-canes, and an excellent Fruit call'd 
Lichi.


The County 
Chunkingfu
 hath store of 
Meutang
-Flowers, and the Fruit 
Licheu.


The Territory 
Queicheufu,
 Fruitful of its self, is also by the Inhabitants very much improv'd by Tillage, no spot of Ground being left Unmanur'd, except some Sandy and Stony Mountains, which lie especially towards the North: Among other excellent Fruits, this Countrey abounds in Oranges and Lemons.


The first little County, wherein stands the City 
Tungchun,
 is exceedingly in∣rich'd by the abundance of Rivers which Water the same.


The small Territory belonging to the City 
Kiating,
 is a pleasant place, and yields plenty of Rice and other Grains.


By the fourth Garrison'd City 
Chinhiung
 grow a sort of Beans, which the 
Chi∣neses
 for their hardness call 
The Stone-Beans;
 they grow on Shrubs, and are ex∣ceeding good against Heart-burning.


The County of 
Huquang
 for its Fruitfulness is call'd 
Iumichity,
 that is, 
The




Countrey of Fish and Rice;
 it is also call'd 
The Corn-store-house of the
 Chineses (as 
Sicilie
 was anciently call'd, 
The Store-house of
 Italy) from its abundance of all things, especially Corn, and all manner of Grain, which it not onely yields to its Inhabitants, but in a plentiful manner furnishes all the neighboring Countries.


The County 
Vuchangfu
 is advantag'd by the many Streams and Channels that run through the same, and along whose Banks grow abundance of Reeds, of which they make Paper.


The second 
Honia,
 among other things, produces in particular great plenty of Lemons, Oranges, and Cytrons: Nor are the fifth and sixth Territories in∣ferior; which last yields all manner of Provisions.


The seventh County 
Iocheufu,
 is very much inrich'd by three Rivers, 
viz.
 the 
Kiang, Siang,
 and 
Fungi,
 and brings forth incomparable Fruits, especially Oran∣ges and Lemons.


The eighth County 
Changxafu,
 generally Champain, but in some places Mountainous, hath a fat and fertile Soil, and plenty of all things, Rice grow∣ing there in abundance, without danger of withering in the dryest Seasons, because there seldom wants Rain, which if there should, the Husband-man supplies it sufficiently with Water, which by an Engine is drawn out of the Lakes and Streams over their Fields, so to moisten the Roots of their Plants.


The County 
Hengcheufu
 is a delightful and well Till'd Countrey, yielding all manner of Provisions, and among the rest, Paper-canes: Much of the same Nature are the tenth and fourteenth Counties.


In the Territory 
Chingyangfu
 grows a Plant, which like our Ivy runs up in height, bears Yellow Flowers, and some White. The utmost end of the Sprigs are very thin, like Silken Threds; they say, that a small Branch thereof being laid to the Naked Body, occasions Sleep, and therefore is call'd 
Munghao,
 that is, 
Flower of Sleep.


The County 
Nanchangfu,
 the first of the Province of 
Kiangfi,
 having every where a fruitful and fat Soil, is Till'd in most places: In like manner, the se∣cond Territory 
Iaocheufu
 is made very pregnant by several Rivers that run through it.


The 
Chineses
 also esteem the fourth County 
Nankangfu,
 for its affording them all kind of Necessaries; the low Grounds yielding plenty of Rice, Corn, and Shell-Fruit; the Mountains store of Wood for Fuel.


The sixth County 
Kienchangfu,
 is, though Mountainous, a Pleasant and Fer∣tile Countrey; as likewise the seventh 
Vuchenfu,
 (through which run many Rivers) it yields store of Gold-colour'd Apples; nor is it wanting in all sorts of Fruit and other Provisions: No less Pleasant and Fruitful is the eighth County 
Lingkiangfu,
 esteem'd by the 
Chineses;
 as also the ninth 
Kieganfu,
 though Hilly and Mountainous: But above all, the tenth Territory 
Xuicheufu,
 a∣bounds in Rice-Fields; as appears by its paying three thousand Bags of Rice for Custom Yearly; when as it contains onely three Cities, of which, the chief at this day call'd 
Xuicheu,
 was in the time of the Family 
Tang
 nam'd 
Micheu,
 that is, 
City of Rice:
 Not much short of this in plenty is the eleventh County 
Iuencheufu.


The fourth County 
Sunkiangfu,
 of the Province of 
Kiangnan,
 though small, is not to be left out of the Fruitful Countries: The fifth 
Changcheufu,
 being a plain Countrey and Water'd by several Rivers, exceeds many other Territories in the goodness of its Soil; producing an excellent kind of Grain. The seventh 
Yan∣cheufu
 hath also a delightful and fertile Soyl.


The ninth County 
Lucheufu,
 being water'd by the Lake 
Cao,
 possesses in most parts thereof very luxuriant Plains: In like manner doth the eleventh, 
Taipingfu.


The Province of 
Chekiang,
 by reason of the many Brooks, Rivers and Lakes which wash the same, is a rich Magazine of Plenty: And though 
Chokiang
 hath many Mountains on its South and West parts, yet they are all Till'd▪ ex∣cept those which are stony; and they also afford Timber, fit for the building of Ships or Houses. In most parts are store of Mulberry Trees, which are Prun'd yearly like our Vines, thereby the better to provide Food for the Silk-Worms; for the 
Chineses
 suffer them not to grow too high, having by the expe∣rience of many years learn'd, that the Leaves of the Orange-Trees, and those that are most kept down, yield the best Silk.


In the County 
Hucheufu,
 the third of the Province of 
Chekiang,
 grows 
Cha,
 which is call'd 
Riaicha.


In the fifth Territory 
Kinhaofu
 grows a sort of great Plumbs, which being dry'd, are sent from thence to most parts of 
China.


The whole County of 
Ningpofu,
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 hath a fertile Soil, except where it is full of Rocks and Mountains.


The eleventh County 
Vencheufu
 flourishes all along till you come to the Mountains in the Province of 
Fokien,
 which extend themselves a vast way.


The Province of 
Fokien
 is for the most part over▪spread with Mountains, which in many places are cover'd with pleasant Woods, especially on steep Ascents: The Timber is good for the building of Ships, Houses, and the like. That part also which is plain, is for the most part Sandy and unfit for Tillage: but to supply that defect, the Water is led thither in little Channels, whereby those places that are barren by Nature, are rendred productive by the Art and Industry of Man.


The sixth County 
Tingcheufu
 hath abundance of all things requisite for the subsistance of Mankind, notwithstanding it is very Mountainous.


The seventh Territory 
Hinghoafu
 in the Province of 
Fokien,
 is the fertilest and pleasantest in the whole Countrey, and especially abounding in Rice, as ap∣pears by its paying seventy two thousand Bags of Tribute, whereas it onely contains two Cities.


The little Territory of the City 
Foning
 hath also plenty of Provision, not∣withstanding it is every where full of Mountains.


The Province of 
Quantung
 is a rich Store-house of Plenty: The Fields are so bountiful in the production of Rice and Wheat, that they are Sown twice a year, each Harvest yielding the Husband-man a most plentiful Crop, by rea∣son the whole Province feels neither Frost nor Snow, insomuch that the 
Chi∣neses
 have a Proverb concerning it, 
viz. That in the Province of
 Quantung 
are three unusual things, The Skie without Snow, The Trees always green,
 and 
The Inhabi∣tants continually spitting Blood,
 that is to say, a red-colour'd Spittle occasion'd by the continual chewing the Leaves of 
Betel
 with 
Faufel
 or 
Araka,
 a Composition made of burnt Oyster-shells.


In the same Province also are every where many excellent Fruits, as Pomegranates, Grapes, Pears, Chesnuts, 
Indian
 Figs, 
Indian
 Nuts, 
Anana's, Li∣chin, Lunggon, Ieucu,
 or Muskmelons, Apples, and all sorts of Citrons.


The fifth Territory 
Iaocheufu
 in the Province of 
Quantung,
 hath a fertile Soyl, except in some places where it is oppress'd with Rocks.


The sixth 
Chaokingfu
 yields store of sweet Wood, and amongst the rest that which the 
Portuguese
 name 
Pao de Rosa,
 that is, 
Rose-Wood.


The ninth County 
Luicheufu
 exceeds in many things all the other Territo∣ries in the Province of 
Quantung:


In most parts of this Countrey grows a Twig, which the 
Chineses
 call 
Teng,
 and the 
Portuguese, Rosa.


The Province of 
Quangsi
 is not altogether so delightful as that of 
Quantung;
 yet in some measure is supply'd with Provisions: The whole Province is full of Hills, except the South part, which reaches to the Shore, where it is all Till'd and Manur'd.


The third County 
Kingyvenfu
 is a Craggy and Mountainous Countrey, yet produces 
Araka,
 little 
Indian
 Nuts, and the Fruit 
Lichias.


The sixth Territory 
Cincheufu,
 is a pleasant Place, and not so barren as the former.


The Province of 
Queicheu
 is the craggiest and unfertilest Place in all 
China,
 being nothing but a continu'd and inaccessible Ridge of Mountains.


In the fourth Territory 
Chinyvenfu
 grow a sort of Flowers, highly esteem'd by the 
Chineses,
 Granates, and Golden Apples.


The first County 
Iunnanfu
 in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 is a very pleasant Countrey, having plenty of all things, and rises in some places in Hills and high. Mountains, and in others extends a vast way on plain and Champain Grounds: It produces Rose-Wood.


In the second County 
Talifu
 in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 grow 
European
 Figs, which the 
Chineses
 call 
Vuhoaquo,
 that is, 
Fruit without Flowers,
 because they grow without ever having any Blossoms; for 
Vu
 signifies 
Without; Hoa, Flower;
 and 
Quo, A Blossom.
 There likewise grows 
Cha
 or 
Tee.


The third County 
Langanfu
 yields Rice, Wheat, Honey, and Wax; and also all sorts of Fruits which grow in 
India.
 It is partly Champain, and partly Mountainous.


The fourth Territory 
Cuihungfu
 is a plain Countrey, flourishing with Corn-Fields, brave Meadows, and Pastures for Cattel.


The whole County 
Kingtungfu
 produces chiefly (and therefore in great abundance) Rice.


The Territory 
Quangnangfu
 is by the 
Chineses,
 for its excellent fertility, call'd 
The Golden Land.


In the fifth Territory 
Iunnanfu,
 where stands the Garrison'd City 
Cioking,
 are store of Pine-Apples; as likewise in the sixth.


The seventh abounds with Silk, Ebony-Wood, Date-Trees, and 
Araka,
 which the Inhabitants chew with 
Betel
-Leaves, as also the 
Indians,
 who call it 
Makinnang.


Thus much of the temperature of the Air, and fertility of the Soyl of 
China;
 as to what concerns their manner of Husbandry, and the Description of some Plants that belong properly to 
China,
 we will here Treat at large.






Of their manner of Husbandry.


AS to what concerns Husbandry, no People in the World are more skil∣ful and experienc'd than the 
Chineses:
 They say (and not without some Ground) that a Man may live without all Arts, except that of Husbandry, which is amongst them esteem'd the onely Business of Conse∣quence. They say continually that Husbandry is the greatest and chiefest






Work of the Empire, and that even Kings and Magistrates ought seriously to concern themselves in it. And it comes to pass by the great Priviledges and Encouragements allow'd to the Husband-man, that not one Spot of Land is left unimprov'd, if it be either naturally fruitful, or can be made so by Art: and because it is a great part of their care to keep their Ground in heart by frequent Dunging and Manuring, they use many more sorts of Dung than are in use amongst us, as Man's Dung, Ox Legs stamp'd, Hogs Bristles, 
&c.
 insomuch, that the 
Chineses,
 though stor'd with great abundance of preci∣ous things, nothing is lost, how mean soever it is, but is all improv'd to the great benefit of the whole Empire. Where there is want of Water, it is con∣vey'd, though a considerable way, out of the Rivers, along digg'd Channels; (by which means all 
China
 is made Navigable) and conducted from low to high places by means of an Engine made of four square Planks holding great store of Water, which with Iron Chains they hale up like Buckets. It is re∣ported, that several of their Emperors and Empresses did in ancient times pra∣ctise Husbandry.


The Emperor 
Ven,
 who began his Reign 
Anno
 197 before the 
Incarnation,
 pro∣moted Husbandry, then decay'd by the continual Wars, with great zeal, and put his own Hands to the Work, that by his Example he might oblige all the greatest Noble-men to follow him. He caus'd all Women to plant Mul∣bery-Trees, and breed Silk-Worms, from the Example of his Empress, whom he enjoyn'd to set the fore-mention'd Trees, and breed Silk-Worms in his Pa∣lace; insomuch that all the Clothes she wore, and which were us'd in their Religious Ceremonies, were of her making.


It is credible that from hence the high Feast, which the 
Chineses
 call 
Hinchun,
 hath its original: This may well be term'd 
The Countrey-man's Holiday;
 for in the beginning of the Spring, when the Sun is in the 
Aequator,
 this Day is by the 
Chineses
 through the whole Empire kept with great Solemnity, by all de∣grees of Persons in every City, and in the Metropolis 
Peking
 it self after this manner:


One of the chiefest of the Nobility, Crown'd with a Garland of Flowers, goes to the Eastern Gate of the City, with all manner of Instruments Playing before him, and attended with a number of burning Torches and Flags. Behind fol∣low a Train of Men, which carry several Dishes of Meat to Trees, whereon hang the ancient Monuments of Husbandry, being either made of Wood or some other Material, and set forth with Silk and Cloth of Gold. In several places through which they pass, stand Triumphal Arches, and all the Streets are hung with Tapestry. In this manner the Nobleman goes to the Eastern Gate, as it were, to meet the approaching Spring.


The chiefest Pageantries of this Solemnity are, A Cow of Bak'd Clay, so big, that forty Men are scarce able to carry it: The other is a Youth, whom they call 
The Careful and Industrious Spirit,
 who going bare with one Leg, and the other cover'd with a Stocking, continually strikes the Cow on the Back with a Switch: Then follow divers Countrey-men, carrying Spades, Shovels, Axes, and the like Tools, us'd in Husbandry; yet nothing of what they carry or do, but represents a peculiar Secret; as by the continual beating on the Cow, they signifie, what care the Husband-man must take in the Manuring of his Lands; by the Youths going with one Leg bare, and the other antick∣ly clad, they express what speed they must use to go to their Labor, and scarce allow time to Clothe themselves.


When the whole Train is led to the King's or Governor's Palace, the Stone Cow is bereav'd of all her Garlands and other Ornamentals: Out of her open'd Belly (like as from the 
Trojan
 Horse) little Clayie Oxen are drawn in great numbers, of which the Emperor sends one to every Governor, with ad∣monishments, that the Subjects would be careful and diligent in the Tilling of their Lands, and leave not an Acre unsow'd; and among other Ceremonies, the Emperor himself Plows, and throws Seed on the Ground that day.


The Emperor 
Hiaou,
 though when he was grown very old, betook himself three years before his Death to Husbandry, and forsaking all kind of State Af∣fairs, Plough'd and Sow'd the Ground himself, that by that means he might shew good examples to his Subjects, and stir them up in like manner to Hus∣bandry: Then enquiring out experienc'd Planters, commanded them to go through his whole Dominions, and teach all People the way of Husbandry: to which purpose, they found out all sorts of Implements or Tools useful in Tillage, and many other the like things which are requir'd in Husbandry; so that we may now cease from wondering, that formerly mean Rusticks were rais'd from the Plough to the Imperial Throne and sole 
Monarchy
 of all 
China,
 when we see that Emperors descended from the Throne to the Plough, nay, which is more, manag'd the Empire and the Plough at once.


The ancient 
Chinese
 Emperors and Kings have had several Laws concerning
 Husbandry, amongst which were these.


The nineteenth part of whatsoe're the Soil produces, falls to the Emperor.


The Governors ought in time of Famine to take notice of the Subjects Goods and Estates, and Tax them according to their Quality.


The dividing of the Ground was after this manner; every Person was to have an equal share, and one Family no more than the other: All the Fields were divided into great Squares, and these again into nine lesser, of which each Person had one to Manure; but the middlemost was either the Empe∣ror's or the King's Square, which was also by eight Overseers Till'd on the Emperor's Account.


The eight Squares were call'd 
Peculiar Acres,
 but the middlemost, 
The Cammon or Free Square,
 which when left Untill'd, no Man was permitted to Manure his own.


The Emperor 
Xinnung
 first Invented the Plough and other Necessary things for Husbandry, and taught the Inhabitants to Sow Wheat, Rice, Barly, 
Maiz
 or 
Turkish
 Corn, and other Grains.


The Emperor 
Yu,
 who Raign'd 
Anno
 2207. before the 
Nativity,
 hath written many things concerning Tillage, 
viz.
 after what manner the Fields of every County, are to be Till'd and Sown; for he had gain'd excellent knowledge of the Nature of several Soils, to which he attain'd by his own Industry: And observing their Situation among Rivers, concerning which he also wrote seve∣ral Treatises, and from his Writings the 
Chineses
 observe several Rules in their Tilling, according to the several qualities of the Ground.


The Mountains are also in 
China
 Manur'd after a peculiar manner, but in no Province so much, as in that of 
Fokien,
 because there are the most Moun∣tains.


Michael Boem
 observes, that the Countrey of 
China
 is exceeding fruitful, not onely in the producing of 
Indian,
 (especially the Southern Provinces) but also all sorts of 
European
 Fruits, besides others, solely belonging to it self: It is a wonder to consider, how many excellent Fruits the Inhabitants in the fifteen Provinces of 
China
 enjoy; for those Provinces which want any sorts of Fruits are furnish'd by their Neighbors with those which they have not; by which means they have all the Year long fresh Fruits, even in the midst of Winter; for in some Provinces, the Fruits are ripe in 
November, December, Ianuary,
 and 
February;
 in others, in 
March, April, May
 and 
Iune;
 and in some, in 
Iuly, August, September
 and 
October.


The manner of Nursing up of young Plants amongst the 
Chineses
 and most 
Indians
 is three several ways: The first is by burying of the Fruit and Seed toge∣ther in the Ground; for the 
Chinese
 Gardners put whole Golden Apples and other Fruits in the Earth, and then Plant the Sprouts which shoot from the Seed at a distance from one another, by which means they grow in a short time to be great Trees, and bear excellent Fruit.


They Graff their Trees also after the same manner as we do ours; and not onely Graff Trees, but also Flowers, by which means, one Stalk, if Graffed, bears several Flowers of divers shapes and Colours the next Year.


The third way of Nursing up of Plants, is by Lopping, as they do in Vine∣yards, and by cutting off Sprigs from old Trees, and Planting them again; after which manner they increase their 
Manga
 and 
Goyava;
 sometimes onely the Leaves, as the 
Paparja,
 which in a short time run up to be high Trees.


It is to be observ'd in Trees, of what size or sort soever, the 
Chineses
 intend should speedily grow to Perfection and produce Fruit, they Plant the cut-off Branches that day when the Sun enters the fifteenth Degree of 
Capricorn,
 which never fails to shoot forth in a short time; for they have either observ'd by ex∣perience, or learnt from the Ancients from time to time, that onely this day is fit for that business, 
viz.
 that if a Sprig of what Tree soever be Planted or set in the Ground on that day, it will very suddenly become a Fruit▪bearing Tree.








Plants.


DIvers sorts of strange Herbs, Trees, Roots, Canes, and Flowers grow in the Countrey of 
China,
 some of which are proper to 
China
 onely; others again common to that, with other Countries, especially 
India.
 Most of the Provinces yield each of them many Herbs, which are of a strange Soveraign Vertue.


In the seventh County 
Kingyangfu,
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 grows an Herb
 in manner like a Tuft of Yellow Hair, wherefore it is call'd 
Kinsu,
 that is, 
Silk of Gold,
 or 
Golden Thred of Silk-worms,
 for 
Kin
 signifies 
Gold,
 and 
Su, Silk:
 It is of a bitterish Taste, but more cooling than heating; cures suddenly all man∣ner of Scabs and Breakings-out in the Body, without leaving the least Spot behind.


In the same County is a sort of Rice, exceeding good to cleanse the Body, and especially to provoke Urine: There are also several sorts of Beans, which are an excellent Remedy against Poyson.


In the eighth County 
Ienganfu
 grows a Flower nam'd 
Meutang,
 which signi∣fies
 
King of Flowers;
 it is highly esteem'd by the 
Chineses,
 being bigger than a common Rose, and also resembling the same, but spreads its Leaves out fur∣ther; and though it smells not so sweet, yet is pleasanter to the Eye, and with∣out prickles; the colour of it is a pale Purple streak'd with White; there are also some which are Red and Yellow. It grows on a Tree not unlike our Birch-Trees, and is Planted in all Gardens through the whole Empire of 
Chi∣na,
 though with great Care and Industry; for in warm places it must be pre∣serv'd from the heat of the Sun.


By the Garrison'd City 
Hocheu,
 grow those Trees that produce 
Mirobalans,
 and others, whose Wood is the Drug call'd 
Santalum.


In the County 
Cinanfu,
 of the Province of 
Xantung,
 grows a kind of Fruit call'd 
Linkio
 and 
Lieu.


In the third County 
Changtefu,
 in the Province of 
Honan,
 grow several sorts
 of Wormwood. In the County 
Hoangcheufu,
 in the Province of 
Huquang,
 grows 
White Wormwood,
 so call'd for its excellency by the 
Chinese
 Druggists. On the Mountains, in the County 
Fangyangfu,
 in the Province of 
Kiangnan,
 is Red Wormwood, both being us'd by the 
Chineses
 against many Distempers, especi∣ally against Heat.


The true and real 
China
-Root grows onely in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 but
 that sort which is Wild in all parts of 
China,
 for there are two sorts; Wild and Tame, both which are by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Folcin,
 or as some say, 
Lampatam.


None but that which is Wild, being of a Reddish Colour within, is brought over to us: It is not so big as the true and Tame Root, neither hath it that Pow∣er, yet is not altogether void of Efficacy.


The true Root, as they say, grows onely in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 under the Ground, in old Woods of Pine-Trees, almost after the same manner as 
Po∣tatoes
 in 
India;
 wherefore the 
Chineses
 write, that it grows from a tough Slime or Pitch of the Pine-Tree, which dropping on the Earth, fastens in the Ground, and becomes a Plant, which spreading all about over the Earth, breeds a Root under Ground, sometimes as big as a Childs Head, and in Weight and Form not unlike Coco-nuts, from which the Shell or Rind doth not differ much, though not so hard and thick, but much weaker and thinner; under the Rind


is a Kernel or white Spungy Flesh, which is highly esteem'd by the 
Chineses,
 and us'd amongst their Medicines; yet if they want this, they despise not the fore-mention'd Wild sort, though it is not altogether of so powerful an Ope∣ration.


The Wild 
China
-Root grows also in 
Cochin-China,
 on the Coast of 
Malabar,
 and several other places in 
India.


The 
China
-Root, as 
Michael Boem
 writes, is by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Pe Folcin;
 by the 
Portuguese, Pao de Cina;
 and in 
Europe, China,
 among the 
Chineses
 it grows only in the Provinces of 
Iunnan, Quamsi, Quantum, Kaoli,
 and 
Leaotum:
 The Plant or Tree is surrounded with many Thorns, which touch not the Leaves.


The 
Chineses
 eat the Pith of the Root of this Tree in Broth, which is whol∣some and us'd against the Gout, Ulcers, Stoppings in the Stomach, Lameness, Dropsie, Pain in the Legs and Body, and many other Distempers; the heaviest of them is accounted the best, and the White esteem'd before the Red: The Powder of this Root taken with Sugar, and us'd like a Conserve, is generally with good success given against Distempers in the Breast. They say, that the use and knowledge of this Root was 
Anno
 1535. by the 
Portuguese
 brought into 
India
 and 
Europe.


Another Bastard 
China
-Root of the same Vertue, as the Wild Root, grows in 
Brasile,
 especially in the Province of 
Parayba,
 where the Inhabitants call it 
Ivaspecanga.


In the eighth County 
Iungpingfu,
 in the Province of 
Peking;
 and in that of
 
Xansi
 near the City 
Leao,
 grows the most excellent and famous Root in all 
Chi∣na,
 by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Ginseng,
 and by the 
Iapanners, Nisi.
 The 
Chinese
 name 
Ginseng
 is taken from the shape, because it represents a Man (in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Gin
) striding with his Legs; it is much smaller than our 
Man∣dragora,
 or 
Mandrake;
 yet we need not doubt but it is a sort of it, because it is exactly like it, and hath the same Operation. The dry'd Root is of a yellow Colour, hath very few or scarce any Strings, by which it draws Nourishment; is streak'd round about with blackish Vains, as if drawn with Ink; yields when chaw'd an unpleasant sweetness, being mix'd with bitterness; a quar∣ter of an Ounce of this Root taken in Syrup, exceedingly revives the Spirits, and if taken in a greater quantity, strengthens those that are Sick and Weak, and pleasantly warms the whole Body.


Those that are of a hot and strong Constitution indanger their Lives by using the same, because of its too much increasing and heighthning the Spirits; but on the contrary, it recovers those that by long Sicknesses or other Causes are consum'd and grown weak. It oftentimes restores those that lie a dying, and with the help of some other Physick restores them to their Health again. Many other Vertues the 
Chineses
 ascribe to this Root, and give three pound of Gold for one pound of it. The same Root is sometimes to be had in 
Holland;
 but because of its excessive dearness is little us'd.


The Provinces of 
Xensi
 and 
Suchuen,
 according to 
Martinius,
 bring forth ex∣cellent Medicines, especially the Root 
Rhubarb,
 in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Taihoang.
 This Root (says he) grows not wild, as some affirm, but on the con∣trary requires great care and pains in the Planting of it: it is of a yellow Co∣lour streak'e with Flames, not hollow, but firm and hard, and in som places having Knobs and Swellings: The Leaves are somewhat like our Cabbage Leaves, but much bigger. The 
Chineses
 make a Hole through the Root, and hang them out to dry in the Shade, for being dry'd in the Sun they lose their Vertue.


Most of the 
Rhubarb
 which is brought into 
Europe,
 comes for the most part out of the Provinces of 
Xensi
 and 
Suchuen;
 being brought from 
China
 and 
Persia
 by Sea to 
Batavia,
 and from thence to 
Holland;
 or else out of 
China
 by Land to 
Kaskar, Astrakan
 and 
Russia,
 or through 
Thebet
 and 
Persia
 by 
Venice
 to 
Italy;
 for those of 
Tebet
 and 
Mogor
 frequent the Province of 
Suchuen,
 and from thence bring the 
Rhubarb
 hither. Thus far 
Martinius.


Matthiolus
 gives us another Description of 
Rhubarb
 in his 
Comment
 upon 
Di
s∣corides,
 which agrees with that of 
Michael Boem,
 in his 
Chinese Flora,
 and with 
Baptista Ramusio,
 formerly Secretary to the 
State
 of 
Venice,
 in his 
Preface
 before the 
Voyage
 of 
Marcus Paulus Venetus,
 which is to this effect▪


Though (say they) 
Rhubarb
 grows in all parts of 
China,
 yet it grows in greater abundance in the Provinces of 
Suciven,
 (perhaps 
Suchuen
) 
Xensi,
 and in the Jurisdiction of the City 
Socieu
 near the 
Great Wall,
 than in any other place. The Earth in which it grows is red and Clayie, occasion'd by its being conti∣nually moistned with Springs and Rain: The Leaves, according to the Plant, are two Handfuls long, narrow below, broad at the end, and the edges there∣of cover'd with a hairy Wool: When they are come to their f
ll growth and maturity, they immediately grow yellow and lank: The Stalk shoots a Hands∣breadth with the Leaves above the Earth; from the middle of the Leaf runs a thin Stalk, which bears Flowers not unlike a great Pink; likewise towards the top, which is of a sharp and strong smell: The Root or Stalk which is in the Ground, is of a dark Copper colour, one, two, and sometimes three Hand∣fuls long, and as thick as a Man's Arm; from which shoot forth other lesser Roots, which are cut off from the same. The Root 
Rhubarb,
 when cut asun∣der, shews a dark yellow Flesh streak'd with red Veins, out of which drops a red slimy Juice. Moreover, if any one immediately hangs these moist pieces up to dry, then, as experience hath taught, the moisture instantly vanishes, and the Root growing very light, loses all its Vertue; therefore those who are ex∣perienc'd herein, first lay the pieces of green 
Rhubarb
 on Tables, and turn them twice or thrice in a day, that so the Sap or Juice may soak and dry by degrees into the pieces, and remain in them; four days after, when the moisture is dry'd up, they put the pieces on Strings, and hang them from the Sun in the Shadow to dry by the Wind.


The best time to dig up the 
Rhubarb
 is in the Winter before the Trees begin
 to Bud, because at that time (about the beginning of 
April
) the Juice and Vertue unites and gathers together. But if the Root of 
Rhubarb
 be digg'd up in Summer, or at that time when it sends forth green Leaves, which is a sign of its not being ripe, then it never comes to the perfection of the 
Rhubarb,
 which is digg'd up in the Winter.


One Wagon full of 
Rhubarb
 Roots which is full of moisture, costs one 
Scudo
 and a half: The Juice when dry'd up abates so much of the weight, that of seven Pound of green, there scarce remains one Pound when dress'd. The 
Chi∣neses
 call it 
Tayhuan,
 that is, 
High Yellow.


This Plant is discours'd of at large by the fore mention'd Authors, and par∣ticularly 
Michael Boem
 makes a curious Disquisition, whether the 
Rhaponticum
 of 
Alpinus
 be the same with that which is commonly brought out of 
Muscovy,
 and takes much pains to prove that that which grows in 
China
 is much better than that which is brought by 
Russia
 into 
Europe.


In the County 
Chungkingfu,
 belonging to the Province of 
Suchuen,
 grows in
 great plenty a Fruit by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Lichi,
 and by the 
Portuguese of Makao,


















Lichias:
 but in greater abundance in the Southern parts of the Province of 
Fokien;
 yet the best sort in the County 
Hinghoafu:
 It grows on very large and high Trees, whose Leaves resemble those of a Laurel-Tree: On the tops of the Boughs hang Clusters of Fruit like Grapes, not altogether so thick, but on longer Stalks: It bears the shape of a Deers Heart, and is as big as a 
Coco
-Nut, having a thin shrubby and knotty Shell, like that of a Pine-Apple, which may easily be pull'd off with the Fingers: within is a white juicy Kernel of a pleasant taste, and smelling like a Rose: The ripe Fruits are of a Purple colour, so that the Trees shew as if hung round about with Purple Hearts, a Sight delightful to behold: within the Flesh is a Stone, which the smaller it is, the better the Fruit is esteem'd of.


This Fruit may justly be call'd 
The King of Fruits,
 since in so ample a mea∣sure it both delights the Eye and pleases the Palate, which seems never satisfi'd therewith: The Kernel of it melts in the Mouth like Sugar.


Another Fruit nam'd 
Lungyen,
 that is, 
Dragons-Eye,
 grows in 
China;
 it is not
 much unlike the former, though smaller and rounder like our Cherries; but the Shell of the Fruit 
Lichi
 is somewhat harder and thicker. Both these Fruits are dry'd and sent from this Province through the whole Empire as a Dainty: nevertheless the dry'd are not comparable to the green, because all the Juice is dry'd out of them. They also press a Juice out of the Fruit 
Lichi,
 which the 
Chineses
 call 
Wine,
 which is very sweet, but very scarce to be had. The ripe Fruit 
Lichi
 is generally brought fresh out of the County 
Chinkingfu.


A particular Description of both these Fruits may be seen in the foremen∣tion'd
 Author 
Michael Boem,
 in his Book call'd 
Flores sinarum regionis.


In the same County 
Focheufu
 in the Province of 
Fokien,
 grows a Fruit call'd
 
Muigiuli,
 that is to say, 
Fair Womans Plumb.
 These Plumbs are of an Oval Figure, bigger and much better than Damask Prunes.


In the County 
Kingcheufu,
 belonging to the Province of 
Huquang,
 grows an
 Herb which the 
Chineses
 call 
Herb of a thousand years;
 nay, affirm that it never fades, but is as it were immortal.


To drink the Water wherein the formention'd Herb hath lay'n to soak, makes white Hair black, and is said to be exceeding good to prolong Life, and restore Youth to the Aged.


In the County 
Changtefu,
 in the Province of 
Huquang,
 grow all sorts of Golden Apples; amongst which are some that by the 
Chineses
 are call'd 
Winter Apples,
 for when all the others fall off, these begin to grow ripe, and are of a sweet taste.


In the Province of 
Kiangsi
 and other places, grows (for the most part in Lakes and standing Waters) a Plant with a Flower, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Lien,
 and by the 
Portuguese, Fula de Golfon.


The Flower 
Lien
 shoots up two or three Yards above the Water on hard and strong Stalks, and is of several Colours, as Purple, White, Parti-colour'd, Red, 
&c.
 onely Yellow is a Colour peculiar to those that grow in 
Iuncheufu,
 a County of the Province of 
Huquang.


This Flower exceeds our Lilies in bigness, and much more in beauty, but is in scent rather worse than better. We should call this Flower 
The great Lilie,
 because it differs not much in fashion, especially when it opens its Leaves.


To this Plont belongs also a sort of Fruit like a Ninepin, which is above a Span lang, and a Hand thick. The top or point of this Fruit is fast to the Stalk, on which the Flower hung before, the Cod stands upright, and hath se∣veral


Partitions fill'd with Fruits bigger than Hazle-Nuts, or 
French
 Beans: each Fruit is without cover'd with a green Rind, and within fill'd up with a white Kernel, or Pith of a delightful taste, whether fresh or dry'd.


This Fruit is by the 
Chinese
 Physicians highly esteem'd, and accounted an excellent Food; wherefore they are generally given to sick Persons that are upon their recovery.


The Leaves of this Plant are very big, sometimes two Handfuls broad, and for the most part round: They lie and drive on the Water like those of our Water-Lilies, and joyn by long Stalks to the Root. The Root, which is thicker than a Mans Arm, sends forth a very fine Stalk two or three Ells long, di∣stinguish'd with Joynts like a Cane: The outward Shell is firm and whole, but the Flesh is parted, and in several divisions: The dry'd Leaves are by Grocers and other Tradesmen us'd in stead of Paper to wrap or wind their Wares in. The Root also is very excellent, and esteem'd a Dainty of great value in the Summer, when it is taken to cool and expel Heat; so that nothing belongs to this Plant but what is useful.


In 
China
 are whole Lakes (a pleasant thing to behold) overgrown with Flowers, not wild, but produc'd by Art, by throwing once a year the Seed into the Water. Moreover, divers Persons of Quality keep great Earthen Vessels fill'd with Slime and Water in their Gardens, wherein they Sowe the foremention'd Flowers.


In the Lake 
Hung,
 on the East side of the City 
Hoaigan
 in the Province of 
Kiangnan,
 grows a kind of high Reed, which by the Inhabitants of the whole County are burnt in stead of Wood, very few Trees growing in that Coun∣trey.


In all parts of the County 
Kiahingfu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 in standing
 Water, grows a Fruit call'd 
Peci,
 which is no bigger than a Chesnut, and hath a Kernel cover'd with a dark-colour'd Skin, white within, full of Juice, and of a pleasing taste, harder than an ordinary Apple, and somewhat sowerer.


This Fruit is said to be of such a Nature, that the Juice of it softens Cop∣per to that degree, that it may be chew'd in the Mouth.


In the County 
Kinhoafu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 grows a small Tree with
 one Flower, which the 
Portuguese
 in 
India
 call 
Mogorin;
 It is very white like a 
Iessamin
 Flower, yet fuller of Leaves, and of a sweeter smell, insomuch that a few of them put in any Room perfumes the whole House; wherefore it is not undeservedly held in great esteem amongst the 
Chineses,
 and the Tree thereof preserv'd with great care in the Winter in Earthen Pots.


In the same County grows also a Tree call'd 
Kieuyen,
 which produces a
 kind of fat substance like Tallow, of which pure white Candles are made, and are not subject to grease the Fingers though often handled, like those which are of Tallow. The Tree hath pretty big Leaves, somewhat like those of our Pear-Tree, with white Blossoms like our Cherry-Trees: after the Blossom follows a round Cod as big as a Cherry, cover'd with a blackish thin Skin, which incloses a white Pith appearing through the Skin, which cracks when the Cod is grown ripe. The Cods thus ripe, are pull'd off and boyl'd in Wa∣ter; by which means the Flesh melting, becomes perfect Tallow when grown cold again; then the remaining Kernel being press'd produces store of Oyl, which they use not in Sallets, but burn in Lamps: In the Winter the Leaves are quite red like Copper, which is pleasant to behold, for they appear at a distance like Red-woods: At last the Leaves falling off afford excellent


Feeding (by reason of their fatness) for Sheep and other Cattel, which so Fed grow exceeding fat.


On the Mountain 
Loseu,
 by the City 
Polo
 in the Province of 
Quantung,
 grows a very long and thick Cane, the Body thereof being ten Handfulls in cir∣cumference.


On the Mountain 
Chang,
 by the City 
Lochang
 in the same Province, grows a black Cane, of which the 
Chineses
 make their Pipes, and many other things, which seem as if made of Ebony Wood.


On the Shore of the River 
Kinxe,
 near the City 
Kinhao,
 grows abundance of thick Canes, which the Inhabitants beating into thin Shreds, Weave and make Clothes of them.


The Shore of the River 
Tao,
 in the County 
Xaocheufu
 in the Province of 
Quantung,
 is all Planted with Peach-Trees, from whence it hath its Denomi∣nation, for 
Tao
 signifies 
A Peach.


In the County 
Chaokingfu
 in the same Province, grow divers sorts of sweet Wood, and amongst others 
Rose-Wood,
 by the 
Portuguese
 call'd 
Pao de Rosa;
 of which they make Cabinets, Stools, Tables, and the like: It is exceeding good Wood, of a dark Red, with several Veins, and looks naturally as if Painted: It grows also in the County 
Iunnanfu
 in the Province of 
Iunnan.


In most parts of the Province of 
Quantung,
 and on the Island 
Aynan,
 grows a
 kind of Plant, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Teng,
 and by the 
Portuguese, Rota,
 which seems like a Rope naturally twisted together; for it runs along the Ground and over the Mountains like a Rope; it is full of Prickles, and hath long green Leaves, and though scarce a Finger thick, extends it self a whole Furlong in length, and in such abundance over the Mountains, that it makes the Way, by its twining and twisting together, unpassable: It is an exceeding tough Plant, and cannot be broke; wherefore the 
Chineses
 make Cables and Tackling for their Ships of it; and slitting it into thin Twigs, make Baskets, Hurdles, and the like, of them, but most of all exceeding fine Mats, on which the 
Chineses,
 from the meanest Person to the Emperor himself, sleep or repose themselves, they being very cool in the Summer, and by the 
Chineses
 long Custom of sleeping in that manner, are judg'd very easie, notwithstanding they are spread on the bare Floor. Of the same Plant they make Quilts and Bolsters for their Beds, which they fill with divers sorts of Perfumes. The whole Isle of 
Ainan
 is overgrown with it, especially with the white, which is the best.


In most parts of 
China
 grows a Flower call'd 
Quei,
 but no where in such
 abundance as in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 especially in the County 
Quelingfu,
 from whence the chief City 
Quelin
 hath its Denomination, for 
Quelin
 signifies 
Flowry Green.
 This Flower grows upon a high Tree, whose Leaves are not un∣like those of the Laurel or Cinamon-Tree: It being very small, and of a yellow Colour, smells very odoriferously: When display'd, it hangs a consi∣derable time on the Tree without withering; when it falls off, the Tree within a Moneth after Buds again, and in Harvest smells so strong and sweet, that it may be scented at a very considerable distance.


The 
Chineses
 prepare many Dainties of this Flower, both to please the Pa∣late, and to delight the Smell. This also is the same Flower which steep'd in the Juice of Lemmon the 
Turks
 use to colour their Hair with: The Trees thereof suffer no other to grow near them, nor grow in places where others have grown.


In the County 
Lieucheufu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 on the Shore of the



River 
Lieu,
 grow many Willow Trees. There are likewise several excellent Herbs, good against many Sicknesses; amongst which the Herb 
Pusu,
 that is, 
Immortal,
 so call'd by the 
Chineses,
 because they always preserve it green in their Houses.


In the County 
Gucheufu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 grows a Tree nam'd
 
Quanglang,
 which in stead of Pith or Marrow, incloses a kind of thin Matter like Honey, in stead of which it is often us'd, being no less pleasing to the Palate.


In the Territory 
Cincheufu,
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 grows an Herb call'd 
Yu;
 of which the Inhabitants make their Clothes, which are richer than Silk, and amongst them of greater value. There also grows a Tree, whose Wood is like Iron, it being much harder than our Box-wood. The same County likewise produces excellent Cinamon, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Kueypi,
 which onely differs from the 
Ceylon
 Cinamon in this, that it is more biting on the Tongue, and of a better scent.


The 
Chineses
 in ancient times us'd to carry Cinamon from the Island 
Ceylon,
 (which was, according to 
Boem,
 so call'd by the 
Chineses
 from the many Ships which suffer'd Shipwrack on the same; or else 
Ceylon,
 or rather 
Sinland,
 signi∣fies, according to 
Martinius, People of China,
 or 
Chineses
) by Sea to 
Ormuz,
 from whence it was carry'd by Land to 
Aleppo
 in 
Syria,
 and 
Greece.
 The ignorant sort of People suppos'd that it came out of the 
Moors
 Countrey and 
Egypt,
 whenas it never grew in that Countrey, though sometimes a Fleet of four thousand Ships came Laden with Gold, Silk, Precious Stones, Musk, Porcelane, Copper, Allom, Nutmegs, Cloves, and chiefly Cinamon, into the Bay of 
Persia.
 The Merchants, as the same 
Boem
 tells us, call'd Cinamon (otherwise by the 
Chineses
 nam'd 
The Bark of the sweet Tree
) 
Cina
 and 
Momum,
 which signifies 
Sweet and well scented
 Chinese 
Wood.


In the County 
Lipingfu
 in the Province of 
Queicheu,
 grows an Herb like
 Hemp, which the 
Chineses
 call 
Ko,
 and make their Summer Garments thereof, which are an excellent Wear against the excessive heat of the Sun: It also grows in the County 
Nankangfu,
 in the Province of 
Kiangsi.


In the Southern Provinces of 
Iunnan, Quangsi, Quantung, Fokien,
 and on the
 Isle 
Ainan,
 grows in great abundance a Tree by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Fanyaycocu;
 by the Eastern 
Indians, Papayo;
 by the 
West-Indian
 Inhabitants, 
Pinoyuacu;
 and by the 
Portuguese Mamoua:
 It produces a Fruit which springs out of the top of the
 Body of the Tree, looking red within, and having in stead of Pith a thin Juice, that may be eaten with a Spoon. They are accounted to be very cool∣ing, and to abate lascivious Desires, and cause Barrenness.


This Tree (a strange thing!) hath no Branches, but onely Leaves, which grow on the top thereof; from amongst which Leaves sprout out white Flow∣ers, which afterwards become Fruit. The Fruit hath no set-time of the Year to ripen in, but successively ripe Fruits are to be found on the Trees every Moneth in the Year. The 
Chineses
 call it 
Fanyaycocu,
 that is, 
Fruit of the Fanyay;
 for 
Kocu
 signifies 
Fruit;
 and the 
Portuguese, Maman,
 because it hangs on the Tree like a Teat. The Fruit, Leaves, and whole Tree, are pleasant and de∣lightful to the Eye. The Tree springs first from the Seed of its Fruit, and af∣terwards new Trees from the Strings which shoot out of the Root: The Leaves and part of the Body of the Tree being put into the Ground, grow very speedily and in a short time to a high Tree.


Anno
 1626. the 
Papayo
-Tree being Sow'n, grew in 
Naples:
 It had a whitish


Root full of Strings, a whitish Stem or Body, eighteen Inches long and a Fin∣ger thick, of the same colour with the Root, spongy and round, not unlike the Body of the 
Wonder-Tree,
 and notch'd after the same manner under the Leaves, which when green hang by a long Stalk round about the Body of the Tree, sloaping from the middle upwards, all of them four or five Inches broad, divi∣ded like the Fig-Leaves into five parts, but notch'd much deeper, smooth, and of a pleasant Green; all of them fell off in the Winter, and the Body with the Root also wither'd away by degrees: But we may doubt whether this Tree was the right 
Papayo,
 because, according to 
Michael Boem,
 the 
Fanyacu,
 or 
Papayo,
 hath its Leaves onely on the top, and not as this in 
Naples,
 from the middle upwards.


Peter de Valla,
 by Letters to 
Fabius Columna,
 gives quite another Description of the 
Papayo,
 which (saith he) is a Plant like our Fig-Tree, but much pleasanter; the Fruit like our ordinary Melons, oval, smooth, and with a green Rind; the Flesh within of an Orange colour, and tasting like a sweet Orange, but more Spicy and pleasanter; the fresh Seed blackish, when dry'd turns to a Chesnut colour, and is about the thickness of 
Coriander
 Seeds, but longer; the Flesh thereof being cut through in the middle looks whitish, is tough, tastes sweet, and is like old Musk▪melons Seed; the Stalk of the Fruit, though green, yields like those of Figs: The Tree is full of Branches like the Fig-Tree.


The experienc'd and Learned Physician, 
William Piso,
 makes mention of two
 sorts of 
Papayo
 growing in the 
West-Indies,
 where it is call'd 
Pinoguacu,
 a Male and Female; of both which he hath a particular Description, which may be seen at large in his 
Natural History.


To conclude, most agree in this, that the 
Papayo
-Tree grows not of it self, but is Planted: What Countrey it properly belongs to is not yet certainly known, but it is by most believ'd to be a Stranger to 
India,
 and brought thither from a foreign Countrey.


In no Place, except 
China,
 grows that Tree and excellent Fruit, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Supim;
 it is of a Golden colour, bigger than an ordinary Apple, and hath within its Shell or Rind, a soft and red Pulp, within which are se∣veral Stones: The dry Fruit is very like an 
European
 Fig, and keeps good ma∣ny years: The 
Chinese
 Physicians use it often in their Compounds. In the Province of 
Quantung
 it ripens in 
Ianuary, February,
 and 
March;
 but in 
Xensi, Honan,
 and other Northern Provinces, in 
Iune, Iuly,
 and 
August.


The Tree laden with this Fruit affords a pleasant Prospect, and is constantly watch'd against the Birds.


There also grows a Tree in the Province of 
Quantung,
 and in the Island 
Ainan,
 with Leaves of half the size of a Man of ordinary Stature: The Root thereof grows half in the Ground, and the other half out, and bears red Flowers, and a Fruit like our Figs. The ripe Fruits are also red, and the Flesh within tastes also like our Figs, and are ripe in 
Iuly
 and 
August.


The Fruit by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Cienko,
 is by the 
Indians
 and 
Portuguese
 call'd
 
Goyaun:
 It seems to those that are not us'd thereto, to have no good savor, but indeed smells very Spicy, and is desir'd afterwards by those that at first dis∣relish'd it, because it warms, and hath a soveraign healing power, and is ex∣ceeding good to stop a Loosness, and fortifie the Stomach: Within it are ma∣ny little round Stones, from which the Trees grow, though quickerby Setting a Bough thereof in the Ground: The Boughs bear great store of Fruit and


sweet-smelling Leaves, which rubb'd to pieces smell very strong, and are ac∣counted excellent Medicines against Feavers: The Fruit is also in the 
Portu∣guese
 Tongue call'd 
Pera,
 that is, 
Pear,
 because it is exactly like a Pear.


In 
India
 this Fruit ripens in 
November
 and 
December,
 and for the most part continues in all the other Moneths; but in the Province of 
Quantung,
 in 
Iune
 and 
Iuly.


On the Island 
Hiamxan,
 lying near 
China,
 in 
Makau,
 and in 
Malacca,
 grows a
 Tree and Fruit nam'd 
Giambo,
 which is of two or three sorts; for in 
India
 are red, white, and yellow, which smell like Roses: the first hath a white, and the second a pale yellow Flower: The Body and Boughs are Ash-colour'd, the Leaves smooth, a Hand-breadth long, and three Fingers broad: The Fruit is as big as a Pear, with a thin sweetish spongy Flesh; it is pleasant to the Eye, either quite red or white, or partly red and partly white: On one Bough grow Flowers, green and ripe Fruit together. They are very cooling, and the onely thing in great Feavers to quench Thirst.


The 
Indians
 make a Conserve of this Fruit, exceeding good against Agues and other Distempers arising from the Gaul. In stead of Seed it incloses a round Kernel; but the yellow sort hath two Kernels, or rather one divided into two parts: the Flesh of the yellow is very sweet and luscious: the red ripens in 
India
 in 
October
 and 
November,
 but the yellow in some places in 
March,
 and in other places in 
Iuly.


The 
Pipa
 is a Fruit of a yellowish Green when it is ripe, sweet of taste like
 our Plumbs, and cover'd with the like sort of Skin, within it lies a hard oval Stone; it is generally gather'd ripe in 
February
 and 
March:
 The Tree, by rea∣son of its fine Leaves and Flowers, is very pleasant to behold.


The Fruit 
Yata
 hath a green, knotty, and prickly Shell, like a Pine-Apple;
 within which is a waterish Pulp as white as Snow, hiding in little Reposito∣ries hard and black Stones: The bigger this Fruit is, the better it is esteem'd. The Tree grows chiefly in 
Malacca,
 from whence it was transplanted into 
China,
 where it grows in some plenty: In some places the Fruit is ripe in 
October
 and 
November,
 and in others in 
February
 and 
March.


The Fruit 
Manko,
 by the 
Chineses
 and the 
Indians
 call'd 
Manga,
 and by the
 
Turks, Ambo,
 grows most plentifully in the Southern Provinces of 
China:
 In 
India
 are several sorts, the biggest whereof weigh two, and sometimes three Pound, especially if they grow on a Bough Prun'd to a Cedar-Tree, of whose Fruit they borrow the Coat and rough Shell.


Their Pruning on other Trees is much like ours in 
Europe,
 but not in the 
Mango
-Tree, a Bough of which being cut off, is ty'd to the Bough of another Tree, and daub'd all about with Clay, by which means the Boughs in time growing together bear Fruit. The ripe Fruits sometimes all upon one Tree
 are of several Colours, some green, others yellow, and some red; or as others
 write, greenish yellow, and reddish: It hath a bitter Kernel within a hard and woolly Shell, as big as an Almond: there are also some without Stones. The Flesh of those that are ripe is of a kind of Purple colour, and exceeds all other in lusciousness: Some account it the best Fruit in the World: They are ripe in 
April
 and 
May,
 and continue till 
November.


The Tree, according to 
Garcias,
 on which this Fruit grows, is like a Pear-Tree, high and full of Boughs; the Leaves are very thin, ten Inches long and three broad, with a thick sinew in the middle.


Garcias
 had a Tree which bore Fruit twice in a year, 
viz.
 in 
May
 and 
August;



















the Fruit thereof is cool and moist: Of the green Fruits they make a Con∣serve: they are also Pickled and boyl'd in Rice and Water. The 
Netherlan∣ders
 at their Return from 
India
 use them in stead of Pickled Cucumbers or Girkins: The 
Indians
 account them hot and very Feaverish, but they are ra∣ther moist and cooling. The Stones thereof calcin'd into a Powder, kill the Worms in the Belly, and are a present Remedy against a Loosness. The fresh Kernel is suppos'd to destroy the Worms because of its bitterness.


Acosta
 tells us, That the Fruit being slic'd and laid to soke in Wine is counted for a dainty Banquet. It is also laid in Sugar, thereby to preserve it the longer; and sometimes open'd with a Knife is fill'd with Ginger, Garlick, and Mustard-seed, and laid to steep in Salt, Oyl, and Vinegar, or else is eaten with Rice, or Pickled like Olives: It grows in many places in 
India,
 as in 
Ma∣labar, Goa, Surrat, Balagate, Bengale, Pegu,
 and others; but the best sort is judg'd to grow in 
Ormus,
 the second in 
Surrat,
 and the 
 in 
Balagate.


A Fruit nam'd 
Mangan,
 which grows on the Isle 
Iava,
 is by the Inhabitants accounted above all Cordials in the World, whether 
Lapis Bezoar,
 or any other: It is as big as a 
Coco▪
Nut, and joyns close together till grown ripe, for then it cracks and bursts asunder; within lies the Seed wrapp'd up in Wooll, which if not taken off in time, is blown away by the Wind. This Fruit is so dear, that it can scarce be purchas'd with Money. Moreover, the parts split from each other stick so fast at the bottom to the Stalk, that the strongest Man cannot pull them from it.


In many places in 
China
 grows also Cotton, but in greatest abundance in the Province of 
Nanking,
 especially near the City 
Xangchai,
 where there are said to dwell two hundred Cotton-Weavers, it being in that place and two neighbor∣ing Villages, the onely thing whereby the Inhabitants maintain themselves. The Seed, according to their Relation, was brought out of other Countreys into 
China
 about five hundred years ago. The Herb or Plant on which the Cotton grows in 
China,
 hath a wooddy Stalk of a Foot and a half long, or two Foot high, and being cover'd with a darkish red Bark or Rind, divides it self into several short Branches: The Leaves like those of a Vine are divided into three parts, and hang on rough Stalks of two or three Inches long: The Blos∣som or Flower is like those of Mallows, and ends in Saffron, or (as others say) blue and Purple Stalks; after the Flower follows round Fruit as big as a small Apple, which when grown ripe cracks in two or three places, and shews the white Cotton which is in it; under it is an Oval and white-colour'd Seed, which tastes like an Almond or Pine-Apple.


Another Plant also which produces Cotton, but grows like a Tree, and hath smoother Leaves, grows in 
Egypt
 and 
Arabia;
 where by the 
Egyptians
 it is call'd 
Gotnel Segia,,
 and shoots up to the heighth of ten Cubits; the Leaves hang on Violet-colour'd Stalks, and are divided into five parts; when grown to matu∣rity, the Fruit is almost of the same fashion, though bigger, with brown Seed. Of these Cotton-Trees they make the fine Clothes call'd 
Sessa
 in 
Arabia.


The County 
Chucheufu
 is full of ancient Pine-Tree Woods, of which the 
Chi∣neses
 build their Houses and Ships.


It is said, that by the 
Singian,
 that is, 
Earth of Pine-Trees,
 are such exceeding large Trees, that eighty Men cannot grasp one of them; and some of so vast a compass, that they can inclose thirty Men in their hollow Trunks.


In the same County in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 in the River 
Luyeu,
 by the City 
Kingning,
 grow great Woods of Canes, which the 
Chineses
 by a general


Name call'd 
Cho;
 (for there are several sorts) the 
Indians, Mambu;
 the 
Portu∣guese, Bambu;
 and the 
Hollanders, Bamba's:
 some smaller, others bigger, but all of them as hard as Iron, and oftentimes two or three Span thick, and to∣wards the bottom about the bigness of a Man's Thigh; nay, there are some of such a thickness, that the 
Indians
 make Boats of them, by onely splitting them in the middle, leaving on each side onely two of the undermost Joynts, there sitting on each end a naked 
Indian
 with a Paddle in each hand, with which they Row these Boats with great swiftness against the Stream. Of the thickest parts of these Canes they make Vessels to put Water or Merchandise into, the Wood thereof being about three Inches thick: The least of them are half a Rod high, and the biggest much higher; wherefore they are not unjustly by some call'd Trees, and particularly by 
Garcias
 compar'd to the Poplar; some are green, others quite black, and most of them Massive; the 
Portuguese
 in 
India
 call them 
Bambu Macho,
 that is, 
Man's Cane;
 though the last sort grows not in 
China
 but in 
India:
 They grow in Rocky places, shooting upright, though sometimes by Art made crooked, the better to be us'd for the making of 
Pala∣kins:
 They consist from top to bottom of Knots or Joynts, about a Hand∣breadth from each other; out of which shoot some straight Branches.


Piso
 tells of two sorts of 
Bambu
 or 
Mambu
 that grows in 
India,
 the one small, though fuller within, the other bigger, and less fill'd, which in heighth and firmness exceeds all other Canes. A more exact Description whereof, toge∣ther
 with their use, both in Physick and in the making of divers Utensils, may be found in the abovemention'd Author, in his 
Mantissa Aromatica,
 and also in 
Martinius.


In the Gallery of the high School at 
Leyden
 are kept two of the foremen∣tion'd
 Canes, broke off at both ends, which were brought 
Anno
 1601. out of the 
East-Indies;
 the smallest is about one and twenty Foot long, distinguish'd by twenty nine Joynts at the bottom, seventeen Inches in circumference, and fourteen on the top; the biggest is a Foot and a half longer, and three Inches thicker: how big the whole Canes were, may be guess'd by these pieces.


In many places of 
China
 grow also Sugar-Canes, especially in the County
 
Tungchuenfu
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 out of which they press great store of good Sugar. But those Canes were in a manner useless amongst the 
Chineses,
 till of late years that they were taught this Art of making Sugar, as it is said, by an 
Indian
 Priest upon this occasion: This Priest's Ass on which he us'd to Ride, running into a Cane-Field, was detain'd by the Owner thereof for satis∣faction for the damage which he had done; whereupon the Priest, that he might make satisfaction without the forfeiture of his Ass, taught him the Art of boyling Sugar out of the Canes.


In the Province of 
Quantung,
 and many other places in 
China,
 grows a Rose
 which changes its colour twice a day, first it is of a yellowish colour, then Purple, and anon quite white: It hath no smell, and grows on a little Tree. Concerning which change of colour 
Kircher
 makes a curious Enquiry, and takes upon him to give the reason thereof in his 
China Illustrata.


Ioannes Baptista Ferrarius
 largely describes a sort of 
Chinese
 Rose, by the Inha∣bitants
 call'd 
Fuyo,
 by others nam'd 
The
 Indian 
and
 Japan 
Melleuwe,
 which by the same 
Ferrarius
 was brought out of the 
West-Indies
 to 
Rome;
 where being Sow'd it grew up in a short time: It is of a Milky colour, but afterwards changes to white and red, and at last turning to a Purple, fades and withers: In 
India
 it is in one day of three several colours (and flourishes onely one


day) 
viz.
 in the Morning it is White, at Noon, Red, and Purple at Night.


The Province of 
Quantung
 produces a Fruit, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Yencu;
 by
 the 
Portuguese, Iambos,
 (and the Tree 
Iambeiro;
) by the 
Malabars,
 and those of the 
Canaries, Iambali;
 by the 
Indians, Tufa;
 by the 
Persians
 and 
Arabians, Tufat;
 by the 
Turks, Almat;
 and by the 
Hollanders, Pampelmoes;
 the Tree whereon it grows is prickly like the Lemon Tree, but somewhat bigger; the Flower or Blossom being also like that of the Lemon, is white and smells very oderi∣ferously, and out of which they Distil sweet Water: The Fruit much exceeds the greatest Lemons in bigness, for it is oftentimes as big as a Mans Head: The Shell is in Colour like that of the 
Golden Apple;
 the Pulp, red and sweet, mixt with a little tartness, and tasting like a Grape which is not quite ripe; so that often times a Liquor is Press'd out of them to drink, in the manner of Cherry-Wine, Perry, or Syder; it remains good a whole Year.


Garcias
 tell us, that this Fruit is in high esteem amongst the 
Indians,
 and that it was brought first thither a few years since from 
Malaka,
 where it grows in great abundance; and gives a farther Description much to the same purpose with what hath been already deliver'd.


There are two sorts of these Trees, very like one another; (yet their Fruits differ a little) and resemble not only in fashion and shape, but also in bigness our 
European
 Apple-Trees.


The Flowers and Fruits of 
Iambos
 moisten and cool, smell very sweet, and are therefore by the 
Indians
 accounted amongst the greatest Dainties; they ge∣nerally use them in Physick, for being Preserv'd in Sugar, they are exceeding good against hot Distempers, because by their coolness and moistness, they quench Thirst in Feavers, and revive the Spirits.


In the County 
Chivencheufu
 and 
Changcheufu,
 in the Province of 
Fokien,
 grow
 abundance of Golden-Apples, which in weight and bigness differ little from the 
European,
 but surpass them in Scent and Deliciousness; neither doth the Tree differ much from the 
European,
 but the Fruit differs from that which grows in other parts of 
China,
 and both Tastes and Smells exactly like a 
Muskadel-Grape,
 so that it yields not to any kind of Fruit that 
Europe
 affords: the Golden and thick Rind is easily Pill'd off; in like manner, the Meat is distinguish'd by a thin Skin, which is easily broken.


The Inhabitants Preserve the Fruits (after having Press'd the same between two Boards) in Sugar, and so keeping them a whole Year, both furnish their Neighbors, and send of them into foraign Countries.


In most parts of 
China,
 in all standing-Waters, they Sow a Seed, which with
 small Leaves covers all the Water: The Fruit thereof call'd 
Linkio,
 grows in great abundance under the Water, and is in fashion like a three-sided Spire: The Rind which is green and thick, and red at the corners, turns black when dry'd: The Kernel thereof is very White, and tastes like a Chest-nut, but is twice or thrice as big.


The Lake 
Malo
 lying in the fifth County 
Xuntefu
 in the Province of 
Peking,
 is much noted for the fore-mention'd Fruit.


In the Southern Provinces of 
China,
 and especially in the Province of 
Quei∣cheu,
 by the little City 
Pugan,
 grows a Fruit, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Pacayao;
 by the 
Malabars
 and 
Malaers, Palan;
 by the 
Iavans, Piesang
 or 
Pysang;
 by the 
Brasilians
 in the 
West-Indies, Bananas;
 by the 
Arabians
 in 
Egypt, Mauz;
 by some in 
Europe, Indian-Figs,
 and 
Adams-Apples,
 from the Opinion of a 
Franciscan Monk,
 who holds this Fruit to be the same with that which 
Adam
 eat in 
Paradise,
 and


with the Leaves whereof being very large, he cover'd his Nakedness.


The Tree, or rather Sprout, is according to 
Acosta,
 a fine Plant, and grows eighteen or twenty handfuls high, and being as big about as a Mans Thigh, consists of many Barks, which lie close one upon another; it grows to the heighth of a Granate-Tree without Branches, for it spreads its Leaves like Canes. 
Boem
 writes, that the body thereof is thick, round, and green, not firm nor massie, but swell'd with a Watery moysture; it seems to consist of abundance of roul'd-up Leaves, which are nine handfuls long, and two and a half broad; or according to 
Alpinus,
 three or four Yards long, and about two
 broad, insomuch, that one Leaf may cover a Man all over, nay, wind round about him. The young Leaves extend in length and heighth like 
Indian
 Canes, being first roul'd up together, but when grown old, begin to open; through the middle long-ways, runs a pretty thick and long Vein, yet nevertheless, they are subject to crack and rent at the edges, if ruffl'd by the Wind; and on each side many cross Veins, which are of a sad Colour underneath, but up∣wards of a pale Green; from the top of the Tree grows a Stalk with ruddy Colour'd Flowers, like a Pine-Apple, each of them is bigger than a Tulip or Lilly, but round, or rather Oval; afterwards it produces a Branch, divided into many Joynts, on each of which hang ten or fourteen Figs, so that this Bough is sometimes loaden with a hundred, or two hundred Figs: Or as 
Boem
 saith, from the middle of the Leaf shoots one single Branch with Flowers, which also grow to be Figs, to the number sometimes of above a thousand on one Bough, which one man is scarce able to carry; some of the Figs are as small as a Damsin, others as big as a great Pear, according to the Boughs on which they grow. The Fruit it self is very sweet, hath a Yellow Shell, with a soft, sweet, and well-scented Pulp, which tastes like Preserv'd Rasberries; be∣ing boyl'd either in Honey or Sugar, and afterwards dry'd, it is counted good against Phlegmatick Humors. The Fruit is all the Year long to be had in the Southern Provinces of 
China,
 but in the Northern, it bears onely great Leaves, and yields no Fruit; though it requires six Moneths to ripen, yet ripe Figs may be had every Moneth, since this Tree observes no set-time, but Buds, Flowers, and is Ripe in several places all at one time. If one Bough be cut off from the
 Tree, or one Fig pluck'd from a Bough, the Tree will never produce either Bough or Fruit more, but withering, is cut off, and given in 
India
 for Food to the Elephants.


This Plant, as some say, grew first from a Sugar-Cane, Graffed on the Root of another Plant, call'd 
Colokasia,
 very common in 
Egypt;
 and indeed you may perceive the nature of both in the same, for the Leaves are as long as those of Sugar-Canes, and as broad as those of 
Colokasia;
 it is always Green, and never bare of Leaves.


The common Opinion is, that from the Mouth of the Flower, open'd at
 the right time, drops a kind of Spittle, which is suppos'd to be its Seed, since young Sprouts grow out of the Root or Foot of the Tree, before ever the Flow∣er opens.


The 
Chineses
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 in the County 
Pinglofu,
 make Clothes of the Red 
Muisu
 Leaves.


In divers places in 
China,
 and especially on the Isle 
Ainan,
 grows a Fruit-Tree, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Polomie;
 by the 
Portuguese,
 from the 
Indians, Giaka
 and 
Ia∣ka;
 by those of 
Surat, Pana's;
 by those of the 
Canaries, Panasu;
 by the 
Arabi∣ans, Panax;
 by the 
Persians, Funax;
 and in 
Kalicut, Ionceras.


The Tree in the 
Chinese
 Tongue properly call'd 
Polomioxu,
 that is, 
Polomy Tree,
 is, as 
Acosta
 tells us, very tall and big about, hath pale Green Leaves, about a Hand big, with a hard sinew in the middle; it bears a small num∣ber of a very large Fruit, which grow not on the Boughs, but on the main Body of the Tree (as 
Peter Martyr
 saith) as if the Boughs refus'd to carry so great a burthen, notwithstanding they are very tough and strong.


Acosta
 saith, that the Fruit 
Iaka
 is long, thick, dark Green, hard, and hath a thick Shell: 
Martin
 affirms, that it is so hard and thick, that it must be open'd with an Ax: It is full of Green Thorns with Black Points, very like the Fruit 
Durion,
 but not sharp nor prickly, though seeming so; when ripe it hath a strong Scent: The smallest of this sort of Fruit is bigger than the greatest Pumkin, especially that which grows in 
Malabar,
 but that of 
Goa
 is lesser and of a worse Taste. 
Martinius
 saith, That the 
Iaka
 or 
Polomie
 is accounted the big∣gest Fruit in the World: And 
Boem
 affirms, That one of them alone is a Mans burthen: It is White, and hath a firm Pulp, with little Husks, wherein are se∣veral Nuts or Kernels like Chest-nuts, (sometimes enough to suffice ten or twenty Men) longer and thicker than Dates, and cover'd with Ash-colour'd Shells; Earthy, of an ill Taste, and causing Wind if eaten Raw, but if Roasted like Chest-nuts, well-tasted; they are said to provoke Leachery, for which reason the Common People esteem them highly.


Every Chest-nut-like-Kernel is inclos'd in a Yellow and tough Husk (like that of the Fruit 
Durion,
 yet not without a little difference) and being Boyl'd, tastes like a sweet Chest-nut.


This Fruit is by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
A Bag full of Honey-Chest-nuts;
 it tastes much better than a Mellon, but is counted unwholsome and hard of Digestion. The Pith about the Kernels, which the 
Portuguese
 call 
Cocobarka,
 is by how much harder, so much the better; the softness of the Skin, is a sign of the ripe∣ness of the Fruit; it ripens commonly in 
May
 and 
Iune.


Another sort of 
Iaka,
 call'd 
Champidaka,
 grows not only in 
China,
 but on the
 Island 
Iava,
 and several other places in 
India;
 and that after the common manner, not on the Body of the Tree, as the first sort; it is of a better taste, and wholsomer than the common 
Iaka:
 The Tree spreads it self very much, and is extraordinary high, and broad Leav'd; out of the calcin'd Shells of these two prickly Fruits, the 
Indians
 make a Composition, which they use in stead of Sope or Lye to scowr Clothes with.


In the Southern Provinces, 
Quantung, Quangsi, Iunnan, Foquieu,
 and on the
 Island 
Ainan,
 grows in great abundance a Fruit, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Fanpolomie;
 by the 
Brasilians,
 (acording to 
Piso
) 
Nano;
 (according to 
Lerius,
) 
Panaco;
 by the 
Spaniards
 in 
New-Spain, Iajama,
 from its likeness with a Pine-Apple; and by the 
Portuguese, Ananas,
 which they hammer'd without doubt from the 
Brasilian
 name 
Nana.


The Fruit (as 
Acosta
 tells us) was first brought from the Province of St. 
Cruis
 in 
Brasile
 to 
Peru,
 and from thence to the 
East-Indies,
 and lastly to 
China:
 The Plant of this Fruit grows like an Artichoke, but without prickly Points; but about the same bigness, upon the top of it are Ears which lie upon one ano∣ther: As it grows to Maturity, there shoot forth from between the Leaves several colour'd Flowers, for the most part Blue, consisting of three Leaves, which at the Ripening of the Fruit fall off: The Leaves, out of which the 
Ana∣nas
 grow, are twenty in number; longish, Indented about the edges, and sharp at the ends like a Sword, and are very like the Leaves of 
Aloe;
 small, Reddish,






or Black Grains lie Inclos'd in the Fruit, which being Sow'd or put into the Ground produce others.


The ripe Fruit is very Juycie, and of a sweetish taste with a mixture of sowr∣ness; of a deep Vermillion Colour, or (as 
Acosta
 says) Yellow, as big as a Mel∣lon or Cytron, or (as 
Boem
 writes) as a Pine-Apple; the edges are of a lively Colour, good smell, nay so strong it is, that any Person walking may smell in what House they hang up in to ripen: It is generally without full of whitish knobs; the ripe Fruit is crown'd with a young Plant, which cut off, and without Root, (for it hath none put into the Ground) bears Fruit the next Year; every Plant produces onely one Fruit a Year, and that Fruit a new Plant, which when cut off and set in the Ground, the old is pull'd out, and thrown away as unfruitful; the Root is like that of an Artichoke; the Fruit slic'd and steep'd in Wine, gives it an excellent Savor and Rellish, but bites the Tongue and heats the Palate: The Juyce thereof refreshes the fainting Heart, revives the Spirits, and strengthens a squemish Stomack: Moreover, its Juyce or Wine (much more the Distill'd Water) is exceeding good against the Gravel: The Root also is a Remedy to cure the fore-mention'd Distemper: But those that are troubled with, or are careful to avoid Agues, must be sure to abstain both from the Fruit, and all that belongs to it.


China
 also produces several sorts of Spices and Aromatick Plants, in the Sou∣thern Province, bordering upon 
India,
 though in no great abundance, 
viz.
 Pep∣per, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Hucyao,
 which grows in the Province of 
Iunnan.
 Cinamon (as already we have made mention) in the Province of 
Quantung
 and 
Quangsi:
 But there is exceeding good Ginger in great abundance, which they call 
Sem Kiam,
 and store of Coco-nuts in the Southern Provinces, and especi∣ally on the Isle 
Ainan:
 But because all those Plants and Fruits have been large∣ly describ'd by others, it would be needless to make rehearsal thereof.


In several places in 
China
 grows the Plant 
Tee
 or 
Cha,
 so call'd by the 
Chine∣ses,
 by which Name it is known among us; and 
Cia
 or 
Tchia
 and 
Tsia,
 by the



Iapanners;
 though amongst the 
Chineses,
 according to the several places wherein it grows, it hath several Denominations; as likewise from its goodness, for the Inhabitants of the thirteenth County 
Chucheufu
 in the Province of 
Nanking,
 call the best 
Tee Sunglocha;
 those of the third County 
Hucheufu,
 in the Province of 
Chekiang, Kiaichai;
 those in the Province of 
Fokien, Ziazcha.


The Water or Liquor in which this Plant is boyl'd, is also by the 
Chineses
 properly call'd 
Tee
 and 
Cha,
 and 
Chia
 or 
Tsia
 by the 
Iapanners:
 There are those which say, that 
Tsia
 or 
Chia
 in general signifies 
Meat and Drink;
 as 
Loe Chia, Will you please to have Meat or Drink?


The Plant 
The,
 according to 
Martin
 and 
Trigaut,
 is a Shrub and no Tree, grows about the 
 height of an 
European
 Rasberry-bush, or Rose-Tree, and 
 dividing it self into several Boughs, is like the Mirtle-Tree, and partly tastes like it, yet grows not Wild but is Planted: 
 The Boughs and Stalks of the whole Sprout, are from top to bottom, always full of Leaves and Flowers: The Leaves are thin, sharp before, and notch'd round about, in shape Oval, in bigness like those of the Granate-Tree; and though of one shape, yet are of such several bignesses, that on one Sprout four or five sizes of Leaves are to be seen: The first and biggest grow on the undermost Boughs, and are like the Leaves of Garden-Balsom: The second size much less than the first; so ac∣cordingly the rest which grow higher, still lessen more and more; but as much as the uppermost Leaves abate in bigness, so much they increase in value; for one of the first rank of Leaves dry'd and prepar'd, costs five Pence; the second sort, fifty; the third, ten Shillings; the fourth, if rightly prepar'd, thirty; the difference of the Value, follows from the difference of the Vertue, which ac∣cording to 
Trigaut,
 is very considerable; insomuch, that they often give for one Pound of the best, two, sometimes three Duckets: In 
Iapan,
 the best cost ten, and twelve Duckets.


The Flowers of the 
The
 are of a Yellowish White, in bigness and shape like the 
Eglantine,
 but not in smell, which according to 
Martin,
 is faintyish. After the falling off of the Flowers, there remains a Cod or Husk, which is first Green, and afterwards turns Black, in it lies a round Black Seed, like those of Roses: This Seed Sown, yields a new Plant in three years time.


The Root is full of Strings, divided into several Knobs, which lie not deep in the Ground, but are just cover'd with the same, and are for no use; all the Vertue of this Plant consisting onely in the Leaves; the freshest and youngest of which are made use of in the making their Drink 
Cha;
 they gather them in the Spring, one by one, and immediately put them to warm in an Iron Kettle over the fire, then laying them a on fine light Mat, roul them together with their Hands: The Leaves thus roul'd up, are again hang'd over the fire, and then again roul'd closer together, till they are dry, and then put up carefully in Tin Vessels, thereby to keep them from all moystness; 
Trigaut
 tells us, that the 
Chineses
 dry not the Leaves over the fire, but in the Sun.


In the using of these Leaves is some differnece betwixt the 
Iapanners
 and 
Chi∣neses,
 for they (says 
Trigaut
) throw some of the Leaves into a Pot of boyling Water, which when the Vertue of the Leaf is sufficiently infus'd into it, they Drink hot, without eating the Leaves: The 
Chineses,
 as the Lord 
Tulp
 tells us, boyl the Leaves with a little Salt and Sugar, to take away the bitterness in a certain Liquor which they drink warm; or else they put a Handful of 
The
 Leaves in a Pint-Pot, then pour it full of scalding Water, and about two or three Minutes after, Drink the same very hot.


The 
Chineses
 generally, both Night and Day, drink of the Liquor wherein the fore mention'd Leaves are boyl'd, and not onely ordinarily at Table, but have it ready upon all occasions at great Entertainments; and the greatest Nobles and Princes think not much to prepare it themselves, and have in their Palaces Hearths of rich Stone, principally made for that purpose, and are much look'd upon according to the richness of the Utensils they use therein.


The Water of the Fountain 
Hoei,
 in the County 
Chancheufu,
 of the Province of 
Kiangnan,
 is accounted the best by the 
Chineses
 to make their Drink 
Cha;
 and for that use bought by the Grandees, and from thence carry'd to the remotest Provinces, nay to the Emperor's Court at 
Peking.


The 
Chineses
 also drink their 
Cha
 out of peculiar Earthen Dishes, which add a curious smell to the Liquor, almost like that of Juniper, Cypress and Aloes-Wood; some of them are to be seen, being brought from thence hither.


The best of these Cups (according to 
Martinius
) are made in the City 
Guihing,
 (in the Province of 
Kiangnang
) which from whence takes its Denomination, for 
Guihing
 signifies 
Glory of the Earth;
 these are for this reason by the 
Chineses
 cho∣sen before those of the Province of 
Kiangsi,
 notwithstanding those are clearer and brighter, because they give a pleasant scent and taste to the Liquor, for which cause they are highly esteem'd by them; and in the whole City before nam'd, they do in a manner nothing else but make 
Tee
-Cups, some of which they sell very dear.


The 
Chineses
 highly extol the Vertue of the Liquor 
Tee,
 and chiefly ascribe the reason that they are never troubled with the Stone nor Gout, to the same; for, say they, to drink it after Meals, takes away all indigestion and rawness of the Stomach, and causes Digestion, makes those that are inebriated sober, and restores them fresh power and Senses, removes giddiness and pains of the Head, occasion'd by excess of Drink, because it consumes the abundance of Moistures; and those that are call'd upon to vigilancy, by drinking the same expel their drowsiness, and become very vigorous and fit for Business; it pro∣longs life also, fortifies the Sight, and is commended by the famous Physi∣cian 
Nicholaus Tulp,
 for the wholsomest Plant that grows: And for a more particular enumeration of its Vertues, the said Physician may not unfitly be∣consulted.


Moreover, the 
Chineses
 not onely use this Drink, but also the 
Indians, Tartars,
 those of 
Tibet, Mogor,
 and almost all the People on the Shore of the 
Oriental Sea;
 and of late years it hath been in use in divers parts of 
Europe,
 where it is pre∣par'd after the same manner as amongst the 
Chineses,
 excepting that we put a little Sugar-Candy into it, to abate the bitterness of it, as it appears to our Palates.


It is doubted whether this Plant and the use thereof were known to the 
Chi∣neses
 in former Ages: 
Trigaut
 tells us that they have not us'd it long, because in the old 
Chinese
 Books not one Character or Letter is found that expresses the same. Others affirm, that this Plant or Herb grew many Ages ago wild, and without Planting, but that the Setting or Sowing of it, its Vertue and manner of making Liquor thereof was known but of late to the 
Chineses.
 The Herb at this day grows not wild, but is planted with great care on Hills, and Set about three Foot distant one Plant from another. It grows in no other place but 
China, Siam, Iapan
 aud 
Tunking;
 but in no part of 
China
 in greater abundance than in the thirteenth County 
Chicheufu
 in the Province of 
Nanking.


In the seventh County 
Iuenki
 in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 and in the third


County 
Kingyuen
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 grows the Fruit call'd 
Areka
 (al∣ready spoken of) otherwise call'd 
Fausel,
 which the Inhabitants, as most of the 
Indians,
 chew with the Leaves of 
Betel,
 which colours their Spittle red: It is in the Countrey Language nam'd 
Makinnang.






Beasts.


AS the Countrey of 
China
 is bless'd with divers sorts of Trees, Plants and Herbs, so it likewise abounds with four-footed Beasts, Birds, Fishes, and creeping Animals.


In all parts of 
China,
 especially in the Province of 
Quantung,
 are Harts, Stags, Bucks, Hares, and the like, which by Travellers are seen in great Herds. Great abundance of Deer are also in the Province of 
Huquang.


China
 also is every where stor'd with such like Sheep as are found in 
Persia
 and 
Tartary, viz.
 having long and thick Tails, which trail after them, and weigh sometimes forty Pound, and are extraordinary good Meat.


About the tenth Garrison'd City 
Tieki
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 and in the County 
Iungningfu
 in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 are a sort of Cattel with long, thick, and curl'd Hair on their Tails, which the 
Chinese
 Soldiers wear on their Helmets and Ensigns in stead of Feathers. Of this Hair they also make Tape∣stry, and exceeding good Clothes to keep out Rain. Great store of these kind of Cattel are also in the Kingdom of 
Tibet.


The Kine in the Counties 
Chingcheufu
 and 
Tengcheufu
 in the Province of 
Xan∣tung,
 have a certain Stone found in their Maw, which they call 
Nicuhoang,
 that is, 
The yellowness of a Cow,
 because of the yellow colour, for 
Nicu
 is 
A Cow,
 and 
Hoang, Yellow.
 This Stone differs in bigness, and is sometimes as big as a Goose Egg, but is not so firm as a 
Bezoar
 Stone, and therefore much lighter, yet in greater esteem amongst the 
Chinese
 Physicians: it appears to those that look on it like yellowish Chalk. It is, as the 
Chineses
 affirm, of a cold Tem∣per, but dries up the Rheum in the Head extreamly: Its Powder, if thrown into boyling Water, immediately cools the same, but cold Water being pour'd upon it, a Vapor arises from it, and presently soaks up the Water.


According to 
Martinius,
 this Stone is by 
Bellenius
 call'd the 
Gall-Stone;
 and by the 
Arabians,
 as the same Author writeth, 
Haraczi.


In the County 
Luicheufu
 in the Province of 
Quantung,
 is a Beast, by the 
Chi∣neses
 call'd 
The flying Cow,
 because of its swiftness in running, for they say it can run three hundred Furlongs in a day: It hath a long round Horn on the Head.


In the County 
Cincheufu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 is a Horn'd Beast like an Ox, whose Horns are much whiter than Ivory. This Beast is strangely desirous of Salt; whereof the Hunters taking their advantage, lay whole Bags full before it, which it falls upon so greedily, that it suffers it self rather to be taken, bound, and kill'd, than to desist from licking the Salt-Bags, which is the onely way they have to take it.


In the Province of 
Peking
 are Cats with white long Hair, and hanging Ears,
 which by Ladies and Persons of Quality are kept for their pleasure, but will not catch Mice, being perhaps fed with other Dainties; yet there are other good Mousing Cats, which are not so well fed as the former. And amongst the rest is a Cat call'd 
Xumxu,
 of a yellow colour (though some are black) with
 very shining Hair, being an excellent Mouser.


These Creatures are naturally wild, but when taken by the 
Chineses
 are made


tame, and hang Silver about their Necks: Some of them are sold for nine 
Scudo's.


In the Province of 
Peking,
 about the Garrison'd City 
Siven,
 are great Mice
 with yellow Hair, in great esteem amongst the 
Chineses.


In the Province of 
Xantung
 are Wolves, which devour both Men and Plants.


In the Province of 
Xensi
 are many Bears, whose fore-Feet are by the 
Chineses
 accounted a great Dainty.


In the Mountainous County 
Linyaofu
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 are many wild Bulls, and Beasts like Tygers, or Panthers, or Leopards, and according to 
Martinius
 call'd 
Pau,
 and by 
Boem, Hiven Pao:
 The 
Chineses
 make Clothing of their Skins.


In the Province of 
Suchuen,
 and likewise in the fifth County 
Chucheufu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 is the Beast which the 
Greeks
 call 
Rhinoceros,
 that is 
Nose-Horn,
 because of a Horn which it hath on its Snout or Nose.


The Elephants which are seen in most parts of 
China,
 are all brought out of the Provinces of 
Iunnan
 and 
Quangsi,
 where they breed in great numbers, the Inhabitants making use of them in time of War.


The whole Province of 
Chekiang
 is infested with fierce Tygers; but on the Mountain 
Kutien,
 near the City 
Kaiho,
 breed Tygers which do no hurt to Men. In the neighboring Countreys again they are very wild, and of a cruel Nature; yet the wildest of them being brought to this Mountain grow imme∣diately tame. Tygers breed also on the Mountain 
Xepao
 in the County 
Gu∣cheufu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi.
 There are likewise ravenous Tygers and Leopards in the Mountain 
Nalo
 in the County 
Chinyvenfu
 in the Province of 
Iunnan.


In the County 
Nanningfu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 are great wild Boars,
 with Tusks of a Foot and a half long, which with a strange motion of their Bodies they strike at all Persons which come near them, and certainly tear them to pieces.


In no part of 
China
 are so many good Horses as in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 especially in the County 
Iunnanfu,
 and by the Garrison 
Moping;
 likewise in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 near the Garrison'd City 
Po.


On the Mountain 
Holan
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 by the Garrison'd City 
Ninghia,
 are many wild Horses.


The 
Chinese
 Horses are generally of no high size, but very fat, broad But∣tock'd, and strong for Travel; they are Ridden with a Bit, and without being beaten, observe their Masters words of command.


In the County 
Cungkingfu
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 on the Mountain 
Ta∣yung,
 are Baboons, which in bigness and shape are very like a Man, and so fu∣riously lustful after Women, that oftentimes surprising them in the Way, they Ravish them.


In the Province of 
Fokien,
 by the third little City on the Mountain 
Puon,
 as the 
Chineses
 write, there is a hairy Animal very like a Man. The same Crea∣ture call'd 
Tuse,
 is found in the Kingdom of 
Gannan.


In the Province of 
Xansi,
 about the City 
Leao,
 and especially in the third County 
Hangcheufu
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 in the second 
Paoningfu,
 and about the City 
Kiating,
 by the sixth Garrison'd City 
Tienciven,
 in several places in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 and many other parts towards the West, there is great store of Musk, which a kind of Matter taken from the sweating of the Navel (in form of a Purse) of a certain Beast like a Deer, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue


call'd 
Xe,
 and the Musk 
Xehiang,
 that is, 
Scent of the Xe,
 for 
Hiang
 signifies 
Scent;
 or according to 
Michael Boem,
 and 
Philip Marinus,
 in his History of the Kingdom of 
Tunking, Xehiang
 signifies properly 
A sweet-scented Hart.


Philip Marinus
 before mention'd describes the Musk which this Beast pro∣duces in this manner:


They have (meaning those of 
Laos
) the natural and true Musk out of the Kingdom of 
Goai.
 In the Woods lurks a Deer which the 
Chineses
 call 
Yehiam,
 that is, 
Musk-Deer,
 which is as big as a Doe or Hart, though, to speak truth, I know no Beast that hath greater resemblance with it (except the Head, which is like that of a Wolf, and hath two long Teeth) than an old wild Boar: it is of a sadder colour than a Deer, and so slow in motion, that the Hunters thereof are onely troubled to rouze it, for then it stands still, and suffers it self to be kill'd without making the least resistance. Moreover, the Musk which they take from this Beast is of divers Prices: After they have taken it they draw all the Blood from it, and keep it apart from his Navel; they also cut a Bag which is full of Blood, or sweet-scented Moisture; then they flay and cut it in many pieces. When they will make the best Musk of it, they take one half of the Beast, the hind part from the Kidneys, which with a little Blood they stamp in a great Stone-Mortar till they have made it a Pap, with which after it is dry'd they fill little Bags made of the Deers Skin. There is a worse sort, made of the fore-part of the Beast as far as the Kidneys; but the worst of all is made of the whole Beast toge∣ther: And this last is the Musk us'd in these Countreys of 
Europe.
 Thus far 
Marinus.


When this Beast, as the 
Chineses
 write, is carry'd out of the Kingdom of 
Lu
 into that of 
Laos,
 it dies instantly, like a Fish which is taken out of the Water.






Birds.


IN the Province of 
Xensi,
 about the Garrison'd City 
Mincheu,
 and by the sixth Garrison'd City 
Tienciven
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 are Hens, whose Bo∣dies are cover'd with Wool like that of Sheep in stead of Feathers: they are little, and have short Legs, but are very valiant; great Ladies keep them for their pleasure. The like sort are also in 
Kambodia
 and 
Siam.
 But 
Kircher
 ob∣jects against this Relation, and maintains by several Arguments, that they are rather fine curl'd Feathers or Doun, than Wool.


In the County 
Nanningfu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi
 are a sort of strange and wonderful Hens, which evacuate long Threds, such as are generally Spun of the Cotton which grows on Trees, and (if they be not immediately taken from them) swallow them up again.


Another sort of wild Hens call'd 
Ieki,
 breed on the high Mountains in the Provinces of 
Xensi
 and 
Quangsi,
 and are of an extraordinary bigness, having white Heads and divers colour'd Feathers, with Bunches both on their Backs and Breasts, wherefore they are by some call'd 
Toki,
 that is, 
Cammel-Hens.


In the first County 
Chingtefu
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 is a strange and
 wonderful Bird, which the 
Chineses
 call 
Tunghoafung,
 that is, 
The Bird of the Flower
 Tung; 
Fung
 signifies a 
Bird,
 and 
Hoa
 a 
Flower;
 and 
Tung
 is the proper Name for the Flower, for it grows out of the Flower 
Tunghoa,
 and lives so long as the Flower of the Tree continues: We might justly call it 
A Living Flower,



partly for its likeness and beauty, and partly for its shortness of life: It hath a reddish Bill, tastes very sweet, and is very admirable to behold, being of all sorts of Colours.


In several parts of 
China
 is a Bird nam'd 
Chin,
 whose Feathers mix'd with Wine made of Rice, and afterwards pounded very small, is so deadly a Poyson, that no Medicine whatsoever can expel the same.


In the County 
Xincheufu
 in the Province of 
Huquang,
 breeds a Bird on the
 Mountain 
Lekung,
 which never makes a noise but against Rain, and thereby gives warning thereof to the Husband-men.


In the County 
Kiahingfu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 the 
Chineses
 catch cer∣tain
 Birds nam'd 
Hoangcio,
 which steeping in Wine made with Rice, they sell all the year long for a great Dainty.


In the first Territory 
Queilingfu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 are many curious Birds, whose various colour'd Feathers the 
Chineses
 Weave amongst their Silk-Stuffs.


In the County 
Kiocingfu
 in the Province of 
Iunnan
 are Swallows with divers
 white Spots under their Bellies, some bigger, some lesser: The 
Chinese
 Physi∣cians Distill an excellent Water from them, which cures all Distempers inci∣dent to the Eyes.


The Province of 
Quantung
 abounds with a sort of Ducks, which are brought
 up with great care by the Inhabitants; they are in most parts of 
China,
 but no where in such abundance as in 
Quantung.


These Ducks, Hatch not their Eggs as with us, but the 
Chineses
 put them into a warm Oven, or bury them in hot Dung after the same manner as it is said the 
Egyptians
 do at 
Grand Cairo.


The 
Chineses
 also on Ship-board breed whole Coops full of Ducks, setting them on the Shore at Low-water, there to feed on Oysters, Crabs, and the like. Several Companies of them belonging to divers Vessels, oftentimes mix them∣selves together in the Water and on the Shore, but towards Evening at the Ringing on a Bason return to their several Vessels.


The 
Chineses
 also use Ducks to Weed their Rice.


In most parts of 
China
 is found a Bird in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Louwa,
 which is smaller than a Goose, and not unlike a Raven, with a long Bill and Neck like a Crane, at the end crooked, with Feet like a Swan, and a very wide Maw, excellent for Fishing.


This Bird seems to be the same with that which 
Pliny
 calls by the 
Greek
 Name 
, which signifies 
Asse's Cymbal,
 because of its strange noise, and is by him describ'd in the following words:


The 
 (saith he) differs not much in shape from a Swan, except in the Throat, in which, being of an extraordinary bigness, this unreasona∣ble Creature stores all that it gets: After it hath gotten its fill, the gorged Store comes up again into the Mouth, and from thence being chew'd, goes into the Belly.
 Thus far 
Pliny.


The 
Chineses
 fish with these Birds, teaching them to catch Fish as here we teach our Dogs to Hunt: Their Fishing is in this manner:


The Fisher-man goes with little Boats, or Floats of Canes joyn'd close toge∣ther, puts out into some River or Lake with the foremention'd Birds; which being let out, immediately dive under Water, and shoot down with great swift∣ness. So soon as any of these Birds have overtaken a Fish in the Water, he swallows him up into his Maw, and immediately rising again comes to the






side of the Boat, where the Fisher-man forces open his Bill, and pulls the Fish out of his Maw with great dexterity; then puts the Bird over-board again, to catch more Fish after the same manner.


But to prevent these Birds from swallowing the Fish, which they are very greedy of; they lock their Throats, by putting on an Iron Ring about them, beyond which the Fish cannot pass.


Those Fish which by reason of their bigness cannot be swallow'd, they bring up in their Bills, giving timely notice to the Fisher-man, by a noise which they make, that so he may be ready to take the Fish from them; nay some∣times one Bird helps another (if the Fish be very big) to bring him to the Boat, each holding a part thereof in his Bill.


If any Bird, after his being put over-board, Dive not instantly under Wa∣ter, it is cruelly beaten with a Cane, till the Feathers flie off, thereby to break it of its slothfulness.


After they have taken a considerable number of Fish, the Iron Ring is taken off from them, that then they may Fish for themselves, which makes them an∣other time the willinger to Fish for their Masters.


The Fisher-men pay yearly for every Fish a certain Tribute to the Emperor.


The Birds before-mention'd are very dear, one of them (which is any thing dextrous in fishing) being sold for fifty 
Tail
 of Silver, every 
Tail
 being an 
English
 Crown.


Iohn Gonzalves
 of 
Mendoza,
 in his Description of the Empire of 
China,
 calls these Fishing-birds 
Sholfers,
 and gives an account of their Fishing, much to the same purpose as hath been already describ'd.


The 
Chineses
 (says he) have a peculiar way of Fishing, which is very plea∣sant and good. The Emperor keeps in every Town built near Rivers certain Houses, in which every year young 
Sholfers
 are bred up, with which they Fish in certain seasons, after this manner:


The Masters of the Fowls take them out of their Coops, and carry them


down to the Shore, where they keep many Boats to Fish with, and fill them half way full of Water, then they tie their Crop with a String under their Wings so close that they cannot swallow the Fish; then they throw them into the Water to Fish, which they do with great eagerness, and Dive with great dexterity and swiftness under the Water; after having been a while out of sight, they appear again with their Bill and Throat full of Fish, and come fly∣ing towards the Boat, and evacuate the Fish in the Water which is in the Boat, that so they may be kept alive.


In the County 
Nanningfu,
 of the Province of 
Quangsi,
 are a kind of small Par∣rets, in bigness and shape like Mag-Pies.


On the craggy Mountains of 
Suchuen
 are very large Mag-Pies, and in the same County, near the Garrison'd City 
Ydmui
 great store of Larks.


In the Provinces of 
Quantung, Quangsi,
 and 
Iunnan,
 are both tame and wild Peacocks; they are in no other Provinces, unless brought from thence.


In the County 
Hoaiganfu,
 in the Province of 
Nanking,
 are more Quails and Pheasants than in any other part of 
China.


In the County 
Taipingfu,
 in the Province of 
Nanking,
 lies an Island nam'd 
Hoa,
 in the River 
Kiang,
 which seems to be nothing but a hollow Rock, in which are an incredible number of Owls; from whence the Island hath gotten its Denomination.


In the Province of 
Xantung
 are great store of Poultrey, Pheasants and Wood-Cocks, insomuch that they are bought there extraordinary cheap.


Very remarkable is a Bird properly call'd 
Fung,
 and by addition of the word 
Ciang,
 is nam'd 
Fungciang,
 in regard the appearance of the Bird (which is very seldom and always alone) is by the 
Chineses
 look'd upon as a good Omen, and ve∣ry fortunate to the whole Empire. 
Boem
 also writes, that if this Bird disappears suddenly from the sight of Men, it is a sign of one or other sad event, or threat∣ning danger to those of the Royal Blood. The 
Chineses
 have this Bird in great veneration, so that the Figure of it is frequently seen among them, both in their Paintings, Tapestry, Weavings, and their Imbroyderies of Gold, Silver and Silk, and the greatest of the Nobility have the Effigies of it often wrought on their Clothes. 
Martinius
 will have him to be the Phenix, or else an unknown sort of Crane, resembling a Peacock in head, and variety of Colours; it is said to breed in the Mountain of the Kingdom of 
Tang.


The same 
Martinius
 tells us, that in the County 
Munghoafu,
 in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 is a Mountain, from the 
Chinese
 Phenix call'd 
Funghoang;
 because this Bird (as they say) dy'd on the same, after he had sung a while very melodiously. They also add, that all the Birds about the latter end of Harvest meet on the same, and there bewail the death of their Phenix: The Inhabitants observe al∣so that time, and climb up the Hill in the Night with Lights to catch Birds, and return from thence loaden with their purchase.


In the Province of 
Xensi
 are Bats as big as Hens or Geese; they are by the 
Chineses
 accounted great Dainties, who prefer their flesh before that of Poultry. The like Bats being all over Hairy, and Headed like Apes or Cats, and as big
 as Pigeons, Hens, or Geese, are found in several parts of 
Asia,
 as in the King∣dom of 
Mogor,
 in the Countrey of 
Kasmir
 in 
Surrat,
 and on the neighboring Isle, as also in 
Brasile;
 they flie in great shoals in 
Surrat,
 like Wild-Geese, and in the Evening are seen to hang on Trees; and because of their extraordinary big∣ness, appear so strangely, that they strike amazement to such as never saw them before: Wherefore the 
Netherlanders
 surpris'd with the sudden sight and novel∣ty






thereof, call'd them 
Flying Apes;
 yet they may well be reckon'd amongst the other sort of Bats, having their Wings Skinny and not Feather'd, and because they have Ears and Claws, and lay no Eggs, but suckle their Young: they are as big as a Cat, with a thick Hairy Breast and Belly, and likewise are cover'd all over from their Neck to the Claws with a Skin like a Sprit-Sail; they seem to differ from all other Bats, besides that, this Skin like a Sail is fleshy underneath, but on the top cover'd with soft Hair like a Conies, of an Ash-colour: Moreover, their Wings are not as those of other Bats, drawn together, and spread out again with folds; therefore we shall find, if these and the Bats of 
Brasile,
 or any other in 
India
 be compar'd together, that there is a great difference betwixt them. The whole Creature is about three Foot long, and of a proportionable breadth; hath a thin Tail of a Span long, which seems to be fasten'd to the fore-mention'd Skin, which covers the whole Body from Head to Foot, like a Sprit-Sail; the Legs are also cover'd with a soft yellow Wool; the Feet are arm'd with sharp Claws, with which it holds all things that it seizes on, especially Fruit; it hath a long Head of an ugly aspect and wide Mouth, little Teeth, and round short Ears, consisting of a thin Skin. 
Kircher
 tells us, that those Bats have not Quilly, but Sinnewie Wings, with which they flie in the Air like ordinary Bats; yet, that their Nervous Wings are so well distinguish'd in length, that they show as if they were Feather'd. They breed in thick Woods, and hang by their Claws on the hollow Bodies and Boughs of Trees, or on the Roofs of Huts, appearing with their Sail-like Skins, rather like Sachels than Animls, by which means they escape the fury of other Creatures their Enemies: They annoy the Cattel exceedingly by sucking their Blood and Milk, which is their best Food.


Moreover, (according to 
Bontius
) on the Island 
Iava,
 breed ordinary Bats in the Woods, which are as big as Pigeons, which the 
Iavans
 eat for a great Dain∣ty: They often come into the Houses at Night, if the Windows or Doors chance to be left open in the Day, and fastning themselves like Leeches to the


Feet of those whom they find asleep, suck great abundance of Blood from them, which more amazes than hurts them when they awake.






Fishes.


BEcause of the many Rivers, Pools and Lakes, the Countrey of 
China
 abounds with variety of Fish, especially the Province of 
Xantung,
 which by reason of its Neighborhood to the Sea, hath, besides the Fish taken in Rivers and Lakes, great store which are got in the Sea, in such abundance, that for the value of a Peny they purchase ten Pound weight of Fish.


Also there is incredible store of Fish in the Province of 
Huquang,
 and like∣wise in that of 
Kiangsi,
 especially Salmon.


In the River 
Kiang,
 about the City 
Kieukyang,
 though some Leagues from the Sea, store of Fish is caught, as Cod, Dolphins, and Salmon.


In the River 
Lofeu,
 by the City 
Xeu
 in the Province of 
Huquang,
 are excel∣lent Lamprees in abundance.


The 
Yellow River
 amongst the rest breeds a Fish nam'd 
Xehon,
 that is 
Marbled Flower,
 so call'd from the Marble Spots on its Skin: It is caught in no other place but near the City 
Paote
 in the Province of 
Xansi,
 and is in great esteem amongst such as take upon them to understand Eating: They are taken chiefly in the Province of 
Fokien
 near the City 
Hunghoa.


The River 
Tan,
 which glides close by the chief City 
Nanyang
 in the Province of 
Honan,
 hath Fish of a perfect red colour, which are onely seen and caught in the beginning of Summer; for the remaining time of the year they hide them∣selves.


The 
Chineses
 ridiculously believe, and some have written to that effect: If any one besmears his Feet with the Blood of this Fish, he may walk on the Water as well as on the Land. They add moreover, That if the Water be stirr'd at that time, it immediately turns red, together with all the Fish, which at that present appear; wherefore it hath the Name of 
Tan,
 that is, 
Red.


The County of 
Ningpofu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 lying near the Sea, is well provided with Sea-Fish, which they dry in the Sun, as Oysters, Crabs, and Lobsters, with which they furnish most parts of 
China.


In the beginning of Summer is caught a Fish nam'd 
Hoang,
 that is to say,
 
Yellow,
 because of its yellow colour. This Fish is of such a Nature, that it will not last one hour good after it is taken out of the Water; but it is exceedingly valu'd amongst the 
Chineses:
 they put it into Vessels with Ice, and so bring it to Market; for which purpose they preserve Ice in the Winter to keep the fore-mention'd Fish in in the Summer.


In a Lake of the compass of two hundred Acres, lying on the Mountain
 
Cienking
 in the County 
Hancheufu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 they catch Fish of a Golden colour, from which they are call'd 
Kinyu,
 for 
Kin
 signifies 
Gold,
 and 
Yu,
 a 
Fish,
 having a Scale which shines as if sprinkled with Gold. They scarce ever exceed a Fingers length, yet have Tails split into two or three parts, sometimes intire and broad, which make them appear fair to the Eye: They are by the 
Chineses
 kept with great care alive in their Houses or Gardens in neat Vessels made for that purpose. The Grandees often with their own Hands catch this Fish, which on the other side, as if it knew who was its Lord, and what pleasure it did him, comes as it were on purpose with his Compa∣nion


and plays just above the Water. One of these Fishes, if it be perfect and sound, costs sometimes three or four Crowns.


In the watry Valley on the Mountain 
Haiyang,
 near the City 
Queiling
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 are Four-footed and Horn'd Fish.


In the River 
Siang,
 in the County 
Changxafu
 in the Province of 
Huquang,
 and
 in the great River 
Kiang,
 where it runs through the Province of 
Nanking,
 are a sort of Fish, by the 
Chineses
 from the 
Portuguese
 corruptly call'd 
Xanel.
 A great quantity of this Fish pack'd up alive in Ice in peculiar Vessels, is sent to the Emperor to 
Peking,
 every Week two Ships Lading of them as long as the time of Fishing continues; and though it be above two hundred Leagues by Wa∣ter, yet in eight or ten days they finish their Journey: for Night and Day the Vessels are Toed by a Line, and new Toers taken so soon as the old ones begin to be tir'd, which at appointed places, like our Stages, stand ready: for by a Letter sent before they acquaint them with the Hour when they shall be there; and if any neglect happen herein, the Governors forfeit their Lives. No Cost nor Charges are spar'd to procure the Emperor this excellent Fish, of which he gives some to his Council of State.


The County 
Chinkiangfu
 in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 hath many Rivers, Pools and Lakes abounding with Fish, and amongst others one, out of which the Physicians draw an excellent Medicine against all kind of Scurf and Scabs.


In the same County by the City 
Yangcung,
 in the Lake 
Ming,
 is a black co∣lour'd
 Fish nam'd 
Cing,
 which is said to be good against many Diseases.


In the County 
Fungciangfu
 in the Province of 
Xensi
 near the City 
Pingyang,
 they take a Fish call'd 
Xe,
 that is, 
Stone,
 which being dry'd and beaten to Pow∣der, keeps Moths out of Clothes if strow'd on the same.


In the Sea before the County 
Taicheufu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 the 
Chi∣neses
 catch many 
Haions,
 or 
Seals,
 whose Skins they send to 
Iapan
 to make Scab∣bards for Swords, and through all parts of 
China,
 making great profit of them; as the said Skin is us'd amongst us, for the making Cases for Watches, and Han∣dles for Knives.






Serpents and creeping Animals.


IN the County 
Fungchiangfu
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 is a sort of black Ser∣pent, of which the 
Chineses
 make a Medicine to expel Poyson, and cure many Distempers.


In the County 
Nanyangfu
 in the Province of 
Honan,
 are Serpents, whose Skin is generally full of white Spots. The Wine in which they have been steep'd, is an excellent Remedy against Stiffness of the Joynts or Limbs.


In the County 
Hoangcheufu
 in the Province of 
Huquang,
 are Serpents which heal the Leprosie and Scabbiness.


On the Mountain 
Citien,
 by the City 
Caihoa
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 are very great Serpents, which have no manner of Poyson.


In the County 
Gucheufu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 are (as the 
Chineses
 write)
 Serpents several Rods in length, no wonder then if they are affirm'd to be the biggest in the whole World. 
Michael Boem
 saith, That these Serpents, call'd 
Gento,
 are found on the Isle 
Ainan
 in the Provinces of 
Quantung, Quangsi,
 and some other places, and are without doubt the biggest of all Serpents, being about eighteen or twenty Foot long: they are said to swallow whole Deer, but are not accounted very poysonous; when hungry they leap out of Hedges


or Bramble-Bushes, then rising upright and standing on their Tail, encounter whatever they meet, whether Man or Beast; sometimes from a Tree set upon Travellers, and winding about their middle, destroy them: Their Gall is ac∣counted by the 
Chineses
 good for sore Eyes.


In the Province of 
Quangsi,
 and in many other places in 
India,
 is a sort of
 Serpents, by the 
Portuguese
 call'd 
Cabros de Cabello,
 that is, 
Serpents of Hair,
 or 
Hairy Serpents;
 in the Heads whereof a Stone is found, by the 
Portuguese
 nam'd 
Piedro del Cobra,
 or 
Serpent-Stone,
 good against Wounds or the Bitings of the same Serpent, which otherwise would destroy in twenty four Hours: It is round, and of a blue colour, in the middle pierc'd with white; being laid to the Wound it sticks fast thereon of it self, but when impregnated with the Poy∣son, it falls from it, then thrown a while into Milk, it returns to its natural Quality; if it sticks the second time to the Wound, it is a certain sign that all the Poyson is not drawn out, but if it falls off, then the Patient is certainly past danger.


This Stone hath been experienc'd with good success upon divers, both Men and Beasts, according to the testimony of 
Kircher
 and several others.


There is also a Root good against the Bitings of these Serpents, which the 
Portuguese
 call 
Rais de Cabro,
 that is, 
Serpent-Root,
 which being chew'd so long till the Patient Sneezes two or three times, cures him.


This Vertue is not onely in the natural, but also the artificial Stone made of some of the pieces of the natural Stone, or of the Head, Liver, Teeth, and Heart of the Serpent, mix'd with 
Terra Sigillata,
 or 
Seal'd Earth.
 The 
Brach∣mans,
 though proffer'd never so great a Sum of Money, will not teach this Art to any.


Moreover, there is another very venomous Serpent amongst the 
Chineses,
 which by biting kills a Man in few Hours; out of which also they draw a Me∣dicine, good against several Sicknesses, after this manner: The Tail and Body is put into a Kettle of the best Wine, leaving onely the Head, which is put through a Hole made in the Lid thereof; out of which the Serpent at the boyl∣ing of the Wine, which is hung over a great Fire, breathes forth all the Poyson through its gaping Mouth. The Flesh, the Head being cut off, is given to the Sick, and preserv'd, being (as they say) the onely precious thing to expel Poy∣son, like Treacle, or other soveraign Medicines.


The Province of 
Xensi
 is exceedingly infested with Locusts, which devour all the Product of the Fields, insomuch that at some times there is not one Blade of Grass to be seen, notwithstanding the Inhabitants, both great and small, at Command of their Magistrates, kill and destroy them in the Fields. There are often in such thick great Swarms, that by Clouding the Sun they darken the Earth; but they make some amends with their Bodies, for the 
Chi∣neses
 boyl these Locusts for a Dainty Dish.


In the County 
Tegaufu,
 of the Province of 
Huquang,
 and in the County 
Ping∣lofu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 are little Worms, which make white Wax after the same manner as the Bees do their Honey-Combs; but the Combs of these Worms are much less, and extraordinary white; neither are they bred up by Hand, but wild. Of the Combs the 
Chineses
 make Candles, as we of our Wax, but they are much whiter, and being very dear, are onely us'd by Persons of Quality; for besides their whiteness they give an excellent scent when lighted; neither do they spot the Clothes they drop upon, and burn also very clear and bright.


In several Inlets or Creeks along the Sea-shore of 
China,
 and also under the Island 
Ainan,
 is a Land and Sea-Monster, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Hayma,
 that is, 
Sea-Horse,
 for 
Hay
 signifies the 
Sea,
 and 
May
 a 
Horse:
 It is knownto us by the Name of 
Sea-Horse,
 as it was to the 
Greeks
 by that of 
, that is, 
River-Horse,
 not for its likeness to a Horse, but for its bigness, for the word 
 in the 
Greek
 is apply'd to those things which are to be represented big∣ger than ordinary. It is by the 
Chineses
 represented like a Horse with a Mayn, but having on each side of the Mouth long Teeth sticking out like Horns. The Head (according to 
Boem,
 who saw these Beasts wading in shallow places on the Coast of 
Cafruria,
 opposite to 
Mosambique
) is from the Mouth to the Shoul∣ders three Cubits long; on his nethermost Jaw grow two very long and crooked Teeth, and on the uppermost also two thick ones, though shorter, which jut upon them; between lies their Tongue: Their Skin is very hard, inso∣much that it can scarce be pierced with a Lance; it hath no Hair, except at the end of the Tail, which shines like black Horn; each Hair is about the bigness of a Straw, and which bending is not easily to be broke. The 
Caffers,
 both Men and Women, make Bracelets of the Hair, which serves both for an Orna∣ment about their Wrists, and is said to prevent the Palsie. Of the Teeth (says 
Boem
) in 
India
 and 
Goa,
 are made Garlands, Images, and also Crosses. It hath also been found, that these Teeth are great stoppers of Bleeding; though expe∣rience hath taught us, that the Teeth of these Horses have not always the same Vertue, but certain times must be observ'd in the killing of this Beast, that then his Teeth may have the fore-mention'd Power in a greater measure.


No place in 
China
 feeds more Silk-Worms than the Province of 
Chekiang;
 for it not onely furnishes its own Inhabitants, and all 
China
 with Silk-Stuffs of divers sorts, but also the neighboring Countrey 
Iapan,
 the 
Spaniards
 on the 
Phi∣lippine
 Isles, nay, 
India
 and the remotest Countreys in 
Europe;
 for the 
Hollanders
 buy great store of Silk at 
Hocksieu
 in the Province of 
Fokien,
 which is all brought thither out of the Province of 
Chekiang.


The Silk-Stuffs made in this Province are accounted the best in all 
China,
 and are to be had at so cheap a Rate, that ten Men may go clad in Silk at less Charge than one Man in Cloth in 
Europe.
 They Prune their Mulberry-Trees once a year, as we do our Vines, and suffer them not to grow up to high Trees, because through long experience they have learn'd, that the Leaves of the smallest and youngest Trees make the best Silk, and know thereby how to distinguish the first Spinning of the Threds from the second, 
viz.
 the first is that which comes from the young Leaves that are gather'd in 
March,
 with which they feed their Silk-Worms; and the second is of the ould Summer Leaves, and it is onely the change of Food, as the young and old Leaves, which makes the difference in the Silk. This is perhaps the reason why the Silk which is made in 
Europe
 is courser than that made by the 
Chineses.
 The Prices of the first and second Spinning also differs amongst the 
Chineses,
 whenas most Silk-Throsters in 
Europe
 make no difference therein. The best Silk is Spun in 
March,
 the coursest in 
Iune,
 yet both in one year. The breeding of the Worms is all one, and requires as much trouble and care as in some places in 
Europe;
 therefore it is plainly false, and a 
Romance,
 That all the Silk in 
China
 is produc'd by the Silk-Worms on the Trees without care or labour.


Martinius
 tells us, That the breeding of Silk-Worms, and making of Cotton and Silk, is an ancient Invention of the 
Chineses;
 for the Wife of the Emperor 
Ya,
 who Reign'd 
Anno
 2357. before the Navity of 
Christ,
 is said to have been the


first Inventress and Teacher thereof to her Subjects: for though the breeding of Silk-Worms was not unknown to the 
Chineses
 at that time, yet they were ignorant in the Art of making Clothes of the same, as it generally happens in the beginning of all things. To the 
Chineses
 justly belongs the honour, that from them originally the Art of making Silk was translated to other Coun∣treys of 
Asia
 and 
Europe.


In the Province of 
Xantung
 the Silk Threds are Spun on Trees and in the Fields, not by tame Silk-Worms, but another kind of Worm like a Caterpiller which Spin not their Silk in manner of a Ball or Egg, but in long Threds of a white colour, which are blown to and again by the Wind on Trees and Hou∣ses, from whence the Inhabitants fetch them; almost after the same manner as our long Spider-Threds in Cobwebs, which flye up and down in Summer. Of this Silk they also make Silk-Stuffs as well as of that Spun by Silk-Worms, and much stronger, though somewhat courser.


Divers Animals in the 
Greek
 Tongue call'd 
, or Creatures which live in the Water as well as on the Shore, are in several places of 
China.


In the County 
Hoeicheufu
 in the Province of 
Quantung,
 breeds a Monster of Nature, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Hoangcioyu,
 that is, 
Yellow-Bird Fish;
 for it is nei∣ther Bird nor Fish, but both; that is to say, all the Summer it is a Bird of a Saffron colour, and flyes in the Mountains, but at the end of Harvest it betakes it self to the Sea and becomes a Fish, and being caught in Winter, is (as the 
Chineses
 say) very sweet and good Meat.


In the County 
Chaocheufu
 in the same Province, are many Crocodiles in the River 
Zo,
 which oftentimes hurt the neighboring People.


On the East side of the chief City 
Gucheu
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 is a lit∣tle Lake nam'd 
Go,
 in which King 
Pegao
 in ancient times kept ten Crocodiles, to which he threw Malefactors to be devour'd by them; those which were guiltless or innocent, being (as the 
Chineses
 say) found untouch'd, were taken out again and releas'd.


In the Province of 
Huquang,
 in the River 
Siang,
 is a Beast which chiefly re∣sembles a Horse, but with Scales on its Body, and Claws like a Tyger: It is of a cruel Nature, and seizes on Man and Beast, especially in Harvest, for then it often comes out of the Water, and runs all over the Countrey.


In the River 
Iun,
 in the same County 
Chaokingfu
 in the Province of 
Quantung,
 breeds a Fish, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
The Swimming Cow,
 because it often comes out of the Water and engages with its Horns the tame Cow; but if it stays long out of the Water its Horns turn yellow, and lose their hardness, by which means it is forc'd to return to the Water, where it becomes a Fish again, and the Horns obtain their former hardness.


In the County 
Changtefu
 in the Province of 
Honan,
 breeds a Fish in the Ri∣vers, by the 
Chineses
 nam'd 
Hagul,
 that is, 
Child,
 because when caught it cries like a Child. In shape this Fish differs little from a Crocodile, hath a long Tail, and goes on four Feet: The Fat thereof once set on fire, cannot be quench'd either by Water, or any other means.


In 
China
 also are many Land and Sea-Tortoises, or Turtles, call'd 
Quei,
 espe∣cially in the County 
Chunkingfu
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 and in the Island 
Pequei,
 that is, 
Isle of Turtles,
 lying in the River 
Kiang,
 and the Province of 
Huquang;
 some of them are very big, and others small and handsom, which the Inhabitants keep in their Houses; some are no bigger than a small Bird.


The 
Chineses
 relate of a strange accident that happen'd there to a Soldier, who being accidentally by his Enemies thrown into the River, was by a Tor∣toise (which it is likely he had formerly fed and set at liberty) carry'd like an 
Arion
 on a Dolphins back to the opposite Shore.


In the fourth County 
Hoeicheufu,
 in the Province of 
Quantung,
 are seen at Sea, Turtles of such a vast bigness, that afar off they seem to be Rocks, some having Shrubs and other Plants growing on their Shells.


In some Provinces of 
China,
 and especially in 
Honan
 are flying Turtles, with green, and others with blue Wings on their Feet, by the spreading out of which they push themselves forward, leaping after the manner of Grashoppers: The Feet of these Turtles, are for the Rarity thereof, in great esteem among the 
Chineses;
 those that have green Wing'd Feet are call'd 
Lo Mae Quey, Quey
 sig∣nifying 
A Tortoise; Lo, Green;
 and 
Mae, Wings.


In all places near the Sea are plenty of Oysters, almost as good as our 
Colchester
-Oysters, especially in the County 
Tencheufu,
 in the Province of 
Xan∣tung.


In the eleventh County 
Vencheufu,
 of the Province of 
Chikiang,
 are small Oy∣sters, of which it is reported, that from the Powder of them, dry'd and stamp'd, and Sown like Seed along the Fields in Marsh Ground, there grow Oysters of a very sweet Rellish; most of the Sea-bordering places abound also with Crabs and Lobsters.






Minerals, Stones, and Earths.


THrough all 
China
 are an innumerable company of Mines, which abound in all sorts of Mettal, and in particular Gold and Silver in great store, though there be an Edict in 
China
 not to Dig for them; because (as the 
Chineses
 say) Men are generally kill'd in the Mines, by the dangerous Damps and Vapours that arise from the Earth: But to gather Gold on the Shores of Rivers is free for every Man, after which manner they get great store; and Gold is rather a Commodity or Merchandize it self amongst the 
Chineses,
 than a Purchaser of other Commodities.


In the Province of 
Iunnan
 they gather great quantities of Gold out of the cleans'd Sand; but if the Mines might be open'd, the 
Chineses
 could not expect greater abundance of Gold or Silver from any other place: from whence there is a Proverb amongst them, wherein those that are seen to spend their Estates in Riot and Prodigality, are ask'd, 
Whither their Fathers be Receivers of the Empe∣rors Revenue in the Province of
 Junnan? There are also in this Province Mines of Tin, Iron, and Lead.


The Province of 
Fokien
 hath Copper, Tin, and Iron Mines, and in some places Gold and Siver Mines also: Particularly in the sixth County 
Tingcheufu,
 in the same Province, the Mountain 
Kin,
 that is, 
Gold,
 is so call'd from its Gol∣den Mines which were open'd by the Family 
Sung.


The Mountains in the Province of 
Queicheu,
 inclose (as the 
Chineses
 write) Gold, Silver, Quicksilver, and the like rich Mettals, all which might easily be gotten, if the Mountaineers, or Inhabitants of the Mountains could be sub∣du'd and brought to Obedience; but now the 
Chineses
 have no more benefit than the fore-mention'd People will give them out of their free Wills in Barter for Salt, or any other Necessaries.


The County 
Hengcheufu,
 in the Province of 
Huquang,
 hath many rich Sil∣ver Mines which may not be open'd.


All over the Province of 
Suchuen
 great store of Iron, Lead, and Tin is Digg'd out of the Mountains: 
China
 hath also divers sorts of Precious and ordinary Stones.


In the Province of 
Suchuen
 are the best sort of Load-stones to be found; as also in the Provinces of 
Huquang
 and 
Honan.


In the little County 
Lincheufu,
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 is a sort of Green Stone call'd 
Lapis Lazuli:
 and likewise in the seventh County 
Nanganfu,
 in the Province of 
Honan:
 and in the Territory 
Honanfu
 of the Province of 
Iunnan.


In the seventh County 
Kaocheufu,
 in the Province of 
Quantung,
 and out of the Mountain 
Tiniang,
 in the second 
Talifu,
 in the Province of 
Iunnan,
 they Dig ve∣ry excellent Marble, which the 
Chineses
 cut in thin Squares to make Tables, Walls, and the like Ornaments for their Houses; for this Marble is naturally streak'd with several Colours, in such a manner, that it represents Mountains, Rivers, Trees, Landskips, and the like, as if done by a great Artist with a Pencil. This Marble is call'd 
Tienciang,
 from the Mountain out of which it is Digg'd. There is also very good Marble in the County 
Iunnanfu:
 Out of the Mountains near the Garrison'd City 
Siven,
 in the Province of 
Peking,
 they Dig white and red Marble or Porphyre-stones, and also exceeding good Crystal, which is also found on the Mountain 
Ting,
 in the County 
Quanglingfu,
 in the Province of 
Quangsi:
 In the same Province are Agats, for their colour and hardness highly esteem'd.


By the little City 
Queiyang,
 in the County 
Hengchufu,
 in the Province of 
Hu∣quang,
 on the Mountain 
Xeyen,
 are Stones found after Rainy Weather exactly re∣sembling Swallows; which we have already mention'd among the Mountains.


On the Mountain 
Queiyu,
 in the County 
Taicheufu,
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 all the Stones, as well great as small, grow naturally square.


In the County 
Cunchangfu,
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 they gather little blue Stones with white Veins or Streaks, which are highly esteem'd by Persons of Quality; for the common Opinion is, that being burnt to Chalk and pounded very small, they are good to prolong Life.


On the Mountain 
Pao,
 in the fifth County 
Hoangcheufu,
 in the Province of 
Huquang
 they find Stones, of which, some if laid in the Sun, turn Red, others Yellow, and retain that Colour for a considerable time.


Out of the almost inaccessible Mountain 
Io,
 by the City 
Pa,
 in the County 
Paoningfu,
 in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 they Dig Precious Stones.


Out of the Mountains 
Vutu,
 in the third County 
Hangchungfu,
 in the Pro∣vince of 
Xensi;
 and in the fourth, 
Cungchangfu;
 and also in the Province of 
Su∣chuen,
 by the Garrison'd City 
Po,
 they Dig a Mineral, by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Hi∣unghoang:
 It is of a deep yellow, or sometimes Vermillion, distinguish'd with black Spots; it is like a Chalky Stone or hard Earth, and is accounted an ex∣cellent Medicine against many Malignant Feavers and Agues, dangerous Heats in the 
Dog-Days,
 if laid to steep in Wine, and drunk up.


Out of the Mountain 
Tape,
 by the City 
Lungkieu,
 in the County 
Taitungfu,
 of the Province of 
Xansi,
 they Dig Earth so Red, that it is us'd in stead of Ver∣million to Print the Red 
Chinese
 Characters with.


Out of the Mountain 
Nieuxeu,
 in the County 
Siganfu,
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 is Digg'd a certain White Earth, which is us'd by the Women in stead of White Lead, to make them Beautiful, by taking away all Spots and Freckles


in the Face: The 
Chineses
 call it 
Queiki,
 that is, 
Fair Woman.


The Mountain 
Io,
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 produces a certain Blue Earth or Mineral, with which they make a kind of Starch for their Linnen.


Through all the Province of 
Xansi,
 they Dig a sort of Coal, firm and slick like Jet or black Marble, such as those of 
Luker-land,
 or like our Cannel-Coal in 
Derby-shire:
 The 
Chineses,
 especially the Common people, burn these Coals (call'd 
Mui
) on their Hearths, in their Kitchins or Chambers, but first break them very small, (they being Digg'd in great Pieces) and then mixt with Water, make them into Balls; they are a long while a kindling, but once light∣ed, they cast a great heat, and keep in a great while: The Northern 
Chineses
 burn also Wood, Cane, and other Fuel.


In the same Province are wonderful Fire-pits, like our Water-pits; they are in most places, and serve in stead of other Fires, for the poor people to boyl their Meat over; which they do after this manner, the Mouth of the Pit is shut very close, except a little hole just big enough for the Pot to stand in; and so the Inhabitants Boyl their Meat without trouble: They say that this Fire burns dull and not bright, and though it be very hot, yet sets not the least Stick of Wood a fire, if thrown into the same; nay that which is more, it may by being put into a great hollow Cane, be carry'd from one place to the other, so that every man may use it when he pleaseth; and by opening the Mouth of the Cane, out of which the heat strikes, Boyl a Pot with Meat, yet never hurt the Cane in which the Fire is Inclos'd.


Out of the Mountains 
Kie
 and 
Siuvu,
 in the Province of 
Peking,
 by the City 
Pingeo,
 they Dig another sort of Coal, which they burn for ordinary Fuel.


On the Mountain 
Io,
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 by the little City 
Chinyven,
 are very bright Stones found, not unlike Diamonds.


The Province of 
Iunnan
 produces Rubies, Saphyrs, Agats, and the like Pre∣cious Stones, call'd by a general Name 
Iemin.


In the County 
Kincheufu,
 of the Province of 
Huquang,
 and in the County 
Quei∣lingfu,
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 are very excellent Stones found, with which the 
Chineses
 temper their Ink, as the 
European
 Painters their Colours.


In the County 
Nanhingfu
 is a black Stone, very like the 
Chinese
 Ink, with which they write on Boards, as we do with Chalk: There is also a Stone which is so hard, that the Inhabitants make Stone Axes and Knives thereof.


Out of the Mountain 
Tiexe,
 lying in the Province of 
Suchuen,
 by the Garri∣son'd City 
Kienchang
 they Dig Stones, which melted in the fire produce Iron, very good to make Swords and Faulchions of.


By the City 
Siaoxan
 is a Quarry, which furnishes all 
China
 with Free-stone.


In several places in 
China,
 especially in the fourth County 
Nieucheufu,
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 is a kind of Gum, in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Cie,
 which drops out of the Trees, and is very like Gum or Oyl of Turpentine: The 
Chi∣neses
 gather it in the Summer, and cleansing the same, Colour it how they please; the best is yellow like Gold, and the next black; before it is dry'd it yields a malignant Damp, which makes the Faces of those which are not us'd to it, swell and look pale for a time, but they soon recover again: It dries ve∣ry leasurely when any Chests or Cabinets are Varnish'd with the same, but when once dry, it never melts again: What a curious and shining thing this Gum is, 
Europe
 hath long since seen by the Cabinets and Chests that are brought hither from 
China
 and 
Iapan:
 The 
Chineses
 varnish all their curious Wood-Work with the same; as also their Ships, Houses, Tables, Bed-steads, Closets, and


all their Houshold Utensils, to the great lustre thereof. 
Trigaut
 gives us this following Account of this Gum, 
viz.


In 
China
 is a certain Gum like Musk, press'd out of the Bark of a Tree, and thick like Pitch, of which the 
Chineses
 make a Varnish, by them call'd 
Cie,
 and by the 
Portuguese, Ciaro.
 With this 
Cie
 they Varnish their Tables, Presses, and other Housholdstuff, as also their Ships and Houses, and Colour it how they please: The Work thus Varnish'd shines like Glass, and is very beautiful to the Eye, and acceptable by reason of its smoothness, and conti∣nues many years. By means of this Gum the Houses of the 
Chineses
 and 
Ia∣panners
 shine in such a manner, that they dazle the Eyes of the Beholders. With this also they represent the colour of all kind of Wood. And for this reason the 
Chineses,
 by whom this Gum is us'd, account Table-clothes alto∣gether superfluous; for if the shining and Crystal-like Tables acciden∣tally, by spilling of any Grease upon them, are bereav'd of their lustre, they are restor'd to their former beauty, by being wash'd over with warm Water, because nothing can soak through the hard Gum. Besides this Gum there is an Oyl, press'd out of the Fruit of another Tree, not unlike the former; the use thereof is also one and the same, but gives not so great a Gloss.


We have several kinds of Varnish amongst us, in imitation of the 
Chineses,
 but far short of it, the true Preparation thereof being doubtless unknown to us, or but imperfectly discover'd.


Out of the Mountains in the eighth County 
Ienganfu
 in the Province of
 
Xensi,
 is digg'd a slimy Moisture, generally call'd 
Peters-Oyl,
 which the 
Chineses
 use in their Lamps, and against Scabs.


In the Province of 
Suchuen
 is abundance of yellow Amber, which is gather'd on the Coast of 
Pomeren,
 and in other parts of the same Province another sort of a reddish colour.


Martinius
 speaks of great quantities of artificial Amber, made of the boyl'd Gum of Pine-Trees, and sold by the 
Chineses;
 so exactly imitated, that it was not to be distinguish'd from the best; neither is it a certain sign of true Am∣ber, to attract Chaff or other light things; for the falsifi'd and artificial, if rubb'd, hath an attracting power as well as the natural.


In the Provinces of 
Iunnan
 they also have Amber which is somewhat redder than the 
Pomeran;
 for yellow they have none.


The Salt which the 
Chineses
 have, is not onely made in the Sea-bordering Provinces, but there are also Inland Waters of which they make Salt without any great trouble.


In the County 
Hokienfu
 in the Province of 
Peking,
 are large Fields, which extending to the Sea-side, are wash'd by the Sea Water, which leaves great quantities of Salt upon the Banks.


All the Water of the Lake 
Ieu,
 lying in the County 
Pingyangfu
 in the Pro∣vince of 
Xansi,
 is as salt as Sea-Water, and Salt also made of it by the Inha∣bitants.


In the County 
Kingyangfu
 in the Province of 
Xensi,
 are two Pools of salt Water, of which they make abundance of Salt.


In the Province of 
Iunnan,
 on the North-East side of the City 
Yaogan,
 is a great Pit of salt Water, out of which is extracted exceeding white Salt, with which the whole County 
Yaoganfu
 is furnish'd. The Pit is call'd 
Peyencing,
 that is, 
Pit of white Salt.
 The first finding of this Salt is ascrib'd to the Sheep, be∣cause they us'd to lick the Earth thereabouts, and scratch up lumps of Salt


with their Feet, till the Inhabitants at last observing the same, found salt Wa∣ter and Earth there.


China
 abounds with Salt in all places; so that besides the great plenty for common use, the Salt-Trade brings great Revenue into the Emperor's Trea∣sury, there being an incredible number of People which Trade in that Com∣modity.


Every Province in which Salt is made, pays yearly a certain weight of Salt to the Emperor for Tribute.


On the Mountains in the Province of 
Suchuen
 are Salt-pits, which supply all the Inhabitants of that Province with Salt; which is a great testimony of God's Providence to these People, considering this part of 
China
 lies remote from the Sea, and could not be furnish'd with Salt from any other places, but with exceeding great trouble.


These Pits are some of them a hundred Paces deep, as being on inhabited Hills of salt Earth: The Mouth of one of them is not above three or four Hands∣breadth wide: They are search'd with an Iron Instrument in form of a Hand, which being let down in the Ground, by reason of its great weight and sharp Fingers, presses through the same, then drawn up again shuts close, and brings up a handful of Earth; which they do so long till they come to salt Earth and Water, which is afterwards pull'd out with a Tub or Bucket, which hath a Co∣ver at the top, and a Hole in the bottom, through which the Water running as the Vessel goes down thrusts it open, but when it is full and pull'd up by a Rope it falls and shuts again: which salt Water being taken out and set over the Fire, its watry part evaporates forth▪ and leaves white Salt in the bottom; yet is not altogether so salt as that which is made of Sea-Water.


There are Salt-pits also in the County 
Queicheufu.
 And likewise in the Ter∣ritory 
Kiahingfu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 are very great Salt-pits, in the Fields near the Sea, where they make abundance of Salt. Also in the County 
Hoaiganfu,
 not far from the City 
Hoaigain,
 and in several other places bordering on the Sea.


In 
China
 onely is that kind of fine Earth of which is made that rich Mate∣rial of those we call 
China-Dishes,
 and this Stuff is call'd 
Porcelane.
 Some falsly affirm, That the Matter of which the 
Porcelane
 is made is prepar'd of pounded Egg-shells, or Sea-Cockles, adding, That it must lie a hundred years under Ground before it can be us'd. Others tell us, That the right 
Porcelane
 is made of a hard chalky Earth, which is first beaten to Powder, and ground to Meal, and then is thrown into Troughs made of gray Stone full of Water, and there left to soak so long till it becomes a Pap; mean while a thin Skin comes over it, of some of which they make 
Porcelane,
 as fine and clear as Crystal, which on pain of Death may not be carry'd out of the Countrey, but must all be brought to the Court, and deliver'd to the Emperor and his Council: The next sort is made of the uppermost Stuff under this Skin; and this is the finest 
Porcelane
 we have in 
Europe:
 and so the nearer this Mucilage is to the bottom of the Troughs, still so much the courser is the 
Porcelane
 made thereof, the bottom of all being not much better than our Earthen Ware. But 
Martinius, Trigaut,
 and other 
Iesuits,
 who were Eye-witnesses, write with more probability, That the Stuff of which they make their 
Porcelane,
 is a dry Earth, like Chalk and 
 Sand, and (according to 
Trigaut
) yellow.


This Earth is digg'd in the fourteenth County 
Hoeicheufu
 in the Province of 
Nanking,
 and from thence carry'd in square Lumps or Cakes, each weighing


about three 
Catties,
 to the Province of 
Kiangsi,
 along the River 
Po.
 And in this Province, at a Village call'd 
Sinktesinu,
 near the City 
Feuleang,
 in the fourth County 
Iaocheufu,
 the best 
Porcelane
 in all 
China
 is made: for though there be Earth in other places, of which the 
Porcelane
 might be made, yet it is no way to be compar'd to that which is made in the Village.


It is to be observ'd, that 
Porcelane
 cannot be made in the fore-mention'd place, where there is such an abundance of Earth, either for want of Water, or because the Water is not so proper for the making of it.


Those which dig the Earth carry it not themselves to the Province of 
Ki∣angsi,
 but generally sell Cakes or Lumps thereof to other People, who main∣tain themselves by carrying of them thither; yet not one Lump may be car∣ry'd away before it is mark'd with the Emperor's Arms, thereby to prevent the falsifying of it.


The 
Porcelane
 Vessels are made after the same manner as our Potters make their Earthen Ware. The Vessels, Plates or Dishes, as soon as form'd, are Painted with various Colours, as yellow, red, blue, or any other. That which is of a Saffron colour, and Painted with Shapes of Dragons, is sent to the Empe∣ror and his Council; and the red, yellow, and blue, is sold amongst the com∣mon People.


To colour the 
Porcelane
 blue they generall use a certain Weed, which in the Southern Provinces is found in great abundance.


The Baking of these Vessels is after this manner: Being shap'd, and having stood a while in the Wind and Sun to dry, they are put into an Oven, which is for fifteen days after made extraordinary hot, and both all that while, and for fifteen days longer are stopp'd so close, that the least Air cannot get in or out of it; then the Oven is open'd, and the Vessels remaining therein left to cool by degrees; for if the glowing Vessels should be taken out of the Oven and put in∣to the Air, they would crack to pieces like Glass; after the expiration of thirty days the Furnace is open'd in the presence of an Officer, appointed by the Em∣peror for that purpose; who examining what is Bak'd, takes of every sort the fifth piece for the Empeor, by virtue of an ancient Law. 'Tis said, that of the pieces also of broken 
Porcelane,
 first beaten, and afterwards sifted, then mix'd with Water and kneaded in a Lump, are new Vessels made, but cannot be brought to their former lustre.


It is observable, that though some use the fresh Lumps which are brought to them, and make 
Porcelane
 of it, yet others, more curious, let them lie a while till they grow as hard as a Stone. The Earth thus dry'd, when they in∣tend to use it, is beaten like the broken pieces of 
Porcelane,
 and also sifted and mix'd with Water, then kneaded into Lumps or Cakes, of which they make 
Porcelane
 as of the fresh Earth.


Besides the goodness of the Stuff, and curious fashioning, the 
Porcelane
 Ves∣sels are of a high value, because they can endure extraordinary hot Liquors in them without cracking; also the pieces, if joyn'd with Iron, or small Cop∣per Wyre, hold any Moisture without leaking.


Through all 
China
 are People which are experienc'd in this Art, and carry a curious small Drill, with a Diamond at the end thereof, with which they 
ake the Holes in the 
Porcelane.


In 
China
 are also divers sorts of Paper made, sometimes of Canes and the Leaves thereof, and sometimes of Cotton, Silk and Hemp: The Paper made of Cotton is not inferior in whiteness to the 
French
 Paper.


In the County 
Vuchanfu
 in the Province of 
Huquang,
 is abundance of Paper made of Canes and the Leaves thereof, which grow there.


There is also good Paper made in the County 
Lucheufu,
 in the Province of 
Kiangnan.


There are more ways of making Paper among the 
Chineses
 (as 
Trigaut
 wit∣nesseth) than among us: The same Author affirms, that the 
Chinese
 Paper is ve∣ry rotten, apt to tear, and not durable; so that no Paper, whatsoever sort it be, can compare to ours in 
Europe:
 But whereas he saith, that it cannot bear on both sides to be Written or Printed, it is a meer mistake, because several sorts of 
Chinese
 Paper are found in the 
Netherlands,
 which not only by the 
Hol∣landers,
 but the 
Chineses
 also are written on both sides without the least sinking. The 
Chinese
 Paper is of several sizes, some two Foot and a half long, and two broad, some six Foot long, and three broad, which sort is brought from 
China
 into 
Holland.


China
 also in several places produces Sugar, 
,
 Honey; and in the Moun∣tains abundance of Salt-Petre.






Of the Shape, Nature, and Complexion of the Chineses.


THe 
Chineses
 in Colour and Complexion are like the People of 
Europe,
 especially those of the Northern Provinces, for those in the Southern, by reason of their Neighborhood to the Line and Heat of the Sun, are of a brown Complexion.


The Hair of their Beards is stiff and short, and appears not till full Man∣hood; so that a 
Chinese
 of thirty years, looks a
 Youthful as an 
European
 of twenty.


The Colour of the Hair, both of their Heads and Beards, is generally black, and it is accounted a dishonor in 
China
 to wear long Hair.


Their Eyes are small, somewhat oblong, black, and standing out: their Noses are small, and not high: their Ears of an indifferent bigness, in which the 
Chi∣neses,
 as also in their other Features differ little from the 
European,
 though in some Provinces they have flat, and in a manner square Faces.


In the Province of 
Quantung
 and 
Quangsi,
 most people on every little Toe have two Nails, which is also common amongst those of 
Cochin-China;
 and some say that in former times they had six Toes on every Foot.


All the Women are of little Stature, white Skins, brown Eyes, and extraor∣dinary small Feet, in which last they account their chiefest Beauty to consist; for though a Woman be never so fair, yet she is accounted homely if she hath great Feet; insomuch, that the Mothers Swathe and Rowl up their Daugh∣ters Feet from their Infancy, that by these Swathes (which they wear all their Life-time) they may prevent the natural growth of them: This Swathing of their Feet often occasions in tender Bodies such a pain, that they sometimes become lame of their Feet and decrepit; yet the Women generally Dance pret∣tily, and make strange gestures with their bare Arms.


Some will have it, that this Swathing was inven
ed by some politick and jealous Person, that by this means they might be kept at home, and prevented from walking the Streets, which in that Countrey 
edounds to the dishonor of the Women, and disesteem of the Men.


But, as 
Martinius
 tells us, this Custom was deriv'd from 
Taquia,
 an ancient Empress of 
Che,
 who, though exceeding all other Women in Beauty, had ex∣traordinary small Feet, which extreamly troubled her in going; her Wo∣men hereupon in flattery imitated her, and also to make their Feet smaller Swath'd them; and this Custom to this day is of such Authority among them, that should they behold a second 
Helen,
 they would look upon her as a Monster if she had great Feet.


Others say, that 
Taquia
 was no Woman, but a Spirit in Female shape, with Goats Feet; which, because she would not have them discover'd, she kept con∣tinually wrap'd up; and that from thence it hath also been a Custom for Wo∣men to cover their Feet, which if they do not, it is accounted very ridiculous: Moreover, in this they resemble 
Taquia,
 that their Feet seem so little in their Shoes, that they appear no bigger than Goats Feet.


The 
Chineses,
 both Men and Women, before the Conquering of the Empire of 
China
 by the 
Tartars,
 are said to have wore long Hair on their Heads, with∣out ever Shaving it, except Children, who till the fifteenth year of their Age Shav'd their Heads, only leaving a long Lock on their Crown; after that time they suffer'd their Hair to grow without Shaving, till they came to twenty years of age, (which was the time that Men putting on their Hat of Manhood, an ancient Custom like that of the 
Toga Virilis
 amongst the 
Romans
) and let it hang loose over their Shoulders: In the twentieth year they ty'd up their Hair, and wore a Cap or Hat over it made of Horse-hair, or Silk; but this Cap was not us'd by the Women, who went only with their Hair ty'd up, and adorn'd with Gold, Silver, Precious-stones, and all manner of curious Flowers, and the like.


But there hath been since a great alteration in the Shaving and Wearing of their Hair; for all those 
Chineses
 which were subdu'd by them, were forc'd to Shave their Hair according to the 
Tartar
 fashion, only reserving one Lock be∣hind on their Heads, wherefore the 
Hollanders
 generally call them 
Shaven Chi∣neses,
 as those who refusing to submit to the 
Tartars,
 and to Shave off their Hair, joyn'd with the Rebel 
K
xinga,
 are call'd 
Unshaven Chineses:
 
ut in for∣mer times they took such a Pride in their long Hair, that they rather chose to Die, than lose the least Lock thereof; nor was it only Pride but something of Superstition that made them so concern'd in long Hair, for they like the 
Ma∣humetants
 entertain'd a simple Imagination, that they should be pull'd up to Hea∣ven by their Hair. Nevertheless, the Priests us'd in ancient times to Shave the Hair of their Heads and Beards every eighth day.


The 
Chineses
 also have a strange Opinion of themselves, accounting none equal to them, and looking upon all Affairs of foraign Kingdoms and People as not worthy their knowledge nor description; insomuch, that we find not any one Countrey which they have frequented with their Ships, mention'd in their Histories, when as they are very exact in the describing of those Coun∣tries within their own Dominions: Moreover, all the Names with which they express foraign places are ridiculous, and signifying either 
Barbarians, Slaves,
 or the like, for they never take notice of the proper and true Names of Strangers; as for example, they ridiculously name the 
Iapanners Vocu,
 which by them signi∣fies 
The Countrey of a
 Barba
ian 
Language;
 and the 
Tartars, Nucieu.


All the Northern 
Chinefes,
 or the Inhabitants of the seven Northern Provinces, especially those of the Province of 
Peking,
 are Inferior to those of the Southern Provinces in Learning, Arts, and other Exercises of Ingenuity, but are Valianter and better Soldiers.


In like manner, the Southern 
Chineses
 are very Politick and Civil, and the Northern Rough and Unpolish'd: As for the Inhabitants of the Province of 
Xensi,
 they are very Civil and Courteous, yet they are as dull in Learning as the other Northern 
Chineses.
 Those of the Province of 
Fokien
 are much inclin'd to Riot and Lasciviousness, yet are they Politick, of great Understanding, and subtile in the way of Merchandize, very full of Fraud: They are addicted to Literature, and have many Learned Persons among them; yet they are by the other 
Chineses
 accounted a People of a Salvage cruel Nature, as seeming to have retain'd some of the antique 
Barbarism,
 because they were the last that im∣brac'd the present Laws and Customs of the 
Chineses.


The Inhabitants of the little City 
Vu
iven,
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 are in high credit amongst the 
Chineses
 for their Policy and Understanding; many of them being chosen for Governors and High-priests.


The City 
Xaohing,
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 sends forth the most Ingeni∣ous and best Orators in all 
China;
 insomuch, that there is scarce a Governor but hath one of this City for his Council.


The Inhabitants of the eleventh County 
Vencheufu,
 in the Province of 
Cheki∣ang,
 have been of old much given to the abominable Sin of 
Sodomy,
 which is grown so habitual among them, that neither Law nor shame restrains them from acting it publickly.


Several Mountains lying in the twelfth County of 
Xincheufu,
 in the Pro∣vince
 of 
Huquang,
 are inhabited by Wild and Salvage People call'd 
Vulinman:
 Concerning the Original of these People, the 
Chinese
 Writers give us this fabu∣lous account.


King 
Kaosin
 Warring against a Robber nam'd 
U,
 was driven by him to ut∣most extremity, for the Robbers. Valor and Experience in War was such, that he often Defeated King 
Kaosin,
 and Routed all his Forces; wherefore 
Kaosin
 caus'd to be Proclaim'd amongst his Souldiers, that he would give twenty thou∣sand Ounces of Silver and a City, with his youngest Daughter, to any one that would bring him the General 
U
's Head: While this Edict was in force, King 
Kaosin's
 Dog call'd 
Puonho,
 ran into the Enemies Army, which lay at that time Incamp'd in a Wood, and killing the General 
U,
 brought his Head to the King, who exceedingly rejoyc'd at the Death of so great an Enemy, yet thought himself not oblig'd to perform what the Proclamation had promis'd, as concluding it very unseemly for a Beast to Marry a Woman: Which his Daughter hearing, urg'd the Sacredness of the Edict, and of the King's Word, which ought not to be broke; and thereupon she was Marry'd to the Dog, by whom, in six years time she had six Sons and six Daughters, who by Marrying one another, bred a Generation of Dog-like Natur'd People.


But it is to be suppos'd, that this Fable was feign'd by the 
Chineses,
 because they accounted none to be Humane, which are not of their Countrey, or ob∣serve their Laws.


Yet in the Journal of a 
Monk,
 written in the second Book of 
Navigation and Travels,
 Collected by 
M. Gio Baptista Ramusio,
 we find this for the confirmation of these Dogs.


The 
Tartars
 returning through the Wildernesses, came to a Countrey, in which (as the 
Ruthens,
 which had been there, relate) they found a Generati∣on of Wild Women, who after they had been ask'd by several Interpreters what People they were that Inhabited that Countrey, answer'd, 
That all the Women of that place were of humane shape, but the Men like Dogs:
 And that upon this


occasion, whilst the 
Tartars
 stay'd in this Countrey, the Dogs met together on one side of the River, and leap'd (being Winter) into the Water, and after∣wards roul'd themselves in the Sand, which by the excessive cold, Froze up∣on them, and Arm'd them with a kind of a Coat of Mail: This having done several times together, the 
Tartars
 falling upon them, threw their Darts at them; but the Dogs running amongst the midst of them, made a great slaugh∣ter among them, and drove the 
Tartars
 out of the Countrey, and took Posses∣sion thereof. Thus far 
Baptista.


The Inhabitants of the eighth County 
Taiping,
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 are by a 
Chinese
 Writer call'd 
Barbarians,
 because (having cast off the 
Chinese
 Laws and Government) they go bare-footed like Salvage People, and live without Law, Rule, Order, or Decency, killing one another upon every slight occasion.


Also on the Mountains in the ninth County 
Cuncheufu,
 in the Province of 
Kiangsi,
 there live many wild People, which (according to the Relation of the 
Chinese
 Writers) live after a Salvage and Bestial manner.


Likewise on the Mountains in the Province of 
Queicheu
 inhabit a People, for the most part Wild and untractable, for they observe not the 
Chinese
 Laws or Customs, but live of themselves under several Governors of their own Elections: They often Sally out upon the 
Chineses
 which live near them, sometimes forcing them to a Peace, which at their pleasure they break again, never suffering any that are not for their way of Living to come amongst them.


To reduce this Countrey to Reason, the Emperors have often sent Forces thither, but with little success that ever was heard of.


Those of 
Queiyangfu,
 in the time of the Family 
Taiming,
 first apply'd them∣selves to study the Learning and Customs of the 
Chineses,
 by which means not a few of them have attain'd to the highest degree thereof.


The People of the second County 
Sucheufu,
 of the Province of 
Queicheu
 are strong Limb'd and Valiant, and withal, Courteous and Civil, yet have some∣thing of Wild in their manner of Living; they go with their Hair loose, bare-footed, and the Soles of their Feet have contracted such a hard Cal∣losity, that they fear not to tread on the sharpest Stones, and most prickly Thornes.


Those of the third County, though somewhat of a Salvage Nature, yet they have mix'd therewith a kind of Clownish Civility.


The Mountaineers of the sixth County 
Tungganfu,
 in the Province of 
Quei∣cheu,
 were formerly the most Cruel and Barbarous People in all that Province, Proud of themselves, Fraudulent, and having a Custom among them to kill their old People; but have of late, by their conversing with the other 
Chineses,
 learnt something of Morality.


The City 
Hinghoa,
 in the Province of 
Fokien,
 is famous for the Industrious∣ness of its Inhabitants, in Learning, Arts, and ingenious Faculties.


The Inhabitants of the seventh County 
Yancheufu,
 of the Province of 
Kiang∣nan,
 are much inclin'd to Lasciviousness.


The Northern Mountaineers, as in the County of the Garrison'd City 
Pu∣ting,
 of the Province of 
Queicheu,
 trouble not themselves with Learning, Man∣ners, or Civility, every one doing what they please, living without Laws or Go∣vernment.


The Inhabitants of the Mountain near the Garrison'd City 
Lungli
 have by their Conversing with the neighboring 
Chineses
 learn'd several of their Customs; yet going always Arm'd delight in War and the noise of Arms.


Those of the Province of 
Kiangsi
 are politick and subtle, and many of them attain to the highest degree of Literature, and thereby are rais'd to great Pre∣ferments.


The Inhabitants of the City 
Sucheu
 in the Province of 
Nanking,
 are exceed∣ingly inclin'd to dainty and delicious Fare, and love the Art of Candying and Preserving in Sugar.


All the Inhabitants of the ninth County 
Ningpofu
 in the Province of 
Chekiang,
 are great lovers of salt Meats, whereupon this proverbial Sentence passes upon them, 
That they cannot rot after Death, being so much sa
ted during Life.


The People of the Province of 
Iunnan,
 by reason of their Neighborhood to 
India,
 participate with them in their Customs; and the main thing wherein they differ from the rest of the 
Chineses
 is this, namely, that whereas in all parts of 
China
 besides they Lock their Women up in their Houses, and suffer them not to be spoken with or seen by any Man, or ever to come out of their Houses into the Streets, here the Women walk abroad upon their occasions as in 
Eu∣rope.
 They exceed the rest of the 
Chineses
 in Courage and Valour, being ne∣ver daunted at the Engaging of an Enemy, and training up their Elephants to War. They are friendly, Courteous, and Civil to Strangers, and more tracta∣ble to embrace the 
Christian
 Religion than any of the 
Chineses
 besides.


On the North-side of the fourth County 
Cuihungfu
 in the Province of 
Iun∣nan,
 before the 
Tartars
 coming into 
China
 in the time of the Family 
Iuen,
 dwelt a People call'd 
Kinchi,
 that is, 
Golden-Teeth,
 because they us'd to cover their Teeth with thin Plates of Gold; which is also a Custom amongst those of the eighth Garrison'd City in the same Province.


The Inhabitants of the twelfth County 
Xunningfu
 in the same Province, are very barbarous and inhumane; some of them take pleasure to make their Teeth black; others Paint several Images on their Faces, rubbing in their Skin, first pierc'd with a Needle, a kind of black Colour.


The Inhabitants of the first Garrison'd City 
Kiocing
 of the same Province, are good Husband-men, but very litigious, often spending in Law that which they have labour'd for the whole year, and all for a trifle; yet they are not the onely People possess'd with this fond humor, but may be paralell'd in this Nation, especially in some parts of 
Wales.


The People of the second Garrison'd City 
Yaogan,
 in the same Province, are (according to the 
Chinese
 Writers) prodigiously strong, and therefore delight more in War than Peace.


The Inhabitants of the third Garrison'd City 
Cioking
 in the same Province, are valiant, prudent, and stout People; they Fight generally with Bowes and Arrows.


Though the Inhabitants of the sixth Garrison'd City 
Likiang,
 Extracted from the ancient'st Inhabitants of 
China,
 do not fully observe the 
Chinese
 Laws, be∣cause of their nearness to other People, whose Customs they have learn'd, yet nevertheless they partly observe those of the 
Chineses:
 They are very much ad∣dicted to Drinking and Jollity, spending whole Days and Nights in Singing, Dancing and Revelling; they are good Horsemen, and use Bowes and Ar∣rows.


It is scarce to be believ'd, how strictly the Women (I mean those of high


Quality, for the ordinary Women walk the Streets) are kept through all 
China,
 from the natural jealousie of the People: Their Residences are made after such a manner, that they cannot see nor be seen by others: They are seldom permitted to go out, except on extraordinary occasions, and are carry'd in Sedans made for that purpose, and so closely shut, that there is not the least Crevise through which they may be seen. Moreover, they spend their time in breeding little Dogs, Birds, and the like.






Characters and Languages.


THe 
Chineses
 have no Letters like the People of 
Europe,
 and other parts of the World, which any way agree in a certain Order or Rule of an Al∣phabet, neither have they any such thing as Vowels and Consonants, or other Literals that can be joyn'd to make Words of; but they have Cha∣racters, Signs, or Images, or what you please to name them, in stead of the Letters of the Alphabet, for every Word or Name which they speak hath a certain Figure or Character, by which it is express'd: This Figure consists in Strokes and Specks, which as they differ in shape, so in signification one from another; they are joyn'd without Art or Method, as it were by accident ex∣pressing the Name or Thing which they design: Therefore the 
Chineses
 use as many Figures or Characters as there are Things which they would express.


The 
Chineses
 (saith 
Trigaut
) express not with any Letters of the Alphabet their Language in Writing, as almost all other People on the Earth, but draw as many Figures or Characters as there are Words and Things to signifie; so that if any one would Translate a Dictionary out of 
English
 into their Language, he would need as many several Characters as there are Words. As to what concerns the number of these Characters, though according to the greatness of any Sub∣ject, the more of them are requir'd, yet they have brought them all within the compass of seventy or eighty thousand; all which stand written in order in a Book call'd 
Haipien:
 besides which there is another much shorter (which teaches to Read, Write, and Understand their Books) which at most contains not above eight or ten thousand. If in their Reading they chance to meet with a Word which they understand not, then they turn to their great Dictionary, like one who learns the 
Latine
 or 
French
 Tongue; by which we may conclude, that the more Characters the 
Chineses
 know, the more Learned they are accounted: therefore it must be one of an exceeding Memory, that will be reckon'd a Scho∣lar amongst them.


Kircher
 tells us, That at this day none are accounted amongst the number of the eminently Learned, which have not attain'd to the perfect knowledge of eighty thousand Characters, though any one that will learn to speak the Lan∣guage hath enough of ten thousand: Neither do the 
Chineses
 themselves know all these Characters, the vulgar Person learning no more than he thinks may serve him in his way of Trading.


In like manner saith 
Trigaut,
 He that knows ten thousand Characters, hath obtain'd those which are commonly us'd in Writing.


Martinius
 makes the learning of the 
Chinese
 Characters so hard, that to know them throughly requires a whole Age, for he affirms, that he spent ten years in the learning of them, and yet at the expiration of that time, he had attain'd no farther knowledge of them, than to understand a small Prayer-Book.


It is strange to consider, that the 
Chineses
 make the great distinction of their


vast number of Characters by no more than nine Specks, by adding or leaving out any of which, another signification is produc'd: As for Exaample, one straight Stroke thus—signifies 
One;
 the same Stroke, cut through with ano∣ther like a Cross in this manner † signifies 
Tzi,
 or 
Ten;
 another being added to the bottom of the Cross † signifies 
Thou,
 or 
Earth;
 and with a third on the top † 
Vam,
 that is, 
King;
 one Speck being added on the left-side of the uppermost Stroke † signifies 
Iu,
 or 
Gu,
 that is, 
A Pearl;
 and so all kinds of Minerals, Plants, Animals, 
&c.
 are 
 by the different position of Specks and Lines.


But this Rule, saith 
Semedo,
 is not always certain▪ for the 
Chineses
 not onely joyn several Lines 
nto one Figure, but make divers of their Significations by joyning two or more whole Figures together; so that a square Figure which signifies 
 
Sun,
 joyn'd to another, signifies the 
Moon,
 and being added to a third of the same form, expresses 
Min,
 that is, 
:
 To signifie a 
Door
 they draw a Figure like it, which they call 
Muen;
 and to signifie the 
Heart,
 a Figure like a 
Heart:
 To express 
Melancholy,
 or 
Sadness,
 the
 put the Character which expresses a 
Heart
 in the middle of that of a 
Door,
 as if the Heart found it self oppress'd in the entrance of a narrow Door: And because Sorrow hath its seat in the Heart, they always add the Figure of a 
Heart
 to all those Characters with which they express any kind of sorrowful Object or Consideration.


These Characters are generally us'd, not onely in 
ll the fifteen Provinces of the whole Empire of 
China,
 but also in 
Iapan, Corea, Cochinchina, Tungking, Camboya,
 and 
Sionei,
 though every Countrey hath a peculiar Language. By this means the 
Iapanners, Cochin-Chineses, Chineses, Coreans,
 and 
Tungkingans,
 can under∣stand one anothers Books, as being all written in the fore-mention'd Chara∣cters; yet cannot speak with, nor understand one another: In like manner as the Figures of 
Arithmetick
 are us'd all 
Europe
 over, and understood by all the se∣veral Nations thereof, yet the words with which they are express'd differ very much; for these 
Chinese
 Characters are signs of th
 things which they signifie, and are by all in general understood: therefore it is one thing to know the 
Chinese
 Characters, and another to speak their Language; insomuch that a Foreigner endu'd with a great Memory, may by often reading the 
Chinese
 Books, attain to the highest degree of their Learning, though he cannot Dis∣course with, nor understand them.


These 
Chinese
 Characters seem to be of the same Original with the People themselves; for (according to some of their ancient Histories) they have been in use amongst them three thousand seven hundred and thirty years. Many ascribe the first Invention of them to the Emperor 
Fohi,
 who 
 to Reign 
Anno
 2952. before the 
Incarnation,
 and (according to 
Kircher
) three hundred years before the 
Flood.
 But it is to be observ'd, that the old 
Chinese
 Characters differ'd much from the modern; for the first 
Chineses
 took not their significations from joint Figures, but, from the representation of natural things, as Birds, Beasts, In∣sects, Fishes, Herbs, Trees, Minerals, and the like; 
y which, put in order, and joyn'd several ways, the 
Chineses
 at first declar'd their Thoughts and Appre∣hensions.


When they treated of fiery things, they us'd 
 and Dragons, which being plac'd in several orders, had such and such significations; and in ex∣pressing aerial things, they made Figures of Birds; and for watry, Fishes; for earthly things▪ Beasts, Plants, Trees and Leaves; for Stars, Specks and Cir∣cles; and in like manner for things of another nature.


The forms of the ancient 
Chinese
 Characters were of seventeen sorts: The first, invented by the Emperor 
Fohi,
 consisted (according to their Chronicles) of Serpents and Dragons; wherefore the Book which he writ of 
Astronomy
 is call'd 
The Book of Dragons:
 In it are Serpents strangely twisted together, and in several forms, after the manner of those things which they signifie there∣with: But at this day few 
Chineses
 understand these Characters, Age having worn out the knowledge of them.


The second sort are taken from 
 belonging to Hu
bandry, joyn'd to∣gether, and were first us'd by the Emperor 
Xin,
 in his Book of 
Agriculture,
 or Husbandry.


The third sort consists in the placing of several Feathers of the Bird 
Tunghoa∣hang,
 which is by them accounted the best Bird that flies. It is said that the Emperor 
Xanghoang
 us'd the
e Characters in his Book of Birds.


The fourth sort consists of Shell-fishes and Insects.


The fifth, of Roots and 
erbs.


The sixth, of the Feet of Birds, which the Emperor 
Choanghang
 us'd.


The seventh, being an Invention of the Emperor 
Iao,
 consists of Turtles.


The eighth, of Fowls.


The ninth and tenth, of Herbs.


The eleventh, of Representations of the Planets.


The twelfth and thirteenth were formerly call'd 
The useful Characters of Laws and Constitutions.


The fourteenth consist of Characters expressing Rest, Joy, Knowledge, Light, and Darkness.


The fifteenth, of Fishing.


The sixteenth cannot be read nor understood.


The seventeenth and l
st sort was us'd for Superscriptions on Letters, Deeds, Bonds, and the like.


But the modern 
Chineses
 grown wiser by Experience, and finding a great confusion and trouble in the representing of so many Beasts, Plants, 
&c.
) in∣vented a far shorter way of joyning Specks and Lines together.


THe Language of the 
Chineses
 is, for its antiquity, by many accounted for
 one of the seventy two Tongues of the Tower of 
Babel:
 But certain it is (according to the testimony of their Books) that it hath been in being for three thousand six hundred years. It is not all one, but differing in the several Kingdoms or Provinces which now make up that Empire.


Trigaut
 tells us, that 
very Province differs so much from another in their Language, that they 
 understand one another, notwithstanding they use the same Books 
 Characters.


The Inhabitants of the County 
Taipin
 in the Province of 
Quangsi,
 speak quite another Language from the 
Chineses.


In like manner those of the seventh County 
Lipingfu
 of the Province of 
Queicheu,
 speak a different Language, altogether unknown to the other 
Chi∣neses.


In the Province of 
Fokien
 the Inhabitants use not one Dialect but every County hath a peculiar Speech, insomuch that the one cannot understand the other.


Those of the Province of 
Fokien,
 who speak a gross and ungraceful Language, use in stead of 
N
 the Letter 
 for 
Nanking
 is by them call'd 
Lanking;
 the Suburbs


of 
Hoksieu
 or 
Focheu, Lanthai;
 which the 
Portuguese
 and 
Hollanders,
 with whom they Trade, have follow'd.


Those of the second County 
Sucheufu
 in the Province of 
Queicheu,
 knew no∣thing of any Letters formerly, though they express'd themselves by writing Figures on Boards, but have lately learn'd the vulgar Characters.


Besides the several Dialects belonging properly to each Province, after the reducing of them to one sole Empire, another Language was instituted, which was made common through the whole Realm. This Language is by the 
Chineses
 nam'd 
Quonhoa
 or 
Quonthoa,
 that is, 
Court,
 or 
Pleading Tongue;
 because it is most us'd at Court, by the 
Mandarins,
 Governors and Magistrates: It is also known by the Name of 
The Mandarins Language,
 but is least of all us'd in the Province of 
Fokien.
 This was done, because it hapned oftentimes that all the Magistrates were Foreigners or Strangers in the Province, where by the Emperors Order they were plac'd, and that they might not be necessitated to learn a strange Language, there was a general one Instituted in the whole Empire.


In this Language they not onely try Causes, but all well bred People or Strangers speak the same with the Natives in every Province, in the same man∣ner as the 
English, French, Italians, Germans,
 and other People use the 
Latine
 Tongue through all 
Europe.


The 
Iesuits
 which are sent to 
China
 to promulgate the 
Christian
 Religion, learn all of them this general Language, because those which belong'd to each se∣veral Province are neither useful nor elegant, nor spoken by People of Qua∣lity, except in their Houses to their Servants, or in other Countreys, thereby to put them in mind of their Native Countrey. This Language is also spoken by Women and Children, because long custom hath conquer'd the difficulty of learning it. Tradesmen speak the Language of their own Province; and though they all understand the 
Mandarins
 Tongue, yet they speak it not.


This general 
Chinese
 Tongue is very brief and short, and though rich and abounding in Characters above all other Languages, yet inferior to them in scarcity of words; for the number of the words exceed not sixteen hundred, and according to 
Semedo,
 not above three hundred twenty six. All the words end almost in a Vowel, yet some few of them with 
M
 or 
N;
 and (which is re∣markable in this Language) there are no Dissyllables or Polysyllables, but all Monosyllables, or words consisting of one syllable onely, I mean all radical and fundamental words, for Appellatives or Names of Places and Things, are compounded of two or three words clapt together, as 
Tunghoafung
 of 
Fung,
 a Bird, 
Hoa
 a Flower, and 
Tung
 the Name of the Flower: and herein it is para∣lell'd even by our 
English
 Tongue, whose fundamental words being originally 
Saxon,
 are for the most part Monosyllable, as 
Tree, Stone, Hand, Eye,
 &c. It hath many Diphthongs, or double Vowels joyn'd together in one syllable, I say Vow∣els after our way of speaking, meaning the force of Vowels; for Vowels are no us'd by the 
Chineses,
 but as every thing, so every word hath its peculiar Sign: wherefore▪ it may be ask'd, Are there so many Signs in so small a number of words as the 
Chineses
 
? or, How can they with so few words express all things which their thoughts comprehend? In answer hereof I say, That the 
Chinese
 Language is very comprehensive, that is to say, it hath few words, but oftentimes one word signifies ten or twenty several things, which are not to be distinguish'd but by the different sound and pronunciation in speaking, which distinction is so small, that Strangers 
an scarce observe the same; insomuch


that one might say, this Language was rather Artificially invented, than Na∣turally proceeding from the necessity of Discourse; therefore they that will rightly understand the sense of the words, had need be as attentive to the Tone in Speaking, as the Accent in Writing.


To make the 
Chinese
 Tongue the easier, (for it is very hard to learn) the 
Iesu∣its
 have from the Method of Musical Notes, as 
Ut, Re, Mi, Fa, Sol,
 taught to know the high and low Sounds which the 
Chineses
 observe in their Speaking: To this purpose 
Iacob Pantoja
 first found out these five Signs, which written over the 
Chinese
 words after the 
European
 manner, are thus express'd 
. And by these five Marks of Sound, Foraigners learn the Language, though not without great Pains and Study; partly, because of the manifold Characters of the words, and partly, by reason of the difficulty of hitting upon the several Tones or Sounds.


The first Sign of the five Sounds or Tones mark'd thus 
, agrees with 
Ut
 in Musick; and the Sound or Pronounciation is in the 
Chinese
 Tongue call'd 
Cho Pim,
 as if they would say, 
The first agreeable Tone.
 The second Sign 
 agrees with 
Re,
 in 
Chinese
 call'd 
Pim Xim,
 that is, 
A clear and even Voice.
 The third Sign 
 agrees with 
Mi;
 this Sound in 
Chinese
 is call'd 
Xam Xim,
 that is, 
High Voice.
 The fourth Sign 
 agrees with 
Fa,
 and is by the 
Chineses
 nam'd, 
Kiu Xim,
 that is, 
High Voice of the Goer.
 The fifth U agrees with 
Sol,
 and is by the 
Chineses
 call'd 
Ge Xim,
 that is, 
Proper Voice of the Enterer.


According as any word written in 
European
 Letters is mark'd with these Signs, it must be utter'd in a different Voice or Sound, as it is written by the 
Chi∣neses
 with several Characters, and hath also there its several significations: As for example, the word 
Ia,
 written with 
European
 Letters, according as it is mark'd with any' of the five Signs, signifies several things, and must also be ut∣ter'd with a difference of Sounds; for the Word or Syllable 
Iâ,
 with this Sign 
 signifies 
A Tooth; Iā
 with a strait Stroke, 
A Voice; Ià
 with a sloaping Stroke towards the Left, 
Excellent; Iá
 with a sloaping Stroke towards the Right, 
A Deafness; Iă
 with a Semi-Circle, 
He Goes.


In like manner, the Syllable 
Ko,
 is by the 
Chineses
 Ton'd ten several ways, and each Tone hath a peculiar signification; as also, each signification a pecu∣liar Mark, whereby it is distinguish'd from the other; so that no Language in the whole world is so Univocal or containing so many several meanings under one word as the 
Chinese;
 and the Marks that distinguish the significations of a word by the Accent, are so many, that the difference of Sound can scarce be discern'd in all; insomuch, that not any one Book can be understood from a Reader by the Auditor, an Ocular Inspection being absolutely necessary to di∣stinguish by the Marks the difference of the Sound, and by consequence, the double sense of the words, which cannot be distinguish'd by the Ear; nay, that which is more, it often happens in their Speaking, that when one cannot understand the others sense, notwithstanding he speaks plain and distinctly, he is not only necessitated to repeat his Discourse, but also to write it; and if they chance not to have Pen or Paper, they do it with Water on a Table, or with their Fingers in the Air, or express the meaning with the Hand of the Auditor: This happens most amongst the Learned and Eloquent part of the People, who study to speak more exact and quai
t than ordinary, according as they write in their Books.


The reason of the Univocalness of this Language seems to proceed from no∣thing else, but that these People from 
ll Ages have endeavour'd more to write


well than speak well, because their best Language to this day consists in Wri∣ting and not in Speaking; therefore it also happens, that Messages are not deli∣ver'd by word of Mouth, but in Writing, though it be in one and the same City; for though this Language be very scanty of words, nevertheless, it is the pleasing∣est and most ingenious of all others; for whereas in any action we cannot express the manner of doing but in several words, the 
Chineses
 often comprehend it in one word: As for example, the word 
Nien,
 among them signifies 
Taking hold with two Fingers;
 Tzo, 
Taking hold with all the Fingers:
 In like manner, we make several uses of the word 
Are,
 when we say 
They are a Bed, are at Table, are at the Tavern;
 but the 
Chineses
 express the being and manner of being in one word; we also say, 
The Foot of a Man, the Foot of a Bird, the Foot of a Beast,
 never omit∣ting to add the word 
Foot:
 But the 
Chineses
 to express the Foot of a Man, say, 
Kio,
 that of a Bird, 
Cua,
 that of a four footed Beast 
Thi.


The 
Chineses,
 considering they have no Alphabet, are accustom'd from their Infancy to express themselves by this way of sign'd Sounds, and very much wonder how we of 
Europe
 can write down their Words in 
Latin
 Letters, and pronounce the
 so plainly.


They use not the Sound of the Letter 
R.
 which they cannot Pronounce, nor ever put two Consonants together, without a Vowel between; so that to this day they call the 
Franks, Falankes,
 by whom perhaps, they, as well as the 
Moors,
 understand all the People of 
Europe,
 except the 
Greeks.


A
 for the Language of the 
Tartars
 it is much easier to learn, seeming in some measure to agree with the 
Persian,
 and having some Characters or Letters like the 
Arabick.


The Alphabet of this Language is said to consist of sixty several Letters, which may the rather be, because some of them have the force of Consonant and Vowel joyn'd in one, as 
La, Le, Li, Lo, Lu; Pa, Pe, Pi, Po, Pu.


In Reading they descend down-wards like the 
Chineses,
 and proceed from the Right to the Left side, as anciently the 
Hebrews
 and other Easterly Nations, and at this day the 
Arabians
 and 
Chineses.




FINIS.










CHINA AIMOEY QUEMOEY


On these Islands which are now becom a Kingdom used the famous Pyrates: Yquen & Kocksinga to Resort


map








IMPERIUM SINICUM Quindicupartitum


Imperium Sinicum
 in XV Regna seu Provincias distributum una cum genuino situ Vrbium Metropolitanarum, Montium, Fluminum, Lacum, caeterarum∣que rerum consideratione dignarum.


map of China and Korea



































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































































