An Exact journal of the seige of Lymerick from the 8th to the 15th of September, 1691 / from an officer in the camp to his friend in London.
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A38921




Wing E3647



ESTC R32792





ocm 12755181




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
An Exact journal of the seige of Lymerick from the 8th to the 15th of September, 1691 / from an officer in the camp to his friend in London.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


London :


Printed for Abraham Mason ...,


1691.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Ireland --  History --  War of 1689-1691 --  Campaigns.
Limerick (Limerick, Ireland) --  History --  Siege, 1691.
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-10
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2012-10
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






E3647


R32792


12755181


93399












An Exact JOURNAL OF THE Siege of Lymerick, From the 
8th
 to the 
15th
 of 
September,
 1691.


From an Officer in the Camp, to his Friend in 
London.


ON the Ninth, about Two in the Afternoon the Enemy came out, and appeared as if they intended a Sally, but design∣ed only to secure a Ditch that lay betwixt them and our Batteries, which was no sooner known, but our Men marcht down upon them, and beat them back into the Town, killing about 30, with the loss only of one Granadeer: All this day our Guns and Mortars plaid furiously on the Town, and so continued all Night without intermission; On the 
12th,
 in the Morning early came over to us one Captain 
Dobbins,
 who says, That yesterday in beating the Enemy into the Town we killed two of their Majors, and one of our Bombs killed Monsieur 
La Four,
 who was Brother to the Governour, and that the Governour and Officers, to keep up the Hearts of the Town and Garison, assure them, that the 
French
 Fleet have totally beat the 
English
 and 
Dutch,
 and forced those 
En∣glish
 Vessels with Captain 
Cole
 into the 
Shannon,
 but that day, or within 48 hours a Squadron of 
French
 would come into the River to their Relief, and wholly destroy the 
English,
 &c.


That the Garison Consisted of about 15000, of which but 7 or 8000 were well armed, and had no Horse, nor did any Horse come there in the Night to Guard. All this day we con∣tinued Firing, and about Six and Night the Town appear∣ed on Fire, in many places; to prevent its spreading, the Enemy blew up Divers Houses and Buildings, notwithstanding which, some very Considerable Place continued burning with great violence un∣til Two the next Morning.


The 
11th
 in the Morning came to the General, some Officers of 
Cunningham
's Regiment Col. 
Echlin,
 of the loss of their Coll. and to pray the General's Favour to have the Regiment: The said Coll, Sir 
Albert Cunningham
's Regiment being detached from the Camp to join the Forces for the reducing of 
Sligo,
 and he staying after them, did follow with Ten Men only as a Guard. In their March, upon the Hills near 
Boyle,
 they unhappily mistook their way in a Fogg, and fell into the Hands of 2 or 300 
Rapparees,
 to whom they sold their Lives at the utmost Rate, killing about 25, but were at last over∣pour'd,

and cut in pieces, whose Blood was soon reveng'd by 
Bal∣derick O Donnel,
 who was in hearing of the Guns, but came too late to save the Brave Coll. however he kill'd many of them, and Routed the rest: We continued to batter and Bomb the Town all this day and all night.


The 
12th,
 Last night and this day we continued firing into the Town without Intermission. This Morning came to us Ten Dragoons and an Officer, Deserters, who say, That in the great Fire that was in the Town on the Tenth at night, the Bombs set Fire to Three Magazines; one of Powder, which in blowing up, set Fire unto, and burnt great part of the 
English Town,
 and much o∣ther Mischiefs, the other two of Beef, Bisket, Oates, Brandy and Wine, which was all destroy'd, and would be soon wanted a∣mongst them.


The Weather hitherto continues very good; the Breach in the Wall is very wide, and is every moment wider: Our Guns con∣tinually firing thereat, which gives us hopes of being Masters there∣of in a very few days, above half the Town being already ruin'd with our Ball, Bombs, Carcasses, 
&c.
 Our Men are Impatient to Storm, but when it will be we know not, all things being kept secret until put in Action.


The 
13th.
 the General sent an Express to the Queen, and we con∣tinued all day to Batter the Town.


The 
14th
 the General sent two Regiments towards 
Clonmell
 and 
Waterford
 to reinforce the Militia, there being many Prisoners at the latter, and the 
Irish
 in those parts become Insolent. His Excellency hath also sent Miners and Guards to support them, with Orders to blow up and demolish Castle 
Connell
 and the other Castles we have taken near 
Lymerick
 on the 
Shannon,
 and elsewhere, to prevent their being any more Nests of Rebels, Raparees, 
&c.


The 
15th
 we continued to Bomb and Batter the Town, and made the Breaches so wide that we plainly see into the Town, which looks ruinous. The Enemy have made much Sod-works, and a very deep Trench or Ditch with Pallisadoes and Stockadoes, yet the Men con∣tinue impatient to storm, they hoping to have had Orders to have made this night a general Assault, but as yet hear nothing thereof, though some think the Camp are ready for the work in all points.


Dublin
 the 
17th.
 This night was Published a Proclamation of the Lords Justices for a full and free Pardon to all Raparees and others in Arms against the Government, provided they come in and lay down their Arms in 20 days, otherwise to be excluded from Mercy, and not only leave given for any Person to kill them, but a reward of 40 
s.
 for each Head brought in, Which shall immediately be paid by the next Justice of Peace, and the publick Revenue to reimburse it, which it's thought will be an effectual way to clear the whole King∣dom, and prove more advantageous than droves of Cattel to the Raparee Hunters.












Licensed,


September 
the 24th,
 1691.
 
J.F.




LONDON:
 Printed for 
Abraham Mason
 near 
Temple-Bar,
 1691









