An exact journal of the engagement between the English fleet and the French from May the 18th to the 25th, 1692.
Approx. 9 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A38920




Wing E3645



ESTC R36398





ocm 15687168




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
An exact journal of the engagement between the English fleet and the French from May the 18th to the 25th, 1692.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


London :


Printed for Richard Baldwin ...,


1692.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
La Hogue, Battle of, France, 1692.
Great Britain --  History, Naval --  Stuarts, 1603-1714.
France --  History, Military --  1643-1715.
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-10
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2012-10
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






E3645


R36398


15687168


104371












An Exact JOURNAL OF THE ENGAGEMENT Between the 
English Fleet and the French
 From 
May
 the 18
th
. to the 25
th
. 1692.


May
 18. ABOUT nine a Clock this Morn∣ing, the Admiral, with the whole Fleet weighed, being all at An∣chor off 
Dunnose
 with the Wind at W. S. W. and S. W. by W. stood over to the French Coast all night, 
&c.


May
 19. This Morning at day-light, the Wind W. S. W. and W. by S. we dis∣covered the French Fleet a great way to Windward, signal was made for our draw∣ing into the Line of Battel, and about nine a Clock the French began to bear down, 
Tourville
 himself, with a great deal of Bravery singled out our Admiral; and was received with more than equal Cou∣rage: At Eleven, the French being got pretty near, 
Tourville
 himself being brought to within less that Musquet Shot of Ad∣miral 
Russel,
 which was admired in general both by the English and Dutch, that the French Admiral, being so small a Fleet, should so Resolutely attack outs, being so much Superior to his in number, for the French Line spreading but little farther a Head or a Stern than the Red Squadron, we could not well construe the meaning of their vigorously falling upon that Squa∣dron, the Dutch and the Blue having little or no share in the Fight, but in less than a quarter of an Hours time there was no∣thing to be seen but a Terrible Smoak and Fire that darkened all the Air, so that none could perceive a Cables length from their Ships, which was accompanied with a continual Thunder of Guns for four Hours, the Firing being smart on both sides, from Eleven till Three; but the French Admiral finding the English too hot for him, and his Main Top Sail Yard being Shot, about Five a clock he got his Main Tack on Board, and it proving little Wind he towed off, and endeavoured to get out of the way and reach of our Mischievous English Guns: His Example was followed by the rest of the French Fleet, but about Six or Seven of the Clock the Wind shifted to the Eastward, they fell in amongst the Blue, some of which Squadron, together with Sir 
Cloudsley Shovell,
 had a very hot dispute with them till near Eleven a Clock, the French fighting their way through, and it being but little Wind, we stood till night after them, and at Ten a Clock at night we saw some Ships Blown up.


May
 20. All last night we continued the Chase, and the Wind this Morning having shifted to the Westward, the French were again got to the Windward, they Plying and we after them; at Five in the Afternoon they Anchored, and we did the same, 
Cape de Hogue
 bearing W. S. W. about seven Leagues distant, and a prodi∣gious strong Tide running at Eleven this Night, we weighed and plied to Wind∣ward all night.


May
 21. This Morning part of the French Fleet run in at the Race of 
Alderney,
 the rest plying to Windward, and Anchored to the Westward of it. Sir 
John Ashby
 and some of the English Windward, most Ships Anchored after the French; Admiral 
Russell
 and the Fleet with him Cut, and followed some Ships of the French, that drove out of the Race again, their Anchors not being able to bring them up against so strong a Tide; the Admiral left Sir 
Ralph Delavall
 with some Ships, to destroy part of the French Fleet that were run into 
Cherburg,
 whilst he himself followed others into 
La Hogue.


May
 22. Sir 
John Ashby,
 and the Ships with him, not being able to get up with the Ships he chased, only one Fire Ship which was taken yesterday in the Evening, the French having this Morning borne away among the Islands of 
Alderney, Jersey


and 
Guernsey,
 and the Rocks, Sir 
John
 and the rest bore away to the Admiral and Sir 
Ralph,
 with the Fire-Ships and Boats with him (having first sent ashore a Flag of Truce to give the French warning, to take their Men both Well and Wounded out of their Ships) burnt three of their Ca∣pital Ships, one of them the 
Soleil Royal,
 the French refusing to take their Men ashore, great part of them were Burnt and Blown up.


May
 23. This Morning Sir 
John Ashby,
 Sir 
Ralph Delaval
 and the 
Dutch,
 Joyned the General and the Ships with him, who Anchored off 
La Hogue;
 and there all the rest of the 
French
 Men of War that were drove out of the Race, were close into the Shoar, which the Admiral design'd to Burn and Destroy, having ordered Vice Admiral 
Rooke
 with a Detachment of some of the Third and Fourth Rates to go in with six Fire ships, and all the Pinnaces and Long boats of the Fleet. About Six a Clock they were got into the Shore, and our Ships Fired at their Ships and Forts that were there, but could not get in; so the Boats attempted to tow in the Fire-ships, but finding the busi∣ness might be done without burning the fire ships, the Boats only went in, and about Nine a Clock set on Fire the first Ship, which was by it self, and set on Fire 
 Five more that Night, which made the most extraordinary Bonfire that ever was seen, five of them being three Deck'd Ships, and it being in the Night, was seen to all the Advantage imaginable, the Smoak and Fire, together with the Guns Firing and Ships Blowing up, being Pro∣digious: The Earl of 
Danby
 signaliz'd him∣self by going in the Headmost Boat, and going on Board three of their biggest Ships and Burning them.


May
 24. All this day the Boats continu∣ed to Burn the 
French
 Ships in the Shore, and Burn'd Eight Men of War more, of which there were not above four small Ships of Forty or Fifty Guns, all the rest of a Hundred or Eighty Guns, besides a great many Merchant Ships and small Craft, and their Magazine of Powder Blowing up a Shore. There never was so many fine Ships destroyed at one time, nor so terrible a Light for People to be∣hold on their own Coast: And about Twelve a Clock at Noon, the Vice-Ad∣miral with all the Ships and Boats came off again into the Fleet, having left all the Enemies Ships on a Flame, and a great Army to be Spectators, there being drawn down about Thirty thousand Men, Commanded by 
Belfont,
 King 
James
 be∣ing there to see all the Transactions.


In all we lost not one Man of War; some Fire ships were burn'd without do∣ing Execution, some by Accident; and we cannot find that any Officers are Kill'd besides Rear-Admiral 
Carter
 and Colonel 
Hastings,
 Captain 
Graydon
 is said to be Dead, but of that no Certainty.


The 
French
 have lost 
Gabaret
 their Ad∣miral of the 
Blew,
 Ship and all in the Fight Burn'd, and one Captain 
Decombe,
 who was Captain of the 
Illustrious,
 a Ship of Seventy Guns Burnt: 
Tourville
's Nephew is thought to be Killed also; what Damage they im∣mediately received in the Fight, is not as yet known: But upon the whole matter, there never was so great a Victory obtained at Sea in so short a time, and I hope it is a presage for a future Success.


May
 25. This Morning the Wind at East and by South, and 
E. S. E.
 the Ad∣miral and the Fleet Sailed and Steered a∣way 
N. E.
 by 
N.
 and 
N.
 by 
E.
 for 
Eng∣land.










ADVERTISEMENT.


TRuth brought to Light: Or the History of the First 
14
 Years of King 
James I.
 In Four Parts. 
I.
 The happy State of 
England
 at His Majesty's Entrance; The Corruption of it afterwards. With the Rise of particular Favourites, and the Divisions between this and other States abroad. 
II.
 The Divorce be∣twixt the Lady 
Frances Howard
 and 
Robert
 Earl of 
Essex,
 before the King's Delegates, Authorised under the King's Broad Seal: As also the Arraignment of Sir 
Jer. Ellis,
 Lieu∣tenant of the 
Tower, &c.
 about the Murther of Sir 
Tho. Overbury,
 with all Proceedings thereupon, and the King's Gracious Pardon and Favour to the Countess. 
III.
 A Declaration of His Majesty's Revenue since he came to the Crown of 
England;
 With the Annual Issues, Gifts, Pensions, and extraordinary Disburst∣ments. 
IV.
 The Commissions and Warrants for the burning of two Hereticks, newly revi∣ved, with two Pardons, one for 
Theophilus Higgins,
 the other for Sir 
Eustace Hart.
 Sold by 
Richard Baldwin.






LONDON,
 Printed for 
Richard Baldwin,
 near the 
Oxford
 Arms in 
Warwick-Lane,
 1692.









