An Exact relation of the glorious victory obtain'd upon the French and Irish army before London-Derry, on Sunday, June the 2d, 1689 with an account of Major-General Kirk's arrival at London-Derry, and the number of ships under his command.
Approx. 9 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A38952




Wing E3689



ESTC R40584





ocm 19370433




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
An Exact relation of the glorious victory obtain'd upon the French and Irish army before London-Derry, on Sunday, June the 2d, 1689 with an account of Major-General Kirk's arrival at London-Derry, and the number of ships under his command.
2 p.   


London :


Printed for Richard Baldwin ...,


MDCLXXXIX [1689]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Kirke, Percy, 1646?-1691.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702.
Ireland --  History --  1660-1690.
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-04
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2013-04
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






E3689


R40584


19370433


108807












An Exact Relation of the GLORIOUS VICTORY Obtain'd upon the French and Irish Army BEFORE LONDON-DERRY, On 
Sunday, June
 the 2d, 1689. WITH An Account of Major-General 
KIRK
's Arrival at 
London-Derry,
 and the Number of Ships under his Command.




Lisenced and Entred according to Order.




THE Letters from 
Dublin
 say, That all Artifices are used to bring over the Prote∣stants, to espouse the late King's Interest, but they are ineffectual, which is evident, for that there are in 
Ireland
 many thousand Prote∣stants, of which a great number are able to bear Arms, and amongst them very many good Officers; yet hath not the late King since his Arrival in that Kingdom, with all his gilded offers of Protection, and Liberty of Conscience, been able to prevail with Twenty Men of the Reformed Religion, to take up Arms for Defence of his Popish Cause, or assist to enslave their Posterities.


The 
French
 already behave themselves with that haughty Insolence in the Court, Camp, and Coun∣trey, as if they were entering on the Meritorious Service (as at home) of Dragooning the defence∣less Protestants, and Lording it over the Native 
Irish,
 insomuch, that their Biggotry and Loyalty begins to stagger, and the wiser and wealthier of them think they are assisting a Fatal Work to their Posterity, and Countrey, wishing themselves under a Protestant Protection again; the godly Monsieur stick not to say publickly, that 
Ireland
 cannot be blessed until there is not one damned Heretick left a∣live in the Kingdom.


Upon a modest Calculation, the Papist Army and Mobile, together, have already despoiled the Prote∣stants of their personal Estates in Money, Plate, Stock, and Houshould-Goods, to the value of more than five hundred thousand Pounds Sterling; and the Commissioners appointed in each County for Se∣questrations, have sequestred more than five hun∣dred thousand Pounds 
per Annum
 of their real E∣states, and are proceeding therein.


And Orders are given for the seizing to the use of the late King what remains unplundered in the Hou∣ses of all Protestants Absenters; and the pretended House of Commons have unanimously voted the Restitution of all Lands belonging to Abbeys, Prio∣ries, Monasteries, and all other Religious Houses throughout the Kingdom, which makes the Priests, Fryars, Monks, and the order of that disorderly Crew to appear in such Herd
 as if they were upon a General Muster, and the numbers of Masses for Suc∣cess is incredible; but it's a Question among them∣selves whether most are offered for the 
French
 King, or his Lieutenant.


Amidst all these their 
Halcyon
 hopes, the dissatis∣faction which appears in the most considerate of the Natives, the unanimous proceedings in 
England,
 the firmness and swift proceedings in 
Scotland,
 and the Resolution of the Garrisons of 
London-Derry,
 and 
Inniskilling,
 whose Courage hath destroyed the flower of their Army, & discouraged the rest, who con∣fest they have lost before 
Derry,
 and elsewhere 10000 Horse, Foot, and Dragoons most killed, some wounded, some taken, and some deserted. And it's

credited at 
Dublin,
 that the Siege is raised, and the rather, for that some harrassed Troops of Horse (some wanting above half their number) are come thither from before 
Derry,
 and are ordered to joyn the Camp that is forming near 
Dublin,
 and there to be filled up, whiles Recruits are marching to the Northward, to Reinforce the Army.


The Account credited at 
Dublin
 concerning the late Action near 
Ballyshannon
 is, That there are in 
Inniskilling
 4000 Foot well Arm'd, and above 1000 Horse, of as brave stout Men from the Northern Borders of both Kingdoms, as any are in 
Europe,
 and commanded by Col. 
William Hamilton,
 Capt. 
King∣ston,
 and many other brave Officers, who have made frequent and successful Sallies upon the 
Irish,
 particularly in 
May
 last, upon the Occasion follow∣ing.


Those of 
Inniskilling
 having gotten together a great Stock of Provisions of all sorts at 
Ballyshannon,
 which they designed to get thither by Water; the 
Irish
 got Notice thereof, and with a strong Party of 12, some say 1500 Horse and Dragoons, com∣manded by Col. 
Sarsfield,
 resolved to make them∣selves Masters thereof, and were on their March ac∣cordingly. But Col. 
Hamilton
 drew out of the Town all the Horse he had, and a considerable Bo∣dy of Foot, and Attaqued them so Opportunely, and with that Courage and Resolution, that they were soon forced in Disorder and Confusion, and the Foot coming up and securing a Pass, the whole Party was entirely defeated, 
Sarsfield
 and five or six more nar∣rowly escaping, the rest being most killed, and about 200 taken, the best of which they kept, and the rest they stript and sent away to carry the News to their Friends. In this Action they got many good Horses, Arms, and Plunder, and have gotten home their Provisions; since which, at a place called 
Kil∣ley-Shani,
 they attaqued and routed a Detachment that was marching to the Army, and took from them some Cannon and Bombs, 100 Prisoners, and as many killed; of both which Actions they have gi∣ven an Account to 
Derry,
 and that they are in good Heart, and, if possible, will joyn them in a few days, and take the Field with what Forces they can make, and bring Provisions with them.


Letters from 
Chester
 say, That on the 
31st.
 past, about 3 in the Morning, the Wind at South-East, a brisk Gale, Major-Gen. 
Kirk
 failed from 
High Lake,
 having with him 3 Men of War, and 24 Ships of Bur∣then, on whom are Embarqued the Major-General's Regiment, Sir 
John Hanmore
's, and Col. 
Stewart
's, and the rest of the Forces, with Gunners, Engineers, and a great quantity of Provisions, Arms, Ammunition, Bombs, Cannon, Morters, Ball, Pick-axes, and Sho∣vels.


Last Night, being 
June
 the Fifth, came an Advice from 
Liverpool,
 sent in there by the 
Portland-Frigate,
 with the account fol∣lowing, 
viz.
 That being cruising on the 
Irish
 Coast, she met with Major-General 
Kirk
 on 
Saturday
 the first instant, at Ten in the Mor∣ning off of 
Carrick-Fergus
 Bay, with the whole Fleet, under a good Wind for 
London-Derry,
 where they in all probability arrived on Sabbath-day.


There is certain Advice from 
London-Derry,
 That the Protestants in 
London-Derry
 having Notice on Sabbath-day Morning, 
June
 the Se∣cond, that Major-General 
Kirk,
 and the Fleet under his Command, were arrived within the Harbour's Mouth, called a Council of War, and resolved to make a Sally on the Enemy; which they executed with all the whole Force of the Garrison (about a thou∣sand Men excepted) and with that desperate Courage and Resolution, that they fell pell-mell upon the Enemy in their Trenches, and beat them off from their Three Batteries, and out of all their Trenches, took all their Mortars and Guns: And so bloody and ob∣stinate was the Fight, that the Protestants lost about 1500 Men, and the Enemy 6000, some account 5000, but the least above 4000 dead on the spot.


After which the Enemy discamped with their whole Army in a very great disorder and confusion, leaving behind them all their Bag and Baggage, of which the Protestants are now the Masters, and of the Field eight Miles round.


This Good News is brought by the 
Dublin
 Yatch, Captain 
Rice
 Commander, who went with Major-General 
Kirk
 to 
Derry,
 and left them in the Harbour on Sabbath-day night, intending to land on 
Munday
 Mor∣ning. The Particulars of this Great and Glorious Action is expected next Post from 
Derry,
 with the true state of the Garrison.


The Letters from 
Portsmouth
 do affirm, That yesterday, 
June
 the Fifth, the 
Dutch
 Fleet consisting of Forty Ships of War, 
&c.
 came to the 
Spitt-head,
 where the reciprocal Joy and Friendship of each Fleet, was loudly proclaimed by their Cannon.










LONDON:
 Printed for 
Richard Baldwin,
 near the 
Black Bull
 in the 
Old-Baily.
 MDCLXXXIX.









