Nevv Englands first fruits in respect, first of the conversion of some, conviction of divers, preparation of sundry of the Indians, 2. of the progresse of learning in the colledge at Cambridge in Massacusets Bay : with divers other speciall matters concerning the country.
Approx. 63 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 15 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A39231




Wing E519



ESTC R1260





ocm 12128542




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Nevv Englands first fruits in respect, first of the conversion of some, conviction of divers, preparation of sundry of the Indians, 2. of the progresse of learning in the colledge at Cambridge in Massacusets Bay : with divers other speciall matters concerning the country.
[2], 26 p.   


London :


Printed by R. O. and G. D. for Henry Overton ...,


1643.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Harvard College (1636-1780) --  History.
Indians of North America --  New England.
2013-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Enrique Valdive
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Enrique Valdive
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






E519


R1260


12128542


54650












NEW ENGLANDS FIRST FRUITS; IN RESPECT, First of the Conversion of some, of the 
Indians.


First of the Conviction of divers, of the 
Indians.


First of the Preparation of sundry of the 
Indians.


2. Of the progresse of 
Learning,
 in the 
Colledge
 at CAMBRIDGE in 
Massacusets
 Bay.


WITH Divers other speciall Matters concerning that 
Countrey.


Published by the instant request of sundry Friends, who desire to be satisfied in these points by many 
New-England
 Men who are here present, and were eye or eare-witnesses of the same.


Who hath despised the Day of small things.


Zach. 4.10.


If thou wert pure and upright, surely now he will awake for thee: — And though thy beginnings be small, thy latter end shall greatly enerease.


Iob. 86, 7.


LONDON,
 Printed by R. O. and 
G. D.
 for 
Henry Overton,
 and are to sold at his Shop in 
Popes-head-Alley.
 1643.














NEW ENGLANDS FIRST FRUITS: 1. In respect of the INDIANS, &c.


T
He Lord, who useth not to be wanting to the desires of his Servants, as he hath not frustrated the ends of our Transplanting in sundry other respects; so neither in the giving some light to those poore 
Indians,
 who have ever sate in hellish darknesse, adoring the 
Divell
 himselfe for their 
GOD:
 but hath given us some testimony of his gracious acceptance of our poore endeavours towards them▪ and of our groanes to himselfe for mercy upon those miserable Soules (the very Ruines of Mankind) there amongst us; our very bowels yer∣ning within us to see them goe downe to Hell by swarmes with∣out remedy.


Wherefore we judged it our duty no longer to conceale but to de∣clare (to the praise of his owe free grace) what 
first Fruits
 he ha
h begun to gather in amongst them, as a sure pledge (we are consident) of a greater 
Harvest
 in his owne time. And wonder not that wee mention no more instances at present: but consider, First their in∣finite distance from Christianity, having never been prepared there∣unto by any Civility at all. Secondly, the difficulty of their Lan∣guage to us, and of ours to them; there being no Rules 
o learne ei∣ther by. Thirdly, the diversity of their owne Language to it selfe;

every part of that Countrey having its own Dialect, differing much from the other; all which make their comming into the Gospel the more slow. But what God hath done for some of them, we will declare.


1. MAny years since at 
Plimmouth
 Plantation, when the Church did fast and pray for Raine in extreame Drought; it being a very hot and cleare sun-shine day, all the former part thereof; An 
Indian
 of good quality, being present, and seeing what they were a∣bout, fell a wondring at them for praying for raine in a day so un∣likely, when all Sunne and no Clouds appeared; and thought that their God was not able to give Raine at such a time as that: but this poore wretch seeing them still to continue in their Prayers, and be∣holding that at last the Clouds began to rise, and by that time they had ended their Duty, the Raine fell in a most sweet, constant, soaking showre, fell into wonderment at the power that the English had with their God, and the greatnesse and goodnesse of that God whom they served, and was smitten with terror that he had abused them and their God by his former hard thoughts of them; and re∣solved from that day not to rest till he did know this great good 
God,
 and for that end to forsake the 
Indians,
 and cleare to the English, which he presently did, and laboured by all publique and private meanes to suck in more and more of the knowledge of God, and his wayes. And as he increased in knowledge so in affection and also in his practice, reforming and conforming himselfe accordingly: and (though he was much tempted by inticements, scoffes and scornes from the 
Indians
) yet, could he never be gotten from the 
English,
 nor from seeking after their God, but died amongst them, leaving some good hopes in their hearts, that his soule went to rest.


2. 
Sagamore Iohn,
 Prince of 
Massaquesets,
 was from our very first landing more courteous, ingenious, and to the English more loving then others of them; he desired to learne and speake our Language, and loved to imitate us in our behaviour and apparrell, and began to hearken after our God and his wayes, and would much commend English-men, and their God; saying (
Much good men, much good God
) and being convinced that our condition and wayes were better farre then theirs, did resolve and promise to leave the 
Indians,
 and come live with us; but yet kept downe by feare of the scoffes of the 
Indi∣ans,
 had not power to make good his purpose; yet went on not with∣out

some trouble of mind, and secret plucks of Conscience, as the sequel declares: for being struck with death, fearfully cryed out of himselfe that he had not come to live with us, to have knowne our 
God better:
 
But now (
said he
) I must die, the God of the English is much angry with me, and will destroy me; ah, 
I
 was affraid of the scoffes of these wicked 
Indians;
 yet my Child shall live with the 
English,
 and learne to knew their God when I am dead; Ile give him to Mr. 
Wilson,
 he is a much Good man, and much loved me:
 so sent for Mr. 
Wilson
 to come to him, and committed his onely Child to his care, and so died.


3. Divers of the 
Indians
 Children, Boyes and Girles we have re∣ceived into our houses, who are long since civilized, and in subjecti∣on to us, painfull and handy in their businesse, and can speak our lan∣guage familiarly; divers of whom can read English, and begin to un∣derstand in their measure, the grounds of Christian Religion; some of them are able to give us account of the Sermons they heare, and of the word read and expounded in our Families, and are convinced of their sinfull and miserable Estates, and affected with the sense of Gods displeasure, and the thoughts of Eternity, and will sometimes tremble and melt into teares at our opening and pressing the Word upon their Consciences; and as farre as we can discerne, some of them use to pray in secret and are much in love with us, and cannot indure to returne any more to the 
Indians.


Some of them will not be absent from a Sermon or Family du∣ties if they can help it; and we have knowne some would use to weep and cry when detained by occasion from the Sermon.


Others of them are very inquisitive after God and his wayes; and being themselves industrious in their Calling, will much complaine of other servants idlenesse, and reprove them.


One of them, who for some misdemeanour that laid him open to publique punishment, ran away; and being gone, God so followed him, that of his owne accord he returned home, rendred himselfe to Justice and was willing to submit himselfe, though he might have escaped.


An 
Indian
 Maid at 
Salem,
 would often come from the Word, cry∣ing out with abundance of teares, concluding that she must burne when she die, and would say, she knew her selfe naught for present, and like to be miserable for ever, unlesse free Grace should prevent it; and after this grew very carefull of her carriage, proved industri∣ous in her place, and so continued.




Another often frequenting the House of one of the Ministers at 
Salem,
 would tell him the Story of the Bible, even to his admirati∣on, and that he attended upon the Word preached, and loved it; and how he could tell all the Commandements, and in particular each Commandement by it selfe, and how he laboured to keep them all; and yet for all this (said he) 
[Me are, and walke in fire]
 that is, when I die, I must to Hell: That Minister asked him why? he answered, because I know not 
Iesus Christ,
 and pray'd him earnestly to teach him 
Iesus Christ,
 and after went out amongst the 
Indians,
 and called upon them to put away all their wives save one, because it was a sinne against English-mans Saviour.


Another 
Indian
 comming by, and seeing one of the English (who was remote from our jurisdiction, prophaning the Lords day, by fel∣ling of a tree, said to him, 
Doe 
ou not know that this is the Lords day,
 in 
Massaqusetts? much machet man,
 that is 
very wicked man, what, breake you Gods Day?


The same man comming into an house in those parts where a man and his wife were chiding, and they bidding him sit downe, he was welcome; he answered, 
He would not stay there, God did not dwell there, Ho
mock,
 (that is 
the Devill
) 
was there,
 and so departed.


One of the 
Sagamores,
 having complaint made to him by some of the English, that his men did use to kill Pigeons upon the Lords day, thereupon forbad them to doe so any more; yet afterwards some of them did attempt it, and climbing the high trees (upon which Pige∣ons in that Countrey use to make their nests) one of them fell down from off the tree and brake his neck, and another fell down and brake some of his limbs: thereupon the 
Sagamore
 sent two grave old men to proclaime it amongst his 
Indians,
 that none of them should kill Pigeons upon the Sabboth day any more.


Another 
Indian
 hearing of the fame of the 
English,
 and their God came from a far to see them, and such was this mans love to the 
En∣glish
 and their wayes after he came acquainted with them, that he la∣boured to transform himselfe into the 
English
 manners and practises, as if he had been an English man indeed; he would be called no more by his 
Indian
 name, but would be named 
William;
 he would not goe naked like the 
Indians,
 but cloathed just as one of our selves; he ab∣horred to dwell with the 
Indians
 any longer; but forsaking all his friends and Kindred dwelt wholly with us; when he sate downe to meat with us, if thanks were given before he came in, or if he did eat

by himselfe, constantly he would give thanks reverently and grave∣ly, he frequented the word and family duties where he came, and gat a good measure of knowledge beyond ordinary, being a man of sin∣gular par
s, and would complaine that he knew not Christ, and with∣out him, he said all he did was nothing; hee was so zealous for the Lords day, that (as it was observed) if he saw any profaning it, he would rebuke them and threaten them to carry them to the Gover∣nour.


All which things weighed, we dare not but hope, that many of them, doe belong to the Kingdome of God; and what further time may produce, we leave it to him that is excellent in Counsell, and wonderfull in working.


4. There is also a Blackmore maid, that hath long lived at 
Dorche∣ster
 in 
New England,
 unto whom God hath so blessed the publique and private means of Grace that she is not only indued with a com∣petent measure of knowledge in the mysteries of God, and convicti∣on of her miserable estate by sinne; but hath also experience of a saving work of grace in her heart, and a sweet savour of Christ brea∣thing in her; insomuch that her soule hath longed to enjoy Church-fellowship with the Saints there, and having propounded her desire to the Elders of the Church, after some triall of her taken in private, she was called before the whole Church, and there did make confes∣sion of her knowledge in the Mysteries of Christ and of the work of Conversion upon her Soule: And after that there was such a testi∣mony given of her blamelesse and godly Conversation, that she was admitted a member by the joynt consent of the Church with great joy to all their hearts. Since which time, we have heard her much admiring Gods free grace to such a poore wretch as she was; that God leaving all her friends and Kindred still in their sinnes, should cast an eye upon her, to make her a member of Christ, and of the Church also: and hath with teares exhorted some other of the 
In∣dians
 that live with us to embrace 
Iesus Christ,
 declaring how willing he would be to receive them even as he had received her.


5. The last instance we will give shall be of that famous Indian 
W
uash
 who was a Captaine a proper man of person, and of a very grave and sober spirit; the Story of which comming to our hands very lately, was indeed the occasion of writing all the rest: This man a few yeares since, seeing and beholding the mighty power of God in our English Forces, how they fell upon the 
Pequits,
 where

divers hundreds of them were slaine in an houre: The Lord, as a God of glory in great terrour did appeare unto the Soule and Con∣science of this poore Wretch in that very act; and though before that time he had low apprehensions of our God, having conceived him so be (as he said) but a 
Muskett
 God or a God like unto a flye; and as meane thoughts of the English that served this God that they were silly weake men; yet from that time he was convinced and per∣swaded that our God was a most dreadfull God; and that one 
En∣glish
 man by the help of his God was able to slay and put to flight an hundred 
n
an
.


This conviction did pursue and follow him night and day, so that he could have no rest or quiet because hee was ignorant of the 
En∣glish mans God:
 he went up and down bemoaning his condition, and filling every place where he came with sighes and groanes.


Afterward it pleased the Lord that some 
English
 (well acquainted with his Language) did meet with him; thereupon as a Hart pan∣ting after the water Brookes he enquired after God with such inces∣sant diligence that they were constrained constantly for his satisfa∣ction to spend more then halfe the night in conversing with him.


Afterwards he came to dwell amongst the English at 
Connecticus,
 still travelling with all his might and lamenting after the Lord: his manner was to smite his hand on his breast, and to complaine sadly of his heart saying it was 
much machet,
 (that is very evill) and when any spake with him he would say 
Wequash, no God, Wequash no know Christ.
 It pleased the Lord, that in the use of the meanes, he grew greatly in the knowledge of Christ, and in the Principles of Religi∣on and became thorowly reformed according to his light, hating and loathing himselfe for his dearest sinnes, which were especially these two 
Lust
 and 
Revenge,
 this repentance for the former was te∣stified by his temperance and abstinence from all occasions, or mat∣ter of provocation thereunto. Secondly, by putting away all his Wives, saving the first, to whom he had most right.


His repentance for the latter was testified by an eminent degree of meeknesse and patience, that now, if any did abuse him, he could lie downe at their feet, and if any did smite him on the one cheeke, he would rather turne the other, than offend them: many trialls hee had from the 
Jndians
 in this case. Thirdly, by going up and downe to those hee had offered violence or wrong unto, confessing it, and making restitution.




Afterwards he went amongst the Indians, like that poore Woman of 
Samaria,
 proclaiming 
Christ,
 and telling them what a Treasure he had found, instructing them in the knowledge of the true 
God
 and this he did with a grave and serious spirit, warning them with all faithfullnesse to flee from the wrath to come, by breaking off their sinnes and wickednesse.


This course of his did so disturb the Devill, that ere long some of the Indians, whose hearts Satan had filled did secretly give him poy∣son, which he tooke without suspition: and when he lay upon his death bed, some Indians who were by him, wished him according to the Indian manner, to send for 
Po
ow
 (that is to say) a Wizzard; he told them, 
If Iesus Christ say that Wequash shall live, then Wequash must live; if Iesus Christ say that Wequash shall dye, then Wequash is willing to dye, and will not lengthen 
ur his life by any such meanes.
 Before he dyed, he did bequeath his Child to the godly care of the English for education and instruction and so yielded up his soule into 
Christ
 his hands.


I cannot omit the testimony of Mr. 
Sh
 a godly Minister in the 
Bay,
 that wrote to his Friend in 
London
 concerning this Story, his lines are full plain and pithy his words these,


Wequash the famous Indian at the Rivers mouth is dead, and certainly in heaven; gloriously did the Grace of
 Christ 
shine forth in his conversation, a yeare and a halfe before his death he knew Christ, he loved Christ, he prea∣ched Christ up and down, and then suffered Martyrdome for Christ; and when he dyed▪ he gave his soule to Christ, and his only child to the English, rejoycing in this hope, that the child should know more of Christ then its poore Father ever did.


Thus we have given you a little tast of the sprincklings of Gods spirit, upon a few Indians, but one may easily imagine, that here are not all that may be produced: for if a very few of us here present, upon very sudden thoughts, have snatcht up only such instances which came at present to hand, you may conveive, that if all in our Plantations (which are farre and wide) should set themselves to bring in the confluence of all their Observations together, much more might be added.


We beleeve one mean amongst others, that hath thus farre wonne these poore wretches to looke after the Gospell, hath been the deal∣ings and carriages, which God hath guided the English in our Pa∣tent, to exercise towards them: For,




1. At our entrance upon the Land, it was not with violence and intrusion, but free and faire, with their consents and allowance the chief Sagamores of all that part of the Countrey, entertaining us heartily, and professed we were all much welcome.


2. When any of them had possession of, or right unto any Land we were to plant upon, none were suffered, (to our knowledge) to take one acre from them, but do use to compound with them to con∣tent.


3. They have had justice truly exercised towards them in all other particular acts; that as we expect right dealing from them, in case any of them shall trespasse us, we send to their Sagamore, and he presently rights us, or else we summon them to our Court to answer it; so if any of our men offend them, and complaint and proofe be made to any of our Magistrates, or the publique Court (they know) they are sure to be righted to the utmost by us.


4. The humanity of the Enghish towards them doth much gaine upon them, we being generally wary, and tender in giving them of∣fensive or harsh language, or carriage, but use them fairly and cour∣teously, with loving termes, good looks and kind salutes.


Thus they having first a good esteem of our Persons, (such of them as God intends good unto) are the sooner brought to hearken to our words, and then to serve our God: wheras on the contrary, the wicked, injurious and scandalous carriages of some other Plan∣tations, have bin a mean to harden chose poore wofull soules against the English, and all Religion for their sakes; and seale them up under perdition.


Yet (mistake us not) we are wont to keep them at such a distance, (knowing they serve the Devill and are led by him) as not to im∣bolden them too much or trust them too farre; though we do them what good we can. And the truth is, God hath so kept them, (ex∣cepting that act of the Pequits, long since, to some few of our men) that we never found any hurt from them, nor could ever prove any reall intentions of evill against us: And if there should be such in∣tentions and that they all should combine together against us with all their strength that they can raise, we see no probable ground at all to feare any hurt from them, they being naked men, and the numb
r of them that be amongst us not considerable.


Let us here g
ve a touch also of what God hath done and is further about to doe, to divers Plantations of the English, which before that

time that God sent light into our coasts, were almost as darke and rude as the Indians themselves.


1. First at 
Agamenticus
 (a Plantation out of our jurisdiction) to which one of our Preachers comming and labouring amongst them, was a meanes under God, not only to sparkle heavenly knowledge, and worke conviction and reformation in divers of them, but con∣version also to Christ in some of them, that blesse God to this day, that 
ver he came thither.


2. Then after that, as 
Sauco
 Plantation, which is an hundred miles from us, divers of that place comming often into our coas
s and hear∣ing the Word preached, and seeing Gods goings amongst his people there, being much affected went home and lamented amongst their neighbours their own wofull condition, that lived like heathens without the Gospel, when others injoyed it in great plenty: here∣upon with joynt consent two of their chiefe men were sent in all their names earnestly to intreat us to send a godly Minister to preach the Word unto them; which was doe accordingly, not without good successe to the people there, and divers places about them.


3. After this, towards the end of last Summer, foure more Planta∣tions some of which are divers hundred miles, others of them many hundred leagues from our Plantation) hearing of the goodnesse of God to his people in our parts, and of the light of the Gospel there shining; have done even as 
Jacob
 did in the Famine time, when he heard there was bread in 
Egypt
 he hasted away his Sonnes for Corn, that they might live and not die: in like manner three severall Towns in 
Virginia
 as also 
Ba
bados, Christophers
 and 
Antego
 all of them much about the same time, as if they had known the minds of each other did send Letters and Messengers crying out unto us as the man of 
Macedonia
 to 
Paul, Come and help us
 and th
 with such earnest∣nesse, as men hunger-starved and ready to die cry for bread; so they cry out unto us in the bowels of compassion for the Lord Jesus sake to send them some helpe. They tell us in some of their Letters that from the one end of the Land to the other, there is none to break the 
bread
 of 
life
 unto the 
hungry;
 and those that should doe it, are so vil
, that even drunkards and swearers, cry shame on them.


We had thought (but only for the swelling of our Discourse) to have set down their Letters at large, which they wrote to all our Churches, which spake with such strength of reason and affection, that when they were read in our Congregations they prevailed with

us, that for their necessity we spared the bread from our own mouth
 to save th
ir lives, and sent two of our Ministers for the present to 
Virginia;
 and when the Ships came away from them they left them in serious consultation, whom to give up to the worke of Christ in the other three places also.


We heare moreover that the Indians themselves in some of the places named did joyne with them in this their suit.


Now from what hath bin said, see the riches of Gods free Grace in Christ, that is willing to impart mercy even to the worst of men, and such as are furthest off cry out with 
Paul, On the depths, &c.
 and let heaven and earth be filled with the glorious praises of God for the same.


And if such as are afarre off, why should not we that are nearer presse in for a share therin, and cry out, as 
Esau
 did with teares to his Father, when he saw the blessing going away to his young
r brother, and himselfe, like to lose it: [
Oh my Father h
st thou but one blessing, blesse me also, even me thy first borne, blesse me, oh my Father.
] Else these poore Indians will certainly rise up against us, and with great bold∣nesse condemn us in the great day of our accompts, when many of us here und
r great light, shall see men come from the East and from the West, and sit down in the Kingdome of God, and our selves cast out.


2. Let the world know, that God led not so many thousands of his people into the Wildernesse, to see a reed shaken with the wind, but amongst many other speciall ends, this was none of the least, to spread the light of his blessed Gospel, to such as never heard the sound of it. To stop the mouths of the profane that calumniate the work of God in our hands, and to satisfie the hearts of the Saints herin that God had some speciall service for his people there to doe, which in part alr
ady we begin to see, and wait upon 
D
vine Wis
me,
 to discover more of his pleasure herin, and upon his Grace to effect, which we b
leeve in his time he will so doe, that men shall see and know the wisdome and power of God herin.


3. Shall we touch here upon that apprehension which many god∣ly and wise have conceived, and that from some Scriptures compa∣red, and from other grounds, and passages of Providence collected that (as it's very probable) God meanes to carry his Gospel west∣ward, in these latter times of the world; and have thought, as the Sunne in the afternoon of the day, still declines more and more to

the West and then sets: so the Gospel (that great light of the world) though it rose in the East, and in former ages, hath ligntened it with his beames; yet in the latter ages of the world will bend Westward, and before its setting, brighten these parts, with his glorious lustre also.


4. See how Gods wisdome produceth glorious effects, from un∣likely meanes, and make streight works by crooked instrumen
s: for who would have thought, that the chasing away hence so many godly Ministers, should so farre have promoted the praises of God, and should be a meane to spread the Gospel, when they intend
d to ruine it: they blew out their lights and they burn clearer: their silencing Ministers have opened their mouths so wide as to sound ou
 his glorious praises, to the uttermost parts of the earth, say with the Psalmist, 
This is the Lords doing and it is marvelous in our eyes.


5. Despise not the day of small things; let none say of us as those scoffers did of their building 
erusalem, 
hat will these weak 
ewes 
?
 but learne to adore God in all his Providence, and wait to see his ends.


6. Lend us, we beseech you (all you that love 
Zion
) your prayers and helpe in heaven and earth for the furtherance of this great and glorious worke in our hands; great works need many hands, many prayers, many teares: And desire the Lord to stirre up the bowels of some godly minded, to pitty those poore Heathen that are bleeding to death to eternall death and to reach forth an hand of soule-mercy, to save some of them from the fire of hell by affording some means to maintain some fit instruments on purpose to spend their time, and give themselves wholly to preach to these poore wretches▪ that as the tender 
Samari
a
 did to the wounded man they may pitty them and g
t them healed that even their bowels may blesse them in the day of their visitation, and Christs bowels refreshed by their love, may set it on his own score, and pay them all againe in the day of their accompts.








NEW ENGLANDS FIRST FRUITS: 2. In 
espect of the Colledge, and the proceedings of 
Learning
 therein.




1. 
A
Fter God had carried us safe to 
New-England,
 and wee had builded our houses, provided necessaries for our liveli-hood, rear'd convenient places for Gods worship, and setled the Civill Government: One of the next things we longed for, and looked after was to advance 
Learning
 and perpetuate it to Posterity; dreading to leave an illiterate Ministery to the Churches, when our present Ministers shall lie in the Dust. And as wee were thinking and consulting how to effect this great Work; it pleased God to stir up the heart of one Mr. 
Harvard
 (a god∣ly Gentleman, and a lover of Learning, there living amongst us) to give the one halfe of his Estate (it being in all about 17
0. l.) to∣wards the erecting of a Colledge and all his Library: after him ano∣ther gave 300. l. others after them cast in more, and the publique hand of the State added the rest: the Colledge was, by common consent, appointed to be at 
Cambridge,
 (a place very pleasant and ac∣commodate)▪ and is called (according to the name of the first foun∣der) 
Harvard Colledge.


The Edifice is very faire and comely within and without, having in it a spacious Hall; (where they daily meet at Common Lectures) Exercises, and a large Library with some Bookes to it, the gifts of

diverse of our friends, their Chambers and studies also fitted for, and possessed by the Students, and all other roomes of Office necessary and convenient, with all needfull Offices thereto belonging: And by the side of the Colledge a faire 
Grammar
 Schoole for the training up of young Schollars, and fitting of them for 
Academicall Learning,
 that still as they are judged ripe, they may be received into the Colledge of this Schoole. Master 
Corlet
 is the Mr. who hath very well ap∣proved himselfe for his abilities dexterity and painfulnesse in teach∣ing and education of the youth under him.


Over the Colledge is master 
Dunster
 placed, as President, a learned conscionable and industrious man, who hath so trained up his Pupills in the tongues and Arts, and so seasoned them with the principles of Divinity and Christianity that we have to our great comfort, (and in truth) beyond our hopes, beheld their progresse in Learning and godlinesse also; the former of these hath appeared in their publique declamations in 
Latine
 and 
Greeke,
 and Disputations Logicall and Philosophicall, which they have beene won
ed (besides their ordinary Exercises in the Colledg
-Hall) in the audience of the Magistrates, Ministers, and other Schollars, for the probation of their growth in Learning, upon set dayes, constantly once every moneth to make and uphold: The latter hath been manifested in sundry of them, by the savoury breathings of their Spirits in their godly conversation. Insomuch that we are confident, if these early blossomes may be cherished and warmed with the influence of the friends of Learning and▪ lovers of this pious worke, they will by the help of God, come to happy maturity in a short time.


Over the Colledge are twelve Overseers chosen by the generall Court, six of them are of the Magistrates, the other six of the Mini∣sters, who are to promote the best good of it and (having a power of influence into all persons in it) are to see that every one be diligent and proficient in his proper place.






2.
 Rules, and Precepts that are observ
d in the Colledge.


1. VVHen any Schollar is able to understand 
Tully,
 or such like classicall Latine Author 
extempore,
 and make and speake true Latine in Verse and Prose, 
suo ut a
unt M
rie;
 And decline per∣fectly the Paradig
m's of 
Nounes
 and 
Verbes
 in the 
Greek
 tongue: Let him then and not before be capable of admission into the Colledge.




2. Let every Student be plainly instructed, and earnestly pressed to consider well, the maine end of his life and studies is, 
to know God and Iesus Christ which is eternall life,
 Joh. 17.3. and therefore to lay 
Christ
 in the bottome, as the only foundation of all sound know∣ledge and Learning.


And seeing the Lord only giveth wisedome, Let every one seri∣ously set himselfe by pray
r in secret to seeke i
 of him 
Prov
 2, 3.


3. Every one shall so exercise himselfe in reading the Scriptures twice a day, that he shall be ready to give such an account of his pro∣fic
ncy therein, both in 
Theoreticall
 observations of the Language, and 
Log
,
 and in 
Practicall
 and spirituall truths, as his Tutor shall require, according to his ability, seeing 
the entrance of the word giveth light 
 giv
 
 understanding 
o the simple,
 Psalm. 119.130.


4 That they eshewing all profana
ion of Gods Name, Attri∣bu es, Word Ordinances and times of Worship, doe studie with good conscience, carefully to retaine God, and the love of his truth in heir mindes else let them know, that (notwithstanding their Learning) God may give them up 
to strong a
usions,
 and in the end 
to are probare minde.
 2 Thes. 2.11, 12. Rom. 1.28.


5. That they studiously red
eme the time; observe the generall houres appoint
d for all the S
udents, and the speciall houres for their owne 
Classi:
 and then diligently attend the Lectures without any disturbance by word or gesture. And if in any thing the doubt, they shall 
nquire as of their fellowes, so, (in case of 
Non satisfacti∣on
) modestly of th
r Tutors.


6. None shall under any pretence whatsoever, frequent the com∣pany and society of such men as lead an unfit, and dissolute life.


Nor shall any without his Tutors leave, or (in his absence) the call of Parents or Guardians, goe abroad to other Townes.


7. Every Schollar shall be present in his Tutors chamber at the 7th. houre in the morning, immediately after the sound of the Bell at his opening the Scripture and prayer, so also at the 5th. houre at night, and then give account of his owne private read∣ing 
 res
id in Par
icular the third, and constantly attend Le∣ctures in the 
 all at the houres appointed? But if any (without necessary impediment) shall absent himself from prayer or Lectures, he shall b
e lyable to Admonition, if he offend above once a weeke.


8. If any Schollar shall be found to transgresse any of the Lawes of God, or the Schoole, after twice Admonition, he shall be lyable,

if not 
adultus,
 to correction, if 
adultus,
 his name shall be given up to the Overseers of the Colledge, that he may bee admonished at the publick monethly Act.






3.
 The times and order of their Studies, unlesse experi∣ence shall shew cause to alter.


THe second and third day of the weeke, read Lectures, as follow∣eth.


To the first yeare at 8th. of the clock in the morning 
Logick,
 the first three quarters, 
Physicks
 the last quarter.


To the second yeare, at the 9th. houre, 
Ethicks
 and 
Politicks,
 at con∣venient distances of time.


To the third yeare at the 10th. 
Arithmetick
 and 
Geometry,
 the three first quarters, 
Astronomy
 the last.


Afternoone,


The first yeare disputes at the second houre.


The 2d. yeare at the 3d. houre.


The 3d. yeare at the 4th. every one in his Art.


The 4th. day reads Greeke.


To the first yeare the 
Etymologie
 and 
Syntax
 at the eight houre.


To the 2d. at the 9th. houre, 
Prosedia
 and 
Dialects.


Afternoone.


The first yeare at 2d. houre practice the precepts of 
Grammar
 in such Authors as have variety of words.


The 2d. yeare at 3d. houre practice in 
Poêsy, Nonnus, Duport,
 or the like.


The 3d. yeare perfect their 
Theory
 before noone, and exercise 
Style, Composition, Imitation, Epitome,
 both in Prose and Verse, afternoone.


The fift day reads Hebrew, and the Easterne Tongues.


Grammar
 to the first yeare houre the 8th.


To the 2d. 
Chaldee
 at the 9th. houre.


To the 3d. 
Syriack
 at the 10th. houre.


Afternoone.


The first yeare practice in the Bible at the 2d. houre.


The 2d. in 
Ezra
 and 
Danel
 at the 3d. houre.


The 3d. at the 4th. houre in 
Trestius
 New Testament.


The
 6th. 
day reads Rhetorick to all at the
 8th. 
houre.


Declamations
 at the 9th. So ordered that every Scholler may de∣claime

once a moneth. The rest of the day 
vacat Rhetoricis studiis. The 7th. day reads Divinity Carecheticall at the
 8
h. 
houre, Common places at the
 9th. 
houre. Afternoone.


The first houre reads history in the Winter,


The nature of plants in the Summer


The summe of every Lecture shall be examined, before the new Lecture be read.


Every Schollar, that on proofe is found able to read the Originalls of the 
Old
 and 
New Testament
 in to the Latine tongue, and to resolve them 
Logically;
 withall being of godly life and conversation; And at any publick Act hath the Approbation of the Overseers and Master of the Colledge is fit to be dignified with his first Degree.


Every Schollar that giveth up in writing a 
System,
 or 
Synopsis,
 or summe of 
Logick,
 Naturall and Morall 
Phylosophy, Arithmetick, Geo∣metry
 and 
Astronemy:
 and is ready to defend his 
Theses
 or positions: withall skilled in the Originalls as above said: and of godly life & con∣versation: and so approved by the Overseers and Master of the Col∣ledge, at any publique 
Act,
 is fit to be dignified with his 2d. Degree.






4.
 The manner of the late Commencement, expressed in a Letter s
nt over from the Governour, and diverse of the Ministers, their own words these.


THE Sindents of the first Classis that have beene these foure yeeres trained up in 
University-Learning
 (for their ripening in the know∣ledge of the Tongues and Arts) and are apprved for their manners as they have kept their publick Acts in former yeares, our selves being present, at them; so have they lately kept two solemne Acts for their Commencement, when the Governour, Magistrates, and the Ministers from all parts, with allsorts of Schollars, and others in great numbers were present, and did heare their Exercises; which were Latine and Greeke Orations, and Declamati∣ons, and Hebrew Analasis Grammaticall, Logicall & Rhetoricall of the Psalms: And their Answers and Disputations in Logicall, Ethicall, Physicall and Me∣taphysicall Questions; and so were found worthy of the first degree, (common∣ly called Batchelour) 
Pro more Academiarum in Anglia:
 Being first pre∣sented by the 
r
sident to the Magistrates and Ministers and by him, upon their Approbation, solemnly admitted unto the same degree, and a Booke of

Arts delivered into each of their hands, and power given them to read Le∣ctures in the Hall upon any of the Arts, when they shall be thereunto called, and a liberty of studying in the Library.


All things in the Colledge are at present, like to proceed even as wee can wish, may it but please the Lord to goe on with his blessing in 
hrist, and stir up the hearts of his faithfull, and able Servants in our owne Native Coun∣try, and here, (as 
e hath graciously begun) to advance this Honourable and most hopefull worke. The beginnings whereof and progresse hitherto (gene∣rally) doe fill our hearts with comfort, and raise them up to much more expe∣ctation, of the Lords goodnesse for hereafter, for the good of posterity, and the Churches of Christ Iesus.


BOSTON in New-England,
 
September the 
26. 1642.


Your very loving friends,
 &c.






A Copie of the Questions given and maintained by the 
Commencers
 in their publick Acts, printed in 
Cam∣bridge
 in 
New-England,
 and reprinted here 
verbatim,
 as followeth.










Spectatissimis Pietate, et Illustrissimis Eximia Virtute Viris, D. 
Iohanni Winthropo,
 inclytae Massachu∣setti Coloniae Gubernatori, D. 
Johanni Endicotto
 Vice-Gubernatori, D. 
Thom. Dudleo,
 D. 
Rich. Bellingham
,
 D. 
Ioan. Humphrydo,
 D. 
Israel. Stoughton
.


Nec non Reverendis pientiffimisque viris 
Ioanpi Cotton
, Ioan, Wils
n
, Ioan, Davenport, Tho. Weldo. Hugons Petro, Tho. Shepardo,
 Collegij 
Harvardensis
 nov. 
Cantab
.
 inspectoribus fidelissimis, caeteris{que} Magistratibus, & Ecclesiatum 
usdem Coloniae Pres∣byteris vigilantissimis,


Has Theses Philologicas, & Philosophicas, quas Deo duce, Praeside 
Henrico Dunstero
 palam pro virili propugnare conabuntur, (ho∣noris & 
bservantiae gratia) dicant consecranique in artibus liberalibus initiati Adolescentes.




Benjamin Woodbrigins.


Georgius Downingus.


Gulielmus Hubb
rdus.


Henricus Saltonstall.


Iohannes Bulkleius.


Iohannes Wilsonus.


Nathaniel Brusterus.


Samuel Belinghamus.


Tobias Bernardus.






Theses Philologicas.




GRAMMATICAS.


L
Inguarum Scientia est utilissima.


Literae non exprimunt quantum vocis Organa efferunt.


3 Haebraea 
t Linguarum Mater.


4. Con
onantes & vocal
s Haebreorum sunt coaetaneae.


5. Punctationes chatepha ae 
yllabam proprie no efficiunt.


6. Linguarum Graeca est copiosillima


7. Lingua Graeca est ad acc
ntus pronuntianda.


8. Lingua Latina est eloquentistima.








RHETORICAS.


RHetorica specie differt a Logica.


In 
locutione p
rspicu
tati cedit ornatus, ornatui copia.


3. Actio primas tenet in pronuntiotione.


4. Ora
oris est celare Artem.






LOGICAS.


UNiversalia non sunt extra intellectum.


Omnia Argumenta sunt relata.


3. Causa 
sine qua non
 non est peculiaris causa a quatuor reliquis gene∣ralibus,


4. Causa & Effectus sunt simul tempore.


5. Dissentanea sunt aeque nota.


6. Contrarietas est tantum inter duo,


7. Sublato relato tollitur correlatum.


8. Genus perfectum aequaliter communicatur speciebus.


9 Testimonium valet quantum testis.


10. Elenchorum doctrina in Logica non est necessaria.


11. Axioma contingens est, quod ita verum est, ut aliquando falsum esse possit.


12. Praecepta Artium debent esse 
.








Theses Philosophicas.




ETHICAS.


PHilosophia practica est eruditions meta.


Actio virtutis h
bitum antecellit.


3. Voluntas est virturtis moralis subjectum.


4. Voluntas est formaliter libera.


5. Prudentia virtutum difficillima.


6. Prudentia est virtus intellectualis & moralis.


7. Justitia mater omnium vi
tutum.


8. Mors potius subeunda quam aliquid culpae perpetrandum.


9. Non injuste agit nisi qui libens agit.


10. Mentiri potest qui verum dicit.


11. Juveni modestia summum Oranmentum.








PHYSICAS


COrpu
 naturale mobile est subjectum Phisicae. Materia secunda non potest existere fine forma.


3. Forma est 
ccidens


4. Unius re
non est nisi unica forma constitutiva.


5. Forma est principium individuationis.


6. Privatio non est principium internum.


7. Ex meris accidentibu
 non fit substantia.


8. Q
icquid movetur abalio movecur.


9. In omni motu movens simul est cum mobili.


10. Coelum
on movetur ab intelligen
ijs.


11. Non dantur orbes in coelo.


12. Quodlibe Flemen
um habet unam ex primis qualitatibus sibi maxime propriam.


13. Putredo in humido fit a calore externo.


14. Animanon fit extraduce.


15. Vehemens sensibile destruit sensum.






METAPHISICAS.


OMne ens est bonum.


Omme creatum est concretum.


3. 
icquid aecernum idem & immensum.


4. Bonum Metaphysicum non suscipit gradus.


Thus farre hath the good hand of God favoured our beginnings: see whe
her he hath no
 engage
 us to wait still upon his goodnesse for the future▪ by such further remarkable passages of his providence to our Plantation in such things as these:


1. In sweeping away great multitudes of the Natives by the small Po
 a little before we went thither, that he might make room for us th
re.


2. In giving such merveilous safe Passage from first to last, to so many thousands that went thither, the like hath hardly been ever observed in any Sea-voyages.


3. In blessing us generally with health and strength, as much as ever (we might truly say) more then ever in our Native Land; many that were tender and sickly here, are stronger and heartier there. That wheras diverse other Plantations have been the graves of their

Inhabitants and their numbers much decreased: God hath so pros∣pered the climate to us, that our bodies are hailer, and Children there born stronger, wherby our number is exceedingly increased.


4. In giving us such peace and freedome from enemies, wh
n al∣most all the world is on a fire that (excepting that short trouble with the Pequits) we never heard of any sound of Warres to this day. And in that Warre which we made against them Gods hand from heaven was so manifested, that a very few of our men, in a short time pursu∣ed through the Wildernesse, slew and took priso
rs about 1
00 of them, even all they could find, to the great terrour and amazement of all the Indians to this day: so that the name of the s
equits (as of 
Amaleck.
) is blotted out from under heaven there being not one that is or, (as least) dare call himselfe a Pequi
.


5. In subduing those erronious opinions carryed over from hence by some of the Passengers, which for a time infested our Churches peace but (through the goodnesse of God) by conference preaching, a generall assembly of l
arned men, Magistraces timely care▪ and lastly, by Gods own hand from heaven, in most remarkable stroaks upon some of the chief fomenters of them; the matter came to such an happie conclusion, that most of the seduced came humbly and confessed their Errours in our publique Assembli
s and abid
 
o this day constant in the Truth; the rest (that remained obstinate) finding no fit market there to vent their wares, departed from us to an Iland farre off; some of whom also since that time, have repented and re∣turned to us▪ and are received againe into our bosomes. And from that time not any unsound, unsavourie and giddie fancie have dared to lift up his head, or abide the light amongst us.


6. In settling and bringing civil matters to such a maturity in a short time amongst us having planted 50. Townes and Villages, built 30. or 40. Churches, and more Ministers houses; a Castle, a Colledge, Prisons, Forts, Cartwaies, Causies many, and all these upon our owne charges no publique hand reaching out any helpe: having comfort∣able Houses, Gardens, Orchards, Grounds fenced, Corne fields &c. and such a forme and face of a Common wealth appearing in all the Plantation, that Strangers from other parts, seeing how much is done in so few yeares, have wondred at Gods blessing on our indea∣vours.


7. In giving such plenty of all manner of Food in a Wildernesse insomuch, that all kinds of Flesh amongst the rest, store of Venison

in its season. Fish, both from Sea and Fresh water. Fowle of all kinds, wild & tame; store of Whit-Meale, together with all sorts of English Graine, aswell as Indian, are plentifull amongst us; as also Rootes, Herbs and Fruit, which being better digested by the Sun, are farre more faire pleasant and wholsome then here.


8. In prospering Hempe and Flaxe so well, that its frequently sowen, spun, and woven into linnen Cloath: (and in a short time may serve for Cordage) and so with Cotton-wooll, (which we may have at very reasonable rates from the Islands) and our linnen Yarne, we can make Dimittees and Fustions for our Summer cloathing. And having a matter of a 1000. Sheep, which prosper well, to begin withall, in a competent time we hope to have wollen Cloath there made. And great and small Cattel, being now very frequently killd for food; their skins will afford us Leather for Boots and Shoes, and other uses: so that God is leading us by the hand into a way of cloa∣thing.


9. In affording us many materialls, (which in part already are, and will in time further be improved) for Staple commodities, to supply all other defects: As



1. Furres, Bever, Otter, &c.


2. Clapboord, Hoops, Pipestaves, Masts.


3. English Wheat and other graine for 
Spains
 and West Indies; and all other provisions for Victualling of Shippes


4. Fish, as Cod, Haddock, Herrings, Mackerill, Basse, Sturgeon, Seales, Whales, Sea-horse.


5. Oyle of sundry sorts, of Whale, Sea-horse, &c.


6. Pitch and Tarre, Rosen and Turpentine, having Pines, Spruce, and Pitch-trees in our Countrey to make these on.


7. Hempe and Flaxe.


8. Mineralls discovered and proved, as of Iron in sundry places, Black-lead (many other in hopes) for the improving of which, we are now about to carry over Servants and instruments with us,


9. (Besides many Boates, Shallops, Hows, Lighters, Pinnaces) we are in a way of building Shippes, of an 100, 200, 300. 400. tunne, five of them are already at Sea; many more in hand at this present, we being much incouraged therein by reason of the plenty and excellencie of our Timber for that urpofe, and seeing all the materialls will be had there in short time.




10. In giving of such Magistrates, as are all of them godly men, and members of our Churches, who countenance those that be good, and punish evill doers, that a vile person dares not lift up his head; nor need a godly man to hang it down, that (to Gods praise be it spoken) one may live there from yeare to yeare, and not see a drunkard heare an oath, or meet a begger. Now where sinne is punished, and judge∣ment executed, God is wont to blesse that place, and protect it, 
Psal.
 106.30, 
Ier.
 5.1, 
Ios.
 7.25 with 8. 1. 
c con
ra E
a.
 20 21.


11. In storing that place with very many of his own people, and diverse of them eminent for godlinesse. Now where his people are, there is his presence, and Promise 
to be in the middest of them, a mighty God to save, and to joy over them with singing,
 Zeph. 3.17.


12. Above all our other blessings, in planting 
his own Name,
 and 
precious Ordinances
 among us; (we speak it humbly, and in his feare) our indeavour is to have all his own Institutions, and no more then his own and all those in their native simplicity without any humane dressings; having a liberty to injoy all that God Commands, and yet urged to nothing more then he Commands. Now 
Where soever he records his Name, thither he will come and blesse,
 Ex. 20, 24.




Which promise he eath already performed to very many soules in their effectuall conversion to Christ, and the edification of others in their holy Faith, who daily blesse God that ever he carried them in∣to those parts.


All which blessings named we looke upon, as an earnest-penny of more to come. If we seeke his face, and serve his Providence, wee have no cause to doubt, that he for his part will faile to make seaso∣nable supplies unto us.


1 By some meanes to carry on to their perfection our staple trades begun.


2. By Additions of Ammunition and Powder.


3. By maintenance of Schooles of Learning especially the Col∣ledge, as also additions of building to it, and furnishing the Library.


4. By stirring up some well-minded to cloath and transport o∣ver poore children Boyes and Girles, which may be a great mercy to their bodies and soules and a help to us, they being super abun∣dant here, and we wanting hands to carry on our trades, manufa∣cture and husbandry there.


5. By stirring up some to shew mercy to the 
Indians,
 in affording maintenance to some of our godly active young Schollars, there to

make it their worke to studie their Language converse with them and carry light amongst them, that so the Gospell might be spread into those darke parts of the world.


Ob.
 But all your own cost and ours also will be lost, because there can be no subsistence there for any long time. For,


1. Your ground is barren,


Answ.
 1. If you should see our goodly Corne-fields, neere har∣vest you would answer this your selfe. Secondly, how could it be thin, that we should have 
English
 Wheat at 4. 
s. per
 bushell, and 
Indi∣an
 at 2.8. and this not only for ready money, but in way of exchange. Thirdly, that in a wildernesse in so few yeares, we should have corne enough for our selves and our friends that come over, and much to spare.


2 
Obj.
 Your ground will not continue above 3. or 4 yeares to beare corne.


Answ.
 Our ground hath been sowne and planted with corne these 7.10.
2. yeares already by our selves, and (which is more than can be said here of 
English
 Land (never yet summer tild: but have borne corne, every yeare since we first went, and the same ground plant
d as long by the 
Indians
 before, and yet have good crops upon it still, and as like to continue as ever: But this is, (as many other slanders against that good Land against all sense, reason and experience.


3 
Obj.
 But you have no money there.


Answ.
 It's true we have not much, though some there is, but wee having those staple commodi
ies named, they will (still as they are improved) fetch money from other parts. Ships, Fish, Iron, Pip
staves. Corn, Bever, Oyle, &c will help us with money and o∣ther things also.


2 Littl money is raised in coyne in 
England,
 how then comes it to abound, but by this meane?


3. We can trade amongst our selves by way of exchange, one com∣modity for another, and so doe usually.


4. 
Obj.
 You are like to want clo
hes hereafter.


Answ.
 1. Linnen Fustians Dimettees we are making already. Secondly, Sheepe are comming on for woollen cloath. Thirdly in meane time we may be supplied by way of trade to other parts. 4th. Cor
vant. Deere, Seale; and Moose Skins (which are beasts as big Oxen, and their skins are buffe) are there to be had plentifully; 
hich will help this way, especially for servants cloathing.




5. 
Obj.
 Your Winters are cold.


Answ.
 True, at sometimes when the wind blowes strong at 
Nor-West:
 but it holds not long together, and then it useth to be ve∣ry moderate for a good space. First the coldnesse being not naturall (that place being 42. degrees) but accidentall. Secondly, The cold there is no impediment to health, but very wholsome for our bo∣dies, insomuch that all sorts generally, weake and strong had scarce ever such measure of health in all their lives as there. Thirdly, Its not a moist and foggie cold, as in 
Holland,
 and some parts of 
England,
 but bright, cleare, and faire wether, that men are seldome troubled in Winter with coughes and Rheumes. Fourthly, it hinders not our imployment, for people are able to worke or travell usually all the Winter long, so there is no losse of time, simply in respect of the cold. Fiftly good fires (wood being so plentifull) will make amends.


6. 
Ob.
 Many are growne weaker in their estates since they went over.


Ans.
 Are not diverse in 
London
 broken in their Estates? and many in 
England
 are growne poore and thousands goe a begging (yet wee never saw a beggar there) and will any taxe the City or Kingdome, and say they are unsubsistable places?


Secondly their Estates now he in houses, Lands, Horses, Cattel, Corne &c. though they have not so much money as they had here, and so cannot make appearance of their wealth to those in 
England,
 yet they have it still, so that their Estates are not lost but changed.


3. Some mens Estates may be weaker through gr
at and vast com∣mon changes, which the first planters especially have bin at in make∣ing the place subsistable and comfortable, which now others reape the fruit of unknowne summes lye buried underground in such a worke as that is.


4. Some may be poore (so we are sure) many are rich, that carri∣ed nothing at all that now have House Land, Corne, Cattel, &c and such as carry something are much encreased.


7. 
Ob.
 Many speake evill of the place.


Ans.
 Did not some doe so of 
he Land of 
Canaan
 it selfe yet 
Cana∣an
 was never the worse and themselves smarted for so doing. Second∣ly some have been punished there for their Delinquencies, or restrai∣ned from their exorbitances; or discountenanced for their ill opi∣nions and not sufferd to vent their stuffe: and hence being displeas∣ed take revenge by slanderous report. Thirdly, Let such if any such there be as have ought to alleadge, deale fairely and above board, and

come and justifie any thing against the Country to our faces while we are here to answer, but such never yet appeared in any of our presence to avouch any thing in this kinde, nor (we beleive) dare do it without blushing.


8. 
Ob.
 Why doe many come away from thence?


Answ.
 Doe not many remove from one Country to another, and yet none likes the Country the lesse because some depart from it? Secondly, few that we know of intend to abide here, but doe come on some speciall busines, and purpose to returne. Thirdly of them that are come hither to stay, (on our knowledge) some of the wisest repent them already, and wish themselves there againe. Fourthly, as some went thither upon sudden undigested grounds, and saw not God leading them in their way, but were carryed by an unstayed spirit, so have they returned upon as sleight headlesse, unworthy rea∣sons as they went Fiftly others must have elbow-roome, and can∣not abide to be so pinioned with the strict Government in the 
Com∣mon-wealth,
 or Discipline in the Church, now why should such live there; as 
Ireland
 will not brooke venemous beasts, so will not that Land vile persons, and loose livers. Sixtly, though some few have removed from them, yet (we may truly say) thousands as wise as themselves would not change their place for any other in the World.


FINIS.













