By the Lords Justices, a proclamation ... whereas we formerly received information ... that one Henry Every, commander of this ship called the Phansie ... committed several acts of piracy ...
England and Wales. Lords Justices.
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 1 1-bit group-IV TIFF page image.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2004-03 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A39489




Wing E934



ESTC R39434





ocm 18411138




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
By the Lords Justices, a proclamation ... whereas we formerly received information ... that one Henry Every, commander of this ship called the Phansie ... committed several acts of piracy ...
England and Wales. Lords Justices.
1 broadside.   


London :


Printed by Charles Bill, and the executrix of Thomas Newcomb ...,


1696.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Avery, John, fl. 1695.
Pirates --  England.
Proclamations --  Great Britain.
Great Britain --  History --  1689-1714.
2003-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2003-09
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2003-12
Daniel Haig
Sampled and proofread
2003-12
Daniel Haig
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2004-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






E934


18411138


107511
















DIEV ET MON DROIT


royal blazon or coat of arms




By the Lords Justices, A PROCLAMATION.




Tho. Cantuar.


J. Sommers 
C. S.


Pembroke 
C. P. S.


Shrewsbury.




W
Hereas We formerly received Information from the Governour and Company of Merchants of 
London
 Trading to the 
East Indies,
 That one 
Henry Every,
 Commander of the Ship called the 
Phansie alias Charles,
 of Fourty six Guns, and One hundred and thirty Men, had, under 
English
 Colours, committed several Acts of Piracy upon the Seas of 
India
 or 
Persia,
 whereupon We Issued a Proclamation, bearing Date the Seventeenth Day of 
July
 last, for the Taking and Apprehend∣ing the said 
Henry Every,
 and such other Persons as were with him in the said Ship, in Order to have them Punished as Pirates and common Robbers upon the High Seas; And whereas We have since the Issuing the said Proclamation received further Information from the said Gover∣nour and Company of Merchants Trading to the 
East Indies,
 That the said 
Henry Every
 hath changed his Name, and now goes by the Name of 
Henry Bridgman,
 and that 
James Cray, Thomas Summerton, Edward Kirwood, William Down, John Reddy, John Stroger, Nathaniel Pike, Peter Soanes, Henry Adams, Francis Frennier, Thomas Johnson, Joseph Dawson, Samuel Dawson, James Lewis, John Sparks, Joseph Goss, Charles Falconer, James Murray, Robert Rich, John Miller, John King, Edward Savill, William Philips, Thomas Jope
 and 
Thomas Belisha,
 together with several others whose Names are not yet Discovered (amongst whom were Fifty two 
Frenchmen,
 Fourtéen 
Danes,
 and others of other Nations) were with the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman,
 in the said Ship 
Phansie,
 when the several Acts of Piracy were committed, and were Aiding and Assisting therein, and shared in the Plunder so by them Piratically taken, to the amount of One thousand Pounds a Man or thereabouts; And whereas We are Informed, That the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman,
 with several other Persons above named, have, since they committed such Acts of Piracy, left the said Ship in the Island of 
Providence,
 and are arrived in 
Ireland
 in Two small Sloops, and have there dispersed themselves, some of which Persons remain there, and others are come into this Kingdom and the Kingdom of 
Scotland,
 as Two of their Accomplices, who are now Taken and in Custody, have Confessed and Declared: We have therefore thought fit (by the Advice of His Majesties most Honourable Privy Council) to Issue this Proclamation, here∣by Declaring, That the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman,
 together with the said several Persons above named, and others, 
English∣men, Scotchmen,
 and Foreigners, to the Number of about One hundred and thirty, did Steal and Run away with the said Ship from the Port of 
Corunna
 in 
Spain;
 and that neither the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman,
 nor any of the Persons abovenamed had any Commission or Authority from His Majesty to Command the said Ship, or the Men therein; but that the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman,
 and the several other Persons abovenamed, and such others as were with them in the said Ship, are Pirates and Rob∣bers upon the High Seas. And We do hereby Charge and Command all His Majesties Admirals, Captains, and other Officers at Sea, and all His Majesties Governours and Commanders of any Forts, Castles or other Places in His Majesties Plantations, and all other Officers and Persons whatsoever, to Seize and Apprehend the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman, James Cray, Thomas Summerton, Edward Kirwood, William Down, John Reddy, John Stroger, Nathaniel Pike, Peter Soanes, Henry Adams, Francis Frennier, Thomas Johnson, Joseph Dawson, Samuel Dawson, James Lewis, John Sparks, Joseph Goss, Charles Falconer, James Murray, Robert Rich, John Miller, John King, Edward Savill, William Philips, Thomas Jope,
 and 
Thomas Belisha,
 and such others as were with them in the said Ship, (who may probably be known and discovered by the great Quantities of Gold and Silver of Foreign Coins which they have with them) in order that they may be brought to Iustice, and suffer the just Punishment of the Law, as Pi∣rates upon the High Seas. And We do hereby further Declare, That in case any of the Persons abovenamed (except the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman)
 or any other Persons who were in the said Ship with the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman,
 shall Discover the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman,
 or any other of the Persons abovenamed, so as they may be Seized and Ta∣ken, in order to be brought to Iustice, he and they making such Discovery shall have His Majesties Gracious Pardon for their Ofences. And We do hereby further Declare, That such Person or Persons, or any other Person or Persons who shall Discover the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman,
 so as he may be Seized or Taken, or shall be otherwise Instrumental in Sei∣zing the said 
Henry Every alias Bridgman,
 he or they making such Discovery or Seizure, shall have the Reward of Five hundred Pounds promised in the said former Proclamation, for the Discovery and Seizure of the said 
Henry Every.
 And that in case any Person or Persons shall Discover any of the other Persons abovenamed, so as they may be Seized or Taken, or shall be otherwise Instrumental in Seizing any of the said Persons, he or they making such Discovery or Seizure, shall have a Re∣ward of Fifty Pounds for every of the said Persons, whom he or they shall so Discover or Seize, which said several Sums of Five hundred Pounds and Fifty Pounds, the Lords Commissioners of His Majesties Treasury are hereby Required and Di∣rected to Pay accordingly.


Given at the Council Chamber in 
Whitehall,


the Tenth Day of 
August,
 1696. In the Eighth Year of His Majesties Reign.

God save the King.










LONDON,
 Printed by 
Charles Bill,
 and the Executrix of 
Thomas Newcomb,
 deceas'd, Printers to the Kings most Excellent Majesty. 1696.









