Fair trade, besides the heavy duties it lies under, suffers yet more from the frauds of smuglers and the exactions of officers for preventing both which, the bill before the House is calculated so that 'tis no wonder if the private interests of clandestine traders and officers should unite in raising a clamour against it.
Approx. 12 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A39547




Wing F102BA



ESTC R36408





ocm 15689665




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Fair trade, besides the heavy duties it lies under, suffers yet more from the frauds of smuglers and the exactions of officers for preventing both which, the bill before the House is calculated so that 'tis no wonder if the private interests of clandestine traders and officers should unite in raising a clamour against it.
3 p.   


[London? :


s.n.,


1700]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Tariff --  Law and legislation --  England.
Trade regulation --  England.
Smuggling --  England.
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-02
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2013-02
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F102BA


R36408


15689665


104381












FOR THE BILL AGAINST 
Clandestine Trade.












Fair Trade,
 besides the Heavy Duties it lies under, suffers yet more from the 
Frauds
 of 
Smuglers
 and the 
Exactions
 of 
Officers,
 for preventing both which, the 
BILL
 before the 
House
 is Calculated so that 'tis no wonder if the Pri∣vate Interests of 
Clandestine Traders
 and 
Officers,
 should unite, in raising a Clamour against it.






The 
Clauses
 whereof are to the Effect following.


 






1. THAT all Ships under just suspicion of an Irregular Trade, by hover∣ing and remaining unnecessarily near the Shore, should be subject to a Search, and the Master obliged to declare his Consignment.


SUCH Declaration of the Master, is no more than what is already required from all who come into Port, and this Clause will not delay any Ship which duly pro∣secutes her Voyage, or prevent taking in ne∣cessary Supplies.






2. The second Clause subjects all Persons any way aiding or assisting in Smugling, to a Penalty, and also forfeits the Horses or Car∣riages imployed in such Service.


This was in the French Prohibition Act, and the speedy Conviction, will make it more Ef∣fectual, as well as more Useful, to the Poor.






3, 4, 5. The third, fourth, and fifth Clau∣ses require the Making True Entries, with re∣ference to the Countrey, and also the Proper∣ty of the Goods, under a Penalty, on any Prevarication.


This necessary to prevent Colouring French or Aliens Goods, under other Names; but if the Swearing 
Toties Quoties
 be objected to, a General Oath may suffice instead of it.






6. The sixth Clause provides for the Secu∣rity of Goods casually cast on Shore, till the Duties are paid.


The King's Interest in such Goods, would help to preserve the Subjects Right better than it would be otherwise.






7. Brandy in small Casks, or Salt in Bags, to be forfeited, if found on board Ships pre∣tending to be bound to 
Ireland,
 or the Neigh∣bouring Islands, as well as if Imported to 
Eng∣land.


This Clause makes the Smugling more diffi∣cult in these Instances, wherein it was before too frequently practised.






8. No House to be broken open in Search of Uncustomed Goods, but on fresh Pursuit, or Information upon Oath, and the Informer to have Equal Share with the Officer.


'Tis no unusual Practice for Merchants to di∣sturb one another in the same Trade, by whi∣spering Stories to Officers, without any Foun∣dation, which is a great Mischief, when it goes so far as to break into Houses. The other part is for Encouraging Just Informations.






9. All Merchants to be Civilly treated and diligently dispatched, on pain of suspending the Officer who neglects his Duty herein. That is in dispatching due Certificates of Over En∣tries or Damage; and Post Entries to be a∣voided as much as is possible.


The Fundamental Security to the Revenue arises from the Obligation upon Merchants to enter their Goods before they land them; And all Short Entries under Colour of Damage or any other Pretence whatsoever, subjects so much to Frauds by Collusive Practices with the Officers at the Water-side.






10. Goods brought to the Ware-house at the Merchants desire, for securing the Duty to be entred in a certain time, or the Ware∣house room to be paid for.


This only to oblige the Merchants to di∣spatch the Entring their Goods, in order to clear the Kings Ware-house.






 11. Wines to be Imported in Certain Cask, on pain of Losing the 12 
per Cent.
 for Leakage, and to be obliged to enter as fill'd up, gaug∣ing the Wine if otherwise Imported.


The Rule in the Book of Rates, which al∣lows Outs, supposes Certain Cask, and the Mer∣chant who had before his Election on the En∣try, Whether to Enter fill'd or unfill'd; will have it now on the Importation.






12. Damaged Tobacco to be destroyed, on certain Conditions.


The partiality of Officers in the Allowances for Damage, is a great Discouragement to Fair Trade, which this Clause prevents, as well as prejudice to the Subject, by the Mix∣ing of Unwholsom Tobacco with Sound: and if the like Practice might be used to Unsound Wines, it would probably have the same good Effect every way.






13. No Person to be admitted to Claim any Goods seized, without giving Security to an∣swer Costs of Suit.


This to prevent Sham-Claims of Persons no way interested in the Property of the Goods.






14. No Goods to be carried Coast-ways without a Custom-house Dispatch, or Landed, but in presence of an Officer.


These Three Clauses necessary to prevent the Frauds usually practised in the Coast Trade.






15. Fisher Boats, Coal Ships, or other Coast∣ing Vessels, taking in any Uncustomed or Prohibited, or Certificat Goods at Sea, with∣out Warrant, shall be forfeited, unless in Ca∣ses of absolute necessity.






16. Foreign Goods carried up the Naviga∣ble Rivers, shall have Custom-house Di∣spatches, as if carried from Port to Port.






17. Endorsed Cocquets to be by Actual En∣dorsement on the first Warrant in all Cases where 'tis practicable.


This saves the Merchant the unnecessary trouble and charge of Two Entries, and se∣cures the Revenue better from double Ship∣ping of Subsidy Goods and Double Deben∣tures for Certificat Goods.






18. No Bounty to be paid for Corn Ex∣ported, without the same Proof which the Law already requires, before the Bond be Cancell'd.


Security being already required for Export∣ing such Corn, the Reason of the Law holds against paying the Bounty, till such Security be duly discharged by a Certificat of the Actual Exportation.






19. No Ship importing any Foreign Goods shall discharge the same into Lighters, but on a Sufferance with Condition to secure a due Entry of all such Goods.


The unshipping Goods before Entry creates a Forfeiture in Law; And tho' Trade may be accommodated in this Particular, yet the King's Security should not be lessened.






20. Officers to be settled in the Isles of 
Man, Guernzy,
 and 
Jerzy,
 &c. with Autho∣rities to prevent Irregular Trade.


Without such Care those Islands may be made Magazines for Plantation and Prohibited Goods, which will be more easily stollen from thence into 
England.






21. and 22. Certain enumerated Goods paying very high Duties, as also all 
French
 and Prohibted Goods being seized and con∣demned to be sold by Inch of Candle; The King to have Two thirds of such Sale, paying the charge of Prosecution, and no Letter of Li∣cence to be granted for Compounding such Seizures.


The Reason of these Clauses is, that the King's Share by Composition, and even his Moiety of the ordinary Appraisements, comes to less than the Duty on some Goods, which tends to run the Revenue into Forfeiture by Collusive Seizures, wherein the Merchant will find his Account.






 23. The Commissioners may compound Petty Seizures only where the Subsidy does not exceed 40 shillings.


This always allowed in the Commission of the Custom, as supposing the Goods will not answer the Charge of the Prosecution in the 
Exchequer;
 nevertheless the Practice of it is uneasie to hat Court.






24. The Register of Ships hitherto requi∣red for such only as trade to the Plantations, to be extended to all 
English
 Ships trading to any Foreign Parts, in order to preserve the Pri∣vileges intended by the Act of Navigation to 
English
 Ships and 
English
 Seamen entire to them.


This Cluse does only pursue the Inten∣tion of the Act of Navigation, by encoura∣ging the Juilding of Ships in 
England,
 and employing of 
Englilish
 Seamen.






25. Masters of Ships coming from Foreign Parts, tho' pretending to be in Ballast, to make Declaration at the 
Custom-house


That 
he Pretence of Ballast may not be a Cover to Fraud, as it proves too often.






26, & 30. The Commanders of Men of War and Yatchs coming from Foreign Parts, as also Masters of Vessels employed in the Service of the Navy, Victualling, or Tran∣sports, to be subject to Declaration and Rules as well as others.


This nought to be a necessary Caution, to prevent Opportunities of Smuggling, under Colour of the Publick Service.






27, 28, 29. The Oaths required from Ma∣sters of Ships to be writ down on the Reports Inwards, and the Contents Outwards, to be Signed by the Masters of the Ships, and to be attested by the proper Officers administring the same respectively.


The Law already requires the Oath and the making it more solemn, by writing it down to be read and subscribed, before sworn may procure a greater Regard of it.






31. A Regular Account of all Seizures to be given from time to time to the Commissioners.


The necessary to prevent Discharges with∣out die Course of Law.






32. All Bonds duly Certified to be Cancelled, and the Certificate to be annexed to the Bond, to justifie the Officer in Cancelling the same.


The present Practice, is to return the Bonds into the 
Exchequer
 without Cancelling; so that if the Certificate happens to be lost, the Mer∣chantis unreasonably prosecuted.






33. Bonds not duly Certified, to be re∣turned regularly into the 
Exchequer,
 in or∣der to a Prosecution.


This no less reasonable than the other, to discourage Irregular Practices.






34. The Impositions to be accompted for in the 
Exchequer
 by the Patent-Officers in the Year-Books as well as the Subsidy.


Those Duties now amounting to more than the Old Subsidy, may deserve as much Care from the Officer in rendring a just Account of then.






35. Collectors to give in their Quarterly Accounts of Incidents upon Oath, and all Officers to attend diligently at reasonable Hours the Dispatch of Merchants Business.


The first Part but a reasonable Caution from the Officer, and the other a just Regard to the Accommodation of Trade.






Ʋpon the whole Matter, This Bill is of very Publick Concernment: For as there was in the Year ending at 
Michaelmas
 l
st near 1500000 
l.
 in Money received for Duties at the 
Custom-house,
 and applied to the Discharge of the Debt of the Nation, It is plain that a due Collection of these Duties does not only tend to en∣courage Trade in General, but to ease the Land of every Gentleman in 
England
 of so much of that Publick Burthen which must otherwise come upon it. And if there be ony one Clause in the whole Bill, which upon due Deliberation shall be found Impracticable or too Rigorous, the Bill being framed as it is by Rules to make it more intelligible in fewer Words, any one of them may be left out without Pre∣judice to the rest, as having no necessary Dependance on, or Connexion with one another.









