A Full and true account of the landing and reception of the late King James at Kinsale with the particulars of the ships, arms, ammunition, men, and money that he brought with him : in a letter from Bristol April 1st, 1689.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A40567




Wing F2306



ESTC R11317





ocm 13791238




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Full and true account of the landing and reception of the late King James at Kinsale with the particulars of the ships, arms, ammunition, men, and money that he brought with him : in a letter from Bristol April 1st, 1689.
1 sheet (2 p.)   


London :


Printed by D.M.,


1689.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
James --  II, --  King of England, 1633-1701.
Great Britain --  History --  Revolution of 1688.
Broadsides --  England --  London --  17th century
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-07
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2013-07
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F2306


R11317


13791238


101844












A Full and True ACCOUNT OF THE 
Landing and Reception
 OF THE Late King JAMES AT KINSALE, WITH The Particulars of the Ships, Arms, Ammu∣nition, Men and Money, that He brought with Him. In a Letter from 
Bristol, April
 1st. 1689.




Licensed,


April 4. 1689.
 
James Fraser.






SIR,


THis Day Landed several of my Acquaintance who left the County of 
Cork
 on the 24th of 
March,
 and give the following Particulars of the Late King 
James
's Landing and Reception there.


On the 12th of 
March
 entered the Harbor of 
Kinsale
 12 great Men of War with 
French
 Colours, 3 Fireships, 8 Merchantmen, and cast Anchor before the Fort. Soon after the Earl of 
Clancartie,
 who commanded in that place, having Notice of His Late Majesties being in the Fleet, gave Order to his Regiment to draw up ready to receive him, whil'st he went on Board the 
St. Michael
 to Congratulate His Happy Arrival to that King∣dom. In the Afternoon His Majesty Landed, and went up to the Fort, being accompanied by the Duke of 
Berwick,
 Mr. 
Fitz-James,
 the Mar∣quis of 
Powis,
 the Earl 
Melfort,
 and the Bishop of 
Chester,
 who lay tha
 Night in the Fort.




Those who came with His Majesty debarqued also at the same time, and went up to the Town, being to the Number of 150 Officers, which were all the Persons that embarqued at 
Brest.


There His Majesty stay'd till the 15th, in which time the Arms, Ammu∣nition and Money were brought ashore, and laid up in the Fort.


The List of the Arms delivered at 
Brest
 amounted to 15000, together with 30000 Swords and Ammunition proportionable to the Service. There was also a 100000 
l.
 in Money.


During His Majesties stay here, Lieutenant General 
Maccartie,
 and seve∣ral 
Irish
 Officers came to Congratulate His Arrival, and on the 15th, he went to 
Cork,
 and lay at 
St. Dominicks,
 being received by the 
Irish,
 after their rude and barbarous manner, by Bagpipes, Dancing, throwing their Mantles under his Horses Feet, making a Garland of a Cabbage Stump, and such like Expressions of Joy.


During His stay at 
Cork,
 Mr. 
Brady,
 the Minister of the place, and Ten Men of 
Bandon
 petition'd Him for Pardon for that Town, which he granted, saying, 
You may now see you have a Gracious King.
 And when the Earl of 
Clancartie,
 and Duke of 
Berwick
 urg'd the Destruction of that Nest of Rebels: To the first he said, 
He was a Young Man.
 And to the latter, 
That he was a Fool.


After that, came many of the distressed 
English,
 complaining of their barbarous Usage, and how all they had was taken. Whereupon He issued out a Proclamation to quiet all, and that Restitution might be made to them; which the 
Rabble
 (or 
Rapperies,
 as they call them) little regard∣ing, continued plundering publickly every day, not sparing even their own Party: Insomuch that of Ten Oxen which were sent the King as a Pre∣sent, Two of them were by those Villains taken away.


Two Days after, notwithstanding the King's Promise of Pardon to those of 
Bandon,
 several were Indicted at the Assizes, insomuch that 30 or 40 of them fled by this Opportunity, and came to 
Bristol,
 being frightned at the bloody Proceeding against one Mr. 
Brown,
 who was Hang'd, Drawn and Quartered at the same Assizes.


Several Petitions were also preferr'd for the Pardon of Sir 
Thomas South∣well,
 Capt. 
Mills,
 and many others, who being taken in their way to the 
North,
 were carried to 
Galloway,
 and there Try'd, and Condemn'd to dye: But the King rejected their Petition; however, reprieved them for three weeks, deferring it till His Arrival at 
Dublin,
 to which place 
He
 set for∣ward on the 21st in the morning.


This, Sir, is what's confirmed by all Persons come over, who were Eye-Witnesses of all that is here related; and who farther add, that most of the 
French
 Ships set Sail back again on the 17th for 
Brest.


I am, Sir,
 
Yours.












LONDON,
 Printed by 
D. M.
 1689.









