A Full and exact relation of the fight betwixt the Henry, an East-India merchant-man, and the Marine, a French man of war of 40 guns, on the coast of Ireland on the 12th of July 1695 written from Ireland by an officer of the said ship.
Approx. 10 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A40540




Wing F2277A



ESTC R36442





ocm 15691222




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Full and exact relation of the fight betwixt the Henry, an East-India merchant-man, and the Marine, a French man of war of 40 guns, on the coast of Ireland on the 12th of July 1695 written from Ireland by an officer of the said ship.
1 sheet (2 p.)   


London :


Printed by R.E. and are to be sold by J. Whitlock ...,


1695.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History, Naval --  Stuarts, 1603-1714.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702.
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-09
Judith Siefring
Sampled and proofread
2012-09
Judith Siefring
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F2277A


R36442


15691222


104416












A Full and Exact Relation of the Fight betwixt the
 Henry, 
an
 East-India 
Merchant-man, and the
 Marine, 
a French Man of War of 40 Guns, on the Coast of
 Ireland, 
on the 12th of
 July, 1695.


Written from 
Ireland
 by an Officer of the said Ship.


Dingle Couch,


July
 21. 1695.
 
Dear Brother,


IN my last I had not time to give you a short Narration of our Voyage and Misfor∣tune since we departed 
India,
 which is as followeth:


We departed 
Surrat
 the 19th of 
January,
 1694/5. and saw the 
Cape of Good▪ Hope
 about the 7th of 
April;
 the 8th, 
ditto,
 our Gunner by accident blew up, as we did suppose, in small Cases, Powder-Horns and Granado-shells, above 30 
l.
 of Powder in the Gun-room, which fired our Ship. It pleased God, by cutting up our Decks, and throwing Water, we quencht it in about two hours. The Gunner died next day by the Wounds he received; his Mate is still living, but has lost as yet the Use of both his Hands. There were several others that had small hurts. About the 3d or 4th of 
May
 we saw the Island 
Ascension;
 and the 10th of this instant we made the Land of 
Ireland,
 in the Latitude of 54. Degr. or thereabouts, it being very thick hazy Weather, and so much Wind and Rain, that we could not deal with it. On 
Friday
 the 12th Instant, about 7 in the morning, we made the 
Skellicks,
 steering directly in with them, still the Wind fresh, thick Weather, and a great Sea. About 10 in the morning we saw a Sail without us bearing down; we prepared our Ship for a Fight, and still kept on our Course towards the 
Skellicks.
 Just as we got into the Sound, which was about 3 of the Clock, the Ship came up with us under En∣glish Colours within a Ships length, and bid us strike for King 
James.
 We told him, We would not. In Answer he said, He would make us presently, and in a very short time fired his Broad-side and Small Shot. We answered him with the like Salute. Then he laid us on Board athwart the Harse, and entred about 100 Men on our Forecastle. The Broad-side he gave us by Misfortune carried away the Bulk-head of our Cuddy, and laid those Close Quarters quite open, and at the same time killed Mr. 
John Pluncknett
 a Gentleman on Board us; which forc'd the Men that were quartered there to retire into the Steeridge and great Cabbin. At the first of the entring, by what Accident I know not, they took our Forecastle, where we had 15 Men quartered, of which they carried away 13, and left one dead, and another sadly mangled, his Right Hand being off, and his Mouth and Jaw shot to pieces. All this time from the Steeridge Quarters we gauld them on our Forecastle, and on their Quarter and Poop, they still halling away their Dead Men, and re-entring fresh. We forc'd them to forsake the top of our Forecastle; then they made themselves Masters of the Quarter-deck and Round-house, and down our Stair-case, which was open, they cast down G
anada-shells and Stink-pots, and fired Pistols, with which they wounded 2 Men; one of them died afterwards: We had nothing to return that could offend them but Huzzaes, that they might know we were in being; and so guarded the Passage, that they could not descend. In the Interim, after the Ships staying 2 hours or more thwart our Harse, they cast round our Starboard Bow along our side at about a Ships Breadth distance: We gave him a Broad-side, at the receiving of which he stood off, and brought on the Careen, leaving about 40 or 50 Men on Board us. We forc'd them out of the Round-house, and they lodg'd most on the Poop (except such as were in our Tops cutting our Rigging, and in our Forecastle.) We design'd to Sally, but our Small-Arms were all disabled, having flown out of the Stocks, and cloyed with often firing; and some of the Locks broke, which we fired with Matches, one taking Aim, and the other giving Fire. Then we resolved to convey half a Barrel of Powder into the Round-house, to blow up the Poop, which accordingly we conveyed there, and fired, but did not the expected Ex∣ecution. Finding no other means, but to venture at all, resolving they should not have the Ship, we carried a whole Barrel of Powder into the former place, and set Fire thereto, but it did not the expected Execution in blowing up the Deck; the reason we suppose to be, was by the Bulk head being down, and the Powder decayed. Then we resolved to Sally with our Swords, half Pikes, and Javelings, which accordingly we did; they having Fire-Arms were too hard for

 us; we had one Man killed, but took two of theirs Prisoners: We Sallied again, and mounted the Quarter Deck; they being on the Poop, in the Mizen Sh
rds and Tops, and some over the Ships Quarter: We bid them cast over-board their Arms, and they should have good Quarter, and they said if we did not lay down our Arms and Sur∣render, we should have no Quarter: They fired several small Arms, which fired one of our Mens Eyes almost out, either they had no shot in them, or were bad Marks-men, otherwise they must needs have killed many of us. After a long Parley, they begun to Surrender. The Ship was on fire on the Larboard Quarter, which I judge was caused by the last Barrel of Powder we blew up. We secured their Offi∣cers, and set their Men and some of ours to the Pump, and putting the Fire out, o∣thers to Trimming the Sails; the Rigging was so much cut and shot, that we could not brace the Yards, and she was a shoar immediately, and the Fire as high as the Mizen Top: In the interim we were doing this, the Ship struck against the Rocks, about a Mile from a place called 
Vintrey,
 and three Miles from hence. The Man of War lay all this while hovering about a Mile from us: In the time of our Fight, we gave him our Larboard Guns, which was the last salute he received from us: 'tis sup∣pos'd he receiv'd more dammage than we can imagine; otherwise his Men say he would have boarded us again, for they call'd to him on our Poop to come, signifying if they did, the Ship would be theirs. After we had Conquered them that were on Board; we found they were 35, or 40 sound men, far exceeding our Number; but the Ship running a shoar, we all were left to the mercy of the Fire and Water, the first was soon got to our Main Mast. We had 3 Men killed, and about 7 wound∣ed in the Action, 1 Dyed on the Rocks of his Wounds, and about 4 Drown'd and Starv'd with Cold: It was about 7 at Night when we ran a shore, and nigh 12 be∣fore all were got off, there going a great Sea. Here is constantly, as People tell us, Men of War and Privateers of the Enemies Cruizing off of this Port: I have seen 2 (three or four times) and now they lay nigh the 
B
asketts;
 tho' it pleased God four Days since, a small Ship called the 
Susanna,
 belonging to 
Bristol,
 about 100 Tünns, 
John Vic
are
 Master, from 
Mevis,
 got safe in. The Man of War that we fought, was of 36 Guns and 280 Men, called the 
Marine
 of 
Brest,
 Commanded by Captain 
Neagle.
 They had a great many 
English
 and 
Irish
 men on Board: Some of our Pri∣soners are 
English
 Men. The Country hath secured 27, the most of note are Escaped. One 
Fitz Gerrard
 who was the Commissary, had a Letter found in his Pocket, of some Importance.




Men Dead in the Voyage.


Hugh Levelis
 Chief Mate.


Richard Foster.


Job Herbert.


John Hawkins.


John Hobbs.


Thomas Eales.


Robert Lee,
 Gunner.


George William
 a Dutchman.


John Jackson.


William Thornehurst.






Killed in the Action.


Mr. 
John Plucknett.


Mr. 
Walter Aston.


Abraham Starke
 a Dutch man.






Drown'd and Died upon the Rocks.


William Merton.


John Waton.


Harman Mire
 a Dutchman.


Edward Rutteridge.






Carried Prisoners to 
France.


Robert Hudson.


Ralph Porter.


John Adean.


John Daynes.


Edward Brumidge.


Edmond Duke.


Phillip Lee.


Henry Lewis,
 and 5 more.




What I have here Writ, is a True Account of the Action, and more we could not do to save the Ship. I thank God I escaped with Life, and received no other Da∣mage than a small Blast, which took the left side of my Face, and scorched me a little; my Eye was hurt, but now I thank God I am well of it. There is not a prospect of much to be saved, for there is a Storm now which hath shatter'd her bottom all to pieces, and the Canes are floating about the Sea.


I am, Your Affectionate Brother, 
&c.










LONDON,
 Printed by 
R. E.
 and are to be Sold by 
J. Whitlock
 near 
Stationers-Hall,
 1695.









