A Full and true relation of the remarkable fight betwixt Capt. Hamilton and Capt. Brown, commanders of the two Scotch frigats, and three French men of war that brought over the Irish men to joyn Dundee in the Western sea, as it was delivered to some of the privy counsellors in Scotland, by those that were eye witnesses during the whole action.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A40597




Wing F2329



ESTC R36521





ocm 15714413




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Full and true relation of the remarkable fight betwixt Capt. Hamilton and Capt. Brown, commanders of the two Scotch frigats, and three French men of war that brought over the Irish men to joyn Dundee in the Western sea, as it was delivered to some of the privy counsellors in Scotland, by those that were eye witnesses during the whole action.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


London :


Printed for Rich. Chiswell ...,


1689.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History, Naval --  Stuarts, 1603-1714.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702.
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-10
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F2329


R36521


15714413


104498












A Full and True RELATION OF THE Remarkable Fight BETWIXT Capt. HAMILTON and Capt. BROWN, Commanders of the Two 
Scotch
 FRIGATS, AND Three 
French
 Men of WAR, 
That brought over the
 IRISH 
Men to Joyn
 Dundee 
in the
 Western 
Sea, as it was delivered to some of the Privy Counsellors in
 Scotland, 
by those that were Eye Witnesses during the whole Action.
 LICENSED 
Aug. 2. 1689. J. Fraser.


IN regard that the Bravery and Gallantness of the last Actions of Captain 
Hamilton
 and Captain 
Brown's
 Lives are so Remar∣kable, and not frequently paralell'd, I think it not amiss to give you a particular and distinct Account of them, as it was deli∣vered to some Members of the Privy-Council here, by one of the Lieutenants of those Frigats that had the good Fortune to come off after he had been taken Prisoner, and by other persons now in Town, who were present, and Witnesses of what past, which was thus. On 
Wednesday
 the 
10th.
 of 
July,
 Captain 
Ha∣milton
 Commanding the 
Pelican
 carrying 18 Guns and 120 Men, and Captain 
Brown
 in the 
Jennet
 Frigate carrying 12 Guns and 80 Men, as they were Cruising between the Mull of 
Kintire
 in 
Scot∣land
 and 
Carrichsergus Lough
 in 
Ireland,
 happened to discover at Sea to the Southward three Sail of Ships, to whom they immedi∣ately ply'd up, and when they came within such a distance as to be able to discern them; they observed them to look like En∣glish built Ships, carrying the English Flag and Colours, which led them into the mistake of believing them to be English and Friends: This obliged them to make up close to them to Salute them; but they did not sooner perceive their Errour, than they

 found it impossible to Retreat; they being three French Men of War, having on Aboard a Battalion of 400 Men of Collonel 
Por∣sils
 Regiment of Foot, that was going to joyn 
Dundee;
 the big∣gest of them carrying 36 Guns, the Second 30, and the third 24 Guns: And so to Action they fell immediately, and fought it with all the Gallantry and Resolution imaginable with their Guns above an hour; the two lesser Frigats fell to Captain 
Brown
's share to engage with, and when his Main Mast was shot down, they came and lay aboard him, in which Action his Right Arm was shot off with a Canon Bullet, yet notwithstanding he maintained the Fight Resolutely, and continued giving directions and Orders to his Men, untill he received seven Musket Bullets in his Body, the last of which killed him dead, one 
Cambell
 his Lieutenant maintain'd the Fight with the same Gallantry, until be∣ing over power'd by the Enemies men, who after great slaughters coming on board found the Lieutenant lying on the Deck, Shot throught the right Thigh, the right Shoulder, and left Arm, hav∣ing only 14 Men alive, whereof 8 were wounded and disabled. Captain 
Brown
's Ship being thus taken, these two Frigats Joyn the great one, and all three fall on Captain 
Hamilton,
 who made his part good against the French Man alone, and when his Ship had been much batter'd and torn, the two biggest Ships came and en∣deavoured to board him; and with them he fought a considerable time, his Ship being better provided for a close Fight then Cap∣tain 
Brown's
 was, he had the misfortune to be thrice boarded by the Enemy, and the Courage to clear his Deck as often of them. At last his Forecastle and Steerage being torn open by the violence and frequency of the Enemies Shot, and the hand gra∣nadoes doing much mischief to his Men, the Enemy boarded him the fourth time in great Numbers, so that looking upon himself and his Ship for lost, as his last affort, gave orders to his Gunner to go down to the hold and blow up the Ship; and he no sooner gave the word of Command for Executing what he had purposed to do, but a Cannon Bullet at random Shot from the third Ship, came and dispatcht him, and hindred his last orders from being obey'd. And so his Ship fell into the Enemies hands, and of the 120 Men he had on board, only 30 Men were found alive, whereof the greatest part were wounded and much disabled. In this Action there were killed of our People, the two Captains, one hundred and fifty Six Men; and of the Enemies one French Captain, two Lieutenants, two hundred and Eighteen Men, and many wounded.


This Account we have from some that were taken and now have made their Escape, and from those that have been aboard the French Ship since the Action, as also from some of those Irish that were taken prisoners since that time, all their Relations agreeing as above is mentioned.










LONDON,
 Printed for 
Rich, Chiswell
 at the 
Rose
 and 
Crown
 in St. 
Pauls Church-Yard.
 1689.









