A Full and true account of the beseiging and taking of Carrickfergus by the Duke of Schomberg as also a relation of what has lately pass'd in the islands of Antego, Mevis, and Monteserrat, in the West-Indies, where Their Majesties have beensolemnly proclaim'd: in a letter from Chester of August the  31st.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A40561




Wing F2302A



ESTC R9520





ocm 13744877




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Full and true account of the beseiging and taking of Carrickfergus by the Duke of Schomberg as also a relation of what has lately pass'd in the islands of Antego, Mevis, and Monteserrat, in the West-Indies, where Their Majesties have beensolemnly proclaim'd: in a letter from Chester of August the  31st.
1 sheet (2 p.)   


London :


Printed for Richard Baldwin ...,


1689.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Schomberg, Friedrich Hermann Schomberg, --  Duke of, 1615-1690.
Carrickfergus (Northern Ireland) --  History --  Siege, 1689.
West Indies --  History --  17th century.
Broadsides --  England --  London --  17th century
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-09
Judith Siefring
Sampled and proofread
2012-09
Judith Siefring
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F2302A


R9520


13744877


101696












A Full and True ACCOUNT Of the Besieging and Taking of CARRICK FERGUS BY THE DUKE of 
SCHOMBERG;
 As also a RELATION Of what has lately pass'd in the Islands of ANTEGO, MEVIS, and MONTESERRAT in the 
West-Indies:
 Where Their MAJESTIES have been Solemnly Proclaim'd.




Licensed and Entered according to Order.






In a Letter from
 Chester 
of
 August 
the
 31st.


THE 
Irish
 finding that they had not gain'd much Reputation by their Actions in the Field, or by being valiant and successful in the taking of Towns, were resolved at last to try what they could do in keeping of Towns committed to their Care and Courage: 
Carrick fergus
 was the place where they thought sit, in some measure, to retrieve their Credit and Reputation: But when our Frigats at Sea, and Land Forces at Land had appeared before it, and made such Breaches in the Walls, and Destruction in the Town, by their Guns and Bombs, they judged in safest for them to Capitulate and Surrender; which they did on 
Wednesday
 last. The Garrison consisted of near Two thousand Men, and though at the first Summons sent them by the Duke of 
Schom∣berg,
 they were so stout as to refuse to hearken to any Conditions of Surren∣der, yet their Courage not continuing long, they accepted of the Terms of Marching out with Colours flying Arms, and Drums beating, 
&c.
 and to go to 
Charlemont.
 But such was the ill nature of the Rabble, that they fell upon

 them in their March, and disarm'd them. The Town has been so misera∣bly defaced by the continual playing of the Bombs for Five Days together, that it looks like a dismal heap of ruine. Sir 
Henry Ingolsby
 is made Go∣vernour of the Town and Castle: A great deal of Arms, Ammunition, and Provisions of all sorts, was found in the Town. This has cleared the 
North,
 for the most part, of any considerable Party of the 
Irish:
 many come in dayly to the General. The Ships come last Night to 
High-lake,
 assure us of the Arrival of the Four Regiments of Horse into the 
Bay
 of 
Carrick-fer∣gus;
 who were turning in into the 
Lake
 on 
Wednesday,
 as the Ships that are arrived here were turning out from thence.


Neither is it in 
Scotland
 and 
Ireland
 only, where Success does so constantly attend their Majesties Affairs, but even the 
West-Indies
 afford us variety of Examples of Zeal for his Majesties Service: For the Blossom of 
London
 coming from 
Antego,
 in 
June
 last, and arrived here two days ago, brings the News, that Sr. 
Nathaniel Johnston
 not finding it safe for him to continue longer upon those Islands, whereof he had the Government committed to him in the late Reign, is gone to 
Carolina,
 and that the Inhabitants of 
Mevis
 and other Islands had constituted Major General 
Codrington
 Governour in his room; That the 
Irish
 Planters and Inhabitants of 
Montserat
 had declared for the late King, and appeared in a Body of Seven or Eight hundred Men for that Interest, but that Colonel 
Blakeston,
 the Governour of the said Island had raised what 
English
 men he could, to the number of Two hun∣dred, with which he was resolved to attack them: But the 
Irish
 no sooner saw him appear with that unequal number of 
English,
 and to march to∣wards them, but they all offered to lay down their Arms, and upon Arti∣cles promised to disperse; at which instant of time a Reinforcement of an Hundred and fifty Men arrived from 
Antego
 and seized the chief of the 
Irish,
 brought them up Prisoners to 
Antego,
 and solemnly Proclaim'd King 
William
 and Queen 
Mary,
 with all possible Demonstrations of Joy and Gladness. The new Governour 
Codrington
 hath sent an Hundred Men from 
Mevis
 to St. 
Christopher
's to strengthen the 
English
 Interest in that Island.


Lord 
Hewets,
 and Colonel 
Villers
 Regiments of Horse are to embark with the first fair Wind for 
Ireland
 to joyn the Duke of 
Schomberg.












LONDON,
 Printed for 
Richard Baldwin
 near the 
Black-Bull
 in the 
Old-Baily.
 MDCLXXXIX.









