A Full and true account of two famous and signal victories obtained by Their Majesties forces over the Irish rebels, the first over General Sarsfield, near the Shannon, raising the siege of Bir, taking all their cannon and killing an hundred and sixty on the spot, driving them over the Shannon, the second over four thousand raparees, the killing five hundred of them, and taking all their arms also the arrival of Sir Clovesly Shovel with Their Majesties fleet : with many other material occurrences : in a letter from Dublin.
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A40579




Wing F2311C



ESTC R11320





ocm 13791442




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Full and true account of two famous and signal victories obtained by Their Majesties forces over the Irish rebels, the first over General Sarsfield, near the Shannon, raising the siege of Bir, taking all their cannon and killing an hundred and sixty on the spot, driving them over the Shannon, the second over four thousand raparees, the killing five hundred of them, and taking all their arms also the arrival of Sir Clovesly Shovel with Their Majesties fleet : with many other material occurrences : in a letter from Dublin.
1 sheet (2 p.)   


London :


Printed for T. Cooper,


1690.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Sarsfield, Patrick, --  Earl of Lucan, d. 1693.
Shovell, Clowdisley, --  Sir, 1650-1707.
Ireland --  History --  War of 1689-1691.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702.
Broadsides --  England --  London --  17th century
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-11
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2012-11
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F2311C


R11320


13791442


101847














A Full and True ACCOUNT Of Two Famous and Signal VICTORIES Obtained by Their Majesties Forces OVER THE IRISH REBELS.



The 
First
 over General 
Sarsfield,
 near the 
Shannon,
 Raising the Siege of 
Bir,
 taking all their Can∣non, and Killing an Hundred and Sixty on the Spot, driving them over the 
Shannon.


The 
Second
 over Four Thousand Raparees; the Killing Five Hundred of them, and taking all their Arms.




Also the Arrival of Sir 
Clovesly Shovel
 with Their Majesties Fleet. With many other Material Occurrences.


In a Letter from
 Dublin.


SIR,


SINCE my last, of the Action of Major General 
Scravemore
 and 
Tetau,
 and that of 
Levison
's Dra∣goons, we have receiv'd the fol∣
owing Accounts from our Forces: That 
ome Scouts of M. General 
Scravemore,
 
ad Two days agoe brought to him Two Raparee Prisoners they had taken, who were sound to be Officers among 
hem, and very Intelligent Persons, up∣
n their Examination they could not 
e brought to Confess any thing about their Associates, or where the chief Rende
vous of any Numbers of them were, upon which one of them were immediately Executed, and Orders were given for the Execution of the other, upon which he consessed where a great Body of them were: The General im∣mediately ordered a strong Detachment to be sent with the Guide, who marched secretly by covered ways, till they came near to a Mountainous place, be∣tween which, in a great Vale, were got

 together between Three and Four Thou∣sand of them, with a great quantity of Cattle, that they had gotten from the Counties adjacent (they were Carousing themselves, some taking of Snees, others Smoaking and Drinking;) upon the approach of our Forces, the Raparee Rebels gave a great Shout or Cry, like that of the 
Turks,
 seeming to come on with a great deal of Resolution; but on our Forces first Fire they immediately Fled, leaving their Prey of Cattle, and most of their Arms, among which were Fifty Silver Hilted Swords, supposed to belong to their Chief Officers: Our Forces pursued them with a great Slaughter, killing between Five and Six Hundred of them, and taking many Prisoners.


We likewise have an Account from 
Connaught
-side, That the Body of the 
Irish,
 consisting of between Five and Six Thousand, that have been moving for some time, about the 
Shannon,
 Com∣manded by 
Sarsfield
 and others, hav∣ing crossed the 
Shannon
 and come on this side, they Marched with Five Can∣non to a strong Town and Castle called 
Bir,
 which belonged to one Sir 
Lawrence Parsons,
 it's Scituated within Two Miles of the 
Shannon,
 Fifty Two from 
Dublin,
 and as many from 
Cork,
 and being come within Two Hundred Yards of the Place, they sent a Summons to the Governor to Surrender, who had in it a Garrison of about Eighty Soldi∣ers, besides Townsmen in Arms; the Governor sent back a Resolute Answer, That he knew no King but King 
William,
 for whom he kept the Castle, and to whom he hoped to be able to give a good Account of his Trust, by a Resolute De∣fence; on which the Enemy raised a Battery with their Cannon, from whence they Played pretty briskly on the Place; the Garrison at the same time (and while the Battery was raising) Played as briskly from the Castle on the Enemy, and killed a great many of their Men; while this was doing, Lieutenant Gene∣ral 
Douglas;
 and Sir 
John Lanier,
 who were going in Pursuit of 
Sarsfield
 and his Parties, hearing the Guns Play too
 the Alarm, and by their Scouts or Ad∣vanced Parties, had Advice brough
 them, that the Enemy had laid Siege to 
Bir,
 on which they immediately March∣ed thither with their whole Force, upon whose Approach the Enemy raised th
 Siege, and retired over the 
Shannon
 a¦gain, leaving their Cannon and Baggage and about 160 of their Company Dea
 on the Place, which had been Killed b
 the Cannon from the Garrison.


We have an Account from all hands That the 
Irish
 are fallen under miserabl
 Necessities, and what is more to ou
 Comfort, things are like to grow muc
 worse with the Rog
s. The Train'd Bands or Militia of 
he several Coun¦ties, Cities, and Towns in Their Ma¦jesties Possession, are Raising, and man
 Raised and Armed to be in a posture 
 assist in Defending the Country Peopl
 this Winter from the Insolencies and Vi
¦lanies of the Raparees. Trade begins t
 Flourish, and fall into its old Channe
 again: And the Effects at the 
Custom
 House
 advances very much. The great∣est Want we fear this Winter is Coal for Firing.


Sir 
Clovesly Shovel,
 with his whol
 Fleet, came into the Bay of 
Waterfor
 Two Days since, and we hear he is Sail¦ing again towards the Coast of 
Galway
 in search of some 
French
 that we hea
 is Crusing there-abouts; but we hea
 not one Word of the Grand Fleet.










London,
 Printed for 
T. Cooper.
 1690.









