A Faithful account of a great engagement which happened on Good-Friday the 18th instant before the city of Dublin the late King James being himself in person at the head of his troops : with a relation of the taking his admiral routing his forces and other particulars.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A40763




Wing F260A



ESTC R36411





ocm 15689734




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Faithful account of a great engagement which happened on Good-Friday the 18th instant before the city of Dublin the late King James being himself in person at the head of his troops : with a relation of the taking his admiral routing his forces and other particulars.
1 sheet (2 p.)   


London :


Printed for R. Hayhurst ...,


1690.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Ireland --  History --  War of 1689-1691.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702.
2013-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F260A


R36411


15689734


104384












A Faithful ACCOUNT OF A Great Engagement Which happened On Good-Friday the 18th Instant, BEFORE THE City of Dublin, 
The Late King Iames
 Being Himself in Person, at the Head of His Troops.


With a Relation of The Taking His Admiral, Routing His Forces, and other particulars.




Licensed,
 April 25. 1690.


James Fraser,
 Entred according to Order.




THE joyful News of Sir 
Clowdsley Shovel
's Success at 
Dublin
-Harbour, has much Elevated the de∣prest Spirits of our poor Friends here; and I doubt not but it will meet with the like joyful accep∣tance where-ever it comes, which has much induced me to send you this Letter, which will give you an account of a notable Engagement.


THe before-mentioned Worthy Commander, with the Squa∣dron of Ships mentioned in my last, Arrived safe on 
Good-Friday
 last, in the 
Bay
 of 
Dublin,
 where he spyed in the Harbour, the 
Irish
 Admiral (a 
Scoth
 Ship taken from Captain 
Hammilton,
 and now Commanded by one 
Patrick Bennet
) with about Twenty other Vessels of smaller Burthen, Laden with Hides, Tal∣low,

and Butter, riding at Anchor in 
Polebeg,
 within the Bar. Where∣upon the Captain quitted his own Ship (She being of too great a Bur∣then to enter the Harbour,) and went on Board the 
Monmouth
-Yatch, and with That, and Two more, he went over the Bar, Steering his Course directly towards the 
Irish
-Admiral, who cut her Cables, and endeavoured to run up to 
Kingsend-Point
 (as the other Vessels did, du∣ring the Engagement,) but Sir 
Clowdsley Shovel
 being under Sail, approached so fast, that he forced an Engagement; and the Fight lasted an hour, being closely fol∣lowed on both sides; after which, Captain 
Bennet
 seeing little hopes of Victory, and perceiving many of his Men to lye dead on the Decks, he run the Ship on ground, on the South 
Strand,
 and the Capt. and what Men he had left alive, made their Escape, and got on Shore, leaving his Ship a Prize to that Worthy Commander, our 
English
 Captain. The Firing so briskly in the Harbour, soon Al∣larmed the City, whereupon King 
James,
 and his small Army, being Two Regiments of Foot, and One of Horse, came down on the 
Strand,
 by 
Andrew Cave
's House (about half a Mile from 
Ringsend
) dread∣ing an Invasion, and fearing the business would have gone farther than the loss of his Ships. Sir 
Clowdsley
 Man'd out some long Boats, and by the help of the Tide, brought off the Vessel: King 
James
 himself being a Spectator, and Eye∣witness of this our Commanders Bravery, and his own great loss: And I believe was glad it proceeded no farther. All the Opposition his gazing Soldiers gave, was, Two 
French
 Troops rid into the Water, and shot their Pistols against the side of the Ship: In recompence whereof, a Shot was sent from the Ship, which brought one of the Troopers into the Water, his Horse being shot under him.


Two Boys ran from the Shore (being 
Protestants
) up to their Necks in Water, desiring help from the Sea-men, and were taken up by one of the long Boats.


In this Action we lost not a Man, neither had we any but one Wound∣ed, though there were found in the Enemies Vessels Twenty Dead, besides others, which in the Fight, undoubtedly dropt over-Board.


On 
Munday
 last came in here Forty Five Waggons, belonging to the Train of Artillery; and yester∣day Morning they went down to 
Highlake.


Yesterday came in here Count 
Nassaw
's Regiment of Foot: And to Morrow comes in another Regi∣ment of Foot.


We hear from 
Lisburne,
 of the 14th Instant, That the Forces Shipt off at 
Bristol,
 are safely Arrived there, consisting of Three Thou∣sand Men: And that Fifty Thou∣sand Pounds 
Sterling
 came thither that day: And that our Men are Hearty, and the Weather good; so that we suddenly expect to hear of further Action.










LONDON,
 Printed for 
R. Hayhurst
 in 
Little-Brittain,
 1690.









