A Faithful account of the taking the bridge, and beating down the Irish town of Athlone, which stands on the other side of the Shannon with a perfect diary of every days several actions before the said Irish town, &c. : as also, the welcome news from Kinsaile, giving an impartial account of the safe and happy arrival of the Smirna and Turkey fleets.
Approx. 7 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A40766




Wing F263A



ESTC R7446





ocm 12144699




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Faithful account of the taking the bridge, and beating down the Irish town of Athlone, which stands on the other side of the Shannon with a perfect diary of every days several actions before the said Irish town, &c. : as also, the welcome news from Kinsaile, giving an impartial account of the safe and happy arrival of the Smirna and Turkey fleets.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


London :


Printed for Robert Hayhurst ...,


1691.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Ireland --  History --  War of 1689-1691.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702.
Broadsides --  England --  17th century.
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-03
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2013-03
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F263A


R7446


12144699


54912












A Faithful ACCOUNT OF THE 
Taking the Bridge.
 And 
Beating Down,
 the Irish Town of Athlone, Which stands on The other side of the SHANNON. WITH A Perfect DIARY of every Days several Actions, before the said 
Irish Town,
 &c. AS ALSO, The Welcome News from 
Kinsaile:
 Giving an Impartial Account of the Safe, and Happy Arrival OF THE 
Smirna, and Turkey Fleets.
 
4. July. 1691




LICENS'D, 
July
 the 3
d.
1691. J. FRAISER.






Camp at 
ATHLONE,
 
25th. 
past, (Two in the Afternoon.)


SINCE my last, it's said, The Drum that came to the General, was an Answer to a Message, sent by the General, about Exchange of Priso∣ners on the 
24th.
 This Morning about the Hour of Six, the Drum returned from the Enemies Quarters; all our Hands (that can any ways possibly be spared from other Du∣ty,) are mending the Tin Boats; and our Men are working, with all diligence, in raising of three New Batteries, one below the Bridge, another above it; and the third without the Town-Wall, by the River-side, opposite to a large Bastion, the Enemy have erected, on the other side the River 
Shannon,
 which is there not so broad as the River of 
Thames,
 between 
Westminster Horse Ferry,
 and 
Lambeth
 at Low-Water.


About Seaven of the Clock this Evening, one of the Granadeers belonging to the Lord 
Lisburn
's Regiment going under some Arches of the Bridge of 
Athlone,
 to look for Plunder amongst the Enemies Dead, found a pair of Colours, belonging to a Company of the Earl of 
Clanrickard
's Regiment; which were

on the Breach when we Stormed the Town, and brought them off flying to the General; and though, I believe, 100 Shot were made at him, yet none hurt him: The Lord Ba∣ron 
Ginkle,
 our General, very generously Rewarded him with Five Guineas. The 
25th.
 yesterday the Enemy were very hard at work, in raising two new Batteries above the Castle; the one close by the River side, the other on a rising ground, a distance from it; and about Eight of the Clock last Night they were finished, one of them are of four, the other of three, six Pounders, with the latter of which, they have played briskly on the old Walls of the Town, where our Men are, (but without killing, or wound∣ing any;) with the other, they shot into some of our Regiments, who lay Encamp'd on the Bank of the River, which obliged our Men to Decamp, and remove farther off.


About this Morning, our Battery (below the Bridge) was finished, and 26 four Pound∣ers planted thereon, which has ever since Six this Morning, played incessantly on the Enemies Breast-work, on the other side, by which, most of the said Breast-work is beat down and levelled with the ground; as also, most of the Houses that stood on the other side the Town; by which means, the Ene∣mies Works are so much exposed to our view, that they are forced to quit the Town, a great part or them retiring to 
S
's Camp, others retiring behind the Castle, and in the Work over the Bridge, which in a few hours, from our upper Battery, will be soon likewise ruined, and it's not doubt∣ed, but that very soon we may acquaint you, that we are Masters of the River, and Ruined Town of 
Athlone:
 Our Guns are now firing very furiously from all our Bat∣teries, with very good success.






26th. 
At Noon.
 Sir,


Yesterday our Guns and Mortars played incessantly against the Enemies Works, 
&c.
 The Tin-Boats are all mended, and all things in a readiness to attempt our Passage over the River 
Shan∣non,
 &c. which will be at three several pla∣ces, both above, and below the 
Bridge of Athlone;
 and I am certainly informed, that to Morrow will be the Day. A Deserter that came into our Camp this Morning, says The Enemies Army hourly expects our going over the 
Shannon.






27th. 
At Seven of the Clock in the Eve∣ning.


Just now we have possessed our selves of the whole 
Bridge of Athlone,
 to the very Works of the 
Irissi Town;
 two Arches of the 
Bridge
 were broke down by the Enemies Troops, one of which we have mended, and the other is to be mended this Night; and to morrow Morning, by Break of Day, there is Eight fresh Regiments appointed to Storm the Town.






Kinsaile
 
the 26
th.


This Day is seen off of our Hills, a great Fleet, consist∣ing, as near as we can tell them, of be∣tween Sixty and Seventy Sail, which we are assured, is the 
Smirna,
 and 
Turkey
 Fleet.








Advertisement.


☞ An Exact Description of the Roads of 
Connaught,
 and part of 
Mu
,
 at present possess'd by the 
, Rebels;) giving the True Distances of the Several Cities, Towns, Passes and Places of Strength, each from the o∣ther; with their due Distances from Their Ma∣jesties Frontier Towns. Also, an Exact Ac∣count of the Situation of the Enemies Chief For∣tified Places, 
viz. LYMERICK, Ath∣lone, GALWAY,
 and 
SLEGOE,
 their present Fortifications; with the Additio∣nal Works lately made by the 
French
 and 
Irish.
 Very necessary for all Gentlemen and others, now our Army are Marched into the Enemies Quar∣ters. Price 
One Penny.


☞ An Exact Description of the Roads of 
Flanders,
 (according to the last and best Sur∣vey) giving the True Distances of all the Cities, Towns, Castles, and Places of Strength (each from the other) in the Ten Provinces. And the most possable Roads for the Confederate Army (Commanded by the King of 
England
) to March to any Place. And the passable Ways, by which the Confederate Army may enter into the very Heart of 
France.
 With distinguishing Characters; Shewing What Part of 
Flanders
 is possest by the 
Spaniards;
 What by the 
Dutch;
 What by the Bishop of 
Liege;
 What by the 
French;
 and What by the Duke of 
Juliers.
 Very necessary for Accomodating all Gentlemen and others (during the War in 
Flanders
) in Reaning the 
English
 and Foreign 
Gazatts,
 and other Intelligences, of the Movements and Acti∣ons of the Confederate and 
French
 Armies. Price, 
Two Pence.


Both Printed for, and are to be Sold by 
Robert Hayhurst,
 at the 
Axe
 in 
Little-Britain.










London,
 Printed for 
Robert Hayhurst,
 at the 
Axe
 in 
Little-Britain,
 1691.









