The famous tragedie of King Charles I basely butchered by those who are, omne nesas proni patare pudoris inanes crudeles, violenti, importunique tyranni mendaces, falsi, perversi, perfidiosi, fædifragi, falsis verbis infunda loquentes in which is included, the several combinations and machinations that brought that incomparable Prince to the block, the overtures hapning at the famous seige of Colchester, the tragicall fals of Sir Charls Lucas and Sir George Lisle, the just reward of the leveller Rainsborough, Hamilton and Bailies trecheries, in delivering the late Scottish army into the hands of Cromwell, and the designe the rebels have, to destroy the royal posterity.
Approx. 92 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 26 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A40857




Wing F384



ESTC R3816





ocm 11791246




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The famous tragedie of King Charles I basely butchered by those who are, omne nesas proni patare pudoris inanes crudeles, violenti, importunique tyranni mendaces, falsi, perversi, perfidiosi, fædifragi, falsis verbis infunda loquentes in which is included, the several combinations and machinations that brought that incomparable Prince to the block, the overtures hapning at the famous seige of Colchester, the tragicall fals of Sir Charls Lucas and Sir George Lisle, the just reward of the leveller Rainsborough, Hamilton and Bailies trecheries, in delivering the late Scottish army into the hands of Cromwell, and the designe the rebels have, to destroy the royal posterity.
[8], 43 p.   


[London? :


s.n.],


1649.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Charles --  I, --  King of England, 1600-1649 --  Drama.
Great Britain --  History --  Civil War, 1642-1649 --  Drama.
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-01
Jayanthi Reddy
Sampled and proofread
2013-01
Jayanthi Reddy
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F384


R3816


11791246


49209














THE FAMOUS TRAGEDIE OF King Charles I.


Basely BUTCHERED by those who are,


Omne nefas proni patare pudoris inanes


Crudeles, violenti, Importunique tyranni


Mendaces, falsi, perversi, perfidiosi,


Faedifragi, falsis verbis infunda loquentes.


IN WHICH IS INCLUDED, The several Combinations and machinations that brought that incomparable PRINCE to the Block, the overtures hapning at the famous Seige of 
Col∣chester,
 the Tragicall fals of Sir 
Charls Lucas
 and Sir 
George Lisle,
 the just reward of the Level∣ler 
Rainsborough, Hamilton
 and 
Bailies
 Treche∣ries, In delivering the late 
Scottish
 Army into the hands of 
Cromwell,
 and the designe the Rebels have, to destroy the 
ROYAL POSTERITY.


Printed in the Year, 1649.










To the Sacred MAJESTIE OF Great 
Britain, France
 and 
Ireland,
 KING 
CHARLS
 II.


May it please Your Majesty,




I.


STerne Fates permitted, Your Great Syre to fall


By those (who at the first) disguiz'd their ends


With specious showes, and have procur'd our thrall


Like holy miscreants, and Religious Fiends,


By a most pious trick, have slav'd us all


To Death, an Hell, till 
Jove
 his mission sends


By 
Michal's
 hand, to Thee Great 
Charls
 His Heire


To Redeeme us, and fill the Regall Chaire.






II.


The depth of their Designe, was hatch'd in Hell


From the first houre, Your Father warm'd his Seate;


So that even 
Infants
 now can prattle well


Twenty years since (in thought they were as great




As now they are) and (O most strange) to tell


Had taken Oathes, their Machine, to compleat


Or sinke in the attempt, though to the 
Nation


It seem'd, they nothing sought, but 
Reformation.






III.


O 
Reformation
 dire, that kils our King,


Doth both invert, and subvert, Discipline;


Vacates all Law, each private man doth bring


(For fear) to countenance, their damn'd Designe.


Propriety, Great 
Britains
 Gimiel KING


Taken away, while Treason in a line


Like the plague takes, and the damn'd Faction grows


Great in that Tribe, in which at first it rose.






IV.


Our Goods and Lives, we forfeit at their wils


Our Noble 
Heros,
 do by dozens fall;


The Loyall Gentry, grief, or Prisons kils;


The People each day rob'd and spoil'd of all,


While those 
Plebeians,
 who procure our ills


Feed high, sleep soft, have Kingdomes at their cals.


Strange revolution, O accurst mutation


That appoints 
Coblers
 for to rule a 
Nation.






V.


But sure (Great Prince) thou oft hast laugh'd aloud


To cogitate, what their 
ambition


Hath brought them to, who now are grown so proud


As (fearlesse of thy strength, and their condition)


As to proclaime Thee Traytor, midst the crowd


And to divulge, their Trayterous prohibition


If thou returne, for to regaine thy right


Thou must expect to perish by their spight.








VI.


Summon all Nations, to thy speedy aide,


Search from the 
Orient
 to the 
Occident,


The 
Gets,
 and 
Parthians, Switzers,
 (who are swaid


By fierce 
Camillas
 second) 
Tartars
 bent


To bloud and horrour, those whose God is said


To hang twixt Heaven and Earth, the 
Truculent;


Fastidious Moore,
 take all, except 'gainst none,


For many hands, must lead Thee to Thy Throne.






VII.


So let this most unhospitable Land


Smart for her Treasons till all kneele to Thee


Offering themselves as Slaves to Thy Command


Whom 
Jove
 hath sworn, an Earthly Deitie


That by Thy heavy, and Victorious hand


Those Monsters who doom'd Thy great Syre to die


May receive treble vengeance, and so perish,


Ensuing times, may fear their thoughts to cherish.






VIII.


That having gain'd thine own, appeas'd the Rabble,


Silenc'd Thy foes, by Counsels or by Death,


Purg'd that accursed fowle 
Augaean
 stable


At 
Westminster,
 by Thy vindictive breath


Like Thy Great 
Ancestors,
 Thou maist be able


To weare in Peace, Great 
Britaines
 glorious Wreath,


While all Thy Subjects for to serve Thee Joy


Singing allowd with me, 
Vive le Roy.










To the Author, on his Tragedy.


WIth a sowre aspect, and a Critick eye


I have perus'd, thy well writ Tragedie;


My ravisht soul, grew sicker then the Age


When as I hastned, to the latter page:


Wrapt in a sweet amazement such an one


As dreaming men, sometimes, do thinke upon


Who when they wake, are wroth and vexed sore


They of that sweet delusion taste no more.


I wisht thy Play had been more largely writ


Or I had ne're seene, or perused it.


In which 
Apollo,
 and the three times three


Sweet 
Thespian
 Ladies, chaunt (though dolefully)


Such stately layes, that famous 
Sophocles


Would write his Plaies a new, saw he but these:


Melpomene,
 girt in a purple Robe


Her hand in Heaven, her foot upon Earths Globe


Is taught by thee, to chaunt forth Tragick notes


Such as do damn the Rebels and their Votes.


He that can read thy Play, and yet forbear


For his late Murthered Lord, to shed a tear,


Hath an heart fram'd of 
Adamant
 and may


Passe for an 
Atheist
 the Reformed way.


But to conclude, thy raptures I admire


As those are sung, even to 
Apollo's
 lyre,


E. D.








THE PROLOGUE TO THE GENTRY.


THough 
Johnson, Shakespeare, Goffe,
 and 
Devenant,


Brave 
Sucklin, Beaumont, Fletcher, Shurley
 want


The life of action, and their learned lines


Are loathed, by the Monsters of the times;


Yet your refined Soules, can penetrate


Their depth of merit, and excuse their Fate:


With this position those rude Elves that dare


'Gainst all Divine, and humane Laws, make War;


Who count it treble glory, to transgresse


Perfect in nothing, but imperfectnesse.


Can finde no better engine to advance


Their Thrones, then vile, and beastly Ignorance:


Their bloudy 
Myrmidons,
 o'th' Table round


Project, to raze, our Theaters to the ground:


No marvell they lap bloud as milke and glory


To be recorded, villaines, upon Story.


"For having kill'd their KING, where will they stay


"That thorow GOD, and MAJESTIE, make way,


"Throwing the Nobles, and the Gentry downe


"Levelling, all distinctions, to the Crowne.




So that (which Heaven forbid) should they reduce


Our 
English
 world, to their confused use,


'Twill be admir'd, more then a prodegie


To hear an Herald, state a prodigee;


An 'twill be thought, a sharpe, and bitter blur


To salute any, by the title 
(Sir.)


We here present you, his deplored fall


Whose Death will prove a ruine generall,


(If Fates forbid not) and we hold to view


What the world knows, is not more strange then true:


Anotomizing Treason, damning them


Who Murther'd 
Charls,
 to share His Diadem,


And to preserve their Soules in flesh, whose ends


Unto the ruine, of all 
Europe
 tends:


But 
Joves
 all potent thunder shall divide


Their plots, and sinke them, in their height of pride.


Exit.






The Persons.




Fairfax.


Ireton.


Rainsborough.


Peters.


Bosvill.


Cromwell.


Pride.


Sir
 Charls Lucas.


Sir
 George Lisle.


Blackburne.


Lord
 Capell.


Lord
 Goring.


Treason, Ambition, Lust, Perjury, Sacri∣ledge, Revenge, Parlia∣ment-men, Messengers. Mrs.
 Lambert.




Mutes.


Souldiers


Servants.
















THE 
TRAGEDIE
 OF 
King
 CHARLES 
the First.




ACT. I.


Enter 
Hugh Peters,
 and 
Oliver Cromwwell.




Crom∣well.


M
Y fine 
facetious Devill,
 who wear'st 
the Liverie
 of 
the Stygian God,
 as the white 
Embleme
 of thy 
innocence;
 Hast thou 
prepar'd
 a pithie 
formall Speech
 against the 
essence
 and 
the Power of
 KINGS? that when 
to morrow
 all my 
Myrmi∣dons doe meet
 on 
Onslow-heath,
 like the 
Greek Exorcist,
 renowned 
Calchas,
 when with his 
Magicke
 numbers he incouraged great 
Alreus
 Sonne and martiall 
Diomed
 to prosecute their Siege 'gainst 
Priam's
 Towne, by thy in∣sinuating perswasive art, their hearts may move, like Reeds, when 
Boreas
 breath smites the huge 
Oakes,
 that on Mount 
Pelion
 grow, I know that 
Nectar
 hangs upon thy lippes, and that the most absurd Syllogisme, or care-deceiving paradox, maintain'd by thee, shall seem

oraculous, more dangerous to question than the Sacred Writ:


Sing then (my 
Hugh
) and so thy Numbers sing,


All those that heare, may joyntly curse their 
King.






Peters.


Most valiant, and invincible Commander, whose Name's as terrible to the 
Royallists
 as e're was 
Huniades
 to the 
Turkes,
 or 
Talbot
 to the 
French;
 thy Nose, like a bright Beacon, sparkling still (the 
Aetna,
 that doth fame our English world) hangs like a Comet o're thy dreadfull face, denouncing death & vengeance; the Ancients fam'd 
Alcides
 for his Acts, thou hast not slaine, but tane the Kingly 
Lyon,
 and like great 
Tamber∣laine
 with his 
Bajazet,
 canst render him within an Iron-Cage a spectacle of mirth, when e're thou pleasest. Had the Snake-footed, earth-borne Sons of old but had thy ayde, 
Imponere pelion ossae,
 old 
Saturne
 might have laugh'd to see his Sonne sit sadly by him in the Cime∣rian shades, while thou didst sway the Empire of the Skies; 
Englands
 best Patriot, and my noble Patron, a Sermon (such as 
Ignatius Loyalla
 himselfe, were he to morrow to supply my place, for dangerous Doctrine, direfull Use, and dreadfull Application, would glory to name his) I have provided such an one,


As shall confirme our Faction ten times more


Then all that they have known, or heard before:


In it I'le prove Kings 
(ab origine)
 have been the Peoples plague, given them by the angry Gods in wrath, the meer exuberance of their crimes, the sordid Vulgar be∣ing delighted much to honour those dull Images which themselves erect, and dread those Anticks which them∣selves depaint, themselves affording both the hornes and nailes which make them either dangerous or ugly, I will

assert, that Regall power is Devilish, and inconsistent with the Peoples Freedome: I will make it good, the 
Tyrant
 now in hold, (whom some yet call, 
their Lord King
 CHARLES) doth merit violent death, as guilty of the many thousand horrours committed in the late most bitter Warre, I will demonstratively—






Crom.


Enough, enough, (my dearest 
Hugh
) thou art my better 
Genius,
 thy advice, I will relie on with more sure respect, then on a Sybils words or Delphian Oracle, drink the 
Elixar
 of that pretious mettall,

[he gives him Gold]
 'tis soveraign 'gainst that perilous disease, call'd 
Speaking truth,
 'twill prove an animation to thy mind, for to pro∣ceed in thy audacious practise (I meane, against the King and's House of Peers) thou'lt find it a most precious An∣tidote against the poyson, wavering fame shall spit, and to conclude, a perfect supplement of all defects that Time, or Fate, shall by harsh doome appoint,


But what will please the best (my dearest 
Hugh
)


'Twill purvey for thee, Wine, and Wenches too.






Pet.


Sir, you are pleased to make my faults your mirth, I doe confesse the luscious Paphian sinne, hath ever van∣quish'd all my virtuous powers, the Cyprian Queene (in full aspect of 
Mars
) being predominant solely at my birth, besides the constitution of my body made up of moisture and venerable humors (though some great La∣dies say, 
leane men doe best
) may help for to extenuate my crime of being too often prov'd beneath the Navell: But Noble Sir, this Colloquie is too poor, if we consi∣der our most high resolves, our language should be like those Lawes we meane to give, awfull and to be won∣der'd at by mortals, sable-brow'd 
Saturne,
 and bloud-thirsty

Mars
 must seem sole Rectors over us abroad, though 
Venus
 and her soft Sonne the sightlesse Boy, challenge our utmost faculties in private.






Crom.


Thou art that Load-stone, which shall draw my sense to any part of policy i'the Machiavilian world, we two (like 
Mahomet
 and his pliant 
Monke
) will frame an 
English Alchoran,
 which shall be written with the self-same pensil great 
Draco
 grav'd his Lawes; but first, we must subdue the testie Scot, and send the Beggars home, as lowsie, though not so propt with limbs, or so well shap'd as when they chose the politique 
Hamilton
 to be their Generall: meane time if those auspicious starres of sinne, whose influence hath prosper'd Treason hither∣to, shall still continue gracious to our villany, 
Tom Fair∣fax
 may take in the Towne of 
Colchester,
 and force those stubborn truly-valiant 
Heroes
 (for in my thoughts I doe esteem them so who have tane shelter in that antient City at least for to comply on remisse tearms; my next work then is to new-mould our Army, and give a strong pur∣gation to those Punies who act for me, and may be cal∣led 
my Parliament,
 whose great worke yet remaines to do (my 
Hugh
) 
the King shall die,
 and they shal Father the most damned act upon the power of 
justice;
 that done, all Earles and Lords shall downe for to make way for me and those I favour,


Then thee and I, and those whom we create


Will Reigne like Princes, and the Lords of Fate.






Pet.


I knew before the scope of your intents, and doe applaud them as magnanimous, and the sole way left to preserve our lives; in order unto which your deare de∣signe, it shall be my taske, both at Presse and Pulpit, to

render Kingly Government obnoxious and incompa∣tible with the Peoples Rights; to prove the imprisoned King a truculent Tyrant, whose bloud alone can expiate Heavens wrath, and purchase an atonement with the Deities; expect me all I may (renowned Sir) for pro∣mulgation of our well-fixt Cause, from which no feare of paine, or hope of profit shall be of force to draw me.


For he that dares attempt, and goes not on,


Doth leap for safety into 
Phlegeton.






Crom.


Our conference here must end, some three daies hence I march towards the cold North to meet the Ban∣nock feeding fierry 
Scots:
 they have (I heard) already worsted 
Lambert,
 and puff'd up with the pride of victory come on like Lyons, flush'd in humane gore, I shall not need to pray your readinesse.






Pet.


Command me as your Creature; Sir, you were pleased to impose a taske upon me (which, by the ayde of some one amongst the Nine, I know not which to thanke for the good turne) I have performed, after a te∣dious pumping: the Theame you gave me, Sir, you know was this,

The Peoples right transcends the power of Kings.
 Sir, I have done my best to justifie your learned Axiome in this scroule.


gives him a Paper.






Crom.


Your love to my requests makes your perfor∣mance of them swift and punctuall by the great 
Genius
 of this Land (o're which I hope to Reigne) I had forgot what late I urg'd you to, this shall oblige my love—What's here — I am an ill Versefier or Verse∣maker, (what doe you call your Trimeter-men?) and

none but those have sipt of 
Hellicon
 (I've heard) can grace a Verse i'th' reading it —pray sing them your selfe.


gives the Scroule backe to
 Peters.






Pet.


How Sir? sing them!






Crom.


Sing them, or say them, all's one; thinke not I I take you for a Ballet-Poet, but I want tearmes of art.






Pet.


At your pleasure Sir.


Peters 
reads


Even till this Age the People durst not see


The pride of pompe in formall Tyrannie,


The People who raise Kings unto the Crowne


Are ladders, standing still, to let them downe.






Crom.


The Peoples backs is the worst paire of staires a man can possibly adventure upon; they are strong, but slippery; firme, but false: You are an excellent Simi∣list (my 
Hugh
) 'tis an apt comparison to similize the People to a Ladder; but I pray Heaven thee and I have not ascended so high upon this tall Ladder that we shall never have an opportunity to descend without hazar∣ding our necks.






Pet.


I beseech you Sir, either heare me, without pa∣raphrasing, or command me read no more—






Crom.


Nay, now I see thou art a pettish Poet; read on, I'le be as silent as a Statue—






Pet.


Abolish these false Oracles of might,


'Cause we were once blind, shal we now hate light?


Why, like the wood that yeilds helves to the Axe


Should we upon our selves lay heavy taxe,




Setting up Kings our freedome to confound


With our own strength, exhausting our own ground?






Crom.


So, so, enough of this, I'le heare the rest in in private, let it suffice (deare 
Hugh
) that I accept your Verses with all love, and do assigne you (if 
Apollo
 please) a Grove of Bay to shade your learned skull from his all-piercing Beames; wing'd-Time hath sent one of his Sonnes to warne me hasten hence; my fate moves swift, and I must move with it (my 
Hugh
) Farewell, faile not to offer up strict Orisons unto our swarthy Patron if now I prove victorious:


A King and Kingdome is my valours prize,


By both their ruines, I intend to rise.


manet Peters.


exit Cromwell.






Pet.


This fellow (sure) was born (as the Third 
Richard,
 who once rul'd this Land) with his mouth full of teeth, Nature hath given him an iron soule, able and active limbs, a politique braine which is indeed a store-house of politique stratagems, as if she meant him for the fall & ruine of all mankind; his stout Confederates work their ends amaine, but he outworks 'em all; the very mine they've plac'd for to blow up their pious Soveraigne, shall countermine by Him ruine to themselves, and I saile with them to the invisible Land (my 
Hugh
) the 
King must die,
 those were his words: Oh sad and fatall project! when they have serv'd their utmost ends upon Him, and on their knees tooke Oathes to re-instate Him, must a black Coffin be His Throne, and a cold Vault His garnished Pavillion? Let the fam'd Villaines of all former times have their dire deeds razed out of Fames black Booke as triviall accidents and neglected dreams,

that these may take up all the roome on Record for the most glorious Miscreants e're Rebell'd; but what strange fancy lurks within my braine, which makes me tax their waies with whom I act, whose deeds I doe applaud as meritorious, deserving honour, and the best repute? what vile sinister fate governs my life? I loath the ills I doe, yet hugge them next my heart. Pardon great 
Jove
 and my most gracious Prince, whose virtues doe deprive thee of a being; I must goe on, though 
Orcus
 yawne upon me, and 
Demogorgon
 (with his damned crew) di∣ctates in person what I preach or write. 
Cromwell
 I come with a disguised face, with as reserv'd a cunning as that 
Greek
 that broughe in 
Pallas
's Horse to halfe-raz'd 
Troy;
 thy craft I wil repell with double care, resting as jealous as I lay perdue behind a potent Foe; thy guilt is great, so mine and all of us; 'tis policy that must protect my life, and place me a degree above you all.


For he that will the Devils Master be,


Must have a mind, more mischievous then he.


Exit.




The end of the first Act.








ACT. II.


Enter 
Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow,
 in Armes, Drums beating, Colours flying, with Soldiers as before the Towne of 
Colchester.




Fair∣fax.


THus having tam'd our Enemies in 
Kent,
 quieted 
Cornwall,
 and secured 
Devonshire;
 what now remaines, but with accustomed courage to take in this strong Town of 
Colchester?
 with∣in whose Walls doe lodge divers of note, who are pro∣fess'd and open Enemies unto the State we serve.






Ireton.


The fate was just, that with delusive hopes hath led them to a receptacle of ruine, from whence they cannot budge without our knowledge.






Rainsborow.


They're taken in our Toyles, and must not scape with life; quickly let us draw out our Line, and raise our Batteries, girting the Towne with a close Siege, and let the Canons dreadfull voice proclaime to them their certaine ruine.






Fairf.


First let us Summon them to yeild on Termes; if they prove so Fool-hardy as to refuse, then let our Iron-balls in smoake and sulphur sing a sad 
Requiem
 in their fearfull eares, sound loud the Summons, that the Foe may heare & know we wish a Parlee.


A Parlee sounded.




Sir 
Charles Lucas,
 Sir 
George Lisle,
 Lord 
Capell,
 Lord 
Goring, &c.
 appeares as upon the Walls.




Sir 
Charles.


Who gives this hasty Summons?






Fairfax.


Know Sir, the Generall & the Army rais'd for the preservation of the State of 
England,
 for to sup∣port

and vindicate their Priviledges; in their Names doth demand, that you yeild up your selves, and all are under your Command, together with this Towne, unto their use.






Sir 
Charles.


Traytour to God, and to thy gracious Prince (for whom I hold this City) chosen thereto by the Essexianists; know, I and these my loyall valiant Cohorts will hold this Towne while twenty doe survive, and rather then yeild up the Towne to you we'l blow our selves (with it) into the Ayre.






Sir 
George.


Fairfax,
 thou and thy trayterous Asso∣ciates shall find, this Towne harbours such Men as dare meet thee ingyrt with all thy Myrmidons, one to a hun∣dred, and a hundred to a thousand; Fortune hath fa∣vour'd thee I doe confesse (thou hast triumph'd thou bloudy 
Marius,
 and shalt descend unto Hels shades like him) but that proves not the justnesse of thy cause:


For, by the same rule 
Ottaman
 may boast,


The partiall Deities favour him the most.






Rainsborow.


By that God whom I serve thou Tray∣tour 
Lisle,
 I'le see thee hewne to pieces, and thy curst Body throwne unto the Dogs.






Sir 
George.


Avaunt thou home-bred Mungrel, who art (in truth) meerly a valiant Voice, an hollow Cask in w
ch
 some rumbling wind delights to sport it selfe; 
Thersites
 thus, durst menace 
Agamemnon,
 Know Fellow, I have been victorious even against a multitude, have trod the thorny path of cragged Warre, my Body naked and my Feet unshood, have view'd those horrors of a purple Field untroubled and untouch'd, which but-to heare summ'd up, would fright thy Coward-soule from forth her dirty Dog-hole.






Rainsborow.


Why spend we time in Dialogue with

these Miscreants, these cautiffe Elves, who fight for Yoakes and Fetters, with as much zeale as half-starv'd Wretches beg a boone to sate their hungers, and wish profusely for to spend their blouds to please a Tyrants lust?






Lord 
Capell.


Away, Mechanick Slave, what sawcy Devill prompts thee so to prate, when to the meanest here thou ought'st to stoop with all obsequious duty? thou sordid Groome, whom of a Skippers Boy, the Westminsterian Rebels made thee their Admiral, whom even the dullest Sea-man so despis'd, they scorn'd to hale an Anchor at thy bidding, and at last (tyr'd with thy loathed company) intending to have sowz'd thee in the deep (mov'd with thy tricling teares, and pitious plaints) set thee on shore to foot it backe to 
Westminster;
 how dares thy perjur'd tongue to challenge us, serving our dread Lord, His sacred Majesty, Him whom all 
Europe
 wonders at, as the best of all the Christian Kings, who for his discreet valour Rivals 
Scipio,
 for prudence 
Salo∣mon,
 for temperance without parallel, as are his suffe∣rings, and griping griefs by you (base Traytours) each day heap'd upon Him, having immur'd His Royall Per∣son up in a strong Den fit for untamed Lyons, banish'd His loyall and Imperiall Lady, and with Her the two eldest of His Issue, bereaved Him of His Navie and Re∣venue, and what e're truth called His; know perjur'd Rebels, e're this Summer end, (perhaps e're 
Sol
 doth hunt the Nemean Lyon) we shall have strong relief, you a just punishment; if not,


Our comfort is, though we be left i'th' lurch,


We Martyrs, fall, for God, the King, and Church.






Ireton.


You'l not accept then of our profer'd Sum∣mons, or come to composition.








L. 
Goring.


Compound! confound we may (perhaps) some thousands of you.






Sir 
Charles.


I am resolv'd ye Traytors, and so I know are these my honoured Friends, which is the sense of all within the Towne, to hold this place even to the utmost hazard; nor are we destitute of much Provision, enough for to supply us many Months; when that failes, we have Horses many hundreds, of Dogs and Cats even a multitude: 
Zeno,
 and 
Chrisippus,
 the two maine pillars of the Stoicks Sect, pronounce such meats as usefull to Mankind as the best Sheep or Neat: the antient Al∣maines held the self-same doctrine: We'l be their Imi∣tators, and that you may know 'tis our resolution, for∣sake your station, e're we leave the Walls, or the hot breath that lightens from an angry Canons throat, shall trie to waft you thence, away, away, we'l meet you in plaine Field:


Thou true 
Jehovah,
 now owne thine owne Cause,


Thou know'st we fight for thee, our King, & Lawes.






Fair.


Draw up our Troups, we'l make these Boasters feel


The potent rigour of our strong-edg'd steel.


Alarum, 
excursions, a shout within, and crying,
 Open the Gates, On, on, on.


Fairfax 
cum suis Exit.




Enter S
r
 
C. Lucas,
 S
r
 
G. Lisle,
 & L
d
 
Capel,
 their Party: At the other dore, 
Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow,
 with their Party, they charge three to three, while the Souldiers on both sides in∣counter, the 
Roundheads
 are beaten off, a Re∣treat sounded.




Sir 
Charles.


The Power superior to the God of War hath grac'd our first attempt with victory; the Rebels (with exceeding losse) are fled, whom the most valiant

Capel
 hath in pursuit; see how they scut over the neigh∣bouring Plaines like flocks of Sheep before an hungry Lyon; so for the future, let Almighty 
Jove
 infatuate their proud hearts with panick feare who strike at him himselfe in his Vicegerent:


Kings are Earths Gods, and those that menace them


(Were't in their power) would share His Diadem.


He speaks this looking upon some Roundheads lying dead on the ground.


Alas deluded self-destroying Men! whose erring Soules by this winged 
Hermes,
 hath usher'd unto the depth of 
Barathrum,
 in blew flames, for evermore to howle, cursing your selves for your impieties! Oh erring Vul∣gar! oh besotted People, that take such paines to be∣come miserable, who (with the Phrygian Fabulators Dog) catch at vaine shadowes, and lose the substance! So the Athenians courted thirty Tyrants to be the Par∣tie that should gall their heart-strings; and the fond Sy∣racusians laboured sore to have the 
Dionisii
 be their Consuls: Was ever any Nation bless'd with so good a Prince (as CHARLES our King) that so opprobriously deserted Him? succeeding Ages cannot chuse but say,


Nations have suffer'd cause their Kings were ill,


But 
Britains
 CHARLES, His Peoples sinnes did kill.


But let it hap as God shall appoint, if it be written in the Booke of Fate the Rebels shall dissolve the English Mo∣narchy, with the life-bloud of their most gracious Prince, yet let us hinder that dire ominous day, (while we have being) with our utmost might, and e're we fall and be commixt with new and stranger earth, by hard atchievements and heroick acts (perform'd for 
Charles,
 and for our Countries sake) let us provide us fame when we are dead, that the next Age, when they shall read the Story of this unnaturall, uncivill Warre, and amongst

a crowd of Warriours find our Names filed with those that durst passe through all horrors by death and ven∣geance for their KING and Soveraigne:


They may sing Peans to our valiant Acts,


And yeild us a kind 
plaudit
 for our facts.






Sir 
George.


If we defend this Towne against the Re∣bels furie but one Month longer, the Hamiltonian Duke (who now hath passed 
Tweed
 with a numerous Army, full Twenty thousand Scots, Ten thousand English com∣manded by the truly-valiant and invincible Knight, re∣nowned 
Langdale,
 we shall have honourable and sure re∣liefe; meane time by frequent Sallies we'l indeavour to breake in pieces 
Fairfax
 his guilty Forces; the Prince of 
Wales
 is now upon the 
Downes,
 and with Him most part of the Royall Navie; the Londoners speake high against the Junto, and every day are fear'd to rise against them; the loyall Welch continue strong in Armes, and eke in every Angle of the Land the People wish for a∣ction; the face of things at present promise fairly:


But should all faile (by force of Destinie)


Our comfort is, we (when we list) can die.






Sir 
Charles.


I heed not 
Hamilton
 or his Resolves, knowing him to be ambitious, treacherous, a 
Proteus
 that can shift into all shapes, a slie insinuating Sicophant, who by his most falacious machinations hath been the ruine of the KING and us; 'twas he that instigated first the KING to raise a Warre against the Covenanters, (yet underhand incited them against Him) 'twas he that gave His Majesty advice to go in Person to the Senate-house, there to demand the five seditious Members (yet secretly sent them word of His intentions) 'twas he (how e're he seemed in show averse) that when His Majesty scap'd to the Scots, when 
Fairfax
 wholly had subdued

His Forces, procured the damned 
sallary
 of his Master, for Twenty thousand pounds; and, I much feare, 'tis he, and onely he, that will betray the Army he now leads, (knowst thou not 
George
) he ever did aspire to be the 
King of Scots.


'Tis he that hath made 
England
 all on flame,


Blasted its beauty, burnt its goodly frame;


And the 
Armilla,
 which his zeale doth twist


Is to be 
Cataline,
 yet a Calvanist.






Sir 
George.


Let him be damn'd and sinke to Hell with all his Sinnes about him, let us doe our parts, and leave the rest to Heaven (Faith Sir 
Charles
) since we have beat the Foe, while swarthy 
Tom
 flies with his timerous Troups, here let us frollick one halfe houre, 
Mars
 and 
Thalia
 sometimes doe accord, onely a Health or two unto our Royall Master.






Sir 
Charles.


George,
 I am easily led by thy advice, al∣though it suite not with our present state to play at Barly-breake in a 
Golgatha,
 or drinke downe sorrow 'mongst a heap of Trunks as livelesse as those Clods they lie upon; I prithee doe thy pleasure: but, say that 
Ireton
 (who stands facing us) should in the midst of our intended mirth come up and turne our triumph into purple teares, and in our Goblets mix our sanguine gore.






Sir 
George.


Why? 'twill be rare, I'de wish no other sport; we Lapethites should soon repell those Centaures, the scuffle (sure) would be as strange and famous as that wherein all 
Ixion's
 Horse-hoof'd race, were sent to Hell (swift 
Nessus
 onely scaping) who was reserv'd for a more dreadfull Fate, they shal have nought to boast of (come they here) but Iron in their Fesh, and Gun-powder in their Noses.






Sir 
Charles.


Be it as thou dost wish, I'le strive to be

as mery as 
Democritus,
 and laugh at warre and damages.






Sir 
George.


You highly honour us (most noble Go∣vernour) My fellow Soldiers, have all

Speaking to the Soldiers.
 your Armes in readinesse as you were now to Charge the surly Foe, we will not jest away our lives, or give the Roundheads cause to boast a triumph in their Cathe∣drated Conventicles; two of you fetch

Sends two Soldiers.
 that Runlet of old Sherrie that's placed behind the dore of the Towne Hall, bring also store of Pots, for we shall use 'em here (as the Trojans, when by 
Atreus
 Sons they were beleaguer'd close for 
Hellens
 rape, 
Hector, Sarpedon, Troyolus,
 and old 
Priam,
 beneath faire 
Illion's
 Walls (gyrt in bright Armes) sate banqueting before the black-hayr'd Greeks, we'l sit securely and pledge full-crown'd Cups, (perhaps) 'twill mad the Rebels:


Which if I know, I shall grow fat with laughter,


And I will use to drinke them downe hereafter.






Sir 
Charles.


The same good-fellow 
(George)
 thou ever wert; see how the Rebels grin and gape upon us.






Sir 
George.


They should participate of our flowing Cups would they take but the paines to come amongst us, such as the Roman 
Cateline
 did provide for those he had drawne in to his Confederacy, Wine mixt with bloud (an horrid Sacacrament) by which they swore to level 
Romes
 proud battlements,

The Soldiers returne with the Wine.
 So, set it downe (my Friends) and quickly pierce it, and then draw out with as inlarg'd a mind as Princes give Gratuities— 'tis rich and lusty liquor, such as would make 
Heraclitus
 to laugh, and dull 
Diogenes
 daunce, even in his Tub; Here noble Governour, this Bowle brimfull unto the happinesse of Him whom fame of all the European Kings doth call the best.






Sir 
Charles.


With as much willingnesse as one half-spent

with a contagious Feaver, receives a Dose he hopes may bring him health, will

All kneele, they drinke the Health round while the Chambers are shot, and Trum∣pets perpètually sound.
 I solemnize it upon my knees.






Sir 
George.


So, this was well perform'd, about again with't.






Sir 
Charles.


Once more receive it Soldiers, and that done, let us retire unto our Garrison, believe me 
(George)
 we play with lightning too securely; you know I dare as much, as him dares most, but dare not to be too con∣fidently rash.






Sir 
George.


By heaven (Sir 
Charles
) we will not part so tamely; we'l have one Catch e're we forsake this ground, if you please but to ayde me with your voyce, (for't must be sung in parts) You (Soldiers) all joyne voices in the close, what saith Sir 
Charles?






Sir 
Charles.


You may command my suffrage (wor∣thy 
Lisle
) I know the Song you fancie; begin—






SONG.




Sir 
George.


Plump cheek'd
 Bacchus, 
we to thee


Will yeild all honour, as befits,


For sure thou art a Deity


That canst refine the dullest wits,


The liquour of thy Vine


Is pretious and divine,


It makes even Cowards fight.






Sir 
Charles.


It prompts our tongues to talke,


Though not our feet to walke,


And dictates what to write.






Omnes.


Drinke then (Boyes) and drown all sorrow,


Who knows if we shall drink to morrow?








Sir 
George.


Even in the midst of danger


When safetie is a stranger


And no hope of reliefe,


Take a bowle full of Canary,


We of our woes grow weary,


And crie a figge for griefe.






Sir 
Charles.


Drinke each a hearty draught


Till by the braines y'are caught,


'Twill quite expell all humours;


Crie, God preserve the King,


And shield him with his wing;


And a—for the Roundheads rumors.






Omnes.


Drinke, &c.








Sir 
George.


Judge you Gentlemen, is not this better than to be alwaies moyling in Sand and Salt-peter, con∣tinually imployed in raising Rampires, throwing up Sconces, and inventing Stratagems, to foile that Foe who feares to looke upon us? hath not this added to your former vigour? we must not alwaies fight, lest we become all but one wound; nor ever tipple, lest the Circaean liquor do metamorphose us into swinish shapes: he that's a true Soldier


Will undertake all horrors, for his chinke;


And no lesse venture, for a Wench and drinke.






Sir 
Charles.


This doctrine (my friend 
Lisle
) is dan∣gerous, yet too much preach'd and practis'd in all Ar∣mies; Souldiers doe dim their glory, and detract from their owne worth that love to drinke and drab; he onely may be term'd truely valiant that can repulse and van∣quish his own passions; but this Dish I perceive (my Sol∣diers) is too much stuff'd with Sage, for you to palliate—I wonder Noble 
Capel
 stayes so long, I feare he hath in∣gag'd

himselfe too farre after the flying Foe; he knowes not which way back for to retreate.






Sir 
George.


He's an experienc'd Souldier, and so in∣ur'd unto the severall Stratagems of warre, that 'twere a sinne 
Mars
 would severely plague, but for to doubt his fortune.






Sir 
Charles.


I would not be too confident, or too carelesse, Heavens bring him off with safety, and with honour—let's now re-enter our invincible Fort, and there consult for safety; we must expect the Rebels will once more make their approaches to our Walls (per∣haps) with new Supplies; we will prepare a Tempest 'gainst they Storme.


But if great 
Jove
 remember whose we are,


His ponderous thunder will their Onset marre.


Exit.




The end of the second Act.






ACT. III.


Enter 
Cromwell, solus.




Crom∣well.


THus farre my policies run smooth and cur∣rant, deep Rivers glide as silent as the night when shallow Brooks fall with a troubled noise; wherefore was Man created like the Gods, but that like them he should dispose his acts to the great dread of some, envie of others, easily deluded the King

my Master, I have led on with hopes of re-establishment so long, that now He doubts my feign'd reallity; and a strong Partie in the Junto sit, who without me, are now in Treatie with Him, but I shall breake the necke of their Designe (perhaps) before they thinke it, the severall Commanders of the Army are now all of my Faction, while 
Fairfax
 (silly Foole) sits like a Statue, as if he nothing knew, or nothing durst, I have propo∣sed unto the severall Officers to forsake the King, and yeild Him up (as one not fit to live) unto the block; I have informed them, (and it takes exceedingly, so for∣ward are the Fooles to worke my ends and their owne certaine ruine) that the King is a Man of bloud, by no meanes to be trusted, being of a rigid and implacable Spirit, hating (even to the death) all have opposed Him, and that should He regaine his former Power, He quick∣ly would make use on't to their ruine, that therefore they should make a retreat in time, nor yeild their necks unto a Tyrants mercy, that they having declar'd so highly for Him, might the more easily (by farre) entrap Him; nor was it a discredit so to doe, since in all Ages such a poli∣tick course hath been thought just and safe: they (sna∣red with my words) resolve to doe so, for to remove the King by violent death, and to set up a Military Power; now my plots worke, the Stage growes great with hor∣ror, the English Monarchy growes sick to death, its very Basis hath an Ague-fit, which wil not cease to shake it, till it be Levell'd to the humble earth.


Mount, mount my thoughts, unite like scatter'd springs,


'Tis a strong Torrent that must beare downe Kings.


Here I appointed my deare Buffone 
Pe∣ters,


Enter
 Peters, Bos∣will, Pride, 
with Soldiers.
 and Coll. 
Boswill, Pride,
 and my whole Army to meet about this houre—

See, they come; Welcome deare Friends, you have ob∣serv'd your time: My 
Hugh,
 how thrives our Counsell in the Army that our great Generall the Lord 
Fairfax
 guides? I am sure these gallant Soules serve under me are all unanimous to shake off Kings, and while the I∣ron's hot to strike that blow which shall for ever free the English Nation from Tyrants, and their awfull power.






Peters.


Heroick Sir, they all (even as one Man) ap∣plaud even to the skies your rare projection, both Offi∣cers and Souldiers covetous for to accomplish what's by you propos'd, and as a signall of their Resolutions, see here, the more part of a queint 
Remonstrance,
 which must by us be brought unto a period, wherein we will divulge unto the world, the reasons and grounds of our intents.






Cromwell.


As I would wish, never till now could 
Eng∣land
 hope a happinesse; why, how now 
Boswill,
 why art thou so sad? the noble 
Pride
 stands—like a man a∣stonish'd, or like a marble Statue whose aged feet are wrapt in wither'd mosse, what's the matter?






Pride.


Nothing (deare Sir) but an excessive joy which hath surpriz'd my faculties, and craz'd upon the organs of my speech, my mind is busied 'bout the Kingdomes fate, my Soule in a deep conference with my sense about mature affaires.






Boswill.


The constitution of my Soule agrees with thine in each degree of temper, (most honoured 
Crom∣well
) from our late-sworne Principles I'le not recede though Heaven rain'd down fire upon me, though Earth yawn'd wide, and Hell gorg'd balls of Sulphure, the King (that Man of bloud) shall lose His Head, and all His prime Adherents wait on Him unto the other world; the People we will Rule by the Sword's power, their

lives and goods, (by Conquest) we have gain'd, our sway must be maintain'd by Strength, not Law.


The Sword that cut a passage to our Sphere


'Tis that alone must secure us there.






Cromwell.


Oh let me put thee in my bosome 
(Boswill)
 henceforth let us converse more neerly, and like the Zo∣diacks 
Gemini
 mix our loves, we'l be a second 
Pylades
 and 
Orestes,
 and never part till death (my 
Hugh
) let's hear some part of that 
Remonstrance,
 'twill highly spurre us on to action.






Peters.


You shall, the most material Clauses (Sir) are these, which take with this 
exordium
 I penn'd late yester∣night:


He Reads.


Absolute power of necessity must subsist and keep above water, though all else be assur'd of drowning, to the losse of all (or at least many) branches of universall Freedome, and therefore the Fox did not conclude amisse when he saw his fellowes steps march towards the Lyons Den,
 Nos vesti∣gia terrent, 
if we enter into a strict scrutinie, we shall find that our choice and our nature gave us Kings, the dignity conferr'd upon a single Man, was (sure) intended for the good of all, but where one drawes from all, can that be plea∣sing or fortunate? or to leave this one, can that be injury? and therefore in order theretowe declare, That we will call King CHARLES to an account as the prime Promoter, Abettor, and sole Occasioner of all the murthers, and out∣rages, committed this many yeares, during the Warre, and bring Him to a Tryall for His life; That with Him we will bring to judgement all those of His Partie, who (in order to His Arbitrary Commands) have murthered, spoyled, and impoverished the Free-borne People of
 England—






Crom.


Hold, I have heard enough, why this is done to purpose, and shewes all gallantry did not die with

Brutus
 and his Confederate Consulls; now Lawrell wreathes commixt with Myrtle branches shall deck our fortunate brows as the true Patriots of our native Coun∣trey, 
(We'l give the whole world cause for to remember us)
 aside the ensuing Ages when they read our Acts shall blesse our memory with devout respect, but flying 
Phoe∣bus
 now hath left our Hemisphere, black night hath now put on her ebbon robe and wrapt the Welkin in a sable shrowd, we must away now towards the frozen North, (my fellow Souldiers) we must direct our march to jerke the Scots back to their Sedgie Cottages; malevolent 
Sa∣turne,
 oh be thou propitious, prosper thy Agent in his deeds of death,


Which are so grim and horrid, full of ire,


Some will suspect, the Devill, was my Sire.




Exeunt omnes.


Enter 
Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow, cum aliis,
 as in a Tent, a Table, and Tapers.




Fairfax.


How goes the night?






Ireton.


About the howre of twelve.






Fairfax.


Now then, while all the worl'ds involv'd in silence, and man and beast takes their repose and rest, let us determine 'bout these captive Heroes, who, with this Towne of 
Colchester
 to morrow must yeild themselves unto our mercy.






Rainsborow.


Renowned Generall, under whose con∣duct we have been fortunate and victorious, I need not now recite, since you well know what vast expence of bloud, of toyle, and treasure, we have been at since we besieg'd this Towne, the third part of our Army quite consum'd by the immured Enemies frequent Sallies, by our unfruitfull Onsets, and hard Duty, and how mercy∣lesse

they have shewn themselves to those (of ours) whom Fortune gave them Prisoners; all which considered, I doe give my vote (and justice speaks the same) that 
Ca∣pel, Goring, Lucas,
 and stout 
Lisle,
 die without mercy, even that very day which we receive the Towne.






Ireton.


Which is to morrow.






Fairfax.


The Law of Armes will not allow of that, they yeild themselves on Quarter, and for the Peers (I meane 
Goring
 and 
Capel
) our power doth not extend to question them, they must be order'd as our States de∣cree: the auncient onely Captaines of the world, 
Ha∣nibal, Scipio,
 and 
Themistocles,
 esteem'd it farre more glorious, having conquer'd their proud Antagonists, to preserve their lives (given them as their boone) then to inflict an ugly censure on them: I love an Enemy that is truely valiant, these have exceeded story in their Acts,


And have repell'd a Siege, such as 
Breda


Never beheld, nor famous 
Ravena.






Raisborow.


Then let them live to be a terror to us, and once more to ingage the Land in broyles, (know Sir) we are not safe whilst these subsist; and should your clement mind so sway your sense, as not to take their lives, who have sought ours, we shall have cause to dis∣esteem your Person and your Power, as him, whose easie nature and sost temper is incompatible with our persons safety, our honour and repute:


Since, if by you, mercy to them is showne


You seek our ruine, and project your owne.






Fairfax.


Ha.






Ireton.


Though in a rough unpollish'd phrase (he ut∣ters truth) most noble General, let not his seeming rude∣nesse raise your anger, since time hath taught you he is truly faithfull, no lesse magnanimous in active war; Sir, it

concernes you neerly not to permit your innate love to valour, so graile the wings of just deserved fury, you must not tollerate these men to escape with life:


For 'twill be thought if you remisly doe,


You love their actions, and applaud them too.






Fairfax.


You then are Generals of the Hoste, not I; but be it as you councell, share you betwixt the brave Spirits of Two that (if 
Pithagor as
 transmigration were) would make a 
Thersites,
 or 
Thraso
 valiant, 
(Rainsborow)
 see them shot to death as Souldiers destin'd by fortune to a noble end; some two houres hence I shall expect to heare you say, they 
are dead.


My Soule (I feele) is wondrously perplext,


Who knowes but mine or your turne may be next?


Exit.






Rainsborow.


He's much distemper'd, sure they have bought his mercy; how stoutly did he argue to preserve them, with what reluctancy, denounce their doome.






Ireton.


An ardent love to worth and honour moves him (without all doubt) to pitty their sad fate, for though mountaines may meet, and generate e're they, and we, enter firme union, yet we must needs acknowledge they are Men of most approved valour; but see the cheerfull Lady of the light appeares i'the Horizon deck'd in her saffron robe, having forsook old 
Tithons
 chill imbraces, she summons every young and sprightly 
Sol
 to wrap her in his odoriferous bosome—harke, they

A shout within.
 shout; What may this portend?


[Enter a Souldier.]


What newes doth thy tongue labour with?






Sould.


The Towne of 
Colchester
 is just now surren∣dred unto the Generals hands, the Governour S
r
 
Charles Lucas,
 his lov'd associate Sir 
George Lisle,
 with the L. 
Ca∣pel,


old 
Goring,
 and a number more of Gentlemen are cried up as Prisoners.






Rainsborow.


Be it thy charge forthwith to certifie 
Lu∣cas
 and 
Lisle,
 that they prepare themselves two howers hence to travaile toward the Empire of the Skies, or to the shades of 
Dis,
 I meane, 
to die.






Sould.


I shall, Sir.


Exit.






Rainsborow.


Come Commissary, let's goe view the Towne to cheare our Friends, and doome our scornfull Foes:


It glads my Soule, and is the onely good


That I delight in, for to spill their bloud.


Exeunt ambo.




[Enter S
r
. 
Ch: Lucas,
 & S
r
. 
George Lisle,
 as in Prison.]




Sir 
Charles.


The iron hand of 
Jove
 lies heavy on us, (oh 
George
) the proud Rebellious crew prevaile, Loyalty sinks with plumets at his heeles, while curst Rebellion rides on the Sun beams, justles 
Jove
 from his seat, and fathomes Clouds.






Sir 
George.


They may thanke that invincible Cham∣pion, Hunger, had not he help'd, the Towne had yet been ours, the wofull cries of Women, and of Children imploring Bread to staunch their pining stomacks, their guts almost congeal'd to stone within them, their faces black with famine, stalking the streets like (magicke summon'd) Ghosts, together with our owne dire need, inforc'd us to surrender to those Rebels, but 
Joves
 dread vengeance (sure) will seize on them that mought (but would not) have prevented this; degenerate 
London,
 who hast shaken hands with thine Allegiance, thy aspi∣ring Fabricks ere long must lie—What speaks thy haste?


[Enter a Souldier.]








Soul.


From the Commanders, Col. 
Rainsborow,
 and Cōmissary 
Ireton,
 I have in trust to let you know, some minutes hence you are to die.


Exit.






S
r
 
Charls.


Oh perjur'd Miscreants! is this your 
mercy?
 this my prophetick Soule still whisper'd to me; I knew they in our blouds would bathe their guilt, and sacrifice our lives to their God Treason, these Victims befit 
Mo∣lech,
 not 
Messiah,
 whom these professed Saints, but reall Devils, seem to make the umpire of their deeds.


Angry 
Rhamnusia,
 though we fall to dust,


Punish these Traytors, for their acts unjust.






Sir 
George.


Then 'tis decreed, we must take leave of day light, and tread the paths of immortality.


Jove,
 art thou just, hast thou reward for those


Who unto pious acts their lives difpose?


And hast thou lost thy vengeance, can it be


That these aspiring 
Titans,
 scape Scot-free?


Where are thy dire Cyclopean balles, the same


That mudling 
Mulciber,
 doth in 
Lemnos
 frame?


'Tis thy Olympick vigour can alone


Ding downe these Rebels unto 
Phlegeton.


[Enter three Souldiers armed.]


Ha, what are you?






Souldiers.


Your Executioners.






Sir 
Charles.


You are our welcomest friends; who is allotted to make his 
exit
 first?






1. 
Sould.


Your selfe must lead the dance of death.






Sir 
Charles.


Here then I bid farewell, unto this Stage of misery, my life hath been but one continued Scene, wovenwith perturbations and anxieties—but stay, whither must now my fleeting Soul take wing? into you Starry mansion, or steep 
Tartarus,
 up to the Milkie way, she'l take her flight




Where Soules of Heroes doe enjoy their blisse,


Where all Celestiall comforts, meet, and kisse;


Mankinds Redeemer, oh 
Emanuel!


Who in Mans shape on Earth were pleas'd to dwell, Receive my better part—are you prepar'd—






Souldiers.


We are.






Sir 
Charles.


Charge me then home, I love to chew those Winter-plums, they are those Cordiall comfits I accept, as sick men do great 
Gallens
 Antidotes; methinks the Earth goes round 
Copernicus:
 thou didst relate a truth, that 
Tellus
 ever hath an Ague fit; 
Sol
 wrap thy glorious head within a Cloud, or if thou needs wilt view my Destinie, put on a maske of bloud, Death is but 
Som∣nus
 Harbinger, we visit his all-peacefull Monarchy, e're we arive at Heavens golden gates, where such as knock with a religious hand, doe never misse of entrance; Let me imbrace thee 
(George)
 e're I part hence,

They imbrace.
 Thou wilt not long survive me—Shoot, shoot.


Incomparable 
Strafford
 (see) I come


To wait on thee in blest 
Elizium.


They shoot.


So, you have done it bravely, you are good Marks-men, I applaud you for't even in Death—so many pas∣sages are allow'd my Soule, she knowes not which to issue out at, this fabricke of my flesh now 'gins to totter, like to some City (for it's Peoples finnes) rock'd by the humerous winds; what a fierce combate is there now maintain'd betwixt my wounded heart & mighty 
Mors,
 who grasps it 'twixt his hands, squeezing it like a spunge; so furious 
Boreas
 smites the solid Oakes that on Mount 
Pelion
 grow, making them nod like unto feeble Reeds, 
(George)
 thy hand, my twins of light, have lost their wonted property, death with his icie-fingers seals them up: Farewell, great CHARLES, I die thy loyall Ser∣vant.

George,
 we shal meet some minutes hence (I doubt not) in a place where all joyes injoy one center; the worlds great Architectresse never saw two of her Sonnes murther'd so barbarously after faire Quarter promised:


Therefore great 
Jove,
 if thou lov'st loyall breath,


Take vengeance on the Authors of my death.






Sir 
George.


There crack'd the cords of life,

He dies.
 Oh noble 
Lucas!
 let me breathe out my Soule,

Kisses him.
 upon thy azure lips: so brave a compleat man no Mon∣sters (these excepted) would have butcher'd; my turne is next, is it not?






Souldiers.


It is.






Sir 
George.


Nor would I purchase life with one In∣treaty, this object so inflames me I am growne weary of this fleshly weed, and faine would put it off, exchanging it for an immortall robe, invelloped with Carbuncles, and Saphires— I, but to have our live bereft by a sharp violent death to sleep in a thin shrowd, involv'd in feign'd earth, our Nerves and Arteries shrunke up like sing'd Lute-strings, or the wither'd Wreath of some fam'd Heroe, made away i'th' darke for to converse with Wormes, and half-form'd creatures, such as the slime of Seven headed 
Nile
 produceth by the aide of 
Phoebus
 beames: Oh! there's a contemplation that would stag∣ger the most resolved Spirit, but destiny must be obey'd, Death is still death though diversly inflicted: to have ones Throat sluc'd with a golden Knife, or to be thrust through with a silver Sword, mitigates not the wound, more than the sufferance. But, oh ye vengefull Furies of darke Hell! ye three-fell Sisters of steep 
Erebus,
 aw∣full 
Aenyo,
 all ye dreaded Hags ominous to mortalls, forsake your black Cimerian Cells, and with your steely Whips ascend the Earth, Lash, lash these Traytours to

despaire and obloquie; Let strife, contention, fraud, guile and deep horror seize on great CHARLES his Foes, seve∣ring their strength, and frustrating their hopes till they sinke lower, underneath their Treasons, then plumets cast into the 
Baltick
 Sea: Now doe your office,

They shoot.
 I am prepar'd; Oh! you have put Balls of wild-fire in my Bowels, I am but all one 
Aetna;
 Farewell, base gloomie world, in which deluded Man, ravish'd with toyes, hunts after bubbles; till them he breake and va∣nisheth as he had never been, I sinke beneath the burthen of my owne weight, would with my fall, the Machinie of the world might be unriveted and shooke to pieces, the Ayre, cōmixt with Earth, the humid with the tumid Element, and active fire contesting gainst them both, re∣ducing all to the Originall Chaos; but I contend in vaine, the Gods created Man but for their sport, and its fit I should fulfill their ends, wishing but not prevailing; I spie the pure immaculate Soule of 
Lucas,
 travailing through the Ayre to find a residence: Stay gentle Spi∣rit, company is good, when tedious journies are pre∣scribed, we'l both fix in one Sphere, when looking downe, we will behold and smile,


To see these seeming Saints, but reall Friends


Fall by their devilishly devised ends.


He dies.






1. 
Souldier.


The Traytors both are dead.






2. 
Souldier.


Traytors, those are Traytors, whose most rigorous doome, we have obey'd, in murthering these brave Men.






3. 
Souldier.


How's this? let's seize upon him.






1. 
Souldier.


Doe, and make hast to most assur'd dam∣nation.






2. 
Souldier.


I am no longer of your base so∣cietie;

Drawes.
 Heaven pardon what is past, my future deeds

shall amply expiate my former crimes, the bloud of noble 
Lucas
 and brave 
Lifle,


On 
Rainsborow's
 base head, I will requite,


And send his Soule unto eternall night.


Exit.






1. 
Souldier.


Let us remove the Bodies, and make af∣ter him.


Exeunt, bearing the Bodies.




The end of the third Act.






ACT. IV.


[Enter 
Peters
 with M
rs
 
Lambert.
]




Pet.


THis he impos'd as a command, it hath not been my practice to solicite in causes of this kind for other men.






M
rs
. 
Lambert.


Too soon you have made triall of your skill; doth your grave habit suite with such course im∣ployment, reverend Sir?






Peters.


Faith Mistresse, amongst Friends, the outward garbe ought not to cause a nicety; He is my honoured Patron, tooke me halfe frozen from the foodfull Earth, and warm'd me in his bosome; and 'twere a dull ingra∣titude in me not to reward his bounty with my service: the radiant lustre of your Star-like eyes makes him to bow as your obsequious Vassall, whom thousands count it honour to obey; so great an influence hath your ex∣cellent beauty upon his manly faculties: He's now re∣turn'd, deck'd with triumphant Wreaths, from chasing the Blew Bonnets to their Mountaines, having taught

that stubborne People, his Name can make the Genius of their Country tremble, the politick 
Hamilton
 is his Prisoner, all knees bow to him, as Great 
Caesars
 Rivall; nothing doth want for to compleat his Conquest, but your assent to love him.






M
rs
. 
Lambert.


Why so I doe, and all Men else that doe retaine his temper.






Peters.


Your love admits of a too vast extent, I mean, can you affect him so, as to admit him to your Bed?






M
rs
 
Lambert.


S
t
 
Winifrid
 forbid it; you know (Sir) that I have a Lord and Husband, a Man made up of magnanimity, whose love is mixt with an indulgent care, should he but doubt of such an Injury, your Master, I my selfe, and all by him suspected, had better enter a Phalarian Bull, or stand the thunders shock— alas! I dare not.






Peters.


These are but Womanish feares, incident unto all your Sex; come, you must yeild to love him, how should your Husband know of your day Banquets, your nightly Revels, and sweet Paphian sports? he's now in 
Lancashire,
 Disbanding Troups of Horse: or should some wayward Feind convey the knowledge of your stolne Imbraces unto his jealous eare, my Masters great∣nesse countermands his furie, circled within his armes, should heaven, earth, and hell conspire to wrong you, 'twere sinne to doubt a danger: Consider (Lady) what a potent Friend, what treasure, honour, and content you'l gaine (if mundane glories doe affect you) by yeilding love for love to him, whom other Dames of highest bloud and fortune would sue for such a favour.






M
rs
 
Lambert.


Although my inward thoughts doe tax my levitie, yet won with your most sugred eloquence; I here yeild all of mine, 
Lambert
 calls his, unto your Ma∣sters bosome.








Crom.


I accept it (Lady) nor

Enter
 Cromwell, 
having been seen to peep through the hang∣ings, during the Colloquie 'twixt
 Pet. 
& Mrs.
 Lambert
 shall my most delicious 
Parragon
 ever have cause for to repent her favour, my selfe, my Sword, all under my Command, the spoiles of Nations, all that Earth can boast, shall at thy becke be prov'd for to be summon'd (Popea-like) bathe thou thy delicate body in Asses milke, commixt with Almond flower, (with 
Cleopatra
) dissolve inesti∣mable precious Stones in every glasse of luscious Wine thou drink'st, tread thou on Tyrian Silks and Ermins skins, let Art and Nature both industriously conspire to sate thy lavish wishes, my Treasurie is inexhaustible; Three Kingdomes (Deare) I graspe thus— in this palme, their Riches and their glories all are mine, the Goddess of the world my Patroness 
Fortune
 hath given all into my hands; as for the Man (they call the KING) He hath not foure and twenty howers to live, I've hyr'd a dapper Lad, a neat-tongu'd (but inexorable Fellow) for fifteene hundred pounds, to ease Him of the burthen of His cares, (good King, he's fitter farre for to converse with Saints and Seraphims, than with erronious and am∣bitious Mortalls, and 'twere a sinne (a grand one) for to deterre the hopes Celestialls have for to enjoy His pre∣sence) my 
Bradshaws
 braines doe brood, and hath dis∣cover'd a line of Law that never yet was talkt on, which saith, If Kings doe not obey their Subjects, they may chastise them with Imprisonment, Banishment, or Death; with him a Crew (whom I have eke in pay) doe fit as Judges to make good this Maxime: my 
Bradshaw
 is growne proud of his great Office, I've Order'd him for to be cloathed in Purple, all Heads for to stand bare on every shoulder when the Lord President (for so I have created him) shall be in presence, his Co-adjutors all

have honour too; and when assembled, have no worse a title then the 
High Court of Justice:
 these all are sworne for to fulfill my ends, and Doome their KING to die; which once perform'd, then I am Lord alone, though not a King by Title, yet by Power, and thou (my Dea∣rest) shalt share glories with me, thy lovely browes deckt with a Coronet of Ophir Gold, inchas'd with Onix Stones; nor doe thou dread thy Husbands anger, his open violence, or his clandestine plots, he is my Vassell meerly at my pleasure; and if I heare he but repines at our Imbraces, I'le spurne his Soule out with my foot. (My 
Hugh
) this businesse was well manag'd, thou art a fluent Orator, when Cypryan 
Venus,
 and her wing'd Sonne, waits at thy elbow, this service hath oblig'd me more unto thee then all thy former industries.






Peters.


I am your humblest Creature.






Cromwell.


But why (my dearest Mistresse) is that face of yours (which even the Gods gaze at with greedy long∣ing) obscur'd with sullen mists? what sorrow claimes a superiority o're your harmonious senses? oh let not care plow furrowes in that forehead! is (now) more smooth than polish'd Ivory, or the true Turtles feather; give but your grief a name, and if it lie in humane power to ease you, resolve, a speedy and a pleasing remedy hasts to your comfort.






M
rs
 
Lambert.


Sir, can you thinke my heart is so ob∣durate? or that I can so soone be lost unto a feminine temper, as not to cogitate with what hasty rashnesse I have extinguisht 
Hymens
 Tapers, which (some howers since) rivald 
Sols
 beames in lustre, with what a forward zeale I have infring'd my Marriage Vow, and given a∣way that which is none of mine? oh Heaven!






Peters.


'sfoot Sir, she's falne into a relapse; kisse her

Sir, (quickly) or shee'l coole so fast, and her heart freeze into so hard a lumpe, not all your future Courtship or activity, shall be of force to melt her to your wishes.






Crom.


How stupid am I in these amorous Arts deare Mistresse! let not penitentiall fancies (the spurious issues of dull Melancholly) gaine the least power over your fa∣culties: what can you feare, while I dare be your friend? think on the glories that I late proposed; all which shall be made yours, with eminent safety.






M
rs
 
Lambert.


I shall endeavour, Sir, to beare my selfe as her that loves and honours you.






Cromwell.


Now thou sing'st sweetly, in a farre more melifluous tone than Quires of 
Nightingals,
 and that this temper never may forsake thee, our time we'l spend in various delights, such as 
Caligula,
 were he againe on earth would covet to enjoy; enter ye six prime West∣minsterian Senators:


Musick, strike hie, our Spirits to advance,


While we doe mingle in an active Dance.




Enter six Masquers, habited for ambition, trea∣son, lust, revenge, perjury, sacriledge, musick; they daunce with them, joyne 
Cromwell
 and Mistresse 
Lambert, Peters
 singing out last, they daunce together by themselves.




SONG.




Let these joyes ever be in prime,


Nought but virtue is a crime;


Maugre the wise,


Meane men must rise,


Every Olympiad of time.




Taste then boldly, terrene pleasures,


Yours is the Earth, and all its Treasures;


Rifle, Plunder,


And keep all under,


Let Murmurers waite your leisures.


Exeunt Masquers.








Cromwell.


This was perform'd as I would wish, now Sweet let's in for to compleat our happinesse, and taste those joyes which 
Jove
 himselfe will envie, knowing 
Agenors
 Daughter, or 
Calisto, Inachian Io,
 or his blasted 
Semele,
 were not indu'd with beauty so immense as thee (my dearest happinesse)


Set on unto the Chamber of delight,


Doe not dream 
(Lambert)
 thou art horn'd to night.


Exeunt.




[Enter 
Fairfax, Ireton, Rainsborow.
 &c.]




Fair.


I need not advertise you Col. 
Rainsborow,
 not to be implacably severe, against the refractory 
Chom∣ley;
 or when you are sate downe before that most im∣pregnable 
Pontefract. Castle
 to storme more oft than faire advantages calls you to action: 
Mars
 go along with you, I am for 
London
 with my Prisoners.






Rains.


My Lord, your humble Servant, victory and triumph ever waite upon you.






Ireton.


Farewell noble Colonel.






Rains.


Adieu, sweet Commissary,

Exeunt Fairfax
 and 
Ireton.
 Alone, and in all haste to take my journey, to so remote an Angle of the Land, there to take charge of those I never saw, discard their Generall, and make my selfe their Leader, this is a strange injunction, but I must doe it:

[Enter his 
Servant
]
 Hast thou delivered what I gave in charge?






Servant.


I have Sir; he will not faile punctually to

performe it, and sent you, the true and exact relation (as neer as he can gather) who were the prime Promoters (of your unlookt-for) Journey.






Rains.


Let's to Horse, I'le ride twelve miles this night, they shall have no cause to blame my tardinesse, away.


Exeunt.


Enter 
Blackburne
 (being the Souldier that esca∣ped from amongst the Fairfaxians, with an in∣tent to kill 
Rainsborow,
 Act. 3.) with him, three Souldiers, their Pistols and Swords.






Black.


Hist, this way the Villaine posted, onely his Man and he together; I hope the divine justice will not suffer him, for to escape our hands; that way, that way,


Exeunt.




[Enter 
Rainsborow
 and his 
Servant.
]




Rains.


We have quite lost the beaten roade—there let our Horses grase awhile; I feele strange thoughts fighting about my heart, either my guilty fancy did de∣lude me, or I beheld the Ghosts of 
Lucas
 and of 
Lisle,
 all full of wounds staring just now upon me, there, there, dost thou see nothing?






Serv.


Not I Sir; good Sir let us forsake this gloomie glade, it presents horror, and besides the night is neer halfe spent.






Rainsb.


A grim, but supine terror clogs my soule; 
Morpheus
 with's leaden Mace arrests my senses, I needs must sleep awhile.


Lies downe.




[Enter 
Blackburne,
 and his Mates.]




Black.


Kind Fates, I thank you; this is that cruell Ty∣ger (my Fellowes) who contriv'd the much lamented deaths of generous 
Lucas,
 and the valiant 
Lisle.






Rains.


Ha, who sent thee hither?


He rises up.






Black.


Thy sinnes; I come to kill thee.








Rains.


It is no easie taske that thou hast undertaken, I have an arme as vigorous as thine, a Pistoll that will lighten e're it thunders, a Sword too that ne'r yet for∣sooke his Master in time of danger.






Black.


If thou but call to mind thy damned Treasons, thy Charnell plots, and vile Conspiracies, thy murthers, rapines, and fell outrages, a Child of seven yeares old may quell thy force and lead thee captive in a string; if thou dar'st thinke thy numerous crimes have not barr'd up the dore of Heav'n 'gainst thee, pray be but speedy in thy orisons, I have no mind to kill thy Soule.






Rains.


Saucie Slave, thinke on thy owne sad end; and either at my feet implore remission of thy rash attempt, or thou art dead.






Black.


So brave, have at you Sir.






Servant.


This is honour beyond

They charge with their Pi∣stols,
 Rainsborow's 
Man falls; also one of
 Black∣burne's 
Confederates.
 thought to fall, or to survive my Ma∣sters second.






Rains.


Come on, Sir.






Black.


Though thou hast scap'd my scalding lead, my cooler steele shall find a passage to thy heart.


They sight.






Rains.


Thou art not (sure) invulnerable, even 
Thetis
 Sonne was slaine by 
Phrigian Paris
— but, oh my guilt hangs heavie on my Arme! and impedes the vio∣lence of my blowes—there.


They sight.






Black.


Will you not sink, or have you many Souls that take their reigne by turnes? if it be so, I have so good a Cause I cannot shrinke beneath the Trenchant blade, till by my single force, I have dismiss'd them all; there Dogge—






Rains.


Injurious Destinies, have you inrich'd my fame with many victories over whole Troups of men, for to permit my fall in the Catastrophe, by a most despicable

Knapsack-bearer, why carves my flesh as Butchers doe their meat, and bores me till I grow transparent— Oh! my bloud drils like to some prodigall spout which Huswifes set a tilt to cleanse their linnen— but, shall I fall without revenge—


He falls.






Black.


Oh! are you measuring out your length in clay? Ye Twins of valour 
Lucas
 and brave 
Lisle,


Your heads, up from your earthly pillowes reare,


And see your Murtherer lie weltering here.






Rains.


My spirit's faint, my heart is sick to death, I hold the panting lumpe betwixt my teeth, But 'twill not brooke to stay; Let all those that have sought their Soveraignes ruine looke upon me and my deserved de∣stiny, I would invoke the powers above, but them I have so much exasperated, they'l stop their eares to my com∣plaints: Oh! I die—


Thou King of flames, let me in Sulphure swim


Neare to that Caudron, holds my Patron, 
Pim.


He dies.






Blackburne.


Oh dire and dreadfull end! he's gone to his owne home, (the cursed Dungeon) with as much willingnesse as holy Anchorites surrender their white Soules to holy Angels, his Body we will throw in yon∣der ditch for Beasts and Birds, to prey on:


They remove him.


I have some wounds, but none (I think) are mortall. Come, fellow Souldier, let us hast to shelter, this deed, when once divulg'd, will be examin'd strictly—


Beyond the Seas, for safety I will flie,


Till 
England
 once more be a Monarchie.


Exeunt.




The end of the fourth Act.








ACT. V.


[Ent. 
Cromwell
 with M
rs
 
Lambert,
 in their night Robes.]




Crom∣well.


APollo
 is too hasty in his rise, and emulates my happinesse; had 
Jupiter
 injoy'd so rare a Creature as thy selfe (my Deare) in his lascivious armes, he would have charm'd bright 
Phoebus
 to the East, and have united day & night in one, as when he revell'd 'twixt 
Amphitrios
 sheets; how likes my love of her new Bed-fellow?






M
rs
 
Lambert.


You are as valiant Sir, in those soft skir∣mishes 
Venus
 expects in her pavillion, as in those deeds of death 
Mars
 doth approve of in his Tent of Warre.


[Enter 
Peters.
]






Pet.


Good morrow to the most renowned 
Cromwell,
 & his most excellent Mistresse; Sir, I this morning have receiv'd a Letter directed unto you, I thinke it comes from Commissary 
Ireton.






Cromwell.


Some newes of more than ordinary conse∣quence if it beare date from him:


He opens and reads the Letter.




Lieutenant Generall,


THe deed is done, (which either ever makes, or marres us all) the King (according to the doome of our High Court of Justice) this morning lost His Head, thousands of people being Spectators of His Tragedy; His Body we have given to the Duke of 
Richmond,
 to be dispos'd of as he thinks fit: the Vulgar (generally) are much inraged at it,

and say (having proceeded so farre in our Treasons against him, that we despaired of pardon to preserve our own lives, and to make our selves Master over them) we have mur∣thered the most virtuous Prince in 
Europe
 at his owne dore, but we shall muzell the mouthes of that many-headed Hydra ere it be long; and in the meane time must resolve to keep what we have got by fraud and force, by oppression and vio∣lence: we have Outlawed the Eldest and Second Sonne of the dead King, and proclaimed, That if ever they be taken on English ground, they shall die without mercy: we are now modelizing the Common-wealth, in the prosecution of which, both Souldiers and Senators, desire your aide; this I was commanded to certifie you: and had I not been com∣manded, it had been done of his owne accord by


Your assured Friend to serve you, 
IRETON.








Crom.


Then now I am above the reach of fate, prepare (my 
Hugh
) though not to be a Bishop, yet to dispose of a whole Diocesse: you Lady (the sole Mistresse of my hopes) are yet untainted in your Husbands thoughts, let him againe repose his horned head betwixt your deli∣cate paps, I must with speed to 
London,
 whence I will send thee thy lap-full of Gold (my 
Danae
) and Jewels rich and sparkling, for to adorne thy onely eminent beauty; nor shalt be long ere I in person visit thee.






M
rs
 
Lambert.


Sir, you have robb'd me both of ho∣nour, and my heart at once; so strange a Fate doth sway me, that whatsoe're you judge to be convenient, I must not contradict.






Crom.


Thou art as wise as beautious, rest confident of my fidelity, Farewell Star of the North.


Kisses her, she goes off.




Come 
(Hugh)
 lets poste unto the famous Cittie


To sit in Councell with the State Committee.




Exeunt.


[Enter 
Chorus.
]






Now all is lost to humane sense,


The King is murther'd on pretence


He was a Tyrant, and in Him


Our Lawes and Rights to laethe swim,


Buried forever in His death,


Since they subsisted by His Breath,






1. See here, what would make Indians weep,


These
 14 
Ver∣see are spoken wholly in re∣lation to the
 Kings 
Mur∣ther.


2. And force the Monsters of the deep;


3. Shed teares into the brinie maine,


4. And after drinke them up againe;


5. That which forc'd 
Sol
 to hide his head


6. Pierc'd into Graves, and wak'd the dead;


He discovers be∣hind the travers the dead body of the
 King; 
also the Bodies of the Lord
 Capel, Hamilton 
&
 Holland.


7. And that which made the Angels hide


8. Their faces (deep in scarlet di'de)


9. With their soft wings, and doth compell


10. The Catholick to turne Infidel,


11. And to believe 
Presbyter Johns,


12. And strictest Solifidians,


13. Are damn'd (even from their Cradle) since


14. They murther'd so divine a Prince.






This body, when possest of life


Pointing to
 Hamilton.


Was the sole Causer of the strife


And breach (which so our Land hath rent)


Betwixt the King and Parliament;


'Twas he, that by his Hell-bred plots


decoyd the King amongst the Scots;


Yet afterward (his owne to hold)


Sold Him to Traytors for their Gold;




All this in hopes to win that Crowne,


Desire of which, hath brought him downe


Unto the earth, slaine (even by them)


From whom he hop'd a Diadem;


His Soule the Furies meane to ply


With tortures to eternity.






This Body when it us'd to walke,


Pointing to
 Holland.


Knew better how to Drab and talke,


To weare gay Cloathes, and Complement,


Then to be wisely eminent;


For loyalty unto his King


His folly not, his faith did bring


Him to the Block. But here lies one,


Pointing to the L.
 Capel.


The glory of his Nation,


A man for valour, virtue, wit,


Who learning lov'd, and cherisht it


Without compare; his Charity


Extended unto each degree,


Ages and Sex, (had they no more


But this one Devilish Act in store


Of murthering him) the Rebels (sure)


Could not, yet eight yeare more procure,


To Reigne by bloud, by rapines, horrors,


Treason, inexplicable terrors;


But what the Fates allot we must


Submit to, and in them we trust


To see these Monsters fall and rot,


By God and virtuous men forgot.




Exit.




FINIS.











