Batavia, or, The Hollander displayed in brief characters & observations of the people & country, the government of their state & private families, their virtues and vices : also, A perfect description of the people & country of Scotland.
Brief character of the Low-Countries under the states
Felltham, Owen, 1602?-1668.
Approx. 69 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 47 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2003-01 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A41077




Wing F647



ESTC R13602





ocm 11834566




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Batavia, or, The Hollander displayed in brief characters & observations of the people & country, the government of their state & private families, their virtues and vices : also, A perfect description of the people & country of Scotland.
Brief character of the Low-Countries under the states
Felltham, Owen, 1602?-1668.
Weldon, Anthony, Sir, d. 1649? Perfect description of the people and countrey of Scotland.
[4], 89 p.   


London :


Printed for G. Widdowes ...,


1672.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Netherlands --  Description and travel.
Netherlands --  Social conditions --  Early works to 1800.
2002-02
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2002-02
Apex CoVantage
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2002-03
TCP Staff (Michigan)
Sampled and proofread
2002-03
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2002-04
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






F647


11834566


49755
















BATAVIA: OR THE Hollander displayed: IN BRIEF Characters & Observations Of the PEOPLE & COUNTRY, THE GOVERNMENT OF THEIR 
TATE & Private FAMILIES, THEIR VIRTUES and VICES.


ALSO, A PERFECT DESCRIPTION Of the PEOPLE & COUNTRY OF SCOTLAND.


LONDON, 
rinted for 
G. Widdowes,
 at the 
Green-Dragon
 in 
St. Paul's Church-yard,
 1672.










TO THE READER.


AS I live Gentlemen, I am a∣maz'd how any Piece could be made such minc't meat as this hath been by a twice-printed Co∣py, which I find flying abroad to a∣buse the 
Author,
 who long since tra∣velling for Companies-sake, with a Friend into the Low-Countreys, would needs for his own Recreation, write this Essay of them, as he then found them: I am sure as far from ever thinking to have it publick, as he was from any private spleen to the Nation, or any person in it; for I have moved him often to Print it, but could never get his consent, his modesty ever esteeming it among his 
Puerilia,
 and (as he said) a piece


too light for a Prudential man to publish: th truth is, it was meerly occasional in his youth, and the time so little, that he had for observation (his stay there not being above three weeks) that it could not well be ex∣pected, he should say more, and though the former part be joculary and spor∣tive, yet the seriousness of the latter part renders the Character no way injurious to the people. And now find∣ing some ruffled Feathers only pre∣sented for the whole Bird, and having a perfect Copy by me, I have presu∣med to trespass so much upon the 
Au∣thor
 as to give it you (in vindication of him) so as I am confilent it was dressed by his own Pen. And after I have begged his Pardon for exposing it without his Warrant, I shall leave you to judg by comparing this and the former Impressions, whether or no he hath not been abused sufficiently.












Three Weeks
 OBSERVATI∣ONS 
of the
 Low Coun∣treys; 
Especially
 HOLLAND.


THey are a general Sea-Land. The great Bog of 
Europe.
 There is not such another Marsh in the world that's flat. They are an universal Quag-mire Epito∣miz'd. 
A Green Cheese in pickle.
 There is in them an 
AEquilibrium
 of mud and water. A strong Earth∣quake would shake them to a 
Chaos,
 from which the successive force of the Sun, rather then Creation, hath a little emended them. They are the Ingredients of a black Pudding,


and want only stirring together. Marry 'tis best making on't in a dry Summer, else you will have more blood then grist; and then have you no way to make it serve for a∣ny thing, but to tread it under 
Zo∣na Torrida,
 and so dry it for Turfs.


Sayes one, it affords the people one commodity beyond all the o∣ther Regions; if they die in per∣dition, they are so low, that they have a shorter cut to Hell then the rest of their Neighbours. And for this cause, perhaps all strange Religions throng thither, as natu∣rally inclining towards their (en∣ter. Besides, their Riches shews them to be 
Pluto's
 Region, and you all know what part that was which the Poets did of old assign him. Here is 
Seyx, Acheron, Cecytus,
 and the rest of those muddy streams


that have made matter for the Fa∣blers. Almost every one is a 
Charon
 here, and if you have but a 
Naulum
 to give, you cannot want or Boat or Pilot. To confirm all, let but some of our Separatists be asked, and they shall swear that the 
Elizian Fields
 are there.


It is an excellent Countrey for a despairing Lover: for every cor∣ner affords him Willow to make a Garland on; but if Justice doom him to be hang'd on any other Tree, he may in spight of the sen∣tence live long and confident. If he had rather quench his spirits than suffocate them, so rather chuse to feed Lob
ers then Crows; 'tis but leaping from his window, and he lights in a River or Sea; for most of their dwellings stand like Privies in moted-houses, hanging still over the water. If none of


these cure him, keep him but a Winter in a house without a Stove, and that shall cool him.


The oile is all fat, though want∣ing the colour to shew it so; for indeed it is the buttock of the World, full of veins and blood, but no bones in't. Had 
St. Steven
 been condemn'd to suffer here, he might have been alive at this day; for un∣less it be in their paved Cities, gold is a great deal more plentiful then stones, except it be living ones; and then for their heaviness you may take in almost all the Na∣tion.


'Tis a singular place to fat Mon∣keys in. There are Spiders as big as Shrimps, and I think as many. Their Gardens being moist, abound with these. No creatures; fo
 sure they were bred, not made. Were they but as venemous as rank, to


gather herbs were to hazard Mar∣tyrdom. They are so large, that you would almost believe the 
Hes∣perides
 were here, and these the 
Dragons
 that did guard them.


You may travel the Countrey though you have not a guide: for you cannot baulk your road with∣out the hazard of drowning. There is not there any use of an Harbin∣ger. Wheresoever men go the way is made before them. Had they Cities large as their walls, 
Rome
 would be esteemed a bable. 20 miles in length is nothing for a Waggon to be hurried on one of them, where if your fore-man be sober, you may travel in safety, otherwise you must have stronger faith then 
Peter
 had, else you sink immediate∣ly. A starting horse endangers you to two deathe at once, breaking of your neck, and drowning.



If your way be not thus, it hangs in the water, and at the approach of your Waggon shall shake as if it were Ague strucken. 
Duke d' Al∣va's
 taxing of the tenth penny frighted it into a 
Palsey,
 which all the 
Mountebancks
 they have bred since could never tell how to cure.


'Tis indeed but a bridge of swim∣ming earth, or a flag somewhat thicker then ordinary, if the strings crack your course is shortned, you can neither hope for Heaven nor fear Hell, you shall be sure to stick fast between them. Marry if your Faith flow Purgatory height, you may pray if you will for that to clense you from the Mud shall soil you.


'Tis a green sod in water, where if the 
German Eagle
 dares to bath himself, he's glad again to pearch that he may dry his wings.



Some things they do that seem Wonders. 'Tis ordinary to see them fish for fire in water, which they catch in Nets and transport to land in their boats, where they spread it more smoothly then a 
Mercer
 doth his 
Velvet
 when he would hook in an heir upon his coming to age. Thus lying in a field, you would think you saw a Cantle of green Cheese spread o∣ver with black butter.


If 
AEtna
 be Hells mouth or fore∣gate, sure here's found the 
Postern.
 'Tis the 
Port-Esquiline
 of the world, where the whole earth doth vent her crude blackgore, which the Inhabitants scrape away for fuel, as men with spoon 
 excre∣ments-from 
Civit-Cats.


Their ordinary Pack-horses are all of wood, carry their bridles in their tails, and their burdens


in their bellies. A strong Tide and a stiff Gale are the spurs that make them speedy. When they travel they touch no ground, and when they stand still they ride; and are never in danger but when they drink up too much of their way.


There is a Province among them, where every woman carries a Cony in a 
Lambskin.
 'Tis a cu∣stom, and not one that travels e∣ver leaves it behind her. Now guess if you can what beast that is, which is clad in a fur both of hair and wool.


They dress their meat 
in Aqua Coelesti,
 for it springs not as ours from the earth, but comes to them as 
Mann
 to the 
Israelites,
 falling from Heaven. This they keep un∣der ground till it stinks, and then they pump it out again for use. So when you wash your hands with


one hand, you had need hold your nose with the other; for though it be not Cordial, 'tis certainly a strong water


The Elem
nts are here at vari∣ance, the subtile overswaying the grosser. The fire consumes the earth, and the air the water. They burn Turffs, and drain their grounds with Wind-mills: As if the Cholick were a remedy for the Stone; and they would prove a∣gainst Philosophy the Worlds Con∣flagration to be natural, even shewing thereby that the very Ele∣ment of earth is combustible.


The Land that they 
 keep as neatly as 
 his Beard. They ha
 Mowing. 'Tis so 
 water and Rivers, 
t it is impos∣sible to make a
ommon among them. Even the 
ists
 are here


at a stand, only they hold their pride in wrangling for that which they never will find. Our Justices would be much at ease although our 
English
 Poor were still among them: For whatsoever they do, they can break no hedges. Sure had the wise men of 
Gotham
 lived here, they would have studied some other death for their 
Cuckow.


Their Ditches they frame as they list, and distinguish them in∣to nooks, as my Lord Majors Cook doth his Custards. Clense them they do often: but 'tis as Physicians 
ve their potions, more to catch 
 then cast the Mud out.


 Country be part of a 
 every house almost 
and. And that though 
 it, looks as smug as a Lady 
 newly lockt up her colours 
 by her Irons.


A gallant masquing suit sits not more compleat, then a coat of thatch though many years wearing.


If it stand dry 'tis embraced by 
Vines,
 as if it were against the na∣ture of a 
Dutch man
 not to have 
Bacchus
 his neighbour. If you find it lower-seated, 'tis only a close Arbor in a plump of 
Willows
 and 
Alders,
 pleasant enough while the dog-days last; but those past once, you must practice wading, or be prisoner till the next Spring. Only a hard frost with the help of a Sledge, may release you.


The Bridg to this is an out landish Planck with a box of stones to poiz it withal, which with the least help turns round like the ex∣ecutioner when he whips off a head. That when the Master is over
ands drawn, and then he
in his Castle.


'Tis sure his 
hat renders


him suspicious. That he may there∣fore certainly see who enters, you shall ever find his window made over his door. But it may be, that is to shew you his Pedigree, for though his Ancestors were never known, their Arms are there; which (in spight of Heraldry) shall bear their Atchievment with a Helmet for a Baron at least Marry the Field perhaps shall be charged with three baskets, to shew what trade his father was.


Escutcheons are as plentiful as Gentry is scarce. Every man there is his own Herald; and he that has but wit enough to invent a Coat, may challenge it as his own.


When you are entred the house, the first thing you encounter is a Looking gla
 No question but a true Emb
 politick hospi∣tality;


for though it reflect your self in your own figure 'tis yet no longer then while you are there before it. When you are gone once it flatters the next comer, without the least remembrance that you e're were there.


The next are the vessels of the house marshalled about the room like Watchmen. All as neat as if you werein a Citizens Wives Ca∣binet; for unless it be themselves, they let none of Gods creatures lose any thing of their native beauty.


Their houses, especially in their Cities, are the best eye-beauties of their Countrey. For cost and sight they far exceed our 
English,
 but they want their magnificence. Their lining is yet more rich then their outside, not in hangings but pi∣ctures, which ev
he poorest are


there furnisht with. Not a Cobler but has his toys for ornament. Were the knacks of all their houses set together, there would not be such another 
Bartholomew
 Fair in 
Europe.


Their Artists for these are as rare as thought, for they can paint you a fat hen in her feathers; and if you want the language, you may learn a great deal of Dutch by their signs; for what they are, they ever write under them. So by this device hang up more honesty then they keep.


Coaches are as rare as Comets; and those that live loosely need not fear one punishment which often vexes such with us: They may be sure, though they be discovered, they shall not be carted.


All their Merchandise they draw through the streets on Sledges;


or as we on Hurdles do traitors to execution.


Their rooms are but several land-boxes: if so, you must either go out to spit, or blush when you see the Map brought.


Their beds are no other then land-cabins, high enough to need a ladder or stairs. Up once, you are walled in with Wainscot, and that is good discretion to avoid the trouble of making your will every night; for once falling out else would break your neck perfectly. But if you die in it, this comfort you shall leave your friends, that you di'd in clean linnen.


Whatsoever their estates be, their houses must be fair. There∣fore from 
Amsterdam
 they have banisht Sea-cole, lest it soil their buildings, of which the statelier sort are somtimes sententious, and


in the front carry some conceit of the Owner, As to give you a taste in these.


Christus Adjutor meus;


Hoc abdicato Perenne Quero;


Hic Medio tuitus Itur.


Every door seems studded with Diamonds. The nails and hinges hold a constant brightness, as if rust there were not a quality incident to Iron. Their houses they keep cleaner then their bodies, their bodies then their souls. Go to one, you shall find the Andirons shut up in net-work. At a second, the Warming pan muffled in 
Italian
 Cut-work. At a third the Sconce clad in Cambrick. And like a Crown advanced in the middle of the house, for the woman there is the head of the husband, so takes


the horn to her own charge, which she sometimes multiplies, and be∣stows the increase on her man.


'Tis true, they are not so ready at this play as the 
English;
 for nei∣ther are they so generally bred to't, nor are their men such linnen∣lifters. Idleness and Courtship has not banisht honesty. They speak more, and do less; yet doth their blood boil high, and their veins are full, which argues strongly that when they will they may take up the custom of entertaining stran∣gers. And having once done it, I believe they will be notable; for I have heard they trade more for love then money, but 'tis of the sport not the man, and therefore when they like the pastim they will reward the Gamester; otherwise their gross feed and clownish bree∣ding hath spoiled them from being


nobly minded. And if you once in publick discover her private favours or pretend to more then is civil, she falls off like Fairy wealth dis∣closed, and turns like Beer with Lightening to a sowerness, which neither Art nor Labour can ever make sweet again.


But this I must give you on re∣port onely; Experience herein hath neither made me Fool nor Wise.


The People are generally Boor∣ish, yet none but may be bred to a States-man, they having all this gift, Not to be so nice-conscienced, but that they can turn out Religi∣on to let in Policy.


Their Countrey is the God they worship. War is their Heaven, Peace is their Hell, and the 
Spani∣ard
 is the Devil they hate. Custom is their Law, and their Will Rea∣son.



You may sooner convert a 
Iew,
 than make an ordinary 
Dutch man
 yield to arguments that cross him. An old Baud is easilier turned Puri∣tan, than a Waggoner persuaded not to bait thrice in 9 miles. And when he doth, his horses must not stir, but have their Manger brought them into the way, where in a top∣sweat they eat their grass, and drink their water, and presently after hurry away. For they ever drive as if they were all the sons of 
Nimshi,
 and were furiously either pursuing an enemy, or flying him.


His spirits are generated from the 
English
 Beer, and that makes him headstrong. His body is built of pickled Herring, and they render him testy: these with a little But∣ter, Onions, and 
Holland
 Cheese, are the Ingredients of an ordinary 
Dutch man;
 which a Voyage to the



East-Indies,
 with the heat of the 
Equinoctial Consolidates.


If you see him fat, he hath been rooting in a Cabbage-ground and that bladdered him. Viewing him naked, you will pray him to pull off his Masque and Gloves, or wish him to hide his face that he may appear more lovely. For that and his hands are 
Egypt,
 however his body 
e 
Europe.
 He hath exposed them so much to the Sun and wa∣ter, as he is now his own disguise, and without a vizard, may serve in any 
Antimasque
 you put him in.


For their condition they are churlish as their breeder 
Neptune:
 and without doubt very ancient; for they were bred before manners were in fashion. Yet all they have not they account superfluity, which they say mendeth some, and mar∣reth many.



They should make good Justices, for they respect neither petsons nor apparel. A boor in his liquord slop, shall have as much good use as a Courtier in his bravery: Nay more, for he that is but Courtly or Gentile, is among them like a 
Merlyn
 after 
Michaelmasi
 in the field with 
Crowes.
 They wonder at and envy, but worship no such Images. Marry with a Silver hook you shall catch these 
Gudgeons
 pre∣sently. The love of gain being to them as natural as water to a Goose, or Carrion to any Kite that flies.


They are seldom deceived; for they trust no body; so by conse∣quence are better to hold a fort then win it; yet they can do both. Trust them you must if you travel. For to ask a Bill of particulars, is to purre in a Wasps nest; you must


pay what they ask, as sure as if it were the Assesment of a Sub∣sidy.


Complement is an idleness they were never trained up in, and 'tis their happiness that Court-vani∣ties have not stole away their minds from business.


Their being Sailors and Souldi∣ers have marred two parts already, if they bath once in Court oyle they are painted Trap-doors And shall then let the 
Jews
 build a City where 
Harlem Mere
 is, and after cozen 'em on't.


They shall abuse a stranger for nothing, and after a few base terms scotch one another to a 
Carbonado,
 or as they do their Roaches when they fry them.


Nothing can quiet them but money and liberty, yet when they have them they abuse both; but if


you tell them so you awake their fury; and you may sooner calm the sea, then conjure that into com∣pass again. Their anger hath no eyes; and their judgment doth not flow so much from reason as passion and partiality.


They are in a manner all 
Aqua∣tiles,
 and therefore the 
Spaniard
 calls them water-dogs. To this, though you need not condiscend; yet withal, you may think they can catch you a duck as soon. Sea 
Gulls
 do not swim more readily: nor 
More-hens
 from then nest run sooner to the water. Every thing is so made to swim among them, as it is a question if 
Elizeus
 his Axe were now floating there, it would be taken for a mi∣racle.


They love none but those that do for them; and when they leave


off, they neglect him. They have no friends but their kindred, which at every wedding feast among themselves like Tribes.


All that help them not they hold popish; and take it for an argu∣ment of much honesty, to rail bit∣terly against the King of 
Spain.
 And certainly, this is the badge of an ill Nature, when they have once cast off the yoke, to be most viru∣lent against those to whom of right they owe respect and service. Grate∣ful dispositions, though by their Lords they be exempt from ser∣vice, will yet be paying reverence and affection. 
I
 am confident, that had they not been once the Subjects of 
Spain,
 they would have loved the Nation better. But now out of dying Duties ashes all the Blazes of hostility and flame. And 'tis sufficient ground to contemn their


eternal hate, to know the world remembers, they were once the lawful subjects of that most Catho∣lick Crown.


Their shipping is the 
Babel
 which they boast on for the glory of their Nation. 'Tis indeed a won∣der, and they will have it so. But we may well hope they will never be so mighty by Land, left they shew us how doggedly they can insult where they get the mastery.


'Tis their own 
Chronicle
 business, which can tell you that at the siege of 
Leyden,
 a Fort being held by the 
Spanish,
 by the 
Dutch
 was after taken by assault. The Defendants were put to the sword, where one of the 
Dutch
 in the fury of the slaughter, ript up the Captain's body, and with a barbarous hand tore out the yet-lving heart pant∣ing among the reeking bowels, then


then with his teeth rent it still warm with blood into gobbets, which he spitted over the Battel∣ments in defiance to the rest of the Army.


Oh Tigres breed! The 
Seythian
 Bear could never have been more savage To be necessitated into cruelty, is a misfortune to the strongly tempted to it; but to let spleen rave, and mad it in resistless blood, shews nature steep'd i'th' livid gall of passion; and beyond all bruitishness displays the un∣noble Tyranny of a prevailing Coward.


Their Navies are the whip of 
Spain,
 or the Arm wherewith they pull away his 
Indies.
 Nature hath not bred them so active for the land as some others: But at Sea they are water devils, to attempt things incredible.



In Fleets they can fight close, and rather hazard all then save some, while others perish: but single, they will flag and fear like birds in a bush, when the 
Sparrow-Hawks
 bells are heard.


A 
Turkish
 Man of War is as dreadful to them as a 
Falcon
 to a 
Mallard;
 from whom their best remedy is to steal away. But if they come to blows, they want the valiant stoutness of the 
English,
 who will rather expire bravely in a bold resistance, then yield to the lasting slavery of becoming captives to so barbarous an ene∣my. And this shews, they have not learned yet even Pagan Philo∣sophy, which ever preferred an ho∣nourable death before a life thral∣led to perpetual slavery.


Their ships lie like high Woods in Winter: and if you view them


on the north-side you frieze with∣out hope, for they ride so thick, that you can through them see no Sun to warm you with.


Sailers among them are as com∣mon as beggars with us. They can drink, rail, swear, niggle, steal, and be lowsie alike; but examining their use, a mess of their Knaves are worth a million of ours: for they in a boisterous rudeness can work, and live, and toil, whereas ours will rather laze themselves to po∣verty, and like Cabages left out in winter, rot away in the lothsome∣ness of a nauseous sloth.


Almost all among them are Sea∣men born, and like frogs can live both on land and water. Not a Countrey-Uriester but can handle an oar, steer a boat, raise a mast, and bear you out in the roughest straits you come in. The ship she


avouches much better for sleep then a bed. Being full of humors, that is her cradle, which lulls and and rocks her to a dull phlegma∣tickness, most of them looking like a full grown Oyster boil'd. Slime, humid air, water, and wet dier, have so bag'd their cheeks, that some would take their paunches to be gotten above their chin.


The Countreys Government is a 
Democracy,
 and there had need be many to rule such a rabble of rude ones. Tell them of a King, and they could cut your throat in earnest. The very name carries servitude in it, and they hate it more then a 
Jew
 doth Images, a Woman old age, or a Non-conformist a Surplice.


None among them hath Autho∣rity by inheritance, that were the way in time to parcel out their Countrey to Families. They are


chosen all as our Kings chuse She∣riffs for the Counties: not for their sin of Wit, but for the Wealth they have to bear it out withal; which they so over affect, that 
Myn Here
 shall walk the Streets as U∣surers go to Bawdy-houses, all a∣lone and melancholy. And if they may be had cheap, he will daub his faced cloke with two pen∣niworth of pickled Herrings which himself shall carry home in a string. A common voice hath given him preeminence, and he loses it by li∣ving as he did when he was but a 
Boor.
 But if you pardon what is past, they are about thinking it time to learn more civility.


Their justice is strict, if it cross not policy: but rather then hinder Traffick tolerates any thing.


There is not under Heaven such


a Den of several Serpents as 
Am∣sterdam
 is, you may be what devil you will so you push not the State with your horns.


'Tis an University of all Religi∣ons which grow here confusedly (like stocks in a Nursery) without either order or pruning. If you be unsetled in your Religion, you may here try all, and take at last what you like best. If you fancy none, you have a pattern to follow, of two, that would be a Church to themselves.


'Tis the Fair of all the Sects, where all the Pedlers of Religion have leave to vent their toys, their Ribands, and phanatick Rattles. And should it be true, it were a cruel brand which 
Romists
 stick up∣on them. For (say they) as the 
Camelion
 changes into all Co∣lours but white: so they admit


of all Religions but the true; for the 
Papist
 only may not exercise his in publick: yet his restraint they plead is not in hatred but ju∣stice, because the 
Spaniard
 abridges the 
Protestant.
 And they had ra∣ther shew a little spleen, then not cry quit with their enemy. His act is their Warrant, which they reta∣liate justly. And for this reason rather then the 
Dunkirks
 they take shall not die, 
Amsterdam
 having none of their own, shall borrow a Hangman from 
Harlem.


Now albeit the 
Papists
 do them wrong herein, yet can it not ex∣cuse their boundless 
Toleration,
 which shews they place their Re∣publick in a higher esteem then Heaven it self: and had rather cross upon 
God
 then it. For whoso∣ever disturbs the civil Government is liable to punishment: But the


Decrees of Heaven, and Sanctions of the Deity any one may break uncheck't, by professing what false Religion he please. So 
Consulary Rome
 of old, brought all the strag∣ling gods of other Nations to the City, where blinded superstition paid an adoration to them.


In their Families they all are equals, and you have no way to know the Master and Mistress, but by taking them in bed together. It may be those are they: Otherwise 
Maiky
 can prate as much, laugh as loud, be as bold, and sit as well as her Mistress.


Had 
Logicians
 lived here first, Father and Son had never passed so long for Relatives. They are here Individuals, for no Demonstrance of Duty or Authority can distin∣guish them, as if they were created together, and not born successive∣ly.


And as for your Mother, bidding her good night, and kissing her, is punctual blessing.


Your man shall be saucy, and you must not strike; if you do, he shall complain to the 
Schont,
 and perhaps have recompence, 'tis a dainty place to please boys in: for your father shal bargain with your Schoolmaster not to whip you: if he doth, he shall revenge it with his knife, and have Law for it.


Their apparel is civil enough and good enough, but very uncomly, & has usually more stuffe then shape. Only their 
Huykes
 are commodious in winter; but 'tis to be lamented, that they have not wit enough to lay them by when Summer comes.


Their women would have good faces if they did not mar them with making. Their 
Ear-wyers
 have so nip: in their Cheeks, that you


would think some Fairy, to do them a mischief, had pincht them behind with tongs. These they dress, as if they would shew you all their wit lay behind, and they needs would cover it. And thus ordered, they have much more forehead then face.


They love the 
EnglishGentry
 well; and when Soldiers come over to be billeted among them, they are 
e∣mulous
 in chusing of their guest, who fares much the better for be∣ing liked by his 
Hostess.


Men and women are there 
starch∣ed so blew,
 that if they once grow old, you would verily believe you saw 
winter
 walking up to the neck in a barrel of 
Indigo:
 And therefore they rail at 
England
 for spending no more 
blowing.


Your man among them is else cl
 tolerably unless he inclines


to the Sea-fashion: and then are his breeches yawning at the knees, as if they were about to swallow his legs unmercifully.


They are far the
e from going naked, for of a whole woman you can see but half a face. As for her hand, that shews her a sore La∣bourer; which you shall ever find as it were in recompence loaden with Rings to the cracking of her fingers. If you look lower; she's a Monkey chain'd about the middle, and had rather want it in diet, then not have silver links to hang her keys in.


Their Gowns are fit to hide great bellies, but they make them shew so unhandsom that men do not care for getting them. Marry this you shall find to their com∣mendation, their smocks are ever whiter then their skin.



Where the Woman lies in, the Ringle of the door does penance, and is lapped about with linnen; ei∣ther to shew you that loud knock∣ing may wake the child, or else that for a month the Ring is not to be run at. But if the child be dead, there is thrust out a Nosegay tied to a sticks end; perhaps for an emblem of the life of man, which may wither as soon as born; or else to let you know, that though these fade upon their gathering, yet from the same stock, the next year a new shoot may spring.


You may rail at us for often changing; but I assure you with them is a great deal more follow∣ing the fashion; which they will plead for as the ignorant Laity for their faith. They will keep it be∣cause their Ancestors lived in it. Thus they will rather keep an old


fault though they discover errors in it, then in an easie change to meet a certain remedy.


For their diet, they eat much and spend little: When they set out a Fleet to the 
Indies,
 it shall live three months on the Offals, which we here fear would surfeit our swine, yet they feed on't, and are still the same 
Dutchmen.


In their houses Roots and Stock∣fish are Staple-commodities. If they make a feast and add flesh, they have Art to keep it hot more days, then a 
Pigs-head
 in 
Py-cor∣ner.
 Salt meats and four 
Cream
 they hold him a fool that loves not, only the last they correct with Sugar, and are not half so well pleased with having it sweet at first, as with letting it four, that they may sweeten it again, as if a woman were not half so pleasing


being easily won, as after a scold∣ing fit she comes by man to be calmed again.


Fish indeed they have brave and plentiful; and herein practice hath made them Cooks as good as ere 
Luculbus
 his latter Kitchin had, which is some recompence for their wilfulness, for you can nei∣ther pray nor buy them to alter their own Cookery.


To a feast they come readily, but being set once you must have pati∣ence. They are longer eating meat then we preparing it. If it be to supper, you conclude timely when you get away by day-break. They drink down the evening. Starre, and drink up the morning Starre. At those times it goes hard with a stranger, all in courtesie will be drinking to him, and all that do so he must pledge: till he doth,


the fill'd Cups circle round his Trencher, from whence they are not taken away till emptied. For though they give you day for pay∣ment, yet they will not abate the sum. They sit not there as we in 
England,
 men together, and women first, but ever intermingled with a man between: and instead of March-panes, and such juncates, 'tis good manners if any be there, to carry away a piece of Apple-Py in your pocket.


The time they there spend, is in eating well, in drinking much, and prating most. For the truth is, the compleatest drinker in 
Europe
 is your English Gallant. There is no such Consumer of liquor as the Quaffing off of his Healths. Time was the 
Dutch
 had the better of it; but of late he hath lost it by pra∣ting too long over his pot. He sips,


and laughs, and tells his tale, and in a Tavern is more prodigal of his time then his wine. He drinks as if he were short-winded; and as it were eats his drink by morsels, rather besieging his brains then assaulting them. But the 
English∣man
 charges home on the sudden, swallows it whole, and like a hasty tide, fills and flows himself till the mad brain swims, and tosses on the hasty fume. As if his Liver were burning out his stomach, and he striving to quench it, drowns it. So the one is drunk sooner, and the other longer. As if striving to recover the wager, the 
Dutchman
 would still be the perfectest soker.


In this
 Progress 
you have seen some of their
 Vices, 
now view a
 Fairer Object.






SOlomon 
tells of
 four 
things that are small and full of
 Wisdome; 
The
 Pismire, 
the
 Grashop∣per, 
the
 Coney, 
and the
 Spider.


FOr 
Providence,
 they are the 
Pismires
 of the world: and ha∣ving nothing but what grass af∣fords them; are yet for almost all Provisions, the Store-house of the whole of 
Christendom.
 What is it which there may not be found in plenty? They making by their industry all the fruits of the vast Earth their own. What Land can boast a priviledge that they do not partake of? They have not of their own enough materials to compile


one ship; Yet how many Nations do they furnish? the remoter angles of the world do by their pains de∣liver them their sweets: and be∣ing of themselves in want, their di∣ligence hath made them both 
In∣dies
 nearer home.


They are frugal to the saving of Egg-shels, and maintain it for a Maxime, That a thing lasts longer mended then new.


Their 
Cities
 are their 
Mole-hills;
 Their 
Schutes
 and 
Flyboats
 creep and return with their store for Winter: every one is busie and carries his grain; as if every City were a several 
Hive,
 and the 
Bees
 not permitting a drone to inhabit; For idle persons must finde some other mansion. And lest necessity bereave men of means to set them on work, there are publick Banks, that (without use) lend upon


pawns to all the poor that want.


There is a season when the 
Pis∣mires
 fly, and so each 
Summer
 they likewise 
swarm
 abroad with their Armies.


The 
Ant,
 says one, is a wise crea∣ture, but a shrewd thing in a Gar∣den or Orchard. And truly so are they; For they look upon others too little, and upon themselves too much. And wheresoever they light in a pleasant or rich soyl, like suck∣ers and lower plants, they rob from the root of that tree which gives them shade and protection, so their wisdom is not indeed He∣roick or Numnial; as Courting an Universal Good; But rather nar∣row and restrictive; As being a wis∣dom but for themselves, Which to speak plainly, is descending into Craft; and is but the sinister part of that which is really Noble and Coelestiall.



Nay in all they hold so true a proportion with the 
Emmet,
 as yon shall not find they want so much as the sting.


For dwelling in Rocks they are Conies. And while the 
Spanish
 tumbler plays about them, they rest secure in their own inaccessible berries. Where have you under heaven, such impregnable Fortifi∣cations? Where are beautifies na∣ture, and nature makes art invin∣cible: Here in indeed they differ: The Conies find Rocks, and they make them. And as they would in∣vert the miracle of 
Moses,
 They raise them in the bosom of the waves, where within these twenty years, ships furrowed in the path∣less Ocean, the peaceful plough now unbowels the fertile earth, which at night is carried home to the fairest Mansions in 
Holland.



Every Town hath his Garrison; and the Keys of the Gates in the night-time are not trusted but in the State-house. From these holds they bolt abroad for provisions, and then return to their fastnesses replenished.


For war they are Grashoppers, and without a King go forth in bands to conquer Kings. They have not only defended themselves at their own home, but have bra∣ved the 
Spaniard
 at his. In 
Anno
 1599. under the command of 
Van∣der Does,
 was the Grand Canary taken. The chief City sackt; the King of 
Spain's
 Ensigns taken down, and the colours of his Excellency set up in their room. In the year 1600 the battel of 
Nieuport
 was a gallant piece, when with the loss of a thousand or little more, they slew 7000 of their enemies, took


above 100 Ensigns, the Admiral of 
Arragon
 a prisoner. The very fur∣niture of the Arch Duke's own Chamber and Cabinet, yea, the signet that belonged to his hand.


In 1607. they assailed the 
Ar∣mado
 of 
Spain
 in the Bay of 
Gibral∣tar,
 under covert of the Castle and Towns Ordnance, and with the loss of 150, slew above 2000, and ruined the whole Fleet. Certainly a bolder attempt hath ever scarce been done. The 
Indian
 Mastiff never was more fierce against the angry Lion. Nor can the Cock in his crowing valour, becom more prodigal of his blood then they.


There hardly is upon earth such a school of Martial Discipline. 'Tis the Christian worlds 
Academy
 for Arms, whither all the Neighbour-Nations resort to be instructed; where they may observe how un∣resistible


a blow many small grains of powder will make, being heap∣ed together, which yet if you se∣parate, can do nothing but sparkle and die.


Their recreation is the practice of Arms; and they learn to be souldiers sooner then men. Nay, as if they placed a Religion in Arms, every Sunday is concluded with the train'd-bands marching through their Cities.


For industry, they are 
Spiders,
 and are in the Palaces of Kings. Of old they were the guard of the per∣son of the 
Roman
 Emperor; And by the 
Romans
 themselves decla∣red to be their friends and compa∣nions. There is none have the like intelligence; Their Merchants are at this day the greatest of the Uni∣verse. What Nation is it where they have not insinuated? Nay,


which they have not almost anato∣mized, and even discovered the very intrinsick veins on't?


Even among us, they shame us with their industry, which makes them seem as if they had a faculty from the worlds Creation, out of water to make dry land appear. They win our drowned grounds which we cannot recover, and chase back 
Neptune
 to his own old Banks.


All that they do is by such la∣bour as it seems extracted out of their own bowels. And in their wa∣ry thrist, they hang by such a slen∣der sustentation of life, that one would think their own weight should be enough to crack it.


Want of Idleness keeps them from want. And tis their dili∣gence makes them Rich.



A fruitful Soil encreaseth the Harvest. A plentiful Sunne aug∣menteth the Store; and seasonable showres drop fatness on the Crop we reap. But no Rain fructifies more then the dew of Sweat.


You would think being with them you were in old 
Israel,
 for you find not a beggar among them. Nor are they mindful of their own alone; but strangers also partake of their care and bounty. If they will depart, they have money for their Convoy. If they stay, they have work provided. If unable, they find an Hospital. Their Providence extends even from the Prince to the catching of flies. And left you lose an afternoon by fruitless mourning, by two of the Clock all Burials must end. Wherein to pre∣vent the wast of ground, they pile Coffin upon Coffin til the Sepulchre be full.



In all their Manufactures they hold a truth and constancy, for they are as fruits from Trees, the same every year that they are at first; Not Apples one year and Crabs the next; and so for ever after. In the sale of these they also are at a word, they will gain rather then exact, and have not that way wher∣by our Citizens abuse the wise and cozen the ignorant; and by their infinite over-asking for commodi∣ties proclaim to the world that they would cheat all if it were in their power.


The Depravation of Manners they punish with contempt, but the defects of Nature they favor with charity. Even their 
Bedlam
 is a place so curious, that a Lord might live in it; Their 
Hospital
 might lodge a Lady: So that safely you may conclude amongst them even


Poverty and Madness do both in∣habit handsomly. And though Vice makes every thing turn for∣did, yet the State will have the very correction of it to be neat, as if they would shew, that though odedience fail, yet Government must be still it self and decent. To prove this, they that do but view their 
Bridewel,
 will think it may receive a Gentleman though a Gallant. And so their prison a weal∣thy Citizen. But for a poor man, 'tis his best policy to be laid there, for he that cast him in must main∣tain him.


Tht is Language though it differ from the higher 
Germany,
 yet hath it the same ground, and is a sold as 
Babel.
 And albeit harsh, yet so losty and full a tongue as made 
Goropius Becanus
 maintain it for the speech of 
Adam
 in his Paradise. And


surely if there were not other rea∣sons against it, the significan cyof the Ancient 
Teutonick
 might car∣ry it from the primest Dialect. 
Stevin
 of 
Bruges
 reckons up 2170 Monosyllables, which being com∣pounded, how richly do they grace a Tongue? A Tongue that for the general profession is ex∣tended further then any that I know. Through both the 
Germa∣nis, Denmark, Norway, Sweden,
 and sometimes 
France, England Spain.
 And still among us all our words are 
Dutch,
 with yet so little change, that certainly it is in a manner the same that it was 2000 years ago, without the too much mingled borrowings of their neighbor Nations.


The 
Germans
 are a people that more then all the world I think may boast sincerity, as being for fom thousands of years a pure and


unmixed people. And surely I see not but their conduction by 
Tuisco
 from the building of 
Babel
 may pass as unconfuted Story, they yet retaining the Appellation from his Name.


They are a large and numerous people, having ever kept their own, and transported Colonies into o∣ther Nations. In 
Italy
 were the 
Longobards;
 In 
Spain
 the 
Gothes
 and 
Vandalls;
 In 
France
 the 
Franks
 or 
Franconians;
 In 
England
 the 
Saxons:
 having in all these left reverend Steps of their Antiquity and Language.


It is a noble Testimony that so grave an Historian as 
Tacitus
 hath left still extant of them, and writ∣ten above fifteen hundred years a∣go: 
Deliberant dum fingere nesci∣unt: Constituunt dum errare non possant.
 They deliberate when they


cannot dissemble: and resolve when they cannot erre.


Two hundred and ten years the 
Romans
 were in conquering them. In which space on either side were the losses sad and fatal. So as nei∣ther the 
Samnites,
 the 
Carthagini∣ans,
 the 
Spaniards,
 the 
Gauls,
 no nor the 
Parthians
 ever troubled them like the 
Germans.
 They slew and took prisoners several Com. manders of the highest rank, as 
Carbo, Cassius, S. Caurus Aurelius Cervilius Cepio,
 and 
M. Manlius'
 They defeated five 
Consulary Ar∣mies,
 and 
Varus
 with three legions, yet after all this he concludes, 
Tri∣umphati magis guam victi sunt.
 They were rather triumphed over then conquered. To confirm this, the keeping of their own language is an argument unanswerable. The change where of ever follows upon


the fully vanqnished, as we may see it did in 
Italy, France, Spain, England.


And this he speaks of the Nati∣on in general: nor was the opi∣nion of the 
Romans
 less worthy in particular concerning these lower Provinces, which made them for their valor and warlike minds stile them by the name of 
Gallie Belgica,
 and especially of the 
Ba∣tavians,
 which were the 
Hollanders
 and part of 
Guelders.
 You may hear in what honourable terms he mentions them, where speaking of the several people of 
Germany,
 he says, 
Omnium harum Gentium vir∣tute praecipui Batavi: Nam nec tribucis contemnuntur, reepublica∣nus atterit: exempti oneribu & Col∣lationibus, & tantum in usum prae∣liorum siposit, velut tela atque Ar∣ma Bellisreservantes,
 Of all these


Nations the prineipal in valiant vertue are the 
Batavians;
 for nei∣ther are they become despleable by paying of tribute, nor oppres∣sed too much by the Farmor of publick Revenues, but free from taxes and contributions of servi∣lity; they are specially set apart for the fight, as Armor and Wea∣pons only reserved for War.


All this even at this day they seem to make good. For of all the world they are the people that thrive and grow rich by the war, like the 
Porepisce,
 that plays in the storm, but at other times keeps sober under the water.


War which is the worlds ruine, and ravins upon the beauty of all, is to them prosperity and ditati∣on. And surely the reason of this is their strength in shipping, the open Sea, their many sortified


Towns and the Country by reason of its lowness and plentifull irri∣guation becoming unpassable for an army when the winter but ap∣proaches. Otherwise it is hardly possible that so small a parcell of Mankind, should brave the most potent Monarch of Christendom, who in his own hands holds the Mines of the wars sinews Money, and hath now got a command so wide, that out of his Dominions the Sun can neither rise nor set.


The whole seventeen Provin∣ces are not above a thousand Eng∣lish miles in circuit. And in the States hands there is not 7 of those. Yet have they in the field some∣times 60000 Souldiers, besides those which they always keep in Garrison, which cannot be but a considerable number neer thirty thousand more. There being in


the whole Countries above two hundred wall'd Towns and Cities. So that if they have people for the War, one would wonder where they should get mony to pay them; They being, when they have an ar∣my in the field, at a thousand pound a day charge extraordi∣nary.


To maintain this, their Excise is an unwasted Mine, which with the Infiniteness of their Traffick, and their untired industry, is by every part of the World in some∣thing or other contributed to.


The Sea yields them by two sorts of Fish only, 
Herrings
 and 
Cod,
 six∣ty thousand pound 
per annum;
 for which they go out sometimes se∣ven or eight hundred boats at once, and for greater ships, they are able to set out double the num∣ber.



Their Merchandise amounted in 
Guiceiardinis
 time to fourteen millions 
per annum.
 Whereas 
Eng∣land,
 which is in compass almost as large again, and hath the Ocean as a Ring about her, made not a∣bove six millions yearly; so sedu∣lous are these Bees to labour and enrich their Hive.


As they on the Sea, so the wo∣men are busie on land in weaving of Nets, and helping to adde to the heap. And though a husbands long absence might tempt them to lascivious ways; yet they hate adultery, and are resolute in Matri∣monial chastity. I do not remember that ever I read in Story, of any great Lady of that nation, that hath bin taxt with loosness. And questi∣onless 'tis their ever being busie, makes them have no leisure for lust


'Tis idleness that is 
Cupids



Nurse; but business breaks his Bow, and makes his arrows use∣less.


They are both Merchants and Farmers. And there act parts, which men can but discharge with us. As if they would shew that the Soul in all is masculine, and not varied into weaker sex as are the bodies that they wear about them.


Whether this be from the na∣ture of their Country, in which if they be not laborious they cannot live; or from an Innate Genius of people by a Superiour Providence adapted to them of such a situa∣tion; from their own inclination addicted to parsimony; from cu∣stome in their way of breeding; from any Transcendency of active parts more than other Nations; or from being in their Country, like people in a City besieged,


whereby their own vertues do more compact and fortifie; I will not determine. But certainly in ge∣neral they are the most painful and diligent people on earth: And of all other the most truly of 
Vespasi∣ans
 opinion, to think, that 
Ex re qualibet bonus odor lucri;
 Be it rai∣sed from what it will, the smell of gain is pleasant.


Yet they are in some sort Gods, for they set bounds to the Sea: and when they list let it pass them. Even their dwellings is a miracle. They live lower then the fishes. In the very lap of the floods, and incircled in their watry arms. They are the 
Israelites
 passing through the Red Sea. The wa∣ters wall in them, and if they set ope their sluces shall drown up their enemies.


They have strugled long with



Spains Pharaoh,
 and they have at length inforced him to let them go. They are a 
Gideons
 Army up∣on the march again. They are the 
Indian
 Rat, gnawing the bowels of the 
Spanish Crocodile,
 to which they got when he gap'd to swal∣low them. They are a serpent wreathed about the legs of that 
E∣lephant.
 They are the little sword∣fish pricking the belly of the 
Whale.
 They are the wane of that Empire, which increas'd in 
Isabella,
 and in 
Charles
 the fifth was at full.


They are a glass wherein Kings may see that though they be So∣veraigns over lives and goods, yet when they usurp upon Gods part, and will be Kings over conscience too, they are sometimes punisht with losse of that which lawful∣ly is their own. That Religion


too fiercely urg'd is to stretch a string till it not onely jars, but cracks; & in the breaking, whips (perhaps) the streiners eye out.


That an extreme taxation is to take away the hony while the Bees keep the Hive, whereas he that would Inke that, should first either burn them, or drive them out. That Tyrants in their Government are he greatest Traitors to their own States. That a desire of be∣ing too absolute is to walk upon 
Pinacles
 and the tops of 
Pyramides,
 where not only the footing is ful of hazard, but even the sharpness of that they tread on may run into their foot and wound them That too much to regrate on the pati∣ence of but tickle Subjects, is to press a thom till it prick your finger. That nothing makes a more desperate Rebell than a


Prerogative inforced too far.


That liberty in man is as the skin to the body, not to be put off, but together with life. That they which will command more than they ought, shall not at last command so much as is fit.


That moderate Princes sit faster in their Regalities, than such as being but men, would yet have their power over their Subjects, as the Gods unlimited. That oppres∣sion is an iron heat till it burns the hand. That to debar some States of 
antient Priviledges,
 is for a Falcon to undertake to beat a flock of Wild-geese out of the Fens. That to go about to compell a sullen reason to submit to a wilfull pe∣remptoriness, is so long to beat a chain'd mastiffinto his kennell, till at last he turns and flies at your


throat. That unjust policy is to shoot as they did at 
Ostend,
 into the mouth of a charged Canon, to have two Bullets returned for one. That he doth but indanger him∣self, that riding with too weak a Bit, provokes a head-strong horse with a spur. That tis safer to meet a valiant man weaponless, then al∣most a coward in Armor. That e∣ven a weak cause with a strong Castle, wili boil salt blood to a re∣bellious Itch. That 'tis better keeping a Crazy body in an equal temper, than to anger humors by too sharp a Physick.


That Admonitions from a dying man are too serious to be negle∣cted. That there is nothing cer∣tain that is not impossible. That a Cobler of 
Vlushing
 was one of the greatest enemies that the King of 
Spain
 ever had.



To conclude, the Country it self is a Moted Castle, keeping a Garnish of the richest Jewels of the world in't; The Queen of 
Bohemia
 and her Princely Children.


The people in it are Jews of the New Testament that have exchanged nothing but the Law for the Gospel; and this they rather prosess then practice. To∣gether a Man of War riding at 
Anchor
 in the Downs of 
Ger∣many.


For forein Princes to help them is wise self-policy. When they have made them able to defend themselves against 
Spain,
 they are at the Pale, if they enable them to offend others they go beyond it. For que∣stionless,


were this thorn out of the 
Spaniards
 side, he might be feared too soon to grasp his long intended Monarchy. And were the 
Spaniard
 but possessed Lord of the Low. Countreys, or had the States but the wealth and power of 
Spain,
 the rest of 
Eu∣rope
 might be like people at Sea in a Ship on fire: that could only chuse wherther they would drown or burn. Now, their war is the peace of their neigh∣bours. So 
Rome
 when busied in her civil broils, the 
Parthi∣ans
 lived at rest; but those con∣cluded once, by 
Caesar
 next are they designed for Con∣quest.


If any man wonder at these contraries, let him look in his own body for as many several


humors. In his own brain for as many different Fancies. In his own heart for as various passi∣ons; and from all these he may learn That there is not in all the World such another Beast as 
Man.




FINIS.


















A PERFECT DESCRIPTION OF THE PEOPLE AND COUNTREY OF Scotland.


LONDON.
 Printed for 
Rich. Lownds.
 1670.














A Perfect DESCRIPTION of 
Scotland.


FIrst, for the Countrey, I must confess it is good for those that possess it, and too bad for others, to be at the charge to conquer it. The Air might be wholsom, but for the stinking people that inhabit it The ground might be fruitful had they wit to manure it.


Their Beasts be generally small, women only excepted, of which sort there are none greater in the whole world. There is great store of Fowl, too, as foul houses, foul sheets,


foul linen, foul dishes and pots, foul trenchers, and napkins; with which sort, we have been forced to say, as the children did with their fowl in the wilderness They have good store of fish too, and good for these that can eat it raw; but if it come once into their hands, it is worse than if it were three days old. For their Butter and Cheese, I will not meddle with I at this time, nor no man else at any time that loves his life.


They have great store of Deer, but they are so far from the place where I have been, that I had ra∣ther believe, than go to disprove it: I confess, all the Deer I met withal, was dear Lodgings, dear Horse-meat, and dear Tobaco, and English Beer.


As sor fruit, for their Grand fire 
Adams
 sake, they never planted


any; and for other Trees, had 
Christ
 been betrayed in this Country, (as doubtless he should, had he come as a stranger) 
Judas
 had sooner found the Grace of Repentance, than a Tree to hang himself on.


They have many hills, wherein they say is much treasure, but they shew none of it; Nature bath only discovered to them some Mines of Coal, to shew to what end he cre∣ated them.


I saw little grass, but in their Potrage: The Thistle is not given of nought, for it is the fairest flower in their Garden. The word Hay is Heathen Greek unto them; neither man nor beast knows what it means.


Corn is reasonable plenty at this time, for since they heard of the Kings comming, it hath


been as unlawful for the common people to eat Wheat, as it was in the old time for any, but the Priests, to eat shew-bread. They prayed much for his coming, and long fasted for his welfare; but in the more plain sense, that he might fare the better: all his followers were welcom, but his guard; for those they say are like 
Pharaoh's
 lean Kine, and threaten death wheresoever they come: They could perswade the Foot∣men, that oaten cakes would make them long-winded; and the chil∣dren of the Chappel they have brought to eat of them, for the maintenance of their voices.


They say our Cooks are too sawcy, and for Grooms and Coach∣men they wish them to give to their Horses no worse then they eat themselves; they commend


the brave mind, of the Pensioners, and the Gentlemen of the Bed-Chambers, which choose rather to go to Taverns, then to be always eating of the Kings provision, they likewise do commend the Yeomen of the Buttery and Cellar, for their readiness and silence, in that they will hear 20 knocks, before they will answer one. They perswade the Trumpeters that fasting is good for men of that quality; for emptiness, they say, causes winde, and winde causes a Trumpet to sound well.


The bringing of Heralds, they say, was a needless charge, they all know their pedigrees wel enough, and the Harbingers might have been spared, s
he
ce they brought so many beds with them; and of two evils, since the least should be chosen. They wish the beds


might remain with them, and poor Harbingers keep their places, and do their office, as they return His Hangings they desire might like∣wise be left as Reliquos, to put them in mind of His Majesty; and they promise to dispense with the wooden Images, but for those gra∣ven Images in his new beautified Chappel, they threaten to pull down soon after his departure, and to make of them a burnt offering, to appease the indignation they imagined conceived against them in the Brest of the Almighty, for suffering such idolatry to enter in∣to their Kingdom; The Organ, I think, will find mercy, because (as they say) there is some affinity be∣tween them and the Bag pipes.


The Skipper that brought the singing men with their Papistical Vestments, complains that he hath


been much troubled with a strange singing in his head, ever since they came aboard his ship. For reme∣dy whereof the Parson of the Pa∣rish hath perswaded him to fell that prophane Vessel, and to distri∣bute the money among the faith∣ful Brethren.


For his Majesties entertainment, I must needs ingeniously confess, he was received into the Parish of 
Edinburgh,
 (for a City I cannot call it) with great shouts of joy, but no shews of charg for Pageants; they hold them idolatrous things, and not fit to be used in so refor∣med a place; from the Castle they gave him som pieces of Ordnance, which surely he gave them since he was King of 
England,
 and at the entrance of the town, they pre∣sented him with a golden Bason, which was carried before him on


mens shoulders to his Palace, I think, from whence it came. His Majesty was convey'd by the Youn∣kers of the Town, which were about 100 Halberds, (dearly shall they rue it, in regard of the charge) to the Cress and so to the high Church where the only bell they had stood on tip toe to behold his sweet face; where I must intreat you to spare him, for an hour I lost him.


In the mean time to report the Speeches of the people concerning his never-exampled entertainment, were to make his discourse too te∣dious unto you, as the Sermon was to those that were constrained to endure it. After the Preachment he was conducted by the same Hal∣berds unto his Palace, of which I forbear to speak, because it was a place sanctified by his divine Ma∣jesty, only I wish it had been better


walled for my friends sake that waited on him.


Now I will begin briefly to speak of the people according to their degrees and qualities; for the Lords Spiritual, they may well be termed so indeed, for they are neither Fish nor Flesh, but what it shall please their earthly God, the King, to make them. Obedience is better then Sacrifice, and therefore they make a mock at Martyrdom, say∣ing, That Christ was to die for them, and not they for him. They will rather subscribe then surren∣der, and rather dispense with small things, then trouble themselves with great disputation; they will rather acknowledge the King to be their head, then want where∣with to pamper their bodies.


They have taken great pains and trouble to compass their Bishop∣ricks,


and they will not leave them for a trifle; for the Deacon, whose defects will not lift them up to dignities, all their study is to dis∣grace them that have gotten the least degree above them; and be∣cause they cannot Bishop, they pro∣claim they never heard of any. The Scriptures, say they, speak of Deacons and Elders, but not a word of Bishops. Their Discour∣ses are full of detraction; their Sermons nothing but railing; and their Conclusions nothing but Herefies and Treasons. For their Religion they have, I confess they have it above reach, and God-wil∣ling I will never reach for it.


They christen without the Cross, marry without the Ring, receiv the Sacrament without reverence, die without repentance, and bury without divine Service; they keep


no Holy-days, nor acknowledge any Saint but S. 
Andrew,
 who they said got that honor by presenting Christ with an oaten cake after his forty days fast. They say likewise, that he that translated the Bible was the son of a Maulster, because it speaks of a miracle done by Bar∣ley-Loaves, whereas they swear they were Oaten Cakes, and that no other bread of that quantity could have sufficedso many thou∣sands.


They use no prayer at all, for they say it is needless, God knows their minds without pratling; and what he doth, he loves to do it freely. Their Sabbaths exercise, is a preaching in the forenoon, and a persecuting in the afternoon; they go to Church in the forenoon to hear the Law, and to the crags and mountains in the afternoon to louz themselves.



They hold their Noses if you talk of Bear-baiting, and stop their Ears if you speak of a Play: Forni∣cation they hold but a pastime, wherein mans ability is approved, and a womans fertility is discover∣ed; At Adultery they shake their heads; Theft they rail at; Murther they wink at; and Blasphemy they laugh at; they think it impossible to lose the way to Heaven if they can but leave 
Rome
 behind them.


To be opposite to the Pope, is to be presently with God; to con∣clude, I am perswaded, that if God and his Angels at the last day, should come down in their whi∣est Garments, they would run a∣way and cry, The Children of the Chappel are come again to tor∣ment us, let us flie from the abomi∣nation of these boys, and hide our selves in the Mountains.



For the Lords Temporal and spiritual, temporizing Gentle∣men, if I were apt to sp ak of any, I could not speak much of them; only I must let you know they are not Scottishmen, for assoon as they fall from the breast of the beast their mother, their careful fire posts them away for 
France,
 which as they pass, the Sea sucks from them that which they have suckt from their rude dams; there they gather new flesh, new blood, new manners, and there they learn to put on their cloaths, and then re∣turn, into their Countreys, to wear them out; there they learn to stand, speak, discourse and congee, to court women, and to complement with men.


They spared for no cost to honor the King, nor no complemental curtesy to welcom their Country∣men;


their followers are their fel∣lows their wives their slaves, their horses their masters, and their swords their Judges; by reason whereof, they have but few labo∣rers, and those not very rich: their Parliaments holo but three dayes, their Statutes three lines, and their Suits are determined in a manner in three words, or very few more, &c.


The wonders of their Kingdom are these; the Lord Chancellor, he is believed; the Master of the Rolls, well spoken of; and the whole Councel, who are the Judges for all causes, are free from suspition of corruption. The Country, although it be mountainous, affords no Monsters but Women, of which, the greatest sort (as Countesses, and Ladies) are kept like Lions in Iron grates; the Merchants wives


are also prisoners, but not in so strong a hold; they have wooden Cages, like our Boar Franks, through which, sometimes peeping to catch the Air, we are almost choaked with the sight of them; the greatest madness amongst the men, is Jealousie; in that they fear what no man that hath but two of his sences will take from them.


The Ladies are of opinion, that 
Susanna
 could not be chast, be∣cause she bathed so often. Pride is a thing bred in their bones, and their flesh naturally abhors cleanli∣ness; their breath commonly stinks of Pottage, their linen of Piss, their hands of Pigs turds, their body of sweat, and their splay-feet never offend in Socks To be chained in marriage with one of them, were to be tyed to a dead carkass, and cast into a stinking ditch; Formo∣sity,


and a dainty face, are things they dream not of.


The Oyntments they most fre∣quently use amongst them are Brimstone and Butter for the Scab, and Oyl of Bays, and Stave sacre. I protest, I had rather be the mean∣est servant of the two of my Pupils Chamber-maids, then to be the Master-Minion to the fairest Coun∣tess I have yet discovered. The sin of curiosity of oyntments is but newly crept inro the Kingdom, and I do not think will long continue.


To draw you down by degree from the Citizens Wives, to the Countrey Gentlewomen, and con∣vey you to common Dames in Sea¦coal lane, that converse with Rags and Marrow-bones, are things o
 Mineral-race; every whore i
 
Hound ditch
 is an 
Helena;
 and the greasie Bauds in 
Turnmil
 street at


Greekish Dames in comparison of these. And therefore to conclude, The men of old did no more won∣der, that the great 
Messias
 should be born in so poor a town as 
Beth∣lem
 in 
Judea,
 then I do wonder that so brave a Prince as King 
Iames,
 should be born in so stinking a Town as 
Edinburgh,
 in lowsie 
Scotland.


FINIS.











