Good news from the English fleet being an account of a great bloody engagement which hapned yesterday betwixt Their Majesties fleet commanded by the Earl of Torrington and the French fleet, near the Beachy, upon the coast of Suffolk : with a particular relation of the blowing-up of six of the biggest of the French men of war ...
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A41415




Wing G1070A



ESTC R36549





ocm 15721146




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Good news from the English fleet being an account of a great bloody engagement which hapned yesterday betwixt Their Majesties fleet commanded by the Earl of Torrington and the French fleet, near the Beachy, upon the coast of Suffolk : with a particular relation of the blowing-up of six of the biggest of the French men of war ...
1 sheet (2 p.)   


London :


Printed for T. Clarke ...,


1690.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Beachy Head (England), Battle of, 1690.
Great Britain --  History, Naval --  Stuarts, 1603-1714.
Europe --  History --  1648-1715.
2012-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-12
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2012-12
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






G1070A


R36549


15721146


104527












Good News from the English Fleet: Being an ACCOUNT OF A 
Great & Bloody Engagement
 Which hapned Yesterday, betwixt Their Majesties Fleet, Commanded by the Earl of Torrington, 
And the French Fleet.
 Near the 
BEACHY,
 upon The Coast of Sussex.


2. July. 1690


With a Particular Relation of the Blowing-up of Six of the Biggest of the 
FRENCH
 Men of War; The Breaking the Lines of the 
FRENCH;
 And several other Occurrences.


ON Monday the 23th. in∣stant, the Earl of 
Tor∣rington
 Sailed with their Majesties Fleet from St. 
Hellens,
 and the 
Spithead;
 the Wind being at North-East, and stood to∣ward the 
French
 Fleet (which, as the Advice Boats brought an Ac∣count, lay at Anchor about two Leagues from Shore, off of 
Fresh∣water-gate
 in the 
Isle of Wight
) with a Resolution to Fight the 
French;
 but the Witd coming about, and taking them short, he came to an Anchor, off of a place called 
Dun∣nose,
 which is within Five Leagues, or Fifteen English Miles, of the 
French
 Fleet, who were removed, and were at Auchor in 
Compton-Bay.
 The next day, being Tues∣day, about Three in the Morning, there came up with us, and joyned our Fleet, several Men of War, 
Dutch
 and 
English;
 and in the E∣vening, the 
Dutch
 Admiral 
Evertz∣zen,
 in a Ship of Ninety delicate Brass Guns, with Two 
Dutch
 Men of War more, one of which was a Rear Admiral. Also their Ma∣jesties Ships, the 
Lyon
 and 
Con∣stant Warwick,
 all joyned our Fleet.


On Wednesday, about Five in the Morning, our Admiral, the Earl of 
Torrington,
 stood to the Westward, the Wind at South and by East, with a Windward Tide; and about Noon they were with∣in fight of 
Dunnose Point,
 about Four Leagues from the Shore.


The 
French
 Fleet stood at the same time to the East-ward, being

at the like distance from the Shore; and about Three of the Clock in the Afternoon, the two Fleets were within a little above a League of each other; so that it was verily expected an Engagement would immediately ensue, by the Dispo∣sition of the 
French
 in their seem∣ing to meet us; but on a sudden, the Admiral of the 
French
 Ordered a Gun to be Fired, and Tacqued about, and the rest of the Fleet stood after and followed him; who steered directly West-ward, and from us. Our Fleet follow'd them till Night, but we could not reach them near enough to Engage.


The next day being Thursday the 26th. the 
French
 Fleet came to an Anchor, on the South side of the 
Isle of Wight.


On Friday there arose so great a Mist and Fog, that both the Fleets continued at Anchor.


Nothing of moment happened on Saturday.


On Sunday, being the 29th. in the Morning, there joyn'd our Ad∣miral, Their Majesties Ships the 
Mil∣ford
 and 
Garland,
 and a Dutch Man of War of 72 Guns. And in the Afternoon, our Advice-Boats brought Word, That the 
French
 Fleet had weighed Anchor, and were put to Sea; upon which, our Fleet weighed likewise, and made towards the 
French,
 who steered their Course as if they had endea∣voured to get the Wind of us, or rather to avoid Fighting, and make for their own Coast, would the Wind have permitted them.


And Yesterday, being Monday, (the 30th. Instant) about Eight in the Morning, our Fleet came up with the 
French
 (who steered East∣ward) early in the Morning, near the. 
Beechy,
 on the Coast of 
Sussex,
 about Three Leagues off of the Shoar: And the two Fleets being drawn up into Lines, in order of Battel, ours in the Form of a Half-Moon, immediately the two Ad∣mirals advanced at the Head of their Squadrons; and several S
ots be∣exchanged by each Fleet's Defiance-Frigats and Advice-Boats, about Ten a Clock a most furious and bloody Fight ensued between both Fleets, engaging Board and Board; which though it continued, till Night put an end, yet 'tis obser∣vable, That after a few Hours, we took the Lines of the 
French
 Fleet, and put them into great Confusi∣on. They Fought retreating for several Hours before Night, and tis thought this Morning our Fleet has engaged them again, the Wind 'being still at East South East; so that they cannot well escape us, by making to any of their own Ports that can harbour them, the nearest 
French
 Ports being 
Dunkirk
 and 
Calice,
 neither of which can har∣bour their great Men of War, by reason of the shallowness of the waters, that they cannot get over the Bars: So that we Doubt not, but our Fleet (by the Blessing of GOD) will destroy most of the 
French,
 before we let them go off from the 
English
 Coast.


The particulars of this Engage∣ment, also what Ships we have Taken, Sunk, and Men Killed, is expected with grert impatience: But several Gentlemen from the Hills of 
Sussex,
 with their Tele∣scopes, affirm, that they saw Six large Ships of the 
French
 on Fire, one of which being the 
Dauphin,
 a Ship of 110 Brass Guns; on Board of which was their Grand Admiral M. 
Turville.


And thus we see how the great Monarch of the Universe, and So∣veraign Disposer of all Sublunary things, is graciously pleas'd to bless their Majesties Armes, as well by Sea as Land; to be, in so great a measure, instrumental in pulling down the 
French
 Tyrant, who has arrived to that pitch of Pride and Vain glory (like the great Tyrant in the Gospel) that neither fear'd G
d, nor regarded Man.










London,
 Printed for 
T. Clarke,
 in 
Smithfield.
 1690.









