Good news from Kent Being a true relation of an hundred and twenty peeces of ordnance taken neere Gravesend, and of five cart loads taken from Cobham Hall, August 20. And a discovery of ammunition for five hundred men taken from the Archbishop of Canterburies house at Lambeth on friday night last. Also a description of the battell between the Hollanders and nine ships of Dunkirk going to aid the rebels in Ireland, and how after three houres fight they were surprized by the Hollanders. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
Approx. 9 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A41409




Wing G1060A



ESTC R213395





99825786




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Good news from Kent Being a true relation of an hundred and twenty peeces of ordnance taken neere Gravesend, and of five cart loads taken from Cobham Hall, August 20. And a discovery of ammunition for five hundred men taken from the Archbishop of Canterburies house at Lambeth on friday night last. Also a description of the battell between the Hollanders and nine ships of Dunkirk going to aid the rebels in Ireland, and how after three houres fight they were surprized by the Hollanders. H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.
England and Wales. Parliament.
[2], 6 p.   


[London] :


Printed for Io. Iohnson,


August 22. 1642.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History --  Civil War, 1642-1649 --  Early works to 1800.
Kent (England) --  History --  17th century --  Early works to 1800.
2012-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-03
Geremy Carnes
Sampled and proofread
2013-03
Geremy Carnes
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






G1060A


R213395


99825786


30174














GOOD NEWES FROM KENT.


Being a true Relation of an hundred and twen∣ty peeces of Ordnance taken neere 
Gravesend,
 and of five cart loads taken from 
Cobham Hall,
 August 20.


AND A discovery of ammunition for five hundred men taken from the Archbishop of 
Canterburies
 house at 
Lambeth
 on friday night last.


Also a description of the battell between the 
Hollanders
 and nine ships of 
Dunkirk
 going to aid the Rebels in 
Ireland,
 and how after three houres sight they were surprized by the 
Hollanders.


H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


Printed for 
Io. Iohnson. August
 22. 1642.














JOYFULL NEWES FROM COBHAM-HALL IN KENT. Being a true Relation of such armes as were taken from thence August 20. ALSO A Discovery of such Ammunition as was taken from the Arthbishop of Canterbury 
Aug. 19.


S
Vch hath beene the providence and vi∣gilancie of this our Parliament, having been so prosperously seconded with the blessing of God up∣on their endeavours that they have been successefull even be∣yond hope, in detecting and defeating the plots of the malignant party, how cunningly soever by them contrived. Vpon the nineteenth of

this moneth the Parliament received informa∣tion of about an hundred and twenty pieces of Ordnance that lay neere the water side foure miles from Gravesend, which causeth the in∣habitants to watch them every night, fearing lest those which are ill-affected to the King and Parliament should possesse themselves of them or steale some of them away, many of them being so small, that they might be carried away by two or three men, which might prove very preiudiciall to the peace of that countrey: whereupon the Parliament have taken order for the securing and safe keeping of them.


No sooner is one pernicious designe disco∣vered, but another supplies the roome of it: for information being given to the Parliament-House, that great store of armes and ammuni∣tion was provided by that arch-ploiter of these evils, the Arch-bishop of Canterbury, and laid up in his house at Lambeth, the same evening, being friday, about two hundred Foot, and a troop of Horse were sent to search his house, wherein they found armes for foure or five hundred men, all which they tooke away from his house at Lambeth, and laid them in the Ci∣ty having little need of such ammunition for his defence, being better provided in the Tower since hee kept Court there. Vpon the same evening a troupe of Horse were sent into Kent to search some Recusants houses which were

suspected to have great store of armes and am∣munition, and coming to make search at Cob∣ham-Hall, they were denied entrance, and very much resisted, though little hurt was done, as is credibly reported, notwithstanding the ru∣mor of so many being hurt and slaine: after much opposition they entred the house, and found there five cart loads of ammunition, which they have taken away, intending to bring it up to London. Vpon this day also Sir John Meldrom that was sent to Hull, according to the desire of Sir John Hotham, by the Parlia∣ment, for to aid and assist him in the defence of that towne, came to the Parliament House, and acquainted them with the true state of of things there, and that Sir John Hotham hath so cleared the coasts about him by sea and land, that the Cavaliers dare not so much as to come neer the towne. As for the maior part of Yorkshire, they are so well affected to the Parliament, that when as His Maiesty had commanded all his loving subiects to repaire unto him that would aid and assist him, the chiefest of the Gentry of that countrey refu∣se to obey the said command, and are resolved to assist the Parliament against all that shall op∣pose them, profering their own persons to both Houses to maintaine the said Cause: and for that end have desired the Parliament to send such forces as might secure them in so doing.




As the faces of all 
Britaine
 shew their hearts and inclinations, so if their hearts were trans∣parent, and as perspicuous as their faces, they would appeare fearfull of the future, were not the Representative Body of the State carefull to cure the present malady, by qualifying and tempering the distempered humours, and save the much indangered body, by cutting off some rotten and putrified members which infect, in∣fest and invade the republique: and herein consists a great part of the happinesse of this Kingdome, which (next under the Searcher of hearts) is derived unto us by the pious care and industry of the Parliament, in that they have been so successefull in discovering and searching out of the plots & machinations of the adverse party, and so indulgent and friendly to all such as are well-affected to the peace and welfare of this Kingdome. Nor is there amity and friend∣ship circumscribed and terminated within this Kingdome of 
England,
 but is further shewed in the unity and correspondence betwixt us and our Brethren of 
Scotland,
 though so many ill-affected spirits have endeavoured a disiunction. A further degree of our happines in this Island is to be seen in the mutuall concord betwixt us and the States of 
Holland,
 whose confederacie with this Nation hath been happy, and all their designes seconded with successe since their first union. They have lately declared their fideli∣ty

and good affection to the Parliament in cer∣taine letters presented to the House, wherein is intimated and declared to them their true, re∣all, and constant affection and resolution to the Parliament. Their actions shew as much as their words, which is further manifested in an overthrow given to the Fleet of 
Dunkirk
 go∣ing to aid the Bebels in 
Ireland.


Upon the 15 of this moneth nine ships set out from 
Dunkirk,
 sailing with all speed to the coasts of 
Ireland:
 but the Lord of the seas be∣ing displeased with their intentions prospered not their proceedings, but raised a great tem∣pest which drove them back upon the coast of 
England
 but fearing to come too neer by rea∣son of the Earle of 
Warwicks
 Fleet they cast an∣chor about 41. leagues distant from the 
English
 coast, and staying there two dayes by reason of a contrary wind, they espied two Flemish ships sailing neer them, which caused a great feare and jealousie in them, suspecting they would descry them to the Dutch Fleet which lay by the way as they were to saile homeward, which indeed they did, describing the number of the Spanish Fleet, and in what place they lay: which occasioned the Dutch Admirall (a terrible e∣nemy against the Spaniard) with all speed to prepare five ships of warre to hoise sail toward the Fleet of 
Dunkirk,
 going himselfe in person, and coming in sight of them hanged out his co∣lours,

and making all ready for the fight, com∣ing neer made shot against them, the fight last∣ing full two houres, and many men being slain on both sides, at last two of the Spanish ships were sunk, which dishearthed the rest, and for∣ced them to flight: the Durch Admirall cha∣sed them within six leagues of 
Dunkirk,
 where he took two of them loaden with ammunition, intended for the aid of the Irish Rebels, but the other five, being swift of saile, escaped into 
Dunkirk.


The Lords and Commons in Parliament declare. That all such persons as shall upon any pretence whatsoever, assist His Maiesty in this Warte, with Horse, Arms, Plate or Money, are Traytors to His Maiesty, the Parliament and Kingdome, and shall be brought to con∣digne punishment for so high an offence.










Ordered to be forthwith published & printed,


H. Elsynge, Cler. Parl. D. Com.


FINIS.











