Great and joyful news for England giving an account of K. William's happy voyage with Prince George from Limerick to London and of the great victory obtain'd over the Irish-rebels, K. William being in the heat of the action : also the number of what officers and soldiers were kill'd and taken prisoner on both sides.
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A41867




Wing G1657A



ESTC R36553





ocm 15724868




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Great and joyful news for England giving an account of K. William's happy voyage with Prince George from Limerick to London and of the great victory obtain'd over the Irish-rebels, K. William being in the heat of the action : also the number of what officers and soldiers were kill'd and taken prisoner on both sides.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


London :


Printed by Tho. Moore,


1690.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Ireland --  History --  War of 1689-1691.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702.
2012-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-12
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2012-12
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






G1657A


R36553


15724868


104531












Great and Joyful News for England, Giving an ACCOUNT OF 
K. William's happy Voyage
 With PRINCE GEORGE FROM LIMERICK to LONDON, And of the great Victory obtain'd over the IRISH-REBELS. K. 
William
 being in the heat of the Action. Also the number of what Officers and Soldiers were kill'd and taken Pri∣soners on both sides.
9. Sept. 1690.


Printed according to Order, 
September
 8th. 1690.


SInce our Gracious Kings Resolution for 
England,
 great preparations were made for His Majesties setting forward, who accordingly took Shiping at 
Waterford,
 and Landed on 
Saturday
 Night at 
Aust-Ferry,
 Four Miles from Sir 
Robert Southwells,
 and lay at Sir 
Roberts
 that Night, and on Sunday went to the Duke of 
Beaufords
 House at 
Major-Babington
 in 
Wiltshire,
 where he lay that Night, and this day he comes to Sir 
William Rich
's House at 
Sonning
 near 
Reading,
 and to Morrow designs to Dine at 
Kingsington,
 whither his Royol Consort is gone to order the Affairs for his Reception, and designs to meet his Ma∣jesty at 
Hampton-Court.


Orders were given to Relieve them at 4 in the Afternoon, being the 19th, which was accordingly done by Count 
Solmes,
 Count 
Nassau,
 and Sir 
John Hanmore,
 who it was thought would have stormed the Fort but did not, this day the Cannon on both sides fired very briskly, we dismounted 3 of their Guns, but all Night both sides were quiet, we prepared a Battery for Six 24 pounders, which were drawn all but one and planted within a Carbine Shot of the Wall.


Wednesday
 the 20th. This Morning Early we played on the Fort with 2 Batteries, and by 3 in the Afternoon had tumbled down a good part thereof; His Majesty after Dinner went to a place near the Battery, and

on a Signal of 3 Guns, our Granadiers being ready, each having 3 Gra∣nadoes, Storm'd the Fort, and in less than half an hour were Masters of it, putting all to the Sword they found therin, being 150. except the Officer one Captain 
Barret,
 who was brought to the Guard by his Ma∣jesties Order: The Enemy made a brisk Salley with Horse, they expect∣ing to beat us out of our new gain'd Ground, but our Men being prepa∣red to receive them sent them in again quickly with great loss, for just as they Sallied, Major General 
Kirk
 relieved our Trenches, and those that were on before, joyned him, and gave them so warm a Wel∣come, being seconded by a Detach'd Body of 600 Horse, and a Peal or two from our Ordinance, that they ran in again. We had some Officers killed and wounded, Capt. 
Lucy
 of the Lord 
Oxfords
 Regiment Killed; Col. 
Belliastle
 (formerly Lieutenant to 
Callimote
) Wounded; and about 100 private Soldiers Killed and Wounded; But the Enemy had at least 500 Slain, and the Wounded we cannot learn. Capt. 
Needham
 of Lord 
Meathes
 Regiment of Granadiers (who behaved himself to admiration, as indeed did all our Officers and Soldiers) was Killed coming from the Trenches after they were relieved.


This morning between 3 and 4, being 
Thursday
 the 21th, the Enemy made a brisk Sally, and 
Kirk
 whose Post they Attacked) let them come up to his Trenches, and then gave them such a welcome with his small Shot, and seconded by our Cannon, that in less than a quarter of an hour they ran in again with a very considerable loss. This day the Enemy Fired upon us in the Fort we had gained, from a Roundal and Square To∣wer which over-looked it, and fired with small Rubonetts, which galled our Men much, so that this day we could do little but shelter our selves with Fachines and other blinds, till our Works could be made to secure us better, and in making a Battery n
ar our Fort, which we compleated, and planted 4 Guns carrying 24 pounders: this Night the Enemy did not Disturb us.


Friday
 the 22d. About 5 this Morning we battered the Roundal with our 4 Guns, and with that success, that about 4 this Afternoon we brought it down, which covered another small Fort the Enemy had; we have since been battering the square Tower which covers their Spurr be∣fore the Gate, in which we have made a considerable Breach. This day came up our great Guns from 
Carrick
 and some Mortars, and are carried down to the Battery, so that I doubt not but to Morrow the Spurr Tow∣er will like wise fall, and then we shall storm their Counterscarpe, which is well Pallisaded, they having left nothing unatempted to strengthen the Town, yet nothing can stand against us. This Evening his Majesty sent a Drum into the Town with Offers of mercy, or else to expect nothing but Fire and Sword. His Majesty never had his health better, to whom 
God of his mercy continue it.


Here has been one 
Crosby
 seized for having Letters sent to him by P
st, which were opened at the Post Office here, and found to be of ill Conse∣quence; he was last Night before the Lords Commissions of the Great-Seal.


The Almighty God has blest us as yet with fair Weather for our Camp, and I hope will continue his Mercy.


The 
Irish
 do commit great Barbarities in the West: the Papists here were in great Consternation for fear of being generally Plundered by the Soldiers, but there ia a Proclamation out against it, which has quieted their minds till the next time.




FINIS.








LONDON,
 Printed by 
Tho. Moore.
 1690.









