A Great miracle at sea, or, A perfect relation of a mighty whale which was pursued in the sea ... : as it was certified by divers mariners of Weymouth sayling from France in a shipp called the Bonanaventure, did shoot the whale, which ... was found dead upon the shore within three miles of Weymouth, where the countrey people ... having opened it's belly, found a Romish priest, with a black box of pardons from the pope for many papists in England and Ireland, whose names are here printed : also the names of the sea-men who were present ...
Approx. 12 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2013-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A41906




Wing G1712



ESTC R43214





ocm 27024430




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Great miracle at sea, or, A perfect relation of a mighty whale which was pursued in the sea ... : as it was certified by divers mariners of Weymouth sayling from France in a shipp called the Bonanaventure, did shoot the whale, which ... was found dead upon the shore within three miles of Weymouth, where the countrey people ... having opened it's belly, found a Romish priest, with a black box of pardons from the pope for many papists in England and Ireland, whose names are here printed : also the names of the sea-men who were present ...
[2], 6 p.   


[S.l. :


s.n.,


1645?]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Anti-Catholicism --  England.
Curiosities and wonders --  England.
2012-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-10
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2012-12
John Pas
Sampled and proofread
2012-12
John Pas
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2013-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






G1712


R43214


27024430


109918












A great Miracle AT SEA: OR, A perfect Relation of a mighty 
Whale,
 which was pursued in the Sea, and encountred by multitudes of other Fishes, As it was certified by divers Mariners of 
Wey∣mouth
 Sayling from 
France
 in a Shipp called the 
Bonanaventure,
 did shoot the Whale, Which making to Land (as all Whales do when they are mortally wounded) was found dead upon the Shore within three miles of 
Weymouth.


Where the Countrey people (after many dayes labour upon this mighty fish) having opened it's belly, found a Romish Priest, with a black Box of Pardons from the Pope for many Pa∣pists in England and Ireland, whose Names are here printed.


Also the names of the Sea-men who were pre∣sent, and will make attestation of this wonderfull truth.














A great wonder at Sea.


THat Antichrist or the Pope is the Beast of 
Rome,
 hath beene abundantly declared by all reformed Writers; but that this Beast is odious not onely to men and Creatures upon earth, but even to Fishes in the Sea this age onely can give an illuctration of it, and that in such a miraculous manner as never age can produce the like. We will describe unto you the full manner of it, and you shall have it really and plainly related as we have received the truth from many who were the present Spectators of this wonderfull sight, and wee shall desire onely from you but the gentlenesse to receive it, and the credence to beleeve it.


On the 10 of 
October
 1645 being the Lords Day, the good Shipp called 
The Bonaventure of Weymouth,
 being bound for 
England,
 was bringing home her Merchandize from 
France,
 which was Wines, Lin∣nen-Cloth, and abundance of Walnuts: the day was very fair, and no winde stirring, so that the Ship for above three hours space lay hulling uppon the Seas, being not able to move either one way or other, for want of winde, although shee was full Sayled and prepared to take the advantage of every Gale. Being put to some inconveni∣ence by reason of this great Calme, the Sea-men for the present had nothing els to do but to look about them, many of them, as the maner is at Sea, wishing rather for a Tempest, then being Wind-bound to stare about them, and doe nothing, when behold not farre from them they saw a mighty rowling, and working upon the water; and being amazed at the strangenesse of the sight, they called unto one another, and were all come above Board, expecting what should occasion so strange a motion in the water, they found it to draw nearer to them, which made them the more eager to apprehend the cause, at length they perceived it to be a Whale, and that of no small proportion, but (as it were the Leviathan of the Sea) to transcend all other VVhales in length and compasse. The VVhale made towards the Shipp, which

put the Marriners into a great fear, being not able to get from it, but they perceived the Monster of the sea to come to them rather for re∣fuge, then offence, for they saw it was followed by a infinite compa∣ny of other Fish, as if all the fishes of the Sea were in the pursuance of it: There were to be seen Fishes of all sorts, onely the Remora was absent, which the Sea-men afterwards conceived was got under their Ship. There was the Sword-Fish, the Thornbacke aimed with his Prickles, the faire Balena, the filthy Phocae, and such a fry of Sea-Monsters (the old ones following after) as the like was never seen nor can be represented, but onely by those men who were the Specta∣tors of it. In a most violent manner they did beat against the VVhale, making a most hideous and fearfull noyse, and falling upon her, shee made what haste she could to get from them: some of these fishes were in one shape, and some in another, but all most wonderfull to behold, who in great fury did use whatsoever weapons of offence that nature had afforded them to assault this VVhale: nay, many of them were so eager in their fight, that they were seen to leap above the wa∣ter, and as if they had gained an advantage of strength, they did throw themselves with greater rage against it, who being but one against so many thousands, was not able to wirstand their fury, but making a most terrible crie, did what she could to come near the Ship. On this the amazed and distracted Sea-men, fearing the VVhale should over∣turn their ship, and so drowne them all, discharged divers of their muskets against it, which it seemeth took effect, for presently they saw so great store of Blood that the sea was much coloured, and the Whale which before seemed to draw more near the Ship for a safety, did now steer another course through the bloody and foaming waters. The infinite shoales of fish, which in incredible numbers did follow the Whale, were no way dismayed at the noise of the Muskets, nor at the fire which was given, but perceiving the wounded Whale to make a∣way from the Ship, in greedy throng they pressed after it.


This made the Sea-men to wonder more, for many of them whose Names are here subscribed, having been often at Sea, never beheld the like thing before, nor never saw such diversity of pertentous Fishes, following troups on troups, one after another, as if they were in emu∣lation who first should exercise their greatest fury and revenge upon it; Besides, they do professe, that it did increase their wonder, to see this contestation which is against the usuall way of nature, it being com∣mon

and ordinary for the Whale to pursue other Fishes, and to devour them, and not to see a multitude of other Fishes (as if they were confederate all in one obligation) to pursue the Whale, and to do the uttermost of their endeavour to destroy it. In this manner they followed the Whale, and used what violence they could against it, as far as their eyes could reach, the sea beating up and down, and the waters la∣bouring as they passed through them, yet still in cholerick tumults pursued the chase, leaving a great trale upon the wa∣ters, which for a long way was to he seen as they passed.


By this the evening coming on, the winde did begin to rise, which blowing from the South-East was very welcome to the Seamen, who making their best advantage of it, they came on the next morning (being Munday 
Octob.
 20. 1645.) unto 
Weymouth,
 where they were no sooner landed but they understood that a Whale of a mighty bignesse was cast up three miles from that place, who coming in with the Tide, and being sorely wounded with Musket shots, did make what haste she could to Land, and finding the Tyde to forsake her, she made a mighry roar, that the noise thereof (as the coun∣trey people do report) was heard two miles from it: on the next morning she was found dead, like a mighty ruine lying all along upon the shore, the countrey people coming from all places in multitudes to behold it.


On Friday following these Sea-men (having dispatched their businesse at Weymouth, went nine of them together in one company to see the Whale, and the rather because they did truly conjecture it to be the same Whale which on Sun∣day before they saw pursued by such monstrous multitudes of fishes; corceiving also, that by reason of the many wounds which she received by the shots from the Muskets, that she made haste to the next shore to dye on, for the Whale, al∣though when she is living will be covered with the Sea, yet

when she feeleth death coming on, she doth renounce that watery Element, and will admit no coverture but the wide Vault of Heaven. These mariners being come they found the Countrey-people very active in cutting up the Whale, some busie on one part of the body, some on another, the bet∣ter sort standing by and wondring at the mighty compasse and proportion of it, and encouraging the Countrey-people to proceed in their unaccustomed work. The honest people partaked in the labour, the better sort in the profit, and all in the grievousnesse of the smell, which to speake the truth was so excessive, that if it be true Philosophy, that a violent subject or sensible doth destroy the Sensory or the sense, it may be a question whether these Noses can ever have the capacity of senting any thing that is sweet again. Had you been there you might haue seen Greenland near Weymouth, such a noise and a quarter they make when they do hew the Whales in peeces in that Northern Climate, where there is but one night and one day in a whole year.


Their strength being lost with labour, and their spirits with the odious importunity of the increasing favour which pro∣ceeded from the corruption of that mighty Carkasse, they re∣lieve themselves (according to the accustomed practice) with the strength of Hot-Waters: and now being armed against all ingredients of ill savours, they distribute the fish in pre∣pared Cauldrons, which by the benefit of the fire must be im∣proved into Oyle,


While the labourers are boyling the Fish, the Merchants are compounding for the Spelme or seed thereof; and this commonly is called Parmacity, some part therof they design to 
Falmouth,
 some part to 
Exeter,
 some part to 
Weymouth,
 and very like some part to 
Bristoll
 and 
London:


The belly of this Whale being opened, and the vast Ribs being taken asunder there was discovered in the Bowels of

it a man, who it seemes had not long lain buried, his head was shaven, he was sure∣ly some Priest, and the hair on his Crown since his death was not much grown.


They found also with this man a black Box made of Lether, wherein were divers Pardons for severall Papists now in 
Eng∣land
 and in 
Ireland,
 as for 
Iohn Flower
 and 
Humphrey Vaux
] in 
England
 (it is thought that this 
Vaux
 is of kin to 
Guido Vaux,
 who indeavoured to have blown up the Par∣liament House in the yeare 1605.) Also many Pardons for Papists in 
Ireland,
 who have laboured to the uttermost of their endeavours to blow it up again, as to one 
Preston,
 the same who is now expected to come over into 
England
 with Forces; also an exhortation to him to proceed in the Wars he had undertaken, with assurance of the benediction of his Holinesse. A Pardon for one 
Muskerry,
 a Pardon for one 
Oneal,
 for 
Mac Magennis,
 and one for divers others, which was read by a Scholler, who

was then present, as those Sea-men have affirmed, but being themselves but unex∣perienced men in Letters, they are sorry they cannot deliver the particulars so ful∣ly as they desire.


It may evidently appear, that the reason why these multitudes of Fishes before re∣lated did so prosecute this Whale, was by reason of the person in its Belly, who it seemes was cast into the sea by some ship∣wrack, and then swallowed by this great Whale.


The Pardons were for these men, viz.




Englishmen




Iohn Flower


Humphrey Vaux








Irishmen




Iohn Muskerry


William Preston


Patrick Oneal


Iames Macgennis






The Names of the Seamen who affirme this, and were eye witnesses, are 
William Lelo
 Master of the ship, 
Tho: Chib∣nall
 Boteswain, 
Francis Sero, Tho: Taylor.


FINIS.











