A discourse of Bathe, and the hot waters there also some enquiries into the nature of the water of St. Vincent's rock, near Bristol, and that of Castle-Cary : to which is added a century of observations, more fully declaring the nature, property, and distinction of the Baths : with an account of the lives, and character, of the physicians of Bathe / by Tho. Gvidott ...
Guidott, Thomas, fl. 1698.
Approx. 339 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 119 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A42300




Wing G2192



ESTC R10888





ocm 13568232




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A discourse of Bathe, and the hot waters there also some enquiries into the nature of the water of St. Vincent's rock, near Bristol, and that of Castle-Cary : to which is added a century of observations, more fully declaring the nature, property, and distinction of the Baths : with an account of the lives, and character, of the physicians of Bathe / by Tho. Gvidott ...
Guidott, Thomas, fl. 1698.
[32], 200 p. plates  


London :


Printed for Henry Brome ...,


1676.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Physicians --  England --  Bath (Avon)
Mineral waters --  England --  Bath.
Bath (England) --  Description and travel.
2013-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-11
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2014-01
Anne Simpson
Sampled and proofread
2014-01
Anne Simpson
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






G2192


R10888


13568232


100351














The Frontispiece explain'd.




THE 
greatest light
 is not excus'd,


But oft with 
Clouds
 and 
Mist
 abus'd,


Darkness
 on 
our side
 doth appear,


But 
Light
 is in 
his Hemisphere;


The mischief to 
our Selves
 is done,


Though Clouded, yet 'tis still a Sun;


Whose 
rays
 more 
glorious
 are, and 
bright,


After the 
darkness
 of a 
Night,


And finds his 
Lustre
 gains by this


Combin'd Antiperistasis.


The 
Palm Tree prest,
 yet still will 
rise,


And all the 
weight
 on it 
despise:


Spices,
 when 
beaten,
 are most 
sweet,


With more 
delight
 their 
object
 meet;


As doth the 
Walk of Camomel,


When 
Troden,
 best 
affect
 the 
smell.






Then maugre Clouds obscuring force,


This Giant still will run his course.












engraved panel of sun behind clouds with a banner


OBNVBILATVS SOL TAMEN






engraved panel of a man grinding spices


TVNDO. FVNDO






engraved panel of a a man walking in a field in front of a castle


A Briefe Discourse Of Bathe.


CRESCIT SVB PON DERE


ALCATVM VIRET






engraved panel of a palm tree






engraved panel of a sun emerging from behind clouds with a banner


E TENEBRIS CLARIOR




London Printed for Henrii Brome 16












A DISCOURSE OF BATHE, AND THE HOT WATERS There.


ALSO, Some Enquiries into the nature of the Water of St. 
Vincent
's Rock, near 
Bristol;
 and that of 
Castle-Cary.


To which is added, A Century of Observations, more fully de∣claring the Nature, Property, and distinction of the BATHS.


WITH An Account of the Lives, and Character, of the Physicians of 
Bathe.


By 
THO. GƲIDOTT,
 M. B. Physician There.


Virtute vincam Invidiam.


LONDON,
 Printed for 
Henry Brome
 at the 
Gun
 in St. 
Paul
's 
Church-yard,
 the West end, 1676.








Librum hunc dignum judicamus qui Imprimatur


Geo. Ent,
 Praeses. D. 
Whistler Censor.








CLARISSIMORUM MEDICORUM 
LONDINENSIƲM.
 COLLEGIO CELEBERRIMO SPECIATIM VERO EXCELLENTISSIMO VIRO D. D. 
GEORGIO ENT
 EQUITI AURATO PRAESIDI DIGNISSIMO NEC NON SPECTATISSIMO IV. VIRATUI D. D. 
THOMAE COX
 D. D. 
DANIELI WHISTLER
 D. D. 
HUMPHREDO BROOKES
 D. D. 
THOMAE FRANCKLAND,
 CENSORIBUS DOCTISSIMIS RELIQUISQUE SOCIIS ERUDITIONE INGENIO SAGACITATE INSTRUCTISSIMIS HOC QUICQUID EST NOVI DE THERMARUM 
BATHONIENSIUM
 NATURA ET VIRIBUS SUBMISSE OFFERT 
T. G.










To the RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, And my Much Honoured Friend, Sr. 
Edward Greaves
 Baronet, Fellow of the Colledge OF PHYSICIANS in 
London,
 AND Physician in Ordinary TO HIS MAJESTY.


Honoured Sir,


T
HE kind reception you were pleased to afford a small Pa∣per of mine, that had lately the ho∣nour to have your Name prefixt,

 hath given this encouragement to present to your view, a further Col∣lection of Experiments touching the same Subject, relating to the Waters of 
Bathe,
 a place you were pleased once to grace with your Practice, and still with your Favours, for which a more than ordinary respect is, in gratitude, your due.


Besides, Considering you have so far favoured my late Enquiries, as to assist me by your presence, and be an Eye-witness of some of the Experiments, and are a suffici∣ent Judge of them all, I could not fix on any fitter than your self, and the Learned Body you have Relation to, to make this Address unto, or give the Trouble of this present Dedication.




It hath caus'd me sometimes not a little to admire, That the Me∣tropolitan Waters of all 
England,
 (as I may term Them) to say no more, should lye 2000 years, and it may be much longer, in so narrow a Diocess; for the dis∣covery I have made of many Things relating to Them, (of which in part here is some Account) that were never taken notice of by for∣mer Persons, and those few Wri∣ters that have Treated of Them, will Justifie the Expression.


The Principles formerly were accounted Sulphur, Copper, Iron, and a little Marcasite; of late, Bi∣tumen, Nitre, and some Sulphur, which last I endeavour to Confirm, with the Addition of many more, which will partly Constitute, and partly evidence the Nature of these

 Waters: Besides the beneficial dis∣covery of the Rational use of the Bath-waters in Potion, which hi∣therto having been but as a good Back-Sword, are now become a Single-Rapier, ready to save, and not destroy, unless ill manag'd by a distemper'd hand.


I confess I did not think to have appeared in this Dress, having de∣signed, and in part compleated, as you know very well, something else, that would have better suited with my Condition, the Dignity of the Subject, and Reputation of These Waters. But finding some hasty Chirurgion that hath already launced what I intended should have had a longer Time to digest, and expecting, as none but in rea∣son must, the Pretences of many others, I found my self oblig'd to

 appear, though in a careless habit, and in a manner undrest, rather than too much to exercise the Pa∣tience, if not justly incur the Cen∣sure of those friends, whose kind∣ness shall induce them to give me a Visit.


And although my Nature in∣clines me rather to a diffidence, than presumption on any thing that is my own, yet I must be so far confident as to believe, that the Existence of Nitre in the Waters of 
Bathe,
 so much question'd by some, and my particular Concern, is so fully establisht by the fol∣lowing Experiments, made with my own hands, as to keep those words upright in my late Letter to your self, wherein I assert it to be un∣deniable. And whoever shall take the pains to satisfie himself in that

 Particular, as I have done, and shall let me know wherein he is dissatisfied, and can convince me to the Contrary, whom I will as∣sure he shall not find obstinate, he shall have the Honour, if that be any thing, of making me his Convert, (for I think my sin∣gle Reputation a small Sacrifice on the Altar of Truth;) but if not, it will appear, which is no great matter on either hand, that some Body hath been mistaken.


However the Satisfaction is not little, nor the Omen bad, that I have already gained the Appro∣bation of a Person so Judicious as your self, who have formerly taken pains on the same Account, and on which side soever the Scales shall turn, I have had this

 opportunity of doing something to oblige my Countrey, as well as acknowledg my self


Sir,


Your most humble and faithful Servant, 
Tho. Guidott.










A PREFACE TO THE READER.


T
Hat the Reader may be acquainted with the occasion, time, and manner of my making these Enquiries (which are not hasty conclusions, but the product of more mature conside∣ration) I shall here premise something concerning that, and also discourse of, as more perti∣nent in this place, some other matters tending to the enlargement of the Reputation, and usefulness of the Waters.


Taking therefore into consideration the performances of some before me, and the attempts of others, in my time, which were not satisfactory, and having the ad∣vantages of a more retired nature, and constant re∣sidence on the place, with those Conveniencies which some others have not had, I thought it worth my while to employ my leisure hours in some Experiments on

 the Waters, which none had done before to any great purpose, the Waters having hitherto been rather ad∣mir'd than understood, if so I might give my own Curiosity satisfaction in that affair. And indeed, no vain glorious humour of desiring to be Popular, which I never affected, nor itch to have my Name in print, which hath been already sufficiently done by the kind∣ness of my friends, and therefore needs not any labour of my own again, was the occasion of my entring on this undertaking; but observing the Bath-water was drank by some, and probably like to advance, I could not satisfie my self in advising my Patients to it, un∣less I had first made a particular search into what it did contain, it seeming as absurd to me to tell my friends tbat depended on my judgment for their health and preservation, they should drink the Bath-water, which I knew nothing of, as to advise them to the use of such Spirits, Pills, or any other Medicine, I was ignorant of the composition of, or had procured from others.


Had I found this done to my hand, I could well have dispensed witb the confinement and risque this design hath occasion'd, and spent these hours I have done in my Study, as chearfully elsewhere, but find∣ing little satisfaction in what had been before per∣form'd, I first made collection out of the best Mineral Authors, such as 
Fallopius, Agricola, Baccius,
 and others, what was the best way to obtain a Sediment out of any Water, and then how to know of what that sediment did consist, making application of this Theory to the Waters of this place.


Observing then the waies of gaining a Sediment to be chiefly sour, 
Evaporation, Distillation, Precipita∣tion,
 and 
Insolation,
 the last, as too laborious, I thought fit to wave, and resolved on the other three, Evapo∣rating precipitating, and distil
ing first small quantities

 of all the Baths, which gave me encouragement to pro∣ceed to greater.


Having obtained a Sediment, which I call the 
Contents
 of the Water, the very Notion of which was but lately a stranger here, I trusted not to my single judgment, but made it known to the best Physicians of my acquaintance, with whom I had Converse, particularly my ever honoured friend Sr. 
Edward Greaves,
 whose encouragement to this design hath not been little, and also addressed my self in writing to the very Ingenious and Eminent Doctor 
Willis
 (whose loss all Ingenious Philosophers and Physicians must la∣ment, his many thoughts now dying with him) whose assistance I desired by Letter dated 
1. Sept.—73,
 in these words:



Sir,


THe Acquaintance I had the happiness to have with you formerly in 
Oxon,
 and the Civilities you have been pleased to confer on me since, with the readiness you have ever exprest of encouraging all ingenious Inquiries, have emboldened me to give you this Interruption. The desire also I under∣stand you have expressed to Mr. 
Robert Chapman
 an Apothecary of this City, of a better account of the Contents of these Waters, which hath hitherto I know not how, been too much neglected, and concerning which I have of late made some Ex∣periments, hath further encouraged me only at pre∣sent to acquaint you, that about 
Michaelmas
 next, God willing, I shall have a conveniency by a friend of mine, your Neighbour, to send you the true Contents of all the Baths apart, which if you please to examine, and honour me so far as to return me your thoughts of the Ingredients, being doubtless a

 Compounded body, I shall with all alacrity and obsequiousness imaginable give you a larger account of my Observations, vvhich I forbear to do till you please to favour me with an Answer, that so I may not preoccupy your more exact enquiry. The thing it self being of so grand import, and so well suiting with your own genius, I may promise my self the greater happiness in your Correspondence, &c. which is all the trouble shall at this time be given by


Your most humble Servant, 
T. G.




According to this Letter, I sent the Doctor what I promised, on the 
15.
 of 
October
 next ensuing, by my facetious, learned, good friend, Mr. 
Alexander Dyer,
 with this Letter, which because it contains the rude draught of what I afterwards took more pains about, and not much different from what I now publish, I shall here insert.




Honoured Sir,


HEaring nothing of 
Colonel Morgan,
 the Person I designed for conveyance of what I for∣merly promised, I have now met with a conveni∣ent opportunity by my vvorthy friend Mr. 
Alex. Dyer
 to present you with as true an Anatomy of the Baths, as my present inspection will permit: 
viz.
 The Contents of all the Baths, 
Kings, Cross
 and 
Hot,
 in Iron and Glass Vessels; the former ℥i. of each, the latter ℥ii. or thereabouts; that in Glass being all that one Gallon of the Water of each Bath did afford; the other in Iron, not the whole quantity,

 but sufficient, I hope, for your satisfaction, that came from four Gallons, the 
Kings Bath
 yielding in Iron, on my first Experiment ʒxiiii; the 
Cross
 ʒxii ss; the 
Hot
 ℥ix. ℈ii: but on my second Trial performed in the late wet weather, much less out of the same vessel, and quantity of water, which may suggest something to Enquiry if I find it hold. But usually out of 4 Gallons in a Vessel of mixt Mettal, I commonly evaporate it in, I have ℥i. out of a gallon of all the Baths alike, so that I judge about ʒii. to be the common proportion out of a gallon the Water will afford.


Now of these ʒii, as I suppose, you will easily discover all is not Salt, but according to my best observation I find a third part only Saline, or ℈ii. in ʒii: the residue, which I have sent under the name of 
Residuum Sedimenti non Salinum,
 will not relent but continues of a gritty nature, and I suppose, consists of two different substances.


The 
Ochre
 ariseth in a large quantity, where the stream of the Bath meets with any resistance; but what I am not so fully satisfied in for the present is, that though so much continually is breathed out of the water, nothing yellow is discovered in the Con∣tents.


The 
Oleum Salis Thermarum per deliquium,
 is only that Salt I have sent you by the name of 
Sal Thermarum
 relented in the air, and cleansed from impurities that will subside, but tincted greenish by a touch of Copper it met with in extracting, when otherwise the true colour is more inclining to Amber.


One thing more also I think fit to advertise you of, that in Glass Vessels there is a thin crust in the outside covering that part that is most Saline, as thin as the thinnest Wafer, but not Salt at all,

 which I have caused to be separated in the Con∣tents of the 
Hot Bath,
 and put in a distinct glass containing ʒi. gr. 10; this more flakey and much less, if at all Saline, being only ℈ii. gr. 14. The 
Kings
 and 
Cross Bath
 are alike, mixed here in one glass, only the 
Hoth Bath
 separated for your further satisfaction.


You have also the Sand, Mud, and Scum, in Boxes by themselves, all which I submit to your more exact scrutiny what names to call these by, which is the grand thing in question, and 
on which will be built, as I conceive, the truest Hypothesis of the Nature and Vertues of these Waters that hath yet been given, and much different from what hath hi∣therto been supposed and presumed on.


I hope to have the honour of a few lines from you, what your thoughts are of the nature of these particulars, vvhich vvill be very acceptable to


Sir,


Your obliged humble Servant, 
THO. GUIDOTT.






Postscript.


IN an ordinary infusion of any of the Contents in Common Water, you will observe a white gritty substance, which will harden into a stone in the bot∣tom of the glass, one of which I have sent in the Box containing 
Sedimentum non Salinum;
 above that a blewish light, and more dirty substance; then the Salt in the Water to which it gives a yellow tin∣cture.




The Doctors business being much on other accounts, I cannot understand he did any thing in this, only in a Latin Letter he had occasion to write me not long after, on the account of an Honourable Patient, for whom we then were both concern'd he takes a very kind notice of my Letters, and Experiments, and gives me thanks in this expression, 
Clarissime Domine, Multum Tibi debeo pro Litteris & Experimentis Tuis circa Aquas Thermales mihi jam pridem mis∣sis, quae officia Tua ut gratissima habeo, ita compen∣sare studebo;
 but sent me no other satisfaction.


A little after, having an opportunity of obtaining the Contents of many Hogsheads of the Water, I wrought them all of, and came to an exact separation and distinction of Particulars, as expressed in the Ob∣servations hereunto annexed, and as occasion served, com∣municated my Experiments to my Honoured friends, the Learned and accomplisht Sr. 
Charles Scarbo∣rough,
 Doctor 
Thomas Witherley,
 Dr. 
Nathaniel Highmore,
 and Dr. 
Thomas Harbech.
 This I think is sufficient to take off the surmise of Singularity, if any such thing by chance should be thought upon.


And here I cannot but admire how a Judicious man should be so far imposed on by any person what∣soever, as to imagine, that a satisfactory enquiry into the nature of these Waters was so nice a speculation, as to be 
inconvenient
 or 
useless
 [according to these words; 
I have been desirous heretofore to have attempted some discovery of our Baths,
 
according to those Principles: but being thought (by some) either not convenient, or not useful, I was willing to save my labour, which perhaps might have seem∣ed not to be worth thanks.]
 For, what can be more necessary, and therefore useful and convenient too, than to know the Principles of any Water we recom∣mend our Patients to? and what did all the Mineral

 Writers that treated of such Waters before him whose authority he uses, but either make such enquiries, or speak by guess? and which of these two is the more useful or convenient, is easily determin'd.


Besides, by this means we act as rational Physicians, and free the Baths and Mineral Waters from that aspersion they labour under, of being accounted Em∣pirical Medicines, whereas they are the exact compo∣sition of the best Physician, and perform their opera∣tions by virtue of the Ingredients they consist of, and the blessing of God Almighty, as all other good Medi∣cines and Prescriptions do.


Moreover, this way we can better judge of the rea∣son of the effects, which without this, perplex the un∣derstanding with an ignorant admiration, and we prove no better than the ordinary Spectators at a Puppet-play, who admire the motions, but know no∣thing of the hand within that occasions them.


I confess indeed, 
his thinking his pains might not have deserved thanks,
 might somewhat discourage him; but a man of Resolution would have considered that things of this kind, subjected to publick view, would fall either into the hands of understanding, ge∣nerous and unbiast persons; or else ignorant, self-interested, and narrow Souls: the former ever have been, and will be ever ready to give what encourage∣ment ingenuity shall deserve; and for the other, they are not much to be regarded, being best brought to a knowledge of themselves by an understanding of their errors; and as their mouths are no slanders, so their thanks are but slender, if any, commendations. And thanks be to God for it, there have been and now are many worthy, brave, and generous Spirits in this our Nation, who can discern and make distinction 'twixt things that differ, else had would be the condition ef those that have broken through that opposition at

 which others have boggled, and think it no disparage∣ment to undergo rude Censures from the ruder multi∣tude, in prosecution of a design for publick advantage.


Although the Credit of the Waters hath been pre∣served by Bathing, and advanced by Drinking, espe∣cially these two Summers last past, yet a far greater degree of Reputation may be acquired, by a more par∣ticular account of the more remarkable Cures that are annually wrought, principally thereby; which be∣ing digested into the nature of a Register, would mightily conduce to the satisfaction of those that seek remedy here in the like distempers. And although I have endeavoured what in me lay to promote so neces∣sary a good work, yet such is the stupidity of some to things of their own advantage, that nothing of this nature hath yet been performed, although recom∣mended by the learned Doctor 
Jorden,
 then practising on the place, and often inculcated, though with like success, by my self: So that to the wonderful honour of those on whom it must reflect, the Waters have been more beholding to the gratitude of Forreigners in registring their own Cases, than to the care and duty of those that are at home. I shall instance in the Case of Sr. 
Humphrey Lloyd,
 who having received a hurt in his Hip, hy the kick of a horse in 
Milain,
 was grievously afflicted with a Sciatica for a twelve months time, and after having made use of much Physick, from several Physicians, to little purpose, in only six daies using these Waters was perfectly recovered. His words are these; 
Alia
 Belgarum 
urbs,
 Ptolomaeo,
 
Aquae Calidae;
 Antonino, 
Aquae Solis;
 Britannis, 
Caer Badon; &
 Anglis, Bathe 
dicitur, Balneis A∣quarum Calidarum saluberrimis clara; Cujus rei ego certissimus testis esse possum. Nam cùm ex ictu equi Mediolano, in
 Italia, 
excepto, dolore Schiatico duodecim continuis mensibus laborarem,

 diversisque Doctissimorum Medicorum auxiliis, non convalescerem, his Balneis, cum tantum sex diebus usus essem, sanitati pristinae restitutus sum.


And that I may mention one fresh in the memory of all, whose gratitude in this kind deserves a remem∣brance, Mr. 
John Revet,
 an aged man, hath very late∣ly publickly testified his cure of an 
Hemiplegia,
 in a months bathing, by an Inscription round a very fair Brass ring, on the right hand of the Entrance into the Queens Bath out of the Kings, after this manner; 
Thanks to God. I
 John Revet 
his Majesties Bra∣zier, at 56 years of age, in this present month of
 July 
1674, in this place recovered a cure of health and limbs, of the
 Dead Palsey, 
on one side, from head to foot.


That this way of Registring of Cures was also thought necessary, and recommended before the time of Dr. 
Jorden,
 may appear from the words of Mr. 
Jones,
 an honest 
Cambrobritan
 (whose authority I am constrained to make often use of in the following discourse, in regard he is the only man that hath treat∣ed any thing largely of these Waters,) which I re∣cite as they are, being the plain words of an honest meaning man.
 
I wish▪
 saith he 
that you leave a Note of the Commodity received, and a knowledge of your condition and calling in the Records of the Mayor of the City, where it shall be registred, until a Physician be appointed, who then shall be joyned with the Mayor, paying to the Poor-man's Box, and 4 pence for Registring your benefit received there.
 [And in another place;
] 
Alway provided the day of your coming thither be noted before you enter into the Baths, and the day of your departure, with the Country of your habitation, condition, or cal∣ling, with the Infirmities or cause you came for, in the Register book kept of the Warden of the Bath,

 or the Physician that there shall be appointed, and the benefit you received, paying four pence for the Recording.
 This Register may be so contriv'd as that the Patients name, or only letters thereof, as shall be thought expedient, with thir place of residence, distem∣per, and time of using the Waters, may be exprest in short; a model whereof, in many instances, we have in 
Jo. Bauhinus
 de Aquis 
Bollensibus,
 lib. 
1.
 cap. 
17.


And whereas mention is here made of the Poor-man's Box, it gives me a good occasion to remind this Age, of what prudent and charitable disposition the former Age was, in which for the necessary support of the many Poor that came hither for relief, (now sufficiently numerous, and burthensom too) Repara∣tions and Conveniences of the Bath, and other good uses, a Tax, or Pole-bill was made, and willingly con∣sented to by the users of such Waters, by which a cer∣tain reasonable rate, or sum, was required of every man or woman of all conditions, from a Duke to a Yeoman, by which all Clamours, now too frequent, were prevented, and all occasions of Exactions taken away, no person paying, or requiring more than what was commonly known to be their due, reserving their Gratuities to dispose of as they please. The mony collected to be put into the Treasury of the Bath, and intrusted in the hands of one or two honest and suf∣ficient persons, who should every 
Michaelmas
 give up their Accounts, and dispose of good part of the mony chiefly to the use of the poor abroad that come with good Certificates, or accounts of their condition, to be approved of by competent Judges in this case, and other necessary, good, and charitable uses, as shall be thought requisite; provided the Baths, Pumps, or any of their appurtenances be supply'd, and kept in good order and repair. And this was never intended in any violent or compulsory way, but only as a fair pro∣posal

 to the better disposed persons, who by their good example, and readiness to comply in this particular, may have an efficacious influence on the more captious and excepting, to beget in them a better understand∣ing of this charitable, and orderly design.


Neither can this Tax in reason be imagin'd to be prejudicial to the Waters, as some others are reported to have been; on the imposition of which the Waters are said to have lost their virtue: for however the truth of such stories may be admitted, which are de∣liver'd by credible Authors, and I cannot contradict, yet certain it is, that if any such thing ever hap∣pen'd, it was either on the restraint of a publick re∣sort, by denying Poor people the use of the Waters, or else by an Impost collected by the Officers of the Prince to his private advantage; whereas this is only to pre∣vent exactions, and moral abuses, between man and man, and the Poor rather hence to be relieved than exacted of, with a probability of a much greater re∣sort that will be procured by a reasonable demand, and good order withal.


The overplus of this Collection, if rightly manag'd, and the years prove lucky, may in a short time, make a purse for the covering one or two of the Baths also, whereby the Waters would be rendred useful all the year, which hy reason of the coldness of the ambient Air, and fear of injury thereby, and no other, are thought not so fit to be used in the Winter season, the Waters then being as effectual as in Summer.


And this would be agreeable to the use and custom of most of the Baths in 
Europe
 which are cover'd, and thought by the best Physicians to be a means of keeping the Waters to an even Temper, being an equal defence against the wind and cold of the Winter, and the troublesom heat of the Sun in Summer; so that nothing external causing alteration supervening, the

 benefit of the Waters may be safely received from the first of 
January,
 to the last of 
December,
 which would be much for the relief of those infirm persons that require a longer stay than ordinary here, and by their so long absence from the Bath, do but weave 
Pe∣nelope
's web, undoing in the Winter, what is done in Summer; whereas if they did in this manner, as we say, follow their blows, they probably would not only prevent a relapse, but set themselves in a way of perfect recovery with one resolution, without many comings at several seasons, being many times not so well at their second coming, as they went away on their first season of bathing.


For this use I think the Queens Bath most con∣venient, both in regard it is but small, and also more especially for the conveniences of the Slips, and Hou∣ses about it, where it is almost no more than out of Bath, into Bed; and if well cover'd, and care taken in rising, may be as well as if a man made use of a Bath in his own house or Chamber where he lies. After which the Cross Bath may follow, if it be thought fit, the Kings, and Hot, being kept open still.


But against this I foresee two Objections will be made. First, 
That it will be inconvenient in the Summer time to sit so close, if no offence doth a∣rise from the steam.
 And, Secondly, 
That it will be injurious to the Lights about the Bath.


To the first, I answer generally; That those per∣sons that desire good, will think nothing an inconve∣nience that is in order to it, and those that come for pleasure may be somewhere else; yet that it may ap∣pear to be made out some other way, I suppose the increase of Heat, which sometimes that Bath wants, procured by keeping the Air out, and the steam in great measure in, (which yet will not be more than

 will well be endured) will make a sufficient recom∣pence for this supposed molestation. And as for the Steam, a vent hole, or Tunnel at the top, will so dis∣charge, that it may not be offensive or troublesome at all.


As to the Lights, the Cross Bath will certainly inconvenience none, and the Queens may be so con∣triv'd, if made flat, as to do the same but if built more erect for gaining room below, there will be but a very little blind, or perhaps none at all, to the lower Windows on the 
Hart
 lodging side, which house, by reason of the accommodation of the Slip thereunto belonging, being, in all probability, likely to partake most of the profit, may contribute a little in this kind. But to avoid all exception, the Cover may be so made with shutters on a Timber frame, that it may be easily taken off if there be occasion, and as soon closed up again, if necessity shall require.


One thing more I shall only add, which as a means to establish greater order and content, with submission to more political judgments, I here propose, That I con∣ceive that the persons having dependance more imme∣diately on the Bath, may be better paid by Salaries, than the 
Nunquam-satis-arbitrary
 way now on foot; That their number may be lessen'd, being by that rea∣son, and (the consequent thereof) their necessity, only such as repine at now, and prey one upon another; and that two Serjeants, four able men to manage the Pumps, and cleanse the Baths, four Women to intro∣duce and place the Females; with twelve Chair-men, may be sufficient. The Salaries to be paid them by the Officer in chief, collected by the Serjeant, and raised by a moderate demand by the Pole from the Ʋsers of the Waters, according to their conditions, quality, and time of stay at the Bath, expressed in a Table for that purpose mentioned before; and if any

 other clamorous demands, uncivil deportment, neglect, or want of duty, should at any time happen in those Servants, upon complaint made, to be animadverted on, suspended, or discharged by the Authority under which they are. These things some may make light of, but the Prudent will consider.


T. G.










THE CONTENTS.




CHAP. I.
 THe Introduction, 
pag. 1


Chap. II.
 The Opinion of a late Author concerning the Nature of the Baths of 
Bathe, pag. 6


Chap. III.
 An Examination of some particulars in the former Chapter, 
p. 12


Chap. IV.
 Of Nitre in the Bath-water, 
p. 20


Chap. V.
 Of Sulphur in the Bath-water, 
p. 26


Chap. VI.
 Of Vitriol in the Bath-water, 
p. 33


Chap. VII.
 A further proof and illustration of former particulars, 
p. 37


Chap. VIII.
 A Letter formerly written to Sr. 
E. G. p. 42


Chap. IX.
 Of the Antiquity of the Baths and City, 
p. 55


Chap. X.
 Of the 
Roman
 Antiquities in 
Bathe, p. 66


Chap. XI.
 Of the Abbey Church in 
Bathe, p. 76


Chap. XII.
 Of the Baths of 
Bathe, p. 94


Chap. XIII.
 Of the use of the Bath-water in Potion, 
p. 106


Chap. XIV.
 Of the vertues of the Bath-water taken inwardly, 
p. 115


Chap. XV.
 Of the Water of St. 
Vincents
 Rock near 
Bristol, p. 122


Chap. XVI.
 Of 
Castle-Cary
 Water. 
p. 125


A Century of Observations, 
p. 131


The Lives and Character of the Physicians of 
Bathe, p. 163






















illustrated map of Bath


BATHE






Places within the Citie observed by letters






A


S
t
. Maryes






B


High Street






C


Market House






D


S
t.
 Peters






E


The Abbey






F


Abbey Gate






G


S
t.
 James






H


Sta
les Street






I


Abbey lane






K


Kings 
ath






L


Tennis Court






M


Sta
les Church






N


Cheap Street






O


Co
kes lane






P


Vicaridge lane






Q


Spuriers lane






R


The Timber green






S


S
t.
 Michaels






T


Westgate Street






V


S
t
. Johns Hospital






W


Crosse Bathe






X


Hot Bathe






Y


Lazours Bathe






Z


S
t
. Katherines hospital










inset on the map of Bath depicting the Kings Bath and the New Bath


The forme of Kings Bath


The forme of the New Bath






inset on the map of Bath depicting the Cross Bath, the Hot Bath, and Lazours Bath


The forme of the Cross Bath


The forme of the Hot Bathe


Lazours Bath










A Discourse of BATHE, AND THE HOT WATERS There.




CHAP. I.
 The Introduction.


H
Aving formerly, in the year 1668, annexed a brief discourse of 
Bathe
 to one of Doctor 
Jorden
's of Natu∣ral Bathes and Mineral Waters, un∣der the name of an 
Appendix con∣cerning Bathe,
 by which and some other pains I had taken about the Treatise it self, I thought I had obliged (as was the opinion of most) not only the Relations of the deceased Au∣thor, but all his Friends and Well-wishers; but meeting, contrary to all expectation, with 
ude and unhandsom returns from an Impudent person, to

 whose Temper the modest Doctour was a great stranger, and of whose behaviour he would be much asham'd, were he now alive; who on his pretended relation hath repaid me with ill lan∣guage, and foolishly threatned me with Trouble for my good will. Now to put an end to all disputes of this kind, I have thought fit to appeal to any understanding person, that hath his senses exercised, and his wits about him, (for all have not, and some have none at all) whether my Additions have been any impair to the Doctor's Reputation, whom I have treated with all the Civility imaginable; and for the Sale of the Book (a good argument of its acceptance) I believe there were not more sold in the Doctor's life time, of what he printed himself, than went off the first year of my Impression. But to silence all Cavils and silly Objections of this nature, I have discharged that Author, and published in this discourse my own thoughts and Observations, and how much different they are from his, or agreeable to Truth, may best be de∣termin'd by the ingenious Reader.


I did intend indeed, according to my Promise in the end of my Preface to the Edition of Dr. 
Jorden,
 to have amplified that small discourse into an 
History of Bathe;
 but finding no encouragement since to that de∣sign, and many things that have made me alter my resolution, my intentions are to wave that, and apply my self, in some convenient time, to the 
Roman Court,
 where I shall have a fairer Trial, and more Justice done me. In the mean time, I hope this may in some measure stop the gap, and release me of my obligation to the Candid world; especially consi∣dering that the Antiquities of the Baths and City can hardly, I think, be improved higher, and the Mystery of the Sacred Waters of 
Minerva,
 is not

 to be profan'd, which it wants little of if idly pro∣stituted to vulgar Capacities; which, besides that they are incompetent Judges in other matters, are apt to put a sinister interpretation on those very things, that really are, and were so intended for their own advantage; neither had I published the Observations I now do in this language, had it not been on a more particular account.


The ill Usages and great Indignities I have al∣ready met withal, from an ungrateful people, in the prosecution of my design of making further En∣quiries into the Nature of those Waters, are not here to be mentioned; they are sufficiently known to be products of Envy and Malice, and as I have hitherto contemned what pitiful opposition could be made against me by the united strength of En∣vy, Pride, Beggery and Revenge; so I shall not surcease my Thoughts in due time of performing that which will be better esteem'd by more Judici∣ous persons, and render me and my design most acceptable when best understood. It was a fit re∣turn of a grave Divine to a vainglorious opposer of his good Inclinations, 
Nec propter Te coepi, nec propter Te desinam. Thou, Satan,
 said he, 
hast nothing to do with my Concerns, for thou art at neither end of my design; and as I did not begin to do thee a kindness, so I will continue notwithstanding thy rage.
 Such unclean Spirits have no more to do with pub∣lick affairs, than to interrupt the quiet of better than themselves; and are like a troublesom Curr on the Road, that doth little else, with a besom tail and a whiffling bark, than make a man well mount∣ed look back, his horse kick, and so returns.


It hath ever been the fate of New Discoveries to meet with Course entertainment at their first appearance; and whereas men are usually courteous

 and civilly demean'd to strange Persons, they treat strange Opinions and new Inventions at another rate. 'Tis the only Policy accounted to keep a bal∣lance among men, and if any one by a more than ordinary industry and God's blessing on it, hath made at any time a conquest in the Intellectual world, whereby 'tis thought he may get the start of his Neighbours, a rotten 
Cabal
 shall make head a∣gainst him, and perhaps, use him with as much se∣verity as a forceable Intruder on another's right; whereas the Secrets of Nature are free to all, and the Victor here enters not by Blood, and Rapine, and Tyrannical oppression, but in a way both innocent in it self, and advantagious to others.


When I reflect on the hard measure the Re∣nowned Dr. 
Harvey
 met withal from the pride and peevishness of some conceited Brethren (who esteem nothing Currant but what bears their image and superscription, if not minted in their own brain) on his first demonstration of the Circulation to the World, I cannot but conclude, if I had no other instance for it, That neither Ingenuity, Learning, Modesty, nor any thing that is good and truly valua∣ble can give protection from, though a sufficient antidote against, the poyson of Envy; 
Envy,
 that spreading Ring-worm, that 
Ʋbiquitarian
 infection, that Canker of what is sound, and Rust of what is bright! to be found almost in all places, in Town and in Country, in the Shop and in the Street, in the Tavern and in the Ale-house; it hovers over all, and pitches where it can, till at last, if it hurt not others, it preys upon it self:

Thou wicked Fiend! that ne'r didst good,


But hast perversly it withstood,


And ever will, till Time shall be


No more, or We


Be rid of Thee.




But to pass by things of this nature with that of the unconcerned 
Graecian
 to as abusive persons, 
; or that of 
Tacitus, Convitia spreta exolescunt,
 the best answer being nothing at all; I shall rather chuse to acquaint the Read
r, That whereas I conceive, when I writ my Letter of Observations, that 
Bitumen
 and 
Sul∣phur
 were not primarily concern'd in the Body of the Waters, and therefore no way observable in the Contents; by fresher Experiments and Observations of a later date, I am inclin'd to believe, that 
Sul∣phur
 is one ingredient in the Contents of the Wa∣ters, though not proportionable in quantity to the Salts, and lost in the bringing them to a better co∣lour. For if two or three ounces of the Contents, which at first much resemble the courser sort of Sugar, be put into a Crucible in order to fusion, when the Crucible is red, and before the Salt doth run, there is the perfect colour and smell of Brim∣stone, insomuch that it may be sensibly discerned in any part of the room, and as the Salt draws nearer the state of Fusion, the Sulphur wasts and is dimi∣nished; so that as dross or Recrement it burns off in Calcination, and is no way concerned in the refined Salt, though one Ingredient in the Waters, and contained in their body.


I shall further add, that I made a 
Lixivium
 of the Salt calcin'd before fusion, when probably the Sulphurous parts, or so reputed, were not all con∣sum'd, and observ'd so great a 
foetor
 in the 
Lixivi∣um
 representing Sulphur so effectually to my smell, that it presently obtain'd the Testimony (if that be any thing) of that sense.








CHAP. II.
 The Opinion of a late Author concerning the Nature of the Baths of 
Bathe.


AND here I cannot but take notice of a Novel Writer, who Magisterially thus determines: 
Quod ad Nitrum & Sulphur attinet, quibus Thermas Bathonienses imbutas esse hactenus creditum est, eorum neutrum Aquis Thermarum istarum solutum esse arbi∣tror: As to what concerns Nitre and Sulphur, with which the Bathes of Bathe have hitherto been thought to be impregnated, I suppose there is nothing of either of them dissolved in the Waters.


A bold assertion! which had it been vented and believed but 50 years ago, would have prevented much trouble in evincing the contrary; but, since 'tis in fashion to be peremptory, I do assert, 
That both Nitre and Sulphur are to be found in all the Bathes of Bathe, and that dissolved in, and mixed with, the Body of the Waters.
 In order to the Proof of which, I shall take some account of the forementioned Author's 15th. Chapter of his Tract of Sal-Nitre, the arguments he hath against it, and his opinion to the contrary.


His words therefore, as well as I can translate them, are these:


Among the most celebrated Bathes, we may justly reckon those of 
Bathe,
 in which admirable Waters, a continual Vestal and sacred Fire is maintain'd, as if things of a most different na∣ture were interleagu'd. Before I come to the manner how these Bathes receive their Heat, it will not be improper if I make some enquiry into the Contents of these Waters.




It is therefore manifest, that the Bathes of 
Bathe
 are impregnated with a certain Salt of an acid na∣ture, for if any Sal alkali, or volatil Salt purely salin'd, be mixed with these Waters, a precipita∣tion will ensue, and the Waters will become tur∣bid, and of a milky nature.


Moreover, The 
Bathe
-water powred on boyl∣ing Milk, will coagulate it, as any other acid doth.


Neither doth this acid Salt seem to be the only Salt of the 
Bathe,
 but is complicated with an Al∣kali; for if the Water be evaporated quite away, a certain Salt of a more fixt nature will be found in the bottom of the vessel, which, on the powr∣ing of any acid on it, will ferment.


Of the same nature also are the Mud and Sand of the Bathe, which are wrought up with the Springs; for any acid liquor being powred on them, an Ebullition will follow.


There may be also observed in these Waters a Salt, or rather a Lime-Chalk kind of Earth, sticking to the bottom of the Gouts, or passages, almost in all places where the Water passeth.


From what hath been said may be collected; That the Bathes of 
Bathe
 are impregnated with a certain acid saline Salt, and the Salt of the Bathe seems not much unlike Tartar vitriolated, or Aluminous Salt.


The Reason why these Salts destroy not one another, but each of them ferments with its con∣trary Salt; may be understood from what hath been delivered in the former Chapter: To wit; These Salts are so imperfect, that in Conjunction they cannot destroy one another. But more of these Salts, hereafter.


As to Nitre and Sulphur, with which the Bathes

 have hitherto been thought to participate, I sup∣pose, That neither of them is dissolv'd in those Waters.


That there is no Nitre in the Waters appears by this, That the Salts that remain after the Eva∣poration of the Bathe-water, put on a Coal, burn not, as Nitre doth. Although I shall not deny, that those immature Salts of an Alkali nature, (which are also contained in the Sand, and
 Mud of the Bathe) being expos'd sometime to the air, may, perhaps, by its influence be converted into Nitre.


As to Sulphur, which hath been so much re∣ported to be in all Bathes, 'tis not, I believe, dissolved in these Waters. Because,


If a Solution of Alom, Vitriol, or any other Salt, whether acid, or fixt, be mixed with the Water of the Bathe, Sulphur discovers not it self to be precipitated, either by a fetid smell, or any other sign; which notwithstanding in the Soluti∣on of Sulphur in the water of unslak't Lime, or made into a Lixivium, doth appear, where the Sulphur by the affusion of any acid Liquor is precipitated.


I am not ignorant that the Water of these Bathes, if Salt of Tartar, or a purely vola∣til Salt, be cast into it, will presently turn white, as is declared before; which colour proceeds not from Sulphur, but a stony, or Aluminous matter precipitated, not much unlike to what is observed in the Water of unslak't Lime, when any fixt Salt is mixed therewith; in which notwithstand∣ing it is not to be supposed the Sulphur is dissolv∣ed; for if Sulphur be boyled in Water of un∣slak't Lime, the Water becomes white, not by the affusion of a fixt Salt, as before, but of an

 acid; so that fixt Salts may dissolve Sulphur, but not precipitate it. Wherefore if Sulphur be contained in the Waters of the Bathe, they would be precipitated, not by a purely saline, as former∣ly, but an acid Salt, and the Sulphur so precipi∣tated would discover it self by a fetid smell, which it doth not do.


To which I add, That an acid Salt, or some∣thing Aluminous, doth seem to predominate in the Bathes aforesaid, so that they become altoge∣ther unfit to dissolve the Sulphur.


Moreover, If Common Sulphur be boyled in those Waters, they are never tinged with a yellow or Sulphurous colour, neither can Sulphur, by any means, be precipitated from the decoction, as I have often experimented.


And therefore I much admire the famous 
Wil∣lis,
 in his Treatise of the heat of the Blood, should affirm, That Sulphur boyled in Bathe-wa∣ter may be dissolved after the same manner, as if boyled in Water of unslak't Lime.


Now if Sulphur seems to be dissolved in the Waters aforesaid, the occasion of the mistake, I suppose to be, That the decoction was made in a vessel, in which some fixt Salt had been decocted, so that the Solution of the Sulphur may be made by some particle of a fixt Salt, with which the vessel might be season'd.


Concerning the Baths of 
Bathe,
 'Tis the com∣mon Opinion that Silver dipped into them is co∣loured yellow, in the same manner as if it were cast into a Solution of Sulphur, and hence it is supposed that the Baths have Sulphur in them; but experience evinceth the contrary; for Silver put into the Bath-water becomes not reddish, or yellow, but rather black.




The mistake may seem to arise from this, That 'tis customary with the Bathe-Guids to tinge, and as it were guild over pieces of Silver with a Salino-Sulphurous Mud, or Dung, such as is often found in houses of Office, and put them off to Strangers, for a little profit, as if they were coloured with the Bathe-water.


And here this is to be noted, That a kind of Bituminous Mud, with a small pittance of Com∣mon Sulphur, is brought up with the Springs, which only swims on the top, or else continues at the bottom, but never is dissolved in the Waters themselves.


Neither is Sal Armoniack, as some imagine, to be found in these Waters; for if on the So∣lution of Sal Armoniack, Salt of Tartar be in∣jected, the purely saline volatil Salt (of which Sal Armoniack in part doth consist) being at li∣berty from the acid Salt, to which it was former∣ly united, will presently fly off into the air, and will quickly be discover'd by a pungent affecting the nostrils, which is never observ'd in the Bathe-waters.


Lastly; As to Vitriol, the Crosse and Hot Bathe seem to have none at all; for if Galls are beaten, and infused in these Waters, they nei∣ther turn purple nor black; which would cer∣tainly be, if these Waters had Vitriol in them.


The King's Bathe seems to have a little Vitriol in it; for if some beaten Galls are cast into that Water, it will have a light tincture of a black purple colour.


'Tis also to be noted, That a certain
 Mineral of a Metallick nature, ariseth out of the Earth, with the Springs of the Bathe, which is easily turn'd into Vitriol. For if any acid liquor be

 affused on the Sand (which breaking out with the Springs, is found in the bottom of the Bathe) it being corroded with an acid Menstruum, not without a remarkable effervescence, will in part be converted into Vitriol, just as it happens to the filings of Iron corroded with an acid liquor.


For if that Sand of the Bathe corroded with an acid liquor, be put into the Infusion of Galls, the liquor acquires an atropurpureous colour. Whereas if the Infusion of Galls be put on the Sand newly taken out of the Bathe, and not cor∣roded with an acid liquor, it will, by no means, be of a purple colour; an apparent sign, that the Metallick Sand of the Bathe, unless corro∣ded with an acid Menstruum, doth not turn to Vitriol.


It is further observable; That the Sand of the Bathe kept some time, and exposed to the open air, will of its own accord, be converted into Vitriol; for if that Sand be mixed with the Infu∣sion of Galls, the Water will contract an atro∣purpureous appearance.


Moreover, If it be laid on the Tongue, it hath a perfect Vitriolick taste; and no wonder, for the Nitro-aereous Spirit, after some time, closeth with the Metallick Mineral, and Salino-Sulphureous Marchasite, of which Vitriol useth to be made, mixed in the Sand, and causeth it to ferment, and at last, as was shewed before, con∣verts it into Vitriol, 
&c.








CHAP. III.
 An Examination of some Particulars in the former Chapter.


HOW far this Author hath ploughed with my Heifer, I leave to the consideration of those that have been any way acquainted with my design; and shall only here take notice, what Observations are agreeable with, or different from those I have often made with the greatest exactness, and repeat∣ed Trials, submitting all to the unbiast judgment of Indifferent persons.


And first of all, I concur with him, that the Baths of 
Bathe
 are in part impregnated with a certain Salt of an Acid nature; but why this acid Salt should be called 
Aluminous,
 I am not yet so fully resolv'd, as much on other accounts, so some∣what on this, That although an acid Spirit be in Alom, yet the most perceptible taste is either 
acerbe
 or 
austere;
 which being not observed in these Wa∣ters, I have so much reason to judge 
Alom
 not predominant, as asserted here.


The Experiment he mentions of precipitation or alteration of the Waters to a milky colour, or almond Milk, we owe to the Ingenuity of the In∣dustrious Mr. 
Stubbe,
 who, though he had not the good hap to discover what was precipitated, yet gives it the general name of an 
insipid Magistery,
 and is nothing else but 
Freestone
 finely wrought, and intimately mixt with the body of the Wa∣ters.


If any blame me for calling it by so homely a name, I desire they would consider, that I had

 rather call it so than a Metallick Mineral, or a 
Sali∣no-sulphureous Marchasite,
 supposing it more agreea∣ble to all their apprehensions that will be concern'd in things of this nature, and whom I would not have abused with hard names and uncouth ex∣pressions; the effect of Ostentation, or sanctuary of Ignorance.


That this is 
Freestone
 appears by this, that 'tis insipid, gritty, scowrs, leaves a white colour like Chalk on the fingers after it, and is inclinable to an union into a stony consistence.


That this is not 
Calx vive,
 or any 
lapis Calca∣rius
 that holds affinity with it, I am much induced to believe from this,
 That neither the Insipid ma∣gistery, nor the more gritty powder, being no∣thing different but in fineness and colour, will, either alone or together, open the body of Sul∣phur, which is usual with 
Calx vive,
 as I have fully experimented by decocting two parts of the powders with one of Sulphur in a proportionable quantity of Water, which gave the water very lit∣tle alteration, and as little was precipitated. To make it further evident, I calcin'd a large Cruci∣ble of it with as strong a fire as could well be given, yet nothing quick or limy did appear, but dead and gritty ashes, which, mixed with water, neither made it white, nor created any disturbance. But more of this in what will follow.


That the Bath-water will coagulate milk, I con∣fess, but not as any other acid liquor doth; for this doth it sooner upon affusion, and makes a hard curd; that with the Bath-water, must boyl again and that pretty smartly, else a soft white Curd, as commonly it is, will not appear.


I also agree with the forementioned Author in this, That there is a considerable quantity of

 an
 
Alkalizate
 Salt, mixed with some other Salt in the body of the waters, and apparently distin∣guishable by the taste, as well in a 
Lixivium
 made of the Contents of the waters, as in both the Courser part, the result of the Evaporation, and also the purer part, when made white and refin'd; and that this 
Alkali
 doth constitute good part of the Saline matter, with which the Baths are im∣pregnated.


For I am apt to believe, that great part of the acidity is breath'd off in evaporation, either in the Bath or over the fire, or both ways together, in re∣gard very little of that taste is perceptible in the Salt extracted, but the Saline is easily discover'd. To the confirmation of which the acting also of acids on it may somewhat conduce, and the expe∣rience of many this Summer, who according to my directions have dissolved the Salt in the Bath-water to improve it, and have sensibly found an in∣crease in the other taste, but little or nothing at all in acidity.


Neither doth the 
Lixivium,
 though made very strong, nor the 
Oleum per deliquium
 dropt 20, 30, or 40 drops into a small proportion of water, tinge with Galls either purple or black.


I may also urge as an Argument for the evapo∣ration of 
Vitriol,
 the abundance of a yellow 
Ochre
 which ascends with the steam of the Bath, and is there chiefly to be found where the steam of the Water meets with any resistance, as I have noted elsewhere, which probably may be the 
Terra Vi∣trioli:


 And although 'tis not very easie to give the reason, why the 
Vitriol
 should not be as visible as the 
Ochre,
 or else make it more acid than we find it to be; yet if we conceive it to be in 
succo primiti∣vo, aut Solutis principiis,
 and there 
per halitum,
 and so 
per transitum
 too, it may better be conceived to go off, and not imbody as the other Salts do. Yet that all the Acidity is not breathed of, will appear from this, That the Bath-water cold will coagulate Milk. And what is more, the same water distill'd from a gallon to a pint, a fourth part of that pint will make a curd, when the distill'd water in the Receiver will do nothing at all: Which may pro∣bably proceed either from something Vitrioline, or rather from the acidity of Sulphur, in regard the Salt made white, in which is nothing wanting but the Sulphur, will not coagulate, as the water doth; whereas the browner Salt before calcination, dissol∣ved in Spring-water, will. So then, this 
Alkali
 is but one part of the fixt Salt, found in the bot∣tom of the Vessel after evaporation 
ad siccita∣tem.


For a further confirmation that an 
Alkali
 is contained in the waters, which, considering the Quantity that may continually be made evident both to light and taste, will scarcely be judged to need other demonstration. Yet 'tis observable, that the Cross-Bath having lately been kept drawn four or five daies, the Saline matter not meeting with water sufficient for its dissolution, was driven up in substance from the Springs, and again reverberated by the ambient air, and incrustated on the tops of the stones that were above the water in the bottom of the Bath, which gave me some divertisement to behold, and, on examination, appeared much 
alkalizate
 both by taste and ignition; some pun∣gency

 also I observ'd in it, which I rather judg'd to proceed from the acrimony of 
Nitre
 than 
Tartar,
 but the predominant taste was clearly 
alkalisate,
 which after the Nitrous parts were wasted, was less exceptionable in the remaining calx on the I∣ron after burning, in which the Alkalisate taste was most remarkable; not to mention its crepitation, and that some pungency also is observed in an 
Al∣kali
 it self.


To make it further evident that this accretion did probably arise from the 
Minera,
 I believe, not far distant, and was not engendred or contracted from some floating particles in the air derived elsewhere, and there settling by way of Magnetism, as some may imagine; 'tis further remarkable, That nei∣ther the stones under water, nor, what is more ma∣terial, any stone either of the Seats, or in the sides of the bottom of the Bath, remote from the water, had any Salt affixed to them, but only those, as I may so term it, that peeped out of the water, the tops of which only, as I said before, were incru∣stated. So that had a Magnetism any place here, the Salino-Nitrous particles must, I conceive, have lighted as well on the stones of the same nature hard by, as where they were, the reason of the thing being much the same. For a fuller Testimo∣ny of this, 
See Obs.
 88.


I acknowledge also this, That a great Fermen∣tation is produc'd by the affusion of Acids on the Sand and Mud of the Bath, (but do not tell you who first observ'd it) and a much less on the Scum; yet I must be excus'd in this, if I say, That I cannot conceive how this should arise from the action of Acids on a Saline matter, in regard it transcends my understanding to apprehend, how any Salt can possibly lie at the bottom of the Bath,

 either in the Sand or Mud, undissolved, and the waters no higher impregnated than we find they are.


'Tis a trivial Observation, that what is dissolva∣ble in any liquor, the pores of it will receive till it can hold no more; neither can I be yet perswaded, that there are just so many porosities in the Bath-water assigned for 
Vitriol,
 and the rest taken up with other Bodies, seeing the dissolution of 
Vitriol
 in the Bath-water afterwards, and the alteration in taste that happens thereupon, is sufficient to give me satisfaction to the contrary.


But to speak a little more to this, because the Author insists so much upon it; If any 
Vitriol
 be contained in the Sand, 'tis no absurdity to conceive that warm water may dissolve it and fetch it out; now, if half a pint of warm water be poured on an ounce of Sand, with what agitation you shall think convenient, and thus let stand infused ten or twelve hours, the water then decanted, and the sand dried and weighed again, there will be little wanting in the weight, abating for the 
Ochre,
 which ariseth first to the top, through the body of the wa∣ter, much like white 
Vitriol,
 afterwards precipitates and settles at the bottom on the Sand, and is hardly preserved in the decantation.


The Ebullition therefore, on the affusion of acid liquors on the Sand, I conceive doth arise from somewhat not Saline (if Taste be the judge) of which I shall treat more at large by and by: So that the Sand and Salt are no further of the same nature, than as fermentation may arise upon different Commixtures. How this may be reconcil'd to the Experiment I sometime made, of making Ink with Bath-water and Galls, and the Sand of the Bath, with other things which might have been

 no small encouragement to this opinion, I shall have occasion in part to declare hereafter, but more when I find my Answer is required.


As to the Salt, or rather, to use the new-made word, 
Calcineous
 kind of Earth, sticking to the bottom of the Gouts and passages, almost in all places where the water passeth, I was never yet so happy, though I have searched particularly to find any such thing. I confess I have heard it spoken, that five years ago, or thereabouts, there was a Gout out of order at the Cross-Bath, in the recti∣fying of which there was observed some such matter adhering to the Passage; but this, I sup∣pose, was as much above the Civilian's knowledge, as the Physicians, and whether a bare Tradition with some other uncertainties, to say no worse, be a sufficient foundation for this Hypothesis; 
That the Salt of the Bath doth much resemble a Vitrio∣lated Tartar, or Aluminous Salt,
 I shall leave those to determine that know the meaning of this ap∣proved Sentence, 
Nullum simile est idem.
 And seeing that the Author chooses to call this adherent matter by the name of a 
Chalky kind of substance
 rather than a 
Salt,
 I think I may not be much mistaken if I imagine it to be 
Freestone;
 concerning which I can say no more, till I shall happily meet with the like accretion.


That the Fermentation on the affusion of Acids on the Sand, ariseth chiefly from the acting of that liquor on 
Freestone
 in conjunction with some Te∣staceous particles, and not from any other Saline matter, seems evident from this; That whereas these parts with a blew Clay or Marle, Rubrica, Ochre, and Chrystal-pebbles, are clearly distin∣guishable by a Magnifying-glass in the Sand, when the a
i
 liquor hath done its worst, and the dif∣ference

 between the Sand and it, is amicably com∣pos'd, the remaining particles of Sand that will not ferment, are only some part of the Marle and Chrystals; And this I call 
Arena castrata,
 be∣cause, by this means, the Sand loses its fermenting vigour, though the stones do remain.


And whereas the Mud of the Bath, which seems chiefly to consist of this blew Clay or Marle, with something Sulphurous, will do the like; the Fermentation I conceive doth arise not so much, though something I confess, from the Earth it self, as the Testaceous particles with which it a∣bounds, in which Earth nothing Saline can be discovered to which the ebullition may make any pretence.


To this may be added; That the colour of the Acid liquor, after Saturation by the Sand, is altogether the same with what ariseth from the 
Freestone,
 both equally resembling the infusion of the filings of Steel; so that in this also there is an agreement.








CHAP. IV.
 Of 
Nitre
 in the Bath-Water.


THat 
Nitre
 is contained in the Body of the Waters is evident from this, that it may, by art, be extracted thence; and I may as well sus∣pect, and, if I please, believe, that I had not mo∣ny in my pocket, when I took out some silver for a necessary use; as when I see 
Nitre
 taken out of the Bath, say it was never there.


But the difficulty will be to prove the thing; now, I say, a 
Sceptick
 may doubt whether a Man be a Man, a Brute a Brute, or whether he makes use of his voice that asks the Question; but whe∣ther he be not the wiser man that takes these for granted, and not pragmatically contradicts the u∣nanimous consent of Judicious Writers, is easie to determine.


I confess it burns not as Common 
Salt-Peter
 doth, because it leaves a Calx behind it; but in that more resembles the 
Nitre
 of the Ancients, a pound of which being burnt will leave four ounces of Ashes:
 
Salt-Peter
 will leave none.


Neither doth it huff, nor melt altogether in a small quantity as 
Salt-Peter
 doth, on the account of an allay it receives from the mixture of ano∣ther Salt of an 
Alkalisate
 taste with some bitter∣ness withal, which remains on the Iron-plate after accension, and is little more than a fourth part of the Body; wherefore to deny the being of 
Nitre
 in the Salt, because 'tis not all so, is as absurd, to make a Linsey-woolsey Comparison, as to affirm, there is no Woollen in that sort of Vesture where

 Linnen is; or to say, That a man that is both Lawyer and Physician, hath nothing of Physick, because he hath something of Law.


But that 
Nitre
 is there, though not predominant, seems clear by the shooting in 
stiria's,
 which is concluded to be the proper form of that Salt; and although 
Tartar,
 and perhaps some other Salts, may somewhat resemble it; yet the diffe∣rence is easily perceptible by the sight, but more by the taste.


And now I am discoursing of this matter, I conceive the Author did not hit the mark, because he did not make the Bath-water shoot, in that he only mentions, 
the Salts that remain after evapora∣tion, which,
 he says, 
put on a Coal, burn not as Nitre doth.
 But the shootings so called, in a fi∣gure somewhat pyramidal, with many 
Columellae,
 or small pillars closely united, put on a red-hot Iron-plate, and so burnt, may alter the case, which I affirm to do, as I mention'd before.


And, what is not a little considerable, on the burning of six ounces of the Chrystals, in order to the Examination of the remaining Calx, the Nitrous parts of the shoots, being many in number, in a short time melted, and ran down both sides of the Iron-plate in a stream, consonant to 
Pliny
's ob∣servation of 
Nitre,
 which he affirms 
ingentibus ri∣vulis profluxisse.


To which I may add the bitter Taste apparent∣ly discoverable in the Salt, insomuch as to bring it within the verge of a suspicious appearance of a 
Sal amarum
 (if any such Salt there be distinct from 
Nitre
) which bitterness hath been accounted pro∣per to 
Nitre,
 and the waters impregnated there∣with,
 of which the Laborious 
Ballius
 gives this Testimony; 
Differunt etiam Nitrosae Aquae à Salsiae,

 quòd amarorem Nitrosae sapiunt potius quam Salsu∣ginem, & quo magis syncerum habent Nitrum eo sunt amariores.
 So that the bitter Calx mention∣ed before, seems, if any, to be the true Calx of 
Ni∣tre,
 and no small argument of its sincerity, although this taste be not perceptible in the water, in regard the 
Nitre
 is much diluted, and though sufficient for the purpose, not in so great a proportion there.


Also for a further satisfaction, if any Aluminous parts were contained in the Chrystal shoots, I ob∣serv'd, That the six ounces mentioned before, after they had hufft, melted and ran upon the Iron-plate, were in little more than one minute reduced to somewhat less than two ounces of a dead white 
Calx;
 which being again dissolved, filtred and e∣vaporated, gave me a plain 
Alkali
 with some re∣maining bitterness, which on the affusion of any acid would ferment, and being put to undergo the 
fire-ordeal
 Trial, would neither melt nor boyl, but crackle and leap.


To make a further Trial, whether what was bitter and suspiciously Nitrous might be separated from the 
Alkali;
 I dissolved and filtred the same Salt again, and evaporating it 
ad Cuticulam,
 it shot pa
tly into a white hoary down, penetrating cooling, and bitter, distinct from the 
Alkali
 with which before it was mixt, and partly into an in∣spissated juyce, which I judge to be the 
succus primitivus
 of 
Nitre,
 with the same qualities; both which put on the Plate did huff and melt as the former, leaving a small bitter Calx behind it, which, I believe, by frequent dissolutions, evaporations, and coagulations, would huff and melt all off, to the utter consumption of its whole body that way, I mean as far as Nitrous, the 
Alkali
 shewing

 it self proportionable in the Calx, after every trial.


And here I would not be mistaken, as if I pre∣tended to that grand 
Arcanum,
 the discovery of the Nitre of the Ancients, for I am well assured, that the description of that is very much different from what I am now discoursing of, being acknowledged by 
Pliny, Dioscorides,
 and others, to be of a rosie colour, and almost purple, which they used some∣times to dye that colour with (though some white there was also) and came nearer to the nature of or∣dinary Salt, whereupon 
Dioscorides
 in his 85th. Chapter hath these words, 
Nitre, and the froth of Nitre
 (or 
Aphronitrum) have the same virtues as Salt, and are burn't like that;
 yet because some measures may be taken from that, for the better un∣derstanding of what is now under the test, I thought fit in that regard at present, only to make this bare mention of it.


Neither can the contrary, I think, be evinced from the effects; for cooling, penetrating, and purg∣ing, are attributed to Nitre, and confessedly in the waters, the two former evident in allaying thirst, abating inflammations, and quickness of passage: the latter, as plain in its operation, for Nitre as well as Salt, is said both 
alvum laxare,
 and 
urinas ciere,
 and 
Baccius
 treating of nitrous waters, af∣firms, that they do 
vacuare, virtute Nitri, per al∣vum, & per urinas.
 The like may be said of the external effects by Bathing, which can no way pre∣judice the being of Nitre there.


Besides, This way of arguing from the effects is but 
à posteriori,
 and less significant where there is matter of fact, which may be useful in the dark; but if it thwart with a plain experiment, must yield; for, 
Quid verba audiam, cum videam facta?
 And

 whoever shall undertake a business of this nature may consider, that the best judgment to be made of the effects, is from a constant observation of particu∣lars on the place, which cannot be conceived to be so well done at a distance, but must require, besides some time, a good attendance, as well as practice here. But to return.


These 
Stiriae,
 or Needles, I observed in the wa∣ter of all the Baths, yet in a different shape and consistence; for the King's Bath-water after a full imbibition of the Salt dissolved, and a strong Lixi∣vium thence procured, evaporated 
ad Cuticulam,
 and set in a cool place, shot from the inside of the evaporating Glass into its Cavity, into strong, and compacted Needles, with that strength, that it took some of the Common Salt with it, which ap∣peared in the Nitrous shoots, something like the stars in a clear sky, but white, and in a Cubical form, in perfect squares, or Tessera's distinct from the body of the Nitrous shoots, with which the Nitre was studded, being impacted into it.


The Cross Bath shot in smaller Needles, but long∣er and very thin, in great number, directly from the bottom of the glass, very close together, but distinct each from other, much like the Finnow, or hairy excrescence, that oftentimes ariseth from cor∣rupted matter, which on the least violence offer'd would break, and not endure any kind of resist∣ance.


The Hot Bath gave me more trouble to bring it to shoot, insomuch as being frustrated in two or three Experiments, I had almost concluded there was nothing Nitrous there, but the thing after∣wards succeeding, I had on a small quantity of the Salt dissolved, and the Lixivium evaporated ac∣cording to Art, five, or six single Stiria's, bigger,







engraved figure


Fig I






engraved figure


Fig II






engraved figure


Fig III






engraved figure


Fig IV






engraved figure


Fig V






engraved figure


Fig IV






engraved figure


Fig VI






engraved figure


Fig VII






engraved figure


Fig VI








 and stronger, though not so long, as those I observ∣ed in the water of the Cross Bath, which gave me satisfaction as to that Bath also, in the particular thing of Nitre now under debate. Since which time on another Experiment, I had as firm and com∣pacted Needles from the Hot Bath, as I had formerly from the King's, both which Baths shoot much alike, and different from the Cross.


I shall not lay any great stress on these observati∣ons, in relation to the difference between the three Baths mentioned before, in regard it must be a bu∣siness of greater experience, and more exact obser∣vation of many Circumstances, to state that affair as it ought to be, and is, in good part done in the Miscellaneous Observations hereunto annex'd; only this use I may safely make of them, to confirm what I had before asserted, That there is Nitre dis∣solved in the Water of all the Baths of 
Bathe.
 And if this be not the thing that hath hitherto been de∣scribed under that name, by the most approved Writers, I presume we may afterwards take it for a Chimerical notion, that hath no foundation in any work of Nature, but owes its subsistence to a phantastical brain.


To this may be further added; That the 
Liqua∣men,
 or 
oleum per deliquium,
 being closely stopt, and but heated by the fire, presently, as soon as cold, concretes into a Nitrous form; so that we need not call in the secret, and invisible assistance of the external air, to make a Metamorphosis almost as strange as those mentioned by the Poet, when we have clear, and unalterable principles of Nature, and innate propensities, and disposition in matter it self, with a divine impression, that will serve the turn.




In the rear of these Philosophical Arguments, I shall offer one (supernumerary) Grammatical, which is this; That the Salt I call Nitrous, either in the Sun, or by Candle-light, shines and sparkles very much, consonant to the Notation of the word 
Nitrum,
 which probably, may not be so much a Grecian, as the great Etymologist would have it, and derived 
 from its scouring, and absterging nature; as a Latinist, and so called 
à Ni∣tendo;
 because it gives a greater lustre than any other Salt doth.






CHAP. V.
 Of Sulphur in the Bath water.


AS to Sulphur, the next thing to be insisted on, as contained in the Waters, I conceive that many that have endeavoured to avoid 
Charybdis,
 have fallen into 
Scylla,
 and because the ancient Au∣thors have asserted that Sulphur was undoubtedly concern'd in all Baths, they will affirm there is none in any; but whoever builds a fabrick on this foundation, and certainly concludes, that Sulphur is not in the Bath-waters, because it cannot be disco∣ver'd by precipitation, I would have forbear a posi∣tive determination on a negative experiment, till I see Vitriol precipitated in substance from the King's Bath-water, which is acknowledg'd to be there. And if I cannot light on an apt precipitater, which every way opposeth the particles to be so discover'd, and have some other reasons to incline me to the contrary, I should not be so fond of my own con∣ceit,

 as to be prevail'd upon by a comparative in∣stance of unslak't Lime, to wipe my own Nose, and put out my Eyes, which as far as they can, assure me to the contrary.


I shall refer the Reader to what is mention'd be∣fore concerning the Colour and Smell, in calcining the Contents of the Bath-water in general, and till I shall meet with something that will both burn blew, and give a fetid smell, that is not Sulphur, I shall so esteem that, till ascertain'd of the con∣trary.


I may further add, That the Sulphur is proba∣bly incorporated with the Salt, as appears by its passing with it into the Lixivium, and through pa∣pers in filtration, and not discoverable but by a strong fire, by which the body of the Salt is open'd, and a solution of the Continuum made, in order to fusion; so that if you do not precipitate both, you can precipitate neither, unless a separation of the Sulphur from the Salt be made, which, I presume, is not easie to be done, without the help of fire, by which the Sulphur is consum'd: so that the com∣parative instance of unslak't Lime is little to the pur∣pose; where the Sulphur is separated, decocted, and precipitated; here not so, being not apart, but residing in a Saline-Sulphureous Salt, a piece of whose Body, as we now have it, it seems to be.


Moreover, Whereas he collects from the Bath-waters not ringing Silver yellow, but rather black, that there is no Sulphur contained in the same; I may retort, and that very justly, this as an argu∣ment to assert it. For the proper colour that Sul∣phur dissolved gives to Silver is not so much yellow as black, as may be e
sily discerned by putting any piece of Silver, but a very little while, into the de∣coction

 of Sulphur made in the water of unslak't Lime, which gives as near the colour of the Silver I have caused to lye some time near the Springs of the Bath, as may be, so that the difference is not discernable; not to mention that some yellowness is observed on the Silver tinged by the Bath.


Neither am I fully satisfied that the only, or in∣deed the best, precipitator of Sulphur is an acid; for on the decoction of that Mineral in the water of quick Lime (the Lixivium, though with much Sulphur, not succeeding) and very sudden change, on the affusion of Spirit of Vitriol, into a milky, and much whiter Consistence, the Liquor after∣wards settled, and precipitated not as Sulphur, but Lime-stone; so that the Sulphur, although it gave a greater fetid smell, yet was not so apparently pre∣cipitated, as by Oyl of Tartar in another glass, which gave the Sulphur in proper colour precipita∣ted, without a permanent lacteous opacity. Where∣upon I made this observation, as to the present ex∣periment, That although acids do not precipitate of this lapideous matter alone, yet if in the embraces a strong sulphurous commixture, they will, and the Lime-stone is most properly precipitated by an acid, if Sulphur be decocted with it; whereas the Body of Sulphur, decocted as before, is best precipitated by a fixt Salt, the Sulphur appearing without white∣ness, in its own garb, though not so fetid as on the affusion of an acid.


It may be also noted that 
S. Closseus,
 in his pre∣paration of 
Lac Sulphuris,
 in which the body of Sulphur is open'd with 
Calx Vive,
 directs the Sul∣phur to be precipitated with Urine.


The occasion of this mistake (seeing he pretends to give the reason of another, concerning an expe∣riment of a like nature) I conceive to be, That

 the white matter precipitated on the affusion of any acid, was, without much examination, reputed wholly sulphurous, as appears from these words; 
For if Sulphur be boyled in the water of unslak't Lime, the water becomes white, not by the affusion of a fixt Salt, as before, but of an acid: so that fixt Salts may dissolve Sulphur but not precipitate it.
 Where∣as the whiteness ariseth much from the mixture of the Lime-stone, as appears by the open confession of what is precipitated, if standing some time, fil∣ter'd, and brought to the test by fire, where the Lime-stone is discover'd, the Sulphur being rather disturb'd than precipitated by the acid liquor, which makes it give a greater fetor, but never kindly pre∣cipitates; the other precipitation with oyl of Tar∣tar, which here, contrary to its wonted course, joyns with the Lime-stone, which it usually preci∣pitates, and opposeth the Sulphur, is very apparent, and sulphurous beyond contradiction.


I am not ignorant, that in the preparation of 
Lac Sulphuris
 mentioned before, Sulphur also is precipitated by an acid, but 
that fixt Salts should dissolve Sulphur, but not precipitate it,
 is what I said I was not so fully satisfied in. Not to mention that the matter precipitated by a fixt Salt is white on the first affusion, though the whiteness be not so permanent, the Sulphur in a short time precipita∣ting in proper colour.


Besides, If Sulphur be boyled in the Bath-wa∣ter, and doth not tinge it with a yellow colour, I presume, it cannot thence be argu'd that there is no Brimstone there, for the colour of the water in which Sulphur is dissolved, is not so much yellow as Lixiviate, or reddish; and therefore 
Schroder
 gives this direction for the making that preparation of Sulphur mentioned before, that after the Sul∣phur

 and Tartar are mixed, they ought to boyl, 
donec fere omne Sulphur solutum sit, liquor{que} rubeus appareat;
 though some addition I confess it may have from the Tartar. Yet 
Closseus,
 in his way of making that preparation where there is no Salt of Tartar, but, instead of that quick-Lime, which gives no such tincture of it self, hath this Note; 
Coque, donec partes tres aquae sint consumptae, ruborem∣que contraxerit instar sanguinis, ex Sulphure disso∣luto.


I therefore think it no ill advice here, that they that are so much concern'd to give the reason of the mistakes of others, would a little mind to rectifie their own, and not be an 
Argus
 abroad, but a Mole at home.


I do also acknowledg, that I believe that the white Magistery or in-palpable Powder, precipita∣ted from the Bath-water on the affusion of Salt of Tartar, or any other analogous, or agreeable Salt, is not Sulphurous, much less Aluminous; but ra∣ther Stony, of a lapideous substance, the result of an intimate Commixture, with the body of the Wa∣ters, which may have no small influence on their fer∣mentation, as may hereafter be more fully consi∣der'd.


And as to what reflects on that famous Practitio∣ner, the Ingenious and Learned Dr. 
Willis,
 I shall, at present, say no more than this, That ob∣serving one so pedantickly drest up in his own clothes, he ought not to be affrighted with his own shape; only this may be further noted, That where∣as Dr. 
Willis
 had desired of me the exacter trial of that Experiment of decocting Sulphur and An∣timony in the Bath-water, I well remember I re∣turn'd him something of both that was precipita∣ted after a double filtration, and the decoction per∣formed

 in a Vessel altogether free from the season of any fixt Salt.


Yet I must acknowledg, that what was precipi∣tated was very inconsiderable to what was decoct∣ed, and not so much as to make much alteration in the colour of the water; which may deserve their consideration wh
 affirm, a Lime-Chalk Stone, or 
Lapis calcarius,
 to be contained in the Waters, and yet deny them to dissolve Sulphur, and again affirm, that Sulphur is dissolved in the water of Lime.


The same alteration of the water into a turbid milky appearance, and the precipitation by oyl of Tartar, of an insipid powder, mentioned before, was also observed in the Spaw at 
Scarborough,
 and Sulphur-Well at 
Knaresbrough,
 by 
William Simpson
 Doctor in Physick, as appears from several places in his 
Hydrologia Chymica,
 and Hydrological Essays, which he there asserts to be Aluminous, and page 118. of the latter Treatise saith; 
By the addition of Oyl of Tartar this Sulphur-water turns white, and that because it is impregnated with a small quantity of a Simple natural Alom Salt.
 How far Alom is concerned in that water, I shall not here dispute, but leave it to the Learned Dr. 
Wittie,
 whose con∣cern it is: only thus much I can say, that the like 
Phaenomenon
 appearing in these waters, what is thus precipitated here is not Aluminous, as hath been acknowledged by many eminent Physitians, who have seen some quantity of the precipitated powder; and was particularly noted by the ever Honoured Sir 
Charles Scarbrough,
 this Summer, here.


But to prevent any mis-understanding, I must acknowledg that this assertion stands on this founda∣tion, That the white powder precipitated by oyl of Tartar from the Waters, is the same with the finer

 sort of what I had, in greater quantities precipita∣ted spontaneously 
per decubitum,
 on the evaporati∣on of many Hogsheads of the Water, and is now to be seen, though not altogether so white nor fine, having undergone many alterations, which being decocted in Spring-water, the water filter'd will precipitate with oyl of Tartar, as the Bath-water doth; yet if any one shall think fit to deem this Saline, and perhaps, Aluminous; he ought to con∣sider, how any Salt can so soon be devested of the essential property of what is saline, as to be rendred perfectly insipid, when saline at first: though I do not absolutely deny, but that we may attribute, though somewhat Catachrestically, the name of Salt, to something not saline, communicating with it in some other of its properties.


I know very well that Alom dissolved in Spring-water, the Water filter'd and the Salt precipitated with oyl of Tartar, will be impaired much in its saline taste; yet so much of the sowrness, and stip∣ticity will remain, as will be sufficient to discover its nature.








CHAP. VI.
 Of Vitriol in the Bath-water.


TO pass by the Reason of the Common Arti∣fice of tinging Silver at the Bath, what con∣cerns the Scum, and Sal Armoniack, as of no great moment; Vitriol is, by Him, denied to be in the Cross and Hot Bath, because Galls beaten and in∣fused in these Waters, will never turn them purple nor black, which is confessed would certainly be, if these Waters had Vitriol in them.


How true this is, a slight Experiment will soon evince, and if the Author had ever made trial, his Galls or Sight, must be worse than mine, if a pur∣ple colour did not appear.


To which may be added the Experience and Te∣stimony of my Honoured and Learned Friends Sir 
Edward Greaves,
 and Dr. 
Nat. Highmore,
 who have both made trial, and found the Waters turn. With the former of whom I lately further observ'd, that when we had been sufficiently satisfied in the turn∣ing colour of the Hot Bath Pump-water, with less than half a pint of Water and but two grains of Galls, and had thrown away the Water and Galls, in order to the trial of something else, more of the same Water, though much cooler than when brought at first, being powred into the same glass, turn'd colour also, receiving a brisk light purple, from the remaining particles of the former infusion about the glass, though nothing of the Galls did appear at all.




'Tis also confirm'd by this, That whereas the Leaves of Oak make little or no alteration in the Water of the King's Bath, the Chips, or inner Bark of the same make rather a better purple in the Water of all the Baths, than the Galls; only the King's Bath tingeth deeper than the other two, as in all Experiments of this nature, it appears to do. The like also will happen on the Seeds of Sumach contus'd and infus'd, but with Pomegranate Flow∣ers most apparently, so that the Water of any of the Baths affused hot on that, will presently turn purple; though the colour doth not keep so long in strength, as that which ariseth from the Oaken Chips.


These things consider'd, I conceive it no injury to the King's Bath to allow it a little Vitriol, though manifestly derogatory to the other two to deny it, since they make their claim by the same evi∣dence, and that Judg will hardly free himself from the censure of injustice and partiality, that will not hear a poor mans Tale, but suffers an honest Cause that hath weak lungs and a weaker purse to be lost, on the louder clamours of more importunate addresses.


The truth of this Experiment being thus far call'd in question, I am the more afraid of the cer∣tainty of some others; for I remember an old Story of Mr. 
Thief
 in the University, that was wont to be very busie in some Booksellers Shops, and entred in the Shop-Book under that name, whoever there∣fore was taken in the fact but one time, was oblig'd to quit the whole score, on this account, That he that was really convicted once, might commit the same thing five, ten, or twenty times before, and therefore he the man from whom all was re∣quir'd.




The Metallick Mineral, so called, hath nothing Metallick contained in it; and if this be so easily, by the air, converted into Vitriol, 'tis very strange we have not yet had any Houses of Vitriol, which surely have endur'd the air long enough to experi∣ence a Transmutation.


As for the Sand breaking out with the Springs in which Vitriol is supposed to lye undissolv'd, as was mentioned before, if there were no better ar∣guments for Vitriol than this, I shall not stick to say, that he that depends on this, builds at best but on a sandy foundation.


That the purple colour appearing from the mix∣ture of the Sand of the Bath, with the infusion of Galls, may not arise from the tincture of Vitriol, seems more than probable by this Experiment. I have formerly declared, that the Sand of the Bath may be so far corroded with an acid Menstruum, as not to ferment any longer, but lye quiet in the bot∣tom of the glass without any motion at all; now, this Sand on the affusion of Common Water gave an excellent purple, when 'tis not likely that any thing saline should remain, after so many washings and re∣affusions, as are requisite to reduce the Sand to that condition. Moreover 'tis considerable, the infusion was not acid, nor any way alter'd from its common tast. But this Experiment I made but once, and had not an opportunity of repeating it again.


'Tis likewise more observable, That after some hours standing, a purple floccous matter did sponta∣neously precipitate, upon which there being a clear separation, the Water return'd to its pristine colour, and the floccous matter subsided in the bottom of the glass, which being filter'd 
per Chartam,
 and exa∣min'd, was perfectly insipid, and not at all Vitrio∣line.




Besides, On the Calcination of half a pound of the Sand, when the Crucible was as red and the Sand as hot as usually it is when the Salts do run, the Sand powred out glowing hot, nothing saline was observ'd to concrete among it, which it would certainly do, if any fusible Salt were there, as in other Calcinations it appears to do.


I therefore rather judg it to proceed from an in∣sipid but astringent Ochre, such as is mentioned by 
Fallopius,
 which lying some time in the open air, becomes more sowr than when taken out of the Bath, which may occasion the difference between the Sand newly taken, and that which is kept some time; the Ochre it self infus'd making the liquor much blacker after some standing, as is more fully declared in the following Chapter.








CHAP. VII.
 Containing a farther Proof and Illustration of the former particulars.


TO make this a little clearer; 'Tis an easie Ex∣periment to powr warm water on the Sand, in what proportion you please, which if kept some time will alter the water in which it is infus'd, into a yellowish or amber colour: when the water is impregnated very well, mix some of this with the infusion of Galls, and presently an atropurpureous colour will appear, in which if you infuse white paper but a very little while, you will quickly be satisfied what colour it will tinge. Now, if this infusion be permitted to cool, the Ochre will preci∣pitate, leaving the water somewhat yellower than in it self it is, to which it also communicates a harsh tast, and at last settles on the top of the Sand, from which it may be separated by decantation. The contrary happens to the Sand newly taken, in which the Ochre clogg'd with too much moisture cannot shew it self, as when older, and more dry. So that I see no reason or necessity, from this 
Phaeno∣menon,
 to assert the existence of Vitriol in the Sand of the Bath, otherwise than as it hath relation to this astringent Ochre, which I do believe receives this tinging property by the impression of Vitriol, this being in all probability, as is noted elsewhere, the 
Terra Vitrioli,
 or Earth, in which the Vitriol is contain'd before exhalation; as I conceive, the Marl or Mud is the bed of Sulphur, or the 
Terra,
 to which that Mineral doth more nearly ad∣here.




And that 'tis this yellow matter that occasions the alteration, may be further evident from this; That after the first decanting, if the Ochre be powred all off, and warm water affused on the Sand again, and that infusion mixed with the infu∣sion of Galls, no change of colour will ensue. To which may be added, that the Ochre it self kept some time, and infused in the decoction of Galls, will, after lying a pretty while, turn that Liquor into a much blacker appearance.


I shall end this dispute with the observation of one,
 who affirms, That Artificial Alom will not with Galls strike a purple colour, but the Natural Alom with its inbred Ochre, will; ascribing more to the Ochre than the Alom. So that this may be the end of that Controversie about Alom and Galls tinging Water purple, That Alom, as Alom, doth not tinge, but as in conjunction with this inbred Ochre, or as Vitrioline; for between Vitriol and Alom there are many resemblances, and a worthy Author hath observed,
 that the Basis of Vitriol is Alom, both these being much alike, but that Vitri∣ol hath a garb from Copper or Iron, which in the Ochre gives the tinging quality, the Alom, as di∣stinct from Vitriol, contributing nothing at all.


If any shall affirm this Ochre to be Vitrioline, I have not deny'd it, having formerly supposed it might be 
Terra Vitrioli;
 but what I here question is, whether any Vitrioline saline body, different from the Ochre, be contained in the Sand, or can lye undissolved there.


'Tis very remarkable what is said, That if the Sand of the Bath, impregnated with an acid Li∣quor, be put into the infusion of Galls, the Liquor acquires an atropurpureous colour; and no wonder, since the acid Liquor may do much alone, as may

 be seen in the mixture of Vinegar, with the deco∣ction or infusion of Galls, which supplying in some measure the place of Vitriol, by a kind of analogy inclines the infusion to an inky complexion.


And as for the Metallick Mineral contained in the Sand, which on the affusion and corrosion of an acid Menstruum, will in part be converted into Vi∣triol, I have said before that 'tis nothing else but a Common Freestone, a Mineral, I confess, but how far Metallick, I leave to the judgment of the men of that Art.


For a partial satisfaction in this thing; if the sharpest Vinegar be powred on the Sand in one glass, and on Freestone in another, the same fermentation will appear for the present, and the same blewish colour of the infusion afterwards upon Corrosion; so that it much resembles the colour and smell of the saturated Liquor, on the affusion of Vinegar on the filings of Iron. But whether this be a suffici∣ent argument to dub it Metallick, I shall be better satisfied, when I am convinced of this, That Truth hath never suffer'd by meer Resemblances.


But that it may appear that I desire to proceed in this Affair with all ingenuity and freedom from animosity, unless what will seem necessary to disco∣ver truth; I shall here recite a Passage out of Dr. 
Wittie
's Answer to 
Hydrologia Chymica,
 leaving how far it may be applicable to the saline Stiria's mentioned before, to the judicious Reader and further observation.


The Candid Doctor, 
pag.
 63. among other Pre∣parations out of the Minerals of the Spaw at 
Scar∣brough,
 made by Mr. 
Sam. Johnston,
 a Physician at 
Beverly,
 and by him communicated to the Doctor, m
kes mention of 
an Essential Salt, which Mr.
 Johnston 
calls
 Anomalous, 
or
 sui generis, 
as differ∣ing

 much from the factitious or natural kinds of Alom, Vitriol, or Nitre, though in some properties it agree with each of them.


The Reason of this Scruple, he adds, is this, which
 Paracelsus 
hath clearly made out, That here they are not corporally, but
 
percolated, not perfect in their several kinds, but
 in suo primitivo, 
not single, but all mixed together, which as yet I could never attain to separate. And therefore this Salt is nothing so acid as Vitriol, nor stiptick as Alom, nor inflammable as Nitre, notwithstanding it doth shoot in Stiria's. I'le only add this, That they are all here, though
 in fra∣ctis, imminutis, & debilitatis viribus, 
and the vir∣tues of the Waters to be judged from them all.


To which I shall only subjoyn this Remarque, That the Nitre, undoubtedly here, being allay'd with the mixture of some other Salts, could not be expected to do altogether as sincere Nitre doth, and the best way, I conceive, to discover the distinct natures in this 
Compositum,
 had been to have at∣tempted a separation by frequent Calcinations, Dis∣solutions, and Coagulations, which, if done, I much admire the several Salts did not appear in proper form, as they did in the anomalous Salt of these Waters, subjected to the same way of trial: and then I somewhat question, whether Alom would have deserved so much favour, as the Doctor's good nature hath allow'd it here.


I shall forbear, at present, to trace this Author or follow his track any further, as also to examine his Opinion, concerning the Cause of the Heat of the Bath-waters, till my Treatise, in the same lan∣guage he hath written in, be presented to the World; only thus much I shall say now, That I conceive an 
Hypothesis
 founded, though not on a subterranean 
ire, yet on things under ground, may probably

 give more satisfaction than some airy notions, con∣sidering especially, that nothing external to the Body of the Earth, can in reason be supposed capable of reaching these Waters, but rather somewhat inclu∣ded in its own Bowels, which may be near at hand, of an active, even, and durable nature; when, to say no more, nothing is more variable than the air, nor unconstant than rain.


I shall also distinguish the whole bulk of what relates to the Body of the Waters, into things Sa∣line, and 
non
-Saline: the former I shall endeavour to evince to be 
Nitre, Common Salt,
 and 
Vitriol;
 the latter, to be partly unctuous, as 
Bitumen
 and 
Sulphur;
 partly gritty, as 
Freestone;
 and partly earthy, as 
Marl
 and 
Ochre.
 I shall likewise exa∣mine what pretences Alom can make, and further discourse of the difference between that and Vitri∣ol: and lastly, enquire into the competition of 
Lapis Calcarius
 with Freestone; so that the Bath-water will have relation to, or comprehend in its largest extent, eight distinct Substances, at least ac∣cording to my Observations, which will be the bu∣siness, God willing, of the first Book of my Trea∣tise 
De Thermis Bathoniensibus,
 viz. 
de Aquarum Principiis, una cum earundem appendiculis, nimi∣rum, Arena, sive Sabulo, Luto, & supernatante uligine, sive Spumâ.
 The second Book shall treat 
De Aquarum Calore.
 The third 
De usu Thermarum; ubi de modo Balneandi; de Aquarum potatione; de Antliatione jam in usu loco dulciae, aut Stillicidii Veterum; de usu Luti,
 &c. The fourth and last Book, I intend, shall be 
De Aquarum Virtutibus, & Nocumentis, observationibus quibusdam rarioribus, quantum res ipsa patitur confirmatis:
 Which Emo∣luments and Inconveniences shall be both evidently deduced from the precedent Principles, the one re∣commended,

 the other provided against. But this will require some time; for I am willing to prevent that fault in my self, which I find in another, and would not have it justly said of me, 
Canis festinans coecos parit Catulos.






CHAP. VIII.
 Being a Letter formerly written to Sir 
Edward Greaves.




I Know you (as well as other Ingenious and In∣quisitive Persons) are somewhat concern'd, and desirous to understand, what Success my late En∣quiries have had into one of the Grand Mysteries of Nature, I mean, the BATHS of this Ci∣ty: considering especially that you were pleased the last Summer to afford me the Honour of your Com∣pany and particular Acquaintance, and to express a more than ordinary desire of my proceeding in this Thing.


Concerning which I must tell you, That as I have not been wanting, either to Pains or Pay, in my Proceedings hitherto; so I have had the good Hap (which hath been my Encouragement) to meet with many considerable Discoveries. And though the main Body of the Matter collected touching this Affair, be not yet ripe for the Laun∣cet, but will require a longer time to digest; yet some Observations I shall now communicate, which will give a little satisfaction to an earnest desire, and make, in some measure, appear that we have been

 lame and defective hitherto in a rational Account and true Understanding of the Nature of these Waters.


It hath been indeed the ill fortune of these Baths, (which I may truly say are as good if not better than any Baths in the world) to lie a long time in obscu∣rity, and not so much as to be mentioned among the Baths of 
Europe
 by any forreign Writer, till about the Year 1570. when that Excellent Person Sir 
Edward Carne,
 sent Ambassadour by Queen 
Eliza∣beth
 to Pope 
Julius
 the Third, and 
Paul
 the Fourth, made some Relation of them to that famous Wri∣ter 
Andreas Baccius,
 then at 
Rome,
 and writing his elaborate Book 
de Thermis,
 into which he hath in∣serted them, upon his Relation, 
Lib.
 4. 
Cap.
 13. (though somewhat improperly) among Sulphurous Baths.


About the same time also one 
John Jones,
 an ho∣nest 
Cambro-Britan,
 frequenting the Baths for Pra∣ctice, composed a little Treatise of them, which he calls 
Baths Aid,
 in which are some things not con∣temptible, though in a plain Countrey dress, and which might satisfie and gratifie the Appetite of those times, which fed more heartily and healthily too, on good Beef and Bag-Pudding, than we do now upon Kickshaws and Haut-gusts; yet no∣thing of the true Nature is there discovered, only, as almost in all former Writers of Baths, chiefly Ca∣tholick, a strong Stench of Sulphur, and a great ado about a Subterranean Fire, a fit resemblance of Hell, at least of Purgatory.


Our Countrey-man Dr. 
William Turner,
 I con∣fess, was more particularly concern'd to give a bet∣ter account, than I find is done in his Discourse of English, German, and Italian Baths: And whether want of opportunity, or any other impediment was

 in cause, I know not; but I find that at this stay they stood till the Famous Dr. 
Jorden
 took Pen in Hand, about the Year 1630. To whom I thought fit to make some Additions, at my first entrance on this Place, some five Years since. And although that Learned and Candid Physician had 
chiefly and more especially an intent to enlarge the Knowledg of our Baths in
 Somerset-shire, (as he declares to my Lord 
Cottington,
 in his Dedicatory Epistle) and hath per∣formed more than any Man before him, yet what was first in Intention, was last in Execution; and how small a part of that Treatise is spent upon this Subject, how short he is in some Material Points, and what Objections may be framed against his Opi∣nion, I may sometime or other, with due Respect, more largely treat of; and for the present shall here, with good 
Sem
 and 
Japhet,
 cast a Garment over the Nakedness of this my Father.


What hath been done since (except in some par∣ticular pieces of other Tracts, to the Authors of which the Baths are also indebted for their kindness and good will) is not worth the mentioning. The old saying's true, 
Little Dogs must piss,
 and what is writ upon an Ale-bench claims the greater affinity to the Pipe and the Candle; especially if the best Wine at the Feast (which is usually kept till last) be but a silly Story of 
Tom Coriat,
 and an old 
Taun∣ton
 Ballad new vampt, abusing the dead Ghosts of 
Lud, Hudibras
 and 
Bladud,
 with a Nonsensico-Prag∣matical, Anticruzado-Orientado-Rhodomontado-Untruth-Le Grand, which we Westerly Moderns, call a GROTELYE, into the Bargain. A pretty Artifice in Rhetorick, to cry a thing up, and besmear, and 
shed plentifully
 on the Founder 
Ordure, both Humane and Belluine.






Rode Caper, vitem,
 
tamen hic cúm stabis ad aras


In tua quod fundi cornua possit, erit.






Goat, Bark the Vine; yet juyce enough will rise


To drench thy Head, when made a Sacrifice.




I have Industriously omitted Dr. 
Johnson,
 Dr. 
Venner,
 and some others, in regard it would be improper here to Write more Historically. I shall therefore now let you know not so much what hath been done by others, as what further discoveries have been made by my endeavours, assisted by the careful Pains of Mr. 
Henry Moor
 an expert Apothe∣cary and Chymist of this City.


And here at first I cannot but take notice how that opinion hath so much prevailed as to be ac∣counted Orthodox, and not only received by Tra∣dition as certain, but Printed as such, that the Body of the Waters is so jejune and empty, as to afford little or nothing at all whereby to make a discovery of its Nature, and that what impregnates the Baths is not Substantially, Materially or Corporally there, but potentially, virtually and formally, or to use the Author's own words, 
,
 with much more canting after this manner, in a small discourse in Latin written by an Itinerant Exotick; when as a slight operation will soon evince it, though white and transparent of it self, being taken imme∣diately from the Pump, to contain a considerable quantity of a Dusky, Gritty, and Saline Matter, with many transparent Particles intermixed with it, to the proportion, (as near as I can calculate) of two drams to a gallon of the Water. And this I can ascertain, having had several ounces of it done in Earth, Iron, Bell-metal, and Glass, and have

 at this time three or four ounces by me, untoucht, beside what I have made use of in other Experi∣ments.


But the thing I shall more Peculiarly insist on, at this present, is, That by God's blessing on my In∣dustrious Search, I suppose I have lighted on the main Constituent of the Virtues of the Bath, in which chiefly resides what benefit can be expected from the use of these Waters, and lodgeth in a Sa∣line substance, in a very small proportion to the Bo∣dy of the Waters; so that as they are now, not much more than forty grains is contained in a Gallon, insomuch that this little Soul, as I may so term it, is almost lost in so Gigantick a Body, and cannot animate it with that vigour and activity as may be rationally expected, were a greater quantity of the Salt contained in a less proportion of the Water. The Remainder, which is not Saline, being, as I judg, two Parts of Three of the Bulk of the con∣tents, is partly Whitish, Gritty, and of a Lapide∣ous Nature, concreting of it self, into a stony con∣sistence not easily dissolvable; partly more Light, and Dirty, resembling Clay, or Marle, and disco∣vers it self by an apparent separation from the Sa∣line and Gritty part mentioned before.


Now the chief Virtue of the Bath, as I conceive, consisting in the Salts, which appear by undeniable Experiments, to be Nitrous, and I believe Vitrio∣line (Bitumen and Sulphur being not Primarily, as these Salts, but Secondarily concern'd) and no small proportion of other things blended with it, the best way to make it most serviceable I conceived to be, to free it from those incumbrances and al∣lays it hath from the other Ingredients, and prepare it as exactly as may be performed by Art, for the benefit of those especially who are willing to Drink

 the Waters with greater success in a lesser quantity; which they may now do, and have more of the virtue of the Waters in a quart, three pints, or a pottle, than they formerly had in two or three Gallons, did they drink so much; which will be, besides other Conveniencies, a great relief to the Stomach, which certainly must be relaxed, and the Tone of it injured by that vast quantity of Water which is usually taken, diluting its ferment over∣much, and distending its Membranes beyond all the bounds of a reasonable Capacity.


Besides, What is separated only by an artificial Extraction will better unite again, and mix with the Waters, as much more familiar, than the ex∣traneous Salts of 
Sal Prunella,
 Cream of Tartar, 
&c.
 which are usually dissolved and drunk with the Waters; so that a great part of the Operation may be ascribed to that; and the Waters being, as we say, between two Stools, that of it self, and the dissolvent in it, hath not attained to that degree of Reputation as they have deserved, and may be pro∣cured with much more advantage, if nothing but the same be spent upon the same, a way of Improve∣ment altogether equally beneficial to Fluids and So∣lids, to the wet as to the dry.


Again, Whereas it is a custom here as in all other places of the like Nature, when Persons are not willing, or have not conveniences to come to the Fountain Head, to send for the Waters to the pla∣ces of their Residence, not thinking it much material whether 
Mahomet
 go to the Mountain, or the Moun∣tain come to him, whereby the Virtue of the Wa∣ters is much impaired, if not stopped and sealed up with very great care; this defect may in good part be supplyed by the addition of a Quantity of the same Ingredients, which may repair the loss that

 hath been sustained by Evaporation in the Carri∣age, or other way of damage, and restore it again, as near as may be, to its pristine Virtue, and genuine advantage. Not to mention, that if need require, and the poorer sort cannot procure or pay the Fraight for the Waters, they may take a short∣er course, by mixing the Salt, which they may have at reasonable Rates, with Spring-Water, brought to a proportionable degree of heat at home, and expect more advantage, for ought I know, than those that drink the Waters themselves at so great a distance.


And because I am now fallen on this Subject, I shall crave leave to remind you of what you well enough understand already, that not only 
Dulcius
 but 
Ʋtilius ex ipso Fonte, &c.
 and Waters especially impregnated with volatile Spirits, such as most acid are, and peculiarly Vitrioline, to avoid the incon∣venience and expence, not so much of Money as Virtue, in the Carriage, must be drank on the place where they are, which, in some kind resembling Children, that must live by sucking, if once remov∣ed from their Mother, or Nurse, by degrees dwin∣dle away, and at last die.


It is observable in these Waters, that with four Grains of Galls injected into a Pint Glass of Water, or the Water poured on it, it immediately turns of a purple Colour, which in short time after, as the Water cools, abates much of its vividity, and be∣comes more faint: if the Waters be suffered to cool, and be quite cold before the Galls are injected, but little alteration happens upon a much greater proportion of Galls superadded, and (what is more remarkable) if the Water, which is permitted to cool, be recruited by the Fire, and the same Tryal reiterated, it offers no greater satisfaction in change

 of Colour, than the second Experiment. Consonant to what 
Andreas Baccius
 hath formerly observ'd, who in his second Book 
de Thermis, Cap.
 10. 
Pag.
 69. hath these words, 
Nulla Balnei Aqua, eodem cum successu ac laude bibitur longe exportata, quo ad fontem proprium; maxima enim parte ex ipso fonte haustae ac delatae, amittunt omnem virtutem; multae non servantur per hyemem, dilutae pluviis; & quae ut∣cunque servantur delatae à propriis fonticulis, fieri non potest, quin amittant, cum calore suo Minerali, vivificos illos Spiritus in quibus omnis Juvamenti vis consistit, quae semel amissa, nullo postea extrinseco calore restituitur. Quod est valde notandum.


I have been the more particular in this, in regard it is a very useful and practical Discovery, and may procure more real advantage to Mankind, than the vain and unattainable attempts of the Philosophers Stone, making Glass malleable, and the Quadrature of a Circle.


Some other Observations I shall also mention, of a less magnitude, and more contracted circum∣ference, as the dying of the Bath-guides skins, the Bathers Linnen, and the Stones in the bottom of the Bath, of a yellow colour, and the eating out of the Iron Rings of the Bath, the Iron Bars of the Windows about the Bath, and any Iron infused in it; insomuch as I have now by me a Gad of Iron by accident taken up among the Stones of the Kings-Bath, so much eaten out, and digested by the Ostrich stomach of these Waters, that, the sweetness extracted, what remains resembles very much a Hony-comb, a deep perforation in many places be∣ing attempted, and the whole Gad it self reduced to a thing very much like a Sponge.


The first, 
viz.
 the Tincture I have discovered to arise from an Ochre, with which the Bath abounds,

 and hath afforded me a considerable quantity, so that now I have near a pound by me, and with an infusion of that in warm water, tinge Stones as exactly of the Bath colour, that they are not discern∣able one from another. It is further observable, that the nearer the place of ebullition, where the Springs arise, the deeper and finer is the Yellow colour, so that in some places, about the Cross in the Kings Bath, and at the head of the great Spring, at the Southwest corner thereof, it is almost made a natu∣ral paint, being laboured together by the working of the Springs, and a continual succession of new Matter coming on, free from those impurities it contracts in other places, which make it distinguish∣able into two or three sorts, according to its mix∣tures with, or freedom from, more adulterating Matter. The Clouts also and Woollen Rags, which the Guides use to stop the Gouts withal, besides the Walls, Slip-doors and Posts, when the Bath is kept in a considerable time, as in the Winter season it useth to be, are all very much tinged with this yel∣low substance, and if at any time they chance to lie unwash'd or not thrown away, they send out so ungrateful a scent, that a man had rather smell to a Carnation, Rose, Violet, or a Pomander, than be within the wind of so unwelcom a smell, it being the greatest policy to get the Weather-gage in this encounter. The same thing I have experienced in Vessels at home, where after it had stood some time in a common infusion of warm water, I have the same reverence for that as Pictures, and do aver it to be true, 
E Longinquo reverentia major.


One thing more is to be noted before I leave this particular, that although so much of this yel∣low Matter is continually bred, with which the neighbouring Ground is sufficiently replenisht, as I

 have found by digging in some places not far distant, yet nothing of that colour is discovered in the Con∣tents, a probable argument it either evaporates, to which I am more inclin'd, in regard I find it much more copious where the Steam of the Bath meets with any resistence, or else it may be, which is less probable, turns colour by the fire in evaporation that way; less probable, I say, because for further satisfaction, I have decocted the Ochre more than once, and find rather that it gets than loses in its colour.


The Reason of this I conceive to be, That this Ochre being probably, as I have elsewhere dis∣courst, the vehicle of Vitriol, on its separation from it in the open air, precipitates to the bottom, and tinges the stones with a yellow colour, leaving the body of the waters through which it passes much unconcern'd; which may be one reason, why the Water of the open Bath tingeth not with Galls, as I have observ'd, like that from the Pumps, though the avolation of Spirits may not perhaps be alto∣gether ridiculous, considering especially, that the water from the Pump when cold, will lose its ting∣ing property, though nothing be observ'd to be precipitated. And that some of this yellow matter is contained in the water, though with some difficulty observed, doth appear from the fifty second Obser∣vation.


The greenish colour ariseth from another cause, which I conceive may be the effect either of the Salt or Vitriol, or both, the former making that colour in meats long in salt, and the latter, if from green Copperas, may easily be understood.


The eating out of the Iron I conceive must proceed from something Corrosive, and till any one can assure me 'tis something else, I shall judge

 it to be Vitriol, though the Salt also may contribute not a little. And that it may appear not to be cau∣sed by the bare steam, as Rust is bred upon Pot∣hooks and Cotterels, besides the difficulty to con∣ceive how the steam should operate under water, as in the case of the Gad before mentioned, I made a Lixivium of the contents of the Water, and in it infused Iron but a very small time, and found it to do the same as in the Bath it self, considering the time of infusion; and the very Knives and Spatules I put in to stir some residence in the bottom, were almost as soon as dry, crusted over and defended with a rusty coat.


I have other Arguments I suppose will contri∣bute something more to the confirmation of this opinion; as that with the help of the Sand of the Bath, with Water and Galls, I made good writing Ink, which in a short time comes to be very legible; but the infusion of the Contents in Common wa∣ter, or the Lixivium thereof, with an addition of an inconsiderable proportion of the decoction of Galls makes it tolerably legible on the first com∣mixture, only the first, 
viz.
 that made with Sand, casting an eye of decayed red from a mixture of Ochre contained in the same. Neither is it altoge∣ther to be slighted, that the Water it self hath been heretofore used by the best writing Masters for the making of Ink, who observing by their experience, that Ink made with Bath-water, and the other u∣sual Ingredients, had a better colour, and was more lasting than any other, preferred this Water before any other for this use, as I have been informed by some credible persons. Also having not long since occasion to pour warm water on the Contents of the Bath, in order to the making a Lixivium, some of the water happened by an accident to fall on a

 Bazil skin I sometimes use, and immediately turn∣ed the Red into a Black more than the breadth of an ordinary hand, with as much facility as any Curriers Liquor. Alum I know will do the like, but I find no necessity to assert that, which had it any thing to do here, must make the Water much rougher, whiter and sowrer, than I find it to be. To which I may add, that many judicious persons, my Patients, and some intelligent and eminent Phy∣sicians also have assured me, that they have perfect∣ly discerned by the taste a mixture of Vitriol, and that I need not doubt, but that was one principal Ingredient. 'Tis also not very inconsiderable, that the Bath-water alone will coagulate Milk, though not after the usual way of making a Posset; for after the Milk and Water are put together, it must boil pretty smartly, else the Curd will not rise. I may likewise subjoyn as a further probability, that on the relenting of the Salt extracted into an Oyl 
per deliquium,
 there is a very sharp Stiptick and Vitrioline taste perceived in the gross 
deliquium,
 as also in the clear Oyl, and the Salt it self; not to mention its shooting into glebes, of which I have some small assurances by trials I have made, not yet sufficiently satisfactory, and therefore I dis∣miss this part for the present, with the greatest pro∣bability, till a further inquiry shall make me po∣sitive.


But as to Nitre, there can be no question made about that I suppose; for besides the quick, acri∣monious, cooling, and nauseous taste, most apparent∣ly discoverable both in the infused contents, the Salt and Oyl (the latter of which, 
viz.
 the nauseous Taste, I take more particular notice o
, in regard it is most predominant, and assigned by 
Fallopius
 to Nitre, and the Waters impregnated with it, which,

 he says, sometimes do 
subvertere stomachum, & facere nauseam, de Therm. Aq. & Met. cap.
 9. besides, I say, these probable conjectures) what will set it beyond all contradiction, is, that it hath the true Characteristick of Nitre, and shoots in Needles, of which I have now lately shot above twenty 
Stiriae.


I the rather mention this, in regard it hath been my good hap to bring this thing to perfection and autoptical Demonstration, which hath been in vain attempted by some industrious persons; not that I am, in the least, willing to arrogate to my self, or derogate from them, more than what is fitting, but to confirm this truth, that there are some 
Mollia tempora fandi;
 some opportunities, when Nature will give willing audience, without much ceremo∣ny or ado, confessing more by fair perswasions, than racks and torments, and greater importunity. And that we ought to be very cautious how we affirm a thing not to be, upon the failure of a single, or some repeated Experiments.


In fine, Lest I should too much exceed the bounds of a Letter, what concerns the cause of the Heat of the Waters, I say little of here, only tell you, that when I shall come to discourse of that Subject, of which I intend, God willing, a large Disquisition in another Language, I believe I shall find my self obliged not so much to depend on a subterranean Fire, as to expect greater satis∣faction from another Hypothesis.


Many more Experiments I have made upon the Sand, Scum and Mud of the Bath, with some Observations drawn from the 
Natura Loci,
 or Ground hereabouts; but, I fear, I have been too tedious already, and therefore, without further

 ceremony, shall release you out of this Purgatory, with the Subscription of,


Honoured Sir,


Your most Faithful, &c.








CHAP. IX.
 Of the Antiquity of the Baths and City.


AND now it may be expected I should say something concerning the Antiquity of the Baths and City, which I the rather do here, in regard since my writing any thing of this kind heretofore, in many Particulars I have met with better information.


Not to mention any thing of 
Bladud,
 and the 
British
 Histories, as at best, uncertain,
 I shall first take notice of the Opinion of those that ascribe their discovery to 
Julius Caesar,
 fifty years, or there∣abouts, before Christ, which the Learned Antiqua∣ry Mr. 
Cambden
 thinks not so probable,
 because 
Selinus,
 who lived in the time of 
Titus Vespasian,
 130 years after, and 83 (rather 81) years after Christ, was the first of the 
Romans
 that made men∣tion of them. But if it be uncertain when 
So inus
 lived, and most likely after the year three hundred, as my Judicious friend,
 the Reverend and Learned Dean of 
Bangor
 hath observ'd, then the Antiquity reaches not so high.


To which may be added most assuredly, That 
Julius Caesar
 came not so far up into the Land: For

 whatever some Poets and Poetical Historians that lived a thousand years after him, may deliver, certain it is that 
J. Caesar
 made not so great a Con∣quest here as they made for him; whence 
Tacitus
 writes, That he discover'd only, not delivered un∣to the 
Romans, Britain.
 His words in the life of 
Julius Agricola
 are these; 
Primus omnium D.
 Julius 
cum exercitu
 Britanniam 
ingressus, quanquam pros∣pera pugna terruerit incolas, ac littore potitus sit, potest videri ostendisse posteris, non tradidisse. Horace
 also calls the 
Britain,
 before 
Augustus,
 Untoucht;



Intactus aut
 Britannus 
ut descenderet


Sacra Catenatus via.






Nor yet, Th'unconquered 
Britain
 to convey


Captiv'd, in Chains, down Sacred way.


 And 
Cambden
 saith, That 'tis so far from being true what 
Paterculus
 reports, 
Bis penetrata
 Britan∣nia 
à Caesare,
 That 
Caesar
 passed twice through 
Bri∣tain,
 or twice a great way into 
Britain,
 which is all can well be understood by those words of that Hi∣storian, that he scarce made entry into it. For ma∣ny years after this Entrance of 
Caesar,
 the Inhabi∣tants of this Island were left to the free govern∣ment of their own Kings, and used their own Laws.


Another Learned Antiquary treating of 
Caesar
's Conquest here, is of opinion that it extended no farther than 
Kent,
 some part of 
Sussex, Surrey, Mid∣dlesex
 and 
Essex,
 and perhaps, as the Learned Dr. 
Lloyd
 hath further noted,
 into the edge of 
Berks, Ox∣ford
 and 
Bucks;
 for he mentions the 
Bibroci
 and 
Anealites,
 which 
Cambden
 with good probability places there. The words of 
Twine
 are these; 
Mihi quidem videtur universum
 Cantium, Sussexiae 
vicina

 loca, &
 Suthreiam, 
quae Regni nomine, itemque
 Mid∣dlesexiam 
&
 Essexiam, 
qui hodiè à Doctorum vulgo,
 Trinobantum 
appellatione intelliguntur, legionibus suis invasisse; nec, si ad plures penetrasset, aut in gra∣tiam recepisset, puto praeterire silentio valuisse. Re∣liqui vero populi manus quidem dederunt, quorum tamen regiones nunquam à
 Caesare 
conspectae sunt. To me, indeed, it seemeth probable, that
 Julius Caesar, 
with the Souldiers under his Command, conquered all
 Kent, 
the neighbouring parts of
 Sussex 
and
 Sur∣rey, 
called by the name of
 Regnum, 
also
 Middlesex 
and
 Essex, 
which the Learned call
 Trinobants; 
neither do I believe but that if he had conquered or made peace with more, he would have mentioned them: Some other Inhabitants nearest to danger yield∣ed, whose Country
 Ca sar 
never saw.


The 
Saxon
 names of 
Bathancester, Hat Bathan,
 and 
Akmanchester,
 are of later date, the 
Saxons
 not arriving here till the time of 
Theodosius
 the younger, about the year of Christ, according to the most probable account of Venerable 
Bede,
 449.
 Nay the later name of 
Akmanchester
 was not given till some few years after the year of Christ 577; when from a mean condition, to which this City was then reduced by War, it again recovered strength and great dignity, and from the great concourse of Diseased people that came for Cure, was called 
Akmanchester,
 or, The City of Sickly folks.


Anno
 575, saith the 
Saxon
 Chronicle, 
the City of
 Bathe, 
as also
 Glocester 
and
 Ciceter, 
were taken by
 Cuthwin 
and
 Ceaulin 
the
 Saxons 
from the
 Britains, 
after the slaughter of three
 British 
Kings,
 Commail, Condidan, 
and
 Farinmail, 
that year in a battle at
 Deorham.


Neither can their Antiquity be much more ad∣vanced

 by the 
, or Hot waters in 
Pto∣lomy,
 who flourisht about 
Anno Christi
 161, being also the first year of the Reign of the Emperour 
Antoninus; Aquae Solis,
 or Waters of the Sun of 
Antonine,
 or 
Badiza
 of 
Stephanus,
 who lived 
Anno Dom.
 540. But what may seem to some of greater consequence are the 
British
 Names of 
Yr Ennaint Twymin,
 as 
Cambden
 hath it, or rather 
Caer En∣naint,
 the 
City of Oyntment,
 from the Diseased people that came hither for relief, 
Ennaint
 in Welch signifying 
Ʋnguentum:
 or else, 
Caer yn nant Twy∣min,
 the 
City in the warm Vale;
 whence 
Bristol
 was anciently called, 
Caer Dorr yn nant Badon,
 the 
City Oder in the Vale of Bathe. Caer Baddon,
 or 
Bathon;
 and 
Caer Paladdur,
 the City of 
Pallas,
 or 
Minerva
's Water; especially since 
Solinus
 affirms 
Minerva
 to have been the Patroness of these Baths, if of them he writes, as most probable, in these words, 
Chap.
 25, where speaking of 
Britain,
 he saith, 
In quo spatio magna & multa flumina sunt, fontesque calidi opiparo exculpti apparatu ad usus mortalium: quibus fontibus praesul est
 Minervae 
nu∣men in cujus aede perpetui ignes nunquam canescunt in favillas, sed ubi ignis tabuit, vertitur in globos saxeos;
 i. e. 
In which space are many great Rivers, and Hot springs, very curiously adorned and kept for mens use, the Patroness of which is the Goddess
 Mi∣nerva, 
in whose Temple perpetual fires never turn to ashes, but when the heat is over, become round lumps of stone.
 There being also a Tradition here, that there was formerly a Temple dedicated to 
Minerva,
 where the Church of St. 
Peter
 and 
Paul,
 common∣ly called the 
Abbey-Church,
 now stands. I say, if 
Solinus
 writes of them, because the Baths of 
Buck∣stones
 in 
Darbyshire
 are likewise in 
Britain,
 and were formerly much frequented.




I know very well that 
Mons Palader
 was a name amongst the 
Britans
 for 
Shaftsbury,
 
Paladr
 in that Language signifying a Shaft; but 
Ponticus Vi∣runnius,
 who lived 1500 years since Christ, cor∣ruptly calls it 
Paladur;
 Rudhudibras 
condidit oppi∣dum Montis Paladur quod nunc
 Sefronia 
dicitur;
 and therefore gave occasion to some inconsiderate per∣sons to confound it with 
Bathe:
 Now although any one that knows a Mountain from a Plain may see the difference, yet I must be so impertinent here as to say, That I see no reason to the contrary but that 
Palladdur
 may be two words, and rendred 
Minerva
's Water; 
Dwr
 being the word for Water in 
Welsh,
 and 
Mons Palader, Paladr,
 or 
Baladr,
 as it should be written, and 
Caer Palladdur,
 to be two distinct places; the former 
Shaftsbury,
 the latter 
Bathe:
 However if 
Cambden
 be mistaken, and my self also following his Authority, we are both un∣der the correction of those that have better con∣verse with the 
British
 Writers.


I shall only add, That 
Ptolomy
 reckons 
Therma
 and 
Ischalis
 as Cities of the 
Belgae,
 whereof 
Ischa∣lis,
 now 
Ilchester,
 he places in 16 degrees 40 minutes of Longitude; 53 degrees 30 minutes of Latitude; and the other City 
Therma,
 or 
Bathe,
 in 17 degrees 20 minutes of Longitude, and 53 degrees 40 mi∣nutes of Latitude.


Antoninus
 his Itinerary hath 
Aquae Solis
 in the way between 
Venta Silurum,
 now 
Caer Guent,
 and 
Verlucio,
 now 
Warminster:
 from 
Venta
 to the ferry over Severn, called 
Trajectum,
 he makes six miles; from that Ferry to 
Aquae Solis
 eighteen miles; and from 
Aquae Solis
 to 
Verlucio
 sixteen miles. This may serve to prove, that 
Therma
 in 
Ptolomy,
 and 
Aquae Solis
 in 
Antonine,
 were meant of 
Bathe.


Let this then suffice for the Antiquity of the

 Waters, That we have a Tradition, and the Autho∣rity too of some suspected Writers, that the Baths were discovered eight hundred and odd years be∣fore Christ: That not long after Christ, we have undoubted mention made of them in credible Au∣thors, and that doubtless they were known, and made use of too, long before any Author writ of them: So that to trace their Original, is to unravel the Creation, and to make enquiry for their com∣mencement, little different than to seek after the Head of 
Nile.


To give but a taste of the Philosophy of the Times, but little more than two hundred years ago, in reference to these Waters, I shall mention a part of the Riming History of Unfortunate Prin∣ces, composed by 
John Boccace,
 who lived about 
A. D.
 1450, and translated by 
Dan. Lidgate,
 where fol. 31, 
Bladud
 speaks thus:



I.


Some say I made the Holesom Baths at 
Bath,


And made therefore two burning Tuns of Brass,


And other twain seven kinds of Salts, that have


In them inclos'd; but these be made of Glass;


With Sulphur fill'd, Wild-fire emixt there was.


And in four Wells those Tuns so placed heat, for aye


The Water springeth up before it pass away.






II.


Which Waters heat, and cleansing perfect power,


With vapours of the Sulphur salts and fire,


Hath vertue great to heal, and cleanse, and scower


The bathed Sores therein that health desire.


If of the Vertues more thou dost require


To know, I will recite what old Experience tells


In Causes cold, the noble Vertues of those Wells.








III.


The Baths to soften Sinews Vertue have,


And also for to cleanse and scowr the skin;


From Morphews white and black to heal and save;


The bodies freckled, faint, are bath'd therein,


Scabs, Lepry, sores are old, and fester'd in


The Scurf, Botch, Itch, Gout, Pox, swell'd Joynts and humors fell,


The Milt and Liver hard it heals, and Palsey well.






IV.


I must confess, by learned skill I found


These Native Wells whence springs that help for men.


But well thou knowst, there runs from under ground


Springs, sweet, salt, cold and hot, even now as then,


From Rock, Salt Peter, Alom, Gravel, Fen,


From Sulphur, Iron, Lead, Gold, Silver, Brass and Tin,


Each fountain takes the force of vein it coucheth in.






V.


Then whoso knows by Natures work in these


Of Mettals or of Mines the force to heal,


May sooner give his Judgment in disease


For curing by the Bath; and surer deal


With sickly people of the Publick weal:


And also find of Fountains salt, or hot, or cold,


And for to heal by them the sick with honour be bold.






VI.


The City eke of 
Bathe
 I founded there,


Renowned far by reason of the Wells:


And many Monuments that ancient were,


I placed there, Thou knowst the story tells, 
&c.




What probability the Philosophical part of this Poetry may carry concerning the seven kinds of

 Salts inclosed in four Tuns, and things relating thereunto, may be concluded much from what is Historical, and mentioned in the last place, con∣cerning the Monuments, which cannot possibly pre∣tend to that Antiquity, being not in the least 
British,
 but purely 
Roman,
 as is made appear in the follow∣ing Chapter; This therefore is to be taken as a fan∣cy, and so let it go.


Alexander Necham,
 somewhat above 400 years ago, wrote these Verses on the Baths.


Bathoniae Thermis
 vix praefero 
Virgilianas


Confecto prosunt Balnea nostra Seni;


Prosunt attritis, collisis, invalidis{que}


Et quorum morbis frigida Causa subest.


Praevenit humanum stabilis natura laborem,


Servit Naturae legibus Artis opus.


Igne suo succensa quibus data Balnea fervent


Aenea subter aquas Vasa latere putant.


Errorem figmenta solent inducere passim,


Sed quid? Sulphureum novimus esse locum.


Which I thus made English:

Baths Baines
 with 
Virgil
's I compare,


Useful for ancient folk they are,


Bruis'd, weak, consum'd, as well as old,


And in all griefs whose source is cold.


Nature mans Labour doth prevent,


And Art again serves her Intent.


There's fire under ground some say


That thus makes Baths great Pots to play.


Fancy doth often Error breed,


But what? from Brimstone these proceed.




As to the City, it is not, I think, to be doubted, but that the Baths were before that, and gave name to it, sick people making small Cottages first for their Conveniences, which were afterwards improv∣ed into fairer Buildings. 
Constat Latinum nomen huic Civitati ab Antiquis inditum, Aquae Calidae ex his Balneis,
 saith 
Andr. Baccius,
 if the Testimony of a Stranger may be admitted; 
It is certain the City was called
 Aquae Calidae, 
from the Baths.
 The Statues also of 
Coil
 a Britti h King, and 
Edgar
 a Saxon, who are said, how truly I know not, to have given Charters to this City, placed at the end of the Town-Hall, or Council-House, are argu∣ments of its Antiquity, although perhaps they might be Patrons that were chosen by the Monks.


That 
Edgar
 was Crowned at 
Bathe
 above 700 years ago, 
Bathe
 being then called an 
Old Borough,
 with great Solemnity, on 
Whitsunday,
 appears from these words of the 
Saxon Chronicle,
 written by one that then lived, and writ his History but three years after his Coronation. 
Anno
 973. May 11. 
being
 Whitsunday, Edgar 
was Consecrated King with great glory, in that
 Old Borough Ake∣mannesceastre, 
which by another name they call
 Ba∣thon, 
there was great joy to all men on that Blessed Day, which they call
 Pentecost; 
there was a great Assembly of Priests and Monks, and the Wise met there in Councel.


Edgar
 had lived 29 years full of trouble and mi∣sery, when this came to pass, and in his 30th. year was Consecrated.


Anno
 520. or 71 years after their arrival here out of 
Germany,
 the 
English Saxons
 besieged this City, with whom K. 
Arthur
 fought a great Battel on 
Mons Badonicus,
 now called 
Bannesdown,
 and

 slew so many of them, that they had little heart to make any further attempt for a considerable time, but left it to the quiet possession of the 
Britains.
 Yet 
Ninnius
 writeth, that the 12th. of K. 
Arthur
's Battels against the 
Saxons,
 was at the Hill or Town of 
Bathe,
 where many a one was slain by his force and might. The 
Saxons
 then had besieged 
Bathe,
 K. 
Arthur
 rais'd their Siege, and after besieged them on 
Mons Badonicus,
 where he took their Camp, made a great slaughter of them, and then kept his 
Christmas
 in 
Bathe.
 This was the year that 
Gildas
 was born, and thereupon was called 
Badonicus
 ever after.


Anno
 676. 
Osbrich
 founded here a Nunnery, and not long after 
Offa
 K. of 
Mercia
 built a Church, both which in the time of the 
Danish
 Wars were demolisht. Out of the Ruines of these two arose the Church of St. 
Peter,
 in which 
Edgar
 was Crown'd. But more of the Church in its place.


Anno
 775. the year in which 
Offa
 is said to have began this Church, he fought with 
Kinewulf
 K. of the 
West-Saxons
 at 
Bensington
 near 
Oxford,
 over∣came him, and took 
Bensington.
 This 
Offa
 is said to have spent much of his time at 
Bathe; Iste
 Offa (saith the Author of 
Brutus abbreviatus) multum morabatur
 Bathoniae.
 He began his Reign 
Anno
 755. reigned 39 years, and died 
Anno
 794.


In the Time of 
Edward
 the Confessor 
Bathe
 flourished exceedingly,
 the King having there 64 Burghers, and 30 Burghers of others, the City paying T
ibute according to 20 Hides, which amounts to about 30 yard Land.


In the Reign of 
William Rufus, Robert Mowbray
 Nephew to the Bishop of 
Constance
 sackt and burnt it.




The Industrious Mr. 
Pryn
 in his
 
Brevia Parlia∣mentaria rediviva,
 and
 4th. part of a brief Re∣gister of Parliamentary Writs, hath given an ac∣count of Citizens return'd to serve in Parliament for this City, ever since the 26th. year of K. 
Ed.
 1. about 
A. D.
 1298. or 377 years since.


In 
Bathe
 are three Hospitals, it self, indeed, being but one great one, St. 
Johns, Bellots,
 and the 
Bimburies,
 otherwise called St. 
Katherines,
 besides a Free-School erected in the Time of 
Ed.
 6.


The Hospital of St. 
Johns
 was founded 
A. D.
 1174. by 
Reginald Fitz-Joceline,
 a 
Lombard,
 Bishop of 
Bathe
 and 
Wells,
 and afterward transla∣ted to 
Canterbury,
 but, before he was possessed of his new honour, died, and was buried at 
Bathe.
 It was valued at the yearly Rent of 22 
l.
 19 
s.
 6 
d.
 since which time its revenues are much increas'd, to the great advantage of him that hath it, and no less profit and reputation to the City, with the per∣petual entailment of God's everlasting curse and blast, on the treacherous head and posterity of him, that is notoriously known to have been the Author of this mischief. He gave it this name from St. 
Johns
 in the 
Savoy,
 where he was Consecrated Bi∣shop, after his return from beyond Sea, by 
Richard
 Archbishop of 
Canterbury.


Bellots
 Hospital was built by 
Thomas Bellot
 Esq; one of the Executors of the Lord 
Cecil,
 in the Time of K. 
James,
 of whom we shall treat more largely in the Chapter of the Church, to which he was an especial Benefactor.


As for the 
Bimburies,
 I can learn no more con∣cerning it than this, That it was bu lt by seven Sisters, who left this Hospital behind them as a mo∣nument to Posterity, both of their Charity and Name.








CHAP. X.
 Of the 
Roman
 Antiquities in 
Bathe.


BUT the greatest Argument of Antiquity the Place affords, I suppose to be the 
Roman
 Coins found in or near it, with the Inscriptions and Ima∣ges in the Town or Borough Walls, the latter of which, to wit, the Inscriptions and Images, Mr. 
Cambden
 took notice of, and inserted into his 
Bri∣tannia.


To begin with the 
Roman
 Coins: The first I shall mention is that of 
Vespasian,
 made 1600 years since, this Emperour's Reign beginning 
A. D.
 71. with this Circumscription on the Face-side: IMP. CAES. VESPASIAN. P. F. AUG. 
Imperator Caesar Vespasianus, Pius, Felix, Augustus.
 The Re∣verse; PIETAS AUGUSTI, with an Image be∣tween S. C. signifying 
Senatus Consultum.
 This is of Brass, and Communicated by Mr. 
John Par∣ker
 of 
Bathe,
 where it was also found.


The second is of 
Trajan,
 made 
A. D.
 101. the year this Emperour was 5th. time Consul; read thus: IMP. TRAIANO. AUG. GER. DAC. P. M. T R. P. 
Imperatori Trajano Augusto, Ger∣manico, Dacico, Pontifici Maximo, Tribunitiae potestate.
 Reverse; COS. V. P. P. S. P. Q. R. OPTIMO PRINC. 
Consuli quintò, Patri patriae Senatus Populus{que} Romanus optimo Principi.
 This is Silver, and was found at 
Wrigleton
 five miles off of 
Bathe,
 and given by Mr. 
Hugh Ivy,
 Rector there.




A third is of 
Carausius,
 who usurpt Empire in 
Britain Anno Christi
 285. reigned seven years, was slain by 
Alectus
 who usurpt after him, and was himself killed by 
Asclepiodotus praefectus Praeto∣rio Anno
 295. The Circumscription thus: IMP. C. CARAUSIUS P. F. AUG. 
Imperator, Caesar Carausius, Pius, Foelix, Augustus.
 On the other side PAX. AUG. 
Pax Augusti.
 And underneath an Image M. L X X. denoting 
Miles,
 or 
Milites Legionis vicesimae.
 A Souldier, or the Souldiers of the 20th. Legion, with B. E. on both sides of the Image signifying 
Britannicus Exercitus.


The fourth is of 
Constantine
 the younger, made Caesar together with 
Licinius
 and 
Crispus
 in 
March, Anno Christi
 316. with these Letters round the Head: CONSTANTINUS IUN. NOB. C. 
Constantinus Junior Nobilissimus Caesar.
 The Re∣verse a Palace, and PROVIDENTIAE CAESS. 
Providentiae Caesarum.
 It is the Palace in which he lived at 
Triers,
 expressed in the Letters underneath P. T R E. that is, 
Pecunia Treviris.


The fifth of 
Alex. Sever. A. D.
 224. with this Inscription: IMP. C. M. AUR. SEV. ALEX∣AND. AUG. 
Imperator Caesar Marcus Aurelius Severus Alexander Augustus.
 The Reverse; P. M. T. R. P. II. COS. P. P. 
Pontifex Maxi∣mus, Tribunitia potestate Secundo Consul, pater pa∣triae.
 These three are Brass, and were found in 
Bathe,
 and given by Mr. 
Parker.


The sixth is a Coin of 
Constantius
 made 
Anno Christi
 357. in 
May,
 when he kept his 
Vicenalia,
 as appears by 
Votis XXX. Votis triginta, Multis XXXX. Multis quadraginta,
 within a Wreath. On the Reverse; The Coin stampt at 
Constantinople,
 as is evident from the Letters P. CON. signifying 
Pecunia Constantinopoli.
 On the Face-side DN.

 CONSTANTIUS P. F. AUG. 
Dominus Constan∣tius Pius, Felix, Augustus.
 This is Silver, and was found in 
Glocestershire,
 not far hence, and given by Mr. 
Edward Barnard,
 a skilful Bone-setter at 
Tedbury
 in that County.


The seventh is a Brass piece of 
Valentinian
 the Second, who Reigned 
A. D.
 375, with this Inscrip∣tion on the face-side DN. VALENTINIANUS P. F. AUG, 
Dominus Valentinianus Pius Foelix Augustus.
 The Reverse, 
Victory
 holding a Palm-branch in the left hand, and offering a Garland with the right; the Motto, SECURITAS REIPUB∣LICAE, and P. CON. 
Pecunia Constantinopoli,
 un∣derneath.


The eighth is a Brass Coin of 
Constantine
 the Great, about the year of Christ 307, with this In∣scription CONSTANTINO CAES. 
Constantino Caesari.
 Reverse, 
Victory
 with a Spear and Shield, only these letters under P. TRE. 
Pecunia Treviris.
 These two were the gift of that Worthy Gentleman 
John Harington
 Esquire, Grand-son to the Inge∣nious and Noble Sr. 
John Harington
 (of whom more in the Chapter of the Church) and were found in his own grounds at 
Kelston,
 three miles distant West of 
Bathe.


These are all the Coins I have met with yet of any value, among many others of none at all.


The Inscriptions and Images next succeed; and the first I take notice of is the nearest to the North-gate, being a Memorial of a 
Roman
 Senator, of the Colony of 
Glocester,
 a City built by the 
Romans,
 who also placed there a Colony called 
Colonia Gle∣vum.
 The Inscription thus:




DEC. COLONAE GLEV. VIX✚ AN. LXXXVIII.


i. e.
 Decurioni Coloniae 
Glevi.
 Vixit annos Octoginta octo.


Leafes folded in are at the East end of this In∣scription, Fig. 
13.
 A little lower more leasage not exprest.


And whereas I render 
Decurio
 a Senator, I pitch on this signification of the word as most proper here, of which 
Rosinus
 gives this account:
 
Sena∣tores in Coloniis, ut etiam in Municipiis, Decuriones vocabantur, eam ob causam, quòd,
 Pomponio I. C. 
Authore, decima pars eorum qui deducerentur, sit solita Conscribi.
 I know 
Festus
 mentions another and more usual signification of the word, to wit, an Officer over 10 Horsemen; 
Decuriones,
 inquit, 
ap∣pellantur qui denis Equitibus praesunt.
 Of which if any please to understand it, he shall have my leave.


The next is a little Image about a foot and half in length, supposed by Mr. 
Cambden
 to be 
Hercules,
 bearing his left hand aloft, with a Club in his right. 
See Fig.
 11.


Next to that lower, toward the West-gate, is the Monument of one of the Children of two 
Romans, Primulus, Romulus, Vipomulus,
 or rather 
Vete∣romulus
 (for that word in the stone is somewhat difficult to be read) and 
Victisarina,
 with a longer and exactly 
Roman
 Inscription, in a sepulchre Ta∣ble,

 between two little Images, whereof the one holds the Horn of 
Amalthaea,
 or 
Cornucopia;
 the other bringeth a flying Rowl, or winding List or Banner over the left shoulder.


The Inscription thus:



depiction of a sepulchral tablet bordered by the bas relief of a person on each side


D M 
 SVCC. PETRONIAE. VIX
 ANN. JJJ. M. JJJJ. D. IX. VERO
 MULVS. ET. VIC TSARINA
 FIL. KAR. FEC




Diis Manibus
 Successae Petroniae, 
Vixit annos tres, menses quatuor,
 
Dies Novem.
 Veteromulus 
&
 Victi∣sarina 
filiae
 Carissimae 
fecerunt: i. e.
 To the Ghost of 
Successa Petronia,
 who lived three years, four months, and nine daies. 
Veteromulus
 and 
Victisa∣rina,
 in memory of their dear Child, made this.


A little after follow these Letters, in a Cut stone, very imperfect:


V R N.
 I O P.




In the outside of the Wall, pretty high, is a Head, which seems of no great moment. 
Fig.
 9. And as for 
Hercules
 straining two Snakes, I cannot yet be so fortunate as to light upon it. 
Fig.
 14.


Between the West and South-gates stand these Letters cross, which, by reason the stone is cut on both sides, are unaccountable:

III. VS. SA.
 VS. VX. SC.


Then two fierce heads, one within the cope of the Wall, and another in the outside thereof hard by. 
Fig.
 7, 8.


After that, these Letters standing overthwart, of which no sense can be made:

I L L A.
 I L L A.


Near this place formerly was a Hare running (now lost) which might be the 
Rebus
 of a 
Lepori∣us
 that set up this Monument. There were of that name in 
Britain,
 and it is now the name of the Ho∣nourable Family of my Lord of 
Colerain. Fig.
 15.


An angry man laying hold of a poor Peasant, which may be a bold insulting 
Roman,
 on a poor distressed captivated 
Britan. See Fig.
 6.


Leafage, with leafs folded in, Fig.
 5.


Two kissing and clipping each other, which by the Crook in the right hand of one, and the Dog upon the other, seem to be a Shepherd and his Mi∣stress;

 the Dog reaching up towards the head of the Woman. 
See Fig.
 4.


A Foot Souldier brandishing his Sword, and bearing out his Shield. 
Fig.
 3.


A Footman with a Truncheon in his right hand. 
Fig.
 2.


A great Face, or a Giants Head, with hair. 
Fig.
 1.


As for 
Medusa
's head all Snakes, I cannot, on the best enquiry I can make, find it out. 
See Fig.
 10.


Neither doth 
Ophiuchus
 occur to me. 'Tis there∣fore, I believe, lost in the alteration of the Wall, as the Hare, and 
Medusa
's head mentioned before. 
See Fig.
 12.


At 
Walcot,
 a Parish adjoyning to the City, was found a stone with this Inscription:

VIBIA IVCVNDA H. S. E.


i. e. 
Here lies
 Vibia Jucunda.


Jucunda
 was an 
Agnomen
 of the Family 
Car∣vilia,
 and it seems of 
Vibia,
 as 
Loetus
 of the 
Clau∣diae
 and 
Pomponiae.






1


illustration described as a great face, or a giant's head, with hair. Resembles a sun with a face






2


depiction of a man with a club or truncheon in his right hand






3


depiction of a soldier with a sword in his right hand and a shield in his left


 page. 72



4


depiction of a triangular tympanum depicting a man and woman reclining with a dog






5


depiction of a flower spiralling out into stem and leaves






6


depiction of two men, one with his hand on the other man's head






7


depiction of a right-facing bust






8


depiction of a left-facing bust






9


depiction of a man in a window






10


depiction of a left-facing bust of Medusa






11


illustration a man standing on his right foot with a club in his right hand






12


depiction of a boy holding a snake in his right hand






13


depiction of a flower spiralling out into stem and leaves with leaves along the bottom






14


depiction of a woman carrying two snakes






15


depiction of a right-facing hare








In 
Bathe
 also might be seen this Inscription, On 
Henry Coriat.


MORTUUS. HIC. ET. SEPULTUS. JACET. BIPEDUM. NEQUISSIMUS. 
H. C.
 IMPIE∣TATE. ARROGANTIA. LOQUACITATE. IMPUDENTIA. FASTU. ET. FRAUDE. NULLI. SECUNDUS. MALUS. PARENS. GUBERNATOR. PEJOR. CIVIS. PESSI∣MUS. QUI. POSTQUAM. LX. ANNORUM. CURRICULUM. RAPINIS. ET. LITIBUS. ARMATUS. ET. IN ERMIS. LONGANI∣MITATE. DEI. MAXIMA. TRANSEGIS∣SET. PAUPERUM. PTOCHOTROPHII. S. JOANNIS. BATHONENSIS. ALIMON∣IAM. IN. ALTERIUS. MANUS. PERFIDE. DEDISSET. ET. FISCUM. CIVITATIS-PUBLICUM. IN. PRIVATOS. USUS. CON. VERTISSET. INTER. ALIORUM. ODI∣UM. CONSANGUINEORUM. MISERI∣CORDIAM. SINE. PLANCTU. ET. LA∣CHRYMIS. A. NEMINE. DESIDERATUS. EX. HAC. VITA. MIGRAVIT. IN. VENTU∣RAM. UT. POENAS. AEQUALI. IMPU∣DENTIA. SUSTINEAT. AETERNAS. NISI. EI DEM. SUCCURRAT. QUOD. MINIME. SPERANDUM. SALUS. ALTIS∣SIMI. QUAE. ILLUM. QUIDEM. IPSA. NON. POTUIT. SALVARE.


Lastly, There are two fair Inscriptions, in two Grave-stones, erected in the North wall of a Gar∣den

 by the Cross Bath, belonging to Mrs. 
Crofts,
 preserved by Mr. 
Robert Chambers,
 Father to Dr. 
Humphry Chambers,
 born in this City, between which, 
Robert Chambers
 hath this Inscription, which preserveth him as he has done the other two.


HEC. MONUMEN. VIO LATA. SVLCIS. IN. CA MP. DE. WALCOT. R. C. CVLTOR. ANTIQ. HVC. TRANSTVLIT. A N
o
. VER. INCAR. 1592.


The Inscription on the East of this, is an Epi∣taph of 
Caius Murrius,
 of the Tribe called 
Ar∣niensis,
 the 25th. Tribe among the 
Romans
 (so called from 
Arnus
 a River in 
Tuscany,
 as 
Carolus Sigonius,
 and 
Onuphrius Panvinius
 relate,) born at 
Friuli,
 or 
Forum Julium,
 a modest Souldier of the Second Legion called, 
Adjutrix pia foelix,
 under the Command of 
Julius Secundus,
 25 years of age; how long in pay is broken out of the Stone, but, I suppose, eight. The Inscription as fol∣lows:

C. MVRRIVS. C. F. ARNIENSIS FORO. IVLI. MO DESTVS. MIL. LEG. II. AD. P. F. IVLI. SECVNDI. AN. XXV. STIP. H. S.


Caius Murrius, Caii filius, Arniensis, Foro-Juli∣ensis, Modestus Miles Legionis Secundae, adjutricis piae, foelicis Julii Secundi, Anni Viginti quinque, Stipendio octo, Hic situs est.




The other on the West is an Epitaph of 
Marcus Valerius
 a Latin (as I read, Mr. 
Cambden Eatinus,
 it seems to be an 
Agnomen
) a Souldier of 
Augustus
 his Legion (or the 20th.) 35 years of age, and 20 years in pay.


The true Copy thus:

DIS MANIBUS M. VALERIUS. M. FIL. LATINUS. C. EQ. MILES. LEG. AV. AN. XXXV. STIPEN. XX. H. S. E.


i. e. 
Dis Manibus. Marcus Valerius Marci filius Latinus Coh. Equitum Miles legionis Augustae (aut vicesimae) annis triginta quinque, Stipendio viginti, Hic situs est.


Where it may be noted, that this man was ad∣mitted at 15 years of age,
 when the usual time of listing Souldiers was not till 17.


Ophiuchus, Hercules
 straining two Snakes, 
Me∣dusa
's head, and the Hare, are lost. 
Vid. Fig.
 10. 12. 14, 15.








CHAP. XI.
 Of the Church of St. 
Peter
 and 
Paul
 in 
Bathe.


COncerning that neat and curious fabrick, the Church of St. 
Peter
 and 
Paul,
 commonly called the Abbey Church in 
Bathe,
 I need not give any other account, than what Sr. 
John Haring∣ton,
 a neighbouring Knight, whose good will to this Church and City did rival the acuteness of his Wit and Learning, being both very great, hath done sometime since, in a Latin Poem writ and spoken to Bishop 
Mountague,
 at his first Visitation and sight of the Church, then uncover'd. The Manuscript Copy found in Sr. 
John
's Study, and Communicated by his Grand-son, 
John Harington
 of 
Kelston,
 Esquire, hath this Title; 
Conditiones variae Ecclesiae Sancti
 Petri 
&
 Pauli 
Bathoniensis, à primis fundamentis jactis Anno
 775, 
ad annum de∣currentem
 1609, 
Historico-poetica
 
; 
deque foelicissima ejusdem Ecclesiae restauratione, Vaticini∣um. Ad Reverendissimum in Christo Patrem,
 Ja∣cobum, 
providentiâ divinâ, dignissimum Ecclesiae Bathoniensis, &
 Wellensis, 
Episcopum, Bathoniam primò foeliciter invisentem & Visitantem.








The Poem.




MActe: bonis avibus, recidivi limina Templi,


In Christo Reverende Pater, gratissimus intras.


Macte: sed haud pigeat prius, aequa mente, parumper


Pristina Delubri perpendere fata miselli.






Temporis Elapsi studio monumenta revolvens


Attento, invenies,
 hujus fundamina templi


Prima 
Offam,
 priscum regem, jecisse:
 Secunda


Elphegum,
 regni Primatem,
 tertia tandem


(Cum duo 
Danorum
 rabies, ignisque, priora


Vastasset) Sumptu posuit majore 
Johannes


De villa, natu Gallus,
 non infimus artis


Professor medicae; 
Wellensi
 ingratior aedi;


Qui quùm illic variis viguisset Episcopus annis


Sedem, Thermopolim, Cathedralem transtulit illine,


Ʋrbe hac quingentis Marcis, à Rege coempta.


Pulchrius antiquis fanum construxit; at ipsum


Aevo, Combussit pariter Jovis ira, sequenti.






Structorem Celebris misit 
Normannia,
 quartum


Officio Monachum, 
Rodbertum
 nomine, molem


Subversam toties qui restanravit,
 & inter


Presbyteros, litem, de Sedis honore, diremit,


Exornans titulis utramque aequalibus urbem.






Tandem, post seriem numerosam, munificamque,


Insignis praesul pietate, vicesimus atque


Tertius, hunc sequitur, qui faustum nominis omen


Expressit factis, 
Oliver King
 dictus;
 Olivam


Et Regem vere referebat: adinstar Olivae


Pacis erat populo, simul ubertatis & author;


At magis hoc retulit, regali munere, regem,


Quippe opus incultum 
Rodberti
 sustulit: atqui


Illius, extemplò, vice fundamenta locavit




Ista; dedit Solidis speciosa pterômata muris.


Tecta superstruxit sublimibus alta columnis.


Areolas Soleis longas substravit & amplas.


Omnia, ad hanc pulchram, structurus caetera, formam,


Et spoliis, dubio procul, instructurus, opimis,


Morte immortales, subito est arreptus, ad arces.


(Tantae molis erat tam clarum condere Templum!)


Ne tamen his tantis perfectio debita coeptis


Deforet, huic operi colophonem attexuit almus


Abbatiae Rector 
Gulielmus Birdus.
 At eheu


Sanctis stare diu, fatis (proh fata) negatum est!


Horrida de innocuis fertur sententia fanis;


Abbatiae pereunt, spoliantur Templa, rapinis


Tecta patent, reditus, fundi, sacraria: quid non?


(Ʋnde nefas tantum Zeli fautoribus?) una.


Ipse, vel in cunis, insons discerpitur infans.


Impete diripitur violento haec fabrica; prostant


Saxa, vitrum, plumbi, Campanae, ac omnia praeter


Hoc miserùm 
. Tantae at quae causa ruinae?


Num pietatis amor? vel amor sceleratus habendi?


Hic amor exitio est Templis, Templi{que} ministris.


Hic amor extinxit clarissima lumina regni;


Nec finit hic amor haec extincta resumere lucem.


Nemo bonum Templi, Templi bona quis{que} requirit.


Hinc haec, Cimmeriis, per tot, tam turpiter, annos,


Maxima lux Ʋrbis, latuit suppressa, tenebris.


Sed pater omni-bonus, cui provida cura suorum est,


Hanc piceam, nuper, coelesti lampade, noctem


Dispulit è multis Sanctorum cordibus, unde


Accendere suo nostrum de Lumine lumen.


Sic tamen ut quivis magis hinc sibi luceat ipsi


Ʋt tacito ad praesens reliquo veneremur honore,


Vivida quos totum celebrabit fama per orbem;






Nobile Bellotti Sidus sic emicat, omnes


Inter nutritios Templorum jure colendos,


Plena velut Stellis praefulget luna minutis.




Singula quae cernis pulchrae ornamenta Capellae,


Area, porta, solum, subsellia, rostra, fenestrae,


Bellottum unanimi compellant voce parentem.


Bellottum Sonitu reboat Campana Sonoro,


 sonant Bellottum, Balnea, Vici,


Compita, Bellotti jactant ad sidera nomen.


Quod Christi est cultor, simul excultor{que} sacrorum.






VATICINIUM.




Desine plura: sat est veterum: peragenda peractis


Succedant, meliora bonis, majora minutis.






Auspiciis huc misse sacris (Sanctissime Praesul)


Sensibus haec imis superum consulta repone,


Quae Tibi fatidico dispandit carmine Vates,


Laeta ruinoso proclamans omnia Templo.


Quo decet hanc specta, vultu, sine nube, sereno


Faecundam laudum segetem sine fine Tuarum.


Molliter ossa cubent Offae, ac Elphegi, Oliveri,


Rodberti, ac Birdi: merito celebrentur honore.


Debita Bellotto reddatur palma benigno.


Perpius extento Bellottus floreat aevo.


Non equidem invideo, laetor mage: gratulor illi.


Quod si tam celebrem mereatur guttula laudem,


Praemia quae referet, largos qui funditat imbres?






Tantum at honorifico cedes, Bellotte, Jacobo,


Effuso tenuis quantum imbri guttula cedit.


Bellotti guttis rorata Capella virescit;


Imbribus assiduis divi madefacta Jacobi,


Integra quam laetos diffundent Templa racemos?






Nec tamen haec aqueo, vitis cupit, imbre rigari:


Aureolo hanc Dana
m Saturabis, Jupiter, imbre.


Hinc quae spreta diu languenti Ecclesia morbo


Intabuit; vitam, Te, Te medicante, resumit,


Ʋt redit infuso flaccescens Vena Lyaeo.


Hujus sint alii fautores, sidera, fani:


Cinthia Bellottus;
 solus Tu 
 
Apollo.


Haec Tu vivifico reparabis membra calore:


Haec Tu magnifico decorabis Tecta nitore.






Aspice surgenti laetentur ut omnia Templo?


Grandaevum videor mihi prospectare 
Jacobum,


Aspectûs Virtute Tui, torpore solutum,


At{que} reornato scandentem climace Coelos.


Ʋt renovat vires? ut concipit aethera mente?


Insuper alatos, ultro citro{que} meantes


Coelicolas video, bona climacteribus istis


Nuncia portantes Superis: ac gaudia divûm


Inde renarrantes terris de Praesule tanto,


Te{que} cohortantes, (propria sat sponte citatum)


Euge: opus hoc mirae pietatis perfice Praesul!






Te nempe ad decus hoc peperit Natura; replevit


Dotibus eximiis Deus: Ars perfecta polivit:


In gremio refovet ter magni gratia regis:


Ditavit{que}
 bonis, tanta ad molimina, natis.


Huc opulenta Tibi sua fundit viscera Tellus,


Huc Tua Te Virtus, sorte ancillante, propellit.


Euge; opus hoc mirae pietatis perfice Praesul!


Aggredere aeternos (servit Tibi tempus) honores.


His petitur Coelum scalis, hac itur ad astra.






Nec mora fervet opus. Structor, Lapicida, peritus


Gypsator, Sculptor, Fusor, Vitrarius: omnes


Artifices instant ardentes. Maenia surgunt,


Dissita quae fuerant loca concamerantur Erismis;


Extima plumboso velantur tegmine, pulchris


Intima caelantur laquearibus: omnia miris


Sunt decorata modis: respondent omnia votis.


Nec deerunt Mystae, celebrent qui sacra, frequentes:


Sed numerosa brevi totam quae compleat aedem


Pompa Sacerdotum, Psalmodorum{que} decano


Praeducente chorum, cantabis grata 
Jehovae


Cantica, tantorum fonti, authori{que} bonorum.




Haec mihi praesagit mens non ignara futuri.






Corpore (quis neget hoc?) specioso haec Templa 
Jacobus


Donavit Praesul, (pia na mdecreta proborum


Aequivalent factis) animum Rex ipse 
Jacobus


(Hoc quo{que} quis dubitat?) tribuet. Deus alme 
Jacobi


Decretis benedic factis{que} utrius{que} 
Jacobi.


O fortunatam nimium bona si Tua nôris


Thermopolim,
 tali frueris quae Praesule, Rege!


Funde Deo summas ex imo pectore grates,


Et cole perpetuo pietatis honore 
Jacobos.






Quo pede caepisti, Praesul Sanctissime, pergas.










Episcopi Responsio.


Cupivi diu, has ruinas, & haec rudera videre & contemplari; has vero ruinas & haec rudera videre, & contemplari, jam dolet: Ingrediar tamen, sed hoc animo, ut nunquam, hoc more, sim reingressurus, priusquam isthaec melius tecta videro.










The Translation. AN HISTORICO-POETICAL ACCOUNT
 Of the various state of the Church of St. 
Peter
 and 
Paul
 in 
Bathe,
 from its first foundation, in the Year 
775,
 to this present Year 
1609. ALSO,
 A PROPHESIE of the happy Restau∣ration of the same Church.






WElcome, Right Reverend, to this place,


Invited both by Heart and Face;


Enter; but first let me relate


This ruin'd Churches former fate.






If ancient Monuments you turn over,


King 
Offa
 first you will discover


To found a Temple in this Place,


Arch-Bishop 
Elphege
 next his Grace;


The third (when 
Danish
 rage and fire


To ruine both these did conspire)


With greater cost 
John
 clep'd 
de Villa,


A French man born, but, silly fellow,


Profest the Art, if stories true.


The Grounds of which he never knew.






This man at 
Wells
 did take a pett,


And many years did Bishop sitt;




But once in rage remov'd his See,


And caus'd it here in 
Bathe
 to be.


Five hundred Mark the City cost


The Bishop from the King, at most.


Where he a neater Pile did raise,


Which did not long proclaim his praise;


For God not pleas'd with him that quackt,


Made Sacrifice his Pious act.






Brave 
Normandy
 a Fourth sent,


Monk 
Robert,
 who with good Intent


This ruin'd Fabrick did repair,


Compos'd the strife about the Chair;


Caus'd his Successors, story tells,


To bear the Name of 
Bathe
 and 
Wells.






At length, when Benefactors store


Had grac'd this Church where we adore,


The Three and twentieth Bishop came,


Who minded by his Lucky name,


Oliver King,
 could do no less


Than King and Olive both express.


Like Olive, peace and plenty great,


Were products of this Bishops Seat;


But, to say Truth, in this grand thing,


He did resemble more a King:


Roberts
 attempt away he took,


And rais'd this Chuch on which you look;


Strong Walls, fine Buttresses, the Roof,


With stately Pillars bearing proof:


Made Walks and Isles both long and fair:


In short, this handsom Pile did rear;


And doubtless it was his Intent,


(But sudden death did him prevent)


To have endow'd this Church with Lands,


(He must obey, when God Commands.)


So great a task it was, I wis,


To build so fine a Church as this!








Now lest the Work at stay should stand,


Good Prior
 
Bird
 put his last hand,


He finisht, with his cost, the Thing,


And found some work after a King.






But, Oh the fate of what is holy!


And, Oh the mad Religious folly!


Nothing that Sacred is must hold,


And men with Temples must make bold;


Abbeys are ruin'd, Churches sackt,


Roofs sold, and Rents are more than rackt;


Deluge of Sacriledge! what not?


Have Zealots thus their God forgot?


This innocent Chrysom's boxt about,


And torn in its Swadling-clout:


The Fabrick's spoil'd, they sell the Stones,


Glass, Lead, Bells, all except these Bones;


Of this great Spoil, what was the cause?


Was't love of Mony, or God's Laws?


'Tis that hath ruin'd Church and Priest,


And laid our greatest Heads to rest.


'Tis that extinguisht, and keeps out


The Lights, that erst shone all about.


None seek the Churches good, but all


What they steal from it, their own call;


Hence in the darkest blackest night,


Hath lodg'd the Cities greatest light.


But our good God, who loves his own,


This pitchy storm away hath blown,


And with his heavenly Lamp dispell'd,


The Chains of darkness which us held,




So that we now beholding are


To them for light they to us spare;


Yet so as each hath light enough


To give due praise without a snuff,


To whom deserts shall gain a Name,


And spread or'e all the World a fame.






So far hath 
Bellot
's Star outshin'd


Whoever hath to Church been kind,


As doth full-Moon, in Starry night,


Exceed the lesser Torches light.


The Chappel ornaments, the Floor,


The Benches, Windows, Seats and Door,


Call 
Bellot
 Father; and the Bell


Rings 
Bellot,
 though it ring a Knell.


Hospitals, Baths, Streets and High-waies,


Sound out the Noble 
Bellot
's praise,


'Cause he was Pious, and hath given


Much, whose Reward shall be in heaven.






THE PROPHESIE.




Forbear my Muse; change now thy Text,


Come to things greater, better next.


Enough of old things: now succeeds


A good supply to former Deeds.






Thou, Reverend Prelate, sent to us


By God Almighty's 
Mittimus,


Consider deeply what he saies


To thee, through my Prophetick bays,


Wishing this Church no other ill,


Than to be built, and flourish still.


View with clear aspect from the top,


Your endless Praises fruitful crop.


Let 
Offa, Elphege, Oliver,
 rest


Robert
 and 
Bird
 in Honours nest.




Let bounteous 
Bellot
 take the Palm,


And after Age his Name embalm,


I envy not, but more rejoyce,


And give him too my thankful Voice.


If to a drop this Laud be due,


What's to a greater stock, think you?


He well deserves a grateful sense


That showrs down Benevolence.






Bellot
 alone to 
James
 gives way,


Diff'ring as drop and showr may.


Bellot
's drops make the Chappel thrive,


When 
James
 divine long showrs shall give,


How'll all the Fabrick sprouting live?






This Vine loves not a Watery show'r;


Gold into 
Dande
 Jove will pour,


So that this Church that long hath been


Consumptive, by thy skill agen


Gets strength, as the flagg'd vein plumps up


And swells, with 
Bacchus
 cheerful cup.






Others this Church may somewhat steed,


Bellot
's the Moon, You Sun indeed:


With lively rays these limbs restore,


Thy Roof you'll nobly cover o're.






Behold! how all things now are glad,


Old 
Jacob
 wakes, and as a Lad


Enliven'd by Your presence here,


Ascends the Ladder quick and clear;


Look how he mounts, striving to rise.


And makes with vigour to the skies?






Methinks, I see the Winged host


Of their new Message seem to boast,


Telling the news above, and then


Returning with Gods Joy to men:


And quickning you, though quick before,


Compleat this work we You implore.








Nature hath bred you for this end;


To this God's great endowments tend.


Art you hath wrought, the King embraces,


Who seldom doth misplace his Graces.


And you hath aptly given a
 Mine,


Prepared for this great design:


The Earth her bowels op's to you,


And your good Nature prompts you too.


Finish the work, Time serves, 
My Lord,


Which will eternal praise afford.


This way you will to Heaven climbe,


And to the Stars your self sublime.






Praestò,
 The work advances, all


The Labouring men are come at call;


Builder, Stone-cutter, Plaisterer,


Graver, Bell-founder, Glazier,


All busie. Walls are up; The space


That common was, Arches embrace.


The outside's leaded, Roof adorn'd,


And all things to my wish perform'd.






Nor will there wanting be a Quire,


Which to this place may all retire,


And with resort, and their own Train


Fill this whole Temple once again.


Priests in their habits, Singers, and


A Dean the Quire to command:


Will Anthems sing to God above,


And praise the Fountain head, his love.


My mind perswades me this will be,


And I can at some distance see.






The Prelate 
James
 (none can deny)


Hath given a Body large and high,


(For those things that good men decree


Are equal with their deeds to me)


A Soul King 
James
 (who can this doubt?)


Will add, to make this compound out.








Now 
Jacob
's God bless 
James
's twain,


Their Actions and Intents maintain!


O happy 
Bathe,
 if thou didst know


From whence thy happiness doth flow!


A King and Bishop now thou hast,


Ne'r yet outdone in Ages past;


Give Thanks to God with all thy heart,


And Honour to both 
James
 impart.






Proceed, Most Worthy Prelate, in


The Thing you did so well begin.










The Bishop's Answer.


I have long desired to see and contemplate these Ruines and Rubbish; and now it grieves me to behold Them: However, I will enter, but with this intent, never to re-enter till I see them better cover'd.








For a fuller confirmation of the precedent parti∣culars, I think fit to insert in this place an extract out of an ancient Record, now in the house of my Honoured friend 
Edward Cosin
 Esquire, whose genius inclining him to the study of Antiquity, hath collected, and communicated it to me.


Johannes de Villula,
 the 16th. Bishop of 
Wells,
 having bought the Town of 
Bathe
 of King 
Henry
 the First for five hundred Marks, transferred his Seat unto that City, 1088. Hence grew a jar between the Monks of 
Bathe
 and Canons of 
Wells,
 about the Election of the Bishop. At last the difference was composed by that Bishop 
Robert
 whom before I spake of: 
That
 from thence forward the Bishop should be nominated from both places, and that precedency in the style should be given to 
Bathe. That
 in the Vacancy of the See, a great number of

 Delegates from both Churches should elect their Prelate, who being elected should be installed in them both: 
both
 of them to be reckon'd as the Bi∣shops Chapter, and the Grants and Patents con∣firmed in both. And so it stood until the reign of King 
Henry
 the Eighth; what time the Monastery of 
Bathe
 being dissolved, there passed an Act of Parliament for the Dean and Chapter of 
Wells,
 to make one sole Chapter for the Bishop, A. 35. H. 8. c. 15. 
Thus far Mr. Cosin.


The Church that now is, was first begun 
A. D.
 1137. by 
Oliver King
 Doctor of Laws, of Kings Colledge in 
Cambridge,
 Principal Secretary to three Monarchs of this Land, 
Edward
 the fourth, 
Edward
 the fifth, and 
Henry
 the seventh; Register of the Knights of the Garter, Bishop of 
Exeter,
 and thence translated hither 
Novemb.
 6. 1495. died 24th. of 
Jan.
 1503, and is thought to lie buried at 
Wind∣sor,
 where he was sometime Canon. It was four hundred seventy five years before it was compleat∣ed and brought to perfection (having made many halts by the way) and was finisht about the middle of King 
James
's Reign, near. 
A. D.
 1612, as by the Munificence of Noblemen, Knights, Gentlemen and others, so especially by the liberal hand of the Learned Dr. 
James Mountague
 Bishop of this Diocess, to whom the former Poem was directed, who at one time gave a thousand pounds towards its Reparation, and lies buried, by his own ap∣pointment under a fair Marble Monument, in the body of the Church, deceased 
July
 20. 1618, with this elegant Epitaph on the South-side:

MEMORIAE SACRUM PIETATE VIRTUTE ET DOCTRINA INSIGNIS 
JACOBUS MONTACUTUS
 EDVARDI MONTACUTI DE BOUGH∣TON IN COMITATU NORTHAMTO∣NIAE EQUITIS AURATI A SAR. CO∣MITIBUS DEDUCTA PROPAGINE FI∣LIUS QUINTOGENITUS A SAPIENTIS∣SIMO 
JACOBO
 REGE SACELLO RE∣GIO DECANUS PRAEPOSITUS AD EPISCOPATUM BATHONIENSEM PROMOTUS ET DEINDE AD WIN∣TONIENSEM OB SPECTATAM IN MAXIMIS NEGOTIIS FIDEM DEXTE∣RITATEM ET PRUDENTIAM IN SANCTIUS CONCILIUM ADSCITUS REGIQUE CUI CHARISSIMUS ERAT IN AULA ASSIDUUS IN MEDIO AC∣TUOSAE VITAE CURSU QUAM DEO ECCLESIAE ET PATRIAE DEVOVERAT AD AETERNAM VITAM EVOCATUS 20. JULII ANNO DOMINI 1618. AETATIS 50.


Sacred to Memory.


For Piety, Virtue and Learning, very eminent,
 James Montague, 
fifth Son of Sr.
 Edward Montague, 
of
 Boughton, 
in the County of
 Northampton, 
Knight, lineally descended from the Earls of
 Salisbury, 
by the most wise King
 James 
made Dean of the Chappel, then Bishop of
 Bathe, 
afterwards Bishop of
 Winche∣ster, 
and for his faithfulness, dexterity and prudence in weighty affairs, chosen one of the Privy Councel,

 and very much at Court, being in great favour with the King: In the midst of a busie life, which he had devoted to God, the Church, and Country, was sum∣moned to life everlasting,
 20 July 1618, 
in the
 50th. 
year of his age.


On the North side, this Inscription.


REVERENDISSIMUS HIC EPISCOPUS IN HOC TEMPLO ANTIQUISSIMO QUOD INTER ALIA MULTA EGRE∣GIA PIETATIS MONUMENTA MAXIMIS IMPENSIS INSTAURAVIT CORPUS DEPONI JUSSIT DONEC CHRISTO REDEMPTORI VIDEBITUR EUM CUM JUSTIS AD INTERMINATAM VITAM QUAM IN TERRIS SEMPER ANHE∣LAVIT EXCITARE 
EDVARDUS MONTACUTUS
 DE BOUGHTON 
HENRICUS MONTACUTUS
 CAPITALIS IN BANCO REGIO JUSTITIARIUS 
CAROLUS MONTACUTUS
 TESTA∣MENTI CURATOR ET 
SIDNEIUS MONTACUTUS
 A SUPPLICUM LI∣BELLIS EQUITES AURATI FRATRI OPTIME MERITO CUM LACHRIMIS POSUERUNT.


In this most Ancient Church, which, among many other Monuments of Piety, with great charge, he re∣paired; This most Reverend Bishop commanded his Body to be laid, until Christ the Redeemer shall please to raise him, with the Just, to life eternal, which, when on Earth, he earnestly desired.




Sir
 Edward Mountague 
of
 Boughton, 
Sir
 Henry Mountague 
Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench, Sir
 Charles Mountague 
his Executor, and Sir
 Sidney Mountague 
Master of the Requests, Knights, to their most deserving Brother, in much sorrow, erected this Monument.


Concerning 
Oliver King,
 the founder of this Church, Sr. 
John Harington
 tells this pretty story: That lying at 
Bathe,
 and musing or meditating one night late, after his Devotions and Prayers for the prosperity of 
Henry
 the Seventh and his Children (who were then all or most part living) to which King he was Principal Secretary, and by him pre∣ferred to this Bishoprick; he saw, or supposed he saw a Vision of the holy Trinity, with Angels as∣cending and descending by a Ladder, near to which there was a fair Olive Tree supporting a Crown, and a voice said, 
Let an
 Olive 
establish the Crown, and let a
 King 
restore the Church.
 Of this Dream or Vision he took exceeding great comfort, and told it divers of his friends, applying it to the King his Master in part, and some part to himself. To his Master, because the 
Olive
 being the Emblem or Hieroglyphick of 
Peace
 and 
Plenty
 seemed to him to allude to King 
Henry
 the Seventh, who was worthily counted the wisest and most peaceable King in all Europe of that age. To himself (for the wisest will flatter themselves sometimes) be∣cause he was not only a chief Counsellour to this King, and had been his Ambassadour to conclude a most Honourable Peace with 
Charles
 the Eighth, who paid, as 
Holinshead
 writeth, 745 Duckets, be∣sides a yearly Tribute of 25000 Crowns, but also he carried both the 
Olive
 and 
King
 in his Name; and therefore thought he was specially designed for

 this Church-work, to the advancement of which, he had an extraordinary inclination. Thus though (as St. 
Thomas
 of 
Aquin
 well noteth) all Dreams, be they never so sensible, will be found to halt in some part of their coherence: yet most certain it is, for the time, he was so transported with his Dream, that he presently set in hand with this Church, and at the West end thereof he caused a Representation to be graved of this Vision of the Trinity, the Angels and the Ladder; and on the North side the Olive and Crown, with certain 
French
 words (which I could not read) but in 
English
 is this verse taken out of the book of 
Judges,
 chap. 9.

Trees going to chese their King,


Said, be to us the Olive King.
 All which is so curiously cut and carved, as in the West part of 
England
 is no better work, than in the West end of this poor Church. And to make the credit of all this more authentick, he added this word to it, 
De sursum est, It is from on high.
 Thus much the Stones and Walls (though dumb witnesses, yet credible) do plainly testifie.


Thus far that Learned Knight, and Great Well-wisher to this Church; where it may be noted, that the Olive and Crown are on both sides of the Church, North and South, with an Elephant on each side of the Olive crown'd; and the words Sr. 
John
 saies he could not read, are not French, but Latin, being the old Translation of the English writ on both Pillars, of either side, in good Text hand, though now not so legible, above the Eng∣lish in this manner:



Ierunt ligna ut ungerent super se Regem,


Dixeruntque Olivae Impera nobis.


Trees going to chese their King,


Said, Be to us the
 Oliver King.
 Which gave occasion to some in the late Times to take it for a Prophesie, but was intended nothing more than to preserve the Memory of the Bishop that was Founder.








CHAP. XII.
 Of the Baths of 
Bathe.


COncerning the Nature, Use and Virtues of the Baths, I purpose, if God permit, to write a large and particular Account, in a Just Treatise on that Subject, consonant to my own Principles, which for the greater Credit of this Nation and Place (nothing having ever been before attempted in this kind) shall be in the general Language; the design of which I have expressed 
Chap.
 7. For I well remember what I writ in my Appendix, seven years ago, in these words: 
I come now to speak some∣thing of the Nature, Ʋse and Virtues of the Baths. And here it cannot be expected I should say much, be∣cause my Experience of them as yet hath been but lit∣tle, and the Observations I have made seem fitter, as they are intended, for a foundation to a greater Work, which Time and Variety of Experiments must compleat, than at present to be Communicated to the Publick. And to make some compensation for my Brevity in this

 Thing, which is justly deemed the most material of all other, I shall take the boldness to engage, as soon as Time and Opportunity shall permit, to make a through search into the Cause of the Heat, Nature, and Effi∣cacious Operations of the Baths, and perhaps give a more satisfactory Account of the former, than hath yet been given by any; and for the latter, I shall not build on the Hay and Stubble of the Talk and Rela∣tions of persons byast and concern'd, but on the solid basis of Reason, Observation, and Experience.
 And again, the last words: 
But I hope I may be excused on the score of my former Engagement, if I am not more particular at this time in things of this nature, till a just amassment of Observations and Experiments, and a rational deduction of Conclusions from them, which I hope in some time to accomplish, shall either confirm me in the opinion I now have of the Nature and Virtues of the Baths of
 Bathe, 
or supply me with a better.


Having, I say, intended a Piece of this nature, and also published many Particulars relating to this Affair, in the ensuing Century of Observations, which I now make publick, as a Specimen of my way of procedure, and ground-work or foundation of my next Superstructure, I shall content my self at present with some few Remarks.


The Baths then in some Things do agree; in others are different.


They agree in this, That though chiefly three in number, the King's, Cross, and Hot (the Queen's being but an Appendent to the King's, as the Le∣per's to the Hot) yet they all participate of the same Minerals, only the Hot Bath, if some of my Observations hold, hath something more than the King's, or Cross, both which as to the particulars, and particular proportions, in a Hogshead, Gallon,

 and Pint, are much the same, and what is defe∣ctive in one Ingredient in one Bath, is made up by another, in the other. So that herein the wonder∣ful Contrivance of the Almighty hath appeared, in making so fine a Composition of such various In∣gredients, and acted (with Reverence be it spoken) not only the Physician, but the Apothecary too, a good example and precedent for his Creatures to follow, who have liv'd to see that unhappy day, wherein a blear-ey'd 
Leah
 hath been advanc'd, though with shame and destruction too, above a legitimate 
Rachel.


They differ chiefly in Dimension, and degree of Heat.


In Dimension; The King's Bath being 57 foot, or 19 yards, 10 inches, long; 40 foot, 8 inches, or 13 yards ½ and 2 inches in breadth.


The Queen's, 8 yards, or 24 foot, 2 inches, in breadth; in length 25 foot, 4 inches; or 8 yards, 16 inches.


The Cross Bath, 24 foot; or 8 yards, 6 inches long; 19 foot 11 inches, or 6 yards ½ and 5 inches over Northward; 12 foot, or 4 yards, 7 inches over on the South.


The Hot Bath, 10 yards 8 inches ½ long; 4 yards 13 inches ½ broad South; 4 yards ½ and 5 inches over North.


From this undeniably is deduc'd that they differ in the Water they contain; for being of different dimensions, the greater must hold more, and the lesser less. To pursue this Curiosity a little further, I find by Gage, The King's Bath being 1 yard 18 inches in Water, to contain three hundred and fourteen Tun, thirty six Gallons.


The Queen's, eighty one Tun, three Hogsheads, and eleven Gallons.




The Cross, fifty three Tun, and forty seven Gallons.


The Hot, fifty four Tun, and twenty seven Gallons.


As to the difference arising from the degree of Heat, though I must acknowledg my defect of Ob∣servations in that kind, which I will hereafter sup∣ply, yet I may say thus much now, That the King's and Hot Baths are not more different in that parti∣cular than the Queen's, and Cross, and that this latter is the most temperate of all.


And here it may be noted, That what is written concerning the difference in degree of Heat in the Baths, is so to be understood as esteemed now; for the Hot Bath was formerly accounted the Hottest of all, whence it had its name, 
, the rest being ever, and so reputed Hot, though in some degrees inferior to that. Hence 
Jones
 says, From what he there deliver'd, the reason may be gather'd why some of the Waters of Baths break out most Hot, as the Hot Bath at 
Bathe;
 others meanly Hot, as the Cross Bath; others between both, as the King's Bath. And in another place; The King's Bath is Hot between both the other. But of this I intend, God willing, to make further Try∣als.


The Cause of this Variation I conceive to be not an Intention, and Remission of a Subterranean Fire, (which meeting with an Enemy that hath had so many recruits and reinforcements as the Water hath, and will have till the end of all Things, 'tis much should yet keep its ground, and not be extinct, to mention no other Absurdities at present, that unde∣niably follow on that 
Hypothesis,
 this Variation, I conceive, doth not arise on that score) but rather is caused by a greater or lesser fermentation, arising

 from the Acting of an Acid on an Alcalizate Salt, both which are contained in the Bath, and much as∣sisted by the vast Quantity of an impalpable Pow∣der, the greatest Ingredient in the Waters, and seems to serve for no other end, except, what shall be hereafter mentioned, to administer a perpetual supply to the Fermentation.


'Tis likewise observable, That where the greatest Heat is, as in the King's, and Hot Bath, there is the greatest Quantity of this fermentative matter, insomuch as I have Calculated that near 50 pound weight goes off in little more than 24 hours in the King's; but in the Cross Bath, where less need is, there is less of this gritty matter, and much less goes off in a longer time. So that having sometime resembled this Fermentation to Generation, the fa∣ther of it being an acid saline Spirit, and the mo∣ther this gritty matter and Alcalizate Salt, the Conjunction made, and the Thing produc'd, the father slips away invisibly in a Mist of Steam, and the mother passes out at a back-door as soon as may be, resigning the Work to be successively promoted in the same manner, to future generations. And indeed should the matter still continue that hath done its work, the Springs and Channels would be quickly obstructed, so that what is acid being of light burden, and more active, quickly exhales, and the more Corpulent passeth off by convenient Sluces and Draughts, as an Excrement, upon which the Wheel of Fermentation is kept continually going, by an immediate succession of new matter of the same kind. That not only the acid part, but the more fixt Salts also do in part exhale, may be found confirmed by the 88th. Observation, which cannot but part with something of their Substance in the 
Lucta
 of Fermentation.




Again, In some places where the fermentation is less, as in the Water of St. 
Vincents Rock
 near 
Bristol,
 which hath not half the heat that the Cross-Bath hath, the Water abates near the proportion in the quantity of Ingredients; and although for the most part the same, yet in so small a proportion, cannot act as a greater quantity would do, and the acidity being so little as scarce to coagulate Milk, or turn with Galls, may not be expected to do wonders in a fermentation.


To conceive a continuation of the Hot waters of 
Bathe
 to that of 
Bristol,
 by way of Drein, as some Ingenious persons have imagin'd, is unphilo∣sophical. For if very Salt water becomes insipid by running but the tenth part of that course under ground, how can it rationally be expected that any Salt should be left of that little in the Bath here, after such a tedious journey, in which it may hap∣pily meet with many fresh Subterranean passengers in cross roads, that may intrude upon it, and, by mixing with it rob it long before both of its Salt∣ness and Heat.


I must therefore say here, what I shall further discourse of more at large in another place, That since my first consideration of this matter, I was ever inclin'd to believe, that the cause of the Heat and impregnation of the Baths was not far off from the Baths themselves, 
(Coram adest quod quaerimus)
 for to me it seems not a little strange, that on dig∣ging so many Wells, Stone-quarries, Cole-pits, and other penetrations of the Earth to a considerable depth, that have been made about the City, no Hot water should appear, but only in one Stone-quarry near 
Dunkerton
 about an hundred years ago,
 mentioned by 
Jones
 to have been so hot, that they were fain to forbear working: The truth of which

 Relation I somewhat question, and rather believe the honest 
Cambrobritan,
 being a Stranger here, might the easier be imposed on by some fabulous Relator.


Another Argument for a different Fermentation I take to be the different forms of shooting of the Nitrous stiria's; otherwise, why should the Kings and Hot-Bath, that have the strongest heat, shoot into more compact needles, and much thicker than the Cross? but that the stronger fermentation ripens, and invigorates better the Crude matter of the shoots, when the other not so strong leaves the matter crude and weak.


Before I give a rough Draught of my own Hy∣pothesis, which I only here propose, and shall further, God willing, illustrate and polish in my next undertaking, I must premise these few parti∣culars, which in part contain a Survey of this Country.


First, That the ground on which the City of 
Bathe
 in good part stands, especially near the Baths, is raised ground, and that probably, under some yards of Gravel is a Bog, made by the confluence of Waters hither. This seems in good measure e∣vident from this, That on the digging some foun∣dations not long since, the Workmen came at last to a soft Mud, which yielding much, and a Soul∣diers Pike of a good length thrust into it, no bot∣tom was discovered, but a warm, Marly, Sulphurous mud adhering to the Pike. This was observ'd in the North and South-west parts of the Town.


Secondly, That the Springs of Cold water a∣bout this place are very numerous, insomuch that sometime since, having been desired by that Inge∣nious and Learned Knight Sr. 
Anthony Morgan,
 since

 dead in 
France,
 to search what Springs I could find hereabouts, in order to the making several mixtures, if that way we might give any light to a Fermentation; I remember I brought Water from twenty two several Springs, and might have done from as many more, within two miles com∣pass, on one side.


Thirdly, That the two Water-houses supplying the City, are placed on two Hills, one on the North, and another on the South, for the more convenient supply of the whole with Water.


Fourthly, That the Bowels of the Earth on the South of the Town, with the South-east and South-west parts, for four or five miles compass, are sufficiently replenisht with great plenty of Free∣stone, which supplies the Country round about with good Materials for building, and would do many Counties more were there a way agreed upon for its better conveyance.


Fifthly, That on the North part of the Town little or none of this Freestone is digged, but Wa∣ter arises in abundance, and on the Hills about 
Marshfield
 some Marcasites have been found, of which Vitriol is made, and probably more of that kind are contained in that ground. I mean not the white Marcasite found on 
Lansdown:
 what that was is notoriously known.


Sixthly, That another sort of Earth that abounds about 
Bathe,
 is blew Marle and Ochre. This is discovered almost in all sides of deep hollow ways, the River sides, and particularly at 
Lambridge,
 a mile off, is a blew Marly slate with Ochre sticking to it, and under that clear Ochre alone. And


Seventhly, That almost all things about the Bath, as Marle, Ochre, Freestone, Sand, Mud, Scum, Shells and Salts, will ferment on the affusion of any acid.




These things premised, I proceed to my Con∣jecture concerning the Rise, Continuation and Heat of the Baths; and man can do no more; for 
, 
the best Prophesie is but a good Guess.


I conceive then, that the Salts and Marle with the conflux of Waters into this compass of lower ground, being created in the beginning, and then placed under or near where the Baths now stand, by the virtue of those words, 
, 
increase
 and 
multiply,
 have increased ever since from their own seeds, in their proper Seminaries, as the great∣est part of the Creation doth and ever will, till the consummation of all things. Neither do I see much more reason to admire the breeding and in∣crease of those Minerals under ground, than the perpetual springing and inexhaustible growth of the little spires of Grass we tread on above it: But it ever was and will be the humor of the gene∣rality of Mankind to overlook what's before them, and pay their admiration to what they do not see, it faring with many other things as with Vertue in the Poet:

— 
Praesentem odimus


Sublatam ex oculis quaerimus invidi.


Vertue remov'd we dote on; present slight:


And darkness thus prefer before the light.
 The Salts being here sufficiently fixt, two large Currents of Water may come down upon them, and meet very near or under the Baths themselves; the one from the South, bringing with it its 
Cargo
 of Freestone, the commodity, as was said of that part of the Country; the other from the North, acuated by some Vitrioline Marcasites, over which

 it may pass, and meeting near the place with all this matter that is fermentative, a fermentation may arise sufficiently productive of what heat we find; considering especially the closeness of the Caverns of the Earth in which it is bred, where little air can abate it, but rather by that advantage, reduplicate the heat.


Much to this purpose are the words of that In∣genious and Learned Physician Dr. 
Sherley,
 whose Philosophical Essay came late to my hands, and some considerable time after I had framed, and in these words written, my own Hypothesis; yet in regard some coincidencies, though at this di∣stance, and without any converse, have happen'd, which may confirm and illustrate what is before discoursed, I shall, by his permission, crave leave to say, That if the words I now recite be under∣stood of the Bath-waters, as he intended them of Water in general, the duration and equality of these Waters will be better understood, and found to be according as I have before asserted. He therefore saith in the beginning of the eighth Se∣ction of this Philosophical Essay, p. 112. 
In the beginning God infused into the bosom of the Waters the Seeds of all those things that were afterwards to be made out of the Waters, setting them their con∣stant rules and laws of acting, and by the power of the words,
 Increase 
and
 Multiply, 
they had a faculty given them to continue themselves in the same order till the World shall be destroyed by fire; at which time all Seminal beings shall desert their gross bodies, and return to their first fountain and grand Exemplar, GOD, on whom they have at this time a constant de∣pendance.


This I am apt to believe might be made de∣monstrative, if digging about the Baths might be

 admitted and practic'd without prejudice to the Springs, which, 'tis feared, will ensue, and there∣fore I must be content with that kind of Demon∣stration, which Art will afford in imitation of Na∣ture, some of which I could now propose; but I will not prevent my self in things of this nature, and therefore shall end this Subject for the present with these two Remarks:


First, That the Baths having the same Minerals, and but little differing in proportion neither, must be equally advantagious in the same distempers, but with this difference, that the different degrees of Heat altering somewhat the case, judgment must ad∣vise what Bath the Patient shall be committed to; how long it may be convenient to stay, and what government is to be used more in one Bath than another, besides the determination of the Distemper 'tis proper to relieve.


And, Secondly, Whereas great discourse hath arisen here concerning the conveyance of some Nuts that were observed in the Cistern over the main Spring of the Kings Bath, upon the altera∣tion of a firm stone cross in the middle, to that pretty Wooden device that now stands there; some whereof were black and rotten, others fresh with their kernels in them, and some with shales very green about them: the way of passage may be con∣ceived to have been by the currents of Cold water from an open Spring, if not the River, near a Cop∣pice or Wood-side, with which the water of the Bath may in part be supply'd, the Bath being, as I suppose, the great Exchequer, into which the lesser Rivulets do return their tribute, and to which they pay their homage, as to their Liege Lord and Soveraign, constituted such by Him, by whom Kings reign, and from whom alone they receive their Scep∣ters.

 That these Nuts could not come, by a nearer cut, from the Bath-side, is most evident from this, That the Cistern was so well plaister'd about with Plaister of equal hardness with a stone, that it cost very many blows to get it up; presently from the rise of which the Nuts did appear, immediately shot up from the Springs themselves.


As to the Internal use of the Waters, so much of late applauded, and not without cause;
 as a grave Physician, sometime of this Place, hath in his Wri∣tings condemned that, the Reason of which he ne∣ver understood; so would not I on the contrary, give my Vote for that which I had not throughly examin'd, and on good grounds judged and found advantagious.


It being therefore clear, that Vitrioline, Nitrous, and Saline springs, are recommended by the most Intelligent Writers to be used as a drink; and the forementioned Salts, the two latter fixt and visible to the eye, the former more invisible, transient and halituous, being contained in the Waters, I may conclude them by good consequence to be potable and most proper to be drank. Neither is the heat offensive, but amicable to the stomach, and doth not of it self, unless ingurgitation procure it, incline to Vomit. But because the drinking of the Wa∣ters hath so much obtain'd, I have the more par∣ticularly discours'd of that in the two following Chapt
rs.








CHAP. XIII.
 Of the Use of the Bath-Water in Potion.


HAving in the close of the former Chapter de∣bated and determin'd in short the Question, Whether the Bath-water may be safely used inward∣ly, and on good grounds carried it in the Affirma∣tive: The next Thing I am to proceed to, is, The manner how, and what course is to be taken by those that would use it so as to find benefit thereby. But before I treat of this, I shall enervate one grand Objection, and then give some preparatory directi∣ons for the better information, and greater benefit of the Patient.




An OBJECTION.


It may then be said; That the Bath-Water, ac∣cording to present discoveries, containing those In∣gredients that may be prejudicial to the Body, the use of them in potion may not seem to be safe, and the best way to decry the internal use, is to Anato∣mize their body, and declare their Contents; some of which being gritty, and of a Lapideous nature, may obstruct the mesentery, milky veins, and other passages, and conduce much to the heaping up a fa∣bulous matter in the Body, and thereby give occasi∣on to the intolerable excruciations of the Stone and Gout, besides the foundation it may lay for other distempers; others being of a relaxing and effemi∣nating nature, may have no good effect and influence upon the Nervous parts, especially the Stomach and

 intestines, through which they pass; and therefore this use of the Waters seems rather to be avoided, and the inconveniences arising in probability from some parts 
non
-saline, may be thought much to overbear the advantages expected from the Salts.






The ANSWER.


To this, I think the Substance of all that can be objected, I return this Answer;


That the supposed Culpable parts in and about the Contents of the Bath-water, being only three, Grit, Bitumen and Sulphur, the former, though in the greatest proportion, is so finely wrought and intimately mixed with the Body of the Waters, that in truth it cannot deserve that name, and there∣fore I call it so in relation to the more brown and gritty, appearing on Evaporation,
 as I have else∣where observ'd; this then in the Waters that are drank being soft and impalpabable, and no magiste∣ry more finely pulveriz'd, must pass in Conjunction with the Water through all its Meanders; neither is the stay usually so long in the Body, as to occasion any fear of a Separation, which probably may be if they pass not well, and therein chiefly, I suppose, to lye the danger, the natural heat being not so vio∣lent, but of a more moderate and even tenour, and too weak to make an analysis of the Water in so short a time, or dissolve its body, as the fire doth, but having discharged its office, is discharged also by the usual ways of Evacuation, if the Water stay not in the Body too long.


Besides, The benefit of this Insipid magistery may not be a little; for if the acrimony of the blood be abated, and sharp humours allay'd, miti∣gated

 and dulcifi'd, as the Experience of many per∣sons, the two Summers last past especially seem to testifie; I know nothing else in the Waters I can attribute this effect with greater justice to, than this impalpable powder, which like Coral and Pearls, being in themselves gritty and insipid, are known to produce the same effects without preju∣dice to the body, by imbibing the Acrimony, or altering the property of those humors they are found to allay. I confess indeed, some expecta∣tion might in reason be of a fermentation within, as by the means of this powder, in good part▪ there probably hath been without in the Waters them∣selves, according to my Hypothesis mentioned in the former Chapter, if the Powder were separated and immediately mixed with acids in the Bowels, Stomach, Spleen, or elsewhere, upon which, Eru∣ctations, Inflations, and other inconveniences might ensue; but the Water passing quickly off, and there being not that constant supply as underground, nor proportionable acids neither, as may be there, no such ill effects can reasonably be fear'd, nor yet have been observ'd.


As to 
Bitumen,
 either Liquid or Solid, the first of which is chiefly condemned by Mineral Writers, no inconvenience can arise from that, in regard I do not conceive it mixed, or indeed capable of mixing with the body of the Waters, but is at some certain times eructed from the Springs, chiefly in the Months of 
June, July
 and 
August,
 it ascends, being driven through the Waters, without mixture, to the surface, and there remains as a Scum, which taken off and dried burns like Stone-pitch, and is noted elsewhere:
 So that the quantity being in∣considerable to any other of the Minerals, and the times of breeding and appearing not constant, with

 an incapacity of mixing with the body of the Wa∣ters, otherwise certainly it would not ascend and float on the surface as we find it doth: these things, I say, considered, I cannot but think it strange, the Learned Dr. 
Jorden
 should assert these Baths to be Bituminous 
à praedominio,
 or consist principally of Bitumen, which I shall hereafter make appear to be but a less principal Principle, and rather an ap∣purtenance to, than an Ingredient in the waters. So much also I must further say, That the swim∣ming of a Bituminous substance on the surface of the waters; the shrivelling of the tops of the fingers in the Bath; and the bare smell of Sulphur by the Baths-side; are no masculine foundations for as∣serting those Principles, and making 
that
 the great∣est ingredient in the waters, that is not capable of mixing with them.


Whereas 
Sulphur
 (the third Ingredient of Dr. 
Jorden,
 and least proportionable,
 affirming the Baths to consist principally of Bitumen, with Nitre and some Sulphur) is in much greater proportion than the Bitumen mentioned but now, and contains, I judge, near a fourth part of the courser Contents, the result of evaporation, for so much or there∣bouts is lost in Calcination, this, I say, though much in quantity, cannot relax or effeminate, either by fattiness or otherwise, as some Authors pretend; for, whatever it may have of that, 'tis certainly so much alter'd by the other Ingredients into whose bosom it is taken, and to which it is so nearly u∣nited, that nothing of that nature doth appear at any time, and is in nothing discovered more than its inflammability. We ought therefore here to expect the known vertues and benefits of Sulphur, to befriend the Lungs, to comfort and cherish weak parts, and do all those good offices we experience

 in a Composition though made of many things be∣sides, rather than to imagine the Water of the Foun∣tain 
Salmacis,
 to be continued hither, or be fright∣ed with any 
Sardanapalian
 nature in Sulphur, which may create inconveniences we know not what. But if any person, notwithstanding what hath been said to the contrary, may be in some suspicion of any no∣cument from the Sulphur, he may have a Salt made out of the Waters to be dissolved in it, in which Sulphur is not concern'd, and so the Waters may be drank in lesser proportion.


Having therefore combated these three supposed Enemies to the Waters inward use, and found them weak and insufficient to maintain the opposition they pretend to, the greater confirmation will accrue from the consideration of the three-fold encourage∣ment, arising from the mixture of the triple Salt, Nitre, Salt and Vitriol, the further enlargement on which I shall at present forbear, and now give some few directions for the Patient's benefit I men∣tioned before.


The first of which is, That 'tis very necessary the Body be well prepar'd before the Waters be ta∣ken, and consequently that good advice be had whe∣ther it be proper or no, for the inconsiderate use of any thing must be very prejudicial; and the best rea∣son why many Effects are not produc'd, is because in reason they could not be expected. This prepa∣ration must be made, not slightly with a little Bath-water and Salt, Syrup of Roses, and Manna, and such like alimentary Medicines, but with proper, effectual, and frequent Purgations, as the knowing Physician will think requisite sometimes. For what Impurities are 
in primis viis,
 the Stomach, Inte∣stines, 
&c.
 will certainly with the Current be car∣ried further into the Body, defile the blood, and

 thereby create an Iliad of evils; whereas if the Bo∣dy be well prepar'd, the Water hath besides a cleaner passage, a more free one too, unto the parts it must relieve.


'Tis also less beneficial for the Patient to drink the Water in the Bath, and contrary to the rules and directions of intelligent Physicians; but if thirst be troublesom, somewhat may be taken to al∣lay that, and half an hour before rising a quantity may be drank, and the rest in bed, if occasion shall require; otherwise to set aside some time for drink∣ing alone, and never, during that time, to use the Bath at all, is what may give both Uses due liberty to exert their operations, and not cramp or supplant one another, as they often do when made use of together.


It is likewise requisite that a good course of Diet be observed in the use of the Waters, both as to Meat and Drink; that dinner be of meats of light and easie digestion, at twelve or one a clock, when the Waters have made a considerable pass; and that supper be in good time, that the Body may be clear against the next morning again.


The best time for drinking is in the morning ear∣ly, from the Pump, at the place it self, if it may be, otherwise, if near, at home, very warm, with a quarter of an hours walking after every Pint or Quart, at utmost; arising from three to six pints, four to eight, or five to ten, as the Body will bear, for no set gage can be given; and the best Rule is, that it ought to be taken 
pro Tolerantia,
 every one as they are able to bear, without ingurgitation, or relucting again. The number of days, 7, 14, 21, or a month, after which time I have observ'd the like effects not to be produc'd, as in the intermedi∣ate space, and therefore none ought to use it longer at one season.








But these Things, and many more of this nature, shall be further discuss'd, and the whole Circuit of the way of drinking gon, and comprehended, in the Solution of the following Questions, which I shall only here propound.




Question I.


Whether the Bath-water ought to be drank Hot, or Cold?


Quest. II.


Whether in a great or little Quantity?


Quest. III.


Whether it may be drank at Meals?


Quest. IV.


Whether Bathing and Drinking may be done on the same day?


Quest. V.


Whether Drinking may be in the morning, and Bathing in the evening of the same day?


Quest. VI.


Whether the Bath-water ought to be taken many days together, or else some days to Bathe, and others to Drink?


Quest. VII.


Whether large Draughts may be taken, or more moderate; and what time is required should be be∣tween the Draughts?




Quest. VIII.


How many days it is convenient the Bath-water should be drank?


Quest. IX.


Whether any Medicines may be usefully taken with the Waters, to further their operation?


Quest. X.


What times of the year are most proper to Drink it in?


Quest. XI.


Whether the Bath-water may be taken in Winter?


Quest. XII.


Whether the Leap-year hath any malign Influence on drinking the Waters?


Quest. XIII.


Whether the Waters may be safely used in the Dog-days?


Quest. XIV.


Which is first to be done, either Bathing, or Drink∣ing?




To give a greater security and Credit to the drinking these Waters, with which I shall conclude this Chapter, it may be noted, That, besides the common Discourse of things within the memory of

 man, the Bath-water hath been order'd to be drank above an hundred years ago;
 for I find in a Physi∣cian that writ concerning them, 
A.D.
 1572. among other things, these directions:


About an hour after Sun-rising in the morning, drink the Water out of the Spring; the Body afore purged, the digestion fulfilled, and the Bath first cleansed, remaining clean six hours before.


So much of the Water as shall not be grievous to the Stomach may be drank.


The Water being drank, the Patient must walk gently a few paces in a temperate air.


By which it appears, how careful they were then of preparing the Body, and having the Water pure, which ought not to be less regarded now, other∣wise the danger will be more, and the benefit less, according to the right or wrong use of the Waters. That this was discontinu'd, no better reason, I think, can be given, than the Humour of the Times, to which also, a want of a due method in drinking, and a true understanding of the nature of the Wa∣ters, may much conduce.










CHAP. XIV.
 Of the Virtues of the Bath-water taken inwardly.


THat the Water, and consequently the Salt ex∣tracted from it, and dissolved in it, may not be defrauded of their just Commendation internally used by way of Potion, as well as by Bathing, or Lotion, outwardly, and that it may be rightly made use of in a due way and manner, without expecting more from it than in reason is to be done; I shall give a short Account of the Distempers in which it may be profitable, and used with advan∣tage.


And first, in General, I conceive it very proper in all Diseases or Symptoms, that require cooling, cleansing, opening, or gentle Evacuation; under which Heads are comprehended many Maladies, which I shall but briefly touch on, and leave the fuller discovery of its Virtues to experience, and a longer use.


I shall begin with the Stomach, both in regard it is the part it first descends into, and also, because in righting that, it is a general Benefactor to the whole Body, the use of the Stomach being of absolute ne∣cessity to every part, without which there can be no supply.


It must therefore infallibly cleanse this useful Re∣ceptacle from any impurities lodging in the Bottom or Plicatures thereof, (which may render what is taken in more foul) and prepare it the better for digestion of the food, on which depends the main∣tenance

 of the lesser Universe, conducing much this way to the making better Chyle, purer blood, and more clear and active spirits, the wheels and ma∣chines of all sense and motion.


The next Advantage is, That it procures an Ap∣petite, and makes those that drink it receive and enjoy their food with more delight and satisfaction. This is generally known to all that use it, and is ef∣fected partly by removing what lines the inner Coat of the Stomach with too much Viscosity, with which the fibres, and nervous filaments, the Organs of Sensation, are obstructed; partly by an Esurine quality residing in the Salt, provoking the desire of Sustenance, which we call Hunger, by its immedi∣ate application to the parts mentioned before. And in this Esurine Quality it doth exceed Common Water, of which 
Hippocrates
 hath written, That it makes men hungry; 
viz.
 by its washing and cleansing the Stomach, as is declared before; but this by the mixture of the Salt, is made more ef∣fectual.


A third Convenience is, That it allays Thirst, which is often very troublesom, and sometimes dan∣gerous to take in Liquors to suppress it, that may create farther disturbances in the Body, and prove more offensive; whereas this, by its cooling and moistening nature, is the best Remedy that can be provided, and that in no great proportion neither, as hath been often experimented.


It is also of good use in the Heart-burning, or 
Cardialgia,
 occasioned by the sharpness and acri∣mony of a bilious humour, vellicating the nerves and membranes of the upper orifice of the Sto∣mach, called by the Ancients, by reason of its great communication therewith, the Heart; which sharp and acrimonious humour it alters, washes off, and

 at last evacuates, upon which the Passion ceaseth, and ease doth ensue.


Also it clears by its immediate passage out of the Stomach, for some water, I suppose, doth pass that way, whatever obstructions are found in the Ves∣sels about the Stomach, relating either to that or the Caul, arising from the 
Vena Porta,
 and known commonly among Anatomists by the hard names of 
Venae Gastricae, Epiplociae,
 and 
Gastro-Epiplociae,
 conveying what is transmitted from the Celiack Ar∣tery, to the Liver, and so by the 
Vena Cava,
 to the Heart, according to the undoubted and esta∣blished doctrine of the Circulation.


Moreover, It is of singular use in all Fluxes, whether with blood, or without; Diarrhea's, Dy∣senteries, or bloody Urine; not that it hath any strong astringent quality, which oftentimes is pre∣judicial, but by its absterging and cleansing virtue, and gently evacuative withal, it allays Acrimony, sweeps away pungent particles, and discharges them by the draught. However, if astringent Medicines shall at any time be judged necessary, the Cure will be facilitated, and more speedily performed, if the Water be drank, or used by Clyster, or both ways made use of, before they are advised, which will be a good preparatory to other Remedies.


It is also good in the Colick, on the account be∣fore specified, and with the addition of its Heat; insomuch that those that drink the Bath-water, are observed to break more wind than other people, and find great relief in that case.


It is proper also in the Distemper that is com∣monly, though improperly, called the Heat of the Liver, when the Face is red, pimpled, and the Bo∣dy afflicted with cholerick and pustulous Eruptions, having its foundation in the blood, which the Wa∣ter

 attemperates, and brings down to a just degree, proportionable to the Natural and Balsamick Tem∣per of its prime Composure.


It opens likewise the obstructions of the Liver, Spleen and Gall, and therefore proper in the Spleen, so far as it ariseth from that Cause, and not impro∣per, but very advantagious, in the Scurvy, Jaundise, and obstructions of the Mesentery, which, if the Waters pass, must be much advantage to the Body; in regard there most commonly lyes the 
Sentina Corporis,
 or Sink of the whole, which is cleansed this way, as the Sewers in 
Bristow,
 by St. 
David
's Flood.


It is also very beneficial, if moderately taken, in the Gravel of the Kidneys, or any Gravel or Phlegm obstructing them, or the Ureters, which it undeni∣ably cleanseth, and prevents Concretions, which may afterward terminate in Tophes and Stones; so that 'tis a good preservative against the Stone, and will dissolve what is not too firmly impacted, which may be discover'd, if the water pass not freely that way.


It is also of incomparable use in the 
Diabetes,
 or pissing Disease, which is usually attended with a great drought, which it allays above any thing; and, the quantity moderated for fear of pissing too much, produces great effects, as hath been experi∣enced of late by a Person of Honour.


I doubt not also to commend it in the Dropsie, but care must be taken that it pass well away, other∣wise it may prove more prejudicial than advan∣tagious. The like also may be said of the Gout.


'Tis beneficial likewise in the Whites in Women, and what is somewhat consequential, prepares them for Conception; so that in some kinds of Barren∣ness,

 no more effectual Medicine can be used. 
Pli∣nius dicit, Aquarum aliquas sterilitatem foeminarum abolere, & conceptus ipsis representare, sicut
 Sinues∣sanas 
in
 Campania; Thespiarum 
fontis in
 Boeotia; Elati 
fluminis in
 Arcadia; 
qui effectus significant hu∣jusmodi Aquas esse Nitrosas: Etenim hae vulvam, quo∣niam eam abstergunt, Conceptioni faciunt habilem,
 saith 
Georg. Agricola;
 and again, a little after,
 
Nitrosae vulvam ad Concipiendum aptam faciunt. Nitrous Waters dispose the Matrix to Conception.
 So that I question not but that outwardly and inwardly used, but chiefly the latter, these Waters are very advantagious in that condition.


The inward use is also very profitable in all foul∣ness of the Blood, the Itch, Scabs, Leprosie, and the Worms.


For the Distempers of the Head it may be less useful, being somewhat remote, yet in many not prejudicial; for the fore-quoted Author says, speaking of Nitrous Waters; 
Capita, succis frigid s qui mentem obtundunt, repleta exiccantes & robo∣rantes, tandem mentem denuo acuere, & sanitati re∣stituere possunt. Those Heads that are filled with cold humours, which dull the mind, Nitrous Waters, by their drying and corroborating faculty, do relieve; and sharpening the understanding, restore to perfect health.
 Yet in regard this may be referred to the general Head of Obstructions, as before, I shall say no more at this time of the Virtues of the Water in parti∣cular: only add what 
Kircher
 says of Nitrous Wa∣ters in his Chapter of that Subject: 
When Nitre is
 
predominant, it makes the Water that hath imbib'd it powerful in operation; enables it to correct an ill habit of Body, which such as are phlegmatick are prone to; it looses the Belly; is good in the diseases of the Nerves, and for such as are subject to defluxions

 upon the Lungs; heals the Itch, and other diseases of the Skin; cures the ringing of the Ears, dropt into them; and, in a word, makes it to be of an emi∣nent absterging property.
 Where it may be noted, That whereas this Author affirms Nitrous Waters to be good for such as are subject to defluxions upon the Lungs, and consequently for those that are weakned by a consumptive disposition, in extenua∣ted persons; it is easie to determine to which of the Minerals chiefly we may attribute that great advan∣tage an Eminent Chirurgion of this Nation hath lately found by drinking the Waters, who from a thin body, and hoarse voice, hath now recover'd a plump Corpulency, clear speech, and good habit of Body and Lungs, to the great credit and reputa∣tion of the Water.


For the satisfaction of those that desire to know which way the Water comes to the Kidneys and Bladder, whereby they may somewhat judg of the usefulness of the Water, and true extent of its operation; I shall briefly, for a close, discourse of that.


The Drink, or Water, which descends into the Stomach by the Gullet, passes thence, either imme∣diately by the Veins, that have a more immediate relation to the Stomach, Caul, 
&c.
 or mediately, by the lower orifice of the Stomach, called 
Pylorus,
 into the Guts, whence the most part passeth by the milky Veins to the 
Lumbar glandules,
 or Kernels of the Kidneys, ascribed to the Learned D. 
Th. Bartholine,
 Professor at 
Copenhagen,
 as the first inventer, and answering to the Receptacle of Chyle in 
Brutes;
 and partly, perhaps, by the Mesaraicks, passeth to the Liver. From those 
Glandules,
 or the Receptacle, some affirm that the Potulent mat∣ter passeth directly to the Emulgents and Kidneys;

 but since this opinion seems not to be beyond dis∣pute, as I have noted elsewhere, I shall add no more as to that here, only admit, that the greatest share of it passes from the Receptacle or 
Glandules,
 by the milky veins of the Breast, into the right Ven∣tricle of the Heart, thence, through the Lungs, into the left, then into the great Artery, and so, by the Circular motion of the Blood, is carried to the emulgent Arteries, and discharged into the Kid∣neys, where, by reason of their fabrick, aptly ac∣commodated to the work of Straining, the Serum is separated from the Blood, and drops down by the Ureters, into the Bladder, whence through the 
Ʋrethra,
 or passage of the Yard, it again visiteth the open air, where I shall now leave it, as of no further use, till it come into the Urinal, and meet with some juggling and quacking Phy∣sician.








CHAP. XV.
 Of the Water of St. 
Vincent
's Rock, near 
Bristol.


HAving in the 12th. Chapter of this Discourse made some mention of this Water, as a neighbouring Water to 
Bathe,
 and supposed only a Continuation thither, which I did not think pro∣bable on the Reasons there alledged; it will not be altogether improper in this place, to treat a little more largely of that, which hath a name among the useful Mineral Waters of this Land.


As to the Principles of this Hot-Well Water, as 'tis usually call'd, without which the Reason of the Virtues can never be understood, they have been variously reported; what I have found on my own observation, I here declare.


On the Evaporation of two Gallons of the Wa∣ter, I had ℈v. of the Contents; of which ℈iv. were a reddish ferrugineous Earth, somewhat re∣sembling in colour, an Iron Ore, but in substance, very light and friable, with a mixture of a Lime-stone: The other ℈. which the Lixivium gave me, evaporated in Glass, seemed to be Alom, yet in re∣gard the Lime-stone may counterfeit Alom, especi¦ally when precipitated, I could not absolutely con∣clude it to be Aluminous.


To be a little better satisfied, I caused Mr. 
Ri∣chard Millechape,
 an industrious and skilful Apothe∣cary in 
Bristol,
 to evaporate one Hogshead of the Water of the Hot-Well, which he did in a furnace, first, to three or four Gallons, afterwards finished

 it in an evaporating Glass, and sent me the Con∣tents, which were little wanting of ℥v ss. four Ounces of which were, on examination, that red, rusty colour'd Earth, mentioned before, and some∣what, though much less in quantity, more white.


Upon this 
non
-Saline part, as I call it, to distin∣guish it from the Saline part that constitutes the Lixivium, being put into a Crucible and calcin'd, I observ'd: That the red Earth was not harder, but more friable, and lost its rusty colour, becoming more blew; but the white being cold, and mixed with fair water, did, upon the first injection, hiss, and afterwards dissolve, leaving the water white, and a Limy residence in the bottom of the Vessel I infused it in; and both white and blew, after infu∣sion, being dryed again, became very white and limy.


The other part being Saline imbibed into a Lixi∣vium, I evaporated away to half a Pint, and set∣ting it in a cool pla
, found the next morning, it had shot into long 
nall Stiria's, much resembling those of the Cross Bath here, to the quantity of ʒiii. the remaining part of the Liquor that did not shoot, I breath'd away, and had ℥i. of another kind of Salt, now under examination; so that the Saline part is here much exceeded by the 
non
-Saline, to which it seems to bear proportionably not much more than a 5th. part, and to be contained accor∣ding to this Estimate, scarce twelve Grains in a Gallon, whereas that of 
Bathe
 hath about forty impure.


To give then a short Account of the Principles of this Water, I judg it to consist of Iron, a Nitro-Sulphureous Salt, and some Lime-stone, according to the proportions before deliver'd, and the Con∣tents

 tents Saline, and 
non
-Saline, to be, in all, near half as much as in the Waters of 
Bathe,
 where the Salts are a third, and here a fifth, or thereabout, as was mentioned before.


That very little of an acid is contained in these Waters, may appear from this, That neither the cold Water, nor a strong Lixivium made of the Salt, will either turn with Galls, or coagulate Milk; neither doth any thing glebous shew it self among the Shoots I have had yet.


What the other Salt is, which I have not yet ful∣ly examin'd, and tasts much Alcalizate, I do here promise to declare on another occasion: only for the present, which is all I shall say of the Principles of this Water now, To make it further evident, that this is Lime-stone, after the 
non
-Saline part was well calcin'd, with a strong fire, in the water of that I decocted Sulphur, which it did dissolve, and was precipitated with a fetid smell, both by di∣still'd Vinegar, Spirit of Vitriol, and Oyl of Tar∣tar, in a considerable quantity.


This Water then though participating of the same Salts with the Water of 
Bathe,
 but not in that proportion, cannot be expected to be as advantagi∣ous in the same Distempers, as it is less hot; but containing so much of Iron, hath that advantage above it, and may be as effectual as 
Tunbridg
 Wa∣ters, in any Diseases that Water is proper for, and, for ought I know, do every way as well.








CHAP. XVI.
 Of 
Castle-Cary
 Water.


THE Mineral Water in 
Somersetshire,
 common∣ly known by the name of 
Castle-Cary,
 or 
Alford
-water, being of a quick working nature, and by some persons made use of at 
Bathe,
 deserves also an Examination; which I the rather do here, in regard it may confirm and illustrate what I for∣merly discourst of, concerning the Nature and Vir∣tues of the Baths of 
Bathe,
 to which it may be also very subservient.


By Tryals therefore, according as I had done on the Waters of 
Bathe
 and 
Bristol,
 I find it to consist of some parts Saline, some 
non
-Saline. The Sa∣line part is chiefly Nitrous, Nitre being almost double to the other Salts; and therefore I judg this Water, 
Nitrosa à praedominio;
 Nitre appearing in a nauseous taste, apparent bitterness, cooling, pe∣netrating, and shooting into as long and firm Sti∣ria's, as I have ever seen in the King's, or Hot Baths.


The other Salt, is common brown Salt, arising, I conceive, from a small Rock or Mine, of that sort of Salt in the ground about the Spring. This, I said, is little more than half the proportion of the former, and shews it self in proper Squares or Cubes, peculiar to that Salt, the Nitre shooting first, and this Salt last of all.


The parts 
non
-Saline are likewise double:


First, A red Gritt, arising also from a Rock of that colour, and is the proper Gritt of the ground;

 next the Earth under the Sward, of which I am now to treat a little. The Earth under the surface of the ground is first, a stiff blew Marl: under that a white Clay: and last of all the Red Rock.


The Earth, the second part 
non
-Saline contain∣ed in the Water, is chiefly the latter, I mean the white Clay, which with the Rocky Sediment, makes up near the proportion of the brown Salt, or rather somewhat more, the Rock bearing not a fourth part to the Clay.


Out of 12 Gallons of this Water wanting 3 Pints, I had ℥18. ʒvi ss. of the Contents, besides dross and scum in the depuration of the Water, of which ℥iii. Nitre; ℥i. ʒvi. brown Salt; and ℥ii. Earth and Rock. ℥iii. gr. 30. lost in working. So that ℥ss. of Salt is contained in every Gallon of the Water, or proportionably ʒss. in every Pint, or between 20 and 30 Grains, of which two parts are Nitre, and one brown Salt.


Note, That out of the quantity of Water men∣tioned before, I had of the pure refined Salt only ℥iv. 2 Drams, and 40 Grains, in a Gallon; 20 Grains in a Pint.


This Water then must be of good use to cool, cleanse, penetrate and attenuate gross humours; allay acrimony; attemperate and suppress undue fermentation. Good in the Spleen, Scurvy, Jaun∣dise, and all obstructions of the Mesentery and Bowels, having all those properties 
Kircher
 gives of Nitrous Waters, mentioned 
Chap.
 14.


It cleanses the Kidneys and Ureters, and is very beneficial in the Stone, moving by Siege, Urine and Sweat, and that very effectually, in regard the Minerals are so strongly imbibed, which makes it better to be mixed with the Water from the Springs

 at 
Bathe,
 which, having the same Salts are less, operative, because less impregnated.


And thus having discours'd of Three Mineral Waters, by the Salts, the main of their Compositi∣on, somewhat related, St. 
Vincent
's 
Hot Well,
 less impregnated; 
Bathe,
 more; and 
Castle-Cary Wa∣ter,
 in the highest degree; I hope the best use will be made of them all. And so I take leave of this Subject for the present, referring the Curious to more Particulars, concerning the principal part of my Design, to the ensuing 
Century of Observa∣tions.




















A CENTURY OF Observations: Containing further DISCOVERIES Of the Nature of the HOT WATERS at 
BATHE;
 With the Contents, Property, and Distinction of each Bath, in particular.


By 
T.G. M.B.


LONDON,
 Printed for 
Henry Brome.
 MDCLXXVI.














OBSERVATIONES HYDROSTATICAE;
 OR, OBSERVATIONS Relating to the Waters Weight.




OBSERV.
 I.


T
HAT the Weight of the Water of all the Baths is much alike, only the Hot Bath Water is somewhat lighter than the King's and Cross, as is further evidenced in the fol∣lowing Observations.






Observ.
 II.


That the Bath-water if exactly weighed, is

 lighter than Common Water by 2 ounces in a 
llon; for 12 Gallons of the Bath-water weigh∣
 
 95 pound 14 ounces, whereas Common 
 as much weighed 97 pound, 6 ounces; 24 
s, or 
lb
iss. difference. The like will hold in 
ller proportions, as ʒii. in a Pint, and ℥i. in a 
nt, and ℥i. in a Pottle. Note,


That this Observation was made in Frost, and must be understood of Bath-water cold. See 
Obs.
 IV.






Observ.
 III.


That a Gallon of the Bath-water hot, weighed 8 pound, 8 ounces; 2 pound, 2 ounces, the Quart: Cold, 8 pound, 2 ounces and half; 2 pound ʒv. the Quart. 5 ounces and half in a Gallon wanting; ʒxi. in a Quart; ʒvss. in every Pint.






Observ.
 IV.


That the usual proportion in open dry weather is Common Water 
lb
i. ʒvi. the Pint; Bath-water hot 
lb
i. ʒv. Bath-water cold 
lb
i. ʒiv. Bath-water 1 ounce in a Gallon less cold than hot; ℥i. lighter than Common Water hot; ℥ii. cold. Note,


That this Observation is chiefly to be understood of the King's and Cross Bath; and of the Mea∣sure, Weights and Scales used at that time.






Observ.
 V.


That Bath-water hot being weighed a second time, in like proportion, against Common Water, in open Scale, both Waters did very near, in open weather, balance each other, but standing in the Scale, till the Bath-water was cold, the Bath-wa∣ter

 required ʒii. in a Pint, to make up the Ba∣lance.






Observ.
 VI.


That on another Tryal made 
Nov.
 18. 75. in open weather, Bath-water hot, and Common Wa∣ter did weigh much alike; but cold, wanted ʒii. in a Pint of its own weight hot, and (consequent∣ly) was ʒii. in a Pint, or ℥ii. in a Gallon, lighter than Common Water.






Observ.
 VII.


That at any time, Bath-water hot, nor cold, was not heavier than Common Spring-water.






Observ.
 VIII.


That the same Pint of Bath-water weighed at the first 12 hours end, after taking from the Springs, standing 12 hours longer, did weigh lighter by ʒi.






Observ.
 IX.


That by a Pint, Wine-measure, the Cross Bath Water exactly weighed, 17. 
Nov.
 75. did weigh 
lb
i. ℥i. ʒv. and 8 grains.






Observ.
 X.


That the King's Bath Water weighed much the same, by the same Measure, Weights and Scales, at the same time, and, if any difference, the King's was somewhat heavier, being immediately weighed in the dry-Pump Room.








Observ.
 XI.


That the Hot Bath Water 1 Pint, weighed then at the King's Bath, did weigh 
lb
i. ℥i. ʒiii. ʒss. and 4 grains; but at the Hot Bath, with the same Measure, Weights and Scales, weighed 
lb
i. ℥i. ʒiv. and 12 grains; 38 grains more than at the King's Bath.






Observ.
 XII.


That the Hot Bath Water, one Pint, weighed ℈ii. 8 grains lighter than the Cros
.






Observ.
 XIII.


That the Water of the Hot Bath, one Pint, weighed 42 grains lighter than the Kings.






Observ.
 XIV.


That the two former Observations immediately foregoing, were made with the Hot Bath Water, against the just weight of the King's and Cross, and the Measure twice filled with the greatest ex∣actness, may cause this little Variation of 6 grains between King's and Cross; but if the estimate be made from the weight of the King's, Cross, and Hot Bath Water, at, or near their respective Pumps (as in 
Obs.
 9, 10, 11.) then the Hot Bath Water, one Pint, is 56 grains lighter than either King's, or Cross.






Observ.
 XV.


That the Hot Bath Water is the lightest of all, but the King's and Cross are in weight much alike,

 provided the Water of both be weighed, at or near the Pump of either Bath.






Observ.
 XVI.


That the Menstruum, or Water imbibing the Minerals of the Hot Bath, is lighter than that of the King's or Cross: for in one Pint of the former are contain'd 11 grains 
/4 (as in 
Obs.
 69.) and the two latter but 9 grains ½ (as in 
Obs.
 67, 68.) one grain 1/3 more in a Pint of the Hot Bath Water, than the Cross or King's, and yet the Hot Bath is so much lighter than either King's or Cross, according to the former Observations.






Observ.
 XVII.


That as the King's Bath Water hath as much less Marle, as it hath more Gritt than the Cross; so the Cross Bath on the contrary, hath more Marle, and less Gritt than the King's: which makes the contents even, and the weight of the Water equal, the Menstruum of both weighing both alike.






Observ.
 XVIII.


That the drinking Pump in the King's Bath, and dry Pump out of it, convey out Water of an equal weight: neither is that received at the dry Pump, lighter than that which is taken immediate∣ly from the Springs.






Observ.
 XIX.


That the Water of none of the Baths, did at any time weigh heavier than Common Water, by the same Measure, Weights and Scales.








Observ.
 XX.


That Hydrostatical Observations may vary, ac∣cording to the difference of Weather, Water, Measure, Weights and Scales; but that what is mentioned before in relation to that Affair, is done (I judg) with as much exactness as may be.










OBSERVATIONES CHROMATICAE:
 OR, OBSERVATIONS Concerning the Waters Tincturing.




Observation
 XXI.


THat the Water of all the Baths warm will tinge with Galls.






Observ.
 XXII.


That the same quantity of Bathwater warm, with the same proportion of Galls, gives a deeper Tincture in frosty weather, than in open.








Observ. XXIII.


That the New Pump, and dry Pump, at the Kings Bath, Tincture both alike, but the Water of the Bath it self, not at all.




Note,


That this Observation is to be understood of the Bath when full; for if trial be made when the Bath is filling, and the water low, the water of the open Bath will Tinge, as coming more immediately from the Springs.








Observ. XXIV.


That a Glass-bottle filled with water hot from the Kings Bath, well cork't and seal'd, gave a deep tincture with Galls, in open weather, 48 hours after.






Observ. XXV.


The like Tincture, but somewhat more faint, I have observed at three daies end.






Observ. XXVI.


That the Water of the Kings, Cross, and Hot Baths, being kept close stopt and seal'd for the space of seven daies, the King's Bath did turn with Galls, but the Cross and Hot were not alter'd at all.




Note,


That here might be some fault in stopping, for on another Trial, the Cross Bath, on the seventh day, did give a tincture. 
See Obs.
 45.










Observ. XXVII.


That the water of the Kings Bath well stopt and seal'd, did, at eight weeks end, give a purple tincture with Galls, little different from what it did, when taken hot from the Pump.




Note,


That this I had from the Relation of another, and is not consonant to my other Observations: if so, there must be then a long Frost, which I have not met with since.








Observ. XXVIII.


That the Water of the Cross Bath corkt, and waxt, gave a pretty brisk tincture, on the sixth day after taking from the Pump, in open weather, although the bottle had been open'd and wax't up again two daies before. The Kings Bath Water also taken at the same time did turn, but not so soon, and more faint. Another bottle also of the Kings Bath did the like, filled 
Nov.
 6. and open'd 
Nov.
 12. the same daies as before.






Observ. XXIX.


That the Water of the Hot Bath corkt and waxt, and open'd at 24. hours end, did not strike a purple tincture with Galls, though carefully made up, as soon as taken from the Pump.






Observ. XXX.


That another Vial of the Hot Bath-water o∣pen'd at three hours end, in open weather, did

 not tincture, though corkt and waxt as the former.






Observ. XXXI.


That two bottles of the Water of the Cross and Hot Bath, open'd twelve hours after sealing at the Pump, in Frost, and in a short time carefully sealed up again, did the next morning, twelve hours after, give a tincture both with Galls and Oaken chips, but sooner and higher the Cross.






Observ. XXXII.


That two bottles of the Water of the Cross and Hot Bath filled from the Pump, and standing twen∣ty four hours in Frosty weather, unstopt, the water of both the Baths did turn with Galls, but sooner and deeper the Cross.






Observ. XXXIII.


That the Water in the same bottles standing twenty four hours longer unstopt, the water still continuing Frosty, the Cross Bath water did tinge as formerly, but that of the Hot was not alter'd at all.






Observ. XXXIV.


That three hours after the former Experiment, the weather then breaking that had been frosty be∣fore, neither Hot nor Cross Bath water was consi∣derably alter'd, though the water of the Hot Bath was but three hours before taken hot from the Pump. The Cross Bath water, that but that morning had Tinged very well after forty eight hours standing, did then very little; and the Hot

 taken immediately from the Pump but three hours before, not at all.






Observ. XXXV.


That two glass Vials of the Cross and Hot Bath-water well corkt and seal'd up hot, and o∣pen'd at three daies end, the Cross Bath water did tincture with Galls, but the Hot was very little alter'd. Another half pint bottle corkt and waxt, open'd at four daies end, the water of the Hot Bath, gave no tincture at all.






Observ. XXXVI.


That trial having been made with Galls, on the Water of all the Baths unstopt, at ten hours end, in open weather; The Hot Bath lost its Tin∣cturing first; the Kings decayed much next; but the Cross Bath gave a tincture much brighter than the Kings.






Observ. XXXVII.


That the next morning, thirteen hours after, the weather still continuing without frost, the Cross Bath did tinge very well; but the Kings Bath very little,






Observ. XXXVIII.


That after six hours more, the Cross Bath did tinge as formerly, but the water of the Kings did not tincture at all.








Observ. XXXIX.


That eighteen hours after that, the Cross Bath in the same open weather unstopt, gave a very faint tincture with Galls, after some standing, and short∣ly after became as the Kings the day before.






Observ. XL.


That the Water of the Kings Bath in open weather, unstopt, gave no tincture with Galls at 18 hours end, when the Cross Bath did at 28.






Observ. XLI.


That the same Water of the Cross Bath kept unstopt, in open weather, 18 hours longer, or at 46 hours end, did not tincture with Galls, but in a short time became thick and white.






Observ. XLII.


That the Kings Bath-water that Tinctur'd faintly in the morning, at six daies end, in open weather, stopt again with Cork, but not waxt, four hours after did not tincture at all.






Observ. XLIII.


That the Kings Bath-water unstopt in open weather at 10 hours end, gives a faint tincture with Galls; at 18 hours very little (if any;) and at 24 hours none at all, unless in frost, or weather frost-like.








Observ. XLIV.


That the Cross Bath-water unstopt loseth its tinging in little more than 48 hours, in any wea∣ther.






Observ. XLV.


That the Water of the same Bath stopt and seal'd, will tincture after six or seven daies, with a faint tincture; but after nine daies, in open wea∣ther, will not tincture at all.






Observ. XLVI.


That the Water of the Hot Bath unstopt, in o∣pen Weather, will give no tincture with Galls after three or four hours, although the Water then re∣tain somewhat of its heat.






Observ. XLVII.


That the Water of the same Bath open'd or stopt, will not turn with Galls after three or four daies, in any weather.






Observ. XLVIII.


That the Kings Bath-water unstopt, did give a purple tincture with Galls at four daies end, in frost, and the fifth day, the weather breaking, with fresh Galls added to more of the water became turbid and white, much resembling Almond-milk.








Observ. XLIX.


That the Cross Bath-water cold and unstopt, in open weather, tinctures longer than the Kings.






Observ. L.


That the Hot Bath-water unstopt loses its tin∣cturing before 'tis cold, or in four hours time at most; The Kings Bath seldom exceeds 24 hours, and the Cross 48, in open weather.






Observ. LI.


That the Water of all the Baths may appear somewhat purplish after the times before men∣tioned, but that faint colour seldom holds more than three or four minutes before the water grows thick, and for the most part white; in long stand∣ing palish yellow; with fewer Galls, more green, and sometimes black.






Observ. LII.


That the Water of the Cross and Hot Baths kept in two Vials stopt with cork, but not seal'd, for the space of two years, did then with oyl of Tartar become white, although both had deposited a sediment, as well white as yellow. The Water of neither did tinge with Galls.








Observ. LIII.


That the Halitous part is not made more visible, nor can be saved by distillation, although the joynts be luted never so close; neither is the first distilled Water acid, nor will turn with Galls. The like hath Dr. 
French
 observed, in the vvaters of the Vitrioline Well at 
Knaresborough, Yorkshire Spaw,
 p. 67.






Observ. LIV.


That the Water of all the Baths effete, and de∣vested of their Tincturing purple with Galls, in a short time become opake, and something like a thin Whey, or as if some few drops of oyl of Tartar had been mixed with it.






Observ. LV.


That the Bath-water loses its Tincturing with Galls, although nothing be observ'd to be precipi∣tated.






Observ. LVI.


That the Bath-water sealed up in a glass bottle cold, and laid near the Springs of the Bath twenty four hours, doth not then recover its Tinging property with Galls, but becomes white as preci∣pitated with oyl of Tartar, which Spirit of Vitriol makes clear again.








Observ. LVII.


That the cold Water of none of the Baths, ex∣cept the Cross, standing 24 hours before Trial un∣stopt, vvill Tinge vvith Galls or otherwise, in open weather, unless well stopt and seal'd up hot.




Note,


That in Frost-like vveather, in the Winter season, the Cross Bath chiefly, and sometimes the Kings, may colour after this time; but not after 48 hours unless in constant frost.








Observ. LVIII.


That the Water of the Drinking-pump lately erected in the Kings Bath, tinges with Galls no longer than that of the Dry-pump; but both with∣in ten, and twenty hours space, unstopt, in open weather, lose their Tincturing and become effoete.






Observ. LIX.


That the Kings Bath-water at eight daies end, and the Cross at nine, in open vveather, did not give any tincture with Galls, although Trial was made on seven glass Vials (4 of the Kings, and 3 of the Cross) corkt and waxt, at the same time, and successively open'd and experimented, with good fresh Galls injected into every Glass.






Observ. LX.


That how long the Waters of all the Baths will Tincture in Frost, this Winter proving very mild, hath not yet given me an opportunity to experi∣ment.










OBSERVATIONES MISCELLANEAE;
 OR, OBSERVATIONS Touching divers Subjects; more especially, The Contents of the Waters, and Things appertaining thereunto.




Observ. LXI.


THAT the Water of all the Baths, though clear and transparent in a Glass, do contain in their Body, a considerable quantity of a fine, white, insipid Powder, which afterwards, by de∣coction, becomes more brown and gritty, with a blew Sulphurous Earth or Marle, and a Saline matter.








Observ. LXII.


That the Contents of the Bath are less in the same proportion of Water, in wet weather, than in dry.






Observ. LXIII.


That the Saline matter producible in Substance from the Bath-water, subjected to the Sight, and other senses concern'd, are only Common Salt and Nitre.






Observ. LXIV.


That out of one Hogshead of the Water of the Kings Bath taken from the Pump, in wet weather, I had ℥x. ʒvss. whereof ℥v. ʒiii. were Gritt; ℥ii. ʒviiss. Salt; ℥ii. ʒiss. Marle.




Note,


That after this proportion, Gritt hath five parts; Salt about three parts; and Marle two; Common Salt more than two; Nitre one.








Observ. LXV.


That out of one Hogshead of the Cross Bath in the same weather, came ℥xviii. ʒv. whereof ℥iv. Gritt; ℥iii. ʒi. Marle; ℥ii. Common Salt; and ℥ss. of Niter.








Observ. LXVI.


That one Hogshead of the Hot Bath, in the same weather, yielded ℥xi. ʒiii. whereof ℥iv. ʒiv. Gritt; ℥iii. ʒii. Marle; ℥ii. ʒvi. Common Salt; and ʒvi. of Nitre.






Observ. LXVII.


That the King's Bath one Gallon ordinarily con∣tains near 43 grains of Gritt; 23 grains ½ of Salt; 17 grains ½ of Marle; in all ℈iv. 7 grains. 5 grains Gritt; 2 grains ½ Salt (
viz.
 2 grains 
Sal Commu∣ne,
 and ½ grain Nitre) and 2 grains Marle, the Pint. In all 9 grains ½.






Observ. LXVIII.


That the Cross Bath one Gallon contains near 32 grains Gritt; 25 grains Marle; 16 grains 
Sal Commune;
 4 grains Nitre; in all ʒi. gr. 14. 4 gr. Gritt; 3 gr. Marle; 2 gr. 
Sal Commune,
 and 1/ gr. Nitre, the Pint. Total 9 gr. ½.






Observ. LXIX.


That one Gallon of the Hot Bath Water con∣tains near 36 gr. ½ of Gritt; 26 gr. Marle; 22 gr. 
Sal Commune;
 and 6 gr. ½ of Nitre. 4 gr. ½ Gritt; 3 gr. ¼ Marle; 2 gr. 1/3 
Sal Commune;
 1/3 gr. of Nitre. Total 11 gr. ¼ in a Pint.








Observ. LXX.


That the Gritt in proportion is almost double to all the Salts; in the King's Bath, more.






Observ. LXXI.


That the Common Salt is near three parts, and the Nitre but one.






Observ. LXXII.


That the Hot Bath Water contains by more than a fourth part more Nitre than the Cross. The like will hold as to Common Salt.






Observ. LXXIII.


That the Proportion the Saline part bears in the King's and Cross Bath, is near ℥iiss. in a Hogshead, or 60 Gallons; but in the Hot Bath ℥iii. or some∣what better. So that in a Gallon of the two for∣mer are no more than 20 gr. Salt, 2 gr. ½ in a Pint; in the latter 24 gr. in a Gallon, or 3 gr. in a Pint.




Note,


That what is asserted in the two Observations immediately preceding, concerning the Hot Bath Water containing more than the King's or Cross, was done on a single Experiment, which I have not since repeated.










Observ. LXXIV.


That one Hogshead from the Pump of the King's Bath, in frosty weather, afforded ℥xii. ʒii. of the Contents; whereof ℥vi. Gritt; ℥iiiss. Salt; and ℥ii. ʒvi. Marle; ℥ii. ʒii. 
Sal Communis;
 and ʒx. Nitre.




Note,


That the same quantity of the Cross and Hot Bath Water I have not experimented in frost, but judge them proportionable to the King's, upon which is grounded the 62. Observation.








Observ. LXXV.


That the Nitrous parts of the King's and Hot Baths shoot much alike, into strong, firm, and compacted Needles; but the Cross Bath more faint, into small hoary Threads, slender, short, and brittle.






Observ. LXXVI.


That what I call Marle, is chiefly that insipid blew Earth which remains on the filtring paper af∣ter Calcination, and in part burns away to less in the Crucible, being the 
Terra
 adhering more near∣ly to the Salt, and in which (probably) the Sulphur doth reside.








Observ. LXXVII.


That the Cross Bath Water hath less Gritt than the King's.






Observ. LXXVIII.


That the King's Bath hath as much Nitre as the Cross, although the form of shooting be diffe∣rent.






Observ. LXXIX.


That the Water both of the King's and Cross Baths, have an operation in Potion much alike, only the Cross Bath drinks more pleasant, the rea∣son of which may be gather'd from 
Obs.
 77.






Observ. LXXX.


That the Bath-water cold will coagulate Milk.






Observ. LXXXI.


That ℈ii. of the impalpable Powder precipita∣ted from the Bath-water with oyl of Tartar, and mixed with Spring-water, did not coagulate Milk, when 20 grains of Alom did it effectually.




Note,


That half a Pint of Water will turn the Milk; and that this quantity of the Powder is near as much as is contained in a Gallon.










Observ. LXXXII.


That ʒi. of the white Salt dissolved in half a Pint of Spring-water, and mixed with as much boyling Milk, made no alteration; whereas ℈i. of Alom dissolved in like manner, made a clear Posset, with a hard Curd.






Observ. LXXXIII.


That the precipitated Powder, though fine, white, and impalpable, if precipitated, in Evapo∣ration becomes more gross, browner, and gritty, and upon settlement leaves the bottom of the Wa∣ter thick and white.






Observ. LXXXIV.


That the same Powder when precipitated, put on a red hot Iron Plate, neither boyls, crackles, nor melts, but lyes heavy, dead, and burns not at all.




Note,


That this impalpable Powder bears an equal pro∣portion with, at least, if not exceeds all the Salts contained in the same.








Observ. LXXXV.


That the Infusion of the yellow Crocus, or Ochre, poured on a Solution of 
Sal Chalybis,
 with the addition of Galls, makes a deep purple first, and afterwards black.








Observ. LXXXVI.


That the Bath-water receives no alteration by being close stopt with wax; nor will, unless by long standing, deposite any Sediment that way.






Observ. LXXXVII.


That the Salts do exhale; as is evident from this Observation. On the 20th. of 
February,
 1674/5. the Cross Bath having been kept drawn 5 or 6 days, and the Water so low, that the tops of many of the Stones did appear above it, a Salt of the same nature with that which is extracted, was observed to adhere to the Stones above the Water, reverberated by the ambient air, the season then very frosty, and fixed on the Stones in the nature of a Candyed drop, or small white tip, or speck, resembled by some that saw it to the excrements of Birds; some of the Stones I brought away, which a month after abated nothing of their Saltness, nei∣ther would have done, if kept till this time. Mr. 
Henry Dyer,
 Serjeant of the Cross Bath, gave me notice of it as an unusual accident, and 
Robert Baulch,
 at the White Horse against the Hot Bath, collected a good quantity from the tops of the Stones, which he afterwards gave me for examination. It did melt on an Iron Plate, and left a Calx much like the Chrystals, the taste chiefly alcalisate. The like Concretion I observed a second time, 24 
Octob.
 1675.




Note,


That the King's Bath hath not yet afforded the like Observation, in regard the Water of that Bath cannot well be drawn so low.










Observ. LXXXVIII.


That an exact Pint of the Bath-water put into a Pint glass Bottle, and the height of the Water presently marked, the Bath-water cold subsided lower than the mark on the neck of the Bottle un∣stopt, the breadth of half an inch.






Observ. LXXXIX.


That the subsiding or seeming Vacuity, mention∣ed in the former Observation, did appear within the space of two hours, although the Bottle well fill'd was immediately stopt and seal'd.




Note,


That Common Water waxt up warm, will sub∣side in the neck of the Bottle, after the same man∣ner as Bath-water doth: The Bottle top full, a void space of half an inch afterwards appearing, 
Q. annon hic detur Vacuum?








Observ. XC.


That the Sand of the Bath doth consist of Free-stone-Gritt, Marle, Ochre, Shells, Rubrica, Chry∣stal Pebbles, and Sulphur; and that nothing Saline is contained in the same.






Observ. XCI.


That the Sand of the Bath dryed and weighed after the affusion of warm water on it, and has so continu'd for some time, is not sensibly diminisht

 in its weight, of what it was of before the affusion of the water, neither is the water any thing salter, but a little more rough.






Observ. XCIII.


That a large quantity of the Sand calcin'd in a Flemish Crucible, with as great a heat as could well be given, no Concretion was observed, but dead gritty ashes, neither did the water in which it was afterward infused, become more salt.






Observ. XCIV.


That the Sand of the Bath put on a red hot Iron Plate, and held in a dark place, burns very blew, and smells much of Sulphur, if only lying some time before a strong heat.






Observ. XCV.


That the Sand of the Bath on the affusion of Vinegar, or any acid Liquor, will ferment.




Note,


That Common Freestone, and Shells, will do the like.








Observ. XCVI.


That the Mud of the Bath dryed will ferment as the Sand.






Observ. XCVII.


That the Mud of the Bath doth consist of a blew Marle, some Shelly, or Testaceous particles, and more Sulphur than the Sand.








Observ. XCVIII.


That the foul Contents of the Bath put into a Crucible for Calcination, in order to the making the Salt more pure, before the Marly or Muddy parts are consum'd, the Crucible then open'd, and the Contents touched with a Spatule, give a very strong stench of Brimstone, and burn as blew, as ever I saw any Sulphur do.






Observ. XCIX.


That the Mud it self hot hath a Sulphurous smell, and is very useful if apply'd in these external Distempers, which Sulphur doth relieve.






Observ. C.


That the Scum of the Bath arising usually most in 
June, July,
 and 
August,
 floating on the Surface of the Waters, dryed into Cakes, burns like Stone-Pitch; and being once kindled, goes not out till all be consum'd.


These Observations are made according to present Experiments; Anomalous Observations may be noted afterwards.




















THE LIVES AND CHARACTER OF THE PHYSICIANS OF BATHE, From the Year, MDXCVIII, To this present Year, MDCLXXVI.


In which, Within the compass of Fourscore Years, is comprehended great part of the Lives of XVII. Physicians, which confirms the words of 
Hippocrates,
 in his first 
Aphorism;


Ars Longa, Vita Brevis.


By 
T. G.
 M. B.


LONDON,
 Printed for 
Henry Brome,
 MDCLXXVII.










TO THE READER.


Courteous Reader,


A
Lthough he that writes the Life of another man, doth almost the same thing as he that takes upon him the care of a friend in Trust, which, however faithfully discharged, is oftentimes accounted but a Thankless office; yet I have adventured to give in the following Papers, a brief account of some particulars relating to the Physicians of 
Bathe,
 with all the Truth and Candour that I can; and if my Expressions, which I have smoothed what I may, in a few places seem to grate and bear hard upon some, I would have those consider that shall take excep∣tion at it, that 'tis not my fault I had not bet∣ter matter; and if I have proceeded as near as I could, according to the Subject, as I'm sure is done, it will appear that I have not industri∣ously abused the dead, or distasted the living, but

 used distributive Justice, in giving every one his due.


This may also encourage others that have the like opportunity, to do the same, that so those mo∣dest Meal-mouths, that think it too great an honour to publish any thing in their own time, (whereby I am perswaded Learning hath been more injured than by any one thing whatsoever, good Copies by this means falling afterwards into the hands of corrupt and illiterate persons) may not want their just commendation; and those that keep their own breath, as we say, to cool their Pottage in a Chimney-corner, may have this good use of another mans. Whether well or ill, 
Quod scripsi, scripsi,
 and so Farewel.












THE Lives and Character OF THE PHYSICIANS OF BATHE.


H
AVING hitherto discoursed of the Waters and City, I think it not improper here to give some ac∣count of the PHYSICIANS of 
Bathe,
 both in regard they have been as eminent as any, I think, in any part of 
England,
 and also for the most part have been continued in a 
Series
 of Judicious, able men, well qualified and graduated in Universities, which deserve the greatest and most particular mention here. And although I would have wish∣ed, that they had signaliz'd themselves on the place,

 by some other way besides their practice, by which more remarkable Memorials would have remained to posterity, and been a good occasion of my Com∣mendation; yet since they were pleased, for rea∣sons best known to themselves, to pass by the thing that best deserv'd their consideration, I mean the nature of the Waters, (only one or two having written of them) I shall not make them the like requital, but give what account I either know or can procure, and gather up the fragments of their Memories that remain. And first of Doctor 
Reu∣ben Sherwood.




1. Doctor 
Reuben Sherwood.


OF Dr. 
Reuben Sherwood,
 the first Physician I meet with any remembrance of, I can give no other account than that he died here 
Anno Dom.
 1598.






2. Dr. 
Thomas Elton.


DOctor 
Thomas Elton
 'tis likely was contempo∣rary with Dr. 
Sherwood,
 or not long after, whom he survived twenty years, and was buried at 
Bathe,
 Aug. 11. 1618; A well bred Gentleman, obliging and affable.








3. Dr. 
John Sherwood.


AT the same time also flourished Dr. 
John Sherwood,
 graduated in the University of 
Cambridge,
 who died two years after Dr. 
Elton,
 and was buried in the Church of St. 
Peter
 and 
Paul,
 in the South-Isle, as appears by this indiffe∣rent poetry on a piece of Brass against the Wall; in which he is recommended to posterity with this bare Title: 
Joannes Sherwood Doctor Med. Sepul∣tus
 16 
Febr.
 1620.


The Verses these;

Conditur hic 
Sherwood,
 medicâ praeclarus in arte


Doctor, adhuc cujus fama corusca volat:


Ossa licet lateant hujus sub mole sepulchri,


Spiritus aethereâ vivit in arce poli.


Which may thus be answerably translated:

Here famous Doctor 
Sherwood
 lies,


Whose skill in Physick Lore


Was great, and his bright Fame yet flies,


Both now and evermore.


Although within this Tomb his bones


Are hidden out of sight,


His Soul, not pent within these stones,


To Heav'n hath ta'n her flight.


Of him I can learn nothing more observable, than that he was of the 
Romish
 Religion, and a good Housekeeper.








4. Doctor 
Edward Jorden.


COncerning Dr. 
Jorden,
 whose Name is yet fresh, and memory very acceptable to all that knew him, having left the deserved Reputation of a Learned, Candid, and Sober Physician: I have written something heretofore, and shall only here again mention some particulars more nearly relating to his person and condition.


Doctor 
Jorden,
 I understand, was a Gentleman of a good Family, and, being a younger Brother, designed for a Profession, for which when he had accomplish't himself, by a convenient course of studies in his own Country, he travelled abroad to see the Manners and Customes of the Universities be∣yond Sea, and having spent some time there, espe∣cially at 
Padua,
 where he took the degree of Doctor in Physick, returned home, practiced at 
London,
 became an eminently solid and rational Philosopher and Physician, and one of that famous and learned Society, 
The Kings Colledge of the Physicians there.


He had a natural inclination to Mineral works, and was at great charges about the ordering of Alom, which succeeding not according to expecta∣tion, he was thereby much prejudic'd in his estate, as appears from these words in the seventh Chap∣ter of his Treatise of 
Nat. Bathes
 and 
Mineral Waters;
 Now I come to 
Allum (Indignum vex ipsa jubet renovare dolorem,)
 the greatest debtor I have, and I the greatest benefactor to it, as shall appear when I think fit to publish the artifice thereof. For the Patent or Grant for the profit of the Alom works, which he reasonably did expect,

 fell afterwards, I know not how, to Sr. 
Arthur In∣grams
 lot, although the Doctor also had a good share in the affection of King 
James.


After he had practised sometime in 
London,
 he settled at 
Bathe,
 where living many years, and ha∣ving Children not a few, his conversation was so sweet, his carriage so obliging, and his life so an∣swerable to the port and dignity of the faculty he profest, that he had the applause of the Learned, the respect of the Rich, the prayers of the Poor, and the love of all. But living a studious and se∣dentary life, which might encourage his two grand distempers he labours under, the Stone and Gout, departed this life in the great Climacterical year of his age 63, and of our Saviours Nativity 1632, lying buried in the South Isle of the Abbey Church, but without a Monument, or any Inscription. And thus much for Dr. 
Jorden
 who was the first Physi∣cian that writ any thing of the Waters, that resi∣ded on the place.






5. Doctor 
Edward Lapworth.


DOctor 
Lapworth
 was bred up in the famous University of 
Oxford,
 and a member of that flourishing Society, 
Magdalen
 Colledge there, where he proceeded Doctor in a solemn Act in the year 1611, with two eminent Physicians his contemporaries, Dr. 
Simon Baskervill,
 and Dr. 
Tho∣mas Clayton.


His correspondence was good with 
Jorden,
 be∣ing both at one time practicioners on the place, as appears from the verses he hath prefixt to Dr. 
Jor∣den
 in 
Laudem operis.
 He had only one Daughter, who being married out of this place, caused his

 Name to be extinct here, lying buried in the North Isle of the Abbey Church in 
Bathe,
 and deserv'd a better Epitaph than this 
English
 Inscription cut round the Stone that lies over him:

Here lieth the Body of 
Edward Lap∣worth,
 Doctor in Physick, who deceased 
24
 of 
May, An. Dom. 1636.
 His age I guess was near 60. As to his gifts of Mind they are doubtless beyond exception, having been so well educated, and a professour, if I mi∣stake not, in 
Oxford,
 which gave some interruption to his practice here; being in body not tall, fat and corpulent, which inclin'd him the more to take his ease.






6. Doctor 
Tobias Venner.


DOctor 
Tobias Venner
 was born at 
Petherton
 near 
Bridgwater
 in the County of 
Somerset,
 of honest Parents, who sent him to 
Oxford,
 where he was made Doctor in Physick to the great repute of his own family, and 
Alban Hall,
 in the year 1613. He lived many years at 
Bathe,
 and had the Name of a plain, charitable Physician, but no ready man at stating a Case, which occasion'd one, a little tartly, to say, 
That whereas some other men had,
 (according to the common Phrase) 
Guts in their Brains;
 Dr. Venners 
Brains were in his Guts.
 However he found the right way to write a book called 
Via recta ad vitam longam,
 wherein is this memorable Observation,
 
That a Gammon of Bacon is of the same nature with the rest of the Hog.
 He wrote also a little discourse of 
Bathe,
 thereby ex∣pressing

 his good will to the Waters, which had it been bigger he should have had more thanks, but being very small, must be contented with the like commendation.


He lived to see both his Wives, and all his Children die before him, and left his Estate to the Relations by his second wife now in 
Bathe:


The Ashes of this grave,


No Phoenix, but Chimaera gave,


The Head, the Feet, about the Thigh,


A Duck, a Mouse, a Butterflie.


I can give no better account of him than a Friend of his hath done in this 
Epitaph,
 to be seen engraven in a Marble Table, in the middle of a massie Monument of Freestone against the East Wall of the South Isle, in the greatest Church of 
Bathe,
 under his Effigies in this manner.


SISTE VIATOR
 PAUCIS TE VOLO
 JUXTA HIC SITUS EST VENNERI VENERANDUS CINIS
 INTER MORTUORUM CLAUSTRA MORTUUS JACET
 MAGNUS MODO MORTIS ANTAGONISTA
 DOCTOR ET DECOR MEDICINAE
 CUJUS SUPERBIAM NON FORMIDABANT AECRI
 UTI NEC CONCULCABANT FACILITATEM
 AUXILIUM ENIM


 NEC SORDIDE OBTULIT
 NEC FASTIDIOSE NEGAVIT
 IN HOC CONVERSATIONIS SUAVITATI
 IN ILLO PROFESSIONIS DIGNITATI
 PROSPICIENS
 PAUPERUM ET DIVITUM MEDICUS
 HORUM QUOD MEDICINAM
 ILLORUM QUOD CHARITATEM
 SOLUS HIC TAMDIU EXERCUISSET
 HORUM QUIDEM OMNIUM APPLAUSU
 ILLORUM CIVITATIS HUJUS DELECTU
 NEC PLUS DEFUIT SANIS QUAM AEGRIS PAUPERIBUS
 MANU NON PARCA EXHIBENS
 HIS MEDICINAM
 ILLIS ALIMONIAM
 VIAM RECTAM AD VITAM LONGAM
 NON MONSTRAVIT MODO SED ET PERAMBULAVIT
 THEORIAM UNIUS ANNI CONFIRMANS PRAXI 85
 TANDEM ITINERANDO DEFESSUS DISCUBUIT
 ET IN HOC DORMITORIO OBDORMIT
 GRATA MEMORIA DIGNISSIMUS
 DOCTOR TOBIAS VENNER


 QUI
 NATUS PETHERTONIAE
 EDUCATUS OXONIAE
 OBIIT BATHONIAE
 MART. 27.
 1660.


The Author of this Epitaph, for who made it is uncertain, seems rather to me to have been a Divine than a Physician, for which conjecture I have these Reasons:


1. That the form thereof is borrowed from one made on Doctor 
Daniel Featley,
 now in 
Lambeth,
 as I could clearly make appear by comparing the Expressions, as I have sometime done, and for the satisfaction of any that desire it, may without a journey thither, be read, 
mutatis mutandis,
 in Doctor 
Featley
's Book against the Anabaptists, where it is copied, and whence it was probably taken. Now a Physician, I conceive, would never have taken pattern from a Divine, to make an Epitaph on his own faculty, which is proper for a Divine, being more his concern.


2. 
Venerandus
 is a word suiting better with a Divine, and a more proper Epithete than for a Physician, as 
Reverendus & Venerabilis;
 and is most likely to have come from one whose tongue was tipp'd with such language, who vvould rather chuse to run the risque of an impropriety in speech, than lose the honour of a jingling quib∣ble.


3. 'Tis probable this Epitaph was made near a Church, and that either when the Bells were go∣ing,

 or else in imitation of that sound, as may ap∣pear from the Chime of 
Hoc
 and 
Illo, Horum
 and 
Illorum, His
 and 
Illis,
 with the great pains taken to observe the Cadences so exactly as is done.


4. In the fourth place, the word 
plus
 is some∣what suspicious, by which vve must understand 
Minus,
 otherwise, 
Nec plus defuit sanis quam aegris paupe
ibus,
 may bear this sense, and not well any other, 
that the Doctor was wanting both to the one and the other,
 vvhen the Author, I suppose, meant 
he was wanting to neither.
 Now 
Plus
 is a fit word for a divine, and might the sooner have been made choice of for this, that 'tis the origin or sourse of the word 
Plurality.


Fifthly and lastly; No Physician would have used that Expression, 
Theoriam unius anni confir∣mans Praxi
 85, by vvhich Doctor 
Venner
 is made a Practicioner from his Mothers womb, and longer a Physician than St. 
John Baptist
 was a Prophet, which in it self being somewhat harsh, though ta∣ken in relation to his course of life, vvhere the life of that expression lay, can proceed from none but a Divine, vvho oftentimes will be nibbling at Physick.


Again, for I reserved something for a second part, That expression is justly liable to exception, 
Quod Charitatem solus hic tamdiu exercuisset,
 where∣in Dr. 
Venner
 is made the only Charitable person in 
Bathe,
 whereas there vvere then living, besides some Charitable Inhabitants of another stamp, three or four more Physicians there, whose Charity, though perhaps not so rampant as Dr. 
Venners,
 was enough both in food and Physick to call the truth of that expression into question.




And although this necessary requisite to every good Christian that is in a condition so to do, be not with that ostentation put into the Epitaph of Dr. 
Baue.
 Yet I have heard a good Character of him also in this kind, and do know many poor persons now alive in 
Bathe,
 that will affirm they have re∣ceived good Alms and Physick too from his Cha∣rity. I confess 
Tamdiu
 may do some service here, to this effect, that Dr. 
Venner
 vvas the only man that was charitable here so long, which, though it may abate somewhat, doth not take off the arro∣gance of 
Solus,
 which, like the Sun, never appears without reflection. I vvrite not this to derogate from Dr. 
Venner,
 or disparage the Epitaph, having that esteem for both they do deserve; but as the Devil, we say, should have his due, so I think, 'tis not fitting a Saint should have more. And thus much for the Charitable Dr. 
Venner.






7. Dr. 
Ralph Bayly.


DOctor 
Ralph Bayly,
 of whom I am next to treat, was well known to all his Collegues of 
New-Colledge
 in 
Oxon,
 where he had his Edu∣cation, to be as stout a man as that Society hath yielded, having in his Temper an equal mixture of 
Mars
 and 
Mercury,
 or rather, born under the 
praedominium
 of 
Mars,
 as he hath often evidenced when he long'd for Venison, though sometimes bought at a dear rate.


Doctor 
Bayly
 was born in 
Berkshire,
 descended of a good Family in that County, whose Coat-armour is, 
In a field Gules, three Martlets;
 or, 
A Chief Vairy Argent of Azure.
 Having spent some time in 
Winchester
 School, that fruitful Seminary of

 Learning, he was in due time transplanted to 
New-Colledge
 in 
Oxford,
 where he gradually proceeded with good applause, till he arrived at the per∣fection of Doctor of Physick, which hapned in the year 1618. By two Wives, the one a 
Quintin,
 the other a 
Hungerford,
 both comely Women; he had issue both Male and Female.


His eldest Son 
Walter,
 my intimate friend and acquaintance, he educated in the University, in 
Magdalen
 Hall in 
Oxford;
 but finding his genius not so much inclining him to Learning, though he was 
 great admirer of it, and had much respect for any Scholar that was truly so, and had Learn∣ing enough himself to render him facetious, and as good company as any man could wish; finding, I say, his genius not so much bent to study, he rather chose a gentile Education, and being very acceptable to all persons of Quality, especially the Gentry of 
Hampshire,
 in particular Sr. 
Richard Gifford
 of 
Sumburne, Henry Ludlow
 of 
Tadley
 Esquire, and many others, where he used to hunt and recreate with all the kindness imaginable; at last, on the death of his Father took to the Estate, and settled at 
Bathe
 in the same house the Doctor enjoy'd, where he lived plentifully many years, and saw an end of all his Generation, till at length, for Death is the end as well of the good Compani∣on as the Sot, of a lingring distemper, being much obstructed in the Mesentery and Urinary passages; he ended this life about the sixtieth year of his age, on the 15 day of 
November, An. Dom.
 1672, and is buried in the Abbey Church in 
Bathe.


Doctor 
Bayly
 is further remarkable in this, that he is the only man save one, of any Physician that lived here; that had a Son of his own Profession, which was Mr. 
Thomas Bayly,
 by his second Wife

 Mrs. 
Hungerford,
 an Ingenious man, and good Phy∣sician, of whom his Brother would often speak with much affection and respect, who in the be∣ginning of the Wars, when no Acts were kept, was with many others, created Doctor 
An. Dom.
 1642, and practising at 
Newbury
 in 
Berkshire,
 with good success and reputation, died of a high infection in the prime of his years, not long after. He was much encouraged to the Delivery of Women, be∣ing fitted for that service both by art and na∣ture.


It is also further observable in Doctor 
Ralph Bayly,
 that although he had good practise, and pre∣scribed to many Patients, yet such was his good Temper of Nature, and Temperance withal, that he never took any Physick himself, or made use of the Bath, being never sick in all his life; which fell the heavier on him, according to the vulgar obser∣vation; for going from his house at 
Bathe
 to ano∣ther he had at 
Widcombe,
 a mile distant, he was suddenly taken with a great faintness, insomuch as he was constrained to call at a Neighbours house before he came to his own, to desire something to refresh him, using these words, 
as God shall mend me,
 which was his usual saying, 
I am ill,
 and presently departed, and was buried at 
Widcombe,
 Nov. 16. 1645.


He was a proper, Comely person, charitable, and well read in the Ancient learning, witness a good Collection of old Authors, well markt with his own Hand, now in my possession. And so much for Dr. 
Ralph Bayly,
 being the only man, I think, that ever liv'd and dy'd without pain.








8. Sr. 
Edward Greaves.


DOctor 
Edward Greaves
 ought also to have a mention here, having sometime liv'd and practised in this place (to which he hath relation yet) till his deserts preferr'd him to what he now enjoys, concerning whom, to avoid the imputa∣tion of flattery, vvhich I ever hated, I shall say no more, than that he is full of Honour, Wealth and years, being a Baronet, one of the Colledge of Physicians in 
London,
 Physician in ordinary to his Majesty, and 35 years Doctor in Physick, which he took being Fellow of 
All-Souls
 Colledge in 
Oxford, An. Dom.
 1641.






9. Doctor 
Samuel Baue.


WIth Doctor 
Baue
 I had the happiness to have a particular acquaintance, being the eldest Physician on the place at my coming hither, in the year 1667, and although many things are observable in his life and practise, having lived to see compleated fourscore years, yet I shall con∣tract my self as much as may be, in regard I would not be tedious in a thing that ought to be brief.


Doctor 
Baue
 was born in the remarkable year 1588, at 
Colen
 in 
Germany,
 of a good Family, as appears by a good Coat of Arms brought thence, vvhence he came young for 
England,
 on occasion, as he told me, of his being Tutor to Sr. 
Thomas Ed∣mond
's Son, which Sr. 
Thomas
 vvas Ambassadour

 from King 
James
 at 
Paris,
 vvhere Mr. 
Baue
 was then a Student, in which Family, and about the Court, he continued some time vvith an honourable allowance from the Knight, but chiefly bent his studies to the faculty of Physick, in order to which he afterwards became a Member of that great Body and famous Society of 
Christ-Church
 Colledge in 
Oxford;
 vvhere he proceeded Doctor in Physick in the year 1628, vvith three other Phy∣sicians that vvent out vvith him, 
viz.
 Dr. 
Taylor,
 and Dr. 
Speed
 of St. 
Johns,
 and Dr. 
Saunders
 of 
Oriel,
 at a very splendid Act.


The first beginning of his publick Practise vvas at 
Glocester,
 being invited thither by one 
Whitting∣ton
 an Apothecary, vvhere though his condition could not be expected to be extraordinary, having no Natural, but acquired Friends in 
England,
 yet in time he made his own fortunes, and so vvell im∣prov'd his small Talent at first, as to leave behind him, besides what he parted with in his life time which was not inconsiderable) the best estate of any Physician that died in 
Bathe.
 And I have often heard him bless God for that good success he had given his undertakings, and the prosperous condi∣tion he had brought him to, not without a modest humble reflection on what no man had any reason to be asham'd of, in the words of good Old 
Jacob,
 in the like condition, 
With my staff have I passed over this
 Jordan, 
and now the Lord hath made me many bands.
 Which is more than many men have said, that have been raised to greater Estates by less skill or pains, it being no disparagement to any man to have a beginning since none but God but had so; and a gatherer, though the first rise of a Fa∣mily, is much better than him that scatters through many Generations.




After he had been some time in 
Glocester,
 his Parts and Learning procured the good opinion of Alderman 
Robinson,
 a wealthy Citizen, and Coun∣sellor at Law, whose Daughter he married, with vvhom he lived many years, and had Sons and Daughters. From 
Glocester
 he removed to 
Bathe,
 about the year 1640, where practising with ad∣mirable success, for near thirty years, and main∣taining a mighty riding practise, died in a good old age, in his eightieth year, as may further ap∣pear by this Epitaph I caused to be engraven in Marble on a handsom Monument, erected by his Wife Mrs. 
Hester Baue
 in the South Isle of the Ab∣bey Church, as followeth:

P. S.
 QUIS QUIS ES
 QUI NON FASTIDIS CADAVERIBUS INTERESSE
 NEC FUNCTORUM VITA QUICQUAM TIBI EST MOLESTA MEMORIA
 SCIAS VELIM
 JUXTA CONDI BEATAM RESURRECTIONEM MANENS
 QUICQUID ERAT MORTALE
 SAMUELIS BAUE
 MEDICINARUM DOCTORIS ET IN HAC CIVITATE HAUD ITA PRIDEM
 PRAXIN EXERCENTIS
 MAJORI FELICITATE AN SEDULITATE INCERTUM
 MORBORUM PERDUELLIS, FACULTATI VINDICIS, EMPI∣RICORUM MALLEI
 QUEM


 COLONIAE AGRIPPINAE NATUM
 ET IN VARIIS ACADEMIIS IN QUIBUS OXONIA EDUCTUM
 GLOCESTRIA PRIMITUS EXCEPIT DEIN BATHONIA
 UBI
 POSTQUAM PER ANNORUM PRAETER PROPTER XXX. CURRICULUM
 NON SINE MAGNO FAMILIARIS REI INCREMENTO
 NEC MINORI AEGROTANTIUM TAM EGENORUM UAM DI∣VITUM LEVAMINE
 MEDICINAM FECISSET
 ET DE MORBIS CUJUSCUNQUE GENERIS TRIUMPHOS EGISSET
 TANDEM
 HUMANAE SORTIS MISERIAS PERTAESUS
 MORTI ULTRO SE TRADIDIT
 AC
 AETERNIS BEATITUDINIBUS FRUI EXOPTANS
 CARNIS EXUVIAS LAETUS DEPOSUIT
 ET
 MORTALITATI NON VITAE VALEDIXIT
 Vto. DIE AUGUSTI
 ANNO AERAE CHRISTIANAE
 
M DC LXVIII.
 AETATIS SUAE
 LXXX.


 OBDORMIUNT ETIAM NON PROCUL ABHINC
 DOCTORE PRAEDICTO ET ESTERA UXORE EJUS ORIUN∣DUM
 DUPLEX PAR
 MASCULUM UNUM ALTERUM FOEMINEUM
 MAJOR NATU MARIA RIDLEY MINOR ESTERA BARNES
 JOANNES INSUPER ET FRANCISCUS UTERQUE COELEBS
 VITAMQUE JAM UT SPERATUR AGENS
 VERE COELESTEM.


He was besides an able Physician, well verst in the 
High-dutch, Low-dutch,
 and 
French
 Tongues, but above all eminent in the 
Latin,
 which he wrote and spake very fluent and proper.


He met with no kind usage toward the latter end of his daies from one whom he had formerly sufficiently obliged, who, because I hope he hath or may live long enough to repent his unhandsom carriage to him, and some others of the faculty, shall only here be markt with the Letter, 
I. F.


He had an excellent memory, and ready inven∣tion, insomuch as having much business, and using two 
Amanuenses,
 he would write himself, and di∣ctate to the other two, at the same time, in several Languages.


He was also very happy in, the glory of a Phy∣sician, the Cure of Chronical distempers, which he effected chiefly by Chalybeat Medicines, which, he was wont to say, were as true as Steel; but a little too much addicted to the vanity of 
Nostrums,
 which he being many times unwilling to discover, caused some dislike on consultation with others.




He was by Nature not so affable, but somewhat morose, and hated an Emperick, though made use of his Medicines. In short, He was an industrious man, an able Physician, and much in the favour of that great Physician of his Time Sir 
Theodore May∣ern,
 between whom many Letters passed, on Com∣mendation of Patients, chiefly French. And so I pass on to Dr. 
Maplet.






10. Dr. 
John Maplet.


DOctor 
John Maplet
 was born in 
London,
 bred at 
Westminster
-School, and afterwards re∣moved to 
Christ-Church
 in 
Oxford,
 where he was first Proctor of the University, then Doctor of Phy∣sick, in the year
 1647. and after that Principal of 
Glocester-Hall;
 a man well accomplisht as a Gentle∣man and a Scholar, meek, sober, and temperate, beloved and respected by all that knew him.


While he was in the University, he had an op∣portunity by accompanying the Lord Viscount 
Falk∣land,
 to whom he was Tutor, to Travel, and ac∣cordingly went in the year 1650. into 
France,
 where he continued near two years, chiefly at 
Or∣leans, Bloys
 and 
Saumur,
 and made many Observa∣tions on those Countreys, which he committed to Writing in a neat and curious Hand, in some Epistles now with me, with a particular Tract of his Tra∣vels, in an elegant Latin Style, which I may some∣time or other make publick, and do further right to the memory of this Worthy Person.


A second time he Travell'd into 
Holland
 and the 
Low-Countries,
 with my Lord 
Falkland,
 then Vis∣count, on the death of his elder Brother, whom before he had accompanied into 
France,
 the young

 Lord 
Scudamore,
 and Sir 
Henry Jones,
 who lost his life by an unfortunate Shot at the late Siege of 
Maestricht,
 and at his return, or shortly after, mar∣ried Mrs. 
Anne Hull
 of 
Bristol,
 where he usually practised in the Winter time, and at 
Bathe
 in the Summer.


And although he left a good Estate, considering the small time he had for practice, dying not old, and spending much of his time at first abroad, yet I must say, he had no right done him, by one that pretended much kindness to him,
 on whom, to my knowledg, he had reason to depend, and whom he not only courted and honoured as a Patron, but had almost the same Reverence for as for a Father, as doth appear by that Volume of familiar Latin Epi∣stles, I have by me directed to him for the whole space of 16 years, 
viz.
 from the year 1650. in which he travell'd, to the year 1666. But seeing that Cunning Fox is now earth'd, I shall not dig af∣ter him; but proceed to some other Particulars, of no Vulpone alike under ground.


He was of a tender, brittle Constitution, incli∣ning to feminine, clear skin'd, and of a very fresh Complexion, and though very temperate, as I said before, yet inclinable to Rheumatick Distempers, chiefly Gouts and Catarrhs, which would often∣times confine his Body, but not his Mind, which was then more at liberty to expatiate, and give some invitation to his Poetick Genius, which was very good, to descant on the Tormenter, and trans∣mute his Sorrow into a Scene of Mirth. I shall mention one or two out of the Manus
ripts I have, because Ingenious and short.




The first is,



De 
Catarrhi
 in oculorum alterum defluxu ad Amicum singularem D. 
D. Wall.


SPongia praemadidi collis mihi clausa cerebri est,


Expresso{que} oculum degravat imbre meum;


Omnis ab infuso turgescit Venula succo,


Nec siccum hoc aqueo cernis in orbe locum,


Ingratum Phaebi lumen: transire fenestras


Auroram roseo nil juvat ore meas.


Nil juvat in faculo lignorum lucida Strages,


Pyramidesve altae quas sibi flamma facit.


Nil florum splendor: species nil pulchra colorum,


Hos si vel proprio fundis ab ore, Venus.


Delicias oculo facitis qui forte serenat,


Cui gratum est quicquid, dum micat ipse, micat:


Sed pluvias, & acre serum immingente Catarrho,


Solamen Tenebrae lumine majus habent,


Defluvium pacant quae sunt expertia lucis,


Ni tamen è vultu lux ruat illa Tuo.


Nam de Te radius mulcet fulgore Catarrhum,


Opticus & mihi quem frons Tua vibrat, erit.


Sufficit in reliquis obscurae noctis imago,


De Te sed veniet quae{que} serena dies.






Another is,



De 
Catarrhi
 Fugâ.


FAre, ubi diluvium est? mihi tandem exaruit orbis,


Absumptas{que} suas continet amnis aquas.


Ordo Naturae, rerum & Simulachra recurrunt,


Et minimas atomos sicca pupilla capit.


Non fontem, sed pumiceum jam cernis ocellum,


Et Victor lachrymis fraena dat ille suis.


Splendore ingenito lucet Chrystallina sedes,


Cui fuscam ecclipsin guttula nulla parit.


Jam licet immittas, oculorum Phaebe, fenestris


Te totum, Sphaera est illa, vel illa, capax.


Pulchra veni, si quando lubet, Tu Flora, colores,


Seu facies istos, seu Tuus hortus alit.


Nil jam divinum lumen, jam palpebra nullum


Excludit, mihi Nox at{que} Catarrhus abest.


Plus tamen hoc gratum est quod non circumfluit humor,


Vultum qui possit dimidiare Tuum.


Nam mihi quem lippo reserebant vivida vela,


Integer haud fuerat, pars erat illa Tui.


Te fruor, at{que} oculi speculo, sed dulcius illud


Quam speculi, quod pars perdita nulla Tui est.






The good Doctor was very sensible of his ap∣proaching end, and well knew, that all the props of Art were too weak to support his crazy Temper, and therefore was not of the number of those that are blamed for having gray hairs creeping on them, but not regarding it; for he made these Excellent Verses 
In Primam Canitiem,
 which shall be the last of his I shall mention here.


Humida jam Nivibus sparguntur Tempora primis,


Et fuscam intingunt albida fila comam.


Sentio quam tacite non intellecta Senectus


Obrepit; nos Ver credimus, instat Hyems.


Haec si tardescat, mox infert Cura senectam,


Mens{que} dies citò quod non facit, ipsa facit.


En quoties morimur? succos sive exedit hora,


Sive hos degeneres turbida Cura parat.


Grata mihi veniunt tamen haec praeludia fati,


Mors{que} his primitiis, quàm ferit, ante monet.


Respicias animum, Tibi det Prudentia canos,


At{que} annos Virtus praeeat alma tuos.


Hoc decet, hoc pulchrum est, at{que} hoc canescere divûm est;


Foedus eris canus Vertice, mente Puer.




I have not adventured to Translate the two for∣mer Copies on the Catarrh, in regard I think they cannot be so aptly expressed in any other language, those Verses, as many others, sounding best in their own words; yet as a foyl to the Doctor's Jewel, to render it more radiant, I have attempted a Tran∣slation of the last, thus:



On the First gray Hairs.


On Temples moist first Snow is shed,


Twist, brown and white, is on my Head;


Old age creeps on, that Silent Thing,


Winter's at hand, We call it Spring.


If this delay, Care brings on age,


And thoughtfulness prevents Time's rage.


How oft we die? whe'r Time devour


Or Toilsome Care our Juyces sour.


Welcome these Monitors of Death;


Death stops not now, but warns, my breath.


In prudent mind see Thou be sage,


Let Virtue older be than Age.


Thus to be gray is meet and good,


For God grows gray thus understood;


And 'tis indecent to behold


A Boyish Soul, a Body old.






His Body being macerated by a weakness of the Tone of all the Parts, by degrees languished to that measure, that confined him for some few days to his Chamber and Bed, and a flux of blood supervening from the Hemorroides, which, though stopp'd in time, gave him little hopes of recovery, and there∣fore after the use of many means in vain attempted, he resigned himself to death, which in a short time ensued.


One thing I must remind, as an argument of his Contentedness to leave this World, That after my self, and Mr. 
Rob. Chapman
 his Apothecary, who attended him in his sickness, had left him, and taken our leaves of this dying Friend,
 an Eminent Physi∣cian of his former acquaintance coming accidentally to Town, and hearing the Doctor was so danger∣ously ill, made what hast he could to pay him his respects, and enquiring of Mrs. 
Maplet
 how the Doctor did, and she replying, without any hope of Life, he, in kindness, said, 
If he were not dead, he would do his utmost endeavour to recover him;
 and desired her to acquaint him with as much, which she did; but the Doctor replyed in his modest manner, 
Pray remember my Service to Sr.
 Richard, 
and let him know that I thank him for his visit, but am past his cure and any body's else, and shall take it as a kindness, if in the condition I am now in I am not troubled;
 and the same night parted with this Life for a better, according to the Motto of the Rings at his Funeral, 
Morier ut vivam.


He wrote several Latin Epistles, in which he had a singular faculty, (which, with some Poems, and a few Observations, were the greatest part of his Writings he left behind) as well to the most Eminent Sir 
Alexander Fraiser
 Knight, and Princi∣pal Physician to his Majesty, his Learned and good

 Friend Sir 
John Baber,
 with whom he had an inti∣mate acquaintance, Sir 
Francis Prujean,
 Dr. 
Bate,
 Dr. 
Meara,
 Dr. 
Nedham,
 and others at home, as also to some abroad, particularly Dr. 
Neal
 of 
Leedes,
 and Dr. 
Bennet
 of 
Saumur,
 where he was very sick, and recover'd from an im∣minent danger of death, by the help and assistance of this Physician, as he most pertinently exprest in one Epistle, in which are these words; 
Sed & Si∣lente illa Comitatis Tuae voce, resuscitata Mihi Tua ope Sanitas, ad hoc scribendi officium, nullo etiamsi alio devinctum nomine, adegisset, ut qui fuerit conser∣vatum Corpus, Corporis saltem pars manus recognos∣ceret. Per Tuam scilicet Apollineam manum, in suo refloruit domicilio, robustus ille vigor, quo itinerum aut suscipere labores, aut perferre debueram.


I shall end the Life of Dr. 
Maplet,
 with one ex∣pression of his kindness to me, and another of mine in return to himself.


The first is, That on the setting up of Dr. 
Bave
's Monument, there having been some envious spirits that rais'd a discourse to the disparagement of that Epitaph, I was constrained to appeal to this Wor∣thy Judg of Learning for a Censure, which I did in these words. 
Censuram Tuam, Vir Doctissime, de hoc Epitaphio liberam & vere criticam peto obnixe; Ʋtrum Prisciani, ut dicitur, Capiti vulnus aliquod sit inflictum, quemadmodum Tenebrio quidam anony∣mus, cui sinciput uti suspicor, parum sanum est, de∣blaterat, fac ut sciat Tui Observantissimus.
 To which the Candid Doctor returned this answer; 
Cur dicam Tibi Epitaphii hujus causâ scribat ullam, aut ferulae plagam cur jubeat retribui, ob vulnus ali∣quod in Capite suo inde acceptum, omnino non habet Prisci
nus. A Tuo, ut ab Eruditorum calamis solet, illaesus permanet, debito{que} fruitur honore; si vero Be∣atitudines

 in plurali, apud authores politos infre∣quentius legamus, haud ideo in Grammaticen pecca∣tur; sed & isti numero Hebraeorum idioma de Coele∣sti loquentium felicitate, quod Te callere scio, forte favet. Ecce quam libere Tecum & sincere, prout ipse jubes, ago; quod ipfum amoris studii{que} erga Te mei certissimum quoddam pignus esto. Tibi deditissi∣mus.


The other I call a kindness to Him, is an Epi∣taph much short of his desert, now standing in the North-Isle of the Abbey Church in 
Bathe,
 which out of the great respect I had to the memory of my Worthy and Learned Friend, I presented to Mrs. 
Maplet,
 and is now cut in a black Marble Ta∣ble well adorn'd, and set in the midst of a neat Monument of Alabaster, in these words:

 CONDITUR HIC
 JOANNES MAPLET M. D.
 TRINOBANTIBUS ORIUNDUS
 ANIMI CORPORISQUE BONIS PRAEDITUS
 ERUDITIONE MODESTIA ET COMITATE
 PAUCIS SECUNDUS
 ARTIUM ET SCIENTIARUM OMNIUM PANOPLIA IN∣STRUCTUS
 REI AUTEM MEDICAE ADEO PERITUS
 UT EXEMPLUM DESIDERETUR
 PROFUIT QUIBUS POTUIT
 OBFUIT NEMINI
 ACADEMIAM PATRIAM OXONIENSEM
 UBI PLURES ANNOS VIXIT
 EXTERIS ETIAM NON INSALUTATIS
 BATHONIAM ET BRISTOLIAM
 UBI PARTITIS ANNI VICIBUS
 FECIT MEDICINAM
 NON MINUS VIRTUTUM SUARUM EXEMPLO, QUAM PRAXI
 HONESTAVIT


 OBIIT PRIDIE NONAS SEXTILES
 ANNO CHRISTI INCARNATI
 MDCLXX
 AETATIS SUAE
 LV
 CUJUS OSSA CUBENT MOLLITER.


His Wife also enjoying little health afterwards, being Paralytick and Convulsive, died Apoplectick, the 14th. of 
February
 following, only 6 months and 12 days surviving the Doctor, of whom, as also of two Children 
John
 and 
Mary,
 lying on both sides of the Parents, this remembrance may be seen in a little Marble Table under the former.


 SEPELITUR ETIAM JUXTA
 ANNA UXOR EJUS
 SEX TANTUM MENSES ET DECEM DIES
 MARITO SUPERSTES
 OBIIT XIV FEBR. ANO DNI MDCLXX
 ANNOS NATA XXXV.
 INTER PARENTES QUOQUE QUASI IN LECTO
 PLACIDE OBDORMIUNT
 CONJUGII SUI PIGNORA CHARISSIMA
 JOANNES ET MARIA
 HAEC TRIMESTRIS ILLE TRIENNIS
 OMNESQUE
 RESURRECTIONEM FELICEM
 UNA EXPECTANT.




His style in Latin was terse, his words choice, but his Periods a little too elaborate. And thus much for the Learned, Candid, and Ingenious Dr. 
Maplet,
 a good Physician, a better Christian, and an excellent Poet.




On
 Themison.


WHen many Autumns 
Themison
 had past,


He Master of a great house was at last;


Another passing by, and viewing it,


Said, 
Here's a great head, but, pray, where's the wit.


The House was great, the Furniture but small,


The Head had skull, but had no brain at all.






Ʋltimus hic ego sum, sed quam benè, quam malè,
 
nolo


Dicere, de me qui judicet alter erit.






I am the last, but whether Bee, or Drone,


Anothers pen shall write, and not my own.




Others also there were good Practitioners on the place, though not of that degree. The first of which is;








Mr.
 Thomas Leyson.


THis Physician was a 
Welchman,
 but of what County in 
Wales
 I know not; a man of a good repute, and especially taken notice of for his Charity to the Poor. He is as remarkably com∣mendable for his kindness to his Wife, who lies bu∣ried in the Parish Church of St. 
James
 in 
Bathe,
 with this Epitaph made by himself in Brass against the Wall, under the East Window, which, because a rare instance of Affection, I shall mention here, and for the further 
ropagation of the kindness of this 
Welsh
 Love, shall translate into our own lan∣guage.


The Latin Verses are these:



TRistia quae Ʋxori moestus Tibi carmina pono


Quam vellem nimium Te potuisse mihi?


Septem annos (sic velle Dei est, sed nolle Parentum)


Et sine Connubio mutuus arsit amor.


Bis septem sine lite ulla simul egimus annos,


Disjungi & mortis Lis mihi prima Tuae est.


Sola meos Tu, habuique Tuos ego solus amores,


Quos habet atque habeat dehinc Libitina Tua.


Tecum semper eram viva, defuncta ero Tecum,


Nunc animo, & dum mors junxerit atra duos.


Namque istâ (cum fata vocant) dormire sub urnâ


Destino, propitius det mihi vota Deus.


Tho. Leyson Vir moestiss. Mariae uxori posuit
 
1599, Apr. 15.






The Translation thus:




THese Verses thus in grief made on Thee, Wife,


Would Thou hadst made on me to save thy li .


Seven years (so long did friends cross heavens will)


We lov'd and lik'd, but at a distance still.


Twice seven years more we liv'd in love together,


Serene and calm, Thy death first brought foul wea∣ther.


Thou hadst my Loves alone, I only Thine,


Which now unto Thy Ghost I do consign,


Alive was with Thee still, dead will be so,


In mind at present, till in Body too:


For when God please, I'll rest too in Thy grave,


From whom this boon in mercy now I crave.


Tho. Leyson in much grief made this on Mary his wife,
 
1599. 
Apr.
 15.




This Mr. 
Leyson
 writ a Latin Poem, in which was contained the description of the Ancient Seat of the as ancient Family of the 
Stradlings,
 called St. 
De∣nets
 in 
Glamorganshire,
 which, the laborious and learned 
John David Rhaesus,
 that took so much pains to so little purpose, in the Epistle Dedicatory to his 
Latin Welsh Grammar,
 written to Sr. 
Edward Stradling,
 affirms he saw, and turned into 
Welsh,
 giving it the commendation of 
Venustum Poema,
 and He the title of, 
Vir 
ùm rei medicae, tùm Poetices peritissimus.
 He died in 
Bathe,
 and, as far as I un∣derstand, had his desire, expressed in the two last verses on his Wife. The time of his death is un∣certain, being not entred in the Register.








John Vincentius Ostendorph.


OF this Physician I can give no other account than that he vvas a 
German,
 and like 
Field-fares
 and 
Wind-thrushes
 did change his climate for better food, which he liked so well that he married here one Mrs. 
Cavell,
 Sister to an Ingenious Limner of that name, and after some years practise, died, and was buried in the Abbey Church in 
Bathe,
 the 12th. day of 
April, An. Dom.
 1648. I have men∣tioned him in this place, because if a Doctor of Physick it was beyond Sea, of which I have not assurance.






Mr.
 John Dauntsey.


MR. 
John Dauntsey
 was a Gentleman of a good extraction, and younger Son, as I have heard, to a Knight, who having been bred a Scho∣lar, was encouraged to the practise of Physick by Dr. 
Jorden,
 for vvhom Mr. 
Dauntsey
 had a great esteem, as appears by his Verses on Dr. 
Jorden
's Treatise. He vvas a man of great integrity, but made no considerable advance in the World. He died ancient near 80, in the year 1650, and vvas buried in the Abbey Church, 
Febr.
 12. He married a Gentlewoman of a good family, one Mrs. 
Winter,
 by whom he had besides other Children, Mr. 
John Dauntsey
 his eldest Son, who practised Physick with good success in 
Bristol,
 and died lately; and another now living a Chirurgeon.




There was an Epitaph made on him by one known by the name of Dr. 
Somerschall,
 a Chymist, vvho if no better Chymist than Poet, was never like to attain the liquor 
Alkahest,
 or the Philosophers 
Ar∣canum,
 vvhich, because I am inform'd, it was put on Mr. 
Dauntsey
's Tombstone by this Philosopher (of vvhich I have seen some marks) I have through his means made so great a progress as to know where the Philosophers Stone is, though but little legible on it now, vvhereupon, as greater Chy∣mists have been in this search, I was frustrated of my expectation; however the Verses were in part these, or to this purpose:

Here lies Doctor 
John Dauntsey
 by name,


Whose harmless life, whose Saint-like death, whose lasting fame


With judgment good in Physick lore,


Approved to posterity shall this engraving over last evermore▪








Mr.
 Thomas Brewer.


MR. 
Thomas Brewer
 vvas born in the County of 
Somerset,
 vvhere there are now of that name related to him, of good Estates; an indu∣strious man, a good Scholar, and expert Physician, as I have understood by his prescriptions. He was well acquainted vvith the Greek and Latin Tongues, and excellent in the former, vvhich is so rare among many pretenders to the faculty now, that 
Graecum est, non potest legi,
 may be made use of again, and therefore this instance of Commenda∣tion ought not to be omitted. He lived many years in good esteem, and is buried in the Abbey Church vvith this Inscription on a piece of brass on his Tombstone: 
Here lieth the Body of
 Thomas Brewer, 
late of the City of
 Bathe 
Physician, who departed this life the third of
 November, 
An. Dom.
 1665.








Mr.
 Somerschall.


AS a Conclusion, or Epilogue, I shall add the life of one 
Somerschall,
 a Chymist, mention'd before, vvho died in 
Bathe,
 after many pro∣jects, in a poor condition, vvhich, in a merry ri∣ming humour, I thus suddenly vvrote.




There dwelt a Chymist here of note,


That wore in Summer a furr'd Coat;


Who promising to make all rich,


Left not enough to cure the Itch.


Full glad vvas 
Bathe
 of such a guest,


And gave him room among the rest


That came to practise here, or try


What gain it was to multiply.


His tackling he together got,


To vvork he went, would do vvhat not?


And sooner others to fetch over,


He vvheedled in the Earl of 
Dover.


Both night and day the fire brent,


To bring to pass this grand intent,


Which vvas the thing aim'd at, I'm told,


To pave the streets of 
Bathe
 vvith gold.


But yet to compass this design,


There must before-hand be some Coin,


Which freely lent, on Reputation,


To pay, the 
German
 pawn'd his Nation.


A house vvas built fit for the vvork,


Where he in privacy might lurk,


As close as if made underground,


The mony vvent but nothing found,


For something still fell out to cross


The main, and multiply the loss.




At length, when nothing did appear,


And he had wrought this and that year,


Death seizeth on this Artist great


To try if he were not a cheat.


Unwilling he was sore to go,


And leave his work imperfect so,


But go he must; on which they mind


to see what pelf he left behind,


And find no Gold or Silver oar,


But Soot and Horsedung there good store.


His pockets searcht too were unwilling


To part with all they had, a shilling,


Which was too little judg'd by all


To pay the charge of's Funeral:


The boards of a poor Hut he built


Were sold to multiply the gilt,


To set the 
Caput mort
 in ground


Of this Philosopher profound.


Th'Apothecaries too, they say,


Were willing something to defray,


As part of what they got to boot


By sale of's famed Spirit of Soot.


Hermes
 his Bird went thus to rest,


Leaving a Feather in his nest.


On whom as on a broken staff,


I write this homely Epitaph:






Here lies the man, whom
 Bathe 
did call


By th'name of Doctor
 Somerschall;


Or, if you like this better, know it,


Here lies
 John Dauntsey
's famous Poet.






THE END.















