(EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A42562)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 57883)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1641-1700 ; 916:3)
Reproduction of original in Huntington Library.
Advertisement: p. [24]
Index: p. [9]-[24]
The Cli∣mate of
The true Title of the Em∣peror of
The Pro∣vinces of
The ori∣ginal of
A Descri∣ption of the Lake of
Islands in the Lake of
The true Cause of the rising of
It was known by the Anci∣ents.
Several great Ri∣vers be∣sides the
There is a great mixture of People in
The Queen of
Her Son by
The Eu∣nuch that was bapti∣zed by


The
Nine Monks come into

The busi∣ness of the Embassy.
The

The

A Tri∣bute laid on the Patriarch of
The
The King of
The 7th place in a General Council given to the
Pope
Pope
It is pro∣bable that there was never any such Em∣peror.

Sultan
The Em∣peror
Monkery much the same in
Their Mona∣stries are little Vil∣lages.
The
They are
They de∣ny the Popes Su∣premacy.
The Em∣peror is Head of the Church.
Their Priests Marry.
They have divers Forms of Baptism.
All that are present at the Celebration of the Sacrament must communicate. They do not elevate nor a∣dore the Host, nor keep it after the Com∣munion. They break it after it is consecra∣ted. They reckon the receiving of it breaks their Fast.
They do not be∣lieve
They have only a ge∣neral Con∣fession.
They de∣ny Purga∣tory; Con∣firmation, and Extream Unction. They condemn Graven Images. They keep
They are very de∣vout. They ne∣ver go into a Church with their Shooes on; nor sit in it, but up∣on the ground.
They seldom preach.
The
His ill success at first.
Not dis∣couraged thereby, nor by Railery, nor by grave Nonsense, from go∣ing on with his Projects.
The Island of
The Dis∣coveries were in∣termitted, and revi∣ved again by
The Astrolabe and Ta∣bles of Declina∣tion were found out by the



He was detained as a Spy by King
He sends an account of the Country to


The Em∣press
She sends the King a piece of the true Cross, as it came to her from
She desires a Daugh∣ter of
The
After ha∣ving lain five years neglected at
The
The
The Pope's Answer to the

A False∣hood.
The
The
Clerks may mar∣ry.
The
The
They Cir∣cumcise both Men and Wo∣men.
A blind story of the Queen of
The Eu∣charist is Admini∣stred to Children when they are Baptized.
Circumci∣sion is not observed by them as a Sacra∣ment, but as a civil Custom.
The Chil∣dren of Christian Parents before they are Baptized are called
Confirma∣tion and Extream Unction no Sacra∣ments.
The Scri∣pture the perfect Rule of Faith.
They all receive the Sacra∣ment in both Ele∣ments. It is not kept in their Churches.
It is never received but in the Church.
The Sa∣crament is never admini∣stred above once a day in a Church. It is not shewed to the Peo∣ple. No Masses are said for the Dead.
A long Justifica∣tion of their ab∣staining from Meats that are made unclean by the Law.
A chari∣table Ad∣monition.
The de∣sign of this
A false ac∣count of the Electi∣on of the
A Censure on
The Em∣peror

He drives him at last in a man∣ner out of his Em∣pire.



Where he acted as the
He re∣turns to


The Queen Mother leaving of a
They ob∣tain 400 Soldiers of the

He sends an 100 of his men to fetch the Empress to his Camp.
The Em∣press ar∣rives at the Camp.
The Em∣peror be∣ing ac∣quainted with the arrival of the
The strong Moun∣tain of
The Church that had been turn∣ed into a

A Huffing Message, with a ri∣diculous Present is sent to


He opens a passage to himself with the bravery of his Men, being as∣sisted with Artillery.
He obli∣geth




The Em∣peror joins the
He fights and routs

The Em∣peror be∣ing resto∣red to the quiet pos∣session of his King∣dom, quar∣rels with the
The chief cause of this Quar∣rel was the
The Em∣peror is resolved never to turn Ro∣man-Ca∣tholick.
The King of

A Patri∣arch, two Bishops, Coadju∣tors, with 10 Friars all of the Jesuits order, are nomina∣ted to go into
The Pope's Bull for the Con∣secrating of the new
The Pope allows of the Con∣secration of a Bi∣shop, by one Bishop and two Presby∣ters.
The Pa∣triarch, and one of his Co∣adjutors, are Conse∣crated at
The Jesuits leaping so quickly into such high dig∣nities, contrary to their Vows, creates them Enemies.
The King of

An ex∣pression of the great∣ness of the
The Em∣peror's de∣fence of himself and his Faith.
No menti∣on of

The first Prelate of the Jesuits Order was an Usut∣per.
The old Patriarch was lodg∣ed at the Jesuits College in
Sent home and dropt in the Island of St.
The Pope endea∣vours to hire the Patriarch of
Comple∣ments strained to promises.
The
A trick of an
A Confe∣rence be∣twixt the Emperor, and a
The new Patriarch arrives at
He re∣mains there, and sends his
The Co∣adjutor's Letter to the Emperor.
He goes to Court.
He is re∣ceived with great Ceremo∣ny.
He urges the Empe∣ror to sub∣mit him∣self to the Pope.
The Em∣peror de∣clares his resolution never to do it.
The Em∣peror's Confessi∣on of Faith.
The Em∣peror of∣fers to lay the De∣bates a∣bout Re∣ligion be∣fore his Council.
The Co∣adjutor endea∣vours to divert him from that course by the fol∣lowing Letter.
He ac∣know∣ledges
Several Conferen∣ces about Religion.
The Em∣peror an∣swers the Coadju∣tor's Book; and writes one in defence of his own Faith.
The Co∣adjutor thunders out an Excom∣munica∣tion.


A Dia∣logue be∣twixt the Emperor and Coad∣jutor.

He is rou∣ted, and goes over to the
He brings the

The Coad∣jutor and the Fa∣thers are made Pri∣soners by the

The Pa∣triarch dying at
The Pa∣triarch sollicits hard for Troops.
Father
The Car∣dinal of
The Pope's Letters of Revocati∣on.
The Pa∣triarch is unwilling to return to the
His An∣swer to the Pope.
The rea∣son why the
The Pa∣triarch dieth.
The un∣happy issue of this Mis∣sion.
Two Je∣suits are sent in a disguise to
They were dis∣covered and made Slaves in
A
He is dis∣covered and put to death for having professed himself a
The Pope sends an
Who be∣ing disco∣covered was Mur∣thered by the
The Archbi∣shop of

The Archbi∣shop of
The Je∣suits erect a College at
Father


The Em∣peror in∣vites Fa∣ther
Father
Father
The Em∣peror dis∣covers his intention to Father
The Em∣peror's Letter to the Pope.
Father
A Rebelli∣on breaks out pre∣sently af∣ter.
The Em∣peror marcheth against the Rebels.
The Em∣peror is Killed Fighting.
Father
Finding them di∣vided, he retires, to wait to see where the Crown would fix.
The Gran∣dees are divided, so me be∣ing for restoring

Upon
A Mes∣sage is sent to him by the Army.
The Ar∣my upon receiving a Letter from







Two Fa∣thers are sent from
The Em∣peror sends to Father
The Em∣peror of∣fers to write to the King of
The Em∣peror's Letter to the Pope.
His Let∣ters to the King of
These Let∣ters were probably forged by some Mis∣sionary.

His Letter to the Viceroy of the
A Mock Emperor set up and Murther∣ed.
The Em∣peror and his Bro∣ther

The King of
The Pope's Letter to the same Emperor.
The Popes are civiler to remote Hereticks than Do∣mestick ones.
Embassa∣dors are sent from
The Em∣peror's Letter to the Pope.

A particu∣lar ac∣count of the Em∣bassador's Journey.
They industri∣ously are sent out of their way.
They are kindly received by the Comical King of
The Em∣bassadors are stopt by the Prince of
They are suffered to proceed on their Journey.
They are thrown into Jayl by the King of
The Cour∣tiers find∣ing that none but Papists were fa∣voured, turn civil to the Fa∣thers and their Reli∣gion.
The Countrey is much alarm'd there with.
Several publick Conferen∣ces about Religion.
An Edict is publish∣ed by the Emperor prohibi∣ting any to affirm that there is but one Nature in Christ. The
The Con∣ferences are renew∣ed before him.
The
The Em∣peror is provoked thereby to publish a Proclama∣tion Com∣manding all his Subjects to turn
The Em∣peror is addressed to not to trouble his Sub∣jects about their Reli∣gion.
He is deaf to all such addresses.
The
The
Upon the Emperor slighting their com∣plaints, they leave the Camp in a rage.
Father
An at∣tempt is made up∣on the Emperor's life.

He Marcheth with a great
The
He fights the Em∣peror's Army and is killed.
The
The Em∣peror up∣on this Victory prohibits his Sub∣jects to observe
A severe Libel comes out against the Emperor.
The Em∣peror by a Second Proclama∣tion com∣mands all his Sub∣jects to work upon
A Rebelli∣on breaks out upon it.
An ad∣dress is made to the Empe∣ror not to trouble his people with Po∣pery.
The Ad∣dressers are punished.
The Em∣peror's Speech thereup∣on.
The Em∣peror sends an Army a∣gainst the Rebels, and routs them.
The
The Em∣peror re∣conciles himself to the Church of
The Ge∣neral of the
He sends a Nuncio to him to acquaint him therewith.
The Em∣peror publisheth a re∣proachful
The Em∣peror grows jea∣lous of his Brother.
He sends him a∣gainst
A Patri∣arch of
The Pa∣triarch ar∣rives at
The Em∣peror's Letter to the Patri∣arch.

The Pa∣triarch Lands at
The Pa∣triarch comes to Court.
He is gra∣ciously re∣ceived by the Em∣peror.
The day is fixt for the Emperor's submitting himself and his Empire to the Pope.
The Pa∣triarch preacheth before the Emperor.
The High Chamber∣lain's Speech.
The Em∣peror's Submissi∣on.
The Sub∣mission of the Prince, Grandees, and Ec∣clesia∣sticks.
A new re∣venue is setled on the Patri∣arch.
The Je∣suits do reckon their work done be∣fore it was well be∣gun.
Pretty stories sent from
Two
A fifth
It is rou∣ted, and the Gene∣ral of it, who was the Empe∣ror's Son-in-Law, is taken.
A Lady is put to death for her Reli∣gion.
The won∣derful change Popery had wrought on the tempers of its Con∣verts.
An inhu∣mane per∣secution is raised against the
The Pa∣triarch Excom∣municates a great Man for keeping Church-Lands.

One of the chief Wit∣nesses against him is murthered by his order.
The
The Em∣peror is obliged to employ his Bro∣ther a∣gainst them.
He is ac∣cused of treachery.
The Prince a∣bandons the
The
Their great Champi∣on
The Pa∣triarch hastens the down∣fall of Po∣pery by two in∣discreet acts.
He oppo∣ses a To∣leration when pro∣posed to him by the Em∣peror.

The Em∣peror's Zeal revi∣ved by this Letter, and a
The Viceroy of
The Prince is displeased with the Viceroy for what he had done.
He marcheth against him.
He routs the
The Em∣peror is defeated by the Peasants of
He is pas∣sionately addressed to for a Tolerati∣on.
He speaks to the Patriarch about it, and will not be deni'd.
The Tole∣ration is proclaim∣ed.
The Patri∣arch's pro∣testation against it.
The Em∣peror's an∣swer to the Patri∣arch's Pro∣testation.
The Je∣suits never wrought any Mira∣cles in
The Em∣peror de∣clares his Resoluti∣on to con∣tinue a
The Pa∣triarch is baffled in a great point of Jurisdicti∣on.

The Em∣peror marcheth against them.
He ob∣tains a great Vi∣ctory.
He is mo∣ved by the passionate Remon∣strances of the Gran∣dees and others, to restore the
The Pa∣triarch and Fathers wait upon him to di∣vert him from do∣ing it.
The Em∣peror continues immovea∣ble in his resolution.
The Pa∣triarch's
The Pro∣clamation for resto∣ring the
Excessive Joy and Festivities thereup∣on.
The Pa∣triarch is advised by his friends to give over preaching.
The

He sends for the Pa∣triarch and Fa∣thers Arms, and Banisheth them all to
The Pa∣triarch's Letter to the Empe∣ror there∣upon.
The Em∣peror re∣news his orders for banishing and dis∣arming them.
The Pa∣triarch's second Letter to the Empe∣ror.
The Prin∣ciple of the
The Em∣peror's answer to the Patri∣arch.
The Cru∣elty of the Persecuti∣ons raised by the Jesuits.
The Pa∣triarch be∣gins his Journey to
His Me∣morial to the Em∣peror.
The Pa∣triarch so soon as he arrived at
He sues to
O
The Em∣peror hearing thereof, commands the Patri∣arch and Fathers to leave
The Em∣peror's Letter to the Patri∣arch to depart.
The Pa∣triarch sends to O
The Pa∣triarch and Fa∣thers are lodged safe in
The Em∣peror treats with

The Pa∣triarch and most of the Fa∣thers are put into the hands of the
The Go∣vernor ha∣ving squeezed all that he could out of them, sends them to
Seven of the Fa∣thers pur∣chase leave to go to
The Fa∣thers be∣ing got to
But can obtain nothing but fair promises.
* The Viceroy, who had no Ships nor Troops to spare for
The King of
The King of
The
Father
He ob∣tains no∣thing at
The Patri∣arch gets to
O
They are all four condem∣ned as Traytors, and exe∣cuted by the Mob.
The Con∣gregation
Six
Four of them are murther∣ed, and the other two con∣tinue at
The two remaining Jesuits in
The Pea∣sant's Ge∣neral is kill'd, and the two Fathers taken, and hanged.
Two
They write to the Empe∣ror for leave to come into his Coun∣try.
The Em∣peror writes to the Ba∣shaw of
The Ba∣shaw murthers them all three, and sendstheir Heads to the Empe∣ror.
Father
Father
At
He is for∣tunate in finding the Skulls of the two
The Pa∣triarch is so kind as to give these Sa∣cred Re∣liques to the Ca∣puchins of
The Pa∣triarch sends an
The Priest accepts of it, and writes for


The Pa∣triarch is named to the Arch∣bishoprick of

After a happy Reign of Thirty Two years is succeed∣ed by his Son

History of the
The Im∣postor dis∣covered.
Her Pe∣nances assigned.