Strange news from Plymouth, or, A wonderful and tragical relation of a voyage from the Indies where by extraordinary hardships, and the extremities of the late great frost, several of the seamen and others miserably perish'd : and for want of provision, cast-lots for their lives, and were forced to eat one another, and how a Dutch merchant eat part of his own children, and then murdered himself because he would not kill his wife : with the miraculous preservation of George Carpinger, an English seaman, and the Dutch merchants wife, now a shore at Plymouth : in a letter to Mr. D.B. of London, merchant.
J. G.
Approx. 13 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-12 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A42530




Wing G41



ESTC R40434





ocm 19319853




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
Strange news from Plymouth, or, A wonderful and tragical relation of a voyage from the Indies where by extraordinary hardships, and the extremities of the late great frost, several of the seamen and others miserably perish'd : and for want of provision, cast-lots for their lives, and were forced to eat one another, and how a Dutch merchant eat part of his own children, and then murdered himself because he would not kill his wife : with the miraculous preservation of George Carpinger, an English seaman, and the Dutch merchants wife, now a shore at Plymouth : in a letter to Mr. D.B. of London, merchant.
J. G.
8 p.   


London :


Printed for J. Conyers ...,


1684.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Voyages and travels --  Anecdotes
Sea stories, English.
2009-04
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2009-05
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2011-03
Pip Willcox
Sampled and proofread
2011-03
Pip Willcox
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2011-06
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






G41


19319853


108601












STRANGE NEWS FROM PLYMOUTH: OR, A Wonderful and Tragical RELATION of a VOYAGE FROM THE INDIES,


Where by Extraordinary Hardships, and the Extremities of the late great Frost, several of the Seamen and others Miserably Perish'd; and for want of Provision, Cast-Lots for their Lives, and were forced to Eat one another; And how a 
Dutch
 Merchant Eat part of his own Children, and then Murdered himself because he would not Kill his Wife: with the Miraculous Preservation of 
George Carpinger
 an 
English
 Seaman, and the 
Dutch
 Merchants Wife, now a Shore at 
Plymouth.


In a Letter to Mr.
 D. B. of London, 
Merchant.


LONDON,
 Printed for 
J. Conyers
 at the 
Black-Raven
 in

Duck-Lane,
 1684.














Strange News from
 Plymouth: 
Or, a Wonderful and Tragical Relation of a Voyage from the
 Indies, &c.


SIR,


ACcording to promise in my last, I have inquired into the particulars of that so Tragical Relation therein mentioned, the which (without any Prologue) I shall lay down in its Naked Truth, as I had the same from the mouth of the Survivours who are now at my House, which if you please take as follows— A Gentleman called the 
Heer van Essell
 Native of the Low-Countries, having had the Edu∣cation of a Merchant at home, was resolved to improve his Pacri∣mony in some Forreign Parts: To which end, being thereunto the more Encouraged by the promise of a strict Correspondence with several of his Countrymen, he undertook a Voyage to the 
Indies,
 whither he Arrived about the year 1670. And by the Industrious Management of his Affairs, increased his Estate so con∣siderably, that few Men in those parts Lived in greater splendor, being thus setled about 7 years, afterwards he came acquain∣ted with the Daughter of a 
Dutch
 Merchant of great Fortune, a Gentlewoman of many worthy Accomplishments, and exceed∣ing Beautiful, our Merchant being much taken with her Port and Beauty, made his Addresses to her, and resolving to change his Condition, found her not altogether averse to his Happiness, which by degrees he raised to Consent, and obtain'd Her for his Wife, with whom he lived very happily for several years, till he had increased his Estate to such a Portion as made him think to return to his own Country where he first drew Breath, and had left his Relations, Communicating which Design to his Lady, she readily assented to the Voyage, and accordingly he made preparation to gather his Estate into a Bottom, and take leave of the 
Indies,
 which in a short time he Effected, and being supplied

with a Vessel that had discharged her self at the said Port; he hired the same for 
Rotterdam,
 and therein Imbarked himselfe, his Wife, two Children, and one Servant, with all his Estate, which amounted to a very considerable Catgoe, and in 
August
 last took Shipping. The flattering Sea which too often beguiles us to our undoing, promised him for the two first months a very hap∣py Voyage, and fill'd his Heart with hopes of touching the Shore, the long absence of his Friends rendred very desirable to him, and Boy'd up with the exp
ctation of a happiness cruel Fat
 had design'd to deprive him off, was on a sudden becalm'd, insomuch that for several weeks they could scar
e tell whether they were forwarded a Leagues space, in which time the sixteen Seamen and Master that was one Board, by a Disease that increased amongst them, several Dyed, and by Degrees their Provision growing short, they were forced to deal the same more sparingly about, hoping by their care they might have enough to serve then thro their Voyage, and made the best way they could to their desired Port; yet such was their misfortune, that they were failed of their expectation, and came to see the last of what they had spent, and for four days lived without any sustenance, and the Wi
d be∣ing Cross they could not make Land, where they might re∣victual, but were forced to keep on their Voyage. Their ex∣treamity was such that the two Children not so well able to be
 the hardship as others, both died, on whose Bodies notwithstanding the Tears and Entreaties of the Merchant and his Wife they were forced to feed, which being in a short

 consum
 
 came to be considered, having no sight not hope of any 
 that they must either all of them submit to the Fate that 
 ned them, or contrive some other method to save themselves▪ which at present they had not the least prospect of, unless in the common Calamity, they consented by Lot or otherwise

 destroy some one in the number to save the rest, which unwil∣lingly they were at length inforced to, and Joyn
y 
 that according to the number then a Board, they should number

so many Lots, and on whom number 1 fell, he should be slain, and number 2 should be his Executioner. But here a Dispute arose, whether the Merchants Wife whose two Chil∣dren had to her great grief been already Eaten, and in favour to her Sex, should not be Exempted from the Fatall Lot, some were of the opinion she ought, and particularly one 
George Car∣pinger,
 a stout 
English
 Seaman, used his endeavours to work the Company to Assent thereunto; but as nothing is so Voracious or Cruell as the Jaws of Hunger on the one hand, or so Esti∣mable as Life on the other, he could not Effect his Design, so that the majority having over-ruled his Arguments, they drew in common, and such was their misfortune, that the Lot fell on the woman for Death, and on her Husband for Executioner; miserable was the Lamentation of the Husband and Wife, that so fatal a Mischance should for ever part them, yet Tears and Entreaties were ineffectual, so that nothing but submission was left, tho the Merchants Servant and 
Carpinger
 stood resolutely against the rest, and resolved to spare them, which the Merchant perceiving, and knowing their force was too little to accomplish their wishes, with a settled Countenance, spake to them to the following purpo
t: 
Honest Friends, for such you have approved your selves to me, you have seen the hardship of my Fate, and since 'tis drove to this point, I am resolved never to be her Executioner, who hath been so loving and just a Wife to me, but in her stead am resolved my self the Sacrifice, and therefore, what I have to say to you is, that you stand her Friends when I am Dead, what is in this Vestel, does as you know belong to me, spare nothing of it to serve Her, and with these Notes, if ever that Arrive at
 Rotterdam,

tho all in this Cargoe be lost, you shall be plentifully Rewarded:
 which after he had said, and they with Tears had heard, being about to Answer him, he drew a Pistol from his Pocket, which he so unexpectedly discharged, they had not time to prevent it, and shot himself in the Head, of which Wound he Immediately Dyed.




The Cry they made at his Fall, and the noise of the Pistol was quickly heard to the rest of the Ships Cr
w, which soon called them thithe
; Nor was his Wife long absent, who poor Lady had been preparing her self for her end, which by this less pleas∣ing Disaster she saw prevented. The Tears she shed and extra∣vagancies she acted at so Dismal a T
gedy, were but needless to recount, since none so hard-hearted but might in some Mea∣sure Judge; She Swounded and almost Dyed with Grief, and beg'd to be her own Executioner, but she was too narrowly watch'd by her Servant and

Carpinger
 to effect so cruel a purpose; their Eyes never left her, and their cares more for her Preservati∣on then their own, but in vain was all their watchfulness against the Enemy from without, when she Harboured in her own Breast

 sufficient to destroy a greater strength then Grief had left her, for no entreaties could perswade her to Feed on that dear Corps she had so often cherrished, but what share thereof the hardship of her Fate allowed her for her Food, she Embalmed with her Tears, and by renew'd Vows promised to share For∣tunes with it, and be Buryed in the same unwonted Grave in which that Flesh was distributed, she once so much admir'd, which she had near accomplish'd, having had no Food in that time but two Rats which were Fortunately taken, and Presented to her by 
Carpinger
) at such time as the Fatal Lot was to take its second round, in which she was resolved to share notwithstanding all the entreaties of 
Carpinger
 and her Servant, and in short, she had her wish, and drew again a Second time her own Sentence, which she welcom'd more then Bridal-days, and being just ready to yield her Throat to the Executioners Knife, she had certainly Fell, had not 
Carpinger
 with two more whom he hired, stept in and resolutely withstood the Execution; Upon which Quartel they drew their Fal
hions, and four Persons were Slain, amongst whom the Faithful Servant was one. This was a sufficient Mor∣sel for the present, and staid the Bloody Hunger of the Survivors, who were now reduced to 5 or 6 Persons besides the Lady, with

the Bodies of the Slain they were then Fed more plenteously then for some Months proceeding, but such was the Rigour or their Fa
e, that by the unusual Dyce most of their Men were Dead, just as they got sight of the Lands end of 
England,
 and having but very few hands to work their Vessel, they found that from the dangers they had been so long in, a second threatned them from the Severity of the late Season, for the Ice being there in very great Flakes, they found themselves drove amidst the same to∣wards the Shore, from whence they could not disingage the Ship, in which time 
Carpinger
 (bring a Person of a Volluable Tongue, and formerly well bred about 
Stepney
 in 
London,
 where his Fa∣ther Captain 
Carpinger
 had long Lived) used all the Consolation he could, by Words, or Devise, to Comfort the Desp
ing Lad
 till at length she was prevailed to hearken to him, and give her promise to spare all violence on her self, and waite her

 Fortane, in this Case they lay for six days, till all but two Per∣sons besides themselves were Dead, and these so Miserably weak they could not leave their Cabbins, so that, being Froze in, that they could not

, 
Carpinger
 with the Lady resolved to venture on the Ice, and set forward towards the Shore, which she the rather undertook for that

 by to find a Grave in those

 on which the had lost what she

 above her

 Preservation, with this Resolution

Carpinger
 taking charge of the Lady got a Planck and a long Pole in his Hand, and with these left the Ship, and with great danger and difficulty in six hours got safe to Shore, having opportunity only of saving a Casket of Jewels, which he brought off with him, where at my own House the said Parties do now remain, in reasonable Health. And considering the care and kindness of 
Carpinger,
 the Lady seems much to Favour him, and when the time of Mournings over, will undoubtedly make him Happy in her Embraces.












SIR,


YOu may according to the Credit I have with you, Communicate this to the Publick, if you think fit, after 
Easter
 I intend to see you at 
London,
 and in the mean time, I am,


Your Servant, J. G.


Plymouth,

Feb. 3d. 1683
.






POSTSCRIPT.


I Should have given you some Account of the Ship called the 
Do Ruyter
 of

Rotterdam,
 which we see at a distance, but as yet the Frost is so hard we cannot get to her, but have small hopes of Preserving hot.


I. G.






This Relation is Justified for from.


By Us,



John Cross,


William Atkins,


 Seamen.


FINIS.









