France painted to the life by a learned and impartial hand.
Heylyn, Peter, 1600-1662.
Approx. 636 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 183 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2008-09 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A43533




Wing H1710



ESTC R5545





ocm 12138982




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
France painted to the life by a learned and impartial hand.
Heylyn, Peter, 1600-1662.
[4], 362, [2] p.   


London :


Printed for William Leake ...,


1656.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
France --  Description and travel.
2005-11
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2006-03
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2007-04
Ali Jakobson
Sampled and proofread
2007-04
Ali Jakobson
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2008-02
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






H1710


12138982


54835














FRANCE PAINTED to the LIFE▪


By a Learned and Impar∣tial Hand.


—Quid non 
Gallia
 parturit ingens.


LONDON.


Printed for 
William Leake,
 at the 
Crown
 in 
Fleet-street,
 betwixt the two 
Temple
 Gates. 1656.










TO THE READER.


H
Istories
 are like 
Iewels,
 not va∣lued by their 
bulk,
 but their 
beauty
 and lustre: Real 
worth
 exceeds 
words
; yet this 
History
 is fur∣nished with both; tis rare for the 
matter, method, truth
 and 
use.


It needs no 
Apologie,
 its own 
furni∣ture
 will sufficiently praise it, especi∣ally amongst the 
Ingenuous
 and 
Learn∣ed
; here is a solid and pleasant 
relish∣ment
 for any that desire forrain rari∣ties.


The Pen-man managed his time with 
advantage
: And it may be said, that a Judicious Reader may see



France
 in this Book as well as by tra∣vel. Nothing worthy observation hath escap'd the 
Author
; what hath, was not worth his Pen. Thou hast (as it came to hand) without any 
adulteration,
 a true Copy of his 
con∣ceptions
 and 
labours
 without addition or diminution. Take hereof a se∣rious view, thereby thou shalt inform thy 
judgement,
 please thy 
fancy,
 and be rendred able to discourse of the seve∣ral 
places
 and 
passages
 therein mentio∣ned, equally with those who have in person 
surveyed
 them.












FRANCE Painted to the Life. The First Book. The beginning of our Journey, the nature of the Sea, a Farewell to 
England.


O
N Thursday the 28th of 
June,
 at the time when 
England
 had recei∣ved the cheif beauty of 
France,
 and the 
French
 had seen the cheif beauties of 
England,
 we went to Sea in a Bark of 
Dover
; The Port we arrived at 
Diepe
 in 
Normandy,
 the hour three in the afternoon: the wind fair and high▪ able, had


it continued in that point, to have given us a waft∣age as speedy as our longing. Two hours before night it came about to the Westward, and the tide also not befriending us, our passage became tedi∣ous and troublesome. The next day being dedi∣cate to the glory of God, in memory of St. 
Peter,
 we took the benifit of the ebb to assist us against the wind. This brought us out of the sight of 
Eng∣land,
 and the floud ensuing compelled us to our an∣chor.


I had now leisure to see 
Gods wonders in the deep,
 wonders indeed to us, which had never before seen them: but too much familiarity had made them none other than the Saylers play-fellows. The waves striving by an inbred ambition which should be the highest, which foremost: precedency and super-eminency was equally desired, and each en∣joyed it in succession. The wind more covetous in appearance to play with the water than disturbe it, did onely rock the billow, and seemed indeed to dandle the Ocean. You would at another time have thought, that the Seas had onely danced at the Winds whistle, or that the Wind straining it self to a treble, and the Seas by a disdiapason supply∣ing the base, had tuned a Coranto to our Ship. For so orderly we rose and fell, according to the time and note of the billow, that her violent agitation might be thought to be nothing but a nimble Gal∣liard filled with Capers. The nimbleness of the waves, and correspondency of our Bark unto them, was not to all our company alike pleasing: what in me moved onely a reverend and awful pleasure, was to others an occasion of sickness:


their heads giddy, their joynts enfeebled, their stomacks loathing sustenance, and with great pangs avoiding what they had taken▪ In their mouthes nothing so frequent, as that of 
Horace,


— Illi robur & aes triplex


Circa pectus erat, qui fragilem truci


Commisit pelago ratem.


Hard was his heart as brass, which first did ven∣ture


In a weak Ship on the rough Seas to enter.

Whether it be that the noisom smels which arise from the saltness and tartness of that Region of waters, poisoneth the brain? or that the ungo∣verned and unequal motion of the Ship stirreth and unsettleth the stomack, or both? we may conje∣cture with the Philosphers rather than determine. This I am sure of, that the Cabbins and Deck were but as so many Hospitals or Pest-houses filled with diseased persons: whilst I and the Marriners one∣ly made good the hatches: here did I see the sca∣ly Nation of that Kingdom solace themselves in the brim of the waves, rejoycing in the light and warmness of the day, and yet spouting from their mouthes such quantity of waters, as if they had purposed to quench that fire which gave it. They danced about our vessel, as if she had been a mo∣ving May-pole; and that with such a delightful 
de∣corum,
 that you never saw a Measure better troaden with less art: And now I know not what wave bigger than the rest▪ tossed up our Ship so high, that I once more ken'd the coast of 
England
; an object


which took such hold on my senses, that I forgot the harmless company which sported below me, to bestow on my dearest Mother this (and for ought I could assure my self, my last) 
Farewell.


England
 adiew: thy most unworthy Son


Leaves thee, and grieves to see what he hath done;


What he hath done in leaving thee, the best


Of Mothers, and more glorious than the rest,


Thy sister Nations. Had'st thou been unkind:


Yet might he trust thee safer than the Wind.


Had'st thou been weak: yet far more strength in thee,


Than in two inches of a sinking Tree.


Say thou wert cruel? yet thy angry face


Hath more love in it, then the Seas embrace.


Suppose thee poor! his zeal and love the less,


Thus to forsake his Mother in distress.


But thou art none of those: No want in thee,


Onely a needless Curiositie,


Hath made him leap thy Ditch. O let him have


Thy blessing in his Voyage, and hee'l crave


The Gods to thunder wrath on his neglect,


When he performs not thee all due respect:


That 
Nemesis
 on him her scourge would pluck,


When he forgets those breasts wich gave him suck:


That Nature would dissolve and turn him earth,


If thou bee'st not remembred in his Mirth.


May he be cast from Mankind, if he shame


To make profession of his Mothers name.


Rest then assur'd in this: though some times he,


Conceal'd perhaps his Faith, he will not thee.






CHAP. I.




Normandy
 in general, the Name and bounds of it, The condition of the ancient 
Nor∣mans,
 and of the present. 
Ortelius
 Cha∣racter of them examined. In what they re∣semble the Inhabitants of 
Norfolk.
 The Commodities of it, and the Government.




THe next ebb brought us in sight of the sea-coast of 
Normandy,
 a shoar so evenly compo∣sed and levelled, that it seemeth the work of Art not Nature, The Rock all the way of an equal height, rising from the bottom to the top in a per∣pendicular, and withal so smooth and polished, that if you dare beleive it the work of Nature, you must also think that Nature wrought it by the line, and shewed an art in it, above the imitation of an Artist; This wall is the Northern bound of this Province; the South part of it being confined with 
Le-Maine la Beausse & l' Isle du France.
 On the East it is divided from 
Picardy
 by the River of 
Some,
 and on the West it is bounded with the O∣cean, and the little River 
Crenon
 which severeth it from a corner of 
Britain.
 It extendeth in length from the beginning of the 9th degree of longitude to the middle of the 23. 
viz.
 from the 
Cape
 of St. 
Saviour
 West, to the Port town of St. 
Valeria
 East. For breadth it lieth partly in the 49th partly in the 50th degree of latitude. So that reckoning 60. miles to a degree, we shall find it to contain 270.


English miles in length, and 60 English miles in breadth where it is narrowest.


Amongst the Nations it was accounted a part of 
Gallia Celtica,
 the name 
Neustria.
 This new title it got by receiving into it a new Nation. A peo∣ple that had so terribly spoiled the Maritine Coasts of 
England, France
 and 
Belgia,
 that 
a furore Normannorum
 was inserted into the 
Letany.
 Ori∣ginally they were of 
Norway,
 their name importeth it: 
Anno
 800. or thereabouts they began first to be accounted one of the plagues of 
Europe:
 900. they seated themselves in 
France
 by permission of 
Charles
 the 
Balde,
 and the valour of 
Rollo
 their Captain. Before this they had made themselves Masters of 
Ireland,
 though they long held it not, and 
Anno
 1067. they added to the glory of their name by the Conquest of 
England.
 You would think them a people not onely born to the warrs, but to victory. But 
Ʋt frugum semina mutato so∣lo degenerant, sic illa genuina feritas eorum amaeni∣tate mollita est. Florus
 spake it of the 
Gaules
 re∣moved into 
Asia,
 it is appliable to the 
Norwegians
 transplanted into 
Gallia
; yet fell they not sudden∣ly and at once into the want of courage, which now possesseth them. During the time they con∣tinued 
English,
 they attempt the Kingdom of 
Na∣ples
 and 
Antioch
 with a fortune answerable to their valour. Being once oppressed by the 
French,
 and inslaved under that Monarchy, they grew pre∣sently Crest fall'n, and at once lost both their spi∣rits and their liberty.


The present 
Norman
 then is but the corruption of the ancient: the heir of his name, and perhaps


his possessions; but neither of his strength nor his manhood: Bondage and a fruitful soil hath so e∣masculated them, that it is lost labour to look for 
Normans
 in 
Normandy.
 There remaineth almost nothing in them of their Progenitors but the re∣mainders of two qualities, and those also degene∣rated, if not bastards; a penurious pride, and an ungoverned doggedness: Neither of them become their fortune or their habit, yet to those they are constant. Finally, view him in his rags and de∣jected countenance, and you would swear it im∣possible, that those snakes should be the descen∣dents of those brave 
Heroes
 which so often trium∣phed over both Religions, foyling the 
Saracens,
 and vanquishing the 
Christians.


But perchance their courage is evaporated into wit, and then the change made the better. 
Ortelius
 would seem to perswade us to this conceit of them, and well might do it, if his words were Oracle. 
Le Gens
 (saith he, speaking of this Nation) 
sont de plus accorls, & subtills d' esprit de la Gaule.
 A Character for which the French will little thank him, who (if he speak truth) must in matter of descretion give precedency to their vassals. But as 
Imbat
 a French Leader said of the 
Florentines
 in the fifth book of 
Guicciardine, Non supena done con∣sistesse lingeque tanto celebrare de Fior
ntini,
 so may I say of the 
Normans
: for my part I could never yet find, where that great wit of theirs lay. Cer∣tain it is, that as the 
French
 in general are termed the 
King's asses:
 so may these men peculiarly be called the 
Asses of the French,
 or the veriest Asses of the rest. For what with the unproportionable


rents which they pay to their Lords on the one side, and the immeasurable taxes laid upon them by the King on the other; they are kept in such a perpetuated course of drudgery, that there is no place for wit or wisdom left amongst them. Liber∣ty is the Mother and Nurse of those two qualities; and therefore the 
Romans
 (not unhappily) ex∣pressed both the condition of a Free-man and a discreet and modest personage by this one word 
Ingenuous.
 Why the 
French
 King should lay a greater burden upon the backs of this Nation, than their fellows, I cannot determine. Perchance it is because they have been twice conquered by them (once from King 
John,
 and again from 
Henry
 the sixth) and therefore undergo a double servitude. It may be to abate their natural pride and stub∣bornness. Likely also it is, that being a revolting people, and apt to an apostasie from their Allegi∣ance, they may by this meanes be kept impoverish∣ed, and by consequence disabled from such practi∣ses. This a French Gentleman of good under∣standing told me, that it was generally conceited in 
France,
 that the 
Normans
 would suddenly and unanimously betray their Country to the 
English,
 were their King a 
Cath
like.


But there is a further cause yet of their beggar∣liness and poverty, which is, the litigiousness and frequent going to law (as we call it:) 
Ortelius,
 however he failed in the first part of the Chara∣cter, in the conclusion of it hath done them justice. 
Mais en generall
 (saith he) 
its sont scavans an passible en prosses & pluideries.
 They are pretty well versed in the querks of the Law, and have wit more than enough to wrangle.


In this they agree exactly well with the Inhabi∣tants of our Country of 
Norfolke. Ex infima plebe non pauci reperiuntur
 (saith Mr. 
Cambden) qui, si nihil sit litium, lites tamen ex ipsis jaris apicibus se∣rere callent.
 They are pretty fellows to find out quirks in Law, and to it they will, whatsoever it cost them. Mr. 
Cambden
 spake not at random, or by the guess: for besides what my self observed in them at my being once among them in a 
Colledge-progress
; I have heard, that there have been no less than 340. 
Nisi prius's
 tried there at one 
Assises.
 The reason of this likeness between the two Na∣tions, I conjecture to be, the resemblance of the site and the soyl: both lie upon the Sea, with a long and spacious coast, both enjoy a Country champain, little swell'd with hils, and for the most part, of a light and sandy mould. To proceed to more particulars, if there be any difference be∣tween the two Provinces, it is onely this, that the Country of 
Normandy
 is much better, and the people of 
Norfolk
 are somewhat the richer.


For indeed the Country of 
Normandy
 is enrich∣ed with a fat and liking soil, such a one, 
quae demum votis respondet avari Agricolae,
 which may satisfie the expectation of the Husbandman, were it never so exorbitant. In my life I never saw Corn-fields more large and lovely extended in an equal level, almost as far as eye-reach. The wheat (for I saw little Barley) of a fair length in the stalk, and so heavy in the ear, that it even bended double, you would think the grain had a desire to kiss the earth its Mother; or that it purposed by making it self away into the ground, to save the Plow-man his


next years labour. Thick it groweth, and so per∣fectly void of weeds, that no garden can be ima∣gined to be kept cleaner by art, than these fields are by nature. Pasture ground it hath little, and less meadow: yet sufficient to nourish those few Cat∣tel they have in it. In all the way between 
Diepe
 and 
Pontois,
 I saw but two flocks of Sheep, and then not above forty in a flock. Kine they have in some measure, but not fat, nor large: without these, there were no living for them. The Noblest eat the flesh, whiles the Farmer feeds on Butter and Cheese, and that but sparingly. But the miserable states of the 
Norman paissant,
 we wiil deferre till another opportunity. Swine also they have in pretty number, and some Pullen in their backsides, but of neither an excess. The principal Rivers of it is 
Seine,
 of which more hereafter, and besides this I saw two rivulets, 
Robee
 and 
Renel
e.


In matter of civil Government this Country is directed by the Court of Parliament established at 
Roven
: for matters Military it hath an Officer like the Lieutenants of our Shires in 
England,
 the 
Go∣vernour
 they call him. The present Governour 
Mounsieur Duc de Longueville,
 to whom the charge of this province was committed by the present King 
Lewis
 the thirteenth 
Anno
 1629. The Laws by which they are governed, are the 
Civil
 or 
Im∣perial,
 augmented by some customes of the 
French,
 and others more particular, which are the 
Nor∣man.
 One of the principallest is in matters of in∣heritance: the French custom giving to all the Sons an equality in their estate, which we in 
Eng∣land



call 
Gavel-kind.
 The 
Norman
 dividing the estate into three parts, and thereof allotting two unto the eldest brother, and a third to be divided among the others. A Law which the 
French
 ac∣count not just, the younger brothers of 
England
 would think the contrary. To conclude this ge∣neral discourse of the 
Normans
: I dare say it is as happy a Country as most in 
Europe,
 were it subject to the same Kings, and governed by the same Laws which it gave unto 
England.






CHAP. II.




Diepe
 the Town, strength and importance of it: The policy of 
Henry
 the fourth not se∣conded by his Son: The custom of the 
Eng∣lish
 Kings in placing Governours in their Forts: The breaden God there, and strength of their Religion: Our passage from 
Di∣epe
 to 
Roven:
 The 
Norman
 Inns, Wo∣men and Manners: The importunity of Ser∣vants in hosteries: The saucy familiarity of the attendants: 
Ad pileum vocare,
 What it was amongst the 
Romans,
 and 
jus pilea∣rum
 in the Universities of 
England.




IƲne
 the 30th at six of the clock in the morning we landed at 
Diepe,
 one of the Haven Towns of 
Normandy,
 seated on an arm of the Sea, between two hils which imbrace it in the nature of a bag:


this secureth the Haven from the violence of the weather, and is a great strength to the Town a∣gainst the attempts of any forces, which should assault it by Sea, the Town lying within these Mountains a quarter of a mile up the channel. The Town it self is not uncomely, the streets large and well paved, the houses of an indifferent height, and built upright without any juttings out of one part over the other. The Fortifications (as they say, for we were not permitted to see them) are very good and modern, without, stones, within, earth. On the top of the hill a Castle finely seated, both to defend the Town, and on occasions to command it. The Garrison consisteth of sixty men, in pay no more, but when need requireth the Captain hath authority to arm the Inhabitants: The present Go∣vernour is the Duke of 
Longueville,
 who also is the Governour of the Province, intrusted with both those charges by 
Lewis
 the thirteenth, 1619. An action wherein he swarved somewhat from the ensample of his Father, who never committed the military command of a Country (which is the Office of a Governour) and the custody of a Town of war or a Fortress unto one man. The Duke of 
Biron
 might have as great a courtesie from that King, as the most deserving of his sub∣jects: he had stuck close to him in all his adversi∣ties, received many an honourable fear in his ser∣vice, and indeed was 
Fabius
 and 
Scipio,
 both the sword and buckler of the 
French Empire.
 In a word, he might have said to this 
Henry,
 what 
Silius
 in 
Tacitus
 did to 
Tiberius. Suum militem in obse∣quio mans
sse, cum alii ad sedetiones prolaberentur, ne∣que


daraturum Tiberii imperium, si iis quoque Le∣gionibus cupido novandi fuisset
; yet when he be∣came petitioner to the King for the Cittadel of 
Bourg,
 seated on the confines of his Government of 
Burgogne,
 the King denied it. The reason was, because Governours of Provinces which com∣manded in chief ought not to have the command of places and fortresses within their Government: there was also another reason, and more enfor∣cing, which was, that the petitioner was suspected to hold intelligence with the Duke of 
Savoy
 whose Town it was. The same 
Henry
 though he loved the Duke 
Espernon
 even to the envy of the Court, yet even to him also used he the same cauti∣on. Therefore when he had made him Govern∣our of 
Xanictoigne
 and 
Angoulmois,
 he put also in∣to his hands the Towns of 
Mets
 and 
Boullogne,
 places so remote from his seat of Government, and so distant one from the other, that they did rather distract his power than encrease it.


The Kings of 
England
 have been well, and for a long time, versed in this Maxime of State. Let 
Kent
 be one of our ensamples and 
Hampshire
 the other. In 
Kent
 at this time the 
Lieutenant
 (or as the 
French
 would call him) the 
Governour
 is the Earl of 
Montgomery
; yet is 
Dover
 Castle in the hands of the Duke of 
Buckingham,
 and yet 
Quin∣borough
 in the custody of Sir 
Edward Hobby.
 Of which the one commandeth the Sea, and the other the 
Thames
 and the 
Medway.
 In 
Hampshire
 the 
Lieutenant
 is the Earl of 
Southampton,
 but the Go∣vernment of the Town and Garrison of 
Ports∣mouth
 is intrusted to the Earl of 
Pembroke.
 Nei∣ther


is there any of the best Sconces or Block-hou∣ses on the shore side of the Country which is com∣manded by the Lieutenant.


But King 
Lewis
 now raigning in 
France,
 minded not his Fathers actions, when at the same time also he made his Confident 
M. Luines
 Governour of 
Picardy,
 and of the Town and Cittadel of 
Amiens.
 The time ensuing gave him an insight of that state-breach; for when the Dukes of 
Espernon, Vendosme, Longueville, Magenne
 and 
Nemours,
 the Count of 
Soisons
 and others sided with the Queen Mother against the King; the Duke of 
Longueville
 streng∣thened this 
Dieppe,
 and had not peace suddenly followed, would have made good, maugre the Kings forces. A town it is of great importance, King 
Henry
 the fourth using it as his 
Asylum,
 or City of Refuge, when that League was hottest against him. For had he been further distressed, from hence might he have made an escape into 
England,
 and at this door was the entrance made for the Eng∣lish forces, which gave him the first step to his Throne. The Town hath been pillaged and taken by our 
Richard
 the first, in his warrs against 
Philip Augustus,
 and in the declining of our affairs in 
France,
 it was a moneth together besieged by the Duke of 
York,
 but with that success which com∣monly attendeth a falling Empire.


The number of the Inhabitants is about 30000. whereof 9000. and upwards are of the Religion, and have allowed them for the exercise of their Religion the Church of 
Argues,
 a Village some two miles distant. The Remainder are Papists. In this Town I met with the first Idolatry which ever


I yet saw, more than in my books. 
Quas antea au∣diebam hodi
, video Deos,
 as a barbarous 
German
 in 
Velleius
 said to 
Tiberius.
 The Gods of 
Rome
 which before I onely heard of I now see, and might have worshipped, it was the 
Hoast,
 as they call it, or the Sacrament reserved, carried by a couple of Priests under a Canopy; ushered by two or three torches, and attended by a company of boyes & old people which had no other imployment. Before it, went a bell continually tinckling, at the sound whereof all such as are in their houses, being warned that then their God goeth by them, make some shew of reverence; those which meet it in the street, with bended knees and elevated heads doing it honour. The Protestants of this bell make an use more reli∣gious, and use it as a warning or a watch-peal, to avoid that street through which they hear it coming. This invention of the Bell hath some∣what of 
Turcisme,
 it being the custom there, at their Canonical hours, when they hear the cryers bawl∣ing in the steeples; to fall prostrate on the ground wheresoever they are, and to kiss it thrice, so doing their devotions to 
Mahomet.
 The carrying it about the streets hath no question in it a touch of the 
Jew:
 this Ceremony being borrowed from that of the carrying about the Ark upon the shoul∣ders of the Priests. The other main part of it, which is the adoration, is derived from the Hea∣then; there never being a people but they which afforded divine honour to things inanimate. But the people indeed I cannot blame for this idola∣trous devotion, their consciences being perswaded, that what they see pass by them is the very body of


their Saviour. For my part could the like beleif possess my understanding▪ I could meet it with a greater reverence, then their charge can enjoyn me. The Priests and Doctors of the people are to be condemned onely, who impose and inforce this sin upon their bearers, and doubtless there is a reward which attendeth them for it. Of standing it is so yoūg, that I never met with it before the year 1215. Then did Pope 
Innocent
 ordain in a Council holden at 
Rome,
 that there should be a Pixe made to cover the Bread, and a Bell bought to be rung before it. The adoration of it was enjoyned by Pope 
Honorius Anno Dom.
 1226. Both afterwards encreast by the new solemn Feast of 
Corpus Chri∣sti
 day by Pope 
Ʋrban
 the fourth, 
Anno
 1264. and confirmed for ever with multitudes of pardons in the Council of 
Vienna
 by 
Clement
 the third, 
Anno
 1310. Such a punie is this great God of the Ro∣mans 
Lactantius
 in his first book of Institutions against the Gentiles taxeth the wise men of those times of infinite ridiculousness, who worshipped 
Jupiter
 as a God, 
Cum eundem tamen Saturno & Rhea genitum confiterentur,
 since themselves so per∣fectly knew his original. As much I marvail at the impudency of the Romish Clergy, who will needs impose a new God upon their people, being so well acquainted with his cradle.


It is now time to go on in our journey to 
Roven.
 The Cart stayeth, and it is fit we were in it; Horses we could get none for money, and for love we did not expect them: we are now mount∣ed in our Chariot, for so we must call it. An English man thought it a plain Cart, and if it needs will


have the honour of being a Chariot, let it, sure I am it was never ordained for a triumph. At one end were fastened three carkasses of Horses, and three bodies which had been once Horses and now were worn to dead Images. Had the statue of a man been placed on any one of them, it might have been hang'd up at an Inn door to represent Saint 
George
 on horse-back: so liveless they were and so little moving; yet at last they began to crawl, for go they could not. This converted me from my former heresie, and made me apprehend life in them, but it was so little, that it seemed onely e∣nough to carry them to the next pack af Hounds. Thus accomodated we bad Farewell to 
Diepe,
 and proceeded with a pace so slow, that we thought our journey to 
Roven
 would prove a most perfect Emblem of the motion of the ninth Sphere, which was 49000. years in finishing. But this was not our greatest misery: The rain fell on us through our Tilt, which for the many holes in it we would have thought a net. The durt brake plentifully in upon us through the rails of our Chariot, & the unequal and unproportionable pace of it startled almost every bone of us. I protest I marvel how a French-man durst adventure in it. Thus endured we all the dis∣eases of a journey, and the danger of three several deaths, drowning, choaking with the mire, and breaking of the wheel, besides a fear of being fa∣mished before we came to our Inn, which was six French miles from us. The mad Duke that in the Play undertook to drive two Snails from 
Millaine
 to 
Musco,
 without staffe, whip, or goad; and in a bravery to match him, for an experiment would


here have had matter to have tired his pati∣ence.


On the left hand we saw 
Argues,
 once famous for a siege laid about it by our 
Richard
 the first, but wasted speedily by the French. It is now (as be∣fore I told you) the Parish Church of 
Diepe Pro∣testants,
 their Preachers were Mr. 
Courteau
 and Mr. 
Mondeme,
 who had each of them an yearly sti∣pend, fifty pound or thereabouts. A poor pay, if the faithful discharge of that duty were not a re∣ward unto it self above the value of gold and si∣ver. To instance in none of these beggerly Vil∣lages we past through: we came at last unto 
Tostes,
 the place destinate to our Lodging, a Town like the worser sort of Market Towns in 
England.
 There our Charioter brought us to the ruines of an house, an Alehouse I would scarce have thought it, and yet in spite of my teeth it must be an Inn, yea, and that an honourable one too, as 
Don Quixot's
 Host told him. Despair of finding there either bedding or victuals, made me just like the fellow at the Gallows, who when he might have been reprei∣ved, on condition he would marry a Wench, which there sued for him, having veiwed well, cried to the Hangman to drive on his Cart. The truth is, 
I' eschappay du tonnere etrencheu en l'es lair,
 according to the French proverb; I fell out of the frying-pan into the hot fire. One of the house (a ragged fellow I am sure he was, and so most likely to live there) brought us to a room somewhat of kindred to a Charnel-house; as dark and as dampish: I confess it was paved with brick at the bottom, and had towards the Orchard a pretty hole, which in


former times had been a window, but now the glass was all vanished. By the light that came in at the hole, I first perceived that I was not in 
England.
 There stood in the chamber three beds, if at the least it be lawful so to call them. The foundation of them was of straw, so infinitely thronged toge∣ther, that the wooll-pack which our Judges fit on in the Parliament were melted butter to them; up∣on this lay a medley of flocks and feathers toge∣ther, sowed up in a large bag (for I am confident it was not a Tick) but so ill ordered, that the knobs stuck out on each side of it, like a crabtree-cudgel. He must needs have flesh enough that lieth upon one of them; otherwise the second night would wear out his bones. The sheets which they brought for us were so course, that in my consciente no Marriner would vouchsafe to use them for a sail: and the Coverlid so bare, that if a man would un∣dertake to reckon the threeds, he need not miss one of the number. The Napery of the Table was sutable to the bedding, so foul and durty, that I durst not conceive it had ever been washed above once, and yet the poor cloth looked as briskly, as if it had been promised for the whole year ensuing to scape many a scouring. The Napkins were fit companions for the cloath; 
Ʋnum si noveris, om∣nes nosti.
 By my description of the Inn, you may guess at the rest of 
France.
 Not altogether so wretched, yet is the alteration almost insensi∣ble.


Let us now walk into the Kitchen, and observe their provision, and here we found a most terrible execusion committed on the person of a Pullet.


My Hostess, cruel woman, had cut the throat of it, and without plucking off the feathers, tare it into pieces with her hands, and afterwards took away skin and feathers together, just as we strip Rabbets in 
England.
 This done, it was clapt into a pan, and fried into a supper. In other places where we could get meat for the spit, it useth to be presently broached, and laid perpendicularly over the fire: three turns at the most dispatcheth it, and bringeth it up to the table, rather scorched than roasted; I say, where we could get it, for in these rascally Inns you cannot have what you would, but what you may, and that also not at the cheapest. At 
Pontoise
 we met with a Rabbet, and we thought we had found a great purchase. Larded it was, as all meat is in that Country, otherwise it is so lean, it would never endure the roasting. In the eating it proved so tough, that I could not be perswaded that it was any more than three removes from that Rabbet which was in the Ark. The price half a Crown English: My Companions thought it over dear, to me it seem'd very reasonable, for certainly the grass that fed it was worth more than thrice the money: but I return to 
Tostes.


And it is time, you might perchance else have lost the sight of mine Hostess and her Daughters, you would have sworn at first blush they had been of a bloud, and it had been great pitty, had it been otherwise. The salutation of 
Horace, O mater pul∣chra, filia pulchrior,
 was never so seasonable as here. Not to honour them with a further chara∣cter let this suffice that their persons kept so excel∣lent 
decorum
 with the house and furniture, that one


could not possibly make use of 
Tullies, Quam dis∣pari dominaris domino!
 But this is not their luck onely. The Women not of 
Normandy
 alone, but generally of all 
France
 are forced to be contented with a little beauty; and she which with us is rec∣koned among the vulgar; would amongst them be taken for a Princess. But of the French Women more, when we have taken a view of the Dames of 
Paris,
 now onely somewhat of their habit and con∣dition. Their habit in which they differ from the rest of 
France,
 is the attire of their heads, which hangeth down their backs in fashion of a vail. In 
Roven
 and the greater Cities, it is made of linnen pure and decent, here and in the villages it cannot possibly be any thing else than an old dish-clout turned out of service, or the corner of a table-cloth reserved from washing. Their best condition is not alwayes visible, they shew it onely in the morn∣ings, or when you are ready to depart, and that is their begging. You shall have about you such a throng of these ill faces, and every one whining out this ditty, 
Pour les servantes
; that one might with greater ease distribute a dole at a rich mans funeral, then give them a penny: Had you a pur∣pose to give them unasked, their importunity will prevent your speediest bounty. After all this im∣portunate begging, their ambition reacheth no higher than a 
Sol
: He that giveth more out-bid∣deth their expectation, and shall be counted a spend-thrift.


But the principal ornaments of these times are the men-servants, the raggedst regiment that ever I yet looked upon. Such a thing as a Chamberlain


was never heard of among them, and good clothes are as little known there as he. By the habit of his attendants a man would think himself in Gaole, their clothes either full of patches, or else open to the skin. Bid one of them wipe your boots, he presently hath recourse to the curtains; with those he will perhaps rub over one side, and leave the other to be made clean by the Guest. It is enough for him that he hath written the coppy. They wait alwayes with their hats on their heads, and so also do servants before their Masters: Attending-bare∣headed is as much out of fashion there as in 
Tur∣key.
 Of all 
French
 fashions in my opinion the most unfitting and unseeming. Time and much use re∣conciled me to all other things, which at the first were offensive, to this irreverent custom I returned an enemy. Neither can I see how it can choose but stomack the most patient, to see the worthiest sign of liberty usurped and profaned by the basest of slaves. For seeing that the French paisants are such infamous slaves unto their Lords and Princes; it cannot be, but that those which are their servants must be one degree at the least below the lowest condition.


Certainly among the Ancients this promiscuous covering of the head was never heard of, it was with them the chief sign of freedom, as is well known to those which are conversant with antiqui∣ty. The 
Lacones
 a people of 
Peloponnesus,
 after they had obtained to be made free Denizens of 
Lacedaemon,
 in sign of their now gotten liberty would never go into the battel, 
nisi pileati,
 but with their hats on. Amongst the 
Africans,
 as it is written


of 
Alexander, ab Alexandro,
 the placing of an hat on the top of a spear, was used as a token to incite the people to their liberty which had been oppres∣sed by 
Tyrants: Per pileum in bast â propositum ad libertatem proclamari.
 But among the 
Romans
 we have more variety. The taking off the hat of 
Targuinius Priscus
 by an Eagle, and the putting of it on again, occasioned the 
Augures
 to prophesie unto him the Kingdom; which fell out accord∣ingly. In their Sword-playes when one of their 
Gladiators
 had with credit slain his adversary, they would sometimes honour him with a 
Palm,
 some∣times with a Hat, of these the last was the worthier; the Palm onely honouring the Victor; this also enfranchising the receiver; therefore conferred commonly on him which killed most men in the Theaters: Hence the complaint of 
Tertuslian lib. de Spectaculis cap.
 21. 
Qui insigniore cuiquam ho∣micide leonem poscit, idem gladiatori atroci Rudem petat (Redis
 was another token of enfranchize∣ment) 
& pileum proemium conferat.
 In their common 
Forum
 or 
Guild-Hall,
 when they purpo∣sed to manumit any of their servants, their custom also was, after the 
Lictor
 or 
Sergeant
 had registred the name of the party manumitted, to shave his head, and give him a cap, whence according to 
Rosinus, ad pileum Vocare,
 is to set one at li∣berty.


Erasmus
 in his 
Chiliades
 maketh the hat to be the sign of some eminent worth iu him that wear∣eth it. 
Pileus
 (saith he) 
insigne spectatae, virtu∣tis.
 On this he conjectureth, that the putting on of caps on the heads of such as are created 
Doctors



or 
Masters
 had its original. In the Universities of 
England
 this custom is still in force, the putting on of the Cap being never performed but on the solemn 
Comitia,
 and in the presence of all such as are either auditors or spectators of that dayes ex∣ercise: When I was 
Regent,
 the whole house of 
Congregation
 joyned together in a petition to the Earl of 
Pembroke,
 to restore unto us the 
jus pileo∣rum,
 the licence of putting on our caps at our pub∣like meetings, which priviledge time and the ty∣ranny of our 
Vice-Chancellors
 had taken from us. Amongst other motives we used the solemn form of creating a Mr. in the 
Arts
 by putting on his cap, and that that sign of liberty might distinguish us that were the 
Regents
 from those boyes which we were to govern: which request he graciously granted. But this 
French
 sauciness had drawn me out of my way. An impudent familiarity, which I must confess did much offend me, and to which I will still profess my self an open enemy. Though 
Jack
 speach 
French,
 I cannot endure that 
Jack
 should be a Gentleman.






CHAP. III.




Roven
 a neat City: how seated and built. The strength of it. St. 
Kathe
ines
 Mount. The Church of 
Nostre-dame, &c.
 The Indeco∣rum of the Papists in the several and unsu∣table pictures of the 
Virgin.
 The little Chappel of the 
Capuchins
 in 
Boulogne
▪


The House of Parliament. The precedency of the President and Governour. The Legend of St. 
Romain,
 and the priviledge thence arising. The Language and Religion of the 
Rhothomagenses.




IƲly
 the first we set out for 
Roven
; in ten hours our Cart dragged us thither, the whole journey being in all six miles 
French
; admirable speed. About three of the clock in the afternoon we had a sight of the Town, daintily seated in a valley on the River 
Seine
: I know not any Town better sci∣tuated (
Oxford
 excepted) which indeed it much resembleth, I mean not in bigness but in scituation. It standeth on all sides environed with Mountains, the North excepted, and hath a large and pleasant walk of meadow by the river side, to the South-Eastward, as 
Oxford
 hath towards 
Iffley.
 It is seat∣ed on the principal River of 
France,
 distant from the 
Metropolis
 of that Countrey fifty miles Eng∣lish or thereabouts; as 
Oxford
 on the 
Thames
 and from 
London
: watered also it is with two small Rillets, 
Rosee
 and 
Renelle,
 as the other with 
Char∣well
 and 
Evenlode.
 The difference is, that 
Oxford
 is seated somewhat higher on the swelling of an hill, and a little more removed from those moun∣tains which environ it, and that the Rivers which run through some part of 
Roven,
 do onely wash the precincts of the other. The buildings are in some places wood, in some stone, in others both. The houses without juttings or overlets four stories high, and in the front not very beautiful. The


most promising house which mine eyes met with was that of Mr. 
Boniface,
 who being of obscure parents; and having raised himself a fortune in the wars against the 
League,
 here built a receptacle for his age. It is fashioned after the manner of new buildings in 
London,
 composed all of dainty white stone, square and polished. On the partition be∣twixt the first story and the second it hath these words engraven, 
Ʋt & Virtute Martisopus; Ten∣tanda via amore & armis.
 A Motto sutable to his rising.


The other buildings of note are the 
Bridge
 (for I as yet omit the House of Parliament and the Churches) and the Town wall by it. The Bridge whilst it was all standing, was thought to have been the fairest and strongest piece of that kind in all 
France,
 it consisted of twelve arches large and high, there now remain but seven of them, the rest being broken down by the English, in the falling of their affairs in 
France,
 the better to make good the Town against the French. The River is here about the breadth of the 
Thames
 at 
Fullham.
 Be∣tween the River and the Town wall is the 
Ex∣change
 or meeting place of the Merchants, paved with broad and even pebble-stones; in breadth up to the wallwards thirty yeards, in length a hun∣dred. A fine walk in fair weather. All along the bankside lay the Ships, which by reason of the bro∣ken bridge come up hither, and on occasion high∣er; a good turn for 
Paris.
 The wall for the length of an hundred yeards is as streight as one may lay a line; of a just height, and composed of square and excellent stone so cunningly laid, that I never


saw the side of a Noble mans house built more handsomly. But it is not onely the beauty of the wall which 
Roven
 delighteth in, there must some∣what also be expected of it for strength. To which purpose it might seem indifferently well, were there some addition of earth within it. It is well helped on the outside by the breadth and depth of the ditches, but more by St. 
Katharines
 Fort seated on an hill at the East side of it. A Fort which, were it strengthned according to the mo∣dern art of fortifying, would much assure the Town, and make it at once both a slave and a Commander. The 
Marshal
 D'c 
Anere,
 when he was Lieutenant here for the 
Queen-Mother,
 began to fortifie this Mountain, 
Quilleboeuse
 and other places of importance; but upon his death they were all razed. What were his projects in it, they know best which were acquainted with his ambition. Certainly the jarrs which he had sown among the Princes, one with the other, and between them and the King, shew that they were not intended for no∣thing.


There are in 
Roven
 thirty two Parish Churches, besides those which belong to 
Abbeys
 and 
Religi∣ous
 Houses; of which the most beautiful is that of St. 
Audom
 or 
Owen,
 once Arch-bishop of this City. The seat and Church of the Arch-bishop is that of 
Nostre-dame,
 a building far more gorgeous in the outside than within. It presents it self to you with a very gracious and majestical front, decked with most curious imagery, and adorned with three stately Towers. The first called 
La tour St. Ro∣main
; the second 
La tour de beaurre
 (because it


was built with that money which was raised by Cardinal 
D' Amboyse,
 for granting a dispensation to eat butter in the 
Lent
) and a third built over the Porch, or great Door, wherein is the great Bell so much talked of: Within it is but plain and or∣dinary, such as common Cathedral Churches usually are, so big, so fashioned. Behind the high Altar at a pillar on the left hand is the remainder of the Duke of 
Bedford
's Tomb, which for ought I could discern was nothing but an Epitaph, some three yeards high in the Pillar. I saw nothing in it, which might move the envy of any Courtier to have it defaced, unless it were the title of 
Regent du Ro∣jaume de France,
 which is the least he merit∣ed.


Somewhat Eastward beyond this is our 
Ladies Chappel,
 a pretty neat piece, and daintily set out. There standeth on the top of the Screen the Image of the 
Virgin
 her self between two Angels. They have attired her in a red Mantle laced with two gold laces, a handsom ruffe about her neck, a vail of fine lawn hanging down her back, and (to shew that she was the Queen of Heaven) a Crown up∣on her head. In her left arm she holds her Son in his side coat, a black hat and a golden hat-band. A jolly plump Lady she seemeth to be, of a flaxen hair, a ruddy lip, and a chearful complexion. 'Twere well the Painters would agree about the limming of her; otherwise we are like to have as many Ladies as Churches. At 
Nostre dame
 in 
Pa∣ris
 she is taught us to be brown, and seemeth some∣what inclin'd to melancholy, I speak not of her different habit, for I envy her not her changes


of apparel. Onely I could not but observe how those of St. 
Sepulchres Church en la rue St. Denis,
 hath placed her on the top of their Screen in a Coape, as if she had taken on her the zeal of 
A∣braham,
 and were going to make a bloudy sacrifice of her Son. They of 
Nostre-dame in Amiens
 have erected her Statue all in gold, with her Son also of the same mettal in her arms, casting beams of gold round about her, as the Sun is painted in its full glory. Strange Idolatries! On the contra∣ry, in the parish Church of 
Tury in la Beause
 she is to be seen in a plain petticoat of red, and her other garments correspondent. In my mind this hold∣eth most proportion to her estate, and will but serve to free their irreligion from an absurdity. If they will worship her as a Nurse with her Child in her arms, or at her breast, let them array her in such apparel as might beseem a Carpenters Wife, such as she might be supposed to have worn before the world had taken notice that she was the Mother of her Saviour. If they must needs have her in her estate of glory, as at 
Amiens
; or of honour (be∣ing now publikely acknowledged to be the bles∣sedness among Women) as at 
Paris
: let them disburden her of her Child. To clap them thus both together, is a folly equally worthy of scorn & laughter. Certainly had she but so much liberty as to make choice of her own clothes, I doubt not but she would observe a greater 
decorum.
 And there∣fore I commend the Capouchins of 
Boulogne,
 who in a little side Chappel consecrated unto her, have placed onely an handsom fair looking-glass upon her Altar, the best ornament of a Female Closet.


Why they placed it there I cannot say: onely I conceive it was, that she might there see how to dress her self.


This Church is said to have been built (I should rather think repaired) by 
Raoul
 or 
Rollo
 the first Duke of 
Normandy:
 Since it hath been much beautified by the English, when they were Lords of this Province. It is the seat of an Arch-bishop, a Dean and fifty Canons. The Arch-bishoprick was instituted by the authority of 
Constantine
 the Great, during the sitting of the Council of 
Arles; Anidian
 who was there present being consecrated the first Arch-bishop. The Bishops of Seas, 
Au∣renches, Constances, Beaux, Lysieaux
 and 
Eureux,
 were appointed for his Diocesans. The now Arch-bishop is said to be an able Schollar and a sound States-man: his name I enquired not. The Re∣venues of his Chair are said to be ten thousand Crowns. More they would amount to, were the Country any way fruitful of Vines: out of which the other Prelates of 
France
 draw no small part of their 
Intrado.


The Parliament of this Country was established here by 
Lewis
 the twelfth, who also built that fair Palace, wherein Justice is administred, 
Anno
 1501. At that time he divided 
Normandy
 into seven 
Cathes, Rapes,
 or 
Baliwicks,
 viz. 
Roven, Caux, Con∣stentin, Caen, Eureux, Gisors,
 and 
Alenzon,
 This Court hath supreme power to enquire into, and give sentence of all causes within the limits of 
Normandy.
 It receiveth appeals from the inferi∣our Courts of the Dutchy unto it, but admitteth none from it. Here is also 
Cour des Esleuz,
 a Court


of the general Commissioners for taxes: and 
la Chambre des aides,
 instituted by 
Charles
 the seventh for the receiving of his subsidies, 
Gabels, Imposts,
 &c. The house of Parliament is in form 
quadran∣gular,
 a very graceful and delectable building. That of 
Paris
 is but a 
Chaos
 or a 
Babel
 to it. In the great Hall (into which you ascend by some thirty steps or upwards) are the seats and desks of the 
Procu∣rators,
 every ones name being written in Capital letters over his head. These Procurators are like our Attourneys, to prepare causes, and make them ready for the 
Advocates.
 In this Hall do suitors use, either to attend, or walk up and down and con∣fer with their pleaders. Within this Hall is the great Chamber, the Tribunal or Seat of Justice, both in Causes Criminal and Civil.


At domus interior regali splendida luxu


Instruitur.


As 
Virgil
 of 
Queen Dido's
 dining room.


A Chamber so gallantly and richly built, that I must confess it far supasseth all the rooms that ever I saw in my life. The Palace of the 
Lou're
 hath no∣thing in it comparable. The seiling all inlaid with gold, and yet did the workmanship exceed the mat∣ter. This Court consisteth of two Presidents, twen∣ty Counsellors or Assistants, and as many Advo∣cates as the Court will admit of, The prime Pre∣sident is termed Mr. 
De Riz.
 by birth a 
Norman
: upon the Bench and in all the places of his Court he taketh precedency of the Duke of 
Longue∣ville.
 When there is a Convention of the


three estates summoned the Duke hath the prio∣rity.


We said even now, that from the sentence of this Court there lay no appeal: but this must be re∣canted, and it is no shame to do it. St. 
Austin
 hath writ his 
Retractions
; so also hath 
Bellarmine,
 Once in the year there is an appeal admitted; but for one man onely, and that on this occasion. There was a poysonous Dragon not far from 
Roven,
 which had done much harm to the Country and City. Many wayes had been tried to destroy him, but none prospered. At last 
Roman,
 afterwards made a St. then Arch-bishop of the Town, ac∣companied with a theif and a murderer, whose lives had been forfeited to a sentence, undertaketh the enter prise. Upon sight of the Dragon the theif stole away, the murderer goeth in and seeth that holy man vanquish the Serpent, armed onely with a 
Stoale
 (it is a neck habit sanctified by his holiness of 
Rome,
 and made much after the fashion of a tippet) with this 
Stoale
 tyed about the neck of the Dragon doth the murderer lead him priso∣ner to 
Roven.
 To make short work; the Name of God is praised, the Bishop magnified, the murderer pardoned, and the Dragon burned. This accident (if the story be not 
Apocrypha
) is said to have hap∣ned on 
Holy Thursday. Audom
 or 
Owen
 successor unto St. 
Roman,
 in memory of this marvellous act, obtained of King 
Dagobert
 the first (he began his raign 
Anno
 632.) that from that time forwards the Chapter of the Cathedral Church should on every 
Ascension
 day have the faculty of delivering any Malefactor whom the Laws had condemned.


This that King then granted, and all the following Kings to this time have successively confirmed it. I omit the ceremonies and solemnities wherewith this Prisoner is taken out of his Irons and restored to liberty. It is not above nine years agone, since a Baron of 
Gascoyne
 took occasion to kill his Wife; which done, he fled hither into 
Normandy
; and having first acquainted the Canons of 
Nostre∣dame
 with his desire, put himself to the sentence of the Court, and was adjudged to the 
Wheele. As∣cension
 day immediately comming on, the Canons challenged him, and the Judge, according to the custom, caused him to be delivered. But the 
Nor∣mans
 pleaded, that the benefit of that priviledge belonged onely to the Natives of that Country, and they pleaded with such fury, that the Baron was a∣gain committed to prison, till the 
Queen Mother
 had wooed the people, 
pro eâ saltem vice,
 to admit of his repreival.


I deferred to speak of the language of 
Norman∣dy,
 till I came hither, because here it is best spoken. It differeth from the 
Parisian,
 and more elegant French, almost as much as the English spoken in the 
North
 doth from that of 
London
 or 
Oxford.
 Some of the old 
Norman
 words it still retaineth, but not many. It is much altered from what it was in the time of the Conqueror: few of the words in which our Laws were written being known by them. One of our company gave a 
Lit∣tletons tenures
 written in that language to a 
French Doctor
 in the Laws, who protested that in three lines he could not understand three words of it. The religion in this Town is indifferently poysed▪


as it is also in most places of this 
Province.
 The 
Protestants
 are thought to be as great a party as the other, but far weaker: the Duke of 
Longueville
 having disarmed them in the beginning of the last troubles.






CHAP. IV.




Our journey between 
Roven
 and 
Pontoise;
 the holy man of St. 
Claire,
 and the Pilgrims thither. My sore eyes. 
Mante, Pontoise, Normandy
 justly taken from K. 
John.
 The end of this Book.




IƲly
 the second we took our farewell of 
Roven
; better accommodated than when we came thi∣ther; yet not so well as I desired. We are now preferred, 
ab asinis ad equos,
 from the Cart to the Waggon. The 
French
 call it a 
Coach,
 but that mat∣ters not; so would they needs have the Cart to be Chariot▪ These Waggons are ordinary instru∣ments of travel in those Countries, much of kin to a 
Graves-end Barge:
 you shall hardly find them without a knave or a 
Giglot.
 A man may be sure to be merry in them, were he as certain of being wholesome. This in which we travelled contain∣ed ten persons, as all of them commonly do: and amongst these ten, one might have found 
English, Scots, French, Normans, Dutch,
 and 
Italians
; a jolly medley; had our religions been as different as our Nations, I should have thought my self in



Amsterdam,
 or 
Poland.
 If a man had desired to have seen a brief or an 
Epitome
 of the world, he could no where have received such satisfaction, as by looking on us. I have already reckoned up the several nations, I will now lay open the several con∣ditions. There were then to be found among these passengers Men and Women, Lords and Serving-men, Schollars and Clowns, Ladies and Chamber∣maids, Priests and Lay-men, Gentlemen and Arti∣ficers, people of all sexes, and almost of all ages▪ If all the learning in the world were lost, it might be found in 
Plutarch,
 so said 
Budaeus.
 If all the Nations in the world had been lost, they might have been found again in our Waggon, so I: Seriously I think our Coach to have been no unfit represen∣tation of the Ark, a whole world of men and lan∣guages might have grown out of it.


But all this while our Waggon joggeth on, but so leasuresy, that it gave me leave to take a more patient view of the Country then we could in the Cart. And here indeed I saw sufficient to affect the Country, yea to dote on it; had I not come out of 
England.
 The fields such as already I have described: every where beset with Apple-trees, and fruits of the like nature: you could scarce see any thing which was barren in the whole Coun∣try. These Apples are both meat and drink to the poor Pesant, for the Country is ill provided with vines (the onely want I could observe in it) and Beer is a good beverage at a Gentlemans table. Sider then or Perry are the poor mans Clarret; and happy man is he, which can once or twice in a week aspire so high above water. To proceed▪


Through many a miserable Village (
Duburgs
 they call them) and one Town somewhat bigger then the rest, called 
Ecquille,
 we came that night to St. 
Claire,
 ten French miles from 
Roven.
 A poor Town, God wot, and had nothing in it remarkable, but an accident. There dwelt a Monk grown into great opinion for his sanctity; and one who had an especial hand on sore eyes: yet his ability here∣in was not general, none being capable of cure from him, but pure Virgins. I perswade my self 
France
 could not yeild him many Patients: and yet from all parts he was much sought unto. Hope of cure, and a charitable opinion which they had of themselves, had brought unto him divers di∣stressed Damsels, which I am confident had no in∣terest in his miracle. In the same Inn (Alehouse I should say) where we were to be harboured, there had put in a whole covey of these Ladies Er∣rant. Pilgrims they called themselves, and had come on foot two dayes journey to clear their eye-sight. They had white vails hanging down their backs, which in part covered their faces, yet I perceived by a glimpse, that some of them were past cure: though my charity durst allow them Maids▪ it was afraid to suppose them Virgins: yet so far I dare assure them they should recover their sight, that when they came home they should see their folly. At that time, what with too much watching on ship-board, what with the tartness of the water, and the violence of the wind working upon me almost forty hours together whilst I lay on the hatches mine eyes had gotten a rheum and redness. My Hostess (good woman) perswaded


me to this holy and blessed Wight; but I durst not venture; not that I had not as good a claim to my virginity as the best there; but because I had learn∣ed what a greivous sentence was denounced on 
Ahaziah
 King of 
Israel
 for seeking help of 
Beel∣zebub
 the God of 
Ekron
: When I hap to be ill, let mine amendment come in God's Name. 
Mal∣lem semper profanus esse, quám sic religiosus,
 as 
Mi∣nutius Felix
 of the 
Roman
 Sacrifices: let my body still be troubled with a sore eye, then have such a recovery be a perpetual eye-sore to my conscience. Rather than go on pilgrimage to such a Saint, let the 
Papists
 count me for an Heretick. Besides, how durst I imagine in him an ability of curing my bo∣dily eyes, who above seventy years had been trou∣bled with a blindness in the eyes of his soul. 
Thou Fool
 (said our Saviour almost in the like case) 
first cast out the beam of thine own eye, and then shalt thou see clearly to cast the mote out of thy brothers eye.


The next morning, 
August
 the third, I left my Pilgrims to try their fortunes, and went on in our journey to 
Paris,
 which that day we were to visit. My eyes not permitting me to read, and mine ears altogether strangers to the French chat, drave my thoughts back to 
Roven
; and there nothing so much possessed me, as the small honour done to 
Bedford
 in his Monument. I had leisure enough to provide him a longer Epitaph; and a short apo∣logy against the envy of that Courtier which per∣swaded 
Charles
 the eighth to deface the ruines of his Sepulcher, Thus:



So did the Fox, the coward'st of the Heard▪


Ki
k the dead Lion and profane his Beard.


So did the 
Greeks
 about their vanquisht Hoast


Drag 
Hector
's Reliques, and torment his Ghost.


So did the 
Parthian
 slaves deride the head


Of the great 
Crassus,
 now betray'd and dead:


To whose victorious Sword, not long before,


They would have sacrific'd their lives, or more.


So do the 
French
 assault dead 
Bedford
's spright,


And trample on his ashes in despite.


But foolish 
Curio
 cease, and do not blame


So small an honour done unto his Name,


Why griev'st thou him a Sepulcher to have,


Who when he liv'd had made all 
France
 a Grave!


His Sword triump'd through all those Towns which lie


In the 
Isle, Main, Aniou, Guyen Normandy.


Thy Fathers felt it. Oh thou worst of men


(If Man thou art) do not endeavour then


This Conqueror from his last Hold to thrust;


Whom all brave minds shall honour in the dust.


But be not troubled 
Bedford!
 Thou shalt stand


above the reach of malice: Though the hand


Of a 
French
 baseness may deface thy name▪


And tear it from thy Marble: Yet shall Fame


Speak lowdly of thee and thy acts. Thy praise


A Pyramis unto it self shall raise.


Thy brave Atchievements in the time to come


Shall be a Monument above a Tombe


Thy name shall be thy Epitaph: and he


Which once reads 
Bedford
 shall imagine thee


Beyond the power of Verses; and shall say,


None could express thy Worth's a fuller way,


Rest thou then quiet in the shades of Night,


Nor vex thy self with 
Curio
's weaker spright:


Whilst 
France
 remains, and Histories are writ,


Bedford
 shall live, and 
France
 shall Chronicle it.


Having offered this unworthy, yet grateful sa∣crifice to the Manes of that brave 
Heroe,
 I had the more leisure to behold 
Mante,
 and the Vines a∣bout it, being the first that ever I saw. They are planted like our Hop-gardens, and grow up by the help of Poles, but not so high. They are kept with little cost: and yeild profit to an Husband∣man sufficient to make him rich, had he neither King nor Landlord. The Wine which is pressed out of them is harsh and not pleasing; as much dif∣fering in sweetness from the Wines of 
Paris
 or 
Orleans,
 as their language doth in elegancy. The rest of the Norman Wines which are not very fre∣quent, as growing onely on the frontiers towards 
France,
 are of the same quality. As for the Town of 
Mante
 it seemeth to have been of good strength before the use of great Ordinance; having a wall, a competent ditch, and at every gate a Draw∣bridge. They are still sufficient to guard their pullen from the Fox; and in the night time to se∣cure their houses from forrain burglaries: Once indeed they were able to make resistance to a King of 
France,
 but the 
English
 were then within it: At last on honourable terms it yeilded, and was entred by 
Charles
 the seventh the second of 
August, Anno
 1449. The Town is for building and bigness some∣what above the better sort of Market Towns here in 
England.


The last Town of 
Normandy
 towards 
Paris
 is 
Pontoise
: a Town well fortified, as being a borde∣rer, and one of the strongest bulwarks against 
France.
 It hath in it two fair Abbeys of 
Mau∣buisson
 and St. 
Martin
: six Churches parochial, whereof that of 
Nostre-dame
 in the suburbs is most beautiful. The name it derives from a bridge built over the River of 
Oyse,
 on which it is scitua∣ted, and by which on that side it is well defended: the bridge being strengthened with a strong gate, and two draw-bridges. It is commodiously scitu∣ate on the rising of an hill; and is famous for the siege laid before it by 
Charles
 the seventh, 
Anno
 1442. but more fortunate unto him in the taking of it. For having raised his armes upon the Duke of 
Yorkes
 coming to give him battel with 6000. men onely, the French Army consisting of double the number, he retired, or fled rather, unto St. 
De∣uis.
 But there hearing how scandalous his retreat was to the 
Parisians,
 even ready to mutiny; and that the Duke of 
Orleance,
 and others of the Prin∣ces, stirred with the ignominiousness of his flight, began to practise against him; he speedily return∣eth to 
pontoise
 and maketh himself Master of it by assault. Certainly to that fright he owed the get∣ting of the Town, and all 
Normandy
; the 
French
 by that door making their entry into this Province; out of which at last they thrust the 
English, Anno
 1450. So desperate a thing is a frighted Cow∣ard.


This Country had once before been in possessi∣on of the 
English
: and that by a firmer title than the Sword. 
William
 the 
Conqueror
 had conveyed


it once over the Seas into 
England,
 & it continued an appendix of that Crown from the year 1067. unto that of 1204. At that time 
John
 called 
Sáns


terre,
 third Son unto King 
Henry
 the second, ha∣ving usurped the States of 
England,
 and the 
Eng∣lish
 possessions in 
France
 upon 
Arthur
 heir of 
Bri∣tain,
 and Son unto 
Geofrey
 his elder brother; was warred on by 
Phillip Augustus
 King of 
France,
 who sided with the said 
Arthur,
 In the end 
Ar∣thur
 was taken, and not long after found dead in the ditches of the Castle of 
Roven.
 Whether this violent death happened unto him by the practises of his Uncle, as the 
French
 say, or that the young Prince came to that unfortunate end in an attempt to escape, as the 
English
 report, is not yet deter∣mined. For my part considering the other carria∣ges and virulencies of that King; I dare be of that opinion, that the death of 
Arthur
 was not with∣out his contrivement. Certainly he that rebelled against his Father, and practised the eternal im∣prisonment and ruine of his Brother, would not much stick (this being so speedy a way to settle his affairs) at the murther of a Nephew. Upon the first bruit of this murther, 
Constance
 Mother to the young Prince, complained unto the King and Par∣liament of 
France
; not the Court which now is in force, consisting of men only of the long Robe: but the Court of 
Pairrie,
 or twelve Peers, whereof himself was one as Duke of 
Normandy.
 I see not how in justice 
Philip
 could do less than summon him: an Homager being 
lain, and an Homager accused. To this summons 
John
 refused to yeild himself. A counsel rather magnanimous than wise,


and such as had more in it of an English King than a French Subject. 
Edward
 the third a prince of a finer mettal than this 
John
 obeyed the like warrant and performed a personal homage to 
Philip
 of 
Valoys
: and it is not reckoned among his dispa∣ragements. He committed yet a further error or solaecisme in State, not so much as sending any of his people to supply his place, or plead his cause. Upon this none appearance the Peers proceed to sentence. 
Il fur par Arrest la dire Cour
 (saith Du' 
Chesne) condemne pour attaint, et convainuc du crime de parricide, & de felonnie
: Parricide for the killing of his own Nephew, and felony for committing an act so execrable on the person of a French vassal and in 
France. Jhon de Sienes
 addeth a third cause, which was contempt in disobeying the Kings commandement. Upon this verdict the Court awarded; 
Que toutes les terres qu' il avoit par deca de mourerient acquises & confisques a la corronne, &c.
 A proceeding so fair and orderly, that I should sooner accuse King 
John
 of indiscre∣tion, than the 
French
 of injustice: when my estate or life is in danger, I wish it may have no more si∣nister a trial. The 
English
 thus outed of 
Normandy
 by the weakness of 
John,
 recovered it again by the puissance of 
Henry.
 But being held onely by the sword; it was after thirty years recovered again as I have told you. And now being passed over the 
Oyse,
 I have at once freed the 
English
 and my self of 
Normandy,
 here ending this Book, but not that dayes journey.










The Second Book, or FRANCE.




CHAP. I.




France
 in what sense so called; the bounds of it: All old 
Gallia
 not possessed by the 
French.
 Countries follow the name of the most predo∣minant Nation. The condition of the pre∣sent 
French
 not different from that of the old 
Gaules.
 That the Heavens have a con∣stant power upon the same Climate, though the Inhabitants be changed. The quality of the 
French
 in private, at the Church, and at the Table. Their Language, Comple∣ments, Discourse, 
&c.




I
Ʋly
 the third, which was the day we set out of 
St. Claire,
 having passed through 
Pontoise,
 and crossed the Ri∣ver, we were entred into 
France: France
 as it is understood in his limitted sense, and as a part onely of the whole. For when 
Me∣roveus
 the Grandchild of 
Pharamond,
 first King of the 
Francones,
 had taken an opportunity to pass the 
Rhene,
 having also during the warres between the 
Romans
 and the 
Gothes
 taken 
Paris
; he resol∣ved


there to set up his rest: and to make that the head City of his 
Empire.
 The Country round a∣bout it, which was of no large extent, he com∣manded to be called 
Francia,
 or 
Terra Franco∣rum,
 after the name of his 
Francks
 whom he go∣verned. In this bounded and restrained sense, we now take it, being confined with 
Normandy
 on the North, 
Campagne
 on the East, and on the West and South with the little Province of 
la Be∣ausse.
 It is also called, and that more properly, to distinguish it from the whole continent, the 
Isle of France,
 and 
 
the Isle
; I know not any thing more like it, then the 
Isle of Elie
: the 
Eure
 on the West, the 
Velle
 on the East, the 
Oyse
 on the Northward, and a vein riveret of the 
Seine
 towards the South, are the Rivers which encircle it. But the principall environings are made by the 
Seine,
 and the 
Marne,
 a river of 
Champagne,
 which within the main 
Island,
 make divers 
Ilets:
 the waters winding up and down, as desirous to recreate the earth, with the pleasures of its love∣ly and delicious embraces.


This 
Isle,
 this portion of 
Gaule
 properly and limitedly stiled 
France,
 was the seate of the 
Franks,
 at their first coming hither; and hath still conti∣nued so. The rest of 
Gallia
 is in effect rather sub∣dued by the 
French
 than inhabited; their valour in time having taken in those Countries which they never planted. So that if we look appre∣hensively into 
Gaule,
 we shall find the other 
Na∣tions
 of it, to have just cause to take up the com∣plaint of the King of 
Portugal,
 against 
Ferdinand
 of 
Castile,
 for assuming to himself the title of 
Ca∣tholique


King of Spain, eius tam non exiguâ parte penes reges alios,
 as 
Mariana
 relateth it. Cer∣tain it is, that the least part of 
old Gallia,
 is in the hands of the 
French
; the 
Normans, Britons, Biscaines,
 or 
Gascoynes,
 the 
Gothes
 (of 
Langue∣doc
 and 
Provence) Burgundians,
 and the ancient 
Gaules
 of 
Poictou,
 retaining in it such fair and ample Provinces. But it is the custome (shall I say) or fate of lesser and weaker Nations, to loose their names unto the stronger; as Wives do to their Husbands: and the smaller Rivers to the greater. Thus we see the little Province of 
Po∣land
 to have mastered, and given name to the 
Pruteni, Marovy,
 and other Nations of 
Sarmatia, Europaea
: as that of 
Moseo
 hath unto all the 
Pro∣vinces
 of 
Asiatica.
 Thus hath 
Sweden
 conquered and denominated almost all the great 
Peninsula
 of 
Scandia,
 where it is but a little parcell: and thus did the 
English Saxon,
 being the most pre∣vailing of the rest, impose the name of 
English
 on all the people of the 
Heptarchy.


Et dedit imposito nomina prisca jugo.


And good reason the vanquished should sub∣mit themselves as well unto the appellation, as the Lawes of the Victor.


The 
French
 then are possessors of some part of 
old Gallia,
 and masters of the rest; possessors not of their Cities onely, but their conditions; a double victory it seemeth they enjoyed over that people: and took from them at once, both their Qualities and their Countries. Certainly whoso∣ever will please to peruse the Commentaries of 
Caesar de Bello Gallice,
 he will easily guess him an


Historian, and a Prophet. He will rather make himself beleeve that he hath Prophicied the cha∣racter of the present 
French,
 then delivered one of the ancient 
Gaules.
 And indeed it is a matter worthy both of wonder and observation, that the old 
Gaules,
 being in a manner all worn out, should yet have most of their condition surviving in those men which now inhabit that Region, be∣ing of so many several Countries and originals. If we dive into Natural causes, we have a speedy recourse unto the powerfull influence of the Hea∣vens; for as those celestial bodies considered in the general, do work upon all sublunary bodies in the general, by light, influence, and motion: so have they a particular operation on particulars: an operation there is wrought by them in a man, as born at such and such a minute; and again, as born under such and such a climate: the one de∣rived from the setting of the houses, and the Lord of the 
Horoscope
 at the time of his nativity: the other from that Constellation which govern∣eth as it were the Province of his birth; and is the 
Genius
 or 
Deus tutelaris loci. Hinc illa ab anti∣quo vitia,
 (saith an Author, moderne rather in time than judgement) 
et patriae sorte dur antia, quae totas in historiis gentes aut commendant aut notant.
 Two or three Authors by name of paralel, will make it clear in the example, though it appear not obscure in the search of causes. 
Primus Gal∣lorum impe
us major quàm virorum; Secundus mi∣nor quam foeminarum,
 saith 
Florus
 of the 
Gaules.
 What else is that which Mr. 
Dallington
 saith of the 
French,
 when he reporteth that they begin an


action like thunder, and end it in a smoak. Their attempts on 
Naples
 and 
Millaine,
 (to omit their present enterprize on 
Genoa
) are manifest proofs of it. Neither will I now speak of the battaile of 
Po
cctiers,
 when they were so forward in the on-set, and furious in the flight, 
ut sunt Gallorum subita ingenia,
 saith 
Caesar
; and I think these people are well known to be as hair-brain'd, as the other ever were. 
Juvenal
 calleth 
Galliam foecundum Causidicorum,
 and amongst the modern 
French,
 it is related that there are tryed more Law cases in one year, than have been in 
England
 since the Conquest. Of the ancient 
Germaines,
 the next neighbours and confederates of the 
Gaules. Tacitus
 hath given us this note, 
Diem noctemque continaure potando nulli probrum
: and presently after, 
de jungendis affinitatibus, de bello denique et pace inconviviis consuttant.
 Since the times of 
Tacitus
 hath 
Germany
 almost shifted all her old inhabitants, and received new 
lonie
 of 
Lombards, Sueves, Gothes, Sclavonians, Hunn's, Saxons, Vandals,
 and divers other Na∣tions unknown to that writer; yet still is that ex∣horbitancie of drinking in fashion: and to this day do the present 
Germaines
 consult of most of their affairs in their cups: if the 
English
 have bor∣rowed any thing of this humor, it is not to be thought the vice of the Country, but the times. To go yet higher and further, the Philosopher 
Anacharsis
 (and he lived six hundred and odd years before 
Christ
) noted it in the 
Greeks,
 that at the beginning of their feasts they used little goblets, and greater towards the end, when


they were almost drunken: 
: as 
Laertius
 reporteth it. Sr. 
George San∣dis
 in that excellent discourse of his own travells, reporteth the same custome to continue still a∣mongst them, notwithstanding the length of time, and all those changes of State and People which have since happened. Their Empire indeed they have lost, their Valour, and all other Graces which set them out in the eye of the World; and no marvail, these were not National condi∣tions, but personall endowments. I conclude this digression with the words of 
Barklay, Hae∣ret itaque in omnì gente vis quaedam inconcussa, quae hominibus pro conditione terrarum in quibus nasc
 contigerit, sua fata dimiserit.


The present 
French,
 then is nothing but an old 
Gaule,
 moulded into a new name: as rash he is, as head strong, and as hair-brain'd. A Nation whom you shall winne with a feather, and loose with a straw; upon the first sight of him, you shall have him as familiar as your sleep, or the ne∣cessity of breathing, In one hours conference, you may indear him to you, in the second un∣button him, the third pumps him dry of all his secrets, and he gives them you as faithfully, as if you were his 
Ghostly Father,
 and bound to con∣ceale them 
sub sigillo confessionis
; when you have learned this, you may lay him aside, for he is no lon∣ger serviceable. If you have any humor in holding him in a further acquaintance (a favour which he confesseth, and I beleeve him, he is unworthy of,) himself will make the first separation: he hath


said over his lesson now unto you, and now must find out some body else, to whom to repeate it. 
Fare
 him well; he i
 a garment whom I would be loath to wear above two dayes together, for in that time he will be thred bare. 
Familiare est ho∣minis omnia sibi remittere,
 saith 
Velleius
 of all▪ it holdeth most properly in this people. He is very kind hearted to himself, and thinketh himself as free from wants, as he is full: so much he hath in him the nature of a 
Chynois
; that he thinketh all men blind but himself. In this private self con∣ceitedness he hateth the 
Spaniard,
 loveth not the 
English,
 and contemneth the 
German
: himself is the onely Courtier and compleat Gentleman; but it is his own glass which he seeth in. Out of this conceit of his own excellencie, and partly out of a shallowness of brain, he is very lyable to exceptions; the least distaste that can be, draw∣eth his sword, and a minutes pause sheatheth it to your hand: afterwards if you beat him into better manners, he shall take it kindly, and cry 
Serviteur.
 In this one thing they are wonderfully like the Devil; meekness or submission makes them insolent, a little resistance putteth them to their heeles, or makes them your 
Spaniels.
 In a word (for I have held him too long) he is a wal∣ing vanitie in a new fashion.


I will give you now a taste of his Table, which you shall find in a measure furnished, (I speak not of the Paisant) but not with so full a manner as with us. Their Beef they cut out into such chops, that that which goeth there for a laudable dish, would be thought here a 
Ʋniversity Com∣mons
;


new served from the Hatch. A Loyne of Mutton serves amongst them for three rostings, besides the hazard of making pottage with the rump. Fowl also they have in good plenty; es∣pecially such as the King found in 
Scotland:
 to say truth, that which they have, is sufficient for nature and a friend, were it not for the Mistriss, or the Kitchin wench. I have heard much fame of the 
french
 Cookes, but their skill lyeth not in the neat handling of Beef or Mutton. They (have as generally have all this Nation) good fancies, and are speciall fellowes for the making of puff pastes, and the ordering of banquets. Their trade is not to feed the belly, but the pallat. It is now time you were set down, where the first thing you must do, is to say your own Grace; private Graces are as ordinary there, as private Masses, and from thence I think they learned them. That done, fall to where you like best; they observe no method in their eating, and if you look for a carver, you may rise fasting. When you are risen, if you can digest the sluttishness of the Cookery, (which is most abominable at first sight) I dare trust you in a Garrison; follow him to Church and there he will shew himself most irrereligious and irreverent: I speak not of all but the gene∣ral. At a Masse in 
Cordeliers
 Church in 
Paris,
 I saw two 
French
 Papists, even when the most sacred Mistery of their faith was celebrating, break out in∣to such a blasphemous and athiestical laughter, that even an 
Ethnick
 would have hated it: it was well they were known to be 
Catholiques,
 otherwise some 
French
 hot head or other, would have sent them laughing to 
Pluto.


The 
French
 Language is indeed very sweet and delectable, it is cleared of all harshness, by the cutting and leaving out the consonants, which makerh it fall off the tongue very volubly; yet in mine opinion, it is rather elegant than copious; and therefore is much troubled for want of words to find out Periphrases. It expresseth very much of it self in the action: the head, body and shoul∣ders concurre all in the pronouncing of it; and he that hopeth to speak it with a good grace, must have something in him of the 
Mimick.
 It is en∣riched with a full number of significant Proverbs, which is a great help to the 
French
 humor in scof∣fing, and very full of Courtship, which maketh all the people complemental; the poorest Cob∣ler in the village hath his Court cringes, and his 
eau bemste de Cour,
 his Court holy water as per∣fectly as the Prince of 
Conde.


In the 
Passadoes
 of their Courtship, they ex∣presse themselves with much variety of gesture, and indeed it doth not misbecome them: were it as gracious in the Gentlemen of other Nations as in them, it were worth your patience; but the affectation of it is scurvy and ridiculous. 
Quocun∣que salutationis artificio corpus inflestant, putes ni∣hil ist â institutione mages convenice. Vicinae autem gentes ridiculo errore deceptae, eiusdem Venustatis imitationem ludieram faciunt et ingratam
: as one happily observed at his being amongst them. I have heard of a young Gallant Sonne to a great Lord of one of the three Brittish Kingdomes, that spent some years in 
France
 to learn fashions; at his return he desired to see the King, and his Father


procured him an enterveiwe; when he came with∣in the presence Chamber, he began to compose his head, and carryed it, as though he had been ridden with a Martingale; next he fell to draw back his leggs, and thrust out his shoulders, and that with such a graceless apishness, that the King asked him, if he meant to shoulder him out of his Chair, and so left him to act out his complement to the hangings. In their Courtship they bestow e∣ven the highest titles upon those of the lowest con∣dition. This is the vice also of their common talk, the begger begitteth 
Monsieurs
 and 
Ma∣dames
 to his Sonnes and Daughters, as familiarly as the King: were there no other reason to per∣swade me, that the 
Welch
 or 
Brittaynes
 were the defendants of the 
Gaules,
 this onely were suffici∣ent, that they would all be Gentlemen.


His discourse runneth commonly on two wheeles, 
Treason
 and 
Ribaldry
; I never heard people talk less reverently of their Prince, nor more sawcily of his actions; scarce a day passeth away, without some seditious pamphlet printed and published in the disgrace of the King, or of some of his Courtires. These are every mans mo∣ney, and he that buyeth them is not coye of the Contents, be they never so scandalous: of all hu∣mors the most harsh and odious. Take him from this (which you can hardly do till he hath told all) and then he falleth upon his ribaldry; with∣out these crutches, his discourse would never be able to keep pace with his company. Thus shall you have them relate the stories of their own un∣cleanness, with a face as confident, as if they


had no accident to please their hearers more com∣mendible. Thus will they reckon up the several profanations of pleasure, by which they have 
dismanned themselves
; sometimes not sparing to descend unto particulars. A valiant Captaine never gloried more, in the number of the Cities he had taken, then they do of the several women they have prostituted.


Egregiam verò Laudem, et spolia ampla!


Foolish and most perishing wretches, by whom 
each several incontinency is twice committed,
 first 
in the act,
 and secondly 
in the boast.
 By them∣selves they measure others; and think them 
Na∣turals
 or 
Simplicians
 which are not so condition∣ed I protest I was fain sometimes to put on a little impudencie, that I might avoid the suspiti∣on of a gelding or a sheep-biter. It was St. 
Au∣stins
 case as himself testifyeth in the second Book of his Confessions: 
Fingebam me
 (saith the good Father) 
fecisse quod non feceram, ne caeteris vide∣rer abiectior.
 But he afterwards was sorry for it, and so am I, and yet indeed there was no other way to keep in a good opinion of that unmanly and ungoverned people.






CHAP. II.




The 
French
 Women, their persons, prating and conditions; the immodesty of the 
French
 Ladies. Kissing not in use amongst them, and the sinister opinion conceived of the free


use of it in 
England
: The innocency and harmlesness of it amongst us: The impo∣stures of 
French
 Pandors in 
London,
 with the scandall thence arising: The peccancy of our old 
English
 Doctor. More of the 
French
 Women: Their Marriages and lives after Wedlock: An Elegie to the 
English
 Ladies.




I Am now come to the 
French
 Women; and it were great pitty they should not immediately follow the discourse of the Men; so like they are one to the other, that one would think them to be the same, and that all the difference lay in the apparel: for person they are generally of an in∣different stature, their bodies straight, and their wastes commonly small; but whether it be so by, nature, or by much restraining of those parts, I cannot say. It is said that an 
absolute Woman
 should have (amongst other qualities requisite) the parts of a 
French
 Woman from the neck to the girdle; but I beleeve it holdeth not good; their shoulders and backs being so broad, that they hold no proportion with their middles: yet this may be the vice of their apparrel. 
Their hands
 are in my opinion the comelyest and 
best or∣dered
 parts of them, 
long, white, and slender
; were their faces answerable, even an 
English
 eye would apprehend them lovely: but here I find a pretty contradictory, the hand, as it is the best orna∣ment of the whole structure, so doth it most dis∣grace it: whether it be that ill dyet be the cause


of it, or that hot blood wrought upon by a hot and scalding ayr, must of necessity by such means vent itself, I am not certain: this I am sure of that scarce the tythe of all the maids we saw, had their hands, armes, and wrests free from scabs; which had overrunne them like a Leprosie. Their hair is generally black, and indeed somewhat blac∣ker, then a gratious loveliness would admit. The Poets commend 
Leda
 for her black hair, and not unworthily.


Leda fuit nigris conspicienda comis.


As 
Ovid
 hath it; yet was that blackness but a darker brown, and not so fearful as this of the 
French
 women. Again the blackness of 
the hair is there accounted an ornament
; when the face a∣bout which it hangeth, is of so perfect a comple∣ction and symmetrie, that it giveth a lustre; then doth 
the hair set forth the face, as a shaddow doth a picture,
 and the face becometh the hair, as 
a field argent doth a sable bearing
: which kind of armou∣ry the Heralds call the most fairest, But in this the 
French
 Women are most unlucky, 
Don Quix∣ote
 did not so deservedly assume to himself the name of 
the Knight of the ill favoured face
; as may they that of the Damosells of it. It was therefore a happy speech of a young 
French
 gallant, that came in our company out of 
England,
 and had it been spoken amongst the Ancients, it might have been registred for an 
Apothegme
: That the 
English
 of all the people in the World were only 
Nati ad voluptates
: you have, saith he, 
the fair∣est


Women, the goodliest Horses,
 and 
the best breed of Doggs under Heaven
: for my part (as farre as I could in so short a time observe) I dare in his first beleeve him. 
Enland
 not onely being (as it is stiled) 
a Paradise for Women,
 by reason of their priviledges; but a 
Paradise also of Wo∣men,
 by reason of their unmatchable perfections: Their dispositions hold good intelligence with their faces; you cannot say of them as 
Sueton
 doth of 
Galba, Ingenium Galbae male habitat
: they suit so well the one with the other, that in my life I never met with a better decorum. But you must first here them speak, 
Loquere ut te videam,
 was the method in old times, and it holdeth now. You cannot gather a better Character of a 
French
 Woman than from her 
prating, which is tedious and infinite; that you shall sooner want ear
s, than she tongue.
 The fastedious pratler which 
Horace
 mentioneth in his ninth Satyre, was but a Puesne to her. The writers of these times call the 
Sici∣lians gerrae Siculae,
 and not undeservedly; yet were they but the Scholers of the 
French
; and learned this faculty of them before the Vespers. It is manners to give precedency to the Maistres∣se, and she will have it, if words may carry it for two things, I would have had 
Aristotle
 acquaint∣ed with these Chartings; first it would have sa∣ved him a labour in taking such paines about find∣ing out the prepetual motion: secondly it would have freed him from an Heresie with which his doctrine is now inserted, and that is, 
Quicquid movetur, ab alio movetur
; their tongues I am certain move themselves, and make their own


occasions of discoursing: when 
they are a going they are like a Watch,
 you need not wind them a∣bove once in twelve hours, for so long the 
thred of their tongues will be in spinning.
 A Dame of 
Paris
 came in a Coach with us from 
Roven,
 four∣teen hours we were together, of which time (Ile take my oath upon it) 
her tongue fretted away a eleven hours and fifty seven minutes
; such ever∣lasting talkers are they all, that they will sooner want breath than words, and they are 
never silent but in the grave,
 which may also be doubted.


As they are endless in their talk, so are they also regardless of the comyany they speak in; be he stranger or of their acquaintance it much mat∣ters not; though indeed no man is to them a stranger, within an hour of the first sight you shall have them familiar more than enough; and 
as merry with you, as if they had known your bearing cloth.
 It may be they are chast, and I perswade my self many of them are; but you will hardly gather it out of there behaviour. 
Te tamen et cultus damnat,
 as 
Ausonius
 of an honest Woman, that carryed her self lesse modestly. They are abundantly full of laughter and toying, and are never without variety of lascivious songs, which they spare not to sing in whose company soever: you would think modesty were quite banished the Kingdom, or rather that it had never been there. Neither is this the weakness of some few, it is an 
Epidemicall disease
: Maids and Wives are alike sick of it, though not both so desperately. The Galliards of the Mayds being of the two a little more tollerable; that of the Women coming hard


upon the confines of shamelesness. As for the 
Ladies of the Court
 (I can speak this but upon hear-say) 
they are as much above them in their light∣ness, as they are in their place
: and so much the worse, in that they have made their lightness impudent: for whereas the daughter of 
Pytha∣goras,
 being demanded what shamed her most to discourse of? made answer, 
▪ those parts which made her a Women: these 
French
 Dames will speak of them even in the hearing of men, as freely, and almost as broadly as a Midwife, or a Barbar Surgeon. Nay I have heard a Gentleman of good credence relate, that being at a Tilting, he saw a Courtier going to re∣move a boy, who very roguishly looked under a Ladies Cloathes; but when her Ladyship per∣ceived his intention, she hindered him with this Complement, 
Laisse Monsieur Laisse les yeux ne pas Larrons,
 the boyes would steal nothing. A very merciful and gentle Lady: if that of 
Justin
 be still true, 
Vera mulierum ornament a pudicitiam esse non vestes:
 that 
modesty were the best apparrel of a Woman
; I am affraid many of the female sexe in 
France
 would be thinly clad, or else go naked.


Being a people thus prone to a sudden famili∣arity, and so prodigal of their tongues and compa∣ny; you would scarce imagine them to be coy of their lips; yet this is their humour. It seemed to me at first strange and uncivil, that a woman should turn away from the proffer of a salutation. After∣wards I liked the custom very well, and I had good cause for it; for it saved me from many 
an unsa∣voury peice of mannerliness,
 This notwithstanding


could not but amaze me, that they who in their actions were so light and wanton, should yet think themselves modest; and confine all lasciviousness unto a kiss. A woman that is kissed, they account more than half whored, be her deportment never so becoming; which maketh them very sparing of receiving such kindnesses. But this is but a dissembled unwillingness, and hath somewhat in it of the 
Italian
; As 
they had rather murther a man in private, than openly speak ill of him:
 so it may be thought, that these Damsels would hardly refuse a mans bed, though education hath taught them to fly from his lips. Night and the Curtains may conceal the one, the other can obtain no pardon in the eye of such as may happen to ob∣serve it.


Upon this ground your French Traveller, that perhaps may see his Hostess kissed at 
Dover
; and see a Gentleman salute a Lady in the streets of 
London,
 relateth at his coming home strange Chy∣mera's of the English modesty: to further this si∣nister opinion, he will not spare to tell his Come∣rades (for this I have noted to you to be a part of his humour) what Merchants Wives he enjoyed at 
London,
 and in what familiarity such a Lady enter∣tained him at 
Westminster.
 Terrible untruths, and yet my poor Gallant thinketh he lieth not. I re∣member I met in 
Paris
 with an English Docter, and the Master of a Colledge there, who complained much of the lasciviousness of the English Women; and how infamously every French Taylor that came from us reported of them, withall he protest∣ed it did not much greive him; because he thought


it a just judgement of God upon our Nation, that all the married men should thus suffer. 
A strange peice of Divinity to me,
 that never before heard such preaching. This was the occasion of the doctrine. In the old English 
Mass-book,
 called 
Secundum usum Sarum,
 the Woman at the time of marriage promiseth her future Husband to be bon∣ny and buxome at bed and at board till death us depart, &c. This being too light for the gravity of the action then in hand; and in mine opinion somewhat less reverent than a Church duty would require; the Reformers of that Book thought good to alter, and thought fitter to 
put in, to love, cherish and obey.
 That this was a sufficient assurance of Conjugal faith he would not grant, because the promise of being buxome in bed was excluded. Besides, he accounted the supposed dishonesty of the English Wives as a vengeance plucked down on the heads of the people, for chopping and changing the words of the holy Sacrament (for such they esteem the form of Matrimony.) Though his argument needed no answer; yet his accusati∣on might expect one. And an English Gentleman (though not of the English faith) laid open the abuse, and seemed to speak it out of knowledge. When the 
Monsieurs
 came over full pursed to 
London,
 the French Pandars, which lay in wait for such booties, grow into their acquaintance, and promise them the imbraces of such a Dame of the City, or of such a Lady of the Court; Women per∣haps famed for admirable beauties. But 
as
 Ixion 
amongst the Poets expected
 Juno▪ 
and enjoyed a Cloud
: So those beguiled wretches, instead of those


eminent persons mentioned to them, take into their bosomes some of the common prostitutes of the Town. Thus are they cozened in their desires: thus do they lie in their reports: whilst, poor fools, they think themselves guilty of neither im∣posture.


For the other accusation, which would seem to fasten a note of immodesty upon our English Gentlewomens lips; I should be like enough to confess the crime, were the English kisses like unto those of the French. As therefore Doctor 
Bale
 Master of the Requests said unto 
Mendoza
 the Spa∣nish Embassador, upon his dislike of the promiscu∣ous sitting of men and women within our Church∣es, 
Turpe quidem id esse apud
 Hispanos, 
qui etiam in locis sacris cogitarent de explendâ libidine, a quâ pro∣cul aberant
 Anglorum 
mentes
: So do I answer to the bill of the Complaint. An 
Oxford
 Doctor up∣on this Text, 
Betrayest thou the Son of man with a Kiss?
 made mention of four sorts of kisses, 
viz. Osculum charitatis, Osculum gratioris familiaritatis, Osculum calliditatis,
 and 
Osculum carnalitatis:
 Of these I will bestow the 
last on the French
; and the 
third on the Spaniards,
 retaining the 
two first unto our selves
: whereof the one is enjoyned by the precept, and the other warranted by the examples of holy Scriptures: For my part I see nothing in the innocent and harmless salutations of the Eng∣lish, which the Doctor calleth 
Oscula gratioris fa∣miliaritatis,
 that may move a French mans suspiti∣on; much, I confess, which may stir his envy▪ Perhaps a want of that happiness in himself maketh him to dislike it in us: as the Fox that had lost his


tayl perswaded all others to cut off theirs. But I have already toucht the reason, why that Nation is unworthy of such a favour; their kisses being heat and sulphury; and indeed nothing but the 
Pro∣logue of their lust
: whereas on the contrary, and I dare be confident in it, the chast and innocent kiss of the English Gentlewoman is more in Heaven, than many of their best devotions. It were not amiss to explain in this place a verse of 
Ovids,
 common in the mouthes of many, but in the under∣standing of few.

Oscula qui sumpsit, & non & caetera sumpsit


Hoec quoque quae sumpsit perdere dignus erat.


He that doth onely kiss, and doth no more,


Deserves to loose the kisses given before.

Which must be understood according to the fashi∣on of 
Rome
 and 
Italy
 (and since of 
France
 and 
Spain
) where they were given as pawns of a dishonest contract, and not according to the cu∣stoms of 
England,
 where they are onely proffered in the way of a gratious and innocent familiarity, and so accepted,


I return again to the French women, and though 
I may not kiss them (which he that seeth them will have good cause to thank God for)
 yet they are at liberty to be courted: An office which they admit freely, and return as liberally: an office to which they are so used, that they can hardly distinguish complement from wooing, till the Priest expecteth them at the Church door: That day they set them∣selves forth with all the variety of riches their cre∣dit


can extend to: A Schollar of the University never disfurnished so many of his Freinds to pro∣vide for a journey, as they do neighbours to adorn that wedding. At my being at 
Pontoise
 I saw Mrs. 
Bride
 return from the Church; the day before she had been somewhat of the condition of a Kitchen wench, but now so 
tricked up with scarfes, rings and cross-garters,
 that 
you never saw a Whitson Lady better rigged:
 I should much have applauded the fellows fortunes, if he could have married the Clothes: but (God be merciful to him) he is chained to the Wench: Much joy may they have together most peerless couple.

Hymen O Hymenaee, Hymen Hymen O Hymenaee.

The match was well knit up among them. I would have a French man marry none but a French woman.


Being now made Mistress of an house, she can give her self a dispensation to drink Wine. Before she had a fling at the bottle by stealth, and could make a shift 
to play off her whole one in a corner
; as St. 
Austin
 in the ninth book of his 
Confessions
 reporteth of his Mother 
Monica
: Now she hath her draughts like the second Edition of a book augmented and revised; and which is more, published 
cum Privi∣legio. Her house she keeps as she doth her self. It would puzzle a strong judgement to resolve which of the two was the most nasty
: yet after ten of the clock you may come nigh her; for by that time she hath not onely eaten, but it may be her hall hath had a brushing. If you be not careful of your time, you


shall commonly find her speechless, her mouth be∣ing stopped with some of the reliques of last nights supper. 
To five meals a day she is very constant,
 and for variety sake she will make some of them at the street door. She is an exceeding good soul (as 
Sancho Pancha
 said of his Wife) and one that will not pine her self, though her heirs smart for it. 
To her Husband she is
 very servile, seldom sitteth with him at the table, readily executing all his commands, and is 
indeed rather a married servant than a Wife,
 or 
a houshold drudge under the title of a Mistress.
 Yet on the other side she hath free∣dome enough, and certainly much more than a moderate wisedome would permit her. It is one of her 
iura conjugalia
 to admit of Courtship even in the sight of her Husband, to walk arm in arm about the streets, or in the fields, with her 
Pri∣vado,
 to proffer occasions of familiarity and ac∣quaintance at the first sight of one whose person she relisheth, and all this 
sans suspecion
 without the least imputation. A liberty somewhat of the largest, and we may justly fear, that having thus wholly in her own power the keys of the Cabinet, she sheweth her Jewels to more than her husband. Such are the French women, and such lives do they lead both Maids and Married.


Then happy 
England
! Thy four Seas contain


The 
pride of Beauties;
 Such as may disdain


Rivals on earth; Such as at once may move,


By a strange power, the envy and the love


Of all their Sex besides. Admit a Dame


Of 
France
 or 
Spain
 pass in the breath of Fame


And her own thoughts for Fair: Yet let her view


The common'st Beauties of the English crew;


And in despair shee'l execrate the day


Which bare her black, and sigh her self away.


So pin'd the Phrygian Dames and hang'd the head,


When into 
Troy Paris
 his 
Helen
 lead:


But boast not 
Paris; England
 now enjoyes


Helens
 enough to sack a World of 
Troys
:


So do the vulgar Tapers of the Skie


Loose all their lustre when the Moon is nigh.


Yet English Ladies 
(glorious Lights)
 as far


Exceed the Moon, as doth the Moon a Star:


So do the common people of the Groves


Grow hush't, when 
Philomel
 recounts her Loves:


But when our Ladies sing, even she forbears


To use her tongue; and turns her tongue to ears:


Nay more; their beauties should proud 
Venus
 see,


Shee'd 
blush her self out of her Deitie;


Drop into 
Vulcan
's forge, her raign now done,


And yeild to them her Empire and her Son.


Yet this were needless; I can hardly find


Any of these 
Land-stars,
 but straight my mind


Speaks her a 
Venus;
 and me thinks I spye


A little 
Cupid
 sporting in her eye:


Who thence his shaft more powerfully delivers


Than e're did th' other 
Cupid
 from his quivers:


Such in a word they are: you would them guess


An harmony of all the Goddesses:


Or swear, that partial Nature at their birth


Had robb'd the Heavens to glorifie the earth.


Such though they are; yet mean these graces bi


Compar'd unto the vertues lodg'd within:


For needs the Jewels must be rich and pretious,


The Cask that keeps them being so delicious.






CHAP. III.




France
 described: The Valley of 
Montmo∣rancie
 and the Dukes of it. 
Mont-Martyr.
 Burials in former times not permitted with∣in the Wals. The prosecuting of this dis∣course by manner of a Journal intermitted. The Town and Church of St. 
Denis.
 The Legend of him and his head. Of 
Dagobert
 and the Leper. The reliques to be seen there: Martyrs how esteem'd in St. 
Austin
's time: The Sepulchers of the French Kings and the Treasury there. The Kings House of 
Madrit.
 The Queen Mothers House at 
Ruall,
 and fine devices in it▪ St. 
Germanenly
 another of the Kings Houses: the curious painting in it. (
Gorrambery
 Window.) The Garden belonging to it, and the excellency of the Wa∣ter-works. Boys, St. 
Vincent
 and the Castle called 
Bisestre.




I Have now done with the 
French
 both Men and Womē: a people much extolled by many of the English Travellers for all those graces which may enoble and adorn both Sexes: For my part, having observed them as well as I could, and traced them


in all their several humours, I set up my rest with this proposition, that 
there is nothing to be envied in them but their Country
; To that indeed I am earn∣estly, and I think not unworthily affected: here being nothing wanting which may be required to raise and reward ones liking. If Nature were ever prodigal of her blessings, or scattered them with an over-plentiful hand, it was in this Island into which we were entred as soon as we were passed over the bridge of 
Pontoise.
 The first part of it, lasting for three leagues, was upon the plain of a Mountain, but such a Mountain as will hardly yeild to the best Valley in 
Europe
 out of 
France.
 On both sides of us the Vines grew up in a just length, and promised to the Husband-man a thriving vin∣tage. The Wines they yeild are far better than those of 
Normandy
 or 
Gascoyne,
 and indeed the best in the whole Continent, those of 
Orleans
 ex∣cepted; yet what we saw here was but as a bit to prepare our stomacks, least we should surfeit in the Valley.


Here we beheld Nature in her richest vestments. The fields enterchangeably planted with Wheat and Vines: That had 
L. Florus
 once beheld it, he would never have given unto 
Campania
 the title of 
Cereris & Bacchi certamen.
 These fields were dis∣persedly here and there beset with Cherry-trees: which considered with the rest gave unto the eye an excellent object. For the Vines yet green, the Wheat ready for the sithe, and the Cherries now full ripened, and shewing forth their beauty through the vail of the leaves, made such a various and delightsome mixture of colours, that no art


could have expressed it self more delectable. If you have ever seen an exquisite Mosaical work you may best judge of the beauty of this Valley. Add to this that the River 
Seine
 being now past 
Paris,
 either to embrace that flourishing soyl, or out of a wanton desire to play with it self, hath divided it self into sundry lesser channels, besides its several windings and turnings: So that one may very just∣ly, and not irreligiously conceive it to be an 
Idaea
 or 
representation of the Garden of Eden
; the River so happily separating it self to water the ground. This Valley is a very large circuit. And as the Welch-men call 
Anglesea Mon Mam Gymry,
 that is, 
the Mother of Wales
: so may we call this the 
Mother of Paris:
 for so abundantly doth it furnish that great and populous City, that when the 
Dukes
 of 
Bary
 and 
Burgundie
 besieged it with 100000. men, there being at that time three or 400000. Citizens and Souldiers within the wals, neither the people within, nor the enemy without, found any want of provision.


It is called the Valley of 
Montmorencie,
 from the Town and Castle of 
Montmorencie
 seated in it. But this Town nameth not the Valley onely; it giveth name also to the ancient family of the 
Dukes
 of 
Montmorencie,
 the 
ancientest house of Christendom.
 He stiled himself 
Lepremier Christien, & plus vicil Baron du' France,
 and it is said, that his Ancestors received the faith of Christ by the preaching of St. 
Denis
 the first Bishop of 
Paris.
 Their princi∣pal houses are that of 
Chantilly
 and 
Ecqucan,
 both seated in the Isle: This last being given to this present Dukes Father by King 
Henry
 the fourth, to


whom it was confiscated by the condemnation of one of his Treasurers. This house also (and so I beleive it) hath been observed to have yeilded to 
France
 more 
Constables, Marshals, Admirals,
 and the like Officers of power and command than any three other in the whole Kingdom, insomuch that I may say of it, what 
Irenicus
 doth of the 
Count Palatines,
 the names of the Countries onely chan∣ged: 
Non alia Galliae est familia cui plus debent no∣bilitus.
 The now Duke named 
Henry,
 is at this pre∣sent 
Admiral
 of 
France.


The most eminent place in all the Isle is 
Mont-Martyr,
 eminent I mean by reason of its height; though it hath also enough of antiquity to make it remarkable. It is seated within a mile of 
Paris,
 high upon a Mountain, on which many of the faith∣ful, during the time that 
Gaule
 was heathenish, were made 
Martyrs
: Hence the name; though 
Paris
 was the place of apprehension and sentence, yet was this Mountain commonly the Scaffold of execution: It being the custom of the Ancients, 
neither to put to death, nor bury within the wals of their Cities.
 Thus the 
Jews
 when they crucified our Sa∣viour, led him out of the City of 
Hierusalem
 unto Mount 
Calvary
: unto which St. 
Paul
 is thought to allude, 
Hebr.
 13. saying, 
Let us therefore go forth to him,
 &c. Thus also doth St. 
Luke
 (to omit other instances) report of St. 
Stephen, Acts
 7. 
And they cast him out of the City and stoned him.
 So in the State of 
Rome
; the 
Vestal Virgin
 having committed fornication was stifled in the 
Campus Sceleritatus
; and other Malefactors thrown down the 
Tarpeian rock
; both scituate without the Town.


So also had the 
Thessalians
 a place of execution from the praecipice of an hill, which they called the 
 or 
Corvi
: whence arose the Proverb 
, 
be hanged.
 As they permitted not execu∣tion of Malefactors within their wals: so neither would they suffer the best of their Citizens to be buried within them. This was it which made 
A∣braham
 to buy him 
a field wherein to bury his dead
: and thus we read in the seventh of 
Luke,
 that the Widow of 
Naims
 Son was carried out to be buri∣ed. This custom also we find among the 
Athe∣nians, Corinthians
 and other of the 
Graecians; qui inagris suis
 (saith 
Alexander ab Alexandro) aut in fundo suburbano, ceuinavito aut patrio solo cor∣pora humari consuevere.
 Amongst the 
Romans
 it was once the fashion to burn the bodies of their dead within their City. This continued till the bringing in of the 
Laws of Athens,
 commonly called the 
Laws of the twelve Tables
: one of which Laws runneth in these words. 
In urbe ne sepelito, neve drito.
 After this prohibition their dead corps were first 
burned in Campus Martius
; and their Urnes covered in sundry places of the field. The frequent Urnes or sepulchral stones digged up a∣mongst us here in 
England
 are sufficient testimo∣nies of this assertion. Besides we may find in 
Ap∣pian,
 that the chief reason why the rich men in 
Rome
 would not yeild to the Law called 
Lex A∣grariae
 (for that Law divided the Roman possessi∣ons equally among the people) was, because they thought it an irreligious thing, that the Monuments of their fore-fathers should be sold to others. The first that is registred to have been buried in the


City was 
Trajane
 the Emperor. Afterward it was granted as an honorary to such as had deserved well of the Republique. And when the Christian Religion prevailed; and Church-yards, those dor∣mitories of the Saints were consecrated, the liber∣ty of burying within the wals was to all equally granted.


On this ground it not being lawful to put to death or bury within the Town of 
Paris
; this Mountain was destinate to these purposes: then was it onely a Mountain, now it is enlarged unto a Town. It hath a poor wall, an 
Abbey
 of 
Benedi∣ctine Monks,
 and a Chappel called 
La Chapelle des Martyrs:
 both founded by 
Lewis
 the sixth, called 
The Gross.
 Amongst others which received here the Crown of Martyrdom, none more famous than St. 
Denis
 (said to be 
Dionisius Areopagita
) the first Bishop of 
Paris: Rusticus
 his Arch-preist, and 
Eleutherius
 his Deacon. The time when, under the raign of 
Domitian
: the person by whose com∣mand 
Hesubinus
 Governour of 
Paris
; the crime; for not bowing before the Altar of 
Mercury,
 and offering sacrifice unto him. Of St. 
Denis,
 being the 
Patron
 or 
Tutelary St. of France,
 the 
Legend
 reports strange wonders, as namely, when the Exe∣cutioner had smitten off his head, he caught it be∣tween his arms, and ran with it down the hill, as fast as his legs could bear him. Half a mile from the place of his execution he sate down, rested, and so he did nine times in all, even till he came to the place where his Church is now built. There he fell down and died, being 
three milee English from Mount Martyr
; and there he was buried together


with 
Rusticus
 and 
Eleutherius
: who not being able to go as fast as he did, were brought after by the people. 
O impudentiam admirabilem & verè Ro∣manam!
 and yet so far was the succeeding age pos∣sessed with a beleif of this miracle, that in the nine several places, where he is said to have rested, so many handsom crosses of stones there are erected: all of a making.


To the memory of this St. did 
Dagobert
 the first build a Temple, and the times ensuing improved it to a Town. Afterwards in honour of St. 
Denis,
 and because it lay near 
Paris,
 some of the follow∣ing Kings bestowed a wall upon it. A wall it is of a large circuit, and very much unproportionable to the Town which standeth in it; for all the world 
like a Spaniards little face in his great ruffe
: or like a small chop of Mutton in a large dish of Pottage (at the three-penny ordinary.) Thus was the Town (as you see) built by means, but it was not so with the Temple: unless that be worth a Mira∣cle in the building and in the consecrating of it, I will not give a straw for it. Thus then saith the story: 
Dagobert
 afterwards King of 
France,
 during the life of 
Clotarre
 the second his Father, had cru∣elly slain 
Sadrasagille
 his Governor. To avoid the fury of his Father, much incensed with that un∣princely action, he was compelled to wander up and down 
France,
 hungry and thirsty: And as he went, and he went (for this tale should be told in the same stile that Wenches tell theirs by the fires side) till he came to the 
Sepulcher of St. Denis
; where he laid himself down and slept: and then there appeared unto him a fine old man, with a


staffe in his hand, and he told him, that his Father was dead; and that he should be King: and he prayed him of all loves, that when he came to be King, he would build a 
Church
 there, 
to the honour of St. Denis.
 He had an hard heart, that could deny so sweet an old man so little a curtesie for so much good news: and I trow he was more kind than so. And so when the Church was built, the Bishop was sent for in all hast to bless it. But it chanced the night before the day wherein the Bi∣shop was to bless it, there came to the Town an ugly Leper, and the foulest that ever was seen. And this Leper would needs lie in the Church: and when he was there, about twelve a clock in the night our 
Saviour
 came to the Church in garments as white as the driven snow. There came with him the 
Apostles,
 the 
Angels,
 and the 
Martyrs,
 and the sweetest musick that ever was heard in the world. Then 
Christ blessed the Church
; and said unto the Leper, that he should tell the Bishop that the Church was already blessed: and for a token of it, he gave the Leper his health: who presently be∣came as fine a sweet youth as one should see in a summers day. 
Auditam admisse risu
teneatis?
 you may laugh if you please, but I will assure you this is the story: Neither is it a jot the less authentical be∣cause of the stile. Such ridiculous stuffe did the 
Monks
 and 
Friers
 of those times invent to please and blind the people. So prone were our Ance∣stors to 
beleive as Oracles
 whatever was delivered unto them by these 
Impostors. Majoribus nostris tam facilis in mendaciis fides fuit, ut temere credid
∣r
nt illa monstrosa mira
ula: & quicquid famae licet


fingere, illis erat libenter audire. Minutius Felix
 spake it of his fore-fathers being Heathens, we may affirm it of ours also being Christians.


But (to omit the additions of the Legend) true it is, that 
Dagobert
 was the 
first Founder
 of the Church: which was afterward rebuilt and beauti∣fied by the twenty fifth Abbot of it, called 
Sugger,
 in the raign of King 
Lewis
 the sixth. A reverent and comely Fabrick certainly it is: Dark, as the Churches of those times commonly were, and none of the poorest. It maintaineth sixty two 
Monks
 and an 
Abbot,
 whose single revenue is thought to be 
worth ten thousand Crowns
 and upward. The present Abbot is 
Henry
 of 
Lorrain,
 Son to the 
Duke
 of 
Guise,
 a young Gentleman of some four∣teen years of age, or thereabouts: but of him more hereafter. The Abbot of it, among many other priviledges, hath a full power upon the lives, goods, and honours of his vassals; and hath a voice in the Parliament of 
Paris
 as full and binding as any of the Counsellors there sitting. As for the Church it self, it is in height eighty foot, an hundred in breadth, and in length three hundred. The 
high Altar,
 under which the bodies of Saint 
Denis
 and his two fellow Martyrs are said to be buried, is a very rich and excellent work: the 
Crucifix
 stand∣ing over it being all of pure gold, embos'd with divers pearls and pretious stones of great value. Before it hangeth a silver Lamp continually burning; and if you look about it, you shall see the richest and the fairest glass for painting in all 
France,
 that of 
Amiens
 onely excepted; one thing I will further note in this Church, before I come to


the Tombs and Reliques; which is, how 
Henry the fourth in this Church said his first Mass
 after his last reconcilement to the Church of 
Rome
: and good reason I have to say his last: For having first been brought up in the Romish faith; he was by his Mother made a 
Protestant.
 At the Massacre of 
Paris,
 fear of death or imprisonment turned him 
Papist.
 Liberty made him again an 
Hugonot.
 In this he continued till the year 1595. And then once more 
re-embosom'd himself in the Roman Sy∣nagogue,
 which was the time we now speak of. 
Quo teneam nodo mutantem protea vultum
? the onely 
Proteus
 in matters of faith of our times, Doctor 
Perne,
 was a diamond to him.


It is now time I should shew you the 
Reliques
: but you must first stay till the Clerk hath put on his Surplice. I have heard of a blind Priest, that could never mumble over his Mass without his spectacles: this 
fellow and his Surplice
 is just like him. I perswade my self, that the Surplice without the Clark could marshal the Reliques, as well as the Clark without the Surplice. As soon as he was sadled for his journey, he put himself into his way, and followed it with a pace so nimbly, that there was no keeping of him company. His tongue ran so fast, that the quickest eye there was fain to give him over in plain ground: the fellow that sheweth the 
Tombs
 at 
Westminster,
 being no more to be compared to him for the volubility of his chops, than a 
Capouchin
 to a 
Jesuite
: yet as we learned af∣terwards of him, when he was out of his road, they were thus disposed. On the right hand of the Altar (not that high Altar above mentioned) there are


said to be kept one of the 
nails
 which fastened our Saviour to the Cross. Secondly, a 
peice of the Cross
 it self. Thirdly, some of the 
Virgin Maries Milk.
 Fourthly, the 
arm of St. Simeon
 set in a case of gold. And fiftly, the 
Reliques of St. Lewis
 reserved in a little Chappel, all of gold also, and built after the fashion of 
Nostre-dame
 in 
Paris.
 On the left there was shewed us the 
head of St. Denis,
 and a part of his body: But I mistake my self, it was not the head, but the Portraiture in gold; the head being said to be within it. By this representation he seemeth to have had a very reverend and awful counte∣nance; though I perswade my self, that the rich Crown Miter which he there weareth (and cer∣tainly they are of an high value) never belonged to him in his life. On each side of the head are two Angels supporting it, reported to be the work of one 
Ely Le plus artiste orfeure de son temps
: the cunningst Gold-smith of his time, who afterwards was made Bishop of 
Noyon
 and Sainted.


Concerning Reliques I shall have occasion to speak further, when I come to the 
holy Chappel in Paris
: somewhat now of the honour due unto the memory of Martyrs. I am none of those that think the memories of those Heroes of the Primi∣tive times not to be honoured in the dust. Neither would I assault their shrines with an irreverent fin∣ger. On the other side, they shall never have my prayers directed to them, nor my devotions: nor can I think it lawful to give the remnants of them any bodily observance: though I do and will ho∣nour, yet I dare not worship them. St. 
Austin
 hath cut out the mid-way between the 
Papists
 and


the 
Zelots,
 in the eighth book of his most excellent work 
de Civitate Dei,
 and his path it is best to fol∣low: 
Honoramus sane memorias eorum, tanquam Sanctorum hominum Dei, qui usque ad mortem suo∣rum corporum pro veritate certarunt.
 And a little after, he sheweth the end of these memorials: 
viz. Ʋt ea celebritate Deo vero gratias de eorum victoriis agamus, & nos ad imitationem talium coronarum eorum memoriae revocatione adhortemur.
 One Re∣lique there is, of which this use cannot possibly be made, and what do you think that should be, but the 
Lanthorn
 which 
Judas
 used when he went to apprehend his Master. A pretty one I confess, it is richly beset with studs of Christal, through which all the light cometh, the main of it being of a sub∣stance not transparent. Had it been shewed me within the first Century of years after the Passion, I might have perhaps been fooled into a beleif, for I am confident it can be no elder. Being as it is, I will acknowledge it to be a Lanthorn, though it belonged not to 
Judas.


From the 
Reliques of Martyrs,
 proceed we to those of 
Kings,
 and amongst those there is nothing which will long detain an English man. He that hath seen the 
Tombs
 at 
Westminster,
 will think those to be but trifles: if he consider the workmanship, or the riches and the magnificence. The cheif of those mean ones which are there, are those of 
Hen∣ry
 the second, and 
Katherine de Medices
 his Wife, in a little Chappel of her own building, both in their full proportion, and in their royal habiliments exceeding stately. Here is also a neat 
Tomb
 of the same 
Henry built all of brass,
 and supported by four


brass pillars. His statue of the same mettal placed on the top of it, and composed as if at his prayers. The rest are more in tale than weight: but the chiefest beauties of the Church are in the 
Treasu∣ry,
 which was not mine happiness to see. As I am imformed, the most remarkable things in it are these. The 
Swords
 of 
Joan
 the Virgin, 
Charles
 the great, 
Rowland
 his Cozen, and that of 
Henry
 the fourth when he was crowned. His Boots, Crowns and Scepters, as those of his Son now raigning. A 
Cross
 of three foot high made of pure gold: A Crown, Scepter and golden Ball given by 
Pope Adrian
 to 
Carolus Magnus
: A golden Crown of a larger size be decked with adamants and other pretious stones, given by 
Charles Martell
 after his victory over the 
Saracens
: A very fair 
Chalice
 all of gold, in which St. 
Denis
 is said to have conse∣crated the Sacramental Wine. The others of les∣ser note I purposely omit: for having not seen them, I am loath to go any further upon trust. And so I leave St. 
Denis,
 a Church so richly furnished, that had I seen all the rarities and glory of it, that onely dayes content had deserved our journey; 
Sed haec infaelici nimia,


Not to continue this discourse any further by way of 
journal,
 or 
gesta dierum
; some few dayes after we had wearied our selves with the sight of 
Paris,
 we went to see some of their Majesties hou∣ses in the Country; and here we passed by 
Madrit,
 so called of the King of 
Spains
 house at 
Madrit
▪ after the form of which it is built. The Founder of it was 
Francis
 the first, who being taken priso∣ner at the 
ba
tel of Pavi
, Anno
 15
5. and thence


carried into 
Spain,
 had no less than a twelve-moneths leisure to draw that platform. A fine contrived house it seemed to be; but our journey lay beyond it: One league beyond it lay 
Ruall,
 a small Town belonging to the Abbey of St. 
Denis.
 In the corner of this Town, the 
Queen Mother
 hath a fine summer house, abundantly adorned with re∣tired walks, and a most curious variety of Water-works: For besides the forms of divers glasses, pil∣lars and geometrical figures, all framed by the wa∣ter, there were birds of sundry forts so artificially made, that they both deceived the eye by their mo∣tion, and the ear by their melody: Somewhat higher, in the midst of a most delicious garden, are two 
Fountains
 of admirable workmanship. In the first the Portraitures of 
Cerberus,
 the 
Bore
 of 
Calidon,
 the 
Naemean Lyon,
 and in the navel of it 
Hercules
 killing 
Hydra.
 In the other onely a 
Crocodile
 full of wild and unruly tricks, and send∣ing from his throat a musick not far different from Organs. Had your eyes been shut, you would have thought your self in some Cathedral Church: this melody of the 
Crocodile,
 and that other of the Birds, so exactly counterfeiting the harmony of a well ordered Quire. And now we are come into the 
Grove,
 a place so full of retired walks, so sweetly and delectably contrived, that they would even en∣tice a man to melancholy; because in them even melancholy would seem delightful. The trees so interchangeably folded the one within the other, that they were at once a shelter against wind and sun, yet not not so sullenly close, but that they af∣forded the eye an excellent Lordship over the


vines, and verdures of the earth imprisoned within them. It seemed a Grove, an Orchard, and a Vine∣yard, so variously enterwoven and mixed together, as if it had been the purpose of the Artist to make a man fall in love with confusion. In the middle of the wilderness was seated the 
house,
 environed round about with a moat of running water; the house pretty and therefore little, built rather for a banquet than a feast. It was built and thus enrich∣ed with variety of pleasures by 
Mr. de Ponte
 Tay∣lor to King 
Henry
 the fourth, and was, no question, the best garment he ever cut out in his life. Dying he gave it to 
Mr. Landerbone,
 once his servant, and now his Son by adoption, of whom the 
Queen Mother,
 taking a liking to it, bought it, giving in exchange an Office in the Treasury worth 400000 Crowns to be sold.


Two leagues from 
Ruall
 is the Kings house of St. 
Germanenly,
 an house seated on the top of an hill, just like 
Windsore.
 The Town of St. 
Germain
 lyeth all round about it: the River 
Reine
 (of the same breadth as the 
Thames
 is at the place mentioned) runneth below it; and the house, by reason of the scite, having a large command of the Country round about it. The Town is poor, and hath no∣thing in it remarkable but the name, which it took from St. 
Germain
 Bishop of 
Auxerre,
 who toge∣ther with St. 
Lupus
 Bishop of 
Troyes
 sailed into 
Britain
 to root out 
Pelagianisme.
 The Castle or Seat royal is divided into two parts, the old & the new. The old, which is next unto the Town, is built of brick and for form it is triangular. Founded it was at the first by 
Charles
 the first, since strengthened


and beautified by the 
English,
 when it was in their possession. 
Francis
 the first added to it the upper story, and the battlements, and 
in memoriam facti
 hath left a 
Capital F.
 upon every of the chimneys. The new house distant from the old about a fur∣long, and to Which you descend by a handsome green Court. It was built by 
Henry
 the fourth. It consists of three several parts all joyned together, the two outermost quadrangular; that in the mid∣dle almost round, and in the fashion of a Jewish Synagogue. Here we saw the 
Volatory
 full of sun∣dry forrein Birds, and in one of the lowest rooms great store of out-landish Coins, but these were but accessories. The principal was the majesty of the house, which is indeed worth the observa∣tion. The Palace of the 
Lou're
 so much famed, is not to be named the same day with that. The rooms are well ordered and well roofed: gorgeously set out with the curiosity of the Painter. In some of the Chambers they shewed us some poetical ficti∣ons, expressed by the pencil in the windows, and on the wainscot, and seemed to glory much in them. I confess they might plentifully have possessed my fancy, had I not seen the Window in 
Gorrambury
 gallery, belonging to the right Honorable 
Francis Viscount St. Albons,
 a Window, in which all the 
Fables
 of 
Ovid
's 
Metamorphosis
 are so naturally and lively resembled, that if ever Art went beyond it self, it was in that admirable expression.


Let us now take a veiw of the 
Water-works,
 and here we shall see in the first Water-house (which is a stately large walk, vaulted over head) the effi∣gies of a 
Dragon
 just against the entrance. An


unquiet Beast, that vomiteth on all that come nigh it. At the end toward the right hand is the statue of a 
Nymph
 sitting before a pair of Organs. Upon the loosing of one of the pipes the Nymphs fin∣gers began to manage the keys, and brought the instrument to yeild such a musick, that if it were not that of an Organ, it was like it as could be, and not be the same: Unto the division of her fingers her head kept a proportionable time, jolting from one shoulder to the other: as I have seen an old Fid∣ler at a Wake. In the same partition were the coun∣terfeits of all sorts of mils, w
ch
 before very eagerly discharged their functions, but upon the beginning of the harmony they suddenly stood still, as if they had ears to have heard it. At the other end toward the left hand we saw a shop of Smiths, another of Joyners, and backsides full of Sawyers and Ma∣sons, all idle: upon the first command of the water they all fell to their occupations, and plied them lustily: the Birds every where by their singing sa∣ving the Artificers the labour of whistling. Besides upon the drawing of a wooden curtain, there ap∣peared unto us two 
Tritons
 riding on their Dol∣phins, and each of them with a shell in his hand, which interchangeably and in turns served them in¦stead of Trumpets. A very happy 
decorum,
 and truly poetical.

Caeruleum Tritona vocat, conchâque sonanti


Inspirare jubet.—

Afterwards follows 
Neptune
 himself sitting in his Chariot drawn with four Tortises, and grasping his



Tricuspis
 or threefold Scepter in his hand; the water under them representing all the while a Sea somewhat troubled. Thirty six steps from the front of the house we descended into this Water-house, and by sixty more descended into a second of the same fashion, but not of an equal length with the other. At the right hand of this, is the whole story of 
Perseus
 and 
Andromeda,
 and the whole lively acted: the Whale being killed and the Lady loosed from the rock very perfectly. But withall it was so cunningly mannaged, and that with such mutual change of fortune on the parts of both the Com∣batants, that one who had not known the Fable, would have been sore afraid, that the Knight would have lost the victory, and the Lady her life. At the other end there was shewed unto us,

Orpheus in silvis positus, silvaeque sequentes.

I say, there appeared unto us the resemblance of 
Orpheus
 playing on a treble Violl; the trees mo∣ving with the force of the musick, and the wild Beasts dancing in two rings about him. An inven∣tion which could not but cost King 
Henry
 a great sum of money; one string of the Fiddle being by mischance broken, having cost King 
Lewis
 his Son 1500. Livers. Upon the opening of a double leafed door, there were exhibited unto us divers representations and conceits: which certainly might have been more graceful, if they had not had so much in them of a Pudpet-play. By some thirty steps more we descended into the Garden; and by as many more into a Green, which opened into


the water sides: In which the goodliest Flower and most pleasing to mine eye, was the statue of an Horse in brass, of that bigness, that I and one of my companions could stand on the neck of him; but dismounting from this Horse we mounted our own, and so took our leaves of Saint 
Ger∣main.


Upon the other side of 
Paris
 and up the River, we saw another of the Kings Houses called Saint 
Vincent,
 or 
Vincennes.
 It was beautified with a large Park by 
Philip Augustus, An.
 1185. who also wal∣led the Park and replenished it with Deer. In this House have died many famous personages, as 
Phi∣lip the fair, Lewis Hutin,
 and 
Charles the fair,
 but none so much to be lamented as that of our 
Hen∣ry
 the fifth, cut down in the flower of his age, and the middest of his victories. A man most truly valiant, and the 
Alexander
 of his times. Not far from thence is an old Castle, once strong, but time hath made it now unserviceable. The people call it 
Chasteau bisestre
 corruptly for 
Vincester,
 which maketh me beleive it was built by the English when they were Masters of this Isle.






CHAP. IV.




Paris,
 the names and antiquity of it. The sci∣tuation and greatness; the cheif strength and fortifications about it. The streets and build∣ings. King 
James
 his laudable care in beau∣tifying



London:
 King 
Henry
 the fourth his intent to fortifie the Town: Why not actuated. The Artifices and wealth of the Citizens: The bravery of the Citizens de∣scribed under the person of a Barber.




WE are now come to 
Paris,
 whether indeed I should have brought you the same day we came from 
Pontoise.
 It hath had in several ages two several names; the one taken from the people, the other from the scituation. The name taken from the people is that of 
Paris: Julius Caesar
 in his Commentaries making mention of the Nation of the 
Parisii
: and at that time calling the City 
Ʋrbem pacisiorum: Amianus Marcellinus
 calleth it by the same name appellative: for as yet the name of 
Paris
 was not appropriated to it. As for these 
Parisii,
 it is well known that they were a people of 
Gallia Celtica
: but why the people were so called hath been questioned, and that deserved∣ly. Some derive them from a Son of 
Paris
 the Son of 
Priam:
 but the humor of deriving all na∣tional originations from 
Troy,
 hath long since been hissed out of the School of Antiquity: The 
Berosus
 of 
John Annins
 bringeth them from one 
Paris
 King of the 
Celtae
: and this authority is a∣like authentical: The bastards which this 
Annius
 imposed upon the ancient Writers, are now taught to know their own Fathers. Others deduce it from 
 a Greek word, importing 
boldness in speech,
 which is approved by 
William Breton
 in the first book of his 
Philippiades.






Finibus egressi patriis per Gallica rura


Sedem quaerebant ponendis maembus aptum:


Et se Parisios dixerant, nomine Graeco:


Quod sonat expositum nostris audacia, verbis.






Leaving their native Soil, they sought through 
Gaule


A place to build a City and a Wall:


And call'd themselves 
Parisians
: which in Greek


Doth note a prompt audacity to speak.




It is spoken of the 
Gaules,
 who coming out of the more Southern parts here planted themselves Neither is it improbable, that a 
Gallick
 Nation should assume unto it self a Greek name; that language having taken good footing in these parts long before and 
sans time
; as himself testifieth in his Commentaries. How well this name agreeth with the French nature, I have already manifested, in the character of this people both Men and Wo∣men: But I will not stand to this Etymology. The names of great Cities are obscure, as those of their Founders: and the conjecturall derivations of them are oftentimes rather plausible than proba∣ble, and sometimes neither. As for the antiquity of it, it is said to have been built in the time of 
Amaziah King of Judah
; but this also is uncer∣tain, the beginnings of ancient Cities being as dark and hidden as their names. Certain it is, that it is no 
puisne
 in the world, it being a strong and opu∣lent Town in the dayes of 
Julius Caesar.


The other name of the City, which indeed is the ancient, and was taken from the scituation of it, is 
Lu
etia
 from 
Lutum,
 Durt; as being seated in an


exceeding clammy and durty soyl. To this also consenteth the above named 
William
 of 
Bre∣ton
 in his said first book of his 
Philippiades,
 saying.



— Quoniam tunc temporis illam


Reddebat palus, & terrae pinguaedo lutosam


Aptam Parisii posuere Lutetia nomen.






And since the Fens and clammy soyl did make


Their City dirty: for that reasons sake


The Town the name 
Lutetia
 did take.



As for the Etymology of 
Munster,
 who derived the name from 
Paris
 one of the Kings of 
Celtae,
 it may (for ought that I know) deservedly keep company with that of 
Berosus
 already recited. This name of 
Lutetia
 continued till the coming of the 
Franks
 into these parts, who to endear the Nation of the 
Parisii,
 and oblige them more faith∣fully to do them service, commanded it for ever after to be called 
Paris.
 But the scituation of the Town gave it not onely the name, it gave it also (as the custom of Godfathers is in 
England
) a Christening gift, which is the riches of it, and by consequence the preeminence. In how delicate and flourishing a soyl it is scituate, I have already told you in my description of the valley of 
Mont∣morencie
 wherein it standeth. If you will beleive 
Comines
 in the first book of his History, he will tell you, that (
'est la cite que iamais ie veisse environn
e de meilleux pais & plantureux:
 of all the Cities which ever he saw, it is environned with the best


and fruitfullest Country. The River of 
Seine
 is also no question a great help to the enriching of it: though it be not navigable to the Town; yet it giveth free passage unto Boats of an indifferent bigg burden; into which the Ships are unladen, and so their commodities carryed up the water: A profitable entercourse between the Sea and the City for the 
Merchants.
 Of these Boats there are an infinite company, which ply up and down the water, and more indeed (as the said 
Comin∣ces
 is of opinion) than any man can beleeve, that hath not seen them.


It is in circuit (as 
Boterus
 is of opinion) twelve miles; others judge it at ten: for my part I dare not guesse it to be above eight, and yet I am told by a 
French man
 that it was in compasse no less than fourteen Leagues within the Walls: an un∣truth bigger than the Towne. For figure it is 
circular
; that being (according to the 
Geome∣tricians
) of all figures the most capacious. And questionless if it be true that 
Ʋrbs non in maenibus sed in civibus posita est, Paris
 may chalenge as great a circuit, as the most of 
Europe
; it being little inferiour to the biggest for the multitude of her inhabitants. Joyn the compass and the populous∣ness together, and you shall hear the wisest of the 
French
 men say, 
Que ce qu'est l' ame a la rai∣sen, et la prunet a locit, cela mesme est Paris a la France.
 Adde to this the virdict of 
Charles
 the fifth, who being demanded which he thought to be the biggest 
City of France,
 answered 
Roven:
 and being then asked what he though of 
Paris,
 made answer, 
Ʋn Pàis,
 that it was a whole Coun∣try;


the 
Emperour
 did well to flatter 
Francis
 the first, who asked him these questions, and in whose power he then was: otherwise he might have gi∣ven men good cause to suspect his judgement. The truth is that 
Paris
 is a fayr and goodly Town, yet withal it is no thing like the miracle that some make it. Were the figure of 
London
 altered, and all the houses of it cast into a ring, I dare able it a 
larger and more goodly Town than Paris,
 and that in the comparison, it may give it at the least half a mile oddes.


For matter of strength and resistance certain it is, that this 
City
 is exceeding well seated, were it as well fortified. It lyeth in a plain flat and levell, and hath no hills nigh unto it, from which it can any way be annoyed: and for the casting and making of rowling Trenches, I think the soyle is hardly serviceable. If Art were no more wanting to the strengh of it than Nature, in mine opinion it might be made almost impregnable. 
Henry
 the fourth, seeing the present weakness of it, had once a purpose (as it is said) to have strenthened it according to the moderne Art of fortifications: but it went no further than the purpose. He was a great builder, and had may projects of Masonry in his head, which were little for his profit; and this would have proved less than any: for besides the infinite sums of money, which would have been employed in so immense a work; what had this been in effect, but to put a sword into a mad mans hand. The oft mutinies and seditions of this people hath made it little inferiour to 
Laigh,
 or 
Gaunt,
 the two most revolting Townes in 
Eu∣rope.



And again, the 
Baracadoes
 against the per∣son of 
King Henry
 the third, and the long resist∣ance it made to himself being weak, were sufficient to instruct him, what might be expected from it by his 
Successors,
 when it should be strengthened and enabled to rebellion.


The present strength of the Town then is not great, the walles being very weak and ruinous; and those other few helps which it hath being little available for defence. The beautifullest part of the whole resistance is the Ditch, deep, praecipitate, and broad; and to say no more of it, an excellent ward were there any thing else correspondent to it. As for the 
Fort
 next to St. 
Antonies
 gate called the 
Bastille,
 it is in my con∣ceit too little to protect the Town, and too low to command it. When Swords onely and Pick-axes were in use, and afterwards in the infancy of Gunnes, it did some service in the Nature of of a 
Fortresse
; now it onely serveth as a 
Prison,
 principally for those of the greater sort, who will permit themselves to be taken. It is said to be built by the 
English,
 when they were 
Lords of Paris:
 and the 
Vulgar
 are all of this opinion. O∣thers of the more learned sort, make it to be the work of one of the 
Provosts
 of the 
City Du Chesne
 calleth him 
Hugues Ambriott,
 in the time of 
Char∣les
 the fifth, when as yet the 
English
 had nothing to do here. The word 
Bastille
 in general is a 
Fortresse
; the article 
la
 prefixed before it maketh it a name, and appropriateth it to this building. There are also two little turrets just against the Gallery of the 
Louure
 on both sides of the 
Seine,



intended for the defence of the River; though now they are little able to answer that intention. They also are fathered on the 
English
; but how true I know not. Another place I marked, de∣signed perhaps for a 
Rampart,
 but employed on∣ly at this time by Wind-mills: it is a goodly mount of earth, high and capacious, scituate close unto the gate called 
St. Martin,
 the most defensible part (if well manned) of all 
Paris.
 Thus is the strength of this Town (as you see) but small, and if 
Henry
 the fourth, lay so long before it with his Army, it was not because he could not take it, but because he would not: 
He was loath
 (as 
By∣ron
 advised him,) 
to receive the bird naked,
 which he expected with all his feathers: and this answer he gave to my Lord 
Willoughby,
 who undertook to force an entry into it.


For the 
Streets
 they are made of a lawfull and competent bredth, well pitched under the foot with fair and large Pebble: This paving of it was the work of 
Philip Augustus, Anno
 1223. or there∣bouts: before which time it could not but be mi∣serably dirty, if not unpassable. As it now is, the least 
rain maketh it very slippery and trouble∣some,
 and as little a continuance of 
warm wea∣ther, stinking and poisononus:
 But whether this noysomness proceed from the nature of the ground, or the sluttishness of the people in their houses, or the neglect of the Magistrates in not providing a sufficiency of 
Scavingers,
 or all, I am not to determine. This I am confident of, that the 
nastiest Lane in London, is Frankincense and Juniter to the sweetest Street in this City.
 The an∣cient


by-word was (and there is good reason for it) 
Il destaint come la fange de Paris.
 Had I the power of making Proverbs, I would only change 
Il destaint, into Il puit,
 and make the 
by-word
 ten times more Orthodoxe. I have spoken somewhat of the 
Fortifications
 of this Town, but they are but triflles: the only 
venome
 of the Streets is a strength unto it more powerful, than the ditches or the Bullwark of 
St. Martin, Morison
 in his 
Itinera∣ry
 relateth how the 
Citizens
 of 
Prague in Bohe∣mia
 were reparing the walls of the Town for fear of the 
Turks
: but withal he addeth, that if the stink of the Streets kept him not thence, there was assurance to be looked for of the walls: I know not now how true it is of that 
City
; I am sure it may be justly verified upon this. It was therefore not injudiciously said of an 
English Gen∣tleman,
 that he thought 
Paris
 was the 
strongest Town in Christendome
: for he took strong in that sense, as we do in 
England,
 when we say, such a man hath a strong breath. These things consi∣dered, it could not but be an infinite happinesse granted by Nature to our 
Henry
 the fifth, that he never stopped his nose at any stink, as our 
Chro∣nicles
 report of him; otherwise in my conscience he had never been able to have kept his 
Court
 here. But that which most amazeth me is, that in such a perpetuated constancy of stinks, there should yet be found, so large and admirable a va∣riety; a variety so specifical and distinct, that any 
Chymicall
 nose (I dare lay my life on it) after two or three perambulations, would hunt out blindfold each several street by the smell; as per∣fectly


as another by his eye. A Town of a strange composition: one can hardly live in it in the Summer without poisoning, in the Winter with∣out myring.


For the 
Buildings,
 they are I confess very hand∣somly and uniformly set out to the street ward; not unseemly in themselves and very suitable one with another: high and perpendicular, with windowes reaching almost from the top to the bottome. The houses of the new mould in 
London
 are just after their fashion, wherein the care and designe of our late 
Soveraigne King James,
 is highly to be magnified. Time and his good beginnings well seconded will make that City nothing inferiour for the beauty and excellency of her structures, to the gallantest of 
Europe.
 Insomuch that he might truly have said of his 
London
 what 
Augustus
 did of his 
Rome.
 
: as 
Dyon
 hath it, 
Ʋrbem quam la∣teritiam inveni marmoreum relenquo.
 But as 
Lon∣don
 now is, the houses of it in the inside are both better contrived, and more richly furnished by farre, than those of 
Paris
: the inward beautie and ornaments most commonly following the e∣state of the builders or owners. Their houses are distinguished by Signes, as with us, and under every signe there is printed in Capital Letters what signe it is: neither is it more than needs. The old shift off, This is a 
Cock,
 and This is a 
Bull,
 was never more requisite in the infancy of Painting, than in this City, for so hideously, and so without resemblance to the thing signified, are most of these 
Pencill Works,
 that I may without


danger say of them as 
Psuedalus implautus
 doeh of the Letter which was written from 
Phaenicium
 to his young Mr. 
Callidorus: An absecro herclé ha∣bent quoque gallinae manus: nam has quidem galli∣na scripsit.
 If a Hen would not scrape better 
Portraictures
 in a Dunghil, than they have hang∣ed up before their doors, I would send her to my 
Hostesse of Tostes,
 to be executed.


And indeed generally the 
Artificers
 of 
Paris
 are as slovenly in their Trades, as in their houses; yet you may find nimble dancers, pretty Fidlers for a toy, and a Taylor that can trick you up after the best and newest fashion. Their Cutlers make such abominable and fearfull knives as would grieve a mans heart to see them; and the Glovers are worse than they: you would imagine by their Gloves, that the hand for which they were made were cut off by the wrest; yet on the other side, they are very perfect at Tooth-picks, Beard-bru∣shes, and (which I hold the most commendable Art of them) the cutting of a Seal. Their Mer∣cers are but one degree removed from a Pedler; such as in 
England
 we call 
Chapmen
; that is, a Pedler with a shop: and for 
Goldsmiths
 there is little use for them, Glasses there being most in re∣quest; both because neat and because cheap: I perswade my self that the two several ranks of shops in 
Cheapside,
 can show more Plate, and more variety of Mercery warres, good and rich, than three parts of 
Paris. Merchants
 they have but not many; and those which they have not very wealthy. The River ebbs not and floweth, not nigher them than fifteen miles or thereabouts;


and the Boats which thence serve the 
City,
 be no bigger than our Westren Barges. The principal means by which the people do subsist, are the 
Court
 of the 
King,
 most time held amongst them, and the great resort of 
Advodates
 and 
Clients,
 to the 
Chambers
 of 
Parliament:
 without these two crutches the Town would get a vile halting, and perhaps be scarce able to stand. What the estates of some of the wealthiest Citizens may amount to, I cannot say: yet I dare conjecture it not to be su∣perfluous. The Author of the Book entitled 
Les estats du monde
 reckoneth it for a great mer∣vail, that some of our 
London Merchants
 should be worth 100000. 
Crownes
: we account that e∣state amongst us not to be so wonderful; and may hence safely conclude, that they which made a Prodegy of so little, are not much worth themselves.


If you beleeve their apparrel, you may perhaps be perswaded otherwise, that questionless speak∣eth no less than 
Millions
; though like it is, that when they are in their best clothes, they are in the 
middle of their estate.
 But concernig the ridicu∣lous bravery of the poor 
Parisian,
 take along with you this story. Upon our first coming into 
Paris,
 there came to visit a 
German Lord,
 whom we met a Ship-board, a couple of 
French Gal∣lants,
 his acquaintance: the one of them (for I did not much observe the other) had a suit of 
Turkey Grogram
 dublet with Taffaty, cut with long slashes and carbonadoes after the 
French
 fa∣shion, and belayed with bugle lace; through the opening of his dublet appeared his shirt, of the


Purest Holland, and wrought with curious needle-work; the points of his wast and knees all edged with a silver edging, his Garters Roses and Hat∣band sutable to his points; a Beaver hat, and a pare of silk Stokings: his Cloak also of 
Turkey Grogram
 cut upon black 
Taffaty
: This 
Lord
 (for who would have dared to guesse him other) ap∣plied himself to me, and perceiving my ignorance in the 
French,
 accosted me in 
Latine,
 which he spake indifferently well. After some discourse he took notice of mine eyes which were then sore, and Sea sick; and promised me, if I would call on him at his lodging the next morning, to give me a water which suddenly would restore them to their strength and vigor; I humbled thanked his 
Lordship,
 for such an ineffable and immerited fa∣vour, in the best complement and greatest abai∣sance I could devise. It was not for nought thought I, that our 
English
 extoll so much, the humanity of this people: Nay I began to accuse report of envy, as not having published the one half of their graces and affabilities. 
Quantillum enim virtutum istarum famâ acceperam.
 And thus taking my leave of his 
Honour,
 I greedily expe∣cted the next morning: the morning come, and the hour of visitting his 
Lordship
 almost at hand, I sent a Servant to fetch a 
Barbar
 to combe me, and make me neat, as not knowing what occasi∣on I might have of seeing his 
Lady,
 or his Daugh∣ters: upon the return of the messenger, present∣ly followed 
His Altitude,
 and bidding me sit down in the chair, he disburdened one of his po∣ckets, 
(quis hoc credat nisi sit proteste vetustas)
 of


a case of instruments, and the other of a bundle of linnen. Thus accomodated he falleth to work about me, to the earning of 
a quart descu:
 in my life I had never more ado to hold in my laugh∣ter: and certainly had not an anger or vexation at mine own folly, in casting away so much humble rhetorick the night before upon him, somewhat troubled me, I should either have laught him out of his fine suit, or have broke my heart in the re∣straint, 
Quid Domini facient, audent cum talia fures.
 If a 
Barber
 may thus be taken in suspicion for a 
Lord
: no doubt but a 
Mercer
 may be accu∣sed for a 
Marquesse.






CHAP. II.




Paris
 divided into four parts. The 
Faulx Bourgs
 in general. Of the 
Pest house.
 The 
Faulx Bourg,
 and 
Abbey
 of St. 
Germain.
 The 
Queene
 Mothers house there: her pur∣pose never to reside in it. Of the Town and Government of 
Paris.
 The Provost of 
Mer∣chands,
 and his Authority. The 
Armes
 of the Towne. The Grand Castellet. The Ar∣cenal. The place Royall, 
&c.
 The Vicoun∣ty of 
Paris,
 and the Provosts seven Daugh∣ters.




THey which write of 
Lusitania,
 divide it into three parts; 
viz. Ʋlteriorum,
 lying beyond



Duerus North. Citerioram,
 lying from 
Tagus,
 south; and 
Interamnem,
 scituate betwixt both the Rivers. 
Paris
 is seated just as that Province, and may in a manner admit the same division; for the River of 
Seine,
 doth there disperse it self, that it hath divided the 
French Metropolis
 into three parts also, 
viz. Citeriorem
 lying on this side the River which they call 
la Ville, the Towne; Ʋlte∣riorem,
 lying beyond the further branch of it, which they call 
l' université
; and 
Interamnem
 sci∣tuate between both the streames, in a little Island which they call 
la Ceté.
 To these adde the 
Sub∣urbs,
 or (as they call them) the 
Faulx Bourgs
: and you have in all four parts of 
Paris.


These 
Faulx bourgs
 are not incorporated into the Town, or joyned together with it, as the 
Suburbs
 of 
London
 are unto that 
Citie:
 they stand severed from it a pretty distance, and appear what indeed they are, a distinct body from it. For the most part the houses in them are old and ruinous; yet the 
Faulx bourg
 of 
St. Jacques
 is in pretty good fashion, and the least unsightly of them all except 
St. Germain
: The 
Faulx bourg
 of 
St. Martin
 al∣so hath somewhat to commend it, which is, that the great 
Pest house
 built by 
Henry
 the fourth, is within the precincts of it. A House built qua∣drangular-wise, very large and capacious; and seemeth to such as stand afarre off it (for it is not safe venturing nigh it or within it) to be more like the 
Pallace of a King,
 then the 
Kings Pallace
 it self. But the 
principallest
 of all the 
Suburbs
 is that of 
St. Germain,
 a place lately repared, full of divers stately houses, and in bigness little inferi∣our


to 
Oxford.
 It took name from the 
Abbey
 of 
St. Germain,
 seated in it, built by 
Childebert
 the son of 
Clovis, Anno
 542. in the honour of 
St. Vincint.
 Afterward it got the name of 
St. Ger∣main,
 a 
Bishop
 of 
Paris,
 whose body was there buried, and at whose instigation it had formerly been founded. The number of the 
Monkes
 was enlarged to the number of 120. by 
Charles
 the 
bald,
 (he began his raigne 
Anno
 841.) and so they continue till this day. The present 
Abbot
 is 
Henry
 of 
Burbon, Bishop
 of 
Metz,
 base son unto 
Henry
 the fourth: He is by his place 
Lord
 of all the goodly Suburbs, hath the power of levying taxes upon his Tennants, and to him accrew all the profits of the 
great fayre
 holden here every 
February.


The principall house in it, is that of the 
Queen Mother,
 not yet fully built; the 
Gallery
 of it, which possesseth all the right side of the square, is perfectly finished, and said to be a most royall and majestical piece: the further part also opposite to the gate is finished, so farre forth as concern∣ing the outside and strength of it: the ornamen∣tall part and trapping of it, being not yet added: when it is absolutely consummate, if it hold pro∣portion with the two other sides both within and without, it will be a 
Pallace
 for the elegancy and politeness of the fabrick, not fellowed in 
Europe.
 A 
Pallace
 answerable to the greatness of her mind that built it; yet it is by divers conjectured, that her purpose is never to reside there; for which cause the building goeth slowly forward: for when upon the death of her great 
Privado,
 the



Marquiss d' Ancre
 (on whom she bestowed much of her grace and favour) she was removed to 
Blois,
 those of the opposite 
faction
 in the 
Court,
 get so strongly into the favour of the 
King,
 that not without great struggling of those of her party, and the hazard of two Civil Warres, she obtain∣ed her former neerness to his 
Majesty.
 She can see by this what to trust to, should her absence leave the 
Kings
 mind any way prepared for new impressions. Likely therefore it is, that she will rather choose to leave her fine house unhabited (further than on occasions for a Banquet) then give the least opportunity to stagger her greatness. This house is called 
Luxembourg Pallace,
 as being built in a place of an old house, belonging to the 
Dukes
 of that 
Province.
 The second house of note in this Suburb, is that of the 
Prince
 of 
Condé,
 to whom it was given by the 
Queene Mo∣ther,
 in the first year of her 
Regency.


The 
Town
 of 
Paris
 is that part of it which lyeth on this side of the hithermost branch of the 
Seine
 towards 
Picardie
: what was spoken before in the general, hath its reference to this particular, whe∣ther it concernes the sweetness of the streets, the manner of the building, the furniture of the Ar∣tificer, or the like. It conteineth in it thirteen 
Parish Churches,
 viz. 1. 
St. Germainde l' Auxerre
 2. 
St. Eustace.
 3. 
les St. Innocents.
 4. 
St. Sau∣veur.
 5. 
St. Nicholas des Champs.
 6. 
le Sepulchre.
 7. 
St. Jacques de la boucherie.
 8. 
St. Josse.
 9. 
St. Mercy.
 10· 
St. Jean,
 11. 
St. Gervase et St. Pro∣tasse.
 12. 
St. Paul.
 13. 
St. Jean de ronde.
 It hath also in it seven Gates, sc. 1. 
St. Anthony
 up∣on


the side of the River near unto the 
Arcenal.
 2. 
Porte du Temple.
 3. 
St. Martin.
 4. 
St. Denis.
 5. 
Porte Montmartre.
 6. 
St. Honore.
 7. 
Porte neu∣fue
; so called because it was built since the o∣thers, which joyneth hard by the 
Tuilleries
 the Garden of the 
Louure.


The 
principall Governour
 of 
Paris,
 as also of the whole 
Isle
 of 
France,
 is the 
Duke
 of 
Mont-ba∣zon,
 who hath held the office ever since the year, 1619. when it was surrendred by 
Luines,
 but he little medleth with the City. The particular Go∣vernours of it are the two 
Provosts,
 the one cal∣led 
le Provost de Paris,
 the other 
le Provost des Merchands
: The 
Provost
 of 
Paris,
 determineth all causes between Citizen and Citizen, whether they be crimical or civil: the office is for term of life: the place of judgement the 
Grand Castellet.
 The present 
Provost
 is called 
Mr. Sequse,
 and is by birth of the 
Nobilitie
; as all which are honour∣ed with this office must be: He hath as his Assi∣stants three 
Leiutenants:
 the 
Leiutenant Criminal,
 which judgeth in matters of life and death: the 
Leiutenant Civil,
 which desideth causes of debt or trespasse between party and party: and the 
Leiutenant perticulier,
 who supplyeth their seve∣ral places in their absence. There are also neces∣sarily required to this Court, the 
Procareur
 and the 
Advocate,
 or the 
Kings Solicitor
 and 
Atturney
: twelve 
Counsellers,
 and of under Officers more than enough. This Office is said to have been erect∣ed in the time of 
Lewis
 the Son of 
Charles
 the great. In matters criminal there is an 
Appeale
 admitted from hence to the 
Attornelle.
 In matters 
Civil,
 if


the summe exceed the value of 250. 
Liures
 to the great Chamber, or 
le grand Chambre
 in the Court of 
Parliament.


The 
Provost
 of the 
Merchands
 and his authori∣ty was first instituted by 
Philip Augustus,
 who began his raigne 
Anno
 1290. His office is to con∣serve the liberties and indulgences granted to the 
Merchants,
 and 
Artificers
 of the 
Citie,
 to have an eye over the sales of 
Wine, Corn, Wood, Coal,
 &c. and to impose Taxes on them: to keep the keyes of the Gates, to give the watch word in time of warre: to grant 
Passports
 to such as are willing to leave the Town▪ and the like. There are also four other Officers joyned unto him; 
Es∣chevins
 they call them, who also carry a great sway in the 
Citie.
 There are moreover 
Assistants
 to them in their proceedings; yea the 
Kings Solici∣tor,
 (or 
Procureur
) and twenty four 
Counsellers.
 To compare this 
Corporation
 with that of 
London
: the 
Provost
 is as the 
Mayor
: the 
Eschevins
 as the 
Sheriffs
: the twenty four 
Counsellers,
 as the 
Al∣dermen
: and the 
Procureur
 as the 
Recorder.
 I o∣mit the under Officers whereof here there is no scarcity. The place of their meeting is called 
l' hostelle de ville,
 or the 
Guild Hall.
 The present 
Provost, Mr de Gri
ux
; his habit as also that of the 
Eschevins
 and 
Counsellers,
 half red, half sky coloured, the 
Citie
 Leveries with an Hood of the same.


This 
Provost
 is as much above the other in po∣wer, as men which are loved commonly are above those which are feared. This 
Provost
 the people willingly, yea sometimes factiously obey; as the



Conservator
 of their Liberties: the other they on∣ly dread as the 
Judges
 of their lives; and the Ty∣rants of their estates. To shew the power of this 
Provost
 both for and with the people against their 
Princes,
 you may please to take notice of two in∣stances, for the people, against 
Philip devalois Anno
 1349. when the said 
King
 desiring an im∣post of one 
liure
 in five 
Crownes,
 upon all wares sold in 
Paris,
 (for his better managing his warres against the 
English
) could obtain it but for one year onely; and that not without especial Letters reservall, that it should no way incommodate their priviledges: which the people 
Anno
 1357. when 
King John
 was prisoner in 
England,
 and 
Charles
 the 
Daulphine,
 afterwards the fifth of that name, laboured his ransome among the 
Parisiens,
 for then 
Steven Marcell
 attended by the vulgar 
Citizens,
 not onely brake open the 
Daulphin
s
 Chamber, but slew 
John de Confluns,
 and 
Robert
 of 
Chermont,
 two 
Marshalls
 of 
France
 before his face. Nay to adde yet further insolencies to this, he took his parti-coloured hood off his head, put∣ting it on the 
Daulphins,
 and all that day wore the 
Daulphines
 hat being a brown black, 
pour sig∣nal de sa Dictateur,
 as the token of his 
Dictator∣ship.
 And which is more than all this, he sent the 
Daulphin
 cloath to make him a Cloak and Hood of the 
Cities Liverie
; and compelled him to avow the 
Massacre
 of his Servants above named, as done by his command: Horrible insolencies! 
Quam miserum est eum haec impunè pacere potuisse,
 as 
Tullie of Marc. Antonius.


The Arms of the Town, as also of the Corpora∣tion of the 
Provost
 and 
Eschevins
 are 
Gules,
 a Ship Argent, a Cheife poudred with 
Flower de Luces Or.
 The seat or place of their Assemblies is called (as we said▪) 
Hostel de Ville
 or the 
Guild-hall.
 It was built or rather finisht by 
Francis
 the first, 
Anno
 1533. and since beautified and repaired by 
Fran∣cis Miron
 once 
Provost des Merchands,
 and after∣wards privy 
Counsellor
 to the King. It standeth on one side of the 
Greue,
 which is the publike place of the Execution, and is built quadrangular-wise, all of free and polished stone, evenly and orderly laid-together. You ascend by thirty or forty steps fair and large, before you come to the quadrate, and thence by several stairs into the several rooms and chambers of it, which are very neatly contri∣ved and richly furnished. The grand 
Chastelet
 is said to have been built by 
Julian
 the 
Apostata,
 at such time as he was Governour of 
Gaul.
 It was afterwards new built by 
Philip Augustus,
 and since repaired by 
Lewis
 the twelfth. In which time of repaitation the 
Provost
 of 
Paris
 kept his Court in the Palace of the 
Louure.
 To sight it is not very graceful, what it may be within I know not. Cer∣tain it is, that it looketh far more like a 
Prison
 (for which use it also serveth) than a Town Hall or seat of judgement.


In this part of 
Paris,
 called 
la Ville
 or the 
Town,
 is the 
Kings Arcenal or Magazin
 of War. It carrieth not any great face of majesty on the out∣side; neither indeed is it necessary: Such places are most beautiful without when they are most ter∣rible within. It was begun by 
Henry
 the second,


finished by 
Charles
 the ninth, and since augmented by Mr. 
Rhosme
 great 
Master
 of the 
Artillery.
 It is said to contain an hundred field peices and their Carriage; and also armour sufficient for ten thou∣sand Horses, and fifty thousand Foot. In this part also of 
Paris
 is that excellent pile of building, cal∣led the 
Place Royal,
 built partly at the charges, and partly at the encouragement of 
Henry
 the fourth. It is built after the form of a 
Quadrangle,
 every side of the square being in length seventy two fa∣thoms; the materials brick of divers colours, which make it very pleasant, though less durable. It is cloystered round just after the fashion of the 
Roy∣all Exchange
 in 
London
; the walks being paved under foot. The houses of it are very fair and large, every one having its garden and other out∣lets. In all they are thirty six, nine on a side, and seemed to be sufficiently capable of a great reti∣nue. The 
Ambassadour
 for the 
State of Venice
 ly∣ing in one of them. It is scituate in that place, whereas formerly the solemn tiltings were per∣formed. A place famous and fatal for the death of 
Henry
 the second, who was here slain with the splinter of a Launce, as he was running with the 
Earl of Mountgomery, a Scottish
 man. A sad and heavy accident.


To conclude this discourse of the 
Ville
 or 
Town
 of 
Paris,
 I must wander a little out of it; because the power and command of the provost saith that it must be so: For his authority is not confined within the Town, he hath seven Daughters on which he may exercise it, 
Les sept filles de la Pro∣paste de Paris,
 as the 
French
 call them. These


seven Daughters are seven Bayliwicks comprehen∣ded within the 
Vicointe of Paris
: Viz. 1. 
Poissy.
 2. 
St. Germanenlay.
 3. 
Tornon.
 4. 
Teroiene Brie.
 5. 
Corbeil.
 6. 
Moutherrie
: and the 7. 
Gennesseen France.
 Over these his jurisdiction is extended, though not as 
Provost
 of 
Paris.
 Here he commandeth and giveth judgement as 
Leiute∣nant Civil
 to the 
Duke
 of 
Mont-bâzon,
 or the su∣preme Governour of 
Paris
 and the Isle of 
France
 for the time being; yet this Leiutenancy being an Office perpetually annexed to the 
Provostship,
 is the occasion that the Bayliwicks above named are called, 
Les sept filles de la Provaste.






CHAP. VI.




The Universitie of 
Paris,
 and Founders of it. Of the Colledges in general: Marriage when permitted to the Rectors of them: The small maintenance allowed to Schollars in the Universities of 
France.
 The great Col∣ledge at 
Tholoza.
 Of the Colledge of the 
Sorbone
 in particular, That and the House of Parliament the cheif bulwarks of the French liberty. Of the policy nnd government of the Universtty. The Rector and his prece∣dency. The disordered life of the Schollars there being. An Apology for 
Oxford
 and 
Cambridge.
 The priviledges of the Schol∣ars: Theer Degrees, &c.




THis part of 
Paris
 which lieth beyond the fur∣thermost branch of the 
Seine
 is called the U∣niversity. It is little inferior to the 
Town
 for big∣ness, and less superior to it in sweetness or opulen∣cy; whatsoever was said of the whole in general, was intended to this part also as well as the others. All the learning in it being not able to free it from those inconveniencies wherewith it is distressed: It containeth in it onely six parish 
Churches,
 the pau∣city whereof is supplied by the multitude of reli∣gious houses which are in it. These six 
Churches,
 are called by the names, 
St. Nicholas du' Chardo∣mere.
 2. 
St. Estienne
 at this time in repairing. 3. 
St. Severin.
 4. 
St. Bennoist.
 5. 
St. Andre
: and the 6. 
St. Cosme.
 It hath also eight 
Gates
; 1. 
Porte de Nesse,
 by the water side, over against the 
Louure.
 2. 
Porte de Bucy.
 3. 
St. Germain.
 4. 
St. Michell.
 5. 
St. Jacques.
 6. 
St. Mar∣cell.
 7. 
St. Victor:
 and the 8. 
Porte de la Tor∣nelle.
 It was not accounted as a distinct member of 
Paris,
 or as the third part of it, until the year 1304. at which time the 
Scholars
 having lived for∣merly dispersed about the 
City,
 began to settle themselves together in this place, and so to become a peculiar 
Corporation.


The 
Ʋniversity
 was founded by 
Charles
 the great, 
Anno
 791. at the perswosion of 
Al'uine
 an 
Oxford
 man, and the 
Scholar Venerable Bede,
 who brought with him three of his condisciples to be the first 
Readers
 there. Their names were 
Rabba∣nus Maurus, John Duns
 surnamed 
Scotus, Clau∣dus,
 who was also called 
Clement.
 To these four doth the 
Ʋniversity
 of 
Paris
 owe its original and


first rudiments. Neither was this the first time that 
England
 had been the 
School-master
 unto 
France
: we lent them not onely their first 
Doctors
 in 
Divinity
 and 
Philosophy
; but from us also did they receive the mysteries of their Religion when they were Heathens. 
Disciplina in Britannia re∣perta
 (saith 
Julius Caesar Com.
 6.) 
atque inde in Galliam translata esse existimatur:
 an authority not to be questioned by any but by a 
Caesar.
 Lear∣ning thus new born at 
Paris
 continued not long in any full vigor; for almost three hundred years it was fallen into a deadly trance, and not here one∣ly, but almost through the greatest part of 
Europe. Anno
 1160▪ or thereabouts, 
Peter Lambard Bi∣shop of Paris,
 the first Author of Scholastical Di∣vinity; and by his followers called the 
Master
 of the 
Sentences,
 received it here in this, by the favour and incouragement of 
Lewis
 the seventh. In his own house were the 
Lectures
 first read: and after as the number of 
Students
 did encrease, in sundry other parts of the Town. 
Colledges
 they had none till the year 1304. the Schollars sojourning in the houses of the Citizens, accordingly as they could bargain for their entertainment.


But 
Anno
 1304. 
Joan Queen of Navarre
 Wife to 
Philip
 the fair, built that Colledge, which then and ever since hath been called the 
Colledge
 of 
Navarre
; and it is at this day the fairest and lar∣gest of all the rest: 
Non ibi consistunt exempla ubi caeperunt, sed intenuem accepta tramitem la
issima e∣vaganoi viam sibi faciunt, as Velleius
: This good example ended not in twenty it self: but invited diverse others of the 
French Kings
 and people to


the erecting of convenient places of study: so that in process of time 
Paris
 became enriched with fifty two 
Colledges:
 so many it still hath, though the odd fourty are little serviceable to 
Learning
: For in twelve onely of them is there any publike reading, either in 
Divinity
 or 
Philosophy.
 These twelve are the 
Colledges
 of 1. 
Harcourte.
 2. 
Caillve,
 or the 
petit Sorbonne.
 3. 
Liseuer,
 or 
Ce∣rovium.
 4. 
Boncorrte.
 5. 
Montague.
 6. 
Les Marche.
 7. 
Navarre.
 8. 
De le Cardinal de Noyne.
 9. 
Le Plessis.
 10. 
De Beavis.
 11. 
La Sorbonne.
 12. 
De Clermont,
 or the 
Colledge
 of the 
Jesuits.
 There are also publike readings in the houses of the four Orders of 
Mendicant Fri∣ers: Viz.
 the 
Carmelites, the Augustines, the Franciscans,
 or 
Cordeliers,
 and the 
Dominicans.
 The other 
Colledges
 are destinate to other uses: That of 
Arras
 is converted to an house of 
English Fu∣gitives
: and there is another of them hard by the gate of 
Jacques
 employed for the reception of the 
Irish
: in others of them there is Lodging al∣lotted out to 
Students,
 who for ther instruction have resort to some of the twelve 
Colledges
 above mentioned.


In each of these 
Colledges
 there is a 
Rector,
 most of whose places yeild them but small profit. The greatest commodity which accreweth to them is raised from Chamber-rents: their Preferments be∣ing much of a nature with that of a 
Principal
 of an 
Hall in Oxford:
 or that of a 
Treasurer
 in an 
Inne of Chancery
 in 
London.
 At the first erection of their 
Colledges
 they were all prohibited marriage, though I see little reason for it: There can hardly come


any inconvenience or damage by it unto the 
Scho∣lars
 under their charge, by assuming of leases into their own hands, for I think few of them have any to be so embezelled
: Anno
 1520. or thereabouts, it was permitted to such of them as were 
Doctors
 in 
Physick
; that they might marry; the 
Cardinal
 of 
Toute-ville, Legate in France
 giving to them that indulgence. Afterwards in the year 1534. the 
Doctors
 of the 
Laws
 petitioned the 
Ʋniversity
 for the like priviledge, which in fine was granted to them: and confirmed by the 
Court of Parliament.
 The 
Doctors of Divinity
 are the onely 
Academicals
 now barred from it, and that not as 
Rectors
 but as 
Preists.
 These 
Colledges
 for their building are very inelegant and generally little beholding to the cu∣riosity of the Artificer. So confused and so ill proportioned in respect of our 
Colledges in Eng∣land
; as 
Exeter in Oxford
 was some twelve years since in comparison of the rest; or as the two 
Temples in London
 now are in reference to 
Lin∣colns Inne.
 The Revenues of them are sutable to the 
Fabricks,
 as mean and curtailed: I could not learn of any 
Colledge
 that hath greater allowances than that of the 
Sorbonne,
 and how small a trifle that is, we shall tell you presently. But this is not the poverty of the 
Ʋniversity of Paris
 onely, all 
France
 is troubled with the same want of encou∣ragements in learning: Neither are the 
Academies of Germany
 in any happier estate; which occasio∣ned 
Erasmus
 that great light of his times, having been here in 
England,
 and seen 
Cambridge,
 to write thus to one of his 
Dutch
 acquaintance
: Ʋnum Collegium Cantabrigiense (confidenter dicam) su∣perat


vel decem nostra.
 It holdeth good in the neat∣ness and graces of the buildings, in which sense he spake it, but it had been more undeniable had he intended it of the 
Revenues.
 Yet I was given to understand, that at 
Tholoza
 there was amongst twenty 
Colledges
 one of an especial quality, and so indeed it is if rightly considered. There are said to be in it twenty 
Students
 places (or 
Fellowships
 as we call them) The 
Students
 at their entrance are to lay down in 
deposito
 six thousand F
lorens
 or 
Liures,
 to stay there onely six years; in the mean time to enjoy the profits of the House, & at the 6, years end to have his 6000. 
Liures
 paid unto him by Successor: 
Vendere jure potest, emerat ille prius.
 A pretty Market.


The 
Colledge
 of 
Sorbonni
 (which indeed is the glory of this 
Ʋniversity
) Was built by one 
Robert de Sorbonne
 of the Chamber to 
Lewit
 the ninth, of whom he was very well beloved. It consisteth meerly of 
Doctors of Divinity
: neither can any of another profession, nor any of the same profession, not so graduated, be admitted unto it. At this time their number is about seventy, their allowance a pint of Wine (their pint being but a thought less than our quart) and a certain quantity of bread daily. Meat they have none allowed them, unless they pay for it; but they pay not so much: for five 
Sols
 (which amounteth to six pence 
English
) a day they challenge a competency of flesh or fish to be served to them at their Chambers. These 
Doctors
 have the sole power & authority in conferring de∣grees in 
Divinity:
 The 
Rector
 and other Officers in the University having nothing to do in it. To them


alone belongeth the examination of the 
Students
 in that faculty: the approbation and bestowing of the honours: and to their 
Lectures
 do all such assiduously repair as are that way minded. All of them in their turns discharge this office of reading and that by six in a day, three of them making good the Pulpit in the forenoon, and as many in the af∣ternoon. These 
Doctors
 also are accounted toge∣ther with the 
Parliament of Paris,
 the principal pil∣lars of the 
French
 liberty; whereof indeed they are exceeding jealous, as well in matters 
Ecclesiasti∣cal
 as 
Civil.
 When 
Gerson Chancellor of Paris
 (he died 
Anno
 1429.) had published a book in appro∣bation of the 
Council
 of 
Constance,
 where it was enacted, that the authority of the 
Council
 was greater than that of the 
Pope
; the 
Sorbonne Doctors
 declared that also to be their doctrine. Afterwards when 
Lewis
 the eleventh, to gratifie 
Pope Pius
 the second, purposed to abolish the force of the 
Prag∣matick Sanction,
 the 
Sorbonnists
 in the behalf of the Church 
Gallican
 and the 
Ʋniversity of Paris mag∣nis obsistebant animis
 (saith 
Sleidan
 in his Com∣mentary) 
& a papâ provacabant ad Concilium.
 The 
Council
 unto which they appealed was that of 
Ba∣sil,
 where that 
Sanction
 was made: So that by this appeal they verified their former 
Thesis,
 that the 
Council
 was above the 
Pope.
 And not long since, 
Anno, viz.
 1613. casually meeting with a Book written by 
Becanus
 entituled, 
Controversia Angli∣cana de potestate Regis & Papae,
 they called an As∣sembly and condemned it. For though the Main of it were against the power and supremacy of the 
King of England,
 yet did it reflect also on the au∣thority


of the 
Pope
 over the 
Christian Kings
 by the by; which occasioned the sentence. So jealous are they of the least circumstances, in which the immunity of their Nation may be endan∣gered.


As for the government of the 
Ʋniversity,
 it hath for its cheif 
Director,
 a 
Rector,
 with a 
Chancellor,
 four 
Procurators
 or 
Proctors,
 and as many others whom they call his 
Intrantes
 to assist him; besides the 
Regents.
 Of these the 
Regents
 are such 
Masters
 of the 
Arts,
 who are by the consent of the rest selected to read the publike 
Lectures
 of 
Logick
 and 
Philosophy.
 Their name they derive 
a regendo, eo quod in artibus rexerint.
 These are divided into four Nations: 
Viz.
 1. The 
Norman.
 2. The 
Picard.
 3. The 
Germain.
 4. The 
French.
 Un∣der the two first are comprehended the 
Students
 of those several 
Provinces
; under the third the 
Stu∣dents
 of all 
Forrain Nations,
 which repair hither for the attainment of knowledge. It was heretofore called 
Natio Anglica
: but the 
English
 being thought unworthy of the honour, because of their separation from the 
Church
 of 
Rome,
 the name and credit of it was given to the 
Germains.
 That of the 
French
 is again subdivided into two parts; that which is immediately within the 
Diocess
 of 
Paris,
 and the rest of 
Gallia
: these four Nations (for notwithstanding the subdivision above mentioned, the 
French Nation
 is reckoned but as one) choose yearly four 
Proctors
 or 
Procurators,
 so called, 
Quia negotia nationis suae procurant.
 They choose also four other 
Officers,
 whom they call 
les Intrants,
 in whose power there remaineth the delegated au∣thority


of their several 
Nations.
 And here it is to be observed, that in the French Nation the Procu∣rator and Intrant is one year of the 
Diocess of Pa∣ris,
 and the following year of the rest of 
France,
 the reason why that 
Nation
 is subdivided: These four 
Intrants
 thus named have amongst them the election of their 
Rector,
 who is their supreme 
Ma∣gistrate.


The present 
Rector
 is Mr. 
Tarrisnus
 of the 
Col∣ledge of Harcourte,
 a Master of the 
Arts,
 for a 
Doctor
 is not capable of the office. The honour lasteth onely three moneths; which time expired, the 
Intrants
 proceed to a new election; though oftentimes it happeneth, that the same hath the lease of his authority renewed. Within the con∣fines of the University he taketh place next after the 
Princes
 of the 
Bloud:
 and at the publike ex∣ercises of 
Learning
 before the 
Cardinals
; other∣wise he giveth them the precedency. But to 
Bi∣shops
 and 
Arch-bishops
 he will not grant it upon any occasion. It was not two moneths before my being there, that there happened a shrewd contro∣versie about it. The 
King
 had then summoned an assembly of twenty five 
Bishops
 of the 
Provinces
 adjoyning, to consult about some 
Church
 affairs; and they had chosen the 
Colledge
 of 
Sorbonne
 to be their 
Senate-House
: When the first day of their sitting came, a 
Doctor
 of the 
House
 being appoint∣ed to preach before them, began his 
Oration
 with 
Reverendissime Rector & vos Amplissimi Praesulei.
 Here the 
Arch-bishop
 of 
Roven,
 a man of an high spirit interrupted him, and commanded him to invert his stile. He obeyed, and presently the 
Re∣ctor



riseth up with 
Impono tibi silentium,
 which is an 
Injunction
 within the compass of his power. Upon this, the 
Preacher
 being tongue-tied, the contro∣versie grew hot between the 
Bishops
 and the 
Rector,
 both parties very eagerly pleading their own pri∣ority. All the morning being almost spent in this altercation; a 
Cardinal
 wiser than the rest, desi∣red that their question for that time might be laid aside, and that the 
Rector
 would be pleased to per∣mit the 
Doctor
 to deliver his Sermon, beginning it without any 
Praeludium
 at all. To which request the 
Rector
 yeilded; and so the contention at that time was ended.


But 
Salus Academiae non vertitur in istis.
 It were more for honour and profit of the 
Ʋniversity,
 if the 
Rector
 would leave of to be so mindful of his place, and look a little to his office; for certainly the eye and utmost diligence of a 
Magistrate
 was never wanting more; and yet more necessary in this place. 
Penelopes suiters
 never behaved them∣selves so insolently in the house of 
Ʋlisses,
 as the 
Academicks
 here do in the houses and streets of 
Paris.


Nos numerus sumus & fruges consumere nati


Sponsi Penelopes, nebulones, Alcinoque, 
&c.

Was never the mouth of any of these; when you hear of their behaviour you would think you were in 
Turkey,
 and that these men were the 
Janizaries
: For an Angel given among them to drink, they will arrest whom you shall appoint them; double the money, and they will break open his house, and


ravish him into Gaole; I have not heard that they can be hired to a murder, though nothing be more common amongst them than killing, except it be stealing. Witness those many Carcasses which are found dead in a morning, whom a desire to secur themselves, and make resistance to their pillages, hath (onely) made earth again. Nay, which is most horrible, they have regulated their villanous practises into a 
Common-wealth,
 and have their 
Captains
 and other Officers, who command them in their night walks and dispose of their purcha∣ses. To be a 
Gypsie,
 and a 
Scholar
 of 
Paris
 are al∣most 
Synonime's.
 One of their 
Captains
 had in one week (for no longer would the gallows let him enjoy his honour) stoln no fewer than eighty Cloaks: 
Nam fuit Autolei tam piceata manus?
 For these thefts being apprehended, he was adjudged to the wheel; but because the 
Judges
 were informed. that during the time of his raign he had kept the hands of himself and his company unpolluted with bloud, he had the favour to be hanged. In a word, this ungoverned rabble (whom to call 
Scho∣lars
 were to prophane the title) omit no outrages or turbulent misdemeanours which possibly can be, or were ever known to be committed in a place, which consisteth meerly of priviledge and no∣thing of statute.


I could heartily wish, that those, who are so ill conceited of their own two 
Ʋniversities, Oxford and Cambridge,
 and accuse them of dissolutions in their behaviour, would either spend some time in the 
Schools
 beyond Seas, or enquire what news abroad of those which have seen them; then would


they doubtless see their own errors and correct them; then would they admire the regularity and civility of those places, which before they condem∣ned of debauchedness: then would they esteem those places as the seminaries of modesty and ver∣tue, which they now account as the nurseries onely of an impudent rudeness. Such an opinion I am sure, some of the 
Aristarchi
 of these dayes have lodged in their breasts concerning the misgovern∣ing of our 
Athens.
 Perhaps a Kinsman of theirs hath played the unthrift equally of his time and his money: Hence their malice to it, and their inve∣ctives against it. Thus of old.

—Pallas exurere classem


Argivum atque ipsos potuit submergere ponto


Ʋnius ob noxam & furias Aiacis Oilei.

An injustice more unpardonable than the greatest sin of the 
Ʋniversities.
 But I wrong a good cause with an unnecessary patronage, yet such is the pec∣cant humour of some, that they know not how to expiate the follies of some one, but with the ca∣lumny and dispraise of all. An unmanly weakness, and yet many possessed with it. I know it is im∣possible, that in a place of youth and liberty, some should not give occasion of offence. The 
Ark,
 wherein there were eight persons onely, was not without one 
Canaan
: And of the twelve which 
Christ
 had chosen one was a 
Devil.
 It were then above a miracle, if amongst so full a Cohort of young Souldiers none should forsake the 
Ensign
 of his 
General
: He notwithstanding that should give


the imputation of cowardise to the whole Army, cannot but be accounted malitious or peevish. But let all such as have evil will at 
Sion
 live unregarded, and die unremembred for want of some 
Sciolar
 to write their 
Epitaph.
 Certainly a man not wedded to envy and a spiteful vexation of spirit, upon a due examination of our 
Lycaea,
 and a Comparison of them abroad with those abroad, cannot but say, and that justly, 
Non habent Academiae Anglicanae pares, nisi seipsas.


The principal cause of the rudeness and disor∣ders in 
Paris
 had been cheifly occasioned by the great priviledges where with the 
Kings of France
 intended the furtherance and security of 
Learn∣ing.
 Having thus let them get the bridle in their own hands, no marvel if they grow sick with an uncontrouled licentiousness. Of these privi∣ledges some are, that no 
Scholars
 goods can be sei∣zed upon for the payments of his debts: that none of them should be liable to any taxes or impositi∣ons: (a 
Royal
 immunity to such as are acquainted with 
France
;) that they might carry and recarry their 
utensiles
 without the least molestation: that they should have the 
Provost of Paris
 to be the 
Keeper
 and 
Defender
 of their 
Liberties,
 who is therefore stiled, 
Le conservateur despriviledges Royaux de le Ʋniversite de Paris,
 &c.


One greater priviledge they have yet than all these; which is their soon taking of degrees. Two years seeth them both novices in the 
Arts,
 and 
Master
 of them: so that enjoying by their de∣grees an absolute freedom, before the fol
ies and violencies of youth are broken in them, they be∣come


so unruly and insolent as I have told you· These degrees are conferred on them by the 
Chan∣cellor,
 who seldom examineth further of them than hss 
Fees.
 Those paid, he presenteth them to the 
Rector,
 and giveth them their 
Letters Patents
 sealed with the 
Ʋniversities
 seal, which is the main part of the Creation. He also setteth the Seal to the 
Authentical Letters
 (for so they term them) of such whom the 
Sorbonists
 have passed for 
Doctors.
 The present 
Chancellor
 is named 
Petrus de Piere Vi∣ve, Doctor of Divinity,
 and 
Chanoin
 of the 
Church
 of 
Nostre-dame
 (as also are all they which enjoy that 
Office.
) He is chosen by the 
Bishop
 of 
Paris,
 and taketh place of any under that dignity. But of this ill managed 
Ʋniversity
 enough, if not too much.






CHAP. VII.




The City of 
Paris
 in the place of old 
Lute∣tia:
 The bridges which joyn it to the Town, and University: King 
Henries
 statua: 
Alexanders
 injurious policy. The Church and Revenues of 
Nostre-Dame.
 The holy Water there, the original making and vertue of it. The Lamp before the Altar. The heathenishness of both customs. 
Paris
 best seen from the top of the Church: The great Bell there never rung but in time of Thun∣der. The baptizing of Bels. The grand


Hospital and decency of it. The place 
Daul∣phin
: the holy Chappel and Reliques there. What the Ancients thought of Reliques. The Exchange. The little Chastelet. A transition to thc Parliament.




THe 
Isle
 of 
Paris
 commonly called 
Isle de palais
 seated between the 
Ʋniversity
 and the Town, is that part of the whole, which is called 
la Cite
 the 
City
: The 
Epitome
 and abstract of all 
France:
 It is the sweetest and best ordered part of 
Paris
; and certainly if 
Paris
 may be thought the eye of the 
Realm,
 this 
Island
 may equally be judged the 
apple
 of the eye. It is by much the lesser part, and by as much the richer, by as much the decenter, and affordeth more variety of delightful objects than both the other. It containeth an equal number of parish 
Churches
 with the 
Town,
 and double the number with the 
Ʋniversity.
 For it hath in it thir∣teen 
Churches
 parochial: 
Viz.
 1. 
La Magda∣lene.
 2. 
St. Geniveue des Ardents.
 3. 
St. Chri∣stofer.
 4. 
St. Pierre aux boeafs.
 5. 
St. Marine.
 6. 
St. Landry.
 7. 
St. Symphoryan.
 8. 
St. Denis de la charite.
 9. 
St. Bartellemie.
 10. 
St. Pier∣re des Assis.
 11. 
St. Croix.
 12. 
St. Marcial.
 13. 
St. German le Vieux.
 Seated it is in the mid∣dle of the 
Seine,
 and in that place where stood the old 
Lutetia. Labienus cum quatuor legionibus
 (saith 
Julius Caesar
 7. 
Comment.) Lutetiam pro∣ficiscitur, id est oppidum Parisioram positum in medio flumin
s Sequanae,
 it is joyned to the 
Main Land,
 and the other parts of this 
French Metropolis
 by six



bridges,
 two of wood and four of stone. The stone 
bridges
 are, 1. 
Le petit pont, a bridge
 which certainly deserveth the name. 2. 
Le pont de Nostre-Dame,
 which is all covered with two goodly ranks of houses, and those adorned with portly and an∣tick imagery. 3. 
Le pont St. Michell,
 (so called, because it leadeth towards the gate of 
St. Michell
) hath also on each side a beautiful row of houses all of the same fashion so exactly, that but by their several doors you could scarce think them to be several houses. They are all new, as being built in the raign of this present King; whose Armes is engraven over every door of them. The fourth and last 
bridge
 is that which standeth at the end of the 
Isle
 next the 
Louure,
 and covereth the waters now united into one stream. It was begun to be built by 
Katherine of Medices the Queen Mo∣ther, Anno
 1578. her Son 
King Henry
 the third laying the first stone of it. The finishing of it was reserved to 
Henry
 the fourth, who as soon as he had settled his affairs in this 
Town,
 presently sent the workmen about it. In the end of it, where it joyneth to the 
Town,
 there is a 
Water house,
 which by artificial engines forceth up waters from a fresh spring rising from under the 
River,
 done at the charges of the 
King
 also. In the midst of it is the 
Statua
 of the said 
Henry
 the fourth all in brass, mounted upon his barbed Steed of the same mer∣tal. They are both of them very unproportiona∣ble to those bodies which they represent, and would shew them big enough were they placed upon the top of 
Nostre-dame Church:
 What min∣ded 
King Lewis
 to make his 
Father
 of so 
Gigantine



a stature I cannot tell. 
Alexander
 at his return from his 
Indian
 expedition scattered armours, swords, and horse-bits far bigger than were serviceable, to make future ages admire his greatness: Yet some have hence collected, that the acts he performed are not so great as is reported, because he strived to make them seem greater than they were. It may also chance to happen, that men in the times to come, comparing the atchievements of this 
King
 with his brasen portraiture, may think that the 
Historians
 have as much belyed his valour, as his 
Statuary
 hath his person.


A ponte ad pontifices.
 From the bridge proceed we to the 
Church
: the principal 
Church
 of 
Paris
 being that of 
Nostre-dame.
 A 
Church
 very un∣certain of its first 
Founder
; though some report him to be 
St. Savinian,
 of whom I can meet with no more than his name. But whoever laid the first foundation it much matters not, all the glory of the work being now cast on 
Philip Augustus,
 who pit∣tying the ruines of it, began to build it 
Anno
 1196. It is a very fair and awful building, adorned with a very beautiful front, and two towers of especial height. It is in length 174. paces, and sixty in breadth, and is said to be as many paces high, and that the two towers are seventy yards higher than the rest of his 
Church.
 At your first entrance on the right hand, is the 
Effigies
 of 
St. Christopher
 with our 
Saviour
 on his shoulders: A man the 
Le∣gend
 maketh him, as well as the 
Mason,
 of a 
Gigan∣tine
 stature, though of the two the 
Masons
 work∣manship is the more admirable; his being cut out all of one 
Fair stone,
 that of the 
Legendary
 being


patched up of many fabulous & ridiculous shreeds. It hath in it four ranks of 
pillars
 30 in a rank, and forty five little 
Chappels,
 or 
Mass-closets,
 built be∣tween the outermost range of 
pillars
 and the 
wals.
 This is the seat of the 
Arch-bishop
 of 
Paris,
 for such now he is. It was a 
Bishoprick
 onely till the year 1622. when 
Pope Gregory
 the fifteenth at the re∣quest of 
King Lewis
 raised it to a 
Metropolitanship.
 But beside the addition of 
Honour,
 I think the pre∣sent 
Incumbent
 hath got nothing either in prece∣dency or profit. He had before a necessary voyce in the the 
Courts
 of 
Parliament,
 and took place immediately after the 
Presidents,
 he doth no more now. Before he had the priority of all the 
Bishops,
 and now he is but the last of all the 
Arch-bishops.
 A preferment almost rather intellectual than real, and perhaps his successors may account it a punish∣ment. For besides that, the dignity is too un∣weildy for the 
Revenue,
 which is but 600. 
liures,
 or 600 
li English
 yearly; like enough it is, that some may come into that 
See
 of 
Caesars
 mind, who be∣ing in a small Village of the 
Alpes,
 thus delivered his ambition to his followers, 
Mallem esse hic pri∣mus, quam Romae secundus.
 The present possessour of this 
Chair
 is one 
Francis de Gondi,
 by birth a 
Florentine,
 one whom I have heard much famed for a 
Statesman,
 but little for a 
Scholar.
 But had he nothing in him, this one thing were sufficient to make him famous to posterity; that he was the first 
Arlh-bishop,
 and the last 
Bishop
 of the City of 
Paris.
 There is moreover in this 
Church
 a 
Dean,
 seven 
Dignities
 and fifty 
Canons.
 The 
Deans
 place is valued at 4000▪ 
liuree,
 t
 
he 
Dignities
 at 3006. and


the 
Canons
 at 2000. no great 
Intrado's,
 and yet un∣proportionable to the 
Arch-bishoprick.


At 
Diepe
 (as I have said) I observed the first 
Idolatry
 of the 
Papists
; here I noted their first Su∣perstitions, which were the needless use of 
holy Water
; and the burning of Lamps before the 
Al∣ter.
 The first is said to be the invention of 
Pope Alexander,
 the seventh 
Bishop
 of 
Rome,
 in their account after 
Peter.
 I dare not give so much credit unto 
Platina,
 as to beleeve it of this Anti∣quity, much less unto 
Bellarmine,
 who deriveth it from the 
Apostles
 themselves: in this 
Paradox
 he hath enemies enough at home; his own 
Do∣ctors
 being all for 
Alexander
: yet they also are not in the right. The principall foundation of their opinion is an 
Epistle Decretory
 of the said 
Alexander,
 which in it self carries its own con∣futation. The citations of 
Scriptures,
 on which this Superstition is thought to be grounded, are all taken out of the 
Vulgar Translation, Latine,
 at∣tributed to 
St. Hierome
; whereas neither was there in the time of 
Alexander
 any publick Translation of the 
Bible
 into 
Latine
; neither was 
St. Hie∣rome
 born within 300. years after him. 
Holy Water
 then is not of such a standing in the 
Church,
 as the 
Papists
 would perswade us; and as yet I have not met with any, that can justly inform me at what time the 
Church
 received it. Many cor∣ruptions they have among them, whereof neither they nor we can tell the beginning.


It consisteth of two Ingredients. 
Salt
 and 
Wa∣ter
; each of them severally consecrated, or ra∣ther exorcized; for so the words go, 
Exorcizo te


creatura salis
: and afterwards 
Exorcizo te creatu∣ra aquae &c.
 This done the Salt is sprinkled into the Water in form of a 
Crosse,
 the 
Priest
 in the mean time saying 
Commixtio salis et aquae pariter fiat in nomine Patris,
 &c. Being made it is put into a 
Cisterne
 standing at the entrance of their 
Churches
: the people at their coming in some∣times dipping their fingers into it, and making with it the sign of the 
Crosse
 in their foreheads, and sometimes being sprinkled with it by one of the 
Priests,
 who in course bestow that blessing upon them. 
Pope Alexander,
 who is said to be the Father of it, gave it the gift of purifying and sanctifying all which it washed: 
Ʋt Cunesti il∣la aspersi purificentur et sanctificentur,
 saith his 
Decretall.
 The 
Roman Ritual
 published and con∣firmed by 
Paulus
 the fifth, maketh it very sove∣raigne, 
ad abigendos Daemones, et Spiritus imun∣dos: Bellarmine
 maintaineth it a principall reme∣dy 
ad remissionem peccatorum Venialium:
 and saith, that this was the perpetual doctrine of the 
Church. August. Steuchus
 in his 
Commentary
 upon 
Num∣bers,
 leaveth out 
Venialia,
 and pronounceth it to be necessary; 
Ʋt ad eius aspersum debita nostra deleantur:
 So omnipotent is the 
Holy Water,
 that the blood of our 
Saviour Christ
 may be in a manner judged unnecessary. But it is not onely used in the 
Churches,
 the 
Rituale Romanum,
 (of which I spake but now) alloweth any of the faithfull to carry it away with them, in their ves∣sels, 
ad aspergendos aegros, domos, agros, vineas et alia, et ad habendum eam in cubiculis suis.
 To which purposes it cannot but think this 
Water
 ve∣ry serviceable.


The second Superstition which this 
Church
 shewed me, was the continual burning of a Lamp, before the 
Alter
: A Ceremony brought into the 
Churches
 (as it is likely) by 
Pope Innocent
 the third, 
Anno
 1215. at which time he ordained there should a 
Pix
 be bought to cover the bread, and that it should therein be reserved over the 
Al∣tar.
 This honour one of late times hath commu∣nicated also unto the 
Virgin Mary
; whose Image in the 
Church
 hath a 
Lanthorne ex diametro
 before it; and in that a 
Candle
 perpetually burning. The name of the 
Donor
 I could not learn: onely I met on the Screene close by the 
Ladies Image
 this 
Inscription: Vne Ave Mariae et un Pater nostre pour luy qui ce la donne:
 which was intended on him that bestowed the 
Lanthorne.
 No question but 
Pope Innocent
 when he ordained this 
V
stall Fire
 to be kept amongst the 
Christians
 thought he had done God good service, in reviving this old 
Commandement
 given to 
Moses
 in the twenty seventh of 
Exodus
 and the twentieth and twenty one verses. If so the World cannot clear him of 
Judaisme,
 therefore the best way were to say, he learned it of the 
Géntiles
; for we read that the 
Athenians
 had 
Lychnum inextineti luminis
 before the 
Statua
 of their 
Pallas:
 that the 
Persians
 also had 
ign
m pervigilem
 in their 
Temples:
 and so also had the 
Medians
 and 
Asirians:
 to omit the everlasting Fire of 
Vesta,
 and come neer home, we meet with it also here in 
Britaine. In Brita∣nia quoque
 (saith a good 
Philosopher) Minervae numen colitur: in cuius Templo perpetui ignes
 &c. Afterwards the flattery of the 
Court
 applying di∣vine


honours unto their 
Kings,
 this custom of ha∣ving fire continually burning before them, began to grow in fashion among the 
Romans: Herodian
 amongst other the ensigns of 
Imperial Majesty
 is sure not to omit this: and therefore telleth us, that notwithanding 
Commodus
 was fallen out with his sister 
Lucilla,
 he permitted her her antient seat in the 
Theater,
 
, and that fire should be carried before her. The present 
Romans
 succeed the former as in their possessions so in their follies. For calling the 
Sacrament
 their 
Lord God,
 and the 
Virgin
 their 
Lady
; they thought they should rob them of half their honour, should they not have their lamps and fires also burning before them.


As are their 
Lamps,
 so is their 
Holy water,
 meer∣ly heathenish, 
Siquidem in omnibus Sacris
 (as we read in the fourth book 
Genialium Dierum
) 
Sacer∣dos cum Diis immolat & rem divinan facit, corporis ablutione purgatur.
 The Author giveth a reason for it, and I would no 
Papist,
 no not 
Bellarmine
 himself to give a better. 
Aquae enim aspersione la∣bemtolli, & castimoniam praestare putant.
 Neither did the 
Preist
 onely use it himself, but he sprinkled the people also with it.

Spargere rore Levi, & ramo faelicis Olivae


Lustravit{que} viros.—


As 
Virgil
 in the 
Aeneads.

In which place two things are to be noted: First, 
ramus Olivae,
 now called 
Aspersorium,
 or the sprin∣kling rod, wherewith the water is sprinkled on the


standers by: and secondly, the term 
Lustrare
 meer∣ly 
heathenish,
 whence the 
Holy water
 of the 
Papists
 (no question) had the name of 
Aqua lustralis,
 by which they call it. That the 
Laicks
 also of the 
Gen∣tiles
 were cleansed of sin by this water, is evident by that of 
Homer,
 where he maketh 
Orestes,
 having killed his Mother and threupon grown mad, at once restored to his wits by washing in the water. Perhaps 
Pilate
 might allude to this custom, when having condemned our 
Saviour,
 he washed his hands in the midst of the 
Congregation.
 Hereunto also 
Ovid.




O faciles nimium, qui tristia crimina caedis


Fluminae â tolli posse putatis aquâ.






Too facil souls, which think such hainous matters


Can be abolish'd by the River-Waters.



Indeed in the word 
Fluminae â
 the 
Poet
 was some∣what out, the waters onely of the Sea serving for the expiation of any crime; the reason was, 
cum propter vim igneam magnopere purgationibus consen∣taneae putaretur.
 And for this cause questionless do the 
popish Priest
 use salt in the consecration of their 
holy water,
 that it might as near as was possi∣ble resemble the waters of the Sea in saltness, so willing are they in all circumstances to act the Heathens.


But I have kept you too long within the 
Church,
 it is now time to go up to the top, and survey the out-works of it. It hath (as we have already said) at the front two 
Towers
 of admirable beauty,


they are both of an equal height, and are each of them 377. steps in the ascent. From thence we could clearly see the whole circuit of 
Paris,
 and each several street of it, such as we have already described, of an orbicular form, and neatly com∣pacted. From hence we could see the whole val∣ley round about it, such as I have delineated alrea∣dy though not in such lively colours as it meriteth. An object it is so delicious and ravishing, that had the 
Devil
 taken 
King Henry
 the fourth and placed him on the top of this 
Temple,
 as he did our 
Savi∣our
 on that of 
Hierusalem,
 and said unto him, all this will I give thee, this alone had been enough to have made him fall down and worship him.


In One of those 
Towers
 there is a 
Ring of Bels,
 in the other two onely, but those for worth equal to all the rest. The bigger of the two is said to be greater than that of 
Roven
 so much talked of, as being eight yards and a span in compass, and two yards and an half in depth; the bowl also of the clapper being one yard and a quarter round. Of a great weight it must needs be; and therefore (
Multorum manibus grande levatur onus
) there are no less than four main ropes besides their seve∣ral tayl ropes to ring it. By reason of the trouble it is never rung but in time of thunders, and these no mean ones neither. Lesser Bels will serve the lesser tempests; this is onely used in the horrider claps, and such as threaten a dissolution of 
Nature.
 But how well, as well this, as the smallest discharge that office, experience would tell us, were we void of reason; yet so much do the people affiance


themselves to this conceit of the power of them, that they suppose it inherent to them continually, after the 
Bishop
 hath baptized them, which is done in this manner. The 
Bell
 being so hanged, that it may be washed within and without, in cometh the 
Bishop
 in his 
Episcopal
 robes, attended by one of his 
Deacons,
 and sitting by the 
Bell
 in his chair, saith with a loud voice the 50, 53, 56, 66, 69, 85, and 129. 
Psalmes,
 or some of them; then doth he ex∣orcize severally the 
Salt
 and the 
Water,
 and having conjured those ingredients into an 
holy water,
 he washeth with it the 
Bell,
 both on the inside and the outside; wiping it dry with a linnen cloath, he readeth the 145, 146, 147, 148, 149, 150, 
Psalms
; he draweth a 
cross
 on it with his right thumb dipped in hallowed oyl (
chrysome
 they call it) and then prayeth over it. His prayer finished, he wipeth out the 
cross,
 and having said over it the 48. 
Psalm,
 he draweth on it with the same oyle seven other 
crosses,
 saying, 
Sanctificetur & consecre∣tur Domine Campana ista, in nomine,
 &c. After another prayer, the 
Bishop
 taketh another 
Censer,
 and putting into it Myrrh and Frankincense, set∣teth it on fire, and putteth it under the 
Bell,
 that it may all receive sume of it; this done, the 76. 
Psalm
 read, & some other prayers repeated, the 
Bell
 hath received his whole and intire 
Baptisme,
 and these vertues following, 
viz. Ʋt per illius tactam procul pellantur omnes insidiae mimici, fragor grandinum, procella turbinum, impetus tempestatum,
 &c. for so one of the 
Prayers
 reckoneth them: prescribed in the 
Roman Pontifical
 authorized by 
Clement
 8th. A stranqe piece of Religion, that a 
Bell
 should be



baptized,
 and so much the stranger, in that those in∣animate bodies can be received into the 
Church
 by no other ministery than that of the 
Bishop,
 the true Sacrament being permitted to every 
Hedge-Priest.


Not farre from the West-gate of the 
Church
 of 
Nostre-dame
 is the 
Hosteldein,
 or 
le grand Hospital de Paris,
 first founded by 
King Lewis, Anno
 1258. It hath been since beautified and inlarged, 
Anno
 1535. by Mr. 
Anthony Prat Chancellor
 of 
France,
 who augmented the number of the hospitallers, and gave fair revenues for the maintaining of 
Sur∣geons, Apothecaries,
 and religious men amongst them. Since that time the 
Provost
 and 
Eschevins
 of 
Paris
 have been especial Benefactors unto it. At your first entrance into it you come into their 
Chappel,
 small but handsome and well furnished: After you pass into a large gallery having four ranks of beds, two close to the wals, and two in the middle. The beds are all sutable the one to the other; their vallance, curtains and rugs being all yellow. At the further end of this a door open∣ed into another chamber dedicated onely to sick 
women
; and within them another room, wherein 
women
 with child are lightned of their burden, and their children kept till seven years of age at the charge of the 
Hospital.
 At the middle of the first gallery on the left hand, were other four ranks of beds, little differing from the rest, but that their furniture was blew, and in them there was no place for any, but such as were some way wounded, and belonged properly to the 
Chirurgion.
 There are numbred in the whole 
Hospital
 no less than seven


hundred beds (besides those of attendants, 
Priests, Apothecaries,
 &c.) and in every bed two persons. One would imagine, that in such a variety of wounds and diseases, a walk into it, and a view of it might savour more of curiosity than discretion. But indeed it is nothing less: for besides that, no person of an infectious disease it admitted into it, which maketh much for the safety of such as view it, all things are kept there so cleanly and orderly, that it is sweeter walking there, than in the best street of 
Paris,
 none excepted.


Next unto those succeeded 
la Saincte Chapelle
 scituate in the middle of the 
Palais
: a 
Chappel
 fa∣mous for its form, but more for its 
Reliques.
 It was founded by 
Lewis
 the ninth, vulgarly called 
St. Lewis, Anno
 1248. and is divided into two parts, the 
Ʋpper
 and the 
Lower:
 the 
Lower
 serving for the keeping of the 
Reliques,
 and the 
Ʋpper
 for celebrating of the 
Mass.
 It is a comely spruce Edifice without, but farre more curious within: the glass of it for the excellency of painting, and the 
Organs
 for the richness and elaborate work∣manship of the Case, not giving way to any in 
Eu∣rope.
 I could not learn the number of 
Chanoins
 which are maintained in it, though I heard they were places of three hundred 
Crowns
 revenue. As for their 
Treasurer, le Threasurier,
 as they call their 
Governor,
 he hath granted him by especial privi∣ledge, the licence to wear all the 
Episcopal
 habits, except the 
Crosier-staffe,
 and to bear himself as a 
Bishop
 within the liberties of his 
Chappel.
 In the top of the upper 
Chappel
 (it is built almost in the form of a 
Synagogue
) there hangeth the true pro∣portion


(as they say) of the 
Crown of Thorns
: but of this more when we have gone over the 
Re∣liques.
 I was there divers times to have seen them, but it seemeth they were not visible to a 
Hugonots
 eyes; though me thinketh they might have consi∣dered, that my money was 
Catholick.
 They are kept, as I said, in the lower 
Chappel,
 and are thus marshalled in a Table hanging in the upper. Know then that you may beleive that they can shew you the 
Crown
 of 
Thornes,
 the bloud which ran from our 
Saviours
 breast, his swadling 
Clouts,
 and a great part of the 
Cross
 (they also of 
Nostre-dame
 have some of it,) the chain by which the 
Jews
 bound him, no small peice of the stone of the 
Sepulchre, Sanctam taelam tabulae insertam,
 which I know not how to 
English
; some of the 
Virgins milk,
 (for I would not have those of 
St. Denis
 think the 
Vir∣gin
 gave milk to none other but to them) the head of the 
Launce
 which peirced our 
Saviour:
 the 
Purple Robe
: the 
Sponge,
 a peice of his 
Shrowd
: the 
Napkin
 wherewith he was girt when he washed his Disciples feet: the 
Rod
 of 
Moses,
 the head of 
St. Blase, St. Clement,
 and 
St. Simeon,
 and part of the head of 
John Baptist.
 Immediately under this recital of these 
Reliques
 (and venerable ones I durst say they were, could I be perswaded there were no imposture in them) there are set down a 
Prayer
 and an 
Antheme,
 both in the same Table as followeth.







ORATIO. Quaesumus Omnipotens Deus, ut qui sacra sanctis∣simae redemptionis nostrae insignia temporaliter


veneramur, per haec indesinenter munite aeterni∣tatis gloriam consequamur: dominum nostrum, &c.


De sacrosanctis Reliquiis Antiphonae


Christo plebs debita, tot Christi donis praedita


Jucunderis hodie: Tota sis devota:


Erumpens in Jubilum depone mentes nubilum


Tempus est Laetitiae. Cura sit summota.


Ecce Crux & Lancea, Ferrum, Corona spine


Arma Regis gloriae tibi offerantur,


Omnes terrae populi laudent actorem seculi


Per quem tantis gratiae signis offererantur. 
Amen.







Pretty 
divinity
 if one had time to examine it. These 
Reliques,
 as the Table enformeth us, were given unto 
St. Lewis, Anno
 1247. By 
Baldwin
 the second, the last King of the 
Latines
 in 
Constantino∣ple,
 to which place the 
Christians
 of 
Palaestine
 had brought them, during the time that those parts were harrowed by the 
Turks and Saracens.
 Certainly were they the same, which they are said to be, I see no harm in it if we should honour them. The very reverence due to antiquity and a silver head could not but extort some acknowledgement of respect even from a heathen. It was therefore commend∣ably done by 
Pope Leo,
 having received a parcel of the 
Cross
 from the 
Bishop
 of 
Hierusalem,
 that he en∣tertained it with respect. 
Particulam Dominicae Crucis
 (saith he in his 72. 
Epislte) cum eulogiis dilectionis tuae Veneranter accepi.
 To adore and worship that, or any other 
Relique
 whatsoever, with prayers and 
Anthems,
 as the 
Papists
 you see


do, never came within the minds of the 
Ancients,
 and therefore 
St. Ambrose
 calleth it 
Gentilis error, & vanitas impiorum.
 This was also 
St. Hierom
's religion, as himself testifieth in his 
Epistle
 to 
Ru∣parius. Nos
 (faith he) 
non dico martyrum reli∣quias, sed ne Solem quidem & Lunam, non Angelos,
 &c. 
colimus & adoramus.
 Thus were those two 
Fathers
 minded towards such 
Reliques,
 as were known to be no others than what they seem∣ed: Before too many 
Centuries
 of years had con∣sumed the true ones, and the imposture of the 
Priests
 had brought in the false. Had they lived in our times, and seen the supposed 
Reliques
 of the 
Saints
 not honoured onely, but adored and wor∣shipped by the blind and infatuated people, what would they have said, or rather what would they not have said: Questionless, the least they could do, were to take up the complaint of 
Vigilantius
 (the 
Papists
 reckon him for an 
Heretick
) saying, 
Quid necesse est tanto honore, non solum honorare sed etiam ador are, illud nescio quid, quod in vasculo trans∣ferendo colis.


Presently without the 
Chappel
 is the 
Burse la Gallerie des Merchands,
 a rank of shops in shew, but not in substance, like to those in the 
Exchange
 at 
London:
 It reacheth from the 
Chappel
 unto the great 
Hall of Parliament,
 and is the common through-fare between them. On the bottom of the stairs, and round about the several houses con∣secrated to the execution of justice, are sundry shops of the same nature, meanly furnished, if com∣pared with ours, yet I perswade my self the richest of this kind in 
Paris.


I should now go and take a view of the 
Parlia∣ment House,
 but I will step a little out of the way to see the place 
Daulphin,
 and the little 
Chastelet.
 This last serveth now onely as the 
Gaole
 or common prison belonging to the 
Court
 of the 
Provost
 of the 
Merchants,
 and it deserveth no other employment. It is seated at the end of the bridge called 
Petit pont,
 and was built by 
Hugh Aubriot,
 once 
Provost
 of the 
Town,
 to repress the fury and insolencies of the 
Scholars,
 whose rudeness and misdemeanours can no way be better bridled. 
Omnes eos qui no∣men ipsum Academiae, vel serio, vel ioco nominassent▪ haereticos pronunciavit
 (saith 
Platina
 of 
Pope Paul
 the second) I will say it of this wilderness; that whosoever will account it as an 
Academy
 is an 
He∣retick
 to 
Learning
 and 
Civility.
 The place 
Daul∣phin
 is a beautiful heap of building, scituate nigh unto the new bridge. It was built at the encou∣ragement of 
Henry
 the fourth, and entituled ac∣cording to the title of his Son. The houses are all of brick, high built, uniform, and indeed such as deserve, and would exact a longer description, were not the 
Parliament
 now ready to sit, and my self summoned to make my appearance.






CHAP. VIII.




The Parliament of 
France
 when began: Of whom it consisted: The Dignity and esteem of it abroad, made sedentary at 
Paris,
 appro∣priated


to the long Robe: The 
Palais
 by whom built and converted to seats of Ju∣stice: The seven Chambers of Parliament the great Chamber; the number and dignity of the Presidents. The Duke of 
Biron
 a∣fraid of them. The Kings seat in it. The sitting of the 
Grandsigneur
 in the 
Divano.
 The authority of the Court in causes of all kinds, and over the affairs of the King. This Court the main pillar of the liberty of 
France. La Tournelle
 and the Judges of it. The five Chambers of Enquests seve∣rally instituted, and by whom. In what causes it is decisive. The form of admit∣ting Advocates into the Court of Parlia∣ment. The Chancellor of 
France
 and his authority. The two Courts of Requests and Masters of them. The vain envy of the 
English
 Clergy against the Lawyers.




THe 
Court of Parliament
 was at the first insti∣tuted by 
Charles Marcell
 Grandfather to 
Charlemaine,
 at such time as he was 
Maior
 of the 
Palace
 unto the lazy and retchless 
Kings
 of 
France.
 In the beginning of the 
French Empire
 their 
King
 did justice to the people in person. Afterwards banishing themselves from all the affairs of State, that burden was cast upon the shoulders of their 
Maires.
 An Office much of the nature with the 
Praefesti Praetorio
 in the 
Roman Empire.
 When this


Office was bestowed upon the said 
Charles Mar∣cell,
 he, partly weary of the trouble, partly intent about a business of a higher nature, which was the estating of the 
Crown
 in his own Posterity, but principally to indear himself to the Common peo∣ple, ordained the 
Court
 of 
Parliament, Anno
 720. It consisted in the beginning of twelve 
Peers,
 the 
Prelates
 and 
Noblemen
 of the best fashion, toge∣ther with some of the principallest of the 
Kings Houshold.
 Other 
Courts
 are called the 
Parliament
 with the addition of place, as of 
Paris,
 at 
Roven,
 &c. This onely 
, the 
Parliament.
 It handled as well causes of 
State,
 as those of private persons. For hither did the 
Embassadours
 of mighty 
Princes
 re∣pair to have their audience and dispatch; and hi∣ther were the 
Articles
 (agreed upon in the 
Nati∣onal Synods
 of 
France
) sent to be confirmed and verified: Here did the 
Subjects
 tender in their ho∣mages and oaths of fidelity to the 
King
: And here were the 
Appeals
 heard of all such as had complained against 
Comtes,
 at that time the Go∣vernors and Judges in their several 
Counties.
 Be∣ing furnished thus with the prime and choisest 
Nobles
 of the 
Land,
 it grew into great estimation abroad in the world, insomuch that the 
Kings
 of 
Sicily, Cyprus, Scotland, Bohemia, Portugal
 and 
Navarre,
 have thought it no disparagement unto them to sit in it. And which is more, when 
Frede∣rick
 the second had spent so much time in quarrels with 
Pope Innocent
 the fourth, he submitted himself and the rightness of his cause to be examined by this 
Noble Court of Parliament.


At the first institution of this 
Court
 it had no settled place of residence, being sometimes kept at 
Tholoza,
 sometimes at 
Aix la Chapelle,
 sometimes in other places, according as the 
Kings
 pleasure and the case of the people did require. During the time of its peregrination it was called 
Ambulatorie,
 following for the most part the 
Kings Court,
 as the lower 
Sphears
 do the motin of the 
Primum Mobile.
 But 
Philip le Belle
 (he began his raign 
An.
 1280.) being to take a journey into 
Flanders,
 and to stay there a long space of time, for the settling of his affairs in that Countrey, took order that his 
Court of Parliament
 should stay behind him at 
Paris,
 where ever since it hath continued. Now began it to be called 
Sedentary,
 or settled, and also 
peu a pen
 by little and little to loose much of its lu∣stre: For the Cheif 
Princes
 and 
Nobles
 of the 
Kings
 retinue, not able to live out of the air of the 
Court,
 withdrew themselves from the troubles of it, by which means it came at last to be appropriated to those of the long Robe, as they term them, both 
Bishops
 and 
Lawyers.
 In the year 1463. the 
Pre∣lates
 also were removed by the 
Command
 of 
Lewis
 the eleventh, an utter enemy to the great ones of his 
Kingdom,
 onely the 
Bishop
 of 
Paris
 and the 
Ab∣bot
 of 
St. Denis
 being permitted their place in it. Since which time the 
Professors
 of the 
Civil Law
 have had all the swaying in it, 
& cedeunt arma togae,
 as 
Tully.
 The place in which this 
Sedentary Court of Parliament
 is now kept is called the 
Pala
e,
 be∣ing built by 
Philip le Belle,
 and intended to be his 
Mansion
 or dwelling house. He began it in the first year of his reign, 
Viz. Anno
 1286. and after∣wards


assigned a part of it to his 
Judges
 of the 
Par∣liament,
 it being not totally and absolutely quitted unto them till the dayes of 
King Luwis
 the tenth. In this the 
French
 Subjects are beholding to the 
English
; by whose good example they got the ease of a 
Sedentary Court
: Our 
Law Courts
 also removing with the 
King,
 till the year 1224. when by a 
Statute
 in the 
Magna Charta,
 it was appoint∣ed to be fixt, and a part of the 
Kings Pallace
 in 
Westminster
 allotted for that purpose.


Within the 
Virge
 of this 
Pallace
 are contained the seven Chambers the 
Parliament.
 That called 
le grand Chambre
: five Chambers of Inquisition, or 
des Enquests,
 and one other called 
la Tournelle.
 There are moreover the Chambers, 
des aides, des accompts, de l'ediect, des Monnoyes,
 and one cal∣led 
la Chambre Royal:
 of all which we shall have occasion to speak in their proper places: these not concerning the common Government of the People, but onely the 
Kings Revenues.
 Of these seven 
Chambers
 of 
Parliaments, le grand Chambre
 is most famous: and at the building of this House by 
Philip le belle,
 was intended for the 
Kings
 bed. It is no such beautiful place as the 
French
 make it; that at 
Roven
 being farre beyond it: although indeed it much excells the fairest room of Justice in 
Westminster.
 So that it standeth in a middle rank between them; and almost in the same pro∣portion as 
Virgil,
 between 
Homer
 and 
Ovid.


Quantum Virgilius magno concessit Homero,


Tantum ego Virgilio Naso Poeta m
o.


It consisteth of seven 
Presidents, Councellers,
 the 
Kings Atturney,
 and as many 
Advocates,
 and 
Pro∣ctors,
 as the 
Court
 will please to give admission to. The 
Advocates
 have no settled studies with∣in the 
Pallace,
 but at the 
Barre
: but the 
Procure∣urs
 or 
Atturneys
 have their several Pewes in a great Hall, which is without this 
Grand Chambre
 in such manner as I have before described at 
Ro∣ven.
 A large building it is faire and high roofed, not long since ruined by casualty of fire, and not yet fully finished. The names of the 
Presi∣dents
 are, 1. 
Mr. Verdun,
 the first 
President,
 or by way of excellencie 
le President,
 being the sec
nd man of the long Robe in 
France.
 2. 
Mr. Sequer
 lately dead, and likely to have his Son succeed him as well in his Office, as his 
Lands.
 3. 
Mr. Lei∣ger.
 4. 
Mr.Dosammoi.
 5. 
Mr. Sevin.
 6. 
Mr. Baillure.
 and 7. 
Mr. Maisme.
 None of these, neither 
Presidents
 nor 
Councellers
 can goe out of 
Paris
 when the 
Lawes
 are open, without leave of the 
Court.
 It was ordained so by 
Lewis
 the twelfth. 
Anno
 1499. and that with good judgement; Sentences being given with greater awe, and business managed with greater 
Majesty
 when the 
Bench
 is full: and it seemeth indeed that they carry with them a great terrour. For the 
Duke
 of 
Biron,
 a man of as uncontrolled a spirit, as any in 
France,
 being called to answer for himself in this 
Court,
 protested that those scar∣let Robes did more amaze him, than all the red 
Cassocks
 of 
Spain.


At the left hand of this 
Grand Chambre,
 or gol∣den Chamber as they call it, is a 
Throne
 or Seate



Royall,
 reserved for the 
King,
 when he shall please to come, and see the administration of Ju∣stice amongst his people. At common times it is naked and plain, but when the 
King
 is expected, it is clothed with blew purple Velvet, semied with 
Flowers de lys.
 On each side of it are two forms, or benches, where the 
Peers
 of both habits both 
Ecclesiastcal
 and 
Secular
 use to fit, and accompa∣ny the 
King,
 but this is little to the ease or bene∣fit of the Subject; and as little available to try the integrity of the 
Judges:
 his presence being alwayes fore-known, and so they accordingly pr
pared. Farre better then is it in the 
Court
 of the 
Grand Signeur,
 where the 
Divano
 or 
Counsell
 of the 
Turkish
 Affaires holden by the 
Bassa's
 is hard by his bed Chamber which looketh into it. The window which giveth him this enterveiwe is perpetually hidden with a curtaine on that side of the partition which is towards the 
Divano,
 so that the 
Bassa's
 and other Judges cannot at any time tell, that the 
Emperour
 is not listening to their Sentences. An action in which nothing is 
Turkish
 or 
Mahometan.


The authority of this 
Court
 extendeth it self to all Causes, within the Jurisdiction of it, not be∣ing meerly 
Ecclesiastical.
 It is a Law unto it self, following no Rule written in their Sentences; but judging according to equity and conscience. In matters criminal of greater consequence, the pro∣cess is here immediately examined, without any preparation of it from the inferiour 
Courts,
 as at the araignment of the 
Duke
 of 
Biron
; and divers times also in matter personall. But their power


is most eminent in disposing the affaires of 
State
 and of the 
Kingdome
: for such prerogatives have the 
French Kings
 given hereunto, that they can neither denounce Warre, nor conclude Peace, without the consent (a formall one at the least) of this 
Chamber.
 An 
Alieniation
 of the least of the Lands of the Crown, is not any whit valued, unless confirmed by this 
Court
; neither are his 
Edicts
 in force till they are here verified: nor his 
Letters Pattents
 for the creating of a 
Peere,
 till they are here allowed of. Most of these I confess, are little more than matters of form, the 
Kings
 power and pleasure being become boundless: yet sufficient to shew the body of Authority which they once had, and the shaddow of it which they still keep: yet of late they have got into their dis∣posing one priviledge belonging formerly to the 
Conventus Ordinum,
 or the Assembly of the three 
Estates
; which is the conferring of the 
Regency,
 or protection of their 
Kings
 during their minori∣ty. That the Assembly of the three 
Estates
 for∣merly had this priviledge is evident by their sto∣ries. Thus we find them to have made 
Queene Blanche Regent
 of the 
Realm
 during the non-age of her Son 
St. Lewiis, Anno
 1227. that they declared 
Phillip le Valois
 successor to the 
Crowne,
 in case that the widdow of 
Charles de belle,
 was not delivered of a Son, 
Anno
 1328. That they made 
Charles
 the 
Daulphin Regent
 of 
France
 du∣ring the imprisonment of 
King John
 his Father, 
Anno
 1357. As also 
Phillip
 of 
Burgony,
 during the Lunary 
Charles
 the sixth, 
Anno
 1394 with divers others. On the other side, we have a


late example of the power of the 
Parliament
 of 
Paris
 in this very case; for the same day that 
Henry
 the fourth was slain by 
Raviliae,
 the 
Par∣liament
 met, and after a short consultation, de∣clared 
Mary de Medices,
 Mother to the 
King Re∣gent
 in 
France,
 for the Government of the State, (during the minority of her Son) with all power and authority: such are the words of the 
Instru∣ment,
 dated the 14. of 
May,
 1610.


It cannot be said but this 
Court
 deserveth not onely this, but any other indulgence whereof any one member of the Common-wealth is capable. So watchful are they over the health of the 
State,
 and so tenderly do they take the least danger threatned to the liberties of that 
Kingdome,
 that they may not unjustly be called 
Patres Patriae.
 In the year 1614. they seazed upon a discourse writ∣ten by 
Suarez
 a 
Jesuite
 entitled 
Adversus Angli∣canae sectae errores,
 wherein the 
Popes
 temporal power over 
Kings
 and 
Princes
 is averred: which they sentenced to be burnt in the 
Pallace
 yard by the publick Hangman. The yeare before they in∣flicted the same punishment upon a vain and blas∣plemous discourse penned by 
Gasper Niopins,
 a fellow of a most desperate brain, and a very in∣cendiary. Neither hath 
Bellarmine
 himself that great 
Atlas
 of the 
Roman Church
 escaped much better; for writing a Book concerning the tem∣poral power of his 
Holiness,
 it had the ill luck to come into 
Paris,
 where the 
Parliament
 finding it to thwart the Liberty and Royalty of the 
King,
 and Country, gave it over to the Hangman; and he to the Fire. Thus it is evident, that the titles


which the 
French
 writers gave it, as the true 
Tem∣ple
 of the 
French justice,
 the 
Buttresse
 of 
Equity,
 the 
Guardian
 of the 
Rights
 of 
France,
 and the like, are abundantly deserved of it.


The next 
Chamber
 in esteem is the 
Tournelle,
 which handleth all matters Criminal. It is so called from 
Tourner,
 which signifieth to change or alter; because the 
Judges
 of the other several Chambers give sentence in this, according to their several turnes. The reason of which Insti∣tution is said to be, least a continual custome of condemning should make the 
Judges
 less merciful, and more prodigall of blood. An order full of health and providence; it was instituted by the above named 
Phillip le Belle,
 at the same time when he made the 
Parliament
 sedentary at 
Paris
; and besides its particular and original employ∣ment, it receiveth Appeals from, and redresseth the errours of the 
Provost
 of 
Paris.
 The other five Chambers are called 
des Enquests,
 or 
Camerae Inquasitionum:
 the first and ancientest of them, was erected also by 
Phillip le Belle,
 and afterwards divided into two by 
Charles
 the seventh. After∣wards of 
Processes
 being greater than could be dis∣patched in these 
Courts,
 there was added a third. 
Francis
 the first established the fourth, for the better raising of a sum of money which then he wanted: every one of the new 
Counsellers
 paying right dearly for his place. The fifth and last was founded in the year 1568. In each of these seve∣rall Chambers, there be two 
Presidents,
 and twen∣ty 
Counsellers,
 beside 
Advocates
 and 
Proctors, ad placitum.
 In the 
Tournelle
 which is the aggrega∣tion


of all the other 
Courts,
 there are supposed to be no fewer than two hundred 
Officers
 of all sorts, which is no great number considering the many Causes there handled. In the 
Tournelle,
 the 
Iud∣ges
 sit on matters of life and death; in the Cham∣bers of 
Enquests
 they examine onely civil Affairs, of estate, title, debts, and the like. The 
Plea∣ders
 in these 
Courts
 are called 
Advocates
; and must be at the least 
Licentiats
 in the study of the 
Law.
 At the 
Parliaments
 of 
Tholoza
 and 
Bur∣deaux,
 they admit of none but 
Doctors
: now the form of admitting them is this. In an open and frequent 
Court,
 one of the agedest of the 
Long Robe,
 presenteth the party which desireth admis∣sion, to the 
Kings Atturney General,
 saying with a loud voice, 
Paisse a Cour recevoir N. N. Licen∣cie
 (or 
Docteur) en droict civil, a l'office d' Advo∣cate.
 This said; the 
Kings Atturney
 biddeth him hold up his hand, and saith to him in 
Latine, Tu jurabis observare omnes Reges Consuetudines,
 he answereth 
Iuro,
 and departeth. At the Cham∣ber door of the 
Court,
 whereof he is now sworne an 
Advocate,
 he payeth two 
Crownes,
 which is forthwith put into the common Treasury, ap∣pointed for the relief of the distressed-Widdows, of ruined 
Advocates
 and 
Proctors: Hanc veniam pe∣timusque damusque.
 It may be their own cases, and therefore it is paid willingly. The highest preferment of which these 
Advocates
 are capable, is that of 
Chauncellor
: an Office of great power and profit. The present 
Chauncellor
 is named 
Mr. d' Allegre,
 by birth of 
Chartres,
 he hath no settled 
Court
 wherein to exercise his authority; but hath


in all the 
Courts
 of 
France,
 the supream place whensoever he will vouchsafe to visit them. He is also 
President
 of the 
Councill
 of 
Estate
 by his place, and on him dependeth the making of good and sacred 
Lawes,
 the administration of 
Justice,
 the reformation of superfluous, and abroga∣tion of unprofitable 
Edicts,
 &c. He hath the keeping of the 
Kings
 geeat 
Seal,
 and by vertue of that, either passeth or putteth back such 
Letters Pattents,
 and 
Writs
 as are exhibited to him. He hath under him immediately for the better dis∣patch of his Affairs, four 
Masters
 of the 
Requests,
 and their 
Courts.
 Their Office and manner of proceeding is the same, which they also use in 
England
: in the persons there is thus much diffe∣rence, that in 
Franee
 two of them must be per∣petually of the 
Clergy.
 One of their 
Courts
 is ve∣ry ancient, and hath in it two 
Presidents.
 which are two of the 
Masters,
 and fourteen 
Counsellers.
 The other is of a later erection; as being founded 
Anno
 1580. and in that the two other of the 
Ma∣sters,
 and eight 
Councellers
 give sentence.


Thus have I taken a veiw of the several 
Cham∣bers
 of the 
Parliament
 of 
Paris,
 and of their parti∣cular Jurisdictions, as far as my information could conduct me. One thing I noted further, and in my mind the fairest ornament of the 
Pallace,
 which is the neatness and decency of the 
Law∣yers
 in their apparrel; for besides the fashion of their habit, which is I assure you exceeding plea∣sant, and comely; themselves by their own care and love to handsomeness, adde great lustre to their garments, and more to their persons. Rich∣ly


drest they are and well may be so, as being the a∣blest & most powerfull men under the 
Princes
 & 
la Noblesse
 in all the 
Country.
 An happiness (as I conjecture) rather of the calling than of the men. It hath been the fate and destiny of the 
Law,
 to strengthen & enable its professors beyond any other any Art or Science: the 
Pleaders
 in all Common∣wealths both for sway amongst the people, and vague amongst the Military men, having alwaies had the preheminence. Of this rank were 
Peri∣cles, Phochion, Alcibiades,
 and 
Demosthenes,
 a∣mongst the 
Athenians, Antonius, Mar. Cato, Caesar,
 and 
Tullie
 amongst the 
Romans
: men e∣qually famous for Oratory and the Sword; yet this I can confidently say, that the several States above mentioned, were more indebted unto 
Tul∣lie
 and 
Demosthenes,
 being both meer 
Gown men,
 than to the best of their Captaines: the one free∣ing 
Athens
 from the Armies of 
Macedon
; the other delivering 
Rome
 from the conspiracy of 
Ca∣tiline. O fortunatum natam me Consule Romam.
 It is not then the fate of 
France
 only, nor of 
England,
 to see so much power in the hand of the 
Lawyers
; and the case being general, me thinks the envy should be the less; and less it is indeed with them than with us. The 
English Clergy
 though otherwise the most accomplisht in the World, in this folly deserveth no Apologie, being so strangely ill affected to the Pleaders of this Nation, that I fear it may be said of some of them, 
Quod invidiam non ad causam sed personam, et ad valantatem dirigant.
 A weakness not more unworthy of them, than prejudicial to them, for


fostering between both Gownes such an unneces∣sary emulation, they do but exasperate that pow∣er, which they cannot controle, and betray them∣selves to much envy and discontentedness. A dis∣ease whose care is more in my wishes, than in my hopes.






CHAP. IX.




The 
Kings
 Pallace of the Louure, by whom built; the unsutableness of it. The fine Gal∣lery of the 
Queene
 Mother. The long Gal∣lery of 
Henry
 the fourth; his magnanimous intent to have built it into a Quadrangle. 
Henry
 the fourth a great builder; his infi∣nite project upon the Mediterranean, and the Ocean. Lasalle des Antiques. The 
French
 not studious of Antiquities. 
Bur∣bon
 House. The Tuilleries, 
&c.




WE have discharged the 
King
 of one 
Pallace,
 and must follow him to the other, where we shall find his residence. It is seated in the west side of the Town or 
Ville
 of 
Paris,
 hard by 
Porte neufue,
 and also by the new Bridge. An House of great fame, and which the 
Kings
 of 
France
 have long kept their 
Courts
 in. It was first built by 
Phillip Augustus, anno
 1214. and by him intended for a Castle, it then serving to imprison the more 
potent of the Noblesse,
 and to


lay up the 
Kings
 Treasury; for that cause it was well moated and strengthened with walls and draw Bridges, very serviceable in those times. It had the name of 
Louure quasi L'oeuure,
 or the work: the Building by way of excellencie. An 
Etymologie
 which draweth nigher to the ear than the understanding, or the eye. And yet the 
French
 writers would make it a miracle: 
Du Chesne
 cal∣leth it 
superbe bastiment qui n' a son esgal en toute la Christiente
: and you shall hear it called in ano∣ther place, 
Bastiment qui passe muiourd huy en ex∣cellenee et en grandeur, tous les autres.
 Brave 
E∣ligies,
 if all were Gold that glistered. It hath given up now its charge of money, and great pri∣soners to the 
Bastile
; and at this time serveth on∣ly to imprison the 
Court.
 In my life I never saw any thing more abused by a good report, or that more belyeth the rumours that go of it. The ordinary talk of vulgar travellers, and the bigg words of the 
French
 had made me expect at the least some prodigie of Architecture, some such Majestical house as the 
Sunne Don Phoebus
 is said to have dwelt in by 
Ovid.


Regia solis erat sublimibus alta columnis,


Clara micante auro, flammasque imitante pyropo:


Cuius ebur nitidum, 
&c.


Indeed I thought no fiction in 
Poetry
 had been able to have parralell'd it; and made no doubt but it would have put me into such a passion▪ as to have cryed out with the young Gallant in the 
Comidie,
 when he saw his 
Sweet heart; Hei mi∣hi


qualis erat? talis erat qualem nunquem ego vidi.
 But I was much deceived in that hope, and could find nothing in it to admire, much less to envy. The Fable of the 
Mountaine
 which was with child, and brought forth a Mouse, is question∣less a Fable. This House, and the large fame it hath in the world is the 
Morall
 of it. Never was there an House more unsuitable to it self in the particular examination of parts, nor more unsu∣table to the Character and esteem of it in the ge∣neral survey of the whole.


You enter into it over two 
Draw-bridges
; and thorough three 
Gates,
 ruinous enough and abun∣dantly unsightly. In the 
Quadrangle
 you meet with three several fashions of buildings, of three several ages; and they so unhappily joyned one to the other, that one would half beleeve they were clapped together by an 
Earthquake.
 The 
South
 and 
West
 parts of it are new, and indeed 
Prince like,
 being the work of 
Francis
 the first, and his Son 
Henry
: had it been all cast into the same mould, I perswade my self, that it would be very gratious and lovely. The other two are of an∣cient work and so contemptible, that they dis∣grace the rest: and of these I suppose the one to be at the least a hundred years older than his part∣ner: such is it without. As for the inside it is farre more graceful, and would be pleasing at the entrance, were the 
Gaurd Chamber
 reformed. Some 
Hugonot Architect
 which were not in love with the errours of Antiquity, might make a pret∣ty room of it: a 
Catholick Carpenter
 would never get credit by it; for whereas the provident thrift


of our fore fathers intended it (for the House would else be too narrow for the 
Kings
 retinue) both for a room of safety and of pleasure, both for 
Bellmen
 and 
Dancers
; and for that cause made up some six ranks of seats on each side. That spa∣ringness in the more curious eyes of this time is little 
King like.
 Country wenches might with an indifferent stomack abuse a Galliard in it, or it might perhaps serve, with a Stage at one end, to entertain the 
Parisiens
 at a Play; or with a par∣tition in the middle, it might be divided into pretty plausible 
Cockpits.
 But to be employed in the nature it is now, either to solace the 
King
 and 
Lords
 in a dance, or to give any forraign 
Am∣bassadour
 his welcome in a 
Masque,
 is little su∣table with the majesty of a 
King
 of 
France.
 The 
Chambers
 of it are well built, but ill furnished; the hangings of them being somewhat below a meanness: and yet of these here is no small scarcity, for as it is said of the 
Gymnosophists
 of 
India,
 that 
Ʋnadomus et mansioni sufficit et sepulturae:
 so may we of this 
Prince.
 The same Chamber serveth for to Iodge him, feed him, & also to confer & discourse with his 
Nobility.
 But like enough it is that this want may proceed from the several 
Courts
 of the 
King,
 the 
Monsieur,
 the 
Queene Mother,
 and the 
Queene Regnant,
 being all kept within it.


Proceed we now to the two 
Galleries,
 where∣of the first is that of the 
Queene Mother,
 as being beautified and adorned exceedingly, by 
Cathe∣rine de Medices,
 Mother to 
Henry
 the third, and 
Charles
 the ninth. It containeth the Pictures of all the 
Kings
 of 
France,
 and the most loved of


their 
Queens
 since the time of 
St. Lewis.
 They stand each 
King
 opposite to his 
Queen,
 she being that of his Wives, which either brought him most estate, or his 
Successor.
 The tables are all of a just length, very fair, and according to my little ac∣quaintance with the Painter, of a most excellent workmanship. And which addeth more grace to it, they are in a manner a perfect history of the State and Court of 
France
 in their several times, For under each of the 
Kings
 pictures they have drawn the potraitures of most of their 
Lords,
 whom valour and true courage in the field enno∣bled beyond their births: Under each of the 
Queens,
 the lively shapes of the most principal 
La∣dies,
 whose beauty and vertue had honoured the Court. A dainty invention, and happily expres∣sed. At the further end of it stand the last 
King,
 and the present 
Queen Mother,
 who fill up the whole room. The succeeding 
Princes,
 if they mean to live in their pictures, must either build new places for them, or else make use of the Long Gallery built by 
Henry
 the fourth, and which o∣peneth in to that of the 
Queen Mother.
 A Galle∣ry it is of an incredible length, as being above 500. yards long, and of a breadth and height not un∣proportionable. A room built rather for often∣tation than use, and such as hath more in it of the 
Majesty
 of ist Founder than the 
Grace
: It is said to have been erected purposely to joyn the 
Louure
 unto the house and garden of the 
Tuilleries
: an unlikely matter, that such a stupendious building should be designed onely for a cleanly convey∣ance into a Summer-house. Others are of opinion,


that he had a resolution to have the House qua∣drangular, every side being correspondent to this, which should have been the common Gallery to the rest, which design had it taken effect, this 
Pa∣lace
 would at once have been the wonder of the world, and the envy of it. For my part I dare be of the last mind, as well because the second is in part begun, as also considering how infinitely this 
King
 was affected to building. The place 
Daulphin,
 and the place 
Royal,
 two of the finest piles of 
Paris,
 were erected partly by his purse, but principally by his encouragement. The new 
Bridge
 in 
Paris
 was meerly his work; so was also the new 
Palace,
 and the most admirable 
Water-Works of St. Germanen∣lay
; this long 
Gallery
 and the 
Pesthouse
 owe them∣selves wholly unto him, and the house of 
Fountain bleau,
 which is the fairest in 
France,
 is beholding to him for most of its beauty. Adde to this his fortifications bestowed on the 
Bastile,
 and his pur∣pose to have strengthened 
Paris
 according to the modern art of Towns, and you will find the attri∣bute of 
Parietaria
 or 
Wall-floure,
 which 
Constantine
 scoffingly gave unto 
Trajane
 for his great humour of building, to be due unto this 
King,
 but seriously and with reverence.


Besides the general love he had to building, h
 had also an ambition to go beyond ensample, which also induceth me further to beleive his in∣tent of making that large and admirable quadran∣gle above spoken of, to have been serious and real. For to omit others, certain it is, that he had a pro∣ject of great spirit and difficulty, which was to joyn the 
Mediterranean
 Sea and the 
Ocean
 toge∣ther;


and to make the navigation from the one to the other through 
France,
 and not to pass by the straight of 
Gibraltare.
 It came into counsel 
Anno
 1604. and was resolved to be done by this meanes. The River of 
Garond
 is navigable from the 
Ocean
 almost to 
Tholoza
; and the 
Mediterranean
 open∣eth it self into the land by a little River (whose name I know not) as high as 
Narbonne.
 Betwixt these two places was there a navigable channel to have been digged, and it proceeded so far towards being actuated, that a workman had undertaken it, and the price was agreed upon. But there arising some discontents between the 
Kings
 of 
France
 and 
Spain,
 about the building of the 
Fort Fuentis,
 in the Countrey of the 
Grisons
; the King not know∣ing what use he might have of treasure in that quar∣rel, commanded the work not to go forward: However it is to be commended in the attempt, which was indeed Kingly, and worthy his spirit, and praise him in his heroick purpose and de∣sign:


Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.


But the principal beauty, if I may judge of this so much admired Palace of the 
Louure,
 is a low plain room, paved under foot with brick, and without any hangings or tapestry on the sides; yet being the best set out and furnished, to my content, of any in 
France
: It is called 
La salle des Antiques,
 and hath in it five of the ancientest and venera∣blest pieces of all the 
Kingdom
: For the 
Nation
 ge∣nerally is regardless of antiquity, both in the mo∣numents


and in the study of it; so that you shall hardly find any ancient inscription, or any famous ruine snatched from the hand of time, in the best of their 
Cities
 and 
Churches.
 In the 
Church
 onely of 
Amiens
 could I meet with any antient Character; which also was but a 
Gothish Dutch Letter,
 and ex∣pressed nothing but the name and vertue of a 
Bi∣shop
 of the 
Church,
 in whose time it was. So little also did I perceive them to be inclining to be 
An∣tiquaries
; that both neglects considered (
si Verbis audaciadetur
) I dare confidently averre, that one 
Cotton
 for the Treasury, and one 
Selden
 (now Mr. 
Camden
 is dead) for the study of Antiquities, are worth all the 
French:
 As for these five peices in 
La salle des Antiques,
 they are, I confess, worthy our observation, and respect also, if they be such as our trudgeman informed us. At the further end of it, the 
Statua
 of 
Diana,
 the same (as it is said) which was worshipped in the renowned Temple of 
Ephesus,
 and of which 
Demetrius
 the Silver∣smith and his fellow Artists cried out, 
, Great is 
Diana
 of the 
Ephesians
: Of a large and manly proportion she seemeth to be.

Quantum & quale latus, quam juvenile femur.


As 
Ovid
 of his Mistriss.

She is all naked save her feet, which are buskin'd, and yet she hath a scarfe or linnen roul, which coming over her left shoulder, and meeting about her middle, hung down with both ends of it a little lower. In the first place towards the right hand,


as we descended towards the door, was the 
Statua
 of one of the 
Gods of Aethiopia,
 as black as any of his people, and one that had nothing about him to express his particular being. Next unto him the 
Effigies
 of 
Mercury,
 naked all except his feet, and with a pipe in his mouth, as when he inchant∣ed 
Argos.


— Nam que reperta Fistula nuper erat.


Saith the 
Metamorphosis.

Next unto him the portraiture of 
Venus,
 quite na∣ked and most immodestly apparreld, in her hand her little Son 
Cupid,
 as well arrayed as his Mother, sitting on a 
Dolphin.
 Last of all 
Apollo
 also in the same naked truth, but that he had shooes on; He was portrayed as lately returned from a 
Combat,
 perhaps that against the Serpent 
Python.




Quem Deus arcitenens, & nunquam talibus armis


Ante, nisi in damis, capris{que} fugacibus, usus


Mille gravem telis (exhausta pane pharetra)


Perdidit, effuso per vulnera nigra, veneno.






The Archer-God, who, e're that present tide,


Ne're us'e those arms, but 'gainst the Roes and Deer,


With thousand shafts the earth made to be dy'de


With Serpents bloud, (his quiver emptied cleer.



That I was in the right conjecture I had these rea∣sons to perswade me; the Quiver on the 
Gods



right shoulder almost emptied, his warlike belt hanging about his neck, his garments loosly tum∣bling upon his left arm, and the slain Monster being a water-serpent, as 
Pithon
 is fained to be by the 
Poets.
 All of these were in the same side of the wall, the other being altogether destitute of orna∣ment, and are confidently said to be the statues of those 
Gods,
 in the same forms that they were wor∣shipped in, and taken from their several Temples. They were bestowed on the 
King
 by his Holiness of 
Rome,
 and I cannot blame him for it. It was worthy but little thanks to give unto him the 
Idols
 of the Heathen, who for his Holiness satisfaction had given himself to the 
Idols
 of the 
Romans.
 I beleive, that upon the same terms the 
King of Eng∣gland
 should have all the Reliques and ruines of Antiquity which can be found in 
Rome.


Without this room, the 
Salle des Antiques
; and somewhat on the other side of the 
Louure
 is the House of 
Burbon,
 and old decayed fabrick, in which was nothing observable but the 
Omen.
 For being built by 
Lewis
 of 
Burbon
 the third 
Duke
 of that branch; he caused this Motto, 
ESPE∣RANCE,
 to be engraven in Capital Letters over the door, signifying his hopes, that from his loyns should proceed a 
King,
 which should joyn both the Houses and the Families, and it is accord∣ingly happened. For the 
Tuilleries
 I have nothing to say of them, but that they were built by 
Cathe∣rine de Medices,
 in the year 1564, and that they took name from the lime-kils and tile-pits there being before the foundation of the house and the garden; the word 
Tuillerie
 importing as much in


the 
French
 language: I was not so happy as to see them, and will not be indebted to any for the rela∣tion.






CHAP. X.




The person, age and marraige of 
King Lewis
: Conjectural reasons of his being issueless. 
Jaqueline
 Countess of 
Holland
 kept from issue by the house of 
Burgundy:
 The Kings Sisters all married, and his alliances by them. His natural Brethren and their preferment. His lawful Brother the title of 
Monsieur
 in 
France: Monsieur
 as yet unmarried; not like to marry 
Mont-Peusiers
 Daughter: That Lady a fit Wife for the Earl of 
Soi∣sons:
 The difference between him and the Prince of 
Conde
 for the Crown, in case the Line of 
Navarre
 fail: How the Lords stand affected in the cause; Whether a Child may be born in the eleventh moneth. 
King Henry
 the fourth a great Lover of fair La∣dies: 
Monsieur Barrados
 the Kings Favo∣rite, his birth and offices. The omniregency of the 
Queen Mother
 and the 
Cardinal
 of 
Richilieu;
 The 
Queen Mother
 a wise and prudent Woman.




THe 
King
 is the soul of the Court, without his presence it is but a Carcass, a thing without life and honour. I dare not so farre wrong the 
Louure,
 as to make it but a common house, and rob it of the fruition of its 
Prince,
 and therefore will treat of him here; though during my aboad in 
France
 he lay all the while in 
Fountain Bleau
: For person he is of the middle stature, and rather well proportioned than large. His face knoweth little yet of a beard, but that which is, is black and swar∣thy; his complexion also much of the same heiw, carrying in it a certain boysterousness, and that in a further measure than what a graceful Majesty can admit of: So that one can hardly say of him with∣out a spice of Courtship, what 
Paterculus
 did of 
Tiberius, Quod visus praetulerit principem,
 that his countenance proclaimed him a 
King.
 But questi∣onless his greatest defect is want of utterance, which is very unpleasing by reason of a desperate and un∣curable stammering, which defect is likely more and more to grow upon him. At this time he is aged twenty four years, and as much as since the 27 day of 
September
 last, which was his birth day, an age which he beareth not very plausibly; want of beard and the swarthiness of his complexion ma∣king him seem elder. At the age of eleven years he was affianced to the 
Lady Anna Infanta of Spain,
 by whom as yet he hath no children. It is thought by many, and covertly spoken by divers in 
France,
 that the principal cause of the 
Queens
 bar∣tenness proceedeth from 
Spain,
 that people being loath to fall under the 
French
 obedience, which may very well happen, she being the elder Sister of


the 
King.
 For this cause, in the seventh article of marriage there is a clause, that neither the said 
In∣fanta,
 nor the Children born by her (to the 
King
) shall be capable to inherit any of the estates of the 
King of Spain
; and in the eighth article she is bound to make an act of renunciation under her own hand-writing, as soon as she cometh to be twelve years old, which was accordingly performed. But this being not sufficient to secure their fears, it is thought that she was some way or other disabled from conception, before ever she came into the 
Kings
 embraces: A great crime I confess if true: yet I cannot say with 
Tully
 in his defence of 
Li∣garius: Novum crimen Caie Caesar, & hec tempus mauditum. Jaqueline Countess of Holland
 was Co∣zen to 
Philip Duke
 of 
Burgundie
: Her being fruit∣ful would have debarred him from those estates of 
Holland, Zealand
 and 
West-Freezland
; therefore though she had three Husbands there was order taken she should never have Child: with her two first Husbands the 
Duke
 would never suffer her to live: and when she had stollen a wedding with 
Frane of Borselle
 one of her servants, the 
Dukes Physitians
 gave him such a potion, that she might as well have married an 
Eunuch
: upon this injury the poor 
Lady
 died; and the 
Duke
 succeeded in those Countries; which by his Grand-child 
Marie
 were conveyed over into the House of 
Austria,
 together with the rest of his estate. I dare not say, that that Family hath inherited his practises with his lands; and yet I have heard, that the 
Infanta Isabella
 had the like or worse measure afforded her, before she was bedded to the 
Arch-duke Al∣bertus.



A diabolical trick, which the prostitutes of the heathen used in the beginnings of the 
Gospel,
 and before, of whom 
Octavius
 complaineth, 
quod originem futuri hominis extinguant, & paricidium faciunt, antequam pariunt.


Better luck than the 
King
 hath his Sister beyond the mountains, I mean his eldest Sister 
Madame Elizabeth,
 married to the 
King of Spain
 now living, as being, or having been the Mother of two Chil∣dren: His second Sister, 
Madame Christian,
 is married to 
Amadeo Victor Principe Maior,
 or heir apparent of the 
Duke
 of 
Savoy,
 to whom as yet she hath born no issue. The youngest, 
Henrietta Mariae,
 is newly married to his most Excellent Majesty of 
England,
 to whom may she prove of a most happy and fruitful womb. 
Et pulchra faciat te prole parentem.
 Of these alliances the first were very profitable to both 
Princes,
 could there be made a marriage between the Kingdoms as well as the 
Kings.
 But it is well known, that the affecti∣ons of each people are divided, more unconquera∣ble mountains, than their dominions: The 
French
 extreamly hating the proud humour and ambition of the 
Spaniard.
 We may therefore account each of them in these marriages to have rather intend∣ed the perpetuity of their particular houses, than the strength of their Empires; and that they more desired a noble stock whereon to graft posterity, than power. The alliance with 
Savoy
 is more ad∣vantagious, though less powerful than that of 
Spain.
 For if the 
King of France
 can keep this 
Prince
 on his party, he need not fear the greatness of the other, or any of his faction. The continu∣all


siding of this House with that of 
Austria,
 ha∣ving given many and great impediments to the fortune of the 
French.
 It standeth so fitly to coun∣tenance the affairs of either 
King
 in 
Italy
 or 
Ger∣many
 to which it shall incline, that it is just of the same nature with the estate of 
Florence
 between 
Millain
 and 
Venice
: of which 
Guicciaraine
 saith, that 
Mantennero le cose
d Italia bilan
iate
 On this reason 
King Henry
 the fourth earnestly desired to match one of his Children into this Countrey, and left this desire as a Legacie with his Council. But the alliance of most use to the State of 
France,
 is that of 
England,
 as being the nighest and most able of all his neighbours. An alliance which will make his Estate invincible, and incompassed about as it were with a wall of brass.


As for the 
Kings
 bastard Brethren they are four in number, and born of three several beds. The eldest is 
Mr. Alexander,
 made 
Knight
 of the Or∣der of St. 
John,
 or of 
Malta,
 in the life time of his Father. He is now 
Grand Prior of France,
 and it is much laboured and hoped by the 
French,
 that he shall be the next Master of the 
Order
; a place of great command and credit. The second and most loved of his Father, whose lively image and character he is said to be, is 
Mr Caesar,
 made 
Duke
 of 
Vendosme
 by his Father, and is at this time Go∣vernor of 
Brittain,
 a man of a brave spirit, and one who swayeth much in the affairs of State. His Father took great care for his advancement before his death, and therefore married him to the Daughter and Heir of the 
Duke of Mercuer,
 a man of great possessions in 
Brittain.
 It is thought


that the inheritance of this 
Lady,
-both by her Fa∣thers side, and also by her Mothers, who was of the Family of 
Marsegues,
 being a stock of the old 
Ducal
 tree, is no less than 200000. Crowns year∣ly. Both these were born unto the 
King
 by 
Ma∣dame Gabriele,
 for her excellent beauty surnamed 
la¦belle, Dutchess of Beauforte,
 a 
Lady
 whom the 
King
 most entirely affected even to the last gasp, and one who never abused her power with him; so that we may truly say of her what 
Velleius
 flatter∣ingly said of 
Livia
 the Wife of 
Augustus, Ejus potentiam nemo senset, nisi levatione periculi, aut ac∣cessione dignitatis.
 The third of the 
Kings
 natural Brethren is Mr. 
Henry,
 now 
Bishop of Metz
 in 
Lor∣raine,
 and 
Abbot
 of 
St. Germans
 in 
Paris.
 As 
Abbot
 he is Lord of the goodly 
Fairbourg
 of 
St. Ger∣mans,
 and hath the profits of the great Fair there holden, which make a large revenue. His Bisho∣prick yeildeth him the profits of 20000. Crowns and upwards, which is the remainder of 60000. the rest being pawned to the 
Duke
 of 
Lorraine,
 by the last Bishop, who was of that family. The Mo∣ther of this Mr. 
Henry
 is the 
Marchioness of Verne∣ville,
 who before the death of the 
King
 fell out of his favour into the prison, and was not restored to her liberty till the beginning of the 
Queen Mo∣thers Regency.
 The fourth and youngest is Mr. 
Antonie,
 born unto the 
King
 by the 
Countess of Morret,
 who is 
Abbot
 of the Churches of 
Marseil∣les
 and 
Cave
▪ & hath as yet not fully six thousand pound a year, when his Mother dieth he Will be richer.


The 
Kings
 lawful Brother is named 
John Baptist


Gaston,
 born the 25th of 
April, Anno
 1608. A Prince of a brave and manlike aspect, likely to in∣herit as large a part of his Fathers spirit, as the 
King
 doth of his Crown. He is entituled 
Duke of Aniou,
 as being the third Son of 
France,
 but his next elder Brother the 
Duke of Orleance
 being dead in his childhood, he is vulgarly and properly called, 
Monsieur.
 This title is different from that of 
Daulphin,
 in that that title is onely appropria∣ted to the Heir apparent, being the 
Kings
 eldest Son living. This limited to the Heir apparent, be∣ing the 
Kings
 eldest Brother surviving; if there be neither Son nor Brother, then the next Heir ap∣parent is stiled onely 
Le primier Prince du sang, The first Prince of the bloud.
 This title of 
Mon∣sieur
 answereth to that of the 
Despote
 in the 
Greek Empire
; and in imitation of that it is thought to have been instituted. Others of the 
French
 Princes are called 
Monsieurs
 also, but with some addition of place or honour; the 
Kings
 eldest Brother onely is called 
Monsieur sans quene,
 as the 
French
 use to say; that is, simply 
Monsieur.
 This young Prince is as yet unmarried, but destinate to the bed of the young 
Dutchess of Mont-pensier,
 whose Fa∣ther died in the time of 
Henry
 the fourth. Had the 
Duke of Orleance
 lived, he had espoused her long ere this; but it is generally beleived, that this 
Prince
 is so affected. He seeth his elder Brother as yet childless, himself the next Heir to the Crown, and it is likely he will look on a while, and expect the issue of his fortune.


Some that speak of the affairs of the Court, hold her to be a fit match for the young 
Count of


Soisons,
 a Prince of the bloud, and a Gentleman of a fine temper. The 
Lady
 her self is said not to be averse from the Match; neither will the 
King
 not be inclinable unto him, as hoping therein to give him some satisfaction, for not performing a Court promise, made unto him about marrying him to the young 
Madame,
 now 
Queen of England.
 As for the 
Count
 it cannot but be advantagious to him divers wayes; partly to joyn together the two Fa∣milies of 
Mont pensier
 and 
Soisons,
 both issuing from the house of 
Burbon
; partly to enrich him∣self by adding unto his inheritance so fair an e∣state; and partly by gaining all the Freinds and Allies of the 
Ladies
 kinred unto him; the better to enable his opposition against the 
Prince of Con∣de.
 The difference between them standeth thus: 
Lewis
 the first 
Prince of Conde
 had by two Wives, amongst other Children, two Sons; by his first Wife 
Henry Prince
 of 
Conde,
 by the second 
Charles Count of Soisons. Henry Prince
 of 
Conde
 had to his first Wife 
Mary
 of 
Cleve,
 Daughter to the 
Duke
 of 
Nevers,
 by whom he had no Children: to his second Wife he took the 
Lady Katherine
 of 
Tre∣moville,
 Sister to the 
Duke
 of 
Thovars, Anno
 1586. two years after his marriage he died of an old greif took from a poysoned cup, which was given him, 
Anno
 1552. and partly from a blow given him with a Lance at the battel of 
Contras, Anno
 1587. In the eleventh moneth after his decease, his young 
Princess
 was brought to bed of a young Son, which is now 
Prince
 of 
Conde. Charles Count
 of 
Soisons
 in the raign of 
Henry
 the fourth began to question the 
Princes
 legitimation; whereupon the 
King



dealt with the Parliament of 
Paris,
 to declare the place of the first 
Prince
 of the bloud to belong to the 
Prince
 of 
Conde
: And for the clearer and more evident proof of the title, twenty four physitians of good faith and skill made an open protestation of oath in the Coutt, that it was not onely possible but common for Women to be delivered in the eleventh moneth. On this it was awarded to the 
Prince.


This decree of Parliament notwithstanding, if ever the King and his Brother should die childless, it is said, that the young 
Count
 of 
Soisons
 (his Fa∣ther died 
Anno
 1614.) will not so give over his title: He is 
Steward
 of the 
Kings
 House, as his Fa∣ther also was before him, a place of good credit, and in which he hath demeaned himself very plau∣sibly. In case it should come to a tryal, 
, which God forbid, he is like to make a great party▪ both within the Realm and without it; with∣out it by means of the House of 
Savoy,
 having mar∣ried his eldest Sister unto 
Don Thomazo,
 the second Son of that 
Dukedom
 now living: A brave man at armes, and indeed the fairest fruit that ever grew on that tree, next Heir of his Father after the death of 
Don Amadeo,
 yet childless: within the Realm the 
Lords
 have already declared themselves, which happened on this occasion. In the year 1620. the moneth of 
March,
 the 
King
 being to wash, the 
Prince
 of 
Conde
 laid hold on the towel, chalenging that honour as first 
Prince
 of the bloud: and on the other side the 
Count
 of 
Soisons
 seized on it as appertaining to his office of 
Steward,
 and 
Prince
 of the bloud also. The 
King
 to decide the contro∣versie


for the present, commanded it to be given to 
Monsieur
 his Brother, yet did not this satisfie. For in the morning the Friends of both 
Princes
 came to offer their service in the cause. To the 
Count
 came in general all the opposites of the 
Prince
 of 
Conde,
 and of the 
Duke
 of 
Luines
 and 
Guise
; in particular the 
Duke
 of 
Maien,
 the 
Duke
 of 
Ven∣dosme,
 the 
Dukes
 of 
Longueville, Espernon, Nemours,
 the 
Grand Prior,
 the 
Dukes
 of 
Thovars, Retz
 and 
Rohan,
 the 
Viscount
 of 
Aubetene,
 &c. who all with∣drew themselves from the Court, made themselves Masters of the best places in their Governments, and were united presently into an open faction, of which the 
Queen Mother
 declared her self head. As for the Commons, without whom the Nobility may well quarrel, but not fight, they are more zea∣lous in behalf of the 
Count,
 as being brought up alwayes a 
Papist,
 and born of a Catholike kin∣red, whereas the 
Prince,
 though at this instant he be a Catholike, yet 
non fuit sic ab initio,
 he was born, they say, and brought up an 
Hugonot,
 and perchance the alteration is but dissem∣bled.


Concerning the 
Prince of Conde,
 he hath a sen∣tence of Parliament on his side, and a verdict of Physitians, both weak helps to a soveraignty, unless well backed by the Sword. And for the verdict of the Physitians, thus the case is stated by the Doctors of that faculty. 
Laurentius
 a Professor of 
M
nt-pellier
 in 
Languedoc,
 in his excellent Treatise of Anatomy, maketh three terms of a Womans delivery, 
Primus, intermedius, & ultimus
: The first, the seventh and eighth moneth after con∣ception,


in each of which the Child is vital and may live if it be born. To this also consenteth the Dr. of their 
Chair Hippocrates,
 saying, 
, that a Child born in the seventh moneth, if it be well looked to, may live. We read also, how in 
Spain
 the Women are oftentimes lightned in the end of the seventh moneth, and commonly in the end of the eighth: and further, that 
Sempronius
 and 
Corbula,
 both 
Roman Consuls,
 were born in the seventh moneth: 
Plinie
 in his natural History reporteth it as a truth, though per∣haps the Women that told him either misreckoned their time, or else dissembled it to conceal their honesties. The middle time (
terminus interme∣dius
) is the ninth and tenth moneths, at which time Children do seldom miscarry: In the former two moneths they had gathered life, in these later they onely consummate strength, so say the 
Physi∣tians
 generally. 
Non enim in duobus sequentibus mensibus
 (they speak it of the 
intermedii) addi∣tur aliquid ad perfectionem partium, sed ad perfectio∣nem roboris.
 The last time (
terminus ultimus
) in the common account of this Profession is the ele∣venth moneth, which some of them hold neither unlikely nor rare. 
Massurius
 recordeth of 
Pa∣pyrius,
 a 
Roman Praetor,
 to have recovered his inhe∣ritance in open Court, though his Mother confest him to be born in the thirteenth month. And 
A∣vicen
 a 
Moor
 of 
Corduba
 relateth (as he is cited in 
Laurentius
) that he had seen a Child born after the fourteenth. But these are but the impostures of Women; and yet indeed the modern Doctors are more charitable, and refer it to supernatural causes,



Ʋt extra ordinariam artis considerationem.
 On the other side 
Hippocrates
 giveth it out definitively, 
, that in ten moneths at the furthest (understand ten moneths compleat) the Child is born. And 
Ʋlpian
 the great 
Civilian
 of his times, in the title of 
Digests de Testamentis
 is of opinion, that a Child born af∣ter the tenth moneth (compleat) is not to be admitted to the inheritance of its pretended Fa∣ther. As for the Common Law of 
England,
 as I remember, I have read it in a book written of 
Wils
 and 
Testaments,
 it taketh a middle course between the charity of nature and the severity of Law, lea∣ving it meerly to the conscience and circumstance of the 
Judge.


But all this must be conceived (taking it in the most favourable construction) after the concep∣tion of the 
Mother,
 and by no meanes after the death of the 
Father,
 and so can it no way (if I were first 
President
) advantage the 
Prince
 of 
Con∣de
: His Father had been extreamly sick no small time before his death for the particular, and suppo∣sed since his poison taken, 
Anno
 1552. to be little prone to Women in the general. They therefore that would seem to know more than the vul∣gar, reckon him as one of the by-blows of 
Henry
 the fourth, but this under the 
Rose:
 yet by way of conjecture we may argue thus. First, from the 
Kings
 care of his education, assigning him for his 
Tutor Nicholas de Februe,
 whom he also designed for his Son 
King Lewis.
 Secondly, from his care to work the 
Prince,
 then young, 
Mollis & aptus agi,
 to become a 
Catholike.
 Thirdly, the age of the


old 
Henry
 of 
Conde,
 and the privacy of this 
King
 with his 
Lady,
 being then 
King
 of 
Navarre,
 in the prime of his strength, and in discontent with the 
Lady Margaret
 of 
Valoys
 his first Wife. Adde to this that 
Kings
 love to fair 
Ladies
 in the general, and we may see this probability to be no miracle: For besides the 
Dutchess
 of 
Beaufort,
 the 
Marchio∣ness
 of 
Verneville,
 and the 
Countess
 of 
Morret
 al∣ready mentioned, he is beleived to have been the 
Father
 of Mr. 
Luines
 the great Favorite of 
King Lewis.
 And certain it is, that the very year before his death, when he was even in the winter of his dayes, he took such an amorous liking to the 
Prince
 of 
Conde,
s Wife, a very beautiful 
Lady,
 and Daugh∣ter to the Constable 
Duke
 of 
Montmorencie,
 that the 
Prince
 to save his honour was compelled to flie, together with his 
Princess,
 into the 
Arch-Dukes Country,
 whence he returned not till long after the death of 
King Henry.
 If 
Marie de Me∣dices
 in her Husbands life time paid his debts for him (which I cannot say) she onely made good that of 
Quintilian, Et uxor mariti exemplo incitata, aut imitari se putat, aut vindicate
· And yet per∣haps a consciousness of some injuries not onely moved her to back the 
Count
 of 
Soison's
 and his faction against the 
Prince
 and his, but also to resolve upon him for the Husband of her Daugh∣ter.


From the 
Princes
 of the bloud descend we to the 
Princes
 of the 
Court,
 and therein the first place we meet with 
Mr. Barradas,
 the 
Kings
 present Favourite, a young Gentleman of a fresh and lively hew, little bearded, and one whom the


people as yet cannot accuse for any oppression or misgovernment. Honours the 
King
 hath confer∣red none upon him, but onely 
Pensions
 and 
Of∣fices.
 He is the Governour of the 
Kings
 Chil∣dren of 
Honour, (Pages
 we call them in 
England
) a place of more trouble, than wealth or credit. He is also the Master of the 
Horse,
 or 
le grand Escuire
; the esteem of which place recompenceth the emp∣tiness of the other; for by vertue of this Office he carryeth the 
Kings
 Sword sheathed before him at his entrance into 
Paris
: the Cloth of Estate car∣ryed over the 
King
 by the 
Provosts
 and 
Eschevins,
 is his 
Fee.
 No man can be the 
Kings
 Spur maker, his Smith, or have any place in the 
Kings
 Stables but from him, and the like. This place (to note so much by the way) was taken out of the 
Con∣stables
 Office (
Comes stabuli.
 is the true name) to whom it properly belonged, in the time of 
Charles
 the seventh. Besides this he hath a pension of 500000. Crowns yearly; and had an Office gi∣ven him, which he sold for 100000. Crownes in ready money. A good fortune for one who the other day was but the 
Kings Page.


And to say truth, he is as yet but a little better, being onely removed from his Servant to his 
play-fellow:
 with the affairs of 
State
 he intermeddleth not; if he should, he might expect the 
Queene Mother
 should say to him, what 
Apollo
 in 
Ovid
 did to 
Cupid.


— Tibi quia cum fortibus armis,


Mi puer: ista decent humeros gestamina nostros.


For indeed first during her Sons minority, and after since her redentigration with him, she hath made her self so absolute a Mistress of her mind, that he hath entrusted to her, the entire conduct of all his most weighty affairs: for her Assistant in the managing of her greatest business, she hath pieced her self to the strongest side of the State, the 
Church,
 having principally (since the death of the 
Marshall D' Anere Joneane
) assumed to her Counsails the 
Cardinal
 of 
Richileiu
: a man of no great birth, were 
Nobility
 the greatest 
Parentage
: but otherwise to be ranked among the 
Noblest.
 Of a sound reach he is, and of a close brain; one exceedingly well mixt of a 
Lay Ʋnderstanding,
 and a 
Church Habit
; one that is compleatly skil∣led in the art of men, and a perfect Master of his own mind and affections. Him the 
Queene
 useth as her Counseller, to keep out frailty and the 
Kings
 name as her countenance to keep off envy. She is of a 
Florentine
 wit, and hath in her all the vertues of 
Katherine de Medices
 her Ancestor in the 
Regencie
: and some also of her vices, only her designes tend not to the ruine of her Kingdome, and her Children. 
John de Seirres
 telleth us in his 
Inventaire
 of 
France,
 how the 
Queene Katherine
 suffered her Son 
Henry
 the third, a devout and simple 
Prince,
 to spend his most dangerous times even uncontrolled upon his Beades, whiles in the meantime, she usurped the Government of the Realm. Like it is that 
Queene Mary
 hath learn∣ed so much of her kinswoman, as to permit this Son of hers also to spend his time, in his Gar∣den amongst his play fellows and his Birds, that


she may the more securely mannage the State at her discretion. And to say nothing of her un∣true or misbecoming her vertue, she harh notably well discharged her ambition; the Realm of 
France
 being never more quietly and evenly Go∣verned, the
n first during her Regencie; and now during the time of her favour with the 
King.
 For during his minority, she carryed her self so fairly between the Factions of the Court, that she was of all sides honoured: the time of 
Mar∣quessd' Ancre
 onely excepted. And for the dif∣ferences in Religion, her most earnest desire was not to oppress the 
Protestants,
 insomuch that the warre raised against them during the Command of 
Mr. Luines,
 was presently after his death and her restoring to grace ended. An heroical 
Lady,
 and worthy of the best report of posterity: the frailty and weekness of her, as being a woman, not being to be accounted hers but her Sexes.






CHAP. II.




The Religions struggling in 
France,
 like the two Twins in the womb of 
Rebecca
: The comparison between them two and those in general. A more peculiar Survey of the Pa∣pists Church in 
France
; In Policie, Privi∣ledge, and Revenue. The Complaint of the 
Clergie
 to the 
King.
 The acknowledgement of the 
French
 Church to the 
Pope,
 meerly


titular. The pragmatick Sanction: 
Maxi∣ma tua fatuitas, et Conventui Tridentino,
 severally written to the 
Pope
 and the 
Trent Councill.
 The tedious quarrels about In∣vestitures. Four things propounded by the Parliament to the 
Jesuit's.
 The 
French Bi∣shops
 not to meddle with 
Friers:
 Their lives and Land. The ignorance of the 
French
 Priests. The Chanoins Latine in Orleans. The 
French
 not hard to be convert∣ed if plausibly humoured, 
&c.




FRom the Court of the 
King
 of 
France,
 I can∣not better provide for my self, than to have recourse unto the Court of the 
King
 of 
Heaven,
 and though the 
Poet
 meant not 
Exeat aulâ qui vult esse pius
 in that sense, yet will it be no trea∣son for me to apply it so. And even in this Court the Church, which should be like the Coat of its 
Redeemer
 without seam, do I find rents and sactions; and of the two, these in the Church more dangerous, than those in the 
Louure.
 I know, the story of 
Rebecca,
 and the Children struggling in her, is generally applyed to the births and contentions of the 
Law
 and the 
Gospell.
 In particular we may make use of it in the present e∣state of the Church, and Religions in 
France
▪ for certain it is, that there were divers pangs in the womb of the 
French
 Church before it was de∣livered: and first she was delivered of 
Esau,
 the Popish faith being first after the struggling coun∣tenaaced


by authority, and he came out 
red all o∣ver like a hairy Garment,
 saith the text, which very oppositely expresseth the bloody and rough condition of the 
French
 Papist at the birth of the Reformation: before experience and long ac∣quaintance had bred a liking between them. And after came his Brother out, which laid hold on 
Esaus
 heel, and his name was called 
Jacob
: where∣in is described the quality of the 
Protestant party
: which though confirmed by publick 
Edict
 after the other, yet hath it divers times endeavoured, and will perchance one day effect the tripping up of the others heeles. And 
Esau
 (saith 
Moses) was a cunning hunter; a man of the field: but Jacob was a plain man dwelling in Tents.
 In which words the comparison is most exact. A cunning Archer in the Scriptures, signifieth a man of Art and Po∣wer mingled: as when 
Nimrod
 in the 10th of 
Ge∣neses
 is termed, 
A mighty Hunter.
 Such is the 
Papist,
 a side of greater strength and subtilty, a side of warre, and of the field. On the other side the 
Protestants
 are a plain race of men, simple in their actions, without craft and fraudulent beha∣haviour, and dwelling in Tents, that is, having no certain abiding place, no one 
Province
 which they can call theirs, but living dispersed and scat∣terred over the Country; which in the phrase of Scripture, is dwelling in Tents. As for the other words differencing the two Brethren, 
and the el∣der shall serve the younger,
 they are rather to be accounted a Prophesie, than a Character: we must therefore leave the 
Analogie
 it holds with the 
Rebecca
 of 
France,
 and her two Sons, to the e∣vent and prayer.


For a more particular insight into the strength and subtilty of this 
Esau
; we must consider it in the three main particular strengths of it, 
Its policy, priviledge, revenue.
 For the first, so it is, that the 
Popish Church
 in 
France
 is governed like those of the first and purer times, by 
Arch-bishops
 and 
Bi∣shops: Archibishops
 it comprehendeth twelve, and of 
Bishops
 an hundred and four. Of these the 
Me∣tropolitan
 is he of 
Rhemes,
 who useth to annoint the 
Kings,
 which office and preheminence hath been annexed to this seat, ever since the time of 
St. Re∣megius Bishop
 hereof, who converted 
Clovis King
 of the 
Franks
 unto the 
Gospel.
 The present 
Pri∣mate
 is Son to the 
Duke
 of 
Guise,
 by name 
Henry de Lorrein,
 of the age of fourteen yeares or thereabouts, a burden too unweildy for his shoul∣ders,

—Et quae non viribus istis


Munera conveniunt, nec tam puerilibus annis.

For the better government therefore of a charge so weighty, they have appointed him a 
Coadjutor
 to discharge that great function, till he come to age to take Orders. His name is 
Gifford,
 an 
English fugitive,
 said to be a man worthy of a great for∣tune, and able to bear it. The revenues of this 
Arch-bishoprick
 are somewhat of the meanest, not a∣mouting yearly to above 10000. Crowns, whereof Doctor 
Gifford
 receiveth onely two thousand, the remainder going to the 
Cadet
 of 
Lorreine.
 This trick the 
French
 learnt of the 
Protestants
 in 
Germa∣ny,
 where the 
Princes,
 after the reformation began


by 
Luther,
 took in the power and Lordships of the 
Bishops,
 which, together with their functions, they divided into two parts. The Lands they bestowed upon some of their younger Sons or Kinsmen, with the title of 
Administrator;
 the office and power of it they conferred with some annual pension on one of their Chaplains, whom they stiled the 
Su∣perintendent
 of the 
Bishoprick.
 This 
Archbishop,
 together with the rest of the 
Bishops,
 have under them their several 
Chancellors, Commissaries, Arch∣deacons
 and other Officers attending in their Courts, in which their power is not so general, as with us in 
England.
 Matters of 
Testament
 never trouble them, as belonging to the Court of Parlia∣ment, who also have wrested into their own hands almost all the business of importance, sure I am, all the causes of profit originally belonging to the Church. The affairs meerly 
Episcopal
 and 
Spiri∣tual
 are left unto them, as granting licence for mar∣riages, punishing whoredom by way of pennance, and the like: To go beyond this were 
Ʋltra cre∣pidam,
 and they should be sure to have a prohibi∣tion from the 
Parliament.


Of their Priviledges, the chief of the 
Clergy∣men
 is, the little or no dependency they have on the 
Pope,
 and the little profits they pay unto their 
King.
 Of the 
Pope
 anon. To the 
King
 they pay onely their 
dismes
 or tithes according to the old rates, a small sum if compared unto the payments of their neighbours, it being thought, that the 
King
 of 
Spain
 receiveth yearly one half of the Li∣ving of the Churches. But this I mean of their Livings onely, for otherwise they pay the usual ga∣bels


and customs that are paid by the rest of the 
Kings Leige-people.
 In the general assembly of the three Estates, the 
Clergy
 hath authority to elect a set number of Commissioners to undertake for them & the Church, w
ch
 Commissioners do make up the the first of the three 
Estates,
 & do first exhibite their greivances and petitions to the 
King.
 In a word, the 
French Church
 is the freest of any in Christen∣dom, that have not yet quitted their subjection to the 
Pope,
 as alwayes protesting against the 
Inquisi∣tion,
 not subjecting themselves to the Council of 
Trent,
 and paying very little to his 
Holiness
 of that plentiful revenue wherewith 
God
 and good men have blessed it.


The number of those which the Church-land maintaineth in 
France
 is 
tantum non infinite,
 there∣fore the 
intrado
 and revenues of it must needs be uncountable. There are numbred in it (as we said before) twelve 
Archbishopricks,
 an hundred and four 
Bishopricks
: To these add five hundred and fourty 
Archpriorities,
 one thousand four hundred and fifty 
Abbies
; twelve thousand three hundred and twenty 
Priorities,
 the sixty seven 
Nunneries,
 seven hundred 
Covents
 of 
Friers,
 two hundred fifty nine 
Commendams
 of the Order of 
Malta,
 and one hundred and thirty thousand 
Parish Priests,
 yet this is not all. Their reckoning was made in the year 1598. since which time the 
Jesuits
 have di∣vers Colledges founded for them, and they are known to be none of the poorest. To maintain this large wilderness of men, the 
Statists
 of 
France,
 who have proportioned the Country, do allow un∣to the 
Clergy
 almost a fourth part of the whole.


For supposing 
France
 to contain two hundred millions of 
Arpens
 (a measure somewhat bigger than one Acre) they have allotted to the Church for its temporal revenue forty seven millions of them. In particular of the 
Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
 and Parish 
Priests,
 they of 
Aulx, Alby, Clumai,
 and 
St. Estiennes
 in 
Paris,
 are said to be the wealthiest. The 
Archbishop
 of 
Aux
 in 
Gascoyne
 is valued at 400000. liures, or 40000 
li.
 English yearly. The 
Bishop
 of 
Alby
 in 
Languedoc
 is prized at 100000. 
Florens,
 which is a fourth part of it, a great part of the revenue arising out of Saffron. The 
Abbot
 of 
Clumac
 in the 
Dutchy
 of 
Burgundy
 is said to be worth 50000 Crowns yearly, the pre∣sent 
Abbot
 being 
Henry
 of 
Lorreine, Archbishop
 of 
Rhemes
 and 
Abbot
 of 
St. Denis.
 The Parish 
Priest
 of 
St. Estiennes
 is judged to receive yearly no fewer than eight thousand Crowns, a good intra∣do. As for the vulgar Clergy, they have little tithe, and less glebe; most part of that Revenue being appropriated unto 
Abbies
 and other religious Houses. The greatest part of their meanes is the 
Baisemen,
 which is the Church offerings of the people at 
Christnings, Marriages, Burials, Dirges, Indulgences
 and the like, which is thought to a∣mount to almost as much as the temporal estate of the Church: An 
Income
 able to maintain them in good abundance, were it not for the greatness of their number. For reckoning that there are (as we have said) in 
France
 one hundred and thirty thousand Parish 
Priests,
 and that there are onely twenty seven thousand four hundred Parishes, it must of necessity be, that every Prrish, one with


another, hath no fewer than four Priests, too many to be rich.


But this were one of the least injuries offered to the 
French,
 thrift, and would little hinder them from rising, if it were not, that the goodliest of their preferments are before their faces given unto Boyes and Children. An affront, which not onely despaireth them of the honours due unto their cal∣lings, but dishearteneth them in their studies, and by consequence draweth them to debauched and slanderous courses.

— Quis emim virtutem exquireret ipsam.


Praemia si tollas.

The Clergy therefore, 
Anno
 1617. being assembled at the house of 
Austin Friers
 in 
Paris,
 (as every two years they use to do) being to take their leaves of the 
King,
 elected the 
Bishop
 of 
Aire
 to be their 
Spokesman,
 and to certifie his Majesty of their greivances. In performing which business, the principal thing of which he spake was to this pur∣pose. That whereas his Majesty was bound to give them 
Fathers,
 he gave them Children; that the name of 
Abbot
 signifieth a 
Father,
 and the fun∣ction of a 
Bishop
 was full of fatherly authority, yet 
Erance
 notwithstanding was now filled with 
Bi∣shops
 and 
Abbots
 which are yet in their Nurses arms, or else under their Regents in Colledges. Nay more, that the abuse goeth before the being, Children being commonly designed to 
Bishopricks
 & 
Abbacies
 before they were born. He also made another Complaint, that the Sovereign Courts by


their decrees had attempted upon the authority which was committed to the 
Clergy,
 even in that which concerned meerly 
Ecclesiastical
 discipline and government of the Church. To these Com∣plaints he gave them indeed a very gratious hear∣ing, but it never went further than a hearing, being never followed by redress. The Court of Parlia∣ment knew too well the strength of their own au∣thority, and the 
King
 was loath to take from him∣self those excellent advantages of binding to him∣self his Nobility, by the speedy preferring of their Children: And so the Clergy departed with a great deal of envy, and a little of satisfacti∣on.


Like enough it were, that the 
Pope
 would in part redress this injury, especially in the point of 
Juris∣diction,
 if he were able, but his wings are shrewdly clipped in this Country, neither can he flie at all, but as farre as they please to suffer him. For his temporal power, they never could be induced to ac∣knowledge it, as we see in their stories, 
Anno
 1610. the 
Divines
 of 
Paris,
 in a Declaration of theirs tender'd to the 
Queen Mother,
 affirm the supre∣macy of the 
Pope
 to be an erroneus doctrine, and the ground of that hellish position of deposing and killing of 
Kings. Anno
 1517. when the 
Council
 of 
Luteram
 had determined the 
Pope
 to be the Head of the 
Church
 in causes also temporal, the 
Ʋuniversity
 of 
Paris
 testified against it, in an 
Apoligie
 of theirs dated the twelfth of 
March
 the same year. 
Leo decimus
 (saith the 
Apologie) in quidam coetu non tamen in spiritu Domini congrega∣to, contra fidem Catholicam &c. sacrum Basiliense


Concilium damnavit
; In which Councill of 
Basill,
 the supremacy of the 
Pope
 was condemned. Nei∣ther did the 
Kings
 of 
France
 forget to maintain their own authority: And therefore whereas 
Pope Boniface
 the eighth, had in a peremptory Letter Written to 
Phillip le Belle King
 of 
France
 stiled himself, 
Dominus totius Mundi tam in tem∣poralibus quam in spiritualibus
: the 
King
 returned him an answer with an 
Epithite
 sutable to his ar∣rogancy: 
Sciat maxima tua fatuitas nos intempora∣libus alicui non subesse,
 &c. The like answer though in modester termes, was sent to another of the 
Popes
 by 
St. Lewis
; a man of a most mild and sweet disposition, yet unwilling to forgoe his Royalties.


His spiritual power is almost as little in sub∣stance, though more in shew; for whereas the 
Councill
 of 
Trent
 hath been an especiall authorizer of the 
Popes
 spiritual supremacy; the 
French
 Church never would receive it: by this means the 
Bishops
 keep in their hands their own full au∣thority, whereof an obedience to the decrees of that 
Councill
 would deprive them. It was truly said by 
St. Gregory,
 and they well knew it: Lib. 7. Epist. 70. 
Si unus universalis est, restat ut vos Episcopinon Sitis.
 Further the 
Ʋniversity
 of 
Pa∣ris
 in their Declaration 
Anno
 1610. above menti∣oned, plainly affirme that it is directly opposite to the doctrine of the Church, which the 
Ʋniver∣sity
 of 
Paris
 hath alwaies maintained; that the 
Pope
 hath power of a Monarch in the spiritual Government of the Church. To look upon higher times, when the 
Councill
 of 
Constance
 had submit∣ted


the authority of the 
Pope,
 unto that of a 
Councill. John Gerson Theologus Parisiensis magni nominis,
 defended that deeree, and entitleth them 
Perniciosos esse ad modum adulatores, qui tyranidem istam in Ecclesia invexere, quasi nullis Regum teneatur vinculis; quasi neque parere debeat Concilio Pontifex: nec ab eo judicare queat.
 The 
Kings
 themselves also befreind their 
Clergy
 in this Cause, and therefore not onely protested against the 
Council
 of 
Trent,
 wherein the spiritual tyranny was generally consented to by the 
Catholike
 facti∣on, but 
Henry
 the second also would not acknow∣ledge them to be a 
Council,
 calling them in his Let∣ters by no other name than 
Conventus Tridenti∣nus
: An indignity which the, 
Fathers
 took very offensively.


Put the principal thing, in which it behooveth them not to acknowledge his spiritual supremacy is the Collation of 
Benefices
 and 
Bishopricks,
 and the 
Annates
 and first fruits thence arising. The first and greatest controversie between the 
Pope
 and 
Princes
 of 
Christendom
 was about the bestow∣ing the Livings of the Church, and giving the in∣vestiture unto 
Bishops.
 The 
Popes
 had long thir∣sted after that authority, as being a great meanes to advance their followers, and establish their own greatness; for which cause, in divers petty 
Coun∣cels,
 the receiving of any 
Ecclesiastical
 preferment of a 
Lay-man
 was decreed to be 
Simony.
 But this did little edifie with such patrons as had good Li∣vings: As soon as ever 
Hi
el brand,
 in the Cata∣logue of the 
Popes
 called 
Gregory
 the seventh, came to the throne of 
Rome,
 he set himself entirely to


effect the business as well in 
Germany
 now he was 
Pope,
 as he had done in 
France
 whilst he was 
Le∣gate.
 He commandeth therefore 
Henry
 the third 
Emperour: Ne deinceps Episcopatus & Beneficia
 (they are 
Platina
's own words) 
per cupiditatem Simoniacam committat, aliter se usurum in ipsum censuris Ecclesiasticis.
 To this injustice when the 
Emperour
 would not yeild, he called a solemn 
Council
 at the 
Lateran,
 where the 
Emperour
 was pronounced to be 
Simoniacal,
 and afterwards ex∣communicated: Neither would this 
Tyrant
 ever leave persecuting of him till he had laid him in his grave. After this followed great strugling between the 
Popes
 and the 
Emperours
 for this very matter; but in the end the 
Popes
 got the victory. In 
Eng∣land
 here, he that first bickered about it was 
Willi∣am Rufus,
 the controversie being, whether he or 
Pope Ʋrban
 should invest 
Anselme Archbishop
 of 
Canterbury. Anselme
 would receive his investiture of none but the 
Pope
; whereupon the 
King
 ba∣nished him the Realm, into which he was not ad∣mitted till the raign of 
Henry
 the second. He to endear himself with his 
Clergy
 relinquished his right to the 
Pope
; but afterwards repenting himself of it, he revoked his grant. Neither did the 
English Kings
 wholly loose it, till the raign of that unfor∣tunate Prince 
King John, Edward
 the first again recovered it, and his Successors kept it.


The 
Popes
 having with much violence and op∣position wrested into their hands this Priviledge, of nominating 
Priests
 and investing 
Bishops,
 they spared not to lay on what taxes they pleased; as on the 
Benefices, First fruits, Pensions, Subsidies,


Fifteenths, Tenths
; and on the 
Bishopricks,
 for 
Palls, Mitres, Crosiers, Rings,
 and I know not what bables. By these means the Churches were so impoverished; that upon complaint made unto the 
Council
 of 
Basel,
 all these cheating tricks, these 
aucupia & eapilandi rationes,
 were abolished. This 
Decree
 was called 
Pragmatica sanctio,
 and was con∣firmed in 
France
 by 
Charles
 the seventh, 
Anno
 1438. An act of singular improvement to the 
Church,
 and 
Kingdom
 of 
France,
 which yearly be∣fore, as the Court of Parliament manifested to 
Lewis
 the eleventh had drained the State of a mil∣lion of Crowns. Since which time the 
Kings
 of 
France
 have sometimes omitted the vigour of the 
Sanction,
 and sometimes also exacted it, according as their affairs with the 
Pope
 stood: for which cause it was called, 
fraenum pontificum:
 At the last 
King Francis
 the first having conquered 
Millain,
 fell unto this composition with his 
Holiness,
 namely, that upon the falling of any 
Abbacie
 or 
Bishoprick
 the 
King
 should have six moneths time to present a fit man unto him, whom the 
Pope
 legally might invest: If the 
King
 neglected his time limited, the 
Pope
 might take the benefit of the relapse, and in∣stitute whom he pleased. So is it also with the in∣ferior benifices between the 
Pope
 and the 
Patrons
; insomuch that any or every 
Lay-patron
 and 
Bishop
 together in 
England,
 hath for ought I see (at the least in this particular) as great a spiritual supremacy as the 
Pope
 in 
France,


Nay to proceed further, and to shew how meer∣ly titular both his supremacies are, as well the 
spi∣ritual
 as the 
temporal,
 you may plainly see in the


case of the 
Jesuites,
 w
ch
 was thus. In the year 1609. the 
Jesuites
 had obtained of 
King Henry
 the fourth license to read again in their Colledge of 
Paris:
 but when their Letters Patents came to be verified in the Court of Parliament, the 
Rector
 and 
Ʋni∣versity
 opposed them. On the seventeenth of 
De∣cember, Anno
 1611. both parties came to have an hearing; and the 
Ʋniversity
 got the day, unless the 
Jesuits
 would subscribe unto these four points: 
Viz.
 First, that the 
Council
 was above the 
Pope.
 Secondly, that the 
Pope
 had not temporal power over 
Kings,
 and could not by Excommunication deprive them of their Realms and Estates. Third∣ly, that Clergy men having heard of any attempt or conspiracy against the King, or his Realm, or any matter of treason in Confession, they were bound to reveal it. And fourthly, that Clergy men were subject to the 
Secular Prince,
 or 
Politick Magi∣strate.
 It appeared by our former discourse, what title, or no power, they had left the 
Pope
 over the estates and preferments of the 
French.
 By these propositions (to which the 
Jusuits
 in the end subscribed, I know not with what mental reservation) it is more than evident, that they have left him no command, neither over their con∣sciences nor their persons. So that all things con∣sidered, we may justly say of the Papal power in 
France,
 what the 
Papists
 falsly say of 
Erasmus,
 namely, that it is 
Nomen sine rebus.


In one thing onely his authority here is entire, which is his immediate protection of all the Or∣ders of 
Friers,
 and also a 
superintendency
 or supreme eye over the 
Monks,
 who acknowledge very small


obedience, if any at all, to the 
French Bishops.
 For though at the beginning every part and member of the 
Diocess
 was directly under the care and com∣mand of the 
Bishop
; yet it so happened at the buil∣ding of 
Monestaries
 in the 
Western Church,
 the 
Abbots
 being men of good parts and sincere life, grew much into the envy of their 
Diocesan.
 For which cause, as also to be more at their own com∣mand, they made suit to the 
Pope,
 that they might be freed from that subjection: 
Ʋtque intutelam Dive Petri admitterentur.
 A proposition very plausible to his 
Holiness
 ambition, which by this meanes might the sooner be raised to his height, and there∣fore without difficulty granted: This gap opened, first the several Orders of 
Friers,
 and after them the 
Deans
 and 
Chapters
 purchased to themselves the like exemptions. In this the 
Popes
 power was wonderfully strengthened, in having such able and so many props to uphold his authority; it being a true 
Maxime
 in State, 
Quod qui privilegia obtenent, ad eadem conservanda, teneantur authoritatem conce∣dentis tueri.
 This continued till the 
Council
 of 
Trent
 unquestioned, where the 
Bishops
 much com∣plained of their want of authority, and imputed all the schismes and vices in the Church to this, that their hands were tied. Hereupon the 
Popes Legates
 thought it fit to restore to their jurisdicti∣on their 
Deans
 and 
Chapters:
 At that of the 
Monks
 and 
Monestaries
 they were more sticking: till at the last 
Sebastian Pighinus
 one of the 
Popes
 Officers found out for them this satisfaction, that they should have an eye and inspection into the lives of the 
Monks,
 not by any authority of their


own, 
Sed tanquam a sede Apostolica delegati.
 But as for the Orders of 
Friers,
 the 
Pope
 would not by any means give way unto it. They are his 
Jani∣zaries,
 and the strongest bulwarks of his Empire, and are therefore called in a good Author, 
Egre∣gia Romanae Curiae instrumenta.
 So that with them the 
Diocesan
 hath nothing to do; each severall religious House being as a Court of 
Peculiars,
 subject onely to the great Metropolitan of 
Rome.


This near dependance on his 
Holiness
 maketh this generation a great deal more regardless of their behaviour than otherwise it would be, though since the growth of the reformation, shame and fear hath much reformed them. They have still how∣soever a spice of their former wantonness, and on occasions will permit themselves a little good fel∣lowship. And to say truth of them, I think them to be the best Companions in 
France
 for a journey, but not for acquaintance. They live very merrily, and keep a competent table, more I suppose than can stand with their vow, and yet far short of that affluency whereof many of our books accuse them. It was my chance to be in an house of the 
Francis∣cans
 in 
Paris,
 where one of the 
Friers,
 upon the en∣treaty of our Friend, had us into the Hall, it being then the time of their Refectory, a favour not vul∣gar. There saw we the Brothers sitting all on a side, and every one a pretty distance from the o∣ther; their several commons being a dish of pot∣tage, a chop of mutton, a dish of Cherries, and a large glass of water. This provision, together with a liberal allowance of ease, and a little of stu∣dy,


keepeth them exceeding plump and in good liking, and maketh them, having little to take thought for, maketh them (as I said before) pas∣sing good Company. As I travelled to 
Orleans
 we had in coach with us three of these mortified sinners; two of the Order of 
St. Austin,
 and one 
Francis∣can,
 the merriest Crickets that ever chirped. No∣thing in them but mad tricks and complements, and for musick they would sing like Hawks; when we came to a vein of good Wine, they would chear up themselves and their neighbour with this comfortable doctrine, 
Vivamus ut bibamus, et bi∣bamus ut vivamus
: and for Courtship, and toy∣ing with the 
Wenches,
 you would easily beleeve it had been a trade, with which they had not a little been acquainted. Of all men when I am married God keep my wife from them, and till then my neighbours.


On the other side the common Priests of 
France
 are so dull and blockish, that you shall hardly meet with a more contemptible people. The meanest of our 
Curats
 in 
England
 for spirit and discourse are very 
Popes
 to them: for learning they may safely say with 
Socrates, Hoc tantum sci∣mus, quod nescimus
: but you must not look that they should say it in Latine. Tongues they have none but those of their 
Mother
 and the 
Masse Book
; of which last they can make no use▪ unless the Book be open, and then also the Book is fain to read it self: for in the last 
Romanum Missale,
 established by the authority of 
Pius
 the fifth, and recognized by 
Clement
 the eighth, 
Anno
 1600.


every sillable is diversly marked, whether it must be sounded long or short; just as the varifying examples are in the end of the 
English Grammer.
 When I had lost my self in the streets of 
Paris,
 and wanted 
French
 to enquire homeward, I used to apply my self to some of this reverend habit: But 
O soeclum insipiens et infacitum
; you might as easi∣ly have wrought water out of the flint, as a word of 
Latine
 out of their mouthes. Nor is this the disease of the vulgar 
Masse mumbler
 onely, it hath also infected the right worshipful of the Clergy:


In 
Orleans
 I had business with a 
Chanoin
 of the Church of 
St. Croiz,
 a fellow that wore his sur∣plice (it was made of Lawne and Lace) with as good a credit as ever I saw any; and for the com∣liness and capacity of his cap, he might have been a 
Metropolitan
: perceiving me to speak to him in a strange Tongue (for it was 
Latine
) he very learnedly asked me this question; 
Num potestis loqui Gallica
? which when I had denied, at last he brake out into another Interrogatory: 
viz. Quandiu fuistis in Gallice.
 To conclude having read over my Letter, with two or three deadly pangs, and six times rubbing of his temples, he dismissed me with this cordial; and truly it was very comfortable to my humor. 
Ego necotias vestras curabo.
 A strange beast and one of the greatest prodigies of Ignorance, that ever I met with in mans apparrel.


Such being the 
Romish Priests,
 it is no marvail if the 
French
 be no more setled and resolute in their Religion. If the eye be blind, the body cannot chuse but be darkned: and certainly there


is nothing that hath prepared many of this Realm more to embrace the reformation, than this block∣ishness of their own Clergy: an excellent ad∣vantage to the 
Protestant Ministers,
 could they but well humor it; and likely to be a fair inlarge∣ment to their party, if well husbanded. Besides this the 
French Catholicks
 are not over earnest in their cause, and so do lye open to the assaults of any politick enemy; to deal with them by main force of argument, and in the servent spirit of zeal (as the 
Protestants
 too often do) is not the way: Men uncapable of opposition (as this people generally are) and furious, if once thwar∣ted, must be tamed as 
Alexander
 did his Horse 
Bucephalus.
 Those that came to back him with the tyranny of the spur and a cudgel, he quickly threw down, and mischieved; 
Alexander
 came otherwise prepared, for turning his Horse toward the Sun, that he might not see the impatiency of his shadow, he spake kindly to him, and gently clapping him on the back, till he had left his flinging and wildness, he lightly leapeth into the saddle, the Horse never making resistance. 
Plu∣tarch
 in his life relateth the storie, and this the 
Morall
 of it.






CHAP. XII.




The correspondency between the King and the Pope: This Pope: An Omen of the Mar∣riage of 
France
 with 
England
; An Eng∣lish


Catholick's conceit of it: His Holiness 
Nuntio
 in 
Paris
: A learned argument to prove the Popes universality. A continuation of the Allegory of 
Jacob
 and 
Esau.
 The Protestants compelled to leave their Forts and Towns: Their present estate and strength: The last War against them justly undertaken: not fairly mannaged. Their insolence and disobedience to the Kings command. Their purpose to have themselves a free Estate. The War not a War of Religion. King 
James
 in justice could not assist them more than he did: First forsaken by their own party. Their happiness before the War. The Court of the Edict. A view of them in their Churches: The commendation which the 
French Papists
 give to the Church of 
Eng∣land
: Their Discipline and Ministery, 
&c.




WE have seen the strength and subtilty, as also somewhat of his poverties at home, let us now see the alliance which this 
French Esau
 hath abroad in the world: in what credit and opi∣nion he standeth in the eye of 
B
e
i
 the 
Romish Hittite,
 the daughter of whose abominations he hath married: And here I find him to hold good correspondency, as being the eldest son of the Church: and an equal poize to ballance the af∣fairs of 
Italy
 against the potency of 
Spain.
 O
 this ground the present 
Pope
 hath alwayes shewed


himself very favorable to the 
French
 side, well knowing into what perils a necessary and impoli∣tick dependance on the 
Spanish
 party onely, would one day bring the state 
Ecclesiastick.
 As in the general, so in many particulars also, hath he ex∣pressed much affection unto him: as first by ta∣king into his hand the 
Valtolin,
 till his Son of 
France
 might settle himself in some course to reco∣ver it: secondly, his not stirring in the behalf of the 
Spaniard
 during the last warrs in 
Italy
; and thirdly, his speedy and willing grant of the dispen∣sation of 
Madames
 marriage, of which his 
Papacy
 was so large an 
Omen,
 so fair a 
Prognostick.


Est Deus in nobis agitante calescimus illi.

The 
Lar,
 or 
Angel Guardian
 of his thoughts ha∣stened him in it, in whose time there was so plausi∣ble a presage, that it must be accomplished. For thus it standeth: 
Malachy
 now a 
Saint,
 then one of the first 
Apostles
 of the 
Irish,
 one much reveren∣ced in his memory to this day by that Nation, left behind him by way of prophesie a certain number of 
Motto's
 in 
Latine,
 telling those, that there should follow that certain number of 
Popes
 onely, whose conditions successively should be hereby expressed in those 
Motto's,
 according to that order he had, placed them in. 
Messingham
 an Irish Priest, & Master of the Colledge of Irish fugitives in 
Pa∣ris,
 hath collected together the lives of all the 
Irish Saints,
 which book himself shewed me. In that volume, and the life of that 
Saint,
 are the several 
Motto's,
 and the several 
Popes,
 set down colume∣wise


one against the other. I compared the lives of them with the 
Motto's,
 as farre as my memory would carry me, and found many of them very answerable: as I remember there are thirty six 
Motto's
 yet to come, and when just as many 
Popes
 are joyned to them, they are of opinion (for so 
Malachy
 foretold) that either the world should end, or the 
Popedom
 be ruined. Amongst others, the 
Motto
 of the present 
Pope
 is most remarkable, and sutable to the cheif action likely to happen in his time, being this [
Lilium & Rosa
] which they interpret, and in my mind not unhappily, to be in∣tended to the conjunction of the 
French Lillie
 and the 
English Rose.
 To take from me any suspition of imposture, he shewed me an old book, printed almost two hundred years ago, written by one 
Wi∣on
 a 
Flemming,
 and comparing the number of the 
Motto's
 with the Catalogue of the 
Popes,
 I found the name of 
Ʋrban
 (now 
Pope
) directly to answer it: upon this ground an 
English Catholike,
 whose acquaintance I gained in 
France,
 made a Copy of Verses in French, and presented them to the 
Eng∣lish Embassadors,
 the 
Earles of Carlisle
 and 
Holland
: because he is my Friend, and the conceit is not to be despised, I begged them of him, and these are they.



Lilia juncta Rosis.


Embleme de bon' presage de l' alliance de la 
France,
 avec l' 
Angleterre.






Ce grand dieu quid' un oecl voit tout ce que les a
s


Souos leurs voiles sacrez vont a nous yeax cathans.


Descouvre quelque fois ainsi qui bon luy semble


Et les moux avenir, et les biene tout ensemble.


Ainsc fit il iadis a ce luy, qui primier,


Dans l' Ireland porta de la foye le laurier,


Malachie son nom, qu' autymon de l' Eglise


On verra soir un jour il qui pour sa devise


Aura les Lys chenus ioints aux plus belles fleures


Qui docent le pin
temps de leurs doubles couleurs,


CHARLES est le fleuron de la roso pour pree


HENRITTE est le Lys, que la plus belle pree


De la France n
urit, pour estr
 quelque iour


Et la Reine des fl
ures, et des roses l' amour


Adorable banquet bien beu reux cour
nne


Que la bonte du ciel, en parrage nous donne


Heu reux ma partie, heu reux mille fois


Cela qui te fera reflorrier en les Roys.



With these verses I take my leave of his 
Holiness,
 wishing none of his successors would presage worse luck unto 
England
: I go now to see his 
Nuntio,
 to whose house the same 
English Catholike
 brought me, but he was not at home, his name is 
Ferdinando d' Espado
; a man (as he informed me) able to discharge the trust reposed in him by his Master, and one that very well affecteth the 
Eng∣lish
 Nation He hath the fairest 
Eglise,
 and keepeth the largest retinue of any ordinary 
Embassadour
 in the Realm, and maketh good his Masters suprema∣cy by his own precedency. To honour him, against he was to take this charge, his Holiness created him 
Bishop
 of 
Damiata
 in 
Egypt.
 A place, which I am certain never any of them saw but in a 
Map
; and for the profits he receiveth thence, they will


never be able to pay for his 
Crosier.
 But this is one of his 
Holiness
 usual policies, to satisfie his fol∣lowers with empty titles. So he made 
Bishop
 whom he sent to govern for him in 
England
 Bishop of 
Chalcedon
 in 
Asia
: and 
Smith
 also, who is come over about the same business with the 
Queen, Bishop of Archidala
 a City of 
Thrace.
 An old 
English Doctor
 used it as an especial argument, to prove the Universality of power in the 
Pope,
 be∣cause he could ordain 
Bishops
 over all Cities in 
Christendom.
 If he could as easily also give them the revenue; this reason I confess would much sway me, till then I am sorry, that men should still be boyes and play with bubbles: By the same au∣thority he might do well, to make all his Courtiers 
Kings,
 and he were sure to have a most Royal and beggerly 
Court
 of it.


To proceed a little further in the 
Allegory
: so it is, that when 
Jacob
 saw 
Esau
 to have incurred his Fathers and Mothers anger, for his heathenish marriage; he set himself to bereave his elder bro∣ther of his blessing: prayers and the sweet smell of his Venison, the sweet smelling of his sacrifices obtained of his 
Lord
 and 
Father
 a blessing for him, for indeed the 
Lord
 hath given unto this his 
French Jacob,
 as it is in the 
Text: The dew of heaven and the fatness of the earth, and plenty of corn and Wine
 Gen. 27. 5, 28. It followeth in the 41. ver. of the chap∣ter: 
And
 Esau 
hated
 Jacob, 
because of the blessing wherewith his Father had blessed him: and
 Esau 
said in his heart, the dayes of mourning for my Father are at hand, then will I slay my brother
 Jacob: The e∣vent of which his bloudy resolution was, that 
Jacob



was fain to relinquish all that he had and fly unto his 
Ʋncle.
 This last story expresseth very much of the estate of the 
French
 Church. The 
Papists
 ha∣ted the 
Protestants
 to see them thrive and encrease so much amongst them; this hatred moved them to a war, by which they hoped to root them out all together; and this war compelled the 
Protestants
 to abandon their good Towns, and strong Holds, and all their possessions, and to fly unto their friends wheresoever they could find them. And indeed the present estate of the 
Protestants
 is not much better than that of 
Jacob
 in 
Mesopotamia,
 nor much different; the blessing which they ex∣pect, lyeth more in the seed than in the harvest, and well may they hope to be restored to the love and bosome of their brethren, of which as yet they have no assurance: For their strength it consisteth principally in their 
prayers to God
; and secondly, in their obedience to their 
King
: Within these two Fortresses, if they can keep themselves, they need fear none ill, because they shall deserve none. The onely outward strengths they have left them, are the two Towns of 
Moutabon
 and 
Rochell
; the one deemed invincible, the other threatned a spee∣dy destruction. The 
Duke of Espernon
 (at my being there) lay round about it, and it was said, that the Town was in very bad terms; all the neigh∣bouring Townes, to whose opposition they most trusted, having yeilded at the first sight of the Ca∣non. 
Rochell
 its thought cannot be forced by as∣saults, nor compelled by a famine; some 
Protestants
 are glad of it, and hope to see the 
French
 Church restored to its former powerableness, by the resist∣ance


of that Town meerly: I rather think, that the perverse and stubborn condition of it will at last drive the young 
King
 into a fury, and incite him to revenge their contradiction on their innocent Friends, now disarmed and disabled. Then will they see at last the issue of their own peremptory resolutions, and begin to beleive, that the Heathen 
Historian
 was of the two the better 
Christian,
 when he gave us this note. 
Non turpe est ab eo vinci, quem vincere esset nefas, neque illi, in honeste etiam sum∣mitti, quem fortuna super omnes extulisset.


This weakness and misery which hath now be∣fallen the 
Protestants,
 was an effect, I confess, of the ill will which the other party bare them; but that they bare them ill will, was a fruit of their own grafting. In this circumstance they were nothing like 
Jacob,
 who in the hatred, which his brother 
Esau
 had to him, was meerly passive. They being active also in the birth of it. And indeed the lamentable and bloudy war which fell upon them, they not onely endeavoured not to avoid, but in∣vited. During the raign of 
Henry
 the fourth, who would not see it, and the troublesome minority of 
Lewis
 the thirteenth. who could not molest them, they had made themselves masters of ninety nine Towns, well fortified and enabled for a siege. A strength too great for any one faction to keep to∣ther under a 
King
 which desires to be himself and so rule his people. In the opinion of their potency they call Assemblies, Parliaments, as it were, when and as often as they pleased. There they consulted of the common affairs of Religion, made new Laws of government, removed and exchanged their ge∣neral


Officers, the 
Kings
 leave all this while never so much as formally asked. Had they onely been guilty of too much power, that crime alone had been sufficient to have raised a war against them, it not standing with the safety and honour of a 
King,
 not to be the absolute commander of his own subjects. But in this their licentious calling of Assemblies, they abused their power into a neg∣lect, and in not dissolving them at his Majesties commandement, they increased their neglect into a disobedience. The Assembly which principally the war and their ruine, was that of 
Rochell,
 called by the 
Protestants
 presently upon the 
Kings
 journey into 
Bearne.
 This general meeting the 
King
 pro∣hibited by his especial Edicts: declaring all them to be guilty of treason, which notwithstanding, they would not hearken to, but very undutifully went on in their purposes: It was said by a Gen∣tleman of that party, and one that had been em∣ployed in many of their affairs, that the very zeal of some who had the guiding of their consciences, had thrusted them into those desperate courses, and I beleive him.


Tantum Religio potuit suadere malorum.


Being assembled, they sent the 
King
 a Remon∣strance of their greivances, to which the 
Duke Les∣diguiers,
 in a letter to them written, gives them a 
e y fair and plausible answer, wherein also he en∣treateth them to obey the 
Kings
 Edict, and break off the Assembly: Upon the receit of this Letter those of the Assembly published a Declaration,


wherein they verified the meeting to be lawful; and their purpose not to dismiss themselves till their desires were granted. This affront done to the 
King,
 made him gather together his forces; yet at the 
Duke of Lesdiguiers
 request, he allowed them twenty four dayes respite before his Armies should march towards them. He offered them also very fair and reasonable conditions, such al∣most as their 
Deputies
 had sollicited, but far better than those which they were glad to accept, when all their Towns were taken from them. 
Profect
 meluctabilis fatorum vis, cujus fortunam mutare constituit, ejus corrumpit consilia:
 It holds very rightly in this people, who turned a deaf ear to all good advise, and were resolved, it seemeth, not to hear the voice of the charmer, charmed he never so sweetly. In their Assembly therefore they make Laws and Orders to regulate their disobedience; as that no peace should be made without the con∣sent of the general Convocation, about paying of the Souldiers wages, for the detaining of the Re∣venues of the 
King
 and the 
Clergy,
 and the like. They also have divided 
France
 into seven circles or parts, assigning over every circle several Gene∣rals and Lieutenants, and prescribed Orders how those Generals should proceed in the warr.


Thus we see the 
Kings
 Army levied upon no sleight grounds. His regal authority was neglected, his especial Edicts violated, his gratious proffers slighted, his revenues forbidden him, and his Realm divided before his face, and alotted unto Officers not of his own election. Had the prosecution of his


action been as fair as the cause was just and legal, the 
Protestants
 onely had deserved the infamy: But 
hinc illae lachrymae,
 the 
King
 so behaved himself in it, that he suffered the sword to walk at randome, as if his main design had been, not to correct his peo∣ple, but to ruine them. I will instance onely in the tyrannical slaughter which he permitted at the taking of 
Nigrepelisse
 a Town of 
Queren,
 where indeed the Souldiers shewed the very rigor of se∣verity, which either a barbarous Victor could in∣flict, or a vanquished people suffer. 
Nec ullum saevitiae genus omisit ira & Victoria:
 as 
Tacitus
 of the angred 
Romans
: For they spared neither man, nor woman, nor child, all equally subject to the cruelty of the Sword and the Conqueror: the streets paved with dead carcasses, the channels run∣ning with the bloud of Christians: no noise in the streets, but of such as were welcoming death, or suing for life. The Churches, which the 
Gothes
 spared in the sack of 
Rome,
 were at this place made the 
Theaters
 of 
lust and bloud
; neither priviledge of Sanctuary, nor fear of 
God,
 in whose House they were, qualifying their outrage. Thus in the Com∣mon places.

At domus interior gemitu miseroque tumultu


Miscetur: Penitus{que} eavae clangoribus aedes


Faeminiis ululant —


As 
Virgill
 in the ruine of 
Troy.

But the calamities which befel the men were mer∣ciful and sparing, if compared with those which the women suffered: when the Souldiers had made


them the Subjects of their lust, they made them after the subjects of their fury; in that onely pit∣tiful to that poor and distressed Sex, that they did not let them survive their honours. Such of them, who out of fear and faintness had made but little resistance, had the favour to be stabbed; but those, whose virtue and courage maintained their bodies valiantly from the rape of those villains, had the secrets of Nature (
Procul hinc este cast ae misericor∣des aures
) filled with Gun-powder, and so blown into ashes. Whether, O 
Ye Divine Powers,
 is hu∣manity fled, when it is not to be found in Christi∣ans? or where shall we find the effects of a pitti∣ful nature, when men are become so unnatural? It is said, that the 
King
 was ignorant of this barba∣rousness, and offended at it: Offended, I perswade my self, he could not but be, unless he had totally put off himself and degenerated into a 
Tyger
: but for his ignorance, I dare not conceive it to be any other than that of 
Nero,
 an ignorance rather in his eye than in his understanding. 
Subduxit oculos Nero
 (saith 
Tacitus) jussitque scelera, non spectavit.


Though the 
Protestants
 deserved affliction for their disobedience, yet this was an execution above the nature of a punishment, a misery beyond the condition of the crime. True it is, and I shall ne∣ver acquit them of it, that in the time of their pros∣perity they had done the 
King
 many affronts, and committed many acts of disobedience and inso∣lency, which justly occasioned the warr against them. For besides those already recited, they themselves first brake those 
Edicts,
 the due execu∣tion


whereof seemed to have been their onely petition. The 
King
 by his 
Edict
 of 
Pacification
 had licensed the free exercise of both Religions, and thereupon permitted the 
Priests
 and 
Jesuites
 to preach in the Towns of 
Caution,
 being then in the hands of the 
Protestants.
 On the other side, the 
Protestants
 assembled at 
Loudan,
 straitly comman∣ded all their Governours, Mayors, and Sheriffs, not to suffer any 
Jesuits,
 or any of any other Order, to preach in their Towns, although licensed by the 
Bishop
 of the 
Diocess:
 When upon dislike of their proceedings in that Assembly, the 
King
 had declared their meetings to be unlawful, and con∣trary to his peace, and this Declaration was verifi∣ed against them by the Parliament; they notwith∣standing would not separate themselves, but stood still upon terms of capitulation, and the justifia∣bleness of their action. Again, whereas it hap∣pened that the 
Lord
 of 
Privas,
 Town full of those of the Religion, dyed in the year 1620. and left his Daughter and Heir in the bed and marriage of the 
Viscount
 of 
Cheylane
 a Catholike; this new Lord, according to law and right, in his own Town changed the former Garrison, putting his own servants and dependants in their places. Upon this the 
Protestants
 of the Town and Country about it, draw themselves in Troops, surprize many of the Towns about it, and at the last compelled the young Gentleman to fly from his inheritance; an action which jumping even with the time of the Assembly at 
Rochell,
 made the 
King
 more doubtful of their sincerity. I could add to these divers others of their undutiful practises, being the


effects of too much felicity, and of a fortune which they could not govern. 
Atqui animus meminisse horret, luctu{que} refuget.


These their insolencies and unruly acts of diso∣bedience made the 
King
 and his 
Council
 suspect that their designs tended further than Religion; and that their purpose might be to make them∣selves a free Estate, after the example of 
Geneva
 and the 
Low Country-men.
 The late power which they had taken of calling their own 
Synods
 and 
Convocations,
 was a strong argument of their pur∣pose: so also was the intelligence which they held with those of their faith at the 
Synod
 at 
Sappe,
 cal∣led by the permission of 
Henry
 the fourth on the first of 
October, Anno
 1603. They not onely gave audience to Ambassadours, and received Letters from forrain Princes, but also importuned his Ma∣jesty to have a general liberty of going into any other Countreys, and assigning at their Counsel a matter of especial importance. And therefore the 
King
 upon a foresight of the dangers, wisely pro∣hibited them to go to any Assemblies without a particular licence, upon pain to be declared Tray∣tors. Since that time growing into greater strength, whensoever they had occasion of busi∣ness with 
King Lewis,
 they would never treat with him but by their 
Embassadors,
 and upon especial Articles. An ambition above the quality of those that profess themselves 
Sorbonets,
 and the onely way, as 
Du Seirres
 noteth, to make an estate in the 
State
: but the answers made unto the 
King
 by those of 
Alerack
 and 
Montanbon
 are pregnant proofs of their intent and meaning in this kind.


The first, being summoned by the 
King
 and his Army the 22. of 
July, Anno
 1621. returned thus, that the 
King
 should suffer them to enjoy their liberties, and leave their fortifications as they were for them of their lives, and so they would declare themselves to be his subjects. They of 
Montan∣bon
 made a fuller expression of the general design 
Disobedience
; which was, that they were resolved to live and die in the 
Ʋnion
 of the Churches: had they said, for the 
Service
 of the 
King,
 it had been spoken bravely, but now rebelliously.


This union and confederacy of theirs 
King Lewis
 used to call, 
the Common-wealth of Rochell
; for the overthrow of which he alwayes protested that he had onely taken Arms: and if we compare circumstances, we shall find it to be no other. In the second of 
April,
 before he had as yet advanced into the Feild, he published a 
Declaration
 in favour of all those of the Religion, which would contain themselves within duty and obedience. And whereas some of 
Tours
 at the beginning of the warrs had tumultuously molested the 
Protestants
 at the burial of one of their dead, five of them by the 
Kings
 especial commandement were openly executed: When the warr was hottest abroad, those of the 
Gospel
 at 
Paris
 lived as securely as ever, and had their accustomed meetings at 
Cha∣rentan.
 So had those also of other places. More∣over when tidings came to 
Paris
 of the 
Duke
 of 
Mayens
 death slain before 
Montanbon,
 the 
Rascal French,
 according to their hot headed dispositions, breathed out nothing but ruine to the 
Hugonots
; the 
Duke
 of 
Montbazon,
 Governour of the City,


commanded their houses and the streets to be safely guarded. After when this Rabble had burnt down their Temple at 
Charentan,
 the Court of 
Parliament
 on the day following ordained, that it should be built up again in a more beautiful man∣ner, and that at the 
Kings
 charge. Add to this, that since the ending of the warrs, and the reducti∣on of almost all their Towns, we have not seen the least alteration of Religion. Besides that, they have been permitted to hold a National 
Synod
 at 
Clarenton
 for establishing the truth of their do∣ctrine, against the errors of 
Arminius
 Professor of 
Leiden
 in 
Holland.


All things thus considered in their true being, I cannot see for what cause our late Soveraign should suffer so much envy as he did, for not gi∣ving them assistance. I cannot but say, that my self hath too often condemned his remissness in that cause, which upon better consideration I can∣not tell how he should have dealt in. Had he been a meddler in it further than he was, he had not so much preserved Religion as supported rebellion; besides the consequence of the example. To have assisted the disobedient 
French,
 under the colour of the liberty of Conscience, had been onely to have taught that 
King
 a way into 
England
 upon the same pretence, and to have troad the path of his own hazard. Further, he had not long before denyed succor to his own children, when he might have given upon a better ground, and for a fairer purpose; and could not now in honour counte∣nance the like action in another: For that other denial of his helping hand, I much doubt how farre


posterity will acquit him, though certainly he was a good Prince, and had been an happy instrument of the peace of 
Christendom,
 had not the later part of his raign happened in a time so full of troubles. So that betwixt the quietness of his nature, and the turbulencies of his later dayes, he fell into that mi∣serable exigent mentioned in the 
Historian: Miser∣rimum est cum alicui aut natura sua excedenda est, aut minuenda dignitas.
 Add to this, that the 
French
 had first been abandoned at home by their own friends: of seven Generals, whom they had ap∣pointed for the seven circles into which they divi∣ded all 
France,
 four of them never giving them incouragement. The three which accepted of those inordinate Governments, were the 
Duke
 of 
Rohan
 his Brother Mr. 
Sonbise,
 and the 
Marquess la Force
: the four others being the 
Duke
 of 
Tre∣moville,
 the 
Earl of Chastillon,
 the 
Duke
 of 
Lesdi∣guier,
 and the 
Duke
 of 
Bovillon,
 who should have commanded in cheif: So that the 
French Prote∣stants
 cannot say, that he was first wanting unto them, but they to themselves. If we demand what should move the 
French Protestants
 to this rebel∣lious contradiction of his Majesties commande∣ments, we must answer, that it was too much happi∣ness: 
Causa hujus belli eadem, quae omnium nimid faelicitas
: as 
Florus
 of the Civil warrs between 
Caesar
 and 
Pompey.
 Before the year 1620. when they fell first into the 
Kings
 dis-favour, they were possessed of almost an hundred good Towns well fortified for their safety, besides beautiful houses and ample possessions in the Villages. They slept every man under his own Vine, and his own Fig-tree,


neither fearing nor needing to fear the least disturbance with those of the Catholike party; they were grown so intimate and entire by reason of their inter-marriages, that a very few years would have made them incorporated, if not into one faith, yet into one family: For their better satisfaction in matters of Justice, it pleased 
King Henry
 the fourth to erect a chamber in the Court of 
Parliament
 of 
Paris
 purposely for them. It consisted of one 
President
 and sixteen 
Counsellors
; their office, to take knowledge of all the Causes and Suits of them of the Reformed Religion, as well within the jurisdiction of the 
Parliament
 of 
Paris,
 as also in 
Normandy
 and 
Brittain,
 till there should be a Chamber erected in either of them. There were appointed also two Chambers in the 
Parliament
 of 
Bourdeaux
 and 
Grenoble,
 and one at 
Chasters
 for the 
Parliament
 at 
Tholoza.
 These Chambers were called, 
Les Chambres de l' Edict,
 because they were established by a special 
Edict
 at the Town of 
Nantes
 in 
Brittain, April
 the eighth; 
Anno
 1598. In a word, they lived so secure and happy, that one would have thought their felicities had been immortal.

O faciles dare summa Deos eadem{que} tuer


Difficiles!

And yet they are not brought so low, but that they may live happily, if they can be content to live obediently, that which is taken from them be∣ing matter of strength onely, not privi∣ledge.


Let us now look upon them in their Churches; which we shall find as empty of magnificence as ceremony: to talk amongst them of Common prayers, were to fright them with a second coming of the 
Mass:
 and to mention Prayers at the bu∣rial of the dead, were to perswade them of a 
Pur∣gatory.
 Painted glass in a Church window is ac∣counted for the flag and ensign of 
Antichrist,
 and for 
Organs,
 no question, but they are deemed the 
Devils Bap pipes:
 Shew them a Surplice, and they cry out, a rag of the 
Whore
 of 
Babylon,
 yet a Sheet upon a Woman when she is in child
bed is a grea∣ter abomination than the other: A strange people, that could never think the 
Mass-book
 sufficiently reformed, till they had taken away 
Prayers,
 nor that their Churches could ever be handsome until they were ragged. This foolish opposition of their first Reformers hath drawn the 
Protestants
 of these parts into a world of dislike and envy, and been no small disadvantage to their side, whereas the Church of 
England,
 though it dissent as much from the 
Papists
 in point of doctrine, is yet not uncharitably thought on by the moderatest Ca∣tholikes, by reason it retained such an excellency of discipline. When the 
Liturgie
 of our Church was translated into 
Latine
 by 
Doctor Mocket
 once 
Warden of All-Souls Colledge in Oxford,
 it was with great approof and applause received here in 
France
 by those whom they call 
Catholikes Royal,
 as marvelling to see such order and regular devo∣tion in them, whom they were taught to condemn for heretical An allowance which with some little help might have been raised higher, from the pra∣ctise


of our Church, to some points of our judge∣ment. And it is very worthy of our observation, that which the 
Marquess
 of 
Rhosney
 spake of 
Can∣terbury,
 when he came as extraordinary 
Embassa∣dour
 from 
King Henry
 the fourth to welcome 
King James
 into 
England,
 for upon the view of our solemn Service and Ceremonies he openly said unto his fellows, that if the reformed Church∣es in 
France
 had kept the same orders amongst them which we have, he was assured, that there would have been many thousands more of 
Prote∣stants
 than now there are. But the 
Marquess
 of 
Rhosney
 was not the last that said so: I have heard divers 
French Papists,
 who were here at the 
Queens
 coming over, and ventured so far upon an excom∣munication, as to be present at our Church solemn Services, extolling them, and us for their sakes, even almost unto 
Hyperboles
: So graciously is our temper entertained amongst them. As are their Churches, such is their discipline, naked of all antiquity, and almost as modern as the men which embraced it. The power and calling of 
Bishops
 they abrogated with the 
Mass
; upon no other cause, then that 
Geneva
 had done it. As if that excellent man, Mr. 
Calvin,
 had been the 
Pythagoras
 of our age, and his 
, his 
Ipse dixit
 had stood for 
Oracle.
 The 
Hierarchi
 of 
Bishops
 thus cast out, they have brought in their places 
Lay-Elders,
 a kind of 
Monsters
 never heard of in the Scriptures or first times of the 
Gospel.
 These men leap from the stall to the 
Bench,
 and partly sleep∣ing, and partly stroaking their beard they enact Laws of government for the Church: So that we


may justly take up the complaint of the 
Satyrist
: saying, 
Surgunt nobis e Sterquitineo magistratus, nec dum tot is manibus publica tractant negotia
: yet to these very men, composed equally of ignorance and a Trade, are the most weighty matters of the Church committed. In them is the power of or∣daining 
Priests,
 of conferring places of Charge, and even of the severest censure of the Church, 
Excommunication.
 When any business which concerneth the good of the Congregation is be∣fallen, they must be called to counsel, and you shall find them there as soon as ever they can put off their aprons. Having blotted out there a little classical non-sense, and passed their consents, ra∣ther by nodding of their heads, than any other sensible articulation, they hasten to their Shops, as 
Quinctius
 the 
Dictator,
 in 
Florus,
 did to his Plow, 
Ʋt adopus relictum festinasse videatur.
 Such a platform though it be, as needeth no further con∣futation then to know it, yet had it been the more tolerable, if the Contrivers of it had not endea∣voured to impose it on all the reformation; by which meanes what troubles have been raised by the great Zealots here in 
England,
 there is none so young but hath heard some tragical relations. 
God
 be magnified, and our late 
King
 praised, by whom this weed hath been snatched up out of the garden of this our 
Israel.
 As for their Ministery, it is indeed very learned in their study, and exceeding painful in their calling; by the first they confute the ignorant of the 
Romish Clergy
: by the second their laziness: And questionless it behoveth them so to be; for living in a Country full of oppositi∣on,


they are forced to a necessity of book-learning to maintain the Cause: and being continually (as it were) beset with spies, did therefore frequent the Pulpits to hold up their credits: The mainte∣nance which is alotted them scarce amounteth to a competency, though by that name they please to call it. With receiving of tythes they never meddle, and therefore in their 
Systematical Tra∣ctats
 of 
Divinity,
 they do hardly allow of paying of them: Some of them hold, that they are 
Jewish
 and abrogated with the Law: Others think them meerly to be 
Jure Humano
: and yet that they may be lawfully accepted where they are tendered. It is well yet, that there are some amongst thē which will commend grapes though they cannot reach them: This Competency may come to forty or fifty pound yearly or a little more. 
Beza
 that great and famous Preacher of 
Geneva
 had but eighty pound a year, and about that rate was 
Peter du Moulins
 pension, when he preached at 
Claren∣ton.
 These stipends are partly paid by the 
King,
 and partly raised by way of Collection. So the Ministers of those Churches are much of the na∣ture of the 
English Lecturers.
 As for the Tythes, they belong to the several Parish Priests in whose precincts they are due: and those, I warrant you, according to the little learning which they have, will hold them to be 
Jure Divino.
 The Sermons of the 
French
 are very plain home-spun, little in them of the 
Fathers,
 and less of humane learning: it being concluded in the 
Synode
 of 
Sappe,
 that onely the 
Scriptures
 should be used in their Pulpits; they consist much of exhortation and use, and of


nothing in a manner which concerneth know∣ledge. A ready way to raise up and edifie the will and affections, but withall to starve the un∣derstanding. For the education of them being Children they have private Schools, when they are better grown, they may have free recourse unto any of the 
French Academies,
 besides the new 
Ʋ∣niversity
 of 
Saumus
 which is wholly theirs, and is the cheif place of their study.






CHAP. XIII.




The connexion between the Church and Com∣mon-wealth in general. A transition to the particulars of France: The Government there meerly Regal. A mixt form of Go∣vernment most commendable. The Kings Patents for Offices, Monopolies above the censure of the Parliament. The strange Office intended by Mr. 
Luines
: The Kings gifts and expences. The Chamber of Ac∣compts: 
France
 divided into three sorts of people: The 
Conventus Ordinum
 nothing but a Title. The inequality between the No∣Nobles and Commons in 
France.
 The Kings power how much respected by the Princes: The powerableness of that rank: The form of Execution done on them: The muititude and confusion of Nobility. King



James
 defended. A Censure of the French Heralds: The power and command of the French Nobles and their Tennants, their baillages, giblets and other 
Regalia
: Why they conspire with the King to undo the Com∣mons.




HAving thus spoken of the Church, I must now treat a little of the Common-wealth. Religion is as the soul of a 
State,
 policy as the bo∣dy; we can hardly discourse of the one, without a relation to the other; if we do, We commit a wil∣ful murder in the destroying a 
Republick.
 The Common-wealth without the Church is but a Car∣cass or thing inanimate: The Church without the Common-wealth is as it were, 
anima separata.
 The joyning of them together maketh of both one flourishing and permanent body: and therefore as they are in nature, so in my relations, 
Connubio jungam stabili.
 Moreover such a secret simpathy there is between them; such a necessary depen∣dency of one upon the other, that we may say of them what 
Tullie
 doth of two Twinns in his book 
de Fato Eorum morbus eodem tempore gravescit, & eodem levatur.
 They grow sick and well at the same time, and commonly run out of their race at the same instant. There is besides the general respects each to other, a more particular bond betwixt them here in 
France,
 which is a likeness and resemblance in the Church of 
France.
 We have found a 
Head
 and a 
Body.
 This 
Body
 again divided into two parts, the 
Catholike
 and 
Protestant.
 The 
Head
 is


in his own opinion and the minds of many others, of a power unlimited; yet the Catholike party hath strongly curbed it: And of the two parts of the body, we see the 
Papists
 flourishing and in tri∣umph, whilst that of the 
Protestants
 is in misery and affliction. Thus it is also in the 
Body Politick,
 the 
King
 in his own Conceit boundless and om∣nipotent, is yet affronted by his 
Nobles
: which 
Nobles
 enjoy all freedom of riches and happiness; the poor 
Pesants
 in the mean time living in drudgery and bondage.


For the government of the 
King
 is meerly 
Re∣gall,
 or to give it the right name, 
Despotical
: Though the Country be his Wife, and all the peo∣ple are his Children, yet doth he neither govern as a Husband or a Father: He accounteth of them all as of his servants, and therefore commandeth them as a Master. In his 
Edicts,
 which he over-frequently sendeth about, he never mentioned the good will of his Subjects, nor the approbation of his Council, but concludeth all of them in this form, 
Cartel est nostre plaisir: sic volo, sic jubeo.
 A form of government very prone to degenerate into Tyranny, if the 
Princes
 had not oftentimes strength and will to make resistance. But this not the vice of the entire and Soveraign Monar∣chy alone, which the 
Greeks
 call 
: the other two good forms of regiment being subject also to the same frailty. Thus in the reading of Histories have we observed an 
Aristocracie
 to have been frequently corrupted into an 
Oligarchie
: and 
Politeia
 (or Common-wealth properly so called) into a 
Democracie.
 For as in the body


natural the purest Complexions are less lasting, and easily broken, and subject to alteration. So it is in the body 
Civil:
 The pure and unmixt forms of government, though perfect & absolute in their kinds, are of little continuance, and very sub∣ject to change into its opposite. They therefore which have written of 
Republicks
 do most applaud and commend the mixt manner of Rule, which is equally compounded of the Kingdom and 
Politeia,
 because in them 
Kings
 have all the power belong∣ing to their title, without prejudice to the proper∣ty. In these there is reserved to the 
King
 absolute Majesty, to the 
Nobles
 convenient authority, to the people an incorrupted liberty, all in a just and equal proportion. Every one of these is like the 
Empire
 of 
Rome,
 as it was moderated by 
Nerva. Qui res olim dissociabiles miscuerat principatum & libertatem
: wherein the soveraignty of one en∣damaged not the freedom of all. A rare mixture of government. And such is the Kingdom of 
Eng∣land.
 A Kingdom of a perfect and happy com∣position, wherein the 
King
 hath his full preroga∣tive, the 
Nobles
 all due respects, and the 
People
 amongst other blessings perfect in this, that they are masters of their own purses, and have a strong hand in the making of their own Lawes.


On the other side, in the 
Regal
 government of 
France,
 the Subject frameth his life meerly as the 
Kings
 variable 
Edicts
 shall please to enjoyn him, is banisht of his money as the 
Kings
 task-masters think fit, and suffereth many other oppressions, which in their proper place shall be specified. This



Aristotle
 in the third book of his 
Politicks
 cal∣leth 
, or the command of a Master and defineth it to be 
. Such an Empire, by which a 
Prince
 may command, and do whatso∣ever shall seem good in his own eyes, one of the Prerogatives 
Royall
 of the 
French Kings.
 For though the Court of 
Parliament
 doth seem to challenge a perusal of his 
Edicts
 before they pass for Laws, yet is this but a meer formality: It is the 
Cartell est nostre plaisir,
 which maketh them currant, which it seemeth these 
Princes
 learned of the 
Ro∣man Emperours, Justinian
 in the book of 
Insti∣tutions
 maketh five parts of the Civil Lawes: 
Viz.
 (He meaneth the Law of the twelve Tables:) 
Plebiscita, Senatus consulta, Prudentum responsa,
 and 
Principum placita
: To this last he addeth this general strength, 
Quod principi placuerit legis habet valorem
: The very foundation of the 
Kings
 pow∣erfulness. True it is yet, that the Courts of 
Par∣liament
 do use to demurre sometimes upon his 
Patents
 and 
Decrees,
 and to petition him for a Reversal of them: but his answer commonly is, 
Stat pro ratione Voluntas.
 He knoweth his own power, and granteth 
Letters Patents
 for new Offi∣ces and Monopolies abundantly. If a moneyed man can make a friend in Court, he may have an Office found for him, of six pence upon every Sword made in 
France
: a 
liure
 upon the selling of every head of Cattel: a brace of 
soles
 for every pair of boots, and the like. It is the onely study of some men, to find out such devices of enrich∣ing themselves and undoing the people. The Pa∣tent


for 
Mines
 granted to 
Sir Giles Mompesson,
 was just one of the 
French
 Offices. As for 
Mono∣polies,
 they are here so common, that the Subject taketh no notice of it, not a scurvy petty book being printed, but it hath its priviledge affixed, 
ad imprimendum solum.
 These being granted by the 
King,
 are carried to the 
Parliament,
 by them for∣mally perused, and finally verified: after which they are in force and vertue against all oppositi∣on.


It is said in 
France,
 that Mr. 
Luines
 had obtain∣ed a 
Patent
 of the 
King
 for a 
quart d' Escu
 to be paid unto him for the Christning of every Child throughout the 
Kingdom.
 A very unjust and un∣conscionable extortion: Had he lived to have presented it to the Court, I much doubt of their denial, though the onely cause of bringing before them such 
Patents,
 is onely intended, that they should discuss the justice and convenience of them.


As the 
Parliament
 hath a formality of power left in them of verifying the 
Kings Edicts,
 his grants of Offices and 
Monopolies
; so hath the Chamber of Accompts, a superficial survey of his gifts and expences: For his expences, they are thought to be as great now as ever, by reason of the several retinues of 
Himself,
 his 
Mother,
 his 
Queen,
 and the 
Monsieur.
 Neither are his gifts lessened. The late warrs which he mannaged against the 
Protestants
 cost him dear, he being fain to bind unto him most of his 
Princes
 by money and Pensions. As the expences of the 
King
 are brought unto this Court to be examined, so are


also the gifts and pensions by him granted to be ratified. The titulary power given to this 
Chamber,
 is to cut off all those of the 
Kings
 grants which have no good ground and foundation; the Officers being solemnly, at the least formally, sworn, not to suffer any thing to pass them to the detriment of the 
Kingdom,
 whatsoever Letters of Command they have to the contrary: But with this Oath they do oftentimes dispense. To this 
Court
 also belongeth the Enfranchisement or 
Naturalization
 of 
Aliens.
 Anciently certain 
Lords, Officers
 of the Crown, and of the 
Privie Council,
 were appointed to look into the Ac∣compts: now it is made an ordinary and soveraign Court, consisting of two 
Presidents,
 and divers 
Auditors,
 and after, under Officers. The Chamber wherein it is kept is called, 
La Chambre des Comp∣tes,
 it is the beautifullest piece of the whole Palace, the great Chamber it self not being worthy to be named in the same day with it. It was built by 
Charles
 the eighth, 
Anno
 1485. afterwards adorn∣ed and beautified by 
Lewis
 the twelfth, whose 
Statua
 is there standing in his Royal Robes, and the 
Scepter
 in his hand; he is accompanied by the four 
Cardinal-Virtues,
 expressed by way of 
Hie∣roglychick,
 very properly and cunning: each of them have in them its particular 
Motto
 to declare its being. The 
Kings
 Portraicture also as if he were the fifth Virtue, had its word under-written, and contained in a couple of verses, which (let all that love the 
Muses
 skip them in the reading) are these:



Quatuor has comites fowro, caelestia dona


Innocuae pacis, prospera sceptra gerens.


From the 
King
 descend we to the Subjects, 
ab equis, quod aiunt, ad asinos
; and the phrase is not much improper; the French Commonalty being called the 
Kings Asses.
 These are divided into three ranks or Classes; the 
Clergy,
 the 
Nobless,
 the 
Paisants,
 out of which certain 
Delegates
 or 
Committees,
 chosen upon an occasion, and sent to the 
King,
 did anciently concurre to the making of the supreme Court for justice in 
France,
 it was called the 
Assembly
 of the three 
Estates,
 or 
Con∣ventus Ordinum,
 and was just like the Parliament of 
England,
 but these meetings are now forgotten or out of use, neither indeed, as this time goeth, can they any way advantage the 
State.
 For whereas there are three principal if not sole causes of these Conventions, which are, the disposing of the Re∣gency during the non-age or sickness of a 
King
; the granting aids or subsidies, and the redressing of grievances, there is now another course taken in them. The Parliament of 
Paris,
 which speaketh as it is prompted by power and greatness, appoin∣teth the 
Regent
: the 
Kings
 themselves with their Officers determine of the taxes, and as concerning their grievances, the 
Kings
 ear is open to private Petitions. Thus is that title of a Common-wealth, which went to the making up of this Monarchy, escheated or rather devoured by the 
King:
 that name alone containing in it both 
Clergy, Princes
 and 
People
; so that some of the 
French Counsellors



may say with 
Tully
 in his Oration for 
Marcellus
 unto 
Caesar, Doleoque cum Respublica immortalis esse debeat, eam unius mortalis anima consistere:
 yet I cannot but withal affirm, that the 
Princes
 and 
Nobles
 of 
France
 do, for as much as concerneth themselves, upon all advantages fly off from the 
Kings
 obedience; but all this while the poor 
Paisant
 is ruined. Let the poor Tennant starve, or eat the bread of carefulness, it matters not, so they may have their pleasure, and be accompted firm Zealots of the Common liberty, and certain∣ly this is the issue of it; the Farmer liveth the life of a slave to maintain his 
Lord
 in pride and lazi∣ness, the 
Lord
 leadeth the life of a 
King
 to oppress his Tennant by fines and exactions. An equality little answerable to the old platforms of 
Repub∣licks. Aristotle, genius ille naturae,
 as a learned man calleth him, in his fourth book of 
Politicks
 hath an excellent discourse concerning this dis∣proportion. In that chapter his project is to have a correspondency so far between Subjects under the 
King,
 or people of the same City, that neither the one might be over rich, nor the other too mi∣serably poor. They, saith he, which are too happy, strong, or rich, or greatly favoured, and the like, cannot nor will not obey, with which evil they are infected from their infancy. The other, through want of these things, are too abjectly minded and base, for that the one cannot but command, and the other but serve, and this he calleth, 
, a City inhabited onely by slaves and tyrants. That questionless is the most perfect and compleat form of Government: 
Ʋbi veneratur


potentem humilis, non timet, antecedit, non contemnit humiliorem potens,
 as 
Velleius.
 But this is an hap∣piness whereof 
France
 is not capable, their 
Lords
 being 
Kings,
 and their 
Commons Villains.
 And to say no less of them than in truth they are, the 
Princes
 of this Country are little inferior in mat∣ters of 
Royalty
 to any 
King
 abroad, and by conse∣quence little respective in matter of obedience to their own 
King
 at home. Upon the least discon∣tent they will draw themselves from the Court, or put themselves into Arms; and of all other com∣forts are ever sure of this, that they shall never want partizans, neither do they use to stand off from him fearfully and at distance, but justifie their revolt by publike declaration, and think the 
King
 much indebted to them, if upon fair terms, and an honourable reconcilement, they will please to put themselves again into his obedience. 
Henry
 the fourth was a Prince of as undanted and uncon∣troulable a spirit, as ever any of his Predecessors, and one that loved to be obeyed, yet was he also very frequently baffled by these 
Roytelets,
 and at the last died in an affront.


The Prince of 
Conde
 perceiving the 
Kings
 affe∣ction to his new 
Lady,
 began to grow jealous of him, for which reason he retired unto 
Bruxels.
 The 
King
 offended at this retreat sent after him, and commanded him home: The 
Prince
 returned answer, that he was the 
Kings
 most humble Sub∣ject and Servant, but into 
France
 he would not come, unless he might have a Town for his assu∣rance, withal he protected in publike writing a 
Nullity
 of any thing that should be done to his


prejudice in his absence. A stomackful resolution, and somewhat misbecoming a Subject: yet in this opposition he persisted, his humour of disobedi∣ence out-living the 
King
 whom he had thus af∣fronted. But these tricks are ordinary here, other∣wise a man might have construed this action by the term of rebellion. The chief meanes whereby these 
Princes
 become so head-strong, is an immu∣nity given them by their 
Kings,
 and a liberty which they have taken to themselves: By their 
Kings
 they have been absolutely exempted from all tributes, tolles, taxes, customs, impositions and subsidies; by them they have been alwayes estated in whole entire Provinces, with a power of 
Hante and many justice
 (as the 
Lawyers
 term it) passed over unto them: the 
Kings
 having scarce an ho∣mage or acknowledgement of them. To this they have added much to their strength and securi∣ty, by the insconcing and fortifying their houses, w
ch
 both often moveth & afterwards enableth thē to contemn his Majesty. An example we have of this in the Castle of 
Rochforte,
 belonging to the 
Duke
 of 
Tremoville,
 which in the long 
Civil Wars,
 endured a shelf of five thousand shot and yet was not taken. A very impolitick course (in my conceit) in the French, to bestow honours and immunities upon those, 
Qui
 (as the Historian saith) 
ea suo arbitrio aut reposcituri, aut retentu∣rem videantur, quique modum habent in sua volun∣tate:
 For upon a knowledge of this strength in themselves, the 
Princes
 have been alwayes prone to civil Warrs, as having sufficient means for safe∣ty and resistance. On this ground all they write


the 
Kings
 authority, and disobey his justice. Inso∣much that the greatest sort of 
Nobles
 in this 
King∣dom
 can seldom be arraigned or executed in per∣son, and therefore the Laws condemn them in their images, and hang them in their pictures. A pretty device to work justice. If by chance or some handsome sleight any of them be apprehen∣ded, they are put under a sure guard, and not doomed to death without great fear of tumult and unquietness. Neither is it 
Ʋnus & alter,
 onely some two or three that thus stand upon their di∣stance with the 
King,
 but even all the 
Nobility
 of the Realm- A rout so disordered, unconfined and numberless, that even 
Fabius
 himself would be out of breath in making the reckoning. I speak not here of those that are stiled 
La Noblesse,
 but of 
Titulados,
 men onely of titular 
Nobility,
 of the degree of 
Baron
 and above: of these there is in this Country a number almost innumerable, 
quot Coelum stellas,
 take quantity for quan∣tity, and I dare be of the opinion, that Hea∣ven hath not more Stars than 
France Nobles
; you shall meet with them so thick in the 
Kings
 Court especially, that you would think it almost impossible the Country should bear any other fruit. This I think I may safely affirm and with∣out 
Hyperbole,
 that they have there as many 
Princes
 as we in 
England
 have 
Dukes,
 as many 
Dukes
 as we 
Earls,
 as many 
Earls
 as we 
Barons,
 as many 
Barons
 as we 
Knights.
 A jolly company, and such as know their own strength too. I cannot but as much marvel, that those 
Kings
 should be so pro∣digal in conferring honours, considering this, that


every 
Nobleman
 he createth is so great a weak∣ening to his power. On the other side, I cannot but as much wonder at some of our 
Nation,
 who have murmured against our late Soveraign, and accused him of an unpardonable unthriftiness, in bestowing the dignities of his Realm with so full and liberal an hand. Certainly could there any danger have risen by it unto the State, I could have been as impatient of it as another. But with us titles and ennobling in this kind, are onely either the 
Kings
 favour, or the parties merit, & maketh, whomsoever he be that receiveth them, rather reverenced than powerful. 
Raro eorum honoribus invidetur quorum vis non timetur,
 was a good A∣phorism in the dayes of 
Paterculus,
 and may, for ought I know, be as good still: Why should I en∣vy any man that honour, which taketh not from my safety, or repine at my Soveraign for raising any of his Servants into an higher degree of emi∣nency, when that favour cannot make them exor∣bitant. Besides it concerneth the improvement of the 
Exchequer
 at the occasions of Subsidies: and the glory of the 
Kingdom,
 when the 
Prince
 is not attended by men meerly of the 
Vulgar.
 Add to this the few 
Noble men
 of any title, which he found at his happy coming in amongst us, and the additions of power which his coming brought unto us, and we shall find it proportionable, that he should enlarge our 
Nobility
 with our Country. Neither yet have we indeed a number to be talked of, comparing us with our neighbour 
Nations.
 We may see all of the three first rank in the books of 
Miles, Brook,
 and 
Vincent,
 and we are promi∣sed


also a Catalogue of the creations and successi∣ons of all our 
Barons
; then we should see that as yet we have not surfeited. Were this care taken by the 
Heralds
 in 
France,
 perhaps the 
Nobility
 there would not seem so numberless, sure I am, not so confused: but this is the main vice of that Pro∣fession: of six 
Heralds
 which they have amongst them, 
Viz Mountjoy, Normandy, Guyenns, Valoys, Britain,
 and 
Burgoyne,
 not one of them is reported to be a 
Genealogist
: Neither were their 
Predecessors
 better affected to this study. 
Peradine
 the onely man that ever was amongst them, hath drawn down the 
Genealogies
 of twenty four of the cheif Families, all eminent and of the bloud; in which he hath excellently well discharged him∣self: but what a small pittance is that, compared to the present multitude.


The 
Nobles
 being so populous, it cannot be but the 
Nobless
 (as they call them) that is, the 
Gentry,
 must needs be thick set, and onely not innumera∣ble. Of these 
Nobless
 there be some that hold their estates immediately of the 
Crown,
 and they have the like immunity with the 
Princes.
 Some hold their 
feifes
 (or 
seuda
) of some other of the 
Lords,
 and he hath onely 
Basse justice
 permitted to him, as to mulct and amerce his Tennants, to imprison them, or to give them any other correcti∣on under death. All of them have power to raise and enhaunce up their rents, to tax his Subjects on occasion, and to prohibite them such pleasures, as they think fit to be reserved for themselves. In 
Grettanl
 in 
Picardie
 I saw a post fastened in the ground, like a race-post with us, and thereon an in∣scription,


I made presently to it, as hoping to have heard news of sōe memorable battel there fought, but when I came at it, I found it to be nothing but a declaration of the 
Prince
 of 
Condes
 pleasure, that no man should hunt in those quarters. After∣ward I observed them to be very frequent. But not to wander through all particulars, I will in some few of them onely give instance of their power here.


The first is 
Droict de Balliage,
 power to keep 
Assizes,
 or to have under them a 
Baillie,
 and an 
Imperial
 seat of justice, for the definition of such causes as fall under the compass of ordinary juris∣diction. In this Court there is notice taken of treason, robberies, murthers, protections, pardons, fairs, markets, and other matters of priviledge.


Next they have a Court of ordinary jurisdicti∣on, and therein a 
Judge
 whom they call 
Le Guarde de Justice,
 for the decision of smaller business, as debts, trespass, breach of the 
Kings
 peace, and the like. In this the purse is onely emptied; the other extendeth to the taking away of the life; for which every one that hath 
Hante Justice
 annexed to his 
feife,
 hath also his particular Gibbet. Nay, which is wonderful methodical, by the 
Criticisme
 of the 
Gibbet
 you may judge at the quality of him that owneth it, for the 
Gibbet
 of one of the 
No∣blesse
 hath but two pillars, that of the 
Chastellan
 three, the 
Barons
 four, the 
Earls
 six, the 
Dukes
 eight, and yet this difference is rather precise than general.


The last of their 
jura Regalia,
 which I will here speak of, is the Command they have upon the peo∣ple


to follow them unto the warrs, a Command not so advantagious to the 
Lord,
 as dangerous to the 
Kingdom.


Thus live the 
French Princes,
 thus the 
Noblesse,
 thus those Sheep which 
God
 and the 
Laws
 hath brought under them, they do not shear, but fleece them, and (which is worse than this) having themselves taken away the wooll, they give up the naked carcass to the 
King. Tonderi oves meas vo∣lo, non deglubi
; was accounted one of the golden sayings of 
Tiberius,
 but it is not currant here in 
France
: Here the 
Lord
 and the 
King,
 though otherwise at odds amongst themselves, be sure to agree in this, the undoing and oppressing of the 
Paisant. Ephraim
 against 
Manasseh,
 and 
Mas∣nasseh
 against 
Ephraim,
 but both against 
Juda,
 saith the 
Scripture.
 The reason why they thus desire the poverty of the Commons, is, as they pretend, the safety of the 
State,
 and their own particulars. Were the people once warmed with the feeling of ease, and their own riches, they would be presently hearkening after the Warrs. And if no employ∣ment were offered abroad, they would make some at home. Histories and experience hath taught us enough of this humour in this kind: it being impossible for this hot-headed and hare-brain'd people not to be doing. 
Si extraneus deest domi hostem quaerunt
: as 
Justin
 hath observed of the ancient 
Spaniards.
 A pretty quality, and for which they have often smarted.








CHAP. XIV.




The base and low estate of the French Paisant. The misery of them under their Lords. The bed of 
Procrustes.
 The suppressing of the Subject prejudicial to a State. The Wisdom of 
King Henry
 the seventh. The French forces all in the Cavillery. The cruel Impo∣sitions laid upon the people by the King. No Demain in 
France.
 Why the trial by twelve men can be used onely in 
England.
 The ga∣bel of Salt. The Popes licence for wench∣ing. The gabel by whom refused, and why the 
Gascoines
 impatient of taxes. The Taille and Taylon. The Pancarte or aids, the vain resistance of those of 
Paris.
 The Court of aids. The manner of gathering the Kings moneys. The Kings Revenue. The corruption of the French Publicans. King 
Lewis
 why called the Just. The mo∣neys currant in 
France.
 The gold of 
Spain
 more Catholike than the King. The happiness of English Subjects.




BY that which hath been spoken already of the 
Nobless,
 we may partly guess at the low estate of the 
Paisant
 or Country man: of whom we will not now speak, as Subjects to their 
Lords,
 and how


farre they are under their commandment, but how miserable and wretched they are in their apparel and their houses: For their apparel, it is well if they can allow themselves Canvas, or an outside of that nature: As for Cloath, it is above their purse, equally, and their ambition: if they can as∣pire unto Fustian, they are as happy as their wishes: and he that is so arrayed, will not spare to aim at the best place in the Parish, even unto that of Church-Warden: When they go to Plow or to the Church they have shooes and stockings; at other times they make bold with Nature and wear their skins. Hats they will not want though their bellies pinch for it: and that you may be sure they have them, they will alwayes keep them on their heads. The most impudent custom of a beggarly fortune that ever I met with, and which already hath had my blessing. As for the Women, they know in what degree Nature hath created them, and therefore dare not be so fine as their Hus∣bands: some of them never had above one pair of stockings in all their lives, which they wear every day, for indeed they are very durable: the goodness of their faces tels us that they have no need of a band, therefore they use none. And as concerning petticoats, so it is, that all have such a garment, but most of them so short, that you would imagine them to be cut off at the placket: When the parents have sufficiently worn these ve∣stures, and that commonly is till the rottenness of them will save the labour of undressing; they are a new cut out and fittted to the Children. Search into their houses, and you shall find them very


wretched, and destitute, as well of furniture as provision. No butter salted up against Winter, no poudering tub, no pullein in the rick barten, no flesh in the pot, or at the spit, and which is worse, no money to buy them. The description of the poor aged couple, 
Philemon
 and 
Baucis,
 in the eigth book of the 
Metamorphosis,
 is a perfect cha∣racter of the 
French Paisant
 in his house-keeping, though I cannot affirm, that if 
Jupiter
 and 
Mer∣cury
 did come amongst them, they should have so hearty an entertainment; for thus 
Ovid
 marshel∣leth the dishes.




Ponitur hic bicolor sincerae bacca 
Minervae


Intubaque & radix, & lactis Massa coacti


Ovaque non acri leviter versata favellâ,


Prunaque & in patulis redolentia mala canistris


Hic nux, hic mixta est rugosis carica palmis


Et de purpurers collectae vitibus uvae.


Omnia fictilibus nitede.






They on the Table set 
Minerva's
 fruit;


The double coulour'd Olive: Endive root,


Raddish & Cheese, and to the board there came


A dish of Eggs ne're roasted by the flame:


Next they had Nuts, course Dates & lenten Figs,


And Apples from a basket made with twigs.


And Plums and Grapes cut newly from the tree,


All serv'd in earthen dishes huswifelie.




But you must not look for this ohear often: At 
Wakes
 or feast days, you may perchance be so hap∣py as to see this plenty: but at other times, 
onus omne


patilla,
 the best provision they can shew you, is a piece of 
Bacon
 where with to fatten their pottage, and now and then the inwards of Beasts killed for the Gentleman. But of their miseries, this me thinketh is the greatest, that sowing so many acres of excellent Wheat in a year, and gathering in such a plentiful vintage as they do, they should not yet be so fortunate as to eat white bread, or drink Wine: for such infinite rents do they pay to their 
Lords,
 and such innumerable taxes to the 
King,
 that the profits arising out of these commodities are onely sufficient to pay their duties, and keep them from the extremities of cold and famine. The bread which they eat is of the coursest flower, and so black that it cannot admit the name of brown, and as for their drink, they have recourse unto the next fountain: A people of any the most infortunate, not permitted to enjoy the fruit of their labours: and such as above all others are subject to that 
Sarcasme
 in the 
Gospel, This man planted a Vineyard, and doth not drink of the fruit thereof.


Neo prosunt Domino, quae prosunt omnibus artes.


Yet were their cases not altogether so deplora∣ble, if there were but hopes left to them of a bet∣ter; if they could but compass this certainty, that a painful drudging and thrifty saving would one day bring them out of this hell of bondage. In this questionless they are entirely miserable; in that they are sensible of their present fortunes, and dare not labour nor expect an alteration.


If industry and a sparing hand hath raised any of these afflicted people so high, that he is but four or five shillings richer than his neighbour, his 
Lord
 immediately enhanceth his rent, and enformeth the 
Kings
 task-masters of his riches; by which meanes he is within two or three years brought into equal poverty with the rest. A strange course and much different from that of 
England
; where the 
Gentry
 take a delight in having their Tennants thrive under them, and account it no crime in any that hold of them to be wealthy. On the other side, those of 
France
 can abide no body to gain or grow rich upon their Farms, and therefore thus upon occasions rack their poor Tennants. In which they are like the 
Tyrant Procrustes,
 who laying hands upon all he met, cast them upon his bed: if they were shorter than it, he racked their joynts till he had made them even to it; if they were longer, he cut as much of their bodies from them as did hang over; so keeping all that fell into his power in an equality of stature. I need not make further application of the story but this, that the 
French Lords
 are like that 
Tyrant.


How much this course doth depress the military power of the Kingdom, is apparent by the true principles of warr, and the examples of other Countries. For it hath been held the general opinion of the best judgements in matters of war, that the main buttress and pillar of an Army is the foot, or (as the 
Martialists
 term it) the infantry. Now to make a good infantry, it requireth that men be brought up not in a slavish or needy fa∣shion of life, but in some free and liberal manner.


Therefore it is well observed by the 
Viscount St. Albons
 in his history of 
Henry
 the seventh, that if a State run most to 
Nobles
 and 
Gentry,
 and that the Husbandmen be but as their meer drudges, or else simple Cottagers, that that State may have a good 
Cavilleria,
 but never good stable bands of Foot: like to Coppines wood, in which, if you let them grow too thick in the standerds, they will run to bushes or briers, and have little clean under wood. Neither is it thus in 
Franne
 onely, but in 
Italy
 also, and some other parts abroad; insomuch that they are enforced to employ mercenary Souldiers for their battalions of Foot; whereby it cometh to pass in those Countries, that they have much peo∣ple but few men.


On this consideration 
King Henry
 the seventh, one of the wisest of our 
Princes,
 took a course so cunning and wholesome for the encrease of the military power of this Realm, that though it be much less in territories, yet it should have infinite∣ly more Souldiers of its native forces than its neighbour Nations. For in the fourth year of his raign there passed an Act of Parliament preten∣sively against the depopulation of Villages and decay of tillage, but purposely to make his Sub∣jects for the warrs. The Act was, that all houses of Husbandry which had been used with twenty acres of ground and upwards should be maintain∣ed and kept up so, together with a competent pro∣portion of Land to be used and occupied with them, &c. By this meanes the houses being kept up, did of necessity enfarce a dweller, and that dweller, because of the proportion of Land, not to


be a beggar, but a man of some substance, able to keep hinds and servants, and to set the Plow go∣ing. An Order which did wonderfully concern the might and manhood of the Kingdom, these Farmers being sufficient to maintain an able body out of penury, and by consequence to prepare them for service, and encourage them to high ho∣nours: for,

Haud facile emergunt, quorum virtutibus obstat


Res angusta domi —


As the 
Poet
 hath it.

But this Ordinance is not thought of such use in 
France
; where all the hopes of their Armies con∣sist in the Cavallery or the Horse; which perhaps is the cause why our Ancestors have won so many battels upon them: As for the 
French
 Foot, they are quite out of all reputation, and are accounted to be the basest and unworthiest company in the world.


Besides, should the 
French
 people be enfranchi∣zed as it were from the tyranny of their 
Lords,
 and estated in free hold, and other tenures after the manner of 
England,
 it would much trouble the 
Councill
 of 
France
 to find out a new way of raising the 
Kings
 Revenues, which are now meerly sucked out of the bloud and sweat of the Subject. An∣ciently the 
Kings
 of 
France
 had rich and plentiful demeasnes, such as was sufficient to maintain their Majesty and greatness, without being burdensome unto the Country. Pride in matters of sumptu∣ousness and the tedious Civil warrs which have


lasted in this Country almost ever since the death of 
Henry
 the second, have been the occasion, that most of the Crown Lands have been sold and morgaged: insomuch that the people are now become the 
Demain,
 and the Subject onely is the revenue of the Crown; by the sweat of their brows is the Court fed and the Souldier paid, and by their labours are the 
Princes
 maintained in idle∣ness. What impositions soever it pleaseth the 
King
 to put upon them, it is almost a point of treason, not onely to deny, but to question: 
Apud illos vere regnatur, nefasque quantum regi liceat dubitare
; as one of them: The 
Kings
 hand lieth hard upon them, and hath almost thrust them into an Egypti∣an bondage: the poor 
Paisant
 being constrained to make up daily his full tale of brick, and yet have no straw allowed him. Upon the sight of these miseries and poverties of this people, Sir 
John Fortescue Chancellor
 of 
England,
 in his book intituled, 
De laudibus Regum Angliae,
 concludeth them to be unfit men for 
Jurers
 or 
Judges,
 should the custom of the Country admit of such a trial: for having proved there unto the 
Prince
 (he was Son unto 
Henry
 the sixth) that the manner of trial, according to the Common Law, by twelve 
Jurats,
 was more commendable than the practise of the Civil or Imperial Laws, by the deposition onely of two Witnesses, or the forced confession of the person arraigned: the 
Prince
 seemed to marvel, 
Cur ea lex Angliae quae tam frugi & op∣tabilis est, non sit toti mundo communis
: to this he maketh answer, by shewing the free condition of the 
English
 Subjects, who alone are used at these


Inditements; men of a fair and large estate, such as dwell nigh the place of the deed committed: men that are of ingenuous education, such as scorn to be suborned or corrupted, and afraid of infamy. Then he sheweth how in other places all things are contrary: the Husbandman an ab∣solute beggar, easie to be bribed by reason of his poverty: The Gentlemen living far asunder, and so taking no notice of the fact. The 
Paisant
 also neither fearing infamy nor loss of goods if he be found faulty, because he hath them not. In the end he concludeth thus: 
Nec mireris igitur prin∣ceps, si lex quae
 Anglia 
veritas inquiritur, ab ea non pervagetur in alias nationes: Ipsae namque, ut
 An∣glia, 
nequeunt facere sufficientes, consimilesque jura∣tas.
 The last part of the 
Latine
 savoureth some∣what of the 
Lawyer
; the word 
Jurata
 being there put to signifie a 
Jury.


To go over all those impositions, which this miserable people are afflicted withal, were almost as wretched as the payment of them. I will there∣fore speak onely of the principal: and here I meet in the first place with the 
gabel
 or imposition on 
Salt.
 This 
gabelle de Sel,
 this Impost on Salt was first begun by 
Philip
 the 
Long,
 who took for it a 
Double,
 which is half a 
Sol,
 upon the pound. After whom 
Philip de Valoys, Anno
 1328. doubled it. 
Charles
 the seventh raised it unto three 
Doubles,
 and 
Lewis
 the eleventh unto six; since that time it hath been altered from so much upon the pound to a certain rate on the Maid, which containeth some thirty bushels 
English,
 the rates rising and falling at the 
Kings
 pleasure. This one Commo∣dity


were very advantagious to the 
Exchequer,
 were it all in the 
Kings
 hands; but at this time a great part of it is morgaged. It is thought to be worth unto the 
King
 three millions of Crowns yearly, that onely of 
Paris
 and the 
Provosts
 seven Daughters being farmed at 1700000. Crowns the year. The late 
Kings
 since 
Anno
 1581. being intangled in warrs, have been constrained to let it to others; insomuch that about 
Anno
 1599. the 
King
 lost above 800000. Crowns yearly: and no longer then 
Anno
 1621. the 
King
 taking up 600000. pounds of the 
Provost
 of the 
Merchants
 and the 
Eschevins,
 gave unto them a Rent charge of 40000. pound yearly, to be issuing out of the customs of Salt till their money were repaid them. This 
gabel
 is indeed a 
Monopolie,
 and that one of the unjustest and unmeasurablest in the world: for no man in the Kingdom (those Countries hereafter mentioned excepted) can eat any Salt, but he must buy it of the 
King,
 and at his price, which is most unconscionable; that being sold at 
Paris
 and else∣where for five 
liures,
 which in the exempted pla∣ces is sold for one. Therefore that the 
Kings
 profits might not be diminished, there is diligent watch and ward, that no forrain Salt be brought into the Land, upon pain of forfeiture and impri∣sonment. A search that is made so strictly, that we had much ado at 
Diepe
 to be pardoned the searching of our Trunks and Port-mantues; and that not but upon our solemn protestations, that we had none of that Commodity. This Salt is of a brown colour, being onely such as we in 
Eng∣land
 call 
Bay Salt,
 & is imposed on the Subjects by


the 
Kings
 Officers with great rigor. For though they have some of their last provision in the house, or perchance would be content (through pover∣ty) to eat their meat without it; yet will these cruel villains enforce them to take such a quantity of them; howsoever they will have of them so much money. But this tyranny is not general; the 
Normans
 and 
Picards
 enduring most of it, and the other 
Paisants
 the rest. Much like unto this was the licence which the 
Popes
 and 
Bishops
 of old granted in matter of keeping 
Concubines
: for when such as had the charge of gathering the 
Popes
 rents happened upon a Priest which had no 
Concubine,
 and for that cause made denial of the tribute, the Collectors would return them this an∣swer, that notwithstanding this they should pay down the money, because they might have had the keeping of a Wench if they would.


This 
gabel
 as it sitteth hard upon some, so are there some also, who are never troubled with it: of this sort are the 
Princes
 in the general release, and many of the 
Nobless
 in particular: insomuch that it was proved unto 
King Lewis, Anno
 1614. that for every Gentleman which took of his Majesties Salt, there were two thousand of the Commons. There are also some entire Provinces which refuse to eat of this Salt, as 
Britain, Gascoine, Poictou, Queren, Naintogne,
 and the 
County
 of 
Boulonnois.
 Of these the 
County
 of 
Boulonnois
 pretendeth a peculiar exemption, as belonging immediately to the patrimony of our 
Lady (Nostre-Dame)
 of which we shall learn more when we are in 
Bovil∣lon.
 The 
Britains
 came united to the Crown by a


fair marriage, and had strength enough to make their own Capitulations, when they first entered into the 
French
 subjection; besides, here are yet divers of the 
Ducal
 Family living in the Country, who would much trouble the quiet of the King∣dom, should the people be oppressed with this bondage, and they take the protection of them. 
Poictou
 and 
Queren
 have compounded for it with the former 
Kings,
 and pay a certain rent yearly; which is called the 
Equivalent. Xaintogne
 is un∣der the command of 
Rochell,
 of whom it receiveth sufficient at a better rate. And as for the 
Gascoynes
 the 
King
 dareth not impose it upon them for fear of rebellion. They are a stubborn and churlish people, very impatient of a rigorous yoak; and such as inherit a full measure of the 
Beiseains
 liber∣ty and spirit, from whom they are descended. 
Le Droit de fonage,
 the priviledge of levying of a certain peice of money upon every Chimney in an house that smoaked, was in times not long since one of the 
Jura Regalia
 of the 
French Lords,
 and the people paid it without grumbling: yet when 
Edward
 the black Prince returned from his unhap∣py journey into 
Spain,
 and for the paying of his Souldiers to whō he was indebted, laid this 
fonage
 upon the people, being then 
English,
 they all pre∣sently revolted to the 
French,
 and brought great prejudice to our affairs in those quarters.


Next unto the 
Gabel
 of Salt we may place the 
Taille
 and the 
Taillon
; which are much of a na∣ture with the 
Subsidies
 in 
England,
 being granted by the people, and the sum of that certain shall please to impose them. Anciently the 
Tailles



were onely levied by way of extraordinary subsi∣die, and that upon four occasions, which were, the 
Knighting
 of the 
Kings
 Son, the 
Marriage
 of his 
Daughters,
 a 
Voyage
 of the 
Kings
 beyond Sea, and his 
Ransome
 in case he were taken Prisoner. 
Les Tailles ne sont point deves de devoyer ordicmer
 (saith 
Rayneau) ains ont este accorded, durant la necessite des Affaires Semblement.
 Afterward they were continually levied in times of warr, and at length 
Charles
 the first made them ordinary, neither is it extended equally, all of it would amount to a very fair revenue. For supposing this, that the 
King∣dom
 of 
France
 contained two hundred millions of acres (as it doth) and that from every one there were raised to the 
King
 two 
Sols
 yeerly; which is little in respect of the taxes imposed on them; that income alone, besides that which levied on goods personal, would amount to two millions of pounds in a year. But this payment also lyeth all on the 
Paisant.
 The greater Towns, the Officers of the 
Kings House,
 the Officers of Warrs, the 
Presidents, Counsellors
 and Officers of the 
Court
 of 
Parlia∣ment;
 the 
Nobility,
 the 
Clergy,
 and the 
Schollars
 of the 
Ʋniversity
 being freed from it. That which they call the 
Taillon,
 was intended for the ease of the Country, though now it prove one of the greatest burdens unto it. In former times, the 
Kings
 Souldiers lay all upon the charge of the Villages, the poor people being fain to find them diet, lodging and all necessaries for themselves, their horses and their harlots, which they brought with them. If they were not well pleased with their entertainment, they used commonly to beat


their Host, abuse his family, and rob him of that small provision which he had laid up for his Chil∣dren, and all this 
Cum privilegio.
 Thus did they move from one Village to another, and at the last returned unto them from whence they came, 
Ita ut non sit ibi villula una expers calamitatis istius, quae non semel aut bis in anno hac nefandâ pressurâ depiletur,
 as Sir 
John F
rtescue
 observed in his time. To redress this mischeif, 
King Henry
 the second, 
Anno
 1549. raised his Imposition called the 
Tail∣lon,
 issuing out of the lands and goods of the poor Country man; whereby he was at the first some∣what eased: but now all is again out of order, the miserable Paisant being oppressed by the Souldier as much as ever, and yet he still payeth both taxes▪ the 
Taille
 and the 
Taillon.


The 
Pancarte
 comprehendeth in it divers par∣ticular imposts, but especially the 
Sol
 upon the 
Liure,
 that is, the twentieth penny of all things bought or sold (corn, sallets, and the like onely excepted.) Upon wine, besides the 
Sol
 upon the 
Liure,
 he hath his several customs at the entrance of it into any of his Cities, passages by Land, Sea, or River. To these 
Charles
 the ninth, 
Anno
 1561. added a tax of five 
Sols
 upon every 
Maid,
 which is the third part of a Tun, and yet when all this is done, the poor 
Vintner
 payeth unto the 
King
 the eighth penny he takes for that wine which he sel∣leth.


In this 
Pancart
 is also contained the 
bant passage,
 which are the tols paid unto the 
King,
 for passage of men and cattel over his bridges and his City gates, as also for all such Commodities which they


bring with them. A good and round sum consi∣dering the largeness of the 
Kingdom,
 the 
thorough∣fare of Lyons
 being farmed yearly of the 
King
 for 100000. Crowns. Hereunto belong also the 
Aides,
 which are a taxe also of the 
Sol
 on the 
Liure,
 upon all sorts of fruits, provision, wares and Merchandize, granted first unto 
Charles Duke
 of 
Normandy,
 when 
John
 his 
Father
 was prisoner in 
England
; and since made perpetual. For such is the lamentable fate of that Country, that their kindnesses are made duties; and those moneys which they once grant out of love, are alwayes af∣ter exacted of them, and paid out of necessity. The bedrolle of all these impositions and taxes is cal∣led the 
Paneart,
 because it was hanged up in a frame, like as the Officers Fees are in our 
Bishops Diocesan
 Courts; the word 
Pan
 signifying a frame or pane of wainscot. These impositions time and custom hath now made tolerable, though at first day they seemed very burdensome, and moved many Cities to murmuring, some to rebellion. A∣mongst others the City of 
Paris,
 proud of her an∣cient liberties and immunities, refused to admit of it. This indignity so incensed 
Charles
 the sixth their 
King,
 then young and in hot bloud, that he seized into his hands all their priviledges, took from their 
Provost des Merchants
 and the 
Esche∣vins,
 as also the key of their gates, and the chains of their streets, and making through the whole Town such a face of mourning, that one might justly have said:

Haec facies 
Troiae
 cum caperetur erat.



This happened in the year 1383. and was for five years together continued; which time being ex∣pired, and other Cities warned by that example, the imposition was established, and the priviledges restored. For the better regulating of the profits arising from these imposts, the 
French King
 erect∣ed a 
Court, Le Cour des Aides.
 It consisted at the first of the general of the 
Aides,
 and of any four of the 
Lords
 of the Councel, whom they would call to their assistance. Afterwards 
Charles
 the fifth, 
Anno
 1380. or thereabouts, settled it in 
Paris
 and caused it to be numbred as one of the 
Sove∣raign Courts, Lewis
 the eleventh dissolved it, and committed the managing of his 
Aids
 to his House∣hold servants, as loath to have any publike Officers take notice how he fleeced his people, 
Anno
 1464. it was restored again. And finally 
Henry
 the se∣cond, 
Anno
 1551. added to it a second Chamber, composed of two 
Presidens
 and eight 
Counsellors.
 One of which 
Presidents,
 Mr. 
Cavilayer,
 is said to be the best moneyed man of all 
France.
 There are also others of these Courts in the Country: as one at 
Roven,
 one at 
Montferrant
 in 
Averyne,
 one at 
Bourdeaux,
 and another at 
Montpellier
 established by 
Charles
 the first, 
Anno
 1537. For the levying and gathering up of rhese taxes, you must know, that the whole Country of 
France
 is divided into twenty three generalities and Counties as it were, and these again into divers 
Eslections,
 which are much like unto our Hundreds. In every of the Generalities there are ten or twelve Treasurers, nine Receivers for the Generality, and as many Controulers, besides all under Officers, which are


thought to amount in all to thirty thousand men. When the 
King
 levieth his taxes, he sendeth his 
Letters Patents
 to the principal Officers of every Generality, whom they call 
Les genereaux des Aides,
 and they dispatch their warrant to the 
Ezlenzor
 Commissioners. These taxing every one of the Parishes and Villages within their se∣veral divisions at a certain rate, send their Recei∣vers to collect it, who account for it to their Con∣troulers, by them it ascendeth 
Ezleie
; from him to the Receiver general of that Generality, next to the Controuler, then to the Treasurer, after∣wards to the 
General des Aides
; and so

Per varios cesus, per tot discrimina rerum


Tendimus in Latium —

By all these hands it is at last conveyed into the 
Kings
 purse: in which several passage, 
necesse est ut aliquid haereat,
 it cannot be, but it must needs have many a shrewd snatch: Insomuch that I was told by a Gentleman of good credence in 
France,
 that there could not be gathered by the several exactions above specified, an
 other devices of prowling (which I have omitted) less than eighty five millions a year, whereof the 
King
 receiveth fifteen onely. A report not altogether to be sle
ghted: considering that a 
President
 of the Court of Accompts made it evident to the Assem∣bly at 
Blois
 in the time of 
King Henry
 the fourth, that by the time that every one of the Officers had had his share of it, there came not to the 
Kings
 Coffers one 
teston
 (which is one shilling four


pence) of a Crown: So that by reckoning five 
testons
 to a Crown or 
Escue,
 as it is but two pence over, these Officers must collect five times the money which they pay to the 
King
; which a∣mouteth to seventy five millions, and is not much short of that proportion which before I spake of. The 
Kings
 revenues then, notwithstanding this infinite oppression of his people, amounteth to fifteen millions; some would have it eighteen, which is also a good improvement in respect of what they were in times afore. 
Lewis
 the eleventh as good a Husband of his Crown, as ever any was in 
France,
 gathering but one and an half onely, but as you count the 
flow,
 so also if you reckon the 
ebb
 of his treasures, you will find much wanting of a full sea in his Coffers, it being generally known, that the Fees of Officers, Pensions, Garrisons and the men of Arms draw from him yearly, no fewer than six of his fifteen millions. True it is, that his Treasure hath many good helps by way of 
Es∣cheat,
 and that most frequently when he cometh to take an account of his Treasurers and other Offi∣cers. An action so abominable, full of base and unmannly villanies in their several charges, that the 
Publicans
 of old 
Rome
 were milk and white broth to them: For so miserably do they abuse the poor Paisant, that if he hath in all the world but eight 
Sols,
 it shall go hard but he will extort from him five of them.

Non missura cutim nisi plena cruoris hirudo.

He is just of the nature of the 
Horsleach,
 when he


hath once gotten hold of you, he will never let you go till he be filled, and which is most strange, he thinks it a greater clemency, that he hath left the poor man some of his money, than the cruelty was in wresting from him the rest. Nay they will brag of it, when they have taken but five of the eight 
Sols,
 that they have given him three, and expect thanks for it. A kindness of a very theevish na∣ture, it being the condition of Robbers, as 
Tully
 hath observed, 
Ʋt commemorent iis se dedisse vitam, quibus non ademerint.
 Were the people but so happy as to have a certain rate set upon their mi∣series, it could not but be a great ease to them, and would well defend them from the tyranny of these theeves: but, which is not the least part of their wretchedness, their taxings and assemblings are left arbitrary, and are exacted according as these 
Publicans
 will give out of the 
Kings
 necessities. So that the Country man hath no other remedy, than to give 
Cerberus
 a crust, as the saying, is, and to kiss his rod and hug his punishment. By this meanes the 
Quaestors
 thrive abundantly, it being commonly said of them, 
Fari bouvier au jourd huy Cheualier,
 to day a Swineheard, to morrow a Gen∣tleman; and certainly they grow into great riches. Mr. 
Beaumarchais
 one of the Treasurers (Mr. 
de Vi
ry,
 who slew the 
Marquess de Ancri,
 married his onely Daughter) having raked unto himself, by the v
l
ainous abuse of his place, no less than twenty two millions of 
Liures,
 as it is commonly reported: but he is not like to carry it to his grave, the 
King
 having seised upon a good part of it, and himself being condemned to the Gallows by the


grand Chamber of 
Parliament,
 though as yet he cannot be apprehended & advanced to the ladder, And this hath been the end of many of them since the raign of this present 
King
 (whom it may be for this cause they call 
Lewis the Just:
) This fa∣shion of affixing Epithites to the names of their 
Kings,
 was in great use heretofore with this Nati∣on. 
Carolus
 the Son of 
Pipin
 was by them sur∣named 
Le magne: Lewis
 his Son 
Le Debonaire
; and so of the rest: since the time of 
Charles
 the sixth, who was by them surnamed the 
Beloved,
 it was discontinued and new revived again in the persons of 
King Henry
 the fourth and his Son 
King Lewis
: (but this by the way.) It may be also he is called the 
Just
 by way of negation; because he hath yet committed no notable act of injustice (for I wink at his cruel and unjust slaugh∣ter at 
Nigrepelisse.
) It may be also to keep him continually in mind of his duty, that he may make himself worthy of that attribute: 
Vere Imperator sui nominis,
 as one said of 
Severus.


Let us add one more misery to the 
State
 and 
Commonalty
 of 
France,
 and that is the base and corrupt money in it: for besides the 
Sol
 which is made of 
Tin,
 they have the 
Double
 made of 
Brass,
 where of six make a 
Sol,
 and the 
Deneir,
 whereof two make a 
Double
: a Coin so vile & base of value, that one hundred and twenty of them go to our English Shilling: These are the common Coins of the Country. Silver and Gold not being to be seen but upon holy-dayes. As for their Silver it is most of it of their new coining, but all exceed∣ingly clipt and shorn, their Gold being most of it



Spanish.
 In my little being in the Country, though I casually saw much Gold, I could onely see two pieces of 
French
 stamp, the rest coming all from 
Spain,
 as 
Pistolets, Demi pistolets,
 and double 
Pi∣stolets.
 Neither is 
France
 onely furnisht thus with 
Chastilian
 Coin; it is happiness also of other Countries, as 
Italy, Barbary, Brabant,
 and else∣where, and indeed it is kindly done of him, that being the sole 
Monopolist
 of the 
Mines,
 he will yet let other Nations have a share in the mettal. Were the 
King
 as 
Catholike
 as his money, I think I should be in some fear of him; till then we may lawfully take that ambitious title from the 
King,
 and bestow it on his pictures: the soveraignty of the 
Spanish
 gold is more universally embraced, and more seri∣ously acknowledged in most parts of Christen∣dom, than that of him which stampt it. To this he, which entituleth himself 
Catholike,
 is but a prisoner, and never saw half those Provinces, in which this more powerful Monarch hath been heartily welcommed: And yet if he will needs be 
King
 let him grow somewhat more jealous of his 
Queen,
 and confess that his Gold doth royally deserve his embraces, whom before this extent of its dominion, the ancient 
Poets
 stiled, 
Regina Pecu∣nia.


True it is, that by the frame and shape of this 
Empress
 you would little think her to be lovely, and less worthy your entertainment, the stones which little boys break into quoyts, are a great deal better proportioned. If a 
Geometrician
 were to take the angles of it, I think it would quite put him besides his 
Euclide:
 Neither can I tell to


what thing in the world fitter to resemble it, then a 
French
 Cheese, for it is neither long, nor square, nor round, nor thin, nor thick, nor any one of these, but yet all, and yet none of them. No question it was the 
Kings
 desire, by this unsightly dressing of his 
Lady,
 to make men out of love with her, that so he might keep her to himself; but in this his hopes have cozened him: for as in other Cuckoldings, so in this, some men will be bold to keep his Wife from him, be it onely in spite.


These circumstances thus laid together and considered, we may the clearer and the better see our own felicities, which to exprese generally and in a word, is to say onely this, that the 
English
 sub∣ject is in no circumstance a 
French-man
: here have we our money made of the best and purest matal, that onely excepted which a charitable considera∣tion hath coined into farthings: here have we our 
King
 royally, and to the envy of the world, magni∣ficently provided for, without the sweat and bloud of the people: no pillages nor impositions upon any private wares; no Gabels upon our Commo∣dities: 
Nullum in tam ingenti regno vestigal: non in urbibus pontium vae discriminibus publicanorum stationes
; as one truly hath observed of us. The moneys which the 
King
 wanteth to supply his ne∣cessities are here freely given him, he doth not compel our bounties, but accept them. The Laws by which we are governed, we impart, are makers of: each Peasant of the Countrey hath a free voice in the enacting of them, if not in his person, yet in his 
Proxie:
 we are not here subject to the lusts and tyranny of our 
Lords
; and may therefore say


safely, what the 
Jews
 spake factiously, that 
We have no King but Caesar
: the greatest 
Prince
 here is sub∣ject with us to the same law; and we stand before the Tribunal of the 
Judge
: we acknowledge no difference: here do we inhabit our own houses, plow our own lands, enjoy the fruits of our la∣bour▪ comfort our selves with the Wives of our youth; and see our selves grow up in those Chil∣dren which shall inherit after us the same felicities. But I forget my self; to endeavour the numbring of 
Gods
 blessings, may perhaps be as great a pu∣nishment as 
Davids
 numbring the people. I con∣clude with the 
Poet.


O fortunati nimium bona si sua norint Agricolae nostri.










THE THIRD BOOK: OR, LA BEAƲSSE.




CHAP. I.




Our Journey towards 
Orleans,
 the Towne, Castle, and Battaile of 
Montliherrie.
 Ma∣ny things imputed to the English, which they never did. 
Lewis
 the 
11
th.
 brought not the French Kings out of Wardship. The Towne of 
Chastres
 and mourning Church there▪ The Countrey of 
La Beausse,
 an old People of it, 
Estampes.
 The dancing there. The new art of begging in the Innes of this Countrey. 
Angervile, Toury.
 The sawci∣nesse of French Fidlers. Three kindes of Musick amongst the Ancients. The French Musick.




HAving abundantly stifled our spirits in the stink of 
Paris,
 on Tuesday being the 12. of 
June,
 we took our leave of it, and prepared our selves to entertaine the sweet aire and winde of



Orleans.
 The day faire, and not so much as di∣sposed to a cloud, save that they began to gather about noon, in the nature of a Curtaine, to defend us from the injury of the Sun; the winde rather sufficient to fan the aire, then to disturb it, by qua∣lifying the heat of that celestiall fire, brought the day to an excellent mediocrity of temper. You would have thought it a day meerly framed for that great 
Princesse Nature
 to take her pleasure in, and that the Birds which cheerfully gave us their voices from the neighbouring bushes, had been the lowd musick of her Court; in a word, it was a d
y solely consecrated to a pleasant journey, and he that did not put it to that use mis-spent it. Ha∣ving therefore put our selves into our Waggon, we took a short farewell of 
Paris,
 exceeding joy∣full that we yet lived to see the beauty of the fields againe, and enjoy the happinesse of a free Heaven. The Countrey, such as that part of the 
Isle
 of 
France
 towards 
Normandy,
 onely that the Corne fields were larger and more even: On the left hand of us we had a side-glance of the 
Royall
 house of 
Boys,
 and 
Vincennes,
 and the Castle of 
Bifectre,
 and about some two miles beyond them, we had a sight also of a new house lately built by Mr. 
Sillerie Chancellor
 of the Kingdome, a pretty house it pro∣mised to be, having two base Courts on the hither side of it, and beyond it a Parke, an ornament, whereof many great mansions in 
France
 are altoge∣ther ignorant.


Foure leagues from 
Paris
 is the town of 
Mont∣l'herrie
; now old and ruinous, and hath nothing in it to commend it, but the carkasse of a Castle; without


it, it hath to brag of a large and spacious plaine, on which was fought that memorable battaile between 
Lewis
 the 11. and 
Charles le Hardie Duke
 of 
Bur∣goyne.
 A battaile memorable onely for the run∣ning away of each Army, the Field being in a man∣ner emptyed of all the forces, and yet neither of the 
Princes victorious. Hic spe celer, ille salute.
 Some ran out of fear to dye, and some out of hope to live, that it was hard to say which of the Soldiers made most use of their heels in the combat. This notwithstanding, the 
King
 esteemed himselfe the 
Conqueror,
 not that he overcame, but because not vanquisht. He was a Prince of no heart to make a warriour, and therefore Resistance was to him al∣most as much hugged as Victory. It was 
Antho∣nies
 case in his Warre against the 
Parthians,
 a Cap∣tain whose 
Launce King Lewis
 was not worthy to beare after him: 
Crassus
 before him had been ta∣ken by that people, but 
Anthonius
 made a retreat though with losse. 
Hanc itaque fugam suam, quia victus non exierat, victoriam vocabat,
 as 
Paterculus
 one that loved him not saith of him: yet was 
King Lewis
 so puffed up with this conceit of victo∣ry, that he ever after sl
ighted his enemies, and at last ruin'd them, and their cause with them. The Warre which they undertook against him, they en∣tituled, 
the Warre of the Weale publick,
 because the occasion of their taking Armes was for the li∣berty of the Countrey and the People, both whom the 
King
 had beyond measure oppressed. True it is, they had also their particular purposes, but this was the main, and failing in the expected event of it, all that they did was to confirme the bondage


of the Realm by their owne overthrow. These 
Princes
 once disbanded, and severally broken, none durst ever afterwards enter into the action: for which reason King 
Lewis
 used to say that he had brought the 
Kings
 of 
France Hors Pupillage
 out of their Wardship: a speech of more Brag than Truth. The people I confesse he brought into such terms of slavery, that they not long merited the name of Subjects: but yet for this great boast, the 
Nobles
 of 
France
 are the 
Kings Guardians.
 I have already shewn you much of their potencie, by that you may see, that the 
French Kings
 have not yet sued their 
Outre le maine,
 as our Lawyers call it. Had he also in some measure broken the powerableness of the 
Princes,
 he had then been perfectly his word's Master; and till that be done, I shall think his Successors to be in their 
Pupillage.
 That 
King
 is but half himselfe, which hath the absolute com∣mand onely of half his people.


The Battaile by this towne, the common peo∣ple impute to the 
English
; and so do many others, which they had no hand in: for hearing their 
Gran∣dames
 talk of their Warres with our Nation, and of the many Fields which we gained of them, they no sooner heare talk of a pitch'd Field, but pre∣sently (as the nature of men in a fright is) they at∣tribute it to the 
English.
 Good simple soules, 
Qui nos non solum laudibus nostris ornare velint, sed alie∣nis onerare:
 as 
Tullie
 in his 
Philippicks.
 An hu∣mour just like unto that of little children, who be∣ing once afrighted with the Tales of 
Robin Good-fellow,
 do never after heare any noyse in the night, but they streight imagine, that it is he which maketh


it, or like the women of the villages neere 
Oxford
; who having heard the tragicall story of a Duck or a Hen killed and carried to the 
Ʋniversity,
 no sooner misse one of their chickins, but instantly they cry out upon the 
Schollars.
 On the same false ground also, hearing that the 
English
 whilst they had possessions in this Countrey were great builders, they bestow on them without any more adoe, the foundation and perfecting of most of the Churches and Castles in the Countr
y. Thus are our Ancestors said to have built the Churches of 
Roven, Amiens, Bayon,
 &c. as also the Castles of 
Boys,
 S. 
Vincennes,
 the 
Bastile,
 the two little Forts on the River side by the 
Louvre
 at S. 
Germaines
▪ and amongst many others this of 
Montl'herrie,
 where we now are, and all alike. As for this Castle, it was bu
lt during the reigne of King 
Robert, Anno
 1015. by one of his servants named 
Thebald,
 long before the 
English
 had any poss
ssions in this Continent. It was ra∣zed by 
Lewis
 the 
Grosse,
 as being a harbourer of Rebells in former times, and by that meanes as a strong bridle in the mouth of 
Paris
; nothing now standing of it save an high Tower, which is seen a great distance round about, and serveth for a Land∣mark.


Two leagu
s from 
Montl'herrie
 is the twon of 
Chastres,
 seated in the farthest angle of 
France,
 where it confineth to 
la Beauss,
 a town of an ordi∣nary size, somewhat bigger than for a market, and lesse than would beseem a city. A wall it hath and a ditch, but neither serviceable further than to re∣sist the enemy at one gate, while the people run away by the other. Nothing else remarkable in it,


but the habit of the 
Church
 which was 
mourning
 for such is the fashion of 
France,
 that when any of the 
Noblesse
 are buried, the Church which entombeth them is painted black within and without for the breadth of a yard, or thereabouts, and their coats of Armes drawn on it. To goe to the charges of hanging it round with cloath is not for their profits. Besides, this countefeit sorrow feareth thieves, & dareth out-brave a tempest. He for whom the Church of 
Chastres
 was thus apparelled, had been 
Lord
 of the Towne, by name as I remember Mr. 
St. Bennoist,
 his Armes were argent, three Crescents on a Mullet of the same, but whether this Mullet were part of the Coat, or a mark onely of difference I could not learn. Thelike Funerall chur∣ches I saw also at 
Tostes
 in 
Normandie,
 and in a Village of 
Picardie,
 whose name I minde not; 
nec operae pretium.
 And now we are passed the con∣fines of 
France,
 a poore River, which for the nar∣rownesse of it, you would think a ditch parting it from the Province of 
La Beausse.


La Beausse
 hath on the 
North, Normandie,
 on the 
East,
 the 
Isle of France,
 on the 
South,
 the River of 
Loyer,
 and on the 
West,
 the Countreys of 
Tou∣rein
 and 
le Main
; it lieth in 22 & 23 degree of Lon∣gitude, and the 48 and 49 of Latitude, taking whol∣ly up the breadth of the two former, and but part onely of each of the latter. If you measure it for the best advantage of length, you will finde it to ex∣tend from 
la Forte Bernard
 in the 
North west
 cor∣ner of it, to 
Gyan
 in the 
South east,
 which accor∣ding to the proportion of degrees, amounteth to 60 miles English, and somewhat better; for breadth


it is much after the same reckoning. The ancient inhabitants of this Province, and the reason of the name I could not learn amongst the people; nei∣ther can I find any certainty of it in my books, with whom I have consulted. If I may be bold to goe by conjecture, I should think this countrey to have been the seat of 
Bellocassi,
 a people of 
Gaule Cel∣tick,
 mentioned by 
Caesar
 in his Commentaries. Certaine it is that in this Tract they were seated, and in likelihood in this 
Province
; the names an∣cient and moderne being not much different in sense, though in sound. For the 
Franks
 called that which in 
Latine
 is 
pulcher
 or 
bellus,
 by the name of 
Bell
 in the Masculine Gender; 
Beu
 the Pronoune it, and 
Beau
 as it were the Faeminine. At this time 
Beau
 is Masculine, and 
Belle
 Faeminine: so that the name of 
Bellocassi
 is but varied into that of 
Beausse
: Besides that 
Province
 which the 
Roman
 writers stile 
Bellovaci,
 the 
French
 now call 
Beauvais,
 where 
Belle
 is also turned into 
Beau.
 Adde to this, that the 
Latine
 writers doe terme this contrey, 
Bello Bessia,
 where the ancient 
Bello
 is still preserved; and my conjecture may be pardoned, if not approved. As for those which have removed this people into 
Normandie,
 and found them in the city of 
Baieux,
 I appeale to any understanding man, whether their peremptory sentence, or my submisse opinion be the more allowable.


— Haec si tibi vera videtur,


Dede manus: aut si falsa est, accingere contra.


The same night we came to 
Estampes,
 a towne


scituate in a very plentifull and fruitfull Soile, and watered with a River of the same name, stored with the best Crevices; it seemeth to have been a town of principall importance, there b
ing five walls and gates in a length, one before another. So that it appeareth to be rather a continuation of many townes together than simply one. The Streets are of a large breadth, the Buildings for sub∣stance are stone, and for fashion as the rest of 
France.
 It containeth in it five Churches, whereof the principall is a 
Colledge
 of 
Chanons,
 as that of 
No∣stredame,
 built by King 
Robert,
 who is said also to have founded the 
Castle,
 which now can scarcely be visited in its ruines; without the towne they have a fine green Meadow daintily seated within the circlings of the Water, into which they use to fol∣low their recreations. At my being there, the sport was dancing, an exercise much used by the 
French,
 who doe naturally affect it. And it seems this natural inclination is so strong and deep rooted, that neither age, nor the absence of a smiling for∣tune can prevaile against it. For on this Dancing-green there assembleth not onely Youth and Gen∣try, but also Age and Beggery, old wives which could not set foot to ground without a Crutch in the streets, had here taught their feet to amble, you would have thought by the cleanly conveyance and carriage of their bodies, that they had beene troubled with the 
Sciatica,
 and yet so eager in the sport, as if their dancing-dayes should never be done. Some there were so ragged, that a swift Galliard would almost have shaked them into na∣kednesse, and they also most violent to have their


carcasses directed in a measure. To have attempted the staying of them at home, or the perswading of them to work when they heard the Fiddle, had been a task too unweildy for 
Hercules.
 In this m
xture of age and condition did we observe them at their pastime; the raggs being so interwoven with the silks, and wrinkled browes so interchangably mingled with fresh beauties, that you would have thought it to have been a mummery of fortunes; as for those of both sexes which were altogether past action, they had caused themselves to be carried thither in their chaires, and trod the measures with their eyes.


The 
Inne
 which we lay in was just like those of 
Normandie,
 or at the least so like, as was fit for Si∣sters, for such Guests take them.

—Facies non omnibus una


Nec diversa tamen, qualem de cet esse sororum.

All the difference in them lay in the morning, and amongst the maid-servants, for there we were not troubled with such an importunate begging, as in that other countrey. These here had learned a more neat and compendious art of getting money, and petitioned not our eares, but our noses, by the 
Rhe∣torick of a Poësie
; they prevailed upon the purse, by giving each of us a bundle of dead flowers tacked together, seemed rather to buy our bounties than to beg them. A sweeter and more generous kinde of craving, than the other of 
Normandie,
 and such as may seem to imply in it some happy contradicti∣on; for what else is it, that a maid should proffer


her self to be deflowred without prejudice to her modesty, and raise to her future husband an honest stock by the usury of a kindenesse. Refreshed with these favours, we took our leave of 
Estampes
 and the dancing Miscelanie, jogging on through many a beautifull field of corne, till we came unto 
Anger∣ville,
 which is six leagues distant: a Town of which I could not observe or heare any thing memorable, but that it was taken by 
Montacute,
 Earle of 
Sa∣lisbury,
 as hee went this way to the siege of 
Or∣leans,
 and indeed the taking of it was no great mi∣racle, the walls being so thin that an arrow could almost as soon make a breach in them as a canon. The same fortune befell also unto 
Toury,
 a place not much beyond it in strength or bignesse, onely that it had more confidence (as 
Savage
 an 
English Gentleman
 once said) in the walls of bones, which were within it, than in the walls of stones which were without it.


This Town standeth in the middle way betwixt 
Estampes
 and 
Orleans,
 and therefore a fit stage to act a dinner on, and to it we went: by that time we had cleared our selves of our pottage, there entred upon us three uncouth fellowes with hats on their heads, like cover'd dishes; as soon as ever I saw them, I cast one eye upon my cloak, and the other on my sword, as not knowing what use I might have of my steele to maintain my 
cloath.
 There was great talk at that time of Mr. 
Sonbise
's being in armes, and I much feared that these might be some straglers of his army; and this I suspected by their countenances, which were very thievish and full of insolence. But when I had made a survey


of their apparell, I quickly altered that opinion, and accounted them as the excrement of the next prison, deceived alike in both my jealousies, for these pretty parcels of mans flesh were neither bet∣ter nor worse, but even arrant fidlers, and such which in 
England
 we should not hold worthy of the whipping post. Our leave not asked, and no reve∣rence on their parts performed, they abused our eares with a harsh lesson; and as if that had not been punishment enough unto us, they must needs adde unto it one of their songs; by that little 
French
 which I had gathered, and the simpering of a 
Fille de joy
 of 
Paris
 who came along with us, I percei∣ved it was bawdy, and to say truth, more than pati∣ently could be endured by any but a 
French-man,
 but 
quid facerem,
 what should I doe but endure the mi∣sery, for I had not lagu
ge enough to call them rogues handsomely, and the villaines were inferiour to a beating, and indeed not worthy of mine or any honest mans anger.

Praeda canum lepus est, vastos non implet hiatus


Nec gaudet tenui sanguine tanta s
is▪

They were a knot of Rascalls so infinitely below the severity of a Statute, that they would have discredi∣ted the 
State,
 and to have hanged them had been to hazard the reputation of the Gallows. In a yeare you would hardly finde out some vengeance for them, which they would not injure in the suffering; unlesse it be not to hearken to their ribaldry, which is one of their greatest torments. To proceed, after their song ended, one of the company (the Master of them it should seem) draweth a dish out of his pocket, and layeth it before us, into which we were


to cast our benevolence. Custome hath allowed them a 
Sol,
 for each man at the table, they expect no more, and will take no lesse; no large summe, and yet I assure you, richly worth the musick, which was meerly 
French,
 that is, lascivious in the composure: and 
French
 also, that is, unskilfully handled in the playing.


Amongst the Ancients I have met with three kindes of 
Musick, viz.
 First, that which the 
Greeks
 call 
, which consisted altogether of long notes or 
Spondees,
 which was the gravest and saddest of all the rest, called by 
Aristotle,
 in the last Chapter of his 
Politicks,
 
, or morall, because it setled the affections: 
Boetius
 whom we account the classicall Author in this faculty, called it 
Ly∣dian,
 because in much use with those of that Na∣tion at this day: We may call it 
Italian,
 as being generally a peculiar musick to that people. This is the 
Musick
 which 
Elisha
 called for, to invite unto him the spirit of Prophesie, 1 
Kings
 3.15. and this is it which is yet sung in our Churches. A practice which we derive from the Ancients (however some of late have opposed it) and which is much commended by Saint 
Augustine,
 this be∣ing the use of it, 
Ʋt per oblectamenta aurium in∣firmior animus in pietatis affectum assurgat.
 The se∣cond kinde the 
Artists
 call 
, which con∣sisteth of a mixture of long and short notes, or of the 
Dactylus.
 The Philosopher termeth it 
. being it had been in much esteem amongst the 
Dores,
 a 
Greek Nation:
 we may now call it 
English,
 as being that 
Musick
 with which our Na∣tion is particularly affected. This is that Musick,


which cheereth the spirits, and is so soveraign an 
Antidote
 to a minde afflicted, and which, as the 
Poet
 hath it, doth 
Saxa movere sono.
 The third sort is, that which the 
Greeks
 call 
, consisting al∣together of short notes, or 
Tribracches. Aristotle
 calleth it, 
, ravishing, because it un∣hinged the affections, and stirred them to lascivi∣ousnesse. 
Boetius
 termeth this 
Phrygian,
 as being the strain of that wanton and luxuriant people. In these times we may call it 
French,
 as most delighted in by the stirring spirits, and lightness of this Nation, a note of Musick forbidden unto youth by 
Aristo∣tle
 and 
Plato,
 and not countenanced by any of them, but on the common theatres, to satisfie the rude manners and desires of the 
vulgar,
 
, and to give them also con∣tent in their recreations, yet is this Musick altoge∣ther in use in this Countrey; no lesson amongst their profest Musicians that I could hear which had any gravity, or solid Art shewed in the Composi∣tion. They are pretty fellowes, I confesse, for the setting out of a 
Mask
 or a 
Coranto,
 but beyond this nothing, which maketh the Musick in their Churches so base and unpleasing, so that the glory of perfect Musick at this time, lyeth between the 
English
 and 
Italian
; that of 
France
 being as triviall as their behaviour, of which indeed it is a conco∣mitant. 
Mutata Musica mutantur mores,
 saith 
Tullie,
 and therefore he giveth us this lesson, 
Cu∣randum itaque est, ut musica quam gravissima & sedatissima retineatur.
 A good 
item
 for the 
French.








CHAP. II.




The Countrey and Site of 
Orleans,
 like that of 
Worcester.
 The Wine of 
Orleans.
 Prae∣sidiall Townes in 
France,
 what they are. The sale of offices in 
France.
 The fine walk and pastime of the 
Palle Malle.
 The Church of St. 
Croix
 founded by Superstiti∣on of a Miracle, defaced by the 
Hugonets.
 Some things hated onely for their name. The Bishop of 
Orleans
 and his priviledge. The Chappel and Pilgrim of St. 
Jacques.
 The form of Masse in St. 
Croix.
 Censing a heathenish Custome. The great Siege of 
Orleans,
 raised by 
Joane
 the Virgin. The valor of that Woman, that she was no Witch. An Eulogie on her.




WE are now come into the countrey of 
Or∣leans,
 which though within the limits of 
La Beausse,
 will yet be accounted an intire Coun∣ty of it selfe, it is a dainty and pleasant Region, very even and large in the fields of it, insomuch that we could not see a hill or swelling of the ground within 
eye-reach.
 It consisted of an indifferent mea∣sure of 
Corne,
 but most plentiful of 
Vines,
 and hath of all other Fruits a very liberall portion. Neither is it meanly beholding to the 
Loyre
 for the benefits is receiveth by that River, on which the


City of 
Orleans
 it selfe is sweetly seated. Of all places in 
England, Worcester-shire
 in my opinion cometh most nigh it, as well in respect of the Coun∣trey, as the scituation of the Towne: for certainly that Countrey may be called the 
Epitome of En∣gland,
 as that of 
France.
 To the richest of the Corn-fields of 
Orleans
 we may compare the Vale of 
Evesham.
 Neither will it yeild for choyce and variety of Fruits, the Vine onely excepted. The Hedges in that Countrey are prodigall and lavish of those trees, which would become the fairest Orchards of the West, and in a manner recom∣penceth the want of Wine by its plenty of 
Perry
 and 
Syder.
 In a word, what a good Writer hath said of one, we may say of both, 
Coelum & sol
m ita propitium habent, ut salubritate & ubertate vici∣nis non concedunt.
 But the resemblance betweene the townes is more happy; both seated on the se∣cond 
River
 of note in their severall 
Countreys
; and which are not much unlike in their severall courses. 
Severn
 washing the walls of 
Gloucoster,
 and pas∣sing nigh unto 
Bristoll,
 seated on a little Rivulet, and its Homager divideth the ancient 
Britaines
 from the rest of the 
English.
 The 
Loyre
 gliding to the city 
Tours,
 and passing nigh unto 
Angiers,
 sea∣ted also within the land on a little River, and one of its Tributaries, separateth the modern 
Bri∣taines
 from the rest of the 
French. Posita est in loco modice acclivi, ad flumen, quod turrigero ponti conjungitur, & muro satis firmo munita,
 saith Mr. 
Cambden
 of 
Worcester. Orleans
 is seated on the like declivitie of an hill, hath its bridge well forti∣fied with Turrets, and its walls of an equall ability


of resistance; 
Sed decus est ab incolis qui sunt nume∣rosi & humani, ab aedificiorum nitore, à templorum numero & maxime à Sede Episcopali,
 saith he of ours in genrall; we may see it fitly applied to this in each particular. The people of this town are not of the fewest, no town in 
France
 (the propor∣tion of it considered) being more populous: for standing in so delicate an Aire, and on so commo∣dious a River, it inviteth the 
Gentry
 or 
Noblesse
 of the countrey about it to inhabite there, and they accept it. Concerning their behaviour and huma∣nity, certainly they much exceed the 
Parisians,
 I was about to say all the 
French-men,
 and indeed I not grudge them this 
Eulogie,
 which 
Caesar
 giveth unto those of 
Kent,
 and verifie that they are 
omnium incolarum longe humanissimi,
 my selfe here obser∣ving more courtesie and affability in one day, than I could meet withall in 
Paris,
 during all my abode there. The buildings of it are very suitable to themselves, and the rest of 
France
; the streets large and well kept, not yeilding the least offence to the most curious nostrill: 
Parish Churches
 it hath in it 26. of different and unequall beeing, as it useth to be in other places; besides these, it containeth the 
Episcopall Church
 of S. 
Croix,
 and divers other houses of religious persons, amongst which is St. 
Jacques
; of both which I shall speak in their due order. Thus much for the resemblance of the Townes, the difference betwixt them is this, that 
Orleans
 is the bigger, and 
Worcester
 the richer. 
Orleans
 consisteth much of the 
Noblesse,
 and of So∣journers; 
Worcester
 of 
Citizens
 and Home-dwel∣lers; and for the manner of life in them, so it is


that 
Worcester
 hath the handsomer woman in it, 
Orleans
 the finer, and in my opinion the loveliest in all 
France. Worcester
 thriveth the most on 
Cloa∣thing, Orleans
 on their 
Vine-presses.


And questionlesse the Wine of 
Orleans
 is the greatest riches, not of the Towne onely, but of the 
Countrey
 also about it. For this cause 
A
dre dis Chesne
 calleth it, 
the prime Cellar of Paris, Est une pars
 (saith he) 
si henreuse & si secunde sur tout in vins quon la pent dice l'unde primiers celiers de Paris.
 Those Vines wherein he maketh it to be so happy, deserve no lesse a commendation than he hath gi∣ven them, as yeilding the best Wines in all the Kingdome, such as it much moved me to mingle with Water, they being so delicious to the Palate, and the 
Epicurisme
 of the taste. I have heard of a 
Dutch
 Gentleman, who being in 
Italy
 was brought acquainted with a kinde of Wine which they there call 
Lachrymae Christi
; no sooner had he tasted it, but he fell into a deep melancholy; and after some seaven sighes, besides the addition of two gro
nes, he brake out into this patheticall Ejacu∣lation: 
Dii boni, quare non Christus lachrymatus esset in nostris regionibus
? This 
Dutchman
 and I were for a time both of one minde, insomuch that I could almost have picked a quarrell with 
Nature,
 for giving us none of this 
Liquor in England
 At last we grew friends, again, when I had perceived how offensive it was to the brain (if not well qualified) for which cause it is said, that K. 
Lewis
 hath bani∣shed it his Cellar, no doubt to the great grief of his drinking Courtiers, who may therefore say with 
Martial,




Quid tantum fecere boni tibi pessima vina?


Aut quid fecerunt optima vina mali?


This towne called 
Genabum
 by 
Caesar,
 was re∣edified by 
Aurelian
 the 
Emperour, Anno
 276. and called by his name 
Aurelianum,
 which it still re∣taineth amongst the 
Latines.
 It hath been famous heretofore for four 
Councels
 here celebrated; and for being the seat royall of the 
Kings of Orleans
: though as now I could not heare any thing of the ruines of the 
Palace.
 The same of it at this time consisteth in the 
Ʋniversity
 and its seat of 
Justice
: This town being one of them which they call 
Sie∣ges Presidiaux.
 Now these 
Seiges Presidiaux, Seats
 or 
Courts of Justice,
 were established in divers ci∣ties of the Realme for the ease of the people, 
Anno
 1551. or thereabouts. In them all civill causes not exceeding 
250 Liu'res
 in Money, or 10. 
Liu'res
 in Rents, are heard and determined soveraignly and without appeale. If the summe exceed those pro∣portions the appeale holdeth good, and shall be examined in that Court of Parliament, under whose jurisdiction it is. Their Court here consisteth of a 
Baille,
 whose name is Mr. 
Digion,
 of twelve 
Coun∣sellors,
 two 
Lieutenants,
 one 
civill,
 the other 
cri∣minall,
 and a publique 
Notarie.
 When Mr. 
Le Compte de St. Paul,
 who is the Governour or Lieu∣tenant Generall of the Province cometh into their Court, he giveth precedency to the 
Baille,
 in other places he receiveth it. This institution of these 
Pre∣sidiall Courts,
 was at first a very profitable ordi∣nance, and much eased the people, but now it is


grown burdensome. The reason is, that the offi∣ces are meere sa
able, and purchased by them with a great deale of money, which afterwards they wrest againe out of the purses of the Pa
sant. The sale of Offices drawing necessarily after it, the sale of 
Justice,
 a mischief which is spread so far, that there is not the worst 
under Officer
 in all the Realm Who may not say with the 
Captaine
 in the 22. of the Acts and the 28. verse, 
. 
With a great summe of money obtained I this freedome.
 Twenty yeares purchase is said to be no extraordinary rate; and I have read, that onely by the sale of Offices one of the 
Kings
 had raised in twenty yeares 139 
millions,
 which amounteth to the proportion of 7 
millions
 yearly, or thereabouts, of all wayes to thrift and treasure the most unkindly. In the yeare 1614. the 
King
 motioned the abolishing of the sales of this Market, but it was upon a condition more prejudi∣ciall to the people than the mischiefe. For he desi∣red in lieu of it to have a greater imposition laid upon 
Salt,
 and upon the 
Aides,
 which those that were 
Commissioners
 for the 
C
mmonalty
 would not admit of, because then a common misery had been brought out of the State, to make their particular miseries the greater, and so the corruption remain∣eth unaltered.


This Towne as it is sweetly seated, in respect of the aire, so is it finely convenienced with the walks, of which the chief are, that next unto 
Paris gate,
 having the wall on the one hand, and a rank of 
Palm
 trees on the other; the second, that neere unto the bridge, having the Water pleasingly run∣ning


on both sides: and a third which is indeed the principall, on the 
East-side
 of the 
City,
 it is called the 
Palle Malle,
 of an exercise of that name much used in this Kingdome, a very Gentleman-like sport, not over violent, and such as affordeth good opportunity of discourse, as they walk from one mark to the other. Into this walk, which is of a wonderful length and beauty▪ you shall have a clear evening empty all the towne, the aged people bor∣rowing legs to carry them, and the younger armes to guide them. If any young Dame or 
Monsieur
 walk thither single, they will quickly finde some or other to link with them, though perhaps such with whom they have no familiarity. Thus do they mea∣sure and re-measure the length of the 
Palle Malle,
 not minding the shutting in of the day, till dark∣ness hath taken away the sense of blushing; at all houres of the night, be it warm and dry, you shall be sure to finde them thus coupled; and if at the yeares end there be found more children in the towne than fathers, this walk and the night are shrewdly suspected to be accessories; a greater in∣cnovenience in mine opinion, than an 
English Kiss.


There is yet a fourth walk in this towne, called 
L'estappe,
 a walk principally frequented by 
Mer∣chants,
 who here meet to confer of their occasi∣ons. It lieth before the house of Mr. 
Le Comte de St. Paul,
 the Governour, and reacheth up to the 
Cloister
 of 
St. Croix:
 of the buildings of which 
Church
 I could never yet hear or read of any thing, but that which is meerly fabulous: for the 
Citizens
 report, that long since, time out of minde, there ap∣peared a 
Vision
 to a 
holy Monk,
 which lived therea∣bouts,


and bad him dig deep in such a place, where he should finde a piece of the 
Holy Crosse,
 charging him to preserve that blessed relique in great ho∣nour, and to cause a 
Church
 to be built in that place where it had been buried. Upon this warning the Church was founded, but at whose charges they could not inform me: so that all which I cou
d learn concerning the foundation of this Church, is, that it was erected by Superstition & a Lie. The Superstition is apparent in the worshipping of such rotten sticks, as they imagine to be the remnants of the 
Crosse
: their calling of it holy, and dedicating of this 
Church
 unto it. Nay they have consecrated unto it two 
Holy-dayes,
 one in 
May,
 and the other in 
Sep∣tember,
 and are bound to salute it as often as they see it in the streets, or high wayes, with these words, 
Ave salus totius Seculi, arbor salutifera.
 Hor∣rible blasphemy, and never heard of but under 
An∣tichrist, Cruces subeundas esse non adorandas,
 being the lesson of the 
Ancients.
 As for the Miracle I ac∣count it as others of the same stamp, equally false and ridiculous. This Church in the yeare 1562. was defaced and ruined by the 
Hugonots,
 who had en∣tred the town under the conduct of the Prince of 
Conde.
 An action little savouring of Humanity, and lesse of Religion; the very Heathens themselves ne∣ver demolishing any of the Churches of those towns which they had taken: but in this action the 
Hugonots
 consulted only with rashnesse and zealous fury, thinking no title so glorious as to be called the 
Scourge of Papists,
 and the overthrowers of 
Popish Churches.


Quid facerent hostes captâ crudelius urbe?


The most barbarous en
mies in the world could not more have exercised their malice on the van∣qu
shed. And this I pe
swade my selfe had been the fate of most of our Churches, if that Fict
on had got the upper hand of us; but this Church notwithstanding is likely now to survive their mad∣nesse, being 
Henry
 the fourth beg
n the repairing of it, and his Son 
Lewis
 hath si
ce continued it, so that the Quire is not quite finished, and the workmen are in hand with the rest. What should move the 
Hugonots
 to this execution I cannot say, except it were a hate which they beare unto the name, and perhaps not that unlikely. We read how the 
Romans
 having expelled the 
Kings
 banished also 
Collatinus
 their 
Consul,
 a man in whom they could finde no fault, but this, that his sirname was 
Tarquinius. Tantum ob nomen & genus regium,
 saith 
Florus:
 Afterwards 
quam invisum fuerit Re∣gis nomen,
 is very frequent in the stories of those times. Among those which had been of the 
Con∣spiracy
 against 
Julius Caesar,
 there was one named 
Cinna,
 a name so odious among the people, that meeting by chance with one of 
Caesars
 friends, and hearing that his name was 
Cinna,
 they presently murthered him in the place. For which cause one 
Cassius,
 which was also the name of one of the Conspirators, published a writing of his name and ped
gree, shewing therein that he neither was the Traytor, nor any kin to him. The reason of his action 
Dion
 giveth us, 
.



Ne si nominis causâ occideretur.
 With a like heat it may be were the 
French Protestants
 possessed against the name of the 
Crosse.
 For they not onely ruined that Temple, but beat downe also all those little 
Crosses
 betwixt 
Mount Mactre
 and 
St. Denis,
 though now 
King Lewis
 hath caused them to be re-edified. And what troubles the 
French
 party here in 
England
 have raised because of that harm∣lesse ceremony of the 
Crosse, Notius est quam ut stylo egeat,
 and therefore I omit it.


This 
Church
 is the Seat of a 
Bishop,
 who ac∣knowledgeth the 
Archbishoprick
 of 
Seines
 for his 
Metropolitan.
 The present 
Bishop
 is named 
Fran∣ciscus de Anbespins,
 said to be a worthy Scholar, and a sound 
Polititian
; though he were never gradu∣ated farther than the 
Arts
: of his revenue I could learn nothing, but of his privileges this, namely, that at the entrance of every new 
Bishop
 into this 
Church,
 he hath the liberty of setting free of any of the Prisoners of the Gaole, though their crime be never so mortall. For the originall of this in∣dulgence we are beholding to St. 
A
gnan,
 once 
Bishop
 here, and who defended the city against 
Atella
 the 
Huanne
: At his first entrance into the towne (saith the Story) after he was invested 
Bi∣shop,
 he besought 
Agrippinus
 the 
Governor
 that for his sake he would let loose all his Prisoners; 
Ʋt omnes quos pro variis criminibus poenalis car
er deti∣nebat inclusos, sibi in introitus gratiam redderet re∣solutos:
 When the 
Governour
 had heard this re∣quest, he denied it, and presently a stone falleth on his head, no man knew from whence. Wounded and terrified with this, the 
Governour
 granteth hi



desire, recovereth his health, and ever since the custome hath continued. For the truth of this story I intend to be no 
Champion,
 for I hold it ri∣diculous, and savouring too much of the 
Legend
; but this I am certain of, that every new 
Bishop
 maketh a solemn and majestick entry into the City, and at his entry releaseth a Prisoner.


Let us follow the 
Bishop
 into his Church, and we shall finde him entertained with an high 
Masse,
 the ceremonies whereof are very pretty and ab∣surd; To goe over them all would require a vo∣lume, I will therefore mention those onely, where∣in they diff
r from other 
Masses
 and they are two, the one Fantasticall, the other Heathenish; for as soon as the 
Priest
 at the 
Altar
 hath read a certain lesson, but what, his voyce was not audible enough to tell me, out marcheth the 
Dean,
 or in his ab∣sence the senior 
Chanoin
 out of the 
Church
; before him two or three Torches, and a long 
Crosse
 sil∣vered over; after him all those of the 
Church,
 and lastly, the 
Lay-people
 both men and women, so that there is none left to keep possession, but the 
Priest
 at the 
Altar,
 and such strangers as come thither for curiosity; they went out at one door, and just circuited the Quire, and the body of the Church, afterwards they return to their places, and the 
Priest
 proceedeth; I have seen many a dumb shew in a Play just like it. This onely is the difference, that here we had no interpreter nor 
Chorus
 afforded us to shew us the mysterie of this silent je
iculation. The other addition which I ob∣served here at the 
Masse
 (though I have since been told, that it is ordinrary at 
High Masses
 in 
Cathe∣drall


Churches
) was the 
censing
 of the people, which was performed in this manner: Whiles the 
Priest
 was busie at the 
Altar,
 there entred into the 
Quire
 at a side door, two Boyes in their Surplices bearing waxe Tapers in their hands, and immediately after them the foresaid fellow with the 
Crosse.
 In the rare there came two of the 
Priests
 in their 
Copes,
 and other stately vestments, between both a young lad with the Incense pot, made full of holes to let out the fume, which he swinged on all sides of him, with a chain to which it was fastned: Having thus marched through the 
Church,
 and censed the people, he ascended unto the 
Altar,
 & there censed the 
Cross,
 the 
Reliques,
 the 
Bread
 and 
Wine,
 the 
Chalice,
 the 
Images
▪ and I know not what not. A custome very much used amongst the 
Heathen: Omnibus vicis factae sunt statuae, & ad eas thus & cerei,
 saith 
Tully:
 and 
Jane tibi primùm thura merumque fero,
 saith 
Ovid
 in his book 
de Fastis
; so have we in 
Martiall, Te primùm pia thura rogent,
 and the like in divers other writers of the 
Antients.
 At what time it crept into the Churches of the Christians, I can∣not tell. Sure I am, it was not used in the Pri∣mitive times, nor in the third Century after our Saviour, save only in their Burialls, 
Sciant sabae
 (saith 
Tertullian,
 (who at that time lived) 
plures & chari∣ores merces suas Christianis, saepeliendis profligari, quā Diis fumigantibus. Arnobius
 also in his first book, 
ad∣versus gentes,
 disclaimeth the use of it, and yet their 
Councel of Trent
 in the 22 
Session
 defineth it to be as boldly an Apostolicall institution and tradition, as if the 
Apostles
 themselves had told them so; I know they had rather seem to derive it from the


10. chapter of 
Exodus,
 and the 1. verse, and so 
Bi∣shop Durand
 is of opinion in his 
Rationale Divino∣rum,
 but this will not help them. 
Aaron
 there is commanded to burne Incense onely on the 
Altar,
 and not to cense Men and Images, 
Crosses
 and re∣liques, as the 
Papists
 doe; so that will they, 
ill they, they must be counted followers of the Hea∣then, though I envy them not the honour of being 
Jewes.
 From the History and Revenue of the Church proceed we to that of the Town, where nothing occurreth more memorable, than the great si
ge laid before it by the 
English.
 A siege of great importance to both parties, 
France
 having been totally won unto 
King Henry,
 if this Town had yeelded, and once so nigh it was to submit it selfe, that the people proffered to yeeld themselves to 
Philip Duke of Burgundie,
 then a great confederate of our Nation, who had not been present in the Camp, but this the 
English Generall
 would not consent unto; and it was the resolution of 
An∣tigonus
 a long time before us, 
Negavit Antigonus
 (saith 
Justine) se in ejus belli praedam socios admit∣tere, in cujus periculum solus descenderat.
 On this determinate sentence of the 
Generall,
 (he was 
Montacute Earl of Salisbury
) the Town purposed to hold out a little longer, and was at last relieved by 
Joane de Arca
 maid of vancoleure in 
Loraine
 whom they called 
la Puelle
; how by that excellent Soldier the 
Generall
 war slaine, and the siege raised, I need not relate, it is extant in all our Chro∣nicles. This onely now, that ever since that time, the people of 
Orleans
 keep a solemn procession on every eighth day of 
May,
 on which day, 
An.
 1427.


their City was delivered from its enemies.


But the atchievements of this brave 
Virago,
 stayed not here, sh
 thinkes it not enough to d
pulse her enemies, unlesse she also vanquish them; armed therefore 
cap a pea
; she went to seek an occasion of battaile▪ and was alwayes formost, and in the head or her Troops.


Duxit Amazonidum lunatis agmina bellis,


Penthesilea furens, mediisque in millibus arde
.


For her first service she taketh 
Jargean,
 discom∣fiteth the 
English
 which were in it, and maketh the 
Earl of Suffolk
 Prisoner: soon after followed the battaile of 
Patay,
 in which the 
English
 were driven out of the field, and the great 
Talbot
 taken. This done, she accompanieth 
Charles
 the 1. whose 
Angell-Guardian
 she was thought, all 
Champayne
 unto 
Rhemes,
 where she solemnly saw him Crowned, all the Townes of those Countreyes yeelding upon the approach of her, and the 
Kings
 Army. Finally, after many acts performed above the nature of her sexe, which I will not stand here to particulate: she was taken prisoner at the siege of 
Campaigne
 delivered over unto the 
Earle of Bedford
 by him sent unto 
Roven
 and there burnt for a 
Witch
 on the sixth of 
July Anno
 1431. There was also another crime objected against her, as namely that she had abused the nature of her sexe, marching up and downe in the habit of a man; 
& nihil muliebre p
aeter corpus gerens,
 of all accu∣sations the most impotent, for in what other habit could she dresse her selfe, undertaking the actions


of a General: and besides, to have worne her womans weeds in time of battaile, had been to have betrayed her safety, and to have made her selfe the marke of every Arrow. It was therefore requisite, that she should array her selfe in compleat harness, and in that habit of compleat armour have those of 
Orleans,
 erected those 
statua's
 all in brasse, upon the middle of their bridge.


As for that other imputation of being a 
Witch,
 saving the credit of those that condemned her, and theirs also, who in their writings have so repor∣ted her, I dare be of the contrary opinion, for dividing her actions into two parts, those that precede her coming unto 
Orleans,
 and those that followed it, I find much in it of valour, somewhat perhaps of cunning, but nothing that is divelish; her relieving of 
Orleans,
 and courage shewn at the battaile of 
Patay
 and 
Gargean,
 with the conducting of the King unto 
Rhemes,
 are no such prodigies, that they need to be ascribed unto 
Witchcraft
: She was not the first woman whom the world knew famed in armes, there being no Nation almost of the Earth, who have not had a Champion of this sexe to defend their liberties: to omit the whole Nation of the 
Amazon's,
 to the 
Jewes
 in the time of their afflictions, the 
Lord
 raised up a Salvation by meanes of two women, 
Deborah
 and 
Judith:
 And 
God
 is not the 
God
 of the 
Jewes
 onely, but also of the 
Gentiles.
 Amongst the 
Sirvans, Zeno∣bia,
 Queen of 
Palmira
 is very famous: the 
Ro∣mans
 (whom she often foiled) never mentioning her without honour. The like commendable testi∣mony they give of 
Velleda,
 a Queen amongst the



Germanes,
 and a woman which much hindered their affaires in that Countrey: thus had the 
Gothes
 their 
Amalasunta,
 the 
Assyrians
 their 
Semiramis
 the 
Scythians
 their 
Tomyres
; the 
Romans
 their 
Fla∣via,
 and brave Captaines, and such as posterity hath admired without envie. To come home unto our selves, the writers of the 
Romans
 mention the revolt of 
Britaines
 and the slaughter of 70000 Confederates to the 
Romans,
 under the conduct of 
Vocudia
: and she in the beginning of her encou∣ragements to the action telleth the people thus, 
Solitum quidem Britannis foeminarum ductu bellare.
 Of all these Heroicall 
Ladyes,
 I read no accusation of witchcraft; innative courage, and a sense of injury, being the armes they fought withall. Nei∣ther can I see why the 
Romans
 should exceed us in modesty, or that we need envie unto the 
French
 this one female Warriour: when it is a fortune which hath befallen most nations. As for her at∣chievements, they are not so much beyond a com∣mon being, but that they may be imputed to natu∣rall meanes. For had she been a 
Witch,
 it is likely she would have prevented the disgrace which her valour suffered in the ditches of 
Paris
; though she could not avoid those of 
Champeigne
 who took her prisoner. The 
Divell
 at such an exigent only being accustomed to forsake those which he hath intan∣gled; so that she enjoyed not such a perpetuity of faelicity, as to entitle her to the 
Divells
 assistance, she being sometimes conquerour, sometimes over∣throwne, and at last imprisoned. 
Communia for∣tune ludibria,
 the ordinary sports of 
Fortune
; her actions before her March to 
Orleans
 having some∣what in them of cunning and perhaps of impo∣sture,


as the 
Vision
 which she reported to have in∣cited her to these attempts; her finding out of the 
King
 disguised in the habit of a Countrey-man, and her appointing to her selfe an old sword, hanging in Saint 
Katharines Church in Tours.
 The 
French
 were at this time meerly cr
t-fallen, not to be rai∣sed but by a miracle. This therefore is invented, and so that which of all the rest must prove her a sorce∣resse, will onely prove her an impostor. 
Gerrard seigneur de Haillan,
 one of the best writers of 
France
 is of opinion, that all that plot of her coming to the 
King,
 was contrived by three 
Lords
 of the Court to hearten the people, as if 
God
 now miraculously intended the restauration of the 
Kingdome.
 Add to this, that she never commanded in any battaile, without the assistance of the best Captaines of the 
French
 Nation, and amongst whom was the Ba∣stard of 
Orleans,
 who is thought to have put this device into her head. The Lord 
Bellay
 in his dis∣course of Art Military, proceedeth further, and maketh her a man, onely thus habited: 
Pour fair revenir le courage aux Francois,
 which had it been so, would have been discovered at the time of her burning. Other of the later 
French Writers
 (for those of the former age savour too much of the 
Legend
) make her to be a lusty 
lasse
 of 
Lorreine,
 trained up by the 
Bastard
 of 
Orleans
 and the 
Seig∣neur
 of 
Brandicourt,
 only for this service & that she might carry with her the reputation of a 
Prophe∣tesse,
 and an 
Ambassadresse
 from Heaven, Admit this, and farewell 
Witchcraft.
 As for the sentence of her Condemnation, and the confirmation of it by the 
Divines
 and 
Ʋniversity
 of 
Paris,
 it is with


me of no moment, being composed onely to hu∣mour the 
Victor.
 If this could sway me, I had more reason to encline to the other party; for when 
Charles
 had setled his estate, the same man who had condemned her of Sorcery, absolved her; and there was also added in defence of her inno∣cency, a Decree from the 
Court
 of 
Rome. Joane
 then with me shall inherit the title of 
La puelle d' Orleans,
 with me she shall be ranked amongst the famous Captaines of her time, and be placed in the same throne, equall with the valiant'st of all her Sex in times before her. Let those whom partiality hath wrested aside from the path of truth, pro∣claime her for a Sorceress: for my part I will not flatter the best Fortunes of my Countrey to the prejudice of a truth; neither will I ever be induced to think of this female Warriour otherwise than as of a noble 
Captaine.


— Audet{que} viris concurrere Virgo.


Penthesilea
 did it, why not she


Without the stain of Spells and Sorcery?


Why should those Arts in her be counted sin,


Which in the other have commended been?


Nor is it fit that 
France
 should be deny'd


This Female Soldier; since all Realms beside


Have had the honour of one, and relate


How much that Sex hath ev'n forc'd the state


Of their decaying strength: let 
Scytha
 spare


To speak of 
Tomyris;
 the 
Assyrians
 care


Shall be no more to have their deeds recited


Of 
Ninus
's wife, nor are the 
Dutch
 delighted


To have the name of their 
Velleda
 extoll'd, the name


Of this French Warriour hath eclips'd their fame,


And silenc'd their atchievements; let the praise


That's due to Vertue wait upon her, raise


An Obelisk unto her, you of Gaule,


And let her Acts live in the mouths of all:


Speak boldly of her, and of her alone,


That never Lady was as good as 
Joane.


She dy'd a Virgin, 'twas because the earth


Held not a man, whose Vertues, or whose Birth


Might merit such a Blessing; but above


The Gods provided her a fitting Love,


And gave her to 
St. Denis
; she with him


Protects the Lillies and their Diadem.


You then about whose Armies she doth watch,


Give her the honour due unto her Match.


And when in Field your Standard you ad∣vance,


Cry 'loud, St. 
Denis
 and St. 
Joan
 for 
France.








CHAP. III.




The study of the Civil Law received in 
Eu∣rope.
 The dead time of Learning. The Schoole of Law in 
Orleans.
 The Oecono∣mie of them. The Chancelour of 
Oxford
 anciently appointed by the Diocaesan there. Method here, and Prodigality in bestow∣ing Degrees. 
Orleans
 a great Conflux of Strangers. The Language there. The Cor∣poration of 
Germaines
 there. Their House and Privilege. Dutch Latine. The diffe∣rence between an Academy and an Uni∣versity.




I Have now done with the Town and City of 
Orleans,
 and am come to the 
Ʋniversity
 or 
Schooles of Law
 which are in it, this being one of the first places in which the Study of the 
Civil Law
 was received in 
Europe
; for immediately after the death of 
Justinian,
 who out of no lesse than two thousand volumes of 
Law-Writers,
 had collected that body of the 
Imperiall Laws,
 which we now call the 
Digest,
 or the 
Pandects,
 the study of them grew neglected in these 
Westerne
 parts: nor did any for a long time professe or read them. The reason was b
cause 
Italy, France, Spaine, England
 and 
Germa∣ny,
 having received new 
Lords
 over them, as the 
Franks, Lombards, Saxons, Sarcens,
 and others, were faine to submit themselves to their 
Lawes.



It happened afterwards that 
Lotharius Saxo
 the 
Emperour,
 who began his Raigne 
Anno
 1126, being 560 yeares after the death of 
Justinian,
 having taken the 
City
 of 
Melphy
 in 
Naples,
 found there an old Copy of the 
Pandects.
 This he gave to the 
Pisans
 his Confederates, as a most reverend re∣lique of Learning and Antiquity, whence it is cal∣led 
Litera pisana.
 Moreover he founded the 
Ʋni∣versity
 of 
Bologne,
 or 
Bononia
 ordaining the 
Civill Law,
 to be profest therein, 
Wernir
 being the first 
Professor
; upon whose advice the said 
Emperour
 ordained, that 
Bononia
 should be 
Legum & Juris Schola una & sola,
 and here was the first time and place of that study in the 
Westerne Empire.
 But it was not the fate onely of the 
Civill Lawes
 to be thus neglected, all other parts of Learning, both 
Arts
 and 
Languages
 were in the same desperate Estates. The 
Poets
 exclamation, 
O coelum insipiens & infacetum,
 never being so appliable as in those times, for it is with the knowledge of good 
Let∣ters
 as it is in the effects of 
Nature
; they have their times of growth alike, of perfection and of death like the Sea, it hath its ebbs as well as its flouds; and like the Earth, it hath its Winter, wherein the seeds of it are deaded, and bound up, as well as a Spring wherein it re-flourisheth. Thus the learning of the 
Greeks
▪ lay forgotten, and lost in 
Europe,
 for 700 yeares, even unto 
Emanuel Chry∣solarus
 taught it at 
Venice,
 being driven out of his owne 
Countrey
 by the 
Turks.
 Thus the 
Philosophy
 of 
Aristotle
 lay hidden in the moath of dust and 
Libraries; Et nominabatur potiùs quam legebatur,
 as 
Ludovicus Vives
 observeth in his notes. S. 
Austin,



untill the time of 
Alexander Aphrodiseus.
 Thus also lay the elegancies of the 
Roman
 tongue ob∣scure, till that 
Erasmus Moor
 and 
Reuclyn
 in the several kingdomes of 
Germany, England
 and 
France
 endeavoured the restauration of it.


But to return to the 
Civill Law,
 after the foun∣dation of the 
Ʋniversity of Bologne,
 it pleased 
Phi∣lip le Belle
 King of 
France,
 to found another here at 
Orleans
 for the same purpose, 
Anno
 1
12. which was the first school of that profession, on this side the mountaines; this is evident by the Bull of 
Cle∣ment
 the fifth, dated at 
Lyons
 in the yeare 1367. where he giveth this title; 
Fructiferum Ʋniversi∣tatis Aurelianum sis inter caetera Citramontana stu∣dia prius, solennius, antiquius, tam Civilis, quam Canonicae facultatis studium.
 At the first there were instituted eight 
Professors,
 now they are re∣duced unto four onely, the reason of this decrease being the increase of 
Ʋniversities:
 the place in which they read their Lectures is called, 
Les grands Escoles,
 and that part of the City, 
La Ʋniversitie,
 neither of which attributes it can any way merit: 
Colledges
 they have none, either to lodge the 
Stu∣dents,
 or to entertaine the 
Professors
; the former sojourning in divers places of the Town, these last in their severall houses. As for their places of reading, which they call 
Les grands Escoles,
 it is onely an old Barne converted into a School, by the addition of five rankes of Formes, and a Pew in the middle; you never saw any thing so mock its own name: 
Lucus
 not being of more people called so, 
à non lucendo,
 then this ruinous house is, the 
great School,
 because it is little. The present 
Professors



are Mr. 
Fowrner,
 the 
Rector
 at my being there, Mr. 
Tullerie
 and Mr. 
Grand
: the fourth of them named Mr. 
Angram,
 was newly dead, and his place, like a dead pay among Soldiers, not supplied: In which estate was the function also of Mr. 
Podes,
 whose office it was to read the book of 
Institutions,
 unto such as come newly to the town. They read each of them an houre in their turnes every mor∣ning in the week, unlesse 
Holy-dayes
 and 
Thursdayes,
 their hearers taking their Lectures of them in their tables. Their principall office is that of the 
Rector,
 which every three moneths descendeth down unto the next, so that once in a yeare, every one of those 
Professors
 hath his turne of being 
Rector.
 The next in dignity unto him is the 
Chancellor,
 whose office is during life, and in whose names all degrees are given, and of the 
Letters Authenticall
 (as they terme them) granted. The present 
Chancellor
 is named Mr. 
Bouchier,
 Doctor of 
Divinity,
 and of both the 
Lawes
; and 
Prebend
 also of the Church of S. 
Croix
; his place is in the gift of the 
Bishop
 of 
Orleans,
 and so are the 
Chancellors
 places in all 
France,
 at the bestowing of the 
Diocesan:
 anciently it was thus al∣so with us of 
Oxford
; the 
Bishop
 of 
Lincolne
 nomi∣nating unto us our 
Chancellors,
 till the yeare, 1370. 
William
 of 
Renmington
 being the first 
Chancellor
 e∣lected by the 
Ʋniversity.


In the bestowing of their degrees here, they are very liberall, and deny no man that is able to pay his fees: 
Legem ponere,
 is with them more power∣full than 
Legem dicere,
 and he that hath but his gold ready, shall have a sooner dispatch, than the best Scholar upon the ticket.



Ipsè licet venias Musis comitatus Homere,


Si nihil attuleris, ibis Homere for as.

It is the 
Money
 that disputeth best with them.


Money
 makes the man, saith the 
Greek
 and 
En∣glish proverb.
 That of one of the 
Popes
 (I remember not suddenly his name) who openly protested, that he would give the orders of 
Priesthood
 to an 
Asse,
 should the 
King of England
 commend an 
Asse
 unto him, may be most appositely spoken of them. The exercise which is to be performed before the degree taken, is very little, and as trivially performed. When you have chosen the 
Law,
 which you mean to defend, they will conduct you into an old rui∣nous chamber, they call it their 
Library
; for my part I should have thought it to have been the 
Ware∣house
 of some 
second hand Bookseller:
 those few books which were there, were as old as Printing, and could hardly make amongst them one cover to resist the violence of a 
Rat.
 They stood not up end∣long, but lay one upon the other, and were joyned together with 
Cobwebs
 instead of strings; he that would ever gesse them to have been looked into since the long reigne of Ignorance, might justly have condemned his own charity. For my part I was prone to believe, that the three last centuries of yeeres had never seen the inside of them or that the poor p
per had been troubled with the disease called 
Noli me tangere.
 In this unlucky room doe they hold their disputations, unlesse they be solemn and full of expectation: and after two or three arguments urged, commend the suffi∣ciency of the 
Respondent,
 and pronounce him worthy of his degrees. That done, they cause


his 
Authenticall Letters
 to be sealed, and in them they tell the 
Reader,
 with what diligence and paines they sifted the 
Candidate:
 that it is necessary to the Common-wealth of 
Learning,
 that 
Industry
 should be honoured, and that on that ground they have thought it fitting. 
Post angustias solamen, post vigilias requietem, post dolores gaudia,
 for so (as I remember) goeth the forme, to recompence the labours of 
N. N.
 with the degree of 
Doctor
 or 
Licentiate,
 with a great deale more of the like for∣mall foolery; 
Et ad hunc modum fiunt Doctores.


From the Study of the 
Law,
 proceed we unto that of the 
Language,
 which is said to be better spoken here, then in any part of 
France,
 and cer∣tainly the people hereof spake it more distinctly then the rest, I cannot say more elegantly; yet partly for this reason, partly because of the study of the 
Law,
 and partly because of the sweetnesse of the aire; the Town is never without abundance of strangers of all Nations, which are in correspon∣dency with the 
French
: but in the greatest measure it is replenished with those of 
Germany,
 who have here a 
Corporation,
 & indeed do make among them∣selves a better 
Ʋniversity
 then the 
Ʋniversity.
 This 
Corporation
 consisteth of a 
Procurator,
 a 
Questor,
 an 
Assessor,
 two 
Bibliothecaries,
 and twelve 
Counsellors
; they have all of them their distinct jurisdictions, and are solemnly elected by the rest of the company every third moneth. The 
Consulship
 of 
Rome,
 was never so welcome unto 
Cicero,
 as the office of 
Procurator
 is to a 
Dutch Gentleman:
 he for the time of his command, ordering the affaires of all his Nation, and to say truth, being much respected


by those of the Towne; it is his office to admit of the young comers, to receive the moneyes due at their admission, and to receive an account of the dispending of it, of the 
Questor,
 and the expiring of his charge. The office of an 
Assessor,
 is like that of a 
Clerk
 of the 
Councell,
 and the 
Secretary
 mixt: fot he registreth the 
Acts
 of their 
Coun∣sells,
 writeth Letters in the name of the House, to each of the 
French Kings,
 at their new coming to the 
Crown,
 and if any 
Prince,
 or extraordinary 
Ambassadour
 cometh to the town, he entertaineth him with a Speech. The 
Bibliothecaries
 look to the 
Library,
 in which they are bound to remain three houres a day in their severall tu
nes; a pretty room it is, very plentifully furnished with choyce books, and that at small charge, for that it is here the cu∣stome, that every one of the Nation at his depar∣ture, must leave with them one of what kinde or price it best pleaseth him: besides, each of the Of∣ficers at the resigning of his charge, giveth unto the new 
Questor,
 a piece of gold about the value of a 
Pistolet,
 to be expended according as the necessities of their state require, which most an end is bestowed upon the increase of their 
Library.


Next unto this 
Cite des Littres
 (as one of the 
French writers
 calleth 
Paris
) is their 
Counsell-house,
 an handsome squire Chamber, and well furnished: In this they hold their 
consultations,
 and in this preserve their Records and Priviledges, the keeping of the one, and summoning the other, being meer∣ly in the hands of the 
Procurator.
 About the Table they have five Chaires, for the five principall 
Offi∣cers,
 those of the 
Councell
 sitting round the 
Cham∣ber



on Stools: the arms of the 
Empire
 being placed directly over every of the Seats: If it happen that any of them dye there, they all accompany him to his Grave, in a manner mixt so orderly of Griefe and State, that you would think the obsequies of some great 
Potentate
 were solemnizing; and to say truth of them, they are a hearty and loving Nation, not to one another onely, but to stran∣gers, and especially to us of 
England.
 Onely I could wish that in their Speech and Complement they would not use the 
Latine tongue,
 or else speak it more congruously: You shall hardly finde a man amongst them, which can make a shift to expresse himselfe in that language, nor one amongst an hundred that can doe it 
Latinely. Galleriam, Com∣paginem, Gardinum
 and the like, are as usuall in their common discourse, as to drinke at three of the clock, and as familiar as their sleep. Had they bent their study that way, I perswade my self they would have been excellent good at the 
Common Lawes,
 their tongues so naturally falling on these words which are necessary to a 
Declaration:
 but a∣mongst the rest, I took especiall notice of one Mr. 
Gebour,
 a man of that various mixture of words, that you would have thought his tongue to have been a very 
Amsterdam of Languages, Cras mane 
 non irous ad magnam Galleriam,
 was one of his remarkable speeches when we were at 
Paris:
 but here at 
Orleans,
 we had them of him thick and threefold. If ever he should chance to dye in a strange place, where his Countrey could not be knowne but by his tongue, it could not possibly be, but that more Nations would strive


for him, than ever did for 
Homer.
 I had before read of the confusion of 
Babel,
 in him I came acquain∣ted with it: yet this use might be made of him, and his hotch-potch of 
Languages,
 that a good 
Chy∣micall Physitian
 would make an excellent medicine of it against the 
stone.
 In a word, to goe no more upon the particulars, I never knew a people that spake more words and lesse 
Latine.


Of these ingredients is the 
Ʋniversity of Orleans
 compounded, if at least it be lawfull to call it an 
Ʋniversity,
 as I thinke it be not; the name of 
Aca∣demie
 would beseem it better, and 
God
 grant (as 
Zancho Panca
 said of his wife) it be able to discharge that calling. I know that these names are indiffe∣rently used, but not properly; for an 
Academie
 (the name is derived from a place neer 
Athens,
 called 
Academia,
 where 
Plato
 first taught 
Philoso∣phie
) in its strict and proper sense is such a study, wherein one or two Arts are professed, as 
Law
 at 
Orleans
 and 
Bononia,
 and 
Physick
 at 
Montpelleir
 and 
Padua.
 An 
Ʋniversity
 is so called, 
quòd Ʋ∣niversae ibi traduntur disciplinae,
 as the name import∣eth, where Learning is professed in the Generality, and in the whole 
 of it. The first the 
Germans
 call 
Schola illustris
; the latter, 
Gene∣rale studium
: very opposite titles, and in which there is little of a 
German.








CHAP. IV.




Orleans
 not an University, till the coming of the Jesuits. Their Colledge there, by whom built. The Jesuits not Singers. Their laudable and exact Method of teaching. Their Policy in it. Received not without great difficulty into 
Paris.
 Their houses in that University. Their strictnesse unto the Rules of their order. Much maliced by the other Priests and Friers. Why not sent into 
England
 with the Queen. And of what order they were that came with her. Our returne to 
Paris.




THe difference between an 
Ʋniversity
 and an 
Academy
 standing thus; those which lived in our Fathers dayes, could hardly have called 
Or∣leans
 an 
Ʋniversity
: a 
Shoole
 of 
Law
 being the name most fit for it. At this time, since the coming of the 
Jesuits,
 that appellation may not misbecome it; they having brought with them those parts of Learning, which before were wanting in it▪ but that hath not been of any long standing, their 
Colledge
 being yet not fully finished: By an 
Inscri∣ption
 over the gate, it seemeth to be the work of Mr. 
Cagliery,
 one of the 
Advocates
 in the 
Parliament
 of 
Paris,
 a man of large practise, and by the consequence, of great
 possessi∣ons, and who having no child but this Colledge, is


said to intend the fastening of his estate upon it. In this house doe those of this order apply themsevles to the study of good 
Letters
; in the pursuit where∣of, as the rest of this 
Fraternity
 are, they are good proficients, and much exceed all other sorts of 
Friers,
 as having better teachers, and more leisure to learn. That time which the other spend at their 
High Masses,
 and at their 
Canonicall houres,
 these men bestow upon their books, they being exempted from those duties by their order. Upon this ground they trouble not their heads with the 
Crotchets
 of 
Musick,
 nor spend their mouthes up∣on the chanting out of their Services: they have other matters to employ their braines upon, such as are the ruine of 
Kingdoms
 & desolation of 
Coun∣treys.
 It was the saying of 
Themistocles,
 being re∣quested to play a Lesson on the 
Lute, That he could not fiddle, but he could tell how to make a little Town a great City.
 The like may we say of the 
Jesuites,
 they are no great singers, but are well skilled in making little 
cities
 great, and great ones little: and certaine it is, that they are so farre from any ability or desire this way, that upon any of their solemne Festivals, when their Statutes require 
Mu∣sick,
 they are faine to hire the Singing men of the next 
Cathedrall,
 as here upon the feast of their 
Pa∣tron
 St. 
Ignatius,
 being the 22. of 
July;
 they were compelled to make use of the voyces of the church of S. 
Croix.


To this advantage of leisure is added the exact method of their teaching, which is indeed so excel∣lent, that the 
Protestants
 themselves in some pla∣ces send their sons to their 
Schooles,
 upon desire to


have them prove exquisite in those arts they teach. To them resort the Children of the rich as well as of the poor, and that in such abundance, that wheresoever they settle; other houses become in a manner desolate, or frequented only by those of the more heavy and phlegmatick constitutions. Into their Schooles when they have received them, they place them in that forme or 
Classe,
 into which they are best fitted to enter. Of these 
Classes
 the lowest is for 
Grammar
; the second for the com∣position or making of 
Themes,
 as we call it; the third for 
Poetrie,
 the fourth for 
Oratory,
 the fifth for 
Greeke Grammar
 and Compositions; the sixth for 
Poesie
 and 
Rhetorick
 of that Language; the seventh for 
Logick
; and the eighth and last for 
Phi∣losophy.
 In each of these Schools there is a severall Reader, or Institutor, who onely intendeth that art, and the perfection of it, which for that yeare he teacheth. That yeare ended, he removeth both himselfe and Schollars with him into the 
Classes
 or Schoole next beyond him, till he hath brought them through the whole study of humanity. In the last Forme, which is that of 
Philosophy,
 he continueth two yeares, which once expired, his Scholars are made perfect in the Universality of Learning, and themselves are manumitted from their 
Tutors,
 and permitted their private Studies. Nor doe they onely teach their Scholars an exictnesse in those severall parts of Learning which they handle: but they also endeavour to breed in them an obstinacy of minde, and a sturdy eagernesse of spirit, to make them thereby hot prosecutors of their own opini∣ons, and impatient of any contrary consideration:


This it is which maketh all those of their education to affect 
Victory
 in all their controversies of Wit and Knowledge, with such a violence, that even in their very 
Grammaticall disputations,
 you shall find little boyes maintain arguments with such a fierce impatience, that you would think it above the na∣ture of years; and all this they perform freely, and for nothing: the poore Paisants sonne being by them equally instructed with that of the 
Noblesse.
 By this meanes they get into their Society great honour and great strength: Honour in furnishing their Schooles with so many persons of excellent quality, or nobility, of whom afterwards they make their best advantages for their strength also: As for those of the poorer sort, they have also their ends upon them; for by this free and liberall edu∣cation of their 
children,
 the common people doe infinitely affect them; besides that, out of that rank of their Scholars, they assume such into their Fraternity, whom they finde to be of a rare wit, an excellent spirit, or any other way fitted for their profession.


Thus do they make their owne purpose out of all conditions, and refuse no fish which either they can draw into their nets, or which will offer it selfe unto them. 
Si locuples quis est, avari sunt; si pauper ambitiosi: quos non oriens non occidens satiaverit, soli omnium opes atque in piam opur affectu concu∣piscunt. Galgacus
 a British Captaine spake it of the Souldiers of the 
Roman Empire,
 we may as justly verifie it of these Souldiers of the 
Roman Church:
 they being the men whom neither the 
East
 nor 
West Indies
 can satisfie, and who with a like fer∣vency


desire the education of the needy and the wealthy. Moreover, by this method of teaching they do not onely strengthen themselves in the af∣fections of men abroad, but also fortifie themselves within their owne walls at home; for by this meanes there is not one of their society who hath perfectly concocted in his head the whole 
 of knowledge, but hath gained unto him∣self the true art of speaking, and readinesse of ex∣pressing what he knoweth, without the least de∣mur or hesitancie; the greatest happinesse of a 
Scholer.
 To conclude then, and say no more of them & their abilities (for 
virtus & in hoste probatur
) it is thought by men of wisdome and judgement, that the planting of a 
Colledge of Jesuits
 in any place, is the onely sure way to re-establish that Religion which they professe, and in time to eat out the con∣trary.


This notwithstanding they were at the first institu∣tion of them rightly opposed, & no where more v
∣olently than in the University of 
Paris.
 An Ʋniversity that standeth much upon its liberties & privileges, to which this order was imagined to be an hindrance, it being lawfull for them to take any degree in their owne houses without reference to any pub∣lique exercise or examination. In the year 1554. at which time they first began to set foot in 
France,
 the 
Colledge
 of the 
Sorbonists
 made a long Decree against them: in the end whereof are these words, and they are worth the reading, 
Videtur haec societas in negotio fidei periculosa, pacis & Ecclesiae pertur∣bativa, Monasticae religionis eversiva, & magis ad destructionem quam ad aedificationem.
 A 
censure
 too


full of vinegar and bitternesse: Afterwards in the yeare 1564. they preferred a Petition to the 
Ʋni∣versity,
 that the 
Colledge
 which the 
Bishop of Cler∣mont
 had built for them, might be incorporated in∣to the 
Ʋniversity,
 and every the immunities of it: Upon the 
Ʋniversities
 deniall of their desire, there arose a suit between them and the 
Ʋniversity
 in the 
High court of Parliament, Peter Versories
 plea∣ding for the 
Jesuits,
 and 
Steven Pasquier
 for the other party: in the end they were admitted, though upon terms of wonderfull strictnesse. 
Anno
 1594. 
John Chastell
 of 
Novice
 of this order, having wounded King 
Henry
 the fourth in the mouth, oc∣casioned the banishment of this Society out of all 
France.
 Into which they were not againe received till the yeare 1604. and then also upon limitations more strict than ever. Into 
Paris
 they were not re-admitted untill 
Anno
 1606. neither had they the liberty of reading Lectures, and instructing the Youth, confirmed unto them untill 
Anno
 1621. which also was compassed not without great trou∣ble and vexation.


Per varios casus & tot discrimina rerum,


as 
Aeneas
 and his companions came into 
La∣tium.


In this 
Ʋniversity
 they have at this instant three 
Houses,
 one of 
Novices,
 a second of 
Institutors,
 which they call the 
Colledge,
 and a third of profes∣sed 
Jesuits,
 which they stile their 
Monastery,
 or the 
professed House
 of St. 
Lewis.
 In their house of 
Novices
 they traine up all those whom they have


called out of their Schooles, to be of their order, and therein imitate them in the art of 
Jesuitisme,
 and their mysteries of iniquity. There they teach them not 
Grammaticall
 construction, or compositi∣on, but instruct them in the paths of Vertue, Cou∣rage, and Obedience, according to such examples as their 
Authors
 afford them. But he that made the Funerall Oration for 
Henry
 the fourth, 
Anno
 1610. reported otherwise: 
Latini Sermonis obten∣tu
 (saith he) 
impurissime Gallicae juventutis mores ingenuos foedant: Bonarum artium praetextu, pessimas edocent artes; Dum ingenia excolunt, animas perdunt,
 &c. In their 
College
 they have the same method of teaching, which the others of their company use in 
Orleans.
 A 
Colledge
 first given unto them by Mr. 
William Prat,
 Bishop of 
Clermont,
 whose House it was, but much beautified by themselves after his de∣cease; for with the money which he gave unto them by his Will, which amounteth (as it was thought) to 60000. Crowns; they added to it the 
Court
 called 
de Langres,
 in S. 
James
's street; 
An.
 1582. Their 
Mo∣nastery,
 or house of prayer or 
profession,
 is that unto which they retire themselves, after they have dis∣charged their duties in the 
College,
 by reading and studying publickly in their severall 
Classes
; when they are here, their study both for time and quali∣ty, is 
ad placitum,
 though generally their onely stu∣dy in it, is 
Policy,
 and the advancing of their cause. And indeed out of this 
Trojan Horse
 it is that those firebrands and incendiaries, are let out to disturb, and set in combustion the affaires of 
Christendome.
 Out of this Forge come all those Stratagems, and tricks of 
Machiavillianisme
 which


tend to the ruine of the 
Protestants
 & the desolation of their Countries. I speak not this of their house of 
Profession
 here in 
Paris,
 either onely or princi∣pally; wheresoever they settle, they have a House of this nature, out of which they issue to overthrow the 
Gospel.
 Being once sent by their superiours, a necessity is laid upon them of obedience, be the imployment never so dangerous; and certainly this nation doth most strictly obey the rules of their order of any whosoever, not excepting the 
Capu∣chins,
 nor the 
Carthusians.
 This I am witnesse un∣to, that whereas the 
Divinity Lecture
 is to end at the tolling of a Bell, one of the Society in the 
College
 of 
Clermont,
 reading about the fall of the 
Angells,
 ended his Lecture with these words, 
De∣nique in quibuscunque
; for then was the warning given, and he durst not so farre trespasse upon his rule, as to speak out his sentence.


But it is not the fate of these 
Jesuites
 to have great persons onely, and 
Ʋniversities
 to oppose their fortunes, they have also the most accomplisht malice, that either the 
Secular Priests,
 or their friends amongst whom they live, can fasten upon them. Some envy them for the greatnesse of their possessions, some because of the excellency of their Learning; some hate them for their power; some for the shrewdnesse of their braines; all together making good that saying of 
Paterculus,
 that 
Sem∣per eminentis fortunae comes est invidia.
 True in∣deed it is, that the 
Jesuites
 have in a manner de∣served all this clamor and stomack by their own insolencies, for they have not onely drawne into their owne hands all the principall affaires of 
Court



and 
State,
 but upon occasions cast all the storme and contempt they can, upon those of the other Or∣ders. The 
Janizaries
 of the 
Turke
 never more neglectfully speak of the 
Asapi,
 than these doe of the rest of the 
Clergie.
 A great crime in those men who desire to be accounted such excellent Masters of their owne affections. Neither is the affection borne to them abroad, greater then that at home; amongst those, I mean, of the opposite party, who being so often troubled and frumped by them, have little cause to afford them a liking, and much lesse a welcome. Upon this reason they were not sent into 
England
 with the 
Queen,
 although at the first they were destinate to that purpose. It was well known how odious that name was among us, and so little countenance the 
Court
 or Countrey would have afforded them. They therefore that had the governance of that businesse, sent hither in their places the 
Oratorians
 or 
Fratres Congregationis. Ora∣torii
 were a race of men never as yet offensive to the 
English,
 further than the generall defence of the 
Romish
 cause, and so lesse subject to envie and exception. They were first entituled by 
Philip Nerius,
 not long after the 
Jesuits,
 and advanced and dignified by 
Pope Sixtus
 the fifth, principally for this end, that by their incessant Sermons to the People of the lives of 
Saints,
 and other 
Ec∣clesiasticall antiquitie,
 they might get a new repu∣tation, and so divert a little the torrent of the peo∣ples affections from the 
Jesuits. Baronius,
 that great and excellent 
Historian
; and 
Bozius
 that deadly enemy to the soveraignty of 
Princes,
 were of the first foundation of this new order.


I have now done with 
Orleans
 and the 
Jesuits,
 and must prepare for my returne to 
Paris,
 which journey I began the 13. of 
July,
 and ended the day following. We went back the same way that we came, though we were not so fortunate as to enjoy the same company we came in formerly: Instead of the good and acceptable society of one of the 
French Noblesse,
 some Gentlemen of 
Ger∣many,
 and two 
Friers
 of the Order of S. 
Austin,
 we had the perpetuall vexation of foure Tradesmen of 
Paris,
 two 
Fulles de Joy,
 and an old Woman. The 
Artizans
 so slovenly attired, and greazy in their apparell, that a most modest apprehension could have conceived no better of them, than that they had been newly raked out of the Scullery: one of them by an inkhorne that hung by his side, wou
d have made us believe that he had been 
 
Notary
▪ bu
 by the thread of his discourse, we found out that h
 was a 
Sumner
; so full of 
Ribaldry
 was it, and so rankly did it savour of the 
French Bawdy court
 The rest of them talked according to their skill concerning the price of Commodities; and wh
 was the most likely man of all the 
City
 to be made one of the next yeares 
Eschevins
: Of the two Wenches, one so extremely impudent, that even an immodest 
are would have abhorred her lan∣guage, and of such a shamelesse deportment, that her very behaviour would have frighted Lust out of the most incontinent man living. Since I first knew mankinde and the world, I never observed so much impudency in the generall, as I did then in her par∣ticular, and I hope shall never be so miserable as to suffer two dayes more the torment of her, and of


her conversation. In a word, she was a wench borne to shame all the 
Friers
 with whom she had traffiqued; for she would not be 
Casta,
 and could not be 
Cauta
; and so I leave her. A creature ex∣tremely bold, because extremely faulty, and yet having no good property to redeem both these and other unlovely qualities; but as Sir 
Philip Sidney
 saith of the 
strumpet Baccha,
 in the 
Arcadia
 a little counterfeit Beauty disgraced with wandring eyes, and unweighed speeches. The other of the young females (for as yet I am doubfull whether I may call any of them women) is of the same pro∣fession also, but not halfe so rampant as her com∣panion;

Haec habitu casto cum non sit casta videtur.

as 
Aus
nius
 giveth it of one of the two wanton Si∣sters: by her carriage a charitable stranger would have thought her honest; and to that favourable opinion had my self been inclinable, if a 
French Monsieur
 had not given me her 
Character
 at 
Or∣leans
: besides, there was an odde twinkling of her eye, which spoyled the composednesse of her coun∣tenance, otherwise she might have passed for cur∣rant, so that I may safely say of her, in respect of her fellow-harlot, what 
Tacitus
 doth of 
Pompey
 in reference to 
Caesar,
 viz. 
Secretior Pompeius Caesare, non melior
; they were both equally guilty of the same sin, though this last had the more cunning to dissemble it, and avoyd the infamy and censure due unto it. And so I am come to the old Woman, which was the last of our goodly companions; A


woman so old, that I am not at this day fully re∣solved whether she were ever young or no; 'twas well I had read the Scriptures, otherwise I might have been prone to have thought her one of the first pieces of the Creation, and that by some mis∣chance she had escaped the Floud: her face was for all the world like unto that of 
Sybilla Erythraea
 in some old print, or that of one of 
Solomons
 two Harlots in the painted cloth; you would not but have imagined her one of the 
Relikes
 of the first age after the building of 
Babel,
 for her very complexi∣on was a confusion more dreadfull than that of Languages; as yet I am uncertain whether the Po∣em of our 
Arch-Poet Spencer,
 entituled was not purposely intended on her: sure I am it is very appliable in the Title; but I might have saved all this labour: 
Ovid
 in his description of 
Fames,
 hath most exactly given us her Portraiture, and out of him and the eighth book of the 
Metamorphosis,
 you may take this view of her;



Nullus erat crinis, cava lumina, pallor in ore,


Labra incana situ, scabri rubigine dentes,


Dura cutis, per quā spectari viscera possent,


Ventris erat pro ventre locus, pēdere putares


Pectus, & a spinae tantummodo crate teneri.






Unhair'd, pale-fac'd, her eyes sunk in her head,


Lips hoary-white, and teeth most rusty red.


Through her course skin her guts you might e∣spie


In what estate and posture they did lie.








Belly she had none, onely there was seen


The place where her belly should have been:


And with her Hips her body did agree,


As if 'twere fastned by Geometry.



But of this our 
Companion,
 as also of the rest of the Coach full, 
Sunday-night
 and our arrival at 
Paris,
 hath at the last delivered us. Ablessing, for which 
 can never be sufficiently thankfull: and thus,

—Dedit Deus his quoque finem.














The Fourth Book: Or PICARDY.




CHAP. I




Our return towards 
England,
 more of the 
Hu∣gonots
 hate unto Crosses. The Towns of 
Luzarch
 and St. 
Lowp
: The Country of 
Picardy
 and People: The 
Picts
 of 
Brit∣tain
 not of this Country: Mr. 
Lesdiguier
 Governour of 
Picardy
: The Office of Con∣stable what it is in 
France
; By whom the place supplied in 
England.
 The Marble Table in 
France,
 and Causes there handled. 
Clermont
 and the Castle there: The Warrs raised by the Princes against 
D' Ancre:
 What his Designs might tend to, &c.




I
Ʋly
 the twenty seventh having dispatch∣ed that business which brought us into 
France,
 and surveyed as much of the 
Country
 as that opportunity would permit us: we began our journey towards 
Eng∣land



in a Coach of 
Amiens
; better accompanied we were, than when we came from 
Orleans
; for here we had Gentlemen of the choisest fashion, very ingenuous, and in mine opinion finer condi∣tioned than any I had met withal, in all my ac∣quaintance with that Nation, and which appeared to me somewhat marvellous, we had no vexation with us in the shape of a 
French-woman,
 to torment our ears with her discourse, or punish our eyes with her complexion. Thus associated we began to wag on towards 
St. Lowp,
 where that night we were to be lodged. The 
Country
 such as already I have described it in the 
Isle
 of 
France
; save that beyond 
St Denis
 it began to be somewhat more hilly: by the way I observed those little cressets erected in the memory of 
St. Denis
 (as being vainly supposed to be his resting places, when he ran from 
Mountmartyr
 with his head in his hand) which the zealous madness of the 
Hugonots
 had thrown down, and were now reedifyed by 
King Lewis
: It could not but call to mind the hate of that Nation unto that harmless monument of Christs suffering, the 
Cross
; which is grown, it seemeth, so exorbitant, that the 
Papists
 make use of it to discover an 
Hugonot.


I remember that as we passed by water from 
Amiens
 to 
Abbeville,
 we met in the boat with a berry of 
French Gentlewomen.
 To one of them, with that little 
French
 which I had, I applied my self; and she perceiving me to be 
English,
 questi∣oned my 
Religion
: I answered (as I safely might) that I was a 
Catholike:
 and she for her better sa∣tisfaction proffered me the little 
cross
 which was


on the to
 of her beads to kiss: I kissed it, and ra∣the
 should I desire to kiss it than many of their lip: thereupon the rest of the company gave 
ome this verdict, that I was 
un urai Christien et 
 point un Hugonet.
 But to proceed to our jour∣
ey.


The same day we parted from 
Paris
 we passed through the Town of 
Luzarch,
 and came to that of 
St. Lowp.
 The first famous onely in its owner, which is the 
Count
 of 
Soisons
: the second in an 
Abbey
 there scituate, built in memory of 
St. Lu∣pus Bishop of Troyes
 in 
Campagne.
 These Towns passed, we entred into 
Picardy.


Picardy
 is divided into the higher, which con∣taineth the territories of 
Calais
 and 
Burlogne,
 with the Town of 
Monstrevelle
 and the lower; wherein are the goodly 
Cities
 of 
Amiens, Abeville,
 and many other places of principal note. The higher, which is the lesser, and more Northern part, is bounded 
North
 and 
West
 with the 
English Ocean,
 and on the 
East
 with 
Flanders
 and 
Artoys.
 The later, which is the larger, the richer and the more Southern, hath on the 
East
 the little 
County
 of 
Veromandoys,
 on the 
West Normandy,
 and on the 
South
 the 
County
 of 
Campaigne.
 In length it com∣prehendeth all the fifty one degree of 
Latitude,
 and three parts of the fiftieth, extending from 
Cales
 in the 
North
 to 
Clermont
 in the 
South.
 In breadth it is of a great inequality: For the higher 
Picardy
 is like 
Linea
 amongst the 
Logicians,
 which they define to be 
Longitudo sine Latitudine,
 it be∣ing indeed nothing in a manner but a meer bor∣der. The lower is of a larger breadth, and con∣taineth


in it the wole twenty fourth degree of 
Longitude,
 and a fourth part of the twenty three. So that by the proportion of degrees this pro∣vince is an hundred and five miles long, and seven∣ty five broad.


Concerning the name of 
Picardy,
 it is a diffi∣culty beyond my reading and my conjecture. All that I can do is, to overthrow the less probable opinions of other Writers; and make my self sub∣ject to the scoffe which 
Lactantius
 bestoweth on 
Aristotle. Recte hic sustulit aliorum disciplinas, sed non recte fundavit suam.
 Some then derive it from 
Pignan,
 one sorsooth of 
Alexander
 the greats Captains, who they fain to have built 
Amiens
 and 
Pigmingin
; an absurdity not to be honoured with a confutation. Some from the Town of 
Pigmin∣gin
 it self, of which mind is 
Mercator
; but that Town never was of such note as to name a 
Pro∣vince.
 Others derive it from 
Picardus,
 a fanatical heretick of these parts, about the year 1300. and after; but the appellation is farre older than the man. Others fetch it from the 
Picts
 of 
Brittanie,
 whom they would have to fly hither, after the dis∣comfiture of their 
Empire
 and 
Nation
 by the 
Scots.
 A transmigration of which all Histories are silent: this being the verdict of the best 
Antiquary
 ever nursed up in 
Brittain. Picti itaque praelio funestissimo debellati, aut penitus fuerunt extincti, aut paulatim in Scotorum nomen & nationem concesserint.
 Lastly, some others derive the name from 
Pigs,
 which sig∣nifyeth a 
Lance
 or 
Pike
: the inventors of which warlike Weapon the fathers of this device would fain make them. In like manner some of 
Germany



have laboured to prove, that the 
Saxons
 had that name given them, from the short Swords which they used to wear, called in their language 
Seaxen
: but neither truly: For my part, I have consulted 
Ptolomie
 for all the Nations, and the 
Itinerarium
 of 
Antonius
 for all the Towns in this Tract, but can find none, of which I may fasten any probable 
Etymologie.
 All therefore that I can say, is that which 
Mr. Robert Bishop
 of 
Auranches
 in 
Normandy
 hath said before me, and that onely in the general: 
Quos itaque aetas nostra Picardos appellat, Vere Belgae dicendi sunt, qui post modum in Picardorum nomen transmigrarunt.


This 
Country
 is very plentiful of corn and other grain, with which it abundantly furnisheth 
Paris
; and hath in it more store of pasture and meadow ground, than I else saw in any part of 
France:
 In Vines onely it is defective, and that (as it is thought) more by the want of industry in the people, than any inability ih the soyl; for indeed they are a people that will not labour more than they needs must; standing much upon their state and distance, in the carriage of their bodies savou∣ring a little of the 
Spaniard
; when 
Picardiser,
 to play the 
Picard
 is usually said of those who are lofty in their looks; or gluttonous at their tables: this last being also one of their simptomes of a 
Picard.


The Governour of this 
Province
 is the 
Duke les Deguiers
; into which Office he succeeded Mr. 
Luynes,
 as he also did in that of the 
Constable
; two preferments which he purchased at a deer rate, ha∣ving sold or abandoned that Religion to compass


them, which he had professed for more than sixty years together. An Apostasie most unworthy of the man, who having for so many years supported the cause of Religion, hath now forsaken it, and thereby made himself guilty of the cowardice of 
M. Antonius, qui cumin desertores saeviri debue∣r at desertor sui exercitus factus est.
 But I fear an heavier sentence waiteth upon him; the Crown of immortality not being promised to all those which run, but to those onely which hold out to the end: For the present indeed he hath augmented his ho∣nours. By this Office, which is the principal of all 
France,
 he hath place and command before and over all the 
Peers
 and 
Princes
 of the bloud, and at the coronation of the French Kings ministreth the Oath. When the 
King
 entereth a City in state, or upon the rendition of that, he goeth before with the Sword naked; and when the 
King
 sitteth in an Assembly of the three 
Estates,
 he is placed at the 
Kings
 right hand: he hath command over all his Majesties Forces, and he that killeth him is guilty of high treason: he sitteth also as cheif Judge at the Table of 
Marble,
 upon all suits, actions, per∣sons and complaints whatsoever concerning the warrs.


This Table 
de Marble
 was wont to be continu∣ally in the great Hall of the 
Palace
 of 
Paris
; from whence at the burning of that Hall it was removed to the 
Louure.
 At this Table doth the 
Admiral
 of 
France
 hold his Sessions, to judge of traffiick, pri∣zes, Letters of Marts, piracies and business of the like nature. At this Table judgeth all 
Le grand Maistre des eaures et Forrests,
 we may call him the 
Justice



in 
Eire
 all his Majesties Forrests and Waters. The actions there handled are thefts and abuses committed in the 
Kings
 Forrests, Rivers, Parks, Fish-ponds and the like. In the absence of the 
Grand Maistre,
 the power of sentence resteth in the 
Les grands Maistres enquesteures, et gene∣raux reformateurs,
 who have under their command no fewer than 300. subordinate Officers. Here also sit the 
Marshals
 of 
France,
 who are ten in num∣ber, sometimes in their own power, sometimes as 
Assistants
 to the 
Constable,
 under whose direction they are: with us in 
England
 the authority of the 
Marshalship
 is more entire, as that which besides its own jurisdiction, hath now incorporated in it self most of the matters anciently belonging to the 
Constables
: which Office ended in the death of 
Edward Lord Duke of Buckingham,
 the last here∣ditary and proprietary 
Constable
 of 
England.
 This Office of 
Constable,
 to note unto you so much by the way, was first instituted by 
Lewis
 the 
Gross,
 who began his reign 
Anno
 1110. and conferred on 
Mr. Les Deguiers
 on the 24th of 
July Anno
 1622. in the Cathedral Church of 
Grenoble,
 where he first heard 
Mass,
 and where he was installed 
Knight
 of both Orders. And so I leave the 
Constable,
 to take a veiw of his 
Province
: A man at this time beloved of neither parties; hated by the 
Protestants
 as an 
Apostata,
 and suspected by the 
Papists
 not to be entire.


To proceed: 
July
 the twenty eighth we came unto 
Clermont,
 the first Town of any note that we met with in 
Picardy.
 A pretty nea Town, and finely seated on the rising of an hill: For the de∣fence


of it, it hath on the upper side of it an indif∣ferent large 
Castle,
 and such as were the scituations of it, somewhat helped by the strengths of Art, might be brought to good service. Towards the Town it is of an easie access, to the fieldward more difficult, as being built on the pendicular fall of a Rock. In the year 1615. it was made good by 
Mr. Haroncourt
 with the Regiment of eight Companies, who kept it in the name of the 
Prince
 of 
Conde,
 and the rest of that Confederacy; but it held not long: For at the 
Marshal d' Ancres
 coming before it with his Army and artillery, it was presently yeilded. This warr, which was the second 
Civil warr
 that had happened in the reign of 
King Lewis,
 was undertaken by the 
Princes
 chiefly to thwart the designes of the 
Queen Mo∣ther,
 and to crush the powerableness of her grand favourite the 
Marshall.
 The pretence (as in such cases commonly is) was the good of the Common∣wealth: the occasion, the cross 
Marriages
 then consummated by the 
Marshal
 between the 
Kings
 of 
France
 and 
Spain
: For by those marriages they seemed to fear the augmentation of the 
Spaniards
 greatness; the alienation of the affections of their ancient Allies, and by consequence the ruine of the 
French Empire.
 But it was not the fate of 
D' Ancre
 to perish; two years more of Command and insolencies his 
destinies
 allowed, and then he tumbled: This opportunity of his death ending the third 
Civil war,
 each of which his faulty great∣ness had occasioned.


What the ambition of his designs did tend to, I dare not absolutely determine, though like enough


it is, that they aimed further than at a private or personal potency: for having under the favour and countenance of the 
Queen Mother,
 made him∣self Master of the 
Kings
 ear, and of his counsels, he made a shift to get into his own hands an au∣thority almost as unlimitted, as that of the old 
Mayre
 of the 
Palace
; for he had suppressed the liberty of the general Estates, and of the 
Soveraign Court,
 removed all the 
Officers
 and 
Coun∣sellors
 of the last 
King
: ravished one of the 
Presi∣dents
 of the great Chamber, by name 
Mr. Le Jay,
 out of the 
Parliament
 into the Prison; and plan∣ted Garrisons of his own in most of the good Towns of 
Normandy,
 of which 
Province
 he was Governour: Add to this, that he had caused the 
Prince
 of 
Conde,
 being acknowledged the first Prince of the bloud, to be imprisoned in the 
Ba∣stile
: and had searched into the continuance of the lives of the 
King
 and his Brother by the help of sorcery and witchcraft: Besides he was suspected to have had secret intelligence with some forrain 
Princes,
 ill-willers to the State, and had disgraced some, and neglected others of the 
Kings
 Confede∣rates: And certainly those actions seem to import some project beyond a private and obedient great∣ness; though I can hardly beleive, that he durst be ambitious of the 
Crown
; for being a fellow of a low birth, his heart could not but be too narrow for such an hope, and having no party amongst the Nobility, and being less gratious among the peo∣ple, he was altogether destitute of means to com∣pass it. I therefore am of opinion, that the 
Spanish gold
 had corrupted him to some project


concerning the enlargement of that 
Empire
 upon the 
French
 dominions, which the 
cross Marriages
 (whereof he was the contriver) and which seem∣ed so full of danger to all the best 
Patriots
 of 
France,
 may seem to demonstrate. And again, at that time, when he had put the Realm into this third combustion, the 
King
 of 
Spain
 had an Army on foot against the 
Duke
 of 
Savoy,
 and another in the Countries of 
Cleive
 and 
Juliers
; which had not the timely fall of this 
Monsieur,
 and the peace ensuing prevented it, might both perhaps have met together in the midst of 
France:
 but this is onely conjectural.






CHAP. II.




The fair City of 
Amiens,
 and greatness of it. The 
English
 feasted within it, and the error of that action: The Town how built, seated and fortified: The Cittadel of it thought to be impregnable, not permitted to be veiwed. The over-much openness of the 
English
 in discovering their strengths: The watch and form of government in the Town. 
Amiens
 a 
Visedamate,
 and to whom it pertaineth. What that honour is in 
France,
 and how ma∣ny there enjoy it, 
&c.




THat night we went from 
Clermont
 to a Town called 
B
etaul,
 where we were harboured, be∣ing


from 
Clermont
 six 
French
 Leagues, and from 
Paris
 twenty. Our entertainment there such as in other places, as sluttish and as inconvenient. The next day, being the twenty ninth, about ten of the clock we had a sight of the goodly and fair 
City
 of 
Amiens.
 A 
City
 of some 
English
 miles circuit within the wals, which is all the greatness of it, for without the wals it hath houses few or none. A 
City
 very capacious, and for that cause hath been many times honoured with the persons and trains of many great 
Princes
: Besides that, once it en∣tertained almost a whole Army of the 
English.
 For 
King Lewis
 the eleventh having made an advan∣tagious peace with our 
Edward,
 and perceiving how ingrateful it was amongst the military men, he intended also to give them some manner of sa∣tisfaction: he sent therefore unto them three hun∣dred Carts laden with the best Wines, and seeing how acceptable a present that had proved, he in∣tended also to feast them in 
Amiens
; within half a league of which their Camp was lodged. This entertainment lasted four dayes, each street having in it two long tables, and each table being furnish∣ed with very plentiful provision Neither were they denied entrance into any of the Taverns or Victualling-houses, or therein stinted either in meats or drinks, whatsoever was called for, was de∣fraied by 
King Lewis.
 An action wherein, if my opinion might carry it, there was little of the 
Poli∣tician
; for there were permitted to enter into the Town so many of the 
English-men
 at once, that had they been but so minded, they might easily have made themselves as well Masters of the place, as of


the 
Kings person
: nine thousand are reckoned by 
Comminees
 to have been within together, and most of them armed; so that they might very easily have surprised the Gates and let in the rest of the Ar∣my. Those of the 
French Kings Council
 feared it much, and therefore informed both 
Princes,
 the one of his Town, the other of his 
honour.
 But this jealousie was but a 
French
 distrust, and might well have been spared: the 
English
 being of that 
Ge∣nerals
 mind, that scorned to steal a 
Victory,
 and of that generous disposition, that they would not betray their credits. 
Nunquam illis adeo ulla op∣portuna visa est victoriae occasio, quam damno pensa∣
ent fidei
; as the Historian of 
Tiberius.
 If then this 
City
 escaped a sack or a surprisal, it cannot be imputed to the wisdom of the 
French,
 but to the modesty and fair dealing of the 
English:
 but this was not the onely 
Solaecisme
 in point of State com∣mitted by that great 
Politick
 of his time 
King Lewis,
 there never being a man so famed for brain, that more grosly over-reached himself, than that 
Prince,
 though perhaps more frequently.


The buildings of this Town are of divers mate∣rials, some built of stone, others of wood, and some again of both: the streets very sweet and clean, and the air not giving place to any for a lively pureness: Of their buildings the principal are their 
Churches,
 whereof there are twelve onely in number. Churches, I mean, parochial, besides those belonging unto 
Religious Houses.
 Next unto them, the work of most especial note, is a great large 
Hospital,
 in method and disposing of the beds much like unto the 
Hostel Dieu
 in 
Paris,
 but in


number much inferior: 
Et me tamen capuerant
: and yet the decency of them did much delight me. The sweetness and neatness of the Town proceed∣eth partly (as I say) from the air, and partly from the conveniencie of the 
River
 of 
Some,
 on which it is seated: for the River running in one entire bank at the further end of the Town, is there divided into six 
Channels,
 which almost at an equal distance run through the several parts of it. These Channels thus divided receive into them all the ordure and filth wherewith the Town were other∣wise likely to be pestered, and affordeth the people a plentiful measure of water, wherewith to purge the lanes and by-corners of it, as often as them li∣steth. But this is not all the benefit of these Chan∣nels; they bestow upon the 
City
 matter also of commodity, which is the infinite number of 
Griest-Mils
 that are built upon them. At the other end of the Town the Channels are again united into one stream, both those places, as well at the divisi∣on as the union, of the Channels being exceeding∣ly fortified with chains and piles, and also with bul∣warks and out-works.


Neither is the Town well fortified and streng∣thened at those passages onely in the upper parts of it, having enough of strength to enable them to a long resistance. The 
Ditch
 round about it, save where it meeteth with the 
Cittadel,
 is exceeding deep and steepy, the wals of a good height, broad and composed of earth and stone equally: the one making up the outside of them, and the other the inside. The Gates are very large and strong, as well in the sinewie composition of themselves, as


in addition of the Draw-bridge. 
Subburbs
 this 
City
 hath none, because a Town of Warr, nor any liberal circuit of territoty, because a Frontier: yet the people are indifferent wealthy, and have a∣mongst them good trading, besides the benefit of the Garrison and the Cathedral. The Garrison consisteth of two hundred and fity men (five hun∣dred in all they should be) who are continually in pay to guard the Cittadel: their pay eight Sols daily. The Governour of them is the 
Duke
 of 
Chawne,
 who is also the Lieutenant or 
Deputy Go∣vernour
 of the whole 
Province
 under the 
Consta∣ble.
 Their 
Captain Mr Le Noyr,
 said to be a man of good experience, and worthy his place. This 
Cittadel
 was built by 
Henry
 the fourth as soon as he had recovered the Town from the 
Spaniards, Anno
 1591. It is seated on the lower part of the 
City,
 though somewhat on the advantage of an hill; and seemeth in my opinion better scituate to command the Town, than to defend it, or rather to recover the Town, being taken, than to save it from taking. They who have seen it, and know the arts of Fortification, report it to be impreg∣nable.

— Quod nec Jovis ira, nec ignes


Nec poterit ferrum, nec edax abolere vetustas.

Nor am I able to contradict it: for besides that it is a skill beyond my profession, we were not per∣mitted to come within it, to take a survey of it at a distance: As soon as we approached nigh unto it, one of the Garrison offered us the musket, a


sufficient warning not to be too venterous. So that all I could observe was this, that they had within themselves good plenty of earth to make their gabions and repair their breaches. With the same jealousie also, are the rest of the Forts and Towns of importance guarded in this and other Countries: no people that ever I heard of being so open in shewing their places of strength and safety unto strangers as the 
English
: For a dozen of Ale a Forreiner may pace over the 
Curtain of Portsmouth,
 and measure every sconce and bulwark of it: for a shilling more he shall see their provi∣sion of powder and other munition, and when that is done, if he will, he shall walk the round too. A 
French
 crown fathometh the wals of 
Dover Ca∣stle
; and for a pint of Wine one may see the na∣kedness of the block-houses at 
Gravesend.
 A negligence which may one day cost us dearly, though now we think it not. For what else do we in it, but commit that prodigal folly, for which 
Plutarch
 condemneth 
Pericles? Viz.
 
 &c. that is, to break open all the pales and inclosures of our Land, to the end that every man might come in freely, and take away our fruits at his pleasure. 
Jealousie,
 though a vice in a man toward his Wife, is yet one of the safest Vertues in a 
Governour
 towards his Fortress, and therefore I could wish, that an 
Eng∣lish man
 would borrow a little of this 
Italian
 hu∣mor. Besides these Souldiers which are continu∣ally in garrison for the defence of the Cittadel, there are also three hundred which keep watch every night for the defence of the 
City.
 These


watchmen receive no pay from the 
King,
 but dis∣charge that duty amongst themselves, and in turns, every house finding one for that service twelve nights in the year: The Weapons which they use are 
Pikes
 onely and 
Musquets,
 there being not one peice of Ordinance all about the Town, or on the wals of it. The 
Governour
 of this Town, as it hath reference to the 
King,
 is a 
Bailly,
 who hath belonging unto him all the authority which belongeth to a 
Siege Presidial.
 Under him he hath a 
Lieutenant Generall
 and particular; seven 
Coun∣sellors,
 a publick 
Notary,
 and other inferior Officers and Magistrates. As it is a 
Corporation
 the Cheif 
Governour
 of it is a 
Mayor,
 and next to him the 
Eschevins
 or 
Sheriffs,
 as 
Protectors
 of the Inhabi∣tants and their Liberties, besides those of the 
Com∣mon-Council.


Another Circumstance there is which ennobleth this Town of 
Amiens,
 which is, that it is a 
Vise∣damate,
 or that it giveth honour to one of the 
No∣bility,
 who is called the 
Visedame
 of 
Amiens.
 This title at this time belongeth to the 
Duke
 of 
Chau∣ny,
 Governour of the 
Cittadel,
 together with the 
Lordship
 of 
Pigingin
; both which he obtained by marrying the Daughter and Heir of the last 
Vise∣dame
 of 
Amiens,
 and 
Lord
 of 
Pigingin, Anno
 1619. A marriage which much advanced his fortunes, & which was compassed for him by the 
Constable Luynes
 his brother, who also obtained for him of the 
King
 the title of 
Duke
: His highest attribute before, being that of 
Mr. de Cadinet,
 by which name he was known here in 
England,
 at such time as he was sent extraordinary 
Ambassadour
 to 
King


James.
 This honour of 
Visedame
 is, for ought that ever I could see, used onely in 
France.
 True it is, that in some 
English
 Charters we meet with 
Vice-Dominus,
 as in the 
Charter
 of 
King Edred
 to the 
Abbey of Crowland
 in 
Lincoln-shire,
 dated in the year 948. there is subscribed, 
Ego Bingulph Vice-dominus,
 &c. but with us, and at those times, this title was onely used to denotate a subordination to some superior 
Lord,
 and not as an honorary at∣tribute, in which sense it is now used in 
France
: besides that, with us it is frequently, though falsly, used for 
Vicecomes
: between which two Offices of 
Vicount
 and 
Vidame
 there are found no small re∣semblances: For as they which did 
agere Vicem Comitis,
 were called 
Vicecomites
 or 
Vicomits,
 so were they also called 
Vidames,
 or 
Vice-Domini, qui Do∣mini Episcopi vicem gerebant in temporalibus.
 And as 
Vicountes
 from Offices of the 
Earles
 became 
honorary
; so did the 
Vidames
 disclaim the relation to the 
Bishop,
 and became 
Seigneural
 or 
honorary
 also.


The 
Vidames
 then, according to the first institu∣tion, were the substitutes of the greater 
Bishops
 in matters of secular administration, for which cause, though they have altered their tenure, they take all of them their denomination from the cheif Town of some 
Bishoprick
; neither is there any of them, who holdeth not of some 
Bishoprick
 or o∣ther: Concerning the number of them that are thus dignified I cannot determine. 
Mr. Glover,
 otherwise called 
Sommerset Herald,
 in his discourse of 
Nobility,
 published by Mr. 
Miles
 of 
Canter∣bury,
 putteth it down for absolute, that here are four


onely, 
Viz.
 of 
Amiens,
 of 
Chartres,
 of 
Chalons,
 and of 
Gerbery
 in 
Bauvice:
 but in this he hath deceived both himself and his Readers; there be∣ing besides these divers others, as of 
Rhemes, Mans,
 and the like: but the particular and exact number of them, together with the place denomi∣nating, I leave to the 
French Heralds,
 unto whose profession it belongeth.






CHAP. III.




The Church of 
Nostre-Dame
 in 
Amiens.
 The Principal Churches in most Cities called by her name: More honour performed to her, than to her 
Saviour
: The surpassing beauty of this Church on the outside: The front of it. 
King Henry
 the seventh's Chappel at 
Westminster:
 The curiousness of this Church within: By what means it became to be so: The three sumptuous Mas∣sing-Closets in it: The excellency of Per∣spective works. Indulgencies by whom first founded: The estate of the Bisho∣prick.




THere is yet one thing which addeth more lu∣stre to the Citie of 
Amiens,
 than either the 
Visdamate,
 or the 
Cittadel,
 which is the Church of 
Nostre Dame
: a name by which most of the


principal Churches are known in 
France:
 there have we the 
Nostre Dame
 in 
Roven,
 a second in 
Paris,
 a third in this 
City,
 a fourth in 
Boulogne,
 all 
Cathedrall
; so also a 
Nostre Dame
 in 
Abbeville,
 and another in 
Estampes,
 the principal Churches in those Towns also; Had I seen more of their Towns, I had met with more of her Temples; for so of many 
 have heard, that if there be more than two Churches in a Town, one shall be sure to be dedicated to her, and that one of the fairest. Of any Temples consecrated to the Name and memo∣ry of our 
Saviour. Ne gry quidem,
 there was not so much as a word stirring; neither could I mar∣vel at it, considering the honours done to her, and those to her 
Son
; betwixt which there is so great a disproportion, that you would have imagined that 
Mary,
 and not 
Jesus,
 had been our 
Saviour
; for one 
Pater Noster
 the people are enjoyned ten 
Ave Maries
: and to recompence one pilgrimage to 
Christs
 Sepulchre at 
Hierusalem,
 you shall hear of two hundred undertaken to our 
Lady
 of 
Lo∣retto
: And whereas in their 
Kalendar
 they have dedicated onely four 
Festivals
 to our 
Saviour,
 which are those of his 
birth, circumcision, resurre∣ction,
 and 
ascension,
 all which the 
English Church
 also observeth; for the 
Virgins
 sake they have more than doubled the number. Thus do they solemnize the feast of her 
Purification
 and 
Annun∣ciation,
 at the times which we also do: of her 
Vi∣sitation
 of 
Elizabeth
 in 
July
; of her 
Dedication
 and 
Assumption
 in 
August,
 of her 
Nativity
 in 
Sep∣tember,
 of her 
Presentation
 in 
November,
 and of her 
Conception
 in the womb of her Mother in 
De∣cember.



To her have they appropriated set forms of prayers prescribed in the two books, called one 
Officium,
 and the other 
Rosarium beatae Mariae Vir∣ginis
: whereas her 
Son
 must be contented with those Orisons which are in the 
Common Mass Book:
 her 
Shrines
 and 
Images
 are more glorious and magnificent, then those of her 
Son,
 and in her 
Chappel
 are more Vows paid, than before the 
Cru∣cifix.
 But I cannot blame the 
Vulgar,
 when the great Masters of their souls are thus also besotted. The 
Officium
 before mentioned, published by the Command of 
Pius
 the fifth, saith thus of her. 
Gaude Maria Virgo, tu sola omnes haereses intermist
 in universo mundo. Catherinus
 in the 
Council
 of 
Trent,
 calleth 
Fidelissimam Dei sociam
: and he was modest, if compared with others. In one of their 
Councils Christs
 name is quite forgotten, and the name of our 
Lady
 put in the place of it, for thus it beginneth: 
Authoritate Dei Patris, & beatae Vir∣ginis, & omnium Sanctorum,
 &c. but most horrible is that of one of their Writers (I am loath to say it was 
Bernard) Beata Virgo monstra te esse Ma∣trem, jube filium:
 which 
Harding
 in his confuta∣tion of the 
Apologie,
 endeavouring to make good, would needs have it to be onely an excess of mind, or a spiritual sport and dalliance: but from all such 
sports
 and 
dalliances, good Lord deliver us.


Leaving our 
Lady,
 let us go see her 
Church,
 which questionless is one of the most glorious piles of building under the Heavens; what 
Velleius
 saith of 
Augustus,
 that he was 
homo qui omnibus omnium gentium viris inducturus erat caliginem,
 or what



Suetonius
 spake of 
Titus,
 when he called him 
Deli∣as humani generis,
 both these attributes and more too, may I most fitly fasten on this magnificent structure. The whole body of it is of most curious and polished stones, every where born up by but∣tresses of excellent composure, that they seem to add more of beauty to it than of strength: the 
Quire
 of it is, as in great Churches commonly it is, of a fairer fabrick than the body, thick set with dainty pillars, and most of them reaching unto the top of it, in the fashion of an 
Arch.
 I am not well able to judge, whether the Quire of the 
Chappel
 of 
King Henry
 the seventh at 
Westminster
 be the more exquisite piece of 
Architecture,
 though I am not ignorant, that 
Leland
 calleth that of our 
King, Miraculum Orbis.
 I perswade my self, that a most discerning eye could find out but little difference between them, and that difference more subtil than sound: For if such perfections may receive the word of more, it might be said, that there were more majesty in this of 
Amiens,
 and more loveli∣ness in that of 
Westminster
; yet so, that the ones majesty did exceed in loveliness, and the others loveliness excelled in majesty.


Tam bene conveniunt & in unâ sede morantur


Majestas & Amor —


But now we are come unto the divinity of work∣manship, the 
Front
; which presenteth it self unto us with two Towers, and three Gates, that in the middle being the principal: the 
Fronts
 of 
Wels
 or 
Peterborough,
 which we so much fam
 in 
England,



deserve not to be named in the same 
Myriad
 of years with this of 
Amiens
: For here have you al∣most all the sacred Stories engraven so lively, that you would no longer think this story of 
Pigmali∣ons
 image to be a fable; and indeed at the first sight you would confidently beleive, that the 
Histories
 there represented were not carved but acted: To say no more of it (for all my abilities will but disgrace it) in the description: that of 
Zeuxis
 may most fitly be inscribed upon it: 
Invi∣sur
m facilius aliquem, quam imitaturum:
 so infinitely is it above the ambition of imitati∣on.


The outside of the 
Church
 being so admirable you would have thought that Art and treasure had left nothing of themselves to bestow within it, yet herein would such thoughts deceive you: 
No∣stre Dame
 in 
Paris
 and 
Roven
 lay most without; yet here it serveth but as a mask to hide and con∣ceal those more admirable graces which are with∣in. As soon as you are entred, you will suppose that the materials of it are all of gold, such a lustre doth it cast upon the eyes of all those that look upon it: the glory of 
Solomons
 Temple, next unto the description of it in the 
Scriptures,
 is best read in this 
Church
; of which it seemeth to have been the pattern. 
Jupiters house
 in Heaven, described by the 
Poets,
 was never half so gorgeous as this on the earth, that therefore which 
Ovid
 poetically spake concerning that imagery Palace of the false 
God,
 we most truly verifie of this real Mansion of the true 
God.




Hic locus est, quem si verbis audacia detur


Haud timeam Magni dixisse Palatia Regis.

To instance in particulars, the partition between the 
Quire
 and the body is so overlaid with gold, that the acutest sight could apprehend no other substance of it, and yet had the art of the work∣man so fully exprest its power on it; that the cost was much inferiour to the workmanship; so curi∣ously was it adorned with excellent imagery, and what else the hand of man could fashion into por∣traiture. On the top of it was the 
Statua
 of our 
Lady,
 in the just height and proportion of a wo∣man, all either of gold or gilded, her Child in her arms of the same making.


She was there exprest, as standing in a round circle, unto every part of which she darted ou
 rayes and beams of gold, just as the 
Sun
 doth seem to do, when the 
Painter
 hath drawn him in his full lustre. The glass of the 
Church
 generally, and par∣ticularly that about the 
Quire,
 the 
Virgins
 Chap∣pel is the most full of life and beauty of any that I ever set eye upon: As much as that of 
St. Denis
 exceedeth ours at 
Canterbury,
 so much doth this 
St. Denis.
 But the largest measure of perfection in it is that of the pillars; which though full of majesty in their height and compass, have yet an ornament added to them more majestical than that majesty, for upon each of them (there are four ranks of them in all) are fastened four tables, which take up their whole circuit, every table be∣ing in length two yards or thereabouts: In every of these are the pictures of sundry men and wo∣men


of the better quality, so exactly limmed, that neither a curious eye could desire, or a cunning hand discharge it better. These tables are the monuments and tombs of the 
Burgers
 of the 
City,
 or of the 
Nobles
 of the 
Country
 nigh unto it, who in them have caused their pictures to be drawn, with as great art and state as cost could procure them, and in a subscription of golden letters have eternized their names, and that art to all succeed∣ing posterity. So that we may justly say of the sumptuousness of this 
Church,
 what the 
Historian
 doth of the 
Temple
 at 
Delphos. Multa igitur ibi, & opul
nta regum populorumque visuntus munera, quaeque magnificen
ia sui reddentium vota gratans voluntatem magnifestant.
 Neither have these se∣pulchral ornaments been of any great standing; the ancientest of them that I could observe, having been erected since the year 1570. Add to these the curious works which the Engraver hath cut in the main wals, and then perhaps you will fall into the same extasie that I did, and pick a quarrel with Nature and the Heavens, that they had not made you all into an eye.


In this 
Church,
 as in others also of this party, besides the high 
Altar
 in the midst of the 
Quire,
 there are divers others in the private 
Clossets,
 which are destinate to the mumbling of their low 
Mas∣ses:
 of these here are in number twenty four, all of them seated within the two outermost ranks of pillars and the wals pretty neat pla
es, and it is pitty they should be abused to such 
Idolatries.
 Of three of them I took especial notice, they being indeed the cheifest of the rest, either for furniture or for


use. The first of them is that of the 
Virgin,
 which was divided from the 
West
 of the 
Church
 by a sphere made of wood, which reached unto the top of the partition. On the outside, the Planets, Starrs and Constellations were most artificially set down in their proper Orbes, with the time of ab∣solving their several courses: On the inside those places were filled up with a pack of verses in com∣mendation of our 
Lady.
 The Alter there was for matter and making the most glorious that ever I yet looked upon: that on the other side in the 
Quire,
 and over which is the image of our 
Savi∣our,
 being more despicable than were fit for the credit of a Village. Over this 
Altar
 was the 
Vir∣gins Statua,
 all gift, and of a full and womanly proportion: two 
Angels
 of the same materials attending on her: Finally, this 
Chappel,
 consider∣ing the richness and glory of it, may be stiled the 
Epitome
 of the 
Church
: that attribute of 
immensae opulentiae templum,
 being no more deservedly ap∣pliable to 
Solomons Temple,
 which 
Tacitus
 spake it, than to this.


The second of them stood, as I remember, at the further end of the 
Church
 behind the 
Quire,
 not directed, for ought I could perceive, to any parti∣cular 
Saint
: yet not to be passed over without a due remembrance: It was separated from the rest of the 
Church
 by two ranks of brass pillars, one rank above the other. The pillars are curiously cast, and such as would not shame rhe workman. In the 
massing Closset
 over the 
Altar
 there was hanged a tablet, which by the many lines and sha∣dows drawn in it, seemed to represent some piece


of building. Moving my hand towards my eye, in the nature and kind of a perspective-glass, I perceived to be the representation of that 
Church
 wherein I stood to see it, and it was done with that cunning, that it would almost have perswaded a man out of himself, and made him beleive, that he had been in the 
Church-yard
; so perfectly did it shew the majesty of the 
Front,
 the beauty of the 
Iles,
 the number of the 
pillars,
 and the glory of the 
Quire
; a kind of work in my opinion of all others the most excellent, and such as would infinitely delight an 
Optick
: Had not such peices been vul∣gar to me, it had more affected me: But in the gallery of 
Mr. Crane
 of 
Cambridge,
 once belong∣ing to that 
humerous Physitian Mr. Butler,
 and in that of 
Sir Noel Caron
 late 
Leiger
 for the 
States
 at 
Lambeth,
 I had seen divers of them, whereof some perfecter.


The third of these 
Massing Clossets
 was that of 
St. Peter,
 not so gorgeous as the rest unto the eyes of them that saw it, but more useful to the soules of those who had a mind to take the benefit of it, for therein hung an 
Indulgence
 granted by 
Pope Gregory
 the fifteenth unto that 
Church,
 dated the twenty seventh of 
July, Anno Dom.
 1612. and of his 
Popedom
 the twentieth. The contents of it were, an absolute exemption from the pains and place of 
Purgatory,
 to those, who upon the Feast of 
All-Soules (Festum commemorationis Sanctorum
 the 
Breif
 calleth it) and the 
Octaves
 of it, would come to pay their devotions and moneys in that Temple. Had the extent of it been general, it would quickly have emptied the 
Popes
 treasury,


and in time to have put an end to 
Purgatory.
 His 
Holiness
 therefore did wisely restrain it in his 
Bull
 to the natives of that 
Diocess.
 The author and first founder of those 
Indulgences
 (if it be lawful to note so much by the way) was 
Pope Ʋrban
 the second, who began his 
Popedom, Anno
 1088. who conferred them on all such who would go into the warrs for the recovering of 
Hierusalem:
 Next they began to be conferred on those who would side with the 
Pope
 in his unlawful warrs against the 
Emperours.
 And lastly, about the time of 
Cle∣m
nt
 the fifth (he began his raign, 
Anno
 1306.) they began to grow merchantable, for to him that gainful invention of the 
Church
 treasury, consist∣ing of the merits of our 
Saviour
 and the 
Saints,
 is imputed: but I return again to the 
Church
 of 
Amiens.


This glorious 
Church
 is the seat of a 
Bishop,
 who acknowledgeth for his 
Metropolitan
 the 
Archbishop
 of 
Rhemes, Primate
 of all 
France
: the first 
Bishop
 of it was one 
Firnamus
 a native of 
Pam∣pelune
 in the Kingdom of 
Navarre,
 who suffered 
Martyrdom
 under the 
Emperor Dioclesian
: to him succeeded another 
Firminus,
 to whom the first foundation of this 
Church
 is attributed: the pre∣sent 
Diocesan
 is named 
Franciscus Faber,
 his 
intra∣do
 about six thousand Crowns a year: 
Chanoins
 there are in the 
Church
 to the number of forty, of whose revenue I could not learn any thing. Neither could I be so happy as to see the Head of 
St. John Baptist,
 which is said to be here entire: though it cannot be denied, that a peice of it is in the holy 
Chappel
 of 
Paris
;


besides those fractions of it which are in other places.






CHAP. IV.




Our journey down the 
Some,
 and Company. The Town and Castle of 
Pigingi
 for what famous: 
Comminees
 censure of the 
Eng∣lish
 on matter of Propheoies. A Farewell to the Church of 
Amiens
: The Town and Castle of 
Pont d' Armie Abbeville,
 how seated, and the Garrison there: No Gover∣nour in it but the Mayor. The 
French
 Post-horses, how base and tired: Mp prefer∣ment to the Trunk-horse: the House of 
Philip de Commi
ees
: The Town and strength of 
Monstreville
: The impor∣tance of these three Towns to the 
French
 border, &c.




IƲly
 the thirtieth we took boat to go down to 
Abbevi
e
 by the River of 
Some,
 a River ōf no g
e
t breadth, but deep and full: the boat that carried us, was much of the making of those Lighters that live upon the 
Thames,
 but that it was more weildy and fit for speed; there were in it of 
 
hall to the number of thirty persons or thereabouts; people of all conditions, and such with whom a man of any humour might have


found a companion, under the tilt we espied a bearie of 
Lasses,
 mixt with some young Gentle∣men. To them we applied our selves, and they taking a delight to hear our broken 
French,
 made much of our company, for in that little time of our abode, there we had learned onely so much of the 
French,
 as a little Child after a years practise hath of his 
Mothers
 tongue: 
Linguis dimidiata ad huc verba tentantibus & loquelâ ipso affectantis lin∣guae fragmine dulciori.
 The Gentlewomen, next those of 
Orleans,
 were the handsomest that I had seen in 
France
; very pleasant and affable: one of them being she that put my Religion to the touch∣stone of kissing the cross of her 
beads
: Thus asso∣ciated we passed merrily down the stream, though slowly; the delight which our language gave the company, and the content which their liberal hu∣manity afforded to us, beguiling the tediousness of the way.


The first thing which we met with observable, was the Town and 
Castle
 of 
Pignigni
: The Town poor and beggerly; and so unlikely to have na∣med the 
Province,
 as 
Mercator
 would have it: besides the disproportion, and dissimilitude of their names. The 
Castle
 scituate on the top of the Hill, is now a place of more pleasure, than strength, as having command over an open and good Country, which lyeth below it; it belon∣geth as we have said, to the 
Vidimate
 of 
Amiens,
 and so doth the Town also. This Town is famous among the 
French,
 for a tradition and a truth. The tradition is of a famous defeate given to the 
Eng∣lish
▪ neer unto it; but in whose raigne, and under


whose conduct, they could not tell us; being thus routed they fled to this Town, into which their enemies followed with them, intending to put them all to the sword: but at last their furie being allayed, they proposed that mercy unto them, which those of 
Gilead
 did unto those of 
E∣phraim
 in the 
Scriptures
: life and liberty being promised to all them that could pronounce this word 
Pignigni
: it seemeth it was not a word in those daies possible for an 
English
 mouth, for the 
English
 saying all of them 
Peguenie,
 instead of 
Pignigni,
 were all of them put to the sword: thus farre the tradition. The truth of story by which this Town is famous in the writers of both Nations, is an enterviewe there given between our 
Edward
 the fourth, and their 
Lewis
 the ele∣venth, upon the concluding of their nine years truce; a circumstance of no great moment in it self, had not 
Phillip de Comminees
 made it such by one of his own observations. Upon this meeting the 
Chancellor
 of 
England,
 being 
Bishop
 of 
Ely,
 made an oration to both 
Kings
; beginning with a prophesie, which said that in this place of 
Pig∣nigni,
 an honourable peace should be concluded between both the 
Kingdomes.
 On this ground, which himself also is the onely man that related, he hath built two observations: the one (I have not the original by me) that the 
English
 men are never unfurnished with 
Prophesies:
 the other that they ground every thing which they speak upon 
Prophesies
: How far those times were guilty of that humor I cannot say; though sure I am, we are not the onely men that were so affected: 
Pau∣lus


Jovius
 in some place of his 
Histories
 (I remem∣ber not the particular) hath vindicated that quar∣rel for us, and fastned the same imitation upon the 
French.
 So true is that of the 
Fragaedian, Quod quisque fecit, patitur; authorem scelus Repe∣rit
: And now being past 
Pignigni,
 I have lost the sight of the Church of 
Amiens.


The fairest fabrick, and most rich to see,


That ere was guilty of mortalitie,


No present structure like it: nor can Fame


In all its bead rolles boast an equal name:


Let then the barbarous Egyptians cease


So to extol their huge Pyramides,


Let them grow silent of their Pharus, and


Conceale the other triumphs of their Land.


And let the Charians henceforth leave to raise


Their Mausolaea with such endless praise:


This Church alone doth them as much excell


As they the lowest Cottages; where dwell


The least of men; as they those urnes: which keep


The smallest ashes which are laid to sleep.


Nor be thou vext, thou glorious Queen of night;


Nor let a cloud of darkness mask thy light:


That renown'd Temple, which the Greeks did call,


The Worlds seventh wonder; and the fair'st of all


That Pile; so famous that the World did see


Two onely great and high; thy Fame and Thee;


Is neither burnt nor perisht: Ephesus


Survives the follies of Herostratus,


Onely thy name in Europe to advance,


It was transported to the Realm of France:


And here it stands, not robb'd of any grace


Which there it had; not altered save in place,


Cast thy Beams on it: and t'will soon be proud,


Thy Temple was not ruin'd, but remov'd:


Nor are thy Rights so chang'd, but thou'lt averre


Ibis Christian is thy old Idolater.


But oh great God, how long shall thy Decree


permit this Temple to Idolatrie:


How long shall they profane this Church and make


Those sacred Walls and Pavements to partake


Of their loud sins: and here that doctrine teach


'Gainst which the very stones do seem to preach;


Reduce them Lord unto thee: make them see


How ill this building and their Rites agree;


Or make them know, though they be still the same,


This House was purpos'd onely to thy Name.


The next place of note which the water con∣veyed us to, was the Town and Castle of 
Pont d' Armie,
 a place now scarce vissible in the auines: and belonging to one 
Mr. Queran
: it took name, (as they said) from a Bridge here built for the transpo
tation of an 
Armie
; but this I cannot justifie: Three Leagues down the River is the Town of 
Abbeville
; a Town conveniently seated on the 
Some,
 which runneth through it. It is of greater circuit within the walls, than the Citie of 
Amiens,
 and hath four parish Churches more in it, but is not so beautifull nor so populous: for the houses here are of an older stamp: and there is within the Town no scarcity of wast ground: I went round about the walls, and ob¦served the thinness of the houses, and the large∣ness of the fields; which are of that capacity and


extent, that for ought I could apprehend; the Town needs never to be compelled by famine, if those fields were husbanded to the best advan∣tages: the walls are of earth within and stone without: of an unequal bredth and in some pla∣ces rui
ous: A 
Castle
 it once had, of which there is now scarce any thing remaining; instead of which and in places more convenient, they have built out three bastions very large and capacious; and such which well manned, needs not yeeld up on a summons. There are also a couple of 
Mounts
 raised nigh unto the Wall at that place, where the Country is most plain; upon which good Ordinance would have good command, but at this time there were none upon it: without the wal
s it is diversly strengthened, having in some places a deep ditch without water; in some a shallower ditch, but well filled with the benefit of the benefit of the 
River
: the others only a marish, and fennie levell, more dangerous to the enemie and service to the Town, than either of the rest; and therefore never guarded by the Souldiers of the Garrison: but the chief strength of it is five Companies of 
Swisses,
 100. men in a Company, proper tall fel
owes in appearance, and such as one would imagine fit for the service: It was my chance to see them begin their watch; to which employment they advanced with so good order and such shew or stomack, as if they had not gone to guard a sown, but possess one. Their watch was at 
Port de Boys,
 and 
Port St. Valery
: the first thing 
ear unto 
Hesden
 a 
frontier
 Town of 
Artoys
: the other five Leagues only from the See


and Haven of 
St. Valery
: from these places most danger was feared, and therefore there kept most of their Souldiers, and all their Ordinance. The 
Captain
 is named 
Mr. Aille
 a 
Grison
 by birth, and reported for a good Souldier: besides him they have no Military Commander: the 
Mayor
 of the Town, contrary to the common nature of Towns of warre, being there in highest authority: A priviledge granted unto the 
Mayors
 hereof not long since, as a reward due to one of their Inte∣grities, who understanding that the 
Governour
 of the Town held intelligence with the 
Arch Duke
; apprehended him, and sent him to the Court where he receceived his punishment. This 
Ab∣beville
 (and so I leave it, and in it the berry of 
French Lasses
) is so called 
quasi Abbatis Villa,
 as formerly belonging to some 
Abbot.


July
 the last we took post-horse for 
Boulogne,
 if at least we may call those 
Post-horses
 which we rode on: As lean they were as 
Envis
 is in the 
Poet: Macies in corporatota,
 being most true of them. Neither were they onely lean enough to have their ribs numbred, but the very spur-gals had made such casements through their skins, that it had been no greater difficulty to have surveyed their entrails. A strange kind of Cattel in mine opi∣nion, and such as had neither flesh on their bones, nor skin on their flesh, nor hair on their skin. Sure I am, they were not so lusty as the 
Horses
 of the 
Sun
 in 
Ovid
: neither could we say of them, 
flammiferis implent hinnitibus aur as
: All the neigh∣ng we could hear from the proudest of them, was onely an old dry cough, which Ile assure you did


much comfort me, for by that noise I first learned there was life in them. Upon such 
Anatomies
 of Horses, or to speak more properly, upon such se∣veral heaps of bones were I and my company mounted, and when we expected, however they seemed outwardly, to see somewhat of the post in them, my beast began to move after an 
Aldermans pace,
 or like 
Envie
 in 
Ovid
:

Surgit humi pigre, passu{que} incedet inerti.

Out of this gravity no perswasion could work them; the dull jades being grown insensible of the spur; and to hearten them with wands would in short time have distressed the Country. Now was the Cart of 
Diepe
 thought a speedy convey∣ance, and those that had the happiness of a Wag∣gon were esteemed too blessed, yea, though it came with the hazard of the old woman and the wenches. If good nature, or a sight of their journeys ever did chance to put any of them into a pace like a gallop, we were sure to have them tire in the middle way, and so the remainder of the Stage was to be measured with our own feet: be∣ing weary of this trade, I made bold to dismount the 
Postilion,
 and ascended the 
Trunk Horse,
 where I sate in such magnificent posture, that the best Carrier in 
Paris
 might have envied my felicity: behind me I had a good large Trunk, and a Port∣mantue, before me a bundle of Cloaks, and a par∣cel of Books. Sure I was, that if my stirrups could poize me equally on both sides, that I could not likely fall backwards nor forwards. Thus preferred


I encouraged my Companions, who cast many an envious eye upon my prosperity: and certainly there was not any of them, who might not more justly have said of me, 
Tu as un meilleur temps que le pape,
 then poor 
Lauarillo
's Master d
d, when he allowed him an Onion for four dayes. This cir∣cumstance I confess might have well been omit∣ted, had I not great example for it. 
Philip de Comminees
 in the midst of his grave and serious relation of the battel of 
Mont l' hierrie,
 hath a note much about this nature, which gave me encou∣ragement, which is, that himself had an 
old Horse half tired
 (and this was just my case) who by chance thrust his head into a pail of Wine, and drunk it off, which made him lustier and friskier that day than ever before, but in that his Horse had better luck than I had.


On the right hand of us, and almost in the mid∣dle way betwixt 
Abbeville
 and 
Boulogne,
 we left the Town of 
Monstreville,
 which we had not lea∣sure to see. It seemed daintily seated for com∣mand and resistance; as being built upon the top and declivity of an hill, it is well strengthened with 
Bastions
 & ramparts on the outside & hath within a Garrison of five Companies of Souldiers: their 
Governour
 (as I learned of one of the 
Paisants
) being called 
Lenroy:
 And indeed it concerneth the 
King of France
 to l
ck well to his Town of 
Monstreville,
 as being a border Town within two miles of 
Artoys
; and especially co
si
ering, that the taking of it would 
ut off all entercourse be∣tween the Countreys of 
Boulogne
 and 
Calais
 with the rest of 
France.
 Of the like importance also


are the Towns of 
Abbeville
 and 
Amiens
; and that the 
French Kings
 are not ignorant of: Insomuch that those two onely, together with that of 
St. Quintin,
 being put into the hands of 
Philip Duke
 of 
Burgundy,
 to draw him from the party of the 
English,
 were redeemed again by 
Lewis
 the ele∣venth for 450000. Crowns, an infinite sum of mo∣ney, according to the standard of those times, and yet it seemeth the 
King
 of 
France
 had no bad bar∣gain of it; for upon an hope onely of regaining those Towns, 
Charls Earl of Charoloys,
 Son to 
Duke Philip,
 undertook that warr against 
King Lewis,
 by which at the last he lost his life, and ha∣zarded his estate.






CHAP. V.




The Country of 
Boulonnois,
 and Town of 
Boulogne,
 by whom enfranchised: The present of salt butter. 
Boulogne
 divided into two Towns. Procession in the low Town to divert the Plague. The forms of it. Pro∣cessions of the Letany, by whom brought into the Church. The high Town garrisoned: The old man of 
Boulogne
: The neglect of the 
English
 in leaving open the Havens. The fraternity 
de la charite,
 and inconveni∣ence of it. The costly journey of 
Henry
 the eigth to 
Boulogne.
 Sir 
Wa
ter Raleighs



censure of that Prince condemned: the dis∣courtesie of 
Charls
 the fifth towards our 
Ed∣ward
 the sixth. The defence of the House of 
Burgundy
 how chnrgeable to the Kings of 
England: Boulogne
 re-yeilded.




WE are now come to the 
Country
 of 
Bou∣lonnois,
 which though a part of 
Picardy,
 disdaineth yet to be so counted; but will be rec∣koned a 
County
 of it self: It comprehendeth in it the Towns of 
Boulogne, Escapes
 and 
Neus-Chastel,
 beside-divers Villages, and consisteth much of hils and valleys, much after the nature of 
England
; the soyl being indifferent fruitful of corn, and yeild∣ing more glass than any other part of 
France
 (which we saw) for the quantity. Neither is it onely a County of it self but it is in a manner also a free County; it being holden immediately of the 
Virgin Mary
; who is, no question, a very gra∣cious 
Land Lady
: For when 
King Lewis
 the ele∣venth, after the decease of 
Charles of Burgundy,
 had taken in 
Boulogne▪ Anno
 1477. As new 
Lord
 of the Town (thus 
John de Sierries
 relateth it) he did homage without sword or spurs, bare∣headed, and on his knee before the 
Virgin Mary,
 offering unto her image an heart of 
Massie gold,
 weighing two thousand Crowns; he added also this, that he and his successors after him being 
Kings
 should hold the 
County
 of 
Boulogne
 of the same Virgin, and do homage unto her image in the great 
Church
 of the higher Town dedicated to her na
e, giving 
 every change of a 
Vassal
 an


heart of pure gold of the same weight. Since that time the 
Boulonnois
 being the Tennants of our 
La∣dy,
 have enjoyed a perpetual exemption from ma∣ny of those tributes and taxes under which the rest of 
France
 are miserably afflicted. Amongst others they have been alwayes freed from the gabel of Salt, by reason whereof, and by the goodness of their pastures, they have there the best Butter in all the 
Kingdom,
 I say, partly by reason of their Salt, because having it at a low rate they do liberally season all their Butter with it; whereas they which do buy their Salt at the 
Kings
 price cannot afford it any of that dear commodity: Upon this ground, it is the custom of these of 
Boulonnois
 to send unto their Freinds of 
France
 and 
Paris
 a barrel of Butter seasoned according to their fashion; a present no less ordinary and acceptable, than Turkeys, Capons, and the like are from our Country Gentlemen to those of 
London.


As for the Town of 
Boulogne
 it is divided into two parts, 
la haute Ville,
 and 
la Bass Ville,
 or the 
High Town,
 and the 
Low Town,
 distant one from the other about an hundred paces and upwards. The high Town is seated upon the top of an hill; the low Town upon the the declivity of it and towards the Haven: Or else we may divide it into two other parts, 
Viz.
 the Town and the 
City
; the Town that towards the water, and the 
City
; that which lieth above it. It was made a 
City
 in the reign of 
Henry
 the second, 
Anno
 1553. at which time the 
City
 of 
Terorenne
 was totally ruined by the 
Impe∣rials,
 and the 
Bishop
 was removed 
ther: The



Church
 of 
Nostre Dame
 being made the Cathe∣dral: there came along hither upon the remove of the 
Bishop
 20. 
Chanoins,
 which number is here still retained; their revenues being about a 1000. 
Liures
 yearly: as for the present 
Bishop,
 his name is 
Pierre de Arme,
 his intrado twenty thousand 
Liures
: His 
Metropolitan
 he of 
Rhemes
: The Town or (as they call it) the low Town is bigger than the 
City,
 and better built, the streets larger, and the people richer, most of the Merchants li∣ving in it, because it lieth above the Haven: but that which made this low town most pleasing, was a solemn procession that passed through the streets of it, intended to pacifie 
Gods
 anger, and divert the plague, which at that time was in the 
City.


In the first front there was carried the 
Cross,
 and after that the holy and sanctified Banner; next unto it followed all the 
Priests
 of the Town bare∣headed, and in their Surplices, singing as they went the services destinate to that occasion: after them followed the Men, and after them the Women of the Town by two and two, it being so ordered by the 
Roman Ritual. Ʋt Laicia Cl
ricis, faeminae a viris separatae prosequantur.
 On the other side of the street went the Brethren 
dela Charite,
 every one of them holding in his hand a little triangular Banner, or a Pennon: after them the Boys and Wenches: in this method did the solemnity mea∣sure every lane and angle of the Town, the 
Priests
 singing, and all the people answering them in the same note. At the 
Church
 they began it in prayer, and having visited all the Town, they returned


again thither to end it with the same devotion. An action vety grave and solemn, and such as I could very well allow of, were it not onely for one prayer, which is alwayes said at the time of this performance, and addition of the Banners: The prayer is this; 
Exaudi nos Deus salutaris noster, & intercedente beatâ & gloriosa Dei genetrice Mariâ semper Virgine, & Sebastiano beato Martyre tuo
 (this 
Sebastian
 is their 
Aesculapius,
 or 
Tutelary Saint
 against the sickness) 
& omnibus Sanctis po∣pulum tuum ab iracundiae tuae terroribus libera, & misericordiae tuae fac largitate securum. Amen.
 This onely excepted, there is nothing in the whole 
Li∣turgy
 of it, which can be offensive to any consci∣ence not idle scrupulous.


These 
Processions
 were first instituted by 
Pope Stephanus
 the second, who began his 
Popedom Anno
 752. the intent of them is, as 
Platina
 reporteth, 
Ad placandam Dei iram.
 The first place that they ever went to in 
Procession,
 was the 
Church
 of our 
Lady
 in the Shambles, or 
ad Sanctam Dei genitri∣cem ad praesepe,
 as the 
Historia
 calleth them. As for the 
Letany,
 which is a principal part of it, it was first compiled by 
Mamercus Bishop of Vienna
 in 
Daul∣phine,
 in the time of 
Pope Leo
 the first, which was 308. years after the time of 
Stephanus.
 The mo∣tive of it was the often danger to which 
France
 was subject by reason of the frequency of Earth∣quakes: Since those beginnings, which were fair and commendable, the 
Romish Church
 hath added much to them of magnificence, and somewhat of impiety and prophaneness. As for the Brethren 
de la Charite,
 I could not learn any thing of their


original, but much of their office: for they are bound to visit all such as are infected with the Plague, to minister unto them all things necessary, and if they die, to shrowd them and carry them to their graves. These duties they perform very willingly, being possessed with this fancy, that they are priviledged from contagion by vertue of their Order; and to say the truth, they are most of them old, and so less subject to it; and indeed such sapless, thin, and unbodied fellows, that one would think almost no disease could catch them: yet hath their prerogative not alwayes held to them: Of thirty three of them in 
Callice
 three onely sur∣viving the disease about four years since: But were the danger to which themselves are liable all the inconvenience of it, I should not much disallow it. There is a greater mischeif waiting upon it, and that is the infecting of others; they immedi∣ately after their return from the 
Pest-house
 mixing themselves with any of their neighbours: A most speedy meanes to spread the pestilence, where it is once begun, though neither they nor the people will be perswaded unto it.


The 
City
 or the high Town standeth, as we have said, on the top of the hill, environed with deep ditches, a strong wall, and closed with a tre∣ble gate▪ and two draw-bridges: a little small Town it is, not much above a slights shoot thwart where it is widest; and hath in it but one 
Church
 besides that of 
Nostre Dame,
 which is the Cathedral: the streets not many, and those narrow, unless it be in the market place; where the 
Corpus du Guard
 is 
ept. What the outworks are, or whether it hath


any or no I cannot say; Even in this time of League and peace, their jealousie will not permit an 
English man
 to walk their wall, either within the Town or without. A Castle they said, that it hath; bur such a one as seemeth more for a dwel∣ling than a fort. The Garrison of this Town consisteth of five Companies, sixty in a Company, which amount in all to 300. their 
Governour
 being 
Mr. de Anmont
 sonne to the 
Marshal de Anmont,
 who so faithfully adhered to 
Henry
 the fourth in the beginning of his troubles: the cause why this Town being so small is so strongly Garrison'd is the safe keeping of the Haven which is under it; and the command of the passage from the Haven up into the Country: The first of these services it can hardly perform without much injury to the low Town which standeth between them; but for the ready discharge of the last it is daintily seated, for though to spare the low Town, they should permit an enemie to land; yet as soon as he is in his march up into the higher Country, their Or∣dinance will tear him to pieces: But for the im∣mediate security of the Haven, their Ancestors did use to fortifie the old Town standing on the top of the hill, called 
La Tower de Ordre
; it is said to have been built by 
Julius Caesar,
 at the time of his second expedition into 
Brittaine
: this Haven being then 
Portus Gessorianus.
 This Tower which, we now see, seemeth to be but the remainder of a greater work; and by the height and scituation of it, one would guesse it to have been the 
Key
 or watch Tower unto the rest; it is built of rude and vulgar stone, but strongly cemented together;


the figure of it is six square, every square of it be∣ing nine paces in length: A compass to little for a Fortress; and therefore it is long since it was put to that use: it now serving onely as a Sea mark by day and a 
Pharos
 by night. 
Ʋbi accensae noctu faces navigantium cursum dirigunt.
 The 
English men
 call it the 
Old man of Boulogue
: and not improperly; for it hath all the signes of age upon it. The Sea hath by undermining it, taken from it all the earth, about two squares of the bot∣tom of it, the stones begin to drop out from the top; and upon the rising of the wind, you would think it were troubled with the Palsie: in a word two hard winters, seconded with a violent tempest, maketh it rubbish: what therefore is wanting of present strength to the Haven in this ruine of a Tower, the wisdom of this age hath made good in a Garrison. And here me thinks I might justly ac
use the impolitick thrift of our former 
Kings
 of 
England,
 in not laying out some money upon the strength and safety of our Haven Townes; not one of them (
Portsmouth
 onely excepted) being Garrison'd: true it is, that 
Henry
 the eighth did e
ect 
Block-Houses
 in many of them▪ but what b
bles they are, and how unable to resist a 
Flees
 royally appointed is known to every one▪ I know indeed we were sufficiently Garrison'd by out 
Na
e
; could it either keep a watch on all parti∣cular places, or had it no
 sometimes occasion to be absent; I hope our 
Kings
 are not of 
Darius
 mind in the storie, 
qu
 gloriosius ra
us est hostem 
, quam non admittere
: neither will I take 
 to give counsell; onely I could wish that


we were not inferiour to our neighbours in the greatness of our care; since we are equal to the best of them in the goodness of our 
Country.


This Town of 
Boulogne
 and the 
Country
 about it was taken by 
Henry
 the eighth of 
England, Anno
 1545. himself being in person at the siege; a ve∣ry costly and chargeable victory. The whole list of his Forces did amount to 44000. foot, and 3000. horse: Field Pieces he drew after him a∣bove a hundred, besides those of smaller making, and for the conveyance of their Ordinance, bag∣gage, and other provision, there were transport∣ed into the Continent above 25000. Horses. True it is that his designes had a further aim, had not 
Charles
 the 
Emperour,
 with whom he was to join, left the field, and made peace without him, So that judging onely by the success of the expediti∣on, we cannot but say that the winning of 
Bou∣lonnois
 was a dear purchase; and indeed in this one particular 
Sr. Walter Raleigh
 in the preface to his most excellent History saith not amiss of him, namely, that in his vain and fruitless expedi∣tions abroad, he consumed more treasure, than all the rest of our victorious Kings before him did in their several Conquests: The other part of his censure of that 
Prince,
 I know not well what to think of, as meerly composed of gall and bitter∣ness: Onely I cannot but much marvail that a man of his wisdom, being raised from almost no∣thing by the 
Daughter,
 could be so severely in∣vective against the 
Father
: certainly a most cha∣ritable judge cannot but condemn him of want of true affection and duty to his 
Queen
: seeing that


it is (as his late Majesty hath excellently noted in his ΒΑΣΙΛΙΚΟΝ ΔΩΡΟΝ) a thing mon∣strous to see a man love the Child and hate the Parents: And therefore he may earnestly enjoyn his Son 
Henry,
 to 
repress the insolencie of such as un∣der pretence to tax a vice in the person▪ seek craftily to stain the Race.


Presently after this taking 
Boulogne,
 the French again endeavoured the regaining of it, even during the life of the 
Conquerour
; but he was strong e∣nough to keep his gettings: After his death the 
English
 being engaged in a warr against the 
Scots,
 and 
Kit
 having raised a rebellion in 
Norfolk
 they began again the reconquest of it, and that more violently than ever. Upon news of their prepa∣rations, an 
Ambassage
 was dispatched to 
Charles
 the fifth to desire succours of him; and to lay be∣fore him the infancy and several necessity of the young 
King,
 who was then about the age of ten years. This desire when the 
Emperour
 had refused to hearken to, they besought him, that he would at the least be pleased to take into his hands and keeping the Town of 
Boulogne,
 and that for no longer time, than until 
King Edward
 could make an end of the troubles of his Subjects at home. An easie request; yet did he not onely deny to satis∣fie the 
King
 in this, except he would restore the 
Catholike Religion,
 but he also expresly command∣ed, that neither any of his men or munition should go to the assistance of the 
English.
 An ingratitude for which I cannot find a fitting 
Epithite,
 consi∣dering what fast friends the 
Kings of England
 have alwayes been to the united 
Houses
 of 
Burgundy



and 
Austria
; what moneys they have helped them with, and what sundry warrs they have made for them, both in 
Belgium
 to maintain their authority, and in 
France
 to augment their potency: from the marriage of 
Maximilian
 of the Family of 
Austria
 with the 
Lady Mary
 of 
Burgundie,
 which happen∣ed in they ear 1478. unto the death of 
Henry
 the eighth, which fell in the year 1548. are just seventy years, in which time onely it is thought by men of knowledge and experience, that it cost the 
Kings
 of 
England
 at the least six millions of pounds in the meer quarrels and defence of the 
Princes
 of those Houses. An expense which might seem to have earned a greater requital than that now de∣manded. Upon this denial of the unkindful 
Em∣perour,
 a 
Treaty
 followed between 
England
 and 
France:
 The effect of it was, that 
Boulogne
 and all the Country of it should be restored to the 
French,
 by paying to the 
English
 at two dayes of payment 800000. Crowns. Other Articles there were, but this the principal: and so the fortune of young 
Edward
 was like that of 
Julius Caesar
 towards his end: 
Dum clementiam, quam praestiterant, expectant, incauti ab ingratis occupati sunt.










The CONCLUSION. A Generall censure of 
France,
 and the 
French.
 A gratulation to 
England.
 The end of our journey.


ON 
wednesday
 the third of 
August,
 having stay∣ed in 
Boulogne
 three dayes for wind and company, and not daring to venture on 
Calice,
 by reason of the sickness there raging, we took ship for 
England
: the day fair, and the wind fitly ser∣ving us, we were quickly got out of the harbour into the main. And so I take my leave of 
France,
 a 
Country
 which I know not whether it be more happy in it self, or more unhappy in its Inhabi∣tants. This I am almost confident of, that the worst of its commodities are the people; who by no vertue of theirs, which my understanding is yet guilty of, deserve to grow there: 
France
 then being in their possession, is like a delicate choice dish of meat disgraced in the cooking: Or to give you my verdict of them both, both Men and Country; modestly, and in a word, I think you never saw 
a fair Lady worse marred,
 and indeed to speak the truth —,






But soft; What white is that which I espie,


Which with its lustre doth eclipse mine eye?


That which doth 
Neptunes
 fury so disdain,


And beats the billow back into the main?


It is some dreadful 
Scylla
 fast'ned there,


To shake the Sayler into prayer and fear:


Or its some I stand floating on the Wave,


Of which in Writers we the stories have:


'Tis 
England
; hah! 'tis so: clap, clap your hands,


That the full noise may strike the nighb'ring lands


Into a Palsey: Doth not that lov'd name


Move you to extasie? Oh were the same


As dear to you as me; that very word


Would make you dance and caper over board.


Dull Shipemen, how they move not, how their hoof


Grows to the planks: yet stay, here's sport enough:


For see the Sea Nimphs foot it, and the fish


Leap their high measures, equal to my wish


Triton
 doth sound his shell; and to delight me,


Old 
Nereus
 hobbleth with his 
Amphitrite.


Excellent triumphs! but (curs'd Fates) the Main


Quickly divides, and takes them in again:


And left me dying; till I came to land


And kist my dearest Mother in her sand.






Hail happy 
England
! hail thou sweetest Ile,


Within whose bounds no 
Pagan
 rites defile


The purer Faith; 
Christ
 is by 
Saints
 not mated;


And he alone is worshipp'd that created.


In thee the lab'ring man enjoys his wealth;


Not subject to the Lords rape; or the stealth


Of hungry Publicans: In thee thy King


Fears not the power of any underling,


Or petty Prince; but by his awful word


Commands not more the Beggar than the Lord.






In thee those heav'nly beauties lie, would make


Most of the Gods turn Mortals for their sake:


Such as out-go report, and make Fame see,


They stand above her bigg'st Hyperbole:


And yet to strangers will not grude the bliss


Of salutation and an harmless kiss.


Hail then sweet 
England
! May I breath my last


In thy lov'd arms: and when my dayes are past,


And to the silence of the grave I must,


All I desire is, Thou would'st keep my Dust.




And now I am safely come into my 
Country,
 where, according to the custom of the 
Ancients,
 I offer up my thanksgiving to the 
God
 of the Wa∣ters, and testifie before his 
Altars
 the grateful ac∣knowledgement of a safe voyage, and a prosperous return: Blessings which I never merited.


—Me tabula sacer


Votiva paries indicat uvida


Suspendisse potenti


Vestimenta inariis Deo.


FINIS.


March
 11. 1655.

This Book is Entred 
J. BURROUGHS












Printed or sold by 
William Leake,
 at the sign of the Crown in 
Fleetstreet
 between the two Temple Gates:




These Books following.


YOrk's Heraldry, Folio A Bible of a very fair large Roman letter, 40.


Orlando Furioso,
 Folio


Callis
 learned Readings on the S
at. 21. 
Hen.
 8. Chap. 5 of Sewers


Perkins
 on the Law of 
Engl.


Wikinsons
 Office of Sheriffs


Persons
 Law.


Mirrour of Justice


Topicks in the Laws of 
Engl.


Sken de significatione Verborum


Delamon
's use of the Horizon∣tal Quadrant.


Wilby
's 2d. set of Musique, 3, 4, 5, and 6 parts


Corderius
 in English


Doctor 
Fulk
's Meteors, with Observations


Malthus
 Fire-works


Nyes
 Gunnery and Fire-works


Cator Major
 with Annotations, by 
Will. Austin
 Esquier


Mel Helliconium
 by 
Alexander Rosse


Nosce teipsum
 by Sr. 
John Davis


Animadversions on 
Lillies
 Grammer


The History of 
Vienna
 and 
Paris.


Lazarillo de Tormes


Hero
 and 
Leander
 by 
G. Chap∣man
 and 
Christoph. Marlow.


Posing of the Accidence


Guilliam
's Heraldry


Herberts
 Travels


Man become guilty, by 
Iohn Francis Senalt,
 and Englished by 
Henry
 Earl of 
Monmouth


Excersitatio Scolastica


The Ideot in 4. books; the first and second of Wisdom; the third of the Mind; the fourth of Statick Experiments of the Ballance.


The life and Reign of 
Henry
 the eighth, written by the Lord 
Herbert.


Aulalucis,
 or the house of light The Fort Royal of Holy Scriptures, by 
I. H.
 the third Edition.


A Tragedy of Christs Passion, written by the most learned 
Hugo Grotius,
 and Englished by 
George Sands.


Mathematical Recreations, with the general Horological Ring and the double Horizontal Dial, by 
William Oughtred


The Garden of 
Eden,
 or an Acurate description of all Flowers and Fruits now growing in 
England,
 with particular rules how to ad∣vance their Nature & Growth as well in Seeds and Hearbs,


as the secret ordering of Trees and Plants, by that learned and great Observer Sir 
Hugh Plat,
 Knight, the fourth Edi∣tion


Solitary devotions with man in glory, by the most Reverend and holy Father 
Ansolem,
 Arch-Bishop of 
Canterbury.






PLAYES.


Henry
 the Fourth.


Philaster


The Wedding.


The Hollander.


Maids Tragidy.


King and no King.


The grateful Servant.


The strange discovery


The Merchant of 
Venice.













