The Hvmble petition of the merchant-strangers and others in the city of London concerned in the importation of plate and bullion into this kingdome presented to both houses of Parliament : with an ordinance or declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament concerning the said petition.
Approx. 5 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A45059




Wing H3561



ESTC R30354





ocm 11299524




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The Hvmble petition of the merchant-strangers and others in the city of London concerned in the importation of plate and bullion into this kingdome presented to both houses of Parliament : with an ordinance or declaration of the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament concerning the said petition.
6 p.   


London :


Printed for Iohn Wright ...,


Aug. 28, 1643.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
England and Wales. --  Parliament.
Precious metals --  England.
Plate --  England.
2013-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Olivia Bottum
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Olivia Bottum
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






H3561


R30354


11299524


47353














THE HVMBLE PETITION OF THE MERCHANT-STRANGERS, and others in the City of LONDON, concerned in the Importation of Plate and Bullion into this Kingdome. Presented to both Houses of Parliament.


WITH AN ORDINANCE OR DECLARATION OF THE LORDS and COMMONS Assembled in Parliament, Concerning the said PETITION.




Die Sabbathi 26. Augusti. 1643.


ORdered by the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament, that this Petition, with the Ordinance concerning the same, shall be forthwith printed and published.


I. Brown Cler. Parliamentorum.




LONDON,
 Printed for 
Iohn Wright
 in the Old Bayley, Aug. 28. 1643.














TO THE RIGHT HONOURABLE THE LORDS and COMMONS now Assembled in Parliament.


The humble Petition of the Merchant-Stran∣gers, and others concerned in the Importati∣on of Plate and Bullion into this Kingdom,


Sheweth,


T
Hat the Petitioners Correspondents have forborne to lade their Plate and Bullion in English Ships, as for∣merly they have done, by reason of the Visits, Search,

Arrests, and Molests which have been lately attempted and used for the find∣ing out or seizing of the said Plate and Bullion, which hath been a great hinderance to the Petitioners, and a generall damage to this Kingdom. For by the Importation thereof, many Shippes were imployed, the Navi∣gation increased, the Owners encou∣raged to build and maintaine good Shippes, great profit by the Coin∣age, and by the low Exchange, Mer∣chants had plenty of Money to im∣ploy in the Manifactures of this Kingdome; and generally the whole Kingdome hath been, and is, inrich∣ed by the said Treasure that comes in and remaines in the Kingdome. And the Petitioners are very confi∣dent, That if they could give their

Correspondents assurance by an Or∣dinance of both Houses of Parlia∣ment, That their Plate and Bulli∣on may for the future be imported in English Shippes without any mo∣lest or interruption, with Decla∣ration that they should also have and enjoy the full benefit of the Arti∣cles of Peace made with 
Spaine,
 that then they would imploy Eng∣lish Shippes againe, and remit their Plate and Bullion, and other Goods to 
Dover,
 as formerly they have done: And for the reall effecting hereof, and better encouragement of the Parties concerned, and for the remo∣ving of all Doubts and Iealousies for the future:


The Petitioners humbly pray this most Ho∣nourable Assembly, to make an Ordinance

according to the tenour of this Petition, or as in your Wisdomes shall bee thought fit, and that this Petition, together with the said Ordinance, may be printed and published by Order of both Houses of Parliament, and they permitted to send them abroad, for the timely prevailing and effecting of a worke of so much im∣portance to this Kingdome.


And the Petitioners shall pray.








AN ORDINANCE OR DECLARATION OF THE Lords and Commons.


Assembled in Parliament.


Die Sabbathi
 26. 
August,
 1643.


T
he Lords and Commons now in Parliament assembled, ha∣ving received information by a Petition of Merchant-stran∣gers, and others, concerned in the importation of Plate and Bullion into this Kingdome, That their correspondents inhabiting in the parts beyond the Seas, have conceived many feares and jealousies

which might discourage them in the usuall importing of Bullion into this Kingdome; For the better security and encouragement of all Traders and bringers in of Bullion or Coyne into this Kingdome, doe Declare, and Ordaine, That Bullion and Coyne, that shall be brought into this Kingdome, by any English shipping, shall have free and safe passage and protection, as in any former times; both by Sea, and Land, into the Ports of 
Dover
 and 
London:
 and accor∣dingly into, and out of His Maiesties Mint in the Tower of 
London,
 without any in∣terruption.


FINIS.











