In the act for raising two millions, and for setling the trade to the East-Indies, are the following clauses, viz
Public General Acts. 1697. 9 & 10 William III c.44. Selections.
England and Wales.
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A45846




Wing I123



ESTC R215991





99827746




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
In the act for raising two millions, and for setling the trade to the East-Indies, are the following clauses, viz
Public General Acts. 1697. 9 & 10 William III c.44. Selections.
England and Wales.
1 sheet (2 p.)   


[Edinburgh? :


s.n.,


1698]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  Commerce --  East Indies --  Early works to 1800.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702 --  Early works to 1800.
2013-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-11
Colm MacCrossan
Sampled and proofread
2013-11
Colm MacCrossan
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






I123


R215991


99827746


32169












In the Act for Raising Two Millions, and for Setling the Trade to the
 East-Indies, 
are the following Clauses,
 Viz.


 AND Be it further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That if the said whole Sum of Two Millions, or one Moiety, or any greater part thereof, shall be Subscribed on or before the said Nine and twentieth Day of 
September
 One thousand six hundred ninety eight, and all or any Corporations, or other Person or Persons, having particular Shares or Interests in the Principal Stock of the Gene∣ral Society, or in proportionable Annuities or Yearly Payments, issuing out of the said Yearly Fund, shall be willing and desirous to unite or join together such their several Shares and Interests, and to be Incorporated so as they may be able to Manage their Trade in proportion to their Interests as a Company, and by a Joint Stock, That then it shall or may be lawful to and for His Majesty, by Letters Patents under the Great Seal of 
England,
 to Incorporate all such Persons and Corporations, by such pro∣per Name as His Majesty, His Heirs, or Successors, shall think fit to be 
One Company,
 with Power to Manage and Carry on their Trade to the 
East-Indies,
 and other the Limits aforesaid, by a Joint Stock, and to have a perpetual Succession and a Com∣mon Seal, and with Power to Grant and Take, Sue and be Sued, and to Choose their own Managers or Directors and Officers from time to time, and such other Powers and Clauses as shall be ne∣cessary or requisite for the Carrying on of such Trade, and shall be Reasonable for His Majesty to Grant: Nevertheless, such Com∣pany so to be Created with Power to Trade with a Joint Stock, as aforesaid, shall be restrained to such proportion of the Trade in the whole as all the particular Members thereof would have been Intituled to at the Rate before-mentioned, in case such new Com∣pany were not made; And the Directors or Managers, and o∣ther Members of the same, shall be subject to such further Rules, Qualifications, and Appointments as His Majesty in their Charter shall think necessary or reasonable to be Inserted.


 
And the said Commons of England,
 in Parliament Assembled, for the Ends and Purposes in this Act expressed, have also Given and Granted unto His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors, the further Rates and Duties herein after mentioned; And it is here∣by further Enacted by the Authority aforesaid, That for and upon all Goods, Wares, and Merchandizes whatsoever, of the Growth,

Product or Manufacture of the 
East-Indies,
 or any other Coun∣treys or Places within the Limits aforesaid, to wit, beyond the 
Cape
 to the 
Streights of Magellan,
 which from and after the said Nine and twentieth day of 
September,
 One thousand six hun∣dred ninety eight, at any time or times, shall be Imported, or brought into the Kingdom of 
England,
 Dominion of 
Wales,
 or Town of 
Berwick
 upon 
Tweed,
 by any Corporation, Person or Persons Trading within the Limits aforesaid, by Vertue or in Pursuance of this Act, there shall be yielded and paid to His Majesty, His Heirs and Successors (over and above all other Duties payable for the same) a Duty after the Rate of Five Pounds for every One hundred Pounds of the true and real value of the said Goods, to be paid over from time to time to the said Ge∣neral Society of Subscribers and their Successors, or such Trea∣surer or Treasurers as such Society shall Appoint to Receive the same, unless a Company upon the Desire of the Subscribers, or any of them, shall be Erected in pursuance to this Act, to Trade with a Joint Stock as aforesaid; And from and after the Erecting or Setling of such Company, then the said Duty of Five Pounds 
per Cent.
 shall be paid over to such Company and their Successors, or to their Treasurer, to the End that the said General Society, and the said Company respectively, may out of the Produce of the said Duty of Five Pounds 
per Cent.
 maintain such Ambassa∣dors or other Ministers as His Majesty, His Heirs or Successors, (at the Nomination of the Trustees, Directors, or Managers of or for the General Society aforesaid, or of such Company so to be Impowered to Trade with a Joint Stock as aforesaid) shall be pleased to send to any Emperor, Prince, or State, within the Parts aforesaid, and defray any other Extraordinary or Necessary Expences in Carrying on the said Trade. And if at any time or times there be an Overplus of the Produce of the said Duty, to dispose the same from time to time to and for the Benefit of all the Members of the said General Society, until a Company to Trade with a Joint Stock shall be erected as aforesaid. 
And after such Company shall be Erected, then to and for the Benefit of all the Members thereof according to their respective Shares or Interests in the Principal or Capital Stock of the same.









