A joyfull message sent from the House of Commons to Robert Earle of Warvvicke, admirall of His Majesties navie royall, concerning the ships which now lye ready at the coast of Holland laden with ammunition, to be sent to His Majesty at Yorke with the message which they sent to the Dutch ambassadour : and his answer to the said message : likewise the report which was made to both Hovses, concerning 8000 men which are to be sent from France, and Spaine, to His Majesty to assist him against the High Court of Parliament, and the Parliaments resolution concerning the same.
England and Wales. Parliament.
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A46323




Wing J1130



ESTC R1852





ocm 12688835




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A joyfull message sent from the House of Commons to Robert Earle of Warvvicke, admirall of His Majesties navie royall, concerning the ships which now lye ready at the coast of Holland laden with ammunition, to be sent to His Majesty at Yorke with the message which they sent to the Dutch ambassadour : and his answer to the said message : likewise the report which was made to both Hovses, concerning 8000 men which are to be sent from France, and Spaine, to His Majesty to assist him against the High Court of Parliament, and the Parliaments resolution concerning the same.
England and Wales. Parliament.
[8] p.   


London :


Printed for J. H. and T. Ryder,


Iuly 9, 1642.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Great Britain --  History --  Civil War, 1642-1649.
2013-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-11
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-12
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-12
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






J1130


R1852


12688835


65806












A Joyfull MESSAGE Sent from the House of COMMONS to ROBERT Earle of WARVVICKE, Admirall of His Majesties Navie Royall, concer∣ning the Ships which now lye ready at the Coast of 
Holland
 laden with Ammuniti∣on, to be sent to His Majesty at YORKE.


With the MESSAGE which they sent to the Dutch Ambassadour, And his Answer to the said Message.


Likewise the Report which was made to both HOVSES, concerning 8000 men which are to be sent from 
France,
 and 
Spaine,
 to His Maje∣sty to assist hi
 against the High Court of Parliament, And the Parliaments Re∣solution concerning the same.


Ordered by the Lords and Commons, that this be Printed and published throughout the Kingdome.


John Browne Cler. Parl.


LONDON, Printed for 
J. H.
 and 
T. Ryder, Iuly
 9. 1642.














A Joyfull Message sent from the Honourable House of Commons, to 
Robert,
 Earle of 
Warwicke,
 Admirall of his Maiesties Navie Royall.


T
He manifold de∣stractions of this Kingdome are great, and the disturbances of this Iland are manifestly and apparently un∣derstood, and by sad experience made knowne to the world, insomuch that all Nations doe reioyce, which are Enemies to the Peace of great Brittaine, but J hope all those that are Enemies to 
Sion
 will have their wages paid by the Di∣vell

 that set them at worke, fo
 
 mallicious spleene against this Kingdom
 hath beene long intended, and now of late tis burst out in abundance, God grant all those that goe about, and seeke the destruction of this Kingdome, and of our gra ious Soveraigne King Charles, may be utterly confounded, and brought to destruction.


What a sad and lamentable thing it is, for the Subjects o
 
England
 to thinke that a civill Warre should begin in the Kingdome, who are now at Peace with all the Princes in the World, no inten∣tion to take up Armes, but the malig∣nant Party separating his Maiesty from his great Councell, the High Court of Parliament, and creating a misunderstan∣ding betweene his Maiesty and them, it is grea
tly to be feared that the effects will be fatall, for it is a knowne maxime, that Jealuosie is the Mother of dissenti∣on, dissention that nourishes distraction, and distraction intestine warre, nay a

 civill Warre, in comparisoo of which none is more bloody, and uncivill, and the distractions of this Kingdome de∣clare that we have great cause to feare that the same effects will insue.


For intelligence hath beene given to the House, of great store of Armes and Ammunition, to be transported to 
New-Castle,
 for his Maiesties defence, likewise diverse pieces of Ordnance, and many other things belonging to warre, like∣wise many Captaines are ready to be transported over to serve the King, who have taken an Oath amongst themselves that if they be set upon by the way, they will fight it out to the last man.


Likewise there was a report made to the House of Commons, that there is great preparations made both in 
France,
 and 
Spaine,
 for the raising of an Army to be transported to his Majesty, to asist h
m against the Parliament, and that the Popes 
Nuncio
 doth goe about to raise Forces for the same designe.




Therfore both Houses of Parliament, had great doubt that his Maiesty had some Designe, for the altering his religi∣on.


Likewise the Popes Nuntio hath soli∣cited the Kings of 
France
 and 
Spaine,
 to lend the King of 
England
 foure thousand men a piece, to helpe to maintaine the Royalty of the King against the Parlia∣ment, but we hope God will direct his Maiesty better.


These are the chiefe grounds of our Feares.


The House of Commons having taken the aforesaid reports into serious consi∣deration, gave Order that there should be a speedy Message, sent to to the Earle of 
Warwicke,
 intimating unto him the information which they had received, de∣siring him to have a speciall care there∣in, and to stop the passages of all those which shall transport Armes or Ammu∣nition, from 
Rome, Venice, Parris,
 and

 other neere adioyning parts, as also from 
Holland,
 there having beene of late great preparations of Instruments of warre, sent over in severall Letters from thence to the high Court of Parliament.


Likewise they received more intelli∣gence, of certaine Ships laden with Ord∣nance and other Ammunition, to be sent to his Maiesty, and that they are now upon the Sea.


Which Newes doth increase the sor∣row of the Parliament, considering the great misery which is like to fall upon the Kingdome, whereby they 
 infor∣ced (for the prevention of whi
) to ap∣ply themselves to the use of t
 power which by the Fundamentall Lawes of the Land resides in them, yet still resol∣ving to keepe themselves within the bounds of faithfullnesse and allegiance, to his sacred Maiesty.


Likewise the Honorable Houses of Parliament thought it convenient, and

 conduceable to the Peace of the King∣dome, for to make further enquiry there∣of wherefore they sent a Message to the 
Dutch
 Ambassador, to know of him whi∣ther there were any such thing, or not, the Messenger which carried this Message returning backe, reported to the House the Answer that he had received from the said 
Dutch
 Ambassador, intimating unto them that he had received no such intelligence from 
Holland,
 neither did he know of any such thing.




Ordered by the Lords and Commons asesmbled in Parliament, that this Letter be forthwith Printed, and published throughout all the Kingdome.


Iohn Browne, Cler. Parliamentorum.




FINIS.









