A Journal of the Venetian campaigne, A.D. 1687, under the conduct of the Capt. General Morosini, General Coningsmark, [brace] [brace] Providitor Gen. Cornaro, General Venieri, &c. translated from the Italian original, sent from Venice, and printed by order of the most serene republick.
Approx. 117 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 28 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A46313




Wing J1107



ESTC R39041





ocm 18207321




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Journal of the Venetian campaigne, A.D. 1687, under the conduct of the Capt. General Morosini, General Coningsmark, [brace] [brace] Providitor Gen. Cornaro, General Venieri, &c. translated from the Italian original, sent from Venice, and printed by order of the most serene republick.
[8], 44 p., [1] leaf of plates : map.  


London :


Printed by H.C. and sold by R. Taylor ...,


1688.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Venice (Italy) --  History --  Turkish Wars, 17th century --  Sources.
Turkey --  History --  1683-1829 --  Sources.
2013-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-09
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-10
Enrique Valdive
Sampled and proofread
2013-10
Enrique Valdive
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






J1107


R39041


18207321


107108












A JOURNAL OF THE 
Venetian Campaigne,
 A. D.
 1687. Under the Conduct of the



Capt. General 
Morosini,


General 
Coningsmark,


Providitor Gen. 
Cornaro,


General 
Venieri,
 &c.




Translated from the 
Italian
 Original, sent from 
Venice,
 and Printed by Order of the most Serene Republick.


Licensed, 
Decemb.
 16. 1687.


R. L'ESTRANGE.


LONDON:
 Printed by 
H. C.
 and sold by 
R. Taylor,
 near 
Stationers-Hall,
 1688.










To the READER.


THE famous 
Sabellicus, Bembo,
 and others, give this account of the Original of the 
Venetian
 Com∣monwealth. In the Year of Christ, 
421.
 the Inha∣bitants of 
Aqulteia
 and 
Padua,
 through dread of the 
Hunns,
 and finding their own Cities destroy'd, betook themselves to Flight, and made themselves Masters of the Islands of the 
Adri∣atic Sea;
 and retiring first to the upper Shoar, now call'd the 
Rialto,
 there laid the Foundations of 
Venice.
 The City it self is seated in the inmost recess of the 
Adriatick Bay,
 containing almost Sixty Islands, at a very small distance one from another, divided by narrow Eddies running between, with a small Mount (provided by Provident Nature) defends from the Violence of the Sea. It is stor'd with convenient Rivers, which import all thiugs as well for Delight, as for the Necessities of Mankind.


The whole City consists of three Ranks of People, the 
Patrici∣ans,
 or Gentlemen, the Citizens, and Mechanics. The Supream Power of Government, is in the hands of the 
Patricians.
 It is divided into six Quarters, containing Seventy two Companies of Common People: One and forty Religious Houses, Seventeen for Monks, and Twenty four for Nuns. Ʋpon the Front that looks toward the Shoar, stand two very vast Pillars, the one bearing the 
Winged Lion of St. Mark,
 and the other the Statue of St. 
Theodorus;
 and in the Space between, all Malefactors are Executed. The Cathedral of St. 
Mark,
 is a most Sumptuous and Magnificent Structure, all of Marble. The Streets are di∣vided with small Channels, or Caneales, joyned together with seve∣ral Bridges, part of Wood, and part of Stone, to the Number of 
440.
 The Arsenal, is a place every way surrounded with strong Walls, wherein Four hundred Workmen are continually em∣ploy'd in preparing Materials for the Building of Galleys, and the Reparation of the Bridges, who are every Week paid their Wages to the value of 
2000.
 Crowns. In a word, 
Venice
 is the Queen of all the Cities in the World, and which is more, never Subdu'd to Foraign Subjection. This is She, that has for so many Centuries of Years been the Bulwark of 
Christendom,
 against the Power of the 
Turks;
 being Marry'd to the Sea every Year, by the Cere∣mony of throwing a Gold Ring into the Neighbouring Ocean upon

Ascension-Day.
 In a word, such is the strength of her Situa∣tion, such the Constitution of her Government, such the strict Observance of her Constitutions, and so exact the Fidelity of her Subjects under an easie and gentle 
Rule,
 that she may well be coun∣ted the most Renowned City in the Ʋniverse.


If we consider the Diminution of her Territorys by the loss of 
Candy,
 we shall find that Loss in some measure Repair'd by the Recovery of the 
Morea,
 to the Extermination (as it may well be hoped) of the 
Turks,
 from the most flourishing and fairest Portion of all 
Greece.


The 
Morea,
 formerly known by the name of the 
Peloponnesus,
 is a Peninsula, from North to South, an Hundred and fifty Miles in breadth, that is, from 
Corinth
 to 
Cape Macapan,
 and a Hundred seventy five from East to West, and in Circuit Six hun∣dred Miles, or thereabout. Formerly it was divided into 
Achaia, Arcady,
 the 
Argives,
 the Territories of 
Corinth, Elis, Laco∣nia, Messenia,
 and 
Sicyonia.
 Now it is divided into the Duke∣dom of 
Clarentia,
 containing 
Achaia
 properly so called, 
Belve∣dera,
 containing the Territories of the 
Messenians,
 and those of 
Elis. Saccania
 containing the Country of 
Argos;
 and 
Tzaco∣nia,
 containing 
Laconia
 and 
Arcady.


The chief Cities of it were 
Argos, Argo; Corinth,
 now 
Corinto; Corone,
 or 
Coron; Dyme,
 now 
Clarentia; Elis,
 or 
Belvedera; Epidaunes,
 or 
Malvasia; Megalopolis,
 or 
Leontati; Messene,
 or 
Mosseniga, Modon, Nauplia,
 now 
Na∣poli di Romania, Patrae,
 or 
Patrasse,
 and 
Militra,
 formerly 
Lacedemon.


This Peninsule is divided from the rest of 
Greece
 by a narrow Neck of Land, not above Forty Furlongs, or five Miles wide: Which King 
Demetrius, Nero, Julius Caesar, Caligula, Nero,
 and some other Princes, endeavoured to have Cut through, and so to have let in the Sea round about it; but their Labour prov'd in vain, by reason of the Rockie substance of the Earth. How∣ever, Succeeding Ages rear'd up a thick Wall in the same Place, from Sea to Sea, which 
Amurath
 the 
II.
 afterward Levell'd with the Ground, when he Conquer'd and Sack'd the 
Peloponnesus.
 It was after that Rebuilt in the Year 
1453.
 by the 
Venetians
 in fifteen Days, with the Assistance of 
30000.
 Men, but then again utterly Ruin'd by the 
Turks,
 when they made themselves Masters of the whole Country.


Patrasso,
 anciently 
Patrae,
 from 
Patreus,
 who Peopl'd it, and

Surrounded it with Walls. By the 
Romans
 it was call'd 
Augusta Aroe Patrensis,
 and by reason of its commodious Situation for Commerce, by them much frequented and fill'd with Inhabitants; it is seated about Seven hundred Paces from the Gulph of 
Patrasso.
 In this City 
Diana
 was formerly Worshipp'd, under the Name of 
Diana Triclariena,
 to whom the People made an Annual Sacri∣fice of a Young Man and a Virgin, the most Beautiful they could find to Expiate the Crime of two Persons, that were Sacrific'd for Marrying in that Temple without the consent of their Parents. Here St. 
Andrew
 the Apostle suffer'd Martyrdom, as also 
Hero∣dian,
 who was one of the Seventy Disciples and Bishop of this Town.


It is Peopl'd at present for the most part with 
Jews,
 who make it a place of Trade, not only with the Neighbouring Islands, but with the 
French
 and 
English.
 However the Air is none of the Wholesomest, by reason of the High Mountains which overlook it, always cover'd with Snow, and for that the Ground about it is all Marshie. In the time of the 
Despotes,
 it was a Dutchie; but those Princes not finding themselves strong enough to keep it, Sold it in the Year, 
1408.
 to the 
Venetians,
 from whom it was taken by the 
Turks,
 in the Year 
1463.
 In the Year 
1533.
 it was Be∣sieg'd and Taken by 
D'Oria,
 but the very next Year the 
Turks
 Retook it again, and held it till this last succesful Conquest of the 
Venetians.


Lepanto,
 formerly call'd 
Naupactus,
 is seated near the Gulph of 
Lepanto,
 so Famous for the Battle of 
Lepanto,
 wherein the 
Turks
 were Overthrown by the 
Christians,
 with a great Slaugh∣ter of Men, and loss of Ships: It is an Archiepiscopal City, built about a Mountain rising in the form of a Sugar-Loaf, whereon the Fortress stands, encompassed with four large Walls, separated by Valleys, whereon the Houses of the Inhabitants stand; the Port is but small, and might easily be secur'd with a Chain. In the times of Heathenism, it had four Temples dedicated to 
Venus, Nep∣tune, Esculapius,
 and 
Diana.
 Ʋnder the Jurisdiction of the 
Turks,
 it contain'd seven Mosques, two Churches for the 
Greeks,
 and three Synagogues for the 
Jews.
 In the Year 
1408. Emanuel,
 Emperor of 
Constantinople,
 put it into the hands of the 
Veneti∣ans,
 not able to defend it himself. But in the Year 
1477.
 it was Besieg'd by the 
Turks,
 with an Army of 
30000.
 Men, who after they had Batter'd it for four Months together, were forc'd to raise their Siege, and leave it under the 
Venetian
 Government, till the

Year 
1498. Bajazet
 with an Army of 
150000
 men, forc'd it to a Surrender. However the Arms of St. 
Mark
 remain'd, till it was now last Regain'd by General 
Morosini.


Corinth,
 so call'd from 
Corinthus,
 the Son of 
Pelop
's, was accounted the most Noble and Wealthy City of all 
Greece;
 and by the means of its Situation, it arriv'd to that degree of Splendor and Pride, as to abuse the Embassadors that were sent by the 
Ro∣mans;
 which the Senate took so hainously, that they sent 
Mem∣mius,
 with Orders when he had taken the City, to Level it with the Ground, and to put all the Inhabitants to Sale. 
Memmius
 ac∣cording to his Instructions, set it on Fire; and the mixture of mettals in that dismal Conflagration, produc'd that sort of Brass, call'd 
Corinthian Brass,
 much more esteem'd then Silver or Gold. 
Augustus
 afterwards Rebuilt and Peopl'd it; but it retains nothing of its Pristin glory, being nothing but a heap of Ruines, serving to harbour a small number of People. 
Amurath
 the 
II.
 and 
Maho∣met
 his Son, made it the Seat of their Barbarous Cruelties, and so Ruin'd it, that there are very few Houses to be seen, and those built out of the Ruines of the former Structures. The Fortress that both Commanded and Secur'd it, was call'd 
Acro-Corinth,
 seated upon a high and almost inaccessible Rock, furnish'd with Wells of excellent Spring-Water; and among the rest, the Fountain 
Pirene,
 which was Consecrated to the Muses, the Water being very clear, and most pleasant to the taste.


Misitra,
 was the Ancient 
Sparta,
 or 
Lacedemon,
 so famous in Ancient Story, and when in its Splendor, two Leagues in Com∣pass. This City is divided into four Parts, all distinctly separated one from the other. This was the Habitation of 
Menelaus,
 the Husband of 
Helena,
 who being Ravish'd away by 
Paris,
 occasion'd the Siege and Destruction of 
Troy.
 Here the Laws of 
Lycurgus
 took place; Constitutions contriv'd with that Wisdom and Policy, that their Observance preserv'd the Splendor of this City, for the space of 
880
 Years. It was taken by 
Mahomet
 the 
II.
 in the Year 
1460.
 and 
3200.
 after its first Foundation.


Castel-Nuovo
 is the Capital City of the Province of St. 
Sobba,
 ten days march in Length, and four in Breadth, bounded by 
Bossi∣na
 and 
Dalmatia.
 It was built by 
Tuardus
 King of 
Bossina,
 and is seated upon the Banks of the Canal of 
Cattaro,
 three miles from the mouth of it, and just opposite to the 
Levant Sea,
 about 
800.
 Paces in Compass. It has two Towers in the West side, and one upon the Sea-shoar; but the Walls having been often shaken by

Earthquakes, are neither very strong, nor yet Terrass'd. The Castle of 
Salimanega
 which joyns to the Town, and is built upon a Rock, is commanded by the Mountain of 
Santa Veneranda;
 from whence you may likewise batter the Castle of 
Testagick,
 which is Terrass'd, and built partly upon a Rock, partly upon a Mount of Earth, and serv'd the 
Turks
 for ae Magazine of Powder.


The upper Fortress that goes by the name of 
Gornigrade,
 is 
650
 Paces from the City. Northward; one of the Angles stands upon Earth, the other three upon a Rock. The whole Fortress is not a∣bove 
250
 Paces in Circuit, and might be easily ruin'd by a Battery from the Mountain of 
Sliebi.
 In the Year 
1572.
 the 
Venetians
 having lost it before to 
Ariadene Barbarosso,
 made an Attempt to recover this Place, under the Conduct of General 
Venieri,
 but they met with so many Obstacles, and such considerable Opposition, that they were forc'd to give over the Enterprize, which they never af∣terwards ventur'd any more till this present Year, under the more succesful Conduct of General 
Cornaro.


The onsuing Journal is a Prospect of the last Summer's Conquests under the succesful Banners of the most Serene Republick of 
Venice.
 The particulars of which are from day to day set down, as it may be suppos'd, by the stile of the Original, which is in 
Italian,
 by some great Officers, that were Eyewitnesses of the Success in both Places, and of no small Credit for the truth of the Relation, as being Al∣low'd and Licens'd by 
Public Authority.


As for the 
Negropont,
 which it is thought will be the first En∣terprize of the next Campaigne, if it be not already taken accord∣ing to Report, and the general Expectations, it was anciently call'd 
Abantis,
 afterwards 
Euboea,
 from the name of a Matron of Mas∣culine Courage that govern'd it. This Island may well be said to be the Queen of all the Islands in the 
Archipelago,
 as being in length 
130
 miles, in breadth 
30,
 and in Circuit 
300.
 It lies stretch'd all along to the North upon the Coast of 
Achaia,
 from whence it is divided by a narrow Frith, not above 
50
 Foot over; the chief City is 
Chalcis,
 now 
Negropont,
 joyn'd to the Continent by a Draw-bridg. In so much that some Geographers believe, it was for∣merly a part of the Continent it self, and only separated from it by some Earthquake, to which the Island is subject sometimes. It was formerly subject to the 
Venetians,
 to whom it was assign'd by 
Raba∣nius Carcerius,
 who was Duke of it; but in the Year 
1470.
 it was subdu'd by 
Mahomet
 the 
II.
 with a great slaughter of the Christians. It has a very strong Castle with four Towers, and a well stor'd Arsenal.




And thus we see the haughty Turk run down on every side, chas'd out of 
Hungary,
 expell'd the 
Morea,
 losing Ground in 
Dal∣matia;
 and in a word, the Ottoman Empire, according to all human Reason, hastning to its period. For there is a Spirit of Conduct, Mag∣nanimity and Gallantry, which ranges about the World, and fixes sometimes here, sometimes there, as Destiny designs to turn the scales of Success. And this is the reason that decaying Empires Languish under sloathful and effeminate Princes. A Critical Season which the Prudence and Vigilance of Inferior Dominion always lay hold of, to wrest from the feeble hands of Potentates subjugated to their pleasures, the wrongful Conquests of their Ancestors. As if the Spirit and Vi∣gor of their Fore-fathers were departed from them to their Enemies. Such a conjuncture as this, now luckily fell out at 
Venice,
 which was never better stor'd then now, with Personages not only Illustrious for the antiquity of their Descent, then for their own personal Vertues.


For of the Name and Family of the 
Morosini
 we find in History, no less then Three who were Dukes of 
Venice.


The first was 
Dominico Morosini,
 the 
37th.
 Duke of 
Venice,
 who clear'd the Gulph of the Corsairs of 
Ancona,
 among whom 
Guiscard,
 who was the chief, was taken and hanged: He recover'd 
Pola,
 and 
Parenzo,
 revolted from the Signorie in 
Istria.
 He ador∣ned 
Venice
 with Beautiful Structures, and began the Tower of St. 
Mark.


Next to him was 
Marino Morosini,
 the 
44th.
 Duke of 
Venice;
 in whose time a Colony of Nobility was sent into 
Candy,
 who Built 
Candy.


The third was 
Michele Morosini,
 the 
61st.
 Duke of 
Venice;
 a Person of great Learning and Wisdom; who tho' he lived but a short while, Enacted several good Laws for the benefit of the Republic.


The Family of the 
Cornari
 is likewise very Ancient, and reckon'd into their Number. 
Marco Cornari,
 who reduced the Rebellious 
Candiots
 to their Obedience to the Common Wealth, in the time of 
Urban
 the 
5th.
 Of the Family of 
Venieri,
 was 
Francesco Ve∣nieri, 81st.
 Duke of 
Venice;
 who, tho' the 
Turk
 at the same time, made War upon 
Puglia,
 and the King of 
France
 in 
Florence,
 yet entertained the King of 
Poland
 in 
Venice.
 And 
Sebastian Ve∣nieri,
 the 
86th.
 Duke of 
Venice;
 who was chosen with that unani∣mous consent, that even several of the 
Turks
 themselves, came to kiss his Feet.


To Speak more of their Living Descendants is a labour beyond the task of these few Sheets, which only gives a rough draught of their Great Atchievements, for publick and present Satisfaction; leaving the rest for Histories more Polite and Copious, to render Glorious to Posterity.












map of Greece


MOREA olim PELOPONESUS


By Iohn Seller.














A JOURNAL OF THE FAMOUS 
Venetian Campaigne.




From the Venetian Fleet in the Seas of
 Lepanto 
and
 Patrasso, July 25. 1687.


AFTER some little Heats and Conten∣tions, which redounded much to the Honor of his Excellency, my Lord Ad∣miral, tho' they put some stop to this present Campaign, this Morning with loud Peals of great Guns aboard the whole Fleet, and with most Devout Thanksgivings to the Supreme God of Victory, was so∣lemniz'd the appearance of this day so much wish'd for, which restoring Universal Prattick to our Vessels, and safeguard to our Seas, has brought us that Joy and Consolation, which it is not possible for any Person to comprehend, that does not fo∣ster Sentiments of Christianity in his Heart. After which,

his Excellency made it his Business. After which, his Ex∣cellency betook himself, according to the Dictates of his own Religious Zeal, to return to the God of Mercy, the most Devout Remonstrances of Humiliation, for so mira∣culous a Blessing. So that upon 
Sunday,
 the 20th. of this Instant Month, being attended by all the Chief Commanders at Sea, and by all the young Patritian Nobility, under a most pompous Pavillion he caus'd 
Te Deum
 to be Sung; and the whole Fleet at the same time to acknowledge the sig∣nal Favours of Heaven, to the Confusion of our Infidel Ene∣mies. Thus after their Excellencies had heard the Holy Mass, and received the most Holy Sacrament, they retired every one to their particular Commands.


This necessary Christian Duty, being thus ended, and a Resolution being taken to carry on the Invasions towards the Castle of 
Lepanto
 and 
Patrasso
 to compleat the entire Possession of the 
Morea,
 his Excellency fail'd not in the first place to furnish himself with all sorts of necessary Pro∣vision and Ammunition. He reduc'd the Foot that was to land to about Nine thousand Foot, all sound Men, in sepa∣rate Bodies according to their Nations, under Officers of Valor and Conduct. With these he joyn'd a strong Bo∣dy of Thirteen hundred Horse, and had not sickness very much afflicted the Soldiery, their number would have been much greater.


Having Embark'd all his Forces, he weigh'd and set sail from 
Glimeno,
 the 20th of 
July
 in the Evening, with twenty six Gallies, fourteen Galeots, six Galeasses, Vessels with square Sails, what with Ships, Fly-boats, Pinks, Brigantines, and Tenders, to the number of Eighty Seven. Which Body was under the Command of Captain 
Zaguri.
 The Lighter Vessels, by the help of their Oars, made a shift to leave the Greater Vessels behind, tho' they put forth to Sea many hours after the others had set Sail.


21st. Next Morning the Fleet arriv'd within sight of the Castles, and 
Patrasso,
 having had a fair Wind, and no less prosper'd by the Gales of a Celestial Bene∣diction.


Coming neer the Shore, they discover'd the Enemies Tents pitch'd in great numbers upon a Hill, which over∣looks

the Fortress; and another great Encampment, be∣tween the same Fortress, and the Castle of the 
Morea,
 seated also in a very advantageous place. Now to obtain some understanding of the Enemies design, our Ships coasted along the Shore within Musket shot, at what time we could discern the Enemy running busily to and fro, un∣der the protection of a Breast-work by them erected above a Mile a this and that side 
Patrass,
 making a shew of a great number of Ensigns, and of much Courage and Resolution.


But where the Breast-work ended, there they gave over appearing; Which being observ'd by his Excellency; after he had amus'd 'em for some time longer with his Gallies, he past on to the Shore of 
Rumelia,
 which he saw likewise very strongly Guarded with Soldiers, and such another Breast∣work, and near to the Castle was discover'd another great Encampment.


General 
Coningsmark
 had embark'd himself aboard the General's Gally, which was therefore so desired by his Ex∣cellency, that he might have the more opportunity to con∣fer with him about their manner of Landing.


That, it was foreseen, would be difficult if the 
Otto∣mans,
 were resolv'd to hinder them; because they might do it safely under the protection of their Works. Being therefore so much as they were a head of the rest of the Fleet, they resolv'd to effect it, in the place before men∣tioned, where the Breast-work ended upon the Right side of 
Patrass,
 because they could command it with the Prows of their Gallies.


22d. The next Morning therefore the whole Fleet made an attempt to Land, and first the Galeots and Gallies them∣selves being come to the place first pitch'd upon, the Foreigners first set foot ashore, who were afterwards fol∣lowed by all the rest of the Militia.


The Turks did not appear to oppose them, for that the Rising Ground being pass'd, the other part being all Marshie, they thought it not worth their while to make themselves masters of it, not knowing where to retire, should any disaster befal them. Therefore Marching in sight of our Vessels, they went with a Body of about Three hundred Horse to attack the Right Wing where were

those of 
Brunswick,
 and the Foreigners; who giving them the Liberty to approach, ply'd them so well with their Musket shot, that the Turks were forced to retire, who being pursu'd by the Foreigners left many of their People dead upon the spot, whose Heads became a prey to our own Men.


By this Time the People in the Galeasses disembark'd, and the Ships, and flat bottom'd Vessels being arriv'd, all the rest of the Horse and Foot landed, Three Miles from the Fortress; which could not happen sooner, by reason the Winds happen'd something contrary. The Turks shew'd themselves in good Order upon the Curtins under the Fortress, and were intrench'd upon the Shore after that manner, that they took up two Miles in Front, with a Bat∣tery of two pieces of Cannon.


In the Night, by the favour of the Darkness, the most Excellent 
Sanudo,
 with a Squadron of Eight slender Gallies, pass'd within the Castles, on purpose to destroy the Barks, to the end the Turks might be depriv'd of the Opportu∣nity of transporting their Soldiers out of 
Grecia
 into 
Morea.


The 23d. the Galeasses, and one Pinnace got within Musket shot of the Face of the Battery, and in less than Three Hours with their prow-Cannons beat it down, and in many places ruin'd their Trenches, and with another Pinnace that shot Stones, drave the Turks quite from their post.


The 24th. this Morning which was St. 
Christins
 day, be∣ginning their March again by Break of Day, in regard they had a long way to go, they March'd but slowly, and keeping an exact Order, at what time General 
Coningsmark
 shew'd his great Knowledge in Military Discipline. The Enemy abandoning their Breast-work upon the Coast, and leaving their Tents, began their Approaches nearer and nearer to our Army, making a shew of great Resolution, but soon after turn'd their backs, as if they intended to flee. But the more uncertain their Motions were, so much the less did we alter our March, yet with an Ardent desire, however, to come to handy strokes.




At length, after eighteen hours thus spent, the Barba∣rians approached, and began to Skirmish with a Batalian of the 
Oltramarine's,
 Commanded by Colonel 
Ceclina;
 at what time our Forces embodying, and the Enemy approaching with all their Forces, the Sign of Battel was given, and the Christian Army prepar'd themselses for the so long ex∣perienc'd Tryal of their Valour.


The Turks fir'd very thick with their Muskets upon the 
Oltramarines
 which were upon the Right Wing, and with their Swords in their hands, made a bold Attaque upon their Rear.


But then the Oltramarines being bravely flank'd by the Frisian Horse of the Left Wing, ply'd their Small-shot so nimbly, that the Enemy slacken'd their Fury, and were re∣puls'd with great loss.


Quitting therefore this Attaque, they made another As∣sault upon the Brunswickers in Flank, where intending to have broken in with their Swords in their hands, they met with such a solid and vigorous resistance, that being well mortify'd with the well order'd Volleys of the Muskets, and seeing many of their Men fall dead upon the place, after a close Fight of four hours, maintain'd by our Men, who upon all occasions were still succour'd by the Sclavonians and the Cavalry, they betook themselves to an ignominious flight, being valiantly pursu'd by the Oltramarines, and by the Marquess 
Corbon,
 with his Cavalry. However, General 
Co∣ningsmark
 would not suffer ours to pursue the Enemy very far, for fear of falling into any Embuscado, and because he would not that the Army should break their Order. So that the Turks making haste to their Tents, pull'd up the greatest part, at what time they in the Piazza of 
Patrass
 setting fire to a Magazine of Amunition, joyn'd with the rest, and leaving in a moment all that compass of Ground in our Pos∣session, they all disappear'd. In this Fight, singular was the Conrage and Experienc'd Conduct of General 
Conings∣mark;
 and the valorous Arm of the Prince of 
Turrena
 did great Execution, who being joyned with the Marquess 
Cor∣bon,
 lead the Horse: Nor did the Prince of 
Brunswick
 less generously behave himself, who with his Troops was still in the hottest of the Action. The Death of Colonel 
Ceclina,


shot in the Breast with a Musket-Bullet, is univerfally la∣mented; who being by Nation an Oltramarine, tho' he had lost his Chief Commander, understood so well with so much vigor, to humble the furious Pride of the Muselmen. Of whom there were Five hundred slain upon the place, and 'tis believ'd a great many more were kill'd, in regard of the great number of Tents that were left for want of Owners.


We took five Pieces of Artilery, besides two Pieces of Cannon, which were found planted upon the shore within their Trenches, when at the beginning of the Fight the Ge∣neral order'd the Volunteers to land, on purpose to divert the Enemy. On the other Side we had little loss, in regard we kept the Enemy at a distance with our Muskets. It added also to their greater fear, for that the General in the heat of the Fight, had caused a great number of the Seamen to land, who possessing themselves of the Trench aforesaid, found therein the two fore-mentioned Brass Pieces, and two others at a little distance from thence, which form'd the Battery already spoken of; besides which, the Enemy left behind them six Field-Pieces which they lost in the Conflict. Great was the number of the 
Ottoman
 Colours, which the Chri∣stians brought away as Trophies of their Valor, and that which added to the Glory of their Triumph, was, their taking of three Ensigns with Tayles, besides a very rich Standard guilded; with which the Fringe and Blazon were evident Signs of the Basha-Generalship; of which the Se∣rasquier is depriv'd. His Flight, together with that of the Army, was immediately followed by the Flight of their other Party at 
Rumelia,
 and the abandoning their Tents. And the Night after, his Excellency understanding that the Turks had left the Castle of the 
Morea,
 he turn'd the Prows of his Galleys, and he no sooner came in sight of the place, but he saw some part of the Wall toward the Sea, on 
Greece
 side, blown up by Gun-Powder, and the Castle left under the Dominion of the Venetians, with forty Pieces of Cannon.


The General for all this, would not suffer his wonted heat, for the Good of his Country and Christendem, to cool, but held on his Voyage for 
Lepanto,
 to make the ad∣vantage of his good Fortune during this Consternation of the

Turk: And indeed the Favour of Heaven prosper'd his zea∣lous Designs, for the Barbarians being still more and more seiz'd with 
Panick
-Terror, could not endure the sight of our Vessels; so that seeking their safety in other places, they retreated, and left to the Victorious Venetians the Piazza itself. And thus, to the great wonder of every one, this most Signal Victory was obtained through the Favor of the God of Hosts, with the most Glorious Conquest of four Fortresses in the turning round of one Sun: By which the Public gain'd One hundred and sixty Pieces of Cannon almost all Brass, besides a great quantity of Provisions and Warlike Amunition, together with fourteen Pyrate Barks. So that the most Serene Republic now Commands a most Delicious, Fertile and Spacious Gulph, a Spacious and Rich Country, to the incredible Contempt and Loss of the Persecutors of the Holy Religion and the Christian Faith. 
Carlo Pisani,
 Captain of the condemn'd Persons, is also designed by His Excellency, to take all the Turkish Vessels which he can find in the vast Gulph of 
Lepanto.
 So that after such ma∣ture and timely Provisions, we have no reason but to pro∣mise ourselves from the Assistance of God, for the future, Progresses of most Remarkable Consequence for the Honor of the Christian Armies, and the greater advantage of our Invincible Republic.








From the Fleet, in the Bay of
 Corinth, August 17. 1687.


SO glorious was the Fame of the Valour of the Venetian Armies upon the Overthrow given to the Serasquier in the late Battel, in the Campains of 
Patrass,
 and by the gain∣ing of 
Patrass, Lepanto,
 and two Castles besides, that the Turks, now taught by the fortunate Success of the Christians, are sufficiently convinc'd, that Fortune, which for so long time has favour'd the Ottoman Armies, to the great Oppres∣sion of the Christians, has now forsak'n their Side. After these glorious Acquists, we understand, that 
Kamor,
 Basha of 
Avaruti,
 and 
Gavar,
 Basha of 
Vallona,
 both fell under the Valor of the Venetian Victors, being the Persons who were order'd to guard the Shore of the Continent from this Place to the 
Prevesa;
 and that of an Hundred and twenty Colours which they had, to every one of which belong'd fifty Men, that only three remain'd safe, the rest were all destroy'd.


They reck'n lost of the Ottoman Side, about a thousand slain outright, and above as many more wounded, which dy'd in the hasty flight which the Serasquier made to 
Corinth.
 For the greater Proof of which, there are many Carcasses to be seen upon the Road. Besides a great many which are also found in the Country Houses by our Adventurers, who range the Country to make Slaves of both Sexes, who averr that the Enemy were about Twelve thousand, being recruit∣ed but a little before with Three thousand Soldiers from 
Ne∣gropont. Mustapha
 Basha, who guarded part of 
Rumelia,
 that is to say, the Castle and City of 
Lepanto,
 fled with equal Cowardice, without being pursu'd, and abandoning all, was followed by a few of his own Men, the rest, to the number of Eight thousand, taking the Hill-way, while he with hardly Fifteen hundred, march'd toward 
Salona:
 But that he had not march'd far before he was met by 
Ismael Basha,
 who brought along with him about a thousand Soldiers from 
Salonich,
 who then turn'd back also, and stopp'd two days

March from 
Salona,
 giving out a Report, that the Reason of his Flight was upon a Rumor of the Death of the Serasquier, which happen'd soon after the Fight, but understanding af∣terwards that he was at 
Corinth,
 he departed also from thence, without any hopes of ever being reconcil'd to him again, for fear of proving the fatal Effects of his Anger.


How great the fear of the Serasquier was, may be easily conjectur'd, by his causing part of the Houses of the Fortress to be burnt, so soon as he came to 
Corinth:
 Which Fortress stands upon the top of an Hill, three Miles and more distant from the Sea. He also burnt a good part of the City, to hinder the Christians from taking Possession of it; command∣ing also all the Families of the Turks to depart the 
Morea,
 and hast'ning the flight of those from the places abandon'd; and to facilitate their Motion, leaving the Remainder of his Baggage and his Army at 
Thebes.
 He attributed it very much to his good fortune, that he was not pursu'd by us, as he thought he should have been: which enabled him to save the Remainder that were left him, and those that were spread through the Kingdom.


The foresaid Places were provided with Governors; in 
Patrasso,
 the Signior 
Gerolamo Priuli,
 under the Title of Pro∣veditor Extraordinary; Signor 
Pietro Grioni
 is made Con∣stable; 
Tadio Gradenigo
 was made Proveditor Extraordinary of 
Lepanto,
 and the Marquess of 
Meliluppi
 Constable of the Castle: In the Castle of the 
Morea, Marco Barberigo
 is de∣sign'd for Proveditor, and for Governor of the Castle 
Gero∣nimo Tiepolo:
 In the Castle of 
Rumelia
 was design'd for Pro∣veditor Ordinary 
Aloisio Sagredo,
 and because the Castle of 
Tornese
 is since surrender'd, 
Zorzy Toscarini
 was sent thither to Command it. At the same time, the Places were all suc∣cessively provided of Governors, Chaplains, Physitians, Chyrurgeons, Hospitals, Medicines, and all necessary Pro∣visions for War and Food. There are many Families of the 
Gastuni,
 and of their Ample Territory, which contains an hundred Towns, who desire to be admitted into the holy Faith. To which purpose there is intended a Solemn Office of Baptism, and to perform the Solemnity with peals of Cannon, and with all other Demonstrations, which may serve the more to confound the Ottoman Sect. For this glo∣rious

Conquest, by which was gain'd the Possession of all the 
the Morea,
 all due Thanksgivings were rendered to the God of Victory, with peals of Cannon from the whole Fleet, and in the foresaid places 
Te Deum
 was sung with a general con∣sent. Afterwards the whole Fleet set Sail for the Coasts of 
Corinth,
 whither a small Squadran had been sent before to secure the Position of some places; for because this Gulph is usually very tempestuous, it did not fail to shew its fury at this time, there being no Port for an hundred Miles toge∣ther on the 
Morea
 Side; and on the other Side, only a small Bay very incommodious, and capable to receive but few Vessels.


Upon our approach to the Great Bay of 
Corinth,
 there were some Horses still to be seen, and the Fire was still burn∣ing which the Bassa had set to the Houses. But the Enemy soon disappearing, we understood by the Country People, who came to humble themselves with the Primates of that place, that those of 
Misitra, Caritenae, Drapolizza,
 and other Towns, who had randezvouz'd to one particular Town, that they might march in an intire Body, still stay'd at the Entrance into the 
Morea,
 and were under the Command of 
Mahomet
 Bassa, who stay'd at 
Caritena,
 and had about Two thousand Men; the rest, to the number of Ten thousand Families, being all the Inhabitants of the said deserted Places.


There were found in the City many Pieces of Antiquity, among the rest a Statue of 
Janus.
 We had also the oppor∣tunity in our Voyage, to see in the opposite part of 
Rumelia
 the Mountain of 
Parnassus,
 the Fountain of 
Helicon,
 so much celebrated by the Poets, not far from which there stands a Town which preserves the Name still: And not far from thence stands 
Pindarus,
 now all over Wooddy, the Grandeur of those Ages being all devour'd by Time, and vanish'd.


It was thought fit to send back the said Vessels to the Ca∣stle of the 
Morea,
 and while they were considering what other Important Actions to go upon, they did not forbear to mind one thing of Principal Moment, which was to take a strict view of the Streight, and of the Place itself, as well in or∣der to necessary Deliberations, as to find out a way to pre∣vent the Return, if they should attempt it, of the Turks

into the 
Morea;
 which as it could not be performed but with a strong Force, therefore they set Sail with the whole Fleet to that Station, where they Imbark'd all their Com∣panies of Foot, marching the Cavalry by Land: They also fill'd some of the fourteen Galeots which they took in the Port of 
Lepanto
 with Italian Soldiers, to make use of in con∣junction with the rest. And with all that remain'd with the Cavalry, General 
Coningsmarck,
 when they came to the Place of Business, caus'd the Infantry to be landed, under the Command of a Serjeant Major of Batalia. Thus they possess'd themselves of the City, where they lodg'd them∣selves the best they could, and to the Fortress was dispatch'd Colonel 
Bonomitti,
 with his own and Count 
Verroual
's Com∣pany; who presently set up the glorious Standard of St. 
Mark.
 And there they found many Houses untouch'd, with forty six Pieces of Cannon all Brass, and four of Iron, besides Ammunition and Victuals. Immediately His Excel∣lency dispatch'd away three Galiots to the Castle 
Fornese,
 with Letters to the Aga of that place, inviting him to a Surrender, but severely threatning him if he refus'd, who immediate deliver'd up the Place to our Men, imbarking himself upon a Vessel of 
Ragusa,
 by him freighted for 
Smyrna,
 leaving behind him an Hundred and fifty Turks, who being illuminated by Heaven, resolv'd to be Baptiz'd and follow the True Faith. Upon the Castle they found nine Pieces of Brass Cannon, and twenty of Iron.


Now while it was believ'd that 
Mahomet
 Bassa, with his Forces above-mentioned, was not as yet departed the King∣dom, there was some assurance that laying hold of the Con∣juncture while the Pass was free, he had made the more haste to get out of 
Rumelia,
 and retire to 
Thebes,
 where the Se∣rasquier had his abode, with those Forces which he could retain in their Obedience. But then it was that all the Al∣baneses and Walachians in the Kingdom were in chase of the Ottomans that lagg'd behind, for the most part Women and Children; but the Value was Considerable, of Four thousand of all Sexes and Ages, which they and the Adven∣turers resolv'd to make Slaves, finding them straggling among the Mountains, whither, through the Violence of their Fears, they had made their Escapes. Nor were the Greeks exempt

from the last Severities of the Turks, who, where-ever they pass'd along, by force drave all into Slavery, and carry'd away all the Beasts of Carriage, to carry their Baggage. Many Parties of the 
Albanesi
 ventur'd as far as 
Megara,
 which is the first Main Land without the Isthmus, and at∣tacking the Rear of the Fugitive Enemies, made many Pri∣soners, and gain'd a greater number of large and small Beasts which they brought off with them. Soon after the Desires of General 
Coningsmark
 were accomplished by the arrival of the Ship St. 
Dominic
 at 
Zant,
 whither she was sent to fetch his Wife, and bring her to the Fleet, whither she came, and with her a Convoy of seven Ships, under the Command of 
Zuanne Morosini,
 on the Seventh of this Instant, with the Soldiers aboard, which were landed and joyn'd with the rest, to supply the number of the Sick, which, as it was then reported, were many.


By Letters from the Signior Captain of the Men of War, dated the Last of 
June,
 came Advice, that having shut up the Sultan Ships of the Turkish King, with several other Vessels of the Barbarians, laden with Provisions from 
Constantinople,
 and Land-Soldiers, he kept them there penn'd up, having also met with certain Corsairs which he kept with him, as being bound from the Coast of 
Syria
 with Provisions and Soldiers, and pretending to relieve the Besieged.


As to the disposal of the Churches, made choice of in every one of the Places, conquer'd by the most Serene Republic, they are the fairest of the Moschees, of which there are a very great number.


In 
Patrasso,
 within the Fortress the 
Moschee
 was given to the Franciscan Fryers of the Order of the most holy Concep∣tion, and the Provincial 
Buonanome
 has the Possession of it. And in the, City was given another with the Title of St. 
Andrews
 to the Barefoot Carmelite Fryers.


In 
Lepanto
 the fairest Moschee was Consecrated by the Name of St. 
James,
 and the Solemnity was performed pre∣sently after the gaining of the City. In the Castle of the 
Morea
 another was dedicated to our Lady of Health or Sal∣vation, and a Priest was placed therein. In the Castle os 
Tornese,
 another was dedicated to our Lady of 
Loretto;
 and St. 
Anthony
 of 
Padoua.
 But there was no Chaplain ap∣pointed,

nor any Disposal then made at 
Corinth.
 The two Ships, the St. 
John Baptist,
 and the 
Factor of Zant,
 Master 
Anzolo Michiel,
 are return'd from 
Napoli
 in 
Romania,
 which in the time of the Sickness there, were sent thither to rein∣force that Important City; but there being no need of any Reinforcement, they have return'd the Three hundred Foot which were aboard, tho' they have not prattic allow'd them as yet, because those parts are still suspected.


The Captain Bassa, with his Fleet, suffer'd heavily while his Fleet was infected with the same Distemper, so that he was forc'd to re-enter the 
Dardanels
 to recruit his Vessels almost empty of Men. 
Scio
 and 
Senirna
 are infected with the same Distemper, but the Islands of 
Paris
 and 
Lemnos
 are free.


The Metropolitan of 
Corinth,
 which is a Dignity of great Honor, came to visit the Captain General, with a large Train of Priests of his own Religion; and was re∣ceived with the same Demonstrations of Affection, as the Addresses of so worthy a Prelate were humble and con∣descending, and becoming a Person so greatly esteem'd both in these and other parts.


And indeed, new Subjects come in every day to do Ho∣mage to his Excellency; and to obtain positive Orders not to be molested by the Soldiers or Seamen, to the end they may undisturb'd enjoy those Felicities, which they have so long wish'd for in being freed from the slavery of the Barba∣rians.


Misitra
 still remains to resemble the Ancient 
Sparta,
 rich in Gold and Merchandise, and peopl'd with Twelve thousand Souls. His Excellency has sent thither the Proveditor of 
Zar∣nata Palani,
 with Six thousand 
Mainotts,
 and other Country Men, to compel it to submission by a Siege.


The first fight of the Besiegers brought the Affrighted Enemy to so much complacency, that they hung out a White Flag, and after Hostages given on both sides, they went so far as to resign three principal Members of this Place, to the Supreme Authority of his Excellency, with Letters from their Bassa, that they were ready to abandon the whole Territory, provided they might have passage for themselves,

their Families, and their Baggage. But in regard they had held out to the last gaspings of the whole Kingdom, and thereby had forfeited Compassion, he deny'd their Propo∣sitions; only he was content, to let the Women, Children, and Aged Persons to go; but as for them, they should remain Slaves, with this Liberty to redeem themselves at the price of Two hundred thousand 
Reals;
 leaving them upon refusal of both these Proposals, to shut themselves up within their Walls, from whence it would be afterwards his part to ex∣pel them by force of Arms.


The three Commissioners being thus sent back with the General's Answer, we are in expectation of the Resolution of the Citizens.


Upon the 13th. Instant, his Excellency went with a stout Body of Horse and Foot, to visit the 
Isthmus
 or Neck of Land, between the 
Ionian
 and 
Egean
 Sea, and which joyns the 
Morea
 to the Continent, and march'd as far as the footsteps of the Ancient Walls, which closed up the same, made by the Grecian Emperor, in the year 1413. and demolish'd afterwards by 
Armurath
 the Second, in the year 1424. after∣wards re-edifi'd by the Captain General 
Luigi Loredano,
 who landed the Soldiers of his Fleet, under the Command of 
Bertaldo D' Este,
 by means of whose laborious Toil, as the Historians testifie, and the assistance of Eighty thousand Work∣men, in fifteen days they sinish'd the whole Work, in the year 1463. fortifi'd with One hunderd thirty six Towers, and Three Motes, now dismantled and levell'd, so that no footsteps thereof remain in many places. He also view'd the Fortress call'd 
Acro-Corinto,
 seated in a place of great advantage, which tho' it be plac'd upon a very high Hill, is nevertheless furnish'd with Wells of excellent Water, as also the Fountain 
Pyrene,
 so much celebrated by 
Homer.
 The importance of the Place, and the easiness of it to be made Tenable, induc'd him to believe that it was of necessity to be provided with all things necessary both for Defence and Offence, and requisite Provisions of Victuals; and 
Anzolo Michiel,
 a Gentleman of Discretion, Abilities and Vertue, was design'd extraordinary Proveditor for that place; being also resolv'd not to let slip the remaining part of the Season, without making some other progress in his Conquests, which

will fall either upon 
Negroponte
 or 
Athens,
 yet not so, but that he will take his Measures from the Effects of the Season, and the variety of the Weather, which he may meet with in the Seas of the 
Archipelago,
 and to facilitate his Voyage, the Foot and Horse shall be left at 
Cortuno,
 which shall after∣wards be carry'd to the Coasts of the 
Egean,
 from the other part of the 
Isthmus.


Signor 
Daniel Venier
 dy'd of an Inflammation, which kill'd him in few days; and 
Peter Marcello
 was conditional∣ly order'd to Command his Galley.


The Knight, Sir 
Cittadella
 a 
Padouan,
 comes under Con∣duct, being sent to be Governor of 
Corinth,
 which place will be well Garrison'd.


Many Families in 
Rumelia
 desirous to pass into the 
Morea,
 to withdraw themselves from subjection to the Turks, have made their Applications by their Commissioners to the Captain General, and having had audience, several Barks, and some Gallies have heen order'd for their Tran∣sportation.


There is great sollicitation made to remove with the Fleet, and make a long Voyage to the other streight of the 
Egean,
 so to proceed upon other designs, which are agreed upon to advance the Fame of the Arms of the most Serene Republic.








From the Venetian Fleet, under
 Castle Novo 
in
 Dalmatia, September 16. 1687.


THis most Serene Republic, makes it her Business to mind the Security and Prosperity of all Christendom, and the Holy League, having generously resolv'd to purge the 
Adriatick
 Sea of that pestilent Rabble of 
Corsaires
 of 
Ca∣stel Novo,
 and other adjacent Places, which with their Barks and Pyracies they render impassible, and all the Neighbour∣ing Coasts unsecure for Trade. To which purpose, at the vast expence of her own Treasures, she has rais'd a strong Army in 
Dalmatia,
 under the Command of his Excellency 
Girolamo Cornaro:
 For that those Places being attack'd and reduc'd, which serve as a Sanctuary and Security to those Enemies of the Christian Name, the Triumphant Standard of the Cross will be gloriously advanc'd by the zealous Valour of the Venetian. Thereupon an Enterprize so im∣portant being concluded upon, it was agreed that the Enemy should be attack'd where-ever he should be found. Nor was the Sieur 
Janco
 second to any, a Person of great Courage, and much dreaded by the Turks; who setting out of 
Spalatro
 in company of his Morlacks, and understanding that in the Plains of 
Dunno,
 beyond 
Cettina,
 about Three hundred Turks were got together, went resolutely to fight them; and the Fray being begun, having himself with his Cutlace laid a Turk sprawling upon the ground, believ'd him dead: but the other having a Pistol in his hand, let fly at the Victor and shot him. However, there were kill'd and taken fifty of the Turks by the 
Morlacks,
 with the loss of only two Men; all their Tents and Baggage were also taken.


His Excellency therefore being resolv'd upon his in∣tended Design, took shipping with his whole Army, and after contrary Winds which kept our Fleet thirteen days

at Sea, not without some detriment to the Horse for want of Water and Forrage, our Fleet arriv'd with a propitious Wind, the second of 
September,
 within the Roses over against 
Castle Novo,
 which to the number of a hundred and thirty, or more Sail, made such a Majestic shew of it self, which consider'd together with the Courage of those abroad, strook no ordinary Terror into the Turks: Which was by them made the more manifest, for that they let us sile off our Men within Cannon shot, without so much as firing one Gun at us.


The next day about Six a Clock, our Army landed not above two Miles from the Fortress, and then advancing slowly in good Order toward the same Fortress, and about a Mile from the same, they found some Opposition from the Turks, who being got to the top of a little Hill, and posted in a Church, call'd by the name of 
Santa Veneranda,
 occasion'd a bloody Skirmish. Presently the General dis∣patch'd away Orders to the Auxiliaries, to advance with the Gallies within Cannon shot, and to bring their Guns to bear upon the Enemy, by that means to disloge them, and to hasten their own landing, to reinforce our Men. At the same Instant, the General mounting a Horseback with all the Cavalry, consisting of Four hundred able stout Sol∣diers commanded by the most Illustrious 
Giovanni Loredano,
 appointed by his Excellency Proveditor of the Cavalry in the Camp, and ordering the Oltramarine Militia to land, threw himself personally together with them, into the Place of the Conflict, which lasted for two hours with great obstinacy on the Turks side. But at length the Auxilaries being landed under the protection of the continual firing of the great Guns from the Gallies; and our new Reinforce∣ments being discern'd by the Turks, who surrounded his Excellency in very good Order, the Enemy retir'd toward the place continually skirmishing, and firing upon our Men; who having possess'd themselves of the most advantageous Posts of the said Church, the Marquess of 
Borro,
 Serjeant Major of Battalia, went in the Night time to take a view of an advantageous Post, in a House within Cannon shot of the lower City: where our 
Banditti
 of 
Abruzzo
 being post∣ed, and our paid Foot being entrench'd a little behind to∣gether

with the Auxiliaries, his Excellency commanded two of our Gallies, commanded by 
Ludovic Balbi,
 and 
Benetto Zorzi Querini
 to take two small Vessels grappl'd together, and bring them within shot of the City, which was done not without great difficulty, by reason of the continual firing of the Enemy, tho to no purpose. The same day Eighty Men were kill'd of the Enemy, together with three Aga's, which was told us by a Slave that was taken Prisoner. And of ours five or six were slain, among whom a Knight of 
Malta,
 and some few common Soldiers, with two Knights of 
Malta
 wounded.


The fourth day upon opening the Trenches to advance our Works, our Men found obstinate resistance from the Turks, who having strengthen'd themselves in another House, and entrench'd themselves within half Pistol shot of our people, there happen'd all that day continual firing on both sides, not without some loss of blood, besides, that the great Guns continually plaid upon our Battalians, and did us some mischief. However, the Pinnaces fail'd not to play continually upon the low City with their Bombs, to the considerable damage of the Enemy.


The Fifth day his Excellency observing the Resolution of the Turks, who vigorously maintain'd their Post in the foresaid House, resolv'd to bring two Sacres to dislodge the Enemy from that Post. For the Execution of which design the Guns arriv'd about the 21st. hour, at what time they were mounted, and began their Battery upon the said House, which did not a little scare the Enemy; who having never∣theless secur'd themselves with new Trenches, as also the advantage of a continual Rain and Wind on their side, those advantages not only hinder'd the battering the House, but very much endamag'd our Men, who while they endeavour to keep their Muskets dry, were themselves almost drown'd in the Rain, which fell so excessive that Night, that it was impos∣sible to shrow'd their Arms.


The Fifth day, tho' it continu'd rainy Weather, yet acts of Hostility did not cease for all that, for their was conti∣nual firing of Small-shot on both sides, and continual shoot∣ing, as well from the upper Town, as the Castle with their Cannon, but so ineffectual to us, that we receiv'd little or

no damage, tho' the Turks were tormented by the Bombs of our small Frigats, which the Sieur 
Pietro Duodo,
 having by Order of his Excellency brought within an easie reach of the Town, very much incommoded the Town by the per∣petual firing their Bombs, to the number of five hundred, among which there was one that brought to the ground a part of one of their Moschees, and another fell into one of their great Towers over against the upper Castle, while they landed their Cannon and Mortar Pieces to perfect their Battery.


Upon the 6th. day, the Turks made a shift to advance to our Battery of the two Sacres, which were valiantly de∣fended by our Dragoons in the Post, advanc'd by the 
Brandi Stocchi
 of our Soldiers, upon which day the number was small either of slain or wounded.


The 8th. day, being the Festival of the Blessed Virgin, was design'd by his Excellency to land more Men upon the West side, to the end there might be a Communication between our Men, and to prevent the like between those that were besieg'd in the upper Fortress and the lower. For the Execution of which, the Auxiliary Gallies were commanded by their continual firing to secure our landing, at what time our four Gallies, with the Militia aboard them, with several small Vessels grappl'd together, ad∣vanc'd to the West side, the Proveditor General leading the way with his Feluque. The first that landed were Fif∣teen hundred Dragoons, who were plac'd in the Van, on purpose to take any advantageous Posts, who found certain Houses for shelter near the City, to the succour of whom his Excellency sent a good number of the paid Soldiers of the Galeots, as also a considerable number of the 
Morlacks
 of 
Spalato,
 and 
Chissa.
 At length the Turks secur'd from the frequent Peals, as well of our Auxiliary Gallies, as our own, his Excellency in person causing two Battalions of Infantry to land, the Turks retir'd, leaving the Houses of the City expos'd to Plunder, which consisted of some small quantity of powder'd Flesh, the Truks having carry'd away all the rest into the Fortress. At the same time the 
Maltesi
 and 
Papalines,
 who that day guarded the Post upon the West side, where the Turks were fortifi'd in a certain House,

from whence they had not a little perplex'd our Men, having got over the Trenches with Drums beating, advanc'd to∣ward the Turks, who dismay'd to see the Courage of the Assailants, basely quitted their Posts, which was possess'd by the 
Maltesi,
 who not so content, trarsported by their Courage, attempted to make their way into the City, in the hurly burly and confusion of the Turks, that throng'd into it. Which fell out unfortunately, for that near the City, they met with a numerous Embuscado, where five Horsemen were slain, whose Heads the Turks cut off, and took away their upper red Coats, with the white Cross upon their Breasts, and about twenty more were wounded, besides a good number of their Foot kill'd, as some report sixty, as others seventy.


In the mean time our 
Perastines
 crept down from a little Hillock to the Cavalier of the Fortress, and advanc'd to another Post within Musket shot of the same Forts, in hopes to have cut the Embuscado in pieces, which had so en∣damag'd our Auxiliaries, but the misfortunes of the Rain, which caused great overflowings of Water at that time, would not permit them to make any other attempts, while our Men had all their Fire Arms all over much wet. Only they made a shift to lodge themselves within Musket shot of the City, the 
Perastines
 entrenching themselves near the upper Castle, and the 
Maltesi
 retreating in good Order to the Post, first taken from the Turks.


The 9th. day his Excellency design'd to go in person to re∣view the Post, possess'd by the 
Perastines,
 as also that which com∣manded the upper Castle, and riding a Horseback to that part; the Turks who observ'd it, to shew their Courage, Sally'd out of the Castle, to the number of Four hundred, and at∣tempted to recover the Post which the 
Maltesi
 had gain'd the day before, and then defended by the Marquess of 
Boro,
 Ser∣jeant Major of 
Battalia:
 But they were receiv'd by ours with hail of Musket shot, so that being beaten back, they at∣tempted to win the Post which was kept by the 
Perastines.
 To which purpose with large, Poles in their hands, they advanc'd toward their Trenches: Upon their first Charge the 
Perastines
 were a little disorder'd; but being encouraged by the presence of his Excellency, who imme∣diately

sending a good Body of the said Militia to their Assi∣stance, they forc'd the Enemy to retreat. Our small Frigates also pursu'd their firing into the City and the Lower Castle, with wonderful Effects. That day there was but little Rain, but the same night following it fell with an unspeakable violence.


The Tenth day, his Excellency caus'd two great Cannons of Fifty pound Bullets to be mounted, which, together with two more of Twenty pound, were to batter the Lower For∣tress, but the Rain was so violent that there was no playing of them: However, they were mounted, and upon the Eleventh, at Night, they play'd upon the lower Castle from the West. By this means His Excellency thought to pro∣cure a Parley; to which purpose he sent the Sieur 
Doliza Dicattaro,
 well known to them, who approaching the City in a Feluque, he was answer'd in Musket-language, tho' without any hurt done to any that were in the Felnque.


On the Eleventh, we began to play upon the Enemy with our Battery, and it was our good Fortune with two shot of a Cannon of Fifty pound Bullet to light into their Platform, to the considerable damage of the Enemy. The Enemy made good their Defence with extraordinary Courage, more especially expecting to be reliev'd by the Bassa of 
Azugouina,
 who was approaching to their succour with Four thousand Men; and at this Instant, we are preparing to march forth to meet him and give him Battel; to which purpose His Ex∣cellency also goes in Person, and it is hop'd that our Courage will be such as to beat the Enemy.


Toward the Evening of the Eleventh Day, an Old Wo∣man was taken Prisoner, whom the Turks made use of to send to the Bassa. There was found about her under one of her Breasts, a Letter, wherein the Besieged earnestly be∣sought the Bassa's Relief.


Upon the Twelfth, Letters were brought to His Excel∣lency from a Confident, which set forth the weak Condition of the Bassa, who was not able to muster together above Eight hundred Turks: Which is the more probable, because it comes from a Person of Credit: and a Consident of the Bassa's. There are some that report him not above Four thousand of all that he can scrape together. However,

His Excellency is resolv'd to meet him, tho' 'tis suppos'd the Bassa will not advance forward. This day our Batteries have considerably endamag'd the the lower Castle; beginning to batter the upper parts to take from them their Places of Shelter, and chiefest Offence, which consists in a great Piece of Cannon of Fifty pound Ball, and two Falconets, which play hard upon the Battery. The Turks have this day made many shot to dismount our Battery, but with no suc∣cess. At this Instant His Excellency is gone to the advanc'd Post, to review our Batteries.






From the Venetian Fleet, under
 Castel Nuovo, 
in
 Dalmatia.


THe Siege of 
Castel Nuovo
 continuing with extraordi∣nary vigour on the part of the Venetians, as has been declar'd in the last. Upon the Twelfth day, the Turks shew'd but little Courage, so that ours got ground, and the 
Abruzzesi
 extended their Line with an Intention to encom∣pass the Upper Fortress. In the Night-time about Seventy Christians, Men, Women and Children, that were in the Upper Fortress, render'd themselves, who related that they were very much pester'd by the Carkasses of the Turks, who lay slain in their way, to the number of a hundred, slain in the Skirmishes of the former days: That an hundred and thirty lay wounded in the Castle, and about forty sick, that the wounded perish'd for want of skilful Men to look after them: That the Beigh, or Principal Commander, was slain upon the Eight day by the 
Maltesi:
 That the Governor of the Upper Fortress lay very ill; and that if that day the Rain had not fallen so violently, but that our Men in the pursuit of the Enemy had enter'd the City, the Turks, dis∣may'd with the Isiue of the Conflict, would certainly have left the Gates open in the Consternation of their flight; be∣sides, that the Conduit being broken, they must of necessity

have been forc'd to a Surrender for want of Water, had not the Rain fallen.


The same-Day, His Excellency sent for a Mortar-piece from the West side, in regard the Bombists sent from 
Ve∣nice
 were busied in raising of a New Battery.


This Day appear'd two Deputies from the Common∣wealth of 
Ragusa;
 the one to Congratulate His Excellency for the News of the Conquest of 
Morea,
 the other was sent to the General of 
Malta
 upon the same account.


The Thirteenth we finished our West and East Lines, and joyn'd them together; as for the Turks, they shut themselves up in the City, and there stood upon their De∣fence.


The same Day two Turks were made Slaves, sent from the Bassa of 
Archigouina
 with Circulatory Letters to the Ter∣ritories and Villages adjoyning, with Orders to raise Forces within their Limits; but not a Man was rais'd, under pre∣tence that they had no Men fit for Service.


After Dinner, came to the Camp some of the Principal of Mount 
Nisita,
 in the Sclavonian language, Mount 
Ninick;
 where lye several small Territories confining upon Mount 
Negrini,
 of the Greek Church. They surrender'd themselves wholly to the disposal of the Serene Republic, with all their Coun∣try, two days distant. They left Ten Hostages, and the Chief Heads were rewarded with a Donative of an Hun∣dred 
Checkines.
 They reported that a Turk that was woun∣ded in the last Battel of 
Hungary,
 was by the Prime Visier Ele∣cted Bassa of 
Archigouina,
 who rambles up and down pick∣ing up what Fugitives he can find, to succour this Place; but the Subjects of 
Nisita
 were resolv'd openly to declare for the Republic of 
Venice.
 To which purpose they had re∣quested a Standard; upon which one was given them, they promising within three or four days such a sufficient Number, as should be able to hinder the Passage of the Enemy. For which His Excellency promis'd an Exhibition of a Thou∣sand 
Checkines,
 every time they should rout the Enemy's Forces. In the Night, two Pieces, Fifty Pounders, were desir'd for the Battery against the Roundels, in the midst of the City.




The Fourteenth, two Mortar-Pieces were brought from the West, and a Cannon-shot fell into a 
Palander,
 and wounded two Men, and another fell into the General's 
Caick,
 while it was rowing a Mortar-Piece a-shore, and hurt two of the Rowers. The Turks toward the Sea sent forth seve∣ral Women to fetch Water, which could not be prevented by our Men, by reason of the Assistance which the Enemy gave the Women. At the same time a Turk flew up in the Air, being toss'd up by the breaking of a Bomb. The same day, Advice came, that the Bassa's of 
Arcigouiana
 and 
Albania
 were within four hours March of our Army, with a considerable number of Turks and Christians; so that we stood all the time to our Arms: The Passes were re-inforced with other Companies, and with an Hundred and Twenty 
Zupponi
 that came in the mean time under three Banners; and from those Fortifications were flung about Six hundred Bombs.


The Fifteenth, came Letters to His Excellency from 
Ragusa,
 that the Turks were at a small distance off, and that the next Morning they would Attack the Trenches. There∣upon His Excellellency review'd the Posts; the Batteries were advanc'd to the City, and the half of the Roundels Defence was beat down by the Cannon, being almost laid level, notwithstanding the Walls were two Cubits thick.


At the same time two Men of War were brought from the East part to play upon the Enemy, if they attempted to pass that way: And for the same reason the Auxilaries were brought and planted upon the West side, where our Men had thrown up a Counter-Line. Besides that, they cut down several little Groves, under the Protection of which they might be securely assail'd by the Turks.


Toward the Eighteenth hour, the Turks appear'd, who came to relieve the Place, so soon as they had forc'd their way through the streight Passes which were guarded by our Men; who instead of making that resistance which they ought to have done, abandon'd their Station at the first sight of the Enemy, and retir'd to certain Valleys. The Turks at the same time made long strides towards our Lines upon the West, of which the Count of 
Mutia,
 Serjeant Ma∣jor of Battalia, being advis'd, presently got his Companies in order.




And as soon the Turks with great Fury and loud Cries invested our Trenches; which prov'd much to their Advan∣tage, while the Squadron on the Town-side being terrify'd, without so much as discharging a Musket, began to fly amain. So did the Squadron of Colonel 
Perini,
 being dis∣order'd by the flight of the first; so that the Enemy made themselves Masters of our Works, which they began to ruin. But the Count of 
Mutia
 presently dispatch'd Colonel 
Adel∣man
 with a Squadron of Dragoons, and another of Grana∣deers, and restor'd the Battel. In flew also Colonel 
Conti,
 with his Men, encourag'd by the Squadron of 
Carponese,
 which, without staying for Command, broke in, to the great advantage of the Combat.


The Turks thereupon, try'd with a hasty March, and no longer able to make resistance, after a long Fight, turn'd their backs, and betook themselves to flight. The pursuit was attended with a great slaughter, and they who had let them pass by before, observing the Rout, fell upon their flanks; so that the 
Perinists
 and 
Montenegrini
 much encreased the Havock.


His Excellency rode to the Place of the Conflict, to animate his Men, and to be ready with Relief upon all occasions; nor would he stir, till several Heads and Colours were brought him, with certain Advice of the Victory.


There were above Three hundred Heads to be seen, be∣sides many slain upon the Place; Twelve Colours, and Twelve Slaves, of which one was of 
Castle-Novo,
 who had got out of the Town to solicit the Relief; a Principal Person of 
Scutari,
 very Rich, and one 
Cozzo
 of 
Muster.


His Excellency shew'd the Signals of his Conquest to those of the Upper Fortress, who might well observe the Fight, exposing to their view the Heads that were cut off, the Co∣lours, and part of the Slaves, and gave the Besieged to un∣derstand, that seeing they had no hope of Relief, there Army being routed; and considering the streightness of their own Condition, they ought to submit to the Victorious Arms of the Republick, and s
cease all future fruitless Obstinacy: But the Defendants cutting off all long Preambles, made Answer, It was not yet time, and at the same Instant di∣scharg'd a Volley of Musket-shot.




From the Slaves they understood, that the depos'd Bassa of 
Archigouina
 was Elected Bassa of 
Bossina;
 that he who had exchang'd with him, had only Ten Persons in his Train; that the Remainder, part Christians, part Turks, amounted not to above Four thousand at most; that they both came with a Body of Two thousand severally; and that the Bassa of 
Aroigouina
 was the Person that invested our Men, the Bassa of 
Bossina
 staying behind; and that the Government of 
Ra∣gusa
 had accommodated these Commanders both with Provi∣sions and Money.


But notwithstanding Night came on, the Turks were pur∣su'd by the Militia, among whom the 
Sclavonians
 signaliz'd themselves, who serv'd in the Galleys, the Burghers of 
Spala∣tro, Sebenico
 and 
Trau,
 who were the first that leap'd out of the Redoubts with their. Swords in their hands against the Enemy.


Upon this Victory, which cost little Christian Blood, de∣pended the Conquest of this Place. So that


In the Evening, all the Guns in the Fleet were shot off in Token of Victory, and a Squadron of 
Morlacks
 was sent to re-inforce the advanc'd Posts.


The Sixteenth, His Excellency caus'd 
Te Deum
 to be sung, as a return of Thanks to Heaven; while the Enemy turning their backs, retreated a whole days March from these Parts. Eight Slaves were also brought in, of which one was the Brother of a Captain of a 
Dolcignota
 Galley, and a Colonel of 
Master;
 also two Heads, the one of the 
Giambeck
 of 
Bossina,
 who Commanded a Thousand Persons; the other of a Cap∣tain of 
Retino.


Among the other Heads before-mentioned, that of the Brother of the Slave of 
Scutary
 came to be known. The same day, two of the Cannons which were in the Upper Battery, were remov'd into the Lower, and another Battery was built of two Pieces of Fifty; so that the Place was play'd upon with a Battery of Ten Pieces.


Soon after, His Excellency expos'd the Heads and Stan∣dards a second time, and made a second Summons; but was Answer'd, That so long as the Red Standards were di∣splay'd upon the Walls, it would be a Sign of Hostility;

That it was not a Time for Treaties, and that God would assist the Defendants.


That day the Batteries beat down altogether the Defence of the Roundel, and they raised Bonnets and Lines to sur∣round the Fortress.


A Bomb falling upon some pieces of Timber and Mate∣rials of Earth, reduc'd all to Ashes. Our Militia also on the East-side, by the benefit of the Night, possess'd them∣selves of a House near to the Castle, being a fit place to form a Shelter for Miners. The 
Maltesi
 also having got ground, threw up a Line of Circumvallation to surround the Castle, and as they were making a great round Platform, the Turks sally'd out to hinder them, but were beaten back.


The Fifteenth, a Battery was finish'd of one great Gun of Fifty, and a Cannon of Twenty, and two Mortar∣pieces of Five hundred on the East-side, and began to play upon the Curtin of the City near the Roundel, which open'd a Breach in the solid Wall, but not low enough.


About the middle of the day was brought a Colours, and the Head of one 
Deli,
 a Person of Quality, cut off by one of the Chief of the 
Perastines
 who guarded the advanc'd Posts; and he that was the Messenger said, that the Enemy was very much shatter'd in their flight; that many of our People were at their heels, cutting of those that lagg'd behind and thought to hide themselves. Another Slave said, That the Enemy were above Four thousand, most Men that were forc'd from Provinces afar off; and that the Bassa of 
Bossina,
 with Two hundred Horse only, remain'd to shew his back to his own People. That he was over-rul'd to attack our Men by the Bassa of 
Arcigouina,
 who was the first that with Two hundred Horse enter'd our Trenches, and that in his flight the Bassa of 
Bossina
 was flightly wounded. No more then Eight hundred of our Men enter'd the Battel, and dis∣pers'd so great a Party of the Turks, with the loss of only Four of ours, and Five and twenty wounded.


After Dinner, the Besieged set up Gabions, and pali∣zado'd the Bastion and Roundel, and gave some disturbance to those that assisted at the Battery. But our Men turning two Cannon upon them, the Shot fell among the Gabions,

turn'd them topsie-turvy. and made a great slaughter of the Turks. After that, four Mantelets were set up in places agreed upon, which serv'd for Defence of the Miners, who wrought underneath. All night it Rain'd, and the Turks made a great Salley, in hopes to surprize our Men; and it might have fallen out luckily for them, for our Men began to fly in disorder, and made loud Cries: But that, instead of encouraging the Enemy, rather daunted them; so that be∣lieving they should meet with a numerous Opposition, they retreated without any more to do.


The Eighteenth, the Enemy mounted two Falconets, the one upon the Great Tower toward the Sea, the other upon the Castle of the City; which very much prejudic'd the Camp. But one of our Bombs reveng'd us; for lighting upon a Barrel of Gun-Powder in the Upper Fortress, it did great damage, besides the killing of twenty Persons, Men and Women.


The same day, we had Advice, that the Bassa's before∣mention'd, upon a Muster of their Men, found missing Six hundred thirty five, among which were between Fifteen and Twenty five Persons of Note, for the most part Officers, whose heads were known by the Slaves. Moreover the Bassa of 
Albania
 goes about picking up Soldiers as the other two did, not sparing Persons exempt, to encrease his Number, and try the Fortune of another Combat, resolv'd to do their utmost to relieve the Place, which they believe to be reduc'd to the last Extremity.


Late there came a Bombist, sent by the most Serene Duke of 
Tuscany;
 whereupon Orders were given to get ready new Mortar-pieces. At Night the Turks with a numerous Sally gave us an Alarum, but were valiantly repell'd.


The Nineteenth, a Person of the Greek Church being stopp'd who had been abroad the night before, reported, That the Defendants, seeing the ill success of the Fifteenth Day, believ'd it to be a Design concerted among our For∣ces, not being able to conceive that so great a Power should be so easily routed; but being afterwards certify'd of the Truth of the Fact, they were very much disheartned; yet they remain'd obstinate in their own Defence, and had

made a Circle of Palizadoes, Beams and Faggots round about the Breach.


There were found three Turkish Colours more in the hands of the 
Perastines,
 and a Slave of Quality and Honor, 
Ali Bei.
 Of ours in the Campaigne between kill'd, wound∣ed and sick, there are about six hundred. But the three hundred 
Florentines
 being arriv'd, and those of 
Baraide
 being not far off, the losses of the Camp were sufficiently supply'd.






From the Venetian Camp, under
 Castle Novo 
in
 Dalmatia, September 19. 1687.


THE Turks made more sallies upon the City, shewing very great Courage.


They kill'd several Soldiers, and among others wounded a Knight of 
Malta,
 who dy'd the next day.


Our Men made themselves Masters of divers little Houses adjoyning to the City, still more and more uniting their Lines, striving also to hinder the Communication between the upper Fortress and the City; which they continually plaid upon with their Batteries, and infested with their Bombs; no less diligent in hastening their Mine, tho' that Night they could not do much, by reason of the abundance of Rain that fell.


The 20th. the Florentine Forces arriv'd, Soldiers pick'd and call'd out of the Garrisons of 
Livorn,
 commanded by Signor 
Cancelli
i,
 to the number of Three hundred.


There was also about the same time taken young Lads that belong'd to the City, who reported, that the Turks la∣bour'd continually to fortifie the Breach, and that they de∣sign'd to cast up two Pieces of Fortification, that should with∣stand all Assaults. Whereupon all the Artillery was brought to

bear upon that part to level the Breach, and beat down the Tower.


That Night our Men near rais'd their Works, and cleans'd their Trenches, which the Rain had ruin'd.


21st. They made Ladders to storm the City in seve∣ral places, and weakned the Defence of the Besieged.


A report also ran that 
Soliman Sangiac
 of 
Scutari
 was get∣ing Forces together, to relieve 
Castle Novo.
 Whereupon his Excellency design'd to send several Vessels and Men of War, under the Command of Signor 
Duodo,
 toward 
Dnlcigna,
 a City greatly belov'd by the 
Sangiac,
 on purpose to divert him; but the Time would not permit him.


Thereupon they prosecuted their Mining with more industry then before, to the end they might come at the Foundations of the City, thereby to enlarge the Breach to∣ward the City.


The 22d. was spent in expediting the Men of War, and other Vessels toward 
Dulcigna,
 but the Rains, and contrary Weather would not suffer their departure.


But then the Rumour increasing of the Turks drawing together to relieve the City, they set themselves to raise o∣ther Works, and to finish some Bonnets.


At which time there arriv'd other German Foot, un∣der the Command of Colonel 
Baracter,
 to the number of five hundred in all.


The 23th. they went on finishing their Works, and bring∣ing their Mines to perfection; not ceasing to thunder from their Batteries, which were continually visited by his Ex∣cellency, and his Lieutenant General.


The 24th. the Men of War, and other Vessels set sail for 
Dulcigna;
 at which time the Turks open'd their Gate to∣ward the Sea, which they always kept shut before, by which means they had Water to their own content.


The 25th. a Mine was set to work under the upper Tower, to the end it might fall together with the City: But the suc∣cess was bad by reason of the Opposition of the Enemy, and the Engineer 
Baerbieri
 was wounded in the Head with a Stone; but the Mine toward the City advanc'd to the very sides of the Wall.




About the same time, the Enemy made a sally unexpected∣ly, and Assailing our nearnest Trenches, cut off the Heads of two of our Men, and carry'd away another.


The 26th. the 
Perastines
 made themselves Masters to∣ward the North, of the Turks Magazines, which they made use of instead of an Arsenal, seiz'd upon two Barks that were there, and a Mortar-peice.


The same day they set the Mines to work at the For∣tress, labouring more securely under the protection of 
Mantclets;
 but to no effect, for that the Enemy di∣sturb'd the Workmen with Granado's, and continually throwing down Stones, the Ingineer 
Carnuto
 being wound∣ed first in the hand with a Fuzee, and afterward in the Foot.


While thus nothing of Military Diligence and labour was neglected, his Excellency resolv'd to try what Policy would do, and considering there were great Divisions in the Town, between the Inhabitants, and the Garrison, consisting of many 
Albanese
's;


These 
Albanese
's therefore, the General design'd to per∣swade to leave the Town, by the means of the 
Perastines,
 on purpose to weaken the Enemies Garrisons, and force them to a Surrender, when they should find themselves abandon'd by so considerable a part of their Defendants.


Upon this, two of the Turkish 
Albanesi
 were by the 
Pe∣rastines
 towld forth, upon the General's Parol, that they should receive no injury, who being treated with all civi∣lity, engag'd the rest to depart the Garrison the next Night, to the number of two hundred and twenty.


 the mean time, all diligence was us'd to advance the Mine, but meeting with nothing but Free-stone, the work went on but slowly.


The Turks, however, endeavoured to Countermine it, upon intelligence given them by the Fugitives, but meeting the same Opposition of Free-stone, all their industry was in vain.


Now it was agreed with the 
Albanesi,
 that they should go forth at the great Tower, which looks toward the Sea; whereupon his Excellency imbarking three hundred select Foot upon two Gallies, the 
Brazzana,
 and the 
Achesana,


and himself going aboard a Feluque, he made it his design not only to get out the 
Albanesi,
 but to in∣troduce his own three hundred Men into the Great Tower.


But 'twas impossible for him to bring the 
Albanesi
 to that. For tho' they were willing to leave the City themselves, un∣der pretence that they were deny'd their Pay, they could not be brought to forfeit their Allegiance to the Grand Sig∣nor, by betraying the Place to his Enemies.


Having therefore proceeded so luckily thus far, and the Breaches being sufficiently widen'd, his Excellency resolv'd upon a General Assault, seeing he could so suddenly bring his Mine to perfection.


The 28th. it was agreed upon, that the Assault should be delay'd, by reason of the ill weather, and the continual Rains that fell like a Deluge.


The same day a Florentine Bombist let fly a Bomb into the Great Tower of 
Kernegh
 next the Sea Shore, which lighting upon several Barrels of Powder, sent a great number of Turks into the Air with their Wives and Children.


The 
Perastines
 having accomplish'd their first design, con∣ducted ten more 
Albanesi
 toward the Sea-side, who had let themselves down from a great Tower, and after they had been made much of in the Camp, were put a board with the rest.


Soon after the Weather clearing up, the General in pursuance of his good luck resolv'd upon a general On∣set.


And it was so order'd, that the Auxiliaries with the C
l∣lies, should lie close to the Shore, and play with their Can∣non for several hours together. Also the five Batteries plaid without interruption, Sieur 
Vicenzo Grittie,
 Provedi∣tor of the Artillery, 
Signor di Bucant
 Superintendant, Signior 
Grancesco Maria Scotto,
 and Signor 
Francesco Gonner Ville,
 behaving themselves with extraordinary diligence, and assisting with all their might at so important a Duty.


Signor 
Giovan Battista Calbo,
 Signor 
Pietro Perini,
 Super∣intendent, the 
Oltramarine
 Militia, the 
Perastines,
 and the rest that belong'd to the Post on the North side, with

Lieutenant Colonel 
Canagitti,
 were order'd to assail the City on that side.


On the Breach side were order'd the 
Germans
 under 
Baraitex,
 the 
Florentines,
 and part of the Auxiliary Militia assisted by divers Knights of the Order, and Companies of Dragoons.


Thus the Granadiers being sent before, the Soldiers ran up∣on the Breach, enter'd the great Tower in part demolish'd; but the Houses being destroy'd that were behind, was the reason that they could not thunder upon the Enemy, as they would have done with their small Shot; yet many 
Florentines,
 Lieutenant Colonel 
Satonini,
 and others made their way to the Moschee. But the Turks being fortified in the Houses, kill'd 
Santonini,
 the Captain of the Granadiers, and a great many Souldiers of his Excellenties Guard, the Harquebu∣siers, and many other Florentines, the main Body of the Turks, with their Wives and Children, being got into the Castle of the City, from whence they shot without ceasing.


The Christians having thus lost the best of their Officers upon the Breach, with two Knights of 
Malta,
 and one wounded, it could not be guess'd, whither it were out of fear of some suppos'd Mine, or whither it were by the fall of a Banner set up by the 
Maltesi,
 not only 
Baraiter
's Companies, but the Gentlemen Auxiliaries began to re∣treat.


However, this disorder did not put the more Courage∣ous into any Confusion, but having got the great Tower, with two Pieces of Cannon, and three Patarrs, they kept Possession: the 
Abruzzesi
 having bravely behav'd themselves, in maintaining the Combat, being assisted by the Va∣lour of Signor 
Bori,
 Serjeant Major of Battalia.


Signor 
Giovanni Loredano,
 Signor 
Tranquillo Bolani,
 the Marquess 
Orologio,
 shew'd very great Courage: and all the while his Excellency attended by many Noble Volunteers, and other Adventurers, in all the heat of the Combat took no rest, exposing himself to all danger, and running from Hill to Hill to give out all fitting Orders, and to animate the Assailants, both with his Presence, and his Exhortation.




Signor 
Gramani,
 the Lieutenant General led up to the very brink of the Breach, encourag'd the Men in falling on, and forc'd back the Fugitives.


Also Signor 
Lexio Balbi,
 Governor of 
Cattaro,
 and 
Ber∣nardo Barbaro,
 being near to the 
Prazza
 and the Breach, were punctual at this time of Exigence.


The 29th of 
September,
 a Turk of 
Tabiach
 was taken, who having been in 
Castle Novo,
 was making his escape to his own Country, and reported that there were burnt in the great Tower the day before, by the Barrels of Powder fir'd by the Bomb many Goods of Value, and about One hundred and sixty Persons, Men, Women and Children.


By and by his Excellency discovering the earnest desire of the 
Morlacks,
 and the Levies of the Territories of 
Se∣benico, Trau, Spalatro
 and 
Clissa,
 as also those of 
Cattaro,
 and the 
Montenegrine
 had to enter the Breach, he gave them their Liberty, to which purpose he caus'd the five Batteries to fire, and play upon the Castle, and the great Tower to∣ward the Sea, and the City Houses for a good while, and then let them go on.


They would have enter'd by the great Tower, but that being already won, and maintain'd by the paid Militia, it would not be permitted them, so that they were necessitated to pass on the other side the Breach, where they met with many difficulties in getting down, and were a good while before they could get footing. However, their Courage overcame the difficulty, and they got with three Colours flying into the City; about forty recovering a House, which they got possession of. The rest returning back with their Booty, making the others believe, that they retreated with∣out Walls, as being pursu'd by the Turks, were somewhat disorder'd at the sight, tho' without having damage, only 
Zuranne Marowich,
 Governor of the Men of 
Trau,
 being wounded in the City, with some few of the same Na∣tion; whom nevertheless, the Sieurs 
Balbi, Barbaro
 and 
Gi∣rolamo Bochio, Antonio Bochi,
 and Count 
Francisco
 so pre∣recover'd to their former Courage.


These things thus done, the General resolv'd to send for some Petars to break open the Doors of the Houses, where the Enemy had fortifi'd themselves; and to fill up

the Mores and Trenches with Timber and Bavins, and to Level, to make the Access to the City more easie to the Body of the Army, and to fill the town with Soldiers, to which purpose there was brought together in a short time a vast quantity of Tools and Materials. Toward Evening the Work going busily forward, his Excellency, perswaded some of the Turks, who were in the great Tower toward the Sea, to surrender, upon Condition that they should be sent away to the rest of the 
Albaneses,
 and so to have the Liberty to repair home to their several abodes. Who having thus quitted the great Tower in the Night, our Men took possession of it, and found therein two Pieces of Cannon, one 
Saker,
 and a Standard: All this while our Men made diligent hast with their Timber and Fagots to finish their Works, that they might be able to pass from the Tower of the 
Abruzzesi,
 to the Walls, and so get into the City; wherein the Signors 
Antonio Canel, Alvise de Mula,
 and Count 
Porro,
 Colonel Conductor of the Soldiers in∣troduc'd signaliz'd their industry, together with Lieute∣nant Colonel 
De Termes.


The 30th being the day dedicated to the glorious St. 
Gi∣rolamo,
 Native and Protector of 
Dalmatia,
 it being the plea∣sure of God to restore to the Bosom of Christianity, a place which formerly, through the 
Ottoman
 Power, under the Magnificent Empire of 
Solyman,
 was esteem'd the Ram∣part of 
Turky
 against the Valor of 
Charles
 the Fifth; so it happen'd, that his Excellency being sent with a noble Fleet, and a courageous Army quite reduc'd it, and subdu'd it, to augment the glorious Conquests of the most Serene Republic of 
Venice.


Our Men being thus got into the City, made some Slaves, and set at Liberty several Christians, that had been shut up by force within the Walls of the City. By the Prisoners we were inform'd of the death of 
Kirbasse,
 in the Opposition which was made to our first entring the Breach: which dis∣couraging the hearts and spirits of the rest, they consulted all that Night, what to do, finding it was but meer rash∣ness to think of holding out any longer. Thereup∣on they gave Commission to a Turk to go and fall

at his Excellency's feet, and implore Acts of Huma∣nity.


His Excellency therefore considering, that the Castle was fortifi'd, and which was more, fortifi'd by Nature withal, as being seated upon a high Rock, which it would require a long time to level, the following Articles were agreed upon.


That the Turks with their Families should depart.


That they should have Vessels allow'd to transport them into
 Albania.


That they should take nothing along with them, but such effects as every one should carry off arm'd with Sword and Pistol.


That the Castle with all the Cannon, Standards, Arms, Am∣munition should be deliver'd immediately to his Serene Highness the Duke of
 Venice, 
without any imbezelment, leaving the Rene∣gado's to his Excellencies Discretion.


Sending therefore for some 
Perastine
 Shallops, near to 
Castle Novo
 and drawing up the Soldiers on both sides the way from the Castle to the Sea-side, in the presence of his Excellency with all the Noble Men of 
Venice,
 and some Knights of 
Malta,
 to prevent the Soldiers and 
Morlocks
 from doing any injury to the Turks, they departed with all their Families, the Articles being punctually perform'd without any detriment to any person.


The number of the Enemies, which were in the said Ca∣stle, amounted to near four hundred, what with Old Men, Wounded, and those that were able to bear Arms, a Peo∣ple fierce and warlike, besides about a thousand Women and Children.


The First of 
October,
 the Turks which were in the upper Fortress, mov'd with the Indulgent usage shew'd their Friends, made an Agreement upon the same Conditions, and had their departure so, and with the same Formalities; to the number of about a thousand five hundred Men, Women and Children.


Thus therefore fell to the Patrimony of the Most Serene

Republic, one of the strongest Holds of these Provinces, by the Valour of His Excellency 
Cornaro,
 after it had been some hundreds of years in Possession of the Turks; being now made the Metropolis of 
Arcegouina,
 of which Signior 
Giro∣lamo Donato
 is appointed Governor, who having been Go∣vernor of the City and Island 
Liessia,
 has, in the Employ∣ment of Commissary of the Camp, augmented the Honor of his Name, by his Sedulity in providing Provision for the Camp.






From the Venetian Fleet, near
 Athens, Septemb. 21. 1687.


HAving fetch'd their Compass round about the 
Morea,
 after the surrender of 
Misitra
 at Discretion, and the Ruin of all 
Malvasia
 with Bombs, to let those haughty Turks understand the Power of the Serene Republic, His Ex∣cellency, the Lord Admiral, having rendezvouz'd his Fleet within the Streight of 
Corinth,
 in the Gulph of 
Egena,
 had an earnest desire to put an end to this years Campaigne with the Conquest of the 
Negropont,
 so much by him desir'd; but considering, together with the other Superior Command∣ers and Sea-Captains, who are admitted to Council, not only the difficulties of the Season, far advanc'd in the Year, but the numerous Garrison, of above Five thousand Foot, which guarded that Precinct, and the Opposition which the Sera∣squier might make, with the unanimous consent of the whole Council, the Siege of 
Athens
 was agreed upon, to make way the next Season for the Conquest of the 
Negro∣pont.


Thereupon the Men of War being sent away to this Island in a distinct Squadron, to amuse the Enemy, and draw the Serasquier thither with his Forces, they steer'd directly toward Port 
Draco
 the Twentieth in the Evening, and the next Morning reach'd the Port.




On the Twenty first they landed all their Militia, Horse and Foot, but not so much as one Turk appear'd in the Field; whereupon they pass'd on to 
Athens,
 and made them∣selves Masters of the Town, which is only inhabited by the 
Greeks,
 while the 
Ottomans
 were retir'd into the Upper Enclosure.


His Excellency understanding the strong Situation of the Place, because he would not be constrain'd to ruin it with his Bombs, summon'd the Defendants to a surrender: But the Enemy return'd Answer by word of mouth, That they were resolv'd to hold out.


The Twenty second, two Mortar-pieces of Five hundred, and two Pieces of Cannon of Fifty, with two lesser Guns of Twenty, were landed, which were easily brought to the Batteries that were raising, because the Way was smooth and level, and but six Miles in length.


On the Twenty third, they went on with their Work in raising their Batteries, during which labour, Serjeant Major 
Perez
 of the Regiment of 
Cleuters,
 dy'd the Twenty fourth at Night, of a wound receiv'd by a Musket-Bullet.


The Twenty third, four more great Guns, two of Fifty, and two of Twenty, with two Mortar-pieces, were landed and brought to the Battery.


The Twenty sixth, they began to play with their Bombs upon the Fortress; one of which fell among their Ammuni∣tion, and fir'd a great part of it, to the great terror of the Besieged, whose Defences began to fail them, their Parapets being ruin'd, and their great Guns dismounted.


The twenty seventh, This day the Trenches were open'd in order to make the Approaches, and to advance under the Walls.


The Twenty eighth, towards Evening, through the con∣tinual playing of our Bombs, which fell all into the small Enclosure, there hapen'd another great Fire, which encrea∣sing upon the fuel of the Houses, and the continual playing our Bombs, endur'd so furious all that Day and the next Night, that the Enemy, astonish'd to see their Houses and their Goods consum'd, and their Families burn'd, resolv'd to hang out a white Flag; and with earnest and loud cries toward the Battery of the Super-intendant, Count 
Felice,
 begg'd 'em to

fling no more Bombs; which the Count understanding, caus'd all Hostility to cease. Whereupon General 
Conings∣mark
 gave leave for five Hostages to come forth, who being sent to the Lord Admiral and Captain General, the follow∣ing Capitulations were agreed upon: Which being translated into the Turkish Idiom, one Copy was Sign'd by the Hosta∣ges afore-mentioned, and the other sent to the Fortress for punctual performance.


His Excellency was glad of this Advantage; for tho' the Enclosure were but small, yet it would have cost a great deal of Time, and loss of much Blood, to have Master'd it, by reason of the strength of the Situation.


Moreover it was of great consequence, because it Com∣mands not only a Country of Spacious Extent, but also a Large and Wealthy City lying under it; a Place of great Trade for several sorts of Merchandize that are brought to this Town; and which will therefore, in Time of Peace, bring great Revenue to the Public Treasury.






Porto Lion, 
Septemb.
 29. 1687.


ALi Aga, Kussein Effendi, Kussein Aga, Kazi-Mahomet, Acamet Effendi Poscha,
 Turks, sent by the Comman∣der of 
Athens,
 in the Quality of Hostages, being all toge∣ther in the Admiral Galley, to treat upon Conditions of Surrender with His Excellency Procurator, and Captain General. The Articles were agreed upon in the Form fol∣lowing.


I. 
That as an Act of Gracious Clemency, all the Turks, with their Wives and Children, should be permitted to depart and quit the Enclosure within the space of Five Days, begun this present Day; with liberty to carry forth as many useful Necessaries as every one can be able to carry on his back, Arms only excepted.


II. 
That they shall have leave at
 Noleggio 
to hire Vessels at their own Charges, to carry them to
 Smyrna, 
or where they please.




III. 
That at their departure they shall not put any force upon any Person that is not willing to go along with them, and shall leave all the Slaves behind them of what condition soever.


IV. 
That in case there shall be at present found any want of Water, or any scarcity of Ammunition or Provisions, that then these Articles are to be void and of no effect, and that the Defen∣dants shall run the risco of being compell'd to surrender at Discre∣tion.


The Fourth of 
October,
 the Turks quitted the Place, to the number of Three thousand Souls, of which there were about Five hundred Soldiers, and coming to the Sea-side with what Goods they could carry, were put a-board four Foreign Vessels which they hir'd themselves.


8. 
Ditto.
 Were found in the Castle eighteen great Guns of several sorts; and tho' now it be a heap of Ruins, yet in a short time it may be made a Place of great Strength.


And in regard this Important and Glorious Conquest presages not only to the Most Serene Republic, but to all Christendom far greater Progresses, the City of 
Athens
 being now become Tributary ever since the beginning of this Month to the 
Venetian
 Armies; it will not be amiss to con∣sider the Importance of the Situation, and the present Con∣dition of that Ancient and most Renowned City.


It is situated not far from the Sea-Coasts, in the midst of the Gulph of 
Engia,
 in 
Greece,
 and the Capital City of all 
Attica.
 It is now call'd by the Greeks 
Setine.


 Anciently it had several Names from the several Princes that Reign'd therein, subject more then other to Changes of Govern∣ment. It has a Cittadel built upon a Rock of Free-stone, surrounded with Walls joyn'd together to the Points and Circuit of the Rock, which is about a Thousand and two hundred Paces in compass. Below the Hill are to be seen distinctly the Foundations of another Wall which surrounded almost all the whole City, and render'd it very difficult of access. There, that is in the Cittadel, the Turks inhabit only, who are upon continual Guard against the Surprizes of the corsairs.




In this Enclosure stood a Temple Dedicated 
To the unknown God:
 The Inscription of whose Altar is still to be seen; and tho' the workmanship be very costly for the Marble, yet it serves for no use, either to the Christians or Turks.


The Second part of this City, which is in the middle of the First and Third, is inhabited solely by the Christians: And the Third, which is lower than the two former, con∣tains a most stately Palace of Marble; upon the Gate of which are Ingraven in Greek Characters, certain Words that signifie,


Behold
 Athens! 
formerly the Seat of
 Theseus.


There is also to be seen in 
Athens
 another Structure, the most Beautiful that can be imagin'd, called the 
Pantheon;
 upon the outside of which are engraved the Atchievments of the Greeks.


Among other Miracles of this Sumptuous Building, at the larger Gate are to be seen two Horses cut to the Life; the Workmanstip of 
Prapiteles.


The 
Areopago,
 so much frequented in former Ages, is now reduced to a Monastic Solitude. Nor is there any thing of the Famous 
Academy
 remaining, but only a Greek Iuscription which wishes Travellers a good Journey.


It is thought that the Enclosure of 
Athens
 far exceeds that of 
Prague,
 the Capital City of 
Bohemia.


There are an Infinite number of other Antiquities to be seen; among which the Arsenal of 
Lycurgus,
 after the 
Doric
 Order, where their Arms were stored; the Lanthorn of 
De∣mosthenes;
 the Tower of the Winds, of an Octaginal Figure, of which 
Andronicus Cirestes
 gave the Model; and the Tem∣ple of 
Theseus.


Formerly Learning and Learned Men flourished in high re∣putation in this City: Nevertheless She suffered her Vicissi∣tudes, when in the 39th. 
Olympian, Draco
 instituted those Bloody and Cruel Laws, which were afterwards abrogated and abolished by 
Solon,
 the Fourth wise man of 
Greece,
 all but those against Robbers. He punished Laziness with equal punishment to death. 
Xerxes
 Four Hundred and Fifty Years before the coming of CHRIST having broke through the Streights of Mount 
Olta,
 now called 
Bocca di Lupo,
 or the 
Wolf's Mouth,
 burnt this City, tho' empty of Inhabitants, who at the same time were aboard Two Hundred Vessels at Sea.




From the Reparation of the Walls of this City, the Civil Wars had their Original; which after 
Greece
 was free'd from their Fears by the means of 
Leonidas
 and 
Spartan,
 divided all 
Greece
 into two Parties; while the 
Lacedemonians
 pretended That there ought to be no place without the 
Peloponnesus,
 or 
Morea,
 where the Barbarous Nations might harbour and for∣tify themselves.


Lastly, In the Year Four Hundred and Four (before the birth of CHRIST) after a Fierce and Bloody War of Se∣ven and Twenty Years standing, the Athenians being over∣thrown near to 
Aegos Potamos,
 they became subject to the Spartans.


The Schools of 
Athens
 were the most Famous in the World; and while the City flourished, bred the most Fa∣mous Persons, beyond the Schools of any other City or Na∣tion.


To 
Plato
 Succeeded 
Speussippus;
 to him 
Zenocrates;
 to him 
Zenephon,
 so Famous in War: Then came 
Polemo, Crates, Crantor, Archesilaus,
 who erected the 
Academy;
 whose Learn∣ing was in the midst between the Aristotelics and Platonics. 
Epicurus, Zeno
 the Founder of the Stoics; 
Demosthenes
 the 
Tully
 of 
Greece. Aristotle
 founded the Sect of the Peripatetics, and his Successors were 
Theophrastus, Strato, Lycus, Chryso∣laus, Lacides
 the Cyrenaean, and 
Diogenes,
 who raised the Fame of the 
Stoics
 to their highest Splendor.


The Dukedom of 
Athens
 formerly reckon'd under their Jurisdiction One Hundred Seventy Four Villages or Towns; some of which were equal to many Cities. Now the greatest number lies in the Plain of 
Mesogia,
 which are not a few.


The Air is sharp and clear, and consequently very whole∣som; the Land is watered with most limpid Fountains, so that the Meadows produce all manner of Herbs, as well for Physic as for Sallads, which grew there as in a most Fruitful Garden: It abounds with Groves of Olive Trees, that yield a most perfect Oyl in great quantity, and serve for the use of the 
Grand Signior
's Palace at 
Constantinople.


Of all her Mountains the chiefest is called 
Hymettus,
 which being mighty pleasant and rich in Flowers, produces a most delicious sort of Honey in great quantity, and excells all the Mountains of 
Greece,
 and perhaps of any other Country.


In the series of several Ages, it has been under the Domi∣nion

of several Princes. 
Sylla,
 after a long Siege made him∣self Master of it, and reduced it under the power of the Ro∣mans.


Bajazet
 triumph'd over it, when it was in subjection to 
Aristonicus
 the 
Epicurean
 Philosopher. After that, 
Renizer Acciajali
 was Lord of it, from whom the Venetians won it; but afterwards recovered by the same 
Acciajoli,
 who pos∣sessed at the same time 
Attica
 and 
Boeotia.
 In the Year One Thousand Four Hundred Fifty five, 
Dlahome
 II. besieged it, and sack'd it for want of Relief: Since which time 'till now, it remained all along in the Power of the Ottoman Emperors.


The News of the great Victory was brought upon the the Tenth of 
August
 by a Feluque, which before she came within ken, they knew not what the sight might mean; but when they saw the Ottoman Colours and Standards ex∣posed to view, the People crouded to the Sea-side with shouts of Victory, and immediately the News spreading with the swiftness of the Wind, presently a humming noise of Joy ran through all the Streets, while the People gathered in clusters gave ear to the Speaker, who undertook to give a relation of the Victory, before he knew it himself. By and by the loud Acclamations of 
Long live St.
 Mark, filled all the neigh∣bouring Skie, while the Bells with their brazen Throats pro∣claim'd the joyful tidings to places more remote; and the Vessels in, Harbour discharging their great Guns, with their gladsom terror diffus'd a pleasing Satisfaction into the hearts of the Faithful.


The same night the Most Serene Republick ordered Bon∣fires to be made upon the 
Piazza,
 accompany'd with several Volleys and Peals of small and great Shot for two Evenings together; at both which times was to be seen the Great Steeple, resembling the Castle of 
Babylon,
 with her Head and Shoulders stuck with Lights, resembling an Immense Atlas, bearing upon his bunchy Back another Heaven, adorned with Stars propitious to the desires of the People.


In the Ducal Church was Sung 
Te Deum,
 accompany'd with Music so charming, that it was a difficult thing to judge, whe∣ther Paradise did not congratulate us for the advantages of so great a Victory.


And to shew that this Serene Republic never suffers Great Actions to go unrewarded, nor Valour to be deprived of its

due Recompence. No sooner did the welcom News of so ma∣ny Noble Atchievments reach the Ears of our Senators, to∣gether with the Names of the Commanders and Volunteers, who had been sharers in an Action so renowned, but they vo∣ted a Statue to be erected to the Admiral General 
Francisco Morosini,
 in the Council Chamber of 
Ten,
 with an Inscription in Letters of Gold.


To General 
Coningsmark,
 they ordered his Imployment to be continued for Five Years longer, with a considerable ad∣dition to his Pension, which is at this time above Twenty Four Thousand Ducats a Year.


To the Prince of 
Brumswick
 was sent a fair, large and rich Diamond, of a considerable value. A Sword enchased with Diamonds was sent to the Prince of 
Turena.
 And acknow∣ledgment was made to the Marquiss of 
Corbous,
 by augment∣ing his annual Pension, and declaring him Serjeant Major of 
Battalia.


Medals of Gold were also ordered to several Officers, who signaliz'd their Valour in so important and famous an Enter∣prize.


And for a Conclusion, give me leave to insert a short 
Pa∣negyric
 Presented to General 
Coningsmark,
 by Signior 
Antonio Martinelli;
 thus in English;


To the Most Illustrious, and Most Excellent Lord, Ge∣neral
 Coningsmark: 
Ʋpon the Rout of the Serasquier, and the Conquest of
 Patrasso, 
and the
 Dardanel 
of the
 MOREA.




BRave Hero, with
 Venetian 
Lawrels Crown'd!


How loud thy Glories through the World resound?


Thou but unsheath'st thy Conquering Sword, and streight


The Prostrate
 Turk 
falls tamely at thy Feet.


This the
 Serasquier 
witness'd, bold in Fight,


'Till in thy Looks he saw thy Courage writ:


But then thy Fame Despairing to with-stand,


Quitted the Field to thy
 Supreme Command.


Nor does
 Morea 
won, thy
 Name 
confine,


So fast th'affrighted
 Turks 
their Posts resign;


Too narrow is th'
 Achaian 
Theatre,


'Till at
 Bysantiums 
Walls thy Strength appear:


And that, if my
 Prophetic Muse 
foresee,


Is the next
 Work by Heaven 
Ordain'd for
 Thee.




FINIS.











