The Late K. James's commission to his privateers to ravage, plunder, burn, sink, and destroy all the ships and goods of the people of England, Scotland, and Ireland : with remarks thereupon.
Approx. 8 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 2 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A46462




Wing J155A



ESTC R37009





ocm 16182432




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The Late K. James's commission to his privateers to ravage, plunder, burn, sink, and destroy all the ships and goods of the people of England, Scotland, and Ireland : with remarks thereupon.
James II, King of England, 1633-1701. To our trusty and well-beloved, Captain Patrick Lambert.
1 sheet ([2] p.)   


London :


Printed for P. Smart ...,


1692.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
James --  II, --  King of England, 1633-1701.
Jacobites.
Privateering --  England.
Great Britain --  History --  William and Mary, 1689-1702.
2013-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-11
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-12
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2013-12
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






J155A


R37009


16182432


105001












THE LATE K. James's Commission, TO HIS PRIVATEERS: To Ravage, Plunder, Burn, Sink, and Destroy all the Ships and Goods of the People of 
England, Scotland,
 and 
Ireland. With Remarks thereupon.


James, 
by the Grace of God of
 England, Scotland, 
and
 Ire∣land, 
King, Defender of the Faith,
 &c. 
 
To Our Trusty and Well-Beloved, Captain
 Patrick Lambert.


KNOW ye, That we Reposing Special Trust in your Approved Fidelity and Valour have Assigned, Constituted and Appointed you Commander of the Good 
Frigat
 called the 
Providence;
 and further, We give you full Power and Authority to enter into any 
Port
 or 
River
 of the Kingdoms of 
England, Scotland
 and 
Ire∣land,
 or any 
Territories
 thereunto belonging, and either there or at Sea, to take and apprehend, and in case of any Opposition or Resistance, to 
Sink, Burn,
 or other∣wise 
Destroy
 all 
Ships
 and 
Vessels,
 together with their Goods, Lading, and Merchan∣dizes belonging to the Inhabitants of 
England, Scotland
 and 
Ireland,
 or either of them, together with the Ships, Goods, and Merchandizes of the 
States
 of the 
United Pro∣vinces
 or Their Subjects, and to bring and send up all such Ships and Goods as they shall ta
e in
 some 
Port
 of 
France,
 and to procure the same to be adiudged 
law∣ful Prize
 in the next Court of 
Admiralty,
 established by our 
Dear Brother
 the Most 
Christian King.
 And the 
Tenths
 and other Dues arising out of the said 
Prizes
 are to be paid to 
Thomas Stratford,
 or in his absence to 
Jean Nimport
 of 
Brest,
 or to such other Persons as shall have 
Authority
 from 
Us
 to receive the same.


Given at Our Court at the Castle of St. 
Germains,
 &c.


Signed 
Melfort.




This is the Substance of the Commission.








REMARQUES, 
&c.


THE Passions and Affections of some People are so unaccoun∣table, that it puzles Imaginati∣on to conceive how strong a Zeal can arise from so undeserving a Sub∣ject of their Veneration. For instance, not to Treat untenderly with on the Ru∣ines of Majesty, nor take up Royal Mis∣carriages, to make Reflections on Great∣ness in Distress: The Publication of this following 
Commission,
 of the Late King 
James,
 is not so much intended, as an In∣vective on that unhappy Prince, as to ex∣press our Admiration at the unfathomable Extravagancies of some over-bigotted Zealots in his Favour.


We are all sensible that 'tis the common Ambition of degraded Princes, how just∣ly soever Dethroned, to indeavour their own Restauration. There is a Chance in a Crown, and 'tis an extraordinary Resig∣nation, that can quit the Pretences to Ti∣tles so Great, though never so deserving∣ly Forfeited. We do not therefore at all wonder at the 
Irish
 and 
French
 Army, pre∣pared for his once intended Descent and Invasion of 
England;
 nor the early Naval Preparations of the 
French
 on that Occa∣sion. Such an Expedition on so important an Attempt, carried some little Face of Glory in it. His very Enemies could not deny but such an Enterprize had been an

 Ambition we
 
; and had he suc∣ceeded, he might fairly have written himself 
James
 the Conqueror. But Gen∣tlemen, as bold and gallant Atchieve∣ments, in the Universal Standard of Ho∣nour, carry a great Name; and which true Greatness, possibly, has no occasion to be ashamed of. Nevertheless, there may be those poorer Designs, that instead of being either Great or Glorious, perhaps may carry the vilest and most abject Face, that a much less Character then King 
James
 ought to blush at. As for Example, the foregoing 
Commission.


There you'l find instead of a more war∣rantable Ambition of recovering Three Kingdoms, he poorly descends to grant his Commissions to Privateers to R
fle and Spoil all the Subjects of 
England, Scot∣land
 and 
Ireland,
 indifferently to Burn, Sink and Fire their Vessels, 
&c.
 and all this without respect of Persons, Interests or Religion. The severest Romanist, or most violent Jacobite (without excepti∣on) is to he swept in the common Doom. So that instead of pretending all his for∣mer promis'd Impunity and Tenderness to the People of 
England,
 or instead of Bravely grappling at his Royal Rival in the Imperial Seat, he vilely sumes little less than a common Pyrate, Authorizes the Depredations of the 
English
 Merchants even by the very hands of 
Englishmen.
 This last poor Spirited Meanness must either plainly tell us, that he has utterly renounced all hopes of recovery of his Kingdoms; and so under that Despair he resolves to play at a small Game rather than stand out, (which indeed is the best Title I can give it) and consequent∣ly (like the Famous 
Dionysius
 sumed Pedagogue) when he can Scourge King∣doms no longer, he prepares his lesser Rods for a more humble Tyrannick Lash; or else that forgetting that he ever was a Monarch, and therefore blushing at no∣thing though never so Unprincely, he contents himself with being under Secre∣tary to the 
French
 King, whilst the little 
James
 is but a Subscription to the Grea∣ter 
Lewis.
 The 
French
 King deputes him as his 
Emanuensis
 to Copy Commissions for hi
; and the Contented Receiver o
 that high Favour is paid to officiate in the Trust. It was remarkt of him, that at his first departure from 
England
 upon his Transport from 
Feversham,
 he uttered this Expression. 
That he had rather be a Captain of a Troop of Light Horse under the
 French 
King, than Raign King of
 Eng∣land 
under the Lash and Controul of Parlia∣ments.
 A Captain of a Troop of Horse is no over-high Post. But truely of the two 'tis much the more Honourable than the granting of such Commissions. But indeed all these tend to the aggrandizing o
 
he 
Freech
 King; the poorer the Sub∣jects of 
England,
 the stronger the Grand 
Lewis;
 his inviolable Zeal and Fidelity, therefore to that most Christian (so titled) 
Nero,
 supercedes all other Considerations, and 
(fas aut nefas)
 right or wrong, ho∣nourable or infamous, nothing comes a∣miss that carries the least shadow of service to that darling Idol.


One thing is very Remarkable in the 
Janus
 Faces of King 
James
's Prete
ces. This very Commission found on Board one of the late Prizes, was dated at St. 
Germans,
 the 22d of 
February:
 which (pray observe) bearing date before his intended Invasion; impours this Privateer to enter into any Port or River of 
Eng∣land, Scotland,
 or 
Ireland;
 and commit all those Hostilities of Firing, Sinking, Burning, 
&c.
 All Traders Vessels what∣ever; at the same time that his Declarati∣on, prepared for his Reception in 
Eng∣land,
 intimated all the Affection and Ten∣derness imaginable to the Interests Pro∣perty, and what not, of his Subjects of 
England,
 viz. That he was coming only to recover his own Right, Establish and Restore their Laws and Liberties; and yet at the same time he gave out Com∣missions to Waste, Ruine, and Destroy the most innocent Traders of the King∣dom, possibly no ways interested in the Titles, and Disputes of Princes, in Par∣ties or Causes; but on the contrary only endeavouring a peaceable Acquisition of their Dread, by their Honest Commerce and Industry.










London,
 Printed for 
P. Smart,
 in the 
Poultry,
 1692.









