(EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A46594)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 95069)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1641-1700 ; 716:10)
Marginal notes.
"A list of the first thirty one elder brethren, appointed by this charter": p. 106; Samuel Papys is listed as Master.
Added t.p. on p. [197]: Orders, constitutions, and by-laws ...
Reproduction of original in Huntington Library.
Foundation of this Charter.
Former Char∣ters.
The Ends there∣of.
The Corporation confirmed.
Their Name.
Their Succession perpetual.
Old Rights continued.
New allowed.
To hold Lands,
To plead and be impleaded.
To have, break, and alter their common Seal.
To have a Ma∣ster.
Four Wardens.
Eight Assistants.
Eighteen Elder Brethren.
And a Clerk.
Their first Ma∣ster.
His Deputy and how chosen.
Determination of his Office.
The four first Wardens.
Their Deputies and how chosen.
Determination of their Offices.
The eight first Assistants.
Their Deputies and how chosen.
Their Office for Life.
The eighteen first Elder Brethren.
Their Office for Life.
Their Clerk.
His Deputy and how to be chosen.
Who are younger Brothers.
Time, Manner, and Place, of choosing their Master.
The Masters Oaths.
Duration of the Masters Office.
The Master re∣moveable and how.
And another to be chosen in his room.
The Masters fine for refusing or neglecting to serve.
And how to be raised.
Masters Deputy removeable, and how,
And another to be chosen in his Room.
Duration of the Office of Masters Deputy.
Oath for the Masters Deputy.
Masters Depu∣ty's fine for re∣sing or neglecting to serve.
And how to be raised.
The Choice of the Wardens.
The distinction of Lower and Ʋp∣per Wardens.
Wardens Oaths.
Duration of the Wardens Office.
Wardens Depu∣ty.
Wardens remov∣able and how,
And others to be chosen in their rooms, and lieu.
New Election o Wardens.
New Wardens to act, how and how long.
After Oaths first taken.
Wardens fine for refusing, or neg∣lecting to act when chosen.
Wardens Depu∣ties.
removeable.
And others to be chosen.
With power to act, how, and how long.
After Oaths ta∣ken.
Deputy Wardens fine for neglect.
New choice of Assistants upon deaths or dis∣placings.
Assistants to be sworn.
Assistants Oath.
Assistants Office for Life.
Assistants Duty.
Assistants re∣movable.
And others to be chosen.
With power to act for Life.
After Oaths first taken.
The Assistants fine, for refusing or neglecting to act.
Assistants Depu∣tyes removable.
And others to be chosen.
With power to act for Life.
Ʋpon Oath first first taken.
Assistants De∣puties, their fine for refusing or neglecting to act when chosen.
Elder Brethren.
Removeable.
And others to be chosen.
Elder Brethren new elected to have power to act; how, and how long.
After Oaths taken.
Power of ap∣pointing and displacing all inferiour Offi∣cers,
Power of Ele∣cting and re∣moving Younger Brothers; who and how.
Every Brother to have Power of taking Ap∣prentices; who, and how.
To examine and certifie the Pro∣ficiencies of the Mathematical Children of Christ's Hospi∣tal, and see them bound.
Power of Mi∣nistring Oaths in all Marine Causes, and o∣ther Occasions of the Corpora∣tion.
Power of ap∣pointing all Pi∣lots, and Loads∣men into and out of the River of
To be confirmed by the Lord High Admiral.
To appoint Pi∣lots to all Ali∣ens Ships out of the River of
Power of rate∣ing the Pilo∣tage to all Ali∣ens Ships.
No Master or Pilot to take charge into or out of the
And their par∣ticular know∣ledges on this or that Coast cer∣tified by them.
Lord Admiral to approve of all Masters, Pilots, and Loadsmen.
Twenty Pounds Fine upon all unlicensed Ma∣sters, Pilots,
A Grant of all ancient Profits, Dues,
Loadsmanage and Pilotage, how much.
Primage, how much.
The Precedeing Duties, how to be recovered.
Power of hold∣ing Courts, how, where, and for what.
Their Profits how to be em∣ploy'd.
Without Ac∣compt.
General subject of their debates, and Trust.
Power to make and alter Laws.
Their Laws binding to all within the Ri∣ver of
Proviso about their said Laws.
Infringers of their Laws to be punished, and how.
Ʋses of their Monies arising from Fines, For∣feitures,
Repair of their Houses, and Alms-houses.
Relief of poor Brothers, and their Widdows.
General Chari∣ties.
To hold and dis∣pose of their Revenue with∣out Account.
Their Laws, Fines,
Six Months ab∣sence (saving for sickness) to be punished by Dismission.
The Oaths and subscription en∣joyn'd the Ma∣ster.
Oaths generally enjoyned upon the Wardens, Assistants, El∣der Brethren, and Clerk.
Power to the Master of ad∣minstring them.
Power reserved to the King of displacing any Master, Warden, Elder Brother, or Clerk, and how.
The Master, Wardens, and Assistants,
And therefore to be exempted from all Land Service and contributions thereto.
And from all Assizes, Juries,
Saving in case of Tenures or Admiralty Sessi∣ons.
This exemption nevertheless re∣vocable by an order of Council.
Power to stop all unlicensed Ma∣sters and Pilots, and to licence thereto such as are sufficient; admitting them into the Brother∣hood, and certi∣fying their par∣ticular abilities.
Power to impri∣son or fine un∣licensed Masters or Pilots at di∣scretion.
Our Channels, Sands,
And therefore no Alien to be suf∣fered to sail in any English Ships, unless al∣lowed by this Corporation.
Ʋnder the for∣feiture of five pounds.
A forfeiture up∣on every English Ship carrying an Alien as a Mariner.
Power to punish all Seamen de∣serting their Ships, or muti∣nous.
Power to hear and determine all complaints of Sea-men, Officers,
With the re∣serve of an Ap∣peal to the Lord Admiral, or Judg of the Admiralty.
What shall be reputed an Eng∣lish Ship.
And what a Stranger.
The Master to be always in the Commission of the Peace for
Power (by themselves or their Order) of levying all Fines,
In consideration of the growing Poverty of Sea∣men, they have power of pur∣chaseing in Mortmain to
Without account:
With Power to others to be be∣nefactors to them in Mortmain to that Value.
A Confirmation of all former Grants of Li∣berties, Estates,
With an Exemp∣tion from all Ac∣counts, for any thing clai∣med or done by them, before the Date hereof.
The Lord Mayor of
The 1st. of
The 3d.
13
To erect Sea-Marks.
To License Ma∣riners to row in the
Surrender of the Ballastage by the Lord Ad∣miral.
And Title to the same.
Prays the Granting there∣of to the
Surrenders also the Beaconage and Buoyage.
Declares the Right thereof to be in
Not fully enough express'd in the said Act.
Prays therefore a further confir∣mation, and ex∣planation there∣of.
The Ballastage granted and con∣firmed to the
The Beaconage and Buoyage al∣so confirm'd to the
To enjoy the said Ballastage, Bea∣conage and Buoyage for e∣ver.
With all Fees, Profits,
To hold them in free and common Soccage.
Q.
The Reason for granting the Ballastage to Collonel
The Grant there∣of to Colonel
The Title to the Ballastage dis∣puted between

The Grant of the Ballaststage
All the wast Grounds,
The first Grant, surrendred by the
The Ballastage, regranted to the
What to be ac∣coun
The Ballast of all Vessels pas∣sing between the Bridge of
Grant also of the
To dig, and take up the said
To lay the same, ashore on any Wast-ground, not granted to others.
And upon any Wharfe, agree∣ing with the Owners for the same.
And they only to fell the same.
To enjoy the said Ballastage,
For the Ʋse and benefit of the Poor.
Paying

To have suffici∣ent number of Lighters for ballasting Ships.
Lighters to be Gaged and marked to pre∣vent deceit.
Ballast to be sold at the Rates accusto∣med.
Payment to be made there∣fore within six Tydes, or to pay double.
Gives all Fines set or impos'd, for removal of shelves
How to be re∣cover'd.
How to be re∣cover'd.
The Treasurer, and all Offi∣cers of the Exchecquer, commanded to assist them therein.
To pay the King One third part of all the said Fines upon Oath.

Their Boats and Lighters also not to be press'd.
Except by order of Council.
Acquits them from all Claims of any Lord Admiral for the time to come.
Provision for due payment of
To pay him five pound for e∣very Month, after the rent is due.

The Treasurer and all other: the Officers of the Exchecquer, commanded to assist him there∣in.
Exchecquer to pay
Ballast not to annoy any of the King's Palla∣ces.
Nor to be laid on any Wast-Ground, or Wharfe granted to others.
This Grant to be inroll'd with∣in six Months.
With the Kings Auditor for
Or to forfeit Ten pound for every six Months de∣fault.
Several Lords of the Council, assign'd to hear and redress all complaints about the Ballastage.
Parties offend∣ing their order to suffer Fine and imprison∣ment.
27 Henry 8. Chap. 18.
Officers of the Customs at
Nor searchers at
Or to make good all losses.
This Grant to be renewed and strengthned when and as often as desired.
No Former Grants, nor Errors in Reci∣tal, or Omissions are to hurt this Grant.
The Penal∣ties of
The Penalty of
The Penalty of a
The Penalty of taking or keeping Powder aboard, but at such times and Places.
The Penalty of heating
How Bread Rooms to be dry'd, and the Penalty of not observing the same.
The Penalty of keeping Guns shotted.
The Penalty of firing Guns in the Night time.
The Penalty of
Of not carry∣ing and laying ashore their
Of throwing their
The Penalty of taking in or heaving out
The Penalty of hindring the
The Penalty of any Bro∣thers Petitio∣ning about any general Sea-Cause, without the consent of
Orders for the good Go∣vernment of Sea-men on ship-board.
The Penalty of
Lying on shore without Leave.
Absence from
Drunkenness.
Disobedience.
At the Li∣berty of the
The Penalty of a Seaman's deserting one
The