The Jewes message to their brethern in Holland; and a new letter touching their further proceedings sent from the kingdom of Scotland: with the arrive [sic] of some of them near Aberdeen, in a small ship, whose sails were white cranched sattin, their ropes and tackling silk of the sames colour; and their food on board only rice and pure honey. Also, another letter from Dr. Serarias, to doctor Homes; the rendovouzing of sexteen hundred thousand in the Turks dominions; and threescore thousand come into Europe; the Great Turks sad and fearful dream; and strange miracles performed by the Captain-general of the wandring Israelites; a description of their persons, habits, and weapons; the granting of liberty of conscience to all excepting infidels; a prophecie touching the downfal of Babylon in 66, and the year of reformation for the Gospel to be preached throughout all nations.
Approx. 9 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 4 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A46883




Wing J743



ESTC R220740





99832132




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The Jewes message to their brethern in Holland; and a new letter touching their further proceedings sent from the kingdom of Scotland: with the arrive [sic] of some of them near Aberdeen, in a small ship, whose sails were white cranched sattin, their ropes and tackling silk of the sames colour; and their food on board only rice and pure honey. Also, another letter from Dr. Serarias, to doctor Homes; the rendovouzing of sexteen hundred thousand in the Turks dominions; and threescore thousand come into Europe; the Great Turks sad and fearful dream; and strange miracles performed by the Captain-general of the wandring Israelites; a description of their persons, habits, and weapons; the granting of liberty of conscience to all excepting infidels; a prophecie touching the downfal of Babylon in 66, and the year of reformation for the Gospel to be preached throughout all nations.
[2], 6 p.   


[London] :


printed for George Freeman,


Anno dom. 1665.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Jews --  Turkey --  History --  Early works to 1800.
Turkey --  Ethnic relations --  History --  Early works to 1800.
2013-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-11
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2014-01
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2014-01
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






J743


R220740


99832132


36603












THE Jewes Message TO Their Brethren in HOLLAND; AND A New Letter touching their further Proceedings sent from the Kingdom of 
Scotland:
 With the arrive of some of them near 
Aberdeen,
 in a small Ship, whose Sails were white branched Sattin, their Ropes and Tackling Silk of the same Colour; and their Food on Board only Rice and pure Honey.


Also, another Letter from Dr. Serarias, 
o Doctor 
Homes;
 The Rendevouzing of Sixteen Hundred Thousand in the 
Turks
 Dominions; and Threescore Thou∣sand come into 
Europe;
 The 
Great Turks
 sad and fearful 
Dream;
 and strange Miracles performed by the Cap∣tain-General of the 
Wandring Israelites;
 A Descrip∣tion of their Persons, Habits, and Weapons; the granting of 
Liberty of Conscience
 to all except∣ing 
Infidels;
 A Prophecie touching the Downfal of 
Babylon
 in 66, and the Year of Reformation for the Gospel to be preached throughout all NATIONS.


Printed for 
George Freem
n,
 Anno Dom. 1665.














A New Letter sent from 
Scotland,
 concerning the further Proceedings of the 
JEWS.


SIR,


H
Aving received a more full account of the pro∣ceedings of the 
Jews,
 I shall here present you with such 
Occurrences,
 in this juncture of time, wherein scarce any thing else, is either talkt of, or lookt after, in comparison of them. The whole World we see is out of order, nothing to be expected but Intestine Broils, and whether the Lord will be pleased in the midst of these Combustions to call in his Antient People, and magnifie his Name in them, He onely knoweth. On the 23 of 
October,
 by the foulnesse of the weather and storms, put into 
Aberdeen
 a Ship, from whence she came, 'tis uncertain; but the Professour of that City, of the Tongues and Languages, having Notice thereof, went down unto them, and by their Dis∣course perceived they spoke broken 
Hebrew,
 and bound for 
Am∣sterdam,
 as was intimated by a Letter in 
High-Dutch,
 to have Cor∣respondence with their Brethren (the 
Jews
) there: Which Letter further relates, That there is Sixteen hundred thousand of them together in 
Arabia,
 and that there came into 
Europe
 Six∣ty Thousand more; withall, that they have had many Encoun∣ters with the 
Turks,
 defeating several Bodies, and killing many Thousands, none being able to stand against them. They give Liberty of 
Conscience
 to all, except the 
Turks,
 endeavouring the utter Ruine and Extirpation of them. But for the ship, the Sails thereof are white branched Sattin, and all their Ropes are Silk of the same Colour; and in the Sails was this Inscription in fair Red Characters,


These are of the Ten Tribes of Israel.


Which was to discover them to be 
Jews:
 Their Food on board was onely Rice and Honey: Their Habit [or Cloathing] Black

 Black and Blew. It seems they have sent to most of the chief Cities in the World to their Brethren, to give them Notice of their Proceedings, to the end they may come and joyn with them. The 
Great Turk
 having had a 
Dream,
 that a 
Jew
 had ta∣ken the Crown from his Head, resolved to put all to death within his Dominions; but his Council disswaded him from that 
Bloody Design.
 The 
Jewish
 Host are sai
 to increase daily, and that many of them believe in the true Messias, and that it was the Saviour of the 
World
 that was crucified at 
Jerusalem.


This was sent in a Letter t
 Oxford, 
Dated from
 Scotland, 
Novemb.
 15.
 
The following Letters were s
nt from Dr.
 Ser
rias, 
to Dr.
 Homes, 
Mr.
 Bruce, 
and others.






SIR,


SInce my last of the Proceedings of the 
Israelites,
 We have had Expresses not onely from 
Jeru∣salem,
 but 
Tunnis
 also; That this Year no Carrivan is to go to 
Mecha,
 by reason the City is besieged by the 
Israelites,
 who appear in great Numbers, and are said to be sent by the Ten Tribes to be the Fore-runners:


From 
Jerusalem
 we have received very good News, and likewise many of our Christian Merchants have received the like from 
Alexandria,
 The Particulars of which is, that the Bashaw of 
Alexandria,
 with the King of 
Arabia,
 made use of a Carravan, that is, an Army of Sixty Thousand Men, and marched toward 
Mecha,
 and being within one days Iourney of the Ci∣tie, sent out a Troop to take notice how things were, which Troop having seen this People lying in Tents about the Citie, and hearing that they profest them∣selves to be 
Israelites,
 reported this to the Bashaw who for all that resolved to march on with his Forces and coming within sight of the City, discovered an innu∣merable Multitude of People coming out of their

 Tents. Whereupon the Turks advanced up against them, gave fire, & discharged several Volleys of round shot; but after a little fighting a pannick fear took them and terror seized on them, making them cry out 
Who is able to fight with these People, seeing our Arrows and Shot return back upon our selves.
 So the Turks lea∣ving off fighting, 
eturned Home, and the Israelites into their Tents without pursuing them. This Af∣front caused the Bashaw and King of the Moors, tho∣row-out all Egypt and Arabia, to impose on the Iews in all their Dominions a new Tax five times greater then it was before. And the Bashaw, the better to in∣form himself what this People were sent ten Iews to them who found them to be Israelites, and that they spake 
Hebrew,
 saying, they were sent before to remain at 
Meka
 till the rest of their Brethren came, for that the time was now come, that they should return unto their own Land of their Fore-Fathers, which others had usurped and taken from them. Another Letter saith, that the Commander of 
Meka
 sent 
4
 Troops to oppose them, but not one returned and that divers Ca∣ravans and great Bodies have bin wholly defeated by the said 
Israelites;
 and that twelve thousand Turks coming from a City called 
Metai,
 near 
Meka
 were also routed, and eight thousand slain upon the Place, their own Swords and Muskets turning against themselves. Of the ten Iews that were sent, six re∣mained with their Brethren, and but 
4
 returned to the Turks. As for the great Prophet in 
North-Skilton,
 Doctor 
Collonest
 hath bin at his House in a Town called 
Long-Ditch,
 where he heard these things out of his own Mouth. That in the Year 
1661.
 he medita∣ted on the Scriptures speaking 
 
e 
La
ter Times;




 of the great Multitude: yet withall heard of other 
Jews
 that several of them spake the 
Holy Tongue;
 and that who∣soever goeth to contend with this People in Battel, are presently vanquished, and slein.


They have already possest themselves of several Pla∣ces and Cities, putting all the Inhabitants to the Sword, the 
Jews
 onely excepted. They are a People of a middle stature, their Bodies comely, their Complexions fair: This Party saw no Woman amongst them, nor any other Arms, besides those above-mentioned; their Horses are many, their Attire blew, and their 
Tents
 black. From the aforesaid City of 
Sus,
 the whole Host of them might be plainly and distinctly viewed the whole Week, and might see their Fires and Smoak ascending; but on the Sabbath, neither of both could be discerned throughout the whole Camp, or Host.


Several of them being commanded up to a 
 
 to 
 for a 
Brass-Tamber,
 or 
Trumpet;
 and up∣on the finding it, three times to sound it, and then all Na∣tions to be gathered into one Universal Church: their Leader is of an extraordinary discerning Spirit for no soo∣ner doth he see a Man, but he knows his Mind, and the thoughts of his Heart, treating them with very much hu∣mility and respect. And coming to a 
River
 not Foorda∣ble he consulted with his Officers and unanimously re∣solved to implore the great 
od by Petition and Prayer, to deliver them as he had 
ne their Fore-Fathers, and to shew them some Mira
 to evence them of the truth of the great Messias born of a Virgin, to be the Saviour of the World: whereupon, so great and wonderful a Work was wrought, that the great Waters immediatly divided, as soon as they had ended Prayers, and the whole Army in 
cked over even as it were upon dry Land.




FINIS.







