The present state of Genova with the articles of the treaty of Cession to the French king, and an account of the late actions of the French fleet, before it, and ofthe damages there sustain'd by the bombs and carcasses. To which is added, a letter from the Republick of Genova to the City of Argiers upon that subject.
Leti, Gregorio, 1630-1701.
Approx. 102 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 54 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A47958




Wing L1339



ESTC R217652





99829307




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The present state of Genova with the articles of the treaty of Cession to the French king, and an account of the late actions of the French fleet, before it, and ofthe damages there sustain'd by the bombs and carcasses. To which is added, a letter from the Republick of Genova to the City of Argiers upon that subject.
Leti, Gregorio, 1630-1701.
[2], 103, [1] p.   


London :


printed for Randall Taylor near Stationers-Hall,


1687.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Genoa (Italy) --  History --  1528-1789 --  Early works to 1800.
2013-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-11
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-12
Enrique Valdive
Sampled and proofread
2013-12
Enrique Valdive
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






L1339


R217652


99829307


33744












THE 
Present State
 OF 
GENOƲA,
 WITH THE ARTICLES OF THE Treaty of Cession TO THE FRENCH KING, AND An Account of the late ACTIONS of the 
French
 Fleet, before it, and of the Damages there sustain'd by the Bombs and Carcasses.


To which is added, A LETTER from the Republick of 
Genoua
 to the City of 
Argiers
 upon that Subject.


LONDON:
 Printed for 
Randall Taylor
 near 
Stationers-Hall.
 1687.














THE Present State OF GENOA.




O
F all Countries in the world,
 the Territory of 
GENOA
 seems to be the most abandon∣ed of Nature, but instead thereof, above all others, the most assisted by humane Industry: since among the dry sands of a barren Sea, and the high cliffs of craggy and bare Mountains, men have built one of the stateliest Cities in the Earth, filled it with magnificent Palaces, adorned it with pompous publick Structures, enriched it

 with exquisite Pictures, inestima∣ble Statues, precious Furniture; planted about it the most delight∣full Gardens of 
Europe,
 and in a word, seeing all that can con∣tribute to Pleasure, and support Luxury, is there to be found in abundance: The truth is, he that casts his eyes upon the sumptuous palaces that make the New-street, and that of 
Balbi,
 must confess, that the meanest of them is fit to re∣ceive the Greatest Prince in the World.


The City of 
Genoa
 is so ancient, that it is impossible to trace it to its original; some concluding from conjecture and some allusion of name,
 attribute the foundation thereof to 
Janus,
 tho in all ap∣pearance that name hath been given it by the 
Latins,
 thereby to denote that it is the door of 
Italy.
 But whatever its beginning was, it is certain that in the time of the Commonwealth of 
Rome,


 it was the capital City of 
Liguria
 and under the protection of that Republick, seeing as 
Titus Livius
 reports, 
Genoa
 as an Allie of the 
Romans
 was destroyed by 
Mago
 Admiral of 
Carthage
 and Brother to 
Hannibal,
 during the second Pu∣nick War, and that the Goverment thereof was continued to the Prae∣tor 
Spurius Lucretius,
 that he might rebuild it, and repair the Ha∣ven; which by his diligence he accomplished in the space of a year.


The same 
Livy
 relates that that fickle City with the rest of 
Liguria
 revolted against 
Rome,
 at the time when that Republick having de∣stroyed 
Carthage,
 and subdued 
Africa, Greece,
 and 
Asia,
 was at the highest pitch of grandeur:
 He says that in that defection the 
Ge∣noese
 with Fourty thousand men attacked 
Pisa,
 that the Consul 
Mi∣nutius
 had much adoe to defend it, that the War as being of great dan∣ger

 and importance was managed against them by both the Consuls, that many bloody Battels were fought, in which the 
Ligurians
 had so great advantage, that 
Rome
 in extream consternation, was forced to appoint Prayers and Vows for the publick safety; which shews in what power 
Genoa
 was at that time.


It was at length absolutely re∣duced under the dominion of 
Rome,
 and continued so under the 
Caesars,
 then under the Kings of the 
Herules
 or 
Goths,
 who Pos∣sessed 
Italy;
 and afterwards under the Greek Emperours, and the Exarchs of 
Ravenna;
 But the 
Lom∣bards
 having utterly destroyed the 
Roman
 Empire in 
Italy,
 Assaul∣ted, took and Sackt 
Genoa
 in the year 670. and that City remain∣ed in their hands,
 until 
Charle∣magne
 having overcome 
Didier
 the last King of Lombardy, and made him Prisoner, conquered

 all 
Italy,
 whereof he made 
Pepin
 his Eldest son King, and gave the Government of 
Genoa
 to Count 
Ademar
 his Kinsman, who shortly after in the year 806. commanding the Fleet of which 
Charlemagne
 had made him Admiral, defeated the Saracens at Sea, and after a bloody Battel which he gained upon them in the Island of 
Corsica,
 wherein nevertheless he died, re∣conquered that Island, which by that means was annexed to the State of 
Genoa,
 from which it hath never been separated since.


It is certain that after the Death of 
Charlemagne, Genoa
 and the Island of 
Corsica
 remained under the dominion of the French, of which Count 
Boniface
 was Governour for 
Louis the Debonnaire
 in the year 828. It is also certain that it fell to the share of 
Lotharius,
 eldest son of 
Louis the Debonnaire,
 with the rest of the States of 
Italy,
 and that his Successors peaceably enjoyed

 it; but after the Death of 
Charles the Gross
 which happened in the year 888. the Empire and King∣dom of 
Italy
 were all of a sudden dismembred by the weakness of 
Charles the Simple,
 who was so far from reuniting all that belonged to his Crown, that to the Age of Twenty five years he had several Regents substituted to him with the Title of King.


These Usurpers that they might Peaceably enjoy what was within the Kingdom, shamefully suffered the Empire and the fair flowers of the State without to be invaded, and under their very Nose permit∣ted 
Italy
 to be disputed and rent into pieces by the Wars which 
Louis,
 the Son of 
Bozon
 King of 
Provence
 had against 
Berenger,
 Son of 
Everard
 Duke of 
Frioli,
 who had caused himself to be Pro∣claimed King of 
Italy
 in 
Pavia,
 whilst 
Guy
 Duke of 
Spoleto
 his competitour attempted the

 same thing in 
Padua,
 and so, many Princes having intruded into the States which 
Charlemagne
 had Conquered beyond the Alps, and having successively killed or dis∣possessed one another, 
Genoa,
 as all the rest, fell to him that could first possess it; so that du∣ring the revolution which Provi∣dence was preparing in 
France,
 in favour of 
Hugh Capet,
 the last Kings of the second race having their hands full on't by the affairs of 
Germany,
 and the maintaining their own Crown, divisions in∣creased daily in 
Italy,
 and gave occasion to the 
Saracens
 to make a descent at 
Genoa,
 which they unexpectedly surprised in the year 936. sacked and burnt it, carry∣ing away all that could be put on board their Ships; but they were met betwixt 
Corsica
 and 
Sardinia
 by the Fleet of the 
Genoese
 upon their return from cruising, and were engaged with so bad a success for

 the Infidels, that they were wholly defeated,
 the Slaves re∣taken, and the City reestablished upon its ashes.


After that dismal desolation it continued during the space of 450. years,
 sometimes in an Anarchy, sometimes in a kind of Republican Government, and sometimes un∣der the dominion of several Prin∣ces. At length the People weary of the divisions which these chan∣ges of State caused amongst their chief Citizens,
 resolved to return under the dominion of the Kings of 
France,
 who were become law∣ful Lords of 
Genoa
 from the time that 
Charlemagne
 reckoned it a∣mongst his other Conquests.


The cause of that Revolution was, that in the year 1363. 
Simon Bocca negra
 Duke of 
Genoa
 having been Poisoned, 
Gabriel Adorno
 a Merchant of the faction of the 
Guelphs,
 was chosen to succeed him, and Governed seven

 years, until 
Dominico de Campo Fregozo
 a Merchant of the 
Gibel∣line
 faction, displaced him the 13. of 
August
 1370. and was installed in his place. That was the beginn∣ing of the long Quarrel betwixt the 
Adorno's
 and 
Fregozo's,
 which during the space of 180. years held the City of 
Genoa
 in continual divisions and factions, which ended not but by the extinction of one of these Families, the 
Montaldo's
 and 
Guarco's
 who were very powerful, maintained the 
Fregozo's;
 and 
Antoniot Adorno,
 who having been Elected Duke, ex∣pelled, and restored, in the years 1383. 1390. and 1392. was for the fourth time Master of the Re∣publick in the year 1396. not thinking himself strong enough to maintain his Authority against his powerful Enemies, by the mediation of the Cardinal 
Louis of Fieschi
 and of 
Anthony
 Count of 
Lavagna
 his brother, with the uni∣versal

 consent of all the 
Genoese
 made over to 
Charles
 VI.
 King of 
France,
 and his Successors, the Sovereign Lordship of the Republick, and of all the States that depend on it; the resignation was made by an Authentick Treaty of the 25. of 
October,
 and the 27. of 
November;
 the Arms of 
France
 were set up upon the Gates and the great Tower of the Palace; and in presence of all the People, 
Antoniot Adorno
 delive∣red the Keys of the Gates and the Battoon of Command into the hands of the Kings Ambassadors, which were presently given back to him, as to the Governour for the King: That Treaty was put in execution,
 and afterwards con∣firmed a second time, by all the Orders of the City of 
Genoa
 with 
Charles
 VII. in the year 1458. so that the Kings of 
France
 enjoyed it during an Age and a half,
 un∣til the revolt of 
Andrew Doria


 made it rebel against 
Francis
 the first.


This happened in the year 1528. two years after the impri∣sonment of that more valiant than fortunate King; and after that revolt,
 they settled a kind of Aris∣stocratical Government, which continues to this day, and which according to the model of that of 
Venice,
 admits of none but the Nobles to the administration of publick Affairs.


They chose twelve reformers for making new Laws,
 the first of which was, that the Duke or Doge should continue but two years in office, that his Govern∣ment should expire on the last of 
December.
 And that his authority might be the more stinted, it was added, that he could not be con∣tinued; that after that day he should have no Power; that none of his Name and Family should be chosen immediatly after him, and

 that he himself could not again enter into that dignity till after the expiration of five years; that he be full fifty years of age, and have an allowance of Six thousand Livres a year, reduced since to Four thousand; that after his reign he should be perpetual Pro∣curator of the Republick, if he committed no Fault in his Office; which should be examined by the Syndicks within 8. days after the conclusion of his administration.


The 
Government
 of 
Genoa
 consists of two Councils, the one called the great Council,
 and the other the lit∣tle, in both which the Doge Head of the Republick presides, who, as hath been said, is changed every two years, and hath always for his asses∣sors twelve Senators, eight Procu∣rators, and those who have carried the supream Dignity of Doge.


The great Council
 is made up of all the Nobles of the State in ge∣neral, provided they be present, and

 two and twenty years of age com∣pleat. These Gentlemen are about seven hundred in number, who constitute near an hundred and fifty Noble Familes, some of which are but the branches of others, or adopted into them. In this Coun∣cil properly the Supream power resides, and of that number of se∣ven hundred, the two hundred who constitute the little Council are yearly chosen: and in this manner the Election is made.


A few days before the new year begins, the Doge with the Senators,
 Procurators and the old Doges, assemble the little Council, which by Plurality of voices chuses thir∣ty Nobles whom they look upon to be the best Citizens, most zea∣lous for the publick Good, and in greatest Reputation for probity and honour, which thirty chuse out of the seven hundred Gentle∣men of the great Council, the two hundred who are to make up the

 little Council for the year follow∣ing, which begins the first of 
Ja∣nuary,
 and it happens almost al∣ways that those of the foregoing year are for most part continued, if there be no weighty cause nor se∣cret reasons of State for excluding them; so that it may be said that the choice which at present they make, is onely for supplying the Places of those who are dead or absent, or who have been preferred to more considerable employ∣ments.


I have told you that for presi∣ding in those two Councils, the Doge had for Assessors twelve Se∣nators and eight Procurators: They continue in Office two years, and every Six Months three Senators and two Procurators are substitu∣ted in the Place of those that go out; the Election being performed in this manner.


There is a box called the Semi∣nary, wherein are the names of

 sixscore Gentlemen, of Fourty years of Age at least, in billets; and seeing there are a great many names yearly taken out either for filling the places of Senators, Pro∣curators and sometimes of the Doge; or of those who die, or are taken up about other employ∣ments, the number of these sixscore billets must yearly be made com∣pleat;
 and for that purpose in the beginning of 
June
 the little Council is called; and upon the report made to them of the number that is necessary to fill up the Seminary, every Gentleman of the little Council, proposes a Person fourty years old, whom he judges worthy to be put in, and amongst all those who are proposed, this Council chuses double the number of what is necessary for supplying the num∣ber that is wanting in the box;
 and then that double number chosen by the little Council, is proposed to the great Council of seven hun∣dred,

 which rejects one half and retains the other, whose names are put into the Lottery box. Out of this box every six months five names are taken by hazard, three for Senators, and two for Procurators: so that it may be said that the Government of that Re∣publick depends wholly upon fortune, and that unfortunate merit and the honestest man of the State many times by the caprici∣ousness of obstinate fate lies buri∣ed in obscurity at the bottom of the box.


The same fortune hath some share also in the election of the Doge, but in a different manner, because for the Senators Choice begins and Chance concludes, and for the Doge, Election compleats what Lot began. When the Doge hath finished his two years, the great Council meets, the number of those who compose it is taken, and as many little balls of equal

 bigness are put into a box, of which fifty are gilt, and the rest silvered over; Every one by a little hole through which the hand alone can pass without seeing, takes out one of these balls, and the fifty Gentlemen who have drawn the gilt balls, meet, and by scrutiny chuse twenty persons each Fifty years old at least; and then about those twenty chosen by scrutiny they go to a Vote; and by the Plurality of Voices five of them are rejected, and fifteen retained, who are proposed to the little Council, which out of these fifteen chuse six by the Plu∣rality of voices; And of these six at length proposed to the great Council, he that hath most Voices is 
Doge;
 And it is to be obser∣ved that as the Offices are equally divided betwixt the Ancient and new Nobility, so the 
Doge
 is taken alternatly out of both, so that if he be to day named from amongst the

 ancient Nobility, two years after he will be taken out of the new, and so successively.


The 
Doge
 with the twelve Senators represents the Prince, and enjoys the Supream autho∣rity; He can do all that he is not expresly prohibited to do by law; with them he judges Suits betwixt Parties, or empowers others to judge, and can even rescind Testaments and Contracts.


With the Senators and Procu∣rators, he administers the affairs of State, the Exchequer, Publick Revenues, and those things which by the Laws are referred to the cognizance of the Colledg of Pro∣curators.


One of the great Prerogatives of the 
Doge,
 is the right that he hath of making the Propositions to the Council, which the 
Doge
 of 
Venice
 hath not; that right gives of him a powerful Authority,
 because if he perceive that the dispositions

 of the Council are not favourable to the matter in deliberation, he interrupts it, and brings another affair upon the Stage. It is he that gives Audiences, and or∣ders them according to the pre∣sence or absence of the friends of those whom he intends to favour or cross, chusing proper times and junctures to make them miscarry or succeed: and seeing he can propose the same affair three times, when he perceives some votes wanting, he so dextrously insinuates his intentions to the Council, that he always brings about some voices for obtaining the thing he intends.


Heretofore the Senators made use of the right which they had of proposing twice a month, and employed it for the service of their friends,
 who could not obtain a favourable Audience of the 
Doge:
 but whether it be that the register of Priviledges hath been supprest,

 or that the Power of the Princes naturally advances in growth by the flattery or easy compliance of the rest, for some years no Senator hath made use of that Priviledg; a dangerous change and favoura∣ble to those who aspire to that chief dignity; but the People and Nobles who are not in a condition of attaining to that, suffer it with extream discontent, yet dare not speak of it, for fear of an exclusion, and of being reckoned turbulent Persons who are better pleased with novelty than Justice; so that by a cowardly silence they are fain to purchase a share in the Go∣vernment.


Weighty affairs are not resolved upon by the 
Doge
 and by these two Colledges; but for determi∣ning them the little Council is cal∣led; and when they are of great importance, the whole great Council meets, and when either of the two assemble, it must be in

 Presence of five Persons who have the Title of Conservators of the Laws,
 and whose office is to take heed that nothing be Acted con∣trary to the Laws of the State.


There is another Magistracy consisting of seven Persons, called the Inquisitors of the State,
 which are as a Sentinel, to observe the dangers of the Republick, Factions, Conspiracies, and eve∣ry thing that may be committed against the repose and tranquillity of the People: six others have the care of those things that relate to War,
 five have the oversight of the Corn, five of the Galleys, five of the Shipping, five of the Walls, Harbours, Aqueducts and high Ways, and five more of the Mar∣kets and Provisions.


The Inquisitors of the State, whom I just now mentioned, have not onely the care of the Publick Peace; but they have an Eye also over the conduct of Forreign Mi∣nisters,

 and keep correspondences in the Courts of other Princes, where they entertain Spies who are not suspected, that give them intelligence not only of Intrigues that may concern their State, but of the conduct also of their own Ministers. The 
English, Venetians, Dutch,
 and 
Florentines
 have Consuls at 
Genoa
 for their Traffick, who give advice of the Affairs that may concern the States of their Masters, as 
Mon∣sieur Compan
 was there for 
France;
 but 
Spain
 kept an Ambassadour there for encouraging their Party, who of late hath been changed into a Resident or Envoy; such was 
Villagarcia
 at present Am∣bassadour at 
Venice.
 His Con∣duct was very grateful to the Republick, and 
Coloma
 who suc∣ceeded him hath not found the same Civilities, not onely by the refusal of the Honours that were rendered to his Predecessour, but

 also by an accident which de∣serves to be known, and which I may very well take notice of by the by in this place.


The Governour of 
Milan
 up∣on the complaint of the Patron of a Bark of 
Final,
 a Creditor to some 
Genoese,
 against whom he could not have Justice from the Senat, caused all the effects be∣longing to the Subjects of the Republick to be sequestrated; (for this is the way by which the 
Spaniards
 do themselves Justice) 
Coloma
 wrote to 
Spain
 to justifie the Sequestration;
 But the 
Ge∣noese
 stop'd the Courier without the Gates, and having opened his Packet, suppressed his Let∣ters, and counterfeited others in their place, which the Courier carried to 
Spain
 as sent from 
Co∣loma.
 That is no difficult thing for them to do, because they al∣ways entertain a Man skilful in counterfeiting all sorts of Wri∣ting,

 whom they use upon oc∣casion. He whom they have at present, is called 
Montiar∣din,
 a Prisoner in the Tower of the Palace for many forge∣ries he had done for private Persons; and he who rendered the same Office to the Repub∣lick before him, was one named 
Caracciola
 who fled upon some discontents that he received; so that when they have a mind to undo any Man, they make use of such Forgeries, upon which they cause those who displease them to be arrested and clap'd up into Prison for several years, and that without any form of Justice; but by a formality of Matchiavilian Policy, which they call 
est informata conscientia.
 To return then again to 
Coloma,
 the forged Packet being come into 
Spain,
 it was believed to be his, and Orders were presently di∣spatched to discharge the Seque∣stration.

 The Governour of 
Mi∣lan
 incensed against 
Coloma,
 whom he thought to be the real Au∣thor of that Release, set so many Engines at work against him, that he hath got him to be re∣called; and that unfortunate Minister could never discover the Cheat till he had lost his place at 
Genoa
 and his Credit at Court, where the 
Genoese
 are still so cunning as to render him su∣spected of discovering the secrets of his Residence to 
Monsieur de Saint Olon
 Envoy of 
France.


The Protectors of the House or Bank of St. 
George,
 make a∣nother Magistracy, or particular Court. It is a kind of Body independent of the Republick, and as a State within a State. This Bank which is governed by very laudable Constitutions, owes its Original to the publick neces∣sities. It is a sacred depost of all the Wealth of the People, and

 in this manner it was establish∣ed. The Treasure of the State having been exhausted by long and continual Wars;
 it was re∣solved to borrow considerable sums of Money, and to engage for them the Revenues of the publick Impositions: so that in stead of assigning, as is usual in 
France,
 payments upon the duties of the Town, 
Genoa
 made over the duties themselves and other Rights to their Creditors, to the end they might receive them and reimburse themselves with their own hands. To faci∣litate the execution of this, they were allowed to form amongst themselves a Council of four hundred Directors, to take out of this Council a Magistrate,
 eight Protectors and other infe∣riour Officers, who take care to bring into the publick stock of St. 
George
 the Impositions assign∣ed, and to make the distribu∣tion

 of them amongst the Cre∣ditors of the Republick accord∣ing to their several Debts, with power to judg Sovereignly ac∣cording to the Laws of the State, all Suits Civil and Criminal that arise upon that account, and the mutual Credit betwixt the Re∣publick and that Bank is so pun∣ctually observed, that what ne∣cessity soever the State hath been reduced to, it was never propo∣sed to meddle with these Sacred Revenues, and that the most Criminal Rebels, and Strangers in War with the Republick have alwayes been regularly payed the interest of their principal. A wise and politick Maxim that cannot be too much commended, and which hath so well main∣tained that Bank, that the Money not onely of all the private 
Ge∣noese,
 but also of an infinite number of Strangers has been put into it, and that its Money

 and Credit are inexhaustible. So true it is that publick Purses as well as private, cannot subsist but by a long experienced Inte∣grity and Justice, and that when a Prince can once persuade his people of this honesty, all mens Coffers will open freely of themselves, when necessities do urge.


Vast is the Riches which the 
Genoese
 have heaped up during a long Peace, and the continual good success of a well-setled Com∣merce. Their wealth is proud in outward appearance, and their luxury prodigious; but that Re∣publick is far more wealthy than strong, far more haughty than valiant, and it is easier to subdue it, than to make it a sincere Friend; because that people may become good and useful Sub∣jects, but they will always be jealous and unsincere Neigh∣bours. Poverty made them in∣dustrious,

 Labour rendered them powerful and victorious at Sea; that Power settled their great Commerce, which brought them Wealth, and this introduced Lu∣xury, Licentiousness and the ef∣feminacy of Peace, wherein their dastardized Vertue hath for a long time languished. Their care is to swell their Revenues, their amusement and diversion to rear stately Palaces, and their delight to plant sumptuous Gardens, more fit for the reception of Kings, than of Merchants and Sea∣faring Men. Nevertheless whilst the Subjects increase daily in Riches, the body Politick decays, its Dignity declines, and all its Grandeur at present consists in the pompous Attire, wherewith that people set off their 
Doge,
 and the imaginary pretensions that make them vie, if they could, with Crowned Heads, in all the Courts of 
Europe.




Notwithstanding the prodigi∣ous wealth of the Citizens, yet the constant Revenue of the Repub∣lick, exceeds not eight hundred thousand Crowns a year. The truth is it might be improved to more, if the Governours were so faithful as not to employ to their private uses part of that which is imposed for publick necessities.


Upon that Revenue the Re∣publick entertains three thousand Foot in constant pay, who in time of Peace are sufficient to garrison the places not onely of the main Land, but also of the Island of 
Corsica.


The next Charge of the Re∣publick, is the constant main∣taining of six Galleys, which a∣mounts to ten thousand Crowns a year a piece. They have since armed four new ones, but the fund for maintaining them is set∣led upon extraordinary imposi∣tions.

 The two Residents which they entertain in 
France
 and 
Spain
 cost them twelve thousand Crowns a year; but the greatest charge is employed in the main∣taining of two 
Rota
's or Courts of Justice, the Civil and Crimi∣nal, their Chancellours, Secreta∣ries or Clarks, Judges of the Sea-coasts and Isle of 
Corsica,
 Officers and other inferiour Ministers of Justice, who, as in other States, are of a prodigious number, a grievance to the people, and an abuse that cannot be too much reformed.


The remaining part of the Revenue is employed for the charges of forein Ministers, and paying the interest of bor∣rowed Money put into their Chambers, such as the Chamber of St. 
John Baptist,
 and the Cham∣ber of St. 
Bernard,
 which are much like to the Chamber of the City of 
London;
 And all

 these Charges being defrayed, if any surplus remain, it is divided amongst the 
Doge
 and the more powerful Senators and Nobles, who so order matters by their secret Intrigues and close Combi∣nations that they always govern the Republick successfully, and impropriate to themselves the Places and Offices, to the exclu∣sion of all the rest.


Besides the vast Wealth that renders the Capital one of the richest Cities of 
Europe;
 The people have been so industrious in cultivating their Lands, that they enrich the Inhabitants by the plentiful crops of Corn, Fruit, Oil and Wine, which both the 
Riviera
's produce; for so they call the Coasts of 
Liguria
 to the East and West of the City of 
Genoa.


The truth is, to the West-side the Territories alone of 
Dian, Porto Moriso
 and 
Vintimiglia,
 in

 good years yield above four hundred thousand Tun of these sweet and precious Oils, which are the delights of the 
North,
 and the provision of 
Italy,
 so that one year with another the profit of them is valued at eight hundred thousand Pistols a a year.


The prodigious plenty of Ci∣trons,
 Limons and Oranges which are yearly gathered in the Ter∣ritory of 
San-Remo,
 is greater than can be believed: 
England
 and 
Holland
 load whole Fleets with them; the 
Lombards
 buy them, they are transported into 
Germany,
 and an infinite number of Families live and grow rich by the sale onely of the Flowers. They who coast along the shore by these delicious Forrests of Ci∣tron and Limon-trees, have not onely their Eyes diverted by the surprising prospect of a verdure always fresh, and agreeably ming∣led

 with the 
Or
 and 
Argent
 of the Fruit and Flowers, but a breeze from the Land conveys to them also so fragrant a smell, that it would seem Nature had there summoned together all her Per∣fumes for the delight of Tra∣vellers.


The Muscat Wines which grow in the Territory of 
Taggia,
 are so esteemed all over 
Italy,
 and especially at 
Rome,
 that they are the dainties of the most de∣licate Tables, and that rich Vil∣lage is filled with wealthy 
Con∣tadini,
 who shew the vast Estates which their Forefathers have rai∣sed onely from their Grapes and Raisins.


On the same 
Riviera
 to the West are 
Sestry di Ponente
 and 
Veltry
 Colonies of rich Mer∣chants, who by the Trade of 
Spain
 and 
America
 have got pro∣digious Wealth; and at 
Vel∣try
 are those Paper-Mills which

 make the finest and whitest Paper of 
Europe.


Aranza,
 a small inconsiderable Borough sometime ago had got into so vast a Trade, that there were no less than threescore Mer∣chant Ships that belonged to it, and plied the Trade of 
Africa,
 the 
Levant
 and 
Spain.
 The truth is, the 
Corsaires
 of 
Barbary
 having disturbed their Traffick, their Fleet hath been diminished, and reduced to a small number of Vessels; so that at present they have no more than ten or twelve Ships from forty to sixty pieces of Cannon, wherewith they fol∣low their Traffick.


The rest of the 
Riviera
 to the Westward lying nearer the City, is destined more for pleasure than profit; for there it is that the rich 
Genoeses
 have built their Country Houses, where they spend the pleasant time of the Summer and Autumn: And

 there are so many Palaces and de∣lightful Gardens to be seen there, that a great Cardinal speaking of St. 
Peter d' Arenes,
 of its situation, and the magnificence of its buildings, said that a Prince ought either to live in Heaven or in that place.


The 
Riviera
 to the East a∣bounds in Wines, which are suf∣ficient to supply the State, and produces plenty of extraordinary good Oil: Oranges and Citrons abound not there so much as at 
San Remo,
 but they are better: and the Inhabitants of that Coast are not so rich, because they are of a more warlike and less mer∣cenary disposition.


The State of 
Genoa
 on that side reaches to 
La Magra,
 which divides it from 
Tuscany.
 The first place of Strength is 
Sarzana,
 situated in a fertile Plain. It is defended by a great Ditch, and a Wall, with an antient Castle

 flanked with four Towers. And 
Sarzanella
 is a Fort upon an ad∣joyning Hill, which wholly com∣mands 
Sarzana.
 It was built by 
Castruccio,
 who made himself Master of the City of 
Luca:
 but after his death, the Mareschal of 
Boucicaut
 Governour of 
Genoa
 received it in name of 
Charles
 VI. of 
France.
 The Dukes of 
Milan
 possessed it afterwards, and made it over to 
Thomas de Campo Fre∣goso,
 who transacted with the 
Florentines
 for it: And 
Charles
 the Eighth having made himself Master of 
Florence,
 became so also of 
Sarzana
 and 
Sarzanella,
 and made the Bastard of 
Brienne
 Governour thereof; who per∣ceiving the Affairs of 
Italy
 going to wrack, resolved to make his private advantage of them, and without Orders from the King his Master, sold them to the 
Genoese,
 who by virtue of that illegal Contract, usurped them,

 and have held them in possession till this present.


Next to 
Sarzana
 is 
Lerice
 built at the foot of the Rocks, upon a point of Land, from whence it hath no prospect but towards the Sea, and discovers the Gulf 
delle Spetie,
 of which it defends one of the Entries. Opposite to that on the other point of the Gulf is 
Porto-Venere,
 and a little far∣ther in, on the same side stands the Fort St. 
Marie,
 which de∣fends the whole compass thereof. The mouth of that Gulf then, is reckoned from 
Lerice
 to 
Porto-Venere,
 and betwixt the two are two little Islands which take up a great part of that Mouth, and leaving onely an entry to the East on the side of 
Lerice,
 and another to the West on the side of 
Porto-Venere,
 cover the Gulf, and defend it from the Southern Winds; which renders it the most commodious, as it is the most

 spacious of all the Havens of the 
Mediterranean;
 in so much that there is no Royal Fleet but may securely lie there.


In those two Islands which are in the mouth of the Gulf,
 there is black Marble dug of extraor∣dinary beauty and fineness; it is full of Veins that look and shine like the purest Gold; and there is some found there as variously coloured as the Porphyrian Marble of the East. In the middle of this Gulf, as by a miracle of Nature,
 springs a Fountain of fresh water, which through the salt Waters rises to the Surface, and spreads it self as it were into a large Basin, from which fresh Wa∣ter may be taken, without any necessity of going ashoar to fetch it on board of Ships.


La Spetia
 which is at the bot∣tom of the Gulf, and which hath given it the name, belonged here∣tofore to the Counts of 
Fieschi.


 The Republick of 
Genoa
 that sei∣zed it, about thirty years since or thereabouts caused a Cart-way to be made,
 which crossing all the Lands of the Counts of 
Fie∣schi
 reaches to the bourg of 
Val∣detaro,
 heretofore a Principality of the same Counts, and at pre∣sent possessed by the Duke of 
Parma.
 The Republick made that Way in hopes, nay and up∣on the Promise which the Duke of 
Parma
 made to them, of con∣tinuing it to 
Fornova,
 or of per∣mitting the 
Genoese
 to do it at their charges, which afterwards they might be reimbursed of by the Tolls that should be settled in several places. Their design was to draw by that way to the Port 
della Spetia
 all the Trade of 
Legorne:
 And the truth is that place is far more proper for a Staple, than any other place whatsoever of the 
Mediterrane∣an.
 The 
English
 and 
Dutch
 Mer∣chants

 desired it, not onely be∣cause of the security and com∣modiousness of the Port, but also because they could more con∣veniently unload their Commo∣dities there for 
Parma, Modena, Bologna,
 and all 
Lombardy,
 and by the 
Po
 convey them into the State of 
Milan, Montferrat, Man∣toua,
 and the States of 
Venice, Ferrara
 and the patrimony of St. 
Peter,
 which without doubt would have been very profitable to the Duke of 
Parma.
 But the late great Duke,
 one of the wisest Princes of 
Europe,
 pre∣vented the 
Genoese.
 And seeing the Duchess of 
Parma,
 his Sister governed the State during the minority of her Son, he engaged her not to suffer that way to be continued in the Lands of the State of 
Parma.
 The 
Genoese
 being netled at that politick A∣ction of the Great Dukes, to be revenged, and with design to

 vex him, resolved to buy the Principality of 
Pontremoli,
 which the 
Spaniards
 possessed, having usurped it upon the Counts of 
Fieschi.
 That Principality is con∣tiguous to 
La Spetia;
 and by that means the 
Genoese
 might have cut off from the Duke of 
Tuscany
 the way of sending his goods from 
Legorn
 into 
Lom∣bardy,
 by laying great Impositi∣ons upon all that pass'd that way. But the Great Duke a Man of more ability and cunning than the 
Genoese,
 who have much ado to agree in their resolutions, and are always slow in the executi∣on of them,
 prevented them a∣gain: and though they were got into the possession of that State, which they had morgaged from the Governour of 
Milan,
 for eight hundred thousand Crowns in ready Money, with a clause of ratification on the part of the King of 
Spain;
 yet the Great

 Duke caused the Affair to be ne∣gotiated directly at Court, and purchased that Principality in Fee without Reversion, for the sum of twelve hundred thousand Crowns in ready Money, where∣of eight hundred thousand were employed for the reimbursement of the 
Genoese,
 who had onely bought it in Morgage; And the other four hundred thousand Crowns went into the Exchequer of 
Milan,
 and served to the re∣gaining of 
Tortona
 from the 
French,
 and the defending of 
Lombardy
 against them. The 
Genoese
 who discovered the trick that the Governour had put up∣on them, and knew that he had kept by him a whole year the ratification of their Treaty, that he might give the Great Duke leisure during that time to sup∣plant them, were upon the point of breaking with the 
Spaniards:
 but the cunning of the Gover∣nour,









 and the private interest of the chief members of the Re∣publick, put a stop to the fer∣mentation of their bad humours; And though they were ill satis∣fied with 
Spain
 and the Great Duke, yet they continued quiet, and gave no vent to their resent∣ment.


Upon that Coast to the East are 
Rimaggio,
 
Manerola, Corniglia, Vernazza, Monterosso, Levanto, Bonasola, Framura, Deina, Mo∣neglia,
 and other Lands in the Mountains, all abounding in most excellent Wines, Oil, Figs, Citrons, and Oranges.


Sestri di Levante
 is upon that 
Riviera:
 It is a Town built up∣on a Tongue of Land, betwixt a Strand and a Port: it belong∣ed to the Counts of 
Fieschi;
 and might be rendered considerable for the passage into 
Lombardy.
 Adjoining to that is 
Cucurno,
 which belonged to the Counts

 of the same name of 
Cucurno,
 who having made it over to the Republick of 
Genoa,
 by a cruel revolution of Fortune are become so miserable, that they are at present reduced to the gaining of a living by Fishing, and Seafa∣ring.


From 
Sestri
 forwards the Coast is surprisingly beautiful; and the lower Mountains are more easily cultivated, producing with won∣derful profusion what ever the Inhabitants please to demand of the Earth.


There lies 
Lavagna,
 the An∣cient Inheritance of the Counts of 
Fieschi,
 who have always carried the Title of it since the year nine hundred ninety four, though the Republick hath out∣ed them. 
Chiavari, Rapallo, San∣ta Marguareta,
 and 
Porto fini
 come next, after which we find 
Caniogli, Bogiasio,
 abounding in Oil, and 
Nervi,
 which is rich

 in Roses that blow all the year long.


The publick Riches of the People consist in many things; The Kings of 
Spain
 owe them a∣bove thirty Millions of Gold, the first of which Debts were con∣tracted by 
Philip
 the Second up∣on a very politick account, that by that bit of Gold he might curb a People naturally incon∣stant. These Debts or Actions were by the 
Spaniards
 assigned upon divers Librances or Rights, as they call them, but in such a manner that it is difficult to exact the payment of them, or indeed the profit, so that most part have been forced to aban∣don the Principal.


The 
Genoese
 being disappoint∣ed of the fair dealing which they expected from 
Spain
 in relation to their Debts, have taken other measures, and put their Money into the Banks of 
Rome, Venice,

 Flo∣rence, Milan, Naples
 and 
Sicily,
 and have purchased considerable Lands within these States, where they have laid out great sums for Inheritances or Morgages, from whence they draw several mil∣lions of Rent; They have also many in the Town Hall of 
Paris
 and in the Bank of 
Lyon.


It is to be observed that the 
Spaniards
 by a quaint piece of Policy giving the 
Genoese
 the in∣vestiture of Fiefs and Lands which they have acquired in the States subject to the Catholick King,
 do it upon condition that they sell them not to any but to 
Ge∣noese;
 that so they may always have a hank over them as over Vassals, and hinder them from transferring the price of these Fiefs any where else; And that's the thing which unites them more closely both in interest and inclination to 
Spain,
 according to the Maxim, That where a

 Man's Treasure is, there is his Heart also.


The four most considerable Ports of this State upon the main Land, are that of 
Genoa,
 wonder∣ful through industry; 
Savona,
 which is at present filling up; 
Vado,
 by the Provencals called 
Vaye;
 and the Gulf 
delle-Spetie,
 which is the largest and securest Port of all the 
Mediterranean.


The Port of 
Genoa,
 one of the Wonders of the World, is the most considerable and most fre∣quented: Art hath rendered it safe and commodious by two vast and stately Moles of hard Stone, which encompass a large extent of Sea, and cover it from the South-wind. These two prodi∣gious Walls have cost incredible sums of Money; and to defend them against the beating of the Sea; there is a strong Rampart made before them of rocky stones of extraordinary bigness, which

 have been rolled and cast in hab nab at random; so that sloping naturally of themselves, they face the Mole at Water-mark and break the violence of the Waves, which by that means can∣not damnifie the Wall. On the contrary, the Sea it self in its continual agitations, to second that Master-piece of humane in∣dustry, drives daily in great heaps of Sand against that pile of Rocks, and mingles those with them in such a manner, that not onely it makes a second solid comport against its own fury, but also spreading its banks of Sand, prepares insensibly a road without, which in time will prove one of the best of the 
Mediter∣ranean.


This Port within begins to dry towards the Land, by the filth and dirt that the common Sewers bring to it. It would not be difficult to fill it up as

 far as the mouth of the 
Darsena,
 and joyn that great space to the City which would much enlarge it: And on the other hand by carrying further out on each side the two Arms whith the old and new Moles stretch out into the Sea, the Harbour of 
Genoa
 might by that means be rendered one of the largest, most stately and safe Ports in the World; For the wide opening which is betwixt the two Moles, as they are at pre∣sent, leaves too much Sea expo∣sed to the rage of the South, South-east and South-west winds, so that Vessels cannot lie opposite to the mouth of the Harbour when any of these Winds blow hard.






The 
Darsena
 I mentioned, is a little Harbour within, which can hold five and twenty Gal∣leys, as in a box. It might ea∣sily be made twice as big, by breaking down a Wall which di∣vides

 it from another bosom of the Sea, called the 
Darsena
 of Wine, because the Barks that bring it put in there.


The Sea 
Arsenal
 hath great shades and Coverts,
 where twen∣ty Galleys may be built at a time. And the Arsenal of Arms, which is in the Ducal Palace, is always furnished with Arms for forty thousand Foot. The Ma∣gazines of Powder are well pro∣vided; but they entertain no more Soldiers ordinarily than the three thousand Men I spake of.


Having surveyed the main Land, we must now give a de∣scription of the Isle of 
Corsica.
 It lies in a very good Climate, betwixt the fortieth and two and fortieth degree of North lati∣tude. It is in circuit one hun∣dred and fifty 
French
 Leagues. That part which looks to 
Italy,
 and which they call 
Banda di den∣tro,


 is less cultivated than the rest All that this Island produces is excellent; exquisite Wines and delicate Oil: it yields also Silk, Wax, Honey and all sorts of Fruits in abundance. It hath Iron Mines, two salt Pits, and a good breed of Horses might be kept there: but for all that this Country is so fertile;
 the 
Ge∣noese
 do what they can to render it almost desart and abandoned, for two reasons: First, because they think that if the People grew numerous and powerful, they would revolt against them: And secondly, that they may not excite Strangers to invade an Island which they endeavour to render contemptible, that they make it to be less envied. There are not reckoned to be upon it at present above one hundred thousand Souls; but it might easily admit and maintain six times as many. It is divided

 into six Bishopricks,
 reduced in to five, by the union of the Bi∣shoprick of 
Mariana
 to that of 
Accia: Aleria, Aiazzo, Nebbio
 and 
Sagona
 are the other four.


The considerable parts of it are 
Calvi, Aiazzo, Boniface,
 St. 
Florent,
 and 
Porto-vecchio,
 and the 
Genoese
 have made at 
Bastia
 the ordinary residence of the Governour, a Mole capable to contain four Galleys under cover. St. 
Florent
 was a work of the 
French
 fortified before the Peace of 
Chasteau Cambresis:
 The 
Ge∣noese
 have demolished it; but the foundations of Free-stone are still remaining, so that it might easily be raised again; and if a descent were to be made upon the Island, there is no place more commo∣dious, not onely by reason of its situation on the West side; but also because it is but three Leagues distant from 
Bastia
 the Capital Town of the Island, op∣posite

 to it, and seated on the Coast which looks to 
Italy
 on the East side.


The Territory of 
Aiazzo
 a∣bounds in Wine, Corn and in all sorts of fruit.


Cap Corfe
 produces excellent Wine, and the people of this Countrey, are the civilest and most peaceable of all the rest of the Island.


Balagna,
 which is called the Garden of of 
Corsica,
 yields the excellentest Oil in the World, and exquisite fruits of all kinds.


Bastia,
 the residence of the Governour, hath a good, rich and fertile Soil. There are thir∣ty thousand Souls reckoned to be in it, the Town has a good Trade and is well govern∣ed. There is good Hunting and better Fishing about it, by reason of the many Lakes and Ponds that are near the same.




On 
Alerie
 that is destroyed and 
Porto-vecchio
 depend large Lands, which are partly uncultivated, though they be fit to bear all sorts of Corn. The great quan∣tity of standing dead Water that is there, incommodes the Air, and makes that Country almost abandoned. There Colonies ought to be planted for draining the Fens, and labouring a fat and fertile soil, which alone might feed all 
Liguria,
 that hath so little Corn, that it is forced to supply it self from 
Lombardy, Sicily,
 and many times from 
A∣frica:
 That draining would be easie, and the 
Genoese
 have seen a proof of it, since they brought thither a hundred Families of 
Magnote Greeks,
 a people neigh∣bouring upon 
Morea,
 who have much advanced Husbandry in the place where they have set∣led; but that number is not suf∣ficient for a corner of all these

 great Countries, which labour and industry would render most fruitful, if men enough were em∣ployed to compass so good a work: a thing that would be easie by dividing all these Lands into inheritances of different Te∣nures and qualities, to be grant∣ed upon condition of settling a certain number of Families there∣in, sowing of Corn, planting Vines and Olive Trees, and e∣specially quantities of Mulberry Trees for Silks. By that means of a despicable Island, it might be made one of the richest Pro∣vinces in the World.


Aitona
 is famous for the vast Forrests, and innumerable Trees that grow upon the Mountains thereof, and which are of a big∣ness and quality, not onely for building of Houses, but also for building and masting all sorts of Vessels: These Mountains make a chain of some Leagues in length;

 And the Forrest would never be consumed, provided it were or∣derly cut: the Timber even cut in the new Moon alters not, and is of a particular grain. The 
Ge∣noese
 who have found the impor∣tance of this, have employed an hundred thousand Crowns, to plain a way upon the ridg of the Mountains, which from the For∣rest reaches to the Sea-shore, where they have built great Ma∣gazines, for preparing the Tim∣ber, keeping it dry and preser∣ving it. There is very good fish∣ing for Tunnys there, and abun∣dance of Coral; which if well looked after, might turn to a considerable account. There are two salt Pits also in the Island, but the Republick slights them through a Politick condescension to the 
Spaniards.


Salt is a sacred Commodity,
 which People cannot be without, and whereof some Princes make

 their ordinary Revenues: that E∣lement of life, as necessary as Corn: that 
Manna,
 which seasons all our food, to defend us from corruption; that source of all the delights of the Taste, is one of the pillars that in many States upholds the publick Treasure: It costs but little at first, but people pay dear for it. And ge∣nerally Kings, and Republicks have imposed severe punishments upon those, who by a greedy rashness attempt in that parti∣cular to avoid and frustrate the Laws. 
Genoa
 draws a conside∣rable duty from Salt, because that City furnishes not onely all the State; but likewise 
Milan
 and all 
Lombardy
 with it. It is a great branch of the Revenue, and the House or Bank of St. 
George
 to whom the 
Gabel
 is engaged,
 has the administration thereof, which is performed with much order and Economy. But the 
Genoese


 might, without exacting, double the profit of it, because they load their Salt at 
Yvyca,
 where the 
Spaniards
 sell it them dear, and from whence they import it at great charges; whereas by re-e∣stablishing the two salt Pits of the Island of 
Corsica
 which they slight,
 that they may not dis∣please the 
Spaniards,
 they might have it of their own, and at home: nay, if instead of going to load at 
Yvyca,
 they would come and take their Salt at the 
Hiere
 Isles, much nearer them, it would cost them far less both in the purchase and transporta∣tion. This hath been several times proposed by some 
Genoese
 to the Great Council; but the 
Spanish
 Cabal hath always by a mystery of State hindered the resolution, though acknowledged to be advantageous.




Since I have fallen upon the matter of Salt, it will not be im∣pertinent to speak of that which the 
French
 King would have con∣veighed from the 
Hiere
 Isles to 
Montferrat
 for supplying of 
Ca∣zal
 and the Forces which he maintains there, who are not used to the Salt of the Country which is inferiour to that of 
France.


This King demanded of the 
Genoese
 the setling of a Magazine of Salt at 
Savona.
 They excu∣sed themselves to his Majesty, because all things are carrried in the Council of 
Genoa
 by the influence of the 
Spaniards.


They have gone farther; for being persuaded that the commo∣diousness of the Port of 
Savona
 put the King upon making that de∣mand,
 they have quite spoil'd it: And as 
Andrew Doria
 began heretofore to render it less use∣ful, by sinking two great Vessels

 full of Earth in the mouth of it, so they have set Masons at work to wall up the Entry, and wholly to fill it up. And in the manner they spoil it, it will be almost impossible to restore it again. But there is a shorter way to have a place upon the Sea Coast for unloading of Salt, making a Magazine, and transporting it to 
Montferrat;
 There needs no more but to back the just pre∣tensions of the Counts of 
Fieschi,
 for the restitution of his Estates. The Marquisat of 
Laon,
 which borders upon the limits of the Marquisat of 
Montferrat,
 is one of the chief Lands usurped from them: it is a little Town by the Sea-side, with a stately Castle, possessed by the House of 
Doria,
 since 
Andrew Doria
 took it from those Counts. It is walled round, and seated upon an easie descent that reaches the shore. It con∣tains about three thousand Souls;

 and may be easily fortified: It hath no Harbour, but the Road is good; and by the help of a little Mole there might be easily made a Haven sufficient for the unloading of Salt, which might be carried as soon from 
Laon
 to 
Cazal,
 as if the Magazine were at 
Savona;
 And for having it, the King needs onely to require that Justice and Restitution may be made to the Count of 
Fieschi,
 and that the restitution begin by that Marquisat of 
Laon,
 which may be bought from him.


Upon that Coast two Leagues from 
Laon
 is 
Albegna,
 a strong place and well situated, where by the help of a little Isle that is opposite to it, and a Mole, which on the East-side might joyn the Island to the main Land; one of the best Ports of 
Europe
 might be made, which would make 
Montferrat
 reach as far as the Sea, supply it with the Salt

 of the 
Hieres
 without any need of 
Savona,
 and facilitate the tran∣sportation of Forces by Sea, with∣out being obliged to march them through 
Savoy,
 which in the re∣volution of time may prove not so faithful to 
France
 as it is at present. All that is to be done then, is onely to make the Re∣publick restore to the Counts of 
Fieschi
 the Estates that lawful∣ly belong to them, and which could not be confiscated for the reasons that are solidly alledged in their second Petition.


Genoa
 is an Arch-bishoprick,
 which hath eleven Suffragan Bi∣shops; six in the Continent, 
Brugneto
 and 
Sarzana
 to the East; 
Savona, Noli, Albegna
 and 
Vin∣timiglia
 to the West; and five in the Island of 
Corsica
 as we have mentioned before. No Man is promoted to Episcopal Dignity, unless he be a 
Genoese,
 or of the State of 
Genoa,
 and the Arch-bishop

 must be of a noble Fa∣mily, who is nominated by the Pope. The Cathedral Church called St. 
Laurence
 hath given to the Church, Popes, Cardinals and Bishops.
 The Chapter hereto∣fore decided all Controversies that happened betwixt the Arch-bishop and the Senate: and it was in so great reputation, that 
Rome
 esteemed its decisions no less than 
France
 does those of the 
Sorbone:
 but since the Senate hath arrogated to it self the ho∣nours of Royalty, and forced the Arch-bishop to take his place on the side of the 
Epistle,
 tran∣sporting thither his Episcopal Chair, to make room for the 
Doge
 on the side of the 
Gospel;
 the Chapter hath clashed with the Senate, who to depress the Ca∣nons have raised and maintained against them certain Chaplains, founded in that Church by the Counts of 
Fieschi
 who cross them in all things.




Besides that, the Senate hath erected a new Tribunal consist∣ing of six Monks and three Se∣nators, which they call 
the Ec∣clesiastick Juncto. Rome
 hath com∣plained of it, as belonging to her alone to establish Ecclesiastical Courts in 
Italy.
 But the Senate believed they might satisfie the Pope, by changing the name of that Tribunal, and calling it 
the Juncto of Jurisdiction.
 The Re∣publick is guided by it in the Affairs of Conscience. The Monks that constitute it are of the Or∣der of 
Mendicants,
 and enjoy great priviledges, being exempt∣ed from the Quire, and conven∣tual Offices, well-lodged with a Lay-Brother to attend them, and a double allowance; go out and in without their Superiours leave, and have besides a Pension for their private occasions. The way how they give their Opi∣nions, is a mere Mummery: their

 Judgment is not set down in wri∣ting; but when they have given it by word of mouth, the three Senators are to make report there∣of to the Chancellour; and they turn the Report as they please, and very often quite contrary to the Sentiment of the Monks.


The Court of Inquisition is a∣nother piece of Pageantry, in the way they manage it. The In∣quisitor is sent from 
Rome,
 who is a 
Dominican
 Monk, with a Se∣cretary and Companion. These three Fathers make up the Inqui∣sition, and can judg absolutely; but nothing is put in execution but by express orders from the Senate, which never gives them. The Inquisitor exclaims and vexes himself; but if his Complaints sound too loud, the Senate sends him packing, under pretext of reason of State, and as turbulent.


There is no Religion but the Catholick, professed at 
Genoa.


 Since the time that St. 
Nazaras
 and St. 
Celsus
 preached the Go∣spel there, no Heresie hath there taken footing: And for that con∣stancy in the true faith, and the Wars they have had against Infi∣dels, the body of the State rec∣kon it one of their priviledges, that they cannot incur an Inter∣dict, nor general Excommunicati∣on, no not from the Holy See,
 if in the excommunication his Ho∣liness mention not the priviledg, and expresly derogate from it.


That priviledg was granted them by Pope 
Innocent
 IV.
 of the House of 
Fieschi,
 who being be∣sieged in 
Gajetta,
 with the whole College of Cardinals by 
Frede∣rick
 II. was delivered by 
James
 and 
Nicolas Fieschi's
 his Nephews, to whom 
Genoa
 lent them Galleys for that important Expedition; So that these two Nephews ma∣king a shew of going against the 
Moors
 of 
Africa,
 put back to shoar

 again of a sudden; and coming to 
Gajetta,
 took on board the Pope and Cardinals, and carried them to 
Genoa,
 and from thence to 
France,
 where the Pope in presence of St. 
Louis
 celebrated the Council of 
Lyon,
 wherein 
Fre∣derick the second
 was declared fallen from the Empire, and ano∣ther chosen in his place.


The religious 
Mendicants
 have stately Churches in 
Genoa,
 and every Order hath two or three. The 
Jesuits
 keep the publick Schools, and have extraordinary credit with the Nobility. The Senate are pious in appearance, but in reality Machiavilians, with a fair outside of Religion, but little correspondence to it within; being proud, revengeful, irreconcileable, cruel, and glory∣ing in Usury; saying that they have a Bull from the Pope, (which no man ever saw) which allows them to take Interest at seven in

 the hundred, and a good pledg besides.


There are twenty four Frater∣nities
 established in 
Genoa:
 and there is not one 
Genoese
 who is not enrolled in one or other of these Fraternities: so that it may be said, that under pretext of Devotion, there are twenty four factions in 
Genoa,
 who still feed that secret rancour which hereto∣fore divided the State into 
Guelphs
 and 
Gibellins,
 under the names of the 
Adorno's,
 and 
Fregozo's,
 and which is still entertained betwixt the 
Fieschi's
 and other Families; the 
Fregoso
's being 
Guelphs,
 and the 
Adorno
's 
Gibellins:
 And as a mark of distinction betwixt those two parties, the 
Fregozo
's both Men and Women wear their Hair and Posies on the right side, and a 
Turky
 blew; and when they pro∣mise any thing, they hold up the Thumb, and close the Fist: where∣as the 
Adorno
's wear their Hair

 on the left side; put their Posies there, and delight in green; and when they assure any thing, they point out the Fore-finger, and close the rest of the Hand. The 
A∣dorno
's are of the 
Spanish
 facti∣on, and the 
Fregozo
's who are in∣feriour in number, incline to the 
French.
 Nevertheless, the Nobi∣lity of late have withdrawn from these Fraternities, and leave the people onely engaged in them, whom they are willing to have divided into many little facti∣ons, that they may not unite against the Nobility.


I forgot to tell, that there is a Court, which is called 
the Court of the Arsenal,
 consisting of five Gentlemen and a Chancellour. Their care is to cause Galleys to be built, and to have always a certain number ready to be put to Sea.
 The structure of them is excellent, the Workmen very skil∣ful, and the work perfectly good.

 And to the end that the building of Galleys may not cost the Re∣publick much, they always build many more than they need; and the sale of those that are super∣fluous supplies the charge of those which are necessary. And hence it is that the Squadrons of 
Spain, Naples, Sicily
 and 
Sardinia,
 are made up of Galleys built in the 
Arsenal
 of 
Genoa.
 And that the prohibition made to them by 
M. de St. Olon,
 on the part of the 
French
 King, hath strangely stun∣ned them, through the appre∣hension of being obliged to dismiss so many able Artists that work in their 
Arsenal.


They have also established a∣nother Court,
 which they call 
the Court of the Borders,
 to take heed that none of the Subjects of the Republick, nor neighbouring Prin∣ces, undertake any works upon the Rivers, such as 
Milns, Dykes,
 or 
Canals,
 that may be prejudicial to the Publick.




Besides the Revenue that I have mentioned, there is a certain pub∣lick stock, which is called the 
Peculio,
 and is a Cash yearly re∣served and put apart for urgent necessities. No man whatsoever can know what it amounts to; that's a secret reserved for the perpetual Procurators, the know∣ledg of it being kept even from the ordinary Procurators; be∣cause they who manage the 
Pecu∣lio
 are accountable to no man, which hath made it to be belie∣ved that they appropriate it to themselves, as they do the Rents of certain Farms.


The 
Genoese
 have an admirable Government as to the regulation of Provisions and Victuals; that the People may have plenty and at cheap Rates. Their conduct in that particular deserves not onely to be commended, but also imi∣tated by all Princes: and especi∣ally as to Corn and Wine, which

 are as the two Poles on which the life of man turns. They take particular care to have always a sufficient quantity of both to sup∣ply the whole City for two years compleat.


As to the Corn,
 they take this course: They have publick Gra∣naries, which are four great square Houses, with several vaulted sto∣ries one over another in each, which are so many different Gra∣naries; and which for greater se∣curity are enclosed with a Wall that hath but one Gate well guar∣ded. All these Granaries together can hold a sufficient quantity of Corn to supply the Town for three years; and as one is empti∣ed, another is filled; with this prudent care, that if it be a plen∣tiful year and the Corn cheap, the Granaries are filled double: and if the year be barren, and the Corn very dear, they spend the time with the former Provision,

 and wait till the following year to fill them again: So that it is not to be thought strange, if by so wise a conduct the Bread is no dearer at one time than at ano∣ther; the People being never sen∣sible of the barrenness of the Earth, which by divine Providence hath never for two years together refused to man his sustenance.


Out of these publick Grana∣naries all the Bakers are obliged to buy their Corn, with which they supply the people with bread: and they are prohibited under severe Penalties to buy it elsewhere. Private Persons ne∣vertheless are permitted to bake their own bread at home; but since bread is at a very reasonable rate, the Republick being content with a moderate profit, few give themselves the trouble of making particular provisions, besides that the Republick sets a price upon the Corn according to the plenti∣fulness

 of the Crop, and none can buy, till the publick Granaries be first supplied: And when there is a scarcity in 
Liguria,
 the Magi∣strate appointed for the regulati∣on of Provisions, causes Corn to be brought from 
Sicily,
 or 
Africa,
 to be put into the publick Gra∣naries, that the crop of the Coun∣try may be for the use of the Country People, the other Towns and private Families.


As to Wine,
 every private Per∣son is allowed to furnish himself, and freely to buy for his provi∣on; but no person whosoever in 
Genoa
 dares to sell or retail it out, no not Vintners and they who keep Victualling Houses; The Republick reserves to itself alone, the right of selling Wine by re∣tail, and for the more convenient distribution thereof, there is in every quarter a publick Cellar al∣ways full of Wine of two different prices, which never rise nor fall.




They call these publick Cellars 
Fondaqui,
 over every one of which an Overseer is put, to whom the Wine is delivered upon account, and who brings the Money that it is sold for to the publick Cash. He is strictly prohibited not to after the Wine, either by ming∣ling one sort with another, or ad∣ding Water; strict inspection is taken into that; and they are not onely punished by great Fines, but are sent to the Galleys; so that there is seldom any complaint made of them. The Cellars are filled as fast as they are emptied; and the provision is always for two years.


Though this Policy as to Wine seems to be somewhat inconve∣nient, and that it would seem that Princes who have consider∣able duties from the retail of Wines in Taverns ought not to approve it, nevertheless it hath certainly its advantages, not only

 because it prevents Drunkenness, and the disorders which attend it; but also because the profit which the Republick draws from the re∣tailing of Wine, comes clear into the publick stock; whereas the duties that in other places are raised from Vintners, pass through so many Hands, and to the profit of so many Leeches, before they come to the publick Treasury, that the Prince receives but a very small share of the profit of that Imposition; besides that thereby the adulterations and poisonings of Wine by the Wine-Coopers and Vintners are pre∣vented.


Money is reckoned at 
Genoa
 by 
Livres
 and 
Sols;
 but the 20 
s.
 of 
Genoa
 are worth but 12 
s.
 of 
France:
 and so the 
sous
 of 
Ge∣noa
 is but worth seven Deniers of 
France,
 and a fifth Denier; by that reason a 
French
 Crown and Patacoon are there worth five Li∣vres;

 And a 
Louis-d'or,
 is there valued at 18. 6. 
s.
 8. 
den.
 That's to say three 
Louis d'ors,
 are there worth fifty five Livres 
Genoese
 Money.


They Coin certain pieces of Silver, which they call 
Genuines,
 that are worth seven Livres of their Money, which are four Liv. 4 
s.
 of 
France:
 they are of a very fine allay, being of eleven De∣niers and six grains fine, and the neighbouring States melt them down for Coining their Money which is of a baser Standard.


They have four different Pistols, which pass at the same value, and which they call the 
Quatrostampe:
 these are the 
Louis-d'ors,
 the Pi∣stol of 
Spain,
 the Pistol of 
Genoa,
 and that of 
Florence,
 which are of the same weight and Coined of Gold of twenty two Carrats, with two grains of allay. All other Pi∣stols are current there, at some∣what less value. Their 
Genuines


 of Silver are in great esteem in 
Savoy,
 and pass as far as 
Lyon:
 but on this side of it, there are few of them to be seen, though there be few pieces of coined Silver in 
Eu∣rope
 that equal them in goodness.


There are three sorts of Per∣sons
 in 
Genoa:
 the least in num∣ber, but the most powerful are the Nobles,
 who govern the States and possess great Estates, and con∣siderable Inheritances in the Ter∣ritories of the Catholick King; which links them close to the Crown of 
Spain,
 by an indispen∣sable necessity of Interests. And they who engage not blindly in that stronger side, have little share in the Government, and cannot but be much dissatisfied with the present State.


The second sort is that of the Merchants,
 who mind nothing but their Trade: These have na∣turally a Republican Soul; but they are onely wedded to 
Spain


 by the consideration of the profi∣tableness of their Commerce, which if it succeeded under the protection of another Sovereign, they would by degrees fall off from the 
Spaniards.


They have a pretty good in∣clination to 
France,
 upon account that they think Justice there im∣partially distributed without di∣stinction of Persons, whereas at 
Genoa
 they feel a Tyranny, which is so much the more uneasie, that it increases as fast as the Nobles who compose the State do mul∣tiply.


The last sort, the weakest, and yet the greatest, is made up of the Populace, the Artificers and the Poor; who not only through the common inclination which misery gives, desire a change, in hopes of bettering their condi∣tion: but likewise, I may say, would be willing to be under the protection of 
France,
 upon more honourable Motives.




All the Forces of 
Genoa
 consist in six Galleys which they con∣stantly entertain, and to which of late they have added four new ones, for reasons well enough known to all 
Europe.


They have laid up the two great Men of War which con∣veyed their Merchant Ships for the Trade of 
Spain:
 And this they have done upon the resent∣ment of a secret displeasure they conceived, and which they ex∣pressed to Captain 
Palavicini,
 who going to 
Spain
 suffered his Ships to be visited. For there is no Nation in the World more haughty and vain than the 
Ge∣noese.
 They are nevertheless re∣solved to fit out three Men of War, in place of those two which they have unrigged.


There are,
 as I have already said, ten or twelve great Ships well equipped belonging to pri∣vate Persons, wherewith they

 trade into the 
Levant,
 the West, and 
Africa;
 and in the two 
Ri∣viera's
 there are about three hun∣dred Barks great and small, and two hundred Coralines, which are onely employed in fishing for Coral upon the Coasts of 
Corsica
 and 
Sardinia.


The two 
Riviera's
 or Coasts of 
Liguria
 can furnish six or seven thousand good Seamen: And if all the Militia of the main Land were raised, it's thought they might amount to fifty or three∣score thousand vigorous and har∣dy Men able to carry Arms, and who want nothing but discipline and exercise. On the West side the Men are Richer but not so Warlike, and those on the East side are poorer but better Soldiers. 
Corsica
 also can furnish a Militia of fifteen thousand good Men.


There are in 
Genoa
 an hundred and fifty Families of rich and powerful Nobles, who for most

 part follow Merchandising; but these one hundred and fifty are properly reduced to fourscore and ten, or thereabouts; for some of them are but branches of other Families. As for Merchants, there are at least three hundred very rich Families: They have all sumptuous Palaces, Country Houses, delightful Gardens, cost∣ly Furniture, rich Tapistry, much Plate, exquisite Pictures, excel∣lent Statues, and their Wives are always cloathed in cloth of Gold, covered with Jewels and precious Stones.


The Nobility is divided into the Ancient and the new:
 the Offices of State are always filled by half of the one and half of the other, and the 
Doge
 is chosen out of the two by turn. In the year 1528. when 
Genoa
 having revolt∣ed from 
France,
 established a new form of Government, a Register of the Nobility was made, in a

 Book which they called 
the Gol∣den Book,
 wherein all that were Ancient were recorded. There they inserted eight and twenty Families which composed it. The new Nobility is far more nume∣rous, and was established by a permission given to the Ancient Nobility to adopt to these twenty eight, other 
Plebeian
 Families. And according to that aggrega∣tion or adoption, they were and are daily still inserted in the gol∣den Book. It is also to be ob∣served that many who were of the Ancient Nobility, having neg∣lected in the year 1528. to cause themselves to be inserted, have onely place amongst the new, as the 
Justiniani:
 and that many of the new, for want of insertion, have lost their Priviledges, though their Children be without dispute received at 
Malta.


Of the twenty eight Families of the Ancient Nobility, there are

 four which without contradiction are the chief, to wit, the Families of the



Fieschi,


Spinola,


Grimaldi,


Doria.




The House of the 
Fieschi's,
 whereof 
Don John-Louis Mario
 who fled into 
France
 and lives there, is the Head, is at present the lowest of the four in Riches and Power, tho the most Noble and Illustrious: they descend from the Ancient Sovereign Counts of 
Lavagra,
 who issued from the Ancient Dukes of 
Bur∣gundy,
 whose Arms they still re∣tain, having onely changed the Colours, which was heretofore often enough practised by youn∣ger Brothers. They possessed se∣veral considerable Estates in 
Italy,
 where they were perpetual Vi∣cars of the Empire, Admirals of 
Liguria,
 and coined Money.

 There have been two Popes of that Family, and an incredible number of Cardinals. The Counts of 
Savoy
 at present Dukes, the Counts of 
Montferrat,
 and the Dukes of 
Milan,
 from whom all Christian Princes spring by the Mother side, have allied with the House of 
Fieschi.
 Histories are full of the glorious Exploits of Generals of Armies which it hath produced: but there can be no better proof of the gran∣deur of that illustrious Family, than the priviledges which were preserved to it in a Treaty of Peace made by advice of the Duke of 
Milan
 in the year 1453. betwixt the Count 
Philip
 the chief of that House, and the Re∣publick of 
Genoa;
 wherein amongst other Articles it is agreed upon, that he shall always have place by the side of the 
Doge,
 and the same honours; that most part of Offices shall be granted, one half

 by the 
Doge,
 and the other half by the Count of 
Fieschi;
 that he shall establish as well as the 
Doge,
 his Notaries, and Podestats; and that he shall have his Forces and Garisons.


These four chief Families have been always divided into two Parties:
 The 
Fieschi's
 and 
Gri∣maldi's
 have supported the fa∣ction of the 
Guelphs,
 and espoused the Interests of 
France:
 but the 
Spinola's
 and 
Doria's
 have sided with the 
Gibellin
 Party, and sticking close to 
Spain,
 have ac∣quired two Grandeeships in it, seeing the Prince of 
Melfi
 and the Duke of 
Tursis
 Grandees of 
Spain,
 are of the House of 
Doria:
 and the Marquess 
de los Balbaces,
 and the Duke of 
San-pietro
 are of the Family of 
Spinola.
 As for the 
Grimaldi,
 it is above six hundred years since the Head of their Family was Sovereign of 
Monaco:
 but the 
Fieschi's
 have

 been strip'd of all since the en∣terprise of the year 1547. And they have no more now remain∣ing but the hopes of the 
French
 King's protection, to restore them to their Estates unjustly usurped.


The other four and twenty Families of the Ancient Nobility are the Families of the



Cibo,


Lomellini,


Roeres,


Negrons,


Catanees,


Palavicins,


Imperiali,


Centurions,


Mari,


Serra,


Piquenots,


Leccari,


Salvaggi,


Pavezes,


Cigales,


Rapasquieres,


Pinelles,


Marini,


Grilli,


Gentilli,


Negri,


Ʋsodimari,


Malaspini,


Vivaldi.




And amongst the Families of the new Nobility, there are four Chief, which vie in Quality

 with those of the Ancient; and these are


The



Justiniani,


Sauli,


Franchi,


Fornaci.




The others that came to my khowledg during my abode in 
Genoa,
 are the



Adorni,


Inbrees,


Saluzzi,


Franzoni,


Federici,


Paggi,


Viali,


Doughi,


Torilles,


Cazelles,


Balbi,


Raggi,


Torre,


Duraz,


Bassadone,


Carmagnoles,


Zoagli,


Brignoles,


Balians,


Odons,


Sophranes,


Carpenius,


Gropallo,


Scaglia,


Tiscornes,


Moneilles,


Castagnoles,


Morans,




Fosses,


Androvins,


Biasses,


Prato,


Costaguts,


Guani,


Garibaldi,


Caze,


Pietra-Rag∣gia,


Garbarins,


Mercanti,


Levanti,


Calvi,


Clavezani,


Ferrari,


Ricci,


Poveroto,


Gritta,


Tasso,


Caregges,


Restoro,


Monzia,


Maineri,


Oliva,


Ansaldi,


Nuovo Paffiiani,


Gievardi,


Airoldi.


Passaggi,


Chiavari.




Others there may be, of which I have not been informed.


The Custom-House is always provided of all sorts of Commo∣dities, as Silk, Sugars, Spice, cloth of Gold, silken and wool∣len Stuffs, and of every thing that necessity or luxury requires.


The Port is much frequented by 
English
 and 
Dutch,
 who trade

 with the City of 
Genoa,
 in Silks, Oil, Velvet, Damask, Honey, Wax, and Commodities of the 
Levant.


The most considerable Forts of the 
Terra firma
 or main Land are 
Savona, Gavi, Sarzana,
 and the Fort St. 
Marie,
 in the Gulf 
delle Spetie;
 and in 
Corsica
 they have 
Calvi, Boniface,
 and 
Aiazzo;
 but the whole State hath not both by Sea and Land six hun∣dred Piece of brass Cannon.


The Garison of 
Genoa
 exceeds not two thousand five hundred Men,
 who have never seen the fire of an Enemy nor a Mortar-piece play; its Walls towards the Land side and Mountains, are two 
French
 Leagues in extent, they make a double enclosure, of which the outermost is almost wholly cut out of the Rock, but the Ditch of it is narrow and shal∣low, and the Covert-way is so far from being large, that two

 Men cannot pass it a breast, be∣sides that the Works which de∣fend the Town, the Gates and Posts which of necessity must be furnished, require as many to defend it, as are necessary to at∣tack the same.


In bringing succours from the 
Milanese,
 there is a necessity of marching through a great many narrow passes, in the Mountains that divide their States, and two or three thousand Dragoons post∣ed in the avenues of these Passes, would be enough to hinder all relief: Men may land not onely without Musquet shot, but it is easie for them also in landing to lodge under Covert, either on the side of 
Bizagne,
 or on the side of S. 
Peter des Arenes.
 Batteries may be raised betwixt the 
Fanal
 and the new Mole without the reach of any assault, which would bat∣ter down the City on all sides; besides, there is nothing more

 easie, than to cut the Aqueducts which make the 
Milns
 to go and furnish the City with fresh water, so that the People without Bread and Water, starved with hunger and thirst, would quickly cry for Peace, the whole City is also full of common Sewers and subterra∣nean Vaults which discharge themselves into the Sea, and no∣thing hinders but Mines and o∣ther Engines may be made to play, which would overthrow the Walls that cross those Sewers, and make in them as many breaches as might be thought fit: from whence it may be conclu∣ded that that City is supported more by its name, haughtiness, and outward appearance, than by any solid strength.


That Republick then, though exceeding rich, is notwithstand∣ing in it self very weak for two reasons: First, Because the pro∣found Peace it hath for a long

 time enjoyed, has inured the People to softness and luxury; and secondly, because though the private Persons be extreme weal∣thy, yet the Revenues of the State are but very moderate, and it is no easie matter in Common-wealths to impose new Taxes for defraying the charges of War, which always displeases the Peo∣ple who are naturally inclined to rest. But to remedy this weak∣ness which the 
Genoese
 themselves are sensible enough of, they are so straitly linked in Interest with the 
Spaniards,
 that they will al∣ways be supported with all the Forces of that Kingdom. That strict Alliance is founded not onely, on what I have already said, of the great Estates which the 
Genoese
 possess in the Terri∣tories of the Catholick King; but also because the 
Milanese
 borders upon the States of 
Ge∣noa;
 and that 
Final,
 which be∣longs

 to the 
Spaniards,
 is a place apart, and situated betwixt 
Al∣begnao
 and 
Savona,
 in the middle of the States of this Republick, which inviron it on all hands: so that 
Milan
 can have no commu∣nication with that important Maritime place, but by passing through the Lands of 
Genoa,
 which are bordered on the West by the Mountains of 
Piemont;
 on the North by 
Montferrat
 and the 
Milanese;
 on the East by the States of the Dukes of 
Florence
 and 
Parma;
 and on the South, by the Sea of 
Liguria.


Some time before the 
Pyrenean
 Peace, the 
Spaniards
 fearing that the 
French
 might seize 
Final,
 proposed to sell it to the 
Genoese:
 the price was agreed upon;
 but the Marquess 
de los Balbaces
 a Grandee of 
Spain
 of the House of 
Spinola,
 as a faithful Subject, preferring the Interest of the King he served, before that of his own

 Country, opposed it. He was Counsellour of State for the Af∣fairs of 
Italy,
 and with much vigour and stedfastness he repre∣sented, that if 
Final
 were aban∣doned, and the 
Genoese
 should afterwards break with 
Spain,
 it would be impossible to send re∣lief in to the 
Milanese:
 but that if the 
Genoese
 should abandon 
Spain,
 relief might always be sent by 
Final,
 and 
Montferrat,
 with∣out being obliged to them. His reasons were good, because at that time 
Montferrat
 was not in the hands of the 
French:
 but if at present 
Genoa
 abandoned 
Spain, Milan
 would be without relief; because to go from 
Final
 to 
Mi∣lan, Montferrat
 being shut, there is a necessity of passing through the State of 
Genoa.
 The advice of 
Los Balbaces
 was followed:
 the Treaty of 
Final
 was broken off; and the 
Genoese
 thereupon conceived so great indignation

 against 
Balbaces
 their Country∣man, that they deprived him of all his priviledges, which were to go with his Servants armed, to have the Cushion at Church, and to be visited by the Nobility without the permission of the 
Doge:
 which obliged him whol∣ly to renounce 
Genoa,
 and to settle in 
Spain.


Final
 then, is one of the chief links that unites 
Genoa
 with the Catholick King. Nevertheless, what Efforts soever 
Spain
 makes in favour of that Republick, yet it can give them but very mode∣rate assistances by Land; because it can onely help them with the Forces of the 
Milanese
 which it dares not ungarison. But by Sea it can defend them with all the Galleys of the Squadrons of 
Naples, Sicily, Sardinia
 and 
Spain.
 So that provided a powerful Prince who intended to attack 
Genoa,
 had a Fleet strong enough

 to give a check to the Naval forces of 
Spain,
 it would be easie for him by 
Piemont
 and 
Montferrat
 to assault that Republick by Land, and in a short time to triumph over its pride, with a smaller number of men than one may imagine; and so much the rather that Commerce being the Soul of that Republick, a Fleet cruising before their Harbours, would no sooner interrupt their Trade, but that the People and Artificers would be reduced to extremity; besides that 
Genoa,
 the Country furnishing but very little Corn, is obliged to supply it self from 
Sicily
 and 
Africa
 by Sea; and that finding themselves besieged by Land, and blocked up by Sea, with little relief from the Forces of the 
Milanese,
 and out of con∣dition of being revictualled from any where else, it would quickly be reduced to the last pinch, ha∣ving but very few standing Sol∣diers,

 and the Militia of the Coun∣try altogether undisciplined.


But if the Nobility as well as People of 
Genoa,
 could be once cleared of the false notions they have conceived of a Government contrary to that under which they live; if once they could be persuaded that the Republican yoke gives instead of one lawful Master, an hundred insatiable Tyrants, that it is a 
Hydra
 of many Heads, which seldom agree in their resolutions; that a King governs alone, in imitation of the Deity; whereas popular As∣semblies are for the most part but a confused 
Babylon;
 that by an inclination of Nature which tends always to perfection, all Repub∣licks soon or late terminate in a Monarchy, as heretofore 
Rome,
 and 
Florence
 in later days furnish the 
Genoese
 with almost a dome∣stick instance: if they would also call to mind that they freely

 gave themselvs over to 
Charles
 VI. and his Successours upon condi∣tions religiously observed on the part of our Kings, who by con∣sequent are their true and lawful Sovereigns: If to all these Rea∣sons, they added serious refle∣ctions upon the incomparable Virtues of the greatest King that ever 
France
 had; and that touch∣ed with a remorse for a revolt that made them shake off his Dominion, they would sincerely return under his Royal Protecti∣on, to what pitch of grandeur might not that rich Republick advance? what Traffick might not the 
Genoese
 aspire to, under the triumphant banner of 
France?
 and what 
Corsaires
 durst appear in the 
Mediterranean,
 when our Squadrons joined to twenty Gal∣leys that 
Genoa
 might entertain, should cruise from 
Europe
 to 
A∣frica
 against these infesters of the Seas?




I say that 
Genoa,
 which com∣monly sends out but six Galleys, might easily maintain not onely twenty, but also six men of War at least; to convey their Merchant Ships, if that Republick were again under the protection of the Kings of 
France:
 for seeing then they could have no cause to fear a War from their Neighbours, all their Revenues might be wholly employed in Navigation, that they might become Masters of all the Trade of the 
Mediterra∣nean,
 and successfully carry it on as far as the East and West 
Indies.
 And as the Nobles of 
Genoa
 are extraordinarily rich, and have no less Wit and Courage than Wealth, what employments might not they render themselves capable of under a King, who with wonderful exactness knows how to discern the merit of his Sub∣jects, and who would furnish them with continual occasions of cul∣tivating

 a 
genius,
 that is dastar∣dized by pleasures, and of em∣ploying a Courage, which by an unactive Peace languishes in idle∣ness? The principal Dignities of the State, the highest Commands in the Army the considerable Of∣fices of the Kingdom, would be as much the recompences of their merit, as of their sincere submis∣sions; and it would be a pleasant thing to see them share in the good fortune and glory of a State, whose Interests would go hand in hand with their own. 
Genoa
 and 
Marseilles
 united under the Standard of the 
Flower-de-luce,
 would give the Law from 
Cadiz
 to the 
Dardanelles,
 keep all 
Barbary
 in awful respect, and make the 
Sul∣tan,
 tremble even in the 
Seraglio
 of 
Constantinople.
 The Treasures of the 
Ligurians,
 would daily in∣crease by the free Trade that they might have in their own hands: and that great Commerce draw∣ing

 into the Coffers of the King's Subjects all the Money of 
Europe,
 would render his own the more inexhaustible for the enlarge∣ment of that high Power to which his Virtues buoyed up by extraordinary fortune have raised him. May Heavens grant that that invincible Monarch may reunite to his Crown that pre∣cious Flower, which a revolt heretofore struck out of it, and that 
Louis the Great
 and the 
Ge∣noese
 may contend who shall have the better on't; he by Clemency, and they by profound Submis∣sions.













