A Fight in Ireland between the Lord Lievt. Cromwels forces and the Lord Inchequeens army neer Washford, the number killed and taken prisoners, Col. Trevor wounded and the Lord Inchequeens colours taken, General Oneal dead and the Lord Lievt. drawing away his forces from besieging Duncanon : also the taking of Capt. Plunkets ship with 36 pieces of ordnance with four other ships of a great value, and the manner of Capt. Plunckets escape for his life in a long-boat.
Approx. 6 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 5 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A49673




Wing L53A



ESTC R30487





ocm 11342550




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
A Fight in Ireland between the Lord Lievt. Cromwels forces and the Lord Inchequeens army neer Washford, the number killed and taken prisoners, Col. Trevor wounded and the Lord Inchequeens colours taken, General Oneal dead and the Lord Lievt. drawing away his forces from besieging Duncanon : also the taking of Capt. Plunkets ship with 36 pieces of ordnance with four other ships of a great value, and the manner of Capt. Plunckets escape for his life in a long-boat.
6 p.   


[London] :


Printed for B.A.,


[1649]


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Ireland --  History --  1649-1660.
2012-08
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2012-08
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2013-04
Mona Logarbo
Sampled and proofread
2013-04
Mona Logarbo
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






L53A


R30487


11342550


47502














A FIGHT IN IRELAND Between the Lord Lievt. Cromwels forces and the Lord Inchequeens army neer Washford, the number killed and taken prisoners, Col Tre∣vor wounded, and the Lord Inchequeens co∣lours taken, General Oneal dead, and the Lord Lievt. drawing away his forces from besieging Duncanon, ALSO The taking of Capt. Plunkets ship with 36 pieces of Ordnance with four other ships of a great value, and the manner of Capt. Plunckets es∣cape for his life in a Long-boat.


Printed for B. A.














Severall LEETTERS Of a great fight in IRELAND Neer Washsord betweene the Lord Lievte∣nant Cromwells forces, and the Lord In∣chequeens army.


SIR,


A
Bout five hundred foot, and three hundred horse, which were left at Dublin, for reco∣very of their health, were ap∣pointed by the Lord Lievtenant to march

unto Washford, under the command of Major Nelson. The Enemy having intel∣ligence thereof, sent out a party of about fifteen hundred horse, and two Regiments of foot of Inchequins men under the command of Sir Thomas Armstrong, but it pleased God miraculously to deliver, out party out of the hands of the enemy who had a sharp encounter with them, and after a while put them to the worst, and had the pursuit of them above a mile in this fight (on the enemies party was wounded Collouel Trevor, and his bro∣ther was slain and about twenty more on the place, we took about thirty prisoners, amongst which was Inchequeens Cornet, we also taking his Colours, not one Of∣ficer was lost on our side, only a Captain of horse was shot in the Leg, and about six private Souldiers slain, This morning we hear, that Owen Roe Oneal is dead, the English Souldiers come in dayly from the enemy, The death of General Oneal, is very much lamented among his party, and it is probable, that this businesse will

in a short time, cause a great faction, to a∣rise amongst the Irish, which is all at pre∣sent from your assured friend.


R.L.


Dublin 
Novemb. 14. 1649.






Another Letter from Ireland.


SIR,


I Thank you for your Letter, and am heartily glad to hear of the present re∣crvits for Ireland. For newes here, take it briefly thus, the Kord Lieutenant of Ire∣land did send five hundred foote, and three hundred horse to go to Wexford, and the Lord Inchiquin hearing of them, sent fir Thomas Armstrong with eight hun∣dred horse, and two thousand foot, to fall upon them, saying, they should not need to fight much with them, for they should find them lye dead under every hedge, but it pleased God, miraculously to deliver these poor men, for the Enemy 
alling on, it pleased God to strengthen these poore

distressed creatures. that they routed the Enemy, killed about 30, and took neer 60, with very little loss on our fide, thus you see the great mercy of God to us, and J doubt not, but in a short time, the Lord will finish his great work in that nation. So J rest,


Your affectionate friend I. M.






A Letter from Chester.


SIR,


COllonel Pride is here, and hath three parties of foot coming hither to be trans∣ported for Ireland, and I believe they will be about a thousand men, and then these with three companies of Colonell Moors, and three com∣panies of colonel Fenwicks, wil make a consi∣derable body: Captain Clarke, captain of the swan frigot that went convoy for Derry, is come back and put into Heland, and writes me

thence some relation he hath heard from scot∣land, that eight great ships should be arrived there, and that colonell King, collonel Iohnson. others are landed, and sixty sail of ships with souldiers, of all which I believe little or no part of it; for I have a Nephew that went over with captain Clark to London-Derry, who sent me a letter, wherein he writes not one word of it. This is all I will trouble you at present.


November 24, 1649.






Another Letter from Ireland.


SIR


SInce my last, I received Letters, confir∣ming for certain Corke and youghall have declared for the Parliament of England, and they hope the most part of Munster will be gained without shedding of bloud.


I hope your distractions are at a period, and if so, I doubt not but by the blessing of God, in

ear longer the adversaries boasting spirits will be quieted. We are now treating with Waterford, and in a short time I hope to give you a good account of it: many of our Officers are dead. That arch sea Pirate, captain Plun∣ket was taken, with two prizes, but himself e∣scaped in a long boat, his ship had thirty six piece of Ordnance, and came into our harbour before he was aware, three prises more were ta∣ken in the River near Duncannon, before we withdraw our Army thence.






Imprimatur,


JOHN RUSHWORTH.


FINIS











