An epistle to the Christian Indians, giving them a short account, of what the English desire them to know and to do, in order to their happiness written by an English minister, at the desire of an English magistrate, who sends unto them this token of love.
Mather, Cotton, 1663-1728.
Approx. 44 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 15 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2014-11 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A50181




Wing M1178



ESTC W18263





ocm 12561222




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
An epistle to the Christian Indians, giving them a short account, of what the English desire them to know and to do, in order to their happiness written by an English minister, at the desire of an English magistrate, who sends unto them this token of love.
Mather, Cotton, 1663-1728.
[2], 14 [i.e. 28] p.   


Boston :


Printed by Bartholomew Green, and John Allen,


1700.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Indians of North America --  Massachusetts --  Missions.
Indians of North America --  Languages.
2013-10
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2013-12
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2014-01
Kate Allen
Sampled and proofread
2014-01
Kate Allen
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2014-03
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






M1178


W18263


12561222


63202














Wussukwhonk En Christianeue asuh peantamwae INDIANOG, Wahteauwaheonaount Teanteagquassinish, Nish ENGLISHMANSOG Kodtantamwog 
Indianog
 Wahteaunate kah Ussenate, En michemohtae Wunniyeuonganit.


Wussukwhosik nashpe 
Cotton Mather,
 Englishmanne 
Nohtompeantog,
 nampoo∣hamunate kodtantamoonk 
Edward Bromfield
 Englishmanne 
Nanawunnuaenuh,
 noh ukkodanmnumau yeu womoausue Magooonk en Indiansut.


MƲSHAƲWOMƲK,
 Printeuun nashpe 
Bartholomew Green,
 kah 
John Allen.
 1700.












Wussukwhonk EN INDIANSUT, Neeg wehquetogeeg oowesuong Jesus Christ, Nullordeumun, wuttaieyeuoh kah Nenawun. 
Kitteamonteanitteaonk apehtunko
k kah wunohtea∣onk wutch Godut kooshinonut kah wutch nul∣Lordeumun Jesus Christ.


KOOwehquetumonumwoo, Neematog, nashpe ummonaneteaongash God,
 unnantamoe nat∣wontamunate 
ish wunnamuhkuteyeuash yeuut wussukwhonganit Ut wabesuoga∣
n it kah womoausuonganit God yeush 
 w
mook: 
Yeush Noowaongash quttauwemocutch ut kuttahhoowout.


Kuppey a
numwoo paudtanunnate yeu nehtamo∣onk; 
Webe wuttinneum bkook Lord Jesus Christ nashpe mamusse kuttahhoowoash; newutche, natwontamook
 ut∣toh an mogagish 
kutusseanshuken.


Wunnamuhkut woh kussimwoo, 
Jehovah, kum∣mishanakausuwehtunkqun.


Ne Q
oshowaonk God, 
Nag nuttinnoog, matta wamissiminneumeoneg, ken nummissinninneum, kah nag gish noowaog, keen Nummanittoom.


Ut kuhhogkaout, 
Christiane Indianog,
 nenawun

 
Christiane Englishmansog,
 nashpe monchanata
w
 wekontamoonk nunnaumumum ne Quoshodtuonh pakodche nnih. Kah sunnamatta kenaau kummon∣chanatamumwoo yeu wutuffeeonk God?


Tohsohke kenaau mat peantamoog, 
kenishkeneunk∣qussimwoo kah kukkittumunkeyeumwoo kah kuppogkenum∣woo kah kapposkissimwoo;
 Qut God ut wunnana won∣tamooonganit wogl
ouunum 
Englishmansog
 Womo∣ausuonk kukkuhkootomunkqunaout wahteauonk, noh 
webe wunnamuhkuttee Manit kah Jesus Christ noh anoo∣nut, nnoh sampoi wahteaunnate ne micheme pomanta∣moonk


Asquam kenootamumwoo 
Sobsumoe Wunaunche∣mokaonk God, na ahquompak wanne koo-Christeumum∣wop, wanne annoosey
g kah wanne Manittoemeyog, u
 muttachkit
 Neit apeyog ut 
wuttahpebannit Mattannit, mafinobteamukeeg nashpe nagum ussenate wuttenantam∣moonk.
 Na abquompak kenaau 
kummattamagoemum∣woo, matta kenoswehtamumwoo kutasoekekodteamumwos, kah kutussemwoo moocheke matchekedtant amoong ash, kuppomantamumwoo ishkauanittuonganit, kussekene asim∣woo kah kussekenaattimwoo ishkauanittuonganit, kussekeneasim∣woo kah kussekenaattimwoo
 Kuppomantamumwoo ut pohk
nahtu
kah asootuonganit; nux, 
kenupmwoo, ash p
mantam
g;
 kah moochcke kenuppooonganoo kuk∣keteahogkounooog auog 
en muttae pohkenaiyeuut, kah awakompanae ayeuonganit.


Missi ukkitteamonteanitteaonkaneuoo ut English∣mansog, matra we be kuttinninnumunkqunaout mo∣nataih mutraohkee wanegukish, qut koowahteau∣wahikqunaout 
may ne sagkompagunuomocuk en micheme pomantamoonganit.
 Matta pahtoooog Englishmansog weenauwetuonk wutche kenaau; wamut onkquatunk oadich
caog Englishmansog wu
che nishnoh teag ne a
munumopanneg wutche Indianog; Matta, qut

 kukkuhkootamunkoopanneg 
Wanaunchemooka
 Christ,
 atquam ne kukkodtantamumwoo, kah 
ayi
 wog Wunaunchemook 
onk Christ mo 
ohunnoadti
nooudt,
 tohkonogque malishadtauog moocheke muttanongane poundtooooash, on
 kenaau woh kutahtomwoo Wunaunchemookaonk God.


Monatash ennomaiyeuteaon gash, yeu waj woh kuttabuttantamumwoo womoausue Englishmanog, newutche naumoh
ttit Indiansog 
poshkino
g, noochum∣wehtahwhoog, kah naken nuppooog; ukkitteamonteanumo∣uh kah wunnanauwanumouh.
 Englishmanog missi ke∣tompaog: y
 waj woh koowomonomwoo English∣manog neane kooshoowong, kah k
mattooog: Toh n
it kenaau marwaweyog ayeuuhkone Englishman∣sog; asuh tohneit kummagumwoo aninnumoad
uonk en nummatwomunonut, 
neit kutonkquadtausimwoo machi
k wutch wanegik;
 kah neit kutogqueneunkqus∣simwoo Askook togqùodchit, neh howae Indian pasooont en nootaut mahche Askook nano kussop∣pissu, chohkoohwhau nnoh Indianoh kah wunnush∣oun.


Qu
 mat wohkukquoshinnue missi kitteamontea∣nitteaouk mistugkenuk God, wekontamwaheonate Englishmanog 
k
nohtinukqunate yeu womoausuonk Je∣hovah.
 Missuglten God annoonont Wunaunche∣mookaonk en kuhhogkaout, woh kussimwoo, 
Ho∣nane K
s
kquie Ketas
oot natinneaham? nuppooe A∣tium? asuh Papekq?


Mahc
e ku
ohtomwoo Wunaunchemook
onk, 
Missinninnueg apitcheg pohkenaiyeuut
 naumwog missi 
qu
i; kah apb
ttit wutohket kah wutonkouchtom Nuppooonk, wequai speemoo. Newaieh 
yeu wunne∣toonk God,
 mishontoowagk, 
Ʋttoh unne wunnegen God?
 kah yeu oonenehuwaonk God woh usluwehteamoo en aiu
koianatamunate.




Tob unne wum
egen God?
 noh kuttinninumunkqun 
Wus
ukwhongash, nish tapenunmoougish koowaeantamwa∣hikqunnaou en wadeha
i
tuongani
, Ʋpbookum God, pomantamo
 Ʋpbo
kum, Ʋpbib
eum
 qushkinnumuk en Indiane unnontoowaonganit. U
 kenugke wame muttanonganogkuss
og 
Indianog
 wu
ohtimoneash, ut yeu missi chippi muttaohke
; matta howae Indiane wutohtimoin webe kenaau, ohtoog Upbibleum ne∣henwonche unnontowaonganit, 
kenaau kummithet∣teamwoo en kesukqut.
 Kah kutahtomwoo ukkatechi∣zaongash kah onkatoganash upbookumash ut ne∣henwonche Indiane unnontowaonganit kattaninnum∣onkqunaount wohtamunate Upbiblcum


Kukkunkootomonteamwoo onk 
pasuk nont webe God, nashpe nagum wame teanteagquassinish; yeuoh JE∣HOƲAH wunnamubkuttee God kah pomantamwae God.


Onk 
missugken kum-Manittoomun, kah mishe menuh∣kesu; oowohwohtamoonk matta wohkukquoano: kah God womoausu kah numwohtea kitteamonteanitteaonk, cheh∣cheke musquantam, kah monat Ʋmmonaneteaonk?
 Kah 
Jehovah sampweussu ut wame ummayut, & wunnetu∣panatam wame wittanakausuonganit.


O
k ut 
pasuk Manittoout ne Wutooshimau, Wun∣naumonniin & wunnetupanatamwe Nashauanit, & yeug nishuog pasukooooog.


Onk 
negonne kuhquttum God ummissinninneumoh en wunnaumonakononate mukki
g nashpe Jesus Christ, & noh 
ezteunk wame neane weogkontog ut nehenwonche wuttenantamooonganit.


Onk 
we
ke kutchissik ayim God Kesuk & obke, & wunnaumun G d nishnoh teag mahche kezteunk & kus∣seb mo ahche wunnegen.


Onk 
kogkounum (asuh quaquanunnum) God wame ceanteagqussinish nas
pe ummenuhkesue wuttinnoowaonk.




Onk 
nnihyeuog Angelsog, neg wuttenn
 Nashaua∣nittooog, annoonooog nah wunnanaunonaount neg pish 
ump
nukeeg wadchanittuonk; Kah apoog onkatogkeeg Angelsog neg matta wadchanumoogeg wunnegonappuonga∣noo, qut nukkodtumwog wutappuonganoo kah wadchanoog ut michemohtag Chainsash agwe pohkenahtu en wussit∣tumooonganit ne mohsag kesuk
d.


Onk 
God kezheop wosketompuh neaunak nehenwenche wuttinnussuonk


Onk nashpe 
pasuk wosketomp,
 nashpe 
Adam
 kah ummittamwussoh 
Evah,
 nag meechwog 
ummeechum∣muonk Mahtug
 ne God ukquhtinouh, 
Ma
eheseonk petutteau mutta
hket
 kah 
Nuppooonk nashpe Matcheseonk
 kah 
nemehkuh Nuppooonk nuhkuhkauau wame missinnin∣
uog newutche wame matchesebettit.


Onk 
God wus
aumowomontam muttaok, newaj ma∣guk Wunnukquttegheonob,
 onk 
howan wunnamptauont, matta wob awakompanau, qut woh ohtau micheme po∣mantamooonk


Onk 
Christ noh wutche Israelitsog nashpe weyans, noh aneukausit wame Manit micheme wunniyeu.


Onk, 
Jesus Christ neemunum en wuhhogkat neyana∣yeuunate wuttinneumunat, kah namhet netatuppe wos∣ketompaut, hohpaheau wuhhogkuh kah noswehtamwae Nupp
o pummetenkapunae Nuppooonk Newajeh God qunnunkqueu misheheop kah oowesuonganukauopoh aneu∣k
m
moo wame Wesuongash.


Onk 
God missohham K
suk uttoh ad
 pish Wussittuk mutta
k u
 sampweusseonganit, nashpe neh wosketompuh (L
rd Jesus Christ) anonobeh, yeu wame wosketompaog w
h wunnamuhkut oowabtineau, newutche wutomuhkinub wu
ch Nuppunate.


O k 
H
ur peraumoo, na ut wame ut wenohkeit a∣piteh
eg pish nootamuneau oowadtauatonkqussuonk
 Lord

 Jesus Christ, 
kah pish sohhamwog, neg wunne
sseecheg eu omohkenate en Pomantamoconganit & neg mateh
∣secheeg omohkena
s en Awakompanaonganit.


O
k 
noowadchanitteamun, nashpe Kitteamonteanit∣tu
nk nashpe Wunnamptamooonk & matta nashpe nehenwonche nenawun, ne ummagooonk God.


Onk nashpe Jesus Christ 
kohkotomouteaog abquoan∣tamoadtin matcheseongash, & nashpe 
uoh wame Wanamptogeeg sampwanumoog.


Onk 
Wunnamptamwe imnoowaonk onk nag Wanamp∣tauoncheg God, woh abchue usseog wunanakausuongash, newutche yeush wunnegenash & wutchaiyeuong anoooo∣ash wutch wosketompaog.


Onk 
noh nooche usseit wunanakausuonk ut nuhhogka∣nonut, pish upkodehe ussen no pajeh ukkesuk
dtumus Jesus Christ.


Woi kuttumunge Indianog; 
Ketassoot Kesukqu
 & ohkeit adtahtunk
 yeush sohsumoe teanteagquaffin∣ish wutche onkatoganash wutohtimoneash ut mut∣taohket 
(neg paguanoog, newutche quenauhikquog woh∣wchtamoonk)
 qut 
Koowabteauwahitteanash


Yeuyeu missi ne kutanakaufuonganoo, 
att
unum∣
enate wunnamuhkuteyeuuk ut womonittuonganit.


Wimnamptamog
 wunamuhkuteyeuuk, 
ne
 kenun∣nook asuh menuhkenook ne 
Kitteamonteanittea
 Wuunoowaonk
 ne God ayik weeche ummissinuin∣neumoh nashpe Jesus Christ. Unnok.


W
i Schsumoe Jehovah, pasuk God, Wutooshima
, Wunnaumoniin & wunnetupanatamwe Nashauanit; Nanous Kukkitteamonteanitteaonk yeuyeu noowekonta
∣wahikqun kittinninnumaunate nuhhog, onk woh nutoheo wnnnaiye
onk webe ut Kuhhogkat, nnoh Nummanitt
om & Nussampoiyeum (asuh nutahtoonk) micheme. Kah nuhhog nummagon en Wunnaumonuh God abtauunate

 Samp
usseonk & wadchanittuonk & quiunupp
 peyaonaonk en Watooshimau, nashpe Nagum: Kah nuhhog nummagon en Wunnashauanis God, onk wo
 noowahtedh Wunnaum niin & o
womononate & ootin∣ninneumuhkouonate, & wek ntamoe metahuc ussenato Naumatuongash Nuppo
qu
chwussueneum


Ku
tumunge Indian!
 Ponush Ku
tah ka
 k nutch
g yeu Wunnoowaonganit. Ogk 
aman kah nootaman yeu wunnoowaonkan
 Kut
oongash, U, Lord, Noowek
itam; Lord! noo
 elcontum


Y
u Wunnoow
onk le
dtantamup God as imun∣ate weeche mona
g li d
nog 
u
oh
imou
ash 
ke∣ratrean
u
gano
: qu
 ma
a wuttapen
noounneau. Kah newu c
 ma
 wo
p neamoounn au yeu waj paguanoog na
hpe U kqu
u
q
e W
ss
tumoo∣ongash God, n
an
 
u
q
ash ut Touohkomuk Mohtuttaash nas
 p
 N o
au


Nullordeun 
 J 
us Christ kuhquuum 
Baptizaonk
 menu
kereahac K
nkinn
su
nk yeu Wunnoowaonk. Neg me
ahhoowac n
munuke 
 
eu Wunnoowaonk l
shnon
 
Baptiz
og
 nashp
 Ukku
koo
umwetenenuh Jesus Christ N
htomp
antog lok
nuk 
Nippe
 ut kuh∣hogkat, ut o
w
su
nganit Wutooshimau, Wunnau∣mon
kah wunn
 upanatamwe Nashauanit, wussin God, Kitunnumauunun 
henwonche nuhhog kah Nuk i 
eamont
ani
eaonk kah 
 quoantamoadtuonk kah K
suk; K
h ku
sh
nt neil kussim, Lord, neen kutta
h
, wudchanen! Lord wekon
amwe neen kit∣tinninn
um.


Kah 
euyeu m
nul ke usseck noswehtamunate Wuum
u
ma
uong
sh kui-Lordeumwoo kum-Ma∣noohoowaeneum.


N
wu 
e annoonau God en kuhhogkaout we∣kontmo
 Wunaunchemokaonk, onk neetu wutch

 kena
u wadchanuwaenin, ku
shnont kuttabuttan∣mauomwoo God, kah wahteauwaheuk kuttabuttan∣tamoonk nashpt Nosw
htamoonk


Ahque cheketok Jehovah kesukque Ketassoot, noh wunnanumukqueog nashpe Nashauanhtue Wunna∣nittuongash ut kesukque ayeuonganehtu nashpe Jesus Christ Nullordeumun! Woi mattammagwe & asooge missinninnuog, toh neit yeu kuttin oadtuhkauoneau Jehovah.


Plukquodtash wutannoo
eamoongash God, kah yeush wame wunnetupanatamweyeuooash, sampoi∣
euash & wunnegenuooash. Nish piuk wutannoo∣teamoongash God kukkuhkootomunkqun, Woi Indiane Netomp! Womononate Jehovah kum-Ma∣nittoom weeche wame Kuttah & wame Kukketea∣hogkou & wame Kuttenantamoonk & womon∣nonate ketatteamung neane Kuhhog. Natwontash yeush 
Piuk wutannooteamoongash
 ne ahhuttahshe kenaum pluk Kuppohchanutchegash.


Negonne Wutannooteamoonk ne, um Manitto∣muhkon onkatogkeeg Manittooog ut anaquabeh, Yeu nauwuttamun, Sohsumwah ne webeyeue wun∣namu
kuttee Jehovah, webe Lordut J
sus Christ & Wowussumau nagum, nashpe Kukketeahogkou & Kuhhog, & matta howan onkatog qut webe nagum. W
ekontash nnoh ut, yeuoh Pabuhtanum, yeuoh Womous, yeuoh Peantamau, wuttinnoowaonk Nootas
, & Ketoohamau Waenomaonk.


N
h
h o
u wutannooteamoonk, ne A
imauuhkon Kuhhog Nunnukontunk, you nauwuttamun, Kun∣kinneasish & nanaeihteash wame ukkuhkoowaong∣ash ut wowussumaonganit God kah matta onka∣toganash, qut yeush w
be nish ku
quttum God nagum.




Nishwe wutannooteamoonk ne, Neemunumooh∣kon OOwesuonk Jehovah kum-Mani
toom tahnoo∣che, yeu nauwuttamun, U wame wauflumaonganit God, nahnaunne ut chadch
ke
euaonganit nanawon∣tamwe avish, kah nagwu
teae quttianumo
 auwoh∣teash nishnoh teag n
 nashpe God noowahteauwa∣hikqun Wuhhog, OOwesuongash, Wuttinnoowa∣ongash kah Wutanak
usuongash


Y
ue tahshe Wu
annoot
am
onk, ne Mehquoan∣tash 
Sabbath day
 kuppahketeauunate, yeu na uwut∣tamun, chippe ponush Manittoe ukk sukodtum wut∣che Wauss
maonk God Kah momansh nanaweh∣teaush mamusse Ukkesukod
um wutche Peantamoo∣onk & momansh mamusse ukkesukodtum wutche Tabu
antamoonk.


Na panna ta
she Wutannooteamoonk, ne Quttia∣num Koosh & Kookas, Yeu nauwuttamun, nishnoh Howan quttianum ut ayeuonganit, Wessukiin kah Ummittamwussin, Wutchetuonganog & Mukkielog, Wussontimominneunk & Wu
tinneuminneunk, Na∣nanuacheg & agwopehtauoncheeg, Noht ompean∣togeeg & neg Nootoge
g, kuttinne womonittinneaout kah kuttinne quttianittinneaout.


Nequtta tanshe Wuttannooteamoonk ne, Nusheh∣teohkon, Yeu nauwuttamun, Auwohteash nishnoh wunnegen Aninnumoadtuonk wadchanumunate nuk∣keteaonk, nuppomantamoonk & noonohteaonk kah onkatogkeeg uppomantamooonganoo.


Nesiusuk tahshe Wutanooteamooonk ne, 
Ma∣mussehkon;
 Yeu nauwuttamun, Ahqueteaush wame nishkeneunk
ussuonk ut metahnut, ut kuttoowonga∣nit, 
ah ut uss
onganit. Akodchish ut nishnoh teag.


Swos
k tanshe Wutannooteamooonk ne, 
Kummoo∣
ubkon,
 Yeu nauwuttamun, Ussish sampwutteahae ut

 antuhamauaonganit kah ut wadchanumooonganit maumachiash, kah wanne teag mat sampweusseae neemunush wutche howan, enninnumau nanouwe Magooongash neg ut quenauhikqutcheeg.


Paskoogash tahshe Wutannooteamoonk ne, 
Pan∣noowae wauwaonuhkon ketatteamung.
 Nagwutteae sampwe unnounch kah menuhke ussegk onkatogkeeg wosketompaog sampwe unnonate: Nanawehteaush kukquehtianumoonk kah quehtianum onkatogkeeg missinninnuog.


Piuk tahshe Wutannooteamoonk ye
, 
Ahchowon∣wontogkon,
 Yeu nauwuttamun, Tapantamook me∣ta
hoowae ne ut unnihyeuonganit ne God kuhqut∣tumungqueong. A
que ishkauoush onkatogkeeg wun∣naiyeuonk.


Nootamook, Woi kenaau kuhkootomauwutcheeg Indianog. Tohneit Koonamptamumwoo ut wunnof∣tamooonganit Lord Jesus Christ en Godut, onk woh Kussampweusseahitteamwoo nashpe wunnoswehtam∣moonk Lord Jesus Christ; neit God kupponumun∣kou wekontamwe Metah ussenate neaunak sampwe wutuhshuwaonk Christ, kah 
asuhkauonate God neane wcmonitcheeg Noswehtamoe Mukkiesog.


Wunnamuhkut Nunnoswehtamoonk nogque en wunnetupanatamwe Godur, webe peasin: Yeu waj asekesukokish 
Aiuskoiantamoe
 wussumook kuhhogka∣oog an
quabit Lord, newutche ne wussaume peasin.


Qut tohncit matta kenoswehtamoomwoo wutte∣nantamoonk God ut Jesus Christut, 
neaunak wame Watanno
teamo
ongash,
 neit kenaau 
asq Wunnamp∣tamoogeeg
 kah 
ummusquanittea
nk God kutapehtunkum∣woo.
 Kah tohneit kenaau matta 
Wunnetupanatamwae∣nuog,
 kah matta kukkodtantamumwoo 
Wunnetupana∣tamweyeuinnate nishnch ut unnibyeuonganit, matta

 kuttapenumo
mwoo obtauunate wussam poiyeu
 W
∣netupanatogeeg ut wequaiyeuut.


Hah, ahche womonogeeg Indianog, 
Ʋnnok Lord, nootowontam wame Kittinoowa
ngash papaume wame teanteagquassinish sampoiyeuut kah nussekeneam nishnoh pannoowae ma
.


Newutche, wunnamuhkut woh nuffim, 
Wann
 wunnetupanatamoonk, matta h
wa
 wosket
mp w
h nauoou Godoh.


Qut 
Neetompaog!
 Toh waj neit monaog ut kenug∣ke kenaau matcheseog nashpe 
Kogkeissippamoonk
 ne∣tatuppe nikku
me, neane wosketomp pomushadt ut pohkenahtu nikkumme penushau ut pahsahtheganit? 
Kogkeissippamoonk
 ne Matcheseonk ayeuuhkone 
nishwe tahshe Wutannooteamoonk;
 Newutche ne nashpe wun∣negen Teag matcheseae auwohteamuk. Kah ne matcheseonk ayeuuhkone 
wame piuk Wutannooteamo∣ongash:
 newutche Kogkeissippamwaen, qutchehuk Mattanitto, wahteurk pokquenum wame 
Piuk Wut∣anncoteamoongash.
 Uttoh unne ku
tumunge kah nish∣kencunkqussu 
K
gkeissipamwaen,
 ogque Hogsut oyom∣weu pusseogquanit. Woi kuttumungeyeue lndianog, Sun kukodtauwompasimwo Christ wutche 
peasin wut∣tattamooonk?
 Sun pish kummagumwoo kukketea∣hogkounoog wutche peasin 
Rum
 asuh 
Cyder.
 Wana∣netamoohteok ne unkqueneunkque Wuttinnoowa∣onk God; ne ogque mishontoowau Padtohquohhanit, 
Kogkeissippamwaenuog matta pish ahtauouog Wutassoo∣tamoonk God.


Kah, Tohwaj monaog ut kenugke kenaau matta sampwe wunne nananumooog wutteateashiyeuonga∣nooash? Kuhkootomok 
Kummukkiesumog,
 nanaua∣numook 
Kummukkiesumog; menuhke ussegk,
 onk Kum∣mukkiesumog woh Peantamunneau en Godut.

 Matta ne nanoog, neit nashpe 
napanna tahshe Wut∣ann ottamoonk
 pish Koosumitteamwoo?


N
shpe 
swosuk tahshe Wutannooteamoonk
 pish koo∣sumitteamwoo pomantamog 
ut Sasekeneamooonganit.
 N g matta anakauseog, 
nananweseog
 Tohwajmatta ku
ahtooomwoo 
Wetuomash,
 kah wuttittannohketea∣ong
sh & 
Orcha
dsash
 & 
Netasuog
 & 
tumhowae N
h
oanakausuongash
 netatuppe wonk 
Nenawun.
 Nau∣mog nu
uhshuwaonganun, woh kutakodchimwoo; kah wogkouunook kuhhogkaoog menuhke Ana kausinate.


Ahquompi, yeu 
nagwutteac menuhke kutussemwoo matta wuttameheonate asuh God asuh wosk
tompaog,
 Neit neg Wunnetowog 
woh moacog en Moeuweh∣k
monganit.


Qut 
asquam ayik Motuwehkomunk, negonne mo
 Kuppeantamumwoo
 weeche 
matmetseonk
 & mos Ke∣natootomumwoo ukkenoosoowaonk onkatoganash Moeuwehkomonganash nanceswe 
Englishmansog kab Indiansog.


Neit woh kuppetutteam wunnetupanatamwe 
Wun∣noowaonk
 kah Quoshomuaonk, yeu unne.


Metahboowae nummagumun nuhogkanonog en webe∣yeue wunnamuhkutee God, JEHOƲAH, noh Wutoosh∣iman, Wunnaumoniin,
 kah 
wunnetupanatamwe Nash∣auanic,
 kah 
nuppogkodtantaminnun nashpe aninnumo∣adtuonk God, wuttinneumuhkauonate micheme: Kah nukquoshauomun moae wowussumonate God kah aninnum∣meadtinate wame neemalog yeu ut Mooeuwehkomonganit pumushonate ut Sampwe ummayash Lord


Neit pepenamook 
Nohtompeantog,
 yeu mos 
Wun∣n
tou,
 Tap
nuk kah w
kontog kukkuhkootomunk∣qunaout 
Wahteauunate Lord,
 kah woshwunnumunato kah Auwonteanate 
Ʋkkuhkootomwehteaongash God,


 en wame missinninnutu, kah noh mos 
Askuhwheteau
 kah 
Mamtunissu
 & 
muttae Peantog
 keme 
 weeche onkatogeeg, kah noh 
wunne Nanawanum nehenwon∣che Week;
 kah noh 
Waenomukqussu
 kah Kesukquie Uppomushaonk. Netatuppe Nohtompeantog kus∣nunt 
Konoswetamumwoo,
 newutche 
Nanawunnuwaen
 kah 
Askuhwheteaenin wutche Kukketeahogkounouh, noh pish nampooham en Godut wutche Kukketeahogkounouh.
 Kah woh kuppepenamumwoo 
Eldersog, neg pish wun∣ne Wunnanawunumunneau Ʋmmoeuwehkomonganit;
 kah en netatuppeyeue Eldersut magook anue 
Quttia∣nittuonk,
 kah en onkatogkeeg wosketompaog Wonk 
Deaconsog
 woh ohtoog ut Kummoeuwehkomonganu∣out, quoshai
amunate nish quenauhikoongash wut∣che Nohtompeantogecg kah wutche wut-Tableumut Lord. Ut 
Wuttableeumut Lord,
 Pastorsog asuh Nohtompeantog neit pish magou en kuhhogkaout, 
Sohqunum
e Petukqunnunk kah Wine ut Wuttattam∣waitch,
 ne nauwuttamun, 
Wuhhog kah OOsqheonk
 Lord Jesus Christ, ne Sephausu Christ wu
ch kenaau.


A
quam kummoookomoomwoo 
Sacrament,
 Na∣tootomook Kuttahhoowoash kah kuppomantamoo∣onganoooash, kah aiuskoiantamoe sampooagk kum∣ma
cheseonganoo ayeuuhkone wame 
Piuk Wutaen∣nooteamoongash,
 kah pean
amo
k God wutche ah∣quoantamoad
uonk nashpe wunnuppooonk Jesus Christ. Kah apeog Sacramen
ut, a
quompi kutta∣tumunumumwoo 
Petukqunnunk kah Wine,
 Anomittea∣hae unnok, Lord! 
Nuttattumunum koo-Christeum! Lord! Yeu
eu nunneemunum Christ! kah Lord newut∣che Christ napuk, yeuwaj nuppoomooutch nummatchese∣
uk k
 
 mantaj Nukketeahogkou


M
hehe yeu, match
sean, neit anue matchi
 kum∣matahes
onk, onk orkatog
eg missinninnuog

 matcheseong. Wunnetupanatamwe Manit moocheke moomoosqheau neg matchesecheg mahche 
mooohkom∣wog Sacrament.
 Howan ut kenugke kenaau yeuyeu matcheseit, nnoh Aushkomook, kah nnoh ayimook sampoounate ummatcheseonk kah aiu
k
ianatamun∣nate Qut tohneit Howan nagwuteae aushkomut matta aius oianatamoo, neit 
Pogkenook wutch kenugke kenaau noh matcheseanuh.


Womonogkeeg Indianog! Nukkodtumog um∣mayash Lord J
sus Christ, 
Nummenuhke wanwon pish papquanne Kummahtissimwoo.
 God pish wutuhque paguanau kenaau nashpe ummusquanittamoe wussit∣tumooongash: Kah ut Chepiohkomukqut pish kummishontoowam, 
Nutawakompanam, Nutawa∣kompanam!
 wutche anue moocheke kodtumwaeu onk wunnepagwash kenaum ut Mehtugqut.


Qut, toh neit kuppomushaumwoo ut ummayut Lord Jesus Christ, pish kutahtomwoo anue Nasha∣uanittue weenauwetuongash moocheke onk neg ah∣tongeeg wame muttaohkee teanteagquassinish Kah nuppooog, God pish neemunau Kukketeahogkou∣nouh we
chauonate Angelsog. Lord Jesus Christ pi
 Omol
kinnau kuhhogkaoog wutch Nuppunnate en michemohtae Pomontamoonganit, Wussituumwae K
tukodtut. Pish koonanumitteamwoo weoche Lord Jesus Christ anue mooch
ke kodtumwaeu onk kena∣umumwoo anogqsog ponkokqut, asuh quslukquanash ut ohkeit, asuh nippe padtipp
shinsh ut Seippuut.


Yeuveu 
Natwontash toh Ancowai kah Lord anin∣numnnksush wohwohtamoonk nishnoh ut.


WOHKUKQUOSHIN.
















An EPISTLE To the Christian INDIANS, Giving them A Short Account, of what the ENGLISH Desire them to KNOW and to DO, in order to their Happiness.


Written by an English 
Minister,
 at the Desire of an English 
Magistrate,
 who sends unto them this Token of Love.


BOSTON,
 Printed by 
Bartholomew Green,
 and 
John Allen.
 1700.












An EPISTLE To the INDIANS Who
 call upon the Name of Jesus Christ our Lord, both their Lord and ours. Grace be unto you, and Peace, from God our Father, and from our Lord Jesus Christ.


I 
Beseech you Brethren, by the mercies of God,
 that you consider seriously the true things, Which my Epistle shall tell you. In the Fear, and the Love of God, consider them. 
Let these sayings sink down into your Hearts.


I come to you, with this M
ssage; 
Only serve the Lord
 Jesus Christ 
with all your Heart, for, consider how great things he hath done for you


Truly, you may say, 
The Lord hath done great things for us


It was the promise of God, 
I will say to them which were not my people, Thou art my people, and they shall say, Thou art my God.


In you 
Christian Indians,
 we

 
Christian English,
 do with wonder and glad∣ness behold that promise accomplished. And will not you wonder at it?


While you were in your Ignorance, you were 
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind,
 & 
naked;
 But God in his providence hath stir∣rid up the charity of the 
English,
 to bring you the 
knowledge
 of Him, who is 
the only true God, and Jesus Christ, whom he hath sent, whom to know is Life eternal.


Before you heard the 
Glorious Gospel of God,
 you were 
at that time without Christ, having no Hope, and without God in the world.
 Then y
 were, in the 
snare of the Devil, taken Captive by him, to do his Wi
l.
 Then 
ye were, foolish disobedient, deceived, serving diverse Lusts and pleasures, living in malice, and envy, hateful and hating one another.
 You lived in Darkness, and madness, while you lived: yea, you were 
Dead while you lived;
 And when you Died, your Spirits went into 
utter Darkness
 and the 
place of Torment.


It was great compassion in the English, not only to offer you many comforts of this Life, but also to show you the 
way that leads to ever∣lasting Life.
 The English did not expect any Benefits from you; they have given you a good price, for all that you Communicate unto them; No, but they have Preached

 unto you the 
Gospel of Christ,
 even when you, being asleep, did not ask for it; and in doing so, they have 
made the Gospel of Christ without charge
 to you, though they put themselves to the 
charge
 of many thousands of pounds, that you might enjoy that Favour of God. You have cause to be thanklul unto the Chari
able English; who saw you 
stripped, and wounded, and Half Dead;
 but 
when they saw you they had compassion on you, and took care of you.
 The English have been your great Friends; you must be for them, as for your Fathers, and your Brothers; If you be their enemies, or help their enemies, you will 
Requite Evil for Good,
 and you will be, as if an Indian should bring to the fire side a Snake frozen and starved, and the Snake after he is comforted should sting the kind Indian, and kiil him.


But infinitely g
ea
er was the compassion of the great God in moving the English, thus to 
shew you the kindness of the Lord.
 When the great God sends his Gosp
l to you, you may say, 
After whom does the King of Heaven seek? After a dead Dog, after a Flea.


Since you have the Gospel, 
The people which Sat in Darkness, See a Great Light, and unto them which sat in the Region and shadow of Death, Light is sprung up.
 Let this 
goodness of God,
 cause you to cry out, 
How Good is God?
 and let it 
lead you to Repentance.




How good is God,
 who hath given you the 
Scripture,
 whereby you may be made wise 
unto Salvation! Gods Book, the Book of life,
 the 
Bible,
 is translated into your language. Among all the thousands of Na
ions of 
Indians,
 on this mighty half of the Wo
ld, there is not one besides you, so 
Lifted up to Heaven
 And you have Catechisms, and other Treatises, in your own language, to help you in understanding of the Bible.


You are Instructed, That 
there is but one God of whom are all things,
 even JEHOVAH, 
He is the True God, he is the living God.


That 
great is our Lord, and of great Power, His understanding is Infinite,
 And, 
The Lord is Gracious, and full of compassion, slow to Anger, and of great Mercy:
 And, 
The Lord is Righteous in all His wayes, and Holy in His works


That in 
the one God, there is the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
 and, 
These three are One


That God 
hath predestinated His People unto the Adoption of children by Jesus Christ, and works all things after the counsel of His own Will.


That 
in the Beginning God created the Heavens and the Earth, and God saw all that He had made, and behold, it was very good.


That 
God upholds all things, by the word of his Power.




That there are 
Angels,
 who are 
Ministring Spirits, sent forth to minister for them, who shall be Heirs of salvation;
 And there are other 
An∣gel
, who k
p
 not their first Estate, but left their own Habitation and be Reserved in everlasting Chains under Darkness, unto the Judgment of the great Day.


That God 
created man in Hi
 own Image.


That by one 
man even by Adam,
 and his wife 
Eve,
 ea
ing the 
F
uit
 of a 
Tree
 forbidden by God unto th
m 
Sin entred into the world, and Death by Sin: and so Death is come upon all men, for that all have sinned.


That 
God so loved the world, as to give His only Begotte
 Son, that whosever Believeth on Him shou d not perish but have ever
asting Life.


Tha 
Christ,
 who is 
of the Israelites as con∣cerning the flesh,
 is, 
God over all Blessed forever.


That Jesus Christ 
took upon Him the form of a Servant, and being found in fashion as a man, He humbled himself, and became obedient unto Death, even the Death of the Cross. Wherefore God hath highly ex
lted Him, and given Him a Name above every Name.


That 
God hath appointed a Day in which He will Judge the world in Righteousness by that Man the Lord Jesus Christ whom he hath Ordained, whereof He hath given Assurance unto all men, in that He hath raised Him from the Dead.


That 
the Hour is coming, in which all that are in their graves, shall Hear the voice of the Lord


 Jesus Christ, 
and shall come forth, they that have done Good, unto the Resurrection of Life, and they that have done Evil, unto the Resurrection of Dam∣nation.


That 
we are saved by Grace, through Faith and this not of our selves, but it is the Gift of God.


That through Jesus Christ is 
Preached unto us the forgiveness of Sins, and by Him all that Believe are made Righteous.


That it is 
a Faithfull saying, That they who Believe in God, should be carefull to maintain good Works, for these things are good and profitable unto men


That He 
who hath begun a good Work in us, will finish it until the day of Jesus Christ.


Poor 
Indians; The Lord of Heaven and Earth,
 has 
hid
 these Glorious things, from other nati∣ons of the Earth, (who are 
destroyed for the lack of knowledge
) and has 
Revealed them unto you.


It is your main Duty now, to 
Receive this Truth in the Love of it.


If you do 
Receive it,
 Let it appear, by your consenting to that 
Covenant of Grace,
 which God hath made with His People, through Jesus Christ. Say,


O Glorious Jehovah, One God, Father, Son, and Holy Spirit; Thy Free Grace, does now help me to give my self unto thee, That I may be happy in thee alone, as my God, and my Portion forever: and to give my self unto the Son of God that I may obtain

 Righteousness and Salvation, and be brought Home unto the Father th
ouh Him; and to give my self unto the Spirit of God, that I may know the Son, and Love Him, and serve Him, and have an Heart to keep the Laws of my Redeemer.


Poor 
Indian,
 Let thy Heart, and thy Hand, be put unto this 
Covenant
 Wh
n thou Readest and Hearest the 
Words of this Covenant,
 Let thy Tongue say, 
Lord, I am Willing, Lord, I am Willing.


This 
Covenant of God,
 was offered unto many Nations of your N
ighbours, but they Refused it. And because they Refus
d it, they are destroyed by the Dreadful Judgments of God, just as one would Burn up the Trees in the Wilderness.


The Lord Jesus Christ, hath appointed 
Baptism,
 to be the 
Seal
 of this 
Covenant.
 When you heartily lay Hold on the 
Covenant,
 you must then be 
Baptised,
 by a Minister of Jesus Christ. When a Minister pours 
Water
 on you, 
In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit,
 God says, 
I give you my Self, and my Grace, and Pardon and Heaven;
 and you must say, 
Lord, I am thine, Save me: Lord, I am willing to be thy servant.


And now, it must be your endeavour to keep the Laws of your 
Lord Redeemer.


Because the Lord hath sent you 
good Ti∣dings of great Joy, that unto you, there is born

 a Saviour,
 you must be thankful to Him, and show your 
Thankfulness
 by your 
Obedience.


Will you be Rebellious against the King of Heaven, who hath 
Blessed us with Spiritual Blessings, in Heavenly Places, through Jesus Christ our Lord?
 Oh, 
Foolish people and unwise,
 If you so 
Requi
e the Lord.


God hath given you 
Ten Commandments,
 which are all 
Holy, and Just, & good.
 Those 
Ten Commandments
 require, thee, my Indian Freind, 
To Love the Lord thy God, with all thy Heart, and all thy Soul, and all thy Mind,
 and, 
To Love thy Neighbour as thy Self.
 Look upon these 
Ten Commandments,
 as often as upon thy 
Ten Fingers.


The first Commandment is, 
Thou shalt have no other Gods before my face.
 That is, Glorify the only True God, Jehovah, only in the Lord Jesus Christ, Let thy Love, thy Trust, thy Joy be placed on Him, and pray to Him, and Hear His word, and sing His Praise: And wor∣ship Him, with Soul and Body: And none else besides Him.


The second is, 
Thou shalt not make to thy self any Image.
 That is, Observe such 
Ordinances
 in the Worship of God, as God Himself hath ordained; And None but such.




The third is, 
Thou shalt not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain.
 That is, In all the Worship of God, and especially in Swearing, be very Serious. And, Neither Irreverently nor unprofitably make us of any thing where∣by God makes Himself known unto us; as, His Names, His Words, and His Works.


The fourth is, 
Remember the Sabbah day to keep it Holy.
 That is, When the Lords day comes, wholly set it a part for the Service of the Lord. And keep Solemn Dayes of Suppli∣cation, and solemn Dayes of Thanks giving, when there is occasion for them.


The fifth is, 
Honour thy Father and thy Mo∣ther.
 That is, Let every man be respected in his Place; Let 
Husbands
 and 
Wives,
 Let Pa∣rents and Children, Let Masters and Servants, Let Rulers & Subjects, Let Pastors and People, Show suitable Respects to one another.


The sixth is, 
Thou shalt not kill,
 That is, Use all due means, to preserve our own Life, and Health, and Peace, and the Life of others.


The seventh is, 
Thou shalt not Commit Adul∣tery.
 That is, Shun all unchast Filthiness, of Heart, and of Speech, and of Action: Be Modest in every Thing.


The eighth is, 
Thou shalt not Steal.


That is, Be Honest in increasing, and

 preserving our Estates, and unjustly take away nothing of another mans, but give Alms to them that are in want.


The ninth is, 
Thou shalt not bear False witness against thy Neighbour.
 That is, Ever∣more speak the Truth our selves, and Labour that the Truth may be spoken by others; and particularly, be Tender as of our own Credit, so of other mens.


The tenth is, 
Thou shalt not Covet.
 That is, Let our Heart be content with what condition God shall order for us, and Let not our Heart burn with any Envy against the prosperity of others.


Hear, O Instructed Indians. If you Be∣lieve in the Obedience which the Lord Jesus Christ yielded unto God, that you may be Righteous by the obedience of the Lord Jesus Christ, then, as a sign of it, God gives you an Heart to imitate His exemple as far as you can, and be 
Followers of God, as Obedient Children.


Indeed it is but little Obedience that you can yield unto the Holy God: And you must with daily 
Repentance,
 Loath and Judge your selves before the Lord for its being so little.


But if you don't Obey the will of God in Jesus Christ, with 
Respect unto all His Command∣ments, you are unbelievers, and the wrath of God a∣bideth on you.
 And if you be not 
Saints,
 and per∣sons who Desire and study to be 
Holy in all

 manner of conversation,
 you will not be 
meet for the Inheritance of the Saints in Light.
 Come then, Say, my dear Indians, O say, 
Lord, I count thy Precepts concerning all things to be Right, and I hate every false way.
 For indeed I must tell you, 
Without Holiness no man shall see the Lord.


Is it so, my 
Indians?
 How comes it then to pass that many of you fall into the sin of 
Drunk∣enness,
 as easily, as a man going in the Dark, falls into a Pit? The sin of 
Drunkenness,
 is against the 
Third Commandment;
 for it abuses the Good creatures of God. And it is against all the 
Ten Commandments;
 For a Drunken man, Tempted by the Devil, will soon break all the 
Ten Commandments.
 How miserable do you make your selves, even like 
a Swine wallowing in the mire,
 when you make your s
lves 
Drunk?
 Unhappy Indians! will you sell Christ, for a little 
Drink?
 Will you truck away your souls, for a little 
Rum,
 or 
Cider?
 Don't forget the Terrible Word of God, which sounds like the Thunder, 
Drunkards shall not inherit the Kingdom of God.


And, Why have so many of you, so Little Order in your 
Families?
 Teach your 
Children,
 Rule your 
Children,
 do what you can, that your 
Children
 may pray to God.

 Else the 
Fifth Commandment
 will condemn you.


The 
eighth Commandment
 will condemn you, if you Live in 
Idlenes.
 They that 
work not at all,
 do 
walk Disorderly.
 What ails you that you can't have your 
Houses,
 and 
Orchards,
 and 
Cattel,
 and gainful 
Trades,
 as well as 
We?
 Let our 
enample
 shame you, & spur you, into Diligence?


When you 
exercise your selves to keep a Con∣science void of offence, towards God, and towards men,
 Then 'tis time for your Godly Men, to 
Gather a Church.


But when you 
Gather a Church,
 you must 
Pray
 with 
Fasting
 over the undertaking, and ask the Advice of other Churches, both 
English
 and 
Indian.


You must then Enter into solemn 
Covenant,
 and promise after this manner.


We heartely give up our selves to the Only true God, JEHOVAH, who is Father, Son, and Holy Spirit, Resolving by His Help, to Serve Him for∣ever. And we give our selves to one another, promising, that by the Help of God, we will Worship Him together, and Help one another in the Right wayes of the Lord.


After this you must Choose a Pastor, who must be a 
Good Man,
 Able and Ready to feed you with the 
Know
edge of the Lord,
 and Open and Apply the 
Oracles of God,


 unto the whole Flock, and a 
Watchful,
 and 
Sober
 man, and a man much in 
Prayer,
 bo
h by himself, and with you, and one that 
Ruleth well his own House,
 and a man 
of Good Report,
 and one of an Heavenly conversation.


When you have such a 
Pastor,
 you must 
Obey him, as having the Rule over you, and watching for your Souls, being to give an Ac∣count of them.
 And you may Join to him, 
Elders
 that shall 
Rule well;
 and unto such 
Elders
 you must give 
more Honour
 then unto other men. 
Deacons
 also should be in your. Churches, to Provide Necessary things both for the 
Pastor,
 and for the 
Table of the Lord.
 At the 
Table of the Lord,
 your 
Pastors
 will then admi∣nister unto you, 
Bread Broken,
 and, 
Wine in a Cup,
 to signify the 
Body,
 and the 
Bl
od
 of the Lord Jesus Christ, which were once offered unto God for you. B
fore the Administration of that 
Sacrament,
 you must spend some time, in searching your Hearts, and Lives, and in mourning over all your sins against the 
Ten Commandments,
 and in crying to God, for the pardon of them, through the Death of Jesus Christ. And, at the 
Sacrament,
 when you Re∣ceive the 
Bread
 and the 
Wine,
 you must with all seriousness, inwardly say, 
Lord! I Receive thy Christ! Lord, I Receive thy Christ!
 And, 
Lord, Because thy Christ did Dy, therefore let my sin Dy, and let my Soul Live.




If after this, you fall into Sin, your sin will be worse then other mens The Holy God will be very Angry at them, that sin after the 
Sacrament.
 If any of you do now sin, you must Reprove one another, and bring the sinful to Confession and Repentance. But, if they are Incorrigible, you must 
put away that wicked Person from among you


My dear 
Indians,
 If you do forsake the wayes of the Lord Jesus Christ, I 
earnestly testify
 unto you, That you shall 
utterly perish
 God will kill you, with one Thunderstroke of His wrath after another. And in Hell, you shall cry out, 
I am Tormented! I am Tormented!
 for more years, than you now see Leaves upon the Trees.


But, if you do follow the wayes of the Lord Jesus Christ, you will be Rich above those people that have Money, and all Riches. At your Death, God will take your Souls to be among the Angels. The Lord Jesus Christ shall Raise you from the Dead unto everlasting Life, at the Day of Judgment. You shall be Blessed with the Lord Jesus Christ, infinitely more years, than you see stars in the Sky, or stones on the Earth, or Drops of water in the Rivers.


Now, 
Consider what I say, and the Lord give you understanding.


FINIS.











