The voyages and adventures of Fernand Mendez Pinto, a Portugal, during his travels for the space of one and twenty years in the Kingdoms of Ethiopia, China, Tartaria, Cauchinchina, Calaminham, Siam, Pegu, Japan, and a great part of the East-Indiaes with a relation and description of most of the places thereof, their religion, laws, riches, customs, and government in time of peace and war : where he five times suffered shipwrack, was sixteen times sold, and thirteen times made a slave / written originally by himself in the Portugal tongue and dedicated to the Majesty of Philip King of Spain ; done into English by H.C. Gent.
Peregrina cam. English
Pinto, Fernão Mendes, d. 1583.
Approx. 1644 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 167 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2004-03 (EEBO-TCP Phase 1).
A50610




Wing M1705



ESTC R18200





ocm 11871318




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The voyages and adventures of Fernand Mendez Pinto, a Portugal, during his travels for the space of one and twenty years in the Kingdoms of Ethiopia, China, Tartaria, Cauchinchina, Calaminham, Siam, Pegu, Japan, and a great part of the East-Indiaes with a relation and description of most of the places thereof, their religion, laws, riches, customs, and government in time of peace and war : where he five times suffered shipwrack, was sixteen times sold, and thirteen times made a slave / written originally by himself in the Portugal tongue and dedicated to the Majesty of Philip King of Spain ; done into English by H.C. Gent.
Peregrina cam. English
Pinto, Fernão Mendes, d. 1583.
Cogan, Henry.
[15], 326 p.   


London :


Printed by J. Macock, for Henry Cripps and Lodowick Lloyd,


1653.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Voyages and travels.
Asia --  Description and travel.
2003-09
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2003-10
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2003-11
Emma (Leeson) Huber
Sampled and proofread
2003-11
Emma (Leeson) Huber
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2003-12
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






M1705


11871318


50126














THE VOYAGES AND ADVENTURES, OF Fernand Mendez Pinto, A 
Portugal:
 During his TRAVELS for the space of one and twenty years in The Kingdoms of Ethiopia, China, Tartaria, Cauchin∣china, Calaminham, Siam, Pegu, Japan, and a great part of the East-Indiaes. With a 
Relation
 and 
Description
 of most of the Places thereof; their Religion, Laws, Riches, Customs, and Government in time of Peace and War. Where he five times suffered Shipwrack, was sixteen times sold, and thirteen times made a Slave. 


Written Originally by himself in the Portugal Tongue, and Dedicated to the Majesty of Philip King of Spain. Done into English by 
H. C.
 Gent.


LONDON, Printed by 
I. Macock,
 for 
Henry Cripps,
 and 
Lodowick Lloyd,
 and are to be sold at their shop in 
Popes head Alley
 neer 
Lumbar-street.
 1653.










TO THE Right Noble Lord, and worthy of all Honor, William, Earl of Strafford, Vicount 
Wentworth,
 Baron 
Wentworth
 of Wentworth, Woodhouse, Newmarsh, 
Oversley,
 and 
Raby.


My Lord,


P
Vrchas,
 a Writer of good credit here in 
England,
 gives this testimony of my Au∣thor, that no man before him, to his knowledg, hath spoken so much, and so truly, of those Oriental parts of the World, which are so little known to us, as he hath done: And that too, not upon hearsay, and report, but for the most part as an ocular Witness, and personal Actor, of, and in, all that he hath related, which is so full of Variety, and strange Occurrences, that, as another Writer af∣firms, the like will hardly be met withall elsewhere: So that the most curious Wits, which delight in reading of rare Books, will, I beleeve, find all the satisfaction they can desire in this same of his; where, without so much as stirring out of their Studies, or running the danger of Shipwrack, they may traverse the Seas, view the good∣liest


Provinces of the World, entertain themselves with stupendious and unheard
of things, consider in the man∣ner of those peoples living, whom we term 
Barbarians,
 their Laws, their Riches, their Government in time of Peace and War; and, in a word, represent unto them∣selves, as in a picture, all that is most exquisite, and of greatest marvel, in the extent of 
Europe, Affrica,
 and 
Asia.
 These, together with many other remarkable matters, are contained in this Work, which I have taken the presumption to present unto your Honor, being invited thereunto by the example of two Translators of it into the 
Spanish
 and 
French
 Tongues, whereof the one dedicated it to the Archbishop of 
Toledo
 in 
Spain,
 and the other to the Cardinal 
Richelieu
 of 
France,
 both of them, the most eminent persons, of their time, in those Kingdoms: And with whom your Honor may justly be ranked, especially in respect of the Nobility of your Birth, as well as for the great Hope, which your many present Vertues, and Abilities, do give unto the World, of your future Worth, and Estimation. Be pleased then, my Lord, to receive it favorably, as a tender of the great desire I have to appear in all occasions,


Your Honors most humble, and devoted Servant, 
HENRY COGAN.








AN Apologetical Defence OF FERNAND MENDEZ PINTO HIS HISTORY.


I
F it be true that Authors do render themselvs commendable by their Works, there is no doubt, but that 
Fernand Mendez Pinto
 hath by this same of his justly acquired such reputation, as will make him be esteemed for ever. He was a man of a strong wit, and sound judg∣ment, and indued with a most rare, and extraordinary memory, as appears in the Relation of his Voyages and Adventures, which suffi∣ciently testifie how far he excelled therein, retaining in his remembrance an infinitie of such strange and wonderful things, (whereof to his cost he was for the most part an eye witness) as many great Personages of 
Asia
 and 
Europe
 took no little delight in hearing him recount them; especially 
Philip
 the second King of 
Spain,
 who at se∣veral times spent many houres in discoursing with him there about, which question∣less he would never have done, being a Prince, in the opinion of all the world, of a most exact and profound judgment, had he not been verily perswaded that what he delivered was true. Nevertheless since there may be some who in regard of the stu∣pendious things which he delivers, wil seem to give no credit thereunto; I have held it very necessary to cite here many several authentick Authors, that in their writings have confirmed the verity of his Narrations, as followeth.


Of the Riches and Grandeurs of these Orientall Countries, and perticularly of the Kingdome of 
China, Nicholas Trigault,
 the Iesuite treates diffusedly in his book intituled, 
De Christiana expeditione apud Sinas,
 in the first part thereof, prin∣cipally in the 
6
th
 Chapter. 
Gasper de la Cruz,
 in his book of 
China,
 the third, fourth, fifth, and nineteen Chapters. 
John de Lucena,
 in the life of 
Francis Xavier
 the Iesuite, in the tenth Book, from the seventeenth to the twenty fourth Chapter. 
Anthony Galuan
 in his Treatise of the Discovery of those Parts, fol. 
39.
 and in his History of 
Florida. Mendoza,
 in his History of 
China,
 the second Chapter of the third Book. 
Trigault,
 in his first Book, the seventh Chapter, Palatii Regis. Doctor 
Babia,
 in the third part of his Pontifical History, the 
18
 Chapter, in the life of 
Sixtus Quintus. Boterus,
 in his Relations. 
John de Sanctis,
 in his Orien∣tall Aethiopian History, Chap. 
8.
 and in the Ecclesiastical History of 
Rebullosa. Ribadeneyra, Mathew,
 and 
Lewes Gusman,
 in divers Chapters of the Orientall Histories. 
Josephus de Acosta, Peter
 of 
Leon, Zarate, Michael Vazquez de Padilla, Peter Martyr, Cefas
 Bishop of 
Chiapa, Francesco Lopez de Gomor∣ra, Hierosme du Pré, Ferdinand de Cordoua, Hierosme Romain, Illescas,


Antonio de Herrera, Pineda, Prudentius de Sandobal,
 and 
Garcilasso
 in divers places of his Royal Commentaries, and in the 
20
th
 Chapter of his third Book.


Touching that which 
Fernand Mendez
 writes of the Governors of those King∣domes, of the strict observation of Iustice, of the Names of the Iudges, Vice-Royes, Magistrates, Captains, Governours, and Ministers of the State, 
Boterus,
 in his universal Relations, sayes the same. 
Trigault,
 in divers places, particularly in the sixth Chapter of the first book, 
de Senensis Reipublicae administratione. Gaspar de la Cruz,
 in the 
16.17.18.
 and 
19.
 Chapters. 
Babia,
 in the third page of his Ponticall book, in the life of 
Sixtus Quintus. Lucena,
 in the life of 
Francis Xavier,
 the tenth book. 
Mendoza,
 in the ninth and tenth chapters of his third Book, and in many other Chapters of his new world. 
Mafeus,
 in his Oriental Histo∣ry; and in the Letters of 
China,
 written by 
Guerrier
 the Iesuit. Concerning the great number of prisons, and other particularities, the same may be seen at large in the History of 
China. Mendoza,
 in the twelfth Chapter of his first book. 
Gas∣par de la Cruz,
 Chapter ninth and twenty second. 
Trigault,
 in divers places of his History. 
Lucena,
 in the twenty first Chapter of his tenth book. and 
Alexan∣der Valignario,
 in his Letters missive.


That which he speaks of the great multitudes of people that are in those Countries, read in 
Lucena,
 the nineteenth Chapter of his tenth Book. 
Trigault,
 in sundry places, chiefly in the second Chapter, 
de nomine, situ, et magnitudine Regni Sinarum.


Fernand Mendez
 in the eighty ninth Chapter writes of a Temple built upon a great company of pillars; Read 
de la Cruz,
 the seventh Chapter. 
Mendoza,
 the third Chapter of his first Book. 
Mafeus; Anthony de
 S
t
 Romain; and 
George Bruno,
 in his book of the City of the World.


In this History are set forth huge Statues of Brass and Iron. See the first, third, fourth, fifth, Chapters of the first book of 
Gasper de la Cruz. Mendoza,
 the ninth and tenth Chapters of his first Book. The second Book of 
Boterus,
 in his relation of 
Siam. Rebullosa,
 in his Ecclesiastical History, fol. 
117.
 and 
118. John de San∣ctis,
 in his Aethiopian History, the seventh, and twelfth Chapters. 
Lucena,
 in the 
1.6.8.
 and 
9.
 Chapters of his seventh book. 
Trigault,
 in the ninth and eighteenth Chapters of his first Book. 
Mafeus,
 and S. 
Romain,
 in the 
90
th
 Chapter. 
Men∣doza,
 in the seventh Chapter of his first Book, and in the fourteenth Chapter of his second Part, as also in divers places of his Itinerary. 
Lucena,
 in the nineteenth Chapter of his nineteenth Book; and many other Authors.


Touching the manner of breeding and keeping of wilde Ducks in Rivers, men∣tioned in the 
97.
 Chapter. See 
De la Cruz,
 the 
7.
 and 
8.
 Chapters. 
Mendo∣za,
 the 
21.
 Chapter. 
Trigault,
 the second chapter of his first Book; and divers others.


As for that which he writes of the Towns that are made on Rivers and the Sea, with an infinite company of ships in the 
98.
 Chap. read 
Lucena,
 in the 
19.
 chapter of his 
10.
 Book. 
Mendoza,
 in his Itineraries the 
17.
 chap. 
De la Cruz,
 in the 
8.
 and 
12.
 Chapters. 
Trigault,
 in the third Chapter of his first Book, Navium Capia. 
Lucena,
 in his first Book the 
19.
 Chapter.


For so much as is spoken of the Wall which separates 
Tartaria
 from 
China
: See 
Lucena,
 in the 
21.
 Chapter of his tenth Book. 
Gasper de la Cruz,
 the second and fourth Chapters. 
Trigault,
 in the second Chapter of his first Book, and in the 
12.
 Chapter of his fifth Book. 
Galvan,
 in his Commentaries fol. 
70. Mendoza,
 the first part, in the fifth chapter of his first book, and in the seventeenth chapter of the


second part. 
Babia,
 in the second part of his Pontifical History, chap. 
18.
 and gene∣rally all that write of those parts of 
China.


Concerning that which 
Fernand
 sayes of the Treasure of the Dead, read 
Lucean,
 in the eighth chapter of the seventh Book. 
De la Cruz,
 and 
Mendoza. Paulus Jovius,
 in his History of the Turks. But that which 
Passavinus
 delivers in the Description of the 
Persians,
 and 
Belorus,
 in his Chronologie of the Kings of 
Persia,
 is yet a greater mervel. The like do 
Celius
 and 
Augustinus Corion
 write of the War of the 
Cimbrians,
 wherein such an infinite number of 
Saracens
 were slain, neer to 
Marseilles,
 as they made up the fences of their fields with the bones of them. 
Anthony Boussin
 in his Decades of 
Hungary.


Our Author imploys many Chapters in the description of the stately edifices of those Eastern Countries; The same may be seen in all the other Writers, that intreat of those parts of 
Asia,
 who set them forth strangely rich and great. 
Lucena,
 in the fifth Book of the life of 
Frances Xavier.
 Father 
Lewis
 in his Letters. The same 
Lucena,
 in the eighth Chapter.


For the innumerable company of Religious men and women (as they term them) which serve for the worship of their false Gods, it shall suffice to read 
De la Cruz,
 in his first Chapter.


And for a full clearing thereof read 
Damien De Gois,
 in the History of King 
Don Emanuel. Mafeus,
 in his eleventh and fou
teenth Books. S
t
 
Romain,
 and 
Trigault.
 As also for the removing of all doubt in the reading of those things, as incridible, look on the sixteenth Chapter of the Book of Prester Iohn, written by 
Francesco Alvarez. John de Sanctis,
 in his Ethiopian History, the 
17
th
 Chapter. 
Levis de Parama, de Origine Inquisitionis,
 the nineteenth Chapter of his second Book, entituled 
In sexta aetate Mundi Razis,
 in his Chronicle 
Sancti Dominice,
 folio 
299. Galvan,
 in his Discoveries, folio 
70. Lucena,
 in divers places of his Book. 
Mendoza,
 in the eighteenth, nineteenth, twentieth, and twenty third Chapters, and throughout his first and second Books. 
Gaspar de la Cruz,
 the fifth, seventh, and nineth Chapters. 
Boterus,
 in his Relations of 
China, Narsingua, Japon,
 and 
Siam. Rebullosa,
 fol 
141. Leonard Abel
 in his Relations. 
Paul Maria,
 in his Iourney into 
Egypt
; and many others.


Concerning the setting forth, sumptuousness, and magnificence of those peoples Banquets; their Comedies, Feasts, Dances, Musick, and diversity of Instruments; see 
Lucena,
 in the thirteenth Chapter of his tenth Book. 
Mendoza,
 in the twenty fourth and twenty eighth Chapters of his first Book; as also in the fourteenth and eighteenth Chapters of his third Book. 
Trigault,
 in the seventh Chapter of his first Book, 
Conrinia.
 Touching their Feasts read 
Mafeus,
 in the sixth Book of his History, 
S
t
 Romain
 in his, and generally 
Trigault, de expeditione apud Chinas.


For the manner of their sacrificing, see 
de Sanctis,
 in the eighth Chapter of his 
Ethiophia. Damen de Gois,
 in the History of King 
Emanuel. Mendoza,
 in the twenty sixt Chapter of his 
Itenerary. Trigault,
 throughout the whole tenth Chapter of his first Book. 
Lucena,
 in several places of his seventh Book. 
De la Cruz,
 the thirteenth Chapter. 
Boterus,
 in his Relations. The Maps of 
Japon,
 and 
China. Ma∣thew Ricio,
 S
t
 
Romain,
 and 
Mafeus.


In the 
116.
 and 
117.
 Chapters of the present Book, the Author treats of the Castle of 
Nixiancoo,
 for which peruse 
Trigault, de Christiana expeditione,
 the eleventh Chapter of his fourth Book. 
Polenus,
 in his Book of Stratagems. 
Vegeti∣us, de re militari; Vanitius,
 and 
Vasionzelos.


Touching that which 
Fernand
 speaks of the 
Chineses,
 their penances and mortifi∣cations in the Temple of 
Tinagoogoo
; as also of their processions, and the sacri∣ficing of themselves there, reade 
John de Sanctis,
 in the eighth Chapter of his 
Ethiopian
 History. 
Mendoza,
 in the twenty eighth Chapter of his Itinerary. 
Trigault,
 in the tenth Chapter of his first Book; and in the second part of the History of 
China. Galvan,
 in his discoveries, fol. 
56. Mafeus,
 S
t
. 
Romain, Bote∣rus,
 and 
Anthony de Govea,
 in the Archbishop of 
Goa
 his Voyage.


Of that which is said concerning the great number of Idols and Statues, 
Mendo∣za
 speakes amply, in the ninth Chapter of his first Book, in the seventh Chapter of his second Book, and in many other places; 
de sanctis,
 in the second part of his 
Aethiopian
 History, the seventh Chapter. 
Lucena,
 throughout his whole seventh Book. 
Trigault,
 in the tenth Chapter of his first Book, §. 
Idolorum multitudo. Rebullosa;
 from 
folio 116.
 to 
folio 120. De la Cruz,
 in many places of his Book. 
Damien de Gois; Boterus,
 in his relations of 
Pegu: Babia,
 in the third part of his Pontifall History, the eighteenth Chapter, 
In vita Sexti Quinti.


Fernand
 makes a narration of certain men, whom he calls 
Caloges,
 and 
Fin∣gaos,
 which have their feet r
und, like unto those of Cows, and hands all over hairy; for the clearing of the truth whereof read 
Galvan,
 in his discoveries, 
folio 32.
 and 
72. Gaspar de la Cruz,
 the s
venth Chapter.


Touching the tryumphant Arches, which they have in their streets, together with their manner of accommo
ating, and inriching them, when as they solemnised certain Feasts, read 
de la Cruz,
 the seventh chapter.


Of the Universities, which they have in 
China,
 see 
Trigault,
 in the third and fifth Chapters of his first Book, 
De Artibus apud Sinas liberalibus, ac Scientiis, &c.
 And in another, entituled, 
De Artibus apud Sinas mechanicis.


For a Confirmation of that which our Author says of the strange Ceremonies and Complements, used by them at their saluting one another, when they meet together by chance in the streets, and in their visits, read 
Mafeus,
 in the sixth Book of his 
Indian
 History, 
folio 134.
 beginning with these words, 
Salutandi ritus miter plebeios, &c.
 And 
Mendoza,
 in divers places of his Book declares the same. 
Trigault,
 in the seventh Chapter of his first Book, at the title, 
De Sinarum ritibus non nullis,
 de∣scribes their manner of Salutations. 
Babia,
 in the third Part of his Pontifical Histo∣ry, in the life of 
Gregory
 the thirteenth.


The History of the King of 
Bramaa,
 together with his Victories and Conquests, may be found in the Relations of 
Boterus. De la Cruz,
 in the second and fourth Chapters. 
Mafeus,
 and S
t
 
Romain.


Of the entrance of the 
Tartars
 into 
China,
 and their besieging of 
Pequin: Bo∣terus
 in his Relations; 
De la Cruz,
 the fourth Chapter; 
Paulus Jovius, Anto∣nius Armenius,
 and 
Mathias de Micuy,
 discourse at large.


That which is written of the subversion of the Provinces of 
Cuy,
 and 
Sansii,
 and of the d
leful and dreadful events ensuing thereupon, 
Gaspar de la Cruz
 hath spoken of sufficiently in the 
29
th
 Chapter of his Book.


As for that which 
Fernand
 says of their Gods, 
Fatoquis, Amida, Xaca, Gizon,
 and 
Canom
; as also of the fooleries, dreams, and leasings, which they recount of them; and of their original, and the respests and reverences they bear unto them; it may be all seen in the twelfth Book of 
Mafeus
 his 
Indian
 History; and in the first and fourth Chapters of his Epistles. 
Trigault,
 in his first and second Book. 
Boterus,
 in his Rela
ions. S
t
 
Romain,
 and many others.


By all this now is my Author throughly vindicated from all aspersions of falshood, that may be cast upon this his Work, which, were it otherwise, and meerly devised, yet is it so full of variety, and of such strange, both Comick and Tragick Events, as cannot chuse but delight far more then any 
Romance,
 or other of that kind. But being accompanyed with the truth, as I have suffi∣ciently proved, it will no doubt give all the satisfaction and content, that can be desired of the Reader.








The Contents.




CHAP. I.
 IN what manner I past my youth in the Kingdom of 
Portugal,
 until my going to the 
Indiaes.


Fol. 1.


CHAP. II.
 My Departure from 
Portugal
 for the 
East-Idiaes;
 and my imbarquing there for the Straight of 
Mecqua.


3


CHAP. III.
 Our travelling from 
Mazua
 by Land to the Mother of 
Prester John;
 as also our re-imbarquing at the Port of 
Arquico;
 and that which befell us by the encoun∣ter of three 
Turkish
 Vessels.


5


CHAP. IV.
 A Mutiny happening in the Town of 
Mocaa;
 the occasion thereof; that which be∣fell thereupon, and by what means I was carryed to 
Ormuz;
 as also my sailing from thence to 
Goa;
 and what success I had in that Voyage.


8.


CHAP. V. Goncalo vas Co
inhoes
 Treaty with the Queen of 
Onor;
 his assaulting of a 
Turkish
 
; and that which happened unto us as we were upon our return to 
Goa.


11


CHAP. VI.
 What passed till such time as 
Pedro de Faria
 arrived at 
Malaca;
 his receiving an Embassador from the King of 
Batas,
 with his sending me to that King, and that which arrived unto me in that Voyage.


14


CHAP. VII.
 What happened to me at 
Panaiu,
 with the King of 
Batas
 expedition against the Ty∣rant of 
Achem,
 and what he did after his Victory over him.


18


CHAP. VIII.
 That which past between the King of 
Batas
 and me, until such time as I imbarqued for 
Malaca;
 my arrival in the Kingdom of 
Queda,
 and my return from thence to 
Malaca.


21


CHAP. IX.
 The arrival of an Embassador at the Fortress of 
Malaca,
 from the King of 
Aaru
 to the Captain thereof; his sending me to the said King, my coming to 
Aaru,
 and that which happened unto me after my departure from thence.


26


CHAP. X.
 By what means I was carryed to the Town of 
Siaca,
 and that which befell me there; my going to 
Malaca
 with a 
Mahometan
 Merchant; and the Tyrant of 
Achems
 Army marching against the King of 
Aaru.




CHAP. XI.
 The death of the King of 
Aaru,
 and the cruel justice that was executed on him by his Enemies; the going of his Queen to 
Malaca,
 and her reception there.


33


CHAP. XII.
 The Queen of 
Aaru's
 departure from 
Malaca
▪ her going to the King of 
Jantana,
 his summoning the Tyrant of 
Achem
 to restore the Kingdom of 
Aaru;
 and that which past between them thereupon.


36


CHAP. XIII.
 My departure to go to 
Pan
; that which fortuned after my arrival there, with the murther of the King of 
Pan,
 and the cause thereof.


39


CHAP. XIV.
 The misfortune that befell us at our entry into the River of 
Lugor
; our hiding our selves in a Wood, with that which happened unto us afterwards; and our return unto 
Malaca.


42


CHAP. XV. Antonio de Faria
 his setting forth for the Isle of 
Anyan,
 his arrival at the River of 
Tinacoreu
; and that which befell us in this Voyage.


46


CHAP. XVI. Antonio de Faria
's arrival at the Bay of 
Camoy,
 where was the fishing of Pearls for the King of 
China
; the relation made to him of the Isle of 
Aynan
; with that which happened to him by the means of a renegado Pirate, and other ways.


52


CHAP. XVII.
 The information that 
Antonio de Faria
 had of the Country; some passages betwixt him and the 
Nautarel
 of the Town; his going to the River of 
Madel,
 with his encountering a Pirate there, and that which passed between them.


58


CHAP. XVIII.
 What 
Antonio de Faria
 did with the Captain of the Pirates Iunck; that which past between him and the people of the Country, with our casting away upon the Island of Thieves.


61


CHAP. XIX.
 In what sort we escaped miraculously out of this Island; our passage from thence to the River of 
Xingrau
; our encountering with a 
Chinese
 Pirate, and the agree∣ment we made with him.


65


CHAP. XX.
 Our encounter at Sea with eight 
Portugals
 very sorely hurt, and 
Antonio de Fa∣ria's
 meeting and fighting with 
Coia Acem
 the Pirate.


69


CHAP. XXI.
 What 
Antonio de Faria
 did after his Victory; his departure from the River of 
Tinlau,
 with his ill success thereupon, and the succor we met withall.


73


CHAP. XXII. Antonio de Faria
 hath news of the five 
Portugals
 that were made Captives; his Letter to the 
Mandarin
 of 
Nouday
 about them, and his assaulting the said Town.


76


CHAP. XXIII. Antonio de Faria
's Navigation till he came to the Port of 
Liampoo
; his arri∣val, and gallant reception there by the 
Portugals.


81


CHAP. XXIV. Antonio de Faria
 departs from 
Liampoo
 for to go and seek out the Island of 
Ca∣lempluy;
 the strange things that we saw, and the hazard we ran in our Voyage thither.


87


CHAP. XXV.
 Our arrival at the Island of 
Calempluy,
 with the description thereof; what hap∣pened to 
Antonio de Faria
 in one of the Hermitages there, and how we were discovered.


92


CHAP. XXVI.
 Our casting away in the gulph of 
Nanquin,
 with all that befell us after this la∣mentable shipwrack.


97


CHAP. XXVII.
 Our arrival at the Town of 
Taypor,
 where we were made Prisoners, and so sent to the City of 
Nanquin.


103


CHAP. XXVIII.
 The Marvels of the City of 
Nanquin
; our departure from thence towards 
Pequin,
 and that which happened unto us till we arrived at the Town of 
Sempitay.


107


CHAP. XXIX.
 Our arrival at 
Sempitay,
 our encounter there with a Christian woman; together with the original and foundation of the Empire of 
China,
 and who they were that first peopled it.


112


CHAP. XXX.
 The foundation of the four chief Cities of 
China
; together with which of the Kings of 
China
 it was that built the wall betwixt 
China
 and 
Tartaria
; and many things that we saw as we past along.


116


CHAP. XXXI.
 The order which is observed in the moving Towns, that are made upon the Rivers; and that which further befell us.


122


CHAP. XXXII.
 Our arrival at the City of 
Pequin;
 with our imprisonment, and that which more∣over happened unto us there; as also the great Majesty of the Officers of their Court of Iustice.


125


CHAP. XXXIII.
 What past between us and the 
Tanigores
 of Mercy, with the great favor they did us; and a brief relation of the City of 
Pequin,
 where the King of 
China
 keeps his Court.


131


CHAP. XXXIV.
 The order which is observed in the Feasts that are made in certain Inns, and the state which the 
Chaems
 of the two and thirty Universities keeps, with certain remarkable things in the City of 
Pequin.


134


CHAP. XXXV.
 The Prison of 
Ximanguibaleu,
 wherein those are kept which have been condemned to serve at the reparations of the wall of 
Tartaria
; and another Inclosure, called the Treasure of the dead, with the revenues whereof this Prison is maintained.


137


CHAP. XXXVI.
 Of an Edifice scituated in the midst of the River, wherein were the hundred and thirteen Chappels of the Kings of 
China,
 and the publique 
Granaries
 establish∣ed for the relief of the poor.


142


CHAP. XXXVII.
 The great number of Officers and other people, which are in the King of 
China's
 Pallace; with our going to 
Quincay
 to accomplish the time of our Exile, and what befell us there.


144


CHAP. XXXVIII.
 A 
Tartar
 Commander enters with his Army into the Town of 
Quincay,
 and that which followed thereupon; with the 
Nauticors
 besieging the Castle of 
Nixiam∣coo,
 and the taking of it by the means of some of us 
Portugals.


149


CHAP. XXXIX.
 The 
Mitaquer
 departs from the Castle of 
Nixiamcoo,
 and goes to the King of 
Tar∣taria's
 Camp before 
Pequin
; with that which we saw till we arrived there; and the 
Mitaquers
 presenting us unto the King.


154


CHAP. XL.
 The King of 
Tartaria's
 raising his siege from before 
Pequin
 for to return into his Country; and that which passed until his arrival there.


158


CHAP. XLI.
 In what manner we were brought again before the King of 
Tartaria,
 with our departure from that Kingdom; and all that we saw and befell us in our Voyage, till our arrival at the Court of the King of 
Chauchinchina.


160


CHAP. XLII.
 The reception of the 
Tartarian
 Embassador by the King of 
Chauchinchina,
 with the said Kings going to the City of 
Uzanguea,
 and his triumphal entry thereinto.


167


CHAP. XLIII.
 Our departure from the City of 
Uzanguea,
 and our adventures till our arrival at the Isle of 
Tanixumaa,
 with our going a shore there.


170


CHAP. XLIV.
 The great Honor, which the 
Nautaquin,
 Lord of the Isle, did to one of us for having seen him shoot with an Harquebuse; and his sending me to the King of 
Bungo,
 with that which passed till my arrival at this Court.


172


CHAP. XLV.
 The great mishap which befell the King of 
Bungo's
 son, with the extream danger that I was in for the same, and what followed thereupon.


176


CHAP. XLVI.
 My curing the young Prince of 
Bungo
; with my return to 
Tanixumaa,
 and imbarquing there for 
Liampoo
; and also that which happened to us on land after the shipwrack we suffered by the way thither.


178


CHAP. XLVII.
 The carrying of us to the Town of 
Pungor,
 and presenting us to the 
Broquen,
 Governor of the Kingdom, with that which ensued upon it.


181


CHAP. XLVIII.
 The King of 
Lequios
 sending a cruel sentence against us to the 
Broquen
 of the Town where we were Prisoners, to the end he should put it in execution; and that which further hap∣pened unto us till our arrival at 
Liampoo.


184


CHAP. XLIX.
 My sailing from 
Liampoo
 to 
Malaca,
 with the sending me by the Captain of the Fortress there to the 
Chaubainhaa
 at 
Martibano
; and all that befell us in our Voyage thither.


189


CHAP. L.
 The Continuance of our Voyage to the Bar of 
Martibano,
 and certain memorable particula∣rities happening there.


195


CHAP. LI.
 In what manner the 
Chaubinhaa
 rendered himself to the King of 
Bramaa
; and the cruel pr
∣ceeding against the Queen of 
Martabano,
 and the Ladies her attendants.


201


CHAP. LII.
 In what manner the sentence of death was executed on the person of the 
Chaubinhaa,
 King of 
Martabano, Nhay Canatoo
 his wife, and an hundred and forty women; with that which the King of 
Bramaa
 did after his return to 
Pegu.


205


CHAP. LIII.
 That which passed between the Queen of 
Prom
 and the King of 
Bramaa,
 together with the first assault that was given to the City, and the success thereof.


209


CHAP. LIV.
 The King of 
Bramaa
 his besieging the Fortress of 
Meleytay,
 with his going from thence to 
Avaa,
 and that which passed there.


282


CHAP. LV.
 Our going with the King of 
Bramaa's
 Embassador to the 
Calaminham
; with the course which we held until we arrived at the Temple, or Pagode of 
Tinagoogoo
; and a descrip∣tion thereof.


215


CHAP. LVI.
 The great and sumptuous Procession made in this Pagode; together with their Sacrifices, and other particularities.


218


CHAP. LVII.
 What we saw in the continuing of our Voyage, until we arrived at the City of 
Tim∣plan.


223


CHAP. LVIII.
 The Magnificent Reception of the King of 
Bramaa
 his Embassador, at the City of 
Timplan
; and that which passed betwixt the 
Calaminham,
 and him.


226


CHAP. LIX.
 An ample Relation of the Empire of 
Calaminham,
 and of the Kingdoms of 
Pegu,
 and 
Bramaa
; with the continuance of our Voyage, and what we saw during the same.


241


CHAP. LX.
 Our arrival at 
Pegu,
 with the death of the 
Roolim
 of 
Mounay.


245


CHAP. LXI.
 The Election of the new 
Roolim
 of 
Mounay,
 the grand 
Talagrepo
 of these 
Gentiles
 of the Kingdom of 
Pegu.


248


CHAP. LXII.
 In what manner the 
Roolim
 of 
Mounay
 was conducted to the Isle of 
Mou∣nay,
 and put into possession of his Dignity.


252


CHAP. LXIII.
 A continuation of the success which we had in this Voyage; with my departure from 
Goa
 to 
Zunda,
 and what passed during my abode there.


255


CHAP. LXIV.
 The expedition of the 
Pangueyram,
 Emperor of 
Jao
,
 and King of 
Demaa,
 against the King of 
Passervan
; and all that which passed in this War.


258


CHAP. LXV.
 The death of the King of 
Demaa
 by a very strange accident, and that which arrived thereupon.


263


CHAP. LXVI.
 That which befell us until our departure towards the Port of 
Zunda,
 from whence we set sail for 
China,
 and what afterwards happened unto us.


266


CHAP. LXVII.
 My passing from 
Zunda
 to 
Siam,
 where in the company of 
Portugals
 I went to the War of 
Chyamay
; and that which the King of 
Siam
 did until he returned in∣to his Kingdom, where his Queen poysoned him.


269


CHAP. LXVIII.
 The lamentable death of the King of 
Siam
; with certain illustrious and memorable things done by him during his life; and many other accidents, which arri∣ved in that Kingdom.


273


CHAP. LXIX.
 The King of 
Bramaa's
 enterprize against the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 and that which past until his arrival at the City of 
Odi
,
 with his besieging of it, and all that insued thereupon.


278


CHAP. LXX.
 The King of 
Bramaa's
 raising his siege from before the City of 
Odia
,
 with a description of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 and the fertility thereof.


283


CHAP. LXXI.
 A continuation of that which happened in the Kingdom of 
Pegu,
 as well during the life, as after the death of the King of 
Bramaa.


286


CHAP. LXXII.
 That which arrived in the time of 
Xemin de Satan,
 and an abominable case that happened to 
Diego Suarez,
 together with the 
Xemindooes
 expedition against 
Xe∣min de Satan,
 and that which insued thereupon.


289


CHAP. LXXIII.
 That which the 
Xemindoo
 did, after he was crowned King of 
Pegu
; with the 
Chaumigre
s,
 the King of 
Bramaa's
 Foster-brothers marching against him with a great Army▪ and divers other memorable things.


295


CHAP. LXXIV.
 The finding of the 
Xemindoo,
 and bringing him to the King of 
Bra∣maa
; with the manner of his execution and death; and other particularities concerning the same.


301


CHAP. LXXV.
 My imbarquing in the Kingdom of 
Pegu
 to go to 
Malaca,
 and from thence to 
Japon;
 with a strange accident which arrived there.


305


CHAP. LXXVI.
 Our passing from the Town of 
Fucheo
 to the Port of 
Hiamangoo,
 and 
hat which befell us there, together with my departure from 
Malaca,
 and arrival at 
Goa.


310


CHAP. LXXVII.
 Father 
Belquiors
 and my departure from the 
Indiaes
 to go to 
Japon
; and that which befell us till my arrival at the Island of 
Champeiloo.


312


CHAP. LXXVIII.
 Our departure from the Island of 
Champeiloo,
 and our arrival at that of 
Lampacau
; with a relation of two great disasters, which happened in 
China
 unto two 
Portugal
 Colonies; and of a strange accident besides that fell out in the Country.


314


CHAP. LXXIX
 Our arrival in the Kingdom of 
Bungo,
 and that which past there∣upon.


318


CHAP. LXXX.
 My reception by the King of 
Bungo,
 as Embassador from the 
Vice-Roy
 of the 
Indiaes.


321


CHAP. LXXXI.
 What past after our departure from 
Zequa,
 till my arrival in the 
In∣diaes,
 and from thence into the Kingdom of 
Portugal.


323










THE Travels, Voyages & Adventures OF Ferdinand Mendez Pinto.




CHAP. I. After what manner I past my Youth in the Kingdom of 
Portugal,
 until my going to the Indiaes.


S
O often as I represent unto my self the great and continual Travels that have accompanied me from my birth,
 and amidst the which I have spen
 my first years, I find that I have a great deal of reason to complain of Fortune, for that she seemeth to have taken a particular care to persecute me, and to make me feel that which is most insupportable in her, as if her glory had no other foundation then her cruelty. For not content to have made me be born, and to live miserably in my Country during my youth, she conducted me, notwithstanding the fear I had of the dangers that menaced me, to the 
East Indiaes,
 where in stead of the relief which I went thither to seek, she made me find an increase of my pains, according to the increase of my age. Since then it hath pleased God to deliver me from so many dangers, and to protect me from the fury of that adverse Fortune, for to bring me into a Port of safety and assurance, I see that I have not so much cau
e to complain of my Travels past, as I have to render him thanks for the benefits which until now I have received of him, seeing that by his divine bounty he hath preserved my life, to the end I might have means to leave this rude and unpolished Discourse unto my children for a memorial and an inheritance. For my intention is no other but to write it for them, that they may behold what strange fortunes I have run for the space of one and twenty years, during the which I was thirteen times a captive, and seventeen times sold in the 
Indiaes,
 in 
Aethiopia,
 in 
Arabia,
 in 
China,
 in 
Tartaria,
 in 
Madagascar,
 in 
Sumatra,
 and in divers other Kingdoms and Provinces of that Oriental Archipalage upon the Confines of 
Asia,
 which the 
Chineses, Siames, Gu
os,
 and 
Lecquios
 name, and that with reason in their Geography, the eye-lids of the World, whereof I hope to entreat more particularly and largely hereafter. Whereby men, for the time to come, may take example, and a resolution not to be discouraged for any crosses that may arrive unto them in the course of their lives. For no disgrace of Fortune ought to esloign us never so little from the duty which we are bound to render unto God, because there is no adversity, how great soever, but the nature of man may well undergo it, being favored with


the assistance of Heaven. Now that others may help me to praise the Lord Almighty for the infinite mercy he hath shewed me, without any regard to my sins, which I confess were the cause and original of all my mis-fortunes, and that from the same divine Power I received strength and courage to resist them, escaping out of so many dangers with my life saved, I take for the beginning of my Voyage the time which I spent in this Kingdom of 
Portugal,
 and say, That after I had lived there till I was about eleven or twelve years old in the misery and po∣verty of my fathers house within the Town of 
Monte-mor Ovelho,
 an Uncle of mine, desirous to advance me to a better fortune then that whereunto I was reduced at that time, and to take me from the caresses and cockering of my Mother, brought me to this City of 
Lisbon,
 where he put me into the service of a very honorable Lady: To the which he was carried out of the hope he had, that by the favor of her self and her friends he might attain to his desire for my ad∣vancement, and this was in the same year, that the funeral pomp of the deceased King 
Ema∣nuel
 of happy memory was celebrated at 
Lisbon,
 namely Saint 
Luces
 day, the thirteenth of 
December,
 1521. which is the furthe
 thing I can remember. In the mean time my Uncles des
g
 had a succes
 
 contrary to that which he had promised to himself in favor of me; For having been in the service of this Lady about a year and an half, an accident befell me, that cast me into manifest peril of my life, so that to save my self I was constrained to abandon her house with all the speed that possibly I could. Flying away then in very great fear, I arrived before I was aware at the Ford of 
Pedra,
 which is a small Port so called; There I found a Carvel of 
Alfama,
 that was laden with the horses and stuff of a Lord, who was going to 
Se∣tuval,
 where at that instant King 
Ioana
 the Third kept his Court by reason of a great plague that raigned in divers parts of the Kingdom.


Perceiving then that this Carvel was ready to put to Sea, I imbarqued my self in her, and departed the next day. But alas! a little after we had set sail, having gotten to a place named 
Cezmibra,
 we were set upon by a 
French
 Pirate, who having boarded us, caused fifteen or sixteen of his men to leap into our Vessel, who finding no resistance made themselves Masters of her: Now after they had pillaged every one of us, they emptied all the Merchandise where∣withall ours was laden, which amounted to above six thousand duckets, into their ship, and then sunk her; so that of seventeen of us that remained alive, not so much as one could escape slavery, for they clapped us up all bound hand and foot under hatches, with an intent to go and sell us at 
La Rache
 in 
Barbary,
 whither also, as we found by being amongst them, they car∣ried Arms to the 
Mahometans
 in way of Trade; for this purpose they kept us thirteen days together, continually whipping us; but at the end thereof it fortuned that about Sun set they discovered a ship, unto which they gave chase all the night, following her close, like old Pirates long used to such Theeveries; Having fetcht her up by break of day, they gave her a volley of thre
 p
eces of Ordnance, and presently invested her with a great deal of courage; Now though at first they found some resistance, yet they quickly rendred themselves M
sters of her, killing six 
Portugals,
 and ten or eleven slaves. This was a goodly Vessel, and belonged to a 
Portugal
 Merchant of the Town of 
Conde,
 named 
Silvestre Godinho,
 which divers other Merchants of 
Lisbon
 had laden at Saint 
Tome
 with great store of Sugar and Slaves; In such sort that those poor people seeing themselves thus▪ taken and robbed fell to lament their loss, which they esti∣m
ted to be forty thousand Duckets. Whereupon these Pirates, having gotten so rich a booty, changed their design for going to 
la Rache,
 and bent their course for the Goast of 
France,
 carry∣ing with them such of ours for slaves, as they judged fit for the service of their Navigation. The remainder of us they left at night in the Road, at a place called 
Melides,
 where we were landed miserably naked, our bodies covered with nothing but with the stripes of the lashes which so cruelly we had received the days before. In this pitiful case we arrived the next morn∣ing at Saint 
Iago de Cacen,
 where we were relieved by the inhabitants of the place, especially by a Lady, that was there at that time, named 
Donna Beatrix,
 daughter to the Earl of 
Villa∣nova,
 and wife to 
Alonso Perez Pantoia,
 Commander and grand Provost of the Town. Now after the sick and wounded were recovered, each of us departed, and got him where he hoped to find best assistance; for my self, poor wretch, I went with six or seven that accompanied me in my misery to 
Setuval:
 Thither I was no sooner come, but my good fortune placed me in the service of 
Francisco de Faria,
 a Gentleman belonging to the great Commander of Saint 
Iago,
 who in recompence of four years service, that I did him, put me to the said Commander to wait on him in his chamber, which I performed for an year and an half after. But in regard the en∣tertainment, which was given at that time in Noble-mens houses, was so small as I was not


able to live on it, necessity constrained me to quit my Master, with a design to imbarque my self by his favor to go to the 
Indiaes
; for that I thought was the best way I could take to free me of my poverty. So albeit I were but meanly accommodated I imbarqued my self notwith∣standing, submitting my self to whatsoever fortune should arrive unto me in those far Coun∣tries, either good or bad.






CHAP. II. My departure from Portugal for the Indiaes, and my imbarquing there for the Straight of Mecqua.


IT was in the year 1537. and the eleventh of 
March,
 that I parted from this Kingdom in a Fleet of five Ships, whereof there was no General;
 for each of those Vessels was com∣manded by a particular Captain: For example, in the ship named the Queen, commanded 
Don Pedro de Silva,
 surnamed the Cock, son to the Admiral 
Don Vasco de Gama
; In the ship, called S
t
 Rock, commanded 
Don Fernando de Lima,
 son to 
Diego Lopez de Lima,
 grand Pro∣vost of the Town of 
Guimaranes,
 who dyed valiantly in defence of the Fortress of 
Ormuz,
 whereof he was Captain the year following, 1538. In the S. 
Barba,
 commanded 
Don Fernando de Lima,
 who was to be Governor of the Town of 
Chaul
; Of that, which was called the 
Flower of the Sea, Lope Vaz Vagado
 was Captain; And in the fifth and last ship, named 
Ga∣lega,
 commanded 
Martimde Freitas,
 born in the Isle of 
Madera,
 who the same year was slain at 
Damao,
 together with five and thirty men that followed him. These Vessels, sailing different ways, arrived at length at a good Port called 
Mozambique
; There we met with the S. 
Michel,
 that wintered there, and was commanded by 
Duart Tristao,
 who parted thence richly laden for to return into 
Portugal
; Howbeit I beleeve she was taken, or suffered ship∣wrack, as it happens but too often in this Voyage to the 
Indiaes,
 for he was never heard of since. After our five Vessels were equipped with all that was necessary for them, and ready to set sail from 
Mozambique,
 the Lievtenant of the Fortress, called 
Vincent Pegado,
 shew∣ed the Captains of the said five ships a Mandate from the Governor, named 
Nunho de Cunha,
 whereby he expresly commanded that all 
Portugal
 ships, which did arrive in that Port this year, should go to 
Diu,
 and leave their men there for the guard of the Fortress, because of the fear they were in of the 
Turkish
 Army, which was every hour expected in the 
Indiaes,
 by reason of the death of 
Sultan Bandur
 King of 
Cambaya,
 whom the said Governor had put to death the Summer before. In regard this affair was of great importance, it was the cause that all the Captains assembled together to deliberate thereupon; At length to meet with the present ne∣cessity they concluded, that three of those five ships, appertaining to the King, should go to 
Diu,
 conformable to the contents of the said Mandate, and that the other two, which belonged to particular Merchants, should pursue their course to 
Goa:
 The Kings three ships sailing to 
Diu,
 and the other two Merchants towards 
Goa,
 it pleased God to conduct them safe thither. Now as soon as the Kings three ships came to the mouth of the River of the Port of 
Diu,
 which fell on the fifth of 
September
 the same year, 1538. 
Antonio de Silv
ra,
 the Brother of 
Louys Silvera,
 Earl of 
Sortelha,
 who was Captain there at that time, gave them all the testimony that possibly he could of the joy he took at this their arrival; For proof whereof he bestowed liberally on every one, keeping a set table for above seven hundred persons which they brought along with them, besides his secret rewards, and extraordinary gifts, whereby he supplyed the necessities they had suffered during their Voyage. Whereupon the Soldiers considering how this Captain entreated them very royally, that he payed them before-hand, distributed their pay and munition unto them with his own hands, caused the sick to be carefully tended, and shew∣ed himself most ready to assist every one, it so wrought upon them, that of their own accord they offered to stay there for to serve him, being no way constrained thereunto, as they use to be in those Countries in all the Fortresses which expect a siege. This done, as soon as the three ships had sold the Merchandise they had brought, they set sail for 
Goa,
 carrying none with them but the Officers of the Vessels, and some Sea
men to conduct them; where they abode till such time as the Governor had given them dispatches for to go to 
Cochin,
 where being arrived they took in their lading, and return
d all five safe into 
Portugal.


Seventeen days after we were arrived at the Fortress of 
Diu,
 where at that time two Foists were ready prepared to go to the Streight of 
Mecqua,
 for to discover, and find out the design of the 
Turkish
 Army, whose coming was greatly feared in the 
Indiaes,
 because one of those


Foists was commanded by a Captain that was a great friend of mine, who gave me good hope of the Voyage he was bound for, I imbarqued my self with him; Relying then on the promises which the Captain made me, that by his favor and means I should quickly be rich, the only thing in the world that I most desired, and suffering my self to be deceived by my hopes, I ima∣gined that I was already Master of great wealth, never considering how vain and uncertain the promises of men are, and that I could not reap much benefit by the Voyage I was going to un∣dertake, by reason it was dangerous, and unseasonable for Navigation in that Country. Now being departed from 
Diu,
 we sailed in a time full of storms, because it was about the end of Winter, which seemed to begin anew, so impetuous were the winds, and so great was the rain: Nevertheless, how violent soever the Tempest was, and dark the weather, we letted not to discover the Isles of 
Curia, Muria,
 and 
Avedalcuria,
 at the sight whereof we thought our selves quite lost, and without hope of life. Whereupon to decline the danger we turned the prow of our Vessel to the South-east, knowing no other mean then that to avoyd shipwrack; But by good fortune for us, it pleased God, that we let fall an anchor at the point of the Island of 
Socotora
; there we presently anchored, a league below the place, where 
Don Francisco d' Almeyda
 caused a Fortress to be built in the year 1507. when he came from 
Portugal,
 as the first Victory that ever was in the 
Indiaes.
 In the said place we took in fresh water, and some provision of Victuals, that we bought of the Christians of the Country, which are the descend∣ants of those, whom the Apostle S. 
Thomas
 converted in those parts. Being refreshed thus, we parted from thence with a purpose to enter the 
Straight,
 so that after we had sailed nine days with a favorable wind we found our selves right against 
Mazua
; There about Sun set we de∣scryed a sail at Sea, whereunto we gave so hard chace, that before the first watch of the night we came up close to her, and then to satisfie the desire we had for to learn something of the Captain by gentleness touching the 
Turkish
 Army, we demanded of him whether it was parted from 
Sues,
 or whether he had not met with it in any place; and that we might be the better informed we spake aloud to all those that were in the ship. But in stead of answer, without speaking a word, and in contempt of us, they gave us a dozen pieces of Ordnance, whereof, five were small, and the other seven, field Pieces, together with good store of Musquet shot; And withall, in a kind of jollity, and as it were beleeving that we were already theirs, they made all the ayr about resound again with their confused cries; After this, to brave and terrifie us the more, they flourished a many flags and streamers up and down, and from the top of their poop they brandished a number of naked Scymitars, commanding us with great threatening to come aboard and yield our selves unto them. At the first view of so many Rhodomontades and bravings we were in some doubt and amaze, which caused the Captains of our Foists to call the Soldiers to Councel for to know what they should do, and the conclusion was to continue shooting at them till the next morning, that so by day-light they might be the better fought withall and invested, it being agreed upon of all sides that they were not to be let go unpunished for their presumption: Which accordingly was performed, and all the rest of the night we gave them chace, plying them with our Ordnance. So morning come, their ship being shot through and through in many places, and cruelly battered all over, they rendred themselves into our hands. In the incounter there were threescore and four of their men killed, and of fourscore that remained, the most part, seeing themselves reduced to extremity, cast themselves into the Sea, choosing rather there to be drowned, then to be burnt in their ship with the artificial fires that we had hurled into her, so that of all the fourscore there escaped but five very sore hurt, whereof one was the Captain. This same, by force of torture, whereunto he was exposed by the Command of our two Captains, confessed that he came from 
Iudaa,
 and that the 
Turkish
 Army was already departed from 
Sues,
 with a design to take in 
Ad
m,
 and then to build a For∣tress there before they attempted any thing in the 
Indiaes,
 according to an express charge sent by the great 
Turk
 from 
Constantinople
 to the 
Bassa
 of 
grand Cair
,
 who was going to be Ge∣neral of the Army: Besides this, he confessed many other things conformable to our desire, amongst the which he said, that he was a renegado Christian, a 
Maliorquin
 by Nation, born at 
Cerdenha,
 and son to one named 
Paul Andrez,
 a Merchant of that Island, and that about four years before growing enamored of a very 
air 
Greekish Mahumetan,
 that was then his wife, for the love of her he had abjured Christianity, and embraced the Law of 
Mahomet.
 Our Captains much amazed hereat, gently perswaded him to acquit this abominable belief, and become a Christian again, whereunto the wicked Caytiff made answer with a brutish obstinacy, that at no hand he would yield to forsake his Law, shewing himself so hardened in the resolution


to continue therein, as if he had been born in it, and never had profest any other. By these speeches of his, the Captains, perceiving there was no hope of recalling him from his damnable error, caused him to be bound hand and foot, and so with a great stone tyed about his neck to be cast alive into the Sea, sending him to participate with the torments of his 
Mahomet,
 and to be his companion in the other world, as he had been his confident in this. This Infidel being executed in this sort, we put the other prisoners into one of our Foists, and then sunk their Vessel with all the goods that were in her, which consisted most in packs of stained Cloths, whereof we had no use, and a few pieces of Chamlet that the Soldiers got to make them apparel.






CHAP. III. Our travelling from Mazua by land to the Mother of Prester Iohn; as also our re∣imbarquing at the Port of Arquic
, and that which befell us by the incounter of three Turkish Vessels.


WE departed from this place with an intent to go to 
Arquico,
 the Territory of 
Prester Iohn,
 Emperor of 
Aethiopia,
 for we had a Letter to deliver, which 
Antonio de Syl∣vera
 sent to a Factor of his, named 
Anrique Barbosa,
 who had been three years resident in that Country by the Commandment of the Governor 
Nuno de Cunha.
 When we were arrived at 
Gottor,
 a league lower then the Port of 
Mazua,
 we were all received there very courteously, as well by the Inhabitants, as by a 
Portugal,
 called 
Vasco Martins de Seixas,
 born in the Town of 
Obidos,
 who was come thither by 
Henrico Barbosa
's order, and had been there a month attending the arrival of some 
Portugal
 ship. The cause of that his abode was to deliver a Letter from the said 
Henrico,
 as accordingly he did to the Captains of our Foi
ts; By this Letter he certified the estate of the 
Turkish
 Army, and besought them at any hand to send him some 
Portugals,
 to induce them whereunto, he remonstrated unto them how it much imported the service both of God and the King, and that for his own part he could not come unto them, because he was employed with forty other 
Portugals
 in the Fort of 
Gileytor
 for the guard of the person of the Princess of 
Tigremahon,
 Mother to 
Prester Iohn.
 The two Captains, having perused this Letter, communicated it to the chiefest of the Soldiers, and sat in Councel upon it, where it was determined that four of them should go along with 
Vasco Martins
 to 
Barbosa,
 and that they should carry the Letter which 
Antonio de Sylvera
 had sent him: This was no sooner resolved then executed, for the next day three other 
Portugals,
 and my self, departed accordingly, and we went by Land mounted upon good Mules, which the 
Ciquaxy,
 Captain of the Town, sent us by the Command of the Princess, the Emperors Mother, together with six 
Abissins
 to accompany us. The first night we lay at a very fair Monastery, called 
Satilgaon
; The next day before the Sun rose we travelled along by a River, and by that time we had rode five leagues we arrived at a place, named 
Bitonte,
 where we spent that night in a Convent of religious persons, dedicated to S. 
Michael
; there we were very well entertained both by the Prior, and the Fryers: A little after our arrival, the son of 
Bernagais,
 Governor of that Em∣pire of 
Aethiopia,
 a very proper and courteous Gentleman, about seventeen years old, came to see us, accompanied with thirty men, all mounted upon Mules, and himself on a horse fur∣nished after the 
Portugal
 manner; the furniture was of Purple Velvet trimmed with Gold fringe, which two years before the Governor 
Nuno de Cunha
 sent him from the 
Indiaes,
 by one 
Lopez Chanoca,
 who was afterwards made a slave at 
Gran Cario,
 whereof this young Prince being advertised, he presently dispatched away a 
Iewish
 Merchant of 
Azabiba
 to redeem him, but as ill fortune would he dyed before the Jew could get thither, which so grieved this Prince when he understood of it, as the s
id 
Vasco Martins
 assured us that in the said Monastery of S. 
Michael
 he caused the most honorable funerals to be celebrated for him that ever he saw, wherein assisted above four thousand Priests, besides a greater number of Novices, which in their language are called 
Santilcos:
 No
 was this all, for this Prince hearing that the deceased had been married at 
Goa,
 and likewise that he had left three daughters there behind him, which were very young and poor, he bestowed on them three hundred 
O qu
 of Gold, that are worth twelve 
Crusadoes
 of our mony a piece, 
 liberality truly royal, and which I relate here, as well to amplifie the nobleness of this Prince, as that it may serve for an example to others, and render them more charitable upon like occasions.


The next morning we continued our journey, making all the hast
 that possibly we could, to which end we got upon good Horses, that were given us by this Prince, and withall he ap∣pointed


four of his servants to accompany us, who during our Voyage entertained us every where very sumptuously. That day our lodging was at a goodly place, called 
Betenigus,
 which signifies a royal house, and in truth it was not without reason so named, for on whatso∣ever part one cast an eye it was invironed with gallant high Trees for three leagues about, nor is it to be credited how pleasing this Wood was, for that it was composed all of Cedars, Cy∣pres, Palm, Date Trees, and Cocos, like to those in the 
Indiaes
; Here we past the night with all kind of contentment; In the morning we proceeded on our journey, and travelling after five leagues a day we past over a great Plain, all full of goodly Corn; Then we arrived at a Mountain, named 
Vangaleu,
 inhabited by Jews, which were very white and handsom; Two days and an half after we came to a good Town, called 
Fumbau,
 not above two leagues distant from the Fort of 
Gileytor,
 there we found 
Barbosa,
 and the forty 
Portugals
 aforesaid, who received us with great demonstrations of joy, but not without shedding of some tears, for though they lived there at their ease, and were absolute Masters of all the Country, as they said, yet the consideration how they were as men banished from their Country into this place, did very much trouble them.


Now because it was night when we arrived, and that we had all need of rest, 
Barbosa
 was of the opinion that we should not see the Emperors Mother till the next morning, which was a Sunday, the fourth of 
October
; that come, and we well refreshed, we went, accompanied with 
Barbosa
 and his forty 
Portugals,
 to the Princesses Palace, where we found her at Mass in her Chappel: A while after being advertised of our arrival, she caused us to be admitted into her presence; Whereupon we fell on our knees before her, and with all kind of humility kissed the Ventilow that she held in her hand; To these submissions we adjoyned many other Cere∣monies according to their fashion, conformable to the instructions we had taken from the 
Por∣tugals
 that conducted us thither. She received us with a smiling countenance, and to testifie how much she was pleased with our coming; 
Verily,
 said she, 
you cannot imagine how glad I am to see you, that are right Christians, for it hath been a thing which I have always as much desired, as a fair garden enameled with flowers doth the mornings dew, wherefore you are most welcome come, and may your entrance into my house be as propitious, as that of the vertuous Queen
 Helena
's was into blessed Ierusalem.
 Herewith she made us to sit down upon ma
, not above five or six paces distant from her; Then shewing her self exceedingly contented, she questioned us about certain matters, of which, she assured us, that she very much longed to be satisfied: First she asked us the name of our holy Father the Pope, also how many Kings there were in Christendom, and whether any of us had ever been in the holy Land; whereupon she much condemned the Christian Princes, for their neglect and want of care in seeking to ruine the power of the 
Turk,
 who, she said, was the common Enemy of them all. Likewise she would know of us whether the King of 
Portugal
 was great in the 
Indiaes,
 what Forts he had there, in what places they were seated, and how defended. She made us many other like demands, to the which we answered the best we could for to content her; whereupon she dis∣missed us, and we returning to our lodging, continued there nine days, which we spent in waiting on this Princess, with whom we had much discourse on several subjects: That Term expired, we went to take our leaves of her, and in kissing of her hands she seemed to be some∣what troubled at our departure. 
Truly,
 said she, 
it grieves me that you will be gone so soon, but since there is no remedy, I wish your Voyage may be so prosperous, that at your arrival in the Indiaes you may be as well received by yours, as the Queen of
 Sheba 
was heretofore by King
 Solomon 
in the admirable Palace of his greatness.
 Now before we departed she be∣stowed on us twenty four 
Oquea
 of Gold, which make two hundred forty Duckets of our mony; She caused us also to be conducted by a 
Naiqu
,
 and twenty 
Abissins,
 as well to serve us for Guides, and guard us from Robbers, whereof that Country was full, as to furnish us with Victuals and Horses until such time as we got to 
Arquico,
 where our Foists attended for us. This Princess also sent a rich present of divers Jewels of Gold and Stones by 
Vasco Martins de S
ixas
 unto the Governor of the 
Indiaes,
 which by ill fortune was lost in this Voyage, as shall be declared hereafter.


After we were returned to the Port of 
Arquico,
 where we found our companions caulking of our Foists, and furnishing them with all that was necessary for our Voyage, we fell to work with them for the space of nine days. At length all things being ready, we set sail, and parted from thence on Tuesday, the sixth of 
November,
 1538. We carried with us both 
Vasco Martins de Seixas,
 that had the Present and a Letter from the Princess to the Governor of the



Indiaes,
 as also an 
Abissin
 Bishop, who was bound for 
Portugal,
 with an intent to go from thence to 
Galicia, Rome,
 and 
Venice,
 and afterwards to travel to 
Ierusalem,
 which especially he desired to see in regard of the holiness of the place. An hour before day we left the Port, and sail
d along the Coast afore the wind, until such time as about noon we reached the point of the Cape of 
Coçam,
 and before we arrived at the Island of Rocks, we disc
ned three Vessels on the other side, that seemed to us to be 
Gelvas
 or 
Terrades,
 which are the names of the Ves∣sels of that Country; Whereupon we gave them chace, and with the strength of our oars, be∣cause the wind was then somewhat down, we pursued them in such sort, that in less then two hours, having gotten up to them, we might easily perceive them to be 
Turkish
 Gallies, whereof we were no sooner assured, but that we presently betook our selves to flight, and made towards the Land with all the haste that might be, so if it were possible to escape the danger that inevitably threatned us: But whether the 
Turks
 suspected our design, or knew it, in less then a quarter of an hour they hoisted up all their sails, and having the wind favorable they followed us very hard, so as in a little while getting within a small faulcon shot of us, they discharged all their Ordnance upon us, wherewith they not only killed nine of our men, and hur
 six and twenty, but so b
ttered our Foists, that we were fain to cast a great part of our goods into the Sea; Mean while the 
Turks
 lost no time, but joyned us so close, that from their poop they hurt us easily with their pikes: Now there were four and forty good Soldiers remaining yet unhurt in our Foists, who knowing that upon their valor, and the force of their arms, depended the lives both of themselves, and all the rest, they determined to fight it out; With this resolution they set couragiously upon the Admiral of the three Gallies, wherein was 
Solyman Dragu
,
 General of the Fleet; Their onset was so furious, as they invested her from poop to prow, and killed seven and twenty 
Ianizaries,
 nevertheless she being instantly suc∣cored with fresh men by the other two Gallies, which had stayed a little behind, we were so wearied and oppressed with numbers, that we were not able to make any further resistance, for of four and fifty that we were at first, there was but eleven left alive, whereof two also dyed the next day, whom the 
Turks
 caused to be cut in quarters, which they hung at the end of their main yards for a sign of their Victory, and in that manner carried them to the Town of 
Mocaa,
 whereof the Father-in-law of the said 
Solyman Dragu
,
 that had taken us, was Governor; who with all the Inhabitants waited the coming of his Son-in-law at the entry into the Port, to receive and welcome him for his Victory. In his Company he had a certain 
Cacis,
 who was 
Moulana,
 the chiefest Sacerdotal dignity, and because he had been a little before in pilgrimage at the Temple of their Prophet 
Mahomet
 in 
Mecca,
 he was held by all the people for a very holy man: This Impostet rode up and down the Town in a triumphant Charret, covered all over with Silk Tapestry, and with a deal of Ceremony blessed the people as he went along, exhort∣ing them to render all possible thanks unto their Prophet for the Victory, which 
Solyman Dra∣gu
 had obtained over us. As soon as they arrived at this place, we nine that remained alive were set on shore, tyed altogether with a great chain, and amongst us was the 
Abissin
 Bishop, so pitifully wounded that he dyed the next day, and in his end shewed the repentance of a true Christian, which very much encouraged and comforted us. In the mean time all the Inhabi∣tants, that were assembled about us, hearing that we were the Christians which were taken Captives, being exceedingly transported with choller, fell to beating of us in that cruel manner, as for my own part I never thought to have escaped alive out of their hands, whereunto they were especially incited by the wicked 
Cacis,
 who made them believe that they should obtain the more favor and mercy from their 
Mahomet,
 the worse they intreated us. Thus chained all together, and persecuted by every one, we were led in triumph over all the Town, where nothing was heard but acclamations and shouts, intermingled with a world of musick, as well of instruments, as voyces. Moreover, there was not a woman, were she never so retired, that came not forth then to see us, and to do us some outrage; for from the very least children to the oldest men, all that beheld us pass by cast out of the windows and balcons upon us pots of piss, and other filth, in contempt and derision of a name of a Christian, wherein every one strived to be most forward, in regard their cursed Priest continued still preaching unto them, that they should gain remission of their sins by abusing us. Having been tormented in this sort until the evening, they went and layd us bound as we were in a dark Dungeon, where we remained seven∣teen days, exposed to all kind of misery, having no other victual all that time, but a little oatmeal, which was distributed to us every morning to serve us all the day: Sometimes they gave us the same measure in dry Peason a little soaked in water, and this was all the meat we had.








CHAP. IV. A Mutiny happening in the Town of 
Moca
,
 the occasion thereof, that which befell thereupon, and by what means I was carried to 
Ormuz
; as also my sailing from thence to 
Goa,
 and what success I had in that Voyage.


THe next day, in regard that we had been so miserably moiled, and our hurts, that were great, but ill looked unto, of us nine there dyed two, whereof one was named 
Nuno Delgado,
 and the other 
Andre Borges,
 both of them men of courage, and of good families. The Jaylor, which in their language is called 
Mocadan,
 repairing in the morning to us, and finding our two companions dead, goes away in all haste therewith to acquaint the 
Gauzil,
 which is as the Judg with us, who came in person to the prison, attended by a great many of Officers, and other people; Where having caused their irons to be striken off, and their feet to be tyed together with a rope, he commanded them so to be dragged from thence clean through the Town, where the whole multitude, to the very children, pursued and palted them with staves and stones, until such time as being wearied with harrying those poor bodies in such fashion, they cast them all battered to pieces into the Sea. At last we seven, that were left a∣live, were chained all together, and brought forth into the publique place of the Town, to be sold to them that would give most: There all the people being met together, I was the first that was put to sale; whereupon, just as the Cryer was offering to deliver me unto whomso∣ever would buy me, in comes that very 
Cacis Moulana,
 whom they held for a Saint, with ten or eleven other 
Cacis
 his Inferiors, all Priests like himself of their wicked Sect, and addres∣sing his speech to 
Heredrin Sofo,
 the Governor of the Town, who sate as President of the Portsale, he required him to send us, as an alms, unto the Temple of 
Mecqua,
 saying, that he was upon returning thither, and having resolved to make that pilgrimage in the name of all the people, it were not fit to go thither without carrying some offering to the Prophet 
Noby,
 (so they termed their 
Mahomet,
) a thing, said he, that would utterly displease 
Razaadat Mou∣lana,
 the Chief Priest of 
Medina Talnab,
 who without that would grant no kind of grace or pardon to the Inhabitants of this Town, which by reason of their great offences stood in ex∣tream need of the favor of God, and of his Prophet.


The Governor having heard the 
Cacis
 speak thus, declared unto him that for his particular he had no power to dispose with any part of the booty, and that therefore he should apply himself to 
Solyman Dragut
 his Son-in-law, who had made us slaves, so that in right it appertained only unto him to do with us as he pleased; and I do not think, added he, that he will contra∣dict so holy an intention as this is. Thou hast reason for it, answered the 
Cacis,
 but withall thou must know, that the things of God, and the alms that are done in his name, lose their va∣lue and force, when they are sifted through so many hands, and turmoiled with such humane opinions, for which very cause seldom doth any divine resolution follow thereupon, especially in a subject such as this is, which thou mayst absolutely dispose of, as thou art soveraign Com∣mander of this people: Moreover, as there is no body can be displeased therewith, so I do not see how it can bring thee any discontent. For besides that, this demand is very just, it is also most agreeable to our Prophet 
Noby,
 who is the absolute Lord of this prize, in regard the Vic∣tory came solely from his holy hand, though with as much falshood as malice thou goest about to attribute the glory of it to the valor of thy Son-in law, and the courage of his Soldiers. At this instant a 
Ianizary
 was present, Captain of one of the three Gallies that took us, a man that for his exceeding valor was in great esteem amongst them, called 
Copa Geynal,
 who netled with that which he heard the 
Cacis
 speak, so much in contempt both of himself, and the rest of the Soldiers, that had carried themselves very valiantly in the fight with us, returned him this answer. Certainly you might do better for the Salvation of your Soul, to distribute some part of the excessive riches you possess amongst these poor Soldiers, then seek with feigned speeches, full of hypocrisie and deceit, to rob them of these slaves, which have cost the lives of so many brave men, their fellows in arms, and have been dearly bought by us that survive, even with our dearest blood, as the wounds we have upon us can but two well witness; so can it not be said of your Cabayage (a Sacerdotal Robe after their fashion,) which for all it sits so trim and neat upon you, covers a pernicious habit you have of purloyning other mens estates from them: Wherefore I would wish you to desist from the damnable plot you have layd a∣gainst the absolute Masters of this Prize, whereof you shall not have so much as a token, and


seek out some other Present for the 
Cacis
 of 
Mecqua,
 to the end he may conceal your theeve∣ties, and impiety, provided it be not done with the expence of our lives and blood, but rather with the goods you have so lewdly gotten by your wicked and cunning devices.


This 
Cacis Moulana
 having received so bold an answer from this Captain, found it very rude, and hard of digestion, which made him in bitter terms, and voyd of all respects, exceedingly to blame the Captain, and the Soldiers that were there present, who, as well 
Turks
 as 
Saracens,
 being much offended with his ill language, combined together and mutined against him, and the rest of the people, in whose favor he had spoken so insolently; nor could this mutiny be appeased by any kind of means, though the Governor of the Town, Father-in-law to the said 
Solyman Dragut,
 together with the Officers of Justice, did all that possibly they could. In a word, that I may not stand longer upon the particulars of this affair, I say, that from this small mutiny did arise so cruel and enraged a contention, as it ended not but with the death of six hundred persons, of the one and the other side: But at length the Soldiers party prevailing, they pillaged the most part of the Town, especially the said 
Cacis Moulana
's house, killing seven wives and nine children that he had, whose bodies together with his own were dis∣membered, and cast into the Sea with a great deal of cruelty. In the same manner they intreat∣ed all that belonged unto him, not so much as giving life to one that was known to be his. As for us seven 
Portugals,
 which were exposed to sale in the publique place, we could find out no better expedient to save our lives, then to return into the same hole, from whence we came, and that too without any Officer of Justice to carry us thither; neither did we take it for a small favor that the Jaylor would receive us into the prison. Now this Mutiny had not ceased but by the authority of 
Solyman Dragut,
 General of the Gallies aforesaid▪ For this man with very gentle words gave an end to the sedition of the people, and pacified the Mutiners, which shews of what power courtesie is, even with such as are altogether ignorant of it. In the mean time 
Heredrin Sopho,
 Governor of the Town, came off but ill from this hurly burly, by rea∣son that in the very first incounter he had one of his arms almost cut off. Three days after this disorder was quieted we were led all seven again to the Market place, there to be sold with the rest of the booty, which consisted of our Stuff, and Ordnance, that they had taken in our Foists, and were sold at a very easie rate: For my self, miserable that I was, and the most wretched of them all, Fortune, my sworn enemy, made me fall into the hands of a Greek renegado, whom I shall detest as long as I have a day to live, because that in the space of three Months I was with him, he used me so cruelly, that becoming even desparate, for that I was not able to en∣dure the evil he did me, I was seven or eight times upon the point to have poysoned my self, which questionless I had done, if God of his infinite mercy and goodness had not diverted me from it, whereunto I was the rather induced to make him lose the mony he payd for me, be∣cause he was the most covetous man in the world, and the most inhumane, and cruellest enemy to the name of a Christian. But at the end of three Months it pleased the Almighty to deliver me out of the hands of this Tyrant, who for fear of losing the mony I cost him, if I should chance to make my self away, as one of his neighbors perswaded him I would, telling him that he had discovered so much by my countenance, and manner of behavior, wherefore in pity of me he counselled him to sell me away, as he did 
ot long after unto a Jew, named 
Abraham Muça,
 Natif
 of a Town, called in those quarters 
Toro,
 not above a league and an half distan
 from Mount 
Sinay
: This man gave for me 
 value of three hundred Reals in Dates, which was the Merchandise that this Jew did ordinarily trade in with my late Master, and so I parted with him in the company of divers Merchants for to go from 
Babylon
 to 
Cayxem,
 whence he carried me to 
Ormuz,
 and there presented me to 
Don Fernand de Lima,
 who was at that time Captain of the Fort, and to Doctor 
Pedro Fernandez,
 Commissary General of the 
Indiaes,
 that was then resid
ng at 
Ormuz
 for the service of the King by order from the Governor 
Nun∣ho de Cunha.
 These two, namely 
Fernandez
 and 
de Lima
 gave the Jew in recompence for me two hundred 
Pardaos,
 which are worth three shillings and nine pence a piece of our coyn, whereof part was their own mony, and the rest was raised of the alms which they caused to be gathered for me in the Town, so we both remained contented, the Jew for the satisfaction he had received from them, and I to find my self at full liberty as before.


Seeing my self by Gods mercy delivered from the miseries I had endured;
 after I had been seventeen days at 
Ormuz,
 I imba
qued my self for the 
Indiaes
 in a ship that belonged to one 
Iorge Fernandez Taborda,
 who was to carry Horses to 
Goa.
 In the course that we held we sailed with so prosperous a gale, that in seventeen days we arrived in view of the Fort of 
Diu
;


There, by the advice of the Captains, coasting along by the Land for to learn some news, we descryed a great number of fires all that night, also at times we heard divers Pieces of Ordnance discharged, which very much troubled us, by reason we could not imagine what those fires, o
 that shooting in the night should mean, in so much that we were divided into several opini∣ons. During this incertainty our best advice was, to sail the rest of the night with as little cloth as might be, until that on the next morning by the favor of day light we perceived a great many sails, which invironed the Fort on all sides. Some affirmed that it was the Governor newly come from 
Goa
 to make peace for the death of 
Sultan Bandur,
 King of 
Cambaya,
 that was slain a little before. Others said that it was the Infant, Brother to the King 
Dom Iovan,
 lately arrived there from 
Portugal,
 because he was every day expected in the 
Indiaes.
 Some thought that it was the 
Pat
marcaa,
 with the King of 
Cabicuts
 hundred Foists of 
Camorin.
 And the last assured us, how they could justifie with good and sufficient reasons that they were the 
Turks.
 As we were in this diversity of minds, and terrified with that which we discerned be∣fore our eyes, five very great Gallies came forth of the midst of this Fleet, with a many of ban∣ners, flags, and streamers, which we saw on the tops of their Masts, and the ends of their sail∣yards, whereof some were so long that they touched even the very water. These Gallies, be∣ing come forth in this sort, turned their prows towards us in such a couragious and confident manner, that by their sailing we presently judged them to be 
Turks
; Which we no sooner knew to be so indeed, but we clapt on all our cloth, for to avoyd them, and to get into the main Sea, not without exceeding fear, le
t for our sins we should fall into the like estate, from whence I was so lately escaped. These five Gallies having observed our flight, took a resolution to pursue us, and chased us till night, at which time it pleased God that they tacked about, and returned to the Army from whence they came. Seeing our selves freed from so great a danger we went joyfully on, and two days after arrived at the Town of 
Chaul,
 where our Captain and the Merchants only landed for to visit the Captain of the Fort, named 
Simon Guedez,
 unto whom they reported that which had befallen them. Assuredly, said he, you are very much bound to give God thanks for delivering you from one of the greatest perils that ever you were in, for without his assistance it had been impossible for you ever to have declined it, or to tell me of it with such joy as now you do: Thereupon he declared unto them▪ that the Army they had incountred was the very same, which had held 
Antonio de Silveyra
 twenty days to∣gether besieged, being composed of a great number of 
Turks,
 whereof 
Solyman
 the 
Bassa,
 Vice-roy of 
Caire,
 was General, and that those Sails they had seen, were eight and fifty Gal∣lies great and small, each of which carried five Pieces of Ordnance in her prow, and some of them were Pieces of Battery, besides eight other great Vessels, full of 
Turks,
 that were kept in reserve to succor the Army, and supply the places of such as should be killed; Moreover he added, that they had great abundance of victuals, amongst the which there was twelve Basi∣lisks. This news having much amazed us, we rendered infinite praise to the Lord for shewing us such grace, as to deliver us from so imminent a danger.


We stayed at 
Chaul
 but one day, and then we set sail for 
Goa
; Being advanced as far as to the River of 
Carapatan,
 we met with 
Fernand de Morais,
 Captain of three Foists, who by the command of the Vice-roy, 
Dom Garcia de Noronha,
 was going to 
Dabul,
 to the end he might see whether he could take or burn a 
Turkish
 Vessel, which was in the Port, laden with Victuals by order from the 
Bassa.
 This 
Fernand de Morais
 had no sooner gotten acquaintance of our ship, but he desired our Captain to lend him fifteen men, of twenty that he had, for to supply the great necessity he was in that way, by reason of the V
c
-roys hastening him away upon the sudden, which, said he, would much advance the service both of God, and his High∣ness. After many contestations of either part upon this occasion, and which, to make shor
, I will pass under silence, at length they were agreed, that our Captain should let 
Fernand de Morais
 have twelve, of fifteen men, that he requested, wherewithall he was very well satis∣fied: Of this number I was one, as being always of the least respected. The ship departing for 
Goa, Fernand de Morais
 with his three Foists continued his Voyage towards the Port of 
Da∣bul,
 where we arrived the next day about nine of the clock in the morning, and presently took a Patach of 
Malabar,
 which laden with Cotton Wool and Pepper, rode at anchor in the midst of the Port. Having taken it we put the Captain and Pilot to torture, who instantly confessed that a few days before a ship came into that Port expresly from the 
Bassa
 to lade Victuals, and that there was in her an Embassador, who had brought 
Hidalcan
 a very rich 
Cabaya,
 that is a garment worn by the Gentlemen of that Country, which he would not accept of, for that


thereby he would not acknowledg himself subject to the 
Turk,
 it being a custom among the 
Mahumetans,
 for the Lord to do that honor to his Vassal; and further, that this refusal had so much v
xed the Embassador, as he returned without taking any kind of provision of Victuals, and that 
Hidalcan
 had answered, he made much more esteem of the King of 
Portugals
 amity, then of his, which was nothing but deceit, as having usurped the Town of 
Goa
 upon him, after he had offered to ayd him with his favor and forces to regain it. Moreover they said, that it was not above two days since the ship, they spake of, parted from the Port, and that the Cap∣tain of her, named 
Cide Ale,
 had denounced War against 
Hidalcan,
 vowing that as soon as the Fort of 
Diu
 was taken, which could not hold out above eight days, according to the estate wherein h
 had left it, 
Hidalcan
 should lose his Kingdom, or life, and that then he should to his cost know how little the 
Portugals,
 in whom he put his confidence, could avail him. With these news Captain 
Morais
 returned towards 
Goa,
 where he arrived two days after, and gave accompt to the Vice-roy of that which had past. There we found 
Gonçallo vaz Coutinho,
 who was going with five Foists to 
Onor,
 to demand of the Queen thereof one of the Gallies of 
Solymans
 Army, which by a contrary wind had been driven into her Ports: Now one of the Captains of those Foists my special friend, seeing me poor and necessitous, perswaded me to accompany him in this Voyage, and to that end got me five duckets pay, which I very gladly accepted of, out of the hope I had that God would thereby open me a way to a better fortune. Being imbarqued then, the Captain and Soldiers pitying the case I was in, bestowed such spare clothes as they had upon me, by which means being reasonably well pieced up again, we parted the next morning from the Road of 
Bardees,
 and the Monday following we cast anchor in the Port of 
Onor
; where, that the inhabitants of the place might know how little account we made of that mighty Army, we gave them a great peal of Ordnance, putting forth all our fights, beating our D
ums, and sounding our Trumpets, to the end that by these exterior demonstra∣tions they might conclude we regarded not the 
Turks
 awhit.






CHAP. V. Gonçallo vaz Coutinho's Treaty with the Queen of 
Onor
; his assaulting of a Turkish Galley, and that which hapned unto us as we were upon our return to 
Goa.


OU
 Fleet making a stand upon the discharging of our peal of Ordnance,
 the General 
Gon∣çallo vaz Coutinho
 sent 
Bento Castanho,
 a very discreet and eloquent man, to the Queen of 
Onor,
 to present her with a Letter from the Vice-roy, and to tell her that he was come to complain of her, for that she had sworn a peace and amity with the King of 
Portugal,
 and yet suffered the 
Turks,
 mortal enemies to the 
Portugals,
 to abide in her Ports. Hereunto she re∣turned this answer; 
That both himself and his company were very welcome, that she greatly esteemed of them, because they were Vassals to the King of
 Portugal, 
and as touching that he said of the peace which she had with the King, and his Governors, it was most true, and that she desired to maintain it as long as she lived: For that which he said of the Turks, she took her God to witness how much against her will she had received and suffered them in her Ports, but that finding her self too weak for to resist such powerful enemies, she was constrain∣ed to dissemble, which she would never have done had she been furnished with sufficient forces; furthermore, to clear her self the better unto them, she offered both her power and people for to r
p
l them out of her Ports, and whereas he had brought men enough to chace them thence, she requested him to do it, wherein she would assist him all that possibly she could, which she confirmed with oaths, swearing by the golden Sandals of the Soveraign God whom she adored:
 To this speech she added, that 
she should be as well pleased if God would give him the victory over them, as if the King of
 Narsingu
, 
whose slave she was, should set her at the table with his wife. Gonçallo vaz Coutinho
 having received this Embassage, and other complements from the Qu
en, though he had little hope of any performance on her part, yet did he wisely dissem∣ble it. Afterwards being fully informed by the people of the Country of the 
Turks
 intention, of the place where they were, and what they did at that instant, he called a Councel thereupon, and having throughly debated and considered all things, it was unanimously concluded, that both for the King of 
Portugal
 their Masters honor, and his own, it was expedient to set upon this Galley, either for to take, or fire it, wherein it was hoped that God, for whose glory we 
ought, would be assisting to us against those enemies of his holy Faith. This resolution being made, and signed by us all, he entered some two faulcons shot within the River, where he had


s
rc
 anchored, when as a little Boat, which they call an 
Almadia,
 came aboard us, with a 
Brachman
 that spake very good 
Portugu
ze:
 This man delivered a message from the Queen unto our Captain, whereby she earnestly desired him, that for the Vice-roys sake he would de∣si
 from the enterprize he had undertaken, and not to assault the 
Turks
 any manner of way, w
ich, said she, could not be done without great disadvantage, for that she had been adver∣tised by her Spies, that they had fortified themselves with a good Trench, which they had cast up near the place where they had moored their Galley, in regard whereof it seemed to her al∣most impossible for him with no more Forces then he had to be able to prevail in so great an at∣tempt: wherefore she took her God to witness how much she was troubled with the fear she was in lest some mis-fortune should betide him. Hereunto our Captain returned an answer full of wisdom and cour
sie, saying, that he kissed her Highness hands for the extraordinary favor she did him in giving him so good advice: but as for his Combat with the 
Turks
 he could not follow her counsel, and therefore would proceed in his determination, it being always the cu∣stom of the 
Portugals
 not to enquire whether their Enemies were few, or many, since the more they were, the more should be their loss, and the greater his profit and honor. Thus was the 
Brachman
 dismissed, our Captain bestowing on him a piece of green Chamlet, and an Hat li
ed with red Sattin, wherewith he returned very well contented.


The 
Brachman
 dismist, 
Gonçallo vaz Coutinho
 resolved to fight with the 
Turks,
 but before h
 proceeded any further he was advertised by Spies what stratagems the Enemy would use a∣gainst us, and that the precedent night by the favor of the Queen they had moored up the Gal∣ley, and by it raised up a platform, whereupon they had flanked five and twenty Pieces of Ord∣nance, but all that stayed him not from advancing towards the Enemy; Seeing himself then within a Cannon shot of them, he went out of his Foist, and with fourscore men only landed, the rest which he had brought with him from 
Goa
 for this enterprize, being but an hundred more, he left for the guard of the Foists. So after he had set his men in Battel array, he march∣ed couragiously against his adversaries, who perceiving us making towards them valiantly re∣solved to defend themselves, to which end they sallied some five and twenty or thirty paces out of their Trenches, where the fight began on either side with such fury, that in less then a quar∣ter of an hour five and forty lay dead in the place, amongst the which there was not above eight of ours; Hereupon our General, not contented with this first charge, gave them a second, by means whereof i
 pleased God to make them turn their backs, in such sort that they retired pell-
ell, as men routed and in fear of death: Mean while we pursued them to their very Tren
hes, where they turned upon us, and m
de head anew, in the heat hereof we were so far engaged and intangled together, that we knocked one another with the pummels of our swords; Mean while our Foists arrived, which were come along by the shore to succor us, and accord∣ingly they discharged all their Ordnance upon our Enemies, to such good purpose, as they kill∣ed eleven or twelve of the valiantest 
Ianizaries,
 which wore green Turbants, as a mark of their Nobility. The death of these so terrified the rest, that they presently forsook the field, by means whereof we had leasure to set the Galley on fire upon the express command of our Ge∣neral 
Gonçallo,
 so that having cast into her five pots of powder, the fire took hold on her with such violence, as it was apparant it could not be long before she were utterly consumed, for the mast and sail yards were all of a flame, had not the 
Turks,
 knowing the danger she was in, most couragiously quenched the fire; but we labo
ed all that possibly we could to hinder them from it, and to make good that we had so bravely begun, which the enemies perceiving, as their last refuge they gave fire to a great Piece of Ordnance, which charged with stones, and other shot, killed six of ours, whereof the principal was 
Diego vas Coutinho,
 the Generals son, besides a dozen others were hurt, that put us quite in disorder; Whereupon the Enemies finding how they had spoiled us, fell to shouting in sign of Victory, and to rendring of thanks to their 
Mahomet
; at the naming of this their false Prophet, whom they invoked, our Gene∣ral the better to encourage his Soldiers, 
Fellows in arms,
 said he, 
seeing these Dogs call upon the Devil to ayd them, let us pray unto our Saviour Iesus Christ to assist us.
 This said, we once more assaulted the Trench, which the Enemies no sooner perceived, but they craft
y turned their backs, and took their flight towards the Galley, but they were instantly followed by some of ours, who within a while made themselves Masters of all their Trenches, in the mean time the Infidel
 gave fire to a secret myne, which they had made a little within their Trenches, and blew up six of our 
Portugals,
 and eight Slaves, maiming many others besides; Now the smoak was such and so thick, as we could hardly discern one another, in regard


whereof our General, fearing least some greater loss then the former should befall him, re∣treated to the water side, carrying along with him both the dead bodies, and all the hurt men, and so went where his Foists lay, into the which every one being imbarqued, we returned with strength of rowing to the place from whence we came, where with extream sorrow he caused the slain to be interred, and all that were hurt to be drest, which were a very great number.


The same day that was so fatal to us, a list being taken of all the surviving Soldiers,
 that so it might be known how many had been lost in the l
st fight upon assaulting of the Trench, we found that of fourscore which we were, there was fifteen slain, fifty four hurt, and nine quite maimed for ever: The rest of the day, and the night following, we kept very good watch to avoyd all surprizes of the Enemy. As soon as the next morning appeared, there came an Embassador from the Queen of 
Onor
 to the General 
Gonçallo,
 with a Present of Hens, Chickens, and new layd Eggs for the relief of our sick men; Now though we had great need of those things, yet in stead of receiving our General utterly refused them, and shewing himself very much dis∣pleased with the Queen he could not forbear lashing out some words, that were a little more harsher then was requisite; saying, that the Vice-roy should ere long be advertised of the bad Offices she had rendred the King of 
Portugal,
 and how much he was obliged to pay her that debt, when occasion should serve: Further he bid him tell her, that for an assurance of that which he said, he had left his son dead and buried in her Land, together with the other 
Portu∣gals,
 who had been miserably slaughtered through her practises, by assisting the 
Turks
 against them: and in a word, that he would thank her more fully another time for the Present she had sent, the better to dissemble what she had executed against him, for which he would one day return her a recompence according to her merit.


The Embassador, very much terrified with this speech, departed; and being come to the Queen his Mistress, he so throughly represented 
Gonçallo
's answer unto her, as she greatly doubted that this Galley would be an occasion of the loss of her Kingdom; wherefore to decline so great a mischief she thought it necessary to seek by all means possible to maintain the League with our General, to which end she assembled her Councel, by whose advice she dispatched another Embassador unto him, who was a 
Brachman,
 a grave and reverent personage, and her nearest kinsman. At his arrival where our Foists lay, our General gave him very good enter∣tainment, and after the ordinary ceremonies and complements the 
Brachman
 having demand∣ed permission to deliver his Embassage; 
Signior,
 said he to our Governor, 
if you will give me audience, I will declare the cause of my coming hither from the Queen of
 Onor 
my Mi∣stress.
 Hereunto 
Gonçallo
 replyed, 
That Embassadors had always assurance for their per∣sons, and permission freely to deliver the particulars of their Embassy, so that he might boldly say what he would.
 The 
Brachman
 having thanked him, 
Verily,
 continued he, 
I am not able to express unto you, how sensible the Queen my Mistress is of the death of your son, and of those other Portugals, that were yesterday slain in the fight; And without lying I swear un∣to you by her life, and by this string of a Brachman that I wear, the mark of my Priestly dig∣nity, and only proper to those which are of that profession, wherein I have been exercised from my youth, that she was so exceedingly afflicted at the notice of your disaster, and the un∣luckie success of your conflict, as she could not have been more vexed if she had been made to eat Cows flesh (which is the greatest sin committed amongst us) at the principal gate of the Temple, where her father is interred: Whereby you may judg, Signior, what a share she bears of your sorrow. But since there is no remedy for things done, she desireth, and very instantly beseecheth you to confirm the Peace unto her anew which other Governers have al∣ways granted her heretofore; Whereunto she the rather intreats you, because she knows of what power you are with the Vice-roy: Now that confirmed unto her, she assures you, and faithfully promiseth, within four days to burn the Galley, that hath put you to so much pain, and turn the Turks out of the limits of her Kingdom, which is all that she can do, and which you may be most confident she will not fail to execute accordingly.


Our General knowing of what importance this affair was,
 presently accepted of the 
Brach∣mans
 offer, and told him that he was contented that the League should be renewed betwixt them, according whereunto it was instantly published on either part with all the ceremonies accustomed in such cases; Thereupon the 
Brachman
 returned to the Queen, who afterwards labored all she could to make good her word; But because 
Gonçallo
 could not stay the four days, which she had demanded, in regard of the extream danger he should thereby have exposed


our hurt men unto, he resolved to be gone, and so the same day after dinner we departed; Howbeit he first left one, nam
d 
Georgio Neogueyra,
 there, with express order exactly to observe all that was done concerning that affair, and thereof to give certain intelligence to the Vice-roy, as the Queen her self had requested.






CHAP. VI. What passed till such time as 
Pedro de Faria
 arrived at 
Malaca;
 his receiving an Embassador from the King of 
Batas;
 with his sending me to that King, and that which arrived to me in that Voyage.


THe next day our General 
Gonçallo vaz Coutinho
 arrived at 
Goa,
 with so many of us as remained alive; There he was exceedingly welcomed by the Vice-roy, unto whom he rendred an accompt of his Voyage, as also of that which he had concluded with the Queen of 
Onor,
 who had promised to burn the Galley within four days, and to chace the 
Turks
 out of all the Confines of her Kingdom, wherewith the Vice-roy was very well satisfied. In the mean time after I had remained three and twenty days in the said Town of 
Goa,
 where I was cured of two hurts which I had received in fight at the 
Turks
 Trenches, the necessity whereunto I saw my self reduced, and the counsel of a Fryer, my Friend, perswaded me to offer my service unto a Gentleman, named 
Pedro de Faria,
 that was then newly preferred to the Charge of Captain of 
Malaca,
 who upon the first motion was very willing to entertain me for a Soldier, and promised me withall to give me something over and above the rest of his Company during the Voyage which he was going to make with the Vice-roy. For it was at that very time when as the Vice-roy 
Dom Garcia de Noronha
 was preparing to go to the succor of the Fortress of 
Diu,
 which he certainly knew was besieged, and in great danger to be taken, by reason of the great Forces wherewithall it was invested by the 
Turk,
 and to relieve it the Vice-roy had as∣sembled a mighty Fleet at 
Goa,
 consisting of about two hundred and twenty five Vessels, whereof fourscore and three were great ones, namely Ships, Gallions, Carvels, and the rest Brigantins, Foists, and Galleys, wherein it was said there were ten thousand Land-men, and thirty thousand Mariners, besides a great number of Slaves. The time of setting sail being come, and the Foists provided of all things necessary, the Vice-roy imbarqued himself on 
Saturday
 the fourteenth of 
November,
 1538. Howbeit five days past away before he put out of the Haven, in regard he stayed for his men that were not all ready to imbarque, the mean while a Catur ar∣rived from the Town of 
Diu
 with a Letter from 
Antonio de Silveyra,
 Captain of the Fortress, whereby he advertised the Vice-roy, that the 
Turks
 had raised the siege, and were retired. Now though these were good news, yet was the whole Fleet grieved thereat for the great de∣sire every one had to fight with the Enemies of our Faith. Hereupon the Vice-roy abode there five days longer, during the which he took order for all things necessary to the conservation of his Government of the 
Indiaes,
 and then commanding to hoist sail he departed from 
Goa
 on a Thursday morning the sixteenth of 
December:
 The four
eenth of his Navigation he went and cast anchor at 
Chaul,
 where he remained three days, during the which he entred into confer∣ence with 
Inezamuluco,
 a 
Mahometan
 Prince, and took order for certain affairs very much importing the surety of the Fortress: After that he cau
ed some of the Vessels of the Fleet to be rigged, which he furnished with Soldiers and Victuals, and then d
parted for to go to 
Diu
; But it was his ill fortune, as he was crossing the Gulph, to be suddenly overtaken by such a furious Tempest, that it not only separated his Fleet, but was the loss of many Vessels, chiefly of the Bastard Galley, which was cast away at the mouth of the River 
Dabul,
 whereof 
Dom Alvaro de Noronha,
 the Vice-roys son, and General of the Sea-forces, was Captain; In the same Gulph also perished the Galley named 
Espinheyro,
 commanded by 
Iovan de Sousa,
 how∣beit the most part of their men were saved by 
Christophilo de Gama,
 who came most oppor∣tunely to their succor. During this Tempest there were seven other ships likewise cast away, the names of which I have forgotten, in so much that it was a month before the Vice-roy could recover himself of the loss he had sustained, and re-assemble his Fleet again which this storm had scattered in divers places: At length the sixteenth of 
Ianuary,
 1539. he arrived at the Town of 
Diu,
 where he caused the Fortress to be re-built, the greater part whereof had been demo∣lished by the 
Turks,
 so as it seemed that it had been defended by the besieged, rather by mi∣racle, then force: Now to effect it the better he made proclamation, that all the Captains with their Soldiers should each of them take in charge to re-build that quarter, which should be al∣lotted


them; and because never a Commander there had more then 
Pedro de Faria,
 he thought fit to appoint him the Bulwark, which looked to the Sea, for his quarter, together with the out-wall that was on the Lands side; wherein he bestowed such care and diligence, that in six and twenty days space, both the one and the other were restored to a better state then before, by the means of three hundred Soldiers that were employed about it. This done, for that it was the fourteenth of 
March,
 and a fit time for Navigation to 
Malaca, Pedro de Faria
 set sail for 
Goa,
 where by vertue of a Pattent granted him by the Vice-roy he furnished himself with all things necessary for his Voyage; Departing then from 
Goa
 on the thirteenth of 
April
 with a Fleet of eight Ships, four Foists, and one Galley, wherein there were five hundred men, he had so favorable a wind, that he arrived at 
Malaca
 the fifth day of 
Iune
 in the same year, 1539.


Pedro de Faria
 succeeding 
Dons Estevano de Gama
 in the Charge of Captain of 
Malaca,
 arrived there safely with his Fleet, nothing hapning in his Voyage worthy of writing. Now because at his arrival, 
Estevan de Gama
 had not yet ended the time of his Commission, he was not put into the possession of that Government until the day that he was to enter upon his Charge. Howbeit, in regard 
Pedro de Faria
 was ere long to be Governor of the Fortress, the neighboring Kings sent their Embassadors to congratulate with him, and to make a tender of their amity, and of a mutual conservation of Peace with the King of 
Portugal.
 Amongst these Embassadors there was one from the King of 
Batas,
 who raigned in the Isle of 
Samatra,
 where it is held for a surety that the Island of Gold is, which the King of 
Portugal, Dom Ioana
 the Third, had resolved should have been discovered by the advice of certain Captains of the Country. This Embassador, that was Brother-in-law to the King of 
Batas,
 named 
Aqua∣rem Dabolay,
 brought him a rich Present of Wood of 
Aloes, Calambaa,
 and five quintals of Benjamon in flowers, with a Letter written on the bark of a Palm tree, where these words were inserted.


More ambitious then all men of the service of the crowned Lyon, seated in the dreadful Throne of the Sea, the rich and mighty Prince of
 Portugal, 
thy Master and mine, to whom, in thee
 Pedro de Faria, 
I do now render obedience with a sincere and true amity, to the end I may become his Subject with all the purity and affection which a Vassal is obliged to carry unto his Master; I
 Angeessiry Timorraia, 
King of
 Batas, 
desiring to insinuate my self into thy friend∣ship, that thy Subjects may be inriched with the fruits of this my Country, I do offer by a new Treaty to replenish the Magazins of thy King, who is also mine, with Gold, Pepper, Cam∣fire, Benjamon, and Aloes, upon condition that with an entire confidence thou shalt send me a safe conduct, written and assigned with thine own hand, by means whereof all my
 Lanchares 
and
 Jurupanges 
may navigate in safety. Furthermore, in favor of this new amity, I do again beseech thee to succor me with some Powder and great Shot, whereof thou hast but too much in thy Store-houses, and therefore mayst well spare them; for I had never so great need of all kind of warlike munitions as at this present. This granted, I shall be much indebted to thee if by thy means I may once chastise those perjured
 Achems, 
the mortal and eminent Enemies of thy
 Malaca, 
with whom, I swear to thee, I will never have peace as long as I live, until such time as I have had satisfaction for the blood of my three children, which call upon me for vengeance, and that therewith I may asswage the sorrow of their noble Mother, who having given them suck, and brought them up, hath seen them since miserably butchered by that cruel Tyrant of
 Achem 
in the Towns of
 Jacur 
and
 Lingua, 
as thou shalt be more particularly informed by
 Aquarem Dabolay, 
the Brother of those childrens desolate Mother, whom I have sent unto thee for a confirmation of our new amity, to the end, Signior, that he may treat with thee about such things as shall seem good unto thee, as well for the service of God, as for the good of thy people. From
 Paniau 
the fifth day of the eighth Moon.


This Embassador received from 
Pedro de Faria
 all the honor that he could do him after their manner, and as soon as he had delivered him the Letter it was translated into the 
Por∣tugal
 out of the 
Malayan
 Tongue wherein it was written. Whereupon the Embassador by his Interpreter declared the occasion of the discord, which was between the Tyrant of 
Achem,
 and the King of 
Batas,
 proceeding from this, that the Tyrant had not long before propounded unto this King of 
Batas,
 who was a Gentile, the imbracing of 
Mahomet
 Law, conditionally that he would wed him to a Sister of his, for which purpose he should quit his wife, that was also a Gentile, and married to him six and twenty years; Now because the King of 
Batas
 would by no means condescend thereunto, the Tyrant, incited by a 
Cacis
 of his, immediately


denounced War against him: So each of them having raised a mighty Army, they fought a most bloody Battel, that continued three hours, and better, during the which the Tyrant per∣ceiving the advantage the 
Bataes
 had of him, after he had lost a great number of his people, he made his retreat into a Mountain, called 
Cagerrendan,
 where the 
Bataes
 held him besieged by the space of three and twenty days, but because in that time many of the Kings men fell sick, and that also the Tyrants Camp began to want Victuals, they concluded a Peace, upon condi∣tion that the Tyrant should give the King five bars of Gold (which are in value two hundred thousand crowns of our mony) for to pay his Soldiers, and that the King should marry his eldest son to that sister of the Tyrant, who had been the cause of making that War. This accord be∣ing signed by either part, the King returned into his Country, where he was no sooner arrived, but relying on this Treaty of Peace he dismist his Army, and discharged all his Forces. The tranquillity of this Peace lasted not above two months and an half, in which time there came to the Tyrant three hundred 
Turks,
 whom he had long expected from the Straight of 
Mecqua,
 and for them had sent four Vessels laden with Pepper, wherein also were brought a great many Cases full of Muskets and Hargebusezes, together with divers Pieces both of Brass and Iron Ordnance. Whereupon the first thing the Tyrant did was to joyn those three hundred 
Turks
 to some Forces he had still afoot, then making as though he would go to 
Pacem
 for to take in a Captain that was revolted against him, he cunningly fell upon two places, named 
Iacur
 and 
Lingua,
 that app
rtained to the King of 
Batas,
 which he suddenly surprized when they with∣in th
m least thought of it, for the Peace newly made between them took away all the mistrust of such an attempt, so as by that means it was easie for the Tyrant to render himself Master of those Fortresses. Having taken them he put three of the Kings sons to death, and seven hun∣dred 
Ouroballones,
 so are the noblest and the valiant
st of the Kingdom called. This while the King of 
Batas,
 much resenting, and that with good cause, so great a Treachery, sware by the head of his god 
Quiay Hocombinor,
 the principal Idol of the Gentiles sect, who hold him for their god of Justice, never to eat either fruit, salt, or any other thing, that might bring the least gust to his palate, before he had revenged the death of his children, and drawn reason from the Tyrant for this loss; protesting further, that he was resolved to dye in the mainte∣nance of so just a War. To which end, and the better to bring it to pass, the King of 
Batas
 straightway assembled an Army of fifteen thousand men, as well natives, as strangers, where∣withall he was assisted by some Princes his friends: and to the same effect he emplored the Forces of us Christians, which was the reason why he sought to contract that new amity, we have spoken of before, with 
Pedro de Faria,
 who was very well contented with it, in regard he knew that it greatly imported, both the service of the King of 
Portugal,
 and the conserva∣tion of the Fortress, besides that by this means he hoped very much to augment the Revenue of the Customs, together with his own particular, and all the rest of the 
Portugals
 profit, in regard of the great Trade they had in those Countries of the 
South.


After that the King of 
Batas
 Embassador had been seventeen days with us, 
Pedro de Faria
 dismissed him, having first granted whatsoever the King his Master had demanded, and some∣thing over and above, as fire-pots, darts, and murdering Pieces, wherewith the Embassador departed from the Fortress so contented, that he shed tears for joy, nay, it was observed, that passing by the great door of the Church, he turned himself towards it, with his hands and eyes lift up to Heaven, and then as it were praying to God; 
Almighty Lord,
 said he openly, 
that in rest and great joy livest there above seated on the Treasure of thy Riches, which are the spirits formed by thy Will, here I promise thee, if it may be thy good pleasure to give us the victory against this Tyrant of
 Achem, 
and to permit us to regain that from him, which with such notable treachery he hath taken from us in those places of
 Jacur 
and
 Lingua, 
we will al∣ways most faithfully and sincerely acknowledg thee according to the Law of the
 Portugals, 
and according to that holy Verity, wherein consists the Salvation of all that are born in the world: Furthermore, in our Country we will build fair Temples unto thee, perfumed with sweet odours, where all living Souls shall on their bended knees adore thee, as it hath been always used to be done unto this present in the Land of
 Portugal. 
And hear what besides I promise, and swear unto thee with all the assuredness of a good and faithful servant, that the King my Master shall never acknowledg any other King then the great
 Portugal, 
who is now Lord of Malaca.


Having made this protestation, he presently imbarqued himself in the same 
Lanchara,
 wherein he came thither, being accompanied with eleven or twelve 
Balons,
 which are small


Barques, and so went to the Isle of 
Vpa,
 distant not above half a league from the Port. There the 
Bandara
 of 
Malaca
 (who is as it were chief Justicer amongst the 
Mahometans
) was pre∣sent in person by the express commandment of 
Pedro de Faria
 for to entertain him; And ac∣cordingly he made him a great Feast, which was celebrated with Hoboys, Drums, Trumpets, and Cymbals, together with an excellent consort of voyces framed to the tune of Harps, Lutes, and Viols after the 
Portugal
 manner. Whereat this Embassador did so wonder, that he would often put his finger on his mouth, an usual action with those of that Country when they mar∣vel at any thing. About twenty days after the d
parture of this Embassador, 
Pedro de Faria
 being informed, that if he would send some Commodities from the 
Indiaes
 to the Kingdom of 
Batas,
 he might make great profit thereof, and much more of those which should be returned from thence, he to that effect set forth a 
Iurupango,
 of the bigness of a small Carvel, wherein he ventured a matter of some ten thousand duckets; In this Vessel he sent, as his Factor, a cer∣tain 
Mahometan,
 born at 
Malaca,
 and was desirous to have me to accompany him, telling me that thereby I should not only much oblige him, but that also under pretext of being sent as Embassador thither, I might both see the King of 
Batas,
 and going along with him in his jour∣ney against the Tyrant of 
Achem,
 which some way or other would questionless redound to my benefit. Now to the end that upon my return out of those Countries I might make him a true relation of all that I had seen, he prayed me carefully to observe whatsoever should pass there, and especially to learn whether the Isle of Gold, so much talked of, was in those parts, for that he was minded, if any discovery of it should be made, to write unto the King of 
Portugal
 about it. To speak the truth, I would fain have excused my self from this Voyage, by reason those Countries were unknown to me, and for that the inhabitants were by every one account∣ed faithless and treacherous, having small hope besides to make any gain by it, in regard that all my stock amounted not to above an hundred duckets; But because I durst not oppose the Cap∣tains desire I imbarqued my self, though very unwillingly, with that Infidel who had the charge of the Merchandise. Our Pilot steered his course from 
Malaca
 to the Port of 
Sorotilau,
 which is in the Kingdom of 
Aaru,
 always coasting the Isle of 
Samatra
 towards the 
Mediterranean
 Sea, till at length we arrived at a certain River, called 
Hicandure
; After we had continued five days sailing in this manner we came to an Harbor, named 
Minhatoley,
 distant some ten leagues from the Kingdom of 
Peedir.
 In the end finding our selves on the other side of the Ocean we sailed on four days together, and then cast anchor in a little river, called 
Gaateamgim,
 that was not above seven fathom deep, up the which we past some seven or eight leagues. Now all the while we sailed in this River with a fair wind, we saw athwart a Wood, which grew on the bank of it, such a many Adders, and other crawling creatures, no less prodigious for their length, then for the strangeness of their forms, that I shall not marvel if they that read this History will not be∣leeve my report of them; especially such as have not travelled, for they that have seen little beleeve not much, whereas they that have seen much beleeve the more. All along this River, that was not very broad, there were a number of Lizards, which might more properly be called Serpents, because some of them were as big as an 
Almadia,
 with scales upon their backs, and mouths two foot wide. Those of the Country assured us, that these creatures are so hardy, as there be of them that sometimes will set upon an 
Almadia,
 chiefly when they perceive there is not above four or five persons in her, and overturn it with their tails, swallowing up the men whole, without dismembering of them. In this place also we saw strange kind of crea∣tures, which they call 
Caquesseitan
; They are of the bigness of a great Goose, very black, and scaly on their backs, with a row of sharp pricks on their chins, as long as a writing pen: Moreover, they have wings like unto those of Bats, long necks, and a little bone growing on their heads resembling a Cocks spur, with a very long tail spotted black and green, like unto the Lizards of that Country; These creatures hop and fly together, like Grashoppers, and in that manner they hunt Apes, and such other beasts, whom they pursue even to the tops of the highest Trees. Also we saw Adders, that were copped on the crowns of their heads, as big as a mans thigh, and so venomous, as the 
Negroes
 of the Country informed us, that if any living thing came within the reach of their breath, it dyed presently, there being no remedy nor antidote against it. We likewise saw others, that were not copped on the crowns, nor so venomous as the former, but far greater and longer, with an head as big as a Calves. We were told that they hunt their prey in this manner: They get up into a tree, and winding their tails about some branch of it, let their bodies hang down to the foot of the tree, and then laying one of their ears close to the ground, they harken whether they can hear any thing stir during the still∣ness


of the night, so that if an Ox, a Boar, or any other beast doth chance to pass by, they pre∣sently seize on it, and so carries it up into the tree where he devours it. In like sort we de∣scryed a number of Baboons, both grey and black, as big as a great Mastiff, of whom the 
Ne∣groes
 of the Country are more afraid, then of all the other beasts, because they will set upon them with that hardiness, as they have much ado to resist them.






CHAP. VII. What happened to me at 
Penaiu
 with the King of 
Batas
 expedition against the Tyrant of 
Achem
; and what he did after his Victory over him.


BY that time we had sailed seven or eight leagues up the River, at the end we arrived at a little Town, named 
Botterrendan,
 not above a quarter of a mile distant from 
Panaiu,
 where the King of 
Batas
 was at that time making preparation for the War he had undertaken against the Tyrant of 
Achem.
 This King understanding that I had brought him a Letter and a Present from the Captain of 
Malaca,
 caused me to be entertained by the 
Xabandar,
 who is he that with absolute power governs all the affairs of the Army: This General, accompanied with five 
Lanchares,
 and twelve 
Ballons,
 came to me to the Port where I rode at anchor; Then with a great noise of Drums, Bells, and popular acclamations, he brought me to a certain Key of the Town, called 
Campalator
; There the 
Bendara,
 Governor of the Kingdom, stayed for me in great solemnity, attended by many 
Our
balons
 and 
Amborraias,
 which are the noblest persons of his Court, the most part of whom, for all that, were but poor and base, both in their habit, and manner of living, whereby I knew that the Country was not so rich as it was thought to be in 
Malaca.
 When I was come to the Kings Palace, and had past through the first Court, at the entrance of the second I found an old woman, accompanied with other per∣sons far nobler, and better apparelled then those that marched before me, who beckoning m
 with her hand, as if she had commanded me to enter:


Man of Malaca,
 said she unto me, 
Thy arrival in the King my Masters Land, is as agreeable unto him, as a s
owre of rain is to a crop of Rice in dry and hot weather; Wherefore enter boldly, and be afraid of nothing, for the people, which by the goodness of God thou seest here, are no other then those of thine own Country, since the hope which we have in the same God makes us believe that he will maintain us all together unto the end of the world.
 Having said so, she carried me where the King was, unto whom I did obeysance according to the man-of the Country, then I delivered him the Letter and the Present I had brought him, which he graciously accepted of, and asked me what occasion drew me thither. Whereunto I answered, as I had in commission, that I was come to serve his Highness in the Wars, where I hoped to 
 the honor to attend on him, and not to leave him till such time as he returned Conqueror of his Enemies: Hereunto I likewise added, that I desired to see the City of 
Achem,
 as also the scituation and fortifications of it, and what depth the River was of, whereby I might know whether it would bear great Vessels and Gallions, because the Captain of 
Malaca
 had a design to come and succor his Higness, as soon as his men were returned from the 
Indiaes,
 and to d
liver his mortal Enemy, the Tyrant of 
Achem,
 into his hands. This poor King presently believed all that I said to be true, and so much the rather, for that it was conformable to his desire, in such sort, that rising out of his Th
one where he was set, I saw him go and fall on his knees before the carcass of a Cows head, set up against the wall, whose horns were guilt, and crowned with flowers; Then lifting up his hands and eyes, 
O thou,
 said he, 
that not con∣strained by any material love, where
nto Nature hath obliged thee, dost continually make glad all those that desire thy milk, as the own mother doth him whom she hath brought into the world, without participating either of the miseries, or pains, which ordinarily she suffers from whom we take our Being, be favorable unto the prayer which now with all my heart I offer up unto thee: and it is no other but this, that in the meadows of the Sun, where with the payment and recompence which thou receivest, thou art contented with the good that thou dost here below, thou wilt be pleased to conserve me in the new amity of this good Captain, to the end he may put in execution all that this man here hath told me.
 At these words all the Courtiers, which were likewise on their knees, said three times as it were in answer, 
How happy were he that could see that, and then dye incontinently?
 Whereupon the King arose, and wiping his eyes, which were all beblubbered with the tears that proceeded from the zeal of the prayer he had made, he questioned me about many particular things of the 
Indiaes,
 and



Malaca.
 Having spent some time therein, he very courteously dismissed me, with a promise to cause the Merchandise, which the 
Mahometan
 had brought in the Captain of 
Mala
a
's name, to be well and profitably put off, which indeed was the thing I most desired. Now for as much as the King at my arrival was making his preparations for to march against the Ty∣rant of 
Achem,
 and had taken order for all things necessary for that his Voyage, after I had re∣mained nine days in 
Panaiu,
 the Capital City of the Kingdom of 
Batas,
 he departed with some Troops towards a place, named 
Turban,
 some five leagues of, where he arrived an hour before Sun-set, without any manner of reception, or shew of joy, in regard of the grief he was in for the death of his children, which was such as he never appeared in publique, but with great demonstrations of sorrow.


The next morning the King of 
Batas
 marched from 
Turban
 towards the Kingdom of 
A∣chem,
 being eighteen leagues thither: He carried with him fifteen thousand men of War, whereof eight thousand were 
Bataes,
 and the rest 
Menancabes, Lusons, Andraguires, Iambes,
 and 
Bournees,
 whom the Princes his neighbors had assisted him with, as also forty Elephants, and twelve Carts with small Ordnance, namely, Faulcons, Bases, and other field Pieces, amongst the which there were three that had the Arms of 
France,
 and were taken in the year 1526. at such time as 
Lopo Vaz d
 Sampayo
 governed the State of the 
Indiaes.
 Now the King of 
Batas
 marching five leagues a day came to a River, called 
Quilem
; There by some of the Tyrants Spies, which he had taken, he learnt that his Enemy waited for him at 
Tonda∣cur,
 two leagues from 
Achem,
 with a purpose to fight with him, and that he had great store of strangers in his Army, namely 
Turks, Cambayans,
 and 
Malabars:
 Whereupon the King of 
Batas
 assembling his Councel of War, and falling into consultation of this affair, it was con∣cluded as most expedient to set upon the Enemy before he grew more strong. With this reso∣lution having quit the River he marched somewhat faster then ordinary, and arrived about ten of the clock in the night at the foot of a Mountain, half a league from the Enemies Camp, where, after he had reposed himself a matter of three hours, he marched on in very good order, for which effect having divided his Army into four Squadrons, and passing along by a little hill, when he came to the end thereof he discovered a great Plain sowed with Rice, where the Ene∣my stood ranged in two Battalions. As soon as the two Armies descryed one another, and that at the sound of their Trumpets, Drums, and Bells the Soldiers had set up a terrible cry, they encountred very valiantly together, and after the discharge of their shot on both sides, they came to fight hand to hand with such courage, that I trembled with fear to behold their fury. The Battel continued in this manner above an hour, and yet could it not possibly be discerned which party had the better. At last the Tyrant foreseeing, that if he persisted in the fight, he should lose the day, because he perceived his men to grow faint and weary, he retreated to a rising ground, that lay South of the 
Bataes,
 and about a Faulcons shot distant from them. There his intention was to fortifie himself in certain Trenches which before he had caused to be cast up against a Rock in form of a garden, or tilth of Rice; But a brother to the King of 
An∣draguire
 interrupted his design, for stepping before him with two thousand men, he cut off his way, and stopt him from passing further, in so much that the medly grew to be the same it was before, and the fight was renewed between them with such fury, as cruelly wounding one another, they testified sufficiently how they came but little short of other Nations in courage. By this means the Tyrant, before he could recover his Trenches, lost fifteen hundred of his men, of which number were the hundred and threescore 
Turks,
 that a little before were come to him from the Straight of 
Mecqua,
 with two hundred 
Sarrazins, Malabars,
 and some 
Abissins,
 which were the best men he had; Now because it was about mid-day, and therefore very hot, the King of 
Batas
 retired towards the Mountain, where he spent the rest of the day in causing those that were wounded to be looked unto, and the dead to be buried. Hereupon, not being well resolved what to do, in regard he was altogether ignorant of the Enemies design, he took care to have good watch kept all that night in every part. The next morning no sooner began the Sun to appear but he perceived the Valley, wherein the 
Achems
 had been the day before, to be quite abandoned, and not one of them to be seen there, which made him think the Enemy was defeated: In this opinion, the better to pursue the first point of his Victory, he dismissed all the hurt men, as being unfit for service, and followed the Tyrant to the City, where arriving two hours before Sun-set, to shew that he had strength and courage enough to combat his Ene∣mies, he resolved to give them proof of it by some remarkable action before he would encamp himself; To which effect he fired two of the Suburbs of the Town, as also four Ships, and


two Gallions, which were drawn on Land, and were those that had brought the 
Turks
 from the Straight of 
Mecqua
: And indeed the fire took with such violence on those six Vessels, as they were quite consumed in a very little time, the Enemy not daring to issue forth for to quench it. After this, the King of 
Batas
 seeing himself favored by Fortune, to lose no opportunity began to assault a Fort, called 
Penacao,
 which with twelve Pieces of Ordnance defended the entry of the River, to the Scalado of this he went in person, his whole Army looking on, and having caused some seventy or eighty ladders to be planted, he behaved himself so well, that with the loss only of seven and thirty men he entred the place, and put all to the sword that he found in it, to the number of seven hundred persons, without sparing so much as one of them. Thus did he on the day of his arrival perform three memorable things, whereby his Soldiers were so heartned, as they would fain have assaulted the City the very same night if he would have permitted them, but in regard it was very dark, and his men weary, he gave thanks to God, and contented himself with that which he had done.


The King of 
Batas
 held the City besieged by the space of three and twenty days, during the which two sallies were made, wherein nothing past of any reckoning, for there were but ten men slain on either part; Now as victories and good success in War do ordinarily encourage the victorious, so oftentimes it happens that the weak become strong, and cowards so hardy, as laying aside all fear they dare undertake most difficile and dangerous things▪ whence also it as often falls out, that the one prospers, and the other is ruined, which appeared but too evident∣ly in that which I observed of these two Princes; For the King of 
Batas,
 seeing that the Ty∣rant had shut himself up in his City, thereby as it were confessing that he was vanquished, grew to such an height of confidence, that both he and his people beleeving it was impossible for them to be resisted, and trusting in this vain opinion, that blinded them, were twice in ha∣zard to be lost by the rash and inconsiderate actions which they entred into. In the third sally, made by the inhabitants, the King of 
Batas
 people encountred them very lustily in two places, which those of 
Achem
 perceiving▪ they made as though they were the weaker, and so retreat∣ed to the same Fort, that was taken from them by the 
Bataes
 the first day of their arrival, be∣ing closely followed by one of the Kings Captains, who taking hold of the opportunity, entred pell-mell with the 
Achems,
 being perswaded that the Victory was sure his own; But when they were all together in the Trenches the 
Achems
 turned about, and making head afresh de∣fended themselves very couragiously▪ At length in the heat of their medley, the one side en∣deavoring to go on, and the other to withstand them, those of 
Achem
 gave fire to a Myne they had made, which wrought so effectually, as it blew up the Captain of the 
Bataes,
 and above three hundred of his Soldiers, with so great a noise, and so thick a smoak, as the place seemed to be the very portraiture of Hell: In the mean time the Enemies giving a great shout, the Tyrant sallied forth in person, accompanied with five thousand resolute men, and charged the 
Bataes
 very furiously; Now for that neither of them could see one another by reason of the smoak pro∣ceeding from the Myne, there was a most confused and cruel conflict between them, but to speak the truth I am not able to deliver the manner of it, sufficeth it that in a quarter of an hours space, the time this fight endured, four thousand were slain in the place on both sides, whereof the King of 
Batas
 lost the better part, which made him retire with the remainder of his Army to a Rock, called 
Minacaleu,
 where causing his hurt men to be drest, he found them to be two thousand in number, besides those that were killed, which because they could not be so suddenly buried were thrown into the current of the River. Hereupon the two Kings con∣tinued quiet for four days after, at the end whereof one morning, when nothing was less thought of, there appeared in the midst of the River on 
Penaticans
 side a Fleet of fourscore and six Sails, with a great noise of musick, and acclamations of joy: At first this object much ama∣zed the 
Bataes,
 because they knew not what it was, howbeit the night before their scouts had taken five fishermen, who put to torture confessed, that this was the Army which the Tyrant had sent some two months before to 
Tevassery,
 in regard he had War with the 
Sornau,
 King of 
Siam,
 and it was said that this Army was composed of five thousand 
Lussons
 and 
Sornes,
 all choyce men, having to their General a 
Turk
▪ named 
Hametecam,
 Nephew to the 
Bassa
 of 
Cairo.
 Whereupon the King of 
Batas
 making use of these fishermens confession, resolved to retire himself in any sort whatsoever, well considering that the time would not permit him to make an hours stay, as well because his Enemies Forces were far greater then his, as for that every minute they expected succors from 
Pedir
 and 
Pazen,
 whence, as it was reported for certain, there were twelve ships full of strangers coming. No sooner was the King fortified


in this resolution, but the night ensuing he departed very sad, and ill contented for the bad su
∣cess of his enterprize, wherein he had lost above three thousand and five hundred men, not comprising the wounded, which were more in number, nor those that were burnt with the fire of the Myn
. Five days after his departure he arrived at 
Panaiu,
 where he dismissed all his Forces, both his own subjects and strangers; That done, he imbarqued himself in a small 
Lanchara,
 and went up the River without any other company then two or three of his Favo∣rites: With this small retinue he betook himself to a place, called 
Pachissaru,
 where he shu
 himself up for fourteen days, by way of pennance, in a Pagod of an Idol, named 
Gi
nasser
d,
 which signifies 
the God of Sadness.
 At his return to 
Panaiu
 he sent for me, and the 
Mahome∣tan
 that brought 
Pedro de Faria
's Merchandise; The first thing that he did was to enquire particularly of him whether he made a good sale of it, adding withall, that if any thing were still owing to him he would command it to be presently satisfied; Hereunto the 
Mahometan
 and I answered, that through his Highness favor all our business had received a very good dis∣patch, and that we were well payd for that we had sold, in regard whereof the Captain of 
Malaca
 would not fail to acknowledg that courtesie, by sending him succor for to be revenged on his Enemy the Tyrant of 
Achem,
 whom he would inforce to restore all the places, which he had unjustly usurped upon him. The King hearing me speak in this manner stood a while musing with himself, and then in answer to my speech, 
A
 Portugal,
 said he, 
since thou con∣strainest me to tell thee freely what I think, beleeve me not hereafter to be so ignorant, as that thou mayst be able to perswade me, or that I can be capable to imagine, that he, which in thirty years space could not revenge himself, is of power to succor me at this present in so short a time; or if yet thou thinkest I deceive my self, tell me I pre thee now whence comes it that thy King and his Governors could not hinder this cruel King of
 Achem 
from gaining from you the Fort of
 Pazem, 
and the Galley which went to the
 Molu
quaes, 
as also three Ships in
 Queda, 
and the Gallion of
 Malaca, 
at such time as
 Garcia 
was Captain there, besides the four Foists that were taken since at
 Salengor, 
with the two Ships that came from
 Bengal
, 
or
 Lop
 Chanoc
's Iounk and Ship, as likewise many other Vessels, which I cannot now remember, 
 the which, as I have been assured, this Inhumane h
th put to death above a thousand
 Portu∣gals, 
and gotten an extream rich bo
ty. Wherefore if this Tyrant should happen to come once more against me, how canst thou have me rely upon their word which have been so often over∣come? I must of necessity then continue as I am with three of my children murdered, and the greatest part of my Kingdom destroyed, seeing you your selves are not much more assured in your Fortress of Malaca.
 I must needs confess that this answer, made with so much resent∣ment, rendred me so ashamed, knowing he spake nothing but truth, that I durst not talk to him afterwards of any succor, nor for our honor reiterate the promises which I had formerly made him.






CHAP. VIII. What past between the King of 
Batas
 and me, until such time as I imbarqued for 
Malaca;
 my Arrival in the Kingdom of 
Queda,
 and my return from thence to 
Malaca.


THe 
Mahometan
 and I returning to our lodging, departed not in four days after,
 employ∣ing that time in shipping an hundred Bars of Tin, and thirty of Benjamin, which were still on Land. Then being fully satisfied by our Merchants, and ready to go, I went to wait upon the King at his 
Passeiran,
 which was a great place before the Palace, where those of the Country kept their most solemn Fairs; There I gave him to understand, that now we had no∣thing more to do but to depart if it would please his Majesty to permit us: The entertainment that he gave me then was very gracious, and for answer he said to me, I am very glad for that 
Hermon Xabandar
 (who was chief General of the Wars) assured me yesterday that your Cap∣tains commodities were well sold, but it may be that that which he told me was not so, and that he delivered not the truth for to please me, and to accommodate himself to the desire he knew I had to have it so, wherefore, continued he, I pre-thee declare unto me freely whether he dealt truly with me, and whether the 
Mahometan
 that brought them be fully satisfied, for I would not that to my dishonor those of 
Malaca
 should have cause to complain of the Mer∣chants of 
Panaiu,
 saying, that they are not men of their word, and that there is not a King there who can constrain them to pay their debts; and I swear to thee by the faith of Pagan,


that this affront would be no less insupportable to my condition, then if I should chance to make peace with that Tyrant, and perjured Enemy of mine, the King of 
Achem.
 Whereunto having replyed, that we had dispatched all our affairs, and that there was nothing due to us in his Country; Verily, said he, I am very well pleased to hear that it is so, wherefore since thou hast nothing else to do here, I hold it requisite, that without any further delay thou shouldst go, for the 
me is now fit to set sail, and to avoyd the great heats that ordinarily are endured in passing the Gulph, which is the cause that ships are many times cast upon 
Pazem
 by foul weather at Sea, from which I pray God deliver thee, for I assure thee that if thy ill fortune should carry thee thither, the men of 
Achem
 would eat thee alive, and the Tyrant himself would have the first bite at thee, there being nothing in the world these Inhumanes so much vaunt of, as to car
y on the crest of their Arms the device of 
Drinkers of the troubled blood of miserable Ca
∣sers,
 who they say are come from the end of the world, calling them 
Tyrannical men, and Vsurpers in a soveraign degree of other mens Kingdoms in the Indiaes, and Isles of the Sea.
 This is the title wherein they glory most, and which they attribute particularly to themselves, as being sent them from 
Mecqua
 in recompence of the golden Lamps, which they offered to the Alcoran of their 
Mahomet,
 as they use to do every year. Furthermore, although heretofore I 
 often advised thy Captain of 
Malaca
 to take careful heed of this Tyrant of 
Achem,
 yet do not thou omit to advertise him of it once more from me; for know that he never had, nor shall have other thoughts then to labor by all means to expel him out of the 
Indiaes,
 and make the 
Turk
 Master of them, who to that end promiseth to send him great succors; but I hope that God will so order it, as all the malice and cunning of this disloyal wretch shall have a contrary success to his intentions. After he had used this language to me, he gave me a Letter in answer to my Embassage, together with a present, which he desired me to deliver from him to Captain 
de Faria
; this was six small Javelins headed with Gold, twelve 
Cates
 of 
Calambuca
 Wood, every one of them weighing twenty ounces, and a box of exceeding value, made of a Tortoise sh
ll, beautified with Gold, and full of great seed pearl, amongst the which there were sixteen fair pearls of rich account: For my self, he gave me two 
Cates
 of Gold, and a little Courte∣l
 garnished with the same. Then he dismissed me with as much demonstration of honor as he had always used to me before, protesting to me in particular, that the amity which he had con∣tracted with our Nation should ever continue inviolable on his part. Thus I imbarqued my self with 
Aquarem Dab
lay,
 his Brother-in-law, who was the same he had sent Embassador to 
Malaca,
 as I have related before. Being departed from the Port of 
Panaiu,
 we arrived about two hours in the 
ight at a little Island, called 
Apofingua,
 distant some league and an half from the mouth of the River, and inhabited by poor people, who lived by the fishing of Shad
.


The next morning, leaving that Island of 
Apofingua,
 we ran along by the coast of the Ocean Sea for the space of five and twenty leagues, until such time as at length we entered into the Straight of 
Minhagaruu,
 by which we came; then passing by the contrary coast of this other 
Mediterranean
 Sea, we continued our course along by it, and at last arrived near to 
Pullo Bugay:
 There we crost over to the firm Land, and passing by the Port of 
Iunçalan,
 we sailed two days and an half with a favorable wind, by means whereof we got to the River of 
Parles
 in the Kingdom of 
Queda,
 there we rode five days at anchor in expectation of a fit wind to carry us on. During that time, the 
Mahometan
 and my self, by the counsel of certain Mer∣chants of the Country, went to visit the King with an 
Odiaa,
 or Present of divers things, that we thought were convenient for our design, which was received with much demonstration of being very well pleased therewith. When we came to his Court we found, that with a great deal of pomp, excellent musick, dancing, and largess to the poor, he was solemnizing the fune∣rals of his Father, whom he himself had poynarded, of purpose for to marry his own mother, after he had gotten her with child: Wherewithall not being contented, to decline the murmur, which so wicked and horrible an act might provoke unto, he had made proclamation, that on pain of a most rigorous death no person whatsoever should be so daring, as to speak a word of that which had past, and it was told us there, how for that cause he had most tyrannically put the principal Personages of his Kingdom, and a number of Merchants already to death, whose goods he had confiscated to his own use, and thereby enriched his Coffers with two millions of Gold; So that upon our arrival we perceived such a general fear to be amongst the people, as not the most hardy of them all durst so much as make the least mention in the world of it. Now in regard the 
Mahometan,
 my companion, named 
Coia Ale,
 was a man liberal of his tongue,


and that would say any thing which came into his head, he perswaded himself, in regard he was a stranger, and the Captain of 
Malaca
's Factor, that he might with more liberty then those of the Country talk what he listed, and the King not punish him for it, as he did his Subjects; But he found himself far short of his account, and this presumption cost him his life: For being invited to a feast by another 
Mahometan
 like himself, a Merchant stranger, born at 
Patana,
 when as they were both of them high with wine and meat, as I learned since, they began to talk boldly, and without any respect of the Kings Brutality and Parracide, whereof the King, being incontinently advertised by Spies, which he had in every corner for that purpose, he caused the house to be presently invested, and all the guests to be apprehended, to the number of seventeen persons; These poor wretches were no sooner brought bound before him, but immediately, without observing any form of Justice, or hearing what they could say for them∣selves either good or bad, he commanded them to be put to a most cruel kind of death, called by them 
Gregoge,
 which is, to saw off the feet, hands, and heads of them that are condemned to it, as I beheld afterwards my self. This execution done, the King, fea
ing lest the Captain of 
Malaca
 should be offended for that he had executed his Factor thus with the rest, and there∣fore might arrest some goods that he had at 
Malaca,
 sent the night following for me to the 
Iurupango,
 where I was sleeping, and altogether ignorant of that which had past: understand∣ing the Kings pleasure away I went, and coming about midnight to the Palace I perceived in the outward Court a great many men in arms; the sight whereof I must confess put me into a migh∣ty amazement and mistrust, because I could not imagine what should be the cause of it, and doubting lest it might be some such Treason as at other times they had practised against us, I would fain have returned, but they that accompanied me, judging that my fear proceeded from the Soldiers which I beheld there, bid me be afraid of nothing, for these men were only going forth to apprehend an offendor by the Kings commandment; Having said thus with an intent to confirm me, I could not for all that be satisfied, but was seized with so terrible a fear, as I was not able to utter a word, howbeit at length recollecting my self a little, I signified to them the best I could, how if they would permit me to return to my Skiff for to fetch a thing which I had forgotten, I would give them forty Crowns in Gold; whereunto they answered, that if I would give them all the Silver in 
Malaca
 they would not let me go, for if they should, they were sure to lose their heads: This speech of theirs redoubled my fear, which yet increased when I saw my self invironned with twenty more of those armed men, who guarded me all that night. The next morning the King being advertised that I was there, commanded me to be brought unto him, into the next Court, where I found him mounted on an Elephant, and accompanied with an hundred persons besides those of his guard, which were far more in num∣ber; When he saw me coming towards him, much troubled, and indeed more dead then alive, he said twice to me, 
Be not afraid, but come nearer to me, and thou shalt know the cause why I sent for thee.
 Thereupon having made a sign to me with his hand that I should look that way he pointed me to, I turned me about and beheld a great many bodies extended on the place, and weltring in their own blood, amongst the which I presently knew the 
Mahometan, Coia Ale,
 with whom I came, which I no sooner perceived, but like a man distraught of his wits I cast my self at the feet of the Elephant whereupon the King rode, and with tears in my eyes cryed out, O Sir, have pity on me, and take me for thy slave, rather then cause me to end my days with the torments which have taken those out of the world whom I see here; I swear unto thee by the faith of a Christian, that I have not deserved death, as having no way offend∣ed thee; Consider likewise, I beseech thee, that I am Nephew to the Captain of 
Malaca,
 who will give thee any ransom for me thou wil
 desire, as also that thou hast the 
Iurupango,
 where∣in I came, in thy Port, full of goods, all which thou mayst take it if thou pleasest. Hearing me speak in this sort, 
God forbid,
 said he, 
that ever I should do any such thing, no, no, be not afraid, but stand up, and recollect thy self, for I see well thou art much troubled, and when thou art in better case to hear me I will tell thee wherefore I caused the Moor, that came with thee, to be executed; and in good faith if he had been either a Portugal, or a Christian, I would not have put him to death, no, though he had killed mine own son.
 Howbeit perceiving, that all which he could say would not rid me of my fear, he commanded a pot of fresh water to be brought me, whereof I drunk a pretty quantity, and withall made one of his followers to fan me with a ventilow for to refresh me: A quarter of an hour, or thereabouts, was spent in this action, at the end thereof finding that I was so well recovered, as I was able with good sence to answer unto the questions he should ask me; 
Portugal,
 said he unto me, I know that


thou hast bern told, since thy coming hither, how I killed my Father, as indeed I did, because I was sure he would have killed me, incited thereunto by the false reports of some of his slaves, would have made him believe that I had gotten my mother with child, whereof I had never so much as the least thought, whereby thou mayst see what ill tongues can do. Indeed it is true, that being most assured he had without all reason given such credit to those slanderous reports, as he was fully resolved to have taken away my life, to decline that imminent peril I prevented him, and caught him in the same snare he had layd for me; But God knows how much against my mind this fell out, and how I always made it my chiefest glory to render him the dutiful of∣fices of a most obedient son, as it may well appear now at this present: for to keep my mother from being a sad and desolate widow, as many others are, seeing my self to be the cause of her misery, and obliged to comfort her, I have taken her to wife; judg then whether I have been wrongfully blamed, or no, since that for her I have refused many great parties, that have been propounded unto me from 
Patacia, Berdio, Tanauçarin, Siaca, Iamba,
 and 
Andragia,
 who were no less then Sisters and Daughters of Kings, and offered unto me with very rich dowries. Now being informed that such false reports had been dispersed abroad of me, for to arrest the tongues of Detractors, which are so audacious as to talk of any thing comes in their heads, I caused it to be proclaimed, that none should dare to speak of that affair; But for as much as without any regard at all of this my Injunction, this fellow of thine, which lies there in the company of those other Dogs, like unto himself, spoke yesterday of me most reproach∣fully in publique, saying, I was an Hog, or worse then a very Hog, and my mother a salt Bitch; as well to punish his slanders, as to preserve my honor, I was constrained to put him to death, together with these other Dogs, who were no less slanderous then he: Wherefore I am to de∣sire thee, that as my friend thou wilt not think this procedure of mine any way strange. Now if thou shouldst happen to think, that I have done it on purpose to seize upon the Captain of 
Malaca
's goods, be confident that I never meant it, & thou mayst truly certifie him so much; For I swear unto thee by my Law, that I have ever been a great friend to the 
Portugals,
 and so will continue all my life. Hereupon being somewhat recovered from the fear I was in a little before, I answered him, How his Highness had much obliged his very good friend, and brother, the Captain of 
Malaca,
 by the execution of that 
Mahometan,
 who had imbezelled away a great part of the goods committed to his charge, and understanding that I had discovered his knavery he had twice gone about to poyson me; whereunto also I added, how this Dog when he was drunk would bark at every one, and speak his pleasure at large. This answer made upon the sudden, and not knowing well what I said, very much pleased the King, who commanding me to come nearer to him, Verily, continued he, by this speech of thine I perceive thou art an ho∣nest man, and my friend, and being so I doubt not but thou wilt give a good interpretation to my actions, contrary to those mastiff Dogs that lie there weltring in their own blood. Having said so, he took a purse from his girdle trimmed with gold, and gave it me, as also a Letter di∣rected to 
Pedro de Faria,
 whereupon I took my leave of him, with a promise that I would stay there a week longer; howbeit getting speedily aboard my 
Iurupango,
 I made not a minutes stay, but instantly caused the Mariners to hoist sail, and away, still imagining that some were following to apprehend me, by reason of the extream fear I was in, having so lately escaped, as I thought, the danger of a most cruel death.


Being departed from the River of 
Parles
 on a Saturday about Sun-set, I made all the speed that possibly I could, and continued my course until the Tuesday following, when it pleased God that I reached to the Isles of 
Pullo Sambalin,
 the first Land on the Coast of 
Mallayo.
 There by good fortune I met with three 
Portugal
 ships (whereof two came from 
Bengala,
 and the other from 
Pegu
) commanded by 
Tristan de Gaa,
 who had sometimes been Gover∣nor of the person of 
Don Lorenzo,
 son to the Vice-roy 
Don Francesco d' Almeda,
 that was afterward put to death by 
Miroocem
 in 
Chaul
 Roade, as is at large delivered in the History of the Discovery of the 
Indiaes.
 This same 
Tristan
 furnished me with many things that I had great need of, as tackle, and Mariners, together with two Soldiers, and a Pilot; moreover, both himself and the other to ships had always a care of me until our arrival at 
Malaca
▪ where dis-imbarquing my self, the first thing I did was to go to the Fortress for to salute the Captain, and to render him an account of the whole success of my Voyage, where I discoursed unto him at large what Rivers, Ports, and Havens I had newly discovered in the Isle of 
Samatra,
 as well on the 
Mediterranean,
 as on the Ocean Seas side, as also what commerce the inhabitants of the Country used; Then I declared unto him the manner of all that Coast, of all those Ports,


and of all those Rivers; whereunto I added the scituations, the heights, the degrees, the names, and the depths of the Ports, according to the direction he had given me at my departure. There∣withall I made him a description of the Rode wherein 
Rosado,
 the Captain of a 
French
 ship, was lost, and another, named 
Matelote de Brigas,
 as also the Commander of another ship, who by a storm at Sea was cast into the Port of 
Diu
 in the year 1529. during the raign of 
Sultan Bandur,
 King of 
Cambaya.
 This Prince having taken them all, made fourscore and two of them abjure their 
aith, who served him in his Wars against the great 
Mogor,
 and were every one of them miserably slain in that expedition. Moreover I brought him the description of a place fit for anchorage in 
Pullo Botum
 Roade, where the 
Bisquayn
 Ship suffered shipwrack, which was said to be the very same, wherein 
Mag
llan
 compassed the World, and was called the 
Vittoria,
 which traversing the Isle of 
Iooa
 was cast a way at the mouth of the River of 
Sonda.
 I made him a recital likewise of many different Nations, which inhabit all along this Ocean, and the River of 
Lampon,
 from whence the Gold of 
Menancabo
 is transported to the Kingdom of 
Campar,
 upon the waters of 
Iambes
 and 
Broteo.
 For the inhabitants affirm out of their Chro∣nicles, how in this very Town of 
Lampon
 there was anciently a Factory of Merchants, esta∣blished by the Queen of 
Sheba,
 whereof one, named 
Nausem,
 sent her a great quantity of Gold, which she carried to the Temple of 
Ierusalem,
 at such time as she went to visit the wise King 
Solomon
; From whence, some say, she returned with child of a son, that afterwards succeeded to the Empire of 
Aethiopia,
 whom now we call 
Prester-Iohn,
 of whose race the 
Abissins
 vaunt they are descended. Further, I told him what course was usually held for the fishing of seed pearl betwixt 
Pullo Tiquos
 and 
Pullo Quenim,
 which in times past were car∣ried by the 
Bataes
 to 
Pazem
 and 
Pedir,
 and exchanged with the 
Turks
 of the Straight of 
Mecqua,
 and the Ships of 
Iud
a,
 for such Merchandise as they brought from 
Grand Cairo,
 and the Ports of 
Arabia Foelix.
 Divers other things I recounted unto him, having learnt them of the King of 
Batas,
 and of the Merchants of 
Pan
i
:
 And for conclusion, I gave him an in∣formation in writing, as he had formerly desi
ed me, concerning the Island of Gold: I told him, how this Island is beyond the River of 
Calandor
 five degrees to the Southward, inviron∣ed with many shelfs of sand, and currents of water, as also that it was distant some hundred and threescore leagues from the point of the Isle of 
Samatra.
 With all which reports 
Pedro de Faria
 remained so well satisfied, that he made present relation thereof to the King 
Don Iovan
 the Third of happy memory, who the year after ordained 
Francesco d' Almeida
 for Captain to discover the Isle of Gold, a Gentleman of merit, and very capable of that charge, who indeed had long before petitioned the King for it in recompence of the services by him performed in the Islands of 
Banda,
 of the 
Molucques,
 of 
Ternate,
 and 
Geilolo:
 But by ill fortune this 
Francesco d' Almeida,
 being gone from the 
India
s
 to discover that place, dyed of a feaver in the Isles of 
Nicubar
; Whereof the King of 
Portugal
 being advertised, he honored one 
Diego Cabral,
 born at the 
Maderaes,
 with that Command, but the Court of Justice deprived him of it by express order from 
Martinez Alphonso de Sousa,
 who was at that time Governor, which partly proceeded, according to report, for that he had murmured against him; Where∣upon he gave it to 
Ieronimo Figuereydo,
 a Gentleman belonging to the Duke of 
Braganca,
 who in the year 1542. departed from 
Goa
 with two Foists, and one Carvel, wherein there were fourscore men, as well Soldiers, as Mariners; But it is said, that his Voyage was without effect, for that, according to the apparances that he gave of it afterward, it seemed that he desired to enrich himself too suddenly: To which end he passed to the Coast of 
Tanassery,
 where he took certain Ships, that came from 
Mecqua, Adem, Alcosser, Iudaa,
 and other places upon the Coast of 
Persia.
 And verily this booty was the occasion of his undoing, for upon an unequal partition thereof falling at difference with his Soldiers, they mutined in such fort against him, as after many affronts done him they bound him hand and foot, and so carried him to the Isle of 
Ceilan,
 where they set him on Land; and the Carvel, with the two Foists, they returned to the Governor 
Don Ioano de Castra,
 who in regard of the necessity of the time pardoned them the fault, and took them along with him in the Army, which he led to 
Diu
 for the succor of 
Don Ioana Mascarenhas,
 that was then straitly besieged by the King of 
Cambaya
's Forces. Since that time there hath been no talk of the discovery of this Island of Gold, although it seems very much to import the common good of our Kingdom of 
Portugal,
 if it would please God it might be brought to pass.








CHAP. IX. The Arrival of an Embassador at 
Malaca
 from the King of 
Aaru
 to the Captain thereof; his sending me to the said King, my coming to 
Aaru,
 and that which happend to me after my departing from thence.


FIve and twenty days after my coming to 
Malaca, Dom Stephano de Gama
 being still Cap∣tain of the Fortress, an Embassador arrived there from the King of 
Aaru,
 for to demand succor of men from him, and some munitions of War, as Powder, and Bullets, for to defend himself from a great Fleet that the King of 
Achem
 was setting forth against him, with an in∣tention to deprive him of his Kingdom, and so be a nearer neighbor unto us, to the end that having gained that passage, he might afterwards send his forces the more easily against our For∣tress of 
Malaca:
 whereof 
Pedro de Faria
 was no sooner advertised, but representing unto himself how important this affair was for the service of the King, and preservation of the For∣tress, he acquainted 
Dom Stephano de Gama
 with it, in regard his Command of the place was to continue yet six weeks longer; howbeit he excused himself from giving the succor, which was required, saying, that the time of his Government was now expiring, and that his being shortly to come in the duty of his charge did oblige him to take care of this business, and to think of the danger that menaced him. Hereunto 
Pedro de Faria
 made answer, that if he would relinquish his Government for the time he had yet to come in it, or give him full power to dis∣pose of the publique Magazins, he would provide for the succor that he thought was necessary. In a word, and not to stand long on that which past betwixt them, it shall suffice to say, that this Embassador was utterly denyed his demand by these two Captains, whereof the one alledg∣ed for excuse, that he was not yet entered upon his Charge, and the other that he was upon the finishing of his: whereupon he returned very ill satisfied with this refusal, and so far resented injustice, which he thought was done unto his King, as the very morning wherein he imbarqued himself, having met by chance with the two Captains at the gate of the Fortress, he said aloud before them publiquely with the tears in his eyes; 
O God! that with a soveraign Power and Majesty raignest in the highest of the Heavens, even with deep sighs fetch'd from the bottom of my heart, I take thee for Iudg of my cause, and for witness of the just occasion I have to make this request to these Captains here, and that in the name of my King, the faithful Vassal of the great King of
 Portugal, 
upon homage sworn by his Ancestors to the famous
 Albu∣que
que, 
who promised us, that if the Kings of our Kingdom did always continue true and loyal Subjects to his Master, that then both he and his successors would oblige themselves to defend them against all their enemies, as belonged to their soveraign Lord to do; wherefore since we have continued still loyal to this day, what reason have you, my Masters, not to ac∣complish this obligation, wherein your King and you are so deeply engaged, especially seeing you know that only in respect of you this perfidious Tyrant of
 Achem 
takes our Country from us; For there is nothing he so much reproacheth us withall, as that my King is as good a Por∣tugal, and Christian, as if he had been born in
 Portugal; 
and yet now that he desires you to suc∣cor him in his need, as allyes and true friends ought to do, you excuse your selves with reasons that are of no validity. The succor we require of you for to secure us, and to keep this faithless wretch from seizing on our Kingdom, is a very small matter, namely, forty or fifty
 Portugals, 
that may instruct us in the military art, together with four barrels of Powder, and two hun∣dred Bullets for field Pieces; a poor thing in comparison of that you have. Now if you can yet be perswaded to grant us this little ayd, you shall thereby so much oblige our King, as he will ever remain a faithful slave to the mighty Prince of
 Portugal, 
your Master and ours, in whose name I beseech you, once, twice, nay an hundred times, that you will perform that ap∣pertains unto your duty to do, for this which I thus publikely demand of you is of so great importance, that therein consists, not so much the preservation of the Kingdom of
 Aaru, 
as the safety of this your Fortress of
 Malaca, 
which that Tyrant of
 Achem 
our enemy so extreamly desires to possess, and to that purpose he hath gotten the assistance of divers strange Nations; but because he finds that our Kingdom is a let to the execution of his design, he en∣deavors to usurp it upon us, and then he intends to guard this Straight in such sort, as he will quite exclude you from all Commerce with the Spices of
 Banda 
and the
 Molucques, 
and from all the Trade and Navigation of the Seas of
 China, Sunda, Borneo, Timor, 
and
 Jappon, 
and this his own people stick not to boast of even already, being also further manifested by the accord,


which he hath lately made with the Turk, through the interpos
ure of the Bassa of grand
 Cairo, 
who in consideration thereof hath promised to ay
 him with great Forces: Wherefore at length give ear unto the request which I have made unto you in the name of my King, and that so much concerns the service of yours, for since you may yet give a remedy to the mischief, which you see is ready to fall, I desire you to do it speedily; And let not one of you excuse himself by alledging that the time of his Government is almost at an end, nor the other, that he is not as yet entered upon his Charge, for it is sufficient that you know you are both of you equally ob∣liged thereunto.


Having finished this speech in form of a request, which availed him nothing, he stooped down to the ground, from whence taking up two stones, he knocked with them upon a Piece of Ordnance, and then the tears standing in his eyes he said, 
The Lord, who hath created us, will defend us if he please,
 and so imbarquing himself he departed greatly discontented for the bad answer he carried back. Five days after his departure 
Pedro de Faria
 was told how all the Town murmured at the small respect, that both he and 
Dom Stephano
 had carried to that poor King, who had ever been a friend both to them, and the whole 
Portugal
 Nation, and conti∣nually done very good offices to the Fort, for which cause his Kingdom was now like to be taken from him: This advice causing him to see his fault, and to be ashamed of his proceeding, he labored to have palliated it with certain excuses, but at last he sent this King by way of succor fifteen quintals of fine Powder, an hundred pots of Wild-fire, an hundred and fifty Bullets for great Ordnance, twelve Harquebuzes, forty sacks of stones, threescore Headpieces, and a Coat of guilt Mail, lined with Crimson Sattin for his own person, together with many other garments of divers sorts, as also twenty pieces of 
Caracas,
 which are stained linnen, or Cotten Tapestry, that come from the 
Indiaes,
 and cloth of 
Malaya,
 wherewith they usually apparel themselves in that Country, as well for his wife, as his daughters. All these things being laden aboard a 
Lanchara
 with oars, he desired me to conduct and present them from him to the King of 
Aaru,
 adding withall, that this business greatly concerned the King of 
Portugals
 service, and that at my return, besides the recompence I should receive from him, he would give me an extraordinary pay, and upon all occasions employ me in such Voyages, as might redound to my profit; whereupon I undertook it, in an ill hour as I may say, and for a punishment of my sins, in regard of what arrived unto me thereupon, as shall be seen hereafter. So then I imbarqued my self on Tuesday morning, the fifth of 
October,
 1539. and used such speed, that on Sunday following I arrived at the River of 
Panetican,
 upon which the City of 
Aaru
 is scitu∣ated.


I no sooner got to the River of 
Panetican,
 but presently landing I went directly to a Trench,
 which the King in person was causing to be made at the mouth of the River for to impeach the Enemies dis-imbarquing; Presenting my self unto him, he received me with great demonstra∣tion of joy, whereupon I delivered him 
Pedro de Faria
's Letter, which gave him some hope of his coming in person to succor him, if need required, with many other complements, that cost little the saying, wherewith the King was wonderfully contented, because he already imagined that the effect thereof would infallibly ensue; But after he saw the Present I brought him, con∣sisting of Powder, and Ammunitions, he was so glad, that taking me in his arms, My good friend, said be unto me, I assure thee that the last night I dreamt how all these things, which I behold here before me, came unto me from the King of 
Portugal,
 my Masters Fortress, by m
ans whereof, with Gods assistance, I hope to defend my Kingdom, and to serve him, in the manner I have always hitherto done, that is, most faithfully, as all the Captains can very well testifie, which have heretofore commanded in 
Malaca.
 Hereupon questioning me about certain matters, that he desired to know, as well concerning the 
Indiaes,
 as the Kingdom of 
Portugal,
 he recommended the finishing of the Trench to his people, who wrought very ear∣nestly and chearfully in it, and taking me by the hand, on foot as he was, attended only by five or six Gentlemen, 
e led me directly to the City, that was about some quarter of a league from the Trench, where in his Palace he entertained me most magnificently, yea and made me to sa∣lute his wife, a matter very rarely practised in that Country, and held for a special honor, which when I had done with abundance of tears he said unto me, 
Portugal,
 here is the cause that makes me so much to redoubt the coming of mine Enemies, for were I not withheld by my wife I swear unto thee by the Law of a good and true Moor, that I would prevent them in their de∣signs without any other ayd then of my own Subjects; for it is not now that I begin to know what manner of man the per
idious 
Achem
 is, or how far his power extends; Alas! it is the


great store of Gold, which he possesseth, that covers his weakness, and by means whereof he wageth such forces of strangers, wherewith he is continually served: But now that thou mayst on the other side understand how vile and odious poverty is, and how hurtful to a poor King, such as I may be, come thee along with me, and by that little which I will presently let thee see thou shalt perceive, whether it be not too true, that Fortune hath been exceeding niggardly to me of her goods; Saying so, he carried me to his Orsenal, which was covered with thatch, and shewed me all that he had within it, whereof he might say with reason, that it was no∣thing in comparison of what he needed for to withstand the attempts of two hundred and thir∣ty Vessels, replenished with such warlike people, as the 
Achems
 and 
Mulabar Turks
 were; Moreover, with a sad countenance, and as one that desired to discharge his mind of the grief he was in for the danger was threatened him, he recounted unto me, that he had in all but six thou∣sand men 
Aaruns,
 without any other forraign succor, forty Pieces of small Ordnance, as Fal∣conets, and Bases, and one cast Piece, which he had formerly bought of a 
Portugal,
 named 
Antonio de Garcia,
 sometimes Receiver of the Toll and Customs of the Ports of the Fortress of 
Pacem,
 whom 
Georgio 
' Albuqurque
 caused since to be hanged and quartered at 
Malaca,
 for that he treated by Letters with the King of 
Bintham
 about a plot of Treason, which they had contrived together; He told me besides, that he had also forty Muskets, six and twenty Elephants, fifty Horsemen for the guard of the place, eleven or twelve thousand staves hardened in the fire, called 
Salignes,
 whose points were poysoned, and for the defence of the Trench fifty Lances, good store of Targets, a thousand pots of unslack'd Lime made into Powder, and to be used in stead of pots of Wild-fire, and three or four Barques full laden with great flints; In a word, by the view of these, and such other of his miseries, I easily perceived he was so unpro∣vided of things necessary for his defence, that I presently concluded the Enemy would have no great ado to seize on this Kingdom: Nevertheless he having demanded of me what I thought of all this Ammunition in his Magazin, and whether there were not enough to receive the guests he expected, I answered him, that it would serve to entertain them; but he understand∣ing my meaning stood musing a pretty while, and then shaking his head, Verily, said he unto me, if your King of 
Portugal
 did but know what a loss it would be to him, that the Tyrant of 
Achem
 should take my Kingdom from me, doubtless he would chastise the little care of his Captains, who, blinded as they are, and wallowing in their avarice, have suffered my Enemy to grow so strong, that I am much afraid they shall not be able to restrain him when they would, or if they could, that then it must be with an infinite expence. I labored to answer this which he had said unto me with such resentment, but he confuted all my reasons with so much truth, as I had not the heart to make any farther reply; withall he represented divers foul and enormous actions unto me, wherewithall he charged some particulars amongst us, which I am contented to pass by in silence, both in regard they are nothing pertinent to my discourse, and that I desire not to discover other mens faults; For a conclusion of his speech, he related unto me the little punishment which was ordained for such as were culpable of these matters, and the great re∣wards that he had seen conferred on those which had not deserved them; whereunto he added, that if the King desired throughly to perform the duty of his Charge, and by Arms to conquer people so far distant from his Kingdom, and to preserve them, it was as necessary for him to punish the wicked, as to recompence the good. This said, he sent me to lodg in a Merchants house, who for five days together, that I remained there, entertained me bravely, though to speak truth I had rather have been at that time in some other place with any poor victuals, for here I was always in fear, by reason of the Enemies continual alarms, and the certain news that came to the King the next day after my arrival, how the 
Achems
 were already marching towards 
Aa∣ru,
 and would be there within eight days at the farthest, which made him in all haste to give directions for such things as he had not taken order for before, and to send the women, and all that were unfit for War, out of the City five or six leagues into the Wood, amongst the which the Queen her self made one, mounted on an Elephant. Five days after my arrival, the King sent for me, and asked me when I would be gone, whereunto I replyed, at such time as it would please his Greatness to command me, though I should be glad it might be with the soon∣est, for that I was to be employed by my Captain with his Merchandise to 
China:
 Thou hast reason, answered he; then taking two Bracelets of massy Gold off from his wrists, worth some thirty Crowns, I pre-thee now, said he, giving them to me, do not impute it to miser∣ableness that I bestow so little on thee, for thou mayst be assured, that it hath been always my desire for to have much for to give much; withall I must desire thee to present this Letter, and


this Diamond from me to thy Captain, to whom thou shalt say, that whatsoever I am further engaged to him in for the pleasure he hath done me by succoring me with those Ammunitions he hath sent me by thee, I will bring it to him my self hereafter, when I shall be at more liberty then now I am.


Having taken leave of the King of 
Aaru,
 I presently imbarqued my self,
 and departed about Sun-set, rowing down the River to an Hamlet, that is at the entrance thereof, composed of ten or eleven houses covered with 
traw: This place is inhabited with very poor people, that get their living by killing of 
Lezards,
 of whose livers they make a poyson, wherewith they anoint the heads of their arrows; For the poyson of this place, chiefly that, which is called 
Pocausilim,
 is held by them the best of those Countries, because there is no remedy for him that is hurt with it. The next day, having left this small Village, we sailed along the coast with a land wind until evening, that we doubled the Islands of 
Anchepisan,
 then the day and part of the night following we put forth somewhat farther to Sea: But about the first watch the wind changed to the North-east, for such winds are ordinary about the Isle of 
Samatra,
 and grew to be so tempestuous, that it blew our mast over board, tore our sails in pieces, and so shattered our Vessel, that the water came in that abundance into her at two several places, as she sunk in∣continently to the bottom, so that of eight & twenty persons, which were in her, three and twen∣ty were drowned in less then a quarter of an hour. For as five that escaped by the mercy of God, we passed the rest of the night upon a Rock, where the waves of the Sea had cast us. There all that we could do was with tears to lament our sad fortune, not knowing what counsel or course to take, by reason the Country was so moorish, and invironned with so thick a Wood, that a bird, were she never so little, could hardly make way through the branches of it, for that the trees grew so close together; We sat crouching for the space of three whole days upon this Rock, where for all our sustenance we had nothing but Snails, and such filth, as the 
oam of the Sea produced there. After this time, which we spent in great misery and pain, we walked a whole day along by the Isle of 
Samatra,
 in the owze up to the girdle-stead, and about Sun-set we came to the mouth of a little River, some Crossbow-shot broad, which we durst not un∣dertake to swim over, for that it was deep, and we very weak and weary; so that we were forced to pass all that night, standing up to the chin in the water. To this misery was there adjoyned the great affliction which the Flies and Gnats brought us, that coming out of the neighboring Woods, bit and stung us in such sort, as not one of us but was gore blood. The next morning as soon as we perceived day, which we much desired to see, though we had lit∣tle hope of life, I demanded of my four companions, all Mariners, whether they knew the Country, or whether there was any habitation thereabout; Whereupon the eldest of them, who had a wife at 
Malaca,
 not able to contain his tears, Alas! answered he, the place that now is most proper for you, and me, is the house of death, where ere it be long we must give an account of our sins, it therefore behoves us to prepare our selves for it without any further delay, and patiently to attend that which is sent us from the hand of God: For my part, let me intreat thee to be of a good courage whatsoever thou seest, and not be terrified with the fear of dying, since, every thing well considered, it matters not whether it be to day, or to morrow. This spoken, he embraced me, and with tears in his eyes desired me to make him a Christian, because he beleeved, as he said, that to be so was sufficient to save his Soul, which could not otherwise be done in the cursed sect of 
Mahomet,
 wherein he had lived till then, and for which he craved pardon of God. Having finished these last words, he remained dead in mine arms, for he was so weak, as he was not able to subsist any longer, as well for that he had not eaten ought in three or four days before, as in regard of a great wound the wrack of the 
Lanchara
 had given him in his head, through which one might see his brains all putrefied and corrupted, occasioned both for want of looking unto, as by salt water and flies that were gotten into it. Verily this accident grieved me very much, but for my self I was in little better case, for I was likewise so weak, that every step I made in the water I was ready to swoon, by reason of cer∣tain hurts on my head and body, out of which I had lost a great deal of blood. Having buried him in the owze the best we could, the other three Mariners and my self resolved to cross the River, for to go and sleep on certain great Trees, that we saw on the other side, for fear of the Tygers and Crocodiles, whereof that Country is full, besides many other venomous creatures, as an infinite of those copped Adders I have spoken of before in the sixth Chapter, and divers sorts of Serpents with black and green scales, whose venom is so contagious, as they kill men with their very breath. This resolution being thus taken by us, I desired two of them to swim


over first, and the other to stay with me for to hold me up in the water, for that in regard of my great weakness I could hardly stand upon my legs: whereupon they two cast themselves presently into the water, exhorting us to follow them, and not be afraid; But alas! they were scarce in the midst of this River, when as we saw them caught by two great L
zards, that before our faces, and in an instant tearing them in pieces, dragged them to the bottom, leaving the water all bloody, which was so dreadful a spectacle to us, as we had not the power to cry out; and for my self, I knew not who drew me out of the water, nor how I escaped thence, for I was gone before into the River as deep as my waste, with that other Mariner which h
ld me by the hand.






CHAP. X. By what means I was carried to the Town of 
Ciaca,
 and that which befell me there; my going to 
Malaca
 with a Mahometan Merchant; and the Tyrant of 
Achems
 Army marching against the King of 
Aaru.


FInding my self reduced to that extremity I have spoken of, I was above three hours so be∣sides my self,
 as I could neither speak, nor weep; At length the other Mariner and I went into the Sea again, where we continued the rest of that day. The next morning having disco∣vered a Ba
que, that was seeking the mouth of the River, as soon as it was near we got out of the water, and falling on our knees with our hands lift up we desired them to come and take us up; whereupon they gave over rowing, and considering the miserable state we were in they judged immediately that we had suffered shipwrack, so that coming somewhat nearer they asked us what we desired of them; we answered, that we were Christians, dwelling at 
Ma∣laca,
 and that in our return from 
Aaru
 we were cast away by a storm about nine days before, and therefore prayed them for Gods sake to take us away with them whithersoever they pleased. Thereupon one amongst them, whom we guessed to be the chiefest of them, spake to us thus, By that which I see, you are not in case to do us any service, and gain your meat, if we should receive you into our Barque, wherefore if you have any mony hidden, you shall do well to give it us aforehand, and then we will use towards you that charity you require of us, for otherwise it is in vain for you to hope for any help from us: Saying so, they made shew as though they would be gone; whereupon we besought them again weeping, that they would take us for slaves, and go sell us where they pleased; hereunto I added, how they might have any ran∣som for me they would require, as having the honor to appertain very nearly unto the Captain of 
Malaca.
 Well, answered he then, we are contented to accept of thy offer, upon condition, that if that which thou sayst be not true, we will cast thee, bound hand and foot, alive into the Sea. Having replyed, that they might do so if they found it otherwise, four of them got pre∣sently to us, and carried us into their Barque, for we were so weak at that time, as we were not able to stir of our selves. When they had us aboard, imagining that by whipping they might make us confess where we had hid our mony, for still they were perswaded that we had som
, they tyed us both to the foot of the Mast, and then with two double coards they whipped us till we were nothing but blood all over. Now because that with this beating I was almost dead, they gave not to me, as they did to my companion, a certain drink, made of a kind of Lime, 
eep
d in Urine, which he having taken it, made him fall into such a furious vomiting, as he cast up both his lungs and his liver, so as he dyed within an hour after. And for that they found no gold come up in his vomit, as they hoped, it pleased God that that was the cause why they deal
 not so with me, but only they washed the stripes they had given me with the said liquor, to keep them from festering, which notwithstanding put me to such pain, as I was even at the point of death. Being departed from this River, which was called 
Arissumhea,
 we went the next day after dinner ashore at a place, where the houses were covered with straw, named 
Ciaca,
 in the Kingdom of 
Iambes,
 there they kept me seven and twenty days, in which time by the assistance of Heaven I got my self throughly cured of all my hurts. Then they that had a share in my person, who were seven in number, seeing me unfit for their Trade, which was fishing, exposed me to sale three several times, and yet could meet with no body that would buy me; whereupon being out of hope of selling me, they turned me out of doors, be∣cause they would not be at the charge of feeding me. I had been six and thirty days thus aban∣doned by these Inhumanes, and put a grasing like a cast Horse, having no other means to live but what I got by begging from door to door, which God knows was very little, in regard


those of the Country were extream poor, when as one day, as I was lying in the Sun upon the sand by the Sea side, and lamenting my ill fortune with my self, it pleased God that a 
Maho∣metan,
 born in the Isle of 
Palimban,
 came accidentally by: This man, having been sometimes at 
Malaca
 in the company of 
Portugals,
 beholding me lie naked on the ground, asked me if I were not a 
Portugal,
 and willed me to tell him the truth; whereunto I answered, that indeed I was one, and descended of very rich parents, who would give him for my ransom whatsoever he would demand, if he would carry me to 
Malaca,
 where I was Nephew to the Captain of the Fortress, as being the son of his sister. The 
Mahometan
 hearing me say thus, If it be true, replyed he, that thou art such as thou deliverest thy self to be, what so great sin hast thou com∣mitted that could reduce thee to this miserable estate wherein I now see thee? Then I recount∣ed to him from point to point how I was cast away, and in what sort the fishermen had first brought me thither in their Barque, and afterwards had turned me out to the wide world, be∣cause they could not find any body that would buy me. Hereat he seemed to be much astonish∣ed, so that musing a pretty while by himself, Know stranger, said he unto me, that I am but a poor Merchant, all whose wealth amounts not to above an hundred 
Pardains
 (which are worth two shillings a piece of our mony) with which I trade for the rows of Shads, thereby hoping to get my living; Now I am assured that I might gain something at 
Malaca,
 if so be the Cap∣tain, and the Officers of the Custom-house there, would not do me the wrong, which I have heard say they do to many Merchants that come thither to traffique; wherefore if thou thinkst that for thy sake I should be well used there, I could be contented to redeem thee from the fishermen, and go thither with thee. Thereunto I answered him, with tears in mine eyes, that considering the state I was in at the present, it was not likely he could give credit to any thing I said, because it was probable that to free my self out of my miserable captivity I would prize my person at a far higher value then it would be esteemed for at 
Malaca
; howbeit if he would lend any belief to my oaths, since I had no other assurance to give him, I would swear to him, and also set it under my hand, that if he would carry me to 
Malaca,
 the Captain should do him a great deal of honor for my sake, and besides the exempting of his Merchandise from paying of custom, he should receive ten times as much as he should disburse for me. Well, re∣plyed the 
Mahometan,
 I am contented to redeem, and reconduct thee to 
Malaca,
 but thou must take heed that thou speakest not a word of that we have concluded on, for fear thy Ma∣sters hold thee at so dear a rate, as I shall not be able to draw thee out of their hands though I would never so fain; whereupon I gave him my faith to do nothing but what he would have me do, especially in that particular, which I held to be most necessary for the better effecting of our desire.


Four days after this agreement, the 
Mahometan
 Merchant,
 that he might the more easily redeem me, used the interposure of a man born in the Country, who under hand went to the fishermen, and carried the business so cunningly with them, as they quickly consented to my redemption, for they were already very weary of me, as well in regard that I was sickly, as for that I could no way stand them in any stead, and therefore, as I delivered before, they had turned me out of doors, where I had continued a month and better; so by the means of this third person, whom the 
Mahometan
 had employed, the fishermen sold me to the Merchant for the sum of seven 
mazes
 of gold, which amounts in our mony to seventeen shillings and six pence. The 
Mahometan
 as soon as he had redeemed me, brought me to his house, where I was five days out of the tyranny of these fishermen, and in a far better captivity then the for∣mer; At the end whereof my new Master went five leagues off to a place, named 
Sorobaya,
 where he got his Merchandise aboard, which, as I said before, was nothing but the rows of Shads; For there is such great abundance of them in that River, as the Inhabitants do there∣with every year lade above two thousand Vessels, which carry at least an hundred and fifty, or two hundred Barrels, whereof each one contains a thousand rows, the rest of the fish not yield∣ing them a peny. After that the 
Mahometan
 had laden a 
Lanchara
 with this commodity, he presently set sail for 
Malaca,
 where within a while he safely arrived, and carrying me to the Fortress presented me to the Captain, relating unto him what agreement we had made together. 
Pedro de Faria
 was so amazed to see me in such a lamentable plight, as the tears stood in his eyes, whereupon he bade me speak out aloud, that he might know whether it was I that he beheld, for that I did not seem to be my self, in regard of the strange deformity of my face. Now because that in three months space there had been no news of me, and that every one thought me to be dead, there came so manyfolks to see me, as the Fortress could scarce hold them:


Here being demanded the occasion of my mis-fortune, and who had brought me into that mi∣serable case, I recounted the adventures of my Voyage, just in the same manner as I have al∣ready delivered them, whereat the whole company were so astonished, that I saw some go a∣way without speaking a word, and others shrink up their shoulders, and bless themselves in admiration of that which they had heard from me; but in conclusion their compassion towards me was such, that with the very alms they bestowed on me I became far richer then I was be∣fore I undertook that unlucky Voyage. As for 
Pedro de Faria,
 he caused threescore duckets to be given to the 
Mahometan
 Merchant that brought me, besides two pieces of good 
China
 Damask; moreover he freed him of all the duties he was to pay for the custom of his Merchan∣dise, which amounted to very near a like sum, so as he remained exceeding well satisfied of the bargain he had made with me. After this, to the end I might be the better used and looked unto, the Captain commanded me to be lodged in the Registers house of the Kings Customs, where for that he was married there he thought I might be better accommodated then in any other place, as indeed I was very well entreated by him and his wife, so that having kept my bed about the space of a month, it pleased God to restore me unto my perfect health.


When I had recovered my health, 
Pedro de Faria
 sent for me to the Fortress, where he questioned me about that which had past betwixt me and the King of 
Aaru,
 as also how and in what place I was cast away, whereupon I made him an ample relation thereof. But before I proceed any further, it is requisite I should here report what was the success of the War be∣tween the Kings of 
Aaru
 and 
Achem,
 to the end, that the desolation, which I have so often foretold, of our Fortress of 
Malaca,
 may the more evidently appear, it being a matter of too much importance for to be so neglected as it is by those, who ought to have more care of it. For this is certain, that either the power of the King of 
Achem
 is utterly to be ruined, or by it we shall be miserably expelled out of all the Countries we have conquered all along the South∣ern Coast, as 
Malaca, Banda, Maluco, Sunda, Borneo,
 and 
Timor,
 and Northwards, 
China, Iapan,
 and the 
L
qmos,
 as also many other parts and Ports, where the 
Portugals
 are very much interessed by reason of the Traffique which they dayly use there, and where they reap more profit then in any other place, that is yet discovered, beyond the Cape of good hope, the extent thereof being so great, that it contains along the Coast above three thousand leagues, as may easily be seen by the cards and globes of the world, if so be their graduation be true. Besides, if this loss should happen, which God of his infinite mercy forbid, though we have but two much deserved it for our carelessness and sins, we are in danger in like manner to lose the Customs of 
Mandorim
 of the City of 
Goa,
 which is the best thing the King of 
Portugal
 hath in the 
Indiaes,
 for they are Ports and Islands, mentioned heretofore, whereon depends the greatest part of his Revenue, not comprehending the Spices, namely, the Nutmegs, Cloves, and Maces, which are brought into this Kingdom from those Countries. Now to return to my discourse, I say, that the Tyrant of 
Achem
 was advised by his Councel how there was no way in the world to take 
Malaca,
 if he would assail it by Sea, as he had done divers times be∣fore, when as 
Dom Stephano de Gama
 and his Predecessors were Captains of the Fortress, but first to make himself Master of the Kingdom of 
Aaru,
 to the end he might afterwards fortifie himself on the River of 
Panetican,
 where his Forces might more commodiously and nearly maintain the War he intended to make: For then he might have means with less charge to shut up the Straights of 
Cincapura,
 and 
Sabaon,
 and so stop our Ships from passing to the Seas of 
China, Sunda, Banda,
 and the 
Molucques,
 whereby he might have the profit of all the Drugs which came from that great Archipelague; And verily this counsel was so approved by the Ty∣rant, that he prepared a Navy of an hundred and threescore Sails, whereof the most part were 
Lanchares
 with oars, Galiots, 
Calabuzes
 of 
Iaoa,
 and fifteen Ships high built, furnished with Munition and Victual. In these Vessels he imbarqued seventeen thousand men, namely twelve thousand Soldiers, the rest Sailers and Pioners. Amongst these were four thousand Strangers, 
Turks, Abissins, Malabares, Gusurates,
 and 
Lusons
 of the Isle of 
Borneo.
 Their General was one, named 
Heredin Mahomet,
 Brother-in-law to the Tyrant, by marriage with a Sister of his, and Governor of the Kingdom of 
Baarros.
 This Fleet arrived safely at the Ri∣ver of 
Panetican,
 where the King of 
Aaru
 attended them with six thousand of his own natural Subjects, and not a forraigner amongst them, both in regard he wanted mony for to entertain Soldiers, and that also he had a Country unprovided of victual to feed them. At their arrival the Enemies found them fortifying of the Trench, whereof I spake heretofore; Whereupon


without any further delay they began to play with their Ordnance, and to batter the Town on the Sea side with great fury, which lasted six whole days together. In the mean time the be∣sieged defended themselves very valiantly, so as there was much blood spilt on either side: The General of the 
Achems,
 perceiving he advanced but little, caused his Forces to Land, and mounting twelve great Pieces he renewed the battery three several times with such impetuosity, that it demolished one of the two Forts that commanded the River, by means whereof, and under the shelter of certain packs of Cotton which the 
Achems
 carried before them, they one morning assaulted the principal Fortress: In this assault an 
Abissin
 commanded, called 
Ma∣medecan,
 who a month, or thereabout, before was come from 
Iuda,
 to confirm the new League made by the Bassa of 
Caire
 on the behalf of the grand 
Signior
 with the Tyrant of 
A∣chem,
 whereby he granted him a Custom-house in the Port of 
Pazem.
 This 
Abissin
 rendered himself Master of the Bulwark, with threescore 
Turks,
 forty 
Ianizaries,
 and some 
Malabar
 Moo
s, who instantly planted five Ensigns on the walls; In the mean time the King of 
Aaru,
 encouraging his people with promises, and such words as the time required, wrought so effectu∣ally, that with a valorous resolution they set upon the Enemy, and recovered the Bulwark which they had so lately lost, so as the 
Abissin
 Captain was slain on the place, and all those that were there with him. The King following his good fortune, at the same instant caused the gates of the Trench to be opened, and sallying out with a good part of his Forces, he combated his Enemies so valiantly, as he quite routed them; In like manner he took eight of their twelve Pieces of Ordnance, and so retreating in safety he fortified himself the best he could for to su∣stain his Enemies future assaults.






CHAP. XI. The Death of the King of 
Aaru,
 and the cruel Iustice that was executed on him by his Enemies; the going of his Queen to 
Malaca,
 and her reception there.


THe General of 
Achem,
 seeing the bad success which he received in this incounter,
 was more grieved for the death of the 
Abissin
 Captain, and the loss of those eight Pieces of Ordnance, then for all them that were slain besides; whereupon he assembled his Councel of War, who were all of opinion that the commenced siege was to be continued, and the Trench assailed on every side, which was so speed
ly put in execution, that in seventeen days it was as∣saulted nine several times, in so much as by divers sorts of fire-works, continually invented by a 
Turkish
 Engineer, that was in their Camp, they demolished the greater part of the Trench; Moreover they overthrew two of the principal Forts on the South side, together with a great Platform, which in the manner of a false-bray defended the entry of the River, notwithstand∣ing all the resistance the King of 
Aaru
 could make with his people, though they behaved them∣selves so valiantly, as the 
Achems
 lost above two thousand and five hundred men, besides those that were hurt, which were far more then the slain, whereof the most part dyed shortly after for want of looking to. As for the King of 
Aaru,
 he lost not above four hundred men, how∣beit for that his people were but few, and his Enemies many, as also better ordered, and better armed, in the last assault, that was given on the thirteenth day of the Moon, the business ended unfortunately by the utter defeat of the King of 
Aaru
's Forces; For it was his ill hap, that having made a salley forth by the advice of a 
Cacis
 of his, whom he greatly trusted, it fell out that this Traytor suffering himself to be corrupted with a bar of gold, weighing about forty thousand duckets, which the 
Achem
 gave him, whereof the King of 
Aaru
 being ignorant, set couragiously on his Enemies, and fought a bloody battel with them, wherein the advantage re∣mained on his side in all mens judgment, but that Dog, the perfidious 
Cacis,
 whom he had left Commander of the Trench, sallied forth with five hundred men, under colour of seconding the King in his pursuit of so prosperous a beginning, and left the Trench without any manner of defence, which perceived by one of the Enemies Captains, a 
Mahometan Malabar,
 named 
Cutiale Marcaa,
 he presently with six hundred 
Gusarates
 and 
Malabars,
 whom he had led thither for that purpose, made himself Master of the Trench, which the traytrous 
Cacis
 for the bar of gold he had received had left unguarded, and forthwith put all the sick and hurt men that he found there to the sword, amounting to the number of about fifteen hundred, whereof he would not spare so much as one. In the mean time the unhappy King of 
Aaru,
 who thought of nothing less then the treachery of his 
Cacis,
 seeing his Trench taken, ran to the succoring of it, being a matter that most imported him: But finding himself the weaker, he was constrained


to quit the place, so that as he was making his retreat to the Town ditch, it was his ill fortune to be killed by a shot of an Ha
quebuse from a 
Turk
 his enemy. Upon this death of his ensued the loss of all the rest, by reason of the great disorder it brought amongst them. Whereat the Enemies exceedingly rejoycing, took up the Corps of that wretched King, which they found amongst the other dead bodies, and having imbowelled and salted him they put him up in a Case, and so sent him as a Present to the Tyrant, who, after many ceremonies of Justice, caused him to be publiquely sawed into sundry pieces, and then boiled in a great Cauldron full of Oyl and Pitch, with a dreadful Publication, the tenor whereof was this:


See here the Iustice, which
 Sultan Laradin, 
King of the Land of the two Seas, hath caused to be executed, whose will and pleasure it is, that as the body of this miserable Mahometan hath been sawed in sunder, and boiled here on Earth, so his Soul shall suffer worse torments in Hell, and that most worthily, for his transgressing of the Law of
 Mahomet, 
and of the per∣fect belief of the
 Musselmans 
of the House of
 M
qua: 
For this execution is very just, and con∣formable to the holy Doctrine of the Book of Flowers, in regard this Miscreant hath shewed himself in all his works to be so far without the fear of God, as he hath incessantly from time to time betrayed the most secret and important affairs of this Kingdom to those accursed Dogs of the other end of the world, who for our sins, and through our negligence, have with notorious Tyranny made themselves Lords of Malaca.
 This Publication ended, a fearful noise arose a∣mongst the people, who cryed out, 
This punishment is but too little for so execrable a crime.
 Behold truly the manner of this passage, and how the loss of the Kingdom of 
Aaru
 was joyned with the death of that poor King, who lived in such good correspondence with us, and that in my opinion might have been succored by us with very small charge and pains, if at the be∣ginning of the War he had been assisted with that little he demanded by his Embassador; Now who was in the fault hereof, I will leave to the judgment of them which most it concerns to know it.


After that this infortunate King of 
Aaru
 had miserably ended his days, as I have before re∣lated, and that his whole Army was utterly defeated, both the Town and the rest of the King∣dom were easily and quickly taken in. Thereupon the General of the 
Achems
 repaired the Trenches, and fortified them in such manner as he thought requisite for the conservation and security of all that he had gained: which done, he left there a Garison of eight hundred of the most couragious men of his Army, who were commanded by a certain 
Lusan Mahometan,
 named 
Sapetù de Raia,
 and incontinently after departed with the rest of his Forces. The common report was that he went to the Tyrant of 
Achem,
 who received him with very much honor for the good success of this enterprize; For, as I have already delivered, being before but Governor and 
Mandara
 of the Kingdom of 
Baarros,
 he gave him the title of King, so that ever after he was called 
Sultan
 of 
Baarros,
 which is the proper denomination of such as are Kings amongst the 
Mahometans.
 Now whilest things passed in this sort, the desolate Queen remained some seven leagues from 
Aaru,
 where being advertised and assured of the death of the King her husband, and of the lamentable issue of the War, she presently resolved to cast her self into the fire, for so she had promised her husband in his life time, confirming it with many and great oaths; But her friends and servants, to divert her from putting so de∣sperate a design in execution, used many reasons unto her, so that at length, overcome by their perswasions, 
Verily,
 said she unto them, 
although I yield to your request, yet I would have you know, that neither the considerations you have propounded, nor the zeal you seem to sh
w of good and faithful Subjects, were of power to turn me from so generous a determination, as that is which I promised to my King, my Husband, and my Master, if God had not inspired me with this thought, that living I may better revenge his death, as by his dear blood I vow unto you to labor as long as I live to do, and to that end I will undergo any extremi
y whatso∣ever, nay if need be turn Christian a thousand times over, if by that means I may be able to compass this my desire.
 Saying so, she immediately got up on an Elephant, and accompanied with a matter of seven hundred men, she marched towards the Town with a purpose to set it on fire, where incountring some four hundred 
Achems,
 that were busie about pillaging of such goods as were yet remaining, she so encouraged her people with her words and tears, that they cut them all presently in pieces; This execution done, knowing her self too weak for to hold the Town, she returned into the Wood, where she sojourned twenty days, during which time she made War upon the Townsmen, surprising and pillaging them as often as they issued forth to get water, wood, or other necessaries, so as they durst not stir out of the Town to provide


themselves such things as they needed, in which regard if she could possibly have continued this War other twenty days longer, she had so famished them, as they would have been constrained to render the Town: But because at that time it rained continually by reason of the Climate, and that the place was boggy and full of bushes, as also the fruits, wherewithall they nourished themselves in the Wood, were all rotten, so that the most part of her people fell sick, and no means there to relieve them, the Queen was constrained to depart to a River, named 
Minha∣çumbaa,
 some five leagues from thence, where she imbarqued her self in sixteen Vessels, such as she could get, which were fishermens 
Paroos,
 and in them she went to 
Malaca,
 with a belief that at her Arrival there she should not be denyed any thing she would ask.


Pedro de Faria,
 being advertised of the Queens coming, sent 
Alvaro de Faria,
 his son,
 and General of the Sea-forces, to receive her with a Galley, five Foists, two Catures, twenty Balons, and three hundred men, besides divers persons of the Country. So she was brought to the Fortress, where she was saluted with an honorable peal of Ordnance, which lasted the space of a good hour. Being landed, and having seen certain things, which 
Pedro de Faria
 desired to shew her, as the Custom-house, the River, the Army, the Manufactures, stores of Powder, and other particulars, prepared before for that purpose, she was lodged in a fair house, and her people, to the number of six hundred, in a field, called 
Ilher,
 in Tents and Cabbins, where they were accommodated the best that might be. During all the time of her abode, which was about a matter of five months, she continued soliciting for succor, and means to revenge the death of her husband. But at length perceiving the small assistance she was likely to have from us, and that all we did was but a meer entertainment of good words, she determined to speak freely unto 
Pedro de Faria,
 that so she might know how far she might trust to his prom ses; To which end, attending him one Sunday at the gate of the Fortress, at such time as the place was full of people, and that he was going forth to hear Mass, she went to him, and after some complements between them, she said unto him; 
Noble and valiant Captain, I bese
ch you by the generosity of your race, to give me the hearing in a few things I have to re∣present unto you. Consider, I pray you, that albeit I am a Mahometan, and that for the greatness of my sins I am altogether ignorant in the knowledg of your holy Law, yet in regard I am a woman, and have been a Queen, you ought to carry some respect to me, and to behold my misery with the eyes of a Christian.
 Hereunto at first 
Pedro de Faria
 knew not what to answer, in the end putting off his cap, he made her a low reverence, and after they had both continued a good while without speaking, the Queen bowed to the Church gate, that was just before them, and then spake again to 
Pedro de Faria. Truly,
 said she, 
the desire I have al∣ways had to revenge the death of my husband, hath been, and still is, so great, that I have resolved to seek out all the means that possibly I may to effect it, since by reason of the weakness of my sex Fortune will not permit me to bear arms; Being perswaded then that this here, which is the first I have tryed, was the most assured, and that I more relyed upon then any other, as trusting in the ancient amity which hath always been betwixt us and you Portugals, and the obligation wherein this Fortress is engaged to us, passing by many other considerations well known to you, I am now to desire you with tears in mine eyes, that for the honor of the high and mighty King of
 Portugal, 
my soveraign Lord, and unto whom my husband was ever a loyal Subject and Vassal, you will ayd and succor me in this my great adversity, which in the presence of many noble Personages you have promised me to do; howbeit now I see that in stead of performing the promises which you have so often made me, you alledg for an excuse that you have written unto the Vice-roy about it, whereas I have no need of such great Forces as you speak of, for that with an hundred men only, and such of my own people as are flying up and down in hope and expectation of my return, I should be able enough, though I be but a woman, in a short space to recover my Country, and revenge the death of my husband, through the help of Almighty God, in whose Name I beseech and require you, that for the service of the King of
 Portugal, 
my Master, and the only refuge of my widowhood, you will, since you can, assist me speedily, because expedition is that which in this affair imports the most, and so doing you shall prevent the plot which the wicked enemy hath upon this Fortress, as too well you may perceive by the means he hath used to effect it. If you will be pleased to give me the succor I demand of you, say so; if not, deal clearly with me, for that you will prejudice me as much in making me lose time, as if you refused me that which so earnestly I desire, and which as a Chri∣stian you are obliged to grant me, as the Almighty Lord of Heaven and Earth doth well know▪ whom I take to witness of this my request.








CHAP. XII. The Queen of 
Aaru
's departure from 
Malaca
; her going to the King of 
Jantana
; his summoning the Tyrant of 
Achem
 to restore the Kingdom of 
A
ru,
 and that which past between them thereupon.


PEdro de Faria,
 having heard what this desolate Queen said openly unto him, convinced by his own conscience,
 and even ashamed of having delayed her in that fashion, answered her, that in truth, and by the faith of a Christian, he had recommended this affair unto the Vice∣roy, and that doubtless there would some succor come for her ere it were long, if so be there were no trouble in the 
Indiaes
 that might hinder it, wherefore he advised and prayed her to stay still in 
Malaca,
 and that shortly she should see the verity of his speeches. Thereunto this Princess having replyed upon the uncertainty of such succor, 
Pedro de Faria
 grew into choller, because he thought she did not believe him, so that in the heat of his passion he lashed out some words that were more rude then was fit. Whereupon the desolate Queen, with tears in her eyes, and beholding the Church gate, which was just against her, and sobbing in such manner as she could scarcely speak; 
The clear Fountain,
 said she, 
is the God which is adored in that house, out of whose mouth proceeds all truth, but the men of the Earth are sinks of troubled water, wherein change and faults are by nature continually remaining, wherefore accursed is he that trusts to the opening of their lips; For I assure you, Captain, that 
ver since I knew my self to this present I have neither heard, nor seen ought, but that the more such unhappy wretches, as my late husband was, and my self now am, do for you Portugals, the less you re∣gard them, and the more you are obliged, the less you acknowledg, whence I may well conclude that the recompence of the
 Portugal 
Nation consists more in favor, then in the merits of per∣sons; And would to God, my deceased husband had nine and twenty years ago but known what now for my sins I perceive too well, for then he had not been so deceived by you as he was: But since it is so, I have this only left to comfort me in my misery, that I see many others scandalized with your amity as well as my self; For if you had neither the power nor the will to succor me, why would you so far engage your self to me, a poor desolate widow, concerning that which I hoped to obtain from you, and so beguile me with your large promises?
 Having spoken thus, she turned her back to the Captain, and without harkening to what he might say she instantly returned to her lodging, then caused her Vess
ls, wherein she came thither, to be made ready, and the next day set sail for 
Bi
tan,
 where the King of 
Iantana
 was at that time, who, according to the report was made of it to us afterward, received her with great honor at her arrival. To him she recounted all that had past betwixt her and 
Pedro de Faria,
 and how she had lost all hope of our friendship; Unto whom, it is said, the King made this answer, 
That he did not marvel at the little faith she had found in us, for that we had shewed it but too much upon sundry occasions unto all the world.
 Now the better to confirm his saying, he re∣cited some particular examples of matters, which he said had befallen us, conformable to his purpose; and like a 
Mahometan,
 and our Enemy, he made them appear more enormous then they were: So after he had recounted many things of us very ill done, amongst the which he interlaced divers Treacheries, Robberies, and Tyrannies, at length he told her, that as a good King, and a good 
Mahometan,
 he would promise her, that ere it were long she should see her self by his means restored again to every foot of her Kingdom; and to the end she might be the more assured of his promise, he told her that he was content to take her for his wife, if so she pleased, for that thereby he should have the greater cause to become the King of 
Achems
 Enemy, upon whom for her sake he should be constrained to make War, if he would not by fair means be perswaded to abandon that which he had unjustly taken from her. Whereunto she made answer, that albeit the honor he did her was very great, yet she would never accept of it, unless he would first promise, as in way of a dowry, to revenge the death of her former husband, saying, it was a thing she so much desired, as without it she would not accept of the Soveraignty of the whole world. The King condescended to her request, and by a so∣lemn Oath taken on a Book of their Sect confirmed the promise which to that effect he made her.


After that the King of 
Iantana
 had taken that Oath before a great 
Cacis
 of his, called 
Raia Moulana,
 upon a festival day when as they solemnized their 
Ramadan,
 he went to the Isle of 
Compar,
 where immediately upon the celebration of their Nuptials he called a Councel for to


advise of the course he was to hold for the performance of that whereunto he had engaged him∣self, for he knew it was a matter of great difficulty, and wherein he should be forced to hazard much of his Estate. The resolution that he took hereupon was before he enterprized any thing to send to summon the Tyrant of 
Achem
 to surrender the Kingdom of 
Aaru,
 which in the right of his new wife belonged now unto him▪ and then according to the answer he should receive to govern himself. This Councel seemed so good to the King, that he presently dispatched an Em∣bassador to the Tyrant, with a rich Present of Jewels, and Silks, together with a Letter con∣taining these words. 
Sibri Laya quendou, pracama de Raia, lawful King by a long succession of
 Malaca, 
which by strong hand, and the injustice of the faithless Kings of
 Jantana 
and
 Bintan 
hath been usurped from me, To thee
 Siry Sultan Aaradin, 
King of
 Achem, 
and of all the Land of the two Seas, my true Brother by the ancient Amity of our forefathers. I, thine Ally in flesh and in blood, do give thee to understand by my Embassador, that about the seventh Moon of this present year the noble Widow
 Anchesiny, 
Queen of
 Aaru, 
came to me full of grief and tears, and prostrating her self on the ground before me, she told me that thy Captains had taken her Kingdom from her, as also the two Rivers of
 Lava 
and
 Panetican, 
and slain
 Alibon∣car 
her husband, together with five thousand
 Amborraias 
and
 Ouroballons, 
all men of mark, that were with him, and made three thousand children slaves, which had never offended, tying their hands behind them, and scourging them continually without pity, as if they had been the sons of unbelieving mothers. Wherefore being moved with compassion I have received her under the protection of my faith, to the end that I might with more certainty inform my self of the reason and right thou hadst so to do, and perceiving by her oaths that thou hadst none, I have taken her to my wife, that I might the more freely before God demand that which is hers. I desire thee then, as being thy true Brother, that thou wilt render that thou hast taken from her, and thereof make her a good and full restitution; And touching the proceeding that is to be held in this restitution which I demand of thee, it is to be done according to the manner that
 Syribican 
my Embassador will shew thee. And not doing thus conformable to what in justice I require of thee, I declare my self thine Enemy in the behalf of this Lady, unto whom I am obliged by a solemn Oath to defend her in her affliction.
 This Embassador being come to 
A∣che
,
 the Tyrant received him very honorably, and took his Letter; But after he had opened it, and read the contents, he would presently have put him to death, had he not been diverted by his Councel, who told him, that in so doing he would incur great infamy: Whereupon he in∣stantly dismissed the Embassador with his Present, which in contempt of him he would not ac∣cept of, and in answer of that he brought him he returned him a Letter, wherein it was thus written. 
I
 Sultan Aaradin, 
King of
 Achem, Baarros, Pedir, Paacem, 
and of the Signories of
 Dayaa, 
and
 Batas, 
Prince of all the Land of the two Seas, both Mediterranean and Ocean, and of the Mynes of
 Menencabo, 
and of the Kingdom of
 Aaru 
newly conquered upon just cause, To thee King, replenished with joy, and desirous of a doubtful heritage: I have seen thy Let∣ter, written at the table of thy Nuptials, and by the inconsiderate words thereof have dis∣cerned the drunkenness of thy Councellors and Secretaries, whereunto I would not have vouchsafed an answer, had it not been for the humble prayers of my servants. As touching the Kingdom of
 Aaru, 
do not thou dare to speak of it if thou desirest to live, sufficeth it that I have caused it to be taken in, and that it is mine, as thine also shall be ere long, if thou hast married
 Anchesiny 
with a purpose upon that occasion to make claim to a Kingdom, that now is none of hers; wherefore live with her as other husbands do with their wives, that tilling the ground are contented with the labor of their hands. Recover first thy
 Malaca, 
since it was once thine, and then thou mayst think of that which never belonged to thee. I will favor thee as a Vassal, and not as a Brother, as thou qualifiest thy self. From my great and Royal House of rich
 Achem, 
the very day of this thy Embassadors arrival, whom I have presently sent away without further seeing or hearing of him, as he may tell thee upon his return to thy pre∣sence.


The King of 
Iantana
's Embassador,
 being dismissed with this Answer the very same day that he arrived, which amongst them they hold for a mighty affront, carried back the Present, which the Tyrant would not accept of in the greater contempt both of him that sent, and he that brought it, and arrived at 
Compar,
 where the King of 
Iantana
 was at that instant, who upon the understanding of all that had past grew by report so sad and vext, that his servants have vowed they have divers times seen him weep for very grief that the Tyrant should make so little reckoning of him; Howbeit he held a Councel there upon the second time, where it was con∣cluded,


that at any hand he should make War upon him, as on his mortal Enemy, and that the first thing he should undertake, should be the recovery of the Kingdom of 
Aaru,
 and the Fort of 
Panetican,
 before it was further fortified▪ The King accordingly set forth a Fleet of two hundred Sails, whereof the most part were 
Lanchares, Calaluses,
 and fifteen tall Juncks, fur∣nished with Munition necessary for the enterprize; And of this Navy he made General the great 
Laque Xemena,
 his Admiral, of whose valor the History of the 
Indiaes
 hath spoken in divers places. To him he gave two thousand Soldiers, as also four thousand Mariners and gally slaves, all choyce and trained men. This General departed immediately with his Fleet, and arrived at the River of 
Panetican
 close by the Enemies Fort, which he assaulted five several times, both with scaling ladders, and divers artificial fires, but perceiving he could not prevail that way, he began to batter it with four hundred great Pieces of Ordnance▪ which shot continually for the space of seven whole days together, at the end whereof the most part of the Fort was ruined, and overthrown to the ground, whereupon he presently caused his men to give an assault to it, who performed it so valiantly, that they entered it, and slew fourteen hundred 
Achems,
 the most of which came thither but the day before the Fleet arrived under the conduct of a 
Turkish
 Captain, Nephew to the 
Bassa
 of 
Caire,
 named 
Mora do Arraiz,
 who was also sl
i
 there with four hundred 
Turks
 he had brought along with him, whereof 
Laque Xemena
 would not spare so much as one. After this he used such diligence in repairing that which was fallen, wherein most of the Soldiers labored, that in twelve days the Fort was rebuilt, and made as strong as before, with the augmentation of two Bulwarks. The news of this Fleet, which the King of 
Iantana
 prepared in the Ports of 
Bintan
 and 
Compar,
 came to the Tyrants ears, who fearing to lose that which he had gotten, put instantly to Sea another Fleet of fourteen hundred and twenty Sails, Foists, Lanchares, Galiots, and fifteen Galleys of five and twenty banks of oa
s a piece, wherein he caused fifteen thousand men to be imbarqued, namely, twelve thou∣sand Soldiers, and the rest Mariners, and such as were for the service of the Sea; Of this Army he made the same 
Heredin Mahomet
 General, who had before (as I have already declared) conquered the Kingdom of 
Aaru,
 in regard he knew him to be a man of a great spirit, and fortunate in War, who departing with this Army arrived at a place, called 
Aapessumhee,
 with∣in four leagues of the River of 
Panetican,
 where he learnt of certain fishermen, whom he took and put to torture, all that had past concerning the Fort and the Kingdom, and how 
Laque Xe∣mena
 had made himself Master both of the Land and Sea in expectation of him. At this news, it is said, that 
Heredin Mahomet
 was much perplexed, because intruth he did not b
lieve the Enemy could do so much in so little time; By reason whereof he assembled his Councel, where it was concluded, that since both the Fort and Kingdom were regained, and all the men he had left there cut in pieces, as likewise for that the Enemy was very strong, both at Sea and Land, and the season very unfit for their design, therefore they were to return back: Neverth
less 
He∣redin Mahomet
 was of a contrary opinion, saying, that he would rather dye like a man of cou∣rage, then live in dishonor, and that seeing the King had made choyce of him for that purpose, by the help of God he would not lose one jot of the reputation he had gotten; wherefore he vowed and swore by the bones of 
Mahomet,
 and all the Lamps that perpetually burn in his Chappel, to put all those to death as Traytors that should go about to oppose this intent of his, and that they should be boiled alive in a Cauldron of Pitch, in such manner as he meant to deal with 
Laque Xemena
 himself; and with this boiling resolution he parted from the place where he rode at anchor, with great cries, and noise of Drums, and Bells, as they are accustomed to do upon like occasions. In this sort by force of oars and sails they got into the entry of the Ri∣ver, and coming in sight of 
Laque Xemena
's Navy, who was ready waiting for him, and well reinforced with a great number of Soldiers, that were newly come to him from 
P
ra, Bintan, Siaca
▪ and many other places thereabout, he made towards him, and after the discharging of their O
dnance afar off, they joyned together with as much violence as might be. The fight was such, that during the space of an hour and an half there could no advantage be discerned on either part, until such time as 
Heredin Mahomet,
 General of the 
Achems,
 was slain with a great shot, that hit him just in the brest, and battered him to pieces. The death of this Chief∣tain discouraged his people in such manner, as laboring to return unto a Point, named 
Baroqui∣rin,
 with a purpose there to unite and fortifie themselves until night, and then by the favor thereof to fly away, they could not execute their design, in regard of the great currant of the water, wh
ch separated and dispersed them sundry ways, by which means the Tyrants Army 
ell into the power of 
Laque Xemena,
 who defeated it, so that but fourteen Sails of them


escaped, and the other hundred threescore and six were taken, and in them were thirteen thou∣sand and five hundred men killed, besides the fourteen hundred that were slain in the Trench. These fourteen Sails that so escaped returned to 
Achem,
 where they gave the Tyrant to un∣derstand how all had past, at which, it is reported, he took such grief, as he shut up himself for twenty days without seeing any body, at the end whereof he struck off the heads of all the Captains of the fourteen Sails, and commanded all the Soldiers beards that were in them to be shaved off, enjoyning them expresly upon pain of being sawed asunder alive, to go ever after attired in womens apparel, playing upon Timbrels in all places where they went, and that whensoever they made any protestation, it should be in saying, 
So may God bring me back my husband again, as this is true,
 or, 
So may I have joy of the children I have brought into the world.
 Most of these men seeing themselves inforced to undergo a chastisement so scandalous to them, fled their Country, and many made themselves away, some with poyson, some with halters, and some with the sword. A relation altogether true, without any addition of mine. Thus was the Kingdom of 
Aaru
 recovered from the Tyrant of 
Achem,
 and remained in the hands of the King of 
Iantana
 until the year 1574. At which time the said Tyrant with a Fleet of two hundred Sails, feigning as though he would go to take in 
Patava,
 fell cunningly one night on 
Iantana,
 where the King was at that time, whom, together with his wife, children, and many others, he took prisoners, and carried into his Country, where he put them all to most cruel deaths, and for the King himself he caused his brains to be beaten out of his head with a great club. After these bloody executions he possest the Kingdom of 
Aaru,
 whereof he presently made his eldest son King, the same that was afterward slain at 
Malaca,
 coming to besiege it in the time of 
Don Lionis P
reyra,
 son to the Earl of 
Feyra,
 Captain of the Fortress, who defended it so valiantly, that it seemed to be rather a miracle then any natural work, by reason the power of that Enemy was so great, and ours so little in comparison of theirs, as it may be truly spoken how they were two hundred 
Mahometans
 against one 
Christian.






CHAP. XIII. My departure from 
Malaca
 to go to 
Pan
; that which fortuned after my arrival there; with the murther of the King of 
Pan,
 and the cause thereof.


TO return unto the Discourse where I left, I say,
 that when I was recovered of the sickness which I got in my Captivity at 
Siaca, Pedro de Faria,
 desiring to find out some occasion to advance and benefit me, sent me in a 
Lanchara
 to the Kingdom of 
Pan
 with goods of his, to the value of ten thousand duckets, for to consign them into the hands of a Factor of his, that recided there, named 
Tome Lobo,
 and from thence to go to 
Patava,
 which is an hundred leagues beyond that. To that purpose he gave me a Letter and a Present for the King, and an ample Commission to treat with him about the redemption of five 
Portugals,
 who in the Kingdom of 
Siam
 were Slaves to 
Monteo de Bancha
 his Brother-in-law. I parted then from 
Malaca
 upon this employment, and the seventh day of our Voyage, just as we were opposite to the Island of 
Pullo Timano,
 which may be distant from 
Malaca
 some ninety leagues, and ten or twelve from the mouth of the River of 
Pan,
 a little before day we heard at two several times great lamentations at Sea, and being not able in regard of the darkness of the night to know what it was, we were all suspended into divers opinions, for that we could not imagine what it should be, in so much that to learn the certainty thereof I caused them to hoist up sail, and row towards that part where we heard the lamentation, every one looking down round about close to the water, the better to discern and hear that of which we were in such doubt. After we had continued a pretty while in this manner, we perceived far from us a black thing that floated on the Sea, and unable at first to discover what it was, we advised together about it. Now there being but four 
Portugals
 of us in the 
Lanchara,
 we were all of different minds, so that I was told how I was to go directly to the place whither 
Pedro de Faria
 had sent me, that losing but an hours time I might endanger the Voyage, and hazard the goods, and so for want of performing the duty of my charge I might very much wrong him. Whereunto I an∣swered, that happen what might, I would not leave off laboring to know what it was, and that if in so doing I committed any fault, the 
Lanchara
 appertained to none but 
Pedro de Fa∣ria,
 unto whom my self was to render an account of the goods in it, and not they, that had nothing else in the Vessel but their persons, which were in no more danger then mine: During this debate it pleased God that the day appeared, by the light whereof we perceived p
ople that


were cast away, who floated pell-mell together upon planks, and other pieces of wood: Whereupon without further fear we turned our prow towards them, and with force of sails and oars we made to them, hearing them cry six or seven times, without using any other speech, 
Lord have mercy upon us.
 At the sight of this strange and pitiful spectacle we remained so a∣mazed, that we were almost besides our selves, and causing some of the Mariners to get with all speed into the Cock-boat, they fetcht three and twenty persons of them into the Lanchara, namely fourteen 
Portugals,
 and nine Slaves, which were all so dis-figured in the face, as they made us afraid to look on them, and so weak as they could neither speak nor stand. After they had been thus taken up by us, and entreated in the best manner we could, we demanded of them the cause of their mis-fortune, whereunto one of the company we
ping answered, My Masters, I am named 
Fernand Gil Porcal
o,
 and the eye, which you behold I want, was strucken out by the 
Achems
 at the siege of 
Malaca,
 when as the second time they came to sur∣prize 
Dom Est
vano de Gama,
 who desiring to do something for me, because he saw me poor, as I was at that time, gave me leave to go to the 
Molucques,
 where would to God I had ne∣ver been, since my Voyage was to have so bad a success: for after I departed from the Port of 
Talagame,
 which is the Roade of our Fort at 
Ternate,
 having sailed three and twenty days with a favorable gale in a Junck that carried a thousand bars of Cloves, worth above an hundred thousand duckets, my ill fortune would, that at the point of 
Surabaya
 in the Isle of 
Iaoa,
 there arose so impetuous a North-wind, that our Junck brake in the prow, which constrained us to lighten the hatches; So we passed that night by the shoar, without bearing so much as a rag of sail, by reason the Sea was exceedingly moved, and the waves most insupportable. The next day we perceived that our Junk sank, so that of an hundred forty and seven persons that were in her there were saved but six and twenty, and now it is fourtain days that we have been upon these planks, having during all that time eaten nothing but a slave of mine that dyed, with whom we have sustained our selves eight days, and the very last night two 
Portugals
 more dyed, on whom we would not feed, although we were very much prest to it by our hunger, because we hoped that this or the next day would give an end both to our lives and misery.


The relation, which this man made us, having rendred us all very pensive, and full of amaze∣ment to see him and his companions reduced to so deplorable an estate, we greatly wondered at the means, whereby God had so miraculously delivered them, wherefore we gave him most humble thanks for it, and comforted our new guests, in representing unto them all those things which the duty of true Christians and our poor captivity obliged us to tell them. After that we bestowed part of our clothes on them, and layd them in our ordinary beds, then we apply∣ed those remedies to them, which we thought necessary for their recovery; for not having slept of a long time, they were so exceeding dizzy in the head, that they would fall down stunn
d in such sort, as they continued without any knowledg for an hour together. This done, we went to seek out the Port of 
Pan,
 where we arrived near about midnight, casting anchor in the Roade, just against a little inhabited place, called 
Campalaru.
 The next morning by break of day we rowed up the River about some league to the Town, where we found 
Tome Lobo,
 who, as I have already declared, resided there, as Factor for the Captain of 
Malaca,
 into whose hands I consigned all the Merchandise that I brought along with me. The same day three of the fourteen 
Portugals,
 which we took up at Sea, dyed, whereof the afore-named 
Fernando Gil Porcalho
 was one, as also five young men that were Christians, whom we cast all into the Sea, with great stones tyed to their feet and about their necks for to make them sink to the bottom, in regard we could not be permitted to bury them in the Town, although 
Tome Lobo
 offered them forty duckets for that purpose, the reason they alledged was, that if they should suffer it, their Country would remain accursed, and incapable of nourishing any thing, because the deceased were not purged from the Hogs flesh they had eaten, it being the most de∣testable and enormous sin of all others; As for those which rested alive, 
Tome Lobo
 gave them very good entertainment, and furnished them with all things that they wanted, until such time as they recovered and returned to 
Malaca.
 Not long after, preparing my self for my Voyage to 
Patana, Tome Lobo
 very earnestly desired me not to go thither, and told me that he held not himself safe in that Town, by reason he was advertised that one 
Taan N
rrafa,
 a man of reputation, and of the chiefest of the Town, had sworn to burn him in his house, with all the goods that were in it, saying, that at 
Malaca
 the Captains Factor had taken from him the va∣lue of five thousand duckets in Benjamin, Silk, and wood of Aloes, at a far lower rate then it was worth, and that he had payd him at his own pleasure, and therewith not contented had


in part of payment given him rotten stuffs, which he could make nothing of; moreover, that for all his five thousand duckets worth of Commodities, that in 
Malaca
 would have yielded him ten thousand, and by exchange of vendible wares, he might easily have returned, would have made him ten thousand more, he never could get above seven hundred duckets; and there∣fore to be revenged of this wrong, he had picked quarrels of purpose to tole him forth to kill him, in regard whereof he instantly desired me to stay, and not abandon him and the Captains stock to such apparant danger: Whereupon having used all the reasons I could to facilitate my voyage, he would by no means approve of them, but contradicted me in all my propositions. For conclusion, I remonstrated unto him, that if it were his ill fortune, as he said he feared, to be killed for that which he had, I should be in no better case, and therefore I marvelled why he would let those eleven 
Portugals
 go, with whom rather he should have imbarqued himself for 
Malaca.
 Hereunto after a little pause he made answer, that he was very sorry he had not done so, but since it was now too late, he intreated me not to forsake him in this extremity, and that for the Captains sake, who he knew would not take it well I should leave him so alone with his goods, which were no less worth then thirty thousand duckets, besides those belonging to him∣self, that amounted to almost as much more. This request of his made to me with such instance on the one side, somewhat perplexed me, and on the other considering the extream hazard I ran if I stay'd, I knew not what to resolve; At length after I had well thought of the matter, I was constrained to come to this accord with him, that in case he did not within fifteen days imbarque himself with me in my 
Lanchara
 for 
Patana,
 with all his Commodities reduced into gold, or stones, whereof there was great plenty in the Town, that then I might go where I pleased without him; an offer that he was forced to accept of, and so we remained agreed.


The fear 
Tome Lobo
 was in, left that wherewithall he was threatened should befall him,
 made him use such diligence in selling away of his commodities, that by means of the good peny-worths he afforded them at, in less then eight days he cleared his Warehouse, and the other places wherein they lay; so that utterly refusing Pepper; Cloves, and such other Drugs, which took up too much room, he trucked all away for gold of 
Menencabo,
 for Diamonds of 
Lavo
 and 
Taucampura,
 and Pearls of 
Borneo.
 Now having made a full dispatch of all, and that we were resolved to imbarque the next day, by ill fortune a most terrible accident happened the night ensuing, which was, that one, named 
Coin Geinal,
 the King of 
Borneo's
 Embassador, who had been three or four years resident in the King of 
Pan's
 Court, and a marvelous rich man, killed the King upon finding him in bed with his wife, which caused such a commotion in the Town, that it seemed to be a Tumult of Hell rather then any humane business; Whereupon certain rogues and vagabonds, that wished for nothing more then such like occasions, to the end they might do what before for fear of the King they durst not enterprize, made a Troop of five or six hundred, which separated into three bands, went directly to the house, where 
Tome Lobo
 dwelt. Having assaulted it in six or seven places, they entred by force, notwithstanding all the resistance we could make, and that in defending it we lost eleven men, whereof the 
Por∣tugals,
 which came with me from 
Malaca,
 were three. During this violence, all that 
Tome Lobo
 could do was to escape away with six great blows of a sword, one of the which had cut his right cheek almost away, so as he was like to dye of that hurt. We were both of us then constrained to abandon the house to them, together with all the goods that were in it, and re∣tire to the 
Lanchara,
 where we remained with five Boys and eight Mariners, not having so much as the worth of a peny left of all our merchandize, which amounted to fifty thousand crowns in gold and stone only. In this 
Lanchara
 we past away all the night very much afflict∣ed, and still harkening what might be the end of this mutiny, which was risen among the peo∣ple, as I have before related. At length perceiving the matters grew worse and worse, and that there was no hope for us to recover any part of our goods, we thought it a far safer course to go away to 
Patana,
 then by staying to run a hazard of being killed, as above four thousand persons were. With this resolution we parted from this place, and in six days arrived at 
Patana,
 where we were very well received by the 
Portugals
 which were in that Country, unto whom we recounted all that had past at 
Pan
▪ and the pitious estate wherein we had left that miserable Town. This accident very much afflicted them, so that desiring to give some remedy there∣unto, with a true affection of charitable Christians they went all to the Palace of the King, and complained to him of the wrong that had been done to the Captain of 
Malaca,
 beseeching him thereupon they might be permitted to recover, if it were possible, the loss they had sustain∣ed, and have leave granted to right themselves upon any merchants goods belonging to the


Kingdom of 
Pan,
 to the value of the sum they had been despoyled of. The King having heard their complaint, and presently granting what they demanded; It is reasonable, said he, that you should do as you have been done unto, and that you should spoyl them that first have spoyled you, especially in a matter that concerns the Captain of 
Malaca,
 unto whom all of you are so much obliged. The 
Portugals,
 having rendred him very humble thanks for this grace, re∣turned to their houses, where they concluded to seize upon all the goods they could meet with belonging to the Kingdom of 
Pan,
 until such time as they had fully recovered their loss. It hapned then about nine days after they being advertised, that some ten leagues off, in the river of 
Calantan,
 were three Junks of 
China,
 very rich, and appertaining to 
Mahometan
 Merchants, Natives of the Kingdom of 
Pan,
 that by foul weather at Sea were constrained to put in there, our people resolved to fall upon them: To which effect, out of three hundred 
Portugals,
 that were then in the Country, we chose out fourscore, with whom we imbarqued our selves in two Foysts, and one round ship, well provided of all things we thought to be necessary for this en∣terprize. So we departed three days after with all speed, for fear lest the 
Mahometans
 of the Country, having discovered our design, should advertise them of it whom we went to seek; Of these three vessels one 
Ioano Fernandez Dabrea,
 born in the Isle of 
Madera,
 was General, who with forty Soldiers went in the round ship, and the other two Foysts were commanded by 
Laurenco de Goes,
 and 
Vasco Sermento,
 both of them of the City of 
Braganea
 in 
Portugal,
 and very well experienced in Sea-service. The next day we arrived at the river of 
Calentan,
 where as soon as we decryed the three Junks riding at anchor, which we had been told of, we set very valiantly upon them, and albeit those that were in them did at first do their best endevor to defend themselves, yet at length all their resistance was in vain, for in less then an hour we reduced them all under our power, so as seventy and four of theirs were slain, and but three of ours, though we had many men hurt. I will not hold you here with any particular discourse of what was done on either side, let it suffice, that after the three Junks had rendred themselves, we presently set sail, and carryed them away with us in all haste, because the whole Country thereabout was in an uproar, directing our course towards 
Patana,
 where by the favor of a fair wind we arrived the next day in the afternoon: Having then cast anchor, we saluted the Town with a peal of Ordnance in sign of joy, which put the 
Mahometans
 of the Country out of all patience; for though we stood in the terms of good friends with them, yet they left not to use all possible means, both of Presents which they gave to the Governors and the Kings Favorites, and otherwise, for to make our prizes voyd, and that the King would expel us out of his dominions, whereunto he would at no hand consent, saying, that he would not for any thing in the world break the peace, which his Ancestors had made with the Christians of 
Ma∣laca,
 
nd that all that he could do therein was to become a third betwixt them: Whereupon he de
ed us, that the three 
Necodas
 of the Junks, so are the Commanders of them called in that Country, restoring unto us what had been taken from the Captain of 
Malaca,
 we would like∣wise render unto them as well their vessels free, as the overplus, a matter which 
Ioano Fer∣nandez Dabrea,
 and the rest of the 
Portugals
 very willingly agreed unto, to testifie the desire they had to content him; As indeed he was exceedingly well pleased with them for it, which he expressed both in courteous language, and many promises of his future favor. Thus were the fifty thousand duckets recovered, that 
Pedro de Faria
 and 
Tome Lobo
 had lost, and the 
Portugals
 were in great esteem over all that Country, so that their valor rendred them very formidable to the 
Mahometans.
 A little after the Soldiers assured us, that in the three Junks we had taken, there was only in lingo
s of silver, besides the other merchandize wherewithall they were laden, to the value of two hundred 
Taieis,
 which in our mony amounts to an hun∣dred thousand duckets.






CHAP. XIV. The Misfortune that befell us at the entry into the River of 
Lugor
; our hiding our selves in a Wood, with that which happened unto us afterwards; and our return unto 
Malaca.


HAving sojourned six and twenty days at 
Patana
 for to sell away some few commodities of 
China
 that I had, there arrived a Foyst from 
Malaca,
 commanded by one 
Antonio de Faria,
 who came thither by the express commandment of 
Pedro de Faria
 to treat with the King about some accord, as also to confirm the ancient league anew which he had with 
Ma∣laca,



and withall to give him thanks for the good entertainment he gave in his Kingdom to those of the 
Portugal
 Nation. This business was carryed with a fair shew of an Embassie, ac∣companyed with a Letter and a Present of Jewels, sent in the name of the King of 
Portugal
 our Master, and taken out o
 his Coffers, as all the Captains of that place used to do. Now for as much as the said 
Antonio de Faria
 had brought along with him some ten or twelve thou∣sand crowns worth of 
Indian
 woolen and linnen cloth, which he had taken up on his credit at 
Malaca,
 and that he saw there was so little utterance of that commodity, as he could not meet with any Merchant that would deal for it, he was fain to resolve for to spend the winter there until such time as he might meet with some opportunity to put it off; Howbeit he was ad∣vised by some of the best experienced of the Country to send it unto 
Lugor,
 which is a great Town in the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 an hundred leagues lower towards the North, for they alledg∣ed that this Port was very rich, and of great vent, by reason of a world of Junks that arrived there dayly from the Isle of 
Iaoa,
 from 
Lava, Taniampura, Iapara, Demaa, Panaruca Sy∣dayo, Passarvan, Solor,
 and 
Borneo,
 whose Merchants were used to give a good rate for such like commodities, in exchange of gold, or stone. This advice was well approved of by 
Anto∣nio de Faria,
 who instantly went about to put it in execution; To which end he took order for the providing of a vessel, by reason the Foyst wherein he came was altogether unfit for a further voyage: Matters thus disposed of, he deputed one, named 
Christovano Borhalho,
 for his Factor, a man exceeding well vers'd in business of Traffique, with whom there imbarqued some sixteen men, as well Soldiers as Merchants, with a hope that one crown would yield them six or seven, what in the commodities they should carry, as in those they should return. Here∣upon▪ wretched I being one of the sixteen, we parted from the Port on a Saturday, and sailed with a favorable wind along the coast till Thursday next in the morning, that we arrived at 
Lu∣gor
 Road, and anchored at the mouth of the River; There it was thought fit to pass the rest of the day, to the end we might inform our selves of what was behoveful for us to do, as well for the sale of our commodities, as for the safety of our persons: And to say truth, we learnt such good news, that we were confident of gaining above six times double, and to be sure of freedom and liberty during all the month of 
September,
 according to the Ordinance of the King of 
Siam,
 because it was the month of the Kings 
Sumbayas.
 Now the better to clear this, you must know, that all along this coast of 
Malaya,
 and within the Land, a great King commands, who for a more famous and recommendable Title above all other Kings, causeth himself to be called 
Prechau Saleu,
 Emperor of all 
Sornau,
 which is a Country wherein there are thirteen Kingdoms, by us commonly called 
Siam,
 to the which fourteen petty Kings are subject, and yield homage, that were anciently obliged to make their personal repair unto 
Odiaa,
 the Capi∣tal City of this Empire, as well to bring their Tribute thither, as to do the 
Sumbaya
 to their Emperor, which was indeed to kiss the Courtelas that he ware by his side; Now because this City was seated fifty leagues within the Land, and the Currents of the Rivers so strong, as these Kings were oftentimes forced to abide the whole winter there to their great charge, they petitioned the 
Prechau,
 King of 
Siam,
 that the place of doing this their homage might be al∣tered, whereupon he was pleased to ordain, that for the future there should be a Viceroy resi∣dent in the Town of 
Lugor,
 which in their language is called 
Poyho,
 unto whom every three years those fourteen Kings should render that duty and obedience they were accustomed to do unto himself, and that during that time they spent there in performing the same, being the whole month of 
September,
 both their own merchandize, and that of all others, as well natives as strangers, that either came in, or went out of the Country, should be free from all manner of imposts whatsoever: So that we arriving in the time of this freedom, there was such a multi∣tude of Merchants that flocked thither from all parts, as we were assured there was no less then fifteen hundred Vessels in the Port, all laden with an infinity of Commodities of very great value: And this was the good news we learnt at such time as we arrived at the mouth of the River; wherewith we were so well pleased, that we presently resolved to put in as soon as the wind would permit us. But alass! we were so unfortunate, that we could never come to see what we so much desired; for about ten of the clock, just as we had dined, and were preparing to set sail, we saw a great Junk coming upon us, which perceiving us to be 
Portugals,
 few in number, and our Vessel small fell close with our prow on the larboard side, and then those that were in her threw into us great Cramp-irons, fastened unto two long chains, wherewithall they grappled us fast unto them, which they had no sooner done, but straightway some seventy or eighty 
Mahometans
 came flying out from under their hatches, that till then had lien lurking


there, who with a mighty cry cast so many stones, darts, and lances, which 
ell as thick as hail upon us, that of us sixteen 
Portugals
 twelve rested dead in the place, together with six and thirty others, as well Boys as Mariners. Now for us four remaining 
Portugals,
 after we had escaped so dreadful 
n incounter, we leapt all of us into the Sea, where one was drowned, and we three that were left getting to land as well as we could, being dangerously hurt, and wading up to the wast in mud, went and hid our selves in the next adjoyning wood. In the mean time the 
Mahometans
 of the Junk, entring into our Frigot, not contented with the slaughter they had made of our men, like mad dogs they killed six or seven Boys out-right, whom they found wounded on the D
ck, not sparing so much as one of them: That done, they imbarqued all the goods of our Vessel into their Junk, then made a great hole in her, and so sunk her: Im∣mediately whereupon, leaving their anchor in the Sea, and the Cramp-irons wherewithall they had grappled us unto them, they set sail, and made away as fast as ever they could for fear of be∣ing discovered.


After this our escape, seeing our selves all sore hurt, and without any hope of help, we did nothing but weep and complain, for in this disaster we knew not what to resolve on, so much were we amazed with that which had befaln us within the space of half an hour. In this de∣solation we spent the rest of that sad day, but considering with our selves, that the place was moorish, and full of Adders and Lizards, we thought it our safest course to continue there all the night too, as accordingly we did, standing up to the middle in the Owze: The next morn∣ing as soon as it was day we went along by the Rivers side, until we came unto a little channel, which we durst not pass, as well for that it was very deep, as for fear of a great number of Lizards that we saw in it, so that in great pain we stayd not only that night there, but five days a
ter, being not able either to go forward, or turn aside, by reason of the bogs round about us, all covered over with rushes: In the mean time one of our companions dyed, whose name was 
Bastian Anriques,
 a rich man, and that had lost eight thousand crown
 in the 
Lanchara,
 in so much that of all the company we were before there remained none but 
Christovano Bor∣ralho
 and my self, that with tears sat lamenting over the poor dead mans body, which we had covered with a little earth as well as we could, for we were then so weak, that we could hard∣ly stir, or almost speak, so as we had set up our rest to make an end of those few hours we hoped to live in that place. The next day, being the seventh of our disaster, about Sun-set we espyed a great Barque coming rowing up the River, whereupon as soon as it was near us, we prostrated our selves on the ground, beseeching those that were aboard her to take us in; They wondering at us, presently made a stand, seeming much amazed to see us so on our knees, and our hands lift up to Heaven, as though we were at our prayers; nevertheless without speaking at all to us, they made as if they would go on, which constrained us afresh to cry aloud to them with tears that they would not suffer us for want of succor to dye miserably there. Upon thos
 our cries and lamentations an ancient woman came forth from under the hatches, whose grave countenance represented her to be such as afterwards we found her to be; she seeing us in so pitiful a plight, moved with our misfortune, and our wounds that we shewed her, she took up a stick, and therewith struck three or four of the Mariners because they would not take us in, whereupon approaching to the bank, five or six of them leapt on shore, and by her command∣ment took us upon their shoulders, and carryed us into the Barque. This honorable woman, much grieved to behold us so hurt, and our shirts and linnen drawers all bloody and mired, caused them straightway to be washed, and having given each of us, a linnen cloth to cover us withall, she would needs have us to sit down by her, where commanding meat to be brought us, she her self presenting it to us with her own hand, 
Eat, eat,
 said she, 
poor strangers, and be not afflicted to see y
ur selves reduced unto the estate you are in; for I, whom now you look upon, and that am but a woman, not having as yet attained to the age of fifty years, have seen my self a slave, and despoyled of above an hundred thousand duckets worth of goods: Nor is that all, for to this misfortune was the death of three of my sons adjoyned, and that of my husband, whom I held far more dearer then these eyes of mine, these eyes, alass! wherewith I beheld both the father and the sons torn in pieces by the King of
 Siams 
Elephants, together with two brothers, and a son-in-law I had; Ever since I have had a languishing life, and to all these miseries have many others far greater succeeded, for so implacable hath fortune been unto me, that I have seen three daughters of mine ready to be marryed, as also my father, mother, and two and thirty of my kinsmen, nephews, and cousins, thrown into burning fur∣naces, where their cries and lamentations could not chuse but reach unto Heaven, for God to


succor them in the violence of that insupportable torment; but alass! the enormity of my sins no doubt so stopped the ears of the clemency of the Lord of Lords, that he would not hea
 our request, which seemed very just to me; nevertheless I deceived my self, since nothing is just but what it pleaseth his divine Majesty to ordain.
 Hereunto we answered, that the sins which we also had committed against him were the cause of our calamities. Seeing it is so, re∣plyed she, mingling her tears with ours, it is always good in your adversities to acknowledg, that the touches of the hand of God are evermore righteous, for both in that, as also in a con∣fession of the mouth, in a sorrow for having offended, and in a firm resolution to do so no more, consisteth all the remedy of your sufferings and mine. Having entertained us thus with the discourse of her misfortune, she enquired of us the occasion of ours, and by what means we came to be in that miserable estate, whereupon we recounted unto her all that had past, and that we neither knew who it was that had so ill intreated us, nor wherefore he did it; Her people, hearing us, said, that the great Junk, whereof we spake, belonged to a 
Mahometan,
 a 
Guzarat
 by Nation, named 
Coia Acem,
 who the same morning went out of the River laden with Brazil, and was bound for the Isle of 
Ainan:
 Hereat the good woman smote her brest, and seeming to be much moved, 
Let me not live,
 said she, 
if it be not so, for I have heard that
 Mahometan, 
of whom you speak, vaunt publiquely before all that would give ear unto him, that he had s
ain a great number of the race of those of
 Malaca, 
and that he hated them in such sort, as he had promised to his
 Mahomet 
to kill more of them in time.
 Being amazed hereat, we desired her to declare unto us who that man was, and why he was so much our enemy, whereunto she answered, that she knew no other reason, but for that a great Captain of our Nation, named 
Hector de Sylv
ira,
 had killed his father and two of his brothers in a ship, which he took from them in the straight of 
M
cqua,
 that was going from 
Iudas
 to 
Dabul.
 Thus much did this good Matron tell us, and many other things afterwards concerning the great hatred this 
Mahometan
 bore us, as also what lyes he devised to render us infamous.


This honorable woman, departing from the place where she found us,
 went some two leagues up the River, till she came to a little Village, where she lay that night; The next morn∣ing parting from thence, she made directly to the Town of 
Lugor,
 which was above five leagues further. Arriving there about noon, she landed, and went to her house, whither she carryed us with her, and kept us there three and twenty days, during which time we were very well looked unto, and plentifully accommodated with all that was necessary for us▪ This woman was a widow, and of an honorable family, as afterwards we learnt, and that had been marryed to the Captain General, which they call 
Xabandar
 of 
Prevedim,
 whom the 
Pata
 of 
Lasapara
 King of 
Quaijuan
 had put to death in the Isle of 
Iaoa
 the year 1538. At the time she met with us, as I have related, she came from a Junk of hers, that lay at the Road laden with Salt; and because it was great, and could not pass up by reason of the shelves, she caused it to be unladen by little and little with tha
 Barque. By that time the three and twenty days, I spake of, were expired, it pleased God to restore us to our perfect health, so that this virtuous D
me seeing us able to travel, recommended us to a Merchant, her kinsman, that was bound for 
Patana,
 with whom, after we had taken our leave of that noble Matron, unto whom we were so much obliged, we imbarqued our selves in a 
Cataluz
 with Oars, and sail∣ing on a River, called 
Sumh
chitano,
 we arrived seven days after at 
Patana.
 Now for as much as 
Antonio de Faria
 looked every day for our return, with a hope of good success in his business, as soon as he saw us, and understood what had past, he remained so sad and discontent∣ed, that he continued above an hour without speaking a word; in the mean time such a number of 
Portugals
 came in, as the house was scarce able to contain them, by reason the greatest part of them had ventu
ed goods in the 
Lanchara,
 whose lading in that regard amounted to seven∣ty thousand duckets and better, the most of it being in silver coyn, of purpose with it to re∣turn gold. 
Antonio de Faria
 seeing himself stripped of the twelve thousand duckets he had borrowed at 
Malaca,
 resolved not to return thither, because he had no means to pay his Cre∣ditors, but rather thought it fitter to pursue those that had robbed him of his goods; so that he took a solemn Oath upon the holy Evangelists to part incontinently from that place for to go in quest of those Pyrats, for to revenge upon them the death of those fourteen 
Portugals,
 and thirty six 
Christians,
 Boys and Mariners, killed by them as aforesaid; Adding withall, that if such a course were not taken, they should every day be used so, 
ay far worse. All the Assistants very much commended him valorous resolution, and for the execution thereof there were many young Soldiers amongst them that offered to accompany him in that voyage; some


likewise presented him with mony, and others furnished him with divers necessaries: Having accepted these offers and presents of his friends, he used such diligence, that within eighteen days he made all his preparations, and got together five and fifty Soldiers, amongst whom poor unfortunate I was fain to be one; for I saw my self in that case, as I had not so much as a single token, nor knew any one that would either give or lend me one, being indebted besides at 
Malaca
 above five hundred duckets, that I had borrowed there of some of my friends, which, with as much more, that dog had 
obbed me of amongst others, as I have related be∣fo
e, having been able to save nothing but my miserable carcass, wounded in three places with a Javelin, and my skull crackt with a stone, whereby I was three or four times at the point of death; But my companion 
Christovan Borralho
 was yet 
ar worse entreated then my self, and that with more hurts, which he received in satisfaction of five and twenty hundred duckets that he was robbed of as the rest.






CHAP. XV. 
Antonio de Faria's
 setting forth for the Isle of 
Ainan,
 his arrival at the River of 
Tinacoren
; and that which befell us in this Voyage.


AS soon as 
Antonio de Faria
 was ready, he departed from 
Patana
 on a Saturday the ninth of 
May,
 1540. and steered North North-west, towards the Kingdom of 
Champaa,
 with an intent to discover the Ports and Havens thereof, as also by the means of some good booty to furnish himself with such things as he wanted; for his haste to part from 
Patana
 was such, as he had not time to furnish himself with that which was necessary for him, no not with victual and warlike ammunition enough. After we had sailed three days we had sight of an Island, called 
Pullo Condor,
 at the height of eight degrees and three quarters, on the North Coast, and almost North-west towards the mouth of the River of 
Camboia,
 so that having rounded all the Coast, we discovered a good Haven Eastward, where in the Island of 
Camboia,
 distant some six leagues from the firm Land, we met with a Junk of 
Lequios,
 that was going to the Kingdom of 
Siam
 with an Embassador from the 
Nautauquim
 of 
Lindau,
 who was Prince of the Island of 
Tosa,
 and that had no sooner discovered us but he sent a message by a 
Chinese
 Pilot to 
Antonio de Faria,
 full of complements, whereunto was added these words from them all: 
That the time would come when as they should communicate with us in the true love of the Law of God, and of his in
inite clemency, who by his death had given life to all men, and a perpetual inheritance in the house of the good, and that they beleeved this should be so, after the half of the half time was past.
 With this complement they sent him a Courtelas of great value, whose handle and scabbard was of gold, as also six and twenty Pearls in a little Box likewise of gold, made after the fashion of a Salt-seller, whereat 
Antonio de Faria
 was very much grieved, by reason he was not able to render the like unto this Prince, as he was obliged to do, for wh
n the 
Chinese
 arrived with this message they were distant above a league at Sea from us. Hereupon we went ashore, where we spent three days in taking in fresh water, and fishing. Then we put to Sea again, laboring to get to the firm Land, there to seek out a River, named 
Pullo Cambim,
 which divides the State of 
Camboia
 from the Kingdom of 
Champaa,
 in the height of nine degrees, where arriving on a Sunday the last of 
May,
 we went up three leagues in this River, and anchored just against a great Town, called 
Catimparu,
 there we re∣mained twelve days in peace, during the which we made our provision of all things necessary. Now b
cause 
Antonio de Faria
 was naturally curious, he endevored to understand from the people of the Country what Nation inhabited beyond them, and whence that mighty River took its sou
ce; whereunto he was answered, that it was derived from a lake, named 
Pinator,
 d
stant from them Eastward two hundred and sixty leagues in the Kingdom of 
Quitirvan,
 and that it was invironed with high mountains, at the foot whereof, upon the brink of the water, were eight and thirty villages, of which thirteen were very great, and the rest small, and that only in one of the great on
s, called 
Xincaleu,
 there was such a huge myne of gold, as by the re∣p
t of those that lived thereabout, there was every day a bar and a half drawn out of it, which, according to the value of our mony, makes two and twenty millions in a year, and that four Lords had share in it, who continually were in war together, each one striving to make himself master of it; I, and that one of them, named 
Raiahitau,
 had in an inner yard of his house, in pots under ground, that were full to the very brims, above six hundred bars of gold in powder, like to that of 
Mexancabo
 of the Island of 
Samatra
; And th
 if three hundred


Harquebusiers of our Nation should go and assault it, without doubt they would carry it: Moreover that in another of those Villages, called 
Buaquirim,
 there was a quarry, where out of an old Rock they digged a great quantity of Diamonds, that were very fine, and of greater value then those of 
Lava
 and 
Taniampura
 in the Isle of 
Iaoa.
 Whereupon 
Antonio de Fa∣ria
 having questioned them about many other particularities, they made him a relation of the fertility of the Country, which was further up this River, no less fit to be desired, then easie to be conquered, and that with little charge.


Being departed from this River of 
Pullo Cambim,
 we sailed along the Coast of the Kingdom of 
Champaa,
 till we came to an Haven, called 
Saleyzacau,
 seventeen leagues farther on to∣wards the North, whereinto we entred. Now because there was nothing to be gotten there, we went out of this place about sun-setting, and the next morning we came to a River, named 
Toobasoy,
 without the which 
Antonio de Faria
 cast anchor, because the Pilot would not ven∣ture to enter into it, for that he had never been there before, and therefore knew not the depth of it. As we were contesting hereabout, some for to enter, and others gainsaying it, we dis∣cerned a great sail making towards this Port from the main Sea. Hereupon, without stirring from the place where we were, we prepared to receive them in a peaceable manner, so that as soon as they came neer us, we saluted them, and hung up the flag of the Country, called 
Cha∣rachina,
 which is a sign of friendship, used among them in such like occasions. They of the ship, in stead of answering us in the same manner, as in reason it seemed they should have done, and knowing that we were 
Portugals,
 to whom they wished not well, gave us very vile and base words, and from the top of their poup made a capher slave hold up his arse bare to us with a mighty noise and din of Trumpets, Drums, and Bells, by way of scorn and derision of us. Whereat 
Antonio de Faria
 was so offended, that he gave them a whole broad side, to see if that would make them more courteous; To this sho
 of ours they returned us an answer of five pieces of Ordnance, namely three Faulcons, and two little field-pieces; whereupon consulting together what we should do, we resolved to abide where we were, for we held it not fit to undertake so doubtful an enterprize, until such time as the next days light might discover the forces of this Vessel unto us, that so we might afterwards either set upon her with the more se∣curity, or let her pass by: This counsel was approved both by 
Antonio de Faria,
 and us all, so that keeping good watch, and giving order for all that was necssary, we continued in that place expecting day; now about two of the clock in the morning we perceived three black things close to the water coming towards us, which we could not well discern, whereupon we wakened 
Antonio de Faria,
 who was then asleep on the hatches, and shewed him what we had discovered, being by that time not far from us; He fearing, as we did, lest they were Enemies, cryed out presently, 
Arm, Arm, Arm,
 wherein he was straightway obeyed; for now plainly perceiving that they were Vessels rowing towards us, we betook us to our Arms, and were bestowed by our Captain in places most necessary to defend our selves. We conceived by their silent approaching to us, that they were the Enemies we had seen over night, so that 
Antonio de Faria
 said unto us, 
My masters, this is some Pyrat coming to set upon us, who thinks we are not above six or seven at the most, as the manner is in such kinde of Vessels; wherefore let every man stoop down, so as they may not see any of us, and then we shall soon know their design; in the mean time let the pots of powder be made ready, with which, and our swo
ds, I hope we shall give a good end to this adventure: Let every one also hide his match in such sort, as they may not be discovered, whereby they may be perswaded that we are asleep:
 all which, as he had prudently ordained, was incontinently executed. These three Vessels, being come within a 
light shoot of our
, went round about her, and after they had viewed her well, they joyned all close together, as if they had entred into some new consulta∣tion, continuing so about a quarter of an hour; that done, they separated themselves into two parts, namely the two lesser went together to our poup, and the third, that was greater, and better armed, made to the starboard of us; Hereupon they entred our Lorch where most con∣veniently they could, so that in less then half a quarter of an hour above forty men were got∣ten in, which seen by 
Antonio de Faria,
 he issued out from under the hatches with some forty Soldiers, and invoking Saint 
Iames
 our Patron, he fell so couragiously upon them, that in a short time he killed them almost all; Then with ayd of the pots of powder, that he caused to be cast in amongst those that were remaining in the three Vessels which he presently took, he made an end of defeating them, the most of them being constrained to leap into the Sea, where they were all drowned but five, whom we took up alive, whereof one was the capher slave that


shewed us his tail, and the other four were one 
Turk,
 two 
A
hems,
 and the Captain of the Junk, named 
Similau,
 a notorious Pyrat, and our mortal Enemy. 
Antonio de Faria
 com∣manded them instantly to be put to torture, for to draw out of them who they were, from whence they came, and what they would have had of us, whereunto the two 
Achems
 an∣swered most brutishly; and when as we were going about to torment the slave in like maner, he began with tears to beseech us to spare him, for that he was a Christian as we were, and that without torture he would answer truly to all our demands; whereupon 
Antonio de Faria
 caused him to be unbound, and setting him by him, gave him a piece of Bisket, and a glass of wine, then with fair words he perswaded him to declare the truth of every thing to him, since he was a Christian, as he affirmed; To which he replyed in this sort, 
If I do not speak the truth unto you▪ then take me not for such as I am; my name is
 Sebastian, 
and I was slave to
 Gaspar de Mello, 
whom this dog
 Simila
, 
here present, slew about two years ago in
 Liampao, 
with five and twenty other
 Portugals 
that were in his ship. Antonio de Faria
 hear∣ing this, cryed out, like a man amazed, and said, Nay now I care not for knowing any more; is this then that dog 
Similau,
 that slew thy master? 
Yes,
 answered he, 
it is he, and that meant likewise to have done as much to you, thinking that ye were not above six or seven, for which effect he came away in haste with a purpose, as he said, to take you alive, for to make your brains fly out of your heads with a frontal of cord, as he did to my Master, but God I hope will pay him for all the mischief he hath committed. Antonio de Faria
 being also advertised by this slave, that this dog 
Similau
 had brought all his men of war along with him, and left none in his Junk but some 
Chinese
 Mariners, he resolved to make use of this good fortune, after he had put 
Similau
 and his companions to death, by making their brains fly out of their heads with a cord, as 
Similau
 had done to 
Gaspar de Mello,
 and the other 
Portugals
 in 
Liampao:
 Where∣fore he presently imbarqued himself with thirty Soldiers in his Boat, and the three 
Machna
,
 wherein the Enemies came, and by means of the 
lood and a favorable wind, he arrived with∣less then an hour, where the Junk rode at anchor within the River about a league from us, whereupon he presently boarded her, and made himself master of the poup, from whence, with only four pots of powder, which he cast in among the Rascals that were asleep upon the hatches, he made them all leap into the Sea, where nine or ten of them were drowned, the rest crying out for help were taken up and saved, because we stood in need of them for the navi∣gation of the Junk, that was a great tall Vessel. Thus you see how it pleased God out of his divine justice to make the arrogant confidence of this cursed dog a means to chastise him for his cruelties, and to give him by the hands of 
Portugals
 a just punishment for that which he had done unto them. The next morning, taking an inventory of this prize, we found six and thir∣ty thousand 
Ta
is
 in silver of 
Iapan,
 which amounts in our mony to fifty four thousand duckets, besides divers other good commodities, that were not then praised for want of time, because the Country was all in an uproar, and fires every where kindled, whereby they use to give warning one to another upon any alarm or doubt of Enemies, which constrained us to make a∣way with all speed.


Antonio de Faria
 parted from this River of 
Toobasoy
 on a Wednesday morning, being 
Corpus Christi
 Eve, in the year 1540. and sailed along by the Coast of the Kingdom of 
Champaa,
 fearing to abandon it, the wind being Easterly, which in that place is oftentimes very impetuous, especially in the conjunction of the new and full Moons. The Friday follow∣ing we found our selves just against a River, called by the inhabitants of the Country 
Tinaco∣reu,
 and by us 
Varella,
 whereinto we thought fit to enter, as well to be informed of certain things 
Antonio de Faria
 desired to know, as also to see whether he could learn any news of 
Coia Acem
 whom he sought for, in regard that all the Junks of 
Siam,
 and of all the Coast of 
Malaya,
 that sail to 
China,
 use to trade in this River, where many times they sell their com∣modities well in exchange of gold, 
Calembouc
 wood, and Ivory, whereof there is abundance in that Kingdom; and having cast anchor a little within the mouth of the River, over against a Village, named 
Taquilleu,
 there came a number of 
Paroos,
 and many other small Boats with fishermen, full of refreshments, who having never seen men made like unto us, said one to another; 
Lo, this is a strange novelty wherewithall God doth visit us, let us beseech him he will be pleased, that these bearded men may not be such as for their particular profit do spy Countries like Merchants, and afterwards rob them like Theeves. Let us get to the woods for fear lest the sparks of these firebrands do not burn up our houses, and reduce the fields of our labors into ashes, as they use to do unto the Lands of other men.
 Whereunto some of them


made answer, God forbid it should be so; but if by misfortune they should come amongst us, let us carry our selves in such sort, as they may not perceive we fear them as Enemies, for so they would set upon us with the more confidence; wherefore the best course for us will be, in a fair way, and with gentle words, to endevor to learn of th
m what they would have of us, that upon knowledg thereof we may certifie it unto 
Hoyaa Paquir,
 who is now at 
Congrau. Antonio de Faria,
 making as though he did not understand them, although all that they said was delivered to him by an Interpreter, received them very courteously, and bought the re∣freshments, which they brought, of them at their own price, wherewithall they were very well satisfied; And they demanding of him from whence he came, and what he would have, he answered them, that he was of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 and as a Merchant was going to traf∣fique in the Isle of 
Lequios,
 being come into that place only to learn some news of a friend of his named 
Coia Acem,
 that was also bound thither: whereupon he enquired of them whether he were past by, or no; howsoever he intended to depart thence suddenly, both for to lose no time, as for that he knew he could not sell his commodities there. To which they replyed, You say true, for in this village of ours there is nothing but nets and fisher Boats, wherewith we get our living, and that poorly enough God knows. Howbeit, added they, if thou wilt go up the River to the Town of 
Pilaucacem,
 where the King is, thou wilt sell not only the com∣modities which are in thy ships, be they never so rich, but likewise more then ten such ships as thine could carry, by reason that there are Merchants in that place so wealthy, and that drive so great a trade, as they go with whole Troops of Elephants, Oxen, and Camels, whom they send laden with goods to the Lands of the 
Lauhos, Pafuaas,
 and 
Gueos,
 which are inhabited by very rich people. 
Antonio de Faria
 seeing a good occasion offered to inform himself of that he desired to know, questioned them at large concerning many things, whereunto some of them, that seemed to be of more authority then the rest, answered very aptly, how the River, where we rode at anchor, was called 
Tinacoreu,
 and that it extended to 
Moncalor,
 a moun∣tain dist
nt from thence some fourscore leagues, and that further upwards it was far broader, but not so deep, where in many places there was great shelves of sand, and a world of land overflown with water, in the which wer
 such a multitude of fowls, as they covered all the Country thereabout; And how beyond that it was all mountainous and rocky, and so full of Elephants, Rhinoceroses, Lions, wilde Boars, Buffles, and such other wilde bea
ts, as men could not possibly live there for them; And moreover, how in the midst of that continent there was a great Lake, which the inhabitants thereof called 
Cunebetea,
 and others 
Chiammay,
 from whence this River took its beginning, as also three others, that watered a good part of this Country; And that the said Lake, according to the report of those who have written of it, was threescore Jaos about, each Jao containing three Leagues, all along the which there were many Mynes of Silver, Copper, Tin, and Lead, from whence great quantities thereof were conti∣nually drawn, which the Merchants carryed away with Troops of Elephants and Rhinoceroses, for to transport it into the Kingdoms of 
Sornau,
 by us called 
Siam, Passiloco, Sarady, Tangu, Prom, Calamniham,
 and other Provinces, that are very far within land, and distant from these Coasts two or three months journey. Further, they told us, that these Countries were divided into Kingdoms, and Regions inhabited with people, that were white, tawny, and others somewhat blacker; and that in exchange of those commodities they returned Gold, Diamonds, and Rubies. Having thereupon demanded of them whether those people had Arms, they an∣swered none, but staves hardened in the fire, and daggers with blades two spans long; They also assured us that from hence one could not go thither by the River in less then half two months, or two months and an half, by reason of the impetuosity of the waters descending with a great and 
trong current the most part of the year, and that one might return in eight or ten days at the most. After these demands 
Antonio de Faria
 made them divers others, wherein they also gave him good satisfaction▪ and reported many other particulars unto him, whereby it may be gathered, that if the Country could be taken, it would, without so much labor and loss of blood, be of greater profit, and less charge, then the 
Indiaes.


The Friday following we left this River of 
Tinacoreu,
 and by our Pilots advice we went to find out 
Pullo Champeiloo,
 which is an inhabited Island, scituate in the entrance to the Bay of 
Cauchenchina
 in forty degrees and a third to the Northward; Being come to it, we cast anchor in an Haven, where there was good and safe riding, and there we remained three days, accommodating our artillery in the best manner we could; That done, we set sail towards the Isle of 
Ainan,
 hoping to meet with the Pyrat 
Coia Acem
 there whom we sought for, and ar∣riving


at 
Pullo Capas,
 which was the first land that we saw of it, we sailed close to the shoar, the better to discover the Ports and Rivers on that side, and the entries into them. Now because the Lorch, wherein 
Antonio de Faria
 came from 
Pa
ana,
 leaked very much, 
e commanded all his Soldiers to pass into another better Vessel, which was immediately performed, and ar∣riving at a River, that about evening we found towards the East, he cast anchor a league out at Sea, by reason his Junk was great, and drew much water, so that fearing the sands, which he had often met withall in this Voyage, he sent 
Christovano B
rralho
 with fourteen Soldiers in the Lorch up the River to discover what fires those might be that he saw. Being gone then about a league in the River, he incountred a Fleet of forty very great Junks, whereupon fearing le
t it was the 
Mandarims
 Army, whereof we had heard much talk, he kept aloof off from them, and anchored close by the shoar; now about midnight the tyde began to come in, which 
B
r∣ralho
 no sooner perceived, but he presently without noise weighed 
nchor, and declining the Junks he went on to that part where he had seen the fires, that by this time were almost all out, there being not above two or three that gave any light, and which served to guide him. So continuing his course very discreetly, he came to a place where he beheld a mighty company of great and small Ships, to the number as he guessed of thousand Sails, passing through the which very stilly he arrived at a Town of above ten thousand housholds, enclosed with a strong wall of Brick, with Towers and Bulwarks after our manner, and with Curtains full of water. Here five of the fourteen Soldiers, that were in the Lorch, went on shoar with two of those 
Chinese
es,
 that were saved out of 
Similaus
 Junk, who had left their wives as hostages with us for their return; These having spent three hours in viewing and surveying the Town on the outside, reimbarqued themselves without any notice taken of them at all, and so went back very quietly as they came to the mouth of the River, where they found a Junk riding at anchor, that was come thither since their departure in the evening. Being returned to 
Antonio de Faria,
 they related unto him what they had seen, particularly the great Army that lay up in the Ri∣ver, as also the Junk, which they had left rid
g at anchor at the entrance into it, telling him that it might well be the Dog 
Coia Acem
 whom he sought for. These news so rejoyced him, that instantly he weighed anchor, and set sail, saying, his mind gave him that it was undoubt∣edly he; and if it proved so, he assured us all that he was contented to lose his life in fighting with him, for to be revenged of such a Rogue as had done him so much wrong. Approaching within sight of the Junk, he commanded the Lorch to pass unto the other side of her, to the end they might board her both together at once, and charged that not a Piece should be shot off, for fear they should be heard of the Army that lay up in the River, who might thereupon come to discover them. As soon as we were come to the Junk, she was presently invested by us, and twenty of our Soldiers leaping in made themselves Masters of her without any resist∣ance, for the most of her men threw themselves into the Sea, the rest that were more couragi∣ous valiantly made head against our people; but 
Antonio de Faria
 presently getting in with twenty Soldiers more made an end of defeating them, killing above thirty of theirs, so as there remained none alive but those which voluntarily cast themselves into the Sea, whom he caused to be drawn up to serve for the Navigation of his Vessels, and for to learn who they were, and from whence they came, to which purpose he commanded four of them to be put to torture, whereof two chose rather to dye so then to confe
 any thing; and as they were about to do the like to a little boy, an old man, his father, that was layd on the deck, cryed out with tears in his eyes for to give him the hearing before they did any hurt to the child; 
Antonio de Faria
 made the Executioner stay, and bade the old man say what he would, provided he spake truth, for otherwise he vowed, that both he and the boy should be thrown alive into the Sea, whereas on the contrary, if he dealt truly, he promised to set them both at liberty on shoar, and restore unto him whatsoever he would take his oath did appertain unto him: Whereunto the old 
Ma∣hometan
 answered, 
I accept of the promise which thou makest me, and I very much thank thee for sparing the life of this child, for as for mine, as a thing unprofitable, I make no reckoning of it, and I will rely on thy word, although the course thou h
ldest may well divert me from it, in regard it is no way conformable to the Christian Law, which thou hast profest in thy Bap∣tism
▪ An answer, that rendred 
Antonio de Faria
 so confounded and amazed, as he knew not wha
 
o reply; Howbeit he caused him to come ne
rer to him, and questioned him gently with∣out any further threat
ning.


This old man then sat him down by 
Antonio de Faria,
 who seeing him white like unto us, asked him whether he were a 
Turk,
 or a 
Persian?
 whereunto he answered, that he was nei∣ther,


but that he was a Christian, born at Mount 
Sinai. Antonio de Faria
 thereupon replyed, how he wondred much, being a Christian, as he said, that he lived not amongst Christians. To which the old man answered, that he was a Merchant of a good family, named 
Tome Mo∣stanguo,
 and that riding one day at anchor in a Ship of his in the Port of 
Iudaa,
 in the year one thousand five hundred thirty and eight, 
Soliman
 the Bassa, Vice-roy of 
Cairo,
 took his, and sev
n others Ships, to carry Victual and Munition for his Army of threescore Galleys, where∣with he went by the Command of the grand 
Signior
 to restore 
Sultan Bandur
 to his Kingdom of 
Cambaya,
 which the great 
Mogul
 had deprived him of; And that at the end of the Voyage going to demand the freight which they had promised him, the 
Turks,
 that were ever cruel and faithless, took his wife, and a young daughter he had; and forced them before his face, and because his son wept at the sight of this injury they threw him bound hand and foot into the Sea; as for himself, they layd him in Irons, and continually scourging him they stript him of all his goods, to the value of six thousand duckets and better, saying, that it was not lawful for any to enjoy the blessings of God, but the holy and just 
Mouss
limans,
 such as they were: And that his wife and daughter dying not long after, he found means one night to cast himself into the Sea with that little boy, which was his son, at the mouth of the River of 
Diu,
 from whence he went by Land to 
Surrat,
 and so to 
Malaca
 in a ship of 
Garcia de Saas,
 Captain of 
Bacaim
; then how by the commandment of 
Estevano de Gama,
 going to 
China
 with 
Chri∣stovano Sardinha,
 which had been Factor at the 
Molucques,
 one night as they rode at anchor in 
Cincaapura, Quiay Taijano,
 Master of the Junk, surprized them, and killed the said 
Sar∣dinha,
 together with six and twenty 
Portugals
 more; as for him, because he was a Gunner they saved his life. At this report 
Antonio de Faria
 striking himself on the brest, as a man amazed at this discourse, 
Lord, Lord,
 said he, 
this seems to be a dream that I hear
; then turning himself to his Soldiers that stood about him, he related the life of this 
Quiay
 unto them, and further affirmed, that he had slain at times in strayed Vessels above an hundred 
Portugals,
 and despoyled them of an hundred thousand duckets at least; And though his name was such, as this 
Armenian
 delivered, to wit, 
Quiay Taijano,
 yet after he had killed 
Christovano Sar∣dinha
 in 
Cincaapura,
 in a vain-glory of that which he had done he caused himself to be called Captain 
Sardinha.
 Whereupon having demanded of the 
Armenian
 where he was, he told us, that he was very sore hurt, and hidden in the hold of the Junk amongst the Cables with five or six others. Hereat 
Antonio de Faria
 arose, and went directly to the place where this Dog was hidden, followed by the greatest part of his Soldiers, which opened the scuttle where the Cables lay to see whether the 
Armenian
 spake true or no; in the mean time the Dog, and the six others that were with him, got out at another scuttle, and most desperately fell upon our men, who were above thirty in number, besides fourteen boys. Then began there so furious and bloody a fight, that in less then a quarter of an hour we made a clean dispatch of them all, but in the mean while two 
Portugals,
 and seven boys were slain, besides I know not how many hurt, whereof 
Antonio de Faria
 received two downright blows on his head, and one on his arm, which put him to very much pain. After this defeat, and that the wounded men were drest, he set sail, for fear of the forty Junks that were in the River: So getting far from Land, about evening we went and anchored on the other side of 
Cauchenchina,
 where 
Antonio de Faria
 causing an Inventory to be taken of all that was in this Pyrats Junk, there was found in her five hundred Bars of Pepper, after fifty quintals to the Bar, forty of Nutmegs and Mace, four∣score of Tin, thirty of Ivory, twelve of Wax, and five of Wood of fine Aloes, which might be worth according to the rate of the Country seventy thousand duckets; besides a little field Piece, four Faulcons, and thirty Bases of Brass, the greatest part of which Artillery had been ours, for this 
Mahometan
 had taken them in the ships of 
Sardinha, Oliveyra,
 and 
Bartole∣meu de Matos:
 There were also found three Coffers covered with Leather, full of Silk quilts, and the apparel of 
Portugals,
 with a great Bason and Ewer silver and guilt, and a Salt-seller of the same, two and twenty Spoons, three Candlesticks, five guilt Cups, eight and fifty Har∣quebuzes, twelve hundred twenty and two pieces of 
Bengala
 Cloth, all which were 
Portu∣gals
 goods, eighteen quintals of Powder, and nine Children about seven or eight years of age, chained together by the hands and the feet, most lamentable to behold, for that they were so weak and lean, that one might easily through their skins have counted all the bones in their bodies.








CHAP. XVI. 
Antonio de Faria
's Arrival at the Bay of 
Camoy,
 where was the fishing of Pearls for the King of 
China;
 the Relation made to him of the Isle of 
Ainan;
 with that which happened to him by the means of a renegado Pyrat, and otherwise.


THe next day after noon, 
Antonio de Faria
 parted from the place where he rode at anchor, and returned towards the Coast of 
Ainan,
 by the which he kept all the rest of that day, and the next night with five and twenty or thirty fathom water. In the morning he came to a Bay, where there were many great Boats fishing for Pearls, and being unresolved what course to take, he bestowed all the forenoon in counsel with his company thereabout, whereof some were of the opinion that he should seize upon the Boats that were fishing for Pearls, and others opposed it, saying, it was a safer way to treat with them as Merchants, for that in exchange of the great store of Pearls, which were in that place, they might easily put off the most part of their Commodities. This appearing to be the best and safest advice, 
Antonio de Faria
 caused the Flag of Trade to be hung out, according to the Custom of 
China,
 so that instantly there came two Lanteaas from Land to us, which are Vessels like to Foists, with great abundance of refreshments, and those that were in them, having saluted us after their manner, went aboard the great Junk wherein 
Antonio de Faria
 was; but when they beheld men, such as we were, having never seen the like before, they were much amazed, and demanded what people we were, and wherefore we came into their Country. Whereunto we answered by an Interpre∣ter, that we were Merchants born in the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 and were come thither to sell or barter our Commodities with them, if so be they would permit us. To this, an old man, much respected of all the rest, replyed, that here was no Traffique used, but in another place 
urther forward, called 
Guamboy,
 where all strangers that came from 
Cantan, Chincheo, La∣mau, Comhay, Sumbor, Liampau,
 and other Sea-coast Towns, did ordinarily trade: Wherefore he counselled him to get him suddenly from thence, in regard this was a place de∣stined only to the fishing of Pearls for the Treasure of the house of the son of the Sun, to the which, by the Ordinance of the 
Tutan
 of 
Comhay,
 who was the soveraign Governor of all the Country of 
Cauchenchina,
 no Vessel was permitted to come, but only such as were ap∣pointed for that service, and that all other ships, which were found there, were by the Law to be burnt, and all that were in them; but since he, as a stranger, and ignorant of the Laws of the Country, had transgressed the same, not out of contempt, but want of knowledg, he thought fit to advertise him of it, to the end he might be gone from thence before the arrival of the 
Mandarim
 of the Army, which we call General, to whom the Government of that fishing appertained, and that would be within three or four days at the most, being gone not above six or seven leagues from thence to a Village, named 
Buhaquirim,
 for to take in Victual. 
Antonio de Faria
 thanking him for his good advice, asked him how many Sails, and what Forces the 
Mandarim
 had with him: Whereunto the old man answered, that he was accom∣panied with forty great Junks, and twenty five 
Vancans
 with oars, wherein there were seven thousand men, namely, five thousand Soldiers, and the rest Slaves and Mariners; and that he was there every year six Months, during the which time was the fishing for Pearls, that is to say, from the first of 
March
 to the last of 
August.
 Our Captain desiring to know what du∣ties were payd out of this fishing, and what revenue it yielded in those six Months, the old man told him, that of Pearls which weighed above five Carats they gave two thirds, of the worser sort h
lf less, and of seed Pearl the third part; and that this Revenue was not always alike, be∣cause the fishing was sometimes better in one year, then in another, but that one with another he thought it might yield annually four hundred thousand 
Ta
is. Antonio de Faria
 made very much of the old man, and gave him two cakes of Wax, a bag of Pepper, and a tooth of Ivory, wherewith both he and the rest were exceedingly well pleased. He also demanded of them, of what bigness this Isle of 
Ainan
 might be, whereof so many wonders were spoken. Tell us first, replyed they, who you are, and wherefore you are come hither, then will we satisfie you in that you desire of us; for we vow unto you, that in all our lives we never saw so many young fellows together in any Merchants ships, as we now see in this of yours, nor so spruce and ne
t; and it seems that in their Country 
China
 Silks are so cheap as they are of no esteem, or else that they have had them at so easie a rate, as they have given nothing near the worth for them, for we see them play away a piece of Damask at one cast at Dice, as those that come


lightly by them: A speech that made 
Antonio de Faria
 secretly to smile, for that thereby he well perceived how these fishermen had a shrewd guess that the same were stollen, which made him tell them, that they did this like young men, who were the sons of very rich Merchants, and in that regard valued things far under that they were worth, and had cost their fathers; dissembling then what they thought, they answered in this manner, It may very well be as you say. Whereupon 
Antonio de Faria
 gave a sign to the Soldiers to leave off their play, and to hide the pieces of Silk that they were playing for, to the end they might not be suspected for Rob∣bers by these folks, which immediately they did, and the better to assure these 
Chineses
 that we were honest men, and Merchants, our Captain commanded the scuttles of the Junk to be opened, that we had taken the night before from Captain 
Sardinha,
 which was laden with Pepper, whereby they were somewhat restored to a better opinion then they had of us before, saying one to another, Since now we find that they are Merchants indeed, let us freely answer to their demand, so as they may not think, though we be rude, that we know nothing but how to catch fish and Oysters.


The old man desiring to satisfie 
Antonio de Faria
's demand, 
Sir,
 said he,
 
since now I know what you are, and that only out of curiosity you fairly require to learn this particular of me, I will clearly tell you all that I know thereof, and what I have heard others deliver concerning it, that have been elder then my self, and which have a long time governed this Archipelague; They said then, that this Island was an absolute State under a very rich and mighty King, who, for an higher and more transcendent title then other Monarchs his Contemporaries car∣ried, caused himself to be stiled
 Prechau Gam
u; 
He dying without heirs, so great a discord arose amongst the people about the succession to the Crown, as encreasing by little and little it caused such effusion of blood, that the Chronicles of those times affirm, how only in four years and an half sixteen
 Lacazaas 
of men were slain, every
 Lacazaa 
containing an hundred thousand, by means wheroof the Country remained so deserted of people, that unable to defend it self the King of
 Cauchin 
conquered it, only with seven thousand
 Mogores, 
which the King of
 Tartarie 
sent him from the City of
 Tuymican, 
that then was Metrapolitan of all his Empires. This Island of
 Ainan 
being conquered, the King of
 Cauchin 
returned into his Country, and for Governor thereof left behind him a Commander of his, named
 Hoyha Paguarol, 
who revolted from him for certain just causes, as he pretended, that invited him thereunto. Now to have the assistance and support of the King of
 China, 
he became his Tributary for four hundred thousand
 Taeis 
by the year, which amount to six hundred thousand duckets, in consideration whereof the King of
 China 
obliged himself to defend him against all his enemies, whensoever he should have need: This accord continued be
ween them the space of thirteen years, during the which the King of
 Cauchin 
was five several times defeated in open Battel; At length this
 Hoyha Paguarol 
coming to dye without issue, in regard of the good offices that in his life time he had received from the King of
 China, 
he by his testament declared him for his Successor and lawful Heir, so that ever since, being now two hundred thirty and five years ago, to this present, this Isle of
 Ainan 
hath remained annexed to the Scepter of the great
 Chinese. 
And touching that you have further demanded of me concerning the Treasures, and Revenue of this Island, I am able to say no more then what I have learnt of some ancient Personages, who, as I have related before, have governed it in quality of
 Teutons, 
and
 Chaems, 
and I remember they said, that all the Revenues thereof, as well in Mynes of Silver, Customs, and otherways, amounted unto two Millions and an half
 Taeis 
yearly
; And perceiving that our Captain was amazed to hear him speak of so mighty a riches, continuing his discourse, 
Truly, my Masters,
 said he laughing, 
if you make such a matter of that little I have spoken of, what would you do if you saw the great City of
 Pequin, 
where the son of the Sun
 (the name they give to their King) 
with his Court is always resident, and where the Revenues of two and thirty Kingdoms, that depend on this Monarchy, are received, of which out of fourscore and six Mynes of Gold and Silver only is annually drawn above fifteen thousand
 Picos, 
which according to our weight comes to twenty thousand quintals?
 After 
Antonio de Faria
 had given him many thanks for satisfying him so fully in his demands, he d
sired him to tell him in what Port he would advise him to go and sell his Commodities, seeing the season was not proper to set sail for 
Liampoo.
 Whereunto he answered, that we were not to go into any Port of that Country, nor to put trust in any 
Chinese
 whatsoever; for I assure you, said he, there is not one of them will speak truth in any thing he says to you, and believe me, for I am rich, and will not lye to you like a poor man; besides, I would wish you to go in this Straight always with the plummet in your


hand for to sound your way, because there are very many dangerous shelvs all along till you come to a River called 
Tanauquir,
 and there is a Port where is very good anchoring, and where you may be as safe as you can desire, as also you may there, in less then two days, put off all your commodities, and much more if you had them. Nevertheless I will not counsel you to dis∣imbarque your goods on land, but to sell them in your Vessels, in regard that many times the sight causeth desire, and desire disorder amongst peaceable persons, much more with them that are mutinous and of an evil conscience, whose wicked inclination carries them rather to take away another mans goods from him, then give of their own to the needy for Gods sake. This said, both he that spake, and those that accompanyed him, took leave of our Captain, and us, with many complements and promises, whereof they are not ordinarily very sparing in those parts, bestowing on 
Antonio de Faria,
 in return of that he had given them, a little Box made of a Tortoise shell, full of seed-pearl, and twelve pearls of a pretty bigness, craving his par∣don for that they durst not traffique with him in this place, for fear lest if they should do so, to be all put to death, conformably to the Law of the rigorous justice of the Country; and they again intreated him to make haste away before the 
Mandarims
 arrival with his Army, for if he found him there, he would burn both his Vessel, and him and all his company. 
Antonio de Faria
 unwilling to neglect the counsel of this man, lest that which he told him should prove true, he set sail immediately, and passed to the other side towards the South, and in two days with a Westerly wind he arrived at the River of 
Tanauquir,
 where just over against a little village, called 
Neytor,
 he cast anchor.


We remained all that day, and the next night, at the mouth of the River of 
Tanauquir,
 in∣tending the next morning to sail up to the Town, which was some five leagues from thence in the River, to see if by any means we might put off our commodities there, for our Vessels were so heavy laden with them, as there was scarce a day wherein we ran not twice or thrice on some shelve or other, which in divers places were four or five leagues long, wherefore it was con∣cluded that before we did any thing else we were to sell away our commodities, so that we la∣bored with all our might to get into the River, whose current was so strong, that though we had all our sails up, yet could we prevail but very little against it; As we were in this pain we perceived two great Junks in warlike manner come out of the River upon us, which chaining themselves together for the more strength, attaqued us so lively, as we had scarce the leasure to defend our selves, so that we were constrained to throw into the Sea all that stood in our way to make room for our artillery, being that we had then most need of: The first salutation we had from them was a peal of six and twenty pieces of Ordnance, whereof nine were Falconets, and field-pieces: 
Antonio de Faria,
 as a man verst in such affairs, seeing them chained one to another, perceived their drift, and therefore made as though he fled, as well to win time to prepare himself, as to make them beleeve that they were no Christians; whereupon they, like cunning thieves, desi
ing that the prey, which they held to be surely their own, should not escape out of their hands, loosed themselves the one from the other the better to set upon us, and approaching very near to us, they shot so many arrows and darts into our Junk, as no man was able to appear upon the deck: 
Antonio de Faria,
 to avoyd this storm, retired under the half deck, with five and twenty Soldiers, and some ten or twelve others, Slaves and Mariners; there he entertained the Enemy with Harquebuse shot the space of half an hour, in which time, having used all their munitions of war, some forty of them, that seemed to be more va∣liant then the rest, longing to finish their enterprize, leaped into our Junk, with a purpose to make themselves master of the prow; but to hinder them from it, our Captain was constrained to go and receive them, so that there began a most bloody fight, wherein it pleased God with∣in an hour to give us the upper hand by the sl
ughter of four and twenty of their forty in the place: Thereupon twenty of ours, pursuing this good success, boarded the Enemies Junk, where finding but small resistance, by reason the principals were already slain, all that were in her quickly rendred themselves unto us. That done, 
Antonio de Faria
 went with all speed to succor 
Christovano Borral
o,
 who was boarded by the other Junk, and very doubtful of the victory, in regard the greatest part of his men were hurt, but at our approach the Enemies threw themselves all into the Sea, where most of them were drowned, and so both the Junks remained in our power. After this we took a survey of our company, the b
tter to understand what this victory had cost us, and we found there was one 
Portugal,
 five Boys, and nine Mariners killed, besides those that were hurt: and on the Enemies part fourscore were slain, and almost as many taken. Having given order then for the dressing and accommodating of our


wounded men in the best manner that could be, 
Antonio de Faria
 caused as many Mariners to be taken up as could be saved, and commanding them to be brought into the great Junk where he was, he demanded of them what those Junks were, how the Captain of them was named, and whether he were alive or dead, whereunto not one of them would make any answer, but chose rather to dye in torments like mad dogs, when as 
Christovano Borralho
 cryed out from the Junk where he was, 
Signior, Signior, come hither quickly, for we have more to do then we think of
; whereat 
Antonio de Faria,
 accompanyed with fifteen or sixteen of his men, leapt into his Junk, asking what the matter was? 
I hear a many talking together,
 said he, 
towards the prow, which I doubt are hidden there
; hereupon opening the scuttle, they heard divers cry out, 
Lord Iesus have mercy upon us
; and that in such a woful manner, as struck u
 all with pity: 
Antonio de Faria
 approaching to the scuttle, and looking down, could perceive some persons there shut up, but not able to discern what they might be▪ he made two of his boys to go down, who a little after brought up seventeen Christians, namely two 
Portugals,
 five small children, two girls, and eight boys, which were in such a lamentable case, as would have grieved any heart to have beheld them; The first thing he did was to cause their Irons to be strucken off, and then he enquired of one of the 
Portugals
 (for the other was like a man dead) unto whom those children appertained, and how they fell into the hands of this Pyrat, as also what his name was. Whereunto he answered, that the Pyrat had two names, the one Christian, the other Pagan, and that his Pagan name, wherewith he used to be called of late, was 
Necoda Nicau∣lem,
 and his Christian name 
Francisco d
 Saa,
 being Christned at 
Malaca,
 at such time as 
Garcia de Saa
 was Captain of the Fortress, and for that he was his godfather, and had caused him to be baptized, he gave him that name, and marryed him to an orphan maid, a very hand∣som wench, the daughter of an honorable 
Portugal,
 to oblige him the more to our Religion and Country; but in the year 1534. setting sail for 
China
 in a great Junk of his, wherein there accompanyed him twenty of the wealthiest 
Portugals
 of 
Malaca,
 as also his wife, and arriving at the Island of 
Pullo Cat
n,
 they stayd two days to take in fresh water, during which time he and his Company, who were all 
Chineses
 like himself, and no better Christians, con∣spired the death of the poor 
Portugals
 for to despoyl them of their goods, so that one night whil'st the 
Portugals
 were asleep, and little dream'd of such Treason, they killed them all with their little hatchets, and their servants likewise, not sparing the life of any one that bore the name of a Christian; after which, he perswaded, with his wife, to turn Pagan, and adore an Idol, that 
Tucan,
 Captain of the Junk, had concealed in his chest, and that then being free from the Christian Religion he would marry her to 
Tucan,
 who in exchang
 would give him a sister of hi
to wife, that was a 
Chinese,
 and there with him. But in regard she would nei∣ther adore the Idol, nor consent to the rest, the dog struck her over the head with his hatchet till her brains fl
w out, and then departing from thence went to the Port of 
Liampoo,
 where the same year before he had traded; and not daring to go to 
Patana,
 for fear of the 
Portugals
 that resided there, he wintered at 
Siam,
 and the year following he returned to the Port of 
Chincheo,
 where he took a little Junk that came from 
Su
da,
 with ten 
Portugals
 in her, all which he slew; And because the wickedness that he had done us was known over all the Coun∣try, doubting to encounter some 
Portugal
 forces, he had retired himself into this straight of 
Cauche
china,
 where as a Merchant he traded, and as a Pyrat robbed those he met withall that were weaker then himself. It being now three years since he had taken this River for a refuge of his Robberies, thinking himself secure here from us 
Portugals,
 by reason we have not used to traffique in the Ports of this straight, and Island of 
Ainan. Antonio de Faria
 asked of him whether those children belonged to the 
Portugals
 he had mentioned before; whereunto he answered, that they did not, but that both they, and the boys and girls, were the children of 
Nuno Preto, Gian de Diaz,
 and of 
Pero B
rges,
 whom he had killed at 
Mompollacota,
 near the mouth of the River of 
Siam
 in 
Ioano Oliveyra's
 Junk, where he also put sixteen 
Portu∣gals
 more to death, only he saved their two lives, because one was a shipwright, and the other a Caulker, and had carryed them along with him in this manner, continually whipping, and almost famishing of them; further he said, that when he set upon us, he did not think we had been 
Portugal
,
 but some 
Chinese
 Merchant, like such as he had accustomed to rob when he found them at advantage, as he thought to have found us. 
Antonio de Faria
 demanded of him, whether he could know the Pyrat amongst those other dead bodies? Having replyed that he could, the Captain presently arose, and taking him by the hand, went with him into the other Junk, that was fastned to his, and having made him view all that lay dead upon the hatches, he


said that it was none of them. Whereupon he commanded a Manchuas, which is a little boat, to be made ready, wherein he and this man went and sought for him amongst the other dead bodies that floated on the water, where they found him with a great cut over his head, and a thrust quite through the body; so causing him to be taken up, and layd upon the hatches, he demanded of that man again, if he were sure that this was he, who answered, how without doubt it was he. Whereunto 
Antonio de Faria
 gave the more credit, by reason of a great chain of gold he had about his neck, to which was fastned an Idol of gold with two heads, made in the form of a Lizard, having the tail and paws enammelled with green and black, and com∣manding him to be drawn towards the prow, he caused his head to be chopt off, and the rest of the body to be cut in pieces, which were cast into the Sea.


Having obtained this victory in the manner I have before declared, caused our hurt men to be drest, and provided for the guard of our Captains, we took an Inventory of the goods that were in these two Junks, and found that our prize was worth forty thousand 
Taeis,
 which was immediately committed to the charge of 
Antonio Borges,
 who was Factor for the Prizes. Both the Junks were great and good, yet were we constrained to burn one of them for want of Mariners to man it: There was in them besides seventeen pieces of brass Ordnance, namely four Faulconets, and thirteen small pieces, the most part whereof had the Royal Arms of 
Portugal
 upon them, for the Pyrat had taken them in the three ships where he killed the forty 
Portugals.
 The next day 
Antonio de Faria
 went about once more to get into the River, but he was advised by fishermen, which he took a little before, that he should beware of going to the Town, because they were advised there of all that had passed betwixt him and the renegado Pyrat, for whose death the people were in an uproar, in so much that if he would let them have his commodities for nothing, yet would they not take them, in regard that 
Chileu,
 the Governor of that Province, had contracted with him, to give him the third part of all the prizes he took, in lieu whereof he would render him a safe retreat in his Country; so that his loss now being great by the death of the Pyrat, he should be but badly welcomed by him, and to that purpose had already commanded two great Rafts, covered with dry wood, barrels of pitch, and other combustible stuff, to be placed at the entering into the Port, that were to be kindled and sent down upon us, as soon as we had cast anchor, for to fire us, besides two hun∣dred 
Paraos,
 full of shot, and men of war were also in readiness to assault us. These news made 
Antonio de Faria
 conclude to make away unto another Port, named 
Mutipinan,
 distant from thence above 
orty leagues towards the East, for that there were many rich Merchants, as well Natives as Strangers, which came in great Troops from the Countries of 
Laubos, Pafuaas,
 and 
Gu
os,
 with great sums of mony. So we set sail with the three Junks, and the Lor
h, wherein we came from 
Patana,
 coasting the Land from one side to the other, by reason of a contrary wind, until we arrived at a place called 
Tilaumera,
 where we anchored, for that the current of the water ran very strong against us. After we had continued so three days together, with a contrary wind, and in great want of victual, our good fortune about Evening brought four 
Lanteaas
 unto us, that are like unto Foysts, in one of the which was a Bride, that was go∣ing to a Village, named 
Pandurea:
 Now because they were all in jollity, they had so many Drums beating aboard them, as it was almost impossible to hear one another for the noise they made. Whereupon we were in great doubt what this might be, and wherefore there was such triumphing; some thought that they were spies sent from the Captain of 
Tanauquir's
 Army, who insulting, for that we were already in their power, gave this testimony thereof. 
Antonio de Faria
 left his anchors in the Sea, and preparing himself to sustain all that might happen unto him, he displayed all his Banners and Flags, and with demonstration of joy attended the arri∣val of these 
Lanteaas,
 who when they perceived us to be all together, imagining it was the Bridegroom that stay'd to receive them, they came joyfully towards us. So after we had salu∣ted one another after the manner of the Country, they went and anchored by the shore. And because we could not comprehend the mystery of this affair, all our Captains concluded that they were spies from the Enemies Army, which forbore assaulting us in expectation of some other Vessels that were also to come; In this suspicion we spent the little remainder of that Evening, and almost two hours of the night: But then the Bride, seeing that her Spouse sent not to visit her, as was his part to do, to shew the love she bore him she sent her Uncle in one of the 
Lanteaas
 with a Letter to him, containing these words. 
If the feeble sex of a woman would permit me to go from the place where I am for to see thy face, without reproach to mine honor, assure thy self that to kiss thy tardy feet my body would fly as doth the hungry Faulcon


after the fearful Heron; But since I am parted from my fathers house, for to seek thee out here, come thy self hither to me, where indeed I am not, for I cannot see my self, but in see∣ing thee; Now if thou dost not come to see me in the obscurity of this night, making it bright for me, I fear that to morrow morning when thou arrivest here, thou shalt not find me living. My Vncle
 Licorpinau 
will more particularly acquaint thee with what I keep concealed in my heart, for I am not able to say any more, such is my grief to be so long deprived of thy so much desired sight; Wherefore I pray thee come unto me, or permit me to come unto thee, as the greatness of my love to thee doth deserve, and as thou art obliged to do unto her, whom now thou art to possess in marriage until death, from which Almighty God of his infinite good∣ness keep thee as many years, as the Sun and Moon have made turns about the World since the beginning of their birth.
 This 
Lanteaa
 being arrived with the Brides Uncle and Letter, 
Antonio de Faria
 caused all the 
Portugals
 to hide themselves, suffering none to appear but our 
Chinese
 Mariners, to the end they might not be afraid of us; To our Junk then they ap∣proached with confidence, and three of them coming aboard us, asked where the Bridegroom was? All the answer we made them was to lay hold of them, and clap them presently under hatches; now because the most part of them were drunk, those that were in the 
Lanteaa
 ne∣ver heard our bustling with them, nor if they had, could they have had time to escape, for sud∣denly from the top of our poup we fastned a cable to their mast, whereby they were so arrest∣ed, as it was impossible for them to get loose of us; whereupon casting in some pots of pow∣der amongst them, the most of them leapt into the Sea, by which time six or seven of our Sol∣diers, and as many Mariners, got into the 
Lanteaa,
 and straight rendred themselves masters of her, where the next thing they did was to take up the poor wretches, who cryed out that they drowned: Having made them sure, 
Antonio de Faria
 went towards the other three 
Lanteaas,
 that anchored some quarter of a league from thence, and coming to the first, wherein was the Bride, he entred her without any resistance, in regard there were none other in her but a few Mariners, and six or seven men, that seemed to be of good reckoning, all of kin to the Bride, being there only to accompany her, together with two little boys her brothers, that were very white, and certain ancient women, of such as in 
China
 are hired for mony to dance, sing, and play of instruments upon like festival occasions. The other two 
Lanteaas
 beholding this sad success, left their anchors in the Sea, and fled in such haste, as if the Devil had been in them, but for all that we took one of them, so that we had three of the four: This done, we re∣turned aboard our Junk, and by reason it was now midnight, we did nothing for the present but take our prisoners, and shut them up under the hatches, where they remained until day, that 
Antonio de Faria
 came to view them, and seeing they were most of them aged, full of sorrow, and fit for nothing, he caused them to be set a shore, retaining only the Bride, and her two brothers, because they were young, white, and well-favored, and some twenty Mariners, which afterwards were of great use to us for the navigation of our Junks. This Bride, as since we learned, was daughter to the 
A
chary
 of 
Colem
 (which signifies Governor) and betroth∣ed to a youth, the son of the 
Chifuu,
 Captain of 
Pandurea,
 who had written unto her that he would attend her in this place with three or four Junks of his fathers, who was very rich, but alass! we shamefully cozened him. After dinner, being departed from thence, the Bride∣groom arrived, seeking for his Bride with five sail full of Flags, Streamers, and Banners; Passing by us, he saluted us with great store of musick, and shews of gladness, ignorant of his misfortune, and that we carryed away his wife. In this jollity he doubled the Cape of 
Ti∣la
mera,
 where the day before we took this prize, and there anchored attending his Bride, according as he had written to her, whil'st we sailing on arrived three days after at the Port of 
Muti
iman,
 which was the place we aymed at, in regard of the advice that 
Antonio de Fa∣ria
 had, that there he might sell off his commodities.








CHAP. XVII. 
Antonio de Faria
's Arrival at the Port: The Information that 
Antonio de Faria
 had of the Country; some passages between him and the Nautarel of the Town; his going to the River of 
Madel
; with his incountring a Pyrat there, and that which passed betwixt them.


BEing arrived at this Port we anchored in a Rode, which the Land makes near to a little Island on the South side of the mouth of the River, at the entry whereinto we remained without saluting the Port, or making any noise, intending as soon as it was night to send for to sound the River, and to be informed of that we desired to know. Upon the appearing of the Moon, which was about eleven of the clock, 
Antonio de Faria
 sent away one of his 
Lanteaas,
 well furnished, and twelve Soldiers in her, besides the Captain, named 
Valentino Martins Dalpoem,
 a discreet man, and of great courage, that at other times had given good proof of himself in like occasions, who departing went always sounding the depth of the River, until he arrived where divers Vessels rode at anchor; There he took two men that were sleeping in a Barque laden with earthen ware, and returning aboard undiscovered he rendred 
Antonio de Faria
 an accompt of what he had found touching the greatness of the place, and the fewness of the Ships that were in the Port, wherefore his opinion was, that he might boldly enter into it, and if it happened he could not trade there as he desired, no body could hinder him from issuing forth whensoever he pleased, by reason the River was very large, clean, and without any shelves, sands, or other things that might endanger him. Having consulted then with his company, he concluded by their advice, not to put the two 
Mahometans,
 that were taken, to torture, as was before ordained, because there was no need of it; Day being come, 
Anto∣nio de Faria
 desiring, before he stirred, to be informed from those two 
Mahometans
 of some particulars he would fain know, and thinking he might sooner prevail with them by fair mean
, then by menaces and torment, he made very much of them, and then declared his mind: Whereupon both of them with one accord said, that touching the entrance of the River there was nothing to be feared, in regard it was one of the best in all that Bay, and that ordinarily far greater Vessels then his went in and out there, for that the shallowest place was fifteen fathom at the least, and as for the people of the Country he was not to stand in any doubt of them, by reason they were naturally weak, and without arms; And that the strangers, which were at that instant there, arrived some nine days before from the Kingdom of 
Benan
 in two Companies of fifty Oxen a piece, laden with store of Silver, Wood of Aloes, Cloth, Silk, Linnen, Ivory, Wax, Lacre, Benjamin, Camphire, and Gold in Powder, like to that of the Isl
nd of 
Sama∣tra,
 who were come with th
 Merchandise to buy Pepper, Drugs, and Pearls of the Isle of 
Ainan.
 Being demanded whether there was any Army in those parts, they answered No, because most of the Wars, which the 
Prechau,
 that is, the Emperor of the 
Ca
chins,
 made, or were made against him, were by Land; and that when any was made upon the Rivers it was always with little Vessels, and not with such great Ships as his, for that they were not deep enough for them: Further being asked, whether the 
Prechau
 was near to that place, they replyed, that he was twelve days journey from thence, at the City of 
Quangepaar
,
 where most commonly he with his Court resided, governing his Kingdom in Peace and Justice, and that the Mynes, reserved for his Crown, rendred him in yearly 
ent fifteen thousand 
Pic
s
 of Silver, every 
Pico
 weighing five quintals, the moy
y whereof by the divine Law, inviolably observed in his Countries, was for the poor Laborers, that tilled the ground, to sustain their families withall, but that all his people by a general consent h
d freely relinquished that right unto him, upon condition, that from thence-forward he should not constrain them to pay tri∣bute, or any other thing that might concern them, and that the ancient 
Prechaus
 had protested to accomplish it as long as the Sun should give light to the Earth. 
Antonio de Faria
 further demanded of them, what belief they were of, whereunto they answered, that they hold the very verity of all verities, and that they believed there was but one God Almighty, who as he had created all, so he preserved all; howbeit if at any time our understandings were intangled with the disorder and discord of our desires, that no way proceeded from the soveraign Crea∣tor, in whom was no imperfection, but only from the sinner himself, that out of his impati∣ence judged according to the wicked inclination of his heart. Moreover asking of them, whe∣ther in their Law they believed, that the great God, which governeth this All, came at any time


into the world, clothed with a humane form, they said No, because there could be nothing that might oblige him to so great an extremity, in regard he was through the excellency of the divine Nature delivered from our miseries, and far esloigned from the Treasures of the Earth, all things being more then base in the presence of his splendor. By these answers of theirs, we perceived that these people had never attained to any knowledg of our truth, more then their eyes made them to see in the picture of Heaven, and in the beauty of the day, for continually in their 
Com∣bayes,
 which are their prayers, lifting up their hands they say, 
By thy works, Lord, we confess thy greatness.
 After this 
Antonio de Faria
 set them at liberty, and having given them certain presents, wherewith they were very well pleased, he caused them to be conveyed to Land; that done, the wind beginning a little to rise he set sail, having all his Vessels ado
ned with di∣vers coloured Silks, their Banners, Flags and Streamers displayed, and a Standart of Trade hung out after the manner of the Country, to the end they might be taken for Merchants, and not for Pyrats, and so an hour after he anchored just against the Key of the Town, which he saluted with a little peal of Ordnance, whereupon ten or eleven 
Almadiaes
 came presently to us with good store of refreshments; Howbeit finding us to be strangers, and discerning by our habits that we were neither 
Siams, Iaos,
 nor 
Malayos,
 nor yet of any other Nation that ever they had seen, they said one to another, 
Please Heaven, that the dew of the fresh morning may be as profitable to us all, as this evening seems fair with the presence of these whom our eyes be∣hold.
 Having said thus, one of the 
Almadiaes
 asked leave to come aboard us, which they were told they might do, because we were all their brothers, so that three of nine, which were in that 
Almadia,
 entred into our Junk, whom 
Antonio de Faria
 received very kindly, and causing them to sit down upon a Turky Carpet by him, he told them, that he was a Mer∣chant of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 and going with his goods towards the Isle of 
Ainan
 he had been advertised, that he might better and more securely sell off his Commodities in this Town, then in any other place, because the Merchants thereof were juster and truer of their word, then the 
Chineses
 of the Coast of 
Ainan
; Whereunto they thus answered, 
Thou art not deceived in that which thou sayst, for if thou be a Merchant, as thou affirmest, beleeve it, that in every thing and every where thou shalt be honored in this place, wherefore thou mayst sleep without fear.


Antonio de Faria
 mistrusting some intelligence might come over Land concerning that which he had done to the Pyrat upon the River of 
Tanauquir,
 and so might work him some prejudice, would not dis-imbarque his goods, as the Officers of the Custom-house would have had him, which was the cause of much displeasure and vexation to him afterward, so that his business was twice interrupted by that means, wherefore perceiving that good words would not serve to make them consent to his Propositions, he sent them word by a Merchant, who dealt between them, that he knew well enough they had a great deal of reason to require the landing of his goods, because it was the usual course for every one so to do; But he assured them, that he could not possibly do it, in regard the season was almost past, and therefore he was of necessity to hasten his departure as soon as might be, the rather too for the accommo∣dating of the Junk wherein he came, for as much as she took in so much water, that threescore Mariners were always laboring at three pumps to clear her, whereby he ran a great hazard of losing all his goods; And that touching the Kings Customs he was contented to pay them, not after thirty in the hundred, as they demanded, but after ten, as they did in other Kingdoms, and so much he would pay presently and willingly. To this offer they rendred no answer, but detained him that carried the message prisoner; 
Antonio de Faria,
 seeing that his messenger re∣turned not, set s
il immediately, hanging forth a number of flags, as one that cared not whe∣ther he sold or no; Whereupon the Merchants strangers, that were come thither to trade, per∣ceiving the Commodities, of which they hoped to make some profit, to be going out of the Port, through the perversness and obstinacy of the 
Nautarel
 of the Town, they went all to him, and desired him to recall 
Antonio de Faria,
 otherwise they protested to complain to the King of the injustice he did them, in being the cause of hindring their Traffique. The 
Nau∣tarel,
 that is the Governor, with all the Officers of the Custom-house, fearing left they might upon this occasion be turned out of their places, condescended to their request, upon condition, since we would pay but ten in the hundred, that they should pay five more, whereunto they agreed, and instantly sent away the Merchant, whom they had detained prisoner, with a Letter full of complements, wherein they declared the agreement they had made. 
Antonio de Faria
 answered them, that since he was out of the Port, he would not re-enter it upon any terms,


by reason he had not leasure to make any stay, howbeit if they would buy his Commodities in gross, bringing lingots of silver with them for that purpose, he would sell them to them, and in no other manner would deal, for he was much distasted with the little respect the 
Nautarel
 of the Town had carried towards him, by despising his messages; and if they were contented to accept thereof, that then they should let him know so much within an hour at the farthest, otherwise he would sail away to 
Ainan,
 where he might put off his Commodities far better then there. They finding him so resolved, and doubting to lose so fair an occasion, as this was, for them to return into their Country, embarqued themselves in five great Lighters with forty chests full of lingots of silver, and a many sacks to bring away the Pepper, and arriving at 
An∣tonio de Faria
's Junk, they were very well received by him, unto whom they represented anew the agreement they had made with the 
Nautarel
 of the Town, greatly complaining of his ill Government, and of some wrongs, which without all reason he had done them; but since they had pacified him by consenting to give him fifteen in the hundred, whereof they would pay five, they desired him to pay the ten, as he had promised, for otherways they could not buy his Commodities. Whereunto 
Antonio de Faria
 answered, that he was contented so to do, more for the love of them, then for any profit he hoped to reap thereby, for which they gave him many thanks, and so being on all sides agreed they used such diligence in discharging the goods, as in three days the most of it was weighed and consigned into the hands of the owners thereof; whereupon the accompts were made up, and the lingots of silver received, amounting in all to an hundred and thirty thousand 
Taeis,
 after the rate of seven shillings and six pence the 
Taei,
 as I have said elsewhere. And though all possible speed was used herein, yet before all was finished, news came of that which we had done to the Pyrat in the River of 
Tananquir,
 in so much that not one of the inhabitants would come near us afterward, by reason whereof 
Antonio de Faria
 was constrained to set sail in all haste.


After we had quit the River of 
Mutepinan,
 directing our course Northward, 
Antonio de Faria
 thought good to make to the Coast of the Island of 
Ainan,
 for to seek out a River, named 
Madel,
 with a purpose there to accommodate the great Junk, wherein he was, because it took in much water, or provide himself of a better in exchange upon any terms whatsoever; So having sailed for the space of twelve days with a contrary wind, at length he arrived at the Cape of 
Pullo Hinhor,
 which is the Island of Cocos; There hearing no news of the Pyrat he sought for, he returned towards the South Coast, where he took certain Prizes, which were of good value, and well gotten as we thought. For it was the main intention of this Captain to deal with the Pyrat, which frequented this Coast of 
Ainan,
 as they before had done with divers Christians in depriving them of their lives and goods; For as God doth ordinarily draw good out of evil, so it pleased him out of his divine Justice to permit, that 
Antonio de Faria
 in revenge of the Robbery, committed by 
Coia Acem
 upon us in the Port of 
Lugor,
 should in the pursuit of him chastise other Theeves, that deserved to be punished by the hands of the 
Por∣tugals.
 Now having for certain days together with much labor continued our Navigation within this Bay of 
Cauchenchina,
 as we were newly entred into a Port, called 
Madel,
 upon the day of the nativity of our Lady, being the eight of 
September,
 for the fear that we were in of the new Moon, during the which there oftentimes happens in this Climate such a terrible storm of wind and rain, as it is not possible for ships to withstand it, which by the 
Chineses
 is named 
Tufan,
 and that the Sky charged full with Clouds had four days together threatened that which we feared, it pleased God amongst many other Junks that fled into this Port for shelter, there came in one belonging to a notorious 
Chinese
 Pyrat, named 
Hinimilau,
 who of a Gentile, that he had been, was not long before become a 
Mahometan,
 induced thereunto (as it was said) by a 
Cacis
 of that accursed Sect, who had made him such an Enemy to the Christian name, as he vaunted publiquely, that God did owe Heaven unto him for the great service he had done him upon Earth, in depopulating it by little and little of the 
Portugal
 Na∣tion, who from their mothers wombs delighted in their offences, as the very Inhabitants of the smoaky House, a name which they give to Hell; And thus did he with such sayings, and other like blasphemies, speak as villanously and abominably of us as could be imagined. This Pyrat, entring into the River in a very great and tall Junk, came up to us where we rode at anchor, and saluted us after the custom of the Country, whereunto we returned the like, as it is the manner there to do at the entry into any of the Ports, they neither knowing us to be 
Portugals,
 nor we what they were; for we thought they had been 
Chineses,
 and that they came into the Port to shrewd themselves from the storm as others did, whereupon, behold,


five young men, that were Christians, whom this Robber held as Slaves in his Junk, guessing us to be 
Portugals,
 fell a crying out three or four times together, 
Lord, have mercy upon us.
 At these words we all stood up to see who they were, and perceiving them to be Christians, we called aloud to the Mariners for to stay their course, which they would not do, but con∣trarily beating up a Drum, as it were in contempt of us, they gave three great shouts, and withall brandished their naked Scymitars in the ayr in a way of threatening us, and then cast an∣chor some quarter of a league beyond us. 
Antonio de Faria
 desiring to learn the reason hereof, sent a 
Balon
 to them, which no sooner arrived near them, but the barbarous Rogues pelted them with so many stones, that the Vessel was almost overwhelmed, so that they were glad to return, both Mariners and Soldiers being very sore hurt; 
Antonio de Faria
 seeing them come back all bloody, demanded the cause of it: 
Sir,
 answered they, 
we are not able to tell you, only you behold in what plight we are
; saying so, and shewing him the hurts on their heads, they declared unto him in what manner they had been entertained. At first this accident much troubled 
Antonio de Faria,
 so that he stood musing a good while upon it, but at length turn∣ing himself to them that were present, 
Let every one here,
 said he, 
prepare himself, for I cannot be perswaded but this is that Dog
 Coia Acem, 
who I hope this day shall pay for all the wrong he hath done us.
 Whereupon he commanded presently to weigh anchor, and with all the speed that might be he set sail with the three Junks and Lanteas. Being come within a Mus∣ket shot of them, he saluted them with six and thirty Pieces of Ordnance, whereof twelve were Faulconets, and other Field-pieces, amongst the which was one of Battery, that carried cast Bullets, wherewith the Enemies were so amated, as all the resolution they could take for the instant was to leave their anchors in the Sea, not having leasure to weigh them, and to make to the shoar, wherein also they failed of their desire; for 
Antonio de Faria
 perceiving their design got before them, and boarded their Junk with all the Forces of his Vessels; hereupon began a most furious Combat both with Pikes, Darts, and pots full of Powder thrown from either side, so that for half an hour it could not be discerned who had the better: But at length it pleased God to favor us so much, that the Enemies, finding themselves weary, wounded, and hurt, threw themselves into the Sea. 
Antonio de Faria,
 seeing these wretches ready to sink by reason of the impetuousness and strength of the current, he imbarqued himself with some Soldiers in two Balons, and with much ado saved sixteen men, whereunto he was induced by the great need he stood in of them for the maning of his 
Lanteas,
 because he had lost a great many of his people in the former fights.






CHAP. XVIII. What 
Antonio de Faria
 did with the Captain of the Pyrats Iunk; that which past be∣tween him and the people of the Country; with our casting away upon the Island of Theeves.


ANtonio de Faria
 having obtained this Victory in the manner I have related,
 the first thing he did was to see his hurt men drest, as that which chiefly imported him; then being given to understand that the Pyrat 
Hinimilau,
 the Captain of the Junk he had taken, was one of the sixteen he had saved, he commanded him to be brought before him, and after he had caused him to be drest of two wounds that he had received, he demanded of him what was become of the young 
Portugals
 which he held as Slaves? Whereunto the Pyrat, being mad with rage, having answered that he could not tell, upon the second demand that was made him with menaces, he said, that if first they would give him a little water, in regard he was so dry as he was not able to speak, that then he would consider what answer to make. Thereupon having water brought him, which he drunk so greedily as he spilt the most part of it without quenching his thirst, he desired to have some more given him, protesting, that if they would let him drink his fill, he would oblige himself by the Law of 
Mahomets Alcoran
 voluntarily to confess all that they desired to know of him. 
Antonio de Faria,
 having given him as much as he would drink, questioned him again about the young Christians, whereto he replyed, that he should find them in the chamber of the prow; thereupon he commanded three Soldiers to go thither and fetch them, who had no sooner opened the scuttle to bid them come up, but they saw them lie dead in the place with their throats cut, which made them cry out, 
Iesus, Iesus, come hither we beseech you, Sir, and behold a most lamentable spectacle
; hereat 
Antonio de Faria,
 and those that were with him, ran thither, and beholding those youths lying so o
e


upon another, he could not forbear shedding of tears; having caused them then to be brought upon the deck, together with a woman and two pretty children, about seven or eight years old, that had their throats also cut, he demanded of the Pyrat why he had used such cruelty to those poor innocents: Whereunto he answered, that it was because they were Traytors, in discover∣ing themselves to those, which were such great Enemies to him as the 
Portugals
 were, and also for that having heard them call upon their Christ for help, he desired to see whether he would deliver them; as for the two infants, there was cause enough to kill them, for that they were the childr
n of 
Portugals,
 whom he ever hated: with the like extravagancy he an∣swered to many other questions, which were propounded to him, and that with so much obstinacy as if he had been a very Devil. Afterwards being asked whether▪ he were a Christian, he answered, no, but that he had been one at such time as 
Don Paulo de Ga∣ma
 was Captain of 
Malaca.
 Whereupon 
Antonio de Faria
 demanded of him, what moved him, since he had been a Christian, to forsake the Law of 
Iesus Christ,
 wherein he was assured of his salvation, for to embrace that of the false Prophet 
Mahomet,
 from whence he could hope for nothing but the loss of his Soul. Thereunto he answered, that he was induced so to do, for that so long as he was a Christian, the 
Portugals
 had al∣ways contemned him, whereas before when he was a 
Gentile
 they called him 
Quiay Ne∣coda,
 that is to say, 
Signior
 Captain, but that respect immediately upon his Baptism for∣sook him, which he verily believed did arrive to him by 
Mahomets
 express permission, to the end it should open his eyes to turn 
Mahometan,
 as after he did at 
Bintan,
 where the King of 
Iantana
 was in person present at the ceremony, and that ever since he had much honored him, and that all the 
Mandarins
 called him brother, in regard of the vow he had made upon the holy Book of Flowers, that as long as he lived he would be a sworn Enemy to the 
Portugals,
 and of all others that profest the Name of Christ, for which both the King and the 
Cacis Moulana
 had exceedingly cōmended him, promising that his Soul should be most blessed if he performed that vow. Being likewise demanded how long ago it was since he revolted, what 
Portugal
 Ves∣sels he had taken, how many men he had put to death, and what Merchandize he had despoyled them of? He answered, that it was seven years since he became a 
Mahometan
; that the first Vessel he took was 
Luiso de Pavia's
 Junk, which he surprized in the River of 
Liamp
o
 with four hundred Bars of Pepper only, and no other spice, whereof having made himself master, that he had put to death eighteen 
Portugals,
 besides their slaves, of whom he made no reckon∣ing, because they were not such as could satisfie the Oath he had made; That after this prize he had taken four ships, and in them put to death above an hundred persons, amongst whom there was some threescore and ten 
Portugals,
 and that he thought the Merchandize in them amount∣ed to fifteen or sixteen hundred Bars of Pepper, whereof the King of 
Pan
 had the better moity for to give him a safe retrait in his Ports, and to secure him from the 
Portugals,
 giving him to that purpose an hundred men, with commandment to obey him as their King. Being further demanded, whether he had not killed any 
Portugals,
 or lent an hand for the doing thereof, he said no, but that some two years before, being in the River of 
Choaboquec
 on the Coast of 
China,
 a great Junk arrived there with a great many 
Portugals
 in her, whereof an intimate friend of his, named 
Ruy Lobo,
 was Captain, whom 
Don Estevan de Gama,
 then Governor of the Fortress of 
Malaca,
 had sent thither in the way of commerce, and that upon the sale of his commodities going out of the Port, his Junk about five days after took so great a leak, as not being able to clear her, he was constrained to return towards the same Port from whence he parted, but that by ill fortune clapping on all his sails to get the sooner to Land, she was overset by the violence of the wind, so as all were cast away saving 
Ruy Lobo,
 seventeen 
Portu∣gals,
 and some slaves, who in their skiff made for the Island of 
Laman,
 without sail, without wa∣ter, or 
ny manner of victual; That in this extremity 
Ruy Lobo,
 relying on the ancient friendship that was between them, came with tears in his eyes, and pray'd him on his knees to receive him and his into his Junk, which was then ready to set sail for 
Patana,
 whereunto he agreed upon condition that therefore he should give him two thousand duckets, for the performance where∣of he bound himself by his Oath of a Christian. But that after he had taken them in, he was counselled by the 
Mahometans
 not to trust unto the friendship of Christians, lest he might en∣danger his own life, for when they had recovered strength, they would without doubt seize upon his Junk, and all the goods that were in her, it being their usual custom so to do in all places where they found themselves the strongest: wherefore fearing lest that which the 
Maho∣metans
 suggested should befall him, he slew them all on a night as they slept, for the which not∣withstanding


he was sorry afterwards. This declaration so much incensed 
Antonio de Faria,
 and all that were about him, as indeed the enormity of so wicked a fact did require, that pre∣sently, without questioning or hearing of him further, he commanded him to be put to death with four more of his company, and so they were all thrown into the Sea.


This justice being executed on the Pyrat and his four companions,
 
Antonio de Faria
 caused an Inventory to be taken of all that was in the Junk, which was adjudged to amount unto forty thousand 
Taeis
 
o raw and twisted Silk, pieces of Sattin, Damask, Musk, fine Pource∣lains, and other less valuable commodities, which with the Junk we were constrained to burn, because we wanted Mariners for our navigation. With these valorous exploits the 
Chineses
 were so amazed, as they stood in dread of the very mention of the name of the 
Portugals,
 in so much that the 
Necodae
,
 or Masters, of the Junks, that were in the Port, fearing the like might be done to them, assembled all together in councel; and there making Election of two of the principal amongst them, whom they held most capable of performing their charge, they sent them as Embassadors unto 
Antonio de Faria,
 desiring him, that as King of the Sea he would protect them upon the assurance of his word, so as they might pass safely out of the pl
ce where they were, for to make their voyage whil'st the season served; in consideration whereof, as his Tributar
es, subjects, and slaves, they would give him twenty thousand 
Taeis
 in Ingots of Silver, wherof payment should be made out of hand by way of acknowledging him to be their Lord. 
Antonio de Faria
 received them very courteously, and granting their request, protested and sware to perform the same, and upon his word to protect them for the future from having any of their goods taken from them by any Pyrat. Whereupon one of the Embassadors remained as surety for the twenty thousand 
Taeis,
 and the other went to fetch the Ingots, which he brought an hour after, together with a rich present of many several things sent him over and above by the 
Necodaes.
 This done, 
Antonio de Faria
 desiring to ad∣vance a servant of his, named 
Cost
▪ made him Clark of the Patents that were to be granted to the 
Necodaes,
 whereof he presently set a rate, namely five 
Taeis
 for a Junk, and two 
Ta
is
 for a 
Vaneo, Lanta
,
 and small Barq
e, which proved so beneficial to him, that in the space of thirteen days, wherein these Patents were dispatched, he got (according the report of those that envyed him) above four thousand 
Taeis
 in silver, besides many good gratuities that were given him for expedition: The form of these Patents was thus, 
I give assurance up∣on my word to
 Necoda 
such a one, that he shall sail safely all about the Coast of
 China 
with∣out any disturbance of any that belongs to me, upon condition that wheresoever he meets with any
 Portugals 
he shall 
reat them as brethren
; and underneath he signed, 
Antonio de Faria:
 All which Pa
ents were most exactly observed, and by that means he was so redoubted all a∣long this Coast, as the 
Ch
m
 himself of the Island of 
Ainan,
 who is the Viceroy thereof, up∣on the report which he heard of him, sent to visit him by his Embassador, with a rich present of Pearls and Jewels, as also a Letter, whereby he desired him to take entertainment from the son of the Sun, a name which they give to the Emperor of this Monarchy, for to serve him as Commander General of all the Coast from 
Lamau
 to 
Liampoo,
 with ten thousand 
Taeis
 Pension yearly, and that if he carryed himself well, according to the renown went of him, he assured him that upon the expiration of his three years charge he should be advanced into the rank of the 
Chaems
 of the State, and that such men as he, if they were faithful, might at∣tain to be one of the twelve 
Futoens
 of the Empire, whom the soveraign son of the Sun, be∣ing the Lion crowned on the Throne of the World, admitted to his bed and board, as mem∣bers united to his person by means of the honor, power, and command that he gave them, with an annual Pension of an hundred thousand 
Taeis. Antonio de Faria
 gave him many thanks for this offer, and excused himself with complements after their manner; saying, that he was not capable of so great f
vor as he would honor him withall, but that without any re∣gard at all of mony he would be ready to serve him as often as the 
Tutoens
 of 
Pequin
 would be pleased to command him. After this going out of the Port of 
Mad
l,
 where he had been fourteen days, he ran all along the Coast of that Country for to find out 
Coia Acem,
 it being the main design of all his voyage, as I have declared before: Imagining then that he might meet with him in some of these places, he stayd there above six months, with much pain and h
zard of his person; At length he arrived at a very fair Town, named 
Quangiparu,
 wherein were goodly buildings and Temples: In this Port he abode all that day and the night follow∣ing, under colour of being a Merchant, peaceably buying that which was brought him aboard; And because it was a Town of fifteen hundred fires, as we guessed, the next morning by break


of day we set sail without any great notice taken of us. So returning to Sea, although it were with a contrary wind, in twelve days with a troublesom navigation he visited the shores both of the South and North Coasts, without incountring any thing worthy the observation, al∣though they were replenished with a many of little Villages, whereof divers were inclosed with walls of brick, but not strong enough to withstand the force of thirty good Soldiers, the people of themselves being very weak, and having no other Arms but staves hardned in the fire; howsoever the scituation of this Country was under one of the best and fertilest Climates on the Earth, abounding with great store of cattel, and many goodly large fields, sowed with Wheat, Rice, Barly, Millet, and sundry other kinds of grain; as also replenished with many great groves of Pine, and 
Angeline
 trees, as in the 
Indiaes,
 able to furnish a world of ship∣ing: Moreover, by the relation of certain Merchants, 
Antonio de Faria
 was informed, that in this Land there were many Mynes of Copper, Silver, Tin, Saltpeter, Sulphur, and an infi∣nite deal of untilled, but excellently good ground, altogether neglected by this weak Nation, which were it in our power, we might in all probability be more advanced in the 
Indiaes,
 then now we are through the unhappiness of our sins.


After we had been seven months and an half in this Country, sometimes on the one side, sometimes on the other, from River to River, and on both Coasts, North and South, as also in the Isle of 
Ainan,
 without hearing any news of 
Coia Acem,
 the Soldiers, weary of so long and tedious travel, assembled all together, and desired 
Antonio de Faria
 to make a partition of that which had been gotten, according to a promise before made to them by a note under his hand, saying that thereupon they would return unto the 
Indiaes,
 or where else they thought good, whereby a great deal of stir arose amongst us; At length it was agreed, that we should go and winter in 
Siam,
 where all the goods which were in the Junk should be sold, and being reduced into gold, division should be made of it, as was desired. With this accord, sworn and signed by all, we went and anchored in an Island, called the Island of Thieves, in regard it was the outermost Island of all that Bay, to the end that from thence we might make our voyage with the first fair wind that should blow. So having continued there twelve days with an earnest desire to effect the agreement we had made together, it fortuned, that by the conjunction of the new Moon in 
October,
 which we had always feared, there arose such a tempest of rain and wind, as seemed to be no natural thing, in so much that lying open to the South wind, as we traverst the Coast, the waves went so high, that though we used all means possible to save our selves, cutting down our Masts, and all the dead works from poop to prow, as also casting into the Sea even the most part of our merchandize, reducing our great Ordnance into their places again, out of which they had been toss'd, and strengthening our Cables, that were half rotten, with ropes; But all this was not able to preserve us, for the night was so dark, the weather so cold, the sea so rough, the wind so high, and the storm so horrible, that in these extremities nothing could deliver us but the meer mercy of God, whom with continual cries and tears we called upon for help: But for as much as in regard of our sins we did not de∣serve to receive this grace at his hands, his divine justice ordained, that about two hours after midnight there came such a fearful gust of wind, as drove our four vessels foul one of another upon the shore, where they were all broken to pieces, so that four hundred and fourscore men were drowned, amongst which were eight 
Portugals,
 and it pleased God that the remainder, being fifty three persons, were saved, whereof three and twenty were 
Portugals,
 the rest slaves and Mariners. After this lamentable shipwrack we got half naked, and most of us hurt, into a Marish hard by, where we stay'd till the next morning, and as soon as it was day we return∣ed to the Sea side, which we found all strewed with dead bodies, a spectacle of that dread and horror as scarce any one of us could forbear swooning to behold it; over them we stood lamenting a great while, till such time an 
Antonio de Faria,
 who by the mercy of God was one of those that remained alive, whereof we were all very glad, concealing the grief which we could not dissemble, came where we were, having on a scarlet coat, that he had taken from one of the dead, and with a joyful countenance, his eyes dry and voyd of tears, he made a short speech unto us, wherein he remonstrated how variable and uncertain the things of this world were, and therefore he desired us as Brethren, that we would endevor to forget them, seeing the remembrance of them was but a means to grieve us; for considering the time and 
i
erable estate whereunto we were reduced, we saw how necessary his counsel was: And 
ow he hoped that God would in this desolate place present us with some good opportunity to 
ame our selves, and how we might be assured that he never permitted any evil but for a greater


good; moreover how he firmly believed, that though we had now lost five hundred thousand crowns, we should ere it were long get above six hundred thousand for them. This brief ex∣hortation was heard by us all with tears and discomfort enough, so we spent two days and an half there in burying the dead, during which time we recovered some wet victuals and provi∣sions to sustain us withall, but they lasted not above five days of fifteen that we stayed there, for by reason of their wetness they corrupted presently, and did us little good. After these fif∣teen days it pleased God, who never forsakes them that truly put their trust in him, miracu∣lously to send us a remedy, whereby we escaped out of that misery we were in, as I will de∣clare hereafter.






CHAP. XIX. In what sort we escaped miraculously out of this Island; our passage from thence to the River of 
Xingrau
; our incountring with a 
Chinese
 Pyrat, and the agreement we made with him.


BEing escaped from this miserable shipwrack,
 it was a lamentable thing to see how we walked up and down almost naked, enduring such cruel cold and hunger, that many of us talking one to another fell down suddenly dead with very weakness, which proceeded not so much from want of victuals, as from the eating of such things as were hurtful to us, by reason they were all rotten, and stunk so vilely, that no man could endure the taste of them in his mouth; But as our God is an infinite good, there is no place so remote, or desert, where the misery of sinners can be hid from the assistance of his infinite mercy, which I speak, in regard that on the day when as the feast of S. 
Michael
 is celebrated, as we were drowned in tears, and without hope of any humane help, according as it seemed to the weakness of our little faith, a Kite came unexpectedly flying over our heads from behind a point, which the Island made towards the South, and by chance let fall a fish, called a Mullet, about a foot long. This fish falling close by 
Antonio de Faria,
 it somewhat amazed him till he perceived what it was, so that having considered a little he fell on his knees, and with tears pronounced these words from the bottom of his heart. 
O Lord Iesus Christ, the eternal Son of God, I humbly beseech thee by the sorrows of thy sacred Passion, that thou wilt not suffer us to be overwhelmed with the unbelief, whereinto the misery of our weakness hath cast us; for I hope, and am almost assured, that the same succor which thou didst send unto
 Daniel 
in the Lions den by the hand of thy Pro∣phet
 Abacuc, 
thou wilt grant us at this present out of thy infinite goodness, and not only here, but in every other place, where a sinner shall invoke thy ayd with a firm and true faith; Wherefore, my Lord, and my God, I pray thee, not for mine, but thine own sake, that thou wilt not cast thine eyes on that we have merited from thee, but on that thou hast merited for us, to the end it 
ay please thee to accord us the succor which we hope to receive from thee, and out of thy blessed mercy to send us the means whereby we may get from hence into some Christian Country, where still persevering in the holy Worship of thee, we may for ever continue thy faithful servants.
 This said, he took the Mullet and caused it to be broiled upon coals, and given to such of the sick as had most need of it; Then looking towards the point of the Island from whence the Kite came, we perceived divers others, that in their flying made many stoopings, whence we concluded that there was some kind of prey there whereon these fowls fed; now all of us being most desirous of relief, we went thither in all haste, and com∣ing to the top of the higher ground we discovered a low valley full of divers fruit trees, and in the middle a river of fresh water, whereupon by good fortune before we went down we saw a Stag newly killed, and a Tyger beginning to eat him, therewith we made a great cry, which frighted him away into the Wood, leaving us the Stag as he was; Then descended we to the River, and by the bank of it stayd all that night, making a feast, as well with the Stag, as with divers Mullets that we took there, for there were a great number of Kites, that from the water catched a many of those fishes, and oftentimes let them fall being scared with our cries: Thus continued we by this River till Saturday following, when about the break of day we discerned a Sail making as we thought towards the Island where we were, the better to be assured where∣of we returned to the shoar where we were wracked, and there staying about half an hour, we found it to be so indeed, in which regard we got us presently into the Wood to decline disco∣very from those in the V
ssel, which arriving in the Port we perceived it to be a 
Lantea,
 and that those that were in her fastened her to the shoar with two cables, at the beak and the stern,


the better to accommodate a plank for to pass in and out of her. Being all dis-imbarqued out of her to about the number of thirty persons, more or less, they went presently some to making provision of water and wood, some to washing of their linnen, and dressing of meat, and others to wrastling, and such like pastimes, little thinking to find any body in that place which could any way annoy them. 
Antonio de Faria
 seeing them altogether without fear and order, and that there was none remaining in the Vessel able to resist us; 
My Masters,
 said he unto us, 
you behold the wretched estate whereinto our mis-fortune hath reduced us, whereof I confess my sins are the cause, but the mercy of God is so infinite, as I am verily perswaded he will not suffer us to perish thus miserably here, and therefore hath as it were miraculously sent this Vessel hither, by seizing whereupon we may escape from hence, which before to humane reason seemed almost impossible; wherefore I exhort you all to joyn with me in making our selves Masters suddenly of her ere ever we be heard or seen, and having so done, let our only care be to possess our selves of the Arms we shall find in her, that therewith we may defend our selves, and make good our possession, upon which, next under God, our safety depends; and as soon as you shall hear me say three times,
 Jesus, 
do as you shall see me do:
 Whereunto we answered, that we would diligently perform what he had enjoyned us; so that we standing all prepared to execute his design, 
Antonio de Faria
 gave the signal which he had spoken of, and withall ran as fast as over he could, and we along with him, till he arrived at the 
Lantea,
 whereinto we suddenly entred without any contradiction; then unloosing the two cables with which she was fastened, we put out to Sea about a Crossbow shot from Land. The 
Chineses
 surprized in this manner, ran all to the Sea side upon the noise that they heard, and seeing their Vessel taken, were much amazed, but knew not how to help it, for we shot at them with an Iron Base that was in the 
Lantea,
 which made them fly into the Wood, where no doubt they passed the rest of that day in lamenting the sad success of their ill fortune, as we had done ours be∣fore.


After we were gotten into the 
Lantea,
 and that we were sure the deceived 
Chineses
 could no way hurt us, we sat us down to eat that at leasure which they had caused to be made ready for their dinner by an old man, that we found there, and it was a great Skillet full of Rice with hached Lard, whereunto we fell with good stomacks, as being not a little hungry: Dinner done, and thanks rendred to God for his gracious mercy to us, an Inventory was taken of the goods that were in the 
Lantea,
 which was raw Silks, Damasks, Sattins, together with three great pots of Musk, amounting in all to the value of four thousand Crowns, besides good store of Rice, Sugar, Gammons of Bacon, and two Coups full of Poultry, whereof we had more need then of all the rest for the recovery of our sick men, which were not a few amongst us. Hereupon we all began without fear to cut out pieces of Silk, therewith to accommodate every one with clothes. 
Antonio de Faria,
 having found a pretty boy in the 
Lantea,
 about some twelve or thirteen years old, demanded of him from whence she came, and what she did in this place, as also to whom she belonged, and whither she was bound. 
Alas!
 answered the boy, 
she not long since belonged to my unfortunate Father, whose ill hap it is to have that taken from him by you in less then an hour, which he hath been above thirty years in getting: He came from a place, called
 Quoaman, 
where in exchange of lingots of Silver he bought all th
se Commodities, that you have, with a purpose to have gone and sold them to the Iunks of
 Siam, 
which are in the Port of
 Comhay; 
And wanting fresh water, it was his ill hap to come hither for to take in some, where you have robbed him of all that he hath without any fear at all of the divine Iustice.
 Whereupon 
Antonio de Faria
 bade him leave weeping, and making much of him promised to use him as his own son, and that he would always account him so; Here
 smiling as it were in disdain, he answered, 
Think not though I am but a child, that I am so foolish to beleeve, that having robbed my Father, thou canst ever use me like thy son: But if thou wilt do as thou sayst, I beseech thee for the love of thy God suffer me to swim unto that sad Land where he remains that begot me, who indeed is my true father, with whom I had rather dye where I see him lamenting, then live with such wicked people as you are.
 Then some of them that were present reprehending and telling him that it was not well spoken; 
Would you know,
 replyed he, 
why I said so? it was because I saw you after you had filled your bellies praise God with lifted up hands, and yet for all that like hypocrites never care for ma∣king restitution of that you have stollen; but he assured, that after death you shall feel the ri∣gorous chastisement of the Lord Almighty for so unjustly taking mens goods from them
. Antonio de Faria
 admiring the childs speech, asked him whether he would become a Christian?


Whereunto, earnestly beholding him, he answered, 
I understand not what you say, nor that you propound; declare it first unto me, and then you shall know my mind further.
 Then 
An∣tonio de Faria
 began to instruct him therein after the best manner he could, but the boy would not answer him a word, only lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven he said weeping, 
Blessed be thy Power, O Lord, that permits such people to live on the Earth▪ that speak so well of thee, and yet so ill observe thy Law, as these blinded Miscreants do, who think that robbing and preaching are things that can be acceptable to thee.
 Having said so, he got him into a corner, and there remained weeping for three days together without eating any thing that was presented unto him. Hereupon falling to consult whether were the best course for us to hold from this place, either Northward, or Southward, much dispute arose thereabout, at length it was concluded that we should go to 
Liampoo,
 a Port distant from thence Northwards two hundred and threescore leagues, for we hoped that along this Coast we might happen to in∣counter and seize on some other greater and more commodious Vessel then that we had, which was too little for so long a Voyage, in regard of the dangerous storms that are ordinarily caused by the new Moons on the Coast of 
China,
 where dayly many Ships are cast away. With this design we put to Sea about Sun-set, and so went on this night with a South-west wind, and before day we discovered a little Island, named 
Quintoo,
 where we surprized a fisher-boat full of fresh fish, of which we took as much as we had need of, as also eight of twelve men that were in her for the service of our 
Lantea,
 by reason our own were so feeble as they were not able to hold out any longer. These eight fishermen, being demanded what Ports there were on this Coast to 
Chincheo,
 where we thought we might meet with some Ship of 
Malaca,
 an∣swered, that about eighteen leagues from thence there was a good River and a good Rode, called 
Xingrau,
 much frequented with Junks, where we might be easily and through∣ly accommodated with all that we stood in need of; that at the entring into it, there was a little Village, named 
Xamoy,
 inhabited with poor fishermen, and three leagues beyond that the Town, where there was great store of Silks, Musk, Pourcelains, and many other sorts of Commodities, which were transported into divers parts. Upon this advice we steered our course towards that River, where we arrived the next day immediately after dinner, and cast anchor just against it about a league in the Sea, for fear lest our ill fortune should run us into the same mischief we were in before. The night following we took a 
Paroo
 of fishermen, of whom we demanded what Junks there were in this River, and how they were man'd, with divers other questions proper for our design. Whereunto they answered, that at the Town up the River there was not above two hundred Junks, by reason the greatest part were already gone to 
Ainan, Sumb
r, Lailo
,
 and other Ports of 
Cauchenchina
; moreover, that we might ride in safety at 
Xamoy,
 and that there we might buy any thing we wanted; Whereupon we entred into the River, and anchored close to the Village, where we continued the space of half an hour, being much about midnight. But 
Antonio de Faria
 seeing that the 
Lantea
 wherein we sailed could not carry us to 
Liampoo,
 where we purposed to lie all the Winter, he concluded by the advice of his company to furnish himself with a better Vessel, and although we were not then in case to enterprise any thing, yet necessity constrained us to undertake more then our Forces would permit; Now there being at that instant a little Junk riding at anchor fast by us alone, and no other near her, having but few men in her, and those asleep, 
Antonio de Faria
 thought he had a good opportunity to effect his purpose, wherefore leaving his anchor in the Sea, he got up close to this Junk, and with seven and twenty Soldiers and eight Boys boarded her on a sudden unespyed, where finding seven or eight 
Chinese
 Mariners fast asleep, he caused them to be taken, and bound hand and foot, threatening if they cryed out never so little to kill them all, which put them in such a fear as they durst not so much as quetch. Then cutting her cables, he got him straight out of the River, and sailing away with all the speed he could; The next day we arrived at an Island, named 
Pullo Quirim
▪ distant from 
Xamoy
 not above nine leagues, there meeting with a little favorable gale within three days we went and anchored at another Island, called 
Luxitay,
 where, in regard the ayr was wholesom, and the water good, we thought fit to stay some fifteen days for the recovery of our sick men: In this place we visit∣ed the Junk, but found no other commodity in her then Rice, the greatest part whereof we cast into the Sea, to make her the lighter and securer for our Voyage; Then we unladed all her furniture into the 
Lantea,
 and set her on ground for to caulk her, so that in doing thereof, and making our provision of water, we spent (as I said before) fifteen days in this Island, by which time our sick men fully recovered their health; whereupon we departed for 
Liampoo,
 being


given to understand, that many 
Portugals
 were come thither from 
Malaca, Sunda, Siam,
 and 
Patana,
 as they used ordinarily to do about that time for to winter there.


We had sailed two days together along the Coast of 
Lama
 with a favorable wind, when it pleased God to make us incounter with a Junk of 
Patana,
 that came from 
Lequio,
 which was commanded by a 
Chinese
 Pyrat, named 
Quiay Panian,
 a great friend of the 
Portugal
 N
t
on, and much addicted to our fashions and manner of life, with him there were thirty 
Portugals,
 choyce and proper men, whom he kept in pay, and advantaged more then the rest with gifts and presents, so that they were all very rich. This Pyrat had no sooner discovered us but he resolved to attaque us, thinking nothing less then that we were 
Portugals,
 so that endeavoring to invest us, like an old Soldier as he was, and ver
t in the trade of Pyrat, he got the wind of us; that done, falling down within a Musket shot of us, he saluted us with fifteen Pieces of Ordnance, wherewith we were much affrighted, because the most of them were Faulcone
s; but 
Antonio de Faria
 encouraging his men, like a valiant Captain, and a good Christian, dis∣posed them on the hatches in places most convenient, as well in the prow as the poop, reserving some to be afterwards fitted as need should require. Being thus resolved to see the end of that which Fortune should present us, it pleased God that we descryed a Cross in our Enemies Flag, and on the foredeck a number of red Caps, which our men were wont to wear at Sea in those times, whereby we were perswaded that they might be 
Portugals,
 that were going from 
Liampoo
 to 
Malaca
; Whereupon we made them a sign for to make our selves known to them, who no sooner perceived that we were 
Portugals,
 but in token of joy they gave a great shout, and withall vailing their two top sails in shew of obedience, they sent their long boat, called a B
lon, with two 
Portugals
 in her, for to learn what we were, and from whence we came: At length having well observed and considered us, they approached with some more confidence to our Junk, and having saluted us, and we them, they came aboard her, where 
Antonio de Faria
 received them very courteously; And for that they were known to some of our Soldier
, they continued there a good while, during the which they recounted divers particulars unto us necessary for our design. That done, 
Antonio de Faria
 sent 
Christovano Borralho
 to accom∣pany them back, and to visit 
Quiay Panian
 from him, as also to deliver him a Letter, full of complements, and many other offers of friendship, wherewith this Pyrat 
Panian
 was so con∣tented and proud, that he seemed not to be himself, such was his vanity, and passing close by our Junk he took in all his sails; then accompanied with twenty 
Portugals,
 he came and vi∣sited 
Antonio de Faria
 with a goodly rich Present, worth above two thousand duckets, as well in Ambergreece and Pearls, as Jewels of Gold and Silver. 
Antonio de Faria,
 and the rest of us, received him with great demonstrations of love and honor: After that he and all his company were set, 
Antonio de Faria
 fell to discourse with them of divers things according to the time and occasion, and then recited unto them his unhappy Voyage, and the loss he had sustained, acquainting them with his determination to go unto 
Liampoo,
 for to reinforce him∣self with men, and make provision of Vessels with oars, to the end he might return again, to pass once more into the Streight of 
Cauchenchina,
 and so get to the Mynes of 
Quoaniaparu,
 where he had been told there were 
ix large houses full of lingots of Silver, besides a far greater quantity that was continually melted all along the River, and that without any peril one might be wonderfully enriched. Whereunto the Pyrat 
Panian
 made this answer, 
For mine own part, Signior Captain, I am not so rich as many think, though it is true I have been so heretofore, but having been beaten with the same misfortune, which thou sayst hath befallen thee, my riches have been taken from me; Now to return to
 Patana, 
where I have a wife and children, I dare not, by reason I am assured that the King will despoil me of all that I should bring thi∣ther,, because I departed from thence without his permission, which he would make a most haynous crime, to the end he might seize upon my estate, as he hath done to others f
r far lesser occasions then that wherewith he may charge me. Wherefore if thou canst be contented that I shall accompany thee in the Voyage thou meanest to undertaken, with an hundred men that I have in my Iunk, fifteen Pieces of Ordnance, thirty Muskets, and forty Harquebuses, which these Signiors, the
 Portugals 
that are with me, do carry, I shall most willingly do it, upon con∣dition that thou wilt impart unto me a third part of that which shall be gotten, and to that effect I desire thee to give me an assurance und
r thy hand, as also to swear unto me by thy Law to perform it accordingly. Antonio de Faria
 accepted of this offer very gladly, and after he had rendred him many thanks for it, he swore unto him upon the holy Evangelists fully and without all fail to accomplish what he required, and thereof likewise made him a promise under


his hand, to which divers of their company subscribed their names as witnesses. This accord past between them, they went both together into a River, called 
Anay,
 some five leagues from thence, where they furnished themselves with all that they stood in need of, by means of a Present of an hundred duckets, which they gave to the 
Mandarin,
 Captain of the Town.






CHAP. XX. Our Encounter at Sea with a little Fisher-boat, wherein were eight 
Portugals
 very sore hurt; and 
Antonio de Faria's
 meeting and fighting with 
Coia Acem
 the Pyrat.


BEing parted from this River of 
Anay,
 and well provided of all things necessary for the Voyage we had undertaken, 
Antonio de Faria
 resolv
d by the advice and counsel of 
Quiay Panian,
 whom he much respected, to go and anchor in the Port of 
Chincheo,
 there to be in∣formed by such 
Portugals
 as were come from 
Sunda, Malaca, Timor,
 and 
Patana,
 of cer∣tain matters requisite for his design, and whether they had any news from 
Liampoo,
 in regard the report went in the Country, that the King of 
China
 had sent thither a Fleet of four hun∣dred Junks, wherein there were an hundred thousand men, for to take the 
Portugals
 that re∣
ided there, and to burn their houses, for that he would not endure them to be any longer in his dominions, because he had been lately advertised, that they were not a people so faithful and peaceable as he had been formerly given to understand. Arriving then in the Port of 
Chincheo,
 we found five 
Portugal
 ships that were come thither about a month before from the places above mentioned. These ships received us with great joy, and after they had given us intelligence of the Country, Traffique, and Tranquillity of the Ports, they told us they had no other news from 
Liampoo,
 but that it was said a great number of 
Portugals
 were come thither from many parts to winter there; and how that great Army, which we so much feared, was not thereabout; but that it was suspected to be gone for the Islands of 
Go
o,
 to the succor of 
Sucan de Pontir,
 from whom the brute went a Brother-in-law of his had taken his Kingdom, and that in regard 
Sucan
 had lately made himself subject to the King of 
China,
 and his Tributary for an hundred thousand 
Taeis
 by the year, he had in contemplation thereof given him this great Army of four hundred Junks, with the forces aforesaid, for to restore him to his Crown and Signiories, whereof he had been despoyled. Being very glad of this news, after we had remained in this Port of 
Chincheo
 the space of nine days, we departed from thence for 
Liampoo,
 taking along with us five and thirty Soldiers more out of the five ships we found there, to whom 
Antonio de Faria
 gave very good pay; and after we had sailed five days with a contrary wind, coasting from one side to another, without advancing any whit at all, it happened that one night about the first watch we met with a little Fisher-boat, or 
Paroo,
 wherein there were eight 
Portugals,
 very sore hurt, two of the which were named 
M
m Taborda,
 and 
Antonio A
riques,
 men of honor, and very much renowned in those quarters, the cause why in particular I name them; These and the other six were in such a piti∣ful estate, and so hideous to see to, as they moved every one to compassion. This 
Paroo
 coming close to 
Antonio de Faria,
 he caused them to be taken up into his Junk, where they presently cast themselves at his feet, from whence he raised them up, weeping for pity to be∣hold them so naked, and all bathed in their own blood with the wounds they had received, and then demanded of them the occasion of their misfortune: Whereunto one of the two made answer, that about seventeen days before they set sail from 
Liampoo
 for 
Malaca,
 and that being advanced as far as the Isle of 
Sumbor
 they had been set upon by a Pyrat, a 
Guzarat
 by Nation, called 
Coia Acem,
 who had three Junks, and four 
Lanteaas,
 wherein were fifteen hundred men, namely an hundred and fifty 
Mahometans,
 the rest 
Luzzons, Iaoas,
 and 
Champaas,
 people of the other side of 
Malaya,
 and that after they had fought with them from one to four in the afternon, they had been taken with the death of fourscore and two men, whereof eighteen were 
Portugals,
 and as many made slaves; And that in their Junk, what of his and of others, there was lost in merchandize above an hundred thousand 
Taeis. Anto∣nio de Faria
 remaining a good while pensive at that which these men related unto him, at length said unto them, I pray tell me how was it possible for you to escape more then the rest, the fight passing as you deliver? 
After we had been fought withall about an hour and an half, 
he three great Iunks boarded us five times, and with the force of their s
ot they so tore the Prow of our Vessel, that we were ready to sink; wherefore to keep out the water, and lighten


our ship, we were constrained to cast the most part of our goods into the Sea, and whil'st our men were laboring to do so, our Enemies layd so close at us, as every one was fain to leave that he was about for to defend himself on the hatches: But whil'st we were thus troubled, most of our company being hurt, and many slain, it pleased God that one of the Enemies Iunks came to be so furiously fired, as it caught hold likewise of another that was fastned unto it, which made the Pyrats Soldiers leave the fight for to go and save their Vessels, yet that they could not do so speedily, but that one of them was burnt down even to the very water, so that they of the Iunk were compelled to leap into the Sea to save themselves from burning, where most of them were drowned: In the m
an time we made shift to get our Iunk close to a stock of Piles, which Fishermen had plant
d there against a rock, hard by the mouth of the river, where at this present is the Temple of the
 Siams, 
but the dog
 Coia Acem 
was instantly with us, and having fast grappled us, h
 leapt into our Vessel, being followed by a great number of
 Mahometans, 
all armed with Coats of Mail, and Buff Ierkins, who straightway killed above an hundred and fifty of ours, whereof eighteen were
 Portugals; 
which we no sooner perceived, but all wounded as we were, and spoyled with the fire, as you see, we sought for some way to save our selves, and to that end we sped us into a
 Manchu
, 
that was fastened to the stern of our Iunk, wherein it pleased God that fifteen of us escaped, whereof two dyed yesterday, and of the thirteen, that remain yet miraculously alive, there are eight
 Portugals, 
and five servants. In this sort we got us with all speed between this Pallisade and the land amongst the rocks, the better to preserve us from being boarded by their Iunk, but they were otherwise employed in seeking to save the men of their burnt Vessel; and afterwards they entred all into our Iunk, where they were so carryed away with covetousness of the booty, as they never thought of pursuing us; so that the Sun being almost set, and they wonderful glad of their victory over us, they retired into the River with great acclamations. Antonio de Faria,
 very joyful at this news, though he was as sad again on the other side for the bad success of those that had made him this relation▪ rendred thanks unto God for that he had found his Enemy, it being a matter so much desired of him and his: Certainly, said he unto them then, by your report they must needs be now in great disorder, and much spoiled in the River where they are, for I am perswaded, that neither your Junk, nor that of theirs, which was fastned to the burnt one, can do them any longer service, and that in the great Junk, which assaulted you, it is not possible but that you have hurt and killed a good many. Where∣unto they answered, that without doubt they had killed and hurt a great number. Then 
An∣tonio de Faria,
 putting off his cap, fell down on his knees, and with his hands and eyes lifted up to Heaven he said weeping, 
O Lord Iesus Christ, my God and Saviour, even as thou art the true hope of those that put their trust in thee, I, that am the greatest sinner of all men, do most humbly beseech thee in the name of thy servants, that are here present, whose Souls thou hast bought with thy precious blood, that thou wilt give us strength and victory against this cruel Enemy, the murtherer of so many
 Portugals, 
whom with thy favor and ayd, and for the honor of thy holy Name I have resolved to seek out, as hitherto I have done, to the end he may pay to thy Soldiers and faithful servants what he hath so long owed them.
 Whereunto all that were by answered with one cry, 
To them, to them, in the Name of Iesus Christ, that this dog may now render us that, which for so long together he hath taken, as well from us, as from our poor miserable companions.
 Hereupon with marvelous ardor and great acclamations we set sail for the Port of 
Lailoo,
 which we had left eight leagues behind us, whither by the advice of some of his company 
Antonio de Faria
 went to furnish himself with all that was necessary for the fight he hoped to make with the Pyrat, in the quest of whom (as I have al∣ready delivered) he had spent so much time, and yet could never till then hear any news of him in all the Ports and places where he had been.


The next morning we arrived at the Port of 
Lailoo,
 where 
Quiay Panian
 had much kinred, and many friends, so that he wanted no credit in that place; wherefore he intreated the 
Man∣darin
 (who is the Captain of the Town) to permit us to buy for our mony such things as we stood in need of, which he instantly granted, as well for fear lest some displeasure might be done him, as for the sum of a thousand duckets, presented unto him by 
Antonio de Faria,
 wherewith he rested very well satisfied. Hereupon some of our Company went ashore, who with all diligence bought whatsoever we wanted, as Saltpeter and Sulphur to make powder, Lead, Bullets, Victual, Cordage, Oyl, Pitch, Rosin, Ockam, Timber, Planks, Arms, Darts, Staves hardened in the fire, Masts, Sails, Sail-yards, Targets, Flints, Pullies, and Anchors; that done, we


took in fresh water, and furnished our Vessels with Mariners. Now although that this place contained not above three or four hundred houses, yet was there both there, and in the villages adjoyning, such a quantity of the aforesaid things, that in truth it were hard to express it; for 
China
 i
 excellent in this, that it may vaunt to be the Country in the world most abounding in all things that may be desired. Besides for that 
Antonio de Faria
 was exceeding liberal, in re∣gard he spent out of the general booty, before the partitions were made, he payd for all that he bought at the price the sellers would set, by means whereof he had more brought him by far then he had use for, so that within thirteen days he went out of this Port wonderfully well accommodated, with two other new great Junks, which he had exchanged for two little ones that he had, and two 
Lanteaas
 with Oars, as also an hundred and sixty Mariners, both for rowing, and for governing the sails. After all these preparations were made, and we ready to weigh anchor, a general muster was taken of all that were in our Army, which in number was found to be five hundred persons, as well for fight, as for the service and navigation of our Vessels, amongst whom were fourscore and fifteen 
Portugals,
 young and resolute, the rest were Boys, and Mariners, and men of the other Coast, which 
Quiay Panian
 kept in pay, and were well practised in Sea-fight, as they that had been five years Pyrats. Moreover we had an hundred and sixty Harquebuses, forty pieces of brass Ordnance, whereof twenty were field-pieces, that carryed stone-bullets, threescore quintals of powder, namely fifty four for the great Ordnance, and six for the Harquebuses, besides what the Harquebusiers had already delivered to them, nine hundred pots of artificial fire, whereof four hundred were of powder, and five hundred of uns
aked Lime after the 
Chinese
 manner, a great number of stones, Arrows, Half-pikes, four thousand small Javelings, store of Hatchets to serve at boarding, six Boats full of Flints, wherewith the Sailers fought, twelve Cramp-irons with their hooks fastned to great Iron chains for to grapple Vessels together, and many sorts of fire-works, which an En∣gineer of the 
Levant
 made for us. With all this equipage we departed from this Port of 
Lai∣l
,
 and within three days after it pleased God that we arrived at the fishing place, where 
Coia Acem
 took the 
Portugals
 Junk: There as soon as it was night 
Antonio de Faria
 sent spies into the River, for to l
rn whereabout he was, who took a 
Paroo,
 with six Fishermen in her, that gave us to understand how this Pyrat was some two leagues from thence in a River, called 
Tinlau,
 and that he was accommodating the Junk he had taken from the 
Portugals,
 for to go in her, with two others that he had, unto 
Siam,
 where he was born, and that he was to depart within two days. Upon this news 
Antonio de Faria
 called some of his company to councel, where it was concluded, that first of all the places and forces of our Enemy was to be visited and seen, because in a matter of so much hazard, it was not safe to run as it were blind∣fold unto it, but to advise on it well beforehand, and that upon the certainty of that which should be known, such resolution might afterwards be taken, as should seem good to all; Then drawing the fishermen out of the 
Paroo,
 he put some of 
Quiay Panians
 Mariners into her, and sending her away only with two of those fishermen, keeping the rest as hostages, he committed the charge of her to a valiant Soldier, named 
Vincentio Morosa,
 attired after the 
Chinese
 fashion, for fear of discovery; who arriving at the place where the Enemy rode, made shew of fishing as others did, and by that means espyed all that he came for, whereupon re∣
ur
ing, he gave an account of what he had seen, and assured us that the Enemies were so weak, 
s upon 
oarding of them they might easily be taken. 
Antonio de Faria
 caused the most expe∣rienced men of his company to be assembled, to advise thereon, and that in 
Quiay Panians
 Junk, to honor him the more, as also to maintain his friendship, which he much esteemed: At this meeting it was resolved, that as soon as it was night they should go and anchor at the mouth of the River, where the Enemy lay, for to set upon him the next morning before day. This agreed unto by all, 
Antonio de F
ria
 set down what order and course should be held at the entring into the River, and how the Enemy should be assaulted: Then dividing his men, he placed thirty 
Portugals
 in 
Quiay Panians
 Junk, such as he pleased to choose, because he would be sure to give him no distaste; Likewise he disposed six 
Portugals
 into each of the 
Lant
as,
 and into 
Christovano Borralho's
 Junk twenty; the rest of the 
Portugals,
 being three and thirty, he retained with himself, besides slaves and divers Christians, all valiant and trusty men. Thus accommodated and ordered for the execution of his enterprize, he set sail towards the River of 
Tinlau,
 where he arrived about Sun-set, and there keeping good watch he past the night till three of the clock in the morning, at which time he made to the Enemy, who rode some half a league up in the River.


It pleased God that the Sea was calm, and the wind so favorable, as our Fleet, sailing up the River, arrived in less then an hour close to the Enemy, unperceived of any; But because they were Thieves, and feared the people of the Country, in regard of the great mischiefs and robberies which they dayly committed, they stood so upon their guard, and kept so good watch, that as soon as they discerned us, in all haste they rung an alarum with a Bell, the sound whereof caused such a rumor and disorder, as well amongst them that were ashore, as those aboard, that one could hardly hear one another, by reason of the great noise they made. Whereupon 
Antonio de Faria,
 seeing we were discovered, cryed out to his company, 
To them, my Masters, to them in the name of God before they be succored by their Lorches,
 wherewith discharging all his Ordnance, it pleased Heaven, that the shot lighted to such purpose, as it overthrew and tore in pieces the most part of the valiantest, that then were mounted and ap∣peared on the deck, even right as we could have wished: In the neck hereof our Harquebu∣siers, which might be some hundred and threescore, failed not to shoot upon the signal, that had formerly been ordained for it, so that the hatches of the Junk were cleared of all those that were upon them, and that with such a slaughter as not an Enemy durst appear there after∣wards; At which very instant our two Junks boarded their two in the case they were in, where the fight grew so hot on either side, as I confess I am not able to relate in particular what passed therein, though I was present at it, for when it began it was scarce day. Now that which rendred the conflict betwixt us and our Enemies most dreadful was the noise of Drums, Basins, and Bells, accompanyed with the report of the great Ordnance, wherewith the valleys and rocks thereabouts resounded again. This fight continuing in this manner some quarter of an hour, their 
Lorches
 and 
Lanteaas
 came from the shore to assist them with fresh men, which one, named 
Diego Meyrelez,
 in 
Quiay Panians
 Junk, perceiving, and that a Gunner employed not his shot to any purpose, in regard he was so beside himself with fear, that he knew not what he did, as he was ready to give fire to a Piece, he thrust him away so rudely, as he threw him down into the scuttle, saying to him, 
Away villain, thou canst do nothing, this business belongs to men, such as I am, not to thee:
 whereupon pointing the Gun with its wedges of level, as he knew very well how to do, he gave fire to the Piece, which was charged with bullets and stones, and hitting the Lorch that came foremost, carryed away all the upper part of her from Poup to Prow, so that she presently sank, and all that were in her, not a man saved: The shot then having past so through the first 
Lorch,
 fell on the hatches of another 
Lorch,
 that came a little behind, and killed the Captain of her, with six or seven more that were by him, wherewith the two other 
Lorches
 were so terrified, that going about to fly back to Land, they fell foul one of another, so as they could not clear themselves, but remained entangled together, and not able to go forward or backward, which perceived by the Cap∣tains of our two 
Lorches,
 called 
Gasparo d' Oliveyra,
 and 
Vincentio Morosa,
 they presently set upon them, casting a great many artificial pots into them, wherewith they were so fired, that they burnt down to the very water, which made the most of those that were in them to leap into the Sea, where our men killed them all with their Pikes, so that in those three 
Lorches
 alone there dyed above two hundred persons; and in the other, whereof the Captain was slain, there was not one escaped, for 
Quiay Panian
 pursued them in a 
Champana,
 which was the Boat of his Junk, and dispatched most of them as they were getting to Land, the rest were all battered against the rocks that were by the shore: which the Enemies in the Junks percei∣ving, being some hundred and fifty 
Mahometans, Luzzons, Borneos,
 and 
Iaos,
 they began to be so discouraged, that many of them threw themselves into the Sea; whereupon the dog 
Coia Acem,
 who yet was not known, ran to this disorder, for to animate his men. He had on a Coat of Mail lined with Crimson Sattin, edged with gold fringe, that had formerly belong∣ed to some 
Portugal,
 and crying out with a loud voyce, that every one might hear him, he said three times, 
Lah hilah, hilah la Mahumed, rocol halah, Massulmens, and true Believers in the holy Law of
 Mahomet, 
will you suffer your selves to be vanquished by such feeble slaves, as these Christian Dogs, who have no more heart then white Pullets, or bearded women? To them, to them, for we are assured by the Book of Flowers, wherein the Prophet
 Noby 
doth promise eternal delights to the
 Daroezes 
of the House of
 Mecqua, 
that he will keep his word both with you and me, provided that we bathe our selves in the blood of these dogs without Law:
 With these cursed words the Devil so encouraged them, that rallying all into one body, they re-inforced the fight, and so valiantly made head against us, as it was a dreadful thing to see how desperately they ran amongst our weapons. In the mean time 
Antonio de Faria
 thus


exhorted his men: 
Courage valiant Christians, and whilest those wicked Miscreants fortifie themselves in their devilish Sect, let us trust in our Lord Iesus Christ, nailed on the Cross for us, who will never forsake us, how great sinners soever we be, for after all we are his, which these Dogs here are not.
 With this ferver and zeal of faith flying upon 
Coia Acem,
 to whom he had most spleen, he discharged so great a blow on his head with a two-handed sword, that cutting through a Cap of Mail he wore, he layd him at his feet, then redoubling with another reverse stroke he lamed him of both his legs, so as he could not rise, which his followers be∣holding they gave a mighty cry, and assaulted 
Antonio de Faria
 with such fury and hardiness, as they made no reckoning of a many of 
Portugals,
 by whom they were invironned, but gave him divers blows that had almost overthrown him to the ground; Our men seeing this ran pre∣sently to his ayd, and behave
 
hemselves so well, that in half a quarter of an hour forty eight of our enemies lay slaughtered on the dead body of 
Coia Acem,
 and but fourteen of ours, whereof there were not above five 
Portugals,
 the rest were servants and slaves, good and faith∣ful Christians. The remainder of them, beginning to faint, retired in disorder towards the foredeck, with an intent to fortifie themselves there, for prevention whereof twenty Soldiers, of thirty that were in 
Quiay Panians
 Junk, ran instantly and got before them, so that ere they could render themselves Masters of what they pretended unto, they were inforced to leap into the Sea, where they fell one upon another, and were by our men qu
te made an end of, so that of all their number there remained but only five, whom they took alive, and cast into the Hold bound hand and foot, to the end they might afterwards be forced by torments to confess cer∣tain matters that should be demanded of them, but they fairly tore out one anothers throats with their teeth, for fear of the death they expected, which yet could not keep them from be∣ing dismembered by our servants, and after thrown into the Se
, in the company of the Dog 
Coia Acem
 their Captain, great 
Cacis
 of the King of 
Bintan,
 the Shedder and Drinker of the blood of 
Portugals,
 Titles which he ordinarily gave himself in his Letters, and which he pub∣lished openly to all 
Mahometans,
 by reason whereof, and for the superstition of his cursed Sect, he was greatly honored by them.






CHAP. XXI. What 
Antonio de Faria
 did after his Victory; his departure from the River of 
Tinlau,
 with his ill success thereupon, and the succor we met withall.


THis bloody Battel finished with the honor of the Victory, before-mentioned,
 in the de∣scription whereof I have not used many words; for if I should undertake to recount the particularies of it, and set forth all that was performed by ours, as also the valor wherewith the Enemies defended themselves, besides that I am unable to do it, I should then be forced to make a far larger discourse, and more ample History then this is: but it being my intention to declare things 
n passant,
 I have labored to speak succinctly in divers places, where possibly better wits then mine would amplifie matters in a more accomplished manner, and this is the reason that I have now delivered nothing but what was needful to be written. Returning then to my former discourse, I say, that the first thing 
Antonio de Faria
 did after this Victory was to see his hurt men looked unto, whereof there were about fourscore and twelve, the most part 
Portugals,
 our servants being included; As for the number of the dead, there were on our side forty two, amongst which eight were 
Portugals,
 the loss of whom afflicted 
An∣tonio de Faria
 more then all the rest, and of the Enemies three hundred and eighty, whereof an hundred and fifty fell by fire and sword, the remainder were drowned. Now albeit this Victory brought a great deal of content to us all, yet were there many tears shed both in gene∣ral and particular for the slaughter of our companions, the most part of whose heads were cleft asunder with the Enemies hatchets. After this 
Antonio de Faria,
 notwithstanding he was hurt in two or three places, went presently ashoar with those that were in case to accompany him, where the first thing he did was to give order for the burial of the dead; thereupon he surrounded the Island for to see what he could discover: Compassing of it then in this sort he lighted upon a very pleasant Valley, wherein were many gardens, replenished with sundry kinds of fruits; there also was a Village of about forty or fifty very low houses, which the in∣famous 
Coia Acem
 had sacked, and in them slain many of the inhabitants, that had not the means to escape his hands. Further, in the said Valley, and by a delicate River of fresh water, wherein were a number of Mullets and Trouts, he met with a very fair house, which seemed


to be the 
Pagod
 of the Village, that was full of sick and hurt persons, whom 
Coia Acem
 had put there to be cured; amongst these were divers 
Mahometans
 of his kinred, and others of his best Soldiers, to the number of ninety six, who as soon as they perceived 
Antonio de Faria
 afar off cryed out to him for mercy and forgiveness, but he would by no means harken unto them, alledging that he could not spare those that had killed so many Christians; Saying so, he caused the house to be fired in six or seven places, which in regard it was of wood, bepitched; and covered with dry Palm tree leaves, burned in such 
ort as it was dreadful to behold; In the mean time it would have moved any man to pity to hear the lamentable cries made by these wretches within, and to see them cast themselves headlong out of the windows, where ou
 men, provoked with a desire of 
evenge, received them upon their Pikes and H
lberds. This cruelty performed, 
Antonio de Faria
 returned to the Sea side, where the Junk lay, that 
Coia Acem
 had taken a month b
fore from the 
Portugals
 of 
Liampoo,
 and caused it to be lanched into the Sea, having been forme
ly repaired and caulked, which being done, and he aboard again, he restored it to 
Mem Taborda,
 and 
Antonio Anriques,
 to whom it belonged, as I have already declared; But first, causing them to lay their hands on the Book of Prayers, 
Worthy Friends,
 said he unto them, 
for all those my companions sakes, as well living as dead, who for your Iunk here have lost so much blood, and so many lives, I present you with her, and all the goods that were in her, as a free gift, to the end that thereby our Lord may receive us into his everlasting Kingdom; and besides, be pleased to grant us an abolition of all our sins in this world, and in the other everlasting life, as I trust he hath given to our brethren, that this day dyed like good Christians for the holy Catholique Faith; Howbeit, I pray and expresly enjoyn you, nay I conjure you by the oath you are now to make, that you take no other goods but such only as appertain unto you, and that you brought from
 Liampoo, 
both for your selves, and those other Merchants that were Venturers with you: For more I do not give you, nor were i
 reasonable I should, in regard it would be much against the duty of either of our con∣sciences, for me to give, and you to receive it.
 Having spoken in this manner, 
Mem Taborda
 and 
Antonio Anriques,
 who little looked for any such favor, fell down at his feet, and with tears of joy rendred him a world of thanks, and then presently went ashoar for to seek out their goods, taking with them about fifty or threescore servants, whom their Masters had lent them for to help gather up the Silks that were wet, and hanged up by the Enemies on Trees a drying, besides two great rooms full of such as had never been wet, all which amounted, as it was said, to an hundred thousand 
Taeis,
 wherein above an hundred Merchants had a share, as well of them that dwelt at 
Liampoo,
 as at 
Malaca,
 to whom they were consigned; The rest of their Commodities, being a third part thereof, were lost, and could never be heard of. The next morning, as soon as it was light, he went to the great Junk that he had taken, which was full of the bodies of them that were slain in her the day before, whom without further ado he caused to be thrown into the Sea; howbeit for 
Coia Acems,
 in regard he was of a more eminent con∣dition then the rest, and consequently deserving a greater honor in his funerals, he commanded him clothed and armed as he was to be cut into four quarters, and so cast also into the Sea, where for the merit of his works his body was intombed in the bellies of the hungry Lizards, whereof there was a great company all about our Junk, that shewed themselves above water, allured by the appast of those formerly thrown over-board; and in precipitating him so dis∣membered into the Sea, 
Antonio de Faria
 in stead of a prayer, 
Go wicked wretch,
 said he, 
to the bottom of Hell, where thy damned Soul doth now enjoy the promised delights of thy Maho∣met, as thou didst yesterday publish to these other Dogs such as thy self.
 Thereupon he com∣manded all the Slaves and Captives of his company, together with their Masters, before him, unto whom he made a speech like a true Christian, as indeed he was, whereby he prayed them in the Name of God to manumit these Slaves, according to the promise he had made them be∣fore the fight, engaging himself to satisfie them for it out of his own Estate: Whereunto they answered all with one consent, that since it was his desire they were wel contented, and that they did even then set them at full liberty, whereof he caused a writing to be presently made with all their hands unto it, being as much as could be done for the instant, but afterwards each of them had in particular Letters of manumission granted unto them. This done, an Inventory was taken of such Commodities as were found to be good and merchantable, over and above those which were given to the 
Portugals,
 and all was praised at an hundred and thirty thousand 
Taeis
 in Silver Lingots of 
Iapan,
 consisting of Sattin, Damask, raw Silk, Taffety, Musk, and very fine Porcelain, for as touching the rest they were not put in writing; And all these Robberies


the Pyrats had committed on the Coasts between 
Sumbor
 and 
Fucheo,
 where for above a year together they had coursed up and down.


After that 
Antonio de Faria
 had remained four and twenty days in this River of 
Tinlau,
 during which time all his hurt men were cured, he set sail directly for 
Liampoo,
 where he purposed to pass the Winter, to the end that with the beginning of the Spring he might set forth on his Voyage to the Mynes of 
Quoaniaparu,
 as he had resolved with 
Quiay Panian,
 the 
Chinese
 Pyrat that was in his company, but being advanced even to the point of 
Micuy,
 which is at the height of six and twenty degrees, so great a Tempest arose towards the North-west, that we were fain to strike our top-sails, for fear we should be forced back again from our course; but after dinner it increased with such a terrible storm of rain, and the Sea went so high, that the two 
Lanteas
 were not able to brook it, so that about evening they made to Land, with an intent to recover the River of 
Xilendau,
 which was about a league and an half from thence, whereupon 
Antonio de Faria
 doubting some misfortune, carried as little sail as possibly he could, as well for that he would not outgo the 
Lanteas,
 as in regard of the violence of the wind, which was such, as they durst not carry more: Now by reason the night was so dark, and the billows so great, they could not discern a shelf of sand, that lay betwixt an Island and the point of a Rock, so that passing over it our Junk struck her self so rudely on it, as her upper keel cleft in two or three places, and her under keel a little, whereupon the Gunner would have given fire to a Falconet, for to have warned the other Junks to come in to succor us in this extremity, but 
Antonio de Faria
 would by no means permit him, saying, that since it pleased God he should be cast away in that place, there was no reason that others should be lost there also for his cause; But he desired every one to assist him, both with manual labor, and secret prayers unto God to pardon their sins: Having said so, he caused the main Mast to be cut down, whereby the Junk came to be in somewhat a better case then she was before; but alas! the fall of it cost three Mariners and one of our servants their lives, who chancing to be under it when it fell were battered all to pieces; In like manner he made all the other Masts from poop to prow to be hewed down, together with all the dead works, as the cabins and galleries with∣out, so that all was taken away close to the hatches. And though all this was done with incre∣dible diligence, yet it stood us in little stead, for that the weather was so foul, the sea so swoln, the night so dark, the waves so furious, the rain so great, and the violence of the storm so in∣tolerable, that no man was able to withstand it: In the mean time the other four Junks made a sign to us, as if they also were cast away; Whereupon 
Antonio de Faria
 lifting up his eyes and hands to Heaven, 
Lord,
 said he before them all, 
as through thy infinite mercy thou wast fast∣ened upon the Cross for the Redemption of sinners, so I beseech thee, who art all mercy, that for the satisfaction of thy Iustice I alone may suffer for the offences which these men have com∣mitted, since I am the principal cause of their trespassing against thy divine goodness; permit not then, O Lord, that in this woful night they may fall into that danger wherein I see my self as this present by reason of my sins; but with a repentant Soul I most humbly beseech thee, and that in the name of all the rest, though I am most unworthy to be heard, that in stead of having regard to our sins, thou wilt behold us with the eyes of that pity and infinite clemency wherewith thou art replenished.
 Upon these words we all fell a crying out so lamentably, 
Lord have mercy upon us,
 that it would have grieved any heart in the world to have heard us; And as all men, that find themselves in the like extremity, are naturally carried to the preserva∣tion of their lives, without any regard at all of ought else, there was not one amongst us that sought not the means to safe his, so that all of us together employed our selves in discharging our Vessel, by casting our goods into the Sea; To which effect about an hundred men of us, as well 
Portugals,
 as Slaves and Mariners, leapt down into the Ship, and in less then an hour heav'd all over-board, without any respect in so eminent a danger of that which we did, for amongst the rest we threw twelve great chests full of lingots of Silver into the Sea, which in the last incounter we had taken from 
Coia Acem,
 besides many other things of great value, whereby our Junk was somewhat lightened.


Having past the night in that miserable state we were in, at length,
 as the day began to break, it pleased God that the wind also began to slack, whereby our Junk remained a little more at rest, though she was still in great peril, by reason of the water sh
 had taken in, it be∣ing almost four yards deep in her, so that to avoyd the eminent danger we were threatened with, we all of us got forth, and catching hold by the tackle we hung on the out-side of the Junk, because the waves beat with such violence against her, that we feared to be drowned,


or cast against the Rocks, which had already happened to eleven or twelve of our company for want of taking heed: Now when the day began perfectly to appear, it pleased God that 
Mem Taborda
's and 
Antonio Anriquez
 Junks discovered us, and presently coming up close to us, they that were in her threw us a great many staves tyed to cords, to the end we might fasten our selves to them, as we presently did, and therein an hour was spent with much ado, by rea∣son of the extream disorder amongst us, every man desiring and striving to be first saved, by which occasion twenty men were drowned, whereof five were 
Portugals,
 for whom 
Anto∣nio de Faria
 was more grieved, then for the loss of the Junk, and all the goods that were in her, although the value thereof was not so small, but that it amounted to above an hundred thou∣sand 
Ta
is,
 and that in Silver alone; for the greatest part of the booty, taken from 
Coia A∣cem,
 had been put into 
Antonio de Faria
's Junk, as that which was held to be freer from dan∣ger then all the rest: Thus after we had with much peril and pain gotten into 
Taborda
's Junk, we past all that day in continual lamentation for our ill success without hearing any news of our consorts; Nevertheless it pleased God, that about evening we discovered two Sails, which made so many short turnings from one side to another, as one might well guess they did it of purpose to spend time, whereby we were perswaded that they were of our company. Now because it was almost night, we thought it not fit to go to them for some reasons given there∣upon, but having made them a sign they answered us presently with the like according to our desire, and about the end of the last watch they approached so near unto us, that after they had sadly saluted us they demanded how the Captain General and the rest did; whereunto we re∣plyed, that as soon as it was day we would tell them, and that in the mean time they should retire from thence till the next morning that it was light, for that the waves then went so high, as some disaster might otherwise ensue thereupon. The next day as soon as the Sun began to appeared two 
Portugals
 came to us from 
Quiay Panians
 Junk, who seeing 
Antonio de Faria
 in the case he was in aboard 
Mem Taborda
's Junk, and understanding the bad success of his fortune, they recounted theirs unto us, which seemed to be little better then ours; for they declared that a gust of wind had caught up and thrown three of their men a stones cast from the Vessel into the Sea, a thing never seen nor heard of before: Withall they delivered, how the little Junk was cast away, with fifty men in her, almost all Christians, amongst the which were seven 
Portugals,
 and the Captain, named 
Nuno Preto,
 an honorable man, and of great cou∣rage and wisdom, whereof he had given good proof in the former adversities: A
 this relation 
Antonio de Faria
 was very much grieved, but much more when a little after one of the two 
Lanteas,
 of whom no news had been heard of till then, arriving, told us what dangers they had ran, and that the other having broken their cables, and left their anchors in the Sea, was in their sight battered all to pieces on the Sea shoar, all that were in her being drowned, saving thirteen persons, whereof there were five 
Portugals,
 and three servants Christians, whom those of the Country had made Slaves, and carried to a place, called 
Nouday
; so that by this unlucky Tempest two Junks, and one 
Lantea,
 or 
Lorch,
 were cast away, wherein above an hundred men were lost, besides Slaves, Apparel, Commodities, Silver, Jewels, Ordnance, Arms, Victual, and Munition, worth in all above two hundred thousand Duckets, in so much tha
 both our General, and every one of us Soldiers, found our selves destitute of all manner of relief, having nothing left us but what was upon our backs. We learnt afterwards, that such-like fortunes at Sea do ordinarily happen on this Coast of 
China,
 more then in any other part, so that it is impossible to sail there a whole year together without shipwrack, unless upon the Conjunction of the new Moons one fly into the Ports for shelter, which are there so many, and so good, that without fear of any thing one may enter them easily, because they are all very clear, except those of 
Lamau
 and 
Sumbor,
 which have certain Rocks lying some half a league South∣ward from the mouth of the River.






CHAP. XXII. 
Antonio de Faria
 hath news of the five Portugals that were made Captives; his Letter to the Mandarin of 
Nouday
 about them; and his assaulting the said Town.


AFter this furious Tempest was wholly asswaged, 
Antonio de Faria
 incontinently im∣barqued himself in the other great Junk, that he had taken from 
Coia Acem,
 whereof 
Pedro de Silva
 was Captain, and setting sail he departed with the rest of his Company, which


consisted of three Junks, and one 
Lorch,
 or 
Lantea,
 as the 
Chineses
 term them. The first thing he did then was to go and anchor in the Haven of 
Nouday,
 to the end he might learn some news of the thirteen Captives, that were carried thither; being arrived there about night he sent two small Barques, called 
Baloes,
 well man'd, to spy the Port, and sound the depth of the River, as also to observe the scituation of the Country, and to learn by some means what Ships were riding there, together with divers other matters answerable to his design; For which effect he commanded the Mariners to endeavor all they could for to surprize some of the Inhabitants of the Town, that by them he might be truly informed what was become of the 
Portugals,
 by reason he was afraid they were already carried further up into the Country. These 
Baloes
 went away about two hours after midnight, and arrived at a little Village seated at the mouth of the River on a little stream of water, called 
Nipaphau
; There it pleased God that they behaved themselves so well, as they returned before day aboard our Junk, bringing along with them a Barque laden with earthen vessel, and Sugar canes, which they had found lying at anchor in the midst of the River: In this Barque there were eight men, and two wo∣men, together with a little child some six or seven years old, who seeing themselves thus in our power, became so transported with the fear of death, that they were in a manner besides them∣selves, which 
Antonio de Faria
 perceiving labored all he could to comfort them, and began to speak them very fair, but to all his questions, he could draw no other answer from them then these words following, 
Do not kill us without cause, for God will require an account of our blood from you, because we are poor folks
; and saying thus, they wept and trembled in such sort, as they could scarce pronounce a word; Whereupon 
Antonio de Faria,
 pitying their misery and simplicity, would importune them no further: Howbeit, the better to compass his intent, he intreated a 
Chinese
 woman, that was a Christian, and came along with the Pilot, to make much of them, and to assure them they should have no hurt, to the end, that being more confirmed by this means, they might answer to that should be demanded of them; Wherein the 
Chinese
 so well acquitted her self, and made them so tractable, as about an hour after they told her, that if the Captain would let them freely return in their boat to the place from whence they were taken, they would willingly confess all that either they had heard or seen. 
Antonio de Faria
 having promised them to do so, and that with many words and pro∣testations one amongst them, that was ancienter, and that seemed to be of more authority then the rest, addressing himself to him: 
Truly,
 said he, 
I do not rely much on thy words, because that by amplifying of them in such manner thou makest me afeard, that the affect will not be conformable to thy steech; Wherefore I beseech thee to swear unto me by this Element that bears thee, that thou wilt not fail to perform that which thou hast promised unto me: for otherwise perjuring thy self, be assured that the Lord, whose hand is Almighty, will be incensed against thee with such indignat
n, as the winds from above, and the Seas from below, will never cease to oppose thy desires during thy Voyages; for I vow unto thee by the beauty of these Stars, that lying is no less odious and abominable in the sight of that Soveraign Lord, then the pride of those Iudges on Earth, that with scorn and contempt do answer those which de∣mand Iustice of them. Antonio de Faria
 obliging himself by oath, as the old man required, to perform his word, the 
Chinese
 said he was satisfied, and then he continued in this sort: 
A∣bout two days since I saw those men, whom thou enquirest after, layd in prison at
 Nouday 
with great irons on their legs, because it was beleeved they were notorious Theeves, that made a trade of robbing such as they met upon the Seas.
 This relation very much enraged and disqui∣eted 
Antonio de Faria,
 who was perswaded that it might well be as the old man delivered, so that desiring to take some course for their deliverance as soon as might be, he sent them a Letter by one of the 
Chineses,
 retaining all the rest in hostage for him, who departed the next morning by break of day, and because it much imported the 
Chineses
 to be delivered out of captivity, he that carried the Letter, and that was husband to one of the two women, which had been taken in the boat of earthen vessel, and were now aboard in our Junk, made such speed, that he returned about noon with an answer, endorsed on the Letter we sent, and sign∣ed by all the five 
Portugals
; Thereby they gave 
Antonio de Faria
 to understand, that they were cruelly detained in prison, out of which they did not think they should ever get, unless it were to go to execution, and therefore they besought him for the passion of our Lord Jesus Christ, that he would not suffer them to perish there for want of succor, according as he had promised them at their setting forth in that Voyage, and the rather in regard it was only for his sake that they were reduced to that miserable estate; Hereunto they added many other very


pitiful entreaties, as might well come from such poor wretches, that were Captives under the Tyranny of such fell and cruel people, as the 
Chineses
 were. 
Antonio de Faria,
 having re∣ceiv
d this Letter, read it in the presence of all his Company, of whom he asked counsel there∣upon; but as they were many, so were their opinions many and different, which was the oc∣casion of much contention amongst them; whereby perceiving that nothing would be conclu∣ded concerning this affair, he said to them as it were in choller; 
My Masters and Friends, I promised to God by a solemn oath that I have taken, never to part from hence, till by some means or other I have recovered these poor Soldiers, my companions, though I should therefore venture my life a thousand times, yea and all my estate, which I make little reckoning of in regard of them; wherefore, my Masters, I earnestly desire you, that no man go about to oppose this resolution of mine, upon the execution whereof mine honor wholly depends, for whosoever shall contrary me therein I must take him for mine enemy, as one that would seek the prejudice of my Soul.
 To this speech all made answer, that he was in the right, and that for the discharge of his conscience nothing should stay him from performing the same; adding moreover, that all of them would stand to him in that behalf to the death. The Captain hereupon giving them many thanks, and with tears in his eyes and his hat in his hand embracing them, protested that he would when time should serve acknowledg this good-will of theirs in such real manner as it deserved, wherewith they all remained very well satisfied.


This resolution being taken, they fell to councel concerning the carriage of this affair, where∣upon they concluded to treat with the 
Mandarin
 in a gentle manner, and for that end to send unto him to demand these Prisoners, with promise to give him for their ransom whatsoever should be thought reasonable, and that according to his answer such further course should be taken therein as should seem requisite: A Petition then was presently drawn answerable to the form, that was usually presented to the Judges, which 
Antonio de Faria
 sent to the 
Manda∣rin
 by two of the chiefest of the 
Chineses
 he had taken, who also carried him a present worth two hundred duckets, whereby he hoped to induce him to restore the poor prisoners; but it fell out far otherwise then he expected: For as soon as the 
Chineses
 had delivered the Petition and the Present, they returned the next day with an answer written on the back of the Petition, the tenor whereof was this: 
Let thy mouth come and present it self at my feet, and after I have heard thee I will do thee justice. Antonio de Faria
 seeing what high words the 
Manda∣rin
 gave was exceedingly troubled, because he well perceived by this beginning, that he should have much ado to deliver his companions, wherefore having communicated this affair in parti∣cular to some few, whom for that end he had called unto him, they were of several opinions; nevertheless after good deliberation it was at length concluded to send another Messenger, that should more effectually demand the Prisoners of him, and for their ransom offer the sum of two thousand 
Tacis
 in lingots of Silver and Commodities, declaring unto him, that he would not part from that place till he had returned them; for he made account that it might be this reso∣lution would oblige him to do that which he had refused him another way, or that he would be carried to it by the consideration of his own gain and interest. So the two 
Chineses
 went again the second time with a Letter sealed up, as from one person to another, without any kind of ceremony or complement, which these Gentiles so much use amongst themselves; And this 
Antonio de Faria
 did of purpose, to the end that by the sharpness of this Letter the 
Mandarin
 might know he was displeased, and resolved to execute what he had written. But before I proceed any further I will only relate the two main points of the contents of the Letter, which were the cause of the utter ruine of this business. The first was, where 
Antonio de Faria
 said, that he was a Merchant stranger, a 
Portugal
 by Nation, that was going by way of Traffique towards the Port of 
Liampoo,
 where there were also many other Merchants strangers like him∣self, who duly payd the usual Customs, without committing any manner of ill or injustice. The second point was, where he said, that the King of 
Portugal
 his Master was allyed in a brotherly amity with the King of 
China,
 by reason whereof they traded in his Country, as the 
Chineses
 used to do at 
Malaca,
 where they were entertained with all favor and justice duly ministred unto them. Now though both these points were distastful to the 
Mandarin,
 yet the last, wherein he mentioned the King of 
Portugal
 to be brother to the King of 
China,
 was that which put him so out of patience, that without any regard at all he commanded them that brought the Letter, not only to be cruelly scourged, but to have their noses cut off, and in that pickle he sent them back to 
Antonio de Faria
 with an answer written on a scurvy piece of torn p
p
r, where these words were written: 
Stinking carrion, begotten of vile flies in the filthiest


sink that 
ver was in any dungeon of a lothsom prison, what hath made thy baseness so bold, as that thou darest undertake to meddle with heavenly things? Having caused thy Petition to be read, whereby like a Lord, as I am, thou prayest me to have pity on thee, which art but a poor wr
tch, my greatness, out of its generosity, was even deigning to accept of that little thou pre∣sentedst me withall, and was also inclining to grant thy request, when as my ears were touched with the horrible blasphemy of thy arrogance, which made thee t
rm thy King Brother to the son of the Sun, the Lion crowned by an incredible Power in the Throne of the World, under whose feet all the Diad
ms of those that govern the Vniverse are subjected, nay all Scepters do 
rve but as latches to his most rich sandals, as the Writers of the golden Temple do certifie under the Law of their Verities, and that through the whole habitable Earth: Know then, that for the great Heresie thou hast uttered, I have caused thy Paper to be burnt, thereby re∣presenting the vile effigies of thy person, which I desire to use in like manner for the enormous 
rime thou hast committed; wherefore I command thee to be speedily packing, that the River which bears thee may not be accursed.
 So soon as the Interpreter had read the Letter, and ex∣pounded the contents thereof, all that heard it were much vexed therewith, but no man was so sensible of it as 
Antonio de Faria,
 who was exceedingly grieved to see himself thus wholly deprived of all hope of recovering his Prisoners, wherefore after they had well considered the insolent words of the 
Mandarins
 Letter, and his great discourtesie, they in the end concluded to go ashoar, and attaque the Town, in hope that God would assist them, seeing their inten∣tions were good; For this effect they instantly prepared Vessels to land with, which were the 
our fishermens great Barques they had taken the night before: Whereupon taking a muster of the Forces he could make for this enterprize, he found the number to be three hundred, where∣of forty were 
Portugals,
 the rest were Slaves and Mariners, besides 
Quiay Panians
 men, amongst whom were an hundred and threescore Harquebusiers, the others were armed with Pikes and Lance
; he had also some Pieces of Ordnance, and other things necessary for his de∣sign.


The next morning a little before day 
Antonio de Faria
 sailed up the River with three Junks,
 the 
Lorches,
 and the four Barques he had taken, and so went and anchored at six fathom and an half of water close by the walls of the Town; Then causing the sails to be taken down without any noise, or discharge of Ordnance, he displayed the Banner of Trade according to the fashion of 
China,
 to the end that by this demonstration of peace no complement should rest unper∣formed, although he was perswaded that nothing would prevail with the 
Mandarin:
 Here∣upon he sent another Messenger unto him, never making shew that he had received any ill usage from him, by whom with a great deal of complement he demanded the Prisoners, and offered him a round sum of mony for their ransom, with a promise of perpetual correspondence and amity; But so far was this Dog the 
Mandarin
 from harkening thereunto, that contrariwise he made the poor 
Chinese,
 that carried the Letter, to be hewed in pieces, and so shewed him from the top of the wall to the whole Fleet, the more to despight us. This tragical act wholly de∣prived 
Antonio de Faria
 of that little hope, which some had given him for the deliverance of the Prisoners; hereupon the Soldiers, being more incensed then before, said unto him, that since he had resolved to land, he should no longer defer it, because further delay would but give his Enemies leasure to gather more strength: This counsel seeming good to him, he presently im∣barqued with them he had chosen for the action, having first given order to his Junks to shoot continually at the Town, and the Enemy, wheresoever they perceived any 
tore of people as∣sembled, howbeit with this caution, to forbear till they saw them together by the ears with them. Having landed then about a Faulcon shot below the Rode, he marched without any le
 along the shoars side directly to the Town: In the mean time a number of people appeared upon the walls, with divers ensigns of different colours, where these Barbarous made a mighty nois
 Fifes, Drums, and Bells, and withall hooting at us, made us signs with their caps to approach, thereby intimating the little reckoning they made of us: Now by that time we were come within a Musket shot of the walls, we discerned some thousand, or twelve hundred men, as we guessed, sally out at two several gates, of which some sixscore were mounted on horses, or to say better, on lean carrion Tits that were nothing but skin and bone, wherewith they began to course up and down the field in a skirmishing manner, wherein they shewed themselves so untoward, as they often ran one upon another, and tumbled down together; which when 
Antonio de Faria
 saw he was exceeding glad, and encouraging his men to the fight he stood firm attending the Enemy, who continued still wheeling about us, being perswaded, it seems,


that that would suffice to skare us, and make us retire to our vessels; But when they perceived us remain unmoved, without turning our backs as they beleeved, and as it may be, they desired we would doe, they closed themselves into one body, and so in very ill order they made a stand without advancing on. But then our Captain, see∣ing them in this posture, caused all his Muskettiers to discharge at one instant, who till that time had not stirred, which succeeded with such effect, as it pleased God that he most part of this goodly Cavalry fell to the ground with feare; we taking this for a good presage ran and lustily pursued them, invoking to our aid the name of Jesus, whose good pleasure it was though his divine mercy, to make our enemies slye before us so amazed, and in such disorder, as they tumbled pell mell one upon another, in which manner arriving at a bridge that crost the town ditch, they were so pestered together, as they could neither go forward nor backward; in the mean time our forces coming up to them discharged their shot to such purpose amongst them, that we laid three hundred of them on the earth, which in truth was a pittifull sight to behold, because there was not one of them that had the heart so much as to draw a sword: whereupon hotly pursuing the first point of this victory, we ran to the g
te, where we found the 
Manda∣rin
 in the front of six hundred men, mounted upon a good Horse, having on 
 cuirasse lined with purple Velvet, which had belonged, as we knew afterwards, to a Portugal, named 
Tome Perez,
 whom King 
Don Emanoel
 of glorious memory had sent as Am∣bassador to 
China,
 in 
Fernando Perez
 his ship, at such time as 
Lopo Suarez d' Alber∣garia
 governed the 
Indies.
 At the entrance into the gate the 
Mandarin
 and his people made head against us, so that there was a shrewd bickering between us, this enemy shew∣ing another manner of courage then we had met with on the bridge; but by good hap it fortuned that one of our servant hit the 
Mandarin
 just in the breast with an Harque∣busse shot, and overthrew him dead from his Horse, wherewith all the 
Chinesses
 were so terrified, as they presently turned their backs, and in great disorder retired within the gate, not one of them having the wit to shut it after them, so that we chased them before us with our Lances, as if they had been a drove of cattell: In this sort they fled pell mell to∣gether quite through a great street, and issued out at another gate, which was on the lands from whence they got all away, not so much as one remaining behind. There∣upon 
Antonio de Faria,
 assembling his men into one body, for fear of some disorder, marched with them directly to the prison, where our companions lay, who seeing us coming, gave a great cry, saying, 
Lord have mercy upon us,
 straightway the doors and iron grates were broken up, and our poor fellows irons knocked off their legs, which being done, and they set at liberty, all our company had leave to make what purchase they could, to the end that without speaking afterwards of partition, every one might be Ma∣ster of what he had gotten. Howbeit 
Antonio de Faria
 desired them to perform it sud∣denly, and therefore he gave them but half an houres time for it, whereunto they all con∣descended very willingly, and so 
ell to ransacking the houses. In the mean space 
Anto∣nio de Faria
 went to that of the 
Mandarin,
 which he took for his part, where he met with eight thousand 
Taeis
 in silver, together with eight great vessels full of Muske, and that he caused to be reserved for himself; the rest he left to the servants that were with him, who moreover found there a great deal of raw Silke, Sattin, Damask, and fine Pourcellain, whereof every one took as much as he could carry, so as the four Barques, and the three Champanaes, that brought our men on shore, were four several times la∣den and unladen aboard the Juncks, insomuch that the meanest Marriner amongst us spake not of this booty but by whole cases, besides what each one concealed in his particular.


But when 
Antonio de Faria
 perceived that an hour and half had been spent in pil∣laging, he commanded a surcease thereof, but his company were so hot upon the spoil, that by no means they would be drawn from it, wherein the persons of qualitie were most saul∣ty, in which regard our Captain fearing least some disaster might happen by reason the night approached, he caused the Town to be set on fire in eleven or twelve places; Now for that most of it was built of Firr, and other wood, it was in such a flame within a quarter of an hour, as to see it burn so, one would have taken it for a pourtraiture of Hell. This done, and all our company retired, 
Antonio de Faria
 embarqued without any im∣pediment, every man being well satisfied and contented, onely it was great pittie to behold a number of handsome maids lead away, tied four and four and five and five together


with the matches of their Muskets, weeping and lamenting, whilst our people did no∣thing but laugh and sing.






CHAP. XXIII. 
Antonio de Faria
's Navigation till he came to the Port of 
Liampoo
; his arrival and gallant reception there by the Portugals.


AFter that 
Antonio de Faria
 had embarqued his men, the first thing he did was 
o give order for the dressing of those that were hurt,
 which were in number fif∣tie, whereof eight of them were 
Portugals,
 and the rest slaves and Mariners: He also took care for the burial of the dead, that were not above nine, of which onely one was a 
Portugal.
 All that night we kept good watch, and placed Sentinels in sundry parts, for fear of the Junks that were upon the River; The next morning as soon as it was day, our Captain went to a little Town that was on the other side of the water, where he met not with any Inhabitant, they being all fled, howbeit he found a great deal of Merchan∣dise in their houses, together with good store of Victuals, wherewith he had laded the Junks, fearing lea
t that which he had done in this place, should be the occasion of barring him from being furnished with any in the Ports where he should happen to arrive. Fur∣thermore, by the advice of his company, he resolved to go and winter, during the three moneths he had yet to make his voyage in, at a certain desart Island, distant some fifteen leagues from the Sea of 
Liampoo,
 called 
Pullo Hinhor,
 where there was a good road, and good water; whereunto he was chiefly induced, because he thought that going directly to 
Liampoo,
 his voyage thither might bring some prejudice to the traffique of the 
Portugals,
 who wintered there peaceably with their goods: And indeed this advice was so approved of every one, as it was generally applauded. Being departed then from 
Nouday
▪ after we had sailed five dayes between the Isles of 
Comolem,
 and the continent, we were set upon on 
Saturday
 about noon by a Pirate, named 
Premata Gundel,
 a sworn enemy to the 
Portugals,
 unto whom he had oftentimes done much damage, as well at 
Patana,
 as at 
Sunda, Siam,
 and many other places, when he found himself the stronger. This Ro∣ver beleeving that we were 
Chineses
 came and assailed us with two great Juncks, where∣in there were two hundred fighting men, besides Mariners; One of them being grappled to 
Mem Taborda
's Junk had almost made her self Master of it, which 
Quiay Panian
 per∣ceiving, who was a little before, he turned upon her, and with full sails running her on the Sta
board side gave her so terrible a shock, that they sank both together, whereby 
Mem Taborda
 was delivered from the danger he was in, howbeit 
Quia Panian
 was instantly, and so opportunely succoured by three Lorches, which 
Antonio de Faria
 had taken a lit∣tle before at 
Nouday,
 that all his men in a manner were saved, but every one of the ene∣mies were drowned: In the mean time the Pyrate 
Premata Gundel,
 setting upon the great Junk, wherein 
Antonio de Faria
 was, the first thing he did was to grapple her poop to prow with two great cramp-irons, fastened to long chains, whereupon began such a fight betwixt them, as deserved to be seen, which for half an hour was so coura∣giously maintained by the Enemie, that 
Antonio de Faria
 and most of his men were hurt, and himself besides in danger twice to have been taken; neverthelesse it was his good hap to be relieved in time by three Lorches, and a small Junck, commanded by 
Pedro de Sylva,
 by which means it pleased God that ours not onely recovered what they had lo
t, but pressed the Enemie in such sort, as the fight ended with the death of fourscore and six 
Mahometans,
 which were in 
Antonio de Faria
's Junk, and had held him up so strait, that our men had nothing left them but the fore-deck in her: After this we entred into the Pirates Junck, and put all those to the edge of the Sword that we found there, not sparing so much as one, all the Mariners having cast themselves before into the Sea. Howbeit we got not this victorie so cheap, but that it cost seventeen mens lives, where∣of five were 
Portugals,
 and of the best Souldiers we had, besides three and fourty were hurt▪ 
Antonio de Faria
 being one of them, who had one wound with a dart, and two with a sword. The fight being ended in this sort, an Inventorie was taken of all that was in the enemies Junck, and this prize was estimated at fourscore thousand 
Ta
is,
 the better part whereof consisted in 
Lingots
 of silver of 
Iapan,
 which the Pirate had taken in three Merchants Ships, that from 
Firando
 were bound for 
Chincheo,
 so that the Pirate had in


this onely vessel to the value of sixscore thousand crowns, and it was thought that the other Junck which was sunk was worth 
s much, to the extream grief of all our com∣pany. With this prize 
Antonio de Faria
 retired to a little Island, called 
Buncalou,
 which was three or four Leagues Westward from thence, and much commended for good wa∣ter, and safe riding: Having landed in this place, we spent eighteen dayes there, lodging in Cabbins, that were made for the accommodation of our hurt men. From this Island we sailed towards that part, whither we had resolved before to go, namely, 
Antonio de Faria
 in the great Junk, 
Mem Taborda,
 and 
Antonio Anriquez
 in theirs, 
Pedro de Sylva
 in the lit∣tle Junk, that was taken at 
Nouday,
 and 
Quiay Panian
 with all his followers in the Pyrats, last taken, which was given him in recompence of his that he had lost, together with twen∣ty thousand 
Taeis
 out of the general booty, wherewith he rested very well contented, being done with the consent of the whole company at the request of 
Antonio de Faria.
 Sail∣ing in this manner we arrived six dayes after at the Ports of 
Liampoo,
 which are two Islands, one just against another, distant three Leagues from the place, where at that time the 
Portugals
 used their commerce; There they had built above a thousand houses, that were governed by Sheriffs, Auditors, Consuls, Judges, and six or seven other kinde of Officers, where the Notaries underneath the publique Acts, which they made, wrote thus, 
I▪ such a one, publique Notarie of this Town of Liampoo for the King our Soveraign Lord.
 And this they did with as much confidence and assurance, as if this place had been scitu∣ated between 
Santarem
 and 
Lisbon
; so that there were houses there which cost three or four thousand Duckats the building, but both they and all the rest were afterwards de∣molished for our sins by the 
Chineses,
 as I hope to relate more amply hereafter: Whereby one may see how uncertain our 
ffairs are in 
China,
 whereof the 
Portugals
▪ discourse with so much curiosity, and abused by apparances make such account, never considering what hazard they hourly run, and how they are exposed to infinite disasters.


Between these two Islands, which the Inhabitants of the Country, and they that sail in those Seas, call the Ports of 
Liampoo,
 there is a channel, some two Harquebuse shot o∣ver, and five and twenty fathom deep, where in certain places is very good anchoring, as also a pleasant River of fresh water, which takes his beginning from the top of a mountain, and passeth by thick woods of Cedar, Oak, and Firr trees, whereof many Ships make their provision for Sail-yards, Masts and Planks, never costing them a penny. At these Islands 
Antonio de Faria
 cast anchor on Wednesday morning, and there 
Mem Taborda,
 and 
Antonio Anriquez
 desired him to give them leave to go and advertise the Town of his Arrival, as likewise to understand the news of the Country, and whether there was any speech of that which he had done at 
Nouday
; For in case his coming should prove ne∣ver so lit
le prejudiciall to them, he was resolved (as I have formerly related) to winter in the Isle of 
Pullo Hinhor,
 concerning the which they promised with all diligence to advertize him so much as they could learn: To this request of theirs, 
Antonio de Faria
 condescended very willingly, and withall sent certain Letters by them, directed to the Principal Governours of the Town, whereby he made them a brief Recitall of the successe of his Voyage, and instantly desired them to advise him what they would have him to do, being ready to obey them accordingly, with many other complements of kindnesse, from whence oftentimes much profit arises, without any charge at all. 
An∣tonio Anriquez
 and 
Mem Taborda
 departed about evening, and within two hours of night, they arrived at the Town, where as soon as the Inhabitants heard the effect of their Message, they presently assembled upon the ringing of a Bell, at the Church of the concep∣tion of our Lady, being the Cathedral of six or seven others in the Town, there they de∣liberated upon the Letters which 
Antonio Anrqiuez
 and 
Mem Taborda
 had delivered, and in the end having considered the great liberalitie that 
Antonio de Faria
 had used, as well to them as to all the rest that had part in the Junk, they concluded to acknowledge it un∣to him by all demonstrations of affection; For which purpose they returned him a Letter, signed by them all, as the Resolution of a General Assembly, and sent it him together with two 
Lantea
 full of divers refreshments, and that by an ancient Gentleman, named 
Ie∣ronimo de Rego,
 a Personage of great wisdome and authoritie amongst them: In this Let∣ter they g
ve him thanks in very courteous termes, both for the exceeding favour he had done them by rescuing their goods out of the enemies hands, and for the noble T
stimo∣nie he had given them of his aff
ction by his extraordinary liberality towards them, for


which they hoped that God would throughly requite him: As for the fear he was in touch∣ing his wintering there, by reason of what had past at 
Nouday,
 he might be confident that way, because the Country was so full of trouble, by occasion of a mighty uprore that was then amongst the people thereof, as if he had razed the very Citie of 
Canton
 it self, they would not much regard it, wherefore he might well thinke they would care much lesse for that which he had done at 
Nouday,
 which in 
China,
 compared with many others, was no greater then 
Oeyras
 in 
Portugal
 is, being equally with 
Lisbon
: And concerning the good news he had sent them of his arrivall in their Port, they earnestly desired him to continue still at anchor there six dayes longer, that they might in the mean while make some fit preparation for his entertaiment, seeing that thereby onely they should be able to testifie their good will unto him, having not the power other wayes to acquit so many obligations, wherein they stood ingaged unto him. These words of kindness were accom∣panied with many other complements, whereunto 
Antonio de Faria
 returned them a most curteous Answer, and condescending to their desire, he sent all his sick men on shore in the two 
Lanteaas,
 which brought the refreshments, whom those of 
Liampoo
 received with great shew of affection and charity, for presently they were lodged in the richest houses of the Town, and plentifully accommodated with all things necessary for them, want∣ing nothing. Now during the six dayes 
Antonio de Faria
 remained in that place, there was not a man of any qualitie in all the Town, but came and visited him with ma∣ny presents, and divers sorts of provisions, refreshments, and fruits, and that in such abun∣dance, that we were amazed to behold them, the more too for the good order and mag∣nificence wherewith every thing was accompanied.


During the six dayes,
 that 
Antonio de Faria
 continued in the Port according to his pro∣mise to them of 
Liampoo,
 he never budgd from his Ships▪ At length on Sunday morning before day, which was the time limited for our going to the Town, an excellent consort of Musick was heard, both of Instruments and Voyces, the harmony whereof was won∣derfully pleasing, and after that a Triumph of Drums and Trumpets together, according to the manner of our own country: Then some two houres before Sun-rising, the night be∣ing very quiet, and the Moon exceeding bright, 
Antonio de Faria
 set sail with his whole Fleet, having all his Ships decked with Silken Flaggs, and streamers of sundry Colours, and every 
scuttle
 both of the greater and lesser masts hung round about with cloth of Silver, and many brave Standards of the same: After these Vessels followed a number of row-Barges, wherein were a great many of Trumpets, Hoboyes, Flutes, Fifes, Drums, and other such Instruments, each one of a several Invention.


When it was broad day the winde began to calm, as we were within half a League of the Town, whereupon there came presently to us some twenty 
Lanteaas,
 very well set forth, and full of Musicians, that played on divers Instruments; So in lesse then an hour we arrived at the Road, but first there came aboard 
Antonio de Faria
 about threescore Boats and 
Manchaas,
 adorned with Pavilions and Banners of Silke, as also with Turkie Carpets of great value; In these Boats were about three hundred men, all richly apparrel∣led, with chains of Gold, and guilt Swords, hanging in Belts after the fashion of 
Affrick,
 every thing so well accommodated, that we which beheld this Equipage, were no lesse con∣tented then astonished therewith. With this train 
Antonio de Faria
 came to the Town, where there stood ranged in excellent order twenty six ships, and fourscore Junks, besides a great sort of 
Vancons
 and 
Barcasses,
 all in File one after another, so making as it were a fair long street, every where beautified with Pines, Laurels, and green Canes, with many Triumphal Arches, beset with Cherries, Pears, Lemons, Oranges, and sundry odoriferous green Herbs, wherewith the Masts and Cordage were covered all over. As soon as 
Anto∣nio de Faria
 came neer the place, which was prepared for his landing, he saluted the Town with a great pe
l of Ordnance, which was instantly answered with the like by all the Ships, Junks and Barques before mentioned, in order, a matter very pleasing, and wherewith the 
Chinese
 Merchants were so taken, as they demanded of us, Whether this man, unto whom we did so much honour, was either the brother or kinsman of our King? whereunto certain chief me
 of the Town answered, 
That his Father shod the Horses, whereon the King of
 Portugal 
rode, and that in that regard all this honour was done him
; adding withall, 
That they thought themselves scarce worthy to be his slaves, much lesse his servants
; The 
Chineses
 beleeving all this to be true, said one to another, as it were in admiration; 
Verily, there be great Kings


in the world, whereof our ancient Historians for want of knowledge of them have made no men∣tion in their Writings, and it seems that above them all, the King of these
 Portugals 
is to be most esteemed, for by that which is delivered to us of his greatnesse, he must needs be richer, more mighty, and greater then either the Tartar, or the Cauchin, as is most apparent, since be that shooes his horses, which is but an ordinary and contemptible trade in every Country, is so respected by those of his Nation
; Whereupon another that heard his Companion say thus, 
Certainly,
 said he, 
this Prince is so great, that if it were not a blasphemy, one might almost compare him to the Son of the Sun
; The rest that were about him added, 
It well ap∣pears to be so by the great riches which this bearded Nation get in every place where they come by the power of their armes, wherewith they affront all the People of the world.
 This salutation being ended on either part, a 
Lanteaa
 came aboard 
Antonio de Faria's
 Junk, gallantly equipped, and covered all over with boughs of Chesnut trees, full of their bristled 
ruit just as they grew, and intermingled with delicate small green trees, which those of the Country call 
Lechias,
 stuck every where with most fragrant Roses and Violets, all plash∣ed so close together, that we could not see the Rowers; now upon the upper end of the Deck of this Vessel, there was a kinde of State set up, made of Tynsell, under the which stood a silver chair, and about it six girles of about some ten or eleven yeares of age a piece, wonderful beautiful, and that very harmoniously accorded their voyces, to certain Instru∣ments of Musick whereon they playd: In this 
Lanteaa
 then 
Antonio de Faria
 embar∣qued himself, and so arrived at the Key with a great noyse of Hoyboys, Trumpets, Drums, Fifes, and other such like, after the manner of the 
Chineses, Malayoes, Champaas, Siamites, Borneos, Lequios,
 and other people, that were then in the Haven under the protection of th
 
Portugals,
 for fear of the Pi
ates, which in great numbers over-ran all that Sea. Being landed he found a chair of State provided for him, like unto one of those wherein the principall 
Cha
ms
 of the Empire are usually carried; In this, but with much refusall first on his side, was he placed, and it being supported by eight silver pillars, it was taken up by eight of the chiefest persons amongst them, apparrelled in gowns of cloth of Gold richly imbroidered, and so was he carried on their shoulders into the Town, environed with threescore Halberdeers, bravely set forth, and their Halberds Damasked with 
old and Silver, before him also marched eight Sergeants at Armes, carrying great guilt Maces, clo∣thed in Hongarlines of Crimson-Velvet embroidered with Gold; In the head of them rode eight Knights mounted on gallant white Steeds, and attired in Sattin of the same colour, with white Damask Ensigns, and brave plumes of white Feathers, and fore∣most of all were eight other men likewise on Horseback, wearing Crimson, and green Velvet Caps, which ever and anon cryed out after the manner of 
China
 for people to make way. In this sort was 
Antonio de Faria
 carried along till alighting out of his chair he went to visit the Governours of the Town, who in way of complement prostrated them∣selves at his feet, wherein some small time being spent, two ancient Gentlemen, who had lived long in that place, the one named 
Tristan de Gaa,
 and the other 
Ieronimo de Rego,
 made an eloquent Oration in the commendation of him: That done, he was led from thence to the Church through a long street, adorned on both sides with Laurel and Firr Trees, below strewed with Rushes, and above hung with Sattin and Damask, amongst the which divers court-cupboards were placed, whereon stood very curious perfuming pans of Silver, from whence most pleasing and delicious odours breathed forth: Neer to the end of this street was a Tower of Deal Boards erected, painted all over, as if it had been stone, on the top whereof, under a Banner of white Damask, the Royal Arms of 
Portu∣gal
 were limned in Gold; and in a window of the same Tower, certain little Boyes were drawn, attired after the 
Portugal
 fashion, as al
o an old Woman, that seemed to weep, and hold a man lying dis-membred at her feet, whom some eleven or twelve armed 
Castillians
 were a killing, having their Halberds and Partizans dyed with his bloud; All which Fi∣gures were done so to the life, that one would have thought them to have been the very persons they represented. Now this was to signifie how 
Nimo Gonçalles de Faria,
 chief of that Noble Family, gave for his armes his own body, at such time as he was slain in the Wars, that had been anciently between 
Castile
 and 
Portugal.
 Presently hereupon as soon as a clock, that was on the top of the said Tower, had struck thrice, and that the peo∣ple upon this signal were all silent, there came a venerable old man out of the principall gate, apparrelled in a robe of Crimson Damask, accompanied with four Beadles, vvhich


carried silver Maces before him: Having made a lovv reverence to 
Antonio de Faria,
 he told him in termes full of respect, how much all the Inhabitants were obliged unto him, as well for the great liberality he had used towards them, as for the favour he had done them, by having been the onely cause of the recovery of their goods, in acknovv∣ledgement whereof they all offered themselves to be his Vassals for the time to come, and to do him the Homage of Tributaries as long as he lived: And further, if he pleased to cast his eye upon that Table before him, he should behold there as in a clear Mirror, with how much fidelity his Ancestors had gained the honourable name of his Family, as it was ma∣nifest to all the people of 
Spain,
 whereby he might well perceive how much it was for his honour that he had performed such generous actions, in regard whereof he most earnestly besought him, and that in the Name of them all, that for a beginning of the Tribute, which they offered to give him by way of Vassallage, he would be pleased to accept of a small Present, they now had brought him, onely for to defray the charge of Match for his Soul∣diers, and that for the rest wherein they stood so far ingaged to him, they promised to dis-ob∣lige themselves in time and place convenient; whereupon they presented him with five C
ses full of Lingots of Silver, to the value of ten thousand Taeis. 
Antonio de Faria
 ha∣ving very courteously thanked the good old man for this many Honours had hitherto been done him, as also for the present they now offered unto him, excused himself from recei∣ving of it, though he were very much importuned thereunto.


Antonio de Faria
 setting forward then to go to the Church, whither he was to have been conducted under a rich Canopie,
 which six of the chiefest and honourablest Inhabitants of 
Liampoo
 were there ready with for him, he would by no means accept of it, telling them that he vvas not born to have so much honour as they would do him, and so he pro∣ceeded on without other pompe then ordinary, being ac
mpanied with a world of peo∣ple, as well 
Portugals
 as others of divers Nations, who for commerce sake wete come to that Port, as the best and richest that was then in that Country. In the mean space whereso∣ever he cast his eye he saw nothing but publique rejoycings, which consisted in daunces, Masks, and Playes of several kindes, invented by those of the Country that lived amongst us; all which became more splendidious by the Trumpets, Cornets, Hoboys, Flutes, Harps, Vials, Fifes, and Drums, that were heard in every corner, and confounded together in a Labyrinth of Voyces after the manner of 
China,
 which so amazed the sense, that one knew not whether it were a dream or no, so extraordinary it seemed: Being arrived at the Church door, eight Priests came forth to receive him covered vvith Copes all embroidered vvith Gold and Silver, vvho going in Procession began to sing 
Te Deum,
 whereunto many excellent voyces tuned to the Organs answered, which made up as harmonious Mu∣sick as could be heard in the Chappel of any great Prince: In this sort he was carried up to the High Altar, where there was a State of White Damask, and under it a Chair of Carnation Velvet, and at the foot of it a Cushion of the same; In this Chair he sate him down and heard Masse, which was celebrated vvith a great deal of Ceremonie, and a mar∣vellous consort both of Voyces and Instruments. Masse being ended, the Sermon follow∣ed, that was made by 
Estevano Nogueyra,
 an ancient man, and Curate of the place, vvho, to speak the truth through discontinuance of preaching, was but little verst in Pul∣pit matters, and illiterate vvithall, howbeit desiring to shew himself that day a learned man in so remarkable a solemnity, he laboured to make demonstration of his best Rhe∣torick; To which effect he grounded all his Sermon on the Prayses of 
Antonio de Faria,
 and that in words so ill placed, and so far from his Text, as our Captain was much asha∣med at it, wherefore some of his friends pluckt him three or four times by the Surplis for to make him give over, wherewith being ne
led, he turned him about to those that would have had him leave off, 
I will not,
 said he unto them, 
but will rather say more, for I speake nothing but that which is as true as Gospel, in regard whereof, let me alone I pray you, for I have made a vow to God never to desist from commending this noble Captain, as he more then deserves at my hands, for saving me seven thousand Duckats venture, that
 Mem Taborda 
had of mine in his Iunk, and was taken from him by that dog
 Coia Acem, 
for which let the soul of so cursed a rogue and wicked Devil be tormented in Hell for ever and ever, whereunto say all with me, Amen.
 This Conclusion provoked all the Assembly so to laugh, that we could not hear one another in the Church for the noise that was made there. This tumult over, there came out of the Vestry six little Boyes, attired like Angels, with Instruments of Mu∣sick


in their hands guilt all over, and then the same Priest falling on his knees before the Al∣tar of our Lady, and lifting up his hands, began to sing aloud these words, 
Virgin, you are a Rose,
 wh
reunto the little Boyes answered very melodiously with their Instruments, all being performed with such harmony and devotion, as it drew tears from most of the As∣sistants.


Masse being finished, the four principal Governours of the Town, namely, 
Mateus de Brito, Lançarote Pereyra, Ieronimo de Rego,
 and 
Tristan de Gaa,
 came unto 
Antonio de Fa∣ria,
 and b
ing accompanied with all the 
Portugals,
 which were above a thousand in num∣ber, they conducted him into a great place before the Town Hall, that was compassed a∣bout with a small thick wood of Chesnut Trees, all full of Fruit just as they grew, ador∣ned above with Standards and Banners of Silk, and strewed below with 
Flower de luces,
 and Red and White Roses, whereof there is great abundance in 
China.
 In this Wood were three long Tables set, under a goodly spacious Arbor, that was covered over with Myrtle, and round about were divers Conduits of Water, which ran from one to the other by certain Inventions of the 
Chineses,
 that were so subtile, as one could not possibly discern the secret; For by the means of a kinde of Bellows like unto that of an Organ, that was joyned to the principall Conduit, the water rebounded up so high, that when it came to descend again it fell as small as dew, so that with one onely pot full of water, they could gently moisten that great place; before these three Tables were three Court-cup-boards placed, upon the which was a great deal of very fine Pourcelain, and six huge Vessels of Gold, that the 
Chinese
 Merchants had borrowed of the 
Mandarins
 of the Town of 
Liam∣poo
; For in that Country Persons of quality are served all in Gold, Silver being for those of meaner condition: They brought likewise divers other pieces all of Gold, as great Ba∣sons, Saltsellers and Cups. After they were dismissed which were not for the Banquet, there onely remained those that were invited, being fourscore in number, besides fiftie of 
Antonio de Faria
's Souldiers: These being set at Table were served by young Wenches, very beautiful, and finely apparrelled, according to the manner of the 
Mandarins
; At eve∣ry course that was served up they sung very melodiously to the tune of certain Instruments vvhereon some of their companions played: As for 
Antonio de Faria
 he was served by eight Maidens, the Daughters of worthy Merchants, exceeding fair and comely, whom their Fa∣thers had brought thither for that purpose at the request of 
Mateus de Brito,
 and 
Tristan de Gaa
; They were attired like Mermaids, and carried the meat to the Table, dancing to the sound of divers Instruments, a marvellous thing to behold, and vvherewithal the 
Por∣tugals
 vvere so mightily taken, as they could not sufficiently commend the excellent Order and Gentilenesse of these Magnificencies, by which their eyes and eares were so charmed; Remarkable it was also, that at every health, the Trumpets, Hoboys, and Drums plaid their parts. In this sort the Banquet continued two hours, during vvhich there vvas al∣vvayes one device or other after the 
Portugal
 or 
Chinese
 fashion. I vvill not stand here to recount the delicacy or abundance of the meats, that vvere served up in it, for it would be a matter not onely superfluous, but even infinite to recite every thing in particular. Af∣ter they were risen from Table, they went all to another great place, that vvas invironed vvith Scaffolds, all hung with Silk, and full of People, where ten Bulls and five vvild Hor∣ses were baited, being accompanied with the sound of Trumpets, Fifes, and Drums; in se∣quel vvhereof, divers Mumme
ies of several Inventions were represented. Now because it was late 
Antonio de Faria
 vvould have imbarqued himself again for to have returned unto his Ships, but they of the Town would by no means suffer him, for they had prepa∣red the Houses of 
Tristan de Gaa,
 and 
Mateus de Brito
 for his lodging, having caused a Gallerie to be built from the one to the other for that purpose; There was he lodged ve∣ry commodiously during the space of five Months that he abode in that place, alwaies en∣tertained with new sports and delights of Fishing, Hunting, Hawking, Comedies, and Masques, as also with sumptuous Feasts, as vvell on Sundayes and Holydayes, as other Dayes of the Week, so that we passed these five Months in such pleasure, as at our depar∣ture we did not thinke vve had been there five dayes. This term expired 
Antonio de Faria
 made preparation of Vessels and Men, for his Voyage to the Mines of 
Quoaniapar
,
 for in re∣gard the season was then proper for it, he resolved to be gone as soon as possibly he could, but in the mean time it happened that 
Quiay Panian
 fell into a dangerous sickness, whereof not long after he died, to the extream grief of 
Antonio de Faria,
 vvho exceedingly affected him


for many good qualities that were in him, worthy of his friendship, and therefore he cau∣sed him to be honourably buried, as the last dutie that he could do to his Friend. After the the death of 
Quiay Pa
ia
 he was counselled not to hazard himself in that Voyage, be∣cause it was reported for a certainty, how all that Country was up in arms by reason of the Wars which the 
Prechau Muan
 had with the Kings of 
Chamay,
 and 
Champaa
; And withall he had Information given him of a famous Pirate, named 
Similau,
 whom he went presently to seek out, and having found him, the said 
Similau
 related strange wonders un∣to him of an Island, called 
Calempluy,
 where he assured him there were seventeen Kings of 
China
 interred in Tombes of Gold, as also a great number of Idols of the same Met
al, and such other immense treasures, as I dare not deliver, for fear of not being credited. Now 
Antonio de Faria,
 being naturally curious, and carried with that ambition, whereunto Souldiers are for the most part inclined, lent so good ear to this 
Chineses
 report, as looking for no other assurance of it then what he gave him, he presently resolved to undertake this Voyage, and expose himself to danger, without taking further counsel of any man, where∣at many of his friends were with reason offended.






CHAP. XXIV. 
Antonio de Faria
 departs from 
Liampoo
 for to seek out the Island of 
Calempluy,
 the strange things that we saw, and the hazard we ran in our voyage thither.


THe season being now fit for Navigation,
 and 
Antonio de Faria
 furnished with all that was necessary for this new Voyage, which he had undertaken to make on 
Munday
 the fourteenth of 
May,
 in the year one thousand five hundred forty and two, he departed from this Port to go to the Island of 
Calempluy
▪ For which purpose he imbarqued in two 
Pa∣
oures,
 resembling small Gallies, but that they were a little higher, by reason he was coun∣selled not to use Junks, as well to avoid discovery, as in regard of the great curran
 of wa∣ter that descended from the Bay of 
Nanquin,
 which great Vessels with all their sails were not able to stem, especially at the time wherein he set forth, for then the snows of 
Tar∣taria
 and 
Nixihu
fla
 dissolving ran all the Months of 
May, Iune,
 and 
Iuly,
 into these Seas with a most violent impetuosity. In these two Vessels were fiftie 
Portugals,
 one Priest to say Masse, and fortie eight Marriners, all Natives of 
Patana,
 as also two and fortie slaves, so that the whole number of our company amounted to an hundred forty and one persons, for the Pirate 
Simila
,
 who was our Pilot, would have no more men, nor Vessels, for fear of being known, because he was to traverse the streight of 
Nanquin,
 and to enter into Rivers that were much frequented, whereby we might probably be subject to great haz
rd. That day and al the night following we imployed in getting out from amongst the Islands of 
An∣gitur,
 and pursued our course through Seas, which the 
Portugals
 had neither seen nor sailed on till then. The first five dayes we had the wind favourable enough, being still within sight of land till we came to the mouth of the River of the Fishings of 
Nanquin
; There we cro
t over a Gulf of forty leagues, and discovered a very high Mountain, called 
Nangafo,
 to∣wards the which bending Northerly, we sailed fiftie dayes; at length the wind abated somewhat, and because in that place the Tides were very great, 
Similau
 put into a little Ri∣ver, where was good anchoring and riding, inhabited by men that were white and hand∣some, having very little eyes, like to the 
Chineses,
 but much different from them, both in language and attire. Now during the space of three dayes, that we continued there, the In∣habitants would have no manner of communication with us, but contrariwise they came in troopes to the shore, by which we anchored, and running up and down like mad-men they howled in a most hideous fashion, and shot at us with slings and cross-bows. As soon as the weather and the sea would permit us, 
Similau,
 by whom all vvas then governed, be∣gan to set sail, directing his course East Northeast, and so proceeded seven dayes in sight of land; then traversing another Gulfe, and turning more directly to the East, he past through a straight, ten le
gues over, called 
Sileupaquin
; There he sailed five dayes more, still in view of many goodly Cities and Towns, this River being frequented with an infinite company of Vessels; whereupon 
Antonio de Faria,
 knowing that if he hapned to be discovered he should never escape with life, resolved to get from thence▪ and continue this course no lon∣ger, which 
Similau
 perceiving, and opposing the advice that every one gave him; 
Signior,
 said unto him, 
I do not think that any of your company can accuse me for mis-performing my


duty hitherto, you know how at
 Liampoo 
I told you publiquely in the General Councel that was held in the Church before an hundred
 Portugals 
at the least, that we were to expose our selves to great dangers, and chiefly my self, because I was a
 Chinese 
and a Pilot, for all you could be made to endure but one death, wheras I should be made to endure two thousand if it were possible, whereby you may well conclude, that setting apart all treason, I must of necessity be faithful unto you, 
s I am, and ever will be, not only this Voyage, but in all other enterprizes, in despight of those that murmur, and make false reports unto you of me; howbeit if you fear this danger so much as you say, and are therefore pleased that we shall take some other way lesse frequented with men and vessels, and where we may sail without dread of any thing, then you must be contented to bestow a far longer time in this voyage, wherefore resolve with your company upon it without any further delay, or let us return back, for lo I am ready to do what∣soever you will. Antonio de Faria,
 embracing, and giving him many thanks, fell to dis∣course with him about that other safer way of which he spake: Whereupon 
Similau
 told him, that some hundred and forty leagues further forwards to the North, there was a River somewhat larger by half a league, called 
Sumhepadano,
 where he should meet with no Obstacle, for that it was not peopled like the streight of 
Nanquin,
 wherein they now were, but that then they should be retarded a month longer, by the exceeding much wind∣ing of this River. 
Antonio de Faria
 thinking it far better to expose himself to a length of time, then to hazard his life for abridgement of way, followed the counsel that 
Similau
 gave him; so that going out of the streight of 
Nanquin,
 he coasted the land five dayes, at the end whereof we discovered a very high Mountain towards the East, which 
Similau
 told us was called 
Fanius
; approaching somewhat neer unto it we entred into a very fair Port, forty fathom deep, that extending it self in the form of a Crescent was shel∣tred from all sorts of winds, so spacious withall, as two thousand Vessels how great soever might ride there at ease. 
Antonio de Faria
 went ashore with some ten or eleven Souldiers, and rounded this haven, but could not meet with any one body, that could instruct him in the way he pretended to make, whereat he was very much vext, and greatly repented him for that without any kinde of consideration, or taking advice of any one, he had rashly, and out of a capacious humour, undertaken this Voyage: Howbeit he dissembled this displea∣sure of his the best he could for fear lest his company should tax him with want of courage. In this Haven he discoursed again with 
Similau
 before every one concerning this our Na∣vigation, which he told him was made but by guesse; whereunto the 
Chinese
 answered, 
Signior Captain, If I had any thing I could engage to you of more value then my head, I pro∣test unto you I would most willingly do it, for I am so sure of the course I hold, that I would not fear to give you my very children in Hostage of the promise I made you at
 Liampoo: 
Never∣thelesse I advertise you again, that if repenting the undertaking of this enterprise you fear to proceed any further, in regard of the tales your people are ever tatling in your ear, as I have often observed, do but command, and you shall finde how ready I am to obey your pleasure: And whereas they would make you believe that I spin out this Voyage longer then I promised you at
 Liampoo, 
the reason thereof you know well enough, which seemed not amisse when I pro∣pounded it unto you, seeing then you once allowed of it, let me intreat you to set your heart at rest for that matter, and not to break off this design by returning back, whereby at length you shall finde how profitable this patience of yours will prove.
 This speech somewhat quieted 
Antonio de Faria
's minde, so that he bid him go on as he thought best, and never trouble himself with the murmuring of the Souldiers, whereof he complained, saying, that it was ever the manner of such as were idle, to finde fault with other mens actions, but if they did not mend their error the sooner, he would take a course with them to make them to do it; wherewith 
Similau
 rested very well satisfied and contented.


After we were gone from this Haven, we sailed along the coast above thirteen dayes together, alwaies in sight of land, and at length arrived at a Port, called 
Buxipalem,
 in the height of fortie nine degrees. We found this Climate somewhat colder then the rest, here we saw an infinite company of Fishes and Serpents, of such strange forms, as I cannot speak of them without fear; 
Similau
 told 
Antonio de Faria
 incredible things concerning them, as well of what he had seen himself, having been there before, as of that had been re∣ported unto him, especially in the full Moons of the months of 
November, December,
 and 
Ianuary,
 when the storms raign there most, as indeed this 
Chinese
 made it appear to our own eyes, whereby he justified unto us the most of that which he had af∣firmed.


For in this place we saw Fishes in the shape of Thornbacks that were four fathoms about, and had a Muzzle like an Oxe; likewise we saw others resembling great Lizards, spotted all over with green and black, having three rows of prickles on their backs, that were very sharp, and of the bignesse of an arrow; their bodies also were full of the like, but they were neither so long, nor so great as the others: These Fishes would ever and anon bristle up themselves like Porcupines, which made them very dreadful to be∣hold, they had Snouts that were very sharp and black, with two crooked teeth out of each jawbone, two spans long, like the tusks of a wild Boar. We also saw Fishes whose bo∣dies were exceeding black, so prodigious and great, that their heads onely were above six spans broad. I will passe over in silence many other Fishes of sundry sorts, which we be∣held in this place, because I hold it not fit to stand upon things that are out of my discourse, let it suffice me to say, that during two nights we stayed here we did not thinke our selves safe, by reason of the Lizards, Whales, Fishes and Serpents, which in great numbers shew∣ed themselves to us. Having left this Haven of 
Buxipalem,
 by us called the River of Ser∣pents, which in great numbers shewed themselves to us, 
Similau
 sailed fifteen leagues fur∣ther to another Bay named 
Calindano,
 which was in form of a Crescent, six leagues in cir∣cuit, and invironed with high Mountains, and very thick woods, amidst whereof divers Brooks of fresh waters descended, which made up four great Rivers that fell all into this Bay. There 
Similau
 told us, that all those prodigious creatures we had both seen and heard of, as well in this Bay, as in that where we were before, came thither to feed upon such Ordure and Carrion, as the overflowing of these Rivers brought to this place. 
Antonio de Faria
 demanding of him thereupon, whence those Rivers should proceed, he answered that he knew not, but it was said that the Annals of 
China
 affirmed, how two of those Ri∣vers took their beginnings from a great L
ke, called 
Moscombia,
 and the other two from a Province, named 
Alimania,
 where there are high Mountains, that all the year long are cove∣red with Snow, so that the Snow coming to dissolve, these Rivers swelled in that manner as we then beheld them, for now they were bigger, then at any other time of the year. Hereunto he added, that entring into the mouth of the River, before the which we rode at anchor, we should continue our course, steering Eastward, for to finde out the Port of 
Nan∣quin
 again, which we had left two hundred and threescore leagues behinde us, by reason that in all this distance we had multiplied a greater height then that of the Island was, which we were in quest of. Now although this was exceeding grievous unto us, yet 
Simi∣lau
 desired 
Antonio de Faria
 to think the time we had past well spent, because it was done for the best, and for the better securing of our lives; being asked then by 
Antonio de Faria
 how long vve should be in passing through this River, he answered that vve should be out of it in fourteen or fifteen dayes, and that in five dayes after he would promise to land him and his Souldiers in the Island of 
Calempluy,
 vvhere he hoped fully to content his desire, and to make him think his pains vvell bestowed, vvhereof he now so complained. 
Antonio de Faria,
 having embraced him very lovingly thereupon; vowed to be his friend for ever, and reconciled him to his Souldiers, vvho were very much out vvith him before. Being thus reconfirmed by 
Similau
 speeches, and certified of this nevv course vve vvere to take, he in∣couraged his company, and put all things in order convenient for his design, to that end pre∣paring his Ordnance vvhich till then had never been charged; he caused also his Arms to be made ready, ordained Captains, and Sentinels to keep good vvatch, together vvith all be∣sides that he thought necessary for our defence, in case of any attempt upon us. That done, he spake unto 
Diego Lobato,
 who vvas the Priest that vve carried along with us, and one that we much respected as a man of the Church, to make a Sermon unto his company for to animate them against all dangers that might happen, which he worthily performed, and by the efficacy of his words, full of sweetnesse, and excellent examples, he so revived our spirits, that before were much dejected through the apprehension of the dangers that me∣naced us, as there vvas not one amongst us, but presently took fresh heart, boldly to execute the enterprise vve had undertaken: Whereupon with great devotion and zeal vve sung a 
Salvo,
 before an Image of our Lady, every man promising vvithout any future fear to fi∣nish the Voyage we had begun. That done, vve joyfully hoysed sail, and entring into the mouth of the River, steering directly East, and vvith tears in our eyes invoked from the bot∣tome of our hearts, the assistance of that Soveraign Lord vvhich sits at the right hand of the Father everlasting, to preserve us by his Almighty povver.


Continuing on our course with the force of Oares and Sails, and steering divers wayes, by reason of the many turnings of the River, the next day we arrived at a very high moun∣tain called 
Botinafau,
 whence sundry Rivers of fresh water ran down. In this mountain were a number Tygers, Rhinocerots, Lyons, Ounces, and such other creatures of severall kinds, which running and roaring in their wilde manner, made cruell war upon other weak∣er Beasts, as Stags, Boars, Apes, Monkeys, Baboons, Wolves, and Foxes, wherein we took much delight, spending a great deal of time in beholding them; and ever and anon we cry∣ed out from our Ships to fright them, but they were little moved with it, in regard they were not used to be hunted: We were about six dayes in passing this Mountain, it being some forty or fifty leagues long. Within a pretty while after we had left this Mountain we came to another, named 
Gangitanon,
 no lesse wilde then the former, beyond the which all the Countrie was very stonie, and almost inaccessible; moreover it was full of such thick Woods, as the Sun could not possibly pierce them with his beams: 
Similau
 told us, that in this mountain there were ninety leagues of desert land, altogether unfit for Tillage, and the bottome thereof onely was inhabited by certain most deformed men, called 
Gi∣gauhos,
 who lived after a most brutish fashion, and fed on nothing but what they got in hunting, or some Rice, that the Merchants of 
China
 brought them to 
Catan
 in exchange of Fu
es; which the said Merchants carried from thence to 
Pocasser
 and 
Lantau,
 amounting yearly as by the Books of the Customes thereof appeared, to the number of twenty thousand Ca
es, each Ca
e, or pack, containing threescore skins, wherewith the people used in win∣ter to line their Gowns, hang their Houses, and make coverings for their Beds, to withstand the cold of the Climate, which is great there. 
Antonio de Faria
 wondring at the Relation this 
Chinese
 made of the deformity of these 
Gigauhos,
 desired him if it were possible to let him see one of them, whereby he said he should more content him then if he should give him the treasures of 
China
; whereunto 
Similau
 made him this Answer, 
Signior Cap∣tain, since it it so much imports me, as well to maintain my credit with you, as to stop their mouthes that murmur against me, and that jogging one another scoffe at me, when I recount these things unto you, which they account as so many Fables, and to the end that by the truth of the one, they may be ascertained of the other, I will promise before Sun-setting yet to shew you a couple of these people, and that you shall also speak with them, upon condition you do not go a∣shore, as you have still used to do hitherto, for fear some mischance should happen to you, as ma∣ny times it doth to Merchants in like cases: For I assure you, that the
 Gigauhos 
are of so sa∣vage and brutish a nature, as they feed on nothing commonly but raw flesh and blood, like the wilde Beasts that live in this Forrest.
 So continuing our course all along the side of this Mountain, at length behinde a little point of land, we discovered a young youth, without ere an hair on his face, driving six or seven Cows before him, that pastured there by. 
Si∣milau
 making a sign to him with a napkin, he presently stayed, whereupon coming a little neerer to him, 
Similau
 shewed him a piece of green Taff
a, which he told us was a stuffe very acceptable to these brutish men, and withall by signs demanded of him whether he would buy it; this drew him to the banke of the River, were he answered with an hoarse voice, some words that we could not comprehend, because there was not one in all our Ves∣sels that understood this barbarous language, so that of necessity this commerce was to be made by signs: 
Antonio de Faria
 commanded three or four yards of the said piece of Taffeta to be given him, as also six Pourcelains, wherewith this Salvage seemed to be ve∣ry well pleased, for taking both the one and the other, transported with joy he said some∣thing to us, which we could understand no better then the former, then making a sign with his hand towards the place of his abode, he left his Cows, and ran away to the wood, clothed as he was with a Tigers skin, his arms and legs naked, bare-headed, and a staffe hardned at one end with the fi
e in his hand. For his person, he was well proportioned of his limbs, his hair red and curled hanging down on his shoulders; his stature by conjecture was above ten foot high, but we were amazed to see him return about a quarter of an hour to the very same place again, c
rrying a live Stag on his back, and having thirteen persons in his company, namely eight men and five women, leading three Cows 
yed together, and dancing as they went at the sound of a kinde of Tabor, upon the which they beat five stroaks at a time, and as often clapped their hands together singing to it, with a very hoar
e voice in their language. Hereupon 
Antonio de Faria
 caused five or six pieces of silk stuffe, and a great many of Pourcelains to be shewed them, for to make them beleeve that we were Mer∣chants,


at the sight whereof they very much rejoyced. These persons, both men and wo∣men, were apparrelled all after one and the same fashion, without any kinde of difference, saving that the women wore great tinnen Bracelets about the middle of their armes, and their hair a great deal longer then the mens, stuck all about with flowers, resembling our Flower de luces; they had chains also of red Cockles about their necks, almost as big as Oyster-shels; as for the men they carried great staves in their hands, covered to the mid∣dest with the same skins wherewith they were clothed; moreover they had all of them fierce looks, great lips, flat noses, wide nosthrils, and were of stature very tall, but yet not so high as we thought they had been; for 
Antonio de Faria
 having caused them to be measured, he found that the tallest of them exceeded not ten spans and an half, except one old man that reached to eleven. The womens stature was not fully ten spans: Their ve∣ry countenances shewed them to be very rude and blockish, and lesse rational, then all the other people which we had seen in our Conquests. Now 
Antonio de Faria
 being glad that we had not altogether lost our labour, bestowed on them threescore Pourcelains, a piece of green Taffety, and a pannier full of Pepper, wherewith they seemed to be so contented, that prostrating themselves on the ground, and lifting up their hands to heaven, they fell to saying certain words which we took for a thanksgiving after their manner, because they fell down three several times on the earth, and gave us the three Cows and the Stag, as also a great many of Herbs: Having been talking about two houres with them by signs, and no lesse wondring at us, then we at them, they returned into the wood from whence they came, and we pursued our course up the River by the space of five dayes, during the which we saw more of them along by the water side; after we had past all this distance of land, which might be some forty leagues, or thereabouts, we navigated sixteen dayes more with the force of Oa
s and Sails, without seeing any person in that desert place, onely for two nights together we discerned certain fires a good way off at land: In the end it pleased God that we arrived at the Gulf of 
Nanquin,
 as 
Similau
 had told us, with a hope in five or six dayes to see our desires accomplished.


Being come into the gulf of 
Nanquin, Similau
 councelled 
Antonio de Faria,
 that at any hand he should not suffer any 
Portugal
 to be seen, because if such a thing should happen he feared some uproar would follow amongst the 
Chineses,
 in regard no strangers had ever been seen in those quarters; adding withall, that it would be safer for them to keep still in the middle of the gulf, then by the shore, by reason of the great number of 
Lorches
 and 
Lanteaas,
 that incessantly sailed up and down; this advice was approved of every one, so that having continued our course some six dayes East and East Northeast, we discovered a great Town, called 
Sileupamor,
 whither we directly went, and entred the Haven about two houres within night, where we found an infinite company of Vessels riding at anchor, to the number, according to our thinking, of three thousand at the least, which gave us such an alarum, as not daring scarce to wag vve got out again vvith all the secrecy that might be; crossing over the vvhole breadth of the River then, which vvas some six or seven leagues, vve prosecuted our course all the rest of that day, and coacted along by a great plain, with a resolution to accommodate our selves vvith Victuals vvheresoever vve could first meet vvith any, for vve were in such scarcitie, as for thirteen dayes together, no man had more then three mouthfuls of boyled Rice allowance. Being in this extremity we arrived close to certain old buildings, there went ashore one morning before day, and fell upon a house, that stood a little vvay off from the rest, where vve found a great quantity of Ryce, some Beans, dive
s pots ful of Honey, poudred Geese, Onions, Garlick, and Sugar Canes, vvhere∣vvith vve throughly furnished our selves: Certain 
Chineses
 told us afterwards, that this vvas the storehouse of an Hospital, which vvas some two leagues off, where such were en∣tertained, as past that way in Pilgrimage to the Sepulchers of the Kings of 
China
; Being re-imbarqued, and well provided of Victual, we continued on our voyage seven daies more, which made up two months and an half, since we put out of 
Li
mpoo
; Then 
Antonio de Faria
 began to mistrust the truth of what 
Similau
 had said, so that he repented the under∣taking of this voyage, as he confessed publiquely before us all, neverthelesse in regard there was no other remedy for it but to recommend himself to God, and wisely to prepare for all that might happen, he couragiously performed it. Hereupon it fell out that 
Antonio de Faria
 having one morning demanded of 
Similau
 in what part he thought they were, he


answered him so far from the purpose, and like a man that had lost his judgement, or that knew not which way he had gone, as put 
Antonio de Faria
 into such choller, that he was going to st
b him with a Ponyard that he wore, which without doubt he had done▪ had he not been diverted from i
 by some, that counselled him to forbear, lest it should be the cause of his utter ruine, whereupon moderating his anger he yeelded to the advice of his friends, neverthelesse he was not for all that so contained, but that taking him by the Beard he swore, that if within three dayes at the farthest, he did not let him see, either the truth or the falshood of what he had told him, he would Ponyard him infallibly, where∣with 
Similau
 was so exceedingly terrified, that the night following as we were abiding by the shore he slid down from the Vessel into the River, and that so closely, as he was never discovered by the Sentinels or any other untill the end of the first Watch, when as 
Antonio de Faria
 was thereof advertised: This news put him so far besides himself, as he lost all patience, the rather for that 
e feared some revolt upon it from his Souldiers, who he saw were too much disposed thereunto. But he presently went ashore with a great ma∣ny of his company, and spent the most part of the night in seeking of 
Similau,
 without meet∣ing him, or any other living soul that was able to tell any news of him, but the worst of it yet was, that upon his return into his Junk, of forty six 
Chinese
 Mariners, that he had aboard him, he found six and thirty fled away to prevent the danger they were afraid of, whereat 
Antonio de Faria
 and all his company were so amazed, that lifting up their hands and eyes to heaven, they stood a long time mute, their tears supplying the defect of their speech, thereby testifying the secret sorrow of their hearts, for considering well what had hapned unto them, and the great peril they were in, the least that they could do in this confusion was to lose their courage and judgment, much more their speech. Howbeit falling at length to consult what we should do for the future, after much diversitie of opinion, it was in the 
nd concluded, that we should pursue our design, and labour to take some body that might inform us how far it was from thence to the Island of 
Cal
pl
y,
 and this to be done as secretly as possible might be for fear the Country should rise; likewise that if upon the report should be made us we found it would be 
 t
ke
▪ 
s 
Similau
 had assured us, we should then proceed on, otherwise, that we should 
 wi
h the current of the wa∣ter, which would bring 
s directly to the Sea with its ordinary course. This resolution taken and approved of every one, we went on with no less confusion then fear, for in so manifest a danger we could not chuse but be very much perpl
ed; the night following about break of day we discovered a little B
rque 
 he
d of us riding at 
 in the midst of the Ri∣ver; her we boarded with as little noise as might be, and took five men asleep in her, whom 
Antonio de Faria
 questioned each one apart by himself, to see how they would agree in that they said: To his demands they answered all of them, that the Country wherein we were, was called 
Temquil
m,
 from whence the Island of 
Cal
mpl
y
 was distant but ten leagues, and 
o many other questions propounded 
 
he
 for our common securitie, they answered likewise separately one from the other to very good purpose, wherewith 
Anto∣nio de Faria
 and his whole company, were exceedingly well satisfied, but yet it grieved us not a little, to think what an inconvenience the lack of 
Similau
 would prove to us in this attempt; however 
Antonio de Faria
 causing the five 
Chineses
 to be arrested, and chain∣ed to oares, continued his course two dayes and an half more, at the end whereof it pleas∣ed God that doubling a cape of land, called 
Guimai Tar
,
 we discovered this Island of 
Cal
mpluy,
 which we had been fourscore and three dayes seeking for with extream con∣fusion of pains and labour, as I have before related.






CHAP. XXV. Our Arrival at 
C
lempluy,
 and the description thereof; what hapned to 
Antonio de Faria
 in one of the Hermitages thereof, and how we were discovered.


HAving doubled the Cape of 
Cuimai Tar
,
 two leagues beyond it, we discovered a goodly levell of ground, scituated in the midst of a River, which to our seeming was not above a league in circuit, whereunto 
Antonio de Faria
 approached with exceeding great joy, vvhich yet vvas int
rmingled vvith much f
r, because he knew not to vvhat danger he and his were exposed; about twelve of the clock at night he anchored vvith∣in a Canon shot of this Island, and the next morning as soon as it vvas day he sate in Coun∣cell


with such of his company as he had called to it, there it was concluded that it was not possible so great and magnificent a thing should be without some kind of guard, and there∣fore it was resolved that with the greatest silence that might be, it should be round∣ed all about, for to see what advenues it had, or what Obstacles we might meet with when there was question of landing, to the end that accordingly we might deliberate more amply on that we had to do: With this Resolution, which was approved by every one▪ 
Antonio de Faria
 weighed anchor, and without any noyse got close to the Island, and compassing it about exactly observed every particular that presented it self to his sight. This Island was all inclosed with a platform of Jasper, six and twenty spans high, the stones whereof were so neatly wrought, and joyned together, that the wall seemed to be all of one piece, at which every one greatly marvelled, as having never seen any thing till then, either in the 
Indiaes,
 or elsewhere, that merited comparison with it; this Wall was six and twenty spans deep from the bottome of the River to the Superficies of the water, so that the full height of it was two and fifty spans. Furthermore the top of the Plat∣form was bordered with the same stone, cut into great Tower-work; Upon this wall, which invironed the whole Island, was a Gallerie of Balisters of turn'd Copper, that from six to six fathom joyned to certain Pillars of the same Mettal, upon each of the which was the figure of a Woman holding a bowl in her hand; within this gallery were divers Monsters cast in mettal, standing all in a row, which holding one another by the hand in manner of a dance incompassed the whole Island, being as I have said, a league about: A∣midst these monstrous Idols there was likewise another row of very rich Arches, made of sundry coloured pieces; a sumptuous work, and wherewith the eye might well be en∣tertained and contented; Within was a little wood of Orange Trees, without any mix∣ture of other plants, and in the midst an hundred and threescore Hermitages dedicated to the gods of the year, of whom these Gentiles recount many pleasant Fables in their Chro∣nicles for the defence of their blindness in their f
l
 belief: A quarter of a league beyond these Hermitages, towards the East, divers goodly great Edifices were seen, separated the one from the other with seven fore-fronts of Houses, built after the manner of our Churches; from the top to the bottome as far as could be discerned, these buildings were guilt all over, and annexed to very high Towers, which in all likelihood were Steeples; their Edi∣fices were invironed with two great streets arched all along, like unto the Frontispieces of the Houses; these Arches were supported by very huge Pillars, on the top whereof, and be∣tween every arch was a dainty Prospective; now in regard these buildings, towers, pillars and their chapters, were so exceedingly guilt all over, as one could discern nothing but Gold, it perswaded us that this Temple must needs be wonderfull sumptuous and rich, since such cost had been bestowed on the very Walls. After we had surrounded this whole Island, and observed the adven
es and entries thereof, notwithstanding it was somewhat late, yet would 
Antonio de Faria
 needs go ashore to see if he could get any Intelligence in one of those Hermitages, to the end he might thereupon resolve, either to prosecute his design, or return back: So having left a guard sufficient for his two Vessels, and 
Diego Lo∣bato,
 his Chaplain, Captain of them, he landed with fourty Souldiers, and twenty slaves, as well Pikes, as Harquebuses; He also carried with him four of the 
Chineses,
 which we took a while before, both for that they knew the pla
e well, as having been there at other times, and likewise that they might serve us for truthmen and guides: Being got to the shore unespied of any one▪ and without noise, we entred the Island by one of the eight Advenues that it had, and marching through the middest of the little wood of Orange-trees we arrived at the gate of the first Hermitage, which might be some two Musket-shot from the place we dis-imbarqued, where that hapned unto us which I will deliver here∣after.


Antonio de Faria
 went directly to the next Hermitage he saw before him with the great∣est silence that might be, and vvith no little fear,
 for that he knew not into what danger he was going to ingag
 himself; which he found shut on the inside, he commanded one of the 
Chineses
 to knock at it, as he did two or three times, vvhen at last he heard one speak in this manner, 
Praysed be the Creator, who hath enameled the beauty of the skies, let him that knocks at the gate go about, and he shall finde it open on the other side, where let me know what he desires.
 The 
Chinese
 went presently about, and entring into the Hermitage by a back door, he opened the 
orega
e to 
Antonio de Faria,
 and let him in with all his follovvers;


There he found an old man, that seemed to be an hundred years old; he was apparelled in a long violet coloured damask gown, and by his countenance appeared to be a man of quality, as we understood afterwards: Being amazed to see so many men, he fell to the ground, where he lay a good while without speaking a word, howbeit at length he began to be better confirmed, and beholding us with a serious look, he gravely demanded of us what we were, and what we would have; whereunto the Interpreter answered by the express commandment of 
Antonio de Faria,
 that he was a Captain stranger, a native of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 and that sayling in a Junk of his, laden with merchandise, and bound for 
Liampoo,
 he had suffered shipwrack, whence he had miraculously escaped with all his company, and for that he had vowed to make a pilgrimage to this holy place, to praise God for preserving him from so great a peril, he was now come to perform his vow; also to crave somwhat of him by way of alms, whereby his poverty might be relieved, protesting within three years to render him twice as much as he should then take from him: whereupon the Hermit, named 
Hiticon,
 having mused a little on the mat∣ter, and fixing his eye on 
Antonio de Faria: Whoever thou art,
 said he unto him, 
know that I throughly understand what thou sayest, and that I perceive but too well thy damnable inten∣tion, wherewith out of the obscurity of thy blindness, like an infernal pilot, thou carriest both thy self, and these others, into the profound abism of the lake of night: for instead of rendring thanks to God for so great a favour, as thou confessest he hath shewed thee, thou comest hi∣ther to rob this holy house: But let me ask thee, if thou executest thy mischievous designe, what will the divine Iustice, thinkest thou, do with thee at the last gasp of thy life? Change then thy perverse inclination, and never suffer the imagination of so great a sin to enter thy thoughts; give credit unto me that tels thee nothing but the very truth, even as I hope to thrive by it all the rest of my life. Antonio de Faria
 seeming to approve of the counsel, which the old Hermit gave him, earnestly desired him not to be displeased, assuring him that he had no other means or way left to relieve him and his, but what he could find in that place: To which the Hermit wringing his hands, and lifting up his eyes, said weeping, 
Praised be thou, O Lord, that permittest men to live on the earth, who offend thee under pretext of seeking means to live, and that vouchsafe not to serve thee one hour, although they know how assured thy glory is.
 After he had uttered these words, he remained very pensive and much troubled to see the great disorder we used in breaking up the coffins, and flinging them out of their places; at length looking upon 
Antonio de Faria,
 who stood leaning upon his sword, he intreated him to sit down by him, which he did with a great deal of compliment, not desisting for all that from making signes to his souldiers to persist as they had begun, that was to take the silver which was min∣gled amongst the bones of the dead in the tombs, that they brake up; whereat the Hermit was so grieved as he fell down twice in a swoon from his seat, but being come to himself, he spake thus to 
Antonio de Faria, I will declare unto thee as to a man that seems discreet, the means whereby thou mayst obtain pardon for the sin, which thou and thy people now commit, to the end that thy soul may not perish eternally, when as the last breath of thy mouth shal go out of thy body: Seeing then, as thou sayest, that it is necessity constrains thee to offend in this grievous manner, and that thou hast a purpose to make restitution before thou dyest, of that thou takest away from hence; if thou hast time and power, thou mayst do these three things: First, thou must render again what thou now carriest away, that the Sovereign Lord may not turn his mercy from thee: Secondly, thou must with tears ask him forgiveness for thy fault, which is so odious unto him, never ceasing to chastise thy flesh both day and night: And thirdly, thou must distribute thy goods to the poor, as liberally as to thy self, giving them alms with prudence and discretion, to the end the servant of the night may have nothing to accuse thee of at the last day. Now, for recompence of this counsel, I desire thee to command thy follow∣ers to gather together the bones of the Saints, that they may not be despised on the earth. An∣tonio de Faria
 promised him very curteously to perform his request, wherewith the Hermit was a little better at quiet then before, but yet not fully satisfied, howbeit he spake him very fair, and assured him that after he had once seen him, he very much repented the undertaking of this enterprise, but his souldiers had threatned to kill him, if he returned without execu∣ting of it, and this he told him as a very great secret, 
God grant it be so,
 replyed the Hermit, 
for that thou shalt not be so blame-worthy as these other monst
rs of the night, which are so greedy, like to famished dogs, that it seems all the silver in the world is not able to satiate them.


After we had gathered all the silver together, that was in the graves amongst the dead mens


bones, and carryed it abord our ships, we were all of opinion not to go any farther to the rest of the Hermitages, as well because we knew not the Countrey, as for that it was almost night, upon hope that the next day we might continue our enterprise more at leisure. Now before he re∣inba
qued himselfe, 
Antonio de Faria
 took leave of the Hermit, and giving him very good words, he desired him for Gods sake not to be offended with that his followers had done, being constrained thereunto by meer necessity: for as his for particular he exceedingly abhorred such like actions, adding withall, that at the first sight of him, he would have returned back, out of the remover of conscience, and true repentance; but that his company had hindered him, saying, that if he did so, they would surely kill him; so that for to have his life he was compelled to yeild and consent thereunto, though he plainly saw that it was a very great sin, in regard whereof he was resolved, as soon as he could rid his hands of them, to go up and down the world to perform such penance as was requisite for the purging of him from so enormous a crime. Hereunto the Hermit answered, 
Pleaseth the Lord, who living, reigneth above the beauty of the stars, that the knowledge, which by this discourse, thou shewest to have, be not prejudiciall unto thee; For I be assured, that he who knows these things, and doth them not, runs a far greater danger, than he that sins through ignorance.
 Then one of ours, named 
Nuno Coelho,
 who would needs have an oar in our talk, told him, that he was not to be angry for a matter of so small importance; whereunto the Hermit beholding him with so stern a countenance, answered, 
Certainly, the fear which thou hast of death is yet lesse, since thou imployest thy selfe in actions as infamous and black as the soul that is in thy body; and for my part, I cannot but be perswaded, that all thy ambition is wholly placed up∣on money, as but too well appears by the the thirst of thy insatiable avarice, whereby thou wilt make an end of heaping up the measure of thine infernal appetite: Continue then thy theeveries, for seeing then thou must go to hell for that which thou hast already taken out of this holy house, thou shalt also go thither for those things which thou shalt steal otherwise, so the heavier the burden shall be that thou bearest, the sooner shalt thou be precipitated into the bottom of hell, where already thy wicked works have prepared thee an everlasting abode.
 Hereupon 
Nuno de Coelho
 prayed him to take all things patiently, affirming that the Law of God commanded him so to do. Then the Hermit lift up his hand by way of admiration, and as it were smiling at what the souldier had said, 
Truly,
 answered he, 
I am come to see, that I never thought to see or hear, namely, evil actions disguised with a specious pretext of ver∣tue, which makes me believe that thy blindnesse is exceeding great, since trusting to good words, thou spendest thy life so wickedly, wherefore it is not possible thou shouldest ever come to Heaven, or give any account to God at the last day, as of necessity they must do.
 Saying so, he turned him to 
Antonio de Faria,
 without attending further answer from him, and earnestly desired him not to suffer his company to spit upon and prophane the altar, which he vowed was more grievous to him, then the induring of a thousand deaths; whereupon to satisfie him, he presently commanded the forbearance of it; wherewith the Hermit was somewhat comfor∣ted; Now because it grew late, 
Antonio de Faria
 resolved to leave the place, but before he departed he held it necessary to inform himself of certain other particulars, whereof he stood in some doubt, so that he deserved of the Hermit how many persons there might be in all those Hermitages: whereunto 
Hiticon
 answered, that there were about three hundred and threescore 
Talagrepos,
 besides forty 
Menigrepos,
 appointed to furnish them with things requisite for their maintenance, and to attend them when they were sick: moreover he asked him, whether the King of 
China
 came not somtimes thither; he told him, No, for, said he, the King cannot be condemned by any body, he is the son of the Sun, but contrarily he had power to absolve every one. Then he enquired of him if there were any arms in their Hermitages? O no, an∣swered the Hermit, 
for all such as pretend to go to heaven have more need of patience to in∣dure injuries, then of arms to revenge themselves:
 Being also desirous to know of him the cause why so much silver was mingled with the bones of the dead. 
This silver,
 replied the Her∣mit, 
comes of the alms that the deceased carry with them out of this into the other life, for to serve them at their need in the heaven of the Moon, where they live eternally: In con∣clusion,
 having demanded of him whither they had any women, he said, 
That they which would maintain the life of their souls, ought not to taste the pleasures of the flesh, seeing ex∣perience made it apparent, that the Bee which nourisheth her self in an hony-comb, d
th often sting such as offer to meddle with that sweetness.
 After 
Antonio de Faria
 had propounded all these questions, he took his leave of him, and so went directly to his ships, with an intenti∣on


to return again the next day, for to set upon the other Hermitages, where, as he had been told, was great abundance of silver, and certain Idols of gold, but our sins would not per∣mit us to see the effect of a business, which we had been two months and an halfe a purchasing with so much labor and danger of our lives, as I will deliver hereafter.


At the clearing up of the day, 
Antonio de Faria,
 and all of us, being embarqued, we went and anchored on the other side of the Island, about a faulcon shot from it, with an intent, as I have before declared, to go a shore again the next morning, and set upon the Chappels where the Kings of 
China
 were interred, that so we might the more commodiously lade our two ves∣sels with such treasures, which peradventure might have succeeded according to our desires, if the business had been well carried, and that 
Antonio de Faria
 had followed the counsel was given him, which was, that since we had not been as yet discovered, that he should have car∣ried the Hermit away with him, to the end he might not acquaint the House of the 
Bonzos
 with what we had done; howbeit he would never hearken to it, saying, that we were to fear nothing that way, by reason the Hermit was so old, and his legs so swoln with the gout, as he was not able to stand, much less to go: But it fell out clean contrary to his expectation, for the Hermit no sooner saw us imbarqued, as we understood afterwards, but he presently crawled as well as he could to the next Hermitage, which was not above a flight shoot from his, and giving intelligence of all that had past, he bad his companion, because himself was not able, to go away with all speed to the 
Bonzo
s
 house to acquaint them with it, which the other instant∣ly performed; so that about midnight we saw a great many of fires lighted on the top of the wall of the Temple, where the Kings were buried, being kindled to serve for a signal to the Countrey about, of some extraordinary danger towards: This made us ask of our 
Chineses,
 what they might mean, who answered, that assuredly, we were discovered, in regard wher∣of they advised us without any longer stay to set sail immediatly; Herewith they acquainted 
Antonio de Faria,
 who was fast asleep, but he straightway arose, and leaving his anchor in the sea, rowed directly, afraid as he was, to the Island, for to learn what was done there: Being arrived near to the Key, he heard many bels ringing in each Hermitage, together with a noise of men talking, whereupon the 
Chineses
 that accompanied him, said, Sir, never stand to hear or see more, but retire, we beseech you, as fast as you may, and cause us not to be all miserably slain with your further stay; Howbeit little regarding, or afraid of their words, he went a∣shore only with six souldiers, having no other arms but swords and targots, and going up the stairs of the Key, whither it were that he was vext for having lost so fair an occasion, or carried thereunto by his courage, he entered into the gallery, that invironed the Island, and ran up and down in it like a mad man, without meeting any body; That done, and being returned a∣bord his vessel, much grieved and ashamed, he consulted with his company about what they should do, who were of opinion that the best course we could take, was to depart, and there∣fore they required him to put it accordingly in execution; Seeing them all so resolved, and fea∣ring some tumults among the souldiers, he was fain to answer, that he was also of their mind, but first he thought it fit to know for what cause they should fly away in that manner, and therefore he desired them to stay for him a little in that place, because he would trie whether he could learn by some means or other the truth of the matter, whereof they had but a bare sus∣pition; for which, he told them, he would ask but half an hour at the most, so that there would be time enough to take order for any thing before day; some would have alledged reasons a∣gainst this, but he would not hear them, wherefore having caused them all to take their oaths, upon the holy Evangelists, that they would stay for him, he returned to land with the same souldiers, that had accompanied him before, and entering into the little wood, he heard the sound of a bell, which addressed him to another Hermitage, far richer then that wherein we were the day before: There he met with two men, apparaled like Monks, with large hoods, which made him think they were Hermits, of whom he presently laid hold, wherewith one of them was so terrified, as he was not able to speak a good while after: Hereupon four of the six souldiers past into the Hermitage, and took an Idol of silver from the altar, having a crown of gold on its head, and a wheel in its hand; they also brought away three candlesticks of sil∣ver, with long chains of the same belonging to them: This performed, 
Antonio de Faria
 carrying the two Hermits along with him, went abord again, and sailing away, he propounded divers questions to him, of the two, that was least affraid, threatning to use him in a strange fashion if he did not tell the truth. This Hermit seeing himself so menaced, answered, That an holy man, named 
Pilau Angiroo
 came about midnight to the house of the Kings Sepultures,


where knocking in haste at the gate, he cryed out, saying; 
O miserable men, buried in the drunkenness of carnal sleep, who by a solemn vow, have profest your selves to the honour of the Goddess
 Amida, 
the rich reward of our labou
s, hear, hear, hear, O the most wretched men that ever were born, There are strangers come into our Island, from the further end of the World, which have long beards, and bodies of Iron, these wicked creatures have entred into the Holy House of the seven and twenty Pillars, of whose sacred Temple an holy man is keeper, that hath told it me, where after they had ransacked the rich treasures of the Saints, they con∣temptedly threw their bones to the ground, which they prophaned with their stinking and in∣fectious spitting, and made a mockerie of them like Devils, obstinate and hardned in their wretched sins, wherefore I advise you to look well to your selves, for it is said, that they have sworn to kill us all as soon as it is day: Fly away then, or call some people to your succour, since being Religious men you are not permitted to meddle with any thing that may shed the blood of man.
 Herewith they presently arose and ran to the gate, where they found the Hermite laid on the ground, and half dead with grief and wearinesse through the imbecilli∣ty of his age; whereupon the 
Grepos
 and 
Meingrepos
 made those fires that you saw, and withall sent in all haste to the Towns of 
Corpilem,
 and 
Fonbana,
 for to succour them spee∣dily with the Forces of the Country, so that you may be assured it will not be long before they fall upon this place with all the fury that may be. 
Now this is all that I am able to say concerning the truth of this affair, wherefore I desire you to return us both unto our Her∣mitage with our lives saved, for if you do not so you will commit a greater sin, then you did yesterday: Remember also that God, in regard of the continuall penance we perform, hath ta∣ken us so far into his protection, as he doth visit us almost every hour of the day, wherefore la∣bour to save your selves as much as you will, yet shall you hardly do it; For be sure, that the earth, the air, the winds, the waters, the beasts, the fishes, the fowls, the trees, the plants, and all things created will pursue and torment you so cruelly, as none but he that lives in heaven will be able to help you. Antonio de Faria
 being hereby certainly informed of the truth of the businesse sailed instantly away, tearing his hair and beard for very rage, to see that through his negligence and indiscretion he had lost the fairest occasion, that ever he should be able to meet withall.






CHAP. XXVI. Our casting away in the Gulf of 
Nanquin,
 with all that befell us after this lamentable Shipwrack.


WE had already sailed seven dayes in the Gulf of 
Nanquin,
 to the end that the force of the Current might carry us the more swiftly away,
 as men whose safety consist∣ed wholly in flight, for we were so desolate and sad, that we scarce spake one to another; In the mean time we arrived at a Village, called 
Susequerim,
 where no news being come either of us, or what we had done, we furnished our selves with some Victual, and get∣ting Information very covertly of the course we were to hold, we departed within two hours after, and then with the greatest speed we could make we entred into a straight, na∣med 
Xalingau,
 much lesse frequented then the gulf, that we had past; here we naviga∣ted nine dayes more, in which time we ran an hundred and fourty leagues, then entring a∣gain into the said Gulf of 
Nanquin,
 which in that place was not above ten or eleven leagues broad, we sailed for the space of thirteen dayes from one side to another with a Westerly winde, exceedingly afflicted, both with the great labour we were fain to indure, and the cruel fear we were in, besides the want we began to feel of Victuals: In this case being come within sight of the mountains of 
Conxinacau,
 which are in the height of forty and one degrees, there arose so terrible a Southwind, called by the 
Chineses Tufaon,
 as it could not possibly be thought a natural thing, so that our Vessels being low built, weak, and with∣out Mariners, we were reduced to such extremity, that out of all hope to escape we suffer∣ed our selves to be driven along the coast, as the current of the water would carry us, for we held it more safeto venture our selves amongst the Rocks, then to let us be swallowed up in the midst of the Sea, and though we had chosen this design, as the better and lesse painful, yet did it not succeed, for after dinner the winde turned to the North-west, whereby the Waves became so high, that it was most dreadful to behold; Our fear then was so extream, as we began to cast all that we had into the Sea, even to the Chests full of


Silver: That done, we cut down our two Masts, and so without M
sts and Sails we float∣ed along all the rest of the day; at length about midnight we heard them in 
Antonio de Faria
's Vessel cry, 
Lord have mercy upon us,
 which perswaded us that they were cast a∣way, the apprehension whereof put us in such a fright, as for an hour together no man spake a word. Having past all this sad night in so miserable a plight, about an hour before day our Vessel opened about the Keel, so that it was instantly full of water eight spans high, whereupon perceiving our selves to sinke, we verily beleeved, it was the good pleasure of God that in this place we should finish both our lives and labours: As soon then as it was day we looked out to Sea, as far as possibly we could discern, but could no way discover 
Antonio de Faria,
 which put us quite out of heart, and so continuing in this great affliction till about ten of the clock, with so much terror and amazement, as words are not able to expresse, at last we ran against the coast, and even drowned as we were, the Waves rouled us towards a point of Rocks, that stood out into the Sea, where we were no sooner arrived but that all went to pieces, insomuch that of five and twenty 
Portugals,
 which we were, there were but fourteen saved, the other eleven being drowned, together with eighteen Chri∣stian Servants, and seven 
Chinese
 Mariners. This miserable disaster hapned on a Munday, the fifth of 
August,
 in the year one thousand five hundred forty and two, for which the Lord be praysed everlastingly.


 We fourteen 
Portugals,
 having escaped out of this shipwrack by the meer mercy of God, spent all that day, and the night following, in bewailing our mis
fortune, and the wretched estate whereunto we were reduced, but in the end consulting together, what course to take for to give some remedy thereunto, we concluded to enter into the Country, hoping that far or neer we should not fail to meet with some body, that taking us for slaves, would relieve us with meat, till such time as it should please Heaven to terminate our travels with the end of our lives. With this Resolution we went some six or seven leagues over rocks and hills, and on the other side discovered a great Marsh, so large and void, as it past the reach of our sight, there being no appearance of any land beyond it, which made us turn back again, towards the same place where we were cast away; being arrived there the day after about Sun-set, we found upon the shore the bodies of our men, which the Sea had cast up, over whom we recomenced our sorrow and lamentations, and the next day we buried them in the sand, to keep them from being devoured by the Tygers, whereof that Country is full, which we performed with much labour and pain, in regard we had no o∣ther tools for that purpose but our hands and nails; After these poor bodies were interred we got us into a Marsh, where we spent all the night, as the safest place we could chuse to preserve us from the Tygers: From thence we continued our journey towards the North, and that by such Precipes and thick woods, as we had much adoe to pass through them. Having travelled in this manner three dayes, at length we arrived at a little straight, with∣out meeting any body, over the which resolving to swim, by ill fortune the four first that entred into it, being three 
Portugals
 and a young youth, were miserably drowned, for being very feeble, and the straight somewhat broad, and the current of the water very strong, they were not able to hold out any longer when they came to the midst; so we eleven with three servants that remained, seeing the infortunate successe of our companions, could do nothing but weep and lament, as men that hourly expected such or a worse end. Having spent all that dark night, exposed to the winde, cold, and rain, it pleased our Lord that the next morn∣ing before day we discovered a great fire towards the East, whereupon as soon as the day broke, we marched fair and softly that way, recomending our selves to that Almighty God from whom alone we could hope for a remedy to our miseries, and so continuing our jour∣ney all along the River, the most part of that day, at last we came to a little wood, where we found five men making of coals, whom on our knees we besought for Gods sake to direct us to some place where we might get some relief; 
I would,
 said one of them, beholding us with an eye of pitie, 
it lay in our power to help you, but alas! all the comfort we can give you is to bestow some part of our Supper on you, which is a little rice, where∣with you may passe this night here with us if you will, though I hold it better for you to pre∣ceed on your way, and recover the place you see a little below, where you shall finde an Hos∣pital that serves to lodge such Pilgrims, as chance to come into these quarters.
 Having thank∣ed him for his good addresse, we fell to the Rice they gave us, which came but to two mouthfuls a piece, and so took our leaves of them, going directly to the place they had shew∣ed us, as well as our weakness would permit.


About an hour within night, we arrived at the Hospital, where we met with four men,
 that had the charge of it, who received us very charitably: The next morning as soon as it was day they demanded of us, what we were, and from whence we came? Thereunto we answe∣red, that we were strangers, natives of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 and that coming from the Port of 
Liampoo
 to go to the fishing of 
Nanquin,
 we were cast away at sea by the violence of a storm, having saved nothing out of this shipwrack, but those our miserable and naked bodies. Whereupon demanding of us again, what we intended to do, and whither we would go; we replyed, that we purposed to go to the City of 
Nanquin,
 there to imbarque our selves as row∣ers in the first 
Lanteaa,
 that should put to sea, for to pass unto 
Cantan,
 where our countrey∣men by the permission of the 
Aito
 of 
Panquin,
 exercised their traffique under the protection of the son of the Sun, and 
Lyon
 crowned in the throne of the world, wherefore we desired them for Gods cause to let us stay in that Hospital, until we had recovered our healths, and to bestow any poor clothes of us to cover our nakednedness. After they had given good ear unto us; It was reason, answered they, to grant you that which you require with so much earnest∣ness, and tears; but in regard the House is now very poor, we cannot so easily discharge our du∣ties unto you as we should, howbeit we will do what we may with a very good will; Then quite naked, as we were, they lead us all about the Village, containing some forty or fifty fires, more or less; the inhabitants whereof were exceeding poor, having no other living but what they got by the labour of their hands, from whom they drew by way of alms some two 
Taeis
 in mony, half a Sack of rice, a little meal, aricot beans, onions, and a few old rags, wherewith we made the best shift we could; over and above this they bestowed two 
Taeis
 more on us out of the Stock of the Hospital: But whereas we desired that we might be permitted to stay there, they excused themselves, saying, that no poor might remain there above three days, or five at the most, unless it were sick people, or women with child, of whom special care was to be had, because in their extremities they could not travel without endangering their lives, where∣fore they could for no other persons whatsoever transgress that Ordinance, which had of anci∣ent time been instituted by the advice of very learned and religious men; nevertheless, that three leagues from thence, we should in a great Town, called 
Sileyiacau,
 find a very rich hospi∣tal, where all sorts of poor people were entertained, and that there we should be far better look∣ed unto then in their house, which was poor, and agreeable to the place of its scituation, to which end they would give us a letter of recommendation, by means whereof we should in∣continently be received. For these good offices we rendred them infinite thanks, and told them that God would reward them for it since they did it for his sake, whereupon an old man, one of those four, taking the Speech upon him, 
It is for that consideration alone we do it,
 answe∣red he, 
and not in regard of the world; for God and the World are greatly different in matters of works, and of the intention which one my have in the doing of them; For the world being poor and miserable as it is, can give nothing that is good, whereas God is infinitely rich, and a friend to the poor, that in the he
ghth of their afflictions praise him with patience and humi∣lity; The world is revengeful, but God is suffering; the world is wicked, God is all goodness; the world is gluttonous, God is a lover of abstinence; the world is mutinous and turbulent, God is quiet and peaceable; the world is a lyar and full of dissimulation to them that belong to it, God is always true, free, and merciful to them that invoke him by prayer; the world is sen∣sual and covetous, God is liberal, and purer then the light of the Sun, or stars, or then those other lamps which are far more excellent then they that appear to our eyes, and are always pre∣sent before his most resplendent face; the world is full of irresolution and falshood, wherewith it entertains it self in the smoak of its vain glory, whereas God is constant in his truth, to the end that thereby the humble may possess glory in all sincerity of heart; In a word, the world is full of folly and ignorance, contrarily God is the fountain of wisdom; wherefore my friends, although you be reduced to so pitiful an estate, do you not for all that distrust his promises; for be assured he will not fail you, if you do not render your selves unworthy of his favours, in regard it was never found that he was at any time wanting to his; albeit they, that are blinded by the world, are of another opinion, when as they see themselves oppressed with pover∣ty, and despised of every body.
 Having used this Speech to us, he gave us a letter of recommen∣dation to the Brotherhood of the other Hospital, whither we were to go, and so we departed about noon, and arrived at the town an hour or two before sun-set. The first thing we did, was to go to the house of the repose of the poor, for so the 
Chineses
 call the Hospitals; There we delivered our letters to the Masters of that Society, which they term 
Tanigories,
 whom


we found altogether in a chamber, where they were assembled about the affairs of the poor; After they had received the letter with a kind of compliment, that seemed very strange to us, they commanded the Register to read it, whereupon he stood up and read thus to them that were sitting at the Table: 
We the poorest of the poor, unworthy to serve that Sovereign Lord, whose works are so admirable, as the Sun, and the stars that twinckle in the skie, during the darkness of the night do testifie: Having been elected to the succession of this his house of
 Buatendoo, 
scituated in this Village of
 Catihorau, 
with all manner of respect and honour, do beseech your humble persons, admitted to the service of the Lord, that out of a zeal of chari∣ty, you will lodg and favour these fourteen strangers, whereof three are tawny, the other eleven somewhat whiter, whose poverty will manifestly appear to your eyes, whereby you may judg how much reason we have to present this request unto you, for that 
 have been cast away with all their merchandise in the impetuous waters of the sea, that with their accustomed fury have laid the execution of the Almighty hand upon them, which for a just punishment doth often permit such like things to happen; for to shew us how dreadful his judgments are, from which may it please him to deliver us all at the day of death, to the end we may not see the in∣dignation of his face.
 This letter being read, they caused us presently to be lodged in a very neat chamber, accommodated with a Table, and divers Chairs, where after we had been served with good meat, we rested our selves that night: The next morning the Register came along with the rest of the officers, and demanded of us who we were, of what Nation, and where∣about we had suffered shipwrack, whereunto we answered as we had done before to those of the Village from whence we came, that we might not be found in two tales, and convinced of lying; whereupon having further enquired of us what we meant to do, we told them that our intention was to get our selves cured in that house, if it pleased them to permit us, in regard we were so weak and sickly as we could scarce stand upon our legs: To which they replyed, that they would very willingly see that performed for us, as a thing that was ordinarily done there for the service of God; for the which we thanked them weeping, with so much acknowledg∣ment of their goodness and charity, as the tears stood in their eyes, so that presently sending for a Physician, they bid him look carefully to us, for that we were poor flocks, and had no o∣ther means but what we had from the house; That done he took our names in writing, and set them down in a great book, whereunto we all of us set our hands, saying, it was ne∣cessary it should be so, that an accompt might be rendred of the expence was to be made for us.


Having spent eighteen days in this Hospital, where we were sufficiently provided for with all things necessary,
 it pleased God that we throughly recovered our healths, so that feeling our selves strong enough to travel, we departed from thence for to go to a place, called 
Zuzoan∣gances,
 some five leagues from that Hospital, where we arrived about sun-set; Now in regard we were very weary, we sat us down upon the side of a fountain, that stood at the entrance of that Village, being much perplexed and unresolved what way to take: In the mean time, they which came to fetch water, seeing us set there in so sad an equipage, returned with their pitchers empty, and advertising the inhabitants of it, the most of them came presently forth to us; Then wondering much, because they had never seen men like unto us, they gathered alto∣gether, as if they would consult thereupon, and after they had a good while debated one with another, they sent an old woman to demand of us what people we were, and why we sat so about that fountain, from whence they drew all the water they used: Hereunto we answered, that we were poor strangers, natives of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 who by a storm at sea were cast upon their Countrey, in that miserable plight wherein they beheld us. Tell me, replyed she, what course would you have us to take for you, and what resolve you to do, for here is no house for the repose of the poor whereinto you may be received? To these words one of our com∣pany answered with tears in his eyes, and a gesture conformable to our designe, that God, be∣ing that which he was, would never abandon us with his Almighty hand, but would touch their hearts to take compassion of us, and our poverty; and further, that we were resolved to travel in that miserable case we were in till we had the good fortune to arrive at the City of 
Nanquin,
 where we desired to put our selves into the 
Lanteaas,
 there to serve for rowers to the Merchants that ordinarily went from thence to 
Cantano,
 and so to get to 
Comhay,
 where great store of our Country Junks usually lay, in which we would imbarque our selves. There∣upon having somewhat a better opinion of us then before; Seeing you are, said she, such as you deliver, have a little patience till I come again, and tell you what these folks resolve to do with


you; wherewith she returned to those country people, which were about some hundred per∣sons, with whom she entred into a great contestation, but at length she came back with one of their Priests, attired in a long gown of red damask; which is an ornament of chiefest dig∣nity among them, in this equipage he came to us with an handful of ears of corn in his hand; Then having commanded us to approach unto him, we presently obeyed him with all kind of respect, but he little regarded it, seeing us so poor; whereupon after he had thrown the ears of corn into the fountain, he willed us to put our hands upon them, which we accordingly ha∣ving done: 
You are to confess,
 said he unto us, 
by this holy and solemn oath, that now you take in my presence upon these two substances of bread and water, which the high Creator of all things hath made by his holy will to sustain and nourish all that is born into the world, during the pilgrimage of this life, whether that which you told this woman but now be true, for upon that condition we will give you lodging in this village conformably to the charities we are bound to exercise towards Gods poor people; whereas contrarily, if it be not so, I com∣mand you in his Name that you presently get you gone, upon pain of being bitten and destroyed by the teeth of the gluttenous Serpent, that makes his abode in the bottom of the house of smoak.
 Hereunto we answered, that we had said nothing but what was most true, wh
re∣with the Priest remaining satisfied; since you are, said he, such as you say, come you along boldly with me, and rely on my word: Then returning with us to the inhabitants of the place, be told them that they might bestow their alms upon us without offence, and that he gave them permission so to do, whereupon we were presently conducted into the Village, and lodg∣ed in the porch of their 
Pagode,
 or Temple, where we were furnished with all that was needful for us, and had two mats given us to lie upon: The next morning as soon as it was day, we went up and down the street, begging from door to door, and got four 
Taeis
 in silver, wherewith we supplied our most pressing necessities. After this we went away to another place, called 
Xianguulea,
 that was not above two leagues from that, with a resolution to tra∣vel in that sort, as it were in pilgrimage, to the City of 
Nanquin,
 to which it was then some hundred and forty leagues; for we thought that from thence we might go to 
Cantano,
 where our ships traded at that time, and it may be our designe had succeeded, had it not been for ill fortune. About even-song we arrived at that village, where we sat us down under the sha∣dow of a great tree that stood by it self, but it was our ill hap to meet with three boyes that kept certain cattel there, who no sooner perceived us, but betaking them to their heels, they cried our, Thieves, thieves, whereat the inhabitants came instantly running out, armed with lances and cros-bowes, crying out, stop the thieves, stop the thieves; and so perceiving us, that fled from them, they mauld us cruelly with stones and staves, in such manner as we were all of us grievously hurt, especially one of our boyes that died upon it; Then seizing on us, they tied our arms behind us, and leading us like prisoners into the village, they so beat and buffeted us with their fists, as they had almost killed us, then they plunged us into a cistern of standing water, that reached up to our wasts, wherein were a great number of horse-leeches; In this miserable place we remained two days, which seemed two hundred years to us, having neither rest, nor any thing to eat all that time: At last, it was our good fortune, that a man of 
Zuzoangance,
 from whence we came, passing by, chanced to un∣derstand how we had been used by those of the Village, and thereupon went and told them, that they did us great wrong to take us for thieves, for that we were poor stran∣gers, which had been cast away by a storm at sea, wherefore they had committed a great sin to imprison, and handle us in that sort; The report of this man wrought so ef∣fectually with them, that we were presently taken out of the cistern, being all gore blood with the sucking of the horse-leeches, and I verily believe that if we had stayed there but one day longer, we had all of us been dead: So we departed from this place about evening, and bewayling our bad fortune, continuing on our voyage.


After our departure from 
Xianguulea
 we arrived at a Village, inhabited by very poor people, where we met with three men that were pilling Flax,
 who as soon as they saw us forsook their work, and fled hastily away into a wood of Firr trees, there they cryed out to those that passed by to take heed of us for that we w
re thieves, whereupon fearing to incur the same danger whence we so lately escaped, we got us away presently from that place, although it was almost night, and continued our journie, in the rain and the dark, without knowing whither we went, till we came to a gate where Cattel were kept, and there we lay the rest of the night upon a little heap of dung; the next morning as soon as


it was day we got again into the way which we had left, and not long after we discover∣ed from the top of a little hill a great plain full of trees, and in the midst thereof a very fair House hard by a River, whither forthwith we went, and sate us down by a fountain that was before the outer gate, where we remained two or three hours without seeing any bo∣dy, at length a young Gentleman about sixteen or seventeen years of age came riding up∣on a very good Horse, accompanied with four men on foot, whereof one carried two Hares, and another five 
Nivatores,
 which are Fowls resembling our Phesants, with a Gos-Hawk on his fist, and three or four couple of Spaniels at their heels; when this Gentleman came at us he staid his Horse, to ask us who we were, and whether we would have any thing with him. Hereunto we answered as well as we could, and made him an ample Relati∣on of the whole event of our shipwrack, whereat he seemed to be very sorry, as we could gather by his countenance, so that ere he went, Stay there, said he unto us, for by and by I will send you what you have need of, and that for his sake that with a glory of great riches lives raigning in the highest of all the Heavens. A little after he sent an old woman for us, which was apparelled in a long garment, with a Chaplet hanging down on her neck, the good Dame coming to us, The son of him said she, whom me hold for Master in this house, and whose Rice we ea
, hath sent for you, follow me then with all humlity, to the end you may not seem idle fellows to those that shall see you, and such as beg onely to be exempted from getting your living by the labour of your hands; This said, we entred with her into an outward court, all about invironed with Galleries, as if it had been some Cloister of Religious persons, on the walls whereof were painted divers women on Horse∣back going on hunting with Hawks on their fists; over the gate of this Court was a great arch very richly engraven, in the midst whereof hung a Scutcheon of Arms, in the fashion of a shield, fastned to a silver chai
, within it was a man painted almost in the form of a 
Tortois,
 with the feet up, and the head downwards, and round about it these words were read for a device, 
Ingualec finguau, potim aquarau,
 that is to say, 
So is it with all that appertains to me
; We learnt afterwards, that by this Monster the Figure of the world was represented, which the 
Chineses
 depaint in this manner to demonstrate that there is nothing in it but falshood, and so to dis-abuse all them that make such account of it by making them to see how all things in it are turned upside down. Out of this Court we went up a broad pair of stairs, made of fair hewed stone, and entred into a great Hall, where a woman of about fiftie years of age, was set upon a Tapestry Carpet, having two young Gentlewomen by her side, that were exceeding fair, and richly apparelled, with chains of Pearl about their necks, and hard by them was a reverend old man laid upon a little bed, whom one of the two Gentlewomen fanned with a V
ntiloe; at his Beds head stood the young Gentleman that had sent for us, and a little further off upon another Car∣pet nine young maids, clothed in Crimson and white Damask, sate sowing; as soon as we came before the old man we fell on our knees, and asked an almes of him, beginning our speech with tears, and in the best terms that the time and our necessities could inspire us with, whereupon the old Lady beckning to us with her hand, 
Come, weep no more,
 said she, 
for it grieves me much to see you shed so many tears, it is sufficient that I know you desire an almes of us
; then the old man that lay in the bed spake unto us, and demanded whe∣ther any of us knew what was good for a Fever? Whereat the young Gentlewoman that fan∣ned him, not able to forbear smiling: 
Sir,
 said she, 
they have more need that you would be pleased to give order for the satisfying of their hunger, then to be questioned about a matter which it is likely they are ignorant of, wherefore me thinks it were better first to give them what they want, and afterwards to talk with them about that which concerns them lesse
; For these words the Mother reprehending her, 
Go to,
 said she, 
you will ever be prating when you should not, but surely I shall make you leave this custome
; whereunto the daughter smiling, replied, 
That you shall when you please, but in the mean time I beseech you, let these poor strangers have something to eat:
 For all this the old man would not give over questioning us, for he demanded of us who we were, of what country, and whither we were going, be∣sides many other such like things? To which we answered as occasion required, and re∣counted unto him, how, wh
n, and in what place we had suffered shipwrack, as also how many of our company were drowned, and that thus wandring we travelled up and down not knowing whither to addresse our selves. This answer rendred the old man pen∣sive for a while, until at length turning him to his son, Well now, said he unto him, what


thinkest thou of that which thou hast heard these strangers deliver? It were good for thee to imprint it well in thy memory, to the end it may teach thee to know God better, and give him thanks for that he hath given thee a Father, who to exempt thee from the la∣bours and necessities of this life hath parted with three of the goodliest things in this Coun∣try, whereof the least is worth above a hundred thousand 
Taeis,
 and bestowed them on thee, but thou art of a humour more inclined to hunt a Hare, then to retain this vvhich I novv tell thee; The young Gentleman made no reply, but smiling looked upon his Sisters. Then the old man caused meat to be brought unto us before him, and commanded us to fall to it, as vve most vvillingly did, whereat he took great pleasure, in regard his stomack was quite gone with his sickness, but his young daughters much more, who with their brother did nothing but laugh to see us feed our selves with our hands, for that is contrary to the cu∣stome which is observed throughout the whole Empire of 
China,
 where the Inhabitants at their meat carry it to their mouthes with two little sticks made like a pair of Cizers; Af∣ter we had given God thanks, the old man that had well observed us, lifting up his hands to heaven, with tears in his eyes, 
Lord,
 said he, 
that livest raigning in the tranquility of thy high wisdome, I laud thee in all humility for that thou permittest men that are strangers, come from the farthest end of the world, and without the knowledge of thy doctrine, to render thee thanks, and give thee praise according to their weak capacity, which makes me beleeve that thou wilt accept of them with as good a will, as if it were some great offering of melodious mu∣sick agreeable to thine eares.
 Then he caused three pieces of linnen cloth, and four 
Taeis
 of Silver to be given us, willing us withall to passe that night in his house, because it was somewhat too late for us to proceed on our journey; This offer we most gladly accept∣ed, and with complements, after the manner of the Country we testified our thankfulness to him, wherewith himself, his wife, and his son rested very well satisfied.






CHAP. XXVII. Our arrival at the Town of 
Taypor,
 where we were made Prisoners, and so sent to the Citie of 
Nanquin.


THe next morning by break of day parting from that place, we went to a Village cal∣led 
Einginilau
▪ which was some four leagues from the old Gentlemans house,
 where we remained three dayes, and then continuing travelling from one place to another, and from Village to Village, ever declining the great Towns, for fear lest the Justice of the country should call us in question in regard we were strangers; in this manner we spent al∣most two months without receiving the least damage from any body. Now there is no doubt but we might easily have got to the C
tie of 
Nanquin
 in that time if we had had a guide, but for w
nt of knowing the way we wandred we knew not whither, suffering much, and running many hazards; At length we arrived at a Village, named 
Chaucer,
 at such a time as they were a solemnizing a sumptuous Funeral of a very rich woman, that had disinhe∣rited her kindred, and left her estate to the Pagod of this Village, where she was buried, as we understood by the Inhabitants; We were invited then to this Funeral, as other poor people were, and according to the custome of the Country we did eat on the grave of the deceased: At the end of three dayes that we stayed there, which was the time 
he funeral lasted, we had six 
Taeis
 given us for an Alms, conditionally that in all our Orai∣sons we should pray unto God for the soul of the departed. Being gone from this place we continued on our journey to another Village, called 
Guinapalir,
 from whence we were almost two months travelling from country to country, untill at last our ill fortune brought us to a Town, named 
Taypor,
 where by chance there was at that time a 
Chumbrin,
 that is to say, one of those Super-intendents of Justice, that every three years are sent throughout the Provinces for to make report unto the King of all that passeth there: This naughty man seeing us go begging from door to door called to us from a window where he was, and would know of us who we were, and of what Nation, as also what obliged us to run up and down the World in that manner? Having asked us these questions in the presence of three Registers, and of many other persons, that were gathered together to behold us, we answered him, that we were strangers, Natives of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 who being cast away by a storm at Sea went thus travelling and begging our living, to the end we might su∣stain our selves with the charity of good people, until such time as we could arrive at 
Nan∣quin,



whither we were going with an intent to imbarque our selves there in some of the Mer∣chants 
Lanteaas
 for 
Canton,
 where the shipping of our Nation lay. This answer we made unto the 
Chumbim,
 who questionless had been well enough contented with it, and would have let us go, had it been for one of his Clarks, for he told them that we were idle vagabonds, that spent our time in begging from door to door, and abusing the alms that were given us, and therefore he was at no hand to let us go free, for fear of incurring the punishment, ordained for such as offend in that sort, as is set forth in the seventh of the twelve books of the Statutes of the Realm; wherefore as his faithful servant he counselled him to lay us in good and sure hold, that we might be forth-coming to answer the Law: The 
Chumbim
 presently followed his Clarks advice, and carried himself toward us with as much barbarous cruelty, as could be expected from a Pagan, such as he was, that lived without God or religion; To which effect after he had heard a number of false witnesses, who charged us with many foul crimes, where∣of we never so much as dreamt, he caused us to be put into a deep dungeon, with irons on our hands and feet, and great iron collars about our necks; In this miserable place we endu∣red such hunger, and were so fearfully whipped, that we were in perpetual pain for six and twenty days together, at the end whereof we were by the sentence of the same 
Chumbim
 sent to the Parliament of the 
Cheam
 of 
Nanquin,
 because the Jurisdiction of this extended not to the condemnation of any prisoner to death.


We remained six and twenty days in that cruel prison, whereof I spake before, and I vow we thought we had been six and twenty thousand years there, in regard of the great misery we suffered in it, which was such, as one of our companions called 
Ioano Roderiguez Bravo,
 died in our arms, being eaten up with lice, we being no way able to help him, and it was al∣most a miracle that the rest of us escaped alive from that filthy vermine; At length, one mor∣ning, when we thought of nothing less, loden with irons as we were, and so weak that we could hardly speak, we were drawn out of that prison, and then being chained one to another, we were imbarqued with many others, to the number of thirty or forty, that having been convicted for sundry hainous crimes, were also sent to the Parliament of 
Nanquin,
 wh
e, as I have already declared, is always residing a 
Chaem
 of Justice, which is like to the Sovereign Title of the Vice-roy of 
China:
 There is likewise a Parliament of some five and twenty 
Ge∣rozemos
 and 
Ferucuas,
 which are as those we call Judges with us, and that determine all causes, as well civil as criminal: So as there is no appeal from their sentence, unless it be unto another Court, which hath power even over the King himself, whereunto if one appeals, it is as if he appealed to heaven: To understand this the better, you must know that although this Parli∣ament, and others such like, which are in the principal Cities of the Realm, have an absolute power from the King, both over all criminal & civil causes, without any opposition or appeal whatsoever, yet there is another Court of Justice, which is called the Court of the Creator of all things, where∣unto it is permitted to appeal in weighty and i
portant matters: In this Court are ordinarily assi∣sting four & twenty 
Menigrepos,
 which are certain religious men, very austere in their manner of living, such as the 
Capuchins
 are amongst the Papists, & verily if they were Christians, one might hope for great matters from them in regard of their marvellous abstinence, & sincerity: There are none admitted into this rank of Judges under seventy years of age, & are elected thereunto by the suffrages of their chiefest Prelates, most incorruptible men, & so just in all the causes, whereof there are appeals before them, as it is not possible to meet with more upright, for were it against the King himself, andagainst all the powers that may be imagined in the world, no consideration, how great soever, is able to make them swerve never so little from that they think to be justice. Having been imbarqued in the manner I spake of, the same day at night we went & lay at a great tower, called 
Potinleu,
 in one of the prisons whereof were mained nine days, by reason of the much rain that fell then upon the conjunction of the New-moon: There we happened to meet with a 
Russian
 prisoner, that received as very charitably, of whom demanding in the 
Chinese
 tongue, which he understood as well as we, what countrey-man he was, and what fortune had brought him thither; he told us, that he was of 
Moscovy,
 born in a town, named 
Hiquegens,
 and that some five years past, being accused for the death of a man, he had been condemned to a perpetual prison, but as a stranger he appealed from that sentence to the tribunal of the 
Aytau
 of 
Batampina,
 in the City of 
Pequin,
 who was the highest of the two and thirty Admirals, established in this Empire, that is, for every Kingdom one: He added further, that this Admiral by a particular Jurisdiction, had absolute power over all strangers, whereupon he hoped to find some relief from him, intending to go and die a Christian among the Christians, if he might have the


good hap to be set at liberty. After we had passed those nine days in this prison, being rein∣barqued, we sayled up a great river seven days together, at the end whereof we arrived at 
Nanquin.
 As this City is the second of all the Empire, so is it also the Capital of the three King∣doms of 
Liampoo, Fanius,
 and 
Sambor:
 Here we lay six weeks in prison, and suffered so much pain and misery, as reduced to the last extreamities, we died incensibly for want of suc∣cour, not able to do any thing, but look up to heaven with a pitiful eye; for it was our ill for∣tune to have all that we had stoln from us the first night we came thither: This prison was so great, that there were four thousand prisoners in it at that time, as we were credibly inform∣ed, so that one should hardly 
it down in any place without being robbed, and filled 
ull of lice▪ having layn there a month and an half, as I said, the Anchacy, who was one of the Jud∣ges before whom our cause was to be pleaded, pronounced our sentence at the Suit of the Atturny General, the tenor whereof was, That having seen and considered our process, which the 
Chumbin
 of 
Taypor
 had sent him, it appeared by the accusations laid to outcharge, that we were very hainous mal
factors, & though we denied many things, yet in justice no credit was to be given unto us, & therefore that we were to be publickly whipped, for to teach us to live better in time to come, and that withall our two thumbs should be cut off, wherewith it was evident by manifest suspicions, that we used to commit robberies, and other vile crimes; & furthermore, that for the remainder of the punishment we deserved, he referred us to the 
Aytau
 of 
Bataupina,
 un∣to whom it appertained to take cognisance of such causes, in regard of the Jurisdiction that he had of life and death. This Sentence was pronounced in the prison, where it had been better for us to have suffered death, then the stripes that we received, for all the ground round about us ran with blood upon our whiping, so that it was almost a miracle, that of the eleven which we were, nine escaped alive, for two of our company died three days after, besides one of our servants.


After we had been whipped in that manner, I have declared,
 we were carried into a great Chamber, that was in the prison, where were a number of sick, and diseased persons, lying upon beds, and otherways; There we had presently our stripes washed, and things applyed unto them, whereby we were somewhat eased of our pain, and that by men, much like unto the fraternity of mercy among the Papists, which only out of charity, and for the honour of God, do tend those that are sick, and liberally furnish them with all things necessary. Hereafter some eleven or twelve days, we began to be pretily recovered, and as we were lamenting our ill fortune, for being so rigorously condemned to lose our thumbs, it pleased God one morning, when as we little dreamt ofit, that we espied two men come into the chamber, of a good aspect, clothed in long gowns of violet coloured satin, & carrying white rods in their hands; As soon as they arrived, all the sick persons in the Chamber cried out, 
Blessed be the Ministers of the works ofGod:
 whereunto they answ
red, holding up their rods, 
May it please God to give you pa∣tience in your adversity:
 whereupon having distributed clothes and money to those that were next to them, they came unto us, and after they had saluted us very courteously, with demon∣stration of being moved at our tears, they asked us who we were, and of what countrey, as also why we were imprisoned there: whereunto we answered weeping, that we were strangers, nativ
s of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 and of a country called 
Malaca,
 that being Merchants and well to live, we had imbarqued our selves with our goods, and being bound for 
Liam∣poo,
 we had been cast away just against the Isles of 
Lamau,
 having lost all that we had, and nothing left us but our miserable bodies in the case they now saw us; moreover we ad∣ded, that being thus evil intreated by fortune, arriving at the City of 
Taypor,
 the 
Chumbin
 of Justice had caused us to be apprehended without any cause, laying to our charge, that we were thieves and vagabonds, who to avoid pains-taking went begging from door to door, entertaining our idle laziness with the alms that were given us unjusty, whereof the 
Chumbin
 having made informations at his pleasure, as being both Judg and party, he had laid us in irons in the prison, where for two and forty days space, we had indured incredible pain and hunger, and no man would hear us in our justifications, as well because we had not wherewithall to give presents for to maintain our right, as for that we wanted the language of the Country. In conclusi
n, we told them, how in the mean time, without any cognisance of the cause, we had been condemned to be whipped, as also to have our thumbs cut off, like thieves, so that we had already suffered the first punishment, with so much rigour and cruelty, that the marks thereof remained but two visibly upon our wretched bodies, and therefore we conjured them by the charge they had to serve God in assisting the afflicted, that they would not abandon us in this need, the rather for that our extream poverty rendred as odious to all the world, and ex∣posed


us to the induring of all affronts. These two men having heard us attentively, re∣mained very pensive and amazed at our speech; at length lifting up their eyes, all bathed with tears, to heaven, and kneeling down on the ground, 
O almighty Lord,
 said they, 
that governest in the highest places, and whose patience is incomprehensible, be thou evermore blessed, for that thou art pleased to harken unto the complaints of necessitous and miserable men, to the end that the great offences committed against thy divine goodness by the Ministers of Iu∣stice may not rest unpunished, as we hope that by thy holy Law they will be chastised at one time or other.
 Whereupon they informed themselves more amply by those who were about us, of what we had told them, and presently sending for the Register, in whose hands our sentence was, they straitly commanded him, that upon pain of grievous punishment he should forthwith bring them all the proceedings which had been used against us, as instant∣ly he did; now the two Officers, seeing there was no remedy for the whipping that we had suff
red, presented a Petition in our behalf unto the 
Chaem,
 whereunto this Answer was returned by the Court; 
Mercy hath no place, where Iustice looseth her name, in regard whereof your request cannot be granted.
 This Answer was subscribed by the 
Chaem,
 and eight 
Conchacis,
 that are like criminal Judges. This hard proceeding much astonished these two Proctors for the poor, so named from their office, whe
efore carried with an extream desire to draw us out of this misery, they presently preferred another Petition to the Sove∣raign Court of Justice, of which I spake in the precedent Chapter, where the 
Menigr
pos
 and 
Talegrepos
 were Judges, an Assembly which in their language is called, 
The breath of the Creator of all things.
 In this Petition, as sinners, confessing all that we were accus
d of, we had recourse to mercy, vvhich sorted well for us; for as soon as the Petition was pre∣sented unto them, they read the Processe quite through, and finding that our right was o∣verborn for vvant of succour, they instantly dispatched away two of their Court, vvho with an expresse Mandate und
r their hands and Seals, went and prohibited the 
Chaems
 Court from intermedling with this cause, which they commanded away before them. In obedi∣ence to this Prohibition the 
Chaems
 Court made this Decree, 
We, that are assembled in this Court of Iustice of the Lyon crowned in the throne of the world, having perused the Petition pre∣sented to the four and twenty Iudges of the austere life, do consent, that those nine strangers be sent by way of appeal to the Court of the
 Aytau 
of
 Aytaus 
in the Citie of
 Pequin, 
to the end that in mercy the sentence pronounced against them may be favourably moderated: Given the seventh day of the fourth Moon, in the three and twentieth year of the raign of the Son of the Sun.
 This Decree, being signed by the 
Chaem,
 and the eight 
Conchacis,
 was presently brought us by the two Proctors for the poor, upon the Receit whereof we told them, that we could but pray unto God to reward them for the good they had done us for his sake; whereunto beholding us with an eye of pitie, they answered, 
May his Celestial goodness direct you in the knowledge of his works, that thereby you may with patience gather the fruit of your labours, as they which fear to offend his holy Name.


After we had past all the adversities and miseries, whereof I have spoken before, we were imbarqued in the company of some other thirty or forty Prisoners, that were sent, as we were, from this Court of Justice to that other Soveraign one by way of appeal, there to be either acquitted or condemned, according to the crimes they had committed, and the punishment they had deserved. Now a day before our departure, being imbarqued in a 
Lanteaa,
 and chained three and three together, the two Proctors for the poor came to us, and first of all furnishing us with all things needful, as clothes, and Victuals, they asked us whether we wanted any thing else for our Voyage? Whereunto we answered, that all we could desire of them was, that they would be pleased to convert that further good they in∣tended to us into a Letter of Recommendation unto 
he Officers of that holy Fraternity of the Citie of 
Pequin,
 thereby to oblige them to maintain the right of our cause, in regard (as they very well knew) they should otherwise be sure to be utterly abandoned of every one, by re
son they were strangers and altogether unknown. The Proctors hearing us speak in this manner: 
Say, not so,
 replyed they, 
for though your ignorance discharges you before God, yet have you committed a great sin, because the more you are abased in the world through pover∣ty, the more shall you be exalted before the eyes of his divine Majesty, if you patiently bear your crosses, whereunto the flesh indeed doth always oppose it self, being evermore rebellious against the Spirit, but as a Bird cannot fly without her wings, no more can the soul meditate without works: As for the Letter you require of us, we will give it you most willingly, knowing it will


be very necessary for you, to the end that the favour of good people be not wanting to you in your need.
 This said they g
ve us a sack ful of Rice, together with four 
Taeis
 in silver, and a Coverlet to lay upon us; Then having very much recommended us unto the 
Chifuu,
 who was the Officer of iustice that conducted us, they took their leaves of us in most courteous manner; The next morning as soon as it was day they sent us the Letter, sealed with three Seals in green Wax, the Contents whereof were these; 
Ye servants of that high Lord, the resplendent mirrour of an uncreated light, before whom our merits are nothing in compari∣son of his, we the least servants of that holy house of
 Tauhina
el, 
that was founded in fa∣vour of the fifth prison of
 Nanquin, 
with true words of respect, which we owe unto you, we give your most humble persons to understand, that these nine strangers, the bearers of this Let∣ter, are men of a far country, whose bodies and goods have been so cruelly intreated by the fu∣rie of the sea, that according to their report, of ninety and five that they were, they only have escaped shipwrack, being cast by the tempest on the shore of the Isles of
 Taut
a, 
upon the coast of the Bay of
 Sumbor: 
In which pitious and lamentable case, as we have seen them with our own eyes, begging their living from place to place of such, as charitie obliged to give them something after the manner of good folkes, it was their ill fortune without all reason or ju∣stice to be apprehended by the Chumbin of
 Taypor, 
and sent to this fifth prison of
 Faniau, 
where they were condemned to be whipped, which was immediatly executed upon them by the Mini∣sters of the displeased arm, as by their Process better appeareth: But afterwards, when as through too much crueltie their thumbs were to be cut off, they with tears besought us, for that Soveraign Lords sake, in whose service we are imployed, to be assisting unto them, which pre∣sently undertaken by us we preferred a Petition in their behalf, whereunto this Answer was made by the Court of the crowned Lyon, That mercy had no place where justice lost her name; where∣upon provoked by a true zeal to Gods honour, we addressed our selves to the Court of those four and twenty of the austere life, who carried by a blessed devotion instantly assembled in the Ho∣ly House of the remedy for the poor, and of an extream desire they had to succour these miserable creatures, they interdicted that great Court from proceeding any further against them, and ac∣cordingly the success was agreeable to the mercy of so great a God, for these last Iudges revoking the others first Sentence, sent the cause by way of Appeal to your Citie of
 Pequin 
with amend∣ment of the second punishment, as you may see more at large by the proceedings; In regard whereof, most reverend and humble Brethren, We beseech you all in the Name of God to be favourable unto them, and to assist them with whatsoever you shall thinke necessary for them, that they may not be oppressed in thier right which is a very great sin, and an eternal infamy to us, who again intreat you to supply them with your Alms, and bestow on them means to co∣ver their nakedness, to the end they may not perish for want of help, which if you do there is no doubt but that so pious a work will be most acceptable to that Lord above, to whom the poor of the earth do continually pray, and are heard in the Highest of Heavens, as we hold for an Article of Faith; On which earth may it please that divine Majestie, for whose sake we do this, to preserve us till death, and to render us worthy of his presence in the house of the Sun, where he i
 seated with all his.
 Written in the Chamber of the zeal of Gods honour, the ninth day of the seventh Moon, and the three and twentieth year of the Raign of the Lyon crowned in the Throne of the World.






CHAP. XXVIII. The Marvels of the Citie of 
Nanquin,
 our departure from thence towards 
Pequin,
 and that which hapned unto us, till we arrived at the Town of 
Sempitay.


THis Letter being brought to us very early the next morning,
 we departed in the man∣ner before declared, and continued our voyoge till Sun-set, when as we anchored at a little Village, named 
Minhacutem,
 where the 
Chifuu,
 that conducted us▪ was born, and where his Wife and Children were at that time, vvhich vvas the occasion that he remained there three dayes, at the end whereof he imbarqued himself vvith his family, and so we passed on in the company of divers other Vessels, that went upon this River unto divers parts of this Empire: Now though we vvere all tyed together to the bank of the 
Lauteaa,
 where vve rowed, yet did we not for all that lose the view of many Towns and Villages that were scituated along this River, whereof I hold it not amisse to make some descriptions; To which effect, I will begin with the Citie of 
Nanquin
 from whence we last parted; This


City is under the North in nine and thirty degrees, and three quarters, scituated upon the ri∣ver of 
Batampina,
 which signifies, 
The flower of fish.
 This river, as we were told then, and as I have seen since, comes from 
Tartaria,
 out of a lake, called 
Fanistor,
 nine leagues from the City of 
Lancama,
 where 
Tamberlan,
 King of the 
Tartarians
 usually kept his Court; Out of the same lake, which is eight and twenty leagues long, twelve broad, and of a mighty depth, the greatest rivers, that ever I saw, take their source; The first is the same 
Batampina,
 that passing through the midst of this Empire of 
China
 three hundred and threescore leagues in length, disim∣b
ques into the sea at the bay of 
Nanquin
 in thirty six degrees; The second, named 
Lechuna,
 runs with great swiftness all along by the mountains of 
Pancruum,
 which separate the Coun∣try of 
Cauchim,
 and the State of 
Catebenan,
 in the height of sixteen degrees; The third is called 
Tauquida,
 signifying the 
Mother of waters,
 that going North-west, traverseth the Kingdom of 
Nacataas,
 a Country where 
China
 was anciently seated, as I will declare here∣after, and enters into the sea in the Empire of 
Sornau,
 vulgarly stiled 
Siam,
 by the mouth of 
Cuy,
 one hundred and thirty leagues below 
Patana
; The fourth, named 
Batobasoy,
 de∣scends out of the Province of 
Sansim,
 which is the very same that was quite overwhelmed by the sea in the year 1556. as I purpose to shew else-where, and renders it sel
 into the sea at the mouth of 
Cosmim,
 in the Kingdom of 
Pegu
; The fifth and last, called 
Leysacotay,
 crosseth the Country by 
East
 as far as to the 
Archipelago
 of 
Xinxipou,
 that borders upon 
Mocovye,
 and fals, as is thought, into a sea that is not navigable, by rea
on the clymate there is in the height of seventy degrees. Now to return to my discourse, the City of 
Nanquin,
 as I said before, is seated by this river of 
Batampina,
 upon a reasonable high hill, so as it commands all the plains about it; The climate thereof is somewhat cold, but very healthy, and it is eight leagues about, which way soever it is considered, three leagues broad, and one long; The houses in it are not above two stories high, and all built of wood, only those of the 
Mandarins
 are made of hewed stone, and also invironed with walls and ditches, over which are stone bridges, where∣on they passe to the gates, that have rich and costly arches, with divers sorts of inventions up∣on the towers, all which put together, make a pleasing object to the eye, and represent a cer∣tain kind of I know not what Majesty. The houses of the 
Chaems, Anchacys, Ayta
s, Tu
o
s,
 and 
Chumbims,
 which are all Gove
nours of Provinces or Kingdoms, have stately towers, six or seven stories high, and guilt all 
ver, wherein they have their magazines for arms, their Wardrobes, their treasuries, and a world of rich housholdstuff, as also many other things of great value, together with an infinite of delicate and most fine porcelain, which amongst them is prised and esteemed as much as precious stone, for this sort of porcelain never goes out of the Kingdom, it being expresly forbidden by the laws of the Country, to be sold, upon pain of death to any stranger, unlesse to the 
Xatamaas,
 that is, the 
Sophyes
 of the 
Persians,
 who by a particular permission buy of it at a very dear rate. The 
Chineses
 assured us, that in this City there are eight hundred thousand fires, fourscore thousand 
Mandarins
 houses, threescore and two great market plac
s, an hundred and thirty butchers shambles, each of them con∣taining fourscore shops, and eight thousand streets, whereof six hundred that are fairer and larger then the rest, are compassed about with b
llisters of copper; we were further assured, that there are likewise two thousand and three hundred 
Pagodes,
 a thousand of which were 
Monestaries
 of religious persons, professed in their accursed Sect, whose buildings were exceed∣ing rich and sumptuous, with very high steeples, wherein there were between sixty and seventy such mighty huge bels, that it was a dreadful thing to here them rung; There are moreover in this City thirty great strong prisons, each whereof hath three or four thousand prisoners; and a charitable Hospital, expresly established to supply the necessities of the poor, with Proctors ordained for their defence, both in civil and criminal causes, as is before related; At the en∣trance into every principal street, there are arches and great gates, which for each mans se∣curity, are shut every night, and in most of the streets are goodly fountains whose water is excellent to drink; Besides, at every full 
nd new moon, open fayrs are kept in several places, whither Merchants resort from all parts, and where there is such abundance of all kind of victu∣al, as cannot well be exprest, especially of fl
sh and fruit; It is not possible to deliver the great store of fish that is taken in this river, chiefly Soles and Mullets, which are all sold alive, besides a world of sea-fish, both fresh, salted, and dried; we were told by certain 
Chineses,
 that in this City there are ten thousand trades for the working of silks, which from thence are sent all over the Kingdom; The City it self is invironed with a very strong wall, made of fair hew∣ed stone; The gates of it are an hundred and thirty, at each of which there is a Porter, and


two Halberdiers, who are bound to give an account every day of all that p
sses in and out; There are also twelve Forts or Cittadels, like unto ours, with bulwarks and very high towers, but without any ordinance at all▪ The same 
Chineses
 also affirmed unto us, that the City yeild∣ed the King daily two thousand 
Taeis
 of silver, which amount to three thousand duckats, as I have delivered heretofore; I will not speak of the Pallace royal, because I saw it but on the out∣side, howbeit the 
Chines
s
 tell such wonders of it, as would amaze a man, for it is my intent to relate nothing save what we beheld here with our own eyes, and that was so much as I am afraid to write it, not that it would seem strange to those that have seen and read the marvels of the Kingdom of 
China,
 but because I doubt, that they, which would compare those won∣drous things that are in the countrys, they have not seen with that little they have seen in their own will make some question of it, or it may be give no credit at all to these truth, because they are not confo
mable to their understanding, and small experience.


Continuing our course up this river,
 the first two days we saw not any remarkable town or place, but only a great number of Villages, and little hamlets of two or three hundred fires a piece, which by their buildings seemed to be houses of fisher men, and poor people, that live by the labour of their hands; For the rest, all that was within view in the countrey, was great woods of Firr, Groves, Forrests, and Orange trees, as also plains full of wheat, rice, beans, pease, millet, panick, barley, rye, flax, cotton wool, with great inclosures of gardens, and goodly houses of pleasure, belonging to the 
Mandarins,
 and Lords of the Kingdom: There was likewise all along the river such an infinite number of cattel of all sorts, as I can assure you there is not more in 
Aethiopia,
 nor in all the dominions of 
Prester Iohn
; upon the top of the mountains many houses of their Sects of 
Gentiles
 were to be seen, adorned with high Steeples guilt all over, the glistering whereof was such, and so great, that to behold them a far off was an admirable sight: The fourth day of our voyage we arrived at a town, called 
Pocasser,
 twice as big as 
Cantano,
 compassed about with strong wals of hewed stone, and towers and bulwarks almost like ours, together with a key on the river side, twice as long as the shot of a falconet, and inclosed with two rows of iron grates, with very strong gates, where the Junks and vessels that arrived there were unladen; This place abounds with all kinds of merchandise, which from thence is transported over all the Kingdom, especially with copper, sugar, and allum, whereof there is very great store; Here also in the middest of a carrefour, that is almost at the end of the town, stands a mighty strong castle, having three bulwarks and five towers, in the highest of which the present Kings Father, as the 
Chineses
 told us, kept a King of 
Tartaria
 nine years prisoner, at the end whereof he killed himself with poyson, that his subjects sent him, because they would not be constrained to pay that ran∣some, which the King of 
China
 demanded for his deliverance: In this town the 
Chifuu
 gave three of us leave to go up and down for to crave the alms of good people, accompanied with four 
Hupes,
 that are as Sergeants, or Bailiffs amongst us, who led us, chained together, as we were, through six or seven streets, where we got in alms to the value of above twent
 duckats, as well in clothes, as mony, besides flesh, rice
 meal, fruit, and other victuals, which was 
stow∣ed on us, whereof we gave the one half to the 
Hupes
 that conducted us, it being the custom so to do. Afterwards we were brought to a 
Pagode,
 whither the people flocked from all parts that day, in regard of a very solemn feast that was then celebrated there: This Temple, or 
Pagode,
 as we were told▪ had somtime been a Pallace royal, where the King then reigning was born, now because the Queen his Mother died there in child-birth, she commanded her self to be buried in the very same chamber where she was brought to bed, wherefore to honour her death the better, this Temple was dedicated to the invocation of 
Tauhinaret,
 which is one of the principal Sects of the 
Pagans
 in the Kingdom of 
China,
 as I will more am
ly de∣clare, when as I shall speak of the 
Labyrinth
 of the two and thirty laws that are in it; All the buildings of this Temple, together with all the gardens, and walks, that belong to it, are suspended in the ayr upon three hundred and threescore pillars, every one of the which is of one intire stone of a very great bigness; These three hundred and threescore pillars, are called by the names of three hundred and threescore days of the year, and in each of them is a particular feast kept there with many alms, gifts, and bloody sacaifices, accompanied with musick, dancing, and other sports; Under this 
Pagode,
 namely between those pillars, are eight very fair streets, in∣closed on every side with grates of copper, and gates for the passage of pilgrims, and others, that run continually to this feast, as it were to a Jubilee; The Chamber above, where the Queen lay, was made in the form of a Chappel, but round, and from the top to the bottom all gar∣nished


with silver, the workmanship whereof was of greater cost then the matter it self; In the midst of it stood a kind of Tribunal, framed round, like the Chamber, some fifteen steps high, compassed about with six gra
es of silver, on the top whereof was a great bowl, and upon that a Lion of silver, that with his head supported a shrine of gold, three hand-bredths square, wherein they said, the bones of the Queen were, which these blinded ignorants reve∣renced as a great relique; Below this Tribunal in equal proportion were four bars of silver, that traversed the Chamber, whereon hung three and forty lamps of the same mettal, in memo∣ry of the three and forty years that this Queen lived, and seven lamps of gold in commamo∣ration of seven sons that she had; moreover at the entry into the Chappel, just against the door, were eight other bars of iron, whereon also hung a very great number of silver lamps, which the 
Chineses
 told us were offered by some of the Wives of the 
Chaems, Aytaos, Tu∣toens,
 and 
Anchacys,
 who were assistant at the death of the Queen, so that in aknowledg∣ment of that honour they sent those lamps thither afterwards; without the gates of the Tem∣ple, and round about six ballisters of copper that invironed it, were a great many Statues of Giants, fifteen foot high, cast in brass, all well proportioned with halberts or clubs in their hands, and some of them with battle-axes on their shoulders, which made so brave and ma∣jestical a shew, as one could never be satisfied enough with looking on them; Amongst these Statues, which were in number twelve hundred, as the 
Chineses
 affirmed, there were four and twenty very great Serpents also of brass, and under every one of them a woman seated, with a sword in her hand, and a silver crown on her head; It was said, that those four and twenty women carried the Titles of Queens, because they sacrificed themselves to the death of this Queen, to the end their souls might serve hers in the other life, as in this their bodies had served her body, a matter which the 
Chineses,
 that draw their extraction from these wo∣men, hold for a very great honour, insomuch as they inrich the crests of their coats of arms with it; round about this row of Giants was another of triumphant arches, guilt all over, whereon a number of silver bels hung by chains of the same mettal, which moved with the air kept such a continual ringing, as one could hardly hear one another for the noise they made; Without these arches there were likewise at the same distance two rows of copper grates, that inclosed all this huge work, and among them certain pillars of the same mettal, which support∣ed Lions rampant, mounted upon bowls, being the arms of the Kings of 
China,
 as I have related elsewhere. At each corner of the Carrefour was a monster of brass, of so strange and unmeasurable an heighth, and so deformed to behold, as it is not possible almost for a man to imagine, so that I think it best not to speak of them, the rather for that I confess I am not able in words to express the form wherein I saw their prodigies; Howbeit as it is reaso∣nable to conceal these things without giving some knowledg of them, I will say, as much as my weak understanding is able to deliver. One of these Monsters which is on the right hand, as one comes into the Carrefour, whom the 
Chineses
 call, the Serjeant 
Gluttom
 of the hol∣low or profound house of smoak, and that by their histories is held to be 
Lucifer,
 is represen∣ted under the figure of a Serpent of an excessive heighth, with most hideous and deformed adders coming out of his stomack, covered all over with green and black scares, and a num∣ber of prickles on their backs above a span long, like unto Porcupins quils; each of these Ad∣ders had a woman between his jaws, with her hair all dishevelled, and standing an end, as one affrighted; The monster carried also in his mouth, which was unmeasurable great, a Vizard that was above thirty foot long, and as big as a tun, with his nostrils & chaps so full of blood, that all the rest of his body was besmeared with it, this Vizard held a great Eliphant between his paws, and seemed to gripe him so hard, as his very guts came out of his throat, and all this was done so proportionably, and to the life, that it made a man tremble to behold such a deformed figure, and which was scarce possible for one to imagine: His tail might be some twenty fathom long, was entortilled about such another Monster, that was the second of the four, whereof I spake, in the figure of a man, being an hundred foot high, and by the 
Chineses
 called 
Turcamparoo,
 who they say was the son of that Serpent; besides that he was very ugly, he stood with both his hands in his mouth, that was as big as a great gate, with a row of horrible teeth, and a foul black tongue, hanging out two fathom long, most dreadfull to behold: As for the other two Monsters, one was in the form of a woman, named by the 
Chineses, Magdelgau,
 seven∣teen fathom high, and six thick; This same about the girdlesteed before had a face made pro∣portionable to her body, above two fathom broad, and she breathed out of her mouth and nostrils great 
akes, not of artificial, but true fire, which proceeded, as they told us, from


her head, where fire was continually kept, that in like manner came out of the said face be∣low. By this Figure these Idolaters would demonstrate that she was the Queen of the fie∣ry sphear, which according to their belief is to burn the earth at the end of the World. The fourth Monster was a man, set stooping, which with great swoln cheeks, as big as the main sail of a Ship, seemed to blow extreamly; this Monster was also of an unmeasurable height, an
 of such an hideous and gastly aspect, that a man could hardly endure the sight of it; the 
Chineses
 called it 
Vzanguenaboo,
 and said, that it was he which raised Tempests upon the Sea, and demolished Buildings, in regard whereof the people offred many things unto him, to the end he should do them no harm, and many presented him with a piece of money yearly, that he might not drown their Junks, nor do any of theirs hurt that went by Sea; I will omit many other abuses which their blindness makes them beleeve, and which they hold to be so true, as there is not one of them but would endure a thousand deaths for the maintenance thereof.


The next day being gone from the Town of 
Pocasser
 we arrived at another fair and great Town, called 
Xinligau
; there we saw many Buildings inclosed with walls of Brick,
 and deep ditches about them, and at one end of the Town two Castles, very well fortified with Towers and Bulwarks after our fashion; at the gates were draw Bridges, suspended in the air with great Iron chains, and in the midst of them a Tower five Stories high, very curi∣ously painted with several Pictures; the 
Chineses
 assured us, that in those two Castles there was as much Treasure, as amounted to fifteen thousand pieces of silver, which was the re∣venue of all this 
Archipelage,
 and laid up in this place by the Kings Grandfather now raign∣ing, in Memorial of a Son of his that was born here, and named 
Leuquinau,
 that is to say, 
The joy of all
; those of the Country repute him for a Saint, because he ended his dayes in Religion, where also he was buried in a Temple, dedicated to 
Quiay Varatel,
 the God of all the Fishes of the Sea, of whom these miserable Ignorants recount a world of Foole∣ries, as also the Laws he invented, and the precepts which he left them, being able to asto∣nish a man, as I will more amply declare when time shall serve. In this Town and in another five leagues higher the most part of the Silks of this Kingdome are dyed, because they hold that the waters of these places make the colours far more lively then those of any other part, and these Dyers, which are said to be thirteen thousand, pay unto the King yearly three hundred thousand 
Taeis.
 Continuing our course up the River the day after about evening we arrived at certain great plains, where were great store of Cat
le, as Hor∣ses, Mares, Colts, and Cows, guarded by men on Horsback, that make sale of them to Butchers, who afterwards retail them indifferently as any other flesh: Having past these plains containing some ten or eleven Leagues, we came to a Town called 
Iunquileu,
 walled with Brick, but without Battlements, Bulwarks, or Towers, as others had, where
f I have spoken before; at the end of the Suburbs of this Town we saw divers houses built in the water upon great Piles, in the form of Magazines; Before the gate of a little street stood a Tombe made of stone, invironed with an Iron grate, painted red and green, and over it a steeple framed of pieces of very fine Pourcelain, sustained by four pillars of curious stone; upon the top of the Tombe were five Globes, and two others that seemed to be of cast iron, and on the one side thereof were graven in Letters of gold, and in the 
Chinese
 lan∣guage, words of this substance. 
Here lyes
 Trannocem Mudeliar, 
Vncle to the King of
 Malaca, 
whom death took out of the World before he could be revenged of Captain
 Alphon∣so Albuquerque, 
the Lyon of the robberies of the Sea.
 We were much amazed to behold this Inscription there, wherefore enquiring what it might mean, a 
Chinese,
 that seemed more honourable then the rest, told us; that about some fortie years before, this man which lay buried there, came thither as Embassador from a Prince, that stiled himself King of 
Malaca,
 to demand succour from the son of the Sun against men of a Country, that hath no name, which came by Sea from the end of the World, and had taken 
Malaca
 from him; this man recounted many other incredible things concerning this matter, whereof mention is made in a printed Book thereof, as also that this Embassador having continued three years at the Kings Court suing for this succour, just as it was granted him, and that pre∣parations for it were a making, it was his ill fortune to be surprised one night at Supper with an Apoplexie, whereof he dyed at the end of nine dayes, so that extreamly afflicted to see himself carried away by a suddain death before he had accomplished his business, he ex∣pressed his earnest desire of revenge by the Inscription which he caused to be graven on his


tombe, that posterity might know wherefore he was come thither. Afterwards we departed from this place, and continued our voyage up the river, which thereabouts is not so large as towards the City of 
Nanquin,
 but the Country is here better peopled with Villages, Boroughs, and Gardens, then any other place, for every stones cast we met still with some 
Pagode,
 Man∣sion of pleasure, or Countrey house; Passing on about some two leagues further, we arrived at a place encompassed with great iron gates, in the midst whereof stood two mighty Statues of brass upright, sustained by pillars of cast mettal of the bigness of a bushel, and seven fa∣thom high, the one of a man, and the other of a woman, both of them seventy four spans in heighth, having their hands in their mouths, their cheeks horribly blown out, and their eyes so staring, as they affrighted all that looked on them. That which represented a man, was called 
Quiay Xingatalor,
 and the other in the form of a woman, was named 
Apancapatur
; Ha∣ving demanded of the 
Chineses
 the explication of these figures, they told us that the male was he, which with those mighty swoln cheeks blew the fire of hell for to torment all those mise∣rable wretches, that would not liberally bestow alms in this life; and for the other monster, that she was Porter of hell gate, where she would take notice of those that did her good in this world, and letting them fly away into a river of very cold water, called 
Ochilenday,
 would keep them hid there from being tormented by the Divels, as other damned were: Upon this Speech one of our company could not forbear laughing at such a ridiculous and diabolical foolery, which three of their Priests, or 
Banzoes,
 then present observing, they were so exceed∣ingly offended therewith, as they perswaded the 
Chifuu,
 which conducted us, that if he did not chastise us in such manner, as those gods might be well contented with the punishment in∣flicted on us for our mockery of them, both the one and the other would assuredly torment his soul, and never suffer it to go out of hell; which threatning so mightily terrified this dog, the 
Chifuu,
 that without further delay, or hearing us speak, he caused us all to be bound hand and foot, and commanded each of us to have an hundred lashes given him with a double cord, which was immediately executed with so much rigour, as we were all in a gore bloud, where∣by we were taught not to jeer afterwards at any thing we saw, or heard. At such time as we arrived here we found twelve 
Bonzoes
 upon the place, who with silver censors full of per∣fumes of aloes and beniamin, censed those two divel
sh Monsters, and chanted out aloud, 
Help us, even as we serve thee
; whereunto divers other Priests answered in the name of the Idol with a great noise, 
So I promise to do like a good Lord:
 In this sort they went as it were in procession round about the place, singing with an ill tuned voice to the sound of a great many bels, that were in Steeples thereabouts; In the mean time there were others, that with Drums and Basins made such a dinne, as I may truly say, put them all together, was most horrible to hear.






CHAP. XXIX. Our Arrival at 
Sempitay,
 our encounter there with a Christian woman, toge∣ther with the Original and Foundation of the Empire of Chi∣na; and who they were that first peopled it.


FRom this place we continued our voyage eleven days more up the river, which in those parts is so peopled with Cities, Towns, Villages, Boroughs, Forts and Castles, that commonly they are not a flight shot distant one from another, besides a world of houses of plea∣sure, and temples, where Steeples were all guilt, which made such a glorious shew, as we were much amazed at it; In this manner we arrived at a Town, named 
Sempitay,
 where we abode five days, by reason the 
Chifuus
 wife, that conducted us, was not well: Here by his permission we landed, and chained together, as we were, we went up and down the streets craving of alms, which was very liberally given us by the Inhabitants, who wondering to see such men as we, demanded of us what kind of people we were, of what Kingdom, and how our coun∣trey was called? Hereunto we answered conformably to that we had often said before, namely that we were natives of the Kingdom of of 
Siam,
 that going from 
Liampoo
 to 
Nanquin,
 we had lost all our goods by shipwrack, and that although they beheld us then in so poor a case, yet we had been forme
ly very rich; whereupon a woman who was come thither amongst the rest to see us; It is very likely, said she, speaking to them about her, that what these poor strangers have related is most true, for daily experience doth shew how those that trade by sea, do oftentimes make it their grave, wherefore it is best and surest to travel upon the earth, and


to esteem of it, as of that, whereof it hath pleased God to frame us; saying, so she gave us two mazes, which amounts to about sixteen pence of our mony, advising us to make no more such long voyages, since our lives were so short: Hereupon she unbottoned one of the sleeves of a red Satin Gown she had on, and baring her left arm, she shewed us a crosse imprinted on it, like to the mark of a slave, saying, Do any of you know this signe, which amongst those, that follow the way of truth, is called a crosse? or have any of you ever heard it named? To this falling down on our knees, we answered, with tears in our eyes, that we know exceeding well; Then lifting up her hands, she cried out, 
Our Father, which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name,
 speaking these words in the 
Portugal
 tongue, and because she could speak no more of our language, she very earnestly desired us in 
Chinese
 to tell her whether we were Christians; we replyed that we were, and for proof thereof, after we had kissed that arm, whereon the cross was, we repeated all the rest of the Lords prayer, which she had left unsaid, wherewith being assured that we were Christians indeed, she drew aside from the rest there present, and weeping said to us; Come along Christians of the other end of the world, with her that is your true Sister in the faith of Jesus Christ, or peradven∣ture a kinswoman to one of you, by his side that begot me in this miserable exile, and so go∣ing to carry us to her house, the 
Hupes
 which guarded us, would not suffer her, saying, that if we would not continue our craving of alms, as the 
Chifuu
 had permitted us, they would re∣turn us back to the ship; but this they spake in regard of their own interest, for that they were to have the moitie of what was given us, as I have before declared, and accordingly they made as though they would have lead us thither again, which the woman perceiving, I understand your meaning, said she, and indeed it is but reason you make the best of your pla∣ces, for thereby you live, so opening her purse, she gave them two 
Taeis
 in silver, where∣with they were very well satisfied; whereupon with the leave of the 
Chifuu,
 she carried us home to her house, and there kept us all the while we remained in that place, making exceed∣ing much of us, and using us very charitably; Here she shewed us an Oratory, wherein she had a cross of wood guilt, as also candlesticks, and a lamp of silver: Furthermore she told us, that she was named, 
Inez de Leyria,
 and her Father 
Tome Pirez,
 who had been great Am∣bassadour from 
Portugal
 to the King of 
China,
 and that in regard of an insurrection with a 
Portugal
 Captain, made at 
Canton,
 the 
Chineses
 taking him for a Spye, & not for an Ambassodor, as he termed himself, clapped him and all his followers up in prison, where by order of Justice five of them were put to torture, receiving so many, and such cruel stripes on their bodies, as they died instantly, and that the rest were all banished into several parts, together with her father into this place, where he married with her mother, that had some means, and how he made her a Christian, living so seven and twenty years together, and converting many 
Gentiles
 to the faith of Christ, whereof there were above three hundred then abiding in that Town; which every 
Sunday
 assembled in her house to say the Catechisme: whereupon demanding of her what were their accustomed prayers, she answered, that she used no other but these, which on their knees, with their eyes and hands lift up to heaven, they pronounced in this manner, 
O Lord Iesus Christ, as it is most true that thou art the very Son of God, conceived by the Holy Ghost in the womb of the Virgine Mary for the salvation of sinners, so thou wilt be pleased to forgive us our offence
 that thereby we may become worthy to behold thy face in the glory of thy Kingdom, where thou art sitting at the right hand of the Almighty. Our Father which art in heaven, hallowed be thy Name. In the Name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost, Amen.
 And so all of them kissing the Cross, imbraced one another, and thereupon returned every one to his own home. Moreover she told us, that her Father had left her many other prayers, which the 
Chineses
 had stollen from her, so that she had none left but those before recited; whereunto we replyed, that those we had heard from her were ve∣ry good, but before we went away we would leave her divers other good and wholsome prayers; do so then, answered she, for the respect you owe to so good a God, as yours is, and that hath done such things for you, for me, and for all in general: Then causing the cloth to be laid, she gave us a very good and plentiful dinner, and treated us in like sort every meal, during the five days we continued in her house, which as I said before, was permitted by the 
Chifuu
 in regard of a present that this good woman sent his wife, whom she earnestly in∣treated so to deal with her husband, as we might be well intreated, for that we were men of whom God had a particular care, as the 
Chifuus
 wife promised her to do with many thanks to her for the present she had received; In the mean space, during the five days we remained


in her House, we read the Catechism seven times to the Christians, wherewithall they were very much edifyed, beside, 
Christophoro Borhalho
 made them a little Book in the 
Chinese
 tongue, containing the 
Pater Noster,
 the Creed, the Ten Commandments, and many other good Prayers. After these things we to
k our leaves of 
Inez de Leyria,
 and the Christians who gave us fifty 
Taeis
 in Silver, which stood us since in good stead, 
s I shall declare hereaf∣ter, and withall 
Inez de Leyria
 gave us secretly fifty 
Taeis
 more, humbly desiring us to re∣member her in our Prayers to God.


After our departure from the Town of 
Sempitay
 we continued our course upon the Ri∣ver of 
Bataupina,
 unto a place, named 
Lequinpau,
 containing about eleven or twelve thou∣sand fires, and very well built, at least we judged so by that we could discern, as also inclo∣sed with good Walls, and Curtains rou
d about it: Not far from it was an exceeding long House; having within it thirty Furnaces on each side, where a great quantity of Sil∣ver was melted, which was brought in carts from a Mountain, some five leagues off, called 
Tuxenguim:
 The 
Chineses
 assured us, that above a thousand men wrought continually in that Mine to draw out the Silver, and that the King of 
China
 had in yearly Revenue out of it about five thousand 
Picos
; This place we left about Sun-set, and the next day in the evening we arrived just between two little Towns, that stood opposite one to another, the River onely between, the one named 
Pacau,
 and the other 
Nacau,
 which although they were little, yet were they fairly buil
, and well walled with great hewed stone, having a number of Temples, which they call Pagods, all guilt over, and enriched with Steeples and Fanes of great price, very pleasing and agreeable to the eye. Now in regard of that they recounted unto us here of these two Towns, I hold it not amisse to discour
e it in this place, the rather for that I have heard it confirmed since, and that thereby one may come to know the Original and Foundation of this Empire of 
China,
 whereof ancient Writers have spoken little 
ill this pre∣sent. It is written in the first Chronicle, of fourscore which have been made of the Kings of 
China,
 the thirteenth Chapter, as I have heard it many times delivered, That six hundred thirty and nine years, after the Deluge there was a Country called then 
Guantipocau,
 which as may be judged by the height of the Climate where it is scituated, being in sixty two degrees to the Northward, abutts on the backside of our 
Germany
; In this Country lived at that time a Prince, named 
Turbano,
 whose state was not very great: It is said of him, that being a youth he had three children by a Woman, called 
Nancaa
 whom he extreamly affected, although the Queen his Mother then a Widow, was exceedingly displeased at it. This King being much importuned by the principal Persons of his Kingdom to marry, al∣ways excused himself alledging some Reasons for it, which they did not well allow of, but incited by his Mother, they pressed him so far, that at length they perceived he had no intent to condescend unto them, for indeed his minde was to legitimate the eldest Son he had by 
Nancaa,
 and to resign his Kingdome unto him; to which effect he not long after put himself into Religion in a Temple named 
Gison,
 which seems to have been the Idol of a certain Sect that the 
Rom
s
 had in their time, and that is still at this present in the King∣domes of 
China▪ Iappon, Cauchenchina, Cambaya,
 and 
Siam,
 whereof I have seen many Pagods in those Countries: But first having declared his said 
on King, the Queen his Mo∣ther would by no means approve of it, saying, 
That since the King her Son would needs pro∣fess himself into that Religion, and leave the Kingdom without a lawful Heir, she would labour to remedy so great a disorder,
 as indeed she did by instantly marrying her self, being fifty years of age, to a Priest of hers, called 
Silau,
 that was but six and twenty, whom she proclaimed King, notwithstanding all opposition made to the contrary; whereof 
Turbano
 being pre∣sently advertised, and knowing that his Mother had done it of purpose to defeat his Son of the Crown, he got him forthwith out of his Religion for to repossess himself of it, and to that end used all the means and diligence he could, whereupon the Queen Mother, and 
Silau,
 fearing that which might follow thereof to both their destructions, if he were not in time, and that speedily prevented, they secretly assembled some of their partakers, to the number of thirty Horse, and fourscore Foot, who going one night where 
Turbano
 was, slew him, and all his Company; Howbeit 
Nancaa
 saved her self, with her three Sons, and accompanied with certain of her Domestical Servants, she imbarqued her self in a small 
Lanteaa,
 and fled away down the River to a place some seventy leagues from thence, where she landed with those few followers she had: There assisted with some others that resorted unto her, she fortified her self in a little Island, that was in the middest of the River,


and which she named 
Pilaunere,
 that signifies, 
The retreat of the poor,
 with an intent there to end the rest of her days; now having lived five years in that poor and miserable estate, the Tyrant 
Silan,
 whom the People hated, doubting lest the three young Princes coming to age might expell him o
t of what he had injustly usurped upon them, or at leastwise disturb him with Wars, by reason of the right they pretended to the Kingdom, he sent a Fleet of thirty 
Ienga's,
 wherein, as it is said, were sixteen hundred men, for to seek them out, and de∣stroy them, whereof 
Nancaa
 receiving intelligence fell to consult what she should do, and at length resolved by no means to attend these Forces, in regard her Sons were but Infants, her self a weak Woman, her Men few in number, and unprovided of all that was necessary to make any defence against so great a number of Enemies, and so well furnished; whereupon taking a view of her People she found that they were but thirteen hundred in all, and of them onely five hundred Men, the rest being Women and Children, for all which company there were but three little 
Lanteaa's,
 and one 
Iangaa,
 in the whole River, and they not able to carry an hundred persons; so that 
Nancaa
 seeing no means to transport them away, the History saith, 
She assembled all her People, and declaring the fear she was in, desired them to advise her what she should do; but excusing themselves, they ingenuously confessed, they knew not what counsel to give her in that extremity:
 Whereupon, according to their ancient custome, they resolved to cast Lots, to the end that on whom the Lot did fall to speak, he should free∣ly deliver what God would be pleased to inspire him with; For which purpose they took three days time, wherein with fasting, cries, and tears, they would all with one voice crav
 the favour and assistance of the Lord Almighty, in whose hands was all the hope of their de∣liverance; This advice being approved of all in general, 
Nancaa
 made it to be proclaim∣ed, that upon pain of Death no person whatever should eat above once during those three days, to the end that by this abstinence of the Body, the Spirit might be carried with the greater attention towards God.


The three days abstinence being expired, Lots were cast five times one after another,
 and all those five times the Lot fell still on a little Boy of seven years of age, named, as the Tyrant was, 
Silau,
 whereat they were all exeedingly amazed, in regard that in the whole Troop there was not another of this same name: After that they had made their Sacrifices with all the accustomed Ceremonies of Musick, Perfumes, and sweet Odours, to render thanks unto God, they commanded the little Boy to lift up his hands unto Heaven, and then to say what he thought was necessary for the remedying of so great an Affliction, as that wherein they were; Whereupon the little Boy, 
Silau,
 beholding 
Nancaa,
 the History af∣firms he said these words; 
O feeble and wretched Woman, now that sorrow and affliction makes thee more troubled and perplexed then ever thou wert, in regard of the small relief that humane understanding doth represent unto thee, submit thy self with humble sighs to the om∣nipotent hand of the Lord, Esloign then, or at leastwise labour to esloign, thy minde from the vanities of the Earth, lifting up thine eyes with Faith and Hope, and thou shalt see what the Prayers of an Innocent, afflicted and pursued before the Iustice of him that hath created thee, can do; For assoon as in all humility thou hast declared the weakness of thy power unto the Al∣mighty, Victory will incontinently be given thee from above over the Tyrant
 Silau; 
where∣fore I command thee in his Name to imbarque thy self, thy Children, and all thy Followers in thine Enemies Vessels, wherein amidst the confused murmur of the Waters thou shalt wander so long, till thou arrivest at a placew here thou art to lay the Foundation of a House of that Re∣putation, as the Mercy of the most High shall be published there from Generation to Generation by the Voice of a strange People, whose Cries shall be as pleasing to him, as those of sucking Chil∣dren that lie in the Cradle.
 This said, the little Boy, according to the History, fell down stark dead to the ground, which much astonished 
Nancaa,
 and all hers; The said History further delivers, and as I have often heard it read, that five days after the success the thirty 
Iangaas
 were one morning seen coming down the River in very good equipage, but not so much as one man in them; the reason hereof, by the report of the History, which the 
Chi∣neses
 hold to be most true, was, that all these Ships of War being joyned together for to exe∣cute unmercifully upon 
Nancaa
 and her Children the cruel and damnable intentions of the Tyrant 
Silau,
 one night as this Fleet rode at Anchor in a place, called 
Catebasoy,
 a huge dark Cloud came over them, whereout issued such horrible Thunder and Lightning, accompanied with mighty Rain, the Drops whereof were so hot, that falling upon them which were asleep in the Vessels, it made them leap into the River, so as within less, then an hour they perished


all; And it is said that one drop of this Rain coming to fall upon a body it burnt in such sort, as it penetrated to the very marrow of the bone with most insupportable pain, no cloths, nor arms, being able to resist it. 
Nancaa
 receiving this favour from the hand of the Lord, with abundance of tears and humble thanks, embarqued her self, her children, and all her company, in the said thirty 
Iangaas,
 and sailing down the River was carried by the strength of the cur∣rent, which for her sake, the History saith, redoubled then, in seven and forty days to the ve∣ry place where now the City of 
Pequin
 is built; There she, and all hers landed, and doubt∣ing lest the Tyrant 
Silau,
 whose cruelty she feared, might still pursue her, she fortified her self in this place the best she could.






CHAP. XXX. The Foundation of the four chief Cities of 
China;
 together with which of the Kings of 
China
 it was that built the Wall between 
China
 and 
Tartaria;
 and many things that we saw as we past along.


THe said History delivers, that few days after the poor 
Nancaa,
 and her followers, were setled on shore, she caused them to swear fealty unto her eldest Son, and to acknow∣ledge him for their lawful Prince; Now the very same day that he received the Oath o
 Alle∣geance from these few Subjects of his, he made election of the place where the Fortress should be erected, together with the inclosure of the Wall; Afterwards, assoon as the first Foundati∣ons were laid, which was speedily done, he went out of his Tent, accompanied with his Mother, who governed all, together with his Brothers, and the chiefest of his company, attired in festival Robes, with a great stone carried before him by the noblest Personages, which he had caused to be wrought aforehand; and arriving at the said Foundations he laid his hand upon the Stone, and on his knees, with his eyes lifted up to Heaven, he said to all that were pre∣sent, 
Brethren, and worthy Friends, know that I give mine own Name, that is,
 Pequin, 
to this Stone, upon which this new place is to be built, for I desire, that hereafter it should be so called; wherefore I pray you all, as Friends, and command you as your King, not to call it otherwise, to the end the memory thereof may remain immortal to those that shall come after us to the end of the World; By which means it shall be manifested to all men, that the thirteenth day of the eighth Moon, in the year one thousand six hundred thirty and nine, after the Lord of all things created had made those that lived upon the Earth, see how much he abhorred the sins of Men, for the which he drowned the whole World with Water, that he sent down from Heaven, in satisfaction of his divine Iustice, it shall, I say, be manifested to them, that the new Prince
 Pequin 
built this Fortress, whereunto he gave his Name; And so conform∣able to the Prophesie, which the dead childe hath delivered, it shall be published over all, by the voice of strange People, in what manner the Lord is to be feared, and what Sacrifices are to be made, that they may be just and acceptable unto him.
 Now this was that which King 
Pequin
 said unto his Vassals, and which is at this day to be seen engraven on a silver Scutcheon, fasten∣ed to an Arch of one of the principal Gates of the City, called 
Pommicotay,
 where in me∣mory of this Prophecy, there is ordinarily a Guard of forty Halberdiers, with their Captain, whereas there are but onely four in all the rest, who are bound to render an account of all that pass in and out there daily; And because the Histories relate, that this new King laid the first foundation of this City on the 3
d
 of the moneth of 
August,
 the Kings of 
China
 do on that day usually shew themselves to the People, and that with such Pomp and Majesty, that I pro∣fess I am not able to declare the least part of it, much less to describe the whole. Now in regard of this first Kings words, which the 
Chineses
 hold for an infallible Prophecy, his De∣scendants do so fear the accomplishment thereof, that by a Law expresly made by them, the admittance of any Strangers into this Kingdom, saving Ambassadours and Slaves, is forbidden upon most grievous pains; So that when any do chance to arrive there, they banish them pre∣sently from one place to another, not permitting them to settle any where, as they practised it towards me, and my eight companions. And thus, as I have succinctly delivered, was this Em∣pire of 
China
 founded, and peopled by the means of this Prince, named 
Pequin,
 the eldest of 
Nancaa
's three Sons; As for the other two, called 
Pacan
 and 
Nacau,
 they afterwards found∣ed the other two Towns aforesaid, and withall gave them their own Names. It is also the general opinion, that their Mother 
Nancaa
 founded the City of 
Nanquin,
 which took its denomination from her, continuing so to this day, and is the second City of this great Mo∣narchy.


The Histories further affirm, that from the time of this first Founder, the Empire of 
China
 augmented always from one King to another, by a just Succession till a certain Age, which according to our Computation, was in the Year of Lord, one thousand one hundred and thirty; After which a King that then reigned, named 
Xixipan,
 inclosed the City of 
Pe∣quin,
 within the space of three and twenty years, in such manner as it is seen at this day, and that fourscore and two years after another King, his Grand-childe, called 
Iumbileytay,
 made the like, so that both together were sixty leagues in circuit, namely, each of them thirty, ten in length, and five in breadth: Now it is certain, and I have often times read it, that each of these Inclosures, or Walls, hath a thousand and threescore round Bulwarks, as also two hun∣dred and forty Towers, very fair, strong, large, and high, with gilt Lions upon Globes, being the Arms of the Kings of 
China,
 which are very pleasing to the eye. Without the last Inclo∣sure is an exceeding great Ditch round about it, ten fathom deep, and forty broad, continually replenished with many Barques and Boats, covered over head as if they were Houses, where both Provisions, and all sorts of Merchandise are sold. This City, according to the 
Chineses
 re∣port, hath above three hundred and threescore Gates, in each of which, as I have before re∣cited, there are always four Halberdiers, who are obliged to render an account of all that go in and out daily: There are also certain Chambers in it, whither it is the custome to bring such Children as wander and go astray, in the Town; to the end their Parents that lose them may be sure to hear of them there. I will refer my speaking more largely of the Magnificences of this goodly City to another place, for that which I have now delivered in haste, and as it were 
en passant,
 was but to make a brief Relation of the original of this Empire, and of the first Founder of the City of 
Pequin,
 (which may be truly said to be the chiefest of all the World for greatness, policy, riches, and abundance of all things that can be desired of man) as also of the Foundation of the second City of this mighty Kingdom, that is 
Nanquin,
 and of the other two. 
Pacan
 and 
Nacan,
 whereof I have heretofore spoken, and in which the Found∣ers of them are buried in very stately and rich Temples, within Tombs of white and green Alabaster, all garnished with Gold, and erected upon Lions of Silver, with a world of Lamps, and perfuming Pans full of divers sorts of sweet Odours round about them.


Now that I have spoken of the Original and Foundation of this Empire,
 together with the circuit of the great City of 
Pequin,
 I hold it not amiss to intreat as succinctly as I may of another particular, which is no less admirable then those whereof I have made mention before: It is written in the fifth Book of the Scituation of all the remarkable places of this Empire, or rather Monarchy, (for to speak truly, there is no appellation so great but may be well attri∣buted unto it) that a King, named 
Crisnagol Dicotay,
 who according to the computation of that Book, reigned in the year of our Lord five hundred and eighteen, happened to make war with the 
Tartar,
 about some difference between them concerning the State of 
Xenxinapau,
 that borders on the Kingdom of 
Lauhos,
 and so valiantly demeaned himself in a Battel against him, that he defeated his Army, and remained Master of the Field; whereupon the 
Tartar
 confederating himself with other Kings, his Friends, did by their assistance assemble together greater Forces then the former, and therewith invaded the Kingdom of 
China,
 where (it is said) he took three and thirty very important Towns, of which the principal was 
Panquilor,
 insomuch that the 
Chinese
 fearing he should not be well able to defend himself, concluded a Peace with him upon condition to relinquish his right, which he pretended to that in question betwixt them, and to pay him two thousand 
Picos
 of Silver for to defray the Charges of those strangers the 
Tartar
 had entertained in this War; by this means 
China
 continued for a good while quiet, but the King doubting lest the 
Tartar
 might in time to come return to annoy him again, resolved to build a Wall, that might serve for a Bulwark to his Empire; and to that end calling all his Estates together, he declared his determination unto them, which was presently not onely well approved of, but held most necessary; so that to enable him for the performance of a business so much concerning his state, they gave him ten thousand 
Picos
 of Silver, which amount, according to our account, unto fifteen Millions of Gold, after the rate of fifteen hundred Ducates each 
Pico
; and moreover they entertained him two hundred and fifty thousand men to labour in the work, whereof thirty thousand were appointed for Officers, and all the rest for manual services; Order being taken then for whatsoever was thought fit for so prodigious an enterprise, they fell to it in such sort, as by the report of the History all that huge Wall was in seven and twenty years quite finished from one end to the other; which if credit may be given to the same Chronicle is seventy 
Iaos
 in length, that is six hundred and


fifteen miles after nine miles every 
Iao
; wherein that which seemed most wonderfull and most exceeding the belief of man, was that seven hundred and fifty thousand men laboured incessantly for so long a time in that great work, whereof the Commonalty, as I delivered before, furnished one third part; the Priests, and Isles of 
Aynen,
 another third; and the King assisted by the Princes, Lords, 
Chaems,
 and 
Anchacys
 of the Kingdom, the rest of the build∣ing, which I have both seen and measured, being thirty foot in height, and ten foot in breadth, where it is thickest: It is made of Lime and Sand, and plaistered on the outside with a kind of 
Bitumen,
 which renders it so strong, that no Cannon can demolish it: Instead of Bul∣warks it hath Sentries, or Watch-towers, two stages high, flanked with Buttresses of Carpen∣try made of a certain black wood, which they call 
Caubesy,
 that is to say, Wood of Iron, be∣cause it is exceeding strong and hard, every Buttress being as thick as an Hogshead, and ve∣ry high, so that these Sentries are far stronger then if they were made of Lime and Stone. Now this Wall, by them termed 
Chaufacan,
 which signifies, 
Strong resistance,
 extends in height equal to the Mountains, whereunto it is joyned, and that those Mountains also may serve for a Wall they are cut down very smooth and s
eep, which renders them far stronger then the Wall it self; but you must know that in all this extent of land there is no Wall but in the void spaces from Hill to Hill, so that the Hills themselves make up the rest of the Wall and Fence: Further it is to be noted, that in this whole length of an hundred and fifteen leagues, which this Fortification contains, there are are but onely 5 Entries where∣by the Rivers of 
Tartaria
 do pass, which are derived from the impetuous Torrents that descend from these Mountains, and running above five hundred leagues in the Country, ren∣der themselves into the Seas of 
China
 and 
Cauchenchina
; howbeit one of these Rivers, be∣ing greater then the rest, disemboques by the Bay of 
Cuy
 in the Kingdom of 
Sournau,
 com∣monly called 
Siam.
 Now in all these five Passages both the King of 
China,
 and the King of 
Tartaria,
 keep Garrisons; the 
Chinese
 in each of them entertains seven thousand men gi∣ving them great pay, whereof six thousand are Horse, the rest Foot, being for the most part strangers, as 
Mogores, Pancrus, Champaas, Corosones, Gizares
 of 
Persia,
 and other dif∣ferent Nations, bordering upon this Empire, and which in consideration of the extraordi∣nary pay they receive, serve the 
Chineses
; who (to speak truth) are nothing couragious, as be∣ing but little used to the Wars, and ill provided of Arms and Artillery. In all this length of Wall there are three hundred and twenty Companies, each of them containing five hun∣dred Souldiers; so that there are in all one hundred and threescore thousand men, besides Officers of Justice, 
Anchacis, Chaems,
 and other such like persons necessary for the Go∣vernment, and entertainment of these Forces; so that all joyned together make up the number of two hundred thousand, which are all maintained at the Kings onely charge, by rea∣son the most of them are Malefactours condemned to the reparations and labour of the Wall, as I shall more amply declare when I come to speak of the Prison destined to this pur∣pose, in the City of 
Pequin,
 which is also another Edifice, very remarkable, wherein there are continually above thirty thousand Prisoners, the most of them from eighteen to forty five years of age, appointed to work in this Wall.


Being departed from those two Towns 
Pacau
 and 
Nacau,
 we continued our course up the River,
 and arrived at another Town, called 
Mindoo,
 somewhat bigger then those from whence we parted, where about half a mile off was a great Lake of Salt-water, and a num∣ber of Salt-houses round about it; The 
Chineses
 assured us, that this Lake did ebb and flow like the Sea, and that it extended above two hundred leagues into the Country, rendring the King of 
China
 in yearly Revenue one hundred thousand 
Taeis,
 onely for the third of the Salt that was drawn out of it; as also that the Town yielded him other one hundred thousand 
Taeis
 for the Silk alone that was made there, not speaking at all of the Camphire, Sugar, Pourcelain, Vermilion, and Quick-silver, whereof there was very great plenty; moreover, that some two leagues from this Town were twelve exceeding long Houses, like unto Magazines, where a world of people laboured in casting and purifying of Copper, and the horrible din which the Hammers made there was such, and so strange, as if there were any thing on earth that could represent Hell this was it; wherefore being desirous to un∣derstand the cause of this extraordinary noise, we would needs go to see from whence it proceeded; and we found that there were in each of these Houses forty Fornaces, that is twenty of either side, with forty huge Anvils, upon every of which eight men beat in or∣der, and so swiftly, as a mans eye could hardly discern the blows, so as three hundred and


twenty men wrought in each of these twelve Houses, which in all the twelve Houses made up three thousand eight hundred and forty workmen, beside a great number of other per∣sons that laboured in other particular things; whereupon we demanded how much Copper might be wrought every year in each of these Houses, and they told us, one hundred and ten, or sixscore thousand 
Picos,
 whereof the King had two thirds, because the Mines were his, and that the Mountain from whence it was drawn was called 
Corotum baga,
 which sig∣nifies a River of Copper, for that from the time since it was discovered, being above two hundred years, it never failed, but rather more and more was found. Having past about a league beyond those twelve Ho
ses up the River, we came to a place inclos
d with three ranks of Iron grates, where we beheld thirty Houses, divined into five rows, six in each row, which were very long and compleat, with great Towers full of Bells of cast mettle, and much carved work, as also guilt Pillars, and the Frontispieces of fair hewed stone, whereupon many Inventious were engraved: At this place we went ashore by the 
Chi∣f
us
 permission, that carried us, for that he had made a Vow to this Pagod, which was cal∣led 
Bigay potim,
 that is to say, 
God of an hundred and ten thousand Gods, Corchoo fungané ginaco ginaca,
 which according to their report signifies, 
strong and great above all others,
 for one of the Errors wherewith these wretched people are blinded is, 
that they beleeve e∣very particular thing hath its God, who hath created it, and preserves its natural being, but th
t this
 Bigay potim 
brought them all forth from under his arm-pit
, and that from him as a father, they derive their being, by a filial union, which they term
 Bi
 Porentasay; 
And in the Kingdom of
 Pegu, 
where I have often been, I have seen one like unto this, named by those of the country
 Ginocoginans, 
the God of all greatness, which Temple was in times past built by the
 Chineses, 
when as they commanded in the
 Indiaes, 
being according to their supputati∣on from the year of our Lord Iesus Christ
 1013. 
to the year
 1072. 
by which account it ap∣pears that the
 Indiaes 
were under the Empire of
 China 
but onely fifty and nine years, for the successor of him that conquered it, called
 Exiragano, 
voluntarily abandoned it in regard of the great expence of mony and bloud that the unprofitable keeping of it cost him:
 In those thir∣ty Houses, whereof I formerly spake, were a great number of Idols of guilt Wood▪ and a like number of Tin, L
tten, and Pourcelain, being indeed so many, as I should hardly be believed to declare them. Now we had not past above five or six leagues from this place but we came to a great Town, about a league in circuit, quite destroyed and ruinated, so that asking the 
Chineses
 what might be the cause thereof, they told us, that this Town was anciently called 
Cohilouza,
 that is, 
The flower of the field,
 and had in former times been in very great prosperity, and that about one hundred forty and two years before, a certain stranger, in the company of some Merchants of the Port of 
Tanaçarim
 in the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 chanced to come thither, being as it seems an holy man, although the 
Bonzes
 said he was a Sorcerer, by reason of the wonders he did, having raised up five dead men, and wrought many other Miracles, whereat all men were exceedingly astonished; and that having di∣vers times disputed with the Priests he had so shamed and confounded them, as fearing to deal any more with him, they incensed the Inhabitants against him, and persw
ded them to put him to death, affirming that otherwise God would consume them with fire from Hea∣ven, whereupon all the Townsmen went unto the House of a poor Weaver, where he lodg∣ed, and killing the Weaver, with his son and two sons in Law of his, that would have de∣fended him, the Holy man came forth to them, and reprehending them for this uproar, he told them amongst other things, 
That the God of the Law, whereby they were to be saved was called Iesus Christ, who came down from heaven to the earth for to become a man, and that it was needful he should dye for men, and that with the price of his precious bloud, which he shed for sinners upn the Crosse, God was satisfied in his justice, and that giving him the charge of Hea∣ven▪ and Earth, he had promised him, that whosoever professed his Law with Faith and good works should be saved, and have everlasting life; and withall, that the gods whom the
 Bon∣zes 
served and adored with sacrifices of bloud, were false, and Idols, wherwith the Devil de∣ceived them
; Here at the Churchmen entred into so great furie, that they called unto the people saying, 
Cursed be he that brings not wood and fire for to burn him,
 which was pre∣sently put in execution by them, and the fire beginning exceedingly to rage the Holy man said certain Prayers, by vertue whereof the fire incontinently went out, wherewith the people being amazed cryed out, saying, 
Doubtlesse the God of this man is most mighty, and worthy to be adored throughout the whole World,
 which one of the 
Bonzes
 hearing, who was


ring-leader of this mutiny, and seeing the Town-men retire away in consideration of that they had beheld, he threw a stone at the holy man, saying, 
They which do not as I do, may the Serpent of the night ingulf them into hell fire.
 At these words all the other 
Bonzes
 did the like, so that he was presently knock'd down dead with the stones they fl
ng at him, whereupon they cast him into the river, which most prodigiously staid its course from running down, and so continued for the space of five days together that the body lay in it; By means of this wonder many imbraced the law of that holy man, whereof there are a great number yet remaining in that country: Whilest the 
Chineses
 were relating thishistory unto us, we arrived at a point of land, where going to dou∣ble Cape, we descryed a little place environed with trees, in the midst whereof was a great cross of stone very well made, which we no sooner espied, but transported with exceeding joy, we fell on our knees before our Conductor, humbly desiring him to give us leave to go on shoar, but this Heathen dog refused us, saying, that they had a great way yet to the place where they were to lodge, whereat we were mightily grieved; Howbeit God of his mercy, even miraculously so ordered it, that being gone about a league further, his wife fell in labour, so as he was constrained to return to that place again, it being a Village of thirty or forty houses, hard by where the Cross stood: Here we went on land, and placed his wife in an house, where some nine days after she died in Child-bed, during which time we went to the Cross, and pro∣strating our selves before it with tears in our eyes; The people of the Village beholding us in this posture, came to us, and kneeling down also, with their hands lift up to heaven, they said, 
Christo Iesu, Iesu Christo, Maria micauvidau late impont model,
 which in our tongue sig∣nifies, 
Iesus Christ, Iesus Christ, Mary always a Virgine conceived him, a Virgine brought him forth, and a Virgine still remained
; whereunto we weeping answered, that they spake the very truth; Then they asked us if we were Christians, we told them we were, which as soon as they understood they carried us home to their houses, where they entertained us with great affection; Now all these were Christians, and descended of the Weaver, in whose house the holy man was lodged, of whom demanding whether that which the 
Chineses
 had told us was true; they shewed us a book that contained the whole history thereof at large, with many o∣ther wonders wrought by that holy man, who they said was named 
Matthew Escandel,
 and that he was an Hermit of Mount 
Sinai,
 being an 
Hungarian
 by nation, and born in a place called 
Buda:
 The same book also related that nine days after this Saint was buried, the said Town of 
Cohilouzaa,
 where he was murthered, began to tremble in such sort, as all the peo∣ple thereof in a mighty fright, ran out into the fields, and there continued in their tents, not daring to return unto their houses, for they cried out all with one common consent, 
The blood of this stranger craves vengeance for the unjust death the Bonzes hath given him, because he preached the truth unto us
; But the 
Bonzes
 rebuked and told them, that they committed a great sin in saying so, Nevertheless, they willed them to be of good cheer, for they would go all to 
Quiay Tiguarem,
 God of the night, and request him to command the earth to be quiet, otherwise we would offer him no more sacrifices: Immediately whereupon all the 
Bonzes
 went accordingly in procession to the said Idol, which was the chiefest in the Town, but none of the people durst follow them, for fear of some earthquake, which the very next night, about ele∣ven of the clock, as those divelish monsters were making their sacrifices, with odoriferous per∣fumes, and other ceremonies, accustomed amongst them, increased so terribly, that by the Lords permission, and for a just punishment of their wickedness, it quite overthrew all the Temples, houses, and other edifices of the Town to the ground, wherewith all the 
Bonzes
 were killed, not so much as one escaped alive, being in number above four thousand, as the book delivereth, wherein it is further said, that afterwards the earth opening such abundance of water came forth, as it clean overwhelmed and drowned the whole Town, so that it be∣came a great lake, and above an hundred fathom deep; moreover they recounted many other very strange particulars unto us, and also however since that time the place was named 
Fiun∣ganorsee,
 that is, 
the chastisement of heaven,
 whereas before it was called 
Cohilouzaa,
 which signifies,
 
the flower of the field,
 as I have declared heretofore.


After our Departure from the ruines of 
Fiunganorsee,
 we arrived at a great Town, called 
Iunquinilau,
 which is very rich, abounding with all kind of things, fortified with a strong Gar∣rison of Horse and Foot, and having a number of Junks and Vessels riding before it: Here we remained five days to celebrate the Funeral of our 
Chifuus
 wife; for whose soul he gave us by way of alms both meat and clothes, and withall freeing us from the oar, permitted us to go ashore without irons, which was a very great ease unto us. Having le
t this place, we


continued our course up the river, beholding still on either side a world of goodly great Towns in∣vironed with strong walls, as also many Fortresses and Castles all along the waters side; we saw likewise a great number of Temples, whose Steeples were all guilt, and in the fields such a∣bundance of cattel that the ground was even covered over with them, so far as we could well discern: Moreover there were so many vessels upon this river, especially in some parts, where Fairs were kept, that at first sight one would have thought them to be populous Towns, be∣sides other lesser companies of three hundred, five hundred, six hundred, and a thousand boats, which continually we met withall on both sides of the river, wherein all things that one could imagine were sold; Moreover the 
Chineses
 assured us, that in this Empire of 
China,
 the num∣ber of those which levied upon the rivers, was not less, then those that dwelled in the Towns, and that without the good order which is observed to make the common people work, and to constrain the meaner sort to supply themselves unto trades, for to get their living, they would eat up one another. Now it is to be noted, that every kind of traffique and commerce is divided among them into three or four forms, as followeth: They which trade in Ducks, whereof there are great quantities in this Countrey, proceed therein diversly; some cause their egs to be hatched for to sell the Ducklings, others fat them when they are great for to sell them dead after they are salted; These traffique only with the egs, others with the fea∣thers, and some with the heads, feet, gizards, and intrails, no man being permitted to trench upon his companions sale, under the penalty of thirty lashes, which no priviledg can exempt them from: In the same manner, concerning hogs, some sell them alive, and by whole sale, others dead, and by retail, some make bacon of them, others sell their pigs, and some again sell nothing but the chitterlings, the sweet-breads, the blood, and the haslets; which is also ob∣served for fish, for such a one sels it fresh, that cannot sell it either salted or dried, and so of other Provisions, as flesh, fruit, fowls, venison, pulse, and other things, wherein such rigour is used, as there are chambers expresly established, whose officers have commission and power to see, that they which trade in one particular may not do it in another, if it be not for just and lawful couses, and that on pain of thirty lashes. There be others likewise that get their living by selling fish alive, which to that purpose they keep in great well-boats, and so carry them into divers countrys, where they know there is no other but salt fish. There are likewise all along this river of 
Batampina,
 whereon we went from 
Nanquin
 to 
Pequin,
 which is di∣stant one from the other one hundred and fourscore leagues, such a number of engines for su∣gar, and presses for wine and oyl, made of divers sorts of pulse and fruit, as one could hardly 
ee any other thing on either side of the water. In many other places also there were an infi∣nite company of Houses, and Magazines full of all kinds of provision, that one could imagine, where all sorts of flesh are salted, dried, smoaked, and piled up in great high heaps, as gammons of Bacon, Pork, Lard, Geese, Ducks, Cranes, Bustards, Ostriches, Stags, Cows, Buffles, wild Goats, Rhinoceroses, Horses, Tygers, Dogs, Foxes, and almost all other creatures that one can name, so that we said many times amongst our selves, that it was not possible for all the peo∣ple of the world to eat up all those provisions. We saw likewise upon the same river, a number of Vessels, which they call 
Panouras,
 covered from the poup to the prow with nets, in manner of a cage, three inches high, full of ducks and geese, that were carried from place to place to be sold; when the Owners of those boats would have these fowl to feed, they ap∣proach to the Land, and where there are rich medows, or marshes, they set forth Planks, pen∣ning the doors of those cages, they beat three or four times upon a Drum, which they have expresly for that purpose, whereupon all these fowl, being six or seven thousand at the least, go out of the boat with a mighty noise, & so fall to feeding all along the waters side; Now when the Owner perceives, that these fowl have 
ed sufficiently, and that it is time to return them, he beats the drum the second time, at the sound whereof they gather all together, and re-enter with the same noise, as they went out, wherein it is strange to observe, that they return all in again, not so much as one missing. That done, the Master of the boat parts from that place, and afterwards when he thinks it is time for them to lay, he repairs towards land, and where he finds the grounds dry, and good grass, he opens the doors, and beats the drum again, at which all the fowl of the boat come forth to lay, and then at such time as the Master judges that these fowl have laid, he beats his drum afresh, and suddenly in haste they all throng in to the boat, not so much as one remaining hehind; Thereupon two or three men get ashore, with baskets in their hands, where∣into they gather up the egs, till they have gotten eleven or twelve baskets full, and so they proceed on their voyage to make sale of their war, which being almost spent, to store them∣selves


anew, they go for to buy more unto them that breed them, whose trade it is to sell them young, for they are not suffered to keep them when they are great, as the others do, by reason, as I have said before, no man may deal in any commodity for which he hath not permission from the Governors of the Towns. They that get their living by breeding of Ducks have neer to their Houses certain Ponds, where many times they keep ten or eleven thousand of these duckings, some bigger, some lesser. Now for to hatch the Eggs, they have in very long galleries twenty and thirty furnaces full of dung, wherein they bury two hundred, three hundred, and five hundred Eggs together, then stopping the mouth of each furnace that the dung may become the hotter, they leave the Eggs there till they think the young ones are disclosed, whereupon putting into every several furnace a Capon half pul∣led, and the skin stript from off his brest, they leave him shut up therein for the space of two dayes, at the end whereof being all come out of the shell, they carry them into certain pla∣ces under ground made for that purpose, setting them bran soaked in liquor, and so being left there loose some ten or eleven dayes, they go afterwards of themselves into the ponds, where they feed and bring them up for to sell them unto those former Merchants, who trade with them into divers parts, it being unlawfull for one to trench upon anothers traf∣fick, as I have before related, so that in the Markets and publique places, where provisions for the mouth are sold, if any that sell Goose Eggs do chance to be taken seazed with Hens Eggs and it is suspected that they sell of them, they are presently punished with thirty lashes on the bare Buttocks, without hearing any justification they can make for themselves, being as I have said, found seazed of them, so that if they will have Hens Eggs for their own use, to avoid incurring the penalty of the Law they must be broken at one end, whereby it may appear that they keep them not to sell, but to eat. As for them that sell Fish a∣live, if any of their Fish chance to die, they cut them in pieces, and salting them sell them at the price of salt-fish, which is lesse then that of fresh-fish, wherein they proceed so ex∣actly, that no man dares passe the limits, which are prescribed and ordained by the 
Con∣chalis
 of the State, upon pain of most severe punishment, for in all this Country the King is so much respected, and Justice so feared, as no kinde of person, how great soever, dares murmur, or look awry at an Officer, no not at the very 
Huppes,
 which are as the Bayliffs or Beadles amongst us.






CHAP. XXXI. The order which is observed in the moving Towns that are made upon the Ri∣vers, and that which further befell us.


WEe saw likewise all along this great River a number of Hogs both wilde and do∣mestick, that were kept by certain men on horseback, and many herds of 
ame red Deer, which were driven from place to place like Sheep, to feed, all lamed of their right legs, to hinder them from running away, and they are lamed so, when they are but Calves, to avoid the danger, that otherwise they might incur of their lives: We saw also divers Parks, wherein a world of Dogs were kept to be sold to the Butchers, for in these Coun∣tries they eat all manner of Flesh, whereof they know the price, and of what creatur
s they are, by the choppings they make of them; moreover we met with many small Barques, whereof some, were full of Pigs, others of Tortoises, Frogs, Otters, Adders, Eeeles, Snails, and Lizards, for as I have said, they buy there of all that is judged good to eat; now to the end that such provisions may passe at an easier rate, all that sell them are permitted to make traffick of them in several fashions; true it is, that in some things they have greater Franchises, then in others, to the end that by means thereof no Merchandise may want sale: And because the Subject I now treat of dispences me to speak of all, I will relate that which we further observed there, and whereat we were much abashed, judging thereby how far men suffer themselves to be carried by their Interests, and extream avarice; you must know then that in this Country there are a many of such as make a trade of buying and selling mens Excrements, which is not so mean a Commerce amongst them, but that there are ma∣ny of them grow rich by it, and are held in good account; now these Excrements serve to manure grounds that are newly grubb'd, which is found to be far better for that purpose then the ordinary dung: They which make a trade of buying it go up and down the streets with certain Clappers, like our Spittle men, whereby they give to understand what they


desire without publishing of it otherwise to people, in regard the thing is filthy of it self; whereun∣to I will adde thus m
ch, that this commodity is so much esteemed amonst them, and so great a trade driven of it, that into one sea port, sometimes there comes in one tyde two or three hundred Sayls laden with it: Oftentimes also there is such striving for it, as the Governours of the place are fain to enterpose their authority for the distribution of this goodly commodity, and all for to manure their grounds, which soyled with it, bears three crops in one year. We saw many boats likewise laden with dryed orange pills, wherewith in victualing houses they boyl dogs flesh, for to take away the rank savour and humidity of it, as also to reader it more firm: In brief, we saw so many 
Vaucans, Lanteaas,
 and 
Barcasses,
 in this river, lad
n with all kinds of provision, that either the sea or land produces, and that in such abundance, as I must confess I am not able to expresse it in words; for it is not possible to imagine the in∣finite store of things that are in this Country, of each whereof you shall see two or three hun∣dred Vessels together at a time, all full, especially at the Fairs, and Markets, that are kept up∣on the solemn festival days of their 
Pagodes,
 for then all the fairs are free, and the 
Pagodes
 for the most part are scituated on the banks of rivers, to the end all commodities may the more commodiously be brought thither by water. Now when all these vessels come to joyn together, during these Fairs, they take such order, as they make as it were a great and fair Town of them, so that sometimes you shall have of them a league in length, and three quar∣ters of a league in bredth, being composed of above twenty thousand vessels, besides 
Balons, Guedees,
 and 
Manchuas,
 which are small boats, whose number is infinite; For the Govern∣ment hereof there are threescore Captains appointed, of which thirty are to see good order kept, and the other thirty are for the guard of the Merchants that come thither, to the end they may sail in safety; Moreover there is above them a 
Chaem,
 who hath abso∣lute power both in civil, and criminal causes, without any appeal or opposition whatsoever, during the fifteen days, that this Fair lasts, which is from the new to the full Moon; And in∣deed more come to see the policy, order, and beauty of this kind of Town, then otherwise; for to speak the truth, the framing of it in that manner with vessels, makes it more to be ad∣mired then all the Edifices that can be seen upon the land; There are in this moving Town two thousand streets, exc
eding long, & very strait, inclosed on either side with ships, most of which are covered with silks, and adorned with a world of banners, flags, and streamers, wherein all kind of commodities that can be desired, are to be sold; In other streets are as many trades to be seen, as in any Town on the Land, amidst the which they that traffique, go up and down in little 
Manchuas,
 and that very quietly, and without any disorder▪ Now if by chance any one is taken stealing, he is instantly punished according to his offence; As soon as it is night, all these streets are shut up with cords athwart them, to the end none may passe after the re∣treat sounded; In each of these streets there are at least a d
zen of lanthorns, with lights bur∣ning, fastened a good heighth on the Masts of the vessels, by means whereof all that go in and out are seen, so that it may be known who they are, from whence they come, and what they would have, to the end the 
Chaem
 may the next morning receive an account thereof; And truly to behold all these lights together in the night, is a 
ight scarce able to be imagined, nei∣ther is there a street without a Bell, and a Sentinel, so as when that of the 
Chaems
 ship is heard to ring, all the other bels answer it, with so great a noise of voices adjoyned thereunto, that we were almost besides our selves, at the hearing of a thing, which cannot be well conceived; and that was ruled with such good order: In every of these streets, even in the poorest of them, there is a Chappel to pray in, framed upon great 
Barcasses,
 like to Gallies, very neat, and so well accommod
ted, that for the most part they are enriched with silks, and cloth of gold; In these Chappels are their Idols, and Priests which administer their sacrifices, and receive the offerings that are made them, wherewith they are abundantly furnished for their living; Out of each street, one of the most account, or chiefest Merchant is chosen to wa
ch all night in his turn with those of his Squadron, besides the Captains of the government, who in Ballons, walk the round without, to the end no thiefe may escape by any avenue whatsoever, and for that purpose these guards cry as loud as they can that they may be heard. Amongst the most remarkable things, we saw one street, where there were above an hundred vessels, la∣den with Idols of guilt wood, of divers fashions, which were sold for to be offered to the 
Pa∣godes,
 together with a world of feet, thighs, arms, and heads, that sick folks bought to offer in devotion; There also we beheld other ships, covered with silk hangings, where Comedies, and other playes were represented to entertain the people withall, which in great numbers


flocked thither; In other places, Bils of excha
ge for Heaven were sold, wher
by these Priests of the Divel promised them many merits, with great interest, affirming that without these bils they could not possibly be saved, for that God, say they, is a mortal enemy to all such as do not some good to the 
Pagodes,
 whereupon they tell them such fables and lies, as these un∣happy wretches do often times take the very bread from their mouths to give it them; There were also other vessels all laden with dead mens skuls, which dive
s men bought for to present as an offering, at the tombs of their friends, when they should happen to dye; for, say they, as the deceased is laid in the grave in the company of these skuls, so shall his soul enter into Hea∣ven, attended by those unto whom those skuls belonged, wherefore when the Porter of Pa∣radise shall see such a Merchant, with many followers, he will do him honour, as to a man that in this life hath been a man of quality, for if he be poor, and without a train, the Porter will not open to him, whereas contrarily the more dead mens skuls he hath buried with him, the more happy he shall be esteemed; There were many boats likewise, where there were men that had a great many of Cages, full of live birds, who playing on divers instruments of musick, exhorted the people with a loud voice, to deliver those poor creatures of God, that were there in captivity, whereupon many came and gave them mony for the redemption of those prisoners, which presently they let out of the cages, and then as they flew away, the redeem∣ers of them cried out to the birds, 
Pichau pitauel catan vacaxi,
 that is, 
Go, and tell God, how we serve him here below.
 In imitation of these, there are others also, who in their ships, kept a great many of little live fishes in great pots of water, and like the sellers of birds invite the people, for Gods cause to free those poor innocent fishes, that had never sinned, so that divers bought many of them, and casting them into the river, said, 
Get ye gone, and tell there be∣low, the good I have done you for Gods sake.
 To conclude all, the vessels where these things are exposed to sale, are seldom less in number then two hundred, besides thousands of others, which sell such like wares in a far greater quantity.


We saw likewise many 
Barcasses
 full of men and women; that played upon divers sorts of instruments,
 and for mony gave them musick that desired it; There were other vessels laden with horns, which the Priests sold, therewith to make feasts in Heaven, for they say, that those were the horns of several beasts, which were offered in sacrifice to the Idols out of devotion, and for the performance of vows that men had made in divers kind of misfortunes, and sick∣nesses, wherein they had at others times been; And that as the flesh of those beasts, had been given here below for the honour of God to the poor, so the souls of them for whom those horns were offered, do in the other world eat the souls of of those beasts to whom those horns belonged, and thereunto invite the souls of their friends, as men use to invite others here on earth; Other vessels we saw covered with blacks, and full of tombs, torches, and great wax lights, as also women in them, that for money would be hired to weep and lament for the dead; o∣thers there were, called 
Pitaleus,
 that in great barques kept divers kinds of wild beasts to be shewed for mony, most dreadful to behold as Serpents, huge Adders, monstrous Lizards, Ty∣gers, and many others such like; we saw in like sort a great number of Stationers, which sold all manner of books, that could be desired, as well concerning the creation of the world, whereof they tell a thousand lies, as touching the States, Kingdoms, Islands, and Provinces of the world, together with the Laws and Customs of Nations, but especially of the Kings of 
China,
 their number, brave acts, and of all things else that happened in each of their reigns, Moreover we saw a great many of the light, swift Foysts, wherein were men very well armed, who cried out with a loud voice, that if any one had received an affront, whereof he desired to be avenged, let him come unto them, and they would cause satisfaction to be made him; In other vessels there were old women, that served for midwives, and that would bring women speedily and easily a bed, as also a many of Nurses, ready to be entertained for to give children suck; There were barques likewise very well adorn
d, and set 
orth, that had in them divers reverend old men, and grave matrons, whose profession was to make marriages, and to com∣fort widows, or such as had lost their children, or suffered any other misfortune; In others there were a number of young men and maids, that lacked Masters, and Mistresses, which of∣fered themselves to any that would hire them; There were other vessels that had in them such as undertook to tell fortunes, and to help folks to things lost. In a word, not to dwell any longer upon every particular, that was to be seen in this moving Town, for then I should never have done, it shall suffice me to say, that nothing can be desired on land, which was not to be had in their vessels, and that in greater abundance then I have delivered, wherefore I


will passe from it to shew you that one of the principal causes why this Monarchy of 
China,
 that contains two and thirty Kingdoms, is so mighty, rich, and of so great commerce, is, be∣cause it is exceedingly replenished with rivers, and a world of Chanals that have been anciently made by the Kings, great Lords, and people thereof, for to render all the Country navigable, and so communicate their labours with one another: The narrowest of these Chanals have brid∣ges, of hewed stone over them, that are very high, long and broad, whereof some are of one stone, eighty, ninety, nay, an hundred spans long, and fifteen, or twenty broad, which doubt∣lesse is very marvellous, for it is almost impossible to comprehend by what means so huge a masse of stone could be drawn out of the Quarry without breaking, and how it should be transported to the place where it was to be set. All the ways and passages, from Cities, Towns, and Villages, have very large causeys made of fair stone, at the ends whereof are costly pillars and arches, upon which are inscriptions with letters of gold, containing the pray sers of them that erected them; moreover there are handsome seats placed all along for poor passengers to rest themselves on: There are likewise innumerable Aqueducks and fountains every where, whose water is most wholesom and excellent to drink; And in divers parts there are certain Wenches of love, that out of charity prostitute themselves to travellers, which have no mony, and although amongst us this is held for a great abuse and abomination, yet with them it is ac∣counted a work of mercy, so that many on their death-beds do by their testaments bequeath great revenues, for the maintenance of this wickedness, as a thing very meritorious for the salvation of their souls; moreover many others have left lands for the erecting and maintain∣ing of houses, in deserts and unhabited places, where great fires are kept all the night to guide such as have strayed out of their way, as also water for men to drink, and seats to repose them in, and that there may be no default herein, there are divers persons entertained with very good means, to see these things carefully continued, according to the institution of him that founded them for the health of his soul. By these marvels which are found in the particular Towns of this Empire, may be concluded what the greatness thereof might be, were they joyned all together; but for the better satisfaction of the Reader, I dare boldly say, if my testimony may be worthy of credit, that in one and twenty years space, during which time, with a world of mis∣fortune, labour and pain, I traversed the greatest part of 
Asia
▪ as may appear by this my dis∣course, I had seen in some countrys a wonderfull abundance of several sorts of victuals, and provisions, which we have not in our 
Europe,
 yet without speaking what each of them might have in particular, I do not think there is in all 
Europe
 so much as there is in 
China
 alone; And the same may be said of all the rest, wherewith Heaven hath favoured this clymate, as well for the temperature of the air, as for that which concerns the policy, and riches, the magnificence and greatness of their estate; Now that which gives the greatest luster unto it, is, their exact observation of justice, for there is so well ruled a Government in this Country, as it may justly be envied of all others in the world; And to speak the truth, such as want this particular, have no gloss, be they otherways never so great & commendable. Verily, so often as I represent unto my self those great things which I have seen in this 
China,
 I am on the one side amazed to think how liberally it hath pleased God to heap up on this people, the goods of the earth, & on the other side I am exceedingly grieved to consider how ungratefull they are in acknowledging such extraor∣dinary favours; for they commit amongst themselves an infinite of most enormous sins, wherewithal they incessantly offend the Divine Goodness, as well in their bruitish and diabo∣lical Idolatries, as in the abominable sin of 
Sodomy,
 which is not only permitted amongst them in publique, but is also accounted for a great vertue according to the instructions of their Priests.






CHAP. XXXII. Our Arrival at the City of 
Pequin
; together with our imprisonment, and that which moreover happened unto us there; as also the great Majesty of the Officers of their Court of Iustice.


AFter we were departed from that rare and marvellous Town, whereof I have spoken,
 we continued our course up the river, until at length on 
Tuesday,
 the nineteenth of 
Octo∣ber,
 in the year 1541. we arrived at the great City of 
Pequin,
 whither, as I have said before, we had been remitted by Appeal; In this manner chained three and three together, we were cast into a prison, called 
Gofaniauserca,
 where for our welcom we had at the first dash thirty


lashes a piece given us, wherewith some of us became very sick: Now as soon as the 
Chifuu
 who conducted us thither, had presented the process of our sentence, sealed with twelve seals, to the Justice of the 
Aytao,
 which is their Parliament, the twelve 
Chonchalis
 of the crimi∣nal Chamber, unto whom the cognisance of our cause appertained, commanded us presently away to prison, whereupon one of those twelve, assisted by two Registers, and six or seven officers, whom they term 
Hupes,
 and are much like our Catchpoles here, terrified us not a little, as he was leading us thither, for giving us very threatning speeches▪ 
Come,
 said he unto us, 
By the power and authority, which I have from the Aytao of Batampina, chief Presi∣dent of the two and thirty Iudges of strangers, within whose brest are the secrets of the Lyon crowned on the throne of the world inclosed, I enjoyn and command you to tell me, what people you are, as also of what country, and whether you have a King, who for the service of God, and for the discharge of his dignity, is inclined to do good to the poor, and to render them justice, to the end that with tears in their eyes, and hands lifted up, they may not ad∣dresse their complaints to that Soveraign Lord, which hath made the bright Enamel of the skies, and for whose holy feet all they that reign with him, serve but for sandals.
 To this demand we answered him, that we were poor strangers, natives of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 who being imbarqued with our Merchandise for 
Liampoo,
 were cast away in a great storm at sea, from whence we escaped naked with the loss of all that we had, and how in that deplo∣rable estate we were fain to get our living by begging from door to door till such time as at our arrival at the Town of 
Taypor,
 the 
Chumbim,
 then resident there, had arrested us for prisoners without cause, and so sent us to the City of 
Nanquin,
 where by his report we had been condemned to the whip, and to have our thumbs cut off, without so much as once daigning to hear us in our justifications, by reason whereof lifting up our eyes to Heaven, we had been adviced to have recourse with our tears to the four and twenty Judges of aust
er life, that through their zeal to God, they might take our cause in hand, since by reason of our poverty we were altogether without support, and abandoned of all men, which with an holy zeal they incontinently effected by revoking the cause, and annulling the judgment that had been given against us, and that these things considered we most instantly besought him, that for the ser∣vice of God he would be pleased to have regard to our misery, and the great injustice that was done us, for that we had no means in this Country, nor person that would speak one word for us. The Judg remained somtimes in suspence upon that we had said to him, at length he answered, that we need say no more to him, for it is sufficient that I know you are poor, to the end this affair may go another way then hitherto it hath done, neverthertheless to acquit me of my charge, I give you five days time, conformably to the Law of the third Book, that within the said term you may retain a Proctor to undertake your cause, but if you will be advised by me, you shall present your request to the 
Tanigores
 of the sacred Office, to the end that they carryed by an holy zeal of the honour of God, may out of compassion of your miseries, take upon them to defend your right. Having spoken thus, he gave us a 
Taeis
 in way of alms, and said further to us, Beware of the prisoners that are here, for I assure you that they make it their trade, to steal all that they can from any one; whereupon entring into another chamber where there were a great number of prisoners, he continued there above three hours in giving them audience, at the end whereof he sent seven and twenty men, that the day before had received their judgment to execution, which was inflicted upon them by whipping to death, a specta∣cle so dreadful to us, and that put us in such a fright, as it almost set us besides our selves: The next morning, as soon as it was day, the Jaylors clapt irons on our feet, and manacles on ou
 hands, and put us to exceeding great pain, but seven days after we had endured such misery, being laid on the ground one by another, and bewayling our disaster, for the extream fear we were in, of suffering a most cruel death, if that which we had done at 
Calempluy
 should by any means chance to be discovered, it pleased God that we were visited by the 
Tanigores
 of the house of mercy, which is of the jurisdiction of this prison, who are called in their language 
Cofilem Gnaxy
; At their arrival all the prisoners bowing themselves, said with a lamentable ton
, 
Blessed be the day wherein God doth visit us by the ministery of his servants
; where∣unto the 
Tanigories
 made answer with a grave and modest countenance, 
The Almighty and di∣vine hand of him that hath formed the beauty of the stars keep and preserve you
; Then approaching to us, they very courteously demanded of us what people we were, and whence it proceeded that our imprisonment was more sensible to us then to others? To this speech we replied with tears in our eyes, that we were poor strangers, so abandoned of men, as in all


that Country there was not one that knew our names, and that all we could in our poverty say to intreat them to think of us for Gods sake, was contained in a letter, that we had brought them from the Chamber of the Society of the house of 
Quiay Hinarol,
 in the City of 
Nan∣quin
; whereupon 
Christophoro Borralho,
 presenting them with the letter, they received it with a new ceremony, full of all curtesie, saying, 
Praysed be he who hath created all things, for that he is pleased to serve himself of sinners here below, Whereby they may be recompensed at the last day of all days, by satisfying them double their labour with the riches of his holy treasures, which shall be done, as we believe in as great abundance, as the drops of rain fall from the clouds to the earth.
 After this, one of the four, putting up the Letter, said unto us, that as soon as the Chamber of Justice for the poor was open, they would all of them give an answer to our business, and see us furnished with all that we had need of, and so they departed from us: Three days after they returned to visit us in the prison, and in the next morn∣ing coming to us again, they asked us many questions answerable to a memorial which they had thereof, whereunto we replyed in every point according as we were questioned by each of them, so as they remained very well satisfied with our answers; Then calling the Register to them, who had our papers in charge, they inquired very exactly of him, touching many things that concerned us, and withall required his advice about our affair; that done, having digested all that might make for the conversation of our right into certain heads, they took our process from him, saying, they would peruse it all of them together in their Chambers of Justice with the Proctors of the house, and the next day return it him again, that he might carry it to the 
Chaem,
 as he was resolved before to do.


Not to trouble my self with recounting in particular all that occurred in this affair, until such time as it was fully concluded, wherein six months and an half were imployed,
 during the which we continued stil prisoners in such misery, I will in few words relate all that befel us unto the end; when as our business was come before the twelve 
Conchalis
 of the criminal Court, the two Proctors of the house of mercy most willingly took upon them to cause the unjust sentence, which had been given against us, to be revoked; Having gotten then all the proceedings to be disannulled, they by petition remonstrated unto the 
Chaem,
 who was the President of that Court, 
How we could not for any cause whatsoever be condemned to death, seeing there were no witnesses of any credit that could testifie that we had robbed any man, or had ever seen us carry any offensive weapons contrary to the prohibition made against it by the Law of the first book, but that we were apprehended quite naked, like wretched men, wandering after a lamentable shipwrack, and that therefore our poverty and misery was wor∣thy rather of a pitiful compassion, then of that rigour, wherewith the first Ministers of the arm of wrath had caused us to be whipt; moreover that God alone was the Iudg of our in∣nocency, in whose name they required him once, twice, nay many times, to consider that he was mortal, and could not last long, for that God had given him a perishable life, at the end whereof he was to render an account of that which had been required of him, since by a so∣lemn oath he was obliged to do all that should be manifest to his judgment, without any con∣sideration of men of the world, whose custom it was to make the ballance sway down, which God would have to be upright, according to the integrity of his divine Iustice.
 To this pe∣tition the Kings Proctor opposed himself, as he that was our adverse party, and that in certain articles, which he framed against us, set forth, how he would prove by ocular witnesses, as well of the Country, as strangers, that we were publique thieves, making a common practise of robbing, and not merchants, such as we pretended to be; whereunto he added, that if we had come to the Coast of 
China
 with a good designe, and with an intent to pay the King his due in his Custom-houses, we would have repaired to the ports, where they were establish∣ed by the Ordinance of the 
Aytan
 of the Government, but for a punishment, because we went from Isle to Isle, like Pirats, Almighty God, that detests sin and robber
, had permitted us to suffer shipwrack, that so falling into the hands of the Ministers of his justice, we might receive the guerdon of our wicked works, namely, the pains of death, whereof our crimes rendred us most worthy; In regard of all which, he desired we might be condemned accord∣ing to the Law of the second book, that commanded it in express terms; And that if for other considerations, no way remarkable in us, we could 
y any law be exempted from death, ye
 nevertheless for that we were strangers, and vagabonds, without either faith, or know∣ledg of God, that alone would suffice at leastwise to condemn us to have our hands and no∣ses cut off, and so to be banished for ever into the Country of 
Ponxileytay,
 whither such peo∣ple


as we, were wont to be exiled, as might be verified by divers sentences given and execu∣ted in like cases, and to that effect, he desired the admittance of his articles, which he pro∣mised to prove within the time, that should be prescribed him. These articles were presently excepted against by the Proctor of the Court of Justice, established for the poor, who offered to make the contrary appear within a certain term, which to that end, and for many other reasons alleadged by him in our favour, was granted him, wherefore he required that the said articles might not be admitted, especially for that they were infamous, and directly contrary to the Ordinances of Justice. Whereupon the 
Chaem
 ordered, that his articles should not be admitted, unless he did prove them by evident testimonies, and such as were conformable to the Divine Law, within six days next ensuing, and that upon pain in case of contravention not to be admitted to any demand of a longer delay. The said term of six days being prescribed the Kings Proctor, he, in the mean time, producing no one proof against us, nor any person that so much as knew us, came and demanded a delay of other six days, which was flatly de∣nied him, in regard it but too well appeared, that all he did was only to win time, and therefore he would by no means consent unto it, but contrarily he gave the Proctor for the poor five days respit to alledge all that further he could in our defence; In the mean time, the Kings Proctor declaimed against us in such foul and opprobrious terms, as the 
Chaem
 was much offended thereat, so that he condemned him to pay us twenty 
Taeis
 of silver, both for his want of charity, and for that he could not prove any one of the obligations which he had exhibited against us. Three days being spent herein, four 
Tanigores
 of the house of the poor, coming very early in the morning to the prison, sent for us into the 
Infirmirie,
 where they told us that our business went very well, and how we might hope that our sentence would have a good issue, whereupon we cast our selves at their feet, and with abundance of tears desired God to reward them for the pains they had taken in our behalf. Thereunto one of them replyed, 
And we also most humbly beseech him to keep you in the knowledg of his Law, wherein all the happiness of good m
n consists
; and so they caused two coverlets to be given us, for to lay upon our beds in the night, because the weather was cold, and withall bid us, that we should not stick to ask any thing we wanted, for that God Almighty did not love a sparing hand in the distributing of alms for his sake. A little after their departure came the Re∣gister, and shewing us the 
Chaems
 order, whereby the Kings Proctor was condemned to pay us twenty 
Taeis,
 gave us the mony, and took an acquittance under our hands for the receipt of it; For which giving him a world of thanks, we intreated him for his pains to take as much thereof as he pleased, but he would not touch a peny, saying, I will not for so small a matter lose the recompence which I hope to gain from God, for the consideration of you.


We past nine days in great fear, still expecting to have our sentence pronounced, when as one 
Saturday
 morning two 
Chumbims
 of Justice came to the prison for us, accompanied with twenty officers, by them called 
Huppes,
 carrying Halberts, Portisans, and other arms, which made them very dreadfull to the beholders; These men tying us all nine together in a long iron chain, lead us to the 
Caladigan,
 which was the place where audience was given, and where execution was done on delinquents; Now how we got thither, to confess the truth, I am not able to relate, for we were at that instant so far besides our selves, as we knew not what we did, or which way we went, so as in that extremity all our thought was how to conform our selves to the will of God, and beg of him with tears, that for the merit of his sacred pas∣sion, he would be pleased to receive the punishment, that should be inflicted on us for the satisfaction of our sins. At length after much pain, and many affronts, that were done us by many which followed after us, with loud cries, we arrived at the first Hall of the 
Caladigan,
 where were four and twenty Executioners, whom they call, 
The Ministers of the arm of justice,
 with a great many of other people, that were there about their affairs. Here we re∣mained a long time, till at length upon the ringing of a bell, other doors were opened, that stood under a great A
ch of Architecture, very artificially wrought, and whereon were a num∣ber of rich figures; On the top a monstrous Lion of silver was seen, with his sore and hind feet upon a mighty great bowl, made of the same mettal, whereby the arms of the King of 
China
 are represented, which are ordinarily placed on the Fore-front of all the Sovereign Courts, where the 
Chaems
 precide, who are as Vice-roys amongst us. Those doors being o∣pened, as I said before, all that were there present entred into a very great Hall, like the Body of a Church, hung from the top to the bottom with divers pictures, wherein strange kinds


of execution done upon p
rsons of all conditions, after a most dreadful manner were constrain∣ed, and under every picture was this inscription, 
Such a one was executed with this kind of death for committing such a crime
; so that in beholding the diversity of these fearful pour∣traitures one might see in it, as it were, a declaration of the kind of death that was ordained for each crime, as also the extream rigour which the Justice there observed in such executions. From this Hall we went into another room far richer, and more costly, for it was guilt all o∣ver, so that one could not have a more pleasing object, at least wise, if we could have taken pleasure in any thing, considering the misery we were in. In the midst of this room there was a Tribunal, whereunto one ascended by seven steps, invironed with three rows of ballisters of iron, copper, and ebony; the tops whereof were beautified with Mother of Pearl: At the upper end of all was a cloth of State of white damask, frenged about with a deep cawl frenge of green silk and gold; Under this State sat the 
Chaem
 with a world of greatness and majesty, he was seated in a very rich Chair of silver, having before him a little table, and about him three boys on their knees, sumptuously apparelled, with chains of gold, one of the which (namely, he in the middle) served to give the 
Chaem
 the pen wherewithall he signed; The other two took the petitions that were preferred, and presented them on the Table, that they might be signed; On the right hand in another place somewhat higher, and almost equall with the 
Chaem,
 stood a boy, some ten or eleven years old, attired in a rich robe of white Sa∣tin, imbroidered with roses of gold, having a chain of pearl three double about his neck, and hair as long as a womans, most neatly plaited with a fillet of gold, all enamelled with green, and powdered over with great seed pearl; In his hand he held, as a mark of that which he represented, a little branch of roses, made of silk, gold thread, and rich pearls, very curiously intermixed; And in this manner he appeared so gentile, handsome, and beauiful, as no wo∣man, how fair soever, could overmatch him; this boy leaned on his elbow upon the 
Chaems
 chair, and figured mercy. In the like manner, on the left hand was another goodly boy, richly apparelled in a Coat of carnation Satin, all set with roses of gold, having his right arm ba∣red up to the elbow, and died with a vermilion as red as blood, and in that hand holding a naked sword, which seemed also to be bloody: moreover, on his head he wore a crown, in fashion like to a Myter, hung all with little razors, like unto lancets, wherewith Chyrurgions let men blood, being thus gallantly set forth, and of most beautiful presence, yet he struck all that beheld him with fear, in regard of that he represented, which was Justice. For they say, that the Judg, which holds the place of the King, who presents God on earth, ought necessa∣rily to have those two qualities, 
Iustice,
 and 
Mercy
; and that he which doth not use them is a Tyrant, acknowledging no Law, and usurping the power that he hath. The 
Chaem
 was ap∣parelled in a long Gown of violet Satin, fr
nged with green silk and gold, with a kind of s
a∣pulair about his neck, in the midst of which was a great plate of gold, wherein an hand holding a very even pair of ballance was engraven, and the inscription about it; 
It is the nature of the Lord Almighty, to observe in his justice, weight, measure, and true account, therefore take heed to what thou doest, for if thou comest to sin thou shalt suffer for it eternally.
 Upon his head he had a kind of round bonet, bordered about with small sprigs of gold, all enamelled violet and green, and on the top of it was a little crowned Lion of gold, upon a round bowl of the same mettal; by which Lion crowned, as I have delivered heretofore, is the King signified, and by the bowl, the world, as if by these devices, they would denote, that the King is the Li∣on crowned on the throne of the world; In his right hand he held a little rod of ivory, some three spans long, in manner of a Scepter; upon the top of the three first steps of this Tribunal stood eight Ushers with silver maces on their shoulders, and below were threescore 
Mogors
 on their knees, disposed into three ranks, carrying halberts in their hands, that were neatly damasked with gold; In the vantgard of these same stood, like as if they had been, the Commanders or Cap∣tains of this Squadron, the Statues of two Giants, of a most gallant aspect, and very richly attired, with their swords hanging in scarfs, and mighty great halberts in their hands, and these the 
Chineses
 in their language call 
Gigaos
; on the two sides of this Tribunal below in the room were two very long tables, at each of which sat twelve men, whereof four were Presidents, or Judges, two, Registers, four, Solicitors, and two, 
Conchalis,
 which are as it were, Assistants to the Court, one of these Tables was for criminal, and the other for civil causes, and all the officers of both these Tables were apparelled in gowns of white Satin, that were very long, and had large slieves, thereby demonstrating the latitude and purity of justice; the Tables were covered with carpets of violet damask, and richly bordered about with gold,


the 
Chaems
 table, because it was of silver, had no carpet on it, nor any thing else, but a cu∣shion of cloth of gold, and a Standith; Now all these things put together, as we saw them, carried a wonderful shew of State and Majesty; But to proceed, upon the fourth ringing of a bell, one of the 
C
chalis
 stood up, and after a low obeysanc
 made to the 
Chaem,
 with a very loud voice, that he might be heard of every one, he said, 
Peace there, and with all sub∣mission hearken, on pain of incurring the punishment, ordained by the
 Chaems 
of the Govern∣ment for those, that interrupt the silence of sacred Iustice.
 Whereupon this same sitting down again, another arose, and with the like reverence, mounting up to the Tribunal, where the 
Chaem
 sat, he took the Sentences from him that held them in his hand, and published them aloud one after another, with so many ceremonies, and compliments, as he employed above an hour therein; At length coming to pronounce our judgment, they caused us to kneel down, with our eyes fixed on the ground, and our hands lifted up, as if we were praying unto Hea∣ven, to the end that in all humility we might hear the publ
cation thereof, which was thus; 
Bitau Dicabor, the new
 Chaem 
of this sacred Court, where justice is rendred to strangers, and that by the gracious pleasure of the Son of the Sun, the Lion crowned on the throne of the world, unto whom are subjected all the Scepters and Crowns of the Kings that govern the earth; ye are subjected under his feet by the grace and will of the most High in Heaven, having viewed and considered the Appeal made to me by these nine strangers, whose cause was commanded hither by the City of
 Nanquin, 
by the four and twenty of austeer life, I say▪ by the oath I have taken upon my entry into the Charge, which I exercise for the
 Aytao 
of
 Ba∣tampina, 
the chief of two and thirty that govern all the people of this Empire, that the ninth day of the seventh Moon, in the fifteenth year of the reign of the Son of the Sun, I was pre∣sented with the accusations, which the
 Cumbim 
of
 Taypor, 
sent me against them, whereby he chargeth them to be theeves, and robbers of other mens goods, affirming that they have long practised that trade, to the great offence of the Lord above, who hath created all things; and withall that without any fear of God they used to bathe themselves in the blood of those, that with reason resisted them, for which they have already been condemned to be whipt, and have their thumbs cut off, whereof the one hath been put in execution; but when they came to have their thumbs cut off, the Proctors for the poor, opposing it, alledged in their behalf, that they were wrongfully condemned, because there was no proof of that wherewith they were charged, in regard whereof they required for them, that in stead of judging them upon a bare shew of uncertain suspitions, voluable testimonies might be produced, and such as were con∣formable to the divine Laws, and the Iustice of Heaven; whereunto answer was made by that Court, how justice was to give place to mercy, whereupon they that undertook their cause made their complaint to the four and twenty of austeer life, who both out of very just conside∣rations, and the regard they had to the little support they could have, for that they were stran∣gers, and of a Nation so far distant from us, as we never heard of the Country where they say they were born, mercifully inclining to their lamentable cries, sent them and their cause to be judged by thi
 Court, wherefore omitting the prosecution thereof here by the Kings Pro∣ctor, being able to prove nothing whereof he accused them, affirms only that they are worthy of death for the suspicion and jealousie they have given of themselves, but in regard sacred ju∣stice, that stands upon considerations which are pure and agreeable to God, admits of no rea∣sons from an adverse party, if they be not made good by evident proofs, I thought it not fit to allow of the Kings Proctors accusations, since he could not prove what he had alledged, where∣upon insisting on his demand, without shewing either any just causes, or sufficient proof concern∣ing that he concluded against those strangers, I condemned him in twenty
 Taeis 
of silver a∣mends to his adverse parties, being altogether according to equity, because the reasons al∣ledged by him were grounded upon a bad zeal, and such as were neither just, nor pleasing to God, whose mercy doth always incline to their side that are poor and feeble on the earth, when as they invoke him with tears in their eyes, 
s is daily and clearly manifested by the pitiful ef∣fects of his greatness; so that having thereupon expresly commanded the
 Tanigores 
of the house of mercy, to alledge whatsoever they could say on their behalf, they accord
ngly did so, within the time that was prefixed them for that purpose; And so all proceedings having re∣ceived their due course, th
 cause is now come to a final Iudgment: wherefore every thing duly viewed and considered, without regard had to any humane respect, but only to the merit and equity of their cause, and according to the resolution of the Laws, accepted by the twelve
 Chaems 
of the Government in the fifth book of the will and pleasure of the Son of the Sun, who


in such cases out of his greatness and goodness hath more regard to the complaints of the poor, then to the insolent clamors of the proud of the earth; I do ordain, and decree, that these nine strangers shall be clearly quit and absolved of all that, which the Kings Proctor hath laid to their charge, as also of all the punishment belonging thereunto, condemning them only to a years exile, during which time they shall work for their living in the reparations of Quansy; and when at eight months of the said year shall be accomplished, then I expresly enjoyn all the
 Chumbims, Conchalis, Monteos, 
and other Ministers of their government, that immediately upon their presenting of this my Decree unto them, they give them a passeport and safe con∣duct, to the end they may freely and securely return into their Country, or to any other place they shal think fit.
 After this sentence was thus published in our hearing, we all cried out with a loud voice, 
The Sentence of thy clear judgment is confirmed in us, even as the purity of thy heart is agreeable to the son of the Sun.
 This said, one of the 
Conchalis,
 that sate at one of the tables, stood up, and having made a very low obeisance to the 
Chaem
▪ he said aloud five times one after another, to all that presse of people, which were there in great number; 
Is there any one in this Court, in this City, or in this Kingdom, that will oppose this Decree, or the deliverance of these nine prisoners?
 Whereunto no answer being made the two boyes, that represented justice and mercy, touched the ensignes which they held in their hands together, and said aloud, 
Let them be freed and discharged according to the sentence very justly pronounced for it
; whereupon one of those Ministers, whom they call 
Huppes,
 ha∣ving rung a bell thrice, the two 
Chumbims
 of execution, that had formerly bound us, un∣losed us from our chain, and withall took off our manacles, collers, and the other irons from our legs, so that we were quite delivered, for which we gave infinite thanks to our Lord Jesus Christ, because we always thought, that for the ill conceit men had of us, we should be condemned to death. From thence so delivered as we were, they led us back to the prison, where the two 
Chumhims
 signed our enlargment in the Jaylors book; nevertheless that we might be altogether discharged, we were to go two months after to serve a year according to our sentence, upon pain of becoming slaves for ever to the King, conformable to his Ordinances: Novv because vve vvould presently have gone about to demand the alms of good people in the City, the 
Chifun,
 vvho vvas as Grand Provost of that prison, per∣swaded us to stay till the next day, that he might first recommend us to the 
Tanigores
 of mercy, that they might do something for us.






CHAP. XXXIII. What past betwixt us, and the Tanigores of mercy, with the great favors they did us; and a brief Relation of the City of 
Pequin,
 where the King of 
China
 kept his Court.


THe next morning the four 
Tanigores
 of mercy came to visit the Infirmi
y of this pri∣son, as they used to do; where they rejoyced with us for the good success of our Sen∣tence, giving us great testimony, how well contented they were with it, for which we returned them many thanks, not without shedding abundance of tears, whereat they seem∣ed to be not a little pleased, and willed us not to be troubled with the term we were con∣demned to serve in, for they told us that in stead of a year we should continue but eight months there, and that the other four months, which made the third part of our punish∣ment, the King remitted it by way of alms for Gods sake, in consideration that we were poor, for otherwise if we had been rich, and of ability, we should have had no favour at all, promising to cause this dimunition of punishment to be endorsed on our Sentence, and besides that they would go, and speak to a very honourable man for us, that was ap∣pointed to be the chief Marshal, or Monteo, of 
Quansy,
 the place where we were to serve, to the end he might shew us favour, and cause us to be truly paid for the time we should re∣main there: Now because this man was naturally a friend to the poor, and inclined to do them good, they thought it would be fit to carry us along with them to his house, the ra∣ther for that it might be he would take us into his charge; we gave them all very humble thanks for this good offer of theirs, and told them that God would reward this charity, they shewed us for his sake; whereupon we accompanied them to the 
Monteos
 house, who came forth to receive us in his outward Court, leading his wife by the hand, which he did, either out of a greater form of complement, or to do the more honour to the 
Tanigo∣res,



and coming neer them he prostrated himself at their feet, and said: 
It is now, my Lord, and holy brethren, that I have cause to rejoyce, for that it hath pleased God to permit, that you his holy servants should come unto my house, being that which I could not hope for, in regard I held my selfe unworthy of such favour.
 After the 
Tanigores
 had used many com∣plements and cereremonies to him, as is usuall in that Country, they answered him thus, 
May God, our Soveraign Lord, the infinite source of mercy, recompence the good thou dost for the poor with blessing in this life; for believe it, dear brother, the strongest staff whereon the soul doth lean to keep her from falling so often as she happens to stumble, is the charity, which we use towards our neighbour, when as the vain glory of this world doth not blind the good zeal whereunto his holy Law doth oblige us, and that thou mayst merit the blessed felicity of beholding his face, we have brought thee here these nine
 Portugals, 
who are so poor, as none in this Kingdom are like to them; wherefore we pray thee that in the place whither thou art going now, as
 Monteo, 
thou wilt do for them all that thou thinkest will be acceptable to the Lord above, in whose behalf we crave this of thee.
 To this Speech the 
Monteo,
 and his wife, replyed in such courteous and remarkable terms, as we were almost besides our selves to hear in what manner they attributed the successe of their affairs, to the principal cause of all goodness, even as though they had the light of faith, or the knowledg of the Christian verity. Hereupon they withdrew into a Chamber, into which we went not, and continued there a∣bout half an hour; then as they were about to take leave of one another, they commanded us to come in to them, where the 
Tanigores
 spake to them again about us, and recommending us unto them more then before, the 
Monteo
 caused our names to be written down in a book that lay before him, and said unto us, 
I do this, because I am not so good a man, as to give you something of mine own, nor so bad as to deprive you of the sweat of your labour, whereunto the King hath bound you, wherefore even at this instant you shall begin to get your living, although you do not serve as yet, for the desire I have that this may be accounted to me for an alms, so that now you have nothing to do, but to be merry in my house, where I will give order that you shall be provided of all that is necessary for you; Besides this, I will not promise you any thing, for the fear I am in of the shewing some vanity by my promise, and so the Divel may make use thereof as of an advantage, to lay hold on me, a matter that often arrives through the weak∣ness of our nature; wherefore let it suffice you for the present to know, that I will be mindful of you for the love of these holy brethren here, who have spoken to me for you.
 The four 
Tani∣gores
 thereupon taking their leave, gave us four 
Taeis,
 and said unto us, 
Forget not to render thanks unto God for the good success you have had in your business, for it would be a grievous sin in you not to acknowledge so great a grace.
 Thus were we very well entertained in the house of this Captain for the space of two months, that we remained there, at the end whereof we parted from thence, for to go to 
Quansy,
 where we were to make up our time, under the conduct of this Captain, who ever after used us very kindly, and shewed us many favours, untill that the 
Tartars
 entred into the Town, who did a world of mischief there, as I will more amply declare hereafter.


Before I recount that which happened unto us, after we were imbarqued with those 
Chi∣neses
 that conducted us, and that gave us great hope of setting us at liberty, I think it not amiss to make a brief relation here of the City of 
Pequin,
 which may truly be termed the capital of the Monarchy of the world, as also of some particulars I observed there, as well for its ar∣ches and policy, as for that which concerns its extent, its government, the laws of the Coun∣try, and the admirable manner of providing for the good of the whole State, together in what sort they are paid, that serve in the time of war, according to the Ordinances of the King∣dom, and many other things like unto these, though I must needs confess that herein I shall want the best part, namely, wit, and capacity, to render a reason in what clymate it is scitua∣ted, and in the heigth of how many degrees, which is a matter the learned and curious most desire to be satisfied in; But my designe having never been other (as I have said heretofore) then to leave this my book unto my children, that therein they may see the sufferings I have under∣gone, it little imports me to write otherwise then I do, that is, in a gross and rude manner; for I hold it better to treat of these things in such sort as nature hath taught me, then to use Hy∣perboles, and speeches from the purpose, whereby the weakness of my poor understanding may be made more evident. Howbeit since I am obliged to make mention of this matter, by the promise I have made of it heretofore, I say, that this City, which we call 
Pequin,
 and they of the Country 
Pequin,
 is scituated in the heighth of forty and one degrees of Northerly latitude;


the walls of it are in circuit (by the report of the 
Chineses
 themselves, and as I have read in a little book, treating of the greatness thereof, and intituled 
Aquisendan,
 which I brought since along with me into 
Portugal
) thirty large leagues, namely ten long, and five broad; Some others hold, that it is fifty, namely seventeen in length, and eight in bredth: and forasmuch as they that intreat of it are of different opinions, in that the one make the extent of it thirty leagues, as I have said before, and others fifty, I will render a reason of this doubt, confor∣mable to that which I have seen my self. It is true, that in the manner it is now built, it is thir∣ty leagues in circuit, as they say, for it is invironed with two rows of strong walls, where there are a number of towers and bulwarks after our fashion; But without this circuit, which is of the City it self, there is another far greater, both in length and bredth, that the 
Chineses
 af∣firm was anciently all inhabited, but at this present there are only some Boroughs and Villages, as also a many of fair houses, or castles about it, amongst the which there are sixteen hundred, that have great advantages over the rest, and are the houses of the Proctors of the sixteen hun∣dred Cities, and most remarkable Towns of the two and thirty Kingdoms of this Monarchy, who repair unto this City at the general Assembly of the Estates, which is held every three years for the publique good. Without this great inclosure, which (as I have said) is not com∣prehended in the City, there is in a distance of three leagues broad, and seven long, fourscore thousand Tombs of the 
Mandarins,
 which are little Chappels all guilded within, and compas∣sed about with Ballisters of iron and latin, the entries whereinto are through very rich and sumptuous arches: near to these Chappels there are also very great houses, with gardens and tufted woods of high trees, as also many inventions of ponds, fountains, and aqueducts; whereunto may be added, that the walls of the inclosure are on the inside covered with fine porcelain, and on the fanes above are many Lions pourtrayed in gold, as also in the squares of the steeples, which are likewise very high, and embellished with pictures. It hath also five hundred very great Palaces, which are called 
the houses of the Son of the Sun,
 whither all those retire, that have been hurt in the Wars for the service of the King, as also many other souldiers, who in regard of age or sickness are no longer able to bear arms, and to the end that during the rest of their days they may be exempted from incommodity, each of them receives monthly a certain pay to find himself withall, and to live upon. Now all these men of War, as we learned of the 
Chineses,
 are ordinarily an hundred thousand, there being in each of those houses two hundred men according to their report. We saw also another long street of low houses, where there were four and twenty thousand oar-men, belonging to the King 
Panoures
; and another of the same structure a good league in length, where fourteen thousand Taverners that followed the Court dwelt▪ as also a third street like unto the other two, where live a great number of light women, exempted from the tribute, which they of the City pay, for that they are Curtisans, whereof the most part had quitted their husbands for to follow the wretched trade; and if for that cause they come to receive any hurt, their husbands are grievously punish∣ed for it, because they are there as in a place of freedom, and under the protection of the 
Tu∣tan
 of the Court, Lord Steward of the Kings house. In this inclosure do likewise remain all the Landresses, by them called 
Maynates,
 which wash the linnen of the City, who as we were told, are above an hundred thousand, and live in this quarter, for that there are divers ri∣vers there, together with a number of wells, and deep pools of water, compassed about with good walls. Within this same inclosure, as the said 
Aquisendan
 relates, there are thir∣teen hundred gallant and very sumptuous houses of religio
s men and women, who make pro∣fession of the four principal Laws of those two and thirty which are in the Empire of 
China,
 and it is thought that in some of these houses there are above a thousand persons, besides the servants, that from abroad do furnish them with victuals, and other necessary provisions. We saw also a great many houses, which have fair buildings of a large extent, with spacious inclo∣sures, wherein there are gardens, and very thick woods, full of any kind of game, either for hawking, or hunting, that may be desired; And these houses are as it were Inns, whither come continually in great number people of all ages, and sexe
, as to see Comedies, Playes, Combates, Bul-baitings, Wrastlings, and magnificent Feasts, with the 
Tutons, Chaems, Con∣chacys, Aytaos, Bracalons, Chumbims, Monteos, Lauteas, Lords, Gentlemen, Captains, Merchants,
 and other rich men, do make for to give content to their kindred and friends; These houses are bravely furnished with rich hangings, beds, chairs, and stools, as likewise with huge cupbards of plate, not only of silver, but of gold also; and the attendants that wait at the table, are maids ready to be married, very beautiful, and gallantly attired; howbeit all


this is nothing in comparison of the sumptuousness, and other Magnificences that we saw there. Now the 
Chineses
 assured us, there were some feasts that lasted ten days after the 
Carachina,
 or 
Chinese
 manner, which in regard of the state, pomp, and charge thereof, as well in the at∣tendance of servants and wayters, as in the costly fare of all kind of flesh, fowl, fish, and all delicacies in musick, in sports of hunting, and hawking, in playes, comedies, tilts, turnayes, and in shews both of horse and foot, fighting and skirmishing together, do cost above twenty thousand 
Taeis.
 These Inns do stand in at least a million of gold, and are maintained by certain Companies of very rich Merchants, who in way of commerce and traffique employ their mo∣ny therein, where by it is thought they gain far more, then if they should venture it to sea. It is said also, that there is so good and exact an order observed there, that whensoever any one will be at a charge that way, he goes to the 
Xipaton
 of the house, who is the superintendant there∣of, and declares unto him what his designe is, whereupon he shews him a book, all divided in∣to chapters, which treats of the ordering and sumptuousness of Feasts, as also the rates of them, and how they shall be served in, to the end, that he who will be at the charge, may chuse which he pleases; This book, called 
Pinetoreu,
 I have seen, and heard it read, so that I remember how in the three first Chapters thereof, it speaks of the feasts, whereunto God is to be invited, and of what price they are; and then it descends to the King of 
China,
 of whom it sayes, 
That by a speciall grace of Heaven, and right of Soveraignty, he hath the Govern∣ment of the whole earth, and of all the Kings that inhabit it.
 After it hath done with the King of 
China,
 it speaks of the feasts of the 
Tutons,
 which are the ten Soveraign digni∣ties, that command over the forty 
Chaems,
 who are as the Vice-royes of the State. These 
Tutons
 also are termed the beams of the Sun, for, say they, as the King of 
China
 is the Son of the Sun, so the 
Tutons,
 who represent him, may rightly be termed his beams, for that they proceed from him, even as the rayes do from the Sun; But setting aside the bruitishness of these 
Gentiles,
 I will only speak of the Feast, whereunto God is to be invited, which I have seen some to make with much devotion, though for want of faith, their works can do them little good.






CHAP. XXXIV. The Order which is observed in the Feasts, that are made in certain Inns; and the State, which the 
Chaem
 of the two and thirty Vniversities keeps; with certain remarkable things in the City of 
Pequin.


THe first thing whereof mention is made in the Preface of that Book, which treats of Feasts, as I have said before, is the Feast, that is to be made unto God here upon earth, of which it is spoken in this manner: 
Every Feast, how sumptuous soever it be, may be paid for with a price, more or less, conformable to the bounty of him that makes it, who for all his charge be∣stowed on it reaps no other recompence, then the praise of flatterers and idle persons; where∣fore, O my Brother,
 saith the Preface of the said Book, 
I counsel thee to imploy thy goods in feasting of God in his poor, that is to say, secretly to supply the necessities of good folks, so that they may not perish for want of that which thou hast more then thou needest. Call to mind al∣so the vile matter wherewith thy father ingendred thee, and that too, which is far more ab∣ject, wherewith thy mother conceived thee, and so thou wilt see how much inferiour thou art, even to the bruit beasts, which without distinction of reason apply themselves to that where∣unto they are carried by the flesh; and seeing that in the quality of a man thou wilt invite thy friends, who possibly by to morrow may not be, to shew that thou art good and faithful, invite the poor creatures of God, of whose groans and necessities he like a pitiful Father taketh com∣passion, and promiseth to him that doth them good infinite satisfaction in the house of the Sun, where as an Article of faith we hold, that his servants shall abide for evermore in eternal happiness,
 After these words, and other such like, worthy to be observed, the 
Xipaton,
 who, as I told you, is the chief of them that govern this great Labyrinth, shews him all the Chapters of the Book, from one end to the other, and bids him look what manner of men, or Lords he will invite, what number of guests, and how many days he will have the feast to last; for ad∣deth he, the 
Kings,
 and 
Tutons,
 at the feasts that are made for them, have so many Messes of meat, so many Attendants, such Furniture, such Chambers, such vessel, such plate, such sports, and so many days of hawking, and hunting, all which amounts to such a sum of mony: Then if he will not bestow so much, the 
Xipaton
 shews him in another Chapter, the feasts which


are ordinarily made for the 
Chaems, Ayta
s, Ponchacis, Bracalons, Anchacis, Conchalaas, Lanteas,
 or for Captains, and rich men, whereas other kind of persons of meaner condition have nothing else to do, but to sit down, and fall to on free cost, so that there are usually fifty or threescore rooms full of men and women of all sorts; There are also in other rooms most excellent and melodious consorts of musick, namely of Harps, Viols, Lutes, Bando
es, Cor∣nets, Sackbuts, and other Instruments, which are not in use amongst us. If it be a feast of wo∣men, as it often falls out to be, then are the wayters on the table likewise women, or young D
mosels, richly attired, who for that they are maids, and endued with singular beauty, it hap∣pens many times that men of extraordinary quality fall in love with them, and do marry them. Now for a conclusion of that which I have to say of these Inns, of all the mony, which is spent upon such feasts, four in the hundred, whereof the 
Xipaton
 paies the one half, and they that make the feasts the other, is set apart for the entertainment of the table of the poor, whereunto for Gods sake all manner of people are admitted that will come to it; Moreover, they are al∣lowed a Chamber, and a good bed but that only for the space of three days, unless they be wo∣men with child, or sick persons, which are not able to travel; for in that case they are entertained a longer time, because regard is had unto the people according to the need they are in. We saw also in this outward inclosure, which, as I have delivered, invirons all the other City, two and thirty great Edifices, or Colledges, distant about a 
light shoot the one from the other, where such, as apply themselves to the study of the two and thirty Laws, which are professed in the two and thirty Kingdoms of this Empire, do recide. Now in each of these Colledges, accord∣ing as we could guess by the great number of persons that we saw there, there should be a∣bove ten thousand Scholers; and indeed the 
Aquesendoo,
 which is the Book that treats of these things, makes them amount in the whole to four hundred thousand: There is likewise somewhat apart from the rest, another far greater and fairer Edifice, of almost a league in circuit, where all those that have taken degrees, as well in their Theologie, as in the Laws of the government of this Monarchy, do live. In this University there is a 
Chaem,
 who com∣mands over all the Heads of the Colledges, and is called, by a title of eminent dignity, 
Xiley∣xitapou,
 that is to say, Lord of all the Nobles. This 
Chaem,
 for that he is more honourable, and of an higher quality then all the rest, keeps as great a Court as any 
Tuton
; for he hath ordi∣narily a guard of three hundred 
Mogores,
 four and twenty 
Loshers
 that go with silver Maces before him, and six and thirty women, which mounted on white ambling Nags, trapped with silk and silver, ride playing on certain very harmonious instruments of musick, and singing to the tune thereof, make a pleasing Consort after their manner. There are also led before him twenty very handsome spare horses, without any other furniture then their clothes of silver tinsel, and with headstals full of little silver bells, every horse being waited on by six Halber∣diers, and four footmen very well apparelled; Before all this train goes four hundred 
Huppes,
 with a number of great long chains, which trailing on the ground, make such a dreadful ratling and noise, as does not a lit le terrifie all that are within hearing; Then next to them marches twelve men on horsback, called 
Peretandas,
 each of them carrying an Umbrello of carnation Sattin, and other twelve that follow them with banners of white damask, deeply indented, and edged about with golden frenge; Now after all this pomp comes the 
Chaem
 sitting in a triumphant Chariot, attended by threescore 
Conchalas, Chumbims,
 and 
Monteos,
 such as a∣mongst us are the Chancellors, Judges, and Councellors of the Courts of Justice, and these go all on foot, carrying upon their shoulders Cymiters rightly garnished with gold. Last of all fol∣low lesser officers, that are like unto our Registers, Examiners, Auditors, Clarks Atturneys, and Solicitors, all likewise on foot, and crying out unto the people with a loud voice for to retire themselves into their houses, and clear the streets, so as there may be nothing to hinder or trou∣ble the passage of this magnificnce. But the most observable thing herein is, that close to the Person of the 
Chaem,
 march two little boyes on horsback, one on the right hand, the other on the left, richly attired, with their ensignes in their hands, signifying 
Iustice,
 and 
Mercy,
 whereof I have spoken heretofore; That on the right side representing mercy, is clothed in white, and that on the left representing justice is apparelled in red; The horses whereon these little boyes are mounted, have on them foot-clothes of the same colour their garments are, and all their furniture and trappings are of gold, with a kind of net-work over them, made of silver thread; After each of these children march six young youths, about fifteen years of age, with silver Maces in their hands, so that all these things together are so remarkable, as there is no man that beholds them, but on the one side trembles for fear, and on the other side remains a∣stonished


at the sight of so much greatness, and majesty. Now that I may not longer dwel on that which concerns this great inclosure, I will pass over in silence many other marvels that we saw there, consisting in rich & fair buildings in magnificent 
Pagodes,
 in bridges placed upon great pillars of stone, on either side whereof are rayls or grates of iron finely wrought, and in high ways, that are straight, broad, and all very well paved, whereof I think fit not to speak, for by that which I have already said, one may easily judg of what I have omitted, in regard of the resem∣blance and conformity that is between them; wherefore I will only intreat, and that as suc∣cinctly as I can, of certain buildings, which I saw in this City, chiefly of four, that I observed more curiously then the rest, as also of some other particularities, that well deserve to be in∣sisted upon.


This City of 
Pequin,
 whereof I have promised to speak more amply then yet I have done, is so prodigious, and the things therein remarkable, as I do almost repent me for undertaking to discourse of it, because to speak the truth, I know not where to begin, that I may be as good as my word; for one must not imagine it to be, either as the City of 
Rome,
 or 
Constantinople,
 or 
Venice,
 or 
Paris,
 or 
London,
 or 
Sevill,
 or 
Lisbon,
 or that any of the Cities of 
Europe
 are comparable unto it, how famous or populous soever they be: Nay I will say further, that one must not think it to be like to Grand 
Cairo
 in 
Egypt, Tauris
 in 
Persia, Amadaba
 in 
Cam∣baya, Bisnagar
 in 
Narsingua, Goura
 in 
Bengala, Ava
 in 
Chaleu, Timplan
 in 
Calaminhan, Martaban
 and 
Bagou
 in 
Pegu, Guimpel
 and 
Tinlau
 in 
Siammon, Odia
 in the Kingdom of 
Sornau, Passarvan
 and 
Dema
 in the Island of 
Iaoa, Pangor
 in the Country of the 
Lequiens, Vsangea
 in the 
Grand Cauchin, Lancama
 in 
Tartaria,
 and 
Meaco
 in 
Iappun,
 all which Ci∣ties are the Capitals of many great Kingdoms; for I dare well affirm, that all those same are not to be compared to the least part of the wonderful City of 
Pequin,
 much less to the great∣ness and magnificence of that which is most excellent in it, whereby I understand her stately buildings, her inward riches, her excessive abundance of all that is necessary for the entertain∣ing of life, also the world of people, the infinite number of Barques and Vessels that are there, the Commerce, the Courts of Justice, the Government and the State of the 
Tutons, Chaems, Anchacys, Aytaos, Puchancys,
 and 
Bracanons,
 who rule whole Kingdoms, and very spacious Provinces, with great pentions, and are ordinarily resident in this City, or others for them, when as by the Kings command they are sent about affairs of consequence. But setting these things aside, whereof yet I intend to speak more amply, when time shall serve, I say that this City, (according to that which is written of it, both in the 
Aquesendoo
 before mentioned, and all the Chronicles of the Kingdom of 
China
) is thirty leagues in circuit, not comprehending there∣in the buildings of the other inclosure that is without it, and is invironed with a double wall, made of good strong free-stone, having three hundred and threescore gates, each of which hath a small For
, composed of two high towers, with its ditches, and draw-bridges; and at every gate is a Register, & four Porters with halberds in their hands, who are bound to give account of all that goes in and out. These gates by the Ordinance of the 
Tuton,
 are divided according to the three hundred and threescore dayes of the year, so that every day in his turn hath the feast of the invocation of the Idol, whereof each gate bears the name, celebrated with much solem∣nity. This great City hath also within that large inclosure of her walls, as the 
Chineses
 assu∣red us, three thousand and three hundred 
Pagodes
 or Temples, wherein are continually sacrifi∣ced a great number of birds and wild beasts, which they hold to be more agreeable unto God, then such as are kept tame in houses, whereof their Priests render divers reasons to the people, therewith perswading them to believe so great an abuse for an article of faith. The structures of these 
Pagodes,
 whereof I speak, are very sumptuous, especially those of the orders of the 
Me∣negrepos, Conquiays,
 and 
Talagrepos,
 who are the Priests of the four Sects of 
Xaca, Amida, Gizom,
 and 
Canom,
 which surpass in antipuity the other two and thirty of that Labyrinth of the Divel, who appears to them many times in divers forms, for to make them give more cre∣dit to his impostures and lies. The principal streets of this City are all very long and broad, with fair houses of two or three stories high, and inclosed at both ends with ballisters of iron and lattin; the entrance into them is through lanes, that cross these great streets, at the ends where∣of are great arches, with strong gates, which are shut in the night, and on the top of the arches, there are watch-bels; Each of these streets hath its Captain, and officers, who walk the round in their turns, and are bound every ten dayes to make report into the Town-house of all that passeth in their quarters, to the end that the 
Punchacys,
 or 
Chaems
 of the Govern∣ment, may take such order therein, as reason requires. Moreover this great City (if credit may


be given to that which the said book, so often before mentioned by me, records) hath an hun∣dred and twenty Canals, made by the Kings and people in former times, which are three fa∣thom deep, and twelve broad, crossing through the whole length and bredth of the City, by the means of a great number of bridges, built upon arches of strong free-stone, at the end where∣of there are pillars, with chains, that reach from the one to the other, and resting places for passengers to repose themselves in: It is said that the bridges of these hundred & twenty Canals, or Aqueducts, are in number eighteen hundred, and that if one of them is fair and rich, the other is yet more, as well for the fashion, as for the rest of the workmanship thereof. The said Book affirms, 
That in this City there are sixscore Piatzues, or publique places, in each of the which is a Fair kept every month.
 Now during the two months time that we were at liberty in this City, we saw eleven or twelve of these Fairs, where were an infinite company of people, both on hors-back, and on foot, that out of boxes hanging about their necks sold all things that well neer can be named, as the Haberdashers of small wares do amongst us, besides the ordinary shops of rich Merchants, which were ranged very orderly in the particular streets, where was to be seen a world of silk stuffs, tinsels, cloth of gold, linnen, and cotton-cloth, sables, ermyns, musk, aloes, fine pourcelain, gold and silver plate, pearl, seed pearl, gold in powder, and lingots, and such other things of value, whereat we nine 
Portugals
 were exceedingly astonished; But if I should speak in particular of all the other commodities, that were to be sold there, as of iron, steel, lead, copper, tin, latin, corral, cornalin, crystal, quicksilver, vermillion, ivory, cloves, nut∣megs, mace, ginger, tamarinds, cinnamon, pepper, cardamone, borax, hony, wax, sanders, sugar, conserves, acates, fruit, meal, rice, flesh, venison, fish, pulse, and herbs; there was such abundance of them, as it is scarce possible to express it in words. The 
Chineses
 also assured us, that this City hath an hundred and threescore Butchers shambles, and in each of them an hun∣dred stalls, full of all kinds of flesh that the earth produceth, for that these people feed on all, as Veal, Mutton, Pork, Goat, the flesh of Horses, Buffles, Rhinocerets, Tygers, Lions, Dogs, Mules, Asses, Otters, Shamois, Bodgers, and finally of all other beasts whatsoever. Further∣more, besides the weights which are particularly in every shambles, there is not a gate in the City that hath not its scales, wherein the meat is weighed again, for to see if they have their due weight that have bought it, to the end that by this means the people may not be deceived. Be∣sides those ordinary Shambles, there is not scarce a street but hath five or six Butchers shops in it, where the choicest meat is sold; there are withall many Taverns, where excellent fare is al∣wayes to be had, and cellers full of gammons of bacon, dried tongues, poudered geese, and other savoury viands, for to relish ones drink, all in so great abundance, that it would be very superfluous to say more of it; but what I speak is to shew how liberally God hath imparted to these miserable blinded wretches the good things which he hath created on the earth, to the end that his holy Name may therefore be blessed for evermore.






CHAP. XXXV. The Prison of 
Xinanguibaleu,
 wherein those are kept, which have been condem∣ned to serve at the reparations of the wall of 
Tartaria
; and another inclo∣sure, called the Treasure of the dead, with the revenues whereof this prison is maintained.


DEsisting now from speaking in particular of the great number of the rich and magnificent buildings, which we saw in this City of 
Pequin,
 I will only insist on some of the Edifi∣ces thereof, that seemed more remarkable to me then the rest, whence it may be easie to infer, what all those might be, whereof I will not make any mention here to avoid prolixity; And of these neither would I speak, were it not that our Lord may one day permit, that the 
Portugal
 Nation, full of valour, and of lofty courage, may make use of this relation for the glory of our great God, to the end that by these humane means, and the assistance of his divine favor, it may make those barbarous people understand the verity of our holy Catholique faith, from which their sins have so far esloigned them, as they mock at all that we say to them thereof: Hereunto I will adde, that they are extravagant, and senceless, as they dare boldly affirm, that only with beholding the face of the Son of the Sun, which is their King, a soul would be more happy then with all other things of the world besides, which perswades me that if God of his infinite mercy and goodness would grant, that the King of the people might become a Christian, it would be an easie matter to convert all his Subjects, whereas otherwise I hold it difficult for


so much as one to change his belief, and all by reason of the great awe they are in of the Law, which they fear and reverence a like, and whereof it is not to be believed how much they che∣rish the Ministers. But to return to my discourse, the first building which I saw of those that were most remarkable, was a prison, which they call 
Xinanguibaleu,
 that is to say, 
The in∣closure of the Epiles
; the circuit of this prison is two leagues square, or little less, both in length and bredth: It is inclosed with a very high wall without any battlements; the wall on the outside is invironed with a great deep ditch full of water, over the which are a many of draw∣bridges, that are drawn up in the night with certain iron chains, and so hang suspended on huge cast pillars; In this prison is an arch of strong hewed stone, abutting in two towers, in the tops whereof are six great sentinel bells, which are never rung but all the rest within the said inclo∣sure do answer them, which the 
Chineses
 affirm to be above an hundred, and indeed they make a most horrible din. In this place there are ordinarily three hundred thousand prisoners, between seventeen and fifty, whereat we were much amazed, and indeed we had good cause, in regard it is a thing so unusual and extraordinary. Now desiring to know of the 
Chineses
 the occasion of so marvellous a building, and of the great number of prisoners that were in it; they an∣swered us, that after the King of 
China,
 named 
Crisnago Docotay,
 had finished a wall of three hundred leagues space betwixt this Kingdom of 
China,
 and that of 
Tartaria,
 as I have de∣clared other where, he ordained by the advice of his people, (for to that effect he caused an Assembly of his Estates to be held) that all those which should be condemned to banishment, should be sent to work in the repairing of this wall, and that after they had served six years to∣gether therein, they might freely depart, though they were sentenced to serve for a longer time, because the King pardoned them the remainder of the term by way of charity and alms; but if during those years, they should happen to perform any remarkable act, or other thing, where∣in it appeared they had advantage over others, or if they were three times wounded in the Sal∣lies they should make, or if they killed some of their enemies, they were then to be dispensed with for all the rest of their time, and that the 
Chaem
 should grant them a certificate there∣of, where it should be declared why he had delivered them, and how he had thereby satisfied the Ordinances of War. Two hundred and ten thousand men are to be continually entertained in the work of the wall, by the first institution, whereof defalcation is made of a third part, for such are dead, maimed, and delivered, either for their notable actions, or for that they had accomplished their time: And likewise when as the 
Chaem,
 who is as the chief of all those, sent to the 
Pitaucamay,
 which is the highest Court of Justice, to furnish him with that num∣ber of men, they could not assemble them together so soon as was necessary, for that they were divided in so many several places of that Empire, which is prodigiously great, as I have deliver∣ed before, and that withall a long time was required for the assembling them together, another King, named 
Gopiley Aparau,
 who succeeded to that 
Crisnago Dacotay,
 ordained that the great inclosure should be made in the City of 
Pequin,
 to the end that as soon as any were con∣demned to the work of this wall, they should be carried to 
Xinanguibaleu
 for to be there al∣together, by which means they might be sent away without any delay, as now is done. So soon as the Court of Justice hath committed the prisoners to this prison, whereof he that brings them hath a Certificate, they are immediately left at liberty, so that they may walk at their pleasure within this great inclosure, having nothing but a little plate of a span long, and four fingers broad, wherein these words are engraven, 
Such a one of such a place hath been con∣demned to the general exile for such a cause, he entred such a day, such a month, such a year.
 Now the reason why they make every prisoner to carry this plate for a testimony of their evil actions, is, to manifest for what crime he was condemned, and at what time he entred, be∣cause every one goes forth conformably to the length of time that shall be since he entred in. These prisoners are held for duly delivered when they are drawn out of captivity for to go and work at the wall, for they cannot upon any cause whatsoever be exempted from the prison of 
Xinanguibaleu,
 and the time they are there is counted to them for nothing, in regard they have no hope of liberty but at that instant when their turn permits them to work in the reparations, for then they may be sure to be delivered, according to the ordinance whereof I have made mention before. Having now delivered the occasion whereof so great a prison was made▪ be∣fore I leave it I hold it not amiss to speak of a Fair, which we saw there, of two that are usu∣ally kept every year, which those of the Country call, 
Gunxinem, Apparau, Xinanguibaleu,
 that is to say, 
The rich Fair of the prison of the condemned
; These Fairs are kept in the months of 
Iuly,
 and 
Ianuary,
 with very magnificent feasts, solemnized for the invocation of


their Idols; And even, there they have their plenory indulgences, by means whereof great ri∣ches of gold and silver are promised them in the other world. They are both of them frank and free, so as the Merchants pay no duties, which is the cause that they flock thither in such great number, as they assured us that there were three millions of persons there; And forasmuch as I said before, that the three hundred thousand that are imprisoned there, are at liberty, as well as those that go in and out, you shall see what course they hold to keep the prisoners from get∣ting forth amongst others. Every one that is free and comes in hath a mark set on the wrist of his right arm with a certain Confection made of Oyl, Bitumen, Lacre, Rubarb, and Alum, which being once dry cannot be any wayes defaced, but by the means of vinegar and salt mingled to∣gether very hot; And to the end that so great a number of people may be marked, on both sides of the gates stand a many of 
Chainpatoens,
 who with stamps of lead, dipt in this Bitumen, imprints a mark on every one that presents himself unto them, and so they let him enter; which is only practised on men, not upon women, because none of that Sex are ever condem∣ned to the labour of the wall. When therefore they come to go out of the gates, they must all have their arms bared where this mark is, that the said 
Chaintapo
ns,
 who are the Porters and Ministers of this affair, may know them, and let them pass; and if by chance any one be so un∣happy as to have that mark defaced by any accident, must even have patience, and remain with the other prisoners, in regard there is no way to get him out of this place if he be found with∣out that mark. Now those 
Chaintapoens
 are so dextrous and well versed in it, that an hundred thousand men may in an hour go in and out without trouble, so that by this means the three hundred thousand prisoners continue in their captivity, and none of them can slip away amongst others to get out. There are in this prison three great inclosures like great towns, where there are a number of houses, and very long streets, without any lanes; and at the entrance into each street there are good gates, with their sentinel bells aloft, together with a 
Chumbim,
 and twen∣ty men for a Guard; within a flight shoot of those inclosures are the lodgings of the 
Chaem,
 who commands all this prison, and those lodgings are composed of a number of fair houses, wherein are many out-Courts, Gardens, Ponds, Halls, and Chambers, inriched with excellent inventions, able to lodge a King at his ease, how great a Court soever he have. In the two prin∣cipal of these Towns there are two streets, each of them about a flight shoot long, which abut upon the 
Chaems
 lodgings, arched all along with stone, and covered over head like the Hospital at 
Lisbon,
 but that they far surpass it. Here are all things to be sold that one can de∣sire, as well for victual, and other kind of provisions, as for all sorts of Merchandise, and rich wares. In those arched streets, which are very spacious and long, are these two Fairs kept every year, whither such an infinite multitude of people resort, as I have declared before. Moreover with∣in the inclosure of this prison are divers woods of tall and high trees, with many small streams, and ponds of clear sweet water for the use of the prisoners, and to wash their linnen, as also sundry Hermitages, and Hospitals, together with twelve very sumptuous and rich Monasteries, so that whatsoever is to be had in a great Town, may in great abundance be found within the inclosure, and with advantage in many things, because the most part of these prisoners have their wives and children there, to whom the King gives a lodging answerable to the houshold, or family, which each one hath.


The second of those things, which I have undertaken to relate, is another inclosure we saw almost as big as the former, compassed about with strong walls, and great ditches.
 This place is called 
Muxiparan,
 which signifies 
The treasure of the dead,
 where are many towers of hew∣ed carved stone, and steeples diversly painted. The walls on the top are in stead of battlements invironed with iron grates, where there are a number of idols of different figures, as of Men, Serpents, Horses, Oxen, Elephants, Fishes, Adders, and many other monstrous forms of crea∣tures, which were never seen, some of Brass, and Iron, and others of Tin, and Copper; so that this infinite company of several figures joyned together is one of the most remarkable and plea∣santest things that can be imagined. Having past over the bridge of the ditch we arrived at a great Court that was at the first entrance, inclosed round about with huge gates, and paved all over with white and black stones in checquer work, so polished and bright, as one might see himself in them as in a looking glass; In the midst of this Court was a pillar of Jasper six and thirty spans high, and as it seemed all of one piece, on the top whereof was an idol of silver in the figure of a woman, which with her hands strangled a Serpent, that was excellently ena∣m
lled with black and green. A little further at the entrance of another gate, which stood be∣tween two very high towers, and accompanied with four and twenty pillars of huge great


stone, there were two figures of men, each of them with an iron club in his hand, as if they had served to guard that passage, being an hundred and forty spans high, with such hideous and ugly visages, as makes them even to tremble that behold them; The 
Chineses
 called them 
Xixipatau Xalican,
 that is to say, 
The blowers of the house of smoak.
 At the entring into this gate there were twelve men with halberds, and two Registers, set at a table, who e
rolled all that entred t
ere, unto whom every one paid a matter of a groat: when we were entred with∣in this gate, we met with a very large street, closed on both sides with goodly arches, as well in regard of the workmanship, as the rest, round about the which hung an infinite company of little bells of lattin by chains of the same mettal, that moved by the air, made such a noise as one could with much ado hear one another: This street might be about half a league long, and within these arches, on both sides of the way, were two rows of low houses, like unto great Chur∣ches, with steeples all guilt, and divers inventions of painting: Of these houses the 
Chineses
 assured us there was in that place three thousand, all which from the very top to the bottom were full of dead m
ns skuls, a thing so strange, that in every mans judgment a thousand great shops could hardly contain them. Behind these houses, both on the one side and the other, were two great Mounts of dead mens bones, reaching far above the ridges of the houses, full as long as the street, and of a mighty bredth. These bones were ordered and disposed one upon another so curiously and aptly, that they seemed to grow there; Having demanded of the 
Chi∣neses
 whether any register was kept of these bones, they answered, there was, for the 
Tala∣grepos,
 unto whose charge the administration of these three thousond houses was commited, enrolled them all; and that none of these houses yield
d less then two thousand 
Taeis
 reve∣nue out of such lands, as the owners of these bones had bequeathed to them for their souls health; and that the rent of all these three thousand houses together amounted unto five milli∣ons of gold yearly, whereof the King had four, and the 
Talagrepos
 the other for to defray the expences of this Fabrick; and that the four appertained to the King, as their Support, who dispenced them in the maintenance of the three hundred thousand prisoners of 
Xinanguibaleu.
 Being amazed at this marvel, we began to go along this street, in the midst whereof we found a great 
Piazza,
 compassed about with two huge grates of lattin, and within it was an Adder of brass infolded into I know not how many boughts, and so big that it contained thirty fa∣thom in circuit, being withall so ugly and dreadful, as no words are able to describe it. Some of us would estimate the weight of it, and the least opinions reached to a thousand quintals, were it hollow within, as I believe it was. Now although it was of an unmeasurable great∣ness, yet was it in every part so well proportioned, as nothing can be amended, whereunto also the workmanship thereof is so correspondent, that all the perfection which can be desi∣red from a good workman is observed in it. This monstrous Serpent, which the 
Chinese
 call, 
The gluttonous Serpent of the house of smoak,
 had on the top of his head a bowl of iron, two and fifty foot in circumference, as if it had been thrown at him from some other place; Twenty paces further was the figure of a man of the same brass in the form of a Gyant, in like manner very strange and extraordinary, as well for the greatness of the body, as the hugeness of the limbs: This Monster held an iron bowl just as big as the other aloft in both his hands, and beholding the Serpent with a frowning and angry countenance, he seemed as though he would throw this bowl at him. Round about this figure was a number of little idols all guilt on their knees, with their hands lifted up to him, as if they would adore him. All this great edifice was consecrated to the honour of this Idol, called 
Mucluparon,
 whom the 
Chineses
 affirmed to be the treasurer of all the dead mens bones, and that when the gluttonous Serpent before mentioned came to steal them away, he made at him with that bowl which he held in his hands, whereupon the Serpent in great fear fled immediately away to the bottom of the pro∣found house of smoak, whither God had precipitated him for his great wickedness; and fur∣ther that he had maintained a combate with him three thousand years already, and was to con∣tinue the same three thousand years more, so that from three thousand to three thousand years he was to imploy five bowls, wherewith he was to make an end of killing him; H
reunto they added, that as soon as this Serpent should be dead, the bones that were there assembled, would return into the bodies, to which they appertained formerly, and so should go and remain for ever in the house of the Moon; To these brutish opinions they joyn many others such like, unto which they give so much faith, that nothing can be able to remove them from it, for it is the doctrine that is preached unto them by their 
Bonzes,
 who also tell them that the true way to make a soul happy, is to gather these bones together into this place, by means whereof there


is not a day passes but that a thousand or two of these wretches bones are brought thither. Now if some for their far distance cannot bring all the bones whole thither, they will at least∣wise bring a tooth or two, and so they say that by way of an alms they make as good sa∣tisfaction as if they brought all 
he rest; which is the reason that in all these chunel houses there is such an infinite multitude of these teeth, that one might lade many ships with them.


We saw in a great Plain without the walls of this City another building,
 very sumptuous and rich, which they call 
Nacapirau,
 that is to say, the Queen of Heaven, for it is the opinion of these blinded wretches, that our Lord above is married like the Kings here below, and that the children which he hath had by the 
Nacapirau,
 are the Stars we see twinkling in the Fir∣mament by night, and that when any exhalation comes to dissolve in the air, they say that it is one of his children that is dead, whereof his other brothers are so grieved, that they shed such abundance of tears, as the earth is watered therewith, by which means God provides us of our living, as it were in manner of alms bestowed for the souls of the deceased. But letting pass these and other such like fooleries, I will only intreat of such particulars, as we observed in this great Edifice, whereof the first was one hundred and forty Convents of this accursed Religion, both of men and women, in each of which there are four hundred persons, amounting in all to six and fifty thousand, besides an infinite number of religious servants, that are not obliged to their vow of profession that are within, who for a mark of their Priestly dignity are clothed in violet, with green stars on them, having their head, beard, and eye-brows shaven, and wear∣ing beads about their necks to pray with, but for all that they crave no alms, by reason they have revenue enough to live on. The next was an inclosure within this huge building, a league in circuit, the walls whereof were built upon arches, vaults, of strong hewed stone, and under∣neath them were Galleries, invironed all about with ballisters of lattin; within this inclosure at a gate, through which we past, we saw under most deformed figures the two porters of hell, at least they believe so, calling the one 
Bacharon,
 and the other 
Quagifau,
 both of them with iron clubs in their hands, and so hideous and horrible to see to, that it is impossible to behold them without fear. Having past this gate under a chain, that went a cross from the brest of one of these divels to the other, we entred into a very fair street, both for bredth and length, inclosed at either end with many arches, diversly painted, on the top whereof were all along two rows of idols to the number of five thousand; Now we could not well judg of what matter these idols were made, howsoever they were guilt all over, and upon their heads they wore myters of sundry inventions. At the end of this street was a great square place, paved with black and white stone, and compassed about with four rows of gyants in brass, each of them fifteen foot high, with halberds in their hands, and their hair and beards all guilt, which was not only a very pleasing object to the eye, but also represented a kind of majestical great∣ness. At the end of this place was 
Quiay Huyan,
 the god of rain, which idol was so huge, that with his head he touched the battlements of the tower, being above twelve fathom high; he was likewise of brass, and both from his mouth, head, and brest, at six and twenty several places came out streams of water: Having past between his legs, which stood stradling at a great distance, one from another, we entred into a large room, as long as a Church, where there were three ships set upon very big and high pillars of Jasper; all along the walls thereof on both sides were a many of idols, great and little in divers forms all guilt, fitted and dispo∣sed in such order, as they took up all the bredth and length of the walls, and seemed at first sight to be all gold: At the end of this room or temple upon a round Tribunal, whereunto one as∣cended by fifteen winding stairs, was an altar, proportionable to the same Tribunal, whereon stood the image of 
Nacapirau,
 in the likeness of a very fair woman, with her hair hanging up∣on her shoulders, and her hands lifted up to Heaven. Now for that she was guilt all over with fine gold, and that with a great deal of art and care, she glistered in that manner as it was un∣possible to continue looking on her, so dazled were a mans eyes with the rayes that darted from her. Round about this Tribunal on the first four stairs were the Statues of twelve Kings of 
China
 in silver, with crowns on their heads, and maces on their shoulders; a little lower were three rows of idols guilt, kneeling on their knees, and holding up their hands, and all about hung a number of silver candlesticks with seven branches apiece. When we were out of this, we went through another street all arched like that by which we entred in, and from this we p
ssed through two other streets full of very stately buildings, and so came to a gate, that stood between four high towers, where there was a 
Chifuu,
 with thirty Halberdiers, and


two Registers, which wrot down the names of all that went in and out, as they did ours, and so we gave them about a groat for our passage out.






CHAP. XXXVI. Of an Edifice, scituated in the midst of the river, wherein were the hundred and thirteen Chappels of the Kings of 
China
; with the publique Granaries established for the relief of the poor.


TO give an end to the matter, whereof I intreat, which would be infinite if I should re∣count every thing in particular, amongst the great number of marvellous buildings, which we saw, the most remarkable to my seeming was an inclosure, seated in the midst of the river of 
Batampina,
 containing some league in circuit in an Island, and invironed with fair hewed stone, which on the out-side was about eight and thirty foot high above the water, and on the in-side even with the ground, being encompassed with two rows of ballisters of lattin, where∣of the outermost were but six foot high, for the commoditie of such as would rest them∣selves there, and the innermost were nine foot high, having six Lyons of silver standing upon huge bowls, which are the arms of the King of 
China,
 as I have said elsewhere. Within the in∣closure of these ballisters stood in very goodly order an hundred and thirteen Chappels after the fashion of Bulwarks all round, in each of which was a rich Tomb of Alabaster, placed with much art upon the heads of two silver Serpents, which in regard of the many boughts where∣in they were entertained seemed to be snakes, though they had the vis
ges of women, and three horns on their heads, the explication whereof we could not possibly learn. In each of these Chappels were thirteen branched Candlesticks with seven great lights a piece in them, so that to compute the whole, the candlesticks of these hundred and thirteen Chappels amount to a thousand, four hundred, thirty and nine. In the midst of a great place, invironed round a∣bout with three rows of winding stairs, and two ranks of idols, was a very high tower, with five steeples diversly painted, and silver Lions on the top of all: Here the 
Chineses
 told us were the bones of those hundred and thirteen Kings, that had been transported thither from these Chappels below: And it is the opinion of these brutish people, that these bones, which they hold for great reliques, do feast one another at every new Moon; in regard whereof these 
Barbarians
 use on that day to offer unto them a great Charger full of all kind of fowl, as also Rice, Beef, Pork, Sugar, Hony, and all other sorts of victual that one can name; wherein their blindness is such, as in recompence of these meats, which the Priests take unto themselves, they imagine that all their sins are forgiven them, by way as it were of a plenory indulgence. In this tower likewise we saw an exceeding rich Chamber, covered on the inside all over from the top to the bottom with plates of silver. In this Chamber were the Statues of those hundred and thirteen Kings of 
China
 all of silver, where in each of them were the bones of each several King inclosed; Now they hold, according as they are made to believe by their priests, that these Kings thus assembled together converse every night one with another, and pass away the time in sundry sports, which none is worthy to see, but certain 
Bonzes,
 whom they term 
Cabizun∣des,
 a title amongst them of the most eminent dignity, such it may be as the Cardinals of 
Rome.
 To this beastly ignorance the wretches adde many other blind tales, which they are assuredly perswaded are very clear and manifest truths: Within this great inclosure we counted in seven∣teen places three hundred and forty bells of cast mettal, namely twenty in each place, which are all rung together on those days of the Moon, wherein they say these Kings do visit and feast one another. Near to this tower in a very rich Chappel, built upon seven and thirty pillars of fair hewed stone, was the image of the goddess 
Amida,
 made of silver, having her hair of gold, and seated upon a Tribunal fourteen steps high, that was all overlaid with fine gold; Her face was very beautiful, and her hands were heaved up towards Heaven, at her armpits hung a many of little idols not above half a finger long filed together, whereupon demanding of the 
Chineses
 what those meant, they answered us, 
That after the waters of Heaven had overflowed the earth, so that all mankind was drowned by an universal Deluge, God seeing that the world would be desolate, and no body to inhabit it, he sent the goddess
 Amida, 
the chief Lady of honour to his wife
 Nacapirau 
from the Heaven of the Moon, that she might re∣pair the loss of drowned mankind, and that then the goddess having set her feet on a Land, from which the waters were withdrawn, called
 Calemphuy, (which was the same Island, whereof I have spoken heretofore, in the streight of 
Nanquin,
 whereof 
Antonio de Faria



went on land) 
she was changed all into gold, and in that manner standing upright with her face looking up unto Heaven, she sweat out at her armpits a great number of children, name∣ly males out of the right, and females out of the left, having no other place about her body whence she might bring them forth, as other women of the world have, who have sinned, and that for a chastisement of their sin, God by the order of nature hath subjected them to a mise∣ry full of corruption and filthiness, for to shew how odious unto him the sin was that had been committed against him. The goddess
 Amida 
having thus brought forth these creatures, which they affirm were thirty three thousand, three hundred, thirty and three, two parts of them females, and the other males, for so say they the world was to be repaired, she remained so feeble and faint with this delivery, having no body to assist her at her need, that she fell down dead in the place, for which cause the Moon at that time in memory of this death of hers, whereat she was infinitely grieved, put her self into mourning, which mourning they affirm to be those black spots we ordinarily behold in her face, occasioned indeed by the shadow of the earth, and that when there shall be so many years ran out, as the goddess
 Amida 
brought forth children, which were, as I have delivered, thirty three thousand, three hundred, thirty and three, then the Moon will put off her mourning, and afterwards be as clear as the day.
 With these and such like fopperies did the 
Chineses
 so turmoil us, as we could not chuse but grieve to consider how much those people, which otherwise are quick of apprehension, and of good understanding, are abused in matter of Religion with such evident and manifest untruths. After we were come out of this great place, where we saw all these things, we went unto another Temple of religious Votaries, very sumptuous and rich, where they told us the Mother of the then reign∣ing King, named 
Nhay Camisama,
 did abide, but thereunto we were not permitted to enter, because we were strangers; From this place through a street, arched all along, we arrived at a Key, called 
Hichario Topileu,
 where lay a great number of vessels, full of pilgrims from di∣vers Kingdoms, which came incessantly on pilgrimage to this Temple, for to gain, as they be∣lieve, plenary indulgences, which the King of 
China,
 and the 
Chaems
 of the Government, do grant unto them, besides many priviledges and franchises throughout the whole Country, where victuals are given them abundantly, and for nothing. I will not speak of many other Temples, or 
Pagodes,
 which we saw in this City whilest we were at liberty, for I should ne∣ver have done to make report of them all, howbeit I may not omit some other particulars, that I hold very fit to be related before I break off this discourse; whereof the first were cer∣tain houses, in several parts of this City, called 
Laginampurs,
 that is to say, 
The School of the poor,
 wherein fatherless and motherles
 children, that are found in the streets, are taught to write and read, as also some trade, whereby they may get their living, and of these houses, or schools, there are about some five hundred in this City; Now if it happen that any of them through some defect of nature cannot learn a trade, then have they recourse to some means for to make them get their living according to each ones incommodity; As for example, if they be blind they make them labour in turning of handmils; if they be lame of their feet, they cause them to make laces, riband, and such like manufactures; if they be lame of their hands, then they make them earn their living by carrying of burdens; but if they be lame both of feet and hands, so that nature hath wholly deprived them of means to get their living, then they shut them up in great Convents, where there are a number of persons that pray for the dead, amongst whom they place them, and so they have their share of half the offerings that are made there, the Priests having the other half; if they be dumb, then they are shut up in a great house, where they are maintained with the amerciaments that the common sort of women, as oyster-wives, and such like, are condemned in for their scolding and fighting one with another; As for old queans, that are past the trade, and such of the younger sort as by the lewd exercise thereof are becom
 diseased with the pox, or other filthy sickness, they are put into other houses, where they are very well looked unto, and furnished abundantly with all things necessary, at the charge of the other women that are of the same trade, who thereunto pay a certain sum monthly, and that not unwillingly, because they know that they shall come to be so provided for them∣s
lves by others, and for the collecting of this mony there are Commissioners expresly depu∣ted in several parts of the City. There are also other houses, much like unto Monasteries, where a great many of young maids, that are Orp
ans, are bred up, and these houses are maintained at the charge of such women as are convicted of adultery; for say they it is most just, that if there be one which hath lost her self by her dishonesty, there should be another, that should be maintained by her vertue. Other places there are also, where decayed old people are kept


at the charge of Lawyers, that plead unjust causes, where the parties have no right; and of Judges, that for favoring one more th
n another, and corrupted with bribes, do not execute justice as they ought to do; whereby one may see with how much order and policy these peo∣ple govern all things.


In the prosecution of my discourse it will not be amiss here to deliver the marvellous order and policy, which the Kings of 
China
 observe in furnishing their States abundantly with pro∣visions and victuals, for the relief of the poor people, which may very well serve for an example of charity, and good government, to Christian Kingdoms and Commonwealths. Their Chroni∣cles report, that a certain King, great Grandfather to him that then raigned in 
China,
 named 
Chausi-Zarao Panagor,
 very much beloved of his people for his good disposition and vertues, having lost his sight by an accident of sickness, resolved to do some pious work, that might be acceptable to God, to which effect he assembled his Estates, where he ordained, that for the relief of the poor there should be Granaries established in all the Towns of his Kingdom for wheat and rice, that in the time of dearth (which many times happened) the people might have wherewithall to nourish themselves that year, and to that purpose he gave the tenth part of the Duties of his Kingdom by a Grant under his hand, which when he came to signe accord∣ingly with a golden stamp, that he ordinarily used because he was blind, it pleased God to restore him perfectly to his sight again, which he enjoyed still as long as he lived; By this ex∣ample, if it were true, it seemed that our Lord Jesus Christ would demonstrate, how acceptable the charity that good men exercise towards the poor is to him, even though they be 
Gentiles,
 and without the knowledge of the true Religion; Ever since there have been always a great many of Granaries in this Monarchy, and that to the number of an hundred and fourteen thou∣sand. As for the order which the Magistrates observe in furnishing them continually with corn, is such as followeth; A little before reaping time all the old corn is distributed 
orth to the in∣habitants, as it were by way of love, and that for the term of two months, after this time is expired, they unto whom the old corn was lent, return in as much new, and withall six in the hundred over and above for waste, to the end that this store may never fail: But when it falls out to be a dear year, in that case the corn is distributed to the people without taking any gain or interest for it, and that which is given to the poorer sort, who are not able to repay what hath been lent to them, is made good out of the Rents, which the Countries pay to the King, as an alms bestowed on them by his special grace. Touching the Kings Revenues, which are paid in silver 
Picos,
 they are divided into three parts, whereof the first is for the maintenance of the King, and his State, the second for the defence of the Provinces, as also for the provisions of Maga∣zines, and Armies, and the third to be laid up and reserved in a Treasury, that is in this City of 
Pequin,
 which the King himself may not touch, unless it be upon occasion for defence of the Kingdom, and to oppose the 
Tartars, Cauchins,
 and other Neighbouring Princes, who ma∣ny times make grievous war upon him. This Treasure is by them called 
Chidampur,
 that is to say, 
The wall of the Kingdom,
 for they say, that by means of this treasure, being well im∣ployed and carefully managed, the King needs lay no impositions upon the people, so that they shall not be any ways vexed and oppressed, as it happens in other Kingdoms for want of this providence. Now by this that I have related one may see, how in all the great Monarchy the Government is so excellent, the Laws so exactly observed, and every one so ready and careful to put the Princes Ordinances in execution, that Father 
Navier,
 having well noted it, was wont to say, that if ever God would grant him the grace to return into 
Portugal,
 he would become a Suter to the King for to peruse over the rules and ordinances of those people, and the manner how they govern both in time of war and peace; adding withall that he did not think the 
Romans
 ever ruled so wisely in all the time of their greatest prosperity, and that in matter of policy the 
Chineses
 surpassed all other Nations of whom the Ancients have written.






CHAP. XXXVII. The great number of Officers, and other people, which are in the King of 
Chi∣na's
 Pallace; with our going to 
Quincay
 to accomplish the time of our Exile; and what befell us there.


OUt of the fear I am in left coming to relate in particular all those things which we saw with∣in the large inclosure of this City of 
Pequin,
 they that shall chance to read them may call


them in question, and not to give occasion also unto detractors, who judging of things accord∣ing to the little world they have seen, may hold those truths for fables, which mine own eyes have beheld, I will forbear the delivery of many matters, that possibly might bring much con∣tentment to more worthy spirits, who not judging of the riches and prosperity of other Coun∣tres by the poverty and misery of their own, would be well pleased with the relation thereof. Howbeit on the other side I have no great cause to blame those, who shall not give credit to that which I say, or make any doubt of it, because I must acknowledge, that many times when I call to mind the things that mine eyes have seen, I remain confounded therewith, whither it be the Grandeurs of this City of 
Pequin,
 or the magnificence wherewith this 
Gentile
 King is served, or the pomp of the 
Chaems,
 and 
Anchacys
 of the Government, or the dread and awe wherein all men are of these Ministers, or the sumptuousness of their Temples and 
Pagodes,
 together with all the rest that may be there, for within the only inclosure of the Kings Pallace there are above a thousand Eunuchs, three thousand women, and 12 thousand men of his Guard, unto whom the King gives great entertainment and pentions: also twelve 
Tutons,
 dignities that are Soveraign above all others, whom, as I have already declared, the vulgar call, 
The beams of the Sun
; Under these twelve 
Tutons,
 there are forty 
Chaems,
 or Vice-roys, besides many other inferiour dignities, as Judges, Majors, Governours, Treasurers, Admirals, and Ge∣nerals, which they term, 
Anchacys, Aytaos, Ponchacy, Lauteas,
 and 
Chumbims,
 whereof there are above five hundred always residing at the Court, each of them having at the least two hundred men in his train, which for the most part to strike the greater terror are of di∣vers Nations, namely, 
Megores, Persians, Curazens, Moems, Calaminhams, Tartars, Cau∣chins,
 and some 
Braamas
 of 
Chaleu,
 and 
Tanguu
; for in regard of valour▪ they make no ac∣count of the Natives, who are of a weak and effeminate complection, though otherwise I must confess they are exceeding able and ingenious in whatsoever concerneth Mechanick Trades Tillage, and Husband
y; they have withall a great vivacity of spirit, and are exceeding proper and apt for the inventing of very subtle & industrious things. The women are fair and chaste, and more inclined to labour then the men, The Country is fertile in victual, and so rich & abound
ng in all kind of good things, as I cannot sufficiently express it, & such is their blindness as they attri∣bute all those blessings to the only merit of their King, and not to the Divine Providence, and to the goodness of that Soveraign Lord, who hath created all things. From this blindness and in∣credulity of these people are these great abuses, and confused superstitions derived, which are ordinary amongst them, and wherein they observe a world of diabolical ceremonies; For they are so brutish and wicked as to sacrifice humane blood, offering it up with divers sorts of per∣fumes, and sweet savors; Moreover they present their Priests with many gifts, upon assurance from these profane wretches, of great blessings in this life, and infinite riches and treasure in the other; To which effects the same Priests grant them I know not what Certificates, as it were Bills of Exchange, which the common people call 
Couchinnoces,
 that after their death they may serve above in Heaven to procure for them a recompence of an hundred for one; wherein these miserable creatures are so blinded, that they save the very meat & drink from their own mouths to furnish those accursed priests of Satan with all things necessary, believing that these goodly 
ills they have from them, will assuredly return them that benefit. There are also Priests of another Sect, called 
Naustolins,
 who contrary to those others preach, and affirm with great oaths, that reasonable creatures live and die like beasts, & therfore that they are to make merry▪ & spend their goods jovially whiles life shall last, there being no other after this, as all but fools & ignorants are to believe. There is another Sect, named 
Trimechau,
 who are of opinion that so long time as a man shall live in this world, so long shall he remain under ground, until at length by the prayers of their priests his soul shall reassume the body of a child of seven days old, wherein he shall live again till he shall grow so strong, as to re-enter into the old body, which he hed left in the grave, and so be transported into the Heaven of the Moon, where they say he shal live many years, & in the end be converted into a star, which shall remain fixed above in the Firmament for ever. Another Sect there is called 
Gyson,
 who believe that only the beasts in regard of their sufferings, and the labour which they endure in this life, shall possess Heaven after their death, & not man, that leadeth his life according to the lusts of the flesh, robbing, killing, and committing a world of other offences, by reason whereof, say they, it is not possible for him to be saved, unless at the hour of death he leave all his estate to the 
Pagodes,
 and to the Priests, that they may pray for him; where∣by one may see that all the intentions of their diabolical Sects is not founded but upon a very tyranny, and upon the interests of the 
Bonzes,
 who are they that preach this pernicions doctrine


to the people, and perswaded them with many fables to believe it; In the mean time these things seem so true to these wretches that hear them, as they very willingly give them all their goods, imagining that thereby only they can be saved, and freed from those punishments and fears, wherewithall they threaten them if they do otherwise. I have spoken here of no more then these three Sects, omitting the rest of the two and thirty, which are followed in this great Empire of 
China,
 as well because I should never have done (as I have said heretofore) if I would relate them all at large, as for that by these it may be known what the others are, which are nothing better, but in a manner even the very same; wherefore leaving the remedy of such evils, and great blindness to the mercy and providence of God, unto whom only it appertains; I will pass on to the declarations of the miseries we indured during our exille in the Town of 
Quancy,
 until such time as we were made slaves by the 
Tartars,
 which hap∣pened in the year, 1544.


We had been now two months and an half in this City of 
Pequin,
 when as on 
Saturday,
 the thirteenth of 
Iuly,
 1554. we were carried away to the Town of 
Quansy,
 there to serve all the time that we were condemned unto: Now as soon as we arrived there, the 
Chaem
 cau∣sed us to be brought before him, and after he had asked us some questions, he appointed us to be of the number of fourscore Halberdiers, which the King assigned him for his Guard; This we took as a special favour from God, both in regard this imployment was not very painful, as also because the entertainment was good, and the pay of it better, being assured besides that at the time we should recover our liberty. Thus lived we almost a month very peaceably▪ and well contented for that we met with a better fortune then we expected, when as the divel, seeing how well all we nine agreed together (for all that we had was in common amongst us, and whatsoever misery any one had we shared it with him like true brothers,) he so wrought that two of our company tell into a quarrel, which proved very prejudicial to us all; This di∣vision sprung from a certain vanity too familiar with the 
Portugal
 Nation, whereof I can ren∣der no other reason, but that they are naturally sensible of any thing that touches upon honour
 Now see what the difference was, two of us nine falling by chance in contest about the extra∣ction of the 
Madureyras
 and the 
Fonsecas,
 for to know which of these two houses was in most esteem at the King of 
Portugals
 Court, the matter went so far, that from one word to another they came at length to terms of oyster-wives, saying one to the other, Who are you? and again, who are you? so that thereupon they suffered themselves to be so transported with choller, that one of them gave the other a great box on the ear, who instantly returned him a blow with his sword, which cut away almost half his cheek, this same feeling himself hurt caught up an halbert, and therewith ran the other through the arm; this disaster begot such part-taking amongst us, as of nine that we were seven of us found our selves grievously wound∣ed; In the mean time the 
Chaem
 came running in person to this tumult with all the 
Anchacys
 of Justice, who laying hold of us gave us presently thirty lashes a piece, which drew more blood from us then our hurts; This done, they shut us up in a dungeon under ground, where they kept us six and forty days with heavy iron collers about our necks, manacles on our hands, and irons on our legs, so that we suffered exceedingly in this deplorable estate. This while our business was brought before the Kings Atturny, who having seen our accusations, and that one of the articles made faith, that there were sixteen witnesses against us, he stuck not to say, 
That we were people without the fear or knowledge of God, who did not confess him otherwise with our mouths, then as any wild beast might do if he could speak; that these things presup∣posed it was to be believed, that we were men of blood, of a Language, of a Law, of a Nati∣on, of a Country, and of a Kingdom, the inhabitants whereof wounded and killed one another most cruelly, without any reason or cause, and therefore no other judgment could be made of us, but that we were the servants of the most gluttenous Serpent of the profound pit of smoak, as appeared by our worke, since they were no better then such as that accursed Serpent had accustomed to do, so that according to the Law of the third Book of the will of the Son of the Sun, called
 Mileterau, 
we were to be condemned to a banishment from all commerce of people, as a venemous and contagious plague; so that we deserved to be confined to the Mountains of
 Chabaguay, Sumbor, 
or
 Lamau, 
whither such as we were use to be exiled, to the end they might in that place hear the wild beasts howl in the night, which were of as vile a breed and nature as we.
 From this prison we were one morning led to a place, called by them 
Pitau Calidan,
 whe
e the 
Anchacy
 sat in judgment with a majestical and dreadful greatness; He was accom∣panied by divers 
Chumbims, Vppes, Lanteas,
 and 
Cypatons,
 besides a number of other persons;


there each of us had thirty lashes a piece more given us, and then by publique sentence we were removed to another prison, where we were in better case yet then in that out of which we came, howbeit for all that we did not a little detest amongst our selves both the 
Fonsecas,
 and the 
Madureyras,
 but much more the divel, that wrought us this mischief. In this prison we continued almost two months, during which time our stripes were throughly healed, howbeit we were exceedingly afflicted with hunger, and thirst. At length it pleased God that the 
Cha∣em
 took compassion of us; for on a certain day, wherein they use to do works of charity for the dead, coming to review our sentence he ordained, 
That in regard we were strangers, and of a Country so far distant from theirs, as no man had any knowledge of us, nor that there was any book, or writing which made mention of our name, and that none understood our language; as also that we were accustomed, and even hardned to misery and poverty, which many times puts the best and most peaceable persons into disorder, and therefore might well trouble such, as made no profession of patience in their adversities, whence it followed, that our discord pro∣ceeded rather from the effects of our misery, then from any inclination unto mutiny and tumult, wherewith the Kings Atturny charged us; and furthermore representing unto himself what great need there was of men for the ordinary service of the State, and of the Officers of Iustice, for which provision necessarily was to be made, he thought fit, that the punishment for the crimes we had committed, should in the way of an alms bestowed in the Kings name be mode∣rated, and reduced to the whipping which we had twice already had, upon condition neverthe∣less that we should be detained there as slaves for ever, unless it should please the
 Tuton 
o∣therwise to ordain of us.
 This sentence was pronounced against us, and though we shed a ma∣ny of tears to see our selves reduced unto this miserable condition, wherein we were, yet this seemed not so bad unto us as the former. After the publication of this Decree we were pre∣sently drawn out of prison, and tied three and three together, then led to certain iron Forges, where we past six whole months in strange labours, and great necessities, being in a manner quite naked, without any bed to lie on, and almost 
amished. At last after the enduring of so many evils, we fell sick of a Lethargy, which was the cause, in regard it was a contagious dis∣ease, that they turned us out of doors for to go and seek our living, until we became well again. Being thus set at liberty we continued four months sick, and begging the alms of good people from door to door, which was given us but sparingly, by reason of the great dearth that then reigned over all the Country, so as we were constrained to agree better together, and to pro∣mise one another by a solemn oath, that we took, to live lovingly for the future, as good Chri∣stians should do, and that every month one should be chosen from amongst us to be as it were a kind of Chief, whom, by the oath we had taken, all the rest of us were to obey, as their Su∣perior, so that none of us was to dispose of himself, nor do any thing, without his command, or appointment; and those rules were put into writing by us, that they might be the better ob∣served; As indeed God gave us the grace to live ever afterward in good peace and concord, though it were in great pain, and extream necessity of all things.


We had continued a good while living in peace and tranquility, according to our fore-men∣tioned agreement, when as he, whose lot it was to be our Chief that month,
 named 
Christo∣vano Boralho,
 considering how necessary it was to seek out some relief for our miseries by all the ways that possibly we could, appointed us to serve weekly two and two together, some in begging up and down the Town, some in getting water and dressing our meat, and others in fetching wood from the Forrest, both for our own use, & to sell. Now one day my self & one 
Ga∣spar de Meyrelez
 being enjoyned to go to the Forrest, we rose betimes in the morning, & went forth to perform our charge; And because this 
Gaspar de Meyrelez
 was a pretty Musician, play∣ing well on a Cittern, whereunto he accorded his voice, which was not bad, being parts that are very agreeable to those people, in regard they imploy the most part of their times in the delights of the flesh, they took great pleasure in hearing of him, so as for that purpose they invited him very often to their sports, from whence he never returned without some reward, wherewith we were not a little assisted: As he and I then were going to the wood, and before we were out of the Town, we met by fortune in one of the streets with a great many of people, who full of jollity were carrying a dead corps to the grave with divers banners, and other funeral pomp, in the midst whereof was a Consort of musick and voices; Now he, that had the chief ordering of the Funeral, knowing 
Gaspar de Meyrelez,
 made him stay, and putting a Cittern into his hands, he said unto him, 
Oblige me, I pray thee, by singing as loud as thou canst, so as thou mayst be heard by this dead man whom we are carrying to burial, for I swear unto thee, that he went away very sad for that he was separated from his wife and children, whom he


dearly loved all his life time. Gaspar de Meyrelez
 would fain have excused himself, alledging many reasons thereupon to that end, but so far was the Governour of the 
Funeral
 from ac∣cepting them, that contrarily he answered him very angerly. 
Truly, if thou wilt not deign to benefit this defun
t with the gift, that God hath given thee, of singing, and playing on this instrument, I will no longer say, that thou art an holy man, as we all believed hitherto, but that the excellency of that voice which thou hast comes from the inhabitants of the house of smoak, whose nature it was at first to sing very harmoniously, though now they weep and wail in the profound lake of the night, like hunger-starved dogs, that gnashing their teeth, and foaming with rage against men discharge the froth of their malice by the offences, which they commit against him, that lives in the highest of the Heavens.
 After this ten or eleven of them were so earnest with 
Gaspar de Meyrelez,
 as they made him play almost by force, and led him to the place, where the deceased was to be burnt, according to the custom of those 
Gen∣tiles.
 In the mean time seeing my self left alone without my comrade I went along to the For∣rest for to get some wood according to my Commission, and about evening returning back with my load on my back I met with an old man in a black damask Gown furred clean through with white Lamb, who being all alone, as soon as he espied me, he turned a little out of the way, but perc
iving me to pass on without regarding him, he cried so loud to me, that I might hear him, which I no sooner did, but casting my eye that way, I observed that he beckened to me with his hand, as if he called me, whereupon imagining there was something more then ordi∣nary, herein I said unto him in the 
Chinese
 Language, 
Potauquinay,
 which is, Doest thou call me? whereunto returning no answer, he gave me to understand by signes that in effect he called me; conjecturing then that there might be some thieves thereabouts, which would be∣reave me of my load of wood, I threw it on the ground to be the better able to defend my self, and with my staff in my hand, I went fair and softly after him, who seeing me follow him began to double his pace athwart a little path, which confirmed me in the belief I had before that he was some thief, so that turning back to the place where I left my load, I got it up a∣gain on my back as speedily as I could, with a purpose to get into the great high way, that led unto the City; But the man guessing at my intention, began to cry out louder to me then be∣fore, which making me turn my look towards him, I presently perceived him on his knees, and shewing me afar off a silver cross about a span long, or thereabout, lifting up withall both his hands unto Heaven; whereat being much amazed, I could not imagine what this man should be, in the mean time he with a very pitiful gesture ceased not to make signes unto me to come to him; whereupon somewhat recollecting my self, I resolved to go and see who he was, and what he would have, to which end with my staff in my hand I walked towards him, where he stayed for me; when as then I came near him, having always thought him before to be a 
Chinese,
 I wondred to see him cast himself at my feet, and with tears and sighs to say thus unto me, 
Blessed and praysed be the sweet Name of our Lord Iesus Christ, after so long an exile hath shewed me so much grace, as to let me see a Christian man, that professeth the Law of my God fixed on the Cross.
 I must confess that when I heard so extraordinary a matter, and so far beyond my expectation, I was therewith so surprised, that scarcely knowing what I said, 
I conjure thee,
 answered I unto him, 
in the Name of our Lord Iesus to tell me who thou art?
 At these words this unknown man redoubling his tears, 
Dear Brother,
 replyed he, 
I am a poor Christian, by Nation a Portugal, and named
 Vasco Calvo, 
brother to
 Diego Calvo, 
who was somtime Captain of
 Don Nuna Manoel 
his ship, and made a Slave here in this Country about seven and twenty years since, together with one
 Tome Perez, 
who
 Loppo Soarez 
sent as Am∣bassador into this Kingdom of
 China, 
and that since died miserably by the occasion of a Portu∣gal Captain.
 Whereupon coming throughly to my self again, I lifted him up from the ground where he lay weeping like a child; and shedding no fewer tears then he, I intreated him that we might sit down together, which he would hardly grant, so desirous he was to have me go presently with him to his house, but sitting down by me he began to discourse the whole suc∣cess of his travels, and all that had befallen him since his departure from 
Portugal,
 till that very time, as also the death of the Ambassador 
Tome Perez,
 and of all the rest, whom 
Fernand Perez d' Amdrada
 had left at 
Canton
 to go to the King of 
China,
 which he recounted in ano∣ther manner then our Historians have delivered it. After we had spent the remainder of the day in entertaining one another with our passed adventures, we went to the City, where having shewed me his house, he desired me that I would instantly go and fetch the rest of my fellows, which accordingly I did, and found them all together in the poor lodging where we lay, and


having declared unto them what had befallen me, they were much abashed at it, as indeed they had cause, considering the stratagems of the accident, so they went presently along with me to 
Vasco Calvo's
 house, who waiting for us, gave us such hearty welcome, as we could not chuse but weep for joy; Then he carried us into a Chamber where was his wife, with two little boys, and two girls of his; she entertained us very kindly, and with as much demonstration of love, as if she had been the mother or daughter to either of us; After this we sat down at the table, which he had caused to be covered, and made a very good meal of many several dishes provided for us: Supper done, his wife arose very courteously from the table, and taking a key which hung at her girdle, she opened the door of an Oratory, where there was an altar, with a silver cross, as also two candlesticks, and a lamp of the same, and then she and her four chil∣dren falling down on their knees, with their hands lift up to Heaven, began to pronounce these words very distinctly in the 
Portugal
 tongue: 
O thou true God, we wretched sinners do confess before thy Cross, like good Christians, as we are, the most sacred Trinity, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, three Persons, and one God; and also we promise to live and dye in thy most Ho∣ly Catholique Faith, like good and true Christians, confessing and believing so much of thy holy truth, as is held and believed by thy Church; In like manner we offer up unto thee our souls, which thou hast redeemed with thy most precious bloud, for to be wholly imployed in thy service all the time of our lives, and then to be yielded unto thee at the hour of our death, as to our Lord and God, unto whom we acknowledge they appertain both by Creation and Redemp∣tion.
 After this Confession 
they said the Lords Prayer, and the Creed,
 which they pronoun∣ced very distinctly, whereat we could not chuse but shed a world of tears to see these inno∣cents, born in a Country, so far remote from ours, and where there was no knowledge of the true God, thus to confess his Law in such religious terms. This being done, we returned be∣cause it was three of the clock in the morning to our lodging, exceedingly astonished at that we had seen, as at a thing which we had great reason to admire.






CHAP. XXXVIII. A 
Tartar
 Commander enters with his Army into the Town of 
Quincay,
 and that which followed thereupon; with the 
Nauticors
 besieging the Castle of 
Nixiamcoo,
 and the taking of it by the means of some of us 
Portugals.


WE had been now eight months and an half in this captivity,
 wherein we endured much misery, and many incommodities, for that we had nothing to live upon but what we got by begging up and down the Town, when as one 
Wednesday,
 the third of 
Iuly,
 in the year 1544. a little after midnight there was such a hurly burly amongst the people, that to hear the noise and cries which was made in every part, one would have thought the earth would have come over and over, which caused us to go in haste to 
Vasco Calvo
 his house, of whom we de∣manded the occasion of so great a tumult, whereunto with tears in his eyes he answered us, that certain news were come how the King of 
Tartary
 was fallen upon the City of 
Pequin
 with so great an Army, as the like had never been seen since 
Adams
 time▪ In this army, ac∣cording to report, were seven and twenty Kings, under whom marched eighteen hundred thousand men, whereof six hundred thousand were horse, which were come by land from the Cities of 
Luançama, Famstir,
 and 
Mecuy,
 with fourscore thousand 
Rhinocerots,
 that draw the waggons, wherein was all the B
gage of the Army; as for the other twelve hundred thou∣sand, which were foot, it was said that they arrived by Sea in seventeen thousand vessels, down through the river of 
Batampina
; By reason whereof the King of 
China
 finding himself too weak for the resisting of such great forces, had with a few retired himself to the City of 
Nan∣quin.
 And that also it was reported for a certain, that a 
Nauticor,
 one of the chiefest 
Tartar
 Commanders, was come to the Forrest of 
Malincataran,
 not above a league and an half from 
Quinçay,
 with an Army of threescore and two thousand Horse, wherewith he marched a∣gainst the Town, that in all likelihood he would be there within two hours at the furthest. These news so troubled us, that we did nothing but look one upon another, without being able to speak a word to any purpose, howbeit desiring to save our selves, we prayed 
Vasco Calvo
 to shew us what means he thought we might use to effect it, who sad and full of grief thus answered us; O that we were in our Country between 
Laura
 and 
Carncha,
 where I have often been, and should be there now in safety, but since it cannot be so, all that we can do for


the present, is to recommend our selves to God, and to pray unto him to assist us; for I assure you that an hour ago I would have given a thousand 
Taeis
 in silver to any one, that could have got me from hence, and saved me with my wife and children, but there was no possibility for it, because the gates were then all shut up, and the walls round about invironed with armed men, which the 
Chaem
 hath placed there to withstand the enemy. So my fellows and I, that were nine in number, past the rest of the night there in much affliction and unquietness, with∣out any means of counselling one another, or resolving on what we were to do, continually weeping for the extream fear we were in of what should become of us. The next morning a little before Sun-rising the enemy appeared in a most dreadful manner, they were divided into seven very great Battalions, having their Ensignes quartered with green and white, which are the colours of the King of 
Tartaria
; marching in this order to the sound of their Trumpets, they arrived at a 
Pagode,
 called 
Petilau Nam
ioo,
 a place of good receit, in regard of the many lodg∣ings it had, which was not much distant from the walls. In their Vantguard they had a number of Light-horse, who ran confusedly up and down with their Lances in their Rests. Being in this sort come to the 
Pagode,
 they stayed there about half an hour, and then marching on till they were within an ha
qu
buse shot of the walls, they suddenly ran to them with such hide∣ous cries, as one would have thought that Heaven and Earth would have come together, and rearing up above two thousand Ladders, which for that purpose they had brought alo
g with them, they assaulted the Town on every side with a most invincible courage. Now though the besieged at the beginning made some resistance, yet was it not able to hinder the enemy from effecting his designe, for by the means of certain iron rams broking up the four principal gates, they rendred themselves Masters of the Town after they had slain the 
Chaem,
 together with a great number of 
Mandarins,
 and Gentlemen, that were run thither to keep them from entring; Thus did these 
Barbarians
 possess themselves of this miserable Town, whereof they put all the inhabitants they could meet withall to the sword, without sparing any; and it was said that the number of the slain amounted to threescore thousand persons, amongst whom were many women and maids of very great beauty, which appertained to the chiefest Lords of the place. After the bloody Massacre of so much people, and that the Town was fired, the principal hou∣ses overthrown, and the most sumptuous Temples laid level with the ground, nothing remain∣ing on foot during the disorder, the 
Tartars
 continued there seven days, at the end whereof they returned towards 
Pequin,
 where their King was, and from whence he had sent them to this execution, carrying with them a world of gold and silver only, having burnt all the Mer∣chandise they found there, as well because they knew not how to transport it away, as for that the 
Chineses
 should not make any benefit of it: Two days after their departure they arrived at a Castle, named 
Nixianicoo,
 where the 
Nauticor
 of 
Luançama,
 their General, pitched his Camp, and intrenched himself on all sides with an intention to take it by assault the next day to be revenged on the 
Chineses
 there, for that upon his passing by them towards 
Quinçay,
 they had cut off an hundred of his men by an Ambuscado.


After the Army was encamped, and intrenched, and that the General had placed sure Guards and Sentinels in all places, he retired to his Tent, whither he sent for the seventy Captains that commanded his Army, unto whom upon their arrival he discovered his resolution, which be∣ing well approved of they fell into deliberation in what manner the Castle should be assaulted the day following, which concluded on, the next morning as soon as it was light the souldiers began to march towards the Castle, divided into fourteen Bataillions; being come within a flight shoot of it with the sound of trumpets, and most hideous cries, they reared up their Lad∣ders against the walls, and couragiously mounted up; but in the heat of this assault, where e∣very one shewed his valour, the one in bravely attempting, and the other in well defending, the 
Tartar
 in less then two hours lost above three thousand of his men, which made him found a retreat in great disorder, and he past the rest of that day in burying the dead, and curing of the wounded, whereof, there being a great number, the most part died not long after, for that the arrows wherewith they were hurt had been smeared by the 
Chineses
 with so strange and deadly poison, as there was no remedy to be found for it. In the mean time the 
Tartar
 Com∣manders seeing the ill success of this assault, and fearing the King would be offended at so great a loss for so small an occasion, perswaded the General to call another Councel, wherein it might be considered, whether it would be most expedient for the Kings honour to persist in the Siege of that place, or to give it over, whereupon this affair coming accordingly into delibera∣tion it was a long time debated with such diversity of opinions, as they were not able to


conclude upon any thing, so that it was thought fit, in regard it was then late to put off the As∣sembly till the next day; This resolution taken, every man retired to his quarter. Now we be∣ing led away amidst a great many of other slaves, with whom we had escaped out of the fire of the Town, it fell out, whether for our good, or for our greater misfortune, we could not then tell, that we were under the Guard, as prisoners of war, of one of that Assembly, a rich and honourable man, who returning to his tent with three other persons, of like quality to himself, whom he had invited to Supper, it chanced after they were risen from table that one of them espied us, where we stood chained in a corner of the tent, and perceiving us to weep was so moved, that he demanded of us what people we were? what the name of our Coun∣try was? and how we came to be slaves to the 
Chineses?
 whereunto we gave such an answer, as the 
Tartar
 ingaging himself further in this discourse, enquired of us whether our King was inclined to the wars, and whether we did use to fight in our Country? to whom one of our companions, named 
Iorge Mendez,
 replyed that we did, and that we had been trained up from our infancy in a military course of life; which so pleased the 
Tartar,
 that calling his two friends unto him, Come hither, said he, and have the patience to hear what these prisoners can say; for believe me they seem to be men of understanding; whereupon the other two came near, and hearing us relate some part of our misfortunes, it begat a desire in them to ask us other questions, wherein having satisfied them the best that we could, one of them that seemed more curious then the rest, addressing himself to 
Iorge Mendez,
 spake thus; 
Since you have seen so much of the world, as you say, if there were ere a one amongst you that could find out any device, or stratagem of war, whereby the
 Mitaquer (
for so was the
 Nauticor 
called) might take this Castle, I vow to you that he would become your prisoner, whereas you are his.
 Then 
Iorge Mendez,
 never considering with what imprudence he spake, nor understanding what he said, nor into what danger he was putting himself, boldly answered him; 
If my Lord
 Mi∣taquer 
will in the name of the King g
ve it us under his hand, that we shall have a safe con∣duct to convey us by Sea to the Isle of
 Ainan, 
from whence we may freely return into our Country, possibly I may be the man that will shew him how he shall take the Castle with little ado.
 This Speech being heard, and maturely considered by one of the three, a man in years, and of great authority, as having the honour to be much esteemed and beloved of the 
Mitaquer, Think well of what thou sayest, replyed he to
 Jorge Mendez, 
for I assure thee if thou doest it, that whatsoever thou demandest shall be granted thee, I, and more too.
 Hereupon the rest of us seeing what 
Iorge Mendez
 was going to undertake, as also how far he ingaged himself in his promise, and that the 
Tartars
 began already to ground some hope thereupon, we thought fit to reprehend him for it, and to tell him, that he was not to hazard himself so at random by promising a thing that might bring us into the danger of our lives. 
I fear nothing less,
 said he unto us, 
for as for my life, in the estate where now I am, I make so little account of it, that if any of these
 Barbarians 
would play for it at
 Primero, 
I would with three of the worst cards in the pack venture it upon the first encounter, for I am confident that all the benefit they can expect from us will never oblige them to grant us either life or liberty, so that for my parti∣cular I had as lief die to day as to morrow, judg you only by that which you saw them do at
 Quincay, 
whether you are likely to be better dealt withall now.
 The 
Tartars
 were much a∣bashed to see us thus in contestation one with another, and to hear us talk so loud, which is not usual amongst them, wherefore they reprehended us very seriously, saying, 
That it was for women to speak aloud, who could not put a bridle to their tongue, nor a key to their mouths, and not for men, that carry a sword, and are made for the wars: Howbeit if it were so that
 Jorge Mendez 
could execute what he had propounded, the
 Mitaquer 
could not refuse him any thing he could demand.
 This said, the 
Tartars
 retired every one to his lodging, for that it was eleven of the clock at night, the first watch being newly past, and the Captains of the Guard beginning then to walk the round about the camp at the sound of divers instruments, as is the custom in semblable occasions.


The same of the three 
Tartar
 Commanders,
 which I said before was so esteemed of by the 
Mitaquer,
 had no sooner learnt of 
Iorge Mendez,
 that he could tell how to take the Castle of 
Nixiamcoo,
 but that he went presently to acquaint the General with it, and making the matter greater then it was, he told him, that he could do no less then send for him to hear his reasons, which peradventure would perswade him to give credit unto him, and in case it pro∣ved not so, yet was there nothing lost thereby. The 
Mitaquer
 being well pleased with this advice, sent incontinently a Command to 
Tileymay,
 which was the Captain under whose


Guard we were, for to bring us unto him, as presently he did. Being then arrived, chained as we were, at the 
Mitaquers
 Tent, we found him set in Councel with the seventy Commanders of the Army about two hours after midnight; At our coming he received us with an affable countenance, yet grave and severe, and causing us to approach nearer unto him, he command∣ed part of our chains to be undone, then asked us if we would eat, whereunto we answered most willingly, for that in three days together we had not so much as tasted a bit of any thing, whereat the 
Mitaquer
 was very much offended, and sharply reproving the 
Tileymay
 for it, wil∣led two great platters of sodden rice, and Ducks cut in small pieces to be set before us, whereto we fell with such an appetite, like men that were almost famished, as those of the company, who took great pleasure to see us feed so, said to the 
Mitaquer, When as you had nothing else, my Lord, but cause these to come before you for to flack their hunger, verily you had done very much for them, by saving them from a languishing death, which otherwise they could not have avoided, and so you might have lost these slaves, of whom the service or sale might have been some way profitable unto you, for if you will not make use of them at
 Lancama, 
you may sell them for a thousand
 Taeis 
at least.
 Hereat some began to laugh, but the 
Mitaquer
 commanded more rice to be given us, together with some apples, and other things, conjuring us again to eat, as a thing which he took pleasure to see us do, wherein we most willingly gave him satisfaction. After we had fed well, he began to talk with 
Iorge Mendez
 about that which had been told him of him, and of the means that were to be used for taking the Castle, ma∣king him many great promises of honours, pentions, 
avour with the King, and liberty for all the rest of his fellows, with other such offers, as passed all measure: For he swore unto him that if by his means God should give him the victory, whereby he sought nothing but to be revenged on his enemies for the blood which they had shed of his men, he should every way be like unto himself, or at least to any of his children which soever; Herewith 
Iorge Mendez
 found himself somewhat perplexed, because he held it almost impossible for him to bring it to effect, howsoever he told him, that not to hold him longer in hand, he did not think but if he might view the Castle with his own eys, he might then peradventure let him know how it might be taken, wherefore if his Lordship pleased, he would the next morning consider it all about, and thereupon render him an account what course was to be taken therein. The 
Mitaquer,
 & all the rest, allowed very well of his answer, and greatly commending him for it sent us to be lodged in a Tent not far from his, where we spent the rest of the night under a sure Guard; you may judg now in what fear we were, knowing that if the business did not succeed according to the desire of these 
Barbarians,
 they would cut us all in pieces, for that they were a people which for never so small a matter would not stick to kill twenty or thirty men, without any regard either of God, or any thing else. The next morning about eight of the clock, 
Iorge Mendez,
 and two of us, that were appointed to accompany him, went to survey the place with thirty horse for our safe-Guard; when as 
Iorge Mendez
 h
d well observed the scituation thereof, as also that part whereby it might most commodiously be assaulted, he returned to the 
Mitaquer,
 that expected him with impatience, to whom he gave an acount of what he had seen, and facilitated the taking of the Castle with little hazard, whereat the 
Mitaquer
 was so over∣joyed, that he presently caused the rest of our irons, and the chains, wherewith we were faste∣ned by the neck and feet to be taken off, swearing to us by the rice he did eat, that as soon as he came to 
P
quin,
 he would present us to the King, and infallibly accomplish all that he had promised us, for the more assurance whereof he confirmed it by a Deed under his hand, that was written in letters of gold, to make it more authentical. That done, he sent for us to din∣ner, and would needs have us to sit with him at table, doing us many other honours accord∣ing to their manner, which greatly contented us, but on the other side we were in no little fear, least this affair should not for our sins have a success answerable to that hope the 
Mita∣quer
 had already conceived of it. The rest of this day the Commanders spent in resolving up∣on the order that was to be observed for assaulting the Castle, wherein 
Iorge Mendez
 was the sole Director: First of all then an infinite company of B
vins & Fagots was gotten together for to fill up the ditches; there were also three hundred Ladders made, very strong, and so large, that three men might easily mount up on them a front without incombring one another; likewise there was a world of Paniers, Dossers, and Baskets provided, together with a great multitude of Mattocks, and Spades, that were found in the Villages and Burroughs thereabout, which the inhabitants had deserted upon the bruit of this war, and all the souldiers of the Army made preparation of such things as they should need the next day when the assault was to be given a


In the mean time 
Iorge Mendez
 rode always by the 
Mitaquers
 side, who shewed him many great favours, which we perceived had begotten in him a stately carriage, far different from that he was wont to have, whereat we wondring, some of us (who envious of anothers good fortune, and out of an ill nature) could not chuse but murmur, saying one to another, as it were in disdain, and in a kind of jeering, 
What think you of this dog? verily he will be the cause that either to morrow morning we shall be all cut in pieces, or if the business he hath undertaken succeed as we desire, it is probable that he will be in such credit with these
 Barbari∣ans, 
that we shall account it for a happiness to be his servants
; and this was the talk which we had amongst us. The next day all the Army was put into order, and divided into twelve Battalli∣ons, whereof they made twelve Files, and one Counterfile in the Vantguard, that incompas∣sed the whole Camp in manner of an half moon: upon the wings were the foremost with all that Mass of Bavins, Ladders, Baskets, Mattocks, Spades, and other materials to fill up the ditch, and make it equal with the rest of the ground. Marching in this manner they arrived at the Ca∣stle, which they found strongly mann'd, and with a number of Flags and Streamers waving upon the Battlements. The first Salutation between the besiegers and the besieged was with arrows, darts, stones, and pots of wild-fire, which continued about half an hour, then the 
Tartars
 presently filled the ditch with bavins and earth, and so reared up their ladders against the wall, that now by reason of the filling up of the ditch was not very high; The first that mounted up was 
Iorge Mendez,
 accompanied with two of ours, who as men resolved had set up their rest, either to die there, or to render their valour remarkable by some memorable act, as in effect it pleased our Lord that their resolution had a good success, for they not only entred fi
st, but also planted the first colours upon the wall, whereat the 
Mitaquer,
 and all that were with him, were so amazed, as they said one to another, Doubtless if these people did besiege 
Pequin,
 as we do, the 
Chineses,
 which defend that City, would sooner lose their honour, then we shall make them to do it with all the forces we have; in the mean time all the 
Tartars,
 that were at the foot of the ladders, followed the three 
Portugals,
 and carried themselv
s so valiantly, what with the example of a Captain that had shewed them the way, as out of their own natural disposition, almost as resolute as those of 
Iapan,
 that in a very sh
rt space above 5000 of them were got upon the walls from whence with great violence they made the 
Chineses
 to retire, whereupon so furious and bloody a fight ensued between either party, that in less then half an hour the business was fully decided, and the Castle taken, with the death of two thousand 
Chineses
 and 
Mogores
 that were in it, there being not above sixscore of the 
Tartars
 slain. That done the gates being opened, the 
Mitaquer
 with great acclamations of joy entred, and causing the 
Chineses
 colours to be taken down, and his own to be advanced in their pla∣ces, he with a new ceremony of rejoycing at the sound of many instruments of war after the the manner of the 
Tartars
 gave rewards to the wounded, and made divers of the most vali∣ant of his followers Knights, by putting bracelets of gold about their right arms; and then about noon he with the chief Commanders of his Army, for the greater triumph dined in the Castle, where he also bestowed bracelets of gold upon 
Iorge Mendez,
 and the other 
Portu∣gals,
 whom he made to sit down at table with him; After the cloth was taken away, he went out of the Castle with all his company, and then causing all the walls of it to be dismantelled, 
e razed the place quite to the ground, setting on fire all that remained with a number of cere∣monies, which was performed with great cries and acclamations to the sound of dive
s instru∣ments of war; Moreover he commanded the ruines of this Castle to be sprinkled with the blood of his enemies, and the heads of all of them that lay dead there to be cut off; as for his own souldiers that were slain, he caused them to be triumphantly buried, and such as were hurt to be carefully looked unto; this done, he retired with a huge train, and in great pomp to his tent, having 
Iorge Mendez
 close by him on horsback; As for the other eight of us, together with many brave Noblemen and Captains, we followed him on foot. Being arrived at his tent, which was richly hung, he sent 
Iorge Mendez
 a thousand 
Taeis
 for a reward, and to us but an hundred a piece, whereat some of us, that thought themselves to be better qualified, were very much discontented, for that he was more respected then they, by whose means, as well as his, the enterprise had been so happily atchieved, though by the good success thereof we had all obtained honour and liberty.








CHAP. XXXIX. The 
Mitaquer
 departs from the Castle of 
Nixiamcoo,
 and goes to the King of 
Tartary
 his Camp before Pequin; with that which we saw till we arrived there; and the 
Mitaquers
 pre∣senting us unto the King.


THe next day the 
Mitaquer
 having nothing more to do where he was, resolved to take his way towards the City of 
Pequin,
 before which the King lay, as I have delivered be∣fore; To this effect having put his Army into battel aray, he departed from th
nce at eight of the clock in the morning, and marching leasurely to the sound of his warlike instruments, he made his first station about noon upon the bank of a river, whose scituation was very pleasant, being all about invironed with a world of fruit trees, and a many goodly houses, but wholly deserted, and bereaved of all things which the 
Barbarians
 might any way have made booty of. Having past the greatest heat of the day there, he arose and marched on until about an hour in the night that he took up his lodging at a prety good Town, called 
Lantimay,
 which likewise we found deserted, for all this whole Country was quite dispeopled for fear of the 
Barbarians,
 who spared no kind of person, but wheresoever they came put all to fire and sword, as the next day they did by this place, and many other along this river, which they burnt down to the ground; and that which yet was more lamentable, they set on fire, and clean consumed to ashes a great large plain, being above six leagues about, and full of corn ready to be reaped. This cruelty executed, the Army began again to move, composed as it was of some threescore and five thousand horse, (for as touching the rest they were all slain, as well at the taking of 
Quin∣çay,
 as in that of the Castle of 
Nixiamcoo,
) and went on to a mountain, named 
Pommitay,
 where they remained that night; The next morning dislodging from thence, they marched on somewhat faster then before, that they might arrive by day at the City of 
Pequin,
 which was distant about seven leagues from that mountain: At three of the clock in the afternoon we came to the river of 
Palamxitan,
 where a 
Tartar
 Captain, accompanied with an hundred horse, came to receive us, having waited there two days for that purpose; The first thing that he did, was the delivering of a letter from the King to our General, who received it with a great deal of ceremony; From this river to the Kings quarter, which might be some two leagues, the Army marched without order, as being unable to do otherwise, partly as well in regard of the great concourse of people, wherewith the ways were full incoming to see the Generals ar∣rival, as for the great train which the Lords brought along with them, that over-spread all the fields; In this order, or rather disorder, we arrived at the Castle of 
Lautir,
 which was the first Fort of, nine that the Camp had for the retreat of the Spies, there we found a young Prince, whom the 
Tartar
 had sent thither to accompany the General, who alighting from his horse, took his Scymitar from his side, and on his knees offered it unto him, after he had kissed the ground five times, being the ceremony or compliment ordinarily used amongst them; The Prince was exceedingly pleased with this honour done unto him, which with a smiling coun∣tenance, and much acknowledgment of words he testified unto him; This past, the Prince with a new ceremony stept two or three paces back, and lifting up his voice with more gravi∣ty then before, as he that represented the Person of the King, in whose name he came, said un∣to him, 
He, the border of whose rich vesture my mouth kisseth, and that out of an incredi∣ble greatness mastereth the Scepters of the earth, and of the Isles of the Sea, sends thee word by me, who am his slave, that thy honourable arrival is no less agreeable unto him, then the Summers sweet morning is to the ground, when as the dew doth comfort and refresh our bodies, and therefore would have thee without further delay to come and hear his voice mounted on his horse, whose trappings are garnished with jewels taken out of his Treasury, to the end, that riding by my side, thou mayest be made equal in honour to the greatest of his Court, and that they which behold thee marching in this sort, may acknowledge that the right hand of him is mighty and valiant unto whom the labours of war giveth this recompence.
 Hereupon the Mitaquer prostrating himself on the earth, with his hands lifted up, answered him thus, 
Let my head be an hundred times trampled on by the sole of his feet, that all those of my race may be sensible of so great a favour, and that my eldest Son may ever carry it for a mark of ho∣nour.
 Then mounting on the horse, which the Prince had given him, trapped with gold and precious stones, being one of those that the King used to ride on himself, they marched on with


a great deal of State and Majesty. In this pomp were many spare horses led richly harnessed; there were also a number of Ushers, carrying silver Maces on their shoulders, and six hundred Halberdiers on horsback, together with fifteen Chariots, full of silver Cymbals, and many o∣ther ill tuned barbarous instruments, that made so great a din, as it was not possible to hear one another. Moreover in all this distance of way, which was a league and an half, there were so many men on horsback, as one could hardly pass through the croud in any part thereof. The 
Mitaquer
 being thus in triumph arrived at the first trenches of the Camp, he sent us by one of his Servants to his quarter, where we were very well received, and abundantly furnished with all things necessary for us.


Fourteen days after we arrived at 
his Camp, the 
Mitaquer,
 our General,
 sent for us to his Tent, where in the presence of some of his Gentlemen, he said unto us; 
To morrow morning about this time be you ready, that I may make good my word unto you, which is to let you see the face of him, whom we hold for our Soveraign Lord, a grace that is done you out of a par∣ticular respect to me; And this his Majesty doth not only grant unto you, but your liberty al∣so, which I have obtained of him for you, and which in truth I am no less glad of, then of the taking of
 Mixiancoo, 
the particulars whereof you may relate unto him, if you come to be so happy as to be questioned by him about it. Withall I assure you that I shall take it for a great satisfaction, if when you shall return into your Country, you will remember that I have kept my word with you, and that therein I have shewed my self so punctual, as it may be I would not for that consideration demand of the King some other thing more profitable for me, that you may know this was that which I only desired: Also the King hath done me the honour to grant it me presently, and that with such exceeding demonstration of favour, as I must con∣fess I am thereby more obliged unto you, then you are to me.
 Having spoken thus unto as we prostrated our selves upon the ground, and in this sort answered him. 
My Lord, the good which you have pleased to do us is so great, that to go about to thank you with words (as the world useth to do) in the state we now are in, would rather be an ingratitude, then a true and due acknowledgment; so that we think it better to pass it by in silence within the secret of that soul which God hath put into us; And therefore since our tongues are of no use to us herein, and that they cannot frame words, capable to satisfie so great an obligation, as this is, where∣in all of us stand for ever so infinitely ingaged unto you, we must with continual tears and sighs beg of the Lord which made Heaven and earth, that he will reward you for it; for it is he that out of his infinite mercy and goodness, hath taken upon him to pay that for the poor, which they of themselves are not able to discharge; It is he then, that will throughly recompence you and your children for this good office you have done us, and whereby you merit to have a share in his promises, and to live long and happily in this world.
 Amongst those which ac∣companied the 
Mitaquer
 at that time, there was one named 
Bonquinuda,
 a man in years, and of the principalest Lords of the Kingdom, who in this Army commanded over the strangers and 
Rhinocerots,
 that served for the Guard of the Camp; This same, unto whom more re∣spect was born then to all the rest that were present, had no sooner heard our answer, but lift∣ing up his eyes to Heaven he said, 
O! who could be so happy, as to be able to ask of God the explication of so high a secret, whereunto the weakness of our poor understanding cannot ar∣rive; for I would fain know from whence it comes, that he permits people so for esloigned from the knowledge 
f our truth, to answer on the suddain in terms so agreeable to our ears, that I dare well say, nay, I will venture my head on it, that concerning things of God, and Hea∣ven, they know more sleeping, then we do broad awake, whence it may be inferred that there are Priests amongst them that understand the course of the Stars, and the motions of the Hea∣vens, far better then o
 Bonzes 
of the house of
 Lechuna. Whereupon all that were about him answered, 
Your Greatness hath so much reason for it, that we were obliged to behold it as an Article of our faith, wherefore we think it were fit, that these strangers should not be suffered to go out of our Country, where, as our Masters and Doctors, they might teach us such things they know of the world. That which you advise, replyed the
 Mitaquer, 
is not much amiss, and yet the King would never permit it for all the treasures of
 China, 
because if he should, he would then violate the truth of his word, and so lose all the reputation of his greatness, wherefore you must excuse me if I do not propound things unto him that can∣not be
; whereupon turning himself towards us, 
Go, get you gone,
 said he unto us, 
and to mor∣row morning fail not to be ready for to come again when I shall send for you.
 These words ex∣ceedingly contented us, as there was great cause they should; and accordingly the next day he sent us nine horses very well furnished, upon which we mounted, and so went to his Tent; He


in the mean time had put himself into a 
Piambre
 (that is somewhat like to a Litter) drawn with two horses richly harnessed; round about him for his Guard marched threescore Halber∣diers, six pages apparelled in his Livery mounted on white Curtals, and we nine on horsback a little more behind. In this manner he went on towards the place where the King was, whom he 
ound lodged in the great and sumptuous Edifice of the Goddess 
Nacapirau,
 by the 
Chineses
 called the Queen of Heaven, whereof I have spoken at large in the thirty 
ourth 
Chapter.
 Be∣ing arrived at the first trenches of the Kings Tent, he alighted out of his Litter, and all the rest likewise off 
rom their horses, for to speak to the 
Nautaran,
 of whom with a ki
d of ceremo∣ny, after the fashion of the 
Gentiles,
 he craved leave to enter, which was presently granted him. Thereupon the 
Mitaqu
r
 being returned into his Litter, passed through the gates in the same manner as be
ore, only, we and the rest of his followers waited upon him on foot. When he came to a low and very long Gallery, where there was a great number of Gentlemen, he alight∣ed again out of his Litter, and told us that we were to attend him there, for that he would go and know whether it were a fit time to speak with the King, or no. We stayed there then a∣bout an hour, during the which some of the Gentlemen that were in the Gallery observing us to be strangers, and such kind of people as they had never seen the like, they called us, and very courteously bid us to sit down by them, where having spent some time in beholding certain tumbl
s shewing 
eats of activity, we perceived the 
Mitaquer
 coming forth with four very beautiful boys, attired in long coats after the 
Turkish
 fashion▪ garded all over with green and white, and wearing about the small of their legs little hoops of gold in the fo
m of irons and shackle
. The Gentlemen that were p
esent, as soon as they saw them rose up on their feet, and drawing out their Cour
elasses, which they wore by their sides, they laid them on the ground with a new kind of ceremony, saying three times, 
Let the Lord of our heads live an hundred thousand years.
 In the mean while as 
e lay with our heads bending to the ground, one of those boys said aloud unto us; 
You men of the other end of the world, rejoyce now, for that the hour is come, wherein your desire is to be accomplished, and that you are to have the liberty, which the
 Mitaquer 
promised you at the Castle of
 Nixiamcoo, 
wherefore arise from off the earth, and lift up your hands to Heaven, rendring thanks unto the Lord, who during the night of our peaceable rest, enammels the Firmament with Stars, seeing that of himself alone, with∣out the merit of any flesh, he hath made you to encounter in your exile with a man that deli∣vers your persons.
 To this Speech, prostrated as we were on the ground, we returned him this answer by our truch-man, 
May Heavens grant us so much happiness, as that his foot may trample on our heads
; whereunto he replied, 
Your wish is not small, and may it please God to accord you this gift of riches.


These four boys, and the 
Mitaquer,
 whom we followed, past through a Gallery, erected upon five and twenty p
llars of br
ss, and entred into a great room, where there were a number of Gentlemen, and amongst them many strangers, 
Mogores, Persians, Bordies, Calami
hams,
 and 
Bramaas.
 After we were out of this room, we came unto another, where there were ma∣ny armed men, ranged into five Files all along the room, with Courtelasses on their shoulders, that were garnished with gold. T
ese stayed the 
Mitaquer
 a little, and with great comple∣ments asked him some questions, and took his oath upon the Maces the boys carried, which he performed on his knees, kissing the ground three several times, whereupon he was admitted to pass on into a great place, like a quadrangle; there we saw four ranks of Statues of brass, in the form of wild men, with clubs and crow
s of the same mettal guilt: These Idols or Gy∣ants, were each of them six and twenty spans high, and six broad, as well on the bre
t, as on the shoulders; their countenances were hideous and deformed, and their hair curled like to 
Negroes.
 The desire we had to know what these figures signified, made us to demand it of the 
Tartars,
 who answered us, that they were the three hundred and threescore gods, which framed the days of the year, being placed there expresly, to the end that in their effigies they might be con∣tinually adored, 
or having created the fruits which the earth produceth; and withall that the King of 
Tartary
 had caused them to be transported thither from a great Temple, called 
An∣gicamoy,
 which he had taken in the City of 
Xipaton,
 out of the Chappel of the Tombs of the Kings of 
China,
 for to triumph over them, when as he should happily return into his Country, that the whole world might know how in despight of the King of 
China
 he had captivated his gods. Within this place, whereof I speak, and amidst a plantation of Orange-trees, that was invironed within a fence of Ivy, Roses, Rosemary, and many other sort of flowers, which we have not in 
Europe,
 was a Tent pi
ched upon twelve Ballisters of the wood of Champhire, each


of them wreathed about with silver in the fashion of knotted card-work, bigger then ones arm. In this Tent was a low Throne in the form of an Altar, garnished with branched work of fine gold, and over it was a cloth of State, set thick with silver Stars; where also the Sun and Moon were to be seen, as also certain clouds, some of them white, and others of the colour of which appear in the time of rain, all enammelled so to the life, and with such art, that they beguiled all those that b
held them, for they seemed to rain indeed, so as it was impossible to see a thing more compleat, either for the proportions or colours. In the midst of this Throne upon a bed lay a great Statue of silver called 
Abicau Nilancor,
 which signifies, 
the God of the health of Kings,
 that had been also taken in the Temple of 
Angicamoy.
 Now round about the same Statue were four and thirty Idols of the height of a child of five or six years old, ranged in two Files, and set on the
r knees, with their hands lifted up towards this Idol, as if they would adore him. At the entry into this Tent there were four young Gentlemen richly clad, who with each of them a Cen
er in his hand, went two and two about, then at the sound of a bell prostrated themselves on the ground, and censed one another, saying with a loud voice, 
Let our cry come unto thee as a sweet perfume, to the end thou mayest hear us.
 For the Guard of of this Tent, there were three
core Halberdiers, who at a little distance invironed it all about. They were clothed with guilt leather, and had Murrians on their heads curiously engraven; all which were very agreeable and majestical objects. Out of this place we entred into another division, where there were four Chambers very rich and well furnished, in the which were m
ny Gen∣tlemen, as well strangers as 
Tartars.
 From thence passing on whith
r the 
Mitaquer,
 and the young boys conducted us, we arrived at the door of a great 
ow room, in form like to a Church, where stood six Ushers with their Maces, who with a new complement to the 
Mitaquer
 cau∣sed us 
o 
nter, but kept out all others. In this room was the King of 
Tartaria,
 accompanied with many Princes, Lords, and Captains, amongst whom were the Kings of 
Pafua, Mecuy, Capinper Raina Benan, Anchesacotay,
 and others to the number of fourteen, who in rich attire were all seated some three or four paces from the foot of the Tribunal. A little more on the one side were two and thirty very fair women, who playing upon divers instruments of musick, made a wonderful sweet Consort. The King was set on his Throne under a rich Cloth of State, and had about him twelve young b
ys kneeling on their knees, with little Maces of gold like Scepters, which they carried on their shoulders; close behind him was a young Lady extreamly beautiful, and wonderfully richly attired, with a Ventiloe in her hand, wherewith she ever and anon fanned him. This same was the sister of the 
Mitaquer
 our General, and in∣finitely beloved of the King, for whose sake therefore it was that he was in such credit and re∣putation throughout the whole Army: The King was much about forty years of age, full sta∣ture, somewhat 
an and of a good aspect; His beard was very short, his Mustaches after the 
Turkish
 manner, his eyes like to the 
Chineses,
 and his countenance severe and majestical; As for his vesture, it was violet colour, in fashion like to a 
Turkish
 Roak imbroydered with pearl, upon his feet he had green Sandals wrought all over with gold pearl, and great purls a∣mong it, and on his head a sattin cap of the colour of his habit, with a rich band of diamonds and rubies intermingled together: Before we past any farther, after we had gone ten or eleven steps in the room, we made our complement by kissing of the ground three several times, and performing other ceremonies, which the Truch-men taught us: In the mean time the King commanded the musick to cease, and addressing himself to the 
Mitaquer
; Ask these men of the other end of the world said he unto him, whether they have a King, what is the name of their Country, and how far distant it is from this Kingdom of 
China
 where now I am? Thereupon one of ours speaking for all the rest, answered; That our Country was called 
Portugal,
 that the King thereof was exceeding rich and mighty, and that from thence to the City of 
Pequin
 was at the le
st three years voyage. This answer much amazed the King, because he did not think the world had been so large, so that striking his thigh with a wand that he had in his hand, and lifting up his eyes to Heaven, as though he would render thanks unto God; he said aloud, so as eve
y one might hear him: 
O Creator of all things; are we able to comprehend the marvels of thy grea
ness, we that at the best are but poor worms of the earth?
 Fuxiqui∣dane, fuxiquidane, 
let them approach, let them approach.
 Thereupon beckening to us with his hand, he caused us to come even to the first degree of the Throne, where the fourteen Kings sat, and demanded of him again, as a man astonished, 
Pucau, pucau,
 that is to say, 
how far, how far?
 whereunto he answered as before, that we should be at least three years in return∣ing to our Country. Then he asked why we came not rather by Land, then by Sea, where so


many labours and dangers were to be undergon? Thereunto he replyed, that there was too great an extent of land, through which we were not 
ssured to pass, for that it was commanded by Kings of several nations. 
What come you to seek for then,
 added the King, 
and where∣fore do you expose your selves to such dangers?
 Then having rendred him a reason to this last demand with all the submission that might be, he stayed a prety while without speaking, and then shaking his head three or four times, he addressed himselfe to an old man that was not far from him, and said, 
Certainly we must needs conclude, that there is either much ambition, or little justice in the Country of these people, seeing they come so far to conquer other Lands.
 To this Speech the old man, named 
Raia Benan,
 made no other answer but that it must 
eeds be so, for men, said he, who have recourse unto their industry and invention to run over the Sea for to get that which God hath not given them, are necessarily carried thereunto, either by extream poverty, or by an excess of blindness and vanity, derived from much covetousness, which is the cause why they renounce God, and those that brought them into the world. This reply of the old man was seconded with many jeering words by the other Courtiers, who made great sport upon this occasion, that very much pleased the King, in the mean time the women fell to their musick again, and so continued, till the King withdrew into another Chamber in the company of these fair Musicians, and that young Lady which fanned him, not so much as one of those great Personages, daring to enter besides: Not long after one of those twelve boys, that carried the Scepters before mentioned, came to the 
Mitaquer,
 and told him from his sister, that the King commanded him not to depart away, which he held for a singular favour, by rea∣son this message was delivered to him in the presence of those Kings and Lords that were in the room, so that he stirred not, but sent us word, that we should go unto out tent with this assu∣rance, that he would take care the Son of the Sun should be mindful of us.






CHAP. XL. The King of 
Tartaria's
 raising of his Siege from before 
Pequin,
 for to return into his Country, and that which pas∣sed until his Arrival there.


WE had been now full three and forty dayes in this Camp, during which time there past many fights and skirmishes between the besiegers and the besieged, as also two assaults in the open day which were resisted by them within with an invincible courage like resolute men as they were; In the mean time the King of 
Tartaria,
 seeing how contrary to his hope so great an enterprise had been, wherein h
 had consumed so much treasure, caused his Coun∣cel of War to be assembled, in the which were present the seven and twenty Kings that ac∣companied him, and likewise many Princes, and Lords, and the most part of the chief Com∣manders of the Army: In this Councel it was resolved, that in regard Winter was at hand, and that the rivers had already overflowed their banks with such force and violence, as they had ravaged and carried away m
st of the Trenches and Pallisadoes of the Camp, and that moreover great numbers of the souldiers died daily of sickness, and for want of victuals, that therefore the King could not do better then to raise his Siege, and be gone before Winter came, for fear lest staying longer, he should run the hazard of losing himself, and his Army: All these reasons seemed so good to the King, that without further delay he resolved to follow this coun∣sel, and to obey the present necessity, though it were to his great grief. so that incontinently he caused all his Infantry and Ammunition to be imbarqued, then having commanded his Camp to be set on fire, he himself went away by Land with three hundred thousand Horse, and twen∣ty thousand Rhinocerots: Now after they had taken an account of all the dead, they appeared to be four hundred and fifty thousand, the most of whom died of sickness, as also an hundred thousand Horses, and threescore thousand Rhinocerots, which were eaten in the space of two months and an half, wherein they wanted victual, so that of eighteen hundred thousand men wherewith the King of 
Tartaria
 came out of his Country to besiege the City of 
Pequin,
 be∣fore the which he lay six months and an half, he carried home some seven hundred and fifty thousand less then he brought forth, whereof four and fifty thousand died of sickness, famine, and war, and three hundred thousand went and rendred themselves unto the 
Chineses,
 drawn thereunto by the great pay which they gave them,, and other advantages of honour and presents which they continually bestowed on them; whereat we are not to marvel, seeing expe∣rience doth shew, how that alone is of far more power to oblige men, then all other things in the


world. After the King of 
Tartaria
 was gone from this City of 
Pequin,
 upon a 
Munday,
 the seven
eenth of 
October,
 with three hundred thousand horse, as I have related before, the same day about evening he went and lodged near to a river, called 
Quaytragun,
 and the next morn∣ing an hour before day the A
my began to m
rch at the sou
d of the Drums, Fifes, and other instruments of war, ac
ord
ng to the order prescribed them; In this manner he arrived a little before night at a Town, named 
Guiiamp
a,
 which he found altogether depopulated: After his Army had reposed thereabout an hour and an half, he set forth again, and marching some∣what fast he came to lodg at the foot of a great mountain, called 
Liampeu,
 from whence he departed towards morning. Thus marched he eight leagues a day for fourteen days together, at the end whereof he arrived at a good Town, named 
Guauxitim,
 which might contain about eleven or twelve thousand fires; There he was counselled to furnish himself with victuals, whereof he had great need, for which purpose therefore he begirt it round, and skali
g it in the open day, he q
ickly m
de himself Master of it, and put it to the sack with so cruel a Mas∣sacre of the inhabitants, as my fellows and I were ready to swoond for very astonishment: Now after that the wood and fire had consumed all things, and that the Army was abundantly provided of ammunition and victual, he dep
rted at the break of day; and though he past the next morning in the view of 
Caixiloo,
 yet would not he attaque it▪ for that it was a great and strong Town, and by scituation impregnable, having heard besides that there were fifty thousand men within it, whereof ten thousand were 
Mogors, Cauchins,
 and 
Champaas,
 re∣solute souldiers, and much more warlike then the 
Chineses.
 From thence passing on he arrived at the walls of 
Singrachirau,
 which are the very same, that, as I have said heretofore, do di∣vide those two Empires of 
China
 and 
Tartaria
; There meeting with no resistance he went an
 lodged on the further side of it at 
Panquinor,
 which was the first of his own Towns, and s
ated some three leagues from the said wall, and the next day he marched to 
Psipator,
 where he dismissed the most part of his people. In this place he stayed not above seven days, which he spent in providing pay for his souldiers, and in the execution of certain prisoners he had taken in that war, and brought along with him: These things thus expedited, he, as a man not very well pleased, imbarqued himself for 
Lanç
me,
 in sixscore 
Lanlees,
 with no more then ten or eleven thousand men: So in six dayes after his imbarquing, he arrived at 
Lança∣me,
 where not permitting any reception to be made him he landed about two hours within night.


The King abode in this City of 
Lançame
 until such time as all his forces, as well horse as foot,
 were arrived there, which was within six and twenty days, then having all his Army together, he went on to another City far greater and fairer, called 
Tuymicoa,
 where he was visit
d by some Princes his Neighbours, and hy the Ambassadors of many other Kings and Soveraigns of more remoter Countrys, of which the chiefest were six great and mighty Monarchs, namely 
Xataanas
 the 
Sophy
 of 
Persia; Siamon
 Emperour of the 
Gueos,
 whose Country borders on that of 
Bramaa,
 and 
Tanguu
; the 
Calami
ham, Lord of the indomptable force of the Ele∣phant of the Earth,
 as I shall deliver hereafter, when I come to treat of him and his State; the 
Sourna
 of 
Odiaa,
 that names himself the King of 
Siam,
 whose dominion r
ns seven hundred leagues along the coast with that of 
Tanauserin,
 and on 
Champaa
 side with the 
Malayos, Ber∣dios,
 and 
Patanes,
 and through the heart of the Country with 
Passioloqua, Capioper,
 and 
Chiammay,
 as also with the 
Lauhos,
 and 
Gueos,
 so that this Prince alone hath seventeen King∣doms within his State, by reason whereof, for to make himself the more redoubted amongst the 
Gentiles,
 he causeth himself to be stiled, 
The Lord of the white Elephant
; the fifth was the great 
Mogor,
 whose State is within the heart of the Country, near to the 
Corazones,
 a Province bordering upon 
Persiu,
 and the Kingdom of 
Dely,
 and 
Chitor
; and the last an Em∣perour of a Country, named 
Caran,
 as we were informed there, the bounds of whose Sove∣raignty are at the Mountains of 
Goncalidau
▪ sixty degrees further on, where a certain people live, whom they of the Country call 
Moscovites,
 whereof we have some in this City, which were fair of complection, well shapen, and apparelled with Breeches, Cassocks, and Hats, like to the 
Flemings
 which we see in 
Europe,
 the chiefest of them wearing Gowns lined with Sables, and the rest with ordinary furs. The Ambassador of this Emperor of 
Caran,
 was more remarkable in his entry, then all the rest: He had for his Guard about sixscore men, armed with 
rows, and Partisans damasked with gold and silver, and all attired alike in violet and green; After them marched on horsback twelve Ushers, carrying silver Maces, before whom twelve horses were led, that had carnation clothes on them, bordered about with gold and silver; They


were followed by twelve huge tall men, that seemed to be Giants, clothed with Tygers skins as wild men are used to be painted of them holding in his hand a great Greyhound by a silver chain; Then appeared twelve little Pages, mounted on white Ha
kneys, having green velvet Saddles, trimmed with silver lace and frenge, they were all apparelled alike in crimson sattin Cassocks, lined with marterns, breeches, and hats of the same, and great chains of gold scarf-wise a∣bout them; These twelve boys were all of one equal stature, so fair of face, so well favoured, and of so sweet a proportion of body, as I believe there have never been any seen more accom∣plished: For himself, he was seated in a Chariot with three wheels on each side, garnished all over with silver; Round about this 
Pirange,
 (for so was this Chariot called) there were forty foot-men in jerk
ns, and breeches of green and red cloth, laced all over with carnation silk lace, having swords by their side above three fingers b
oad, with the hilts, handles, and chaps of sil∣ver, and hunting horns hanging in silver chains, bandrick-wise about th
m, and on their heads they wore caps, with feath
rs in them full of silver spangles: Thus was the equipage of this Ambassador so sumptuous and stately, that one might very well conclude he belonged to some very rich and mighty Prince. Now going one day as attendants on the 
Mitaqu
r,
 who went to visit him from the King, amongst other things that we saw in his lodging, we observed there for one of the greatest rarities in that Country, five Chambers hung all with very rich Arras, such as we have in Christendom; and no question brought from thence: In each of these Cham∣bers was a Cloth of State of gold or silver tinsel, and under it a Table with a Bason and Ewer of silver of a very costly fashion; also a Chair of State of rich violet stuff trimmed with gold frenge, and at the foot of it a Cushion of the same, all upon an exceeding large foot-pace of tapestry; There was also a cha
ingdish of silver, with a perfuming pot of the same, out of the wh
ch proceeded a most delicate odour; At the door of each of those five Chambers stood two Halberdiers, who permitted persons of quality to enter that came thither to see them; In another very great room in form like to a Gallery, there was upon a very high and large foot-pace a little table placed, covered with a damask table-cloth, edged about with gold-frenge, and upon a silver plate a napkin with a fork and a spoon of gold, as also two little salt-sellers of the same mettal: Now about ten or eleven paces on the one side from this table were two cupbards of plate of all kind of fashions, and other vessels of great value; Moreover at the four corners of this table were four cisterns about the bigness of a bushel, with their kettels fastened to them with chains all of silver, as also two very great candlesticks of the same with white wax candles in them but not lighted; There were also at the door of the room twelve handsome Halberdiers, clo∣thed in mantles like to 
Irish
 rug, with Scymitars by their sides, all covered over with plates of silver, which Guard (as ordinarily it is with them) were very haughty and rude in their answers to all that speak to them. Although this Ambassadour was come thither in the way of visit as the r
st, yet the principal subject of his Ambassy was to treat of a marriage between the Em∣perour of 
Caran,
 and a sister of the 
Tartar,
 named 
Meica vidau,
 that is to say, a rich Saphir, a Lady about some thirty years of age, but very handsom, and exceeding charitable to the poor, whom we saw divers times in this City at the chiefest Feasts, which these people use to so∣lemnize at certain times of the year, after the manner of the 
Gentiles.
 Howbeit setting aside all this, whereof I had not spoken but that it seemed more remarkable unto me then all the rest, I will return to my former discourse, as well concerning our liberty, as the voyage that we made even to the Islands of the Sea of 
China,
 whether the Emperour of 
Tartaria
 caused us to be conveighed, to the end that such as shall come after us may attain to the knowledge of a part of those things, whereof it may be they have never heard spoken until this pre∣sent.






CHAP. XLI. In what manner we were brought again before the King of 
Tartaria
; with our departure from that Kingdom; and all that we saw, and befell us in our voyage, till our arrival at the Court of the King of 
Cauchinchina.


AFter some time had been spent in the Celebrations of certain remarkable Feasts, that were made for joy of the conclusion of a marriage betwixt the Princess 
Meica vidau,
 the Kings sister, and the Emperour of 
Caran,
 the 
Tar
ar
 by the advice of his Captains resol∣ved to return anew to the Siege of 
Pequin,
 which he had formerly quitted, taking the ill suc∣cess


that he had there as a great affront to his person; To this effect then he caused all the Estates of his Kingdom to be assembled, and also made a league with all the Kings and Princes border∣ing in his Dominions: whereupon considering with our selves how prejudicial this might prove to the promise had been made us for the setting of us at liberty, we repaired to the 
Mitaquer,
 and represented unto him many things that made for our purpose, and obliged him to keep his word with us; To the which he returned us this answer: Certainly you have a great deal of reason for that you say, and I have yet more not to refuse you that which you demand of me with so much justice; wherefore I resolve to put the King in mind of you, that you may enjoy your liberty, and the sooner you shall be gone from hence, the sooner you shall be freed from the labours which the time begins to prepare for us in the enterprise that his Majesty hath new∣ly undertaken by the counsel of some particulars, who for that they know not how to govern themselves have more need to be counselled, then the earth hath need of water to produce the fruits that are sowed in her; but to morrow morning I shall put the King in mind of you, and your poverty, and withall I shall p
esent unto him how you have poor fatherless child ren, as you have heretofore told me, to the end he may be thereby inc
ted to cast his eyes upon you, as he is accustomed to do in like cases, which is none of the least marks of his greatness. Here∣upon he dismissed us for that day, and the next morning he went to 
Pontiveu,
 which is a place where the King useth to give audience to all such as have any suit to him; There beseeching his Majesty to think of us, he answered him, that as soon as he dispatched away an Ambassador to the King of 
Cauchenchina,
 he would send us along with him, for so he had resolved to do: With this answer the 
Mitaquer
 returned to his house, where we were ready attending his coming, and told us what the King had promised him, wherewithal not a little contented we went back to our lodging; There in the expectation of the good success of this promise we continued ten days with some impatience, at the end whereof the 
Mitaquer
 by the Kings ex∣press command carried us with him to the Court, where causing us to approach near to his Majesty, with those ceremonies of greatness which are observed in coming before him, being the same we used at 
Pequin,
 after he had beheld us with a gentle eye, he bid the 
Mitaquer
 ask of us whether we would serve him, and in case we would, he should not only be very well pleased with it, but he would also give us better entertainment, and more advantagious condi∣tions then all the strangers that should follow him in this war. To this demand the 
Mitaquer
 answered very favourably for us, how he had often heard us say, that we were married in our Country▪ 
nd had a great charge of children, who had no other means to maintain them, but what we got with our labour, which was poorly enough God knows: The King heard this speech with some demonstration of pity, so that looking on the 
Mitaquer; I am glad,
 said he, 
to know that they have such good cause to return home as they speak of, that I may with the more contentmant acquit me of that which thou hast promised them in my name.
 At these words the 
Mitaquer,
 and all we that were with him, lifting up our hands, 
s to a testimony of our thankfulness unto him, we kissed the ground three times, and said, 
May thy feet rest them∣selves upon a thousand generations, to the end that thou mayst be Lord of the inhabitants of the earth.
 Hereat the King began to smile, and said to a Prince that was near him, 
These men speak as if they had been bred amongst us
; Then casting his eyes on 
Iorge Mendez,
 who stood before all us next to the 
Mitaquer, And thou,
 said he unto him, 
in what condition art thou, wilt thou go, or stay?
 whereupon 
Mendez,
 who had long before premeditated his answer, 
Sir,
 replyed he, 
for me, that have neither wife, nor children to bewail my absence, the thing I most desire in the world is to serve your Majesty, since you are pleased therewith, whereun∣to I have more affection then to be Cha
m of
 Pequim 
one thousand years together.
 At this the King smiled again, and then dismissed us, so that we returned very well satisfied to our lodg∣ing, where we continued three days in a readiness to depart, at the end of which by the medi∣ation of the 
Mitaquer,
 and means of his sister, who, as I have said before, was wonderfully beloved of the King, his Majesty sent us for the eight that we were two thousand 
Taeis,
 and gave us in charge to his Ambassadour, whom he sent to the City of 
Vzamguee
 in 
Cauchenchina,
 in the company of the same King of 
Cauchenchina's
 Ambassador: With him we departed from thence five days after, being imbarqued in the vessel wherein he went himself: But be∣fore our departure 
Iorge Mendez
 gave us a thousand Duckets, which was easie for him to do, for that he had already six thousand of yearly rent, withal he kept us company all that day, and at length took his leave of us, not without shedding many a tear for grief that he had so exposed himself to a voluntary exile.


Being departed from this City of 
Tuymican
 on the ninth day of 
May,
 in the year one thou∣sand, five hundred, forty and four, we came to lodg that night at a University in a 
Pagode
 cal∣led 
Guatipanior,
 where the two Ambassadors were very well entertained by the 
Tuyxivau
 of the house, which is as the Rector thereof, and the next morning when it was broad day, both of them continued their course down the river, each one in his own ship; besides other two wherein their stuff was; About two hours in the night we arrived at a little Town, named 
Puxanguim,
 well fortified with Towers and bulwarks after our manner, as also with very broad ditches, and strong bridges of hewed stone; there was likewise great store of Artillery, or Cannons of wood, made like unto the pumps of ships, behind the which they put boxes of iron, that held their charge, and were fastened unto them with iron bands; as for the bul∣lets which they shot, they were like unto those of Falconets, and half black: Being much ama∣zed to see this, we demanded of the Ambassador who it was that had invented those kind of guns? whereunto they answered, that it was certain men, called 
Almains,
 and of a Country named 
Muscovy,
 who by a very great lake of salt-water, came down to this Town in nine vessels rowed with oars, in the company of a widdow woman, Lady of a place, called 
Gaytor,
 who they said was chased out of her Country by a King of 
Denmark,
 so that flying for re∣fuge with three sons of her, the great Grand-father of this King of 
Tartaria
 made them all great Lords, and gave them certain kinswoman of his in marriage, from whom are extracted the chie∣fest families of this Empire. The next morning we parted from this Town, and that night lay at another more nobler, named 
Euxcau:
 Five days after we continued our voyage down this river, and then we arrived at a great Temple, called 
Singuafatur,
 where we saw an inclosure of above a league in circuit, in which were builded an hundred, threescore, and four houses, very long and broad, after the fashion of Arcenals, all full up to the very tyles of dead mens heads, whereof there was so great a number, that I am afraid to speak it, for that it will hardly be credited. Without each of these houses were also great piles of the bones of these heads, which were three fathom higher then the ridges of them, so that the house seemed to be buri∣ed, no other part of them appearing but the frontispiece where the gate stood; not far from thence upon a little hill on the South-side of them was a kind of a platform, whereunto one went up by certain winding-stairs of iron, and through four several doors; Upon this platform was the tallest, the most deformed, and dreadful Monster that possibly can be imagined, standing up∣on his feet, and leaning against a mighty tower of hewed stone; he was made of cast iron, and of so great and prodigious a stature, that by guess he seemed to be above thirty fathom high, and more then six broad, notwithstanding the which deformity he was exceedingly well proportioned in all his limbs, only his head was somewhat too little for so great a body. This monster held in both his hands a bowl of the same iron, being six and thirty spans about. Be∣holding so strange and monstrous a thing, we demanded of the 
Tartar
 Ambassadour the ex∣plication thereof, who willing to satisfie our curiosity, 
If you knew,
 answered he, 
what the power of this God is, and how needful it is for you to have him to friend, certainly you would think it well imployed if you presented him with all your means, how great soever they might be, and give them to him rather then to your own children; for you must know that this great Saint, which you see there, is the Treasurer of the bones of all those that are born into the world, to the end that at the last day, when men come to be born again he may give to every one the same bones which he had upon earth, for he knows them all, and can tell in particular to what body each of those bones belong: whereupon you are further to understand, that he, who in this life shall be so unadvised as not to honour him, nor present him with something, will be but in an ill case in the other world, for this Saint will then give him some of the rot∣tenest bones he can meet withal, and one or two less then he should have, by means whereof he will become deformed, lame, or crooked, and therefore if you will follow my counsel, you shall make your selves of his fraternity, by offering something unto him, and you will find by expe∣rience the good that will redound to you thereof hereafter.
 We desired also to know of him what the bowle which this Monster held in his hand, signified, whereunto he answered us, 
That he held it to fling it at the head of the gluttonous Serpent, that lived in the profound Obism of the house of smoak, when he should come thither to steal away any of those bones.
 After this we enquired of him how this Monster was called, and he told us that his name was, 
Pachinavau du beculem Prinaufaque,
 and that it was threescore and fourteen thousand years since he was begotten on a Tortois, called 
Migama,
 by a Sea-horse, that was an hundred and thirty fathom long, named 
Tybrem vucam,
 who had been King of the Giants of 
Fanius
; he


told us likewise many other brutish fooleries and absurdities, which those of that Country be∣lieve as their Creed, and wherewith the Divel precipitates them all into hell; Moreover this Ambassadour assured us, that the gifts which were presented to this Idol, amounted to above two hundred thousand 
Taeis
 of yearly rent, without comprising therein what came from Chap∣pels, and other foundations of obits from the principal Lords of the Country, the Reve∣nue whereof was far greater then that of the gifts; For a conclusion he told us, that this same Idol had ordinarily twelve thousand priests attending on his service, who were maintained with m
at, drink, and clothing, only to pray for the dead, that is to say, for those unto whom these bones appertained; we were also assured, that these priests never went out of this inclosure without the permission of their Superiours, but that there was still without six hundred ser∣vants, who took care for the providing of all things necessary for them; And further that it was not lawful for these priests, save once a year, to break within this inclosure the vow which they had made of chastity, but without the same they might whore their pleasure with whom∣soever they would, without committing any sin; There was also a 
Serraglio
 there, wherein many women, appointed for that purpose were shut up, whom their Governesses permitted to have to do with the priests of this beastly and diabolical Sect.


Continuing our voyage from this 
Pagode,
 or Monastery of 
Gentiles,
 whereof we have spo∣ken, the next day we arrived at a very fair Town, called 
Quanginau,
 which stands on the bank of the river; In this place the Ambassadours stayed three whole dayes for to furnish themselves with certain things they wanted, as also for to see the feastings and joy that was made at that time upon the entry of the 
Tal
picor
 of 
Echuna,
 which is their Pope, who was going then unto the King for to comfort him about the ill success he had in 
China.
 Amongst other graces, which this 
Tolapicor
 bestowed on the inhabitants of this Town, in recompence of the charge they had been at for his reception, he granted unto them, that they might be all Priests, and administer their sacrifices in what places soever they were, and likewise that they might there∣fore receive the same entertainment and gifts, that were accustomed to be given unto our Priests, without any difference between them and those that upon examination had been promoted to that dignity; Moreover he gave them power to grant Bills of Exchange for Heaven unto all such as should do them good here b
low. To the Ambassador of 
Cauchinchina
 he granted as a most singular favor, that he might legitimate any that would pay him for it, & also confer on the Lords of the Court titles, and marks of honour, as far forth as if he had been King, whereof the foolish Ambassador was so proud, as setting aside covetousnesse, though it were a vice he was natu∣rally inclined unto, he imployed all that ever he had there in gifts upon those Priests, and besides not contented therewith, he for that end borrowed of us the two thousand 
Taeis
 the King had given us, which aferwards he paid us again with interest after fifteen in the hundred. After these matters the two Ambassadors resolved to continue their voyage, but before their depar∣ture they went to visit the 
Talapicor
 in a 
Pagode
 where he was lodged, for in regard of his greatness, and that he was held for a Saint, he might not abide with any man, but with the King only. Now as soon as he understood of the Ambassadors coming to him he sent them word not to go away that day, because he was to preach at the Church of certain religious women of the Invocation of 
Pontimaqueu
; this they took for a great honour, and inconti∣nently went to the 
Pagode,
 where the Sermon was to be: At their arrival they found such a concourse of people, that they were constrained to remove the Pulpit to another very great place, which in less then an hour was invironed with Scaffolds, hung about with silk stuff, whereon the one side were the Ladies, richly apparelled, and on the other the Princess, called 
Vanguenarau,
 with all the 
Menigregues,
 or religious women of the 
Pagode,
 being in number above three hundred. After the 
Talapicor
 was gone up into the Pulpit, and that he had made an exterior shew of much holiness, ever and anon lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, he began his Sermon in this manner, 
Like as it is the property of water to clense all things, and of the Sun to warm all creatures, so it is the property of God through a coelestial and divine nature to do good unto all; wherefore we are all bound, as well in general and particular, to imitate this our Lord, who hath created, and doth nourish us, by doing that unto those, who stand in need of the good of this world, as we would that they should do unto us, for that by this work we are more pleasing unto him, then by any other whatsoever. For as the good Father of a Family rejoyceth to see his children made much of, and presents given to them, so our Heavenly Lord, who is the true Father of us all, rejoyceth at such time as with a zeal of charity we communicate one with another; whereby it is evident, that the covetous man,


who shuts his hand, when the poor ask something of him which they want, constrained thereunto by necessity, and that turns him another way without assisting them, shall be treated in the same manner by a just judgment of God, and driven down into the bottom of the sink of the night, where like a frog he shal croke without ceasing, being tormented by the hunger of his covetousness: This being so, I do advise and enjoyn you all, since you have ears to hear me, that you do that which the Law of the Lord obligeth you to do, which is, that you give of that whereof you have too much, to the poor, who have not wherewith to feed themselves, to the end God may not be wanting to you when you shall be at the last gasp of your life: Go to then, let this charity be so re∣markable and universal in you, that the very fowls of the air may taste of your liberality; And this you ought to do to keep the poor, having need of what you possess in excess, from be∣ing forced by their necessity to rob other men of their goods, whereof you would be no less bla∣meable, then if you killed an infant in the cradle; I commend also unto your remembrance that which is written in the Book of our truth, touching the good you are bound to do unto the Priests, that pray for you, to the end they may not perish for want of the good you ought to do unto them, which would be as great a sin before God, as if you should cut the throat of a little white heifer when she is sucking of her Dam, by the death of whom a thousand souls would die, which are buried in her as in a golden Tomb, in expectation of the day, which is to accomplish the promise, that was made unto them, wherein they shall be transformed into white pearls for to dance in Heaven, like unto the moats which are in the beams of the Sun.
 Having uttered these things, he added many others thereunto, and delivering a world of extravagancies and fooleries, he bestirred himself in such manner, as was a wonder to behold, so that we eight 
Portugals
 were exceedingly amazed at the extream devotion of these people, and how that in lifting up their hands to Hands to Heaven, they ever and anon repeated this word 
Taiximi∣da,
 that is to say, 
So we believe
; In the mean time one of our fellows, named 
Vincent Mo∣rosa,
 hearing the auditors so often use that word 
Taiximida,
 said in imitation of them, 
Such may thy life be
; and that with such a grace, and so setled a countenance, not seeming any way to jeer him, that not one in the Assembly could forbear laughing: He in the mean while conti∣nued still firm, and more and more confirmed, seeming even to weep out of an excess of devo∣tion; Now his eyes being always fixed on the 
Talapicor,
 he whensoever he chanced to look on him could not chuse but do as the rest did, so that upon the conclusion of his Sermon all that heard him fell to laughing out-right: The Prioress her self, and all the 
Menigregues
 of her Monastery could not contain themselves in their serious humour, imagining that the faces which the 
Portugal
 made, and his actions, were so many effects of his devotion, and good mean∣ing; For if one had thought it to be otherwise, and that he had not done it out of derision, no question but he had been so chastised, as he should never have been able to mock again. When the Sermon was ended, the 
Talapicor
 returned to the 
Pagod
 where he lodged, being accompanied with the most honourable of all the Assembly, together with the Ambassadours, unto whom all the way as he went he ceased not to commend the devotion of the 
Portugal, Look,
 said he, 
there is not so much as these people, who live like beasts, and without the know∣ledge of our truth, but see well enough that there is nothing but what is godly in that I have preached
; whereunto all answered that it was as he said.


The day after we parted from the Town of 
Quanginau,
 and continued our voyage down the river for the space of fourteen dayes, during the which we saw a number of Towns, and great Boroughs on either side of us, at the end whereof we arrived at a City, called 
Lechuna,
 the chiefest of the Religion of these 
Gentiles,
 and such it may be, as 
Rome
 is amongst us. In this City was a very sumptuous Temple, where there were many remarkable edifices, in the which seven and twenty Kings or Emperours of this Monarchy of 
Tartaria
 have been buried. Their Tomb
 are in Chappels, wonderful rich, as well for the excellency of their workman∣ship, which is of an infinite cost, as for that they are within covered all over with plates of silver, wherein there are divers Idols of different forms made also of silver. On the North side a little part from the Temple was an inclosure worthy the observation, both for its extent, and the fortification thereof; within it were two hundred and fourscore Monasteries, as well of men, as of women, dedicated to certain Idols, and for the service of all these 
Pagodes,
 or Temples there are ordinarily, as we were assured, two and forty thousand Priests and 
Meni∣grepes,
 not comprising therein those which were lodged without the inclosure for the service of these false priests. We observed that in these two hundred and fourscore houses there was an infinite company of pillars of brass, and upon the top of each pillar are idols of the same


m
ttal guilt, besides thos
 which l
kewise were there all of silver: These Idols are the Statues of them, whom in their false Sect they hold for Saints, and of whom they recount such fop∣peries, as would make a man wonder to hear them; For they give unto each of them a Statue, more or less rich, and guilded, according to the degrees of vertue which they have exercised in this life: And this they do expresly, that the living may be incited to imitate them, to the end there may be as much done unto them when they are dead. In one of these Monasteries of the Invocation of 
Quiay Frigau,
 that is to say, 
The God of the moats of the Sun,
 was a sister of the Kings, the widdow of 
Rai
 Benan,
 Prince of 
Pafua,
 whom the death of her husband had made resolve to shut her self up in this Monastery, with six thousand women that had follow∣ed her thither, and she had taken upon her, as the most honourable Title she could think on, the name of, 
the broom of the House of God.
 The Ambassadors went to see this Lady, and kissed her feet as a Saint; she received them very courteously, and demanded many things of them with great discretion, whereunto they rendred such answers as became them; but coming to cast her eye upon us, who stood somewhat far off, and understanding that never any of our Na∣tion was seen in those parts before, she enquired of the Ambassadors of what Country we were? They answered, that we were come from a place at the other end of the world, where∣of no man there knew the name. At those words she stood much amazed, and causing us to come nearer, she questioned us about many things, whereof we gave her such an account as greatly contented her, and all that were present; In the mean time the Princess wondring at the answers, which one of ours made her, 
They speak,
 said she, 
like men that have been brought up amongst people, who have seen more of the world then we have.
 So after she had heard us talk a while of some matters, that sh
 had propounded unto us, she dismissed us with very good words, and caused an hundred 
Taeis
 to be given us in way of an alms. The Ambassadors ha∣ving taken their leave of her, continued their voyage down along the river, so that at the end of five days we arrived at a great Town, called 
Rendacal
m,
 scituated on the uttermost Confines of the Kingdom of 
Tartaria:
 Out of this place we entred upon the State of the 
Xinal
y∣grau,
 and therein we proceeded on four days together, until such time as we came to a Town, named 
Voulem,
 where the Ambassadors were very well entertained by the Lord of the Coun∣try, and abundantly furnished with all things necessary for their voyage, as also with Pilots to guide them in those rivers. From thence we pursued our course for seven days together, du∣ring the which we saw not any thing worthy of note, and at length came to a straight, called 
Caten
ur,
 whereinto the Pilots entred, as well to abridge their voyage, as to avoid the encoun∣ter of a famous Pirot, who had robbed those parts of most of their wealth. Through this straight running East, as also East, North-east; and somtimes East, and by East, according to the windings of the water we arrived at the Lake of 
Singapamor,
 called by them of the Coun∣try 
Cunebetea,
 which was, as our Pilots affirmed, six and thirty leagues in extent, where we saw so many several sorts of birds, that I am not able to recount them. Out of this Lake of 
Singapamor
 (which as an admirable Master-piece nature hath opened in the heart of this Coun∣try) do four very large and deep rivers proceed, whereof the first is named 
Ventrau,
 that run∣neth Eastward through all the Kingdoms of 
Sorna
▪ and 
Siam,
 entring into the Sea by the B
 of 
Chiamtabuu,
 in six and twenty d
grees; The second, 
Iangumaa,
 that going South, and South-east, traverseth also the greatest part of this Country, as likewise the Kingdom of 
Chi∣ammay,
 the 
Laos, Gueos,
 and another part of 
Danbambur,
 disimboking into the Sea by the Bar of 
Martabano,
 in the K
ngdom of 
Pegu,
 and there is in distance from the one to the other by the degrees of this Climate, above seven hundred leagues; The third, called 
Pam∣phileu,
 passeth in the same manner through all the Countries of 
Capimper
 and 
Sacotay,
 and turning above that second river runs quite through the Empire of 
Monginoco,
 and a part of 
Meleytay,
 and 
Sovady,
 rendring it self into the Sea by the Bar of 
Cosmim,
 near to 
Arraca
; The fourth, which in all likelihood is as great as the rest, is not known by any name, neither could the Ambassadors give us any reason for it: but it is probable, according to the opinion of divers, that it is 
Ganges
 in the Kingdom of 
Bengala,
 so that by all the discoveries which have been made in these Oriental Countries it is conceived, that there is not a greater river then it: Having crossed this Lake we continued our course for the space of seven dayes, till we came to a place named 
Caleyputa,
 the inhabitants whereof would by no means permit us to land, for the Ambassadors endeavouring to do so, they entertained us with such store of darts and stones from the shore, as we thought us not a little happy in that we could save our selves from the danger of it. After we had gotten out of this place, much vexed with the bad entreaty


we had received there, that which most afflicted us was to s
t our selves unprovided of things we were greatly in need of, but by the counsel of our Pilots we sailed by another river far larger then the straight which we had left, and that by the sp
ce of nine dayes, at the end whereof we arrived at a very good Town, called 
Tarem,
 the Lord of which was subject to the 
Cauchin,
 who received the Ambassadors with great Demonstrations of love, and furnished them abundant∣ly with all that they wanted. The next day we departed from thence about Sur-set, and continu∣ing our voyage down the river about seven days after we came to an Anchor in the Port of 
Xo∣lor,
 which is a very fair Town, where all the enammelled purcelain, which is carried to 
China,
 is made. There the Ambassadors stayed five days, during which time they caused their ships, that were very heavy, to be haled ashore by the force of boats: That done, and provision made of all things n
cessary, they went to see certain Mines, which the King of 
Cauchin
 hath in that place, from whence great store of silver is drawn, and the Ambassadors being desirous to know how much silver those Mines yielded every year, they were answer
d, that the whole amounted to some six thousand 
Picos,
 which make eight thousand Quintals of our weight.


After our departure from the Town of 
Xolor
 we still continued our course for five days toge∣ther down that great river, and saw all along that while a many of great Bo
oughs, and goodly Towns; for in that Climate the Land is better then other where, very well pe
pled, and full of riches; withall the rivers are frequented with a world of vessels, and the fields very well tilled, and replenished with abundance of wheat, rice, all kind of pulse, and exceeding great Sugar-canes, whereof there is marvellous store in all that Country. The Gentlemen there are ordinarily clothed in silk, and mounted on horses handsomly furnish
d; as for the women, they are exceeding white and fair. Now it was not without much labour, pain, and danger, that we passed those two Channels▪ as also the river of 
Ventinau,
 by reason of the Pyrats that usually are encountred there, nevertheless we at the length arrived at the Town of 
Manaqui∣leu,
 which is scituated at the foot of the Mountains of 
Chomay,
 upon the Frontiers of the two Kingdoms of 
China,
 and 
Cauchenchina,
 where the Ambassadors were both well received by the Governour thereof. The next morning departing from that place, they went and lay in a Town, named 
Quinancaxi,
 which appertained to an Aunt of the Kings, whom they went to visite; she gave them a very kind reception, and withall told them for news, that the King her Nephew, was newly returned from the War of the 
Tinocouhos,
 and wonderfu
ly well plea∣sed with his good success therein; whereunto she added many particularities, which they were glad to hear, especially when she assured them, that the King, after he had dismissed the for∣ces that he had carried out with him, was gone with a small Train to the City of 
Fanaugrem,
 where he intended to spend some time in hunting & fishing, & then to go & winter at 
Vsamgue
,
 the capital City of this Empire of 
Cauchim.
 When as they had consulted a while upon these news, they resolved to send their four vessels away to 
Vsamguee,
 and themselves to trav
l by land to 
Fanaugrem,
 where they understood the King was. This deliberation taken they put incontinently into execution & that by the advice of this Princess, who for that purpose caused them to be fur∣nished with horses for themselves, & their people, as also with eight Rhinocerots for the transpor∣tation of their baggage. They began their journy then about three days after, and having trav
lled fourscore & six leagues, in the space of thirteen days, and that with much toil & labour, by reason of certain mountains which they were to pass, that were of a long extent, and very rough and stony, in the end they arrived at a great lodging, called 
Taraudachit,
 seat
d upon the bank of a river; There they passed the night, and the next morning they parted thence for to go to a Town, named 
Lindau Panoo,
 where they were very well received by the Captain thereof, a kinsman of the Ambassadors of 
Cauchenchina
; who was come not about six days before from 
Fanaugrem,
 where the King remained still, being not more then fifteen leagues from that place. After that this Cap
ain hath told this Ambassador his kinsman some other news of the Court, and of the success of the war, he further advertised him that a Son in law of his was dead, for the love of whom his daughter the wife of the deceased, had cast her self into a pile of flaming fire, where with her husbands body she was consumed to ashes, at which all her kinred exceedingly rejoyced, for that by so generous an end she had given proof of what she had ever been. The Ambassador himself, her father, testified also no little content for the same, saying; 
Now it is, O my daughter, that I know assuredly thou art a Saint, and that thou servest thy husband in Heaven, wherefore I promise and swear to thee, that for so memorable an end, wherein thou hast given an infallible proof of the Royal blood whereof thou art descended, I will in memory of thy goodness 
uild thee such a magnificent and honourable house, as shall


make thee desi
 to come from were thou art, for to recreate thy self in it, in imitation of those blessed souls, which we hold have heretofore done the like.
 This said, he fel fla
 down with his face on the ground, and in that posture continued till the day following, when as he was visited by all the religious men of the place, who comforted him with full assurance that his daughter was a Saint, so that all of them granted him permission to erect a Statue of silver unto her. These speeches of the Priests greatly pleased the Ambassador, who very much acknowledged the same unto them, giving mony both to them, and to all the poor that were thereabout; At this place we spent nine days in celebrating the Funerals of the Defunct, and then departing we went the next day to a certain Monastery, called 
Latiparau,
 that is to say, 
The remedy of the poor,
 where the two Ambassadors remained three days in expectation of news from the King, whom they had already advertised of their arrival; Now his answer to them was, that they should go to a Town, named 
Agimpur,
 three leagues from the place where they were, and but one from 
Fanaugrem,
 whither he would send for them when time served.






CHAP. XLII. The reception of the 
Tartarian
 Ambassador by the King of 
Cauchenchina,
 with the said Kings going from thence to the City of 
Uzam∣guee,
 and his triumphal Entry thereinto.


THe King being advertised by his Ambassadour,
 that he brought another along with him from the King of 
Tartaria,
 sent for him not long after from 
Agimpur
 by the Brother of the Queen his wife, a very valiant and rich Prince: He was mounted on a Chariot with three wheels on a side, adorned all within with plates of silver, and drawn by four white Horses, whose furniture was all imbroidered with gold; This Chariot, which they of the Country call 
Piamber,
 was waited on by threescore footmen, half on the one side, and half on the other, clothed in green leather, with Scymiters by their sides, whose Scabberds were garnished with gold, and before them went twelve Ushers bearing their Maces on their shoulders; After the footmen followed certain others carrying Halberts trimmed with silver, in gowns and breeches of green and white silk, and with Scymiters by their sides; These fellows se
med very haughty and proud, so that by their outward behaviours, which in all their actions appeared to be like unto their surly dispositions, they rendred themselves somewhat terrible to others; Thirty pa∣ces after this Guard marched fourscore Elephants exceeding well furnished, with chairs and castles adorned with silver which they carried on their backs, and on their teeth their Panores, or warlick Defences, together with many little bells of the same mettal hanging about their necks; Before these Elephants, which were said to be the Kings Guard, rode a number of men at Arms in very good Equipage, and in the Vantgard of all this train went twelve Chari∣ots with Cymbals of silver, and covered with silk. When this Prince was come in this stately manner to the Ambassador of 
Tartaria,
 who attended him, and that they had performed all such compliments one to another, as are usual amongst them, the Prince gave the Ambassador the Chariot wherein he came thither, and mounting on a gallant Courser, he placed himself on the right hand of him, and the Kings Ambassadour on the left: In this pomp, and with the same order as before, as also with the sound of divers instruments of musick, they arrived at the first Court of the Kings house, where the 
Broquem,
 Captain of the Guard of the Pallace attended them, being accompanied with many Noble-men, besides a number on horsback, wh
h stood ranked in two files all along the Court. After they had with a new ceremony been com∣plemented withall, they went on foot to the Pallace-gate, where they encountred with an old man, above fourscore years of age, who was said to be the Kings Uncle; This same, being waited upon by divers great Lords, was no sooner perceived by the Ambassadors, but with a new kind of complement they kist the Scymiter that hung by his side, whereupon he returned them the like, together with an honour, which is of no little estimation amongst them, that was to hold his hand upon their heads, so long as they were prostrated on the ground before him. Then having caused the 
Tartar
 to rise, and to march even check by jole with him, he led him through a very long Hall to a door which was at the end thereof, where after he had knock∣ed three times, one demanded of him, who he was, and what he would have? whereunto an∣swering very soberly, 
Here is come,
 said he, 
out of an ancient custom of true amity, an Am∣bassador from the great
 Xinarau 
of
 Tartaria, 
to demand audience of
 P
echau Guimian, 
whom we all hold for the Lord of our heads.
 This answer being returned, the door was opened, into


which they presently entred; the Prince marched fore-most with the Ambassador of 
Tartaria,
 whom de held by the hand, and a little behind them went the other belonging to the King, with the Captain of the Guard, then followed all the company by three and three. Having gone through that room, where there was none but certain of the Guard on their knees with Halberds in their hands, we went into another room far more spacious and fair then the former, in the which we saw threescore and four Statues of brass, and nineteen of silver, all tied by the neck with iron chains; At so extraordinary a thing as this being much abashed, we demanded of one of their 
Grepes,
 or priests, the reason of it, who answered us. That the Statues which we beheld there were the fourscore and three gods of the 
Tinocouhos,
 whom the King in the late war had taken from them out of a Temple, where they were placed; for, added he, there is nothing in the world held in more esteem, or for a greater honour by the King, then to tri∣umph over the gods of his enemies, which he hath led away captive in despight of them▪ whereupon enquiring further of him, why they were set there, he replyed, that it was to have them in a readiness against the time that the King should make his entry in
o 
Vzamguee,
 whi∣ther he purposed shortly to go, for to make a shew of them so chained in his triumph as a spe∣cial mark of the victory he had gained. After we were at the end of this room, where the Idols were, we entred into another very great one, where we saw a number of very fair women, who were set all along, some imployed in curious needle-works, and others singing and playing upon certain instruments of musick, very pleasing to hear. Passing on we arrived at the door of the Kings Chamber, where we found six women, which were as it were porters there, and car∣ried silver Maces; In this room was the King, in the company of a few ancient men, and a great number of young women, to the tune of whose musick certain little girls sung very harmoni∣ously: The King was set on a Throne of eight 
teps high in the manner of an Altar, over the which was a cloth of State supported by pillars, all covered over with gold engraven; near to him were six little children upon their knees with Scepters in their hands, and a little further off stood a woman reasonably well in years, which fanned him ever and anon, and had a great Garland about her neck. This Prince was about some five and thirty years of age, and of a goodly presence: He had full eyes, auborn hair and beard, a grave look, and in all points the countenance of a generous King. As soon as the Ambassadors came into the room they prostra∣ted themselves three times on the ground, and at the third time the 
Kings
 lay still flat all along, whilest the 
Tartar
 passed on; who being come near to the first step of the Throne where the King sate, he said unto him with so loud a voice as all there present might hear him, 
O thou the Prop of all the Forces of the Earth, and the breath of the High God which hath created all things, may the Majestical Being of thy greatness prosper for ever and ever, so that thy Sandals may serve for hairs to the heads of Kings, making thee like to the bones and flesh of the great Prince of the silver mountains, by whose commandment I come to visit thee, as thou mayst perceive by this his Letter sealed with his Royal arms.
 When he had made an end of speaking thus, the 
Cauchin
 beholding him with a smiling countenance, 
May the Sun,
 an∣swered he, 
put a conformity between the desires of the King thy Master, and mine, and that by the sweet heat of his amorous rayes, to the end that the great amity, which is betwixt us, may endure and continue firm till the last noise the Sea shall make, that so the Lord may be eternally praised in his peace.
 At these words all the Lords that were in the room answered with one voice, 
So grant it may be O Lord Almighty, that givest a being to the night and the day.
 Then the same women, which played before, beginning their musick again, the King used no further speech, but only in kindly entertaining the Ambassador, 
I will,
 said he, 
read my brother
 Xinarau's 
Letter, and return an answer thereunto according to thy desire, to the end thou mayst go from me contented.
 The Ambassador made him no reply, but prostrated himself again at the foot of the Royal Throne, laying his head three times on the upp
rmost 
tep where the Kings feet stood. That done the Captain of the Guard took him by the hand, and led him to his house, where he lodged during the three days that he abode there, at the end whereof the King departed thence for to go to 
Vzamguee.


In regard of the Kings journy to 
Vzamguee,
 the 
Tartar
 Ambassador had audience but once by the way, in the which he moved him about our particular, according to the express com∣mandment he had received from his M
ster for that purpose, and it was said that the King heard him very willingly, answering, that he would do what he desired, and therefore willed him to put him in mind of it, when the time should serve, to the end we might not lose the opportunity of the season for our voyage. With this good news the Ambassador acquainted us


at his return, and demanded of us for this good office he had done us, that we would write him out some of those prayers which we made to our God, whose slave, he said, he i
finitely desired to be, in regard of the great exc
llencies which he had heard us deliver of him; This we not only granted him very readily, but also gave him infinite thanks besides for this his great favour shewed unto us, which we made more account of then all the benefits that had been propounded unto us by the King of 
Tartaria,
 if we would have continued in his service. Af∣ter the King was departed from the City of 
Fanaugrem,
 he proceeded on in his journy tra∣velling but only six leagues a day, by reason of the great number of persons that he carried a∣long with him; The first day he dined at a little Town, called 
Benau,
 where he stayed until the evening, and then went to lodge at a Monastery, named 
Pamgatur
; The next morning he departed from thence, and so with not above three thousand horse in his Train, he prosecu∣ted his journy for nine dayes together, passing by many goodly Towns, at least they seemed to be so, without permitting any reception to be made him by any of them; In this manner he arrived at the City of 
Lingator,
 sea
ed on a river of fresh water, which for the bredth and deepness of it is frequented with much shipping; There he abode five days, for that he found him∣self somewhat indisposod with the tediousness of the journy: From this place he departed be∣fore day, taking no greater company with him then thirty horse, and so withdrawing himself from the communication of so much people, as continually importuned him, he spent most part of the time as he went by the way in hawking and hunting; those of the Countryes by which he past providing game always ready for him. In this sort going on he slept most commonly amidst very thick woods in Tents pitched for him to that purpose. Being arrived at the river of 
Baguetor,
 he passed down the same in certain vessels, called 
Laulees
 and 
Iangoas,
 which were there ready for him, till he came to a Town, named 
Natibasoy,
 where about evening he land∣ed without any kind of pomp▪ The rest of his journy he made by land, so that at the end of thirteen dayes he arrived at 
Vzamguee,
 where he had a most magnificent reception. At his entry thereinto there marched before him, as it were in triumph, all the spoyls which he had taken in the wars, whereof the principal, and those which he made most reckoning of, were twelve Chariots laden with the Idols, of whom I have spoken heretofore, and whereof the forms were different, as they use to have them in their 
Pagod
.
 Of these Idols there were threescore and four of brass, which seemed to be Gyants, and nineteen of silver of the same Stature, for, as I hav
 delivered before, these people glory in nothing so 
uch, as to triumph over those idols, that so they may say, 
That in despight of their enemies he had made their gods his slaves
; Round about these twelve Chariots went divers Priests by three and three weeping, and bound with iron chains; After them followed forty other Chariots, each of them being drawn by two Rhinocerots, and full from the bottom to the top of an infinite company of Arms, and trayled Colours; In the tayl of them there were twenty more, carry∣ing each of them a very great Chest, barr'd with iron, and wherein, as we were told, was the treasure of the 
T
nocouhos
; In the same order marched all other things, which are used to be most esteemed of in such triumphant entries, as two hundred Elephants armed with Castles, and warlike 
Panoures,
 which are certain swords that are fastened to their teeth when they fight, and a great number of horses laden with sacks full of dead mens heads and bones; so that in this entry this King of 
Cauchin
 presented to the view of his people all that he had gained from his enemies in the battail he had given them. After we had been a full month in this City, during which time we had seen a world of stately shews, sports, and several sorts of rejoycings, accompanied with most costly feasts and banquets, set forth and made not onely by the greater persons, but by the common people also, the 
Tartar
 Ambassadour, that had brought us thither, moved the King again about our voyage, whereunto he gave us so gracious an ear, that he presently commanded we should be furnished with a Vessel for to carry us to the Coast of 
China,
 where we hoped to mee
 with some 
Portugal
 ship, that might transport us to 
Malaca,
 and from thence to the 
Indiaes,
 which accordingly was done, whereupon without further delay we pre∣pared all things necessary for our departure.








CHAP. XLIII. Our Departure from the City of 
Uzamguee,
 and our adventures till our arri∣vall at the Isle of 
Tanixumaa,
 which is the first Land of 
Jap∣pon
; with our going ashore there.


UPon the twelfth of 
Ianuary
 we departed from the City of 
Vzamguee,
 exceedingly re∣joycing at our escape from so many labours and crosses,
 which we before had sustained, and imbarqued our selves upon a river, that was above a league broad, down the which we went seven dayes together, beholding in the mean time on either side thereof many fair Towns, and goodly Boroughs, which by the outward appearance we believed were inhabited by very rich people, in regard of the sumptuousness of the buildings, not only of particular houses, but much more of the Temples, whose steeples were all covered over with gold, as likewise in reg
rd of the great number of Barques and Vessels, that were on this river, abundantly fraught with all sorts of provisions and merchandise. Now when we were come to a very fair Town, called 
Qua
geparun,
 containing some eighteen or twenty thousand fires, the 
Naude∣lum,
 who was he that conducted us by the express commandm
nt from the King, stayed there twelve dayes 
o trade in exchange of silver and pearl; whereby he confessed to us that he had gained fourteen for one, and that if he had been so advised as to have brought salt thither, he had doubled his mony above thirty times: we were assured that in this Town the King had yearly out of the silver Min
s above fifteen hundred 
Picos,
 which are forty thousand Quintals of our weight, besides the huge revenue, that he drew out of many other different things: This Town hath no other fortification then a weak brick wall, eight foot high, and a shallow ditch some thirty foot broad; The inhabitants are weak and una
med, having neither Artille∣ry, nor any thing for their defence, so that five hundred resolute souldiers might easily take it. We parted from this place on 
Tuesday
 morning, and continued our course thirteen dayes, at the end whereof we got to the Port of 
Sanchan,
 in the Kingdom of 
China.
 Now because there was no shipping of 
Malaca
 there, for they were gone from thence nine dayes before, we went seven leagues further to another Port, named 
Lampacau,
 where we found two Juncks of 
Malaya,
 one of 
Patana,
 and another of 
Lugor
; And whereas it is the quality of us 
Portugals
 to abound in our own sence, and to be obstinate in our opinions, there arose amongst us eight so great a contrariety of judgment about a thing, wherein nothing was so neces
ary for us, as to maintain our selves in peace and unity, that we were even upon the point of killing one another; But because the matter would be too shamefull to recount in the man∣ner as it past, I will say no more but that the 
Necoda
 of the 
Lorche,
 which had brought us thither from 
Vzamguee,
 am
zed at this so great barbarousness of ours, seperated himself from us in such displeasure, that he would not charge himself either with our messages or letters, saying, that he had rather the King should command his head to be cut off, then to offend God in car
ying with him any thing whatsoever that belonged to us. Thus different as we were in opinions, and in very bad terms amongst our selves, we lingered above nine dayes in this lit
le Island, during which time the three Juncks departed without vouchsafing to take us in, so that we were constrained to remain in these solitud
s, exposed to many great dangers, out of which I did not think that ever we could have escaped, if God had not been extraordinarily merciful unto us; for having been there seventeen dayes in great misery and want; it hapened that a Pyrat, named 
Samipocheca,
 arrived in this place, who having been defeated, went fly∣ing from the Fleet of 
Aytao
 of 
Chincheo,
 that of eight and twenty Sayl, which this Pyrat had, had t
ken six and twenty of them from him, so that he had with much ado escaped with those only two remaining, wherein the most part of his men were hurt, for which cause he was cons
rained to stay there seven dayes to have them cured: Now the present necessity in∣forcing us to take some course whatsoever it were, we were glad to agree for to serve under him until such time as we might meet with some good opportunity to get unto 
Malaca.
 Those twenty dayes ended, wherein yet there was no manner of reconciliation between us, but still continuing in discord we imbarqued our selves with this Pyrat, namely three in the Junk where he himself was, and five in the other, whereof he had made a Nephew of his Captain. Having left this Island with an intent to sail unto a Port, called 
Lailoo,
 some seven leagues from 
Chincheo,
 we continued our voyage with a good wind all along the Coast of 
Lamau
 for the 
 of nine dayes, until that one mo
ning when we were near to the river of salt, which is


about five leagues from 
Chabaquea,
 it was our ill fortune to be assailed by a Pirate, who with seven great Juncks fell to fighting with us from six in the morning till ten of the clock before noon, in which conflict we were so entertained with sho
, and pots full of ar
fic
al fire, that at last th
re were three S
il burnt, to wit, two of the Pirats, and one of ours, which was the Junck wherein the five 
Portugals
 were, whom we could by no means succour, for that then most of our men were hurt; But at length towards night being well refreshed by the af∣ternoons gale, it pleased our Lord that we escaped out of this Pirats hands. In this ill equipage wherein we were we continued our course for three dayes together, at the end whereof we were invironed by so great and impetuous a Tempest, that the same night in which it seized us we lost the Coast, and because the violence of the Storm would never suffer us after to re∣cover it again, we were forced to make with full Sail towards the Islands of the 
Lequios,
 where the Pirate, with whom we went, was well known, both to the King, and those of the Country; with this resolution we set our selves to 
ail through the Archipelage of these Islands, where not withstanding we could not make land, as well for that we wanted a Pilot to steer the vessel, ours being slain in the last fight, as also because the wind and tide was a∣gainst us; Amidst so m
ny crosses we beat up and down with labour enough from one 
homb to another for three and twenty dayes together, at the end whereof it pleased God that we discovered land, whereunto approaching to see if we could descry any appearance of a Port, or good anchorage, we perceived on the South-coast near to the Horizon of the Sea a great fire, which perswaded us that there we might peradventure find some Borough, where we might furn
sh our selves with fresh water, whereof we had very great need. So we went and rode just before the Island in seventy fathom, and presently we beheld two 
Almedias
 come towards us from the Land with six men in them, who being come close to the side of our Junck, and having complemented with us according to their manner, demanded of us from whence we c
me? whereunto having answered, that we came from 
China
 with merchandise intending to trade in this place if we might be suffered, one of the six replyed; That the 
Nautaquim,
 Lord of that Island, called 
Tanixumaa,
 would very willingly permit it upon payment of such customs as are usual in 
Iapan,
 which is, co
inued he, this great Country that you see here be∣fore you: At these news, and many other things, which they told us, we were exceeding glad, so that after they had shewed us the Port, we weighed anchor, and went and put our selves un∣der the lee-shoar of a cr
ek, which was on the South-side, and where stood a great Town, named 
Miay-gimaa,
 from whence there came instantly abord of us divers 
Paraoos
 with re∣freshments, which we bought.


We had not been two hours in this Creek of 
Miaygimaa,
 when as the 
Nautaquim,
 Prince of this Island of 
Tanixumaa
 came directly to our Junck, attended by divers Gentlemen and Merchants, who had brought with them many Chests full of silver Ingots, therewith to barter for our commodities; so after ordinary complemen
s past on either side, and that we had given our word for his easiest coming aboard of us; he no sooner perceived us three 
Portugals,
 but he demanded what people we were, saying, that by our beards and faces we could not be 
Chi∣neses
: Hereunto the Pirate answer
d, That we were of a Country called 
Malaca,
 whither many years before we were come from another Lend, named 
Portugal,
 which was at the further end of the world; At these words the 
Nautaquim
 remained much amazed, and turning himself to his followers; 
Let me not live,
 said he unto them, 
if these men here be not the
 Chenchicogis, 
of whom it is written in our books, that flying on the top of the waters they shall from thence subdue the inhabitants of the earth, where God hath created the riches of the world, wherefore it will be a good fortune for us if they come into our Country as good friends.
 Thereupon having called a woman of 
Lequia,
 whom he had brought to serve as an interpre∣ter between him and the 
Chinese,
 Captain of the Junck; 
Ask the Necoda,
 said he unto h
r, 
where he met with these men, and upon what occasion he hath brought them hither with him into our Country of
 Jappon? The Captain thereunto replied, That we were honest men and Merchants, and that having found us at 
Lampacau,
 where we had been cast away, he had out of charity taken us in, as he used to do unto all such as he met withall in the like case, to the end that God might out of his gracious goodness be thereby moved to deliver him from the danger of such violent Tempests, as commonly they that sail on the Sea are subject to perish in. This saying of the Pirate seemed so reasonable to the 
Nautaquim,
 that he presently came abord of us, and because those of his Train were very many, he commanded that none but such 
 he named should enter in. After he had seen all the commodities in the Junck, he sate


him down in a Chair upon the Deck, and began to question us about certain things which he desired to know, to the which we answered him in such sort, as we thought would be most agreeable to his humour, so that he seemed 
o be exceedingly satisfied therewith▪ In this man∣ner he entertained us a good while together, making it apparent by his d
mands that he was a man very curious, and much inclined to hear of novelties, and rare things. That done he took his leave of us, and the 
Necoda,
 little regarding the rest, saying, 
Come and see me at my house to morrow, and for a present bring me an ample relation of the strange things of that great world through which you have travelled, as also of the Countries that you have seen, and withall remember to tell me how they are called, for I swear unto you that I would far more willingly buy this commodity then any that you can sell me.
 This said, he returned to Land, and the next morning as soon as it was day he sent us to our Junck a great 
Parao,
 full of divers sorts of refreshments, as Reasons, Pears, Melons, and other kinds of f
uits of that Country; In exchange of this present the 
Necoda
 returned him by the same messenger divers rich pieces of stuff, together with certain knacks and rarities of 
China,
 and withall sent him word, that as soon as his Junck should be at anchor, and out of danger of the weather, he would come and wait on him ashore, and bring him some patterns of the commodities which we had to sell; as indeed the next mor
ing he went on land, and ca
ried us three along with him, as also some ten or eleven of the chiefest of the 
Chineses
 of his Company, to the end that at this first sight he might settle a good opinion of himself in this people for the better satisfaction o
 that va∣nity whereunto they are naturally inclined; we went then to the 
Nautaquims
 house, where we were very well entertained, and the 
Necoda
 having given him a rich present, shewed him the patterns of all the commodities he had, wherewith he rested so contented, that he sent presently for the principal Merchants of the place, with whom 
he 
Necoda
 having agreed up∣on a price for his commodities, it was resolved that the next day they should be transported from the Junck unto a certain house, which was appointed for the 
Necoda
 and his people to remain in till such time as he should set sail for 
China:
 After all this was concluded, the 
Nau∣taquim
 fell again to questioning of us about many several matters, whereunto we rendred him such answers as might rather fit his humour, then agree with the truth indeed, which yet we did not observe but in some certain demands that he made us, where we thought it necessary to make use of certain particulars altogether fained by us, that so we might not derogate from the great opinion he had conceived of our Country. The first thing he propounded was, how he had learned from the 
Chineses
 and 
Lequios,
 that 
Portugal
 was far richer, and of a larger ex∣tent, then the whole Empire of 
China,
 which we confirmed unto him. The second, how he had likewise been assured, that our King had upon the Sea conquered the greatest part of the world, which also we averred to be so; The third, that our King was so rich in gold and silver, as it was held for most certain, that he had above two thouand houses full of it even to the very tops; but thereunto we answered, that we could not truly say the number of the houses, because the Kingdom of 
Portugal
 was so spacious, so abounding with treasure, and so populous, a
 it was impossible to specifie the same. So after the 
Nautaquim
 had entertained us above two hours with such and the like discourse, he turned him to those of his Train, and said, 
Assuredly not one of those Kings, which at this present we know to be on the earth, is to be esteemed happy, if he be not the vassal of so great a Monarch as the Emperour of this people here.
 Whereupon having dismissed the 
Necoda
 and his Company, he intreated us to passe that night on shore with him, for to satisfie the extream desire that he had to be inform∣ed from us of many things of the world, whereunto he was exceedingly carried by his own inclination; withall he told us, that the next day he would assigne us a lodging next to his own Pallace, which wa
 in the most commodious place of the Town, and for that in∣stant he sent us to lie at a very rich Merchants house, who entertained us very bountifully that night.






CHAP. XLIV. The great honour which the 
Nautaquim,
 Lord of the Isle, did to one of us for having seen him shoot with an Harquebuse; and his sending me to the King of 
Bungo
; and that which passed till my arrival at his Court.


THe next day the 
Chinese Necoda
 disimbarqued all his commodities, as the 
Nautaquim
 had enjoyned him, and put them into sure rooms, which were given him for that purpose,


and in three dayes he sold them all, as well for that he had not many, as because his good for∣tune was such that the Country was at that time utterly unfurnished thereof, by which means this Pirate profited so much, that by this Sale he wholly recovered himself of the losse of the six & twenty Saile which the 
Chinese
 Pirate had taken from him; for they gave him any price he de∣manded, so that he confessed unto us, that of the value of some five and twenty hundred 
Taeis
 which he might have in goods, he made above thirty thousand. Now as for us three 
Portugals,
 having nothing to sell, we imployed our time either in fishing, hunting, or seeing the Temples of these 
Gentiles,
 which were very sumptuous and rich, whereinto the 
Bonzes,
 who are their priests, received us very courteously, for indeed it is the custome of th
se of 
Iappon
 to be ex∣ceeding kind and courteous. Thus we having little to do, one of us, called 
Diego Zeimoto,
 went many times a shooting for his pleasure in an 
Harquebuse
 that he h
d, wherein he was very expert, so that going one day by chance to a certain M
rsh, where there was great store of fowl, he killed at that time about six and twenty wild Ducks; In the mean time these peo∣ple beholding this manner of shooting, which they had never seen before, were much amazed at it, insomuch that it came to the notice of the 
Nautaquim,
 who was at that instant riding of horses, and not knowing what to think of this novelty sent presently for 
Zeimoto,
 just as he was shooting in the Marsh, but when he saw him come with his 
Harquebuse
 on his shoulder and two 
Chineses
 with him carrying the fowl, he wasso mightily taken with the matter, as he could not sufficiently admire it: for whereas they had never seen any Gun before in that Coun∣try, they could not comprehend what it might be, so that for want of understanding the se∣cret of the powder, they all concluded that of necessity it must be some Sorcery; Thereupon 
Zeimoto
 seeing them so astonished, and the 
Nautaquim
 so contented, made three shoots before them, whereof the effect was such▪ that he kill
d one Kite, and two Turtle Doves; In a word then, and not to lose time, by endeering the matter with much Speech, I will say no more, but that the 
Nautaquim
 caused 
Zeimoto
 to get up on the horses croupper behind him, and so accompanied with a great croud of people, and four Hushers, who with Battouns headed with iron went before him, crying a
l along the streets, 
Know all men, that the
 Nautaquim, 
Prince of this Island of
 Tanixuma
, 
and Lord of our heads, enjoyns and expresly commands▪ That all persons whatsoever, which inhabit the Land that lies between the two Seas, do honour thi
 Chenchicogim, 
of the further end of the world, for even at this present and for hereafter he makes him his kinsman, in such manner as the
 Jacharons 
are, who sit next his Person; and whosoever shall not do so willingly, he shall be sure to lose his head.
 Whereunto all the people answered with a great noise; 
We will do so for ever.
 In this pomp 
Zeimoto
 being come to the Pallace gate, the 
Nautaquim
 alighted from his horse, and taking him by the hand, whilest we two followed on foot a prety way after, he led him into his Court, where he made him sit with him at his own table, and to honour him the more, he would needs have him lodg there that night, shewing many other favours to him afterwards, and to us also for his sake. Now 
Zeimoto
 conceiving, that he could not better acknowledge the honour which the 
Nautaquim
 did him, then by giving him his 
Harquebuse,
 which he thought would be a most accep∣t
ble present unto him; on a day when he came home from shooting, he 
endred it unto him with a number of Pigeons and Turtle-doves, which he received very kindly, as a thing of great value, assuring him that he esteemed of it more, then of all the treasures of 
China,
 and giving him withall in recompence thereof a thousand 
Taeis
 in silver, he desired him to teach him how to make the powder, saying, that without that the 
Harquebuse
 would be of no use to him, as being but a piece of unprofitable iron, which 
Zeimoto
 promised him to do, and according∣ly performed the same. Now the 
Nautaquim
 taking pleasure in nothing so much as shooting in this 
Harquebuse,
 and his Subjects perceiving that they could not content him better in any thing, then in this, wherewith he was so much delighted, they took a pattern of the said 
Har∣quebuse
 to make others by it, & the effect thereof was such, that before our departure (whichwas five months & an half after) there was six hundred of them made in the Country; nay I will say more, that afterwards, namely▪ the l
st time that the Vice-roy 
Don Alphonso de Noro
ha
 sent me thither with a present to the K
ng of 
Bungo,
 which happened in the year 1556. those of 
Iap∣pon
 affirmed, that in the City of 
Fucheo,
 being the chief of that Kingdom, there were above thirty thousand; whereat finding my self to be much amazed, for that it seemed impossible unto me, that this invention should multiply in such sort, certain Merchants of good credit as∣sured me that in the whole Island of 
Iappon
 there were above three hundred thousand 
Har∣quebuses,
 and that they alone had transported of them in the way of trade to the Country of


the 
Lequios,
 at 
ix several times, to the number of five and twenty hundred; so that by the means of that one, which 
Zeimoto
 presented to the 
Nautaquim
 in acknowledgment of the honour and good offices that he had done h
m, as I have declared be
ore, the Country was filled with such abundance of them, as at this day there is not so small an h
mlet but 
ath an hundred at the least; for as for Cities and great Towns they have them by thousands, whereby one may perceive what the inclination of this people is, and how much they are na∣turally addicted to the wars, wherein they take more delight, then any other Nation that we know.


We had been now three and twenty dayes in the Island of 
Tanixumaa,
 where very conten∣tedly we past away the time, either in fishing, fowling, or hunting, whereunto these people of 
Iappon
 are much addicted, when as a vessel belonging to the King of 
Bungo
 a 
 in that Port, in the which were divers men of quality, and certain Merchants, who
as 
oon as 
h
y were land∣ed went to wait upon the 
Nautaquim
 with their presents, according to the usual▪ 
 of the Country: Amongst them there was an ancient man, very well att
nd
d, and unto whom the rest carried much respect, that falling on his knees before the 
Nautaquim,
 presented him with a letter, and a rich Court
lass garnished with gold, together with a box full of ve
iloes, which the 
Nautaquim
 received with a great deal of ceremony: Then having spent some time with him in asking of certain questions, he read the letter to himself, and thereupon having remained a prety while as it were in suspenc
, and dismissed the bearer thereof from his pre∣sence, with an express charge unto those about him to see him honourably entertained, he cal∣led us unto him, and commanded the Truchman that was there by, to use these words unto us, 
My good Friends, I intreat you that you will hear this letter read, which is sent me from my Lord and Vncle, and then I will let you know what I desire of you
; So giving it to a Treasurer of his, he commanded him to read it, which instantly he did, and these were the contents of it, 
Thou right eye of my face,
 Hyascarangoxo, Nautaquim 
of
 Tanixuma, 
I
 Or∣gemdoo, 
who am your Father in the true love of my bowels, as he from whom you have taken the name and being of your Person, King of
 Bungo 
and
 Facataa, 
Lord of the great House of
 Fiancima, Tosa, 
and
 Bandou, 
Chief Soveraign of the petty Kings of the Islands of
 Go∣to, 
and
 Xamanaxequa, 
I give you to understand, my Son, by the words of my mouth, which are spoken of your person, that some dayes since certain men, coming from your Country, have assured me, that you have in your Town three
 Chenchicogims 
of the other end of the world, men that accommodate themselves very well with those of
 Japan, 
are clothed in silk, and u∣sually wear swords by their sides, not like Merchants that use traffique, but in the quality of persons that make profession of honour, and which by that only mean pretend to render their names immortal; Moreover I have heard for a truth, that these same men have entertain∣ed you at large with all matters of the whole Vniverse, and have affirmed unto you on their faith that there is another world greater then ours, inhabited with black and tawny people, of whom they have told you things most incredible to our judgment, for which cause I infinite∣ly desire you, as if you were my Son, that by
 Fiangeandono, 
whom I have dispatched from hence to visit my daughter, you will send me one of those three strangers, which I am told you have in your house; the rather for that you know my long in
isposition, accompanied with so much pain and grief, hath great need of some diversion: Now if it should happen that they would not be willing thereunto, you may then assure them, as well on your own faith, as on mine, that I will not fail to return them back in all safety; whereupon, like a good Son that desires to please his Father, so order the matter that I may rejoyce my self in the sight if them, and so have my desire accomplished. What I have further to say unto you, my Ambassadour
 Fingeandono 
shall acquaint you with, by whom I pray you liberally import to me the good news of your person, and that of my daughter, seeing she is as you know the apple of my right eye, whereof the sight is all the joy of my face. From the house of
 Fucheo 
the seventh Ma∣moque of the Moon.
 After that the 
Nautaquim
 had heard this letter read; The King of 
Bun∣go,
 said he unto us, is my Lord, and my 
Vncle,
 the brother of my mother, and above all he is my good Father, for I call him by that name, because he is so to my wife, which is the rea∣son that he loves me no less then his own children, wherefore I count my self exceedingly bound unto him, and do so much desire to please him, that I could now find in my heart to give the best part of my Estate for to be transformed into one of you, as well for to go unto him, as to give him the content of seeing you, which out of the knowledge I have of his dis∣position, I am assured he will value more then all the treasures of 
China
; Now having thus


acquainted you with his desire, I earnestly intreat you to render your selves conformable there∣unto, and that one of you two will take the pains to go to 
Bungo,
 there to see that King whom I hold for my Father, and my Lord, for as for this other to whom I have given the name and being of a kinsman, I am not willing to part with him till he hath taught me to shoot as well as himself. Hereupon 
Christovano Borralho,
 and I, greatly satisfied with the 
Nautaquim's
 courtesie, answered him, that we kiss
d his Highness hands for the exceeding honour he did us in vouchsafing to make use of us, and seeing it was his pleasure so to do, that he should for that effect make choice of which of us two he thought best, and he should not faile to be suddainly ready for the voyage. At these words standing a while in musing to himself, he look∣ed on me, and said, I am resolved to send him there, because he seems not so solemn, but is of a more lively humou
, wherewith those of 
Iapon
 are infinitely delighted, and may thereby cheer up the sick man, whereas the too serious gravity of this other, said he, turning him to 
Borralho,
 though very commendable for more important matters, would serve but to enter∣tain his melancholy in stead of diverting it. Thereupon falling into merry discourse and jest∣ing with those about him, whereunto the people of 
Iapon
 are much inclined, the 
Fingeandono
 arrived, unto whom he presented me, with a special and particular recommendation touching the assurance of my person, wherewith I was not only well satisfied, but had my mind also cleared from certain doubts, which out of the little knowledge I had of these peoples humours, had formerly troubled me. This done, the 
Nautaquim
 commanded two hundred 
Taeis
 to be given me for the expence of my voyage, whereupon the 
Fingeandono
 and I imbarqued our selves in a vessel with O
rs, called a Funce, and in one night having traversed all this Island of 
Tanixumaa,
 the next morning we c
st anchor in an Haven, named 
Hiamangoo,
 from whence we went to a good Town, called 
Quanquixumaa,
 and so continuing our course afore the wind, with a very fair gale, we arrived the day ensuing at a very sweet place, named 
Tanora,
 whence the morrow after we went to 
Minato,
 and so forward to a Fortress of the King of 
Bungoes,
 cal
ed 
Osquy,
 where the 
Fingeandono
 stayed some time, by reason that the Captain of the place (who was his Brother in law) found himself much indisposed in his health. There we left the vessel in which we came, and so went by land directly to the City, where being arrived about noon, the 
Fingeandono,
 because it was not a time fit to wait upon the King, went to his own house. After dinner having rested a little, and shifted himself into a better habit, he mounted on horsback, and with certain of his friends rode to the Court, carrying me along with him, where the King was no sooner advertised of his coming, but he sent a Son of his a∣bout nine or ten years of age to receive him, who accompanied with a number of Noble-men, richly apparelled, and his Ushers with their Maces going before him, took the 
Fingeandono
 by the hand, and beholding him with a smiling countenance; 
May thy entrance,
 said he unto him, 
into this house of the King my Lord, bring thee as much content and honour as thy chil∣dren deserve, and are worthy, being thine, to sit at table with me in the solemn Feasts.
 At these words the 
Fingeandono
 prostrating himself on the ground; 
My Lord,
 answered he, 
I most humbly beseech them that are in Heaven above, which have taught thee to be so cour∣teous and so good, either to answer for me, or to give me a tongue so voluble, as may express my thankfulness in terms agreeable to thy ears for the great honour thou art pleased to do me at this present, for in doing otherwise I should offend no less, then those ingratefull wretches, which inhabit the lowest pit of the profound and obscure house of smoak:
 This said, he offered to kiss the Curtelass which the young Prince wore by his side, which he would by no means permit, but taking him by the hand, he led him to the King his Father, unto whom, lying sick in his bed, he delivered a letter from the 
Nautaquim,
 which after he had read, he commanded him to call me in from the next room where I staid attending, which instantly he did, and pre∣sented me to the King, who entertaining me very graciously. 
Thy arrival,
 said he unto me, 
in this my Country is no less pleasing to me, then the rain which falls from Heaven is profita∣ble to our fields that are sowed with Rice.
 Finding my self somewhat perplexed with the no∣velty of these terms, and this manner of salutation, I made him no answer for the instant, which made the King say to the Lords that were about him, I 
magine that this str
nger is daunted with seeing so much company here, for that peradventure he hath not been accustomed unto it, wherefore I hold it fit to remit him unto some other time, when as he may be better acquaint∣ed, and not be so abashed at the sight of people. Upon this Speech of the Kings I answered by my Truchm
n, that whereas his Highness had said that I was daunted, I confessed that it was true, not in regard of so many folks as were about me, because I had seen far many more,


but that my amazement proceeded from the consideration that I was now before th
 feet of so great a King, which was sufficient to make me mute an hundred thous
nd years, if I could live so long▪ I added further, that those which were present there seemed to me but men, as I my self was, but as for his Highness, that God had given him such great advantages above all, as it was his pleasure that he should be Lord, and that others should be meer servants, yea, and that I my self was but a silly Ant, in comparison of his greatness, so that his Majesty could not see me in regard of my smalness, nor I in respect thereof be able to answer unto his demands. All the Assistants made such account of this mad answer of mine, as clapping their hands by way of astonishment, they said unto the King, Mark I beseech your Highness how he speaks to purpose; verily it seems that this man is not a Merchant, which meddles with base things as buying and selling, but rather a 
Bonzo,
 that offers sacrifices for the people, or if not so, sure∣ly he is some great Captain that hath a long time scoured the Seas. Truly, said the King, I am of the same opinion, now that I see him so resolute; but let every man be silent, because I purpose that none shall speak to him but my self alone, for I assure you that I take so much de∣light in hearing him talk, that at this instant I feel no pain. At those words the Queen and her daughters, which were set by him, were not a little glad, and falling on their knees, with their hands li
ed up to Heaven, they thanked God for this his great goodness unto him.






CHAP. XLV. The great mishap that befel the King of 
Bungo's
 Son, with the ex∣tream danger that I was in for the same; and what followed thereupon.


A Little after the King caused me to approach unto his bed, where he lay sick of the Gout, when I was near him,
 
I pree thee,
 said he unto me, 
be not unwilling to stay here by me, for it does me much good to look on thee, and talk with thee; thou shalt also oblige me to let me know whether in thy Country, which is at the further end of the world, thou hast not learn'd any remedy for this disease wherewith I am tormented, or for the lack of appetite, which hath continued with me now almost these two months without eating any thing to speak of.
 Hereunto I answered, that I made no profession of physick, for that I had never learnt that art, but that in the Junck, wherein I came from 
China,
 there was a certain wood, which in∣fused in water healed far greater sicknesses then that whereof he complained, and that if he took of it, it would assuredly help him; To hear of this he was very glad, insomuch that trans∣ported with an extream desire to be healed, he sent away for it in all haste to 
Tanixumaa,
 where the Junck lay, and having used of it thirty dayes together, he perfectly recovered of this dis∣ease, which had held him so for two years together, as he was not able to stir from one place to another. Now during the time that I remained with much content in this City of 
Fuchea,
 being some twenty dayes, I wanted not occasions to entertain my self withall; for sometimes I was imployed in answering the questions, which the King, Queen, Princes, and Lords asked of me, wherein I easily satisfied them, for that the matters they demanded of me, were of ve∣ry little consequence. Other-whiles I bestowed my selfe in beholding their Solemnities, the Temples, where they offered up their prayers, their warlike Exercises, their naval Fleets, as also their fishing and hunting, wherein they greatly delight, especially in the high flying of Falcons, and Vultures. Oftentimes I past away the time with my 
Harquebuse
 in killing of Turtles, and Quailes, whereof there is great abundance in the Country. In the mean season this new manner of shooting seemed no less marvellous and strange to the inhabitants of this Land, then to them of 
Tanixumaa,
 so that beholding a thing which they had n
ver seen before, they made more reckoning of it then I am able to express, which was the cause that the Kings se∣cond Son, named 
Arichaudono,
 of the age of sixteen or seventeen years, and whom the King wonderfully loved, intreated me one day to teach him to shoot, but I put him off, by saying that there needed a far longer time for it then he imagined, wherewith not well pleased, he complained to his Father of me, who to content the Prince desired me to give him a couple of charges for the satisfying of his mind; whereunto I answered, that I would give him as many as his Highness would be pleased to command me. Now because he was that day to dine with his Father, the matter was referred to the afternoon, howbeit then too there was nothing done, for th
t he waited on his Mother to a Village adjoyning, whither they came from all parts on pilgrimage by reason of a certain feast, which was celebrated there for the health of


the King: The next day this young Prince came with only two young Gentlemen waiting on him to my lodging, where finding me asleep on a Mat, and my 
Harquebuse
 hanging on a hook by, he would not wake me till he had shot off a couple of charges, intending, as he told me af∣terwards him
elf, that these two shoots should not be comprised in them I had promised him: H
ving then commanded one of the young Gentlemen, that attended him, to go softly and kindle the Match, he took down the 
Harquebuse
 from the place where it hung, and going to charge it, as he had seen me do, not knowing how much powder he should put in, he charged the Piece almost two spans deep, then putting in the bullet, he set himself with it to shoot at an Orange tree that was not far off, but fire being given, it was his ill hap that the 
Harquebuse
 brake into three pieces, and gave him two hurts, by one of the which his right hand thumb was in a manner lost, instantly whereupon the Prince fell down as one dead, which the two Gentlemen perceiving, they ran away towards the Court, crying along in the streets that the strangers 
Harquebuse
 had killed the Prince; At these sad news the people flocked in all haste with weapons and great cries to the house where I was; Now God knows whether I was not a little amazed when coming to awake I saw this tumult, as also the young Prince lying along upon the floor by me weltring in his own blood without stirring either hand or foot; All that I could do then was to imbrace him in my arms, so besides my self, as I knew not where I was. In the mean time, behold the King comes in a Chair carried upon four mens shoulders, and so sad and pale, as he seemed more dead then alive; after him followed the Queen on foot leaning upon two Ladies, with her two daughters, and a many of women all weeping. As soon as they were entred into the Chamber, and beheld the young Prince extended on the ground, as if he had been dead, imbraced in my arms, and both of us wallowing in blood, they all concluded that I had killed him, so that two of the Company drawing out their Scymi∣tars, would have slain me; which the King perceiving, 
Stay, stay,
 cried he, 
let us know first how the matter goes, for I fear it comes further off, and that this fellow here hath been cor∣rupted by some of those Traitors kinred, whom I caused to be last executed.
 Thereupon com∣manding the two young Gentlemen to be called which had accompanied the Prince, his Son, thither, he questioned them very exactly; Their answer was, that my 
Harquebuse
 with the inchantments in it had killed him: This deposition served but to incense the Assistants the more, who in a rage addressing themselves to the King; What need, Sir, have you to hear more, cried they? here is but too much, let him be put to a cruel death: Therewith they sent in all hast for the 
Iarabuca,
 who was my Interpreter, to them; now for that upon the arrival of this disaster he was out of extream fear fled away, they brought him straightly bound to the King, but before they fell to examining of him, they mightily threatned him, in case he did not con∣fess the truth; whereunto he answered trembling, and with tears in his eyes, that he would reveal all that he knew. In the mean time being on my knees, with my hands bound, a 
Bonzo,
 that was President of their Justice, having his arms bared up to his shoulders, and a Poynard in his hand dipped in the blood of the young Prince, said thus unto me, 
I conjure thee, thou Son of some Divel, and culpable of the same crime, for which they are damned that inhabit in the house of smoak, where they lye buried in the obscure and deep pit of the Center of the earth, that thou confess unto me with a voice so loud, that every one may hear thee, for what cause thou hast with these sorceries and inchantments killed this young innocent, whom we hold for the hairs, and principal ornament of our heads.
 To this demand I knew not what to answer upon the suddain, for that I was so far besides my self, as if one had taken away my life, I believe I should not have felt it; which the President perceiving, and beholding me with a terrible countenance, 
Seest thou not,
 continued he, 
that if thou doest not answer to the que∣stions I ask thee, that thou mayst hold thy self for condemned to a death of blood, of fire, of water, and of the blasts of the wind; for thou shalt be dismembred into the air, like the fea∣thers of dead fowl, which the wind carries from one place to another, separated from the body with which they were joyned whilest they lived.
 This said, he gave me a great kick with his foo
 for to rowse up my spirits, and cried out again, 
Speak, confess who they are that have corrupted thee? What sum of mony have they given thee? how are they called? and where are they at this present?
 At these words being somewhat come again to my self, I answered him, that God knew my innocence, and that I took him for witness thereof▪ But he not contented with what he had done began to menace me more then before, and set before my eyes an in∣finite of torments and terrible things; wherein a long time being spent, it ple
sed God at length that the young Prince came to himself, who no sooner saw the King his Father, as also his Mo∣ther


and Sisters dissolved into tears, but that he desired them not to weep, and that if he chan∣ced to die, they would attribute his death to none but himself, who was the only cause thereof, conjuring them moreover by the blood, wherein they beheld him weltring, to cause me to be unbound without all delay, if they desired not to make him die anew: The King much ama∣zed with this language, commanded the Manacles to be taken off which they had put upon me; whereupon came in four 
Bonzoes
 to apply remedies unto him, but when they saw in what manner he was wounded, & that his thumb hung in a sort but by the skin, they were so troubled a
 it, as they knew not what to do; which the poor Prince observing, Away, away, said he, send hence these divels, and let others come that have more heart to judg of my hurt, since it hath pleased God to send it me; Therewith the four 
Bonzoes
 were sent away, and other four came in their stead, who likewise wanted the courage to dress him, which the King perceiving was so much troubled as he knew not what to do, howbeit he resolved at length to be advised therein by them that were about him, who counselled him to send for a 
Bonzo,
 called 
Teix
andono,
 a man of great reputation amongst them, and that lived then at the City of 
Facataa,
 some seventy leagues from that place; but the wounded Prince not able to brook these delayes; 
I kn
w not,
 answered he, 
what you mean by this counsel which you give my Father, seeing me in the deplorable estate wherein I am, for whereas I ought to have been dr
st already, you would have me stay for an old rotten man, who cannot be here until one hath made a journy of an hundred and forty leagues, both in going and coming, so that it must be a month at least before he can arrive, wherefore speak no more of it, but if you desire to do me a pleasure, free this Stranger a little from the fear you have put him in, and clear the room of all this throng, he that you believe hath hurt me will help me as he may, for I had rather die under the hands of this poor wretch, that hath wept so much for me, then be touched by the
 Bonzo 
of
 Faca
a
, 
who at the age he is of, of ninety and two years, can see no further then his nose.






CHAP. XLVI. My curing the young Prince of 
Bungo
; with my return to 
Tanixu
a,
 and imbarquing there for 
Liampoo
; and also that which hapened to us on land, after the shipwrack we suffered by the way.


THe King of 
Bungo
 being extreamly grieved to see the disaster of his Son, turned himself to me, and beholding me with a very gentle countenance; 
Stranger,
 said he unto me, 
try I pray thee if thou canst assist my Son in this peril of his life, for I sware unto thee if thou canst do it, I will make no less esteem of thee, then of him himself, and will give thee what∣soever thou wilt demand of me:
 Hereunto I answered the King, that I desired his Majesty to command all those people away, because the coyle that they kept confounded me, and that then I would see whether his hurts were dangerous, for if I found that I was able to cure them, I would do it most willingly: Presently the King willed every one to be gone, whereupon ap∣proaching unto the Prince, I perceived that he had but two hurts; one on the top of his fore∣head, which was no great matter, and the other on his right hand thumb, that was almost cut off: So that our Lord inspiring me, as it were, with new courage, I besought the King not to be grieved, for I hoped in les
 then a month to render him his Son perfectly recovered. Having comfor
ed him in this manner, I began to prepare my self for the dressing of the Prince, but in the mean time the King was very much reprehended by the 
Bon
oes,
 who told him, that his Son would assuredly die that night, and therefore it was better for him to put me to death presently, then to suffer me to kill the Prince out-right, adding further, that if it should hap∣pen to prove so, as it was very likely, it would not only be a great scandal unto him, but also much alienate his peoples affections from him. To these speeches of the 
Bonzoes
 the King replyed, that he thought they had reason for that they said, and therefore he desired them to let him know how he should govern himself in this extremity; You must, said they, stay the com∣ing of the 
Bonzo Teix
andono,
 and never think of any other course, for we assure you in re∣gard he is the holiest man living he will no sooner lay his hand on him but he will heal him straight, as he hath healed many oth
rs in our 
ight: As the King was even resolved to follow the cursed counsel of th
se servants of the Divel, the Prince complained that his wounds pained 
 in such sort a
 he was no
 
ble to indure it, and therefore prayed any handsome re∣medy


might▪ be instantly applied to them, whereupon the King, much distracted between the opinion of the 
Bonzoes,
 and the danger that his Son was in of his life, together with the ex∣tream pain that he suffered, desired those about him to advice him what he should resolve on, in that exigent; not one of them but was of the mind, that it was far more expedient to have the Prince drest out of hand, then to stay the time which the 
Bonzoes
 spake of. This counsel being approved of the King, he came again to me, and making very much of me, he promised me mighty matters if I could recover his Son; I answered him with tears in my eyes, that by the help of God I would do it, and that he himself should be witness of my care therein: So recommending my self to God, and taking a good heart unto me, for I saw there was no other way to save my life, but that, I prepared all things necessary to perform the cure. Now because the hurt of the right hand thumb was most dangerous, I begun with that, and give it seven stitches, whereas peradventure if a Chirurgion had drest him, he would have given it fewer; as for that of the forehead, I gave it but four, in regard it was much slighter then the other; that done, I applyed to them tow wet in the whites of eggs, and so bound them up very close, as I had seen others done in the 
Indiaes:
 Five days after I cut the stitches, and continued dres∣sing him as before, until that at the end of twenty days it plea
d God he was throughly cured, without any other inconvenience remaining to him, then a little weakness in his thumb; For this cause after that time the K
ng and all his Lords did me much honour; the Queen also, and the Princesses her daughters presented me with a great many Sutes of silks, and the chiefest of the Court with Cymitars, and other things, b
sides all which the King gave me six hundred 
Taeis,
 so that after this sort I received in recompence of this my cure above fifteen hundred Duckets, that I carried with me from this place. After things were past in this manner, being advertised by letters from my two Companions at 
Tanixumaa,
 that the 
Chinese
 Pirate, with whom we came thither, was preparing for his return to 
China,
 I besought the King of 
Bungo
 to give me leave to go back, which he readily granted me, and with much acknowledgement of the curing of his Son he willed a Funce to be made ready for me, furnished with all things necessary, wherein commanded a man of quality, that was attended by twenty of the Kings ser∣vants, with whom I departed one 
Saturday
 morning from the City of 
Fucheo,
 and the 
Friday
 following about Sun-set I arrived at 
Tanixumaa,
 where I found my two Comrades, who received me with much joy. Here we continued fifteen days longer, till such time as the Junck was quite ready, and then we set Sail for 
Liampoo,
 which is a Sea-port of the Kingdom of 
China,
 whereof I have spoken at large heretofore, and where at that time the 
Portugals
 tra∣ded. Having continued our voyage with a prosperous wind, it pleased God that we arrived safe at our desired Port, where it is not to be believed how much we were welcome by the Inha∣bitants of the place. Now because it seemed strange unto them, that we had voluntarily sub∣mitted our selves in that sort to the bad faith of the 
Chineses,
 they asked of us from what Coun∣try we came, and where it was that we imbarqued our selves with them? whereupon we freely declared unto them the truth of all, and gave them an account of our Voyage, as also of the new Land of 
Iapon
 that we had discovered, the great abundance of silver that was there, and the exceeding profit that might be made by carrying the commodities of 
China
 thither; wherewith they were wonderfully contented, and instantly ordained a general Procession to be made by way of thanksgiving unto God for so great a blessing: But withall covetousness be∣gan in such sort to seize upon the hearts of most of the Inhabitants, every one striving to be the foremost in this voyage, as they came to divide themselves into troops, and to make several parties, so that even with weapons in their hands they went thronging to buy up the commo∣dities of that Country, which made the 
Chinese
 Merchants, upon the sight of our unruly a∣varice, set so high a price upon their wares, that whereas a 
Pico
 of silk was at first not worth forty 
Taeis,
 it rose before the end of eight dayes to an hundred and threescore, at which rate too the Merchants seemed to part with it very willingly. Thus by the means of this unreasona∣ble desire of gain nine Juncks, which were then in the Port, were in fifteen days ready to set Sail, though to say the truth they were all in such disorder, and so unprovided, that some amongst them had no other Pilots then the Masters themselves, who had but little underst
anding in Na∣vigation. In this bad order they departed all in company together one 
Sunday
 morning, not∣withstanding that they had the wind, the season, the sea, and all things else contrary, not suffer∣ing themselves to be guided by reason, or the consideration of the dangers which they are subject unto that commit themselves to this Element; For they were so obstinate and so blinded as they would not represent any inconvenience to themselves, and I my self was so infortunate,


that I went along with them in one of their Vessels. In this manner they sailed all that same day as it were groping between the Islands and the firm Land, but about midnight there arose in the dark so mighty a Storm, accompanied with such horrible rain, that suffering themselves to be carried at the mercy of the wind, they ran upon the Sands of 
Gotom,
 whereof the nine Juncks two only, as it were by miracle, were saved, so that the other seven were lost out of which not so much as one man escaped. This loss was thought to amount unto above three hundred thousand Crowns in commodities, besides the greater, which was of six hundred persons that left their lives there, whereof there were an hundred and forty 
Portugals,
 all rich men, and of quality. As for the other two Juncks in one of the which by good hap I was, joyning in con∣
ort together, they followed the course they had begun, until such time as they arrived at the Island of the 
Lequios
; There we were beaten with so furious a North-east wind, which in
reased by the conjunction of the new Moon, that our vessels were seperated in such sort as we could never see one another again: After dinner the wind turned to West North-west, whereby the Sea was so moved, and the waves rose with such fury, as it was a most dreadful thing to behold; whereupon our Captain, named 
Gaspar Melo,
 a very couragious Gentle∣man, seeing the greatest part of the prow of the Junck to be half open, and that there was ni
e spans water in the bottom of her, he resolved by the advice of all the Officers to cut down the two Masts, whose weight was the cause of the opening of the Junck, howbeit this could not be done with such care, but that the main Mast in its 
all overwhelmed fourteen persons, whereof five were 
Portugals,
 which were all crushed in pieces, a spectacle so lamentable to behold that it exceedingly grieved every mans heart. Now forasmuch as the Storm increased more and more, we were constrained to let our selves be carried at the mercy of the Sea even until Sun-set, at which time the Junck made an end of splitting quite asunder, whereupon our Captain and every one of us, seeing the deplorable estate whereunto our sins had reduced us, fell to preparing our selves for our last end. Having in this sort past away half of the night, a∣bout the first quarter of the watch we struck upon a Shel
, where at the first blow the Junck broke all to pieces, the event whereof was so lamentable that threescore and two men left their lives there, some of which were drowned, and the rest squeezed to death under the Keel of the Vessel.


There were but four and twenty of us, besides some women, that escaped from this misera∣ble Shipwrack; Now as soon as it was day we perceived by the sight of the Island of fire, and of the Mountain of 
Taydacano,
 that the Land where we were was the great 
Lequio,
 where∣upon wi
h tears in our eyes recommending our selves 
o God, and marching up to the brest in water, we swam over certain d
eper places, and so went five dayes together in great pain, not finding in all that time any thing to eat but the slime which the Sea cast up on the mud; How∣beit a
 length by the mercy of God we got to land, where going into the woods we sustained our selves with a certain herb like unto Sorrel, whereof there was great plenty along these Coasts, which was all the nourishment that we had for three days space that we were there, until at last we were espyed by a boy that was keeping of cattel, who as soon as he had dis∣covered us, ran to the next Village, which was some quarter of a league off, for to give notice of it to the inhabitants there; who presently thereupon with the sound of Drums and Cor∣nets assembled all their Neighbours round about them, so that within three or four hours they w
re a Company of about two hundred men, whereof there were fourteen on horsback. As soon as they descried us a far off, they made dir
ctly towards us, whereupon our Captain, see∣ing the wretched estate whereunto we were reduced, fell down upon his knees, and began to encourage us with many good words, desi
ing us to remember, 
That nothing in the world could fall out without the Providence of God, and therefore like good Christians we should as∣sure our selves it was his pleasure, that this should be the last hour of our lives, so that we could not do better then to conform our selves to his holy will, and with patience imbrace this pitiful end, which came from his Almighty hand, craving pardon from the botto
 of our hearts for all our sins past; and that for himself he had such confidence in his mercy, that we duly repenting us according as we were obliged by his holy Commandments, he would not forget us in this our extremity.
 Having made us this Exhortation, and lifted up his hands to Heaven, he cried out three times together with abundance of tears, 
Lord have mercy upon us,
 which words were reiterated by all the rest, but with such sighs and groans of true Christians, and so full of devotion and zeal, that I may truly say, the thing which then we feared least was that which naturally is most abhorr'd. As we were in this grievous agony six horsmen came unto


us, and beholding us in a manner naked, without arms, on the ground upon ou
 knees, and two women lying as it were dead before us, they were so moved with compassion, that four of them turning back to the footmen, which were coming on, made them all to stay, not suf∣fering them to approach us; Howbeit a little after they came to us again, bringing with them six footmen, which seemed to b
 some of the Officers of Justice, who by the commandment of the horsmen tied us, three and three together, and with some shew of pity bid us, 
That we should not be afraid, for that the King of the
 Lequios 
was a man greatly fearing God, and very well inclined to the poor, upon whom he continually bestowed much alms:
 Moreover they swore unto us by their Law, that we should receive no hurt, yet could we not by any means be perswaded thereunto, for at that time we had so little hope of life, that if persons worthy of credit had assured us of it we should hardly have believed them, much les
 those cru∣el and detestable 
Gentiles,
 who neither had Religion, nor any knowledg of God: When they had tied us together, the footmen placed us in the midst of them, whilest those on horsback coursed up and down on every side, as though they had gone the round; now we no sooner began to march, but that the three wom
n, which were with us more dead then alive, fell down on the place in a swoon, partly through their natural weakness, and partly through the fear they were in, so that the footmen were forced to take them up in their arms, and each one to carry them in his turn, howbeit for all that before we could arrive at the place whither they were leading us, two of the three died, and were left in the Wood for a prey to the Wolves, Foxes, and other Wild-beasts, whereof we saw great plenty thereabout. At length after we had marched a good while we arrived about Sun-set at a great Borough where we were pre∣sently put into a 
Pagode
 or Temple of theirs, which was invironed with very high walls, and yet for the more security they placed an hundred men about it to guard us all that night, who with their cries and beating of their Drums, kept us waking till the next morning, for the noise thereof, and the consideration of our present misery, would not suffer us to take any rest.






CHAP. XLVII. The carrying of us to the Town of 
Pungor,
 and presenting us to the 
Broquen,
 Governour of the Kingdom; with that which ensued upon it.


AS soon as it was morning the next day the chiefest women of the Town came to visit us,
 and in way of charity brought us a quantity of Rice, boyled fish, and certain fruits of the Country for us to eat, she wing themselves to be much moved with our misery, as well by their words, as by their tears; and seeing the extream need we stood in of clothes, for that we had little, or scarce any upon our bodies, six amongst them, which for that purpose were cho∣sen by the rest, went a begging for us through all the streets of the Town, saying; 
O good folks, good folks, which make profession of the Law of the Lord, whose property it is, if one may say so, to shew himself pro
igal towards us by communicating his benefits unto us, come forth of your houses to behold the flesh of our flesh, which the wrath of the hand of the Lord Almighty hath touched, and succour them with your alms, to the end the mercy of his greatness may not abandon you, as it hath done them.
 These words were of such force to stir up their charity, as within less then an hour we were abundantly furnished with all things necessary for us: But about three of the clock in the afternoon came a Post to this Borough with letters to the 
Xivalon
 of the place, that is the Captain thereof, who had no sooner read them, but he caused two Drums to beat an Alarum, at the sound whereof all the people ass
mbled together in 
 great 
Pagode
 or Temple, where out of a window he spake unto them, and gave them to un∣derstand that the 
Broquen,
 the Governour of the Kingdom, had commanded us to be brought to the Town of 
Pung
r,
 which was some seven leagues from thence. The most part of them at first refused to obey this command, so that there was great contention about it, in such sort that nothing could be agreed upon all that day, by means whereof the Post was returned to the 
Broquen
 with a relation of that which had past, and so we were left there till eight of the clock the next morning, at which time two 
Peretanda
s,
 who are as it were Judges, came ac∣companied with divers Burgesses, and some twenty horsmen unto us, and after many writing
 drawn up by certain publique Registers concerning us, they sent us away the same day to a Town, called 
Gond
xilau,
 where we were put into a dungeon, made in the fashion of a Ci
ter
,


remaining there till the next day up to the middle in filthy standing water, that was full of ho
sleeches, which made us all gore blood▪ As soon as it was morning they carried us towards 
Pungor,
 where we arrived about four of the clock in the afternoon, now because it was late the 
Broquen
 would not see us till the day following, and then bound together as we were, he caused us to be led through 
our of the principal streets of the City, where the people thronging from all parts to behold us, seemed much to pity our misery, chiefly the women; In this manner we were brought to a Court of Justice, where there was a great many of Officers, amongst whom we continued a long time waiting for the coming of the Judge, at length upon the thrice striking of a clock, a door that stood just against the place where we attended, was presently opened, by which we entred into a very spacious Hall, where the Governour sat upon a Throne all adorned with rich tapestry, and under a Cloth of State of silver tinsel; round about him were six Ushers upon their knees, carrying Maces on their shoulders, and all along the room stood a Guard with Halberds in their hands, damasked with gold and silver; All the rest of the Hall was full of people of div
rs Nations, the like whereof we had not seen in those Countries. After silence was imposed on 
l
 that were present, we prostrated our selves before the Throne of the 
Broquen,
 and weeping said unto him, 
Sir, we beseech thee by that God which hath made Heaven and Earth, and on whose power we all of us depend, to take pity of our miserable fortune, for since the waves of the Sea hath brought us to the lamentable estate, and wretched condition wherein thou seest us, we most humbly desire thee that thy goodness will be pleased to put us into a better before the King, to the end he may be incited to have com∣passion on us poor strangers, that are destitute of all succour and favour of the world, for so it hath pleased God to have it in regard of our sins.
 At these words the 
Broquen
 looking on them that were abou
 him, and shaking his head, 
What think you of these people,
 said he unto them, 
verily here is one of them that speaks of God as a man which hath the knowledge of his truth, so that we may conclude without all doubt, that there is another great world whereof we have no notice, wherefore since these men know the Source of all good, it is reasonable that we should proceed with them according to the request they have made unto us with so many tears.
 Whereupon turning him towards us, who all this while lay prostrated on the ground, with our hands lifted up, as if we were worshipping God; 
I must confess,
 said he unto us, 
that I have so great compassion of your misery, and am so grieved to see you so poor as you are, as I assure you in all verity, that I had rather, if it were the good pleasure of the King, be like unto one of you, as wretched as you are, then to see my self in this office, which questi∣onless was conferred on me for my sins: wherefore I would be loth to offend you, but the duty of my place obliging me thereunto, I must desire you as friends not to be troubled, if I ask you some questions, which are necessary for the good of Iustice; and as touching your deliverance, if God affords me life, be assured you shall have it, for I am most confident that the King my Masters inclination to the poor is truly Royal.
 These promises exceedingly contented us, and to thank him for them we had recourse to our tears, which we shed in abundance, for our hearts were so full, as we could not possibly bring forth a word to answer him.


The 
Broquen
 caused four Registers, the two 
Peretandaos
 of the Court aforesaid, and some eleven or twelve other Officers of Justice, to come immediately before him; Then rising on his feet, he began with a severe countenance, and a naked Scymitar in his hand, to exa∣mine us, speaking so loud as every one might hear him; 
I Pinaquila,
 said he, Broquen 
of this City of
 Pungor 
by the good pleasure of him whom we all hold for the hairs of our heads, King of the Nation of the
 Lequios, 
and of all this Country of the two Seas, where the fresh and salt waters divide the Mynes of his treasures, do advise and command you by the rigour and force of my words, to tell me clearly, and with a clean heart, what peo∣ple, and of what Nation you are, as also where your Country is, and how it is called?
 To this demand we answered according to the truth, that we were 
Portugals,
 Natives of 
Ma∣laca. It is well,
 added he, 
but what adventure brought you into this Country, and whither did you intend to go when as you suffered shipwrack?
 We replied thereunto, That being Mer∣chants, who make no other profession then of traffique, we had imbarqued our selves in the Kingdom of 
China,
 for to go from the Port of 
Liampoo
 to 
Tanixumaa,
 where we had for∣merly been, but that arriving near to the Island of Fire we were surprized by a mighty tem∣pest, so that not able to oppose the violence of the Sea, we were constrained to lie at the mer∣cy of the winds for the space of three dayes and three nights together; and that at the end thereof our Junck ran her self upon the Sands of 
Taydican,
 where, of ninety and two persons


that we were, threescore and eight were drowned, no more escaping of that great number but these four and twenty of us which stood before him all covered over with wounds, that were saved as it were by miracle through the sp
cial grace of God. At these words standing a little in suspence, 
By what tytle,
 replied he, 
did you possess so much riches, and so many pieces of silk which were in your Iunck, and that were worth above an hundred
 Taeis, 
as I am in∣formed? Truly, it is not credible that you could get so much wealth any other way then by theeving, which being a great offence against God, is a thing proper to the servants of the Ser∣pent of the house of smoak, and not to those of the house of the Sun, where they that are just, and of a pure heart, do bathe themselves amidst perfumes in the great Pool of the most Almighty:
 We answered hereunto, that assuredly we were Merchants, and not thieves, as he was pleased to charge us, because the God in whom we believed forbad us by his holy Law, either to kill or to rob. Hereupon the 
Broquen
 beholding them which were about him; 
Doubtless,
 continu∣ed he, 
if that which these men affirm be true, we may well say that they are like unto us, and that their God is much better then all others, as me thinks may be inferred from the truth of their words.
 Then turning himself towards us, he examined us as before with a stern coun∣tenance, and the behaviour of a Judg that exerciseth his charge with integrity: In this exami∣nation he bestowed almost an hour, and in the last place said unto us; 
I would fain know why those of your Country, when as heretofore they took
 Malaca, 
carried thereunto by extream avarice, did kill our men with so little pity? which is still made good by divers widdows who in these Countries have survived their husbands.
 To this we made answer, how that hap∣ned rather by the chance of war, then out of any desire of robbing, which we had never used to do in any place wheresoever we came; 
What is this you say,
 replied he, 
can you maintain that he that conquers, doth not rob? that he which useth force, doth not kill? that he which shews himself covetous, is not a thief? that which he oppresseth, performs not the action of a Ty∣rant? and lo, all these are the goodly qualities which are given to you, and whereof you are said to be culpable, and that by the affirmation of verity it self: whence it is manifest, that Gods abandoning of you, and permitting the waves of the Sea to swallow you up, is rather a pure 
ffect of his justice, then any injury that is done to you.
 This said he arose out of the Chair where he was set, and commanded the Officers to return us back to prison, promising to give us audience according to the grace which it should please the King to shew us, and the compas∣sion that he would have of us; wherewith we were very much afflicted, and in great dispair of our lives. The next day the King was advertised, as well of our imprisonment, as of the 
nswers we had made, by the 
Broquens
 letters, wherein he had intermingled something in fa∣vour of us, by means whereof he did not cause us to be executed, as it was said he had resolved to have done upon certain false reports which the 
Chineses
 had made to him of us. In this pri∣son we continued very near two months with much pain, never hearing in all that time so much as any word spoken of that first proceeding against us. Now forasmuch as the King desi∣red to be more amply informed concerning us by other more particular inquiries then the letters of the 
Broquen,
 he sen
 a certain man unto us, named 
Randinaa,
 for to come secretly to the prison where we were, to the end that under the pretext of being a Merchant
 stranger, he might exactly learn the cause of ou
 arrival in that place, and that upon the report he should make thereof to the King, he might proceed to do that which should seem just unto him. Howbeit though this was closely carried, yet was it our good fortune to be advertised of it the day before his coming to us, so that we had time enough to arm our selves outwardly with all the appa∣rances of misery and affliction we could possibly devise, and counterfeit; which expedient next to Gods assistance stood us in more stead then any other we could have thought upon. This man then came one morning well accompanied to the prison, and after he had viewed us all one after another, he called to him the 
Iurabaca,
 who served to interpret for him; 
Ask these men,
 said he, 
what is the cause that the mighty hand of God hath so abandoned them, as to permit their lives through an effect of his Divine Iustice to be subjected to the judgement of men, without having so much remorse of conscience, as to set before their eyes the t
rrour of that dreadful vision, which doth use to fright the soul at the last gasp of a mans life, for it is to be believed that they, who have done that which I observe in them, have heaped sin up∣on sin.
 We answered him thereunto, that he had a great deal of reason for what he spake, in regard it was very probable that the sins of men were the principal cause of their sufferings, howbeit that God, as the Soveraign Lord of all, did nevertheless in that case accustome to take pity of them, with sobs and tears continually called upon him, and that it was also


his bounty wherein all our hope was placed, to the end he would be pleased to inspire the Kings heart with a will to do as justice according to our works, for that we were poor stran∣gers destitute of all favour, a thing whereof men make most account in this wo
ld. 
That which you say,
 replyed he, 
is very well, provided that your hearts be conformable to your words, and then you are not to be found fault with, for it is most certain, that he, which enammels all that our eyes do behold for the beautifying 
f the night, and that hath likewise made what∣soever the day doth sh
w us for the sustenance of man, who are but worms of the earth, will not refuse you your deliverance, seeing you beg of him with so many sighs and tears; where∣fore I intreat you not to dissemble with me, but truly to confess what I desire to understand from you at this present; namely, what people you are? of what Nation? in what part of the world you live in, and how the Kingdom of your King is named? whereunto you shall adde the cause that hath brought you hither, and to what place you were going with so much riches, which the Sea hath cast up on the shoars of
 Taydican, 
whereat all the Inhabitants have so wondred, as they were perswaded that you were Masters of all the Trade of
 China. To these, and other like questions, which this Spie asked of us, we returned him such answers, as was most behoofull for us to give him, wherewith he was so contented, that making us many offers, he promised to move the King for our deliverance. In the mean time he spake not a word to us of the occasion for which he was sent, but still fained himself to be a stranger, and a Merchant like one of us. Howbeit when he went away, he carefully recommended us to the Jaylour, and willed him not to let us want any thing, promising to satisfie him for it to his content; In acknowledgment whereof we gave him many humble thanks with tears in our eyes, whereby he was greatly moved to compassion, so that he gave us a Bracelet of gold, that weighed thirty Duckats, and also six sacks of Rice, and withall desired us to excuse h
m for the smalness of the present he had given us. After this he returned back to the King, unto whom he rendred an account of all that had past with us, assuring him that we were not such as the 
Chineses
 had made him to believe, and offered for proof thereof to pawn his life an hun∣dred times, if need were, which was the cause that the King abated much of the suspicion wherewithall they had inveighed him about our manner of lying. But as he was resolving to give order for our enlargement, as well upon the report of this man, as in regard of the letter which the 
Broquen
 had written him, there arrived at the Port a 
Chinese
 Pyrat with four Juncks, unto whom the King gave his Country for a place of Retreat, upon condition that he should share with him the moity of the booty which he should take, by means whereof he was in great favour with the King, and all them of the Country. Now forasmuch as our sins would have it, that this Pyrate was one of the greatest enemies the 
Portugals
 had at that time, by reason of a fight that we had had with him a little before in the Port of 
Lamau,
 where 
La
∣cerote Pareyra,
 born at 
Lyma,
 commanded in chief, and in which he had two Juncks burnt, and three hundred of his men slain; this dog was no sooner advertised of our imprisonment, and how the King was resolved to free us, but that he imbroyled the business in a strange man∣ner, and told him so many lies of us, that he lacked but little of perswading him, that ere long we would be the cause of the loss of his Kingdom: For he assured him that it was our custom to play the Spies in a Count
y under pretence of trading, and then to make our selves Masters of it like robbers as we were, putting all to the sword that we met withall in it; which wrought so powerfully with the King, that he revoked all that he had resolved to have done, and chan∣ging his mind he ordained that in regard of what had been told him, we should each of us be dismembred into four quarters, and the same set up in the publique streets, that all the world might know we had deserved to be used so.






CHAP. XLVIII. The King of the 
Lequios
 sending a cruel Sentence against us to the 
Broquen
 of the Town, where we were prisoners, to the end he should put it in execution; and that which hapened unto us, till our arrival at 
Liampoo.


AFter that this 
ruel Sentence of death had been pronounced against us, the King sent a 
Peretanda
 to the 
Broquen
 of the City, where we were prisoners, to the end that with∣in four dayes it should be executed upon our persons. This 
Peretanda
 departed presently a∣way, and upon his arrival at the City, he went and lodged himself at a certain widows house,


that was his sister, a very honourable woman, and from whom we had received much alms; This same man having secretly imparted unto her the cause of his coming▪ & how he was not to return but with a good Certificate unto the King of the performance of this ex
cu
ion, she went strait-way, and acquainted a Niece of hers with it, who was daughter to the 
Broquen
 of the City, in whose house lay a 
Portugal
 woman, the wife of a Pilot who was a prisoner with us, and two children of hers, d
siring then to comfort her, she discovered unto her all that she had learnt, which she had no sooner understood, but that extreamly afflicted at so sad a news, she fell in∣stantly to the ground in a swoon, wherein she continued a long time speechless; At length being come to her self again, she fell to tearing of her cheeks so cruelly with her nails, that all her face was nothing but gore bloud, which, for that it was a new and extraordinary thing in that Country, was incontinently spread abroad throughout all the City, insomuch that all the women being frighted with it, the most part of them went forth with their children in their hands to the 
Broquens
 daughters house, where th
 
Portugal
 woman was, more ready to die, then to answer to the questions one or another of them asked her, & being exceedingly moved with pi
y to b
hold her, so lamentably taking on, drowned all in tears and blood, which passion & grief had drawn from her, they all resolved to write a letter in favour of us to the old Queen, the Kings Mother, as accordingly they did, and the contents of it were these; 
Sacred pearl, congealed in the greatest shell of the profoundest depth of the waters; thou Star, enammelled with rayes of fire; thou tress of golden hair, intermixed with a Garland of roses, whose feet are so re∣plenished with greatness that they rest upon the top of our heads, like to rubies enchaced in gold, whereof the price is inestimable: We that are no other then the least and poorest of thy creatures, the daughters and kinswomen of the
 Broquens 
wife, together with the rest of thy captives that have set their hands to these presents, do make our moan unto thee concern∣ing a thing which we have seen with our eyes, that is a poor woman, a stranger, who seems to have neither flesh nor face, drowned as she is in a pool of blood, beating her brest with such cruelty, as would stir up even wild-beasts in the Forrest to compassion, and strike fear into e∣very one; Moreover we have heard her cry so loud, as we assure thee by the Law of all ve∣rity, that if God should lend an ear unto her, as we believe he will, because he doth usually assist the poor, that are despised of the world, it is to be feared that some great chastisement of famine and fire will fall upon us; wherefore the extream apprehension, which we have of these things, causeth us to joyn all our voyces together, like little children hungry after their mothers, and humbly beseech thee, that casting thine eyes upon the soul of the deceased King, thy Husbband, for whose sake we beg this of thee, thou wilt vouchsafe to make thy selfe like the Saints, setting aside all respect of the flesh; For the more thou shalt do for God, the great∣er thou shalt be in his house, where we verily believe thou shalt find the King thy Husband, singing to the sound of the harp of those children, that have never sinned, the song of this cha∣ritable alms, which for Gods sake, and his, we pray thee to obtaine of the King, thy Son: And this we hope shall be a means to move him, both for the love of God, and of thy self, as also by the force of our tears and cries, to take pity on these strangers, and freely pardon them all the faults, wherewith they are unjustly charged, since, as thou knowest, they are not the Saints of Heaven that use to accuse us, but men, that are infamous, and of an evil life, to whom we are forbidden to lend an ear.
 Conchenilau, 
the fair Gentlewoman, and well born, but above all more honourable then all those of this City, for having been bred up in thy ser∣vice 
y her Aunt, shall represent unto thee on the behalf of God, and the King thy Husband, for the love of whom we prefer this request unto thee, all the other particularities of this af∣fair, as also the grievous tears and groa
s of these poor folks, and the extream sadness▪ and fear of all the inhabitants of this place, who most earnestly beseech thee to present their hum∣ble Suit to the King, thy Son, cherished above all others, on whom may it please the Lord of all good to bestow so much thereof, as with that, which only shall be resting to him, all these people, that inhabit the Land, and Islands of the Sea, may be replenished.
 This letter, sign∣ed by above an hundred of the chiefest women of the City, was sent by a Gentlewoman, the daughter of the 
Mandarin Comanilau,
 Governour of the Island of 
Bancaa,
 which is on the the South-side of that of the 
Lequios,
 and good luck would have it that this young Da∣mosel came thither, but three dayes before the Sentence of death was to be put into execution upon us, in the company of two of her brothers, and ten or eleven Gentl
men, her kinsmen.


This Gentlewoman being arrived at the City of 
Bintor,
 where the King and the Queen his


Mother were, she went to the house of an Aunt of hers, the chief Lady of honour to the Queen, and that infinitely loved her, to whom she rendred an account of the occasion of her coming, and withall represented unto her how much it imported both her honour and cre∣dit, seeing all the rest had made choice of her for this affair, that her Highness should grant her the grace which all of them together made such suit unto her for: The Lady having given her Neece the best welcome that possibly she could by all demonstrations of her affection, she said unto her, that since she perceived this business so much concerned her honour, she would labour by all the means she could that she should not return discontented, and frustrated of the hope of her request, the rather for that the thing was just in it self, and so earnestly sought for by so many great Ladies; whereupon the Gentlewoman, having given her very humble thanks, besought her to dispatch the business with as much speed as might be, in regard we had but two dayes more to live, according to the tenour of our Sentence, after which time all help would be in vain. 
Since it is so,
 answered her Aunt, 
and that for want of requisite diligence the poor wretches are like to suffer the punishment, whereunto the King hath destined them upon the
 Chineses 
report, I will go and lay my self at the Queens feet, as soon as she awakes, which will be within an hour at the furthest, to the end that this novelty, not having done so these six years by reason of my indisposition, may draw her to demand of me the cause of it.
 Having said this, she left her Neece behind her, and went and opened a Gallery door, whereof she alone had the key, and so entred into the Chamber where the Queen lay; A while after the Queen awaking, found her lying at her feet, whereupon she said unto her; 
How now Nhay Meicamur,
 (for so was this Lady called) 
what is it hath brought you hither at this time? certainly it is some extraordinary matter. Madam,
 answered she, 
that which your Majesty sayes, is very true, and I assure my self that it will seem no less strange in your ears, then it was to me to see my Neece arrive here lately with so much sorrow and grief, that I am not a∣ble to express it in words.
 The Queen having then commanded her to call her in, she presently fetched her; The first thing that this young Gentlewoman did, was to prostrate her self be∣fore the Queen, who was in her bed, and so told her weeping the occasion that brought her thither, and therewithall presented her with the letter, which the Queen commanded her to read, as accordingly she did; and it is said the Queen was so moved with compassion at it, that not induring to have her make an end of reading it, she said many times unto her with tears in her eyes; 
Enough, enough, I will hear no more of it at this time, and since the business stands in the terms you speak of, God, and the Soul of the King my Husband, for whose sake all these Ladies beg this boon of me, forbid, that these poor wretches should lose their lives so unjustly: The false reports which the
 Chineses 
have made of them, together with the mi∣series they have indured at Sea, may serve them in stead of great punishments; Wherefore rely upon me for your request, and in the mean space withdraw your selves til to morrow morn∣ing betimes, when we will go all three to the King my Son before it be day, and then you shall read this letter to him, as you have read it to me, that being incited to pity he may make no difficulty to grant us that which we demand of him with so much reason.
 This resolution taken, the Queen was no sooner up the next day, but carrying along with her only her chief Lady, and the Gentlewoman her Neece, she past through a Gallery to the Chamber of the King her Son, whom she found still in bed, and having rendred him an account of the occasion of her coming, she commanded the Gentlewoman to read the letter, as also to tell by word of mouth all that had happened in that affair, which the Gentlewoman performed very exactly, but not without mingling her tears with those of her Aunts, as we knew afterwards: In the mean time the King looking on his Mother, 
Madam,
 answered he unto her, 
I must needs confess, that I dream'd this night how I saw my self before a very angry Iudge, who carying his hand three times to his face, as if he had threatned me, I promise thee, said he unto me, that if the blood of these strangers doth cry unto me for vengeance, thou and thine shall satisfie my justice, which makes me believe, that assuredly this vision comes from God, for whose sake I will do this alms to his praise, giving them both life and liberty, that so they may go where they will, and moreover I will cause a vessel to be provided for them, furnished with all things they shall need, all at mine own charge.
 The Queen gave th
 King her Son thanks for this his great grace unto them, and withall commanded her Lady and the Gentlewoman to kiss his feet, as instantly they did, and so the Queen retired to her own lodging. Hereupon the King sent for the 
Chumbim
 to command him that the Sentence against us might be revo∣ked, telling him all that had past, as well concerning his dream, as the request the Queen his Mother had made unto him, which he had granted her. Then the Officers of Justice commend∣ing


the King much for this action, revoking the former, drew up another Sentence in favour of us, which contained words to this effect, 
Broquen of my City of Pungor, I, the Lord of se∣ven Generations, and of the hairs of thy head, do send thee the smiles of my mouth, that thy reputation may be thereby augmented. Considering the information which the
 Chineses 
had given me of the pernicious manner of living of th
se strangers, assuring me by a solemn oath, and upon the faith they owe unto their Gods, that infallibly they were Pyrats and robbers, who used no other trade then to steal away othermens goods, and bath
e heir hands in the blood of those that would defend their own according to reason, as they said was manifest to all the world, which they have run over, not leaving any Island, Port of the Sea, River, nor Land, that they have not invaded with fire and sword, committing such enormous and horrible crimes, as for fear of offending God, I may not mention. All which things have at first sight seemed unto me most worthy to be punished in justice according to the Laws of my Kingdom; where∣fore I sent their Proces to the principal officers of my Crown, who all with one common consent swore unto me that these strangers deserved not only one, but many death
, if it were possible, so that relying upon their advice, I wrote unto
 Nhay Peretanda, 
that he should enjoyn thee from me not to fail within four dayes to put that Sentence of mine in execution. Now foras∣much as the chiefest Dames of your City, whom I hold for my kinswomen, have been Suiters unto me since, that I would be pleased to bestow their lives upon them by way of an alms, al∣ledging many reasons in their letters to that purpose, whereby I might be induced not to deny, but rather to accord them that grace; the fear which I have least their cries should in case of refusal arrive at the highest of the Heavens, where that Lord liveth raigning, whose proper∣ty it is to have pity on the tears, which are truly shed by those that have a right zeal to his holy Law, hath wrought so with me, that freeing my self from that blind passion, whereunto the flesh rendred me inclined, I would not let my choller prevail over the blood of those wretches. For which reasons I command thee, that as soon as this fair Gentlewoman, who is of noble extraction, and my kinswoman, shall present thee these letters, signed with my hand, where∣with I confess, I am well contented, in regard of the persons that have made this Suite unto me, thou go unto the prison, whither thou hast committed these strangers, and that without all delay thou set them at liberty, as also that thou furnish them with a vessel at my charge, giving them moreover such alms as the Law of the Lord commandeth thee to bestow on them, and that too with a liberal hand; whereupon thou shalt tell them, that they may go away with∣out seeing my Person, for which I will dispense with them, as well because that labour would be to no purpose, as for that, performing as I do the Office of a King, it is not fit for me to be∣hold men, who have a great knowledge of God, and yet seem to make little account of his Law, in that they accustom themselves to rob others of their goods. Given at
 Bintor 
in the third
 Chavequa 
of the first
 Mamoquo 
of the Moon, in the presence of the Queen my Mother, the Source of my right eye, and Lady of all my Kingdom.
 And signed a little below, 
Hira Pitau, Xinancor, Ambulec, the firm prop of all Iustice.
 As soon as the Gentlewoman had this Letter of the Kings in her hands, she was never at quiet, till she had left her Aunt, and put her self upon her journey, which she continued with such diligence, that in a short space she arrived at the City, and delivered the Letter to the 
Broquen,
 who presently upon the reading of it caused all the 
Peretandas, Chumbims,
 and other Officers of Justice to assemble together, and then went with them directly to the Prison, where we were at that instant under a sure guard; we no sooner saw them enter, but all of us cried out three or four times together, 
Lord have mercy upon us,
 wherewith the 
Broquen,
 and all that accompanied him, whereof the prison was full, were so moved, as some of them could not forbear weeping, out of the compassion they had of us: In the mean time the 
Broquen
 fell to comforting us in such kind and loving terms, as well expressed the greatness of his charity: Withall he commanded the irons to be taken off from our hands and feet, and drawing us into an outward Court, he re∣counted unto us all that had past in our business, whereof we had not any knowledge at all, in regard of the strict watch that was set upon us all the while; Then having caused the Kings Letters to be published: 
My friends,
 said he unto us, 
now that God hath shewed you so much grace, to deliver you as you see, I have one request to make unto you, which is, that for my sake, you will thank him from the bottom of your heart, and praise him for it; for if you make this acknowledgement unto him, he will communicate to you from above, whence all good doth proceed, an agreeable repose, which is a thing far more convenient for us then to live three or four days in the miseries of this world, where there is nothing but labour, grief,


great affliction, and above all poverty, which is the accomplishment of all evils, and whereby ordinarily our souls are wholly consumed in the deep abyss of the house of smoak.


The 
Broquen
 moreover caused two Paniers full of clothes to be brought to that place, and distributed to them amongst us according to each ones need; That done he carried us home to his house, where all the Ladies of the Town came to see us, testifying by their countenances that they greatly rejoyced at the good success of our deliverance: They comforted us also with great demonstration of pity, which is an effect of the good nature of the women of this Country, that is common to them all; and not contented therewith they entertained us in their houses, one after another during all the time we were there until our departure, for we continued in this City afterwards the space of forty six dayes, in which time we were furnished with all things necessary for us, and that in such abundance, as there was not one of us but carried a∣bove an hundred Duckets away with him. As for the 
Portugal
 woman, of whom I spake before, she had above a thousand, as well in mony, as in other gifts which were given her, by which means her husband in less then an year recovered himself of all the losses he had su∣stained. After we had with a great deal of contentment past those forty six dayes there, the season proper for our voyage being come, the 
Broquen
 procured us passage in the Junck of a 
Chinese,
 which was bound for the Port of 
Liampoo
 in the Kingdom of 
China,
 according to the commandment that he had received of the King for that purpose, bu
 first he caused the Captain of the Junck to put in good security for the safety of our persons during all the time of the voyage. In this manner we departed from 
Pungor
 the capital City of the Island of 
Le∣quios,
 of which I will here make a brief relation, to the end that if it shall one day please God to inspire the 
Portugal
 Nation, principally for the exaltation and increase of the Catholick faith, and next for the great benefit that may redound thereof, to undertake the Conquest of this Island, they may know where first to begin, as also the commodities of it, and the easiness of this Conquest. We must understand then that this Island of 
Lequios,
 scituated in nine and twenty degrees, is two hundred leagues in circuit, threescore in length, and thirty in bredth. The Country is almost like that of 
Iapon,
 saving that it is a little more mountainous in certain parts, but in the middle it is plainer and more fertile. It is rendred very agreeable by many large Plains, that are watred with divers rivers of fresh water, and from whence are gathered great provisions, especially of Rice and Wheat. It hath Mountains out of which is drawn such quan∣tity of copper, as in regard of the abundance thereof it is so common among those people, that whole Ships are laden with it from thence in way of traffique to all the Ports of 
China, Lamau, Sumbor, Chabaquea, Tosa, Miacoo,
 and 
Iapon,
 as likewise to all the other Islands on the South-side thereof, as those of 
Sesirau, Goto, Fucanxi,
 and 
Pollem:
 Moreover in all this Country of the 
Lequios,
 there is also great store of iron, steel, lead, tin, allum, salt-peeter, brimstone, hony, wax, sugar, and ginger, far better then that which comes from the 
Indiaes.
 It hath withall a world of Angelin-wood, Chestnuts, Trees, Oak, and Cedar, wherewith thou∣sands of Ships may be made. On the East-side it hath five very great Islands, where many Mynes of Silver are found, as also Pearls, Amber, Frankincense, Silk, Ebony, Brasil, and a great abun∣dance of a certain wood fit for Carpentry, called 
Poytan
; It is true that there is not such store of Silk there, as in 
China.
 The Inhabitants of all this Country do as the 
Chineses
 cloth them∣selves, with Linnen, Cotten, Silk, and a kind of Damask-stuff, which comes to them from 
Nanquin
; They are great eaters, very much addicted to the delights of the flesh, little inclin∣ed to arms, and altogether unfurnished of them; which induceth me to believe that they might be easily conquered, and the rather for that in the year, a thousand, five hundred, fi
ty and six, a 
Portugal
 arrived at 
Malaca,
 named 
Pero Gomez a' Almeyda,
 servant to the Grand Master of 
Santiago,
 with a rich Present, and Letters from the 
Nautaquim,
 Prince of the Island of 
Tanixumaa,
 directed to King 
Iohn
 the third; the Substance and Contents of his request was, to have five hundred 
Portugals
 granted to him, to the end that with them, and his own Forces, he might conquer the Island of 
Lequio,
 for which he would remain tributary to him at five thousand Kintals of Copper, and a thousand of Lattin yearly; which Ambassy came to no effect, because the Messenger was lost in the Gallion, where 
Manael de Souzad▪Sepulveda,
 also perished. A little further to the Northward of this Island of 
Lequio,
 there is a great Archipelago of small I∣slands, from whence is drawn a great quantity of silver, which in my opinion, & by what I gather∣ed out of a petition which 
Ray Lopez de Vilhalobos
 General of the 
Castillians
 presented to 
Iorge de Castro,
 at that time Captain of 
Ternate,
 should be those whereof the Inhabitants


had some knowledge, and which they called the Islands of Silver; and yet I cannot see with what reason that may be, because both by what I have observed, and read, as well in the wri∣tings of 
Ptolomie,
 as other Geographers, not any one of them hath pierced into the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 and the Island of 
Sumatra,
 only our Cosmographers, since the time of 
Alphonso d' Albuquerque
 have passed a little further, and treated of the 
Selebres, Pasuaas, Mindanaus, Champas,
 as also of 
China,
 and 
Iapon,
 but not of the 
Lequios,
 or other 
Archipelagoes,
 which are to be discovered within the vast extent of that Sea. From this brief relation which I have made of the Island of 
Lequios,
 may be inferred, both out of what I have heard and 
een, that with two thousand men only this Island might be taken, together with all the rest of these 
Archipelagoes,
 whence more profit might be drawn then from the 
Indiaes,
 and they might be conserved with less charge, as well in regard of men, as otherwise; for we spake there with Merchants, who assured us, that the sole Revenue of three Custom houses, and of the Island of 
Lequios,
 amounted unto one million and an half of gold, not comprising therein either the Mass of the whole Kingdom, or the Mynes of Silver, Copper, Iron, Steel, Lead, and Tin, which are of a far greater revenue, then the Customs. I will not speak further of other parti∣cularities of this Island, which I might here insert, for that I hold this sufficient to awaken the courages of the 
Portugals,
 and incite them to an Enterprise, of so much service for our King, and profit for themselves.






CHAP. XLIX. My sayling from 
Liampoo
 to 
Malaca,
 from whence the Captain of the Fortress, sent me to the 
Chaubainhaa
 at 
Martabano
; and all that bef
l us in our voyage thither.


BEing arrived at 
Liampoo,
 we were very well received by the 
Portugals,
 that lived there,
 From whence within a while after I imbarqued my self in the Ship of a 
Portugal,
 na∣med 
Tristano de Gaa,
 for to return unto 
Malaca,
 with an intention once more to try my for∣tune, which had so often been contrary to me, as may appear by that which I have delivered before. This Ship being safely arrived at 
Malaca,
 I went presently unto 
Pedro de Faria,
 Go∣vernour of the Fortress, who desiring to benefit me somewhat before the time of his Govern∣ment was expired, he caused me to undertake the voyage of 
Martaban,
 which was usually very profitable, and that in the Junck of a 
Mahumetan,
 named 
Necoda Mamude,
 who had wife and children at 
Malaca.
 Now the principal designe of this voyage was, to conclude a peace with the 
Chaubainhaa,
 King of 
Martabano,
 as also to continue the commerce of those of that Country with us, because their Juncks did greatly serve for the prov
sions of our For∣tress, which at that time was unfurnished thereof by reason of the success of the Wars of 
Iaoa.
 Besides I had a designe in this my voyage of no less consequence, then the res
, which was to get one, called 
Lancarote Gu
rreyro,
 to come thither, who was then on the Coast of 
Tanaucarim
 with an hundred men in four Foists, under the name of a Rebel or Mutiner; I was to require him to come to the succour of the Fortress, in regard it was held for certain, that the King of 
Achem
 was suddainly to fall upon it; so that 
Pedro de Faria,
 seeing himselfe destitute of all that was necessary for him to sustain a Siege, and of men likewise; found it fit to make use of these hundred men, the rather for that they were nearest, and so might be the sooner with him. In the third place he sent me upon another important occasion, namely to give advice to the Ships of 
Bengala,
 that they should come all carefully in consort together, left their negligence in their Navigation should be the cause of some distaster. This voyage then I undertook very unwillingly, and parted from 
Malaca
 upon a 
Wednesday,
 the ninth day of 
Ianuary,
 in the year, one thousand, five hundred, forty and five; being under Sail I continued my course with a good wind to 
Pullo Pracelar,
 where the Pilot was a little retarded by means of the Shelves, which cross all that Channel of the firm Land, even unto the Island of 
Sume∣tra
; When we were got forth with much labour we passed on to the Islands of 
Pullo Sam∣billam,
 where I put my self into a 
Manchua,
 which I had very well equipped, and sayling in it the space of twelve days, I observed, according to the order 
Pedro de Faria
 had given me for it, all the Coast of that Country of 
Malaya,
 which unto 
Iuncalan
 contains an hun∣dred and thirty leagues, entring by all the Rivers of 
Bartuhaas, Salangor, Panaagim, Que∣d
m, Parles, Pendan,
 and 
Sambilan, Siam,
 without so much as hearing any news at all of his enemies in any of them: So continuing the same course nine days more, being the three and


twentieth of our voyage, we went and cast anchor at a little Island, called 
Pisandur
a,
 where the 
Necoda,
 the 
Mahometan
 Captain of the Junck, was of necessity to make a cable, and fur∣nish himself with wood and water; With this resolution going on shore every man applyed himself so the labour he was appointed unto, and therein spent most part of the day; Now whilest they were thus at work the Son of this 
Mahometan
 Captain came and asked me whi∣ther I would go with him, and see if we could kill a Stag, whereof there was great plenty in that Island; I answered him that I would accompany him with all my heart, so that having taken my 
Harquebuse,
 I went along with him athwart the wood, where we had not walked above an hundred spaces, but that we espied a many of wild boars, that were rooting in the earth near to a pond; Having discovered this game, we got as near to them as we could, and discharging amongst them, we carried two of them to the ground: Being very glad of this good success we presently gave a great shout, and ran straight to the place we had seen them rooting. But so dreadful to behold, in this place we found above a dozen bodies of men digged out of the earth, and some nine or ten others half eaten. B
ing much amazed at this ob∣ject, we withdrew a little aside by reason of the great stanch, which proceeded from these dead bodies. Hereupon the 
Sarrazin
 told me, that he thought we should do well to advertise his father of this, to the end we might instantly surround this Island all about for to see whether we could discover any vessels with Pirats; for, said he, there may be some lye hidden behind yonder poynt, whereby we may very well run the hazard of our lives, as it hath often befallen other ships, where m
ny m
n have been lost by the carelesness of their Captains. This advice of the 
Sarrazin
 seemed so good unto me, that we presently returned back unto the Rode, where he gave an account to his father of that we had seen. Now for that the 
Necoda
 was a very pru∣dent man, and scalded (as one may say) with the like inconveniences, he straight way gave or∣der to have the Island surrounded, then causing the women, children, and linnen, although it were but half washed, to be imbarqued, he himself being followed by forty men, armed with Harquebuses and Lances, went directly to the place where we had discovered those bodies, and viewing them one after another, with stopping our noses by reason of the st
nch, which was insupportable, he was so moved to compassion, that he commanded the Marriners to dig a great pit for to bury them in; But as they were about to render them this last duty, and looking o∣ver them again, there was found upon some of them little daggers garnished with gold, and on others bracelets: Whereupon the 
Necoda,
 understanding well this mystery, wished me with all speed to dispatch away the roving vessel that I had to the Captain of 
Malaca,
 for that, as he assured me, those dead men, which they saw there, were 
Achems,
 who had been defeated near to 
Tanauçarim,
 whither their Armies ordinarily retired because of the war which they had with the King of 
Siam.
 The reason he alledged to us for this was, that those which we saw there lying dead, having golden bracelets about them, were Captains of 
Achem,
 who had caused themselves to be buried without permitting them to be taken away, and that he would lose his head if it were not so. For a greater proof whereof, he further added, that he would make some more of them to be dis-enterred, as incontinently he did, and having digged some seven and thirty of them out of the earth, there was found about them sixteen bracelets of gold, twelve very rich daggers, and many jewels, so that thinking of no other but hunting, we got a booty worth above a thousand Duckats, which the 
Necoda
 had, besides what was concealed; but the truth is, this was not altogether to our advantage, for the most part of our men became sick with the extream stench of those bodies. At the very instant I dispatched a∣way the towing vessel that we had to 
Malaca,
 and advertised 
Pedro de Faria
 of the whole success of our voyage; Withall I certified him▪ what course we had held, as also into what Ports, and into what Rivers we had entred, without hearing any other news of his enemies, then that it was suspected they had been at 
Tanauçarim,
 where by the appearances of those dead bodies, it was to be believed that they had been defeated, whereunto I added for a con∣clusion, that if I could light on any more assured news concerning them, I would presently ac∣quaint him with it, in what part soever I were.


After I had dispatched away the rowing Vessel to 
Malaca,
 with the Letters which I had directed to 
Pedro de Faria,
 and that our Junck was furnished with all things necessary for her, we sayled towards the Coast of 
Tanauçarim,
 where, as I said before, I had order to land for to treat with 
Lancerote Guerreyro,
 that he, and the rest of the 
Portugals
 of his Company might come to the succour of 
Malaca,
 which the 
Achems
 intended to besiege, according to the report that went of it. Being under Sail then we arrived at a little Island, a league in cir∣cuit,


called 
Pulho Hinhor,
 where a 
Parao
 came unto us, in the which were six taw
y Moors, poorly clad, with red Bonets on their heads; their Boat being come close to our Junck, which was then under Sayl, they saluted us in a way of peace, whereunto we answered in the like m
nner; That done they demanded of us if there were any 
Portugals
 amongst us? we told them that there were, but mistrusting it, they desired to see one or two of them upon the hatches, because, added they, it imports much that it should be so. Whereupon the 
Ne∣coda
 prayed me to come up, which incontinently I did, though at that time I was shut up in my Cabbin below somewhat indisposed in my health; when I was on the deck I called to them that were in the 
Parao,
 who had no sooner seen me, and known me to be a 
Portugal,
 but they gave a great shout, and clapping their hands for joy they came abord our Junck. Then one of them, who by his countenance seemed to have more Authority then the rest, began to say unto me; 
Signior, Before I crave leave of thee to speak, I desire thee to read this Letter, to the end it may induce thee the more readily to believe that which I am to say unto thee.
 Thereup∣on out of an old filthy clout he took a Letter, wherein after I had opened it, I found this written: 
Signiors Portugals, which are true Christians, this honourable man, that shall shew you this Letter, is King of this Island, newly converted to the Faith, and called
 Dom Lancerote; 
He hath rendred many good Offices, not only to them, who have subscribed this writing, but to us also that have navigated on these Coasts: For he hath given us very important adver∣tisements of the treasons, which the
 Achems 
and
 Turks 
have plotted against us, so that by the means of this honest man we have discovered all their designes: withall God hath made use of him for to give us not long since a great victory against them, wherein we have taken from them one Gally, four Galliots, and five Foists, with the death of above a thousand
 Sar∣razins. 
Wherefore we intreat you, by the wounds of our Lord Iesus Christ, and by the me∣rits of his holy passion, not only to keep him from all wrong, but to assist him with all your power, as the manner is of all good
 Portugals, 
that it may serve for an example to those which shall know this, to do the like in imitation of you; And so we kiss your hands this thirteenth day of
 November, 1544. This Letter was signed by more then fifty 
Portugals,
 among
t whom were the four Captains that I sought for, namely, 
Lançerote Guerreyra, Antonio Gomez, Pedro Ferreyra,
 and 
Cosmo Bernaldes.
 When I had read this Letter, I made a tender of my person to this petty King, for otherwayes my power was so small, as it could not reach fur∣ther then to the giving him a bad dinner, and a red Bonnet I had on, which all worn as it was, was yet better then his own. Now after this poor King had made some Declaration to me of himself, and of his miseries, lifting up his hands to Heaven, and shedding abundance of tears; 
Our Lord Iesus Christ,
 said he unto me, 
whose slave I am, doth know what great need I have now of the favour and succour of some Christians, for bec
use I am a Christian, as they are, a
 Mahometan 
slave of mine about four months ago, reduced me to that extremity, wherein I behold my self at this instant, being not able in the state I am in to do any other then cast up mine eyes to Heaven, and lament my misfortune, with much sorrow, and little remedy. And I assure thee by the verity of that holy and new Law, whereof I now make profession, that only for being a Christian, and a friend to the
 Portugals, 
I am persecuted in this sort. Now for that being alone, as thou art, it is not possible for thee to assist me; I beseech thee,
 Signior, 
to take me along with thee, to the end that this Soul which God hath put into me may not perish, and in recompence thereof I promise to serve thee as a slave all the dayes of my life.
 Lo this is that which this poor King said with so many tears, as it was great pity to behold it, in the mean time the 
Necoda,
 who was of a good disposition, and charita∣bly inclined, was very much moved with the disaster of this unfortunate King, so that he gave him a little Rice, and some linnen to cover himself withall, for he was so ragged, that one might see his naked skin every where about him. After he had informed himself from him of certain particulars, the knowledge whereof concerned him, he demanded him where his ene∣my was, and what forc
s he had? Whereunto he answered. That he was a quarter of a league from thence, in a Cabbin covered with straw, having not above thirty fisher-men with him, who were most of them without Arms. Hereupon the 
Necoda
 cast his eye upon me, and see∣ing me sad, for that I was not able of my self to succour this poor Christian▪ thinking withall that he should much oblige me thereby, 
Signior,
 said he unto me, 
if thou wer
 now Captain of this Iunck, as I am, what remedy wouldst thou give to the tears of this poor man, where∣with also thy eyes do participate?
 I knew not what reply to make him, for that I was greatly moved to behold my Neighbour, a Christian like my self, to suffer in that manner, which the



Necoda
's son perceiving, who was, as I have said, 
 young man of a good spirit, and brought up amongst the 
Portugals,
 and guessing at the shame and sorrow I was in, he desired his father to lend him twenty Mariners of his Junck, that by their means he might re-establish this poor King, and chase the Thief out of the Island; To this the 
Necoda
 answered, That if I would demand so much of him, he would do it very willingly; whereupon casting my self at his feet and embracing him, which is the humblest complement used amongst them, I told him with tears in my eyes, that if he would do me this favour I would be his slave whilest I lived, and that both he and his children should find how ready I would be always to acknowledg the same; He presently granted my request, so that causing the Junck to approach near the shoa
, he prepared himself in three Boats with one Faulcon, three Bases, and threescore Men, 
Iaos
 and 
Lesons,
 all well armed, for thirty of them carried Ha
quebuses, the rest Lances, and Bows and Arrows, besides Grenadoes, and other such like Fireworks, as we thought were convenient for our design.


It was about two of the clock in the afternoon when we landed, and so we went direct∣ly to the Trench where the Enemies were. The 
Necoda
's son led the Vauntgard, consisting of forty men, whereof twenty were armed with Harquebuses, and the rest with Bows and Arrows; The 
Necoda
 himself brought on the Rere, wherein were thirty Soldiers, carrying a Banner, which 
Pedro de Faria
 had given him at his parting from 
Malaca,
 with a cross painted in it, 
o the end he might be known for a Vassal to our King, in case he should en∣counter any of our Ships. Marching in this order by the guiding of this petty King, we ar∣rived where the Rebel was with his men set in order, who by their shouting and cries seemed in shew not to make any reckoning of us. They were in numb
r about fifty, but weak, unarmed, and utterly destitu
e of all things necessary for their defence, having for all their Arms but Staves, ten or eleven Lances, and one Harquebuse. As soon as we had discovered them we gave fire to the Faulcon and Bases, discharging withall twenty Har∣quebuses, whereupon the Theeves betook themselves presently to flight, being in great dis∣order, and most of them hurt; We pursued them then so close, that we overtook them on the top of a little hill, where they were defeated in the space of two 
credoes,
 not one of them escaping with life save only three, whom we spared for that they said they were Christi∣ans. That done, we went to a Village, where there were not above twenty poor low Cabbins, covered with straw, in it we found some threescore and four women, with a many of little children, who no sooner perceived us, but all of them with tears fell a cryed out, 
Chri∣stian, Christian, Iesus, Iesus.
 At these words being fully perswaded that they were Chri∣stians, I desired the 
Necoda
 that he would cause his son to retire, and not suffer any of them to be killed because they were not Gentiles, which he presently yielded unto, and yet for all that he could not keep the Cabbins from sacking, though in them all there was not found the value of five Duckets. For the people of this Island are so poor, that scarce one of them is worth a groat; they feed on nothing but a little fish, which they take with angling, and eat it broiled on the coals without salt, yet are they so vain and presumptuous, that not one almost amongst them but terms himself a King of some vile piece of ground, whereon there is little more then one poor Cabbin; besides, neither the men nor the women have where∣withall to cover their nakedness. After the slaughter of the rebellious 
Sarrazin
 and his fol∣lowers, and the re-establishment of the poor Christian King, putting him in possession of his wife and children, whom his Enemy had made slaves, together with above threescore and three Christian Souls, we ordeined a kind of Church amongst them, for the instruction of those that were newly converted; And then returning to our Junck, we presently set sail, and continued our course towards 
Tanauçarim,
 where I was perswaded I should find 
Lancerote Guerreyra,
 and his companions, for to treat with them about the business, whereof I have formerly spoken: But for as much as in the Letter, which the petty King shewed me, the 
Portugals
 made mention of a Victory which God had given them against the 
Turks
 and 
Achems
 of this Coast, I hold it not amiss to relate here how that hapned, as well for the content the Reader may take therein, as to shew that there is no enterprize which valiant Soldiers at a need may not bring to pass, in regard whereof it imports much to cherish, and make esteem of them. For eight months and more our hundred 
Portugals
 had scoured up and down this Coast in four well rig'd Foists, wherewith they had taken three and twenty rich Ships, and many other lesser Vessels, so that they which used to sail in those parts were so terrified with the sole name of the 
Portugals,
 as they quitted their


Commerce without making any further use of their shipping: By this surcease of Trade the Custom-houses of the Ports of 
Tanauçarim, Iunçalan, Merguim, Vagaruu,
 and 
Tavay,
 fell much in their Revenue, in so much that those people were constrained to give notice of it to the Emperor of 
Sornan,
 King of 
Siam,
 and soveraign Lord of all that Country, beseech∣ing him to give a remedy to this mischief, whereof every one complained. Instantly whereupon, being then at the City of 
Odiaa,
 he sent with all speed to the Frontire of 
La
hos
 for a Turkish Captain of his, named 
Heredrin Mahomet,
 the same who in the year one thou∣sand five hundred thirty and eight came from 
Suez
 to the Army of 
Soliman
 the 
Bashaw,
 Vice-roy of 
Cairo,
 when as the great 
Turk
 sent him to invade the 
Indiaes
; but it fell out that this man slipping from the body of the Army arrived in a Gally on the Coast of 
Tanau∣çarim,
 where he was entertained by the 
Sornau
 King of 
Siam,
 and for a Pention of twelve thousand Duckets by the year served him as a General of that Frontire. Now for that the King held this 
Turk
 for invincible, and made more account of him then of all others, he commanded him from the place where he was, with three hundred 
Ianizaries
 that he had with him, and giving him a great sum of mony he made him General of all the Coast of this Sea, to the end he might free those people from our incursions, withall he promised to make him Duke of 
Banchaa,
 which is an estate of great extent, if he could bring him the heads of four 
Portugal
 Captains. This proud 
Turk,
 becomming more insolent by the re∣ward and promises which the King made him posted presently away to 
Tanauçarim,
 where being arrived he rigged forth a Fleet of ten Sails for to fight with us, being so confident of vanquishing us, as in answer of certain Letters, which the 
Sornau
 had written unto him from 
Odiaa,
 these words was found in one of them. 
From the time that my head was esloigned from the feet of your Highness for to execute this small enterprize, wherein it seems you are pleased I should serve you, I continued my Voyage till at the end of nine days I arrived at
 Tanaucarim, 
where I presently provided my self of such Vessels as were necessary for me, and indeed would have had but only two, for I hold it most infallible that those would suffice to chase away these petty Thieves; howbeit not to disobey the Commission, which
 Combracalon 
the Governor of the Empire hath given me under your great Seal, I have made ready the great Gally, as also the four little ones, and the five Foists, with which I purpose to set forth with all speed; For I fear left these Dogs should have news of my coming, and that for my sins God should be so much their friend, as to give them leasure to fly, which would be so great a grief unto me, that the very imagination thereof might be my death, or through an excess of despair render me like unto them; but I hope that the Prophet
 Mahomet, 
of whose Law I have made profession from mine infancy, will not permit that it should so happen for my sins.
 This 
Here∣drin Mahomet
 being arrived at 
Tanauçarim,
 as I have delivered before, presently made rea∣dy his Fleet, which was composed of five Foists, four Galliots, and one Gally Royal: With∣in these Vessels he imbarqued eight hundred 
Mahometans,
 men of combat (besides the Ma∣riners.) amongst the which were three hundred 
Ianizaries,
 as for the rest they were 
Turks, Greeks, Malabares, Achems,
 and 
Mogores,
 all choyce men, and so disciplined, that their Cap∣tain held the Victory already for most assured; Assisted with these Forces he parted from the Port of 
Tanauçarim
 for to go in the quest of our men, who at that time were in this Island of 
Pul
o Hinhor,
 whereof the foresaid Christian was King. Now during those levies of men of War, this petty King going to the Town for to sell some dryed fish there, as soon as he perceived what was intended against us, he left all his Commodities behind him, and in all haste returned to this Island of his; where finding our men in great security, as little dreaming of that which was in hand against us, he related it all unto them, whereat they re∣mained so much amazed, as the importance of the matter did require; In so much that the same night and the next day having well caulked their Vessels which they had drawn ashore, they lanched them into the Sea, after they had imbarqued their provisions, their water, their artillery, and ammunition. So falling to their oars, with a purpose (as I have heard them say since) to get to 
Bengala,
 or to 
Racan,
 for that they durst not withstand so great an Army; but as they were unresolved thereupon, and divided in opinion, behold they saw all the ten Sails appearing together, and behind them five great Ships of 
Guzarates,
 whose Masters had given 
Heredrin Mahomet
 thirty thousand Duckets for to secure them against our 
Portugals.
 The sight of these fifteen Sails put our men into a very great confu∣sion, and because they were not able at that time to make to Sea for that the wind was con∣trary, they put themselves into a Creek, which was on the South side of the Island, and invi∣ronned


by a Down, or Hill, where they resolved to attend what God would send them: In the mean time the five 
Guzarat
 Ships shewed themselves with full sails at Sea, and the ten Sails▪ with oars went directly to the Island, where they arrived about Sun-set. Presently thereupon the 
Turkish
 Captain sent out Spies to the Ports, where he was advertised that they had been, and entered by little and little into the mouth of the Haven, that so he might render himself more assured of the prize which he pretended to make▪ with hope that as soon as it was day he should take them all, and so bound hand and foot present them to the 
Sornau
 of 
Siam,
 who in recompence thereof had promised him the State of 
Banchaa,
 as I have said before. The 
Manchua,
 which had been at the Port to spy them out, returned to the Fleet about two hours within night, and told 
H
redrin
 for news, that they were fled and gone, wherewith it is said this Barbarian was so afflicted, that teering his hair, 
I always feared,
 said he weeping, 
my sins would be the cause that in the execution of this enterprize God would sh
w himself more a Christian, then a
 Sarazin, 
and that
 Mahomet 
would be like to these Dogs, of whom I go in quest.
 This said, he fell down all along in the place, and so continued a good while without speaking a word. Nevertheless being come again to himself he gave order, like a good Captain, to all that was necessary. First of all then he sent the four Galliots in quest of them to an Island, called 
Ta
basoy,
 distant from that of 
Pulho Hinhor
 about seven leagues, for he was perswaded that our men were retired thither, because this was a better Harbor then that of the Island from whence they were gone. As for the five Foists he di∣vided them into three, whereof he sent two to another Island, named 
Sambilan,
 and other two to those which were nearest to the firm Land, for that all these places were very proper to shelter one in; As for the filth Foist, in regard she was fleeter then the rest, he sent her along with the four Galliots, that she might before it was day bring him news of that which should happen, with promise of great reward for the same; but during these things our men, who had always a watchful eye, seeing the 
Turk
 had rid himself of his greatest Forces, and that there was no more remaining with him but the Gally wherein he was, they re∣solved to fight with him, and so sallying out of the Creek, where they had shrouded them∣selves, they rowed directly to her. Now in regard it was past midnight, and that the Ene∣mies had but weak Sentinels, for that they thought themselves most secure, and never dreamt of any body lying in wait to attaque them there, our four Foists had the opportunity to board her all together, and threescore of their lustiest men leaping suddenly into her, in less then a quarter of an hour, and before the Enemies knew where they were for to make use of their Arms, they killed above fourscore 
Turks,
 as for the rest they cast themselves all into the Sea, not one man remaining alive: The dog 
H
redrin Mahomet
 was slain a∣mongst the rest, and in this great action God was so gracious to our men, and gave them this Victory at so cheap a rate, that they had but one young man killed, and nine 
Portugals
 hurt. They assured me since, that in this Gally in so short a time, what by water, and the sword, above three hundred 
Mahometans
 lost their lives, whereof the most part were 
Ia∣nizaries
 of the Gold Chain, which among the 
Turks
 is a mark of honor. Our 
Portugals
 having past the rest of the night with much contentment, and always keeping good watch, it pleased God that the next morning the two Foists arrived from the Island whither they had been sent▪ who altogether ignorant of that which had past, came carelesly doubling the point of the Haven, where the Gally lay, so that the four Foists made themselves Masters of them in a little space, and with the loss of but a few men. After so good a success they fell diligently to work in fortifying the Gally and the two Foists, which they had taken, and then flanked the South-side of the Island with five great Pieces of Ordnance to defend the entry into the Haven. Now about evening the other two Foists arrived, making to Land with the same indiscretion as the others, and although they had much ado to reach them, yet were they constrained at length to render themselves, with the loss only of two 
Portu∣gals.
 Hereupon our men resolved to attend the four Galliots that remained, and which had been sent to the next Island, but the next day so great a wind arose from the North, that two of them were cast away upon the Coast, not one that was in them escaping. As for the other two about evening they discovered them very much in disorder, destitute of oars, and separated above three leagues the one from the other; But at last about Sun-set one of them came to the Port, and ran the same fortune as the former, without saving any one of the 
Sa∣razins
 lives. The next morning an hour before day, the wind being very calm, our men discovered the other Galliot, which for want of oars was not able to recover the Port, in


regard whereof our men resolved to go and fetch her in, as accordingly they did, and coming somewhat near her with two Cannon shot, they killed the most part of them that were in her, and so bording her took her very easily; Now because all her men were either slain, or hurt, they drew her to land by force of other Boats; so that of the 
en Sail of this Fleet, our men had the Gally, two Galliots, and four Foysts; as for the other two Galliots, they were cast away on the Isle of 
Taubasoy,
 as I have delivered before, and touching the fift Foyst, no news could be heard of her, which made it credible that she also suffered shipwrack, or that the wind had cast her upon some of the other Islands. This glorious victory, which it pleased God to give us, was obtained in the month of 
September,
 one thousand, five hundred, forty and four, on 
Michaelmas
 Eve, which rendred the name of the 
Portugals
 so famous through all those Coasts, that for three years after there was nothing else spoken of, so that the 
Chau∣bainhaa,
 King of 
Martabano
 hearing of it, sent presently to seek them out, and promised them great advantages if they would succour him against the King of 
Bramaa,
 who at that time was making preparation in his City of 
Pegu,
 for to go and besiege 
Martabano,
 with an Army of seven hundred thousand men.






CHAP. L. The Continuance of our voyage to the Bar of 
Martabano
; and certain memorable particularities hapening there.


BEing departed, as I said, from the Island of 
Pulho Hinhor,
 we continued our course to∣wards the Port of 
Tarnassery
 for the affair, of which I have spoken,
 but upon the approach of the night, the Pilot desiring to avoid certain sands that were to the Prow-ward of him, put forth to Sea, with an intention as soon as it was day to return towards land with the Westerly wind, which at that instant blew from the 
Indiaes
 by reason of the Season▪ We had now held this course five dayes, running with much labour by many different roombs, when as it pleased God that we accidentally discovered a little vessel, and for as much as we thought it to be a Fi∣sher-boat, we made to it, for to be informed from them in her whereabouts we were, and how many leagues it was from thence to 
Tarnassery,
 but having passed close by her, and haled her without receiving any answer, we sent off a Shallop well furnished with men for to compel her to come abord us: Our Boat then going directly to the vessel, we entred her, but were much amazed to find in her only five 
Portugals,
 two dead, and three alive, with a Coffer, and a sack full of 
Tangues,
 and 
Larius,
 which is the mony of that Country, and a fardle, wherein there were Basins and Ewers of silver, and two other very great Basins. Having laid up all this safely, I caused the 
Portugals
 to be brought into our Junck, where looking very carefully unto them, yet could I not in two dayes get one word from them; But at length by the means of yolks of egs, and good broaths, which I made them take, they came again to themselves, so that in six or seven dayes they were able to render me a reason of their accident. One of those 
Portugals
 was called 
Christovano Doria,
 who was since sent into this Country for a Captain to Saint 
Tomé
; the other 
Luys Tabo
da,
 and the third 
Simano de Brito,
 all men of credit, and rich Mer∣chants. These same recounted unto us, that coming from the 
Indiaes
 in a vess
l belonging to 
Iorge Manhoz,
 that was married at 
Goa,
 with a purpose to go to the Port of 
Charingan,
 in the Kingdom of 
Bengala,
 they were cast away in the sands of 
Rucano
 for want of taking heed, so that of four
core persons, that they were in the vessel, onely seventeen being saved, they had continued their course all along by the Coast for five dayes together, int
nding if pos∣sibly they could to recover the river of 
Cosmira
 in the Kingdom of 
Pegu,
 there to sh
p th
m∣selves for the 
Indiaes
 in some v
ss
l or other tha
 they should meet with in the Port; but whilest they were in this resolution, th
y were so driven by a most impetuous Westerly wind, that in one day and a night they lost the sight of Land, finding themselves in the ma
n Sea without Oars, without Sayls, and all knowledge of the winds, they continued in that State sixteen da
s together, at the end whereof their water coming to sail, all died but those three he saw before him. Upon the finishing of this relation we proceeded on in our course, and within four days after we met with five 
Portugal
 vessels, which were sayling from 
Bengala
 to 
Malaca.
 Ha∣ving shewed them 
Pedro de Faria's
 Order, I desired them to keep in consort together for fear of the 
Achems
 Army, that ranged all over the Coast, lest through their imprudence they should fall into any mischief, and thereof I demanded a Certificate from them, which they willingly


granted, as also furnished me very plentifully with all things necessary. Having made this dis∣patch we continued our course, and nine days after we arrived at the Bar of 
Martabano,
 on a 
Friday,
 the seven and twentieth of 
March,
 one thousand, five hundred, forty and five, ha∣ving past by 
Tarnassery, Tovay, M
rguin, Iuncay, Pullo, Camuda,
 and 
Vagaruu,
 without hearing any tidings of those hundred 
Portugals,
 in search of whom I went, b
cause be∣fore that they had taken pay in the service of the 
Chaubainhaa,
 King of 
Martabano,
 who, according to report, had sent for them to assist him against the King of 
Bramaa,
 that held him besieged with an Army of seven hundred thousand men, as I have declared before; howbeit they were not at this time in his Service, as we shall see presently.


It was almost two hours within night, when we arrived at the mouth of the River, where we cast anchor with a resolution to go up the next day to the City; Having continued some time very quiet, we 
ver and anon heard many Cannon shot, whereat we were so troubled, as we knew not what to resolve on; As soon as the Sun rose, the 
N
coda
 assembled his men to Coun∣cel, for in Semblable occasions he always used so to do, and told them, that as sure as they were all to have a share in the peril, so it was fit that every one should give his advice about it; Then he made them a Speech, wherein he represented unto them that which they had heard that night, and how in regard thereof he feared to go unto the City. Their opinions upon it were very different, howbeit at length they concluded, that their eyes were to be witnesses of that whereof they stood in such doubt: To this end we set Sail, having both wind and tyde, and doubled a po
nt, called 
Mounay,
 from whence we discovered the City, invironed with a world of men, and upon the River almost as many vessels, and although we suspected what this might be, because we had heard something of it, yet left we not off from sayling to the Port, where we arrrived with a great deal of care, and having discharged our Ordnance ac∣cording to the usual manner in signe of peace, we perceived a vessel very well furnished, came directly to us from the shore, wherein there was six 
Portugals,
 at which we exceedingly rejoyced; These presently came abord our Junck, where they were very well entertained, & having declared unto us what we were to do for the safety of our persons, they councelled us not to budge from thence for any thing in the world, as we had told them our resolution was to have fled that night to 
Bengala,
 because if we had followed that designe, we had 
 been lost, and taken by the Fleet which the King of 
Bramaa
 had in that place, consisting 
 seven∣teen hundred Sayls, wherein were comprised an hundred Gallies very well furnished with stran∣gers. They added withall, that they were of opinion I should go ashore with them to 
Ioano Cay
yro,
 who was Captain of the 
Portugals,
 for to give him an account of the cause that brought me thither, the rather for that he was a man of a sweet disposition, and a great friend of 
Pedro de Faria's,
 to whom they had often heard him give much commendation, as well for his noble extraction, as for the goodly qualities that were in him; besides they told me that I should find 
Lançarote Gueyreyro,
 and the rest of the Captains with him, unto whom my aforesaid Letters were directed, and that I should do nothing therein prejudicial to the Service of God, and the King. This counsel seeming good unto me, I went presently to land with the 
Portugals
 to wait on 
Ioano Cayeyro,
 to whom I was exceeding w
lcome, as likewise to all the rest that were in his quarters, to the number of seven hundred 
Portugals,
 all rich men, and of good esteem. Then I shewed 
Ioano Cayeyro
 my Letters, and the Order that 
Pedro de Faria
 had given me; Moreover I treated with him about the affair that led me thither: where∣upon I observed that he was very instant with the Captains, to whom I was addrest, who an∣swered him that they were ready to serve the King in all occasions that should be presented, howbeit since the Letter of 
Pedro de Faria,
 Governour of 
Malaca,
 was grounded on the fear that he was in of the Army of the 
Achems,
 composed of an hundred and thirty Sayl, whereof 
Bijaya Sora
 King of 
Pedir,
 was General, and it having fallen out, that his Admiral had been defeated at 
Tarnasery
 by those of the Country, with the loss of seventy 
Lanchares,
 and six thousand men, it was not needful they should stir for that occasion; for according to what they had seen with their own eyes, the Forces of that enemy were so mightily weakned, as they did not think he could in ten years space recover again the loss he had sustained. To this they added many other reasons, which made them all to agree, that it was not necessary they should go to 
Malaca.
 After these things I desired 
Ioano Cayeyro
 to make me a D
clarati∣on of all that had past in this business, that it might serve me as it were for a Certificate at my return to our Fortress, determining as soon as I had it to get me from this place, for that I had nothing more to do there. With this resolution I stayed there with 
Ioano Cayeyro,
 in


continual expectation to be gone when the Season should serve for the Junck to depart, and re∣mained with him at this Siege the space of six and forty days, which was the chief time of the King of 
Bramaa
 his abode there, of whom I will say something here in a few words, because I conceive the curious would be well content to know what success the 
Chaubainhaa,
 King of 
Martabano,
 had in this war. This Siege had lasted now six months and thirteen dayes, in which space the City had been assaulted five times in plain-day, but the besieged defended them∣selves always very valiantly, and like men of great courage: Howbeit in regard they were in∣sensibly consumed with length of time, and the success of war, and that no succour came to them from any part, their enemies were without comparison far more in number then they, in such sort as the 
Chaubainhaa
 found himself so destitute of men, as it was thought he had not above five thousand souldiers left in the City, the hundred and thirty thousand which were said to be there at the beginning of the Siege, being consumed by Famine, or the Sword, by reason whereof the Councel assembling for to deliberate what was to be done thereupon, it was resolved that the King should sound his enemy by his Interest, which he presently put in execution: For that effect he sent to tell him, that if he would raise the Siege he would give him thirty thousand Bisses of silver, which is in value a million of gold, and would become his Tributary at threescore thousand Duckets by the year. The answer made by the King of 
Bramaa
 hereunto was, that he could accept of no conditions from him, if he did not first yield himself to his mercy. The second time he propounded unto him, that if he would suffer him to depart away with two ships, in one of the which should be his Treasure, and in the other his Wife and Children, that then he would deliver him the City, and all that was in it. But the King of 
Bramaa
 would hearken no more to that then the former. The third Proposi∣tion which he made him was this, That he should retire with his Army to 
Tagalaa,
 some six leagues off, that so he might have liberty to go away freely with all his, and thereupon he would deliver him the City, and the Kingdom, together with all the Treasure belonging to the King his Predecessour, or that in lieu thereof he would give him three millions of gold: But he also refused this last offer, insomuch that the 
Chaubainhaa
 utterly dispairing of ever making his peace with so cruel an enemy, began to meditate with himself what means he might use to save himself from him; Having long thought upon it he found no better an expedient then therein to serve himself of the succour of the 
Portugals,
 for he was perswaded that by their means he might escape the present danger. He sent then secretly to tell 
Ioano Cayeyro,
 that if he would imbarque himself in the night in his four ships, and take him in, with his wife, and children, and so save them, he would give him half his treasure. In this affair he very closely imployed a certain 
Portugal,
 named 
Paulo de Seixas,
 born in the Town of 
O∣bidos,
 who at that time was with him in the City; This same having disguised himself in a 
Pegu
 habit, that he might not be known, stole one night to 
Cayeyro's
 Tent, and delivered him a Letter from the 
Chaubainhaa,
 wherein this was contained: 
Valiant and faithful Commander of the
 Portugals, 
through the Grace of the great King of the other end of the world, the strong and mighty Lion, dreadfully roaring, with a Crown of Majesty in the House of the Sun, I the unhappy
 Chaubainhaa, 
heretofore a Prince, but now no longer so, finding my self besieged in this wretched and infortunate City, do give thee to understand by the words pronounced out of my mouth, with an assurance no less faithful then true, that I now render my self the Vassel of the great King of
 Portugal, 
Soveraign Lord of me, and my children, with an acknowledgement of homage, and such tribute as he at his pleasure shall impose on me: wherefore I require thee on his behalf, that as soon as
 Paulo Seixas 
shall present this my Let∣ter unto thee, thou come speedily with thy Ships to the Bulwark of the
 Chappel-key, 
where thou shalt find me ready attending thee, and then without taking further counsel, I will deliver my self up to thy mercy, with all the treasures that I have in gold, and precious stones, whereof I will most willingly give the one half to the King of
 Portugal, 
upon condition that he shall permit me with the remainder to leavy in his Kingdom, or in the Fortresses which he hath in the
 Indiaes, 
two thousand
 Portugals, 
to whom I will give extraordinary great pay that by their means I may be re-established in this State, which now I am constrained to a∣bandon; since my ill fortune will have it so. As for that which concerns thee, and thy men, I do promise them by the faith of my verity, that in case they do help to save me, I will di∣vide my treasure so liberally among them, that all of them shall be very well satisfied and contented; And for that, time will not suffer me to enlarge any further
; Paulo de Seixas, 
by whom I send this unto thee, shall assure thee both of that which he hath seen, and of the rest


which I have communicated unto him. Ioano Cayeyro
 had no sooner received this Letter, but he presently caused the chief of his followers secretly to assemble together in Councel. Having shewed them the Letter, he represented unto them how important and profitable it would be for the service of God and the King to accept of the offer, which the 
Chaubain∣haa
 had made them; Whereupon causing an Oath to be given to 
Paulo de Seixas,
 he willed him freely to declare all his knowledg of the matter, and whether it were true that the 
Chaubainhaa
 his Treasure was so great, as it was reported to be. Thereunto he answered by the Oath that he had taken, That he knew not certainly how great his Treasure was, but that he was well assured how he had often seen with his own eyes, an house in form of a Church, and of a reasonable bigness, all 
ull up to the very tyles of bars and wedges of Gold, which might very well lade two great Ships: He further said, That he had moreover seen six and twenty Chests bound about with strong cords, wherein according to the 
Chaubain∣haa
 his own report was the Treasure of the deceased 
Bresaguean
 King of 
Pegu,
 which said Treasure containing an hundred and thirty thousand Bisses, and every Biss in value five hun∣dred Duckets, made up all together the sum of threescore Millions of Gold: He said also, That he knew not certainly the number of the wedges of Gold which he had seen in the Temple of the God of Thunder, but he was most assured notwithstanding that they would fully lade four good Vessels: And for a conclusion he told them, That the same 
Chaubain∣haa
 had shewed him the golden Image of 
Quiay Frigau,
 which was taken at 
Degum,
 all full of such rich and resplendent stones, as it was thought the like again were not in the whole world; So that this Declaration which this man made upon Oath astonished them so that heard it, as they could not possibly beleeve it to be true. Howbeit after they had sent him out of the Tent, they entered into consultation about this affair, wherein nothing was resolved, of which I verily beleeve our sins were the cause, for there were in this Assembly as many different opinions, as 
Babel
 had diversities of Languages, which proceeded especi∣ally from the envy of six or seven men there present, who would needs perswade the rest, that if this affair should happen to have such success, as was hoped for, 
Ioano Cayeyro
 (unto whom they all bore no good will) would go then into 
Portugal
 with so much honor and reputation, as it would be a small matter for the King to make him an Earl, or a Marquis, or at least recompence him with the Government of the 
Indiaes
; so that after these Mini∣sters of the Devil had alledged many reasons wherefore it might not be done, which I think was but the mask of their weakness and ill nature, though it may be they did it out of the fear they were in of losing both their goods and lives if this matter should come to be dis∣covered to the King of 
Bramaa
; howsoever they would not agree to accept of this offer, but contrariwise they threatened 
Ioano Cayeyro,
 that if he desisted not from his purpose, which was to comply with the 
Chaubainhaa,
 they would disclose it to the 
Bramaa,
 so that 
Cayeyro
 was constrained to abandon this business, lest if he should persist therein the 
Portugals
 them∣selves would discover him, as they threatened to do, without either fear of God, or regard of men.


Ioana Cayeyro,
 seeing he could not possibly bring his desi
e to pass, wrote a Letter to the 
Caubainhaa,
 wherein he used many weak excuses for not performing that which he de∣manded of him, and giving it to 
Paulo de Seixas,
 he speedily dispatched him away with it, so that departing about three hours after midnight he arrived safe at the City, where he found the 
Caubainhaa
 attending him in the same place which he had named in his Letter, unto whom he delivered the Answer he had brought; After he had read it, and thereby found that he could not be succored by our men, as he always thought he should, it is said that he remained so confounded, that for very grief and sorrow he sunk down to the ground like a dead man, and continuing a pretty while in that manner, at length he came again to himself, and then beating his brest, and bewailing his miserable fortune, 
Ah Portugals,
 said he with tears in his eyes, 
how ill do you acknowledg that which I have done for you, ima∣gining that thereby I should make acquisition of your friendship, as of a treasure, to the end that like faithful men you would be assisting to me in so great a necessity as this is which now I am in, whereby I desired no other thing then to save my childrens lives, inrich your King, and state you in the number of my chiefest friends? And would it had pleased him, who raigns in the beauty of these stars, that you had merited before him the doing me this good office, which only for my sins you have refused me, for in so doing you had by my means augmented his Law, and I been saved in the promises of his truth.
 Thereupon sending away 
Paulo de Seixas,
 with a


young Wench, by whom he had had two sons, he gave him a pair of Bracelets, and said un∣to him, 
I desire thee not to think of this little which now I give thee, but of the great love I have always born thee; above all, forget not to tell the Portugals, with how much cause and grief I complain of their extream ingratitude, whereof I will render them culpaple before God at the last and dreadful day of Iudgment.
 The night following 
Paul de Seixas
 came back to the 
Portugals,
 with two children, and a very fair young Damosal their Mother, with whom he married afterwards at 
Coromandel,
 and shewed to 
Simon de Binto,
 and 
Pedro de Bruges
▪ Lapidares, the Bracelets which the 
Chaubainhaa
 had given him, who buying them of him payd six and thirty thousand Duckets for them, and had afterwards fourscore thousand for them of 
Trimira Raia
 Governor of 
Narsingua.
 Five days after 
Paulo de Seixas
 coming to the Camp, where he recounted all that I have related before, the 
Chaubainhaa,
 seeing him∣self destitute of all humane remedy, advised with his Councel what course he should take in so many misfortunes, that dayly in the neck of one another fell upon him, and it was re∣solved by them to put to the sword all things living that were not able to fight, and with the blood of them to make a Sacrifice to 
Q
iay Nivandel,
 God of Battels, then to cast all the treasure into the Sea, that their Enemies might make no benefit of it, afterward to set the whole City on fire, and lastly that all those which were able to beat arms should make themselves 
Amoucos,
 that is to say, men resolved either to dye, or vanquish, in fighting with the 
Bramaas.
 The 
Chaubainhaa
 very much approved this counsel, and concluding of it accordingly they fell presently to the demolishing of houses, and were preparing all other things for the effecting of their design, when as one of the three principal Commanders of the City, apprehending that which was to follow the next day, fled the night ensuing to the Enemies Camp, and there rendered himself with four thousand men under his leading to the 
Bramaa
; Hereupon the courages of all the rest were so abated by such a strange infidelity and flight, that not one of them cared afterwards either to keep watch, maintain the brea∣
hes, or do any other service whatsoever, but contrarily all that remained stuck not to say publiquely, that if the 
Chaubainhaa
 would not suddenly resolve to yield himself to the 
Bramaa,
 they would open the gates and let him in, for that it would be better for them to 
ye so, then to languish and consume away like rotten beasts as they did▪ The 
Chaubainhaa
 seeing them stifly bent thereunto for to appease them answered, that he would perform their desire, howbeit withall he caused a review to be made of those that would fight, but he 
ound them to be not above two thousand in all, and they too so destitute of courage, as they 
ould hardly have resisted feeble women: Beholding himself then reduced to the last cast, he communicated his mind to the Queen only, as having no other at that time by whom he may be advised, or that indeed could advise him; The only expedient then that he could rest on, was to render himself into the hands of his Enemy, and to stand to his mercy, or his rigor. Wherefore the next day about six of the clock in the morning he c
u
ed a white flag to be hung out over the wall in sign of peace, whereunto they of the Camp answered with another like banner; Hereupon the 
Xenimbrum,
 who was as it were Marshal of the Camp, sent an horseman to the bulwark, where the flag stood, unto whom it was delivered from the top of the wall, That the 
Chaubainhaa
 desired to send a Letter to the King, so as he might have a safe-conduct for it, which being signified to the 
Xenimbrum,
 he instantly dispatched away two of good quality in the Army with a safe-conduct, and so these two 
Bramaa
 re∣maining for hostages in the City, the 
Chaubainhaa
 sent the King a Letter by one of his Priests, that was fourscore years of age, and reputed for a Saint amongst them. The contents of this Letter were these: 
The love of children hath so much power in this house of our weak∣ness, that amongst us, who are fathers, there is not so much as one that for their sakes would not be well contented to descend a thousand times into the deep pit of the house of the Serpent, much more would expose his life for them, and put himself into the hands of one that useth so much clemency towards them that shall do so: For which reason I resolved this night with my wife and children, contrary to the opinions that would disswade me from this good, which I hold the greatest of all others, to render my self unto your Highness, that you may do with me as you think fit, and as shall be most agreeable to your good pleasure. As for the fault, wherewith I may be charged, and which I submit at your feet, I humbly beseech you not to regard it, that so the merit of the mercy, which you shall shew me, may be the greater before God and men. May your Highness therefore be pleased to send some presently for to take possession of my person, of my wife, of my children, of the City, of the Treasure, and of all the Kingdom; all which I do


even now yield up unto you, as to my Soveraign Lord, and lawful King. All the request that I have to make unto you thereupon with my knees on the ground, i
, that we may all of us with your permission finish our days in a Cloister, where I have already vowed continually to bewail and repent my fault past; For as touching the honors and estates of the world, wherewith your Highness might inrich me, as Lord of the most part of the Earth, and of the Isles of the Sea, they are things which I utterly renounce for evermore. In a word, I do solemnly swear unto you before the greatest of all the Gods, who with the gentle touch of his Almighty hand makes the Clouds of Heaven to move, never to leave that Religion which by your pleasure I shall be commanded to profess, where being freed from the vain hopes of the world, my repentance may be the more pleasing to him that pardoneth all things. This holy
 Grepo, 
Dean of the golden House of Saint
 Quiay, 
who for his goodnesse and austerity of life hath all power over me, will make a more ample relation unto you of what I have omitted, and can more particularly tell you that which concerns the offer I make you of rendring my self, that so relying on the reality of his Speech, the unquietness wherewith my soul is incessantly troubled may be appea∣sed.
 The King of 
Bramaa
 having read this Letter instantly returned another in answer there∣unto full of promises and oaths to this effect, 
That he would forget all that was past, and that for the future he would provide him an estate of so great a Revenue, as should very well content him:
 Which he but badly accomplished, as I shall declare hereafter. These news was published throughout all the Camp with a great deal of joy, and the next morn∣ing all the Equipage and Train that the King had in his quarter was set forth to view: First of all there were to be seen fourscore and six Field-Tents, wonderful rich, each of them be∣ing invironed with thirty Elephants, ranked in two Files, as if they had been ready to fight, with Castles on their backs full of Banners, and their 
Panores
 fastened to their Trunks, the whole number of them amounted unto two thousand, five hundred, and fourscore: Not far from them were twelve thousand and five hundred 
Bramaas,
 all mounted on horses, very richly accoustred; with the order, which they kept, they inclosed all the Kings quarter in four Files, and were all armed in Corslets, or Coats of Mayl, with Lances, Cymitars, and guilded Bucklers. After these Horse followed four Files of Foot, all 
Bramaas,
 being in number a∣bove twenty thousand. For all the other Souldiers of the Camp there were so many as they could not be counted, and they marched all in order after their Captains. In this publique Muster were to be seen
 world of Banners, & rich colours, & such a number of Instruments of war sounded, that the noise thereof, together with that which the Souldiers made, was most dread∣ful, and so great as it was not possible to hear one another. Now for that the King of 
Bra∣maa
 would this day make shew of his greatness in the reddition of the 
Chaubainhaa,
 he gave express Command, that all the Captains which were strangers, with their men, should put on their best clothes, and Arms, and so ranged in two Files, they should make as it were a kind of street, through which the 
Chaubainhaa
 might pass; this accordingly was put in executi∣on; and this street took beginning from the City gate, and reached as far as to the Kings Tent, being in length about three quarters of a League, or better: In this street there were six and thirty thousand strangers of two and forty different Nations, namely 
Portugals, Grecians, Venetians, Turks, Ianizaries, Iews, Arm
nians, Tartars, Mogores, Abyssins, Raizbutos, Nobins, Coracones, Persians, Tuparaas, Gizares, Tanacos, Malabares, Iaos, Achems, Moens, Siams, Lussons
 of the Island 
Borneo, Chacomas, Arracons, Predins, Papuaas, S
lebres, Mindanoas, Pegus, Bramaas,
 and many others whose names I know not. All these Nations were ranked according to the 
Xemimbrums
 order, whereby the 
Portugals
 were placed in the Vantgard, which was next to the gate of the City where the 
Chabain∣haa
 was to come; After them followed the 
Arm
nians,
 then the 
Ianizaries
 and 
Turks,
 and so the rest.








CHAP. LI. In what manner the 
Chaubainhaa
 rendred himself to the King of 
Bramaa,
 and the cruel proceeding against the Queen of 
Martabano,
 and the Ladies, her Attendants.


ABout one of the clock in the afternoon a Cannon was shot off, which was the Signal for the instant opening of the gates of the City,
 whereupon first of all issued out the Soul∣diers, whom the King had sent thither for the guard of it, being four thousand 
Siams
 and 
Bra∣maas,
 all Harquebusiers, Halberdiers, and Pikemen, with above three hundred armed Elephants; all which were commanded by a 
Bramaa,
 Uncle to the King, named 
Monpocasser, Bainba
 of the City of 
Melietay
; Ten or eleven paces after this Guard of Elephants marched divers Princes, and great Lords, whom the King had sent to receive the 
Chaubainhaa,
 all mounted on Elephants, richly harnessed, with Chairs upon their backs, plated over with gold, and Collars of precious stones about their necks; Then followed at some eight or nine paces di∣stance the 
Rolim
 of 
Monnay,
 Soveraign 
Talapoy
 of all the Priests of the Kingdom, and held in the reputation of a Saint, who went alone with the 
Chaubainhaa,
 as a Mediatour between the King and him; immediately after them came in a close Chair, carried upon mens shoulders, 
Nhay Canatoo,
 the daughter of the King of 
Pegu,
 from whom this 
Bramaa
 had taken his Kingdom, and wife to the 
Chaubainhaa,
 having with her four small children, namely, two boyes, and two girls, whereof the eldest was not seven years old; round about her and them went some thirty or forty young women of noble extraction, and wonderful fair, with cast down looks, and tears in their eyes, leaning upon other women: After them marched in or∣der certain 
Talagrepos,
 which are amongst them as the 
Capuchins
 with us, who bare-foot and bare-headed went along praying, holding beads in their hands, and ever and anon comfort∣ing those Ladies the best they could, and casting water in their faces for to bring them to them∣selves again, when as they fainted, which they did very often; A spectacle so lamentable, as it was not possible to behold it without shedding of tears: This desolate Company was attended by another Guard of Foot, and five hundred 
Bramaas
 on Horse-back. The 
Chau∣bainhaa
 was mounted on a little Elephant, in signe of poverty and contempt of the world, conformable to the Religion which he intended to enter into, being simply apparelled in a long Cassock of black velvet, as a mark of his mourning, having his beard, head, and eye∣brows shaven, with an old cord about his neck, so to render himself to the King; In this Equipage he appeared so sad and afflicted, that one could not forbear weeping to behold him; As for his age, he was about some threescore and two yeers old, tall of Stature, with a grave and severe look, and the countenance of a generous Prince. As soon as he was arrived at a place, which was near to the gate of the City, where a great throng of women, children, and old men waited for him, when they saw him in so deplorable an estate, they all made se∣ven times one after another so loud and dreadful a cry, as if Heaven and earth would have come together. Now these lamentations and complaints were presently seconded with such terrible blows, that they gave themselves without pity on their faces with stones, as they were most of them all of a gore blood; In the mean time things so horrible to behold, and mourn∣ful to hear, so much afflicted all the Assistants, that the very 
Bramaas
 of the Guard, though men of war, and consequently but little inclined to compassion, being also enemies to the 
Chaubainhaa,
 could not forbear weeping. It was likewise in this place, where 
Nhay Caua∣too,
 and all the other Ladies that attended on her, fainted twice, by reason whereof they were fain to let the 
Chaubainhaa
 alight from his Elephant for to go and comfort her; whereupon seeing her lying upon the ground in a swoon with her four children in her arms, he kneeled down on both his knees, and looking up to Heaven with his eyes full of tears. 
O mighty Power of God,
 cryed he, 
who is able to comprehend the righteous judgements of thy divine Iustice, in that thou, having no regard to the innocency of these little creatures, givest way to thy wrath, which passeth far beyond the reach of our weak capacities! but remember; O Lord, who thou art, and not what I am:
 This said, he fell with his face on the ground, near to the Queen his wife, which caused all the Assembly, who were without number, to make another such loud and horrible cry, as my words are not able to express it; The 
Chaubainhaa
 then took water in his mouth, and spurted it on his wife, by which means he brought her to her self a∣gain▪ and so taking her up in his arms, he fell a comforting her with speeches so full of zeal and devotion, as any one that heard him would have taken him rather for a Christian, then a



Gentile.
 After he had employed about half an hours time therein, and that they had remounted him on his Elephant, they proceeded on their way in the same orderas they held before, and as soon as the 
Chaubainhaa
 was out of the City gate, and came to the streets which was form∣ed of the several Companies of the strangers, ranked in two Files, he by chance cast his eye on that side, where the seven hundred 
Portugals
 were, all of them in their best clothes, with their buffe-coats, great feathers in their Caps, and their Ha
quebuses on their shoulders, as also 
Ioano Cayeyro
 
n the middest of them, in a Carnation Satin Suit, and a guilt Par
isan in his hand, wherewith he made room; the afflicted Prince no sooner knew him, but he pre∣sently fell down on the Elephant, and there standing still without passing on, he said with tears in his eyes, to those that were about him; 
My brethren, and good friends, I protest unto you, that it is a less grief unto me to make this sacrifice of my self, which the divine Iustice of God permits me to make him this day, then to look upon men so wicked and ingrateful as these same here are; either kill me then, or send these away, for otherwise I will not stir a foot fur∣ther.
 Having said so he turned away his face three times that he might not behold us, thereby shewing the great spleen that he bore us; and indeed all things well considered there was a great deal of reason that he should carry himself in that sort towards us in regard of that which I have related before: In the mean time the Captain of the Guard seeing the stay which the 
Chaubainhaa
 had made, and understanding the cause why he would not go on, though he could not imagine wherefore he complained so of the 
Portugals,
 yet he hastily turned his E∣lephant towards 
Cayeyro,
 and giving him a scurvy look: 
Ge
 you gone,
 said he, 
and that in∣stantly, for such wicked men as you are do not deserve to stand on any ground that bears fruit, and I pray God to pardon him which hath put it in the Kings head that you can be any ways profitable unto him; It were fitter for you therefore to shave away your beards that you may not deceive the world as you do, and we will have women in your places that shall serve us for our money.
 Whereupon the 
Bramaas
 of the Guard, being incensed against us, drove us away from thence with a great deal of shame and contumely. And truly, not to lye, never was I so sensible of any thing as this in respect of the honour of my Country-men. After this, the 
Chaubainhaa
 went on till he came to the Tent of the King, who attended him with a Royal Pomp: for he was accompanied with a great number of Lords, amongst the which there were fifteen 
Bainhaas,
 who are as Dukes with us, and of six or seven others, that were of greater dignity then they: As soon as the 
Chaubainhaa
 came near him, he threw himself at his feet, and so prostrated on the ground he lay there a good while, as it were in a swoon, wi
h
ut 
peaking a word, but the 
Rolim
 of 
Mounay,
 that was close by him, supplyed that de∣fect, and lik
 a religious man, as he was, spake for him to the King, saying; 
Sir, Here is a Sp
ctacle able to move thy heart to pity, though the crime be such as it is; Remember then that the thing most pleasing to God in this world, and whereunto the effects of his mercy is soon∣est communicated, is such an action, and voluntary submission, as this is, which here thou behold
st: It is for thee now to imitate his clemency, and so to do thou art most humbly in∣treated by the hearts of all them that are mollified by so great a misfortune as this is; Now if thou grantest them this their request, which with so much instance they beg of thee, be assured that God will take it in good part, and that at the hour of thy death he will stretch forth his mighty hand over thee, to the end thou mayst be exempted from all manner of faults.
 Hereunto he added many other speeches, whereby he perswaded the King to pardon him; at least-wise he promised so to do, wherewith the 
Rolim,
 and all the Lords there present, shew∣ed themselves very well contented, and commended him exceedingly for it, imagining that the effect should be answerable to that which he had ingaged himself for before all. Now because it began to be night, he commanded the most of them that were about him to retire, as for the 
Chaubainhaa,
 he committed him into the hands of a 
Bramaa
 Commander, named 
Xemin Comm
dau,
 and the Queen his wife, with his children, and the other Ladies were put into the custody of 
Xemin Ansedaa,
 as well because he had his wife there, as for that he was an honourable old man, in whom the King of 
Bramaa
 much confided.


The fear which the King of 
Bramaa
 was in left the men of war should enter into the City of 
Martabano,
 and should pillage it now that it was night before he had done all that, which I am hereafter to relate, was the cause that he sent to all the gates of the City, being four and twenty, 
Bramaa
 Captains for to guard them, with express Commandment, that upon pain of death no man should be suffered to enter in at any of them, before he had taken order for the performance of the promise, which he had made to the strangers to give them the


spoil of it; howbeit he took not that care, and used such diligence for the consideration he sp
ke of, but onely that he might preserve the 
Chaubainhaas
 treasure, to which effect he spent two whole days in conveighing it away, it being so great that a thousand men were for that space altogether imployed therein; At the end of these two days the King went very early in the morning to an hill, called 
Beidao,
 distant from his quarters some two or three flight shoot, and then caused the Captains that were at the Guard of the gates to leave them, and retire away; whereupon the miserable City of 
Martabono
 was delivered to the mercy of the Souldiers, who at the shooting off of a Cannon, which was the signal thereof, entred presently into it pell-mell, and so thronging together, that at the entring into the gates, it is said above three hundred were stifled, for as there was there an infinite company of men of War of different Nations, the most of them without King, without Law, and without the fear and knowledge of God, they went all to the Spoile with closed eyes, and therein shewed themselves so cruel minded, that the thing they made least reckoning of was to kill an hundred men for a crown; And truly the disorder was such in the City, as the King him∣self was fain to go thither six or seven times in Person for to appease it. The Sack of this Ci∣ty endured three days and an half, with so much avarice and cruelty of these barbarous ene∣mies▪ as it was wholly pillaged, without any thing left that might give an eye-cause to covet it. That done, the King with a new ceremony of Proclamations caused the 
Chaubainhaas
 Pallaces, together with thirty or forty very fair rich Houses of his principal Lords, and all the 
Pagods
 and Temples of the City to be demolished, so that according to the opinion of many, it was thought that the loss of those magnificent Edifices amounted to above ten millions of gold: wherewith not yet contented he commanded all the buildings of the Ci∣ty that were still a foot, to be set on fire, which by the violence of the wind kindled in such manner, as in that onely night there remained nothing unburnt, yea the very Walls, Towers, and Bulwarks were consumed even to the foundations. The number of them that were killed in this Sack was threescore thousand persons, nor was that of the prisoners much less. There were an hundred and forty thousand houses, and seventeen hundred Tem∣ples burnt, wherein also were consumed threescore thousand Statues, or Idols of divers mettals, during this Siege they of the City had eaten three thousand Elephants. There was found in this City six thousand pieces of Artillery, what of brass and iron, an hundred thousand Quintals of Pepper, and as much of Sanders, Benjamin, Lacre, Lignum Aloes, Camphire, Silk, and many other kinds of rich Merchandise, but above all an infinite number of com∣modities, which were come thither from the 
Indiaes
 in above an hundred vessels of 
Cambaya, Achem, Melinda, Ceilam,
 and of all the Streight of 
Mecqua,
 of the 
Lequios,
 and of 
Chi∣na.
 As for the gold, silver, precious stones, and jewels, that were found there, one knows not truly what they were, for those things are ordinarily concealed; wherefore it shall suf∣fice me to say, that so much as the King of 
Bramaa
 had for certain of the 
Chaubainhaas
 Treasure, amounted to an hundred Millions of gold, whereof, as I have said before, our King lost the Moitie, as well for our sins, as through the malice and envy of wicked dispo∣sitions. The next day after the City was pillaged, demolished, and burnt, there was seen in the morning upon the hill where the King was, one and twenty pair of Gallows, twenty of the which were of an equal height, and the other a little lower erected on pillars of stone, and guarded by an hundred 
Bramaa
 Horsmen; There were also round about the place very large Trenches, where a great many Banners spotted with drops of bloods were planted. As this Novelty promised somewhat which no man had heard of before, six of us 
Portugals
 ran thither to learn what the matter might be, and as we were going along we heard a great noise made by the men of War from the Camp, whereupon we saw come out of the Kings Quarter a number of Horsmen, who with Lances in their hands prepared a great Street, and cried out aloud; 
Let no man upon pain of death appear in Armes, nor utter that with his mouth which he thinks in his heart.
 A pretty way off from these Horse was the 
Xemimbrum,
 with an hundred armed Elephants, and a good many Foot; after them went fifteen hundred 
Bramaas
 on Horsback, cast into four Orders of Files, each of them six in a rank, whereof the 
Talanagybras,
 Viceroy of 
Tangu,
 was Commander: Then marched the 
Chauseroo Siam∣mon
 with three thousand 
Siammes,
 armed with Harquebuses and Lances, all in one Batta∣lion: In the midst of these was an hundred and twenty women tyed and bound four and four together, and accompanied with 
Talagrepos,
 men of great Austerity, and are such as the 
Capachins
 amongst us, who laboured all they might to comfort them in this last act of life;


Behind them were twelve Ushers with Maces, that went before 
Nhay Canatoo,
 Daughter to the King of 
Pegu,
 from whom this 
Bramaa
 Tyrant had usurped his Kingdom, and wife to the 
Chaubainhaa,
 with four children of hers, which were carried by so many Horsmen: all these sufferers were the wives or daughters of the principal Commanders that the 
Chau∣bainhaa
 had with him in the City, upon whom in the way of a strange revenge this 
Bramaa
 Tyrant desired to wreak his spight, and the hatred that he had alwayes born unto women. The most of these poor wretches were between seventeen and five and twenty years of age, all of them very white and fair, with bright auborn hair, but so weak in body, that often∣times they fell down in a swoon, out of which certain women upon whom they leaned, en∣deavoured still to bring them again, presenting them Comfits, and other such things fit for that purpose, but they would take none of them, for that they were, as I have said, so feeble and benummed, as they could scarce hear what the 
Talegr
pes
 spake unto them, only they now and then lifted up their hands to Heaven. After this Princess marched threescore 
Grepos,
 in two Files, praying with their looks fixed on the ground, and their eyes watered with tears, saying ever and anon in a doleful tone; 
Thou which holdest thy Being of none but thy self, so justifie our works, that they may be agreeable to thy Iustice.
 Whereunto others an∣swered weeping; 
Grant, Lord, that it may be so, that through our fault we lose not the rich gifts of thy promises.
 After these 
Grepos
 followed a procession of three or four hun∣dred little children, quite naked from the Girdle-sted downwards, having in their hands great white wax lights, and cords about their necks; These, like the others, with a sad and lamentable voice, which moved every one to compassion, uttered these words: 
We most humbly beseech thee, O Lord, to give ear unto our cries and groans, and shew mercy to these thy Captives, that with a full rejoycing they may have a part of the graces and bene∣fits of thy rich treasures
; and much more they said to that purpose in 
avour of these poor sufferers: Behind this Procession was another Guard of Footmen, all 
Bramaas,
 and armed with Lances, Arrows, and some Harquebuses. As for the Rear-ward, it consisted of an hundred Elephants, like to them that marched first of all, so that the number of the men of War that assisted at this Execution, as well for the Guard, as for the Pomp thereof, was ten thousand Foot, and two thousand Horse, besides the two hundred Elephants, and a world of other people, both Strangers and Natives, that came thither to behold the end of so mournful and lamentable and action.








CHAP. LII. In what sort the sentence of Death was executed on the person of the 
Chaubainhaa,
 King of 
Martaban, Nhay Canatoo
 his wife, and an hundred and forty women; with that which the King of 
Bramaa
 did after his return to 
Pegu.


THese poor sufferers having been led in the order before mentioned clean through the Camp, they came at last to the place of Execution,
 where the six Ushers with a loud voyce made this Proclamation: 
Let all manner of people see and observe the bloody justice, which is here to be done by the living God, Lord of all truth, and our King the Soveraign of our Heads, who of his absolute power doth command that these hundred and forty Women be put to death, and thrown into the ayr, for that by their counsel and incitement their Fathers and Husbands stood out against us in this City, and at times killed twelve thousand
 Bramaas 
of the Kingdom of
 Tangu. Then at the ringing of a Bell all the Officers and Ministers of Justice pel-mell together with the guards, made such a cry, as was most dreadful to hear; wherupon the cruel Hangmen being ready to put the sentence of Death in execution, those poor wretches embraced one another, and shedding abundance of tears they addressed them∣selves to 
Nhay Canatoo,
 who lay at that time almost dead in the lap of an old Lady, and with their last complements one of them spake for all the rest unto her in this manner; 
Ex∣cellent Lady, that art as a crown of Roses upon our Heads, now that we thy humble servants are entering into those mournful Mansions where Death doth reside, comfort us we beseech thee with thy dear sight, that so we may with less grief quit these bodies full of anguish for to present our selves before that Almighty just Iudg, of whom we will for ever implore his justice for a perpetual vengeance of the wrong that is done us.
 Then 
Nhay Canatoo
 beholding them with a countenance more dead then alive, answered them with a feeble voyce, that could scarce be heard, 
Go not away so soon, my Sisters, but help me to sustain these little children.
 That said, she leaned down again on the bosom of that Lady, without speaking a word more, whereupon the Ministers of the Arm of Vengeance, so they term the Hangmen, layd hold on those poor women, and hanged them up all by the feet, with their heads down∣wards, upon twenty Gibbets, namely seven on each one: now so painful a death as this was, made them give strange and fearful groanes and sobs, until at length the blood stifled them all in less then an hour. In the mean time 
Nhay Canatoo
 was conducted by the four women, upon whom she leaned, directly to the Gallows whereon she and her four chil∣dren were to be hanged, and there the 
Rolim
 of 
Mounay,
 who was held amongst them for a holy man, used some speeches unto her for to encourage her the better to suffer death, whereupon she desired them to give her a little water, which being brought unto her, she filled he mouth with it, and so spurted it upon her four children, whom she held in her arms; then having kissed them many times, she said unto them weeping, 
O my Children, my Children, whom I have conceived anew within the interior of my Soul, how happy would I think my self if I might redeem your lives with the loss of mine own a thousand times over if it were possible! for in regard of the fear and anguish wherein I see you at this present, and wherein every one sees me also, I should receive Death with as good an heart from the hand of this cruel Enemy, as I willingly desire to see my self in the presence of the Soveraign Lord of all things, within the repose of his celestial Habitation.
 Then turning her to the Hangman, who was going to bind her two little boys, 
Good Friend,
 said she, 
be not I pray thee so voyd of pity, as to make me see my children dye, for in so doing thou wouldst com∣mit a great sin; wherefore put me first to death, and refuse me not this boon which I crave of thee for Gods sake.
 After she had thus spoken she took her children again in her arms, and kissing them over and over in giving them her last farewell, she yielded up the ghost in the Ladies lap upon whom she leaned, not so much as once stirring ever after, which the Hang∣man perceiving, ran presently unto her and hanged her as he had done the rest, together with her four little children, two of each side of her, and she in the middle. At this cruel and pitiful spectacle there arose from amongst all this people so great and hideous a cry, that the Earth seemed to tremble under the feet of them that stood upon it, and withall there followed such a Mutiny throughout the whole Camp, as the King was constrained to


fortifie himself in his quarter with six thousand 
Bramaa
 Horse, and thirty thousand Foot, and yet for all that be thought not himself secure enough from it, had not the night come, which onely was able to calm the furious motions of these men of war; For of seven hun∣dred thousand which were in the Camp, six hundred thousand were by Nation 
Pegu's,
 whose King was the Father of this Queen, that was thus put to death; but this Tyrant of 
Bramaa
 had so disarmed and subjected them, as they durst not so much as quich upon any occasion. Behold in what an infamous manner 
Nhay Canatoo
 finished her days, a Princess every way accomplished, wife to the 
Chaubainhaa
 King of 
Martabano,
 and the daughter of the King of 
Pegu,
 Emperor of nine Kingdoms, whose yearly Revenue amounted unto three millions of Gold. As for the infortunate King her Husband, he was the same night cast into the River with a great stone tyed about his neck, together with fifty or threescore of his chiefest Lords, who were either the Fathers, Husbands or Brothers of those hundred and forty Ladies, that were most unjustly put to such an ignominious death, amongst the which there were three, whom this King of 
Bramaa
 had demanded in marriage at such time as he was but a simple Earl, but not one of their Fathers would condescend unto it, whereby one may see how great the revolutions of time and fortune are.


After the Tyrant of 
Bramaa
 had caused this rigorous Justice to be done, he stayed there nine whole days, during the which many of the Inhabitants of the City were also execu∣ed; At last he departed for to go to 
Pegu,
 leaving behind him 
Bainhaa Chaque,
 Lord Steward of his House, to take order for all things that might conduce to the pacifying of that Kingdom, and to provide for the repairing of what the fire had consumed, to which purpose he placed a good Garison there, and carryed with him the rest of his Army; 
Ioano Cayeyro
 followed him also with seven hundred 
Portugals,
 not above three or four re∣maining behind in the ruines of 
Martabano,
 and those too not very considerable, except it were one, named 
Gonçalo Falcan,
 a Gentleman well born, and whom these 
Gentiles
 commonly called 
Crisna Pacan,
 that is to say, 
Flower of Flowers,
 a very honorable Title amongst them, which the King of 
Bramaa
 had given him in recompence of his services: Now for as much as at my departure from 
Malaca, Pedro de Faria
 had given me a Letter directed unto him, whereby he desired him to assist me with his favor, in case I had need of it in the affair for which he sent me thither, as well for the service of the King, as for his own particular; as soon as I arrived at 
Martabano,
 where I found him resident, I de∣livered him this Letter, and withall gave him an account of the occasion that brought me thither, which was to confirm the ancient league of Peace that the 
Chaubainhaa
 had made by his Embassadors with them of 
Malaca,
 at such time as 
Pedro de Faria
 was first Gover∣nor of it, and whereof he could not chuse but have some knowledg; adding moreover, how to that effect I had brought the 
Chaubainhaa
 Letters full of great protestations of ami∣ty, and a Present of certain very rich Pieces of 
China.
 Hereupon this 
Gonçalo Falcan
 imagining that by means hereof he might insinuate himself much more into the good grace of the King of 
Bramaa,
 to whose side he turned at the siege of 
Martabano,
 quitting that of the 
Chaubainhaa,
 whom formerly he served, he went three days after the Kings depar∣ture to his said Governor, and told him that I was come thither, as Embassador from the Captain of 
Malaca
 to treat with the 
Chaubainhaa,
 unto whom the Captain sent an offer of great Forces against the King of 
Bramaa,
 in so much that they of the Country were up∣on the point of fortifying themselves in 
Martabano,
 and chasing away the 
Bramaas
 out of the Kingdom; whereunto he added so many other such like matters, that the Governor sent presently to apprehend me, and after he had put me into safe custody, he went directly to the Junck, in which I came from 
Malaca,
 and seized upon all the goods that were in her, which were worth above an hundred thousand duckets, committing the 
Necoda,
 Captain and Master of the Junck, to prison, as also all the rest that were in her, to the number of an hun∣dred threescore and four persons, wherein comprized forty rich Merchants, 
Malayes, Menancabo's, Mahumetans,
 and 
Gentiles,
 Natives of 
Malaca.
 All these were incontinent∣ly condemned to a confiscation of their goods, and to remain the Kings prisoners, as well as I, for being complices in the Treason, which the Captain of 
Malaca
 had plotted in se∣cret with the 
Chaubainhaa
 against the King of 
Bramaa.
 Having thus caused them to be put into a deep Dungeon, he made them to be so cruelly scourged, that within a month after their imprisonment, of an hundred sixty four of them, which they were, there dyed nine∣teen, either of a Lethargy, or of hunger, or thirst. As for the rest, they were put into a


miserable Shallop without Sails or Oars, wherein they were exposed down the River: Being delivered in this sort to the mercy of Fortune, they were cast by the wind into a de∣sart Island, called 
Pulho Canuida,
 seated twenty leagues within the Sea of this Bar, where they furnished themselves with some Sea-fish, and such fruits as they found in the woods, and in this necessity making a kind of sail of the clothes they had, and with two Oars, which it may be they met withall there, or made themselves, they took their course all along by the Coast of 
Iunçalan,
 and from thence to another place, wherein they employed the space of two months, arriving at length at the River of 
Parles
 in the Kingdom of 
Qu
da,
 where they all dyed of certain Impostumes, which rose in their throats like unto Carbuncles, two onely excepted, who came to 
Malaca,
 and recounted to 
Pedro de Faria
 the whole success of this sad Voyage, and how that I was condemned to dye, as indeed I ex∣pected every hour to be led to execution, when as it pleased God to deliver me miraculous∣ly; for as soon as the 
Necoda
 and the Merchants were banished in the manner that I have declared, I was committed to another prison farther off, where I remained six and thirty days laden with chains and irons in a most cruel and insupportable manner; During all that time the Traytor 
Gonçalo
 exhibited against me dayly new and false allegations, wherein he charged me with a world of things, which I never so much as thought of, and that to no other intent but to procure my death, that so he might rob me, as he had done all the rest that were in the Junck: To which end, having questioned me three several times in Judgment, I never answered any thing to his Interrogatories that was to purpose, whereat he and other of my Enemies were much enraged, saying, that I did it out of pride, and in contempt of Justice, so that for a punishment thereof they caused me to be openly whipped, and a great deal of lacre, which is like unto hard wax, to be dropped scalding hot upon me, whereof the pain was such, as it had almost killed me, and indeed all that were by, held me for a dead man. Now because for the most part I knew not what I spake, but talked like a desperate man, I happened three or four times to say, that for to rob me of my goods I had all these false accusations put upon me, but that Captain 
Ioano Cayeyro,
 who was at 
Pegu,
 would ere it were long acquaint the King with this cruel usage of me, which was the cause of saving my life; for even as this wicked Governor was going to have the sentence executed, which was given against me, some of his friends counselled him to forbear, saying, that if he put me to death, no doubt but that all the 
Portugals,
 which were at 
Pegu,
 would complain of him to the King, and tell him, that for to rob me of an hundred thousand duckets, which I had there in Commodities, appertaining to the Captain of 
Malaca,
 he had most unjustly taken away my life: And that this being so, the King would demand an account of him of all those Commodities, or of the Mony for them, and that if he rendered him even all that he had taken from me, yet would not that con∣tent him, imagining still there was somewhat more, whereby he would so put himself out of the good grace of the King, as he would never recover it again, which would be the cause of the utter overthrown both of himself and his children, besides the dishonor that would redound to him over and above. This dog the Governor 
Bainbaa Chaque,
 fear∣ing lest that should come to pass which they 
ad said, desisted from his former obstinacy, and correcting the sentence he had given, he ordained, That I should not dye, but that my goods should be confiscated, and my self arrested for the Kings prisoner; As indeed so soon as I was healed of the hurts, which the burning of the lacre, and the stripes of the whips had made upon me, I was conducted in chains to 
Pegu,
 and there as a prisoner was put in∣to the hands of a 
Bramaa,
 Treasurer to the King, named 
Diosoray,
 who had also in his custody eight other 
Portugals,
 whose sins had procured them the same misfortune, which mine had caused unto me; for it was now full six months since these poor wretches had been in his power, being taken in the ship of 
Don Anrique Deca
 of 
Cananor,
 which by a tempest was cast on that Coast. Now seeing that hitherto I have discoursed of the success of my Voyage to 
Martabano,
 and of the benefit that redounded to me by my going thither for the service of the King, which was no other then the loss of my goods, and the impri∣sonment of my person; before I engage my self further in these relations, I am resolved to intreat of the divers Fortunes, which I ran in that Kingdom for the space of two years and an half that I travelled therein, being the time of my Captivity, as also of the several Count
es through which I was carryed by my crosses and mishaps, as holding it altogether necessary for the declaration of that which I am going on withall. I say then, that after


this King of 
Bramaa
 was departed from the City of 
Martabano,
 as I have related before, he journeyed so long that at length he came to 
Pegu,
 where, before he dismissed his Com∣manders, he caused a Muster to be made of his Army, and found that of seven hundred thousand men, which he had carryed along with him to the besieging of the 
Chaubainhaa,
 there was fourscore and six thousand of them wanting: And for as much as he had about that time some inckling how the King of 
Avaa,
 confederated with the 
Savadis
 and 
Chaleus,
 would give entry unto the 
Sianmon
 (whose Country borders on the West and Northwest side on the 
Calaminban,
 Emperor of the indomptable Forces of the Elephants of the Earth, as I will shew hereafter when I speak of him) to the end he might win from this 
Bramaa
 the chiefest strengths of his Kingdom, he like a good Captain as he was, and very cunning in matter of War, before he passed on further, caused men to be levyed, with whom, as also with all other necessary things he furnished those principal Fortresses from whence his greatest fear proceeded. Then having resolved to go and besiege the City of 
Prom,
 he retained the Army, which he had already a foot, and made new and great pre∣parations throughout the Kingdom, using such diligence therein, as in six months time he had got together the number of nine hundred thousand men, whom he imba
qued in twelve thousand rowing Vessels, whereof two thousand were 
Seroos, Laulers, Caturos,
 and 
Foists.
 Now all this great Fleet set forth from 
Pegu
 the ninth day of 
March,
 1545. and going up the River of 
Ansedaa,
 it went to 
Danapluu,
 where it was furnished with all such provisions as was necessary. From this place following on their way through a great River of fresh water, called 
Picau Malacou,
 which was above a league broad, at length upon the thirteenth of 
April
 they came within view of 
Prom.
 There, by some whom they took that night, they learned, that the King was dead, and how he had left for his succes∣sor to the Kingdom a son of his of thirteen years of age, whom the King his Father be∣fore he dyed had marryed to his wives sister, the Aunt of the said young Prince, and Daugh∣ter to the King of 
Avaa.
 This young King was no sooner advertised of the King of 
Bramaa
 his coming to besiege him in his City of 
Prom,
 but he sent presently away to the King his Father-in-law for succor, which he instantly granted, and to that end speedily raised an Ar∣my of 30000 
Mons, Tarces,
 and 
Chalems,
 choyce men and trained up in the Wars, of whom he made a son of his, and brother to the Queen, General. In the mean time the 
Bramaa,
 having intelligence thereof, used all possible diligence for to besiege the City before so great a succor might arrive. To which purpose, having landed his Army in a plain, called 
Mei∣gavotau,
 some two leagues below the City, he continued there five days in making ready such preparations as were needful; Having given order for all things, he caused his Army to march one morning before day directly to the City, with the sound of Drums, Fifes, and other such instruments of War; where being arrived about noon without any oppositi∣on, he began presently to settle his Camp, so that before it was night, the whole City was environed with Trenches▪ and very great Ditches, as also with six rows of Cannons, and other Pieces of Ordnance.








CHAP. LIII. That which passed between the Queen of 
Prom,
 and the King of 
Bramaa,
 together with the first Assault that was given to the City and the Success thereof.


THe King of 
Bramaa
 had been now five days before the City of 
Prom,
 when as the Queen that governed the State in the place of her Husband, seeing her self thus besieged, sent to visit this her enemy with a rich jewel of precious stones, which was presented unto him by a 
Talagrepo,
 or religious man, of above an hundred years old, who was held amongst them for a Saint, together with a Letter, wherein this was written; 
Great and mighty Lord, more favoured in the House of fortune then all the Kings of the earth, the force of an ex∣tream power, an increasing of the Salt-seas, whereinto all lesser rivers do render themselvos a Shield full of very fair devices, Processor of the greatest States, upon the Throne whereof thy feet do repose with a marvellous Majesty: I
 Nhay Nivolau, 
a poor woman, Governess, and Tutress of my Son, an Orphan, do prostrate my self before thee with tears in mine eyes, and with the respect which ought to be rendred unto thee; I beseech thee not to draw thy Sword against my weakness, for thou knowest that I am but a silly woman, which can but only cry unto God for the wrong that it done me, whose property also it is to succour with mer∣cy, and to chastice with justice the States of the world be they never so great, trampling them under his feet with so redoubted a power, that the very Inhabitants of the profound house of smoak do fear and tremble before this Almighty Lord: I pray and conjure thee not to take from me that which is mine, seeing it is so small a thing, as thou shalt not be the great∣er for it when thou hast it, nor yet the less if thou hast it not; whereas contrarily, if thou, my Lord, wilt shew thy self pitiful to me, that act of clemency will bring thee such reputati∣on, as the very Infants themselves will cease from sucking the white breasts of their Mo∣thers for to praise thee with the pure lips of their innocency, and likewise all they of my Coun∣try, and Strangers will ever remember such thy charity towards me, and I my self will cause it to be graven on the Tombs of the dead, that both they and the living may give thee thanks for a thing, which I do beg of thee with so much instance from the bottom of my heart. This holy man,
 Avenlachim, 
from whom thou shalt receive this Letter, written with mine own hand, hath Power and Authority to treat with thee in the Name of my Fatherless Son, concern∣ing all that shall be judged reasonable touching the tribute and homage which thou shalt think fit to have rendred unto thee, upon condition that thou wilt be pleased to let us enjoy our hou∣ses, so that under a true assurance thereof we may bring up our children, and gather the fruit of our labours for the nourishment of the poor Inhabitants of this paltry Town, who will all serve thee, and I to with a most humble respect in all things, wherein thou shalt think good to imploy us at thy pleasure.


The 
Bramaa
 received this Letter and Ambassage with a great deal of authority, and enter∣tained the Religious man, that delivered it to him, with much honour, as well in reguard of his age, as for that he was held as a Saint amongst th
m; with all he granted him certain things which were at first demanded, as a Cessation of Arms till such time as Articles should be a∣greed on, as also a permission for the Besieged to converse with the Besiegers, and other such things of little consequence; In the mean time judging with himself that all those offers, which this poor Queen made him, and the humble submissions of her Letter proceeded from weakness and fear, he would never answer the Ambassadour clearly, or to purpose: Contra∣rily he caused all the places there abouts that were weak▪ and unarmed, to be secretly ransaked, and the poor Inhabitants thereof to be unmercifully butchered by their barbarous enemies, whose cruelty was so g
eat, that in five dayes, according to report, they killed fourteen thou∣sand persons, the most part whereof, were women, children, and old men, that were not able to bear Arms. Hereupon the 
Rolim,
 who brought this Letter, relying no longer on the false promises of this Tyrant, and discontented with the little respect he used towards him, de∣manded leave of him to return to the City, which the 
B
amaa
 gave him, together with this answer; That if the Queen would deliver up her self, her Treasure, her Kingdom, and her Vassals to him, he would recompence her another way for the loss of her State: but withall that she was to return him a peremptory answer to this proposition of his the very same day,


which was all the time I could give her, that so he might upon the knowledge of her resolu∣tion determine upon what he had to do. The 
Rolim
 went herewith back to the City, where he gave the Queen an account of all things, saying, That this Tyrant was a man without faith, and replete with damnable intentions, for proof whereof he represented unto her the Siege of 
Martabano,
 the usage of the 
Chaubainhaa
 after he rendred himself unto him upon his word, and how he had put him, his wife, his children, and the chiefest Nobility of his Kingdom to a most shamefull death. These things considered it was instantly concluded, as well by the Queen, as by all those of her Councel, that she should defend the City, till such time as succour came from her Father, which would be within fifteen days at the furthest: This resolution taken, she being of a great courage without further delay took order for all things, that were thought necessary for the defence of the City, animating to that end her people with great prudence, and a man-like Spirit, though she was but a woman; Moreover, as she liberally imparted to them of her Treasure, so she promised every one throughly to acknowledg their services with all manner of recompences and honours, whereby they were mightily encouraged to fight: In the mean space the King of 
Bramaa,
 seeing that the 
Rolim
 returned him no answer within the time prefixt, began the next day to fortifie all the Quarters of his Camp with double rows of Cannon, for to batter the City on every side; and for assaulting of the walls he caused a great number of Ladders to be made, publishing withall throughout his whole Army, that all Souldiers upon pain of death should be ready within three days to go to the Assault; The time then being come, which was the third of 
May,
 1545. About an hour before day the King went out of his Quarter, where he was at anchor upon the river with two thousand vessels of choice men, and giving the Signal to the Commanders which were on Land, to prepare themselves, they altogether in one Body assailed the walls, with so great a cry, as if Heaven and earth would have come together, so that both sides falling to encounter pell-mell with one another, there was such a conflict betwixt them, as within a little while the air was seen all on fire, and the earth all bloody, whereunto being added the clashing of weapons, and noise of guns, it was a spectacle so dreadful, that we few 
Portugals,
 who beheld these things, re∣mained astonished, and almost besides our selves: This fight indured full five hours, at the end whereof the Tyrant of 
Bramaa
 seeing those within defend themselves so valiantly, and the most part of his Forces to grow faint, he went to land with ten or eleven thousand of his best men, and with all diligence re-inforcing the Companies, that were fighting, the Bickering re∣newing in such sort, as one would have said it did but then begin, so great was the fury of it. The second trial continued till night, yet would not th
 K
ng desist from the fight, what coun∣sel soever was given him to retire, but contrarily he swore not to give over the Enterprise begun, and that he would lie that night within the inclosure of the City walls, or cut off the heads of all those Commanders that were not wounded at their coming off; In the mean time this obstinacy was very pejudicial to him, for continuing the Assault till the Moon was gone down, which was two hours past midnight, he was then forced to sound a Retreat, after he had lost in this Assault, as was the next day found upon a Muster, fourscore thousand of his men, besides those which were hurt, which were thirty thousand at the least, whereof many died for want of dressing, whence issued such a plague in the Camp, as well through the cor∣ruption of the air, as the water of the river, that was all tainted with blood and dead bodies, that thereby about fourscore thousand more perished, amongst whom were five hundred 
Por∣tugals,
 having no other buriall then the bellies of Vultures, Crows, and such like birds of prey, which devoured them all along the Coast where they lay.


The King of 
Bramaa,
 having considered that this first Assault having cost him so dear, would no more haza
d his men in that manner,
 but he caused a great Terrace to be made with Bavins, and above ten thousand Date-trees, which he commanded to be cut down, and on that he raised up a platform so high, as it over-topped the walls of the City two fathom, and more, where he placed fourscore pieces of Ordnance, and with them continually battering the City for the space of nine dayes together, it was for the most part demolished with the death of fourteen thousand persons, which quite abated the poor Queens courage, especially when she came to un∣derstand that she had but six thousand fighting men left, all the rest, which consisted of women, chidren, & old men, being unfit and unable to bear Arms. The miserable besieged seeing themselves reduced to such extreamity, assembled together in Councel, and there by the advice of the chief∣est of them, it was concluded, That all in general should anoint themselves with the Oile of the Lamps of the Chappel of 
Quiay Nivandel,
 God of Battail of the field 
Vitan,
 and so


offering themselves up in sacrifice to him, set upon the platform, with a determination either to dye, or to vanquish, in vowing themselves all for the defence of their young King, to whom they had so lately done homage, and sworn to be true and faithful Subjects. This resolution taken, which the Queen and all her Nobility approved of for the best and most assured, in a time wherein all things were wanting to them for the longer defending themselves, they promised to accomplish it in the manner aforesaid by a solemn O
th, which they all took; Now there being no further question but to see how they should carry themselves in this affair, they first of all made an Uncle of the Queens the Captains of this resolute Band, who assembling these six thousand together, the same night, about the first quarter of the watch, made a sally out of the two gates that were neerest to the Terrace and platform, and so taking courage from their despair, and resolution to dye, they fought so valiantly, that in less then half an hour the whole Camp was put in disorder, the Ter∣race gained, the fourscore pieces of Cannon taken, the King himself hurt, the Pallisado burnt, the Trenches broken, and the 
Xenimbrum,
 General of the Army, slain, with above fifteen thousand 
en more, amongst the which were five hundred 
Turks
; there we
e moreover forty Elephants taken, besides those that were killed, and eight hundred 
Bramaas
 made prisoners, so that these six thousand resolute men did that, which an hundred thou∣sand, though valiant enough, could hardly have effected. After this they retreated an hour before day, and upon a review they found, that of six thousand which they were, there was but seven hundred slain. This bad success so grieved and incensed the King of 
Bra∣maa,
 as attributing the cause thereof to the negligence of some of his Cap
ains in the 
ll guarding of the Terrace, that the day following he caused two thousand 
Pegu's
 to be b
∣h
aded, which had stood sentinel that night. This adventure rendred things quiet for the space of twelve days, during which the besieged stirred not; in the mean time one of the four principal Captain of the City, named 
Xemim Meleytay,
 fearing that which all others in general misdoubted, namely, that they could not escape from falling into the hands of so cruel an Enemy, treated secretly with the Tyrant, and upon condition that he would continue him in his charge, not meddle with any of the houses of his friends, and make him 
Xemin
 of 
Ansedaa
 in the Kingdom of 
Pegu,
 with all the Revenue which the 
Bainhaa
 of 
Malacou
 had there, being thirty thousand Duckats a year, he would deliver him up the City by giving him entrance into it through the gate which he commanded: The King of 
Bramaa
 accepted hereof, and for a gage of performance on his part, he sent him a rich Ring from off his finger. This Treason so concluded, was effected on the three and twen∣tieth of 
August,
 in the year 1545. wherein this Tyrant of 
Bramaa
 carryed himself with all the barbarousness and cruelty that he used to practise in the like cases. And for as much as I conceive that I should never have done, if I should recount here at large how this af∣fair past, I will say no more, but that the gate was opened, the City delivered up, the Inhabitants all cut in pieces, without so much as sparing one; the King and Queen made prisoners, their Treasurers taken, the Buildings and Temples demolished, and many other inhumanities exercised with such outragiousness, the belief whereof is beyond the imagi∣nation and thought of man, and truly I never represent unto my self in what manner it was done, as having seen it with mine own eyes, but that I remain as it were astonished and besides my self at it. For as this Tyrant was touched to the quick with the affront he had lately received, so he executed all the cruelties he could imagine against thos
 miser∣able Inhabitants, for to be revenged of the ill success he had had in the siege, which could not proceed from any other but a base mind and vile extraction, for it ordinarily falls out, that barbarousness finds place in such kind of people, rather then in generous and valiant hearts; Whereunto may be added, that he was a man without faith, and of an eff
minate disposition, though he was nevertheless an Enemy to women, albeit there were in that King∣dom, and in all the others whereof he was Lord, those that were very white and fair. After the bloody ruine of that wretched City, the Tyrant entred into it in great pomp, and and as it were in triumph, through a breach that was made of purpose in the wall, and by his express commandment. When he was arrived at the young Kings pallace, he caused himself to be crowned King of 
Prom,
 and during the Ceremony of this Coronation, he made that poor Prince, whom he had deprived of his Kingdom, to continue kneeling be∣fore him, with his hands held up, as if he adored some God, and ever and anon they con∣strained him to stoup down and kiss the Tyrants feet, who in the mean time made shew as


if he were not pleased therewith. This done, he went into a Balcone, which looked on a great Market place, whither he commanded all the dead children, that lay up and down the streets, to be brought, and then causing them to be hacked very small, he gave them, mingled with Bran, Rice, and Herbs, to his Elephants to eat. Afterward, with a strange kind of ceremony, at the sound of Trumpets, Drums, and other such like Instruments, there was above an hundred Horses led in, loaden with the quarters of men and women, which also he commanded to be cut small, and then cast into a great fire, kindled expresly for it. These things so done, the Queen was brought before him, that was wife to the poor little King, who, as I said before, was but thirteen years of age, and she thirty and six, a woman ve∣ry white, and well-favored, Aunt to her own Husband, Sister to his Mother, and Daugh∣ter to the King of 
Avaa,
 which is the Country from whence the Rubies, Saphirs, and Emeralds do come to 
Pegu
; and it was the same Lady, whom this 
Bramaa
 had sent to demand in marriage of her Father, as it was then spoken, but that he refused him, saying to his Embassador for an answer, That the thoughts of his Daughter soared a pitch higher then to be the wife of the 
Xemim
 of 
Tanguu,
 which was the family whence this Tyrant was issued: But now that she was fallen into his hands as his slave, whether he used her so, either out of a revenge of that affront, or out of scorn and contempt, so it was that he made her to be publiquely stript stark naked, and to be torn and mangled with whipping, and then in that manner to be led up and down all the City, where amidst the cries and hooting of the people, he exposed her to other cruel torments, wherewith she was tor∣tured till she gave up the ghost; When she was dead, he made her to be bound to the little King her Husband, who was yet living, and having commanded a great stone to be tyed about their necks, they were cast into the River, which was a kind of cruelty very dread∣ful to all that beheld it. To these barbarous parts he added many others so inhumane, as it is not likely that any other but he could imagine the like; And for a conclusion of his cru∣elties, the next day he caused all the Gentlemen that were taken alive, being some three hundred, to be impaled, and so spitted like rosted Pigs, to be also thrown into the River, whereby may be seen how great and unheard of the injustice of this Tyrant was, which he exercised on these miserable wretches.






CHAP. LIV. The King of 
Bramaa
 his besieging of the Fortress of 
Meleytay,
 with his going from thence to 
Avaa
; and that which passed there.


FOurteen days were past since the doing of these things, during the which the Tyrant employed himself in fortifying the City with a great deal of diligence and care, when as his spies, whom he had sent out, brought him word, that from the City of 
Avaa
 a Fleet of four hundred rowing Vessels was come down the River of 
Queitor,
 wherein there were thirty thousand 
Siamon
 Soldiers, besides the Mariners, of which the King of 
Avaas
 son, and brother to the poor Queen, was General; for this Prince having received adver∣tisement of the taking of the City of 
Prom,
 and of the death of his sister and brother-in-law, went and lodged in the Fortress of 
Meleytay,
 which was some twelve leagues up the River from 
Prom.
 This news much troubled the Tyrant, howbeit he resolved to go him∣self in person against his Enemies before that other succors came to joyn with them, as in∣deed the report went, that fourscore thousand, all 
Mons
 by Nation, and led by the King of 
Avaa,
 were on their way thither: With this resolution the Tyrant of 
Bramaa
 set forth towards 
Meleytay
 with an Army of three hundred thousand men, namely two hundred thousand by Land alongst the Rivers side, whereof the 
Chaumigrem
 his Foster-brother was Commander in chief, and the other hundred thousand under his own conduct, being all choyce men, and imbarqued in two thousand 
Seroos
; Being come within sight of 
Me∣leytay,
 the 
Avaas
 desiring to shew that the resolution wherewith they were come thither, was of far more power with them, then any fear they could have, and that also their Ene∣mies might not receive any benefit by their Fleet which lay on the River, and do them an affront besides by taking of it, they set all the
 Vessels on fire, and burnt them every one; Then, without any dread of that which the flesh doth naturally most fear, they got all into


the field, and ranged themselves into four Battalions, in three of which, whereof each one made ten thousand men, were the thirty thousand 
Mons
; and in the the other, that were somewhat bigger, were all the Mariners of the four hundred Vessels they had burnt: These same they placed in the Vaunt-guard, with an intention that they should weary the Ene∣mies, with whom they made a cruel fight, which lasted about half an hour, wherein all these Mariners were cut in pieces; presently after them the thirty thousand 
Mons,
 close compacted together in three Battalions, presented themselves, and with wonderful vio∣lence set upon their Enemies, between whom and them followed so extraordinary and cruel a battel, as not longer to insist upon it, nor to recount in particular how things past, which also I cannot well do, it shall suffice me to say, that of the thirty thousand 
Mons,
 eight hundred only escaped out of it, who being routed, made their retreat into the For∣tress of 
Meleytay
; but that which was most memorable herein was that of the King of 
Bramaas
 two hundred thousand men, an hundred and fifteen thousand lay dead in field, and all the rest for the most part were wounded. In the mean time the Tyrant, which came along on the River in the two thousand 
Seroos,
 arrived at the place of Battel, where beholding the strange massacre which the 
Mons
 had made of his people, he became so en∣raged at it, that dis-imbarquing his Forces, he instantly layd siege unto the Fortress, with a purpose, as he said, to take all those eight hundred that were in it alive. This siege con∣tinued seven whole days together, during the which those without gave five assaults to it, and the besieged defended themselves always very valiantly, howbeit seeing that the last hour of their life was come, and that they could no longer hold that place for their King, as they had hoped they might, by reason of the fresh Forces which the King of 
Bramaa
 had landed, like couragious men as they were they resolved to dye in the field, as their com∣panions had done, and valiantly revenge their deaths with that of their Enemies, whereun∣to they were the more willingly carryed, because they perceived well that if they continued still in the place, they should never make use of their valor, as they desired to do, for that the Tyrants Ordnance would by little and little consume them: This resolution taken, they under the favor of a very dark and rainy night sallyed forth, and first of all fell upon the two first Courts of guard that were on the Lands side, cutting all in pieces that they met withall▪ Then following their design they passed on like desperate men, and whether they did it, either to shew that they regarded not death which threatened them, or for the desire they had to gain honor, so it was that they behaved themselves so couragiously, and press∣ed the Tyrant so neer, as they forced him to leap into the River, and swim for his life, in so much that all the Camp was in disorder, and broken through in I know not how many places, with the death of above twelve thousand men, amongst whom were fifteen hun∣dred 
Bramaas,
 two thousand strangers of divers Nations, and all the rest 
Pegu's.
 This 
ight last not above half an hour, in which time the eight hundred 
Mons
 were all slain, there being not so much as one of them that would yield upon any composition whatsoever. Hereupon the Tyrant of 
Bramaa
 seeing the fight ended, and all things quiet, went and re∣assembled his Forces together, and so entered into the Fortress of 
Meleytay,
 where he presently commanded the 
Xemims
 head to be cut off, saying, that he was the sole cause of that disaster, and that he who had been a Traytor to his King, could not be faithful unto him: behold the recompence which this Tyrant made him for delivering up the City of 
Prom
 unto him, howsoever it justly belonged unto him for a punishment of his perfidious∣ness, that carryed him to betray his King and his own Country into the power of his Enemies: After this they fell to dressing of the hurt men, which were in very great number.


We p
st all this night with much apprehension, always keeping good watch,
 and the next morning as soon as it was day, the first thing that we did was to rid away the dead bo∣dies, which were in so great number all over the Camp, that the ground was quite cover∣ed with them; After this we took a view of those that were killed, as well on the one, as the other party, and we found that on the 
Bramaas
 side there were an hundred and four∣score thousand, and on the Prince of 
Avaas
 forty and two thousand, wherein were com∣prized the thirty thousand 
Mons.
 That done, after the Tyrant had fortified the City of 
Prom,
 as also the Fort of 
Meleytay,
 and made two other Forts upon the bank of the River, in such places as he judged to be most important for the safety of that Kingdom, he went up the River of 
Queitor
 in a thousand rowing 
Ser
os,
 wherein were imbarqued


seventy thousand men. In this Voyage his intention was to go in his own person, for to ob∣serve the Kingdom of 
Avaa,
 and to see the City himself, the better to consider the strength of it, and thereby judg what Forces he should bring for to take it; So he proceeded still on for the space of eight and twenty days, and during that time passed by many goodly places, which within the Kingdom of 
Chaleu
 and 
Iacuçalaon
 were upon the bank of the River: At length he arrived at the City of 
Avaa
 the thirteenth of 
October
 the same year, a thousand five hundred forty and five; Being come to the Port, he remained there thirteen days, and that while burned between two and three thousand Vessels that he found there; Moreover he set fire on many Villages thereabout, which cost him not so little but that he lost in all these degasts eight thousand of his men, amongst the which were threescore and two 
Portugals.
 Now whereas this City was very strong, as well in regard of the scituation of it, as of the Fortifications which were newly made there, it had besides with∣in it twenty thousand 
Mons,
 who it was said were come thither some five days before from the Mountains of 
Pondal
u,
 where the King of 
Avaa,
 by the permission of the 
Siamon,
 Emperor of that Monarchy, was levying above fourscore thousand men for to go and regain the City of 
Prom:
 for as soon as that King had received certain news of the death of his daughter and son-in-law, perceiving that he was not strong enough of himself to revenge the wrongs this Tyrant had done him, or to secure himself from those which he feared to receive of him in time to come, namely the depriving him of his Kingdom, as he was threatened, he went in person with his wife and children and cast himself at the 
Siamons
 feet, and acquainting him with the great affronts he had received, and what his desire was, he made himself his Tributary at threescore thousand Bisses by the year, which amount to an hundred thousand Duckets of our mony, and a 
gueta
 of Rubies, being a measure like to our pynt, therewith to make a jewel for his wife, of which Tribute it was said, that he ad∣vanced the payment for ten years beforehand, besides many other precious stones, and very rich Plate, which he presented him with, estimated in all at two millions, in recompence whereof the 
Siamon
 obliged himself to take him into his protection, yea and to march into the field for him as often as need should require, and to re-establish him within a year in the Kingdom of 
Prom,
 so as for that effect he granted him those thirty thousand men of suc∣cor, which the 
Bramaa
 defeated at 
Meleytay,
 as also the twenty thousand that were then in the City, and the fourscore thousand which were to come to him, over whom the said King of 
Avaa
 was to be the General. The Tyrant having intelligence thereof, and ap∣prehending that this, above all other things he could fear, might be the cause of his ruine, he gave present order for the fortifying of 
Prom
 with much more care and diligence then for∣merly: howbeit before his departure from this River where he lay at anchor, being about some le
gue from the City of 
Avaa,
 he sent his Treasurer, named 
Dioçory
 (with whom we eight 
Portugals,
 as I have related before, remained prisoners) Embassador to the 
Calamin∣han,
 a Prince of mighty power, who is seated in the midst of this region in a great and spacious extent of Country, and of whom I shall say something when I come to speak of him. The subject of this Embassage was to make him his Brother in Arms by a League and Contract of new amity, offering for that effect to give him a certain quantity of Gold and precious stones, as also to render unto him certain Frontier Lands of his Kingdom, up∣on condition that the Spring following he should keep the 
Siamon
 in war for to divert him from succoring the King of 
Avaa,
 and thereby give him means the more easily to take his City from him, without fear of that assistance which that King hoped should serve for an obstacle to his design. This Embassador departed then after he had imbarqued himself in a 
Laulea,
 that was attended on by twelve 
Seroos,
 wherein there were three hundred men of service, and his guard, besides the Watermen and Mariners, whose number was little less. The Presents which he carryed to the 
Calaminhan
 were very great, and consisted in divers rich pieces, as well of Gold as of precious stones, but above all in the Harness of an Ele∣phant, which according to reports was worth above six hundred thousand Duckets, and it was thought that all the Presents put together amounted to a Million of Gold. At his de∣parture, amongst other favors, which the King his Master conferred on him, this same was not the least for us, that he gave us eight unto him for to be his perpetual slaves; Having clothed us then very well, and furnished us abundantly with all things necessary, he seemed to be exceedingly contented with having us along with him in this Voyage, and ever after he made more account of us, then of all the rest that followed him.








CHAP. LV. Our going with the King of 
B
am
a's
 Ambassadour to the 
Calaminham,
 with the Course which we held until we arrived at the Temple or 
Pagod
 of 
Timagoogoo,
 and a Description thereof.


IT seems fit unto me,
 and conformable to that which I am rela
ing▪ to leave for a while this Tyrant of 
Bramaa,
 to whom I will return again when time shal serve, for to intreat here of the way we held for to go into 
Timplan,
 the capital City of the Empire of the 
Calaminham,
 which signifies, 
Lord of the world
▪ for in their language 
Cala
 is Lord, and 
Minhan
 the world; This Prince also entitles himself, 
The absolu
e Lord of the indomptable force of the Elephants of the Earth
; And indeed I do not think that in all the world there is a greater Lord then he, as I shall declare hereafter. This Ambassadour then departing from 
Avaa
 in the month of 
October,
 a thousand, five hundred, forty and five, took his course up the r
ver of 
Queitor,
 steering West, South-East, and in many places Eastward by reason of the winding of the wa∣ter, and so in this diversity of 
homb
s we continued our voyage seven days together, at the end whereof we arrived at a Chann
l, called 
Guampanoo,
 through which the 
Rhobamo,
 who was our Pilot, took his course, that he might decline the 
Siamons
 Country, being so command∣ed to do by the express Order of the King: A while after we came to a great Town, named 
Gataldy,
 where the Ambassadour stayed three days to make provision of certain things neces∣sary for his voyage. Having left this place we w
nt on still, rowing up through his Channel eleven dayes longer, during which time we met not with any place that was remarkable, only we saw some small villages, the houses whereof were covered with thatch, and peopled with very poor folks, and yet for all that the fields are full of Cattel, which seemed to have no Ma∣ster, for we killed twenty and thirty of them in a day in the sight of those of the Country, no man so much as finding fault with it, but contrarily they brought them in courtesie to us, as if they were glad to see us kill them in that sort. At our going out of this Channel of 
Guam∣panoo
 we entred into a very great river, called 
Angegumaa,
 that was above three Leagues broad, and in some places six and twenty fathom deep, with such impetuous currents as they drove us often-times from our course; This river we coasted above seven dayes together, and at length arrived at a pretty little walled Town, named 
Gumbim,
 in the Kingdom of 
Iangromaa,
 invironed on the Lands side for five or six 
agues space with Forrests of 
B
njamin,
 as al
o with Plains of Lacre, wherewith they ordinarily traded to 
Mar
aban
,
 and do also lade there many vessels with those commodities for to transport them into d
vers Countries of the 
Indiaes,
 as to the Streight of 
Mecqua,
 to 
Alcoçer,
 a
d 
Iudaa.
 There is also in this Town great store of Musk, far better then that of 
China,
 which from thence is carri
d to 
Mart
bano
 and 
Pe∣gu,
 where those of our Nation buy of it therewith to traffiq
e at 
Nar
ingua, Orixaa,
 and 
Masulepatan.
 The women of this Country are all very white and well-
avoured; They ap∣parel themselves with Stuffs made of Silk and Cotten-wool, wear links of gold and silver about their legs, and rich Carcanets about their necks; The ground there is of 
t self exceeding fertile in Wheat, Rice, Millets, Sugar, Wax, and Cattel: This Town with ten leagues of circuit about it, yields every year to the King of 
Iangomaa
 threescore Altars of gold, which are seven hundred thousand Duckets of our mony. From thence we coasted the river South∣ward, for the space of above seven dayes, and arrived at a great Town named 
Catamm
,
 which in our language signifies, 
the golden Crevice,
 being the Patrimony of 
Raud
av
a Tin∣hau,
 the 
Calaminhams
 second Son. The 
Naugator
 of this Town gave good entertainment to the Ambassadour, and sent him many sorts of refreshments for his followers; withall he gave him to understand that the 
Calaminham
 was at the City of 
T
mplan.
 We d
parted from this place on a 
Sunday
 morning, and the day after about evening we came to a Fortress, called 
Campalagor,
 built in the midst of the river in the form of an Island upon a rock, and invi∣roned with good free-stone, having three Bulwarks and two Towers seven stories high▪ where∣in, they told the Ambassador, was one of the four and twenty Treasures, which the 
Cala∣minham
 had in this Kingdom, the most part wh
reof con
sted 
n L
ng
ts of silver, of the weight of six thousand 
Caudins,
 which are four and twenty thousand Quintals, and it was said, that all this silver was buried in wells under ground. After this we still continued our course for the space of thirteen days, during the which we saw on both sides of the river


many very goodly places, whereof the most were fair Towns, and the rest stately high Trees, delicate Gardens, and great Plains full of Corn, as also much Cattel, red Deer, Shamoises, and Rhinocerots, under the keeping of certain men on horsback who looked to them whilest they 
ed. On the river there were a great number of vessels, where in much abundance was all things to be sold which the earth produceth, wherewith it hath pleased God to enrich these Countries more then any other in the world. Now forasmuch as the Ambassadour fell sick here of an Impostume in his stomack, he was councelled to proceed no further till he was healed, so that he resolved to go with some of his Train for to be cured to a famous Hospi∣tal, some twelve Leagues from thence, in a 
Pagode,
 named 
Tinagoogoo,
 which signifies 
the God of thousand Gods,
 and so departing at the same instant he arrived there on 
Saturday
 a∣bout night.


The Ambassadour being set on shore was the next day led to an Hospital, called 
Chipano∣can,
 whither the greatest Lords used to repair when they were sick, and where there were two and forty several Lodgings very neat and convenient, in one of the which he was placed by the express command of the 
Puitaleu,
 who was as it were Governour of the Hospital: There care was taken that he wanted for nothing, but was furnished in abundance with all that was necessary for him: I will omit the odours, the neatness, the care of attendance, the ves∣sels, the robes, the exquisite meats, the delicacies, and all the delights that may be imagined, which were to be had there with as much perfection and curiosity, as more cannot be desired. Thither likewise came twice a day to him exceeding fair women, who sung to the Tune of Instruments of Musick, and at certain hours represented Playes, or Comedies before him, that were very pleasant, and finely set forth. Now that I may not trouble my self in recount∣ing here at length the infinite number of things, which I could speak of concerning this Sub∣ject, I will pass over many of them in silence, whereof, other persons that could better ex∣press them then my self, would peradventure make great esteem. After we had been eight and twenty days there, by which time the Ambassador was perfectly cured, we departed from thence for to go to a Town, named 
Meidur,
 twelve leagues further up the river of 
Angeguma
; But that I may not be blamed for failing in the promise which I made heretofore of speaking of this 
Pagods
 of 
Tinagoogoo,
 I will here leave the Ambassadour to his Voyage, and return me to the 
Pagode,
 that of so many things which we saw there I may deliver some one, for to shew how little we Christians do to save our souls, in comparison of that much these wret∣ches do to lose theirs. During the eight and twenty dayes which the Ambassadour imployed in recovering his health, we nine 
Portugals
 that waited on him not knowing what to do, or how to bestow our time in the mean while, no more then the rest, we past it away in di∣vers things, according to each ones fancy and delight, for to that purpose we wanted no com∣modities. Thus some applied themselves to the hunting of Stags and Wild-boars, whereof there is great store in that Country; Some to the pursuing of Tygers, Rhinocerots, Ounces, Zeores, Lions, Buffles, Wild-bulls, and of many other such kind of beasts which we have not heard spoken of in our 
Europe
; some to shooting at Wild-ducks, Geese, and such like Water-fowl; some to hawking with Vultures and Faulcons; and some to fishing for Trowts, Mackarels, Chevins, Mullets, Soles, and many other sorts of fish, where∣of there is great abundance in all the rivers of this Empire. In this manner we be∣stowed our time, now in one thing, and then in another, but that which we gave our selves most unto was to hear, and see, as also to enquire after the Laws of the Coun∣try, the 
Pagodes,
 and Sacrifices which we beheld there with much terrour and astonish∣ment: Howbeit I purpose not to make any relation here more then of a few of them, which I conceive may suffice to draw out the consequences of those that I shall not dis∣course of. I say then that one of those sacrifices was made on the day of the new Moon of 
December,
 namely on the ninth of that Month, which is a time wherein these blinded peo∣ple are accustomed to celebrate a Feast, called by those of the Country 
Massunterivoo
; by those of 
Iappon, Ferioo
; by the 
Chi
eses Man
ioo
; by the 
Lequios Champas,
 and 
Cauchins, Ampatilor
; by the 
Siamens, Bramaas, P
fuas,
 and 
Sacotays, Sansaporau
; so that though all these names through the diversity of those languages are different, yet do they in our tongue signifie all one thing, that is, 
The memorial of all the dead.
 This was then the Feast which we saw celebrated here with so much diversity of things that we never dreamt of, as I know not where to begin; for such a multitude of people of all the Nations of these Countries came flocking to this place, as is not to be expressed, how∣beit


the chiefest cause of their repair thither in such numbers, is a Fair, which is kept all the time of the Feast, being fifteen dayes, namely from the new to the full Moon. In this Fair are all things to be sold, which Nature hath created on the earth, or in the Se
▪ and that in so high a degree of abundance, as there is not any one kind of thing, whereof there are not whole Streets of Houses, Cabbins, or Tents, so long that one can hardly see from one end to the other. All these streets are replenished with very rich Merchants, besides an infinite company of other people, who are lodged all along the River, which is above two Leagues broad, and planted about with several sorts of Trees, as Walnuts, Ches∣nuts, Cocos, and Dates, whereof every one takes what he pleaseth, because it doth all belong to the 
Pagode.
 The Temple of this Idol is a very sumptuous Edifice, scituated in the midst of a Plain upon a little round hill, more then half a league in circuit: It is built all slope fifteen fathom high, and from thence upward it hath a wall of free-stone of some three fa∣thom, with its Bulwarks, and Towers, after the fashion of ours. Within the inclosure of this wall there is a platform made level with Battlements, a stones cast in bredth, which to∣gether with the wall extends round about the hill, so that at first sight one would take it for a Gallery. There are likewise all along an hundred and threescore Hospitals, in each whereof are above an hundred houses, which are low, but very neat and convenient, where the Pil∣grimes, 
Fucatous,
 and 
Daroezes
 are entertained, which come thither in troops, like the Gipsies in our 
Europe,
 with their Captains, each company of them having two or three thousand persons, some more, some less, according as the Kingdoms from whence they re∣sort are nearer or further off; now it is known of what Country they are by the devices which they carry in their Banners. From the top to the bottom it is all invironed with Cypress-trees, and Cedars, where many fountains of most excellent water do continually flow forth, and on the highest part of this hill, almost a quarter of a league in circuit, there are four Convents, and in them very sumptuous and rich Temples, namely two of men, and as many of women, in each of which, as we were assured, were very near five hundred per∣sons. In the midst of these four Monasteries there is a Garden, compassed about with three inclosures of Ballisters of Lattin, having very fair Arches, of curious Masons-work▪ and Steeples guilt all over, with a number of little silver bels in them, which 
ing continually with the moving of the air. This Chappel of the Idol 
Tinagoogoo
 is of a round form, all over∣laid on the in-side with plates of silver wrought in flowers, and garnished with a great ma∣ny Branches for lights of the same mettal. This Monster, of whom we could not judge, whether he were gold, wood, or copper guilt, stood upright on his feet, with his hands lifted up to Heaven, and a rich Crown on his head; round about him were many other lit∣tle Idols on their knees, and beholding him as it were amazed: Below were two men made of brass, in the fashion of Gyants, seven and thirty spans high, and very ugly and deform∣ed, whom they held for the Gods of the twelve months of the year. Without this place al∣so there were an hundred and forty Gyants, who ranked in two Files inclosed it round a∣bout, and were made of cast iron, holding Halberds in their hands, as if they had been the Guard of it; so that all the Marvels of this Edifice put together made it appear so stately, that looking upon it one could not sufficiently esteem the riches 
nd sumptuousness thereof. But setting aside for this present the relation I could make of the buildings of this 
Pagode,
 because that which I have said of it may, me thinks, suffice for the understanding of the rest, I will intreat here of the Sacrifices which we saw to be made there on a festival day, called by them, 
Xipatil
,
 signif
ing, 
The refreshing of good people.








CHAP. LVI. The great and sumptuous Procession made in this Pagode, together with their Sacrifices; and other particularities.


WHilest this Feast of these 
Gentiles,
 as also the Fair, which was kept all the time thereof, endured for the space of fifteen days, with an infinite concourse of Merchants and Pilgrims, that came flocking thither from all parts, as I have declared be∣fore, there were many Sacrifices made there with different ceremonies, not a day passing without some new thing or other. For amongst many of great charge, and very worthy of observation, one of the chiefest was a 
Iubile
 after their manner, which was published the fifth day of the Moon, together with a Procession, that was above three leagues in length, as we could guess; It was the common opinion of all, that in this Procession there were forty thousand Priests of the four and twenty Sects, which are in this Empire, most of them were of different dignities, and called 
Grepos, Talagrepos, Roolims, Neepois, Bicos, Sacareus,
 and 
Chanfarauhos
; Now by the ornaments they wear, as also by the devices and ensigns which they carry in their hands, they may be distinguished, and so every of them is respected according to his dignity; Howbeit these went not on foot as the other ordina∣ry Priests, for that they were as this day forbidden upon pain of great sin to 
read upon the ground, so that they caused themselves to be born in 
Pallaquins,
 or Arm-chairs, upon the shoulders of other Priests their inferiors, apparelled in green Sattin, with their Stoles of Carnation Damask. In the midst of the ranks of this Proc
ssion were all the inventions of their Sacrifices to be seen, as also the rich Custodes of their Idols, for the which each of them had a particular Devotion; They that carryed them were clothed in yellow, ha∣ving each of them a big wax candle in his hand, and between every fifteen of those Custodes went a triumphant Charet, all which Charets put together were in number an hundred twenty and six: All these Charets were four, and some five stories high, with as many wheels on either side; In each of them there were at the least two hundred persons, what with the Priests and the Guards, and on the top of all an Idol of Silver, with a Miter of Gold on its head, and all of them had rich chains of Pearl and precious stones about their necks; round about every Charet went little Boys, carrying Silver Maces on their shoulders, and behind them were a many of Caskets full of exquisite perfumes, as also divers persons with Censors in their hands, who ever and anon censed the Idol to the tune of certain Instruments of Musick, saying three times with a lamentable voyce, 
Lord, as∣swage the pains of the dead, to the end they may praise thee peaceably
; whereunto all the people answered with a strange noise, 
Such may thy pleasure be, and so may it come to pass every day wherein thou shewest us the Sun.
 Each of these Charets was drawn by above three thousand persons, who for that purpose made use of very long coards, covered with silk, and thereby gained to themselves plenary remission of their sins, without restitution to be made of any thing at all: Now that many might participate of this absolution by drawing the coard, they set their hands to it one after and close to another, continuing doing so to the very end, in such sort that the whole coard was covered with hands, and nothing else to be seen; but that they also which were without might gain this indulgence, they helped those that had their hands on the coard by pu
ting theirs about their shoulders, then they that were behind them did the like, and so consequently all the rest: In this manner through∣out the whole l
ngth of the coard there were six or seven Ranks or Files, and in each of them above five hundred persons. This Procession was envi
oned with a great number of Horsemen, that carryed staves with pikes at both ends, who riding all about, went crying to the people, which were infinite in number, that they should make way, and not inter∣rupt the Priests in their prayers: Many times also they struck those so rudely whom they first met withall, as they brat down three or four together, or hurt them grievously, no man daring to find fault with, or so much as speak a word against it. In this order this mervelous Procession passed through above an hundred streets, which to that end were all adorned with boughs of Palms and Myrtle, amongst the which were many Standarts and Banners of Silk planted; There were also many Tables set up in divers places, where all that desired it for Gods sake were admitted to eat of free cost, yea and in other parts they had clothes


and mony given them; There likewise Enemies reconciled themselves one to another, and the rich men forgave them their debts which were not able to pay. In a word, so many good works were done there, more proper for Cristians, then for Gentiles, as I must needs conclude, that if they had been done with Faith and Baptism for the love of our Lord Je∣sus Christ, and without any mixture of the things of this world, assuredly they would have been acceptable to him. But 
 the best was wanting to them, and that both for theirs and our sins. Whilest this Procession, together with the Charets wherein the Idols were, passed along in this manner, and that with a dreadful noise of Drums, and other such instruments, behold where out of certain wooden Sheds made expresly for that purpose, six, seven, eight, or ten men, all besmeared with odors, and wrapped up in silk, wearing Gold Bracelets about their wrists, start forth all at once, and room being instantly made them by the people, after they had saluted the Idol which was on the top of the Charet, they went and layd themselves down athwart on the ground, so that the wheels coming to go over them crush'd them all to pieces, which the assistants beholding, cryed out aloud together, 
My Soul be with thine:
 Presently whereupon nine or ten of the Priests descending from the Charet took up these blessed, or rather accursed, creatures, that sacrificed themselves in this sort, and putting the head, bowels, and all the other members so crushed in pieces into great bowls made for that purpose, they shewed them to the people from the highest part of the Charet where the Idol stood, saying with a pitiful voyce, 
Miserable sinners, fall ye to praying, that God may make you worthy to be a Saint, as this here is, who hath now offered himself up as a sweet smelling Sacrifice.
 Whereunto all the people prostrated on the ground answered with a fearful noise, 
We hope that the God of a thousand Gods will permit to be so.
 In this manner many other of these wretches sacrificed themselves, to the number, as we were told by certain Merchants worthy of credit, of six hundred and more. After these followed other Martyrs of the Devil, whom they called 
Xixaporaus,
 which sacrificed them∣selves before the said Charets, by most mercilesly sl
shing themselves with sharp Rasors, that to behold them how they did it, one could not think but that they were altogether insen∣sible; for they cut off great gobbets of their flesh, and holding them on high at the end of Arrows, as if they would shoot them up to Heaven, they said, 
That they made a Pre∣sent thereof to God for the Souls of their Fathers, of their Wives, of their Children, or of such a one, for whose sake they did this wicked work.
 Now wheresoever this gobbet of flesh chanced to fall, there ran so much people to catch it up, as oftentimes many were stifled in the press, for they held it as a very great relique. In this sort these miserable wretches stood upon their feet, all bathed in their own blood, without Noses, without Ears, and without any resemblance at all of man, until at length they fell down stark dead on the Earth, then came the 
Grepos
 in all haste down from the top of the Charet, and cutting off their heads, shewed them to all the people, who kneeling on the ground, and lifting up their hands to Heaven cryed out with a loud voyce, 
Let us, O Lord, live to that time, wherein for thy ser∣vice we may do as this same here hath done.
 There were others also whom the Devil drew thither after another manner; Those same craving an Alms, said, 
Give me an Alms for Gods sake, or if thou dost it not, I will kill my self.
 So that if they were not presently contented, they would instantly cut their own throats with Rasors which they held in their hands, or stab themselves in to the belly, and so drop down stark dead; whereupon the 
Grepos
 ran suddenly to them, and having cut off their heads, shewed them, as before, to the people, who reverenced them prostrated on the ground. We likewise saw some, named 
Nucara∣mons,
 men of a very ill look, clothed with Tygers skins, and carrying in their hands certain pots of Copper full of excrements, and filthy corrupted urine, the stench whereof was so horrible and insupportable, as it was not possible for any nostril to endure it; These cra∣ving an Alms of the people, said; 
Give me an Alms, and that instantly, otherwise I will 
at this ordure which the Devil eats, and bespatter thee with it, that so thou mayst be accursed as he is.
 They no sooner uttered these words, but that all ran hastily to give them an Alms, for if they stay'd never so little, they straightway set the pot to their mouths, and taking a great sup of that stinking stuff, they there with all to bedashed such as they pleased; in the mean time all others that beheld them so drest, holding them accursed, fell upon them, and entreated them in such a strange fashion, as the poor wretches knew not which way to turn themselves, for there was not a man of the company that drove them not away with blows, and that railed not at them, saying; 
That they were accursed for having been the cause that


this holy man had eaten of that beastly filth which the Devil feeds upon, and therefore was be∣come stinking before God, so that he could neither go into Paradise, nor live amongst men.
 Behold how strange the blindness of this people is, who otherwise have judgment and wit enough. I will pass by much other beastliness committed by them, which is so far esloign∣ed from all reason, as they serve for a great motive unto us, to render thanks without ceas∣ing unto God for the infinite mercy and goodness that he shews us, in giving us the light of true Faith for the saving of our Souls.


Of the fifteen days that this Feast was to last, nine being past, all the people, which were there assembled, feigning that the g
uttonous Serpent of the House of Smoke (who is their 
Lucifer,
 as I have said elsewhere) was come for to steal away the ashes of them that were dead in these several Sacrifices, and so to keep their Souls from going into Heaven, there arose among them so great and dreadful a noise, as words are not able to express it; for to the confused voyces that were heard from every part, there was adjoyned such a ringing of Bells and Basins, beating of Drums, and winding of Horns, as it was not possible to hear one another, and all this was done to fright away the Devil. Now this noise endured from one of the clock in the afternoon till the next morning, and it is not to be believed what a world of lights and Torches were spent that night, besides the infinite number of fires that were kindled every where; the reason hereof was, as they said, 
For that
 Tinagoogoo, 
the God of thousand Gods, was gone in quest of the gluttonous Serpent, for to kill him with a Sword which had been given him from Heaven.
 After the night had been past thus amidst this infernal noise and tumult, as soon as it was day the whole Hill, whereon the Temple was built, appeared full of white Banners, which the people beholding, they fell straight to giving thanks unto God, and to that end they prostrated themselves on the ground with great demonstrations of joy, and then began to send presents one to another for the good news they received from the Priests by the shew of those white Banners, an assured sign that the gluttonous Serpent was killed. So all the people, transported with incredible glad∣ness, fell to going up the hill, whereon the Temple stood, by four and twenty several ac∣cesses that there were unto it, for to give thanks unto the Idol, and chaunt his praises for the victory he had the night past obtained over the gluttonous Serpent, and cutting off his head: This throng of people continued three days, and three nights, so that during that time it was not possible to break through the press on the way, but with much pain. Now we 
Portugals
 having little to do, resolved to go thither also for to see those abuses, where∣fore we went to ask leave of the Embassador, but he denyed us for the present, willing us to stay till the next day, and that then we should wait on him thither, for in his last sickness he had vowed to visit it; hereat we were very glad, because we thought that by this means we should the more easily see all that we desired: The morrow after, which was the third day of this Assembly, the greatest croud being over, we went along with him to the Tem∣ple of 
Tinagoogoo,
 and at length arrived, though with much ado, at the Hill whereon it was built. There we saw six very fair long streets, all full of Scales hanging on great Rods of Brass; In these Scales a number of people weighed themselves, as well for the accomplishment of the vows they had made in their adversities and sickness, as for the re∣mission of all the sins they had committed till that present, and the weight which each of them layd in the other Scale was answerable to the quality of the fault they had done: So they that found themselves culpable of gluttony, and had not all that year used any absti∣nence, weighed themselves with Hony, Sugar, Eggs, and Butter, which were things not displeasing to the Priests, from whom they were to receive absolution; They that were ad∣dicted to sensuality weighed themselves with Cotton wool, Feathers, Cloth, Apparel, Wine, and sweet Odors, because, say they, those things incite a man to that sin: They that were uncharitable to the poor weighed themselves with Coyn of Copper, Tin, and Silver, or with pieces of Gold; The slothful with Wood, Rice, Coals, Pork, and Fruit; and the en∣vious, because they reap no benefit by their maligning the prosperity of others, expiated their sin by confessing it publiquely, and suffering a dozen boxes on the ear to be given them in the memory and praise of the twelve Moons of the year: As for the sin of pride, it was satisfied with dryed fish, Brooms, and Cow-dung, as being the ba
est of things; And touching them that had spoken ill of their Neighbors, without asking them forgiveness, they put for that a Cow into the Scale, or else an Hog, a Sheep, or a Stag: so that infinite was the number of those which weighed themselves in the Scales that were in those six


streets, from whom the Priests received so much Alms, as there were great piles of all sorts of things made up all along. Now for the poor that had nothing to give for the remission of their sins, they offered their own hair, which was presently cut off by above an hun∣dred Priests, who for that effect sat in order one by another on low stools, with Sizzars in their hands; There also we saw great heaps of that hair, whereof other 
Grepos,
 which were a thousand at least, and ranked also in order, made Wreathes, Tresses, Rings, and Bracelets, which one or another bought for to carry home to their houses, even as our Pil∣grims use to do, that come from 
Santiago de Compostella,
 or other such places. Our Em∣bassador, being amazed at the sight of these things, enquired further of the Priests concer∣ning them, who besides other particulars told him, that all those alms, and other offerings which were given there during the fifteen days of this Assembly, amounted to a great Re∣venue, and that even of the hair of the poor alone there was raised every year above an hun∣dred thousand pardanis of Gold, which are fourscore and ten thousand Duckets of our Mony, whereby one may judg what a world of wealth was made of all the rest. After that the Embassador had stay'd sometime in the streets of the Scales, he passed on through all the other quarters, where were Comedies, dancing, wrastling, and excellent consorts of all kinds of musick, till at length we arrived at 
Tinagoogoo,
 but with much labor and pain, because the throng was so great, as one could hardly break through it. This Temple had but one 
sle, that was very long and spacious, and full of great wax lights, each of them having ten or eleven wieks in it, set up all about in Silver Candlesticks; there was also great store of perfumes of Aloes and Benjamin: As for the Image of 
Tinagoogoo,
 it was placed in the midst of the Temple upon a stately Tribunal in the form of an Altar, environed with a number of Silver Candlesticks, and a many of Children attired in purple, which did no∣thing but cense it at the sound of Instruments of musick, whereon the Priests played rea∣sonable well: Before this Idol danced, to the tune of the said Instrument, 
 in Ladies, which were wonderful fair, and richly clad, to whom the people presented their alms and offerings, which the Priests received for them, and th
n layd them before the Tribunal of the Idol with a great deal of ceremony and complement, ever and anon prostrating them∣selves on the ground. The Status of this Monster was seven and twenty spans high, having the face of a Gyant, the hair of a Negro, wide distorted nostrils, mighty great lips, and a very sowre and ill-favored countenance; He had in his hand an Hatchet in the form of a Coopers Addis, but with a far longer handle: With this Addis, as the Priests made the people believe, 
this Monster the night before killed the gluttonous Serpent of the House of Smoke, for that he would have stoln away the ashes of those that sacrificed themselves.
 There also we saw the Serpent amidst the place before the Tribunal in the form of an Adder, more horrible to behold then the wit of man can imagine, and done so to the life, as all that look∣ed on it trembled for fear; It was layd all along, with the head cut off, being eight fathom long, and the neck of it as thick as a Bushel, so lively represented, that though we knew it to be an artificial thing, yet could we not chuse but be afraid of it. In the mean time all the assistants ran thronging about it, some pricking it with the points of their Halberds, and some with their Daggers, every one with railing speeches cursing, and calling it, 
Proud, presumptuous, accursed, infernal Mannor, Pool of Damnation, envious of Gods goodness, hunger-starved Dragon, in the midst of the night,
 and many other names, which they de∣livered in such extraordinary terms, and so fitted to the effects of this 
Serpent,
 as we could not but admire them. That done, they put into Basins which stood at the foot of the Idols Tribunal a world of alms, of Gold, Silver, Jewels, pieces of Silk, fine Callicoes, Mony, and hundred other things in very great abundance. After we had seen all these things, we continued following the Embassador, who went to see the Grots of the Hermits or Peni∣tents, which were at the utmost end of the Wood, all cut out of the hard Rock, and in such order, as one would have thought that Nature, rather then the hand of man, had labor∣ed in it. There were an hundred forty and two of them, in some of the which remained divers men, whom they held for Saints, and that did very great and austere pennance; They in the first Grots wore long Robes like the 
Bonzes
 of 
Iapan,
 and followed the Law of an Idol, that had sometimes been a man, called 
Situmpor michay,
 who during his life enjoyned those of his Sect to lead their lives in great austerity, assuring them that the only and true way to gain Heaven, was to subdue the flesh, and that the more they labored to afflict themselves, the more liberally God would grant them all they could demand of him. They which ac∣companyed


us thither, told us, that they seldom eat any thing bu
 herbs boyled a few Beans of Aricot rosted, and wilde fruit, which were provided for them by other Priests, who as the Purveyors of a Cloister took care to furnish these Peniten
s with such things as were confortmable to the Law whereof they made profession. After these we saw in a Grot others of a Sect of one of their Saints, or rather of a Devil, named 
Ang
macur,
 these lived in deep holes, made in the midst of the Rock, according to the Rule of their wretched or∣der, eating nothing but Flies, Ants, Scorpions, and Spiders, with the juyce of a certain Herb growing in abundance thereabout, much like to sorrel; These spent their time in medi∣tating day and night, with their eyes lifted up to Heaven▪ and their hands closed one with∣in another, for a testimony that they desired nothing of this world, and in that manner dyed like beasts, but they are accounted greater Saints then all the rest, and as such, after they are dead, they burn them in fires, whereinto they cast great quantities of most precious perfumes; the Funeral pomp being celebrated with great state, and very rich offerings, they have sumptuous Temples erected unto them, thereby to draw the living to do as they had done, for to obtain this vain glory, which is all the recompence that the world gives them for their excessive pennance. We likewise saw others of a Sect al
ogether diabolical, invented by a certain 
Gileu Mitray
; These have sundry orders of pennance, and are not much different in their Opinions from the 
Abissins
 of 
Ethiopia
; Now that their abstinence may be the more agreeable to their Idol, some of them eat nothing but filthy thick 
pit∣ings and snot, with Grashoppers and Hens dung; others clots of blood drawn from other men, with bitter fruits and herbs brought to them from the wood, by reason whereof they live but a short time, and have so bad a look and colour, as they fright those that behold them. I will pass by them of the Sect of 
Godomem,
 who spend their whole life in crying day and night on those mountains, 
Godomem, Godomem,
 and desist not from it until they fall down stark dead to the ground for want of breath: Neither will I speak of them which they call 
Taxilacons,
 who dye more brutishly then the rest, for they shut themselves up in certain Grots made of purposefor it, that are very little and close, stopped on all 
, and then burning green 
histles and thorns in them, they choke themselves with the smoke thereof; Whereby one may see how by such rude and different ways of living these mise∣rable creatures render themselves the Devils Martyrs, who in reward thereof gives them everlasting Hell-fire; and verily it is a pititiful thing to behold the great pains which these wretches take to lose themselves, and the little that we do to be saved.








CHAP. LVII. What we saw in the continuing of our voyage, until we arrived at the City of 
Timplan.


AFter we had seen all these things with wonder enough,
 we departed from this 
Pagod
 of 
Tinagoogoo,
 and continued on our way for thirteen days together, at the end whereof we arrived at two great Towns, scituated on the Bank of the river, just opposite the one a∣gainst the other, about the distance of a stones cast, one of the which was called 
Manavedéa,
 and the other 
Singilapau
; in the midst of this same river, which was there somewhat nar∣row, there was an Island by nature formed round, and in it a rock six and thirty fathom high, and a Cros-bow shoot broad; upon this rock was a Fort built, with nine Bulwarks and five Towers; without the rampire of the wall it was invironed with two rows of great iron gates, and from the Bulwarks to the other side of the river ran a huge Chain of iron, to keep vessels from passing along, so that nothing could possibly enter there: At one of these two Towns, which was called 
Singilapau,
 the Ambassadour landed, where he was exceedingly well en∣tertained by the 
Xemimbrum,
 or Governour of it, who likewise furnished all his Train with great store of refreshments. The next morning we left this place, accompanied with twenty 
Laulês,
 wherein there were a thousand men and better, and about evening we arrived at the Custom-houses of the Kingdom, which are two strong places, and from the one to the other run five mighty great chains of Latten all atwart the whole bredth of the river, so that no∣thing can pass in and out without leave; Hither came a man in a swift 
Seroo
 to the Ambas∣sadour, and told him that he was to go ashore at 
Campalagro,
 which was one of the two Castles on the South-side, for to shew the Letter which this King had sent by him to the 
Ca∣laminham,
 to see if it were written in the form that was required in speaking to him, as was usually observed. The Ambassadour presently obeyed, and being come to land he was led into a great Hall, where were three men 
 a table, with a great many Gentlemen, who gave him good entertainment, and demanded of him the occasion of his coming thither, as they that knew nothing of it; Whereunto the Ambassadour answered; 
That he came thither from the King of
 Bramaa, 
Lord of
 Tanguu, 
and that he had a message to deliver unto the holy
 Calaminham 
concerning matters greatly importing his Estate.
 Then having made further answer to other questions, which were put to him in a way of ceremony by the three principal persons that were at the Table, he shewed them the letter, wherein they corrected some words, which were not of the style wherewith they were accustomed to speak to the 
Calaminham
; together with this letter the Ambassadour shewed them the present which he had brought for him, whereat they very much wondred, especially when they saw the Chair for an Ele∣phant of gold and precious stones, which in the judgments of divers Lapidaries was worth above six hundred thousand Duckets, besides the other rich pieces that he carried him also, as I have before related. After we had our dispatch from this first Custom-house, we went to the other, where we found more venerable men then the former, who with another new Ce∣remony looked likewise on the Letter, and the present, and put to all the several parcels of it strings of wreathed carnation silk, with three Seals in Lacre, which was as the con∣clusion of the receiving of the Ambassy by the 
Calaminham.
 The same day there came a man from the next Town of 
Questor,
 sent by the Governour of the Kingdom to visit the Ambassadour with a present of refreshments of flesh, fruit, and other such things after their manner. During nine dayes that the Ambassadour stayed in this place he was abundantly fur∣nished with all things necessary, both for his own Person, and his Train, and withall was en∣tertained with sundry sports of hunting and fishing▪ as also with Feasts, accompaied with mu∣sick and Comedies represented by very beautiful women, and richly attired: In the mean time we 
Portugals
 went with the permission of the Ambassadour to see certain things, which they of the Country had much commended un
o us▪ namely ve
y antique buildings, rich and sump∣tuous Temples, very fair Gardens, Hou
es and Castles, that were all along the side of this ri∣ver, made after a strange fashion, well 
ortified, and of great charge, amongst the which there was an Hospital for to lodge pilgrims in▪ called 
Manicafaran,
 signifying in our tongue, 
The Prison of the Gods,
 which was above a L
ague in bredth; Here we saw twelve streets, all vaulted over, and in every one of them two hundred and forty houses, namely, sixscore on


each side, which made in all two thousand, eight hundred, and fourscore, all full of pilgrims, who the whole year throughout came thither in pilgrimage from divers Countries; for, as they hold, this pilgrimage ought to be of far greater merit then all others, because that these Idols imprisoned by strangers have need of company. All these pilgrims, which, as they of the Country say, are all the year long without discontinuing above six thousand, have meat given them the whole time of their abode there, at the charge, and out of the revenue of the house: They are served by four thousand Priests of 
Manicafaran,
 who with many others re∣side within the same inclosure in sixscore religious houses, where there are also as many wo∣men that serve in the like manner. The Temple of this Hospital was very great, with three Isles after the fashion of ours, in the midst whereof was a remarkable Chappel built round, and invironed with three very big Ballist
rs of Latten; within it there were fourscore Idols of men and women, besides many other little gods, that lay prostrated on the ground, for the fourscore great Idols only stood upright, and were all tied together with chains of iron; As for the little ones, they were, as I said, laid along on the pavement, as the children of these greater, and tied six to six by the middle with other slighter chains: Moreover without the Ballisters in two Files there stood two hundred, forty and four Giants of brass, six and twen∣ty spans high, with their Halberds and Clubs upon their shoulders, as if they had been set there for the Guard of the captive Gods. There was over-head upon iron rods, that traver∣sed the Isles of the Temple, great store of Lamps hanging, having seven or eight Matches apiece in them, in the fashion of Candlesticks, like to them of the 
Indiaes,
 all varnished with∣out, as also the walls were, and every thing else that we saw there, in token of mourning, by reason of the captivity of these Gods. Being amazed as well at that which I have recount∣ed, as at many other things which I pass over in silence, and not able to comprehend what they meant by the imprisonment of these gods, we demanded the signification of it of the Priests, whereunto one amongst them, that seemed of more authority then the rest, made us this an∣swer; 
Since I see that being Strangers, you desire to learn of me that which I know ve∣ry well, and which you have never heard spoken, nor read of in your Books, I will declare the matter unto you as it past, according as it is truly delivered by our Histories. Know then, that it now seven thousand, three hundred, and twenty Moons, which make six hun∣dred and ten years after the supputation of other Nations, since the time that an holy
 Ca∣laminham, 
named
 Xixivarem Melentay, 
commanding over the Monarchy of the six and twen∣ty Kingdoms of this Crown, waged wars with the
 Siamon, 
Emperour of the Mountains of the Earth, insomuch that there assembled what on the one part and the other threescore and two Kings, who putting themselves into the Field, fought so cruel and bloody a battail, as it endured from an hour before day till night, and there was slain on both sides sixteen
 Laque∣saas 
of men, each of which makes an hundred thousand; At length the victory remaining to our
 Calaminham, 
without any more resting alive of his Forces then two hundred and thir∣ty thousand, he ru
ned in four months space all the enemies Countries, with such a destru∣ction of people, as if credit may be given to our Histories, or to what any other besides have assured, there died fifty
 Laquesaas 
of persons. This battail was fought in the first of the said seven thousand, three hundred, and twenty Moons, in the renowned Field
 Vitau, 
where
 Quiay Nivandel 
appeared to the
 Calaminham, 
sitting in a Chair of wood, who acquired unto himself in this place a greater and more famous Title of honour, then all the other Gods of the
 Mons 
and
 Siammes, 
in regard whereof so often as they that inhabit the earth desire to make oath of things which pass the belief of men, they use for the more authorizing thereof to swear by the holy
 Quiay Nivandel 
God of Battails of the field
 Vitau. 
Now in a great City named
 Sarocatam, 
where five hundred thousand persons were slain, all these Gods, which here you see before you, were made prisoners in despight of the Kings that believed in them, and the Priests that served them with perfumes in their sacrifices. Thus by reason of so glorious a victory all those people became subject to us, and tributaries to the Crown of the
 Calaminham, 
who at this day holds the Scepter of this Monarchy, whereunto he was not raised but with much labour, and the shedding of a world of blood, during the threescore and four rebellions made by the said people since that time until this present; who not able to en∣dure the captivity of their gods, for that, to say the truth, it is a mighty affront unto them, they do still in memory of so unhappy a success continue making great demonstrations of sor∣row for it, renewing every year the vow they have made not to celebrate any Feast, nor to rejoyce in any kind of sort whatsoever, until they have provided for the deliverance of these


prisoners; which also is the cause that no Lamps are seen in their Temples, and that they are resolved to light up none during the captivity of their Idols.
 Some of us seeming to doubt the verity hereof, because it seemed strange unto them, the 
Grepo
 swore that it was most true, and that also there had been killed at sundry times about the deliverance of these Gods, whom there we saw captive, above three millions of men, besides those that fell in precedent Battails; whereby one may clearly see in what a strange manner the Devil keeps these poor blinded wretches subjected unto him, and with how much abuse and extravagancy he precipitates them into hell. When we had well observed all the singularities of this Temple, we went to see another, called 
Vrpanesendoo,
 to speak of which I desire to be excused, that I may not be forced to treat of infamous and abominable matters, wherefore omitting the great abundance of riches, and other things which we saw there; it shall suffice me to say, that this Temple is served by none but women, who are all of them the daughters of Princes, and of the principal Lords of the Kingdom, which dedicates them from their infancy to offer up their ho∣nour in sacrifice there; Now this filthy and sensual sacrifice is performed with so great charge, that many of them bestow above ten thousand Duckets in it, besides the offerings which are made to this Idol 
Vrpanesendoo,
 to whom they sacrifice their honour. This Idol is in a Chap∣pel that is round, and guilt all over; it is made of silver, and set upon a Tribunal in form of an Altar, invironed over-head with a great number of Candlesticks, which are all of silver like∣wise, every light in them having six wieks: Round about this Tribunal are many other I∣dols guilded over, of very comely and well-favoured women, who with their knees on the ground, and hands lifted up, adore this Idol; These same, as the Priests told us, are the holy souls of certain young Ladies, which finished their dayes there to the great honour of their parents, who made more esteem of that then of all the King could give them. They assu∣red us that the Revenue belonging to the Idol, was three hundred thousand Duckets by the year, besides the offerings and rich ornaments of their abominable sacrifices, which was yet worth more. In this Diabolical Temple were shut up within many religious houses that we saw above five thousand women, being all of them old, and for the most part exceeding rich, so that coming to dy, they make a donation of all their wealth to the 
Pagode,
 wherefore it is no marvel, if it have the revenue I spoke of. From this place we went to see the companies of the strangers, which came thither in pilgrimage in the manner that I have declared. These Companies were forty and six in number, every one of an hundred, two hundred, three hun∣dred, four hundred, or five hundred persons; nay, some of them were more, and were all lodged along by the river, as if it had been a Camp. Amidst these troops of strangers we met by chance with a 
Portugal
 woman, whereat we wondred more then at all we had seen before, so that desiring to know of her the reason of so strange an accident, she told us with tears, who she was, what occasion had brought her thither, and how she was at that instant the wife of one of those Pilgrims, to whom she had been married three or four and twenty years; whereunto she further added, that not daring to go and live amongst Christians because of her sin, she continued still in her wickedness, but that she hoped God would at length be pleased to bring her into some Country, where before she ended her dayes, she might re∣pent her of her life past; and that although we found her in the company of people devoted to the service of the Devil, yet she left not for all that to be still a true Christian: we remain∣ed much amazed at so strange a relation, and not a little sorrowful also to see and understand to what a point of misfortune this poor woman was reduced, so that we told her our opini∣on, and what we thought was fit for her to do, whereupon she concluded to go along with us to 
Timplam,
 and so to 
Pegu,
 and from thence to set sail for 
Coromandel,
 there to finish her days in the Island of 
St Thomé.
 Having vowed unto us to do thus we quitted her, not doub∣ting that she would lose so good an opportunity to retire her self out of the errors wherein she was, and to restore her self to an estate wherein she might be saved, since it had pleased God to permit her to meet with us in a Country so far distant from that which she could hope for: Howbeit she performed nothing, for we could never see nor hear of her afterwards, which made us to believe, that either some thing was befallen her that kept her from coming to us, or that through the obstinacy of her sins, she deserved not to make her profit of the grace which our Lord had offered to her out of his infinite goodness and mercy.








CHAP. LVIII. The Magnificent Reception of the King of 
Bramaa
 his Ambassadour, at the City of 
Timplam
; and that which passed betwixt the 
Calaminham,
 and him.


NIne dayes after the King of 
Bramaa
 his Ambassadour had reposed himself there by way of ceremony, according to the fashion of the Co
try, for the more honour of his Am∣bassage, one of the Governours of the City, called 
Quampanogrem,
 came to fetch him, ac∣companied with fourscore 
Seroos
 and 
Laulees,
 very well eqipped, and full of lu
ty able men: Throughout this Fleet they played on so many barbarous and ill accorded instruments, as Bel
, Cymbals, Drums, and Sea-corners, that the din thereof coming to joyn with the noise, which the Rowers made, terrified all those that heard it; and indeed one would have thought it at first to be some inchantment, or to say better, a musick of hell, if there be any there. Amidst this stir we drew near to the City, where we arrived about noon; Being come to the first Key, that was named 
Campalarraia,
 we saw a great many men, both Horse and Foot, all richly accoutred, as also a number of fighting Elephants, very well harnessed, having their chairs and for
-head pieces garnished with silver, and their warlike 
Panores
 fastened to their teeth, which rendred them very terrible. The Ambassadour was no sooner come on shore, but the 
Campanogrem
 took him by the hand, and falling on his knees, presented him to ano∣ther great man that attended for him at the Key in great pomp; This same was called 
Pa∣tedacan,
 one of the chiefest of the Kingdom, as we were told; After he had with a new complement of courtesie received the Ambassadour, he offered him an Elephant furnished with a Chair and harness of gold, but whatsoever the 
Mandarin
 could do to make the Am∣bassadour accept of it, he could by no means draw him thereunto, whereupon he caused ano∣ther almost as well furnished to be brought, and gave it to him. As for us nine 
Portugals,
 and fifty or threescore 
Bramaas
 they provided Horses, on which we mounted: In this manner we departed from that place, having his Chariots before us full of men, that amidst the acclamations of the people played upon divers kinds of instruments; namely on silver Cymbals, Bells, and Drums; Thus we were conducted through many long Streets, whereof nine were invironed with Ballisters of Lattin, and at the entrance into them, there were Ar∣ches very richly wrought, as also many Chapters of pillars guilt, and great Bells, which like unto clocks struck the hours, nay the quarters of the hour of the day, whereby the people were ordinarily directed. After that with much ado, by reason of the great press of people that was in the streets, we were come to the outward Court of the 
Calaminham's
 Pallace, which was as long, or little less, as a Faulcons shot, and broad proportionable thereunto, we saw in it above six thousand Horses, all trapped with silver and silk, and those that were moun∣ted on them were armed with Co
slets of Lattin and Copper, head-pieces of silver, carrying Ensigns in their hands of divers Colours, and Targets at their Saddle-bow
. The C
m∣mander of th
se Troops was the 
Quietor
 of Justice, who is as the Super-intendent over all the other Civil and Criminal Ministers, which is a Jurisdiction 
epe
ate by it self, from whence there is no appeal. The Ambassadour being come near unto him, who was also advanced to receive him, and the two Governours, they all prostra
e
 themselves on the ground three times, which is amongst them a new kind of Compliment, whereupon the 
Queitor
 spake not a word to the Ambassadour, but onely laid his hand on his head, and then gave him a rich Scymitar that he wore by his side, which the Ambassadour accepted of very thankfully, and kissed it thrice; That done the 
Quieor
 set the Ambassadour on his right hand, and lea∣ving the two 
Mandarins
 a little behind, they past along through two ranks of Elephants▪ which made a kind of Street of the length of the outward Court, they being fifteen hundred in number, all furnished with Castles, and rich Chairs of divers inventions, as also with a great many of silk Banners, and gorgeous Coverings; round abou
 were a great Company of Halberdiers, and many other shews of Greatness and Majesty, which made us believe that this Prince was one of the mightiest of the Country. When we were come to a great Gate, that stood between two high Towers, two hundred men which guarded it no sooner saw the 
Quietor,
 but they all fell down on their knees. Through this Gate, we entred into another very long outward Court, where the Kings second Guard was, composed of a thousand men,


who were all in guilt Arms, their Swords by their sides, and on their heads Helmets wrought with gold and silver, wherein stuck gallant plums of several colours. After we had past through the middle of all this Guard we arrived at a great Hall, where there was a 
Manda∣rim,
 Uncle to the King, called the 
Monvagaruu,
 a man of above seventy years of age, ac∣companied with a great number of Nobity, as also with many Captains and Officers of the Kingdom; About him were twelve little boyes richly clad, with great Chains of gold three or four times double about their necks, and each of them a silver Mace upon his shoulder: As soon as the Ambassadour was come near him, he touched him on the head with a 
Ventiloo
 that he held in his hand, and beholding him, 
May thy entrance,
 said he, 
into this Palace of the Lord of the world, be as agreeable to his eyes, as the rain is to our fields of Rice, for so shall he grant thee all that thy King demands of him.
 From thence we went up an high pair of stairs, and entred into a very long room, wherein there were many great Lords, who seeing the 
Monvagaruu
 stood up on their feet, as acknowledging him for their Superiour; Out of this room we entred into another, where there were four Altars, very well accommodated with Idols of silver; upon one of these Altars we saw the Statue of a woman as big as a Gi∣ant, being eighteen spans high, and with her arms all abroad looking up to Heaven: This Idol was of silver, and her hair of gold, which was very long, and spread over her shoulders; There also we saw a great Throne, incompassed round about with thirty Giants of brass, who had guilded Clubs upon their shoulders, and faces as deformed as those they paint for the Divel. From this room we past into a manner of a Gallery, adorned from the top to the bottom with a number of little Tables of Ebony, inlayed with Ivory, and full of mens heads, under every one of the which the name of him to whom it belonged was written in letters of gold; At the end of this Gallery there were a dozen of iron Rods guilt, whereon hung a great many sil∣ver Candlesticks of great value, and a number of persuming Pans, from whence breathed forth a most excellent odour of Amber, and Calambuco, or Lignum Aloes, but such as we have none in 
Christendom.
 There on an Altar invironed all about with three rows of Ballisters of silver, we saw thirteen Kings vissages of the same mettal, with golden Mitars upon their heads, and under each of them a dead mans head, and below many Candlesticks of silver, with great white wax lights in them, which were stuffed ever and anon by little boys, who accorded their voyces to those of the 
Grepos
 that sung in form of a Letany, answering one another. The 
Grepos
 told us that those thirteen dead mens heads which were under the vissages were the skulls of thirteen 
Calaminhams,
 which in times past gained this Empire from certain strangers, cal∣led 
Roparons,
 who by Arms had usurped the same upon them of the Country: As for the other dead mens heads which we saw there, they were the sk
ls of such Commanders, as by their Heroick deeds had honourably ended their dayes in helping to recover this Empire, in re∣gard whereof it was most reasonable, that though death had deprived them of the recompence which they had merited by their action, yet their memory should not be abolished out of the world. When we were gone out of this Gallery, we proceeded on upon a great Bridg, that was in the form of a Street, rayled on either side with Ballisters of Lattin, and beautified with a many of Arches curiously wrought, upon which were Scutchions of Arms, charged with several devices in gold, and the Cr
ts over them were silver Globes, five spans in cir∣cumferences, all very stately and majestical to behold. At the end of this bridge was another building, the doors whereof we found shut, whereupon we knocked four times, they within not deigning to answer us, which is a ceremony observed by them in such occasions; At the length after we had rung a bell four times more as it were in haste, out comes a woman of about fifty years of age, accompanied with six little girls, richly attired, and Scymitars upon their shoul∣ders garnished with 
lowers wrought in gold: This anci
nt woman having demanded of the 
Monvagaruu
 why he had rung the bell, and what he would have, he answered her with a great deal of respect, 
That he had there an Ambassadour from the King of
 Bramaa, 
the Lord of
 Tanguu, 
who was come thither to treat at the feet of the
 Calaminham 
about certain mat∣ters much importing his service.
 By reason of the great authority which this woman was in she seemed little to regard this answer, whereat we wondred much, because he that spake to her was one of the chiefest Lords of the Kingdom, and Uncle to the 
Calaminham,
 as it was said; Nevertheless one of the six girls that accompanied her, spake thus in her behalf to the 
Monvagaruu, My Lord, may it please your Greatness to have a little patience till we may know whether, the time be fit for the kissing of the foot of the Throne of this Lord of the World, and advertising him of the coming of this stranger, and so according to the


grace which our Lord will shew him therein, his heart may rejoyce, and we with him.
 That said, the door was shut again for the space of three or four Credoes, and then the six Girls came and opened it, but the anciant woman that at first came along with them, we saw no more, howbeit in stead of her there came a Boy of about nine years of age, richly apparelled, and having on his head an 
hurfangua
 of Gold, which is a kind of Myter, but that it is somewhat more closed all about, and without any overture, he had also a Mace of Gold, much like a Scepter, which he carryed upon his shoulder: this same, without making much reckoning of the 
Monvagaruu,
 or of any of the other Lords there present, took the Embassador by the hand, and said unto him, 
The news of thy arrival is come unto the feet of
 Binaigaa 
the
 Calaminhan, 
and Scepter of the Kings that govern the Earth, and is so agree∣able to his ears, that with a smiling look he now sends for thee to give thee audience concerning that which is desired of him by thy King, whom he newly receives into the number of his bre∣thren, with a love of the son of his entrals, that so he may remain powerful and victorious over his Enemies
: Thereupon he caused him, together with the Kings Uncle, and the other Governors that accompanyed him, to come in, l
aving all the rest without; the Embassa∣dor then seeing none of his Train follow him, looked three or four times back, seeming by his countenance to be somewhat discontented, which the 
Monvagaruu
 perceiving, spake to the 
Queitor,
 who was a little behind, that he should cause the strangers to be let in, and none else; the doors being then opened again, we 
Portugals
 began to go in with the 
Bra∣maas,
 but such a number of others came thrusting in amongst us, as the Gentlemen Ushers, who were above twenty, had much ado to keep the doors, striking many with Battouns which they had in their hands, and of those some that were persons of quality, and yet could they not therewith, neither with their cries, nor menaces, stop them all from enter∣ing: Thus being come in, we past along through the midst of a great garden, made with such art, and where appeared so many goodly things, so divers, and so pleasing to the eye, as words are not able to express them: For there were there many Alleys environed with Ballisters of Silver, and many Arbors of extraordinary scent, which we were told had so much sympathy with the Moons of the year, that in all seasons whatsoever they bare flowers and fruits; withall there was such abundance and variety of Roses and other flowers, as almost passeth belief. In the midst of this Garden we saw a great many young women, very fair, and well clad, whereof some past away their time in dancing, and others in playing on sundry sorts of Instruments much after our manner, which they per∣formed with so much harmony, as we were not a little delighted therewith: some also be∣stowed themselves in making of curious Needle-works and Gold-strings, some in other things, whilest their companions gathered fruit to eat; and all this was done so quietly, and with such order and good behavior, as made us admire it. At our going out of this Garden, where the 
Monvagaruu
 would needs have the Embassador to stay awhile, that he might there observe something worthy to entertain his King with at his return to 
Pegu,
 we went into a very great Antichamber, where many Commanders and Lords were sitting, as also some great Princes, who received the Embassador with new ceremonies, and com∣plements, and yet not one of them stirred from his place; Through this Antichamber we came to a door, where there were six Gentlemen Ushers with Silver Maces, by which we entered into another room very richly furnished: in this was the 
Calaminhan
 seated on a most majestical Throne, encompassed with three rows of Ballisters of Silver; At the foot of the degrees of his Throne sat twelve women that were exceeding beautiful, and most richly apparelled, playing on divers sorts of Instruments, whereunto they accorded their voyces; On the top of the Throne, and not far from his person, were twelve young Dam∣sels about nine or ten years old, all of them on their knees round about him, and carrying Maces of Gold in the fashion of Scepters; amongst them there was also another that stood on her feet, and fanned him. Below, all along the whole length of the room, were a great many of old men, wearing Myters of Gold on their heads, and long Robes of Sattin and Damask, curiously embroidered, every one having Silver Maces on their shoul∣ders, and ranked in order on either side against the walls: Over all the rest of the room were sitting, upon rich 
Persian
 Carpets, about two hundred young Ladies, as we could guess, that were wonderful fair, and exceeding well favored. Thus did this room, both for the marvelous structure of it, and for the excellent order that was observed therein, re∣present so great and extraordinary a Majesty, as we heard the Embassador say afterwards


talking of it, that if God would grant him the grace to return to 
Pegu,
 he would never speak of it to the King, as well for fear of grieving him, as of being taken for a man that reports things which seem altogether incredible.


As soon as the Embassador was ent
red into the room where the 
Calaminhan
 was,
 ac∣companyed with the four Princes that conducted him, he prostrated himself five times on the ground, without so much as daring to behold the 
Calaminhan,
 in sign of the great re∣spect he carryed towards him, which the 
Monvagaruu
 perceiving, willed him to advance forward, so that being arrived neer to the first degree of his Throne, with his face still bending downward, he said to the 
Calaminhan,
 with so loud a voyce as every one might hear him; 
The Clouds of the Ayr, which recreate the fruits whereof we eat, have published over the whole Monarchy of the World the great Majesty of thy Power, which hath caused my King, desiring to be honored with thy amity, as with a rich pearl, to send me for that pur∣pose, and to tell thee from him, that thou shalt much oblige him, if thou pleasest to accept of him for thy true Brother, with the honorable obedience which he will always render to thee, as to him that is the elder, as thou art: And for that end it is, that he sends thee this Letter, which is the jewel of all his treasure that he prizes most, and wherein his eyes take m
re pleasure, for the honor and contentment they receive by it, then in being Lord of the Kings of
 Avaa, 
and of all the precious stone of the mountain of
 Falent, 
of
 Jatir, 
and
 Pontau. Hereunto the 
Calaminhan
 made him this answer following, and that with a grave and severe counte∣nance; 
For my part I accept of this new amity, thereby to give full satisfaction to thy King, as to a son newly born of my intrals.
 Then began the women to play on Instruments of Musick, and six of them danced with little children for the space of three or four credo
s; After that, other six little girls danced with six of the oldest men that were in the room, which seemed to us a very pretty fantasticalness. This dance ended, there was a very fine Comedy represented by twelve Ladies, exceeding beautiful, and gorgeously attired, where∣in appeared on the Stage a great Sea-monster, holding in his mouth the daughter of a King, whom the fish swallowed up before them all, which the twelve Ladies seeing, went in all haste weeping to an Hermitage, that was at the foot of a Mountain, from whence they re∣turned with an Hermit, who made earnest supplications to 
Quiay Patureu,
 God of the Sea, that he would bring this Monster to the shore, so as they might come to bury the Damsel according to her quality; The Hermit was answered by 
Quiay Patureu,
 That the twelve Ladies should change their lamentations and complaints into so many consorts of musick, that were agreeable to his ears, and he would then command the Sea to cast the fish upon the strand to be done withall as they thought good; whereupon comes on the Stage six little Boys with wings and crowns of Gold upon their heads, in the same manner as we use to paint Angels, and naked all over, who falling on their knees before the Ladies, pre∣sented them with three Harps and three Viols, saying, that 
Quiay Patureu
 s
nt them these Instruments from the Heaven of the Moon, therewith to cast the Monster of the Sea into a sleep, that so they might have their desire on him, whereupon the twelve Ladies took them out of the hands of the little Boys, and began to play upon them, tuning them unto their voyces with so lamentable and sad a tone, and such abundance of tears, that it drew some from the eyes of divers Lords that were in the room; Having continued their musick about half a quarter of an hour, they saw the Monster coming out of the Sea, and by little and little as it were astonished, making to the shore where these fair Musicians were; all which was performed so properly, and to the li
e, that the Assistants could hardly imagine it to be a Fable, and a matter devised for pleasure, but a very truth, besides the Scean was set forth with a world of state and riches. Then one of the twelve Ladies drawing out a Poig∣nard, all set with precious stones, which she wore by her side, ripped up the fish, and out of the belly of it drew the Infanta alive, which presently went and danced to the tune of their Instruments, and so went and kissed the 
Calaminhans
 hand, who received her very graciously, and made her sit down by him; It was said, that this young Lady was his Niepce, the Daughter of a Brother of his; as for the other twelve, they were all the Daugh∣ters of Princes, and of the greatest Lords of the Country, whose Fathers and Brothers were there present. There were also three or four Comedies more like this, acted by other young Ladies of great quality, and set forth with so much pomp and magnificence, as more could not be desired. About evening the 
Calaminhan
 retired into another room, accom∣panyed with women onely, for all the rest they went along with the 
Monvagaruu,
 who


took the Embassador by the hand, and led him back to the outermost room of all, where with many complements after their manner, he took his leave of him, and so committed him to the 
Queitor,
 who straightway ca
ryed him to his House, where he lodged all the while that he was there, being two and thirty days, during which time he was feasted by the principal Lords of the Court in a splendid and sumptuous manner, and continually enter∣tained with several sports of fishing, hunting, hawking, and other such like recreations; As for us 
Portugals,
 we took a singular content in observing, over all the City and about it, the excellent structure of very sumptuous and magnificent edifices, of stat
ly Pagodes or Temples, and of houses adorned with goodly workmanship, and of inestimable value. Now amongst all these Buildings there was not in the wh
le City a more majestical one then that which was dedicated to 
Quiay Pimpocau,
 who is 
The God of the Sick:
 In it serve continually a number of Priests, apparelled in grey Gowns, who being of greater knowledg then all the rest of the four and twenty Sects of this Empire, do distinguish themselves from the others by certain yellow strings, which serve them for girdles; they are also by the vulgar people in a soveraign degree of honor called ordinarily, 
Perfect men.
 The Embassador himself went five times to their Temple, as well to see very marvelous things, as to hear the doctrine of those▪ that preached there, of which, and of all that con∣cerns the extravagancies of their Religion, he brought a great volume to the King of 
Bra∣maa,
 which was so pleasing to him, as he afterward commanded the said Doctrine to be preached in all the Temples of that Kingdom, which is to this day exactly observed in all his states. Of this Book I brought a Translation into the Kingdom of 
Portugal,
 which a 
Florentine
 borrowed of me, and when I asked him for it again, he told me that it was lost, but I found afterward that he had carryed it to 
Florence,
 and presented it to the Duke of 
Tuscany,
 who commanded it to be printed under this Title, 
The new Belief of the Pa∣gans of the other end of the World.
 Upon a day as the Embassador was talking in this Pa∣gode with one of the 
Grepos,
 who professed much kindness unto him, for indeed they are all of a good nature, easie of access, and communicating themselves to strangers freely enough, he demanded of him, how long it was since the Creation of the World, or whether those things had a beginning which God doth shew so clearly to our eyes, such as the Night, the Day, the Sun, the Moon, the Stars, and other Creatures that have neither Father nor Mother, and of whom no reason can be rendered in Nature how they began: The 
Grep
 relying more on his own knowledg, then on the others that were about him made this an∣swer to his Question; 
Nature,
 said he, 
had no other Creation but that which proceeded from the Will of the Creator, who in a certain time, determined in his divine Counsel, manifested it to the Inhabitants of Heaven, created before by his soveraign power, and according to that which is written thereof, it was fourscore and two thousand Moons, since the Earth was dis∣covered from under the Waters, when as God created therein a very fair Garden, where he placed the first man, whom he named
 Adaa, 
together with his wife
 Bazagon, 
them he expresly commanded, for to reduce th
m under the yoke of obedience, that they should not touch a cer∣tain fruit of a tree, called
 Hil
for
n, 
for that he reserved the same for himself; and in case they came to eat thereof, they should for a chastisement of their fault prove the rigor of his Iustice, whereof they and their descendants should feel the dire effects: This being known to the great
 Lupantoo, 
who is the gluttonous Serpent of the profound House of Smoke, and per∣ceiving how by this commandment, God would for mans obedience on Earth give him Hea∣ven for a reward, he went to
 Adaas 
wife and bid her eat of that fruit, and that she should also make her Husband eat thereof, for he assured her that in so doing they should both of them be more excellent in knowledg then all other creatures, and free from that heavy nature wher
f he had composed them, so that in a moment their bodies should mount to Heaven. Then
 Baza∣gon, 
hearing what
 Lupantoo 
had said unto her, was so taken with a desire of enjoying that excellent prerogative of knowledg which he promised her, 
 to attain thereunto she eat of the fruit, and made her Husband likewise to eat of it, whence it insued, that they were both of them by that unhappy morsel subjected to the pains of death of sorrow, and of poverty. For God seeing the disobedience of these two first creatures, made them feel the 
igor of his Iustice, by chasing them out of the Garden where he had placed them, and confirming the punishments upon them wherewith he had threatened them before; Wherefore
 Ada
, 
fearing lest the divine Iustice should proceed further against him, gave himself up for a long time to continual tears; whereupon God sent him word, that if he continued in his repentance he would forgive him


his sin.
 Whilest the 
Grepo
 was speaking thus, the Embassador wondering at his discourse, which was a great novelty to him, 
Certainly,
 said he unto him, 
I am well assured that the King my Master hath never heard the like of this from the Priests of our Temples, for they in recompence of our works propound no other thing unto us but the possession of riches in this life; for,
 as they say, 
there is no guerdon after death, and that we must finish our lives a
 all the beasts of the field do, except the Cows, which for a reward of the milk they have given us, are converted into other Sea-cows, of the apples of whose eyes are pearls ingendred.
 At these words the 
Grepo,
 puffed up with vanity for that which he had said to the Embassador; 
Think not,
 answered he unto him, 
that there is any one in all this Country can let thee under∣stand so much as I have done, unless it be one
 Grepo, 
who is as learned as my self:
 With this 
ume of presumption he chanced to cast his eye on us 
Portugal
,
 that were behind the Em∣bassador, and as the Minister of the Devil, believing that we esteemed him as much as he did himself, 
Verily,
 said he unto us, 
I should be glad, that you, who as strangers have no know∣ledg of this truth, would come more often to hear me, for to understand how God hath cre∣ated all these things, and how much we are bound to him for the benefit of this Creation:
 Then one of our company, named 
Gaspar de Meyrelez,
 shewing himself therein more curious then the rest, after he had thanked the 
Grepo
 in the name of us all, he prayed him to give him leave to ask him something which he desired to know of him; Whereunto the 
Grepo
 made answer, that he was very well contented; 
For,
 added he, 
it is as well the property of a wise and curious man to enquire for to learn, as of an ignorant to hear, and not be able to answer:
 whereupon 
Gaspar de Meyrelez
 demanded of him, whether God, after he had created all these things whereof he spake, had not done some heroical works upon Earth, either by his Justice, or by his Mercy. To this the 
Grepo
 replyed, that he had, 
it being evi∣dent, that as long as man lived in this flesh, he could not chuse but commit sins which would render him punishable, nor God be without a great desire to pardon him
; and he added fur∣ther, 
That the sins of men coming to be multiplyed on Earth, God had overwhelmed the whole World, by commanding the Clouds of Heaven to rain upon it, and to drown all living things, except one just man with his Family, which God put into a great House of wood, from whom issued afterwards all the Inhabitants of the Earth.
 The 
Portugal
 again en∣quired, whether God after this chastisement had not sent some other. 
God did not,
 an∣swered he, 
send any, which taken in general, was like unto that; but it is true, that in particular he chastiseth Kingdoms and People with Wars, and other scourges which he send∣eth them, as we see that he punisheth men with infinite afflictions, labors, diseases, and above all with extream poverty, which is the last and extreamest of all evils.
 The 
Portugal
 con∣tinuing in his demands, desired him to tell him, whether he had any hope that God would one day be appeased, so as men might have entrance into Heaven; Whereunto the 
Grepo
 replyed, 
That he knew nothing thereof, but that it was an evident thing, and to be be∣lieved as an Article of Faith, that even as God was an infinite good, so he would have regard to the good which men did upon Earth for his sake.
 Hereupon he demanded of him, whe∣ther he had not heard it said, or found written, That after all those things, whereof he spake, a man was come into the World, who dying on the Cross, had satisfied God for all men; or whether there was not among them some knowledg thereof: Whereunto the 
Grepo
 answered, 
None can make satisfaction to God but God himself, although there be in the World holy and vertuous men, which satisfie for themselves, and for some of their friends, such as are the Gods of our Temples, as the
 Grepos 
do assure us; But to say, that one alone hath satisfied for all, is a thing which we have never heard of till now, besides, on Earth, which is so base of it self, a Ruby of so high a price cannot be ingendred: It is true never∣theless, that in times past so much was certified to the Inhabitants of this Country by a man, named
 John, 
who came into this City, and was held for an holy man, having been the Dis∣ciple of another, called
 Tomé Modeliar, 
the Servant of God, whom those of the Country put to death, because he went publiquely preaching,
 That God was made man, and that he had suffered death for mankind; 
which at first wrought such a Division amongst the people of this Nation, as many believed it for a very truth, and others opposed it, and formed a con∣trary party against it, incited thereunto by the
 Grepoes 
of the Law of
 Quiay Figrau, 
God of the Atomes of the Sun; so that they reproved all that this stranger said, by reason whereof He was banished from this City to the Kingdom of
 Brama
, 
and from thence for the


same cause to the Town of
 Digan, 
where he was put to death for preaching publiquely, as I said before, That God became man, and was crucified for men.
 Upon these speeches 
Gas∣par de Meyrelez
 and we, said, that this man had preached nothing in this Country which was not most true; wherewith the 
Grepo
 was so taken, that he fell down on his knees be∣fore all that were present, and lifting up his hands and eyes to Heaven, he said with tears in his eyes, 
Lord, of whose beauty and goodness the Heavens and the Stars do give testimony, I with all my heart do beseech thee to permit, that in our times the hour may come, wherein the People of the other end of the World may give thee thanks for so great a Grace.
 After that these matters were past in this manner, and many others besides, which well deserved to be related, if my gross wit were able to describe them, the Embassador took his leave of the 
Grepo
 with many complements and words of courtesie, whereof they are nothing sparing, as being much accustomed to practise them one with another.








CHAP. XLIX. An ample relation of this Empire of the 
Calaminham,
 and of the Kingdomes of 
Pegu,
 and 
Bramaa,
 with the continuance of our voyage, and what we saw among the same.


A Moneth after our arrivall at this City of 
Timphan,
 where the Court then was, the Ambassador demanded an answer to his Ambassie, and it was immediately granted him by the 
Calaminham,
 with whom he spake himself, and being graciously entertained by him, he referred him for his dispatch to the 
Monuagaruu,
 that was, as I have hereto∣fore delivered, the chief man in governing the Kingdome, who gave him an answer on the behalf of the 
Calaminham
▪ as also a present in exchange of that which the King of 
Bramaa
 had sent him, withall he wrote him a Letter, that contained these words, 
Thou arm of a clear Ruby, which God hath newly enchaced into my body, and whose flesh is fitly fastned to me, as that of my brother, by that new league and amity now accorded unto thee, by me
 Prechau Guimiam, 
Lord of the seven and twenty Crownes of the Montaignes of the earth, inherited by a lawfull succession from him, who these two and twenty moneths hath not set his feet upon my head; for so long it is since he left me, never to set me again, by reason of the sanctification which his soul doth now enjoy in feeling the sweet heat of the beams of the Sun. I have seen thy Letter, dated the fifth cha
eca of the eighth moon of the year, whereunto I have given the true credit of a brother, and as such a one I accept of the party thou dost pre∣sent me with, obliging my self to render thee the two passages of
 Savady 
free, that so thou mayest without fear of the
 Siamon 
be King of
 Avaa, 
as thou desirest me by thy Letter: And as for the other conditions, whereof thy Ambassador hath made some mention unto me, I will make answer thereunto by one of mine own, whom will send unto thee from hence e're it be long, to the end thou mayest have a good successe in the pleasure thou seemest to take in making war upon thine enemies.
 The Ambassador having received this Letter, departed from the Court the third day of 
November,
 in the year one thousand five hundred forty and six, accompanied with certain Lords, who by the expresse commandement of the 
Calamin∣ham
 went along with him to 
Bidor,
 where they took their leave of him, after they had made him a great feast, & presented him with divers gifts. But before I intreat of the way which we held from this place till we came to 
Pegu,
 where the King of 
Bramaa
 was, I think it convenient and necessary to make a relation here of certain things which we saw in this country, wherein I will acquit my self as succinctly as I can, as I have done in all other matters whereof 
 have spoken heretofore; for if I would discourse in parti∣cular of all that I have seen, and of that which hath past as well in this Empire, as in o∣ther Kingdomes, where I have been during my painfull voyages, I had then need to make another volume far bigger then this same, and be indued with a wit much above that I have: howbeit that I may not wholly conceal things so remarkable, I am content∣ed to say so much thereof as my grosse stile will permit me to deliver. The Kingdome of 
Pegu
 hath in circuit an hundred and forty leagues, is scituate on the South side in six∣teen degrees, and in the hear
 of the Country towards the rhomb of the East it hath an hundred forty leagues, being invironed all above with an high ground, named 
Pan∣gavirau,
 where the Nation of the 
Bramaas
 doth inhabit, whose country is fourscore leagues broad, and two hundred long. This Monarchy was in times past one sole King∣dome, which now it is not, but is divided into thirteen estates of Soveraignes, who made themselves masters of it by poysoning their King in a banquet which they made him in the City of 
Chaleu,
 as their histories relate: of these thirteen estates, there are eleven that are commanded by other Nations, who by a tract of another great country are joyned to all the bounds of the 
Bramaas,
 where two great Emperors abide, of which the one is called the 
Siamon,
 and the other the 
Calaminham,
 who is the same I purpose only to treat of. According to report, the Empire of the Prince is above three hundred leagues bredth, and as much in length, and it is said that antiently it contained seven and twenty Kingdomes, the inhabitants whereof spake all one language: within this Em∣pire we saw many goodly Cities, exceedingly well peopled, and abounding with all provisions necessary for mans life, as flesh, fresh water, fish, corn, pulse, rice, past
res, vines, and fruits; the chief of all these Cities is 
Tymphan,
 where this Emperor, the 
Cala∣minham,
 with his Court commonly resides: it is seated along by a great river, named 
Pit
y,
 and invironed all about with two broad walls of earth, made up with strong stone


on either side, having very broad ditches, and at each gate a Castle with high Towers; certain Merchants affirmed unto us, that this City had within it some four hundred thousand fires, and albeit the houses are for the most part not above two stories high, yet in recompense thereof they are built very stately, and with great charge, especially those of the Nobility, and of the Merchants, not speaking of the great Lords, which are separated by great inclosures, where are spacious outward Courts, and at the entring into them arches after the manner of 
China,
 as also gardens, and walks planted with trees, and great ponds, all very handsomely accommodated to the pleasures and delights of this life, whereunto these people are very much inclined: We were also certified, that both within the inclosure of the City, and a league about it, there were six and twenty hundred 
Pagodes,
 some of which, wherein we had been, were very sumptuous and rich, indeed for the rest the most of them were but petty houses in the fashion of Hermitages: These people follow four and twenty Sects, all different one from ano∣ther, amongst the which there is so great a confusion of errors, and diabolicall precepts, principally in that which concerns their bloudy Sacrifices, as 
abhor to speak of them; but the Idol which is most in vogue amongst them, and most frequented, is that whereof I have already made mention, called 
Qui
y Frigau,
 that is to say, 
The God of the Meats of the Sun,
 for it is in this false God that the 
Calaminham
 believes, and does adore him, and so do all the chiefest Lords of the Kingdome, wherefore the 
Grepos, Menigrepos,
 and 
Talagrepos
 of this false god are honored far more then all others, and held in the re∣tation of holy personages; their superiours, who by an eminent title are called 
Cabi∣zondos,
 never know women, as they say, but to content their bruitish and sensuall appe∣tites they want not diabolicall inventions, which are more worthy of tears then recital: during the ordinary Fairs of this City, called by them 
Chandu
s,
 we saw all things there that nature hath created, as iron, steel, lead, tin, copper, lattin, saltpeter, brimstone, oyl, vermillion, honey, wax, sugar, lacre, benjamin, divers sorts of stuffes and garments of silk, pepper, ginger, cinamon, linnen cloth, cotton wool, alum, borax, cor
alines, christall, camphire, musk, yvory, cassia, rhubarbe, turbith, scamony, azure, woad, in∣cense, cochenill, saffron, myr
he, rich porcelain, gold, silver, rubies, diamonds, emerauds, saphirs, and generally all other kind of things that can be named, and that in so great a∣bundance, as it is not possible for me to speak that which I have seen, and be believed; women there are ordinarily very white and fair, but that which most commends them is, that they are of a good nature, chast, charitable, and much inclined to compassion: The Priests of all these four and twenty Sects, whereof there are a very great number in this Empire, are cloathed in yellow, like the 
Roolims
 of 
Pegu,
 they have no money ei∣ther of gold or silver, but all their commerce is made with the weight of 
cates, casis, ma∣azes,
 and 
conderins.
 The Court of the 
Calaminham
 is very rich, the Nobility exceeding gallant, and the revenue of the Lords and Princes very great, the King is feared and re∣spected in a marvellous manner; he hath in his Court many Commanders that are stran∣gers, unto whom he giveth great pensions to serve him for the safety of his person, our Ambassador was assured, that in the City of 
Timphan,
 where most commonly the Court is, there are above threescore thousand horse, and ten thousand Elephants: the gentlemen of the country live very hand somely, and are served in vessels of silver, and sometimes of gold, but as for the common people they use porcelain & lattin; in summer they are apparrelled in sattin, damask, and wrought taffeti
s, which come from 
Persia,
 & in winter in gowns furred with marterns; there is no going to Law amongst them, no
 does any man enter into bond there, but if there be any difference among the common people, certain Magistrates, like to our Aldermen of Wards, do decide it, and if con∣tention happens to arise between persons of an higher quality, then they submit to the judgment of certain religious men, who are expresly deputed for that purpose, and from them matters pas
e on in manner of appeal to the Queitor of Justice, which is as the superintendent thereof, from whose sentence there is no appeal, how great and im∣portant soever the business be: The Monarchy of these seven and twenty Kingdomes hath seven hundred Provinces, that is six and twenty in every Kingdome; and in the ca∣pitall town of each of those Provinces doth a Governor preside, all of them being of like and equall power. Now on every new Moon, each Captain is bound to muster the souldiers that are under his charge, which ordinarily are two thousand foot, five hun∣dred


horse, and fourscore fighting Elephants, one of the which is called by the name of the capitall town of the same Province, so that if one should make a just computation of all those men of war that are in those seven hundred companies of those Provinces, they would appear to be seventeen hundred and fifty thousand, whereof there are three hundred and fifty thousand horse, and five and fifty thousand Elephants; for in regard of the great number that there are of those beasts in that country, this Emperor stiles himself in his titles, Lord of the indomptable force of Elephants. The revenue which the Monarch draws from his Royall Prerogatives, by them called, 
the price of the Scepter,
 as also from his Mines, amounts to twenty millions of gold, without comp
ising there∣in the presents which are given him by the Princes, Lords and Captains, and a great quantity of money that is distributed amongst the men of war, according to every on
 merit, which are not of that accompt. In all this country, pearl, amber, and salt are ve∣ry much esteemed of, because they are things that come from the Sea, which is far di∣stant from the City of 
Timpla
,
 but of all other commodities they have infinite store: The Country of it self is very healthy, the ayr very good, and likewise the waters. When they sneeze they use to say, 
the God of truth is three and one,
 whereby one may judge that these people have had some knowledge of the Christian Religion.


Being departed from the town of 
Bidor,
 we held on our course down the great river of 
Pit
y,
 and the same day at night we went and lodged at a certain 
Abby
 of the land of 
Quiay Iareno,
 the God of married folks; this Abby is seated on the bank of the ri∣ver in a plain, where are a great many of trees planted, and very rich buildings, here the Ambassador was well entertained by the 
Cabizondo
 and the 
Talagrepos
; then continuing our voyage seven dayes longer, we arrived at a town named 
Pavel,
 where we staid three dayes to furnish our vessells with some provisions which we needed; in this place the Ambassador bought divers knacks of 
China,
 and other commodities that were sold there at a very cheap rate, as musk, fine porcelains, wrought silks, Ermins, and many o∣ther sorts of furs, which are much used in that country, because it is extreme cold there; these wares were brought thither by great troops of Elephants and Rhinocero's from a certain far distant Province, as the Merchants told us, called 
Friou
araniaa,
 beyond the which, they said, was a kind of people called 
Calog
s
 and 
Funcaos,
 tawny men, and great Archers, having their feet like unto Oxen, but hands like unto other men, save that they are exceeding hairy, they are naturally inclined to cruelty, and have below at the end of the backbone a lump of flesh as big as ones two fists, their dwelling is in mountains that are very high and rough on some parts, where there are mighty deep pits or caves, from whence are heard in winter nights most dreadfull cries, and dolefull la∣mentations: We were told likewise, that not far from these people there were others, called 
Calouhos, Timpates,
 and 
Bugems,
 and a good way beyond them some, named 
O∣quens
 and 
Magores,
 who feed on wild beasts which they catch in hunting, and eat raw, as also on all kind of contagious creatures, as lizards, serpents, and adders; they hunt those wild beasts mounted on certain animalls, as big as horses, which have three horns in the midst of their foreheads, with thick short legs, and on the middle of their backs a row of prickles, wherewith they prick when they are angry, and all the rest of the bo∣dy is like 
 great lizard; besides they have on their necks, instead of hair, other prickles far longer and bigger then those on their backs, and on the joynts of their shoulders short wings like to the sins of fishes, wherewith they fly, as it were, leaping the length of five or six and twenty paces at a jump: These creatures are called 
Banazes,
 upon which these savage ride into the country of their enemies, with whom they hold conti∣nuall war, and whereof some pay them tribute in salt, which is the thing they make most account of, in regard of the need they have of it, for that they are very far distant from the Sea. We spake also with other men called 
Bumioens,
 who live on high mountains, where there are Mines of Alum and Lacre, and great store of wood; of this Nation, we saw a troop conducting of above two thousand oxen, on whom they had put pack-sad∣dles, and so made them to carry their Merchandise; these men were very tall, and had eys and beards like the 
Chineses
: We saw others likewise, that had reasonable long beards, their faces full of freckles, and their ears and nostrills pierced, and in the holes thereof small threds of gold made into clasps, these were called 
Ginaphogaas,
 and the Province whereof they were Natives 
Surobosay,
 which within the mountains of the



La
hos
 are bounded with the lake of 
Chiammay,
 and are cloathed with hairy skins, go∣ing bare-foot and bare-headed, certain Merchants told us that these had great riche
, and that all their traffique was in silver, whereof they had great store. We spake also with another sort of men, call d 
Tuparo
ns,
 who are tawny, great eaters, and much ad∣dicted to the pleasures of the flesh; these gave us better entertainment then all the rest, and oftentimes feasted us. Now because in a certain banquet, where we nine 
Portugals
 were with the Ambassador; one of us, named 
Francisco Temuda,
 challenged them to drink, they taking it for a great affront, caused the feast to continue the longer for the recovery of their honor, but the 
Portugal
 set on them so lustily, twenty that they were, as he laid them all along drunk on the ground, himself remaining still sober; when they were out of their drink, the 
Sapiton,
 that was their Captain, and in whose house the feast had been made, called his company together, which were above three hundred, and whether the 
Portugal
 would or no made him to mount upon an 
Elephant,
 and so lead him through all the town, accompanied with a great multitude of people that fol∣lowed him at the sound of trumpets, drums, and other such instruments; the Captain himself, as also the Ambassador, and the rest of us, together with all the 
Bramaas,
 march∣ing on foot after him, with boughs in our hands, and two men before him on horse∣back, that rode crying, 
O all ye people, praise with gladness the beams which proceed from the midst of the Sun, who is the God that makes our rice to grow, for that you have lived to see a man so holy, that knowing how to drink better then all the men of the world, hath laid on the ground twenty of the principall drinkers of our troop, to the end his renown may be dai∣ly more and more augmented.
 Whereunto all the crowd of people that accompanied him, answered with such cries and acclamations, as the very noyse thereof frighted all that heard it. In this equipage they lead the 
Portugal
 to the Ambassadors house, where they set him down with a great deal of respect and many complements, then on their knees they rendred him to the Ambassador, desiring him to have a care of him as of an holy man, or the son of some great King, for, said they, it cannot be otherwise, seeing God hath bestowed so great a gift on him, as to know how to drink so well. Whereup∣on having made a gathering for him, they got together above two hundred lingots of silver, which they gave him, and untill the time that we departed he was continually visited by the inhabitants, whereof many presented him with rich pieces of silk, and o∣ther gifts, as if they had made an offering to some Saint upon a solemn day of his invo∣cation. After these we saw other men that were very white, named 
Pavilens,
 great ar∣chers, and good horsemen, apparrelled in caslocks of silk like those of 
Iapon,
 and that carried their meat to their mouths with little sticks, after the manner of the 
Chineses
; these same told us that their Coyntry was called 
Binagorem,
 and that it was distant from thence about two hundred leagues up the river, their merchandize was store of gold in powder, like to that of 
Menancab
,
 of the Island of 
Su
atra,
 as also lacre, a∣loes, musk, tin, copper, silk, and wax, which they exchanged for pepper, ginger, salt; wine, and rice: the wives of these men which we saw there are very white, of better con∣versation then all the rest of those countryes, well natured, and exceeding charitable, demanding of them what was their Law, and what was the divinity that they adored they answered us, 
That their Gods were the Sun, the heaven, and the stars, for that from them they received by an holy communication all the good that they enjoyed upon earth; and furthermore, that the soul of man was but a breath which ended in the death of the body, and that afterwards tumbling up and down in the ayr she mingled her self with the clouds, untill such time as coming to be dissolved into water, she died again upon the earth, as the body had done before.
 I omit an infinite many of such extravagances which were told us, and that gave us good cause to wonder at the blindness and confusion of these wretches, and doth also oblige us to render thanks continually unto God for delivering us from these er∣rors, and this false belief. Now from the diversity of these unknown Nations, which we saw in these parts, it is easie to infer, that in this Monarchy of the world there are many countries yet undivided, and unknown to us.








CHAP. LX. Our arrivall at 
Pegu,
 with the death of the 
Roolim
 of 
Mounay.


COntinuing our course from this town of 
Pavel,
 we came the next day to a village, called 
Luncor,
 invironed about the space of three leagues, with a great number of trees of 
Benjamin,
 which from this place is transported into the Kingdoms of 
Pegu,
 and 
Siam.
 From thence we sailed for nine daies together down that great river, all alongst the which we saw many goodly towns, and then we arrived at another river, called 
Ventrau
 thorough the which we continued our voyage to 
Penauchin,
 the first Borough of the Kingdome of 
Iangumaa,
 where the Ambassador registred his vessells, and all that were within them, because such was the custom of the country. Being departed from thence, we went and lay that night at the 
Rauditens,
 which are two strong places be∣longing to the Prince of 
Poncanor.
 Five days after we came to a great town, called 
Magdaleu,
 which is the country from whence lacre is brought to 
Martabano
; the Prince thereof, during the time that we stayed there, shewed the Ambassador a generall muster of all the men of war that he had levied against the King of the 
Lau
os,
 with whom he was at difference, because he had repudiated a daughter of his, which he had married three years before, intending to espouse a gentlewoman by whom he had had a son that he had legitimated, and made choice of for heir of his Kingdom, thereby frustrating his Nephew (by his daughter) of his right. Passing on then thorough the streight of 
Madur,
 wherein we sailed five days, we arrived at a village called 
Mouchell,
 the first place of the Kingdom of 
Pegu
; there one 
Chalag
ni
,
 a famous Pyrat, that went up and down robbing in this place with thirty 
Ceroos,
 well equipped, and full of warlike men, assailed us one night, and fighting with us till it was almost day, he handled us in such sort, as it was the great grace of God that we escaped out of his hands, neverthe∣less it was not without the loss of five of the twelve vessells that we had, together with an hundred and fourscore of our men▪ whereof two were 
Portugals
: The Ambassador himself had a cut on one of his arms, and two wounds besides with arrow shot, which had almost cost him his life; all of us likewise were cruelly hurt, and the Present which the 
Calaminham
 sent to the King of 
Bramaa,
 being worth above an hundred thousand duckats, was taken by the Pyrat, together with a great deal of rich merchandize that was in the five vessells, whereof he had made himself master. In this sad equipage we ar∣rived three days after at the City of 
Martabano,
 from whence the Ambassador wrote the King a letter, wherein he rendred him an accompt of all that had happened to him in his voyage, as also in his disaster. Whereupon the King sent presently away a Fleet of sixscore 
Ceroos,
 with a number of choice men, amongst which were an hundred 
Por∣tugals
 in quest of this Pyrat. This Fleet having by good fortune discovered him, found that he had put on shore his thirty 
Ceroos,
 wherewith he had assailed us, and was with all his forces retired into a fortress, which was full of divers prizes that he had ta∣ken in severall parts thereabout; our men immediately attacqued the place, and carried it easily at the very first assault, only with the loss of some few 
Bramaas
 and one 
Portu∣gal,
 howbeit many were hurt with arrows, but they recovered in a short time without the ma
ing of any one. As soon as the fortress was gained, all that were found with∣in it were put to the sword, not sparing the life of any, but that of the Pyrat, and six∣score others of his company which were led alive to the King of 
Bramaa,
 who caused them to be cast to his Elephants, that instantly dismembred them. In the mean time the taking of this fortress was so advantagious to the 
Portugals
 that were sent thither, as they returned from thence all very rich; and it was thought that five or six of them got each of them the value of five and twenty, or thirty thousand duckats a piece, and that he which had least, had the worth of two or three thousand for his share: After that the Ambassador was cured at 
Martaban
 of the hurts which he had received in the fight, he went directly to the City of 
Pegu,
 where, as I have declared, the King of 
Bramaas
 Court was at that time, who being advertised of his arrivall, and of the letter which he brought him from the 
Calaminham,
 whereby he accepted of his amity, and allied him∣self with him, he sent the 
Chaumigrem,
 his foster-brother, and brother-in-law, to receive him; to which end he set forth, accompanied with all the Grandees of the Kingdom, and four battalions of strangers, amongst the which were a thousand 
Portugals
 com∣manded


by 
Antonio Ferreira,
 born in 
Braguenca,
 a man of great understanding, and to whom this King gave twelve thousand duckats a year pension, besides the Presents which he bestowed on him in particular, that came to little less. Hereupon the King of 
Bramaa
 seeing that by this new league God had contented his desire, he resolved to shew himself thankfull for so great a favour, wherefore he caused great feasts to be made amongst these people, and a number of Sacrifices to be offered in their Temples, where there was no spare of perfumes, and wherein it was thought there were killed above a thousand, stags, cows, and hogs, which were bestowed for an alms among the poor, besides many other works of charity, as the cloathing of five thousand poor folks, and imploying great sums of money in the releasing of a thousand prisoners which were detained for debt. After that these feasts had continued seven whole days toge∣ther, with a most ardent zeal, and at the incredible charge of the King, Lords, and peo∣ple, news came to the City of the death of the 
Aixquendoo, Roolim
 of 
Mounay,
 who was as it were their Soveraign Bishop, which caused all rejoycings to cease in an in∣stant, and every one to fall into mourning, with great expressions of sorrow: The King himself retired, the fairs were given over, the windows, doors, and shops were shut up, so that no living thing was seen to stir in the City, withall their Temples and Pagods were full of penitents of all sorts, who with incessant shedding of tears, exer∣cised such an excesse of repentance, as some of them died therewith. In the mean time the King departed away the same night for to go to 
Mounay,
 which was some twenty leagues from thence, for that he was necessarily to be assistant at this funerall pomp, ac∣cording to the antient custom of the Kings of 
Pegu
; he arrived there the next day some∣what late, and then gave order for all that was necessary for his funerals, so that the next day every thing being in a readiness; the body of the deceased was about evening brought from the place where he died, and laid on a Scaffold that was erected in the midst of a great place, hung all about with white velvet, and covered over head with three cloths of Estate of gold and silver tinsell: in the middle of it was a Throne of twelve steps ascent unto it, and an hearse almost like unto ours, set forth with divers rich works of gold and pretious stones; round about hung a number of silver candlesticks, and perfuming pots, wherein great quantities of sweet odours were burnt, by reason of the corruption of the body, which already began to have an ill savour. In this manner they kept it all that night, during the which was no little ado, and such a tumult of cries and lamentations made by the people, as words are not able to express; for the on∣ly number of the 
Bicos; Grepos, Menigrepos, Talagrepos, Guimons,
 and 
Roolims,
 who are the chiefest of their Priests, amounted to above thirty thousand, that were assembled to∣gether there, besides a world of others which came thither every hour. When divers in∣ventions of sorrow, that were well accommodated to the subject of this mourning, had been shown, there came some two hours after midnight out of a Temple, called 
Quiay Figrau,
 god of the Motes of the Sun, a procession, wherein were seen five hun∣dred little boys stark naked, and bound about the neck and the middle with cords, and chains of iron; upon their heads they carried bundles of wood, and in their hands knives, singing in two Quires with a tone, so lamentable and sad, as few that heard them could hardly forbear crying: In the mean time one amongst them went, saying in this manner, 
Thou that art going to enjoy the contentments of heaven, leave us not prisoners in this exile
; whereunto another Quire answered, 
To the end we may rejoyce with thee in the blessings of the Lord
: then continuing their song in manner of a Letany, they said many otherthings with the same tone. After that, when they were all fallen on their knees before the Scaffold where the body lay, a 
Grepo
 above an hundred years old, prostrated on the ground with his hands lifted up on high, made a speech to him in the name of these lit∣tle boys▪ whereunto another 
Grepo,
 who was neer the hearse, as if he had spoken in the person of the deceased, came to answer thus, 
Since it hath pleased God by his holy will to form me of earth, it hath pleased him also to resolve me into earth, I recommend unto you, my children, the fear of that hour, wherein the hand of the Lord shall put us into the balance of his justice
; whereupon all the rest with a great cry replied in this sort, 
May it please the most Almighty high Lord that raigns in the Sun, to have no regard to our works, that so we may be delivered from the pains of death
: These little boys being retired, there came o∣thers about the age of ten or eleven years, apparrelled in white Sattin robes, with chains


of gold on their feet, and about their necks many rich jewels and pearls: After they had with much ceremony done a great deal of reverence to the dead body, they went and florished naked scymitars which they had in their hands all about the hearse, as if they would chace away the divell, saying aloud, 
Get thee gone, accursed as thou art, into the bot∣tom of the house of smoke, where dying with a perpetuall pain, without making an end of dy∣ing, thou shalt pay, without making an end also of paying the rigorous justice of the Lord a∣bove.
 This said, they withdrew, as if they would shew that by this action they had left the body of the deceased exempt from the power of the divell, which besieged it before; In the place of these same came in six and twenty of their principall 
Talagrepos,
 being fourscore years old and upwards, apparrelled in robes of violet coloured damask, and carrying silver censors in their hands, before whom for the greater gracing of them marched twelve gentlemen Ushers with Maces of the same metall; as soon as these Priests had censed the hearse four severall times with many ceremonies, they all prostra∣ted themselves with their faces on the ground, and then one of them began to say, as if he had spoken to the dead man, 
If the clouds of heaven were able to tell our grief unto the beasts of the fiel
▪ they would forsake their pasture for to help us to wail thy death, and the great extremity whereunto we are reduced; or els they would beseech thee Lord, to imbarque us with thee into this deadly house, where thou seest not us, because we are not worthy of so great a favour▪ but that all this people may be comforted in thee before the tomb shall hide thy body from us, shew us, Lord, by figures of earth▪ the peaceable joy, and sweet contentment of thy repose, that we may be all awaked out of the heavy sleep, wherein the obscurities of the flesh doth wrap us, and that we miserable wretches may be incited to imitate thee, and follow thy steps, for to behold thee in the joyfull house of the Sun at the last gasp of our lives.
 To these words, the people having made a very dreadfull cry, answered incontinently, 
The Lord grant us this grace.
 Then the twelve gentlemen Ushers that carried the Maces, go∣ing on afore to make way thorough the press, though with much ado, because the peo∣ple would not withdraw, there came forth of an house on the right side of the Scaffold four and twenty little boys richly apparelled, with chains of gold and pretious stones about their necks, who playing after their manner on divers instruments of musick, and falling down on their knees in two ranks before the hearse, they continued playing on their instruments, to the tune whereof there were only two of them that sung, where∣unto five others answered from time to time in such a dolefull manner, as made all the assistants shed abundance of tears, yea some of them were so sensible of it, as they could not forbear plucking of their hair, and knocking their heads against the steps of the Throne where the hearse stood. During this and many other ceremonies there per∣formed, six young gentlemen 
Grepos
 sacrificed themselves, by drinking out of a golden cup a certain yellow liquor, so venemous, that before they had made an end of their draught, they fell down stark dead on the ground; this action of theirs brought these Martyrs of the divell into the number of their Saints, so as they were envied by every one for it, and presently their bodies were carried with a solemn procession to be burnt in a great fire, that was made of Sanders, Aloes, and Benjamin, where they were quickly reduced unto ashes. The next morning the Scaffold was disgarnished of all the richest pieces about it, and the hearse, but the cloths of estate, the hangings and banners, as also many other moveables of great worth were not stirred, and so with divers cere∣monies, fearfull cries and lamentations, and a strange noyse of severall sorts of instru∣ments, they set fire on the Scaffold, and all that was upon it, anoynting it often with o∣doriferous liquors, and confections of great price. Thus was the body consumed to a∣shes in a very short time, but whilst it was burning, the King and all the Grandees of his Court which were then present, cast in by way of alms many pieces of gold, pre∣
ious stones, jewels, and chains of pearl of exceeding great value, all which so ill imployed were instantly consumed by the fire, together with the body and bones of that wretched dead man, so as we were certainly informed afterward, that this funerall pomp cost above an hundred thousand duckets, besides the garments which the King and the Grandees of the country gave to thirty thousand Priests that vvere assisting at it, wherein was imployed an incredible quantity of stuffes of severall sorts, witnesse the 
Portugals,
 who mightily profited by so lucky an occasion, because they sold at what price they would such as they brought from 
B
ngala,
 for which they were paid in lin∣gots of gold and silver.








CHAP. LXI. The election of the new 
Roolim
 of 
Mounay,
 the grand 
Talagrepo
 of these Gentiles of the Kingdome of 
Pegu.


THe next day between seven and eight in the morning,
 which was the time when the ashes of the deceased began to be cold, the King and all the great Lords of the Court came unto the place where the body had been burnt, marching all in order after the manner of a stately procession, and assisted by all the 
Grepos,
 amongst whom there were an hundred and thirty with silver censors, and fourteen with miters of gold on their heads; they were apparrelled in long robes of yellow sattin, as for all the rest, to the number of ten thousand, they were cloathed with taffeta of the same colour, and with a kind of surpliss of fine linnen, which was not done without a very great charge, by reason of the number of them. Being arrived at the place where the 
Roolim
 had been burnt, after some ceremonies performed, as is usuall with them, according to the time and sence that every one had of it, a 
Talagrepo
 of the 
Bramaa
 Nation, and Uncle to the King, as Brother to his Father, whom the people held for the ablest of them all, having been chosen to preach that day, went up into the Pulpit for that effect: The be∣ginning of his Sermon was an Elegy touching the defunct, whose life he commended with many speeches that made for his purpose, wherein he grew so earnest and hot, as turning himself to the King with tears in his eys, and lifting up his voice somewhat louder, to the end he might hear him the better, he said unto him, 
If the Kings in these times wherein we live do consider how little a time they have to live, and with what rigour of justice they shall be chastised by the Almighty hand of the most high God for the crimes of their tyrannicall lives, possibly it would be better for them to feed in the open fields like bruit beasts, then to be so absolute in their will, and to use it with so little reason, even as to be cruel to the good, and slack in punishing the wicked, whom by their soveraign power they have put into greatnesse and authority; and truly they are much to be lamented, whose good fortune hath raised them up to an estate so dangerous, as is that of Kings at this day, by reason of the in∣solence and liberty wherein they continually live, without so much as the least apprehe
sion of any fear or shame. But you must know, O ye blinded of the world, that God hath made you Kings to use clemency towards men, to give them audience, to content, to chastise them, but not to kill them tyrannically: Neverthelesse, O ye bad Kings, in the condition whereunto you are raised, you oppose your selves to the nature which God hath indued you with, and take up∣on you many other different forms, in apparrelling your selves every hour with some such li∣very as 
ms best unto you, to the end you may be to the one very bloud-suckers, that inces∣santly suck from them their goods and their lives, never leaving them so long as they have one drop of bloud in their veins; and to others you are dreadfull roaring Lions, who to give a 
a
k and a colour to your ambition and avarice, cause supreme Laws of death to be published for the least faults, and all for to confiscate other mens goods, which is the main end of your pretensions. Contrarily if there be any that you love, and unto whom you, or the world, or I know not what, have given the name of
 Grandees, 
you are so negligent in chastising their proud humors, and so prodigall in inriching them with the spoils and undoing of the poor, whom you have left naked, and even flayed to the very quick, as you cannot doubt but that they will one day accuse you before God for all these things, when you will have no excuse to make, so that there will be nothing left you but a dreadfull confusion to trouble you, and to put you into an horrible disorder.
 To these he added so many other remonstrances in favour of the poor subjects, cried out so mainly, and shed so many tears in their behalf, as the King remain∣ed almost besides himself, and was touched 
o neerly therewith, that he instantly called 
Brazagaran,
 the Governor of 
Pegu,
 unto him, and commanded him without all delay to dismisse all the Deputies of the Provinces of the Kingdome, whom he had caused to be assembled in the Town of 
Cosmin,
 for to demand of them a great sum of money, that he might set upon the Kingdom of 
Savady,
 on which he had newly resolved to make war. Withall he sware publikely on the ashes of the defunct, that during his raign he would never charge his subjects with imposts, nor would make them to serve by force, as he had formerly done; yea, and that for the future he would have a most speci∣all care to hear the poor, and to do them justice against the misdemeanours of the great ones, conformable to the merit of every one, together with many other things very


just and good, which might well serve for a lesson to us that are Christians. This Sermon being finished, the ashes of the defunct, which had been gathered up, was distributed as a relique into fourteen golden basons, whereof the King himself took up one on his head, and the 
Grepos
 of chiefest quality carried the rest; so the Procession going from thence in the same order as it came thither, those ashes were conveyed into a very rich Temple, which might be some flight shot from that place, and named 
Quiay D
cco,
 that is, 
the god of the afflicted of the earth,
 there they were put into a shallow grave, with∣out other pomp or vanity, for so had 
Aixequendoo,
 the late 
Roolim,
 commanded. This grave then was invironed about with three iron grates, and with two of silver, and one of latten, and upon three iron rods that crossed the whole bredth of the chappell, hung seventy and two lamps of silver, namely four and twenty on each of them, all of great value, and fastened together with great silver chains. Furthermore, there were placed a∣bout the steps, whereby one descended into the grave, thirty and six little perfuming pots, with Benjamin, Aloes, and other confections, wherein was great store of Amber∣greece, all which was not finished till it was almost night, by reason of the many cere∣monies used in this funerall; all that day long they freed an infinite number of birds which had been brought thither in above an hundred cages, these Gentiles being of the opinion that they were so many souls of deceased persons, which before times had pas∣sed out of this life, and that were deposited as it were in the bodies of those birds, till the day of their deliverance should come, at which time they were in all liberty to ac∣company the soul of the defunct: The like they did with a great many of little fishes which had been transported thither also in certain vessells full of water, so that to set them at liberty, they cast them into the river with another new ceremony, to the end they might serve the soul of him whose ashes were then buried: There was also brought thither all kind of venison and foul, which was distributed as an alms to all the poore that were present there, whereof the number was almost infinite. These ceremonies, and other such like which were performed in this action being finished, the King in re∣gard it was neer night retired into his quarter, where he had caused tents to be pitched for to lodge in, and that in sign of mourning, the like did all the great ones, so that all the Assembly by little and little withdrew. The next morning as soon as it was day, the King made it to be proclaimed, that all persons of what condition soever they were, should upon pain of death dislodge speedily out of the Island, and that they which were Priests should return to the attendance of their cures, with this penalty, in care of con∣travention to be degraded from their dignity. Whereupon all the Priests went pre
ent∣ly out of the Island, ninety of them excepted, who were deputed for the election of him that was to succeed in the place of the defunct. These same then assembled in the house of 
Gangsparo
 to acquit themselves of their charge, and for that in the two first daies, which was the term limited to make this election, it could not succeed by reason of the diversity of opinions, and great contrariety that was found amongst them, which were to give their votes; the King thought fit, that out of those deputed ninety, there should nine be chosen, who alone should make the election. This resolution be∣ing taken, these nine continued five daies, and as many nights together in continuall prayer; in the mean time a world of offerings were made, and alms given; a great num∣ber of poor people were also cloathed, and tables prepared, where all men that would might eat of free cost, and all this was accompanied with processions in every quarter. At last these nine being agreed in conformity of votes, elected for 
Roolim
 one 
Manichae Mouchan,
 who at that time was a 
Capizondo,
 or Prelate in the town of 
Digum
 of a 
Pagode,
 called 
Quiay Figrau,
 that is to say, 
god of the atomes of the Sun,
 of whom I have oftentimes spoken; he was a man of about threescore and eight years of age, ac∣counted amongst them for an holy personage, very knowing in the customes and lawes of those Sects of the Gentiles, and above all exceeding charitable to the poor: With this election the King and all the great ones of the Court remained very well satisfied: The King then speedily dispatched away the 
Chaumigrem
 his foster-brother, to whom he gave thereupon the title of 
Coutalanhaa,
 which signifies, the Kings brother, to the end he might be the more honorably qualified with an hundred 
Lauleas,
 wherein was the Flower of all the 
Brama
 Nobility, together with the nine Electors, for to go and fetch him which had been newly chosen to the dignity of 
Roolim
: And having brought


him nine dayes after with a great deal of respect and honor to a place called 
Tagalaa,
 some five leagues from the Isle of 
Mounay,
 the King met him with all the great men of the Court, besides a world of other people, and above two thousand vessells with oars. When he was come in this equipage where the new 
Roolim
 vvas, he prostrated him∣self before him, and kissing the ground three times, 
O thou holy pearl,
 said he unto him, 
which art in the midst of the Sun, breath forth upon me by an agreeable inspiration of the Lord of uncreated power, that I may not dread upon earth the insupportable yoke of mine ene∣mies
: At these vvords the nevv 
Roolim
 putting forth his hand to raise him from the ground, spake thus unto him, 
Labour my Son that thy works may be pleasing to God, and I will pray for thee without ceasing.
 Hereupon the King rising up, the 
Roolim
 made him sit dovvn by him, and stroked him three times vvith his hand on the head, vvhich the King took for the greatest honor he could do him; then having said something unto him vvhi
h vve could not hear, for that vve vvere a little too far off, he blovved three times on the Kings head▪ vvhilest he vvas on his knees again before him, and all the people laid flat on the earth. This done, he parted from that place amidst the applauses that vvere given him from all parts, and the sound of bells and instruments of musick, and im∣barqued himself in the Kings 
Laulea,
 where he was seated in a rich chair of gold, set with precious stones, and the King at his feet, which was also taken for a great honor done him by the 
Roolim
; round about, and a little distant from him were twelve little boys attired in yellow sattin, with scarfes of silver Tinsell, golden Maces, and Scepters in their hands: All along the sides of the vessell, instead of Mariners, stood the Lords of the Kingdom with guilt oars by them; and as well in the Poop as the Prow were two Quires of young striplings, apparrelled in carnation sattin, and having divers sorts of instruments in their hands, to the tune whereof they sung the praises of God. Some of our company observed, that one of their songs said thus; 
Children of a pure heart, praise this admirable and divine Lord, for as 
or me being a sinner I am not worthy to do it; and if that too be not permitted unto you let your eys weep before his feet, that so you may render your selves agreeable unto him.
 In the same manner they sung many other songs to the tune of their instruments, and with so much ardor and zeal, as if they had been Christians; it would have been able to have stirred up the devotion of them that heard them. After that the 
Rooli
 was in this sumptuous 
ort arrived at the City of 
Marta∣bano,
 he did not go to Land, as it had been resolved, because it was night, for it was not lawfull for him at any hand to touch the ground with his feet, in regard of the great dignity of his person, but stayed till the next morning, at which time the King disim∣barqued him first of all upon his own shoulders, and so too did the Princes and great Lordsof the Kingdom carry him alternatively to the 
Pagod
 of 
Quiay Ponuedea,
 as being the greatest and most sumptuous of the whole City, in the midst whereof was a Theater richly set forth of yellow sattin, which is the livery of that soveraign dignity. There, out of a new ceremony, being laid all along upon a 
ittle bed of gold, he made as though he were dead, and then at the sound of a bell which gave three toles, the 
Bonzes
 prostrated themselves all with their faces on the ground for the space of half an hour, during which time, all the assistants for a sign of sadnesse held their hands before their eys, in saying aloud, 
Lord recall this thy servant to a new life, to the end we may have one to pray for us.
 Instantly thereupon they took him from thence, and put him into a Tomb adorned with the same livery, then chanting out certain, I know not what, very sorrow∣full words with tears in their eys, they left him, after they had surrounded the Temple thrice, in a grave made expresly for that purpose, covered over with a cloth of black velvet, and invi
oned about with dead mens heads. This done, they said certain prayers after their manner, weeping, which very much moved the King; and then all the throng of people that made a strange noyse, being commanded to silence, they gave three toles with a great bell, for a sign to all the rest of the bells in the City to answer them, as they did with so horrible and dreadfull a din, that the earth even trembled therewith: After the ceasing of this noyse, two 
Talagrepos,
 men of great reputation amongst them, and very well versed in their Laws, went up into two Pulpits, prepared expresly for them, and that were hung with rich Turky Carpets, where they entertained their Auditors with the subject of this ceremony, and gave them the explication of every thing, making an ample relation unto them of the life and death of the deceased 
Roolim,



and of the election of this same, together with the excellent qualities with which he was indued for to be raised to so high a charge whereunto he was called by a particular grace of God; to this they added many other things wherewith the people were ex∣ceedingly satisfied and contented; then the same bell having tolled three times more, the two Priests descended from their Pulpits, which together with all their furniture were presently burned with another new kind of ceremony, whereof I will forbear here making a relation, because it seems unnecessary to me to lose time in these super∣fluities, having said but too much already thereof. After all things were peaceable and quiet, and that for the space of five or six Credoes nothing had been spoken, there ap∣peared coming from the next Temple, which was about a flight shot off, a very rich and sumptuous Procession of little children, attired all in white taffets, for a mark of their innocency and purenesse; they had about their necks a number of jewells, chains of gold upon their legs in form of bracelets, white wax lights in their hands, and upon their heads bonnets imbroydered with silk and gold, and set with Pearls, Rubies, and Saphirs; in the middle of this Procession was a rich Canopy of cloth of gold, which twelve of those little children carried, invironed round about with perfuming pans and censors of silver, from whence breathed forth excellent odors most pleasing to the sent. These little children played on divers instruments of musick, and went on singing praises to God, and praying him to resuscitate this defunct to a new life. When they were arrived at the place where the 
Roolim
 lay, they drew to the shrine, and taking away the cloth wherewith it was covered, there came out of it a little child, which could not be above three or four years old, and although he was naked, yet was not his nakednesse seen, be∣cause he was all covered over with gold and pretious stones, and appeared in the same fashion as we are accustomed to paint Angells; he had also golden wings, and a very rich Crown upon his head: Whenas he was come from out the shrine, the Assistants be∣ing prostrated on the ground, fell to saying aloud with a voice that made those to tremble which heard them, 
Thou Angel of God, sent from heaven for our salvation, pray for us when thou returnest thither again.
 The King went instantly to this child, and ha∣ving taken him in his arms with a great deal of respect, and a strange ceremony, as if he would shew that he was not worthy to touch him, in regard he was an Angell sent from heaven, he set him on the brink of the grave, where after the child had taken away the cloth of black Velvet that covered him, whilest all were on their knees, with their hands and eys lift up to heaven, he said aloud, as if he had spoken to him, 
Thou which hast been conceived in sin, amidst the misery and filthiness of the flesh, God commands thee by me, who am the least of his servants, that thou do resuscitate to a new life which may be agreeable unto him, alwayes dreading the chastisement of his mighty hand, to the end that as the last gasp of thy life thou mayest not stumble like the children of the world; and that from this place where thou art extended stark dead, thou do rise up presently, because it hath been so decreed by the greatest of the greatest in the Temple of the earth, and come after me, and come after me, and come after me.
 The King thereupon took this child again in his arms, and then the 
Roolim
 rising up in the grave where he was, as it were amazed with this vi∣sion, fell on his knees before the child whom the King held, and said, 
I accept of this new grace from the hand of th
 Lord, conformably to that which thou hast told me from him, ob∣liging my self to be even till death an example of humility, and the least of all his, to the end the toads of the earth may not lose themselves in the abundance of the world.
 This said, the child rid himself again out of the Kings arms, and going directly to the grave, he lent the 
Roolim
 his hand to help him out of it. Now he was scarce come forth, whenas they gave five toles with a Bell, which was a sign for all the people to prostrate themselves on the ground the second time, saying, 
Blessed be thou, O Lord, for so great a grace
; whereupon all the bells in the City began to ring, and all the Ordnance that were on the land to shoot of, as also those of above two thousand vessells that rode at Anchor in the Port, from whence proceeded so strange a noyse, as was most insupportable to the ears of them that heard it.








CHAP. LXII. In what manner the Roolim was conducted to the Isle of 
Mounay,
 and put into possession of his dignity.


THe new 
Roolim
 was conducted from that place in a chair of gold exceeding rich, and set with Pretious Stones, which the principall Lords of the Kingdome carried upon their shoulders; the King in the mean time marched on foot before him, bearing a rich S
ymitar upright in his hand. In this equipage he accompanied him to his Palace, which was gorgeously furnished, and where he was lodged three dayes, during which time the preparations necessary for his entry was made in the Isle of 
Mounay.
 Now whilest he abode in the City of 
Martabano
 there were many sorts of inventions of great charge made by the Princes, Lord
, and Inhabitants; In two of those feasts the King himself was present in person, with a most sumptuous entertainment, which I shall not describe, because to say the truth I do not know how it did passe. The day be∣ing arrived, wherein the new 
Roolim,
 who is (as I have already declared) their Soveraign High Priest, was to make his entry into the Isle of 
Mounay,
 the whole Fleet of 
Seroos, Iangoas, Lauleas,
 and such other vessells of divers sorts which were upon the river, to the number of two thousand and better, were ranked in two files, some a league and half in length, being the space between the City & the Island; so that of all those vessels joyn∣ed together was formed a street, the fairest that possibly could be seen, for every vessell was covered with boughs full of several dainty fruits, together with all kind of flowers, Tangets, Standards, and banners of silk, each one striving in emulation of another to gain their pretended Jubilee, and a plenary indulgence and absolution of all the robbe∣ries they had formerly committed, without being subject to the restitution of any thing whatsoever. This they did also to be absolved from an infinite of other abuses of their abhominable lives, which I passe by in silence, as a matter unfit for devout ears, but con∣formable to their diabolicall Sects, and the damnable intentions of those which have instituted them, for their whole manner of living is nothing but dissolution and excesse in the lasciviousnesse of the flesh, as in like manner are all other infidells, and arch-here∣tiques. In the 
Roolims
 company there were not above thirty 
Lauleas
; who were reple∣nished with a great number of the Nobility; as for him he was in a rich 
Seroo,
 seated in a Throne of silver, under a cloth of State of cloth of gold, and the King at his feet, as not being worthy to sit in a more eminent place; round about him were thirty children on their knees attired in Crimson Sattin, with silver Maces on their shoulders, and twelve standing on their feet cloathed with white Damask, having censors in their hands, from whence breathed forth most delicate perfumes. In the rest of the shipping followed two hundred of the most honorable 
Talagrepos,
 such as Archbishops and o∣ther Prelates may be amongst us, in the number of whom were also six or seven young Princes, all the Sons of Kings, comprehended. Now because these Vessells were so full of people as one could not row, they had fifteen 
Lauleas,
 or little 
Skiffes,
 wherein the Supreme religious men of those nine Sects did row, to bring them the sooner to land. In this equipage, and in this order the new 
Roolim
 parted from the City of 
Martabano
 two hours before day, and continued his course amidst these Vessell
, which made, as I have delivered, a kind of street, and forasmuch as it was not yet day, there were a great number of Lanterns of different fashions placed amongst the boughs. As soon as he be∣gan to set forth, a Canon was shot off three times, at which sign there was such a noyse of Bells, and great Ordnance, as also of divers sorts of very strange Instruments intermingled with the cries and acclamations of the people, as one would have thought that heaven and earth would have come together. When he was arrived at the 
Kay,
 where he was to land, he was received with a solemn Procession by certain religious men that live in solitary places, and are called 
Menigr
pos,
 which are like to the 
Capucins
 in 
France,
 whom these Gentiles infinitely respect, by reason of their manner of living, for according to the rule which they observe, they use more abstinence by far then all the rest; These same, being some six or seven thousand in number, were all bare foot, and cloathed with black Mat, to shew their contempt of the world: upon their heads they wore the sculls and bones of dead men, and great cords about their necks, having all their faces dawbed over with dirt, and a writing hanging upon them which contained


these words, 
Mire, mire, do not cast thine eye on thy basenesse, but on the recompenses which God hath promised to those that vilifie themselves to serve him.
 When as they were very neer to the 
Roolim,
 who received them very affably, they prostrated themselves with their faces down to the ground, and after they had continued so some time, the chiefest amongst them looking on the 
Roolim, May it please him
▪ said he, 
from whose hand thou hast newly received so great a blessing, as to be the Head of all on the earth, to rend
r thee so good and so holy a man, that all thy works may be as pleasing unto him, as the inno∣cency of children which hold their peace when their mother gives them the dug.
 Whereunto all the rest answered with a great noyse of confused voices, 
Permit O Lord Almighty that it may be so.
 Passing on then, accompanied with this Procession, which the King for the greater honor governed himself, together with some of the principall person∣ages, whom he called unto him for that purpose, he went directly to the place where the dead 
Roolim
 lay buried, and being arrived at his Tomb, he fell down flat with his face upon it, then having shed a great many tears, he said with a sad and dolefull voice, as if he had spoken to the deceased, 
May it please him, who raigns in the beauty of the Stars, to make me deserve the honor to be thy Slave, to the end, that in the house of the Sun, where now thou recreatest thy self, I may serve as a broom to thy feet, for so shall I be made a Diamond of so high a price, as the world, and all the riches thereof together, shall not be able to equall the value of it
: whereunto the 
Grepos
 answered, 
God grant it.
 Thereupon ta∣king a pair of Beads which had belonged to the deceased, and that was upon the Tomb, he put it about his neck as a relique of great worth, giving as an Almes, six Lamps of silver, two Censors, and six or seven pieces of violet coloured Damask. This done, he retired unto his Palace, accompanied still with the King, the Princes, and great Lords of the Kingdome, as also with the Priests that were there assistant, from whom he pre∣sently rid himself, and then from out of the window he threw down upon the Assem∣bly handfulls of Rice, as amongst the Papists they use to cast Holy Water, which all the people received upon their knees, with their hands lifted up. This Ceremony ended, which lasted very neer three hours, they gave three toles with a Bell, upon which Signal the 
Roolim
 retired for altogether, and so did the Vessells, and they that came in them, wherein all that day was wholly bestowed. About evening the King took his leave of the 
Roolim,
 and returned to the City, making directly the next morning towards 
Pe∣gu,
 which was some eighteen leagues from thence, where he arrived the day following two hours within night, without making any entry or shew, to testifie the extreme griefe he was in for the death of the late 
Roolim,
 whom it was said, he greatly af∣fected.






CHAP. LXIII. That which the King of 
Bramaa
 did after his arrivall at the City of 
Pegu,
 together with his besieging of 
Savady.


TWo and twenty daies after the King of 
Bramaa
 arrived at the City of 
Pegu,
 he perceived by the Letter which his Ambassador brought him from the 
Calaminham,
 that he had concluded the League with him against the 
Siamon,
 yet in regard the season was not fit for him, either to commence that war, or to assail the Kingdome of 
Avaa,
 as he desired, he resolved to send his Foster-brother, unto whom, as I have already de∣clared, he had given the title of lawfull Brother, to the siege of 
Savady,
 which was some hundred and thirty Leagues from thence to the North-East. Having assembled an Army then of an hundred and fifty thousand men, amongst whom were thirty thousand strangers of divers Nations, and five thousand fighting Elephants, besides three thou∣sand others that carried the baggage, and the victualls, the 
Chaumigrem
 departed from 
Pegu
 with a Fleet of thirteen hundred rowing Vessells, the fifteenth of the moneth of 
March.
 Fourteen daies after he arrived in the sight of 
Savady,
 and having cast Anchor neer to a great Plain, called 
G
mpalaor,
 he remained there six daies in attending the five thousand Elephants which were to come to him by land, who were no sooner arrived, but he began to besiege the Town, so that having begirt it round, he assaulted it three times in the open day, and retreated still with very great losse, as well in regard of the notable resistance which they within made against him, as of the extreme trouble his


people were at in planting their ladders against the walls, by reason of their bad scitu∣ation, which was all of Slate; whereupon consulting with his Commanders about what he should do, they were all of opinion to have it battered with the Canon on the weakest side, untill that by the overthrow of some part of the wall, a breach might be made, whereby they might enter with more ease and lesse danger. This resolution was as soon executed as taken, so that the Ingineers fell to making of two manner of bull∣works on the outside upon a great Platform, composed of great beams and bavins, which in five daies they raised up to such an height, as it surpassed the wall two fathom at the least. This done, they planted on each bulwark twenty great pieces of Ordnance, wherewith they began to batter the Town so violently, that in a little time they beat down a pane of the wall; and besides those pieces of battery, there were above three hundred Falcons that shot incessantly, with an intention only to kill those that were in the streets, as indeed they made a great havock, which was the cause that seeing them∣selves so ill-intreated, and their people slain in that manner, they resolved, like valiant men as they were, to sell their lives as dearly as they could, so that one morning having sallied forth by the same breach of the wall which the Canon had made, they gave so valiantly upon those of the Camp, that in lesse then an hour they almost routed the 
Bramaas
 whole Army. Now because it began to be day, the 
Savadis
 thought it fit to re-enter into the Town, leaving eight thousand of their enemies dead on the place. After this they repaired the breach in a very little time by the means of a rampire of earth, which they made up with bavins and other materialls, that was strong enough to resist the Canon. Hereupon the 
Chaumigrem
 seeing the bad successe he had had, re∣solved to make war, both upon the places neer about, as also upon the frontiers that were furthest off from the Town, for which purpose he sent 
Diosa
ay,
 high Treasurer of the Kingdome, whose Slaves we 
Portugals
 were, Colonel of five thousand men to spoil a certain Borough, called 
Valentay,
 which furnished the besieged Town with pro∣visions; but this voyage was so infortunate unto him, that before his arrivall at the de∣signed place, his forces were by two thousand 
Savadis,
 whom he incountred by the way, all cut in pieces in lesse then half an hour, not one escaping with life that fell into the enemies hands. Neverthelesse it pleased our Lord that amidst this defeat we saved our selves by the favour of the night, and without knowing whither we went, we took the way of a very craggy mountain, where we marched in exceeding great pain three daies and an half, at the end whereof we entred into certain Moorish Plains, where we could meet with no path or way, nor having other company then Tygers, Serpents, and other savage beasts, which put us into a mighty fear. But as our God, whom incessantly we invoked with tears in our eys is the true guide of travellers, he out of his infinite mercy permitted, that at length we perceived one evening a certain fire towards the East, so that continuing our course towards that place where we saw this light, we found our selves the next morning neer to a great Lake, where there were some Cottages, which in all likelyhood were inhabited by very poor people; howbeit not daring to discover our selves as yet, we hid us all that day in certain hanging pre∣cipices that were very boggy, and full of Horsle
ches, which made us all gore blood. As soon as it was night we fell to marching again untill the next morning, whenas we arrived neer to a great river, all alongst the which we continued going for five daies to∣gether. At last with much pain we got to another Lake, that was far greater then the former, upon the bank whereof was a little Temple in the form of an Hermitage, and there we found an old Hermite, who gave us the best entertainment that possibly he could: This old man permitted us to repose our selves two daies with him, during which time we demanded many things of him that made for our purpose; whereunto he alwaies answered according to the truth, and told us, that we were still within the Territories of the King of 
Savady,
 that this Lake was called 
Oreg
ant
r,
 that is to say, 
the opening of the night,
 and the Hermitage, 
the God of succour.
 Whereupon being desi∣rous to know of him the signification of this abuse, he laid his hand on an horse of brasse, that stood for the Idoll upon the Altar, and said that he often read in a book, which intreated of the foundation of the Kingdome, that some two hundred, thirty, and seven years before, this Lake being a great Town, called 
O
umhaleu,
 a King that was named 
Ava
 had taken it in war, that in acknowledgement of this victory, his


Priests, by whom he was wholly governed, counselled him to sacrifice unto 
Quiay Gua∣
or,
 the God of war, all the young male children which had been made captives; and in case he did not so, they would when they became men regain the Kingdome from him. The King apprehending the event of this threatning, caused all these children, being fourscore and five thousand in number, to be brought all into one place, and so upon a day that was kept very solemn amongst them, he made them to be put most inhumanely to the edge of the sword, with an intent to have them burned the next morning in Sa∣crifice; but the night following there came a great earthquake, and such lightning and fire fell from heaven upon the Town, as within lesse then half an hour it was quite de∣molished, and all that was in it reduced to nothing, so that by this just judgement of God, the King, together with all his were strucken dead, not so much as one escaping, and besides them thirty thousand Priests in like manner, who ever since during all the New Moons are heard to cry and roar so dreadfully, that all the inhabitants therea∣bouts were ready to go besides themselves with fear, by reason whereof the Country was utterly depopulated, no other habitation remaining therein, save only fourscore and five Hermitages, which were erected in memory of the fourscore and five thousand children, whom the King had caused to be butchered through the evill counsell of his Priests.






CHAP. LXIIII. A continuation of the successe which we had in this voyage, with my departure from 
Goa
 to 
Zunda,
 and what passed during my abode there.


WE past two daies in this Hermitage, where, as I declared before, we were very well entertained by the Hermite;
 the third day after betimes in the morning we took our leave of him, and departed from thence not a little afflicted with that which we had heard, and so all the same day and the night following we continued on our way along by the river; the next morning we arrived at a place where were a great ma∣ny of sugar canes, of which we took some, for that we had nothing els to nourish us withall. In this manner we marched still along by this river, which we kept for a guide of our voyage, because we judged that how long soever it were, yet would it at last ingulfe it self in the Sea, where we hoped that our Lord would raise us up some remedy for our miseries. The day ensuing we arrived at a village called 
Pommiseray,
 where we hid our selves in a very thick wood from being descried by passengers, and two hours within night we continued our design in following the current of this river, being re∣solved to take our death in good part, if it should please God to send it us, for to put an end to so many sufferings as we had undergone day and night; and without lying, the apprehension and visions of this last end troubled us more then death it self, where∣with we imagined our selves to be already ensnared. At the end of seventeen daies, that this painfull and sad voyage had lasted, God shewed us so much grace, that during the obscurity of a very rainy night, we discovered a certain light little more then a Faulcon shot before us, the fear we were in at the first that we were neer some Town, made us to stand still for a good space, without knowing what to resolve upon, untill we observed that this light seemed to move, whereby we conjectured that it was some Vessell which went from one port to another; as indeed half an hour after we percei∣ved one, wherein there were nine persons, who approaching to the bank of the river, neer to the place where we were, landed all in a Creek that was there in the form of an Haven, and presently making a fire, they began to prepare their supper, which was no sooner ready, but they fell to eating with great demonstrations of mirth, where∣in they bestowed a pretty good time. At length when they were well replenished with meat and drink, it happened that all nine of them, amongst whom there were three women, fell fast asleep; whereupon seeing that we could not find a more favourable occasion to make our benefit of this adventure, we went all eight of us very softly into the barque, that stuck half in the Ouze, and was tyed fast to a great stake, which push∣ing forth with our shoulders we set aflote, and then imbarquing our selves in it with all speed, we began to row down the river with as little noyse as possibly we could make. Now in regard the current of the water and the wind were both very favourable


unto us, we found our selves the next morning above ten leagues from the place vvhence vve parted, namely neer to a 
Pagode,
 called 
Quiay Hinarel,
 that is to say, 
the God of Rice,
 vvhere vve met but only vvith one man and seven and thirty vvomen, the most of them old, and Religionaries of this Temple, vvho received us vvith a great deal of cha∣rity, although in my opinion they did it rather out of fear of us, then any vvill that they had to do 
s good. Having questioned them about many things vvhich served for our purpose, they could give us no pertinent ansvver thereunto, alledging still, that they vvere but poor vvomen, vvho upon a solemn vovv had renounced all things in the vvorld, and confined themselves into this inclosure, vvhere they bestovved all their time in continuall prayer to 
Quiay Ponuedea,
 vvhich moves the clouds of heaven, that he vvould be pleased to give them rain, vvhereby their grounds might be made fruitfull to produce them abandance of Rice. In this place vve spent all the day in caulking our barque, and furnishing our selves at these religious vvomens cost, vvith Rice, Sugar, French Beans, Onyons, and some smoak-dried flesh, vvherevvith they vvere sufficiently provided. Being parted from hence about an hour vvithin night, vve continued our course vvith our Oars and Sails for seven vvhole days together, vvithout so much as once daring to touch the Land, so much vvere vve in fear of some disaster that might easily arrive to us from those places vvhich vve savv all alongst the river: But as it is im∣possible to avoid that here belovv vvhich is determined there above, just at the instant, as vve vvere continuing on our course, all confused as vve vvere, and in a perpetuall a∣larm, by reason of the danger that vvas alvvays present before our eys, as vvell for that vvhich vve savv, as for that vve vvere in doubt of, our ill hap vvould have it, that an hour before day, as vve past thorough the mouth of a Channell, three 
Paraos
 of Pyrats assaulted us vvith such violence, and vvith so many different sorts of D
rts, vvhich they showred upon us, that within less then two 
Credoes
 they had killed three of our com∣panions; as for us five that remained, vve cast our selves into the Sea all bloudy as we vvere vvith the vvounds vvhich vve had received, vvhereof tvvo others died a little af∣ter: When as vve vvere got ashore vve hid our selves in the vvoods, vvhere vve past all that day in lamenting our present mishap after so many fortunes as vve had run tho∣rough before time. Thus vvounded as vve vvere, parting from thence in more hope of death then life, vve proceeded on our vvay by Land, vvith so much pain and irresoluti∣on concerning vvhat vve vvere to do, as vve fell many times a vveeping, vvithout being able to comfort one another, in regard of the small likelyhood there vvas of saving our lives by any humane means. As vve vvere reduced to this deplorable estate, vvith tvvo of our companions ready to die, it pleased our Lord (vvhose succour doth ordina∣rily supply our defects) that in a place vvhere vve found our selves upon the bank of the vvater, there chanced to pass by a Vessell, vvherein there vvas a Christian vvoman, na∣med 
Violenta,
 vvho vvas married to a 
Pagan,
 to vvhom this Vessell appertained, vvhich he had laden vvith Cotton Wooll to sell off at 
Cosmin
; this vvoman no sooner percei∣ved us, but moved vvith pity at the sight of us, 
Iesus,
 cried she, 
these are Christians which I behold
! that said, she caused the Vessell vvherein she vvas to come to the shore, and leaping on Land, together vvith her husband, they fell both of them to imbracing us vvith tears in their eys, and then made us to be imbarqued vvith them; presently where∣upon this vertuous Dame took a care to have our vvounds drest, and provided us of cloaths the best that she could, rendring us many other good offices of a true and chari∣table Christian: Then setting aside all fear, vve parted from this place vvith all speed, & five days after thorough Gods grace vve arrived safely at the Tovvn of 
Cosmin,
 vvhich is a part of the Sea in the Kingdome of 
P
gu,
 vvhere in the house of this good Christian vvoman vve vvere as vvel looked unto, that in a short time vve found our selves tho∣roughly cured of all our hurts. Now vvhereas there is never any vvant in the grace which God doth to his creatures, it pleased him that at that very time vve met in this Port vvith a ship, vvhereof 
Luis de Montorrayo
 vvas Master, vvho vvas upon the point of setting sail for 
Bengala,
 so that after we had taken our leave of our Hostess, to whom we rendred many thanks for all the benefits vvhich we had received of her, we imbarqued our selves with the said 
Luis de Montarroyo,
 who likewise intreated us exceeding well, and furnished us abundantly with all that was necessary for us. At our arrivall at the Port of 
Cha
igan
 in the Kingdome of 
Bengala,
 where there was at that time many



Portugals,
 I instantly imbarqued my self in the foist of a certain Merchant, called 
F
r∣nando Caldeyra,
 who was bound for 
Goa,
 where it pleased God I arrived in good health. There I found 
Pedro de Faria,
 who had been Captain of 
Malaca,
 and by whom I had been sent as Ambassador to the 
Chaiubanbaa
 of 
Mar
abano,
 as I have declared hereto∣fore. To him I rendred an exact accompt of all that had past, for which he shewed him∣self very sorrowfulL, and accommodated me with divers things, whereunto his consci∣ence and generosity obliged him, in regard of the goods which I had lost for his occasi∣on. A little after, that I might not lose the oportunity of the season, I imbarqued my self with an intention to go to the Southward, and once more to try my fortune in the Kingdomes of 
China
 and 
Iapan,
 to see if in those countries where I had so many times lost my coat, I could not find a better then that I had on.


Being imbarqued at 
Goa
 in a Junck that belonged to 
Pedro de Faria,
 which was bound in way of trade for 
Zunda,
 I arrived at 
Malaca
 the same day that 
Ruy vas Pereyra,
 termed 
Marramaque
 died, who was then Captain of the fortresse there. Being de∣parted from that place to go to 
Zunda,
 at the end of seventeen dayes I arrived at 
Ban∣ta,
 where the 
Portugals
 are accustomed to traffique. And because there was at that time great scarcity of pepper over all the country, and that we came thither of purpose for it, we were constrained to passe the winter there, with a resolution to go for 
China
 the year following. We had been almost two moneths in this Port, where we exer
ised our commerce very peaceably, whenas from the King of 
Demaa,
 Emperor of all the Islands of 
Iaoa, Angenia, B
la, Madura,
 and of the rest of the Islands of that 
Archi∣pelago,
 there landed in this country a widdow woman, named 
Nhay Pombaya,
 about the age of threescore years, who came as Ambassador to 
Tagaril
▪ King of 
Zu
da,
 that was also his Vassall as well as all the rest of that Monarchy, for to tell him that he was within the term of six weeks to be in person at the town of 
Iapara,
 where he was then making preparation to invade the Kingdome of 
Passaruan.
 When this woman arrived in this Port, the King went in person to the Vessell where she was, from whence he carried her to his Palace with great pomp, and put her into the compa∣ny of his wife for her better entertainment, whilest he himself retired to another lodg∣ing farther off to do her the more honor. Now that one may know the reason wherefore this ambassage was executed rather by a woman then a man, you must note, that it hath alwayes been the custome of the Kings of this Kingdome to treat of the most important matters of their State by the mediation of women, especially when it concernes peace, which they observe not only in particular messages that are sent by the Lords to their Vassalls, such as this was, but also in matter of publique and generall af∣fairs, which is performed by ambassage from one King to another, and all the reason they give for it, is; 
That God hath given more gentlenesse and inclination to courtesie, yea and more authority to women then to men, who are severe, as they say, and by consequent lesse agreeable to those unto whom they are sent.
 Now it is their opinion, that every one of those women which the Kings are accustomed to send about affaires of importance, ought to have certain qualities for well executing of an ambassage, and worthily dis∣charging the Commission which is granted to them: for first of all, they say, 
That she must not be a Maid▪ for fear she chance to lose her honor in going out of her house, because that even as with her beauty she contents every one, so by the same reason she may be a motive of dis∣cord and unquietnesse in matters where unity is required, rather then an accesse to concord, and the peace which is pretended unto.
 To this they adde, 
that she must be married, or at leastwise a widdow after a lawfull marriage; that if she have had children, she must have a Certificate how she hath given them all suck with her own breasts, alledging thereupon, that she who hath borne children, and doth not nourish them if she can, is rather a carnall, voluptuous, corrupted, and dishonest woman, then a true mother.
 And this custome is observed so ex∣actly over all this country, principally amongst persons of quality, that if a mother hath a child which she cannot give suck unto for some valuable consideration, she must make an attestation thereof, as of a thing very serious, and much importing her honor. That if being young too she happens to lose her husband, and becomes a widdow, she must for the better testifying of her vertue enter into Religion, to the end she may thereby shew, that she did not formerly marry for the pleasure which she expected from her marriage, but to have children, according to the pure and honest intention, wherewith


God joyned together the first married couple in the terrestiall Paradise. Furthermore, that there might be nothing to be found fault with in the purity of their marriage, and that it might be altogether conformable to the Law of God, they say, that after a wo∣man is with-child, she ought no longer to have the company of her husband, because the same could not then be but dishonest and sensuall. To these conditions they add many others which I will passe over in silence, for that I think it unreasonable to use prolixity in matters that I hold worthy of excuse, if I do not relate them at length. In the mean time after that 
Nhay Pombaya
 had delivered her Embassage to the King of 
Zunda,
 as I have declared before, and treated with him about the occasion which brought her thi∣ther, she presently departed from this Towne of 
Ba
ta
; whereupon the King having speedily prepared all things in readinesse, he set sail with a Fleet of thirty 
Calaluzes,
 and ten 
Iuripang
es,
 well furnished with ammunition and victuall, in which forty ves∣sells there were seven thousand fighting men, besides the Mariners and Rowers. A∣mongst this number were forty 
Portugalls,
 of six and forty that we were in all, in re∣gard whereof they did us many particular favours in the businesse of our Merchandize, and publikely confessed, that they were much obliged to us for following them as we did, so that we should have had little reason to have excused our selves from accompa∣nying them in this war.






CHAP. XLIV. The expedition of the 
Pangueyran,
 Emperor of 
Jaoa,
 and King of 
Demaa,
 against the King of 
Passeruan,
 and all that which passed in this war.


THe King of 
Zunda
 being departed from the Port of 
Banta
 the fifth day of 
Ianua∣ry,
 in the year one thousand five hundred forty and six, arrived on the nineteenth of the same at the Town of 
Iapura,
 where the King of 
Demaa,
 Emperor of this Island of 
Iaoa,
 was then making his preparatives, having an army on foot of eight hundred thou∣sand men. This Prince being advertised of the King of 
Zundaes
 coming, who was his brother-in-law and vassall, he sent the King of 
Panaruca,
 Admirall of the Fleet, to re∣ceive him, who brought along with him an hundred and threescore 
Calaluzes,
 and nine∣ty 
Lanchares,
 full of 
Luffons
 from the Isle of 
Borneo
: With all this company he arrived where the King of 
Zunda
 was, who entertained him very courteously, and with a great deal of honor. Fourteen daies after our coming to this Town of 
Iapara,
 the King of 
Demaa
 went and imbarqued himself for the Kingdome of 
Passar
an
 in a Fleet of two thousand and seven hundred sails, amongst the which were a thousand high-built Juncks, and all the rest were Vessells with oars. The eleventh of 
February
 he arrived at the ri∣ver of 
Hicandurea,
 which is at the entrance of the bar; and because the King of 
Pana∣ruca,
 Admirall of the Fleet, perceived that the great Vessells could not passe unto the Port, which was two leagues off, by reason of certaine shelves of sand that were in divers parts of the river, he caused all those that were in them to be disimbarqued, and the other V
ssells with oars to go and anchor in the road before the Town, with an in∣tention to burn the Ships that were in the Port, which indeed was accordingly execu∣ted. In this Army was the Emperor 
Pangu
yran
 in person, accompanied with all the grande
s of the Kingdome; the King of 
Zunda,
 his brother-in-law who was Generall of the Army, went by land with a great part of the forces, and being all arrived at the place where they meant to pitch their Camp, they took care in the first place for the fortifying thereof, and for placing the Canon in the most commodious places to bat∣ter the Town, in which labour they bestowed the most part of the day. As for the night ensuing it was spent in rejoycings, and keeping good watch untill such time as it was day, whenas each Captain applied himself to that whereunto his duty obliged him, all in generall imploying themselves according to the ingineers directions, so that by the second day the whole Town was invironed with high 
Pallisadoes,
 and their Plat∣formes fortified with great beames, whereupon they planted divers great pieces of Ordnance, amongst the which were Eagles and Lions of metall, that the 
Ache
s
 and 
Turks
 had cast by the invention of a certain 
Renegado,
 born in the Kingdome of 
Al∣gar
es,
 appertaining to the Crown of 
Portugal,
 and by reason this wicked wretch had changed his belief, he called himself 
Coia Geinal,
 for as for the name which he had be∣fore


when he was a Christian, I am contented to passe it over in silence for the honor of his Family, being indeed of no mean extraction. In the mean time the besieged ha∣ving taken notice how ill-advised they had been in suffering the enemies to labour two whole daies together peaceably in fortifying of their Camp, without any impeachment of theirs; and taking the same for a great affront, they desired their King to permit them to fal upon them the night following, alledging how it was probable that men vvearied vvith labour could not make any great use of their arms, nor be able to resist this first im∣petuosity. The King, who at that time commanded the Kingdom of 
Passaruan,
 was young, & indued with many excellent qualities vvhich made him to be exeeedingly beloved of all his subjects, for as it was reported of him, he was very liberal, no manner of Tyrant, ex∣ceedingly affable to the common people, a friend to the poor, and so charitable towards Widovvs, that if they acquainted him vvith their necessities, he relieved them instantly, and did them more good then they asked of him. Besides these perfections that vvere so recommendable, he possessed some others so confor
able to mens desires, as there vvas not any one that vvould not have exposed his life a thousand times for his service if need 
ad been. Furthermore he had none but choice men vvith him, even the flovver of all his Kingdome, besides many strangers, upon vvhom he conferred much vvealth, honor, and many graces, which he accompanied vvith good vvords, that being indeed the means vvhereby the minds both of great and small are so strongly gained, that they make them Lions of sheep, vvhereas carrying ones self other vvayes, of generous Li∣ons, they are made fearfull hares. This King then examining the request vvh
ch his peo∣ple made unto him, and referring himself to the advice of the antientest and most pru∣dent Councellors of his State vvhich vvere vvith him, there vvas a great contention a∣bout the successe that the affairs might have, but in the end, by the counsell of all in ge∣nerall, it vvas concluded 
That in case 
ortune should be altogether adverse unto them in this sally which they m
ant to make against their enemies, yet would it be a much lesse evill, and lesse consider
ble affront, then to see the King so besieged by vile people, who against all reason would reduce them by force to quit their beliefe, w
erein they had been bred by their Fathers, to imbrace another new one by the suscitation of the
 Farazes, 
who place their salva∣tion in washing their parts behind, in not eating of swines flesh, and mar
ying of seven wives, whereby the best advised may easily judge▪ that God was so much their enemy, as he would not assist them in any thing, seeing that with so great offence they would under pretext of Religi∣on, and with reasons so full of contradiction, compell their King to become a Mahometan, and render himself tributary to them
 To these reasons they added many others, which the King, and they that were with him found to be so good, as they all with one com∣mon consent agreed thereunto, which is en evident mark, that it is a thing no lesse na∣turall for a good Subject to expose his life for his King, then for a vertuous wife to conserve her chastity for the husband which God hath given her: This being so, said they, a matter of so great importance was no longer to be deferred, but we all in gene∣rall, and each one in particular, are by this sally to make demonstration of the extreme affection which we bear to our good King, who we are assured will never be unmindfull of them that shall fight best for his defence, which is all the inheritance we desire to leave to our children Whereupon it was resolved that the night following they should make a sally upon their enemies.


Whereas the joy,
 which this designed sally brought to all the inhabitants of the Town was generall, they never stayed till they were called, but two hours after midnight, and before the time which the King had appointed, they assembled all in a great place, which was not far from the Royall Palace, and where they of the country had accu∣stomed to keep their Fairs and to solemnize their most remarkable feasts on those prin∣cipall dayes which were destined to the invocation of their 
Pagod
s.
 The King in the mean time, wonderfully content to see such heat of courage in them, of seventy thou∣sand inhabitants which were in the Town, drew out twelve thousand only for this en∣terprise, and divided them into four companies, each of them containing three thou∣sand, whereof an Unkle of the Kings was Generall, a man whom experience had ren∣dred very knowing in such undertakings, and that marched in the head of the first com∣pany. Of the second was Captain another of the principall 
Ma
dacins
; Of the third a stranger, a 
Champaa
 by Nation, and born in the Island of 
Barneo
; and of the fourth


one called 
Panbacaluio
; all of them good Commanders, very valiant, and exceeding expert in matters of war. When they were all ready, the King made them a Speech, whereby he succinctly represented unto them the confidence which he had in them touching this enterprise. After which, the better to incourage them, and assure them of his love, he took a cup of gold and drunk to them all, causing the chiefest of them to pledge him, and craving pardon of the rest, for that the time would not permit them to do the like. This gracious carriage of his so incouraged the souldiers, that without further delay the most part of them went and annoynted themselves with 
Mi
hamun∣di,
 which is a certain confection of an odoriferous oyle, wherewith these people are ac∣customed to frote themselves with, when they have taken a full resolution to die, and these same are ordinarily called 
A
acos.
 The hour being come wherein this sally was to be made, four of twelve gates that were in the Town were opened, thorough each of the which sallied forth one of the four Captaines with his company, having first sent out for Spies into the Camp six 
Orobalons,
 of the most valiant that were about the King, whom he had honored with new titles, and with such speciall favours, as use to give courage to them that want it, and to increase it in them that are indued with some resolution. The four Captains marched a little after the six Spies, and went and joyned all together in a certain place, where they were to fight with the enemies: whereupon falling into the midst of them with a marvellous impetuosity, they fought so valiantly, that in lesse then an houres time, which the fight indured, the twelve thousand 
Passaru∣ans
 left above thirty thousand enemies upon the place, besides those that were wound∣ed, which were in a far greater number, and whereof many died afterwards. Further∣more they took prisoner three Kings, and eight 
Pates,
 which are as the Dukes amongst us, the King of 
Zunda
 too, with whom we forty 
Portugalls
 were, could not so save himselfe, but that he was hurt with a Lance in three places, a number being killed in de∣fending him. Thus was the Camp put in so great disorder, as it was almost destroyed, the 
Pa
gueyran
 himself being wounded with a dart, and constrained to leap into the water, where little lacked but that he had been drowned. Whereby one may see what the force of a number of resolute and fearlesse men is against such as are surprised when least they think of it; for before that the enemies could know what they did, or the Commanders could put their souldiers into order, they were twice routed. The next morning, as soon as the day gave them leave to know the truth of the businesse, the 
Passeruans
 retired into the Towne, where they found that they had not lost a∣bove nine hundred of their men, nor more then two or three thousand hurt.


It is scarcely to be believed how much the King of 
Demaa
 was grieved with the disa∣ster of the former day,
 as wel for the affront which he received from those within by the losse of his people, as for the bad successe of the beginning of this siege, whereof he seem∣ed in some sort to impute the fault unto our King of 
Zunda,
 saying that this fortune had happened by the bad directions he had given to the Centinells. Now after he had com∣manded that the wounded should be drest, and the dead buried, he called to Councell all the Kings, Princes, and Captains of the forces that he had, both by Land and Wa∣ter, unto whom he said, 
That he had made a solemn vow, and oath upon the M
zapho of
 Ma∣homet, 
which is their Alcoran, or the book of their Law, never to raise the siege from before this Town, untill he had utterly destroyed it, or lost his own State therein.
 Whereunto he added, 
That he protested he would put to death whomsoever should oppose this resolution of his, what reason soever he could alledge thereupon
; which begot so great a terror in the minds of all that heard him, as there was not one that du
st contradict his will, but con∣trarily they infinitely approved and commended it. He used then all kind of diligence for the new fortifying of the Camp with good ditches, strong Pallisadoes, & divers Bul∣works made of stone and timber, garnished on the inside with their Platformes, where he caused a great many of Canons to be planted, so that by this meanes the Camp was stronger then the Towne it selfe, in regard whereof the besieged did often times jeere the Centinells without, telling them, 
That it must needs be concluded they were notorious cowards, since instead of besieging their enemies like valiant men, they besieged themselves like feeble women, wherefore they bid them return
 home to their houses, where it was fitter for them to fall to spinning, then to make war.
 These were the jeers which they ordinarily


put upon the besiegers, who vvere greatly offended vvith them. This Tovvne had been almost three moneths besieged, and yet had the enemies advanced but little, for during all that time, vvherein there had been five batteries, and three assaults given to it, with above a thousand ladders planted against the vvalls, the besieged defended themselves still like valiant and couragious men, fortifying them selves vvith counter-mires which they opposed to the breaches, vvhich they made vvith pieces of timber taken from the houses; so that all the power of the 
Pangueyran,
 which (as I have declared) was about eight hundred thousand men, whereof the number was much diminished, was not able to give him entrance into it. Hereupon the principall Ingineer of the Camp, who was a Renegado of 
Maillorque,
 seeing that this affair had not a successe answerable to what he had promised the King, he resolved to take another far different course. To that ef∣fect, with a great amasse of earth and bavins he framed a kind of a Platform, which he fortified with six rows of beames, and wrought so, that in nine dayes he raised it a fa∣thom higher then the wall▪ that done, he planted forty great pieces of Canon upon it, together with a number of Bases and Faulconets, wherewith he fell to battering the Town in such sort, as the besieged were therewith mightily damnified, so that the King perceiving that this invention of the enemy was the only thing in the world that could most incommodate him in the Towne, he resolved by the meanes of ten thousand Vo∣lunteers, who had offered themselves unto him for that purpose, and to whom for 
 mark of honor he gave the title of 
Tygers of the world,
 to attacque this Fort, and they that were upon it; this matter was no sooner resolved upon, but was presently put in execution, and for the better incouragement of them, the King himselfe would be their Captaine, albeit this whole enterprise was governed by the four 
Panari
ons,
 which had formerly commanded in the first sally. Having put themselves into the field then with the rising of the Sun, they fought so valiantly without any fear at all of the dreadfull Ordnance; which were planted on the Platform, as in lesse then two 
Credoes
 they got to the top of it, and there setting on the enemies, who were thirty thousand in num∣ber, they defeated them all in a very short time. The 
Pangueyran
 of 
Pate
 seeing his forces thus routed, ran thither in person with twenty thousand choice souldiers, intend∣ing to beat the 
Passeruans
 from the place which they had gained, but they defended it so couragiously, as is not possible to expresse it in words. This bloudy battell having in∣dured till evening, the 
Passeruan,
 who had lost the most part of his men, made his re∣treat into the Towne by the gate that was next to the Platforme, whereunto having first set fire in six or seven places, it took hold of some barrells of powder, whereof there was great store there, which inflamed it so terribly in severall parts, as it was not possible to approach unto it by the space of a flight shoot; this accident was very favour∣able to the besieged, because the enemies were thereby kept from joyning together, and so the Towne was for this time preserved from the great danger wherewithall it was threatned; howbeit the 
Passeruans
 scap't not so scot-free, but that of the ten thousand Volunteers imployed in this service, six thousand remained dead on the top of the Plat∣forme. True it is, that in the 
Pangueyran
 part there vvas above forty thousand killed, amongst the vvhhich vvere three thousand strangers of divers Nations, the most part 
A∣chems, Turks,
 and 
Malabares,
 as also twelve 
Pates,
 or Dukes, five Kings, with many o∣ther Commanders, and men of quality.


All this night was spent on both sides in lamentations and complaints, as also in dressing the vvounded, and casting the dead into the river.
 The next morning as soone as it was day the 
Pangueyran
 of 
Pata
 seeing the bad successe which his enterprise had had untill that present, could not for all that be dravvn to desist from it, so that he caused all his souldiers to prepare themselves for a nevv assaulting of the Tovvne, being persvvaded that the besieged had no great force lef
 to defend them vvithall, considering their vvalls vvere overthrovvn in many places, their ammunition spent, the most part of their people slaine, and their King dangerously hurt, at leastvvise it vvas so reported. Novv the better to be assured thereof, he caused some of his forces to be laid in ambush in certain avenues, by vvhich he had been advertised, that divers of the frontizing inhabitants vvould passe, to bring unto the Tovvne Eggs, Pullaine, and o∣ther such like things necessary for the recovery of sick persons. Novv they, vvhom he had sent for that purpose, arrived at the Camp a little before day, and brought nine


prisoners with them, amongst the which there was one 
Portugal.
 After then that they had racked and tortured the other eight, & were come to do as much to the 
Portugal,
 who was the last, he imagined that it may be they would shew him some favour if he de∣clared unto them what he was, so that upon the first torment he cried out, 
That he was a Portugal,
 he not knowing hitherto any thing of us, nor we of him: Our King of 
Zun∣da
 no sooner heard this Declaration of his, but he commanded him to be taken from the rack, and instantly sent for us to know whether that which this wretch delivered was true; whereupon six of us that were the least hurt went unto him, and at the first sight we judged him by his countenance to be a 
Portugal,
 so that prostrating our selves before the King, we besought him to give us this man, representing unto him, that in re∣gard he was of our Nation we were bound to make this suit for him, which he very willingly granted us, and so we in way of thankfullnesse kissed his feet. After we had received him, we carried him to the place where our companions lay wounded, and then we would needs understand of him whether he were a 
Portugal
 indeed, because he look∣ed so strangely as we could not well know him, no not by his speech; but after he was a little come to himselfe, and that he had shed a many of teares, 
My Masters,
 said he un∣to us, 
I assure you that I am a Christian, and a
 Portugal, 
both by father and mother, al∣though as you see I do not weare the habit of one; my country is
 Penamocor, 
and my name
 Nuno Rodriguez Taborda; 
I went out of
 Portugal 
in the year one thousand five hundred and thirteen, after I had inrolled my self in the Marshalls Army, and in the Ship called the
 S. Joano, 
whereof
 Ruy Diaz Pereyra 
was Captaine. Now because in those first beginnings I shewed my self in all occasions a worthy man,
 Alphonso d'Albuquerque 
made me Cap∣tain of the four brigandines which he had in the Indiaes at that time; afterwards I was pre∣sent with him at the taking of
 Goa 
and
 Malaca; 
withall I laboured in the foundations of
 Or∣muz 
and
 Calecut, 
never failing in any of the services performed in those times by that famous Commander, to whom so many different Nations do at this day give the title of Great. I con∣tinued the same proof of my courage during the Governments of
 Lopo, Suarez, 
of
 Diego, Lopez de Siqueyra, 
and of other Governors of the
 Indiaes, 
even unto
 Don An
iaque de Me∣nesez, 
who succeeded to that charge by the death of the Vice Roy
 Vasco de Gama; 
who at the entrance into his Government made
 Francisco de Sa 
Generall of a Fleet of twelve Vessells, wherein were three hundred men which he was to make use of for the building of a Fort at
 Zunda, 
in regard of the feare they were then in of the
 Spaniards, 
who at that time went to the
 Molucca
s 
by the new way which
 Magellan 
ad discovered unto them; in this Fleet I was made Captain of a Brigandine, called the S.
 Jorge, 
where I commanded over six and twen∣ty very couragious and valiant men. We departed then from the bar of
 Bintan, 
whenas
 Pe∣dro de Mascarenhas 
destroyed it; but when we arrived at the Isle of
 Lingua, 
we were beaten with so furious a tempest, that unable to resist it, we were forced to make towards
 Jaoa, 
where of seven rowing Vessells that we were, six were lost, and my sins would have it that mine was one of that number; besides for my greater infortune, the tempest cast my Brigandine upon the coast of this Country, where I have now remained these three and twenty years, not one of all that were in the Vessell escaping save three of my companions, who are every one dead but my self, and would to God it had pleased him to shew me the grace that I had been so too, that so I might not have offended him as I have done since, for seeing my self continually pressed by th
se Gentiles to follow their pernicious errors, I withstood them a long time, but whereas the flesh is fraile, being very poor, far from my country, and without hope of liberty, my sins made me at their intreaties to yeeld to that which they desired of me with so much im∣portunity; by reason whereof this King
 Father did me many great favours; and being sent for yesterday from a place where I was to look unto two of the chiefest Gentlemen of this coun∣try, it pleased God that I fell into the hands of these dogs, to the end I should no longer be one, for which the Lord be blessed for evermore.
 This mans discourse exceedingly astonished us, and as much as the novelty of so strange an accident required, so that having com∣forted him as well as we could in such termes as we thought were necessaty for the time wherein we were, we asked him whether he would go with us to 
Zunda,
 and from thence to 
Malaca,
 where God might shew him the grace to die in his service like a good Christian. Whereunto having made answer, that he desired nothing more, and that he had never had other design, we gave him another habit, because he was cloathed like a Pagan, and kept him alwayes with us as long as the siege lasted.








CHAP. XLV. The death of the King of 
Demaa
 by a very strange accident, and that which arrived thereupon.


TO come again now to our history, you are to understand, that the 
Pangueyran
 of 
Pata,
 King of 
Demaa,
 being certified by some of the enemies,
 whom his men had taken prisoners, of the piteous estate whereunto the besieged were reduced, the most part of them dead, their ammunition failing, and their King dangerously hurt; all these things together carried him more ardently then ever to the assault, which he had purpo∣sed with himself to give to the besieged Town. He resolved then to scale it in plain day, and to assault it with more violence then before, so that instantly great preparations were made over all the Camp, where divers Serjeants at Armes, on horseback, and car∣rying Maces on their shoulders, went proclaiming aloud after the men of war had been made to assemble together with the sound of trumpets, 
The
 Pangueyran 
of
 Pata 
by the power of him who hath created all things, Lord of the Lands which inviron the Seas, being willing to discover unto all in generall the secret of his soul▪ doth let you know, that nine daies hence he will have you be in a readiness, to the end that with the courages of Tygers, and re∣doubled forces, you assist him in the assault which he intends to give unto the Town, for a re∣compence whereof he liberally promiseth to do great favours, as well in money, as in honorable and remarkable titles, those to the five souldiers▪ which fi
st of all shall plant colours on the enemies walls, or that shall perform actions which shall be agreeable to him. Whereas contra∣rily, they which do not carry themselves valiantly in this enterprise, conformably to his plea∣sure, shall be executed by the way of justice, without any regard had to their condition.
 This Ordinance of the Kings, full of menaces, being published over every part of the Camp, put them into such an alarm, as the Commanders began incontinently to make them∣selves ready, and to provide all things necessary for this assault, without scarce taking a∣ny rest either day or night, making withall so great a noyse, by intermingling their hues and cries with the sounds of drums, and other instruments of war, as it could not be heard without much terror. In the mean time, whereas of the nine daies, destined for the purpose aforesaid, seven were already p
st, so as there rested no more but two, at the end whereof an assault was to be given to the Towne, one morning as the 
Pan∣gueyran
 sate in Councell, to resolve of the 
ffairs of this siege with the principall Lords of his Army, as also of the means, of the time, and places, whereby they were to as∣sault the Town, and of other necessary things, it was said, that from the diversity of o∣pinions, which the one and the other had, there arose so great a contention amongst them, as the King was constrained to take every ones advice in writing. During this time, whereas he had alwayes neer about him a young Page, who carried 
Bethel,
 an herb whose leaves are like unto Plantain, which these Pagans are accustomed to chaw, because it makes them have a sweet breath, and also purges the humours of the stomack; he ask∣ed this Page then for some of it, who at first seemed not to hear him, being much about twelve or thirteen years old, for I hold it fit to make mention of his age, in regard of that I am to say of him hereafter. Now to return to the 
Pangueyran,
 as he vvas conti∣nuing his discourse vvith his Councell of War; thorough much speaking, and somevvhat in choler, his mouth became dry, so that he asked the Page again for some 
Bethel,
 which he ordinarily carried in a little box of gold, but he heard him no more this se∣cond time, then he had done the first; insomuch as the King having asked him for some the third time, one of the Lords that vvas neere to the Page pulled him by the sleeve, and bid him 
give the King some Bethel,
 vvhich immediately he did, and falling on his knees he presented him vvith the box vvhich he had in his hands; the King then took tvvo or three leaves of it, as he used to do, and vvithout being othervvise angry, giving him a light touch vvith his hand on the head, 
art thou deaf,
 said he unto him, 
that thou couldst not hear me?
 and thereupon re-entred into discourse vvith them of his Coun∣cell. Novv because these 
Iaoas
 are the most punctillious and perfidious Nation of the vvorld, and that vvithall they of this country hold it for the greatest affront that can be done thena, vvhen one gives them a touch on the head, this young Page imagining that the King had touched him so out of a mark of so great a contempt, as he should thereby be made infamous for ever, though indeed none of the company took notice of


it, he went aside weeping and sobbing by himself, and in the end resolved to revenge the injury which the King had done him, so that drawing out a little knife which he wore at his girdle, he stabbed the King with it into the midst of the left pap, and so because the blow was mortall, the King fell instantly down on the ground, not able to say any more then these two or three words, 
I am dead:
 wherewithall those of the Councell were so frighted, as it is not possible to expresse it. After that this emotion was a lit∣tle calmed, they fell first unto looking to the King, to see if some remedy might not be applied to his wound; but because he was hurt just in the heart there was no hope of recovery, so that he died within a very short time after: Presently they seized on the Page, whom they put to torture, by reason of some suspitions which they had upon this accident, but he never confessed any thing, and said nought els, save▪ 
That he had done it of his own free will, and to be revenged of the blow which the King had given him on his head by way of contempt, as if he had struck some dog that was barking up and down the streets in the night, without considering that he was the son of the
 Pate Pondan, 
Lord of
 Sure∣bayaa. The Page then was impaled alive, with a good big stake, which was thrust in at his Fundament, and came out at the nape of his neck. As much was done to his Fa∣ther, to three of his brothers, and to threescore and twelve of his kinsmen, so that his whole Race was exterminated, upon which so cruell and rigorous an execution, many great troubles ensued afterwards in all the country of 
Iaoa,
 and in all the Islands of 
ale, Tymor,
 and 
Madura,
 which are very great, and whereof the Governors are Sove∣raigns by their Lawes, and from all antiquity. After the end of this execution, que∣stion was made what should be done with the Kings body, whereupon there were ma∣ny different opinions amongst them, for some said, that to bury him in that place was as much as to leave him in the power of the 
Passeruans
; and others, that if he were tran∣sported to 
Demaa,
 where his Tomb was, it was not possible but that it would be cor∣rupted before it arrived there; whereunto was added, that if they interred him so putri∣fied and corrupted, his soul could not be received into 
Paradis
,
 according to the Law of the country, which is that of 
Mahomet,
 wherein he died. After many contestations thereupon, in the end they followed the counsell which one of our 
Portugals
 gave them, that was so profitable to him afterwards, as it was worth him above ten thousand duckats, wherewith the Lords rewarded him as it were in vye of one another for a re∣compence of the good service which he did then to the deceased. This counsell was, that they should put the body into a Coffin full of Lime and Camphire, and so bury it in a Junck also full of earth; so that albeit the thing was not so marvellous of it self, yet left it not to be very profitable to the 
Portugals,
 because they all found it very good, and well invented, as indeed the successe of it was such, as by means thereof the Kings body was carried to 
Demaa,
 without any kind of corruption or ill savour.


As soon as the Kings body was put into the 
Iunck
 appointed for it, the King of 
Zun∣da,
 Generall of the Army, caused the great Ordinance and the ammunition to be im∣barqued, and with the least noyse that might be, committed to safe custody the most precious things the King had, together with all the treasures of the Tents. But what∣soever care and silence was used therein, the enemy could not be kept from having some inkling of it, and from understanding how things went in the Camp, so that in∣stantly the King marched out of the Town in person, with only three thousand soul∣diers of the past confederacy, who by a solemn vow caused themselves to be annoynted with the oyle which they call 
Minhamundi,
 as men resolved, and that had vowed them∣selves to death. Thus fully determined as they vvere, they went and fell upon the ene∣mies, whom finding busie in trussing up their baggage, they intreated so ill, as in lesse then half an hours space, for no longer lasted the heat of the fight, they cut twelve thou∣sand of them in pieces. Withall they took two Kings, and five 
Pates,
 or 
Dukes
 prison∣ers, together with above three hundred 
Turks, Abyssines,
 and 
Achems,
 yea and their 
Ca∣
ismoubana,
 the Soveraign dignity amongst the 
Mahometans,
 by whose counsell the 
Pangueyran
 was come thither. There vvere also four hundred ships burnt, vvherein vvere the hurt men, so that by this means all the Camp vvas neer lost. After this the King retreated into the Tovvn vvith his men, vvhereof he lost but four hundred. In the mean time the King of 
Zunda
 having caused the remainder of the Army to be re-im∣barqued vvith all speed the same day, being the nineth of 
March,
 they set saile


directly for the City of 
Demaa,
 bringing along with them the body of the 
Pangueyran,
 vvhich upon the arrivall thereof vvas received by the people vvith great cries, and strange demonstrations of a universall mourning. The day after a re∣vievv vvas taken of all the men of vvar, for to knovv hovv many vvere dead, and there vvas found missing an hundred and thirty thousand; vvhereas the 
Passeruans,
 according to report, had lost but five and tvventy thousand; but be it as it vvill, and let fortune make the best market that she can of these things, yet they never arrive, but the field is died vvith the bloud of the vanquishers, and by a stronger reason vvith that of the van∣guished, to vvhom these events do alvvayes cost far dearer, then to the others. The same day there vvas question of creating a nevv 
Pangueyran,
 vvho, as I have said heretofore, is Emperor over all the 
Pates
 and Kings of that great Archipelago, vvhich the 
Chineses, Tartar, Iapon,
 and 
Lequio,
 Historians are vvont to call 
Raterra Vendau,
 that is to say, 
the eye-lid of the world,
 as one may see in the Card, if the elevation of the heights prove true. Novv because that after the death of the 
Pangueyran,
 there vvas not a lavvfull suc∣cessor to be found that might inherit this Crovvn, it vvas resolved that one should be made by election; for vvhich effect by the common consent of all, eight men vvere cho∣sen, as heads of all the people, to create a 
Pangueyran.
 These same assembled then to∣gether in a house, and after order had been taken for the pacifying of all things in the City, they continued seven vvhole daies together vvithout being able to come to any agreement about this election; for vvhereas there vvere eight pretendents of the prin∣cipall Lords of the Kingdome, there vvere found amongst these Electors many different opinions, vvhich proceeded from this, that the most part, or all of them, vvere meerly allied to these 
ight, or to their kinsmen, so that each one laboured to make him 
Pan∣gueyran,
 vvhich vvas most to his mind. Whereupon the inhabitants of the City, and the souldiers of the Army, making use of this delay to their advantage, as men vvho imagi∣ned that this affair vvould never be terminated, and that there vvould be no chastise∣ment for them, they began shamelessly to break out into all kind of actions full of in∣solency and malice. And forasmuch as there vvas a great number of Merchants Ships in the Port, they got aboard them, and fell pell-mell to rifling both of strangers, and those of the country, vvith so much licentiousnesse, as it vvas said, that in four daies they took an hundred Juncks, vvherein they killed above six thousand men; vvhereof notice being given to the King of 
Panaruca,
 Prince of 
Balambuam,
 and Admirall of the Sea of this Empire, he ran thither with all speed, and of the number of those which were convicted of manifest robbery, he caused fourscore to be hanged all along the shore, to the terror of those that should behold them. After this action, 
Quiay Ansedeaa, Pate
 or Duke of 
Cherbom,
 who was Governor of the Towne, and greatly in authori∣ty, taking this which the King of 
Panaruca
 had done for a manifest contempt, because he had, said he, little respected his charge of Governor, was so mightily offended 
t it, as having instantly got together about six or seven thousand men, he went and 
 this Kings Palace, with an intent to seize upon his person; but the 
Panaruca
 resisted him with his followers, and as it was said▪ he endeavoured with many complements to justifie himself to him all that ever he could; whereunto 
Quiay Ans
d
aa
 was so far from having any regard, as contrarily entring by force into his house he flew thirty or forty of his men; in the mean time so many people ran to this mutiny as it was a dread∣full thing to behold. For whereas these two heads were great Lords, one Admirall of the Fleet, the other Governor of the Town, and both of them allied to the principall families of the Country, the devill sowed so great a division amongst them, as if night had not separated the fight, it is credible that not one of them had escaped; neverthe∣lesse the difference went yet much farther, and ended not so; for the men of war, who were at that time above six hundred thousand in number, coming to consider the great affront which 
Quiay Ansedeaa,
 Governor of the Town, had done to their Admirall, they to be revenged thereof went all ashore the same night, the 
Pa
aruca
 not being of power enough to keep them from it, notwithstanding he laboured all that he could to do it. Thus all of them animated and transported with wrath, and a desire of re∣venge, went and set upon 
Quiay Ansedeaas
 house, where they slew him, and ten thou∣sand men; wherewith not contented, they assaulted the Town in ten or eleven places, and fell to killing and plundering all that ever they met with, so that they carried them∣selves


therein with so much violence, as in three daies alone, which was as long as the siege of this Town last
d, nothing remained that was not an insupportable object to the sight. There was withall so great a confusion of howling, weeping, and heavy la∣mentation, as all that heard it could think no other but that the earth was going to turn topsie turvy. In a word, and not to lose time in aggravating this with superfluous speeches, the Town was all on fire, which burnt to the very foundations, so that ac∣cording to report there were above an hundred thousand houses consumed, above three hundred thousand persons cut in pieces, and almost as many made prisoners, which were led away slaves, and sold in divers countries. Besides, there was an infinite of riches stollen, whereof the value, as it was said, only in silver and gold, amounted even to forty millions, and all put together, to an hundred millions of gold. As for the num∣ber of prisoners, and of such as were slain, it was neer five hundred thousand persons; and all these things arrived by the evill counsell of a young King, bred up amongst young people like himself, who did every thing at his own pleasure, without any body contradicting him.






CHAP. LXVI. That which befell us, untill our departure towards the Port of 
Zunda,
 from whence we s
 sail for 
China,
 and what afterwards happened unto us.


THree daies after so cruell and horrible a mutiny, whenas all things were peaceable, the principall Heads of this commotion fearing as soon as a 
Pangueyran
 should be elected, that they should be punished according to the enormity of their crime, they all of them set sail without longer attending the danger which threatned them. They de∣parted away then in the same Vessells wherein they came, the King of 
Panaruca,
 their Admirall, being not possibly able to stay them, but contrarily was twice in jeopardy of losing himselfe in endeavouring to do it with those few men that were of his party. Thus in the space of two daies only, the two thousand sailes which were in the Port went away, leaving the Town still burning, which was the cause that those few Lords, which remained, being joyned together, resolved to pas
 unto the Towne of 
Iapara,
 some five leagues from thence towards the Coast of the Mediterranean Sea. This re∣solution being taken, they put it presently in execution, to the end that with the more tranquillity (for the popular commotion was not yet well appeased) they might make election of the 
Pangu
yran,
 which properly signifies 
Emperor
; As indeed they created one, called 
Pat
 Suday
,
 Prince of 
S
rubayaa,
 who had been none of those eight Pre∣tendents of whom we have spoken; but this election they made, because it seemed to them necessary for their common good, and the qui
t of the Country: All the inhabi∣tant
 
o were exceedingly satisfied with it, and they immediately sent th
 
Panarut
 for 
 to a place some dozen leagues from thence, called 
Pisammenes,
 where he at that time lived. Nine dayes after he was sent for, he failed not to come, accompanied with above two hundred thousand men, imbarqued in fifteen hundred 
Calaluz
s
 and 
Iuri∣pangos.
 He was received by all the people with great demonstrations of j
y, and a lit∣tle after he was crowned with the accustomed ceremonies, as 
Pangueyran
 of all the countries of 
Ia
a, Bala,
 and 
Mad
ra,
 which is a Monarchy that is very populous, and exceeding rich and mighty. That done, he returned to the Towne of 
Demaa,
 with an intent to have it rebuilt anew, and to restore it to its former estate. At his arrivall in that place, the first thing he did was to give order for the punishing of those which were found attainted and convict
d of the sacking of the Town, who proved not to be a∣bove five thousand, though the number of them was far greater, for all the rest were fled away, some here, some there. Th
se wretches suffered onely two kinds of death, some were impaled alive, and the rest were burned in the very same ships wherein they were apprehended; and of four daies, wherein this justice was executed, there past not one without the putting to death of a great number, which so mightily terrified us 
Portugals
 that were there present, as seeing the commotion very great still over the whole country, and no likelyhood that things would of a long time be peaceable, we humbly desired the King of 
Zunda
 to give us leave to go to our ship which lay in the Port of 
Bant
,
 in regard the season for the voyage to 
China
 was already come. This


King having easily granted our request, with an exemption of the customes of our Mer∣chandise, presented every one of us besides with an hundred duckats, and to each of the heirs of fourteen of ours, which were slain in the war, he gave three hundred, which we accepted of as a very honorable reward, and worthy of a most liberall, and good natu∣red Prince. Thus went we presently away very well satisfied of him to the Port of 
Banta,
 and there we remained twelve whole daies together, during the which vve made an end of preparing our selves for our voyage. After this, vve set saile for 
China
 in the company of other four ships, vvho vvere bound for the same place, and vve took a∣long vvith us the same 
Ioan
 Rodriguez,
 vvhom vve incountred at 
Passeruan,
 as I have before declared, that had made himself a Brachman of Pagode, called 
Quiay Nacorel,
 and as for him he had named himself 
Gauxita
 Facal
m,
 vvhich is as much to say as, 
the Councell of the Saint.
 The same 
Ioane Rodriguez
 no sooner arrived at 
China,
 but he im∣barqued himselfe for 
Malaca,
 vvhere (through the grace of God) he vvas reconciled a∣nevv to the Catholike faith, and after he had continued a year there, he died vvith great demonstrations of a good and true Christian, vvhereby it seems vve may believe that our Lord received him to mercy, since after so many years profession of an infidell, he reser∣ved him to come and die in his service, for vvhich be he praised for evermore. Our five ships then, vvith vvhich vve parted from 
Zunda,
 being arrived at 
Chinche
,
 vvhere the 
Portugals
 at that time traded, vve abode three moneths and an half there vvith travell and danger enough of our persons; for vve vvere in a country, vvhere nothing but re∣volts and mutinies vvere spoken of. Withall, there vvere great armies afoot all alongst the Coast, by reason of many robberies vvhich the Pyrats of 
Iapon
 had com∣mitted thereabout, so that in this disorder there vvas no meanes to exercise any commerce, for the Merchants durst not leave their houses to go to Sea. By reason of all this vve vvere constrained to passe unto the Port of 
Chabaqu
a,
 vvhere vve found at an∣chor sixscore 
Iuneks
▪ vvho having set upon us, took three of our five Vessells, vvherein four hundred Christians vvere killed, of which fourscore and two vvere 
Portugals.
 As for the other tvvo Vessells, in one of the vvhich I vvas, they escaped as it vvere by miracle. But because vve could not make to Land, by reason of the Easterly vvinds vvhich vvere contrary to us all that same moneth, vve vvere constrained (though to our great grief) to regain the Coast of 
Iaoa.
 At length after vve had continued our course by the space of tvvo and tvventy daies vvith a great deal of travell and danger, vve discovered an Island called 
Pullo Condor,
 distant eight degrees, and one third of heighth from the bar of the Kingdome of 
Camboya.
 Whereupon as we were even ready to reach it, so fu∣rious a storm came from the South Coast, as we were all in jeopardy to be cast away. Ne∣verthelesse driving along we got to the Isle of 
Lingua,
 where a tempest surprised us at 
West
 and 
South-West,
 with so impetuous a wind, as strugling against the billow, it kept us from making use of our sails: so that being in fear of rocks and shelves of sand, which were on the Prow side, we steered the other way, untill that after some time the Forekeel of our Poup opened within nine hand-bredths of the water, which was the cause, seeing our selves so neer unto death, that we were inforced to cut down our two masts, and to cast all our Merchandises into the Sea, whereby our Ship was somwhat eased. This done, vvhereas vve had left our ship the rest of the day, and a good part of the night to the mercy of the Sea, it pleased our Lord out of an effect of his divine justice, that without knowing how, or without seeing any thing, our ship ran her self against a rock, with the death of seventy and tvvo persons. This miserable successe so deprived us of all our understanding and forces, that not so much as one of us ever thought of any way saving himself, as the 
Chineses,
 whom we had for Mariners in our Junck had done, for they had so bestirred themselves all the night long, that before it was day they had made a raft of such planks and beams as came to their hands, tying them to∣gether in such sort with the cordage of their sails, that forty persons might abide upon it with ease. Now whereas we were all in an imminent danger, and in a time wherein (as they say) the father does nothing for the son, nor the son for the father, no man took care but for himselfe alone, whereof we had a fair example in our 
Chinese
-Mari∣ners, whom we accounted but as our slaves; for 
Martin Esteuez,
 the Captain and Master of the Junck, having intreated his own servants, vvho vvere upon the raft, to receive him amongst them, they ansvvered him, that they could not do it at any hand, vvhich


coming to the ears of one of ours called 
Ruy de Moura,
 whereas he could not indure that these persidious villains should use us with so much discourtesie and ingratitude, he got him up on his feet from a place where he lay hurt, 
nd made unto us a short speech, whereby he represented unto us, 
That we were to remember how odious a thing cowardice was
; and withall, 
how absolutely it imported us to seize upon this raf
 for the saving of our lives.
 To these words he added many other such like, which so incouraged us, that with one accord, and with one and the same resolution, whereunto the present necessi∣ty obliged us, being but eight and twenty 
Portugals,
 we set upon the forty 
Chineses
 which were upon the raft. We opposed our swords then to their iron hatchets, and fought so lustily with them, as we killed them all in the space of two or three 
Credoes.
 It is true indeed, that of us eight and twenty 
Portugals,
 sixteen were slain, and twelve e∣scaped, but so wounded, that four of them died the next day. This was an accident, whereof no doubt the like hath seldome been heard of▪ or seen, whereby one may clear∣ly perceive how great the misery of humane life is, for it was not twelve hours before, when as we all imbraced each other in the ship, and behaved our selves like right bre∣thren, intending to die for one another, and so soon after our sins carried us to such great extremity, as hardly sustaining our selves upon four scu
vy planks, tied together with two ropes, we kissed one another with as much barbarisme, as if we had been mor∣tall enemies, or something worse. It is true, that the excuse which may be alledged thereupon is, that necessity, which hath no law, compelled us thereunto.


Whenas we were were Masters of this raft, which had cost us and the 
Chineses
 so much bloud, we set upon it eight and thirty persons of us that we were, of which there were twelve 
Portugals,
 some of their children, our servants, and the remainder of those that were hurt, whereof the most part died afterwards. Novv forasmuch as we were so great a number upon a very little raft, where we floated at the mercy of the waves of the Sea, the water came up to our middles, and in this fashion we escaped from that dangerous and infortunate rock, one Saturday, being Christmas day, one thousand five hundred forty and seven, with one only piece of an old counter-point, which served us for a 
ail, having neither needle no
 compasse to guide us: True it is, that vve supplied this defect vvith the great hope which we had in our Lord, whom we invoked incessant∣ly with groans and sighs, that were accompanied with abundance of tears. In this piti∣full equipage we navigated four vvhole dayes without eating any thing, so that upon the fifth day necessity constrained us to feed on a 
Cap
a
 which died amongst us, with vvhose body vve sustained our selves five dayes longer, vvhich made up the nineth of our voyage, so that during other four, vvherein vve continued in this case, vve had nothing els to eat but the foam and sl
me of the Sea; for vve resolved to die vvith hunger ra∣ther then feed on any of those four 
Portugals
 vvhich lay dead by us. After vve had vvandred thus at the mercy of the Sea, it pleased our Lord out of his infinite goodness to let us discover land on the tvvelfth day, vvhich vvas so agreeable a sight to us, as the joy of it proved mortall to some of ours, for of fifteen of us that vvere still alive, four died suddainly, vvhereof three vvere 
Portugals
; so that of eight and thirty persons vvhich had been imbarqued on the raft, there vvas but eleven that escaped, namely seven 
Portugals,
 and f
ur of our boyes. In the end having got to land, vve found our selves in a shallovv rode, fashioned much like to an Haven, vvhere vve began to render infinite thanks to God for having thus delivered us from the perills of the Sea, promising our selves also, that through his infinite mercy he vvould dravv us out of those of the land. Having then made provision of certain shell-fish, as oysters, and sea-crabs to nourish our selves vvithall, because vve had observed hovv all this country vvas very desert, and full of Elephants and Tygers, we got up into certain trees, to the end we might avoid the fury of these beasts, and some others which we saw there; then when as we thought that we might proceed on our way with less danger, we gathered us together, & went on tho∣rough a vvood, where to secure our lives, we had recourse to loud cries, and hollowings. In the mean time, as it is the property of the divine mercy never to forsake the poore sufferers that are upon the earth, it permitted us to see coming along in a channell of fresh water, that ran ingulphing it selfe into the Sea, a little barque, laden with timber and other wood, wherein were nine 
Negroes, Iaoas,
 and 
Papua
.
 As soon as these men savv us, imagining that vve vvere some devills, as they confessed to us aftervvards; they leapt


into the vvater, and quite left the Vessell, not so much as one of them abiding in her But vvhen they perceived vvhat vve vvere, they abandoned the fear they vvere in before, and coming unto us they questioned us about many particulars, vvhereunto vve an∣svvered according to the truth, and vvithall, desired them for Gods sake to lead us vvhi∣thersoever they vvould, and there to sell us as sl
ves to some that would carry us to 
Ma∣laca
; adding that we were Merchants, and that in acknowledgement of so good an of∣fice, they should get a great deal of money for us, or as much in commodities as they would require. Now whereas these 
Iaoas
 are naturally inclined to avarice, when they heard us talk of their interest, they began to be more tractable, and gave us better words, with hope of doing that which we desired of them, but these courtesies lasted no long∣er but till such time as they could get again into their barque, which they had quitted; for as soon as they saw themselves aboard her, they put off from the land, and making as though they would part without taking us in, they told us, that to be assured of what we had said to them, they would have us before they proceeded a∣ny further, to yeeld up our armes to them, whereas otherwise they would ne∣ver take us in, no not though they saw us eaten up with Lions. Seeing our selves thus constrained by necessity, and by a certain dispair of finding any other remedy to our present extremity, we were inforced to do all that these men required of us; so that having brought their barque a little neerer, they bid us swim to them, because they had never a boat to fetch us from the shore, which we presently resolved to do. Where∣upon two boys and one 
Portugal,
 leapt into the Sea to take hold of a rope, which they had thrown out to us from of the poup of the barque; but before they could reach it, they were devoured by three great Lizards, nothing of the bodies of all these three ap∣pearing to us, but only the bloud, wherewith the Sea was all died. Whilest this passed so, we the other eight that remained on the shore were so seized with fear and terror, as we were not our selves a long time after, wherewith those dogs which were in the barque were not awhit moved; but contra
l
 
l
pping their hands together in sign of joy, they said in a way of jeering, 
O how happy are these three, for that they have ended their daies without pain!
 Then whenas they saw that we were half sunk up into the Ouze, without so much strength as to get our selves out of it, five of them leaped ashore, and tying us by the middle, drew us into their barque, with a thousand injuries and affronts. After this setting sail they carried us to a village called 
Che
bom,
 which was some do∣zen leagues from thence, where they sold all eight of us, namely six 
Portugals,
 one 
Chi∣nese
 boy, and a 
Caphar,
 for the sum of thirteen 
Pardains,
 which are in value three hun∣dred realls of our money. He that bought us was a Pagan Merchant of the Isle of 
Zel
∣bres,
 in whose power we continued five or six and twenty daies, and without lying, we had no lack with him, either of cloaths or meat. The same Merchant sold us afterwards for twelve Pistolls to the King of 
Calapa,
 who used so great a magnificence towards us, as he sent us freely to the Port of 
Zunda,
 where there were three 
Portugal
 Vessells, whereof 
Ieronimo Gomez Sarmento
 was Generall, who gave us a very good reception; and furnished us abundantly with all that was necessary for us, untill such time as he put to Sea from the Port, to sail to 
China.






CHAP. XLVII. My passing from 
Zunda
 to 
Siam,
 where in the company of the 
Portugals
 I went to the War of 
Chiammay
; and that which the King of 
Siam
 did, untill he returned into his Kingdome, where his Queen poysoned him.


AFter we had been very neer a moneth in this Port of 
Zunda,
 where a good number of 
Portugals
 were assembled together,
 so soon as the season to go to 
China
 was come, the three Vessells set sail for 
Chincheo,
 no more 
Portugals
 remaining ashore, but only two, who went to 
Siam
 in a Junck of 
Patana
 with their Merchandise. I bethought me then to lay hold on this occasion, and put my self into their company, because they offered to bear my charges in this voyage, yea and to lend me some money for to try fortune once more, and see whether by the force of importuning her, she would not use me b
tter then formerly she had done. Being departed then from this place, in six and twenty daies we arrived at the City of 
Odiaa,
 the Capitall of this Empire of 
Sarnau,
 which they of this country do ordinarily call 
Siam,
 where we were wonder∣fully


well received and intreated by the 
Portugals,
 which we found there. Now having been a moneth and better in this City, attending the season for the voyage to 
China,
 that so I might passe to 
Iapon
 in the company of six or seven 
Portugals,
 who had im∣barqued themselves for that purpose, I made account to imploy in commodities some hundred duckats, which those two, with whom I came from 
Zunda,
 had lent me. In the mean time very certain news came to the King of 
Siam,
 who was at that time with all his Court at the said City of 
Odiaa,
 that the King of 
Chiammay,
 allied with the 
Timo∣couhos, Laaos,
 and 
Gueos,
 people which on the North East hold the most part of that country above 
Capimp
r
 and 
Passil
o,
 and are all Soveraignes, exceeding rich and migh∣ty in Estates, had laid siege to the Town of 
Quiteruan,
 with the death of above thirty thousand men, and of 
Oyaa Capimper,
 Governor and Lievtenant Generall of all that Frontire. The King remained so much appalled with this news, that without further temporising, he passed over the very same day to the other side of the river, and never standing to lodge in houses, he went and incamped under Tents in the open field, there∣by to draw others to do the like in imitation of him: Withall he caused Proclamation to be made over all the City, 
That all such as were neither old nor lame, and so could not be dispensed with for going to this war, should be ready to march within twelve daies at the utter∣most, upon pain of being burned alive, with perpetuall infamy for themselves, and their de∣scendants, and confiscation of their Estates to the Crown
: To the which he added many other such great and dreadfull penalties, as the only recitall of them struck terror, not into them of the country, but into the very strangers, whom the King would not ex∣empt from this war, of what Nation soever they vvere; for if they would not serve, they were very expresly enjoyned to depart out of his Kingdome within three daies. In the mean time so rigorous an Edict terrified every one in such sort, as they knew not what counsell to take, or what resolution to follow. As for us 
Portugals,
 in regard that more respect had alwayes been carried in that country to them, then to all other Nations, this King sent to desire them that they would accompany him in this voyage, wherein they should do him a pleasure, because he would trust them onely with the guard of his person, as judgi
g them more proper for it then any other that he could make choice of; and to oblige them the more thereunto, the message was accompanied with many fair promises, and very great hopes of pensions, graces, benefits, favours, and honors, but above all, with a permission which should be granted them to build Churches in his Kingdome, which so obliged us, that of an hundred and thirty 
Portu∣gals
 which we were, there were sixscore of us that agreed together to go to this war. The twelve daies limited being past, the King put himself into the field with an Army of four hundred thousand men, whereof seventy thousand were strangers of divers Nations: They imbarqued all in three hundred 
S
roos, Lauleas,
 and 
Iang
s,
 so that on the nineth day of this voyage the King arrived at a Frontire Town, named 
Suropis
,
 some twelve or thirteen leagues from 
Quitiruan,
 which the enemies had besieged. There he abode above seven daies to attend four thousand Elephants which came to him by Land. During that time, he was certified that the Town was greatly prest, both on the ri∣vers side, which the enemies had seized upon with two thousand Vessels, as also towards the Land, where there were so many men, as the number of them was not truly known, but as it was judged by conjecture, they might be some three hundred thousand, where∣of forty thousand were horse, but no Elephants at all. This news made the King h
sten the more, so that instantly he made a review of his forces, and found that he had five hundred thousand men, for since his coming forth many had joyned with him by the way, as also four thousand Elephants, and two hundred carts with field pieces. With this Army he parted from 
Suropisem,
 and drew towards 
Quitiruan,
 marching not above four or five leagues a day. At the end of the the third, then he arrived at a valley called 
Siputay,
 a league and an half from the place where the enemies lay. Then all these men of War, with the Elephants, being set in battell array by the three Masters of the Camp, whereof two were 
Turks
 by Nation, and the third a 
Portugal,
 named 
Domin∣g
s de S
ixas,
 they proceeded on in their way towards 
Quitiruan,
 where they arrived before the Sun appeared. Now whereas the enemies were already prepared, in regard they had been advertised by their Spies of the King of 
Sia
s
 forces, and of the design vvhich he had, they attended him resolutely in the plain field, relying much on their


forty thousand horse. As soon as they discovered him, they presently advanced, and with their vant-guard, which were the said forty thousand horse, they so charged the King of 
Siams
 rearward, composed of threescore thousand foot, as they defeated them in lesse then a quarter of an hour, with the losse of three Princes that were slaine up∣on the place. The King of 
Siam
 seeing his men thus routed, resolved not to follow the order which he had formerly appointed, but to fall on with the whole body of his Army, and the four thousand Elephants joyned together. With these forces he gave upon the battalion of the enemies with so much impetuosity, as at this first shock they were wholly discomfited, from whence ensued the death of an infinite company of men; for whereas their prin
s 
ll strength consisted in their horse, as soone as the Ele∣phants, sustained by the harque
uses, and the field pieces, fell upon them, they were de∣feated in lesse then an half hour, so that after the routing of these same, all the rest began instantly to retreat. In the meane time the King of 
Siam,
 follow∣ing the honor of the victory, pursued them to the rivers side, which the enemies perceiving, they formed a new Squadron of all those that remained of them, wherein there were above an hundred thousand men, as well sound as hurt, and so past all the same day there, joyned together in one entire body of an Army, the King not daring to fight with them, by reason he saw them fortified with two thousand ships, wherein there were great numbers of men. Neverthelesse as soon as it was dark night the ene∣mies began to march away with all speed all along by the river, wherewith the King was nothing displeased, because the most part of his souldiers being hurt, they were ne∣cessarily to be drest, as indeed that was presently executed, and the most part of the day and the night following imployed therein.


After the King of 
Siam
 had obtained so happy a victory,
 the first thing that he did was to provide with all diligence for the fortifications of the town, and whatsoever els he thought to be necessary for the security thereof. After that he commanded a generall muster to be made of all his men of war, that he might know how many he had lost in this battell; whereupon he found that some fifty thousand were wanting, all men of little reckoning, whom the rigor of the Kings Edict had compelled to serve in this war, ill provided, and without defensive arms: As for the enemies, it was known the next day that an hundred and thirty thousand of them had been slain. As soon as the hurt men were recovered, the King, having put into the principall places of this frontier such guards as seemed requisite to him, was counselled by his Lords to make war upon the Kingdom of 
Guibem,
 which was not above fifteen leagues from thence on the North side, to be revenged on the Queen of 
Guibem,
 for having given free passage tho∣rough her dominions to those of 
Chiammay,
 in regard whereof he attributed to her the losse of 
Oyaa Capimper,
 and the thirty thousand men that had been killed with him. The King approving of this advice, parted from this town with an army of foure hundred thousand men, and went and fell upon one of this Queens towns, called 
Fumbacor,
 which was easily taken, and all the inhabitants put to the sword, not one excepted. This done, he continued his voyage till he came to 
Guitor,
 the capitall town of the Kingdom of 
Guibem,
 where the Queen then was, who being a widdow governed the State under the title of Regent, during the minority of her son, that was about the age of nine years: At his arrivall he laid siege to the Town, and forasmuch a
 the Queen found not her self strong enough to resist the King of 
Siams
 power, she fell to accord with him to pay him an annuall tribute of five thousand 
Turmes
 of silver, which are threescore thousand Duckats of our money, whereof she paid him five years advance in hand. Be∣sides that, the young Prince her son did him homage as his vassall, and the King led him away with him to 
Siam.
 Hereupon he raised his siege from before the Town, and pas∣sed on towards the North-East to the Town of 
Taysiran,
 where he had news that the King of 
Chiammay
 was fallen off from the league aforesaid. In the mean time, where∣as he had been six daies march in the enemies territories, he sacked as many places as he met withall, not permitting the life of any male whatsoever to be saved. So proceed∣ing onward, he arrived at the Lake of 
Singipamor,
 which ordinarily is called 
Chiammay,
 where he stayed six and twenty daies, during the which he took twelve goodly places, invironed with ditches and bullworks after our fashion, all of brick and mortar, with∣out any stone or lime in them, because in the country it is not the custome to build so;


but they had no other Artillery then some Faulconets, and certain muskets of brasse. Now forasmuch as winter began to approach, and that it was very rainy weather, the King too feeling himself not very well, he retired back again to the Town of 
Quiti∣ruan,
 where he tarried three and twenty daies and better, in which space he made an end of fortifying it with walls, and many broad and deep ditches, so that having put this Town into an estate of being able to defend it self against any attempt, he im∣barqued his Army in the three thousand vessells which brought him thither, and so re∣turned towards 
Siam.
 Nine daies after he arrived at 
Odiaa,
 the chiefe City of his whole Kingdome, where for the most part he kept his Court. At his arrivall the inhabitants gave him a stately reception, wherein they bestowed a 
 of money upon divers in∣ventions, which were made against his entry. Now whereas during the six moneths of the Kings absence, the Queen his wife had committed adultery with a Purveyor of her house, named 
Vquu
che
iraa,
 and that at the Kings return she found her selfe gone four moneths with-child by him, the fear she was in left it should be discovered, made her, for the saving of her self from the danger that threatned her, resolve to poyson the King her husband, as indeed without further delaying her pernitious intention, she gave him in a messe of milk, which wrought that effect, as he died of it within five daies after; during which time he took order by his Testament for the most important affairs of his Kingdome, and discharged himself of the obligation wherein he stood in∣gaged to the strangers which had served him in this war of 
Chiammay.
 In this Testa∣ment, whenas he came to make mention of us 
Portugals,
 he would needs have this clause added thereunto, 
It is my intent that the sixscore
 Portugals, 
which have alwayes so faith∣fully watched upon the gu
rd 
f my person, shall 
eceive for a recompence of their good ser∣vices, half a years tribute which the Queen of
 Gu
bem 
gives me; and that in my custome houses, their Merchandise shall pay no custome fo
 the space of three years: Moreover my intent is, that their Priests may throughout all the Townes of my Kingdome publish the Law whereof they m
ke prof
ssion namely of a God made man for the salvation of mankind, as they have many times assured me.
 To these things he added many others such like, which well deserve to be reported here, though I passe them under silence, because I hope to make a more ample mention of them hereafter. Furthermore, he desired all the Gran∣dees of his Court which were present with him, that they would give him the consola∣tion before he died, to make his eldest Son be declared King, which was incontinently executed. For which effect, after that all the 
Oyaas, Conchalis,
 and 
Mont
os,
 which are Soveraign dignities over all the rest of the Kingdome, had taken the oath of Allege∣ance to this young Prince, they shewed him out at a window to all the people, who were in a great place below, and they set upon his head a rich Crovvn of gold in the form of a Miter, and put a svvord into his right hand, and a pair of balances into his left, a custome vvhich they alvvays observe in such a like ceremony. Then 
Oya Passilico,
 who was the highest in dignity in the Kingdome, falling on his knees before this new King, said unto him with tears in his eyes, and so loud that every one might hear him, 
Blessed child, that in so tender an age doest hold from the good influence of thy Star the happinesse to be chosen by heaven there above for Governour of this E
pire of
 Sornau; 
see how God puts it into thy hand by me who am thy vassall, to the end thou mayest take thy first oath, whereby thou doest protest to hold it with obedience from his divine will, as also to observe justice e∣qually to all the people, without having any regard to persons, whether it be in chastising or re∣compencing the great or small, the mighty or the humble, that so in time to come thou mayest not be reproached for not having accomplished that which thou hast sworn in this solemn acti∣on. For if it shall happen, that humane considerations shall make thee swarve from that which for thy justification thou art obliged to do before so just a Lord, thou shalt be greatly punish∣ed for it in the profound pit of the house of smoke, the burning lake of insupportable stench, where the wicked and damned howl continually with a sadnesse of obscure night in their en∣trails. And to the end thou mayest oblige thy selfe to the charge which thou takest upon thee▪ say now
 Xamxaimpom, 
which is as much as to say amongst us, Amen.
 The 
Passilico
 ha∣ving finished his speech, the young Prince said weeping 
Xamxaimpom,
 which so mighti∣ly moved all the Assembly of the people, as there was nothing heard for a good while together, but sighing and wailing. At length, after that this noyse was appeased, the 
Passilico
 proceeding on with his discourse in looking on the young King; 
This Sword,



said he unto him, 
which thou holdest naked in thy hand, is given thee as a Scepter of Sove∣raign power upon earth for the subduing of the rebellious, which is also to say that thou art truly obliged to be the support of the feeble and poor, to the end that they which grow lofty with their power, may not overthrow them with the puffe of their pride, which the Lord doth as much abhor, as he doth the mouth of him that blasphemeth against a little infant which hath never sinned: And that thou mayest in all things satisfie the fair ena
elling of the stars of heaven, which is the perfect, just, and good God, whose power is admirable over all things of the world, say once again
 Xamxaimpom; whereunto the Prince answered twice weeping, 
Maxinau, Maxinau,
 that is to say, 
I promise so to do.
 After this, the 
Passilico
 having instructed him in divers other such like things, the young Prince answered seven times 
Xamxaimpom,
 and so the ceremony of his Coronation was finished; onely there came first a 
Talagrepo,
 of a soveraign dignity above all the other Priests, named 
Quiay Ponuedea,
 who it was said was above an hundred years old: This same prostrating him∣self at the feet of the Prince, gave him an oath upon a golden bason full of rice, and that done, they put him into it, after they had created him thus anew, for time would not permit them to hold him there longer, in regard the King his Father was at the point of death, besides there was so universall a mourning amongst the people, that in every place there was nothing heard but lamentations and wailing.






CHAP. XLVIII. The lamentable death of the King of 
Siam,
 with certain illustrious and memorable things done by him during his life, 
 many other accidents that ar∣rived in this Kingdome.


WHenas the day and the night following had been spent in the manner that I have related,
 the next morning about eight of the clock the infortunate King yeelded up the Ghost in the presence of the most part of the Lords of his Kingdome, for the which all the people made so great demonstrations of mourning, as every where there was nothing but wailing and weeping. Now forasmuch as this Prince had lived in the reputation of being charitable to the poor, liberall in his benefits and re∣compences, pitifull and gentle toward every one, and above all incorrupt in doing of justice, and chastising the wicked; his subjects spake so amply thereof in their lamentati∣ons, as if all that they said of it was true, we are to believe, that there was never a bet∣ter King then he, either amongst these Pagans, or in all the countries of the world. Howbeit, whereas I cannot assure, that those things which they affirmed in their com∣plaints were true, because I did not see them, I will only insist upon those which past concerning him, in the time whilest I was trading in this Kingdome, whereof I will re∣port three or four amongst many others, which I have seen him do, from the year 1540. untill 1545. The first was, that in the year 1540. 
Pedro de Faria,
 being Governour of 
Malaca,
 King 
Ioan
 the 
Iohn,
 the third of glorious memory wrote him a letter, whereby above all things he recommended unto him his using all possible means for the redeeming of a certain 
Domingos de Seixas,
 who for the space of three and twenty years had been a slave in the Kingdome of 
Siam,
 adding that the doing thereof would be very impor∣tant for Gods service and his, in regard he was informed, that from him, rather then from any other he might be certified of the great things which were recounted to him of this Kingdome; and in case he could redeem this Christian, that he should send him incontinently to 
Don Garcia,
 the Vice-Roy of the 
Indiaes,
 to whom he had also writ∣ten, that he should imbarque him in the ship which was to part that year for to returne into 
Portugal. Pedro de Faria
 had no sooner received this letter, but seeing with how much care the King his Master recommended this affair unto him, he sent us his Ambassa∣dor to 
Siam
 one 
Francisco de Crasto,
 a noble and very rich man, to the end he should treat about the ransome of this 
Domingos de Seixas,
 and other sixteen 
Portugals,
 which were also slaves there as well as he. According to this Commission 
Francisco de Castro
 came to the City of 
Odiaa,
 whilest I was there, where he delivered his letter to the King of 
Siam,
 who gave him a very good reception, and after he had read it, and que∣stioned him concerning many new and curious things, he answered him presently, which was a thing he did not usually do to any Ambassador, his answer contained this much, 
As for
 Domingos de Seixas, 
whom the Captain of
 Malaca 
sends to me for, adverti∣sing


me that I shall do the King of
 Portugal 
a great pleasure in releasing him, I do most willingly grant to do it, as also to deliver all the rest that are with him.
 Whereupon 
Fran∣cisco de Crasto,
 having had this dispatch from the King, gave him most humble thanks for it, and prostrated himself three severall times before him, with his head bowed down to the ground, as the custome was to do unto this King, in regard he was more absolute then others. Whenas then the season permitted 
Francisco de Castro
 to return to 
Mala∣ca,
 the King sent to fetch 
Domingos de Seixas
 from the Town of 
Goutaleu,
 where he was at that time Generall of the Frontire, having under his charge thirty thousand foot, five thousand horse, and eighteen thousand duckats pension by the year: With him al∣so he caused to be brought the other sixteen 
Portugals,
 and consigned them all into the hands of 
Francisco de Castro,
 who gave him thanks again for the grace which he did him. A little after, whenas 
Domingos de Seixas
 and his companions went to take their leave of this King, he caused a thousand turmes of silver to be given to them, which are in value twelve thousand duckats of our money, and desired them to pardon him for giving them so little. Another time, which was in the year a thousand five hundred for∣ty and five, 
Simano de Melo,
 being Captain of the same fortresse of 
Malaca,
 one 
Luys de Montarroyo
 coming from 
China
 to go to 
Patana,
 it happened that the ship wherein he was, being beaten with a furious tempest, was cast away in the Port of 
Charir,
 some five leagues from 
Lugor,
 where all his good
 were seized upon by the 
Xabandar
 of the country, after that the Sea had cast him ashore, and withall, he himself was made a pri∣soner, together with all the rest which were saved, to the number of four and twenty 
Portugal,
 and fifty boys, which made in all seventy and four persons; the goods too that were saved out of this Shipwrack, amounted at least to fifteen thousand duckats. Now the reason which the 
Xabandar
 alledged for this same was, that by the antient custom of the Kingdome all these goods belonged unto him▪ whereof 
Luis de Montarrayo
 having advertised certain 
Portugals
 which were at that instant in the City, they concluded a∣mongst themselves to make an 
Odiaa,
 or present of some rich pieces, to the value of a thousand ducka
s, and ther
with to go unto the King, upon the day which was named 
of the white Elephant,
 that vvas ten daies after, and on the which, in regard it was a very solemn feast, this Prince was accustomed to do many graces to such as vvere suitors to him for them. So on the solemnity of this day, vvhich they call 
O
idaypileu,
 that is to say, 
the rejoycing of goodmen,
 all the 
Portugals,
 who were threescore and odd, placed themselves in a certain passage of one of the three principall streets, thorough which the King vvas to passe vvith a great deal of pomp and Majesty, and vvhenas they savv the King come by, they prostrated themselves all upon the ground, as the inhabitants of 
Siam
 use to do, and one of them, being deputed thereunto, recounted unto the King the vvhole businesse of 
Luis de Montarrayo
 and his companions, just as it had past, be∣seeching him he vvould do them so much grace, as to command the releasement of those poor prisoners, vvithout speaking of the goods vvhich the 
Xabandar
 had seized upon, because it seemed not reasonable unto them. But the King, who presently un∣derstood their demand, vvas so moved vvith the tears vvhich he savv some of them shed, as he caused the vvhite Elephant vvhereon he vvas mounted to stay, then casting his eye on the 
Portugals,
 and the Present that some of them held out in their hands, vvhich he knevv they intended to offer unto him; 
My friends,
 said he unto him, 
I take that for received which you would present me with▪ and do thank you for it; for in so solemn a day as this is I do not use to take any thing of any body, but to give, and oblige every one with benefits; wherefore I desire you for the love of your God, whose servant I am, and ever will be, to bestow this Present upon such of your company as are in most need of it; for you shall do far better in gaining thereby therecompence of this Almes, which you shall give for his sake then you could get by all that which I should confer on you in acknowledgement of this Present, it being most certain that before him I am but a poor worm of the earth. As for the prisoners which you demand of me, it is my pleasure to bestow them as an Alms upon you, that so in all liberty they may return unto
 Malaca; 
and further, I command that all the goods which they say have been 
aken from them, be restored to them again; for things which are done for Gods sake, ought to be accomplished with much more liberality then the need of the poor requires, especially when they crave it with tears in their eys.
 Hereupon the 
Portugals
 prostrated themselves all before him, and the next day the King by his L
tters Patents ordained,



That within the term of ten daies the prisoners should be brought to the City, together with all that which had been taken from them
; which incontinently was executed very exactly, for there were restored unto them all the goods which had been saved out of the ship, amounting, as I have already said, to fifteen thousand duckats, which the King freely gave them. Two or three moneths after, in the same year one thousand five hundred forty and five, it greatly importing this King of 
Siam
 to go in person and repulse the King of 
T
parahos,
 who on 
Passilica
s
 side had invaded his country, and sacked some of the weakest places, with an intent to besiege the fortresse of 
Xinan
 and 
Laut
,
 whereon depended the whole safety of this state, he resolved to go against him in per∣son. Wherefore he sent certain Colonells over all the Kingdome to levy men, with an expresse Commission to return within twenty daies with their men of war to the City of 
Odiaa,
 for it was his intention to set forth from thence about that time. Withall he enjoyned his Commanders upon pain of a rigorous chastisement not to dispense with a man that could fight, from this war, except it were such as were any way impotent▪ and above threescore years of age, whereupon each of these Colonells was assigned the Province wherein he should make his levies: It happened then that one 
Quiay Rau∣diuaa,
 a man of quality, and one that the King made oftentimes use of, had for his lot the frontier of 
Blan
haa,
 where the most part of the inhabitants being very rich, as well in money, as other wayes, gave themselves to the delights of the flesh, and spent the most part of their time in feasts, in sports, and other such like pleasures of this life, so that when they saw that 
Quiay Raudiuaa
 would compell them to go to this war, as he was enjoyned to do, they took it for too heavy a yoke, and too insupportable a bur∣then, and that did not well agree with the manner of life which they were wont to lead, and therefore the richest of the country assembled together, and resolved to get a dispensation from this voyage by the means of a great sum of money which they made up amongst themselves, and carried to the Colonel. Now whereas there is no place where money is not powerfull enough to overthrow all things, and from which a man can hardly defend himself, the Colonel 
Raudiuaa
 suffered himself to be overcome with such a masse of coyn as these men presented him with, and consented that they should not budge from their homes. In this sort he was constrained to take up in their steads most of the poor impotent, and old men of the country, without any regard had to the Kings expresse Injunction to the contrary. Being arrived with this goodly com∣pany of souldiers at the City of 
Odiaa,
 he was commanded to make a shew of them be∣fore the King, as all the Colonels did of theirs; as soon as this Prince cast his eye from a window where he was, upon men so wretched, old, and poorly clad, he caused one file of them to come before him; then having asked of them how old they were, and why they presented themselves before him in so bad an equipage; one amongst them speaking for the rest, recounted unto him the whole businesse as it had past, which put the King into such choler, that having presently commanded 
Quiay Raudiuaa
 to be brought before him, and reviled him publikely for his villany and basenesse, he caused him to be bound hand and foot, and having given order for the melting of five 
Turmes
 of silver, he made it to be powred into his mouth in his presence, whereof he died in∣stantly. Whereupon beholding him lie dead before him; 
If it be so,
 said he unto him, 
that there needed but five Turmes of silver to kill thee, how could'st thou imagine that the threescore thousand duckats which thou tookest of the cowards of
 Banchaa 
for to dispense with them from the war, should not be capable of sending th
 into the other world? God forgive thee thy avarice, and 
e the little punishment I have inflicted on thee for the same.
 After this, he sent presently to search his house, where the five thousand 
Turmes
 he had taken were found, which were immediately brought to the King, who caused this money to be distributed in his presence to those old and impotent poor wretches which 
Raudiuaa
 had brought thither, being in number above three thousand; that done he sent them home to their houses, willing them to pray unto God for him. As for those effeminate men, who to be exempted from going to the war had given the five thousand 
Turmes
 to the Colonell, he commanded them to be attired like women, and so banished them into an Island called 
Pulho Caton
; wherewith yet not contented, he confiscated all their estates, which he ordered should be bestowed on such as behaved themselves best in the war. And not long after, observing that one of the hundred and threescore 
Portugals,



which went along with him in this expedition, hung back in a certain attempt, which the rest of his fellows went upon, where they carried themselves so valiantly, and with such courage, as they regained the principall Fort which the enemy had taken in the Town of 
Lautor,
 he commanded him to return to 
Siam,
 seeing he was not like his o∣ther companions, and that as long as he continued there, he should neither offer to go out of the house where he was, nor take upon him the name of a 
Portugal,
 on paine of having his beard shaven off, and used like those of 
Banchaa,
 since he was as cowardly as they; whereas contrarily to all the rest of the 
Portugals
 he sent treble pay, and exempt∣ed them from all duties that were to be paid for their Merchandize, as also gave them power to build Churches in any part of his Kingdome for the adoring of the name of the God of the 
Portugals.
 By these and many other examples which I could produce here, it is manifest how great and commendable the inclinations of this Prince were, who notwithstanding that he was a Gentile, was of a wonderfull good nature, and ex∣ceedingly addicted to vertuous actions.


It is not to be believed with what infinite sorrow, both all the great Lords, and ge∣nerally all the subjects of this Kingdome bewailed the death of their good King; but at length an Assembly was made of all the Priests of this City, who as it was said, were twenty thousand in number, by whose direction the principall persons of the Kingdom concluded upon the funerall pomp, and ceremonies which were to be used thereabout, according to the custome of the country: whereupon a mighty great pile was forth∣with erected, 
ade of Sandal, Aloes Calembaa, and Benjamin, on the which the body of the deceased King being laid, fire was put to it, with a strange ceremony: during all the time that the body was a burning, the people did nothing but wail and lament be∣yond all expression▪ but in the end, it being consumed to ashes, they put them into a sil∣ver shrine, which they imbarqued in a 
Laulea
 very richly equipped, that was accompanied with forty 
Seroos
 full of 
Talagrepos,
 which are the highest dignity of their Gentile Priests, and a great number of other Vessells, wherein there was a world of people; af∣ter them followed an hundred small barques laden with divers figures of Idolls, under the formes of Adders, Lizards, Tygers, Lions, Toads, Serpents, Bats, Geese, Bucks, Dogs, Elephants, Cats, Vultures, Kites, Crows, and other such like creatures, whose figures were so well represented to the life, as they seemed to be living In another very great ship was the King of all these Idolls, which they called, 
The gluttonous Serpent of the profound pit of the house of smoke.
 This Idoll had the figure of a monstrous Adder, was as big about as an hogshead▪ and vvrithed into nine circles, so that whenas it was extended▪ it was above 
n hundred spans long, it had the neck standing upright, and out of the eyes, throat, and breast issued flames of artificiall fire, which rendred this monster so dreadfull and furious, as all that beheld it trembled for fear. Now upon a Theater three fathom high, and richly guilt, was a very beautiful little boy, about four or five years old, covered all over with pearls, and chains, and bracelets of precious stones, having wings, and a bush of hair of fine gold, much after the manner as we use to paint Angells. This child held a rich Curtelas in his hand, by which invention these Pagans would give to understand, 
That it was an Angell of heaven sent from God to imprison all those many de∣vills, to the end they should not steal away the Kings soul, before it should arrive at the place of rest, which was prepared for it there above in glory, for a recompence of the good works which he had done below in the world.
 In this order all these Vessells got to land at a Pa∣gode, called 
Quiay Pout
r,
 where after that the silver shrine, in which the Kings ashes were, was placed, and the little boy taken from thence, fire was put to all that infinite number of Idolls, just in the manner as they stood in the Barques; and this was accom∣panied with so horrible a din of cries, great Ordnance, Harquebuzes, Drums, Bells, Cor∣nets, and other different kinds of noyse, as it was impossible to hear it without trem∣bling. This ceremony lasted not above an hour, for whereas all these figures were made of combustible stuffe, and the Vessells filled with pitch and rozen, so dreadfull a flame ensued presently thereupon, as one might well have said that it was a very pourtraiture of hell; so that in an instant the Vessells, and all that vvere in them vvere seen to be re∣duced to nothing. Whenas this, and many other very lively inventions, which had cost a great deal of money, vvere finished, all the inhabitants, vvhich vvere come thronging thither, and vvhereof the number seemed to be infinite, retired back to their houses,


where they remained with their doors and windows shut, not one appearing in the streets for the space of ten daies, during which time all places were unfrequented, and none were seen stirring but some poor people, who in the night went up and down beg∣ging with strange lamentations. At the end of the ten daies wherein they had shut themselves up so, they opened their doors and windows, and their 
Pagodes,
 or Temples, were adorned with many Ensigns of rejoycing, together with a world of hangings, stan∣dards, and banners of silk. Hereupon there went through all the streets certain men on horseback, apparelled in vvhite Damask, who at the sound of very harmonious instru∣ments, cried aloud with tears in their eys, 
Ye sad inhabitants of this Kingdom
 of
 Siam, 
hearken, hearken to that which is made known to you from God, and with humble and pure hearts praise ye all his holy name, for the effects of his divine justice are great; withall lay∣ing aside your mourning, come forth of your a
odes wherein you are shut up, and sing the praises of the goodnesse of your God, since he hath been pleased to give you a new King, who fears him, and is a friend of the poor.
 This Proclamation being made, all the Assistants, with their faces prostrated on the ground, and their hands lifted up, as people that ren∣dred thanks to God, answered aloud weeping; 
We make the Angells of heaven our At∣torneys, to the end they may continually praise the Lord for us.
 After this, all the inhabi∣tants of the City coming out of their houses, and thinking of nothing but dancing and rejoycing, went to the Temple of 
Quiay Fanarel,
 that is to say, 
the God of the joyfull,
 where they offered sweet perfumes, and the poorest sort, fruits, pullen, and rice, for the entertainment of the Priests. The same day the nevv King shewed himself over all the City with a great deal of pomp and Majesty, in regard whereof the people made great demonstrations of joy and gladnesse. And forasmuch as the King was but nine years old, it was ordained by the four and twenty 
Bracàlo
s
 of the Government, that the Queen his mother should be the Protector or Regent of him, and that she should beare rule over all the Officers of the Crown. Things past thus for the space of four moneths and an half, during the which there was no manner of disorder, but all was peaceable in the Kingdome; howbeit at the end of that time, the Queen coming to be delivered of a Son which she had had by her Purveyor, being displeased with the bad report that went of her, she resolved with her self to satisfie her desire, which was to marry with the Father of this new Son, for that she was desperately in love with him: And further, she wickedly enterprised to make away the new King, her lawfull child, to the end that by this means the Crown might passe to the bastard by right of inheritance. Now to execute this horrible design of hers, she made shew that the excesse of her affection to the young King her Son, kept her always in fear, left some attempt should be made up∣on his life; so that one day having caused all the Councell of the State to be assembled, the represented unto them, that having but this only pearl enchaced in her heart, she de∣sired to keep it from being plucked from thence by some disaster; for which effect she thought it requisite, as well to secure her from her apprehensions, as to prevent the great mischiefs which carelessenesse is wont to bring in such like cases, that there should be a guard set about the Palace, and the person of the King. This affair was immediately de∣bated in the Councell, and accorded to the Queen, in regard the matter seemed good of it self. The Queen seeing then that her design had succeeded so well, took instantly for the guard of the Palace, and the person of her Son, such as she judged were proper for the executing of her damnable enterprise, and in whom she most confided. She or∣dained a guard then of two thousand foot, and five hundred horse, besides the ordinary guard of her house, which were six hundred 
Cauehins
 and 
Lequios,
 and thereof she made Captain one called 
Tileubacus,
 the cozen of the same Purveyor, by whom she had had a child, to the end that by this mans favour she might dispose of things as she pleased, and the more easily bring to passe her pernicious design. Whereupon relying on the great forces which she had already on her party, she began to revenge her self upon some of the great ones of the Kingdome, because she knew they despised her, and held her not in that esteem she desired, The two first whom she caused to be laid hands on were two Deputies of the Government, making use of this pretext, that they held secret in∣telligence with the King of 
Chiamway,
 and were to give him an entry into the King∣dome thorough their lands, so that under colour of justice she caused them to be both executed, and confiscated their estates, whereof she gave the one to her Favorite, and


the other to a brother-in-law of his, who (it was said) had been a Smith: But in regard this execution had been done precipitously, and without any proof, the greatest part of the Lords of the Kingdom murmured against the Queen for it, representing unto her the merit of them whom she had put to death, the services they had rendred to the Crown, the qualitie of the persons, and the nobility and antiquity of their extractions, as being of the bloud royall, and lineally descended from the Kings of 
Siam,
 howbeit she made no reckoning thereof, but contrarily a little after making show as if she had not been well, she in a full Councill renounced her regency, and conferred it on 
Vquumcheuiraa,
 her Favorite, to the end that by this means bearing rule over all others, he might dispose of the affairs of the kingdom at his pleasure, and give the most important charges there∣of to such as would be of his party, which he thought to be the most assured way for him to usurp this Crown, and make himself absolute Lord of the Empire of 
S
rna
,
 where∣of the revenue was twelve millions of gold, besides other comings in, which a∣mounted to as much more. With all these inventions this Queen used so great diligence for the contenting of the desire which she had to raise her Favorite to the Royalty, to marry her self to him, and to make the illegitimate son, which she had bad by him, suc∣cessor of the Crown, as within the space of eight moneths, fortune favouring her de∣signes, and hoping more fully to execute her wicked plot, shee caused most of the great men of the kingdom to be put to death, and confiscated all their lands, goods and trea∣sures, which she distributed amongst such of her creatures as she daily drew to her par∣ty. Now forasmuch as the young King her son served for the principall obstacle to her intentions, this young Prince could not escape her abominable fury, for she her self poy∣soned him even as she had poysoned the King his father. That done, she married with 
Vquumcheniraa,
 who had been one of the Purveyors of her house, and caused him to be crowned King in the city of 
Odiaa,
 the eleventh of November in the yeare one thousand five hundred forty five. But whereas Heaven never leaves wicked actions unpunished, the year after, one thousand five hundred forty and six, and on the fifteenth day of Ja∣nuary, they were both of them slain by 
Oyaa Passilico,
 and the King of 
Cambaya,
 at a cer∣tain banquet which these Princes made in a Temple, that was called 
Quiay Figrau,
 that is to say, 
the god of the atoms of the Sun,
 whose solemnity was that day celebrated: So that, as well by the death of these two persons, as of all the rest of their party, whom these Princes also killed with them, all things became very peaceable, without any fur∣ther prejudice to the people of the kingdom; onely it is true, that it was despoyled of the most part of the Nobility, which formerly it had, by the wicked inventions, and per∣nicious practices, whereof I have spoken before.






CHAP. LXIX. The King of 
Bramaa's
 enterprize upon the Kingdom of 
Siam
; and that which past untill hi
 arrivall at the city of 
Odiaa,
 with his besieging of it, and all that ensued thereupon.


THe Empire of 
Siam
 remaining without a lawfull successor, those two great Lords of the Kingdom, namely, 
Oyaa Passili
,
 and the King of 
Cambaia,
 together with four or five more of the trustiest that were left, and which had been confederate with them, thought fit to chuse for King, a certain religious man, named 
Preti
m,
 in regard he was the naturall brother of the deceased Prince, husband to that wicked Queen of whom I have spoken; whereupon this religious man, who was 
Talagrepo
 of a 
Pagod
,
 called 
Quiay Mitrau,
 from whence he had not budg'd for the space of thirty years, was the day after drawn forth of it by 
Oyaa Passilico,
 who brought him on the seventeenth day of January into the city of 
Odiaa,
 where on the nineteenth he was crowned King with a new kind of ceremony, and a world of magnificence, which (to avoid prolixity) I will not make mention of here, having formerly treated of such like things. Withall passing by all that further arrived in this Kingdom of 
Siam,
 I will content my self with reporting such things as I imagine will be most agreeable to the curious. It happened then that the King of 
Bramaa,
 who at that time reigned tyrannically in 
Pegu,
 being ad∣vertised of the deplorable estate whereinto the Empire of 
S
rnau
 was reduced; and of the death of the greatest Lords of the Country, as also that the new King of this Monar∣chy was a religious man, who had no knowledge either of arms or war, and withall of


a cowardly disposition, a tyrant, and ill beloved of his subjects, he fell to consult there∣upon with his Lords in the town of 
Anapleu,
 where at that time he kept his Court. Desiring their advice then upon so important an enterprize, they all of them told him, that by no means he should desist from it, in regard this Kingdome was one of the best of the world, as well in riches, as in abundance of all things; thereunto they added, that the season which was then so favourable for him, 
romised it to him at so good a rate, as it was likely it would not cost him above the revenue of one only year, what expence soever he should make of his treasure; besides, if he chanced to get it, he should remain Monarch of all the Emperors of the world, and therewithall he should be honored with the soveraign title of 
Lord of the whi
e Elephant,
 by which means the seventeene Kings of 
Capimper,
 who made profession of his Law, must of necessity render him obe∣dience. They told him moreover, that having made so great a conquest, he might, tho∣rough the same territories, and with the succour of the Princes his Allies, passe into 
Chi∣na,
 where was that great City of 
Pequin,
 the incomparable pearl of all the world, and against which the great 
Cham
 of 
Tartaria,
 the 
Siamon,
 and the 
Calaminham,
 had brought such prodigious Armies into the field. The King of 
Bramaa,
 having heard all these reasons, and many others which his great Lords alledged unto him, wherein his in∣terest was especially concerned, which alwayes works powerfully on every man, was perswaded by them, and resolved to undertake this enterprise. For this effect he went directly to 
Martabano,
 where in lesse then two moneths and an half, he raised an Army of eight hundred thousand men, wherein there were an hundred thousand strangers, and amongst them a thousand 
Portugals,
 which were commanded by 
Diego Suar
z d' Albergaria,
 called 
Galego
 by way of nick name. This 
Diego Suarez
 departed out of the Kingdome of 
Portugal
 in the year one thousand five hundred thirty and eight, and went into the 
Indiaes
 with the Fleet of the Vice-Roy, 
Don Garcia de Noronha,
 in a Junck, whereof 
Ioano de Sepulveda
 of the town of 
Euora
 was Captain; but in the time of which I speak, namely in the yeare one thousand five hundred forty and eight, he had of this King of 
Bramaa
 two hundred thousand duckats a yeare, with the title of his brother, and Governor of the Kingdome of 
Pegu.
 The King departed then from the Town of 
Mar
abano
 the Sunday after Easter, being the seventh of 
April
 1548. His Army, as I have already said, was eight hundred thousand men, whereof only forty thousand were horse, and all the rest foor, threescore thousand of them being Harque∣buziers; there were moreover five thousand warlike Elephants; with whom they fight in those countries, and also a world of baggage, together with a thousand pieces of Ca∣non, which were drawn by a thousand couple of Buffles and Rhinocerots; withall, there was a like number of yoke of oxen for the carriage of the victualls. Having taken the field then with these forces, he caused his Army to march still on, untill at length he en∣tred into the Territories of the King of 
Siam,
 where after five days he came to a for∣tresse called 
Tapurau,
 containing some two thousand fires, commanded by a certain 
Mo∣gor,
 a valiant man, and well verst in matters of war. The King of 
Bramaa
 having inve∣sted it, gave three assaults to it in the open day, and laboured to s
ale it with a world of ladders which he had caused to be brought thither for that purpose; but not being able to carry it, in regard of the great resistance of them within, he retreated for that time. But having by the counsell of 
Diego Suarez,
 who was Generall of the Camp, and by whom he was wholly governed, caused forty great pieces of Ordnance, whereof the most of them shot bullets of iron, to be planted against it, he fell to battering it with so much fury, as having made a breach in the wall twelve fathom wide, he assaulted it with ten thousand strangers, 
Turks, Abyssin
, Moors, Malauares, Ac
ems, Iaaos,
 and 
Malayes
; whereupon ensued so terrible a conflict between the one and the other, that in lesse then half an hour, the besieged, vvhich vvere six thousand 
Siamites,
 were all cut in pieces, for not so much as one of them would render himself. As for the King of 
Bramaa,
 he lost above three thousand of his men, vvhereat he vvas inraged, as to be re∣venged for this losse he caused all the women to be put to the sword, vvhich no doubt vvas a strange kind of cruelty: After this execution, he drevv directly tovvards the Tovvn of 
Saco
ay,
 vvhich vvas nine leagues beyond, desiring to make himself master of that, as vvell as of the other. He arrived in the sight of this Tovvn one Saturday about Sun-set, and incamped all along the river of 
Lebrau,
 vvhich is one of the three that issue


out of the Lake of 
Chiammay,
 vvhereof I have formerly made mention, vvith a design to march thorough it directly to 
Odiaa,
 the Capitall City of the Empire of 
Sornau
; for he had already been advertised that the King vvas there in person, and that he vvas ma∣king preparation to fight vvith him in the field; he no sooner received this advice, but his Lords counselled him to make no tarrying in any place, as vvell that he might not lose time, as that he might keep himself from insensibly consuming his forces, in lying before places vvhich he pretended to take, that vvere so vvell fortified, as they vvould cost him dear if he amused himself about them, so that at his arrivall at 
Odiaa
 he vvould find the most part of his men vvanting, and his victualls quite spent. The King having approved of this advice, caused his Army to march avvay the next day thorough vvoods that vvere cut dovvn by threescore thousand Pioners, vvhom he had sent before to plane the passages and vvays; vvhich vvith much ado they performed. When he vvas come to a place, called 
Tila
,
 vvhich is besides 
Iuncala
,
 on the South-East Coast, neere to the Kingdome of 
Quedea,
 an hundred and forty leagues from 
Malaca,
 he took guides that were very well acquainted with the way, by whose means in nine daies jour∣ney he arrived in the sight of 
Odiaa,
 where he pitched his Camp, which he invironed with trenches and strong Pallisadoes.


During the first five daies that the King of 
Bramaa
 had been before the City of 
Odiaa,
 he had bestowed labour and pains enough, as well in making of trenches and Pallisa∣does, as in providing all things necessary for this siege, in all which time the besieged ne∣ver offered to stir, whereof 
Diego Suarez,
 the Marshall of the Camp being aware, as also of the little reckoning which the 
Siamites
 made of so great a power as was there assembled, and not knowing whereunto he should attribute the cause of it, he resolved to execute the design for which he came, to which effect, of the most part of the men which he had under his command, he made two separated Squadrons, in each of which there were six battalions of six thousand a piece. After this manner he marched in bat∣tell array, at the sound of many instruments, towards the two points which the City made on the South-side, because the entrance there seemed more facile to him then any other where. So upon the nineteenth day of 
Iune,
 in the year one thousand five hundred forty and eight, an hour before day, all these men of war, having set up above a thou∣sand ladders against the walls, endeavoured to mount up on them; but the besieged op∣posed them so valiantly, that in lesse then half an hour there remained dead on the place above ten thousand on either part. In the mean time the King, who incouraged his soul∣diers, seeing the ill successe of this fight, commanded these to retreat, and then made the wall to be assaulted afresh, making use for that effect of five thousand Elephants of war which he had brought thither, and divided into twenty troops, of two hundred and fifty apiece, upon whom there were twenty thousand 
Moe
s
 and 
Chale
s,
 choice men, and that had double pay. The wall then was assaulted by these forces with so terrible an impetuosity, as I want words to expresse it. For whereas all the Elephants carried wooden Castles on their backs, from whence they shot with muskets, brasse cul∣verins, and a great number of harquzes a crock, each of them ten or twelve spans long, these guns made such an havock of the besieged, that in lesse then a quarter of an hour the most of them were beaten down; the Elephants withall setting their trunks to the target fences, which served as battlements, and wherewith they within defended them∣selves, tore them down in such sort, as not one of them remained entire, so that by this means the wall was abandoned of all defence, no man daring to shew himself above. In this sort was the entry into the City very easie to the Assailants, who being invited by so good successe to make their profit of so favourable an occasion, set up their ladders a∣gain which they had quitted, and mounting up by them to the top of the wall, with a world of cries and acclamations, they planted thereon in sign of victory a number of Banners and Ensigns. Now because the 
Turks
 desired to have therein a better share then the rest, they besought the King to do them so much favour as to give them the vant∣guard, which the King easily granted them, and that by the counsell of 
Diego Suarez,
 who desired nothing more then to see their number lessened, always gave them the most dangerous imployments. They in the mean time extraordinarily contented, and proud to see themselves preferred before so many other Nations as were in the Camp, resolved to come off with honor from this service which they had undertaken. For which pur∣pose


having formed a Squadron of twelve hundred men, wherein some 
Abyssius
 and 
Ianizaries
 were comprised, they mounted with great cries by those ladders up to the top of the wall, which as I have declared, was at that time in the power of the King of 
Bramaaes
 people. These 
Turks
 then, whither more 
ash, or more infortunate then the rest, sliding down by a pane of the wall, descended thorough a bullwork into a place which was below, with an intent to open a gate, and give an entrance unto the King, to the end they might rightly boast, that they all alone had delivered to him the Capi∣tall City of the Kingdome of 
Siam,
 and so might gain the recompence vvhich they might well expect for so brave an action; for the King had before promised to give un∣to whomsoever should deliver up the City unto him, a thousand bisses of gold, which in value are five hundred thousand duckats of our money. These 
Turks
 being gotten down, as I have said, laboured to break open a gate with two rammes which they had brought with them for that purpose; but as they were occupied about it, upon a confidence that they alone should gain the thousand bisses of gold, which the King had promised to whomsoever should open him the gates, they saw themselves suddainly charged by three thousand 
Ia
s,
 all reso
ute souldiers, who fell upon them with such fury, as little more then a quarter of an hour, there was not so much as one 
Turk
 left alive in the place, wherewith not contented, they mounted up immediately to the top of the wall with a wonderfull courage, and so flesht as they were, and covered over with the bloud of the 
Turks,
 whom they had newly cut in pieces, they set upon the 
Bramaaes
 men which they found there, and fought with them so valiantly, that they durst not make head a∣gainst them, so that most of them were there slain, and the rest tumbled down over the vvall. The King of 
Bramaa
 redoubling his courage more then before, would not for all that give over this assault, but contrarily resolved to undertake it anew, so as imagi∣ning that those Elephants alone would be able to give him an entry into the City, he caused them once again to approach unto the wall. At the noyse hereof, 
Oyaa Pas∣silico,
 Captain Generall of the City, ran in all hast to this part of the wall, accompani∣ed with fifteen thousand men, whereof the most part were 
Luzons, B
rn
s,
 and 
Cham∣paa
s,
 with some 
Menancabos
 among, and caused the gate to be presently opened, 
ho∣rough which the 
Bramaa
 pretended to enter, and then sent him word, that whereas he was given to understand how his Highnesse had promised to give a thousand biss
s of gold to whomsoever should open him the gates, 
hat so he might thereby enter into the City, he had now performed it, so that h
 might enter if he would, provided that like a great King as he was, he would ma
 good his word, and send him the thousand bisses of gold which he stayed there to rec
ve. The King of 
Bramaa
 having received this jeer, would not vouchsafe to return an answer, thereby to shew his contempt of 
Oya
 Passilico;
 but instantly he commanded the City to be assaulted, which was presently ex∣ecuted with a great deal of fury; for the fight became so terrible, as it was a dreadfull thing to behold, the rather for that the violence of it lasted above three whole hours, during the which time the gate vvas tvvice forced open, and twice the Assailants got an entrance into the City, which the King of 
Siam
 no sooner perceived, and that all vvas in danger to be lost, but he ran speedily to oppose them vvith his follovvers, vvhich vvere about thirty thousand in number, and the best souldiers that were in all the City; whereupon the conflict grew much better then before, and continued half an hour and better, during the which I do not know what past, nor can say any other thing, save that we savv streams of bloud running every vvhere, and the ayr all of a light fire; there vvas also on either part such a tumult and noyse, as one would have said the earth had been tottering; for it was a most dreadfull thing to hear the discord and jarring of those barbarous instruments, as bells, drums, and trumpets, intermingled with the noyse of the great Ordnance and smaller shot, and the dreadfull yelling of six thousand Ele∣phants, whence ensued so great a terror, that it took from them that heard it both cou∣rage and sense; withall, that place at the City gate, whereof the 
Bramaa
 had been Ma∣ster, was all covered over with bodies drowned in bloud, a spectacle so horrible, that the very sight of it put us almost besides our selves. 
Diego Suarez
 then, seeing their for∣ces q
ite repulsed out of the City, the most part of the Elephants hurt, and the rest so scared with the noyse of the great Ordnance, as it was impossible to make them return


unto the vvall; as also that the best men of those that had fought at the gate were slain, and that the Sun was almost down, came to the King, and counselled him to sound a re∣treat, whereunto the King yeelded, though much against his will, because he ob∣served, that both he and the most part of the 
Portugals
 were wounded, but it was with a purpose to returne to the same enterprise againe the next morn∣ing.


The King being retired to his quarter, found himself wounded with the shot of an arrow which he received in that daies conflict, and which he felt not untill then, by rea∣son of the heat of the fight. This accident hindered the executing of the resolution he had taken to give another assault to the City the next day; for he was constrained to keep his bed twelve daies together, but at seventeen days end, when he was fully cured of his hurt, he undertook again the prosecution of his design, and to effect that which he had so resolved upon, namely, not to raise his siege from before the City untill he had made himself Master of it, though it cost him both his life and his whole State. He gave then a second assault unto the City, which proved like unto the former, for he lost a vvorld of men in it, so that he was forced to retreat; but his wilfullnesse was such, as nothing daunted with the great slaughter of his men, he gave five assaults more to it in the open day, wherein he made use of many warlike stratagems, which a 
Greek
 Ingineer daily invented for him; but whatsoever he could do, he was always fain to retire with losse, whereat he was greatly troubled. In the mean time, whereas the siege of this City had already indured four moneths and an half, he commanded a generall muster of his souldiers to be made, and he found that an hundred and forty thousand of them were wanting. Whereupon seeing to what estate he was reduced, for the putting of an end to the business, he resolved to assault the City again with another nevv invention, and this assault was the eighth he had already given to it, during the siege, which he enter∣prised by the Councell of war, and that under the favour of the night; for they alledg∣ed unto him, that darknesse would make the assault less dangerous, and the scaling of the walls more facile. This resolution taken, he instantly commanded all preparations necessary for this design to be made, so that in seventeen days they built up six and twen∣ty Castles of strong pieces of timber, whereof each one was set upon six and twenty wheels of iron, which facilitated the motion of so great a frame. Every Castle was fif∣ty foot broad, threescore and five long, and five and twenty high, and all of them were reinforced with double beams, covered over with sheets of lead: Moreover each of them was full of wood, and had fastned to them before great iron chains, and that were very long in regard of the fire. Things thus prepared, one Friday about midnight, being very dark and rainy, the King of 
Bramaa
 caused three times one after another all the great Ordnance of the Camp to be discharged, which, as I remember, I have already said, consisted of an hundred and threescore great pieces, vvhereof the most part shot i∣ron bullets, besides a many of Falconets, bases, and muskets, to the number of fifteen hundred, so that from all these guns shot off together three times one after another, proceeded so horrible and dreadfull a noyse, as I cannot think that any vvhere but in hell the like could be; for on whatsoever the imagination can be fixt, it cannot meet with any thing that may be rightly compared thereunto. At this time, it was not only the great pieces of Ordnance, whereof I have spoken before, and the small ones too, which were shot off, but the like was done by all the guns which were both within the City, and without in the Camp, of what bigness soever they vvere, being at least an hundred thousand in all, for whereas there were, as I have already said, threescore thousand Harquebuziers in the King of 
Bramaaes
 Army, there vvere thirty thousand also in the City, besides seven or eight thousand Falconets and Bases; so that to hear all these shot off continually for the space of three hours together, and intermingled with thunder, lightning, and the tempest of the night, was, to say the truth, a thing which was never seen, read of, or imagined, and such indeed as put every one almost besides himself; for some fell flat on the ground, some crept behind walls, and others got into walls. During the greatest violence of this horrible and furious tempest, they set fire on the six and twenty Castles which they had before brought close to the walls, so that by the force of the wind, which vvas at that time very great, and


by the means of barrels of pitch that had been put into them, they fel a flaming in such a strange manner, as there was anew to be seen so dreadfull a picture of hell (for it is the only name that can be given it, because there is nothing upon earth that may rightly he resembled unto it) that if even those which were without trembled at it, I leave you to think vvith hovv much more reason vvere they to fear it vvhom necessity constrained to abide the violence of it. Hereupon began a most bloudy conflict on either part, they without falling to scale the walls, and the besieged, who took no less care for all things then they, valiantly to defend themselves, so that no advantage was to be found on ei∣ther side, but rather both of them were in a condition to be utterly destroyed; for whereas the one and other reinforced themselves continually with fresh supplies, and that the King of 
Bramaaes
 obstinacy vvas such, as he went himself in person amongst his souldiers, incouraging them with his speeches, and the great promises that he made them, the fight proceeded so far, and increased so mightily, as being unable to deliver the least part of that which passed therein, 
 leave it to the understanding of every one to imagine what it might be. Four hours after midnight, the six and tvventy Castles be∣ing quite burned to the ground, with so terrible a blaze, as no man durst come within a stones cast of it, the King of 
Bramaa
 caused a retreat to be sounded, at the request of the Captains of the strangers, for there vvere so many hurt men amongst them, as all the day, and most part of the night following was imployed in dressing of them.






CHAP. LXX. The King of 
Bramaaes
 raising his siege from before the City of 
Odia
; with a description of the Kingdome of 
Siam
; and the fertility thereof.


THe King of 
Bramaa,
 seeing that neither the great Ordnance vvherewith he had battered the City, nor the assaults vvhich he had given unto it, nor his inventions of Castles, accompanied vvith so many artifices of fire, whereon he had so much relied, had served him to any purpose for the execution of that which he had so mightily desi∣red, and being resolved not to desist from the enterprise vvhich he had begun, he called a Councell of War, vvherein all the Princes, Dukes, Lords, and Commanders that vvere in the Army were present. Having then propounded his desire and intention unto them, he required them to give him their advice thereupon; immediately the affair be∣ing put into deliberation, and thoroughly debated on either part, they concluded in 
he end, that the King vvas by no means to raise this siege, in regard this enterprise was the most glorious, and most profi
able of all that ever might be offered unto him; they represented moreover unto him the vvorld of treasure that he had imployed therein, and that if he continued battering the City without desisting from his assaults, at length the enemies would be spent, because it vvas apparent (as they vvere informed) that they vvere no longer able to vvithstand the least attempt that should be made against them. The King being exceedingly contented, for that their opinions proved to be conforma∣ble to his desire, testified the great satisfaction that he received thereby, so that he gave them many recompences in money, and vovved to them, that if they could take the Ci∣ty, he vvould confer upon them the greatest commands of the Kingdome, vvith very honorable titles and revenues. This resolution being taken, there was no further que∣stion but of considering in vvhat manner the businesse should be carried; whereupon by the counsell of 
Diego Suarez,
 and of the Ingineer, it was concluded, that vvith bavin
 and green turfe a kind of Platform should be erected higher then the vvalls, and that there on should be mounted good store of great Ordnance, wherewith the princi∣pall fortifications of the City should be battered, since that in them alone consisted all the enemies defence. Order then vvas presently given for all that vvas judged neces∣sary thereunto, and the threescore thousand Pioners vvhich vvere in the Camp vvere imployed about it, vvho in tvvelve days brought the Fort or Platform into the estate vvhich the King desired. There vvere already planted on it then forty pieces of Canon for the battering of the City the day ensuing, vvhenas a Post arrived vvith Letters to the King, vvhereby he vvas advertised, 
That the
 Zemindoo 
being risen up in the King∣dome


of
 Pegu, 
had cut fifteen thousand
 Bramaaes 
there in pieces, and had withall seiz
d on the principall places of the country.
 At these news the King was so troubled, that with∣out further delay he raised the siege, and imbarqued himself on a river, called 
Paca
au,
 where he stayed but that night, and the day following, which he imployed in retiring his great Ordnance and ammunition. Then having set fire on all the Pallisadoes, and lodgings of the Camp, he parted away one Tuesday, the fifteenth day of 
October,
 in the year a thousand five hundred forty and eight, for to go to the Town of 
Mar
a∣bano.
 Having used all possible speed in his voyage, at seventeen days end he came thither, and there was amply informed by the 
Chalagonim,
 his Captain of all the 
Zemindoos
 proceedings, in making himself King, and seizing on his treasure; by kil∣ling fifteen thousand 
Bramaaes,
 and that in divers places he had lodged five hundred thousand men, with an intention to stop his passage into the Kingdome. This news ve∣ry much perplexed the King of 
Bramaa,
 so that he fell to thinking with himself what course he should take for the remedying of so great a mischief as he was threatned with: In the end he resolved to tarry a while at 
Martabano,
 to attend some of his forces that were still behind, and then to go and fight a battell with his enemy; but it was his ill luck, that in the space of fourteen days only which he abode there, of four hundred thousand men which he had, fifty thousand quitted him: For whereas they were all 
Peg
es,
 and consequently desirous to shake off the 
Bramaaes
 yoke, they thought it best to side with the new King the 
Zemindoo,
 who was a 
Pegu
 as well as they; and they were the rather induced thereunto, by understanding, that this Prince was of an eminent condition, liberall, and so affable to every one, that he thereby won most men to be of his party. In the mean time the King of 
Bramaa,
 fear∣ing lest the defection of his souldiers should daily more and more increase, was advi∣sed by his Councell to stay no longer there, in regard the longer he should tarry, the more his forces would diminish, for that a great part of his Army was 
Pegues,
 which were not likely to be very faithful unto him. This counsell was approved of by the King, who presently marched away towards 
Pegu,
 neer unto which he was no soon∣er arrived, but he was certified that the 
Zemindoo,
 being advertised of his coming, was attending ready to receive him. So these two Kings being in the view of one an∣other, incamped in a great 
laine, some two leagues from the City of 
Pegu,
 the 
Zemindoo
 with six hundred thousand men, and the 
Bramaa
 with three hundred and fifty thousand. The next day these two Armies being put into battell array, came to joyn together one Friday the sixteenth of 
November,
 the same year, a thousand five hundred forty and eight. It was about six of the clock in the morning when first they began their incounter, vvhich vvas performed vvith so much violence, as a generall de∣feat ensued thereupon, yet fought they with an invincible courage on either part; but the 
Zemindoo
 had the worse, for in lesse then three hours his whole Army was rout∣ed, with the slaughter of three hundred thousand of his men, so that in this extre∣mity he vvas forced to save himself only with six horse in a fortress, called 
Battelor,
 where he stayed but one hour, during the vvhich, he furnished himself with a little Ves∣sell, wherein he fled the night ensuing up the river to 
C
daa.
 Let us leave him now fly∣ing, untill we shall come to him again whenas time shall serve, and return to the King of 
Bramaa,
 who exceedingly contented vvith the victory vvhich he had gotten, march∣ed the next morning against the City of 
Pegu
; where as soon as he arrived, the inha∣bitants rendred themselves unto him, on condition to have their lives and goods sa∣ved. Whereupon he took order for the dressing of them that were hurt; as for those that he lost in this battell, they were found to be threescore thousand in number, a∣mongst the which were two hundred and fourscore 
Portugals,
 all the rest of them being grievously wounded.


Having already intreated of the successe which the King of 
Bramaas
 voyage had in the kingdom of 
Siam,
 and of the rebellion of the Kingdom of 
Pegu,
 me thinks it will not be amisse for me to speak here succinctly of the scituation, extent, abundance, riches, and fertility which I saw in this kingdom of 
Siam,
 and in this Empire of 
Sorna
,
 to shew that the conquest thereof would have been far more utile unto us, then all the estates which now we have in the 
India's,
 and that we might obtain it with a great deal lesse


charge. This kingdom, as may be seen in the Map, is seven hundred leagues in length, and a hundred and threescore in bredth; the most part of it consists in great plaines, where are a world of corn grounds, and rivers of fresh water, by reason whereof the Country is exceeding fertile, and abundantly stored with cattell and victualls. In the most eminent parts of it are thick Forests of 
Angelin
 wood, whereof thousands of ships might be made; there are also many mines of Silver, Iron, Steel, Lead, Tin, Saltpetre, and Brimstone; likewise great abundance of Silk, Aloes, Benjamin, Lacre, Indico, Cot∣ton wooll, Rubies, Saphires, Ivory and gold; There is moreover in the woods marvai∣lous store of Brasill and Ebony, wherewith an hundred Juncks are every year laden, to be transported to 
China, Hainan,
 the 
Lequios, Camboya
 and 
Camp
aa
; besides Wax, Honey, and Sugar, which divers places there do yeeld very plentifully. The Kings yearly revenue is ordinarily twelve millions of gold, over and above the presents which the great Lords make him, that comes to a great matter. In the jurisdiction of his territories there are six and twenty hundred populations, which they call 
Prodou,
 as cities and towns amongst us, besides villages and small hamlets, whereof I have no reckoning. The most part of those populations have no other fortifications or walls, then palisadoes of wood, so that it would be easie for any that should attaque them to make themselves masters thereof; the rather for that the inhabitants of those places are naturally effemi∣nate, and destitute of arms offensive and defensive. This coast of this kingdom joyns up∣on the two North and South Seas; on that of the 
Indiaes
 by 
Iunçalo
 and 
Tanauçarius,
 and on that of 
China
 by 
Monpolocata, Cuy, Lugor, Chintabu,
 and 
Berdio.
 The capitall City of all this Empire is 
Odiaa,
 whereof I have spoken heretofore; it is fortified with walls of brick and mortar, and contains, according to some, foure hundred thousand fires, whereof an hundred thousand are strangers of divers countries of the world: for whereas the country is very rich of it self, and of great traffick, there passes not a yeare whereunto from the Provinces and Islands of 
Iaoa, Bale, Madoura, Augenio, B
rneo,
 and 
Solor,
 there sailes at the least a thousand Iuncks, besides other smaller vessells where∣with all the rivers and all the harbors are full. The King naturally is no way given to ty∣ranny. The customs of all the Kingdome are charitably destinated for the maintenance of certain 
Pagodes,
 where the duties that are paid are very easie; for whereas the religi∣ous men are forbidden to trade with money, they take no more of Merchants then what they will give them out of almes. There are in this Country twelve Sects of Gentiles, as in the Kingdome of 
Pegu
; and the King for a soveraigne title causeth himself to be called 
Prechau Saliu,
 which in our tongue signifies, 
A holy member of God.
 He shewes not himself to the people save only twice in the year, but then with so much riches and majesty, as he hath power and greatnesse, and yet for all this that I say, he less not to acknowledge himself the vassall and tributarie to the King of 
China,
 to the end that by means thereof his subjects Juncks may be admitted into the port of 
Combay,
 where or∣dinarily they exercise their commerce. There is also in this Kingdome a great quantity of Pepper, Ginger, Cinamon, Camphire, Allume, Cassia, Tamarinds and Cardamon; so as one may truly affirm that, which I have often heard say in those parts, namely, that this Kingdom is one of the best countries in the world, and easier to be subdued then a∣ny other Province, how little soever, I could here report likewise many more particula∣rities of things which I have seen only in the city of 
Odiaa,
 but I am not minded to make mention of them, that I may not beget in them that shall read this the same grief which I have for the losse which we made of it through our sins, and the gain we might make in conquering this Kingdom.








CHAP. LXXI. A continuation of that which happened in the Kingdome of 
Pegu,
 as well during the life, as after the death of the King of 
Bramaa.


TO return now unto the history which heretofore I have left, you must know, that after the King of 
Bramaa
 had obtained that memorable victory neer to 
Pegu,
 as I have declared heretofore, by means whereof he remained peaceable possessor of the whole Kingdom, the first thing he imployed himself in was to punish the offendors, which had formerly rebelled; for which effect he cut off the heads of a great many of the Nobility, and Commanders, all whose estates were confiscated to the Crown, which (according to report) amounted unto ten millions of gold, besides plate and jewells, whereby that common Proverb, which was common in the mouths of all, was verified, namely, 
That one mans offence cost many men very deare.
 Whilest the King continued more and more in his cruelties, and injustice, which he executed against divers persons during the space of two moneths and a half, certain newes came to him, that the city of 
Martabano
 was revolted, with the death of two thousand 
Bramaas,
 and that the 
Cha∣logomin,
 Governour of the same city, had declared himself for the 
Xemindoo.
 But that the cause of this revolt may be the better understood by such as are curious, I will (before I proceed any further) succinctly relate, how this 
Xemindoo
 had been of a religious order in 
Pegu,
 a man of noble extraction, and (as some affirmed) neer of kin to the precedent King, whom this 
Bramaa
 had put to death twelve years before, as I have already decla∣red. This 
Xemindoo
 had formerly to name 
Xoripam Xay,
 a man of about forty five years of age, of a great understanding, and held by every one for a Saint: he was withall very wel verst in the Laws of their Sects & false Religion, and had many excellent parts, which rendered him so agreeable unto all that heard him preach, as he was no sooner in the Pulpit, but all the assistants prostrated themselves on the ground, saying at every word that he uttered, 
Assuredly God speaks in thee.
 This 
Xemindoo,
 seeing himself then in such great credit with the people, spurred on by the generosity of his nature, and the occasion which was then so favourable unto him, resolved to try his fortune, and see to what degree it might arrive. To this end, at such time as the King of 
Bramaa
 was fal∣len upon the kingdom of 
Siam,
 and had laid siege to the city of 
Odiaa,
 the 
Xemindoo
 preaching in the temple of 
Conquiay
 at 
Pegu,
 which is as it were the Cathedrall of all the rest, where there was a very great assembly of people, he discoursed at large of the losse of this Kingdom, of the death of their lawfull King, as also of the great extortions, cruell punishments, and many other mischiefs which the 
Bramaas
 had done to their Na∣tion; with so many insolencies, and with so many offences against God, as even the very houses which had been founded by the charity of good people, to serve for Temples wherein the Divine Word might be preached, were all desolated and demolished; or if any were found still standing, they were made use of, either for stables, lay-stalls, or o∣ther such places accustomed to lay filth or dung in. These, and many other such like things, which the 
X
mindoo
 delivered, accompanied with many sighs and tears, made so great an impression in the minds of the people, as from thenceforward they acknow∣ledged him for their lawfull King, and swore allegeance unto him; so that instead of calling him, as they did before, 
Xoripam Xay,
 they named him 
Xemindoo,
 as a soveraigne title which they gave him above all others. Seeing himself raised then to the dignity of King, the first thing during the heat and fury of this people, was to go to the King of 
Bramaas
 palace, where having found five thousand 
Bramaas,
 he cut them all in pie∣ces, not sparing the life of one of them; the like did he afterwards to all the rest of them that were abiding in the most important places of the State, and withall he seized on the Kings treasure, which was not small. In this manner he slew all the 
Bramaas
 that were in the Kingdom, which were fifteen thousand, besides the women of that Na∣tion of what age soever, and seized on the places where they resided, which were in∣stantly demolished; so that in the space of three and twenty dayes onely he became ab∣solute possessor of the Kingdom, and prepared a great Army to fight with the King of 
Bramaa,
 if he should chance to return upon the bruit of this rebellion, as indeed he


fought with him to his great damage, being defeated by him, as I have heretofore de∣clared. And thus having methinks said enough for the intelligence of that which I am to recount, I will come again to my first discourse. This King of 
Bra
aa
 being advertised of the revolt of the Town of 
Martabano,
 and of the death of those two thousand 
Bramaaes,
 gave order immediately to all the Lords of the Kingdome for their repair unto him with as many men as they could levy, and that within the te
m of fifteen daies at the furthest, in regard the present necessity would not indure a longer delay. This done, he parted the day following with a small train from the City of 
Pegu,
 to give example to others to do the like, and wept and lodged at a Town called 
Mouchan,
 with an intention to tarry there those fifteen days he had li∣mited the Lords to come unto him. Now whenas six or seven of them were already past, he was advertised that 
Xemin de Satan,
 Governor of a Town so named, had secretly sent a great sum of gold to the 
Zemindoo,
 and had withall done him homage for the same Town where he commanded. This news somewhat troubled the King of 
Bramaa,
 who devising with himself of the means which he might use to meet with the mischief that threatned him, he sent for 
Xemin de Satan,
 who was then in the said Town of his Government, with a purpose to cut off his head; but he, be∣taking himself to his bed, and making shew of being sick, answered, that he would wait upon the King as soon as he was able to rise. Now in regard he found himself to be guilty, and misdoubting the cause wherefore he was sent for, he communica∣ted this affair to a dozen of his kinsmen that were there present with him, who all of them concluded together, how since there was no better way to save himself then in killing the King, that without further delay it was to be put in execution, so that all of them offering secretly to assist him in this enterprise, they speedily assembled all their Confidents, without declaring unto them at first the occasion wherefore they did it; and withall, drawing others unto them with many fair promises, they made up of all being joyned together a company of six hundred men. Whereupon being informed that the King was lodged in a certain 
Pagode,
 they fell upon it with great violence, and fortune was so favourable unto them that finding him almost a∣lone in his chamber, they slew him without incurring any danger. That done, they retired into an outward Court, where the Kings Guard having had some notice of this treason, set upon them, and the conflict was so hot between them, that in half an hours space, or thereabout, eight hundred men lay dead in the place, whereof the most part were 
Bramaaes.
 After this 
Xemin de Satan
 making away with four hun∣dred of his followers, went to a place of a large extent, called 
Poutel,
 whither all those of the country round about resorted unto him, who being advertised of the death of the King of 
Bramaa,
 whom they mortally hated, made up a body of five thousand men, and went to seek out the three thousand 
Bramaaes
 which the King had brought thither vvith him: And forasmuch as these same vvere dispersed in se∣verall places, they vvere all of them easily slain, not scarce so much as one escaping. With them also vvere killed fourscore of three hundred 
Portugals
 that 
Diego Sua∣rez
 had with him, vvho, together vvith all the rest vvhich remained vvith their lives saved, rendred themselves upon composition, and vvere received to mercy, upon con∣dition that for the future they should faithfully serve 
Xemin de Satan,
 as their proper King, vvhich they easily promised to do. Nine days after this mutiny, the Rebell see∣ing himself favoured by fortune, and such a multitude of people at his devotion, which were come to him out of this Province, to the number of thirty thousand men, caused himself to be declared King of 
Pegu,
 promising great recompences to such as should follow and accompany him, untill he had wholly gained the King∣dome, and driven the 
Bramaaes
 out of the country. With this design he retired to a fortresse called 
Tagalaa,
 and resolved to fortifie himself there out of the feare he was in of the forces vvhich vvere to come to the succour of the deceased King, thinking to find him alive, having been advertised that many vvere already set forth from the City of 
Pegu
 for that purpose. Now of those 
Bramaaes
 which 
Xemin de Satan
 had slain, one by chance escaped, and cast himself all wounde
 as he vvas into the river, and swimming over, never left travelling all that night, and the day fol∣lovving,


for fear of the 
Pegues,
 untill he arrived at a place, called 
Coutasarem,
 where he incountred with the 
Chaumigrem,
 the deceased Kings Foster-brother, vvho vvas incamped there vvith an army of an hundred and 
ourscore thousand men, vvhereof there vvere but only thirty thousand 
Bramaaes,
 all the rest 
Pegues
; finding him then upon the point of parting from thence, in regard of the heat that vvould be vvith∣in tvvo hours after, he acquainted him vvith the death of the King, and all that had past besides. Now though this news greatly troubled the 
Chaumigrem,
 yet he dissem∣bled it for the present with so much courage and prudence, as not one of his follow∣ers perceived any alteration in him: But contrarily, putting on a rich habit of Car∣nation Sattin, imbroidered with gold, and a chain of precious stones about his neck, he caused all the Lords and Commanders of his Army to assemble before him, and then speaking to them with the semblance of a joyfull man, 
Gentlemen,
 said he, 
this fellow which you saw come to me but now in such hast, hath brought me this Letter, which I have here in my hand, from the King, my Lord and yours; and although by the contents thereof he seemeth to blame us for our careless
ness in lingering thus, yet I hope e're long to render him such an accompt of it, as his Highnesse shall give us all thanks for the service we have done him. By this letter too he certifies me, that he hath very certaine intelligence, how the
 Zemindoo 
hath raised an army, with an intent to fall upon the Towns of
 Cosmin 
and
 Dal
 
and to gain all along the rivers of
 Digon 
and
 Me
doo, 
the whole Province of
 Danapl
 
even to
 Ansedaa; 
wherefore he hath expresly enjoyned me, that as soon as possibly I may, I put into those places (as the most important) such forces as shall be able to resist the enemy; and that I take heed nothing be lost through my n
gligence, because in that case 
e will admit of no excuse. This being so, it seems to me very impor∣tan
 and necessary for his service, that you my Lord
 Xemi
brum 
go instantly without all delay, and put your self with your forces into the Town of
 D
laa; 
and your brother-in-law
 Ba
haa Quem 
into that of
 Digon, 
with his fifteen thousand men; as for Colonel
 Gi∣pray 
and
 Monpocasser, 
they shall go with their thirty thousand souldiers into
 Ansedaa, 
and
 Danapluu, 
and
 Ciguamcan, 
with twenty thousand men shall march along to
 Xaraa, 
and so to
 M
lacou; 
moreo
er
 Quiay Brazagaran, 
with his brethren and kinsmen, shall go for Generall of the Frontier, with an Army of fifty thousand men, to the end that assisted with those forces, he may in person give order wheresoever need shall be. Behold, what the King hath written to me, whereof I pray you let us make an agreement, and all sign it to∣gether, for it is no reason that my head should answer for your want of care, and impru∣dence.
 His Commanders presently obeyed him, and without longer tarrying there, each of them went straight to the place, whither his Commission directed him. The 
Chaumigrem,
 by means of this so cunning and well dissembled a sleight, rid himself in lesse then three hours of all the hundred and fifty thousand 
Pegues,
 who he knew, if once they came to hear of the Kings death, would fall upon the thirty thousand 
Bramaaes
 that he had there with him, and not leave one of them alive. This done, as soon as it was night, turning back to the City, which was not above a league from thence, he seized with all speed on the deceased Kings Treasure, which amounted, according to report, unto above thirty millions of gold, besides jewells that were not to be estimated; and withall, he saved all the 
Bramaa
s
 wives and children, and took as many arms and as much ammunition as he could carry away. After this, he set fire on all that was in the Magazines, caused all the lesser Ordnance to be rived a∣sunder, and the greater, which he could not use so, to be cloyed. Furthermore, he made seven thousand Elephants that were in the country to be killed, reserving only two thousand for the carriage of his treasure, ammunition, and baggage. As for all the rest, it was consumed with fire, so that neither in the Palace, where were cham∣bers all seeked with gold, nor in the Magazines and Arsenalls, nor on the river, where were two thousand rowing Vessells, remained ought that was not reduced to ashes. After this execution, he departed in all hast, an hour before day, and drew di∣rectly towards 
Tanguu,
 which was his own country, from whence he came some fourteen years before to the conquest of the Kingdome of 
Pegu,
 which in the heart of the country was distant from thence about an hundred and threescore leagues. Now whereas fear commonly adds wings to the feet, it made him march with such


speed, as he and his arrived in fifteen days at the place whither they were a going. In the mean time, whereas the 
Chaumigrem
 had cunningly sent away the hundred and fifty thousand 
Pegues,
 as I have declared already, it happened that two days after they understood how the King of 
Bramaa
 was dead: Now in regard they vvere mortall enemies of that Nation, sixscore thousand of them in one great body turn∣ed back in hast for to go in quest of the thirty thousand 
Bramaaes,
 but when they ar∣rived at the City, they found that they were gone from thence three days before; this making them to follow in pursuit of them with all the speed that possibly they could, they came to a place, called 
Guinacoutel,
 some forty leagues from the City whence they came; there they were informed, that it was five days since they passed by, so that dispairing of being able to execute the design which they had of cutting them in pieces, they returned back to the place from whence they were parted, where they consulted amongst themselves about that which they were to do and resolved in the end, since they had no lawfull King, and that the Land was quite freed of the 
Bramaaes,
 to go to 
Xemin de Satan,
 as incontinently they did, who re∣ceived them, not only with a great deal of joy and good entertainment, but promi∣sed them mighty matters, and much honor, by raising them to the principall com∣mands of the Kingdome, as soon as time should serve, and that he was more peace∣ably setled. Thereupon he went directly to the City of 
Pegu,
 where he was received with the magnificence of a King, and for such crowned in the Temple of 
Comquiay,
 which is the chief of all the rest.






CHAP. LXXII. That which arrived in the time of 
Xenim de Satan,
 and an abominable 
ase that befell to 
Diego Suarez
; together with the 
Xemindoos
 expedition against 
Xenim de Satan
; and that which insued thereupon.


THree moneths and nine dayes had this Tyrant 
Xenim de Satan
 already peaceably possessed the city and kingdome of 
Pegu,
 whenas without fearing any thing, or being contradicted by none, he fell to distributing the treasure and revenues of the Crown to whomsoever he pleased, whereupon great scandalls insued, which were the cause of divers quarrells and divisions amongst many of the Lords, who for this cause, and the injustice which this tyrant did them, retyred into severall foraigne Countries and Kingdoms. Some also went and sided with the 
Xemindo
,
 who began at that time to be in reputation again: For after he had fled from the battell onely with six horse, as I have declared heretofore, he got into the Kingdom of 
Ansedaa,
 where as well by the efficacy of his Sermons, as by the authority of his person, he won so many to his devotion, as assisted by the favour and forces of those Lords as ad∣hered to him, he made up an army of threescore thousand men, with which he march∣ed to 
Meidoo,
 where he was very well received by those of the Country. Now set∣ting aside what he did in those parts, during the space of foure moneths, that he abode there, I will in the mean time passe to a strange accident which in a few dayes fell out in this city, that one may know what end the good fortune of the great 
Diego Suarez
 had, who had been Governour of this Kingdom of 
Peg
; and the recompence which the world is accustomed to make at last unto all such as serve and trust in it, under the semblance of a good countenance which she shews them at first. The matter past in this sort; There was in this city of 
Pegu
 a Merchant, called 
Manbagoaa,
 a rich man, and that of good reputation in the country: This same resolved to marry a daughter of his to a young man, the son of a worshipfull and very rich Merchant also, named 
Manicaniandarim,
 about that time that 
Diego Suarez
 was in the great∣est height of his fortune, and termed the Kings brother, and in dignity above all the Princes and Lords of the Kingdom. So the fathers of these young couple being a∣greed on this marriage, and of the dowry that was to be given, which by report was three hundred thousand duckats; when as the day was come wherein the nupti∣alls were celebrated with a great deal of state and magnificence, and honoured with the presence of most of the gentlemen of chiefest quality in the city, it happened


that 
Diego Suarez,
 being come a little before Sun-set from the royall palace, with a great train both of horse and foot, as his manner was to be alwayes well accompani∣ed, passed by 
Mambogoaas
 door, where hearing the musick and rejoycing that was in the house, asked what the matter was, whereunto answer being made him, that 
Mam∣bogoaa
 had married his daughter, and that the wedding was kept there, he presently caused the Elephant on which he was mounted to stay, and sent one to tell the fa∣ther of the bride, that he congratulated with him for this marriage, and wished a long and happy life to the new married couple; to these words he added many o∣thers by way of complement, yea and made him many offers if he would make use of him; wherewith the old father of the bride finding himself so exceedingly honored, as not knowing how to acknowledge it, in regard the person who did him so much honor, was no lesse then the King himself in greatnesse and dignity, the desire which he had to satisfie this obligation in part, if he could not wholly do it, made him go and take his daughter by the hand, accompanied with many Ladies of quali∣ty, and so leading her to the street door, where 
Diego Suarez
 was, he prostrated himself on the ground with a great deal of respect, and with many complements af∣ter his manner, thanked him for the favour and honor that he had done him. There∣upon the new married bride, having taken from off her finger a rich ring, presented it on her knees by her fathers expresse commandement, to 
Diego Suarez
; but he that naturally was sensuall and lascivious, instead of using civility, whereunto the Laws of generosity and friendship obliged him, having taken the ring which the maid pre∣sented unto him, he reached out his hand, and plucked her to him by force, saying, 
God forbid that so fair a maid as you should fall into any other hands but mine
; where∣upon the poor old man seeing 
Diego Suarez
 hale his daughter so rudely, lifting up both his hands to heaven, with his knees on the ground, and tears in his eys, 
My Lord,
 said he unto him 
I humbly beseech thee for the love and respect of the great God, whom thou adorest, and which was conceived without any spot of sin in the Virgins womb, as I confesse and believe, according to that which I have heard thereof, that thou wilt not forcibly take away my daughter; for if thou doest so, I shall assuredly die with griefe and displeasure at it; but if thou desire of me that I should give thee her dowry, together with all that is in my house, and that I deliver up my self unto thee for thy slave, I will instant∣ly do it, provided thou wilt permit that her husband may possesse her, for I have no other good in the world but 
e, nor will I have any other as long as I live.
 Whereupon offering to lay hold on his daughter, 
Diego Suarez
 making no answer to him, turned himself about to the Captain of his guard, who was a Turk by Nation, and said unto him, 
kill this dog
 The Turk presently drew out his Scymitar to kill the poor old man, but he suddainly fled away, leaving his daughter with her hair all about her ears in 
Diego Suarez
 his hands. In the mean time the Bridegroom came running to this tumult, with his cheeks all bedeawed with tears, but he was scarcely arrived there, whenas these Barbarians slew him, and his Father too, with six or seven other of his kinsmen. Whilest this past so, the women made such fearfull cries in the house, as terrified all those that heard them, so that even the earth and the ayr seemed to tremble at it, or to say better, they demanded vengeance of God for the little respect which was had to his divine justice, and for so great a violence as this was; and truly if I do not more amply report the particularities of so black and so abhominable an action, I desire to be excused, in regard I passe them by for the honor of the 
Portugal
 Nation. Wherefore it shall suffice me to say, that this poor Maid seeing her self upon the point to be forced, strangled her self with a string that she wore about her middle for a girdle, which she chose rather to do, then suffer this sensuall and bruitish man to carry her away with him by force; but he was therewith so displeased, as he was heard to say, that he repented him more for that he had not enjoyed her, then for u∣sing her in that sort as he did. Now from the day of this abhorred act, till four years after, the good old man, the Father of the Bride, was never seen to go out of his house; but at length to give a greater demonstration of his sorrow, and to shew his extreme resentment of the matter, he covered himself with an old tattered mat, and in that sad equipage went up and downe, begging an alms of his very slaves,


never eating any thing, but lying all along naked, and his face fixed on the ground. Thus continued he in so sad a manner of life, untill in the end he saw that the season invited him to have recourse unto justice, which he demanded in this sort; perceiving that in the Kingdome there was another King, other Governors, and other Jurisdi∣ction, alterations which time ordinarily produceth in every country, and in all kind of affairs, he went out of his house in the wretched fashion he had so long used, having a big cord about his neck, and a white beard, reaching almost down to his girdle, and got him into the midst of a great place, where stood a Temple called 
Quiay Fantare
,
 that is to say, 
the God of the afflicted
; there he took the idoll from off the Altar, and holding it in his armes, he returned out of the Temple, to the said great place, where having cried out aloud three times to draw the people together, as accordingly they came flocking in unto him, he said with teares in his eys; 
O ye people, ye people! who with a cleane and peaceable heart make profession of the truth of this God of the afflicted, which you see here in my armes, come forth like lightning in a dark and rainy night, and joyn with me in crying so loud, that our cryes may pierce the hea∣vens, to the end the pitifull ear of the Lord may be drawn to hear our heavy lamentations, and by them he may know the reason we have to demand justice against this accursed stran∣ger, as the most wicked man that ever was born into the world; for this abhominable wretch hath not been contented with spoiling us of our goods, but hath also dishonored our fami∣lies; wherefore whosoever shall not with me accompany the God which I hold in my hands, and water with my tears, in detesting so horrible a crime, let the gluttonous Serpent of the profound pit of smoke abridge his dayes miserably, and tear his body in pieces at midnight.
 This old mans words so mightily terrified the Assistants, and made so deep an im∣pression in their minds, that in a short time fifty thousand persons assembled in that place, with so much fury and desire of revenge, as was wonderfull to behold. Thus the number of the people still more and more increasing, they ran thronging strait to the Kings Palace, with so horrible a noyse, as struck terror into all that heard them. In this disorder, being arrived at the outward Court of the Palace, they cried out six or seven times with a dreadfull tone; 
O King come out of the place wherein thou art shut up, to hearken to the voice of thy God, who demands justice of thee by the mouth of thy poor people.
 At these cries the King put forth his head out of the window, and affrighted with so strange an accident, would needs know of them what they would have? whereunto they all answered unanimously with such loud cries, as seemed to pierce the heavens, 
Iustice, justice against a wicked infidell, who to spoil us of our goods hath killed our fathers, our children, our brothers, and our kinsmen.
 The King having there∣upon inquired of them who it was, 
it is,
 answered they, 
an accursed thief, participa∣ting with the works of the Serpent, who in the fields of delight abused the first man that God created. Is it possible,
 said he unto them, 
that there should be any such thing as you tell me?
 whereunto they all replied, 
This same is the most accursed man that ever was born on the earth, and is so out of his wicked nature and inclination, wherefore we all of us beseech thee in the name of this God of the afflicted, that his veins may be as much emptied of his bloud, as hell is filled with his wicked works.
 At these words the King turning towards them that were about him, 
What do you think hereof,
 said he unto them? 
What am I to do? and how am I to carry my self in so strange and extraordinary a matter
? To which they all answered, 
My Lord, if thou wilt not hearken to that which this God of the afflicted comes to demand of thee, it is to be feared that he will take care no longer to aid th
e, and will refuse to support thee in thy dignity.
 Then the King turning himself again to the multitude that were below in the Court, 
bad them go to the place where the great Market was kept, and he would give order that the man whom they required should be delivered unto them to be disposed of at their pleasure.
 Whereupon having sent for the 
Chirca of justice,
 who is as the Soveraign Superintendent there∣of above all others, he commanded him to go and apprehend 
Diego Suarez,
 and deliver him bound hand and foot to the people, that they might do justice up∣on him, for he feared if he did otherwise, that God vvould execute it upon him.


The 
Chirca
 of Justice vvent immediately to 
Diego Suarez
 his house, and told him tsiat the King had sent for him;
 he in the mean time was so troubled to see the 
Chirca
 come for him, that he remained a pretty while not able to answer him, as a man that was always besides himself, and had lost his understanding; but at length being somewhat come to himself again; 
He earnestly desired him to dispense with him at this time for going with him, in regard of a great pain that he had in his head, and that in acknowledgement of so good an office, he would give him forty 
isses of gold.
 Where∣unto the 
Chirca
 replied, 
The offer which thou makest me is too little for me to take upon me that great pain which thou s
yest thou hast in thy head, wherefore thou must go along with me, either by fair means or by force, since thou obligest me to tell thee the truth. Diego Suarez
 then, seeing that there was no means to excuse him, would have taken along with him six or seven of his servants, and the 
Chirca
 not permitting it; 
I must,
 said he unto him, 
fulfill the Kings command, which is, that thou shalt come alone, and not with six or seven men, for the time is now past wherein thou wert wont to go so well ac∣companied, as I have oftentimes seen thee do; all thy support is gone by the death of the Tyrant of
 Bramaa, 
who was the quill wherewith thou blowedst up thy self to an unsupport∣able pride, as is apparent by the wicked actions which thou hast committed, which at this present accuse thee before the justice of God.
 This said, he took him by the hand, and led him along with him, invironed with a guard of three hundred men, whereat we remained very much dismayed. Thus marching from one street to another, he arrived in the end at the 
Bazor,
 which was a publike place where all kind of wares was sold; but as he was going thither, he met by chance with 
Balthazar Suarez
 his son, who came from a Merchants house, whither his Father had sent him that morning to re∣ceive some money that was owing to him. The Son, seeing his Father in this plight, alighted presently from his horse, and casting himself at his feet; 
What means this, my Lord,
 said he unto him with tears in his eys, 
and whence cemes it that you are led along in this sort? Ask it of my sins,
 answered Diego Suarez, 
and they will tell thee, for I protest unto thee my Son, that in the case I am in, all things seem dreams unto me.
 There∣upon imbracing one another, and mingling their tears together, they continued so, untill such time as the 
Chirca
 commanded 
Balthazar Suarez
 to get him gone, which he would not do, being loth to part from his father, but the Ministers of justice haled him away by force, and pushed him so rudely, as he fell and broke his head, yea and withall they gave him many blows besides, whereat his Father fell into a swoun. Being come again to himself, he craved a little water, which he had no sooner taken, but lifting up his hands to heaven, he said with tears in his eys, 
Si iniquitates observa∣b
ris Domine, Domine quis sustinebit? But, O Lord,
 added he, 
out of the great confi∣dence I have in the infinite price of thy precious bloud, which thou hast shed for me upon the crosse, I may say with more assurance, Misericordias Domini in aeternum cantabo.
 Thus altogether desolated as he was in this last affliction, when he was come in sight of the place, whither the King had commanded him to be conducted, it is said, that perceiving so many people, he remained so exceedingly dismayed, that turning him∣self to a 
Portugal,
 who was permitted to accompany him, 
Iesus,
 said he unto him, 
have all these accused me to the King
? whereunto the 
Chirca
 made him this answer, 
It is no longer time for thee to think of this, for thou hast wit enough to know, that the peo∣ple a
e of so unruly a humour, that they always follow evill whereunto they are naturally inclined.
 It is not that, replied 
Diego Suarez
 with tears in his eys, 
for I know that if there be any unrulinesse in them, it proceeds from my sins. Thou seest thereby,
 said the 
Chirca, that this is the ordinary recompence which the world is accustomed to give to them, who during their life, have lost the memory of the divine justice, as thou hast done, and God g
ve thee the grace that in this little time thou hast to live, thou mayest repent thee of the faults thou committed, which possibly may avail thee more then all the gold that thou leavest behind thee, for an inheritance to him, who peradventure is the cause of thy death.
 Here 
Diego Suarez
 falling down on his knees, and lifting up his eyes to heaven, 
O Lord Iesus Christ,
 cried he, 
my true Redeemer, I beseech thee by the pains which thou


hast suffered upon the Crosse, to permit that the accusation of these hundred thousand hunger-starved dogs against me, may serve to satisfie the chastisement of thy divine justice in my behalf, to the end that the inestimable price which thou hast imployed for the salvation of my soule, without any merit of mine, may not be unprofitable unto me.
 This said, he ascended the staires which led to the market place, and the 
Portugal
 that assisted him, told mee, how at every step he kissed the ground, and called upon the name of 
IESVS
; at length when he was come to the top, the 
Manbogoaa,
 who held the Idoll in his armes, ani∣mating the people with great cries, said unto them, 
Whosoever shall not for the honour of this God of the afflicted, whom I have here in my armes, stone this accursed Serpent, let him for ever be miserable, and let the braines of his children be consumed in the midst of the night, to the end that by the punishment of so great a sinne, the righteous judgement of the Lord above may be justified in them.
 He had no sooner made an end of speaking thus, but there fell so great a showre of stones on 
Diego Suarez,
 as in lesse then a quarter of an houre he was buried under them, and they that flung them at him, did it so indiscreetly, as the most part of them hurt one another therewith. An houre after they drew forth the poore 
Die∣go Suarez
 from under the stones, and with another new tumult of cries and voices they tore him in pieces, with so much fury and hatred of the whole people in generall, as there was not he which did not believe that he did a charitable and holy work in giving a reward to the most muti∣nous amongst those, which dragged his members and entrailes up and downe the streets. This execution done, the King willing to confiscate his goods, sent men to his house for that purpose, where the disorder was so great, in regard of the extreme avarice which these hungry dogs had, they left not a tile unmoved; and because they found not so much as they expected, they put all his slaves and servants to torture, with such an excesse of cruelty, as eight and thirty of them remained dead in the place, amongst which were seventeen 
Portugals,
 who bore the pain of a thing whereof they were not guilty. In all this spoile there were no more then six hundred bisses of gold found, which are in value three hundred thousand duckats, besides some pieces of rich houshold∣stuffe, but no precious stones, nor jewells at all, which perswaded men that 
Diego Suarez
 had buried all the rest; howsoever it could never be found out, notwithstanding all the search that was made for it, and yet it was verified by the judgement of some who had seene him in his pro∣sperity, that he had in meanes above three millions of gold, according to the supputation of the country. Behold what was the end of the great 
Diego Suarez,
 whom fortune had so favoured in this Kingdome of 
Pegu,
 as she had raised him up to the degree of the Kings Brother, the highest and most absolute title of all others, and given him withall two hundred thousand duckats yearely rent, vvith the charge of Generall of eight hun∣dred thousand men, and Soveraigne over all the other Governours or Vice-Royes of fourteene Kingdomes, which the King of 
Bramaa
 had at that time in his possession. But it is the ordinary course of the goods of this world, especially of such as are ill gotten, alwayes to serve for a way to disgraces and misfortunes.


I return now to the 
Xemindoo
▪ of whom I have not spoken a long time. Wher∣as that Tyrant and avaritious King 
Xenim de Satan
 gave daily new increases to the cruelties and tyrannies which he exercised against all sorts of persons, never ceasing killing and robbing indifferently those, who were thought to have mo∣ney; nor sparing any thing on which he could lay his hands, his rapines proceed∣ed so far, as it was that in the space of seven moneths only, wherin he was peace∣able possessor of this Kingdom of 
Pegu,
 he put to death six thousand very rich Merchants, besides many ancient Lords of the Country, who by way of right of inheritance held their estates from the Crown. These extortions rendered him so odious, as the most part of those that were with him abandoned him to side with the 
Xemindoo,
 who had for him at that time the towns of 
Digon, Meideo, Dalaa,
 and 
Coulam,
 even to the confines of 
Xaraa,
 from whence he parted in hast to go and besiege this Tyrant with an army of two hundred thousand men, & five thousand Elephants. When he was arrived at the city of 
Pegu,
 where 
Xemin de Satan
 then kept his Court, he invested it round about with palisadoes and very strong trenches, yea and gave some assaults to it, but he could not enter it so ea∣sily as he believed, in regard of the great resistance he found from them within; wherefore judging it requisite for him to alter his mind, being prudent as he was, he came very subti ly to a truce of twenty dayes with the Tyrant upon cer∣tain conditions, whereof the principall was, that if within the terme of those twenty dayes he gave him a thousand bisses of gold, which are in value five hun∣dred thousand Duckats, he would desist from the pretension and right which he had to this Kingdome; and all this he did (as I have already said) cunningly, hoping by this means to bring him to his bow with lesse perill. So the time of the truce beginning to run on, all things remained peaceable on either side, and the besiegers fell to communicate with the besieged. During this pacification every morning two houres before day, they of the 
Xemindooes
 Camp played af∣ter their manner upon divers sorts of instruments very melodiously, at the sound whereof all they of the city ran to the walls to see what the matter was. Whereupon those instruments ceasing to play, a Proclamation was made by a Priest, accounted by every man a holy personage, who said these words with a very sad voice, 
O ye people, ye people! unto whom Nature hath given eares to hear, hear
en to the voice of the holy Captain the
 Xemindoo, 
of whom God will make use for the restoring you to your liberty and former quiet; in order wherunto he admonisheth you from
 Quiay Niuandel, 
the god of battells of the field
 Vitau, 
that none of you be so hardy as to lift up your hand against him, nor against this holy assembly which he hath made, out of a holy zeal to∣wards these people of
 Pegu, 
as brother, that he is, to the least of all the poor: Otherwise whosoever shall come against the army of these servants of God, or shall have the will to do them any harm, let him be accursed for it, and as de∣formed and vile as the children of the night, who foaming with poyson make horrible cries, and be delivered into the burning jawes of the dragon of dis∣cord, whom the true Lord of all the Gods hath cursed for ever; whereas con∣trarily, to those, that shall be so happy as to obey this Proclamation, as his holy brethren and allies, shall be granted in this life a perpetuall peace, accompa∣nied with a great deale of wealth and riches; and after their death their souls shall be no lesse pure and agreeable to God, then those of the Saints which goe dancing amidst the beams of the Sun in the celestiall repose of the Lord Al∣mighty.
 This publication made, the musick began to play again with a


great noise as before, which made such an impression in the hearts of them that heard it, as in seven nights that it contin
ed above threescore thousand persons went and rendred themselves to the 
Xemindoo
; for most of them which heard those words gave as much credit thereunto, as if an Angell from heaven had spoken them. In the meane time the besieged Tyrant, seeing that these secret Proclamations of the enemy were so prejudiciall unto him, as they could not chuse but turn to his utter ruine, brake the truce at twelve dayes end, and de∣liberated with his Councell what he should do, who advised him by no means to suffer h mself to remaine any longer besieged, for feare left the inhabitants should mutinie, and fall from him to the enemy; and that the best and surest way was to fight with the 
Xemindoo
 in the open field, before he grew to any further strength. This resolution being approved of by 
Zenim de Satan,
 he prepared himself for the execution of it; to which effect he two dayes after before it was day sallied out at five gates of the city with fourscore thousand men, which then he had, and charged the enemies with strange fury. They then in the meane time, who alwayes stood upon their guard, received them with a great deale of courage, whereupon insued so cruell a conflict between them, that in lesse then halfe an houre, for so long lasted the heat of the fight, there fell on both sides above forty thousand men; but at the end of that time the new King 
Zenim
 was born from his Elephant by an harquebuze shot, discharged at him by a Portugall, na∣med 
Gonçalo N
to,
 which caused all the rest to render themselves, and the city likewise, upon condition that the inhabitants should have their goods and lives saved. By this means the 
Xemindoo
 entred peaceably into it, and the very same day, which was a Saturday the three and twentieth of February, a thousand five hundred fifty and one, he caused himself to be crowned King of 
Pegu
 in the grea∣test Temple of the city. As for 
Gonçalo N
to,
 he gave him in recompence for killing the Tyrant twenty Bisses of gold, which are ten thousand Duckats; and to the other Portugalls, being eighty in number, he gave five thousand Duckats, be∣sides the honors and prsviledges which they had in the country; he also exempt∣ed them for three years from paying any custome for their merchandize, which was afterwards very exactly observed.








CHAP. LXXIII. That which the 
Xemindoo
 did, after he was Crowned King of 
Pegu,
 with the 
Chaumigrems
; the King of 
Bramaaes
 Foster-Brothers coming against him, with a great Army; and divers other memorable things.


THe 
Xemindoo
 seeing himself Crowned King of 
Pegu,
 and peaceable Lord of all the kingdome; began to have thoughts far different from those which 
Xemin de Satan
 had had, being raised to the same dignity of King; for the first and principal thing wherein he imployed himself with all his endeavour, was to maintain his King∣dome in peace, and to cause Justice to flourish; as indeed he established it with so much integritie, as no man how great so ever he was, durst wrong a lesser then him∣self: withall in that which concerned the government of the Kingdome, he procee∣ded with so much vertue, and equity, as it filled the strangers that were there with admi∣ration, so that one could not without marvel consider the peace the quiet, and union of the wills of the people; during the happy and peaceable estate of this Kingdome, which continued the space of a year, and better; at the end whereof the 
Chaumigrem,
 foster-brother to the same King of 
Bramaa,
 whom 
Xemin de Satan
 had slaine, as I have before declared, having received advertisement, that by reason of the rebelli∣ons and warres, which since his departure from thence had happened in the King∣dome of 
Pegu
; the principall men of the State there, had lost their lives; and the 
Xemindoo
 who then raigned, was unprovided of all things necessary for his defence; he resolved once again to adventure upon the same enterprise, which had formerly been undertaken by his late King. With this design, he entertained into his pay a mighty Army of strangers, unto whom he gave a Tincall of gold by the month, which is five dackets of our mony; when as he had prepared all things in a readinesse, he departed from 
Tanguu,
 the place of his birth: On the ninth day of March, a thou∣sand, five hundred, fifty and two, with an Army of three hundred thousand men, whereof only fifty thousand were 
Bramaas,
 and all the rest 
Mons, Chaleus, Cala∣minhams, Sau
nis, Pam
rus,
 and 
Auaas.
 In the mean time the 
Xemindoo,
 the new King of 
Pegu,
 having certain intelligence of these great forces, which were coming to fall upon him, made preparation to go and meet them, with a design to give them battle; for which effect, he assembled in the same City where he was; a huge Army of nine hundred thousand men, which were all 
Pegues
 by nation, and consequently of a weake constitution, and lesse warlick then all the others, whereof I have spoken; and on Tueseday the fourth of April, about noone, having received advice that the e∣nemies Army was incamped all along the river of 
Meleytay
 some twelve leagues from thence, he used such expedition, as the same day, and the next night all his Soul∣diers were put into battle array, for whereas they had prepared every thing long be∣fore, and had also been trayned by their Capt. there needed no great ado to bring them into order. The day ensueing, all these men of warre begun about nine of the clock in the morning, to march at the sound of an infinite company of warlick instruments, and went and lodged that night some two leagues from thence neer to the river 
Pota∣r
u.
 The next day, an hour before Sun-set the 
Bramaa Chaumigrem
 appeared with so great a body of men, as it took up the extent of a league and an half of ground; his Army being composed of seaventy thousand horse, of two hundred and thirty thousand foot, and six thousand fighting elephants, besides as many more which car∣ried the baggage and victuals; and in regard it was almost night, he thought fit to lodge himself all along by the mountain, that he might be in the greater safety. Thus the night past with a good guard, and a strange noise that was made on either part. The day following, which was a Saturday, the seventh of Aprill in the year one thou∣sand, five hundred, fifty and three, about five of the clock in the morning, these two Armies began to move, but with different intentions; for the designe of the 
Bramaa
 was to passe the foard, and recover an advantageous peece of ground, which lay neer to another river; and the 
Xemindoo
 had a desire to keep him from it, and to stop his passage; upon this contention, some skirmishes ensued, which continued most part of the day, and wherein about five hundred men on the one side, and the other were slain,


howbeit the advantage remained with the 
Chaumigrem,
 because he gained the place whereunto he pretented, and passed all the night there in banquetting, and making great bonfires for this good successe. The next day betimes in the morning the 
Xe∣mindoo,
 King of 
Pegu,
 presented the battail to his enemyes, who did not refuse it; so that they incountred one another with all the fury that a cruel hatred is accustomed to kindle in such like cases; the two vantgards then, vvho vvere the best Soldiers a∣mongst them, fell so lustily unto it, that in lesse then half an hour, all the Field was covered with dead bodies, and the 
Pegues
 began to lack courage. Wherupon the 
Xemin∣doo
 seeing his men give ground, came to succor them with a body of three thousand elephants, wherewith he set upon the seventy thousand horse so couragiously, and to the purpose, as the 
Bramaaes
 lost all that they had gained; which perceived by the 
Chaumigrem,
 who was better experienced in matters of Warre, knowing full well what he was to doe, to recover all again; made shew of retyring, as if he had been vanquished; the 
Xemindoo
 thereupon, who understood not this stratagem, and that thought of nothing but the victory, pursued his enemie about a quarter of a league: but incontinently the 
Bramaa
 facing about with all his forces, fell upon his enemy with such violence and horrible cryes, as not only men, but even the very earth, and all the other elements seemed to tremble at it. By this meanes the conflict renewed in such sort, as in a little time the ayre was seen all on fire, and the ground watered all over with bloud; for the 
Pegu
 Lords and Commanders, beholding their King so farre ingaged in the battle, and likely to lose the day, ran instantly to his succor, the like did the 
Panonsaray,
 the 
Bramaaes
 brother, on his side, with fourty thousand men, and two thousand elephants; so that there ensued betwixt them, so bloudy and dreadfull a fight, as words are not able to expresse the truth of it; wherefore I shall say no more, but that half an hour, or there about, before Sun-set, the Army of nine hundred thousand 
Pegues
 was utterly discomfited; and as it was said, four hundred thousand of them were left dead on the place, and all the rest, or the most part of them, grievously wounded; which the 
Xemindoo
 seeing, fled out of the field, and so escaped. Thus did the victory remain unto the 
Chaumigrem,
 who thereupon caused himself to be crowned King of 
Pegu,
 with the same royal Ensignes, magnificence, and triumph, as the other King of 
Bramaa,
 whom 
Xemin de Satan
 slew, had formerly been. And in regard it was already night, they bestowed the time in no other thing, but in dressing the hurt men, and keeping good watch in the Camp.


The next day, as soon as it was light, all the victorious souldiers,
 as wel wound∣ed as unwounded, 
an to the spoil of the dead bodies; wherewith divers amongst them were mightily enriched; for they found there great store of Gold and Jewels, by reason the custome of those Gentiles is, (as I think, I have heretofore delivered) to carry all their wealth about them to the War. The souldiers being well satisfied in this particular, the new King of this miserable Kingdome parted forthwith from the place where he had gotten the Victory, and marched towards the Citie of 
Pegu,
 di∣stant so
 three leagues from thence. Now forasmuch as hee would not that day enter into it, for certain considerations which I will relate hereafter, hee set himself down in the view of it, about half a league off, in a Plain, called 
Sunday Patir:
 and after he had thus encamped his Army, hee gave order for the guard of the four and twenty gates thereof, by placing at each of them a 
Bramaa
 Commander with five thousand Horse. In this manner hee remained there five dayes, without being able to resolve to enter into the Citie, out of the fear he was in, lest the strangers should require of him the pillage of it, as indeed, he was obliged to grant it to them by the promise which he had made them for it at 
Tanguu.
 Now the custom of men of War, who live but upon their pay, being to have regard to nothing but their interests, these six Nations seeing the King thus defer his entry into the Citie, which they could not brook, began to mutinie, and this by the instigation of a 
Portugal,
 named 
Christo∣nano Surnento,
 a man of a turbulent spirit, but otherwise a good and valiant Com∣mander; and this mutinie proceeded so far, as the King of 
Bramaa
 for his own safety was constrained to retire into a 
Pagode,
 where he fortified himself with his 
Bramaaes,
 untill that the next morning about nine of the clock hee came to a truce with them, and causing them to assemble together, from the top of a wall he spake to


them in this sort, 
My worthy Friends, and valiant Commanders, I have caused you to come to this holy resting place of the dead, to the end that with a solemn Oath I may dis∣cover unto you my intentions; whereof, with my knees on the ground, and my eyes lift up unto heaven, I take to witness
 Quiay Nivandel, 
the God of Battel of the field
 Vitau, 
be∣seeching him to be Iudg of this between you and me, and to strike me dumb, if I do not tell you the truth. I very well remember the promise I made you at
 Tanguu, 
which was, to give you the pillage of this tumultuous Citie; as well because I believed your valor would be as it were the minister of my revenge, as in some sort to satisfie your avarice, where∣unto I know you are naturally very much inclined: Now having given you this promise for a gage of my faith, I acknowledg that I am altogether obliged not to break my word with you But when on the other side, I come to consider the great inconveniences which may accrue to me thereby, and the strict account which I shall one day render for it before the equitable and rigorous justice of the Lord above, I must confesse unto you, that I am very much affraid of charging my self with so heavie a burthen: wherefore Reason ad∣vises me to render my self 
aulty towards men, rather then to fall into the displeasure of God: Besides, it is not reasonable that the innocent should pay for the guilty, and of whom I am sufficiently satisfied with the death which they have received in this last bat∣tell by your hands. Behold, how I earnestly intreat you, as children that you are of my bowels, that having regard to my good intention, you will not kindle this fire wherein my soul will be burnt, since you see well enough how reasonable that is which I desire of you, and how unjust it would be for you to refuse it me. Neverthelesse, to the end you may not remain altogether without recompense, I do here promise you to contribute thereunto all that shall seem reasonable to you, and to supply this default in part with my own goods, with my Person, with my Kingdom, and with my State.
 Hereupon the Commanders of those six Nations hearing the Kings justification, and the promise which hee made them, yeelded to agree unto whatsoever he would do: howbeit, they prayed him a∣bove all things to have regard unto souldiers pretensions, who were not at any hand to be discontented, but greatly to be made account of. Whereunto the King re∣plyed, 
That they had reason, and that in all things he would endeavour to conform him∣self to whatsoever they should judg reasonable.
 In the mean time, to avoid disputes which might ensue hereupon, it was concluded, that they should referr themselves to Arbitrators: for which effect the Mutiners were to name three on their side, and the King three others on his, which made six in all, whereof three were to be Religious men, and the rest Strangers, that so the judgment might be given with lesse suspicion. This resolution being taken between them, they agreed together, that the three Re∣ligious men should be the 
Menigrepos
 of a 
Pagode,
 that was named 
Quiay Hifaron,
 that is to say, the God of Povertie; and that for the other three Strangers, the King and the Mutiners should cast lots, to see who should chuse one or two of them on his side. This Election being fallen to the King, he made a choice of two 
Portugals,
 of an hun∣dred and forty that were then in the Citie; whereof the one was 
Gonçalo Pacheco,
 the King our Masters Factor for Lacre, a worthie man, and of a good conscience; and the other a worshipful Merchant, named 
Nuno Fernandez Teixeyra,
 whom the King held in good esteem, as having known him in the life time of the deceased King. By the same means the Commanders of the Mutiners elected another stranger, whose name I do not know. Things thus concluded, the Judges destined for the resoluti∣on of this Affair, were sent for, because the King was not willing to stirre out of the place where he was, untill the matter was determined; to the end he might dismisse them all peaceably before he entred into the Citie, for fear lest if they entered with him, they should not keep their word. For this purpose then the King about mid∣night sent a 
Bramaa
 on horseback to the 
Portugals
 quarter, who vvere in no lesse fear then the 
Pegues
 of being plundered and killed. After that the 
Bramaa
 vvas come into the Citie, and that hee had asked aloud (for so they use to do vvhen they come from the King) vvhere the Captain of the 
Portugals
 vvas, he vvas presently conducted to his Lodging, vvhere being arrived, 
It is a thing
 (said he to the Captain) 
as pro∣per to the nature of that Lord above, who hath created the firmament and the whole heavens, to make good men for the conversion of the wicked, as it is ordinary with the pernicious Dragon to nourish in his bosome spirits of commotion and tumult, to


bring disorder unto the peace which conserves us in the holy Law of the Lord. I mean hereby
 (continued he) 
that amongst all those of your Nation there is one wicked man found, vomiting out of his infernall stomack flames of discord and sedition, by means wher∣of he hath caused the three strange Nations of the
 Chalons, Meleytes 
and
 Savadis 
to mu∣tinie in the King my Masters Army, whereupon hath ensued so great a mischief, that besides almost the utter ruine of the Camp, three thousand
 Bramaaes 
have been slain, and the King himself hath been in such danger, as he was fain to retire into a Fort, where hee hath remained three dayes, and still is there, not daring to come out, because he cannot put any trust in those strangers. Howbeit, for a remedy of so great unquietnesse, it hath pleased God, who is the true Father of concord, to inspire the Kings heart with patience to endure this injurie, being prudent as he is, to the end hee may by that means pacifie the tu∣mult and rebellion of these three turbulent Nations, who inhabit the most desert parts of the mountains of
 Mons, 
and are the most accursed of God amongst all people. Now, to make an entry into this peace and union, a Treaty hath been had between the King and the Commanders of the Mutiners, whereby it hath been concluded on either part with an Oath, That to exempt this Citie from the plundering which had been promised to the Soul∣diers, the King shall give them out of his own estate, as much as six men, deputed for that purpose, shall award; of which number there are already four, so that to make up the whole six, there wants none but thee, whom the King hath chosen for him; and another Portugal, whose name is written in this paper, whereby thou shalt be ascertained of that which I have said unto thee.
 Thereupon he delivered a Letter unto him from the King of 
Bramaa
; which 
Gonçalo Pacheco
 received upon his knees, and laid upon his head, with exterior complements so full of civilitie and courtesie, as the 
Bramaa
 re∣mained very much contented and satisfied therewith, and said unto him, 
Surely, the King my Master must needs have a great knowledg of thee, in that hee hath chosen thee for a Iudg of his Honour and Estate
▪ Hereupon 
Gonçalo Pacheco
 read the Letter a∣loud before all the 
Portugals,
 who heard it standing, with their hats in their hands: The contents of it were to this effect, 
Captain
 Gonçalo Pacheco, 
my dear Friend, and that appears before my eyes like a precious Pearl, as being no lesse vertuous in the tran∣quillitie of thy life, then the holyest Menigrepos which live in the Deserts; I, the ancient
 Chaumigrem, 
and new King of fourteen States, which God hath now put into my hands by the death of the holy King my Master, do send thee a smile of my mouth, to the end thou mayest be as agreeable to me, as those whom I cause to sit at my table in a day of joy and feasting: Know then, that I have thought good to take thee for a Iudg of the Affair that is in question, and therefore have sent for thee, together with my good Friend,
 Nuno Fernandez Teixeyra, 
to come presently unto me, for to give an end to this businesse, which I wholly commit unto your trust. And for so much as concerns the security of your persons, in regard of the fear you may be in of the late Mutinie, I do engage my word, and swear to you by the faith which a King ought to have, whom God himself hath annointed, that I will take you, and all those of your Nation, with all others that beleeve in your God, into my protection.
 After that this Letter was read, to the great astonishment of all us that heard it, we could beleeve no other, but that by Divine permission it came from Heaven for the assurance of our lives, whereof we stood in very great doubt until then. 
Gonçalo Pacheco
 and 
Nuno Fernandez,
 with ten other 
Portugals
 which were chosen for that purpose, instantly prepared a Present of divers rich Pieces to carry to the King, unto whom they went that very same night an hour before day, in the company of the 
Bramaa
 who brought the Letter, in regard the haste the King was in would brook no delay.


Gonçalo Pacheco, Nuno Fernandez,
 and the other 
Portugals,
 arrived at the camp an hour before Sun-rising, and the King sent to receive them one of the chiefest 
Bramaa
 Commanders that he had, and in whom he very much confided, who was accompanied with above an hundred horse, and six Serjeants at armes that carried ma∣ces. This same received the 
Portugals,
 and lead them to the King, who did much honour unto 
Gonçalo Pacheco,
 and 
Nuno Fernandez
; and after he had talked with them of divers matters, he put them in mind of the importance of the businesse for which he had sent for them, and willed them by any means to leane rather to the Commanders then to him, assuring them that he should be very well contented there∣with,


and said many things to them to that purpose. Then he caused them to be conducted by the same 
Bramaa
 Lord to the Tent, where the other four Arbitrators were with the high Treasuror and two Registers; when as they had commanded si∣lence to all that were without, they fell to debating of the businesse for which they were assembled together; whereupon there were many opinions, which took up the most part of the day, but at last all six came to conclude, That albeit on the one side the King, by the promise which he had made at 
Tanguu
 to the forraigne Souldiers, for to give them the spoil or pillage of the places which he should take by force, was excee∣dingly obliged to the performance thereof, yet seeing that on the other side this pro∣mise was of great and notable prejudice to the innocent, because it could not be put in execution without greatly offending God; these things considered, they ordained by their award; 
That the King, in regard of the promise which he had made them, should pay unto them a thousand bisses of gold out of his own treasure; and that upon the Souldiers receiving thereof, they should passe over to the other side of the River, and re∣tire directly into their countries; but that they should first be also paid all that was due to them before this mutiny began, and that they should be furnished with victuals suffici∣ent for twenty daies.
 This award being published, was received with much content to either party; So that the King commanded it to be instantly and punctually executed; and for a greater testimony of his liberality, after he had paid them all this sum of mony, he bestowed upon the Commanders and Officers of each Com∣pany many bountifull rewards, wherewith they were all of them very well pleased, and satisfied. In this sort were these three mutinous nations discharged; for the King would by no meanes trust, or make use of them any longer: Howbeit, he would not suffer these strangers to go all away together, but caused them to be divided into troups; each of them consisting of a thousand men, to the end that by this means, they should give the lesse suspicion in their returne, and should be lesse able to plun∣der the open townes, by which they were to passe; and thus the next day they de∣parted. As for 
Gonçalo Pacheco,
 and 
Nuno Fernandez Teixyra,
 the King gave them ten bisses of gold, for being his Arbitrators in this affair, whereunto he added a pass∣port written with his own hand, whereby the 
Portugals
 were permitted to retire free∣ly into the 
Indies,
 without paying any custome or duty for their marchandize; where∣of we made more account then of all the mony could have been given us, because that for three years before the precedent Kings had retayned us in this country, with excee∣ding much vexation and tyranny, whereby we were oftentimes in great danger of our lives, by reason of the successe of that which I have spoken heretofore. This done, there were Proclamations made by men on horseback, to give notice that the day following, the King would enter into the City in a peaceable manner, threatning all such as should do the contrary, with a cruell death. Accordingly, the next morning at nine of the clock the King parted from the 
Pagode,
 whither he had retired himself; and about an hour after arrived at the City, wherein to entring by the chiefest gate, he was received by an assembly (in form of a▪ 
Procession
) of six thousand Priests of all the twelve Sects which are in this Kingdome; by one of whom, called 
Capizundo,
 an ora∣tion was made unto him, whereof the preface was thus, 
Blessed and praised be that Lord, who ought truly to be acknowledged of all men for such, in regard of the holy works which he hath made with his Divine hands, testified to us by the light of the day, the shi∣ning of the night, and all the other magnificences of his mercy which he hath produced in us; Praised be he, I say, for that by the effects of his infinite power, which are agree∣able unto him, he hath been pleased to establish thee on the earth above all the Kings that govern it; and seeing we hold thee for his favorite, we humbly beseech thee our Lord, that thou wilt never more remember the faults and offences which we have committed a∣gainst thee, to the end that these thy afflicted people may be comforted with the promise there∣of, which they hope thy Majesty will make them at this present.
 This same request was likewise made unto him by the six thousand 
Grepos,
 all prostrated on the ground, and with their hands lifted up to heaven, who with a dreadful tumult of voices said unto him; 
Grant, our Lord and King, peace and pardon for that is past to all the people of this thy Kingdome of Pegu, to the end they may not be troubled with the feare of their offences, which they confesse publikely before thee.
 The King answered them, that he


was contented so to do, and swore to them by the head of 
Quiay Nivandel,
 the God of Battel of the field 
Vitau,
 for the confirmation thereof. Upon this promise all the people prostrated themselves with their faces on the ground, and said unto him; 
God make thee to prosper for infinite years in the victory over thy enemies, that thou mayest trample their heads under thy feet.
 Hereupon for a token of great gladnesse, they fel to playing on divers instruments after their manner, though very barbarously, and un∣tunably; and the 
Grepo Capizondo
 set on his head a rich Crown of gold and precious stones of the fashion of a Miter, wherewith the King made his entry into the City, with a great deal of state and tryumph, causing to march before him all the spoile of the elephants and chariots, as also the statue of the 
Xemindoo,
 whom he had vanqui∣shed, bound with a great yron chain, and forty Colours trayled on the ground; As for him, he was seated on a very mighty elephant, harnessed with gold, and invironed with forty Serjeants at armes bearing Maces: there marched likewise all the great Lords and Commanders on foot with their Scymitars covered with plates of gold, which they carried on their shouldiers, and three thousand fighting elephants, with their Castles of divers inventions, besides a world of other people, as well foot as horse, which followed him without number.






CHAP. LXXIV. The finding of the 
Xemindoo,
 and bringing of him to the King; with the manner of his execution and death; and other particularities concerning the same.


AFter that the King of 
Bramaa
 had continued peaceably in this Citie of 
Pegu
 for the space of six and twenty daies, the first thing he did was to make himself Master of the principal places of this Kingdome, which not knowing the defeat of the 
Xemindoo,
 held still for him: To this purpose, having given Commission to some Commanders for it, hee wrote to the inhabitants of those places divers courteous Letters, wherein he called them his dear children, and gave them an abolition of all that was past: He also promised them by a solemn oath, to maintain them in peace for the time to come, and alwayes to minister justice to them, without any Imposts or other oppression; but that hee would contrarily do them new favours, as to the very 
Bramaas
 which served him in the Warres. To these words hee added many o∣thers, very well accommodated to the time and his desire; for the better crediting whereof, they that were already reduced under his obedience, wrote their Letters al∣so unto them▪ wherein they made an ample relation of the Franchises and Immuni∣ties which the King had granted to them. All this, accompanied with the same which ran thereof in all parts, wrought so great an effect, as all those places rendred unto him, and put themselves under his obedience: so that in imitation of them all the o∣ther Cities, Towns, States and Provinces that were in the Kingdom did the like. For my part, I hold, that this Kingdome whereof the King of 
Bramaa
 made at this time a new Conquest, is the best, the most abundant, and richest in Gold, in Silver, and preci∣ous Stones that may be found in any part of the world. Things being thus accomplished, to the great advantage of the 
Bramaa,
 he dispatches divers Horsemen with all speed in∣to all parts, to go in quest of the 
Xemindoo,
 who (as I have already declared) had escaped from the past Battel, and was so unhappy, that he was discovered in a place named 
Fauleu,
 a league from the Town of 
Potem,
 which separates the Kingdom from 
Aracam:
 Presently whereupon, he was lead with great joy by a man of base conditi∣on, to this King of 
Bramaa,
 who in recompence thereof, gave him thirty thousand Duckats of yeerly rent. Being brought before him, bound as he was with an iron coller, and manacles, he said unto him in way of derision, 
Thou art welcome
 (
King of
 Pegu) 
and maist well kisse the ground which thou seest; for I assure thee, I have set my foot on it; whereby thou mayest perceive how much I am thy Friend, since I do thee an honour which thou couldst never imagine.
 To these words the 
Xemindoo
 made no an∣swer; so that the King falling to jeer this miserable man anew, vvho lay before him with his face on the ground, said unto him, 
What means this? Art thou amazed to see me, or to see thy self in so great honour? Or what is the matter, that thou dost not an∣swer to that which I demand of thee?
 After this affront, the 
Xemindoo,
 whether it were


that he was troubled with his misfortunes, or ashamed of his dishonour, answered him in this sort; 
If the clouds of Heaven, the Sun, the Moon, and the other creatures, which cannot expresse in words that which God hath created for the service of man, and for the beautifying of the Firmament, which hides from us the rich treasures of his power, could naturally with the horrible voice of their dreadfull Thunder explain to them which now look upon me, the estate whereunto I see my self reduced before thee, and the extreme af∣fliction which my soul doth suffer, they would answer for me, and declare the cause I have to be mute in the condition wherein my sins have set me: and whereas thou canst not be Iudg of that which I say, being the party that accusest me, and the minister of the execution of thy designe, I hold my self for excused, if I do not make thee an answer, as I would do before that blessed Lord, who, how faulty soever I could be, would have pitie on me, moved with the least tear that I should shed.
 This said, he fell down with his face on the ground, and twice together asked for a little water: Whereupon the King of 
Bramaa,
 the more to afflict him, commanded that the 
Xemindoo
 should receive this water from the hand of a Daughter of his, (held by him as a slave) whom he exceedingly loved, and had at that time of his defeat promised to the Prince of 
Nautir,
 Son to the King of 
Avaa.
 The Princesse no sooner saw her Father lying in that manner on the ground, but she cast her self at his feet, and straitly embracing him, after shee had kissed him thrice, she said to him with her eyes all bathed in tears, 
O my Father, my Lord, and my King, I intreat you, for the extreme affection which I have alwayes born you, and for that also which you have at all times shewed to me, that you will be plea∣sed to lead me with you, thus imbracing you as I do, to the end that in this sad passage you may have one to comfort you with a cup of water, now that for my sins the world refuses you that respect which is due unto you.
 It is said, that the Father would fain have an∣swered to these words, yet could not possibly do it, so much was he oppressed with grief and anguish of minde, to see this Daughter whom he so dearly loved, in such a taking; but fell as it were in a swoun, and so continued a good vvhile; vvherewith some Lords that were there present vvere so moved, as the tears came into their eyes; vvhich observed by the King of 
Bramaa,
 and that they vvere 
Pegues,
 vvho had for∣merly been the 
Xemindoo
's Subjects, fearing lest they should betray him in time to come, he caused their heads to be presently strucken off, saying vvith a disdainfull and fierce countenance, 
Seeing you have so great pitie of the
 Xemindoo 
your King, get you before and prepare a lodging for him, and there he will pay you for this affection which you testifie to have for him.
 After this, his wrath redoubled in such sort, as instantly he caused this very Daughter to be killed in her Fathers arms; which truly was more then a bruitish and savage cruelty, in seeking to hinder the affections which nature hath imprinted in us. Then no longer enduring the sight of the 
Xemindoo,
 he com∣manded him to be taken from thence, and to be carried to a close prison, where he passed all the night following under a sure guard.


The next morning, Proclamation was made over all the City, for the people to be present at the death of the unhappy 
Xemindoo
; now, the chiefest reason why the 
Bramaa
 did this, was, that the inhabitants seeing him dead, might for ever lose all hope of having him for their King, as all generally desired; for whereas he was their Coun∣tryman, and the 
Bramaa
 a Stranger, they were in extreame fear, least the 
Bramaa
 should become in time like unto him whom 
X
min de Satan
 slew, and that had been during his raign a mortall enemy to the 
P
gues
; intreating them with such extraordi∣nary cruelty, as their scarcely passed a day, wherein he did not execute hundreds of them; and all for matters of small importance, and which deserved no punishment, had they been proceeded against, by the waies of true Justice. About ten of the clock, the unfortunate 
Xemindoo
 was drawn out of the dungeon where he was, in the manner ensuing. Before him marched through the Streets, by which he was to passe, forty men on horseback with lances in their hands, to prepare and clear the waies; there were as many behind as before him, which carried naked swords, crying aloud to the people, whereof the number was infinite, to make roome: After them follow∣ed about fifteen hundred harquebusiers with their matches lighted; next to these last, which they of the country use to call, the 
avant coureurs
 of the Kings wrath, went an hundred and threescore elephants armed with their Castles, and covered with silk ta∣pestry,


marching by five and five in a rank; after them rode in the same order by five in a rank, fifteen men on horseback, which carried black ensignes all bloudy; crying aloud, as it were by way of Proclamation; 
Let those miserable wretches, which are the slaves of hunger, and are continually persecuted by the disgrace of fortune, hearken to the cry of the arm of wrath, executed on them that have offended their King, to the end that the astonishment of the pain, which is ordained them for it, may be deeply imprinted in their memory.
 Behind these same were other fifteen, clothed with a kind of bloudy garment, which rendred them dreadfull and of a bad aspect; who at the sound of five Bell
, which they rung in haste, said with so lamentable a voice, as they that heard them were moved to weep: 
This rigorous Iustice is done by the living God, the Lord of all truth, of whose holy body, the hairs of our heads are the feet; It is he that will have the
 Xemindoo 
put to death, for usurping the Estates of the great King of Bramaa, Lord of Tanguu.
 These Proclamations were answered by a troupe of people, which marched thronging before with such loud cryes, as made one tremble to hear them, saying these words; 
Let him die without having pity on him, that hath committed such an of∣fence:
 These were followed by a company of five hundred 
Bramaa
 horse, and after them came another of foot, whereof some held naked swords and buckle
s in their hands, and the rest were armed with corselets, and coats of maile; In the midst of th
se, came the poor patient, mounted on a lean ill-favored jade, and the hangman on the crupper behind him, holding him up under both the armes. This miserable Prince was so poorly clad, that his naked skinne was every where seen; withall, in an exceeding derision of his person, they had set upon his head a Crowne of straw, like unto an Urinall case; which Crowne was garnished with muscle-shells, fastned toge∣ther with blew thred; and round about his yron coller were a number of onions tyed: Howbeit, though he was reduced to so deplorable an estate, and that his face was scarce like to that of a living man, yet lest he not for all that, from having something of I know not what in his eyes, which manifested the condition of a King. There was besides observed in him, a majesticall sweetnesse, which drew tears from all that beheld him. About this guard which accompanied him, there was another of above a thousand horse men, intermingled with many armed elephants; Passing thus tho∣row the twelve principall streets of the City, where there was a world of people, he arrived at last at a certain street called 
Cabam Bainhaa,
 out of which he went but two and twenty days before, to go and fight with the 
Bramaa,
 in such pomp and greatnesse, as by the report of them that saw it, and of which number I was one, it was without doubt, one of the most marvellous sights that ever hath been seen in the world; whereof notwithstanding I will make no mention here, either in regard I cannot promise to recount rightly how all past, or for that I fear some will receive these truths for lies; neverthelesse mine eyes having been the witnesses of these two successes, if I do not speak of the greatnesse of the first, I will at leastwise declare the miseries of the second, to the end that by these two so different accidents, happening in so short a time, one may learn what little assurance is to be put in the prosperities of the earth, and in all the goods which are given us by inconstant and deceitful Fortune. Whenas the poor Pati∣ent had past that street of 
Cabam Bainha
,
 he arrived at a place where 
Gonçalo Pacheco
 our Captain was, with above an hundred Portugals in his Company; amongst the vvhich there was one of a very base birth, and of a minde yet more vile, vvho having been robbed of his goods some yeers before, as he said, at such time as the Patient raign∣ed, and complained to him of those who had done it, he vvould not vouchsafe to give him audience; so that thinking to be revenged on him for it now, vvith extravagant and unseemly speech; as soon as this poor Prince came where 
Gonçalo Pacheco
 was, with all the other Portugals, the witlesse fellow said aloud to him, that all might hear him 
O Robber
 Xemindoo, 
remember how when I complained to thee of those that had robbed me of my goods, thou wouldst not do me justice; but I hope that now thou shalt sa∣tisfie what thy works deserve: for I will at supper eat a piece of that flesh of thine, where∣unto I will invite two dogs that I have at home.
 The sad Patient having heard the vvords of this hair-brain'd fellow, lifted up his eyes to heaven, and after he had continued a while pensive, turning himself vvith a severe countenance towards him that uttered them, 
Friend,
 said he unto him, 
I pray thee, by the great goodness of that


God in whom thou believest, to pardon me that for which thou accusest me, and to remem∣ber that it is not the part of a Christian, in this painful estate wherein I see my self at this present, to put me in mind of that which I have done heretofore; for besides that, thou canst not thereby recover the loss which thou sayest thou hast sustained, it will but serve to afflict and trouble me the more. Pacheco
 having heard what this fellow said, comman∣ded him to hold his peace, which immediately he did; whereupon the 
Xemindoo
 with a grave countenance made shew that this action pleased him, so that seeming to be more quiet, it made him to acknowledge that with his mouth, which he could not o∣therwise requite, 
I must confess,
 said he unto him, 
that I could wish, if God would permit it, I might have one hour longer of life to profess the excellency of the faith wherein you Portugals live; for, as I have heretofore heard it said, your God alone is true, and all other gods are lyers.
 The Hangman had no sooner heard these words, but he gave him so great a buffet on the face, that his nose ran out with bloud, so that the poor Patient stooping with his hands
downward, 
Brother
 (said he unto him) 
suffer me to save this bloud, to the end thou maist not want some to fry my flesh withall.
 So passing on in the same order as before, he finally arrived at the place where he was to be executed, with so little life as he scarcely thought of any thing: When he was amounted on a great Scaffold, which had been expresly erected for him, the Chirca of Justice fell to reading of his Sentence from an high Seate, where he was placed; the contents where∣of were in few words these; 
The living God of our heads, Lord of the Crown of the Kings of
 Avaa, 
commands, that the perfidious
 Xemindoo 
be executed as the Perturbator of the people of the earth, and the mortal enemy of the
 Bramaa 
Nation.
 This said, he made a sign with his hand, and instantly the Hangman cut off his head at one blow, shewing it to all the people, vvhich vvere there vvithout number, and divided his body into eight quarters, setting his bovvels and other interior parts vvhich vvere put together, in a place by themselves; then covering all vvith a yellovv cloth, vvhich is a mark of mourning amongst them, they vvere left there till the going dovvn of the Sun, at vvhich time they vvere burnt in the manner ensuing.


The eight quarters of the 
Xemindooes
 body vvere exposed from mid-day till three of Clock in the afternoon to the view of all the people, whereof there was an infinite company there, for every one came thronging thither, as well to avoid the punish∣ment wherewith they had been threatned, as to gain in so doing, the Plenary indul∣gence called by them 
Axiperan,
 which their Priests gave them of their sins, without restitution of any thing of all the Theeveries by them formerly committed. After then, that the tumult was appeased, and that certain men on horseback had imposed silence on the people by making certain publications, whereby the Transgressors therein were threatned with terrible punishments, a bell was heard to toll five several times; up∣on this signal twelve men clothed in black robes, spotted all over with bloud, having their faces covered, and bearing silver Maces on their shoulders, came out of a house of wood, made expresly for that purpose, and distant some five or six paces from the Scaffold; after them followed twelve Priests, which they call 
Talagrepos,
 being, as I have said, the most eminent Dignities amongst these Pagans, and held by them as Saints; then appeared the 
Xemin Pocasser,
 the King of 
Bramaaes
 Uncle, who seem∣ed to be near an hundred years old, and was as the rest, all in mourning, and inviron∣ed with twelve little boyes richly apparelled, carrying on their shoulders Courtelasses curiously Damasked. After that the 
Xemin
 had with a great deal of Ceremonie pro∣strated himselfe three times on the ground, in way of extraordinary reverence; 
O holy flesh
 (said he) 
which art more to be 
ste
med then all the Kingdomes of
 Avaa, 
thou o∣rient Pearle of as many Carats as there be Atomes in the beams of the Sun, whom God hath placed in an height of Honour, with a Scepter of Soveraign power above that of Kings, I that am the least of thy meiny, and so unlike thee through my baseness, as I can scarcely see my self, so little I am, do most humbly bese
ch thee, O thou Lord of my head, by the fresh Meadow where thy soul doth now recreat thy self, to hear that with thy sorrowful ears which my mouth sayes to thee in publick, to the end thou maist remain satisfied for the of∣fence which hath been done thee in this world.
 Oretanan Chaumigrem, 
thy brother, Prince of
 Savady 
and
 Tanguu, 
sends to intreat thee by me thy slave, that before he departs out of


this life thou wilt pardon him that which is past if he have given thee any discontent, and withall that thou wilt take possession of all his Kingdomes, because he doth even now yeild them up unto thee, without reserving the least part thereof for himself; withall he protests unto thee by me thy vassal, that he makes this reconciliation with thee voluntari∣ly, to the end that the complaints which thou maiest prefer against him there above in heaven, may not be heard of God: Moreover, for a punishment of the displeasure he hath done thee, he offers to be for thee during this pilgrimage of life, the Captain and Guardian of this thy Kingdome of
 Pegu, 
for which he does thee homage, with an oath to accomplish alwaies upon earth whatsoever thou shalt command him from heaven above; upon conditi∣on that thou wilt bestow the profit which shall arise thereof upon him at an almes for his en∣tertainment; for he knowes very well, that otherwise he should not be permitted to possess the Kingdome, neither would the
 Menigrepos 
ever consent thereunto, nor at the hour of death give him absolution for so great a sinne.
 Upon these words, one of the Priests that was present, and that seemed to have more authoritie then all the rest, made him an∣swer, as if the deceased himself had spoken; 
Since I see, O my Sonne, that thou do∣est now confesse thy past faults, and cravest pardon of me for them in this publick assem∣bly, I do grant it thee with all my hear
; and it pleases me to leave thee in this Kingdome for the pastor of this my flock, on condition that thou dost not violate the faith thou hast given me by this oath; which would be as great an offence, as if thou shouldst now come to lay hands on me without the permission of Heaven.
 All the people having heard these words, answered thereunto with joyfull voices; 
Perform so much, my Lord, my Lord.
 After this, the Priest being got into the pulpit, began to speak thus to the assistants; 
Present me with part of the teares of your eyes for the entertainment of my soul, because of the good newes I now bring you, which is, that by the wil of God this Country is setled on our King
 Chaumigrem, 
without being tyed to make any restitution thereof, for which you have all of you good cause to rejoyce, like good and faithfull servants as you are.
 He had scarcely made an end of speaking thus, when as all those of the assembly clapping their hands, gave great demonstrations of joy, and cryed out in a way of thanksgiving, 
Be thou praised, O Lord.
 All this ceremony ended, the Priests full of devotion and zeal immediately took all the parts of this poor King, dismembred in that sort, and with great veneration carried them to a place below, where a great fire was kindled of Sandal, Aloes, and Benjamin, which cost a great deal; then three of them taking up of the body of the deceased, with the bowels, and all the rest, threw it into it, and afterwads with a strange ceremony offered many sacrifices unto him, whereof the most part were of sheep. The body burned all that night untill the next mo
ning, and the ashes thereof was put into a silver urne, wherein, with a very solemn assembly of a∣bove ten thousand Priests, it was carried to a Temple, called 
The God of thousand Gods,
 and there was buried in a rich tomb within a Chappel guilt all over. Behold what was the end of the great and mighty 
Xemindoo
 King of 
Pegu,
 unto whom his subjects bore so great respect and honour, during the time of his raign, which was so flourishing, that it seemed there was no other Monarch greater then he on the earth; but such is the course of all the world.






CHAP. LXXV. My imbarking in the Kingdome of 
Pegu
 to go to 
Malaca,
 and from thence to 
Japan
; and a strange accident which arrived there.


THe death of the good King of 
Siam,
 and the adulterie of the Queen his wife, whereof I have spoken at large heretofore, were the root and beginning of so ma∣ny discords, and of so many cruell warres, which hapning in those two Kingdomes of 
Pegu
 and 
Siam,
 indured three years and an half, with so much expence of mony and bloud, as is horrible to think of. Now the end of all those warres was, that the 
Chau∣migrem,
 King of 
Bramaa,
 remained absolute Lord of the Kingdome of 
Pegu
: how∣beit for the present I will speak no further of him, but will deliver that which arrived in other Countries, untill such time as the same 
Chaumigrem
 King of 
Bramaa
 retur∣ned upon the Kingdome of 
Siam,
 with so mighty an Army, as never any King what∣soever in the 
Indiaes
 brought a greater into the field, as consisting of seventeen hun∣dred


thousand men, and of sixteen thousand elephants; whereof nine thousand were for the carriage of the Baggage, and seven thousand for fighting; an enterprize that was so dammageable for us, as I learned afterwards, that it cost us two hundred and four score Portugals. I come now again to my designe, from which I have wan∣dered a good while. After that these commotions, whereof I have spoken hereto∣fore, were all appeased, 
Gonçalo Pacheco
 departed from the City of 
Pegu,
 with all us the rest of the Portugals which remained there, and whom the new King of 
Bra∣maa
 had delivered, as I have already declared, causing their merchandize to be resto∣red unto them, and obliging them with many other courtesies, as well of Honour, as of Liberty: So we, an hundred and three score Portugals as we were, imbarqued our selves in five vessels, which were at that time in the Port of 
Cosmin,
 one of the principal Townes of that Kingdom; and there we divided our selves as pilgrims and travellers to the Indiaes, for to go into divers Countries, according as each of us thought to be most convenient for him. As for me, I set sail for 
Malaca,
 with six and twenty of my companions; where when we were arrived, I sojourned there one month only, and then imbarqued my self again to go to 
Iapan
 with one 
Iorge Alva∣rez,
 who in a Sip belonging to 
Simono de Mello,
 Captain of the Fortresse, went to traffick. Now having been already six and twenty dayes under sail, in conti
ing our course with a good winde, according to the season, wee came in sight of an Iland, called 
Tanixumaa,
 some nine Leagues South towards the point of the Land of 
Iapan
; so that turning our prow that vvay, vve vvent and rode the next day in the midst of the haven of 
Ganxiroo
: In this place the 
Nautaquin,
 who was Governour thereof, had the curiositie to come unto us for to see a thing which he had never seen before; to which effect he got aboard of us, where amazed with the fashion and equipage of our vessel, as being the first that ever arrived in that Country, he seemed to be infinitely glad of our coming, yea, and was very earnest vvith us to have us trade in that place with him: but 
Iorge Alvarez
 and the Merchants excused themselves, saying, that this port was not safe for their Ship, if any contrary winde should happen to arise. The day following, being parted from this place, to go to the Kingdom of 
Bungo,
 from whence vve vvere distant some hundred leagues to the Northward; in five dayes after our departure it pleased God that we arrived in the port of the Town of 
Fucheo,
 where we were vvell received, as vvell by the King as the people, vvho great∣ly favoured us in that vvhich concerned the duties of our Merchandize; and the King had yet more obliged us, if in the little time that vve abode there he had not been miserably slain by a Vassal of his named 
Fucarandono,
 a mighty Prince, Lord of many Subjects, and exceeding rich; a disaster, which hapned as followeth, At the time when we arrived there, there was in the King of 
Bungo's
 Court a young man, called 
Axirandoo,
 Nephew to the King of 
Arimaa,
 vvho in regard of the ill intreaty vvhich he had received from the King his Uncle, had retired himself into this Court, and continued there above a yeer, with an intent never to return into his Country again: but his good fortune was such, as his Uncle coming to die, and having no other to succeed him, he declared him for his Heir. Whereupon the 
Fucarandono,
 of whom I lately made mention, desiring to marry this Prince to a Daughter of his, intreated the King to mediate this marriage for him, which he easily condescended unto. For vvhich effect the King one day invited the Prince to go a hunting with him into a Wood, which was some two leagues off, and where there was great store of game, vvhich he much delighted in. When they were there in private together, he moved this Marriage unto him, and certified how exceedingly it vvould content him that hee vvould accept of it; vvhich accordingly he did; vvherewith the King seemed to be extremely satisfied; so that upon his return unto the Town, hee sent for the 
Fuca∣randono,
 and told him how he had prevailed for the Marriage of his Daughter vvith the King of 
Arimaa,
 and therefore vvilled him to go and acknowledg unto him vvith all thankfulnesse this grace and honour which he did him; for he assured him on the vvord of a King, that he himself had desired him for his Son-in-Law. Here∣upon the 
Fucarandono
 cast himself presently at the Kings feet, and in convenient terms for so great an obligation, kissed them, with much sense of so extraordinary a favour as he had shewed him. That done, he went home to his Palace, where, with much


joy and contentment, he gave an account of this Affair to his Wife, to his Sons, and his kinsmen, who shewing themselves exceedingly satisfied therewith, congratulated one another for it, as they commonly use to do in such honourable Matches as this. In the mean time, the Mother of the Bride, as she that had the best part in this Joy, went unto a chamber where her Daughter was sowing, with divers other young Maids that served her; and taking her by the hand, lead her into the room, where her Fa∣ther, Brethren, and kinsmen were, who rejoyced with her for so happy a fortune, and honoured her with the Title of 
Highnesse,
 as being already Queen of the King∣dome of 
Arimaa
; and so all that day was spent in Feasts, Banquets, visits of Ladies, and presenting her with many rich Gifts. But whereas the good or evill of such like Affairs consists more in that which followeth, then in the original thereof, upon the good and joyfull beginning of this Marriage, such great disasters ensued, as they al∣most equalled them of the Kingdom of 
Siam,
 whereof I have spoken heretofore: which I stick not to say, in regard I can affirm it with truth, as having seen these two Successes with mine own eyes, and been present at them wich danger enough of my person. All this day was spent in the visits of the principal persons of the Kingdom; But in this publick rejoycing there was none save the Bride alone that was disconten∣ted, in regard she was desperately in love with a young Gentleman, the son of one 
Groge Arum,
 who was as a Baron amongst us, but very much different in extraction and quality from the 
Fucarandono,
 the Father of the Bride: who, as soon as it was night, compelled by the violence of the love which she bore to him, sent him word by her whom she had alwayes secretly made use of in this Affair, that she would have him come and steal her away out of her Fathers house before some other mischief arrived. Whereupon the young man, vvho was no more free from this passion then shee, failed not to come to her to a place in which they used to meet together, where his Mistresse importuned him in such manner, as he was constrained to carry her a∣way from her Fathers house, and put her into a Monastery of Religious women, vvhereof an Aunt of hers was as it were the Abbesse; in vvhich she continued nine dayes concealed, without the knowledg or privity of any body. The next morning her Governesse vvent into her chamber where she had left her the night before; but not finding her there, she presently repaired to her Mothers chamber, imagining that she was gone thither to trick up her self extraordinarily, in regard of the time, or for some other such like occasion; and missing of her there too, she returned to her bed-chamber, vvhere she found one of the vvindows that looked into a garden, o∣pen, together with a sheet fastned to one of the barrs, and one of her sandals lying below on the ground. Presently misdoubting the businesse, she went without farther delay to impart the sad news unto her Mother, who was still in her bed, out of which in all haste she arose, and diligently searching all the women chambers, vvhere she conceived she might be, and not finding her, it was said, that she vvas so overcome vvith grief, as she fell down dead in the place. In the mean time, the 
Fucarandono,
 vvho as yet understood nothing of the matter, hearing the noise which the women made, ran in haste to know the cause thereof: Whereupon, being assured of the flight of his Daughter, he sent with all speed to acquaint his kinsmen therewith; who amazed vvith the novelty of so unfortunate and unexpected an accident, came in∣stantly unto him: Having consulted then amongst themselves vvhat they should do in this Affair, they resolved to proceed therein with all the rigour that possibly could be used; so that presently beginning with the vvomen of the house, they cut off I know not how many of their heads, under pretext of being complices of this rape or flight. After this execution, being of different opinions touching the place where this maid might be, they were all of the minde not to proceed any further, untill they had first acquainted the King with the businesse; which instantly they did, and withall, very earnestly besought him to permit them to go and search the houses of some whom they named unto him, where they beleeved she was: Which the King refusing, as well to exempt the Masters of them from such an affront, as also to pre∣vent the tumult which this disorder might cause; the 
Fucarandono
 offended for that the King did not grant him his request, returned with his kinsmen to his Palace, where he resolved with them to do therein all that in such a case he thought was for


his honour, alledging that it was onely for men of little worth, and base mindes, to proceed by way of justice in matters which might be carried by force. This resolu∣tion taken, as it is the custome of these people of 
Iapan
 to be more 
mbitious of ho∣nou
 then all the Nations of the world, he determined to bring his designe to passe at any price whatsoever, without regard to any thing that might arrive thereupon; so that giving intelligence thereof to all his friends and kinsmen that were in the Court, they came all to him that night, and approved of this his resolution, after he had de∣clared it unto them; insomuch that they went without further delay to the houses of them where they were perswaded this Maid lay hid: but they being already for∣tified and furnished with men, upon notice given them before-hand of their intent, such a great and terrible uproar ensued thereupon, as there were above twelve thou∣sand persons killed that night. To this disorder the King ran in person with his guard, to see if he could pacifi
 it; but the quarrell grew so hot betwixt them, as it was im∣possible to appease it: so that after they had lost the respect which they owed to the King, they turned all their fury against him, and slew the most part of them that were with him, so that he was constrained to retire unto his Palace, where he ga∣thered unto him as many as possibly he could upon a sudden; but all that served him to little purpose, for they pursued him thither, and killed him, together with very neer all them that he had drawn to his defence, amounting to the number of seven or eight thousand men; amongst the which were six and twenty 
Portugals
 of forty that were with the King. But these ministers of Satan, not contented with having committed so horrible a Treason, went directly to the Queens lodging, where having found her sick in her bed▪ they most mercilesly butchered her with three of h
r Daughters, and all the women they could meet withall. After this, with an inra∣ged fury, they set fire on the Town in six or seven places, which kindling by the vio∣lence of the vvinde, that was very high at that time, it took hold of it in such sort, as in lesse then two hours it was almost burnt down to the ground. Whereupon, vve seven and twenty 
Portugals
 that remained, retired with much adoe to our Vessel, vvhere we saved our selves as it vvere by miracle, leaving our anchor in the sea, and setting sail with all the speed we could. The next morning the mutiners, who were about ten thousand, having sacked the Town, divided themselves into two troops, and retired to a hill, called 
Canaphama
; there they fortified themselves, with an intent to create a new Head that should govern them, because the 
Fucarandono
 had been slain with the stroak of a lance, which he had received in his throat, together with all the rest of his kinsmen, which had given a beginning to this Mutinie.


The same day, after the end of this disorder, advertisement was given thereof to the Prince, the Kings Son, who was at that time in the fort of 
Osquy,
 some seven leagues from the town of 
Fucheo.
 This young Prince, extremely afflicted with this newes, would presently have gone to the town with some of his favorites, which were all the company that he had then with him; but the 
Fingeindono
 his governor, was utterly against it, alledging many reasons to perswade him not to budge from that place, until he had been more amply informed in what termes this affair stood; for it was very credible, that they who durst kill his father, would not stick to dispatch him out of the way too, since it lay in their power so to doe, he not being in a con∣dition to defend himself: Wherefore he advised him to assemble all the forces he could, to the end he might by their means subdue and chastise his enemies. The Prince ap∣proved of this counsell, and having taken order for that which he judged was most ne∣cessary according to the estate wherein he as, he commanded some that were about him, to go and wind the horn, a thing observed in 
Iapan,
 which caused such a hurly burly over all the country, as words are not able to expresse it. Now the better to un∣derstand this same, you must know, that by an ancient custome of this Kingdome of 
Iapan,
 all the inhabitants, in whatsoever place they lived, from the least to the greatest, are bound to have in their houses a horn of a great sea-winckles shell, which they are forbidden at any time to winde upon pain of great punishment, save in one of these four cases, namely, a tumult, a fire, a robberie, and a treason; so that if one winds a horn, the cause of it is presently known; because if it be a tumult, one winds it once; if a fire, twice; if a robberie, thrice; and if it be a treason, four times; insomuch,


that at the first winding of the horne, all others are bound upon pain of death to wind theirs, and in such sort as the first hath winded his, to the end that it may be distinct∣ly known what it is, and that there may be no confusion. Now, because this signal of treason is not so ordinary as the others, which arrive very often; when it happens to be given, all the people are so affrightrd with it, as without further delay, they run thronging to the place where the horn was first winded; so that by this means, the bruit passeth from one to another with such speed, as within lesse then an hour, one is advertised thereof above twenty 
eagues about. But to return to that which I said but now; as soon as the Prince had given order for that particular, he retired into a Monastery of Religious persons, which stood in the midst of a wood; there he re∣mained shut up three daies, during the which, he did nothing but bewail his Father, Mother, and Sisters; and that vvith exceeding demonstrations of sorrovv, testified by his sighs, and tears. At the end of that time, in regard great numbers of his sub∣jects vvere assembled unto him, he went out of that Monastery to provide for that which he judged necessary, as well for the safety of his kingdome, as for the cha∣stisement of the rebels; vvhose goods and estates were immediately confiscated, their houses demolished, and such terrible Proclamations published against them, as could not be heard without trembling. Seven daies after this deplorable event, the Prince was counselled, in regard he had, as already I have said, great numbers come unto him, to go and besiege the ten thousand Mutiners in the place of their retreat: Where∣upon he parted from the fort of 
Osquy,
 and marched directly to the town with his Army, which it was said, consisted of very neer an hundred and thirty thousand men, whereof seventeen thousand were horse, and the rest foot, all lusty and well armed, and capable of executing any high enterprise. Being arrived at the town, he was vvonderfully vvell received by the people, vvho 
estified a great deal of resentment for the death of the late King his father: He vvould not go at first to the Roiall Palace, but went before he past any further to the 
Pagode,
 where his father was buried; there he took care to make him a funerall Pomp, with a great deal of cost and honor, ac∣cording to the manner of the country, which lasted the two nights following. In conclusion, he was shewed the same robe all bloudy, that his father had on when he was killed; upon which he took a solemn oath, never to pardon any of them that should be found guilty, no not if they were 
Bonzes
; and to burn all the Temples where∣into those traitors had fled for sanctuary. The fourth day after his entry into the town, he was proclaimed King, though but with little ceremony and magnificence, in regard of the general mourning. That done, accompanied as he was, with an hundred and three∣score thousand men, he marched directly to the place, whither the mutiners were retired: Now to the end he might the more easily take them, and keep them from flying away; he besieged them in the mountain where they were, and that for the space of nine daies: But whereas they saw that they could hold out no longer for lack of victuals, and that they had no hope of succor, they thought it was better for them to die like valiant men, then to let themselves be besieged like cowards; vvith this resolution, under the favor of a very dark and rainy night, they descended from the mountain by four severall waies, and falling on the Kings Army, which was ready to receive them in battel array, as having been advertised of their design, there ensued so dreadfull and furious a fight betwixt them, as it lasted two hours within day, but at length, the conflict ended with the death of seven and thirty thousand men; amongst the which, the ten thousand Mutiners were slain, not one of them deigning to save himself upon any termes whatsoever. In the mean time, the death of his men great∣ly afflicted the King, who after this punishment of the rebels, retyring to the town, the first thing he did was to provide for the curing of the hurt men, wherein he spent a good time, in regard they were very many, and whereof a great number died af∣terwards.








CHAP. LXXVI. Our passing from the Town of 
Fucheo,
 to the Port of 
Hiamangoo
; and that which befell us there; together with my departure from 
Malaca,
 and arrival at 
Goa.


After that this revolt had taken an end by the death of so many men on the one and the other side, we few 
Portugals
 that remained, as soon as time would per∣mit us, got to the port of the town, where seeing the Country desolated, the mer∣chants fled away, and the King resolved to leave the town, we lost all hope of selling our comodities, yea and of being safe in this harbour, which made us set sail, and go ninety leagues further to another Port, called 
Hiamangoo,
 which is in the bay of 
Can∣guexumaa
; there vve sojourned tvvo months and an half, not able to sell any thing at all, because the country vvas so full of 
Chinese
 comodities, as they fell above half in half in the price: for there vvas not a Port or Read in all this Iland of 
Iapan,
 vvhere there were not thirty or forty 
Iuncks
 at anchor and in some places above an hun∣dred; so that in the same very year, at least two thousand merchants ships came from 
China
 to 
Iapan.
 Now most of this merchandise consisted in Silk, which was given at so cheap a rate, that the peece of Silk which at that time was worth an hundred Taies in 
China,
 was sold in 
Iapan
 for eight and twenty, or thirty at the most, and that too with much adoe; besides, the prices of all other commodities were so low, as holding our selves utterly undone, we knew not what resolution or counsell to take. But whereas the Lord doth dispose of things according to his good pleasure, by waies which surpasse our understanding; he permitted, for reasons only known to himself, that on the new moon in December, being the fifth day of the month, there arose so furious a tempest of wind and rain, as all those vessels saving a few perished, in it: so that the losse caused by this storm, amounted unto a thousand, nine hundred, and seventy two 
Iuncks
; amongst the which, were six and twenty Portugals ships, where∣in five hundred and two of our nation were drowned; besides, a thousand Christians of other Countries, and eight hundred thousand duckets worth of goods cast away. Of 
Chinese
 vessels, according to report, there were a thousand, nine hundred, thirty and six lost, together with above tvvo millions of gold, and an hundred and threescore thousand persons. Now from so miserable a ship-wrack, not above ten or eleven ships es∣caped, of which number, was that wherein I was imbarqued, and that almost by miracle; by reason whereof these same sold their commodities at what price they would. As for us, after we had uttered 
, and prepared our selves for our departure, we put to sea on a twelfth day in the morning; and although we were well enough contented in regard of the profit we had made, yet were we not a little sad, to see things fall out so to the cost of so many lives and riches, both of those of our nation, and of strangers; But when we had weighed anchor, and hoisted our sailes for the prosecution of our course, the ties of our main sail brake; by which means, the sail yard falling down upon the of the ship, brake all to peices; so that we were constrained by this accident, to recover the port again, and to send a shallop on shore to seek for a sail yard, and shipwrights to fit it for us. To this ef∣fect, we sent a present to the Captain of the place, that he might suddenly give us ne∣cessary succor, as accordingly he did; so that the very same day, the ship was put in∣to her former estate, and better then before: Neverthelesse, as we were weighing anchor again, the cable of our anchor broke, and because we had but one more in the ship, we were forced to indeavor all that we might for the recovery thereof, by reason of the great need we stood in of it; now, to do this, we sent to land for such as could dive, who in consideration of ten duckets that we gave them, fell to diving into the sea, where they found our anchor in six and tvventy fathome depth, so that by the means which we fastned unto it, vve hoysted it up, though vvith a great deal of labour, vvherein vve all of us bestovved our selves, and spent the most part of the night. As soon as it vvas day, vve set saile, and parting from this river of 
Hiamangoo,
 it pleased God, that in fourteen daies, vvith a good vvind, vve arrived at 
Chincheo,
 vvhich is one of the most renovvned and richest Ports of the King∣dome of 
China
; there vve vvere advertised, that at the entrance of this river, there


lay at that time a famous Pirate, called 
Cheopocheca,
 vvith a mighty fleet, vvhich put us into such a fear, that in all hast vve got avvay to 
Lamau,
 vvhere vve made some provision of victuals, vvhich lasted us untill our arrivall at 
Malaca.


Having stayed some time at 
Malaca,
 for the dispatch of certain affaires that I had there, I imbarqued my self for 
Goa,
 vvith an intent of length, to return into 
Portugal,
 if I could meet vvith shipping ready to depart from thence at that time; but some fevv daies after my arrivall there it happened, that a 
Portugal
 named 
Antonio Ferreyra,
 brought a present of very rich peeces to the Vice-Roy 
Don Pedro Mascarenhas,
 which the King of 
Bungo
 sent him from 
Iapan,
 to getherwith a letter, whereof the contents were these, 
Illustrious Lord, and of great majesty, Vice-Roy of the limits of the In∣diaes, the dreadfull Lion in the flouds of the sea, by the force of thy ships and artillerie: I
 Yacatauandono 
King of
 Bungo, Facata
, Omangucha, 
and the Countries of the two seas, Lord of the petty Kings of the Ilands of
 Tosa, Xemenarequa, 
and
 Miaygimaa, 
do give thee to understand by this my letter, that Father
 Francisco Xavier 
having been not long since in this Country, preaching to them of
 Omangucha 
the new law of the Creator of all things, I secretly promised to him, that at his return into my Kingdome I would re∣ceive from his hand the name and water of holy Baptism, howsoever the noveltie of so un∣expected a thing might put me into bad terms with my subjects, Whereupon, he also promised me on his side, that if God gave him life, he would come back again unto me as speedily as he could. And for asmuch as his return hath been longer then I looked for, I have sent thus expresly to know both of him, and of you, the cause of this retardment of his. Wherefore my Lord, I desire you, that he may hasten away to me with all the speed that the first season which shall be proper for navigation, will permit. For besides, that his arrivall in my Kingdome is greatly important for the service of God, it will be also very profitable to my self, for the contracting of a new league with the great King of
 Portu∣gal, 
to the end that by this amitie, my country and his may hereafter be but one thing, and that his subjects may in all our ports and rivers be as free as they are in your
 Co∣chim 
where you are; wherefore your Lordship shall exceedingly oblige me by sending one unto me, that may be witnesse of the desire I have to serve your King; for I will do it as willingly, as the Sun is ready to hasten his course from the morning to the night. More∣over,
 Antonio Ferreyra 
will give thee the very same armes wherewith I vanquished the Kings of
 Fiangaa 
and
 Xemenarequa, 
and which I wore in the day of battel. I am rea∣dy in all things to obey my elder Brother, that invincible King of the other end of the world, Lord of the treasures of great
 Portugal. The Vice-Roy having read this Letter, sent for one father 
Belquior,
 Rector of the Colledg of the Jesuits, and ha∣ving imparted unto him the King of 
Bungoes
 desire, he told him, that in regard Father 
Xavier
 was dead, he could wish that he would in his stead undertake this voyage to 
Iapan,
 which in all probalitie would very much redound to the service of God, and the propogation of the Christian faith. The Rector upon the hearing hereof, willing∣ly imbraced the imployment, wherewith the Vice-Roy was exceedingly well pleased, and very much commended him for such his good and pious resolution. After this, the Vice-Roy consulting with some of his friends about the chusing of a man, that in qualitie of his Ambassador, might accompany the Father in this expedition; I was no∣minated unto him, as the fittest he could fix upon, in regard of the knowledg I had, both of the Country, and of the then King thereof: whereupon, I was immediatly also sent for, and the Vice-Roy acquainting me with the great desire he had, that I should take this negotiation upon me, which he said, did so much import the ho∣nor of God, and the King our Masters service; he prest me so earnestly to it, that I knew not how to refuse him, although I must confesse, I was very unwilling thereunto: So that consenting to what I could not well avoide, he commanded that all things necessary for our voyage should with all convenient speed be pre∣pared.








CHAP. LXXVII. Father 
Belquior's
 and my departure from the Indiaes to go to 
Japan,
 and that which befell us till our arrivall at the Island of 
Champeiloo.


FOurteen dayes after, namely on the sixteenth of 
April,
 One thousand five hundred fifty and four, Father 
Belquior
 and I set sail for 
Malaca
 in a ship, wherein also was 
Don Antonio de Noronha,
 Son to 
Don Garcia de Noronha,
 who had been Vice-Roy of the Indiaes, that was going to take possession of the Government of the For∣tresse there; from the which the Vice-Roy had sent order to displace 
Don Alvaro de Tayda,
 who was Captain of it, as well for that he would not obey his Commands, as for many other misdemeanors which he had committed, whereof I will not speak in particular here, because they are altogether from my purpose at this time. The fifth day of June following, we and the new Captain arrived at 
Malaca,
 where the Licentiat 
Gasper Iorge
 Superintendant Generall of the Indiaes, who was the man that prosecuted this businesse, caused the people of the Town to assemble together upon the tolling of a Bell; and having read unto them the Vice-Roys Letters Patents, whereby he displaced 
Don Alvaro,
 he examined him upon divers Interrogatories, whereof two Registers made a verbal process, which was signed both by them and the said Superintendent, and the new Captain. After all this, 
Don Alvaro
 was de∣posed from his Government, made a prisoner▪ and all his estate confiscated: the like was done to all his partakers who had favoured him in the imprisoning of 
Gamboa,
 Superintendent of the Treasure, and in disobeying the Vice-Roys Com∣missions, as also in many other disorders that had been committed thereupon: vvhich was executed with so much rigour, as the most part fled to the 
Mahome∣tans,
 whereby the Fortresse remained so bare of men, as it was in danger of being undone, had not the new Captain provided for it with a great deal of prudence, granting a general Abolition unto all, although they returned for all that but with an ill will. These revolutions, and this excesse of justice, which put all the Country into an uproar, were the cause that Father 
Belquior
 and I could not this year pass unto 
Iapan,
 as we had resolved; so that we were constrained to winter at 
Malaca
 until 
April
 following, in the year One thousand five hundred fifty and five, which was ten months. During that time, the Auditor 
Gaspar Iorge
 continuing the rigorous executions which he exercised day by day, was a subject of great scandal to all the Country; vvherewith not yet contented, and relying on the large Commission vvhich the Vice-Roy had given him, he would needs intermeddle with the Captain 
Don Antonio
's Jurisdiction; and indeed, he incroached so far on his Authority, as 
Don Antonio
 had no more but the name of it, and was no other then as a guard of the Fortress. Now though he was very sensible of this affront, yet he did dissemble and endure it with a great deal of patience: But these excessive rigours of this Au∣ditor continuing for the space of four months; during the which there vvere many discontentments, vvhereof I will not treat here in particular, because the discourse of it would be infinite. One day 
Don Antonio,
 seeing the time proper for the exe∣cution of that which he had formerly resolved on, caused some, whom he had de∣stined for it, to seise on him in the Fortress, and carry him to a private house; vvhere (according to report) he was stript stark naked, and his hands and feet being bound with cords, he was grievously whipped: After which, having drop'd scald∣ing oyl on his bare flesh, (which had almost killed him) and clapt irons on his legs, and manacles on his hands, they pluck'd off all the hair of his beard, leaving him not so much as one, and did many other such like things unto him, as it was pub∣lickly spoken: so that the poor Licentiat 
Gaspar Iorge,
 who termed himself Auditor Generall of the 
Indiaes,
 great Provisor of the deceased and Orphelins, and Superin∣tendent of the Treasure of 
Malaca,
 and or the Countries of the South, for the King our Soveraign Lord, vvas thus handled by 
Don Antonio,
 if the report of it be true. Finally, when the season of Navigation was come, he was sent, so manacled as he was to the 
Indiaes,
 with an infamous verball process; which the Parliament of 
Goa
 annulled afterwards: And 
Don Antonio
 had thereupon an expresse Commandment


from the Vice-Roy 
Don Pedro de Mascarenhas,
 who governed the State of the 
Indiaes
 at that time, to appear personally before him as a Prisoner, for to be confronted in judgment with 
Gaspar Iorge,
 and render an account of his proceeding against him; as indeed 
Don Antonio
 failed not in making his appearance at 
Goa
 accordingly: where being about to justifie himself for that which had past, he was ordered to answer within three dayes to an ignominious Libel, which 
Gaspar Iorge
 had exhibited a∣gainst him: But forasmuch as 
Don Antonio
 was naturally an enemy of Justifica∣tions by Answers and Replyes, whereby it was said, the Councellors of the Parlia∣ment intended to surprize him, the report went (at least wise such was the say∣ing of Detractors; for as for me, I neither saw nor am assured of it) that in stead of imploying the three dayes which had been given him, in making answer to this Libell, hee vvithin four and twenty hours having met accidentally vvith 
Gaspar Iorge,
 sent him to prosecute his Suit in the other World, laying him so sure on the ground, as he never rose again. Howbeit, there are those vvhich recount this Affair quite otherwise, and that say, how in a Feast, vvhereunto he was invited, hee vvas poysoned. By this death of his all this difference vvas decided, and this businesse vvholly ceased, so that 
Don Antonio
 vvas by Sentence absolutely clear∣ed, and sent back to his Government: wherein he continued not above two months and a half, at the end vvhereof he died of a bloody Flux: and so vvere all the storms of envie and discord vvherewith the Fortresse of 
Malaca
 had been beaten, appeased.


When the season was come vvherein vve might continue our Voyage,
 on the first day of 
April,
 in the year One thousand five hundred fifty and five, wee par∣ted from 
Malaca,
 after vvee had imbarqued our selves in a Carvel belonging to the King our Soveraign Lord, which 
Don Antonio,
 the Captain of the Fortresse gave us by the expresse command of the Vice-Roy. Three dayes after our putting to sea, we arrived at an Island called 
Pulho Pisan,
 at the entering into the Streight of 
Sincaapura,
 where the Pilot having never navigated that way before, ran us with full sails so dangerously on certain Rocks, as we thought our selves to be utterly lost, without all hope of recovery: In regard whereof, by the advice of all the rest, the Father and I were constrained to get into a Manchua, for to go and demand succour of one 
Luis Dalmeida,
 who two hours before had passed by us in a Vessell of his, and lay at anchor two leagues off us, by reason the winde was against him: So the Father and I made to him with peril enough. For whereas all that Country, which appertained to the King of 
Iantana,
 Grand-childe to him that had been King of 
Malaca,
 our mortall Enemy, were at that time in arms, his 
Balons
 and 
Lanchares,
 that were assembled in a Fleet of Warr, continually gave us chase, with an intention to take us; but by Gods providence we escaped them. At length, af∣ter we had got to this ship, with no little fear and trouble, he that was Captain of her furnished us with a Boat and Mariners, and so we returned to our Carvel as speedily as we could, for to succour and draw her out of the danger wherein we had left her: But it pleased the Lord that we found her the day after deli∣vered from it; though it is true, that she took in water abundantly in the prow's side; but in the end we stanched it at 
Patana,
 where we arrived seven dayes af∣ter. There I went ashore with two others, to see the King; unto whom I deliver∣ed a Letter from the Captain of 
Malaca:
 and being received very graciously by him, he read it over, whereby he understood, that the cause of our coming thi∣ther was to provide our selves of victuals, and some other things which we had not taken in at 
Malaca
; as also that we were resolved to proceed on in our course directly to 
China,
 and from thence to 
Iapan,
 where Father 
Belquior
 and others with him were to preach the Christian Law to the Gentiles: vvhich the King of 
Patana
 having read, after he had mused a little, he turned to them that were a∣bout him, and said smiling to them, 
O how much better were it for these men, since they expose themselves to so many travels, to go to
 China 
and inrich themselves there, then to recount tales in strange Countreys?
 Whereupon, calling the 
Xabandar
 to him, 
Be sure,
 said he unto him, 
that thou givest these men here all that they shall demand of thee, and that for the love of the Captain of
 Malaca, 
who hath greatly re∣commended


them unto mee: and above all remember, That it is not my custome to com∣mand a thing twice.
 When we had taken leave of the King, exceedingly content∣ed with the good reception he had given us, we fell presently to buying of Victu∣als, and other such things as we stood in need of; So that in eight dayes we were abundantly furnished with whatsoever was necessary for us. Being departed from this Haven of 
Patana,
 we sailed two dayes together with a South-east winde along by the coast of 
Lugor
 and 
Siam,
 traversing the Barr of 
Cuy,
 to go to 
Pulho Cam∣bim,
 and from thence to the Islands of 
Canton,
 with an intent there to attend the conjunction of the new Moon: But it was our ill fortune to be surprized by East and South-east winde, (which raign in that Coast the most part of the year) whereof the violence was so great, that we were in fear to be cast away: so that to decline the event thereof, we were forced to tack about again to the Coast of 
Malaya
; and arriving at an Island, called 
Pullo Timan,
 we ran into great danger there, as well by reason of the tempest which we had upon the sea, as in regard of the great treason of the people of the Country. Now after five dayes that we had continued there, without having either fresh water or victuals, because for the easing of our Vessell we had cast out all into the Sea, it pleased God that wee encountred with three 
Portugal
 Ships which came from 
Sunda,
 by whose arrivall we were very much comforted in our travels: Whereupon Father 
Belquior
 and I began to treat with the Captains of those Vess
ls about that which they thought was requisite we should do; and all were of the opinion, that we should send back the Carvel wherein wee vvere, to 
Malaca
; saying, that there was no likelihood wee should be able to make so long a Voyage in her as that of 
Iapan.
 Having appro∣ved of this counsel, we presently imbarqued our selves in the Ship of one 
Fr
ncisco Toscano,
 a Worshipfull and rich man, who defrayed our cha
ge during all our Voyage, yea, and most part of the time that vve were in 
China,
 not permitting a∣ny of our Company to spend a peny. From this Island 
Pullo Timan
 we put to sea on Friday the seventh of 
Iune
 in the same yeer One thousand five hundred fifty and five, and discovering the firm land of the Kingdome of 
Champaa,
 we sailed along the Coast with a North-West winde, and in twelve dayes we arrived at an Island called 
Pullo Champeiloo,
 in the Straight of 
Cauchenchina,
 where we took in fresh vvater at a River which descended from an high Mountain. There amongst the Rocks we perceived a very-fair Cross graven on a great free Stone, and under it 1518, with six letters abbreviated, which said, 
Duart Coelho:
 We observed al∣so towards the River, and on the South-side, two flight shot off, threescore and two men hanged on trees alongst the Strand, besides others that lay on the ground half eaten; a thing which seemed to have been done not above six or seven dayes before. Upon another tree there hung a great Banner, wherein these vvords vvere seen in 
Chinese
 letters, 
Let every Ship or Iunck which shall arrive in this place, be sure to dislodg quickly from thence after shee hath furnished her self with fresh water, whether shee hath time, or hath it not; on pain of incurring the same justice as these wretches have done, whom the fury of the arm of the son of the Sun hath overwhelm∣ed.
 Wee were mightily surprised vvith so strange an accident, so that vve could make no other judgment of it, but that some 
Chinese
 Army had arrived there, and meeting with those vvretches, had (as Pirats use to do) intreated them as vve saw, under the specious pretext of Justice.






CHAP. LXXVIII. Our departure from the Iland of 
Champeiloo,
 and our arrivall at that of 
Lam∣pacau
; with a relation of two great disasters which hapned in 
Chi∣na
 unto two Portugal Colonies; and of a strange accident that befell in the Country.


WHen we were parted from the Iland of 
Champieloo,
 we got to the Ilands of 
Canton,
 so that on the fifth day of our voyage, it pleased God that we arrived at one of them, called 
Lampacau,
 where at that time the 
Portugals
 excercised their commerce with the 
Chineses,
 which continued untill the year One thousand five hun∣dred,


fifty and seven; when as the 
Mandarins
 of 
Canton,
 at the request of the Mer∣chants of the Country, gave us the port of 
Macao,
 where the trade now is; of which place (that was but a desert Iland before) our country men made a very goodly planta∣tion, wherein there were houses worth three or four thousand Duckats, together with a Cathedral Church: Moreover, this Colony hath its Governor, Auditor, and Officers of Justice; whereunto I shal add, that the inhabitants of this place are in as great safety there, as if they were in the quietest part of 
Portugal.
 But God grant of his infinite mercy, and goodnesse, that this Colony may be of longer durance then that of 
Liampoo,
 which was another of the Portugals, and whereof I have spoken at large heretofore, being two hundred leagues from this same on the North Coast. But ill fortune would, that by the disorder of one Portugal, it was demolished in a very little time; in which disaster, I my self was present, and can say, that the losse which was made there, as well of people, as of riches, was inestimable. For in this plantation, were three thousand men, whereof twelve hundred were 
Portugals,
 and the rest Christians of divers nations: Yea, and I have heard many say, which spoke like knowing men there∣of, that the Portugals traffick there, exceeded three millions of gold: Now, the most part of this traffick was in lingots of silver of 
Iapan,
 which had been found out not above two months before, and was such as a man doubled his mony three or four times by the commodities which he sent thither. In this Colony, there was a Governor, who resided in the Country; there were also an Auditor, Judges, Sheriffs, Aldermen, a Provisor of the deceased and Orphelins, a town Clark, and all other Officers that are usually in a Commonwealth; together with four publick Notaries, and six Re∣gisters, each of whose offices were sold for three thousand duckats; yea, and there were some farre dearer. There were also two Hospitals, wherein above thirty thou∣sand duckats was spent every year, and the Town house had in revenue six thousand 
per annum
; So that it was generally said, that this Colony was the richest, and best peopled, of any that was in the Indiaes; besides, for matter of extent, it had not its fellow in all 
Asia.
 Furthermore, when the Registers or Secretaries passed any Grant, or when the publick Notaries made any writings, they ordinarily used these termes; 
In this most noble and alwaies faithfull town of
 Liampoo, 
for the King our Soveraign Lord.
 Now, having said so much of it, I hold it not amisse to tell you, how and wherefore so noble and rich a Colony was destroyed, which arrived in this sort. There was living there a man of a good extraction and rank, named 
Lancerote Pereyra,
 born at 
Pont de Lima,
 a town in 
Portugal
; it is said, that this same had lent some thousand duckats to certain 
Chineses,
 who were not men solvent, but became bankrupts, and never paid him any thing, nor could he hear any newes of them afterwards; which was the cause that desiring to make good this losse, and to recover it of them which were not the oc∣casion of it, he assembled for that effect some eighteen or twenty 
Portugals,
 idle fel∣lows, and of lewd dispositions, with whom, under the favor of the night, he fell upon a village, some two leagues from thence where he robbed eleven or twelve labouring men; and withall, seizing on their wives and children, killed about half a score persons, without any reason at all so to do. In the mean time, the Alarum being taken up by the whole country round about, by reason of this violence, the inhabi∣tants went and complained to the 
Chumbin
 for Justice; and having made a verball process of the businesse, they presented it in the name of the people to the 
Chaem
 of the Government, which is as one of the Vice-Roys of the Kingdome; who immedi∣ately thereupon, disp
tched away an 
Haitau,
 who is as an Admirall amongst us▪ with an Army of three hundred Juncks, and four score Vançons with Oares; wherein there were threescore thousand men, which being all made ready in seventeen daies, came and fell on this misfortunate Colony, and the matter passed in so strange a man∣ner for them, as I must confesse, I have not capacity enough to recount it sufficient∣ly, neither understanding enough to imagine it; only it shall suffice me to say, as one who saw it, that in lesse then the space of five hours, which this dreadfull chastise∣ment of the hand of God indured; these cruell enemies, left not any thing at all in 
Liampoo
 to which one could give a name, for they demolished and burnt all that they could find; they put to death withall twelve hundred Christians, amongst the which, were eight hundred 
Portugals,
 who were all burned alive in five and twenty ships,


and two and forty Juncks. It is said, that in this common ruine, there was lost to the value of two millions of Gold, as well in Lingots, Pepper, Sandal, Cloves, Mace, and Nutmeggs, as in other Commodities; and all these desasters arrived by the ill conscience, and little judgment of an avaricious 
Portugal.
 Now, from this misfortune, was another farre greater derived; which was, that we lost our credit and re∣putation so mightily over all the Country, as the inhabitants would no longer endure the sight of us; saying, that we were divels incarnate, ingendred by the malediction of the wrath of God, for the punishment of sinners. This hapned in the year, one thou∣sand, five hundred, forty and two, 
Martim Alfonso de Sousa
 being Governor of the 
Indiaes,
 and 
Ruy Van Pereyra Marramaque
 Captain of 
Malaca.
 Two years after, the 
Portugals
 desiring to make another new Colony in a Port, called 
Chincheo,
 in the same Kingdome of China, five leagues lower then 
Liampoo,
 with an intention to settle their trade there, the Merchants of the Country coming to consider what great profit would redound to them thereby, intreated the 
Mandarins
 to make shew of permitting it, and obliged them thereunto with many great presents; we had com∣merce then with those of the Country about two yeares and an half, untill such time as by the expresse command of 
Simano de Mello,
 Captain of the Fortresse, there was sent into this place another man of the same humor as 
Lancerote Pereyra
 was of, un∣to whom the said 
Simano de Mello
 gave a commission to be Governor of this Port of 
Chincheo,
 and Provisor of the Deceased: but the bruit went of him, that the extream covetuousnesse wherewith he was possest, made him lay hands on all things, with∣out any the least respect to ought whatsoever. It hapned then that in his time there arrived in the Port of 
Chincheo
 a stranger, by nation an 
Armenian,
 who was held by every one for a very good Christian: This man, who had an estate of ten or twelve thousand duckets, and being a Christian, as I have said, and a stranger, as we were, passed out of a 
Mahometans
 Junck, wherein he was, into the ship of a 
Portugal,
 na∣med 
Luis de Montaroyo.
 Now having lived some six or seven months very peace∣ably amongst us, and much respected and favored of every one, he chanced to 
all sick of a feaver, whereof he died, but before he gave up the Ghost, he declared by his Testament, that he had a wife and children in a town of 
Armenia,
 called 
Gaborem,
 and that of his twelve thousand duckets estate he left two thousand to the Hospitall at 
Malaca
; and for the rest, he desired it might be kept in safe hands, untill there were an opportunity to have consigned it unto his children, as to his lawfull heirs; and in case they were dead, he left it to the Hospitall. Behold, what was the Te∣stament of this faithfull Christian, who was no sooner buried, but 
Ayr
z Botelho de Sousa,
 Provisor of the dead, seized on all his estate, without making any Inventorie, or other kind of accompt, saying, that before any farther proceeding therein, they were to send to make enquiry in 
Armenia,
 which was above two thosand leagues from thence, to see whether there were not some ingagements, or seizure of Justice upon it: There arrived also at the same time, two 
Chinese
 Merchants, who had to the va∣lue of three thousand duckets in silk, peeces of damaske, musk, and porcelaines, ap∣pertaining to the deceased 
Armenian
: the Provisor arrested them all, and not con∣tented therewith, he would needs make the 
Chineses
 beleeve, that all the merchan∣dise which they had, belonged also unto the 
Armenian
; so that under the pretext thereof, he took eight thousand duckets from them, and bid them go to 
Goa
 and there demand justice of the Provisor Generall, by reason he could do no otherwise then he did; for that, he was obliged to deal in that sort by the duty of his Charge. Now, not to stand upon the delivering of the reasons, which in vain were alledged by them against this injustice of his; I will only say, that these two Merchants returning home without any of their merchandise, went with their Wives and Children, and casting themselves at the 
Chaems
 feet, represented unto him in a Petition the whole businesse, as it past: informing him, moreover, that we were men quite-void of the fear of God. The 
Chaem
 willing to do justice then to these Merchants, and to many others which had formerly complained against us, caused it to be every where proclamed, that no man on pain of death should converse with us; whereupon, the scarcity of victuals came to be so great amongst us, as that which was wont to be bought for six blanks, was then worth above a ducket; so that necessity constrained us to go unto certain hamlets;


whereupon ensued such disorders, as all the Country rose up against us with so much hatred and fury, that sixteen daies after we were set upon by an Army of an hundred and twenty very great Juncks, which intreated us in that manner for our sins, as ofthir∣teen ships which we had in the Port, there was not one that was not burnt; and of five hundred 
Portugals
 which were abiding in the Country, thirty only escaped, who had not the worth of a penny left them. From these two sad histories, recounted by me, I inferre, that it seemes the Affairs which we have now in 
China,
 and the tranquillity and confidence wherewith we live there, (supposing that the treaties of peace which we have with them be firm and assured) wil last but til our sins shal serve for motives to the inhabitants of the Country to mutine against us, which God of his infinite mercy, per∣mit not for the time to come. To return again now to my former discourse, you must understand, that after we were arrived at the Port of 
Lampacau,
 as I have de∣clared before, we could not meet with any vessel that was bound for 
Iapan
; so that we were constrained to passe another year too in this Port, with a design in May following, which was ten months off, to continue our voyage as we had resol∣ved.


Father 
Belquior
 and I perceiving that there was no hope of going to 
Iapan
 this yeare, as well for that the season was past, as for other inconveniences that fell out, we were forced to stay in this Iland till the time should serve for us to make our voyage thither. Having continued there then til the seventeenth of Feb. following, certain news came to us from 
Cantan,
 that on the third day of the same month the Province of 
San∣sy
 had been swallowed up in the manner ensuing. The first day of Frebruary, the earth fel a trembling from eleven til one of the clock at night, and the next day from mid∣night til two in the morning; as also the day following from one til three: During this trembling it was a dreadful thing to hear the terrible noise which the stormes and thun∣der made: After all this such an horrible inundation of waters borke forth out of the center of the earth, as in an instant, all the Country about, was swallowed up threescore leagues round, without the saving of any living creature from perishing, but only of one child of seven years of age, and which was for a great wonder pre∣sented to the King of 
China.
 In the mean time this news was no sooner come to the City of 
Cantan,
 but all the inhabitants thereof were terrifyed with it, yea and all ours were so amazed at it, that holding it for an unpossible thing, fourteen of our company would needs go thither to know the truth thereof; which they immediately put in execution, and at their return affirmed, that the matter was very certain, whereof an attestation was made, signed by fourteen ocular witnesses, who had been upon the place; which attestation was afterwards sent by 
Francisco Toscano
 to the King of 
Portugal, Don Ioano
 the third of glorious memory. This prodigious event so affrighted the inhabitants of the City of 
Cantan,
 that all of them generally testified a world of repentance; and although they were Gentiles, yet must it be acknow∣ledged that they confounded us Christians, who saw how far their devotion extended. For on the first day when the newes thereof arrived there, Proclamations were made throughout all the Principall streets of the City by six men on horseback, who in long mourning robes, and with a sad and lamentable voice, rode crying out these words; 
Miserable creatures as you are, that cease not from offending day by day, the Lord of all things: Heare, O heare, the most lamentable and dreadfull adventure that ever was; For you are to know, that for our sins God hath drawn the sword of his Divine Iustice a∣gainst all the people of
 Cuy 
and
 Sansy, 
overwhelming pell mell with water, fire, and tem∣pests from Heaven all that great Province of
 China, 
none being saved but one only Child which is carried to the Son of the Sun.
 And thereupon, they rung a little bell thrice, which they had in their hands; Then all the people prostrating themselves on the ground, said with fearfull cryes, 
God is Iust in all that he doth.
 After this was past, all the inhabitants retired into their houses, which were shut up for five daies toge∣ther, so that the City was so desolate, as there was not a living creature seen stirring in it. At the end of the five daies, the 
Chaem
 and the 
Anchassis
 of the government, together with all the rest of the people (wherein the men only vvere comprehended, for as for the vvomen, they hold them incapable of being heard of God, by reason of the disobedience of the first sinne committed by 
Eve
) vvent as it vvere in proces∣sion,


thorow the principall Streets of the Citie, while their Priests, which vvere above five thousand in number, cryed with a loud voyce that pierced the very skies, 
O marvellous and pitifull Lord, have no regard to our wickednesse; for if thou takest account of them, we shall remain dumb before thee.
 Whereunto all the peo∣ple with an other fearfull cry, answered, 
Lord, we confesse our faults before thee.
 And so the Procession continuing, still going on, they at length arrived at a magnificent Temple, called 
Nacapyrau,
 whom they hold for the Queen of Heaven, as I have heretofore related. From thence they went the next day to another Temple, called 
The God of Iustice:
 and in this sort they continued fourteen dayes; during which, were great Alms generally bestowed, and many prisoners freed; also divers Sacrifices were made of the odoriferous perfumes of Aloes and Benjamin: There were many o∣thers too, wherein there was good store of blood shed, and wherein many Kine, Stags and Swine vvere offered, vvhich were all distributed in almes to the poor. In pursuance whereof, during the three months that we abode there, they conti∣nued in doing many other good works, which were performed vvith so much charge and charity, as it is to be beleeved, that if the Faith of Jesus Christ had been added thereunto, they would have been acceptable unto him. We heard afterwards, and this report was universall over all the Country, that during the three dayes of that Earth-quake at 
Sansy,
 it had still rained blood in the City of 
Pequin,
 vvhere the King of 
China
's Court was at that time, vvhich made the most part of the inhabitants to forsake it, and the King to fly to 
Nanquin,
 vvhere, it was said, he gave great alms, and set at liberty an infinite many of Slaves; amongst the which were five 
Portugals,
 vvho had been retained prisoners in the Town of 
Pocasser
 above twenty yeers together. When these came to 
Cantan,
 they recount∣ed unto us divers marvellous things; and amongst others, they told us, that the almes which the King had given upon this occasion, amounted to six hundred thousand Duckats, besides the magnificent Temples which he built to appease the vvrath of God; amongst the which hee made one in that very City, very sumptu∣ous, and of great majesty, under the title of 
The Love of God.






CHAP. LXXIX. Our arrival in the Kingdome of 
Bungo,
 and that which pass'd there.


THe season being come vvherein vve might continue our Voyage, vve parted from this Island of 
Lampacau
 the seventh day of 
May,
 One thousand five hundred fifty and six, after vve had imbarqued our selves in a Ship, vvhereof 
Don Francisco de Mascarenhas,
 surnamed 
Pallia,
 vvas Captain. So vve proceeded on in our course for fourteen dayes together; at the end whereof vve discovered the first Islands, at the height of five and thirty degrees; and vvhich by gradation regard the West, North-vvest of 
Tanixumaa:
 vvhereupon, the Pilot knowing that it vvas ill sailing there, steered to the South-vvest, to finde out the point of the Mountain of 
Mi∣natoo
: We coasted 
Tanoraa
 then, and still ran along this coast to the Port of 
Fi∣nugaa.
 And forasmuch as in this Climate the windes are Northerly, and that the current of the vvater vvas contrary to them, the Pilot had a very bad opinion of his Navigation; so that vvhen he came to know his fault, although out of an accusto∣med obstinacy of Mariners, he vvould not confess it, vve vvere already past three∣score leagues beyond the Port vvhere vve meant to arrive; by reason vvhereof, we vvere fain to tack about for the recovery of it fifteen dayes after, though with travell enough, for that the vvindes were crosse; and (without lying) our goods and lives were in no little jeopardy, by reason all this Coast was risen up against the King of 
Bungo
 our Friend, and the inhabitants, who vvere greatly inclined to the Law of the Lord, vvhich had formerly been preached unto them. At length, after that by the mercy of God vve had got to the Town of 
Fucheo,
 vvhereof I have of∣tentimes spoken, which is the capitall of the Kingdom of 
Bungo,
 where the chiefest Christians of all 
Iapan
 do now flourish; all they of the Ship thought it requisite that I should go to the Fortresse of 
Osquy,
 where we heard the King then was: Now though I feared to undertake this Journey, in regard the Country was all up, yet I


resolved for it, at the perswasion of them of the ship, who all in generall intreated me very earnestly unto it. Having prepared my self then, and received a Present worth five hundred Crowns, which 
Don Francisco,
 Captain of the Ship sent to the King, I took four of my companions with me, and so went away. After I was land∣ed at the Town Key, the first thing I did was to go to the house of the Admirall of the Sea, who received me with great demonstrations of friendship, and confirmed me against the fear I was in; whereupon, having given him an account of the cause of my coming thither, I desired him to give me horses and men that might conduct me to the King; which most willingly he did, and more freely then I required. Be∣ing departed from this Town, the next morning about nine of the clock I arrived at a place called 
Fingau,
 which might be a quarter of a league from the Fortresse of 
Osquy
; There I sent one of those of 
Iapan,
 which I had with me, to let the Captain of the place understand that I was arrived, and that I had an Embassie to deliver to his Highnesse from the Vice-Roy of the 
Indiaes:
 In which regard, I intreated him 
to appoint me such a time as he pleased, that I might speak with him.
 Hereunto he returned me this answer by a Son of his, 
That my Companions and I were very welcome, and that the King▪ was in the Isle of
 Xequa, 
where he was enter∣taining himself in the catching of a great Fish, whereof the name was not known, and which was come thither from the bottom of the Sea, with a great number of many o∣ther little fishes: and that having cooped him up in a Channel there, it was likely that he would spend all the day in that sport, and not return till night: But that he would howsoever immediately advertise him of my arrivall.
 Thereupon he sent me to re∣pose my self in a better lodging which he gave me, where I was abundantly fur∣nished with all that was necessary for mee; yea, and he told me by way of Com∣plement, that all this Country was no lesse the King of 
Portugals,
 then 
Malaca, Cochin and Goa.
 Then one of his Followers, whom he had appointed to wait on us, gave us an extraordinary good reception in a 
Pagode,
 whereof the 
Bonz
s
 made us a very sumptuous Feast. In the mean time, the King having notice of my ar∣rivall, dispatched away from the Island where hee was catching that great Fish, three light Galleys, and in them his Chamberlain, a great Favourite of his, na∣med 
Oretandano,
 who about evening came to me to the place where I was, and ha∣ving told me that by word of mouth which the King had enjoyned him, he drew forth a Letter, and having kissed it with the Ceremonies and Complements used amongst them, he delivered it unto me, wherein I found this written, 
Being at his present imployed in an exercise which is very pleasing unto me▪ I have been advertised of thy arrival in my Country, wherewith I am so contented, that I protest unto thee, I would have come away presently unto thee, had I not sworn that I would not part from hence, till I had killed a great Fish which I hold coop'd up here: Wherefore I intreat thee, as my good Friend, since by reason thereof I cannot go to thee, that thou wilt come thy self to me in this Vessel which I have sent for thee: for on thy coming, and on the death which I hope to give to this Fish, my perfect content depends.
 Having read this Let∣ter, I instantly imbarked my self in the Galley wherein 
Oretandono
 came for me, and my followers in the other two, with the Present they carried. And forasmuch as those Galleys were very swift, we arrived within lesse then an hour at the Island, which was some two leagues and an half off. Now we came thither at such time as the King, with above two hundred men in boats, with darts in their hands, was pur∣suing a prodigious Whale, which was altogether unknown and strange to them, as having never seen such a Fish before in all that Country. After they had killed and drawn it to land, the King was so pleased therewith, that to recompence all the fisher∣men that were imployed in the action, he exempted them from a certain Tribute which they had accustomed to pay before: as also conferred new Honours on some Gentlemen whom he loved, and that were there with him, and gave a thou∣sand 
Taeis
 in silver to his Pages: withall, he received me with a smiling count
∣nance, and questioned me very exactly about many particulars; whereunto I an∣swered the best that I could, alwayes adding something of mine own thereunto, as judging it necessary for the increasing of the Portugals reputation, and of the great


esteem vvherein we vvere at that time in the Country; for all the inhabitants held it for most certain, that the King of 
Portugal
 was indeed the only Prince, which might terme himself the Monarch of the world, as well for the large extent of his territo∣ries, as for his power, and mighty treasure; in regard whereof chiefly they of these Countryes made great account of our amitie. These things done, the King vvent from this Iland towards 
Osquy,
 and about an hour within night he arrived at his Castle, vvhere he was received with a great deal of rejoycing, and applaued by every one for so honourable an exploit, as that of killing the Whale, attributing to him alone, that which all the rest had done; whereby one may see, that this pernici∣ous vice of flatttery raigns so absolutely in the Courts of Princes, as it hath establi∣shed its felf a place even amongst the very Gentiles and Infidels. The King ha∣ving dismissed all them that had accompanied him, vvent to Sup with his Wife and Daughters, and would not then be attended on by any body, because the feast was made at his vvives charge. And whereas vve vvere then at a Treasurers house of his, where vve vvere appointed to lodg, he sent for us all five, and intreated us that vve should eat in his presence after the manner of our Country, adding, that the Queen did infinitely desire it. Then having caused a table to be covered for us, and on it placed store of excellent good meat and vvell drest, vvhich vvas served up by very fair vvomen; vve fell to eating after our manner, of all that vvas set be∣fore us, vvhilest the jeasts vvhich the Ladies broke upon us, in seeing us feed so vvith our hands, gave more delight to the King and Queen, then all the Come∣dies that could have been represented before them: for those people being accusto∣med to feed vvith tvvo little st
cks, as I have declared elsevvhere, they hold it for a great incivilitie, to touch the meat with ones hand, as we use to do. Hereupon the Kings Daughter, a marvellous fair Princesse, and not above fourteen or fifteen years of age, craved leave of the Queen her Mother, that she and six or seven of her companions might present a certain Play before them concerning the subject in que∣stion; which the Queen with the Kings consent granted her. That done, they withdrew into another room, where they stayed a pretty while, during the which, they that remained in the place, drove away the time at our cost, by jeering a
d gibing at us, who were much ashamed, especially my 
our companions, which were but novices in the Country, and understood not the la
guage; for as for me, I had before seen such a like Comedy acted at 
Tai
xumaa
 against the 
Portugals.
 As we were thus ministring matter for the Comp
ny to laugh at us▪ and setting the best face on it that possibly we could amidst these affronts, in regard of the great plea∣sure which we observed the King and Queen took therein, we saw the young P
in∣cesse come out of the other room disguised like a Merchant, wearing a Sy
mi
er by her side, covered all over with plates of gold; and the rest of her habit answerable to the person which she represented. In this equipage falling down on her knees before the King her father, with the respect she ow
d to him, 
Most mighty Lord and King
 (said she unto him) 
albeit this my boldn
sse be worthy of great chasti
ement, in regard of the inequalitie which it hath pleased God to put between your greatnesse and my basenesse; yet the necessity whereunto I find my self reduced, makes me shut my eyes a∣gainst all that may happen to me thereby; For being old as I am, and charged with many Children, which I have had by severall Wives, with whom I have been married, my extream poverty, and the desire I have not to leave them destitute of means, hath made me have recourse to my friends for help, which they have granted me; So that having em∣ployed the mony which they have le
t me, in a certain Commoditie, which I cannot s
ll in all
 Japan; 
I have resolved to barter it away for any other whatsoever it be: And having complained hereof to some freinds that I have at
 Meacoo, 
they have assured me that your Highnesse may doe me some good. Wherefore, my Lord, I humbly beseech you, that in consideration of these white haires, and feeble age, as also for that I have many Children, and am poor, you will be pleased to assist me in my need, which will be an almes very well bestowed, and most agreeable to the
 Chenchicos, 
which are lately arrived here in their Ship; for this commoditie of mine will accommodate them better then any other, in regard of the want they have continually thereof.
 Whilest this discourse lasted,


the King and Queen could not forbear laughing, to see that this old Merchant, who had so many children, and so many incommodities, was the Princesse their Daugh∣ter, very young, and exceeding beautifull: But the King forbearing a little from laughing, answered her with a great deal of gravity, that shee should shew some samples of the Merchandize which she had, and if it were such as would accom∣modate us, he would desire us to buy it. At these words, the pretended Merchant having made a very low obeysance, retired into the other room again. In the mean time, we were so confounded with what we heard and saw, as we could not tell what to think, or what should be the event of it; whilest the vvomen which were in the room, being about three score in number, (for there were no other men but we five there) fell to jogging one another, and laughing at us. Hereupon, the Merchant comes in again, bringing with her six fair young maids, richly clad, and disguised also like Merchants, carrying samples of the Merchandize they had to sell: They had Scymiters and Daggers by their sides all guilt, with grave coun∣tenances and high looks, being all of them Daughters to the greatest Lords of the Kingdom, whom the Princesse had expresly chosen to act this Play with her. Each of these six Damsels bare on her shoulder a fardle of green Taffats, and all of them together, seeming to be Merchants sons, danced a Ball to the tune of two Harps and a Viol, and ever and anon sung in verse with a very sweet and melodious voyce, words of this substance, 
High and mighty Lord, by the riches which thou possessest, we pray thee to think of our poverty; we are miserable creatures in this strange Coun∣try, and consequently despised by the inhabitants thereof, which exposeth us to great affronts: wherefore we beseech thee by that which thou art, be mindfull of our poverty.
 After that these young Merchants had finished their Dance and Song, they fell all on their knees before the King, and then the eldest of them having rendred him most humble thanks for the favour he did them, in helping them away with their Merchandize, they untied all their fardle
, and let fall in the midst of the room a great number of woodden arms with hands, the said eldest of them saying with a very good grace, 
Since that Nature for our sins hath subjected us to so villanous a misery, that our hands must of necessity smell alwayes of flesh or fish, or of such o∣ther meat as wee eat with them, this Merchandize will greatly accommodate us, to the end that whilest we make use of one sort of hands, the other may be washed.
 The King and Queen fell heartily a laughing at this Speech; vvhereas in the mean time we five were so ashamed, as the King perceiving it, desired us to take it in good part, saying, That the Princesse his Daughter had done this to no other end, but for the better entertainment of us, vvhom she respected as her Brothers. Where∣unto vve made answer, That 
we hoped God our Master would reward his Highnesse for this honour and grace that he did us; which we confess'd was very great, and for such wee would publish it over all the world as long as we lived:
 Wherewith the King, Queen and Princesse shewed themselves very vvell satisfied, giving us thanks vvith many complements after their manner: yea, and the Princesse said to us more∣over, 
If your God would take me for his servant, I should endeavour the best I could to please him: but I hope he will not forget me.
 At these vvords vve prostrated our selves on our knees before her, and kissing the hem of her garment, vve answered her, 
That we hoped no lesse of her, and that in case shee became a Christian, we should see her Queen of Portugal:
 Whereupon the Queen her Mother and she fell a laugh∣ing. Having taken leave then of the King, vve returned to our lodging, and the next morning as soon as it vvas day, he sent for us again, and questioned us very exactly about the coming of Father 
Belquior,
 the intention of the Vice-Roy, the Letter which I had brought from him; our Ship, and the goods that were in her; and many other things, wherein we spent four hours at the least; after which he dismissed us, saying, that within six dayes he would be at the Town, and that there he would receive the Letter, see the Father, and make answer to all.








CHAP. LXXX. My reception by the King of 
Bungo,
 as Ambassador from the Vice-Roy of the Indiaes.


AFter the six daies were past the King parted from 
Osquy
 to go to the town of 
Fucheo,
 accompanied with a great number of Nobilitie, and a guard of six hundred foot, and two hundred horse, which made a goodly shew. Being ar∣rived there, he was received by the people with great demonstrations of joy, with Shewes, Interludes, and many other inventions after their manner, that were very costly; after which, he went to his Palace, an exceeding fair and magnificent structure, whither the next day he sent for me, and bid me bring him the Vice-Roys Letter, as being come for no other end but to receive it, and that after he had read it, he would speak with Father 
Belquior
 touching the matters that were most im∣portant. Whereupon I presently returned to my lodging, and having made ready all that was necessary for me, about two of the clock in the afternoon, the King sent the Captain of the town, and four other of the chiefest men of the Court for me; who conducted me to the Palace, accompanied with forty 
Portugals,
 which marched all on foot, because it is the custome of the Country so to do. All the streets thorow which we past, were very handsomly set forth, and there was such a world of people, as the officers had much adoe to make way for us. Three 
Por∣tugals
 on horseback, carried each of them a peece of the present; and a little after them followed two curious Spanish Gennets, with rich Saddles and Trappings, and with such Armes as are used in Justs. Upon our arrival at the first court of the Palace, we found the King there on a scaffold, which had been erected expresly for him, ac∣companied with all the Lords of the Kingdome, amongst whom, vvere the Ambassa∣dors of three strange Princes, namely the first of the King of the 
Lequios,
 the second of the King of 
Chauchim,
 and Isle of 
Tosa,
 and the third of the Emperor of the 
Miacoo
; and round about as far as the court extended, there were above a thousand har∣quebuziers, and four hundred men mounted on good horses, besides a multitude of people without number. After that the forty 
Portugals
 and I were come to the Scaffold where the King was, we performed all the ceremonies and complements which are used to be done to him in such cases; and then approaching a little neerer to him, I delivered him the Letter from the vice-Roy, which he would not receive but stan∣ding. Then being set down again in his place, he gave it to one about him, that was as his Secretary who read it aloud that every one might hear. After it was read, the King questioned me before the three strange Ambassadors, and the great Lords with whom he was accompanied, about certain things which he was curious to know touching our 
Europe
; whereof one was, how many men, armed 
cap-a-pe,
 and moun∣ted on such horses as those were that I saw there, the King of 
Portugal
 could bring in∣to the field? Whereupon fearing least I should blush if I came to tell a lie; I must confesse, that I was much troubled how to answer, which one of my companions who was neer me, perceiving, speaking for me, made answer; That he could bring an hundred or sixscore thousand; a matter whereat the King was much abashed, and I too: But the King taking pleasure as it seemed, in the marvellous answer, which this 
Portugal
 gave him, bestovved above an hours time in asking him que∣stions. In the mean season, even the King himself, and all they that were present with him, being exceedingly amazed to hear such great and strange things delivered, he turned to them and said; 
I sware truly unto you, that I should desire nothing so much in the world, as to see the Monarchy of this great Country, whereof I have heard such wonderfull things▪ as well concerning the immence treasures, and the infinite number of ships which he hath; for could I but once do this, I should live very well con∣tented the rest of my daies.
 Thereupon having sent me, and those that accompanied me, away, he said unto me, 
When thou shalt think it a fit time, thou maiest bid the Father come unto me, for he shall find me ready here to receive him.


After I was retired to my lodging. I gave Father 
Belquior
 an accompt of the Kings good reception of me, together with all that had past besides,
 and how desi∣rous he was to see him; in regard whereof I held it fit, since all the 
Portugals
 vvere then together, and in their best clothes, that he should go to him out of hand, which he liked very vvell of. Having furnished himself then with certain things necessary for the better setting forth of his person, he and I went avvay, accompanied vvith forty 
Portugals,
 all very well apparrelled, and vvearing chaines of gold Scarfe-wise; and four pretty boyes in cassocks, and hats of white taffata, and silken crosses on their brests, together with a converted 
Iapanois,
 Christened 
Ioana Fernandez,
 to serve for Interpreter. When wee vvere arrived at the first Court of the Kings Palace, we found some Lords attending us there, who vvith a great deal of courtesie and demon∣strations of friendship brought the Father and me up to a chamber where the King stayed for him, who having taken him by the hand with a joyfull countenance, said unto him; 
Beleeve me, Father, this day is the only one that I can call mine, in regard of the extreme pleasure I take to see thee before mine eyes, because, me thinks, I see Fa∣ther
 Xavier, 
to whom I wished as well as to mine own person:
 Then leading him into a∣nother inner chamber, that was richlyer furnished, he set him down by him, and made very much of the four little Boyes, for that it was a new thing to him, and ne∣ver seen in that Country before. The Father rendred him thanks conformable to the great honor he did him, and after that manner which they are wont to use amongst themselves, and which 
Ioana Fernandez
 had taught him. After this, he entertai∣ned him with the principall cause of his coming, which was, that the Vice-Roy had sent him expresly to serve him, and to shew him the assured way of salvation; which the King seemed to like of, by his action of bowing down of his head: The Father going on, made an holy speech somewhat like unto a Sermon unto him, a∣greeable to the businesse in hand; and which, he had directly studied for that pur∣pose. Whereunto the King made this answer, 
Good Father, I know not how to ex∣presse the great content which I take in seeing thee in this house, and in learning all that which my ears have heard thee say; which I do not answer for the present, in regard the affaires of my State are such, as thou maiest peradventure have heard: Wherefore, I earnestly intreat thee, since God hath brought thee hither, that thou wilt repose thee a while from the travel which thou hast endured for his service. And as for that which the Vice-Roy hath written to me, touching the businesse which I sent to him about by
 Antonio Ferreyra, 
I still avow it; but the Affaires of the pre∣sent time, are reduced to that passe, as I am much afraid, if my subjects see any change in me, that they will approve of the
 Bonzoes 
counsel; Besides, I make no question but the Christians which are here, have told thee the great danger I run in this Coun∣try, by reason of the mutinies that 
ave past here, during the which, I have been in as great jeopardy as any other; so that for the safety of my person, I have been inforced to execute in one morning thirteen of the Principallest Lords of my Kingdome, together with sixteen thousand persons of their faction and league, besides as many more which I have banished. Bat if it ever happens, that God shall grant me that which my soul desires of him, I shall hold it a small matter, to consent to what the Vice-Roy advises me by his Letter.
 Hereunto, the Father replied, 
That he was greatly sa∣tisfied with his holy resolution; but he was to remember, that his life was not in the hands of men, because they were mortall; and that if he should chance to die before he effe∣cted it, what would then become of his soul?
 To which he answered smiling, 
God knows.
 The Father seeing that he could receive no other satisfaction from the King at that present but good words, without making any conclusion on a matter that was so important for him, dissembled with him, and changing discourse, tal∣ked to him of other things, wherein he knew he took more pleasure. So, having spent the most part of the night with the Father, in questioning him about divers novelties, whereunto he was much affected, he dismissed him in very plausible termes, with hope that he would become a Christian, but not so soon; a thing which was then well enough understood, and that sufficiently discovered his inten∣tion. The next day about two a clock in the afternone the Father went to see the


King again, and setting aside his kind welcoming of him, this Prince never answe∣ed him to purpose; and within a while after returned to his Fortresse of 
Osquy,
 from whence he sent to desire him to continue abiding where he was, and to come some times and see him, for that he took extream pleasure in talking with him of the great things of God, and perfection of his Law. In the mean space, above two months and an half past away, without giving in all that time any other fruit of himself, then certain kind of hopes, accompanied ever and anon with some excu∣ses, which did not much content the Father: so that he thought it requisite for him to return to 
Goa,
 as well for the discharging of the duty of his charge there, as for many other reasons that moved him thereunto. Being resolved then for our depar∣ture, I went to the Fortresse of 
Osquy
 to the King, to demand an answer of the Letter I brought him from the Vice-Roy of the 
Indiaes,
 which he presently gave me, having made it ready against my coming; and in exchange of the Present he had received, he sent him very rich Armes, together with two Scymitars garnished with gold, an hundred Ventiloes of the Country of the 
Lequios.
 In the Letter which he himself had written, were these words contained: 
Lord Vice-Roy of ho∣norable Majestie, that art seated in the Throne of those which render Iustice by the power of the Scepter: I
 Yaretandono, 
King of
 Bungo, 
give thee to understand, that
 Ferdinand Mendez Pinto 
is come to me, with a Letter from thy Royall Lordship▪ and a present of Armes, and other peeces very agreeable to my desire, and which I ve∣ry much esteem, for that they are of a Country in the other end of the world, which we call
 Chenchicogim, 
where through the power of great Armies, composed of divers Nations, raignes the Crowned Lion of
 Portugal, 
whose servant and subject I do by these presents declare my self to be: Wherefore I pray thee, that as long as the Sun shall not swerve from the effect for which God hath created him, nor the waters of the sea cease from ri∣sing and falling on the shoares side, thou wilt not forget this homage, which hereby I make to your King, whom I acknowledg for my elder Brother; to the end, that there∣by this my obedience may remain the more honorable, as I am confident it shall alwaies be: And I desire thou wilt daign to accept of these Armes which I send thee, as a gage and assurance of my faith. From this my Fortresse of
 Osquy, 
the ninth
 Mamocos 
of the third Moon, in the thirtie and seventh year of our age.
 With this Letter, and his present I returned to our ship, which rode at anchor some two leagues off in the Port of 
Zequa,
 where I found Father 
Belquior,
 and all the rest of our company, already imbarqued, and from thence we set sail the day after, being the fourteenth of November, One thousand five hundred fifty and six.






CHAP. LXXXI. What past after our departure from 
Zequa,
 till my arrivall in the 
Indiaes,
 and from thence into the Kingdome of 
Portugal.


FRom this Port of 
Zequa
 we continued our course with Northerly vvinds, which were favourable unto us in this season, and on the fourth of December vve ar∣rived at the Port of 
Lampacau,
 vvhere we met with six 
Portugal
 ships, vvhereof was Generall a certain Merchant, called 
Francisco Martinez,
 the creature of 
Francisco Barreto,
 at that time Governour of the State of the Indiaes in the place of 
Don Pedro Mascarenhas.
 And because that then the season for Navigation into 
India
 was almost past, our Captain 
Don Francisco Mascarenhas
 stayed no longer there then was necessary for providing of victuall. We departed then from this Port of 
Lampacau
 a little before 
Christmasse,
 and arrived at 
Goa
 the seventeenth of February. The first thing I did there was to go to 
Francisco Barreto,
 unto whom I gave an account of the Letter which I brought from the King of 
Iapan
: but he having referred it to the day following, I failed not to deliver it to him the next morning, together with the Arms, the Scymitars, and the other Presents which


that Pagan King had sent. Whereupon▪ after he had seen all at leasure, addres∣sing himself unto me, 
I assure you,
 said he unto me, 
that I prize these Arms which you have brought me, as much as the Government of India: for I hope that by the means of this Present, and this Letter from the King of
 Japan, 
I shall render my self agree∣able to the King our Soveraign Lord, that I shall be delivered from the fortune of
 Lis∣bon, 
where almost all of us that govern this State, do go and land for our sins.
 Then, in acknowledgment of this Voyage, and the great expence I had been at, he made me many large offers, which I would by no means accept of at that time: Neverthe∣lesse I was well contented to justifie before him by attestations, and acts past ex∣presly for it, how many times I had been made a slave for the service of the King our Master; and how many times also I had been robbed of my Merchandize: for I imagined that this would suffice to keep me at my return into my Country, from being refused that, which I believed was due to me for my services; as indeed, the Vice-Roy past me an Act of all these things, adding thereunto the Certificates which I presented unto him: withall, he gave me a Letter, addrest to the King, wherein he made so honourable a mention of me and my Services, that relying on these hopes, grounded as they were on such apparant reasons as I had on my side, I imbarqued my self for to return into the Kingdom of 
Portugal
; so contented with the Papers which I carried along with me, that I counted them the best part of my estate; at leastwise, I beleeved so, because I was perswaded that I should no sooner ask a recompence for so many services, but wont it be presently granted me. Upon this hope being put to sea, it pleased our Lord, that I arrived safely at the Citie of 
Lisbon,
 the two and twentieth day of September, in the Year One thou∣sand five hundred fifty and eight, at such time as the Kingdome was governed by Madam 
KATHERINA,
 our Queen of happy memory. Having deli∣vered her the Letter then from the Vice-Roy of the 
Indiaes,
 I told her by word of mouth all that I thought was important for the good of my businesse: vvhere∣upon she referred mee to the Minister of her State, who had the charge of deal∣ing in her Affairs: At first he gave me very good words, but far better hopes, as indeed I held them for most assured, hearing what he said unto me: But in stead of letting me see the effect thereof, he kept me these miserable papers of mine four years and an half, at the end of which, all the fruit I reaped thereby was no other, then the labor and pains which to no purpose I had imployed in these vain sollici∣tations, and which had been more grievous unto me, then all the troubles I had suffered during my voyages: Wherefore seeing of what little profit all my past ser∣vices were unto me, notwithstanding all the suit I could make; I resolved to retire my self, and remain within the terms of my miserie, which I had brought along with me, and gotten by the means of many misfortunes, which was all that was resting to me of the time and wealth which I had bestowed in the service of this King∣dome, leaving the judgment of this processe to the divine Justice. I put this de∣sign of mine then in execution, not a little grieved that I had not done it sooner, be∣cause I might thereby peradventure have saved a good peece of mony. For a con∣clusion, behold what the services have been which I have done for the space of one and twenty years, during which time, I was thirteen times a slave, and sold six∣teen times, by reason of the unlucky events of so long and painfull a voyage, whereof I have made mention amply enough in this Book. But although this be so, yet do I not leave to beleeve, that the cause why I remained without the recompence whereunto I pretented for so many services and travels, rather proceeded from the Divine providence, which permitted it to be so for my sins, then from the neg∣ligence and fault of him, whom the duty of his charge seemed to oblige to do me right. For it being true, that in all the Kings of this Kingdome who are the live∣ly source from whence all recompence do 
low, though many times they ranne tho∣row pipes more affectionate then reasonable, there is alwaies found an holy and ac∣knowledging zeal, accompanied with a very ample and great desire, not only to recompence those which serve them, but also to confer great estates on them which render them no service at all; whereby it is evident, that if I, and others, have not


been satisfied, the same happens by the only fault of the pipes, and not of the source; or rather it is a work of the Divine Justice, which cannot fail, and which disposeth of all things for the best, and as i
 most necessary for us; in regard whereof▪ I render infinite thanks to the King of Heaven, whose pleasure it hath been, that his divine will should be this way accomplished, and do not complain of the Kings of the earth, since my sin
 have made me unworthy of meriting more.




FINIS.








ERRATA.


PAg▪ 4. l. 17. 
read
 first Vice-Roy. p. 10. l. 36. 
r.
 victual and ammunition. p. 21. l. 
ult. r.
 of a Pagan. p. 60. l. 
ult. r.
 shrewd. p 77. l. 33. 
r.
 speech. p. 80. l. 30. 
r.
 lands aside. p. 83. l. 7. 
r.
 equalled. p. 95. l. 8. 
r.
 remorse of conscience. l. 49. 
for
 deserved, 
r.
 demanded. p. 100. l. 28. 
r.
 poor folks. p. 103. l. 33. 
for
 Ch
ucer 
r.
 Chau∣
r. p. 104. l. 48. 
for
 as, 
r.
 us. p. 111. l. 20. 
r.
 picos o
 silver p. 121. l. 10. 
for
 levied, 
r.
 lived. p. 123. l. 8. 
r.
 ren∣der. p. 124. l. 44. 
r.
 many light. p. 125. l. 3. 
r.
 canals. l. 12. 
r.
 praises. p. 127. l. 1
. 
r.
 conservat
on. p. 128. l. 19. 
r.
 allegations. p. 129. l. 1. 
for
 constrained, 
r.
 pain
ed. p. 130. l. 
. 
r.
 standish. l. 17. 
for
 ye are, 
r.
 yea are. l. 
2. 
r.
 valuable. l. 40 
r.
 who being able p. 132. l. 
ult.
 r. 
Paquin.
 p. 1
3. l. 19. 
r.
 ba
sters. p▪ 13
▪ l. 30. 
r.
 Ushers. l. 44▪ 
for
 rightly 
r.
 richly. p. 136▪ l. 12. 
r.
 remarkable. l. 48. 
r.
 antiquitie. p. 137. l. 10. 
r.
 P
a
aes. l. 46. 
r.
 so extravagant. p. 138. l. 5. 
r.
 Exiles: l. 9. 
r▪
 abutting on. p. 139. l. 1. 
r.
 p
enary. p. 141. l. 23. 
r.
 a
ches or vaults. p. 142. l. 15. 
for
 entertained, 
r.
 
nfolded. p. 144. l. 25. 
for
 love, 
r.
 lone. p. 149. l. 2
 
for
 st
atagems 
r.
 strangen
sse. p. 150. l. 21. 
r.
 breaking. p. 155. l. 16. 
r.
 Nix
aticoo. p. 155. 
r▪
 obliged to hold. p. 163. l. 13. 
r.
 at their pleasure▪ p. 241. l. 1. 
r.
 Timplan. l. 46. 
r.
 this Prince. l. 47 
. leagues in bred
h. p. 242. 
l.
 21. 
r.
 re∣putation. p. 244. 
l. ult. for
 undivided, 
r.
 undiscovered. p. 248. 
l.
 4
 
r.
 
log
e. p. 243. 
r.
 savages.











