(EEBO-TCP ; phase 2, no. A51876)
Transcribed from: (Early English Books Online ; image set 110128)
Images scanned from microfilm: (Early English books, 1641-1700 ; 1726:12)
Reproduction of original in Huntington Library.
Three men estee∣med Mira∣cles of Na∣ture a∣mong the Antients,
Pausa∣nias of Greece.
Called so from
Its Scitua∣tion.
Or
Whence called
Where
Famous for a Temple, whose Pillars were 4 Cubits thick, and 50 Cubits high.


The place given by
By the same token that
To the In∣habitants, whereof
Here are the
By the
Who take in here 3 days provision. Especially to those that have not been used to it.

So watch∣ful, that there goeth a word round the Ca∣stle every mi∣nute.
The inhabi∣tants poynt the Cave where the Revelation was writ, shewing St.
This, and
Called now the Mountain of the Holy Cross.
From
Where
Not be∣cause of the red sand or water.
Called so, because of its Gardens.
In Scripture,
Where the people are commonly strong and industrious.
Insomuch, that they who go by water from
That fell their children for meat, and invite their neighbours to enjoy their wives.
The Key of
It is called by

By the
Call'd
There was an edict of
Whence the

Now
Now called
Called
Cabal.
Candabor.
Spanhawn.
Divided from


From which divided by the River
These peo∣ple are sancti∣fied by their Priests by sprinkling them with Milk, Earth, and Cow∣dung.
Whose lea∣ders are their Priests, which they call
From
Out of the profits where∣of they are very charita∣ble to their lame and maimed, reje∣cting the blind, as able to work by grinding of Corn.
And Hogs, whereof six thousand a day eaten in the same place
On which are twelve thousand bridges, un∣der which ships sail.
Or
The snowy Mountains much condu∣cing to the temperature of it.
Growing on a small shrub like a Goose berry bush, bearing seed like cab∣bage seed, which being cut-down and dried for half a year in heaps & rot∣ten, is trod with Oxen in the stalk, and being grownd smal & fine at the Mills, is last of all boyled in Furnaces, re∣fined and sorted, and so sold to the Merchants.
Where those that rob a man will conduct him through the deserts, that others shall not touch him.
Called so from the City
All the peo∣ple there go in Silks and Tiffany, be∣ing coal∣black.
Where they are so barba∣rous, as to change wives with one an∣other in mirth.
Seventy thousand of them there.
Whose wa∣ters they fetch far and neer for Sa∣crifices.
Here their money and their meat is Almonds.
Where the Jesuites were told by the heathen, that they might as lawfully wor∣ship their
By the o∣ver flowings whereof it is made as rich as
And reckon∣ed one of the five
The People here believe that the world will be burnt, and under the ashes of it, two eggs, out of which shall come a man and a woman to re-people it.
A City four square, and each square four miles.
Called so in honour of
That shrinks at a touch.
That is, 1
As they say, will the un∣spun Silks of

In
Eleven hun∣dred thou∣sand by
Which is so severe there, that one hearing one of the Inqui¦sition had a mind to a dish of
Don

Two parts of it, the high town and the low.
Called so, because ship∣ped there.
The skin of some
Giving name to a
To which it is joyned by the bridge
This and

Without which there is a Nunnery of 150 noble Ladies called
Where is the famous building of the
Full of red lead, called
Supplied from
The Fort of St.
Reckoned the fourth Mart of
Healthfull, only the peo∣ple are subject to a disease, called the Blood.
Where they seat the meri∣dian.

Who kept before three parts of the
Where Co∣nies destroy their harvest.
In exchange for which there is year∣ly brought in∣to

A Bishops See.
They being not permitted the free exer∣cise of their Religion in any wall'd town.
Where there are 52 Colledges, like the Halls at
That indu∣red one thou∣sand one hun∣dred shot, 1614, and not taken.
Who is one of the twelve Peeres of
And Queen
Where
Where the Skinners Daughter,
Where is the Gate St.
With abun∣dance of O∣ranges and Lemmons.
Where St.
Duke
Arnon, Theo, Cher, Yeure.

The

The Chief City of the
Famous for a Councel there in
Where is brought much Salt, Oyl and Almonds from the Isle of
Memorable for a reform'd Synod held there 1603, where the Pope was de∣fined to be Antichrist.
A good sto∣mack wine.
Which it sends to St.
Which the people will not change, though they perish, and therefore they kept out the
The breadth of it from the River
Best spoken in
The rich men in
Whereof not one trans∣ported with∣out the Vice-Royes leave.
Whence the
A Rival to
The
And
Thence cal∣led
Called so, because they lye East of us,
Particularly wheat, for which the King of
The fishing of which yearly is worth five hundred thousand Crowns.
Its so strong, that the gates of it are kept open in diri∣sion of the Turks.
Ye
Half
Now called
Which they vend to
The Church whereof is infinitely rich by Pilgrima∣ges.
Neer which is
Surrounded with hills like a theatre, with a Lake in the midst.
The Bishop of which place conse∣crates the Pope head of the Church.
Haud aliàs Paradisum quae∣reret Paleolo∣gus quàm plus in persuavi Patavina omaenitute.
Where good Armour is made.
The Origi∣nall.

The poor Mariners there condu∣cting ships over the bars of
At the foot of the
In the
Where is a retiring place of the Great Dukes, with curious wa∣ter works.
Posted by the

They build two stories high with Marble, the Laws forbid∣ding them to build higher.
Ʋna turris in Cremonâ, unus Petrus in Ro∣mâ, unus portus in Anconâ.
The private shops here equalling the publick stores Houses.
Whence there is a pas∣sage to
A River of the name.
Whose Ca¦stle hath Rooms in it for every sea∣son of the year.
Fortified by
Whereof
Well forti∣fied by nature but since our differences with
Wher there is as many windows as dayes, pillars as hours, and gates as months in the year.
Here's a Lake, where half the water congeals in winter, and half not, and is most tem∣pestuous in a calm, having fish without finns; and a stone on the one side of which you cannot hear a musket shot on the other.
Called in
A colony of
Well privi∣ledged, be∣cause faithfull to the
Mon Mam Cymri.
Where the salting of
Of which the Arch Dutchesse
Which can∣not be be∣sieged for want of fresh water.
Where is a Nunnery of Ladies, that wear their Nuns habits in the morn∣ing, and the habit of their quality in the afternoon.
They say there that their bread is better than bread, fire better than fire, and iron better than iron.
Cole kind∣led with wa∣ter, and quen∣ched with Cyl and Salt.
Where the Children are subject to that Government, to which there Mothers were subject.
Onely the women make Stuffs, Butter and Cheese.
Famous for the Synod, 1618.
A thousand ships ride in & out before it every tide, & the richest Fleet is brought up there in a week.
About which they digg much turf for fewel
Whence
Here was the wooden Eagle, that went a quar∣ter of an ile to meet the Emperour, & returned with him to his Lodging; and the Iron Flie.
Palsgrave, quasi Psalis∣grave.

Famous for a Clock and Steeple.

A severe place to theeves, whence it is said,
Plentiful of excellent fish, as
Where
Or the town of
These three belonging to the Marquess of
A confede∣rate of the
All the nine foregoing places have peculiar Princes of their owne subordinate to the Empe∣rour himself.
Famous for the Councel there held for 18 years, ac∣cording to di∣rections from time to time, receiv'd by the Post from
The birth∣place of
Where
Neer which the battle was fought be∣tween the Emperour & the
The Fran∣kincense grows there like men and womens pri∣vy parts.
The custom whereof af∣fords 2000

The Bishop∣rick of
Where the
Where the Earles of
Formerly having the praeemption of
The Con∣duit pipes of this place, be∣ing the pat∣tern for those of
Where was 177 Brewers to 40 Bakers, one Lawyer, and one Phy∣sitian.
Where there is cu∣stom paid for 50000 head of Cattle pas∣sing from thence into
Or Haven of Merchants.
Where
Called the
Which they drive away now with the Oyle of Ca∣stor.
The best in the world, which with Stock-fish is their bread.
The best in the world, which with Stock-fish is their bread.
Where is a Monastry that is warmed, & hath its meat boyled by the fires under ground there
And whole∣some, unless it be over a pu∣trified lake or two.
Fighting best in the winter when they see their breath, being well discipli∣ned, making and mending their own things them∣selves.
Where they sell winds.
Day sixteen hours long in some places, and no night all the sum∣mer in others.
They will steal their good into one anothers houses, to hang one an∣other for them.
So well for∣tified by a
Where eve∣ry grain brings forth 6 ears of corn.
Where they worship all day the first Beast they meet with in the morning.
Where Sir
Where they drink to their dead, and bu∣ry with them meat, drink, a hatchet, and money.
Where they till the ground with spades and mattocks, say∣ing they have ill corn when they do it with plough.
Where a Pine-tree left on the ground three years turns stone.
Used there to heal all dis∣eases almost.
Where lea∣ther Ord∣nances were first invented, 1628.
Being a ve∣ry famous University and Mart.
Now under the
Between the
The seat of
The seat of the old

Where the
Neer which
So dry, that the Cattle gape morning and evening for dew.
Ʋnde aliquid brevibus Gya∣ris, &c.
Where

Where they make
Burned by a King, who being told, that an honest womans wa∣ter might cure him, and try∣ing many to no purpose, burned them in this town.
St.
Where is good store of Goats, Horses and Wood.
Where the people paint their cheeks and hands with a black cross.
Where is a new
Where it snoweth all the year.
With his Barley meale pap, which they eat on the ground.
Against which

Where they entertain strangers at free cost.
One of the twenty five Kingdomes of this land.
They trade hence to
With the tree

Where they sow their Fe∣male Chil∣drens privy parts, until they are mar¦ried, onely leaving a place for Urine.
Bartered for wheat, wine, cheese, hides.
Whereof almost 4000 Tun vended yearly in
Where a cloud falls on the leaves of a tree, and rains every day to supply their defect of water.

Liking our Religion at first so well, that they would say,
Over whom here and at
Whereof it yields two harvests.
In
It hath nine∣ty
The Stage for those that travel North∣wards.
Which o∣ver-flowed it in 1629, be∣fore which time it had 4 fair things,
Therefore styled
A rich grain used in dying Scarlet.
Neer which is a pit, into which, if you throw a little stone, you hear a clap of thunder.
Noted for Sulphur and Allom.

Especially the Balsome of
Where much Chry∣stal, Emerals, Adamants, Chalcedoni∣ans.
Very cold, beyond the Tropick of
So that the Natives dare not eat their Swine or Poultry, without the
Called
Which they exchange with the
As most of these Coun∣tries are by
And Medi∣cinable association.
Where
Which they sell for Knives and Hatchets.