The traveller's guide and the country's safety being a declaration of the laws of England against high-way-men or robbers upon the road : what is necessary and requisite to be done by such persons as are robbed in order to the recovering their damages : against whom they are to bring their action and the manner how it ought to be brought : illustrated with variety of law cases, historical remarks, customs, usages, antiquities and authentick authorities / by J.M.
J. M.
Approx. 147 KB of XML-encoded text transcribed from 72 1-bit group-IV TIFF page images.
Ann Arbor, MI ; Oxford (UK) :
Text Creation Partnership,
2011-04 (EEBO-TCP Phase 2).
A51818




Wing M50



ESTC R2818





ocm 12412764




This text has been selected for inclusion in the EEBO-TCP: Navigations collection, funded by the National Endowment for the Humanities. To the extent possible under law, the Text Creation Partnership has waived all copyright and related or neighboring rights to this keyboarded and encoded edition of the work described above, according to the terms of the CC0 1.0 Public Domain Dedication ( http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/). This waiver does not extend to any page images or other supplementary files associated with this work, which may be protected by copyright or other license restrictions. Please go to http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/ for more information.
Early English books online text creation partnership.  Navigations series.
The traveller's guide and the country's safety being a declaration of the laws of England against high-way-men or robbers upon the road : what is necessary and requisite to be done by such persons as are robbed in order to the recovering their damages : against whom they are to bring their action and the manner how it ought to be brought : illustrated with variety of law cases, historical remarks, customs, usages, antiquities and authentick authorities / by J.M.
J. M.
[10], 127, [6] p.   


London :


Printed by the assigns of Richard and Edward Atkins, Esquires, for Langley Curtis ... and Thomas Simons ...,


1683.


Header created with script mrcb2eeboutf.xsl on 2016-01-29.
Manually keyed and coded text linked to page images in accordance with level 4 of the TEI in Libraries guidelines.
Issued variously as SGML (TCP schema; ASCII text with mnemonic sdata character entities); displayable XML (TCP schema; characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or text strings within braces); or lossless XML (TEI P5, characters represented either as UTF-8 Unicode or TEI g elements).
Keying and markup guidelines available at TCP web site (http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/)
eng
Travel --  Early works to 1800.
Brigands and robbers --  Law and legislation --  Great Britain.
2009-04
TCP
Assigned for keying and markup
2009-05
SPi Global
Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images
2009-06
John Pas
Sampled and proofread
2009-06
John Pas
Text and markup reviewed and edited
2009-09
pfs
Batch review (QC) and XML conversion






m50


12412764


61578














THE 
Traveller's Guide,
 AND, 
The Country's Safety.


BEING A Declaration of the Laws of 
Eng∣land
 against 
High-way-men,
 or 
Robbers upon the Road;


What is necessary and requisite to be done by such persons as are robbed in order to the recovering their damages;


Against whom they are to bring their Action, and the manner how it ought to be brought.


Illustrated with variety of Law Cases, Historical Remarks, Customs, Usages, Anti∣quities and Authentick Authorities.


By 
J. M.


LONDON,
 Printed by the Assigns of 
Richard
 and 
Edward Atkins,
 Esquires, for 
Langley Curtis,
 on 
Ludgate Hill,
 and 
Thomas Simons,
 at the 
Prince
's 
Arms
 in 
Ludgate Street,
 1683.










TO THE READER.


TO travel the Road in safe∣ty is none of the least ad∣vantages we receive by the Laws of 
England;
 for by them it is that we are protected from the violence of those discontented, designing, profligate Wretches, the Robbers upon the High-way; fellows by their own Heraldry intitling themselves 
Gentlemen of the Road,
 and glory in their invention of the most 
Gentile
 Trade of Ruining Mankind; when, alas, if you look into their 
Pedigree,
 you will find them so

far from men of Honour or Ver∣tue, that nothing can be made of them but a pack of idle disso∣lute Rascals, the best of them but 
Cadets,
 most commonly the spawn of broken Tradesmen and worst of 
Debauchees.


But we design not so much by this Treatise to give the 
Cha∣racter
 of these 
Disturbers
 of the Quiet and Repose of 
Mankind,
 as to set forth what good and wholsome Laws have been for∣merly made by our discerning 
Ancestours
 against them, and how the honest 
Traveller
 may obtain a 
Legal Recompence
 for the Los∣ses he sustains by such Cattel; The main scope and intent of this Discourse being to shew,


That, whereas by the Statute of 
Winton,
 made in the Thirteenth year of King 
Edward
 the First, If divers

persons had committed a Robbery, the Hundred should have been amerced, if they had not apprehen∣ded all the Felons; and how that by the Statute of the Seven and Twentieth of 
Eliz.
 Chap. 13. a new Law is made in these points fol∣lowing,




1. None shall have an Action upon the said Statute 13 
Ed.
 1. except that the party robbed, doth give notice, as soon as he can, of the said Felony, to some of the Inhabitants of some Town, Village or Hamlet, next to the place where the Robbery was done.


2. If they in their pursuit ap∣prehend any of the Offenders, That shall excuse them, although that they do not apprehend them all.






To which is added, for the benefit of Clerks and Attorneys, variety of Precedents, from the Declaration to the Execution, in all Cases relating to the prosecu∣ting of the Hundred where the party is robbed, that nothing may be wanting to compleat a Work so profitable both to the Attorney and his Client.


J. M.








THE TABLE.




RObbery, what it is. 
fol. 1.


Where and how the party is to have restitution of the Goods where∣of he was robbed, upon an Appeal or Indictment. 
fol. 6.


Of the Action upon the Statute of 
Winton
 against the Hundred 
fol. 14.


Where and how notice is to be given of the Robbery. 
fol. 25.


At what time the Robbery must be com∣mitted to charge the Hundred by an Action upon the Statute of 
Win∣ton. fol. 32.


In what place a Robbery must be com∣mitted to charge the Hundred: 
fol. 42.


How one or more against whom Exe∣cution

is had may have contribution from the rest of the Inhabitants of the same Hundred. 
fol. 48.


Of Hue and Cry. 
fol. 66.


Who may raise the Hue and Cry, and for what cause. 
fol. 68.


How and in what manner the fresh suit and pursuit is to be made upon a Hue and Cry levied. 
fol. 74.


Who are bound to pursue upon the Hue and Cry levied. 
fol. 81.


The Statute of 
Westminster 1.
 Cap. 
9. Anno 3 Ed. 1.
 of Robberies. 
fol. 86.


The Statute of 
Winton Anno 13 Ed. 1.
 of Robberies. 
fol. 88.


The Proclamation or Writ directed to the Sheriff 
Anno 21 Ed. 1.
 to pro∣claim the Statute of 
Winton. fol. 91.


The Statute of 
28 Ed. 3.
 Cap. 
11. fol. 94.


The Statute of 
27 Eliz.
 Cap. 
11.
 Of Hue and Cry. 
fol. 97.


The Form of an original Writ upon the Statute of Hue and Cry. 
fol. 111.


The Retorn of the same Writ. 
fol. 115.


A Declaration upon the same. 
fol. 116.


Aliter in Divisis Hundredorum. fol. 117.


General Issue pleaded with challenge to the Hundred. 
fol. 118.




Barr, that no Hue and Cry was made. 
fol. 119.


Non inform'
 to a Declaration upon the Statute, with Judgment after a Writ of Inquiry. 
fol. 120.


Judgment upon the Statute after Ver∣dict. 
fol. 122.


Venire Facias. fol. 123.


Distringas
 against the Jury, with the Retorn. 
fol. ibid.


Writ of Inquiry. 
fol. 124.


The Oath to be taken before a Justice of Peace by the person or persons who are robbed, whereupon the par∣ty robbed may ground his Action ac∣cording to the Statute of 
27 Eliz. fol. 126.
















THE
 Traveller's Guide, 
AND,
 The Country's Safety.




What is Robbery.


RObbery is the felonious ta∣king of any thing from the person of another against his will, whereby the person is put in fear; though the thing taken be but to the value of a peny, for which the Offender shall be hanged.


Yet in some cases it is not neces∣sary that the thing whereof the par∣ty is robbed be actually taken from his person, for if the Robbers ob∣tain it by force and menaces, though the owner himself delivers it to

them, yet this tantamounts to a ta∣king from the person; for the Law respects the original cause 
(viz.)
 the threats and menaces which ne∣cessitated the Propriator to quit his goods for the preservation of his life and person; As if one com∣mand another presently to deliver him his purse, or otherwise he will kill him, which he does according∣ly, this is Robbery, for the danger he confessed himself to be in by rea∣son of those threatnings was the cause and motive of that delivery; So if two or more take a man and by force compell him to take an Oath to bring them such a sum of money, and if he does not they threaten to kill him; Though he brings it in pursuance of his Oath, and delivers it to them and they take it, yet this is Robbery, not∣withstanding that by this inforced Oath he was not bound in consci∣ence to bring them the money; for he took it for fear of death, and so not voluntarily; If Felons come in the night to rob me in my house, and I, fearing lest they should enter

the house and rob me, and, to pre∣vent their entry, I throw money or plate, 
&c.
 out at the window to them,
 which they take and de∣part, this is Robbery; for, in con∣struction of Law, it is the same as if they had taken it from my per∣son.


If Felons take goods openly in a place where the Owner is present, and thereby put him in fear, or take his horse or drive his cattel out of his pasture or fold, he stan∣ding by and looking on them,
 so that he be terrified by their vio∣lent carriage, menaces, assaults or otherwise, this is Robbery in the takers, and the Law supposes it to be done with such violence that he is not able nor dare not to resist them, 
& in privata causa nemo tene∣tur exponere se periculis.


The putting the party in fear is an especial part of a Robbery, with∣out which, in estimation of Law, no Robbery can be committed;
 for if I be travelling upon the road, and one comes by and takes my money from my pocket, or my sword from

my side unknown to me, this is Felo∣ny but no Robbery.


The taking away of something from the person, either in Fact or Law, is as necessary an ingredient to make a Robbery as the Putting of the party in fear; As if one lies in wait in the high-way to rob pas∣sengers, and he bids a Traveller which comes along to stand and yield him his purse,
 if the Travel∣ler upon resistance overcome him, and either apprehends him or puts him to flight, though there was a design and an attempt to commit a Robbery, yet, 
volunt as non reputa∣bitur pro facto,
 and though the Law adjudges this intent to be no Rob∣bery, yet it ranks it, and that not undeserved, amongst the highest of misdemeanours.


So that the difference betwixt Robbery and a Theft is that, That one is done openly and with force, the other secretly and surreptitious∣ly; And if any thing be taken from a man openly and in his presence, and his person is not thereby put in fear, this amounts onely to a trespass.




A Traveller may justifie the kil∣ling of any person who shall at∣tempt to rob or murther him upon the way, and that without the for∣feiture of either lands, goods or chattels;
 This point of the forfei∣ture was somewhat disputable at the Common Law; Some would have it to be the same with killing of a man by chance-medly, or 
se defen∣dendo;
 but this point hath been cleared by an explanatory Act made in the 24 
H.
 8. 
cap.
 5. where it is declared, 
That if any person or per∣sons do attempt feloniously to rob or murther any person or persons in or nigh any common high-way, cart-way, horse-way or foot-way, and if any such evil disposed person happen to be kil∣led or slain in such attempt, and he that so killed him be thereof indicted or appealed, That the person or per∣sons so indicted or appealed, and of the same by verdict so found and tri∣ed, shall not forfeit or lose any lands, tenements, goods or chattels, for the death of any such evil dispo∣sed person in such manner slain, but shall be thereof and for the same fully

acquitted and discharged, in like man∣ner as the same person or persons should be, if he or they were lawfully acquitted of the death of such evil disposed person or persons.






Where and how the party is to have restitution of the goods whereof he was robbed, upon an Appeal or Indictment.


AT the Common Law, before the Statute of 
Westminster,
 the person robbed had no other satis∣faction but onely restitution of his goods, in case he made fresh pur∣suit after the Robber, and convic∣ted him at his own Suit 
(viz.)
 by an Appeal of Robbery. The Law is so eager to have Felons apprehen∣ded, that if the party does not use his utmost endeavours to get the Offender taken, it punisheth him with the loss and forfeiture of the goods stolen; So that if the Male∣factor be convicted at the Suit of the party, yet if the Jury does not

find that he had made fresh suit af∣ter the Felon, the goods stoln are forfeited to the King, and no resti∣tution can be made of them.


As the Law condemns the not pursuing or in slack and faint pur∣suit of Robbers; so it rewardeth diligent endeavours though they meet with no success: for if a Fe∣lon which committed a Robbery be not taken by the space of a year after the Felony committed, yet if the party that was robbed doe his endeavour to apprehend the Felon, and make diligent and special en∣quiry for him, and after he be ta∣ken, though not at the suit of the party robbed, yet that shall be ad∣judged a sufficient fresh suit, and upon his appeal brought, and the Offender convicted, he shall have restitution of his goods robbed; and if this fresh suit was made by a Servant, and not by the party rob∣bed himself, it is sufficient to pro∣cure him restitution.


Conviction without Attainder is sufficient to entitle the Appealant to a restitution, though in ancient

times some opinions have been to the contrary, and that no restitu∣tion could be made untill after at∣tainder, and in some cases where no attainder could be (as where the Felon died in prison before the Owner had commenced his appeal) though the suit was never so fresh, 
Fit. Coron.
 319.8 
E.
 3.10. But now it is agreed that if after the appeal commenced the Felon die in prison or break the prison, the fresh suit shall be enquired, and if found, the party robbed shall be restored to his goods, 
Fit. Coron.
 379. 26 
Ass. p.
 32. So if the Male∣factor stand mute or challenge per∣emptorily above the number which the Law does allow, or demand his Clergy, in every of these cases the fresh suit being found by inquest, the Appealant shall have restitution of his goods, for he had done all that he could in order to an attainder.


If an appeal of Robbery be sued against the Principal and Accessory, and the Principal be attainted and the fresh suit is sound, restitution shall be made of the stoln goods

without prosecuting the suit against the Accessory, and yet his continu∣ance of the suit against the Accesso∣ry shall not hinder his restitution, for that the principal Felon is at∣tainted by his procurement; and the Appealant shall have restitution whether the Accessory be attainted or acquitted; In the same manner the Appealant shall have restitution where he sues an appeal against two as Principals and one of them is ac∣quitted, 21. 
Ed.
 4.16. 10 
H.
 4.5. If one man rob divers men, for which they bring their several ap∣peals, and the Felon is attainted at the suit of one of them, and the fresh suit is found, in this case the rest shall not have restitution untill the Offender be convicted at their several suits, and likewise the fresh suit severally found.


There are some opinions which hold that if the Appealant sue the Robber to the outlawry that he shall have restitution of his goods without enquiring of the fresh suit, for that he had prosecuted against the Appealee as far as the Law gave him way.




An enquiry must be made of the fresh suit before any restitution can be awarded; and that too before the Justices and not the Sheriff, and by the Jury that convicted the De∣fendant of the Robbery: But in case the Defendant doth confess the appeal, then it must be enquired of by a 
Visne
 from that County where the Robbery was committed, and where the appeal is brought, ex∣cept it be brought in 
London;
 for that the City hath a privilege not to be forced to appear upon Juries out of the City; And it cannot be taken there by 
Nisi Prius,
 because it is but an inquest of Office; Therefore in this case the 
Visne
 shall come from that County where the Robber was taken, and so it shall be enquired by the people of that County.


In the first place the Court is to ask the Defendant in the appeal if he claims any property in the goods; which if he says he does not, then it must be enquired if the goods were the Plaintiff's at the time of the Robbery committed,

and also enquire of the fresh suit.


If the Manner (
viz.
 the stoln goods) wherewith the Felon is ta∣ken be portable, or that it can be otherwise done with conveniency, it ought to be brought into the Court before the Justices, and if it be in a trunk, box, chest or cloak-bag, 
&c.
 the Appealant must tell particularly what goods there are in it before it be opened, or that he can have restitution.


The Appealant's fresh suit being found by the Inquest, the Court ought to award him restitution of all the goods contained in his ap∣peal, which the King's Officers or any other had seised to the King's use.


Having shewed how the party robbed might obtain restitution of his goods by Appeal, in the next place falls under consideration the case of an Indictment: At Com∣mon Law, if the person robbed had steered his course this way he had certainly split himself upon the rocks; for restitution could in no

case be awarded upon an Indictment, though the Jury that found the Of∣fender guilty of the Robbery had likewise found the fresh Suit. To remedy this inconveniency an Act was made 21 
H.
 8. 
cap.
 18. whereby it was enacted, 
That if any Felon or Felons do rob or take away money, goods or chattels from any of the King's Sub∣jects, from their person or otherwise within this Realm, and thereof the said Felon or Felons be indicted, and after arraigned of the same Felony and found guilty thereof, or otherwise attainted by reason of evidence given by the party robbedd or owner of the said money, goods and chattels, that as well Justices of Goal delivery, as other Justices before whom any such Felon or Felons shall be found guilty or other∣wise attainted by reason of evidence given by the party so robbed or owner, or by any other by their procurement, have power by this Act to award from time to time Writs of restitution for the said money, goods or chattels in like manner as though any such Felon or Felons were attainted at the Suit of the party in appeal:
 So that by

virtue of this Act the party robbed may have restitution upon evidence given by himself or by any other by his procurement notwithstan∣ding that he made not any fresh Suit.


If the Servant be robbed of his Master's goods, the Master may give evidence against the Felon by virtue of these words 
(the party so robbed or owner)
 And if the party robbed does not give evidence him∣self but procure another to doe it, this is sufficient within the words of the Statute to enable him to obtain restitution.


If one man do rob goods from three men severally, and he is in∣dicted for the robbing of one of them, and thereupon arraigned; though the other two would give evidence against the Malefactor, yet they shall not have restitution of their goods within the intent and meaning of this Act, for the Felon is not attainted of any other Robbery but that whereof he is in∣dicted: But if he be indicted of all the three several Robberies seve∣rally,

and arraigned upon one of them, and convicted upon the evi∣dence given by one of the parties robbed, yet he shall be after ar∣raigned upon the other two Indict∣ments that he may be also found guilty by the evidence of the other two persons robbed; to the end they may have restitution of their goods.


Though this Statute speak onely of the party robbed, yet his Exe∣cutors and Administrators are with∣in the meaning of it: for it is a be∣neficial Law, and gives a more spee∣dy remedy to the party robbed than the Common Law gave by way of Indictment, and therefore ought to be construed beneficially.






Of the Action upon the Statute of 
Winchester
 against the Hun∣dred.


HAving shewed how and in what cases the party robbed may have restitution of the stoln goods,

both upon an Appeal and an Indict∣ment, now I shall proceed to shew what further remedy the Law gives him for his indempnity. At Com∣mon Law, if a man was robbed, he was presently to use his utmost en∣deavour to apprehend the Felon, and if he was found defective or negligent in this particular, the Law would give him no relief; and though there was no neglect in him, yet for want of the due and speedy assistance of others, which were o∣bliged to joyn with him in the pur∣suit, perhaps the Robber was not taken untill such time as he had op∣portunity to make away and im∣bezle the goods; So that if it chan∣ced that he was taken afterwards, the party was destitute of any sort of recompence, whereas if the Fe∣lon had been freshly and vigorously pursued from Town to Town, 
&c.
 as the Law does direct and require, he might have been taken with the Manner, and upon an Appeal brought and a conviction there∣upon, the Owner was to have re∣stitution of the goods which were

stoln from him. It is true the Law did punish the Inhabitants of the place where the Robbery was com∣mitted, if, upon notice given to the Constable of the Town, the Huy and Cry was not raised, and all persons within the Town were bound to follow the pursuit, which if they did not they were punish∣able by Fine and Imprisonment, this Cry was to be carried from Con∣stable to Constable; and if any Town was indicted for the escape of the Felon, the pursuit with Huy and Cry to the next Constable was a good excuse, a total neglect or at least the faint and weak perfor∣mance of these fresh suits being not duly punished, Robbers did escape unpunished, and that impunity was an encouragement to others to commit the like enormities, to the great and manifest danger of the King's Subjects travelling upon their lawfull occasions. For the indemp∣nity of persons who should sustain any loss by Robberies, and for the more effectual obliging of Cities, Towns and Villages, and to discharge

their duty with great care and di∣ligence in the pursuing and appre∣hending of Felons, it was thought fit a Law should be made, that if the Felons were not taken within such a time, the Hundred where the Robbery was committed should sa∣tisfie the party whatever he was damnified thereby; to that end there was a Statute made at 
Win∣chester,
 in the 13 
E.
 1. whereby, in the preamble thereof, is set forth the principal cause of the frequent escapes of Felons without being ap∣prehended, and why the Laws which were then extant proved ineffectu∣al to suppress and extinguish both Felons and Felonies, and whence the growth of them proceeded, for that Felons could not be attainted by the Oaths of Jurors, who had rather strangers should be robbed and the Robbers escape punishment than indict the Offenders, of whom great part were of the same Coun∣try, or at least, if the Offenders were of another Country, the Re∣farvors might be of places near; and they did this, because no Oath

was given to the Jurors of the same Country where the Felonies were committed, and no Law obliged them to restitution of damages, nor any penalty limited for their concealment and Latches. And for that the fear of a penalty more than that of an Oath might be a grea∣ter engagement upon them not to spare or conceal Felonies, therefore it was enacted, 

That if any Robbe∣ry, 
&c.
 be committed (if need re∣quires) Inquest shall be made in Towns by him that is Lord of the Town, and after in the Hundred, and in the Franches and in the County, and some∣times in two, three or four Counties, in case where Felonies shall be commit∣ted in the Marches of Shires.

And it was further enacted, 

That if the Country will not answer for the Bodies of such Offenders, the people of every such Country shall be answerable for the Robberies and also the damages, so that the whole Hundred, with the Franchises being within the precincts of the same Hundred, shall be answe∣rable for the Robberies done. And if the Robbery be done in the divisions

of two Hundreds, both the Hundreds and the Franchises within the same shall be answerable; And after the Robbery be done, the Country shall have no longer space than half a year, with∣in which time it shall behoove them to agree for the Robbery or Offence, or else that they shall answer for the Bo∣dies of the Offenders.


But afterwards by another Sta∣tute made 
An.
 28 
E.
 3. 
cap.
 11. it is ordained 

That the Country shall have no longer term after the Robbe∣ry committed than forty days, with∣in which time they must make satis∣faction for the Robbery or answer the Bodies of the Felons.


The person robbed shall have an Action upon the Statute of 
Winche∣ster
 against the Hundred, notwith∣standing that the Statute does not expresly mention any Action; for when it says the Hundred shall an∣swer for the Robbery and the da∣mages; the Hundred within the meaning of the Statute is to be an∣swerable to the party robbed; for he is the person damnified and in∣tended to be relieved within this

Act; and when the Statute gives him recompence or satisfaction for the loss he had sustained by the Robbery, the Law by implication gives him the necessary means whereby he is to attain to it, and that is an Action to be grounded upon this Statute. Process and Ex∣ecution against the Hundred, I shall speak of at large in another place.


By the two aforesaid Statutes of the 13 
E.
 1. made at 
Winchester,
 and the 28 
E.
 3. the Country, if it did not answer for the Bodies of all the Offenders, must of necessity have made satisfaction for the Robbery, though (in case it was done by ma∣ny) some of the Felons upon pur∣suit had been taken; but this is moderated by a Clause in the 27 
El. cap.
 13. whereby it is enacted, 
If any Robbery be committed by two or more, and any one of them be appre∣hended upon such pursuit as the Law does require, that no Hundred or Franches shall incurr the penalty or loss or forfeiture mentioned in this Statute of the 
27 El.
 or any of the two

former Statutes, though the rest of the Felons make their escape.


The party robbed was not limit∣ted to any time within which he should bring his Action before the 27 
El.
 which Act does provide, 
That no person or persons robbed shall take advantage by virtue of any fer∣mer Act, to charge any Hundred where any robbery shall be committed, unless he or they so robbed shall com∣mence his or their Suit or Action with∣in one year next after such Robbery so committed;
 for if the Robbery be committed upon the first of 
May,
 and the original bear test the first of 
May
 following the Action does not lie, for it must of necessity be commenced within the year.


This Statute of the 27 
El.
 doth likewise bind the person robbed to the performance of some conditi∣ons before he can be enabled to bring his Action, for the Act says, 
That no person or persons robbed, shall maintain any action of the two fore∣mentioned Statutes, except the said person or persons so robbed, shall, with as much convenient speed as may be,

give notice of the same Robbery so committed unto some of the Inhabi∣tants of some Town, Village or Ham∣let near unto the place where such Rob∣bery was committed; Nor shall by virtue of the Statutes aforesaid bring any Action unless he or they shall with∣in twenty days next before such Action to be brought, be examined upon his or their corporal Oaths to be taken be∣fore some one Justice of the Peace of the County where the Robbery was committed, inhabiting within the Hun∣dred where the said Robbery was done or near unto the same, whether he or they know the parties that committed the Robbery or any of them. And if upon examination it be confessed that he or they do know the parties that did the Robbery, or any of them, then he or they so confessing, shall, before the said Action be commenced enter into a Recognizance before the said Justice to prosecute the said person or persons so known to have committed the Rob∣bery by Indictment or otherwise, ac∣cording to the due course of the Laws of this Realm.




So that these four things are ab∣solutely necessary;



1. That notice with all convenient speed be given to the Inhabitants of the place near where the Robbery was done.


2. That the said Oath be taken be∣fore the Justice of the Peace within twenty days next before the Action commenced.


3. That he enter in∣to a Recognizance to prosecute the Felons in case he knows any of them.


4. That the Action it self be brought within a year after the Robbery committed.




If the Servant be robbed of his Master's goods, the Servant is to give the notice to the Inhabitants, for he is best able to describe the Felons, and give information which way they are gone; so that the Coun∣try by his directions may the bet∣ter pursue and descry the Malefac∣tors, and the Oath required by the Statute, made by him is sufficient, because the contents of the Oath is, 
Whether the party robbed knew any of the Offenders?
 and a knowledge of the Robbers (within the mea∣ning of this Act) is expected from

none but the person that was rob∣bed.


The Servant is likewise the per∣son to be bound in the Recogni∣zance, the Statute requires that, be∣cause no person is supposed fitter to give evidence against the Offen∣ders than he that was robbed by them. But the Action against the Hundred must be brought by the Master, for he is the Propriator: but if the Servant refuses to make the Oath, or enter into the Recog∣nizance before the Justice, 
Quaere,
 What remedy the Master hath a∣gainst him?


If a man be robbed in the Hun∣dred of 
A.
 in the County of 
B.
 and he that was robbed takes the Oath injoyned by this Act before a Ju∣stice of the Peace inhabiting in or near the Hundred of 
A.
 at any place out of the County of 
B.
 the Oath so taken hath been adjudged suffici∣ent to entitle him to his Action, for by virtue of this Act he h
th a special power (which is not con∣fined to any place) to administer this Oath whereever he be, and it

is not like that authority which he derives from his Commission, which is local, and can be exercised no where else besides in the County where he is constituted Justice of the Peace.


If several men be robbed at one time and place, the number of their Actions to be brought against the Hundred depends upon the quality of the property they had in the goods whereof they were robbed; for if they had several properties they must bring several Actions,
 but if they be joint Owners or Pro∣prietors then they must all join in one Action, or so many of them as are so jointly possessed.






Where and how notice is to be given of the Robbery.


IT appears by the Statute of 
West∣minster
 the 1st, made in the third year of 
Edward
 the First, That at

Common Law 'twas the duty of the Inhabitants to keep and guard the Country from Thefts and Robbe∣ries, 
&c.
 and in case any Felony was committed they were to pursue and apprehend the Felons, otherwise they were punishable for the escape of such Offenders: every Town was obliged at its peril to take notice of any Robbery committed within its precincts, though done (if in the day time) in a place never so secret;
 as if a man be slain in the Fields or Lane or any other private place belonging to the Town, if the Murtherer escape untaken, the Town was amerceable, though the Inhabitants thereof had not the least knowledge of it, for in many cases the Law doth presume a know∣ledge, as the Jury that is to try an Issue is supposed to have recogni∣zance of the matter of fact in Issue between the parties; So if one be outlawed of Felony in the County-Court, and afterwards is received by any person of the same County, that receipt makes him accessary to the Felony, for the Law believes

no man, residing in the same Coun∣ty, to be ignorant of what is trans∣acted in that Court; to which ge∣nerally every one owes suit and at∣tendance. Likewise if one retain my Servant in the same County where I live, if I bring an Action against him for so doing, his igno∣rance of the fact in this case does not excuse him, for he is bound to take notice of the first retainder, but if he retains my Servant in a∣nother County, then the Law is otherwise; So also a man is bound to take notice of all Acts done up∣on his own freehold. The Statute of 
Winchester,
 which give the Acti∣on against the Hundred, is general, and does not specifie any time or place when or where the Robbery is to be done, which makes the Hundred liable, yet the Sages of the Law have put such a construc∣tion upon the general words of that Statute, that the Robbery, which binds the Country to render satis∣faction to the party robbed, must be committed in the day-time, and not in the night, and not in a pri∣vate

place as a House, but openly, so that the Country may take no∣tice of it themselves,
 for it was not necessary for him that was robbed to levy any Huy and Cry, or give any notice of the Robbery to the Inhabitants of the Country, nei∣ther by the letter of the foresaid Statute of 
Winchester,
 or by the meaning of it; for it may be that the person robbed was bound or maimed, 
&c.
 so that he could not raise any Huy and Cry or give any notice to the Country, and it is a general Rule in Law, that where the Law appoints no person to give notice, the party concerned himself is bound to take notice at his peril; as if a Church becomes void, by vir∣tue of the Statute of the 21st. of 
Hen.
 8. the Patron is bound to pre∣sent at his peril within, six months after the institution and induction into the second Benefice,
 though all this be done without his having the least knowledge of it.
 But if a Church becomes void by sentence of deprivation in the Ecclesiastical Court, and the six months after

which the elapse is to incurr, is to commence but from the time of such notice given, and the reason of the first case is the Church being 
ipso facto
 void, there being no per∣son whom the Law requires to give the Patron notice of such avoidance, he is obliged to take notice of it himself. If a Tenant in Fee-simple convey the Estate to the use of him∣self for life, the remainder to his Wife for life, the remainder to his eldest Son in Fee, and afterwards enfeoffs 
A.
 with Warranty, and dies, the Wife and the Son enter upon 
A.
 and joyn in a Feoffment to 
B.
 the Heir being barred by the Warranty,
 this Feoffment is a for∣feiture of the Wife's Estate for life; for she was to take cognizance of the said Feoffment made by her Husband, because the Livery is a publick and notorious Act, and she ought at her peril to take notice of this Act done upon the Land, none being bound to give her notice of it.


That this matter of the notice is now altered by the Statute of 27 
El.
 whereby it is provided, 
That no

person shall maintain any Action upon the Statute of 
Winchester
 or any o∣ther Statute, except the person robbed, with as much convenient speed as may be, give notice of the Robbery to some of the Inhabitants of some Town, Vil∣lage or Hamlet near the place where such Robbery shall be committed:
 yet it is not necessary that notice be gi∣ven to those of the Hundred where the Robbery was done, but to the Inhabitants of any Village near ad∣joyning to the place where the per∣son was robbed,
 though in another Hundred, for the Statute does not mention that notice be given to the Inhabitants of that Hundred where the Robbery was committed, and also by intendment the person rob∣bed cannot know the divisions of the Hundred; And though notice be given out of the County, yet it is well enough, provided he makes it in a Village near adjoyning to the place where he was robbed;
 As in an Action brought against the Hun∣dreds of 
Dackorum
 and 
Cashoe,
 the Plaintiff alledged the Robbery to be committed at 
Shealey
 and 
Ridge in

divisis Hundredorum de Dackorum & Cashoe in Com. Hertford,
 and that he gave notice of the Robbery at 
South Mims,
 in the County of 
Mid∣dlesex,
 near the Hundreds aforesaid, in this case the whole Court adjud∣ged the notice given in 
Middlesex
 to be sufficient, and that the party robbed is no more bound to know the divisions of Counties than he is of Hundreds. And likewise not∣withstanding that the words of the Statute are, 
that notice be given near the place where the Robbery was,
 yet the Court held that this allegation of the notice given at 
South Mims,
 near the Hundreds aforesaid, was well enough, and shall be intended in the division where the Robbery was done; So if a Robbery be alledged to be committed 
in divisis Hundre∣dorum,
 &c. and notice given at such a place,
 
&c. prope divisis Hundredo∣rum praedict.
 &c. it shall be inten∣ded to be given in the division of the Hundreds where the Robbery was done, and not in the most re∣mote place thereof, for that should be a forein intendment, though it be

good either way, yet it is best to alledge the notice to have been gi∣ven at the place where the Robbe∣ry was committed, or at a Village near unto adjoyning.






At what time the Robbery must be committed, to charge the Hundred by an Action upon the Statute of 
Winchester.


THough the Statute of 
Winche∣ster,
 as I have shewed you in the foregoing Chapter, is general, both as to time and place, and that it hath been expounded not to ex∣tend to any Robbery, unless the same be committed in the day-time,
 for of Felonies done in the night the Country of it self is not bound to take notice, for they can∣not conveniently pursue or make enquiry after the Offenders in the night-time; And since the Statute makes the Country answerable for

the Robbery, it were too hard to require from them a performance of that which they are deprived of the ordinary and convenient means to effect. This Statute was expoun∣ded according to the rule and rea∣son of the Common Law (as it may appear by the case of the 3d. of 
Ed.
 3d. Tit. 
Coron.
 293.) 
That if a Murther or any other Felony be done in the night and the Malefactor esca∣ped, the Town was not to be amerced for it.


In this point of the time there is a difference between a pursuit for the King and for the party, upon the Statute, as shall be further de∣monstrated hereafter, when I come to treat of Huy and Cry; though in neither case the Law does con∣strain the Country to take cogni∣zance at their peril of any Felony acted in the night:
 yet in case of a pursuit for the King, upon actual notice given of the Felony, the Law, upon Huy and Cry levied, ex∣pects the readiness and uttermost diligence of the Inhabitants to fol∣low the Malefactors. As if a man

be robbed or assaulted and offered to be robbed, either in the day or night, if the person himself or any other resort to the Constable of the Town, and acquaint him with the cases, describing the person, and giving information which way the Offender is gone, and require him to raise the Huy and Cry, it is the duty of the Constable to raise the power of the Town, as well in the night as in the day, for the prosecu∣tion of the Offender, and if he be not found, there to give warning to the next Constable, and he to the next, untill the Offender be taken.


If a Traveller be robbed in the night, and gives notice to the Con∣stable of the Village as aforesaid, though the Constable is obliged (as I have said already) to raise the Huy and Cry, yet this at the most is but a pursuit for the King, and the Traveller shall take no advan∣tage of the negligence thereof, in case the Felons make their escape, for God hath ordained the day for man to labour and travel,
 as a fit

time for him to exercise his indu∣stry, and the night for his repose and quietness, being tired and wea∣ried with his daily operation; and accordingly the Law supposes eve∣ry person in the night to have re∣tired himself from his labour to take his natural rest, neither does the Law require his presence or at∣tendance upon his own private af∣fairs,
 nor allow an occasion to in∣terrupt or disturb him in his sleep. Therefore it hath been adjudged that a man cannot distrain in the night for a rent Service (because the distress being in it self a demand of the rent, which the Tenant ought to pay, whensoever it is de∣manded, upon the Land out of which it issues) for that the Law does not require his being upon the ground, nor his readiness to tender his rent in the night as it does in the day-time. It is true,
 a man may distrain for damage Feasant in the night, and the Law does allow it onely for the necessity of the case, for if the Owner of the Land should permit the Cattel to continue there

till morning, perhaps by that time they may estray out of the ground, and so they cannot be distrained at all, for they must be taken damage feasant 
(viz.)
 doing of the trespass upon the ground. Therefore since none are bound to have an eye in the night upon Thieves and Rob∣bers in the Country, it is both the interest and safety of our Travel∣ler, that he take care not to be a∣broad at unseasonable hours, for then in some respect he is out of the protection of the Law, which makes no provision for his indemp∣nity in case he be robbed, and the Poet further warns him of his dan∣ger:


Ʋt jugulent homines surgunt de nocte Latrones.


And whereas it is further provi∣ded by the Statute of 
Winchester, cap.
 4. 
That in all Cities and great Towns which are walled the Gates be kept shut from Sun-setting to Sun-ri∣sing,
 I conceive that if a man be robbed in such a City or Town,

though it be done in the night, yet the Inhabitants shall answer for the Robbery, and notwithstanding that at the Common Law no place was punishable for the escape of any Fe∣lon in the night, yet this Statute hath changed the reason and ground of that Law, and 
ratio Legis est ani∣ma Legis & mutata Legis ratione mutatur & Lex,
 for if they do not keep their Gates shut according to the Statute whereby the Felon e∣scapes, there is a default and ne∣gligence in them, which renders them liable to punishment if the Felon be not apprehended by them, and it was adjudged in the 3d. of 
Ed.
 3d. 
That where a man being slain within a wall'd Town in the night,
 
and the Murtherer escaped, that the whole Town should be amerced, Quaere,
 Whether the case of the Robbery may not be within the same rea∣son?


It is necessary that the Robbery, for which the County is to answer, be done in the day-time and out of the night, and if a man be robbed after Sun-set and before it be dark,

yet the Hundred is chargeable, as it was resolved in an Action brought against the Inhabitants of 
Eveinger,
 by one 
Ashpoole,
 who was robbed in 
January
 after Sun-set while it was day-light, and the Court gave Judg∣ment for the Plaintiff,
 for that it was a time convenient for men to travel and be about their busi∣ness.


And in another Action commen∣ced against the Hundred of 
Dun∣more
 in 
Essex,
 it was resolved that for a Robbery done in the morning 
ante lucem
 (
viz.
 before it is light) the Hundred is not chargeable,
 for that the Robbery is done in the night.


In an Action upon the Statute of 
Winchester,
 brought against the Hundred of 
Morely,
 the Jury found that the Robbery was done 
post lu∣cem ejusdem diei & ante ortum Solis,
 that is, after day-break and before Sun-rising, and it was adjudged the Plaintiff should recover against the Hundred. So also a Robbery com∣mitted 
post occasum Solis & per diur∣nam lucem,
 that is, after Sun-set

and by day-light, was held good to charge the Country.


The Hundred of 
Warrington,
 be∣ing sued upon the aforesaid Statute for a Robbery committed, it was held by 
Anderson
 and all the Ju∣stices, that if a Robbery be done in the morning before day or in the evening after the day,
 in any time of the night in which men use com∣monly to travel, that the Hundred is answerable for it. But if it be done at twelve or one of the Clock in the night, at which time every one is intended to be in bed, the Hundred is not bound to answer for the Robbery, 
Quaere
 of this Case, for it contradicts the forementio∣ned Authorities, and the reasons of them.


Though in most cases travelling upon the 
Sunday
 be prohibited and punishable by Law, yet if any per∣son so travelling be robbed, the Country is not excusable, as it was held by three Justices, in the case of one 
Wayte,
 against the Hundred of 
Stoke,



That notwithstanding a Rob∣bery be committed upon the Sunday in

the time of Divine Service, yet this is no excuse for the Country, for it is their charge and duty to provide that Robberies be not done, and if they be that they suppress them; and the Sta∣tute of 
Winchester
 is made for the maintenance of the peace of the Realm and the advancement of Justice,
 and therefore ought to be liberally and fa∣vourably construed, and the persuing of Felons, who attempt to violate the Sabbath, is no offence but a good work of Charity and Justice, for if it were otherwise it would prove the occasion and encouragement of committing Rob∣beries frequently upon that day. And sometimes divers persons upon neces∣sity are forced to travel upon the Sun∣day, as Physicians, Chirurgeons and Midwives, and it was judged but reasonable they should be protected in their Journies.


But this Law is in some sort now altered by a Statute made in the 29th: year of the Reign of his pre∣sent Majesty, whereby it is provi∣ded, 
That if any person or persons whatsoever which shall travel upon the Lord's day shall be then robbed, That

no Hundred nor the Inhabitants there∣of shall be charged with it, or be answe∣rable for any Robbery so committed; but the person or persons so robbed shall be barred from bringing any Action for the said Robbery, any Law to the contrary notwithstanding; Nevertheless the Inhabitants of the Counties and Hundreds (after notice of any such Robberies to them or some of them given, or after Huy and Cry for the same to be brought) shall make or cause to be made fresh suit and pursuit after the Offenders with Horse∣men and Footmen, according to the Statute made in the 27th. year of Queen 
Elizabeth,
 upon pein of for∣feiting to the King's Majesty his Heirs and Successors, as much money as might have been recovered against the Hundred by the party robbed if this Law had not been made.








In what place a Robbery must be committed to charge the Hun∣dred.


THE Statute of 
Winchester
 speaks in general as well of the place, as of the time, yet resolved 
Co.
 li. 7. in 
Sendill
's Case, 
That if a man be robbed in his House either by day or night, the Hundred in which the House is shall not be charged to answer for it, and that for three reasons



1. For that every man's House is his Castle, which he is bound to defend at his pe∣ril.


2. It is not lawfull for another to enter into any man's House for the tuition and safeguard of it.


3. That such a Robbery for which the Country shall answer within this Act ought to be done openly, so that the Country may take notice of it themselves.




Though the Law be so in case of a Robbery committed in a House, yet it seems (that since this Sta∣tute is to be expounded by the rules of the Common Law) that if

a Robbery be done in any known place besides, the Country is liable. It is held in my Lord 
Dier
's Re∣ports,
 
That if a man be slain in the day-time that the Township should be amerced for the escape, though the Murther was done in any Fields or Lane belonging to the Town;
 hence I do infer, that if a person be rob∣bed in any open or known place out of the High-way, that such Robbery is within the Statute: I conceive this Case may serve as a rule to expound this Statute by in reference to the place where, as well as that Case of the 3
d.
 of 
Ed.
 the 3
d.
 did in point of time, when the Robbery should be committed to charge the Country; for there a Murther was done 
vespere,
 in the evening after Sun-set, and the place was amerced for the escape, and according to the reason of this Case it was adjudged in the seventh Re∣port in 
Ashpool
's Case, 
That a Rob∣bery done after Sun-set and before it was dark was sufficient to charge the Hundred;
 So likewise because an escape in the night is in no case

punishable at Common Law, this Statute hath been expounded by the same rule that the Country should not answer for any Robbery done in the night.


But there is one Case which seems to confine all Robberies (which are within the meaning of this Act) to the Common High-way. The Case was this, 
There was a way which was dangerous for Travellers to pass through, and very chargea
le to be kept in repair, and upon an 
ad quod damnum,
 it was found accordingly; thereupon the old way was stopped up and a new one made through the Fields adjoyning, which was more safe and commodious for Passengers, and to an Information brought for stopping the way this whole matter was pleaded, and Judgment for the King,



1. For that the Owner of the Land through which the new way was made might stop it at his pleasure.


2. Because if any Robbery should happen to be committed upon any person travelling in this new way, the Country was not liable to make satisfaction for it, for that they were not bound to keep Watch

and Ward there.


 
To this I answer, That it is a charge and a duty in∣cumbent upon the Inhabitants of every Country to see that no Rob∣beries be committed in any place within their respective Precincts, and to use all means to prevent them, and if they be to suppress them, and it does not follow that the Country is not answerable for any Robbery unless the Inhabitants be bound to Watch and Ward at the same time and place where and when the Robbery is committed, for then no Robbery done after 
Mi∣chaelmas
 and before the Feast of the 
Ascention
 should bind the Country, nor between the Feast of the 
Ascen∣tion
 and 
Michaelmas,
 unless it be done after Sun-setting and before Sun-rising; for by the Statute, no City, Town or Village is obliged to keep Watch but from Sun-setting to Sun-rising, and that at no other time of the year but from the Feast of 
Ascention
 till 
Michaelmas,
 neither is it to be thought in reason that the number which the Statute does appoint to Watch (
viz.
 six at every

Gate of a City, twelve to a Tower, and six more or less according to the proportion of the Inhabitants to every Village) should guard e∣very particular passage upon the Road: And Watches are not kept in the night to guard and secure Travellers from Robbers in the night, for the Country shall not make any satisfaction for a Robbe∣ry done at that time; but their bu∣siness principally is to examine all Strangers (which travel in the night) whence they come, whither they go, and what they be, and of their business, 
&c.
 and if they find cause of suspicion they may arrest and detain them till the morning, and if then no suspicion be found they may let them go, and if o∣therwise they ought to deliver them to the Sheriff, or carry them before a Justice of the Peace, 
&c.
 And admitting that the Country is bound to keep Watch and Ward in the day-time, according to the 5th. of 
Ed.
 the 4th. where it was held, 
That the Inhabitants are not required by Law to Watch and Ward upon the

Sunday, in the time of Divine Ser∣vice,
 yet it was resolved in an Ac∣tion brought by — against the Hundred of 
Stokes,
 
That not∣withstanding the Robbery was done upon the Sunday, and in the time of Divine Service that the Plaintiff should recover against the Hundred,
 and I conceive that it may be a ge∣neral rule, that in what place so∣ever a Felony be committed, for which the Town or Hundred were answerable at Common Law for the escape of any such Felon, that for a Robbery done under the same circumstances the Country shall an∣swer. I have onely offered these reasons and submit unto the Judg∣ment of the Reader.








How one or more against whom Execution is had may have Contribution from the rest of the Inhabitants of the same Hundred.


BY the Statute of the 13th. of 
Ed.
 the 1st. and 28 of 
Ed.
 the 3d. the whole Hundred where the Robbery was committed with the Liberties within the Precincts there∣of, being liable to answer for the Robbery and the damages sustai∣ned thereby, when the party rob∣bed had obtained Judgment against the Hundred, it was the usual prac∣tice to take Execution for the intire damage against one or very few of the Inhabitants, who being so char∣ged had no remedy to force a con∣tribution from the residue of the Hundred, which often proved to be the absolute impoverishment and ruine of such Inhabitants and their Families. To remedy this great inconveniency, and to lay the bur∣then

equally upon the Inhabitants of the whole Hundred, who were equally chargeable by a Statute made 
Anno
 27 
El.
 cap. 13. it is en∣acted,

That after Execution of da∣mages so had by the party against one or few of the Inhabitants, it may be lawfull upon complaint made by the person or persons so charged, for two Justices of the Peace (whereof one to be of the Quorum) of the same Coun∣ty inhabiting within the said Hundred or near unto the same where any such Execution shall be had, to assess and tax ratably and proportionably accor∣ding to their discretions all and every the Towns, Parishes, Villages and Ham∣lets, as well of the said Hundred where any such Robbery shall be committed as of the Liberties within the said Hundred to and towards an equal contribution to be had and made for the relief of the said Inhabitant or Inhabitants against whom the party or parties robbed had his or their Execu∣tion. And after such taxation made, the Constables, Constable, Headbo∣roughs, or Headborough of every such Town, Parish, Village and Hamlet,

shall by virtue of this Act have full power and authority within their seve∣ral limits ratably and proportionably to tax and assess according to their abilities, every Inhabitant and Dwel∣ler in every such Town, Parish, Vil∣lage and Hamlet, for and towards the payment of such taxation and assess∣ment as shall be so made upon every such Town, Parish, Village and Ham∣let, as aforesaid by the said Justices; And if any Inhabitant of any such Town, Parish, Village or Hamlet shall obstinately refuse and deny to pay the said taxation and assessment so by the said Constables, Constable, Head∣boroughs or Headborough taxed and assessed; Then it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said Constables Headboroughs, and every of them within their several limits and juris∣dictions, to distrain all and every per∣son and persons so refusing or denying by his and their goods and chattels, and the same distress to sell and the money thereof coming to retain to the use aforesaid; And if the goods and chattels so distrained and sold shall be of more value than the said taxation

shall come to, then the residue of the said money over and above the said taxations shall be delivered unto the person or persons so distrained. All and every such Constables and Head∣boroughs after that they have within their several limits and jurisdictions levied and collected their said rates and sums of money so taxed, shall within ten days after such Collection pay and deliver the same unto the said Justices of Peace or one of them to the use and behoof of the said Inha∣bitant or Inhabitants for whom such rate, taxation or assessment shall be had or made as aforesaid, which mo∣ney so payed shall by the Justices or Justice so receiving the same be deli∣vered over (upon request made) unto the said Inhabitant or Inhabitants to whose use the same shall be called.


It was held in one 
Dean
's Case 10 
Car.
 in the Common Pleas,

That a person coming to inhabit in the Hun∣dred after the Robbery, and Judg∣ment given, is not liable to the Execu∣tion at the Suit of the party robbed, but a person coming after to inhabit is assessable to the Contribution, because

the Country is chargeable at the time of the assessment and not the persons which were there at the time of the Robbery committed. 

Vid. 
Dalton's
 Justic. 153.


There was another inconveni∣ency (before the making of the a∣foresaid Statute of 27 
El.
) which occasioned great remissness and ne∣gligence in the pursuing and appre∣hending of Robbers, for that by the Statutes of 13 
Ed.
 1. and 28 
Ed.
 3. the Hundred where the Robbery was done stood charged with the penalties therein contained, not∣withstanding their disability to per∣form what the Law required from them, and likewise notwithstanding they used their uttermost endea∣vours in making of fresh suit and following the Malefactors in order to bring them to justice; the Inha∣bitants of other Hundreds and Counties (besides those where the Robbery was done) knowing that though the Felons escaped that they were not bound to render sa∣tisfaction to the party robbed, were careless in discharging their duty in prosecuting the Huy and Cry

when it was brought to them; And to the end that the Inhabitants and Resiants of other places might be quickened and spurred on to use all possible diligence to suppress Rob∣bers, the aforesaid Statute of 27 
El.
 makes them who shall first make de∣fault in the pursuit to participate of the charge, which before was incumbent onely upon that place where the party was robbed, It is thereby enacted,

That the Inhabi∣tants of every or any such Hundred (with the Liberties within the precinct thereof) wherein negligence, fault, or defect of pursuit after Huy and Cry made, shall happen to be, shall answer and satisfie the one moiety or half of all and every sum or sums of money and damages as shall by force and virtue of the said Statutes of 
13 Ed. 1.
 and 
28 Ed. 3.
 or either of them be recovered or had against, or of the same Hundred with the Fran∣chises therein in which any Robbery or Felony shall at any time hereafter be committed or done, And the same moiety shall at any time hereafter be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill,

Plaint or Information in any of the King's Courts of Record at 
Westmin∣ster,
 by and in the name of the Clerk of the Peace for the time being of eve∣ry such County within this Realm where any such Robbery and Recovery by the party or parties robbed shall be without naming the Christian-name or Sir-name of the said Clerk of the Peace, which moiety so recovered shall be to the onely use and behoof of the Inha∣bitants of the said Hundred where any such Robbery shall be committed.


And lest the Action, 
&c.
 should any way miscarry, either by the death or removal of the Clerk of the Peace it is further provided by the said Act,

That if any Clerk of the Peace of or in any County within this Realm shall at any time hereafter commence or prefer any such Suit, Action or Information, and shall af∣ter the same so sued, commenced or preferred happen to die or to be remo∣ved out of his Office before Recovery and Execution had, yet no such Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit or Infor∣mation sued, commenced or preferred, shall by such displacing or death, be

abated, discontinued or ended, But it shall and may be lawfull to and for the Clerk of the Peace next succeeding in the said County to prosecute, pursue and follow all and every such Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit or Information for the causes aforesaid so hanging and depending in such manner and form to all intents and purposes as that Clerk of the Peace might have done which first commenced or preferred the said Suit, Bill, Plaint or Information.


If the moiety of the penalty be re∣covered in an Action brought upon the foresaid branch of this Statute against any Hundred for want of fresh suit and Execution had there∣upon against one or few of the Inha∣bitants; There shall be the same course and method observed as is provided by this Statute for relief of part of the Inhabitants (of that place where the Robbery was done) whose goods and chattels are taken in Execution for the satisfaction of the person that is rob∣bed, And the like taxation, assessment, levying by distress and payment shall be had and done within every Hun∣dred where default and negligence of

pursuit and fresh suit shall be, for and to the benefit of all and every Inhabitant or Inhabitants of the same Hundred where such default shall be, that shall at any time hereafter by virtue of this Act have any damages or money levyed of them for the pay∣ment of the one moiety of the money recovered against the said Hundred where the Robbery is committed.


There is a private Act of Parlia∣ment made in the 39 
El.
 cap. 25. for the relief of the Inhabitants of 
Begnersh
 alias 
Benherst
 in the Coun∣ty of 
Berkshire,
 who in respect of the smalness and poverty of the place were not able to make satis∣faction for the great and frequent Robberies committed within that Hundred, which hath two great Roads in it, the one leading from 
London
 to 
Henly
 upon 
Thames,
 the other from 
London
 to 
Reading,
 each of them being at least three miles in length thorough the woody ground called the 
Thicket;
 And in respect of the thinness of the Inha∣bitants, and few or none of their Villages being situated upon either

of these Roads; And having sel∣dom any occasion for themselves or their Servants to be much conver∣sant in or near the Roads, most part of the Hundred joyning to the High-way being woody ground, and so not fit for Tillage or Pasture, or any other use which may require the frequent being of the Resiants upon it. And so for these reasons they could not conveniently of themselves take notice of the Rob∣beries committed upon these Roads. And therefore to ease them of the inconveniencies and of the great charges that they were equally like to undergo, to their utter impoverish∣ment and depopulation, it is pro∣vided by this Act,

That the Inhabi∣tants of the said Hundred of 
Ben∣herst
 shall and may to their own proper use in the name of the Clerk of the Peace of the said County recover and leavy all such sums of money, costs and damages as shall hereafter be recove∣red or levied of or against them by force of any of the Statutes which con∣cern Robberies, against the Inhabi∣tants and Resiants of every or any such

Hundred with the Franchises within the precincts thereof, wherein negli∣gence, fault or defect of such pursuit or fresh suit (as by the said Statute of 
27 El.
 is appointed to be made) shall happen to be after notice given or Hay and Cry brought to the said Inhabitants or Resiants or any of them of or upon any Robbery which shall be committed within the Hundred of 
Benherst:
 And this Act shall give full power and au∣thority in all respects to the Inhabi∣tants of the said Hundred of 
Ben∣herst
 (in the name of the Clerk of the Peace of the said County) for the re∣covery and levying of all the said mo∣ney, costs and damages aforesaid, as the Statute of 
27 El.
 gave or intends to give for the recovery of a moiety or one half thereof. Provided always that no such remedy or recovery shall be had by this Statute for all or the whole sum or sums of money and da∣mages aforesaid, but onely in these two cases (viz.) The one where no such notice or intelligence (as by the said Statute of the 
27 El.
 was appointed to be given of every or any Robbery) shall be given to the Inhabitants of the said

Hundred of 
Benherst;
 The other where the Inhabitants of the same Hundred (after such notice of any Robbery to them or some of them given, or after Hay and Cry for the same to them brought) shall make or cause to be made fresh suit and pursuit after the Offenders with Horsemen and Foot∣men, according to the said Statute of 
27 El.
 and where nevertheless the Of∣fenders or any one of them shall not be apprehended within forty days af∣ter the Robbery committed.


One of the chief difficulties that the said Hundred of 
Benherst
 labou∣red under was in regard the Inhabi∣tants thereof for the reasons alrea∣dy shewed could not of themselves take notice of the Robbery that they might make fresh suit after the Offenders, and nothing could ex∣cuse them of the penalty unless they or some other place answer the Bo∣dies of all or any of the Robbers, and the party robbed was not obli∣ged to give notice within the Hun∣dred wherein he was robbed, for notice in another Hundred or Coun∣ty is sufficient, provided it be near

the place where the Robbery was done, as it appears by the preamble of this Statute of 39 
El.
 

That upon a notice given at 
Maidenhead
 out of the Hundred of 
Benherst,
 and three miles distant from those thievish pla∣ces in the Thicket where the Robbery was committed, recovery and Execu∣tion were had against the said Hun∣dred for above two Hundred and fifty pounds;

and you may reade in the Chapter of Notice before, how no∣tice given at 
South-Mims
 in 
Middle∣sex
 of a Robbery done in 
Hertford-shire
 was adjudged good. And not∣withstanding this Act, if a Travel∣ler be robbed within the Hundred of 
Benherst,
 and gives notice of the Robbery at another place out of the Hundred as aforesaid, yet the said Hundred shall answer for the Robbery as formerly, for the mea∣ning of the Statute is not, that if there be notice at all give to the Inhabitants of the said Hundred, that for that reason they shall be excused of the penalty, but that if there be no such notice given to them within the Hundred, and the

party robbed recover against them, they shall recover over against the place where default of fresh suit shall happen the whole and intire penalty recovered against them. And in case there be such notice and intelligence given to the Inha∣bitants or Resiants of this Hundred as the Statute does require, and the Offenders escape, yet they shall re∣cover the moiety according to the Statute of the 27 
El.
 against the Hundred where the fresh suit cea∣sed, 
&c.


There is another private Act made for the relief of the Inhabi∣tants of the Town of 
Tewxbury,
 in the County of 
Glocester,
 against the Commonalty of the 
Forest Dean,
 and of the Hundreds of 
Bledstow
 and 
Westbury,
 in the said County, for that Sundry Robberies were u∣sually committed in a riotous man∣ner by a great multitude of people of the said Commonalty upon the said Inhabitants of the Town of 
Tewxbury
 in their passage from thence upon the River of 
Severn
 to the City of 
Bristol
 and in their

return back again, therefore to re∣medy these great enormities,

The Sheriff of the said County or the Bay∣liffs of the Town of 
Glocester
 for the time being or one of them, upon pein of forfeiture of 
20li.
 to be levied of their lands, goods and chattels to the King's use, shall make proclamation at the said Town of 
Glocester
 within four days next after notification made to them or any of them by the persons so endamaged, or by any other in their names of such injuries and trespasses done, and that the said Trespassers and Offenders shall restore in the same Town of 
Glocester
 within fifteen days after the said proclama∣tion to the said persons so endamaged their corn and merchandise, goods and chattels so taken or the very value of the same, with reasonable amends for the damages sustained by such taking; After which proclamation if the said Trespassers do not restore the said corn and merchandise, 
&c.
 or the value of them to the party so grieved in form aforesaid, with reasonable amends for the damages, or that the said Tres∣passers be not brought to the King's

Prison to the Castle of 
Glocester
 for the said trespasses, by the Officers of the said Forest and Hundreds, or by the Commonalties of the same, that then the consideration of the Statute of 
Winchester
 put for the Robbery of any person which giveth an Action for him that is robbed against the Hundred within which the same Rob∣bery is done, after the form of the same Statute, the said Commonalties shall be charged of the said corn and merchandise, goods and chattels so ta∣ken or of the very value of the same to the party so grieved, to satisfie them of the damages for the same ta∣king. And that the said parties so endamaged and grieved may have their general Actions of Debt against the said Commonalties of the said Fo∣rest and Hundreds of the sum of mo∣ney, to which the value of the corn, merchandises, goods and chattels so taken do extend.


And although the said Commonal∣ties be no Commonalties Corporate, yet they shall have process in such Actions of Debt by Summons, Attachments and Distress, as if he were to have

an Action of Debt at the Common Law; So that if the said Com∣monalties make default of the second distress in such Actions, that then the party which shall sue shall have Judg∣ment to recover his Debt against the said Commonalties, after the supposal of their goods in the form aforesaid, with his reasonable damages and ex∣pences; And whatsoever issue triable by Inquest in the said Forest and Hun∣dreds, shall happen to be taken in such Actions, it shall be tried by Inquest of the Body of the said County out of the same Forest and Hundreds; And that the goods and chattels of every singular person of the said Commonal∣ties for the time being shall be had, taken and holden in Law convict, as the common goods and chattels of the said Commonalties touching the re∣turn, serving and execution of Writs, Processes and Judgments in and of the said Actions. And that every singular person of the said Forest and Commo∣nalties have power by authority of the said Parliament to attach and arrest the said Trespassers by their Bodies, as well within the said Forest as with∣out,

and so arrested to commit to the said Prison, and that the Keeper of the same Prison upon pein of 
40 
li.
 to be levied of his goods and chattels, lands and tenements to the King's use, shall safely keep every such person so com∣mitted to his custody till that the King or his Council hath ordained and pro∣vided their deliverance upon record, and if the goods or chattels of any sin∣gular person or persons of the said Fo∣rest and Hundreds, being not guilty of the said Robberies happen to be put in Execution by reason of any such Acti∣on and Judgment, that then the said person and persons so being not guilty may have their special Action of Debt or Trespass upon the case, of the goods and chattels so upon Execution against the said Trespassers, to recover their damages as well for the value of the same goods and chattels so put in Ex∣ecution, as for the damages and costs which happen to be had by reason of such Actions of Debt, and they shall have such Processes in the said Actions of Debt or Trespass as is to be had in the said Actions of Debt for the said persons so endamaged or spoiled.








Of Huy and Cry.


FElony is so odious in the eye of Law that it punisheth the Au∣thour thereof with death, and will in no manner connive at the impunity such heinous Malefactors, and lest such violators of the peace should escape her Justice, she commands and requires the aid and assistance of all persons to apprehend and se∣cure the Offender, and in case he be not taken in the Fact, to give by degrees a general and universal Al∣arm throughout the whole King∣dom for all people to take notice of the Offender; so that they may pursue and follow him in order to prevent his flight. And this grand Alarm is called in Law 
A Huy and Cry.


Huer
 in French (from whence the Law-Latin word 
Hutesium
 is de∣rived) signifies to hoot or shout, in English to Cry; And the two words Huy and Cry have but one significa∣tion,

and as my Lord 
Cook
 terms it, the one is but an expression of the other, and sometimes one is used without the other, as in 
Westm.
 1. 
cap.
 9. where all men are comman∣ded to be ready at the Cry of the Country. And the Law does not require that this Huy and Cry be made onely with a vocal sound, but it may well answer the ends of the Law if it be performed by an Instru∣ment, as a Horn, a Trumpet, 
&c.
 as the 
Mirour
 and 
Briton
 have it, 
avec Huy & Cry de Corne & de Bouche,
 
(viz.)
 with Huy and Cry of Horn and Mouth.


This way of pursuing Felons by Huy and Cry is part of the ancient Common Law of this Realm, as it appears by those Authours who write of the Laws of 
England
 in use long before the Conquest, yet some have thought that Huy and Cry had its original from the foresaid Sta∣tute of 
Westm.
 1. but that Statute it self proves the contrary, for it finds fault that good suit, that is fresh suit was not duly made.








Who may raise the Huy and Cry, and for what Cause.


THere are two sorts of Huy and Cry, The one by Common Law, the other by Statute. The Huy and Cry by Common Law may be levied by any person who finds just cause to doe it; neither when a Felony is committed is it necessary for him to resort to the Constable of the Town where it was done, and acquaint him with the cause, describing the person, 
&c.
 and re∣quire him to begin it, but that ei∣ther the party grieved or one that is eye Witness to the fact may raise the Huy and Cry themselves, and the people of the Town are bound to follow it when it is once so raised, and if the party does not so he incurs the penalty of the Law. For if a man be present when one is either robbed or murthered,
 and does not endeavour to arrest the Offender, he is punishable by Fine

and imprisonment; And so was the Law of old, 
Siquis aliquem spoliatum viderit, sontem per acela∣mationem insequatur,
 and it is like∣wise to be found amongst the Laws of 
Carnutus
 that if a man met a Robber in the way,
 and would suf∣fer him to pass without raising the Huy and Cry upon him, he was to pay the uttermost penny the Felons life should be valued at.


It is not necessary that the Huy and Cry be made by the Constable, the party grieved, or him that saw the fact committed, nor that it be raised in the Town where the Fe∣lony was done, but that in all ca∣ses where every man has authority by a warrant in Law to arrest an Offender, as a man attainted or in∣dicted of Treason or Felony, may be apprehended by any person whatsoever, if an attempt be made to arrest any such person and he disobeys it and flies, the Huy and Cry may be levied upon him where ever he be.


If a Felony be done, and 
A.
 su∣spects 
John a-Styles
 to be the per∣son

that committed it, the suspici∣on being personal none can attach him besides 
A.
 in this case if 
A.
 en∣deavours to apprehend him and he makes his escape,
 I conceive 
A.
 may raise the Cry after him because he had power to arrest him.


Note the Spectators are not to be Judges of the degree or quality of the offence; for it one kills ano∣ther by chance-medly or 
se defen∣dendo
 and flies for it, the Town shall be amerced for the escape, and by the same reason they may raise the Huy and Cry upon him, because the Inhabitants being bound to ap∣prehend him, the Law allows them the means to effect it, and one of them is by Huy and Cry.


Every Justice of the Peace by vir∣tue of his Commission may cause Huy and Cry,
 fresh suit and search to be made upon any Murther, Robbery or Theft committed.


The Statute of the 3
d.
 of 
Ed.
 1. entitled 
Officium Coronatoris,
 does ordain, 
That upon all Homicides, Burglaries, men slain or put in great danger, the Huy and Cry shall be le∣vied;


though generally a Felony ought to be the ground and foun∣dation of the Huy and Cry, yet in some cases it may be done though there be no Felony,
 as if a man be dangerously wounded or assaulted and attempted to be robbed, in both these cases, though in the one there was but a probability of a Fe∣lony, and in the other onely a will (discovered by the attempt) to commit it; So it seems if a rape be attempted upon a woman, she may justifie the levying of the Huy and Cry though she was not ravished in∣deed.


The Huy and Cry is appointed to be raised in some particular ca∣ses by Acts of Parliament, as the Statute of 
Winchester
 doth authorise the Watch to arrest night walkers, and if they disobey the arrest and fly, the Watchmen may make Huy and Cry,
 and such person shall be pursued from Town to Town and from Country to Country in the same manner with the Felon.


It is likewise ordained by a Sta∣tute made 
An.
 21 
Ed.
 1. 
That if a

Forester, Parker or Warrener, shall find any Malefactors wandring within their respective precincts, with an intent to commit any trespass or damage there,
 the said Officers may levy the Huy and Cry upon them; and if the Offen∣ders thereupon will not render them∣selves to the said Officers, but fly or make resistance, if any of them be slain by the forementioned Officers, or by any other coming to their assistance, within their bounds or limits, and for the killing of such Offenders no person shall be answerable to the Law.


As the Law gives authority to e∣very man to raise the Country when there is a just and legal cause for it; so it does inflict a punishment upon such as shall alarm their Country without sufficient grounds to doe it; for if any man shall upon a feigned cause raise a Huy and Cry upon ano∣ther,
 he may be punished by Fine and imprisonment, and likewise may be bound to his good beha∣viour as a disturber of the publick peace.


And to the end that Malefactors should find no shelter or protection

under the wings of any great Men or chief Officers of any Country, and to engage them as well as other Inhabitants to promote the com∣mon Cry, it is ordained by the Sta∣tute of 
Westm.
 1. 
Cap.
 9. 

That if de∣fault be found in the Lord of a Fran∣chise the King shall seise the Fran∣chise into his own hands, and if de∣fault be found in his Bailiff he shall suffer one years imprisonment and af∣terwards make Fine to the King, and if he hath not wherewith, he shall be im∣prisoned for two years; And if the Sheriff, Coroner, or any Bailiff with∣in such Franchise or without, for re∣ward, or intreaty, or any affinity con∣ceal, consent or procure to conceal the Felonies done within their Liberties, or otherwise will not attach or arrest such Felons (whereas they may) or other∣wise will not doe their Offices for fa∣vour that they bear to such Offenders, and be thereof convicted, they shall be imprisoned for one year, and if they have not whereof to make Fine, they shall have three years imprisonment.


My Lord 
Cook
 in his Comment upon this Statute says that the King

for such default shall retain the Franchise to himself for ever as forfeited;And 
Anno
 30 
H.
 3. be∣fore the making of this Statute, 
W. de Haverhull,
 the Kings Trea∣surer, was commanded to seise the City of 
London
 into the King's hand, for that the Citizens thereof did not levy Huy and Cry for the death of Mr. 
Guido de Arterio
 and others slain there,
 as the Laws and Customs of the Realm did require.






How and in what manner the fresh suit and pursuit is to be made upon a Huy and Cry le∣vied.


THE Statutes of the 13 of 
Ed.
 1. 
Cap.
 2. 28 
Ed.
 3. 
Cap.
 11. do command in general that Huy and Cry be made after Felons from Town to Town and from Country to Country; But it seems that at Common Law the method of pur∣suing

Felons was, That the party robbed or otherwise grieved, or some person for him (though that be not necessary as I have shewed before) should repair to the Con∣stable of the Town, and give him notice of the Felony, 
&c.
 and re∣quire him to raise the Huy and Cry, and the Constable ought to raise the power of the Town, and if the Offender be not found there to car∣ry on the Huy and Cry to the next Constable, who was to doe the like in his Town, and so from Constable to Constable untill the Offender be taken, and this is to be done as well in the night as by day. 
Cook
 3 
Inst.
 116. 2 
Ed.
 4.8, 9.


It seems no Town is bound to pursue any further than to the next Constable,
 for such a pursuit is a good excuse for them if the Town be endicted at the King's Suit for the escape of a Felon. And every Town in this respect is a distinct Body, and ought to aid and assist their Constable (when he requires them) in the execution of his Of∣fice; as the whole County is bound

to obey the Sheriff's command when he hath occasion to make use of the 
Posse Comitatus;
 And if the Inhabitants of any Town were obliged to prosecute a Felon fur∣ther than to the next Constable, then by the same reason they might be required to go on from one end of the Kingdom to the other, which is both inconvenient and unreaso∣nable.


And this seems to be the Law be∣fore the Conquest,
 for the 
Mirour of Justice,
 treating of the Ordi∣nances of the ancient. Kings, saith, it was Ordained, 

That every one of the age of fourteen years and upwards should follow criminal Offenders from Village to Village at the Huy and Cry;

it is said elsewhere that 

Pervetusta Anglorum Lege sancitum est ut siquis damnum ex Furto passus,
 aut qui ip∣sum spoliatum viderit sontem per ac∣clamationem insequatur, Constabulari∣us ejus Villa cujus opem implorat, auxilia ciere, furemque perquirexe debet, quod si furem illic non depren∣derit in proximam transmigrare, & Constabulariam ad ferendas suppetias

iterum invocare,


It is established by the ancient Law of 
England,
 that if any person be robbed, ei∣ther he himself or one that sees the Robbery done, may follow the Offender with a Huy and Cry, and the Constable of that Village whose help he requires, ought to call in aid and make enquiry after the Felon, and if he cannot find him there he ought to repair to the next Village and require the Constable of that place to bring in further aid to pursue the Felon.


If a Huy and Cry be levied, the Officer of the Town where the Fe∣lony, 
&c.
 is done, as also the Of∣ficers of other Towns whither the Huy and Cry is brought ought to give notice to all the Towns round about them respec∣tively, and not to one next Town onely,
 to the end that the Cry may spread it self far and wide into all Countries; So that it may be in a manner impossible for the Felon to escape, and in such cases it is re∣quisite to give notice in writing

(to the pursuers) of the things stoln, 
&c.
 and of the colours and marks thereof, and likewise to give a description of the person of the Felon, his Horse and Apparel, 
&c.
 and (if it can be known) to shew which way he is gone.


After notice given,
 the pursuit from place to place must be made immediately, with all the haste and expedition that may be, and that likewise carefully and industriously, and the pursuers if possible are to find out the Felon's footsteps, and to tract him all the way he went, and to use all other devices and means which may seem most condu∣cing and effectual for the apprehen∣ding of the Felon, since our Law of 
England
 directs the pursuers to tract the Felon, I cannot pass over in silence what the learned Sir 
John Davice
 mentions in his Preface to his 
Reports,


That amongst the mani∣fold absurdities of the 
Brehon
's Laws, formerly in use amongst the Irish, they had one custom that deserves imitation, which was, That if any cattel were stoln and the Owner followed the tract


(wherein, saith the Authour, the Irish are incredible cunning, inso∣much as they can find the same by the bruising of a grass in the Sum∣mer-time) 

if the person into whose land the tract is brought cannot make it off into some other land, he is to answer the stealth to the Owner; and this Law is ratified there as both use∣full and necessary for that Kingdom, though the rest of the 
Brehon
's Laws be abolished.


Sir 
Nicholas Hide
 delivered in his Charge at 
Cambridge
 Assises, 
Anno
 1629.
 

That a Huy and Cry must be made and pursued with Horsemen and Footmen, and that not onely a private search must be made in every Town, but that they must raise the Country as they go, and all still to follow the Huy and Cry as against a common Enemy.


Also if a Huy and Cry be brought into a Town the Officers thereof ought forthwith to search all suspec∣ted Houses and places within their limits; And any person who fol∣lows the Huy and Cry (whether he be an Officer or no) may arrest all

such persons as in the search or pur∣suit shall be found suspicious, and thereupon he that is so suspected ought to be carried before some Justice of the Peace of the Country where he is taken to be examined where he was at the time of the Felony committed.


It is provided by the Statute of the 27 
El.


That no Huy and Cry made by the Country or Inhabitants of any Hundred shall be allowed for a law∣full Huy and Cry or pursuit unless the same be done both with Horsemen and Footmen,


Quere,
 Whether this Statute extends to a pursuit at Common Law or at the suit of the King,
 or onely to a pursuit to be made at the suit of the party rob∣bed, who is to recover against the Hundred upon the Statute of 
Win∣chester.








Who are bound to pursue upon the Huy and Cry levied.


WHen the Huy and Cry is rai∣sed every Inhabitant (whose assistance the Law requires) ought to follow it, though he receives no command or notice thereof from any Officer who hath authority to demand their aid in this case, for if a Felony, 
&c.
 be committed and a Villor hears the Huy and Cry thereupon levied, he is not to ex∣pect command or notice from any person, but ought immediately to follow the Cry; for the Law which enjoins this duty upon him gives him a tacit command to doe it, and the Huy and Cry it self (being once heard) is a sufficient notice; And this Law is as ancient as we are able to trace it by the light of Letters; for many years before the Conquest it was held for Law,
 that if any man heard the Huy and Cry and did not pursue, he was to be

punished as a Contemner of the King's Laws.


The Statute of 
Westm.
 1. being but in affirmance of the Common Law commands 
all persons to be in readiness to arrest Felons when ever the Cry of the Country summons their attendance,
 and by another Statute made the next year after it is com∣manded, 
That all persons shall follow the Huy and Cry, and whoever does not and be thereof convicted shall be attached to answer before the Justices of Gaol delivery, and for such offence shall be fined and imprisoned.
 Brac∣ton 
li.
 3. 
fo.
 118. 3 
Ed.
 3. 
Coron▪
 333.


And 
Bracton,
 who writ before any Statute made concerning Huy and Cry, saith, 
That all Knights and others under the age of fifteen years, ought to take an Oath that they will not receive any outlawed persons, Murtherers, Robbers, or such as have committed Burglary, and if at any time they should hear the Huy and Cry raised they should immediately follow it with their whole Family,
 and herewith agrees 
Briton
 fo. 15, 
9

but 
The Mirour of Justice,
 who was the first Authour that writ of the Laws of 
England,
 relates it to be a Law established by the ancient Kings of this Realm, 
That such as be but of fourteen years of age are bound to pursue Felons upon the Huy and Cry.


Notwithstanding what is said be∣fore be general, and its literal sense comprehends all persons, yet there are some that may claim an exemp∣tion from this service or duty; As, if a man be sick and not able to travel, the Law will allow him a privilege in respect of his infirmi∣ty, as well in this as in other cases; for if a 
Pracipe quod Reddat
 be brought against 
John a-Stiles
 re∣turnable at such a day, the Tenant may be essoined 
de mal
 lecto,
 that is, he may be excused of his appea∣rance, and thereby prevent his de∣fault, because he is sick a bed and cannot travel; So if the Sheriff ar∣rests a man that is sick and returns 
Languidus,
 this is a good return, and the Sheriff shall not be amer∣ced, for the Law constrains no man

to expose his life to imminent dan∣ger, unless it be in the defence of the Commonweale, wherein the publick safety ought to be dearer to every man than his life.


A man may be exempted in re∣gard of any other corporal infirmi∣ty, whereby he is visibly disabled to effect that which the Law ex∣pects to be done, for 
Lex non cogit ad impossibilia.
 The pursuit ought to be made by men that are endued with strength and agility of Body, so that the pursuer may be in a ca∣pacity to follow the Felon, either by running or riding, 
&c.
 with e∣qual speed to that of the Malefac∣tor, whose fear and the sense of his guilt adds vigour to his flight, and puts him upon all desperate enterprises in this extremity, and to oblige a blind or lame person, 
&c.
 to the performance of this Office were to no end, but should be in it self 
vanus & inutilis labor,
 and from the same reason I infer that one over-grown with years may be ex∣cused in respect of his age, as a person 
superannuated
 is freed from

serving upon Juries. As for age, I conceive there is no certain term of years limited when any person shall either begin or cease to pursue upon the Huy and Cry, but in this case the abilities of the body must be the standing rule, as that of the mind in committing of Felonies; for though the Law computes four∣teen years to be the age of discreti∣on, yet if one under that age kills another, and it can be discovered by any circumstance that he had understanding, to discern betwixt good and the evil he had done, the Law will adjudge it Murther, for in this case 
malitia supplet atatem;
 so that if a person of younger years be of greater strength and ability of body than one of twice his years, who is weak and infirm and not able to answer the end of the Law, such person may be required to pur∣sue an Offender upon the Huy and Cry, (notwithstanding the two a∣foresaid authorities) for his capa∣city of performing the duty, brings him within the reason of the Law, which being altered alters the Law

it self, for 
ratio Legis est anima Le∣gis & mutata Legis ratione mutatur & Lex.








The Statute of
 Westm. 1. 
cap.
 9. Anno 3 E. 1.


Of Robberies.


FOrasmuch as the peace of this Realm hath been weakly kept heretofore, for lack of quick and fresh suit making after Felons in due manner,
 and namely be∣cause of Franchises, where the Felons are received: It is provi∣ded, that all generally be ready and apparelled at the command∣ment and summons of Sheriffs,
 and at the Cry of the Country, to pursue and arrest Felons,
 when any need is, as well within Fran∣chises as without;
 and they that

will not so doe,
 and thereof be attainted, shall make a grievous Fine to the King. And if default be found in the Lord of the Fran∣chise,
 the King shall take him to the same Franchise:
 and if de∣fault be in the Bailiff,
 he shall have one years imprisonment,
 and after shall make a grievous Fine,
 and if he have not where∣of, he shall have imprisonment of two years: and if the Sheriff,
 Coroner,
 or other Bailiff within Franchise or without, for Reward or for Prayer, or for any manner of affinity, conceal,
 consent or procure to conceal the Felonies done in their Bailiwicks,
 
 or o∣therwise do forbear to attach or arrest such Felons (there as they may) or otherwise to doe their Office for favour born to such misdoers,
 and be attainted there∣of, they shall have one years im∣prisonment,
 and after make a grie∣vous Fine;
 and if they have not whereof to make Fine, they shall have imprisonment of three years. 
Westm.
 1. 
cap.
 9. 
Anno
 3 
Ed.
 1.

and after 
Anno
 23 
H.
 6. 
cap.
 5. it is enacted that this Statute shall be put in execution.






The Statute of
 Winton, Anno 13 Ed. 1.


Of Robberies.


FOrasmuch as from day to day Robberies, Murthers and burning of Houses be more often used than they have been hereto∣fore, and Felons cannot be at∣tainted by the Oath of Jurors, which had rather suffer Felonies done to strangers to pass without pein, than to indict the Offen∣ders, of whom a great part be folk of the same Country, or at the least, if the Offenders be of another Country, the Receivers be of places near; and they doe

the same, because the Oath is not now put unto Jurors, nor upon the Country where such Felo∣nies were done, as to the resti∣tution of damages hitherto no pein hath been limited for their concealment and laches: Our Lord the King, for to abate the power of Felons, hath established a pein in this case, so that from henceforth for fear of the pein more than for fear of any Oath, they shall not spare any, nor conceal any Felonies; and com∣mandeth that Proclamation be solemnly made in all Counties, Hundreds, Markets, Fairs, and all other places where great Re∣sort of People is, so that none shall excuse themselves by igno∣rance, that from henceforth eve∣ry Country be so well kept, that immediately upon Felonies and Robberies committed, such fresh suit be made from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, likewise when need re∣quire, that Inquest be made in Towns by him that is Lord of

the Town, and after in the Hun∣dred, and after in the Franchise, and in the County, and sometime in two, three or four Counties; in case where Felonies be com∣mitted in the Marches of Shires, so that the Trespassers may be attainted, and if the Country do not answer for such manner of misdoers, the pein shall be such, that the Country, that is, the people dwelling in the Country, shall answer for the. Robberies done, and also for the damages, so that the whole Hundred where the Robbery happeneth to be done, with the Franchises, being within the precinct of the same Hundred, shall answer for the Robberies done; and if the Rob∣bery chance to be done in the Di∣vision of two Hundreds, in such case both Hundreds together, with the Franchises shall answer it; and after that the Felony or Robbery is done, the Country shall have no longer space than forty days, within which it shall behoove them to agree for the

Robbery and Trespass, or else that they answer for the Bodies of the Offenders; and forasmuch as the King will not that his people shall be suddenly put in fear of this penalty, which see∣meth very hard to many, the King granteth that they shall not incur it immediately but it shall be respited untill the 
Easter
 fol∣lowing, 
&c.






Claus. Anno 21 
Ed.
 1. in 4. Dorso.


Proclama∣tio sive Breve di∣rect’ Vic’. De quibus∣dam Arti∣culis Sta∣tuti pro∣clamand’ & publi∣candis, &c.


REX Vic’ Eb
’ s’ Cum ad ma∣jorem tranquilitatem p
is no∣strae tenend’ & depredatorum ac ali
∣rum malefactorum malitiam repri∣mendam quosdam articulos ea occa∣sione per totum Reg
um nostru
 Sta∣tu
imus observera, inter quot ordi∣n
vimus & mandavimus per singul
e Comitatus infra idem Reg
um quod

statim post Robberias & Polonias fact as fieret recens secta de Villa in Villam & de Patria in Patrium. Et similiter Inquisitiones fierent si necesse esset in Villis, Hundredis, Liberta∣tibus, Comitatibus & aliquando in duobus, tribus vel quatuor Comitati∣bus in casibus cum Feloniae factae fu∣issent in Marchia Comitatuum: Ita quod Malefactores deprehendi possent. Et si Patria de Corporibus hujusmodi alefactorum non responderet, homi∣nes in Patria Commorantes de Robbe∣riis factis & damnis responderent, ac jam ex plurium insinuatione acceperi∣mus quod post Statutum & Mandatum praedictum Homicidia, Robberiae, In∣cendia & aliae Trangressiones diversae in Regno nostro in defectum articulo∣rum praedictorum, minus plene obser∣vatorum de die in diem plus solite perpetrantur. Nos hujusmodi dam∣nis & periculis obviare volentes, mit∣timus vobis Statutum illud per nos editum sub sigillo nostro Praecipientes & sub gravi forisfactura nostra fir∣miter injungentes quod omni dilatione praepositae Statutum praedictum in ple∣no Comitatu tuo in singulis Hundredis,

Civitatibus, Burgis, Feriis, Mercatis, & aliis locis solemnibus, quibus om∣nibus & singulis de Com’ prad’ inde major & celerior notitia & eviden∣tia fieri poterit publicé lege clamari & firmiter teneri facias & omnibus & singulis contentis in eodem. Et pro certo scias & universis & singu∣lis de Ballivae tua ex parte nostra scire facias, quod exnunc conditiones & poenas in dicto Statuto contentas de caetero volumus & praecipimus firmiter teneri & inviolabiliter observari. Et istud mandatum ita celeriter & dili∣genter exequaris quod ad te & tua tanquam ad mandatorum nostrorum contemptorem graviter capere non de∣beamus. Teste meipso apud Westm’ xviij. die Novembris.


Eodem modo mandatum est singulis Vic’ per totam Angliam per diversa Mandata sub tenore istius Literae prae∣cedentis de verbo ad verbum, Teste at supra.








The Statute of 
28 Ed. 3.
 Cap. 
11.


BEcause that great Clamour and grievous Complaints be made as well by Aliens as by Denisens, the Merchants and o∣thers passing through the Realm of 
England
 with their Merchan∣dizes and other goods, be slain and robbed, and namely now more than they were wont, whereof remedy hath not been made to the Complainants; our Sovereign Lord the King conside∣ring the profit which may come to the said Realm, by coming and abiding of Merchants Aliens in the same Realm, and the da∣mage and mischief which to them and other is done daily by such Manslaughters and Robberies, and willing to provide for the surety and indemnity of Merchants and

others aforesaid, Hath ordained and established, by the assent of all his Parliament, to the intent that Merchants Aliens shall have the greater will and cou∣rage to come into the said Realm of 
England,
 and that remedy from henceforth be speedily made to such Merchants and others robbed, according to the form contained in the Statute late made at 
Winchester,
 that is to say, that solemn Cry be made in all Coun∣ties, Hundreds and Markets, Fairs and all other places where solemn assembly of the people shall be, so that none by ignorance shall excuse him, that every Country from henceforth be so kept, that immediately after Felonies and Robberies done fresh suit be made from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, and Inquests, if need be, shall be also taken in the Towns by him which it Sove∣reign of the Town, and after in Hundreds, Franchises, and in the County, and sometime in two, three or four Counties, in case

when Felonies shall be done in the Marches of the Counties, so that the Offenders may be attain∣ted; and if the Country doth not answer of such manner of Offen∣ders, the pein shall be such, that every Country, that is to say, the people dwelling in the Coun∣try, shall answer of the Robbe∣ries done, and of the damages, so that all the Hundred where the Robbery shall be done, with the Franchises which be within the precinct of the same Hundred, shall answer of the Robbery done; and if the Robbery be done in the Devises of two Hundreds, both Hundreds shall answer, together with the Franchises; and longer term shall not the Country have after the Robbery or Felony done than forty days, within which them behooveth to make gree of the Robbery or of the Offence, or that they answer of the Bodies of the Offenders.








The Statute of 
27 Eliz.
 Chap. 
11.


Of Huy and Cry.


WHereas by two ancient Sta∣tutes, the one made in the Parliament holden at 
Winche∣ster,
 in the thirteenth year of the reign of King 
Edward
 the First, and the other in the eight and twentieth year of the reign of King 
Edward
 the Third, it was, for the better suppressing of Rob∣beries and Felonies (amongst other things) enacted to this effect, That if the Country do not answer for the bodies of such Malefactours, that then the pein should be such, that is to wit, That the people dwelling in the Country, shall be answerable for the Robberies done, and the da∣mages: so that the whole Hun∣dred where the Robbery shall be

done, with the Franchises which are within the precinct of the same Hundred, shall answer the Robberies done. And if the Rob∣bery chance to be done in the di∣vision of two Hundreds, that then both the Hundreds together, with the Franchises within the precinct of them, shall be answerable, as in the said two several Statutes it doth more at large appear. Forasmuch as the said parts of the said several Statutes being of late days more commonly put in execution than heretofore they have been, are found by experi∣ence to be very hard and extreme to many of the Queens Majesties good Subjects, because by the same Statutes they do remain charged with the penalties there∣in contained, notwithstanding their unability to satisfie the same, and though they doe as much as in reason might be required in pursuing such Malefactours and Offenders, whereby both large scope of negligence is given to the Inhabitants and Resiants in

other Hundreds and Counties, not to prosecute the Huy and Cry made, followed and brought unto them, by reason they are not chargeable for any portion of the goods robbed, nor with any damages in that behalf gi∣ven, and also great incourage∣ment and imboldening is like∣wise given unto the Offenders to commit daily more Felonies and Robberies, as seeing it in manner impossible for the Inhabitants and Resiants of the said Hundred and Franchises wherein the Robbery is committed, to apprehend them without the aid of the other Hundreds and Counties adjoi∣ning, and for that also that the party robbed having remedy by the aforesaid Statutes, for the recovering of his goods robbed, and damages against the Inhabi∣tants and resiants of the Hundred wherein the Robbery was com∣mitted, is many times negligent and careless in prosecuting and pursuing the said Malefactours and Offenders: Our Sovereign

Lady the Queens Majesty, not willing therefore that her people should be impoverished by any such pein or penalty, which should be hard or grievous to them, and have special regard to abate the power of Felons, and to repress Felonies, doth for remedy here∣of, with the consent of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and of the Commons of this present Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same Parliament establish and enact, That the In∣habitants and Resiants of every or any such Hundred,
 (with the Franchises within the precinct thereof) wherein negligence, fault or defect of pursuit, and fresh suit,
 after Huy and Cry made, shall happen to be, from and after forty days next after the end of this present Session of Parliament,
 shall answer and sa∣tisfie the one moiety or half of all and every such sum and sums of money and damages, as shall by force or virtue of the said Sta∣tutes or either of them be reco∣vered

or had, against or of the said Hundred, with the Franchi∣ses therein, in which any Robbe∣ry or Felony shall at any time hereafter be committed or done. And that the same moiety shall and may be recovered by Action of Debt, Bill, Plaint or Infor∣mation, in any of the Queens Majesties Courts of Record at 
Westminster,
 by and in the name of the Clerk of the Peace for the time being,
 of or in any such County within this Realm, where any such Robbery and recovery by the party or parties robbed shall be, without naming the Chri∣stian name or Sirname of the said Clerk of the Peace, which moie∣ty so recovered, shall be to the onely use and behoof of the Inha∣bitants of the said Hundred, where any such Robbery or Felony shall be committed or done. And be it further enacted by the authori∣ty aforesaid, That if any Clerk of the Peace, of or in any Coun∣ty within this Realm shall at any time hereafter commence

or prefer any such Suit, Action, or Information, and shall after the same so sued, commenced, or preferred, happen to die, or to be removed out of his Office, be∣fore recovery and execution had: That yet no such Action; Suit, Bill, Plaint or Information, sued, commenced, or preferred, shall by such displacing or death, be abated, discontinued or ended, but that it shall and may be law∣full to and for the Clerk of the Peace next succeeding in the said County, to prosecute, pursue and follow all and every such Action, Bill, Plaint, Suit and Informati∣on, for the causes aforesaid, so hanging and depending in such manner and form, and to all in∣tents and purposes, as that Clerk of Peace might have done which first commenced or preferred the said Suit, Bill, Plaint or Informa∣tion. And although the whole Hundred where such Robberies and Felonies are committed, with the Liberties within the precinct thereof, are by the two former

Statutes charged with the answe∣ring to the party robbed his da∣mages: yet nevertheless the re∣covery and execution, by and for the party and parties robbed, is had against one, or a very few persons of the said Inhabitants, and he and they so charged, have not heretofore by Law had any mean or way to have any contri∣bution of or from the residue of the said Hundred,
 where the said Robbery is committed, to the great impoverishing of them a∣gainst whom such recovery or execution is had. For remedy whereof, be it enacted by the au∣thority aforesaid, That after ex∣ecution of damages by the party or parties so robbed had, it shall and may be lawfull (upon com∣plaint made by the party or par∣ties so charged) to and for two Justices of the Peace,
 (whereof one to be of the 
Quorum
) of the same County, inhabiting within the said Hundred, or near unto the same, where any such execu∣tion shall be had, to assess and

tax ratably and proportionably,
 according to their discretions, all and every the Towns, Pari∣shes, Villages and Hamlets, as well of the said Hundred where any such Robbery shall be com∣mitted, as of the Liberties with∣in the said Hundred, to and to∣wards an equal contribution to be had and made for the relief of the said Inhabitant or Inhabitants, against whom the party or par∣ties robbed before that time had his or their execution: And that after such taxation made, the Constables,
 Constable, Headbo∣roughs or Headborough of every such Town, Parish, Village and Hamlet, shall by virtue of this present act, have full power and authority within their several limits, ratably and proportio∣nably to tax and assess according to their abilities,
 every Inhabi∣tant and dweller in every such Town, Parish, Village and Ham∣let, for and towards the payment of such taxation and assessment as shall be so made, upon every such

Town, Parish, Village and Ham∣let as aforesaid, by the said Ju∣stices: and that if any Inhabitant of any such Town, Parish, Vil∣lage or Hamlet, shall obstinately refuse and deny to pay the said taxation and assessment,
 so by the said Constables, Constable, Head∣boroughs or Headborough taxed and assessed, that then it shall and may be lawfull to and for the said Constables and Headboroughs, and every of them within their seve∣ral limits and jurisdictions,
 to distrein all and every such per∣son and persons so refusing and denying by his and their goods and chattels, and the same distress to sell, and the money thereof coming to retain to the use afore∣said. And if the goods and chat∣tels so distreined and sold, shall be of more value than the said taxation shall come unto, that then the residue of the said money over and above the said taxation shall be delivered unto the said person and persons so distreined. And be it further enacted, that

all and every the said Constables and Headboroughs,
 after that they have within their several li∣mits and jurisdictions levied and collected their said rates and sums of money so taxed, shall within ten days after such collection pay and deliver the same over unto the said Justices of Peace, or one of them, to the use and behoof of the said Inhabitant or Inhabi∣tants, for whom such rate, taxa∣tion and assessment shall be had or made as aforesaid: which mo∣ney so paid, shall by the Justices or Justice so receiving the same, be delivered over (upon request made) unto the said Inhabitant or Inhabitants, to whose use the same was collected. And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that the like taxati∣on, assessment, levying by distress and payment as aforesaid, shall be had and done within every Hundred where default or negli∣gence of pursuit and fresh fuit shall be,
 for and to the benefit of all and every Inhabitant and

Inhabitants of the same Hundred, where such default shall be, that shall at any time hereafter by virtue of this present Act, have any damages or money levi∣ed of them, for or to the pay∣ment of the one moiety or half of the money recovered against the said Hundred, where any Robbery shall be hereafter com∣mitted. Provided, also, and be it further enacted by the authori∣ty aforesaid, that where any Robbery is,
 or shall be hereafter committed by two, or a grea∣ter number of Malefactours, and that it happen any one of the said Offenders to be apprehended by pursuit to be made according to the said former mentioned Laws and Statutes,
 or according to this present Act, that then and in such case, no Hundred or Franchise shall in any wise incur, or fall in∣to the penalty, loss or forfeiture mentioned either in this present Act, or in the said former Sta∣tutes, although the residue of the said Malefactours shall happen to

escape, and not to be apprehen∣ded: any thing in this Statute, or in the said former Statute to the contrary notwithstanding. Provided also, that no person or persons hereafter robbed shall take any benefit by virtue of any the said former Statutes, to charge any Hundred where any such Robbery shall be committed, ex∣cept he or they so robbed, shall commence his or their Suit or Action within one year next after such Robbery so to be committed.
 And be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid, that no Huy or Cry, or pursuit hereafter to be done or made by the Country or Inhabitants of any Hundred, shall be allowed and taken to be a lawfull Huy and Cry, or pursuit, upon or after any the said Felons or Offenders, except the same Huy and Cry and pursuit be done and made by Horsemen and Foot∣ment,
 any usage or custom to the contrary notwithstanding. And be it further also enacted by the authority of this present Parlia∣ment,

that no person or persons that shall hereafter happen to be robbed, shall have or maintain any Action, or take any benefit by virtue of the said two mentio∣ned Statutes, or either of them, except the said person and per∣sons so robbed, shall with as much convenient speed as may be, give notice and intelligence of the said Felony or Robbery so commit∣ted, unto some of the Inhabitants of some Town, Village or Ham∣let near unto the place where any such Robbery shall be committed, nor shall bring or have any Acti∣on, upon or by virtue of any the Statutes aforesaid, except he or they shall first within twenty days next before such Action to be brought, be examined upon his or their corporal Oath,
 to be ta∣ken before some one Justice of the Peace of the County, where the Robbery was committed, inha∣biting within the said Hundred where the Robbery was commit∣ted, or near unto the same, whe∣ther he or they do know the par∣ties

that committed the said Rob∣bery, or any of them. And if upon such examination it be con∣fessed that he or they do know the parties that committed the said Robbery, or any of them, that then he or they so confessing shall before the said Action be commenced or brought, enter into sufficient bond by Recogni∣sance before the said Justice,
 be∣fore whom the said examination is had, effectually to prosecute the same person and persons so known to have committed the said Robbery, by Indictment or otherwise, according to the due course of the Laws of this Realm. 
Anno
 27 
Eliz
 cap. 13.










Judicial proceedings on the Sta∣tute of Huy and Cry, or choice Precedents in all cases therein from the Original to Execution.




Breve ori∣ginale su∣per Statut’ de Hutes’ & Clam’.


CArolus Secundus, Dei gratia, Angliae, Scotiae, Franciae & Hiberniae Rex, Fidei defensor, &c.


Vic’ D. salutem,


si A. B. nuper de C. in Com’ tuo gen’ fec’ te secur’ de Clam’ suo pros’ tunc Pone per vad’ & salvos pleg’ Homines Inhabitan’ in Hundred’ de O. in Com’ tuo quòd sint coram, &c. (tali Retorn’) ostens’ qua∣re cum in Statuto in Parliamento Do∣mini Edwardi nuper Regis Angliae primi apud Winton’ anno regni sui tertiodecimo tent’ edit’ (inter cae∣tera) ordinat’ sit pro eo quòd de die in diem Roberiae, Homicidia & In∣cendia plus solito tunc fiebant quàm antea solebant & Felones non potuis∣sent esse attinct’ per sacrm’ Jur’ qui magis voluntarie permittebant Felonias fieri de gentibus extraneis, & Felones

evadere abs{que} poena quàm Malefacto∣res indictari, unde magna pars fuerunt gentes de eadem Patria, vel adminus si Malefactores fuerunt de alia Patria eorum Receptores fuerunt de Visneto ubi hujusmodi malefacta fiebant. Et hoc faciebant pro eo quod sacrm’ eis∣dem Juratoribus non ministrabantur nec in Patria ubi Feloniae illae fiebant & quoad restitutionem damnorum poena antetunc non fuit provis’ pro concelamento & negligentia fuis. I∣dem nuper Rex ad debilitand’ posse Felonum stabilivit poenam in illo casu. Ita quòd pro timore poenae plusquam pro pavore Sacramenti nullis extunc parcerent nec aliquas Felonias conce∣larent. Et mandavit quòd Procla∣matio solemniter fieret in omnibus Com’ Hundred’ Mercat’ Feriis & omnibus aliis locis ubi solemnis assem∣blaiio gentium foret sic quod nullus pro ignorantia se possit excusare. Et quod quaelibet Patria extunc sic possit custodiri quod immediate post Roberias & Felonias factas recens insecutio fieret de Villa in Villam & de Patria in Patriam ac etiam Inquisitiones fie∣rent 
 necesse foret in Villis per ipsum

qui superior esset de Villa. Et postea in Hundred’ Franches’ & in Com’. Et aliquando in duobus, tribus vel quatuor Com’ in casu quando Feloniae fact’ fuer’ in Marchiis Com’ ita quod Malefactores potuissent esse attinct’. Et si Patria de hujusmodi Malefacto∣ribus non responderet poena talis esset quod quaelibet Patria scilicet homines in Patria commorantes responderent de Roberiis factis & damnis sic quod totum Hundredum ubi Roberia illa facta foret cum Franches’ quae essent infra praecinct’ ejusdem Hundred’ re∣sponderent de Roberiis, factis. Et si Roberia illa facta foret in divisis duo∣rum Hundred’ responderent inde duo Hundred’ cum Franches’. Et longio∣rem terminum non haberet Patria post Roberiam & Felonias factas quam quadraginta dies infra quos faceret emendas de Roberia & malefactis vel responderet de corporibus Malefacto∣rum prout in Statuto plenius contine∣tur. Ac cum quidam Malefactores prae∣fat’ A. B. ignoti in quodam loco ibi∣dem vocat. B. infra Hundred’ de O. in Com’ tuo vi & armis, &c. in ip∣sum A. B. insultum fecer’ & 20li.

in pecuniis numeratis de denariis ip∣sius A. B. propriis ibidem invent’ de codem A. B. Felonice perceperunt, spo∣liaverunt & asportaverunt contra pa∣cem nostram. Idemque A. B. imme∣diate post Feloniam, Roberiam & spo∣liationem praed’ fact’ apud B. praed’ infra Hundred’ de O. praed’ Hutes’ & Clam’ de Roberia & Felonia praed’ fecit & adtunc notitiam ibidem In∣habitan’ ejusdem Villae de O. praed’ de Roberia & Felonia praed’ fact’ dedit. Et post Roberiam & Feloniam ill’ ac infra 
20
 dies ante diem impetratio∣nis brevis original’ praed’. Idem A. B. coram E. F. Ar’ tunc uno Justic’ nostrorum ad pacem in praed’ Com’ D. conservand’ assign’ inhabitan’ apud L. prope praed’ Hundred’ de O. praed. in Com’ tuo examinat’ fuit super sacrm’ suum corporale juxta formam Statuti apud Westm’ anno regni Dominae Eli∣zabethae nuper Reginae Angliae vicesi∣mo septimo inde edit’ & provis’. I∣demque A. B. super sacrm’ suum praed’ tunc dixit quod ipse non cog∣novit partes quae Roberiam illam fe∣cissent nec earum aliquam. Et post Roberiam illam factam quadraginta

dies jam praterierunt. Iidem tamen homines inhabitantes in Hundred’ praed’ Emendas de Roberia praed’ prae∣fat’ A. B. hucusque non fecerunt nec corpora Felonum & Malefactorum praed’ nec corpus eorum alicujus cepe∣runt nec de corporibus eorum seu de corpore eorum alicujus hucusque re∣sponderunt sed Malefactores & Felo∣nes ill’ evadere permiserunt in nostri contemptum & ipsius A. B. grave damnum & contra formam Statuti praedicti de anno tertiodecimo supra∣dicto. Et habeas ibi nomina Pleg’


& hoc breve Teste meipso apud Westm’, &c.


Plegii de pros’



J. Doo


R. Roo



Sum’ infra nomi∣nat’ Inhabitan’ in Hundred’ de 
O.
 in Com’ infra∣script.


G. H.
 Ar’ Vic’.








Narr’ inde.


Devon’ 
ss.


HOmines inhabitantes in Hundredo de O. in Com’ praedicto attach’ fuer’ ad respon∣dend’ A. B. gen’ de p’lito quare cum in Statuto in Parliamento, &c. (ut supra usque) vel responderet de cor∣poribus Malefactorum prout in Statu∣to praedicto plenius continetur: as cum quidam Malefactores praefato A. ignoti apud O. in Com’ praedicto in quodam loco ibidem vocat’ B. (ut supra usque) & contra formam Sta∣tuti praedicti, &c. Et unde idem A. per G. F. Attorn’ suum queri∣tur quod cum quidam Malefactores videlicet quatuor Homines eidem A. ignot’ 
19
 die J. anno Regni dict’ Do∣mini Regis nunc 
33
 apud O. in Com’ praedicto in quodam loco ibidem vocat’ B. &c. (ut supra usque) Et post Roberiam & Feloniam ill’ fact’ & infra 
20
 dies prox’ ante diem impe∣trationis brevis originalis praedicti A. scilicet 
20
 die J. anno Regni Do∣mini Regis nune 
33
 praedictus A. coram praedicto E. F. Ar. tunc uno Justic’, &c. (ut supra usque) Et post Roberiam illam fact’ & ante

diem impetrationis brevis originalis praedicti A. 
40
 dies jam scilicet die impetrationis brevis originalis ipsius A. praeterierunt, &c. (ut supra us∣que) contra formam Statuti praedicti, unde dic’ quod deteriorat’ est & dam∣num habet ad valenc’, &c. Et inde produc’ sectam, &c.


ss.
 HOmines inhabitan’ infra Hun∣dred’ de A. & B. in Com’ praedicto attach’ fuer’ ad respondend’ tam Domino Regi nunc quàm C. D. gen’ de p’lito quare cum in Statuto (ut in Or’ usque) ac cum quidam Ma∣lefactores praefat’ C. ignot’ in Regia via infra parochiam de B. in Com’ praedicto (quae quidem Regia via est in divisis Hundredorum) vi & armis (ut in Or’ usque) Idemque C. imme∣diate post Feloniam, &c. fact’ apud Villam de H. in praedicto com’ M. (quae quidem Villa de H. est prope praedictum locum ubi Roberia praedicta sic ut praefertur facta fuit) Hutes’ & Clam’ de Roberia & Felonia praed’ fecit. Et adtunc & ibidem notitiam inhabitantibus ejusdem Villae de H. de Roberia & Felonia illis dedit, &c. (ut in Or’.)








Barr’ sur Statut’ de Hutes’ & Clam’.




Non cul. ove chal∣lenge de Hundred’.


ss.
 ET praedicti homines inhabitan’ in Hundredo praedicto per A. B. Attorn’ suum ven’ & defend’ vim & injur’ & omnem contemptum. Et quicquid, &c. Et dic’ quod ipsi in nullo sunt culpabiles de premissis supe∣rius eis impoit’ contra formam Sta∣tuti praedicti prout praedictus quer’ superius versus eos queritur. Et de hoc pon’ se super Patriam & prae∣dictus quer’ similiter. Et super hoc idem quer’ dic’ quod praed’ homines inhabitan’ in praedicto Hundredo de W. ubi Roberia illa facta fuit sunt partes defendentes versus quos idem quer’ in forma praedicta queritur. Et ea de causa pet’ breve Domini Regis Vic’ Com’ praed’ dirigend’ de venire faci∣end’ hic duodecim, &c. de Visn’ Hundredi de O. praed’ in Com’ praed’ (quod quidem Hundredum de O. est prox’ Hundredum in eodem Com’ praedict’ Hundredo de W. prox’ ad∣jacen’)

ad triand’ exitum praedictum superius in forma praedicta junct’. Et quia homines inhabitan’ in praedicto Hundredo de W. hoc non dedic’ ei conceditur, &c.
 Ideo praecept’ est Vic’ quod venire fac’ hic in Crastino san∣ctae Trin’ de Visn’ de praedicto Hun∣dr’ de O. duodecim, &c. per quos, &c. Et qui nec, &c. ad recogn’, &c. quia tam, &c.






Barr’ per nul Huy & Cry fait.


ss.
 ET praedicti inhabitantes per A. B. attorn’ suum ven’ & de∣fend’ vim & injur’ & omnem con∣temptum. Et quicquid, &c. Et dic’ quod praedictus quer’, 
&c.
 Quia prote∣stando quod praedictus quer’ non spolia∣tus fuit Protestandoque etiam quod praedictus quer’ per spoliationem prae∣dictam non perdidit aliqua bona sive catalla vel pecuniarum summas prout praedictus quer’ superius allegavit. Pro placito iidem inhabitan’ dicunt quod praedictus quer’ immediate post Feloniam, Roberiam & spoliationem praedictas superius fieri supposit’ apud A. praedict’ non fecit Hutesiam & Clamorem de Roberia praedicta secun∣dum formam Statuti praedicti prout

ipse superius allegavit. Et hoc para∣ti sunt verificare unde petunt Judi∣cium si praedictus quer’ actionem su∣am praedictam versus eos habere de∣beat, &c.






Non in∣form’ sur Star. de Huy & Cry, ove Judgment puis brief de Inqui∣ry.


ss.
 ET praedicti homines inhabitan∣tes in Hundredo praedicto per C. D. attorn’ suum ven’ & defend’ vim & injur’ quando, &c. Et quic-quid, &c. Et idem attorn’ dic’ quod ipse non est inform’ per eosdem homi∣nes inhabitan’ in Hundredo praedicto de aliquo Respons’ pro eisdem hominibus inhabitan’ in Hundredo praedicto prae∣fat’ quer’ in loquela praedicta dand’. Et nihil aliud inde dic’ per quod idem quer’ reman’ versas praefat’ ho∣mines inhabitan’ in Hundredo prae∣dicto inde indefens’ ob quod praedictus quer’ damna sua occasione prae∣missa versus praefat’ homines inha∣bitan’ in Hundredo praedicto recupe∣rare debeat, sed quia nescitur quae dam∣na idem quer’ sustinuit occasione illa praeceptum est Vic’ quod per Sacra∣mentum proborum & legalium homi∣num de Com’ praedicto diligenter in∣quirat quae damna idem quer’ sustinuit

tam occasione praemissa quàm pro mis’ & custagiis suis per ipsum circa se∣ctam suam in hac parte apposit’. Et Inquisitionem quam, &c. Vic’ con∣stare fac’ hic à die Pasche in quin∣decim dies sub sigillo, &c. Et sigil∣lis, &c. Et Vic’ videlicet A. B. Ar’ modo mand’ hic quandam Inquisitio∣nem coram eo apud Brentford in Com’ praedicto (tali die & Mense) ult’ praeterit’ per sacrm’ duodecim, &c. virtute brevis praedicti capt’ per quam compert’ existit quod praedictus quer’ sustinuit damna occasione praemissa ultra mis’ & custagia sua per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac parte ap∣posit’ ad triginta libras. Et pro mis’ & custagiis illis ad decem solid’. Id∣eo cons’ est quod praedictus quer’ re∣cuperet versus praefat’ homines inha∣bitan’ in Hundredo praedicto damna sua praedicta ad triginta libras & de∣cem solidos per Inquisitionem praedi∣ctam in forma praedicta compert’ nec∣non duodecim libras eidem quer’ ad requisitionem suam pro misis & cu∣stagiis suis praedictis per Cur’ hic de inc’ro adjudicat’. Que quidem dam∣na in toto se attingunt ad quadra∣ginta

duas libras & decem denar’. Et praedicti homines inhabitan’ in Hundredo praedicto in mia’, &c.






Judgment sur Statute de Hue & Cry puis Verdict.


ss.
 I Deo cons’ est quod praedictus quer’ recuperet versus praefat’ homines inhabitan’ in Hundredo prae∣dicto damna sua praedicta ad, &c. per Jur’ praedictos in forma praedicta assess’ necnon, &c. eidem quer’ qui tam, &c. ad requisitionem suam pro mis’ & custagiis suis praedictis per Cur’ hic de inc’ro adjudicat’. Que quidem damna in toto se attingunt ad, &c. Et praedicti homines inha∣bitan’ in mia’, &c.










Venire Facias
 upon the Statute of Huy and Cry.




Ven’ Fac’.


ss.
 PRaecip’ tibi quod Ven’ Fac’ co∣ram, &c. duodecim liberos & legales homines de Visn’ Hundred’ de O. in Com’ D. quorum quilibet habeat 4li. terr’, &c. per quos, &c. Et qui nec A. B. qui tam pro nobis quam pro seipso sequit’ quer’ nec ho∣mines inhabitan’ in Hundredo de O. in Com’ D. aliqua affinitate attingunt ad faciend’ quandam Jur’ inter par∣tes praed’ de placito transgr’ & con∣tempt’ contra formam Stat’ de Hutes’ & Clam’ in hujusmodi casu inde nuper edit’ & provis’ quia tam iidem homines inhabitan’ in Hundre∣do praed’ quam nos & praed’ R. inter quos inde contentio est posuer’ se in jurat’ illam. Et habeas ibi nomina Jur’ & hoc breve T. &c.






Distr’ Jur’.


ss.
 PRaecip’ tibi quod distr’ homines inhabitan’ in Hundred’ de O. in Com’ tuo per omnes, &c. ita quod

habeas corpora eorum coram, &c. ad resp’ tam nobis quam A. B. quare cum in Statuo in Parliamento Do∣mini Edvardi nuper Regis Angliae, primi (ut in Or’ usque) & contra formam Statuti de anno 
13.
 praed’. Et ad audiend’ judicium suum de plur’ defalt’. Et habeat, &c.


 Manucapt’ infra nominat’ hominum inhabitan’ in Hundred’ de O. infra∣script’




J. Doo


R. Roo


Exit’ xli.




E. H.
 Ar’ Vic’.






Inquir’ de dais in Transgr. & contempt’ sur Stat’ de Hutes’ & Clam’.


SAlutem. 


Cum homines inhabitan’ in Hundred’ de O. in Com’ tuo attach’ essent essend’ in Cur’ nostra coram, &c. ad respondend’ tam nob’ quam R. B. de placito quare cum in Statuto in Parliamento Domini Ed∣vardi, &c. Et contra formam Statu∣ti praed’ de anno 
13.
 praed’ Taliter{que} in Cur’ nostra coram, &c. process’ est quod praed’ R. damna sua occasio∣ne

praemissa versus praefat’ homines inhabitan’ infra praed’ Hundred’ de O. recuperare debeat. Et quia Cur’ nostra incognit’ existit que damna praed’ R. tam occasione praemiss’ quam pro mis’ & custagiis suis per ipsum circa sectam suam in hac parte apposit’ sustinuit tibi praecipimus quod per sacr’m proborum & legalium ho∣minum de balliva tua diligent’ inqui∣ras quae damna praed’ R. tam occa∣sione praemiss’ quam pro mis’ & custagiis suis praed’ sustinuit. Et Inquisitionem ill’ sic per te distincte & aperte capt’ Nob’ sub sigillo tuo & sigillis eorum per quorum sacr’m Inquisition’ illam feceris in (tali Re∣torn’) ubicunque tunc fuerimus in Anglia mittas una cum hoc brevi Teste, &c.












The Oath to be taken before a Justice of the Peace by the person or persons who were rob∣bed whereupon the party rob∣bed may ground his Action, according to the Statute of 
27 Eliz.


The
 20th 
day of
 January, 1681.


Mid’
 THE day and year above-said 
A. B.
 of 
C.
 in the County of 
D.
 Gent. came before 
E. F.
 
Esq
 one of his Majesties Justi∣ces of the Peace in the said County of 
D.
 and made Oath, That Monday morning, being the 19th day of this instant 
January,
 about 8 of the Clock, the said 
A. B.
 and one 
L. M.
 of 
London,
 Merchant, came from 
B.
 where they lay the night before at the Sign of the 
King’s Head
 there, and dined at 
C.
 at the 
Queen’s Head
 there, and about two of the Clock went from thence to∣wards

D.
 and about five or six miles off from the Town, there overtook them in the High-way, between a place called 
Johnson
’s Oak and the Park Wall of 
L. T.
Esq
 four Horsemen, one where∣of, 
&c.
 (describing them by their Persons, Habits and Horses) which said four Horsemen set upon this Examinant and robbed him, taking from him by force the Sum of, 
&c.
 and the said 
A. B.
 being examined whether he knoweth the said par∣ties or any of them which so rob∣bed him, he saith and deposeth that he doth not know them or any of them.


A. B.




Jurat’ die & anno supra∣dict’


coram me E. F.






FINIS.












A Catalogue of Books sold by
 Langley Curtis, 
at the Sign of Sir
 Edmundbury Godfrey'
s
 Head 
in
 Goat Court 
on
 Lud∣gate-Hill.




THE 
History
 of the 
Damnable Popish Plot.
 Written by the Authour of 
The weekly Pacquet of Advice from Rome.


The 
Life
 and 
Reign
 of King 
Ri∣chard
 the Second. By a Person of Quality.


Popery;
 or, The 
Principles
 and 
Positions
 approved by the Church of 
Rome
 (when really believ'd and practis'd) are very dangerous to all, and to 
Protestant Kings
 more especially, and inconsistent with Loyalty. By 
T.
 Lord Bishop of 
Lincoln.


Supplications
 of 
Protestants,
 con∣taining the 
Life
 of Sir 
Edmundbury

Godfrey,
 with 
Private
 and 
Family Devotions;
 also 
Prayers
 against 
Po∣pery,
 with 
Thanksgivings
 and 
Graces.
 By 
Henry Godfrey,
 M. A.


A Compendious 
Treatise
 of 
Reco∣veries
 upon Writs of Entry in the Post, and Fines upon Writs of Co∣venant, with ample instructions how to draw, acknowledge and levy the same in all Cases.


The 
Astrological Judgment
 and 
Practice
 of 
Physick,
 deduced from the Position of the Heavens at the Decumbiture of the Sick Person, shewing by an universal Method, not onely the Cause, but the Cure and End of all manner of Diseases incident to humane Bodies: being the thirty years Practice and Expe∣rience of 
Richard Saunders,
 Student in 
Astrology
 and 
Physick.


England
's 
Remarques,
 giving an exact account of the several Shires, Counties and Islands in 
England
 and 
Wales,
 how Bounded, their Length, Breadth and Circumference; the temperature of the Air, and ferti∣lity or barrenness of Soil; the Com∣modities they afford; the Dioceses,

Parishes, Parliament Men, Hundreds and Markets; and whatever else is remarkable throughout the whole Kingdom.


The 
Protestant School,
 or 
Forms of Prayer, Psalms, Lessons, Thanksgi∣vings
 and 
Graces,
 for the bringing up and well-grounding Children and elder Persons in the 
Protestant Religion.
 By Bishop 
Ʋsher.
 Also a Catalogue of all 
English
 Words, from one to eight Syllables, divided and not divided, teaching the rea∣diest way to Spell, Reade and Write 
true English.
 To which is added, an 
Historical Account
 of several 
Plots
 and 
remarkable Passages,
 lively represented in 
Copper Plates.
 By 
Moses Lane,
 Schoolmaster in 
Lon∣don.


An 
Alarm for Sinners;
 or the 
Confession, Prayers, Letters
 and 
last words
 of Mr. 
Foulkes,
 late Minister of 
Stanton-Lacy.


The 
Character
 of an 
Ill-Court-Fa∣vourite,
 representing the 
Michiefs
 that flow from 
Ministers of State
 when they are more 
great
 than 
good.
 Translated out of 
French.




Mr. 
Turbulent;
 or, the 
Melan∣cholicks:
 a Comedy, as it was acted at the 
Duke's Theatre.


The 
Medal Revers'd;
 a 
Satyr
 a∣gainst 
Persecution.
 By the Authour of 
Azaria
 and 
Hushai.


Azaria
 and 
Hushai;
 a Poem.


The 
Clerk
's 
Manual;
 or, an ex∣act Collection of the most approved Forms of Declarations, Pleas, ge∣neral Issues, Judgments, Demurrers, and most kind of Writs now used in the Court of 
Kings Bench,
 with necessary instructions to all 
Clerks, Attorneys, Sollicitours,
 &c. in the use of the same.


The plain 
Englishman
's 
Historian,
 or, a Compendious Chronicle of 
England,
 from its first being inha∣bited to this present year, 1679. But more especially containing the chief Remarques of all our Kings and Queens since the Conquest, their Lives and Reigns, Policies, Wars, Laws, Successes and Troubles: With the most notable Accidents, as Dearths, Tempests, Monstrous Births, and other Prodigies that happened in each of their times re∣spectively.




A 
Synopsis
 of 
Heraldry;
 or, The most plain, short and easie way for the perfect attaining of that Art, containing all necessary directions in order thereunto: There being about 300 Coats of Arms, and about 50 Crests engraven upon Copper Plates; and the Atchievements of the Kings of 
England
 since King 
Egbert
 of the Saxon Race. The Paternal Coats of the Nobility of 
England
 [with a List of the Knights of the Garter] The Arms of the Archiepiscopal and Episcopal Sees, and of the two Universities, and the several Colleges in them; and of the Inns of Court, and other Houses of Law in 
London;
 with some hun∣dreds of Gentlemens Coats, all tru∣ly Blazon'd. To which is added an Alphabetical Table for the rea∣dy finding any name whose Coat is herein Blazon'd.




THE END.











